CAn Thamesis himself so far forget?
But 'tis so long since Tame and Isis met,
That 'tis not rare; for we two are grown old,
And being Rivers, subject to take cold:
Forced with extremity of pain to groan,
As troubled with the gravel and the stone.
(Whole shelves are in our reins) but (Fates so please)
By Artists help we late have got some ease.
Thanks to our Patriots: O when I look
On you, I must acknowledge to a Brook
My River had been turned, had not your care
Been ever studious for our best welfare.
(My recollection help me) you are he
That up to Stanes and down as far as Lee,
Are my great Lord in chief; first than I bow
To your Inauguration, and I now
Rouse me in my Sea Chariot, drawn or led
By your own Griffons: Birds, who have the head
Of Eagles, Lion's body, wings beside,
All Symbols of that Praetor, who shall guide
So great a state; know further, Griffons can
Snatch from the Earth the harnessed horse and man
To pray on them at pleasure, these imply
That you must always have an eagle's eye
To out gaze the Sun, and keep that Aquilant sight
To see what's wrong, and to distinguish right.
The Lion's strength and boldness you must have
(With all his pity,) for to such as crave
Or yield unto him, aining themselves dying,
Scorning to kill, he will not touch them lying:
But such as strive or shall oppugn his laws,
He rends and tears them with his Kingly paws.
The wings your Griffons bear, import what speed
should be applied to such as justice need:
But why should I though best of Neptune's sons
(Whose stream almost by your permission runs)
Instruct him who can teach? since the last year
Till this day, never ran my Tides so clear
As now they do, were never so become
With Barges, Ensigns; Trumpets, Fyfe and Drum,
Me thinkes you make me young again to view
Old customs kept, and (in them) all things new.
Though I by name of Thamesis ame known
My streams are yours, you welcome to your own,
Pass, and return safe, thus much on we build,
What's on my Waters wanting Land shall yield.
IF a true Shepherd you desire to see,
Look this way, for he's embleamed here in me:
But you grave Praetor raised to this high state,
He whom as now I only personate
The numerous throng, which you this day behold
Are your own Sheep, this City is their fold,
And by your grave discretion they shall best,
Know where to browse by day, by night to rest.
As I, so you must on a Dial sit
Which hath no Gnomon but my staff to it,
And such your Sword is now, your wakeful eye
Must still be open to watch where you can spy
The Ravenous Wolf to press, and block the way,
Lest he on any of your Flock should prey:
Although my Dog fly from him, who hath been
Rent with his paw, and fears his horrid grin,
Yet at all hours (you see) I ready stand
With armed hart, and Sheephook in my hand,
(So with your Sword must you) both with an high
Undaunted Spirit, and with a Vigilant eye,
Lest any envious thorn, or schratching briar,
May raze their Skins, or on their Fleeces tire,
And that your charge so carefully be borne
They may be never But in Season shorn:
Great reason too you have, for by this Trade,
(Of which Great Freeman, you first Free were made)
The whole Land's Cloth, no Mystery, no Art,
Science, or Manifacture, that hath part
In Theory or Practic, but must all
Give due respect to this in general:
For since the Trade of Clothing first begun,
Both from the scorching of the summer's Sun,
And blustering North-Winds, Rich, Poor, Young and Old
Have been defenced, nor could that Fleece of Gold
Colchos still boasts, (in the'Auncient Poets rode
So useful prove, or make so fine a thread
With ours, (low prized because not counted rare)
No remote Climat's able to compare:
It is that only Marchand Zewhich brings
All novels wanting here, even foreign Kings
Have thought themselves Rich Habited to have worn
Such Cloth as for the commonness we scorn,
Oh bless then our increase, those that have been
I'th' World's remote parts, and strange Nations seen,
For want of Cloth find them go naked there,
Yet men like us, and the same Image bear,
Make much Sir of your great Charge, 'tis not mine,
Y' are the true Shepherd, I my place resigns.
I Mercury, the Patron of all Trade,
Of Traffic and Commerce, am this day made
A speaker from the Gods: (for my quick motion
Can sail as well upon the Land as Ocean:
And who the Merchant better can assure,
Then Mercury, the Lord of Mercature?
To you, this Day with state and power endowed,
Whose winged Ships all foreign Seas have ploughed,
And maugre, surge, gust; or tempestuous flaw
Discovered what our Polestar never saw.
They from cold Arctos to the burning Zone
Have washed their keels to find out lands unknown.
Crossing the Boreal and the austral lines,
To view the set and rise of all the Signs.
To you whose Factors in both Indies lie,
The East and West: (all parts both far and nigh,)
Who sometimes up, then down the Volga steer,
To know in Musco what is cheap or dear:
And what Hesperian Tagus can afford,
(To match this noble Island) take aboord.
There's nothing the brave Persian can hold rare,
But hither brought by your great Cost and Care.
The potent Turk (although in faith adverse)
I pd th he with England can commerce.
What Genova, Luca, Florence, Naples yields,
What grows, or's found through all the Latian fields.
What is in China, Greece, or Ormous sold,
(That Diamond worthy to be set in Gold.)
For Norway, Dansk, France, Spain, the Netherlands,
What's best in them, comes frequent to our hands.
And for transportage of some surplus ware,
(Our own wants furnished) what we best can spare.
No rarity for profit or for pleasure,
But brought to us in an abundant measure.
To this brave Isle, (by Neptune moared round)
You give a Wall; not fixed on any ground,
But moving 'tween the Ocean and the Air,
Which as you build, so yearly you repair.
And (though a wooden Fabric) so well knit,
That should invasive force once menace it
With loud voiced Thunder, mixed with Sulphurous flame,
'Twould sink, or send them back with fear and shame.
Grave Sir, no other precedents you need
To follow now, then him whom you succeed:
Next on your Motto think: so happy prove,
Let your trust be in him that reigns above.
Grave Praetor, with your Censors, (Sheriffs elected,
And now in place) it is from you expected,
That having your Authority from Kings,
(And many hundred years since) all such things
As Custom (by Time strengthened) hath made good,
You should maintain, withal your livelihood,
Which that you will perform, we doubt the less.
When we consider who's your patroness,
The Holy and blessed Virgin, (further) this
Fabric before you placed, The Bower of bliss.
If we to greater, less things may compare
These present, but the petty Symbols are
Of what is future; for bare Prudence here
Pt and confin'd in humane knowledge, there
Shall be reduced to Wisdom that's Divine.
Temperance (which is bare Abstinence) shall shine
In clarity immaculate: justice, which
Oft sways the Balance so, that to the Rich
It most inclines, shall by an equal Scale,
(Leaning nor this, nor that way) so prevail,
That Right in glorious Star-wreaths shallbe crowned,
And Injury in tenebrous Lethe drowned.
Brave Fortitude which chiefly doth subsist
In opposition of the Antigonist,
(Whether that he the Bodies mortal state
Seek to supplant, or Soul insidiate)
Shall stand impugnable, and thenceforth be
Fined and repured to all Eternity:
When you arrive at yon Celestial Tower,
Which aptly may be titled freeman's Bower.
The way to find which, through these virtues lies
Called Cardinal: The steps by which to rise,
These Grace's show, Faith, Hope, and Love attend you:
Who on their unseen wings shall soon ascend you.
These (when all Earth's pomp fails) your prayers shall bring
Where Saints and Angels Haleluiahs' sing.
Sleep may you soundly Sir, to morrow pressed
To a years trouble for this one nights rest,
In which may Stars and Planits all conspire,
To warm you so by their celestial Fire
Aries whose Gold-Fleece Greece doth so renown
May both enrich you and this Glorious town,
That Taurus in your strength may so appear,
You this great weight may on your Shoulders bear:
That the two Twins the Mother's blessed increase,
May in this City still continue peace.
That Cancer who incites to hate and spleen
May not in your fair Government be seen
That Leo waiting on your judgement seat
May moderate his rage and scorching heat,
That the Celestial Maid may you advice
Virgins and Orphans still to patronise
And rather than your justice here should fail,
Libra no more be seen with Golden scale
And that the Scorpion's sting may be so charmed
The poor may not be wronged, nor innocent harmed,
That Chirons' bent bow so may guide your will,
You may still aim, but never shoot to kill:
And Capricorn though all things said to dare
Though he have power, yet may have will to spare
That as Aquarius doth his water power
You may your goodness on this City shower,
Pisces, the last of Twelve, the Feet they guide,
From Head to Foot, O may you so provide.