ON every side, whereas I glance my roving eye,
Silence in all ears bent I plainly do espy:
But if your eager looks do long such toys to see,
As heretofore in comical wise, were wont abroad to be:
Your lust is lost, and all the pleasures that you sought,
Is frustrate quite of toying Plays. A sudden change is wrought
For lo, our authors Muse, that masked in delight,
Hath forced his Pen against his kind, no more such sports to writ.
Muse he that lust, (right worshipful) for chance hath made this change,
For that to some he seemed too much, in young desires to range:
In which, right glad to please: seeing that he did offend,
Of all he humbly pardon craves: his Pen that shall amend:
And yet (worwipfull Audience,) thus much I dare avouch.
In Comedies, the greatest Skill is this, rightly to touch.
All things to the quick: and eke to frame each person so,
That by his common talk, you may his nature rightly know:
A Roister aught not preach, that were to strange to hear,
But as from virtue he doth swerve, so aught his words appear:
The old man is sober, the young man rash, the Lover triumphing in joys,
The Matron grave, the Harlot wild and full of wanton toys.
Which all in one course they no wise do agreed:
So correspondent to their kind their speeches aught to be.
Which speeches well pronounced, with action lively framed,
If this offend the lookers on, let Horace then be blamed,
Which hath our Author taught at school, from whom he doth not swerve,
In all such kind of exercise decorum to observe,
Thus much for his defence (he saith) as Poetes erst have done,
Which heretofore in Comedies the self same race did roune:
But now for to be brief, the matter to express,
Which here we shall present: is this Dimon and Pythias.
A rare ensample of Friendship true, it is no Legend lie,
But a thing once done in deed as Histories do descry,
Which done of yore in long time passed, yet present shallbe here,
Even as it were in doing now, so lively it shall appear:
Lo here in Siracusae thancient Town, which onceth: Romaines won,
Here Dionysius Palace, within whose court this thing most strange was done,
Which matter mixed with mirth and care, a just name to apply,
As seems most fit we have it termed, a Tragical Comedy,
Wherein talking of Courtly toys, we do protest this flat,
We talk of Dionysius Court, we mean no Court but that,
And that we do so mean, who wisely calleth to mind,
The time, the place, the Authors here most plainly shall it find,
Lo this I speak for our defence, jest of others we should be shent:
But worthy Audience, we you pray, take things as they be meant,
Whose upright judgement we do crave, with heedful ear and Eye,
To here the cause, and see th'effect of this new Tragical Comedy.
TOO strange (perhaps) it seems to some,
That I Aristippus, a Courtier am become:
A Philosopher of late, not of the meanist name,
But now to the Courtly behaviour my life I frame,
Muse he that list, to you of good skill,
I say that I am a Philosopher still:
Lovers of Wisdom, are termed Philosophy,
Than who is a Philosopher so rightly as I?
For in loving of wisdom, proof doth this try,
That Frustra sapit, qui non sapit sibi:
I am wise for myself, then tell me of troth,
Is not that great Wisdom as the world goeth?
Some Philosophers in the street go ragged and torn,
And feeds on vile Roots, whom Boys laugh to scorn:
But I in fine Silks haunt Dionysius Palace,
Wherein with dainty fare myself I do solace:
I can talk of Philosophy as well as the best,
But the straight kind of life I leave to the rest:
And I profess now the Courtly Philosophy,
To crouch, to speak fair, myself I apply,
To feed the kings humour with pleasant devices,
For which I am called Regius Canis:
But wots ye who named me first the kings Dog?
It was the Rogue Diogenes that vile grunting Hog:
Let him roll in his Tub to win a vain praise,
In the Court pleasantly I will spend all my days:
Wherein what to do, I am not to learn,
What will serve mine own turn I can quickly discern:
All my time at School I have not spent vainly,
I can help one, is not that a good point of Philosophy?
I beshrew your fine ears, since you came from School,,
In the Court you have made many a wiseman a fool:
And though you paint out your feigned Philosophy,
So God help me, it is but a plain kind of flattery:
Which you use so finely in so pleasant a sort,
That none but Aristppus, now makes the King sport,
Ere you came hither, poor I was somebody,
The King delighted in me, now I am but a noddy.
In faith Carisophus, you know yourself best,
But I will not call you noddy, but only in jest,
And thus I assure you, though I came from school,
To serve in this Court, I came not yet to be the kings fool,
Or to fill his ears with servile squirilitie,
That office is yours, you know it right perfectly,
Of Parasites and Scicophants you are a grave bencher,
The King feeds you often from his own trencher,
I envy not your state, nor yet your great favour,
Then grudge not at all, if in my behaviour:
I make the King merry, with pleasant urbanity,
Whom I never abused to any man's injury.
Be cock sir, yet in the Court you do best thrive,
For you get more in on day than I do in five.
Why man in the Court, do you not see,
Rewards given for virtue, to every degree?
To reward the unworthy that world is done,
The Court is changed, a good thread hath been spun
Of Dogs will heretofore, and why? be 'cause it was liked,
And not for that it was best trimmed and picked:
But now men's ears are finer, such gross toys are not set by,
Therefore to a trimmer kind of mirth myself I apply,
Wherein though I please, it cometh not of my desert,
But of the kings favour.
It may so be, yet in your prosperity,
Despise not an old courtier, Carisophus is he,
Which hath longe time fed Dionysius humour:
Diligently to please, still at hand, there was never rumour,
Spread in this town of any small thing, but I
Brought it to the King in post by and by,
yet now I crave your friendship, which if I may attain,
most sure and unfeigned friendship I promise you again:
o we two linckt in frindshippe brother and brother,
Full well in the Court may help one another.
by'r Lady Carisophus, though you know not Philosophy,
Yet surely you are a better Courtier than I,
d yet I not so euyll a courtier that wyll séeme to dispise,
such an old courtier as you so expert and so wise,
but where as you crave mine & offer your friendship so willingly,
With heart I give you thanks for this your great courtesy:
Assuring of friendship both with tooth and nail,
While life lasteth never to fail.
A thousand thanks I give you, o friend Aristippus
O friend Carisophus.
How joyful am I sith I have to friend Aristippus now?
None so glad of Carisophus friendship as I, I make God a vow,
I speak as I think, believe me.
Sigh we are now so friendly joined, it seemeth to me,
That one of us help each other in every degree,
Prefer you my cause when you are in presence,
To further your matters to the King let me alone in your absence,
Friend Carisophus, this shall be done as you would wish,
But I pray you tell me, thus much by the way,
Wither now from this place will you take your journey?
I will not dissemble, that were against Friendship,
I go into the City some knaves to nip:
For talk with their goods, to increase the kings Treasure,
In such kind of service, I set my chief pleasure,
Farewell friend Aristippus now for a time,
A dew friend Carisophus: In good faith now,
Of force I must laugh at this solemn vow,
Is Aristippus linked in Friendship with Carisophus?
Quid cum tanto Asino, talis Philosophus?
They say, Morum similitudo consultat amicitias.
Then, how can this Friendship between us two come to pass?
We are as like in conditions, as Iacke Fletcher and his Bowlt,
I brought up in learning, but he is a very dolt
As touching good Letters: but otherwise such a crafty knave,
If you seek a whole Region, his like you can not have:
A Villain for his life, a varlet died in Graine,
You loose Money by him if you sell him for one knave, for he serves for twain:
A flattering Parasite, a sycophant also,
A comen accuser of men: to the good, an open Foe,
Of half a word, he can make a Legend of lies,
Which he will avouch with such tragical cries,
As though all were true that comes out of his mouth,
Where in deed to be hanged by and by,
He cannot tell one tale but twice he must lie,
He spareth no man's life to get the kings favour,
In which kind of servis he hath got such a savour,
That he will never leave, me think then that I,
Have done very wisely to join in friendship with him, jest perhaps I
Coming in his way might be nipped, for such knaves in presence,
We see often times put honest men to silence:
Yet I have played with his beard in knitting this knot,
I promised friendship, but you love few words: I spoke it, but I meant it not,
Who marks this friendship between us two,
Shall judge of the worldly friendship without any more a do,
It may be a right Patron thereof, but true friendship in deed,
Of naught but of virtue, doth truly proséede,
But why do I now enter into Philosophy,
Which do profess the fine kind of courtesy?
I will hence to the Court with all haste I may,
I think the king be stirring, it is now bright day,
To wait at a pinch still in sight I mean,
For wots ye what? a new Broome swéepes clean,
As to high honour I mind not to climb,
So I mean in the court to loose ne time:
Wherein happy man be his dole, I trust that I,
Shall not speed worst, and that very quickly
ONEPTUNE, immortal be thy praise,
For that so safe from Gréece we have passed the seas,
To this noble city SIRACUSAE, where we
The ancient reign of the Romaines may see,
Whose force, Gréece also here to fore hath known,
Whose virtue, the shrill trump of fame so far hath blown.
My Damon, of right high praise we aught to give,
To Neptune and all the Gods, that we safely did arrive,
The Seas I think with contrary winds, never raged so,
I am even yet so Sea-sick, that I faint as I go:
Therefore let us get some lodging quickly:
But where is Stephano?
Not far hence: a Pocks take these Maryner knaves,
Not one would help me to carry this stuff, such drunken slaves
I think be accursed of the Gods own mouths.
Stephano, leave thy raging, and let us enter SIRACUSAE
We will provide lodging, and thou shalt be eased of thy burden by 〈◊〉
Good master make haste, for I tell you plain,
This heavy burden puts poor Stephano to much pain.
Come on thy ways, thou shalt be eased, and that anon.
It is a true saying that often hath been spoken,
The pitcher goeth so long to the water, that he cometh home broken
My own proof this hath taught me, for truly sith I,
In the City have used to walk very slily,
Not with one can I meet, that will in talk join with me,
And to creep into men's bosoms some talk for to snatch,
By which into one trip or other, I might trimly them catch
And so accuse them: Now not with one can I meet,
That will join in talk with me, I am shunned like a Devil in the street.
My credit is crack where I am known, but yet I hear say,
Certain straingers are arrived, they were a good prey,
If happily I might meet with them, I fear not I,
But in talk I should trip them, and that very finely,
Which thing, I assure you, I do for mine own gain,
Or else I would not plod thus up and down, I fell you plain:
Well, I will for a while to the Court to see
What Aristippus doth, I would be loath in favour he should overrun me,
He is a subtle child, he flattereth so finely, that I fear me,
He will lick all the fat from my lips, and so outwery me:
Therefore I will not be long absent, but at hand,
That all his fine drifts I may understand.
I wonder what my Master Aristippus means now a days,
That he leaveth Philosophy, and seeks to please
King Dionysius, with such merry toys,
In Dionysius Court now he only joys,
As trim a Courtier as the best,
Ready to answer, quick in taunts, pleasant to jest,
A lusty companion to devise with fine Dames,
Whose humour to feed, his wily wit he frames.
Be cock as you say, your Master is a Minion,
A foul coil he keeps in this Court. Aristippus alone
Now rules the coast with his pleasant devices,
That I fear he will put out of conceit my Master Carisophus.
Fear not that Iacke, for like brother and brother
They are knit in true Friendship the one with the other,
They are fellows you know, and honest men both,
Therefore the one to hinder the other, they will be loath.
Yea, but I have heard say, there is falsehood in fellowship,
n the Court somtimes, one geues another finely the slippe:
Which when it is spied, it is laughed out with a scoff,
And with sporting and playing, quietly shaken of:
n which kinde of toying, thy master hath such a grace,
That he will never blush, he hath a wooden face:
But Will, my master hath Béees in his head,
f he finde me heare pratinge, I am but dead:
e is styll rotting in the Citie, there is sumwhat in the winde:
His looks bewrays his inward troubled mind:
Therefore I will be packing, to the Court by and by
If he be once angry, Iacke shall cry woe the pie.
Byr Lady, if I tarry long here, of the same sauce shall I taste,
For my master sent me on an errand, and bade me make haste,
Therefore we will depart together.
Oft times I have heard, before I came hither,
That no man can serve two masters together:
A sentence so true, as most men do take it,
At any time false, that no man can make it:
And yet by their leave, that first have it spoken,
How that may prove false, even here I will open:
For I Stephano, lo, so named by my father,
At this time serve two masters together:
And love them a like, the one and the other,
I duly obey, I can do no other,
A bondman I am so nature hath wrought me,
One Damon of Gréece, a gentleman bought me:
To him I stand bond, yet serve I another,
Whom Damon my Master loves, as his own brother:
A Gentleman too, and Pythias he is named,
Fraught with Virtue, whom vice never defamed:
These two, since at School they fell acquainted,
In mutual friendship, at no time have fainted:
But loved so kindly, and friendly each other,
As though they were Brothers by Father and Mother:
Pithagoras learning, these two have embraced,
Which both are in virtue so narrowly laced:
That all their whole doings do fall to this issue,
To have no respect, but only to virtue:
All one in effect: all one in their going,
All one in their study, all one in their doing:
These Gentlemen both, being of one condition,
Both alike of my service have all the fruition:
Pythias is joyful, if Damon be pleased:
If Pythias be served, than Damon is eased:
Serve one, serve both: so near, who would win them?
I think they have but one heart between them:
In traveling Countries, we three have contrived,
Full many a year: and this day arrived
At SIRACUSAE in Sicilia that ancient Town,
Where my Masters are lodged: and I up and down,
Go seeking to learn what News here are walking,
To hark of what things the people are talking.
I like not this Soil: for as I go plodding,
I mark there two, there three, their heads always nodding,
In close secret wise, still whispering together:
If I ask any question, no man doth answer:
But shaking their heads, they go their ways speaking,
I mark how with tears, their wet eyes are leaking:
Some strangeness there is, that breedeth this musinge.
Well: I will to my Masters, and tell of their using,
That they may learn, and walk wisely together,
I fear, we shall curse the time we came hither.
Will, didst thou hear the Ladies so talk of me,
What aileth them? from their nips shall I never be free?
Good faith sir, all the Ladies in the Court, do plainly report,
That without mention of them, you can make no sport:
They are your Plain song to sing Descant upon,
If they wear not, your mirth were gone,
Therefore master, jest no more with women in any wise,
If you do, by cock your are like to know the price.
By'r lady Will, this is good counsel, plainly to jest
Of women, proof hath taught me it is not best,
I will change my copy, how be it, I care not a quinche,
I know the galled horse will soon winch:
But learn thou secretly what privily they talk
Of me in the Court, among them slily walk,
And bring me true news thereof.
I will sir, master thereof have no doubt, for I
Where they talk of you, will inform you perfectly.
Do so my boy: if thou bring it finely to pass,
For thy good service, thou shalt go in thine old coat at Christmas.
Enter Damon, Pythias, Stephano.
Stephano, is all this true that thou hast told me.
Sir, for lies, hitherto ye never controlled me,
O that we had never set foot on this land,
Where Dionysius reigns, with so bloody a hand,
Every day he showeth some token of cruelty,
With blood he hath filled all the streets in the City:
I tremble to hear the people's murmuring,
I lament, to see his most cruel dealing:
I think there is no such tyrant under the Sun,
O my dear masters, this morning what hath he done?
What is that? tell us quickly.
As I this morning passed in the street,
With a woeful man (going to his death) did I meet,
Many people foldwed, and I of one secretly,
Asked the cause, why he was condemned to die?
Whispered in mine ear, naught hath he done but thus,
In his sleep he dreamt he had killed Dionysius,
Which dream told abroad was brought to the king in post,
By whom condemned for suspicion, his life he hath lost:
Marcia was his name as the people said.
My dear friend Damon, I blame not Stephano.
For wishing we had not come hither, seeing it is so:
That for so small cause, such cruel death doth ensue.
My Pythias, where Tyrants reign, such cases are not new,
Which fearing their own state for great cruelty,
To sit fast as they think, do execute speedily
All such as any light suspicion have tainted.
With such quick carvers, I list not be acquainted.
So are they never in quiet, but in suspicion still,
When one is made away, they take occasion another to kill:
Ever in fear, having no trusty friend, void of all people's love,
And in their own conscience, a continual Hell they prove.
As things by their contraries are always best proved,
How happy are then merciful Princes of their people beloved?
Having sure friends every where, no fear doth touch them,
They may safely spend the day pleasantly, at night
(Secure dorm●uatin utranque aurem
O my Damon, if choice were offered me, I would choose to be Pythias
As I am, (Damon's friend:) rather then to be king Dionysius.
And good cause why: for you are entirely beloved of one,
And as far as I hear, Dionysius is beloved of none.
That state is most miserable, thrice happy are we,
Whom true love hath joined in perfect Amity:
Which amity first sprung, without vaunting be it spoken, that is true
Of likeliness of manners, took root by company, & now is conserved by virtue
Which virtue always through worldly things do not frame
Yet doth she archive to her followers immortal fame:
Whereof if men were careful, for virtues sake only
They would honour friendship, and not for commodity:
But such as for profit in friendship do link,
When storms come, they slide away sooner than a man will think:
My Pythias, the some of my talk falls to this issue,
To prove no friendship is sure, but that which is grounded on virtue.
My Damon, of this thing, there needs no proof to me,
The Gods forbid, but that Pythias with Damon in all things should agree
For why it is said: Amicus alteripse,
But that true friends should be two in body: but one in mind,
As it were one transformed into another, which against 〈◊〉
Though it seem: yet in good faith, when I am alone,
I forget I am Pithisas, me think I am Damon.
That could I never 〈◊〉, to forget myself, full well I know,
Wheresoever I go, that I am PAUPER STEPHANO:
But I pray you sir, for all your Philosophy,
See that in this Court you walk very wisely:
You are but newly come hither, being strangers ye know,
Many eyes are bend on you in the streets as ye go:
Many spies are abroad, you can not be too circumspect.
Stephano, because thou art careful of me thy master, I do thee praise,
Yet think this for a surety, no state to displease:
By talk or otherwise, my friend and I intend, we will here
As men that come to see the soil & manners of all men of every degree,
Pythagoras said, that this world was like a Stage,
Whereon many play their parts: the lookers on the sage
Philosophers are saith he, whose part is to learn
The manners of all Nations, and the good from the bad to discern.
Good faith sir, concerning the people they are not gay,
And as far as I see; they be Mummers, for naught they say,
For the most part what soever you ask them:
The soil is such, that to live hear I can not like.
Thou speakest according to thy learning, but I say,
Omnis solum fortis patria: A wise man may live every where:
Therefore my dear friend Pythias,
Let us view this Town in every place,
And then consider the People's manners also.
As you will my Damon, but how say you Stephano?
As it not best ere we go further, to take some repast?
In faith, I like well this question, sir: for all your haste,
To eat somewhat I pray you, think it no folly,
It is high dinner time, I know by my belly.
Then let us to our lodging depart, when dinner is done,
We will view this City as we have begun.
Once again in hope of good wind, I hoist up my sail,
I go into the city to find some prey for mine avail:
I hunger while I may see these strangers, that lately
Arrived, I were safe if once I might meet them happily,
Let them bark that lust, at this kind of gain,
He is a fool that for his profit will not take pain:
Though it be joined with other men's hurt, I care not at all,
For profit I will accuse any man, hap what shall
But soft sirs, I pray you buysh what are they that comes here,
By their apparel, and countenance some strangers they appear,
I will shroud myself secretly, even here for a while,
To hear all their talk that I may them beguile.
A shorre horse soon curried, my belly waxeth thinner,
I am as hungry now as when I went to dinner:
Your philosophical diet, is so fine and small,
That you may eat your dinner & supper at once, & not surfaite at all.
Stephano, much meat breeds heaviness, thin diet makes thee light
I may be lighter thereby but I shall never run the faster.
I have had sufficiently discourse of amity,
Which I had at dinner with Pythias and his pleasant company
Hath fully satisfied me, it doth me good to feed mine eyes on him.
Course or discourse, your course is very course for all your talk,
You had but one bare course, and that was Pike, rise and walk,
And surely for all your talk of Philosophy,
I never heard that a man with words could fill his belly,
Feed your eyes (quoth you) the reason from my wisdom swerveth,
I stared on you both, and yet my belly starveth▪
Ah Stephano, small diet maketh a fine memory.
I care not for your crafty Sophistry,
You two are fine, let me be fed like a gross knave still,
I pray you licence me for a while to have my will:
At home to tarry whiles you take view of this city,
To find some odd victuals in a corner, I am very witty.
At your pleasure sir, I will wait on myself this day,
Yet attend upon Pythias, which for a purpose tarrieth at home,
So doing, you wait upon me also.
With wings on my feet I go.
Not in vain the Poet saith Natura furca expenllas, tamen usque recurrit.
For train up a bonontan never to so good a behaviour,
Yet in some point of servility, he will savour:
As this Stephano, trusty to me his Master, loving and kind,
Yet touching his belly, a very bondman & him find:
He is to be borne withal, being so just and true,
I assure you, I would not change him for no new:
But me thinks, this is a pleasant City,
The Seat is good, and yet not strong, and that is great pity.
I am safe, he is mine own.
The Air subtle and fine, the people should be witty
That devil under this Climate in so pure a Region,
A trimmer Plot I have not seen in my peregrination:
Nothing misliketh me in this Country,
But that I hear such muttering of cruelty:
Fame reporteth strange things of Dionysius,
But kings matters passing our reach, pertain not to us.
Dionysius (quoth you) since the world began,
In Cicilia never reigned so cruel a man:
A despiteful Tyrant to all men, I marvel I,
That none makes him away, and that suddenly.
My friend, the Gods forbid so cruel a thing:
That any man should lift up his Sword against the king:
Or seek other means by death him to prevent,
Whom to rule on earth, the mighty Gods have sent:
But my friend, leave off this talk of king Dionysius.
Why sir? he can not hear us.
What then? An nescis longas Regibus esse manus?
It is no safe talking of them that strikes a far off:
But leaving kings matters, I pray you show me this courtesy:
To describe in few words, the state of this City?
A travailer I am, desirous to know
The state of each Country, where ever I go:
Not to the hurt of any state, but to get experience thereby:
It is not for naught that the Poet doth cry,
Dic mihi Musa virum, captae post tempore Troyae,
Multorum hominum mores qui vidit & vibis.
In which verses, as some Writers do scan,
The Poet describeth, a perfect wise man:
Even so, I being a stranger, addicted to Philosophy,
To see the state of Countries, myself I apply.
Sir, I like this intent, but may I ask your name without scorn
My name is Damon, well known in my Country, a Gentleman borne
You do wisely to search the state of each Country,
To bear intelligence thereof whether you lust: He is a spy,
Sir, I pray you, have patience a while, for I have to do here by:
View this weak part of this City as you stand, & I very quickly
Will return to you again, and then will I show,
The state of all this Country, and of the Court also.
I thank you for your courtesy, this chanceth well that I
Met with this Gentleman so happily,
Which as it seemeth, misliketh some thing,
Else he would not talk so boldly of the king,
And that to a stranger, but lo were he comes in haste.
This is he fellow Snap, snap him up: away with him.
Good fellow thou must go with me to the Court.
To the Court sir, and why?
Well, we will dispute that before the King, away with him quickly
Is this the courtesy you promised me? and that very lately.
Away with him I say.
Use no violence, I will go with you quietly.
Ah Sirrah, byr lady, Aristippus likes Dionysius Court very well,
which in passing joys and pleasures doth excel:
Where he hath Dapsilae caenas, gemalis lectes, & auro.
●gentii turgmani zonam.
ue plied the Haruest, and stroke when the Yron was hotte,
When I spied my time, I was not squeamish to crave God wot:
t with some pleasant tyoe, I rept into the Kinges bosome.
which, Dionysius gave me Aure talentum magnum,
large reward, for so simple services,
What then? the kings praise standeth chief in bountifulness:
which thing, though I told the king very pleasantly,
Yet can I prove it by good Writers of great Antiquity:
t that shall not néede at this time, since that I haue aboundantly▪
en I lacke hereafter, I wyll vse this poinctt of Phylosophie:
t now, where as I haue felt the kynges lyberalytie,
princely as it came, I will sponde it as regallie:
is current men say, and currant comes of currendo
en wyll I make mony runne, as his nature requireth I trow,
what becomes a Philosopher best,
't to despise money above the rest:
yet not so despise it, but to have in store
Enough to serve his own turn, and somewhat more,
th sondrie sports and tauntes, yester night I delighted the kinge,
at with his lowde laughter, the whole courte did ringe:
I thought he laughed not merrier than I, when I got this money,
mumbouget for Carisophus I espy.
haste to come hither, I must handle the knave finely:
Carisophus, my dearest friend, my trusty companion,
at newes with you? where haue you heen so longe?
My best beloved friend Aristippus, I am come at last,
iue not spent all my time in wast,
e got a pray, and that a good one I trw.
What pray is that? feign would I know.
a crafty spy I have caught, I dare say,
As never was in Cicilia, before this day,
Such a one as viewed every weak place in the City,
Suruewed the Haven, and each bulwark, in talk very witty:
And yet by some words, himself he did bewray.
I think so in good faith, as you did handle him.
I handled him clerkly, I joined in talk with him courteously,
But when we were entered, I let him speak his will, and I
Sucked out thus much of his words, that I made him say plainly,
He was come hither to know the state of the City.
And not only this, but that he would understand,
The state of Dionysius Court and of the whole land.
Which words when I heard, I desired him to stay,
Till I had done a little business of the way,
Promising him to return again quickly: And so did convey
Myself to the Court for Snap the Tipstaffe, which came & upsnatched him
Brought him to the Court and in the porters lodge dispatched him:
After I ran to Dionysius as fast as I could,
And bewrayed this matter to him which I have you told:
Which thing when he heard, being very merry before,
He suddenly fell in a dump, and foaming like a Boar:
At last he swore in a great rage that he should die,
By the sword or the wheel, and that very shortly,
I am too shamefast for my travel and toil,
I crave nothing of Dionysius but only his spoil:
Little hath he about him, but a few moth-eaten crowns of gold
Cha pouched them up all ready, they are sure in hold:
And now I go in to the City to say sooth,
To see what he hath at his lodging, to make up my mouth.
My Carisophus, you have done good service, but what is the spy's name
He is called Damon, borne in Créece, from whence lately he came
By my troth, I will go see him, and speak with him to if I may
Do so I pray you, but yet by the way:
As occasion serveth, commend my service to the King.
Dictum sapienti sattest: friend Carisophus, shall I forget that thing,
Not, I warrant you, though I say little to your face,
I will lay one month for you to Dionysius when I am in place:
I speak one word for such a knave, hang me.
our fine Philosopher, out timme learned elf,
Is gone to see as false a Spy as himself:
Damon smatters as well as he of crafty Philosophy,
and can turn Cat in the pan very prettily:
but Carisophus hath given him such a mighty check,
s I thinke in the ende wyll breake his necke:
What care I for that, why would he then pry,
d learne the secret estate of our countrey and citie?
is but a stranger, by his fall let others be wise,
I care not who fall, so that I may rise:
for fine Aristippus, I will keep in with him,
is a shrewd fool to deal withal, he can swim:
d yet by my trouth, to speake my conscience playnlie,
I will use his friendship to mine own commodity:
While Dionysius favoureth him, Aristippus shallbe mine,
But if the king once frown on him, then good night Tomaline:
shallbe as strange, as though I never saw him before,
but I tarry too long, I will prate no more:
Jack, come away.
At hand sir.
At Damon's lodging if that you see,
y sturre to arise, be styll at hand by mée,
Rather then I will loose the spoil, I will blade it out.
What strange News are these, ah my Stephano?
Is my Damon in Prison, as the voice doth go?
It is true, o cruel hap, he is taken for a Spy,
and as they say, by Dionysius own mouth condemned to die.
To die? alas to: what cause?
A sycophant falsely accused him: other cause there is none,
That o Iupiter, of all wrongs the Revenger,
Seest thou this unjustice, and wilt thou stay any longer
From heaven to send down, thy hot consuming fire?
To destroy the workers of wrong, which provoke thy just ire:
Alas master Pythias, what shall we do?
Being in a strange country, void of friends & acquaintance too
Ah poor Stephano, hast thou lived to see this day?
To see thy true Master unjustly made away?
Stephano, seeing the matter is come to this extremity,
Let us make Virtue our friend, of me are necessity:
Run thou to the Court and understand secretly,
As much as thou canst of Damon's cause, and I
Will make some means to entreat Aristippus:
He can do much as I hear with king Dionysius.
I am gone sir: ah, I would to God, my travail and pain
Might restore my Master to his liberty again.
Ah woeful Pythias, sith now I am alone,
What way shall I first begin to make my moan?
What words shall I find apt for my complaint,
Damon my friend, my joy, my life is in peril, of force I must now fain
But o Music, as in joyful tunes, thy merry notes I did borrow,
So now lend me thy yernfull tunes, to utter my sorrow.
AWake ye woeful Wights,
That long have wept in woe:
Resign to me your plaints and tears,
my hapless hap to sho:
My woe no tongue can tell,
ne Pen can well descry:
O, what a death is this to hear,
DAMON my friend must die.
The loss of worldly wealth,
man's wisdom may restore,
And Physic hath provided too,
a Salve for every sore:
But my true Friend once lost,
no Art can well supply:
Then, what a death is this to hear?
DAMON my friend must die.
My mouth refuse the food,
that should my limbs sustain:
Let sorrow sink in to my breast,
and ransack every vain:
You Furies all at once.
on me your torments try:
Why should I live, since that I hear?
Damon my friend should die?
Gripe me you greedy griefs,
and present pangs of death,
You Sisters three, with cruel hands,
with speed now stop my breath:
Shrine me in clay alive,
some good man stop mine eye:
O death come now, seeing I hear,
Damon my friend must die.
In deign I call for Death, which heareth not my complaint,
But what wisdom is this, in such extremity to faint?
Multum iwa in re mala annimas bonus.
I will to the Court myself to make friends, and that presently,
I will never forsake my friend in time of misery:
But do I see Stephano amazed hither to run?
O Pythias, Pythias, we are all undone,
Mine own ears have sucked in mine own sorrow:
I heard Dionysius swear, that Damon should die to morrow.
How camest thou so near the presence of the king,
That thou mightest hear Dionysius speak this thing.
By friendship I gate into the Court, where in great Audience,
I heard Dionysius with his own mouth give this cruel sentence
By these express words: that Damon the Greek that crafty spy,
Without farther judgement, to morrow should die:
Believe me Pythias, with these ears I heard it myself.
Then how near is my death also, ah woe is me.
Ah my Damon, another myself: shall I forego thee?
Sir, there is no time of lamenting now, it behoveth us,
To make means to them which can did much with Dionysius:
That he be not made away ere his cause be fully heard, for we see
By evil report, things be made to Princes far worse than they be,
But lo, yonder cometh Aristippus, in great favour with king Dionysius
Entreat him to speak a good word to the king for us:
And in the mean season, I will to your lodging, to see all things safe there.
To that I agree but let us slip aside his talk to hear.
Here is a sudden change in deed, a strange Metamorphosis.
This Court is clean altered, who would have thought this?
Dionysius of late so pleasant and merry,
Is quite changed now into such melancholy:
That nothing can please him, he walked up and down,
Fretting and chafing, on every man he doth frown:
In so much that when I in pleasant words began to play,
So sternly he frowned on me, and knit me up so short,
I perceive it is no safe playing with Lions, but when it please them,
If you claw where it itch not, you shall disease them:
And so perhaps get a clap, mine own proof taught me this,
That it is very good to be merry and wise:
The only cause of this hurly burly, is Carisophus that wicked man,
Which lately took Damon for a Spy, a poor Gentleman:
And hath incencest the king against him so despitefully,
That Dionysius hath judged him to morrow to die:
I have talked with Damon, whom though in words I found very witty
Yet was he more curious than wise in viewing this City:
But truly for aught I can learn, there is no cause why
So suddenly and cruelly, he should be condemned to die:
How so ever it be, this is the short and longe,
I dare not gainsay the king, be it right or wrong:
I am sorry, and that is all I may or can do in this case,
Naught availeth persuasion, where froward opinion taketh place.
Sir, if humble suits you would not despise,
Then bow on me your pitiful eyes:
My name is Pythias, in Gréece well known,
A perfect friend to that woeful Damon,
Which now a poor captive in this Court doth lie,
By the kings own mouth as I here, condemned to die:
For whom I crave your masterships' goodness,
To stand his friend in this his great distress:
Naught hath he done worthy of Death, but very fond,
Being a stranger, he viewed this City,
For no evil practices, but to feed his eyes,
But seeing Dionysius is informed otherwise,
My suit is to you, when you see time and place,
To assuage the kings anger, and to purchase his grace,
In which doing, you shall not do good to one only,
But you shall further too, and that fully.
My friend, in this case I can do you no pleasure.
Sir, you serve in the Court as Fame doth tell.
I am of the Court in deed, but none of the Counsel.
As I hear, none is in greater favour with the King than you at this day,
The more in favour, the less I dare say.
It is a Courtiers praise to help straingers in misery.
To help an other and hurt myself, it is an evil point of courtesy.
You shall not hurt yourself to speak for the innocent.
He is not innocent, whom the king judgeth nocent.
Why sir? do you think this matter past all remedy?
So far past that Dionysius hath sworn Damon to morrow shall die.
This word my trembling heart cutteh in two,
Ah sir, in this woeful case, what witted I best to do.
Best to content yourself, when there is no remedy,
He is well relieved that for knoweth his misery,
Yet if any comfort be, it resteth in Eubulus,
The chiefest counsellor about king Dionysius:
Which pitieth Damon's case in this great extremity,
Persuading the king from all kind of cruelty.
The mighty Gods preserve you for this word of comfort,
Taking my leave of your goodness, I will now resort,
To Eubulus that good Counsellor:
But hark, me think I hear a Trumpet blow.
The king is at hand, stand close in the press, beware: if he know
You are friend to Damon, he will take you for a spy also:
Farewell I dare not be seen with you.
Gronoo, do my commandment, strike off Damon's Icons by & by,
Then bring him forth, I myself will see him executed presently.
O mighty King, your commandment will I do speedily.
Eubulus: thou hast talked in vain, for sure he shall die.
Shall I suffer my life to stand in peril of every Spy?
That he conspired against your person, his Accuser can not say,
He only viewed your City, and will you for that make him away.
What he would have done, the guess is great, he minded me to hurt
That came so slily to search out the secret estate of my Court:
Shall I still live in fear? no, not: I will cut off such Imps betime,
Lest that to my further danger, too hie they climb.
Yet have the mighty Gods, immortal Fame assigned,
To all worldly Princes, which in mercy be inclined.
Let Fame talk what she list, so I may live in safety.
The only mean to that, is to use mercy.
A mild Prince the people despiseth.
A cruel king the people hateth.
Let them hate me, so they fear me.
That is not the way to live in safety.
My sword and power shall purchase my quietness.
That is sooner procured by mercy and gentleness.
Dionysius aught to be feared.
Better for him to be well-beloved.
Fortune maketh all things subject to my power.
Believe her not she is a light Goddess, she can laugh & lower:
A kings praise standeth in the revenging of his enemy
A greater praise to win him by clemency.
To suffer the wicked live, it is no mercy.
To kill the innocent, it is great cruelty,
Is Damon innocent, which so craftily underminded Carisophus,
To understand what he could of king Dionysius:
which suruewed the Haven and each bulwark in the City,
Where battery might be laid, what way best to approach, shall I
Suffer such a one to live, that worketh me such despite?
he shall die, than I am safe, a dead dog can not bite.
But yet, O mighty, my duty bindeth me,
give such counsel as with your honour may best agree,
e strongest pillers of Princely dignitie,
find this justice, with mercy and prudent liberality,
e one iudgeth all thinges by vpright equitie,
e other rewardeth the worthy, flying eche extremitie:
to spare those, which offend maliciously,
may be called no justice, but extreme injury:
upon suspicion, of each things not well proved,
put to death presently, whom envious flattery accused,
seemeth of tyranny, and upon what fickle ground all tyrants do stand
and Lacedaemon, can teach you if it be rightly scanned:
not only these Citizens, but who curiously seeks,
whole Histories of all the world, not only of Romaines & Greeks
Shall well perceive of all Tyrants the ruinous fall,
Their state uncertain, beloved of none, but hated of all:
Of merciful Princes to set out the passing felicity
I need not: enough of that, even these days do testify:
They live devoid of fear, their sleeps are found, they dréed no enemy
They are feared and loved, and why? they rule with justice & mercy
Extending justice to such, as wickedly from justice have swerved,
Mercy unto those, where opinion, simpleness have mercy deserved:
Of liberty naught I say; but only this thing,
Liberty upholdeth the state of a king:
Whose large bountifulness aught to fall to this issue,
To reward none, but such as deserve it for virtue:
Which merciful justice, if you would follow, & provident liberality
Neither the Caterpillars of all Courts, Et fruges consumere nati.
Parasites with wealth puffed up, should not look so high,
Nor yet for this simple fact, poor Damon should die.
With pain mine ears have heard this vain talk of mercy,
I tell thee, fear and terror, defendeth kings only:
Till he be gone whom I suspect, how shall I live quietly?
Whose memory with chilling horror, fills my breast day & night violently
My dreadful dreams of him, bereaves my rest: On bed I lie
Shaking and trembling, as one ready to yield his throat to Damon sword▪
This quaking dread, nothing but Damon's blood can stay,
Better he die, than I to be tormented with fear always:
He shall die, though Eubulus consent not thereto,
It is lawful for kings as they list all things to do.
O my Damon.
O my Pythias, seeing Death must part us, farewell for ever.
O Damon, o my sweet friend.
Away from the Prisoner, what a press have we here.
As you commanded, O mighty King, we have brought Damon
Then go to, make ready I will not stir out of this place,
Till I see his head strooken off before my face.
It shallbe done sir: Because your eyes have made such a do,
will knock down this your Lantern, & shut up your shop window too.
O mighty king, where as no truth, my innocent life can save,
But that so greedily you thrust, my guiltless blood to have:
Albeit, (even for thought) for aught against your person:
yet now I pled not for life, ne will I crave your pardon:
But seeing in Gréece my Country, where well I am known,
have worldly things, fit for mine Alliance when I am gone,
To dispose them or I die, if I might obtain leisure,
would accounted it (O king) for a passing great pleasure:
not to prolong my life thereby, for which I reckon not this,
But to set my things in a stay: and surely I will not miss,
Upon the faith which all gentlemen aught to embrace,
o returne agayne at your time to appoynte, to yeld my body here in this place:
grant me (O King (such time to dispatch this injury,
And I will not fail, when you appointed, even here my life to pay.
A pleasant request, as though I could trust him absent,
ho in no wise I can not trust beinge present:
and yet though I swore the contrary, do that I require,
give me a pledge for thy return, and have thine own desire:
is as near now as he was before.
There is no surer nor greater pledge, than the faith of a Gentleman
It was wont to be, but otherwise now the world doth stand,
therefore do as I say, else presently yield thy neck to the sword,
I might with mine honour I would recall my word.
Stand to your word, O King, for Kings aught nothing say,
that they would perform, in perfect deeds always:
A you did require, when Damon his suit did mean,
which, with heart and stretched hands, most humble thanks I give,
that you may not say, but Damon hath a friend,
That loves him better than his own life, and will do to his end:
Take me. O mighty King, my life I pawn for his,
Strike off my head, if Damon hap at his day to miss.
What art thou, that chargest me with my word so boldly here?
I am Pythias, a Greek borne, which hold Damon my friend full dear
To dear perhaps, to hazard thy life for him, what fondness moveth thee
No fondness at all, but perfect amity.
A mad kind of amity: advise thyself well, if Damon fail at his day
Which shallbe justly appended, wilt thou die for him, to me his life to pay.
Most willingly, O mighty king: if Damon fail, let Pythias die.
Thou seemest to trust his words, that pawnest thy life so frankly.
What Damon saith, Pythias believeth assuredly.
Take heed for life, worldly men break promise in many things.
Though worldly men do so, it never haps amongst friends.
What callest thou friends, are they not men? is not this true?
Men they be, but such men as love one an other only for virtue.
For what virtue, dost thou love this spy, this Damon.
For that virtue, which yet to you is unknown.
Eubulus, what shall I do? I would dispatch this Damon fain,
But this foolish fellow so chargeth me, that I may not call back my word again.
The reverent majesty of a King, stands chief in keeping his promise
What you have, said, this whole Court beareth witness:
Save your honour what so ever you do.
For saving mine honour, I must forbear my will, go to,
Pythias, seeing thou tookest me at my word, take Damon to thee:
For two mounthes he is thine, unbind him, I set him free,
Which time once expired, if he appear not the next day by noon,
With out further delay, thou shalt loose thy life, and that full soon.
Whether he die by the way, or lie sick in his bead,
If he return not then, thou shalt either hang or loose thy head.
For this O mighty king, I yield immortal thanks, O joyful day
Gronee, take him to thee, bind him, see him kept in safety.
f he escape assure thy selfe, for him thou shalt die,
Eubulus, let us depart, to talk of this strange thing within,
I follow.
Damon, thou servest the Gods well to day, be thou of comfort,
As for you sir, I think you will be hanged in sport,
You heard what the King said? I must keep you safely,
By cock so I will, you shall rather hang than I:
Come on your way,
My Damon, farewell, the Gods have thee in kepeing.
O my Pythias, my Pledge farewell, I part from thee weeping
But joyful at my day appointed I will return again,
When I will deliver thee from all trouble and pain:
Stephano will I leave behind me to wait upon thee in prison alone,
And I whom fortune hath reserved to this misery, will walk home,
Ah my Pythias, my Pledge, my life, my friend, farewell.
Farewell my Damon.
Loath I am to depart, sith sobs my trembling tongue doth stay,
O Music, sound my doleful plaints when I am gone my way.
I am glad he is gone. I had almost wept to, come Pythias
So God help me, I am sorry for thy foolish case,
Will't thou venture thy life for a man, so fond?
It is no venture, my friend is just, for whom I desire to die.
Here is a mad man I tell thee, I have a wife whom I love well,
And if iche woald die for her, chould ich wear in Hell:
Wilt thou do more for a man, than I would for a woman.
Yea, that I will
Then come on your ways, you must to Prison in haste,
repent this folly at last.
That shalt thou never see: but o Music as my Damon requested thee
Sound out thy doleful tunes, in this time of calamity.
Weep no more Stephano, this is but destiny,
Had not this happed, yet I know I am borne to die:
Where or in what place, the Gods know alone,
To whose judgement myself I commit, therefore leave of thy moan,
And wait upon Pythias in Prison, till I return again,
In whom my joy, my care and life doth only remain.
O my dear Master, let me go with you, for my poor company,
shallbe some small comfort in this time of misery.
O Stephano, hast thou been so long with me,
And yet dost not know the force of true amity?
I tell thee once again, my friend and I are but one,
Wait upon Pythias, and think thou art with Damon.
Whereof I may not now discourse, the time passeth away,
The sooner I am gone, the shorter shallbe my journey:
Therefore farewell Stephano, commend me to my friend Pythias
Whom I trust to deliver in time out of this woeful case.
Farewell my dear Master, since your pleasure is so,
O cruel hap, o poor Stephano:
O cursed Carisophus, that first moved this Tragedy,
But what a 'noys is this? Is all well within trow ye:
I fear all be not well within, I will go see:
Come out you weasel, are you seeking Eggs in Damon's chest,
Come out I say, wilt thou be packing? by cock you wear best.
How dared thou villain to lay hands on me?
Out sir knave or I will send ye,
Art thou not content to accuse Damon wrongfully,
But wilt thou rebbe him also, and that openly?
The King gave me the spoil, to take mine own wilt thou let me?
Thy own villain: Where is thine authority?
I am authority of myself, dost thou not know?
By'r lady, that is somewhat, but have you no more to show?
What if I have not?
Then for an earnest penny, take this blow.
shall bombast you, you mocking knave, schil put pro in my purse for this time.
Iacke give me my sword and target.
I can not come to you master, this knave doth me let. Hold master,
Away Iacke napes, 'tis I will colpheg you by and by,
slave I will have my penny worths of thee, therefore if I die,
About villain.
O Citizens, help to defend me.
Nay, they will rather help to hang thee.
Good fellow, let us reason this matter quietly, beaten me no more.
f this condition I wyll stay, yf thou swere as thou art an honest man
ou wylt say nothyng to the Kinge of this when I am gonne.
I will say nothing, here is my hand, as I am an honest man.
Then say on thy mind: I have taken a wise oath on him, have I not trow ye?
o trust such a false knaue vpon his honestie,
he is an honest man (quoth you) he may bewray all to the King,
o breke his oth for this neuer a whit, but my framon I tell you this one thing▪
you disclose this. I will devise such a way,
whilst thou livest thou shalt remember this day.
You need not devise for that, for this day is printed in my memory,
warrant you, I shall remember this beating till I die:
but seeing of courtesy you have granted that we should talk quietly,
e thinkes, in calling me knaue, you doo me muche iniurie.
Why so? I pray thee heartily?
Because I am the kings man, keeps the king any knaves?
He should not, but what he doth it is evident by thee:
And as far as I can learn or understand,
There is none better able to keep knaves in all the land.
O sir, I am a Courtier, when Courtiers shall hear tell,
How you have used me, they will not take it well.
Nay, all right courtiers will ken me thank, and wots ye why?
Because I handled a counterfeit Courtier in his kind so finely,
What syr: all are not Courtiers that have a counterfeit show,
In a trope of honest men, some knaves may stand ye know:
Such as by stealth creep in, under the colour of honesty,
Which sort under that cloak, do all kind of villainy:
A right courtier is virtuous, gentle, and full of urbanity,
Hurting no man, good to all, devoid of all villainy:
But such as thou act, fountains of squirilitie, & vain delights,
Though you hang by the courts, you are but flattering Parasites,
As well deserving the right name of courtesy,
As the coward Knight, the true praise of chivalry:
I could say more, but I will not, for that I am your well willer,
In faith Carisophus, you are no Courtier but a caterpillar,
A sycophant, a Parasite, a flatterer, and a knave?
Whether I will or not, these names you must have:
How well you deserve this, by your deeds it is known,
For that so unjustly thou hast accused poor Damon,
Whose woeful case the Gods help alone.
Sir, are you his servant that you pity his case so?
No bum troth, good man Grumbe, his name is Stephano.
I am called Onaphets, if needs you will know,
The knave beginneth to sift me, but I turn my name in & out,
Cretiso cum cretense, to make him a lout.
What mumble you with yourself Master Onaphets.
I am reckoning with myself, how I may pay my debts.
You have paid me more than you did own me.
Nay, upon a farther reckoning, I will pay you more if I know
Either you talk of that is done, or by your Sicophanticall envy,
You prick forth Dionysius the sooner, that Damon may die:
I will so pay thee, that thy bones shall rattle in thy skin,
Remember what I have said, Onaphets is my name.
The sturdy knave is gone, the devil him take,
He hath made my head, shoulders, arms, sides, and all to ache:
Thou whoreson villain boy, why didst thou wait no better?
As he paid me, so will I not die thy debtor.
Master, why do you fight with me? I am not your match you see,
You durst not fight with him that is gone, & will you wreak your anger on me
Thou villain, by thee I have lost mine honour,
Betten with a codgell like a Slave, a Uacaboun, or a lazy Lubber,
And not given one blow again, hast thou handled me well?
Master I handled you not, but who did handle you very handsomely you can tell.
Handsomely thou crack rope.
Yea sir, very handsomely I hold you a groat,
He handled you so handsomely, that he left not one more in your cote.
O I had firked him trimly thou villain, if thou hadst given me my Sword
It is better as it is, Master believe me at a word:
If he had seen your weapon, he would have been fierser,
And so perhaps beat you worse, I speak it with my heart,
You were never yet at the dealing of fence blows, but you had four away for your part
t is but your lucke, you are man good enough,
But the Wealche Onaphets, was a vengeance knave and rough,
Master you were best go home and rest in your bed,
You thinks your cap weareth to little for your head.
What? doth my head swell?
Yea as big as a Codshed, and bleades too.
I am ashamed to show my face with this hue.
No shame at all, men have been beaten far better than you,
I must go to the Chirurgeons, what shall I say when I am a dresling▪
You may say truly, you met with a knaves blessing.
By mine own experience, I prove true that many men tell,
To live in Court not beloved, better be in Hell:
What crying out? what cursing is there within of Carisophus,
Because he accused Damon to King Dionysius:
Even now, he came whining & crying into the Court for the nonce▪
shewing that one Onaphets had broke his knaves sconce:
Which strange name when they heard, every man laughed heartily,
And I by myself scanned his name secretly,
For well I knew it was some madheded child
That invented this name, that the logheaded knave might be beguiled:
In tossing it often with myself to and fro,
I found out that Onaphets, backward spelled Stephano:
I smiled in my sleeve, how to see by turning his name, he dressed him,
And how for Damon his Master's sake, with a wooden congel he blessed him
None pitied the knave, no man nor woman, but all laughed him to scorn
To be thus hated of all better unborn:
far better Aristippus hath provided I trow,
For in all the Court, I am beloved both of high and low:
I offend none, in so much that women sing this to my great praise,
Omnis Aristippum docuit colore, & locus & res.
But in all this joylity, one thing maseth me,
The strangest thing that ever was hard or known
Is now happened in this Court by that Damon:
Whom Carisophus accused, Damon is now at liberty,
For whose return Pythias his friend lieth in prison, alas in great jeopardy
To morrow is the day, which day by noon if Damon return not, earnestly
The king hath sworn that Pythias should die,
Whereof Pythias hath intelligence very secretly,
Wishing that Damon may not return, till he have paid
His life for his friend: hath it been hear to fore ever said,
That any man for his friend would die so willingly?
O noble friendship, O perfect amity,
Thy force is hear seen, and that very perfectly:
The king himself museth here at, yet is he far out of square,
That he trusteth none, to come near him not his own daughters wit he have
vnsercht to enter his chamber, which he hath made harbars his beard to shave:
Not with Knife or Safour, for all edge tools he fears,
But with hot burning Nutshales, they singe of his hears.
Was there ever man that lived in such misery?
Well, I will go in with a heavy and pensive heart too,
To think how Pythias this poor gentleman to morrow shall die
Will, by my honesty, I will mar your monk's face if you so fond prate
Iacke, by my troth, seeing you are without the Court gate,
f you play Iacke napes, in mocking my master, and dispising my face,
even here with a Pantacle, I will you disgrace:
And though you have a far better face than I,
Yet, who is better man of us two, these sistes shall try,
Unless you leave your taunting.
Thou beganst first, didst thou not say even now,
That Carisophus my Master was no man but a cow,
taking so many blows, and gave never a blow again?
I said so in deed, he is but a tame Ruffian,
that can swear by his flask & twiche hor & Gods precious lady:
And yet be will be beaten with a faggot stick:
These barking whelps were never good biters,
●e yet great crackers were ever great fighters:
but seeing you egg me so much I will somewhat more recite,
Carisophus thy master is a flattering Parisite:
glening away the sweet from the worthy in all the Court,
tragedy hath he moved of late? the devil take him he doth much hurt.
I pray you what is Aristippus thy master, is not he a Parisite to,
that with scoffing and testing in the Court makes so much a do?
He is no parasite, but a pleasant Gentleman, full of courtesy,
Thy master is a churlish lout the heir of a dung fork, as void of honesty,
thou art of honour.
Nay if you will needs be prating of my master still,
faith, I must cool you my friend Dapper Will.
take this at the beginning.
I Praise well your winning, my Pantacle is as ready as yours.
By the Mass I will box you.
By cock I will Fox you
Will, was I with you.
Iacke, did I fly?
Alas pretty cockerel, you are to weak.
In faith Dutting Duttell, you will cry creak,
Away you crack ropes, are you fight at the Court gate?
And I take you hear again, I will swinge you both, what?
I beshrew Snap the Tipstaffe that great knaves heart, y hither did come
Had he not been, you had cried ere this Victus, victa, victum,
But seeing we have breathed ourselves, if ye list,
Let us agree like friends, and shake each other by the fist.
Content am I, for I am not malicious, but on this condition,
That you talk no more so broad of my master as here you have done,
But who have we here, is Cobex epi coming yonder.
Will, let us slip aside and view him well.
What Devil, iche ween the Porters are drunk, will they not buy the gate tooday
Take in Coals for the Kings own mouth, will no body stur I say?
Ich might have lain twain bowers longer in my bed,
Cha tarried so long here, that my teeth chatter in my head.
Will, after our falling out, wilt thou laugh merrily?
I marry Iacke, I pray thee heartily.
Then follow me, and hem in a word now and then:
What brawling knave is there at the Court gate so early?
It is some brainsick Villain, I durst lay a penny.
It was you sir that cried so loud, I trow,
And bid us take in Coals for the kings mouth, even now.
'twas I indeed.
Why sir? how dare you speak such petty treason?
Doth the King eat Coals at any season?
Here is a gay world, Boys now sets old men to school,
I said well enough, what Iacke sauce, thinkest chain a fool:
It Bake house, Buttery hatch, Ritchin, and Seller;
Do they not say for the kings mouth?
What then good man Collier?
What then? seeing without coals they cannot finely dress the kings meat,
May I not say, take in coals for the kings mouth, though coals he do not eat?
Iames Christ, came ever from a collier an answer so trim?
You are learned, are you not Father Grim?
Grim is my name in deed, cham not learned, & yet the Kings collier
This vortie winter cha been to the King a seruiler,
Though I be not learned, yet cha mother wit enough whole & some
So it seems, you have so much mother wit, that you lack your father's wisdom.
Mass, cham well be set: here's is a trim cast of Murleons
What be you my pretty cockerels, that ask me these questions.
Good faith master Grim, if such Marlines on your pouch may light
They are so quick of wing that quickly they can carry it out of your sight
And though we are cockerels now, we shall have spurs one day,
And shall be able perhaps to make you a Capon:
But to tell you troth: we are the Porter's men, which early & late,
Wait on such Gentlemen as you to open the Caurtegate.
Are ye servants then?
Yea sir, are we not pretty men?
Pretty men (ꝙ you) nay, you are strong men, else you could not bear these breeches.
Are these great hose? in faith goodman Colier you see with your nose
By mine honesty, I have but for one lining in one hose, but vij else of Rug.
That is but a little, yet it makes thee seem a great Bug.
How say you good man Colier, can you find any fault here?
Nay you should find fault, marry here's trim gear,
as little knaue, doest not sweat, thou goest with great payne,
These are no hose, but water bougets, I tell thee plain:
Good for none, but such as have no buttocks.
Did you ever see two such little Robin ruddocks,
So laden with breeches? Ihill say no more, jest I offend,
Who invented these monsters first, did it to a ghostly end:
To have a male, ready to put in other folks stuff,
We see this evident by daily prooffe:
One preached of late not far hence, in no Pulpit, but in Waayne cart,
That spoke enough of this, but for my part,
I'll say no more, your own necessity,
In the end will force you to find some remedy.
Well, hold this railing knave with a talk when I am gone,
I will fetch him his filling ale for his good sermon.
Go thy way: father Grim, gaily well you do say,
It is but youngman's folly that list to play:
And mask a while in the net of their own device,
When they come to your age, they will be wise.
Bum troth, but few such roisters come to my years at this day,
They be cut off be times, or they have gone halfe their journey:
I will not tell why, let them guess that can, I mean somewhat thereby
Father Grim, because you are stirring so early,
I have brought you a bowl of wine to make you merry.
Wine, marry, that is welcome to Colliers, chill swapped of by & by
Chwas stirring so early that my very soul is dry.
This is stoutly done, will you have it warmed father Grim.
Not, it is warm enough: it is very loustous and trim,
'tis Musselden ich ween, of fellowship let me have an other spurt,
Ich can drink as easily now, as if I sat in my shirt.
By cock and you shall have it, but I will begin and that anon
It bitten avow mon companion.
Ihar vow pledge petty Zawne,
Can you speak French? here is a trim collier by this day.
What man? iche learned this when ich was a Soldier,
When ich was a lusty fellow, and could yark a whip trimly,
Better than these boy Colliers that come to the Court daily:
When there were not so many captious fellows as now,
That would toruppe men for every trifell. I wots not how:
As there was one Damon, not long since, taken for a Spy,
How justly I know not, but he was condemned to die.
This Wine hath warmed him, this comes well to pass,
We shall know all now, for in VINO VERITAS,
Father Grim, who accused this Damon to King Dionysius?
A vengeance take him, 'twas a gentleman, one Master Crowsphus.
Crowsphus, you clip the kings language, you would have said Carisophus
But I perceive now, either the wind is at the South,
Or else your tongue cleaneth to the roof of your mouth.
A murian take thick Wine, it so intoxicate my brain,
That to be hanged by and by, I cannot speak plain.
You speak knavishly plain, seeing my master you do mock,
In faith ere you go, I will make you a lobbe cecke:
Father Grim, what say they of this Damon abroad?
All men are sorry for him, so help me God.
They say a false knave cused him to the King wrongfully,
And he is gone, and should be here to morrow to die,
Or else his fellow which is in prison, his room shall supply:
I'll not be his half for vortie shillings, I tell you plain,
I think Damon be to wise to return again.
Will no man speak for them in this woeful case.
Not Ihill warrant you, one master Stippus is in place,
Where he may do good, but he frames himself so,
Whatsoever Dionysius willeth to that he will not say no:
'tis a subtle Uor, he will not tread on thorns for none,
A merry Harecoppe 'tis and a pleasant companion,
A right courtier, and can provide for one.
Will, how like you this gear: your master Aristippus also,
At this Colliers' hand hath had a blow:
But in faith father Grim cannot ye Colliers,
Provide for yourselves far better than Courtiers.
Yes I trow, black Colliers go in thread bore coats,
Yet so provide they, that they have the fair white groats:
Ich may say in counsel, though all day I moil in dourte,
Ihill not change lives with any in Dionysius Court:
For though their apparel be never so fine,
Yet sure their credit is far worse than mine:
And by cock I may say, for all their high looks,
I know some sticks full deep in merchants books:
And deeper will fall in, as fame me tells,
As long as in steed of Money, they take up Hawks hoods & Bells:
Whereby they fall into a swelling disease, which Colliers do not know
'tath a mad name, it is called ich ween, Centum pro cento.
Some other in Courts, make others laugh merrily,
When they wail and lament their own estate secretly:
Friendship is dead in Court, Hypocrisy doth reign,
Who is in favour now, to morrow is out again:
The state is so uncertain, that I by my will,
Will never be courtier, but a collier still.
It seemeth that Colliers have a very trim life.
Colliers' get money still: Tell me of troth,
Is not that a trim life now as the world goeth?
All day, though I toil with main and might,
With money in my pouch, I come home merry at night,
And sit down in my chair by my wife fair Alison,
And turn a Crab in the fire, as merry as Pope Iohn.
That Pope was a merry fellow, of whom folk talk so much.
Had to be merry withal, had gold enough in his hutch:
Can gold make men merry? they say who can sing so merry a note,
As he that is not able to change a groat?
Who sings in that case sings never in tune I know for my part
That a heavy pouch with gold makes a light heart:
Of which I have provided for a dear year good store,
And these Benters I trow, shall anon get me more.
By serving the Court with coals you gained all this money.
By the Court only I assure ye.
After what sort I pray thee tell me?
Nay, there bate me an ace (quod Boulon) I can wear a horn & blow it not
By'r lady the wiser man.
Shall I tell you by what slight I got all this money
Then ich wear a noddy in deed: not, not, I warrant ye,
Yet in few words I tell you this one thing,
He is a very fool that can not gain by the King.
Well said father Grim, you are a wily Colier & a brave,
I see now there is no knave to the old knave.
Such knaves have money, when courtiers have none,
But tell me, is it true that a broad is blown?
What is that?
Hath the King made those fair Damsels his daughters,
To be come now fine and trim Barbers.
Yea truly to his own person.
Good fellows believe me, as the case now stands,
I would give one sack of Coals, to be washed at their hands:
If ich came so near them, for my wit chould not give three chips,
If ich could not steal one swap at their lips.
Will, this knave is drunk, let us dress him,
Let us riffell him so that he have not one penny to bless him,
And steal away his Debenters too.
Content, invent the way, and I am ready.
Faith, and I will make him a noddy:
Father Grim, if you pray me well, I will wash you & shave you too
even after the same fashion as the kings daughters do:
In all points as they handle Dionysius, I will dress you trim & fine
Chuld vain learn y: come on then, I'll give thee a whole pint of wine
At Tavern for thy labour, when cha money for my Be●nters hear.
Come mine own Father Grim, sit down.
Mass to begin withal, hear is a trim chair.
What man I will use you like a prince: sir boy, fetch me my gear.
Here sir.
Hold up father Grim.
Me seem my head doth swim.
My Costly perfumes make that, away with this sir Bay: be quick.
Aloyse, aloyse, how how pretty it is, is not here a good face?
A fine Oules eyes, a mouth like an Oven,
Father you have good Butter teeth, full seen,
You wear weaned, else you would have been a great Calf,
Ah trim lips to sweep a Manger, here is a chin,
As soft as the hoof of an horse.
Doth the kings daughters rub so hard?
Hold your head strait man, else all will be marred,
By'r lady, you are of a good complexion,
A right Croyden sanguine, beshrew me,
Hold up father Grim, Will can you bestir ye?
Me thinks after a marvelous fashion you do besmoure me.
It is with VNGVENTUM of Daucus Maucus', that is very costly,
I give not this washing ball to every body:
After you have ben dressed so finely at my hand,
You may kiss any Lady's lips within this land:
A, you are trimly washed, how say you, is not this trimm water?
It may be wholesome, but it is vengeance sour.
It scours the better, sir boy, give me my razor,
Here at hand sir.
God's aims, 'tis a chopping knife, 'tis no Raysour.
It is a Raysour and that a very good one,
It came lately from Palarrime, it cost me twenty crowns alone
Your eyes dassell after your washing, these spectacles put on?
Now view this Raysour, tell me, is it not a good one?
They be gay Barnikels, yet I see never the better.
In deed, they be a young sight, and that is the matter,
But I warrant you, this Raysour is very easy.
Go too then, since you begun, do as please ye.
Hold up father Grim.
O your Raysour doth hurt my lip.
Not, it scrapeth of a pimpell, to ease you of the pip,
I have done now, how say you? are you not well?
Chamlighter than ich was, the truth to tell.
Will you sing after your shaving?
Mass content, but Ihill be polled first or I sing.
Nay that shall not need, you are pould near enough for this time.
Go to then lustyly, I will sing in my man's voice,
Chave a troubling base buss.
You are like to bear the bob, for we will give it,
Set out your bussing base, and we will quiddell upon it.
Too nidden, and too nidden.
Too nidden, and toodle toadle do nidden,
Is not Grim the collier most finely shaven.
Why my fellows think iche am a cow, that you make such tooyin
Nay by'r lady, you are no cow by your singing,
Yet your wife told me you were an Ox.
Did she so? 'tis a peslens queen she is full of such mocks.
But go to, let us sing out our song merely.
The Song at the shaving of the collier.
Such Barber's God sand you at all times of need.
That can dress you finely, and make such quick speed.
Your face like an Incorne, now shineth so gay,
That I with your Nostrils of force must needs play,
With too nidden, and too nidden.
With too nidden, and todle todle do nidden,
Is not Grim the collier most finely shaven.
With shaving you shine like a pestle of Pork:
Here is the trimmest Hogs flesh from London to York.
It would be trim Baken to hang up a while,
To play with this Hogline, of force I must smile,
With too nidden, and too nidden
With too nidden, and todle etc.
Your shaving doth please me, I am now your debtor.
Your wife now will buss you, because you are sweater.
Near would I be poled, as near as cham shaven.
Then out of your jerkin needs must you be shaken.
With too nidden, and too nidden, etc.
It is a trim thing to be washed in the Court.
Their hands are so fine that they never do hurt.
Me think ich am lighter than ever ich was.
Our shaveinge in the Court hath brought this to pass.
With too nidden, and too nidden.
With too nidden and todle todle do nidden.
Is not Grim the Colier most finely shaven.
THis is trimly done, now Ihill pitch my coals not far hence,
And then at the Tavern I'll bestow whole twain pence.
Farewell cock, before the collier again do us seek,
t vs into the Courte to parte the spoyle, share and share like.
Away then.
Out alas, where shall I make my moan?
y Pouche, my Benters and all is gone,
where is that villain that did me shave?
hath rob me alas of all that I have.
Who crieth so at the Court gate.
I, the poor Colier, that was rob of late.
Who rob thee?
Two of the Porter's men that did shave me.
Why? the Porter's men are no Barbers?
A vengeance take them they are quick carners.
What stature wear they of?
As little dapper knaves as they trimly could scoff.
They were Lackeys, as near as I can guess them.
Such Lackeys make me lack, an halter beswenge them,
●am undone they have my Benters too.
Dost thou know them if thou seest them?
Yea that I do?
Then come with me, we will find them out and that quickly.
I follow mast Tipslafe, they be in the Court it is likely.
Then cry no more, come away.
If ever you will show your friendship, now is the time,
seeing the king is displeased with me, of my part without any crime
It should appear it comes of some evil behaviour,
That you so suddenly are cast out of favour.
Nothing have I done but this in talk I overthwarted Eubulus,
When he lamented Pythias case to King Dionysius,
Which to morrow shall die, but for that false knave Damon:
He hath left his friend in the briars and now is gone.
We grew so hot in talk, that Eubulus protested plainly,
Which held his care open to parasitical flattery.
And now in the kings ear like a bell he rings,
crying that flatterers have been the destroyers of kings:
Which talk in Dionysius heart hath made so deep impression,
That he trusteth me not as heretofore in no condition:
And some words broke from him as though that he,
Began to suspect my troth and honesty:
Which you of friendship I know will defend, how so ever the world goeth,
My friend for my honesty, will you not take an oath?
To swear for your honesty, I should loose mine own.
Should you so in deed? I would that were known,
Is your void friendship come thus to pass.
I follow the proverb: Amicus Vsque ad auras.
Where can you say, I ever lost mine honesty.
You never lost it, for you never had it, as far as I know.
Say you so friend Aristippus whom I trust so well?
Because you trust me, to you the truth I tell.
Will you not stretch one point? to bring me in favour again?
I love no stretching, so may I breed mine own pain.
A friend aught to shun no pain, to stand his friend in stead.
Where true friendship is, it is so in very deed.
Why sir? hath not the chain of true friendship, linked us two together?
The chiefest link lacked thereof, it must needs desever.
What link is that? feign would I know.
Honesty.
Doth honesty knit the perfect knot in true friendship,
Yea truly, and that knot so knit will never slip.
Belike then there is no friendship but between honest men.
Between the honest only, for Amicitia inter bonus: saith a learned man
Yet evil men use friendship in things unhonest, where fancy doth serve
That is no friendship, but a lewd liking, it lasts but a while.
What is the perfectest friendship among men that ever grew?
Where men loved one another, not for profit but for virtue.
Are such friends both a like in joy and also in smart?
They must needs, for in two bodies they have but one heart.
Friend Aristippus, deceive me not with Sophistry,
there no perfect friendship, but where is virtue and honesty?
What a Devil than meant Carisophus,
To join in friendship with fine Aristippus?
In whom is as much virtue, truth and honesty,
As there are true feathers in the three Craines of the ventrie:
Yet these fethers haue the shadow of liuely feathers the truth to sa
But Carisophus, hath not the shadow of an honest man,
To be plain, because I know thy villainy:
In abusinge Dionysius, to many men's injury:
Under the cloak of friendship, I played with his head,
And sought means how thou with thine own fancy might be lead,
My friendship thou soughtest for thine own commodity,
As worldly men do by profit measuring amity:
Which I perceiving, to the like myself I framed,
Wherein I know of the wise I shall not be blamed:
If you ask me Quare. I answer, Quia prudentis est multum
To speak more plainer, as the proverb doth go,
In faith Carisophus, Cum cretence cretiso:
Yet a perfect friend I show myself to thee in one thing,
I do not dissemble, now I say I will not speak for thee to the King,
Therefore sink in thy sorrow, I do not deceive thee,
A false knave I found thee, a false knave I leave thee.
He is gone? is this friendship to leave his friend in the plain fields?
Well I see now, I myself have beguiled,
In matching with that false for in amity:
Which hath me used to his own commodity.
Which seeing me in distress, unfeignedly goes his ways,
Lo this is the perfect friendship among men now a days:
Which kind of friendship toward him I used secretly:
And be with me the like, hath requited me craftily.
It is the God's judgement, I see it plainly,
For all the world may know, Incide in foeam quam fed.
Well I must content myself none other help I know,
Until a merrier gale of wind may hap to blow:
Who deals with Kings in matters of great weight,
When froward will, doth bear the chiefest sway:
Must yield of force, their need no subtle sleight:
Ne painted speech the matter to convey,
No prayer can move, when kindled is the ire,
The more ye quench, the more increased is the fire.
This thing I prove in Pythias woeful case,
Whose hawy hap with tears I do lament:
The day is come when he in Damon's place,
Must loose his life the time is fully spent:
Naught can my words now with the King prevail,
Against the wind and striving stream I sail:
For die thou must alas thou silly Greek,
Ah Pythias, now come is thy doleful hour:
A perfect friend none such a world to seek.
Though bitter death shall give thee sauce full sour:
Yet for thy faith enrolled shall be thy name,
Among the Gods within the book of fame:
Who knoweth his case, and will not melt in tears?
His guiltless blood shall trickle down anon.
Alas what hap hast thou poor Pythias now to die,
woe worth the which man for his death hath given us cause to cry.
ME think I hear with yellow rented hears,
The Muses frame their notes my state to moon:
Among which sort as one that mourneth with heart,
In doleful tunes, myself will bear a part.
Who worth the man which for his death. etc.
With yellow rented hears come on you Muses nine,
Fill now my breast with heavy tunes, to me your plaints resign▪
For Pythias I bewail which presently must die,
woe worth the man which for his death hath given us cause. etc.
woe worth the man which for his. etc.
Was ever such a man that would die for his friend,
I think even from the heavens above, the Gods did him down send
To show true friendshipps power, which forced thee now to die,
woe worth the man which for thy death, etc.
Who worth the man, etc.
What Tigars whelp was he, that Damon did accuse?
What faith hast thou, which for thy friend, thy death doth not refuse
O heavy hap hadst thou to play this Tragedy,
woe worth the man which for thy death, etc.
woe worth the man, etc.
Thou young and worthy Greek, that showest such perfect love,
The Gods receive thy simple ghost, into the heavens above:
Thy death we shall lament with many a weeping eye,
woe worth the man which for his death, etc.
woe worth the man which for thy death,
hath given us cause to cry.
Eternal be your fame ye Muses, for that in misery,
You did vouchsafe to strain your notes to walk:
My heart is rend in two, with this miserable case,
Yet am I charged by Dionysius mouth, to see this place,
At all points ready for the execution of Pythias.
Need hath no law: will I or nil I, it must be done,
But lo the bloody minister, is even here at hand.
Gronno, I came hither now to understand,
If all things are well appointed for the execution of Pythias,
The King himself will see it done here in this place.
Sir, all things are ready, here is the place, here is the hand, here is the sword,
Here lacketh none but Pythias, whose head at a word,
If he were present, I could finely strike of,
You may report that all things are ready.
I go with an heavy heart to report it, ah woeful Pythias!
Full near now is thy misery.
I marvel very much, under what constilation,
All hangmen are borne, for they are hated of all, beloved of none,
Which hatred is showed by this point evidently,
The Hangman always dwells in the vilest place of the City:
That such spite should be, I know no cause why,
Unless it be for their offices sake, which is cruel and blondye:
Yet some men must do it to execute laws?
Me think they hate me without any just cause:
But I must look to my toil, Pythias must loose his head at one blow,
Else the Boys will stone me to death in the street as I go:
But hark, the prisoner cometh, and the King also,
I see there is no help, Pythias his life must forego.
Bring forth Pythias that pleasant companion,
Which took me at my word and become pledge for Damon:
It pricketh fast upon noon, I do him no injury,
If now he loose his head for so he requested me.
If Damon return not, which now in Gréece is full merry:
Therefore shall Pythias pay his death, and that by and by,
He thought belike, if Damon were out of the City,
I would not put him to death, for some foolish pity:
But seeing it was his request, I will not be mocked he shall die.
Bring him forth.
give place, let the prisoner come by, give place.
How say you sir? where is Damon your trusty friend?
You have played a wise part I make God a vow,
You know what time a day it is, make you ready.
Most ready I am mighty king and most ready also,
For my true friend Damon this life to forego,
Even at your pleasure.
A true friend, a false Traitor that so breaketh his oath,
Thou shalt loose thy life, though thou be never so loath.
I am not loath to do what so ever I said,
Ne at this present pinch of death am I dismayed:
The Gods now I know, have heard my fervent prayer,
That they have reserved me to this passing great honour,
To die for my friend, whose faith, even now, I do not mistrust:
My friend Damon is no false traitor, he is true and just:
But sith he is no God but a man, he must do as he may,
The wind may be contrary, sickness may let him, or some misadventure by the way,
Which the eternal Gods turn all to my glory,
That Fame may resound how Pythias for Damon did die:
e breaketh no oh, which doth as much as he can,
His mind is hear, he hath some let, he is but a man.
That he might not return, of all the Gods I did require,
Which now to my joy, doth grant my desire:
But why do I stay any longer, seeing that one man's death,
May suffice O king, to pacify thy wrath?
O thou minister of justice, do thine office by and by,
Let not thy hand tremble, for I remble not to die:
Stephano the right patron, of true fidelity,
Commend me to thy master my sweet Damon, & of him crave liberty
When I am dead in my name, for thy trusty services,
Hath well deserved a gift far better than this,
O my Damon farewell now for ever, a true friend to me most dear
Whiles life doth last, my mouth shall still talk of thee,
And when I am dead my simple ghost true witness of amity:
Shall hover about the place wheresoever thou be,
Eubulus, This gear is strange, and yet because,
Damon hath falst his faith, Pythias shall have the law:
Gronnoo, despoil him, and eke dispatch him quickly.
It shall be done: since you came into this place,
I might have strooken of seven heads in this space:
Ber lady here are good garments, these are mine by the rood,
It is an evil wind that bloweth no man good:
Now Pythias kneel down, ask me blessing like a pretty boy,
And with a trise thy head from thy shoulders I will convey.
Stay, stay, stay, for the kings advantage stay,
O mighty king, mine appointed time is not yet fully passed,
Within the compass of mine hour lo, here, I come at last:
A life I own, a life I will you pay:
O my Pythias, my noble pledge, my constant friend,
Ah woe is me for Damon's sake, how near were thou to thy end:
give place to me, this room is mine, on this stage must I play,
Damon is the man, none aught but he to Dionysius his blood to pay.
Are you come sir? you might have tarried if you had been wise,
For your hasty coming you are like to know the prize.
O thou cruel minnister, why didst not thou thine office,
Did not I bid thee make haste in any wise?
Hast thou spared to kill me once that I may die twice:
Not to die for my friend, is present death to me, and alas,
Shall I see my sweet Damon, slain before my face:
What double death is this? but O mighty Dionissus,
true justice now, way this aright, thou noble Eubulus:
me have no wrong, as now stands the case,
Damon aught not to die, but Pythias:
misadventure, not by his will, his hour is past, therefore I
because he came not at his just time, aught justly to die:
was my promise, so was thy promise O King,
this Court can bear witness of this thing.
Not so, O mighty King, to justice it is contrary,
That for an other man's fault, the Innocent should die:
yet is my time plainly expired, it is not fully noon,
f this my day appointed, by all the Clockes in the Towne.
Believe no Clock, the hour is passed by the Son.
Ah my Pythias, shall we now break the bonds of Amity?
Till you now overthwart me, which heretofore so well did agree.
My Damon, the Gods forbidden, but we should agree,
therefore agree to this, let me perform the promise I made for thee
let me die for thee, do me not that injury,
Both to break my promise, and to suffer me too see thee die
Who so dearly I love: this small request grant me,
shall never ask thee more, my desire is but friendly:
oo me this honour, that fame may reporte triumphantly,
that Pythias for his friend Damon was contented to die.
That you were contented for me to die, fame cannot deny,
yet fame shall never touch me with such a villainy:
o reporte that Damon did suffer his friend Pithias, for him giltles to die,
Therefore content thyself, the Gods require thy constant faith,
None but Damon's blood can appease Dionysius wrath:
And now O mighty King, to you my talk I convey,
because you gave me leave, my worldly things to stay:
o requite that good tourne ere I die, for your behalfe this I say,
Although your Regal state, dame Fortune decketh so,
that like a king in worldly wealth, sufficiently ye flow:
Yet fickle is the ground whereon all Tirrants tread,
a thousand sundry cares and fears, do haunt their restless head:
o trustie band; no faithfull fiendes dd garde thy hatefull state,
And why? whom men obey for deadly fear, sure them they deadly hate
That you may safely reign, by love get friends, whose constant faith
Will never fail, this counsel gives poor Damon at his death:
Friends are the surest guard, for kings golden time do wear away
And other precious things do fade, friendship will never decay:
Have friends in store therefore, so shall you safely sleep,
Have friends at home of foreign foes, so need you take no keep:
Abandon flattering tongues, whose clackes truth never tells,
Abase the ill, advance the good, in whom dame virtue dwells:
Let them your play fellows be, but O you earthly kings,
Your sure defence and strongest guard, stands chiefly in faithful friend
Then get you friends by liberal deeds, and here I make an end,
Accept this counsel mighty King of Damon Pythias friend:
O my Pythias, now farewell for ever, let me kiss thee or I die,
My soul shall honour thee, thy constant faith above the heavens shall fly
Come Gronno do thine office now, why is thy colour so dead?
My neck is so is short, that thou wilt never have honesty in striking of this head
Eubulus, my spirits are suddenly appalled, my limbs wax weak
This strange friendship amasseth me so, that I can scarce speak.
O mighty king, let some pity your noble heart mean,
You require but one man's death, take Pythias, let Damon live.
O unspeakable friendship.
Not so, he hath not offended, there is no cause why?
My constant friend my Pythias, for Damon's sake should die?
Alas he is but young, he may do good to many,
Thou coward minister, why dost thou not let me die?
My hand with sudden fear quivereth.
O noble king, show mercy on Damon, let pithias die,
Stay Gronno, my flesh trembleth, Eubulus, what shall I do?
Were there ever such friends on earth as were these two?
What heart is so cruel that would divide them asunder?
O noble friendship, I must yield, at thy force I wonder:
My heart, this rare friendship hath pierced to the root,
And quenched all my fury, this sight hath brought this about:
Which thy grave counsel Eubulus, and learned persuasion could never do:
noble gentlemen, the immortal Gods above,
hath made you play this Tragedy, I think for my behove:
Before this day I never knew what perfect friendship meant,
y cruell mind to blouddy déedes, was full and wholy bente:
y fearefull life, I thought with terrour to defende,
But now I see there is no guard unto a faithful friend:
Which will not spare his life at time of present need,
happy kings within your courts have two such friends in deed:
honour friendship now, which that you may plainly see,
Damon, have thou thy life, from death I pardon thee:
For which good turn, I crave this honour do me lend?
O friendly heart? let me link with you, to you make me the third friend
y courte is yours, dwell here with mée, by my commission large,
y selfe, my realme, my welth, my health, I commit to your charge:
Make me a third friend, more shall I joy in that thing,
Then to be called as I am, Dionysius the mighty king.
O mighty king, first for my life most humble thanks I give,
And next, I praise the immortal Gods, that did your heart so move
That you would have respect to friendships heavenly lore,
For seing well, he need not fear which hath true friends in store
For my part, most noble king, as a third friend, welcome to our friendly society
But you must forget you are a king, for friendship stands in true equality
Unequal though I be in great possessions,
Yet full equal shall you find me in my changed conditions:
tyranny, flattery, oppression, lo, hear I cast away?
justice, truth, love, friendship shall be my joy:
True friendship, will I honour unto my lives end,
My greatest glory shallbe, to be counted a perfect friend.
For this your deed most noble King, the Gods advance your name
And since to friendship's lore, you list your Princely heart to frame:
With joyful heart, O King, most welcome now to me,
With you will I knit the perfect knot of amity:
Wherein I shall instruct you so, and Damon here your friend,
That you may know of amity the mighty force and eke the joyful end:
And how that kings do stand upon a fickle ground,
Within whose Realm at time of need, no faithful friends are found
Your instruction will I follow, to you myself I do commit,
Eubulus, make haste to fet new apparel fit:
For my new friends.
I go with a joyful heart, O happy day.
I am glad to hear this word, though their lives they do not lose,
It is no reason the Hangman should loose his fees:
These are mine, I am gone with a trise.
Put on these Garments now, go in with me the jewels of my Court.
We go with joyful hearts.
O Damon my dear master, in all this joy remember me.
My friend Damon he asketh reason? Dam. Pythias.
Stephano, for thy good service, be thou free.
O most happy, pleasant, joyful, and triumphant day,
Poor Stephano, now shall live in contintinuall joy:
VIVE LE ROY with Damon and pithias in perfect amity,
VIVE TV STEPHANO, in thy pleasant liberality:
Wherein I joy as much as he that hath a conquest won,
I am a free man, none so merry as I now under the Son:
Farewell my Lords, now the Gods grant you all the some of perfect amity
And me long to enjoy my long deanred liberty.
Away villain, away you flatringe Parasite,
Away the plague of this Court, thy filled tongue that forged lies,
No more here shall do hurt, away false sycophant, wilt thou not?
I am gone sir, seeing it is the kings pleasure,
Why whip ye me alone? a plague take Damon and Pythias since they came hither
I am driven to seek relee abroad alas I know not whither,
Yet Eubulus, though I begun, here after time shall try,
There shall be found even in this Court as great flatterers as I:
Well for a while I will forego the Court, though to my great pain,
I doubt not but to spy a time when I may creep in again.
The Serpent that eats men alive, Flattery with all her brood,
Is whipped away in Prince's Courts which yet did never good,
What force: what mighty power, true Friendship may possess?
To all the world Dionysius Court now plainly doth express,
Who since to faithful Friends he gave his willing ear,
Most safely sitteth in his Seat and sleeps devoid of fear,
purged is the Court of vice, since Friendship entered in,
Tyranny quails, he studieth now with love each heart to win,
Virtue is had in price, and hath his just reward:
And painted speech that gloseth for gain, from gifts is quite debarred,
One loveth another now for virtue, not for gain,
Where Virtue doth not knit the knot, there Friendship cannot reign,
Without the which, no house, no land, ne kingdom can endure,
As necessary for man's life, as Water, Air, and Fire,
Which frameth the mind of man, all honest things to do,
Unhonest things Friendship ne craveth, ne yet consents thereto,
In wealth a double joy, in woe a present stay,
A sweet companion in each state true Friendship is always:
A sure defence for Kings, a perfect trusty band,
A force to assail, a Shield to defend the enemies cruel hand,
A rare, and yet the greatest Gift, that God can give to man:
o rare, y• scarce foure couple of faithfull frends haue ben since ye world began
A Gift so strange, & of such price, I wish all Kings to have,
But chiefly yet as duty bindeth I humbly crave,
True friendship, and true friends full fraught with constant faith,
The giver of friends, the Lord grant her most noble Queen Elizabeth.
THe strongest guard that Kings can have,
Are constant friends their state to save:
True friends are constant, both in word and deed,
True friends are present, and help at each need:
True friends talk truly, they gloze for no gain,
When treasure consumeth, true friends will remain,
True friends for their true Prince, refuseth not their death
The Lord grant her such friends most noble Queen Elizabeth▪
Long may she govern in honour and wealth,
Void of all sickness, in most perfect health:
Which health to prolong, as true friends require,
God grant she may have her own hearts desire:
Which friends will defend with most steadfast faith,
The Lord grant her such friends most noble Queen Elizabeth▪