MOst grave Opinion!
Confidence most welcome,
Is Fancy come to Court?
Breaking his way
through the Guard.
So violent?
With jests Which they are less able to resist,
he'll crack a Halberd with his wit,
A most
Strong Fancy, yet we ha' known a little Engine
Break an ingenious Head piece. But your Master—
Companion sir. Fancy will keep no Servants,
And Confidence scorns to wait.
Cry mercy sir,
But is this Gentleman, this Signior Fancy
So rare a thing, so subtle as men speak him.
He's a great Prince of th' Air, believe it sir,
And yet a Bird of night.
A Bird!
Between
An Owl and Bat, a quaint hermaphrodite,
Begot of Mercury and Venus' Wit and Love.
He's worth your entertainment.
I am most
Ambitious to see him, he is not
So nimble as I wish him, where's my Wife,
My Lady Novelty?
Your Wife? you might
Have framed a newer word, they can but call,
Us so i'th' Country.
No exception
Dear Madam Novelty, I must prepare you,
To entertain a Gentleman, where's Admiration,
Our Daughter?
Here sir, what gay man is this?
Please you honour us, and bring in your friend sir.
I'll do't but he prevents me.
Sir I am ignorant
By what titles to salute you, but y'are welcome to Court.
Save yourself sir, your name's Opinion.
And yours Fancy.
Right.
Mine jollity.
Mine Laughter, ha, ha, ha.
Here's a strange shape.
I never saw the like.
I come to do you honour with my friends here
And help the Masque.
You'll do a special favour.
How many Antimasques ha' they? Of what nature?
For these are Fancies that take most, your dull
And phlegmatic inventions are exploded,
Give me a nimble Antimasque.
They have none sir.
No Antimasque? i'd laugh at that i'faith.
What make we here? No jollity.
No Antimasque.
Bid'em down with the Scene, and sell the Timber,
Send Iupiter to grass, and bid Apollo
Keep Cowes again, take all their gods and goddesses,
For these must farce up this night's entertainment,
And pray the Court may have some mercy on 'em,
They will be jeered to death else for their ignorance,
The soul of wit moves here, yet there be some
If my intelligence fail not, mean to show
Themselves jeer Majors, some tall Critics have
Planted Artillery and wit murderers.
No Antimasque? Let 'em look to't.
I have heard sir;
Confidence made them trust, you'd furnish 'em,
I fear they should have made their address earlier
To your invention, but your brain's nimble,
Pray, for the expectation that's upon 'em
Lend them some witty fancies, set some engines
In motion, that may conduce to the design.
I am their friend against the Crowd that envy 'em
And since they come with pure devotions
To sacrifice thee in duties to the King
And Queen, I wish 'em prosper.
You have charmed me,
I'll be their friend tonight, I have a Fancy
Already.
Let it be ridiculous.
And Confident.
And jolly.
The first Antimasque
We will present ourselves in our own persons,
What think you on't? most grave Opinion
You shall do well to lead the dance, and give it
Authority with your face, your lady may
Admire what she finds new.
I shall applaud.
The Novelties.
And I admire.
They tumble,
My skull's too narrow.
Now his Fancies caper.
Confidence, wait you upon Opinion,
Here Admiration, there Novelty,
This is a place for jollity and Laughter
Fancy will dance himself too.
How like you this device?
'tis handsome— but
Opinion will like nothing.
It seems new.
'twas bold.
'twas jocund.
Did not I do the fool well?
Most Admirably.
Nay, and the Ladies do but take
My part, and Laugh at me, I am made, ha, ha.
I could wish something sir, of other nature
To satisfy the present expectation.
I imagine, nay, I'm not ignorant of proprieties
And persons, 'tis a time of peace, i'll fit you.
And instantly make you a representation
Of the effect.
Of peace? I like that well.
And since in nothing, they are more expressed
Then in good fellowship, i'll present you with a Tavern.
A spick and span new Tavern.
Wonderful, here was none within two minutes.
No such wonder Lady, Taverns are quickly
up, it is but hanging out a Bush at a Nobleman's door,
or an Alderman's gate, and 'tis made instantly.
will't please you Ladies to except the wine?
Well said Confidence.
It will be new for Ladies
To go to th' Tavern, but it may be a fashion,
Follow me Admiration.
And the fool,
I may supply the absence of your Fiddlers.
If we can, let's leave Opinion behind us,
Fancy will make him drunk,
I am glad they are off, are these effects of peace?
Corruption rather.
Oh the Beggars show
The benefit of peace.
Their very breath
Hath stifled all the Candles, poisoned the
Perfumes, Beggars a fit presentment? how
They cleave still to my nostril, I must tell you,
I do not like such base, and sordid persons,
And they become not here.
I apprehend,
If these distaste you, I can fit you with
Persons more cleanly,
What think you of Projectors?
How Projectors!
Here's one already.
This is a jockey,
He is to advance a rare, and cunning bridle
Made hollow in the Iron part, wherein
A vapour subtly conveyed, shall so
Cool and refresh a horse, he shall ne'er tire
And now he falls to his pace.
This other?
His habit speaks him
A Country fellow, that has sold his acres
To purchase him a flail, which by the motion
Of a quaint wheel, shall without help of hands,
Thresh Corn all day, and now he lays about him.
This with a face Philosophical and beard,
Hath with the study of twenty years, found out
A lamp, which placed beneath a furnace, shall
Boil Beef so thoroughly, that the very steam
Of the first Vessel, shall alone be able
To make another Pot above seethe over.
A most Scholastic project; his feet follow
The motions of his brain.
But what thing's this?
A chimaera out of Rabelais?
A new project,
A Case to walk you all day under water.
So vast for the necessity of air,
Which, with an artificial bellows cooled
Under each arm, is kept still from corruption,
with those glass eyes, he sees, and can fetch up
Gold, or whatever jewels ha' been lost,
In any River of the World.
Strange Water-Rat!
This grave man, some years passed was a Physician,
A Galenist, and parcel Paracelsus,
Thrived by diseases, but quite lost his practice,
To study a new way to fatten Poultry
With scrapings of a Carrot, a great benefit
To th' Commonwealth.
He will deserve a monument.
This is a kind of Seagull too, that will
Compose a ship to sail against the winds.
he'll undertake to build a most strong castle
On Goodwin sands, to melt huge Rocks to jellly,
And cut 'em out like sweetmeats with his keel,
And thus he sails.
I know not sir, how this may satisfy,
But might we be beholding to your fancy
For some more quaint variety, some other
than humane shapes, would happily delight,
And reach the expectation, I ha' seen
Dainty devices in this kind, Baboons
In quellioes, and so forth.
I can furnish you.
Fancy will much oblige us.
If these objects
Please not, Fancy can present a change,
What see you now?
A Wood, a broad-faced Owl,
An Ivy-bush, and other Birds about her.
These can imagination create,
Silence, observe.
This all you will present?
You speak as if
Fancy could be exhausted, Invention flows
From an immortal spring, you shall taste other
Variety, nimble as thought. We change the Scene.
What are these?
Dotterels, be patient, and expect.
Madam accuse your absence,
We know
All your devices sir.
Ha, what's the matter,
Confidence, jollity, Laughter, Admiration,
And Madam Novelty, and drunk! these are
extremes indeed.
Admirable Opinion.
Be confident.
And foolish.
I am as light now.
Let 'em enjoy their Fancies.
What new change
Is this? these strains are heavenly.
Hence ye profane far hence away,
Time hath sick feathers, while you stay,
Is this delight
For such a glorious night,
Wherein two skies
are to be seen,
One starry, but an aged sphere
another here,
Created new and brighter from the Eyes
of King and Queen?
Hence ye profane, far hence away,
Time hath sick feathers while you stay.
Wherefore do my sister's stay
Appear, appear Eunomia,
'Tis Irene calls to thee,
Irene calls;
Like dew that falls
Into a stream,
I'm lost with them,
That know not how to order me.
See there she shines, oh see
In her celestial gaiety
Crowned with a wreath of Stars to show
The Evenings glory in her brow.
Thinks not I could absent myself this night,
But Peace is gentle, and doth still invite
Eunomia, yet shouldst thou silent be
The Rose and Lily which thou strowest
All the cheerful way thou goest
Would direct to follow thee.
Thou dost beautify increase,
And chain security with peace.
Irene fair, and first divine,
All my blessings spring from thine,
I am but wild without thee, thou abhorrest
What is rude, or apt to wound,
Canst throw proud trees to the ground,
And make a Temple of a Forest.
No more, no more, but join
Thy voice, and Lute with mine.
The world shall give prerogative to neither
We cannot flourish but together.
Irene enters like a perfumed spring,
Eunomia ripens every thing,
And in the golden harvest leaves
To every sickle his own sheaves.
swiftly, oh swiftly, I do move too slow,
What holds my wing from making haste
When every Cloud sails by so fast?
I heard my sister's voice, and know
They have forsaken Heavens bright gate,
To attend another State,
of gods below.
Irene chaste Eunomia.
we
Diche, have stayed expecting thee,
Thou giv'st perfection to our glory,
And seal to this night's story.
Astrea shake the cold dew from thy wing.
Descend.
Descend.
Descend, and help us sing,
The Triumph of Ioves upper Court abated
And all the Deities translated.
The Triumph of Ioves upper Court abated
And all the Deities translated.
Now gaze, and when thy wonder will allow,
Tell what thou hast beheld.
Never, till now,
Was poor Astrea blind, oh strange surprise,
That too much sight should take away my eyes,
Am I in Earth or Heaven?
What Throne is that,
On which so many Stars do wait?
My Eyes are blessed again, and now I see
The Parents of us three.
'Tis Iove and Themis forward move,
And sing to Themis, and to Iove.
To you great King and Queen, whose smile.
Doth scatter blessings through this I'll,
To make it best
And wonder of the rest,
We pay the duty of our birth,
Proud to wait upon that Earth
Where on you move,
Which shall be named
And by your chaste embraces famed
The Paradise of love.
Irene plant thy Olives here,
Thus warmed, at once, they'll bloom and bear,
Eunomia pay thy light,
While Diche, covetous to stay,
Shall throw her silver Wings away,
To dwell within your sight.
No foreign persons I make known,
But here present you with your own,
The Children of your Reign, not blood
Of age, when they are understood.
Not seen by faction or Owls sight,
Whose trouble is the clearest light,
But treasures to their eye, and ear,
That love good for itself, not fear.
Oh smile on what yourselves have made,
These have no form, no sun, no shade,
But what your virtue doth create,
Exalted by your glorious fate,
they'll tower to heaven, next which, they know,
And wish no blessedness but you.
That very look into each eye
Hath shot a soul, I saw it fly.
Descend, move nimbly, and advance,
Your joyful tribute in a dance.
They that were never happy Hours
Till now, return to thank the Powers
that made them so
The Island doth rejoice,
And all her waves are Echo to our voice,
Which in on ages past, hath known
such treasures of her own.
Live Royal pair, & when Your sands are spent
with Heavens and Your consent,
Though late, from Your high Bowers,
Look down on what was Yours,
For till old time his Glass hath hurled
And lost it, in the ashes of the world,
We Prophesy, You shall be read, and seen,
In every Branch, a King or Queen.
D''ee think to keep us out?
Knock her down.
Knock down my Wife, I'd see the tallest Beef-eater on you all, but hold up his Halberd in the way of knocking my Wife down, and i'll bring him a buttonhole lower.
Nay, let 'em, let 'em Husband, at their peril.
Complain to my Lord chamberlain.
My husband is somewhere in the works; I'm sure I helped to make him an Owl and a hobby-horse, and I see no reason but his Wife may be admitted in Forma paperis, to see as good a Mask as this.
I never saw one afore, I am one of the Guard, though of another complexion, and I will see't now I am here, though I be turned out of the Kitchen tomorrow for't.
ay, come, be resolute, we know the worst, and let us challenge a privilege, those stairs were of my painting.
And that Timber I set up: somebody is my witness.
I am sure my husband sold 'em most of the Feathers; somebody promised me a fall too if I came to Court, but let that pass.
And mine embroidered two of the best habits, what though we be no Ladies, we are Christians in these clothes, and the king's subjects God bless us.
Nay, now I am in, I will see a dance, though my shop-windows be shut up for't, tell us?— hum? d'ee hear? do not they laugh at us? what were we best to do, the Masquers will do no feats as long we are here, be ruled by me, hark every one, 'tis our best course to dance a fegary ourselves, and then they'll think it a piece of the Plot, and we may go off again with the more credit, we may else kiss the Porters-lodge for't, let's put a trick upon 'em in revenge, 'twill seem a new device too.
Content.
And the Musicians knew but our mind now. Hark they are at it, now for a lively frisk. now, let us go off cleanly, and somebody will think, this was meant for an Antimasque.
Why do you dwell so long in clouds
And smother your best graces,
'Tis time to cast away those shrouds
And clear your manly faces.
Do not behave yourselves like Spies,
Upon the Ladies here,
On even terms got meet their eyes,
Beauty and love shine there.
You tread dull measures thus alone,
Not satisfy delight,
Go kiss their hands, and make your own
With every touch more white.
In envy to the night,
That keeps such Revels here,
With my unwelcome light,
Thus I invade her sphere.
Proclaiming mars
To Cinthia, and all her Stars,
That like proud Spangles dress her azure Tress.
Because I cannot be a guest, I rise
To shame the Moon, and put out all her eyes.
Come away, away, away
See the dawning of the day,
Risen from the murmuring streams,
Some stars show with sickly beams,
What stock of flame they are allowed,
Each retiring to a Cloud,
Bid your active sports adieu,
The morning else will blush for you.
Ye feathered-footed hours run
To dress the Chariot of the Sun,
Harness the Steeds, it quickly will
Be time to mount the Eastern hill.
The lights grow pale with modest fears,
lest you offend their sacred ears,
And eyes, that lent you all this grace,
Retire, retire to your own place.
And as you move from that blessed Pair,
Let each heart kneel, and think a prayer,
That all, that can make up the glory,
Of good, and great, may fill their story.