NEw Plays, and Maidenheads, are near a kin,
Much followed both, for both much money g'yn,
If they stand sound, and well; And a good Play
(Whose modest Scenes blush on his marriage day,
And shake to lose his honour) is like her
That after holy tie, and first nights stir
Yet still is Modesty, and still retains
More of the maid to sight, than Husband's pains;
We pray our Play may be so; For I am sure
It has a noble Breeder, and a pure,
A learned, and a Poet never went
More famous yet 'twixt Po and silver Trent.
Chaucer (of all admired) the Story gives,
There constant to Eternity it lives;
If we let fall the Nobleness of this,
And the first sound this child bear, be a hiss,
How will it shake the bones of that good man,
And make him cry from under ground, O fan
From me the witless chaff of such a wrighter
That blasts my Bays, and my famed works makes lighter
Than Robin Hood? This is the fear we bring;
For to say Truth, it were an endless thing,
And too ambitious to aspire to him;
Weak as we are, and almost breathless swim
In this deep water. Do but you hold out
Your helping hands, and we shall take about,
And something do to save us: You shall hear
Scenes though below his Art, may yet appear
Worth two hours' travel. To his bones sweet sleep:
Content to you. If this play do not keep,
A little dull time from us, we perceive
Our losses fall so thick, we must needs leave.
ROses their sharp spines being gone,
Not royal in their smells alone,
But in their hue.
Maiden Pinks, of odour faint,
Daisies smel-lesse, yet most quaint
And sweet Time true.
Primrose first borne, child of Ver,
Merry Spring times Harbinger,
With her bells dim.
Oxlips, in their Cradles growing,
Marygolds, on death beds blowing,
Larkes-heeles trim.
All dear nature's children: sweet-
lie fore Bride and Bridegroom's feet
Blessing their sense.
Not an angle of the air,
Bird melodious, or bird fair,
Is absent hence.
The Crow, the slanderous Cuckoo, nor
The boding Raven, nor Clough he
Nor chattring Pie,
May on our Bridehouse perch or sing,
Or with them any discord bring
But from it fly.
For pities sake and true gentilities,
Hear, and respect me.
For your Mother's sake.
And as you wish your womb may thrive with fair ones,
Hear and respect me,
Now for the love of him whom Iove hath marked
The honour of your Bed, and for the sake
Of clear virginity, be Advocate
For us, and our distresses: This good deed
Shall raze you out o'th' Book of Trespasses
All you are set down there.
Sad Lady rise.
Stand up.
No knees to me.
What woman I may steed that is distressed,
Does bind me to her.
What's your request? Deliver you for all.
We are 3. Queens, whose Sovereigns fell before
The wrath of cruel Creon; who endured
The Beakes of Ravens, Talents of the Kights,
And pecks of Crowes, in the fowle feilds of The
He will not suffer us to burn their bones,
To urn their ashes, nor to take th' offence
Of mortal loathsomeness from the blessed eye
Of holy Phoebus, but infects the winds
With stench of our slain Lords. O pity Duke,
Thou purger of the earth, draw thy feared Sword
That does good turns toth' world; give us the Bones
Of our dead Kings, that we may Chapel them;
And of thy boundless goodness take some note
That for our crowned heads we have no roof,
Save this which is the Lions, and the Bears,
And vault to every thing.
Pray you kneel not,
I was transported with your Speech, and suffered
Your knees to wrong themselves; I have heard the fortunes
Of your dead Lords, which gives me such lamenting
As wakes my vengeance, and revenge for'em
King Capaneus, was your Lord the day
That he should marry you, at such a season,
As now it is with me. I met your Groom,
By Marsis Altar, you were that time fair;
Not Juno's Mantle fairer than your Tresses,
Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten wreath
Was then nor threashd, nor blasted; Fortune at you
Dimpled her Cheek with smiles: Hercules our kinsman
(Then weaker than your eyes) laid by his Club,
He tumbled down upon his Nenuan hide
And swore his sinews thawd: O grief, and time,
Fearful consumers, you will all devour.
O I hope some God,
Some God hath put his mercy in your manhood
Whereto he'll infuse power, and press you forth
Our undertaker.
O no knees, none Widow,
Unto the Helmeted-Belona use them,
And pray for me your Soldier.
Troubled I am.
Honoured Hippolita
Most dreaded Amazonian, that hast slain
The Sith-tuskd-Bore; that with thy Arm as strong
As it is white, wast near to make the male
To thy Sex captive; but that this thy Lord
Borne to uphold Creation, in that honour
First nature styled it in, shrunk thee into
The bound thou wast o'erflowing; at once subduing
Thy force, and thy affection: Soldiresse
That equally canst poise sternness with pity,
Whom now I know haste much more power on him
Then ever he had on thee, who ow'st his strength
And his, Love too: who is a Servant for
The Tenor of the Speech. Dear Glass of Ladies
Bid him that we whom flaming war doth scorch,
Under the shadow of his Sword, may cool us:
Require him he advance it o'er our heads;
Speak't in a woman's key: like such a woman
As any of us three; weep ere you fail; lend us a knee;
But touch the ground for us no longer time
Than a Doves motion, when the head's plucked off:
Tell him if he i'th' blood cizd field, lay swollen
Showing the Sun his Teeth; grinning at the Moon
What you would do.
Poor Lady, say no more:
I had as lief trace this good action with you
As that whereto I am going, and never yet
Went I so willing, way. My Lord is taken
Hart deep with your distress: Let him consider:
I'll speak anon.
O my petition was
Set down in ice, which by hot grief uncandied
Melts into drops, so sorrow wanting form
Is pressed with deeper matter.
Pray stand up,
Your grief is written in your check.
O woe,
You cannot read it there; there through my tears,
Like wrinkled peobles in a glass stream
You may behold 'em (Lady, Lady, alack)
He that will all the Treasure know o'th' earth
Must know the Centre too; he that will fish
For my least minnow, let him lead his line
To catch one at my heart. O pardon me
Extremity that sharpens sundry wits
Makes me a Foole.
Pray you say nothing, pray you,
Who cannot feel, nor see the rain being in't,
Knows neither wet, nor dry, if that you were
Tho ground-peece of fome Painter, I would buy you
T'instruct me 'gainst a Capital grief indeed
Such heart pierced demonstration; but alas
Being a natural Sister of our Sex
Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me,
That it shall make a counter reflect 'gainst
My Brother's heart, and warm it to some pity
Though it were made of stone: pray have good comfort.
Forward toth' Temple, leave not out a jot
O'th' sacred Ceremony.
O This Celebration
Will long last, and be more costly then,
Your Suppliants war: Remember that your Fame
Knowles in the ear, o'th' world: what you do quickly,
Is not done rashly; your first thought is more.
Then others laboured meditance: your premeditating
More than their actions: But oh love, your actions
Soon as they moves as Asprayes do the fish,
Subdue before they touch, think, dear Duke think
What beds our slain Kings have.
What griefs our beds
That our dear Lords have none.
None fit forth' dead:
Those that with Cordes, Knives, drams precipitance,
Weary of this world's light, have to themselves
Been deaths most horrid Agents, humane grace
Affords them dust and shadow.
But our Lords
Lie blistring fore the visitating Sun,
And were good Kings, when living.
It is true. and I will give you comfort,
To give your dead Lords graves:
The which to do, must make some work with Creon;
And that work presents itself toth' doing:
Now 'twill take form, the heats are gone to morrow.
Then, bootless toil must recompense itself,
With its own sweat; Now he's secure,
Not dreams, we stand before your puissance
Wrinching our holy begging in our eyes
To make petition clear.
Now you may take him,
Drunk with his victory.
And his Army full
Of Bread, and sloth.
Artesuis that best knowest
How to draw out fit to this enterprise,
The prim'st for this proceeding, and the number
To carry such a business, forth and levy
Our worthiest Instruments, whilst we dispatch
This grand act of our life, this daring deed
Of Fate in wedlock.
Dowagers, take hands
Let us be Widows to our woes, delay
Commends us to a famishing hope.
Farewell.
We come unseasonably: But when could grief
Cull forth as unpanged judgement can, fittest time
For best solicitation.
Why good Ladies,
This is a service, whereto I am going,
Greater than any was; it more imports me
Then all the actions that I have foregone,
Or futurely can cope.
The more proclaiming
Our suit shall be neglected, when her Arms
Able to lock Iove from a Synod, shall
By warranting Moonlight corslet thee, oh when
Her twyning Cherries shall their sweetness fall
Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think
Of rotten Kings or blubbered Queens, what care
For what thou feelst not? what thou feelst being able
To make Mars spurn his Drom. O if thou couch
But one night with her, every hour in't will
Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and
Thou shalt remember nothing more, than what
That Banquet bids thee too.
Though much unlike
You should be so transported, as much sorry
I should be such a Suitor; yet I think
Did I not by th'abstaining of my joy
Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit
That craves a present medicine, I should pluck
All Lady's scandal on me. Therefore Sir
As I shall here make trial of my prayers,
Either presuming them to have some force,
Or sentencing for ay their vigour dumb,
Prorogue this business, we are going about, and hang
Your Shield afore your Heart, about that neck
Which is my fee, and which I freely lend
To do these poor Queen's service.
Oh help now
Our Cause cries for your knee.
If you grant not
My Sister her petition in that force,
With that Celerity, and nature which
She makes it in: from henceforth i'll not dare
To ask you any thing, nor be so hardy
Ever to take a Husband.
Pray stand up.
I am entreating of myself to do
That which you kneel to have me; Pyrithous
Lead on the Bride; get you and pray the Gods
For success, and return; omit not any thing
In the pretended Celebration: Queens
Follow your Soldier (as before) hence you
And at the banks of Anly meet us with
The forces you can raise, where we shall find
The moiety of a number, for a business,
More bigger looked; since that our Theme is haste
I stamp this kiss upon thy currant lip,
Sweet keep it as my Token; Set you forward
For I will see you gone.
Farewell my beauteous Sister: Pirithous
Keep the feast full, bate not an hour on't.
Sir
I'll follow you at heeles; The Feasts solemnity
Shall want till your return.
cousin I charge you
Budge not from Athens; We shall be returning
Ere you can end this Feast; of which I pray you
Make no abatement; once more farewell all.
Thus dost thou still make good the tongue o'th' world.
And earnst a Deity equal with Mars,
If not above him, for
Thou being but mortal makest affections bend
To Godlike honours; they themselves some say
Groan under such a Mastery.
As we are men
Thus should we do, being sensually subdued
We lose our humane title; good cheer Ladies.
Now turn we towards your Comforts.
Dear Palamon, dearer in love then Blood
And our prime Cosen, yet unhardened in
The Crimes of nature; Let us leave the City
Thebes, and the tempt in't, before we further
Sully our gloss of youth,
And here to keep in abstinence we shame
As in Incontinence; for not to swim
I'th' aid o'th' Current, were almost to sink,
At least to frustrate striving, and to follow
The common Stream, 'twould bring us to an Edy
Where we should turn or drown; if labour through,
Our gain but life, and weakness.
Your advice
Is cried up with example: what strange ruins
Since first we went to School, may we perceive
Walking in Thebes? Scars, and bare weeds
The gain o'th' Martialist, who did propound
To his bold ends, honour, and golden Ingots,
Which though he won, he had not, and now flirted
By peace for whom he fought, who then shall offer
To Marsis so scorned Altar? I do bleed
When such I meet, and wish great Iuno would
Resume her ancient fit of jelouzie
To get the Soldier work, that peace might purge
For her repletion, and retain anew
Her charitable heart now hard, and harsher
Then strife, or war could be.
Are you not out?
Meet you no ruin, but the Soldier in
The Cranckes, and turns of Thebes? you did begin
As if you met decays of many kinds:
Perceive you none, that do arowse your pity
But th'un considered Soldier?
Yes, I pity
decays where ere I find them, but such most
That sweating in an honourable Toil
Are paid with ice to coole'em.
'tis not this
I did begin to speak of: This is virtue
Of no respect in Thebes I spoke of Thebes
How dangerous if we will keep our Honours,
It is for our residing, where every evil
Hath a good colour; where every seeming good's
A certain evil, where not to be even jump
As they are, here were to be strangers, and
Such things to be mere Monsters.
'tis in our power,
(Unless we fear that Apes can Tutor's) to
Be Masters of our manners: what need I
Affect another's gate, which is not catching
Where there is faith, or to be fond upon
Another's way of speech, when by mine own
I may be reasonably conceived; saved too,
Speaking it truly; why am I bound
By any generous bond to follow him
Follows his Tailor, haply so long until
The followed, make pursuit? or let me know,
Why mine own Barber is unblessed, with him
My poor Chin too, for 'tis not Cizard just
To such a Favourites glass: What Cannon is there
That does command my Rapier from my hip
To dangle't in my hand, or to go tip toe
Before the street be foul? Either I am
The fore-horse in the Team, or I am none
That draw i'th' sequent trace: these poor slight sores,
Need not a plantin; That which tips my bosom
Almost toth' heart's,
Our Uncle Creon.
He,
A most unbounded Tyrant, whose successes
Makes heaven unfeard, and villainy assured
Beyond its power: there's nothing, almost puts
Faith in a fever, and deifies alone
Voluble chance, who only attributes
The faculties of other Instruments
To his own Nerves and act; Commands men service,
And what they win in't, boot and glory on;
That fears not to do harm; good, dares not; Let
The blood of mine that's sib to him, be sucked
From me with Leeches, Let them break and fall
Off me with that corruption.
Clear spirited Cousin
Lets leave his Court, that we may nothing share,
Of his loud infamy: for our milk,
Will relish of the pasture, and we must
Be vile, or disobedient, not his kinesmen
In blood, unless in quality.
Nothing truer:
I think the Echoes of his shames have dea'ft
The ears of heavenly justice: widows cries
Descend again into their throats; and have not: Enter Valerius.
Due audience of the Gods: Valerius
The King calls for you; yet be leaden footed
Till his great rage be off him. Phoebus when
He broke his whipstock and exclaimed
The Horses of the Sun, but whispered too
The lowdenesse of his Fury.
Small winds shake him,
But what's the matter?
Val. Theseus (who where he threats appalls,) hath sent
Deadly defiance to him, and pronounces
Ruin to Thebes, who is at hand to seal
The promise of his wrath.
Let him approach;
But that we fear the Gods in him, he brings not
A jot of terror to us; Yet what man
Thirds his own worth (the case is each of ours)
When that his actions dregd, with mind assured
'tis bad he goes about.
Leave that unreasond.
Our services stand now for Thebes, not Creon,
Yet to be neutral to him, were dishonour;
Rebellious to oppose: therefore we must
With him stand to the mercy of our Fate,
Who hath bounded our last minute.
So we must;
Is't said this wars afoot? or it shall be
On fail of some condition.
'tis in motion
The intelligence of state came in the instant
With the desier.
Le's to the king, who, were he
A quarter carrier of that honour, which
His Enemy come in, the blood we venture
Should be as for our health, which were not spent,
Rather laid out for purchase: but alas
Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will
The fall o'th' stroke do damage?
Let th'event,
That never erring arbitrator, tell us
When we know all ourselves, and let us follow
The becking of our chance.
No further.
Sir farewell; repeat my wishes
To our great Lord, of whose success I dare not
Make any timorous question, yet I wish him
Excess, and overflow of power, and't might be
To dure ill-dealing fortune; speed to him,
Store never hurts good Governors.
Though I know
His Ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they
Must yield their tribute there: My precious Maid,
Those best affections, that the heavens infuse
In their best tempered pieces, keep enthroned
In your dear heart.
thanks Sir; Remember me
To our all royal Brother, for whose speed
The great Bellona I'll solicit; and
Since in our terrene State petitions are not
Without gifts understood: I'll offer to her
What I shall be advised she likes; our hearts
Are in his Army in his Tent.
In's bosom:
We have been Soldiers, and we cannot weep
When our Friends done their helms, or put to sea,
Or tell of Babe, broached on the Lance, or women
That have sod their Infants in (and after eat them)
Tho brine, they wept at killing 'em; Then if
You stay to see of us such Spinesters, we
Should hold you here for ever.
Peace be to you
As I pursue this war, which shall be then
Beyond further requiring.
How his longing
Follows his Friend; since his depart, his sports
Though craving seriousness, and skill, passed slightly
His careless execution, where nor gain
Made him regard, or loss consider, but
Playing o'er business in his hand, another
Directing in his head, his mind, nurse equal
To these so differing Twins; have you observed him,
Since our great Lord departed?
With much labour:
And I did love him for't, they two have Cabined
In many as dangerous, as poor a Corner,
Peril and want contending, they have skift
Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power
I'th' least of these was dreadful, and they have
Fought out together, where Deaths-selfe was lodged,
Yet fate hath brought them off: Their knot of love
Tide, weaved, entangled, with so true, so long,
And with a finger of so deep a cunning
May be outworne, never undone, I think
Theseus cannot be umpire to himself
Cleaving his conscience into twain, and doing
Each side like justice, which he loves best.
Doubtless
There is a best, and reason has no manners
To say it is not you: I was acquainted
Once with a time, when I enjoyed a Playfellow;
You were at wars, when she the grave enriched,
Who made too proud the Bed, took leave o'th' Moon
(which then looked pale at parting) when our count
Was each a eleven.
'twas Flavia.
Yes
You talk of Pirithous and Theseus love;
Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasons,
More buckled with strong judgement. and their needs
The one of th' other may be said to water
Their intertangled roots of love, but I
And she (I sigh and spoke of) were things innocent,
Loved for we did, and like the Elements
That know not what, nor why, yet do effect
Rare issues by their operance; our souls
Did so to one another; what she liked,
Was then of me approved, what not condemned
No more arraignment, the flower that I would pluck
And put between my breasts, oh (than but beginning
To swell about the blossom) she would long
Till she had such another, and commit it
To the like innocent Cradle, where Phoenix like
They dide in perfume: on my head no toy
But was her pattern, her affections (pretty
Though happily, her careless, were, I followed
For my most serious decking, had mine ear
Stolen some new air, or at adventure hummed on
From misicall Coynadge, why it was a note
Whereon her spirits would sojourn (rather dwell on)
And sing it in her slumbers; This rehearsal
(Which fury-innocent wots well) comes in
Like old importments bastard, has this end,
That the true love 'tween Maid, and maid, may be
More then in sex individual.
Y'are outof breath
And this high speeded-pace, is but to say
That you shall never (like the Maid Flavina)
Love any that's called Man.
I am sure I shall not.
Now alack weak Sister,
I must no more believe thee in this point
(Though, in't I know thou dost believe thyself,)
Then I will trust a sickly appetite,
That loathes even as it longs, but sure my Sister
If I were ripe for your persuasion, you
Have said enough to shake me from the Arm
Of the all noble Theseus, for whose fortunes,
I will now in, and kneel with great assurance,
That we, more than his Pirothous, possess
The high throne in his heart.
I am not against your faith,
Yet I continue mine.
To thee no star be dark.
Both heaven and earth
Friend thee for ever.
All the good that may
Be wished upon thy head, I cry Amen to't.
Th'impartial Gods, who from the mounted heavens
View us their mortal Herd, behold who err,
And in their time chastise: go and find out
The bones of your dead Lords, and honour them
With treble Ceremony, rather than a gap
Should be in their dear rights, we would suppl'it.
But those we will depute, which shall invest
You in your dignities, and even each thing
Our haste does leave imperfect; So adieu
And heavens good eyes look on you. what are those?
Men of great quality, as may be judgd
By their appointment; Some of Thebes have told's
They are Sisters children, Nephews to the King.
Byth' Helm of Mars, I saw them in the war,
Like to a pair of Lions, smeared with prey,
Make lanes in troops aghast. I fixed my note
Constantly on them; for they were a mark
Worth a god's view: what prisoner was't that told me
When I inquired their names?
We leave, they're called
Arcite and Palamon,
'tis right, those, those
They are not dead?
Nor in a state of life, had they been taken
When their last hurts were given, 'twas possible
They might have been recovered; Yet they breathe
And have the name of men.
Then like men use 'em
The very lees of such (millions of rates)
Exceed the wine of others. all our surgeons
Convent in their behoof, our richest balms
Rather then niggard waist, their lives concern us,
Much more than Thebes is worth, rather than have 'em
Freed of this plight, and in their morning state
(Sound and at liberty) I would 'em dead,
But forty thousand fold, we had rather have 'em
Prisoners to us, than death; Bear 'em speedily
From our kind air, to them unkind, and minister
What man to man may do for our sake more,
Since I have known frights, fury, friends, beheastes,
Loves, provocations, zeal, a mistress Task,
Desire of liberty, a fever, madness,
Hath set a mark which nature could not reach too
Without some imposition, sickness in will
Or wrestling strength in reason, for our Love
And great Apollo's mercy, all our best,
Their best skill tender. Lead into the City,
Where having bound things scattered, we will post Florish.
To Athens for our Army.
Urns, and odours, bring away,
Vapours, sighs, darken the day;
Our dole more deadly looks than dying
Balms, and gums, and heavy cheers,
Sacred vials filled with tears,
And clamours through the wild air flying.
Come all sad, and solemn Shows,
That are quick-eyed pleasures foes;
We convent nought else but woes.
This funeral path, brings to your households grave:
joy cease on you again: peace sleep with him.
And this to yours.
Yours this way: Heavens lend
A thousand differing ways, to one sure end.
This world's a City full of straying Streets,
And Death's the market place, where each one meets.
I may depart with little, while I live, some thing I
May cast to you, not much: Alas the Prison I
Keep, though it be for great ones, yet they seldom
Come; Before one Salmon, you shall take a number
Of Minnowes: I am given out to be better lined
Than it can appear, to me report is a true
Speaker: I would I were really, that I am
Delivered to be: Marry, what I have (be it what
it will) I will assure upon my daughter at
The day of my death.
Sir I demand no more than your own offer,
And I will estate your Daughter in what I
Have promised,
Well, we will talk more of this, when the solemnity
Is past; But have you a full promise of her?
When that shall be seen, I tender my consent.
I have Sir; here she comes.
Your Friend and I have chanced to name
You here, upon the old business: But no more of that.
Now, so soon as the Court hurry is over, we will
Have an end of it: I'th' mean time look tenderly
To the two Prisoners. I can tell you they are princes.
These strew are for their Chamber; 'tis pity they
Are in prison, and 'twer pity they should be out: I
Do think they have patience to make any adversity
Ashamed; the prison itself is proud of 'em; and
They have all the world in their Chamber.
They are famed to be a pair of absolute men.
By my troth, I think Fame but stammers 'em, they doers.
Stand a greise above the reach of report.
I heard them reported in the Battle, to be the only
Nay most likely, for they are noble suffrers; I
Marvel how they would have looked had they been
Victors, that with such a constant Nobility, enforce
A freedom out of Bondage, making misery their
Mirth, and affliction, a toy to jest at.
Do they so?
It seems to me they have no more sense of their
Captivity, than I of ruling Athens: they eat
Well, look merrily, discourse of many things,
But nothing of their own restraint, and disasters:
Yet sometime a divided sigh, martyred as 'twer
I'th' deliverance, will break from one of them.
When the other presently gives it so sweet a rebuke,
That I could wish myself a Sigh to be so chid,
Or at least a Sigher to be comforted.
I never saw'em.
The Duke himself came privately in the night,
And so did they, what the reason of it is, I
Know not: Look yonder they are; that's
Arcite looks out.
No Sir, no, that's Palamon; Arcite is the
Lower of the twain; you may perceive a part
Of him.
Go too, leave your pointing; they would not
Make us their object; out of their sight.
It is a holiday to look on them: Lord, the
Difference of men.
How do you Noble Cosen?
How do you Sir?
Why strong enough to laugh at misery,
And bear the chance of war yet, we are prisoners
I fear for ever Cosen.
I believe it,
And to that destiny have patiently
Laid up my hour to come.
Oh Cosen Arcite,
Where is Thebes now? where is our noble Country?
Where are our friends, and kindreds? never more
Must we behold those comforts, never see
The hardy youths strive for the Games of honour
(Hung with the painted favours of their Ladies)
Like tall Ships under sail: then start amongst 'em
And as an Eastwind leave 'em all behind us,
Like lazy Clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,
Even in the wagging of a wanton leg
Outstripped the people's praises, won the Garlands,
Ere they have time to wish 'em ours. O never
Shall we two exercise, like Twins of honour,
Our Arms again, and feel our fiery horses
Like proud Seas under us, our good Swords, now
(Better the red-eyd god of war ne'er were)
Bravishd our sides, like age must run to rust,
And deck the Temples of those gods that hate us,
These hands shall never draw'em out like lightning
To blast whole Armies more.
No Palamon,
Those hopes are Prisoners with us, here we are
And here the graces of our youths must wither
Like a too-timely Spring; here age must find us,
And which is heaviest (Palamon) unmarried,
The sweet embraces of a loving wife
loaden with kisses, armed with thousand Cupids
Shall never clasp our necks, no issue know us,
No figures of ourselves shall we e'er see,
To glad our age, and like young Eagles teach'em
Boldly to gaze against bright arms, and say
Remember what your fathers were, and conquer.
The faire-eyd Maids, shall weep our Bavishments,
And in their Songs, curse ever-blinded fortune
Till she for shame see what a wrong she has done
To youth and nature; This is all our world;
We shall know nothing here but one another,
Hear nothing but the Clock that tells our woes.
The Vine shall grow, but we shall never see it:
Summer shall come, and with her all delights;
But dead-cold winter must inhabit here still.
'tis too true Arcite. To out Theban hounds,
That shook the aged Forrest with their echoes,
No more now must we halo, no more shake
Our pointed Iavelyns, whilst the angry Swine
Flies like a parthian quiver from our rages,
Struck with our well-steeld Darts: All valiant uses,
(The food, and nourishment of noble minds,)
In us two here shall perish; we shall die
(which is the curse of honour) lastly,
Children of grief, and Ignorance.
Yet Cosen,
Even from the bottom of these miseries
From all that fortune can inflict upon us,
I see two comforts rising, two mere blessings,
If the gods please, to hold here a brave patience,
And the enjoying of our griefs together.
Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish
If I think this our prison.
Certainly,
'tis a main goodness Cosen, that our fortunes
Were twyned together; 'tis most true, two souls
Put in two noble Bodies, let'em suffer
The gall of hazard, so they grow together,
Will never sink, they must not, say they could,
A willing man dies sleeping, and all's done.
Shall we make worthy uses of this place
That all men hate so much?
How gentle Cosen?
Let's think this prison, holy sanctuary,
To keep us from corruption of worse men,
We are young and yet desire the ways of honour,
That liberty and common Conversation
The poison of pure spirits; might like women
Woo us to wander from. What worthy blessing
Can be but our Imaginations
May make it ours? And here being thus together,
We are an endless mine to one another;
We are one another's wife, ever begotting
New births of love; we are father, friends, acquaintance,
We are in one another, Families,
I am your heir, and you are mine: This place
Is our Inheritance: no hard Oppressor
Dare take this from us; here with a little patience
We shall live long, and loving: No surfeits seek us:
The hand of war hurts none here, nor the Seas
Swallow their youth: were we at liberty,
A wife might part us lawfully, or business,
Quarrels consume us, Envy of ill men
Crave our acquaintance, I might sicken Cosen,
Where you should never know it, and so perish
Without your noble hand to close mine eyes,
Or prayers to the gods; a thousand chances
Were we from hence, would feaver
You have made me
(I thank you Cosen Arcite) almost wanton
With my Captivity: what a misery
It is to live abroad? and every where:
'tis like a Beast me thinks: I find the Court here,
I am sure a more content, and all those pleasures
That woo the wills of men to vanity,
I see through now, and am sufficient
To tell the world, 'tis but a gaudy shadow,
That old Time, as he passes by takes with him,
What had we been old in the Court of Creon,
Where sin is justice, lust, and ignorance,
The virtues of the great ones: Cosen Arcite,
Had not the loving gods found this place for us
We had died as they do, ill old men, unwept,
And had their Epitaphs, the people's Curses,
Shall I say more?
I would hear you still.
Ye shall.
Is there record of any two that loved
Better than we do Arcite?
Sure there cannot.
I do not think it possible our friendship
Should ever leave us.
Till our deaths it cannot
And after death our spirits shall be led
To those that love eternally. Speak on Sir.
This garden has a world of pleasures in't.
What Flower is this?
'tis called Narcissus Madam.
That was a fair Boy certain, but a fool,
To love himself, were there not maids enough?
Pray forward.
Yes.
Or were they all hard hearted?
They could not be to one so fair.
Thou wouldst not.
I think I should not, Madam.
That's a good wench:
But take heed to your kindness though.
Why Madam?
Men are mad things.
Will ye go forward Cosen?
Canst not thou work such flowers in silk wench?
Yes.
e have a gowne full of 'em and of these,
This is a pretty colour, wilt not do
Rarely upon a Skirt wench?
Dainty Madam.
cousin, Cosen, how do you Sir? Why Palamon?
Never till now I was in prison Arcite.
Why 'ss the matter Man?
Behold, and wonder.
By heaven she is a Goddess.
Ha.
Do reverence.
She is a Goddess Arcite.
Of all Flowers.
Me thinks a Rose is best.
Why gentle Madam?
It is the very Emblem of a Maid.
For when the west wind courts her gently
How modestly she blows, and paints the Sun,
With her chaste blushes? When the North comes near her,
Rude and impatient, then, like Chastity
She locks her beauties in her bud again,
And leaves him to base briers.
Yet good Madam,
Sometimes her modesty will blow so far
She falls for't: a Maid
If she have any honour, would be loath
To take example by her.
Thou art wanton.
She is wondrous fair.
She is all the beauty extant.
The Sun grows high, le's walk in, keep these flowers,
we'll see how near Art can come near their colours;
I am wondrous merry hearted, I could laugh now.
I could lie down I am sure.
And take one with you?
That's as we bargain Madam,
Well, agree then.
What think you of this beauty?
'tis a rare one.
Is't but a rare one?
Yes a matchless beauty.
Might not a man well lose himself and love her?
I cannot tell what you have done, I have,
Beshrew mine eyes for't, now I feel my Shackles.
You love her then?
Who would not?
And desire her?
Before my liberty.
I saw her first.
That's nothing
But it shall be.
I saw her too.
Yes, but you must not love her.
I will not as you do; to worship her;
As she is heavenly, and a blessed Gods;
(I love her as a woman, to enjoy her)
So both may love.
You shall not love at all.
Not love at all.
Who shall deny me?
I that first saw her; I that took possession
First with mine eye of all those beauties
In her revealed to mankind: if thou lov'st her.
Or entertainest a hope to blast my wishes,
Thou art a Traitor Arcite and a fellow
False as thy Title to her: friendship, blood
And all the ties between us I disclaim
If thou once think upon her.
Yes I love her,
And if the lives of all my name lay on it,
I must do so, I love her with my soul,
If that will lose ye, farewell Palamon,
I say again, I love, and in loving her maintain
I am as worthy, and as free a lover
And have as just a title to her beauty
As any Palamon or any living
That is a man's Son.
Have I called thee friend?
Yes, and have found me so; why are you moved thus?
Let me deal coldly with you, am not I
Part of you blood, part of your soul? you have told me
That I was Palamon, and you were Arcite.
Yes.
Am not I liable to those affections,
Those joys, griefs, angers, fears, my friend shall suffer?
Ye may be.
Why then would you deal so cunningly,
So strangely, so unlike a noble kinsman
To love alone? speak truly, do you think me
Unworthy of her sight?
No, but unjust,
If thou pursue that sight.
Because an other
First sees the Enemy, shall I stand still
And let mine honour down, and never charge?
Yes, if he be but one.
But say that one
Had rather combat me?
Let that one say so,
And use thy freedom: else if thou pursuest her,
Be as that cursed man that hates his Country,
A branded villain.
You are mad.
I must be.
Till thou art worthy, Arcite, it concerns me,
And in this madness, if I hazard thee
And take thy life, I deal but truly.
Fie Sir.
You play the Child extremely: I will love her,
I must, I ought to do so, and I dare,
And all this justly.
O that now, that now
Thy false-self and thy friend, had but this fortune
To be one hour at liberty, and grasp
Our good Swords in our hands, I would quickly teach thee
What tw'er to filch affection from another:
Thou art base in it then a Cutpurse;
Put but thy head out of this window more,
And as I have a soul, I'll nail thy life to't.
Thou dar'st not fool, thou canst not, thou art feeble.
Put my head out? I'll throw my Body out,
And leap the garden, when I see her next
And pitch between her arms to anger thee.
No more; the keeper's coming; I shall live
To knock thy brains out with my Shackles.
Do.
By your leave Gentlemen:
Now honest keeper?
Lord Arcite, you must presently toth' Duke;
The cause I know not yet.
I am ready keeper.
Prince Palamon, I must awhile bereave you
Of your fair Cousin's Company.
And me too,
Even when you please of life; why is he sent for?
It may be he shall marry her, he's goodly.
And like enough the Duke hath taken notice
Both of his blood and body: But his falsehood,
Why should a friend be treacherous? If that
Get him a wife so noble, and so fair;
Let honest men ne'er love again. Once more
I would but see this fair One: Blessed Garden,
And fruit, and flowers more blessed that still blossom
As her bright eyes shine on ye. would I were
For all the fortune of my life hereafter
Yond little Tree, yond blooming Apricocke;
How I would spread, and fling my wanton arms
In at her window; I would bring her fruit
Fit for the Gods to feed on: youth and pleasure
Still as she tasted should be doubled on her,
And if she be not heavenly I would make her
So near the Gods in nature, they should fear her.
And then I am sure she would love me: how now keeper
where's Arcite,
Banished: Prince Pirithous
Obtained his liberty; but never more
Upon his oath and life must he set foot
Upon this Kingdom.
he's a blessed man,
He shall see Thebes again, and call to Arms
The bold young men, that when he bids 'em charge,
Fall on like fire: Arcite shall have a Fortune,
If he dare make himself a worthy Lover,
Yet in the Field to strike a battle for her;
And if he lose her then, he's a cold Coward;
How bravely may he bear himself to win her
If he be noble Arcite; thousand ways.
Were I at liberty, I would do things
Of such a virtuous greatness, that this Lady,
This blushing virgin should take manhood to her
And seek to ravish me.
My Lord for you
I have this charge too.
To discharge my life.
No, but from this place to remove your Lordship,
The windows are too open.
Devils take 'em
That are so envious to me; prithee kill me.
And hang for't afterward.
By this good light
Had I a sword I would kill thee.
Why my Lord?
Thou bringst such pelting scurvy news continually
Thou art not worthy life; I will not go.
Indeed yond must my Lord.
May I see the garden?
Noe.
Then I am resolved, I will not go.
I must constrain you then; and for you are dangerous
I'll clap more irons on you.
Do good keeper.
I'll shake'em so, ye shall not sleep,
I'll make ye a new morris, must I go?
There is no remedy.
Farewell kind window.
May rude wind never hurt thee. O my Lady
If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was,
Dream how I suffer. Come; now bury me.
Banished the kingdom? 'tis a benefit,
A mercy I must thank 'em for, but banished
The free enjoying of that face I die for,
Oh 'twas a studied punishment, a death
Beyond Imagination: Such a vengeance
That were I old and wicked, all my sins
Could never pluck upon me. Palamon;
Thou hast the Start now, thou shalt stay and see
Her bright eyes break each morning 'gainst thy window,
And let in life into thee; thou shalt feed
Upon the sweetness of a noble beauty,
That nature ne'er exceeded, nor ne'er shall:
Good gods? what happiness has Palamon?
Twenty to one, he'll come to speak to her,
And if she be as gentle, as she's fair,
I know she's his, he has a Tongue will tame
Tempests, and make the wild Rocks wanton. Come what can come,
The worst is death; I will not leave the Kingdom,
I know mine own, is but a heap of ruins,
And no redress there, if I go, he has her.
I am resolved an other shape shall make me,
Or end my fortunes. Either way, I am happy:
I'll see her, and be near her, or no more.
My Masters, i'll be there that's certain.
And I'll be there.
And I.
Why then have with ye Boys; 'tis but a chiding,
Let the plough play to day, i'll tick'lt out
Of the lads tails to morrow.
I am sure
To have my wife as jealous as a Turkey:
But that's all one, i'll go through, let her mumble.
Clap her aboard to morrow night, and stoa her,
And all's made up again.
ay, do but put a feskue in her fist, and you shall see her
Take a new lesson out, and be a good wench.
Do we all hold, against the Maying?
Hold? what should ail us?
Arcas will be there.
And Sennois.
And Rycas, and 3. better lads ne'er dancd under green Tree,
And yet know what wenches: ha?
But will the dainty Domine, the Schoolmaster keep touch
Do you think: for he does all ye know.
he'll eat a hornbook ere he fail: go too, the matter's too far driven between him, and the Tanner's daughter, to let slip now, and she must see the Duke, and she must dance too.
Shall we be lusty.
All the Boys in Athens blow wind i'th' breech on's, and here i'll be and there i'll be, for our Town, and here again, and there again: ha, Boys, heigh for the weavers.
This must be done i'th' woods.
O pardon me.
By any means our thing of learning sees so: where he himself will edify the Duke most parlously in our behalfs: he's excellent i'th' woods, bring him toth' plains, his learning makes no cry:
we'll see the sports, than every man to's Tackle: and Sweet Companions le's rehearse by any means before The Ladies see us, and do sweetly, and God knows what May come on't.
Content; the sports once ended, we'll perform. Away Boys and hold.
By your leaves honest friends: pray you whither go you.
Whither? why, what a question's that?
Yes, 'tis a question, to me that know not.
To the Games my Friend.
Where were you bred you know it not?
Not fairy Sir,
Are there such Games to day?
Yes marry are there:
And such as you never saw; The Duke himself
Will be in person there.
What pastimes are they?
Wrestling, and Running; 'tis a pretty Fellow.
Thou wilt not go along.
Not yet Sir.
Well Sir
Take your own time, come Boys
My mind misgives me
This fellow has a vengeance trick o'th' hip,
Mark how his Body's made for't
I'll be hanged though
If he dare venture, hang him plumb porridge,
He wrestle? he roast eggs. Come le's be gone Lads.
This is an offered opportunity
I durst not wish for. Well, I could have wrestled,
The best men called it excellent, and run
Swifter, than wind upon a field of Corn
(Curling the wealthy ears) never flew: I'll venture,
And in some poor disguise be there, who knows
Whether my brows may not be girt with garlands?
And happiness prefer me to a place,
Where I may ever dwell in sight of her.
Why should I love this Gentleman? 'tis odds
He never will affect me; I am base,
My Father the mean Keeper of his Prison,
And he a prince; To marry him is hopeless;
To be his whore, is witless; Out upon't;
What bushes are we wenches driven to
When fifteen once has found us? First I saw him,
I (seeing) thought he was a goodly man;
He has as much to please a woman in him,
(If he please to bestow it so) as ever
These eyes yet looked on; Next, I pitied him,
And so would any young wench o'my Conscience
That ever dreamed, or vowed her Maidenhead
To a young handsome Man; Then I loved him,
(extremely loved him) infinitely loved him;
And yet he had a Cosen, fair as he too.
But in my heart was Palamon, and there
Lord, what a coil he keeps? To hear him
Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is?
And yet his Songs are sad-ones; Fairer spoken,
Was never Gentleman. When I come in
To bring him water in a morning, first
He bows his noble body, then salutes me, thus:
Fair, gentle Mayde, good morrow, may thy goodness,
Get thee a happy husband; Once he kissed me,
I loved my lips the better ten days after,
Would he would do so every day; He grieves much,
And me as much to see his misery.
What should I do, to make him know I love him,
For I would fain enjoy him? Say I ventured
To set him free? what says the law then? Thus much
For Law, or kindred: I will do it,
And this night, or to morrow he shall love me.
You have done worthily: I have not seen
Since Hercules, a man of tougher sinews;
What ere you are, you run the best, and wrestle,
That these times can allow.
I am proud to please you.
What Country bred you?
This; but far off, Prince.
Are you a Gentleman?
My father said so;
And to those gentle uses gave me life.
Are you his heir?
His youngest Sir.
Your Father
Sure is a happy Sire then: what proves you?
A little of all noble Qualities:
I could have kept a Hawk, and well have holloa'd
To a deep cry of Dogs; I dare not praise
My feat in horsemanship: yet they that knew me
Would say it was my best piece: last, and greatest,
I would be thought a Soldier.
You are perfect.
Upon my soul, a proper man.
He is so.
How do you like him Lady?
I admire him,
I have not seen so young a man, so noble
(If he say true,) of his sort.
Believe,
His mother was a wondrous handsome woman,
His face me thinks, goes that way.
But his Body
And fiery mind, illustrate a brave Father.
Mark how his virtue, like a hidden Sun
Breaks through his baser garments.
he's well got sure.
What made you seek this place Sir?
Noble Theseus.
To purchase name, and do my ablest service
To such a well-found wonder, as thy worth,
Foe only in thy Court, of all the world
dwells faire-eyd honour.
All his words are worthy.
Sir, we are much indebted to your travel,
Nor shall you lose your wish: Pirithous
Dispose of this fair Gentleman.
Thanks Theseus.
What ere you are y'are mine, and I shall give you
To a most noble service, to this Lady,
This bright young Virgin; pray observe her goodness;
You have honoured her fair birthday, with your virtues,
And as your due y'are hers: kiss her fair hand Sir.
Sir, y'are a noble Giver: dearest Beauty,
Thus let me seal my vowed faith: when your Servant
(Your most unworthy Creature) but offends you,
Command him die, he shall.
That were too cruel.
If you deserve well Sir; I shall soon see't:
Y'are mine, and somewhat better than your rank I'll use you.
I'll see you furnished, and because you say
You are a horseman, I must needs entreat you
This after noon to ride, but 'tis a rough one.
I like him better (Prince) I shall not then
Freeze in my Saddle.
Sweet, you must be ready,
And you Emilia, and you (Friend) and all
To morrow by the Sun, to do observance
To flowery May, in Diane's wood: wait well Sir
Upon your Mistress: Emely, I hope
He shall not go a foot.
That were a shame Sir,
While I have horses: take your choice, and what
You want at any time, let me but know it;
If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you
You'll find a loving mistress.
If I do not,
Let me find that my Father ever hated,
Disgrace, and blows.
Go lead the way; you have won it:
It shall be so; you shall receive all dues
Fit for the honour you have won; Twere wrong else,
Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a Servant,
That if I were a woman, would be Master,
But you are wise.
I hope too wise for that Sir.
Let all the Dukes, and all the devil's roar,
He is at liberty: I have ventured for him,
And out I have brought him to a little wood
A mile hence, I have sent him, where a Cedar
Higher than all the rest, spreads like a plane
Fast by a Brook, and there he shall keep close,
Till I provide him Fyles, and food, for yet
His iron bracelets are not off. O Love
What a stout hearted child thou art! My Father
Durst better have endured cold iron, than done it:
I love him, beyond love, and beyond reason,
Or wit, or safety: I have made him know it
I care not, I am desperate, If the law
Find me, and then condemn me for't; some wenches,
Some honest hearted Maids, will sing my Dirge.
And tell to memory, my death was noble,
Dying almost a Martyr: That way he takes,
I purpose is my way too: Sure he cannot
Be so unmanly, as to leave me here,
If he do, Maids will not so easily
Trust men againe: And yet he has not thank'd m
For what I have done: no not so much as kissed me,
And that (me thinks) is not so well; nor scarcely
Could I persuade him to become a Freeman,
He made such scruples of the wrong he did
To me, and to my Father. Yet I hope
When he considers more, this love of mine
Will take more root within him: Let him do
What he will with me, so he use me kindly,
For use me so he shall, or i'll proclaim him
And to his face, no-man: I'll presently
Provide him necessaries, and pack my clothes up,
And where there is a path of ground I'll venture
So he be with me; By him, like a shadow
I'll ever dwell; within this hour the whoobub
Will be all o'er the prison: I am then
Kissing the man they look for: farewell Father;
Get many more such prisoners, and such daughters,
And shortly you may keep yourself. Now to him:
The Duke has lost Hippolita; each took
A several land. This is a solemn Right
They owe bloomd May, and the Athenians pay it
Toth' heart of Ceremony: O Queen Emilia
Fresher than May, sweeter
Than her gold Buttons on the bows, or all
Th'enameled knacks o'th' Mead, or garden, yea
(We challenge too) the bank of any Nymph
That makes the stream seem flowers; thou o jewel
O'th' wood, o'th' world, hast likewise blessed a pace
With thy sole presence, in thy rumination
That I poor man might eftsoons come between
And chop on some cold thought, thrice blessed chance
To drop on such a Mistress, expectation
most guiltless on't: tell me O Lady Fortune
(Next after Emely my sovereign) how far
I may be proud. She takes strong note of me,
Hath made me near her; and this beuteous Morn
(The prim'st of all the year) presents me with
A brace of horses, two such Steeds might well
Be by a pair of Kings backed, in a Field
That their crowns titles tried: Alas, alas
Poor Cosen Palamon, poor prisoner, thou
So little dreamest upon my fortune, that
Thou thinkst thyself, the happier thing, to be
So near Emilia, me thou deemest at Thebes,
And therein wretched, although free; But if
Thou knew'st my Mistress breathed on me, and that
I eared her language, lived in her eye; O Coz
What passion would enclose thee.
Traitor kinsman,
Thou shouldst perceive my passion, if these signs
Of prisonment were off me, and this hand
But owner of a Sword: By all oaths in one
I, and the justice of my love would make thee
A confessed Traitor, o thou most perfidious
That ever gently looked the voids of honour.
That e'er bore gentle Token; falsest Cosen
That ever blood made kin, call'st thou her thine?
I'll prove it in my Shackles, with these hands,
Void of appointment, that thou liest, and art
A very thief in love, a Chaffy Lord
Nor worth the name of villain: had I a Sword
And these house clogs away.
Dear Cosin Palamon,
Cozener Arcite, give me language, such
As thou hast showed me feat.
Not finding in
The circuit of my breast, any gross stuff
To form me like your blazon, holds me to
This gentleness of answer; 'tis your passion
That thus mistakes, the which to you being enemy,
Cannot to me be kind: honour, and honesty
I cherish, and depend on, how so e'er
You skip them in me, and with them fair Coz
I'll maintain my proceedings; pray be pleased
To show in generous terms, your griefs, since that
Your question's with your equal, who professes
To clear his own way, with the mind and Sword
Of a true Gentleman.
That thou durst Arcite.
My Coz, my Coz, you have been well advertised
How much I dare, y'ave seen me use my Sword
Against th'advice of fear: sure of another
You would not hear me doubted, but your silence
Should break out, though i'th' Sanctuary.
Sir,
I have seen you move in such a place, which well
Might justify your manhood, you were called
A good knight and a bold; But the whole weeke's not fair
If any day it rain: Their valiant temper
Men lose when they incline to treachery,
And then they fight like compelled Bears, would fly
Were they not tied.
Kinsman, you might as well
Speak this, and act it in your Glass, as to
His care, which now disdains you.
Come up to me,
Quit me of these cold Gyves, give me a Sword
Though it be rusty, and the charity
Of one meal lend me; Come before me then
A good Sword in thy hand, and do but say
That Emily is thine, I will forgive
The trespass thou hast done me, yea my life
If then thou carry't, and brave souls in shades
That have dyde manly, which will seek of me
Some news from earth, they shall get none but this
That thou art brave, and noble.
Be content,
Again betake you to your hawthorn house,
With counsel of the night, I will be here
With wholesome viands; these impediments
Will I file off, you shall have garments, and
Perfumes to kill the smell o'th' prison, after
When you shall stretch yourself, and say but Arcite
I am in plight, there shall be at your choice
Both Sword, and Armour.
Oh you heavens, dares any
So noble bear a guilty business! none
But only Arcite, therefore none but Arcite
In this kind is so bold.
Sweet Palamon.
I do embrace you, and your offer, for
Your offer do't I only, Sir your person
Without hypocrisy I may not wish
More than my Sword's edge on't.
You hear the Horns;
Enter your Music lest this match between's
Be crossed, ere met, give me your hand, farewell.
I'll bring you every needful thing: I pray you
Take comfort and be strong.
Pray hold your promise;
And do the deed with a bend brow, most certain
You love me not, be rough with me, and pour
This oil out of your language; by this air
I could for each word, give a Cuff: my stomach
not reconciled by reason,
Plainly spoken,
Yet pardon me hard language, when I spur
My horse, I chide him nor; content, and anger
In me have but one face. Hark Sir, they call
The scattered to the Banquet; you must guess
I have an office there.
Sir your attendance
Cannot please heaven, and I know your office
Unjustly is atcheeved.
If a good title,
I am persuaded this question sick between's,
By bleeding must be cured. I am a Suitor,
That to your Sword you will be queath this plea,
And talk of it no more.
But this one word:
You are going now to gaze upon my Mistress,
For note you, mine she is.
Nay then.
Nay pray you,
You talk of feeding me to breed me strength
You are going now to look upon a Sun
That strengthens what it looks on, there
You have a vantage o'er me, but enjoy't till
I may enforce my remedy. Farewell.
He has mistook; the Beak I meant, is gone
After his fancy, 'tis now well-nigh morning,
No matter, would it were perpetual night,
And darkness Lord o'th' world, Hark 'tis a wolf:
In me hath grief slain fear, and but for one thing
I care for nothing, and that's Palamon.
I wreak not if the wolves would jaw me, so
He had this File; what if I hallowd for him?
I cannot hauling: i I whooped; what then?
If he not answeard, I should call a wolf,
And do him but that service. I have heard
Strange howls this livelong night, why may't not be
They have made prey of him? he has no weapons,
He cannot run, the jengling of his Gives
Might call fell things to listen, who have in them
A sense to know a man unarmed, and can
Smell where resistance is. I'll set it down
He's torn to pieces, they howld many together
And then they feed on him: So much for that,
Be bold to ring the Bell; how stand I then?
All's charged when he is gone, No, no I lye,
My Father's to be hanged for his escape,
Myself to beg, if I prized life so much
As to deny my act, but that I would not,
Should I try death by dussons: I am moped,
Food took I none these two days.
Sipped some water. I have not closed mine eyes
Save when my lids scowrd off their been; alas
Dissolve my life, Let not my sense unsettle
Lest I should drown, or stab, or hang myself,
O state of Nature, fail together in me,
Since thy best props are warped: So which way now?
The best way is, the next way to a grave:
Each errant step beside is torment. Lo
The Moon is down, the Cryckets chirp, the Schreichowl
Calls in the dawn; all offices are done
Save what I fail in: But the point is this
An end, and that is all.
I should be near the place, hoa. Cosen Palamon.
Arcite.
The same: I have brought you food and files,
Come forth and fear not, here no Theseus.
Nor none so honest Arcite.
That's no matter,
we'll argue that hereafter: Come take courage,
You shall not die thus beastly, here Sir drink
I know you are faint, then i'll talk further with you.
Arcite, thou mightst now poison me.
I might.
But I must fear you first: Sit down, and good now
No more of these vain parleys; let us not
Having our ancient reputation with us
Make talk for Fools, and Cowards, To your health, &c.
Do.
Pray sit down then, and let me entreat you
By all the honesty and honour in you,
No mention of this woman, 'twill disturb us,
We shall have time enough.
Well Sir, I'll pledge you.
Drink a good hearty draught, it breeds good blood man.
Do not you feel it thaw you?
Stay, I tell you after a draught or two more.
Spare it not, the Duke has more couz: Eat now.
Yes.
I am glad you have so good a stomach.
I am gladder I have so good meat to't.
Is't not mad lodging, here in the wild woods Cosen
Yes, for then that have wild Consciences.
How tastes your victuals? your hunger needs no sauce I see,
Not much.
But if it did, yours is too tart: sweet Cosen: what is this?
Venison.
'tis a lusty meat:
Give me more wine; here Arcite to the wenches
We have known in our days. The Lord Steward's daughter.
Do you remember her?
After you couz.
She loved a black-haird man.
She did so; well Sir.
And I have heard some call him Arcite. and
Out with't faith.
She met him in an Arbour:
What did she there couz? play o'th' virginals?
Something she did Sir.
Made her groan a month for't; or 2. or 3. or 10.
The Marshal's Sister,
Had her share too, as I remember Cosen,
Else there be tales abroad, you'll pledge her?
Yes.
A pretty brown wench t'is-There was a time
When young men went a hunting, and a wood,
And a broad Beech: and thereby hangs a tale: heigh ho.
For Emily, upon my life; Fool
Away with this strained mirth; I say again
That sigh was breathed for Emily; base Cosen,
Dar'st thou break first?
you are wide.
By heaven and earth, there's nothing in thee honest.
Then I'll leave you: you are a Beast now:
As thou mak'st me, Traitor.
there's all things needful, files and shirts, and, perfumes:
I'll come again some two hours hence, and bring
That that shall quiet all,
A Sword and Armour.
Fear me not; you are now too foul; farewell.
Cet off your Trinkets, you shall want nought;
Sir ha:
I'll hear no more.
If he keep touch, he dies for't.
I am very cold, and all the Stars are out too,
The little Stars, and all, that look like aglets:
The Sun has seen my Folly: Palamon;
Alas no; he's in heaven; where am I now?
Yonder's the sea, and there's a Ship; how't tumbles
And there's a Rock lies watching under water;
Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,
there's a leak sprung, a sound one, how they cry?
Upon her before the wind, you'll lose all else:
Up with a course or two, and take about Boys.
Good night, good night, y'are gone; I am very hungry,
Would I could find a fine Frog; would tell me
news from all parts o'th' world, then would I make
A Carecke of a Cockle shell, and sail
By east and North East to the King of Pigmies,
For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my Father
Twenty to one is trust up in a trice
To morrow morning, I'll say never a word.
For i'll cut my green coat, a foote above my knee,
And i'll clip my yellow locks; an inch below mine eye. hay, nonny, nonny, nonny,
He's buy me a white Cut, forth for to ride
And i'll go seek him, throw the world that is so wide hay nonny, nonny, nonny.
O for a prick now like a Nightingale, to put my breast
Against. I shall sleep like a Top else.
Fie, fie, what tediosity, & disensanity is here among ye? have my Rudiments been laboured so long with ye? milkd unto ye, and by a figure even the very plumbroth & marrow of my understanding laid upon ye? and do you still cry where, and how, & wherefore? you most course freeze capacities, ye jave judgements, have I said thus let be, and there let be, and then let be, and no man understand me, proh deum, medius fidius, ye are all dunces: For why here stand I. Here the Duke comes, there are you close in the Thicket; the Duke appears, I meet him and unto him I utter learned things, and many figures, he hears, and nods, and hums, and then cries rare, and I go forward, at length I fling my Cap up; mark there; then do you as once did Meleager, and the Boar break comely out before him: like true lovers, cast yourselves in a Body decently, and sweetly, by a figure trace, and turn Boys.
And sweetly we will do it Master Gerrold.
Draw up the Company, Where's the Taborour.
Why Timothy.
Here my mad boys, have at ye.
But I say where's their women?
Here's Friz and Maudlin.
And little Luce with the white legs, and bouncing Barbery.
And freckled Nell; that never failed her Master.
Where be your Ribbons maids? swim with your Bodies
And carry it sweetly, and deliverly
And now and then a favour, and a frisk.
Let us alone Sir.
where's the rest o'th' Music.
Dispersed as you commanded.
Couple then
And see what's wanting; where's the Bavian?
My friend, carry your tail without offence
r scandall to the Ladies; and be sure
You tumble with audacity, and manhood,
And when you bark do it with judgement.
Yes Sir.
Quo usque tandem. Here is a woman wanting
We may go whistle: all the fat's i'th' fire.
We have,
As learned Authors utter, washed a Tile,
We have been fatuus, and laboured vainly.
This is that scornful piece, that scurvy hilding
That gave her promise faithfully, she would be here,
Cicely the Sempster's daughter:
The next gloves that I give her shall be dog skin;
Nay and she fail me once, you can tell Arcas
She swore by wine, and bread, she would not break.
An Eel and woman,
A learned Poet says: unless byth' tail
And with thy teeth thou hold, will either fail,
In manners this was false position
A fire ill take her; does she flinch now?
What
Shall we determine Sir?
Nothing,
Our business is become a nullity
Yea, and a woeful, and a piteous nullity.
Now when the credit of our Town lay on it,
Now to be frampold, now to piss o'th' nettle,
Go thy ways, i'll remember thee, i'll fit thee,
The George allow, came from the South, from
The coast of Barbary a.
And there he met with brave gallants of war By one, by two, by three, a
Well hailed well hailed, you jolly gallants,
And whither now are you bound a
O let me have your company till come to the sound a
There was three fools, fell out about an owlet
The one said it was an owl
The other he said nay,
The third he said it was a hawk, and her bells were cut away.
there's a dainty mad woman Mr. comes i'th' Nick as mad as a march hare: if we can get her dance, we are made again: I warrant her, she'll do the rarest gambols.
A mad woman? we are made Boys.
And are you mad good woman?
I would be sorry else,
Give me your hand.
Why?
I can tell your fortune.
You are a fool: tell ten, I have pozd him: Buzz
Friend you must eat no white bread, if you do
Your teeth will bleed extremely, shall we dance ho?
I know you, you're a Tinker: Sirrah Tinker
Stop no more holes, but what you should.
Dij boni. A Tinker Damsel?
Or a Conjurer: raise me a devil now, and let him play
o'th' bells and bones.
Go take her, and fluently persuade her to a peace:
Et opus exegi, quod nec Iouis ira, nec ignis.
Strike up, and lead her in.
Come lass, le's trip it.
I'll lead:
Do, do.
Perswasively, and cunningly: away boys,
I hear the horns: give me some
Meditation, and marke your Cuo:
Pallas inspire me.
This way the Stag took.
Stay, and edify.
What have we here?
Some Country sport, upon my life Sir.
Well Sir, go forward, we will edify.
Ladies sit down, we'll stay it.
Thou doughty Duke all hail: all hail sweet Ladies.
This is a cold beginning.
If you but favour; our Country pastime made is,
We are a few of those collected here
That ruder Tongues distinguish villager,
And to say verity, and not to fable;
We are a merry rout, or else a rabble
Or company, or by a figure, Choris
That fore thy dignity will dance a Morris.
And I that am the rectifier of all
By title Pedagogus, that let fall
The Birch upon the breeches of the small ones,
And humble with a Ferula the tall ones,
Do here present this Machine, or this frame,
And dainty Duke, whose doughty dismal fame
From Dis to Dedalus, from post to pillar
Is blown abroad; help me thy poor well willer,
And with thy twinckling eyes, look right and straight
Upon this mighty Morr— of mickle weight
Is— now comes in, which being glued together
Makes Morris, and the cause that we came hither.
The body of our sport of no small study
I first appear, though rude, and raw, and muddy,
To speak before thy noble grace, this tenner:
At whose great feet I offer up my penner.
The next the Lord of May, and Lady bright,
The Chambermaid, and Servingman by night
That seek out silent hanging: Then mine Host
And his fat Spouse, that welcomes to their cost
The gauled Traveller, and with a beckoning
Informs the Tapster to inflame the reckoning:
Then the beast eating Clown, and next the fool,
The Bavian with long tail, and eke long tool,
Cum multis alijs that make a dance,
Say I, and all shall presently advance.
ay, I by any means, dear Domine.
Produce.
Intrate filij, Come forth, and foot it,
Ladies, if we have been merry
And have pleased thee with a derry,
And a , a
Say the Schoolemaster's no Clown:
Duke, if we have pleased three too
And have done as good Boys should do,
Give us but a tree or twain
For a Maypole, and again
Ere another year run out,
we'll make thee laugh and all this rout.
Take 20. Domine; how does my sweet heart.
Never so pleased Sir.
'twas an excellent dance, and for a preface
I never heard a better.
Schoolmaster, I thank you, One see'em all rewarded.
And here's something to paint your Pole withal.
Now to our sports again.
May the Stag thou huntst stand long,
And thy dogs be swift and strong:
May they kill him without lets,
And the Ladies ate his dowsts: Come we are all de.
Dij Deaque omnes, ye have danced rarely wenches.
About this hour my Cosen gave his faith
To visit me again, and with him bring
Two Swords, and two good Armours; if he fail
He's neither man, nor Soldier; when he left me
I did not think a week could have restored
My lost strength to me, I was grown so low,
And Crest-fallen with my wants: I thank thee Arcite,
Thou art yet a fair Foe; and I feel myself
With this refreshing, able once again
To out dure danger: To delay it longer
Would make the world think when it comes to hearing,
That I lay fatting like a Swine, to fight
And not a Soldier: Therefore this blessed morning
Shall be the last; and that Sword he refuses,
If it but hold, I kill him with; 'tis justice:
So love, and Fortune for me: O good morrow.
Good morrow noble kinsman,
I have put you
To too much pains Sir.
That too much fair Cosen.
Is but a debt to honour, and my duty.
Would you were so in all Sir; I could wish ye
As kind a kinsman, as you force me find
A beneficial foe, that my embraces
Might thank ye, not my blows.
I shall think either
Well done, a noble recompense.
Then I shall quit you.
Defy me in these fair terms, and you show
More than a Mistress to me, no more anger
As you love any thing that's honourable;
We were not bred to talk man, when we are armed
And both upon our guards, then let our fury
Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us,
And then to whom the birthright of this Beauty
Truly pertains (without obbraiding, scorns,
Dispisings of our persons, and such poutings
Fitter for Girls and Schooleboyes) will be seen
And quickly, yours, or mine: wilt please you arm Sir,
Or if you feel yourself not fitting yet
And furnished with your old strength, i'll stay Cosen
And every day discourse you into health,
As I am spared, your person I am friends with,
And I could wish I had not said I loved her
Though I had died; But loving such a Lady
And justifying my Love, I must not fly from't.
Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy
That no man but thy cousin's fit to kill thee,
I am well, and lusty, choose your Arms.
Choose you Sir:
Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou do it
To make me spare thee?
If you think so Cosen,
You are deceived, for as I am a Soldier.
I will not spare you.
That's well said.
You'll find it
Then as I am an honest man and love,
With all the justice of affection
I'll pay thee soundly: This i'll take.
That's mine then,
I'll arm you first.
Do: pray thee tell me Cosen,
Where got'st thou this good Armour.
'tis the Duke's,
And to say true, I stole it; do I pinch you.
Noe.
Is't not too heavy?
I have worn a lighter,
But I shall make it serve.
I'll buckled close.
By any means.
You care not for a Grand guard?
No, no, we'll use no horses, I perceive
You would fain be at that Fight.
I am indifferent.
Faith so am I: good Cosen, thrust the buckle
Through far enough.
I warrant you.
My Cask now.
Will you fight bare-armd?
We shall be the nimbler.
But use your Gauntlets though; those are o'th' least,
Prithee take mine good Cosen.
Thank you Arcite.
How do I look, am I fall'n much away?
Faith very little; love has used you kindly.
I'll warrant thee, I'll strike home.
Do, and spare not;
I'll give you cause sweet cousin.
Now to you Sir,
Me thinkes this armour's very like that, Arcite,
Thou worest that day the 3. King's fell, but lighter.
That was a very good one, and that day
I well remember, you outdid me Cosen,
I never saw such valour: when you charged
Upon the left wing of the Enemy,
I spurred hard to come up, and under me
I had a right good horse.
You had indeed
A bright Bay I remember.
Yes but all
Was vainly laboured in me, you outwent me,
Nor could my wishes reach you; yet a little
I did by imitation.
More by virtue,
You are modest Cosen.
When I saw you charge first,
Me thought I heard a dreadful clap of Thunder
Break from the Troop.
But still before that flew
The lightning of your valour: Stay a little,
Is not this piece too straight?
No, no, 'tis well.
I would have nothing hurt thee but my Sword,
A bruise would be dishonour.
Now I am perfect.
Stand off then.
Take my Sword, I hold it better.
I thank ye: No, keep it, your life lies on it,
Here's one, if it but hold, I ask no more,
For all my hopes: My Cause and honour guard me.
And me my love: * Is there ought else to say?
This only, and no more: Thou art mine Aunts Son.
And that blood we desire to shed is mutual,
In me, thine, and in thee, mine: My Sword
Is in my hand, and if thou killst me
The gods, and I forgive thee; If there be
A place prepared for those that sleep in honour,
I wish his weary soul, that falls may win it:
Fight bravely cousin, give me thy noble hand.
Here Palamon: This hand shall never more
Come near thee with such friendship.
I commend thee.
If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward,
For none but such, dare die in these just Trials.
Once more farewell my Cosen,
Farewell Arcite.
Lo Cosen, lo, our Folly has undone us.
Why?
This is the Duke, a hunting as I told you,
If we be found, we are wretched, O retire
For honour's sake, and safely presently
Into your Bush again; Sir we shall find
Too many hours to die in, gentle Cosen:
If you be seen you perish instantly
For breaking prison, and I, if you reveal me,
For my contempt; Then all the world will scorn us,
And say we had a noble difference,
But base disposers of it.
No, no, Cosen
I will no more be hidden, nor put off
This great adventure to a second Trial;
I know your cunning, and I know your cause,
He that faints now, shame take him, put thyself
Upon thy present guard.
You are not mad?
Or I will make th'advantage of this hour
Mine own, and what to come shall threaten me,
I fear less than my fortune: know weak Cosen
I love Emilia, and in that i'll bury
Thee, and all crosses else.
Then come, what can come
Thou shalt know Palamon, I dare as well
Die, as discourse, or sleep: Only this fears me,
The law will have the honour of our ends.
Have at thy life.
Look to thine own well Arcite.
What ignorant and mad malicious Traitors,
Are you? That 'gainst the tenor of my Laws
Are making Battle, thus like Knights appointed,
Without my leave, and Officers of Arms?
By Castor both shall die.
Hold thy word Theseus,
We are certainly both Traitors, both despisers
Of thee, and of thy goodness: I am Palamon
That cannot love thee, he that broke thy Prison,
Think well, what that deserves; and this is Arcite
A bolder Traitor never trod thy ground
A Falser ne'er seemed friend: This is the man
Was begged and banished, this is he contemns thee
And what thou dar'st do; and in this disguise
Against this own Edict follows thy Sister,
That fortunate bright Star, the fair Emilia
Whose servant, (if there be a right in seeing,
And first bequeathing of the soul to) justly
I am, and which is more, dares think her his.
This treachery like a most trusty Lover,
I called him now to answer; if thou be'st
As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,
The true decider of all injuries,
Say, Fight again, and thou shalt see me Theseus
Do such a justice, thou thyself wilt envy,
Then take my life, I'll woo thee to't.
O heaven,
What more than man is this!
I have sworn.
We seek not
Thy breath of mercy Theseus, 'tis to me
A thing as soon to die, as thee to say it,
And no more moved: where this man calls me Traitor,
Let me say thus much; if in love be Treason,
In service of so excellent a Beauty,
As I love most, and in that faith will perish,
As I have brought my life here to confirm it,
As I have served her truest, worthiest,
As I dare kill this cousin, that denies it,
So let me be most Traitor, and ye please me:
For scorning thy Edict Duke, ask that Lady
Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me
Stay here to love her; and if she say Traitor,
I am a villain fit to lie unburied.
Thou shalt have pity of us both, o Theseus,
If unto neither thou show mercy, stop,
(As thou art just) thy noble ear against us,
As thou art valiant; for thy Cousin's soul
Whose 12. strong labours crown his memory,
Le's die together, at one instant Duke,
Only a little let him fall before me,
That I may tell my Soul he shall not have her.
I grant your wish, for to say true, your Cosen
Has ten times more offended, for I gave him
More mercy than you found, Sir, your offences
Being no more than his: None here speak for'em
For ere the Sun set, both shall sleep for ever.
Asas the pity, now or never Sister
Speak not to be denied; That face of yours
Will bear the curses else of after ages
For these lost Cousins.
In my face dear Sister
I find no anger to 'em; nor no ruin,
The misadventure of their own eyes kill'em;
Yet that I will be woman, and have pity,
My knees shall grow toth' ground but I'll get mercy.
Help me dear Sister, in a deed so virtuous,
The powers of all women will be with us,
Most royal Brother.
Sir by our tie of Marriage.
By your own spotless honour.
By that faith,
That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me.
By that you would have pity in another,
By your own virtues infinite.
By valour,
By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you.
These are strange Conjure.
Nay then I ioin in too: By all our friendship Sir, by all our dangers,
By all you love most, wars; and this sweet Lady.
By that you would have trembled to deny
A blushing Maid.
By your own eyes: By strength
In which you swore I went beyond all women,
Almost all men, and yet I yielded Theseus.
To crown all this; By your most noble soul
Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first.
Next hear my prayers.
Last let me entreat Sir.
For mercy.
Mercy.
Mercy on these Princes.
Ye make my faith reel: Say I felt
Compassion to'em both, how would you place it?
Upon their lives: But with their banishments.
You are a right woman Sister; you have pity,
But want the understanding where to use it.
If you desire their lives, invent a way
Safer than banishment: Can these two live
And have the agony of love about 'em,
And not kill one another? Every day
They'd fight about you; hourly bring your honour
In public question with their Swords; Be wise then
And here forget 'em; it concerns your credit,
And my oath equally: I have said they die,
Better they fall byth' law, than one another.
Bow not my honour.
O my noble Brother,
That oath was rashly made, and in your anger,
Your reason will not hold it, if such vows
Stand for express will, all the world must perish.
Beside, I have another oath, 'gainst yours
Of more authority, I am sure more love,
Not made in passion neither, but good heed.
What is it Sister?
Urge it home brave Lady.
That you would ne'er deny me any thing
Fit for my modest suit, and your free granting:
I tie you to your word now, if ye fall in't,
Think how you maim your honour;
(For now I am set a begging Sir, I am deaf
To all but your compassion) how their lives
Might breed the ruin of my name; Opinion,
Shall any thing that loves me perish for me?
That were a cruel wisdom, do men prune
The straight young Bows that blush with thousand Blossoms
Because they may be rotten? O Duke Theseus
The goodly Mothers that have groaned for these,
And all the longing Maids that ever loved,
If your vow stand, shall curse me and my Beauty,
And in their funeral songs, for these two Cousins
Despise my cruelty, and cry woe worth me,
Till I am nothing but the scorn of women;
For heaven's sake save their lives, and banish 'em.
On what conditions?
Sweare'em never more
To make me their Contention, or to know me,
To tread upon thy Duke doom, and to be
Where ever they shall travel, ever strangers to one another.
I'll be cut a pieces
Before I take this oath, forget I love her?
O all ye gods despise me then: Thy Banishment
I not mislike, so we may fairly carry
Our Swords, and cause along: else never trifle,
But take our lives Duke, I must love and will,
And for that love, must and dare kill this Cosen
On any piece the earth has.
Will you Arcite
Take these conditions?
He's a villain then.
These are men.
No, never Duke: 'tis worse to me than begging
To take my life so basely, though I think
I never shall enjoy her, yet i'll preserve
The honour of affection, and die for her,
Make death a Devil.
What may be done? for now I feel compassion.
Let it not fall again Sir.
Say Emilia
If one of them were dead, as one must, are you
Content to take th'other to your husband?
They cannot both enjoy you; They are Princes
As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble
As ever fame yet spoke of; look upon'em,
And if you can love, end this difference,
I give consent, are you content too Princes?
With all our souls.
He that she refuses
Must die then.
Any death thou canst invent Duke.
If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favour,
And Lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.
If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,
And Soldiers sing my Epitaph.
Make choice then.
I cannot Sir, they are both too excellent
For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.
What will become of 'em?
Thus I ordain it,
And by mine honour, once again it stands,
Or both shall die. You shall both to your Country,
And each within this month accompanied
With three fair Knights, appear again in this place,
In which I'll plant a Pyramid; and whether
Before us that are here, can force his Cosen
By fair and knightly strength to touch the Pillar,
He shall enjoy her: the other loose his head,
And all his friends; Nor shall he grudge to fall,
Nor think he dies with interest in this Lady:
Will this content ye?
Yes: here Cosen Arcite
I am friends again, till that hour.
I embrace ye.
Are you content Sister?
Yes, I must Sir,
Else both miscarry.
Come shake hands again then,
And take heed, as you are Gentlemen, this Quarrel
Sleep till the hour prefixed, and hold your course,
We dare not fail thee Theseus.
Come, I'll give ye
Now usage like to Princes, and to Friends:
When ye return, who wins, I'll settle here,
Who loses, yet I'll weep upon his Beer.
Hear you no more, was nothing said of me
Concerning the escape of Palamon?
Good Sir remember.
Nothing that I heard,
For I came home before the business
Was fully ended: Yet I might perceive
Ere I departed, a great likelihood
Of both their pardons: For Hippolita,
And faire-eyd Emilie, upon their knees
Begged with such handsome pity, that the Duke
Me thought stood staggering, whether he should follow
His rash oth, or the sweet compassion
Of those two Ladies; and to second them,
That truly noble Prince Perithous
Half his own heart, set in too, that I hope
All shall be well: Neither heard I one question
Of your name, or his 'scape.
Pray heaven it hold so.
Be of good comfort man; I bring you news,
Good news.
They are welcome,
Palamon has cleared you,
And got your pardon, and discovered
How, and by whose means he escaped, which was your Daughters,
Whose pardon is procured too, and the Prisoner
Not to be held ungrateful to her goodness,
Has given a sum of money to her Marriage.
A large one i'll assure you.
Ye are a good man
And ever bring good news.
How was it ended?
Why, as it should be; they that ne'er begged
But they prevailed, had their suits fairly granted,
The prisoners have their lives.
I knew 'twould be so.
But there be new conditions, which you'll hear of
At better time.
I hope they are good.
They are honourable,
How good they'll prove, I know not.
'Twill be known.
Alas Sir, where's your Daughter?
Why do you ask?
O Sir when did you see her?
How he looks?
This morning.
Was she well? was she in health? Sir, when did she sleep?
These are strange Questions.
I do not think she was very well, for now
You make me mind her, but this very day
I asked her questions, and she answered me
So far from what she was, so childishly.
So sillily, as if she were a fool,
An Innocent, and I was very angry.
But what of her Sir?
Nothing but my pity; but you must know it, and as good by me
As by an other that less loves her:
Well Sir.
Not right?
Not well?— Wooer, No Sir not well.
'tis too true, she is mad.
It cannot be.
Believe you'll find it so.
I half suspected
What you told me: the gods comfort her:
Either this was her love to Palamon,
Or fear of my miscarrying on his 'scape,
Or both.
'tis likely.
But why all this haste Sir?
I'll tell you quickly. As I late was angling
In the great Lake that lies behind the Palace,
From the far shore, thick set with reeds, and Sedges,
As patiently I was attending sport,
I heard a voice, a shrill one, and attentive
I gave my ear, when I might well perceive
'Twas one that sung, and by the smallness of it
A boy or woman. I than left my angle
To his own skill, came near, but yet perceived not
Who made the sound; the rushes, and the Reeds
Had so encompassed it: I laid me down
And listened to the words she song, for then
Through a small glade cut by the Fisher men,
I saw it was your Daughter.
Pray go on Sir?
She sung much, but no sense; only I heard her
Repeat this often. Palamon is gone,
Is gone toth' wood to gather Mulberries,
I'll find him out to morrow.
Pretty soul.
His shackles will betray him, he'll be taken,
And what shall I do then? I'll bring a bevy,
A hundred black eyed Maids, that love as I do
With Chaplets on their heads of Daffodils,
With cherry-lips, and cheeks of Damask Rofes,
And all we'll dance an Antique fore the Duke,
And beg his pardon; Then she talked of you Sir;
That you must lose your head to morrow morning,
And she must gather flowers to bury you,
And see the house made handsome, than she sung
Nothing but Willow, willow, willow, and between
Ever was, Palamon, fair Palamon,
And Palamon, was a tall young man. The place
Was knee deep where she sat; her careless Tresses,
A wreak of bulrush rounded; about her stuck
Thousand fresh water flowers of several colours.
That me thought she appeared like the fair Nymph
That feeds the lake with waters, or as Iris
Newly dropped down from heaven; Rings she made
Of rushes that grew by, and to 'em spoke
The prettiest posies: Thus our true love's tide,
This you may lose, not me, and many a one:
And then she wept, and sung again, and sighed,
And with the same breath smiled, and kissed her hand.
Alas what pity it is?
I made in to her.
She saw me, and straight sought the flood, I saved her,
And set her safe to land: when presently
She slipped away, and to the city made,
With such a cry, and swiftness, that believe me
She left me far behind her; three, or four,
I saw from far off cross her one of'em
I knew to be your brother, where she stayed,
And fell, scarce to be got away: I left them with her.
And hither came to tell you: Here they are.
May you never more enjoy the light, &c.
Is not this a fine Song?
O a very fine one.
I can sing twenty more.
I think you can,
Yes truly can I, I can sing the Broom,
And Bony Robin. Are not you a tailor?
Yes,
where's my wedding Gown?
I'll bring it to morrow.
Do, very rarely, I must be abroad else
To call the Maids, and pay the Minstrels
For I must lose my Maidenhead by cocklight
'twill never thrive else.
You must even take it patiently.
'tis true,
Good'ev'n, good men, pray did you ever hear
Of one young Palamon?
Yes wench we know him.
Is't not a fine young Gentleman?
'tis, Love.
By no mean cross her, she is then distempered
For worse than now she shows.
Yes, he's a fine man.
O, is he so? you have a Sister.
Yes.
But she shall never have him, tell her so,
For a trick that I know, y'had best look to her,
For if she see him once, she's gone, she's done,
And undone in an hour. All the young Maids
Of our Town are in love with him, but I laugh at'em
And let 'em all alone, Is't not a wise course?
Yes.
There is at least two hundred now with child by him,
There must be four; yet I keep close for all this,
Close as a Cockle; and all these must be Boys,
He has the trick on't, and at ten years old
They must be all gelt for musicians,
And sing the wars of Theseus.
This is strange.
As ever you heard, but say nothing.
No.
They come from all parts of the Dukedom to him,
I'll warrant ye, he had not so few last night
As twenty to dispatch, he'll tickle't up
In two hours, if his hand be in.
She's lost
Past all cure.
Heaven forbid man.
Come hither, you are a wise man.
Does she know him?
No, would she did.
You are master of a Ship?
Yes.
where's your compass?
here.
Set it to'th North.
And now direct your course toth' wood, where Palamon
Lies longing for me; For the Tackling
Let me alone; Come weigh my hearts, cheerly.
Owgh, owgh, owgh, 'tis up, the wind's fair, top the
Bowling, out with the main sail, where's your
Whistle Master?
Le's get her in.
Up to the top Boy.
where's the Pilot?
here,
What ken'st thou?
A fair wood.
Bear for it master: take about:
Yet I may bind those wounds up, that must open
And bleed to death for my sake else; I'll choose,
And end their strife: Two such young handsome men
Shall never fall for me, their weeping Mothers,
Following the dead cold ashes of their Sons
Shall never curse my cruelty: Good heaven,
What a sweet face has Arcite? if wise nature
With all her best endowments, all those beauties
She sows into the births of noble bodies,
Were here a mortal woman, and had in her
The coy denials of young Maids, yet doubtless,
She would run mad for this man: what an eye?
Of what a fiery sparkle, and quick sweetness,
Has this young Prince? Here Love himself sits smiling,
Just such another wanton Ganimead,
Set Love a fire with, and enforced the god
Snatch up the goodly Boy, and set him by him
A shining constellation: What a brow,
Of what a spacious Majesty he carries?
Arched like the great eyed Juno's, but far sweeter,
Smother than Pelops Shoulder? Fame and honour
Mc thinks from hence, as from a Promontory
Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings, and sing
To all the under world, the Loves, and Fights
Of gods, and such men neere'em. Palamon,
Is but his foil, to him, a mere dull shadow,
he's swarth, and meager, of an eye as heavy
As if he had lost his mother; a still temper,
No stirring in him, no alacrity,
Of all this sprightly sharpness, not a smile;
Yet these that we count errors may become him:
Narcissus was a sad Boy, but a heavenly:
Oh who can find the bent of woman's fancy?
I am a Fool, my reason is lost in me,
I have no choice, and I have lied so lewdly
That women ought to beat me. On my knees
I ask thy pardon: Palamon, thou art alone,
And only beautiful, and these the eyes,
These the bright lamps of beauty, that command
And threaten Love, and what young Maid dare cross 'em
What a bold gravity, and yet inviting
Has this brown manly face? O Love, this only
From this hour is Complexion: Lie there Arcite,
Thou art a changeling to him, a mere Gipsy.
And this the noble Body: I am sotted,
Utterly lost: My Virgin's faith has fled me.
For if my brother but even now had asked me
Whether I loved, I had run mad for Arcite,
Now if my Sister; More for Palamon,
Stand both together: Now, come ask me Brother,
Alas, I know not: ask me now sweet Sister,
I may go look; What a mere child is fancy,
That having two fair gauds of equal sweetness,
Cannot distinguish, but must cry for both.
How now Sir?
From the Noble Duke your Brother
Madam, I bring you news: The Knights are come.
To end the quarrel?
Yes.
Would I might end first:
What sins have I committed, chaste Diana,
That my unspotted youth must now be soiled
With blood of Princes? and my Chastity
Be made the Altar, where the lives of Lovers,
Two greater, and two better never yet
Made mother's joy, must be the sacrifice
To my unhappy Beauty?
Bring 'em in quickly,
By any means, I long to see'em.
Your two contending Lovers are returned,
And with them their fair Knights: Now my fair Sister,
You must love one of them.
I had rather both,
So neither for my sake should fall untimely
Who saw'em?
I a while.
And I.
From whence come you Sir?
From the Knights.
Pray speak
You that have seen them, what they are.
I will Sir,
And truly what I think: Six braver spirits
Than these they have brought, (if we judge by the outside)
I never saw, nor read of: He that stands
In the first place with Arcite, by his seeming
Should be a stout man, by his face a Prince,
(His very looks so say him) his complexion,
Nearer a brown, than black; stern, and yet noble,
Which shows him hardy, fearless, proud of dangers:
The circles of his eyes show fair within him,
And as a heated Lion, so he looks;
His hair hangs long behind him, black and shining
Like Ravens wings: his shoulders broad, and strong,
Armed long and round, and on his Thigh a Sword
Hung by a curious Bauldricke; when he frowns
To seal his will with, better o'my conscience
Was never Soldiers friend.
Thou hast well described him.
Yet a great deal short
Me thinks, of him that's first with Palamon.
Pray speak him friend.
I guess he is a Prince too,
And if it may be, greater; for his show
Has all the ornament of honour in't:
he's somewhat bigger, than the Knight he spoke of,
But of a face far sweeter; His complexion
Is (as a ripe grape) ruddy: he has felt
Without doubt what he fights for, and so apt
To make this cause his own: In's face appears
All the fair hopes of what he undertakes,
And when he's angry, than a settled valour
(Not tainted with extremes) runs through his body,
And guides his arm to brave things: Fear he cannot,
He shows no such soft temper, his head's yellow,
Hard haired, and curled, thick twinned like Ivy tops,
Not to undo with thunder: In his face
The livery of the warlike Maid appears,
Pure red, and white, for yet no beard has blessed him.
And in his rolling eyes, sits victory.
As if she ever meant to correct his valour:
His Nose stands high, a Character of honour.
His red lips, after fights, are fit for Ladies.
Must these men die too?
When he speaks, his tongue
Sounds like a Trumpet; All his lineaments
Are as a man would wish 'em, strong, and clean,
He wears a well-steeld Axe, the staff of gold,
His age some five and twenty.
there's another,
A little man, but of a tough soul, seeming
As great as any: fairer promises
In such a Body, yet I never looked on.
O, he that's freckle faced?
The same my Lord,
Are they not sweet ones?
Yes they are well.
Me thinks,
Being so few, and well disposed, they show
Great, and fine art in nature, he's white haired,
Not wanton white, but such a manly colour
Next to an aborne, tough, and nimble set,
Which shows an active soul; his arms are brawny
Lined with strong sinewes: To the shoulder piece,
Gently they swell, like women new conceived,
Which speaks him prone to labour, never fainting
Under the weight of Arms; stout hearted, still,
But when he stirs, a Tiger; he's gray eyed,
Which yields compassion where he conquers: sharp
To spy advantages, and where he finds 'em,
He's swift to make 'em his: He does no wrongs,
Nor takes none; he's round faced, and when he smiles
He shows a Lover, when he frowns, a Soldier:
About his head he wears the winners oak,
And in it stuck the favour of his Lady:
His age, some six and thirty. In his hand
He bears a charging Staff, embossed with silver.
Are they all thus?
They are all the sons of honour.
Now as I have a soul I long to see'em,
Lady you shall see men fight now.
I wish it,
But not the cause my Lord; They would show
Bravely about the Titles of two Kingdoms;
'tis pity Love should be so tyrannous:
O my soft hearted Sister, what think you?
Weep not, till they weep blood; Wench it must be.
You have steeled'em with your Beauty: honoured Friend,
To you I give the Field; pray order it,
Fitting the persons that must use it.
Yes Sir.
Come, I'll go visit'em: I cannot stay.
Their fame has fired me so; Till they appear,
Good Friend be royal.
There shall want no bravery.
Poor wench go weep, for whosoever wins,
Loses a noble Cosen, for thy sins.
Her distraction is more at some time of the Moon,
Then at other some, is it not?
She is continually in a harmless distemper, sleeps
Little, altogether without appetite, save often drinking,
Dreaming of another world, and a better; and what
Broken piece of matter soe'er she's about, the name
Palamon lards it, that she farces every business
Withal, fits it to every question; Look where
she comes, you shall perceive her behaviour.
I have forgot it quite; The burden o''nt, was down
A down a, and penned by no worse man, than
Giraldo, Emily's Schoolmaster; he's as
Fantastical too, as ever he may go upon's legs,
For in the next world will Dido see Palamon, and
Then will she be out of love with Eneas.
What stuff's here? poor soul.
Even thus all day long.
Now for this Charm, that I told you of, you must
Bring a piece of silver on the tip of your tongue,
Or no ferry: then if it be your chance to come where
The blessed spirits, as there's a sight now; we maids
That have our Lyvers, perished, cracked to pieces with
Love, we shall come there, and do nothing all day long
But pick flowers with Proserpina, then will I make
Palamon a Nosegay, then let him mark me,— then.
How prettily she's amiss? note her a little further.
Faith i'll tell you, sometime we go to Barley break,
We of the blessed; alas, 'tis a sore life they have i'th'
Tother place, such burning, frying, boiling, hissing,
Howling, chattering, cursing, oh they have shroud
Measure, take heed; if one be mad, or hang or
Drown themselves, thither they go, Iupiter bless
Us, and there shall we be put in a Cauldron of
Lead, and Usurer's grease, amongst a whole million of
Cutpurses, and there boil like a Gammon of Bacon
That will never be enough.
How her brain coins?
Lords and Courtiers, that have got maids with
Child, they are in this place, they shall stand in fire up to the
Nav'le, and in ice up toth' hart, and there th'offending part burns, and the deceiving part freezes; in troth a very grievous punishment, as one would think, for such a Trifle, believe me one would marry a leprous witch, to be rid on't I'll assure you.
How she continues this fancy? 'tis not an engrafted
Madness, but a most thick, and profound melancholy.
To hear there a proud Lady, and a proud City
wife, howl together: I were a beast and i'd call it good
sport: one cries, o this smoke, another this fire; One cries, o,
that ever I did it behind the arras, and then howls; th'other
curses a suing fellow and her garden house.
Sings. I will be true, my stars, my fate, &c.
What think you of her Sir?
I think she has a perturbed mind, which I cannot minister to.
Alas, what then?
Understand you, she ever affected any man, ere
She beheld Palamon?
I was once Sir, in great hope, she had fixed her
Liking on this gentleman my friend.
I did think so too, and would account I had a great
Pen-worth on't, to give half my slate, that both
She and I at this present stood unfeignedly on the
Same terms.
That intemprat surfeit of her eye, hath distempered the
Other senses, they may return and settle again to
Execute their preordaind faculties, but they are
Now in a most extravagant vagary. This you
Must do, Confine her to a place, where the light
May rather seem to steal in, then be permitted; take
Upon you (young Sir her friend) the name of
Palamon, say you come to eat with her, and to
Commune of Love; this will catch her attention, for
This her mind beats upon; other objects that are
Inserted 'tween her mind and eye, become the pranks
And friskins of her madness; Sing to her, such green
Songs of Love, as she says Palamon hath sung in
Prison; Come to her, stuck in as sweet flowers, as the
Season is mistress of, and thereto make an addition of
Some other compounded odours, which are grateful to the
Sense: all this shall become Palamon, for Palamon can
Sing, and Palamon is sweet, and every good thing, desire
To eat with her, crave her, drink to her, and still
Among, intermingle your petition of grace and acceptance
Into her favour: Learn what Maids have been her
Companions, and play-pheeres, and let them repair to
Her with Palamon in their mouths, and appear with
Tokens, as if they suggested for him, It is a falsehood
She is in, which is with fasehoods to be combated.
This may bring her to eat, to sleep, and reduce what's
Now out of square in her, into their former law, and
Regiment; I have seen it approved, how many times
I know not, but to make the number more, I have
Great hope in this. I will between the passages of
This project, come in with my applyance: Let us
Put it in execution; and hasten the success, which doubt not
Will bring forth comfort.
Now let'em enter, and before the gods
Tender their holy prayers: Let the Temples
Burn bright with sacred fires, and the Altars
In hallowed clouds commend their swelling Incense
To those above us: Let no due be wanting,
They have a noble work in hand, will honour
The very powers that love 'em.
Sir they enter.
You valiant and strong hearted Enemies
You royal German foes, that this day come
To blow that nearness out that flames between ye;
Lay by your anger for an hour, and dovelike
Before the holy Altars of your helpers
(The all feared gods) bow down your stubborn bodies,
Your ire is more than mortal; So your help be,
And as the gods regard ye, fight with justice,
I le leave you to your prayers, and betwixt ye
I part my wishes.
Honour crown the worthiest.
The glass is running now that cannot finish
Till one of us expire: Think you but thus,
That were there aught in me which strove to show
Mine enemy in this business, were't one eyes
Against another: Arm oppressed by Arm:
I would destroy th'offender, Coz, I would
Though parcel of myself: Then from this gather
How I should tender you.
I am in labour
To push your name, your ancient love, our kindred
Out of my memory; and i'th' self same place
To seat something I would confound: So hoist we
The sails, that must these vessel's port even where
The heavenly Lymiter pleases.
You speak well;
Before I turn, Let me embrace thee Cozen
This I shall never do again.
One farewell.
Why let it be so: Farewell Coz.
Farewell Sir;
Knights, Kinsmen, Lovers, yea my Sacrifices
True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you
Expels the seeds of fear, and th'apprehension
Which still is farther off it, Go with me
Before the god of our profession: There
Require of him the hearts of Lions, and
The breath of Tigers, yea the fierceness too,
Yea the speed also, to go on, I mean:
Else wish we to be Snails; you know my prize
Must be dragged out of blood, force and great feat
Must put my Garland on, where she sticks
The Queen of Flowers: our intercession then
Must be to him that makes the Camp, a Cestron
Brymd with the blood of men: give me your aid
And bend your spirits towards him.
Thou mighty one, that with thy power hast turned
Green Nepture into purple.
Comets prewarne, whose havoc in vast Field
Vnearthed skulls proclaim, whose breath blows down,
The teeming Ceres foyzon, who dost pluck
With hand armenypotent from forth blue clouds,
The masoned Turrets, that both mak'st, and break'st
The stony girths of Cities: me thy pupil,
Youngest follower of thy drum, instruct this day
With military skill, that to thy laud
I may advance my Streamer, and by thee,
Be styled the Lord o'th' day, give me great Mars
Some token of thy pleasure.
O Great Corrector of enormous times;
Shaker of ore-rank States, thou grand decider
Of dusty, and old titles, that healst with blood
The earth when it is sick, and cursed the world
O'th' pleurisy of people; I do take
Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name
To my design; march boldly, let us go.
Our stars must glister with new fire, or be
To day extinct; our argument is love,
Which if the goddess of it grant, she gives
Victory too, then blend your spirits with mine,
You, whose free nobleness do make my cause
Your personal hazard; to the goddess Venus
Commend we our proceeding, and implore
Her power unto our party.
Hail Sovereign Queen of secrets, who hast power
To call the feircest Tyrant from his rage;
And weep unto a Girl; that hast the might
Even with an ey-glance, to choke Marsis Drum
And turn th'alarm to whispers, that canst make
A Cripple flourish with his Crutch, and cure him
Before Apollo; that may'st force the King
To be his subject's vassal, and induce
Stale gravity to dance, the pould Bachelor
Whose youth like wanton Boys through Bonfyres
Have skipped thy flame, at seaventy, thou canst catch
And make him to the scorn of his hoarse throat
Abuse young lays of love; what godlike power
Hast thou not power upon? To Phoebus thou
Add'st flames, hotter than his the heavenly fires
Did scorch his mortal Son, thine him; the huntress
All moist and cold, some say began to throw
Her Bow away, and sigh: take to thy grace
Me thy vowed Soldier, who do bear thy yoke
As 'twere a wreath of Roses, yet is heavier
Than Lead itself, stings more than Nettles;
I have never been foul mouthed against thy law,
Ne'er revealed secret, for I knew none; would not
Had I ken all that were; I never practised
Upon man's wife, nor would the Libels read
Of liberall wits: I never at great feasts
Sought to betray a Beauty, but have blushed
At simpering Sirs that did: I have been harsh
To large Confessors, and have hotly asked them
If they had Mothers, I had one, a woman,
And women 'twere they wronged. I knew a man
Of eighty winters, this I told them, who
A Lass of fourteen bribed, 'twas thy power
To put life into dust, the aged Cramp
Had screwed his square foot round,
The Gout had knit his fingers into knots,
Torturing Convulsions from his globie eyes,
Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life
In him seemed torture: this Anatomy
Had by his young fair fere a Boy, and I
Believed it was his, for she swore it was,
And who would not believe her? brief I am
To those that prate and have done; no Companion
To those that boast and have not; a defier
To those that would and cannot; a rejoicer,
Yea him I do not love, that tells close offices
The foulest way, nor names concealments in
The boldest language, such a one I am,
And vow that lover never yet made sigh
Truer than I. O then most soft sweet goddess
Give me the victory of this question, which
Is true love's merit, and bless me with a sign
Of thy great pleasure.
O thou that from eleven, to ninety reign'st
In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world
And we in herds thy game; I give thee thanks
For this fair Token, which being laid unto
Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance
My body to this business. Let us rise
And bow before the goddess: Time comes on.
O sacred, shadowy, cold and constant Queen,
Abandoner of Revels, mute contemplative,
Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure
As windefand Snow, who to thy female knights
Alow'st no more blood than will make a blush,
Which is their order's robe. I here thy Priest
Am humbled fore thine Altar, O vouchsafe
With that thy rare green eye, which never yet
Beheld thing maculate, look on thy virgin,
And sacred silver Mistress, lend thine ear
(Which ne'er heard scurrile term, into whose port
ne'er entered wanton sound,) to my petition
Seasoned with holy fear; This is my last
Of vestal office, I am bride habited,
But maiden hearted, a husband I have pointed,
But do not know him out of two, I should
Choose one, and pray for his success, but I
Am guiltless of election of mine eyes,
Were I to lose one, they are equal precious,
I could doom neither, that which perished should
Go to't unsentenced: Therefore most modest Queen,
He of the two Pretenders, that best loves me
And has the truest title in't, Let him
Take off my wheaten Gerland, or else grant
The file and qualitie I hold, I may
Continue in thy Band.
See what our General of Ebbs and Flows
Out from the bowels of her holy Altar
With sacred act advances: But one Rose,
If well inspired, this Battle shall confound
Both these brave Knights, and I a virgin flower
Must grow alone unplucked.
The flower is fall'n, the Tree descends: O Mistress
Thou here dischargest me, I shall be gathered,
I think so, but I know not thine own will;
Unclasp thy Mystery: I hope she's pleased,
Her Signs were gracious.
Has this advice I told you, done any good upon her?
O very much; The maids that kept her company
Have half persuaded her that I am Palamon; within this
Half hour she came smiling to me, and asked me what I
Would eat, and when I would kiss her: I told her
Presently, and kissed her twice.
T was well done; twenty times had been far better,
For there the cure lies mainly.
Then she told me
She would watch with me to night, for well she knew
What hour my fit would take me.
Let her do so,
And when your fit comes, fit her home,
And presently.
She would have me sing.
You did so?
No.
'twas very ill done then,
You should observe her every way.
Alas
I have no voice Sir, to confirm her that way.
That's all one, if ye make a noise,
If she entreat again, do any thing,
Lie with her if she ask you.
Hoa there Doctor.
Yes in the way of cure.
But first by your leave
I'th' way of honesty.
That's but a niceness,
Ne'er cast your child away for honesty;
Cure her first this way, then if she will be honest,
She has the path before her.
Thank ye Doctor.
Pray bring her in
And let's see how she is.
I will, and tell her
Her Palamon stays for her: But Doctor,
Me thinkes you are i'th' wrong still.
go, go: you Fathers are fine Fools: her honesty?
And we should give her physic till we find that:
Why, do you think she is not honest Sir?
How old is she?
She's eighteen.
She may be,
But that's all one, 'tis nothing to our purpose,
What ere her Father says, if you perceive
Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of
Videlicet, the way of flesh, you have me.
Yet very well Sir.
Please her appetite
And do it home, it cures her ipso facto,
The melancholy humour that infects her.
I am of your mind Doctor.
You'll find it so; she comes, pray honour her.
Come, your Love Palamon stays for you child,
And has done this long hour, to visit you.
I thank him for his gentle patience,
He's a kind Gentleman, and I am much bound to him,
Did you ne'er see the horse he gave me?
Yes.
How do you like him?
He's a very fair one.
You never saw him dance?
No.
I have often.
He dances very finely, very comely,
And for a jig, come cut and long tail to him,
He turns ye like a Top.
That's fine indeed.
he'll dance the Morris twenty mile an hour,
And that will founder the best hobby-horse
(If I have any skill) in all the parish,
And gallops to the turn of Light a'love,
What think you of this horse?
Having these virtues
I think he might be brought to play at Tennis.
Alas that's nothing.
Can he write and read too.
A very fair hand, and casts himself th'accounts
Of all his hay and provender: That Hostler
Must rise betime that cousin's him; you know
The Chestnut Mare the Duke has?
Very well.
She is horribly in love with him, poor beast,
But he is like his master coy and scornful.
What dowry has she?
Some two hundred Bottles,
And twenty strike of Oas; but hee'l ne're have h
He lisps in's neighing able to entice
A Miller's Mare,
Hl be the death of her.
What stuff she utters?
Make curtsy, here your love comes.
Pretty soul
How do ye? that's a fine maid, there's a curtsy.
Yours to command i'th' way of honesty;
How far is't now toth' end o'th' world my Masters?
Why a day's journey wench.
Will you goe with m?
What shall we do there wench?
Why play at stool ball.
What is there else to do?
I am content
If we shall keep our wedding there.
'tis true
For there I will assure you, we shall find
Some blind Priest for the purpose, that will venture
To marry us, for here they are nice, and foolish;
Besides my father must be hanged to morrow
And that would be a blot i'th' business
Are not you Palamon?
Do not you know me?
Yes, but you care not for me; I have nothing
But this poor petticoat, and too corpse Smocks.
That's all one, I will have you.
Will you surely?
Yes by this fair hand will I.
we'll to bed then.
Even when you will.
O Sir, you would fain be nibbling.
Why do you rub my kiss off?
'tis a sweet one,
And will perfume me finely against the wedding.
Is not this your Cosen Arcite?
Yes sweetheart,
And I am glad my Cosen Palamon
Has made so fair a choice.
Do you think he'll have me?
Yes without doubt.
Do you think so too?
Yes.
We shall have many children: Lord, how y'are grown,
My Palamon I hope will grow too finely
Now he's at liberty: Alas poor Chicken
He was kept down with hard meat, and ill lodging
But i'll kiss him up again.
What do you here, you'll lose the noblest sight
That e'er was seen.
Are they i'th' Field?
They are
You bear a charge there too.
I'll away straight
I must even leave you here.
Nay we'll go with you,
I will not lose the Fight.
How did you like her?
I'll warrant you within these 3. or 4 days
I'll make her right again. You must not from her
But still preserve her in this way.
I will,
Le's get her in.
Come sweet we'll go to dinner
And then we'll play at Cards.
And shall we kiss too?
A hundred times
And twenty.
I and twenty.
And then we'll sleep together.
Take her offer.
Yes marry will we.
But you shall not hurt me.
I will not sweet.
If you do (Love) i'll cry.
I'll no step further.
Will you lose this sight?
I had rather see a wren hawk at a fly
Then this decision every; blow that falls
Threats a brave life, each stroke laments
The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like
A Bell, than blade: I will stay here,
It is enough my hearing shall be punished,
With what shall happen, 'gainst the which there is
No deaffing, but to hear; not taint mine eye
With dread sights, it may shun.
Sir, my good Lord
Your Sister will no further.
Oh she must.
She shall see deeds of honour in their kind,
Which sometime show well pencild. Nature now
Shall make, and act the Story, the belief
Both sealed with eye, and ear; you must be present,
You are the victor's meed, the price, and garland
To crown the Questions title.
Pardon me,
If I were there, I'd wink
You must be there;
This Trial is as 'twere i'th' night, and you
The only star to shine.
I am extinct,
There is but envy in that light, which shows
The one the other: darkness which ever was
The dam of horror, who does stand accursed
Of many mortal Millions, may even now
By casting her black mantle over both
That neither could find other, get herself
Some part of a good name, and many a murder
Set off whereto she's guilty.
You must go.
In faith I will not.
Why the knights must kindle
Their valour at your eye: know of this war
You are the Treasure, and must needs be by
To give the Service pay.
Sir pardon me,
The title of a kingdom may be tried
Out of itself.
Well, well then, at your pleasure,
Those that remain with you, could wish their office
To any of their Enemies.
Farewell Sister,
I am like to know your husband fore yourself
By some small start of time, he whom the gods
Do of the two know best, I pray them he
Be made your Lot.
Arcite is gently visagd; yet his eye
Is like an Engyn bent, or a sharp weapon
In a soft sheath; mercy, and manly courage
Are bedfellows in his visage: Palamon
Has a most menacing aspect, his brow
Is graved, and seems to bury what it frowns on,
Yet sometime 'tis not so, but altars to
The quality of his thoughts; long time his eye
Will dwell upon his object. Mellencholly
Becomes him nobly; So does Arcites mirth,
But Palamons' sadness is a kind of mirth,
So mingled, as if mirth did make him sad,
And sadness, merry; those darker humours that
Stick misbecomingly on others, on them
Live in fair dwelling.
Hark how you spurs to spirit do incite
The Princes to their proof, Arcite may win me,
And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to
The spoiling of his figure. O what pity
Enough for such a chance; if I were by
I might do hurt, for they would glance their eyes
Toward my Seat, and in that motion might
Omit a ward, or forfeit an offence
Which craved that very time: it is much better
(Cornets. a great cry and noise within crying a Palamon.)
I am not there, oh better never borne
Then minister to such harm, what is the chance?
The Crie's a Palamon.
Then he has won: 'twas ever likely,
He looked all grace and success, and he is
Doubtless the prim'st of men: I prithee run
And tell me how it goes.
Still Palamon.
Run and inquire, poor Servant thou hast lost,
Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,
Palamons' on the left, why so, I know not,
I had no end in't; else chance would have it so.
On the sinister side, the heart lies; Palamon
Had the best boding chance: This burst of clamour
Is sure th'end o'th' Combat.
They said that Palamon had Arcites body
Within an inch o'th' Pyramid, that the cry
Was general a Palamon: But anon,
Th' Assistants made a brave redemption, and
The two bold Tytlers, at this instant are
Hand to hand at it.
Were they metamorphisd
Both into one; oh why? there were no woman
Worth so composed a Man: their single share,
Their nobleness peculiar to them, gives
The prejudice of disparity values shortness
To any Lady breathing— More exulting?
Palamon still?
Nay, now the sound is Arcite.
I prithee lay attention to the Cry.
Set both thine ears toth' business.
The cry is
Arcite, and victory, hark Arcite, victory,
The Combats consummation is proclaimed
By the wind Instruments.
Half sights saw
That Arcite was no babe: god's lid, his richness
And costliness of spirit looked through him, it could
No more be hid in him, than fire in flax,
Then humble banks can go to law with waters,
That drift winds, force to raging: I did think
Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not
Why I did think so; Our reasons are not prophets
When oft our fancies are: They are coming off:
Alas poor Palamon.
Lo, where our Sister is in expectation,
Yet quaking, and unsettled: Fairest Emily.
The gods by their divine arbitrement
Have given you this Knight, he is a good one
As ever struck at head: Give me your hands;
Receive you her, you him, be plighted with
A love that grows, as you decay;
Emily,
To buy you, I have lost what's dearest to me,
Save what is bought, and yet I purchase cheaply,
As I do rate your value.
O loved Sister,
He speaks now of as brave a Knight as ere
Did spur a noble Steed: Surely the gods
Would have him die a Bachelor, lest his race
Should show i'th' world too godlike: His behaviour
So charmed me, that me thought Alcides was
To him a sow of lead: if I could praise
Each part of him to'th all; I have spoke, your Arcut
Did not lose by't; For he that was thus good
Encountered yet his Better, I have heard
Two emulous Philomel's, beat the ear o'th' night
With their contentious throats, now one the higher,
Anon the other, then again the first,
And by and by outbreasted, that the sense
Could not be judge between 'em: So it fared
Good space between these kinesmen; till heavens did
Make hardly one the winner: wear the Garland
With joy that you have won: For the subdued,
Give them our present justice, since I know
Their lives but pinch'em; Let it here be done:
The scene's not for our seeing, go we hence,
Right joyful, with some sorrow. Arm your prize,
I know you will not lose her: Hippolita
I see one eye of yours conceives a tear
The which it will deliver.
Is this winning?
Oh all you heavenly powers where is you mercy?
But that your wills have said it must be so,
And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,
This miserable Prince, that cuts away
A life more worthy from him, than all women;
I should, and would die too.
Infinite pity
That four such eyes should be so fixed on one
That two must needs be blind for't.
So it is.
there's many a man alive, that hath out lived
The love o'th' people, yea i'th' selfsame state
Stands many a Father with his child; some comfort
We have by so considering: we expire
And not without men's pity. To live still,
Have their good wishes, we prevent
The loathsome misery of age, beguile
The Gout and Rheum, that in lag hours attend
For grey approachers; we come towards the gods
Young, and unwappered not, halting under Crymes
Many and stale: that sure shall please the gods
Sooner than such, to give us Nectar with 'em,
For we are more clear Spirits. My dear kinsmen.
Whose lives (for this poor comfort) are laid down,
You have sold 'em too too cheap.
What ending could be
Of more content? over us the victors have
Fortune, whose title is as momentary,
As to us death is certain: A grain of honour
They not ore'-weigh us.
Let us bid farewell;
And with our patience, anger tottering Fortune,
Who at her certainest reels.
Come? who begins?
Even he that led you to this Banquet, shall
Taste to you all: ah ha my Friend, my Friend,
Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;
You'll see't done now for ever: pray how does she?
I heard she was not well; her kind of ill
gave me some sorrow.
Sir she's well restored,
And to be married shortly.
By my short life
I am most glad on't; 'tis the latest thing
I shall be glad of, prithee tell her so:
Commend me to her, and to piece her portion
Tender her this.
Nay le's be offerers all.
Is it a maid?
Verily I think so,
A right good creature, more to me deserving
Then I can quite or speak of.
Commend us to her.
The gods requite you all,
And make her thankful.
Adieu; and let my life be now as short,
As my leave taking.
Lead courageous Cosin.
we'll follow cheerfully.
Hold, hold, O hold, hold, hold.
Hold hoa: It is a cursed haste you made
If you have done so quickly: noble Palamon,
The gods will show their glory in a life.
That thou art yet to lead.
Can that be,
When Venus I have said is false? How do things fare?
Arise great Sir, and give the tidings ear
That are most early sweet, and bitter.
What
Hath waked us from our dream?
List then: your Cosen
Mounted upon a Steed that Emily
Did first bestow on him, a black one, owing
Not a hair worth of white, which some will say
Weakens his price, and many will not buy
His goodness with this note: Which superstition
Heere finds allowance: On this horse is Arcite
Trotting the stones of Athens, which the Calkins
Did rather tell, then trample; for the horse
Would make his length a mile, if't pleased his Rider
To put pride in him: as he thus went counting
The flinty pavement, dancing as 'twere toth' Music
His own hooves made; (for as they say from iron
Came Musics origen) what envious Flint,
Cold as old Saturn, and like him possessed
With fire malevolent, darted a Spark
Or what fierce sulphur else, to this end made,
I comment not; the hot horse, hot as fire
took Toy at this, and fell to what disorder
His power could give his will, bounds, comes on end,
Forgets school doing, being therein trained,
And of kind mannadge, pig-like he whines
At the sharp Rowel, which he frets at rather
Then any jot obeys; seeks all foul means
Of boisterous and rough jadrie, to dis-seate
His Lord, that kept it bravely: when nought served,
When neither Curb would crack, girth break nor differing plunges
Dis-roote his Rider whence he grew, but that
He kept him 'tween his legs, on his hind hooves on end he stands
That Arcites legs being higher than his head
Seemed with strange art to hang: His victors wreath
Even then fell off his head: and presently
Backward the jade comes over, and his full poise
Becomes the Rider's load: yet is he living.
But such a vessel 'T, that floats but for
The surge that next approaches: he much desires
To have some speech with you: Lo he appears.
O miserable end of our alliance
The gods are mighty Arcite, if thy heart,
Thy worthy, manly heart be yet unbroken;
Give me thy last words, I am Palamon,
One that yet loves thee dying.
Take Emilia
And with her, all the world's joy: Reach thy hand,
Farewell: I have told my last hour; I was false,
Yet never treacherous: Forgive me Cosen:
One kiss from fair Emilia: 'tis done:
Take her: I die.
Thy brave soule Elikium.
I'll close thine eyes Prince; blessed souls be with thee,
Thou art a right good man, and while I live,
This day I give to tears.
And I to honour.
In this place first you fought: even very here
I sundered you, acknowledge to the gods
Our thanks that you are living:
His part is played, and though it were too short
He did it well: your day is lengthened, and,
The blissful dew of heaven does arowze you.
The powerful Venus, well hath graced her Altar,
And given you your love: Our Master Mars
Hast vouched his Oracle, and to Arcite gave
The grace of the Contention: So the Deities
Have showed due justice: Bear this hence.
O Cosen,
That we should things desire, which do cost us
The loss of our desire; That nought could buy
Dear love, but loss of dear love.
Never
Did play a subtler Game: The conquered triumphs,
The victor has the Loss: yet in the passage,
The gods have been most equal: Palamon,
Your kinsman hath confessed the right o'th' Lady
Did lie in you, for you first saw her, and
Even then proclaimed your fancy: He restored her
As your stolen jewel, and desired your spirit
To send him hence forgiven; The gods my justice
Take from my hand, and they themselves become
The Executioners: Lead your Lady off;
And call your Lovers from the stage of death,
Whom I adopt my Friends. A day or two
Let us look sadly, and give grace unto
The Funeral of Arcite, in whose end
The visages of bridegrooms we'll put on
And smile with Palamon; for whom an hour,
But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry,
As glad of Arcite: and am now as glad,
As for him sorry. O you heavenly Charmers,
What things you make of us? For what we lack
We laugh, for what we have, are sorry still,
Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful
For that which is, and with you leave dispute
That are above our question: Let's go off,
And bear us like the time:
I Would now ask ye how ye like the Play,
But as it is with School Boys, cannot say,
I am cruel fearful: pray yet stay a while,
And let me look upon ye: No man smile?
Then it goes hard I see; He that has
Loved a young handsome wench then, show his face:
'tis strange if none be here, and if he will
Against his Conscience let him hiss, and kill
Our Market: 'tis in vain, I see to stay ye,
Have at the worst can come, then; Now what say ye?
And yet mistake me not: I am not bold
We have no such cause. If the tale we have told
(For 'tis no other) any way content ye)
(For to that honest purpose it was meant ye)
We have our end; and ye shall have ere long
I dare say many a better, to prolong
Your old loves to us: we, and all our might,
Rest at your service, Gentlemen, good night.