Know worthy Troop, that I great Thetis am,
Who (hearing of these Triumphs) hither came
From th'Azure court of my most deep Abyss
To grace my fairest daughter Thamisis,
I every twelve hours, by this Child of mine,
Do send you silks and velvets, oil, and wine,
Gold, silver, Jewels, fish, salt, sundry spices,
Fine and course linen, drugs of diverse prices:
What every Realm or climate can produce,
I see it safe transported for your use.
Thus from the bosom of the Deep my floods
(By Thames) do every Tide send up your goods,
For which this matchless well deserving River,
Your Cloth doth back again to me deliver,
With other riches, which I o'er the Sea
Unto my other daughters do convey;
For your commodities I'll ever flow
Unto Danubius, Ister, Rhine, and Poe,
To Maze, Seine, Volga, Ems, Elve, and Tanales,
To Tigris, Nilus, Ganges, Euphrates,
To Tiber, Jordan, Xanthus, Jndus, Tagus,
Past Asphaltites, or Black Mortuus Lacus
As far as Sol or Cynthia spread their beams,
As far as Oceanus sends his streams,
So far will I your servant ever be,
In any thing you'll deign to put on me:
And humble thanks fair Thames and I do render
To you, who of her welfare are so tender,
Who with great cost and care do lend your hands,
To clear your servant Thames from shelves and sands:
Go on and cleanse her, as you have begun,
And she shall do for you as she hath done.
We are assured that Heaven will ever bless
Your stores, who do her injuries redress,
Thetis and Thames, their services shall show
To you, as long as they do ebb and flow.
Thus with our humble duteous bending down,
Long may this City flourish with renown.
Almost 500 days, beheld have I
The Triumphs of Great London's Mayoralty,
And sure old Time, with Joy doth truly say,
He ne'er was better pleased than at this day;
Not that I think a temporising Lord,
Or Pleaser of the Time shall wield the sword,
But as your Honourable Predecessors
Have mended Time, by punishing Trangressors;
So Time hopes that th'addition of your year,
Will make him more Illustrate, pure and clear.
For of all fading things 'tis manifest,
As Time is used, he's either worst or best.
All those that rightly have their Honours won:
Have used Time well, (as you my Lord have done.)
This Honour was ordained you, from your youth
You ever loved my loveliest daughter TRUTH,
And she hath raised you; and she did prefer
You to this dignity to Maintain her.
I do command her, still with you t'abide,
Do you defend her, she shall be your guide:
For truth-sake Time shall be your servant still;
And in your just commands, obey your will.
Time shall transport your Merchandise and wares,
Time shall assist you in your great'st affairs:
Time shall be always yours Auspiciously,
And Time will bring you to Eternity.
Her's Hermes, from his Spheres circumferance
Hath brought the Poet wit, and Eloquence;
And quick Invention, likewise he Inflamed
Into the Artists that these pageants framed,
That for your future Honour, this may be
A day of well Composed Variety
Of Speech and show, these Triumphs we present,
We hope (as they are meant shall give content)
We humbly wish, that you this year may find,
Full of true worth as is your worthy mind.
By me fair London in obedience shows
The service, love, and duty that she owes
To this day's Triumph, but my aim is higher,
My thankfulness doth up to heaven aspire,
Which unto me hath so propitious been,
That I do see this day, and now am seen
The Queen of Cities, Empress of content,
And Princess of unmarched government;
Weigh well my state, and think on other states,
Thebes is ruined with her hundred Gates;
Numantia, Carthage, great Jerusalem,
And Babylon, what are become of them?
Constantinople doth in sorrow lie,
And groan beneath the Turkish tyranny:
Rome, and all Cities that hold Rome supreme,
Their glory's are eclipsed or but a dream;
Whilst fire and sword doth Germany molest,
London's secure, with peace and plenty blessed,
Turk, Pope, and war, bear here no rule or sway,
For I one God, one King, one Law obey;
there's my security, and my state doth stand
Supported by the unsupported hand,
These are the means and instruments whereby
We rise to Honour, painful Industry.
An Idle Citizen is like a Moth,
One spoils b'example tother spoils the Cloth,
True Citizens are the true City's sons,
The others are but bastards, mad that runs,
Like Runagates, or cursed Imps of Cain,
And never shall to Honour's seat Attain:
Work on my Lads, and you in time may be,
Good members of this Honoured Company,
And though good Freeman (of this Corporation)
Deceased before his half years expiration,
Yet Heaven hath soon provided for our good
Another worthy of this Brotherhood.
And now my Lord, I give myself and mine,
To your command and charge, and I divine
That as great is the Honour of your seat,
Your Government shall be more good than great.
Low steps begin to mount the highest hills,
Great Rivers have their heads from little Rills:
From servitude grows freedom, and from thence
(Through Industry) springs Worth and Eminence.
All such as will true Honour's seat ascend,
Must do (as these have) first obey and bend:
For though Humility to man seems low,
The fruit of it as high as Heaven doth grow:
'tis diligence doth the puny-clarke prefer,
To be a Reverend Judge, or Counsellor;
Pains and much peril oft obtains the grace,
A common Soldier gains a General's place:
The poorest Scholars study (by degrees)
Ascends the height of spiritual dignities,
And from th'apprentice seven years' servitude
Proceeds the grave gown, and the Livery-Hood,
Till (in the end) by merit, pains and care,
They win the Grace to fit in Honour's chair;
Thus Humble service is advanced and reared
To Honour's seat, obeyed, beloved and feared.
Authoritie's the touchstone of the mind,
And shows which way the bearer is inclined:
For having power joined to his will,
It makes him much more good, or much more ill:
It makes him to foresee, with Judgements eye,
That Justice without mercy's cruelty:
That Mercy without Justice is much worse,
Breeds scorn, contempt, makes power to lose her force.
When you in scales of Equity do lay
The sword of Justice, who dares but obey.
Your faith and Honour are in marriage joined
By oath this day, which no man can unbind,
Therefore my Lord (whose service and true merit
Hath made this Honour yours which you inherit)
'tis triple Joy that you do wisely know
To mix those virtues well, and to bestow
Them justly, as occasion shall incite:
To guard the good, and make wrong render right,
In which expectance all our hopes abounding,
Joy crown this day with Drums and Trumpets sounding.
My Honoured Lord, let me, (a rural Swain,
And humble shepherd from the lowly plain)
As plainly bid thee welcome to this state
Of England's greatest civil Magistrate.
A shepherd joys to see this day, and I
Will fleece my flock's t'nrich thy company:
I am Endymion, that of yore did keep
Upon th'Arcadian hills my harmless sheep:
Whereas by study, and by observations
I found the Moon's change and her variations,
And for my sake the Swains do still prefer
The book ycleap'd the shepherd's Calendar.
Apollo kept Admetus' sheep ('tis said)
And Tamburlaine (whom Mighty Kings obeyed)
Was once a shepherd, and the Time was when
That shepherds were the noblest, ablest men.
This golden crested Ram, on which I ride
To welcome you, and see you dignifide,
Is the Celestial signe, (Aries by name)
Come from the Zodiac to adorn your fame.
And from the Ram, and his increasing breed
Near half mankind have means to Cloth and feed.
By picking wool, thousands relief do gain,
●s many carding, spinning doth maintain:
Wooll-men, a great and wealthy trade do drive,
Weavers, in great abundance work and live,
The Clothiers, Fuller's, Tuckers, Shermen, Dyers,
From the sheep's fleece have feeding and attires,
But all these Trades, which I do here infer,
Have all relation to the Clothworker,
For were it not for him the rest were nothing,
He only makes it Cloth, and fit for Clothing,
Without the Clothworker, the Draper's Trade
And Merchant's Traffic would decay and fade,
These from the fleece got Clothes and nutriment,
For (under heaven) the Ram's the Instrument.
And when bright Phoebus shall in March begin
To take the Ram for his celestial Inn
Such golden tincture on his fleece hee'le set,
Which many golden pieces shall beget,
And whereas men (to make their worths appear)
Do give their servants Liveries once a year,
The Ram (in bounty) passeth man I note.
And gives his Master every year a coat
Thus poor Endymion, with the beast he tides,
Doth wish you prosperous winds, and happy tides,
That by commerce, and good Negotiation,
Wool turned to Cloth, and Cloth by transformation,
Be turned to gold, that you may say with joy,
That Iasons fleece (to yours) was but a toy.
Time, that this day his service hath expressed,
In duty brings your Lordship to your rest:
Yet ere I take my leave, (for your content)
I'll show the meaning of this Monument.
Then know, this ruined piece doth show that stones
And tombs consume, as do their owner's bones,
For Time is circular in his effects,
Builds and throws down, and ruins and erects:
But fortune, death or fame, or Time cannot
Make virtuous men, or virtue be forgot.
For Immortality is pleased to make
Fame with his Trump the drowsy world to wake,
Who from demollished dilapidations
Proclaims the memorable nominations
Of worthies of this worthy company,
Who Honoured lived, and did with Honour die.
Sir William Hewet was, as you my Lord,
To poyz the balance and to wield the sword:
Sir Rowland Hayward next, next Sir Iames Hawes,
Did rule this City justly by the laws;
Next was Sir Edward Osboorne London's Mayor;
Then Sir Iohn Spencer gained the honoured Chair,
Sir Thomas Schinner after had the place;
Next did Sir Nicholas Mosley gain the Grace;
Then Sir Iohn Watts his year with Honour past,
And Noble Freeman who deceased last.
King Iames the wisest, and the learnedst King,
Whose fame throughout the spacious world doth ring,
He knew your merits, worth and dignity,
And therefore chose your worthy company
To be his Brotherhood; he did understand,
You were most fit for his fraternal band.
And you my Lord, whom Time hath brought to be
The noblest Branch of this fraternity,
Time here salutes you, wishing you may move
More high in Honour, as you do in love.
'tis truly said, that man that rules his passions,
Doth conquer more, than he that conquers Nations.
As you have ruled yourself, let it appear
In ruling London this ensuing year,
So you, with Time shall be together blessed,
And Time shall bring you to Eternal Rest.