FRom the high Senate of the gods, to You
Bright glorious Twins of Love and Majesty,
Before whole Throne three warlike Nations bend
Their willing knees, on whose Imperial brows▪
The Regal Circle prints no awful frowns
To fright your Subjects, but whose calmer eyes
Shed joy and safety on their melting hearts
That flow with cheerful loyal reverence.
Come my Cyllenius, Ioves Ambassador:
Not, as of gold, to whisper amorous tales
Of wanton love, into the glowing ear
Of some choice beauty in this numerons trains
Those days are fled, the rebel slameis quenched
In heavenly breasts, the gods have sworn by Styx,
Never to tempt yielding mortality
To loose embraces Your exemplar life
Hath not alone transfused a zealous heat
Of imitation through your virtuous Court,
By whose bright blaze your Palace is become
The envied pattern of this under-world,
But the aspiring flame hath kindled heaven;
Th' immortal bosoms butne with emulous fires,
Iove rivals your great virtues, Royal Sir,
And Iuno, Madam, your attractive graces▪
He his wild lusts, her raging jealousies
She lays aside, and through th' Olympic hall,
As yours doth here, their great Example spreads,
And though of old, when youthful blood conspired
With his new Empire, prone to heats of lust,
He actedincests, rapes, adulteries
On earthly beauties, which his raging Queen,
Swollen with revengeful fury, turned to beasts,
And in despite he transformed to Stars,
Till he had filled the crowded Firmament
With his loose Strumpets, and their sputious race,
Where the eternal records of his shame
Shine to the world in flaming Characters;
When in the Crystal mirror of your reign
He viewed himself, he found his loathsome stains;
And now, to expiate the infectious guilt
Of those detested luxuries, he'll chase
Th' infamous lights from their usurped Shears,
And drown in the Lethaes an flood, their cursed
Both names and memories. In whose vacant rooms
First you succeed, and of the wheeling Orb
In the most eminent and conspicuous point,
With dazzling beams, and spreading magnitude,
Shine the bright Polestar of this Hemisphere,
Next, by your side, in a triumphant Chair,
And crowned with Ariadne's Diadem,
Sits the fair Consort of your heart, and Throne;
Diffused about you, with that share of light
As they of virtue have derived from you,
he'll fix this Noble train, of either sex;
So to the British stars this lower Globe
Shall owe its light, and they alone dispense
To ' th' world a pure refined influence.
BY your leave, Mortals. Gooden Cousin Hermes, your pardon good my Lord Ambassador: I found the tables of your Arms and Titles, in every Inn betwixt this and Olympus, where your present expedition is registered, your nine thousandth nine hundred ninety ninth Legation. I cannot reach the policy why your Master breeds so few Statesmen, it suits not with his dignity that in the whole Empyraeum there should not be a god fit to send on these honourable errands but yourself, who are not yet so careful of his honour as your own, as might become your quality, when you are itinerant: the Hosts upon the highway cry out with open mouth upon you for supporting pilfery in your train; which, though as you are the god of petty Larceny, you might protect, yet you know it is directly against the new orders, and opposes the Reformation in Diameter.
Peace Railer, bridle your licentious tongue.
And let this Presence teach you modesty.
Let it if it can; in the mean time I will acquaint it with my condition. Know, (gay people) that though your Poets who enjoy by Patent a particular privilege to draw down any of the Deities from Twelfth-night till Shrove-tuesday, at what time there is annually a most familiar intercourse between the two Courts, have as yet never invited me to these Solemnities, yet it shall appear by my intrusion this night, that I am a very considerable Person upon these occasions, and may most properly assist at such entertainments. My name is Momus. ap-Somnus-ap-Erebus-aep-Chaos-ap-Demorgorgon-ap-Eternity. My Offices and Titles are, The Supreme Theomastix, Hypercritic of manners, Protonotary of abuses, Arch-Informer, Dilator General, Universal Calumniator, Eternal Plaintiff, and perpetual Foreman of the Grand Inquest. My privileges are an ubiquitary, circumambulatory, speculatory, interrogatory, redargutory immunity over all the privy lodgings, behind hangings, doors, curtains, through keyholes, chinks, windows, about all Venereal Lobbies, Skonces or Redoubts, though it be to the surprise of a perdu Page or Chambermaid, in, and at all Courts of civil and criminal judicature, all Counsels, Consultations, and Parliamentary Assemblies, where though I am but a Woolsacke god, and have no vote in the sanction of new laws, I have yet a Prerogative of wresting the old to any whatsoever interpretation, whether it be to the behoof, or prejudice, of Iupiter his Crown and Dignity, for, or against the Rights of either house of Patrician or Plebeian gods. My natural qualities are to make Iove frown, Iuno pout, Mars chafe, Venus' blush, Vulcan glow, Saturn quake; Cynthia pale, Phoebus hide his face, and Mercury here take his heels. My recreations are witty mischiefs, as when Saturn guelt his father; the Smith caught his wife and her Bravo in a net of Cobweb-Iron; and Hebe, through the lubricity of the pavement tumbling over the Halfpace, presented the Emblem of the forked tree. and discovered to the tanned Ethiopes the snowy cliffs of Culabria with the Grotta of Puteolum. But that you may arrive at the perfect knowledge of me, by the familiar illustration of a Bird of mine own feather, old Peter Aretine, who reduced all the Sceptres and Mitres of that Age tributary to his wit, was my Parallel; and Frank Rublais sucked much of my milk too; but your modern French Hospital of Oratory, is mere counterfeit, an arrant Mountebank, for though fearing no other fortunes than his Sciatica, he discourse of Kings and Queens with as little Reverence as of Grooms and Chambermaids, yet he wants their fangteeth, and Scorpions tail; I mean that fellow, who to add to his stature thinks it a greater grace to dance on his tiptoes like a Dog in a doublet, than to walk like other men on the soles of his feet.
No more impertinent Trifler, you disturb
The great Affair with your rude scurrilous chat:
What doth the knowledge of your abject state
Concern Ioves solemn Message?
Sir, by your favour, though you have a more especial Commission of employment from Iupiter, and a larger entertainment from his Exchequer, yet as a freeborn god I have the liberty to travel at mine own charges, without your pass or countenance Legacine; and that it may appear a sedulous acute observer, may know as much as a dull phlegmatic Ambassador, and wears a treble key to unlock the mysterious Ciphers of your dark secrecies, I will discourse the politic state of Heaven to this trim Audience—
At this the Scene changeth, and in the heaven is discovered a Sphere, with Stars placed in their several Images; borne up by a huge naked Figure (only a piece of Drapery hanging over his thigh) kneeling and bowing forwards, as if the great weight lying on his shoulders oppressed him, upon his head a Crown, by all which he might easily be known to be Atlas.
You shall understand, that Iupiter upon the inspection of I know not what virtuous Precedents extant (as they say) here in this Court, but as I more probably guess out of the consideration of the decay of his natural abilities, hath before a frequent convocation of the Superlunary Peers in a solemn Oration recanted, disclaimed, and utterly renounced all the lascivious extravagancies, and riotous enormities of his forepast licentious life, and taken his oath on Juno's Breviary, religiously kissing the two-leaved Book, never to stretch his limbs more betwixt adulterous sheets, and hath with pathetical remonstrances exhorted, and under strict penalties enjoined a respective conformity in the several subordinate Deities; and because the Libertines of Antiquity, the Ribald Poets, to perpetuate the memory and example of their triumphs over chastity, to all future imitation, have in their immortal songs celebrated the martyrdom of those Strumpets under the persecution of the wives, and devolved to Posterity the Pedigrees of their whores bawds, and bastards; it is therefore by the authority aforesaid enacted, that this whole Army of Constellations be immediately disbanded and cashiered, so to remove all imputation of impiety from the Celestial Spirits, and all lustful influences upon terrestrial bodies; and consequently that there be an Inquisition erected to expunge in the Ancient, and suppress in the modern and succeeding Poems and Pamphlets, all past, present, and future mention of those abjured heresies, and to take particular notice of all ensuing incontinences, and punish them in their high Commission Court. Am not I in election to be a tall Statesman think you, that can repeat a passage at a Counsel-table thus punctually?
I shun in vain the importunity With which this Snarler vexeth all the gods, Iove cannot scape him: well, what else from heaven?
Heaven! Heaven is no more the place it was; a Cloister of Carthusians, a Monastery of converted gods, Iove is grown old and fearful, apprehends a subversion of his Empire, and doubts lest Fate should introduce a legal succession in the legetimate heir, by repossessing the Titanian line, and hence springs all this innovation. We have had new orders read in the Presence Chamber, by the Vi-President of Parnassus, too strict to be observed long, Monopolies are called in, sophistication of wares punished, and rates imposed on commodities. Injunctions are gone out to the Nectar Brewers, for the purging of the heavenly Beverage of a narcotic weed which hath rendered the Idaeaes' confused in the Divine intellects, and reducing it to the composition used in Saturn's Reign. Edicts are made for the restoring of decayed house-keeping, prohibiting the repair of Families to the Metropolis, but this did endanger an Amazonian mutiny, till the females put on a more masculine resolution of soliciting businesses in their own persons, and leaving their husbands at home for stallions of hospitality. Bacchus hath commanded all Taverns to be shut, and no liquor drawn after ten at night. Cupid must go no more so scandalously naked, but is enjoined to make him breeches, though of his mother's petticoats. Ganymede is forbidden the Bedchamber, and must only minister in public. The gods must keep no Pages, nor Grooms of their Chamber under the age of 25. and those provided of a competent stock of beard. Pan may not pipe, nor Proteus juggle, but by especial permission. Vulcan was brought to an Orotenus and fined, for driving in a plate of Iron into one of the Sun's Chariot-wheels, and frost-nailing his horses upon the fifth of November last, for breach of a penal Statute prohibiting work upon Holidays, that being the annual celebration of the Gigantomachy. In brief, the whole state of the Hierarchy suffers a total reformation, especially in the point of reciprocation of conjugal affection. Venus hath confessed all her adulteries, and is received to grace by her husband, who conscious of the great disparity betwixt her perfections and his deformities, allows those levitieses as an equal counterpoise; but it is the prettiest spectacle to see her stroking with her Ivory hand his collied cheeks, and with her snowy fingers combing his sooty beard. Iupiter too begins to learn to lead his own wife, I left him practising in the milky way; and there is no doubt of an universal obedience, where the Lawgiver himself in his own person observes his degrees so punctually; who besides to eternize the memory of that great example of Matrimonial union which he derives from hence, hath on his Bedchamber door, and ceiling, fretted with stars in capital Letters, engraven the Inscription of CARLOMARIA. This is as much I am sure as either your knowledge or Instructions can direct you to, which I having in a blunt round tale, without State-formality, politic inferences, or suspected Rhetorical elegancies, already delivered, you may now dexteriously proceed to the second part of your charge, which is the raking of your heavenly sparks up in the Embers, or reducing the ethereal lights to their primitive opacity, and gross dark subsistence; they are all unriveted from the Sphere, and hang loose in their sockets, where they but attend the waving of your Caduce, and immediately they reinvest their pristine shapes, and appear before you in their own natural deformities.
Momus thou shalt prevail, for since thy bold
Intrusion hath inverted my resolves,
I must obey necessity, and thus turn
My face, to breathe the Thunder's just decree
Against this adulterate sphere, which first I purge
Of loathsome Monsters, and misshapen forms:
Down from her azure concave, thus I charm
The Lyrnean Hydra, the rough unlicked Bear,
The watchful Dragon, the storm-boding Whale,
The Centaur, the horned Goatfish Capricorn,
The Snake-head Gorgon, and fierce Sagitta;
Divested of your gorgeous starry robes,
Fall from the circling Orb, and e'er you suck
Fresh venom in, measure this happy earth,
Then to the Fens, Caves, Forests, Deserts, Seas,
Fly, and resume your native qualities.
Are not these fine companions, trim play fellows for the Deities? yet these and their fellows have made up all our conversation for some thousands of years. Do not you fair Ladies acknowledge yourselves deeply engaged now to those Poets your servants, that in the height of commendation have raised your beauties to a parallel with such exact proportions, or at least ranked you in their spruce society. Hath not the consideration of these Inhabitants rather frighted your thoughts utterly from the contemplation of the place? but now that these heavenly Mansions are to be void, you that shall hereafter be found unlodged will become inexcusable; especially since Virtue alone shall be sufficient title, fine, and rend: yet if there be a Lady not competently stocked that way, she shall not on the instant utterly despair, if she carry a sufficient pawn of handsomeness; for however the letter of the Law runs, Iupiter notwithstanding his Age and present austerity, will never resuse to stamp beauty, and make it currant with his own Impression; but to such as are destitute of both, I can afford but small encouragement. Proceed Cousin Mercury, what follows?
Look up, and mark where the bright Zodiac
Hangs like a Belt about the breast of heaven;
On the right shoulder, like a flaming jewel,
His shell, with nine rich Topazes adorned,
Lord of this Tropic, sits the scalding Crab:
He, when the Sun gallops in full career
His annual race; his ghastly claws upreared,
Frights at the confines of the torrid Zone,
The fiery team, and proudly stops their course,
Making a solstice, till the fierce Steeds learn
His backward paces, and so retrograde
Post downhill to th'opposed Capricorn.
Thus I depose him from his lofty Throne▪
Drop from the Sky, into the briny flood,
There teach thy motion to the ebbing Sea,
But let those fires that beautified thy shell
Take humane shapes, and the disorder show
Of thy regressive paces here below.
This Crab, I confess, did ill become the heavens; but there is another that more infests the Earth, and makes such a solstice in the politer Arts and Sciences, as they have not been observed for many Ages to have made any sensible advance: could you but lead the learned squadrons with a masculine resolution past this point of retrogradation, it were a benefit to mankind, worthy the power of a god, and to be paid with Altars; but that not being the work of this night, you may pursue your purposes: what now succeeds?
Vice, that unbodied, in the Appetite
Erects his Throne, hath yet, in bestial shapes,
Branded, by Nature, with the Character
And distinct stamp of some peculiar Ill,
Mounted the Sky, and fized his Trophies there:
As fawning flattery in the little Dog;
I'th' bigger, churlish Murmur; Cowardice
I'th' timorous Hare; Ambition in the Eagle;
Rapine and Avarice in th'adventurous Ship
That sailed to Colchos for the golden fleece;
Drunken distemper in the Goblet flows;
I'th' Dart and Scorpion, biting Calumny;
In Hercules and the Lion, furious rage;
Vain Ostentation in Cassiope:
All these I to eternal exile doom,
But to this place their Emblem'd Vices summon,
Clad in those proper Figures, by which best
Their incorpore all nature is expressed.
From hence forth it shall be no more said in the Proverb, when you would express a riotous Assembly, That hell, but Heaven is broke loose: this was an arrant Goal-delivery, all the Prisons of your great Cities could not have vomited more corrupt matter: but Cousin Cylleneus, in my judgement it is not safe that these infectious persons should wander here to the hazard of this Island, they threatened less danger when they were nailed to the Firmament: I should conceive it a very discreet course, since they are provided of a tall vessel of their own ready rigged, to embark them all together in that good Ship called the Argo, and send them to the plantation in New-England, which hath purged more virulent humours from the politic body, then Guacum and all the West-Indian drugs have from the natural bodies of this Kingdom: Can you devise how to dispose them better?
They cannot breathe this pure and temperats Air
Where Virtue lives, but will with hasty flight,
Amongst fogs and vapours, seek unsound abodes.
y after them, srom your usurped seats,
You foul remainders of that viporous brood:
Let not a Star of luxurious race
With his loose blaze stain the skies crystal face.
Before the entry of every Antimasque, the Stars in those figures in the Sphere which they were to represent, were extinct; so as, by the end of the Antimasques in the Sphere no more Stars were seen.
Here is a total Eclipse of the eighth Sphere, which neither Booker, Allestre, nor any of your Prognosticators, no nor their great Master Tico were aware of; but yet in my opinion there were some innocent, and some generous Constellations, that might have been reserved for Noble uses: as the Skales and Sword to adorn the statue of justice, since she resides here on Earth only in Picture and Effigy. The Eagle had been a fit present for the Germans, in regard their Bird hath mewed most of her feathers lately. The Dolphin too had been most welcome to the French, and then had you but clapped Perseus on his Pegasus, brandishing his Sword, the Dragon yawning on his back under the horses feet, with Python's dart through his throat, there had been a Divine St. George for this Nation: but since you have improvidently shuffled them altogether, it now rests only that we provide an immediate succession, and to that purpose I will instantly proclaim a free Election. O yes, O yes, O yes, By the Father of the gods, and the King of men.
Whereas we having observed a very commendable practice taken into frequent use by the Princes of these latter Ages, of perpetuating the memory of their famous enterprises, sieges, battles, victories, in Picture, Sculpture, Tapestry, Embroideries, and other manufactures, where with they have embellished their public Palaces, and taken into Our more distinct and serious consideration, the particular Christmas, hanging of the Guard-Chamber of this Court, wherein the Naval Victory of 88. is to the eternal glory of this Nation exactly delineated; and whereas We likewise out of a prophetical imitation of this so laudable custom, did for many thousand years before, adorn and beautify the eighth room of Our celestial Mansion, commonly called the Star-chamber, with the military adventures, stratagems, achievements, feats and defeats, performed in Our Own person, whilst yet Our Standard was erected, and We a Combatant in the Amorous Warfare. It hath notwithstanding▪ after mature deliberation, and long debate, held first in our own inscrutable bosom, and afterwards communicated with Our Privy Council, seemed meet to Our Omnipotency, for causes to Ourself best known, to unfurnish and disarray Our foresaid star-chamber of all those Ancient Constellations which have for so many Ages been sufficiently notorious, and to admit into their vacant places, such 〈◊〉 only as shall be qualified with exemplar Virtue and eminent Desert, there to shine indelible of glory to all Posterity. It is therefore Our divine will and pleasure, voluntarily, and out of Our own free and proper motion, mere grace and special favour, by these presents to specify and declare to all Our loving People, that it shall be lawful for any Person whatsoever, that conceiveth him or herself to be really endued with any Heroical Virtue or transcendent Merit, worthy so high a calling and dignity, to bring their several pleas and pretences before Our Right trusty and and Well-beloved Cousin, and Councillor, Don Mercury, and god Momus, etc. Our peculiar Deligates for that affair, upon whom We have transferred an absolute power to conclude, and determine without Appeal or Revocation, accordingly as to their wisdoms it shall in such cases appear behooveful and expedient. Given at Our Palace in Olympus the first day of the first month, in the first year of the Reformation.
Who's this appears?
This is a subterranean Fiend, Plutus in this Dialect termed Riches, or the god of Gold; a Poison hid by Providence in the bottom of the Seas, and Navel of the Earth, from man's discovery, where if the seeds begun to sprout aboveground, the excrescence was carefully guarded by Dragons; yet at last by humane curiosity brought to light, to their own destruction; this being the true Pandora's box, whence issued all those mischiefs that now fill the Universe.
That I prevent the message of the gods
Thus with my haste, and not attend their summous;
Which ought in justice call me to the place
I now require of Right, is not alone
To show the just precedence that I hold
Before all earthly, next th'immortal Powers;
But to exclude the hope of partial Grace
In all Pretenders, who, since I descend
To equal trial, must by my example,
Waving your favour, claim by sole Desert.
If Virtue must inherit, she's my slave;
I lead her captive in a golden chain,
About the world: She takes her Form and Being
From my creation; and those barren seeds
That drop from Heaven, if I not cherish them
With my distilling dews, and sotive hear,
They know no vegetation; but exposed
To blasting winds of freezing Poverty,
Or not shoot forth at all, or budding, whither:
Should I proclaim the daily sacrifice
Brought to my Temples by the toiling rout,
Not of the fat and gore of abject Beasts,
But humane sweat, and blood poured on my Altars,
I might provoke the envy of the gods.
Turn but your eyes and mark the busy world,
Climbing steep Mountains for the sparkling stone,
Piercing the Centre for the shining Ore,
And th'ocean's bosom to rake pearly sands,
Crossing the torrid and the frozen Zones,
Midst Rocks and swallowing Gulfs, for gainful trade,
And through opposing swords, fire, murdering Canon,
Scaling the walled Towns for precious spoils.
Plant in the passage to your heavenly seats,
These horrid dangers, and then see who dares
Advance his desperate foot; yet am I sought,
And oft in vain, through these, and greater hazards;
I could discover how your Deities
Are for my sake slighted, despised, abused,
Your Temples, Shrines, Altars, and Images
Uncovered, rifled, robbed, and disarrayed
By sacrilegious hands: yet is this treasure
To th' golden Mountain, where I sit adored
With superstitious solemn rights conveyed,
And becomes sacred there, the sordid wretch
Not daring touch the consecrated Ore,
Or with profane hands lessen the bright heap;
But this might draw your anger down on mortals
For rendering me the homage due to you:
Yet what is said may well express my power
Too great for Earth, and only fit for Heaven.
Now, for your pastime, view the naked root,
Which in the dirty earth, and base mould drowned.
Sends forth this precious Plant, and golden fruit.
You lusty Swains, that to your grazing flocks
Pipe amorous Roundelays; you toiling Hinds,
That barb the fields, and to your merry Teams
Whistle your passions; and you mining Moles,
That in the bowels of your mother-Earth
Dwell the eternal burden of her womb,
Cease from your labours, when Wealth bids you play,
Sing, dance, and keep a cheerful holiday.
Plutus, the gods know and confess your power,
Which feeble Virtue seldom can resist;
Stronger than Towers of brass, or Chastity;
Iove knew you when he courted Danae,
And Cupid wears you on that Arrows head
That still prevails, But the gods keep their Throne:
To install Virtue, not her Enemies,
They dread thy force, which even themselves have felt,
Witness Mount-Ida, where the Martial Maid,
And frowning Iuno, did to mortal eyes
Naked, for gold, their sacred bodies show,
Therefore for ever be from heaven banished.
But since with toil from undiscovered Worlds
Thou art brought hither, where thou first didst breathe
The thirst of Empire, into Regal breasts,
And frightedst quiet Peace from her meek Throne,
Filling the World with tumult, blood, and war,
Follow the Camps of the contentious earth,
And be the Conquerors slave, but he that can
Or conquer thee, or give thee Virtuous stamp,
Shall shine in heaven a pure immortal Lamp,
Nay stay, and take my benediction along with you. I could, being here a Co-judge, like others in my place, now that you are condemned, either rail at you, or break jests upon you, but I rather choose to lose a word of good counsel, and entreat you to be more careful in your choice of company, for you are always found either with Misers, that not use you at all; or with fools, that know not how to use you well: Be not hereafter so reserved and coy to men of worth and parts, and so you shall gain such credit, as at the next Sessions you may be heard with better success. But till you are thus reformed, I pronounce this positive sentence, That wheresoever you shall choose to abide, your society shall add no credit or reputation to the party, nor your discontinuance, or total absence, be matter of disparagement to any man; and whosoever shall hold a contrary estimation of you, shall be condemned to wear perpetual Motley, unless he recant his opinion. Now you may void the Court.
What Creature's this?
The Antipodes to the other, they move like
Two Buckets, or as two nails drive out one another;
If Riches depart, Poverty will enter.
I nothing doubt (Great and Immortal Powers)
But that the place, your wisdom hath denied
My foe, your justice will confer on me;
Since that which renders him incapable,
Proves a strong plea for me. I could pretend,
Even in these rags, a larger Sovereignty
Then gaudy Wealth in all his pomp can boast;
For mark how few they are that share the World;
The numerous Armies, and the swarming Ants
That sight and toil for them, are all my Subjects,
They take my wages, we are my Livery:
Invention too and Wit, are both my creatures,
And the whole race of Virtue is my Offspring;
As many mischiefs issue from my womb,
And those as mighty, as proceed from gold.
Oft o'er his Throne I wave my awful Sceptre,
And in the bowels of his state command,
When 'midst his heaps of coin, and hills of gold,
I pine, and starve the avaricious Foole.
But I decline those titles, and lay claim
To heaven, by right of Divine contemplation;
She is my Darling, I, in my sost lap,
Free from disturbing cares, bargains, accounts,
Leases, Rents, Stewards, and the fear of thieves,
That vex the rich, nurse her in calm repose,
And with her, all the Virtues speculative,
Which, but with me, find no secure retreat.
For entertainment of this hour, I'll call
A race of people to this place, that live
At Nature's charge, and not importune heaven
To chain the winds up, or keep back the storms,
To stay the thunder, or forbid the hail
To thresh the unreaped ear; but to all weathers,
Both chilling srost, and scalding Sun, expose
Their equal face. Come forth, my swarthy train,
In this fair circle dance, and as you move.
Mark, and foretell happy events of Love.
I cannot but wonder that your perpetual conversation with Poets and Philosophers hath furnished you with no more Logic, or that you should think to impose upon us so gross an inference, as because Plutus and you are contrary, therefore whatsoever is denied of the one, must be true of the other; as if it should follow of necessity, because he is not Iupiter, you are. No, I give you to know, I am better versed in cavils with the gods, then to swallow such a fallacy, for though you two cannot be together in one place, yet there are many places that may be without you both, and such is heaven, where neither of you are likely to arrive: therefore let me advise you to marry yourself to Content, and beget sage Apothegms, and goodly moral Sentences in dispraise of Riches, and contempt of the world.
Thou dost presume much, poor needy wretch,
To claim a station in the Firmament,
Because thy humble Cottage, or thy Tub
Nurses some lazy or Pedantic virtue
In the cheap Sunshine, or by shady springs
With roots and pot-herbs; where thy right hand,
Tearing those humane passions from the mind,
Upon whose stocks fair blooming virtues flourish,
Degradeth Nature, and benumbeth sense,
And Gorgonlike, turns active men to stone.
We not require the dull society
Of your necessitated Temperance,
Or that unnatural stupidity
That knows nor joy nor sorrow; nor your
Falsely exalted passive Fortitude
Above the active: This low abject brood,
That fix their seats in mediocrity,
Become your servile minds; but we advance
Such virtues only as admit excess,
Brave bounteous Acts, Regal Magnificence,
All-seeing Prudence, Magnanimity
That knows no bound, and that Heroic virtue
For which Antiquity hath left no name,
But patterns only, such as Hercules,
Achilles, Theseus. Back to thy loathed cell,
And when thou seest the new enlightened Sphere,
Study to know but what those Worthies were.
See where Dame Fortune comes, you may know her by her wheel, and that veil over her eyes, with which she hopes like a seeled Pigeon to mount above the Clouds, and perch in the eighth Sphere: listen, she begins.
I come not here (you gods) to plead the Right,
By which Antiquity assigned my Deity,
Though no peculiar station amongst the Stars,
Yet general power to rule their influence,
Or boast the Title of Omnipotent,
Ascribed me then, by which I rivaled Iove,
Since you have canceled all those old records.
But confident in my good cause and merit,
Claim a succession in the vacant Orb,
For since Astraea fled to heaven, I sit
Her Deputy on Earth, I hold her scales
And weigh men's Fates out, who have made me blind,
Because themselves want eyes to see my causes,
Call me inconstant, 'cause my works surpass
The shallow fathom of their human reason;
Yet here, like blinded justice, I dispense
With my impartial hands, their constant lots,
And if desertless, impious men engross
My best rewards, the fault is yours, you gods,
That scant your graces to mortality,
And niggards of your good, scarce spare the world
One virtuous, for a thousand wicked men.
It is no error to confer dignity,
But to bestow it on a vicious man;
I gave the dignity, but you made the vice,
Make you men good, and I'll make good men happy▪
That Plutus is refused, dismays me not,
He is my Drudge, and the external pomp,
In which he decks the World, proceeds from me,
Not him; like Harmony, that not resides
In strings, or notes, but in the hand and voice.
The revolutions of Empires, States,
Sceptres, and Crowns, are but my game and sport,
Which as they hang on the events of War,
So those depend upon my turning wheel.
You warlike Squadrons, who in battles joyn'd,
Dispute the Right of Kings, which I decide,
Present the model of that martial frame,
By which, when Grownes are staked, I rule the game.
Madam, I should censure you, pro salso clamore, for preferring a scandalous cross-bill of recrimination against the gods, but your blindness shall excuse you. Alas! what would it advantage you, if virtue were as universal as vice is? it would only follow, that as the world now exclaims upon you for exalting the vicious, it would then rail as fast at you sor depressing the virtuous; so they would still keep their tune, though you changed their Ditty.
The mists, in which future events are wrapped,
That oft succeed beside the purposes
Of him that works, his dull eyes not discerning
The first great cause, offered thy clouded shape
To his enquiring search; so in the dark
The groping world first found thy Deity,
And gave thee rule over contingencies,
Which, to the piercing eye of Providence,
Being fixed and certain, where past and to come,
Are always present, thou dost disappear,
Losest thy being, and art not all.
Be thou then only a deluding Phantom,
At best a blind guide, leading blinder fools;
Who, would they but survey their mutual wants,
And help each other, there were left no room
For thy vain aid▪ Wisdom, whose strong-built plots
Leave nought to hazard, mocks thy futile power.
Industrious labour drags thee by the locks,
Bound to his toiling Car, and not attending
Till thou dispense, reaches his own reward.
Only the lazy sluggard yawning lies
Before thy threshold, gaping for thy dole,
And licks the easy hand that feeds his sloth.
The shallow, rash, and unadvised man
Makes thee his stale, disburdens all the follies
Of his misguided actions, on thy shoulders.
Vanish from hence, and seek those idiots out
That thy santasticke god head hath allowed,
And rule that giddy superstitious crowd,
Pleasure, a young woman with a smiling face, in a light lascivious habit, adorned with silver and gold, her Temples crowned with a Garland of Roses, and over that a Rainbow circling her head down to her shoulders.
What wanton's this?
This is the sprightly Lady Hedone, a merry Gamester, this people call her Pleasure.
The reasons (equal judges) here alleged
By the dismissed Pretenders, all concur
To strengthen my just title to the Sphere.
Honour, or Wealth, or the contempt of both,
Have in themselves no simple real good,
But as they are the means to purchase pleasure;
The paths that lead to my delicious Palace;
They for my sake, I for mine own am prized.
Beyond me nothing is, I am the Goal.
The journeys end, to which the sweeting world,
And wearied Nature travels. For this, the best
And wisest sect of all Philosophers,
Made me the seat of supreme happiness.
And though some, more austere, upon my ruins
Did to the prejudice of Nature, raise
Some petty low-built virtues, 'twas because
They wanted wings to reach my soaring pitch.
Had they been Princes borne, themselves had proved
Of all mankind the most luxurious.
For those delights, which to their low condition
Were obvious, they with greedy appetite
Sucked and devoured: from offices of State,
From cares of family, children, wife, hopes, fears
Retired, the churlish cynic in his Tub
Enjoyed those pleasures which his tongue defamed.
Nor am I ranked amongst the supersluous goods;
My necessary offices preserve
Each single man, and propagate the kind.
Then am I universal as the light,
Or common Air we breathe; and since I am
The general desire of all mankind,
Civil Felicity must reside in me.
Tell me what rate my choicest pleasures beat,
When for the short delight of a poor draught
Of cheap cold water, great Lysimachus
Rendered himself slave to the Scythians.
Should I the curious structure of my seats,
The art and beauty of my several objects,
Rehearse at large, your bounties would reserve
For every sense a proper constellation;
But I present their Persons to your eyes.
Come forth my subtle Organs of delight,
With changing figures please the curiouss eye,
And charm the care with moving Harmony.
Bewitching Siren, guilded rottenness,
Thou hast with cunning artifice displayed
Th' enameled outside, and the honeyed verge
Of the faire cup, where deadly poison lurks.
Within, a thousand sorrows dance the round;
And like a shell, Pain circle's thee without,
Grief is the shadow waiting on thy steps,
Which, as thy joys 'ginne towards their West decline,
Doth to a Giant's spreading form extend
Thy Dwarfish stature. Thou thyself art Pain,
Greedy, intense Desire, and the keen edge
Of thy fierce Appetite, oft strangles thee,
And cuts thy slender thread; but still the terror
And apprehension of thy hasty end,
Mingles with Gall thy most refined sweets;
Yet thy Circean charms transform the world.
Captains, that have resisted war and death,
Nations, that over Fortune have triumphed,
Are by thy Magic made effeminate.
Empires, that knew no limits but the Poles,
Have in thy wanton lap melted away.
Thou wert the Author of the first excess
That drew this reformation on the gods. (have
Canst thou then dream, those Powers, that from heaven
Banished th' effect, will there enthrone th' cause?
To thy voluptuous Den, fly Witch, from hence,
There dwell, for ever drowned in brutish sense.
I concur, and am grown so weary of these tedious plead, as I'll pack up too and be gone: Besides, I see a crowd of other suitors pressing hither, I'll stop'em, take their petitions and prefer 'em above; and as I came in bluntly without knocking, and no body bid me welcome; so I'll depart as abruptly without taking leave, and bid no body farewell.
These, with forced reasons, and strained arguments,
Urge vain presences, whilst your Actions plead,
And with a silent importunity
Awake the drowsy justice of the gods
To crown your deeds with immortality.
The growing Titles of your Ancestors,
These Nations glorious Acts, joined to the stock
Of your own Royal virtues, and the clear
Reflex they take from th'imitation
Of your famed Court, make Honour's story full,
And have to that secure fixed state advanced
Both you and them, to which the labouring world,
Wading through streams of blood, sweats to aspire.
Those ancient Worthies of these famous Isles,
That long have slept, in fresh and lively shapes
Shall straight appear, where you shall see yourself
Circled with modern Heroes, who shall be
In Act, what ever elder times can boast,
Noble, or Great; as they in Prophecy
Were all but what you are. Then shall you see
The sacred hand of bright Eternity
Mould you to Stars, and fix you in the Sphere.
To you, your Royal half, to them she'll join
Such of this train, as with industrious steps
In the fair prints your virtuous feet have made,
Though with unequal paces, follow you.
This is decreed by Iove, which my return
Shall see performed; but first be hold the rude
And old Abiders here, and in them view
The point from which your full perfections grew.
You naked, ancient, wild Inhabitants,
That breathed this Air, and pressed this flowery Earth,
Come from those shades where dwells eternal night,
And see what wonders Time hath brought to light.
RAise from these rocky cliffs, your heads,
Brave Sons, and see where Glory spreads
Her glittering wings, where Majesty
Crowned with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye
Diffusive joy, where Good and Fair,
United sit in Honour's Chair.
Call forth your aged Priests, and crystal streams.
To warm their hearts, and waves in these bright beams.
From your consecrated woods,
Holy Druids. 2. Silver stoods,
From your channels fringed with flowers,
Hither move; forsake your bowers
strewed with hallowed Oaken leaves,
Decked with slags and siedgie sheaves,
And behold a wonder. 3. Say,
What do your duller eyes survey?
We see at once in dead of night
A Sun appear, and yet a bright
Noonday, springing from Starlight.
Look up, and see the darkened Sphere
Deprived of light, her eyes shine there;
These are more sparkling than those were.
These shed a nobler influence,
These by a pure intelligence
Of more transcendent Virtue move,
These first feel, then kindle Iove,
From the bosoms they inspire,
These receive a mutual sire;
And where their slames impure return,
These can quench as well as burn.
Here the fare victorious eyes
Make Worth only Beauty's prize,
Here the hand of Virtue ties
'Bout the heart loves amorous chain,
Captives triumph, Vassals reign,
And none live here but the slain.
These are th' Hisperian bowers, whose fair trees bear
Rich golden fruit, and yet no Dragon near.
Then, from your impris'ning womb,
Which is the cradle and the tomb
Of British Worthies (fair sons) send
A troop of Heroes, that may lend
Their hands to ease this loaden grove,
And gather the ripe fruits of Love.
Open thy stony entrails wide,
And break old Atlas, that the pride
Of three famed kingdoms may be spied.
Place forth thou mighty British Hercules,
With thy choice band, for only thou, and these,
May revel here, in Love's Hesperides.
HEre are shapes formed fit for heaven,
Those move gracefully and 〈◊〉,
Here the Air and paces meet
So just, as if the skilful feet
Had struck the Vials▪ 1. 2. 3. So the Ears
Might the tuneful footing hear.
And had the Music silent been,
The eye a moving tune had seen.
These must in the unpeopled sky
Succeed, and govern Destiny,
Iove is temp'ring purer fire,
And will with brighter flames attire
These glorious lights. I must ascend
And help the Worke.
We cannot lend
Heaven so much treasure. 2. Nor that pay
But rendering what it takes away.
Why should they that here can move
So well, be ever-fixed above?
Or be to one eternal posture tied,
That can into such various figures slide.
Iove shall not, to enrich the Sky,
Beggar the Earth, their Fame shall fly
From hence alone, and in the Sphere
Kindle new Stars, whilst they rest here.
How can the shaft stay in the quiver,
Yet hit the mark?
Did not the River
Eridanus, the grace acquire
In Heaven and Earth to flow,
Above in streams of golden fire,
In silver waves below?
But shall not we, now thou art gone
Who wert our Nature, whither,
Or break that triple Union
Which thy soul hold together?
In Concord's pure immortal spring
I will my force renew,
And a more active Virtue bring
At my return. Adieu.
WHilst thus the Darlings of the Gods
From Honour's Temple, to the Shrine
Of Beauty, and these sweet abodes
Of Love, we guide, let thy Divine
Aspects (Bright Deity) with fair
And Halcyon beams, becalm the Air,
We bring Prince Arthur, or the brave
St. George himself (great Queen) to you,
You'll soon discern him; and we have▪
A Guy, a Beavis, or some true
Round-Table Knight, as everfought
For Lady, to each Beauty brought.
Plant in their martial hands, War's seat,
Your peaceful pledges of warm snow,
And, if a speaking touch, repeat
In Love's known language, tales of woe;
Say, in soft whispers of the Palm,
As eyes shoot darts, so Lips shed Balm.
For though you seem like Captives, led
In triumph by the Foe away,
Yet on the Conquerors neck you tread,
And the fierce Victor proves your prey,
What heart is then secure from you,
That can, though vanquished, yet subdue?
BE fixed you rapid Orbs, that bear
The changing seasons of the year
On your swift wings, and see the old
Decrepit Spheres grown dark and cold;
Nor did Iove quench her fires, these bright
Flames, have eclipsed her sullen light:
This Royal Pair, for whom Fate will
Make Motion cease, and Time stand still;
Since Good is here so perfect, as no Worth
Is left for After-Ages to bring forth.
Mortality cannot with more
Religious zeal, the gods adore.
My Truths, from humane eyes concealed,
Are naked to their sight revealed.
Nor do their Actions, from the guide
Of my exactest precepts slide.
And as their own pure Souls entwined,
So are their Subjects hearts combined.
So just, so gentle is their sway,
As it seems Empire to obey.
And their fair Fame, like incense hurled
On Altars, hath perfumed the world.
S O. Wisdom. A L. Truth. E V S. Pure Adoration.
H O. Concord, D I. Rule E V P. Clear Reputation.
crown this King, this Queen, this Nation.
, Truth, &c.
Brave Spirits, whose adventurous feet
Have to the Mountain's top aspired,
Where fair Desert, and Honour meet,
Here, from the toiling Press retired,
Secure from all disturbing Evil,
For ever in my Temple revel.
With wreathes of Stars circled about,
Gild all the spacious Firmament,
And smiling on the panting Routs
That labour in the steep ascent,
With your resistless influence guide
Of humane change th' incertain tide.
But oh you Royal Turtles, shed,
When you from Earth remove,
On the ripe fruits of your chaste bed,
Those sacred seeds of Love.
Which no Power can but yours dispense,
Since you the pattern bear from hence.
Then from your fruitful race shall slow
Endless succession.
Sceptres shall bud, and Laurels blow
'Bout their Immortal Throne.
Propitious Stars shall crown each birth,
Whilst you rule them, and they the Earth.