Didst bid him come?
I did.
Go back again,
And tell him, I am gone abroad.
he's here
Already Sir.
Oh Cosmo!
Dear Pisano,
That I could let thee nearer, into me,
My heart counts this embrace a distance, yet,
Let us incorporate.
I was wooing Cosmo,
My man, to tell thee, I was gone abroad,
Before thou cam'st.
How's this? your words and looks
Are strange, and teach me to infer I am
Not welcome, that on riper Counsel, you
Do wish my absence.
What for telling truth?
He thus should ha' but made thee fit to see
Thy friend, thou com'st with expectation
To hear me talk sense, dost not?
Yes.
La now!
And to discourse as I was wont, of State,
Our friendship, or of women, no such matter.
This is more wild than usual, your language
I not so clear as it was wont, it carries
Not the same even thread although some words
May knit, the sense is scattered.
Right, right Cosmo,
The reason is, I ha' straggled,
And lost myself I know not where, in what
Part of the world, and would not this be shown
As well in him, to ha' prepared thee now?
What humour's this Pisano, I am yet to understand?
understand? why Cosmo,
Had I not changed my Dialect and Method,
What need this tedious Apology?
That's it, I would have had thee known before,
Thou canst not understand me, yet thou hast
A name in Florence, for a ripe young man,
Of nimble apprehension, of a wise
And spreading observation, of whom
Already our old men do prophesy
Good, and great things, worthy thy fair dimensions.
This is an argument above the rest,
Pisano is not well; for being temperate,
He was not wont to flatter, and abuse
His friend.
Beside, there is another reason,
Thou shouldst discover me at heart, through all
These mist, thou art in love too, and who cannot,
That feels himself the heat, but shrewdly guess
At every symptom of that Wanton Fever,
Oh Cosmo!
What misfortune can approach
Your happy love in fairest Amidea,
You have been long contracted, and have passed
The tedious hope, Hymen, doth only wait
An opportunity to light his torch,
Which will burn glorious at your nuptial:
Let jealous, lovers fear and feel what 'tis
To languish, talk away their blood, and strength▪
Question their unkind stars, you have game
Before you sir.
Before me where? why dost
Thou mock me Cosmo? she's not here:
It is
No pilgrimage to travel to her lip.
'tis not for you.
How sir for me? y'ave no
Suspicion, I can be guilty of
A treason, to our friendship, be so just,
If malice have been busy, with my fame,
To let me know——
You hastily interpret,
Thy pardon I have only erred, but not
With the least scruple of thy faith, and honour
To me, thou hast a noble Soul, and lov'st me
Rather too well, I would thou wert my enemy,
That we had been borne in distant climes, and never
Took cement from our Sympathies in nature.
Would we had never seen, or known each other,
This may seem strange, from him, that loves thee Cosmo,
More precious than his life.
Love me, and, wish
This separation?
I will give thee proof;
So well I love thee, nothing in the world
Thy soul doth heartily affect, but I
Do love it too, does it not trouble thy
Belief? I wear not my own heart about me,
But thine exchanged, thy eyes let in my objects,
Thou hear'st for me, talk'st, kissest, and enjoyst
All my felicities.
What means this language?
But what's all this to thee? go to Oriana,
And bathe thy lips in Rosy dew of kisses,
Renew thy eye that looks as Saturn hung
Upon the lid, take in some golden beam,
she'll dart a thousand at one glance, and if
At thy return, thou findst I have a being
In this vain world, I'll tell thee more.
But sir, you must not part so.
Not with my good will,
I have no great ambition to be mad.
Petruchio, let me conjure thee, tell
What weight hangs on thy Master's heart? why does he
Appear so full of trouble?
D''ee not guess?
Point at the cause, I cannot.
Why he loves—
The beauteous Amidea, I know that.
Some such thing was, but you are his friend, my Lord,
His soul is now devoted to Oriana,
And he will die for her, if this Ague hold him.
Ha.
Your doublet pinch you Sir? I cannot tell;
But ne'er a woman in the world should make
Me hang myself, it may be for his honour,
he'll choose another death, he is about one;
For 'tis not possible without some cure,
He should live long, he has forgot to sleep,
And for his diet, h'as not eat this se'night
As much as would choke a Sparrow, a Fly is
An Epicure to him: Good sir, do you counsel him.
So, so, it works;
This was my Lord Lorenzo's plot, and I
Ha'been his Engine in the work, to batter
His love to Amidea, by praising
Oriana to him, he is here, my Lord.
Petruchio, where's your Lord? how moves the work?
To your own wish my Lord, he has thrown off
The thought of Amidea, and is mad
For Cosmo's Mistress, whom by your instructions
I have commended so—
My witty villain!
Cosmo is with him, to whom cunningly
I ha' discovered his disease, and I
Beseech you interrupt 'em not.
This may
Have Tragical effects Petruchio:
For Cosmo, we shall prune his fortune thus,
Oriana's wealth would swell him in the Seat,
He grows too fast already, be still ours.
My Lord, you bought my life, when you procured
My pardon from the Duke.
O friend, thou canst not be so merciful,
To give away such happiness, my Love
Is for some sin I have committed, thus
Transplanted, I looked rather thou shouldst kill me,
Then give away this comfort, 'tis a charity
Will make thee poor, and 'twere a great deal better
That I should languish still, and die.
While I have art to help thee? Oriana
And I were but in treaty, howsoever,
I were not worthy to be called his friend,
Whom I preferred not to a Mistress, if
You can find dispensation, to quit
With Amidea, your first love, be confident
Oriana may be won, and it were necessary
You did prepare the Mother, be not modest—
Each syllable is a blessing, hark
Petruchio.
There is an Engine levelled at my fate,
And I must arm,
Away.
This for thy comfort,
Although some compliments ha' passed between
Me and Oriana, I am not warm
Yet in the Mother's fancy, whose power may
Assist you much, but lose no time, let's follow.
Thou miracle of friendship!
Letters to us? from whom?
Castruchio.
The exile? whence?
Sienna my good Lord,
It came enclosed within my Letter, which
Imposed my care and duty, in the swift
Delivery.
The Duke is pale oath sudden.
A Palsy does possess me, ha? Lorenzo?
Our Cosen, the enemy of our life and State,
My bosom Kinsman? not too loud, the Traitor
May hear, and by escape prevent our justice.
What Traitor?
Signior Alonso, come you hither,
What correspondency maintain you with this
Castruchio?
None my Lord, but I am happy
In his election, to bring the first
Voice to your safety.
Most ingrateful man!
Turn Rebel? I have worn him in my blood.
'tis time to purge the humour.
I will do't.
Our guard, were he more precious, had he shared
Our soul, as he but borrows of our flesh,
This action makes him nothing, had I been
In heaven, I could have lent him my eternity,
He turn conspirator? oh the fate of Princes!
But stay, this paper speaks of no particular,
He does not mention what design what plot▪
More providence is necessary,
Right, right, good Alonso, thou'rt an honest man
And lov'st us well, what's to be done?
'tis best
To make his person sure, by this you may
Discover soonest who are of his faction
And at our leisure study of his punishment,
Which must exceed death, every common trespass
Is so rewarded, first apply all tortures
To enforce confession, who are his confederates,.
And how they meant to murder us, than some rare
Invention to execute the Traitor,
So as he may be half a year a dying,
Will make us famed for justice.
He is here,
shall's apprehend him?
Happy morning to
My gracious Sovereign.
Good morrow coz.
Can Treason couch itself within that frame?
We ha' letters for you.
Letters, these dread sir
Have no direction to me, your highness
Is only named.
They will concern your reading,
Alonso now observe and watch him Florio,
Depazzi come you hither, does Lorenzo
Look like a Traitor?
How sir? a Traitor?
ay sir.
ay sir, by my honour not I sir, I defy
Him that speaks it; I am in a fine pickle
I ha' read—
No blush? not tremble? read again
The substance is, that you maintain
A vigilant eye over Lorenzo, who
Hath threatened with your death, his country's liberty
And other things, touching reducing of
A common wealth.
I like not that.
All's out:
A pox upon him for a Traitor, he
Has hedged me in but I'll confess—
What answer
Make you to this Lorenzo?
This o'th' sudden,
Sir I must owe the title of a Traitor
To your high favours; Envy first conspired,
And malice now accuses, but what story,
Mentioned his name, that had his PRINCE's bosom,
Without the people's hate, 'tis sin enough
In some men to be great, the throng of stars
The rout, and common people of the sky,
Move still another way then the Sun does,
That guilds the creature, take your honour's back,
And if you can, that purple of my veins,
Which flows in yours, and you shall leave me in
A state I sha'not fear the great ones envy,
Nor common people's rage, and yet perhaps
You may be credulous against me.
Ha!
The Duke is cool.
Alonzo look you prove.
Lorenzo what you say.
I say my Lord?
I have discovered all my knowledge sir:
stand to't—
With licence of your highness, what
Can you imagine I should gain by Treason?
Admit I should be impious, as to kill you,
I am your nearest kinsman, and should forfeit
Both name and future title to the State,
By such a hasty, bloody disposition,
The rabble hate me now, how shall I then
Expect a safety? is it reformation,
Of Florence they accuse me of? suggesting
I disaffect a Monarchy, which how
Vain and ridiculous would appear in me,
Your wisdom judge, in you I live and flourish,
What in your death can I expect, to equal
The riches I enjoy under your warmth?
Should I for the air, and talk of a new government,
A Common wealth, lose all my certainties?
And you above 'em all, whose favours have
fall'n like the Dew upon me? have I a soul
To think the guilt of such a murder easy,
Were there no other torments? or can I
Expect the people will reward your murderer
With any thing but death, a parricide?
So so the Duke's already in his circle.
But I am tame, as if I had no sense
Nor other argument to vindicate
My Loyalty, thus poisoned by a paper,
In my eternal fame, and by a slave?
Call to my brow, some one that dare accuse me,
Let him have honour, great as mine, to forfeit,
Or since your grace hath taken me so near,
Your own height, that may seal may not expect
Such a proportioned adversary, yet let him
Have name within his Country, and allow him
A Soul, against which, I may engage my more,
Then equal honour, then I'll praise your justice
But let him not be one condemned already,
A desperate exile— is it possible
A Treason hatched in Florence, 'gainst the Duke
Should have no eyes at home to penetrate,
The growing danger but at Sienna, one
Mu t with a perspectiue discouer all?
Ask this good Councillor, or these gentlemen
Whose faiths are tried, whose cares are always waking
About your person, how have I appeared
To them, that thus I should be rendered hateful,
To you and my good Country, they are virtuous
And dare not blemish a white faith, accuse
My sound heart of dishonour? sir you must
Pardon my bold defence, my virtue bleeds
By your much easiness, and I am compelled
To break all modest limits, and to waken
Your memory (if it be not to late
To say you have one,) with the story of
My fair deservings, who sir overthrew
With his designs your late ambitious brother
Hippolito, who like a Meteor threatened
A black and fatal omen?
'twas Lorenzo.
Be yet as just, and say whose art directed
A countermine to check the pregnant hopes
Of Salviati, who for his cardinal's Cap,
In Rome was potent, and here popular?
None but Lorenzo.
Admirable Traitor?
Whose service was commended when the exiles
One of whose tribe accuseth me had raised
Commotions in our Florence when the hindga
Of State did faint under the burden, and
The people sweat with their own fears, to think
The Soldier should inhabit their calm dwellings,
Who then rose up your safety, and crushed all
Their plots to air?
Our dear cousin Lorenzo.
When he that should reward, forgets the men
That purchased his security, 'tis virtue
To beast a merit with my services
I ha' not starved your treasury, the grand
Captain Gonzales accounted to King Ferdinand,
Three hundred thousand crowns, for spies, what bills
Have I brought in for such intelligence?
I do grow hearty
All thy actions
Stand fresh before us, and confirm, thou art
Our best and dearest friend, thus we assure
Our confidence, they love us not that feed
One jealous thought of our dear coz Lorenzo
New welcome to us all, for you Alonzo
Give o'er your paper kites, learn wit, 'tis time.
Where shall we meet tonight?
Pardon me sir I am a dangerous man.
No more a that
I'll credit my soul with thee, shall we revel
This night with Amidea?
The Duke courts him,
Well go thy ways, for one of the most excellent
Impudent Traitors—
Yet a murmuring
Of a Traitor? we shall sooner suspect him,
That thinks Lorenzo guilty.
I my Lord,
Dare boldly swear, his honour is as free—
From any treason, as myself,
I did prophesy this issue.
'Tis an age
Till night, I long to fold her in my arms,
Prepare Sciarrha, but be very wise
In the discovery, he is all touchwood.
I know he is her brother, leave the managing
Of things to me.
Still when we expect,
Our bliss, time creeps, but when the happier things
Call to enjoy, each saucy hour hath wings.
MY Sister, though he be the Duke, he dares not,
Patience, patience, if there be such a virtue,
I want it Heaven, yet keep't a little longer,
It were a sin to have it, such an injury
Deserves a wrath next to your own, my Sister?
It has thrown wildfire in my brain Lorenzo,
A thousand furies revel in my skull,
Has he not sins enough in's Court to damn him.
But my Roof must be guilty of new jousts,
And none but Amidea? these the honours
His presence brings our house?
Temper your rage.
Are all the Brothels rifled? no quaint piece
Left him in Florence, that will meet his hot
And valiant luxury, that we are come
To supply his blood out of our families?
Diseases gnaw his title off.
My Lord—
He is no Prince of mine, he forfeited
His greatness, that black minute he first gave
Consent to my dishonour.
Then I'm sorry.
Why should you be sorry sir?
You say it is my Sister he would strumpet,
Mine, Amidea? 'tis a wound you feel not,
But it strikes through, and through the poor Sciarrah,
I do not think, but all the ashes of
My Ancestors do swell in their dark urns
At this report, of Amidea's shame:
It is their cause as well as mine, and should
Heaven suffer the Duke's sin to pass unpunished,
Their dust must of necessity conspire,
To make an earthquake in the Temple.
Sir,
You said you would hear me out.
Why is there more
Behind?
And greater Master, your high blood
Till I conclude Sciarrha, I accuse not
Your noble anger, which I have observed,
Is not on every cheap and giddy motion
Inflamed, but Sir, be thrifty in your passion,
This is a petty trespass.
Has mischief any name
Beyond this? will it kill me with the sound?
My Lord, though the dishonouring your Sister,
Be such a fact, the blood of any other
But Alexander could no less than expiate,
Yet this sin stretches farther, and involves
With hers, your greater stain did you e'er promise him?
Yet why do I make any question?
It were another crime, to think Afrique
Could entertain a thought, so far beneath
His birth, you stoop to such a horrid baseness,
Than all the virtue of mankind would sicken,
And soon take leave of earth.
You torture me.
What then could the Duke find, to give him any
Encouragement you would be guilty of
An act, so fatal unto honour, what
When you were least yourself? (as we are all
Frail compositions) did appear so wicked
In you, he should conceive a hope, and flatter
Himself with possibility, to corrupt
Your Soul to a deed so monstrous?
To what?
Though all the teeming glories of His Dukedom,
Nay Florence State offered it self a bribe▪
And tempted the betraying of your name
To infamy, yet to imagine, you
Would turn officious pander to his lust,
And interpose the mercenary bawd.
To Court your Sister to his sinful coupling:
'tis horrid, affrights nature, I grow stiff
With the imagination.
Hah!
Yet this was his command I should impose.
Lorenzo,
I do want breath, my voice is ravished from me,
I am not what I was, or if I be,
Sciarrha thou hast talked too, all this while
Look heedfully about me, and thou mayst
Discover through some cranny of my flesh,
A fire within, my soul is but one flame,
Extended to all parts of this frail building,
I shall to ashes, I begin to shrink,
Is not already my complexion altered,
Does not my face look parched, and my skin gather
Into a heap? my breath is hot enough
To thaw the Alps.
Your fancy would
Transport you.
'tis my rage, but let it cool,
And then we'll talk o'something, something sir,
Shall be to purpose.
Now the flame is mounted,
My Lord I have given proof, although he be
My Duke, and Kinsman, I abhorred his vices,
howe'er the world without examination,
Shoot their malicious noise, and stain my actions:
'tis policy in Princes, to create
A Favourite, who must bear all the guilt
Of things ill managed in the State, if any
Design be happy, 'tis the PRINCE's own.
Heaven knows, how I have counseled this young man,
By virtue to prevent his fate, and govern
With modesty: O the religious days
Of Commonwealths!
We have outlived that blessing.
But I have thought a cure for this great State
Impostume.
What?
To lance it, is't, not ripe?
let's draw cuts, whether your hand or mine
Shall do an act for Florence liberty,
And send this Tyrant to another world.
How, I draw cuts?
Coy it not thus Lorenzo,
But answer, by thy name and birth, you are
His Kinsman; we all know it, that you dwell
In's bosom, great in favour, as in blood,
We know that too, and let me tell you more:
We know you but disguise your heart, and wish
Florence would change her title.
How is this?
We know you have firm correspondence with
The banished men, whose desperate fortunes wait
Your call to tumult, in our streets, all this,
Not to feed your ambition with a Dukedom,
By the remove of Alexander, but
To serve your Country, and create their peace,
Who groan under the Tyranny of a proud,
Lascivious Monarch, is't not true Lorenzo?
My phrase is blunt my Lord.
My Genius
And thine are friends, I see they have conversed
And I Applaud the wisdom of my Stars,
That made me for his friendship, who preserves
The same religious fire, I will confess,
When Alexander left his piety
To Florence, I placed him beneath my Country,
As we should all, but we have lost our souls'
Or changed our active spirits, for a dull
And lazy sufferance, let this secret be
n argument, how much I dare repose
Upon Sciarrha's honour, virtue witness,
I choose no other destiny, command
Lorenzo's fate, dissolve me with your breath,
I'll either ive, in your exchange of faith
A patriot, or die my country's martyr.
Thou hast a fire beyond Prometheus
To quicken earth, thy flame is but a prophecy
Of that high pyramid, the world shall build
To thy immortal name: it was the glory
Of Romans to prefer their empire's safety
To their own lives, they were but men like us,
And of the same ingredients, our souls
Create of no inferior substance; ha?
Heaven knows I've no particular design
To leap unto a throne, I will disclaim
The privilege of blood, let me advance
Our liberty, restore the ancient Laws
Of the republic, rescue from the jaws
Of lust your mothers, wives, your daughters, sisters,
Sisters.
From horrid Rape 'las Amidea:
I am resolved, by all that's blessed, he dies
Return my willingness to be his pander,
My sister's readiness to meet his Dalliance,
His promises have bought our shame, he dies,
The roof he would dishonour with his Lust
Shall be his tomb, bid him be confident,
Conduct him good Lorenzo, i'll dispose
My house for this great scene of death.
Be constant.
Now brother, what news brings the great Lorenzo?
Let me have truce vexation for some minutes,
What news? preferments, honours, offices;
Sister, you must to Court.
Who, I to Court?
Or else the Court will come to you, the Duke
Hath sent already for us Amidea:
O that I knew what happy Stars did govern
At thy Nativity: It were no sin
To adore their influence.
What means my brother?
he's transported.
I shall suspect your health.
I easily could forget I am Sciarrha,
And fall in love myself, is she not fair,
Exceeding beautiful, and tempting Florio?
Look on her well, methinks I could turn Poet,
And make her a more excellent piece than heaven.
Let not fond men hereafter command what
They most admire, by fetching from the Stars
Or flowers their glory of similitude;
But from thyself the role to know all beauty,
And he that shall arrive at so much boldness,
To say his Mistress eyes, or voice, or breath,
Are half so bright, so clear, so sweet as thine,
Hath told the world enough of miracle.
These are the Duke's own Raptures, Amidea,
His own Poetic flames, an argument
He loves my Sister.
Love me?
Infinitely,
I am in earnest, he employed Lorenzo,
No meaner person in this embassy,
You must to Court, Oh happiness!
For what?
What do great Ladies do at Court I pray?
Enjoy the pleasures of the world, dance, kiss
The Amorous Lords, and change Court breath, sing loose
Belief of other, heaven, tell wanton dreams,
Rehearse your sprightly bed-scenes, and boast, which
Hath most Idolaters, accuse all faces,
That trust to the simplicity of nature,
Talk witty blasphemy,
Discourse their gaudy wardrobes, plot new pride,
Jest upon courtier's legs, laugh at the wagging
Of their own feathers, and a thousand more
Delights, which private Ladies never think of:
But above all, and wherein thou shalt make
All other beauties envy thee, the Duke,
The Duke himself shall call thee his, and single
From the fair troop, thy person forth, to exchange
Embraces with, lay siege to these soft lips,
And not remove, till he hath sucked thy heart,
Which soon dissolved with thy sweet breath, shall be
Made part of his, at the same instant, he
Conveying a new soul into thy breast,
With a creating kiss.
You make me wonder,
Pray speak that I may understand.
Why will you
Appear so ignorant? I speak the dialect
Of Florence to you, come, I find your cunning;
The news does please, the rolling of your eye
Betrays you, and I see a guilty blush
Through this white veil upon your cheek, you would
Have it confirmed, you shall, the Duke himself
Shall swear he loves you.
Love me? why?
To Court,
And ask him; be not you too peevish now,
And hinder all our fortune; I ha' promised him
To move you for his armful, as I am
Sciarrha, and your brother, more I ha' sent
Word to him by Lorenzo, that you should
Meet his high flame, in plain Italian
Love him, and—
What for heaven, be the Duke's whore?
No, no, his Mistress, command him, make us.
Give up my Virgin-honour to his lust?
You may give it a better name, but do't.
I do mistake you brother, do I not?
No, no, my meaning is so broad, you cannot.
I would I did then, is't not possible
That this should be a dream? where did you drop
Your virtue Sir? Florio, why move you not?
Why are you slow to tell this man? for sure
'tis not Sciarrah, he hath talked so ill,
And so much, that we may have cause to fear,
The air about's infected.
Are not you
My brother?
Be not you a fool, to move
These empty questions, but join to make her
Supple, and pliant for the Duke, I hope
We are not the first ha' been advanced by a wagtail:
No matter for the talk of musty people,
Look up to the reward, thou art young, and skilled
In these Court temptings, naturally soft,
And moving, I am rough hewn, assist, wilt,
With some quaint charm, to win her to this game?
My Sister?
ay, I.
Come not near him Florio,
'tis not Sciarrha, sure my brother's Nurse
Played the impostor, and with some base issue
Cheated our house.
Gipsy, use better language,
Or I'll forget your sex.
Offer to touch her
With any rudeness, and by all that's virtuous▪—
Why how now boy?
I do not fear your sword,
This with my youth, and innocence, is more
Defence than all thy armoury, what Devil
Has crept into thy soul?
You'll not help?
I'll never kill thee.
'tis very well,
Have you considered better o'the motion?
Yes.
And what's your resolve
To have my name
Stand in the Ivory register of Virgins,
When I am dead, before one factious thought
Should lurk within mee to betray my fame,
To such a blot, my hands shall mutiny,
And boldly with a poniard teach my heart
To weep out a repentance.
Let me kill thee
My excellent chaste sister, Floria
Thou hast my soul, I did but try your virtues,
'Tis truth, the Duke does love thee, viciously,
Let him, let him, he comes to be our guest,
This night he means to revel at our house,
The Tarquin shall be entertained; he shall,
My Lord, Pisano is come.
I had forgot his promise, Look up Sister
And shine with thy own smiles, Pisano's come,
Pisano thy contracted, honoured friend,
A gentleman so rich in hopes, we shall
be happy in's alliance.
Welcome all,
But you above the rest, my brother shortly,
Sister and Florio entertain your noble
Friends, some few minutes, I am absent, we
Must not forget prepare for the Duke's coming,
I'll soon return
You are not cheerful sir.
How is't my Lord? you were not wont to look
So sad when you came hither.
I am not well Amidea.
Oh my !
Be you
Comforted Lady let all griefs repair
To this, their proper Centre.
Sir how fare you?
Altered of late a little.
Virtuous Lady,
I cannot choose but pity her, and accuse
Pisano's levity.
would he were come back,
I might ha' finished ere he went, and not
Delayed his business much, two or three words,
And I had dispatched.
How sir? your language is
Another then you use to speak, you look not
With the same brow upon me.
'las sweet Lady,
But who shall accuse me?
we shall expect to long, Lady I am come
To render all my interest in your love,
And to demand myself again, live happier,
In other choice Fair Amidea, 'tis
Some shame to say my hearts revolted.
Ha.
here's witness, all is canceled betwixt us,
Nay and you weep—
Farewell.
he's gone.
I am amazed.
Now lead me to my blessing.
Shall a long suit and speeding in his love
With the world's notice, and a general fame
Of contract too, just in the instant when
A marriage is expected, be broke off
With infamy to our house.
Brother, if ever
You loved poor Amidea, let not this
Arrive Sciarrha's ere there's danger in
His knowledge of it, this may be a trial
Of my affection
A trial; no
It showed too like a truth
My tears entreat
Your silence
You have
Power to command it, dry your eyes then,
he's returned.
How now,
Weeping? where is Pisano, and his friends?
Their gon sir.
Ha!
Guess by my eyes, you may
Something of sorrow hath befallen, no sooner
You were departed, cut some strange distemper
Invaded him, we might discern a change
In's countenance, and though we prayed him to
Repose with us, he would straight back again,
So with Frederico,
And signior Cosmo, he returned.
The alteration was strange and sudden.
'las noble gentleman— but come clear up
Your face again, we hope it won't last,
Look bright again I say, I ha' given order—
My Lord the Dukes already come.
Remove,
Good Amidea, and reserve thy person
To Crown his entertainment, be not seen yet.
Sciarrah, we are come to be your guest.
Your highness doth an honour to our house.
But where's thy Sister, she must bid us welcome
She is your grace's handmaid,
For this night,
Let the whole world conspire to our delight.
Lorenzo—
Sir be confident— and perish.
You should not rashly give away your heart,
Nor must you without me dispose yourself,
Pray give access to none— yet if Pisano
inquire, direct him to the garden, Cosmo
Is young, and promising, but while Lorenzo
Lives must expect no sunshine.
There's for thy pains,
They are now at opportunity
My Lord,
Do you prepare the Mother, and let me close
With Oriana.
What service can reward thee?
Take occasion
To leave us private, this hour be
Propitious, win but the Matron to you.
She is prepared already
Lose no time
Take the other walk.
My dear Cosmo:
My best Oriana.
You have been too much absent I must chide you
You cannot sweet, I would I knew which way.
To make thee angry, yes, that I might see
How well it would become thee, I do fear
Thou art some Angel, and that sin would be
An argument, to me, that thou wert mortal
I must suspect thy too much goodness else,
And leave thee for the fellowship of Saints,
I am to wicked.
You will make me angry.
But you will love me still, I fear.
D''ee fear it?
is't a misfortune?
What?
My love
Your anger,
And yet the tother often times may carry
An evil with it, we may love to well
And that's a fault
Not where the objects good.
Oyes: Always beware of the extremes.
What mean you? I affect none but my Cosmo,
Nor him with too much flame.
If you should Lady, 'twere
Not nobly done.
To love another?
Yes,
If there be cause, that may be called a virtue:
For what have I to engross the affection
Of any Lady, if she can discern
A greater merit in some other man:
Wisdom forbid, but she command her smiles,
To warm and cherish him.
So we should be inconstant.
Why not, if our reason be
Convinced, that's no such fault as the world goes:
Let us examine all the creatures, read
The book of Nature through, and we shall find
Nothing doth still the same, the stars do wander
And have their divers influence, the Elements
Shuffle into innumerable changes,
Our constitutions vary, Herbs, and Trees
Admit their Frosts and Summer: and why then
Should our desires, that are so nimble, and
More subtle than the spirits in our blood,
Be such stayed things within us, and not share
Their natural liberty, shall we admit a change
In smaller of things, and not allow it in
What most of all concerns us?
What?
Our Loves?
Have you a suspicion I am changed, and thus
Would school me for it, or shall I imagine
That you are altered.
Yes, I am, and therefore
Proclaim thy freedom, I do love thee less,
To show I love thee more.
What riddle's this.
I will explain, upon maturity
Of Council Oriana, I have found
I am not worthy of thee, therefore come
To make thee satisfaction for my sin
Of loving thee, by pointing out a way,
And person, will become thy affection better.
You have a pretty humour.
What dost think
Of brave Pisano, shall his merit plead
Succession in thy chaste thoughts?
I do know him.
Thou canst not choose, and I could study none
Worthy thy love but him.
'tis very likely you would resign then.
I to honour thee,
His service will deserve thee at the best,
And richest value.
Why it shall be so.
Nay but be serious, and declare me happy
That I may say, I have made thee just amends.
I will thank thee.
Why sir I do love him.
Oh when did Cupid aim that golden shaft
But dost thou love him perfectly with a
Desire, when sacred rites of marriage
Are passed, to meet him in thy bed, and call him
Thy husband?
Why sir, did you ever think
I was so taken with your worth, and person,
I could not love another Lord as well?
By your favour, there be many as proper men,
And as deserving, you may save your plea,
And be assured I need no lesson to
Direct my fancy, I did love Pisano,
Before, but for your sake, I mean to place him,
A great deal nearer, sure he does but jest. You did love me.
Now by my heart. I love thee.
This act shall crown our story Oriana,
Thou dost not know how much thou honourest me,
For he's not in the common list of friends,
And he does love thee past imagination
Next his religion, he has placed the thought
Of Oriana, he sleeps nothing else.
And I shall wake him into Heaven, to say
Thou hast consented to be his.
Pray tell me:
But truly I beseech you, do you wish
Pisano mine indeed? are you jealous,
And name him to accuse me?
Not by goodness,
But if there be a charm beyond thy innocence,
By that I would conjure thee Oriana,
Love him and make three happy, it shall be
My bliss to call you his, let me but o wne
A servant in your memory.
Unkind,
And cruel Cosmo, dost thou think it possible,
I can love any but thyself? thou wilt
Undo my heart for ever.
You shall be
Ever most welcome, if I be her Mother,
She must declare obedience, Oriana—
Go cheerfully, thy Mother calls, to him
Whose Orator I have been, alas poor Lady,
I half repent me since she is so constant:
But a friend's life weighs down all other love;
Beside, I thus secure my fate, Lorenzo
Threatens my spring, he is my enemy.
You'll not compel affection?
No, but Court it
With honour, and religion, thus invite it,
I shall forget the nature of a Parent,
Unless you show more softness, and regard
To what is urged, what promise could you make
To Cosmo without me? or if you had—
Here Cosmo' doth give up all title to it,
I have no part in Oriana now:
I've heard too much, do with me what you please
I am all passive, nothing of myself,
But an obedience to unhappiness.
Follow her Pisano.
thouart all friendship.
Trace their warm steps, Virgins resolves are weak.
Leave not her eyes, until you see day break.
ROgero?
My Lord.
Make fast the Chamber-door, stifle the keyhole and the crannies, I must discourse of secret matters, dost thou smell nothing Rogero? ha?
Smell? not any thing my Lord to offend my nostril.
Come hither, what do the people talk abroad of me?
Answer me justly, and to the point what do they say?
Faith my Lord, they say that you are—
They lie, I am not, they are a lousy impudent multitude, a many-headed, and many horned generation, to say that I am—
A noble gentleman, a just and discreet Lord, and one that deserved to have his honours without money.
Oh is that it? I thought the rabble would have said, I had been a Traitor, I am half mad certainly ere since I consented to Lorenzo, 'tis a very hard condition, that a man must lose his head to recompense the procuring of his honours: what if I discover him to the Duke, ten to one, if Lorenzo come but to speak, his grace won't ha' the grace to believe me and then I run the hazard to be thrown out of all at other side: 'tis safest to be a Traitor, hum, who is that you whispered to?
I whisper?
Marry did you sirrah.
Not I good faith my Lord.
Sirrah, sirrah, sirrah, I smell a Rat behind the hangings? Here's nobody, ha? are there no Trunks to convey secret voices?
Your Lordship has a pair on.
I do not like that face i'th' arras, a my conscience he points at me, a pox upon this treason, I have no stomach to't, I do see myself upon a Scaffold, making a pitiful speech already, I shall ha' my head cut off, seven years ago I laid my head upon a wager I remember, and lost it; let me see, it shall be so, 'tis good policy to be armed, Rogero, imagine I were a Traitor.
How sir?
ay but say imagine, we may put the case, and that I were apprehended for a Traitor.
Heaven defend.
Heaven has something else to do, than to defend Traitors:
I say, Imagine I were brought to the bar.
Good my Lord, you brought to the bar?
I will beat you, if you won't imagine at my bidding:
I say, suppose I now were at the bar to answer for my life.
Well sir.
Well sir, that's as it happens, you must imagine I will answer the best I can for myself, conceive I prithee, that these chairs were judges most grave and venerable beards and faces at my arraignment, and that thyself wert in the name of the Duke and state to accuse me what couldst thou say to me?
I accuse your good honour? for what I beseech you?
For high Treason you blockhead.
I must be acquainted with some particulars first.
Mass thou sayest right: why imagine, d''ee hear? you must but imagine, that some great-man had a conspiracy against the Duke's person, and that I being an honest Lord, and one of this great man's friends, had been drawn in, for that's the plain truth on't, 'twas against my will, but that's all one: Well, thou understandest me, show thy wit Rogero, scratch thy nimble pericranium, and thunder out my accusation ex tempore: Here I stand Signior Depazzi, ready to answer the indictment.
Good my Lord it will not become me, being your humble servant.
Humble Coxcomb, is't not for my good? I say, accuse me, bring it home, jerk me soundly to the quick Rogero, tickle me as thou lov'st thy Lord; I do defy thee, spare me not, and the devil take thee if thou be'st not malicious,
Why then have at you, first Signior Depazzi, thou art indicted of high Treason, hold up thy hand, guilty, or not guilty?
Very good.
Nay, very bad sir, answer I say, guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty.
'tis your best course to say so, well imagine I rise up the Duke's most learned in the Laws, and his nimble tongued Orator, have at your Signior.
Come, come on sir, here I stand.
I will prove thou liest in thy throat, if thou deniest thy Treason, and so I address myself to the most understanding seats of Justice, most wise, most honourable, and most incorrupt Judges, sleep not I beseech you, my place hath called me to plead in the behalf of my Prince and Country against this notable, this pernicious, and impudent Traitor, who hath plotted and contrived such high, heinous, and horrible treasons as no Age nor History hath ever mentioned the like. Here he stands, whose birth I will not touch, because it's altogether unknown who begot him: He was brought up among the small wares in the City, became rich by sinister and indirect practises, married a Merchant's wife at adventures, and was soon after advanced to be a Head-officer.
Why you rascal.
Peace sirrah, peace, nay your Lordships shall find him very audacious: This fellow not content to have his branches spread within the City, I speak it to his face, let him deny it, was afterward by the corruption of his confederate, and the mere grace of his highness raised to honour, received infinite favours from his Prince of blessed memory, yet like a wretch, a villain, a viper, a Rat of Nilus, he hath practised Treasons against the sacred person of the Duke, for which he deserveth not only to die, but also to suffer tortures, whips, racks, strappadoes, wheels, and all the fiery brazen bulls that can be invented, as I shall make it appear to this honourable and illustrious Court.
This rogues transported.
With all my heart I obey your Lordships— thus then I pass from these circumstances, and proceed to the principal villainies that we have to lay to his charge. Imprimis thou Signior Depazzi didst offer to a groom a 100 crowns to poison his highness' hunting saddle.
Did I?
Do not interrupt me varlet I will prove it, his hunting saddle, and woe shall be unto thy breech therefore, and finding this serpentine treason broken in the shell, do but lend your reverend ears to his next designs I will cut 'em off presently. This irreligious nay Atheistical Traitor, did with his own hands poison the Duke's prayer book, oh impiety! and had his highness as in former times, he accustomed but prayed once in a month, which by special grace he omitted, how fatal had it been to Florence? but as by justice his excellence did then, and by his own want of devotion, prevent this assassinate's purpose, so we hope in his own discretion, and the council of his state, he will take heed how he prays hereafter while he lives, to which every true subject will say Amen.
May it please your honours—
Thou impudent brazen faced Traitor, wilt thou deny it? more over, and like your good Lordships, he hath for this fortnight or three weeks before his apprehension, walked up and down the Court with a case of pistols charged wherewith, as he partly confessed, he intended to send the Duke to heaven with a powder.
This rogue will undo the Devil at invention, may it please this honourable—
These are but sprinklings of his treason.
Will you justify this? did I any of these things you tadpole?
Hold yourself contented my Lord, he that is brought to the bar in case of treason, must look to have more objected than he can answer, or any man is able to justify.
I confess and please your good Lordships.
Mark, he will confess.
That's the the way to be sent of a headless errand, indeed I confess that I never intended any treason to his highness, nor ever sought the PRINCE's life, true it is, that I heard of a conspiracy.
That that my Lord hath overthrown him, he sayeth he never sought the PRINCE's life, ergo he sought his death, beside he hath heard of treason, now he that heareth and discovereth not is equally guilty in fact: for in offences of this nature there are not accessaries, ergo he is a principal, and being a principal Traitor, he deserveth condemnation.
Shall I not speak?
No, traitors must not be suffered to speak, for when they have leave, they have liberty, and he that is a Traitor deserveth to be close Prisoner.
All that this fellow hath uttered, is false and forged, abominable lies.
I will speak truth, and I will be heard, and no man else in this place.
I never dreamt of a hunting saddle, nor never had so much as a thought of any prayer book.
You sit hear to do justice, I speak for the Duke and the safety of the common wealth.
As for pistols, 'tis well known I could never endure the report one 'em, I defy powder and shot as I do him that accuseth me.
I defy all the world that will hear a Traitor speak, for himself, 'tis against the Law which provides that no man shall defend treason, and he that speaks for himself being a Traitor, doth defend his treason, thou art a Capital obstreperous malefactor.
Thou art a madman:
Go to you have played the fool too much.
Thou continual motion cease, a pox upon thee hold thy tongue.
The pox won't serve your turn.
Why then this shall.
Hold, hold good my Lord, I am sensible, I ha' done, imagine I ha' done, I but obeyed your Lordship, whose baton I find stronger than my imagination, my Lord you will answer this to strike i'th' Court thus?
I Am as weary— hark Rogero one knocks, see, see there's to make thee amends see good
and say nothing pray heaven it be no pursuivant.
Petruchio my Lord, Pisano's Secretary.
But Lorenzo's Engine a very knave,
My very good Lord.
What's here? it can be no goodness:
My very good Lord.
No matter and you were both hanged, Rogero, show him the Wine-cellar: let me see, I must report the Duke's death, I cannot abide this word Death, yet he desires me but to report it, hum, if it be false, why so much the better; there will be the less harm in't, if it should prove true, they will believe me another time: Well I will drink myself half drunk, and be fortified.
Sciarrha, you exceed in entertainment,
Banquet our yes too.
He will feast all Senses.
Only a toy my Lord, I cannot call't,
A mask, not worthy of this presence, yet
It speaks the freedom of my heart, and gratitude
For this great honour.
Amidea must sit near us.
Lords your places, 'twon't be
Worth half this ceremony, let'em begin.
Whose the presenter?
Lust sir, pray observe:
Now let Lust possess the throne
Of Love, and rule in hearts alone:
You sweet tempters to my Sin,
Beauty, smiles, and kisses win
Upon frail mortals, let them know
There is no happiness, but you
Shoot no arrows tipped with lead
Each shaft have his golden head:
Call no Love, delude men still,
Through the flesh, their spirits kill,
Nor spend all your art to take
Common persons, greatness make
By your potent charms to be
Subjects unto hell and me,
Inflame but Kings with loose desire,
Ye soon set all the world on fire.
What's he?
A wild young man that follows lust,
He has too much blood it seems.
Why looks he back?
There is a thing called death that follows him
With a large train of furies, but the Syrens
Of lust make him secure, and now the hag
Embraces him, and circles him with pleasures,
The harpies mean to dance too, hang his conscience
It whines too much.
This is too plain.
He does not tremble yet,
By an by sir you shall see all his tormentors
Join with 'em, there's the sport on't.
methinks they
Should have been first forth' antimasque.
Oh no!
In hell they do not stand upon the method
As we at Court, the ground mask and the glory
Begin the revels, Sister you do ill
To keep the Duke in talk, he cannot see
The devil for you, and the whips: does not
That death's head look most temptingly? the worms
Have kissed the lips off.
How does your highness like this dance?
My eyes so feasted here, I did not mark it,
But I presume 'twas handsome.
Oh the Lethargy
Of Princes! we ha' kept you Sir from bed:
More lights.
Good night to all, to you the best:
Sciarrha bind us ever by performance.
We are all yours.
And Florence thine, once more—
Brightest of Ladies.
You are firm.
Suspect not.
I do not like my brother's Moral Mask,
The Duke himself was personated, I
Wonder it did not startle him.
I hope
Sciarrha does not mean so ill as that
Did promise, he's returned: his looks are full.
Of threatening.
Amidea, go not to bed,
And yet no matter, I can do't alone:
Take both your rest, and in your prayers commend
The Duke to Heaven, 'tis charity; has made
His will already, and bequeathed his body
To you Sister, pity his soul for't, 'tis now
Within few minutes of departing.
How?
Why this way I must help him in his groans
To bring his flesh a-bed.
You won't kill him?
I am not of your mind.
I know you cannot.
You are not studied so perfect in
His destiny I hope; I will endeavour—
To kill your Prince?
What here?
No, in his Chamber.
Shall it be read in Stories of our Florence,
Sciarrha first did stain his family
With such a Treason?
Was he not invited?
Yes, by his lust.
And in your crowned tables,
And Hospitality will you murder him?
Yes, and the reason wherefore he was murdered,
Shall justify the deed to all posterity,
He came to wrong my Sister.
Wanton heat,
Let youthful blood excuse him.
So it must.
Mistake me not, oh think but who he is,
The Duke, that word must needs awake your piety.
How will good men in this remembrance
Abhor your cruelty, that send to hell
One with the weight of all his sins upon him.
It is too late to cool with argument
My incensed blood, will you go dally with him,
And let him board your pinnace: I ha' gone
So far in promise, if you clasp not with him,
It will be dangerous if he outlive
This night.
I ha' thought on't, send him to my bed.
Ha?
Do not question what I purpose, heaven
Witness to my chaste thoughts.
Wot thou trust him?
I will do much sir, to preserve his life,
And your innocence: be not you suspectful
At the worst, you can but respite your revenge.
Dost thou not fear unhappy Luenesse chance,
Or wretched Philomel's dishonour?
No:
Give me his life, and send your wanton to me;
I'll to my Chamber, fear me not Sciarrha,
Have not one thought so bad, I sha' not prosper;
Virgins in heaven will suffer with me.
Trust her?
'tis but deferring of my justice,
She won't kill him sure: draw on her soul
The guilt she hates in mine, if she do yield
To the hot encounter: ha? 'twill be just,
That both their hearts weep blood, to purge their lust.
My poniard?
I've no black intent
To stain't with any blood.
Take it, I know, thou art my virtuous Sister,
It were wickedness to doubt thy purpose
Or the event.
Now leave me.
Thou hast a guard of Angels.
They are coming.
Look, there she is sir, you know how to undress her.
Dearest Sciarrha.
To your recreation, here
I'll obscure myself, Florio? 'tis well.
Lady you know me?
Yes my Prince.
I was so,
Till I saw thee, but I gave up that title,
A conquest to thy beauty, which among
Her other wonders hath created me
A subject and servant, and I shall
Be happier to be received yours by
One of those names then Duke of Tuscany.
Oh take yourself again, use your greatness
To make the hearts of Florence bow to you,
And pay their duties thus.
Rise Amidea,
And since you have given my power back, it will
Become me to command.
And me to obey.
I see thy noble brother hath been faithful
To my desires, he has prepared thee with
A story of my love, which thou rewardst
With too much humbleness: thou hast a quarrel,
And a just one with thy Stars, that did not make thee
A Princess Amidea, yet thouart greater,
Aud borne to justifie unto these times
A Queen of Love, Venus was but thy figure,
And all her graces prophecies of thine,
To make our last age best; I could dwell ever
Here, and imagine I am in a Temple,
To offer on this Altar of thy lip,
Myriads of flaming kisses with a cloud
Of sighs breathed from my heart,
Which by the oblation would increase his stock,
To make my pay eternal.
What mean you?
That question is propounded timely, hadst
Not interrupted me, I should ha' lost
myself upon thy lips, and quite forgot
There is a bliss beyond it, which I came for:
Let others satisfy themselves to read
The wonders in thy face, make proud their eye,
By seeing thine, turn statues at thy voice,
And think they never fix enough to hear thee.
A man half dead with famine, would wish here
To feed on smiles, of which the least hath power
To call an Anchorite from his prayers, tempt Saints
To wish their bodies on, thou dost with ease
Captivate Kings with every beam, and mayst
Lead them like prisoners round about the world,
proud of such golden chains; this were enough,
Had not my Fate provided more, to make me
Believe myself immortal in thy touches,
Come to thy bed, transform me there to happiness;
I'll laugh at all the fables of the gods,
And teach our Poets after I know thee,
To write the true Elysium.
Good my Lord,
I understand you not, and yet I fear
You do not mean well, if you have brought with you
A sinful purpose which I may suspect.
Why Lady, what do yond imagine I
Came hither for?
I know not.
How? is't come to that?
Your brother gave you more.
Desirous of the sport, and brought me hither
Ripe for your dalliance, did you not expect me?
Yes.
And to what other purpose?
To tell you that you are not virtuous.
I'm of your mind.
But I am not so wicked
To be of yours: oh think but who you are,
Your title speaks you nearest heaven, and points
You out a glorious reign among the Angels,
Do not depose yourself of one, and be
Of the other disinherited.
I would
Your brother heard you, prithee do not waste
This tedious divinity, I am
Resolved to grapple with you.
Keep off.
Ha?
Turned Amazon.
Prince, come not to near me.
For by my honour, since you have lost your own,
Although I bow in duty to your person,
I hate your black thoughts, tempt not my just hand
With violent approach, I dare, and will
Do that will grieve you, if you have a soul.
Thou dar'st not kill me.
True, but I dare die.
be thy own murderer?
Rather than you should be my ravisher.
Thou canst not be so merciless, useless sin
To be unchaste, I am thy Prince, I prithee
Throw by that cruel weapon, let our war
De soft embraces, shooting amorous smiles,
Kill and restore each other with a kiss,
I know thou canst not be unkind so long,
Than I command thee.
I must not obey
To be your strumpet, though my hand be unskilful,
I shall soon find my heart.
I'll not believe—
Let this deserve your faith, I dare be just,
This crimson river issuing from my arm.
Hold.
Never, it shall flow, and if this channel
Yield not enough, I'll strike another vein,
And after that another, and not pity
The murmuring stream, till through a prodigal wound
I have drained the fountain: this doth weep for you,
And shall extol my death, if it may teach
You to correct your blood.
There's so much gone
From me I cool apace; this action
Hath shot an ague through me; Amidea,
Pity thyself.
Not, till you swear repentance;
I do not faint yet, 'tis somewhat about,
But I can find a nearer way, this does it.
Contain, I am sorry, sorry from my soul,
Trust me, I do bleed inward, Amidea
Can answer all thy drops: oh pardon me,
Thou faintest already, dost not? I am fearful,
The Phoenix with her wings, when she is dying
Can fan her ashes into another life:
But when they breathe more sweet than all the spice
That helps the other's funeral, returns
To heaven, the world must be eternal looser:
Look to thy wound.
May I believe you sir?
I dare not think awry, again I ask
Forgiveness, in thy innocence I see
My own deformity.
Now a thousand blessings
Reward thy goodness; thou deservest a statue,
A tall one which should reach above the clouds.
Justle the moon, that people afar off
Beholding it, may be invited hither
In hope to climb to heaven by't, but apply
Betimes unto thy wound; Florio assist her.
And now my Lord—
Sciarrah I'll begin to be thy Lord,
I brought intentions of dishonour to thee,
And thy fair sister, but I am reconciled
To virtue, and will study how to satisfy
For you and Florence.
You will be more precious,
Then had you never fallen, I am all joy
in your conversion.
Lorenzo? I think he has not said his prayers yet,
But—
What?
I cannot tell, may be, he does not use it.
How?
My Lord, you now are lovely,
'twere better you'd forget him, he's not right
At heart I fear.
Fear nothing.
To be plain,
You cherish your disease in him, and are
Not safe while he is near you.
Do not envy him.
Then I must tell you sir he is a Traitor,
Within my knowledge hath conspired your death.
With whom?
With me, I should ha' killed you sir
This night, and every minute he expects
To hear you numbered with the dead, I can
Demonstrate this, your pardon, but in truth,
The injuries you meant us were severe,
And he with as much violence did urge 'em
To your destruction, but your piety
Hath charmed my purpose, and I look upon you
With new obedience.
Possible.
we won't shift the scene till you believe it,
Florio, entreat my Lord Lorenzo hither,
Step but but behind the arras, and your ear
Shall tell you who's the greatest Traitor living,
Observe but when I tell him, you are slain,
How he'll rejoice, and call me Florence great
Preserver, bless my arm that in your blood,
Hath given our groaning state a liberty:
Then trust Sciarrha, but observe, I here 'em
Whom talked he too?
'tis done—
What good Sciarrha?
The Duke is dead.
we are not left so miserable,
Heaven is more kind to Florence.
With this hand
I made a passage for his soul.
Defend
Omnipotence, what murdered? and by noble
Sciarrha? how my ear abuses me!
Did not we plot it too?
How we? collect,
I fear you are not well: pray tell me why
You talk thus? where's the Duke? he hath a guard,
An army of heaven about him; who in Florence,
Dares be so black a devil to attempt
His death.
This is fine cunning, why that devil is
Lorenzo, if he dares deny it, we are in private,
You need appear no stranger to that's done
By your direction.
I in the practice?
Then let me creep into the earth, and rise
A monster to affright mankind, Sciarrha,
I must abhor thee for it, oh my Prince!
My dearest kinsman, may thy hand rot off,
Treason, treason.
Then my sword shall fetch
another witness in thy heart
Hold.
Tush, let him come,
My royal Lord, nay, let him kill me now,
I've so much joy and peace about me, 'twere
A sin to wish my life beyond this minute.
Put up I say.
My Lord, we are both cozened:
That very smile's a Traitor.
Come, be calm:
You are too passionate Sciarrha, and
Mistook Lorenzo.
But I hold him noble:
I see he made this trial of my faith,
And I forgive him.
Ye shall be friends, you shall I say.
The Duke—
Where's the Duke?
My Lord, we are blessed to see you safe, report
Hath frighted all the City with your death:
People forsake their beds, and seeking how
To be informed, increase the wretched tumult.
There's nothing but confusion: all men tremble
As if some general fire invaded Florence.
Have comfort sir.
What's to be done?
Depazzi has remembered,
My Lord there is no safety for the State,
Unless you personally appease 'em.
How?
I hope they'll tear him, would he were dead any way.
He hath counselled well.
Your presence only hath the power to charm 'em.
I fear their rage: where is our Guard?
Alonzo, haste afore, proclaim our pardon,
And that we live to give the offender's mercy.
Why are we borne to greatness, mocked with State,
When every tumult staggers our proud fate?
Our quarrel is deferred Sir.
MY plots thrive not, my Engines all deceive me;
And in the very point of their discharge
Recoil with danger to myself: are there
No faithful villains left in nature? all
Turned honest? man nor spirit aid Lorenzo,
Who hath not patience to expect his fate:
But must compel it? how Sciarrha played
The dog-bolt wi''me, and had not I provided
in wisdom for him, that distress had ruined me,
His frozen Sister Amidea too
Hath half converted him; but I must set
New wheels in motion, to make him yet
More hateful, and then cut him from his stalk,
Ripe for my vengeance: I'll not trust the rabble
Confusion on the giddy multitude,
That but two minutes ere the Duke came at'em,
Bellowed out liberty, shook the City with
Their throats, no sooner saw him but they melted
With the hot apprehension of a gallows:
And when a pardon was proclaimed, (a fine
State-snaffle for such Mules) they turned their cry
To acclamations, and deafed Heaven to beg
His long and prosperous reign, a sudden rot
Consume this base herd, and the devil want,
Any Cattle for his own teeth, these are for him.
Sciarrha, my Lord desires to speak with you.
Sciarrha, come near— you understand, admit him.
Welcome my noble Lord,
You were not wont to visit me.
Nor mean ever to do't again.
You bring frowns,
I can be sullen too: what is your pleasure?
You have abused me.
You have injured me.
in what?
Betrayed me basely to the Duke.
You denied then, you were a Traitor.
Yes, I was no fool to run my neck upon
The Axe, and give you such a cause of triumph,
Were it again in question—
Y'are a villain sir.
And I must have it certified under your own hand
To show the Duke.
You shall be humbled to
Confess the contrary, nay subscribe
That I am honest, and desire my pardon;
Look, I have a sword, and arm, and vigour
Dare fight with thee, didst ride upon a whirlwind,
Provoke me on a rock, in waves, in fire?
And kill thee without scruple, such a strength
Is innocence.
Innocence? dost not fear a thunderbolt?
I shall be charitable to the world, and I
Cut thee in pieces; and yet then I fear
Thou wilt come together again: the devil does
Acknowledge thee on earth the greater mischief,
And has a fear when thou art dead, he sha'not
Be safe in hell: thou wot conspire with some
Of his black fiends, and get his kingdom from him:
Didst not thou rail upon the Duke?
I grant it.
Call him a Tyrant?
More I do confess,
I did exasperate you, to kill or murder him;
Give it what name you please, with joy I brought him
Under the colour of your guest, to be
The common sacrifice: all this I remember;
But is heaven's stock of mercy spent already,
That sins though great and horrid, may not be
Forgiven, to the heart that groans with penitence?
Are the eternal fountains quite sealed up?
I was a Villain, Traitor, Murderer,
In my consenting to his death, but hope
Those stains are now washed off.
Hast thou repented?
Trust me, I have.
The devil is turned religious, augment not thy damnation.
As he was
A lustful Duke, a Tyrant, I had lost him
In his return to piety: he commanded
My prayers, and fresh obedience to wait on him;
he's now my Prince again.
This is but cunning to save your life.
My life? within there, ha? welcome.
My gracious Lord.
willt please your honour
Command my service?
Or me?
Or any?
Our swords and lives are yours.
Perhaps your Lordship hath some business
With these Gentlemen, I'll take some other time.
By no means good Sciarrha:
You visit seldom, those are daily with me,
Men that expect employment, that wear swords,
And carry spirits, both to be engaged,
If I but name a cause: Gentlemen, draw.
My providence has betrayed me.
Now Sciarrha, you that with single valour dare come home
To affront me thus; know; but too late, thy heart
Is at the mercy of my breath: these swords
Can fetch it when I please, and to prevent
Your boast of this great daring: I beseech
As you do love and honour your Lorenzo,
No hand advance a weapon, sheath again,
And leave us; I owe service to your loves;
But must not so dishonour you.
We obey.
They're gone: this is some nobleness.
You see
I do not fear your sword; alone I have
Too much advantage, yet you may imagine
How easily I could correct this rashness:
But in my fear to offend gracious Heaven
With a new crime, having so late obtained
My peace, I give you freedom.
Do I dream?
Pray chide me still, I will be patient
To hear my shame.
Is this to be believed?
Doth not Lorenzo counterfeit this virtue?
He does? it is impossible he should repent.
Why tell me Sciarrha, and let us argue a while
In cooler blood; did not you once resolve
To kill the Duke too?
I confess—
To give him death with your own hand?
Methinks it should be the same parricide
In you, if not a greater; yet you change
Your purpose, why did you not go through
And murder him?
He was converted.
Good, that taught you mercy, & perhaps repentance
For your intent.
It did.
Why should not sir
The same conversion of the Duke possess
My heart, with as much piety to him
And sorrow for myself? if I should say
You are but cunning, is this shape of honesty,
And still suspect your soul to be a Traitor?
Might you not blame my want of charity?
He says but right, we are
Both men, frail things: 'tis not impossible.
I am reconciled to heaven already, and the Duke, if you
Be still unsatisfied, I am ready sin.
The circumstance considered, I incline
To think this may be honest.
Come Sciarrha,
We are both hasty: pardon my rash language
In the beginning, I will study service
Shall make you love me: I ha' been too wicked,
Too full of passion, inexorable:
My nature is corrected, at this minute:
I'm friends with all the world, but in your love
Shall number many blessing.
I am converted.
What's the news?
My Lord Depazzi prays some conference
In the next chamber we arrived by chance
Together at your gate: I do not like his talk sir.
Hang him property, let him
Expect, thou art come i'the opportunity:
I could have wished, be wise and second me.
He waits upon Pisano,
Whose health I may inquire, I ha' not seen him
Since he departed sick, a fit occasion.
Married to Oriana: thou mistak'st,
'tis Amidea, Lord Sciarrha's sister.
That contract's broken, and the old Lady
Morrossa is violent to have the marriage
Finished with her daughter.
Sciarrha,
is't true Pisano marries Oriana
The rich Morassa's daughter.
Ha?
we did expect to hear your sister should
Have been his bride: has he forsaken Amidea?
Do not you serve Pisano?
Yes my Lord.
And dare you talk he's to be married
To Oriana?
If they live till tomorrow:
there's great provision to my knowledge and—
Take that, & learn to speak a truth hereafter.
That blow shall cost his life,
It is not possible he dares affront
You thus; the world takes notice of a contract,
he's much to blame if he should wrong so sweet
A Lady as Amidea, now by Hymen.
'tis not so honourable he need not scorn,
Such an alliance.
I am not to give
Account for my Lords actions, let him answer
And justify his honour: but my Lord
Since I am provoked, I must declare he has
Called back his vows to Amidea, given
Her freedom, and does mean to use his own,
And this he dares publish.
What, disclaimed a Lady of her birth and glorious merit?
thouart a villain,
My Lord he is not worth your anger, he
Declares but what his master hath committed,
'tis none of his fault.
It becomes my duty
To take correction my Lord, from you,
I am a servant, a poor gentleman.
Shall I suspect the circumstance at his departure?
It is strange you knew not this before.
I must examine if he dares—
Be patient.
Teach fools and children patience,
The dogs eat up Sciarrha; let me live
The prodigy of sorrow, die a death
That may draw tears from Scythians, if Pisano
Lead o'er his threshold, any soon won dame
To be my sister's shame: I am calm now;
One false, heaven why should thy altars save?
'tis just that Hymen light him to his grave.
A thousand furies swell his rage, although
Pisano bleed, this is the safest killing;
Wisemen secure their fates and execute
Invisibly, like that most subtle flame
That burns the heart, yet leaves no path or touch
Upon the skin to follow or suspect it:
Farewell dull passionate fool, how this doth feed me?
Kill and be lost thyself; or if his sword
Conclude thy life both ways I am revenged.
Petruchio, thou didst hit my instructions rarely,
And I applaud thee': now send in Depazzi, and visit me anon.
I shall my Lord.
Some Politician
That is not wise, but by a precedent,
Would think me weak for using such an instrument,
As this Depazzi; but I know by proof,
Such men whom fear and honour make our creatures,
Do prove safe Engines, fools will still obey,
When cunning knaves our confidence betray.
My Lord, I would speak a word or two in private.
You may.
Is nobody within hearing? all clear behind the arras?
Make no doubt sir.
My Lord the truth is, I am very fearful: is your Lordship sure there are no eaves droppers.
What needs this circumstance? I pray come to the point.
'tis not unknown to your Lordship, that you have been my very good Lord, neither am I ignorant, that I am your humble servant, you advanced men, brought me into the number of the nobles, and I brought you a reasonable number of crowns: I am not the first wise Citizen that hath been converted into a foolish Courtier, but my Lord, I beseech you pardon me: it will out.
What's the matter?
I am ready to burst.
With what?
Treason, treason, now 'tis out, and I feel my body the lighter for't already: the last plot did not take you see, and I would humbly entreat your Lordship to excuse me, and get somebody else hereafter to be your Traitor in my stead.
How sir?
If you did but know the tenderness of my constitution, or feel the pangs and convulsions that I suffer, you would pity me: I fall away you see, I cannot sleep for dreaming of an axe, I have caused, my hangings of Holofernes to be taken down in my dining room, because I dare not look upon a head that is cut off in it, something of my complexion: my wisdom tells me I am a fool to be so fearful, but my conscience tells me I am a greater fool if I ha' not wit enough in my pare to keep my head on my shoulders, I beseech your Lordship take me into your consideration, I am but a mortal, though I be a Lord, every man hath not the like gift of impudence, I have a weak stomach, and treason is physic to me, and although I do not vomit up your secrets they may out some other way.
You won't betray me.
But alas in such a case I may soon bewray myself, and then your Lordship may soon be smelled out: to prevent therefore some mischief that may happen, I desire to leave off while I am well, end that your Lordship may know I mean plainly: I ha' brought you all your letters, I durst not trust any other place with 'em for fear of state rats, I have unripped my bosom to you, and there they are to a title— now I may safely swear I have no hand with your Lordship.
This is very strange.
Mistake not my good Lord, I am still your creature, but I have a great mind to be honest a little while, among the weaker sort of nobility: yet thus much persuade yourself, I will ne'er wrong your Lordship in a syllable, should you tell me of a thousand treasons, and stratagems, I will never reveal any, I scorn that, but your Lordship must pardon me, I will be a Traitor no longer, that's certain, I will be honest, and the rather because nobody shall hit me in the teeth after I am dead, and say look were Depazzi carries his head very high, and my Lord the more to induce your Lordship to dismiss me— Rogero.
My Lord.
Give me the gold, I have brought 1500 crowns more.
Wherefore?
That I may have my Lordship's good will, to leave my office before it be taken from me, and preferred to a worse, 'tis half the price I paid for't, I love peace and a little honesty, I know your honour will find an able man for it, and it is fit I should pay for my quietus.
And what do you resolve?
To return to the dunghill from whence I came, for though I was borne in the City, I have some land in the country dirty acres, and Mansion house, where I will be the miracle of a courtier, and keep good hospitality, love my neighbours, and their wives, and consequently get their children, be admired amongst the Justices, sleep upon every bench, keep a Chaplain in my own house to be my idolater, and furnish me with jests; and when I have nothing else to do, I will think of the court, and how much I have been obliged to your Lordship: my Lord I may do you service with a leading voice in the country, the kennel will cry a my side if it come to election, you or your friend shall carry it, against the Common wealth.
Well sir, since you have expressed yourself so freely, I will not council you against your disposition to stay at court, you may go when, and whither you please; and though at parting I have nothing worth your acceptation, I will bestow these Crowns upon your servant.
Thou shalt give 'em me again.
Indeed my Lord I love a little honesty, 'tis his Lordship's bounty, it will be a stock to set me up, for myself at Court, when your Lordship is retired into the Country, I humbly thank your Lordship: and take my leave of yours.
The Duke my Lord.
How the Duke?
Signior Depazzi.
He has been earnest with me, and please your highness
To be his humble suitor, he may have
Freedom to leave the Court.
He shall be banished
How?
What time will your grace allow to provide?
Two hours.
I had rather lose my head at home, and save charges
Of travail, I beseech your grace.
Well 'tis granted, let him not trouble us.
Enjoy the country, and return when the Duke sends for you.
I humbly thank his highness, and will pray for your increase of grace.
Lorenzo, are we private?
Yes my Lord.
I am very melancholy.
I know the cause, 'tis Amidea.
Right.
I do not wish her dead.
It were a sin.
Not in heaven sir, yet
There be Ladies, that would think it a promotion.
It were pity she should leave
The world, till she hath taught by her example
The nearest way
I am very confident she's yet honest.
Yet Lorenzo?
ay sir, but I'm not of opinion it is
Impossible to know a change.
Take heed.
I must confess she has been very valiant,
In making you remove your siege, and showed
Pretty dexterity at the poniard,
See herself bleed: but this a mortal Virgin
Might do, and not be adored for't: other women
Have gone as far, or else false Legends have
Been thrust upon the easy world: some say
There have been creatures that have killed themselves,
To save their sullen chastities; but I
Have no strong faith that way, yet you were startled
To see her strike her arm, and grew compassionate.
I was not Marble, we break Adamant
With blood, and could I be a man, and not
Be moved to see that hasty ebb be of life
For my sake?
I have read some aged Stories:
What think you of Lucrece? she is remembered.
Chastities great example.
How the world
Was cozened in her? she knew of Tarquin first,
And then suspecting she should never meet
Again the active Gentleman, having
Determined of his death, with well dissembled
Sorrow did stab herself, in hope to meet
The gamester in Elysium, Amidea,
You will allow beneath this Roman Dame.
Lorenzo had the burning ravisher,
Made this attempt on Amidea, she
Would have compelled his penitence, to quench
His fire with holy tears. I had a body
Refined to air, or I was borne up by
A thousand wings: methought I could have flown
And kissed the cheek of Cynthia, thence with ease
Have leapt to Venus' Star, but I was wounded,
And the gay feathers, in whose pride I had
My confidence, served now but with their weight
To hasten me to earth.
Ascend again,
And fix in your loved orb, he brings this comfort
That can assure it, if you have not lost
A heart to entertain with love and pleasure
The beauteous Amidea.
Ha?
You shall enjoy her.
Enjoy fair Amidea? do not tempt,
Or rather mock my frailty with such a promise.
Shake off your melancholy slumber, I
Have here decreed you shall possess her: she
Be sent submissive to your arms, and you
Be gracious to accept what she made coy of.
Is this in nature?
Thus: Sciarrha's life
And fortunes are already growing forfeit
These brains have plotted so: your mercy shall
Purchase what you can wish, for, in his Sister
And he acknowledge rifling of her honour,
A fair and cheap redemption.
Do this,
And I'll repent the folly of my penitence,
And take thee to my soul, a nearer pledge
Than blood or nature gave me: I'm renewed,
I feel my natural warmth return, when, where,
Is this to be expected? I grow old,
While our embraces are deferred.
I go, to hasten your delight, prepare your blood
For amorous game: Sciarrha's fate is cast
Firmer than destiny.
Thou art my Prophet, I'll raise thee up an Altar.
Trust these brains.
Thou mak'st my spirit caper in my veins.
This way they pass.
I would not see 'em.
Why?
What melancholy o'the sudden? it is now past cure.
I know it is, and therefore do not
Desire to witness their solemnity, should Oriana
See me today.
What then?
The object
I Fear would be too prodigious.
We dispute not those nice formalities.
She has spied you already.
I am sorry for't.
How is't my child?
My dearest Oriana,
She faints, what grief is so unmannerly
To interrupt thee now Oriana?
Daughter!
Will Heaven divorce us ere the Priest have made
Our Marriage perfect? we in vain hereafter
Shall hear him teach, that our Religion binds
To have the church's ceremony, she returns.
Why were you so unkind to call me from
A pleasing slumber? Death has a fine dwelling.
This shows her heart's not yet consenting, 'tis
Her Mother's fierce command.
Something spoke to me from that window.
There is nothing.
Nothing now.
Set forward.
I do not like this interruption: 'tis
Ominous.
Not for my sake, but for your own, go back,
Or take some other way, this leads to death
My brother.
What of him?
Transported with
The fury of revenge for my dishonour,
As he conceives; for 'tis against my will:
Hath vowed to kill you in your Nuptial glory.
Alas I fear his haste, now good my Lord,
Have mercy on yourself, I do not beg
Your pity upon me, I know too well
You cannot love me now, nor would I rob
This Virgin of your faith, since you have pleased
To throw me from your love: I do not ask
One smile, nor one poor kiss, every this maid
Created for those blessings: but again,
I would beseech you, cherish your own life,
Though I be lost forever.
It is worth
Your care my Lord, if there be any danger.
Alas her grief hath made her wild poor Lady:
I should not love Oriana to go back,
Set forward, Amidea, you may live
To be a happier Bride: Sciarrha is not
So irreligious to profane these rites.
Will you not then believe me? pray persuade him,
You are his friends. Lady, it will concern
You most of all indeed: fear you'll weep
To see him dead as well as J.
No more,
Go forward.
I have done, pray be not angry,
That still I wish you well, may heaven divert
All harms that threaten you, full blessings crown
Your Marriage: I hope there is no sin in this;
indeed I cannot choose but pray for you,
This might have been my wedding-day.
Good Heaven
I would it were, my heart can tell, I take
No joy in being his bride, none in your prayers,
You shall have my consent to have him still:
I will resign my place, and wait on you,
if you will marry him.
Pray do not mock me,
But if you do, I can forgive you too.
Dear Amidea, do not think I mock
Your sorrow; by these tears that are not worn
By every Virgin on her wedding day;
I am compelled to give away myself:
Your hearts were promised, but he ne'er had mine:
Am not I wretched too?
Alas poor Maid,
We two keep sorrow alive then, but I prithee
When thou art married, love him, prithee love him;
For he esteems thee well, and once a day
Give him a kiss for me, but do not tell him,
'twas my desire, perhaps 'twill fetch a sigh
From him, and I had rather break my heart,
But one word more, and heaven be with you all,
Since you have led the way, I hope my Lord
That I am free to marry too.
Thou art.
Let me beseech you then, to be so kind
After your own solemnities are done,
To grace my wedding, I shall be married shortly.
To whom?
To one whom you have all heard talk of,
Your fathers knew him well: one, who will never
Give cause I should suspect him to forsake me,
A constant lover, one whose lips though cold
Distil chaste kisses, though our bridal bed
Be not adorned with roses, 'twill be green,
We shall have Virgin Laurel Cypress, Ewe,
To make us garlands, though no Pine do burn,
Our nuptial shall have torches, and our chamber
Shall be cut out of marble, where we'll sleep
Free from all care for ever: death my Lord
I hope shall be my husband, now farewell,
Although no kiss, accept my parting tear,
And give me leave to wear my willow here.
Sciarrha! then I prophesy—
Pisano, where's Pisano?
Here, Sciarrha.
I should have answerd with lesse elmor.
But I would not lose my voice, I must be heard,
And does concern you, I profess no Augury,
I have not quartered out the heavens, to take
The flight of birds, nor by inspection
Of entrails made a divination.
But I must tell you, 'tis not safe to marry.
Why?
'twill be fatal, Hymen is gone abroad,
And Venus, Lady of your nativity,
Is found by wise Astrologers this day
I'th' house of death.
This must not fright me sir, set forward.
One cold word you are a villain,
I do not flatter.
I am patient:
This day I consecrate to love, not anger;
we'll meet some other time.
Deride my fury?
Then to thy heart I send my own revenge
And Amidea's.
I am murdered.
Help, murder gentlemen, oh my unhappiness!
Bloody Sciarrha.
Hold.
Come all at once,
Yet let me tell you, my revenge is perfect,
And I would spare your blood, if you despise
My charity—
No man attempt his death,
I'll give yea reasons, this attempt deserves
An exemplary justice.
I am above
Your politic reach, and glory in the wound
That punished our dishonour: is he dead?
I would not be so miserable, not to ha' sped him
For the Empire.
Oh my friend, poor Oriana.
Disarm him:
Return and comfort one another, some
Remove Pisano's body, while I make it
My care Sciarrha scape not.
None of all give me a scratch?
You have forced him with discretion.
Now what must I expect?
You are my prisoner.
I am so.
And be confident to find that favour.
Favour.
Be at distance, more
My Lord, I am sorry for your great misfortune
And if you can but study how I may
Assist you, you shall soon discern my love
My readiness to serve you.
Ha, this honest?
I would deserve your faith,
A friend but in affliction justify
His heart and honour, I durst run some hazard,
Might I secure your fate, name something to me
That may declare my friendship.
Be still safe,
And teach the world repentance, for mistaking thee
I pity not myself, but envy thy Heroic honours.
I will impose no more
Restraint, than your own house, you're honourable:
You have many severe enemies, the Duke
Looked graciously upon Pisano, but—.
You sha'not lose the smallest beam of favour,
To buy a man so desperate, I never
Thought death the monster, that weak men have fancied,
As foil to make us more in love with life,
The devil's picture may affright poor fowls
Into their Body's paleness, but the substance
Too resolute: man's a shadow, and cold sweat
Dare not approach his forehead, I am armed
To die, and give example of that fortitude
Shall shame the law's severity: my sister
May now give back Pisano his false vows,
To line his coffin, one tear shed on me's
Enough, the justice I ha' done, shall make
My memory beloved.
I ha' thought a way.
To recover you, if you incline to't,
Dare you consent?
To any thing that's noble,
Although I never feared to suffer; I
Am not so foolish to despise a life.
There is no difficulty attends it, listen,
The time will not permit much circumstance:
The Duke you know did love your sister.
Viciously.
Her Virtue did but cool him for the present,
As sprinklings on a flame, he's now more passionate
To enjoy her.
Ha?
If she consent to meet
His soft embrace, with his first kiss, he seals
Your pardon, than the act upon Pisano
Appears a true revenge, when none dares question it:
Beside addition of state and fortune,
To you and Amidea, weigh your danger,
And what a trifle she gives up, to save
Your life, that never can be valued,
Less recompensed; the Duke may be so taken
With her return to his delight, who knows
But he may marry her, and discharge his Duchess
With a quaint salad, you do apprehend me.
And repent more, I had one good thought of thee,
Than I had killed a thousand: save my life
And prostitute my sister, though I have
No weapon, I will look thee dead, or breathe
A damp shall stifle thee, that I could vomit
Consuming flames, or stones like Aetna, make
The earth with motion of my feet shrink lower,
And take thee in alive, oh that my voice
Could call a Serpent from corrupted Nile,
To make thee part of her accursed bowels,
Is this noble friendship? readiness
To save my life? let malice read all stories
Famous for cruelty, awake dead Tyrants,
Or be instructed by their ghosts with tortures,
Such as will make a damned fury weep
Only to see inflicted, I would bear'em,
And weary my tormentors, ere consent
In thought to thy temptation.
I ha' done,
And praise your heathen resolution
Of death, go practice immortality,
And tell us when you can get leave to visit
This world again, what fine things you enjoy
In hell, for thither these rash passions drive thee,
And ere thy body hath three days inhabited,
A melancholy chamber in the earth,
Hung round about with skulls and dead men's bones,
Ere Amidea have told all her tears
Upon thy Marble, or the Epitaph
Belie thy soul, by saying it is fled
To Heaven: this Sister shall be ravished,
Maugre thy dust and Heraldry.
Ha, ravished?
When I am dead, was't not so? oh my soul,
I feel it weep within me, and the tears
Soften my flesh: Lorenzo, I repent my fury.
I advised you the best way my wisdom could direct.
I thank you for't,
You have awaked my reason, I am ashamed
I was no sooner sensible: does the Duke
Affect my Sister still say you?
Most passionately.
She shall obey him then, upon my life:
That's it, my life; I know she loves me dearly.
I shall have much ado to win her to't,
But she shall come, I'll send her.
Perform this?
I won't only send her, but prepared
Not to be disobedient to his Highness:
He shall command her any thing.
Do this,
And be for ever happy, when these have
Only for form but waited on you home:
This disengages'em.
My humblest service
To the Duke I pray, and tell him, Amidea
This night shall be at his dispose, by this.
I'm confident, farewell; attend Sciarrha.
Pity the Seaman, that to avoid a shelf,
Must strike upon a rock to save himself.
THe doors are fast,
Enough is wept already for Pisano:
There's something else that must be thought on, and
Of greater consequence: I am yet unsafe,
That for thy sake am guilty of his blood.
Though all my stock of tears were spent already
Upon Pisano's loss, and that my brain
Were bankrupt of moisture, and denied
To lend my grief one drop more for his Funeral;
Yet the remembrance that you have made
A forfeit of your dear life
Is able to create a weeping spring
Within my barren head: oh my lost brother,
Thou hast a cruel destiny, my eyes
In pity of thy fate desire to drown thee.
The Law will only seek thee upon land,
Hid in my tears, thou shalt prevent the stroke
Kills both our name and thee.
I know thou lov'st me
Poor Girl. I shall desire to cherish life
if thou lament me thus: so rich a comfort
Will tempt me, wish I might delay my journey
To Heaven.
Good Heaven that we might go together.
That must not be.
Then let me go before.
How?
Make my suit unto the Prince, my blood
May be your ransom; let me die, Sciarrha
My life is fruitless unto all the world,
The Duke in justice will not deny this:
And though I weep in telling thee, I shall
Smile on the Scaffold.
How my Honour blushes
To hear thee Amidea? in this love
Thou woundst me more, than thou desir'st to save:
Suffer for me? why thou art innocent:
I have provoked the punishment, and dare
Obey it manly; if thou couldst redeem me
With any thing but death, I think I should
Consent to live, but I'd not have thee venture
All at one chance.
Nothing can be too precious
To save a brother, such a loving brother
As you have been.
Death's a devouring gamester,
And sweeps up all: what thinkst thou of an eye?
Couldst thou spare one, and think the blemish recompensed,
To see me safe with tother; or a hand,
This white hand, that hath so often
With admiration trembled on the Lute,
Till we have prayed thee leave the strings awhile,
And laid our ears close to thy Ivory fingers,
Suspecting all the Harmony proceeded
From their own motion, without the need
Of any dull or passive instrument.
No Amidea, shalt not bear one scar
To buy my life: the sickle shall not touch
A flower that grows so fair upon his stalk:
Thy other hand will miss a white companion,
And wither on thy arm; what then can I
Expect from thee to save me? I would live
And owe my life to thee, so 'twere not bought
Too dear.
Do you believe I should not find
The way to Heaven: were both mine eyes thy ransom,
I shall climb up those high and rugged cliffs
Without a hand.
One way there is, if thou
Dost love with that tenderness.
Pronounce it,
And let no danger that attends, incline you
To make a pause.
The Duke thou know'st did love thee.
Hi?
Nay do not start already, nor mistake me;
I do not as before, make trial of thee,
Whether thou canst, laying aside thy honour,
Meet his lascivious arms but by this virtue
I must beseech thee to for go it all,
And turn a sinful woman.
Bless me!
I know the kingdoms of the world contain not
Riches enough to tempt thee to a fall
That will so much undo thee: but I am
Thy brother, dying brother; if thou lov'st
Him therefore, that for thee hath done so much;
Died his pale hands in blood to revenge thee,
And in that murder wounded his own soul
Almost to death, consent to lose thy innocence:
I know it makes thee grieve, but I shall live
To love thee better for it: we'll repent
Together for our sins, and pray and weep
Till Heaven hath pardoned all.
Oh never, never.
Do but repeat thy words, to save my life,
And that will teach compassion: my life,
Our shame, the stain of all our family,
Which will succeed in my ignoble death,
Thou washest off.
But stain myself for ever.
Where? in thy face, who shall behold one blemish,
Or one not more in thy whole frame, thy beauty
Will be the very same, thy speech, thy person
Wear no deformity.
Oh do not speak
So like a rebel to all modesty,
To all Religion, if these arguments
Spring from your jealousy that I am fall'n,
After a proof you did so late applaud.
I had not killed Pisano then: I am now
More spotted than the Marble, than my head
Did owe no forfeiture to Law:
It does ache now, than I but tried thy virtue.
Now my condition calls for mercy to thee,
Though to thyself thou appear cruel for't:
Come we may live both if you please.
I must never
Buy my poor breath at such a rate, who has
Made you afraid to die: I pity you,
And wish myself in any noble cause
Your Leader, when our souls shall leave this dwelling,
The glory of one fair, and virtuous action
Is above all the scutcheons on our tomb,
Or silken banners over us.
So valiant,
I will not interpose another syllable
To entreat your pity say your prayers, and then
thou'rt ripe to be translated from the earth,
To make a cherubin.
What means my brother?
To kill you.
Do not fright me good Sciarrha.
And I allow three minutes for your devotion.
Will you murder me?
D''ee tremble?
Not at the terror of your sword,
But at the horror will affright thy soul,
For this black deed: I see Pisano's blood
Is texted in thy forehead, and thy hands
Retain too many, too many crimson spots already
Make not thyself, by furthering of thy sister
All a red letter,
You shall be the martyr.
Yet stay, is there no remedy but death,
And from your hand? then keep your word, & let me
Use one short prayer.
I shall relent.
Forgive me heaven, and, witness I have still
My Virgin thoughts, 'tis not to save my life,
But his eternal one.
Sciarrha give me leave to veil my face,
I dare not look upon you and pronounce,
I am too much a sister, live, hereafter
I know you will condemn my frailty for it.
I will obey the Duke.
dar'st thou consent.
Oh let me see the wound
'tis well, if any other hand had done it:
Some Angel tell my brother now, I did
But seem consenting.
Ha but seem?
You may believe my last breath.
Why didst say so?
To gain some time, in hope you might call in
Your bloody purpose, and prevent the guilt
Of being my murderer; but Heaven forgive thee.
Again, again, forgive me Amidea,
And pray for me, live but a little longer,
To hear me speak, my passion hath betrayed
Thee to this wound, for which I know not whether
I should rejoice, or weep, since thou art virtuous:
The Duke, whose soul is black again, expects thee
To be his whore: good Death be not so hasty.
The Agent for his lust, Lorenzo, has
My Oath to send thee to his bed: for otherwise
In my denial, hell; and they decree
When I am dead, to ravish thee: mark that,
To ravish thee: and I confess in tears,
As full of sorrow, as thy soul of innocence,
In my religious care to have thee spotless,
I did resolve, when I had found thee ripe,
And nearest Heaven, with all thy best desires
To send thee to thy peace: thy faind consent
Hath brought thy happiness more early to thee,
And saved some guilt, forgive me altogether.
With the same heart I beg Heaven for myself,
Farewell.
Thou shalt not die yet Amidea Sister.
I cannot come:
But one word more: oh which way went thy soul?
Or is it gone so far it cannot hear me?
Look, here's our Sister! so, so, chafe her:
She may return; there is some motion.
Sister?
Speak aloud Florio, if her spirit be not
Departed, I will seal this passage up:
I feel her breath again, here's Florio
Would fain take his leave; so, so, she comes.
Amidea, how came this wound?
I drew the weapon to it:
Heaven knows my brother loved me: now I hope
The Duke won't pursue me with new flames.
Sciarrha, tell the rest, love one another
The time you live together: I'll pray for you
In Heaven, farewell, kiss me when I am dead;
You else will stay my journey.
Didst not hear
An Angel call her? Florio, I have much
To tell thee, take her up; stay I will talk
A little more with her, she is not dead,
Let her alone; nay then she's gone indeed.
But hereabouts her soul must hover still:
let's speak to that, fair Spirit.
You talk idly.
Do you talk wisely then? an excellent pattern
As she now stands for her own Alabaster:
Or may she not be kept from putrefaction,
And be the very figure on her Tomb:
Cannot thy tears and mine preserve her Florio?
If we want brine, a thousand Virgins shall
Weep every day upon her, and themselves
In Winter, leaning round about her Monument,
Being moist creatures, stiffen with the cold,
And freeze into so many white supporters.
But we lose time, I charge thee by thy lo
To this pale Relic, be instructed by me,
Not to thy danger; some revenge must be,
And I am lost already; if thou fall,
Who shall survive to give us Funeral?
Petruchio?
My Lord.
thouart now my servant.
I ever was in heart your humblest vassal.
thouart faithful, I must cherish thy desert,
I shortly shall reward it, very shortly;
Next morning must salute me Duke; the Sun
And I must rise together.
I shall pray
Your glory may outshine him in your Florence,
Apd when he sets, we may enjoy your Sun-beame.
'tis handsome flattery, and becomes a Courtier.
I flatter not my Lord.
Then thouart a fool:
No Music to a Great man chimes so sweetly:
And men must thrive, come hither, how many
Hast thou killed?
But one my Lord.
But one?
And I must owe
My life to your Lordship, I had been hanged else.
But one? wait at the door, he is
Not fit to kill a Duke, whose hand is guilty
But of a single murder; or at least
Not fit alone to act it: I ha' been
Practised already, and though no man see't,
Nor scarce the eye of Heaven, yet every day
I kill a Prince, appear thou Tragic witness.
Which though it bleed not, I may boast a Murder:
Here first the Duke was painted to the life:
But with this Pencil to the death: I love
My brain for the invention, and thus
Confirmed, dare trust my resolution.
I did suspect his youth, and beauty might
Win some compassion when I came to kill him:
Or the remembrance that he is my Kinsman,
Might thrill my blood: or something in his Title,
Might give my hand repulse, and startle Nature:
But thus I have armed myself against all pity,
That when I come to strike, my poniard may
Through all his charms as confidently wound him,
As thus I stab his Picture, and stare on it.
methinks the Duke should feel me now: is not
His soul acquainted; can he less than tremble
When I lift up my arm to wound his counterfeit?
Witches can persecute the lives of whom
They hate, when they torment their senseless figures,
And stick the waxen model full of pins.
Can any stroke of mine carry less spell
To wound his heart, sent with as great a malice?
He smiles, he smiles upon me: I will dig
Thy wanton eyes out, and supply the dark
And hollow Cells with two pitch burning Tapers:
Then place thee Porter in some Charnel house
To light the Coffins in.
My Lord.
The Duke's not come already.
Signior Florio desires to speak with you.
This must retire again into my Closet: admit him.
Welcome, how does Sciarrha?
He commends
His service to your Lordship, and hath sent—
His Sister?
Much ado he had to effect it:
He hopes his Grace will quickly sign his pardon.
It shall be done.
I have a suit my Lord.
To me?
My Sister would entreat your Honour
She may be admitted privately, and that
I may have privilege to prepare her chamber:
She does retain some modesty, and would not!
Trust every servant with her shame: their eyes
Are apt to instruct their tongues.
I won't see her myself, command what you desire.
Y'are gracious.
I'll give directions instantly: poor Lady,
This is the Duke's hot blood, but Heaven convert him,
Follow me good Florio.
I attend my Lord.
Things shall be carried honourably.
We are all bound to you.
This is a sad employment.
The last we're shall do my Lady.
So, now you may return, it will become
Your modest duties, not to inquire the reason
Of this strange service, nor to publish what
Y'ave been commanded; let me look upon
My sister now, still she retains her beauty,
Death has been kind to leave her all this sweetness.
Thus in a morning have I oft saluted
My sister in her chamber, sat upon
Her bed, and talked of many harmless passages,
But now 'tis night, and a long night with her,
I ne'er shall see these Curtains drawn again
Until we meet in heaven. The Duke already.
May I believe?
Trust me my Lord hereafter.
Call me no more thy Lord, but thy companion
I will not wear that honour in my title,
Shall not be thine. who's that?
Her brother Florio.
She is a-bed.
The readier for your pastime.
She means no make a night on't.
This shall declare thee to posterity
The best of Sisters— what of that? and is not
A brother's life more precious than a trifle?
I prithee do not sigh: how many Ladies
Would be ambitious of thy place tonight?
And thank his Highness? yes, and Virgins too.
He pleads for me.
He will deserve some office 'bout your person.
With what words shall I express my joy?
I leave you sir to action, Florio
Is soon dismissed.
he's come: goodnight—
Florio?
Your Slave.
My friend! thou shalt be near our bosom.
Pleasures crown your expectation.
All perfect, till this minute, I could never
Boast I was happy: all this world has not
A blessing to exchange, this world? 'tis Heaven;
And thus I take possession of my Saint:
Asleep already? 'twere great pity to
Disturb her dream, yet if her soul be not
tired with the Body's weight, it must convey
Into her slumbers I wait here, and thus
Seal my devotion— what winter dwells
Upon this lip? 'twas no warm kiss, I'll try
Again— the snow is not so cold, I have
Drunk ice, and feel a numbness spread through
My blood at once— ha? let me examine
A little better; Amidea, she is dead, she is dead!
What horror doth invade me? help Lorenzo;
Murder, where is Lorenzo?
Here my Lord.
Some Traitor hid within the chamber, see
My Amidea's dead.
Dead? 'tis impossible,
Y, sh'as a wound upon her breast.
I prithee kill me:
Ha wilt thou murder me, Lorenzo, villain?
Oh spare me to consider, I would live
A little longer: Treason.
A little longer say'ee
It was my duty to obey you sir.
let's make him sure my Lord.
What would you say? no cares but ours
Can reach his voice, but be not tedious.
Oh spare me, I may live and pardon thee:
Thy Prince begs mercy from thee, that did never
Deny thee any thing; pity my poor soul,
I have not prayed.
I could have wished you better
Prepared, but let your soul e'en take his chance.
No tear prevail? oh whither must wander
Thus Caesar fell by Brutus. I shall tell
News to the world I go to, will not be
Believed, Lorenzo killed me.
Will it not?
I'll presently put in security.
I am coming Amidea, I am coming
For thee inhuman murderer, expect
My blood shall fly to heaven, and there inflamed,
Hang a prodigious meteor all thy life.
And when by some as bloody hand as thine
Thy soul is ebbing forth, it shall descend
In flaming drops upon thee: oh I faint!
Thou flattering world farewell: let Princes gather
My dust into a glass, and learn to spend
Their hour of state, that's all they have; for when
That's out, times never turns the glass again.
So lay him beside his mistress, hide their faces,
The Duke dismissed the train came with him.
He did my Lord.
Run to Sciarrha, pray him come, and speak wi'me,
Secure his passage to this Chamber, haste,
he's dead; I'll trust him now, and his ghost too;
Fools start at shadows, I'm in love with night
And her complexion.
My Lord, he's come without your summons.
Already? leave us.
Welcome, let embraces
Chain us together, noble Florio welcome:
But I must honour thy great soul.
Where's the Duke?
They are a-bed together.
Ha?
he's not stirring yet:
Thou killed'st thy sister, didst not?
I preserved her.
So it was bravely done.
But where's the wanton Duke?
asleep I tell you.
And he shall sleep eternally.
You cannot wake him, look you.
Is he dead?
And in his death we two begin our life
Of greatness, and of Empire, nay he's dead.
That labour's saved.
Now I pronounce Sciarrha,
Thy pardon, and to recompense thy loss,
The share of Florence, I'll but wear the title,
The power we'll divide.
I like this well:
You told a tale once of a common wealth
And liberty.
It was to gain a faction
With discontented persons, a fine trick
To make a buzz of reformation.
My ends are compassed: hang the ribble rabble.
Shall we sweat for the people? lose our breath
To get their fame?
I'll have it given out
The Duke did kill thy sister.
Excellent.
Having first ravished her, he cannot be
Too hateful; it will dull the examination
Of his own death, or if that come to question—
What if I say, I killed him in revenge
Of Amidea? they will pity me.
Beside, 'twill be in your power to pardon
Me altogether.
Most discreetly thought on.
The Devil won't leave us o'the sudden.
Rare wit:
How hastily he climbs the the precipice,
From whence one fillip topples him to ruin:
we two shall live like brothers.
stay we two— now I consider better,
I have no mind to live at all— & you sha'not,
I'll give you proof, if you but make a noise,
You gallop to the Devil.
I'm betrayed.
To death inevitable, brother be you
Spectator only.
This is somewhat noble.
Thank me not Lorenzo, I'll not engage
His innocence to blood, thy hands are white,
Preserve 'em Florio, and unless my arms
Grow feeble, do not interpose thy sword
I charǵe thee.
None to assist me? help Petruchio, help.
Reach thy jaws wider villain, cry out murder,
Treason, any thing; hold— oh.
Will you not fall Colosus?
Are not you hurt?
I know not. Ha? yes he has pricked me somewhere
But I'll make sure of him; now must I follow:
I'll fight with him i'th' tother world— thy hand,
Florio. Farewell.
he's dead too: 'tis in vain for me to fly
Within Break open the doors.
You sha'not need.
Disarm him.
Lorenzo, and Sciarrha slain?
Where is the Duke?
Look here my Lords.
What Traitor?
See Amidea murdered too.
I tremble, here is a heap of Tragedies.
we must have an account from Florio.
He can inform you best that brought you hither.
Lay hands upon Petruchio, disarm him.
What blood is that upon his sword? 'tis fresh.
I'm caught.
To tortures with him.
Spare your fury, know
'twas the best blood in Florence, I must quit
Young Florio; Lorenzo, and myself,
Are only guilty of the PRINCE's death.
inhuman traitors?
But who killed Amidea?
The Duke's lust:
There was no other way to save her honour,
My brother has revenged it here, but fate,
Denied him triumph.
I never heard
Such killing stories, but 'tis meet, we first
Settle the state, Cosmo you are the next
Of blood to challenge Florence.
Pray defer
That till the morning, drag that murderer
To prison: Florio, you must not expect
Your liberty, till all things be examined.
Lorenzo, now I am above thy malice,
And will make satisfaction to Oriana.
'tis a sad night my Lords, by these you see
There is no stay in proud mortality.