SIr, this short journey from my Prince's Throne,
Is meant in Embassy to You alone;
To You, whom he receives not as his Guest,
For You are both his Ornament and Feast.
Although his Greatness is not taught to bow,
His Subjects fear, he will do homage now,
Which he esteems no less'ning to his State,
Since 'tis his Love decrees it, not his Fate.
Nay more, his Message moves so low, I fear,
What sounds like tender Courtship in your ear,
His jealous Barons will dislike, and cry,
I am perverted to disloyalty;
Urge my Commission false, then tax me for
An easy Traitor, no Ambassador;
As if my words would pull his Empire down,
Shorten his Sceptre, and contract his Crown;
Thus whispered by my fears, I must impart
For Ceremony now, what is his heart,
Though with content of Truth, I may report
You have a numerous Faction in his Court.
This Palace where, by sword, than law maintained
His few, but mighty Ancestors have reigned,
Is consecrated yours; which he doth give,
Not in regard he hath short time to live;
For so, since his Successor is unknown,
You take what is his Subjects, not his own,
And what is a surrender now, would be
Received tomorrow as a Legacy:
If more of his free love, I should relate,
They'd style it homage in our jealous state.
Come shut our Temple and away,
Our bold seditious God shall stay;
we'll serve no sacrifice to day,
Our humour is to Feast, not Pray.
The Battle which our Knights have won,
Did last until th' amazed Sun
For fear, did mend his usual pace,
And set betimes to hide his face.
And now the story of their fight
Is universal, as his light,
Which Fame upon her swifter wing
Hath early brought for us to sing.
Hark! hark! the trouble of the day draws near,
And now the Drum doth teach the heart to beat,
Whilst Trumpets cherish not, but wound the ear
Of such, who are ordained for a defeat.
Hark! Hark! some groan, and curse uncertain Fate,
Which us for blood and ruin, doth create.
Charge! charge! cries every bold ambitious knight,
Whilst artificial darkness hid their way,
The lightning of their Swords was all their light,
For dust, & sulphurous clouds had choked the day.
Hark! hark! some groan, and curse uncertain Fate,
Which us for blood and ruin, doth create.
Burn, burn, was straight the noise in every Tent,
Whilst some misled by their disordered fear,
Did help to kindle what they should prevent,
And scaped the Van to perish in the Rear.
Hark! hark! some groan, and curse uncertain Fate,
Which us for blood and ruin, doth create.
Fly, fly, cries then the tame dejected Foe;
Each wondering at the terror which he feels,
And in the hurry of their overthrow,
Forsook their Arms, and trusted to their heels.
Hark! hark! some groan, and curse uncertain Fate,
Which us for blood and ruin, doth create.
Stand! stand! was now the word our Knights did give,
For weary of pursuit, they had no will
To grace with death, who basely sought to live,
As if unworthy of their pains to kill.
Hark! hark! some groan, and curse uncertain Fate,
Which us for blood and ruin, doth create.
Whither so gladly, and so fast,
As if you knew all danger passed
Of Combat, and of War?
As you believed my arms were bound,
Or when I shoot, still every wound.
I make, is but a scar.
Arm now your breasts with shields of steel,
And plates of Brass, yet you shall feel
My arrows are so keen,
Like lightning that not hurts the skin,
Yet melts the solid parts within,
They'll wound, although unseen.
My Mother taught me long ago
To aim my shafts, and draw my Bow
When Mars she did subdue.
And now you must resign to Love,
Your warlike hearts, that she may prove
Those antic Stories true.
Unarm, unarm! no more your fights
Must cause the virgin's tears,
But such as in the silent nights,
Spring rather from their fears,
Such difference as when Doves do bill,
Must now be all your strife:
For all the blood that you shall spill,
Will usher in a life.
And when your Ladies falsely coy
Shall timorous appear,
Believe, they then would fain enjoy
What they pretend to fear.
Breath then each others breath, and kiss
Your souls to union:
And whilst they shall enjoy this bliss,
Your bodies too, are one.
Too morrow will the hasty Sun
Be feared more of each Lover,
For hindering to repeat what's done,
Than what it may discover.
Make room for our God too, make room,
For now surprised, and ravished with delight,
Apollo is from Delphos come,
T'inspire, and breath himself in every Knight.
His Godhead is inclined to prove
How justly proud, and happy you will be,
When with the powers of War and Love,
He shall unite his wiser Deity.
Then still, as if not made of Earth,
Express your thankfuluesse in active pleasure.
Whilst you design your hearts to Mirth,
Your ears to numbers, & your feet to measure.
Behold, how this conjunction thrives!
His radiant beams Apollo strives
So much to strengthen and increase,
As growth and verdure ne'er should cease.
Come you industrious slaves of plenty, bring
All that is hoped for in an Eastern Spring:
Or all that Autumn yields, when she doth pay
Those promised hopes where 'tis perpetual day.
Come strew this ground (delay us not with sloth)
Strew till we walk on sweet Cecillian Flowers,
To prove how Seeds have hastened in their growth,
Drop Indian fruits, as thick as April showers.
The furious Steed, the Phyph and Drum
Invite you still to Triumphs of the War,
Till you as glorious shall become
On Earth as Mars, in Heaven as bright a Star.
The Balms rich sweat, the Myrrhs sweet tears
Perfume your breath when you would Passion move:
And may her heart, that you endears,
the centre be, her Eye the sphere of Love!
And may your Language be of force
To body winds, and animate the Trees,
So full of wonder your discourse,
Till all your guesses shall be Prophecies.
May our three Gods so long conjoin,
To raise your soul, and rarefie your sense,
Till you are rendered so Divine,
'Twill be no Sin t' implore your Influence.