WITH bended knees thus humbly do I pray,
You blessed powers, that glorify this day,
And to my frozen lips have utterance given,
Speak, O speak the Commands you bring from heaven!
For by times Emblem that since Noah's flood,
I thus have grasped, my soul hath understood,
The world no farther journey hath to sail
Then is betwixt this Serpent's head, and tail.
If then before the Earth's great funeral,
Most glorious SIR, you hither come to call
The Inmates of this solitary place
To strict account, for Heaven's sake deign the grace
To lend your patience, and a gentle ear
To what I ought to speak, and you may hear:
A Prodigal profuse in vast expense,
That nothing studied, but to please his sense,
Trimming a glorious outside, whilst within
He cherished nought, but propagating sin,
That multiplied so fast, there was no place
Allowed for virtue, or for saving grace;
God of his mercy pleased was at last
A gracious Eye upon his soul to cast,
Which being so near a final rack as now
His only care, his study is, but how
He may redeem the years he lost in sin
And live as he to live did now begin.
What followed next must be conceived of course,
Confession, contrition, and remorse,
These guides to heaven he happily pursued,
Viewed his past life, and that again reviewed:
And to that end he purchased at a price
This field, then sterile, now his Paradise;
Where he as man of old, by God being bound
With Adam, wrought, and digged, and dressed the ground.
Here are no Rivers such as Eden had,
Nor were these banks with trees or flowers clad
T' invite a stay, the Owl, not Philomel
Within this solitary place did dwell.
And I, the Genius of this obscure Cave
Since the great deluge, lived as in a grave,
Chained to this ROCK, my Toumb-stone in despair
Of freedom, or to view such beams, as are
Shot from your Virtues: All my days were night,
Until the humble Owner brought to light
These eyes of mine, and forced great nature show
This masterpiece, a grace she did not owe
To any age before, and sooth to say,
I think it was created 'gainst this day.
If then you be the God of Britain's earth,
And rule this I'll, (as sure you are by birth)
Vouchsafe a blessing, such a one as may,
Preserve this ROCK, my mansion from decay.
For envy would expel me from my home,
And sink me in the ruins of my own.
But let the true Possessor, to whom heaven
For pure devotion-sake this place hath given,
Let him in peace enjoy it, that he may
Build Altars here, and daily offerings pay
For his preservers health grant this, and then
I that lived long with stones, will live with men:
And think the golden age is now begun,
In which no injuries are meant or done:
Such Innocents' as yet remain with us
That do inhabit here, and humbly thus
We mean to live, having no other fare
Then uncurst water, uncorrupted air.
Vouchsafe to enter, and you here shall find
Nothing but what may please a displeased mind.
My bold Commission's done, and I return
Down to my humble grave, my peaceful urn.
I charge thee answer me to what I ask, Echo: ask
Hath aught presented to these Princes pleased? Echo: pleased
Pleased? O gentle Echo speak that word again, Echo: again
How have they liked our Rock, our Cave, our Well? Echo: well
Well! proud would their Host be should I tell him Echo: tell him
Tell him Echo, I will that he despair not Echo: Spare not
What shall we give them by way of thankfulness? Echo: thankfulness
That, like thee, is air; we would give what's real Echo: all
All, why all that we have is but this Rock, Echo: this Rock
Give them this poor Rock, Echo mean you so? Echo: so
To which of them, toth' King or to the Queen? Echo: the Queen
What to the King, if this be given the Queen? Echo: the Queen
The Queen, there's nought more precious: 'tis true: Echo: true
Can nothing more be added to his bliss? Echo: bliss
Bliss, the bliss of Heaven Echo you mean sure; Echo: sure
Sure be't to them both as this our blessing; Echo: sing
Sing gentle Echo, is that thy desire? Echo: desire
THen blessed be this pair
On the earth, in the air,
Blessed in their Girls, and Boys,
Let them live to hear it told,
Their grand-grandchildrens are grown old.
Let her beauty ever last,
And his vigour never waste.
Let the sea, that bounds these Isles,
Ebb at least ten thousand miles:
And return no more, but leave
New kingdoms for them to bequeath
To the many heirs they get;
And when they pay nature's debt,
Let their bodies not be found
Dwelling in the sluttish ground,
But translated to those thrones,
Only built for blessed ones.
Echo let these prayers be
Posted up to Heaven by thee
And if granted let us know,
Gentle Echo answer so Echo: so
So, then 'tis agreed above Echo: above
That this pair shall live, and love: Echo: and love
And for ever happy be Echo: happy be
In their blessed posterity. Echo: posterity
Echo, for this news I'll give Echo: give
Leave that thou shalt ever live Echo: live
In this Paradise of theirs, Echo: their's
Theirs Echo, 'tis no more mine, Echo: mine
Theirs, and thine, Echo ever, Echo: ever
Fates decrees altar never. Echo: never
Hark, hark, how the stones in the Rock
Strive their tongues to unlock,
And would show,
What they know,
Of the Joy here hath been
Since the King and the Queen
Deign to say
They would pay
A visit to this cell:
But all tongues cannot tell;
Nor language express
Our full thankfulness.
Hark, hark, how the streams roll along,
And for want of a tongue
Vent in tears
All their fears
Lest the King, lest the Queen
Being come, having seen,
What we have
In this cave,
That nothing can delight
That is brought to their sight,
Or fully express
Our heart's thankfulness.
Hark, hark, how the Birds in the groves
Strive to tender their loves,
For the Spring,
That the King,
And the Queen bring along:
Do but see how they throng
With their notes
In their throats,
On each Bank, in each Bush
sits a Lark, and a Thrush,
That fain would express
Their heart's thankfulness.
Hark, hark, we humbly do entreat
How your Hosts heart doth beat,
How it pants,
'Cause it wants
What he gladly would bring
To the Queen, and the King,
Deign to speak,
Lest it break,
Let him know you are pleased
That his heart may be eased
Or this Rock or this cave
Is his Tomb or his grave.