GReat Praetor, and grave Senators, she craves
A free admittance on these curied waves,
Who doth from long antiquity profess
Her to be your gratious Patronesse:
Oft have I on a passant Lion sat,
And through your populous streets been borne in state:
Oft have I grac'ty our Triumphs on the shore,
But on the Waters was not seen before.
Will you the reason know why it doth fall,
That I thus change my Element? you shall:
When Triton with his pearly trumpets blew
A streperous blast, to summon all the crew
Of Marine gods and goddesses to appear,
(As the annual custom is) and meet you here:
As they were then in council to debate,
What honour they might add unto the state
Of this Inauguration; there appeared
God Mercury, who would from Iove be heard:
His Caducaus silence might command,
Whilst all attentive were to understand
The tenor of his message: who thus spoke.
The Sire of gods, with what you undertake
Is highly pleased, and greatly doth commend
That fair design and purpose you intent;
But he beheld a Machine from an high,
Which at first sight dazed his immortal eye;
A royal Ark, whose bright and glorious beams
Rival the Suns, ready to prove your streams:
A vessel of such beauty, burden, state,
That all the high Powers were amazed thereat;
So beautified, so munified, so clad,
As might an eight to the seven wonders add:
Which must be now your charge; 'twas Jove's own motion,
That all of you attend her to the Ocean.
This notwithstanding, such was their great care,
(To show that o'er you they indulgent are)
That Neptune from his Chariot bade me choose
Two of his best Sea-horses, to excuse
His enforced absence: Thames (whose breast doth swell
Still with that glorious burden) bade me tell,
That loves command shall be no sooner done,
But every Tide he'll on your errands run
From hence to the Lands end, and thence again
Back, to convey your traffic from the Main:
My message thus delivered; now proceed
To take your oath, there is no further need
Of my assistance; who on Land will meet you,
And with the state of greater Triumphs greet you.
SAcred's the number four, Philosophers say,
And bears an happy Omen; as this day
It may appear: four Elements conspire,
Namely, the Water, Earth, the Air, and Fire,
To make up man: the colours in him bred
Are also four, White, Pallid, Black, and red:
Of four Complexions he existeth solely,
Phlegmatic, Sanguine, Choler, Melancholy.
His meat four several digestions gains,
In Stomach, Liver, Members, and the Veins.
Four qualities called primae within lie,
Which are thus titled, Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry.
He acts his whole life on this earthy stage,
In Childhood, Youth, Manhood, Decripit age.
The very day that doth afford him light,
Is Morning the Meridian, Evening, Night.
Four seasons still successively appear,
Which put together make a complete year.
The earth, with all the Kingdoms therein guided,
Is into four distinguished parts divided.
The four Winds from the World's four quarters blow,
Eorus, Favonius, Auster, Aquilo.
All Moral virtues we in four include,
As Prudence, justice, Temperance Fortitude.
Court, City, Camp, and Country, the four CCCs;
Which represent to us the four degrees,
Required in every fair and flourishing Land,
Subtract but one a Kingdom cannot stand.
Four Colonels are in this City known,
Of which you, honoured Sir, have long been one:
And those four Crowns, (for so the high Powers please)
Emblem the Kings four Sceptres, and four Seas.
The * fift Imperial Arch above, proclaims
That glorious Crown, at which his Highness' aims.
Thus is our round Globe squared, figuring his power,
And yours beneath Him, in the number four.
THis Structure honoured Sir doth title bear
Of an Imperial Fort, apt for that sphere
In which you now move, borrowing all her grace,
As well from your own person, as your place;
For you have passed through all degrees that tended
Unto that height which you have now ascended.
You have been in this City ('tis known well)
A Soldier, Captain, and a Colonel.
And now in times fair progress, to crown all,
Of this Metropolis chief General.
You, of this Emblem, which this day we bring,
To represent the Chamber of the King,
Are the prime governor: a Royal Fort,
And strongly setted, as not built for sport,
But for example and defence: a Tower
Supported by no less than Sovereign power:
The Theologicke virtues, the three Graces,
And Charites have here their several places.
Here Piety, true Zeal, study of Peace,
(By which small mites to Magozines increase)
Have residence: now opposite there are
To these, and with them at continual war,
Pride, Arrogance, Sloth, Vanity, Prestigion,
profaneness, the contempt of true Religion,
With thousands more, who assiduatly wait
This your Imperial Fort to insidiate.
You may observe i'th' music of your Bells
Like sound in Triumphs, and for funeral kneels;
Marriage and death to them appear all one,
Masking nor mourning cannot change their tone:
With our Fort 'tis not so, whose fair pretence, is
To comply with the nature of offences,
Errors: she knows in low terms how to chide
Great faults, with greater noise are terrified:
But she can load her Cannons, and speak loud
To encounter with the arrogant and proud:
What's further in your Praetorship assigned,
You, in your London's Mirror there may find.
BEhold me Sight, of the five senses prime,
(Now best complying with the place and time)
Presenting London's Mirror, and this Glass
Shows not alone what she is, or once was,
But that the spacious Universe might see
In her, what their great Cities ought to be;
That every foreign Magistrate from hence
Might learn how to dispose his Optic sense.
Aspice saith, Look toward and upon
Desartfull men whom this Age frowneth on.
And Despice cast down thy powerful eye
On the poor wretch that doth beneath thee lie.
Then Conspice take counsel first and pause
With meditation, ere thou judge a cause.
Prospice bids look a far off, and view
(Before conclude) what dangers may ensue.
Perspice wills, in sifting doubts, then scan
The nature of the matter with the man.
Let every cause be searched, and duly sought,
Saith Inspice, ere thou determinst aught.
Circumspice saith, look about to immure
So great a charge, that all within be sure.
Considerate Respice enjoins thee last,
To cast thine eyes back upon all things past.
For London's self, if they shall first begin
To examine her without, and then within,
What Architectures, Palaces, what Bowers,
What Citadels, what turrets, and what towers?
Who in her age grew pregnant, brought a bed
Of a New Town, and late delivered
Of such a burden, as in few years' space,
Can almost speak all tongues, (to her more grace.)
Then her Cathedrals, Temples new repairing,
An act of true devotion, no man sparing
His helping hand; and many, 'tis well known,
To further Gods house have forget their own.
Unto her outward shape I do not prize her,
But let them come within to anatomize her.
Her Praetor, scarlet Senate, Liveries,
The ordering of her brave societies:
Divine Astraea here in equal scale
Doth balance justice, Truth needs not look pale,
Nor poverty dejected, th'orphans cause,
And Widow's plea find help; no subtle clause
Can make demur in sentence: a fair hearing,
And upright doom in every Court appearing:
Still to preserve her so, be't your endeavour,
And she in you, you her shall live for ever.
WE ●o a Valediction are confined,
(Right Honoured) and entreat You bear in mind
What was this Day presented: Your chief Saint
A Martyr once of the Church militant,
But now of the triumphant, bids You spare
Yourself this Night: for to a World of Care
You are engaged to morrow, which must last
Till the whole progress of Your Year be past.
The Sphere-like Globe quadrated, lets You know,
What Pro-Rex doth to the four Sceptres owe.
Your Military honours, (in your Days
Of less command) th' Imperial Fort displays,
And London's Mirror, that all men may see
What Magistrates have been, and aught to be.
Set is the Sun long since, and now the Light
Quite failing us, Thrice Honoured Sir, good Night.