BEfore the starry threshold of Ioves Court
My mansion is, where those immortal shapes
Of bright aerial Spirits live ensphered
In Regions mild of calm and serene air,
Above the smoke and stir of this dim spot
Which men call Earth, and with low-thoughted care
Confined, and pestered in this pinfold here,
Strive to keep up a frail, and feverish being
Unmindful of the crown that Virtue gives
After this mortal change to her true Servants
Amongst the enthroned gods on Sainted seats.
Yet some there be that by due steps aspire
To lay their just hands on that golden key
That opes the palace of Eternity:
To such my errand is, and but for such
I would not soil these pure ambrosial weeds
With the rank vapours of this Sin-worn mould.
But to my task. Neptune besides the sway
Of every salt Flood, and each ebbing Stream
Took in my lot twixt high, and neither love
Imperial rule of all the Sea-girt Isles
That like to rich, and various gems inlay
The unadorned bosom of the Deep,
Which he to grace his tributary gods
By course commits to several government
And gives them leave to wear their Saphire crowns,
And wield their little tridents, but this I'll
The greatest, and the best of all the main
He quarters to his blue-haired deities,
And all this tract that fronts the falling Sun
A noble Peer of mickle trust, and power
Has in his charge, with tempered awe to guide
An old, and haughty Nation proud in Arms:
Where his fair offspring nursed in Princely lore
Are coming to attend their Father's state,
And new-entrusted sceptre, but their way
Lies through the perplexed paths of this drear wood,
The nodding horror of whose shady brows
Threats the forlorn and wandering Passenger.
And here their tender age might suffer peril
But that by quick command from Sovereign Iove
I was dispatched for their defence and guard,
And listen why, for I will tell ye now
What never yet was heard in Tale or Song
From old, or modern Bard in hall, or bower.
Bacchus that first from out the purple Grape
Crushed the sweet poison of misused Wine
After the Tuscan Mariners transformed
Coasting the Tyrrhenic shore, as the winds listed,
On Circe's Island fell (who knows not Circe
The daughter of the Sun? whose charmed Cup
Whoever tasted lost his upright shape
And downward fell into a groveling Swine)
This Nymph that gazed upon his clustering locks
With Ivy berries wreathed, and his blithe youth
Had by him, ere he parted thence, a Son
Much like his Father, but his Mother more,
Whom therefore she brought up and Comus named,
Who ripe, and frolic of his full grown age
Roving the Celtic, and Iberian fields
At last betakes him to this ominous wood,
And in thick shelter of black shades embowered
Excels his Mother at her mighty Art
Offering to every weary Traveller
His orient liquour in a Crystal glass
To quench the drought of Phoebus, which as they taste
(For most do taste through fond intemperate thirst)
Soon as the Potion works, their humane countenance
Th'express resemblance of the gods is changed
Into some brutish form of Wolf, or Bear
Or Ounce, or Tiger, Hog, or bearded Goat,
All other parts remaining as they were,
And they, so perfect in their misery,
Not once perceive their foul disfigurement,
But boast themselves more comely than before
And all their friends; and native home forget
To roll with pleasure in a sensual sty.
Therefore when any favoured of high Iove
Chances to pass through this adventurous glade,
Swift as the Sparkle of a glancing Star
I shoot from heaven to give him safe convoy,
As now I do: but first I must put off
These my sky robes spun out of Iris woof,
And take the weeds and likeness of a Swain,
That to the service of this house belongs,
Who with his soft Pipe, and smooth-dittied Song,
Well knows to still the wild winds when they roar,
And hush the waving woods, nor of less faith,
And in this office of his Mountain watch,
Likeliest, and nearest to the present aid
Of this occasion. But I hear the tread
Of hateful steps, I must be viewless now.
The star that bids the Shepherd fold,
Now the top of heaven doth hold,
And the gilded Car of Day
His glowing Axle doth allay,
In the steep Atlantic stream,
And the slope Sun his upward beam
Shoots against the dusky Pole,
Pacing toward the other goal
Of his Chamber in the East.
meanwhile welcome Joy, and Feast,
Midnight shout, and revelry,
Tipsy dance, and Jollity.
Braid your Locks with rosy Twine,
Dropping odours, dropping Wine.
Rigour now is gone to bed,
And Advice with scrupulous head,
Strict Age, and sour Severity
With their grave Saws in slumber lie.
We that are of purer fire,
Imitate the starry choir,
Who in their nightly watchful Spheres,
Lead in swift round the Months and Years.
The Sounds, and Seas with all their finny drove,
Now to the Moon in wavering morris move,
And on the tawny sands and shelves,
Trip the pert Fairies and the dapper Elves;
By dimpled Brook, and Fountain brim.
The Wood-nymphs decked with daisies trim,
Their merry wakes, and pastimes keep,
What hath night to do with sleep?
Night hath better sweets to prove,
Venus now wakes, and wakens Love.
Come let us our rights begin
'Tis only daylight that makes Sin
Which these dun shades will ne'er report.
Haile Goddess of Nocturnal sport
Dark-veiled Cocytto, t'whom the secret flame
Of midnight Torches burns; mysterious Dame
That ne'er at called, but when the Dragon womb
Of Stygian darkness spets her thickest gloom
And makes one blot of all the air,
Stay thy cloudy Ebon chair,
Wherein thou rid'st with Hecat', and befriend
Us thy vowed Priests, till utmost end
Of all thy dues be done, and none left out
Ere the blabbing Eastern scout
The nice Morn on th' Indian steep
From her cabined loop hole peep,
And to the tell-tale Sun descry
Our concealed Solemnity.
Come, knit hands, and heat the ground
In a light fantastic round.
Break off, break off, I feel the different pace
Of some chaste footing near about this ground,
Run to your shrouds, within these Brakes, and Trees
Our number may affright: Some Virgin sure
(For so I can distinguish by mine Art)
Benighted in these woods. Now to my charms
And to my wily trains, I shall ere long
Be well stocked with as fair a Herd as grazed
About my Mother Circe. Thus I hurl
My dazling Spells into the spongy air
Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion,
And give it false presentments, lest the place
And my quaint habits breed astonishment,
And put the Damsel to suspicious flight,
Which must not be, for that's against my course;
I under fair pretents of friendly ends,
And well placed words of glozing courtesy
Baited with reasons not unplausible
Wind me into the easy hearted man,
And hug him into snares; when once her eye
Hath met the virtue of this Magic dust,
I shall appear some harmless Villager
Whom thrift keeps up about his Country gear
But here she comes, I fairly step aside
And harken, if I may, her business here.
This way the noise was, if mine ear be true
My best guide now, methought it was the sound
Of Riot, and ill managed Merriment,
Such as the jocund Flute, or gamesome Pipe
Stirs up among the loose unlettered Hinds
When for their teeming Flocks, and granges full
In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan,
And thank the gods amiss. I should be loath
To meet the rudeness, and swilled insolence
Of such late Wassailers; yet o where else
Shall I inform my unacquainted feet
In the blind mates of this tangled wood?
My Brothers when they saw me wearied out
With this long way, resolving here to lodge.
Under the spreading favour of these Pines
Stepped as they said to the next Thicket side
To bring me Berries, or such cooling fruit
As the kind hospitable woods provide.
They left me then, when the gray-hooded Ev'n
Like a sad Votarist in Palmer's weeds
Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus' wain.
But where they are, and why they came not back
Is now the labour of my thoughts, 'tis likeliest
They had engaged their wandering steps too far,
And envious darkness, ere they could return,
Had stolen them from me, else o thievish Night
Why shouldst thou, but for some felonious end
In thy dark lantern thus close up the Stars,
That nature hung in Heaven, and filled their lamps
With everlasting oil to give due light
To the misled, and lonely Traveller.
This is the place, as well as I may guess
Whence even now the tumult of loud Mirth
Was rife, and perfect in my listening ear,
Yet nought but single darkness do I find,
What might this be? a thousand fantasies
Begin to throng into my memory
Of calling shapes, and beckoning shadows dire,
And airy tongues, that syllable men's names
On Sands, and Shores, and desert Wildernesses.
These thoughts may startle well, but not astounded
The virtuous mind, that ever walks attended
By a strong siding champion Conscience.—
O welcome pure-eyed Faith, white-handed Hope
Thou flittering Angel girt with golden wins;
And thou unblemished form of Chastity
I see ye visibly, and now believe
That he, the Supreme good, t'whom all things ill
Are but as slavish officers of vengeance
Would send a glistering Guardian if need were
To keep my life, and honour unassailed.
Was I deceived, or did a sable cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night?
I did not err, there does a sables cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night
And casts a gleam over this tufted Grove.
I cannot hallow to my Brothers, but
Such noise as I can make to be heard farthest
I'll venture, for my new enlivened spirits
Prompt me; and they perhaps are not far off.
Sweet echo, sweetest Nymph that liv'st unseen
Within thy airy shell
By slow Meander's margin green,
And in the violet-embroidered vale
Where the love-lorn Nightingale
Nightly to thee her sad Song mourneth well.
Canst thou not tell me of a gentle Pair
That likest thy Narcissus are?
O if thou have
Hid them in some flowery Cave,
Tell me but where
Sweet Queen of parley, Daughter of the sphere,
So mayst thou be translated to the skies,
And give resounding grace to all Heaven's Harmonies.
Can any mortal mixture of Earth's mould
Breath such Divine enchanting ravishment?
Sure something holy lodges in that breast,
And with these raptures moves the vocal air
To testify his hidden residence;
How sweetly did they float upon the wings
Of Silence, through the empty-vaulted night
At every fall smoothing the Raven down
Of darkness till she smiled: I have oft heard
My mother Circe with the Sirens three
Amidst the flowery-kirtled Naiades
Culling their Potent herbs, and baleful drugs
Who as they sung, would take the prisoned soul
And lap it in Elysium, Scylla wept,
And chid her barking waves into attention,
And fell Charybdis murmured soft applause:
Yet they in pleasing slumber lulled the sense
And in sweet madness robbed it of itself,
But such a sacred, and homefelt delight,
Such sober certainty of waking bliss
I never heard till now. I'll speak to her
And she shall be my Queen. Haile foreign wonder
Whom certain these rough shades did never breed
Unless the Goddess that in rural shrine
Dwellest here with Pan, or Sylvan, by blessed Song
Forbidding every bleak unkindly Fog
To touch the prosperous growth of this tall wood.
Nay gentle Shepherd ill is lost that praise
That is addressed to unattending Ears,
Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift
How to regain my severed company
Compelled me to awake the courteous Echo
To give me answer from her mossy Couch.
What chance good Lady hath bereft you thus?
Dim darkness, and this leafy Labyrinth.
Could that divide you from near-ushering guides?
They left me weary on a grassy turf.
By falsehood, or discourtesy, or why?
To seek i'th' valley some cool friendly Spring.
And left your fair side all unguarded Lady?
They were but twain, & purposed quick return.
Perhaps forestalling night prevented them.
How easy my misfortune is to hit!
Imports their loss, beside the present need?
No less than if I should my brothers lose.
Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom?
As smooth as Hebe's their unrazored lips.
Two such I saw, what time the laboured Ox
In his loose traces from the furrow came,
And the swinked hedger at his Supper sat;
I saw them under a green mantling vine
That crawls along the side of yond small hill,
Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots,
Their port was more than humane; as they stood,
I took it for a fairy vision
Of some gay creatures of the element
That in the colours of the Rainbow live
And play i'th' plighted clouds, I was awe-struck,
And as I passed, I worshipped; if those you seek
It were a journey like the path to heaven
To help you find them.
Gentle villager
What readiest way would bring me to that place?
Due west it rises from this shrubby point.
To find out that good shepherd I suppose
In such a scant allowance of star light
Would overtask the best land-pilots art
Without the sure guess of well-practiced feet.
I know each lane, and every alley green
Dingle, or bushy dell of this wild wood,
And every bosky bourn from side to side
My day lie walks and ancient neighbourhood,
And if your stray attendance be yet lodged
Or shroud within these limits, I shall know
Ere morrow wake, or the low-roosted lark
From her thatched palate rouse, if otherwise
I can conduct you Lady to a low
But loyal cottage, where you may be safe
Till further quest.
Shepherd I take thy word,
And trust thy honest offered courtesy,
Which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds
With smoky rafters, then in tapestry halls,
And courts of Princes, where it first was named,
And yet is most pretended: in a place
Less warranted than this, or less secure
I cannot be, that I should fear to change it,
Eye me blessed Providence, and square my trial
To my proportioned strength. Shepheard lead on.—
Unmuffle ye faint stars, and thou fair moon
That wontst to love the travellers benison
Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud
And disinherit Chaos, that reigns here
In double night of darkness, and of shades;
Or if your influence be quite damned up
With black usurping mists, some gentle taper
Though a rush candle from the wicker hole
Of some clay habitation visit us
With thy long leveled rule of streaming light
And thou shalt be our star of Arcady
Or Tyrian Cynosure.
Or if our eyes:
Be barred that happiness, might we but hear
The folded flocks penned in their wattled coats,
Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops,
Or whistle from the Lodge, or village cock
Count the night watches to his feathery Dames,
'twould be some solace yet, some little cheering
In this close dungeon of innumerous bows.
But o that hapless virgin our lost sister
Where may she wander now, whether betake her
From the chill dew, amongst rude burrs and thistles?
Perhaps some cold bank is her bolster now
Or 'gainst the rugged bark of some broad Elm
Leans her unpillowed head fraught with sad fears.
What if in wild amazement, and affright
Or while we speak within he direful grasp
Of Savage hunger, or of Savage heat?
Peace brother, be not over exquisite
To cast the fashion of uncertain evils,
For grant they be so, while they rest unknown
What need a man forestall his date of grief
And run to meet what he would most avoid?
Or if they be but false alarms of Fear
How bitter is such self-delusion?
I do not think my sister so to seek
Or so unprincipled in virtue's book
And the sweet peace that goodness bosoms ever
As that the single want of light, and noise
(Not being in danger, as I trust she is not)
Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts
And pt them into mis becomming plight.
Virtue could see to do what virtue would
By her own radiant light, though Sun and Moon
Were in the flat Sea sunk, and Wisdoms self
Oft seeks to sweet retired Solitude
Where with her best nurse Contemplation
She plumes her feathers, and let's grow her wings
That in the various bustle of resort
Were all to ruffled, and sometimes impaired.
He that has light within his own clear breast
May sit i'th' centre, and enjoy bright day,
But he that hides a dark soul, and foul thoughts
Benighted walks under the midday Sun,
Himself is his own dungeon.
'Tis most true
That musing meditation most affects
The Pensive secrecy of desert cell
Far from the cheerful haunt of men, and herds,
And sits as safe as in a Senate house
For who would rob an Hermit of his weeds
His few books, or his beads, or maple dish,
Or do his grey hairs any violence?
But beauty like the fair Hesperian tree
Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard
Of dragon watch with unenchanted eye
To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit
From the rash hand of bold Incontinence.
You may as well spread out the unsunned heaps
Of miser's treasure by an outlaw's den
And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope
Danger will wink on opportunity
And let a single helpless maiden pass
Uninjured in this wild surrounding waste.
Of night, or loneliness it recks me not
I fear the dread events that dog them both,
I est some ill greeting touch attempt the person
Of our unowned sister.
I do not brother
Infer, as if I thought my sister's state
Secure without all doubt, or controversy:
Yet where an equal poise of hope, and fear
Does arbitrate th'event, my nature is
That I incline to hope, rather than fear
And gladly banish squint suspicion.
My sister is not so defenceless left
As you imagine, she has a hidden strength
Which you remember not.
What hidden strength
Unless the strength of heaven, if mean that?
I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength
Which if heaven gave it, may be termed her own:
'Tis chastity, my brother, chastity:
She that has that, is clad in complete steel,
And like a quivered nymph with arrows keen
May trace huge forests, and unharboured heaths
Infamous hills, and sandy perilous wilds
Where through the sacred rays of chastity
No savage fierce, bandit, or mountaineer
Will dare to soil her virgin purity
Yea there, where very desolation dwells
By grots, and caverns shagged with horrid shades
She may pass on with unblenched majesty
Be it not done in pride, or in presumption.
Some say no evil thing that walks by night
In fog, or fire, by lake, or moorish fen
blue meager hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost
That breaks his magic chains at curfew time
No goblin, or swart Fairy of the mine
Has hurtful power over true virginity.
Do ye believe me yet, or shall I call
Antiquity from the old schools of Greece
To testify the arms of Chastity?
Hence had the huntress Dian her dread bow
Fair silver-shafted Queen for ever chaste
Wherewith we tamed the brinded lioness
And spotted mountain pard, but set at nought
The frivolous bolt of Cupid, gods and men
Feared her stern frown, & she was queen o'th' woods.
What was that snaky headed Gorgon shield
That wise Minerva wore, unconquered virgin
Wherewith she freezed her foes to congealed stone?
But rigid looks of Chaste austerity
And noble grace that dashed brute violence
With sudden adoration, and blank awe.
So dear to heaven is saintly chastity
That when a soul is found sincerely so,
A thousand liveried angels lackey her
Driving far off each thing of sin, and guilt,
And in clear dream, and solemn vision
Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear,
Till oft converse with heavenly habitants
Begin to cast a beam on th' outward shape
The unpolluted temple of the mind
And turns it by degrees to the souls essence
Till all be made immortal; but when lust
By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk
But most by lewd, and lavish act of sin
let's in defilement to the inward parts,
The soul grows clotted by contagion,
embodies, and imbrutes, till she quite loose
The divine property of her first being.
Such are those thick, and gloomy shadows damp
Oft seen in Charnel vaults, and Sepulchers
Hovering, and sitting by a new made grave
As loath to leave the body that it loved,
And linked itself by carnal sensuality
To a degenerate and degraded state.
How charming is divine Philosophy!
Not harsh, and crabbed as dull fools suppose,
But musical as is Apollo's lute,
And a perpetual feast of nectared sweets
Where no crude surfeit reigns.
List, list I hear
Some far off hallow break the silent air.
methought so too, what should it be?
For certain
Either some one like us night foundered here,
Or else some neighbour wood man, or at worst
Some roving robber calling to his fellows.
Heaven keep my sister, again again and near,
Best draw, and stand upon our guard.
I'll hallow,
If he be friendly he comes well, if not
Defence is a good cause, and Heaven be for us.
That hallow I should know, what are you, speak,
Come not too near, you fall on iron stakes else.
What voice is that, my young Lord? speak again.
O brother 'tis my father Shepherd sure.
Thyrsis whose artful strains have oft delayed
The huddling brook to hear his madrigal,
And sweetened every muskrose of the dale,
How cam'st thou here good Swain, hath any ram
Slipped from the fold, or young kid lost his dam,
Or straggling weather the penned flock forsook,
How couldst thou find this dark sequestered nook?
O my loved master's heir, and his next joy
I came not here on such a trivial toy
As a strayed Ewe, or to pursue the stealth
Of pilfering wolf, not all the fleecy wealth
That doth enrich these downs is worth a thought
To this my errand, and the care it brought.
But o my virgin Lady where is she,
How chance she is not in your company?
To tell thee sadly shepherd, without blame
Or our neglect, we lost her as we came.
ay me unhappy then my fears are true.
What fears good Thyrsis? prithee briefly show.
I'll tell you, 'tis not vain, or fabulous
(Though so esteemed by shallow ignorance)
What the sage Poets taught by th'heavenly Muse
Storied of old in high immortal verse
Of dire Chimaeras and enchanted Isles
And rifted rocks whose entrance leads to hell,
To such there be, but unbelief is blind.
Within the navel of this hideous wood
Immured in cypress shades a Sorcerer dwells
Of Bacchus, and of Circe borne, great Comus,
Deep skilled in all his mother's witcheries,
And here to every thirsty wanderer
By sly enticement gives his baneful cup
With many murmurs mixed, whose pleasing poison
The visage quite transforms of him that drinks,
And the inglorious likeness of a beast
Fixes instead, unmoulding reason's mintage
Charactered in the face; this have I learned
Tending my flocks hard by i'th' hilly crofts
That brow this bottom glade, whence night by night
He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl
Like stabled wolves, or tigers at their prey
Doing abhorred rites to Hecate
In their obscured haunts of inmost bowers.
Yet have they many baits, and guileful spells
T'inveigle, and invite th'unwary sense
Of them that pass unwitting by the way.
This evening late by then the chewing flocks
Had ta'en their supper on the savoury herb
Of Knotgrass dew-besprent, and were in fold
I sat me down to watch upon a bank
With ivy canopied, and interwove
With flaunting honeysuckle, and began
Wrapped in a pleasing fit of melancholy
To meditate my rural minstrelsy
Till fancy had her fill, but ere a close
The wonted roar was up amidst the woods,
And filled the air with barbarous dissonance
At which I ceased, and listened them a while
Till an unusual stop of sudden silence
Gave respite to the drowsy frighted steeds
That draw the litter of close-curtained sleep.
At last a soft, and solemn breathing sound
Rose like a steam of rich distilled Perfumes
And stole upon the air, that even Silence
Was took e'er she was ware, and wished she might
Deny her nature, and be never more
Still to be so displaced. I was all ear,
And took in strains that might create a soul
Under the ribs of Death, but o ere long
Too well I did perceive it was the voice
Of my most honoured Lady your dear sister.
Amazed I stood, harrowed with grief and fear,
And o poor hapless nightingale thought I
How sweet thou singest, how near the deadly snare!
Then down the lawns I ran with headlong haste
Through paths, and turnings often trodden by day
Till guided by mine ear I found the place
Where that damned wizard hid in sly-disguise
(For so by certain signs I knew) had met
Already, ere my best speed could prevent
The aidless innocent Lady his wish't prey,
Who gently asked if he had seen such two
Supposing him some neighbour villager;
Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guessed
Ye were the two she meant, with that I sprung
Into swift flight till I had found you here,
But farther know I not.
O night and shades
How are ye joined with hell in triple knot
Against th'unarmed weakness of one virgin
Alone, and helpless! is this the confidence
You gave me brother?
Yes, and keep it still,
leer on it safely, not a period
Shall be unsaid for me; against the threats
Of malice or of sorcery, or that power
Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm,
Virtue may be assailed, but never hurt,
Surprised by unjust force, but not enthralled,
Yea even that which mischief meant most harm,
Shall in the happy trial prove most glory.
But evil on itself shall back recoil
And mix no more with goodness, when at last
Gathered like scum, and settled to itself
It shall be in eternal restless change
Self fed, and self consumed, if this fail
The pillared firmament is rottenness,
And earth's base built on stubble. But come let's on.
Against th' opposing will and arm of heaven
May never this just sword be lifted up,
But for that damned magician, let him be girt
With all the grisly legions that troop
Under the sooty flag of Acheron,
harpies and Hydra's, or all the monstrous bugs
'Twixt Africa, and Ind, I'll find him out
And force him to restore his purchase back
Or drag him by the curls, and cleave his scalp
Down to the hips.
Alas good venturous youth,
I love thy courage yet, and bold Emprise,
But here thy sword can do thee little stead,
Far other arms, and other weapons must
Be those that quell the might of hellish charms,
He with his bare wand can unthread thy joints
And crumble all thy sinews.
Why prithee shepherd
How durst thou then thyself approach so near
As to make this relation?
Care and utmost shifts
How to secure the Lady from surprisal
Brought to my mind a certain shepherd lad
Of small regard to see to, yet well skilled
In every virtuous plant, and healing herb
That spreads her verdant lease toth' morning ray,
He loved me well, and oft would beg me sing,
Which when I did, he on the tender grass
Would sit, and harken even to ecstasy,
And in requital ope his leathern scrip,
And show me simples of a thousand names
Telling their strange, and vigorous faculties,
Amongst the rest a small unsightly root,
But of divine effect, he culled me out;
The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it,
But in another Country, as be said,
Bore a bright golden flower, but not in this soil:
Unknown, and like esteemed, and the dull swain
Treads on it daily with his coloured shoon,
And yet more medicinal is it then that Moby
That Hermes once to wise Ulysseses gave,
He called it Haemony, and gave it me
And bade me keep it as of sovereign use
'Gainst all enchantments, mildew blast, or damp
Or ghastly furies apparition;
I pursed it up, but little reckoning made
Till now that this extremity compelled,
But now I find it true, for by this means
I knew the foul enchanter though disguised,
Entered the very lime-twigs of his spells,
And yet came off, if you have this about you
(As I will give you when we go) you may
Boldly assault the necromancers hall,
Where if he be, with dauntless hardihood
And brandished blade rush on him, break his glass,
And shed the luscious liquour on the ground
But seize his wand, though he and his cursed crew
Fierce sign of battle make, and menace high,
Or like the sons of Vulcan vomit smoke,
Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink
Thyrsis lead on apace I'll follow thee,
And some good angel bear a shield before us.
Nay Lady sit; if I but wave this wand,
Your nerves are all chained up in alabaster,
And you a statue; or as Daphne was
Root bound that fled Apollo.
Fool do not boast,
Thou canst not touch the freedom of my mind
With all thy charms, although this corporal rind
Thou hast emmanacled, while heaven sees good.
Why are you vexed Lady, why do you frown?
Here dwell no frowns, nor anger, from these gates
Sorrow flies far: see here be all the pleasures
That fancy can beget on youthful thoughts
When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns
Brisk as the April buds in primrose season.
And first behold this cordial julep here
That flames, and dances in his crystal bounds
With spirits of balm, and fragrant syrups mixed.
Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone
In Aegypt gave to love borne He
Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst.
Why should you be so cruel to yourself,
And to those dainty limbs which nature lent
For gentle usage, and soft delicacy?
But you invert the covenants of her trust,
And harshly deal like an ill borrower
With that which you received on other terms,
Scorning the unexempt condition,
By which all mortal frailty must subsist,
Refreshment after toil, ease after pain,
That have been tired all day without repast,
And timely rest have wanted, but fair virgin
This will restore all soon.
'twill not false traitor,
'twill not restore the truth and honesty
That thou hast banished from thy tongue with lies,
Was this the cottage, and the safe abode
Thou told'st me of? what grim aspects are these,
These ugly-headed monsters? Mercy guard me!
Hence with thy brewed enchantments foul deceiver,
Hast thou betrayed my credulous innocence
With visored falsehood, and base forgery,
And wouldst thou seek again to trap me here
With liquorish baits fit to ensnare a brute?
Were it a draft for Iuno when she banquets
I would not taste thy treasonous offer; none
But such as are good men can give good things,
And that which is not good, is nor delicious
To a well-governed and wise appetite.
O foolishness of men! that lend their ears
To those budge doctors of the Stoic fur,
And fetch their precepts from the Cynic tub,
Praising the lean, and sallow Abstinence.
Wherefore did Nature pour her bounties forth
With such a full and unwithdrawing hand,
Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks
Thronging the seas with spawn innumerable
But all to please, and sat the curious taste?
And set to work millions of spinning worms,
That in their green shops weave the smooth-haired silk
To deck her Sons, and that no corner might
Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loins
She hutched th'all worshipped over, and precious gems
To store her children with; if all the world
Should in a pet of temperance feed on Pulse,
Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but freeze,
Th'all-giver would be unthanked, would be unpraised,
Not half his riches known, and yet despised,
And we should serve him as a grudging master,
As a penurious niggard of his wealth,
And live like Nature's bastards, not her sons,
Who would be quite surcharged with her own weight, plumes,
And strangled with her waste fertility;
Th'earth cumbered, and the winged air darked with
The herds would over-multitude their Lords,
The sea o'erfraught would swell, and th'unsought diamonds
Would so emblaze he forehead of the Deep,
And so bestud with stars that they below
Would grow enured to light, and come at last
To gaze upon the Sun with shameless brows.
List Lady be not coy, and be not cozened
With that same vaunted name Virginity,
Beauty is nature's coin, must not be hoarded,
But must be currant, and the good thereof
Consists in mutual and partaken bliss,
Unsavoury in th'enjoyment of itself
If you let slip time, like a neglected rose
It withers on the stalk with languished head.
Beauty is nature's brag, and must be shown
In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities
Where most may wonder at the workmanship;
It is for homely features to keep home,
They had their name thence; course complexions
And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply
The sampler, and to tease the huswives wool.
What need a vermeil-tinctured lip for that
Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the Morn
There was another meaning in these gifts?
Think what, and be advised, you are but young yet.
I had not thought to have unlocked my lips
In this unhallowed air, but that this Juggler
Would think to charm my judgement, as mine eyes
Obtruding false rules pranked in reasons garb.
I hate when vice can bolt her arguments
And virtue has no tongue to check her pride:
Impostor do not charge most innocent nature
As if she would her children should be riotous
With her abundance, she good cateress
Means her provision only to the good
That live according to her sober laws
And holy dictate of spare Temperance,
If every just man that now pines with want
Had but a moderate, and beseeming share
Of that which lewdy-pampered Luxury
Now heaps upon some few with vast excess,
Nature's full blessings would be well dispensed
In unsuperfluous even proportion,
And she no whit encumbered with her store,
And then the giver would be better thanked,'
His praise due paid, for swinish gluttony
ne'er looks to heaven amidst his gorgeous feast,
But with besorted base ingratitude
crams, and blasphemes his feeder. Shall I go on?
Or have I said enough? to him that dares
Arm his profane tongue with reproachful words
Against the Sun-clad power of Chastity
Fain would I something say, yet to what end?
Thou hast nor Ear, nor School to apprehend
The sublime notion, and high mystery
That must be uttered to unfold the sage
And serious doctrine of Virginity,
And thou art worthy that thou shouldst not know
More happiness than this thy present lot.
Enjoy your dear Wit, and gay Rhetoric
That hath so well been taught her dazzling fence,
Thou art not fit to hear thyself convinced;
Yet should I try, the uncontrolled worth
Of this pure cause would kindle my rapt spirits
To such a flame of sacred vehemence,
That dumb things would be moved to sympathize,
And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake,
Till all thy magic structures reared so high
Were shattered into heaps o'er thy false head.
She fables not, I feel that I do fear
Her words set off by some superior power;
And though not mortal, yet a cold shuddering dew
Dips me all over, as when the wrath of Iove
Speaks thunder, and the chains of Erebus
To some of Saturn's crew. I must dissemble,
And try her yet more strongly. Come; no more,
This is mere moral babble, and direct
Against the canon laws of our foundation,
I must not suffer this, yet 'tis but the lees
And setlings of a melancholy blood;
But this will cure all straight, one sip of this
Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight
Beyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste.—
What, have you let the false enchanter scape?
O ye mistook, ye should have snatched his wand
And bound him fast; without his rod reversed,
And backward mutters of dissevering power
we cannot free the Lady that sits here
In stony fetters fixed, and motionless;
Yet stay, be not disturbed, now I bethink me,
Some other means I have which may be used,
Which once of Melibaeus old I learned
The soothest shepherd that ere piped on plains.
There is a gentle nymph not far from hence
That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream,
Sabrina is her name, a virgin pure,
Whilom she was the daughter of Locrine,
That had the sceptre from his father Brute.
She guiltless damsel flying the mad pursuit
Of her enraged stepdame Gwendolyn
Commended her fair innocence to the flood
That stayed her flight with his cross-flowing course,
The water Nymphs that in the bottom played
Held up their pearled wrists and took her in,
Bearing her strait to aged Nereus' hall
Who piteous of her woes reared her lank head,
And gave her to his daughters to imbathe
In nectared lavers strewed with asphodel,
And through the porch, and inlet of each sense
Dropped in ambrosial oils till she revived,
And underwent a quick, immortal change
Made goddess of the river; still she retains
Her maiden gentleness, and oft at eve
Visits the herds along the twilight meadows,
Helping all urchin blasts, and ill luck signs
That the shrewd meddling elf delights so make,
Which she with precious vialed liquours heals.
For which the shepherds at their festivals
Carol her goodness loud in rustic lays,
And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream
Of pansies, pinks, and gaudy daffodils.
And, as the old Swain said, she can unlock
The clasping charm, and thaw the numbing spell,
If she be right invoked in warbled Song,
For maidenhood she loves, and will be swift
To aid a virgin such as was herself
In hard besetting need, this will I try
And add the power of some adjuring verse.
Sabrina fair
Listen where thou art sitting
Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave,
In twisted braids of lilies knitting
The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair,
Listen for dear honour's sake
Goddess of the silver lake
Listen and save.
Listen and appear to us
In name of great Oceanus,
By th' earth shaking Neptun's mace
And Tethys' grave majestic pace,
By hoary Nereus wrincled look,
And the Carpathian wizard's hook,
By scaly winding shell.
And old sooth saying Claucus' spell,
By Leucothea's lovely hands,
And her son that rules the strands,
By Thetis' tinsel-slipper feet;
And the songs of Sirens sweet,
By dead Parthenope's dear tomb,
And fair Ligea's golden comb,
Wherewith she sits on diamond rocks
Sleeking her soft alluring locks,
By all the Nymphs that nightly dance
Upon thy streams with wily glance,
Rise, rise and heave thy rosy head
From thy coral-paven bed,
And bridle in thy headlong wave
Till thou our summons answered have.
Listen and save.
Sabrina rises attended by water nymphs and sings.
By the rushy fringed bank,
Where grows the willow and the osier dank
My sliding chariot stays,
Thick set with agate, and the azure sheen
Of turquis blue, and emerald green
That in the channel strays,
Whilst from off the water's fleet
Thus I set my printless feet
o'er the cowslips velvet head,
That bends not as I tread,
Gentle swain at thy request
I am here.
Goddess dear
we implore thy powerful hand
To undo the charmed band
Of true virgin here distressed,
Through the force, and through the wile
Of unblessed enchanter vile.
Shepherd 'tis my office best
To help ensnared chastity;
Brightest Lady look on me,
Thus I sprinkle on thy breast
Drops that from my fountain pure
I have kept of precious cure,
Thrice upon thy finger's tip,
Thrice upon thy rubied lip,
Next this marble venomed seat
Smeared with gums of glutenous heat
I touch with chaste palms moist and cold,
Now the spell hath lost his hold.
And I must haste ere morning hour
To wait in Amphitrite's bower.
Virgin, daughter of Locrine
Sprung of old Anchises line
May thy brimmed waves for this
Their full tribute never miss
From a thousand petty rills,
That tumble down the snowy hills:
Summer drought, or singed air
Never scorch thy tresses fair,
Nor wet October's torrent flood
Thy molten crystal fill with mud,
May thy billows roll ashore
The beryl, and the golden ore,
May thy lofty head be crowned
With many a tower, and terrace round,
And here and there thy banks upon
With groves of myrrh, and cinnamon.
Come Lady while heaven lends us grace,
Let us fly this cursed place,
Lest the sorcerer us entice
With some other new device.
Not a waste, or needless sound
Till we come to holier ground,
I shall be your faithful guide
Through this gloomy covert wide,
And not many furlongs thence
Is your Father's residence,
Where this night are met in state
Many a friend to gratulate
His wish't presence, and beside
All the Swains that there abide,
With jigs, and rural dance resort,
we shall catch them at their sport,
And our sudden coming there
Will double all their mirth, and cheer,
Come let us haste the stars are high
But night sits monarch yet in the mid sky.
Back shepherds, back enough your play,
Till next Sunshine holiday,
Here be without duck or nod,
Other trippings to be trod
Of lighter toes, and such Court guise
As Mercury did first devise
With the mincing dryads
On the lawns, and on the leas.
Noble Lord, and Lady bright,
I have brought ye new delight,
Here behold so goodly grown.
Three fair branches of your own,
Heaven hath timely tried their youth,
Their faith, their patience, and their truth,
And sent them here through hard assays
With a crown of deathless Praise,
To triumph in victorious dance
o'er sensual Folly, and Intemperance.
To the Ocean now I fly,
And those happy climes that lie
Where day never shuts his eye,
Up in the broad fields of the sky:
There I suck the liquid air
All amidst the gardens fair
Of Hesperus, and his daughters three
That sing about the golden tree,
Along the crisped shades, and bowers
Revels the spruce and jocund Spring,
The Graces, and the rosy-bosomed Hours
Thither all their bounties bring,
That there eternal Summer dwells
And west winds, with musky wing
About the cedarn alleys fling
Nard, and Cassia's balmy smells.
Iris there with humid bow
Waters the odorous banks that blow
Flowers of more mingled hue
Then her purfled scarf can show,
And drenches with Elysium dew
(List mortals, if your ears be true)
Beds of Hyacinth, and roses)
Where young Adonis oft reposes,
Waxing well of his deep wound
In slumber soft, and on the ground
Sadly sits th'Assyrian Queen;
But far above in spangled sheen
Celestial Cupid her famed Son advanced,
Holds his dear Psyche sweet entranced
After her wandering labours long,
Till free consent the gods among
Make her his eternal Bride,
And from her fair unspotted side
Two blissful twins are to be borne,
Youth, and joy; so Iove hath sworn.
But now my task is smoothly done,
I can fly, or I can run
Quickly to the green earth's end,
Where the bowed welkin slow doth bend,
And from thence can soar as soon
To the corners of the Moon.
Mortals that would follow me,
Love virtue, she alone is free,
She can teach ye how to climb
Higher than the Sphaery chime;
Or if virtue feeble were
Heaven itself would stoop to her.