My variable Sir; Ith' name of Heaven,
What makes your falsehood here where fame intends
Her triumphs all of Truth? her Trumpet she
Hath chosen new and clean, lest it should taint
Her breath; Thou art so useless to the World
That thou art impudent, when thou dost share
What is most cheap, and common unto all
The Air and Light; I do beseech thee my
Fine, false Artificer, hide both thy faces
(For thou art double everywhere) steal hence
And I'll take care, thou shalt no more be missed
Than shadows are at night.
Be patient Sir!
This valiant humour of disdain works not
So powerfully as you believe, I hide myself?
The reasons must be strong, that shall persuade
Me under ground: The Badger loves his hole,
Yet is not so bashful, but dares look out
And show himself, when there is prey abroad:
Then strangely arrogant, I pity thee
As Politics do men too humble, for
Their care, much more for their redress; that is,
I smile at thee (the Graver way of scorn)
For should I laugh, I fear 'twould make thee think
Thy impudence had somewhat in't of wit,
Didst ever hope to be so useful in
The manage and support of humane works
As I?
Proceed, Proceed, make up your History.
Wisely the jealous skeptics did suspect
Reality in every thing, for every thing but seems,
And borrows the existence it appears
To have: Imposture governs all, even from
The gilded Ethnic Mitre, to the painted staff
Oth' Christian Constable, all but pretend
Th' resemblance of that power which inwardly
They but deride, and whisper merry questions to themselves
Which way it comes.
Y' have cunningly observed
This is a pleasant new Philosophy:
Right Sir, and what is pleasant unto all
Is generally good, Troth I could wish
Our reason were as certain as our sense
Would alter in dispute, as little be
As soon confirmed, but since it is not so,
That universally shall take, which most
Doth please, not what pretends at profit, and
Imaginary good, Is it not fit
And almost safest to cozen all, when all
Delight still to be cozened.
These Lectures would
Subdue a numerous sect, wert thou to preach
To young soft Courtesans, unpractised heirs
Of over practised Usurers, silken
And fine feathered gallants, whose easy ears
Still open to delights, and shut at truths:
But Fate takes not so little care of those
For whom it doth preserve the Elements:
That what is chief within us should be quite
Depraved, as we were only borne to aim
At trifles here, like children in their first
Estate of using legs, to run at sight
Of bubbles, and to leap at noise of bells.
Even so believe't, and in their chiefest growth
They follow but my Grandsire Mahomet's
Divinity, who doth allow the good a handsome Girl
On earth, the valiant two in Paradise.
Thou art so read in humane appetites
That were the Devil licensed to assume
A body, thou might'st be his Cook, yet know
If you endeavour it, you may persuade
yourself, there are some few 'mongst men
That as our making is erect, look up
To face the Stars, and fancy nobler hopes
Than you allow, not downward hang their heads
Like Beasts to meditate on earth, on abject things
Beneath their feet.
'tis a thin number sure,
And much dispersed, for they will hardly meet
In Counsels and in Synods to enact
Their Doctrine by consent, That the next age
May say they parted friends.
'Tis possible
'less you steal in amongst them to disturb
Their peace, disguised in a Canonic weed,
Nor are these such, that by their reasons strict
And rigid discipline, must fright nice Court
Philosophers from their belief, such as impute
A tyrannous intent to heavenly powers,
And that their tyranny alone did point
At men, as if the Fawn and Kid were made
To frisk and caper out their time, and it
Were sin in us to dance, the Nightingale
To sing her tragic tales of love, and we
To recreate ourselves with Groans, as if
All perfumes for the Tiger were ordained
'cause he excels in scent: colours, and gaudy tinctures for
The Eastern birds, whilst all our ornament
Are russet robes, like melancholy Monks.
There are Sir of this rigid sect, and much
They govern too, that think the Godwit and
The Rail were meant the eagle's food, and men
Designed to feed on Salads in a mead,
As if we were created but a great
And larger kind of Frogs.
It is confessed;
There are some sullen Clerks that love
To injure and to scant themselves, yet you
May find a few whose wisdoms merit greater sway
That will allow us pleasures 'bove our cares,
Yet these we must not compass with our guilt,
But every Act be squared by virtue's rule.
Virtue, 'tis a mere name, Virgins that want
A dowry, learned by rote, to raise the price
Of old unhandsome looks: admit, there's one
Or two allow in nature such a thing,
And that it is no dream: These mighty Lords
Of reason have but a few followers,
And those go ragged too, the prosperous, brave
Increasing multitude pursue my steps.
The great devourer of mysterious books
Is come, Merlin, whose deep Prophetic Art
Foretold that at this particle of Time
He would forsake's unbodied friends below
And waste one usual circuit of the Moon
On earth, to try how Nature's face is changed
Since his decease.
Your eyes encounter him
As you would make great use of's visit here.
With reason Sir, for he hath power to wake
Those that have many ages slept, such as
When busy in their flesh, were my Disciples.
Haile thou most ancient Prophet of this Isle,
I that have practised superstitious rites
Unto thy memory, beg thy immortal aid,
To raise their figures that in times forgot
Were in the world predominant; Help to
Confute this righteous fool, that boasts his small
Neglected stock of wisdom, comes from Heaven, and show
How little it prevailed on earth, since all
The mighty here, are of my sect.
'Tis long
Since this my Magic rod hath struck the Air
Yet loss of practice can no Art impair,
That soars above the reach of nature's might,
Thus then I charm the Spirits of the night,
And unto Hell conjure their wings to steer,
And straight collect from dismal corners there
The great seducers of this Isle, that by
Their baits of pleasure strove to multiply
Those sad Inhabitants, who curse that truth below
Which here on Earth they took no pains to know,
Appear! Appear! nimbly obey my will
T' express I died t' increase my Magic skill.
Bellerophon? Thou that the offspring art of Heaven,
Most timely, and by Inspiration sure,
Thou com'st to help me to despise and scorn
These Airy mimic Apparitions, which
This cozening Prophet would present as great
Examples for succeeding times to imitate.
Through thick assembled clouds, through mists that would
Choke up the eagle's eye, I in my swift
And sudden journey through the Air, have seen
All these fantastics objects, which but show
How dull the Impious were to be so sillily
Misled, and how the good did ever need
But little Care, and less of Brain, to scape
Th' apparent baits of such gross Fools.
I Sir,
T' were easy to subdue if Choleric scorn
Might make up confutation without help
Of Arguments, the virtuous Sir of late
Have got a fine Feminine trick to rail
At all they will dislike, refer what is
Not easily understood unto a kind
Obedient Faith, and then call reason but
A new and saucy Heretic, those that
My reverend Prophet raised, which you Sir in
A virtuous fury have called Fools, I'm sure
Did govern when alive, and by
Imposture made their estimation thrive.
Monster! thou know'st 'tis not thy strange defence
Of Reason that provokes my rage, but thou
Wouldst cunningly disguise thy sense
In reason's shape, cozening thy willing self,
And giving seeming pleasures, real Attributes:
These taking tunes, to which the numerous world
Do dance (when your false-sullenness shall please)
You may compare, toth' th' dangerous Music of
The swan, a merry preparation still
To Melancholy death.
Cry mercy, Sir!
You are Heroic virtue, who pretend
An Embassy from Heaven, and that y'are sent
To make new lovers here on Earth, you will
Refine the ways of wooing, and prescribe
To valour, nobler exercise, than what
The Ancient Knights Adventurers taught, but first
See these of th'old Heroic race, Merlin
Assist me once more with thy charming rod,
To show this strict Corrector of delights
What Ladies were of yore, and what their Knights,
Although their shapes and manners now grow strange,
Make him admire, what he would strive to change.
Alas, how weak and easy would you make
Our intellectual strength, when you have hope
It may be overcome with noise and shows.
Yes, and this moral Magistrate; your strict
o'er solemn Friend, that in such comely Phrase
Disputes for active virtue, and declares
Himself the mark of all unrighteous opposites,
His Magnanimity shall yield at last,
straight take my Angle in his hand, then bait
The hook with guilded Flies, to fish in troubled Seas:
For all the world is such, and in a storm;
Where the Philosopher (that still swims in
Profoundest depths) will (Sir) as easily
be snapped, as fools that float on shallow streams
And taken with a Line, no stronger sir, than what
Will tear a little Gudgeons jaws.
The Knight Adventurer that you intend
To raise, must then adventure far, and make
His valour captivate, surer and soon
As his lamenting lady's looks, I'll not
Be taken else.
Most reverend Lord of Dark
Unusual sciences begin thy charm.
Like furious Rivers meeting under ground,
So hollow and so dismal is the sound
Of all my inward murmurs, which no ear
But with a wild astonishment can hear;
Though not so loud as Thunder, Thunders are
A slower noise, and not amaze so far.
Which to express, that distant spirits hear,
And willingly obey: Appear, Appear!
FLy from this Forest, Squire! Fly trusty spark!
I fear like child, whom maid hath left i'th' dark.
O Coward base! whose fear will never Lynne
Till't shrink thy heart as small as head of pin!
Lady, with pretty finger in her eye
Laments her Lamkin Knight, and shall I fly?
Is this a time for blade to shift for's self,
When Giant vile, calls Knight a sneaking Else?
This day, (a Day as fair as heart could wish)
This Giant stood on shore of sea to fish,
For Angling rod he took a sturdy Oak,
For line a Cable that in storm ne'er broke;
His hook was such as heads the end of Pole,
To pluck down house ere fire consumes it whole.
This hook was baited with a dragon's tail,
And then on Rock he stood to bob for Whale:
Which straight he caught and nimbly home did pack,
With ten Cart load of dinner on his back:
Thus homeward bent, his eye too rude and cunning,
Spies Knight and Lady by an hedge a sunning.
That Modicum of meat he down did lay
(For it was all he eat on fasting day)
They come, in's rage he spurns up huge tree roots,
Now stick to Lady Knight, and up with boots.
Bold recr'ant wight! what Fate did hither call thee,
To tempt his strength, that hath such power to maul thee?
How durst thy puling Damsel hither wander?
What was the talk you by yond hedge did maunder?
Patience sweet man of might! alas Heaven knows
We only hither came to gather sloes,
And Bullies two or three; for truth to tell ye
I've longed six weeks with these to fill my belly:
I' fecks if you'll believe't, nought else was meant sure
By this our jaunt, which Errants call Adventure.
Shall I grow meek as Babe when every Trull is
So bold to steal my sloes and pluck my bullies?
Fear not! let him storm on, and still grow rougher,
Thou that art bright as candle cleared by snuffer,
Canst ne'er endure a blemish or Eclipse
From such a hooked nose foul mouthed Bobber lips:
Ere he shall boast, he used thee thus to's People,
I'll see him first hanged high as any steeple.
If I but upward heave my oaken Twig,
I'll teach thee play the Tomboy, her the Rig,
Within my Forest bounds: what doth she ail
But she may serve as Cook to dress my whale?
In this her Damsels tire and robe of sarsenet
She shall souse boar, fry tripes, and wild hog's harsnet.
O monster vile, thou mighty ill bred Lubber,
Art thou not moved to see her whine and blubber?
Shall Damsel fair (as thou must needs confess her)
With Canvas apron, dress thy meat at dresser?
Shall she that is of soft and pliant mettle,
Whose finger's silk would gall, now scour a Kettle?
Though not to scuffle given, now I'll thwart thee,
Let Blouse thy daughter serve for shillings forty.
'tis meeter (I think) such ugly baggages
Should in a Kitchen drudge for yearly wages,
Than gentle She who hath been bred to stand
near chair of Queen with Island shock in hand.
At Questions and commands, all night to play,
And Amber Possits eat at break of Day,
Or score out Husbands in the charcoal ashes.
With Courtly Knights, not roaring country swashes,
Hath been her breeding still, and's more fit far
To play on Virginals, and the guitar,
Than stir a seacole fire, or scum a Cauldron,
When thou shalt break thy fast on a bull's cauldron.
Then I perceive I must lift up my Pole,
And deal your love-sick noddle such a dole
That every blow shall make so huge a clatter,
Men ten leagues off shall ask, Hah! what's the matter?
Kind grumbling youth! I know that thou art able,
And want of breeding makes thee prone to squabble,
Yet sure thy Nature doth compunction mean
Though ('las) thy mother was a sturdy Quean:
Let not meek lovers kindle thy fierce wrath,
But keep thy blustering breath to cool thy broth.
Whine not my love, his fury straight will waste him,
Stand off a while and see how I'll lambast him.
Now look to't Knight, this such a desperate blade is,
In Gaul he swinged the valiant sir Amadis!
With bow, now Cupid shoot this son of Punk
With crossbow else, or pellet out of trunk!
I'll strike thee till thou sink where the abode is
Of wights that sneak below, called Antipodis.
My Art will turn this Combat to delight
They shall unto fantastic Music fight.
How trivial and how lost thy visions are!
Did thy Prophetic Science take such care
(When thou wert mortal) with unlawful power
To recollect thy ashes, 'gainst this hour,
And all for such import? surrender straight
This usurpation of thy warmth and weight,
And turn to Air, thy Spirit to a wind:
Blow thine own dust about, until we find
No small remainder of ill gathered thee
And like to it, so waste thy memory.
Thou Imposture to some dark Region steal
The light is killing, cause it doth reveal
Thy thin disguise, I'th' dark thou ne'er wilt fade,
For dismal plants still prosper in the shade;
Thou art a shadow, and observe how all
Vain shadows to our eyes stretch and grow tall,
Just when the Sun declines to bring in night,
So thou dost thrive in darkness, waste in light.
Away! Fame (still obedient unto Fate)
This happy hour is called to celebrate
Britanocles, and those that in this Isle
The old with modern virtues reconcile.
Away! Fame's universal voice I hear,
'tis fit you vanish quite when they appear.
Break forth thou Treasure of our sight,
That art the hopeful morn of every day,
Whose fair example makes the light,
By which Heroic virtue finds her way.
O thou, our cheerful morning rise
And straight those misty clouds of error clear,
Which long have overcast our eyes,
And else will darken all this Hemisphere:
What to thy Power is hard or strange?
Since not alone confined unto the land;
Thy Sceptre to a trident change,
And straight unruly Seas thou canst command!
How hath thy wisdom raised this Isle?
Or thee, by what new title shall we call
Since it were lessening of thy style,
If we should name thee natures Admiral!
Thou universal wonder know
We all in darkness mourn till thou appear,
And by thy absence dulled may grow,
To make a doubt if day were ever here!
Britanocles, the great and good appears,
His Person fills our eyes, his name our ear,
His virtue every drooping spirit cheers!
Why move these Princes of his train so slow
As taking root, they would to Statues grow,
But that their wonder of his virtue turns them so!
'Tis fit you mix that wonder with delight,
As you were warmed to motion with his sight,
So pay the expectation of this night.
Move then in such a noble order here,
As if you each his governed Planet were,
And he moved first, to move you in each sphere.
O with what joy you'll measure out the time?
Each breast like his still free from every crime,
Whose pensive weight might hinder you to climb!
Our eyes (long since dissolved to Air)
To thee for Day must now repair,
Though raised to life by Merlin's might,
Thy stock of Beauty will supply
Enough of Sun from either eye,
To fill the Organs of our sight!
Yet first thy pity should have drawn
A Cloud of Cypress or of Lawn,
To come between thy radiant Beams:
Our eyes (long darkened in a shade)
When first they so much light invade
Must ache and sicken with extremes.
Yet wiser reason hath prevailed
To wish thy beauties still unveiled,
'Tis better that it blind should make us,
Than we should want such heavenly Fire,
That is so useful to inspire
Those Raptures which would else forsake us.
Who knows but Homer got his Flame
From some Refulgent Grecian Dame
Whose beauty gave his Muse supplies:
And would not trust in humble Prose
His noble thoughts, but rather chose
High numbers, though with loss of eyes?
So well Britanocles o'er seas doth Reign,
Reducing what was wild before,
That fairest sea-Nymphs leave the troubled main,
And haste to visit him on shore.
What are they less than Nymphs since each make show
Of wondrous Immortality?
And each those sparkling Treasures wears that grow
Where breathless Divers cannot Pry?
On ever moving waves they used to dance
Unto the whistling of the wind;
Whose measures hit and meet by erring chance,
Where Music can no concord find.
But now for their Majestic welcome try
How ev'n, and equally they'll meet,
When you shall lead them by such Harmony,
As can direct their ears, and feet.
Wise Nature, that the Dew of sleep prepares
To intermit our joys, and ease our cares,
Invites you from these Triumphs to your rest.
May every whisper that is made be chaste,
Each Lady slowly yield, yet yield at last;
Her Heart a Prisoner to her lover's breast!
To wish unto our Royal Lover more
Of youthful blessings than he had before,
Were but to tempt old Nature have her might,
Since all the Odour, Music, Beauteous Fire,
We in the spring, the spheres, the stars, admire
Is his renewed, and bettered every night!
To Bed, to Bed, may every Lady dream
From that chief beauty she hath stolen a Beam,
Which will amaze her Lovers curious Eyes!
Each lawful Lover to advance his youth,
Dream he hath stolen, his Vigour, Love, and Truth;
Then all will haste to Bed, but none to Rise!