In wet and cloudy mists, I slowly rise,
As with mine own dull weight oppressed.
To close with sleep the jealous lovers eyes,
And give forsaken virgin's rest.
Th' adventurous Merchant and the Mariner,
(Whom storms all day vex in the deep)
Begin to trust the winds when I appear,
And lose their dangers in their sleep.
The studious that consume their brains and sight,
In search where doubtful knowledge lies,
Grow weary of their fruitless use of light,
And wish my shades to ease their eyes.
Th' ambitious toiling Statesman that prepares
Great mischiefs ere the day begins,
Not measures day by hours, but by his cares;
And night must intermit his sins.
Then why, when my slow Chariot used to climb,
Did old mistaking Sages weep?
As if my Empire did usurp their time,
And hours were lost when spent in sleep.
I come to ease their labours and prevent
That weariness which would destroy:
The profit of their toils are still misspent
Till rest enables to enjoy.
The third in purple, and black, on her head a dormouse.
The Chariot of Night being arrived to the middle of the air, stayed, and after some dialogue with her attendants, she ascends singing, and is hidden in the clouds.
Why dreadful Queen dost thou appear,
So early in this Hemisphere?
Where all to triumphs are addressed,
As they did need as little rest
As wandering Planets have above;
Who ne'er are tired, yet ever move.
As little weary as are they;
As free from sufferings and decay,
Or fear of fleeting times expense;
Not tired, with weight, or vexed with sense.
Why would Oblivion mix with these that strive,
To raise new joys, and keep the old alive?
What is the use of silence here?
Thou seest (great Empress) every eye,
Doth watch for measures, every ear
Doth harken after harmony.
Why are we come to give their labours ease?
That reckon sleep a death, rest a disease:
And all this Isle their triumphs now express,
Not to beget, but show their happiness:
A precious sign, they know their own estate,
And that makes Nations chiefly fortunate:
For it alike should often valued be,
To know, as to deserve felicity.
You just, and careful Registers of hours,
And you whose several ever useful powers,
Dispose and make me pleasing whilst I sway,
Produce fantastic creatures of the night,
Though not t' advance, yet vary their delight;
Perhaps these triumphs may defer the day.
All that our striving mystery presents
Will be but foils to nobler ornaments,
Yet I so trust the causes of their joy,
And am so envious of those glistering shows
The Sun in pride, not favour doth disclose,
That I would lengthen what I can't destroy.
Morpheus the presenter of humane shapes.
Iceles, of fearful visions.
And Phantaste, of any thing that may be imagined.
Why (as if guilty) dost thou hide thy head
(Dull sleep!) in gloomy shades with Poppy spread?
If thou dost steal our hours, is it a crime?
Thou dost but lay them by for men's relief,
And art at worst a profitable thief;
Payest Nature double what thou stealest from Time.
Invoke thy chiefest sons, and straight appear,
To make these pleasures sit to last a year!
I come! I come! and that I more may please,
My Morpheus I have brought, and Iceles,
With wild Phantaste; each of them hath power
To raise Ideas from my shady Bower:
Those dreams of humane forms; of worse estate
That reason want, and things inanimate.
How we shall fill each mortal with delight,
To show the soul's fond business every night;
When she doth inwardly contract her beams,
To figure out her influence in dreams!
How they will smile, that man's immortal part,
Works things less perfect than if ruled by Art!
4. Witches.
1. Devil in the shape of a Goat.
Robin-goodfellow.
1. Dairy-maid.
1. Kitchenmaid.
The bright perpetual Traveller
Doth now too long the day defer,
Can he grow old,
Or, in his fiery chariot cold,
Or weary cause he still one course doth run?
Bold Hesperus thou dost mistake the Sun:
Though's journeys never can be passed,
But must for ever last,
Though 'tis not limited how far,
Because it still is circular,
Yet sure he cannot tire,
Nor mortally wax old,
Nor's universal beams grow cold,
Since fed with immaterial fire.
What is the cause he then so long doth stay?
He hath resigned the power of making day
Throughout this Hemisphere,
To a terrestrial beauty here.
Now I perceive why Poets call him wise
He knows the way how to preserve his eyes,
This earthly Star (long since the boast of Fame)
Is both become his envy and his shame.
'Tis true, should he appear, he were undone,
And eclipsed though in his pride of noon.
Yet in her looks he'll least of danger find,
She darkens those with beauties of her mind.
If thou wilt ever shine above,
And in thy Sphere still safely move,
Descend, and summon straight
Apollo's Priests that wait
I'th' garden o'th' Britanides.
Enough, I'll rouse them from their ease,
That they with Hymns may celebrate
Her virtues ever blessed estate.
Her Nymphs (whose beauties can't expire,)
'Cause daily kindled by her fire,
Must needs be ravished with those lays,
Since as their own they love her praise.
Wisely did Arts great Lord
That ruled Mythology,
No vest for Truth afford,
But to each eye
Ordained her body naked still, to show
Some kind of truth's men bashfully should know;
Thy praises being truths are silenced so.
Yet mighty spirits raise
Their actions up to Fame,
When lifted high with praise:
Then who will blame
Great virtue for ambition when it strives
To feed on praise (the food by which it thrives?)
Who earn'st, yet hat'st, himself of truth deprives.
We know it is more lawful far
Than possible to sing your praise,
Who shows how gentle, wise, and just you are,
Must trace wide measures, not in common ways.
As some in war near a defeat,
Confess betimes th' are overcome,
To save their desperate honours by retreat;
so we retire, lest wonder strike us dumb.
How dull and uneffectual is that rage,
Which swells our Poets when their numbers flow?
Resembling sillily, in every ago,
Things excellent, to what they least do know.
How poorly have they done, when they compare
A beauty that can rule severest eyes,
Unto some pretty twinkling senseless Star?
Yet think they mend her by such similes.
If it be safe to gaze on beauty in extremes,
Look there, correct your judgements by your sight!
Those beauties near her, are made up of beams,
They gathered from her useless scattered light.
Now judge (if fairest Stars no more contain
Than what is certain to th' ginger)
Whether compared to Stars she so much gain,
As Stars have gotten when compared to her?
Was there no other way
Our wonder to allay
But thus to falsify relief?
For seeing quickly tired,
What moving we admired,
You turn our wonder into grief.
Renew your measures now
Though but awhile, to show
This respite was not weariness;
But you by thee did please
To give our pleasures ease,
Which if continued, had grown less,
You that are chief in souls, as in your blood,
And nothing bettered by your high descent,
Ev'n in your passions as in reason good,
To whom vast power can add no ornament.
Though Men the blessed estate of angel's praise,
'Cause not perplexed with what we sexes call;
Yet you by such a humane difference raise
Your virtue more, because 'tis conjugal.
Be long expected in your Thrones above!
And stay on earth until our judgements know
The noble use of that we so much love;
Thus heaven still lends what we would ever owe.
The Masquers dance the Revels with the Lords.