HEre, Daphne, by your father Peneus streams
(which falling from the top of Pindus' mount,
Waters Hemonian Tempe) let us sit,
All daughters to the Rivers flowing near:
There old Apidanus steals (murmuring) by;
Next, Poplar-shadowed Enipeus glides:
Not far, Amphrisus, Aeas, and' 'mongst these,
(Not lest) my father, good old Inachus
Lists up his reverend head, with fresh flowers crowned,
Prescribing laws and limits to his streams,
To bond them in their channels, kerb their torrent,
Jest in their pride they should o'reswell their banks;
Commanding them, through thousand strange indents
To pay his plenteous tribute to the seas.
And how much are we bond unto the gods,
(Fair Io) to be Nymphs, not generated
From marish Meres, nor yet from standing Lakes,
From sedgy brooks, thick pools, or shallow fords,
Nor yet from violent and robustuous seas.
Their waters keep a smooth and gentle course,
Not moved to fury by the warring winds;
Nor when loud fluxes fall to swell their bounds,
And make deep inundations on the meads:
Nor can the parching drought so dry their springs,
But that their channels keep a temperature:
Their modest shallows serve us for cool baths
In summer time to play and wanton in:
Their depths, to bate our hooks with worms and fly's
Fastened to lines made of small twisted silk,
And so betray the creatures of the flood.
Their crystal waves are Mirrors, in the which
We dress our heads, and put these curls in form,
Sometimes so cunningly, as if that Art
Had power to exceed Nature: and again,
With careless, but so curious a neglect,
As if mere Chance did antecede them both.
This makes us of the Satyrs so admired,
And of the Fauns and Swains so much beloved.
Why, have you Suitors, Daphne?
Besides such,
For these my father, by whose will I an swayed)
Accounts as mean) of Gallants I have change;
●oth City and the Court.
But I may claim
Priority above all water Nymphs,
Nor can the Naiads compare with me;
Not, Daphne, not yourself. The rural Swains,
they gather from these banks mellifluous flowers,
●nd make you chaplets to adorn your brows,
●nd shadow your choice beauty from the Sun,
●ay think them costly Presents: but I'm one
To whom the gods themselves have offered gifts.
Than before all the daughters of these floods
claim a just precedence.
By what dream,
●r rather by what brainsick fantasy
●ath Io been deluded?
My apprehensions
●●e no weak phantoms to beguile the sense,
●●t real, and in action; with their form
●hey bear a being substance.
Hath your Beauty
●●d among men such long and strange neglect,
●●at Io would to colour such disgrace,
accuse the gods of weakness?
Let earth's Beauties
censure of Earth, mere terren as yours be,
d aime no further: the while this of myne
●●all be new questioned by the Powers Divine.
Now by what gods, for Heaven's sake?
Not the meanest,
such as we call under-deities,
melancholy Saturn, (by his son
●iled and banished from the supreme rule)
Phoebus, a mere Vassal to the earth,
And forced each natural day to measure heaven;
As Neptune, Sovereign o'er the Seas, to whom
Our tributary rivers hourly pay:
As Mercury, though son to Iove himself,
Not better than his Footboy or his Page,
Compelled at every summons to his speed:
But of the potent Thunderer.
He of whom
You have learned to thunder these impossible braves.
Io, I an ashamed.
Yes, that your beauty's
Composed of the grosser elements,
Want that attraction to call Iove himself
Down from his heavenly Fabric, to behold
Us in our eminence.
Strange wonder sure,
To look upon that face in which we Mortals,
And value it at best, can nothing spy,
Breed admiration in a Deity!
Appear, Iove, in thy glory, let them know
Ei, shamed confess their fond surmises vain,
And what it is, thy godhead to profane.
Fly, fly, jest we be thunderstruck, away;
Let's seek our safety, danger's in our stay.
Thou Daphne, who Jove's presence now dost shun,
Swifter ere long shalt from, Apollo run.
But there lie that which makes us terrible,
Affrighting gods and men. Io to thee
In calms I come, and Fair one make me proud,
To seal the love which I so long have vowed.
What steal? what vow?
Both thou shalt find impressed
On thy smooth cheek, soft lip, and Ivory breast,
Forbear to handle; yet I never known
A man so bold and rude: Can gods dispense,
To teach us Women unknown impudence?
Nay rather we solicit you to prove
What yet you have not tried, the sweets of love.
Things that I would not learn.
A Truant still?
If you want art, Io, I can teach you skill:
Give me your hand, your lip: why these but are
The Prologue to a pastime much more rare.
Women by nature are ambitious, and
Long to know what they do not understand.
I'll practise you in that which you before
Never known.
In all this lip-sport? or what more
Is in these kisses meant? I an so dull,—
All these my Comment shall explain at full.
In vain you strive.
Should I do aught save well,
I were undone, my father's floods would tell;
These are his banks, they'll blab: What mean you? fie;
They swell above their bounds, only to spy
And see what we are doing. Pish, away,
Such deeds of darkness can you do by day?
Besides, shall I consent to what you mean,
Not all these silver drops can wash me clean.
Where I do stain I can again make pure:
And that Day shall not hinder us, be sure:
Arise you fogs and damps, your vapours gather,
To shrowded us both from Iuno and thy father.
You make me blush.
These blush's none shall see;
Behold these mists, to curtain us and thee.
Well, when what most you sue for, you have wone,
My comfort is, I see not what is done,
And Io now I'll teach thee sports untried,
In darkness best a Virgins blush to hid.
Not in the heavens? where than? In vain it were
To search the seas; the blue veined Nor●ae,
And green haired Dorid with all their brats,
Styled by the names of water goddesses,
(Though Prostitutes to Neptune)' 'mongst them all
Yield not a face to please his curious eye.
Where than? The earth? I that, if any place,
Yields choice of tempting Beauties: Argos bread
A golden Danaë, Thebes afforded an
Alcmene and a wanton Semele;
Pelagia, a Calisto; Sparta nursed
A swanlike Leda, (Strumpets) of all which
I sought a sure, but found a vain revenge.
Why may not than Thessalian Tempe yield
Like fascination, since their impudence
Is more and more encouraged by my wrongs:
Here than I make inquiry. The day's clear;
Whence come these foggy mists that choke the air,
In so serene and bright an hemisphere?
Aut ego fall●r, aut ego ledar.
If from the earth, this sudden overcast
Would smell of thick and suffocating damps:
If from the air, or any sulphurous fire,
It would be found by their callidity.
If from the Rivers, or these moorish fens,
Humidity would tell us whence they were.
Not, these are forced, and by some godlike power,
Created for a more peculiaruse:
And now my jealousy most truly prompts me.
'Tis some illusion, made to blind mine eyes
From a new injury; which if I find,
On this one Strumpet I will study more,
Than all that have my vengeance scaped before.
The clamorous Queen's descended from the Spheres,
To find the cause of this illusive Fog:
But Io I have so transhaped thee now,
That she by no means can discover thee;
And in that confidence I'll front her boldly.
Jove hear? my jealousies are than not vain,
Howe're I'll give him gentle entertain,
Concealing what's within.
My lovely Iuno?
My Brother and my Husband Iupiter?
What make you here on earth?
What other reason,
But that I missed my sovereign Lord in heaven;
And than I yoked my Peacocks, to their bills
Tied silken bridles, and in my light chariot
Made of fine gold, and decked with Ostrich plumes,
Descended as you see. But what affair
Might Iuno be so bold to ask her Lord)
Detains you now in Tempe?
Though it fits not
Your Sex to ask a thing that ill beseems,
Or pry into the counsels of the gods;
Yet thus much I'll resolve you? I came down
To censure here some causes among men,
And set things crooked upright.
Now I spy
That which hath drawn him headlong from the sky,
And I will make the Adulterer himself
Author of my just vengeance.
Thou once gone,
●e were again transhaped, and we both one.
sweet Iuno will you once more mount your Chariot,
●nd keep your state above My designs ended,
will not long be from you.
My craft now
Shall match his cunning; if there be in me
A godhead, I have cast her destiny.
Dear loving Lord, since 'twas my kindness drawn me
To see unto your safety (though I know
The Deities in every place secure)
Give me some gift on earth, that I in heaven
May applaud your royal bounty.
Be it bread
Beneath the Moon, 'tis my Saturnia's.
I have not seen so sweet and lovely a Beast
White without spot or slain; Is she of the herd
Belonging to these Meadows?
She is, no doubt.
Why doth my Iuno ask?
To make her mine.
A gift too small for Juno to entreat,
Or Iove to grant; Demand some greater boon.
This Cow or nothing.
she's not for thy use;
What would my Love do with her?
Only this,
(Being above the rest most beautiful)
To sacrifice her to your Deity.
Not for the triple world: What was it, Sweet,
That you of me demanded?
Now to know
What put you in this fear? Nay I have begged,
And must not be denied. And have I found you?
In what a straight an I? her to betray,
And give her up into her enemy's hand,
In man would prove a savage cruelty,
Much more in us: and to deny a gift
Appearing of so small a consequence,
Would but augment her too much jealousy,
And open that which is as yet concealed.
What hope have I to enjoy greater things,
That an denied a trifle?
Say I will not,
And give no reason; it may than appear,
This Heifer to be no such as she seems.
Well, she is yours; but how will you dispose her?
So carefully, because she is your gift,
My servant Argus with a hundred eyes
Shall guard her from all dangers.
'Tis enough,
In that, to us you shall express your love.
But prove he to her churlish or unkind,
There's one, at once his hundred eyes shall blind.
So, she is now your charge.
And being mine,
I'll teach base Earth to injure what's divine.
Where is my servant Argus?
Who's that calls?
The sacred goddess Iuno? What new service
Will you command your vassal?
Take't in brief;
Beholdest thou This? This? This no matter what,
Not worth a name; only a thing I loathe;
Out on thee: But I'll spare my railing words,
To express my hate in action.
What's the cause
The poor beast trembles that?
A Beast indeed:
Like such she shall be used; behold her, Argus;
Are these lips fitting for a god to kiss?
These hooves apt palms to gripe? these tears fit pillows?
On which a Deity should breast himself?
These, eyes to tempt? or this an hide to touch?
These horns? (o me) in mine own heraldry
She mocks me without blushing.
In all this
How will you use my service?
As a Spy:
An hundred eyes thou hast, of all which number
I will allow thee two to sleep by turns;
The rest to watch this Strumpet; and of all,
But two to wink, the rest to gaze at full:
Behind thee thou hast eyes, both sides, before;
Which way soe'er thou turnst she's in thy view.
" A thousand he had need, all piercing bright,
To watch a Lover from his choice delight.
And is this all?
Something I had forgot:
Thou art an Herdsman, Argus, and thou knowest
To tame unruly cattle; she is such:
In some unworthy halter bind her neck,
For such a Beauty the first Carkanet.
Her browsing be the Brakes and bitter couch,
For dainties feed her with the sourest herbs;
Led her through briers & brambles, which may scratch
Her itching skin even till her soft sides bleed,
Raise up the mud in clear springs when she drinks,
Keep her from shadow, in the parching Sun,
Till she be stung with horse fly's, and the breeze:
Let her not rest but where the ground's still bore;
Feather her bed with thistles and sharp thorns;
And for her footing choose the barren paths
Strowed with lose pointed flints to gall her hooves.
Argus farewell, I leave her to thy trust,
A sweet revenge for her insatiate lust.
Drawing this piece of Beasts flesh thus along,
Methinks I look like Lybian Hercules
Leading the Dog of hell: nay I shall fit her
According to my charge, and I will keep thee
(Calf with the white face) safe enough from bulling,
The longest day that I have eye to see.
What do you hung an arse? Ptrow, come along,
I'll lead you to bore feeding, and find salads
To take down your full flanks and these plump cheeks.
Along, I'll watch thee well enough from shrinking
Neck out of collar. Nay, on; thou shalt find,
Though my face from thee, I have eyes behind.
Speak not to me of comfort, Jo's lost!
Had she miscarried on the earth, her body
Would have given instance of her timeless fate:
Or had she been by savage beasts devoured,
Her garments stained with blood would tell her death.
Had she in mine or these my neighbour floods
Perished, they would have born her gently up,
And cast her on some bank for burial.
Dear Inachus do not torment yourself,
Nothing so lost, but may be found at length:
For having seen no token of her death,
There's of her life some hope.
Behold, Amphrisus
With this your ancient neighbour Appidanus,
Peneus and others, as we moan your loss,
So in our pity come to comfort you.
OH, brackish not your waters with your tears,
That yet run pure and fresh; but be of comfort.
In vain you speak of what you cannot give,
As I in vain lament mine Io's loss.
How now, cursed Cow? What, start you at that name?
I'll make your long horns shorter.
Io, where?
If under earth, I'll sand my springs in search
As low as to the Centre, Io, where?
If snatched up in the air, like dew exhaled,
With eyes fixed upward I will still thus gaze,
Till from the bosom of some gentle cloud,
Thou drop into mine arms. Fair Io, where?
I think the beast hath breezes in her tail,
She cannot keep her still.
But stay, what's he
That leads the fairest Heifer tethered fast,
That ever drunk of my streams; for Io's sake
I love all creatures that are beautiful.
How now you Harlotry?
Thou churlish herdsman,
I know thee, Argus, jealous Juno's Spy,
Why canst thou be so fierce to one so fair?
What's that to thee, or any of you all.
Among all creatures Nature ever made,
Some to have native beauty 'bove the rest,
Commanding soft affection, this is such.
With all mine eyes I spy no difference,
But love all beasts as beasts.
The more beast thou.
But why should this, the fairest of all herds,
Cast such a piteous moving eye on you,
As wooing your acquaintance?
And 'tis true,
Where ere I go, her sad eye follows me,
So she too, did not Argus keep her backe:
See, see, how gently she endures my touch,
And makes an offer (had she power) to speak.
Hear, take these flowers, and now she kissed mine hand,
Whilst piteous tears drop down her tender cheeks.
What should I say? poor beast I pity thee,
And all the good I can do is to grieve,
Th' hast such a churlish Keeper.
Inachus, I fear
There's something greater in't.
What greater can be,
Unless there live some understanding spirit
In this irrational and savage shape:
What wouldst thou have, that in this bestial figure
Beg'st human pity? what intends she, think you,
By pawing on the ground? Observe her, brethrens,
It seems she hath written something in the dust,
And see, two letters are imprinted fair,
As if it were my Io's Character, And here I read Io.
Io: and see, in every step she hath trod,
That word impressed.
This she? whom I so long in vain have sought,
Through forests, groves, and mountains, fields & floods?
This she, whom I in finding shall most loose?
OH miserable wretched Inachus,
Moore miserable Io, thus transformed:
I term thee lovely, till I known thee such;
But when thy former beauty I record,
Thou ugly art, misshaped, and terrible.
Can the gods suffer this?
Leave this your howling.
Forbear, or in this cord I lead her forth,
I'll strangle her. Dare not to follow me,
There's danger in me both ways; she shall perish,
And you must bleed. Come, Minion we will climb
You craggy mountain top, a prospect fit
For Argus only, who (not moving) can
Behold at once from whence the four winds blow,
And there with her I'll like a Beacon stand,
To watch and to give warning. Will you drive?
I say pursue me not, for if you do,
I'll make her sure, and you repent it too.
Why ptrow there.
With what a piteous action, wailing tongue,
She gave a loving, but a loathe farewell.
But that the high Powers are not limitable,
Who would believe this wonder possible.
We must not question what the gods can do,
Yet in the extremity of all extremes,
And worst of bad's, despair not, Inachus.
How easy 'tis for those that taste not grief,
Bid others be of comfort.
Reverend Sir,—
There is no reverence due: not to the gods,
If this be seen and suffered: OH my Io.
With acclamations I will fill the Meads:
In stead of prayers, I'll execrate and curse,
And to the burden of mine untuned shrieks
The rocks and caves shall echo to thy name.
But Inachus.—
But when your Channels swell,
You can have dams and sluices to discharge
Superfluous waters, jest your torrents rage;
And will you bar the conduits of mine eyes
To ease the flux of my surcharged heart?
My care was, Io, to provide a man
To be thy husband; but I now must find
One of the bellowing herded to call me son:
To have some pretty infant draw thy breast,
But now must some pied urchin suck thy teats.
But that I an immortal, and the doors
And gate to death against me are debarred,
I'd weep myself to nothing, and this Being
Scatter among my floods, that mixed with them,
They might (in less than drops) among their waves,
Convey me to the all-devouring seas,
To mix my brine with his, and be so lost;
And lost, forgotten: But I an still the same,
And Io, I'll still call upon thy name.
How an I moved with Inachus exclaims?
Why are the ears of gods kept open still,
But first to hear, than pity? hast thou not, Mercury,
Seen Io's tears? Perceived her scalding sighs,
And even thus far herded her suspires and groans,
Tortured beneath that Neatherd churlish groom,
Moore savage than the beasts he feeds?
I have.
How often hath she, thinking to heave her hands
For divine pity; when she spied her hooves
Cast them to the earth, with them her head with shame,
And bellowing when she would complain her grief,
Started at her own sound?
How often, when grazing on her father's banks,
(These fruitful banks on which she used to sport)
Offering to drink, when in his Crystal streams,
In which so often she with pride hath looked,
On her white brow, read cheek, and golden curls:
Now when she spies those lips a god hath kissed,
Stretched to so vast a wideness, penthoused o'er
With enlarged nostrils; looking on those eyes,
(In which 'twas once my sole delight to look)
To see them broad and glaring; her clear brow
Late decked with shining jewels, pressed with horns.
How often hath she (more frighted than ashamed)
Thought, from herself, in vain, to hid herself?
This can you see? not study how to help?
I do, and will, by thine aid, Mercury;
Hie therefore to the top of Pindus' mount,
(There Argus keeps his watch) in some disguise;
Thy Caduceus and thy wings laid by,
Find with the slave some conference, till by cunning
Thou charmest his waking eyes, and being fast,
Cut of his head, and with one blow extinguish
So many lights at once.
Great Iove I will:
But thus conditioned, you will interpose
Your awful power 'twixt me and Juno's hate.
Presume the art safe in us.
Than Argus dyes;
One fatal stroke shall shut an hundred eyes.
How dost thou like thine usage, madam Cow?
Your lodging and your diet? How dost think
This hempen chain becomes thee? Will you see
Your sweet face in the river once again?
Or how doth your fair beastship feel yourself?
Wouldst thou not have some Bulchin from the herd
To physic thee of this venereal itch?
If not, I'll see what Nettles muddy streams,
Couchgrass and weeds, thorns, briers, & flints can d●
These failing, here's a goad to prick your sides.
If all these medicines will not tame your lust,
I'll muster new inventions. Nay, I know
You look for pity, but it life's not here.
In this high watchtower stand I sentinel,
To spy who comes and goes. I an made thy guardian,
I'll guard thee both from danger and from rest;
'Twas in thy hearing, Juno's late behest.
This shape may prove suspectless, and the fittest
To cloud a godhead in; my plumed hat
And feathered sandals, by the which I an known,
I have left at foot of this descending hill:
My snaky Rod I have to this sheephook turned.
Accommodated thus, to Argus now,
Aristor's son: behoves him keep good watch,
Whom Mercury (Jove's son) intends to catch.
But Many-eyes have spied me.
How now shepherd,
There's none who in that simple shape or name
Needs treason fear. Should any come prepared
For mischief, I have lights about me shine
Sufficient to prevent it: but thou seem'st
None of such rank. Come sit by me and talk.
The servant to the great Saturnia
Doth me no common grace.
Thou knowest me than?
What shepherd but not only knows your name,
but fears your strength?
Nay sit (by me thou'rt safe)
And tell some pretty tales to make me laugh:
have not long been merry.
First resolve me;
●s that fair heifer of some neighbour herd,
You drag thus in an halter?
she's my charge,
A witty Brutus, a most ingenious beast,
A very apprehensive Animal,
That can do tricks: she hath been taught, I tell thee,
To writ and read.
Argus, not possible.
'Tis as I said before: but having her,
Some pretty tale, I prithee.
But what if
Some goddess should live in this shape disguised,
To whom you are so churlish. I could tell you
A story to that end.
Such toys I love.
Thus the Pierideses report: The Giants
Assembled and made war against the gods,
Heap Ossa upon Pelion, Caucasus
Upon Parnassus, Pindus above them;
Hill upon mountain, mountain upon hill,
Till they had made a scale that reach to heaven.
The conflict than begun: the monstrous Typhon
Was Captain of the Giants: Of the gods
Great Iove, Archduke. The Generals met and fought.
In brief (to cut of circumstance) the earth
Prevailed' 'gainst heaven. The gods are forced to fly:
Iove, chased by Typhon into Egypt, changed
Himself into a Ram: Apollo, frighted,
Turns to a Crow, Bacchus into a Goat,
Iuno a Cow, Diana to a Cat;
Venus into a Fish, and took the sea;
Mars to a Pigmy, jest he should be known:
And Mercury, surnamed the crafty god,
Into a Fox.
A Fox? But I would meet
That craft which could beguile Argus bright eyes.
Proceed, proceed, good shepherd.
Why may not than
Some goddess be included in this shape?
A goddess, sayst thou? think me equal than
With one of these huge Giants, if not greater,
That have the power and potency to lead
A godhead in a string. But ha', what music
Was that strooke up? 'Twas sweet and delicate,
Nor have I herded the like.
My fellow shepherds
Behind that rock (from whence an echo grows)
For the more grace have chus'd that place as fittest,
Pressed to bestow their cunning upon you,
Whom they havé herded, much tired with watching long
And shall we have some merry Madrigal
To pass away the time with?
What you please.
I fame would know how first these Pipes came up
That make this dainty music?
First from Pan
The god of Shepherds. In the memory
Of the Nymph Syrinz, Music strike and tell,
How in the Arcadian plains it once befallen.
Syrinx, one of Diana's train,
Hunting with her on the plain,
Armed alike with shafts and bow;
Each from other would you know?
Which from which could not be told,
Save one's was horn, the others gold.
Hey ho; very fine music I promise' you.
Now it begins to work.
Pan he seas himself makes fine,
In his cap he pricks a Pine:
Now grows careless of his herd,
Sits by brooks to prune his beard,
Meets her, and hath mind to woo,
Much he speaks, and more would do.
'Tis pleasing, but it makes me melancholy,
And drowsy too withal.
'Twill do anon.
Still he proffers, she denies;
He pursues (for Syrinx fly's.)
Passed her knees her coats up flew,
He would feign see something new:
By the leg and thigh he guest
(It seems) the virtue of the rest.
Were it not for my charge I'd take a nap.
This adds wings unto his pace,
The goal for which he is in chase.
She adds feathers to her speed;
Now it was no more than need.
Almost caught, Alas she cries,
Some chaste god my shape disguise.
The rest may sleep secure, so I can keep
But two eyes waking.
Here's a charm for them.
Laedon hears, and girts her round,
Spies a reed that makes sweet sound:
Such is Syrinx. Wondering Pan
Puts it to his mouth anon:
Yet Syrinx thou art mine he said,
And so of her his first pipe made.
My charm hath took effect; with these thine eyes
Take thy last sleep, thou hast not one to see;
My task is done, and Jo thou now free.
The dying groans of Argus called down,
To know what of his lustre is become.
What, all extinct? and is no memory
Extant of their known brightness? hath one night
(Whose nature should be to be proud of stars)
Shut at one time an hundred? nay at once?
Should every piece of time deprive so many,
How shortly would these lights innumerable
Be vanished into nothing? But dear Argus,
That all may know thou hadst a loving mistress,
Grieving thou shouldst thus perish for her sake;
And that these eyes (now blind) in aftertimes
May give a light to perpetuity,
And memorise thy name, thy faith and fall,
Thy hundred eyes (who waist for Iuno slain)
I will transport into my Peacock's train;
Whilst such a bird hath breeding, and can be,
Her painted feathers shall remember thee.
And whilst an heifer grazeth on the plain,
Io, her hoof shall still imprint thy name.
My Iuno are we friends? Let her long divorce,
My fair entreats, with Inachus exclaims
Invoke thy love and pity, by my life.
You use me like a sister, not a wife,
My bed is still so empty.
Now by Styx,
An oath no god was ever known to break,
Sign her release, she shall hereafter be
To Iove as a mere stranger.
Since by that you swear,
What's past is lost, it cuts of future fear,
Saving my quarrel, Mercury, to you.
Madam, I did your servant no great wrong,
●ave teaching him to relish a new song.
Where jars are mediated, vain it were
Call injuries in question. As with Iupiter,
With you we are atoned.
Now Mercury,
●ince Iuno is appeased, fetch Io hither,
her own native beauty, whom we will
Restore unto her father.
Sir I shall.
OH Iupiter! o Iuno!
Inachus,
surcease exclaims, thy prayers have had access,
●hy tears been pitied, and thy loss bemoaned;
Argus is slain, and fair Saturnia pleased,
●nd Io to her pristine shape restored.
Thanks you immortal gods.
Not sooner was this mighty Queen appeased,
●t the rough hair dropped from her tender skin,
●er horns fallen of, her eyes appeared to shine
a less orb, her mouth and lips contracted
●oth into compass, and their native sweetness,
●●r shoulders are restored, fingers and hands;
●●r parted hoof divided into five,
●ow with two feet contented, for on them
●e straightway stood erect, and of a Cow,
●●ve whiteness, naught retaining, and even yet
●e fears to speak, jest she in stead of words
●ould bellow forth her mind.
Yet will I dare
●ss give my father greeting.
OH my child.
I an still jealous of that face: What's he
that makes but a mean sport of wedlock's breach,
But thinks to violate an oath no sin,
Though calling testates all the Stygian gods?
Great King and Lord, Brother and Husband too,
If I be worthy of those attributes
Yourself have deigned, and all the gods approve,
Grant me a second boon.
For thy remissness
In Io's late affliction, speak, 'tis granted.
Than from these fields of Tempe banish her,
As far as into Egypt.
From her father?
Be you pleased,
And Iuno shall, I hope, be satisfied.
Io, you shall to Egypt be confined,
Be that your punishment for Juno's hate:
Which executed you shall taste our love.
In Egypt held a goddess thou shalt be,
Adored and worshipped in thy heifers shape;
Oblations shall be daily offered thee,
And Incense burned to thy divinity,
And this for ever. Iuno, in vain you sorrow,
Jove's word is past, and cannot be revoked.
And now with this one Maxim we conclude;
Where lust is punished, though the blood be tainted,
It (after such long Penance) may be sainted.