WHy lovely Daphne, will you loose yo● Youth,
And let your best hours pass yo● Well you know,
beauty's a Flower, which not being cropped in time,
Soon withers on the stalk, and than (alas)
Will neither serve for use nor ornament.
You own me sweet grandchilds, pretty babes,
Even for your birth you do: it is a debt
That I would see discharged: I to my parents
Paid it in thee; it is a Bond stands firm,
till canceled in thy sweet posterity.
See, I have brought thee Suitors, choice one's too,
Two noble Rivers, both residing near,
Amphrisus, and still-flowing Appidan,
Young, and of means, both active and of strength
To wrestle against barrenness, and give
The hug the foil. Being dead, I live in thee:
Live thou too in thy issue; so successively
Our Line and memory shall never perish,
But last as long as Time.
Your father (Daphne)
Counsels with judgement, and this argument
I could by many reasons amplify.
As, That without succession (one age passed)
Mankind should cease to be. OH what a punishment
Deserve they from the gods, that would destroy
●o glorious a creation, and to leave
●o wonderful a fabric as the world is,
To no admirers?
Save the Plants and Beasts;
And what can they distinguish?
Therefore, Daughter
Make use of time: a season being past,
Can never be recalled, no, not a month.
A month? no day, no hour, no minute can:
●herefore make use of opportunity
Which throws itself upon thee: but being straightened,
Will after prove a stranger; the lest instant
●y long repentance cannot be redeemed.
To you I bow in duty, as to a father;
And these affront in noble courtesy,
Not wronging him, to show my breeding base,
scoffing your proffered love with womanish scorn.
●is counsels, your persuasions, I commend,
knowing both fitting, were they seasonable.
that Maids should love men I an not ignorant,
that the breeding world should still increase;
that Progeny should reach from age to age,
●nd that the gods make't a necessity,
o have all their miraculous works admir'd:
●●l this I know; but
I'll proceed: But what
Can you produce against this?
Hear me out:
But when I in my best considerate thoughts
Ponder my youth, and what it is to love;
That vows are ties not easy to be loosed,
And that the smallest finger can pluck on
What not the hand and arm can well put of:
That Marriage is a Maze, which entered in,
The line is snatched thence which should guide us out.
E'er hazard than that unknown labyrinth,
Much blame me not to pause.
What needst thou fear?
Fond timorous Girl, did not thy mother this
Long time before thee?
Nay, hereafter too
May not your daughter do so?
I'll resolve you
That, when I have a daughter of my years,
And tutored by her mother.
Excellent Nymph,
These are evasions mere unnecessary;
We know you to be ripe, and ourselves grown,
Betwixt us is equality in state,
And parity in years: nor is our course
Irregular or indirect, we come
Admitted by your father, as a way
Plain, and not interdicted: nor is our suit
So far with cradle it may childish seem;
Nor so old, to appear decrepit: we are two
Rivals, yet friends; so you choose one of either,
Even he that is despised rests satisfied,
Nor is our love divided.
I commend you:
There is of you less danger, and lest fear
That you should die of love; when both of you
Come with like premeditation to digest
A rigorous answer.
Pray what should we do?
Our service we have offered equally:
The world is wide, and if we speed not here,
We must provide us elsewhere.
Worthy friends.
To be most plain, to me most pleasing is:
Than take as plain an answer; I confess me
Weak as I an) unworthy of your love.
And yet not so low prized, but have been courted
Both by as great and good. Nor can you blame me,
If I in adding to your worths, shall spare
From mine, in the lest kind to derogate.
To you than, as my equals, I entreat;
Or if you shall deny me, Daphne than
Proclaims it as her william I must retire me
For some few months, in them to meditate
What marriage is, and truly study man,
(A book in which I yet have truanted.)
Now, if I in my more maturity,
And after some cessation of your suits,
Can ground this Maxim, Man is worthy us,
And we of him; we'll breviate your long motions
Within a few short terms.
You speak but reason:
And so long we'll attend you.
Most fit, that such as bargain for their lives,
should read us o'er and o'er, before they set
Their hands to that Indenture. We are pleased.
And I that you are so. Nor can my father
At this be discontented.
Not I, Child;
I would not hurry on my joys too fast,
Having such hope of them. And yet, sweet Daphne,
The more thou hasts their harvest, the ripe crop
Shall be to them more welcome. For this time
'Tis best to leave her to her privacy:
Moore leisure that she hath to meditate,
Less time you have in which to be resolved,
'Twill shorten expectation.
May these hours
That add unto your years, still as you grow,
Increase toward us your love.
Friend you pray well,
And in that hope I take a loving leave,
By kissing your fair hand.
You understand a courtesy as well,
Once being done, as she that knows to do't.
Farewell. Where be my maids?
My Lady, at hand.
Daph. Doth either of you know what this love is,
That men so much affect it?
Trust me, not I: I never looked so far into man
and most sure I an, man never yet entered so far in●●
me, that I should know how to define it. But can y●●
tell the reason why this little god is still portrayed like
child?
I think, because that dotage which he breeds
Only belongs to children. 1 Nymph. But why naked
Either to affright the Modest; or to such
As vow to him, to express their impudence.
But why with bow and arrows?
That denotes
Inconstancy, because the shafts of love
Are ever shot at random.
Wherhfore hood winked?
Howe're his shafts are aimed, it shows his kind
Because they strike the eyes of Reason blind.
Than an I with Love quite out of love, became
at these years I should be loathe to have one to lead ●●
Yet do I love the beauty of the spring,
To listen to the birds, with various lays
To welcome in his coming. I affect
The pride and warmth of Summer, to behold
Abundant Autumn pour his harvest forth
In plenteous sheaves; to see the presses bleed
A flowing vintage. But I most admire
The glory of the Sun who comforts these:
For without him, what were the earth? what heaven?
If all were darkness, who should than discern
The lustre of the one or of the other,
The fresh fertility proudly adorned
With choice and change of all discoloured flowers?
Moore than a cased up jewel, what were Beauty,
Without the Sun to give a brightness to 't?
What's ornament, without the Sun to judge it?
What to be fair or foul, without the Sun,
To censure and distinguish which is best?
The Sun's the deity which I adore.
Here than upon this verdure cast yourselves,
And rest a while; not long 'tis ever he will
In all his glory mount the Eastern hill.
Here on the top of the mount Ericine
Ambush thyself, (a place sacred to me)
Where thou mayst boldly front the god of Light,
Who hath by this already chased hence night.
I'll leave thee now: strike, but strike home, my son,
I'll in these shades absent me whilst 'tis done.
He mocks my bow, but Phoebus soon shall find
Cupid hath power to strike the Sun-god blind.
The stars are frighted from the firmament,
And at the sight of our illustrious beams
Darkness unto the black Cymmerians fled.
Now to our daily progress through the Signs.
But stay, what's he that with our honours, armed,
(The Bow and quiver, proper sole to us)
Braves us upon high Erix Promontory?
I know him now, 'tis Paphian Venus' son,
To whom some fools have vowed a deity.
I'll know the reason why the bastard brat
Dares thus assume my trophies.' Morrow Cupid.
As much to Phoebus.
Weak brat resolve me,
By whose enticement thou hast been so bold
To take to thee the emblem of my power?
Is't not sufficient, thou with brainsick toys
Canst fill the heads of mad men and of fools,
Who'ascribe to thee a godhead, merely usurped?
But thou must wear my due Impresa insculpt,
And ('bout thy shoulders) those known ornaments,
Apollinis insignia? (Apollo's Ensigns)
And why thy?
Because I an styled the god of Archery;
And where I aim I hit, my prey or enemy,
Kill near or far. The monstrous serpent Python
(Whose bulk being slain, an hundred acres spread)
Had from this bow his wounds, and I my honours:
And shall a child boast eminence with me?
Phoebus, thy bow hath monsters strooke to ground,
But mine hath power the gods themselves to wound,
Of which thou art not least. Mother he's sped, He shoot
I have pierced him home with my shafts golden head.
Thou art mine own sweet boy, thy darts ne'er fails
And now Apollo languish and look pale,
Moore wan than did thy sister Moon once prove,
When for Endymion she was sick of love,
Whilst I laugh and rejoice. Now make all sure,
And strike fair Daphne whilst she sleeps secure,
But with contempt and hate.
My arrow fly's,
And as it hits, sick of disdain she lies.
Now mother let's away.
Phoebus, I divine,
Thou'It say his shafts can wound as deep as thy.
What alteration's this I feel? a heat
Beyond mine own fire, kindled at mine eye.
All sleep is still in darkness, yet our souls
See when our eyes are shut. My breast's in uproar;
And yet a dream tells me, the morning grey
Says the Sun's up, I shame to look on day.
What beauty's this on earth, transpiercing more,
Than can the beams from my celestial Orb?
The Sun is up; Awake: What, shame you not
That he should find you sleeping?
Sweet Nymph stay.
The shades best please me, I in them will play;
The Sun's too hot and sultry.
I an he
That measures out the year; and shun you me
Fairest of thy sex, behold the Sun's bright eye,
That all things seas, by whom you all things spy.
Will you in everlasting darkness devil?
Light is heaven's emblem, and becomes it well:
Where I appear, I comfort and make glad;
Be comforted in me, why are you sad?
Would you in blindness live? these rays of mine
Give that reflect by which your Beauties shine,
For what are artificial lights? when I
Appear in fullness they soon faint and die.
They only put on counterfeits: my rays
False colours find, and give the true the praise.
If yours be such, than prove them by my light,
The world will censure they are pure and right.
His piercing beams I never shall endure,
They sick me of a fatal Calenture.
What are you better to be lovely born,
If not beheld? What's state, if not observed?
Or wherefore before Cottages do we
Prefer the stately Palace, and the sumptuous roof?
What virtue were in jewels without me?
Else should they be with pebbles equal prized.
Wherhfore did Nature make you with bright eyes,
Which profit not in night without my beams?
Why should the Rose be read? the Lily white?
The Violet purple? and the Holly green?
All these my creatures. But when I decline,
And night usurps upon the Universe,
Their tincture's not discerned: but white and read
Which in your peerless cheeks exceed all flowers,
What lustre bear they? When my beams are go,
The fair and foul in darkness seem all one.
That darkness doth best please me: let's away,
My beauty will be sun burned if I stay,
he'll blast me like an Ethiope.
Dost thou fly me?
Love bids me follow, and I must pursue:
Not vault, no cave or cavern so obscure,
Through which I will not pierce, to find thee out,
The Antipodes for ever want my rays:
To gaze on her, I'll this Meridian keep,
And till attain the saint that I adore,
Here ever shine, where night shall be no more.
Laugh Cupid, laugh, for I an half revenged,
And shall ever long be fully, when this Blab
Shall in his course, or too much lag or speed
Post sometimes, and again run retrograde.
Where by his too long presence the earth is scorched,
Or by his absence the other world shall frieze:
And all that lies beneath the Moon complain:
And that the gods at man's request shall call
Disorder into question. What can than
Both heaven and earth conclude when this is done,
But this thou didst to avenge me of the Sun.
Will not Mars thank me for't?
And kiss thee too.
OH still by his example punish those
That shall our sweet adulterate sports disclose.
Why fly's my Daphne, knowing 'tis in vain:
Love makes me swifter than thy fear can thee.
OH me, I an so tortured with the Sun,
I hate my very shadow.
I pursue not
As Eagles, Doves do; or the Lions, Hearts;
Or Wolves, the Lamb. Love is my cause of haste:
Run not so fast, jest thou shouldst trip perhaps,
And do thyself some damage: the ground's rough,
Shouldst thou but slide, and I the Author on't,
How much would it offend me? To prevent which,
Stay but thy haste, and I will slack my speed.
I an almost breathless.
See, I an no Satire,
Shepherd, or such as live by grazing herds,
Delphos is mine, Pharos, and Tenedos:
Thou knowest not who thou fliest, I an Apollo,
The only god that speaks by Oracle:
Iove is my father, and the Muses nine
Are all my daughters: I an Patron held
Of Numbers, Raptures, and sweet Poesy.
My shafts are ever certain where they aim,
(Yet one more certain, which hath pierced me deep)
Physic is mine, I first devised that Art,
And could it help me, I were than assured:
But Love is by no Simples to be cured.
OH now I an quite spent; help, goddess Iuno,
(Queen of chaste marriage) bright Diana, help
One of thy true vowed Virgins: change my shape,
That I this hot adulterous Sun may scape.
Thanks, o you Powers divine: the Spheres assent
To my chaste prayer: your heavenly dooms are just.
Here grow I fixed against all powers of lust.
Strange prodigy! Less hope is in her stay,
Than in her speed: her body's round encompassed
With a rough rind, in which her warm heart beats.
Her hair is all grown upward into boughs,
Here milk white fingers and her arms advanced
To great and lesser branches: her fair feet
But late so swift, fast rooted in the earth:
And I, whom Love late blinded, now may see
My Daphne turned into a Laurel tree.
Her life still struggles in the churlish bark,
And from her lips I feel her breath still flow.
One blessed kiss at parting, but in vain,
The very tree shrinks from me in disdain.
And yet in lasting memory of thee
And of my love, thou shalt be ever mine:
In all ovations triumphs and rich shows
The Laurel shall engird the Conqueror's brows.
All eminence shall think it graced in thee.
Poets, the Muse's darlings, shall from thee
Receive their honour, and the best esteemed
Be crowned Laureate, and no excellence
But have it's noble estimate from hence.
Emperor's shall prize thy leaves above pure gold:
For thou shalt ever wait on victory;
And as my youthful and still unshorn hairs
(Unchanging) of this golden hue are seen,
So shall the boughs and branches still be green,
And arm against Jove's lightning. And all these
Shall be for our sake by the gods approved,
In memory that Daphne we once loved.
How comes it, fair Aurora, we the Hours
Are thus disturbed?
One halts, whilst the other runs;
Sometimes made longer by a many minutes,
Sometimes not full three quarters?
An not I
As much distempered, being forced to rise
So often before my time? which makes my husband
Old Tithon jealous (for he bedrid lies)
I have light on some new Love.
All's out of order.
How comes this strange confusion rise of late?
My spring to grow so forward by the Sun?
Summer complains that I usurp on her.
As much as I on thee, Autumn on me,
And says, that in my ripening I include
His harvest, and so rob him of his due.
Have I not cause? when thou not only claimest
The honour of my crop: But frozen Winter,
He keeps a coil too, swearing, I intrude
Into his bounded limits.
This I an sure
I an curtailed of my right; my snow is melted,
And hath not time to cloth the mountain tops:
September is like May, Ianuary as Iune:
And all my bright and precious Icicles
Melting to nothing: What's the reason trow we?
'Tis the Sun's slackness, or his too much speed,
That breeds all this distraction.
The Sun, say you?
Break he, or not directly keep his day,
Seasons and Hours all out of order stray.
Behold her whom you speak of, Day, whence come you?
I parted now with Night, who had been here,
But that both must not in one place appear.
And what says she?
Like you, rails on the Sun,
And says he doth her wrong: nor blame her, when
Being full twelve hours, he scarce affords her ten.
Day, you are the Sun's mistress, hath he not
Revealed the cause to you?
Not, his known brightness
Hath unto me been only dark in that.
Nor an I of his counsel.
Fine world grown,
When every drunken Sexton hath the skill
To make his giddy clock go truer far
Than can the best Sun dial.
What are you
That murmur thus against our Deity?
Are you not all our creatures? though we give you
Full sails on earth, do not we steer the helm?
Disposing you both where and how we please;
And dare you thus rebel?
The god of Light
Is our great Lord and Sovereign.
This submission
Hath somewhat calmed us: had you still stood out,
Disorder, we had to Confusion turned,
And so you all been ruined. But henceforth
Morning shall keep her hour, Hours measure day,
In a true scope the Day proportion Weeks,
Weeks, Months; Months, seasons; to sum up the year.
And we our course in that, perfecting time:
That nothing in this concordance appear
Either preposterous or unseasonable.
For which our grace, wherever you shall find
This new sprung Laurel, you Aurora I charge,
With your moist tears bathe her green tender boughs:
From whence I will exhale them with my beams.
Hours, do you wait upon her gentle growth.
Day comfort her: Ver cheer her with thy spring.
Thou Summer give her warmth: and Autumn, thou
Dare not to spoil her of her plenteous leaves:
Nor Winter thou with thy robustuous gusts,
To blait her lasting verdure. These observed,
Still flourish under us. And that this unity
May last among you many fortunate years,
End in a Hymn tuned to the chiming Spheres.
HOwsoe're the Minutes go,
Run the hours or swift or slow:
Seem the Months or short or long,
Pass the seasons right or wrong:
All we sing that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.
Early fall the Spring or not,
Prove the Summer cold or hot:
Autumn be it fair or foul,
Let the Winter smile or scowl:
Still we sing, that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.