O Faithful servant of mine ancient sire,
Though unto thee, sufficiently be known
The whole discourse of my recureless grief
By seeing me from Princes royal state
Thus basely brought into so great contempt,
As mine own sons repined to hear my plaint,
Now of a Queen but barely bearing name,
Seeing this town, seeing my flesh and blood,
Against itself to levy threatening arms,
(Whereof to talk my heart it rends in twain)
Yet once again, I must to thee recount
The wailful thing that is already spread,
Because I know, that pity will compel
Thy tender heart, more than my natural child,
With ruthful tears to moon my mourning case.
My gracious Queen, as no man might surmount
The constant faith I bear my sovereign Lord,
So do I think, for love and trusty zeal,
No Son you have, doth own you more than I:
For hereunto I am by duty bound,
With service meet no less to honour you,
Than that renowned Prince your dear father.
And as my duties be most infinite,
So infinite, must also be my love:
Then if my life or spending of my blood
May be employed to do your highness good,
Command (O Queen) command this carcase here,
In spite of death to satisfy thy will,
So, though I die, yet shall my willing ghost
Contentedly forsake this withered corpse,
For joy to think I never showed myself
Ingrateful once to such a worthy Queen.
Thou know'st what care my careful father took,
In wedlocks sacred state to settle me
With Laius, king of this unhappy Thebes,
That most unhappy now our City is:
Thou know'st, how he, desirous still to search
The hidden secrets of supernal powers,
Unto Divines did make his oft recourse,
Of them to learn when he should have a son,
That in his Realm might after him succeed:
Of whom receiving answer sharp and sour,
That his own son should work his wailful end,
The wretched king (though all in vain) did seek
For to eschew that could not be eschewed:
And so, forgetting laws of nature's love,
Not sooner had this painful womb brought forth
His eldest son to this desired light,
But strait he charged a trusty man of his
To bear the child into a desert wood,
And leave it there, for Tigers to devour.
O luckless babe, begot in woeful hour.
His servant thus obedient to his hest,
Up by the heels did hung this faultless Imp,
And piercing with a knife his tender feet,
Through both the wounds did draw the slender twigs,
Which being bound about his feeble limbs,
Were strong enough to hold the little soul.
Thus did he leave this infant scarcely borne,
That in short time must needs have lost his life,
If destiny (that for our greater griefs
Decreed before to keep it still alive)
Had not unto this child sent present help:
For so it chanced, a shepherd passing by,
With pity moved, did stay his guiltless death:
He took him home, and gave him to his wife,
With homely fare to feed and foster up:
Now hearken how the heavens have wrought the way
To Laius' death, and to mine own decay.
Experience proves, and daily is it seen,
In vain (too vain) man strives against the heavens.
Not far fro thence, the mighty Polybus,
Of Corinth King, did keep his princely court,
Unto whose woeful wife (lamenting much
She had no offspring by her noble fere)
The courteous shepherd gave my little son:
Which grateful gift, the Queen did so accept,
As nothing seemed more precious in her sight:
Partly, for that, his features were so fine,
Partly, for that, he was so beautiful,
And partly, for because his comely grace
Gave great suspicion of his royal blood.
The infant grew, and many years was deemed
Polybus' son, till time, that Oedipus
(For so he named was) did understand
That Polybus was not his sire in deed,
Whereby forsaking friends and country there,
He did return to seek his native stock:
And being come into Phocides land,
Took notice of the cursed oracle,
How first he should his father do to death,
And then become his mother's wedded mate.
O fierce aspect of cruel planets all,
That can decree such seas of heinous faults.
Then Oedipus, freight full of chilling fear,
By all means sought t' avoid this furious fate,
But whiles he weened to shun the shameful deed,
Unluckily guided by his own mishap,
He fell into the snare that most he feared:
For lo, in Phocides did Laius' lie,
To end the broils that civil discord than
Had raised up in that unquiet land,
By means whereof my woeful Oedipus,
Affording aid unto the other side,
With murdering blade unwares his father slew.
Thus heavenly doom, thus fate, thus powers divine,
Thus wicked read of Prophets took effect:
Now only rests to end the bitter hap
Of me, of me his miserable mother.
Alas, how cold I feel the quaking blood
Pass too and fro within my trembling breast?
Oedipus, when this bloody deed was done,
Forced forth by fatal doom, to Thebes came,
Where as full soon with glory he achieved
The crown and sceptre of this noble land,
By conquering Sphinx that cruel monster lo,
That erst destroyed this goodly flowering soil:
And thus did I (O hateful thing to hear)
To my own son become a wretched wife.
No marvel, though the golden Sun withdrew
His glittering beams from such a sinful fact.
And so by him that from this belly sprang,
I brought to light (O cursed that I am)
Aswell two sons, as daughters also twain:
But when this monstrous marriage was disclosed,
So sore began the rage of boiling wrath
To swell within the furious breast of him,
As he himself by stress of his own nails,
Out of his head did tear his griefful eyen,
Unworthy more to see the shining light.
How could it be, that knowing he had done
So foul a blot, he would remain alive?
So deeply faulteth none, the which unwares
Doth fall into the crime he can not shun:
And he (alas) unto his greater grief,
Prolongs the date of his accursed days,
Knowing that life doth more and more increase
The cruel plagues of his detested guilt,
Where stroke of griefly death doth set an end
Unto the pangs of man's increasing pain.
Of others all, most cause have we to moon
Thy woeful smart (O miserable Queen)
Such and so many are thy grievous harms.
Now to the end this blind outrageous sire.
Should reap no joy of his unnatural fruit,
His wretched sons, pricked forth by furious spite,
Adjudge their father to perpetual prison:
There buried in the depth of dungeon dark,
(Alas) he leads his discontented life,
Accursing still his stony hearted sons,
And wishing all th'infernal spirits of hell,
To breath such poisoned hate into their breasts,
As each with other fall to bloody wars,
And so with pricking point of piercing blade,
To rip their bowels out, that each of them
With others blood might strain his guilty hands,
And both at once by stroke of speedy death
Be forthwith thrown into the Stygian lake.
The mighty Gods prevent so fowl a deed,
They to avoid the wicked blasphemies,
And sinful prayer of their angry sire,
Agreed thus, that of this noble realm,
Until the course of one full year was run,
Eteocles should sway the kingly mace,
And Polynices as exul should depart,
Till time expired: and then to Polynices
Eteocles should yield the sceptre up:
Thus year by year the one succeeding other,
This royal crown should unto both remain.
O th'unbridled minds of ambitious men.
Etocles thus placed in princely seat,
Drunk with the sugared taste of kingly reign,
Not only shut his brother from the crown,
But also from his native country soil.
Alas poor Polynices, what might he do,
Unjustly by his brother thus betrayed?
To Argos he, with sad and heavy cheer
Forthwith conveyed himself, on whom at length
With fawning face good fortune smiled so,
As with Adrastus' king of Argives there,
He found such favour and affinity,
As (to restore my son unto his reign,)
He hath besiege this noble city Thebes,
And hence proceeds my most extreme annoy:
For, of my sons, who ever do prevail,
The victory will turn unto my grief:
Alas, I fear (such is the chance of war)
That one, or both shall purchase death thereby.
Wherefore, to shun the worst that may befall,
Though comfortless, yet as a pitiful mother
Whom nature binds to love her loving sons,
And to provide the best for their avail,
I have thought good by prayers to entreat
The two brethren (nay rather cruel foes)
A while to stay their fierce and furious fight,
Till I have tried by means for to appease
The swelling wrath of their outraging wills,
And so with much to do, at my request
They have forborn unto this only hour.
Small space good wots, to stint so great a strife.
And even right now, a trusty man of mine,
Returned from the camp, informing me
That Polynices will strait to Thebes come,
Thus of my woe, this is the wailful sum.
And for because, in vain and bootless plaint
I have small need to spend this little time,
Here will I cease, in words more to be wray
The restless state of my afflicted mind,
Desiring thee, thou go to Eteocles,
Hartly on my behalf beseeching him,
That out of hand according to his promise,
He will vouchsafe to come unto my court,
I know he loves thee well, and to thy words
I think thou know'st he will give willing ear.
(O noble Queen) sith unto such affairs
My speedy diligence is requisite,
I will apply effectually to do
What so your highness hath commanded me.
I will go in, and pray the Gods therewhile,
With tender pity to appease my grief.
THe simple man, whose marvel is so great
At stately courts, and princes regal seat,
With gazing eye but only doth regard
The golden gloss that outwardly appears,
The crowns bedecked with pearl and precious stones,
The rich attire embossed with beaten gold,
The glittering mace, the pomp of swarming train,
The mighty halls heaped full of flattering friends,
The chambers huge, the goodly gorgeous beds,
The gilted roofs embowed with curious work,
The faces sweet of fine disdaining dames,
The vain suppose of wanton reign at lust:
But never views with eye of inward thought,
The painful toil, the great and grievous cares,
The troubles still, the new increasing fears,
That princes nourish in their jealous breasts:
He weigheth not the charge that Ioue hath laid
On princes, how for themselves they reign not:
He weens, the law must stoop to princely will,
But princes frame their noble wills to law:
He knoweth not, that as the boisterous wind
Doth shake the tops of highest reared towers,
So doth the force of froward fortune strike
The wight that highest sits in haughty state.
Lo Oedipus, that sometime reigned king
Of Theban soil, that wonted to suppress
The mightest Prince, and keep him under check,
That fearful was unto his foreign foes,
Now like a poor afflicted prisoner,
In dungeon dark, shut up from cheerful light,
In every part so plagued with annoy,
As he abhors to lead a longer life,
By means whereof, the one against the other
His wrathful sons have planted all their force,
And Thebes here, this ancient worthy town,
With threatening siege girt in on every side,
In danger lies to be subverted quite,
If help of heavenly Ioue uphold it not,
But as dark night succeeds the shining day,
So lowering grief comes after pleasant joy.
Well now the charge her highness did command
I must fulfil, though haply all in vain.
O Gentle daughter of King Oedipus,
O sister dear to that unhappy wight
Whom brother's rage hath reaved of his right,
To whom, thou know'st, in young and tender years
I was a friend and faithful governor,
Come forth, sith that her grace hath granted leave,
And let me know what cause hath moved now
So chaste a maid to set her dainty foot
Over the threshold of her secret lodge?
Since that the town is furnished every where
With men of arms and warlike instruments,
Unto our ears there comes no other noise,
But sound of trump, and neigh of trampling steeds,
Which running up and down from place to place,
With hideous cries betoken blood and death:
The blazing sun ne shineth half so bright,
As it was wont to do at dawn of day:
The wretched dames throughout the woeful town,
Together clustering to the temples go,
Beseeching Ioue by way of humble plaint,
With tender ruth to pity their distress.
The love I bear to my sweet Polynices,
My dear brother, is only cause hereof.
Why daughter, know'st thou any remedy
How to defend thy father's city here
From that outrage and fierce repining wrath,
Which he against it, justly hath conceived?
O governor might this my faultless blood
Suffice to stay my brethren's dire debate,
With glad content I could afford my life
Betwixt them both to plant a perfect peace.
But since (alas) I cannot as I would,
A hot desire inflames my fervent mind
To have a sight of my sweet Polynices.
Wherefore (good guide) vouchsafe to guide me up
Into some tower about this hugy court,
From whence I may behold our enemy's camp,
Thereby at lest to feed my hungry eyes
But with the sight of my beloved brother:
Then if I die, contented shall I die.
O princely dame, the tender care thou tak'st
Of thy dear brother, deserveth double praise:
Yet crav'st thou that, which cannot be obtained,
By reason of the distance from the town
Unto the plain, where th'army lies encamped:
And furthermore, beseemeth not a maid
To show herself in such unseemly place,
Whereas among such young and lusty troops
Of harebrained soldiers marching to and fro,
Both honest name and honour is impaired:
But yet rejoice, sith this thy great desire,
Without long let, or yet without thy pain,
At wish and will shortly may be fulfilled.
For Polynices forthwith will hither come,
Even I myself was lately at the camp,
Commanded by the Queen to bid him come,
Who laboureth still to link in friendly league,
Her jarring sons (which hap so hoped for,
eftsoons I pray the gracious gods to grant)
And sure I am, that ere this hour pass,
Thou shalt him here in person safely see.
O loving friend, dost thou then warrant me,
That Polynices will come unto this court?
Ere thou he ware thou shalt him here behold.
And who (alas) doth warrant his adventure,
That of Eteocles he take no harm?
For constant pledge, he hath his brother's faith,
He hath also the truce that yet endures.
I fear alas, alas I greatly fear,
Some trustless snare his cruel brother lays
To trap him in.
Daughter, god knows how willing I would be
With sweet relief to comfort thy distress,
But I cannot impart to thee, the good
Which I myself do not as yet enjoy.
The wailful cause that moves Eteocles
With Polynices to enter civil wars
Is overgreat, and for this only cause
Full many men have broke the laws of truth,
And topsy-turvy turned many towns,
To greedy (daughter) too too greedy is
Desire to rule and reign in kingly state.
Ne can he bide, that sways a realm alone
To have another joined with him therein:
Yet must we hope for help of heavenly powers,
Sigh they be just, their mercy is at hand,
To help the weak when worldly force doth fail.
As both my brethren be, so both I bear
As much good will as any sister may,
But yet the wrong that unto Polynices
This trothless tyrant hath unjustly showed,
Doth lead me more, to wish the prosperous life
Of Polynices, than of that cruel wretch,
Besides that, Polynices whiles he remained
In Thebes here, did ever love me more,
Than did Eteocles, whose swelling hate
Is towards me increased more and more:
Whereof I partly may assure myself,
Considering he disdains to visit me,
Yea, haply he intends to reave my life,
And having power he will not stick to do it.
This therefore makes me earnestly desire
Often times to see him: yet ever as I think
For to discharge the duty of a sister,
The fear I have of hurt, doth change as fast
My doubtful love into disdainful spite.
Yet daughter, must ye trust in mighty Ioue,
His will is not, that for th'offence of one
So many suffer undeserved smart:
I mean of thee, I mean of Polynices,
Of Iocasta thy woeful aged mother,
And of Ismena thy beloved sister,
Who though for this she doth not outwardly
For dreary eyen distill lamenting tears,
Yet do I think, no less aflicting grief
Doth inwardly torment her tender breast.
Besides all this, a certain jealousy,
Lately conceived (I know not whence it springs)
Of Creon, my mother's brother, appalls me much,
Him doubt I more than any danger else.
Dear daughter, leave this foolish jealousy,
And seeing that thou shalt here shortly find
Thy brother Polynices, go in again.
O joyful would it be to me therewhile,
To understand the order of the host,
Whether it be such as have sufficient power
To overthrow this mighty town of Thebes.
What place supplies my brother Polynices?
Where found ye him? what answer did he give?
And though so great a care pertaineth not
Unto a maid of my unskill years,
Yet, forbecause myself partaker am
Of good and evil with this my country soil,
I long to hear thee tell those fearful news,
Which otherwise I cannot understand.
So noble a desire (O worthy dame)
I much commend: and briefly as I can,
Will satisfy thy hungry mind herein.
The power of men that Polynices hath brought,
(Whereof he, (being Adrastus' son in law)
Takes chiefest charge) is even the flower of Grece,
Whose hugy train so mighty seems to be,
As I see not, how this our drooping town
Is able to withstand so strong a siege.
Entering the field their army did I find
So orderly in form of battle set,
As though they would forthwith have given the charge:
In battles seven the host divided is,
To each of which, by order of the king,
A valiant knight for captain is assigned:
And as you know this city hath seven gates,
So every captain hath his gate prescribed,
With fierce assault to make his entry at.
And further, passing through our frowning foes
(That gave me countenance of a messenger)
Hard by the King I spied Polynices,
In golden glistering arms most richly clad,
Whose person many a stately prince empaled,
And many a comely crowned head enclosed:
At sight of me his colour strait he changed,
And like a loving child, in clasped arms
He caught me up, and friendly kissed my cheek,
Then hearing what his mother did demand
With glad consent according to her hest
Gave me his hand, to come unto the court,
Of mutual truce desirous so he seemed,
He asked me of Antigone and Ismena,
But chiefly unto thee above the rest
He gave me charge most heartily to commend him.
The gods give grace he may at length possess
His kingly right, and I his wished sight.
Daughter no more, 'tis time ye now return:
It stands not with the honour of your state
Thus to be seen suspiciously abroad:
For vulgar tongues are armed evermore
With slanderous brute to blemish the renown
Of virtues dames, which though at first it spring
Of slender cause, yet doth it swell so fast,
As in short space it filleth every ear
With swift report of undeserved blame:
You cannot be to curious of your name:
Fond show of evil (though still the mind be chaste)
Decays the credit often, that Ladies had,
Sometimes the place presumes a wanton mind:
Repair sometimes of some, doth hurt their honour:
Sometimes the light and garish proud attire
Persuades a yielding bent of pleasing youths.
The voice that goeth of your unspotted fame,
Is like a tender flower, that with the blast
Of every little wind doth fade away.
Go in dear child, this way will I go see
If I can meet thy brother Polynices.
IF greedy lust of man's ambitious eye
(That thirsteth so for sway of earthly things)
Would eke foresee, what mischiefs grow thereby,
What careful toil to quiet state it brings,
What endless grief from such a fountain springs:
Then should he swim in seas of sweet delight,
That now complains of fortunes cruel spite.
For than he would so safely shield himself
With sacred rules of wisdoms sage advise,
As no alluring train of trustless pelf,
To fond affects his fancy should entice,
Then wary heed would quickly make him wise:
Where contrary (such is our skilless kind)
We most do seek, that most may hurt the mind.
Amid the troop of these unstable toys,
Some fancies lo to beauty must be bend,
Some hunt for wealth, and some set all their joys,
In regal power of princely government,
Yet none of these from care are clean exempt:
For either they be got with grievous toil,
Or in the end foregone with shameful foil.
This flitting world doth firmly naught retain,
Wherein a man may boldly rest his trust,
Such fickle chance in fortune doth remain,
As when she lust, she threateneth whom she lust,
From high renown to throw him in the dust:
Thus may we see that each triumphing joy
By fortune's frown is turned to annoy.
Those elder heads may well be thought to err,
The which for easy life and quiet days,
The vulgar sort would seem for to prefer,
If glorious Phoebe withhold his glistering rays,
From such a peer as crown and sceptre sways,
No marvel though he hide his heavenly face,
From us that come of less renowned race.
seld shall you see the ruin of a Prince,
But that the people eke like brunt do bear,
And old records of ancient time long since,
From age to age, yea almost every where,
With proof hereof hath glutted every ear:
Thus by the follies of the prince's heart,
The bounden subject still receiveth smart.
Lo, how unbridled lust of private reign,
Hath pricked both the brethren unto war:
Yet Polynices, with sign of less disdain,
Against this land hath brought from countries far,
A foreign power, to end this cruel jar,
Forgetting quite the duty, love, and zeal,
He aught to bear unto this common weal.
But whosoever gets the victory,
We wretched dames, and thou O noble town,
Shall feel thereof the woeful misery,
Thy gorgeous pomp, thy glorious high renown,
Thy stately towers, and all shall fall a down,
Sigh raging Mars will each of them assist
In other's breast to bathe his bloody fist.
But thou O son of Semel, and of Ioue,
(That tamed the proud attempt of giants strong)
Do thou defend, even of thy tender love,
Thy humble thralls from this afflicting wrong,
Whom waist of war hath now tormented long:
So shall we never fail ne day ne night
With reverence due thy praises to recite.
Lo here mine own city and native soil,
Lo here the nest I aught to nestle in,
Yet being thus entrenched with mine own towers,
And that, from him the safeconduct is given
Which doth enjoy as much as mine should be,
My feet can tread no step without suspect:
For where my brother bides, even there behoves
Moore wary scout than in an enemies camp.
Yet while I may wthin this right hand hold
This bronde, this blade, (unyelden ever yet)
My life shall not be left without revenge.
But here behold the holy sanctuary,
Of Bacchus eke the worthy Image, lo
The altars where the sacred flames have shone,
And where of yore these guiltless hands of mine
Full often have offered to our mighty gods:
I see also a worthy company
Of Theban dames, resembling unto me
The train of Iocasta my dear mother:
Behold them clad in clothes of grisly black,
That hellish hew that nay for other harms
So well beseemed wretched wights to wear:
For why, ere long their selves, themselves shall see
(Gramercy to their prince's tyranny)
Some spoiled of their sweet and sucking babes,
Some lose their husband, other some their sire,
And some their friends that were to them full dear.
But now 'tis time to lay the sword aside.
And eke of them to know where is the Queen:
O worthy dames, heavy, unhappy ye,
Where resteth now the restless queen of Thebes?
O worthy imp sprung out of worthy race,
renowned Prince, whom we have looked for long,
And now in happy hour art come to us,
Some quiet bring to this unquiet realm.
O queen, O queen, come forth and see thy son,
The gentle fruit of all thy joyful seed.
My faithful friends, my dear beloved maids,
I come at call, and at your words I move
My feebled feet with age and agony:
Where is my son? O tell me where is he,
For whom I sighed have so often sith,
For whom I spend both nights and days in tears?
Here noble mother, here, not as the king,
Nor as a Citizen of stately Thebes,
But as a stranger now, I thank my brother.
O son, O sweet and my desired son,
These eyes they see, these hands of mine thee touch,
Yet scarcely can this mind believe the same,
And scarcely can this bruised breast sustain
The sudden joy that is enclosed therein:
O gladsome glass, wherein I see myself.
So grant the Gods, for our common good,
You friendly may your sons both friends behold.
At thy depart, O lovely child, thou left
My house in tears, and me thy wretched dame,
Mirror of martyrdom, waymenting still
Th'unworthy exile thy brother to thee gave:
Ne was there ever son or friend far off,
Of his dear friends or mother so desired,
As thy return, in all the town of Thebes.
And of myself more than the rest to speak,
I have as thou mayst see, clean cast aside
My princely robes, and thus in woeful weed,
Bewrapped have these lustless limbs of mine:
nought else but tears have trickled from mine eyes,
And eke thy wretched blind and aged sire,
Since first he heard what war 'tween you there was,
As one that did his bitter curse repent,
Or that he prayed to Ioue for your decay,
With stretching string, or else with bloody knife
Hath sought full oft to end his loathed life.
Thou this mean while my son, hast lingered long
In far and foreign coasts, and wedded eke,
By whom thou mayst, (when heavens appoints it so)
Strange issue have by one a stranger borne,
Which grieves me sore, and much the more dear child,
Because I was not present at the same,
There to perform thy loving mothers due.
But for I find thy noble match so meet,
And worthy both for thy degree and birth,
I seek to comfort thee by mine advise,
That thou return this city to inhabit,
Which best of all may seem to be the bower,
Both for thyself and for thy noble spouse.
Forget thou then thy brother's injuries,
And know dear child, the harm of all mishap
That haps twixt you, must hap likewise to me:
Ne can the cruel sword so slightly touch
Your tender flesh, but that the self same wound
Shall deeply bruise this aged breast of mine.
There is no love may be compared to that,
The tender mother bears unto her child:
For even somuch the more it doth increase,
As their grief grows, or contentations cease.
I know not mother, if I praise deserve,
(That you to please, whom I aught not displease)
Have trained myself among my trustless foes:
But Nature draws (whether he will or nill)
Each man to love his native country soil:
And who should say, that otherwise it were,
His tongue should never with his heart agree.
This hath me drawn beside my bounden due,
To set full light this luckless life of mine:
For of my brother, what may I else hope,
But trains of treason, force and falsehood both?
Yet neither peril present, nor to come,
Can hold me from my due obedience:
I grant I can not griefless, well behold
My father's palace, the holy altars,
Ne lovely lodge wherein I fostered was:
From whence driven out, and chaste unworthily,
I have to long abode in foreign coasts:
And as the growing green and pleasant plant,
Doth bear fresh branches one above another,
Even so amid the huge heap of my woes,
Doth grow one grudge more grievous than the rest,
To see my dear and doleful mother, clad
In mourning tire, to tire her mourning mind,
Wretched alonely for my wretchedness,
So likes that enemy my brother best:
Soon shall you see that in this wandering world,
No enmity is equal unto that
That dark disdain (the cause of every evil)
Doth breed full oft in consanguinity.
But Ioue, he knows what dole I do endure,
For you and for my father's wretched woe,
And eke how deeply I desire to know
What weary life my loving sisters lead,
And what annoy mine absence them hath given.
Alas, alas, how wreakful wrath of Gods
Doth still afflict Oedipus progeny:
The first cause was thy father's wicked bed,
And then (o why do I my plagues recount?)
My burden borne, and your unhappy birth:
But needs we must with patient hearts abide,
What so from high the heavens do provide.
With thee my child, fain would I question yet
Of certain things me would I that my words
Might thee annoy, ne yet renew thy grief.
say on, dear mother, say what so you please:
What pleaseth you, shall never me disease.
And seems it not a heavy hap my son,
To be deprived of thy country coasts?
So heavy hap as tongue can not express.
And what may most molest the mind of man
This is exiled from his native soil?
The liberty he with his country lost,
And that he lacketh freedom for to speak,
What seemeth best, without control or check.
Why so? each servant lacketh liberty
To speak his mind, without his masters leave.
In exile, every man, or bond or free,
Of noble race, or meaner parentage,
Is not in this unlike unto the slave,
That must of force obey to each man's will,
And praise the peevishness of each man's pride.
And seemed this so grievous unto thee?
What grief can greater be, than so constrained
Slave-like to serve 'gainst right and reason both,
Yea much the more, to him that noble is,
By stately line, or yet by virtuous life,
And hath a heart like to his noble mind.
What helpeth most in such adversity?
Hope helpeth most to comfort misery.
Hope to return from whence he first was driven?
Yea, hope that happeneth oftentimes to late,
And many die before such hap may fall.
And how didst thou before thy marriage son,
Maintain thy life, a stranger so bestead?
Sometime I found (though seldom so it were)
Some gentle heart, that could for courtesy,
Content himself to secure mine estate.
Thy father's friends and thine, did they not help
For to relieve that naked need of thine?
Mother, he hath a foolish fantasy,
That thinks to find a friend in misery.
Thou mightest have help by thy nobility.
Covered alas, in cloak of poverty?
Well aught we then that are but mortal here,
Above all treasure count our country dear:
Yea let me know my son, what cause thee moved
To go to Grece?
The flying fame that thundered in mine ears,
How king Adrastus, governor of Greece,
Was answered by Oracle, that he
Should knit in links of lawful marriage,
His two fair daughters, and his only heirs,
One to a Lion, th'other to a Boar:
An answer such as each man wondered at.
And how belongs this answer now to thee?
I took my guess even by this ensign here,
A Lion lo, which I did always bear:
Yet think I not, but Ioue alonely brought
These hands of mine to such an high exploit.
And how yet came it to this strange effect?
The shining day had run his hasted course,
And dewy night bespread her mantel dark,
When I that wandered after weary toil,
To seek some harbour for mine irked limbs,
'Gan find at last a little cabin, close
Adjoined fast unto the stately walls,
Where king Adrastus held his royal towers.
Scarce was I there in quiet well ycought,
But thither came another exile eke,
Named Tydeus, who strove perforce to drive
Me from this sorry seat, and so at last,
We settled us to fell and bloody fight,
Whereof the rumour grew so great forthwith,
That strait the king informed was thereof,
Who seeing then the ensigns that we bore,
To be even such as were to him foresaid,
Choose each of us to be his son by law,
And sithence did solemnize eke the same.
Yet would I know, if that thy wife be such
As thou canst joy in her? or what she is?
O mother dear, fairer ne wiser dame
Is none in Greece, Argia is her name.
How couldst thou to this doubtful enterprise,
So many bring, thus armed all at once?
Adrastus swore, that he would soon restore
Unto our right both Tydeus, and me:
And first for me, that had the greater need,
Whereby the best and boldest bloods in Greece,
Have followed me unto this enterprise.
A thing both just and grievous unto me,
grievous I say, for that I do lament
To be constrained by such open wrong,
To war against mine own dear country fears.
But unto you (O mother) doth pertain
To stint this strife, and both deliver me
From exile now, and eke the town from siege:
For otherwise, I swear you here by heavens,
Eteocles, who now doth me disdain
For brother, shortly shall see me his lord▪
I ask the seat, whereof I aught of right
Possess the half, I am Oedipus son,
And yours, so am I true son to you both.
Wherefore I hope that as in my defence,
The world will weigh, so Ioue will me assist.
Behold O queen, behold O worthy queen,
Unworthy he, Eteocles here comes,
So, would the Gods, that in this noble realm
Should never long unnoble tyrant reign,
Or that with wrong the right and doubtless heir,
Should banished be out of his princely seat.
Yet thou O queen, so file thy sugared tongue.
And with such counsel deck thy mother's tale,
That peace may both the brother's hearts inflame,
And rancour yield, that erst possess the same.
Mother, behold, your hests for to obey,
In person now am I resorted hither:
In haste therefore, fain would I know what cause
With hasty speed, so moved hath your mind
To call me now so causeless out of time,
When common wealth most craves my only aid:
Fain would I know what quent commodity
Persuades you thus to take a truce for time,
And yield the gates wide open to my foe,
The gates that might our stately state defend,
And now are made the path of our decay.
Repress dear son, those raging storms of wrath,
That so bedim the eyes of thine intent,
As when the tongue (a ready Instrument)
Would fain pronounce the meaning of the mind,
It cannot speak one honest seemly word.
But when disdain is shrunk, or set aside,
And mind of man with leisure can discourse
What seemly words his tale may best beseem,
And that the tongue unfoldes without affects
Then may proceed an answer sage and grave,
And every sentence sawst with soberness:
Wherefore unbend thine angry brows dear child,
And cast thy rolling eyes none other way,
That here dost not Medusa's (a) face behold,
But him, even him, thy blood and brother dear.
And thou behold, my Polynices eke,
Thy brother's face, wherein when thou mayst see
Thy own image, remember therewithal,
That what offence thou wouldst to him were done,
The blows thereof rebound unto thyself.
And hereof eke, I would you both forewarn,
When friends or brethren, kinsfolk or allies,
(Whose hasty hearts some angry mood had moved)
Be face to face by some of pity brought,
Who seeks to end their discord and debate:
They only aught consider well the cause
For which they come, and cast out of their mind
For evermore the old offences passed:
So shall sweet peace drive pleading out of place.
Wherefore the first shall Polynices be,
To tell what reason first his mind did rule,
That thus our walls with foreign foes enclosed
In sharp revenge of causeless wrong received,
As he allegeth by his brother's doom:
And of this wicked woe and dire (b) debate,
Some God of pity be the equal judge,
Whom I beseech, to breath in both your breasts
A yielding heart to deep desire of peace.
My worthy dame, I find that tried truth
Doth best beseem a simple naked tale,
Ne needs to be with painted process pricked,
That in herself hath no diversity,
But always shows one undisguised face,
Where deep deceit and lies must seek the shade,
And wrap their words in guileful eloquence,
As ever fraught with contrariety:
So have I often said, and say again,
That to avoid our father's foul reproach
And bitter curse, I parted from this land
With right good will, yet thus with him agreed,
That while the whirling wings of flying time
Might roll one year about the heavenly sphere,
So long alone he might with peace possess
Our father's seat in princely (c) Diadem,
And when the year should eke his course renew,
Might I succeed to rule again as long.
And that this law might still be kept for ay,
He bond himself by vow of solemn oath
By Gods, by men, by heaven, and eke by earth:
Yet that forgot, without all reverence
Unto the Gods, without respect to right,
Without respect that reason aught to rule,
His faith and troth both trodden under foot,
He still usurps most tyrantlike with wrong
The right that doth of right to me belong.
But if he can with equal doom consent,
That I return into my native soil
To sway with him alike the kingly seat
And evenly bear the bridle both in hand,
Dear mother mine I swear by all the Gods
To raise with speed the siege from these our walls,
And sand the soldiers home from whence they came:
Which if he grant me not, then must I do
(Though loath) as much as right and reason would,
To venge my cause that is both good and just.
Yet this in heaven the Gods my records be,
And here in earth each mortal man may know,
That never yet my guiltless heart did fail
Brotherly duty to Eteocles,
And that causeless he holds me from mine own.
Thus have I said O mother, even as much
As needful is, wherein I me assure:
That in the judgement both of good and bad,
My words may seem of reason to proceed,
Constrained thus in my defence to speak.
None may deny, O peer of princely race,
But that thy words, are honest, good and just,
And such as well beseem that tongue of thine.
If what to some seems honest good and just,
Can seem even so in every doubtful mind,
Not dark debate nor quarrel could arise:
But look, how many men so many minds,
And that, that one man judgeth good and just,
Some other deems as deeply to be wrong.
To say the truth (mother) this mind of mine
Doth fleet full far from that farfetch of his,
Ne will I longer cover my conceit:
If I could rule or reign in heaven above,
And eke command in depth of darksome hell,
No toil ne travel should my spirits abash,
To take the way unto my restless will,
To climb aloft, nor down for to descend.
Then think you not, that I can give consent
To yield a part of my possession,
Wherein I live and lead the monarchy.
A witless fool may every man him guess,
That leaves the more and takes him to the less.
With this, reproach might to my name redound,
If he, that hath with foreign power spoiled
Our pleasant fields, might reave from me perforce,
What so he list by force of arms demand.
Not less reproof the citizens ensues,
If I, for dread of Greekish hosts, should grant
That he might climb to height of his desire.
In fine, he aught not thus of me to crave
Accord, or peace, with bloody sword in hand,
But with humility and prayer both,
For often is it seen, and proof doth teach,
Sweet words prevail, where sword and fire do fail.
Yet this, if here within these stately walls
He list to live, the son of Oedipus,
And not as king of Thebes, I stand content.
But let him think, since now I can command,
This neck of mine shall never yield to yoke
Of servitude: let bring his banners splayed,
Let spear and shield, sharp sword, and cindering flames
Procure the part that he so vainly claims:
As long as life within this breast doth last,
I nill consent that he should reign with me.
If law of right may any way be broke,
Desire of rule within a climbing breast
To break a vow may bear the buckler best.
Who once hath passed the bounds of honesty
In earnest deeds, may pass it well in words.
O son, amongst so many miseries
This benefit hath crooked age, I found,
That as the track of trustless time hath taught,
It seeth much, and many things discerns,
Which reckless youth can never rightly judge,
O, cast aside that vain ambition,
That corrosive, that cruel pestilence,
That most infects the minds of mortal men:
In princely palace and in stately towns
It creepeth oft, and close with it conveys,
(To leave behind it) damage and decays:
By it be love and amity destroyed,
It breaks the laws and common concord beats,
Kingdoms and realms it topsy-turvy turns,
And now, even thee, her gall so poisoned hath,
That the weak eyes of thine affection
Are blinded quite, and see not to themself
But worthy child, drive from thy doubtful breast
This monstrous mate, in stead whereof embrace
Equality, which stately states defends
And binds the mind with true and trusty knots
Of friendly faith which never can be broke,
This man, of right should properly possess,
And who that other doth the more embrace,
Shall purchase pain to be his just reward
By wrathful woe, or else by cruel death.
This, first divided all by equal bonds
What so the earth did yield for our avail?
This, did divide the nights and days alike,
And that the vail of dark and dreadful night)
(Which shrouds in misty clouds the pleasant light,
Ne yet the golden beams of Phoebus' rays
(Which clears the dimmed air with gladsome gleams)
Can yet heap hate in either of them both.
If then the days and nights to serve our turn
Content themselves to yield each other place,
Well oughtest thou with weighty doom to grant
Thy brother's right to rule the reign with thee,
Which heavens ordained common to you both:
If so thou nill O son, O cruel son,
In whose high breast may justice build her hour
When princes' hearts wide open lie to wrong?
Why likes thee so the type of tyranny
With other's loss to gather greedy gain?
Alas how far he wanders from the truth
That counts a pomp, all other to command,
Yet can not rule his own unbridled will,
A vain desire much riches to possess
Whereby the breast is bruised and battered still,
With dread, with danger, care and cold suspect.
Who seeks to have the thing we call enough,
Acquaint him first with contentation,
For plenteousness is but a naked name.
And what sufficeth use of mortal men,
Shall best apay the mean and modest hearts.
These hoarded heaps of gold and worldly wealth
Are not the proper goods of any one,
But pawns which Ioue powers out abundantly
That we likewise might use them equally,
And as he seems to lend them for a time,
Even so in time he takes them home again,
And would that we acknowledge every hour,
That from his hands we did the same receive:
There nothing is so firm and stayed to man,
But whirls about with wheels of restless time.
Now if I should this one thing thee demand,
Which of these two thou wouldst choose to keep,
The town quiet or unquiet tyranny?
And wouldst thou say I choose my kingly chair?
O witless answer sent from wicked heart,
For if so fall (which mighty God defend)
Thy enemies hand should overcome thy might,
And thou shouldest see them sack the town of Thebes,
The chastest virgins ravished for wreck,
The worthy children in captivity,
Then shouldest thou feel that sceptre, crown, & wealth
Yield deeper care to see them ta'en away,
Than to possess them yieldeth deep content.
Now to conclude my son, Ambition
Is it that most offends thy blinded thought,
Blame not thy brother, blame ambition
From whom if so thou not redeem thyself,
I fear to see thee buy repentance dear.
Yea dear, too dear when it shall come too late.
And now to thee my Polynices dear,
I say that silly was Adrastus read,
And thou God knows a simple silly soul,
He to be ruled by thy heady will,
And thou, to war against the Theban walls,
These walls I say whose gates thyself should guard:
Tell me I pray thee, if the City yield,
Or thou it take by force in bloody fight,
(Which never grant the Gods I them beseek)
What spoils? what Palms? what sign of victory
Canst thou set up to have thy country won?
What title worthy of immortal fame,
Shall blazed be in honour of thy name?
O son, dear son, believe thy trusty dame,
The name of glory shall thy name refuse,
And fly full far from all thy fond attempts.
But if so fall thou shouldst be overcome,
Then with what face canst thou return to Greece,
That here hast left so many Greekes on ground▪
Each one shall curse and blame thee to thy face,
As him that only caused their decay,
And eke condemn Adrastus simple head,
That such a fere had chosen for his child.
So may it fall, in one accursed hour,
That thou mayst lose thy wife and country both,
Both which thou mayst with little toil attain,
If thou canst leave high mind and dark disdain.
O mighty Gods of goodness, never grant
Unto these evils, but set desired peace
Between the hearts of these two friendly foes.
The question that betwixt us two is grown,
Believe me mother, can not end with words:
You waste your breath, and I but lose my time,
And all your travel lost and spent in vain:
For this I swear, that peace you never get
Between us two, but with condition,
That whilst I live, I will be Lord of Thebes.
Then set aside these vain forwasted words,
And yield me leave to go where need doth press:
And now good sir, get you out of these walls,
Unless you mean to buy abode with blood.
And who is he that seeks to have my blood,
And shall not shed his own as fast as mine?
By thee he stands, and thou stand'st him before:
Lo here the sword that shall perform his word.
And this shall eke maintain my rightful cause.
O sons, dear sons, away with glittering arms:
And first, before you touch each other's flesh,
With doubled blows come pierce this breast of mine.
Ah wretch, thou art both vile and coward like,
Thy high estate esteems thy life to dear.
If with a wretch or coward shouldst thou fight,
O dastard villain, what first moved thee
With swarms of Greeks to take this enterprise?
For well I witted, that cankered heart of thine
Could safely keep thy head within these walls,
And flee the field when combat should be called.
This truce assureth thee Polynices,
And makes thee bold to give such boasting words:
So be thou sure, that had this truce not been,
Then long erethis, these hands had been imbrued,
And eke this soil besprinkled with thy blood.
Not one small drop of my blood shalt thou spill,
But buy it dear against thy cankered william.
O sons, my sons, for pity yet refrain.
Good Gods, who ever saw so strange a sight?
True love and friendship both be put to flight.
Yield villain, yield my right which thou witholdst.
Cut of thy hope to reign in Theban walls,
Naught hast thou here, nor naught shall ever have,
Away.
O altars of my country soil.
Whom thou art come to spoil and to deface.
O Gods, give ear unto my honest cause.
With foreign power his country to invade.
O holy temples of the heavenly Gods.
That for thy wicked deeds do hate thy name
Out of my kingdom am I driven by force.
Out of the which thou camest me for to drive.
Punish O Gods this wicked tyrant here.
Pray to the Gods in Greece and not in Thebes.
Not savage beast so cruel nor unjust.
Not cruel to my country like to thee.
Since from my right I am with wrong deprived.
Eke from thy life if long thou tarry here.
O father hear what injuries I take.
As though thy devilish deeds were hid from him.
And you mother.
Have done thou not deservest
With that false tongue thy mother once to name.
O dear City.
When thou arivest in Greece,
Choose out thy dwelling in some musty Moors.
I must depart, and parting must I praise
O dear mother the depth of your good william.
O son.
Away I say out of these walls.
I can not choose but must thy will obey,
Yet grant me once my father for to see.
I hear no prayers of my enemy.
Where be my sweet sisters?
And canst thou yet
With shameless tongue once name thy noble race
That art become a common foe to Thebes?
Be sure thou shall them never see again,
Nor other friend that in these walls remain.
Rest you in peace, O worthy mother mine.
How can that be and thou my joy in war?
Hence forth n'am I your join yet your son.
Alas the heavens me whelm with all mishap.
Lo here the cause that stirreth me by wrong.
Much more is that he proffereth unto me.
Well, speak, darest thou come armed to the field?
So dare I come, wherefore dost thou demand?
For needs or thou must end this life of mine,
Or quench my thirst with pouring out thy blood.
Ah wretch, my thirst is all as dry as thine.
Alas and wellaway, what hear I sons?
How can it be? dear children can it be
That brethren's hearts such rancour should enrage?
And that right soon the proof shall plainly show.
O say not so, yet say not so dear sons.
O royal race of Thebes now take thine end.
God shield.
O slow & sluggish heart of mine,
Why do I stay t'embrew these slothful hands?
But for his greater grief I will depart,
And at return if here I find my foe,
This hasty hand shall end our hot debate.
Dear Citizens, and you eternal Gods,
Bear witness with me here before the world,
How this my fierce and cruel enemy,
Whom causeless now my brother I do call,
With threats of death my lingering steps doth drive
Both from my right and from my country soil,
Not as beseems the son of Oedipus,
But as a slave, an abject, or a wretch:
And since you be both pitiful and just,
Vouchsafe O Gods, that as I part with grief,
So may I yet return with joyful spoil
Of this accursed tyrant and (he slain)
I may recover quietly mine own.
O wretched wretch Iocasta, where is found
The misery that may compare to thine?
O would I had nor gazing eyes to see,
Nor listening ears to hear that now I dread:
But what remains, save only to entreat
That cruel dole would yet so courteous be
To reave the breath out of this woeful breast,
Before I hearken to some woeful news.
Rest you here dames, and pray unto the Gods
For our redress, and I in that mean while
Will shut myself from sight of loathsome light.
O mighty God, the governor of Thebes
pity with speed the pain Iocasta bides,
And eke our needs O mighty Bacchus help,
Bend willing ear unto our just complaint:
Leave them not comfortless that trust in thee,
We have no gold nor silver thee to give,
Ne sacrifice to those thine altars due,
In steed whereof we consecrated our hearts
To serve thy will, and hests for to obey.
SInce I have rid mine enemy out of sight,
The best shall be for Creon now to send,
(My mother's brother) that with him I may
Reason, consult, confer, and counsel both,
What shall be best to use in our defence,
Before we venture forth into the field.
But of this travail, lo, he me acquits
That comes in haste towards these royal towers.
O mighty king, not causeless now I come,
To find, that long have sought your majesty.
So to discharge the duty that I own
To you, by comfort and by counsel both.
Not less desire this heart of mine did press,
To sand for thee Creon, since that in vain
My mother hath her words and travail spent,
To reconcile Polynices and me:
For he (so dull was his caparitie)
Did think, he could by dread of danger, win
My princely heart to yield to him his realm.
I understand, the army that he brings
Against these walls, is such, that I me doubt
Our city's force may scarce the same resist.
Yet true it is, that right and reason both
Are on our side, which bring the victory
Oftentimes: for we our country to defend,
They to subdue the same in arms are come.
But what I would unto your highness show,
Is of more weight, and more behoves to know.
And what is that? o quickly tell it me.
A Greek prisoner is come unto my hands.
And what saith he that doth so much import?
That even already by their ranks in ray,
And straight will give assault to these our walls.
Then must I straight prepare our Citizens
In glittering arms to march into the field.
O Prince (and pardon me) thy youthful years
Nor see themself, ne let thee once discern,
What best behoveth in this doubtful case.
For Prudence, she that is the mighty queen
Of all good works, grows by experience,
Which is not found with few days seeking for.
And were not this both sound and wise advise,
Boldly to look our foemen in the face,
Before they spread our fields with hugy host,
And all the town beset by siege at once?
We be but few, and they in number great.
Our men have yet more courage far than they.
That know I not, nor am I sure to say.
Those eyes of thine in little space shall see
How many I myself can bring to ground.
That would I like, but hard it is to do.
I nill pen up our men within the walls.
In counsel yet the victory consists.
And wilt thou then I use some other read?
What else? be still a while, for haste makes waste.
By night I will the Cammassado give.
So may you do and take the overthrow.
The vantage is to him that doth assault.
Yet skirmish given by night is perilous.
Let set upon them as they sit at meat.
Sudden assaults affray the mind no doubt,
But we had need to overcome.
So shall we do.
Not sure, unless some other counsel help.
Amid their trenches shall we them invade?
As who should say, were none to make defence.
Should I then yield the City to my foes?
Not, but advise you well if you be wise.
That were thy part, that knowest more than I
Then shall I say that best doth seem to me?
Yea Creon yea, thy counsel hold I dear.
Seven men of courage have they chosen out.
A slender number for so great emprise.
But they them chose for guides and captains.
To such an host? why they may not suffice.
Nay, to assault the seven gates of the city.
What then behoveth so bestead to done?
With equal number see you do them match.
And then commit our men in charge to them?
Choosing the best and boldest bloods in Thebes.
And how shall I the City then defend?
Well-with the rest,, for one man sees not all.
And shall I choose the boldest or the wisest?
Nay both, for one without that other fails.
Force without wisdom than is little worth.
That one must be fast to that other joined.
Creon I will thy counsel follow still,
For why, I hold it wise and trusty both,
And out of hand for now I will depart
That I in time the better may provide
Before occasion slip out of my hands,
And that I may this Polynices quell:
For well may I with bloody knife him slay
That comes in arms my country for to spoil.
But if so please to fortune and to fate
That other end than I do think may fall,
To thee my friend it resteth to procure
The marriage twixt my sister Antigone
And thy dear son Haemon, to whom for dower
At parting thus I promise' to perform
As much as late I did behest to thee:
My mother's blood and brother dear thou art,
Ne need I crave of thee to guard her well,
As for my father care I not, for if
So chance I die, it may full well be said
His bitter curses brought me to my bane.
The Lord defend, for that unworthy were.
Of Thebes town the rule and sceptre lo
I need nor aught it otherwise dispose
Than unto thee, if I die without heir.
Yet longs my lingering mind to understand,
The doubtful end of this unhappy war:
Wherefore I will thou sand thy son to seek
Tiresias the divine, and learn of him,
For at my call I know he will not come
That often have his arts and him reproved.
As you command, so aught I to perform.
And last, I thee and city both command,
If fortune friendly favour our attempts,
And make our men triumphant victors all,
That none there be so hardy ne so bold
For Polynices' bones to give a grave:
And who presumes to break my best herein,
Shall die the death in penance of his pain:
For though I were by blood to him conjoined
I part it now, and justice goeth with me
To guide my steps victoriously before.
Pray you to Ioue he deign for to defend,
Our City safe both now and evermore.
Gramercy worthy prince, for all thy love
And faithful trust thou dost in me repose,
And if should hap, that I hope never shall,
I promise' yet to do what best behoves,
But chiefly this I swear and make a vow,
For Polynices now our cruel foe,
To hold the hest that thou dost me command.
O Fierce and furious Mars, whose harmful heart,
Rejoiceth most to shed the guiltless blood,
Whose heady will doth all the world subvert,
And doth envy the pleasant merry mood,
Of our estate that erst in quiet stood.
Why dost thou thus our harmless town annoy,
Which mighty Bacchus governed in joy?
Father of war and death, that dost remove
With wrathful wreck from woeful mother's breast,
The trusty pledges of their tender love,
So grant the Gods, that for our final rest,
Dame Venus pleasant looks may please thee best,
Whereby when thou shalt all amazed stand,
The sword may fall out of thy trembling hand.
And thou mayst prove some other way full well
The bloody prowess of thy mighty spear,
Wherewith thou raisest from the depth of hell,
The wrathful spirits of all the furies there,
Who when the weak, do wander every where,
And never rest to range about the coasts,
Tenriche that pit with spoil of damned ghosts.
And when thou hast our fields forsaken thus,
Let cruel discord bear thee company,
Engirt with snakes and serpents venomous,
Even she that can with read vermilion die
The gladsome green that flourished pleasantly,
And make the greedy ground a drinking cup,
To sup the blood of murdered bodies up.
Yet thou return O joy and pleasant peace,
From whence thou didst against our will departed,
Ne let thy worthy mind from travel cease,
To chase disdain out of the poisoned heart,
That raised war to all our pains and smart,
Even from the breast of Oedipus his son,
Whose swelling pride hath all this jar begun.
And thou great God, that dost all things decree,
And sit'st on high above the starry skies,
Thou chiefest cause of causes all that be,
Regard not his offence but hear our cries,
And speedily redress our miseries,
For what cause we poor woeful wretches do
But crave thy aid, and only cleave thereto?
THou trusty guide of my so trustless steps
Dear daughter mine go we, lead thou the way,
For since the day I first did lose this light
Thou only art the light of these mine eyes:
And for thou know'st I am both old & weak
And ever longing after lovely rest,
Direct my steps amid the plainest paths,
That so my feebled feet may feel less pain.
Meneceus thou gentle child, tell me,
Is it far hence, the place where we must go,
Where as thy father for my coming stays?
For like unto the slothful snail I draw,
(Dear son) with pain these aged legs of mine,
And though my mind be quick, scarce can I move.
Comfort thyself divine, Creon thy friend
Lo standeth here, and came to meet with thee
To ease the pain that thou mightst else sustain,
For unto eld each travel yields annoy
And thou his daughter and his faithful guide,
Lo rest him here, and rest thou there withal
Thy virgin's hands, that in sustaining him
Dost well acquit the duty of a child.
For crooked age and hoary silver hears
Still craveth help of lusty youthful years.
Gramercy Lord what is your noble will?
What I would have of thee Tiresias
Is not a thing so soon for to be said.
But rest a while thy weak and weary limbs
And take some breath now after weary walk,
And tell I pray thee, what this crown doth mean,
That sits so kingly on thy skilful head?
Know this, that for I did with grave advise,
Foretell the Citizens of Athens town,
How they might best with loss of little blood,
Have victories against their enemies,
Hath been the cause why I do wear this Crown,
As right reward and not unmeet for me.
So take I then this thy victorious crown,
For our avail in token of good luck,
That knowest, how the discord and debate
Which late is fallen between these brethren twain,
Hath brought all Thebes in danger and in dread.
Eteocles our king, with threatening arms,
Is gone against his greekish enemies,
Commanding me to learn of thee (who art
A true divine of things that be to come)
What were for us the safest to be done,
From peril now our country to preserve.
Long have I been within the town of Thebes,
Since that I tied this trusty tongue of mine
From telling truth, fearing Eteocles:
Yet, since thou dost in so great need desire
I should reveal things hidden unto thee,
For common cause of this our common weal,
I stand content to pleasure thee herein.
But first (that to this mighty God of yours
There might some worthy sacrifice be made)
Let kill the fairest goat that is in Thebes
Within whose bowels when the Priest shall look,
And tell to me what he hath there espied,
I trust t'advise thee what is best to doen.
Lo here the temple, and ere long I look
To see the holy priest that hither comes,
Bringing with him the pure and fair offerings,
Which thou requirest: for not long since, I sent
For him, as one that am not ignorant
Of all your rites and sacred ceremonies:
He went to choose amid our herd of goats,
The fattest there: and look where now he comes.
O famous Citizens, that hold full dear
Your quiet country: Lo where I do come
Most joyfully, with wonted sacrifice,
So to beseech the supreme Citizens,
To stay our state that stagg'ringly doth stand,
And plant us peace where war and discord grows:
Wherefore, with heart devout and humble cheer,
While I break up the bowels of this beast,
(That often thy veneyarde Bacchus hath destroyed,)
Let every wight crave pardon for his faults,
With bending knee about his altars here.
Take here the salt, and sprinkle therewithal
About the neck: that done, cast all the rest
Into the sacred fire, and then anoint
The knife prepared for the sacrifice.
O mighty Ioue, preserve the precious gift
That thou me gave, when first thine angry Queen,
For deep disdain did both mine eyes do out,
Grant me, I may foretell the truth in this,
For, but by thee, I know that I ne may,
Ne will, ne can, one trusty sentence say.
This due is done.
With knife then stick the kid,
Thou daughter of divine Tiresias,
With those unspotted virgin's hands of thine
Receive the blood within this vessel here,
And then devoutly it to Bacchus yield.
O holy God of Thebes, that dost both praise
Sweet peace, and dost in heart also disdain
The noisome noise, the furies and the fight
Of bloody Mars and of Bellona both:
O thou the giver both of joy and health,
Receive in 'gree and with well willing hand
These holy whole brunt offerings unto thee:
And as this town doth wholly thee a door,
So by thy help do grant that it may stand
Safe from the enemies outrage evermore.
Now in thy sacred name I bowel here
This sacrifice.
And what entrails hath it?
Fair and well-formed all in every point,
The liver clean, the heart is not infect,
Save lo, I find but only one heart string
By which I find something I wot near what,
That seems corrupt, and were not only that,
In all the rest, they are both sound and hole.
Now cast at once into the holy flame
The sweet incense, and then advertise me
What hue it bears, and every other rite
That aught may help the truth for to conject.
I see the flames do sundry colours cast,
Now bloody sanguine, strait way purple, blue,
Some parts seem black, some grey, and some be green.
Stay there, sufficeth this for to have seen.
Know Creon, that these outward seemly signs
(By that the Gods have let me understand
Who know the truth of every secret thing)
Betoken that the City great of Thebes
Shall Victor be against the Greekish host,
If so consent be given: but more than this
I list not say.
Alas, for courtesy
Say on Tiresias, never have respect
To any living man, but tell the truth.
In this mean while I will return with speed
From whence I came: for lawful is it not,
That such as I should hear your secrecies.
Contrary then to that which I have said,
The incest foul, and childbirth monstrous
Of Iocasta, so stirs the wrath of Ioue,
This city shall with bloody channels swim,
And angry Mars shall overcome it all
With famine, flame, rape, murder, dole and death:
These lusty towers shall have a headlong fall,
These houses burnt, and all the rest be razed,
And soon be said, here whilom Thebes stood.
One only way I find for to escape,
Which both would thee displease to hear it told,
And me to tell percase were perilous.
Thee therefore with my travel I commend
To Ioue, and with the rest I will endure,
What so shall chance for our adversity.
Yet stay a while,
Creon make me not stay
By force.
Why fléest thou?
Sir 'tis not from thee
I flee, but from this fortune foul and fell.
Yet tell me what behoves the city do?
Thou Creon seemest now desirous still
It to preserve: but if as well as I
Thou knewest that which is to thee unknown,
Then wouldst thou not so soon consent thereto.
And would not I with eager mind desire
The thing that may for Thebes aught avail?
And dost thou then so instantly request
To know which way thou mayest the same preserve?
For nothing else I sent my son of late
To seek for thee.
Then will I satisfy
Thy greedy mind in this: but first tell me,
Menetius where is he?
Not far from me.
I pray thee send him out some other where.
Why wouldst thou that he should not be here?
I would not have him hear what I should say.
He is my son, ne will he it reveal.
And shall I then while he is present speak?
Yea, be thou sure that he no less than I,
Doth wish full well unto this common weal.
Then Creon shalt thou know: the mean to save
This City, is, that thou shalt slay thy son,
And of his body make a sacrifice
For his country: lo here is all you seek
So much to know, and since you have me forced
To tell the thing that I would not have told,
If I have you offended with my words,
Blame then yourself, and eke your froward fate.
O cruel words, o, o, what hast thou said,
Thou cruel soothsayer?
Even that, that heaven
Hath ordained once, and needs it must ensue.
How many evils hast thou knit up in one?
Though evil for thee, yet for thy country good.
And let my country perish, what care I?
Above all things we aught to hold it dear.
Cruel were he, that would not love his child.
For common weal, were well, that one man wail.
To lose mine own, I list none other save.
Best Citizens care lest for private gain.
Departed, for now, with all thy prophecies.
Lo, thus the truth doth always hatred get.
Yet pray I thee by these thy silver hears,
The harm that comes from heaven can not be scaped.
And by thy holy spirit of prophecy,
What heaven hath done, that cannot I undo.
That to no more this secret thou reveal.
And wouldst thou have me learn to make a lie?
I pray thee hold thy peace.
That will I not:
But in thy woe to yield thee some relief,
I tell thee once, thou shalt be Lord of Thebes,
Which hap of thine this string did well declare,
Which from the heart doth out alonely grow.
So did the piece corrupted plainly show,
An argument most evident to prove
Thy son his death.
Well, yet be thou content
To keep full close this secret hidden grief.
I neither aught, ne will keep it so close.
Shall I be then the murderer of mine own?
Ne blame not me, but blame the stars for this.
Can heavens condemn but him alone to die?
We aught believe the cause is good and just.
Unjust is he condemns the innocent.
A fool is he accuseth heavens of wrongs.
There can no ill thing come from heavens above.
Then this that heaven commands can not be ill.
I not believe that thou hast talked with God.
Because I tell thee that doth thee displease.
Out of my sight accursed lying wretch.
Go daughter go, o what fool is he
That puts in ure to publish prophecies?
For if he do foretell a froward fate,
Though it be true, yet shall he purchase hate:
And if he silence keep, or hide the truth,
The heavy wrath of mighty Gods ensueth.
Apollo he might well tell things to come,
That had no dread the angry to offend.
But high we daughter hence some other way.
O my dear child, well hast thou heard with ear
These weary news, or rather wicked tales
That this divine of thee divined hath:
Yet will thy father never be thy foe,
With cruel doom thy death for to consent.
You rather aught, O father, to consent
Unto my death, since that my death may bring
Unto this town both peace and victory.
Ne can I purchase more praise worthy death
Than for my country's wealth to loose my breath
I cannot praise this witless will of thine.
You know dear father, that this life of ours
Is brittle, short, and nothing else in deed
But tedious toil and pangs of endless pain:
And death, whose dart to some men seems so fell,
Brings quiet end to this unquiet life.
Unto which end who soon doth arrive,
Fi●●s soon rest of all his restless grief.
And were it so, that here on earth we felt
Not prick of pain, nor that our flattering days
Were never dashed by froward fortunes frown,
Yet being borne (as all men are) to die,
Were not this worthy glory and renown,
To yield the country soil where I was borne,
For so long time, so short a time as mine?
I can not think that this can be denied.
Then if to shun this haughty high behest,
Mine only cause, O father, doth you move,
Be sure, you seek to take from me your son,
The greatest honour that I can attain:
But if your own commodity you move,
So much the less you aught the same allow:
For look, how much the more you have in Thebes,
So much the more you aught to love the same:
Here have you Haemon, he that in my stead
(O my dear father) may with you remain,
So that, although you be deprived of me
Yet shall you not be quite deprived of heirs.
I can not choose, dear son, but disallow
This thy too hasty, hot desire of death:
For if thy life thou settest all so light,
Yet oughtest thou thy father me respect,
Who as I draw the more to lumpish age,
So much more need have I to crave thine aid:
Ne will I yet, with stubborn tongue deny,
That for his common weal to spend his life,
Doth win the subject high renowned name.
But how? in armour to defend the state,
Not like a beast to bleed in sacrifice:
And therewithal, if any should consent
To such a death, then should the same be I,
That have prolonged life even long enough,
Nay many days have I now to draw on.
And more avail might to the country come,
Dear son, to hold that lusty life of thine,
That art both young and eke of courage stout.
Than may by me that feeble am and old.
Then live dear son in high prosperity,
And give me leave that worthy am to die.
Yet worthy were not that unworthy change.
If such a death bring glory, give it me.
Not you, but me, the heavens call to die.
We be but one in flesh and body both.
I father aught, so aught not you, to die.
If thou son die, think not that I can live:
Then let me die, and so shall he first die,
That aught to die, and yet but one shall die.
Although I, father, aught t'obey your beasts,
Yet evil it were in this to yield your william.
Thy wit is wily for to work thy wo.
O, tender pity moveth me thereto.
A beast is he, that kills himself with a knife,
Of pity to preserve an other's life.
Yet wise is he, that doth obey the Gods
The Gods will not the death of any wight.
Whose life they take, they give him life also.
But thou dost strive to take thy life thyself.
Nay them to obey, that will I shall not live.
What fault, O son, condemneth thee to death?
Who liveth (father) here without a fault?
I see no guilt in thee that death deserves.
But God it seeth that every secret seeth.
How should we know what is the will of God?
We know it then, when he reveals the same.
As though he would come down to tell it us,
By divers means his secrets he discloseth.
O, fond is he, whothinkes to understand
The mysteries of Ioue his secret mind:
And for to end this controversy here,
Lo thus I say, I will we both live yet:
Prepare thee then, my (*) hests to hold and keep,
And pull a down that stubborn heart of thine,
You may of me, as of yourself dispose,
And since my life doth seem so dear to you,
I will preserve the same to your avail,
That I may spend it always to your wil.
Then, thee behoves out of this town to fly:
Before the bold and blind Tiresias
Do publish this that is as yet unknown.
And where, or in what place shall I become?
Where thou mayst be hence furthest out of sight.
You may command, and I aught to obey.
Go to the land of Thesbeoita.
Where Dodona doth sit in sacred chair?
Even there my child.
And who shall guide my wandering steps?
high Ioue.
Who shall give sustenance for my relief?
There will I sand thee heaps of glistering gold.
But when shall I eftsoons my father see?
Ere long I hope: but now, for now departed.
For every lingering let or little stay,
May purchase pain and torment both to me.
First would I take my congee of the Queen,
That since the day my mother lost her life,
Hath nourished me as if I were her own.
O, tarry not my dear son, tarry not.
Behold father, I go. You dames of Thebes,
Pray to almighty Ioue for my return:
You see how mine unhappy stars me drive
To go my country fro: and if so chance,
I end in woe my prime and lusty years
Before the course of Nature do them call,
Honour my death yet with your dreary plaints:
And I shall eke, where so this carcase come,
Pray to the Gods that they preserve this town.
WHen she that rules the rolling wheel of chance,
Doth turn aside her angry frowning face,
On him, whom erst she deigned to advance,
She never leaves to gaulde him with disgrace,
To toss and turn his state in every place,
Till at the last the hurl him from on high
And yield him subject unto misery:
And as the branch that from the root is rest,
He never wins like life to that he left:
Yea though he do, yet can not taste of joy
Compare with pangs that past in his annoy.
Well did the heavens ordain for our behoof
Necessity, and fates by them aloud,
That when we see our high mishaps aloof
(As though our eyes were muffled with a cloud)
Our froward will doth shrink itself and shroud
From our avail wherewith we run so faree:
As none amendss can make that we do mar:
Then draws evil hap & strives to show his strength,
And such as yield unto his might, at length
He leads them by necessity the way
That destiny prepared for our decay.
The Mariner amid the swelling seas
Who seeth his bark with many a billow beaten,
Now here, now there, as wind and waves best please,
When thundering Ioue with tempest list to threaten,
And dreads in deepest gulf for to be eaten,
Yet learns a mean by mere necessity
To save himself in such extremity:
For when he seeth no man hath wit nor power
To fly from fate when fortune list to lower,
His only hope on mighty Ioue doth cast,
Whereby he wins the wished heaven at last.
How fond is that man in his fantasy,
Who thinks that Ioue the maker of us all,
And he that tempers all in heaven on high,
The sun, the moan, the stars celestial,
So that no leaf without his leave can fall,
Hath not in him omnipotence also
To guide and govern all things here below?
O blinded eyes, O wretched mortal wights,
O subject slaves to every ill that lights,
To scape such woe, such pain, such shame and scorn,
Happy were he that never had been borne.
Well might duke Creon driven by destiny,
(If true it be that old Tiresias saith)
Redeem our city from this misery,
By his consent unto Meneceus' death,
Who of himself would feign have lost his breath:
But every man is loath for to fulfil
The heavenly hest that pleaseth not his william.
That public weal must needs to ruin g●
Where private profit is preferred so.
Yet mighty God, thy only aid we crave,
This town from siege, and us from sorrow save.
O Sage and sober dames, O shamefast maids,
O faithful servants of our aged Queen,
Come lead her forth, sith unto her I bring
Such secret news as are of great import.
Come forth, O Queen, surcease thy woeful plaint,
And to my words vouchsafe a willing ear.
My servant dear, dost thou yet bring me news
Of more mishap? ah weary wretch, alas,
How doth Eteocles? whom heretofore
In his increasing years, I wonted aye
From dangerous hap with favour to defend,
Doth he yet live? or hath untimely death
In cruel fight herefte his flowering life?
He lives (O Queen) hereof have ye no doubt,
From such suspect myself will quit you soon.
The venturous Greeks have haply ta'en the town?
The Gods forbidden.
Our soldiers then, perchance,
Dispersed been and yelden to the sword.
Not so, they were at first in danger sure,
But in the end obtained victory.
Alas, what then becomes of Polynices?
O canst thou tell? is he dead or alive?
You have (O Queen) yet both your sons alive
O, how my heart is eased of his pain.
Well, then proceed, and briefly let me hear,
How ye repulsed your proud presuming foes,
That thereby yet at lest I may assuage
The swelling sorrows in my doleful breast,
In that the town is hitherto preserved:
And for the rest, I trust that might Ioue
Will yield us aid.
Not sooner had your worthy valiant son,
Severde the Dukes into seven several parts,
And set them to defence of several gates,
And brought in brave array his horsemen out,
First to encounter with their mighty foen,
And likewise pitched, the footmen face to face
Against the footmen of their enemies,
But fiercely strait, the armies did approach,
Swarming so thick, as covered clean the field,
When dreadful blast of braying trumpets sounds,
Of doleful drums, and thundering cannon shot,
Gave hideous sign of horror of the fight,
Then 'gan the Greekes to give their sharp assault,
Then from the walls our stout courageous men,
With rolling stones, with peise of hugy beams,
With flying darts, with flakes of burning fire,
And deadly blows, did beat them back again:
Thus striving long, with stout and bloody fight,
(Whereby full many thousand slaughtered were)
The hardy Greeks came underneath the walls:
Of whom, first Capaney (a lusty Knight)
Did scale the walls, and on the top thereof
Did vaunt himself, when many hundred more,
With fierce assaults did follow him as fast.
Then lo, the Captains seven bestirred themselves,
(Whose names ye have already understood)
Some here, some there, naught dreading loss of life,
With new relief to feed the fainting breach:
And Polynices, he bended all the force
Of his whole charge, against the greatest gate,
When suddenly a flash of lightning flame
From angry skies struck captain Capaney
That there down dead he fell: at sight whereof
The gazers on were fraught with sudden fear.
The rest, that strove to mount the walls so fast,
From ladder's top did headlong tumble down.
Herewith our men encouraged by good hap,
Took hardy hearts, and so repulsed the Greeks.
There was Eteocles, and I with him,
Who setting first those soldiers to their charge,
Ran straight to tother gates: unto the weak
He manly comfort gave: unto the bold
His lusty words increased courage still:
In so much as th'amazed Graecian king
When he did hear of Capaney his death,
Fearing thereby the Gods become his foen,
Out from the trench withdrew his weary host.
But rash Eteocles (presuming too too much
Upon their flight) did issue out of Thebes,
And forward strait with strength of chivalry,
His flying foes courageously pursued.
Too long it were to make recount of all
That wounded been, or slain, or captive now:
The cloudy air was filled round about
With howling cries and woeful wailing plaints:
So great a slaughter (O renowned Queen)
Before this day I think was never seen.
Thus have we now cut of the fruitless hope
The Grecians had, to sack this noble town.
What joyful end will happen hereunto
Yet know I not: the gods turn all to good.
To conquer, lo, is doubtless worthy praise,
But wisely for to use the conquest got,
Hath ever won immortal sound of fame.
Well, yet therewhile in this we may rejoice,
Sigh heaven and heavenly powers are pleased therewith.
This good success was lucky sure, and such,
As for my part I little looked for:
To save the town and eke to have my sons
(As you report) preserved yet alive.
But yet proceed, and further let me know
The final end that they agreed upon.
Not more (O queen) let this for now suffice,
Sigh hitherto your state is safe enough.
These words of tdine, do whelm my jealous mind
With great suspect of other mischiefs hid.
What would you more, already being sure
That both your sons in safety do remain?
I long to know the rest, or good or bad.
O let me now return to Eteocles,
That of my service greatly stands in need.
Right well I see, thou dost conceal the worst.
O force me not, the good now being past,
To tell the ill.
Tell it I say, on pain of our displeasure.
Since thus ye seek to hear a doleful tale,
I will no longer stay: wit ye therefore,
Your desperate sons together be agreed
For to attempt a wicked enterprise:
To private fight they have betrothed themselves,
Of which conflict, the end must needs be this,
That one do live, that other die the death.
Alas, alas, this did I ever fear.
Now, sith in sum I have revealed that,
Which you have heard with great remorse of mind,
I will proceed, at large to tell the whole.
When your victorious son, with valiant force
Had chaste his foes into their joining tents,
Even there he staid, and strait at sound of trump
With stretched voice the herald thus proclaimed:
You princely Greeks, that hither be arrived
To spoil the fruit of these our fertile fields,
And us to drive from this our Native soil,
O suffer not so many guiltless souls
By this debate descend in Stygian lake,
For private cause of wicked Polynices,
But rather let the brethren, hand to hand,
By mutual blows appease their furious rage,
And so to cease from shedding further blood:
And, to the end you all might understand
The profit that to every side may fall,
Thus much my Lord thought good to proffer you,
This is his will, if he be overcome,
Then Polynices to rule this kingly realm:
If so it hap (as reason would it should)
Our rightful prince to conquer Polynices,
That then no one of you make more ado,
But strait to Argos I'll hast home again.
This, thus pronounced unto the noble Greeks,
Not sooner did the sound of trumpet cease,
But Polynices stepped forth before the host,
And to these words this answer did he make:
O thou, (not brother) but my mortal foe,
Thy proffer here hath pleased me so well,
As presently, without more long delay,
I yield myself prepared to the field.
Our noble King no sooner heard this vaunt,
But forth as fast he priest his princely steps,
With eager mind, as hovering falcon wonts
To make her stoop, when prey appears in sight:
At all assays they both were bravely armed,
To either's side his sword fast being girt,
In either's hand was put a sturdy lance:
About Eteocles our soldiers clung,
To comfort him, and put him then in mind,
He fought for safety of his country soil,
And that in him consisted all their hope.
To Polynices the king Adrastus swore,
If he escaped victor from the field,
At his return he would in Greece erect
A golden Image unto mighty Ioue
In sign of his triumphing victory.
But all this while seek you (O noble queen)
To hinder this your furious sons attempt:
Entreat the Gods it may not take effect,
Else must you needs ere long deprived be
Of both your sons, or of the one at lest.
ANtigone my sweet daughter, come forth
Out of this house, that naught but woe retains,
Come forth I say, not for to sing or dance,
But to prevent (if in our powers it lie)
That thy malicious brethren (swollen with ire)
And I alas, their miserable mother,
Be not destroyed by stroke of dreadful death.
Ah sweet mother, ah my beloved mother,
Alas alas, what cause doth move ye now
From trembling voice to sand such careful cries?
What painful pang? what grief doth gripe you now?
O dear daughter, thy most unhappy brethren
That sometimes lodged within these wretched loins
Shall die this day, if Ioue prevent it not.
Alas what say you? alas what do you say?
Can I (alas) endure to see him dead,
Whom I thus long have sought to see alive?
They both have vowed (I quake alas to tell)
With trenchant blade to spill each other's blood.
O cruel Eteocles, ah ruthless wretch,
Of this outrage thou only art the cause,
Not Polynices, whom thou with hateful spite
Hast reaved first of crown and country soil,
And now dost seek to reave him of his life.
Daughter no more delay, let's go, let's go.
Ah my sweet mother, whither shall I go?
With me, dear daughter, to the greekish host.
Alas how can I go? unless I go
In danger of my life, or of good name?
Time serves not now (my well beloved child)
To way the loss of life or honest name,
But rather to prevent (if so we may)
That wicked deed, which only but to think,
Doth hale my heart out of my heavy breast.
Come then, let's go, good mother let us go.
But what shall we be able for to do,
You a weak old woman foworn with years,
And I God knows a silly simple maid?
Our woeful words, our prayers & our plaints,
Poured out with streams of overflowing tears,
(Where Nature rules) may happen to prevail,
When reason, power, and force of arms do fail.
But if the glowing heat of boiling wrath
So furious be, as it may not relent,
Then I atwixt them both will throw myself,
And this my breast shall bear the deadly blows,
That otherwise should light upon my sons:
So shall they shed my blood and not their own.
Well now dear daughter, let us hasten hence,
For if in time we stay this raging strife,
Then haply may my life prolonged be:
If ere we come the bloody deed be done,
Then must my ghost forsake this feeble corpse:
And thou, dear child, with dolour shalt bewail,
Thy brother's death and mothers all at once.
WHo so hath felt, what faith and fervent love
A mother bears unto her tender sons,
She and none other sure, can comprehend
The doleful grief, the pangs and secret pain,
That presently doth pierce the princely breast
Of our afflicted Queen: alas, I think
No martyrdom might well compare with hers.
So oft as I record her restless state,
Alas me thinks I feel a shivering fear
Flit to and fro along my flushing veins.
Alas for ruth, that thus two brethren should,
Enforce themselves to shed each other's blood.
Where are the laws of nature now become?
Can flesh of flesh, alas can blood of blood,
So far forget itself, as slay itself?
O lowering stars, O dim and angry skies,
O geltie fate, such mischief set aside.
But if supernal powers decreed have,
That death must be the end of this debate,
Alas what floods of tears shall then suffice,
To weep and wail the near approaching death.
I mean the death of sons and mother both,
And with their death the ruin and decay,
Of Oedipus and his princely race:
But lo, here Creon comes with careful cheer:
'tis time that now I end my just complaint.
ALthough I straightly charge my tender child
To flee from Thebes for safeguard of himself,
And that long since he parted from my sight,
Yet do I greatly hung in lingering doubt,
Lest passing through the gates, the privy watch
Hath stayed him by some suspect of treason.
And so therewhile, the prophets having scried
His hidden fate, he purchased have the death
Which I by all means sought he might eschew:
And this mischance so much I fear the more,
How much the wished conquest at the first,
Fallen happily unto the town of Thebes,
But wise men aught with patience to sustain
The sundry haps that slippery fortune frames.
Alas, who can direct my hasty steps
Unto the brother of our woeful Queen?
But lo where carefully he standeth here.
If so the mind may dread his own mishap,
Then dread I much, this man that seeks me thus,
Hath brought the death of my beloved son.
My Lord, the thing you fear is very true,
Your son Meneceus no longer lives.
Alas who can withstand the heavenly powers?
Well, it beseems not me, ne yet my years,
In bootless plaint to waste my wailful tears:
Do thou recount to me his luckless death,
The order, form, and manner of the same.
Your son (my Lord) came to Eteocles,
And told him this in presence of the rest:
renowned King, neither your victory,
Ne yet the safety of this princely Realm
In armour doth consist, but in the death
Of me, of me, (O most victorious King)
So heavenly doom of mighty Ioue commands.
I (knowing what avail my death should yield
Unto your grace, and unto native land)
Might well be deemed a most ungrateful son
Unto this worthy town, if I would shun
The sharpest death to do my country good:
In mourning weed now let the vestal Nymphs,
With feigning tunes commend my faultless ghost
To highest heavens, while I despoil myself,
That afterward (sith Ioue will have it so)
To save your lives, I may receive my death,
Of you I crave, O courteous Citizens,
To shrine my corpse in tomb of marble stone:
Whereon grave this: Meneceus here doth lie,
For country's cause that was content to die.
This said, alas, he made no more a do,
But drew his sword, and sheathed it in his breast.
Not more, I have enough, return ye now
From whence ye came.
Well, since the blood of my beloved son,
Must serve to slake the wrath of angry Ioue,
And since his only death must bring to Thebes
A quiet end of her unquiet state,
Me thinks good reason would, that I henceforth
Of Theban soil should bear the kingly sway:
Yea sure, and so I will ere it belong,
Either by right, or else by force of arms.
Of all mishap lo here the wicked brood,
My sister first espoused hath her son
That slew his fire, of whose accursed seed
Two brethren sprang, whose raging hateful hearts,
By force of boiling ire are bolne so sore
As each do thirst to suck the other's blood:
But why do I sustain the smart hereof?
Why should my blood be spilled for other's guilt?
O welcome were that messenger to me
That brought me word of both my nephews deaths:
Then should it soon be seen in every eye,
Twixt prince and prince what difference would appear,
Then should experience show what grief it is
To serve the humours of unbridled youth.
Now will I go for to prepare with speed
The funerals of my young guiltless son,
The which perhaps may be accompanied
With th'obsequies of proud Eteocles.
O Blissful concord, bred in sacred breast
Of him that guides the restless rolling sky,
That to the earth for man's assured rest
From height of heavens vouchsafest down to fly,
In thee alone the mighty power doth lie,
With sweet accord to keep the frowning stars
And every planet else from hurtful wars.
In thee, in thee such noble virtue bides,
As may command the mightiest Gods to bend,
From thee alone such sugared friendship slides
As mortal wights can scarcely comprehend,
To greatest strife thou setst delightful end,
O holy peace, by thee are only found
The passing joys that every where abound.
Thou only thou, through thy celestial might,
Didst first of all, the heavenly pole divide
From th'old confused heap that Chaos height:
Thou mad'st the Sun, the Moon, and stars to glide,
With ordered course about this world so wide:
Thou hast ordained Dan Titan's shining light,
By dawn of day to chase the darksome night.
When tract of time returns the lusty Ver.
By thee alone, the buds and blossoms spring,
The fields with flowers be garnished every where,
The blooming trees, abundant fruit do bring,
The cheerful birds melodiously do sing,
Thou dost appoint, the crop of summers seed
For man's relief, to serve the winter's need.
Thou dost inspire the hearts of princely peers
By providence, proceeding from above,
In flowering youth to choose their worthy fears,
With whom they live in league of lasting love,
Till fearful death doth flitting life remove,
And look how fast, to death man pays his due,
So fast again, dost thou his stock renew.
By thee, the basest thing advanced is,
Thou every where, dost graff such golden peace,
As filleth man, with more than earthly bliss,
The earth by thee, doth yield her sweet increase
At beck of thee, all bloody discords cease,
And mightiest Realms in quiet do remain,
Whereas thy hand doth hold the royal rain.
But if thou fail, than all things gone to wrack,
The mother then, doth dread her natural child,
Then every town is subject to the sack,
Then spotless maids, the virgins be defiled,
Then rigour rules, than reason is exiled:
And this, thou woeful Thebes, to our great pain,
With present spoil, art likely to sustain.
Me think I hear the wailful weeping cries
Of wretched dames, in every coast resound,
Me thinks I see, how up to heavenly skies
From battered walls, the thundering claps rebound,
Me think I hear, how all things go to ground,
Me think I see, how soldiers wounded lie
With gasping breath, and yet they can not die.
By means whereof, o sweet Meneceus he,
That gives for country's cause his guiltless life,
Of others all, most happy shall he be:
His ghost shall flit from broils of bloody strife,
To heavenly bliss, where pleasing joys be rife:
And would to God, that this his fatal end
From further plagues, our city might defend.
O sacred God, give ear unto thy thrall,
That humbly here upon thy name doth call,
O let not now, our faultless blood be spilled,
For hot revenge of any others gilt.
ALas what shall I do? bemoan myself?
Or rue the ruin of my Native land,
About the which such clouds I see enclosed,
As darker cannot cover dreadful hell.
With mine own eyes I saw my own dear son
All gored with blood of his too bloody breast,
Which he hath shed full like a friend, too dear
To his country, and yet a cruel foe
To me, that was his friend and father both.
Thus to himself he gained a famous name,
And glory great, to me redoubled pain:
Whose hapless death in my afflicted house,
Hath put such plaint, as I ne can espy
What comfort might acquit their distress.
I hither come my sister for to seek,
Iocasta, she that might in woeful wise
Amid her high and over pining cares,
Prepare the baynes for his so wretched corpse,
And eke for him that now is not in life,
May pay the due that to the dead pertains,
And for the honour he did well deserve,
To give some gifts unto infernal Gods.
My Lord, your sister is gone forth long since,
Into the camp, and with her Antigone,
Her daughter dear.
Into the camp? alas and what to do?
She understood, that for this realm forthwith
Her sons were 'greed in combat for to join.
Alas, the funerals of my dear son
Dismayed me so, that I ne did receive,
Ne seek to know these new unwelcome news.
But lo, behold a plain apparent sign
Of further fears: the furious troubled looks
Of him that cometh here so hastily.
ALas, alas, what shall I do? alas,
What shrieking voice may serve my woeful words?
O wretched I, ten thousand times a wretch,
The messenger of dread and cruel death
Yet more mishap? and what unhappy news:
My Lord, your nephews both have lost their lives.
Out and alas, to me and to this town,
Thou dost account great ruin and decay,
You royal family of Oedipus:
And hear you this? your liege and sovereign Lords
The brethren both are slain and done to death.
O cruel news, most cruel that can come,
O news that might these stony walls provoke
For tender ruth to burst in bitter tears,
And so they would, had they the sense of man.
O worthy young Lords, that unworthy were
Of such unworthy death, O me most wretch.
Moore wretched shall ye deem yourself, my lord,
When you shall hear of further misery.
And can there be more misery than this?
With her dear sons the queen herself is slain.
Bewail ladies, alas good ladies wail,
This hard mischance, this cruel common evil,
Ne henceforth hope for ever to rejoice.
O Iocasta, miserable mother,
What hapless end thy life alas hath hent?
Percase the heavens purveyed had the same,
Moved thereto by the wicked wedlock
Of Oedipus thy son yet might thy excuse
But justly made, that knew not of the crime.
But tell me messenger, o tell me yet
The death of these two brethren, driven thereto,
Not thus all only by their dreary fate,
But by the banning and the bitter curse
Of their cruel sire, borne for our annoy,
And here on earth the only source of evil.
Then know my Lord, the battle that begun
Under the walls, was brought to lucky end.
Eteocles had made his footmen flee
Within their trenches, to their foul reproach:
But herewithal the brethren both straightway
Each other challenge forth into the field,
By combat so to stint their cruel strife,
Who armed thus amid the field appeared,
First Polynices turning toward Gréece
His lovely looks, 'gan Iuno thus beseech:
O heavenly queen, thou seest, that since the day
I first did wed Adrastus' daughter dear,
And stayed in Gréece, thy servant have I been:
Then (be it not for mine unworthiness)
Grant me this grace, the victory to win,
Grant me, that I with high triumphant hand,
May bathe this blade within my brother's breast:
I know I crave unworthy victory,
Unworthy triumphs, and unworthy spoils,
Lo he the cause, my cruel enemy.
The people wept to bear the woeful words
Of Polynices, foreseeing eke the end
Of this outrage and cruel combat ta'en,
Each man 'gan look upon his drooping mate,
With minds amazed, and trembling hearts for dread,
Whom pity pierced for these youthful knights.
Eteocles with eyes up cast to heaven,
Thus said:
O mighty love his daughter grant to me,
That this right hand with this sharp armed lance
(Passing amid my brother's cankered breast,)
It may eke pierce that coward heart of his,
And so him slay that thus unworthily
Disturbs the quiet of our common weal.
So said Eteocles, and trumpets blown,
To send the summons of their bloody fight,
That one the other fiercely did encounter,
Like Lions two yfraught with boiling wrath,
Both couched their lances full against the face,
But heaven it * nolde that there they should them taint:
Upon the battered shields the mighty spears
Are both ybroke, and in a thousand shivers
Amid the air flown up into the heavens:
Behold again, with naked sword in hand,
Each one the other furiously assaults.
Here they of Thebes, there stood the Greekes in doubt,
Of whom doth each man feel more chilling dread,
Lest any of the twain should loose his life,
Than any of the twain did feel in fight.
Their angry looks, their deadly daunting blows.
Might witness well, that in their hearts remained
As cankered hate, disdain, and furious mood,
As ever bred in bear or tigers breast.
The first that happed to hurt was Polynices,
Who smote the right thigh of Eteocles:
But as we deem, the blow was nothing deep,
Then cried the Greeks, and leapt with lightened hearts,
But straight again they held their peace, for why?
Eteocles 'gan thrust his wicked sword
In the left arm of unarmed Polynices,
And let the blood from bore unfenced flesh.
With falling drops distill upon the ground,
Ne long he stays, but with an other thrust
His brother's belly bowelled with his blade,
Then wretched he, with bridle left at large,
From of his horse fell pale upon the ground,
Ne long it was, but down our duke dismounts
From of his startling steed, and runs in haste,
His brother's hapless helm for to unlace,
And with such hungry mind desired spoil,
(As one that thought the field already won)
That at unwares, his brother's dagger drawn,
And gripped fast within the dying hand,
Under his side he reckless doth receive,
That made the way to his wide open heart.
Thus falls Eteocles his brother by,
From both whose breasts the blood fast bubbling, gave
A sorry show to Greekes and Thebans both.
O wretched end of our unhappy Lords.
O Oedipus, I must bewail the death
Of thy dear sons, that were my nephews both,
But of these blows thou oughtest feel the smart,
That with thy wonted prayers, thus hast brought
Such noble bloods to this unnoble end.
But now tell on, what followed of the Queen?
When thus with piecced hearts, by their own hands
The brothers fell and wallowed in their blood,
(That one still tumbling on the other's gore)
Came their afflicted mother, then to late,
And eke with her, chaste child Antigone,
Who saw no sooner how their fates had fallen,
But with the doubled echo of alas,
She dimmed the air with loud complaints and cries:
O sons (quoth she) too late came all my help,
And all to late have I my succour sent:
And with these words, upon their carcase cold
She shrieked so, as might have stayed the Sun
To mourn with her: the woeful sister eke,
(That both her cheeks did bathe in flowing tears)
Out from the depth of her tormented breast,
With scalding sighs 'gan draw thief weary words,
O my dear brethren, why abandon ye
Our mother dear, when these her aged years,
(That of themselves are weak and grown with grief,)
Stood most in need of your sustaining help?
Why do you leave her thus disconsolate?
At sound of such her weeping long lament,
Eteocles our king held up his hand,
And sent from bottom of his woeful breast
A doubled sigh, divided with his grief,
In faithful token of his feeble will
To recomfort his mother and sister both:
And in stead of sweet contenting words,
The trickling tears reigned down his paled cheeks:
Then clasped his hands, and shut his dying eyes.
But Polynices, that turned his rolling eyen
Unto his mother and his sister dear,
With hollow voice and fumbling tongue, thus spoke:
Mother, you see how I am now arrived
Unto the heaven of mine unhappy end:
Now nothing doth remain to me, but this,
That I lament my sister's life and yours,
Left thus in everlasting woe and grief:
So am I sorry for Eteocles,
Who though he were my cruel enemy,
He was your son, and brother yet to me:
But since these ghosts of ours must needs go down
With staggering steps into the Stygian reign,
I you beseech, mother and sister both,
Of pity yet, that you will me procure
A royal tomb within my native realm:
And now shut up with those your tender bands,
These grieffull eyes of mine, whose dazzled light
Shadows of dreadful death be come to close.
Now rest in peace, this said, he yielded up
His fainting ghost, that ready was to part.
The mother thus beholding both her sons
Ydone to death, and overcome with dole,
Drew out the dagger of her Polynices,
From brother's breast, and gored therewith her throat,
Falling bet ween her sons:
Then with her feebled arms, she doth unfold
Their bodies both, as if for company
Her uncontented corpse were yet content
To pass with them in Charon's ferry boat.
When cruel fate had thus with force bereft
The woeful mother and her two dear sons,
All suddenly alarm, alarm, they cry,
And hot conflict began for to arise
Between our army and our enemies:
For either part would have the victory.
A while they did with equal force maintain
The bloody fight, at last the Greeks do fly,
Of whom could hardly any one escape,
For in such hugy heaps our men them slew.
The ground was covered all with carcases:
And of our soldiers, some 'gan spoil the dead,
Some other were that parted out the pray,
And some pursuing. Antigone took up
The Queen Iocasta, and the brethren both,
Whom in a chariot hither they will bring
Ere long: and thus, although we gotten have
The victory over our enemies,
Yet have we lost much more than we have won.
O hard mishap, we do not only hear
The weary news of their untimely death,
But eke we must with wailing eyes behold
Their bodies dead, for look where they be brought.
MOst bitter plaint, O ladies, us behoves
Behoveth eke not only bitter plaint,
But that our hears dyshevylde from our heads
About our shoulders hung, and that our breasts
With bouncing blows be all be battered,
Our ghastly faces with our nails defaced:
Behold, your Queen twixt both her sons lies slain,
The Queen whom you did love and honour both,
The Queen that did so tenderly bring up
And nourish you, each one like to her own,
Now hath she left you all (O cruel hap)
With her too cruel death in dying dread,
Pining with pensiveness without all help.
O weary life, why bydste thou in my breast
And I contented be that these mine eyes
Should see her die that gave to me this life,
And I not venge her death by loss of life?
Who can me give a fountain made of moan,
That I may weep as much as is my will,
To souse this sorrow up in swelling tears?
What stony heart could leave for to lament?
O Polynices, now hast thou with thy blood
Bought all too dear the title to this realm,
That cruel he Eteocles thee refte,
And now also hath rest thee of thy life,
Alas, what wicked deed can wrath not do?
And out alas for me.
While thou yet livedst, I had a lively hope
To have some noble wight to be my fere,
By whom I might be crowned a royal Queen:
But now, thy hasty death hath done to die
This dying hope of mine, that hope henceforth
None other wedlock, but tormenting woe,
If so these trembling hands for coward dread
Dare not presume to end this wretched life.
Alas dear dame, let not thy raging grief
Heap one mishap upon another's head.
O doleful day, wherein my sorry sire
Was borne, and yet O more unhappy hour
When he was crowned king of stately Thebes
The Hymenei in unhappy bed,
And wicked wedlock, wittingly did join,
The guiltless mother with her guilty son,
Out of which root we be the branches borne,
To bear the scourge of their so foul offence:
And thou, O father, thou that for this fact,
Haste torn thine eyes from thy tormented head,
Give ear to this, come forth, and bend thine ear
To bloody news, that canst not them behold:
Happy in that, for if thine eyes could see
Thy sons both slain, and even between them both
Thy wife and mother dead, bathed and imbrued
All in one blood, then wouldst thou die for dole,
And so might end all our unlucky stock.
But most unhappy now, that lack of sight
Shall linger life within thy luckless breast,
And still tormented in such misery,
Shall always die, because thou canst not die.
WHy dost thou call out of this darksome den,
(The lustless lodge of my lamenting years,)
(O daughter dear) thy father's blinded eyes,
Into the light I was not worthy of?
Or what such sight (O cruel destiny)
Without tormenting cares might I behold,
That image am of death and not of man?
O father mine, I bring unlucky news
Unto your ears, your sons are now both slain,
Ne doth your wife (that wonted was to guide
So piteously your stayless stumbling steps)
Now see this light, alas and wellaway.
O heap of infinite calamities,
And canst thou yet increase when I thought least
That any grief more great could grow in thee?
But tell me yet, what kind of cruel death
Had these three sorry souls?
Without offence to speak, dear father mine,
The luckless lot, the froward frowning fate
That gave you life to end your father's life,
Have led your sons to reave each other's life.
Of them I thought no less, but tell me yet
What causeless death hath caught from me my dear,
(What shall I call her) mother or my wife?
When as my mother saw her dear sons dead,
As pensive pangs had priest her tender heart,
With bloodless cheeks and ghastly looks she fell,
Drawing the dagger from Eteocles side,
She gored herself with wide recureless wound:
And thus, without more words, gave up the ghost,
Embracing both her sons with both her arms.
In these affrights this frozen heart of mine,
By fear of death maintains my dying life.
This dreary day is cause of many evils,
Poor Oedipus, unto thy progeny,
The Gods yet grant it may become the cause
Of better hap to this afflicted realm.
GOod Ladies leave your bootless vain complaint,
Leave to lament, cut off your woeful cries,
High time it is as now for to provide
The funerals for the renowned king:
And thou Oedipus harken to my words,
And know thus much, that for thy daughter's dower,
Antigone with Haemon shall be wed.
Thy son our king not long before his death
Assigned hath the kingdom should descend
To me, that am his mother's brother borne,
And so the same might to my son succeed.
Now I that am the lord and king of Thebes,
Will not permit that thou abide therein:
Ne marvel yet of this my heady will,
Ne blame thou me, for why, the heavens above
(Which only rule the rolling life of man,)
Have so ordained, and that my words be true,
Tiresias he that knoweth things to come,
By trusty tokens hath foretold the town,
That while thou didst within the walls remain,
It should be plagned still with penury:
Wherefore depart, and think not that I speak
These woeful words for hate I bear to thee,
But for the weal of this afflicted realm.
O foul accursed fate, that hast me bred
To bear the burden of the misery
Of this cold death, which we account for life:
Before my birth my father understood
I should him slay, and scarcely was I borne,
When he me made a prey for savage beasts.
But what? I slew him yet, then caught the crown,
And last of all defiled my mother's bed,
By whom I have this wicked offspring got:
And to this heinous crime and filthy fact
The heavens have from high enforced me,
Against whose doom no counsel can prevail.
Thus hate I now my life, and last of all,
Lo by the news of this so cruel death
Of both my sons and dear beloved wife,
Mine angry constellation me commands
Withouten eyes to wander in mine age,
When these my weary, weak, and crooked limb:
Have greatest need to crave their quiet rest.
O cruel Creon, wilt thou slay me so,
For cruelly thou dost but murder me,
Out of my kingdom now to chase me thus:
Yet can I not with humble mind beseech
Thy courtesy, ne fall before thy feet.
Let fortune take from me these worldly gifts,
She can not conquer this courageous heart,
That never yet could well be overcome,
To force me yield for fear to villainy:
Do what thou canst I will be Oedipus.
So hast thou reason Oedipus, to say,
And for my part I would thee counsel eke,
Still to maintain the high and haughty mind,
That hath been ever in thy noble heart:
For this be sure, if thou wouldst kiss these knees,
And practise eke by prayer to prevail,
No pity could persuade me to consent
That thou remain one only hour in Thebes.
And now, prepare you worthy Citizens,
The funerals that duly do pertain
Unto the Queen, and to Eteocles,
And eke for them provide their stately tombs.
But Polynices, as common enemy
Unto his country, carry forth his corpse
Out of the walls, ne none so hardy be
On pain of death his body to engrave,
But in the fields let him unburied lie,
Without his honour, and without complaint,
An open pray for savage beasts to spoil.
And thou Antigone, dry up thy tears,
Pluck up thy spirits, and cheer thy harmless heart
To marriage: for ere these two days pass,
Thou shalt espouse Haemon mine only heir.
Father, I see us wrapped in endless woe,
And now much more do I your state lament,
Than these that now be dead, not that I think
Their great mishaps too little to bewail,
But this, that you (you only) do surpass
All wretched wights that in this world remain.
But you my Lord, why banish you with wrong
My father thus out of his own perforce?
And why will you deny these guiltless bones
Of Polynices, their grave in country soil?
So would not I, so would Eteocles.
He cruel was, you fond to hold his hests.
Is then a fault to do a king's command?
When his command is cruel and unjust.
Is it unjust that he unburied be?
He not deserved so cruel punishment.
He was his countries cruel enemy.
Or else was he that held him from his right.
Bore he not arms against his native land?
Offendeth he that seeks to win his own?
In spite of thee he shall unburied be.
In spite of thee these hands shall bury him.
And with him eke then will I bury thee.
So grant the gods, I get none other grave,
Then with my Polynices dear to rest.
Go sirs, lay hold on her, and take her in.
I will not leave this corpse unburied.
Canst thou undo the thing that is decreed?
A wicked foul decree to wrong the dead.
The ground ne shall ne aught to cover him.
Creon, yet I beseech thee for the love,
Away I say, thy prayers not prevail.
That thou didst bear Iocasta in her life,
Thou dost but waste thy words amid the wind.
Yet grant me leave to wash his wounded corpse.
It can not be that I should grant thee so.
O my dear Polynices, this tyrant yet
With all his worongfull force can not fordo,
But I will kiss these cold pale lips of thine,
And wash thy wounds with my waymenting tears.
O simple wench, O fond and foolish girl,
Beware, beware, thy tears do not foretell
Some sign of hard mishap unto thy marriage.
Not, not, for Haemon will I never wed.
Dost thou refuse the marriage of my son?
I will nor him, nor any other wed.
Against thy will then must I thee constrain.
If thou me force, I swear thou shalt repent.
What canst thou 'cause that I should once repent?
With bloody knife I can this knot unknit.
And what a fool were thou to kill thyself?
I will ensue some worthy woman's steps.
Speak out Antigone, that I may hear.
This hardy hand shall soon dispatch his life.
O simple fool, and dar'st thou be so bold?
Why should I dread to do so doughty deed?
And wherefore dost thou wedlock so despise?
In cruel exile for to follow him.
What others might beseem, beseems not thee.
If need require with him eke will I die.
Depart, depart, and with thy father die,
Rather than kill my child with bloody knife:
Go hellish monster, go out of the town.
Daughter, I must commend thy noble heart.
Father, I will not live in company
And you alone wander in wilderness.
O yes dear daughter, leave thou me alone
Amid my plagues: be merry while thou mayst.
And who shall guide these aged feet of yours,
That banished been, in blind necessity?
I will endure, as fatal lot me drives:
Resting these crooked sorry sides of mine
Where so the heavens shall lend me harborough.
And in exchange of rich and stately towers,
The woods, the wilderness, the darksome dens,
Shall be the bower of mine unhappy bones.
O father now where is your glory gone?
One happy day did raise me to renown,
One hapless day hath thrown mine honour down.
Yet will I bear a part of your mishaps.
That sitteth not amid thy pleasant years.
Dear father yes, let youth give place to age.
Where is thy mother? let me touch her face,
That with these hands I may yet feel the harm
That these blind eyes forbidden me to behold.
Here father, here her corpse, here put your hand.
O wife, O mother, O both woeful names,
O woeful mother, and O woeful wife,
O would to God, alas, O would to God
Thou near had been my mother, nor my wife.
But where lie now the paled bodies two,
Of mine unlucky sons, O where be they?
Lo here they lie one by an other dead.
Stretch out this hand, dear daughter, stretch this hand
Upon their faces.
Lo father, here, lo, now you touch them both.
O bodies dear, O bodies dearly bought
Unto your father, bought with high mishap.
O lovely name of my dear Polynices,
Why can I not of cruel Creon crave,
Ne with my death now purchase thee a grave?
Now comes Apollo's oracle to pass,
That I in Athens town should end my days:
And since thou dost, O daughter mine, desire
In this exile to be my woeful mate,
Lend me thy hand, and let us go together.
Lo, here all priest my dear beloved father,
A feeble guide, and eke a simple scout,
To pass the perils in a doubtful way.
Unto the wretched, be a wretched guide.
In this all only equal to my father.
And where shall I set forth my trembling feet?
O reach me yet some surer staff, to stay
My staggering pace amid these ways unknown.
Here father here, and here set forth your feet.
Now can I blame none other for my harms
But secret spite of foredecreed fate,
Thou art the cause, that crooked, old and blind,
I am exiled far from my country soil,
And suffer dole that I aught not endure.
O father, father, justice lies on sleep,
Ne doth regard the wrongs of wretchedness,
Ne princes swelling pride it doth redress.
O careful raytife, how am I now changed
From that I was? I am that Oedipus,
That whilom had triumphant victory,
And was both dread and honoured eke in Thebes:
But now (so pleaseth you my froward stars)
Down headlong hurled in depth of misery,
So that remains of Oedipus no more
As now in me, but even the naked name,
And lo, this image, that resembles more
Shadows of death, than shape of Oedipus.
O father, now forget the pleasant days
And happy life that you did whilom lead,
The muse whereof redoubleth but you grief:
Sustain the smart of these your present pains
With patience, that best may you preserve.
Lo where I come, to live and die with you,
Not (as sometimes) the daughter of a king,
But as an abject now in poverty,
That you, by presence of such faithful guide,
May better bear the wreck of misery.
O only comfort of my cruel hap.
Your daughter's pity is but due to you?
Would God I might as well engrave the corpse
Of my dear Polynices, but I ne may,
And that I can not, doubleth all my do●e.
This thy desire, that is both good and just,
Impart to some that be thy trusty friends,
Who moved with pity, may procure the same.
Believe me father, when dame fortune frowns,
Be few that find trusty companions.
And of those few, yet one of those am I:
Wherefore, go we now daughter, lead the way
Into the stony rocks and highest hills,
Where fewest tracks of step may be spied.
Who once hath sit in chair of dignity,
May shame to show himself in misery.
From thee, O country, am I forced to part,
Despoiled thus in flower of my youth,
And yet I leave within my enemies rule,
Ismene my infortunate sister.
Dear citizens, behold your Lord and King
That Thebes set in quiet government,
Now as you see, neglected of you all,
And in these ragged ruthful weeds bewrapt,
Ychased from his native country soil,
Betakes himself (for so this tyrant will)
To everlasting banishment: but why
Do I lament my luckless lot in vain?
Since every man must bear with quiet mind,
The fate that heavens have erst to him assigned.
EXample here, lo take by Oedipus,
You Kings and Princes in prosperity,
And every one that is desirous
To sway the seat of worldly dignity,
How fickle 'tis to trust in Fortunes wheel:
For him whom now she hoisteth up on high,
If so he chance on any side to reel,
She hurls him down in twinkling of an eye:
And him again, that growleth now on ground,
And lieth low in dungeon of despair,
Her whirling wheel can heave up at a bound,
And place aloft in stay of stately chair.
As from the Sun the Moon withdraws her face,
So might of man doth yield dame Fortune place.
LO here the fruit of high aspiring mind,
Who weens to mount above the moving Skies:
Lo here the trap that titles proud do find,
See, ruin grows, when most we reach to rise:
Sweet is the name, and stately is the reign
Of kingly rule, and sway of royal seat,
But bitter is the taste of Prince's gain,
When climbing heads do hunt for to be great.
Who would forecast the bank of restless toil,
Ambitious wights do fraught their breasts withal,
The growing cares, the fears of dreadful foil,
To ill success that on such flight's doth fall,
He would not strain his practise to achieve
The largest limits of the mightiest states.
But o, what fancies sweet do still relieve
The hungry humour of these swelling hates?
What poison sweet inflameth high desire?
How soon the haughty heart is puffed with pride?
How soon is thirst of sceptre set on fire?
How soon in rising minds doth mischief slide?
What bloody stirs doth glut of honour breed?
th'ambitious son doth often surpresse his sire:
Where nature's power unfeigned love should spread,
There malice reigns and reacheth to be higher.
O blind unbridled search of sovereignty,
O tickle train of evil attained state,
O fond desire of princely dignity,
Who climbs too soon, he oft repentes too late.
The golden mean, the happy doth suffice,
They lead the posting day in rare delight,
They fill (not feed) their uncontented eyes,
They reap such rest as doth beguile the might,
They not envy the pomp of haughty train,
Ne dread the dint of proud usurping sword,
But placed allow, more sugared joys attain,
Than sway of lofty Sceptre can afford.
Cease to aspire then, cease to soar so high,
And shun the plague that pierceth noble breasts.
To glittering courts what fondness is to fly,
When better state in base Towers rests?
THe hateful man that heapeth in his mind,
Cruel revenge of wrongs forepast and done,
May not (with ease) the pleasant pathway find,
Of friendly verse which I have now begun,
Unless at first his angry breast untwined,
The crooked knot which cankered choler knit,
And then recoil with reconciled grace.
Likewise I find it said in holy writ,
If thou intend to turn thy fearful face,
To God above: make thine agreement yet,
First with thy Brother whom thou didst abuse,
Confess thy faults, thy frowardness and all,
So that the Lord thy prayer not refuse.
When I consider this, and then the brawl,
Which raging youth (I will not me excuse)
Did whilom breed in mine unmellowed brain,
I thought it meet before I did assay,
To writ in rhyme the double golden gain,
Of amity: first yet to take away
The grudge of grief, as thou dost me constrain.
By due desert whereto I now must yield,
And drown for ay in depth of Lethe's lake,
Disdainful moods whom friendship cannot wield:
Pleading for peace which for my part I make
Of former strife, and henceforth let us writ
The pleasant fruits of faithful friends delight.
THis vain avail which thou by Mars hast won,
Should not allure thy flitting mind to field,
Where sturdy stéeds in depth of dangers run,
By guts welgnawen by claps that Canons yield.
Where faithless friends by warfare waxed ware,
And run to him that giveth best reward:
No fear of laws can 'cause them for to care,
But rob and reave, and steal without regard,
The father's coat, the brother's steed from stall:
The dear friends purse shall picked be for pence,
The native soil, the parents left and all,
With Tant troth tant, the Camp is marching hence.
But when bore beggary bids them to beware,
And late repentance rules them to retire,
Like hivelesse Bees they wander here and there,
And hung on them who (erst) did dread their ire.
This cut throto life (me seems) thou shouldst not like,
And shun the happy haven of mean estate:
High Ioue (pardie) may send what thou dost seek,
And heap up pounds within thy quiet gate.
Nor yet I would that thou shouldst spend thy days
In idleness to tear a golden time:
Like country louts, which count none other praise,
But grease a sheep, and learn to serve the swine.
In vain were then the gifts which nature lent,
If Pan so press to pass dame Pallas lore:
But my good friend, let thus thy youth be spent,
Serve God thy Lord, and praise him evermore.
Search out the skill which learned books do teach,
And serve in field when shadows make thee sure:
Hold with the head, and row not past thy reach.
But pled for peace which plenty may procure.
And (for my life) if thou canst run this race,
Thy bags of coin will multiply apace.
THe feeble thread which Lachesis hath spun,
To draw my days in short abode with thee,
Hath wrought a web which now (well-near) is done,
The wale is worn: and (all to late) I see
That lingering life doth dally but in vain,
For Atropos will cut the twist in twain.
I not discern what life but loathsome were,
When faithful friends are kept in twain by want:
Nor yet perceive what pleasure doth appear,
To deep desires where good success is scant.
Such spite yet shows dame fortune (if she frown,)
The haughty hearts in high mishaps to drown.
Hot be the flames which boil in friendly minds,
Cruel the care and dreadful is the doom:
Slipper the knot which tract of time untwynds,
Hateful the life and welcome were the tomb.
Blest were the day which might devour such youth,
And cursed the want that seeks to choke such truth.
This wailing verse I bathe in flowing tears,
And would my life might end with these my lines:
Year strive I not to force into thine ears,
Such feigned plaints as fickle faith resigns.
But high foresight in dreams hath stopped my breath,
And caused the Swan to sing before his death.
For lo these naked walls do well declare,
My latest leave of thee I taken have:
And unknown coasts which I must seek with care
Do well divine that there shallbe my grave:
There shall my death make many for to moon,
Scarce known to them, well known to thee alone.
This boon of thee (as last request) I crave,
When true report shall sound my death with fame:
Vouchsafe yet then to go unto my grave,
And there first writ my birth and then my name:
And how my life was shortened many years,
By women's wiles as to the world appears.
And in reward of grant to this request,
Permit O God my tongue these words to tell:
(When as his pen shall writ upon my chest)
With shrieking voice mine own dear friend farewell:
Not care on earth did seem so much to me,
As when my corpse was forced to part from thee.
A hundredth sons (in course but not in kind)
Can witness well that I possess no joy:
The fear of death which fretteth in my mind
Consumes my heart with dread of dark annoy.
And for each son a thousand broken sleeps
Divide my dreams with fresh recourse of cares:
The youngest sister sharp her sheare she keeps,
To cut my thread, and thus my life it wears.
Yet let such days, such thousand restless nights,
Spit forth their spite, let fates eke show their force:
Deaths daunting dart where so his buffet lights,
Shall shape no change within my friendly corpse:
But dead or live, in heaven, in earth, in hell
I willbe thine where so my carcase devil.
NOt stately Troy though Priam yet did live,
Can now compare fountain bel'eaü to pass:
Nor Syrian towers, whose lofty steps did strive,
To climb the throne where angry Saturn was.
For outward show the ports are of such price,
As scorn the cost which Cesar spilled in Room:
Such works within as stain the rare device,
Which whilom he Apelles wrought on tomb.
Swift Tiber flood which fed the Roman pools,
Puddle to this where Crystal melts in streams,
The pleasant place where Muses kept their schools,
(Not parched with Phoebe, nor banished from his beams)
Yield to those Dames, nor sight, nor fruit, nor smell,
Which may be thought these gardens to excel.
LAdy receive, receive in gracious wise,
This ragged verse, these rude ill skribled lines:
Too base an object for your heavenly eyes,
For he that writes his freedom (lo) resigns
Into your hands: and freely yields as thrall
His sturdy neck (erst subject to no yoke)
But bending now, and headlong priest to fall,
Before your feet, such force hath beauty's stroke.
Since than mine eyes (which scorned our English) dames
In foreign courts have chosen you for fair,
Let be this verse true token of my flames,
And do not drench your own in deep despair.
Only I crave (as I nill change for new)
That you vouchsafe to think your servant true.
THe thristles thread which pampered beauty spins,
In thraldom binds the foolish gazing eyes:
As cruel Spiders with their crafty gins,
In worthless webs do snare the simple Flies.
The garments gay, the glittering golden gite,
The 'ticing talk which flows from Pallas pools:
The painted pale, the (too much) read made white,
Are smiling baits to fish for loving fools.
But lo, when eld in toothless mouth appears,
And hoary hears in steed of beauty's blaze:
Than had I witted, doth teach repenting years,
The tickle tract of crafty Cupid's maze.
Twixt fair and foul therefore, twixt great and small,
A lovely nuthrowne face is best of all.
THe Partridge in the pretty Mertines foot,
Who feels her force suppressed with fearfulness,
And finds that strength nor strife can do her boot,
To scape the danger of her deep distress:
These woeful words may seem for to rehearse
Which I must writ in this waymenting verse.
What helpeth now (sayeth she) dame natures skill,
To die my feathers like the dusty ground?
Or what prevails to lend me wings at will
Which in the air can make my body bound?
Since from the earth the dogs me drove perforce,
And now aloft the Hawk hath caught my corpse.
If change of colours, could not me convey,
Yet might my wings have scaped the dogs despite:
And if my wings did fail to fly away,
Yet might my strength resist the Merlines might.
But nature made the Merline me to kill,
And me to yield unto the Merlines william.
My lot is like (dear Dame) believe me well,
The quiet life which I full closely kept.
Was not content in happy state to devil,
But forth in haste to gaze on thee it leapt.
Desire thy dog did spring me up in haste,
Thou wert the Hawk, whose talents caught me fast.
What should I then, seek means to fly away?
Or strive by force, to break out of thy feet?
Not, not, perdie, I may no strength assay,
To strive with thee iwis, it were not meet.
Thou art that Hawk, whom nature made to hent me,
And I the Bird, that must therewith content me.
And since Dame nature hath ordained so,
Her happy hest I gladly shall embrace:
I yield my will, although it were to woe,
I stand content to take my grief for grace:
And seal it up within my secret heart,
Which seal receive, as token of my smart.
THis tenth of March when Aries receyud
Dame Phoebus' rays, into his horned head:
And I myself, by learned lore perceived,
That Ver approached, and frosty winter fled.
I crossed the Thames, to take the cheerful air,
In open fields, the weather was so fair.
And as I rowed, fast by the further shore,
I heard a voice, which seemed to lament:
Whereat I stayed, and by a stately door,
I left my Boat, and up on land I went:
Till at the last by lasting pain I found,
The woeful wight, which made this doleful sound.
In pleasant garden (placed all alone)
I saw a Dame, who sat in weary wise,
With scalding sighs, she uttered all her moan,
The rueful tears, down rained from her eyes:
Her lowering head, full low on hand she laid,
On knee her arm: and thus this Lady said.
Alas (quoth she) behold each pleasant green,
Will now renew, his summers livery,
The fragrant flowers, which have not long been seen,
Will flourish now, (ere long) in bravery:
The tender buds, whom cold hath long kept in,
Will spring and sprout, as they do now begin.
But I (alas) within whose mourning mind,
The graffs of grief, are only given to grow,
Cannot enjoy the spring which others find,
But still my will, must whither all in woe:
The cold of care, so nips my joys at root,
No sun doth shine, that well can do them boot.
The lusty Ver, which whilom might exchange
My grief to joy, and then my joys increase,
Spring's now else where, and shows to me but strange,
My winter's woe, therefore can never cease:
In other coasts, his sun full clear doth shine,
And comforts lends to every mould but mine.
What plant can spring, that feels no force of Ver?
What flower can flourish, where no sun doth shine?
These Bales (quoth she) within my breast I bear,
To break my bark, and make my pith to pine:
Needs must I fall, I fade both root and rind,
My branches bow at blast of every wind.
This said: she cast a glance and spied my face,
By sight whereof, Lord how she changed hue?
So that for shame, I turned back a pace
And to my home, myself in haste I drew:
And as I could her woeful words rehearse,
I set them down in this waymenting verse.
Now Ladies you, that know by whom I sing,
And feel the winter, of such frozen wills:
Of courtesy, yet 'cause this noble spring,
To sand his sun, above the highest hills:
And so to shine, upon her fading sprays,
Which now in woe, do wither thus always.
Much like the seely Bird, which close in Cage is penned,
So sing I now, not notes of joy, but lays of deep lament.
And as the hooded Hawk, which hears the Partridge spring,
Who though she feel herself fast tied, yet beats her bating wing:
So strive I now to show, my feeble forward will,
Although I know my labour lost, to hop against the Hill.
The drops of dark disdain, did never drench my heart,
For well I know I am beloved, if that might ease my smart.
Ne yet the privy coals, of glowing iellosie,
Can ever kindle needless fear, within my fantasy.
The rigour of repulse, doth not renew my plaint,
Nor choice of change doth move my moan, nor force me thus to faint.
Only that pang of pain, which passeth all the rest,
And cankerlike doth fret the heart, within the guiltless breast.
Which is if any be, most like the pangs of death,
That present grief now gripeth me, & strives to stop my breath.
When friends in mind may meet, and heart in heart embrace,
And absent yet are feign to plain, for lack of time and place:
Then may I count, their love like seed, that soon is sown,
Yet lacking drops of heavenvly dew, with weeds is overgrown.
The Greyhound is aggrieved, although he see his game,
If still in slip he must be stayed, when he would chase the same.
So fares it now by me, who know myself beloved
Of one the best, in each respect, that ever yet was proved.
But since my luckless lot, forbids me now to taste,
The dulcet fruits of my delight, therefore in woes I wast.
And Swallow like I sing, as one enforced so,
Since others reap the gainful crop, which I with pain did sow.
Yet you that mark my song, excuse my Swallows voice,
And bear with her unpleasant tunes, which cannot well rejoice.
Had I or luck in love, or lease of liberty,
Then should you hear some sweeter notes, so clear my throat would be.
But take it thus in 'gree, and mark my plainsong well,
No heart feels so much hurt, as that, which doth in absence devil.
DEsire of Fame would force my feeble skill,
To praise a Countess by her due desert:
But dread of blame holds back my forward will,
And quenched the coals which kindled in my heart.
Thus am I plongd between dread and deep desire,
To pay the dew which duty doth require.
And when I call the mighty Gods in aid
To further forth some fine invention:
My bashful spirits be full ill afraid
To purchase pain by my presumption.
Such malice reigns (sometimes) in heavenly minds,
To punish him that praiseth as he finds.
For Pallas first, whose filled flowing skill,
Should guide my pen some pleasant words to writ,
With angry mood hath framed a froward will,
To dash devise as often as I indite.
For why? if once my Lady's gifts were known,
Pallas should lose the praises of her own.
And bloody Mars by change of his delight
Hath made Ioues daughter now mine enemy:
In whose conceit my Countess shines so bright,
That Venus pines for burning jealousy:
She may go home to Vulcan now again,
For Mars is sworn to be my Lady's swain.
Of her bright beams Dan Phoebus stands in dread,
And shames to shine within our Horizon:
Dame Cynthia holds in her horned head,
For fear to lose by like comparison:
Lo thus she lives, and laughs them all to scorn,
Countess on earth, in heaven a Goddess borne.
And I sometimes her servant, now her friend,
Whom heaven and earth for her (thus) hate and blame:
Have yet presume in friendly wise to spend,
This ragged verse, in honour of her name:
A simple gift compared by the skill,
Yet what may seem so dear as such good william.
WHen first I thee beheld in colours black and white,
Thy face in form well framed with favour blooming still:
My burning breast in cares did choose his chief delight,
With pen to paint thy praise, contrary to my skill:
Whose worthiness compared with this my rude device,
I blush and am abashed, this work to enterprise.
But when I call to mind thy sundry gifts of grace,
Full fraught with manners meek in happy quiet mind:
My hasty hand forthwith doth scribble on apace,
Lest willing heart might think, it meant to come behind:
Thus do both hand and heart these careful méetres use,
Twixt hope and trembling fear, my duty to excuse.
Wherefore accept these lines, and banish dark disdain,
Be sure they come from one that loveth thee in chief:
And guerdon me thy friend in like with love again,
So shalt thou well be sure to yield me such relief,
As only may redress my sorrows and my smart:
For proof whereof I pledge (dear Dame) to thee my heart.
Give me my Lute in bed now as I lie,
And lock the doors of mine unlucky bower:
So shall my voice in mournful verse descry
The secret smart which causeth me to lower:
Resound you walls an Echo to my moan,
And thou cold bed wherein I lie alone,
Bear witness yet what rest thy Lady takes,
When other sleep which may enjoy their makes.
In prime of youth when Cupid kindled fire,
And warmed my will with flames of fervent love:
To further forth the fruit of my desire,
My friends devised this mean for my behove.
They made a match according to my mind,
And cast a snare my fancy for to blind:
Short tale to make: the deed was almost done,
Before I knew which way the work begun.
And with this lot I did myself content,
I lent a liking to my parent's choice:
With hand and heart I gave my free consent,
And hung in hope for ever to rejoice.
I lived and loved long time in greater joy,
Than she which held king Priam's son of Troy:
But three lewd lots have changed my heaven to hell
And those be these, give ear and mark them well.
First slander he, which always beareth hate,
To happy hearts in heavenly state that bide:
'Gan play his part to stir up some debate,
Whereby suspect into my choice might glide.
And by his means the slime of false suspect,
Did (as I fear) my dearest friend infect.
Thus by these twain long was I plunged in pain,
Yet in good hope my heart did still remain.
But now (ay me) the greatest grief of all,
(Sound loud my Lute, and tell it out my tongue)
The hardest hap that ever might befall,
The only cause wherefore this song is song,
Is this alas: my love, my Lord, my Roy,
My chosen fere, my gem, and all my joy,
Is kept perforce out of my daily sight,
Whereby I lack the stay of my delight.
In lofty walls, in strong and stately towers,
(With troubled mind in solitary sort,)
My lovely Lord doth spend his days and hours,
A weary life devoid of all disport.
And I poor soul must lie here all alone,
To tire my truth, and wound my will with moan:
Such is my hap to shake my blooming time,
With winter's blasts before it pass the prime.
Now have you heard the sum of all my grief,
Whereof to tell my heart (o) rends in twain:
Good Ladies yet lend you me some relief,
And bear a part to ease me of my pain.
My sorts are such, that weighing well my truth,
They might provoke the craggy rocks to ruth,
And move these walls with tears for to lament,
The loathsome life wherein my youth is spent.
But thou my Lute, be still, now take thy rest,
Repose thy bones upon this bed of down:
Thou hast discharged some burden from my breast,
Wherefore take thou my place, herelie thee down.
And let me walk to tire my restless mind,
Until I may entreat some courteous wind
To blow these words unto my noble make,
That he may see I sorrow for his sake.
A Lady once did ask of me,
This pretty thing in privity:
Good sir (quoth she) feign would I crave,
One thing which you yourself not have:
Nor never had yet in times past,
Nor never shall while life doth last.
And if you seek to found it out,
You lose your labour out of doubt:
Yet if you love me as you say,
Then give it me, for sure you may.
L'Escü d'amour, the shield of perfect love,
The shield of love, the force of steadfast faith,
The force of faith which never will remove,
But standeth fast, to bide the brunts of death:
That trusty targe, hath long borne off the blows,
And broke the thrusts, which absence at me throws.
In doleful days I lead an absent life,
And wound my will with many a weary thought:
I pled for peace, yet starve in storms of strife,
I found debate, where quiet rest was sought.
These pangs with more, unto my pain I prove,
Yet bear I all upon my shield of love.
In colder cares are my conceits consumed,
Than Dido felt when false Aeneas fled:
In far more heat, than trusty Troilus fumed,
When crafty Cressyde dwelled with Diomed:
My hope such frost, my hot desire such flame,
That I both fryse, and smoulder in the same.
So that I live, and die in one degree,
Healed by hope, and hurt again with dread:
Fast bound by faith when fancy would be free,
Untied by trust, though thoughts enthrall my head:
Revived by joys, when hope doth most abound,
And yet with grief, in depth of dolours drowned.
In these assaults I feel my feebled force
Gins to faint, thus wearied still in woes:
And scarcely can my thus consumed corpse,
Hold up this Buckler to bear of these blows:
So that I crave, or presence for relief,
Or some supply, to ease mine absent grief.
To you (dear Dame) this doleful plaint I make,
Whose only sight may soon redress my smart:
Then show yourself, and for your servants sake,
Make hast post haste, to help a faithful heart:
Mine own poor shield hath me defended long,
Now lend me yours, for else you do me wrong.
MY reckless race is run, green youth and pride be past,
My riper mellowed years begin to follow on as fast.
My glancing looks are gone, which wonted were to pry
In every gorgeous garish glass that glistered in mine eye.
My sight is now so dim, it can behold none such,
No mirror but the merry mean, can please my fancy much.
And in that noble glass, I take delight to view,
The fashions of the wonted world, compared by the new.
For mark who list to look, each man is for himself,
And beats his brain to hord & heap this trash & worldly pelf.
Our hands are closed up, great gifts go not abroad,
Few men will lend a lock of hay, but for to gain a load.
Give gave is a good man, what need we lash it out,
The world is wondrous fearful now, for danger bids men doubt.
And ask how chanceth this? or what means all this meed?
Forsooth the common answer is, because the Lord hath need.
A noble jest by gisse, I found it in my glass,
The same fréehold our Saviour Christ conveyed to his ass.
A text to try the truth, and for this time full fit,
For where should we our lessons learn, but out of holy writ?
First mark our only God, which ruleth all the roast,
He sets aside all pomp and pride, wherein fond worldlings boast.
His train is not so great, as filthy Satan's band,
A smaller herd may serve to feed, at our great master's hand.
Next mark the heathens Gods, and by them shall we see,
They be not now so good fellows, as they were wont to be.
Ioue, Mars, and Mercury, Dame Venus and the rest,
They banquet not as they were wont, they know it were not best:
So kings and Princes both, have left their halls at large,
Their privy chambers cost enough, they cut off every charge:
And when an office falls, as chance sometimes may be,
First keep it close a year or twain, then geld it by the fee.
And give it out at last, but yet with this proviso,
(A bridle for a brainsick jade) durant bene placito.
Some think these ladders low, to climb aloft with speed:
Well let them creep at leisure then, for sure the Lord hath need.
Duke's Earls and Barons bold, have learned like lesson now,
They break up house & come to court, they live not by the plow.
Percase their rooms be scant, not like their stately hour,
A field bed in a corner couched, a pallad on the flower.
But what for that? no force, they make thereof no boast,
They feed themselves with delicates, and at the prince's cost.
And as for all their men, their pages and their swains,
They choke them up with chines of beef, to multiply their gains.
Themselves lie near to look, when any lease doth fall,
Such croomes were wont to feed poor grooms, but now the Lords lick al.
And why? o sir, because, both Dukes and Lords have need,
I mock not I, my text is true, believe it as your creed.
Our Prelates and our Priests, can tell this text with me,
They can hold fast their fattest fermes, and let no lease go free.
They have both wife and child, which may not be forgot,
The scriptures say the Lord hath need, & therefore blame them not.
Then come a little lower, unto the country knight,
The Squire and the Gentleman, they leave the country quite,
Their halls were all to large, their tables were to long,
The clouted shoes came in so fast, they kept to great a throng,
And at the porters lodge, where lubbers wont to feed,
The porter learns to answer now, hence hence the Lord hath need.
His gests came in too thick, their diet was to great,
Their horses eat up all the hay, which should have fed his neat:
Their teeth were far to fine, to feed on pork and sauce,
Five flocks of sheep could scarce maintain good mutton for his house.
And when this count was cast, it was no biding here,
Unto the good town is he gone, to make his friends good cheer.
And welcome there that will, but shall I tell you how?
At his own dish he feedeth them, that is the fashion now:
Side boards be laid aside, the table's end is gone,
His cook shall make you noble cheer, but ostler hath he none.
The chargers now be changed, wherein he wont to eat,
An old fruit dish is big enough to hold a joint of meat,
A salad or a sauce, to taste your cates withal,
Some strange device to feed mens eyes, mens stomachs now be small.
And when the tenants come to pay a quarters rend,
They bring some fowl at Midsummer, & a dish of fish in Lent,
At Christmas a capon, at Mighelmasse a goose:
And somewhat else at Newyeres tied, for fear their lease fly lose.
Good reason by my troth, when Gentlemen lack groats,
Let ploughmen pinch it out for pens, and patch their russet coats:
For better Former's fast, than Manor houses fall,
The Lord hath need, then says the text, bring old Ass, colt & all.
Well, lowest now at last, let see the country lout,
And mark how he doth swink & sweat to bring this gear about:
His feastings be but few, cast whipstockes, clout his shone,
The wheaten loaf is locked up, as soon as dinners done:
And where he wont to keep a lubber, two or three,
Now hath he learned to keep no more but Sim his son and he,
His wife and Mawde his maid, a boy to pitch the cart,
And turn him up at Hallontide, to feel the winter's smart:
Dame Alyson his wife doth know the price of meal,
Her bridecakes be not half so big as she was wont to steal:
She wears no silver hooks, she is content with worsse,
Her pendants and her silver pins she putteth in her purse.
Thus learn I by my glass, that merry mean is best,
And he most wise that finds the mean to keep himself at rest.
Perchance some open mouth will mutter now and than,
And at the market tell his mate, our landlords a zore man:
He racketh up our rents, and keeps the best in hand,
He makes a wondrous deal of good out of his own measne land:
Yea let such pelters prate, saint Needam be their speed,
We need no text to answer them, but this, The Lord hath need.
TO bind a bush of thorns amongst sweet smelling flowers,
May make the posy seem the worse, and yet the fault is ours:
For throw away the thorn, and mark what will ensue?
The posy than will show itself, sweet, fair, and fresh of hue.
A puttock set on perch, fast by a falcons side,
Will quickly show itself a kite, as time hath often tried.
And in my musing mind, I fear to find like fall,
As just reward to recompense my rash attempts withal.
Thou bidst, and I must bow, thou wilt that I shall writ,
Thou canst command my weary muse some verses to indite.
And yet perdie, thy book is fraught with learned verse,
Such skill as in my musing mind I can none like rehearse.
What follows then for me? but if I must needs writ,
To set down by the falcons side, myself a silly kite.
And yet the silly kite, well woyde in each degree,
May serve sometimes (as in his kind) for man's commodity.
The kite can weed the worm, from corn and costly seeds,
The kite can kill the mowldiwarpe, in pleasant meads the breeds:
Out of the stately streets, the kite can cleanse the filth,
As men can cleanse the worthless weeds, from fruitful fallowed tilth.
And only set aside the hens poor progeny,
I cannot see who can accuse the kite for felony.
The falcon, she must feed on partritch, and on quail,
On pigeon, plover, duck & drake, hearne, lapwing, teale, & rail,
Her hungry throat devours both food and dainty fare,
Whereby I take occasion, thus boldly to compare.
And as a silly kite, (not falcon like that fly,
Nor yet presume to hover by mount Hellycon (a) on high)
I friendly yet presume, upon my friends request,
In barren verse to show my skill, then take it for the best.
And Douty Douglasse thou, that art of falcons kind,
Give willing ear yet to the kite, and bear his words in mind,
Serve thou first God thy Lord, and praise him evermore,
Obey thy Prince and love thy make, by him set greatest store.
Thy Parents follow next, for honour and for awe,
Thy friends use always faithfully, for so commands the law.
Thy seemly self at last, thou shalt likewise regard,
And of thyself this lesson learn, and take it as reward:
That look how far deserts, may seem in thee to shine,
So far thou mayst set out thyself, without impeach or crime.
For this I dare avow, without self love (alight)
It can scarce be that virtue devil, in any earthly wight.
But if in such self love, thou seem to wade so far,
As fall to foul presumption, and judge thyself a star,
Beware betimes and think in our (a) Etymology,
Such faults are plainly called pride, and in french (b) Surcüydrye,
Lo thus can I poor kite, adventure for to teach
The falcon fly, and yet forewarn, she row not past her reach.
Thus can I weed the worm, which seeketh to devour
The seeds of virtue, which might grow within thee every hour.
Thus can I kill the mole, which else would overthrow
The good foundation of thy fame, with every little blow.
And thus can I convey, out of thy comely breast,
The sluttish heaps of peevish pride, which might defile the rest.
Perchance some falcons fly, which will not greatly grudge,
To learn thee first to love thyself, and then to love to much,
But I am none of those, I list not so to range,
I have man's meat enough at home, what need I then seek change.
I am no peacock I: my feathers be not gay,
And though they were, I see my feet such fond affects to stay,
I list not set to sale a thing so little worth,
I rather could keep close my crest, than seek to set it forth.
Wherefore if in this verse, which thou commandest to flow,
Thou chance to fall on construing, whereby some doubts may grow,
Yet grant this only boon, peruse it twice or thrice,
Digest it well ere thou condemn the depth of my device.
And use it like the nut, first crack the outward shell,
Then try the kernel by the taste, and it may please thee well.
Do not as barbers do, which wash beards curiously,
Then cut them off, then cast them out, in open streets to lie.
Remember therewithal, my muse is tied in chains,
The goonshot of calamity hath battered all my brains.
And though this verse scape out, take thou thereat no mark,
It is but like a heedless fly, that tumbleth in the dark.
It was thine own request, remember so it was,
Wherefore if thou dislike the same, then licence it to pass
Into my breast again, from whence it flew in haste,
Full like a kite which not deserves by falcons to be placed:
And like a stubbed thorn, which may not seem to serve,
To stand with such sweet smelling flowers, like praises to deserve.
Yet take this harmless thorn, to pick thy teeth withal,
A tooth pick serves some use perdie, although it be but small.
And when they teeth therewith, be picked fair and clean,
Then bend thy tongue no worse to me, than mine to thee hath been.
MIne own good Bat, before thou hoist up sail,
To make a furrow in the foaming seas,
Content thyself to hear for thine avail,
Such harmless words, as aught thee not displease.
First in thy journey, jape not over much,
What? laughest thou Batte, because I writ so plain?
Believe me now it is a friendly touch,
To use few words where friendship doth remain.
And for I find, that fault hath run to fast,
Both in thy flesh, and fancy too sometime,
Me thinks plain dealing biddeth me to cast
This bone at first amid my doggerel rhyme.
But shall I say, to give thee grave advise?
(Which in my head is (God he knows) full geazon)?
Then mark me well, and though I be not wise,
Yet in my rhyme, thou mayst perhaps found reason.
First every day, beseech thy God on knee,
So to direct thy staggering steps always,
That he which every secret thought doth see
May hold thee in, when thou wouldst go astray:
And that he deign to send thee safe retoure,
And quick dispatch of that which is thy due:
Let this (my Bat) be both thy prime and hour,
Wherein also commend to Nostre Dieu,
Thy good Companion and my very friend,
To whom I should (but time would not permit)
Have taken pain some ragged rhyme to send
In trusty token, that I not forget
His courtesy: but this is debt to thee,
I promysde it, and now I mean to pay:
What was I saying? sirrah, will you see
How soon my wits were wandering astray?
I say, pray thou for thee and for thy mate,
So shipmen sing, and though the note be plain,
Yet sure the music is in heavenly state,
When friends sing so, and know not how to fayne.
The next to GOD, thy Prince have still in mind
Thy countries honour, and the common wealth:
And flee from them, which fled with every wind
From native soil, to foreign coasts by stealth:
Their trains are trustless, tending still to treason,
Their smoothed tongues are lined all with guile,
Their power slender, scarcely worth two peason,
Their malice much, their wits are full of wile:
Eschew them then, and when thou seest them, say,
Da, da, sir K, I may not come at you,
You cast a snare your country to betray,
And would you have me trust you now for true?
Remember Batte the foolish blink eyed boy
Which was at Rome, thou knowest whom I mean,
Remember eke the pretty beardless toy,
Whereby thou foundst a safe return to Geane,
Do so again: (God shield thou shouldst have need,)
But rather so, than to forswear thyself:
A loyal heart, (believe this as thy Creed)
Is evermore more worth than worldly pelf.
And for one lesson, take this more of me,
There are three Ps almost in every place,
From which I counsel thee always to flee,
And take good heed of them in any case,
The first is poison, perilous in deed
To such as travail with a heavy purse:
And thou my Bat beware, for thou hast need,
Thy purse is lined with paper, which is worse:
Thy bills of credit will not they thinkest thou,
Be bait to set italian hands on work?
Yes by my faith, and never worse than now,
When every knave hath leisure for to lurk,
And knoweth thou comest for the shells of Christ:
Beware therefore where ever that thou go,
It may fall out that thou shalt be entiste
To sup sometimes with a Magnifico,
And have a Fico foisted in thy dish,
Because thou shouldest digest thy meat the better:
Beware therefore, and rather feed on fish,
Than learn to spell fine flesh with such a Letter.
Some may present thee with a pound or twain
Of Spanish soap to wash thy linen white:
Beware therefore, and think it were small gain,
To save thy shirt, and cast thy skin off quite:
Some cunning man may teach thee for to ride,
And stuff thy saddle all with Spanish wool,
Or in thy stirrups have a toy so tied,
As both thy legs may swell thy buskins full:
Beware therefore, and bear a noble port,
Drink not for thirst before an other taste:
Let none outlandish Tailor take disport
To stuff thy doublet full of such Bombast,
As it may cast thee in unkindly sweat,
And 'cause thy hair per company to glide,
Strangers are fine in many a proper feat:
Beware therefore: the second P. is Pride,
Moore perilous than was the first by far,
For that infects but blood and leaves the bones,
This poisons all, and minds of men doth mar,
It findeth nooks to creep in for the nonce:
First from the mind it makes the heart to swell,
From thence the flesh is pampered every part,
The skin is taught in Dyers shops to devil,
The hair is curled or frilled up by art:
Believe me Bat, our Countrymen of late
Have caught such knacks abroad in foreign land,
That most men call them Devils incarnate,
So singular in their conceits they stand:
Now sir, if I shall see your mastership
Come home disguysde and clad in quaint array,
As with a piketoothe biting on your lip,
Your brave Mustachyos turned the Turkey way,
A Coptanckt hat made on a Flemish block,
A nightgown cloak down trailing to your toes,
A slender slop close couched to your dock.
A curtold slipper, and a short silk hose:
Bearing your Rapier point above the hilt,
And looking big like Marquis of all Beef,
Then shall I count your toil and travail spilled,
Because my second PEA, with you is chief.
But forwards now, although I stayed a while,
My hindmost PEA, is worse than both these two,
For it both bones and body doth defile,
With fouler blots than both those other do.
Short tale to make, this PEA, can bear no blocks,
(God shield me Bat, should bear it in his breast)
And with a dash it spelleth piles and pocks
A perilous P, and woorsse than both the rest:
Now though I find no cause for to suspect
My Bat in this, because he hath been tried,
Yet since such Spanish buttons can infect
Kings, Emperors, Princes and the world so wide.
And since those suns do mellow men so fast
As most that travail come home very ripe
Although (by sweat) they learn to live and last
When they have danced after Guydoes' pipe:
Therefore I thought it meet to warn my friend
Of this foul PEA, and so an end of Ps.
Now for thy diet mark my tale to end,
And thank me then, for that is all my fees.
See thou exceed not in three double Us,
The first is Wine, which may inflame thy blood,
The second Women, such as haunt the stews,
The third is Wilfulness, which doth no good.
These three eschew, or temper them always:
So shall my Bat prolong his youthful years,
And see long George again, with happy days,
Who if he be as faithful to his fears,
As he was wont, will daily pray for Bat,
And for (a) Pencoyde: and if it fall out so,
That Iames a Parrye do but make good that,
Which he hath said: and if he be (not, not)
The best companion that long George can find,
Then at the Spawe I promise' for to be
In August next, if God turn not my mind,
Where as I would be glad thyself to see:
Till then farewell, and thus I end my song,
Take it in 'gree, for else thou dost me wrong.
MY worthy Lord, I pray you wonder not,
To see your woodman shoot so oft awry,
Nor that he stands amazed like a sot,
And lets the harmless dear (unhurt) go by.
Or if he strike a Do which is but carrion,
Laugh not good Lord, but favour such a fault,
Take will in worth, he would feign hit the barren,
But though his heart be good, his hap is nought:
And therefore now I crave your Lordship's leave,
To tell you plain what is the cause of this:
First if it please your honour to perceive,
What makes your woodman shoot so oft amiss,
Believe me L. the case is nothing strange,
He shoots awry almost at every mark,
His eyes have been so used for to range,
That now God knows they be both dim and dark.
For proof he bears the note of folly now,
Who shot sometimes to hit Philosophy,
And ask you why? forsooth I make avow,
Because his wanton wits went all awry.
Next that, he shot to be a man of law,
And spent sometime with learned Litleton,
Yet in the end, he proved but a daw●,
For law was dark and he had quickly done.
Then could he wish Fitzharbert such a brain,
As Tully had, to writ the law by art,
So that with pleasure, or with little pain,
He might perhaps, have caught a truants part.
But all to late, he most misliked the thing,
Which most might help to guide his arrow straight▪
He winked wrong, and so let slip the string,
Which cast him wide, for all his quaint conceit.
From thence he shot to catch a courtly grace,
And thought even there to wield the world at will,
But out alas he much mistook the place,
And shot awry at every rover still.
The blazing baits which draw the gazing eye,
Unfeather there his first affection,
No wonder then although he shot awry,
Wanting the feathers of discretion.
Yet more than them, the marks of dignity,
He much mistook and shot the wronger way,
Thinking the purse of prodigality,
Had been best mean to purchase such a prey.
He thought the flattering face which fleareth still,
Had been full fraught with all fidelity,
And that such words as courtiers use at william.
Can not have varied from the verity.
But when his bonnet buttened with gold,
His comely cape begarded all with gay,
His bombast hose, with linings manifold,
His knit silk stocks and all his quaint array,
Had picked his purse of all the Peter pence,
Which might have paid for his promotion,
Then (all to late) he found that light expense,
Had quite quenched out the courts devotion.
So that since then the taste of misery,
Hath been always full bitter in his bit,
And why? forsooth because he shot awry,
Mistaking still the marks which others hit,
But now behold what mark the man doth found,
He shoots to be a soldier in his age,
Mistrusting all the virtues of the mind,
He trusts the power of his parsonage.
As though long limbs led by a lusty heart,
Might yet suffice to make him rich again,
But Flushing frays have taught him such a part,
That now he thinks the wars yield no such gain.
And sure I fear, unless your lordship deign,
To train him yet into some better trade,
It will be long before he hit the vein,
Whereby he may a richer man be made.
He cannot climb as other catchers can.
To lead a charge before himself be led,
He cannot spoil the simple sakeles man,
Which is content to feed him with his bread.
He cannot pinch the painful soldiers pay,
And shear him out his share in ragged sheeets,
He cannot stoop to take a greedy pray
Upon his fellows groveling in the streets,
He cannot pull the spoil from such as pill,
And seem full angry at such foul offence,
Although the gain content his greedy will,
Under the cloak of contrary pretence:
And now adays, the man that shoots not so,
May shoot amiss, even as your Woodman doth:
But than you marvel why I let them go,
And never shoot, but say farewell forsooth:
Alas my Lord, while I do muse hereon,
And call to mind my youthful years myspente,
They give me such a bone to gnaw upon,
That all my senses are in silence penned.
My mind is rapt in contemplation,
Wherein my dazzled eyes only behold,
The black hour of my constellation,
Which framed me so luckless on the mould:
Yet therewithal I can not but confess,
That vain presumption makes my heart to swell,
For thus I think, not all the world (I guess,)
Shoots (a) bet than I, nay some shoots not so well.
In Aristotle somewhat did I learn,
To guide my manners all by comeliness,
And Tully taught me somewhat to discern
Between sweet speech and barbarous rudeness.
Old Parkyns, Rastall, and Dan Bractens books,
Did lend me somewhat of the lawless Law,
The crafty Courtiers with their guileful looks,
Must needs put some experience in my maw:
Yet can not these with many masteries more,
Make me shoot straight at any gainful prick,
Where some that never handled such a bow,
Can hit the white, or touch it near the quick,
Who can nor speak, nor writ in pleasant wise,
Nor lead their life by Aristotle's rule,
Nor argue well on questions that arise,
Nor plead a case more than my Lord Mairs mule,
Yet can they hit the marks that I do miss,
And win the mean which may the man maintain.
Now when my mind doth mumble upon this,
No wonder then although I pine for pain:
And whiles mine eyes behold this mirror thus,
The heard goeth by, and farewell gentle does:
So that your Lordship quickly may discuss
What blinds mine eyes so oft (as I suppose.)
But since my Muse can to my Lord rehearse
What makes me miss, and why I do not shoot,
Let me imagine in this worthless verse,
If right before me, at my standings foot
There stood a do, and I should strike her dead,
And then she prove a carrian carcase too,
What figure might I find within my head,
To 'scuse the rage which ruled me so to do?
Some might interpret by plain paraphrase,
That lack of skill or fortune led the chance,
But I must otherwise expound the case,
I say Iehoua did this do advance,
And made her bold to stand before me so,
Till I had thrust mine arrow to her heart,
That by the sudden of her overthrow,
I might endeavour to amend my part,
And turn mine eyes that they no more behold,
Such guileful marks as seem more than they be:
And though they glister outwardly like gold,
Are inwardly but brass, as men may see:
And when I see the milk hung in her teat,
Me thinks it saith, old babe now learn to suck,
Who in thy youth couldst never learn the feat
To hit the whites which live with all good luck.
Thus have I told my Lord, (God grant in season)
A tedious tale in rhyme, but little reason.
THe figure of this world I can compare,
To Garden plots, and such like pleasant places,
The world breeds men of sundry shape and share,
As herbs in gardens, grow of sundry graces:
Some good, some bad, some amiable faces,
Some foul, some gentle, some of froward mind,
Subject like bloom, to blast of every wind.
And as you see the flowers most fresh of hue,
That they prove not always the holesomest,
So fairest men are not always found true:
But even as withered weeds fall from the rest,
So flatterers fall naked from their nest:
When truth hath tried, their painting tising tale,
They lose their gloss, and all their jests seem stolen.
Yet some do present pleasure most esteem,
Till beams of bravery whither all their wealth,
And some again there be can rightly deem,
Those herbs for best, which may maintain their health.
Considering well, that age draws on by stealth,
And when the fairest flower is shrunk and gone,
A well grown root, will stand and shift for one.
Then thus the restless life which men here lead,
May be resembled to the tender plant,
In spring it sprouts, as babes in cradle breed,
Flourish in May, like youths that wisdom want,
In Autumn ripes and roots, lest store wax scant
In winter shrinks and shrouds from every blast,
Like crooked age when lusty youth is past.
And as the ground or grace whereon it grew,
Was fat or lean, even so by it appears▪
If barren soil, why then it changeth hew,
It fadeth fast, it flits to fumbling years,
But if he gathered root amongst his fears,
And light on land that was well muckte in deed,
Then stands it still, or leaves increase of seed.
As for the rest, fall sundry ways (God wots)
Some faint like froathe at every little puff,
Some smart by sword, like herbs that serve the pot,
And some be weeded from the finer stuff,
Some stand by props to maintain all their ruff:
And thus (under correction be it told)
Hath Gascoigne gathered in his Garden mould.
IF any flower that here is grown,
Or any herb may ease your pain,
Take and account it as your own,
But recompense the like again:
For some and some is honest play,
And so my wife taught me to say.
If here to walk you take delight,
Why come, and welcome when you will:
If I bid you sup here this night,
Bid me an other time, and still
Think some and some is honest play,
For so my wife taught me to say.
Thus if you sup or dine with me,
If you walk here, or fit at ease,
If you desire the thing you see,
And have the same your mind to please,
Think some and some is honest play,
And so my wife taught me to say.
IF thou sit here to view this pleasant garden place,
Think thus: at last will come a frost, & all these flowers deface:
But if thou sit at ease to rest thy weary bones,
Remember death brings final rest to all our grievous groans.
So whether for delight, or here thou sit for ease,
Think still upon the latter day, so shalt thou God best please.
Quoniam etiam humiliatos, amoena delectant.
A Strange conceit, a vain of new delight,
Twixt weal and woe, twixte joy and bitter grief,
Hath pricked forth my hasty pen to writ
This worthless verse in hazard of repréefe:
And to mine (a) Alderlievest Lord I must indite
A woeful case, a chip of sorry chance,
A type of heaven, a lively hue of hell,
A fear to fall, a hope of high advance,
A life, a death, a dreary tale to tell.
But since I know the pith of my pastance
Shall most consist in telling of a truth,
Vouchsafe my Lord (b) (en bon gré) for to take
This trusty tale the story of my youth,
This Chronicle which of myself I make,
To show my Lord what healplesse hap ensueth,
When heady youth will gad without a guide,
And range untied in leas of liberty,
Or when bore need a starting hole hath spied
To peep abroad from mother Misery,
And buildeth Castles in the Welkin wide,
In hope thereby to devil with wealth and ease.
But he the Lord (whom my good Lord doth know)
Can bind or loose, as best to him shall please,
Can save or spill, raise up or overthrow,
Can galled with grief, and yet the pain appease.
Which thing to prove if so my L. take time,
(When greater cares his head shall not possess)
To sit and read this ranging ragged rhyme,
I doubt not then but that he will confess,
What falls I found when last I leapt to climb.
In March it was, that cannot I forget,
In this last March upon the nintenth day,
When from Gravesend in boat I 'gan to jest
To board our ship in Quinborough that lay,
From whence the very twentieth day we set
Our sails abroad to slice the Salt sea foam,
And anchors weighed 'gan trust the trustless flood:
That day and night amid the waves we roam
To seek the coast of Holland where it stood.
And on the next when we were far from home,
And near the haven whereto we sought to sail,
A fearly chance: (whereon alone to think)
My hand now quakes, and all my senses fail)
'Gan us befall: the Pilot 'gan to shrink,
And all aghast his courage seemed to quail.
Whereat amazed, the Master and his mate
'Gan ask the cause of his so sudden change.
And from aloft the Steward of our state,
(The sounding plumb) in haste post haste must range,
To try the depth and goodness of our gate.
Me thinks (even yet) I hear his heavy voice,
Fathom three, four, foot more, foot less, that cried:
Me thinks I hear the fearful whispering noise,
Of such as said full softly (me beside)
God grant this journey 'cause us to rejoice.
When I poor soul, which close in cabin lay,
And there had reached till gaule was well-near burst,
With giddy head, my stumbling steps must stay
To look abroad as boldly as I durst.
And whiles I hearken what the Sailors say,
The sownder sings, fadame two full no more.
Aloof, aloof, then cried the Master out,
The Stearesmate strives to send us from the shore,
And trusts the stream, whereof we erst had doubt,
'Tween two extreme thus were we tossed sore,
And went to (b) Hull, until we leisure had
To talk at large, and eke to know the cause
What mood had made our Pilot look so sad.
At last the dutch with butterbitten jaws,
(For so he was a dutch, a Devil, a swad,
A fool, a drunkard, or a traitor tone)
'Gan answer thus: (c) Ghy zijt te uroegh here come,
Tuniet goet tijt and standing all alone,
'Gan preach to us, which fools were all and some
To trust him fool, in whom there skill was none.
Or what knew we if Albaes' subtle brain
(So to prevent our enterprise by treazon)
Had him subornde to 'tice us to this train
And so himself (per Company and season)
For spite, for hate, or else for hope of gain.
This must we think that (e) Alba would not spare
To give out gold for such a sinful deed:
And glistering gold can oftentimes ensnare,
Moore perfect wits than Holland soil doth breed.
But let that pass, and let us now compare
Our own fond fact with this his foul offence.
We knew him not, nor where he word that time,
Nor if he had Pilots experience,
Or Pylats' craft, to clear himself from crime.
Yea more than that (how void were we of sense)
We had small smack of any tale he told,
He powered out Duchess to drown us all in drink,
And we (wise men) upon his words were bold,
To run on head: but let me now bethink
The master's speech: and let me so unfold
The depth of all this foolish oversight.
The master spoke even like a skilful man,
And said I sail the Seas both day and night,
I know the tides as well as other can,
From pole to pole I can the courses plight:
I know France, Spain, Gréece, Denmark, Dasisk & all,
Freeze, Flaunders, Holland, every coast I know,
But truth to tell, it seldom doth befall,
That English merchants ever bend their bow
To shoot at Breyll, where now our flight should fall,
They sand their shafts farther for greater gain.
So that this haven is yet (quoth he) (a) uncouth,
And God grant now that England may attain
Such gains by Breyll, (a gospel on that mouth)
As is desired: thus spoke the master plain.
And since (said he) myself knew not the sown,
How could I well a better Pilot find,
Than this (which first) did say he dwelled in town,
And knew the way where ever sat the wind?
While we thus talk, all sails are taken down,
And we to Hull (as erst I said) 'gan wend,
Till full two hours and somewhat more were passed,
Our guide than spoke in Dutch and bade us bend
All sails again: for now quoth he (at last)
Die tijt is goet, dat heb ick well bekend.
Why stay I long to end a woeful tale?
We trust his Duchess, and up the foresail goes,
We fall on knees amid the happy gale,
(Which by God's will full kind and calmly blows)
And unto him we there unfold our bale,
Whereon to think I write and weep for joy,
That pleasant song the hundredth and seventh Psalm,
There did we read to comfort our annoy,
Which to my soul (me thought) was sweet as balm,
Yea far more sweet than any worldly joy.
And when he had with prayers praised the Lord,
Our (b) Edell Bloetts, 'gan fall to eat and drink,
And for their sauce, at taking up the board
The ship so struck (as all we thought to sink)
Against the ground. Then all with one accord
We fell again on knees to pray apace,
And therewithal even at the second blow,
(The number cannot from my mind outpace)
Our helm struck of, and we must fleet and flow,
Where wind and waves would guide us by their grace.
The wind waxed calm as I have said before,
(O mighty God so didst thou suage our woes)
The selly ship was soused and smitten sore,
With counter buffets, blows and double blows.
At last the keel which might endure no more,
'Gan rend in twain and sucked the water in:
Then might you see pale looks and woeful cheer,
Then might you hear loud cries and deadly din:
Well noble minds in perils best appear,
And boldest hearts in bale will never blinne.
For there were some (of whom I will not say
That I was one) which never changed hue,
But pumped apace, and laboured every way
To save themselves, and all their lovely crew,
Which cast the best freight overboard away,
Both corn and cloth, and all that was of weight.
Which halde and pulled at every helping cord,
Which prayed to God and made their conscience straight.
As for myself: I here protest my Lord,
My words were these: O God in heaven on height,
Behold me not as now a wicked wight,
A sack of sin, a wretch ywrapt in wroth,
Let no fault past (O Lord) offend thy sight,
But weigh my will which now those faults doth loathe,
And of thy mercy pity this our plight.
Even thou good God which of thy grace didst say
That for one good, thou wouldst all Sodom save,
Behold us all: thy shining beams display,
Some here (I trust) thy goodness shall engrave,
To be chaste vessels unto thee alway,
And so to live in honour of thy name:
Believe me Lord, thus to the Lord I said.
But there were some (alas the more their blame)
Which in the pump their only comfort laid,
And trusted that to turn our grief to game.
Alas (quoth I) our pump good God must be,
Our sail, our stern, our tackling, and our trust.
Some other cried to clear the shipboate free,
To save the chief and leave the rest in dust.
Which word once spoke (a wondrous thing to see)
All hast post haste, was made to have it done:
And up it comes in haste much more than speed.
There did I see a woeful work begun,
Which now (even now) doth make my heart to bleed.
Some made such haste that in the boat they won,
Before it was above the hatches brought.
Strange tale to tell, what hast some men shall make
To found their death before the same be sought.
Some twixt the boat and ship their bane do take,
Both drowned and slain with brains for haste crushed out.
At last the boat half freighted in the air
Is hoist aloft, and on the seas down set,
When I that yet in God could not despair,
Still plied the pump, and patiently did let
All such take boat as thither made repair.
And herewithal I safely may protest
I might have won the boat as well as one,
And had that seemed a safety for the rest
I should percase even with the first have gone.
But when I saw the boat was over priest
And pestered full with more than it might bear,
And therewithal with cheerful look might see
My chief companions whom I held most dear
(Whose company had thither trained me)
Abiding still aboard our ship yfeare:
Nay then (quoth I) good God thy will be done,
For with my fears I will both live and die.
And ear the boat far from our sight was gone
The wave so wrought, that they (which thought to flee
And so to scape) with waves were over run.
Lo how he strives in vain that strives with God
For there we lost the flower of the band,
And of our crew full twenty souls and odd,
The Sea sucks up, whiles we on hatches stand
In smarting fear to feel that self same rod.
Well on (as yet) our battered bark did pass,
And brought the rest within a mile of land,
Then thought I sure now need not I to pass,
For I can swim and so escape this sand.
Thus did I deem all careless like an Ass,
When suddenly the wind our foresail took,
And turned about and brought us eft to Seas.
Then cried we all, cast out the anchor hook,
And here let bide such help as god may please:
Which anchor cast, we soon the same forsook,
And cut it off, for fear lest thereupon
Our ship should bouge, then called we fast for fire,
And so discharged our great guns every one,
To warn the town thereby of our desire:
But all in vain, for succour sent they none.
At last a Hoy from Sea came flinging fast,
And towards us held course as straight as line.
Then might you see our hands to heaven up cast
To tender thanks unto the power divine,
That so vouchsafed to save us yet at last:
But when this Hoy 'gan (well-near) board our bark,
And might perceive what peril we were in,
It turned away and left us still in (a) cark,
This tale is true (for now to lie were sin)
It left us there in dread and dangers dark.
It left us so, and that within the sight
And hearing both of all the pear at Breyll.
Now ply thee pen, and paint the foul despite
Of drunken Dutchmen standing there even still,
For whom we came in their cause for to fight,
For whom we came their state for to defend,
For whom we came as friends to grieve their foes,
They now disdained (in this distress) to lend
One helping boat for to assuage our woes:
They saw our harms the which they would not mend,
And had not been that God even than did raise
Some instruments to succour us at need,
We had been sunk and swallowed all in Seas.
But Gods will was (in way of our good speed)
That on the pear (lamenting our misease)
Some english were, whose naked swords did force
The drunken dutch, the cankered churls to come,
And so at last (not moved by remorse,
But forced by fear) they sent us succour some:
Some must I say: and for to tell the course,
They sent us succour saust with sour despite,
They saved our lives and spoiled us of the rest,
They stolen our goods by day and eke by night,
They showed the worst and closely kept the best.
And in this time (this treason must I write)
Our Pilot fled, but how? not empty handed:
He fled from us, and with him did convey
A Hoy full fraught (whiles we mean while were landed)
With powder, shot, and all our best array:
This skill he had, for all he set us sanded.
And now my Lord, declare your noble mind,
Was this a Pilot, or a Pilate judge?
Or rather was he not of Iudas kind:
Which left us thus and close away could trudge?
Well, at the Bryell to tell you what we find,
The Governor was all bedewed with drink,
His trulls and he were all laid down to sleep,
And we must shifted, and of ourselves must think
What mean was best, and how we best might keep
That yet remained: the rest was close in clink.
Well, on our knees with trickling tears of joy,
We gave God thanks: and as we might, did learn
What might be found in every (a) pynke and hoy.
And thus my Lord, your honour may discern
Our perils past, and how in our annoy
God saved me (your Lordships bound for ever)
Who else should not be able now to tell,
The state wherein this country doth persever,
Ne how they seem in careless minds to devil.
(So did they erst and so they will do ever)
And to my Lord for to bewray my mind
Me thinks they be a race of Bulbéefe borne,
Whose hearts their Butter mollyfieth by kind,
And so the force of beef is clean outworn:
And eke their brains with double beer are lynde:
So that they march bombast with buttered beer,
Like sops of browesse puffed up with froth,
Where inwardly they be but hollow gear,
As weak as wind, which with one puff up goeth:
And yet they brag, and think they have no peer,
Because Harlem hath hitherto held out,
Although in deed (as they have suffered Spain)
The end thereof even now doth rest in doubt.
Well, as for that, let it (for me) remain
In God his hands, whose hand hath brought me out,
To tell my Lord this tale now ta'en in hand,
As how they train their trezons all in drink,
And when themselves for drunk can scarcely stand,
Yet suck out secrets (as themselves do think)
From guests. The best (almost) in all their land,
(I name no man, for that were broad before)
Will (as men say) enure the same sometime,
But surely this (or I mistake him sore)
Or else he can (but let it pass in rhyme)
Dissemble deep, and mock sometimes the more:
Well, drunkenness is here good company,
And therewithal per consequens it falls
That whoredom is accounted jollity:
A gentle state, where two such Tenisballes
Are tossed still and better bowls let lie.
I cannot herewith from my Lord conceal,
How God and Mammon here do devil yfeare,
And how the Mass is cloaked under veal
Of policy, till all the coast be clear.
Ne can I choose, but I must ring a peal,
To tell what hypocrites the Nuns here be:
And how the old Nuns be content to go,
Before a man in streets like mother B,
Until they come whereas there dwells a Ho,
(Re: ceyve that half, and let the rest go free)
There can they point with finger as they pass,
Yea sir, sometimes they can come in themself,
To strike the bergaine 'tween a wanton lass,
And Edel bloets: now is not this good pelf?
As for the young Nuns, they be bright as glass,
And chaste forsooth, met v: and anders niet:
What said I? what? that is a mystery,
I may no verse of such a theme indite,
Young Rowlande York may tell it bet than I:
Yet to my Lord this little will I writ,
That though I have (my self) no skill at all,
To take the countenance of a Colonel,
Had I a good Lieutenant general,
As good Iohn Zuche wherever that he dwell,
Or else Ned Dennye (fair might him befall)
I could have brought a noble regiment
Of smugskinnde Nuns into my country soil:
But farewell they as things impertinent,
Let them (for me) go devil with master Moyle,
Who hath behight to place them well in Kent.
And I shall well my silly self content,
To come alone unto my lovely Lord,
And unto him (when rhyming sport is spent)
To tell some sad and reasonable word,
Of Hollandes' state, the which I will present,
In Cartes, in Maps, and eke in Models made,
If God of heaven my purpose not prevent.
And in mean while although my wits do wade
In ranging rhyme, and fling some folly forth,
I trust my Lord will take it well in worth.