Proteus' of all the Marine gods the prime,
And held the noblest both for Birth and Time:
From him who with his Trident sways the main,
And ploughs the waves in curls, or makes them plain:
Neptune, both Lord of Ebb, and Inundation,
I come to greet your great Inauguration.
They call me Versipellis, and 'tis true,
No figure, for me, no shape to me is new;
For I appear what Creature I desire,
Sometimes a Bull, a Serpent, sometimes Fire:
The first denotes my strength; strong must he be,
And powerful, who aspire to your Degree.
You must be wise as Serpents, to decide
Such doubts as Error or Misprision hide.
And next, like Fire, (of th'Elements most pure)
Whose nature can no sordid stuff endure,
As in Calcining Metals we behold,
It sunders and divides the dross from Gold,
And such are the Decorements that still wait
Upon so grave, so great a Magistrate.
This Tortoise, double-natured, doth imply
(By the two Elements of moist and dry)
So much as gives the world to understand,
Your noble Trading both by Sea and Land.
Of Porpoises the vast Herds Proteus keeps,
And I am styled the Prophet of the Deeps,
Sent to predict good Omen: May that Fleet
Which makes th' East Indies with our England meet,
Prosper to all your hearts desires: Their sails
Be to and fro swelled with auspicious gales:
May You (who of this City now take charge)
With all the Scarlet Senate in your Barge,
The Fame thereof so heighten, future Story
Above all other States may crown her glory.
To hinder what's more weighty, I am loath,
Pass therefore freely on, to take your Oath.
BY what rare frame, or in what curious Vorse
Can the rich profits of your Trade's commerce
Be to the full expressed? which to explain,
Lies not in Poet's Pen, or Artists brain.
What Beast, or Bird, for Hide, or Feather rare,
(For man's use made, can with the Sheep compare?
The Horse of strength or swiftness may be proud,
But yet his flesh is not for food allowed.
The Herds yield Milk and Meat (commodious both)
Yet none of all their skins make Wool for Cloth.
The Sheep doth all: The Parrot and the Jay,
The Peacock, Ostrich, all in colours gay,
Delight the Eye, some with their Notes, the Ear,
But what are these unto the Cloth we wear?
Search Forests, Deserts for Beasts wild or tame,
The Mountains or the Vales, search the vast frame
Of the wide Universe, the Earth, and Sky,
Nor Beast nor Bird can with the Sheep comply:
No Creature under Heaven, be't small or great,
But some way useful, one affords us meat,
Another Ornament: She more than this,
Of Patience, and of Profit th' emblem is,
In former Ages by the Heroes sought:
After, from Greece into Hesperia brought:
She's clothed in plenteous riches, and being shorn,
Her Fleece an Order, and by Emperors worn,
All these are known, yet further understand,
In twelve divide the profits of this Land,
As Hides, Tin, Lead; or what else you can name,
Ten of those twelve the Fleece may justly claim:
Then how can that amongst the rest be missed,
By which all States, all Common Weals subsist?
Great honour then belongs unto this trade,
And you, great Lord, for whom this triumph's made.
THe dignity of Merchants who can tell?
Or how much they all Traders ante-cell?
When others hear at home securely sleep,
He ploughs the bosom of each unknown deep,
And in them sees heavens wonders; for he can
Take a full view of the Leviathan,
Whose strength all Marine Monsters doth surpass,
His Ribs as Iron, his Fins and scales as brass.
His Ship like to the feathered Fowl he wings,
And from all Coasts he rich materials brings,
For ornament or profit; those by which
Inferior Arts subsist, and become rich;
By Land he makes discovery of all Nations,
Their Manners, and their Country's situations,
And with those savage natures so complies,
That there's no rarity from thence can rise
But he makes frequent with us, and yet these
Not without dangers, both on shores and seas:
The Land he pierceth, and the Ocean skowers,
To make them all by free transportage ours.
You (honoured Sir) amongst the chief are named,
By whose commerce our Nation hath been famed.
The Romans in their triumphs had before
Their Chariots borne or lead, (to grace the more
The sumptuous Show) the prime and choicest things,
Which they had taken from the Captive, Kings:
What curious Statue▪ what strange bird, or beast
That Clime did yield (if rare above the rest)
Was there exposed: Entering your civil state,
Whom better may we strive to imitate?
This huge Rhinoceros (not 'mongst us seen,
Yet frequent wheresome Factors oft have been)
Is emblem of the Praetorship you bear,
Who to all Beasts of prey, who rend and tear
The innocent herds and flocks, is foe professed,
But in all just defences arms his crest.
You of this wilderness are Lord, so sway,
The weak may be upheld, the proud obey.
SHipping to our first Fathers was not known;
(Though now amongst all Nations common grown)
Nor trade by Sea: we read the first choice piece,
Was th' Argo, built to fetch the golden Fleece,
In which brave voyage, sixty Princes, all
Heroës', such as we Semones call:
In that new Vessel to attain the shore.
Where such a prize was, each tugged at the Oar:
On one bench Hercules and Hilas sat,
Beauty and Strength; and siding just with that
Daunaus and Lynceus of so quick a sight
No interposer, or large distance might
Dull his clear Optics: those that had the charge,
And the chief stearadge of that Princely Barge,
Zethes and Calais, whose judgements meet,
Being said t'have feathers on their heads and feet:
We spare the rest: Grave Sir, the Merchant's trade
Is that, for which all Shipping first was made;
And through an Hellespont who would but pull,
Steere, and hoist sail, to bring home golden Wool?
For we by that are clothed: In the first place
Sat strength and beauty: oh what a sweet grace
Have those united; both now yours, great Lord,
Your beauty is your robe, your strength the sword.
You must have Lynceus eyes, and further see
Than either you before have done, or he
Could ever: having now a true inspection
Into each strife, each cause without affection
To this or that party: some are said,
To have had feathers on their feet and head.
(As those whom I late named) you must have more,
And in your place be feathered now all o'er:
You must have feathers in your thoughts, your eyes,
Your hands, your feet; for he that's truly wise
Must still be of a winged apprehension
As well for execution, as prevention.
You know (Right honoured Sir) delays and pauses,
In judicature, dull, if not damp, good causes:
That we presume t'advise, we pardon crave,
It being confessed, all these, and more you have.
THis Structure is a Citadel, or Tower,
Where Piety, placed in her heavenly bower,
Points out the way to bliss, girt with a ring
Of all those Graces that may glory bring.
Here sits Religion firm, (though else where torn
By Schismatics, and made the Atheists scorn)
Shining in her pure truth, nor need she quake,
Affrighted with the Faggot and the stake:
she's to you dear, you unto her are tender,
Under the Sceptre of the Faith's defender.
How am I extasi'de when I behold
You build new Temples, and repair the old!
There's not a stone that's laid in such foundation,
But is a step degreeing to Salvation:
And not a Scaffold reared to that intent,
But mounts a Soul above the Firmament:
Of Merchants, we know Magistrates are made,
And they (of those) most happy that so Trade.
Your Virgin-Saint sits next Religion crowned,
With her own Handmaids (see) environed round,
And these are they the learned Schoolmen call,
The three prime Virtues Theological,
Faith, Hope, and Love; Zeal all inflamed with fire
Of devout acts, doth a sixt place aspire.
The seventh Humility, and we commend
The Eight to Constancy, which crowns the end.
A Triple crown's th'Emblazon of your Crest,
But to gain one, is to be ever blessed.
Proceed in that fair course you have begun,
So when your Annual Glass of State is run,
(Nay, that of Life) Ours, but the Gate to bliss
Shall let you in to yond Metropolis.
NOw bright Hyperion hath unloosed his Team,
And washed his Coach-Steeds in cold Ister's stream:
Day doth to Night give place, yet ere You sleep,
Remember what the Prophet of the Deep,
Proteus foretold: All such as State aspire,
Must be as Bulls, as Serpents, and like Fire.
The Shepherd grazing of his Flocks, displays
The use and profit from the Fleece we raise.
That Indian Beast, (had he a tongue to speak)
Would say, Suppress the proud, support the weak,
That Ship the Merchant's honour loudly tells,
And how all other Trades it antecells:
But Piety doth point You to that Star,
By which good Merchants steer: too bold we are
To keep you from your rest; To-morrows Sun
Will raise You to new cares, not yet begun.