NOw Philip Chabot, Admiral of France,
The great, and only famous Favourite
To Francis first of that Imperial name,
Hath found a fresh competitor in glory,
(Duke Montmorancie, Constable of France)
Who drinks as deep as he of the stream Royal,
And may in little time convert the strength
To raise his spring, and blow the others fall.
The world would wish it so, that will not patiently
Endure the due rise of a virtuous man.
If he be virtuous, what is the reason
That men affect him not, why is he lost
Tothth' general opinion, and become
Rather their hate than love?
I wonder you
Will question it, ask a ground or reason
Of men bred in this vile degenerate age;
The most men are not good, and it agrees not
With impious natures to allow what's honest,
'tis an offence enough to be exalted
To regal favours, great men are not safe
In their own vice, where good men by the hand
Of Kings are planted to survey their workings;
What man was ever fixed i'th' Sphere of honour,
And precious to his Sovereign, whose actions,
Nay very soul was not exposed to every
Common and base dissection? and not only
That which in Nature hath excuse, and in
Themselves is privileged by name of frailty,
But even Virtues are made crimes, and doomed
Tothth' fate of Treason.
A bad age the while,
I ask your pardon Sir, but thinks your judgement,
His love to Justice, and Corruptions hate
Are true and hearty?
judge yourself by this
One argument, his hearty truth to all,
For in the heart hath anger his wisest seat,
And 'gainst unjust suits such brave anger fires him,
That when they seek to pass his place and power,
Though moved, and urged by the other minion,
Or by his greatest friends, and even the King
Lead them to his allowance with his hand,
First given in Bill, assigned, even than his spirit,
(In nature calm as any Summer's evening)
Puts up his Whole powers like a Winter's sea,
His blood boils over, and his heart even cracks
At the injustice, and he tears the Bill,
And would do, were he for't to be torn in pieces.
'tis brave I swear.
Nay it is worthy your wonder
That I must tell you further, there no Needle
In a Sun Dial placed upon his steel
In such a tender posture, that doth tremble
The timely Dial being held amiss,
And will shake ever, till you hold it right
More tender than himself in any thing
That he concludes in justice for the State:
For as a fever held him, he will shake
When he is signing any things of weight,
Lest humane frailty should misguide his justice.
You have declared him a most noble justicer.
He truly weighs and feels Sir, what a charge
The subjects live are (being even their lives
Laid on the hand of power,) which abused
Though seen, blood flow not from the justice seat,
'tis in true sense as grievous, and horrid.
It argues nothing less, but since your Lord
Is diversely reported for his parts,
What's your true censure of his general worth,
Virtue and judgement.
As of a Picture wrought to optic reason,
That to all passers by, seems as they move
Now woman, now a Monster, now a Devil,
And till you stand, and in a right line view it,
You cannot well judge what the main form is,
So men that view him but in vulgar passes
Casting but lateral, or partial glances,
At what he is, suppose him weak, unjust,
Bloody, and monstrous, but stand free and fast,
And judge him by no more than what you know
Ingenuously, and by the right laid line
Of truth, he truly, will all styles deserve
Of wise, just, good, a man both soul and nerve.
Sir, I must join in just belief with you,
But what's his rival the Lord high Constable?
As just, and well inclined when he's himself,
(Not wrought on with the counsels, and opinions
Of other men) and the main difference is,
The Admiral is not flexible nor won
To move one scruple, when he comprehends
The honest tract and justness of a cause,
The Constable explores not so sincerely
The course he runs, but takes the mind of others
(By name judicial) for what his own
judgement, and knowledge should conclude.
A fault
In my apprehension, another's knowledge
Applied to my instruction, cannot equal
My own soul's knowledge, how to inform Acts;
The Sun's rich radiance shot through waves most fair,
Is but a shadow to his beams i'th' air,
His beams that in the air we so admire,
Is but a darkness to his flame in fire,
In fire his fervour but as vapour flies
To what his own pure bosom rarefies:
And the Almighty wisdom, having given
Each man within himself an apt light
To guide his acts, than any light without him
(Creating nothing not in all things equal)
It seems a fault in any that depend
On others knowledge, and exile their own.
'tis nobly argued, and exemplified,
But now I hear my Lord, and his young rival
Are to be reconciled, and then one light
May serve to guide them both.
I wish it may, the King being made first mover
To form their reconcilement, and inflame it
With all the sweetness of his praise and honour.
See, 'tis dispatched I hope, the King doth grace it.
This doth express the noblest fruit of peace.
Which when the great begin, the humble end
In joyful imitation, all combining
A guardian beyond the Thrigian knot
Past wit to lose it, or the sword, be still so.
'tis certain Sir, by concord least things grow
Most great, and flourishing like trees that wrap
Their forehead in the skies, may these do so.
You hear my Lord, all that is spoke contends
To celebrate with pious vote the atonement
So lately, and so nobly made between you.
Which for itself Sir, resolve to keep
Pure, and inviolable, needing none
To encourage or confirm it, but my own
Love and allegiance to your sacred counsel.
'tis good, and pleases, like my dearest health,
Stand you firm on that sweet simplicity.
Past all earth policy that would infringe it.
'tis well, and answers all the doubts suspected▪
And what moves this close message Philip?
My wife's Father Sir, is closely come to Court.
Is he come to the Court, whose aversation
So much affects him, that he shuns and flies it,
What's the strange reason that he will not rise
Above the middle region he was borne in?
He saith Sir, 'tis because the extreme of height
Makes a man less seem to the imperfect eye
Then he is truly, his acts envied more,
And though he nothing cares for seeming, so
His being just stand firm 'twixt heaven and him,
Yet since in his soul's jealousy, he fears
That he himself advanced, would undervalue
Men placed beneath him, and their business with him,
Since height of place oft dazzles height of judgement,
He takes his top▪ sail down in such rough storms,
And apts his sails to airs more temperate.
A most wise soul he has, how long shall Kings
Raise men that are not wise till they be high▪
You have our leave, but tell him Philip we
Would have him nearer.
Your desires attend you.
We know from whence you come, say to the Queen▪
We were coming to her, 'tis a day of love
And she seals all perfection.
My Lord,
We must beseech your stay.
My stay?
Our Counsels
Have led you thus far to your reconcilement,
And must remember you, to observe the end
At which in plain I told you then we aimed at,
You know we all urged the atonement, rather
To enforce the broader difference between you,
Then to conclude your friendship, which wise men
Know to be fashionable, and privileged policy▪
And will succeed betwixt you, and the Admiral
As sure as fate, if you please to get signed
A suit now to the King with all our hands,
Which will so much increase his precise justice,
That weighing not circumstances of politic State,
He will instantly oppose it, and complain,
And urge in passion, what the King will sooner
Punish than yield too, and so render you
In the King's frown on him, the only darling▪
And mediate power of France.
My good Lord Chancellor,
Shall I so late atoned, and by the King's
Hearty and earnest motion, fall in pieces?
'tis he, not you that break.
Ha' not you patience
To let him burn himself in the King's flame?
Come, be not Sir infected with a spice
Of that too servile equity, that renders
Men free borne slaves, and rid with bits like horses,
When you must know my Lord, that even in nature
A man is Animal politicum,
So that when he informs his actions simply
He does in both 'gainst policy and nature,
And therefore our soul motion is affirmed
To be like heavenly natures circular▪
And circles being called ambitious lines,
We must like them become ambitious ever,
And endless in our circumventions;
No tough hides limiting our cheverill minds.
'tis learnedly, and past all answer argued,
youare great, and must grow greater still, and greater,
And not be like a dull and standing lake,
That settles, putrifies, and chokes with mud,
But like a river gushing from the head,
That winds through the undervalles, what checks o'er flowing
Gets strength still of his course,
Till with the Ocean meeting, even with him
In sway, and title, his brave billows move.
You speak a rare affection, and high souls,
But give me leave great Lords, still my just thankes
Remembered▪ ●o your counsels and direction,
I seeking this way to confirm myself
I undermine the columns that support
My hopeful glorious fortune, and at once
Provoke the tempest▪ though did drown my envy,
With what assurance shall the King expect
My faith to him, that break it for another,
He has engaged our peace, and my revenge
Forfeits my trust with him, whose narrow ●ight
Will penetrate through all our mists, could we
Veil our design with clouds blacker than night;
But grant this danger over, with what justice,
Or satisfaction to the inward judge,
Shall I be guilty of this good man's ruin,
Though I may still the murmuring tongues without me,
Loud conscience has a voice to shadder greatness▪
A name to fright, and terrify young statists,
There is necessity my Lord, that you
Must lose your light, if you eclipse not him,
Two stars so Lucide cannot shine at once
In such a firmament, and better you
Extinguish his fires, then be made his fuel,
And in your ashes give his flame a Trophy.
My Lord, the league that you have vowed of friendship,
In a true understanding not confines you,
But makes you boundless, turn not edge at such
A liberty, but look to your own fortune;
Secure your honour, a Precisian,
In state, is a rideculous miracle
Friendship is but a visor, beneath which
A wise man laughs to see whole families
Ruined, upon whose miserable pile
He mounts to glory, Sir you must resolve
To use any advantage.
Misery
Of rising Statesmen I must on, I see
That 'gainst the politic, and privileged fashion,
All justice tastes but affectation.
Why so? we shall do good on him i'th' end.
You are most welcome.
I wish your Lordship's safety▪
Which whilst I pray for, I must not forget
To urge again the ways to fix you where
No danger has access to threaten you.
Still your old argument, I own your love for't.
But fortified with new and pregnant reasons,
That you should leave the Court.
I dare not Sir.
You dare be undone then.
I should be ingrateful
To such a master, as no subject boasted
To leave his service when they exact
My chiefest duty, and attendance Sir.
Would thou wert less degraded from thy titles,
And swelling offices, that will i'th' end
Engulfe thee past a rescue, I had not come
So far to trouble you at this time, but that
I do not like the loud tongues o'the world,
That say the King has ta'en another favourite,
The Constable a gay man, and a great,
With a hugh train of faction too, the Queen,
Chancellor, Treasurer, Secretary, and
An army of state warriors▪ whose discipline
Is sure, and subtle to confusion,
I hope the rumour's false, thou art so calm.
Report has not abused you Sir.
It has not,
And you are pleased, than you do mean to mix
With unjust courses, the great Constable
And you combining, that no suit may pass
One of the grapples of your either's rape,
I that abhorred, must I now entertain
A thought, that your so strait, and simple custom
To render justice, and the common good,
Should now be patched with policy, and wrested
From the ingenious step you took,
And hang
Upon the shoulders of your enemy
To bear you out in what you shame to act▪
Sir, We both are reconciled.
It follows then that both the acts must bear
Like reconcilement, and if he will now
Malign and malice you for crossing him
Or any of his faction in their suits,
Being now atoned, you must be one in all,
One in corruption, and 'twixt you two millstones
New picked, and put together, must the grain
Of good men's needful means to live, be ground
Into your choking superfluities;
You both too rich, they ruined.
I conceive Sir
We both may be enriched, and raise our fortunes
Even with our places in our Sovereign's favour:
Though past the height of others, yet within
The rules of Law and justice, and approve
Our actions white and innocent.
I doubt it
While enforced show perhaps, which will I fear
Prove in true substance but a Miller's whiteness,
More sticking in your clothes then conscience.
Your censure herein tastes some passion Sir,
And I beseech you nourish better thoughts,
Then to imagine that the King's mere grace
Sustains such prejudice by those it honours;
That of necessity we must pervert it
With passionate enemies, and ambitious boundless
Avarice, and every licence incident
To fortunate greatness, and that all abuse it
For the most impious avarice of some.
As if the total sum of favourites frailties
Affected not the full rule of their Kings
In their own partially disposed ambitions,
And that Kings do no hazard infinitely
In their free realties of rights and honours,
Where they leave much for favourites powers to order.
But we have such a master of our King
In the Imperial art, that no power flies
Out of his favour, but his policy ties
A criance to it, to contain it still;
And for the reconcilement of us Sir,
Never were two in favour, that were more,
One in all love of justice, and true honour,
Though in the act and prosecution
Pehaps we differ. Howsoever yet
One beam us both creating, what should let
That both our souls should both one mettle bear,
And that one stamp, one word, one character.
I could almost be won to be a Courtier,
There's some thing more in's composition,
Then ever yet was favourites.
What's he?
I bring your Lordship a signed bill, to ●ave
The addition of your honoured hand, the counsel
Have all before subscribed, and full prepared it.
It seems then they have weighed the importance of it,
And know the grant is just.
No doubt my Lord,
Or else they take therein the Constable's word,
It being his suit, and his power having wrought
The King already to appose his hand.
I do not like his working of the King,
For if it be a suit made known to him,
And fit to pass, he wrought himself to it,
However my hand goes to no such grant,
But first I'll know and censure it myself.
A he, if thou be'st goddess of contention▪
That Iove took by the hair, and hurled from heaven
Assume in earth thy empire, and this bill
Thy firebrand make to turn his love, thus tempted
Into a hate, as horrid as thy furies.
Does this bear title of his Lordship's suit?
It does my Lord, and therefore he beseeched
The rather your dispatch.
No thought the rather,
But now the rather all powers against it,
The suit being most injust, and he pretending
In all his actions justice, on the sudden
After his so late vow not to violate it,
Is strange and vile, and if the King himself
Should own and urge it, I would stay▪ and cross it,
For 'tis within the free power of my office,
And I should strain his kingdom if I passed it,
I see their poor attempts, and giddy malice;
Is this the reconcilement that so lately
He vowed in sacred witness of the King?
Assuring me, he never more would offer
To pass a suit unjust, which I well know
This is, above all, and have often been urged
To give it passage, be you Sir the Judge.
I wonot meddle
With any thing of state, you knew long since.
Yet you may hear it Sir.
You wonot urge
My opinion then, go to.
An honest merchant
Presuming on our league of France with Spain,
Brought into Spain a wealthy ship, to vent
Her fit commodities to serve the country,
Which, in the place of suffering their sail
Were seized to recompense a Spanish ship
Prized by a French man, ere the league was made,
No suits, no letters of our Kings could gain
Our merchants first right in it, but his letters
Vnreverently received, the King's self scandal,
Beside the leagues breach, and the foul injustice
Done to our honest merchant, who endured all,
Till some small time since (authorised by our counsel,
Though not in open Court▪) he made a ship out,
And took a Spaniard, brings all home, and sues
To gain his full proved loss, full recompense
Of his just prize, his prize is stayed and ceased,
Yet for the King's disposure, and the Spaniard
Makes suit to be restored her, which this bill
Would fain get granted, feigning (as they hoped)
With my allowance, and way given to make
Our Country man's in Spain their absolute prize.
I were absolute injustice.
Should I pass it.
Pass life, and state before.
If this would seem
His Lordship's suit, his love to me, and justice
Including plots upon me, while my simpleness
Is seriously vowed to reconcilement;
Love him good vulgars', and abhor me still,
For if I court your flattery with my crimes,
Heavens love before me fly, till in my tomb
I stick pursuing it, and for this bill,
Thus say 'twas shivered, bless us equal heaven!
This could I cherish, now above his loss,
You may report as much, the bill discharged Sir.
IS it end▪ so.
Good heaven how tame you are?
Do Kings of France reward foul Traitors thus?
No Traitor, y'are too loud▪ Chabots no Traitor,
He has the passions of a man about him,
And multiplicity of cares may make
Wise men forget themselves, come be you patiented.
Can you be so, and see yourself thus torn.
Ourself.
There is some left, if you dare own,
Your royal character, is not this your name?
'tis Francis I confess.
Be but a name
If this stain live upon't, affronted, by
Your subject, shall the sacred name of King,
A word to make your nation bow and tremble,
Be thus profaned, are laws established
To punish the defacers of your image,
But dully set by the rude hand of others
Upon your coin, and shall the character
That doth include the blessing of all France,
Your name, thus written by your royal hand
Designed for Justice, and your Kingdom's honour,
Not call up equal anger to reward it?
Your Counsellors of state contemned, and slighted
As in this brain more circumscribed all wisdom,
And policy of Empire, and your power,
Subordinate and subject to his passion.
Come, it concerns you not.
Is this the consequence
Of an atonement made so lately between▪
The hopeful Mountmorencie, and his Lordship
Urge by yourself with such a precious sanction;
Come, he that dares do this, wants not a heart,
But opportunity.
To do what?
To tear your crown off.
Come your language doth taste more
Of rage and womanish flame than solid reason
Against the Admiral, what commands of yours
Not to your expectation▪ obeyed
By him, is ground of your so keen displeasure?
Commands of mine? he is too great, and powerful
To stoop to my employment, a Colossus,
And can stride from one Province to another
By the assistance of those offices
You have most confidently imposed upon him,
'tis he, not you take up the people's eyes
And admiration, while his Princely wise.
Nay then I reach the spring of your distaste,
He has a wife,—
Whom for her pride I love not,
And I but in her husband's ruin
Can triumph o'er her greatness.
Well, well, I'll think on't?
He begins to incline,
Madam you are the soul of our great work.
I'll follow, and employ my powers upon him.
We are confident you will prevail at last,
And for the pious work oblige the King to you.
And us your humblest creatures.
Press no further.
Let's seek out my Lord Constable.
And inflame him.
To expostulate with Chabot, something may
Arise from thence,▪ to pull more weight upon him.
How sorts the business? how took the King
The tearing of his bill?
Exceeding well,
And seemed to smile at all their grim complaints,
'Gainst all that outrage to his highness' hand,
And said in plain, he signed it but to try
My Lords firm justice
What a sweet King 'tis?
But how his rival the Lord Constable
Is laboured by the Chancellor, and others to retort
His wrong with ten parts more upon my Lord,
Is monstrous?
Need he their spurs?
I Sir, for he's afraid
To bear himself too boldly in his braves
Upon the King (being newly entered Minion)
Since 'tis but patience sometime they think;
Because the favour spending in two streams,
One must run low at length, till when he dare
Take fire in such flame, as his faction wishes,
But with wise fear contains himself, and so
Like a green faggot in his kindling smokes,
And where the Chancellor his chief Cyclops finds
The fire within him apt to take, he blows,
And then the faggot flames, as never more
The bellowes needed, till the too soft greenness
Of his state habit, shows his sap still flows,
Above the solid timber, with which, than
His blaze shrinks head, he cools, and smokes again.
Good man he would be, would the bade not spoil him.
True sir, but they still ply him with their arts,
And as I heard have wrought him, personally
To question my Lord with all the bitterness
The galls of all their faction can pour in,
And such an expectation hangs upon't,
Though all the Court as 'ttwere with child, and longed
To make a mirror of my Lords clear blood,
And therein see the full ebb of his flood,
And therefore if you please to counsel him
You shall perform a father's part.
Nay since
he's gone so far, I would not have him fear
But dare 'em, and yet i'll not meddle in't.
Ho's here, if he have wit to like his cause,
His spirit wonot be ashamed to die in't.
My Lord retire, y'are waylaid in your walks,
Your friends are all fallen from you, all your servants
Suborned by all advantage to report
Each word you whisper out, and to serve you
With hat and knee, while other have their hearts.
Much profit may my foes make of such servants,
I love no enemy I have so well,
To take so ill a bargain from his hands.
Their other odds yet shun, all being combined,
And lodged in ambush arrived to do you mischief
By any means past fear of law, or sovereign.
I walk no desert, yet go armed with that,
That would give wildest beasts instincts to rescue,
Rather than offer any force to hurt me;
My innocence is, which is a conquering justice,
As wears a shield, that both defends and fights.
One against all the world.
The more the odds,
The less the conquest, or if all the world
Be thought an army fit to employ 'gainst one,
That one is argued fit to fight 'gainst all;
If I fall under them, this breast shall bear
Their heap digested in my sepulchre,
Death is the life of good men, let 'em come.
I thought my Lord our reconcilement perfect,
You have expressed what sea of gall flowed in you,
In tearing of the bill I sent to allow.
Dare you confess the sending of that bill.
Dare, why not?
Because it break your oath
Made in our reconcilement, and betrays
The honour, and the chief life of the King
Which is his justice.
Betrays?
No less, and that I'll prove to him.
You cannot.
I would not wish you offer at an action
So most impossibly, and much against
The judgement, and favour of the King.
His judgement nor his favour I respect,
So I preserve his justice.
'tis not justice,
Which I'll prove by law, and absolute learning.
All your great law, and learning are but words,
When I plead plainly, naked truth, and deeds,
Which though you seek to fray with state, and glory,
I'll shoot a shaft at all your globe of light,
If lightning split it, yet 'twas high and right.
Brave resolution so his acts be just,
He cares for gain not honour.
How came he then
By all his infinite honour and his gain?
Well said my Lord.
Answer but only that.
By doing justice still in all his actions.
But if this action prove unjust, will you
Say all his other may be so as well,
And think your own course fit far than his.
I will—
He cools, we must not leave him, we have no
Such engine to remove the Admiral.
I prithee Philip be not so severe
To him I favour, 'tis an argument
That may serve one day to avail yourself,
Nor Does it square with your so gentle nature,
To give such fires of envy to your blood;
For howsoever out of love to justice,
Your jealousy of that doth so incense you,
Yet they that censure it will say 'tis envy.
I serve not you for them, but for yourself,
And that good in your Rule, that justice does you,
And care not this what others say, so you
Please but to do me right for what you know.
You will not do yourself right, why should I
Exceed you to yourself?
Myself am nothing
Compared to what I seek, 'tis justice only
The fount and flood, both of your strength and kingdoms.
But who knows not, that extreme justice is
(by all ruled laws) the extreme of injury,
And must to you be so, the persons that
Your passionate heat calls into question
Are great, and many, and may wrong in you
Your rights of kind, and dignities of fortune,
And I advanced you not to heap on you
Honours, and fortunes, that by strong hand now
Held up, and over you, when heaven takes off
That powerful hand' should thunder on your head,
And after you crush your surviving seeds.
Sir, your regards to both are great, and sacred,
But if the innocence, and right that raised me
And means for mine, can find no friend hereafter
Of him that ever lives, and ever seconds
All King's just bounties with defence, and refuge
In just men's razes, let my fabric ruin,
My stock want sap, my branches by the root
Be ●orne to death, and swept with whirlwinds out.
For my love no relenting.
No my liege,
'tis for your love, and right that I stand out.
Be better yet advised.
I cannot Sir
Should any Oracle become my counsel,
For that I stand not out, thus of set will,
Or pride of any singular conceit,
My ennemmies, and the world may clearly know,
I taste no sweets to drown in others gall,
And to affect in that which makes me loathed,
To leave myself and mine exposed to all
The dangers you proposed, my purchased honours,
And all my fortunes in an instant lost,
That money, cares, and pains, and years have gathered,
How mad were I to rave thus in my wounds,
Unless my known health felt in these forced issues
Were sound, and fit, and that I did not know
By most true proofs, that to become sincere
With all men's hates, doth far excëede their loves,
To be as they are, mixtures of corruption?
And that those envies that I see pursue me
Of all true actions are the natural consequents
Which being my object, and my resolute choice
Not for my good but yours, I will have justice.
You will have justice, is your will so strong
Now against mine? your power being so weak
Before my favour gave them both their forces
Of all that ever shared in my free graces,
You Philip Chabot a mean Gentleman
Have not I-raised you to a supremest Lord,
And given you greater dignities than any?
You have so.
Well said, and to spur your dulinesse
With the particulars to which I raised you,
Have not I made you first a Knight of the Orders
Then Admiral of France, than Count Byzanges,
Lord, and Lieutenant general of all
My country, and command of Burgady;
Lieutenant general likewise of my son
Dauphin, and heir, and of all Normandy,
And of my chiefly honoured privy Counsel,
And cannot all these powers weigh down your will?
No Sir, they were not given me to that end,
But to uphold my will, my will being just.
And who shall judge that Justice, you or I?
I Sir, in this case your royal thoughts are fitly
Exempt from every curious search of one,
You have the general charge with care of all.
And do not generals include particulars?
May not I judge of any thing comprised
In your particular as well as you?
far be the misery from you, that you may,
My cares, pains, broken sleep therein made more
Than yours should make me see more, and my forces
Render of better judgement.
Well Sir, grant
Your force in this my odds in benefits
Paid for your pains, put in the other scale,
And any equal holder of the balance
Will show my merits hoist up yours to air
In rule of any doubt or deed betwixt us.
You merit not of me for benefits
More than myself of you for services.
Is't possible.
'tis true.
Stand you on that?
I to the death and will approve to all men.
I am deceived, but I shall find good Judges
That will find difference.
Find them being good.
Still so? what if conferring
My bounties, and your services to sound them,
We fall foul on some licences of yours,
Nay, give me therein some advantage of you.
They cannot.
Not in sisting their severe discharges
Of all your offices?
The more you sift
The more you shall refine me.
What if I
Grant out against you a commission
Joined with an extraordinary process
To arrest, and put you in laws hands for trial.
Not with laws uttermost.
I'll throw the dice.
And I'll endure the chance,
The dice being square.
Reposed in dreadless confidence, and conscience,
That all your most extremes shall never reach,
Or to my life, my goods or honours breach.
Was ever heard so fine a confidence?
Must it not prove presumption, and can that
Escape bracks and errors in your search of law,
I prithee weigh yet, with more soul than danger,
And some less passion.
Witness heaven, I cannot.
Were I dissolved, and nothing else but soul.
Be shrew my blood, but his resolves amaze me;
Was ever such a justice in a subject▪
Of so much office left to his own swinge
That left to law thus, and his Sovereign's wrath,
Can stand clear spite of both? let reason rule it
Before it come at law, a man so rare
In one thing cannot in the rest be vulgar,
And who sees you not in the broad highway
The common dust up in your own eyes, beating
In quest of riches, honours, offices,
As hearty in show as most believe,
And he that can use actions with the vulgar,
Must needs embrace the same effects & cannot inform him
Whatsoever he pretends, use them with such
Free equity, as fits one just and real▪
Even in the eyes of men, nor stand at all parts
So truly circular, so sound, and solid,
But have his swellings out, his cracks and crannies,
And therefore in this reason, before law
Take you to her, lest you affect and flatter
Yourself with mad opinions.
I were mad
Directly Sir, if I were yet to know
Not the sure danger, but the certain ruin
Of men shot into law from Kings bend brow,
There being no dream from the most muddy brain
Upon the foulest fancy, that can forge
More horror in the shadows of mere fame,
Then can some Lawyer in a man exposed
To his interpretation by the King,
But these grave toys I shall despise in death,
And while I live will lay them open so
(My innocence laid by them) that like foils
They shall stick of my merits ten times more,
And make your bounties nothing, for who gives
And hits i'th' teeth, himself pays with the glory
For which he gave, as being his end of giving,
Not to crown merits, or do any good,
And so no thankes is due but to his glory.
'tis brave I swear.
No Sir, 'tis plain, and rude
But true, and spotless, and where you object
My hearty, and gross vulgar love of riches,
Titles, and honours, I did never seek them
For any love to them, but to that justice
You ought to use in their due gift to merits,
To show you royal, and most open handed,
Not using for hands talons, pincers, grapples;
In whose gripes, and upon whose gored point,
Deserts hang sprawling out their virtuous limbs,
Better and better.
This your glory is
My deserts wrought upon no wretched matter,
But showed your royal palms as free, and moist,
As Ida, all enchased with silver springs,
And yet my merit still their equal sings.
Sing till thou sigh thy soul out hence, and leave us.
My person shall, my love and faith shall never.
Perish thy love, and faith, and thee for ever;
Whos's there?
Let one go for the Chancellor.
He's here in Court Sir.
Haste and send him hither,
This is an insolence I never met with,
Can one so high as his degrees ascend,
Climb all so free, and without stain?
My Lord
Chancellor, I send for you about a service
Of equal price to me, as if again
My ransom came to me from Pavian thraldom,
And more, as if from forth a subject's fetters,
The worst of servitudes my life were rescued.
You fright me with a Prologue of much trouble▪
Me thinks it might be, tell me out of all
Your famous learning, was there ever subject
Raised by his Sovereign's free hand from the dust,
Up to a height above Airs upper region,
That might compare with him in any merit
That so advanced him? and not show in that
Gross overweening worthy cause to think
There might be other oversights excepted
Of capital nature in his sifted greatness.
And past question Sir, for one absurd thing granted,
A thousand follow.
You must then employ
Your most exact, and curious art to explore
A man in place of greatest trust, and charge,
Whom I suspect to have abused them all,
And in whom you may give such proud veins vent,
As will bewray their boiling blood corrupted
Both 'gainst my crown and life.
And may my life
Be crust in every act,
If I explore him not to every finer.
It is my Admiral.
Oh my good Liege
You tempt, not charge me with such search of him.
Doubt not my heartiest meaning, all the troubles
That ever moved in a distracted King,
Put in just fear of his assaulted life
Are not above my sufferings for Chabot.
Then I am glad, and proud that I can cure you,
For he's a man that I am studied in,
And all his offices, and if you please
To give authority.
You shall not want it.
If I discharge you not of that disease,
About your neck grown, by your strange trust in him,
With full discovery of the foulest treasons.
But I must have all proved with that free justice.
Beseech your Majesty do not question it.
About it instantly, and take me wholly
Upon yourself.
How much you grace your servant?
Let it be fiery quick.
It shall have wings,
And every feather show the slight of Kings.
ANd have they put my faithful servant to the rack,
Heaven arm the honest man.
Allegre feels the malice of the Chancellor.
Many upon the torture have confessed
Things against truth, and yet his pain sits nearer
Than all my other fears, come don't weep.
My Lord, I do not grieve out of a thought,
Or poor suspicion, they with all their malice
Can stain your honour, but it troubles me,
The King should grant this licence to your enemies,
As he were willing to hear Chabot guilty.
No more, the King is just, and by exposing me
To this trial, means to render me
More happy to his subjects, and himself
His sacred will be obeyed, take thy own spirit,
And let no thought in fringe thy peace for me,
I go to have my honours all confirmed;
Farewell thy lip, my cause has so much innocence,
It sha'not need thy prayer, I leave her yours
Till my return; oh let me be a son
Still in your thoughts, now Gentlemen set forward.
See you that trust in greatness, what sustains you,
These hazards you must look for, you that thrust
Your heads into a cloud, where lie in ambush
The soldiers of state in privy arms
Of yellow fire jealous, and mad at all
That shoot their foreheads up into their forges,
And pry into their gloomy Cabinets;
You like vain Citizens that must go see
Those ever burning furnaces, wherein
Your brittle glasses of estate are blown;
Who knows not you are all but puff, and bubble
Of breath, and fume forged, your vile brittle natures
Cause of your dearness? were you tough and lasting,
You would be cheap, and not worth half your face,
Now daughter Planet strooke.
I am considering
What form I shall put on, as best agreeing
With my Lord's fortune.
Habit do you mean,
Of mind or body?
Both would be appareled.
In neither you have reason yet to mourn.
I'll not accuse my heart of so much weakness▪
'tTwere a confession 'gainst my Lord. The Queen!
She has expressed 'gainst me some displeasure.
Let's this way through the Gallery.
'tis she,
Do you my Lord say I wot speak with her?
And has Allegre, one of chiefest trust with him
Suffered the rack▪ the Chancellor is violent;
And what's confessed?
Nothing, he contemned all
That could with any cruelest pain explore him,
As if his mind▪ had robbed his nerves of sense,
And through them diffused fiery spirits above
All flesh and blood; for as his limbs were stretched,
His contempts too extended.
A strange fortitude▪
But we shall lose th' arraignment.
The success
Will soon arrive.
You'll not appear, my Lord then?
I desire
Your Lordship would excuse me.
We are your servants.
She attends you Madam.
This humbleness proceeds not from your heart,
Why, you are a Queen yourself in your own thoughts,
The Admiral's wife of France cannot be less,
You have not state enough, you should not move
Without a train of friends and servants.
There is some mystery
Within your language Madam, I would hope
You have more charity than to imagine
My present condition worth your triumph,
In which I am not so lost, but I have
Some friends and servants with proportion
To my Lord's fortune, but none within the list
Of those that obey me can be more ready
To express their duties, than my heart to serve
Your just commands.
Then pride will ebb I see,
There is no constant flood of state, and greatness,
The prodigy is ceasing when your Lord
Comes to the balance, he whose blazing fires,
Shot wonders through the Kingdom, will discover
What flying and corrupted matter said him.
My Lord?
Your high and mighty Justicer,
The man of conscience, the Oracle
Of State, whose honourable titles
Would crack an Elephants back, is now turned mortal,
Must pass examination, and the test
Of Law, have all his offices rip'd up,
And his corrupt soul laid open to the subjects,
His bribes, oppressions, and close sins that made
So many groan, and curse him, now shall find
Their just reward, and all that love their country,
Bless heaven, and the King's justice, for removing
Such a devouring monster.
Sir your pardon
Madam you are the Queen, she is my daughter,
And he that you have charactered so monstrous,
My son in Law, now gone to be arraigned,
The King is just, and a good man, but't does not
Add to the graces of your royal person
To tread upon a Lady thus dejected
By her own grief, her Lord's not yet found guilty,
Much less condemned, though you have pleased to execute him.
What saucy fellow's this?
I must confess
I am a man out of this element
No Courtier, yet I am a gentleman
That dare speak honest truth to the Queen's care,
(A duty every subject wonot pay you)
And justify it to all the world, there's nothing
Doth more eclipse the honours of our soul,
Than an ill grounded, and ill followed passion,
Let sly with noise, and licence against those▪
Whose hearts before are bleeding.
Brave old man.
Cause▪ you are a Queen to trample over a woman,
tongue and faculties are all tied up,
out a Lion's teeth, and pair his claws,
And then a dwarf may pluck him by the beard,
'tis a gay victory.
Did you hëare my Lord?
I ha' done.
And it concerns me to begin,
I have not made this pause through servile fear
Or guilty apprehension of your rage,
But with just wonder of the heats, and wildness
Has prepossessed your nature 'gainst our innocence,
You are my Queen, unto that title bows
The humblest knee in France, my heart made lower
With my obedience, and prostrate duty,
Nor have I powers created for my use,
When just commands of you expect their service;
But were you Queen of all the world, or something
To be thought greater, betwixt heaven and us
That I could reach you with my eyes and voice,
I would shoot both up in defence of my
Abused honour, and stand all your lightning.
So brave.
So just and boldly innocent,
I cannot fear armed with a noble conscience
The tempest of your frown, were it more frightful
Than every fury made a woman's anger,
Prepared to kill with deaths most horrid ceremony,
Yet with what freedom of my soul I can
Forgive your accusation of my pride.
Forgive? what insolence is like this language?
Can any action of ours be capable
Of thy forgiveness? dust! how I despise thee?
Can we sinne to be object of thy mercy?
Yes, and have doubt already, and no stain
To your greatness Madam, 'tis my charity
I can remit, when sovereign Princes dare
Do injury to those that live beneath them,
They turn worth pity, and their prayers, and 'tis
In the free power of those whom they oppress
To pardon 'em, each soul has a prerogative,
And privilege royal that was signed by heaven,
But though i'th' knowledge of my disposition
Stranger to pride, and what you charge me with,
I can forgive the injustice done to me,
And striking at my person, I have no
Commission from my Lord to clear you for
The wrongs you have done him, and still he pardon
The wounding of his loyalty, with which life
Can hold no balance, I must talk just boldness
To say—
No more, now I must tell you daughter
Lest you forget yourself, she is the Queen,
And it becomes not you to vie with her
Passion for passion, if your Lord stand fast
To the full search of Law, Heaven will revenge him,
And give him up precious to good men's loves
If you attempt by these unruly ways
To vindicate his justice, I me against you,
Dear as I wish your husband's life and fame,
Suffer are bound to suffer, not contest
With Princes, since their Will and Acts must be
Accounted one day to a Judge supreme.
I ha' done, if the devotion to my Lord,
Or piety to his innocence have led me
Beyond the awful limits to be observed
By one so much beneath your sacred person,
I thus low crave your royal pardon Madam;
I know you will remember in your goodness,
My life blood is concerned while his least vein
Shall run black and polluted, my heart fed
With what keeps him alive, nor can there be
A greater wound than that which strikes the life
Of our good name, so much above the bleeding
Of this rude pile we carry, as the soul
Hath excellence above this earthborn frailty:
My Lord, by the Kings will is lead already
To a severe arraignment, and to judges,
Will make no tender search into his tract
Of life and state, stay but a little while,
And France shall ●●●ho to his shame or innocence,
This suit I beg with tears, I shall have sorrow
Enough to hear him censured foul and monstrous,
Should you forbear to antedate my sufferings.
Your conscience comes about, and you incline
To fear he may be worth the laws condemning.
I sooner will suspect the stars may lose
Their way, and crystal heaven return to Chaos;
Truth ●its not on her square more firm than he;
Yet let me tell you Madam, were his life
And action so foul as you have charactered,
And the bad world expects, though as a wife
'tTwere duty I should weep myself to death,
To know him fall'n from virtue, yet so much
I a frail woman love my King and Country,
I should condemn him too, and thinke all honours
The price of his lost faith more fatal to me,
Than Cleopatra's asps warm in my bosom,
And as much boast their kill.
This declares
Another soul than was delivered me,
My anger melts, and I begin to pity her,
How much a Prince's ear may be abused?
Enjoy your happy confidence, at more leisure
You may hear from us.
Heaven preserve the Queen,
And may her heart be charitable.
You bless and honour your unworthy servant.
My Lord, did you observe this?
Yes great Madam,
And read a noble spirit, which becomes
The wife of Chabot, their great tie of marriage
I● not more strong upon 'em, than their virtues.
That your opinion? I thought your judgement
Against the Admiral, do you think him honest?
Religiously, a true, most zealous Patrior,
And worth all royal favour.
You amaze me,
Can you be just yourself then, and advance
Your powers against him?
Such a will be far
From Montmoranzie, pioneers of state
Have left no art to gain me to their faction,
And 'tis my misery to be placed in such
A sphere where I am whirled by violence
Of a fierce raging motion, and not what
My own will would incline me. I shall make
This appear Madam, if you please to second
My free speech with the King.
Good heaven protect all,
Haste to the King, justice her swift wing needs,
'tis high time to be good, when virtue bleeds.
Good Mr. Proctor general begin.
It is not unknown to you my very good Lords the judges, and indeed to all the world, for I will make short work, since your honourable ears need not to be enlarged, I speak by a figure with prolix ennumeration how infinitely the King hath favoured this ill favoured Traitor; and yet I may worthily too insist and prove that no grace hath been so large and voluminous, as this, that he hath appointed such upright judges at this time, and the chief of this Triumvirie, our Chancellor by name Poyet, which deriveth from the Greek his Etymology from Poyeni, which is to make, to create, to invent matter that was never extant in nature, from whence also is the name and dignity of Poeta, which I will not insist upon, in this place, although I am confident his Lordship wanteth no faculty in making of Verses: but what addition I say is it to the honour of this Delinquent, that he hath such a judge, a man so learned, so full of equity, so noble, so notable in the progress of his life, so innocent, in the manage of his office so incorrupt; in the passages of State so wise, in affection to his country so religious, in all his services to the King so fortunate, and exploring, as envy itself cannot accuse, or malice vitiate, whom all lips will open to commend, but those of Philip; and in their hearts will erect Altars, and Statues, Columns, and Obelishes, Pillars and Pyramids, to the perpetuity of his name and memory. What shall I say ● but conclude for his so great and sacred service, both to our King and Kingdom, and for their everlasting benefit, there may everlastingly be left here one of his loins, one of his loins ever remain I say, and stay upon this Bench, to be the example of all justice, even while the North and South Star shall continue.
You express your Oratory Mr. Proctor,
I ray come presently to the matter.
Thus with your Lordship's pardon, I proceed; and the first thing I shall glance at, will be worth your Lordship's reflection, his ingratitude, and to whom? to no less person than a King, and to what King, his own, and our general Sovereign Proh deum atque hominum fidem; a King, and such a King, the health, life, and soul of us all, whose very mention draws this salt water from my eyes; for he indeed is our eye, who wakes and watches for us when we sleep, and who will not sleep for him, I mean not sleep, which the Philosophers call, a natural cessation of the common and consequently▪ of all the exterior senses, caused first and immediately by a detension of spirits, which can have no communication, since the way is obstructed, by which these spirits should commearce, by vapours ascending from the stomach to the head, by which evaporation the roots of the nerves are filled, through which the annual spirits, to be poured into the dwellings of the external senses; but sleep I taken for death, which all know to be Vltima linea, who will not sleep eternally for such a King as we enjoy? If therefore in general as he is King of us all, all sharing and dividing the benefits of this our Sovereign: none should be so ingrateful as once to murmur against him, what shall be said of the ingratitude more monstrous in this Chabot, for our Francis hath loved, not in general in the crowd with other subjects, but particularly this Philip advanced him to the supreme dignity of a Statsman, lodged him in his very heart, yet Monstrum horrendum; even to this Francis hath Philip been ingrateful. Brutus the loved son hath stabbed Caesar with a Bodkin: Oh what brute may be compared to him? and in what particulars may this crime be exemplified; he hath, as we say, chopped Logic with the King, nay to the very teeth of his Sovereign advance his own Gnat-like merits, and justified with Luciferous pride, that his services have deserved more than all the bounty of our Munificent King hath paid him.
Observe that my Lords.
Nay he hath gone further, and most traitaerously hath committed outrage and impiety to the Kings own hand, and royal character, which presented to him in a bill from the whole counsel, he most violently did tear in pieces, and will do the very body and person of your King, if our Justice make no timely prevention, and strike out the Serpentine teeth of the high and more than horrible monster.
This was enforced home.
In the next place I will relate to your honours his most cruel exactions upon the subject, the old vantcurriers of rebellions. In the year 15. 6. and 37. This oppressor, and this extortioner, under pretext of his due taxation, being Admiral imposed upon certain Fishermen, (observe I beseech you the circumstance of their persons, Fishermen) who poor Iohns were embarked upon the cost of Normandy, and fishing there for Herrings (which some say is the king of Fishes) he imposed I say twenty sauce, and upon every boat six livers, oh intolerable exaction! enough not only to alienate the hearts of these miserable people from their King, which Ipso facto is high treason, but an occasion of a greater inconvenience, for want of due provision of fish among the subjects, for by this might ensue a necessity of mortal sins, by breaking the religious fast upon Vigils, Embers, and other days commanded by sacred authority, besides the miserable rut that would follow, and perhaps contagion, when feasting and flesh should be licenced for every carnal appetite.— I could urge many more particulars of his dangerous insatiate and boundless Avarice, but the improvement of his estate in so few years, from a private Gentleman's fortune, to a great Duke's revenues, might save our sovereign therein an Orator to enforce and prove faulty even to gyantisme against heaven.
This is but a noise of words.
To the foul outrages so violent, let us add his Commissions granted out of his own presumed authority, his Majesty neither infround or respected his disloyalties, infidelities, contempts, oppressions, extortions, with innumerable abuses, offences, and forfeits, both to his Majesty's most royal person, crown, and dignity, yet notwithstanding all these injustices, this unmatchable, unjust delinquent affecteth to be thought inculpable, and incomparable just; but alas my most learned Lord, none knows better than yourselves, how easy the sincerity of justice is pretended, how hard it is to be performed, and how common it is for him that hath least colour of title to it, to be thought the very substance and soul of it, he that was never true scholar in the least degree, longs as a woman with child to be great with scholar she that was never with child longs Omnibus vijs modis to be got with child, and will wear a cushion to seem with child, and he that was never just, will fly in the King's face to be counted just, though for all he be nothing, but just, a Traitor.
The Admiral smiles.
Answer yourself my Lord.
I shall, and briefly,
The furious eloquence of my accuser hath
Branched my offences heinous to the King,
And then his subject, a most vast indictment,
That to the King I have justified my merit,
And services; which conscience of that truth,
That gave my actions life when they are questioned,
I ought to urge again, and do without
The least part of injustice; for the Bill
A foul, and most unjust one, and preferred
'Gainst the King's honour, and his subjects privilege,
And with a policy to betray my office,
And faith to both, I do confess I tore it,
It being pressed immodestly, but without
A thought of disobedience to his name,
To whose mention I bow, with humble reverence,
And dare appeal to the King's knowledge of me,
How far I am in soul from such a rebel,
For the rest my Lord, and you my honoured judges,
Since all this mountain all this time in labour
With more than mortal fury 'gainst my life,
Hath brought forth nought but some ridiculous vermin,
I will not wrong my right, and innocence,
With any serious plea in my reply,
To frustrate breath, and fight with terrible shadow
That have been forged, and forced against my state,
But leave all, with my life to your free censures;
Only beseeching all your learned judgements
Equal and pious conscience to weigh.
And how this great and mighty fortune hath exalted him to pride is apparent, not only in his braves and bearing to the King, the fountain of all this increase, but in his contempt and scorn of the subject, his vast expenses in buildings, his private bounties, above royal to soldiers and scholars, that he may be the General and Patron, and protector of arms and arts; the number of domestic attendants, an army of Grasshoppers and gay Butterflies able to devour the Spring; his glorious wardrobes, his stable of horses that are pricked with provender, and will enforce us to weed up our Vineyards to sow Oats for supply of their provision, his caroches shining with gold, and more bright than the chariot of the Sun, wearing out the pavements; nay, he is of late so transcendently proud, that men must be his Mules, and carry him up and down as it were in a Procession for men to gaze at him till their chines cracks with the weight of his insupportable pride, and who knows but this may prove a fashion? But who groans for this? the subject, who murmur, and are ready to begin a rebellion, but the tumultuous sailors, and water-rats, who ton up and down the city, like an over-bearing tempest, cursing the Admiral, who in duty ought to undo himself for the general satisfaction of his countrymen.
The variety, and wonder now presented
To your most noble notice, and the worlds,
That all my life and actions, and offices,
Explored with all the hundred eyes of Law
Lighted with lightning, shot out of the wrath
Of an incensed, and commanding King,
And blown with foes, with far more bitter winds,
Then Winter from his Eastern cave exhailes,
Yeh nothing found, but what you all have heard,
And then consider if a peer of State,
Should be exposed to such a wild arraignment
For poor complaints, his fame, faith, life, and honours
Racked for no more.
No more? good heaven, what say
My learned assistants.
My Lord, the crimes urged here for us to censure
As capital, and worth this high arraignment
To me seem strange, because they do not fall
In force of Law, to arraign a Peer of State,
For all that Law can take into her power
To sentence, is the exaction of the Fishermen.
Here is no majesty violated, I consent to what my Brother has expressed.
Break then in wonder,
My frighted words out of their forming powers,
That you no more collect, from all these forfeits
That Mr. Proctor general hath opened,
With so apparent, and impulsive learning,
Against the rage and madness of the offender,
And violate Majesty (my learned assistants)
When Majesties affronted and defied,
It being compared with? and in such an onset
As leapt into his throat? his life affrighting?
Be justified in all insolence, all subjects
If this be so considered, and insult
Upon your privileged malice, is not Majesty
Poisoned in this wonder! and no felony set
Where royalty is robbed, and
Fie how it fights with Law, and grates upon
Her brain and soul, and all the powers of Reason,
Reporter of the process, show the sedule.
Here my good Lord.
1. No altering it in us.
2. far be it from us Sir.
Here's silken justice,
It might be altered, mend your sentences.
Not we my Lord.
Not you? The King shall know
You slight a duty to his will, and safety,
Give me your pen, it must be capital.
1. Make what you please my Lord, our doom shall stand.
Thus I subscribe, now at your perils follow.
Perils my Lord? threats in the King's free justice?
I am amazed they can be so remiss.
Merciful men, pitiful judges certain.
1. Subscribe, it matters nothing being constrained
On this side, and on this side, this capital I,
Both which together put, import plain Vi;
And witness we are forced.
2. Enough,
It will acquit us when we make it known,
Our names are forced.
If traitorous pride
Upon the royal person of a King
Were sentenced unfelloniously before,
I'll burn my Books and be a judge no more.
Here are our hands subscribed.
Why so, it joys me,
You have reformed your justice and your judgement,
Now have you done like judges and learned Lawyers,
The King shall thank, and honour you for this.
Notary read.
We by his sacred Majesty appointed
Judges, upon due trial, and examination
Of Philip Chabot Admiral of France
Declare him guilty of high treasons, etc.
Now Captain of the guard, secure his person,
Till the King signify
His pleasure for his death, this day is happy
To France, thus rescued from the vile devourer.
Hark how the votes applaud their blessed deliverance,
You that so late did right and conscience boast,
Heaven's mercy now implore, the Kings is lost.
YOu raise my thoughts to wonder, that you Madam,
And you my Lord, unite your force to plead
Ith' Admiral's behalf, this is not that
Language you did express, when the torn Bill
Was late pretended to us, it was then
Defiance to our high prerogative,
The act of him whose proud heart would rebel
And armed with faction, too soon attempt
To tear my crown off.
I was ignorant
Then of his worth, and heard but the report
Of his accusers, and his enemies,
Who never mention in his character
Shadows of any virtue in those men,
They would depress like Crows, and carrion birds,
They sly o'er flowrie Meads, clear Springs, fair Gardens,
And stoop at carcases; for your own honour
Pity poor Chabot.
Poor and a Colossus?
What could so lately straddle o'er a Province,
Can he be fallen so low, and miserable,
To want my pity, who breaks forth like day,
Takes up all people's eyes, and admiration?
It cannot be, he hath a Princely wife too.
I interpose not often Sir, or press you
With unbecoming importunity,
To serve the profitable ends of others
Conscience, and duty to yourself enforce
My present mediation, you have given
The health of your own state away, unless
Wisdom in time recover him.
If he prove
No adulterate gold, trial confirms his value.
Although it hold in mettle gracious Sir,
Such fiery examination, and the furnace
May waste a heart that's faithful, and together
With that you call the feces, something of
The precious substance may be hazarded.
Why, you are the chief engine raised against him,
And in the world's Creed labour most to sink him,
That in his fall, and absence every beam
May shine on you, and only gild your fortune,
Your difference is the ground of his arraignment,
Nor were we unsollicited by you,
To have your bill confirmed, from that that spring
Came all these mighty and impetuous waves,
With which he now must wrestle, if the strength
Of his own innocence can break the storm,
Truth wonot lose her servant, her wings cover him,
He must obey his fate.
I would not have
It lie upon my fame, that I should be
Mentioned in Story his unjust supplanter
For your whole Kingdom, I have been abused,
And made believe my suit was just and necessary,
My walks have not been safe, my closet prayers,
But some plot has pursued me, by some great ones
Against your noble Admiral, they have frighted
My fancy into my dreams with their close whispers,
How to uncement your affections,
And render him the fable, and the scorn
Of France.
Brave Montmorancie.
Are you serious.
Have I a soul? or gratitude, to acknowledge
Myself your creature, dignified and honoured
By your high favours with an equal truth,
I must declare the justice of your Admiral
(In what my thoughts are conscious) and will rather
Give up my claim to birth, title, and offices,
Be thrown from your warm smile, the top and crown
Of subjects happiness, then be bribed with all
Their glories to the guilt of Chabots' ruin.
Come, come, you over act this passion,
And if it be not policy it tastes
Too green, and wants some counsel to mature it,
His fall prepares your triumph.
It confirms
My shame alive, and buried will corrupt
My very dust, make our house-genious groan,
And fright the honest marble from my ashes:
His fall prepare my triumph? turn me first
A naked exile to the world.
No more,
Take heed you banish not yourself, be wise,
And let not too much zeal devour your reason,
Your Admiral
Is condemned Sir?
Ha'? strange! no matter,
Leave us, a great man I see may be
As soon dispatched, as a common subject▪
No mercy then for Chabot.
From whence came
That sound of Chabot? then we are all undone:
Oh do not hear the Queen, she is no friend
To my poor Lord, but made against his life,
Which hath too many enemies already.
Poor soul, she thinks the Queen is still against him,
Who employeth all her powers to preserve him.
Say you so my Lord? daughter the Queen's our friend.
Why do you mock my sorrow! can you flatter
Your own grief so, be just, and hear me sir,
And do not sacrifice a subjects blood
To appease a wrathful Queen, let mercy shine
Upon your brow, and heaven will pay it back
Upon your soul, be deaf to all her prayers.
Poor heart, she knows not what she has desired.
I beg my Chabots life, my sorrows yet
Have not destroyed my reason.
He is in the power of my Laws, not mine.
Then you have no power,
And are but the empty shadow of a King,
To whom is it resigned? where shall I beg
The forfeit life of one condemned by Laws
To partial doom?
You hear he is condemned then?
My son is condemned fit.
You know for what too.
What the judges please to call it,
But they have given to a name, Treason they say.
I must not be denied.
I must deny you.
Be●lest for ever for't.
Grant then to her.
Chabot condemned by law?
But you have power
To change the rigour, in ●our breast there is
A Chancellor above it, I ne'er had
A suit before, but my knees join with hers
To implore your royal mercy to her Lord,
And take his cause to your examination,
It cannot wrong your judges, if they have
Been steered by conscience.
It will fame your justice.
I cannot be prescribed, you kneel in vain,
You labour to betray me with your tears
To a treason above his, 'gainst my own Laws,
Look to the Lady—
Sir the Chancellor.
Admit him, leave us all.
How now my Lord?
You have lost no time, and how thrive the proceed.
'twas sit my gracious Sovereign, time should leave
His motion made in all affairs beside,
And spend his wings only in speed of this.
You have showed diligence, and what's become
Of our most curious justicer, the Admiral?
Condemned sir utterly, and all hands set
To his conviction.
And for faults most foul?
More than most impious, but the applausive issue
Struck by the concourse of your ravished subjects
For joy of your free justice, if there were
No other cause to assure the sentence just
Were proof convincing.
Now than he sees clearly
That men perceive how vain his justice was,
And scorn him for the foolish net he wore
To hide his nakedness; is't not a wonder
That men's ambitions should so blind their reason
To affect shapes of honesty, and take pride
Rather in seeming, then in being just.
Seeming has better fortune to attend it
Then being sound at heart, and virtuous.
Profess all? nothing do, like those that live
By looking to the Lamps of holy Temples,
Who still are busy taking off their snuffs,
But for their profit sake will add no oil;
So these will check and sentence every fame,
The blaze of riotous blood doth cast in others,
And in themselves leave the sum most offensive,
But he to do this? more deceives my judgement
Than all the rest whose nature I have sounded.
I know Sir, and have proved it.
Well my Lord
To omit circumstance, I highly thank you
For this late service you have done me here,
Which is so great and meritorious
That with my ablest power I scarce can quit you.
Your sole acceptance (my dread sovereign)
I more rejoice in, than in all the fortunes
That ever chanced me, but when may it please
Your Highness to order the execution?
The haste thus far hath spared no pinions.
No my Lord, your care
Hath therein much deserved.
But where proportion
Is kept toth' end in things, at start so happy
That end set on the crown.
I'll speed it therefore.
Your thoughts direct it, they are winged.
I joy this boldness is condemned, that I may pardon,
And therein get some ground in his opinion
By so much bounty as save his life,
And me thinks that weighed more, should sway the balance
Twixt me and him, held by his own free justice,
For I could never find him obstinate
In any mind he held, when once he saw
Th' error with which he laboured, and since now
He needs must feel it, I admit no doubt,
But that his alteration will beget
Another sense of things 'twixt him and me;
Whos's there?
Go to the Captain of my guard, and will him
To attend his condemned prisoner to me instantly.
I shall sir
My Lords, you were spectators of our Admiral.
And hearers too of his most just conviction,
In which we witnessed over-weight enough
In your great bounties, and as they there were weighed
With all the feathers of his boasted merits.
Has felt a scorching trial, and the test
(That holds fires utmost force) we must give metals
That will not with the hammer, and the melting
Confess their truth, and this same sense of feeling
(Being ground to all the senses) hath one key
More than the rest to let in through them all
The minds true apprehension, that thence takes
Her first conveyed intelligence. I long
To see this man of confidence again:
How think you Lords, will Chabot look on me,
Now spoiled of the integrity, he boasted?
It were too much honour to vouchsafe your sight.
No doubt my Leigh, but he that hath offended
In such a height against your crown and person,
Will want no impudence to look upon you.
Sir, I had charge given me by this Gentleman
To bring your condemned prisoner to your presence.
You have done well, and tell the Queen, and our
Lord Constable we desire their presence, bid
Our Admiral's Lady, and her father too
Attend us here, they are but new withdrawn.
I shall sir!
Do you deserve this confidence?
He stands as all his trial were a dream.
He'll find the horror waking the King's troubled;
Now for ● thunder-clap: the Queen and Constable.
I do not like their mixture.
My Lord Admiral,
You made it your desire to have this trial
That late hath passed upon you;
And now you feel how vain is too much faith
And flattery of yourself, as if your breast
Were proof 'gainst all invasion, 'tis so slight
You see it let's in death, what's past, hath been
To satisfy your insolence, there remains
That now we serve our own free pleasure, therefore
By that most absolute power, with which all right
Puts in my hands, these issues turns, and changes,
I here in ear of all these, pardon all
Your faults and forfeits, whatsoever sensured,
Again advancing, and establishing
Your person in all fullness of that state
That ever you enjoyed before th' attainder▪
Wonderful, pardoned!
Heaven preserve the King.
Who for this will deserve all time to honour him.
And live King's best example.
Son youare pardoned,
Be sure you look hereafter well about you.
Vouchsafe great Sir to assure me what you said,
You named my pardon.
And again declare it,
For all crimes past, of what nature soever.
You cannot pardon me Sir.
How's that Philip?
It is a word carries too much relation
To an offence, of which I am not guilty,
And I must still be bold where truth still arms,
In spite of all those frowns that would deject me
To say I need no pardon.
Ha', how's this?
he's mad with overjoy, and answers nonsense.
Why, tell me Chabot, are not you condemned?
Yes, and that justifies me much the more,
For whatsoever false report hath brought you,
I was condemned for nothing that could reach
To prejudice my life, my goods or honour,
As first in firmness of my conscience,
I confidently told you, not alas
Presuming on your slender thread of favour,
Or pride of fortunate and courtly boldness,
But what my faith and justice bade me trust too,
For none of all your learned assistant Judges,
With all the malice of my crimes could urge,
Or felony or hurt of sacred power.
Do any hear this, but myself? My Lords,
This man still justifies his innocence,
What prodigies are these? have not our Laws
Past on his actions, have not equal judges
Certified his arraignment, and him guilty
Of capital Treason? and yet do I hear
Chabot accuse all these, and quit himself.
It does appear distraction sir.
Did we
Seem so indulgent to propose our free
And royal pardon without suit or prayer,
To meet with his contempt?
Vnhea●'d of impudence!
I were malicious to myself, and desperate
To force untruths upon my soul, and when
'tis clear, to confess a shame to exercise
Your pardon sir, were I so foul and monstrous
As I am given to you, you would commit
A sin next mine, by wronging your own mercy
To let me draw out impious breath, it will
Release your wonder, if you give command
To see your process, and if it prove other
Tha● I presume to Inform, tear me in pieces.
Go for the Process, and the Chancellor,
With the assistant judges. I thank heaven
That with all these enforcements of distraction
My reason stays so clear to hear, and answer,
And ●● direct a message. This inversion
Of all the loyalties, and true deserts
That I believed I governed with, till now
In my choice Lawyers, and chief Counsellors
Is able to shake all my frame of reason.
I am much grieved.
No more, I do incline
To think I am abused, my Laws betrayed
And wrested to the purpose of my Judges,
This confidence in Chabot turns my judgement,
This was too wild away▪ to make his merits
Stoop and acknowledge my superior bounties,
That it doth raise, and six 'em passed my art,
To shadow all the shame and forfeits mine.
The Chancellor and Judges Sir.
I like not
This passion in the King, the Queen and Constable
Are of that side.
My Lord, you dare appear then?
Dare Sir, I hope.
Well done, hope still, and tell me,
Is not this man condemned?
Strange question Sir,
The process will declare it, signed with all
These my assistant brothers reverend hands
To his conviction in a public trial.
You said for foul and monstrous facts proved by 〈◊〉
The very words are there sir.
But the deeds
I look for sir, name me but one that's monstrous?
His foul comparisons, and affronts of you,
To me seemed monstrous.
I told you them sir,
Nor were they any that your so vast knowledge,
Being a man studied in him, could produce
And prove as clear as heaven, you warranted
To make appear such treasons in the Admiral,
As never all Laws, Volumes yet had sentenced,
And France should look on, having scaped with wonder
What in this nature hath been clearly proved
In his arraignment.
1. Nothing that we heard
In slenderest touch urged by your Advocate.
Dare you affirm this too?
2. Most confidently.
No base corruptions charged upon him.
1. None sir.
This argues Chabot has corrupted him.
I do not like this.
1. The sum of all
Was urged to prove your Admiral corrupt,
Was an exaction of his officers,
Of twenty sauce taken from the Fishermen
For every boat, and that fished the Normand coast.
And was this all
The mountains, and the marvels promised me,
To be in clear proof made against the life.
Of our so hated Admiral.
All sir,
Upon our lives and consciences.
I am blasted.
How durst you then subscribe to his conviction.
1. For threats by my Lord Chancellor on the Bench,
Affirming that your Majesty would have it
Made capital treason, or account us traitors.
2. Yet sir, we did put to our names with this
Interposition of a note in secret
In these two letters V, and I, to show
We were enforced to what we did, which then
In Law is nothing.
How do you feel your Lordship,
Did you not find some stuffing in your head,
Your brain should have been purged,
I fall to pieces,
Would they had rotten on the Bench.
And so you saved the peace of that high Court.
Which otherwise his impious rage had broken,
But thus am I by his malicious arts
A parley rendered, and most tyrannous spur
To all the open course of his base envies,
A forcer of my judges, and a thirst
Of my nobilities blood, and all by one,
I trusted to make clear my love of justice.
I beseech your Majesty, let all my zeal
To serve your virtues, with a sacred value
Made of your royal state, to which each least
But shade of violence in any subject
Doth provoke certain death.
Death on thy name
And memory for ever, one command
Our Advocate attend us presently.
He waits here.
But single death shall not excuse, thy skin
Torn o'er thine ears, and what else can be inflicted
If thy life with the same severity
Dissected cannot stand so many fires.
Tre. Be merciful great Sir.
Yet more amaze?
Is there a knee in all the world beside
That any humane conscience can let bow
For him, youare traitors all that pity him.
This is no time to move.
Yet 'twas my fault
To trust this wretch, whom I knew fierce and proud
With forms of tongue and learning, what a prisoner
Is pride of the whole 'slud of man? for as
A humane seed is said to be a mixture
And fair contemperature extracted from
All our best faculties, so the seed of all
Man's sensual frailty, may be said to abide,
And have their confluence in only pride,
It stupifies man's reason so, and dulls
True sense of any thing, but what may fall
In his own glory, quenches all the spirits
That light a man to honour and true goodness.
Your Advocate.
Come hither.
My most gracious Sovereign.
Madam you infinitely oblige our duty.
I was too long ignorant of your worth my Lord,
And this sweet Lady's virtue.
Both your servants.
I never had a fear of the King's justice,
And yet I Know not what creeps over my heart,
And leaves an ice beneath it, my Lord Chancellor,
You have my forgiveness, but implore heavens pardon
For wrongs to equal justice, you shall want
No charity of mine to mediate
To the King for you.
Horror of my soul
Confounds my gratitude.
To me now most welcome.
It was my allegiance sir, I did enforce,
But by directions of your Chancellor,
It was my office to advance your cause
'Gainst all the world, which when I leave to execute,
Flea me, and turn me out a most raw Advocate.
You see my Chancellor.
He has an ill look with him.
It shall be your province now, on our behalf
To urge what can in justice be against him,
His riot on our Laws, and corrupt actions
Will give you scope and field enough.
And I
Will play my law prize, never fear it sir.
He shall be guilty of what you please, I am studied
In him sir, I will squeeze his villainies,
And urge his acts so whom into his bowels,
The force of it shall make him hang himself,
And save the Laws a labour.
judges, for all
The poisonous outrage, that this viper spile
On all my royal freedom and my Empire,
As making all but servants to his malice,
I will have you revise the late arraignment,
And for those worthy reasons, that already
Affect you for my Admiral's acquittal
Employ your justice on this Chancellor, away with him,
Arrest him Captain of my guard to answer
All that due course of Law against him can
Charge both his Acts and life.
I do arrest thee
Lord Chancellor in his Highness' name,
To answer all that equal course of Law
Can charge thy acts and life with.
I Obey.
How false a heart corruption has, how base
Without true worth are all these earth-bred glories?
Oh blessed justice, by which all things stand,
That stills the thunder, and makes lightning sinke
Twixt earth and heaven amazed, and cannot strike,
Being proved so now in wonder of this man,
The object of men's hate, and heavens bright love;
And as in cloudy days, we see the Sun
Glide over turrets, temples, richest fields,
All those left dark, and slighted in his way,
And on the wretched plight of some poor shed,
Powers all the glories of his golden head;
So heavenly virtue, on this envied Lord,
Points all his graces, that I may dinstinguish
Him better from the world.
You do him right.
But away judges, and pursue the afraignement
Of this polluted Chancellor with that swiftness,
His fury winged against my Admiral,
And be you all, that sat on him compurgators
Of me against this false judge.
We are so.
Be you two joined in the commission,
And nothing urged but justly, of me learning
This one more lesson out of the events
Of these affairs now past, that whatsoever
Charge or Commission judges have from us,
They ever make their aim ingenuous justice,
Not partial for reward, or swelling favour,
To which if your King steer you, spare to obey;
For when his troubled blood is clear, and calm,
He will repent that he pursued his rage,
Before his pious Law, and hold that judge
Unworthy of his place, that lets his censure
Float in the waves of an imagined favour,
This shipwrecks in the haven, and but wounds
Their consciences that soothe the soon ebbed humours
Of their incensed King.
Royal and sacred.
Come Philip, shine thy honour now for ever,
For this short temporal eclipse it suffered
By th' interposed desire I had to try thee,
Nor let the thought of what is past afflict thee,
For my unkindness, live still circled here,
The bright intelligence of our royal spheere.
THe Admiral sick?
Fa. With danger at the heart,
I came to tell the King.
He never had
More reason in his soul, to entertain
All the delights of health.
I fear my Lord,
Some apprehension of the King's unkindness,
By giving up his person, and his offices
To the Law's gripe and search, is ground of his
Sad change, the greatest fowls are thus oft wounded,
If he vouchsafe his presence, it may quicken
His fast decaying spirits, and prevent
The hasty ebb of life.
The King is now
Fraught with the joy of his fresh preservation,
The news so violent, let into his ear,
May have some dangerous effect in him,
I would not counsel sir to that.
With greater reason
I may suspect they'll spread my Lord, and as
A river left his curled and impetuous waves
Over the banks, by confluence of streams
That fill and swell her channel, for by this time
He has the addition of Allegres suffering,
His honest servant, whom I met though feeble
And worn with torture, going to congratulatë
His Master's safety.
It seems he much
Affected that Allegre.
There will be
But a sad interview and dialogue.
Does he keep his bed?
In that alone
He shows a fortitude, he will move, and walk
He says while his own strength or others can
Support him, wishing he might stand and look
His destiny in the face at the last summon,
Not sluggishly exhaile his soul in bed,
With indulgence, and nice flattery of his limbs.
Can he in this show spirit, and want force
To wrestle with a thought?
Oh Madam, Madam,
We may have proof against thë sword, and tyranny
Of boisterous war that threatens us, but when
King's frown, a Cannon mounted in each eye,
Shoot death to apprehension, ere their fire
And force approach us.
Here's the King.
No words
To interrupt his quiet,
I'll begun then.
Our Admiral's father! call him back.
I won't stay to hear 'em.
Sir, be prudent,
And do not for your son fright the King's health.
What, ha' they left us? how does my Admiral?
I am forbid to tell you sir.
By whom.
The Queen and my Lord Constable.
Are there
Remaining seeds of faction? have they souls
Not yet convinced i'th' truth of Chabots' honour,
Clear as the crystal heaven, and 'bove the reach
Of imitation.
'tis their care of you,
And no thought prejudicial to my son.
Their care of me?
How can the knowledge of my Admiral's state
Concern their fears of me, I see their envy
Of Chabots' happiness, whose joy to be
Rendered so pure and genuine to the world
Doth grate upon their conscience and affright 'em;
But let 'em vex, and bid my Chabot still
Exalt his heart, and triumph, he shall hauë
The access of ours, the kingdom shall put on
Such joys for him as she would boast to celebratë
Her own escape from ruin.
He is not in state to hear my sad news
I perceive.
That countenance is not right, it does not answë●
What I expect,
Say, how is my Admiral?
The truth upon thy life.
To secure his, I would you had.
Ha'? Who durst oppose him?
One that hath power enough hath practised on him
And made his great heart stoop.
I will revenge it
With crushing, crushing that rebellious power to nothing.
Name him.
He was his friend.
A friend to malice, his own black imposthume
Burn his blood up, what mischief hath engendered
New storms?
'tis the old tempest.
Did not we
Appease all horrors that looked wild upon him?
You dressed his wounds I must confess, but made
No cure, they bleed a fresh, pardon me sir,
Although your conscience have closed too soon,
He is in danger, and doth want new surgery
Though he be right in fame, and your opinion,
He thinks you were unkind.
Alas poor Chabot,
Doth that afflict him.
So much, though he strive
With most resolved and Adamantine nerves,
As ever humane fire in flesh and blood,
Forged for example, to bear all, so killing
The arrows that you shot were (still your pardon)
No Centaurs blood could rankle so.
If this
Be all, i'll cure him, Kings retain
More Balsam in their soul them hurt in anger.
far short sir, with one breath they uncreate,
And Kings with only words more wounds can make
Then all their kingdom made in balm can heal,
'tis dangerous to play to wild a descant
On numerous virtue, though it become Princes
To assure their adventures made in every thing,
Goodness confined within poor flesh and blood,
Hath but a queasy and still sickly state,
A musical hand should only play on her
Fluent as air, yet every touch command.
No more,
Commend us to the Admiral, and say,
The King will visit him, and bring health.
I will not doubt that blessing, and shall move
Nimbly with this command.
Did you believe the Chancellor had been
So foul?
he's lost toth' people, what contempts
They throw upon him? but we must be wise.
Were there no other guilt, his malice shëwed
Upon the Admiral, in orebearing justice,
Would well deserve a sentence.
And a deep one.
If please your Lordships to remember that
Was specially commended by the King,
As being most blemish to his royal person,
And the free justice of his state.
Already
He has confessed upon his examinations
Enough for censure, yet to obey form—
Mr. Advocate if you please—
I am ready for your Lordships: It hath been said, and will be said again, and may truly be justified, Omnia ex lite fieri. It was the position of Philosophers, and now proved by a more Phylosophycall sect, the Lawyers, that Omnia ex lite fiant, we are all made by Law, made I say, and worthily if we be just, if we be un just, marred, though in marring some, there is necessity of making others, for if one shall by the Law, ten to one but another is exalted by the execution of the Law, since the corruption of one must conclude the generation of another, though not always in the same profession; the corruption of an Apothecary, may be the generation of a Doctor of Physic; the corruption of a Citizen may beget a Courtier, & a Courtier may very well beget an Alderman, the corruption of an Alderman may be the generation of a Country justice, whose corrupt ignorance easily may beget a tumult, a tumult may beget a Captain, and the corruption of a Captain may beget a Gentleman-usher, and a Gentleman-usher may beget a Lord, whose wit may beget a Poet, and a Poet may get a thousand pound a year, but nothing without corruption.
Good Mr. Advocate be pleased to leave all digressions, and speak of the Chancellor.
Your Lordship doth very seasonably premonish, and I shall not need to leave my subject corruption, while I discourse of him, who is the very fen and stygian abyss of it, five thousand and odd hundred foul and impious corruptions, for I will be brief; have been found by several examinations, and by oaths proved against this odious and polluted Chancellor, a man of so tainted, and contagious a life, that it is a miracle any man enjoyeth his nostrils, that hath lived within the sent of his offices; he was borne with teeth in his head, by an affidavit of his Midwife, to note his devouring, and hath one toe on his left foot crooked, and in the form of an eagle's talon, to foretell his rapacity: What shall I say? branded, marked, and designed in his birth for shame and obloquy, which appeareth further by a mole under his right ear, with only three Witches hairs in't, strange and ominous predictions of nature.
You have acquainted yourself but very lately
With this intelligence, for as I remember
Your tongue was guilty of no such character,
When he sat judge upon the Admiral,
A pious incorrupt man, a faithful and fortunate
Servant to his King, and one of the greatest
Honours that ever the Admiral received, was
That he had so noble and just a judge, this must
Imply a strange volubility in your tongue, or
Conscience, I speak not to discountenance any
Evidence for the King, but to put you in mind,
Mr. Advocate that you had then a better opinion
Of my Lord Chancellor.
Your Lordship hath most aptly interposed, and with a word I shall easily satisfy all your judgements; He was then a Judge, and in Cathedra, in which he could not err; it may be your Lordship's cases, out of the chair and seat of justice, he hath his frailties, is loos'ed and exposed to the conditions of other humane natures; so every judge, your Lordships are not ignorant hath a kind of privilege while he is in his state, office and being, and although he may quoad se, internally and privately be guilty of bribery of justice, yet quoad nos, and in public he is an upright and innocent judge, we are to take no notice, nay, we deserved to suffer, if we should detect or stain him; for in that we disparage the Office, which is the Kings, and may be our own, but once removed from his place by just dishonour of the King, he is no more a judge but a common person, whom the law takes hold on, and we are then to forget what he hath been, and without partiality to strip and lay him open to the world, a counterfeit and corrupt judge, as for example, he may and aught to flourish in his greatness, and break any man's neck, with as much facility as a jest, but the case being altered, and he down, every subject shall be heard, a Wolf may be appareled in a Lambskin; and if every man should be afraid to speak truth, nay and more than truth, if the good of the subject which are clients sometime require it, there would be no remove of Officers, if no remove no motions▪ if no motion in Court no heat, and by consequence but cold Terms; take away this moving, this removing of judges, the Law may bury itself in Buckram, and the kingdom suffer for want of a due execution; and now I hope your Lordships are satisfied.
Most learnedly concluded to acquity ourself.
Mr. Advocate, please you to urge for satisfaction
Of the world, and clearing the King's honour, how
In justly he proceeded against the Admiral.
I shall obey your Lordship— So vast so infinite hath been the impudence of this Chancellor▪ not only toward the subject, but even the sacred person of the King, that I tremble as with a Palsy to remember it. This man, or rather this monster, having power and commission trusted for the examination of the Lord Admiral, a man perfect in all honour and justice; indeed the very ornament and second flower of France, for the Flower de lis, is sacred and above all flowers, and indeed the best flower in our garden. Having used all ways to circumvent his innocence by suborning and promising rewards to his betrayers, by compelling others by the cruelty of tortures, as namely Mounsieur Allegre a most honest and faithful servant to his Lord, tearing and extending his sinews upon the racke to force a confession to his purpose, and finding nothing prevail upon the invincible virtue of the Admiral.
How he would flatter him?
Yet most maliciously proceeded to arraign him; to be short against all colour of justice condemned him of high treasons; oh think what the life of man is, that can never be recompensed; but the life of a just man, a man that is the vigour and glory of our life and nation to be torn to death, and sacrificed beyond the malice of common persecution. What Tiger of Hercanian breed could have been so cruel? but this is not all? he was not guilty only of murder, guilty I may say In foro consctieniae, though our good Admiral was miraculously preserved, but unto this he added a most prodigious & fearful rape, a rape even upon justice itself, the very soul of our state, for the rest of the judges upon the Bench, venerable images of Austria, he most tyranously compelled to set their hands to his most unjust sentence; did ever story remember the like outrage and injustice; what forfeit, what penalty can be enough to satisfy this transcendent offence? and yet my good Lords, this is but venial to the sacrilege which now follows, and by him committed, not content with this sentence, not satisfied with horrid violence upon the sacred Tribunal, but he proceeds and blasphemes the very name and honour of the King himself, observe that, making him the author and impulsive cause of all these rapines, justifying that he moved only by his special command to the death, nay the murder of his most faithful subject, translating all his own black and damnable guilt upon the King's heirs, a traitor to his Country, first, he conspires the death of one whom the King loves, and whom every subject aught to honour, and then makes it no conscience to proclaim it the King's act, & by consequence declares him a murderer of his own, and of his best subjects.
An Advocate, an Advocate, tear him in pieces,
Tear the Chancellor in pieces.
The people have deep sense of the Chancellor's injustice.
We must be careful to prevent their mutiny.
It will become our wisdoms to secure the court
And prisoner.
Captain of the guard.
2. What can you say for yourself Lord Chancellor.
Again, I confess all, and humbly fly to
The royal mercy of the King.
And this submission is the way to purchase it.
Hear me great judges, if you have not lost
For my sake all your charities, I beseech you,
Let the King know my heart is full of penitence,
Calm his high-going sea, or in that tempest
I ruin to eternity, oh my Lords,
Consider your own places, and the helms
You sit at, while with all your providence
You steer, look forth and see devouring quicksands,
My ambition now is punished, and my pride
Of state and greatness falling into nothing,
I that had never time through vast employments
To think of heaven, feel his revengeful wrath,
Boiling my blood, and scorching up my entrills,
There doomsday is my conscience black and horrid,
For my abuse of justice, but no stings
Pricked with that terror as the wounds I made
Upon the pious Admiral, some good man
Bear my repentance thither, he is merciful,
And may incline the King to stay his lightning
Which threatens my confusion, that my free
Resign of title, office, and what else
My pride looked at, would buy my poor lives safety,
For ever banish me the court, and let
Me waste my life far off in some Village.
How? Did your Lordship's note his request to you, he would direct your sentence to punish him with confining him to live in the country, like the Mouse in the Fable, that having offended to deserve death, begged he might be banished into a Parmesan. I hope your Lordships will be more just to the nature of his offences.
I could have wished him fall on softer ground
For his good parts.
My Lord, this is your sentence for you high misdemeanours against his Majesty's judges, for your unjust sentence of the most equal Lord Admiral, for many and foul corruptions and abuse of your office, and that infinite stain of the King's person, and honour, we in his Majesty's name, deprive you of your estate of Chancellor, & declare you uncapable of any judicial office, & beside condemn you in the sum of two hundred thousand crowns; whereof one hundred thousand to the King, and one hundred thousand to the Lord Admiral, and what remaineth of your estate to go to the restitution of those you have injured, and to suffer perpetual imprisonment in the Castle, so take him to your custody. Your Lordships have been merciful in his sentence.
They have spared my life then, that some cure may bring,
I spend it in my prayers for the King.
Allegre I am glad he hath so much strength,
I prithee let me see him.
It will but
Enlarge a passion— my Lord he'll come
Another time and tender you his service.
Nay then—
Although I like it not, I must obey.
Welcome my injured servant, what a misery
Ha' they made on thee?
Though some change appear
Upon my body, whose severe affliction
Hath brought it thus to be sustained by others,
My hurt is still the same in faith to you,
Not broken with their rage.
Alas poor man!
Were all my joys essential, and so mighty
As the affected world believes I taste,
This object were enough to unsweeten all,
Though in thy absence I had suffering,
And felt within me a strong sympathy,
While for my sake their cruelty did vex,
And fright thy nerves with horror of thy sense,
Yet in this spectacle I apprehend
More grief than all my imagination
Can let before into me; didst not curse me
Upon the torture?
Good my Lord, let not
The thought of what I suffered dwell upon
Your memory, they could not punish more
Than what my duty did oblige to bear
For you and justice, but there's some thing in
Your looks, presents more fear than all the malice
Of my tormentors could affect my soul with,
That paleness, and the other forms you wear,
Would well become a guilty Admiral, and one
Lost to his hopes and honour, not the man
Upon whose life the fury of unjustice
Armed with fierce lightning, and the power of thunder,
Can make no breach, I was not racked till now,
There's more death in that falling eye, than all
Rage ever yet brought forth, what accident sir can blast,
Can be so black and fatal to distract
The calm? the triumph that should sit upon
Your noble brow, misfortune could have no
Time to conspire with fate, since you were rescued
By the great arm of providence, nor can
Those garlands that now grow about your forehead
With all the poison of the world be blasted.
Allegre, thou dost bear thy wounds upon thee,
In wide and spacious characters, but in
The volume of my sadness thou dost want
An eye to read an open force, hath torn
Thy manly sinews which sometime may cure
The engine is not seen that wounds thy Master,
Past all the remedy of art or time,
The flatteries of Court, of fame or honours,
Thus in the Summer a tall flourishing tree,
Transplanted by strong hand, with all her leaves
And blooming pride upon her makes a show
Of Spring, tempting the eye with wanton blossom,
But not the Sun with all her amorous smiles,
The dews of mornings, or the tears of night,
Can root her fibers in the earth again,
Or make her bosom kind, to growth and bearing,
But the tree withers, and those very beams
That once were natural warmth to her soft verdure
Dry up her sap and shoot a fever through
The bark and rind, till she becomes a burden
To that which gave her life: so Chabot, Chabot.
Wonder in apprehension, I must
Suspect your health indeed.
No no, thou sha'not
Be troubled, I but stirred thee with a moral,
That's empty contains nothing, I am well,
See I can walk poor man, thou hast not strength yet.
What accident is ground of this distraction?
Thou hast not heard yet what's become o'th' Chancellor?
Not yet my Lord.
Poor gentleman, when I think
Upon the King, I've balm enough to cure
A thousand wounds, have I not Allegre?
Was ever bounteous mercy read in story,
Like his upon my life, condemned for sacrifice
By Law, and snatched out of the flame unlooked for,
And unpetitioned? but his justice then
That would not spare whom his own love made great,
But give me up to the most cruel test
Of judges, for some boldness in defence
Of my own merits, and my honest faith to him
Was rare, past example.
Sir, the King
Is coming hither.
It will
Become my duty sir to leave you now.
Stay by all means Allegre,' 'tshall concernen you,
I'm infinitely honoured in his presence.
Madam be comforted, I'll be his Physician.
Pray heaven you may.
No ceremonial knees,
Give me thy heart, my dear, my honest Chabot,
And yet in vain I challenge that 'tis here
Already in my own, and shall be cherished
With care of my best life, violence
Shall ravish it from my possession,
Not those distempers that infirm my blood
And spirits shall betray it to a fear,
When time and nature join to dispossess
My body of a cold and languishing breath,
No stroke in all my arteries, but silence
In every faculty, yet dissect me then,
And in my heart, the world shall read thee living,
And by the virtue of thy name write there,
That part of me shall never putrefy,
When I am lost in all my other dust.
You too much honour your poor servant sir,
My heart dispares so rich a monument;
But when it dies—
I wonot hear a sound
Of any thing that trenched upon death,
He speaks the funeral of my crown that prophecies
So unkind a fate, we'll live and die together,
And by that duty which hath taught you hitherto,
All loyal and just services I charge thee,
Preserve thy heart for me and thy reward,
Which now shall crown thy merits.
I have found
A glorious harvest in your savour sir,
And by this overflow of royal grace,
All my deserts are shadows and sly from me,
I have not in the wealth of my desires,
Enough to pay you now, yet you encourage me
To make one suit.
So soon as named possess it.
You would be pleased take notice of this Gentleman,
A Secretary of mine.
Mounsieur Allegre,
He that was racked sir for your Admiral.
His limbs want strength to tender their full duty,
An honest man that suffers for my sake.
He shall be dear to us, for what has past sir
By the unjustice of our Chancellor's power,
we'll study to recompense, i'th' mean time that office
You exercised for Chabot we translate
To ourself, you shall be our Secretary.
This is
An honour above my weak desert, and shall
Oblige the service of my life to satisfy it.
You are gracious, and in this act have put
All our complaints to silence, you Allegre,
Cherish your health, and feeble limbs which cannot
Without much prejudice be thus employed;
All my best wishes with thee.
All my prayers
Are duties to your Lordship—
'tis too little,
Can forfeit of his place, wealth, and a lasting
Imprisonment purge his offences to
Our honest Admiral, had our person been
Exempted from his malice, he did persecute
The life of Chabot with an equal wrath,
You should have poured death on his treacherous head,
I revoke all your sentences, and make
Him that was wronged full Master of his destiny,
Be thou his judge.
O far be such injustice,
I know his doom is heavy, and I beg
Where mercy may be let into his sentence
For my sake you would soften it, I have
Glory enough to be set right in yours,
And my dear country's thought, and by an act
With such apparent notice to the world.
Express it in some joy then.
I will strive
To show that pious gratitude to you but—
But what
My frame hath lately sir been ta'en a pieces,
And but now put together, the least force
Of mirth will shake and unjoint all my reason,
Your patience royal sir.
I'll have no patience,
If thou forget the courage of a man.
My strength would flatter me.
Physicians
Now I begin to fear his apprehension,
Why how is Chabots' spirit fall'n?
'tTwere best
He were conveyed to his bed.
How soon turned widow.
Who would not wish to live to serve your goodness.
Stand from me, you betray me with your fears,
The plummets may fall off that hang upon
My heart, they were but thoughts at first, or if
They weigh me down to death let not my eyes
Close with another object then the King,
Let him be last I look on.
I would not have him lost for my whole Kingdom.
He may recover sir.
I see it fall,
For justice being the prop of every Kingdom
And mine broke, violating him that was
The knot and contract of it all in him,
It already falling in my eat,
Pompey could hear it thunder, when the Senate
And Capitol were deaf, so heavens loud chiding,
I'll have another sentence for my Chancellor,
Unless my Chabot live,
In a Prince
What a swift executioner is a frown,
Especially of great and noble souls;
How is it with my Philip?
I must beg
One other boon.
Upon condition
My Chabot will collect his scattered spirits,
And be himself again, he shall divide
My Kingdom with me.
Sweet King.
I observe
A fierce and kill wrath engendered in you;
For my sake, as you wish me strength to serve you,
Forgive your Chancellor, let not the story
Of Philip Chabot read hereafter draw
A tear from any family, I beseech
Your royal mercy on his life, and free
Remission of all seizure upon his state,
I have no comfort else.
Endeavour
But thy own health, and pronounce general pardon
To all through France.
Sir I must kneel to thank you,
It is not sealed else, your blessed hand live happy,
May all you trust have no less faith than Chabot,
Oh.
His heart is broken.
And kneeling sir,
As his ambition were in death to show
The truth of his obedience.
I feared this issue.
he's past hope.
He has a victory in's death, this world
Deserved him not, how soon he was translated
To glorious eternity, 'tis too late
To fright the air with words, my tears embalm him.
What can become of me?
I'll be your husband Madam, and with care
Supply your children's father, to your father
I'll be a son, in what our love or power
Can serve his friends, Chabot shall ne'er be wanting,
The greatest loss is mine, past scale or recompense,
We will proceed no further 'gainst the Chancellor,
To the charity of our Admiral he owes
His life which ever banished to a prison,
Shall not beget in us, or in the subject
Now fears of his injustice, for his fortunes
Great and acquired corruptly, 'tis our will
They make just restitution for all wrongs
That shall within a year be proved against him;
O Chabot that shall boast as many monuments
As there be hearts in France, which as they grow,
Shall with more love enshrine thee, King's they say,
Die not, or starve succession, oh why
Should that stand firm, and Kings themselves despair,
To find their subject still in the next heir▪