WHat wonder you my Lords? why gaze you gentlemen?
And wherefore marvel you Mez Dames, I pray you tell me then●
Is it so rare a sight, or yet so strange a toy,
Among so many nooble peers, to see one power Boy?
Why? boy's have been allowed in every kind of age.
As Ganymede that pretty boy, in Heaven is Ioue his page.
Cupid that mighty God although his force be fierce,
Yet is he but a naked Boy, as Poets do rehearse.
And many a préetye boy a mighty man hath proved,
And served his Prince at all assays deserving to be loved.
Percase my strange attire my glittering golden gite,
Doth either make you marvel thus, or move you with delight.
Yet wonder not my Lords for if your honours please,
But even to give me ear a while, I will your doubts appease.
And you shall know the cause, wherefore these robes are worn,
And why I go outlandish like, yet being English borne.
And why I thus presume to press into this place,
And why I (simple boy) am bold to look such men in face.
first than you must perstande, I am no stranger I,
But English boy, in England borne, and bred but even hereby.
My father was a Knight, Mount Hermer was his name,
My mother of the Mountacutes, a house of worthy fame.
My father from his youth was trained up in field,
And always took his chief delight, in helmet spear and shield.
Soldado for his life, and in his happy days,
Soldado like hath lost his life, to his immortal praise.
The thundering fame which blue about the world so wide,
How that the Christian enemy, the Turk that Prince of pride,
Addressed had his power, to swarm upon the Seas,
With Galleys, foists, and such licks ships, well armed at all assays.
And that he made his vaunt, the greedy fish to glut,
With gobs of Christian carcases, in cruel pieces cut.
These news of this report, did pierce my father's ears,
But never touched his noble heart, with any spark of fears.
For well he knew the trade of all the Turkish wars,
And had amongst them shed his blood, at many cruel jars.
In Rhodes his race begun, a slender tale young man,
Where he by many martial feats, his spurs of knighthood won.
Yea though the piece was lost, yet won he honour still,
And evermore against the Turks he warred by his will.
At Chios many know, how hardily he fought,
And how with streams of striving blood, his honour dear he bought.
At length enforced to yield with many captains more,
He bought his liberty with Lands, and let his goods ago.
Zechines * of glistering gold, two thousand was his price,
The which to pay his lands must leap, for else he were unwise,
Believe me now my Lords although the loss be mine,
Yet I confess them better sold, than like a slave to pine.
For lands may come again, but liberty once lost,
Can never find such recompense, as countervails the cost.
Myself now know the case, who like my father's lot,
Was like of late for to have lost my liberty God wots.
My father (as I say) enforced to leave his land,
In mortgage to my mother's kin, for ready coin in hand,
'Gan now upon these news, which erst I did rehearse,
Prepare himself to save his pawn, or else to lose his phearce.
And first his ransom paid, with that which did remain,
He rigged up a proper Bark, was called Leffort Britain.
And like a venturer (besides him seemly self)
Determined for to venture me and all his worldly pelf.
Perhaps some hope of gain persuaded so his mind,
For sure his haughty heart was bend, some great exploit to find.
How so it were, the winds now hoisted up our sails,
We furrowing in the foaming floods, to take our best avails.
Now hearken to my words, and mark you well the same,
For now I will declare the cause, wherefore I hither came.
My father (as I say) had set up all his rest,
And tossed on seas both day and night, disdaining idle rest,
We left our forelands end, we passed the coast of France,
We reached the cape of Finis Terre our course for to advance.
We passed Marrocchus straits, and at the last descried,
The fertile coasts of Cyprus soil, which I myself first spied.
Myself (a forward boy) on highest top was placed,
And there I saw the Cyprian shore, whereto we sailed in haste.
Which when I had declared unto the master's mate,
He leapt for joy and thanked God, of that our happy state.
But what remains to man, that can continued long?
What sun can shine so clear & bright but clouds may rise among?
Which sentence soon was proved, by our unhappy hap,
We thought ourselves full near our friends, & light in enemy's lap.
The Turk that Tyrant he, with siege had girt the walls,
Of famous Famagosta * then and sought to make them thralls.
And as he lay by land, in strong and stately trench,
So was his power priest by Sea, his Christian foes to drench.
Upon the waltering waves, his Foists and Galleys fleet,
Moore forest like than orderly, for such a man most meet.
This heavy sight once seen, we turned our course apace,
And set up all our sails in haste, to give such fury place.
But out alas, our wills, and winds were contrary,
For raging blasts did blow us still upon our enemy.
My father seeing then, whereto he needs must go,
And that the mighty hand of God, had it appointed so.
Most like a worthy knight (though certain of his death)
'Gan clean forget all wailing words, as lavish of his breath.
And to his Christian crew, this (too short) tale he told,
To comfort them which seemed to faint, & make the coward bold,
Fellows in arms, quoth he, although I bear the charge,
And take upon me chieftains name, of this unhappy barge,
Yet are you all my pheares, and as one company,
We must like true companions, together live and die,
You see quoth he our foes, with furious force at hand,
And in whose hands our handful here, unable is to stand,
What resteth then to do, should we unto them yield?
And wifully receive that yoke, which Christians cannot wield.
Not sure, hereof be sure, our lives were so unsure,
And though we live, yet so to live, as better death endure.
To hear those hellish fiends in raging blasphemy,
Defy our only Saviour, were this no misery?
To see the fowl abuse of boys in tender years,
The which I know must needs abhor all honest Christians ears.
To see maids ravished, Wives, Women forced by fear,
And much more mischief than this time can let me utter here.
Alas, quoth he, I tell not all, my tongue is tied,
But all the slaveries on the earth, we should with them abide.
How much were better than, to die in worthy wise,
And so to make our carcases, a willing Sacrifice.
So shall we pay the debt, which unto God is due,
So shall you die in his defence, who deind to die for you.
And who with hardy hand, most Turkish tikes can quell,
Let him account in conscience, to please his maker well.
You see, quoth he, my son, wherewith he looked on me,
Whom but a babe, yet have I brought, my partner here to be.
For, him I must confess, my heart is pensive now,
To leave him living thus in youth, to die I know not how.
But since it pleaseth God, I may not murmur I,
If God had pleased we both should live, and as God will we die.
Thus with a braying sigh, his noble tongue he stayed,
Commanding all the ordinance, in order to be laid.
And placing all his men in order for to fight,
Fallen groveling still upon his face, before them all in sight.
And when in secret so, he whispered had a while,
He raised his head with cheerful look, his sorrows to beguile:
And with the rest he prayed, to God in heaven on high,
Which ended thus, Thou only Lord, canst help in misery.
This said (behold) the Turks enclosed us round about,
And seemed to wonder that we durst resist so great a rout.
Whereat they doubt not long, for though our power was slender,
We sent them signs by Canon shot, that we meant not to tender.
Then might we see them chafe, than might we hear them rage,
And all at once they bend their force, about our silly cage.
Our ordinance bestowed, our men themselves defend,
On every side so thick beset, they might not long contend.
But as their captain wild, each man his force did strain,
To sand a Turk (some two or three) unto the hellish train,
And he himself which saw, he might no more abide,
Did thrust a mide the thickest throng, and so with honour died.
With him there died like wise, his best approved men,
The rest did yield as men amazed, they had no courage then.
Amongst the which myself, was ta'en by Turks alas,
And with the Turks a turkish life, in Turkey must I pass.
I was not done to death for so I often craude,
But like a slave before the Gattes, of Famagosta saved.
That piece once put to sack, I thither was conveyed,
And under safeguard evermore, I silly boy was stayed.
There did I see such sights, as yet my heart do prick,
I saw the noble * Bragadine, when he was fleyd quick.
First like a slave enforced to bear to every breach,
Two baskets laden full with earth * Mustaffa did him teach.
By whom he might not pass before he kissed the ground,
These cruel torments (yet with more) that worthy soldier found.
His ears cut from his head, they set him in a chair,
And from a main yard hoisted him aloft into the air,
That so he might be showed with cruelty and spite,
Unto us all, whose weeping eyes did much abhor the sight.
Alas why do I thus with woeful words rehearse,
These weary news which all our hearts with pity needs must pierce?
Well then to tell you forth, I still a slave remained,
To one, which Prelybassa height, who held me still enchained.
With him I went to Seas into the gulf of Pant,
With many christians captives more, which did their freedom want.
There with the Turkish train we were enforced to stay,
With waltering still upon the waves, did wait for further pray.
For why? they had advise, that the Venetian fleet,
Did floote in Argostelly then, with whom they hoped to meet.
And as they waltered thus with tides and billows tossed,
Their hope had hap, for at the last they met them to their cost.
As in October last upon the seventh day,
They found the force of christian knights addressed in good array.
And shall I try my tongue to tell the whole discourse,
And how they did encounter first, and how they joined in force?
Then hearken now my lords, for sure my memory,
Doth yet record the very plot of all this victory,
The christian crew came on, in form of battle pight,
And like a crescent cast themselves preparing for to fight.
On other side the Turks, which trusted power to much,
Disorderly did spread their force, the will of God was such.
Well at the last they met, and first with cannones thunder,
Each other sought with furious force to slit their ships in sunder.
The barks are battered sore, the galleys galled with shot,
The hulks are hit, and every man must stand unto his lot.
The powder sends his smoke into the cruddy skies,
The smoulder stops our nose with stench, the fume offends our eyes.
The pots of lime unsteakt, from highest top are cast,
The parched pease are not for got to make them slip as fast.
The wild fire works are wrought and cast in foeman's face,
The grappling hooks are stretched forth, the pikes are pushed a pace.
The halberd hew on head, the brown bills bruise the bones,
The harquebus doth spit his spite, with pretty piercing stones.
The drums cry dub a dub, the braying trumpets blow,
The whistling fifes are seldom herd, these sounds do drown them so.
The voice of warlike wights, to comfort them that faint,
The piteous plaints of golden hearts, which were with fears attaint.
The groaning of such ghosts as gasped now for breath,
The prayers of the better sort, prepared unto death.
And to be short, each grief which on the earth may grow,
Was each and easy to be found, upon these floods to flow.
If any sight on earth, may unto hell resemble,
Then sure this was a hellish sight, it makes me yet to tremble:
And in this bloody fight, when halfe the day was spent,
It pleazed God to help his flock, which thus in pound was penned.
The general of Spain, 'gan galled that galley sore,
Where in my Prely Bassa was, and grieved it more and more:
Upon that other side, with force of sword and flame,
The good Venetian General did charge upon the same.
At leength they came aboard, and in his raging pride,
Struck of this Turkish captains head, which blasphemd as it died:
O how I feel the blood now trickle in my breast,
To think what joy then pierced my heart, and how I thought me blest.
To see that cruel Turk which held me as his slave,
By happy hand of Christians, his payment thus to have:
His head from shoulders cut, upon a Pike did stand,
The which Don Iohn of Austrye, held in his triumphant hand.
The boldest Bassa then, that did in life remain,
'Gan tremble at the sight hereof, for privy grief and pain.
Thus when these fierce had fought, from morning until night,
Christ gave his flock the victory, and put his foes to flight:
And of the Turkish train, were eight score Galleys ta'en,
Fifteen sunk, five and twenty burnt, & brought unto their bane,
Of Christians set at large were fourteen thousand souls,
Turks twenty thousand registered in Belzebub his rolls.
Thus have you now my Lords, the sum of all their fight,
And trust it all for true I tell, for I was still in sight:
But when the Seas were calm, and skies began to clear,
When foes were all or dead or fled, and victors did appear.
Then every Christian sought amongst us for his friend,
His kinsman or companion, some secure them to lend:
And as they ransakte so, lo God his will it was,
A noble wise Venetian, by me did chance to pass:
Who gazing on my face, did seem to like me well,
And what my name, and whence I was, commanded me to tell:
I now which waxed bold, as one that scaped had,
From deepest hell to highest heaven, began for to be glad:
And with a lively spirit, began to pleads my case,
And hide not from this worthy man, mine ancient worthy race:
And told my father's name, and how I did descend,
From Mountacutes by Mother's side, nor there my tale did end.
But furthermore I told my Father's late exploit,
And how he left his lands, goods & life, to pay son Dieu son droit.
Nor of myself I craved so credited to be,
For lo there were remaining yet, These four whom here you see.
Which all were English borne, and knew I had not lied,
And were my Father's soldiers eke, and saw him how he died.
This grave Venetian who heard the famous name,
Of Mountacutes rehearsed there, which long had been of fame.
In Italy, and he of self same worthy race,
'Gan strait with many courteous words, in arms me to embrace.
And kissed me on cheek, and bade me make good cheer,
And thank the mighty hand of God, for that which happened there,
Confessing that he was himself a Montacute,
And bore the self same arms that I did quarter in my scute:
And for a further proof, he showed in his hat,
This token which the Mountacutes did bear always, for that.
They covet to be known from Capulets where they pass,
For ancient grudge which long ago, between these two houses was.
Then took me by the hand, and led me so aboard,
His Galley: where there were yféere, full many a comely Lord:
Of whom eight Mountacutes did sit in highest place,
To whom this first declared first my name, and then my race:
Lo Lordings here (quoth he) a babe of our own bloods,
Whom Turks had ta'en, his father slain, with loss of lands & goods:
See how God favours us, that I should found him now,
I strange to him, he strange to me, we met I know not how.
But sure when I him saw, and gazed in his face,
Me thought he was a Montacute, I chose him by his grace.
Herewith he did rehearse my Father's valiant deed,
For loss of whom each Montacute, did seem in heart to bleed.
They all embraced me then, and strait as you may see,
In comely garments trimmeth me up, as brave as brave may be:
I was in sackcloth I, now am I clad in Gold,
And wear such robes, as I myself take pleasure to behold.
Among their other gifts, this token they me gave,
And had me like a Montacute, myself always behave.
Now hearken then my Lords, I staying on the Seas.
In consort of these lovely Lords, with comfort and with ease.
Determined with them in Italy to devil,
And there by train of youthful years in knowledge to excel.
That so I might at last réedifye the walls,
Which my good father had decayed by tossing fortunes balls.
And while they slice the Seas to their desired shore,
Behold a little gale began, increasing more and more.
At last with raging blast, which from Southeast did blow,
'Gan send our sails upon these shores, which I full well did know.
I spied the Chalky clives upon the kentish coast,
Whereby our Land height Albyon, as Brutus once did boast.
Which I no sooner saw, but to the rest I said,
Siate di buona voglta, My Lords be well apaid:
I see by certain signs these Tempests have us cast,
Upon my native country coasts with happy hap at last:
And if your honours please this honour me to do,
In English havens to harbour you, and see our Cities too:
Lo London is not far, whereas my friends would be,
Right glad, with favour to requited your favour showed to me:
Vouchsafe my Lords (quoth I) to stay upon this strand,
And whiles your Barks be rigged new, remain with me on land,
Who though I be a Boy, my Father dead and slain,
Yet shall you see I have some friends which will you entertain.
These Noble men which are, the flower of courtesy,
Did not disdain this my request, but took it thankfully.
And from their battered Barks commanded to be cast,
Some * Gondalaes, wherein upon our pleasant streams they passed.
Into the month of Thames, thus did I them transport,
And to London at the last, whereas I heard report.
Even as we landed first, of this twice happy day,
To think whereon I leapt for joy, as I both must and may.
And to these lovely Lords, which are Magnificoes,
I did declare the whole discourse in order as it rose:
That you my Lord who are the chiefest Montacute,
And he whom English Mountacutes their only stay impute,
Had found the means this day to match your son and heir,
In marriage with a worthy dame, which is both fresh and fair,
And (as reports are spread) of goodly quallyties,
A virgin trained from her youth in godly exercise,
Whose brother had like wise your daughter ta'en to wife,
And so by double links enchained themselves in lovers life:
These noble Mountacutes which were from Venice droven.
By tempest (as I told before) wherewith they long had striven.
'Gan now give thanks to God which so did them convey,
To see such honours of their kin in such a happy day.
And strait they me entreat, whom they might well command.
That I should come to you my Lord, first them to recommaund.
And then this boon to crave, that under your protection,
They might be bold to enter here, devoid of all suspection.
And so in friendly wise for to conselebrate,
This happy match solemnized, according to your state.
Lo this is all they crave, the which I can not doubt,
But that your Lordship soon will grant, with more, if more ye might:
Yea were it for no more, but for the Courtesy,
Which as I say they showed to me in great extremity:
They are Venetians, and though from Venice reft,
They come in such Venetian robes, as they on seas had left:
And since they be your friends, and kinsmen too by blood,
I trust your entretainement will be to them right good:
They will not tarry long, lo now I hear their drum,
Behold, lo now I see them here, in order how they come,
Receive them well my lord, so shall I pray all ways,
That God vouchsafe to bless this house with many happy days.
GVardate Signori my lovely Lords behold,
This is another Montacute, hereof you may be bold.
Of such our patron here, The viscont Montacute,
Hath many comely sequences, well sorted all in suit.
But as I spied him first, I could not let him pass,
I took the card that liked me best, in order as it was.
And here to you my lords, I do present the same,
Make much of him, I pray you then, for he is of your name.
For whom I dare advante, he may your Trounchman be,
Your herald and ambassador, let him play all for me.
BRother, these noblemen to you now have me sent,
As for their Trounchman to expound the effect of their intent
They bid me tell you then, they like your worthy choice.
And that they cannot choose therein but triumph and rejoice.
As far as guess may give, they seem to praise it well,
They say between your ladies eyes, doth Gentilezza devil.
I term it as they do, their english is but weak,
And I (God knows) am all to young, beyond sea speech to speak.
And you my sister-eke they seem for to commend,
With such good works as may beseem a cousin and a friend.
They like your chosen fere, so pray they for your sake,
That he may always be to you, a faithful loving make.
This in effect is all, but that they crave aboone,
That you will give them licence yet, to come and see you soon.
Then will they speak themselves, such english as they can,
I fear much better than I speak, that am an english man.
Lo now they take their leaves of you and of your dames,
Here after shall you see their face and know them by their nams'.
And I your Seruidore, vibascio le mani,
These words I learned amongst them yet, although I learned not many