Nilus' an ancient River, known to excel
Amongst those four, (which before Adam fell
Watered the earthly Paradise) now claims
A new alliance with his brother Thames.
Martia, so called of Marsius, who to win
The praise from great Apollo, lost his skin:
Amphrisus, who his name shall ever keep,
Since there Apollo kept Admetus' Sheep.
Nor yet Cremera, by whose fertile side
Three hundred and six Fabiuses at once died.
Xantus, and Simois, those too famous floods,
So often stained in Greek and Trojan bloods:
Nor let Pharsalian Enepius boast
In Caesar's triumph, o'er great Pompey's host:
Deucalion brag not of Cephisus fored,
Because near it lost mankind he restored:
Caister of her Swans, Permessus clear,
Proud that the Muses were delighted there.
Pactolus, nor Idaspes, famed of old
For glittering Channels, paved with pearl and gold.
Let none of these compare with aged Nile,
Who only breeds the weeping Crocodile.
Who drew we hither to the Celebration,
Of this your great loud voiced inauguration.
Grave and judicious Praetor, O make me
Your happy Emblem; since as I foresee
By reason, that in Egypt falls no rain,
There needs must be a dearth of grass and grain;
Therefore, by frequent Inundations, I
In my great care, that needful want supply:
So Magistrates (of which you prime and best
We must acknowledge) ought to the distressed:
In your known gravity and goodness cast
The future to provide for, salve what's past.
My sevenfold Sceptres Hieroglyphic, tells
Seven heads, from which (my mighty river swells,
Seven liberal arts (by you maintained) express
Your City's magnitude and worthiness.
And as you see my Crocodiles I sway,
(Monsters, which both by land and water prey)
If any such here breed? as some no doubt,
In place and Office may be; search them out:
And then, what greater honour can you claim,
Then such rude beasts like me to curb and tame?
But y'are too long detained; I next commend you,
Unto those Triumphs that on Land attend you.
I Janus, the years Father, in my prime
Almost as soon as either light, or time;
Hither my servants the four Seasons bring
Cold Winter, Autumn, Summer, and the Spring.
Eleven Months are my Sons, my Daughter May
Makes up the twelft: her Sister's Night, and Day
Acknowledge me their Father: Girls of spleen
So opposed, they never will at once be seen.
The Hours my Handmaids are, which employed well,
Shall make you in your Praetorship excel
(As all the rest forenamed:) Behold this Key,
With which I ope the gates of Land and Sea
To the time future; being made by me
To all your Trade, commerce, and Traffic free.
Proceed and prosper, whilst the year forepast
(As never more to come) I shut up fast;
One face still looking back, least good Acts done
Might be obscured in dark oblivion:
As th'other forward, to see what's to do;
Both for God's Honour, and your Countries to.
From Janus this use may it please you gather,
You for one year are made the City's Father;
These four succeeding Seasons, I resign
Unto your charge; (which I before called mine:
To the twelve Months, most aptly may comply
Your twelve chief Companies: who can deny
My Daughter Day for your employment pressed?
The black-browed Night, sequestered for your rest?
So spend the Hours to enrich future story,
Both for your own grace and the City's glory.
My golden Key make use off, to set wide
Those Prison gates, where many a soul hath died,
Starved by th'Oppressors cruelty; those Gaild
For Capital crimes, unpitied, and unbaild,
Reserve for public Trial: justice is bound
To cut of Gangreenes, to preserve the sound:
But none knows better than yourself (Grave Lord)
What Mercy is; or when to use the Sword.
I Nquire from all antiquity, 'tis said
That when Apollo's Son, (ay Orpheus) played
Upon my Harp: the rivers if they swelled
Above their banks or Torrents that rebelled;
Grew smooth to hear my music: and forbore
To vex the Channels, or molest the Shore.
The Panther, Tiger, the wild Boar, the Bear,
Forget their rage, to give me attentive ear,
Lions with Lambs together couched in love,
As dreadless by the Falcon perched the Dove:
The Hounds their pursuit did leave off, and there
Sat Hart, and Hare, close by them without fear:
The sad predicting Raven, from the Oak
(Hollowed with age) was not once heard to croak,
Nor any Bird of harsh throat: only then
The Nightingale, the Robin, and the Wren
With all their musical choir, in silent groans,
(Afraid to sing out) cherrupt to my Tones.
The very Trees I did so much entrance,
They shook their bows because they could not dance:
But, Stones not rooted, but above the ground
Moved in rare postures to my Harps sweet sound:
I the four blustering Brothers rage's make calm,
And'stead of violent gusts to breath soft balm.
Yet there's an Harmony which doth rejoice
Man's heart, more than the Jnstrument, or Voice;
The Gittern, Harp, the Viol, and the Lute,
When that is heard to sound may all stand mute;
Whose happy Symptoms more contentment brings
Than any Consort, made by breatb or strings:
And sends a sweeter rapture to the ears
Than that above; made by th'orbicular Spheres.
May it your grave Praetorian wisdom please,
You are that Orpheus who can do all these:
If any stream beyond its bounds shall swell,
You bear the Trident that such rage can quell.
When beasts of Rapine (trusting to their power)
Would any of your harmless stocks devour:
Yours is the sword that can such violence stay,
To keep the Rich from rigour, Poor from prey;
Neither from any harshall-boading beak,
Lest discord shall be heard, when you but speak;
Whilst in Harmonious choir the rest contend,
Which in your praise each other shall transcend.
Trees rooted in self-will, and (which seems strange)
Even senseless stones you into life may change.
This Wisdom can; yet there's a more Divine
Concordancy, which far exceedeth mine:
That's of unanimous hearts; plenty, increase;
With all Terrestrial blessings wait on peace:
Which whilst maintained in your Commerce and Trade,
Proves sweeter Music than e'er Orpheus made.
THus doth the daughter of the Colchian King,
Her Husband Jason home in Triumph bring,
After his mighty Conquest of the Fleece;
The Aureum vellus brought from thence to Greece.
And wast not a brave prize? for who so dull
Cannot conceive the worth of golden wool?
The morning's Sun upon their Fleeces shines,
Making the fields appear like richest Mines.
One of the first we read of was the Ram,
Upon whose back Phrixus and Helle swam
The Hellespont: she to her lasting fame
(By being drowned there, gave the Sea that name:)
But Phrixus safely did to Colchos steer,
And on Jove's Altar sacrificed there
The golden Beast, whose faithful service done,
With the Celestial gods such favour won;
That striving 'mongst themselves to have him graced,
Him first of all the Zodiac signs they placed.
And worthily, search the vast earth or deep,
No beast to man, so useful as the sheep:
How many poor men doth it keep in pay,
Of several Trades and faculties; else they
Might starve for want of livelihood: but their charge bearing
By Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Fulling, Shearing.
How with her flesh we are satisfied within,
Clothed with her Wool without; in whose shorn skin
Those reverend antiquities are kept,
Which else long since had in oblivion slept:
And for the Fleece itself, it is an honour;
First Nature, and since Time, hath cast upon her,
So great, so eminent, so meriting praise,
Even Emperors were it on their Festival days:
And none that ever her true virtue knew,
But rated her with Ophir, and Peru.
These Camels though amongst us rarely seen,
Yet frequent where your Lordship oft hath been
In your long Travels: may the world persuade
The rich Commerce and nobleness of your Trade.
Time so contracts us, that we cannot dwell
On all in which you Merchants most excel:
Yet honoured Sir, what's in this place denied
Shall in Pacatus Status be supplied.
W Are, to the unexperienced, pleasant shows,
But they who in the Progress and the Close
Shall trace it, know it horrid; 'Tis a time
Destined, to the revenge, and scourge of Crime:
A time, when numerous armies, with the stress
Of mailed men, and harnessed Horses, press
Groans from the trembling Earth (with fear assounded)
And with the reeking gore of slain and wounded
Drenched her in stead of Rain: when like shooting Comets.
It's lightning bolts the thundering Cannon vomets;
Quaking the bellowing Air: when shrill alarms,
Rushing of routed Troops, clashing of Arms
Render a noise; as hideous and as loud,
As a tumultuous sea in Tempest ploughed:
When slaughter strews the crimson plain with Courses,
Men combat men, enraged Horses Horses:
When Massacre, (all quarter quite denying)
Revels amidst the flying, crying, dying.
It is a Time when Stratagem surrounds,
And the beleaguered City close impounds:
When mounted Ordnance with their streporous peal
(Wars Dialect) on both sides rail; and deal
Death at each dire discharge: When pinching need
Of food, hath forced the famished Motherfeed
On her 'fore-starved Babe; and Hunger raves
So fiercely, Men eat men out of their Graves:
When Plague makes friend, the friend; brother, the brother;
The Harmless, armless; murder one another:
When in the Husbands and sad Parents sight,
The Wife, and Virgins ravished, in despite
Of helpless succour; when without all ruth,
The Honourable Aged, lovely Youth
And Infant, in promiscuous heaps are thrown
(By indifferent havoc) like a meadow mown.
It is a time, when forage, pillage, strage,
What witty cruelty, or barbarous rage
Can or invent or execute; design
To utter desolation: when in fine
Whole Troy is but one Bonfire, that devours
House, Palace, Temple, and kicks down those Towers
That with the Clouds did late alliance boast;
Which in aspiring smoke give up the ghost.
(who Exit, in these Tragic Scenes,
Of sword, fire, famine, plagues find; thraldom gleans.
And such a time is War, and such the throws
Our neighbour Nations travel now in; woes
Quite desperate of delivery: whilst calm Peace,
Prosperity, and Plenty, with increase
Of all concatinated Blessings smile
With cheerful face on this sole-happy Isle.
Let then our gratitudes and Pious cares
Strive to entail them to Us, and our Heirs:
Lest that too late, (having stern War accited)
We wish that Peace; which (whilst we had) we slighted.
THe Sun is set, Day doth not now appear
(As some few hours late) in our Hemisphere;
Hesperus the Captain of the Watch, hath ta'en
Charge of the Stars; and now about Charles-wain
Hath placed his Sentinels to ' attend the Moon,
If possible to make of midnight noon.
May't ple 〈…〉 you to remember from old Nile,
The dang 〈…〉 Amphibian Crocodile;
How from 〈◊〉, you this year have power
Over each seasons Month, each 〈◊〉 hour.
From Orpheus, that sweet music 〈◊〉 parts,
The civil Harmony of tongues 〈◊〉.
The Fleece of Aries Trumpets to eternity,
The Draper's Honour, due to that Fraternity.
We by the Sheep and Camels understand,
Your Lordship's Travels both by Sea and Land:
Status Pacatus last doth intimate,
The happiness of this your peaceful state.
Long may it last (of all Earth's blessings best,)
Whilst we this night commend you to your rest.