BLow winds! until you raise the Seas so high,
That waves may hang like Tears in the sun's eye,
That we (when in vast Cataracts they fall)
May think he weeps at Nature's Funeral.
Blow winds! and from the troubled womb of Earth
(Where you receive your undiscovered birth)
Break out in wild disorders, till you make
ATLAS, beneath his shaking Load to shake.
How am I grieved, the world should everywhere
Be vexed into a storm, save only here?
Thou over-lucky too much happy I'll!
Grow more desirous of this flattering style!
For thy long health can never altered be,
But by thy surfeits on felicity:
And I to stir the humours that increase
In thy full Body (overgrown with peace)
Will call those Furies hither, who incense.
The guilty, and disorder Innocence.
Ascend! Ascend! you horrid sullen brood
Of evil spirits, and displace the good!
The great, make only wiser, to suspect
Whom they have wronged by falsehood, or neglect;
The Rich, make full of avarice as pride,
Like Graves, or swallowing Seas, unsatisfied;
busy to help the State (when needy grown)
From poor men's fortunes, never from their own.
The Poor, ambitious make, apt to obey
The False in hope to rule whom they betray:
And make Religion to become their vice,
Named, to disguise ambitious Avarice:
WHy should I hasten hither, since the good I bring to men is slowly understood? I know it is the Peoples vice, To lay too meane, too cheape a price On ev'ry blessing they possesse Th'injoying makes them thinke it lesse. If then, the need of what is good, Doth make it lov'd, or understood, Or tis by absence better knowne I shall be valew'd, when I'm gonne. Yet stay! O stay! if but to please The great and wise Philogenes. Should dewes not fall, the Sunne forbeare His course, or I my visits here; Alike from these defects would cease The power and hope, of all increase. Stay then! O stay! If but to ease The cares of wise Philogenes. I will! and much I grieve, that though the best Of Kingly science, harbours in his brest, Yet tis his fate, to rule in adverse times, When wisedome must awhile give place to crimes.
O who but he, could thus endure
To live, and govern in a sullen age,
When it is harder far to cure,
The people's folly than resist their rage?
WHen with instructed eyes, we look upon
Our blessings that descend so fast,
From the fair Partner of our monarch's Throne,
We grieve, they are too great to last.
But when those growing comforts we survey,
By whom our hopes are longer lived,
Then gladly we our vows, and praises pay
To her, from whom they are derived.
And since (great Queen) she is derived from you;
We here begin our offerings,
For those who sacrificed to Rivers, knew,
Their first rights due, unto their Springs.
The Stream, from whence our blessings flow, you bred;
You in whose bosom, e'en the chief, and best
Of Modern Victors laid his weary head,
when he rewarded Victories with rest.
Your Beauty kept his valour's flame alive;
Your Tuscan wisdom taught it how to thrive.
WHy are our joys detained by this delay?
Unless (as in a morning Overcast)
We find it long, ere we can find out day;
So whilst our hopes increase, our time doth waste.
Or are you slow 'cause th'way to Honour's Throne
(In which you travail now) is so uneven,
Hilly, and craggy, or as much unknown,
As that uncertain path which leads to Heaven?
O that Philosophers (who through those mists
Low nature casts, do upper knowledge spy)
Or those that smile at them (o'erweening Priests)
Could with such sure such an undoubted eye,
Reach distant Heaven, as you can Honours' Throne,
Than we should shift our flesh t'inhabit there,
Where we are taught, the Heroes are gone;
Though now content with Earth, 'cause you are here.
THose quarreling winds (that deafened unto death
The living, and did wake men dead before)
Seem now to pant small gusts, as out of breath,
And fly, to reconcile themselves on shore.
If it be Kingly patience to out last
Those storms the people's giddy fury raise,
Till like, fantastic winds themselves they waste,
The wisdom of that patience is thy praise.
Murmur's a sickness epidemical;
'Tis catching, and infects weak common ears;
For through those crooked, narrow Alleys, all
Invaded are, and killed by Whisperers.
This you discerned, and by your mercy taught,
Would not (like Monarchs that severe have been)
Invent, Imperial Arts, to question thought;
Nor punish vulgar sickness as a sin.
Nor would your valour, (when it might subdue)
Be hindered of the pleasure to forgive;
theyare worse than overcome (your wisdom knew)
That needed mercy to have leave to live.
Since strength of virtues, gained you honour's throne;
Accept our wonder, and enjoy your praise!
he's fit to govern there, and rule alone,
Whom inward helps, not outward force doth raise.
YOu that so wisely studious are,
To measure, and to trace each Star,
How swift they travail, and how far,
Now number your celestial store,
Planets, or lesser lights, and try,
If in the face of all the sky,
You count so many as before?
If you would practise how to know
The chief for influence, or show;
Level your perspectives below!
For in this nether Orb they move!
Each here (when lost in's doubtful Art)
May by his Eyes, advance his Heart,
And through his Optic learn to love!
But what is she that rules the night?
That kindles Ladies with her light,
And gives to Men the power of sight?
All those who can her virtue doubt,
Her Mind, will in her face advise,
For through the Casements of her Eyes,
Her Soul is ever looking out.
And with its beams, she doth survey
Our growth in Virtue or decay;
Still lighting us in honour's way!
All that are good, she did inspire!
Lovers are chaste, because they know
It is her will, they should be so;
The valiant take from her their Fire!
WHy stand you still, and at these Beauty's gaze,
As if you were afraid,
Or they were made,
Much more for wonder than delight?
Sure those whom first their virtue did amaze,
Their feature must at last invite.
Time never knew, the mischiefs of his haste!
Nor can you force him stay
To keep off day:
Make then fit use of Triumphs here;
It were a crime 'gainst pleasant youth, to waste
This night, in overcivil fear.
Move then like Time, for Love (as well as he)
Hath got a Calendar,
Where must appear,
How evenly you these measures tread;
And when they end, we far more grieved shall be,
Than for his Hours when they are fled.
SO musical as to all Ears,
Doth seem the music of the Spheres,
Are you, unto each other still;
Tuning your thoughts to either's will.
All that are harsh, all that are rude,
Are by your harmony subdued;
Yet so, into obedience wrought,
As if not forced to it, but taught.
Live still, the pleasure of our sight;
Both our examples and delight.
So long, until you find, the good success
Of all your virtues, in one happiness.
Till we so kind, so wise, and careful be,
In the behalf of our Posterity,
That we may wish your Sceptres ruling here,
(Loved even by those, who should your justice fear)
When we are gone, when to our last remove
We are dispatched, to sing your praise above.