AS many blessings as there be bones
In Ptolome's fingers and all at ones,
Held up in Andrew's Cross for the nonce.
Light on you good Master,
I dare be no waster
Of time, or of speech
Where you are in place:
I only beseech
You take in good grace,
Our following the Court,
Since 'tis for your sport
To have you still merry,
And not make you weary.
We may strive to please,
So long (some will say) till we grow a disease
But you Sir, that twice
Have graced us already, encourage to thrice;
Wherein if our boldness your patience invade,
Forgive us the fault that your favour hath made.
IF for our thoughts there could but speech be found,
And all that speech be uttered in one sound;
So that some power above us would afford
The means to make a language of a word,
It should be welcome: In that only voice
We would receive, retain, enjoy, rejoice;
And all effects of love, and life dispense,
Till it were called a copious eloquence:
For should we vent our spirits (now you are come,)
In other syllables, were as to be dumb.
Welcome, o welcome than, and enter here,
The House your bounty hath built, and still doth rear
With those high favours, and those heaped increases,
Which shows a hand not grieved, but when it ceases.
The Master is your creature, as the place;
And every good about him is your grace:
Whom though he stand by silent, think not rude,
But as a man turned all to gratitude.
For what he never can hope, how to restore,
Since while he meditates one, you heap on more.
Vouchsafe to think, he only is oppressed
With their abundance, not that in his breast
His powers are stupid grown; for please you enter
Him, and his house, and search them to the centre:
You'll find within no thanks, or vows there shorter,
For having trusted thus much to his Porter.
Room for the five Princes of Egypt, mounted all upon the Horse like the four Sons of Aymon, to make the miracle the more, by a head, if it may be: gaze upon them, as on the Offspring of Ptolemy, begotten upon several Cleopatra's, in their several Countries; especially on this brave Spark strooke out of Flintshire, upon Justice Jugges Daughter than Sheriff of the County; who running away with a kinsman of our Captains, and her Father pursuing her to the Marshes, He great with Justice, She great with Juggling, they were both for the time turned stone upon the fight each of other, in Chester: Till at last (see the Wonder) A Jugge of the Town Ale reconciling them; the memorial of both their gravities, his in beard, and hers in belly, hath remained ever since preserved in picture upon the most stone Jugs of the Kingdom. The famous imp yet grew a wretchcocke, and though for seven years together, he were very carefully carried at his mother's back, rocked in a cradle of Welch-cheese, like a Maggot, and there fed with broken beer, and blown wine o'the best daily; yet looks he, as if he never saw his Guinquennium. 'tis true, he can thread needles o'horse-backe, to draw a yard of inkle through his nose: But what's that to a grown Gipsy, one of the blood, and of his time if he had thrived: Therefore, till with his painful Progenitors, he be able to beaten it on the hard hoof, or the been Bawse, or the Starling, Ken to nip a Jan, and Cly the Jack; 'tis thought fit he march in the Infant's equipage.
With the Convoy, Cheats, and peckage,
Out of Clutch of Harman Beckage,
To their libkins at the Crackmans',
Or some skipper of the Blackmans'.
WHere the Cacklers, but no Grunters,
Shall uncased be for the Hunters,
Those we still must keep alive;
I, and put them out to thrive
In the Parks, and in the Chases,
And the finer walled places;
As Saint James', Greenwich, Tibballs,
Where the Acorns plump as Chibballs,
Soon shall change both kind and name,
And proclaime'em the King's game.
So the act no harm may be
Unto their keeper Barnabee;
It will prove as good a service,
As did ever Gipsy Jervice,
To our Captain Charles the tall man,
And a part too of our Salmon.
IF we here be a little obscure, it is our pleasure; for rather than we will offer to be our own interpreters, we are resolved not to be understood: yet if any man doubt of the significancy of the language, we refer him to the third volume of reports, set forth by the learned in the laws of Canting, and published in the Gipsies tongue: Give me my Guittarra, and room for our Chief.
FRom the famous Peacke of Derby,
And the Devil's arse there hard-by,
Where we yearly keep our musters,
Thus the Egyptians throng in clusters,
Be not frighted with our fashion,
Though we seem a tattered Nation;
We accounted our rags, our richeses,
So our tricks exceed our stitches.
Give us Bacon, rinds of Walnuts,
Shells of Cockels, and of Smalnuts;
Ribbons, bells, and Safrond linen,
All the World is ours to win in.
Knacks we have that will delight you,
slight of hand that will invite you,
To endure our tawny faces.
WO. Quit your places, and not 'cause you cut your laces.
All your fortunes we can tell ye,
Be they for the back or belly;
In the Moods too, and the Tenses,
That may fit your fine five senses.
Draw but than your gloves we pray you,
And sit still, we will not fray you;
For though we be here at Burley,
we'd be loath to make a hurly.
STay my sweet Singer,
The touch of thy finger,
A little, and linger;
For me that am bringer
Of bound to the border,
The rule and Recorder,
And mouth of the order,
As Priest of the game,
And Prelate of the same.
there's a Gentry Cove here,
Is the top of the Shire,
Of the Beaver Ken,
A man among men;
You need not to fear,
I have an eye, and an ear
That turns here and there,
To look to our gear.
Some say that there be
One or two, if not three,
That are greater than he.
ANd for the Roome-Morts,
I know by their ports,
And their jolly resorts,
They are of the sorts
That love the true sports
Of King Ptolomeus,
Or great Coriphaeus,
And Queen Cleopatra,
The Gipsies grand Matra.
Than if we shall shark it,
Here Fair is, and Market.
Leave Pig by, and Goose,
And play fast, and lose,
A short cut, and long,
Some inch of a song,
Pythagoras' lot,
Drawn out of a pot;
With what says Alchindus?
And Pharaotes Indus,
John de Indagine
With all their Pagine
Of faces and Palmistry,
And this is Almistrie.
Lay by your wimbles,
Your boring for thimbles,
Or using your nimbles,
In diving the pockets,
And sounding the sockets
Of Simper-the Cockets;
Or angling the purses,
Of such as will curse us;
But in the strict duel
Be merry, and cruel,
Strike fair at some jewel,
That mine may accrue well,
For that is the fuel,
To make the Town brew well,
And the pot wring well,
And the brain sing well,
Which we may bring well
About by a string well,
And do the thing well.
It is but a strain
Of true legerdemain,
Once twice and again.
Or what will you say now
If with our fine play now,
Our feats, and our fingering,
Here without lingering;
Cozening the sights
Of the Lords, and the knights.
Some one of their George's
Come of to save charges.
Or what will you say now?
If with our fine play now,
Our knacks, and our dances,
We work on the fancies
Of some of these Nancies.
These trinkets, and tripsies,
And make'em turn Gipsies.
here's no Justice Lippus
Will seek for to nip us,
In Crampring, or Cippus,
And than for to strip us,
And after to whip us.
His justice to vary,
While here we do tarry,
But be wise, and wary,
And we may both carry,
The Kate, and the Mary,
And all the bright ae'ry,
A way to the quarry.
The George and the Garter,
Into our own quarter;
Or durst I go further
In methood and order:
there's a purse and a Seal,
I have a great mind to steal.
That when our tricks are done,
We might seal our own pardon;
All this we may do,
And a great deal more too,
If our brave Ptolomee,
Will but say follow me.
Captain, if ever at the Bozing Ken,
You have in draught of Derby drilled your men;
And we have served there armed all in Ale,
With the brown bowl, and charged in bragget stolen:
If mustered thus, and disciplined in drink,
In our long watches we did never shrink,
But so commanded by you kept our station,
As we preserved ourselves a royal Nation;
And never yet did branch of Statute break,
Made in your famous Pallas of the Peake.
If we have deemed, that Mutton, Lamb, or Veal,
Chick, Capon, Turkey, sweetest we did steal;
As being by our Magna Charta taught
To judge no urands wholesome that are bought.
If for our Linen we still used the lift,
And with the hedge (our trades increase) made shift;
And ever at your solemn feast, and calls,
We have been ready with the Egyptian bralls;
To set Kit Callot forth in Prose or Rhyme,
Or who was Cleopatra for the time.
If we have done this, that, more, such, or so;
Now lend your ear but to the Patrico.
Well, Dance another strain, and we'll think how
THe faery beam upon you,
The stars to glister on you;
A Moon of light,
In the noon of night,
Till the Fire-drake hath o'er gone you.
The wheel of fortune guide you,
The Boy with the bow beside you;
Run ay in the way,
Till the bird of day,
And the luckier lot beside you.
Bless my sweet Masters, the old, and the young,
From the gall of the heart, and the stroke of the tongue.
With you lucky Bird I begin, let me see,
I aim at the best, and I trow you are he,
here's some luck already, if I understand
The grounds of mine Art; here's a Gentleman's hand.
I'll kiss it for lucks sake, you shall by this line
Love a Horse, and a Hound; but no part of a swine.
To hunt the brave Stag, not so much for the food,
As the weal of your body, and the health o'your blood.
Your a man of good means, and have Territories store
Both by Sea, and by Land; and were borne Sir to more,
Which you like a Lord, and the Prince of your peace,
Content with your have, despise to increase:
You are no great Wencher, I see by your table,
Although your Mons Veneris says you are able;
You live chaste, and single, and have buried your Wife,
And mean not to marry, by the line of your life.
Whence he that conjectures, your quality learns,
You are an honest good man, and care of your Barns.
Your Mercury's hill too, a wit doth betoken,
Some booke-craft you have, and are pretty well spoken.
But stay, in your Jupiter's mount, what's here?
A King, a Monarch; what wonders appear!
High, Bountiful, Just: a Jove for your parts,
A Master of men, and that Reign in their hearts.
I'll tell it my train,
And come to you again.
TO the old, long life and treasure,
To the young, all health and pleasure;
To the fair, their face
With eternal grace,
And the foul to be loved at leisure.
To the witty, all clear mirrors,
To the foolish, their dark errors;
To the loving spirit,
A secure delight,
To the jealous his own false terrors.
After which the King's fortune is pursued by the
COuld any doubt that saw this hand,
Or who you are, or what command
You have upon the fate of things,
Or would not say you were let down
From Heaven, on earth to be the Crown,
And top of all your neighbour Kings?
To see the ways of truth you take,
To sallance business, and to make
All Christian differences cease.
Or till the quarrel, and the cause
You can compose, to give them laws,
As arbitor of War, and Peace.
For this, of all the world you shall
Be styled James, the just, and all
Their states dispose, their Sons and daughters,
And for your fortune you alone,
Among them all shall work your own,
By peace, not by human slaughters.
But why do I presume, though true,
To tell a Fortune, Sir, to you,
Who are the maker here of all;
Where none do stand, or sit in view,
But own their fortune unto you,
At lest what they good fortunes call?
Myself a Gipsy here do shine,
Yet are you maker, Sir, of mine.
O that confession could content
So high a bounty, that doth know
No part of motion, but to flow,
and giving never to repent.
May still the matter wait your hand,
That it not feel, or stay, or stand;
but all desert still over charge.
And may your goodness ever find
In me whom you have made, a mind,
As thankful as your own is large.
AS my Captain hath begun
With the Sire, I take the Son,
Your hand Sir.
Of your fortune be secure,
Love, and she, are both at your
Command Sir.
See what States are here at strife,
Who shall tender you a Wife,
A brave one;
And a fit for a man,
Than is offered here, you can
Not have one.
She is Sister of a star,
One the noblest now that are,
Bright Hesper.
Whom the Indians in the East,
Phosphore call, and in the West,
Hight Vesper.
Courses even with the Sun,
Doth her mighty brother run,
For splendour.
What can to the marriage night,
Moore than morn, and evening light
Attend her?
Save the promise before day,
Of a little James to play
Hereafter.
Twixt his Grandsires' knees, and move
All the pretty ways of love,
And laughter.
Whilst with care you strive to please,
In your giving his cares ease,
And labours;
And by being long the aid
Of the Empire, make afraid
III Neighbours.
Till yourself shall come to see
What we wish, yet far to be
Attending:
For it skills not when, or where
That begins, which cannot fear
An ending.
Since your name in peace, or wars,
Naught shall bond until the stars
up take you.
Hurl after an old shoe,
I'll be merry what ever I do,
Though I keep no time,
My words shall chime,
I'll overtake the sense with a rhyme.
Face of a rose
I pray thee depose
Some small piece of silver: It shall be no loss,
But only to make the sign of the cross;
If your hand you hollow,
Good fortune will follow.
I swear by these ten,
You shall have it again,
I do not say when.
But Lady, either I am tipsy,
Or you are to fall in love with a Gipsy;
Blush not Dame Kate,
For early, or late,
I do assure you it will be your fate;
Nor need you be once ashamed of it Madam,
he's as handsome a man, as ever was Adam.
A man out of wax,
As a Lady would axe;
Yet he's not to wed ye:
H'has enjoyed you already,
And I hope he has sped ye.
A dainty young fellow,
And though he look yellow,
He never will be jealous,
But love you most zealous.
there's never a line in your hand but doth tell us.
And you are a foul so white, and so chaste,
A table so smooth, and so newly ra'ste,
As nothing called foul,
Dare approach with a blot,
Or any lest spot;
But still you control,
Or make your own lot,
Preserving love pure as it first was begot:
But Dame I must tell ye,
The fruit of your belly,
Is that you must tender,
And care so to tender;
That as yourself came
In blood, and in name,
From one house of fame,
So that may remain
The glory of twain.
YOu sweet Lady have a hand too,
And a fortune you may stand too;
Both your bravery, and your bounty
Style you Mistress of the County;
You will find it from this night,
Fortune shall forget her spite,
And heap all the blessings on you,
That she can pour out upon you;
To be loved, where most you love,
Is the worst that you shall prove;
And by him to be embraced,
Who so long hath known you chaste,
Wise, and fair; whilst you renew
Joys to him, and he to you:
And when both your years are told,
Neither think the other old.
MAdam we know of your coming so late,
We could not well fit you a nobler fate
Than what you have ready made;
An old man's wife,
Is the light of his life,
A young one is but his shade.
You will not importune,
The change of your fortune;
For if you dare trust to my forecasting,
'tis presently good, and will be lasting.
YOur pardon Lady, here you stand,
If some should judge you by your hand
The greatest felon in the Land
Detected:
I cannot tell you by what Arts,
But you have stolen so many hearts,
As they would make you at all parts
Suspected.
Your very face first, such a one
As being viewed it was alone,
Too slippery to be looked upon;
And threw men.
But than your graces they were such,
As none could ere behold too much;
Both every taste, and every touch
So drew men.
Still blessed in all you think, or do,
Two of your Sons are Gipsies too,
You shall our Queen be, and see who
Importunes
The heart of either yours, or you;
And doth not wish both George, and Sue,
And every Barn besides, all new
Good fortunes.
Help me wonder, her's a book,
Where I would for ever look;
Never yet did Gipsy trace,
Smother lines in hands, or face:
Venus here doth Saturn move
That you should be Queen of love;
And the other Stars consent,
Only Cupid not content;
For though you the theft disguise,
You have told him of his eyes:
And to show his envy further,
Here he chargeth you with murder;
Says, although that at your sight,
He must all his troches light;
Though your either cheeks discloses,
Mingled baths of milk and Roses,
Though your lips be banks of blisses,
Where he plants, and gathers kisses;
And yourself the reason why,
Wisest men for love may dye,
You will turn all hearts to tinder,
And shall make the World one cinder.
Mistress, of a fairer table
Hath not history, nor sable;
Others fortunes may be shown,
You are builder of your own.
And what ever Heaven hath given you,
You preserve the state still in you,
That which time would have depart,
Youth without the help of Art,
You do keep still, and the glory
Of your Sex, is but your story.
THough you Sir be Chamberlain, I have a key
To open your fortune a little by the way;
You are a good man,
Deny it that can;
And faithful you are,
Deny it that dare.
You know how to use your sword and your Pen,
And you love not alone the Arts, but the men;
The graces and Muses every where follow
You, as you were their second Apollo;
Only your hand here tells you to your face,
You have wanted one grace,
To perform, what has been a right of your place;
For by this line which is Mars his Trench,
You never yet helped your Master to a Wench:
'tis well for your honour he's pious, and chaste,
Or you had most certainly been displaced.
AS happy a Palm Sir, as most i' the Land,
It should be a pure, and an innocent hand;
And worthy the trust,
For it says you'll be just,
And carry that Purse,
Without any curse
Of the Publique-weale,
When you take out the Seal,
You do not appear,
A Judge of a year.
I'll venture my life
You never had wife,
But i'll venture my skill,
You may when you william.
You have the King's conscience too in your breast,
And that's a good guest;
Which you will have true touch of,
And yet not make much of;
Moore than by truth yourself forth to bring,
The man that you are, for God, and the King.
I Come to borrow, and you'll grant my demand Sir,
Since 'tis for no money, pray lend me your hand Sir;
And yet this good hand if you please to stretch it,
Had the Errand been money, could easily fetch it;
You command the King's treasure, and yet on my soul
You handle not much, for your palm is not foul:
Your fortune is good, and will be to set
The Office upright, and the King out of debt;
To put all that have Pensions soon out of their pain,
By bringing th' Exchequer in credit again.
HOnest, and old,
In those the good part of a fortune is told;
God sand you your health,
The rest is provided, honour, and wealth;
All which you possess,
Without the making of any man less,
Nor need you my warrant, enjoy it you shall,
For you have a good Privie-Seale for it all.
NExt the great Master, who is the Donor,
I read you here the preserver of honour,
And spy it in all your singular parts,
What a father you are, and a nurse of the Arts.
By cherishing which, a way you have found,
How the free to all, to one may be bound,
And they again love their bonds; for to be
Obliged to you, is the way to be free:
But this is their fortune; Hark to your own,
Yours shall be to make true Gentry known
From the fictitious, not to prise blood
So much by the greatness, as by the good:
To show, and to open clear virtue the way,
Both whether she should, and how far she may;
And whilst you do judge twixt valour, and noise
To'extinguish the race of the roaring boys.
I find by this hand
You have the command
Of the very best man's house i'the land:
Our Captain, and we,
E'er long will see
If you keep a good table;
Your Master's able.
And here be bountiful lines that say
You'll keep no part of his bounty away.
Thus written to Frank
On your Venus' bank;
To prove a false steward you'll found much ado,
Being a true one by blood, and by office too.
Only your hand, and welcome to Court,
Here is a man both for earnest, and sport.
You were lately employed
And your Master is joyed
To have such in his train
So well can sustain
His person abroad,
And not shrink for the load.
But had you been here,
You should have been a Gipsy I swear,
Our Captain had summoned you by a doxy,
To whom you would not have answered by proxy,
One, had she come in the way of your Sceptre,
'tis odds, you had laid it by to have leapt her.
A Hunter you have been heretofore,
And had game good store;
But ever you went
Upon a new sent,
And shifted your loves
As often as they did their smocks, or their gloves:
But since that your brave intendments are
Now bend for the war,
The world shall see
You can constant be,
One Mistress to prove,
And court her for your love.
Pallas, shall be both your Sword, and your Gage;
Truth, bear your Shield, and fortune your Page,
WHy this is a sport,
See it North, see it South,
For the taste of the Court,
For the Courts own mouth.
Come Windsor, the Town,
With the Mayor, and oppose,
we'll put them all down,
Do— do— down like my hose.
A Gipsy in his shape
Moore calls the beholder,
Than the fellow with the Ape,
Or the Ape on his shoulder.
he's a sight that will take
An old Judge from his Wench,
I, and keep him awake,
Yes, awake on the Bench.
And has so much worth,
Though he sit i'the stocks,
He will draw the Girls forth,
I, forth i'their smocks.
Tut, a man's a man;
Let the Clowns with their Sluts
Come mend us if they can,
If they can, for their guts.
Come mend us, come lend us, their shouts, and their noise,
Like thunder, and wonder at Ptolemy's boys.
O the Lord! what be these? Tom dost thou know? Come hither, come hither Dick, didst thou ever see such? the finest Olive-coloured spirits, they have so danced, and gingled here, as if they had been a set of overgrown Fairies.
They should be Morris-dancers by their jingle, but they have no napkins:
Not, nor a Hobby-horse.
O, he's often forgotten, that's no rule; but there is no Mayd-marian, nor Friar amongst them, which is the surer mark.
Nor a Fool that I see.
Unless they be all fools.
Well said Tom fool; why thou simple pish Ass thou! didst thou never see any Gipsies? these are a covey of Gipsies, and the bravest new-come, that ever Constable flew at; goodly game Gipsies, they are Gipsies o''is year, o''is Moon in my conscience.
O they are called the Moon men I remember now!
One shall hardly see such gentlemanlike- Gipsies, though under a hedge in a whole Summer's day, if they be Gipsies.
Male Gipsies all, not a Mort among them.
Where? where? I could never endure the sight of these Rogue-Gipsies, which be they: I would feign see'em.
Yonder they are.
Can they Cant, or Mill? are they masters of their Arts?
Not bachelors these, they cannot have proceeded so far; they have scarce had their time to be lousy yet.
All the better; I would be acquainted with them while they are in clean life, the I'll do their tricks the cleanlier.
We must have some music than, and take out the Wenches.
Music, we'll have a whole poverty of pipers, call cheeks upon the Bagpipe, and Tom Ticklefoot with his Tabor; see where he comes!
I, and all the good wenches of Windsor; after him, yonder is Prue o'the Park,
And Frances o'the Castle;
And long Meg of Eton;
And Christian o' Dorny.
See the miracle of a Minstrel.
he's able to muster up the smocks of the two Shires;
And set the Codpieces and they by th'ears at pleasure.
I cannot hold now, there's my groat, let's have a fit for mirth sake.
Yes, and they'll come about us for luck sake.
But look to our pockets, and purses, for our own sake.
I, I have the greatest charge; gather the money.
Come Girls, here be Gipsies come to town, let's dance'em down.
Sweet Doxies, and dels,
My Roses, and Knells,
Scarce out of the shells,
Your hands nothing else.
We ring you no knells
With our Ptolemy's bells,
Though we come from the fells,
But bring you good spells,
And tell you some chances,
In midst of your dances,
That fortune advances,
To Prudence, or Frances;
To Sisly, or Harry,
To Roger, or Mary,
Or Peg of the Dary;
To Maudlin, or Thomas,
Than do not run from us,
Although we look tawny,
We are healthy, and brawny,
What ere your demand is,
we'll give you no jaundis.
Say you so old Gipsy? 'slid these go too't in rhymes; this is better than canting by tone half.
Nay, you shall hear; peace, they begin with Prudence, mark that.
The wiser Gipsie's the Marry.
Are you advised?
Yes, and i'll stand too't, that a wise Gipsy (take him at time o'year) is as pollique a piece of flesh, as most Justices in the County where he stalks.
To love a Keeper, your fortune will be;
But the Doucets better than him, or his fee.
Ha' Prue, has he hit you i'th' teeth with a sweet bit?
Let her alone, she'll swallow well enough; A learned Gipsy.
You'll hear more hereafter.
Mary, and i'll listen; who stands next? Jack Cockrell.
You'll ha' good luck to horseflesh o' my life,
You ploughed so late with the Vicar's wife.
A Prophet, a prophet, no Gipsy; or if he be a Gipsy, a divine Gipsy.
Mark Frances, now she's going too't, the virginity o' the Parish.
Fear not, in hell you'll never lead Apes;
A mortified maiden, of five 'scapes.
Birlady he touched the virgin string there a little too hard, they are arrant learned men all I see; what say they upon Tom, Clod, List.
Clods feet will in Christmas go near to be bore,
When he has lost all his hob nails at Post and pair.
Has hit the right nail o'th' head, his own game.
And the very metal he deals in at play if you mark it.
Peace, who's this? Long Meg?
Long, and foul Meg, if she be a Meg, as ever I saw of her inches; pray God they fit her with a fair fortune.
They slip her, and treat upon Ticklefoot.
On Sundays you rob the poors box with your tabor,
The Collectors would do it, you save them a labour.
Faith but a little, they'll do it non upstant.
here's my little Christian, forget, ha' you any fortune left for her; a straight-laced Christian of sixteen.
Christian shall get her a lose bodide-gowne,
In tri'mge, how a Gentleman differs from a Clown.
Is that a fortune for a Christian; a Turk, or a Gipsy could not have told her a worse.
Come, I'll stand myself, and once venture the poor head o'the Town, do your worst, my name's Townshead, and here's my hand I'll not be angry.
A Cuckold you must be, and that for three lives;
Your own, the Parsons, and your Wives.
I swear I'll never marry for that, an't be but to give fortune my foe the lie; Come Pan Puppy you must in too:
Not, I'm well enough, I would ha'no good fortune an I might;
Yet look to yourself, you'll ha' some ill luck,
And shortly, for I have his purse at a pluck.
Away birds Mum,
I hear by the Hum,
If Beck-harman come,
he'll strike us all dumb,
With a noise like a Drum,
Let's give him our room,
Here, this way some,
And that way others,
We are not all brothers;
Leave me to the cheats,
I'll show 'em some feats.
What! are they gone? flown all of a sudden? this is fine i'faith? a covey call y'em, they are a covey soon scattered me think, who sprung 'em I marl?
Mary yourself Puppy for aught I know, you quested last.
Would he had quested first, and sprung y'em an ' hour ago, for me.
Why! what's the matter man?
'Slid, they ha' sprung my purse, and all I had about me.
They ha' not, ha' they?
As I am true Clod, ha' they, and ransacled me of every penny, outcept I were with child with an owl (as they say) I never saw such luck, it's enough to make a man a whore.
Hold thy peace, thou talk'st as if thou hadst a licence to loose thy purse alone in this company; 'slid here be those can loose a purse in honour of the Gipsies, as well as thou for thy heart, and never make word of it: I ha' lost my purse too.
What was there i'thy purse, thou keep'st such a whining; was the lease of thy house in it.
Or thy Granam's silver ring.
Not, but a Mill sixpences I loved as dearly, and a 2 pence I had to spend over and above; besides; the Harper that was gathered amongst us, to pay the Piper.
Our whole stock, is that gone? how will Tom Ticklefoot do to wet his whistle than?
Mary, a new collection, there's no music else masters, he can ill pipe that wants his upper lip; Money.
They have robbed me too of a dainty race of ginger, and a jetring I had, to draw Jack straw hither a holy days.
Is't possible? fine fingered Gipsies i'faith.
And I have lost an enchanted Nutmeg, all guilded over, was enchanted at Oxford for me, to put i'my sweet-hearts Ale a mornings; with a row of white-pins that prick me to the very heart, the loss of them.
And I have lost, besides my purse, my best bride-lace I had at Joan Turner's wedding, and a halpeworth of hobnayles: Francis Addle-breech has lost somewhat too, besides her Maidenhead.
I have lost my thimble, and a skein of Coventry-blew I had to work Gregory Lichfield a handkerchief.
And I unhappy Christian as I am, have lost my Practice of Piety, with a bowed groat; and the ballet of Whoop Barnibie, which grieves me ten times worse.
And Ticklefoot h'as lost his clout he says, with a three pence and four tokens in't; besides his Tabouring-sticke even now.
And I my knife and sheath, and my fine Dogs-leather gloves.
Ha' we lost never a dog amongst us, where's Puppy.
Here goodman Townshead, you have nothing to loose it seems, but the Towne-braines you are trusted with.
O my dear marrows!
No shooting of arrows,
Or shafts of your wit,
Each other to hit,
In your skirmishing fit?
Your store is but small,
Than venture not all.
Remember each mock,
Doth spend o' the stock;
And what was here done,
Being under the Moon,
And at afternoon,
Will prove right soon
Disceptio visus,
Done Gratia risus.
there's no such thing,
As the loss of a ring,
Or what you count worse,
The miss of a purse.
But hay for the main,
And pass of the strain,
here's both come again.
And there's an old twinger,
Can show yet the ginger;
The Pins, and the Nutmeg
Are safe here with Slut-megge;
Than strike up your Tabour,
And there's for your labour;
The sheath, and the knife, I'll venture my life,
Shall breed you no strife,
But like man, and wife,
Or Sister, and brother, keep one with another,
And light as a feather,
Make haste to come hither.
THe Coventry-blew,
Hangs there upon Prue,
And here's one opens
The Clout, and the Tokens;
Deny the bowed groat,
And you lie i'your throat.
Or the Tabourers nine pence,
Or the six fine pence.
As for the ballet,
Or the book what you call it;
Alas our society,
Mells not with piety,
Himself hath forsook it,
That first undertook it;
For thimble, or bride-lace
Search yonder side lass.
All's to be found,
If you look yourselves round;
We scorn to take from ye,
We had rather spend on ye,
If any man wrong ye,
The Theef's among ye.
EXcellent i'faith, a most restorative Gipsy, all's here again; and yet by his learning of Legierdemaine, he would make us believe we had robbed ourselves.
A Gipsy of quality believe it, and one of the Kings Gipsies; this a Drinke-alian, or a Drinke-braggatan?
Ask him.
The King has his noise of Gipsies, as well as of Bearwards, and other Minstrels.
What sort or order of Gipsies, I pray sir.
A Flagon-fekian,
A Devils-arse-a Pekian;
Borne first at Niglington,
Bread up at Filchington,
Boarded at Tappington,
Bedded at Wappington.
Fore me, a dainty derived Gipsy.
But I pray sir, if a man might ask on you, how came your Captain's place first to be called the Devills-arse.
For that take my word,
We have a record,
That doth it afford,
And says our first Lord,
Cocklorrell he height,
On a time did invite
The Devil to a feast;
The tail of the jest,
Though since it be long,
Lives yet in a song;
Which if you would hear,
Shall plainly appear.
I'll call in my Clerk
Shall sing like a Lark,
Come in my long shark,
With thy face brown and dark;
With thy tricks, and thy toys,
Make a merry merry noise,
To those mad Country boys,
And chant out the fart of the Grand-devils arse.
Cocklorrell, would needs have the Devil his guest,
And bade him once into the Peake to dinner,
Where never the Fiend had such a feast,
Provided him yet at the charge of a sinner.
His stomach was queasy (for coming there Coached),
The jogging had caused some crudities rise;
To help it he called for a Puritan poached,
That used to turn up the egg's of his eyes.
And so recovered unto his wish,
He sat him down, and he fell to eat;
Promoter in plum-broth was the first dish,
His own privy kitchen had no such meat.
Yet though with this he much were taken
Upon a sudden he shifted his trencher
As soon as he spied the Bawd, and bacon,
By which you may note the devil's a wencher.
Six pickled Tailors sliced and cut,
Sempsters, Tire-women, fit for his pallat;
With Feathermen, and perfumes put,
Some twelve in a Charger to make a grand salad:
A rich fat Usurer stewed in his marrow,
And by him a Lawyer's head and green-sawce;
Both which his belly took in like a barrow,
As if till than he had never seen sauce.
Than Carbonadoed, and Cooked with pains,
Was brought up a cloven Sergeant's face;
The sauce was made of his Yeamans brains,
That had been beaten out with his own mace.
Two roasted Sheriffs came whole to the board;
(The feast had nothing been without 'em)
Both living, and dead, they were foxed, and fu'rd,
Their chains like sausages hung about 'em.
The very next dish, was the Mayor of a Town,
With a pudding of maintenance thrust in his belly;
Like a Goose in the feathers dressed in his gown,
And his couple of Hinch-boyes boiled to a jelly.
A London Cuckold, hot from the spit,
And when the Carver up had broke him;
The Devil chopped up his head at a bit,
But the horns were very near like to have choked him.
The chine of a Lecher too there was roasted,
With a plump Harlot's haunch and garlic;
A Panders pettitoes that had boasted
Himself for a Captain, yet never was warlike.
A large fat pastry of a Midwife hot;
And for a cold baked meat into the story,
A reverend painted Lady was brought,
And coffined in crust, till now she was hoary.
To these, an over-growne-justice of peace,
With a Clerk like a gizzard thrust under each arm;
And warrants for sippets, laid in his own grease,
Set o'er a chaffing dish to be kept warm.
The jowl of a jailer, served for fish,
A Constable soused with vinegar by;
Two Aldermen lobsters asleep in a dish,
A Deputy tart, a Churchwarden pie.
All which devovred; He than for a close,
Did for a full draught of Derby call;
He heaved the huge vessel up to his nose,
And left not till he had drunk up all.
Than from the table he gave a start,
Where banquet, and wine were nothing scarce;
All which he slirted away with a fart,
From whence it was called the Devil's Arse.
And there he made such a breach with the wind,
The hole too standing open the while,
That the sent of the vapour, before, and behind,
Hath foully perfumed most part of the Isle.
And this was Tobacco, the learned suppose;
Which since in Country, Court, and Town,
In the Devil's glister-pipe smokes at the nose
Of Polle at, and Madam, of Gallant, and Clown.
From which wicked weed, with Swines-flesh, and Ling;
Or any thing else that's feast for the Fiend:
Our Captain, and we, cry God save the King,
And sand him good meat, and mirth without end.
AN excellent song, and a sweet Songster, and would have done rarely in a Cage, with a dish of water, and hempseed; a fine breast of his own: Sir you are a Prelate of the Order, I understand, and I have a terrible grudging now upon me to be one of your company; will your Captain take a Prentice Sir? I would bind myself to him body and soul, either for one and twenty years, or as many lives as he would.
I, and put in my life for one, for I am come about too; I am sorry I had no more money i' my purse when you came first upon us Sir; If I had known you would have picked my pocket so like a Gentleman, I would have been better provided; I shall be glad to venture a purse with your Worship at any time you'll appoint, so you would prefer me to your Captain; I'll put in security for my truth, and serve out my time, though I die to morrow.
I, upon those terms Sir, and in hope your Captain keeps better cheer than he made the Devil, for my stomach will ne'er agreed with that diet, we'll be all his followers; I'll go home and fetch a little money Sir, all I have, and you shall pick my pocket to my face, and i'll avouch it; A man would not desire to have his pocket picked in better company.
Tut, they have other manner of gifts than picking of pockets, or telling fortunes; if they would but please to show 'em, or thought us poor Country mortals worthy of them; what might a man do to be a Gentleman of your company Sir?
I, a Gipsy in ordinary, or nothing.
Friends not to refel ye,
Or any way quell ye,
To buy or to cell ye,
I only must tell ye;
Ye aim at a mystery,
Worthy a History;
there's much to be done,
E're you can be a Son,
Or brother of the Moon.
'tis not so soon
Acquired, as desired.
You must be Ben-bowsie,
And sleepy, and drowsy,
And lazy, and lousy,
Before ye can rouse ye,
In shape that arowse ye.
And than you may stalk
The Gipsies walk;
To the Coops, and the Pens,
And bring in the Hens,
Though the Cock be sullen
For loss of the Pullen:
Take Turkey, or Capon,
And Gammons of Bacon,
Let naught be forsaken;
we'll let you go lose,
Like a Fox to a Goose,
And show you the sty
Where the little Pigs lie;
Whence if you can take
One or two, and not wake
The Sow in her dreams,
But by the Moon beams;
So warily high,
As neither do cry.
You shall the next day
Have licence to play
At the hedge a flirt,
For a sheet, or a shirt;
If your hand be light,
I'll show you the slight
Of our Ptolemy's knot,
It is, and 'tis not,
To change your complexion,
With the noble confection
Of Walnuts, and Hogs-grease,
Better than Dogs-grease:
And to milk the Kine,
E'er the Milke-mayd fine
Hath opened her eine.
Or if you desire
To spit, or fart fire,
I'll teach you the knacks,
Of eating of flax;
And out of their noses,
Draw Ribbons, and posies,
As for example,
Mine own is as ample,
And fruitful a nose,
As a wit can suppose;
Yet it shall go hard,
But there will be spared,
Each of you a yard,
And worth your regard.
When they colour, and size
Arrive at your eyes.
And if you incline
To a cup of good wine,
When you sup, or dine;
If you chance it to lack,
Be it Claret, or Sack;
I'll make this snout,
To deal it about,
Or this to run out,
As it were from a spout.
Admirable tricks, and he does 'em all se defendendo, as if he would not be taken in the trap of authority, by a frail fleshly Constable.
Without the aid of a Cheese,
Or help of a flitch of bacon.
O, he would chirp in a pair of stocks sumptuously; I'd give any thing to see him play lose with his hands, when his feet were fast.
O' my conscience he fears not that, and the Marshal himself were here; I protest I admire him.
IS this worth your wonder,
Nay than you shall under-
Stand more of my skill.
I can (for I will)
Here at Burley o'th' Hill,
Give you all your fill,
Each Jack with his Gill,
And show you the King,
The Prince too and bring;
The Gipsies were here,
Like Lords to appear,
With such there attenders,
As you thought offenders,
Who now become new men,
You'll know them for true men;
For he we call chief,
I'll tell it ye in brief,
Is so far from a thief,
As he gives ye relief
With his bread, bear, and beife
And 'tis not long since
Ye drank of his Wine,
And it made you fine;
Both Claret, and Sherry,
Than let us be merry;
And help with your call,
For a Hall, a Hall.
Stand up to the wall,
Both good men, and tall,
We are one man's all.
THe fist of August,
Will not let sawdust
Lie in your throats,
Or cobwebs, or Oats;
But help to scour ye.
This is no Gowrie,
Has drawn James hither,
But the goodman of Beaver,
Our Buckingham's Father;
Than so much the rather
Make it a jolly night,
For 'tis a holy night,
Spite of the Constable,
Or Master Deane of Dunstable.
A Hall, a hall, a hall.
WHy now ye behold,
'twas truth that I told,
And no devise;
They are changed in a trice,
And so will I,
Be myself, by and by.
I only now
Must study now
To come of with a grace,
With my Patrico's place:
Some short kind of blessing,
Itself addressing
Unto my good Master,
Which light on him faster,
Than wishes can fly.
And you that stand by
Be as jocund as I;
Each man with his voice,
Give his heart to rejoice,
Which I'll requited,
If my Art hit right,
Though late now at night,
Each Clown here in sight,
Before day light,
Shall prove a good Knight;
And your Lasses Pages
Worthy their wages,
Where fancy engages
Girls to their ages.
O any thing for the Patrico, what is't? what is't?
Nothing, but bear the bob of the close,
It will be no bruthen you well may suppose.
But bless the Sov'raine, and his senses,
An to wish away offences,
Let us alone, bless the Sov'raine, and his senses.
we'll take them in order, as they have being,
And first of seeing.
FRom a Gipsy, in the morning,
Or a pair of squint-eyes turning:
From the Coblin, and the spectre,
Or a Drunkard, though with Nectar;
From a woman true to no man,
Which is ugly, besides common;
A smock rampant, and the itches,
To be putting on the breeches:
Where so 'ere they ha' their being,
Bless the Sov'raine, and his seeing.
FRom a fool, and serious joys;
From a Lawyer, three parts noise;
From impertinence, like a Drum
Beat at dinner in his room;
From a tongue without a file,
Heaps of Phrases, and no stile.
From a Fiddle out of tune,
As the Cuckoo is in June.
From the candlesticks of Lothbury,
And the loud pure wives of Banbury:
Or a long pretended fit;
Meant for mirth, but is not it:
Only time, and ears outwearing,
Bless the Sov'raine, and his hearing.
FRom a strolling Tinker's sheet,
Or a pair of Carrier's feet:
From a Lady that doth breath,
Worse above, than underneath.
From the Diet, and the knowledge
Of the students in Bears-college.
From Tobacco, with the type
Of the Devil's glister-pipe;
Or a stink all stinks excelling,
A Fishmonger's dwelling,
Bless the sovereign, and his smelling.
FRom an Oyster, and fried fish
A Sow's babye in a dish:
From any portion of a Swine,
From bad Venison, and worse wine.
Ling, what Cook soe'er it boil,
Though with mustard fawced and oil,
Or what else would keep man fasting,
Bless the sovereign, and his tasting.
BOth from birdlime, and from pitch,
From a Doxy, and her itch.
From the brisles of a Hog,
Or the ringworm in a Dog.
From the courtship of a brier,
Or St. Anthony's old fire.
From a needle, or a thorn;
I'the bed at Even, or Morn.
Or from any Gowtes lest grudging.
Bless the sovereign, and his touching.
Bless him too from all offences,
In his sports, as in his fences.
From a Boy to cross his way,
From a fall, or a foul day.
Bless him, o bless him Heaven, and lend him long
to be the sacred burden of all song;
The Acts, and years, of all our Kings t' out go;
And while he's mortal, we not think him so.
THe sports are done, yet do not let
Your joys in sudden silence set;
Delight, and dumbness never met
In oneself subject yet.
If things opposed must mixed appear,
Than add a boldness to your fear,
And speak a hymn to him,
Where all your duties do of right belong,
Which I will sweeten with an under song.
GLory of ours, and grace of all the Eath;
How well your figure doth become your birth,
As if your form, and fortune equal stood,
And only virtue got above your blood.
Virtue; his Kingly virtue which did merit
This Isle entire, and you are to inherit.
HOw right he doth confess him in his face,
His brow, his eye, and every mark of State;
As if he were the issue of each Grace,
And bore about him both his fame, and fate.
Look, look, is he not fair,
And fresh, fragrant too
As Summer sky, or purged Air,
And looks as Lilies do,
That were this morning blown.
O more! that more of him were known.
Look how the Winds upon the Waves grown tame,
Take up Land sounds upon their purple wings;
And catching each from other, bear the fame
To every angle of their sacred springs.
So will we take his praise, and hurl his name
About the Globe, in thousand Ay'ry rings,
If his great virtue be in lore with fame,
For that contemned, both are neglected things.
GOod Princes soar above their fame,
And in their worth,
Come greater forth,
Than in their name.
Such, such the Father is,
Whom every title strives to kiss;
Who on his Royal grounds unto himself doth raise,
The work to trouble fame, and to astonish praise.
INdeed he's not Lord alone of all the State,
But of the love of men, and of the Empire's fate.
The Muse's Arts, the Schools commerce, our honour's laws,
And Virtues hung on him, as on their working cause.
His Handmaid Justice is,
Wisdom, his Wife;
His Mistress, Mercy;
Temperance, his life.
His Page's bounty, and grace which many prove,
His Guards are Magnanimity, and love.
His Ushers, Council, Truth, and Piety,
And all that follows him, Felicity.
O that we understood
Our good;
there's happiness indeed in blood,
And store,
But how much more,
When virtue's flood
In the same stream doth hit?
As that grows high with years, so happiness with it.
LOve, love his fortune than, and virtues known,
Who is the top of men,
But makes the happiness our own;
Since where the Prince, for goodness is renowned,
The Subject with Felicity is Crowned.
AT Burley, Bever, and now last at Windsor,
Which shows we are Gipsies of no common kind Sir.
You have behold (and with delight) their change,
And how they came transformed, may think it strange.
It being a thing not touched at by our Poet,
Good Ben slept there, or else forgot to show it;
But lest it prove like wonder to the sight,
To see a Gipsy, as an Aethiope, white.
Know, that what died our faces, was an ointment
Made, and laid on by Mr. Woolfes appointment,
The Court Licanthropos; yet without spells,
By a mere Barber, and no Magic els:
It was fetched of with water, and a ball,
And to our transformation, this is all,
Save what the Master Fashioner calls his,
For to Gipsies Metamorphosis;
Who doth disguise his habit, and his face,
And takes on a false person by his place:
The power of Poetry can never fail her;
Assisted by a Barber, and a Tailor.