'tIs worth my Fears, to see within this place
Wits most accomplished Senate; 'tis a grace
Transcending our desert, though not our fear,
lest what our Author writes should not appear
Fit for this judging presence; all the ways
He knows that lead to the true throne of Plays
Are rough uneasy paths, such as to tread
Would fright an active able Muse; strike dead
A weak and timorous traveller: for some
Will give the play a piteous martyrdom
Ere it hath life; yet have t'excite that flame,
Only distrust in the new author's name.
Others for shortness force the Author run,
And end his Play before his Plot be done.
Some in an humorous squeamishness will say,
They only come to hear, not see the Play,
Others to see it only, there have been,
And are good store, that come but to be seen:
Not see nor hear the Play: How shall we then
Please the so various appetites of men.
It starts our author's confidence, who by me
Tells you thus much t'excuse the Comedy.
You shall not here be feasted with the sight
Of antic shows; but Actions, such as might
And have been real, and in such a phrase,
As men should speak in: Ladies if you praise,
At least allow his language and his plot,
Your own just Privilege, his Muse hath got
So full a wreath, that spite of Envies frown
Shall in his Brow sit as a lasting Crown.
IS the news certain he is arrived?
The Duke
Had sure intelligence, that the whole Fleet
Anchored last night without the Bay: and now
For confirmation of it, the thick breath
Of his saluting Cannon hangs in Clouds
Over the Citadel, and the glad noise
Of the applauding people, gratulate
His entrance to the River.
The day rose
So cheerfully, as if it meant to gild
With unaccustomed light, his sails swollen big
As pregnant mother with the pleasing air
Of victory.
The rumour of the Fleet
Has filled all Italy with wonder, how
So small a number should in open fight
Defeat the Turkish Navy; and conclude
The general's skill and valour, the mayne cause
Of the achievement.
He has returned as large
Assurance of his worth, as when his force
Backed with successive fortune which attends
His mighty resolution, overthrew
The power of Venice in a fight; which changed
The Sea into a flame, and took me in't
His fortunate Captive.
Sir, 'tis noble in you
To acknowledge that as good, which might have been
Your eminent ruin; stately buildings so
Rise out of ancient structures which the rage
Of eating time, or anger of the winds
Had tottered from the ground works: you may prove
As fairly happy in the general's love,
As in the honour which your name or Country
Conferred on your desert.
You speak the scope
Of my intention, a perfect friend
Includes both honour, Country, Family,
And all that's dear and holy: such a friend
As is my Doria, to whose spacious merit
Succession shall pay volumes, who was man
Ere in the smooth field of his face, rough age
Displayed his hairy Ensign; who has pulled
Bright honour's wreath from her triumphant front
In battles when the trembling Sea being calm
Did crowd and thrust its waves into a storm
To part the dreadful fury.
The report
Of his Land services do stand on terms
Of Competition with the multitude
Of his Sea Victories.
Yet must subscribe
To his Naval triumphs: though the Land
Has seen him Conqueror, when the bodies slain
Buried the ground they died on, which did shake
To view itself entombed by them, for whom
It was ordained a Sepulchre, the Drums
Were to his ears delightful as the Lute:
Pikes moving then in Forest, seemed as groves
Of lofty Cedars stirred by sportive winds,
And when wars Choristers, the whistling Fife,
And surly Trumpet sung an army dirge,
That fatal music wraps his sprightful sense,
Like jovial Hymns at Nuptials.
You cannot exceed
His praises duty, since his worth contains
honour's most several attributes.
Signior Frangipan,
What riding post on foot, whither in such haste?
Very well met gentlemen, I scarce have breath
To utter a wise word yet.
We do believe you Signior, and are in doubt
When you'll have leisure for't.
Hear you the news,
The General's arrived: farewell, he will not land
Till I have had the maidenhead of his hand.
'tis such another parrot, he relates
Things by tradition, as dog's bark: his news
Still marches in the rear, yet he relates it
As confidently, as if each tale he tells,
As to be straight inserted as an eight
To the seven former wonders— But here comes one
Will cut off the fool's Character: renowned General
Do us the gracious honour to permit us
Salute the hand has saved our Country.
Noblest friends,
I am more victorious in your early loves,
Than in the Turkish Conquest; though I remain
A Captive to your kindness, my Vitelli,
The solid earth, or a continued Rock,
May by some strange eruptions of the wind,
Be rent, and so divided; but true friends
Are adjuncts most inseparable: I have
Still worn thee here Vitelli, as a Jewel
Fit for no other Cabinet: gentlemen
Your welcome hands methinks we should embrace,
So as ships grapple in hot fight, nor part,
Till our affectionate fury has discharged
Volleys of joyful courtesy.
This is fitter ceremony for them
Then to embrace an enemy, who will not part
On terms so easy; these gentlemen know better
To cut a Caper, than a Cable, or board a Pink in the Burdells, than a Pinnace at sea: I marvel my Lord should know such Milksops.
My Lord,
You come t'instruct us Courtship, as you've taught
Your foes to fear your valour: you appear
As if this were your Nuptial day, on which
You were to wed bright triumph; but you can
As well Court peace in silks, as raging war
In burnished steel, and touch the ravishing strings
With as much cunning industry as if
Mars could like Orpheus strike the trembling Harp.
Signior Adorni welcome home, I hope
Y'ave made a richer prize, then when my ship
Struck to your mercy.
Yes, we are very like
To make good prize indeed, when all the profit
Goes to the State and heavy-headed Burghers,
That lie and snort at home, and eat what we
Sweat bloody drops for.
Honest Adorni,
His bluntness must excuse him gentlemen;
How harsh and rough soe'er he seems, his honour
Will quickly vary, when I have been tired
With toil of war; the observations which
His travails have afforded him of men,
Countries, and manners, lively set forth
By his expressive action, has begot
Mirth in my drowsy soul: when you're acquainted
With his conceit of carriage; you'll not affect
A jovialler Companion,— See the Duke
My noble warrior,
Peace now looks lovely on us, since we enjoy
The author of't in safety: rise my Doria,
Let me embrace those youthful limbs which cloth
War in love's livery: thy honoured father,
When he returned laden with Turkish spoils,
As trophies of his valour from the slaughter
Of Haly Bassa at Lepanto, where
The Christian name was hazarded, arrived not
More welcome to the State; believe me youth,
Hadst thou a mother living, to be proud
Of thy Nativity, unless she wept
For joy to see thee, could no way express
A more affectionate gladness: Chrisea,
Eurione welcome him home, who cannot
Receive an equal grace to the just value
Of his deservings.
Your grace prepares us for that,
We did intend to offer.
Yes truly did we sir, this General is ill-bred, I warrant him, to slight a gentlewoman of my demeanour.
My gracious Lord,
To tender thanks, where 'tis a debt, not duty,
Befits an equal; subjects ought to offer,
With the sincere devotion that our Priests
Do prayers to Heaven, their hearts as sacrifices
To their deserving Princes, whose sole favours
Do as the quickening lustre of the Sun
Cherish inferior spirits: yours have been
Showered down on me as elemental dew
On the parched earth, which drinks it up, and cannot
Give heaven a retribution, yet my duty
Shall speak my willing thankfulness, and while
These arms can wield victorious steel, no danger
Shall fright me from that service which I owe
My Prince and Country: since men are not borne
For themselves only; but their life's a debt
To th' Commonwealth that bred 'em.
Gentle warrior,
Thy father's spirit swells thy soul, I read it
In thy submissive loyalty; let's in,
'tis just that those who caused the wars to cease,
Should have the early fruits of their own peace,
Have you employed a serious diligence yet
In giving Lord Vitelli secret notice
Of my affection to him?
Truly Madam,
And as I hope to have a husband yet
Ere I be fifty, I have been so ta'en up
About my new device, I scarce have leisure
To say my prayers sincerely: Ladybird
You look not sprightly, ravishing, only this fear
Was not well cut, nor well laid on, it wanted
A little of my learned art: Vitelli
Doubt him not Madam, he shall love you so:
'tis pretty neat now; I would not have a Lady
That wears a glass about her, have the least
Pimple in her countenance discomposed, it does
Disgallant a whole beauty.
But Corimba
What's this to me, thou mayst as well tell tales
Of love to one departing life, these toys
Relish with me as bitter pills with children,
Wilt thou effect my business?
I confess
I have been very fortunate in bringing
Couples together, though I ne'er could couple
myself with any, your Ladyship could not
Have chose a better agent.
Save you sweet Lady, save you, Aunt I have
Lost all my morning exercise at tennis
In seeking you, and yet was still in hazard
Whether I should meet you; I must request a little
Help from your Art good Aunt, a patch, or two,
To make me appear more lovely; for my glass
Tells me I have a very scurvy face
Without some ornament.
'tis a good innocent face, be not ashamed on't;
I'll cut out one instantly; nay I never
Go unprovided of materials let me see,
What form is best for thee; that something timorous
A heart stuck neatly on thy face, will excite
Thy heart to more audacity, good Madam
Dost not become him prettily? Cosen be sure
You do commend this fashion to all gentlemen,
Wert but as common among them as Ladies,
My wit would be eternally made famous
For the invention.
willt please you to dispatch Ant, i'm in haste,
I've a whole staple of news to vent.
Of what trow?
I would have my kind red more ridiculous
To th'world than I am; Cosen all your news
Is stale; invent me rather some choice story,
How true or false no matter, and declare it
For news, 'twill please far better, and endear
Your judgement i'th' relation—
Noble General you're happily encountered:
Have you seen my Aunt yet Signior; here she is, I have
News to inform you worth your knowledge.
Keep them
Good Signior till some other time: Eurione
We must implore your absence, we'd be private.
Why we have been trusted
With as good secrets: please your Lordship
Accept this Crescent, you see my Cosen
Is in the fashion; let me lay it on,
Insooth your face is, for a soldier's,
Too smooth, and polite; this device will show
As't had a scar upon it, which is an honour
To faces Military.
Good Madam gravity,
Keep your devices for your Chamber Lords,
That dance to ladies' shadows; pray be gone,
We need not your society— Sabelli
Put to the door, and then be gone— Chrisea
The modest Turtles which
In view of other more lascivious Birds
Exchange their innocent loves in timorous sighs,
Do when alone most prettily convert
Their chirps to billing; and with feathered arms
Encompass mutually their gaudy necks.
You would infer that we
Should in their imitation spend this time
Intended for a conference which concerns us
Nearer than Compliment.
Why my Chrisea,
We may entwine as freely, since our loves
Are not at age yet to conceive a sin,
Thine being new borne, and mine too young to speak
A lawless passion, for my services
Pay me with priceless treasure of a kiss,
While from the balmy fountains of thy lips
Distils a moisture precious as the Dew,
The amorous bounty of the morn
Casts on the Roses cheek: what wary distance
Do you observe? speak, and enrich my ears
With accents more harmonious than the Larks
When she sings Hymns to Harvest.
Sure my Lord
Y'ave studied Compliment; I thought the war
Had taught men resolution, and not language.
Oh you instruct me justly, I should rather
Have ta'en the modest Privilege of your lip,
And then endeavoured to repay the grace
With my extremest eloquence.
You mistake me.
Remit my ignorance, and let me read
The mystery of thy language in thy looks,
In which are lively Characters of love
Writ in the polished tablets of thy cheeks:
Which seem to vary colours, like the Clouds
When they presage a storm; and those bright eyes
Dart unaccustomed beams, which shine as anger
Flashed from their fiery motion.
You misconstrue
The intention of my looks, I am not angry
Though much distempered.
At what, by whom?
Lives there a creature so extremely bad
Dares discompose your patience? speak, reveal
The monster to me; were he fenced with flames,
Or locked in Bulwarks of congested ye:
And all the fiends stood sentinels to guard
The passage, I would force it to his heart,
Through which the mounting violence of my rage
Should pierce like lightning.
I believe
That in some trivial quarrel to redeem
My fame, should scandal touch it, you would fight
Perhaps to show your valour: But I have
A task to enjoin me, which my fears possess me,
You dare not venture to accept.
By truth
You wrong my faith and courage to suspect me
Of so extreme a Cowardice: have I stood the heat
Of Battles till upon the mountainous piles
Of slaughtered Carcases, the souls which left 'em
Seemed to ascend to Heaven: that your suspicion
Should taint my honour with this base revolt?
This is not noble in you.
Do not rage,
When you shall hear it, you will then confess
Your confident error.
My loyalty will not
Permit that strong rebellion in my breast,
To doubt the meanest falsehood in a word
Her voice can utter, which should charm the world
To a belief, some Cherubin has left
Its room in heaven, to carol to the earth
Celestial Anthems, and I now begin
To question my own frailty; but by all
Which we call good or holy, be't your will
I should invade inevitable death,
In its most ugly horror, my obedience
Shall like a careless Pilot cast this bark
On that pale rock of ruin.
Will you swear this?
Yes, invent
A form of oath so binding, that no Law
Or power can dispense with: and i'll seal
With my best blood: pray Madam tell me what
The imposition is you judge so easily,
Will stagger my just truth, that I may fly
On love's light wings to act it.
Hear it then, and do not,
As you respect your oath, or love, request
The cause of what I shall command.
Still Suspicions:
My honour be my witness, which no action
Shall violate, I will not.
Enough, that vow
Cannot but be material, receive it,
I must no longer love you.
That's no command: what did you say Chrisea?
I must no longer love you, and command you,
Leave your affection to me.
You're very pleasant Lady.
You'll find me very serious: nay more,
I love another, and I do enjoin you,
Since 'tis a man you may o'errule, to assist me
In my obtaining him, without whose love
I'm resolute to perish.
Sure I dream,
Or some strange sudden death has changed his frame
To immortality; for were I flesh
And should hear this, certain my violent rage
Would pull me to some desperate act beyond
The reach of fury; these are words would infect
Rose-coloured patience; Clear and lovely front
With loathsome leprosy, change flames to tears
And with unusual harshness of the sound
Deafen the genius of the world.
Where's now
The strength of soul you boasted, does the noise
Of the death speaking Cannon, not affright
Your settled resolution, and the voice
Of a weak woman shake your youthful blood
Into an ague: since you so ill bear this
When you shall hear the man, whose love has stolen
Your interest, you will rage more than unlimited fire
In populous Cities.
Sure 'tis she who speaks:
I do enjoy yet sound untainted sense,
Each faculty does with a peaceful harmony retain
Its proper Organ; yet she did rehearse
She must no longer love me: oh that word transforms
The soul of quiet into rage,
Above distracted madness: madam tell me,
What place is this? for you have led me
Into a subtle Labyrinth, where I never
Shall have fruition of my former freedom,
But like an humble anchorite, that digs
With his own nails his grave, must live confined
To the sad maze for ever.
Sir you cannot
By most submissive and continued prayers
Reclaim my affection, which stands fixed as Fate
Upon your friend Vitelli.
My friend Vitelli?
Sir, I not use
To jest my life away: Vitelli is
The person, to obtain whose precious love
I do conjure you by all ties of honour
To employ your utmost diligence.
Can I be
So tame o'th' sudden? has the feeble spirit
Of some degenerate Coward frighted hence
My resolution, which has given a Law
To fate itself, that I must now become
The stale to my own ruin: oh Chrisea,
Who wert so good that virtue would have sighed
At the unwelcome spectacle, had you
Appeared but woman in a passion,
Though of the slightest consequence: oh do not
Abjure that Saintlike temper, it will be
A change hereafter, burdenous to your soul:
A sin to one, who all his life-time blessed
With peace of conscience, at his dying minute
Falls into mortal enmity with heaven,
And perishes eternally.
My will guides my determination, and you must
In honour act your promise.
Yes, I will,
Since you can urge it tho, but two
Things precious to me, and one cruel word
Robs me of both; my friend and her, Chrisea
I have not left another sigh to move,
Nor tear to beg your pity.
They are but vain,
You may as easily think to kiss the stars,
'Cause they shine on you, as recall my vows,
Which I will urge no further; but wish you
Regard your honour: But farewell, I must
Be cruel e'er, to my own love unjust.
She's gone; what vapour, which the flattering Sun
Attracts to heaven, as to create a star,
And throw it a fading meteor to the earth,
Has fall'n like me: I am not yet grown ripe
For perfect sorrow, but as a bubbling brook,
That sports and curls within its flowery Banks,
Till the vast sea devour it, only falling
Into the abyss of mischief; passions surround
My intellectual powers, only my heart,
Like to a rocky Island does advance
Above the foe my violence of the flood,
It's unmoved head: love be my careful guide,
Who sails 'gainst danger both of wind and tide.
THanks good Adorni, we are much endeared
To your relation; this rich corsic wine
Erected our dull spirits, and you shall
Command our service in as high and jocund
A Nature.
Sir, although I am
One that affects not the nice phrase of Court,
Having been nursed in war, yet I can frame
myself to imitation of what honour
Shall there, or anywhere appear to be.
Worthy my laughter.
You have explained your knowledge, we who breath
Only the air of Genoa, and ne'er tasted
Foreign behaviour, covet nothing more
Than certain knowledge of it, as 'tis proper to
Complexions intellectual to delight.
In novelties; your Spaniard as you say,
Is of a staid, serious, and haughty garb:
Acts all his words with shrugs and gestures, kisses
His hand away in kindness, is of diet
Sparing, will pick his teeth as formally
After an Orange, or a clove of Garlic,
which is his ordinary morsel, as he'd fed
On Partridges or Pheasant.
'Tis his grace
After his dinner Sir, and to confirm
Their most officious gravity, a Castilian
Was for some crime in Paris to be whipped
In triumph through the streets, and being admonished
To be more swift of foot, so a void
The dreadful lash the sooner, in scorn answered,
He rather would be flayed alive, than break
A Title of his gravity.
Much good
Do it his patient shoulders: but Adorni,
What think you of the French?
Very airy people, who participate
More fire than earth; yet generally good,
And nobly dispositioned, something inclining
To overweening fancy— This Lady
Tells my remembrance of a Comic scene,
I once saw in their Theatre.
Add it to
Your former courtesies, and express it.
Your entreaty
Is a command, if this grave Lady please,
To act the Lady I must court.
Why do you think
I cannot play the woman? I have played a woman's part
About twenty, twenty years ago in a Court Masque,
And though I say't as well as some o' them, & have been courted too,
But it is truth, I have a foolish quality as many more women are guilty of besides myself, I always love them best, which slight me most, and scorn those that do court me: look you Signior, if't be a lover's part you are to act:
Take a black spot or two, I can furnish you.
'Twill make your face more amorous, and appear
More gracious in your Mistress eyes.
Stand fair Lady.
'tis your part to stand fair sir: doubt not my carriage—
O most rare man: sincerely, I shall love the French
The better while I live for this.
Nay pray sir; gentlemen entreat the man
To pacify his wrath, tell him I'll love him,
Rather than see him rage thus.
He would have just reason to be mad indeed then, but now
The Mood is altered.
Excellently ravishing: this is of force
To make the hardest hearted Lady love him:
Can I entreat him but to teach my Cosen
Some of his French, he will for ever be engallanted—
Beauteous Cosen,
Y'ave missed the quaintest sport; honest Adorni
You would endear this Lady to you, would you
Please to react it.
Nay, if you make me common once, farewell,
I am not for your company.
Pray sir a word or two; here is a gentleman,
Nay Nephew, though I say't a toward young man,
Vouchsafe him your acquaintance.
Will he fight, is he soldier?
No truly sir, nor shall he be:
I would be loath to have my only Cosen
Heated about the heart with lead; he's dull
Enough already: Frangipan come hither,
This gentleman will for my sake teach thee French.
For your sake reverent Madam I shall do't:
Sir please you walk, we will confer on rudiments.
Come with him Coz: Sir, and you have occasion
To use me in a pleasure, stands within
The ability of my performance, pray command,
You shall not be denied.
Come Signiors, will you walk?
Cosen Bonivet,
I should be glad, after some minutes, to
Enjoy your Company.
I shall attend your Ladyship.
Corimba what answer from Vitelli? do I live?
Or in the killing rigour of his scorn
Must I die wretched.
Sincerely Madam,
You are too timorous of your own deserts,
Or else you durst not doubt, that he, or any
You being so neat yourself, and dressed as neatly
As any Lady in the Court, should hazard
The reputation of his wit, by slighting
Such an accomplished beauty.
You talk,
And play the cunning flatterer, to excuse
Your negligence; but know affection's fire
Once kindled by desire, and blown by thought
Into a heat, expires a thousand sighs,
Which as love's smoke, like incense flies to heaven,
While the light fire with nimble wings do soar
To its own sphere, true lovers hearts who cherish
The flame, till they to ashes burn, and perish.
Why Ladybird, are you so passionate, the gentleman
Is a kind gentleman, has all that may
Set forth a man; for when I told him how
Like a hurt deer you wounded were with love,
Life how he leapt for joy, as if the self
Same arrow which struck you, had glanced on him,
And as a token of his love, he sent you
A bleeding heart in a Cornelion, which
Beshrew me, most unfortunately I lost.
Cornuba see
If General Doria be within— Eurione
I have been seeking thee, how dost thou sister?
I must demand a question that concerns
The safety of your fame.
I rest
Secure in mine own innocence, and no malice
Can forge an accusation which can blemish
My meanest thought with scandal.
I believe, but know Eurione I am informed
You do affect Vitelli, and conjure you
By the dear memory of our mother, tell me
If the report be certain.
Should I deny't,
My love would muster thousand blushes up
To invade my guilty Cheeks, I must confess
I love him so, as modesty and truth
Afford me warrant.
'tis ill done, and childishly so easily to impart
The treasure of your liberty, to keeping
Of a neglected stranger.
His own worth
Deserves as noble knowledge here, as many
Who borrow titular glory from the dust
Of their forgotten Ancestors.
You defend him
Like a brave Championess, as if you meant,
T'engage your dearest pawn of life and honour
In his protection.
Say I did, the evenest,
Though most strict justice would allow as lawful
My honourable purpose.
Fie, you are led on too wildly by your fancy sister,
It ill befits the greatness of your blood
To seek to mix its pure stream with a poor
Regardless River.
He appears to me
Broad in his own dimensions as the sea,
Clear as a brook, whose crystal lips salute
Only the freshest meadows: such a Creature
That were some cunning painter to express
An Angel clothed in humane shape, he might
From his derive a pattern.
But suppose my fancy
Should oversway my judgement, to affect
Vitelli; sure your manners would allow me,
By willing resignation of your choice,
The privilege of my birthright.
Would you urge
A claim so justly mine, because you viewed
The light two years before me: no Chrisea.
Love's an unlimited passion, that admits
No Ceremonious difference: this prerogative
Should Queens endeavour, their unvalued Dowries
Are not of worth to purchase: and though here
As it befits me, I observe the distance
Due to your birth; yet in love's sacred Court,
My place is high as yours, and there we may
Walk hand in hand together.
Do not flatter
Your fancy with this vain conceit: Vitelli
Must be no more yours; Know I have enjoined
The General Doria to engage his friend,
To embrace my proffered love to him.
You strive,
Because you think my young and timorous flame
Unapt t'encounter brave Vitellis heat;
As cunning Nurses do with froward Babes,
Fright them into an appetite: but say
All this were real, think you Doria would
So easily be persuaded to renounce
His proper interest, and enthrall his friend
To an unwilling slavery?
By truth he has impawned his honour to endeavour
What I have uttered, gentle Girl consider
Loves unresisted violence, and believe
I would not have a rival to usurp
A corner in the Kingdom of that heart
Of which i'm sovereign, so farewell dear soul,
Consider out.
Consider out, why this is such an act,
Done by a cruel sister, as shall taint
That holy name with such a black reproach
That should a thousand pious Virgins weep,
Rivers of tears, their most immaculate drops
Would not wash white her scandal hapless girl,
That in love's tempests wert but lately tossed;
And now recovered in a calm art lost,—
Madam the Duke entreats your instant company.
I shall attend his pleasure, good Lactantio.
If you can meet my Cosen Bonivet,
Desire him visit me.
Noble Lactantio,
You're happily encountered, I expected
My friend Vitelli here, this is his hour,
I wonder he is tardy.
Your Lordship prevents the time with speed, or else Vitelli
Has some impediment by business, sir.
You're opportunely welcome to deliver
Your own excuse, I was about to stretch
My invention for you.
Noble friend, your enemy had you engaged your faith
To any personal meeting could expect you,
But at the minute, reason may dispense
Twixt us with such a nicety.
Now your friends
Arrived, I must beg licence to depart,
I have some urgent business.
Good Lactantio your time's your own.
I kiss your Lordship's hand.
Friend now we're alone, I safely may
Speak my conjecture, I have read your looks,
And in their pensive Characters find secret,
Strange signs of sadness.
I am sad indeed,
When my remembrance tells me I have only
Verbal assurance of your friendship.
Try me by any attempt, whose danger does surpass
The common path of daring, beet to snatch,
A fiery boult when it from heaven comes wrapped
In sheets of lightning to afford true proof
Of my affection, and with eager haste,
Such as inspires a husband to enjoy
His spouse's virgin purity, i'll run
To the achievement.
These are but protests; such as be got by ceremony, proceed
Not from intensive zeal, yet i'll experience
The truth of your affection by a trial
Of such a noble and effective weight,
Which if you bravely do support, you'll stand
As some tall Pyramid or Column for
Your own memorial to tell after-times
The power and strength of friendship.
Pray name't, and 'twere a burden would o'erpress the earth,
I'll be the able Atlas to sustain
Heaven on my willing shoulders.
There is a Lady in whose each eye sits fire, & on her cheek
Victorious beauty captive to her smiles
Dances in lovely triumph, one who emblems
The glory of mortality in each look,
Contracts the orb of lustre to a glance,
Brandishes beams, whose purity dispense,
Light more immaculate than the gorgeous east,
Wears when the prostrate Indian does adore
Its rising brightness, yet this wonder dotes
On you with such inevitable fervour
That I in pity of her sufferings come
T'entreat you love her.
Whom my Lord?
You cannot appear so strangely stupid not to acknowledge
creation's miracle, when I point out
Her very figure you as well may seem,
When the bleak North does with congealing blasts
Bind up the crizzling streams in chains of ice,
Not to know Winter, ignorant of her
Who had she lived when superstitious mists
Shaded the world, more groves of gammes had famed,
T'her Divinest beauty, then to all
The race of idle deities: 'tis Chrisea,
The fair Chrisea loves you.
The fair Chrisea, your Lordship's merry.
Do you slight
What I delivered with that unfeigned zeal,
That penitents do their prayers, I say, Chrisea,
A name whose every accent sweetlier sounds,
Than quires of Syrens sense bereaving notes,
Chrisea loves you infinitely above
Expressive terms; the Orators should strive
To paint her masculine fancy, and i'm bound
To pay this homage to her best content,
As to conjure you, by all sacred ties
Of honour, amity, and what else may serve
To enforce the endearment with your noblest love
To gratify her fancy.
No persuasion
Can make me think this serious, good my Lord,
Do not you love Chrisea?
More than a babe does the kind Nurse that feeds it with her blood,
More than I do my quiet, or the joys
Of aught but blessed eternity; Vitelli,
No other argument can more convince,
Suspicion should it doubt my love: but this
That to procure her peace, I have confined
The greatness of my passion, and give up
To thy dispose, a jewel which the earth
And sea should both unlade their hidden wealth,
Should not have purchased from me.
These are arts to puzzle my conceits, my Lord
I'm no such puny in the Craft of love,
That I want brain to find this drift, which is
As obvious to me as your eyes: now you
Are home returned victorious, big with praise,
Laden with titles that sit heavier on you
Then your steel Corslet in hot fight coniemne,
Affinity with me, to whom you've heard
the fair Eurione has resigned her heart,
And by this circumvention should I court
At your entreats her sister might pretend
A righteous cause, for an unjust revolt,
For were it otherwise, your temper could not
Brook your Chrisea's change without a start
Into a sudden fury.
This language I understand not, by my honour friend,
This iteration may disperse your doubt,
I do again conjure you by all right
Friendship can challenge in you to affect
Chrisea nobly; shall I have your answer?
Nay then my Lord, since you are serious, freely I resume
The privilege of my liberty; this body
I do confess your captive, and 'thas suffered
an honourable thraldom, but my mind
Remains unbounded as the air or fire,
Are from their spheres, Eurione has won
By the subduing valour of her looks,
That in a field of fancy, not of blood,
And ere another shall usurp her right,
In the defence i'll die her willing martyr.
I judged what serious value
your boasted friendship would retain i'th' test,
Draw your bright weapon, know that I do hate
Baseness as much as cowardice: and since
You slight a Lady for whose priceless love
Kings might resign their Crowns, and humbly fall
Like bare foot pilgrims prostrate at the shrine
Of such a beauty, sure if in this sword,
Death has a residence your life shall find it,
And not survive to boast the cruel triumph of her refusal.
Sir your sword cannot excite a trembling in my blood,
The glistering splendour cherishes my sight,
Like polished Crystal, henceforth name of friend
Be no more known betwixt us then a dream.
Thus I expire it, I may now regain
My honour forfeited in the General cause
By this particular Combat.
Should my fate yield me the conquest, yet his death would not
Beget Chrisea's quiet, but augment
Her grief and hate against me: stay, forbear,
I feel a palsy in my veins, and cannot
Manage this little instrument of death,
My sinews put on infancy again
And have no vigour in them, oh Vitelli,
I am so full of passion, I have scarce
Room left to vent a sigh, a mine of lead
Hangs on my heart, and with its weight has cracked
The feeble courage.
Noble soul, his grief
Works more compunction in me, than his sword
Did sudden anger; could I grant what you
Request, no brand-marked slave should fulfil
Sooner his Masters most severe command,
Than I would yours; but this abrogates all laws
Of friendship's duty: if you've vowed this act,
You may as safely disannul the Oath,
As should you in some desperate fury swear
To be your father's murderer.
Bid me first renounce
My allegiance to my honour, sell my faith
I owe my Native Country: my Vitelli
I feel an humour in my brain, which strives
For passage at mine eyes, wilt see me weep?
Consider friend, denying my request
Thou dost undo a Lady, who may claim
The privilege of all hearts: deprivest the world
Of such a gem, that should old nature strive
To frame her second, it would quite exhaust
Her glorious treasury, then in her ruin:
My life and honour's forfeited, think this,
And were thy heart obdurate as a rock
Of Adamant, this thought joined with my tears
Would sooner than the blood of Goats dissolve it
To gentle softness.
Your eyes are moving advocates, they speak
Such an o'erflowing Language, that my love
Then in its own cause a most partial Judge,
Allows my mercy freedom to pronounce
Sentence on your side: you have prevailed,
I'll serve Chrisea, as her pleasure shall
Dispose my will and fortune.
I begin to feel my spirits quicken, and my blood
Receive its noble temper; dear Vitelli,
Thy nobleness does prompt thee to an act
Shall write thy friendship higher in the lists
Of sacred amity, than mother's loves.
Go to my best Chrisea, she expects
To know by thee the truth of my success,
Tell her I am more happy in her bliss,
Than if I had enjoyed her constant love:
So leave me love, I may perhaps transgress
Manhood again, and shouldst thou see me weep
Twice, thou wouldst judge my former flood of tears
A feigned passion.
Your Genius guard you; thus I apply
Balm to his wounds, while I do bleeding die.
Noble General, I come to gratulate the happy choice
Y'ave made in fair Chrisea; she's a Lady,
That though she were a stranger to my blood,
My judgement would allow as rich a virtue
As ever glorified the sex.
'Twould be a sacrilegious error not to admit
Your Character for truth, but in our loves
A thousand hidden causes do produce
Alternate changes, my return has settled
My thoughts on new resolves, and I must suit
My affections to them.
How? perhaps because
You are returned triumphant with your bays,
Growing upon your brow, you do reject
The love before you sued for, 'tis not noble
So to abase a Lady, whose bright fame,
Although untainted as a Crystal rock,
Must pass a popular censure, if you, who
Did with such earnestness pretend her match
Should on the sudden scorn it.
I'm not bound
To give you reasons why; but know my mind,
Which your contesting cannot alter's fixed
On what I have related.
I must then tell you
You do defame the opinion of that worth
The world does credit in you: this affront,
Should all her other friends sit idle gazers
On her disgrace, should stir me to attempt
An ample satisfaction from your heart,
Though you had multitudes of greater glories
Heaped on your head, or were defenced with legions
To affright me from the adventure.
Sir, your courage is juster than your quarrel, do you think
I wear a sword only for ornament;
And though our years declare us equals, yet
My education was i'th' trade of war.
'tis my profession to infranchise souls
From prisons of their flesh, and would be loath
'cause you have interest in Chrisea's blood,
Your passion should betray you to the fury
Of my incensed wrath.
All discourse is tedious to me, sure the world's abused
With report of your valour, men who commit
Affronts they dare not answer, use excuse
In moderation of them, I expected
I should have met an adversary of you,
Of temper hot as lightning, and as bold
As lions vexed with hunger, and I find you
A tame degenerate Coward:
All respect of love and pity hence:
Bear up, my steel
Has pricked your breast; I would not have you die
Chrisea's Martyr.
I've pulled untimely ruin on me, I'm hurt,
I fear to mortal danger: Noble General,
See me conducted to Lactantio's house,
There I shall get a Surgeon.
Noble young man,
Muster thy strongest spirits up: I am one
Of Fortune's pastimes; yesterday returned,
Advanced to heaven by the people's breath,
Today hurled down into the abyss of death.
CAme none yet from the General?
No insooth Madam; I protest your sister
If she continue in these sudden fits,
Will so undo her face, that all my art
Can never rectified; she weeps, as if
She might as easily be supplied with eyes
As with new dressings, i'll be sworn, I took
As hearty pains to cut a handsome heart;
And though I say't it was a pretty one
As e'er was made of taffeta, to grace her Check,
And never trust me if I lie to you,
Her tears has washed her heart away.
thouart still
In these impertinent discourses: what's the cause
My sister is so prodigal of her grief,
To let thee see her vent it?
Why Madam, I have seen a Lady weep,
Besides your sister, and have wept myself too,
I never shall forget the time; I could
e'en cry again to think on't; 'twas at the death
Of your fine little jewel: never Lady
Nursed such a dainty puppy, but he's gone,
And farewell he; I will not give a rush
For any woman cannot use her eyes
With as much liberty as her tongue, these fools,
These loving Idiots men for three forced drops
Will mollify like wax, and be made apt
For any impression.
Vitelli you are welcome, I suppose
Your business has been urgent, we expected
Your presence sooner, howsoever now
'tis grateful hither.
My young Lady shall
Have notice of's arrival, perhaps his sight
Will cheer her drooping spirits.
Madam, my friend
The General, does by me tender his best
and truest service to you, he has sent me
Prompt, to fulfil the nicest point of duty
Your pleasure casts upon me.
Sir, the General is so just in his proceeding, I must ever
Esteem him truly Noble, though I should
Banish him my affection.
I could wish
The sweetness of your virtue would vouchsafe
To lay a reclamation of your love:
Had you but seen with what ambitious haste,
With what extreme persuasions he endeavoured
The satisfaction of your will, you could not.
Fancy a change from one so worthy.
No? not to enjoy yourself?
Me Madam;
No equal eye can parallel my poor
Regardless merit, with the glorious worth
Which does as far transcend mine in desert,
As't does in eminence of fortune.
Sir your modesty
Extenuates your own worthiness, to bestow
A large addition on your friends, my judgement
Has balanced both, and has concluded which
Ought to be held most noble, I do honour
True constancy in men, pray tell me sir,
For it concerns me nearly, did you ever.
Fervently love my sister?
To include,
(All strength of humane zeal) as Doria does adore
Your excellent beauty, with a heat
Holy as souls in dearest fancy
Their sainted fellows.
And can you extinguish
So great a flame so easily, can entreats,
So soon subdue your temper? if your truth
Be of this wavering quality, how shall I
Receive assurance of it?
The vow
I made, my friend secures it, think not Madam
That both my parents with persuasive prayers,
Could have enforced me violate my faith
To fair Eurione, but when my friend,
My honoured friend to whom I owe my life,
As tenant to his, bounty did in tears,
A soldiers tears whose every drop prevails.
More than a captive princess, plead the loss.
Of his own life, my gratitude did vanquish
Passion, and forced me tear even from my soul
Eurione's affection.
You are just
In your determination.
Bless me friendship,
And with thy white wings overshade my heart,
Or here descends a Saint will dispossess thee
Of the accustomed shrine, a bark enclosed,
Twixt two encountering tides is not more tossed
Than I twixt striving passions, while a friend,
I cannot be a lover.
Vitelli am I in your opinion lost? my sister
Relates so sad a wonder, that if truth,
I am undone for ever.
Hark she speaks too,
A tempting language; such was our first mother's voice,
While she was innocent, dear Ladies would
I could divide myself, for being one,
I cannot on the Theater of my mind,
Act both a friend and lover, that two names
Of so entire affinity should occasion
So manifest a dissension, in a soul
That would be true, yet is enforced, though loath,
To forfeit one, or to be false to both.
My expectation did not
Sage this softness in you, I had thought
You had come furnished with a full resolve
To act your friend's request.
Yet I must needs
Speak in a cause so moving; Madam think
How much more noble 'tis in you to save,
Than to destroy; behold three bleeding hearts
Imploring pity from you, mine, your sisters,
And your adorer Dorias, which one word
Of yours would ransom from approaching death,
Oh be not sparing of that breath, 'twill sound
In the just ears of heaven more sweet than prayers
Offered by Cloistered virgins, of resume
Your native charity, and fulfil my suit,
And in requital of that sacred grant.
Time shall depend like summer on your brow,
And your whole life be one continued youth.
Such were the springs in Paradise, and when
You pass to be a sharer in heaven's bliss,
Virgins and innocent lovers spotless tears,
Hardened to pearl by the strong hair of finger,
Shall be your monument.
This whole discourse
Should you enlarge it to a volume, cannot
Alter my meanest thought, I only wish you
As you are noble to respect your honour;
That's all my answer.
But do you mean
Vitelli, to perform what Doria has enjoined you.
I shall melt
Into a willing pity, if the flame
Of friendship did not with its effectual heat,
Dry up loves moisturer dear Madam he
That has commanded me this deathful task,
Claims such a lawful Interest in my life,
That spite of my affection, I must yield
To his resistless will: yet I will love you
So far as honour gives me warrant, and
Wish you the best of women, the best joys
Happiness can impart to you, farewell,
'Tis a befiting gratitude to give
That life a being; by whose gift I live.
sorrows flow high; grief unto grief succeed,
Wounds are more dangerous which do inward bleed.
Come let not this dishearten you, your French
Is a thing easily gotten, and when you have it,
As hard to shake it off, runs in your blood,
As 't were your mother language, but there is
An observation far more necessary
T'improve your judgement, still let your discourse
Concern the foreign business, and be sure
To applaud outlandish fashions, and take off from
What is native, as if you shall hear
Any commend the Genoa garb, or state
Answer in France, in Naples, or in Spain,
No Matter where, so it be far enough.
From hence, they are more politic, more witty;
Every way more deserving, this will speak
Infinitely judicious, when to praise
Our own domestic manners, is as if
A man should praise himself, and be accounted
A self conceited gull for't.
Very good, this is a rule I'll put in practice I,
Thanks to my inclination can speak ill
Of my own father signior.
Signior; still, you betray your igorance, why signior,
Mounsiver has a far more airy and harmonious sound,
There's music in the letters, still polish your phrase
With particles of language, which till I've taught you
Perfectly answer with a shrug or nod,
Or any foreign gesture, such a silence
Will be esteemed for gravity, and become you better
Than volubility of speech does some
Whose tongues are gentlemen ushers to their wits,
Still going before it, and when you do speak,
Let it not be, as now you do of news
Abroach ten days before, and quite drunk of;
But what affairs are acted then in France,
What in the English Court; and still remember
T'extol 'em infinitely, and if any answer
Comparatively with our own a serious laughter,
Will not become you ill, to show how much
You slight their error.
Better still, I like this slighting humour infinitely, but how
If they should talk of our Italian dames,
I'm bound to be their Champion, for I've heard
Strangers report, and I hold their opinion,
Our courtesans excel all other Nations.
That showed those strangers judgements, and confirmed
What I would have you understand in England,
Where public houses are prohibited:
There are the bravest Lasses, there some Donsella
That was the last night yours, shall for two Ducats
Tomorrow be a sailor's: when there
Your Citizens wives, girls fresh as air, and wholesome
As precious Candy wives will meet their Gamesters,
At a convenient Tavern, rob their husbands
Without a scruple, and supply their friends,
While the good innocent Cuckolds pay a price
For their own horning.
Excellent, excellent
Genoa, I do defy thy costive girls,
I'll henceforth love these English sparks of gold:
Would I were there: it should go hard but I
Would graft on their Aldermen's Coxecombs.
theyare grafted fast already sir, besides
They ne'er get Children, but their Hench boys on
Their Sergeants wives, after some City feast,
When the provoking spirit of White broth, and
Custard inflames their blood: what Genoa Burgess
dam res be so boldly couraged: I'll tell you,
And mark how base and sordid it appears
To have our Cellars stuffed with Corsic Wines:
Yet for this foolish sin called Temperance,
Tantalise, and ne'er taste it, while your Dutch,
Your noble-spirited German will carouse
A score of Goblets to provoke this stomach
To's bread and Butter; do nothing but by discreet
Counsel of drink, not match his daughter to
A man he sees not drunk first, scarce says prayers
Till he be full of liquour, which inflames
The mind to generous actions.
Commend 'em, and will be glad to imitate.
Your English
Deserves as large applause, who to say truth,
outdrinks the Dutch, as is the common proverb,
The Dutch-man drinks his buttons off, the English
Doublet and all away, then mark their carriage:
If two fall out and strike, and be by company
Parted; though one wears in his face the badge
Of his dishonour, which excites him to
As brave revenge, not daunts him: for he'll straight
Call out his enemy to a single Duel,
Scorning his life; concerning the Lands laws,
Which do forbid those combats, and ne'er part
Till one be slain, and the survivor sure
As death to hang for't.
Excellent, I love a man that cares not for hanging.
Then to their further glory, which takes off
All the disgrace of halter, they are sure
Ere they be scarce cold, to be Chronicled
In excellent new Ballads, which being sung
Ith' streets 'mong boys and girls, Colliers, and Carmen,
Are bought as great memorials of their fames,
Which to perpetuate, they are commonly stuck up
With as great triumph in the tippling houses,
As they were scutcheons.
Better: yet I'd give
A hundred Ducats to be chronicled
In such a historical Canto: who composes them?
They have their special Poets for that purpose
Such as still drink small Beer, and so are apt
To spit out lamentable stuff: then for their clothes
They hate a cut domestic, but imitate
The French precisely gallants, wear their long
Parisian Breeches, with five points at knees,
Whose tags concurring with their harmonious spurs
Afford rare music; then have they Doublets
So short i'th' waste, they seem as 'twere begot
Upon their Doublets by their Cloaks, which to save stuff
Are but a year's growth longer than their skirts;
And all this magazine of device is furnished
By your French Tailor: what Country man is yours?
A Genoese.
Fie, change him Monsieur,
You have heard a Spanish Count's
Lately arrived, without any advice, how'd'd you salute him?
Thus sir, after our Italian fashion.
That's too vulgar;
You must accost him thus with a state face,
As if your beard had been turned up that morning
By advice of all the Barbers in the City,
As you had dressed you in a looking-glass,
Proper to none but the Duke's privy Counsellors:
Pronounce your Besolos manas with a grace,
As if you were the son and heir, apparent
To th'Adelantado of Castille.
Adorni, this is no time for mirth,
Your noble General has slain Lord Bonivet,
And for the act is a prisoner.
Dares the state bereave him of his liberty,
Without whose most unwearied valour,
It had been betrayed to slavery?
You know Lord Bonivet's alliance to the Duke.
Alliance, death a thousand Bonivet's,
And Dukes and States, weigh not
A scruple poised with his full worth.
He's to be tried i'th' morning without noise,
For fear of mutiny, and 'tis supposed
That if some virgin Lady do not claim
Her privilege, and beg his life, he'll suffer.
If the maid that begs must be above fifteen,
'tis shrewdly doubted where she'll be found.
All our virgins ought, if they have virtue, to contend
For such a glory; but if all be squeamish,
May all the daughters of our best Burghers run
Away with soldiers, and become sutler's wives.
Or else when they have a masculine itch upon 'em,
And would taste man, may they be wed to Eunuchs.
else be forced to keep their maidenheads
Till they be musty and not merchantable
To younger brothers with additions of wealthy portions.
May they when they would strive to mend their faces to allure a suitor, want paint and black-patches to stop the Crannies of their Cheeks; may their Pomatum be mixed with Hogs-grease, that they may be abominable even in the nose of Jews: may the greensickness reign in their bloods, and may they be debarred of oat meal, and clay-wall, and fall to ratsbane.
May their parents turn most precise precisians,
And forbid 'em the sight of plays, or they may never
Dance unless be to a bagpipe or a Crowd.
May they want silks for gowns, and if they seek
Supply from Naples, let them instead, be furnished
With their Disease; may milliners break and feathermen,
May my Aunt die suddenly, and bury with her
All her devices; may there be no Earth
Found to make looking-glasses, that they come to use of
Kitchen-wenches, dress their heads by the reflection of a
Pail of water, or in a pewter chamber vessel.
Lactantio, let's go wait the General
In prison, 'twould be base should we neglect him in
His extremity.
Is it confirmed he's dead?
The general voice
Divulges so i'th' City; and the Duke
Has sent an order which commands you forth
I'th' morning to your trial: my dear Lord
I hope the service you have done the State
Abroad, will here at home secure your life
From the law's violent Rigour.
Yes poor boy,
If thou mightst be thy master's judge Sabelli,
I am at the period of my fate, and would not
Have thee a sad spectator of my fall
At home, whom thou so oft hast waited on
Abroad in triumph, therefore gentle heart,
Return home to thy mother, and survive
To serve a happier master.
My noble Lord
Have I so often followed you, when death
Attended on each step, when every hurt
That scared your noble body, I have wished
Imprinted on my flesh, and with my tears,
Even drowned the purple deluge of your wounds,
That as my truth and loyalties reward,
I must be turned a way unkindly, when
My last and just est service might declare
My zeal to you my master; Oh sir,
You more afflict my innocence with these words,
Then if sad truth had brought me the report
Of my own mother's funeral, and should you
Enforce me leave you, the succeeding care,
And labour of my life should be consumed
In a perpetual weeping.
Good Sabelli
Cease this afflicting language, lest I grow as
Childish as thyself, and burst into tears
To bear thee company.
Besides my Lord,
When your blessed soul does on immortal wings
Arrive at heaven who shall attend it there, the
Saints and Angels will esteem themselves
Worthy to be your fellows, while my poor
And humble Ghost would reckon it a bliss
To wait on you, as carefully as when
We lived on earth together, dear my Lord,
Let me die with you, death and I have been
playfellows these many years, he'll only bring me
To rest as pleasing to my sense as sleep
After a tedious watching.
This kind passion shakes my
Most masculine temper; here Sabelli
Accept this Gold, these jewels, as the lest
Gift of thy perishing Lord, thou shalt accept 'em;
If the law do not pass upon my life,
I'll send for thee again, I prithee leave me,
I would be private, and thy presence does
Disturb my serious thoughts.
Nay then 'tis time for
Me the wretched'st soul on earth to take
My lasting farewell of you; all the joys
Of blessed eternity in stead of my
Desertless service; wait upon your life;
You ne'er shall view your boy again, for sure if your
Light be extinguished, my weak flame
Cannot continue burning; give me licence
To kiss your honoured hand, and to let fall
A parting drop or two: and now farewell
For ever noble Lord; that grief appears most true,
That's writ in blood as well as tears.
Poor boy; I have not yet deserved so ill
But my untimely fate excites some pity.
Adorni thou art come to see the last
And greatest of thy general's actions,
Which like a cunning and well managed scene,
not till the period will disclose the plot
Or my life's Tragedy.
Your life my Lord;
Death dare not venture to invade it, and
The state as soon will call the enemy
Into their City, as pretend the least
Danger to their supporting Column, which
Should it but shake, it might dismantle their
Best Bulwarks, burn their Navy, and surrender
Themselves to present slavery.
The Duke,
Though he did hold his kinsman dear, will value
The public good before his private ruin.
Let the Duke do his worst, and all the state
Stand on Pontilios, I can fetch a Lady
Of excellent quality shall beg your Lordship,
I'll make her do't.
Nay, should all fail you sir,
Should the States angers, and the Duke's partial-sentence,
The people's malice bandy to surprise
The treasure of your life; know you have friends
Would fix the heads of half the Town upon
Their Lances points, ere your least drop of blood
Should be diminished.
Gentlemen, I thank you
All your loves; but know the shape of Death
Is not ugly to me, but if justice
Contract me to the monster, I shall court it
As 'twere some beauteous Bride; and think the Axe
That like the Priest, unites me to a Spouse
That will not play the woman and revolt.
Come Gentlemen let's in, brave souls do hate,
To be dejected by the force of Fate.
I Am very sorry that his Fate has cast
Such a disastrous chance upon his Life:
But his desert will blunt the edge of justice,
And mitigate the severity, which would
Question the safety of his Life.
'Tis in your mercy
To dash the law's proceedings, gracious Madam,
The Privilege that our Country gives your Sex,
Can hope for no employment, that will raise
A greater Trophy to your fame, than this
To ransom him, whose constancy and truth
Exceeds all boast of Stories.
You'll redeem
The opinion of your piety, which scandal,
Should you omit this just and righteous task,
Would blast with blackest infamy.
You plead in your own cause, not his, 't does not beseem
My modesty to interpose myself
In that which nought concerns me.
Is his life
Of such a trivial value in your thoughts,
That you esteemed not worthy your entreats,
To save't from killing, ruin, sacred love,
Thou miracle of Mature, and delight
Of all who know humanity with some
Religious arrow pierce her flinty breast,
Some pious shaft, on whose subduing point
Pity and amorous softness gently sit,
Reduce this straying Schismatic to the first
Unspotted pureness of her constant faith,
And we will pay a thousand clouds of sighs,
As incense to thy Altars.
Offer up
myriads of virgin vows and with our tears
Extinguish all irregular flames that taint
Thy holy fries.
Oh Madam
What heart so barbarous, does not at love's smiles
Put off the native fierceness, beasts with beasts,
Observe his laws; the lions whose big breath
Affrights the trembling people of the woods,
Were his hoarse accents to be understood,
They would appear to be affections groves.
The Nightingale that on lascivious wings
Flies from the poplar to the trembling Beech,
And on each bough chants melancholy notes,
Had hea humane utterance, would proclaim
Those pensive strains, the music of his love;
And can ye be less sensible of a power,
That is so great, than creatures barred the use
Of sacred reason, and discourse?
This is to seek to pacify the sea
With tears; Vitelli you mistake, your friend
Values not at so dear a rate his life,
As to receive a being tributary
To my unasked entreaties, besides I should
Envy the state's prerogative, whose mercy
Is in remitting his unwilling fault,
But a becoming thankfulness, and should
Be censured, as too partial to my own
Affection should I strive to be his wife,
Whose hand is purpled with the innocent blood
Of my late murdered kinsman.
This concerns
As nearly me as you, but by just truth,
Though I'm engaged by my particular choice
To my Vitelli, were I sure the General
Would not contemn my offer, and so blast
My future fame, I would disclaim all eyes
Of former fancy; and implore his safety.
This is a sweetness
Which I could wish you, what has begot
This strange desertion of your faith, true love,
Being once received into the soul converts
Into its very essence, does become
The same eternal substance, can you then
Tear from the tender Cabinet of your breast
Your very heart? this cruelty exceeds
The depth of tyranny, but est assured,
If Doria suffer by your proud contempt,
I'm freed then from my promise, and will sooner
Warm an empoisoning Scorpion in my arms,
Then yield my meanest thought to you who are
By evident circumstance, though not by fact,
My friend the general's murderess.
This Vitelli
Is not a means to win me to your friend,
But more avert me from him, it inflames
My mind with holier fire to Court your love;
There is an evident beauty in your soul,
Equal to truest honour, I will cherish
This bravery in you, if your masculine fancy
Engages you thus constant, to a friend,
You'll be a loyal husband, fare you well,
Be still thus noble, and be happy.
My sister
Has lost all sense of pity; dear Vitelli,
There is no wretchedness oppressing earth
Equal to ours, love thus the Tyrant plays,
Afflicting innocence by unusual ways.
'tis like yourself my noble Lord, but see
The Duke approaching, let your soul expect
An equal hearing.
Bear back, room for the Duke and Senate, what
Cuckold's that would have his Coxcomb broke? bear back there.
Cite in the prisoner.
he's here my Lord.
I'm sorry that
You for whose head the gratitude of the state
Decreed triumphant bays should be enforced
To stand here a delinquent, but the law
Must as a straight and uncorrupted stream
Enjoy its usual freedom, my Lords,
We are not met here to arraign a prisoner,
Whose guilt does speak his sentence, but a person
Not only most unblemished in his fame,
But one to whom our country owes its life:
Who with his dearest blood has balmed the wounds
Which mischief's giant-off-springs, raising war,
Cut in the bosom of the commonwealth.
We all confess his worth.
Yet this brave youth,
This patron of our liberty, all his honours,
His blood and titles, his defensive bays
(That would have guarded his victorious front
From blasts of lightning) laid aside, is come
To tender satisfaction to the laws,
He has offended, and since judgement is
The immediate act of Justice, it must pass
To save impartial censure on his life,
As on the wretched'st malefactors; for
His former merits cannot take away
His present fault; for who ere is guilty
Undoes the privilege of his desert and blood;
For if great men offending pass unpunished,
The common people who do use to sin,
By their example fearless, will run on
Into licentious wickedness.
Your grace delivers
The intention of the state, no oracle
Could have explained the meaning of our laws
With more integrity.
Yet my good Lords,
I speak not this, that my particular vengeance,
Because slew he my kinsman, has the least
Aim at his life, which I would strive to cherish
As my own health, or as the City's peace,
For Magistrates ought to behold their crimes,
Not the committers, as the Poets feign
Of wise Tiresias, to want eyes, and only
Have seeing understanding, for a judge
Is guilty of the fault he does not punish,
And if rewards and triumphs do adorn
Deserts 'tis just that shame and punishments
Should wait on vices, and how much more worthy
The person is that acts them, so far sharper
Should be the penalty inflicted on him.
And when the law
uses its utmost rigor, 'tis the crime,
And not the man it sentences.
In brief We must
Decline his merit, and forget
Our gratitude, and since his hand is dipped
In civil blood, his life must expiate what
His arm unfortunately committed.
My Lords,
The services which I have done the state,
Were but my natural duty, I achieved 'em
To gain me fame and glory, and you safety, and
Should esteem them Traitors to honour, if their intercession
Be a protection for my crimes, I mean not
To plead to save a disrespected life,
'cause I fear death, a sea encompassed rock
Is not less timorous of the assaulting waves,
Than I of the grim monster, but there is
A fame surviving which I would be loath,
Should tell posterity I tamely yielded
My head to th' Axe, and died because my spirit
Durst not desire to live to quit this scandal,
I hope what I can urge in my defence
Shall have indifferent hearing.
Speak freely.
Know then my intention
Is not by excuse to extenuate my fact,
Which I confess most horrid, and would I pay
A thousand showers of sorrow, could this hand
Re-edify that goodly from of flesh
Which it demolished, but my priceless fame,
In whose dear cause I slew him, will to justice
Boldly proclaim, I did no more than what
The truth I owe my reputation tells me,
Was right in point of honour.
But the law
Does disallow it as unjust, and that
Must be your judge, and not that idle breath
Which you abusively term honour.
Your laws cannot without partiality pronounce
judgement against me, for they do acquit
That man of guilt that to defend his life
Is forced to slay his enemy; my act
Carries the same condition, since my fame,
Whose safety urged me to kill him, is my life,
My immortal life, as far transcending this
As the soul does the body, for the sword,
Returns that to its primitive matter dust,
And there it rests forgotten, but a wound
Struck upon reputation, leaves a brand,
So self diffusive is dishonours guilt,
Even to posterity, and does revive
After 'thas suffered martyrdom.
Yet this
Cannot excuse your fact, for civil reason
Allows a reparation for the loss
Of fame, but gives no man a lawful licence
To snatch the privilege from the hands of justice,
Which would dispose it equally.
This strictness destroys all
Right of manhood, since a coward
May fearfully relying on this suffrage
Of Law affront even valour's self, consider
That the most cunning Pilot cannot steer man's
Brittle vessel twixt these dangerous Rocks
Of law and honour safely, sail by this,
And on that suffer ship wrack, for suppose
I had with patience borne this scandalous name
Of a degenerate coward, I not only had
Nipped the budding valour of my youth,
As with a killing frost, but left a shame inherent
To our family, disgraced
My noble father's memory, defamed
Nay cowarded my Ancestors, whose dust,
Would 'a broke through the Marbles, to revenge
To me this fatal infamy.
Well urged, and resolutely.
Nay more, yourselves
That hate the deed being done; would have detested
The doer worse had it not been performed
Withdrawn my charge i'th' army; as from one
Protested for a coward, I might then
Have abjured the trade of war, in which I have been nursed,
Yet for preserving this unvalued gem
Of precious honour that hangs on my soul,
Like a well polished jewel in the care,
Of the exactest beauty, must I suffer
The laws stern rigor.
Sir I should refute
With circumstance your wrong opinion, but in brief,
Religious conscience, utterly disclaims
An act so barbarous to take man's life,
Is to destroy heaven's Image, and if those
Are held as Traitors, and the law inflicts
Severest tortures on them, who deface
The stamps of Princes in their coin, can they appear,
As guiltless whose rude hands disgrace
The great creator's Image, and commit
Treason 'gainst awful nature; Oh my Lord
Collect your serious temper, and put off
The over weening fantasies of youth,
Consider what a vain deluding breath
Is reputation, if compared with life.
Think that an idle, or detracting word
May by a fair submission (which our laws
Of honour do require it will enforce)
Be washed away, but the red guilt of blood
Sticks as a black infection to the soul,
That like an Aethiop cannot be washed white,
Think upon this, and know I must with grief
pronounce your fatal sentence.—
Do you hear General, I'll tell you news, you were in
jeopardy to have had your little weasand slit; but I pronounce
The happy word, be safe; his piece of beauty,
By my persuasions does intend to take
The edge of law off, and become your wife,
True and inseparable.
With reverence to this presence, my good Lords,
Know that I come not urged by heat of youth.
'tis true I'll bear her witness.
Or any wanton or unchaste desire
To beg this gentleman for my husband, neither
To raise myself a fortune by the match,
But moved in charity, and provoked in mind,
With pity to behold a man so proper,
Brought to an end untimely, by a death
So scandalous to honour as the Axe,
I come to crave our privilege, and desire him
For my most lawful husband.
Gentle maid
Your piety does prompt you to an act
That shall engage your country to erect
A statue to your memory, though I could not
Dispense with justice, yet since there's a means
Without the law's infringement, to preserve him,
I do rejoice as much as if my son
Had scaped apparent danger: go on and prosper
In your design.
Do you think because I pleaded
For my honour's life,
I dote so much upon this idle breath,
As to preserv't with infamy, dispose
This womanish privilege to submissive slaves,
Know that I hate a being that depends
Upon another's bounty more than death,
At which my soul does, like an Eagle stretch its
Silver wines, and o'er the monster's head
Will make flight at heaven; pray sit proceed
To judgement suddenly, delay begets
More tortures in me then your sentence.
What do you mean sir, pray let me understand you Better, look upon me, I am no woman to be slighted.
She's not ashamed to show her face, marry her Uncle, that I may call you so.
To wed this figure, is a far greater punishment than Death.
ne'er stand on terms, but marry her, and free your self, and trust to me, you shall not want a mistress has better colours in her face.
Corimba,
I'm much engaged to your officious haste,
And pay you many thanks, conceive not that
I do contemn your person or dislike
The meanness of your match, for were your beauty
Created for a miracle, and adorned
With the addition of a fortune ampler,
Than that perfection, I should crave a licence
To tell your modesty I am prepared
Rather for death than Nuptials, and no strength
Of prayers and beauty, shall have power to tempt me
From my fixed resolution.
This is madness not courage Doria.
Sir I must tell you, you know not how to use a woman rightly,
Perhaps 'tis bashfulness, take courage sir,
I have reserved my dear virginity
This fifty years for such a pious purpose,
And should you slight me now, I should forswear
Good purposes hereafter: gentlemen persuade him,
Sure he cannot choose but melt
At your entreaties.
Will you then pull your ruin on; that seeks
Thus easily to fly from you; justice calls
On me to give your sentence— new interruptions
It is the voice of music, and presages
An Omen as harmonious as its notes,
Approach fair troops of Virgins, here's subject,
Fit for your maiden pity.
'tis time for me to take my farewell, these may be beauties, perhaps my Lady may be one, adieu sir; you may be offered worse.
My honoured Lord,
The charity I owe my native country,
That in the ruin of this brave young man,
Would suffer infinitely, has forced us strive
With early zeal first to present our duties
For his redemption, 'mong ten thousand Virgins
That would attempt it, and my true affection
Has won this favour from my fellows, that
To me they yield their interest, which I claim
As my desired prerogative.
'tis an act the State will thank you for; unveil yourself,
That we may know to whom we owe our gratitude,
A most excelling beauty, such an eye
Would tempt religious coldness to a flame,
Thaw Ages chilly frost, at such a cheek
The Spring might take a pattern to create,
A most accomplished freshness; in her looks,
Are modest signs of innocence, such as Saints
Wear in their liveliest counterfeits: Doria, here
A Lady begs you, whom if you refuse,
The times would black you with the hateful title
Of your own wilful murder; take her to you
And live a fortunate husband.
Noble maid, my misery is so extreme a sin,
It cannot meet your bounty without breach
Of vows; which should I violate, would pull
Eternal torments on me; keep your beauty
For one whose soul, free as the air he breathes,
Can yield a mutual fancy to your flame,
And not destroy his honour, for your goodness
Since my expired date, cannot yield you thanks
Worthy the bound less merit of your love,
If there can be a gratitude after death
Expressed by prayers, my soul in heaven shall pay it
To your kind charity.
Oh my Lord,
I did expect this answer, my poor worth
Cannot deserve your value; yet there is
A constant purity in my thoughts, that intend you
So much of Bliss, that had your safety no
Dependence on my suit, it would be deemed
Most cruel to contemn me, I have loved you
These many years; wished you as many glories
As I have numbered days, have vowed I never
Will marry any man, but your blessed self my Lord,
Should you neglect the justness of my request,
Besides the danger waiting on your life,
A thousand Virgins, whose unspotted prayers
Like hosts of guardian Angels, would have borne
You on their wings to heaven, will for my sake
Convert their zeal to curses, and in tears
Of anguish drown your memory.
Why friend, this is
Such an o'erweening passion, as does question
The soundness of your judgement, fills the world
With a conceit you die; because your fears
Dare not accept of life: Besides your Mistress,
To whom you would so strictly keep your faith,
Does so much scorn your constancy, that no
Entreats could move her pity undertake
This honourable employment.
Do it with speedy diligence.
Her causeless frailty
Shall more confirm my truth:
My Noble Lord pronounce
My happy sentence, 'twill be welcome to me
As charming harmony, and swell my breast
With more than humane pleasure.
Are you come? approach,
Behold this Executioner, and this Priest,
This is to wed you to destruction, that
To this rich Mine of purity: your choice
May accept either: if you fix on this,
Besides your own redemption, you enjoy
A Lady, who may claim as many hearts
As she has virtuous thoughts; but lean to that,
Your Spring returns unpitied, to the rude
Arms of perpetual winter, that will freeze you
To a ne'er melting icicle, be sudden,
And wise in your election.
'tis but vain: a Saint may sooner be o'ercome to sell
His native Piety: come thou grim man,
Thou art to me more lovely than the face of perfect
Beauty: Do thy office, it will free me
From these perplexities.
Well my Lord,
Since I'm unworthy to enjoy in life
Your fair society, my soul shall haste
To wait on you to death, there is no bliss
Without your presence, since you will not have
Mercy on your own life, by your example
I'll be as harsh to mine, I'll go
Before you to the other world,
And be your loved Ghosts Harbinger.
Hold, hold the Lady—
Let no hand presume to seize me,
For the meanest touch that shall
Endeavour to prevent my will
Shall urge my speedier ruin: Good my Lord,
Shall I have answer? I would fain be going
On my long journey.
I'm confounded
In my imagination, I must yield,
You have enforced a benefit upon me, I
Can hardly thank you for, yet I will try
To love you as my wife; that I were lost
In Clouds of black forgetfulness.
My Lord,
Your pardon's sealed as soon as by the Priest
You are conjoined in marriage:
I'll not leave you
Till't be solemnized, Hymen light thy Pine,
Death's tapers fade at the clear flame of thine.
IS the Priest prepared
For his Hymn after Nuptials, and the virgins
Ready to gratulate the Bride, and Bridegroom
With the appointed dance?
The Priest I think
Has the song perfect, but it is a question
Among the wisest, whether in the City
There be seven Virgins to be found to furnish
The dance as't should be; but you must accept them
With all their faults; this music speaks their entrance.
TRiumph appear, Hymen invites
Thee to wait upon this feast,
Mix thy joys with his delights,
'Tis the General is chief guest.
Bid the Drum not leave to teach,
The Soldiers fainting heart to beat,
Nor wars loud music Canon cease,
Breasts with deathful fire to heat.
Thy waving Ensigns in the air display,
The General lives, 'tis triumphs Holiday;
Come bright virtues that reside
In heaven, as in your proper sphere,
Though all contained in the fair bride,
Chastity do thou first appear,
With Temperance and innocent grace,
Rose-coloured Modesty and truth,
Dance harmless measures in this place,
With health, and a perpetual youth:
And all your Virgin Trophies bring away,
To grace these Nuptials, Triumphs Holiday.
You have our hearty thanks, and we shall study
To give you fair requital; come my Lord
Erect your drowsy spirits, let your soul,
Dance airy measures in your jocund breast;
This is a day on which each Bridegroom ought
To wear no earth about him; air and fire
Are Hymen's proper elements, your mirth
Ought to infuse into your frolic guests,
An humour apt for revelling and sport:
Your disposition is more dull, than if
You were to be chief muttoner at a corpse:
For shame shake off this sadness.
It becomes you to say truth scurvily, I do not like it,
You look as if you'd lost some victory,
Of which your hope had an assurance: Shall I tell your Lordship
A very pleasant story?
It must be, if it be delightful to me, a discourse
Of some quick means to free me from this cruel
Oppressive weight of flesh, which does entomb
My martyred soul, that like to sulphury fire
Hid in a mountain's entrails, strives to burst
The prison, and fly upwards; it must needs
Be a sad wedding, when the Bridegroom wears
His Nuptial livery on his eyes in tears.
Friend, this is
A passion too effeminate for a heart
Endued with manly courage; things past help
Should be past thought, your sadness casts a Cloud
Upon the lustre of this Lady's looks,
You make her dim the brightness of her eyes
With unbecoming tears, if you continue
This strange distraction.
Alas my Lord,
Let me participate your cause of sorrow,
And be a willing partner in your grief,
Which like a violent Current that o'erflows
The neighbouring fields and meadows in its rage,
Into two streams divided, smoothly runs,
Kissing with calm lips the imprisoning banks,
Would, though too mighty for you, when my soul
Should vent a part of it, be mild, and pass
Away without disturbance of your peace,
Which to procure I would even burst my heart
With sighs devoted to your quiet, and
Become a loving fountain by my tears
I shed without intermission.
Gentle Lady,
I am at such an enmity with fate,
Makes me incapable of aught but grief,
But I shall study to declare how much
I am indebted to your care— good heaven
Send down some Angel to protect my heart,
Or my religion will scarce stay my hand,
For acting wilful violence on my life,
I have sucked poison from her eyes, that will
Like to juice of Hemlock drown my soul
In a forgetful Lethargy, or oppress
My temperate faculties with madness.
Cosen you're welcome, know this virtuous Lady
Who has redeemed the General.
Sir, i'm come to gratulate your beauteous bride, and wish you joys immortal.
I hope Madam, my innocence has gi'n you no offence,
That you refuse me, being a stranger to you,
The Ceremonious wishes, which pertain
To new made Brides, and only do confer them
Upon my Lord.
Your happiness already,
Is so superlative, I cannot think
A new addition to it, you enjoy
The very sum of fortune in your match,
To such a noble and illustrious husband.
I no longer can hold my passion in,
These walls of flesh are not of
Strength sufficient to contain
My big swollen heart: My Lords behold a creature
So infinitely wretched, I deserve not
The meanest show of pity, who have, like
A silly merchant, trifled away a gem,
The darling of the quarry, lost a love
By my too foolish niceness, to regain
Whose forfeiture I would lay down my life:
But he is gone for ever, and I left
A piteous spectacle for the reproach
And scorn of wiser women.
Is this possible?
Was all her passion to Vitelli feigned?
My hopes recover life again.
Why Chrisea,
Whence springs this passionate fury?
Oh my Lord,
When you shall hear it, you will sigh for me,
And shed a charitable tear, at thought
Of my unkind disaster: sir my Justice
Cannot accuse your constancy, which stood
In the first trial of your love, as fast
And spotless as an Alabaster rock,
That had it but persisted in that height
Of honourable loyalty, your glory
Had been advanced to heaven, as the fix't star,
To guide all lovers through the rough
Seas of affection.
This taxation
Cannot be just from you, who did enforce
The sad revolt upon him.
Is there in heaven no friendly
bolt left that will strike this frame into
The centre, and set free a wretch
(So overgrown with misery) from life,
That death would be a comfort above health,
Or any worldly blessing, may time blot my name out
Of his Book, that such a Prodigy
May not affright succession, nor stick
Like an o'erspreading Leprosy upon
The beauteous face of manhood.
Oh my Lord, each grief of which
You're sensible, is mine, and not your
Torment, every sigh you breath is an
Afflicting motion, expired by my vexed
Spirit, and if you could weep, each drop
Would be my blood, who am the spring
Of the whole flood of sorrow; oh forgive
The too exceeding honour of my love, I would
Have had you for your perfect truth so glorious;
Your loyalty should not for
Preservation of your fame, have needed
To adopt a statue for its heir, or builded a
Monumental pyramid, but love
Is ofttimes loves undoing.
This is such
A cunning labyrinth of,
Sorrow, that no clew
Can lead them out of.
It would be
A great affront to misery, should there live
A person half so wretched to outdare
The strength of my affliction, methinks
I me like some aged mountain that has stood
In the seas watery bosom, thousand shocks
Of threatning tempests, yet by th' flattering waves,
That cling and curl about his stony limbs,
Is undermined and ruined, I have scaped
Wars, killing, dangers, and by peaceful love,
Suffer a strange subversion, Oh Chrisea,
While I have reason left that can distinguish
Things with a cool and undistracted sense,
Let's argue mildly the unhappy cause
Of our undoings.
Truly sister,
'Twas a suspicious rashness, I could wish
You never had attempted.
My Lord,
Humane condition always censures things
By their event, my aims have had success
So strangely hapless, that will blast the truth
Of their intentions purity, I never
Harboured the least suspicion of your faith,
Which I did strive to perfect, by the test,
As richest gold refined, and purged
From dross of other baser metals, and besides
The trial of your constancy, I meant
To sound Vitelli's depth; upon whose love
My sister doted, so that I was loath
To see her cast the treasure of her heart
Upon a stranger, of whose constancy
She had too small assurance.
Gentle Cosen,
Your good intents encountered bad success,
But I ad mire, since you must needs have notice
Of his disaster, that the law would pass
Upon his life, you did not to prevent
All other virgin intercessors haste
To pay the early tribute of your love.
My wretched fate
With a too quick prevention has o'erthrown
The justness of my purpose,
I relied so much upon his nobleness, I thought
The ugly horror of a thousand deaths
Could not have moved his temper, and besides,
Knowing his mighty courage, I permitted
The law proceed upon him, that hereafter
He might be sure no merit can appear
Offended justice, otherwise I could
Easily have stopped this mischief.
How Chrisea? I understand you not.
Lady, to quit all scruple that I do not wish
Yours and your Lords succeeding happiness, I'll offer
Something as an oblation that shall add de
Peace to your nuptial garland (see my Lord)
My Cosen Bonivet lives.
Lives? Lactantio did not you inform us
That he was dead, and you had caused his body
To be prepared for funeral? which occasioned
The general's sudden trial, because our custom
Does not permit the corpses to be entombed,
Before the murderer have his sentence, sir you shall know
What 'tis to mock the state thus.
Good my Lord
Hear but my just excuse, I am so much the fair
Chrisea's beauty's by such ties
Obliged to serve her, that I choose to hazard
The anger of the state ere her displeasure,
And do submit me to your gracious censure.
I must confirm't,
Sir it was I who caused him to conceal
My Cosen Bonivet, for the causes which
I did declare before, and now myself
Having received a satisfying proof
Of his affection, came resolved to clear
These misty errors, but my cruel fate
Has like a sudden storm which has beat down
A goodly field of standing Corn even ripe
For the laborious sickle, crushed my hopes
In one sad minute into nothing.
My Lord I owe
Such an obedient duty to your peace,
That though my heart does wish to wait on yours
For ever; since I see betwixt this Lady
And you such firm apparences of love,
If the law please to allow it, I resign
My interest to her and be fortunate
To see you two live happy.
Since the marriage
Has not arrived to consummating act,
I do believe this may be done.
Do not delude
Your favour with vain hopes, the law cannot
Dispense with the strict Cannon, 'tis impossible
You should be separated.
This happiness
Was too extremely good to be confirmed
To such a wretch as I am: I am like
One that did dream of a huge mass of wealth,
And catching at it, grasped the fleeting air,
And waking grieves at the delusion.
Sir resume your ancient quiet, the formal
Love shall not oppose your peace, I'll disannul
The marriage easily, and most noble Lord
Pardon your humble servant.
Sure this is
Some apparition to confirm my faith,
Speak, art thou my Sabelli.
Yes 'tis he, fate would not suffer two such
Noble souls to be so disunited, gentle boy,
Thy duty to thy Master will continue,
Thy name in story, as the great example
Of loyalty in servants.
'Twas the zeal I ought in duty to my Mrs. life,
Hath put me on the attempt, which if he pardon,
I'm fully satisfied.
My joys does with a sudden ecstasy oppress
My frail mortality, and I should sink,
Wert not for my supporters, my Sabelli,
Thou hast restored two lovers to their bliss,
Whose gratitude shall pay to thy desert
The tribute of their hearts: Dear Madam, now
I hope your scrupulous doubts will remain free
From any new suspicion.
Since I have scaped the danger past, believe i'll avoid
The like hereafter; my Lord please you confirm
My choice; and let my sister be disposed
To good Vitelli, he deserves her.
Your wishes are fulfilled, Cosen Bonivet welcome to life
Again; you and the General must be friends.
Your goodness will pardon my misfortune?
And desire to be esteemed your servant.
With your leave gentlemen: Madam I have such news to tell you, as will tickle your understanding, to believe the General is married; and more, Signior Doria, Lord Bonivet lives; That's lucky news for you.
He's here, good Signior Frangipan.
My news has ever the worst luck; I must resolve to leave it off.
But sir I have some sudden news to tell you:
The thousand Ducats you contracted to pay me,
When you could understand the French as perfectly
As myself; by all these Lords indifferent judgement is
Due on this very minute.
This is news indeed; you do not mean to make a gull of me, a figo for a thousand Ducats: as I am a gentleman I know not French for any thing, not for an Ass: good your grace let me not be abused.
'Twas I my Lord who made the bargain with him,
The money is not due until my cousin
Have French as perfect as himself.
He has, i'll bear him witness; for Adorni Speaks not one true French word.
How not one true French Word?
No not a word, you must disburse.
Tutor, i'll tell you news,
You made a fool of me,
I could abuse him horribly,
If I durst for fear of beating.
My Lord
If he will undertake wars,
I'll quit my bargain.
I'll pay it triple first, the name of war Has brought an age on me.
You two agree that: cousins I rejoice
To see this happy period of your loves.
Let's back unto the Temple, that the Priest
May by his sacred power unite your hearts.
Lead to the Temple.
GEntlemen, I'll tell you News, the Play is done,
And he that writ it betwixt hope and Fear
Stands pensive in the Tiring-house to hear
Your Censures of his Play: Good Gentlemen
Let it be kind, or otherwise his Pen
Will write but dully, for he needs must lack
If you dispraised the quickening Spirit of Sack
To inflame his Genius, which you'll ever find
Devoted to you, if your Votes be kind.