YOu need not fear me Gentlemen, although
I come thus armed; 'tis but to let you know
I am in office; in my own defence,
And to secure me from the violence,
Which might from you (who now my judges sit)
Be offered to this Trophy of my wit:
And cause I know that you will obey
Authority, I do charge you, like the Play:
Think who I am, how often I may catch
You at ill hours in Taverns, or i'th' Watch;
In Frays sometimes; nay sometimes (not to trench
Too much upon you) with a pretty wench.
All this is possible, and Gentlemen,
Consider how my rage will use you then,
If you should now, as sure 'tis worth your fear,
Be in the censure of my wit severe,
Vexed I'm implacable; and though the Tribe
Of Constables do use't, I'll take no bribe
To let you pass: These sturdy knaves will take
Not the least mercy on you for my sake:
Nor will the justice free you: (to your smart)
You'll find, he and his clerk will take my part.
I can but gently warn you to prevent
A danger, nay a certain punishment,
Should you dislike: for if the Play do fall
Under your votes, I'll apprehend you all.
ARe you resolved yet Gentlemen? I am
In earnest haste of Town-affairs, and came
To know your minds: how's that? there's one I spy
That will dislike, to th' Counter instantly
With him; entreats Sir, shall not prevail,
Nor shall you think to come out upon bail.
For in this case (believe it) I'd not spare
(Though the sword were borne before him) my Lord Major;
Nor should the Court of Aldermen reprieve
For such a fact, my good friend Master Shreeve.
If so severe to them then, who by vow,
Are my own brethren? what will become of you?
I have considered; and will now commit
To your free votes the Censures of my wit.
For though their dulness (whom I've threatened) may
Dislike (you've wit) and will allow the play.
Did you ere we departed from the College
o'erlook my library?
Yes sir, I spent two days in sorting Poets from Historians,
As many nights in placing the divines
On their own chairs, I mean their shelves, and then
In separating Philosophers from those people
That kill men with a licence: your Physicians
Cost me a whole day's labour, and I find sir,
Although you tell me learning is immortal,
The paper and the parchment, 'tis contained in,
Savours of much mortality.
I hope my books are all in health.
In the same case the Moths have left them, who have eaten more
Authentic learning then would richly furnish
A hundred country pedants; yet the worms
Are not one letter wiser.
I have been idle
Since I came up from Cambridge, go to my stationer
And bid him send me Swarez Metaphysics,
Tolet de anima is new forth,
So are Granadus commentaries on
Primum secundae Thomae Aquinatis,
Get me the lyric Poets. And—
I admire
How he retains these Author's names, of which
He understands no syllable, 'twere better
I bought the Authentic Legend of Sir Bevis,
Some six new Ballads and the famous Poems
Writ by the learned waterman.
Iohn Taylor, get me his nonsense.
You mean all his works sir.
And a hundred of Booker's new Almanacs.
And the devil to boot,
Your father's books in which he keeps th' accounts
Of all his coin will scarce yield crowns to afford
Your fancy volumes: why you have already
Enough to furnish a new Vatican,
A hundred country pedants can read dictates
To their young pupils out of Seton's logic,
Or Golius Ethics, and make them arrive,
Proficients learned enough in one bare twelvemonth
To instruct the parish they were borne in: you
Out of an itch to this same foolish learning
Bestow more money yearly upon books:
Then would for convert sisters build an almshouse.
You will displease my patience Tristram.
I speak truth: if you should want, your learning scarce would make you
Capable of being town clerk, or at best,
To be a famous Tyrant unto boys,
And wear out birch upon them: or perchance
you may arrive to be the City Poet,
And find the little moisture of your brain
To grace a Lord mayor's festival with shows,
Alluding to his trade, or to the company
Of which he's free, these are the best preferments
That can attend your learning.
I say Tristram, the spirit of my learning stirs me up
To give thee due correction.
Would you study? as does young Thorowgood your noble Cosen,
Not books, but men which are true living volumes:
You would like him, be held rich i'th' esteem
Of all the illustrious wits that deck the city
When the extent of your admirers is
Confined to fresh men: and such youths as only
Know how to frame a syllogism in Darij,
And make the ignorant believe by Logic
The Moons made of a Holland Cheese: and the man in't.
A swag-bellied Dutch Burger
Cosen Holdfast, a good day attend
Thy learned pia mater: prithee tell me
How do the Cabalists and ancient Rabbins
And thou agree? will they be sociable,
And drink their morning's draught of Helicon
With thee: have they instructed you to prove yet
That the world runs on wheels? or that the sea
May be drunk off by a shoal of Whales? such things
You know there are in nature.
O far stranger.
Peace you bookworm,
Fit only to devour more paper than
A thousand grand tobacco men or a legion
Of boys in pellets to their eldern guns.
Dost think to live this life still? you're not now
Amongst your eves at Cambridge, but in London,
Come up to see your mistress beauteous Clare,
The glory of the city: go and court her,
As does become a gentleman of carriage,
Without your Tropes and figures inkhorn terms,
Fit only for a mountebank or Pedant,
Or all your Physics Metaphysics and Meteors,
(Tomes larger far and more replete with lies,
Than Surius, Gallobelgicus, or the welsh
Bard Geoffrey Monmouth) shall be straightway made
Pitiful Martyrs.
Why cosen I had thought.
thyself an errant idiot, that's the fittest
Thought for thy brain more dull than a fat Burghers,
Or reverend country justices, whose wit
Lies in his spruce clerk's standish, thou wert begot
Surely i'th' wane o'th' Moon, when natures tools
Were at lame Vulcan's forge a sharpening, thou art so lumpish.
He has already spoilt
His eyes with prying on Geneva prints,
And small dutch Characters: his watching makes him
Look like a grandchild of old Errapater's,
Some lean Astronomer, who to get ten shillings,
For that's a large price for an Almanac,
Has wasted himself to the bigness of his Jacob's staff,
Which is so limber, 't cannot stand to take height of Venus rising.
He says truth: besides your study has attained already,
Learning enough to inform your mind the knowledge
Of arts fit for a gentleman, wert not better
For you my sprightful senior to advance
Your beaver with a hatband of the last
Edition in the Court, among the noblest
Youths of our nation, than to walk like Faustus,
Or some high German conjurer, in a cap
Fit for a Costermonger, to wear your pearl
Or cut work, band then this small slip of linen
That's proper only for Tom Thum: or some of queen Mab's gentlemen-ushers.
This Cassock were a pretty garment for a fortuneteller.
And this cloak of tinder comely for a ballad-seller,
Life sir, you are borne here to an ample fortune,
Your father absent knows not how you've altered
Your disposition: I must reclaim it,
Thou shalt with me and court the beauteous Clare
Reserved for thee, a purpose i'th' mean time,
Our chief companions, shall be wits more pure,
Than your quick sophisters, or sly logicians,
we'll talk of the bright beauties of the age,
Girls whose each look deserves to be a theme
For all the nimble poets, two days practise
In our brave arts will teach thee to forget
Philosophy as fruitless and abjure
All other Ethics, but what's used 'mongst us, as most erroneous.
Well You shall persuade me, I'll be an errant ass, or any thing
For thy sake coz, but shall we have such wenches
As are at Cambridge, handsome as peg Larkin.
O far before her, cosen thou shalt read
Aretius' Politics; and Ovid's Art,
Shall be new read, thee and we will refine
Thy Academic wit with bowls of wine.
Tristram shall toth' College and sell my books immediately.
Speak like the son of Phoebus and my cosen.
My studious master.
Sell thy Dictionary.
I'll not keep a prayer book.
They are out of fashion.
Nor a Calendar, to look the age o'th' Moon in, Trist. be sure
You burn Green's groats worth of wit; I scorn to keep
The name of wit about me.
'tis confessed sir, but for the numerous Rheims of paper, which
Are piled up in your study, give them me,
I have a brother in law i'th' town's a cook,
I'll give them him to put under his bake meats.
Take them: I will not leave a pen within my lodging,
I will forget to write, or set my hand to any thing.
Unless 't be to a bond.
I'll go put this blessed design in execution,
Cosen anon i'll meet you at your chamber.
What in that reverend shape? the gentlemen
That I converse with, will believe thee some Itinerant
Scholar, have thee whipped by th' statute.
I would be loath, now I am past a fresh man to be had into the butteries.
Still them terms? study to forget them, I'll send my
Man to you with a new suit of mine I never wore yet,
Be sure to put it on right, you mere Scholars
Know no degree of garment above Serge,
Or Satanisco: tie your bandstrings neatly
And do not eat the buttons off, put not
Your Cuffs both on one hand; 'twill tax your judgement
Of new inventing fashions when accoutred,
Come to my chamber, and I'll furnish you
With language fit to accost your mistress.
Rare, I've got more learning from him in half an hour,
Then in a whole life's practice out of books.
Follow me Tristram, farewell dear cosen.
How I could laugh now, were my spleen large enough: a
Hundred such lame stupid Idiots were enough, if married,
To precise Burghers daughters to replenish
The city with a race of fools, and root
The stock of knaves quite out of it, he loves books:
Not that he has a scruple more of learning
Then will suffice him to say grace, but like
Some piteous cowards, who are oft thought valiant
For keeping store of weapons in their chambers,
He loves to be esteemed a doctor by
His volumes: but I shall fit his scholarship: whose's these?
Alderman Covets, Formal, byth' proportion:
That rib of man's flesh should be Clare, dost hear
My honest Cadis garters: who for care
And close attendance on thy charge deserves
To be grand porter to the great Turk's Seraglia: how hight that veiled damsel?
She has been at Britain's burse a buying pins & needle
To work a nightcap for my master sir.
Pox upon him, is not her name Clare, niece to Alderman Covets
Her father was a country Squire of large revenue and her mother.
I shall be forced to hear him blaze her pedigree,
I'd beat him, but that clubs and paring shovels o'th' city
Would be so busy about my ears: they'd spoil
My hearing two months after Gentle Lady
Pardon my error if I do mistake, are not you mistress Clare?
Formal at last, would have resolved you, and I held my
Peace of purpose, cause I knew his slow discovery would vex
Your nimble patience
You are a Gipsie, but does thy uncle's humour hold of wedding
His daughter to sir Timothy.
Yes, or to young monsieur Holdfast whom he says is
Learned enough to make Cheapside a College,
And all the City a new Academy, but have you
Thorowgood performed what I advised you to?
Yes, my girl: good Formal use thy motion to convey
Thy ears a little farther off, there's money
To buy thee a new pair of garters: Clare
Thou shalt no more behold me in the garb
And noble ornament I used to wear, my fashion shall be altered.
To the scholars,
Young Holdfasts likeness.
O by all means girl, thou shalt behold this comely hat transformed
To frugal brim, and steeple crown, this band
Of fair extent changed to a modern cut,
Narrower than a precisian's: all this gay
And gaudy silk I will convert to Serge
Of limber length: like some spruce student (newly
Exalted for saying grace well, to be fellow
Oth' College he had studied) I will
Salute thy reverent Uncle's spectacles,
And without fear of his gold chain, i'll woe thee
In metaphors and tropes Scholastic till
The doting Senator with a liberal hand give
Thee his dainty darling to become my spouse inseparable.
This suits well with my directions.
True girl true, farewell Clare,
I kiss thy white hand: Sir resume your charge,
I've done my errand: let not your old Sir Amiar,
Know of this conference, if you do, that twist
Of spinners thread, on which your life depends
Shall be shorn off like a horse mane. Farewell.
Man's life indeed is but a thread, good day sir.
Attend your charge friend, Valentine, Sir Timothy.
You're well encountered, may I inquire the affair
Which happily has brought you up toth' City?
May I know it? is't not to purchase a Monopoly
For Salt and Herrings? for state business,
Unless it be to see the great new ship,
Or Lincolns Inn fields built: I'm sure you none here.
Very right sir.
But for thee: my noble man of merit, thou art welcome,
we'll be as kind to one another boy,
And witty as brisk poets in their wine,
we'll court the black browed beauties of the time,
And have by them the height of our desires: with ease accomplished
Noble Thorowgood,
Did I not own you by the name of friend,
Already these endearments would engage me to beg that title.
Very right, and me too.
I know you for the most Egregious knight
In all the country.
You sir, you've reason,
Very right, I am indeed esteemed so.
One that live on Onions and Corn-salads.
Right again,
Sure he can conjure, I had one to my breakfast.
Nay no Herald
Can better blaze your pedigree. I've heard
Your father my most worthy knight, was one
That died a knave to leave you so.
Passing right still.
And pray right witty, and right honoured sir,
What may your business seem to be i'th' city.
Are you come up to learn new fashions?
Exceeding right again.
To change this ancient garment to a new one
Of a more spruce edition.
Yes, but before,
For I am privy unto all's intentions,
He means to see and court his mistress.
Who's that? my doughty Imp of spur and sword,
Some fair Dulcina de Toboso.
No, 'tis Grace, daughter to Alderman Covet.
I do commend thee my dear Don, and will
Be thy assistant, go and see thy horse dressed,
And then approach my chamber.
Very right, I kiss your finger's end.
Do you, Valentine, know
The Lady he intends to Court.
Only by report,
Which speaks her most accomplished.
Oh she'll make
An excellent Ass of him: she has a wit
More sharp and piercing than a wasps sting, she speaks
All fire; each word is able to burn up
A thousand such poor Mushrooms: had her mother
Not been held honest, I should have believed
She'd been some courtier's By-blow, or that some
Quick Poet got her.
How's her feature?
Rare, past expression, singular, her eyes
The very spheres of love, her cheeks his throne,
Her lips his paradise, and then her mind
is far more excellent than her shape.
You give her a brave Character; is't possible
To have a sight of her?
Yes, by my means, scarce otherwise wilt thou have her,
Speak but a syllable, 't shall be performed
As sure as if Don Hymen, in his robes
Had ratified the contract.
You are merry sir.
When didst thou know me otherwise: yet now
In sober sadness friend, couldst thou affect
A woman, as there's few of them worth loving,
Thou canst not make a nobler choice: I'll bring thee
On to the skirmish, but if thou retreat,
Beat back by th' hot Artillery of her wit,
Which will play fast upon thee: mayst thou live
To be enamoured on some stale Hay, or Matron
Of fourscore, that may congeal thee to a frost
Sooner than forty winters: or be wed
To an insatiate Chambermaid.
Defend me
From thy last curse; fear not my valour.
This fool shall serve both her and us for sport:
Let's to our task; and if our project hit,
I'll swear all fortune is comprised in wit.
YOu will provoke me.
No matter:
Although you be my uncle, and so nature
Binds me to observe you, i'll not be obliged
To what the phlegmatic humour of your age
Strives to enforce upon me: I was borne
Free, an inheritress to an ample fortune,
Of which you do pervert the use, and trust me,
I'll be no longer tame and suffer it.
Suffer what? you're used
Too well: if you complain of this, I shall
Study to be more harsh.
Do; you shall not, as you had wont,
Think to attire me in black Grogram,
Daubed o'er with Satin lace, as if I were
Daughter, and heir apparent to a Tailor,
Who from the holiday Gowns of six neat fishwives
Had stole the remnants made the thrifty garment.
Nor shall you sir (as 'tis a frequent custom,
Cause you're a worthy Alderman of a Ward.)
Feed me with Custard, and perpetual White-broth,
Sent from the Lord Majors, or the Shreive's feast,
And here preserved ten days, (as 'twere in pickle)
Till a new dinner from the common hall
Supply the large defect.
You'll leave this language?
Leave to use me so then:
Y'ave made myself, your daughter, and my woman,
Sup with a pennyworth of Lettice, under
Pretence 'twould make us sleep well: your full morsels
(Had not the virtue of Clay wall, and Oatmeal
Preserved my maid) ere this she'd been shrunk up
Toth' bigness of a Squirrel.
Any Dwarf
might without stretching his small fingers, have
Spanned me about the waste.
Nor shall you,
(As sure 'tis your intention) marry me
To th' quondam foreman of your shop, (exalted
To be your Cashkeeper) a limber fellow,
Fit only for dear Nan, his schoolfellow,
A grocer's daughter, borne in Bread-street, with
Whom he has used to go to Pimblico,
And spend ten groats in Cakes and Christian Ale,
And by the way has courted her with fragments,
Stolen from the learned Legends of Knights Errants,
Or from the glory of her father's trade,
The Knight o'the Burning Pestle.
Sure the Devil
Has entered her i'th' likeness of an Eel,
Her tongue's so slippery: Minion—
I'll not be frighted
As are your Prentices, with Little ease,
Or showing them the Beadle. In plain terms,
I do not mean to incorporate with a Salter,
Or any of those thriving trades, to have
My shoes licked o'er each saturday night
Byth' under prentice; they shine so brightly
With soot and kitchen-stuff, that I next morning
May spare my glass, and dress my head by their
Greasy reflection: yet let me tell you,
I must be married instantly a virgin:
Of my full age, setting aside all niceness
May justly claim a husband.
Have but patience, i'll wed thee to a Knight.
What is he, one o'th' Post sir, or some such
As was in the old famous Ballad mentioned:
He that has forty pounds per annum, by
Which Charter I should be undutiful,
And take the wall of my aged grandam: No,
I'll have a Courtly gentleman, whose wit
Shall equal his estate, and that so large,
As't shall afford me a sufficient jointure.
This Knight shall do't, or if you like not him,
What say you to Sir Geoffrey Holdfast's son,
The famous Scholar?
If he be a Parson;
And I his wife, I sure shall make my friends
Lucky to horseflesh: No, I will have one
That shall maintain my Coach, and four fair horses:
Not such thin jades, nor such a crazy Chariot,
As i've seen used by Citizens to convey
Their wives with leisure to their Country houses,
(For fear the late Plumpudding they had eaten
Fried to their Breakfast, should with too much jogging
Broil on their queasy stomachs) One that shall
Maintain me a Sedan, and two strong varlets,
That so I may not need the Common men Mules,
With their wood-Litters, with nineteen at end of them,
The usual shelters, which the Gallants carry
Their wenches to their Chambers in: In brief,
If you can find me anywhere a husband
That I can like, I will allow your choice;
If not, i'll take my own; so good day to you.
Pray meditate upon it.
This is the maddest wench: would I were rid of her,
She vexes me more than her Portion's worth;
But if she stoop not to my Country Knight,
Sir Timothy Shallow-wit, or to young Holdfast,
(Whom I had rather marry to my daughter)
She shall ha' grazing.
Sir, there are a brace of gentlemen without,
Desire admittance to you.
Let them enter.
I shall denote your pleasure.
Some young heirs,
To borrow money upon Mortgages.
I shall observe my cousin's rule, ne'er fear me.
Save you sir.
You do not think me damned sir, you bestow
That salutation on me.
Good sir no.
Whom would you speak with here?
Sir, my discourse
Points at one Alderman Covet.
I am the party.
Good Mr. Covet, I covet your acquaintance:
I understand you have a daughter is
Of most unknown perfections.
She is as heaven made her.
She goes naked then,
The tailor has no hand in her; may I see her?
I must desire your name first.
My name is Holdfast.
Son to sir Geff. Holdfast.
His proper son and heir, and I am come
To see your Daughter and your Niece.
Came you from Cambridge lately.
I come from Cambridge:
What do you see in these my looks, should make you
Judge me such a coxcomb.
Your father writ me word, his son that should
Come up to see my Daughter and my Niece,
Was a rare scholar, wholly given to's books.
My father was an arrant ass for's labour,
I ne'er read book in all my life, except
The Counter scuffle, or the merry Gossips,
Raynard the Fox, Tom Thumb, or Gargantua,
And those i've quite forgotten: I a scholar!
He lies in's throat that told you so.
On my Conscience
You may believe him: he scarce ere saw book,
Unless the Chronicle in an iron Chain,
In's fathers Hall: for learning sir, except
What's in a Horse, a Hawk, or hound, he knows not
How to expound your meaning.
I mar'le sir Geff. knowing my aversion
From any of these courses, should bring up
His son to all of them: nay, write me word,
Knowing my love to learning, he had him
A scholar purposely: pray sir resolve me,
Are you sir Geffrey's son?
I am a Bastard else.
Sir Geffrey's son of Epping?
Yes, of Epping,
One that will venture five hundred pounds upon his horse,
Soon as the proudest he that lives in London,
I'll play my crop-ear 'gainst my Lord Major's Steed,
And all his furniture: I do intend
To scour Hide Park this summer.
didst give him
His Oats this morning? Shall I see your daughter.
Did he drink's water hastily? Your Niece
I'd be acquainted with.
Sir, you must pardon me, you're not the man
I took you for.
You did not take me for an Ass I hope.
O by no means, but they cannot be seen
Conveniently this morning: another time,
At your best leisure, I shall not deny you.
Please you walk in, and taste our Beer?
I know 'tis but o'th' sixes; and I hate
liquour of that complexion: pray commend me
To both my sweethearts. Tristram come let's back,
And, as my Cosen says, drink lusty sack.
There's some deceit in this, perhaps some gallant,
Knowing my purpose with Sir Geoffrey Holdfast,
Has ta'en his name upon him: i'll dispatch
A messenger straight to him: whom have we here?
Sir, that's the Alderman my Master.
Is this the venerable Man, to whom
This goodly Mansion is impropriate:
I should negotiate with his reverence
About authentic business.
This rather
Should be sir Geff. son, his words and habit
Speak him most learned. I'm the person, pray
Let me be bold to crave your name.
My appellation or pronomen, as
(It is termed by the Latins) is hight Ieremie,
But my Cognomen, as the English gather,
Is called Holdfast.
This is he certainly; are you, I pray
Sir Geffrey's son of Epping?
The Nominals, the Thomists, all the sects
Of old and modern Schoolmen, do oblige me,
To pay to that Sir Geoffrey filial duty.
I'm glad to hear it, t'other was some varlet,
I shall find out and punish: Sir, you're welcome;
I guess your business; 'tis about a match,
Or with my Niece, or Daughter: which you like,
Shall be at your dispose: if not, your business.
My business is of procreation, or as
The Civil Lawyers learnedly do paraphrase,
Is of concomitance, Cohabitation,
Or what you please to term it.
How am I blessed, that this rare scholar shall
Be matched into my family? Within there;
Niece, Daughter, both come hither.
One at once sir,
'twill satisfy; the Canon does prohibit
Us Polygamy.
Sir, this is my only daughter, this my niece,
Pray know them better.
Fair types, nay Orbs of beauty, I salute you,
Each in his proper altitude.
Heyday, this is some Fortune-teller.
'tis Thorowgood, you must not seem to know him.
Daughter and Niece, this is a gentleman,
My care has picked out, as a most fit husband
For one of you; which he can soonest fancy,
Hear him but speak, and he will put you down
Ten Universities, and inns of Court,
in twenty syllables. Good Mr. Holdfast
Speak learnedly to th'wenches; though I say't,
They have both good capacities.
Most rubicund, stelliferous splendent Ladies,
The ocular faculties, by which the beams
Of love are darted into every soul,
Or humane essence, have into my breast
Conveyed this lady's lustre: and I can
Admire no other object; therefore beauty
Your pardon, if I only do address
In terms Scholastic, and in Metaphors
My phrase to her.
I shall not
Envy my cousin's happiness.
You're full of Candour;
if you will love me Lady, I'll approach your ears,
Not in a garb Domestic, or terms vulgar,
But hourly change my language, court you now,
In the Chaldean, or Arabic tongues,
Expound the Talmud to you, and the rabbins,
Then read the Dialect of the Alanites,
Or Ezion Gebor, which the people use
Five leagues beyond the Sunrising, in stead
Of pages to attend you, I will bring
Sects of Philosophers and quaint Logicians,
we'll Procreate by learned art, and I
Will generate new broods of Scholars on you,
Which shall defend opinions far more various
Than all the Sectaries of Amsterdam
Have ever vented.
Learned, learned young man,
How happy am I in thee?
Do but love,
I'll call the Muses from the sacred hill
To Enucleat your beauty: I myself
(After in loftier numbers I have sung
Your famed Encomiums) will convert to poet,
And for your sake I'll write the city annals,
In famous meeter which shall far surpass
Sir Guy of Warwick's history: or Iohn Stows upon
The custard with the four and twenty Nooks
At my Lord Major's feast.
How am I ravished!
Whose brave show hereafter
Shall be no more set forth with stalking pageants,
Nor children ride for angels nor loud actors
Pronounce bold speeches, I will teach his Henehboyes
Sergeants and trumpeters to act and save
The city all that charges: Nay I'll make a new
Found engine; which without fire shall keep his
white-broth warm till his return from Westminster
Nor shall the Aldermen's daughters, who have
Dreamt at least six nights before of guilded
Marchpane, forfeit their serious longing: I'll have
Horses with their Saint George's on them, that shall gallop
Into their handkerchers.
You promise wonders.
Hold your tongue, he's able
To perform more by's learning.
The cross
And standard in Cheapside I will convert
To Hercules' pillars: and the little conduit
That weeps in lamentation for the Church,
Removed that did lean on, it shall be still
Like the great tun at Heidelberg filled with wine,
And always running, that the prentices
Shall not on Sundays need to frequent Taverns,
And forfeit their indentures.
Still more miraculous.
The great conduit
Shall be a magazine of sack, and Smithfield
A Romish Cirque or Grecian Hippodrom,
My Lord mayor's jennet shall not die without
An Elegy, nor any citizen break,
But have a doleful ditty writ upon him.
Save you gentlemen.
Noble sir Timothy, and your friend both
Welcome, this is my niece, & that my daughter, pray
Be pleased to know them, Sir honour me to walk,
I'd have some private conference with you,
The house sir Timothy is at your command.
Cosen what would these gentlemen?
Truth I know not,
I'll venture my discretion to his nose there,
And that appears a rich one, they are two
Country Idiots whom thy father would
Put upon us for husbands.
Very likely,
Pray gentlemen your business.
Speak for me Valentine.
Ladies we're come to see you, fame does give
You the attribute of fair and witty.
Yet our wits you see sir will not serve to keep
Fools from our company.
Very right i'faith.
That tartness
Becomes you prettily, and might serve to fright
Young linendrapers or some milliner
That does with gloves and bracelets stolen from's
Master court you, a haberdasher would have shaked
His blockhead (as if he had been trying a Dutch
Felt out) and with a shrug departed, but we are
Gentlemen Ladies, and no city foremen
That never dare be venturous on a beauty,
Unless when wenches take them up at plays
To entice them at the next licentious Tavern
To spend a supper on them, we are creatures
Deserve you at your best and noblest value,
And so expect you'll use us.
Very right, this is
A country gentleman my neighbour I,
A trusty and courageous country knight.
I do believe you sir, your face does tell me,
You're one that feed on bacon and bagpudding,
Your nose by its complexion does betray
Your frequent drinking country Ale with lant in't,
Have you no hobnails in your boots, driven in
To save the precious leather from the stones
That pave the streets of London.
Is not sir your
Cloak new turned, the aged three piled velvet
Was not your grandams petticoat this jerkin
Made by your grandsire at his first translation
From Clown to Gentleman, and since reserved
An heir long to the family, and this sword
The parish weapon?
Very right again.
Now for you sir.
Who of two fools do yet appear the wisest,
Can your ingenious noddle think that we
Bred in the various pleasures of the city,
Would for your sake turn beasts and graze i'th' country,
We cannot milk, make wholesome cheese, nor butter,
And sell it at next market and lay up
Out of the precious Income as much coin
In thread bare groats, mill-sixpences, and pence,
As will suffice to find the house in Candles
And Soap a twelvemonth after.
Nor can we
Spin our own smocks out of the flax which grows
Behind your Dovehouse, no. nor card the wool
Must make us petticoats things (to say truth)
Not worth the taking up.
They've Magic in their tongues
They have so daunted me, I think I shall
Turn fool and get me 'em without reply.
All the company,
We can enjoy there is each day to walk
To the next farmer's wife, whose whole discourse
Is what price Barley bears, or how her husband
sold his last yoke of Oxen: other meetings
We cannot have, except it be at Church-ales,
When the sweet bagpipe does draw forth the
Damsels to frisk about the May poles, or at
Weddings, where the best cheer is, wholesome
stewed broth made of legs of pork and turnips.
Yes, at Christenings, where the good
Wives, stead of burnt Wine and comfits,
Drink healths to th' memory of all christian souls
In Ale, scarce three hours old: eat cakes more tough
Than glue or farthing gingerbread: then talk
Of the last Blazing Star, or some new monster:
Then drink, and cry heaven bless us from the Spaniard,
While the learned vicar's wife expounds the Ballad
Of 'twas a Lady's daughter in Paris properly,
And so breaks up the wise assembly.
And you
That are the precious paragons of the City,
Who scorn these harmless sports: can have your meetings
At Islington, and Green Goose fair, and sip
A zealous glass of Wine till the parched floor
Be moistened with your virgin dew, then prattle
How that you dreamed last night that Iohn the Mercer,
Or Tom the draper's man at London-stone
Was in your bed, and what sweet work he made there.
Very right, and kissed you oftener
than ere the good man did his Cow, and hugged you
As the Devil hugged the Witch, that's right now.
When you're married
(For that you will be, or else run away
With Costermongers, Mountebanks, or Tailors)
Your husbands are more subject to you then
Their bondmen are, whom by profuse expense
You break beyond redemption from the Indies, the
straits, or Barbary, see them lodged in Ludgate,
And then turn pricking sempsters, till that trade
Failing, you take yourselves (as to the last refuge)
To the old occupation; till the Marshal
Carry you to Bridewell, of which you're free,
Even by your father's charters that have been
Sometimes the masters of it, there I'll leave you,
So farewell wildcats.
Very right as I am a gentleman.
I like his Clar,
Or none shall be my husband.
help me to laugh good wenches, I have talked
Thy Uncle Clare into so free an humour,
That he's resolved straight to take forth the licence,
And marry us ith' morning.
What odd fellow's this?
Know you him Cosen Grace.
Prithee good wit no more, we've overcome
All foreign enemies, and 'tis unfit
To war among ourselves.
This is the pedant
My father brought to mock us, good thine stuff,
Get thee home to thy parish,
And instruct
Thy people wholesome Doctrine, for us,
We have no zeal to learn.
Life they'll persuade me out of myself,
Clare, Grace, know you not me, not Thorowgood.
Thorowgood, pray put your tricks on somebody,
More easy to be wrought on, Thorowgood, Ha, ha, ha.
What should these wenches mean, the five and shears
Cannot resolve this mystery; they know me
Better than I can know myself: 'twas she
Advised me to this habit to deceive
Her uncle's prying eyes, and why then
Should they abuse me thus? the rest were made
But fools in Quarto, but I find myself
An ass in Folio: I'll away, and if
I quit them not with an abuse as fine,
I'll say there is no quickening spirit in wine.
ARE they so witty sayst thou?
You'd best try
The acuteness of their intellects.
You may endeavour
With the large talon of your masculine wit
To exceed their female sharpness you shall find,
Though you firm and stiff in your defence,
These city lasses able to take down
Your most courageous fury: pray endeavoured.
That gentleman, were to usurp your presence,
I find no inclination, yet I thank you,
To rest a fool upon record as you do.
How's that, my imp of understanding?
By being so egregiously abused
By two poor City infants, things that never
Have heard wit named, unless 'twas when their father
Has called his Formal foreman witty varlet,
For cheating handsomely, had they been some
Illustrious dames, the glory of Cheapside,
Stars of the City, that are daily haunted
By this great Lord that courtly kiss their gossips,
It had been possible their conversation
Might have instilled into them so much language
And wit sufficient to withstand the assaults
Of some young Inns courtman.
Yes, who never
Had mooted in the hall or seen the revels
Kept in the house at Christmas.
Some such gamester might have
Come oft with credit, though he'd ventured
His whole estate of wit on them and lost it,
But you the rooks o'th' age to be o'erdone
At your own game by city girls.
Thou art an ass,
A very coxcomb, there are girls i'th' City
Able to o'erdo at their own game a hundred
Such feeble fellows as thyself, but Thorowgood,
Leaving this infidel to his misbelief,
Are you resolved that I shall undertake
The new design we plotted?
With what speed
Can be convenient, sir Timothy
Shall be our instrument.
If there be wit in't,
Honour me to assist you.
A revenge
Upon these peevish wenches, one of them
Loves me entirely, nay has vowed me a marriage,
And did advise me to assume this shape,
To cheat her uncle.
And for the other,
By many a shroud cast of her eye upon me,
I do suspect for all her quaint dissembling,
She's taken with my good parts.
Thy face I must confess,
Is full of choice allurements, see there maid,
How fares it with your witty mistress,
My gallant type of beauty, is the stomach,
Come down, I'm sure you are furnished
With some excuse or lamentable epistle,
To reconcile me to them.
Sir I am
As ignorant of the interpretation of your words,
As of your person.
she not know me neither?
But if there be one Valentine among you,
A well accomplished gentleman.
That's I, that's I.
Then sir,
I would require your privacy some minutes.
we'll be as private as thou wilt, my girl,
Your patience gentlewoman.
I wonder Thorowgood what business
She can have with him.
he'll declare it.
See they are parting.
Tell them I'll advise on't.
You will be speedy.
Yes, yes, ne'er doubt my haste, say I me their servant.
The business Valentine.
Dost not thou know it,
Even by instinct?
We cannot prophesy.
Thou art a fool then,
Does not the harmony of my good parts
Speak me the conqueror of all beauties Thorowgood.
The wenches are on fire for me.
Their bloods
Are always hot i'th' dog-days: but good Valentine
Be serious, did their maid bring news of love
From either of them?
From both, from both, now wert for the statute,
That Bigamy my tender conscience
Would not much be oppressed to have two wives,
But one of them thy Pinnace, thou shalt man her:
But I delay too long, I must go meet them;
I long to be a kissing, pray heaven their breath
Smell not of Marmalade, 'twill turn my stomach.
You'll practise our design I hope.
Methodically: farewell boys.
Pray be you Sir Timothy, know his entrance:
'tis such another madcap my Scene is.
Nay, come forward Land lord Spoilt else.
'tis my Cousin's lodgings, pray be bold in't,
As is my Chamber. Cosen this is a Constable.
He comes not with a warrant.
No, I'll warrant you, I
Brought him Sir to see you; he's a wit,
A very wit, or as the moderns term it,
A spark, a mere spark, such a one as I am,
Since I left off those idle toys called books,
He'll take Tobacco too, and with a grace
Spit i'th' rubbed chamber, though his testy wife,
Cry fie upon him: he's a very spark,
and worthy your acquaintance.
Come forward sir, you stand as if you'd cozened
One of them with bad linen; pray advance,
My Master is your Leader.
Save you gentlemen.
You're very welcome Sir, my Cosen speaks you
A Citizen of rank.
That you bear office
Of honour in your parish.
That you're witty,
Or as he says a spark.
Nay, a good fellow.
'tis granted gentlemen,
This is my Character, I am by trade
A Linen Draper.
Would trust me
For forty els of Holland?
Ha, how's that sir?
I have more wit I thank you: cause you seem
A Gentleman of quality, I care not
To venture as much cambric as shall make
Your Crush a gorget, but no farther, sir,
There is no wit in't: how's that Mr. Holdfast?
You are a spark still Landlord.
I'll swear in this he's witty.
'tis my humour,
My wit has half and one me long ere this;
But for my wit I'd be an Alderman,
And twirled a ponderous chain upon the bench,
With as much grace as can the formalst of them:
I should have fined for Sheriff, but all Guild-Hall
Hearing I was a wit, cried out upon him,
'twill breed an alteration in the Senate,
To have a wit amongst them. How's that sir?
And so you missed preferment.
And continue
Ith' state of wisdom still; an humble Constable?
Yes, and an honest one, I'll say that for him,
He ne'er stopped wench in's watch.
How's that? I scorn it,
I've stopped a hundred in my time: how's that sir?
You relish wit I see.
'tis so acute,
No palate but most taste it; shall's to th' Tavern?
You're for a cup I hope?
For now sir,
It is my frequent use, when I have set
My watch, to view the Tavern, drink a quart,
And then back to my business, and there wit in't.
'tis granted sir: Come gentlemen, an hour
Is our extent of time: good Mr. Constable
It shall be yours. Cosen I have some business
Concerns your knowledge, as we pass along
I shall inform you.
You see I me come
Upon your summons.
Sure you mistake,
There's none here is so fond of you to court
Your cheap and vulgar presence.
Here's a Letter
Speaks other language, you might cloth your discourse
In the same phrase, or I shall laugh your folly
Into a milder temper, and then leave you.
You're very confident.
No, you're too coy,
I me now i'th' humour to be tempted to
Love any of you: take me while the fit
Is on me, for i'm sure 'twill not endure
Longer than does a wealthy widow's grief
For a loathed husband. Speak, ha' you a mind to me?
Speak quickly, or for ever more hereafter
Be sure to hold your peace, and that's a task
Far worse than death to any of your sex.
Her blushes does betray her, were't to me,
He should find other usage. Sir my Cosen,
I know not how transported by her love,
Above her reason, has enthralled her heart
To your dispose. I hope sir you're so much
A Gentleman, you will make civil use
Of her affection; 'twill be worth your care sir.
Besides the rich endearments of her youth,
She's Mistress of a fortune that may challenge
A noble retribution for her love.
we'll not disturb your conference.
Cosen, cosen, you will not leave me thus?
I pray let me go sir.
Thus far into my arms girl, that's the place
Thou oughtst to rest in: you expect I warrant
That I should court you now, and with an army
Of oaths, stuffed with as many cynical falsehoods,
Protest I love you: by this light I know not,
'tis folly to dissemble, whether or no
I can affect thee; yet thou seemst to wear
That pretty harmless innocence in thy looks,
It wins my credulous thoughts to believe
Thou mayst be virtuous.
Sir, I hope my own
Too forward zeal, in tendering you my love,
Will not in your good thoughts beget an ill
Opinion of my modesty.
Never fear't:
That freeness more engages my just faith
To embrace thy affection. I have seen some Ladies,
Coy as a votaress below their suitors,
Yet with a tough-backed groom, have known them sin
With most libidinous appetite in private;
But I'm as fearless girl, that ought amiss
Can stain thy soul, as thou wert confident
In settling thy most constant choice upon
A stranger; yet I must desire the reason
Why you did love me: for my own good parts,
Certain they're not so attractive as to conquer
A beauty at first sight.
Since I have
Disclosed my affection to you, (although love
Oft times admits no reason) i'll endeavour
To satisfy your question: the first cause
Moved me to love you, was my father.
Hang thy father
In's own gold chain: but such another word,
And never hope to have me; dost thou think
I'll be beholding to an eight i'th' hundred,
To such an empty cask as is thy father,
(Who soon did get his wealth by the old proverb,
Of fools have fortune) for a wife; but that
I have some mercy in me to believe
Thou mayst be virtuous; I would not match
With any of my squeamish Ants of London,
For all the wealth i'th' Chamber.
Sir, you asked,
A question of me, and will not permit
Me give a civil answer; as I said,
My father—
Father again, farewell, my ears do blister
At the harsh sound: would thou hadst been a Bastard,
So thou hadst no title to his blood:
Another father, like a whirlwind, blows me
Hence from thy sight for ever.
Pray hear me.
Intends to match me to Sir Timothy
Shallow-wit, a creature only fit for scorn;
Which to prevent, and taken with the fullness
Of your true worth, I rather choose to cast
My reputation on your noble pity,
Than stand the desperate hazard of my ruin.
She loves me by this light, this is no trick.
Now to my Thorowgood's project: thouart a good wench,
A harmless wench, and I believe a sound one,
And I will have thee; give me thy hand: yet stay,
Ere I do cast myself away upon thee,
You here shall promise Mistress, to become
A most obedient wife, and not according
To th' ancient trick inherent to the City,
Rail till you be my Master.
Never fear me.
Nor shall you, when you're at my house i'th' Country
Be niggardly, or spoil a dinner for
Want of the t'other ounce of Sugar, nor
Repine to see me merry with my friends,
Or curse my brothers, when they so journey with me.
Nor starve my servants when I am from home.
I must be drunk sometimes too, than you must not
Whine and cry out, were I a maid again,
I'd never marry any that does take
This wicked Herb Tobacco. Those injunctions,
And some few hundreds more of the same nature,
Sealed and delivered to me by your promise,
I may be won to wed thee, nay to bed thee,
And get a race of such Heroic children,
As shall entice posterity to conceive
Some good came from Cheapside. Your lip shall seal this.
You see your strengths upon me.
'tis my good girl:
Thy father, armed with the trained bands o'th' City,
Shall never pull thee from me: to confirm thee
How much I love, i'll disclose a plot
I had to gain thy affection.
'tis some good one,
Pray let me hear it.
You see my youth and feature will admit
A woman's Character; if I were clothed
But in the habit, should I not appear
A bouncing Mary Ambree.
Some such creature; but to your project.
I have prepared me
A handsome female-shape, my man without
Has them under his cloak; and I persuaded
Sir Timothy, in hope that would court thee
I his behalf, to have presented me
Here for his Niece; you mark me.
Very well; but now
This the design is useless.
By no means;
It must be put in action; come go in,
And help to dress me: Sir Timothy expects
To meet me in that shape here: and besides
In that disguise, secure I can at any time
Steal out with you, and marry you.
Your reason
Shall govern my obedience.
Come let's in then.
'tis very right that sir, but yet methinks
A wholesome song, sung to a fine new tune,
Should not be much amiss: my boy here has one,
And I'd be very loath, although I cannot
Sing, as they say, myself, that she should hear
What those, I can keep, can do; is not this right now?
Your pleasure shall prevail, though to say truth,
Son Shallow-wit, for son I still shall call you,
I never liked a Song, unless the Ballad
Oth' famous London Prentice, or the building
Of Britain's Burse: for Music, less the Virginals,
I never cared for any. Does but cloy
The ears, but never fills the purse son.
Very right indeed; 'tis too light
For such a purpose.
With your leave sir,
Music is most delightful, and young Mistress
Grace, and her Cosen surely will receive it
With thankful Equipage.
Honest Formal,
thouart in the right still; come exalt thy voice
My little Imp of gut and hair: My Mistress
Shall know there's something in me.
How do you
Like it?
'tis very odoriferous.
I shall begin
To love it better than I have done; 'tis a good boy,
A very pretty boy, and i'll reward thee.
There's a threepence for thee.
Very right.
Father you are too bountiful.
He shall take it,
Indeed he shall; 'tis manners to receive
Money from your betters boy: but here's my Niece.
Very right, I had almost forgotten, pray where's mine?
Why, have you a Niece Sir Timothy?
Yes, yes, I've two or three, but one I sent
Hither, to view my Mistress in a Coach
An hour ago at least.
Sure she is come.
Clare did you see the gentlewoman?
None such came hither yet Sir.
That's not right though,
A pox upon her for her pains.
Mrs. your Cosen does desire some conference with you.
Maudlin,
Did there a Gentlewoman arrive here lately,
To see my daughter?
There is one within,
In busy conference with her.
Very right that, he's pleading for me now.
Fair Damsel that's my Niece; pray tell her, here's
A Knight, a simple Uncle of hers, or so, desires her
Company. But here she comes, my Mistress with her; Niece
'tis well done, i'll give thee the t'other thousand to increase
Thy portion for't: Mistress, and how, and how do you like my
Niece, a plain Country girl, or so.
A very handsome woman, I could love her,
Did I but know her portion. Mistress welcome.
What's in that house is yours?
Sir Timothy,
You have much graced me by the sweet acquaintance
Of this good gentlewoman. Pray Cosen know her;
She's worthy your endearment.
I shall be proud
To do you service.
I most fortunate
To be esteemed your creature.
Very right
she's a poor niece of mine, yet she can speak you
May perceive or see.
Life Thorowgood with young
Holdfast, pray heaven my folly
Has not undone me.
You'll please to pardon
Our rude intention sir, we have some business.
Please you declare't.
This gentleman and myself,
Come to inform you that this spark my Cosen,
Is son and heir to sir Geoffrey Holdfast,
And since I hear you have disposed your daughter
To that good knight, I in his father's name,
Desire your niece should be his wife.
Pray Sir speak
In your own cause he needs no advocate.
I've been abused,
In this Sir Geoffrey's son the scholar?
The very same sir.
I am the spark sir.
Valentine, i'th' name
Of madness: man why in this shape?
Valentine, Ha, ha, ha.
Very right, my niece is Valentine.
And how is't bully, hast not found these girls
Of a hot appetite, how often ha?
Has my Landlady
Provided me a cullis, life my back
Does needs a swathband.
What means this gentleman?
Nothing sir,
But to inform you what strange things your niece,
And daughter and, nay never blush he has
Performed it better than your Uncle's foreman.
I know he has.
Timothy this abuse must not be thus put up,
Did not you say I was your Niece.
Very right, but it was Valentine.
He has been here all night too
Cosen we are basely betrayed.
Take courage.
Do you think sir, my Cosen shall mix with such
Stale ware that keep their gamesters in their chambers.
Or this knight have Valentine's reversions?
Very right, I scorn it.
Keep them. they I serve to set up some twice
Broken Merchant, or undone Linen-draper, come away
Valentine, thou hast made a brave discovery. Farewell,
My witty virgins, you are paid now.
I'll be revenged for this, and if it cost me
Half my estate Formal send post, for sir Geoffrey,
The whole town shall know of this abuse.
I'll make you fast enough.
THey are both sparks, that's certain, if e'er
I take them in my watch, I'll make them stoop
Under my staff of office, Mistress Clare,
Though I'm a Citizen, and by my charter,
Am not allowed much wit, as being free
Oath Linendrapers, and a man in office,
Yet if my counsel, if you please to follow it,
Do not revenge you on these saucy mad caps,
May taking up of Holland at dear rates,
Be quite abjured by courtiers: and I canvased
Out of authority, how's that now?
Master Busy,
You seem of sage discretion: and to say
Truth, I conceive you have the stock of wit
Belonging to the city in your custody,
You are the chamber of London, where that treasure
Is hoarded up, and I do hope you can
Be true and secret.
How's that Lady?
I were unworthy else to thrive by linen,
Could I not keep smock secrets for your uncle,
Your father mistress Grace, I care not for him,
Although he be right worshipful and an Alderman,
As I may say to you he has no more
Wit than the rest o'th' bench: what lies in's thumb-ring,
Yet I do love you dearly for the kindness
Shown to my girl here, and because you have
Some flashes in your brains: and since you have
Opened the case to me, ere we proceed
To sentence, tell me seriously do not you two
Love Valentine, and Freewit?
For my own part,
And I dare say as much too for my cosen,
Their memories are as distant from our hearts,
As civil honesty from theirs.
And though
I well could like that Freewit for a husband,
Yet in mere spite because he shall not have me,
I'll wed the next man's offered me.
How's that?
I would my wife were dead; two comely lasses,
Such as sometimes I light on in my watch,
would make fit wives for such rude sparks, and 'tshall
Go hard but I will for your sakes sweet beauties,
Number a brace of such sound curtel to them,
If you'll give way to it.
And crown thee for
The king of witty Constables use our names,
Or any thing to draw them forward, that
we may in triumph laugh at their disgrace,
And we'll procure a patent, to continue
Thy office to thee, during life: and after
To hire some ingenious poet that shall keep
Thy fame alive in a brave Epitaph
Graved on thy marble.
What varlet should that be trow?
Truth I know not,
Nor can conjecture, yet I do believing
Him to be truly yours, because attired
Ith' habit and the phrase of a right Scholar,
And for your son, pardon me master Holdfast,
I took you for some lewd audacious varlet,
That had usurped that title.
I imagine
It was some bastard of my fathers, gotten
In youth upon his tailor's wife or Laundress,
He has good store of them, but master Alderman
You now conceive I me son and heir apparent
Unto the Holdfasts, whosoever got me,
That's not much matter.
How's that, anon before I set my watch,
I'll visit you again: meantime, pray give my
Daughter Luce leave to come home, her sister
Poor wretched, is troubled with a pain i'th'
Bottom o'th' body, pricks even to her very heart,
And I would have Luce go toth' Pothecaries,
And get some bezar stone, they say 'twill cure her.
Farewell good Ladies, you'll be sure to come Luce.
Are these the maidens, I promise you master
Alderman they're virgins of good feature, and I shall
Be well apaid if my son match to either,
Which lik'st thou best boy?
Both of them good father,
Be not so troublesome, but let me take
A view of them: Sir Timothy which do you
Like best of these two Ladies?
Which do you
Like best good Mr. Holdfast.
Yours shall be
The choice noble Sir Timothy.
Yours indeed,
Magnanimous Mr. Holdfast.
On my gentility yours.
Yours on my knighthood.
Good sir Timothy,
No striving, they are free for you, and for
The stain those idle gallants put upon them,
'twas on my credit gentlemen to keep
All other suitors off, in hope by that means
To obtain them for themselves.
'tis very likely
That Valentine's a wag.
Daughter and niece,
This hopeful gentleman, and this good knight are
By my care provided for your husbands, pray use
Them as befits their worth, and take it
As a fatherly admonition; either resolve
To marry these or none.
'tis a hard choice sir,
Yet rather than our maidenheads shall starve,
we'll feed on this course fare, young wench's uncle,
Are like young hungry Hawks: they'll stoop at
Jackdaws, when they can meet with no better prey,
Draw nearer thou doughty knight, and thou good
Squire o'th' damsels, Uncle these youths are bashful in the
Presence of you two their grave Elders: your grim beards,
And azure notes able are to fright
Their precise love to silence.
she's i'th' right,
I'm such a fearful fool I cannot speak,
If anybody look on me.
Let's withdraw,
Now ply thy business boy.
So now the game
Will begin presently: I pray you tell me
Which of you is the valiant Rosicleer,
Dares break his Lance on me.
Marry that would I
If I durst be so bold, mine is a stiff one,
And will prick sorely.
A fool's babble is't not?
But come in brief toth' purpose: is it you
Sir knight of the ill favoured face,
That would have me for your Dulcina?
Very right,
You know my mind as well it seems as if
You're in my belly.
So then you are sped:
This gentleman's my comely spouse that must be,
'twere fitting Cosen Clare er't be a bargain,
They know on what conditions they do cast
Themselves away upon us.
'twas discreetly
Thought on, I would do nothing rashly.
Mark then
You men that will transform yourselves to
Monsters, wretches that will become so miserable,
You'll hang yourselves: & think it a fair rid dance,
Mark what you'll come to, if you be so mad,
So desperate mad to wed us, you must first,
Resolve like patient gulls to have your noses
twinged if ours chance to itch: your ears like asses
When they grow lazy cropped, lest they o'erhear
Our chamber secrets, for our recreation,
And lest with too much ease we should grow resty,
we'll beat you daily: while you like tame Spaniels,
Shall fawn and lick our shoestrings.
Nor expect,
To get a good word from us in a twelvemonth,
Hourly revilings and perpetual noises
Shall be as favours taken that we would
Vouchsafe to spend in such regardless trifles,
we'll be as proud as ere our mothers were,
When she was Lady majoress, and you humble,
As her trim henchboys: whatsoever servants
You kept before, although they were your grandsires,
You shall turn off and limmit your attendants,
As 'tis the city fashion to a woman
Butler, that shall not dare without our licence,
To let you have a penny pot of sack
To give a frugal entertainment, to
Your visiting friends.
If you have a brother,
Kinsman, or friend, that does in pity grieve at
The tyranny you live in, him it shall be felony
To converse with, we in tissue and plush will
Brave it while you walk in fustian, we'll
When we please have our fair coach and horses
To carry us up to London to ask counsel of
Our mothers and our gossips how to abuse you.
You shall be still obedient, we commanding,
And if a Lord or courtly gentleman,
Whom we style servant, out of love sometimes
Gives us a visit, you shall not repine:
If we forsake your bed to go to his.
And if you chance, as fools will oft be
Peeping to spy us coupling, with respective silence,
You shall depart, not daring to bedew
Your eyes with tears for grief that you are cuckolds,
Nor to exalt your honours above your neighbours,
But big with joy triumph that you have wives
That are in so much credit, as to have
Persons of quality, take the pains to get your
Heirs to your large revenues.
Very right,
'tis not the fashion now adays for knights
To get their own sons, 'tis sufficient for us
If we can leave them lands, no matter who
Was their true fathers.
Say sir Timothy
If upon these conditions you can like
The match is perfect: but faith take my counsel,
Make not yourselves mere rascals: the reproach
To boys and scholars, subjects fit for ballads,
Not worthy M Ps. to them, good Sir Timothy
Have pity on yourself, and marry rather
In your own tribe, some damsel that can churn,
Make Cheese and Apple pies with Currants in them,
And Mr. Holdfast 'twere far better for you to
Match with some grave doctor's imp at Cambridge
Or else as 'twas your use when you're a student,
Lie with your bed maker.
Very right,
Yet I do know all this is but in jest,
To make us love you better.
True sir Timothy;
Speak as it were to let us understand
By an Irony as we the learned call it,
How well they mean to use us: therefore in
My judgement it were requisite with all speed,
While there in this good humour
To strike the match up.
Very right, we are
No Jackdaws to be fright with these Scarecrows,
Mistress your hand, and if you'll have me so,
If not so likewise: but you will repent it,
You'll scarcely meet two that will offer fairer
Than we have done.
But do you mean performance,
Truly of these conditions.
As sincerely
As ere we mean to eat.
Or drink good Ale
At mother Huffs a mornings.
You'll confess this
Before the Priest and witnesses.
Before
The Congregation, or at a Commencement
Before the University.
That you'll be
Honest contented Cuckolds, bear your heads
As peaceably, and with as much obedience,
As the tamest beast i'th' City.
On my Knighthood.
On my gentility.
Why then strike hands on't;
Since you will needs undo yourselves, 'twere folly
To endeavour to redeem you: but this night
We will be married, and in private,
Not yours nor our friends being acquainted with it.
we'll meet you anywhere, procure the licence,
And we'll be ready; so farewell: tonight,
Or not at all let's hear from you.
And feel us too ere morning, 'tshall go hard else.
Sir Timothy, was not this wisely carried:
To let them have their sayings? but we will not
Be such stark fools to do what we have promised;
When they're ours once, we may rule them easily
At our own pleasures.
Very right; and use them
At our own pleasures: But see here's your Mr.
And Mr. Constable your Landlord.
Landlord, welcome
On my Gentility, to my house that must be.
Thou thoughtst, because I did wear Lockram shirts
I'd no wit: but hark thee, I have got
The wench of Gold: Sir Timothy, and I
Have struck the stroke old boy: to night's the night,
Thou shalt know more of it ere twelve of Cle,
And then believe me: Grimes go you to th'office;
There's money, fetch a Licence.
There's more money,
Bring me a Licence too; sure as we wooed
we'll wed together,
How's this? Gentlemen
I shall have gloves I hope.
And favours too,
Thy daughter Nell shall have my Bride garters,
And thy foreman my points: But honest Landlord,
I know th' art excellent at a device,
This matter must be private, not my father,
Nor Mr. Alderman must be acquainted,
Till all is finished: Could thy wit but help us
To plot this finely: Clare and Grace will meet us,
At any place where we'll appoint.
How's that?
I'll set you presently i'th' way; my house
Shall be your rendezvous: soon after ten.
The hour of meeting: there I'll have prepared
For the two Ladies a Sedan: that shall
Carry them thence unseen through the watch
At Ludgate, where I exercise my office,
Into white-Friers, there shall a little Levite
Meet you, and give you to the lawful bed.
With much celerity: give me your money, & i'll take out the licence.
How's that now?
Very right.
Mean time my daughter Luce shall give them notice
How all's contrived, they'll be willing,
When they shall know the manage's committed
To my discretion; but about your business;
It will grow late o'th' sudden.
Come Sir Timothy.
So, so, as I would have it: if I do not
Do something to exalt the fame of Constables,
May I be hanged upon my staff of Office.
Ha! Valentine and Freewit with my daughter?
They must not see me.
'tis certain Mr. Freewit they are contracted,
And this night to be married: I am sorry
You should be thus supplanted, by two such
Dull witless idiots: but they are so bent on't,
That when I speak in your behalfs, my Mistress
Stopped my mouth with a blow o'th' lips: see here
They are themselves; if you do any good,
It must be now or never.
Ha, ha, ha.
What do the Monkeys laugh at?
To behold
Two such trim gallants as yourselves, like Asses,
Shaking your empty Noddles o'er the Oats
You fain would eat, but must not lick your lips at.
You thought to have won us by your wit, where lies it?
In your gay clothes; perhaps so, if you can
Outswear the faithful Tailor, that's unpaid yet.
Or cheat your Sempstress. Troth make safe retreat
Into the Suburbs, there you may find cast wenches,
Who will in pity have you: and for dowry,
Bring you an ampler stock of hot diseases,
Than you are already furnished with. We Orphans
Oth' City have more charity to ourselves,
Than to wed Surgeon's boxes.
When our portions
Shall be consumed in Apothecary's Bills,
Or giving Doctors fees; or at best use,
Serve but to purchase Sack; or be as tribute
Paid toth' three Kings; or piously bestowed
Upon Ierusalem.
No, you'd best reserve them,
Till these you wed be begged for fools; and then
They will be seized to better use. You think now
You have broke our gulls with anger that you have
Resolved on other husbands: who would have you?
But two such idiots, fit to be the styles
To the vast pride and lust lurks in your blood,
Derivative from the City: for ourselves,
Why should you have a thought we could descend
So much from gentry's honour, to mix with you?
'tis true, you appear handsome, but you paint
Worse than a Bawd, or waiting-woman, in love
With the spruce Chaplain.
For your hair let's see
Your eyebrows badge: oh 'tis not your own;
Be modest and confess it: 'tis a Peruke,
I saw it at the Frenchman's in the Strand,
The other day: and though you hold your head up,
It is supposed it grows too near your shoulders,
And you wear iron bodies, to keep down
And rectify the crooked paths that are
In this same hill your body.
Nay, besides
You're infinitely lascivious, 'tis reported
Y'ave killed the reverend Alderman at least,
Ten Prentices, besides four journeymen.
With too much labour: That you will be drunk
ourselves can testify: and with these imperfections
This inexhausted magazine of vices,
Could you imagine we would have you? no.
Heaven give you joy, with your well-chosen spouses:
May they be patient Cuckolds, that's all the harm
we'll wish them: the more fools, more fit for husbands
To such hot wild cats.
Well Mr. Freewit,
I thought however we, in mirth, or madness,
Could have transgressed civility, that you
Would not have made such a severe construction
Of our intentions: how i've loved you, heavens
Can bear me righteous witness; but man's faith
Is fickle as his shadow, never seen,
But when the Sun shines.
And that you, whom I
Even at the first view loved, and fixed my heart on:
Should not alone contemn me, but with these
Abuses wound my fame, torments my soul
Beyond the strength of patience, heaven forgive you.
They are our own, dear Valentine: our own as surely,
As if the officious Priest had put the Ring
Upon their pretty fingers; why you need not
Take words with such unkindness Clare yourselves
Being the occasion.
Such discourtesies
From friends; nay, such beloved friends as you were,
Wounds deeply Mr. Freewit.
Prithee Clara
No more remonstrances of this unkindness,
Dry thy fair eyes, or I shall else grow childish,
And weep for company: poor heart i'm sorry
thouart thus distempered; prithee sweet forgive me;
We will be friends, and instantly steal hence,
And end all difference in a happy marriage.
Ha, ha, ha: hold the man's head, heel swoon
I fear o'th' sudden: marry you; go boast
How you've abused us, and do not forget
This part o'th' story, 'twill much grace the action,
That you were fooled again into belief
That we could love you: ha, ha, ha.
We have made ourselves fine fools, a pox upon them:
I knew their tears could not be serious:
They only fell from their left eye, as wealthy
Young widows weep for their old husbands, Freewit
They're lost, past all recovery.
Who can help it;
There are more wives i'th' Kingdom; yet I'm vexed
That two such gulls should carry them: let's go seek
Sir Timothy and my cousin Holdfast out,
And geld them, then proclaim them to be Eunuchs.
That course may spoil their marriage.
I have o'erheard them all, and it conduces.
Much to my purpose: now, or never Busy
Show thyself a true spark, that Constables
Hereafter may be thought to have some wit,
More than is in their staff. Good day to you gallants,
I have some business with you.
Your name is Busy?
The same body,
Your friend, although a Constable; there were two Ladies
Went lately from you.
What of that?
They told me, as I am of their council, that they loved you.
And though some words of course had passed between you,
As oft does among friends: you know the Proverb put lately
In a Ballad, where I learned it, that amantiumirae amoris redintegratio est: yet that was but in jest, and in all haste,
Wished me to assure you, that if you would speedily
Take out the Licences this very night, twixt nine and ten, at my
House they would meet you, and join with you in Matrimony.
Is this truth?
How's that? upon the faith sir of a man in office,
You may believe me: for a Priest, leave that
To my care gentlemen, i'll have one ready
Privately in White-Friers, the house anon
I will inform you, and what way to take
To miss pursuit, if any should endeavour
Your apprehension.
How may we deserve this kindness from you?
When 'tis done, then thank me; mean time make haste, and get the licences.
I will pursue the rest, and if I fit not somebody,
Let me be held as other of my fellows are, Asses in office.
Luce thou art come as aptly as I could wish: be sure at nine of
Clock to be at home, and if you can bring with you two of the gentlewomen's gowns, question not why?
But on my blessing do it; if this hit,
Time shall report some Constables have wit.
IT is a cold night neighbour,
And 'tis likely we shall have frost,
That will make Sea-coals dear: heaven help poor people.
Is no news stirring neighbour?
Yes, today
I heard such news, heaven bless us, as would make
A man's heart quake in's belly; strange, and true,
It came up in a carrot Boat from Sandwich
Last tide; an Oyster wife, a good old Woman,
Heard it at Billingsgate, and told my wife on it,
What is it? pray let's hear it.
Marry, that twixt Deal
And Dover, one fishing for Flounders, drew
A Spaniards body up, slain i'th' late sea-fight,
And searching him for money, found i'th' sets
Of his great Rust the— I shall think on't presently,
'tis a hard word— the Inquisition.
O monstrous, what's that?
I have not heard of such a Beast before.
You've heard nothing then:
It is a Monster very like the Mandrake
Was shown at Temple Bar.
You have heard nothing neither:
The Monster's no such Monster: neighbour Mandivell
You are a zealous brother, a Translator,
'tis such a Monster as will swallow thee,
And all the Brethren at Amsterdam,
And in new England at a morsel: verilies,
Your yeas, and nays will not appease its stomach,
'twill sup them up as easily as a Tailor
Would do six hot loaves in a morning fasting,
And yet dine after.
There is the Licence sir for Mr. Holdfast,
And wise Sir Timothy; you have instructions
How things ought to be carried: when I have
Disposed my Watch, I will be there myself;
Mean time good Sir be careful.
Doubt me not,
Good Mr. Constable; 'tis not the first time
I have espoused couples of as much worship,
Behind the Brickhills: when 'tis done, 'tis done,
And surely consummate.
Well said neighbours,
You're chatting wisely o'er your Bills and lanterns,
As becomes Watchmen of discretion: pray you
Let's have no wit amongst you; no discourse
O'the Commonwealth; I need not neighbours give you
Your charge tonight: only for fashion sake.
Draw near and be attentive.
I have edified
More by your charge I promise you, than by
Many a morning's exercise.
First, then,
You shall be sure to keep the peace; that is,
If any quarrel, be i'th' streets, sit still, and keep
Your rusty Bills from bloodshed; and as't began
So let it end: only your zeals may wish
The Devil part them.
Forward Mr. Constable.
Next, if a thief chance to pass through your watch,
Let him depart in peace; for should you stay him,
To purchase his redemption he'll impart
Some of his stolen goods, and you're apt to take them,
Which makes you accessary to his theft,
And so fit food for Tyburn.
Good advice,
I promise you, if we have grace to follow it.
Next if a drunkard of a man disguised,
Desire to pass the gate, by all means open't,
You'll run yourselves into th' praemunire,
For your authority stretches but to men,
And they are beasts by statute.
Such as we are,
Horned beasts he means.
How's that; you carry lanterns,
Thou hast wit, and I'll reward't, there's four tokens
To buy the cheese: next for the female creatures,
Which the severer officers i'th' suburbs
Term girls, or wenches, let them pass without
Examining where they been: or taking from them
A single token: lass good souls, they get
Their money hard, with labours of their bodies,
And to exact on those were even extortion
Beyond a broker's.
Yet they do't
Without the City, I have heard a brewer,
Being one year in office, got as much from those
Good souls as bought him a new mash-fat,
And mended all his coolers.
How's that? we are bidden
Not to take ill examples, for yourselves you have
Free leave for th' good o'th' common wealth to
Sleep after eleven: mean time you may play at
Tray trip, or cockall for black puddings,
So now your charge is finished.
Stand, who goes there?
Come before Mr. Constable.
'tis I Landlord,
There's sixteen pence to buy thy watch some Ale.
Prithee tie up their tongues.
And there's four groats
To purchase toasts to it.
How's that, pray stay my masters,
You're sober men and fit to be
Whither goes all this carriage? close,
These are the cunningest wooden bawdy houses,
Were ere invented, and these blue coat men mules,
The most authentic pimps: set down and open
Your chair of sin you varlets
Why good Landlord,
You will spoil all, do you not know your tenant,
Not Ieremy Holdfast?
How's that? not my father
Upon a watch, I'll lay my life they've stolen
Some city orphan, they're so loath to have
Their load discovered.
There's ten shillings Landlord
To buy thee sack: although it be thy office,
And thou art sworn to't, for a friend 'tis lawful
To break an oath: I will forswear myself
A hundred times to do thee good.
I am
Appeased, march on: look you remember my
Instructions: so this money was well gotten,
And 'tshall as merrily be spent, you need no
More, club your half pence sparks to purchase Ale,
You've an exchequer: ha! another chariot,
This same should be some Lady from a labour,
Her waiters smell of groaning cheese: goodnight
Gentlemen, pay the Porter, what is't twelve pence?
Share it amongst you.
Mr. Constable
'tis very late, a fire and a brown tossed now,
With some of mother Trundles Ale, I promise you
Would comfort much the innards.
How's that hang it,
It is heretical: Sack's the orthodoxal
liquour: and now I think on't, you two, and Mendwell
Shall with me to th' Saint John's head: there is
A cup of pure Canary, and we have it,
'twill break your heads, your own bills,
And wear your lanterns in your noses bullies:
My masters, you that stay behind observe
My charge with strictness, and if any business
Be of importance, call me.
Now my masters,
Shall I expound a motion to you, shall we
Share, and share like this money?
With all our hearts. Omnes.
Let's see what comes it to a piece: there's eleven groats,
And we are five of us, that is— that is, let me see seven pence a piece.
No, no, I lie, 'tis eight pence, and six pence over.
Right, right, this it is to be book-learned,
He's a good Arithmetician: but stay neighbours,
Here comes more company: come before the Constable.
This is the government the city keeps,
How do you lik't Sir Geoffrey?
Very well,
I do not think all Christendom affords
The like for formal discipline.
Leave your prating,
And come before the Constable, though he be not
Here himself, there's those that can examine you?
You do well masters to keep diligent watch,
There's many varlets at these hours commit
Disorders in the City: Where's the constable?
Good master Alderman, I cry your worship mercy,
Because your worship wanted your worshipful horse.
We did not know you: Mr. Constable
And please your worship is but at next door
Drinking a pint of sack
How at a Tavern?
At the Saint John's head,
And please your worship, where if your worship please,
You may have excellent sack, and please your worship.
This is the foul'st enormity I ever
Heard on i'th' city, that a Constable,
Who ought to see good orders kept, should be
At these unlawful hours, breeding disorder,
And in an open Tavern. Good Sir Geoffrey
Bear me but company, I'll make the knave
A fair example to all men in office, how they
Come near a bush: watchmen look well
To the charge committed to you: for your Constable,
I'll make him kiss the counter, light on Formal.
A shrewd man this, if ere he live to be
Lord Majors, ha mercy upon us; neighbours surely
'tis very late, and I was up till twelve
Last night a mending my wife's bodies, shall we
Each to his bulk and take a nod?
Agreed, agreed.
Set down your trusty Bills my sparks, and let us
Watch o'er a cup of Sack, here 'tis will make you
Each one an Alderman: a bigger glass boy,
I do not love these thimbles, they are fit
For none but precise Tailors, that do sip,
In zeal, and swear cuds nigs over their wine,
To cheat their customers: so this is something.
A score or two of these my sparks, will set
Our brains a float, and then we'll talk as wisely,
As all the common Counsel, how's that now?
Mr. Constable
You're in the right I promise you: I feel
myself already growing from a watchman
Into a headborough.
How's that? thou shalt be
A Constable within this half hour Mendwell,
Carry thy staff with the red Cross and Dagger
In as much state, as the best gold smith,
That ere bore office in Cheapside; here's to thee,
Hang care and Cozenage; let mercers use it
In the dark shops: I am a Linen Draper,
Love wit and Sack, and am resolved to thrive by't,
When they shall break like bottles: Here let's canvas
This quart, and then will bombast off another,
And drink a health to Holland, and the mad boys
That trail the puissant Pike there: how's that; do you peep?
Please you hear a good song Gentlemen?
These squeakers, do claim more
Privilege in a Tavern,
Than a man in office; into every room
They thrust their frizzled heads; and I'd been at it
With some distressed Damsel, that I had taken
Late in my watch, thus I'd been served: i'll have
An Edict made against them at Guild-Hall,
Next sitting certainly.
A very new song and please your worship's gentlemen.
There you lie boy;
I doubt it is some lamentable stuff,
Oth' Swine-faced gentlewoman, and that you'll grunt out
Worse than a parish Boar when he makes love
Unto the vicar's sow; her story's stale boy,
'T has been already in two plays.
An't please your worships,
My song is of a Constable.
How's that? a Constable,
'tis not myself; I hope i'm not exalted
Into a ballad: Dare you sirrah abuse
Officers in your Madrigals; you deserve,
And so does he that made it, to be whipped for't.
Pray hear it sir: 'tis no such matter on my credit.
How's that? Well, on thy credit I will hear it.
Call in your company; welcome my Masters:
Here: wet your weasands first, than thunder forth
Some lofty Sonnets in the praise of Constables;
And never fear the whipping-post hereafter.
SIng and rejoice, the day is gone.
And the wholesome night appears.
In which the Constable on Throne
Of trusty bench, does with his Peers
The comely watch; men sound of health,
Sleep for the good o'th' Commonwealth.
'tis his office to do so,
Being bound to keep the peace.
And in quiet sleep all know
Mortal jars, and lewd brawls cease:
A Constable may then for's health,
Sleep for the good o'th' Commonwealth.
Unless with Nobler thoughts inspired,
To the Tavern here sort,
Where with Sack his Senses fired,
He reigns as fairy King in Court;
Drinking many a lusty health,
Then sleeps for th' good o'th' Commonwealth.
With a comely girl, whom late
He had taken in his watch,
Oft he steals out of the gate
Her at the old sport to watch,
Though it may impair his health,
He sleeps with her for th' good o'th' Commonwealth.
Who then can Constables deny
To be persons brave and witty,
Since they only are the eye,
The Glory, the delight o th' City,
That with staff, and lantern light
Are like black Pluto Princes of the night.
An excellent Ditty I promise you.
Well done boy.
There's twelve pence for you Knaves, and tell the Poet
That made it, if he'll come to me, i'll give him
A quart of Sack to whet his Muse.
Sir, below there's one inquires for you, and I suppose him
To be at least an Alderman.
And if he be
The Major and his horse, let them come up.
Flinch Squeakers into another room: Good Mr. Alderman
'tis strange you are abroad so late, will't please you
To taste a cup a Sack, 'twill warm your stomach
After your walking.
No Sirrah, i'll not be
Partaker of your riot: this the watch
You keep good Mr. Constable? introth
The City's much beholding to your care,
And they shall understand it, in a Tavern
A fit place for an Officer: but i'll send you
To one fitter for you to the Counter.
Lay hands I charge you, bear him hence,
I'll have you all laid fast else.
How's that? I hope you'll let us
Drink off our sack first: 'twere far better sir,
In my poor judgement, that you sat down in peace,
As does befit your gravity, and drink
A friendly cup or two: then for the first
Offence to send your neighbour to the Counter:
Pray sir be not so fierce; a glass, or two
Will mollify your hard heart.
Will you not stir knaves?
Where is the Master of the house? i'll make
This Busy an example.
Pray do not sir:
Perhaps you're bashful sir, and will not drink,
Cause you want coin to pay: i'll lend you some;
Or if you scorn to borrow, you may dip
Your chain; a good pawn never shames the master.
Pray sit down sir; we just now had Music,
I'll call them in again.
Within, the master of the house, i'll have
These knaves indicted for this bold contempt,
And whipped about the City.
You may see sir,
My Watchmen know their duty, they'll obey
None but the Constable, and i'll experience,
If they'll know me for one: My masters, take
This Alderman and his company I charge you,
And carry them straight to th' Counter, i'll secure you
'Gainst all the harm that follows.
Come, come, come along sir.
Dare you do this sirrah?
Yes, and answer't too sir.
Y'ave met a Constable that has the wit,
To know the power of's office: neighbour Mendwel,
Because they'll take him for a Rat i'th' Counter,
And I'd be loath to have his reverend board
Be twitched off for his Garnish, to my house
Convey him, and that comely Knight, and bid
My maid show them a Chamber; i'll deal kindlier
With you, than you'd have done with me: there watch them
Till I come home: how's that now?
Sirrah, sirrah, i'll make you smoke for this.
Come, we lose time sir.
Let him have
A good fire pray you. So, all works as't had been
Moulded afore in wax: boy there's your reckoning.
Now to my sparks, I've done that will be talked on i'th' City,
And registered, a Constable was witty.
You think you have us sure now. This same Busy
Is a mere cheating Rascal.
Come, your rage
Is useless now: he has done better for you,
Than I by th' circumstance perceive you had
Intended for yourselves: what would you've done
With two such Marchpane husbands? I believe,
For all you set a good face on the matter,
'twas your own plot.
Ours? then may we die Virgins,
And these same trusty youths, now called our husbands,
Be suddenly transformed to Eunuchs; we
Had thought young Holdfast, and Sir Timothy
Had been the Squires had ushered us, and them
We had resolved to couple with.
Sweet Clare
No more of this; for all your quaint dissembling.
I know you love us, better than to part
For a slight quarrel; now we're man and wife,
And we will love you, if you'll be obedient,
And get such Boys upon you, as shall people
Cheap side with wit five generations after us.
Fear not thy father's frowns: sweet Grace I have
An Alderman's heir a jointure.
Bless you my hearts of gold, and give you joy.
Frown not good Mistress Clare, I knew your mind
And so fulfilled it.
Constable, i'll have
Thy Annals writ, in a far larger volume,
Than Speed or Hollingshed.
Well Mr. Busy,
Y'ave served us sweetly.
How's that? I hope your husbands
Anon will serve you sweetlier: faith I thought
There was no wit in't, that you two should cast
yourselves away on two such gulls, your portions.
Deserved more noble husbands: therefore finely
After you were gone down, to take your Chariot,
Instead of them, when i'th' meanwhile my daughters
Held in discourse, I sent these, now your husband's:
To exercise their office: Now you are married.
I shall have Gloves I hope?
Yes, and such favours
As thou shalt wear in triumph: but what have you
Done with our other sweethearts?
How's that? matched them
To two will hold them play: Come will you travail
Your father Mistress Grace is at my house,
Thither you shall, and if he will be angry,
Let him be pleased again: Advance my sparks,
I'll be your valiant Leader.
Storm not so Mr. Alderman, the man
Has done no more believe't, than what his office
Will bear him out in.
I'll spend a thousand
Pound, but I'll be revenged: a saucy rascal
In my own Ward to serve me thus?
Nay, come forward Ladies,
Although your father sweetheart, be in our search,
Be not abashed, come forward, though you kept
Your tongues in peace, ere since our going forth,
And ne'er spoke word, unless before the Parson
When we committed Matrimony, yet now
Pull off your Masks and veils, and show your faces,
Be not ashamed of them.
Who's here? Sir Timothy and your son, I'll lay
My life on't they have struck a marriage up
Without our knowledge.
Very likely Ieremy.
No more words sir, 'tis done, I and sir Timothy
we hit the white: Good father Covet be not
angry mood now I have wed your daughter,
And he your Niece, we'll use them kindly: pray you
Bid give us joy; your daughter is so fearful,
She dares not ask you blessing.
This qualifies all anger, I forgive them.
Forgive us sir? you do not hear us ask it,
Not need we your remission.
Ha! who are these! Sir Geoffrey we are cheated
Abominably, cheated by this Constable,
This rascal Busy, these are his daughters.
Nor are we ashamed
To own him for our father, that has provided
Us two such wealthy husbands.
Nell, I did not think you would have served me thus
Unkindly, gentle Nell.
Unkindly sir, in what? to make you master
Of all I have. I'll use you kindly trust me;
When you come drunk a nights home, in the morning
I'll make you amber Caudles.
sayst thou so;
Give me thy hand: Father pray be not angry,
My Wife's my wife, and so I will maintain her
'gainst all the world. Sir Timothy, your spouse
Is not to be contemned, she's a good girl.
And therefore pray regard her.
Very like; for your sake
I will do much: Although I find myself
Made a stark Ass. Come hither Luce
Your pardon Sir, and blessing.
We have done sir
What cannot be undone, now if you will
Be foolish now, and vex yourselves, you may
Be laughed at for your labour; they're our husbands,
And we no cause now to repent our choice,
Nor you Sir to repine at.
Our duties
And after carriage, shall deserve your love,
Nor our fortunes Sir so mean, but may
Merit their portions
Well, you shall not
Report me cruel; you have my consent,
And blessing with it; neighbour Busy, I'll
Be friends with you, and at my entreaty
Sir Geoffrey shall be reconciled.
How's that?
Give me thy fist good brother Knight, my daughters
Shall not come without portions; they shall have
Each one a Bolt of Holland, that's enough.
Son Knight give me thine too; and son Holdfast
we'll be as merry boys, and drink old Sack
In plenteous glasses, till we all grow witty,
A humorous Poets▪ to your beds, the're ready,
Your wedding dinner shall be mine, we'll dance.
And have the Song o'th' Constable; March fair,
And get each one a chopping boy by Morning;
I and my Watchmen here will drink your healths,
Though we do lose our own by it.
Mr. Busy,
we're all beholding to you, and 'tis fit,
We should confess this Constable had wit.