THere, take your orders, and dispatch;
Your known faiths will not let me doubt th'observance
Of the least circumstance.
Yet give me leave (most noble General
To ask the reason, since his Highness lest
A free dispose at his departure, why
You should use so much severity in your commands?
Not a man enter the city in forfeiture of his life? their's somewhat hard conditions; I've entered a Kingdom, and helped to win it too, on far easier terms; this o'th' sudden, and so unexpected too may meet with a harsh construction.
For mine own part, I've been so long absent,
Especially being a poor servant to the state too,
I dare conclude I'm lost to all their memories;
Nor do I love the Camp so ill, to part with it
To win upon their faiths; urge a tedious catalogue
Of my dead ancestors, and then search records
To show I was their countryman; all this
For a cold welcome, or an annual pension;
To show my scores of wounds, that tally up
So many months pay behind hand: which
After seven years' misery in an hospital,
Shall be both wiped off together: yet all
Are not of my humour.
What though your dull fat Senators, those land-Porpices
That skip, and frisk i'th' storm they ne'er are hurt with,
Those heavy lubbers, leapt in sweaty furs,
battening on sleep and ease, lie snorting out
The peace poor Soldiers purchase,
And not so much as dream of toil, or danger,
Sleight what they are ignorant of: yet you (my Lord)
May know, if cold lazy recompenses injure
Our high deserts such usage kills outright:
True Contareno, that is their intent.
'Las we bring no diseases home with us, unless valour be one; no meager troops of thin starvelings, that they should fear a famine from our commerce, we have fed high, though somewhat irreverently: nor return we in our old skins, blue coats, thrummed caps, that harbour so much vermin, they might fear we'd scatter one of Egypt's plagues among them; and make 'em all lousy.
Enjoy the freedom of your speech; yet know
That they are ignorant of these in junctions,
And for a testimony of their loves
Unto your fair deservings, are all ready
To meet their country's patriots, (so they term you)
After their ancient custom, with procession;
Show us an enemy then, or danger that is real,
And not the birth of fear, and we'll return:
Nay, you may stay at home too:
At home?
'Tis so:
Our sons of peace have caught a surfeit, & would be physicked
for't. ha! do they mutiny? do the fierce rams advance
their horns, to batter down the walls that kept them safe?
Be more composed and hear me, though you hate
Treason as ill as cowardice, yet I must
Tell you, you're the men have brought
The enemy home to Naples, I mean the army:
For what less can I term such a vast body,
Consisting of such disproportioned members;
Fleshed with the spoils of fertile Sicily,
Enriched with what a happy soil can yield
To an insulting conqueror; fed too
With glorious hopes of ease, and plenty?
You know how hard a task you underwent
To govern them abroad, when tamed by want,
Thirst, hunger, heat, and cold; judge then what sway
Authority can bear, when by this change
They are grown mad, and mutinous; who shall
Compose their private jars, and quarrels, when
Their full cups add fury to their pride?
Enough: this speech hath cut of all reply,
Besides, you know Sicily is now in Naples;
The Prince a captive to his Prisoner:
How far his easy nature may be wrought upon
Is yet uncertain, his years though they have outdone
History, are not yet grown up to the ripeness of experience
For my severity; (I'd gladly have
You call it by another name;) it is
My duty, (if not yours) I take it, to be vigilant.
My Lord, think what I spoke was but to gain
Satisfaction, which you have amply given.
And what should I do i'th' City? that retain
No more of my education there, than what I gained
In the Artillery yard: my company
Would be shunned there more than poverty,
Or a disease; I should be interdicted
The Court, merely because I'm out of fashion,
Or for fear of challenges— Troth for the Ladies,
The homeliest please me best; I am as much
Too rough hewn for them, as they're to polished for me:
My constitution requires a dispatch
I'th' vaulting business, beyond that of tedious
Niceties, and witty prologues.
Gongales', and Petrucchio's regiment
I've left aboard to guard the fleet, yours must
Make safe the Castle, and the land forts; you
Cannot endear me more than by your circumspection;
The City will be all in triumph at
These nuptials, twixt our divided houses;
Think these Sicilians, though you have won
And forced them to groan beneath your sword, may yet
At heart be traitors; if not, opportunity
May make them so; at such a time as this
Surprise is easy; history hath such examples,
Unfortunate ones; and you'd be loath to add
Unto the number.
You have chalked out a way
That leads to honour, and we are hasty
To pursue it:
I shall report you noble.
And General, d'ye hear, if you meet with
Ere a masculine feminine, that has impudence
Enough, to follow an army, a wench of twagging haunches,
And full things, fend her to me, she shall be my laundress.
Good Captain be less wild, and use me,
To the loss of honour.
Didst meet with him?— he's here already.
why this distance?
Is't in the power of several climes to break
Our sympathies in nature? true, I have
been long estranged from you, not from your virtue;
Why then should you deny your strict embraces?
Valenzo! you are grown too great, and glorious
For my friendship; become a theme for Princes,
Whose worthy acts enrich their high discourse:
The greedy multitude, snatching each word,
As it falls from 'em, wear your praise
As their best ornament!
How have I lost my friend,
And see Piero, for being so thou wouldst
Nor mock, nor flatter me!
Alas Valenzo!
You prejudice your PRINCE's wisdom, and
Your own just merits, those favours yet
Were never worn by them, that had not first
Deserved them.
You mean these titles, vain and empty names;
Let me enjoy thee still, I'll disinvest
myself of all additions, can but swell
Our pride, not virtue up; my Ancestors
Have left me rich enough in title to
Your friendship, and fore I forfeit that!—
That we could mingle souls.—
Though you be prodigal of your affections,
Yet be not cruel to your Charintha,
Who must needs suffer in this wilful scorn,
You throw on that your valour dearly purchased.
Charintha mine! I hold all worth in her.
Were you as monstrous for impiety, as now
You are famed for virtue, such was her pious thrift,
In treasuring up her clean and humble prayers,
You could not die unpardoned, every hour
(As you are always liable to danger,)
Can witness, with what forward zeal she begged
Heaven, to avert the stroke before it came:
We have taken so much pleasure in her orisons,
That even profane men to have heard her pray,
Would turn devout, were there no merit in't.
No more; my reason yields unto my passion.
And 'tis a joy requires me meet it with
My best temper; I would not surfeit
Nor swallow it too greedily; some light mixture
Of grief would give a relish to't; tell me, come—
What face wears the Court? how looks it
On our new dignities? Envy (like the Sun)
Darts her beams hottest on the rising banks:
Ursini the grand favourite, is at Court,
And has his PRINCE's bosom?
That's his sanctuary,
His safety lies there, yet (though I profess
No augury) I foresee, and read
His fall, all these vast glories which he boasts,
Are built upon the ruins of Alberto,
His tombstone is the basis of that building,
Which we admire, but think not safe.
There was a noble house soon lost.
Sooner (I believe) than 't will be forgotten;
But what was that Frederico, Albert's son?
One that with his father's virtues
Inherited his unhappy fate, young he was,
And valiant; received and known so.
Had he been less famed, he had not yet
Been numbered with the dead; (you are my friend,
My Lord,) I speak my thoughts, and freely;—
Ursini endures no rival.
I've maintained
Fair correspondency with him at distance,
But like not his embracements.
't is dangerous to be near him;
There's such an Antipathy, twixt him, and virtue,
He wears its ruin in his looks.
'Tis strange,
A Prince so wise and virtuous should not descry
His falsehood through his visor; or at least
Lend ear to the loud cries of wronged Innocents.
He hath no use of either ear, or eye,
But what his loved Ursini lends him; he
Only rules, and limits his affections;
Suffers him not to cast a frown or smile,
But where he pleases; his next endearment, is
His care o'th' Princess, our Sicilian captive:
Whom sorrow for her father's death, (slain in
The war, by him that was designed her lover;
Our famed Prince Ferrando,) has brought
Into a desperate melancholy; what reward
He expects, I cannot tell, unless it be
The Crown: you have heard of her strange distemper?
And wonder at the sudden change:
I've seen her, maugre all those sudden fears,
Her tender age, and womanhood could urge;
Stand in the head of troops, that we ev'n feared
They had engaged some Goddess in their quarrel;
Bear up against the enemy, when her men
Lay scattered in the plains, like the ripe ears
The wealthy harvest yields into the Grange.
I know not how, but sure sh'as made the King
Wild; he has such divers fits, as he had learned
To be mysterious in's passion; I have seen him weep,
Like a fond mother o'er her tender babe,
Whom too rude fate has ravished unripe from her:
Then rave, and curse, talk as he wanted reason
To guide his speech's Organ: or soft sleep
To recall his straggling senses:
Mutter distracted thoughts in broken words,
Until he lights upon her name, and then
He bows at the recital; blesses himself
In th' often repetition of Calantha.
There's somewhat in't, her passion should lie hid
So long, and now break out so violently.
She rather seemed too thrifty, than too prodigal
Of tears, when she left Sicily; and taught us
To call't our chiefest happiness, we should have
A Queen, that reigned at home, that bore more sway
Over the people of her breast, than country.
Alas poor maid! why now she's a true captive
To passion, and to Naples: had she been still
Queen over her great self, none could have said
She'd had been unhappy; now, and not till now
She's truly miserable.
'Tis holiness to pity her.
Our tears are better spent upon her sorrows,
Than our own sins, she talks so prettily,
Clothes grief in such a sad, and pious garb,
So void of any rudeness, that we see
Composedness in distraction, reason in madness;
She never walks but when she's led along,
And that so faintly, as she had not spirits
Enough to actuate her tender limbs:
Want of meat and sleep have made her seem
A living corpse; to see her weep, you'd fear
That every drop were her own funeral tear.
Hell, and furies!—
Oh! oh! oh!
A Moore! a devil! a mere devil! his very looks spoke him so, but for his clubfoot, his damnable clubfoot, (Ass that I was not to see it, I'm sure I feel it now,) 'tis an infallible sign: This damned Devil did I bring to Court, and preferred him; but I'm served well enough, he that does the Devil a good turn shall be sure to be thus rewarded. If I should chance to die a sinner (as 'tis ten to one but I shall,) he'll know me again, for I shall carry his marks to my grave: because my Lord Ursini was pleased to exchange some few words with him in private, he grew so insolent, that I going to strike him (in passion, in choler I confess) he falls a kicking me inth' open Court.
And looks, as if he would, have spit fire; but had I not known him to be a devil indeed, I'd spit fire with him.
How? so hot signior?
Men in anger may do anything.
Anything? with your leave Sir,
And you're a fool, and an ass.—
doye find it so by my ears?—
And I'll try what you are—
Draw i'th' Court? I must see the peace kept.
Gentlemen, you know I'm passionate, choleric, somewhat choleric.
And I intend to physic you for't; here's that will allay your heat.
'Tis down already.
I won't be jeered.
we intend no abuse, signior, we only come to gratulate your good fortune, you are turned favourite of late.
It has pleased his Majesty to take some small notice of me.
Yes, and the Ladies speak high, & gloriously of you.
Of me?
You could not but observe it as you walked the streets: you are the only object they gaze at.
In troth I did not think—
Come you are modest now.
Who was't you blessed tother day with a favour?
I give a favour?
Why man? you meant it should be seen.
I slipped a point indeed in a countess's chamber.
Slipped a point?
Dropped it, dropped it, but t' was not worth the taking up.
And yet I've heard her boast it as a special gift from your own hands.
Indeed I flung it somewhat scornfully, because she was very importunate; troth I was angry, she would have none but that.
Were't not for this filthy fretting humour of yours, I could tell you—
What good Grutti?
Of a Lady.
By my best hopes in love with me, is she not?
I'm not so happy as to be acquainted with her intents, but I have heard her in my Lord Ursini's presence commend you highly.
Prithee who is't?
The Lady Charintha.
The Lady Charintha; what should I do with her? she's honest, the only precise madam of the Court.
They that drop the most beads, may commit the most sins, but were't not so, you have a kind of tempting presence, and besides—
Oh! I understand you, she's his Lordship's reversion.
St, not a word.
I'll to her presently.
This is my Lord Ursini's plot, to slander that lady's chastity.
And he has charged me, to whisper't about Court, that he has enjoyed her.
I wonder much, since he seeks her himself in marriage, why he should thus traduce her.
On my conscience she's virtuous.
His plots are dark, and misty, but come, prithee let's leave this talk, we have state knowledge enough already to make us melancholy: I'll show thee a scene of mirth—
Where lies it?
This Physician that was sent for hither from the University to our melancholy Princess, they say, endures no music, and I've prepared a whole consort of these gut-scrapers this morning to salute him; no doubt but he'll be be very bountiful.
If the varlets can make good use of his charity.
I wonder much the Court endures him here; he's an odd humoursome fellow.
His art privileges him.
My Lord.—
Conduct that Moore hither, and see we have all privacy that may be.
He shall wear my life upon his sword that enters without my leave.
See, he comes: here's one that's fit to kill a King,
A thing, whose soul is nothing but a spot
Transmitted from foul parricides, whose thoughts
Wear a more deep and horrid black, than that
Which spreads upon his body—
My Zisco welcome.
This day my Lord—
No more, I know what thou wouldst say: I promised
To endear thee to Ferrando's love, and knowledge,
Are you according to my instructions ready
To meet all his demands?
Perfect.
With a forged Commendamus from his holiness?
Of my stout service done against the Turks
In the Lepanto battle, where I turned Christian,
And was baptized in mine own blood.
'Tis well, but how stood thou resolved for our design?
Unmoved as destiny.
Could you have told me of it in that minute
I should have acted it, I'd owe you for
The glory of a sin, I might have boasted of;
What we intend, ne'er rises to that height
As what we act, because 'tmay prove abortive,
And perish in the thought, and for such crimes,
I only have repentance.
But he's a Prince—
Why there's the honour on't,
Killing the head, I kill the body too,
And at one blow lay a whole Kingdom gasping.
One upon whom attends a guard of men,
And Angels, on whose brow divinity
Sits charactered, a Majesty that darts
Forked arrows into the guilty soul, and strikes
A palsied fear through every limb and joint
Of the murderer.
Fancy, fancy this,
I'm proof against it; I'll take him in's cups
When he's drunk, betray him to a rape,
Or fouler sin, then kill him in the act.
Whom?
The King.
Traitor.
'Tis as soon done as thought of.
He never loved thee Zisco, nor was known
By special favours to deserve thee to him;
But he has made me great, worn me in's soul;
His father took me up, when I was nothing,
Bequeathed me to him, as a care hereditary,
Belonging to the Crown, placed me so near him,
I've grown, and spread like a tall mountain Cedar.
And dare encounter lightning, stand a thunderbolt,
Or enraged winds; contend with that high influence
By which you flourish, yet ne'er fear a blasting:
His favour is a tyranny; it is
The pride of Princes, to be thought Gods here
On earth, daring to mock omnipotence,
To create them favourites, set them aloft
In their own sphere, till remote Kingdoms gaze
At their prodigious height, then in an instant
Shoot them from thence, like falling meteors:
Had he not loved you first, you could not be
The object of his hate, you were too poor,
And safe, when 'twas, to have him glory in
Your ruins: innocence below enjoys
Security, and quiet sleeps, murder's not heard of,
Treachery is a stranger there, they enjoy
Their friends, and loves, without ravishment,
They are all equal, every one's a Prince,
And rules himself, they speak not with their eyes,
Or brows, but with the tongue, & that too dwells i'th' heart:
Were it but thus at Court,
your famed marquess had not fallen.—
Alberto: ha.
Why start you Sir?
'Tis he: Frederico.
Oh that man! he was unhappy in his PRINCE's love.
Your honours are no more your own than his:
'Twas the same favour that conferred them both,
And the same frown may take 'em both away:
He lets you only grow till you are envied,
And then you'll fall unpitied.
I have learned cruelty from him:
Zisco, thou shalt applaud the mysteries,
The rare contrivances of my revenge;
My fate lies in his breast, but this, this arm
Shall ravished thence.
Now your rage becomes you:
When Princes put off their humanity,
Murders, a holy sin, you may be good,
And fall like him, whose aged head lies low,
Low in the dust.
Again? this confirms it.
The groans of whose sunk house, are heard
To affright strangers; whilst Naples yet
Stained with the purple tide, his soul swam forth in,
does blush at its own guilt: his son Frederico
(You know) was lost at Sicily in a crowd.
'Tis so reported, yet I believe—
My Lord.
That he was slain at Ferrando's command.
Perhaps and by a slave.
Felicia too, unhappy maid—
Your sister,— I there,
Now thou strik'st home.
First won to his embraces
By volleys of false oaths, her virgin honour
Rifled, her chaste womb swollen with the impostume
Of his salt lust, then torn with spite from's bosom,
Ravished, murdered, and by whom? (I could hate myself,
For taking birth amongst such,) cursed Moors:
Were she your enemy, her cause, and sex
Would challenge pity; but you loved her dearly,
The Mistress you adored; who then can think
But that your soul is black, and stained as his,
That are thus tame?
Zisco, thoust raised a flame within this breast,
Nought but his blood can quench:—thanks to my brame;—
It shall be so;— The fatal raven croaks;
'Tis ominous, if he outlive this night
We are no more:— Come we'll go plot within.
Here's his, study,
Is he there?
Yet do but observe his posture:
How he sits like a reverend Ape painted upon a Galley-pot, with an Urinal in's hand.
Faith Signior, in my judgement youhave wronged your simile.
He's casting the Princess's water.
Not upon his beard I hope.
Reading in't—
The colour of's coppernose.
All the plots of Sicily; I warrant the poor Lady has not a thought escapes him.
The Sex has been always accounted open, yet I ne'er knew a State betrayed that way; some Ladies would be in a pitiful case, if their secrets could be read in their Gentlewoman's—
Foh, they're mere sives.
Come, come, these are his Lordship's Lodgings,
He came home late yesternight, and I believe
Is scarce stirring yet.— Your last new tune,
This music sure will make him dance antic.
Not yet? pox on him, he's asleep in's study: ha' you no loud music? perhaps his Lordship likes that better.
So, ho, oh, ho, ho, murder, murder, murder,
Enter Hieronymo from his naked bed.
Hieronymo was drunk then last night, he lay in's clothes.
rogue's base rogues, scabby rogues, pocky rogues, out, our rascals, abuse his Majesty's Physician, offer to play under my nose, foh, how the rogue's stink: farts, poisoned farts, foh, these meager-chapped rascals eat so much brimstone, and salt butter, that they outstink hell: had these farts been let in Wales, they would have bred the plague there,— let me see— who should this be. that should abuse me thus, let me but find him out, and be he the best i'th' Court, it shall go hard but I'll have a quaint poison for him, shall work a little otherwise with him than this has done with me.
The best i'th' Court?
A quaint poison for him.
does your retiredness lead you to treason? let's apprehend him:
For a Traitor.
Nay good Gentlemen, what shall I do? I'm undone.
A quaint poison!— so it was.
And for the best i'th' Court.
In troth, signiors, I meant it not.
'Twas too much you said it, Sir.
Do but conceal me.—
Then you'll confess, and bring us in as parties.
May I be hanged if I do; besides, whatever secret disease you have about you, I'll cure you gratis.
And think no more of poisoning them, that brought the musicians to your window; 'twas our plot Sir.
I forgive you, and pray Gentlemen use me for your Physician whenever the state of your bodies requires it. I'll learn secrecy of you.
Agreed.
Faith Grutty, this plot was well thought on; I could find in my heart to trust him.
You may; and hence forward I'll sin with less scruple.
'Tis he— I am confirmed: Frederico, Albert's
Son— I'll let him live concealed, he's a sure
Instrument, and will serve me for all turns.
humph,— could he think his puling sisters,
Or his Fathers, wrongs, sat so heavy on my heartstrings,
That I could be moved to kill my Prince
In their revenge? Indeed I loved her once,
Till I enjoyed her, but she's lost, so is her memory;
I've higher thoughts now; Charintha is my aim,
Ferrando's niece; next heir to the Crown;
Mine by his promise: can I but divorce
Valenzo from her love, together with
His life, I'm safe; 'tis that I am contriving:
He is my rival both in a Mistress, and
A PRINCE's favour.— Who waits within there? ho.
My Lord.
Have you performed what I commanded you concerning the Lady?
Charintha? 'tis done Sir; Fungoso straight intends a visit there.
Leave me— 'Tis well, if this slander can but pull on murder upon him, or any of my servants, from Valenzo's hand, his head shall answer for't; I am his judge,
(My power over the King makes me so:)
And he shall find me cruel; then the fort is mine,
In which his soldiers are in garrison;
This night the French, and Genowayes intend
To seize our empty fleet, that rides i'th' harbour;
Those men I have endeared,—
Mount, mount my soul, let no fear weigh thee down.
He stakes his life that thus casts at a Crown.
This music's dull, strike higher, higher yet.
Oh! oh! oh! I can hold no longer, furies, devils, oh! oh!
What ails our Physician there?
'Tis an odd humour my Lord: any kind of music is less pleasing to him, than the voice of Mandrakes.
Cease there, your accents are distasteful.
I am abused, grossly abused, but i'll be revenged— Sir Your pardon.
Rise and proceed.
As I was telling you, you must in every thing humour her; in each word, each action, the nature of her disease requires it, which yields not unto cure, till it be wrought up toth' height.
Still such a sadness Ladies dwell on your brows? trust me, it misbecomes you: shall's tread a lusty measure? I'm light, and active.
But grief is heavy.
Thus we'll shake it off, and thus.
Pray, why d'ye use me so? you bind my arms,
As if I meant to fight, an they were loose,
Indeed I won't, trust me, I'll kill nobody.
Pray unbind her.
I never killed the poorest worm, or fly,
Though 'twere against my will, but that I wept for't,
And begged a pardon too, for sure 'twas murder.
Marry was it.
Poor Lady, she's distracted!
Death on my fury, this sight brands my best actions with a stain too deep for penitence to wash away.
This exceeds cruelty, they will not let me eat;
Look I am pined almost to nothing.
A mere skeleton.
Had I but strength enough to struggle with heaven
By prayer, I'd expiate their sins, though they
Continued to be cruel.
Good Lady weep not, for if you continue
These tears, my eyes will drop.
Yes, yes, they will drop out, oh happiness!
Would mine would do so too; they smart extremely;
Were't not a courtesy, I think ere this
you'd pulled 'em forth.
Lady, I say weep not.
I say, ben't you a coxcomb.
Take away the fool, we are much indisposed
To laugh today, good heaven, they flour my miseries:
'Tis not well done, you may be sick yourselves,
Before you die; want one to bid God comfort,
When I am dead.
My Lord, a word— you are not privileged
To do men wrong: you have done me one,
Pray take notice—
Of what?
'Slife he won't challenge him.
The old Lord's afraid on't.
How patient I am.
'Tis worth the noting, virtue is rare in you.
You Sir, d'ye hear? they say you'll put
Poison in my drink; do, do, plot on, and be
A politic fool, I see into your thoughts,
My eye-sight's clear, thank heaven, and yet i've lived
A long long while.
Did you hear that?
'Twas shrewd.
fourscore, and ten, you cannot be less madam.
Some ere this would have used spectacles, but I Must suffer all.
View all the monuments, and tombs in Naples,
And if you find grief carved there in such variety of postures
As these women stand in, sell me for a statue.
This spectacle hath made me one.
Good heavens, have you a curse beyond this?
Throw it on me; my guilt deserves it, and
Somewhat beyond your vengeance: afflict not Innocence,
It will be called your crime, not mine, that she
Is miserable.
Look ye, now I think on't, I've a fine device
Come in my head, what think you of a play?
we'll act a play, a tragedy, wilt not be well?
we'll have a King in't, and he, (d'ye understand?) he shall be
Killed, methinks you'd act it handsomely.
My Lord, you'd play the fool in't, an old doting fool rarely.
Now the cur bites.
If you'd lend me your gown, and cap, I should do't better; then, a noise of Musicians would be excellent.
Well, remember this.
Faith so I shall, as often as I am disposed to laugh.
No matter though, Ferrando, now I consider better on't, you shall not, you'd not do it well; do't toth' life, I'll not give a pin for't else: let me alone for one, I'd act that same king's daughter, I can command a tear or two: if need be, perhaps a sigh; if 'twere to rave, or grow stark mad, I should learn too: alas these plays are pretty morals of our lives; fine, harmless, innocent sports.
Her madness grows strongly upon her.
But madam, pray what part shall I act?
Thou Sylvio?— thouart a pretty boy, but that thou weep'st so much; I fear thoust spoiled thy face; with a little paint 'twould serve turn: thou shalt act some Lady in disguise.
How truly do I do it?
One that has been in love.
I should do that scurvily.
Why?
Because I can love none but you, and would be loath to dissemble, though but in jest.
Come, thou shalt not then; thou shalt be my page still.
Indeed madam I should die if I were otherwise: But pray, when will you be well? you have been sick a great while.
Yes, and shall be so till I am dead; say nothing Sylvio,
I'll steal away from them, when they shall not know of't.
Not alone, I'll die with you, and be buried with you if you will give me leave.
Ferrando, you will see it done?
What madam?
See us both buried, laid by my Father, he was a good, good King: build us a tomb as lasting as our names.
A very rich one madam; I'll ensure you they're about it, with stately columns, curious antics, & glorious imagery.
There, let us both be cut in spotless marble,
It never shall upbraid us, we were innocent as that;
But innocence is no guard, it could not keep
The tyrant out: my father's, let his be cut
Just as he fell, make a sword pierce his heart,
And let it bleed too, yet don't hurt the Statua,
I would not have you wound it, when 'tis like
My Father, like a King, lest he that does it,
Learn thence to be a traitor, and in time
Wound you so too, Ferrando.
Mercy good heavens!
Pray why d'ye weep? we shall all sleep quietly
When we are dead, there is no noise of chains,
We shall not dream of prisons, racks or whips:
But every night shall see the Gods descend
On our soft slumbers, and kiss away our miseries.
Ladies, you'll see me shrouded decently,
When I am dead, down in the mead you, where
Grim Pluto stole his Proserpine, are still
The flowers she scattered: go, bring 'em hither,
And strew me o'er with 'em; she was a virgin chaste,
And I have heard that flowers of their gathering,
Will never die; quickly make haste, 'tis said
we're very noisome after death, I would not
Offend then, cause I can't ask forgiveness:
Before I die I'll break my heart, and give
A piece to every one to wear in's bosom,
And you shall have it whole, Ferrando: pray
Use it as you would her you loved, while I
To quit these miseries will go pray, and die.
Now let me alone with her.
Die? and let her, what should we do with her here an she be mad? I hope Ladies you have more wit than to die o'th' sullens.
Grief dares not be so rude, did you but check it.
'las Sir, our miseries have taught it insolence,
Rather your own indulgence, madam.
Pleasure's the same in Naples as in Sicily.
So are our losses too.
The eyes sad flux is tributary due
Unto your dead Lords memories, I confess it,
It carries virtue in't, but how? whilst it is moderate
Pish, let the dead care for themselves:
Did you but see how ugly sorrow looks.—
And then how fruitless.
Yes, where 'tis false, but we
Have grief as real as our misery.
Fun, thy judgement Fun, what think'st thou of these Ladies?
In my judgement, (since your Lordship is pleased to make use of my judgement,) which indeed (my good Lord) is very small.
I perceive thou hast one good quality, thou wilt speak truth.
Truth (my Lord) is precious; but I say in that little judgement I have: (judgement, (since your Lordship was pleased to term it so) but that's all one,) in my mind they're mightily taken;—
With what?
A passion (my good Lord,) which the learned call grief.
Thy judgement against any man's in Naples.
My Lord, I praise not myself, yet I can prove by this that they are in love.
As how?
Grief always follows love; if grief follow love, love goes before, ergo, they're in love.
So, suppose now—
(My good Lord) I do suppose.
What?
Even what your Lordship pleases.
Suppose then, any of 'em should be in love with me, would you?—
Yes my Lord.
What?
Any thing.—
Bring her to my chamber.
But pimp, it will contaminate.—
A fool's head, will it not? I say you shall bring her.
Nay then I will not bring her; slid, shall bring her? shall bring her?
Nay but Fun.— Pox on him, he'll discover me.
Bid me forsake heaven, my virtue, honour,
And all that's good—
Fie, fie.
You do not see me weep,
Distil mine eyes into a dew,
I will not shed one tear, not vent a sigh,
No not in private.
So, this becomes you—
I have shook off all
Those weights that clogged my bosom— we can smile,
Shows it not hand some?
Such a smile ne'er blessed
The cheeks of Peace.
How art thou lost Ursini!
Discredited to truth by this vile flattery!
Thou shouldst have said, heaven smiled, when set with clouds
Black as nights swarthy mantle, when the air
Breaks out in hideous cracks, that cleave the Temple,
And strike dead the devout Priest at the Altar:
For this an easy faith would have believed,
As having less of contradiction in't:
My soul is rapt with furies, here they gnaw,
Like knotted Adders wrapped about my heart.
Oh! my sides swell as they would break, they want
A hoop, lend me your arm,—
Circled in these.
Embraces, you are safe: collect yourself
(Dear Prince;) and let not passion triumph in
The conquest of your reason; think of your honour,
Your name, and spreading glories; how they die.
I'm black and ugly; all
A whole stain already: Oh Calantha,
Thou goest to heaven, to tell Ferrando killed thee;
And those blessed troops of Saints will wreak thy murder,
There's not one but suffers in't.
The King!
Help here— Oh! Bentivoglio, come,
Come practice here, and raise yourself a trophy
In his recovery.
Whence this sudden fit?— My Lord Ferrando:
Oh Calantha.
She lives,
Calantha lives.
What breath is that, that mocks us
With a false sound of our Calantha's life?
She lives; yet let old time add to his age
But one short pair of minutes, she shall be
No more:
No more distracted: next hour shall render
Calantha to your bosom fair, and well;
As rich in all the ornaments of mind,
As when she first blessed Naples with her presence.
Truth's but a name: 'tis false, by heaven 'tis false;
Did not I leave her sunk upon her bed,
Into a soft, but everlasting sleep?
So you supposed; and I have caused her women
To wrap her in her shroud, then sit down by her,
To weep, and pray, as if 'twere for the dead.
As if?— abuse me not, thy art
Shall be no privilege; she's gone, she's gone.
Ben't so passionate; but hear him.
Ursini, I have done.
After a strict enquiry into the nature
Of her disease, I find it by each symptom,
A melancholy deep, not dangerous:
The parents which produced it, grief and abstinence
From meat, and sleep; which as it hath increased.
Has brought her now to such an extreme dotage,
That she does verily suppose herself,
While living dead: In which false supposition
I've caused her women to continue her,
By shrouding her to her own desire,
Strewing her o'er with flowers, then weeping o'er her
What help from this?
Much Sir, this will work her
Into a strong opinion, that she's dead
Indeed, to confirm which I have prepared
Some two or three, tricked up in the same fashion
With shrouds, and chaplets, who shall sit down by her,
Walk, talk, eat, drink, sleep, in all which actions
Calantha will straight imitate them: Now I have prepared
A potion which they shall give her,
To make her sleep, the only remedy
Of her disease; this I lately practised in the French Court,
Yet lost no credit by the experiment.
You may believe him Sir, he's one of the skilfullest Physicians our age has boasted of, Padua is proud of such an ornament.
Thus my Virginio.
My best, my dearest Virginio: thou dost breathe
A music to my soul, cures my distemper:
Thou art an honest man, we'll found a College,
With a large pension to maintain the Students
In thy rare science; thou shalt govern there,
And when thou diest, we'll build a monument
Unto thy name, taller than Egypt's Pyramids.
These o'er your Court promises,
I'll only study some revenge, for you old Lord,
Then I'll return toth' University, & dream on 'em.
For thee Ursini, we will only live
To do thee honour, that shall be our glory;
The world shall know thee great, and envy thee
Thy share, both in our kingdom, and our soul.
Your goodness, my Lord, is as unlimited
As heavens.
You're sad Ursini: has our Niece
Given you no cause of joy, by her soft answer?
None,—
The obstacle? tell me; if t' be any in Court she affects, by my honour I'll remove him.
None but this, that she's too much wedded to Heaven, and her devotions.
If that be all, she's thine.
A bliss, I would for ever live t'enjoy.—
With me?—
What would that Moore?
He has letters here from his holiness,
In which I'm certified, that he lately turned Christian,
And has well deserved i'th' wars,
Against the Turk;— The King admits you to
His hand.
I am in heaven too soon.
We'll view his holiness commendations,
Then hear this Moore, discourse the fight at large;
My griefs begin to vanish; they're much lighter
Than of late they were, I know not why,
But 'tis a good presage.
Be near us.
Thus far I'm safe, heaven is just, and smiles
On my design, now all that's powerful
To move my spirits, to incite revenge
Appear, if not to sight, to memory;
Alberto: father: and my dear, dear sister,
Poor lost Felicia!— Ha! he groans, I hear him;
She sighs poor maid, wrings her hands, cries alas,
Look look I see 'em, there, there, sacred shades—
Vanished, and I'm deluded; no they're angry
At my delay:
I'll haste,— for that revenge must needs be just
Which punishes two sins, murder, and lust.
Happy souls that hither come
To enjoy Elysium;
robbed of bodies though you be,
You're richer by such poverty;
For with them youhave put off pain,
Making of your loss, your gain:
Now your souls may meet and kiss,
Bathing in eternal bliss;
Nor can you surfeit, each delight
Whets, and quiets appetite;
Yet the joys you feed upon
ne'er increase, nor e'er are done;
Freely you may taste, and spend 'em,
Yet nor you, nor time can end 'em:
Where without a fading ray.
Ye enjoy eternal day,
Trace these groves, whose every path
Myriads of true lovers hath;
Where disporting, you may prove
A new, but happier, purer love:
Such, whose flames, though th'ever shine
Yet consume not, but refine.
I am too tame Piero, hold me not,
Lest in deferring of a punishment,
I make the sin mine own; had all malice
Dwelled in one tongue, all slander too been housed
Under the same roof with it, and both busy
To plot the ruin of my own fair name;
I could have stood unmoved: but my Charintha!
Heavens! ye ought t'inspire me with revenge,
Such as you'd call a synod to contrive,
That I may meet this hellborn ravisher
Of my Charintha's spotless fame, with vengeance
As mighty as his crime.
Her virtue is
itself an antidote against all such poisons;
His breath no more can stain that innocent whiteness,
Which ever dwelled upon her soul, than he,
That in a fond maliciousness would throw
Dirt at the Sun, could sully the least ray;
Her memory, when he, and's lying marble
Consume to dust, and rottenness, shall dwell
On earth like a perfume, after the sacrifice,
Pleasing to God, and men.
If I have used
Any immodest braveries, appeared
In wanton gaudiness, a hot temptation
Toth' youthful flowings of the blood;
If I have entertained one looser thought
But such as Chastity's cold votaries,
When they breathe out a soul into her bosom,
Might safely nourish; if I've misemployed
One hour, in which with strict endeavour, I
Might have gained somewhat to my stock of virtue,
(The only dower I'd meet your love withal,)
May I be guilty of that sin, my honour,
My virgin honour's blasted with, and die
A loathed Apostate.
Now you grieve, I suffer double;
Forgive me Lady, I have wronged you, and
Only I.
Mock not my tears, they are holy.
ay, that to purchase fame, and idle breath,
Could venture forth abroad into the world,
And leave thee here a prey to ravenous wolves;
Expose thee tender years of a weak virgin
To labour 'gainst the furious tide of lust
That has assaulted thee; that my low birth
Should stand in need of such additions,
To raise me to a height, might equal yours:
That virtue and not blood ennobled us,
This then had never happened.
Greatness transmitted
Has lesser of Divinity; your honours
Are virtues purchase, and your own deservings.
Valenzo thou return'st in glorious triumph,
Rich, from the conquest of a noble foe,
And yet not laden with the gaudy spoil
So much, as with the valour of the enemy:
As if thou'dstad'st envied them their virtue only,
And soughtest to rob 'em of it; all for me:—
I've waved a plume, dight me i'th' warlike garb,
Managed a sword, or shook a dreaded spear,
Looked terrible, been pitiless to those
That begged a life, revelled in cities sacked,
And rifled tents: too poor and trivial matters
To point at such rich ends as thee, (my love.)
Thy blood runs high, there's not one purple stream
Cased in these a zure veins, but is derived
From th' spring of Princely ancestry, and thouart
The wealthy storehouse of their fortunes too.
'Las! what are these, but what the owner makes them?
Of themselves nothing, only as we use them,
Are good or bad, a blessing or a curse:
But then their virtues, by a thrifty providence,
Are all summed up in thy blessed self, and make thee
A happiness which if enjoyed must be
Bestowed by gift, because above all purchase.
No (my Valenzo,) virtue's ravished hence,
Charintha's strumpeted, her name is ranked
I'th' vulgar breath, 'mongst common prostitutes;
Pardon, (my love) shall't never wed thy shame,
Thy jealousy.
Charintha, thou art cruel, and hast learned
An art to wound toth' death, yet keep alive
Whom thou hast killed, O be but speedy in
Thy execution, and when I come below:
And walk those fields, that hapless lovers trace,
I will report thee mild, soft as the Turtle in her down.
What means Valenzo?
Perhaps report has injured me, and noised
That I was jealous of Charintha's love;
And you contrived this plot to make me hate you;
Or, if you should repent, (as well you may,)
Your favours so ill placed, upon a subject
So poor and worthless; take 'em back again,
Live happy in a better choice, Charintha.
Far, far be such a thought!
Your both abused,
Grossly abused: Ursini's politic plots
May meet an eye, that can discern of objects
Far subtler than they are; come, come,
'Way with this passion, Love has something else
To employ you in:
thoust robbed me of a soul:—
Take in this kiss mine in exchange again.
That's my Lady Sir,
There,— take it I say;
My office will scarce deserve it.
Fungoso, as I wished; he is Ursini's agent, this will confirm my relation; let's step aside.
Ha! What are these? Praesto, be gone; they are vanished: men of office these,— and must be rewarded.— madam—
Come, to your business.
'Slife the lady's rampant: soft and fair, two words to a bargain, now will I seem to neglect her, and she'll straight court me.
Sure the man's mad.
Not with love, sweet Lady; I can hold discourse with your Ladyship, under the loss of my little wits.
A blessed security; but your errand, your errand, Sir.
What d'ye take me for? a foot-post.
Some such thing.
Go, you're a—
What?
A merrily disposed Lady: but faith, what do you think sweet, I have a grant of his Lordship's reversion.
Of cast suits.
La you now, you would make me angry; pretty piece of ingenuity; you understand me, was his Lordship wholesome?
Stop his mouth, he breathes infection.
Traitor.
Devil.
Oh! oh! I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm dead.
Dares he abuse me to my face?— Piero
Thou hast prevented me; 'tshall ne'er be said,
That thou were't forwarder to vindicate
Charintha's fame than I, than her Valenzo.
Nor shall the cause, but the revenge be mine;
I'll show my rage can flow as well as thine.
thoust told a pretty story;— weep no more,
I see the Cupids angry in thine eyes,
That with thy tears, thoust quenched their burning arrows;
Spare 'em until thouart old, and spend 'em then
On thy whole stock of sins: thou play'st the tyrant;
And robbest thyself of all that beauteous treasure.
Nature instructed thee withal.
Ah me!
Would I had never had it, that alone
Has only caused my grief:
Thou art passionate.
The virgins loved my innocence, and it
When I was yet a child.
So thou told'st me boy:
But after thou arriv'd'st in Sicily,
How fared it with thee?
Judge Sir, by these tears.
Did thy friend leave thee?
Yes, and the world too; I know he would not have been so unkind else.
Then went'st thou to the Princess.
Begged relief from her.
Why didst not return?
'Twas told me there, my Parents straightway died.
Thou shalt have new ones, royal ones my boy;
A Princely pair, that pride them in their youth,
And innocent sweetness; whose Majesties shall shed
As vigorous rays on thee, as on the issue,
Th'ensuing nuptial promises to spring
From their own loins.
Those are favours Sir,
That become them to give, not me to take.
Thou hast deserved them boy, Calantha speaks thee
A miracle of love and piety;
Is passionate in thy praise, all to win
Affection from the Prince to thee, dry up
Those tears; which till this time did never flow
Offensive unto any:
This day is consecrate to mirth and Hymen,
'Tis sin to wear a frown, or folded brow,
For every smile, thou lendest them now, they'll pay
A thousand back again:
A large requital!—
A smile from my Ferrando? oh 'twas heaven,
Felicia, whilst thou wishest it! now thou hast
Obtained it, 'tis a hell; the antidote
Is now become my poison: Tyrant love
That sport'st thee at the pains, thy Martyrs feel
And mak'st thy salve applied, wound when 'tshould heal.
Come my Calantha, to consummate that joy,
By mutual vows before the Altar made,
Which thy return to life, to health, and reason,
Hath begun in me; those minutes which bring
Us any good, are swift and fleeting, and
Once passed not to be recalled, who knows
Whether heaven will still be bountiful;
Or smile upon this hasty Union:
Yes royal maid, they have prepared thee for it.
By the addition of new warmth and strength:
For more sorrows; pray let's back, this day
(There's something whispers to me) will prove fatal.
Ursini, see she weeps!
I've took thee from a sea of tears, (my Venus)
And thou art dropping wet yet.
'Tis ominous, this might have been my marriage day;
But heaven forgive, and prosper him.
Create a Sunshine,
With thine own smiles thou mayst, and dry thee in't:
Let the dull Negro dive to fetch thee Jewels,
These scattered seeds of pearl, are all too rich
And pompous for ornament; the least of these
Thy fond neglect has dropped, would purchase heaven.
Blame not my pious thrift, I shed them for't;
Thither my journey tends, I shortly shall arrive there.
Thou yield'st too much to passion!
These rites,
(If we may credit what our dreams foretell,)
Will turn to funeral obsequies, for such
This morning, (when your careful art had bound
My senses up.) fancy presented 'em.
Methought I saw,
Aurora from the East come weeping up,
Wrapped in night's sables, and the following day
Paced slowly on, in griefs sad livery;
The pensive winds sighed forth a solemn dirge,
And strove to blow our marriage tapers out;
When you Ursini joined in the solemnity,
I saw you look, like Sicily's pale ghost,
Broke from the hollow Caverns of the earth;
This hand Ferrando, at each gentle touch
Mouldered to ashes; on your lip there sat
A frost, which when I tasted straight conveyed
An icy chillness through every joint;
The stammering Priest methought mistook the rites,
And stead of those are used at nuptials,
Sung a short requiem to our souls, committed
All that was left of us, to the earth, our last
Cold bed.
I warrant you Ladies, this was because she lay alone; you should advise her better.
'Twas the intemperance of your disease
Suggested these Chimaeras.
And with it they are fled.
No, no Ferrando;
I've sinned against my father's ghost; ere yet
His royal corpse had slept two silent Moons
I'th' peaceful earth, or ere I had paid down
Just tribute of my tears, I've changed my sables
For a gay nuptial garment, whose light outside
Denotes the looseness of a lighter mind,
To which grief should have been perpetual guest.
Urge it no more, thy misery's Virgin Queen
Are powerful with me, and have taught this breast
A sad repentance.
Canst thou Ferrando then repent?
I can, that I have wronged thy innocence, Killed thy father.
O take me to thy soul, we'll mingle sighs,
And tears, which still shall flow together from us,
As if the motion were but one; and those
So frequent, that the stones, which cloth his dust,
Shall soften into turf, from whence shall spring
A bed of flowers, creeping about the grave,
As if they'd strew themselves upon him, then
Whither, that men might think we wept for them.
Yet pardon Love, whenever I remember
He was a Prince, a Prince of equal power,
And strength with him he wronged; that he once stood
A bar betwixt our loves, or rather mocked
Our hopes of mutual enjoyment; that
For his own peevish humour, he would ruin
The edifice, that we had built to honour,
I glory in the act.
Take pity on me courteous death!
My thoughts are grown more terrible than thou!
I am monstrous, a prodigy in nature, one with
Him, that was my father's murderer.
Royal my Queen!
'Tis the excess of piety,
The error of your duty, that thus wrongs
The justice of my cause.
Yet you might have spared
His life, and made it your just praise, that you
Could conquer, and not kill:
He was so eager in the pursuit of the foe,
When first he routed us, that willingly
He ran upon my sword, that stood t'oppose
His haste, and met a death instead of victory.
Nay rather we may say, that he met both
Who triumphs over life, and all the misery's
That too officiously attend upon it;
Crown his pale statua, with victorious wreaths,
And call his unkind fate, his happiness!
His fall was honourable, Kings like other men
Travel to death, they go i'th' common road,
Are in their end as sensible of pain
As the base peasants, whom they by and by
I'th' grave are equal with; their only privilege
Is in their executioner, who would not rather
Fall under a king's hand, than yield his life
Up to a weak disease, a Fever, Gout,
Or grating Stone, which had he missed this stroke,
Might straight have seized him; and have robbed him of
The glory of his end?
I cannot yield
So far to reason, but I still must look
Upon you, as an enemy to Sicily;
As him that killed my father, and so hate you;
Yet I must love you too: when first we met
Together in your Tent, both armed (you know)
I would have fought, nay, and have killed you too,
(Could skill or strength have done it, some I had
Of both;) yet I meant not to survive you,
Nor should I need t'have made another wound
To let mine own life out, I'd died with yours.
Ursini thou must quit some interest in my love, Calantha—
Deserves it all;
'Twere a sin no less than sacrilege,
To rob her o'th' least part of your affections.
My faculties are grown
All to one power, called love, and you engross it
Whole to yourself; yet have it still entire
To my Calantha, 'tis a divers flame,
That burns me, yet but one, each takes its difference,
And being from the object, be you still
My friend, & thou my love, whom when we have once joined
Unto our amorous folds, thus we will move
And of our arms make a new sphere for love.
This way? toth' Temple sayst?
Married by this:
The Prince is fierce and eager in's desires,
Impatient of delay.
But seemed not she unwilling?
There appeared somewhat more in her, than in a virgin niceness,
They are here:—
The Priest has done his office, all delights
The married have a privilege in, are yours:
Be bold in the enjoyment, whate'er while
Was termed a looseness in desire, is now
A virtuous thought: those flames which cloth your Souls
Are chaste and holy, dalliance is your devotion.
Yet you my Royal fair, can wear me at
A careful distance, tremble at each touch
Of hand or lip, as if you feared a rape:
Display this beauteous treasure, lovely sweet
And let these flowers which dwell upon thy cheek,
Like those proud Maja wears, i'th' smiling ides
Blaze wild and open— see! they are fresh and lively,
Their odour flies to heaven in sacrifice!
Jove I'm thy rival;— and will share thy incense:
Sweet as the purple smoke arising from
The Phoenix funeral pile, or Southern breath
Perfumed with all Arabia's spiceries.
Good my Lord! you will too much endear us to you with your courtesies.
And being strangers we are apt to be traduced:
Our good names are precious, they are all we have left
Unconquered.
Hymen applauds this early piety:
The doves that drive the chariot of love's Queen.
Are swift in motion, and those happy troops,
Which wait upon her triumphs, make't their strife
Which shall outrun the other, those that lag
Cupid will whip with roses to the Altar.
Henceforth (my Lord) I must attend your will,
Let me but drop a tear or two upon
My father's dust, and with his memory
I'll bid farewell to grief.
This vault contains it.
Let us pay our last duties.
The Choir attends without.
Noblest bodies are but guilded clay;
put away
But the precious shining rind;
The inmost rottenness remains behind.
Kings, on earth though gods they be,
Yet in death are vile as we;
He, a thousands King before,
Now is vassal unto more.
Vermin now insulting lie,
And dig for Diamonds in each eye;
Whilst the sceptre bearing hand
Cannot their inroads withstand.
Here doth one in odours wade
By the regal unction made,
While another dares to gnaw
On that tongue, his people's law.
fools! ah fools are we, who so contrive,
And do strive,
In each gaudy ornament,
Who shall his corpse in the best dish present.
'Tis well; enough is wept for Sicily; cheer up,
We have other vows to pay, and as religious ones
As these: we made them at the Altar; and
If we perform them not, shall forfeit all
Our after joys:— remove those objects there;
We have no use of fables now; they breed
Melancholy thoughts; we will be loud,
And big in mirth, as full of pride as noise,
Till we draw envy on our revels; which
Nor fate, nor the dull stoic shall control,
Whose sullen faith is the disease of's soul.
Revenge! were't thou more ugly than ere Painter
Limbed witch or fury, I could kiss thee now,
For thy so opportunely prompting me;
These brace of Courtiers here, my trim complotters,
Have tried my skill upon their bodies; and now
I'm dearer to them, than their confessor,
Both these have sworn to further my design,
I have against this Lord, this dotard; who
Hath heat his blood so with carousing healths,
That he's grown wild and furious; believes
His strength more able in these love-sinks,
Than when he was i'th' pride, and prime of youth;
Him are these two according to instructions
Leading into the snares, that I've spread for him;
Into which, if they, and blind fortune conduct him,
I'll use him less gently, than I would a noise
Of gouty-cheeked trumpeters:— They're here.
I'll be with you straight.—
Hymen is now predominant; the Stars
Will have it so; I must and will be married.
Married?
Yes, yes, you shall have favours, favours, Gentlemen: bring me but to the sight of a woman, I'll clap up a match with her, and to bed straight; and if I don't outdo Hercules at his thirteenth labour, cut of my dainty dowsets, and feed dogs with 'em.
He deflowered fifty virgins in one night, I hope you won't marry so many.
Yes, and thou wilt get so many i'th' Kingdom, fifty? what's fifty? I'll have a monopoly of 'em, get 'em all with child with males, and they shall be borne with beards on.
There might have been some likelihood of this once, but now you are old.
Old? ha! ha! he! Grutti, Grutti, dost hear him? ha! ha! he! prithee how old? how old dost think? have I not a warm moist palm? does not my pulse beat strong, and healthy?
The flowings of your blood, that downy chin, and these full veins, speak you— some twenty, Sir.
And of complexion sanguine, I know it by my dreams.
The rosebuds now are blooming on your cheeks,
And ope themselves into a crimson blush;
This hair curls up like wire, and and speaks you lusty,
Your strength is bold, and daring.
Believe it, I'm a wanton.
Come let's to a wench then.
Hang marrying, 'tis a slavery!
A mere purgatory!
An hell to be bound to one, and she prove false, ugly, or loud, when we may enjoy our liberties, to take or leave 'em, as our stomach serves us; have the choice beauties run into our arms, and every night a fresh one.
Hey! to a Wench; to a Wench! now an I were King it should be treason for any subject to marry.
Allow 'em but Wenches, and 'twill be well enough.
Or to lie with a Woman.
How would you do for subjects then?
Perhaps an I had a mind to't, I'd get all my subjects myself, ha! what sayst thou to't, Grutti?
I say 'tis fit, you have a mind.
Bentivoglio! we are friends, come thou shalt along with us, to a wench, old trangdido, to a wench, and thou shalt so bumfiddle her.
Nay, good my Lord, touch no more upon that string; but d''ee hear? I came to carry you to one.
Art right? art right? old boy! these Physicians are notable jerkers, come, where's their rendezvous?
In my Lodgings.
Ha? how many?— how many?— what's that there?
A draught to provoke.
Sleep.
Nay good Bentivoglio give it me, a whole one, a whole one!
Be moderate; you'll take the next beggar you meet else; & then the Lady's expectation yonder will be frustrate.
Ha! ha! he! Super naculum! my old bully lively, my authentic Don, soul of pleasure; line of life; let's too't; such a violent fit o'th' sudden! a dozen Calentures are an ague to't; twenty Juleps will not cool one wish.
Let's have him to bed quickly, and heal him warm; Bonum erit si sudaverit,
Foh! his breath stinks oath University.
Signior 'tis not perfumed:— now will I go fetch these Ladies to him; & if he have courage enough but to speak to 'em; I'll forfeit my art, and turn tooth-drawer.
My Lord!—
Villain!
The injury! I am not any way conscious.—
Traitor thou liest;
Hell, and thyself the greater mischief, has
Conspired to ruin goodness.—
madam! youhave viewed these gardens;— has not art
Sweetly conspired with nature, to make up
A pleasure of variety?
It takes exceedingly.—
What does?
Pretty indeed,
To have these flowers read moral lectures to us.
Yet madam, you can find in your heart to tread
Them underfoot, scorning as much the beauty,
As the rare sense they carry.
Yes I can,
Yet straight I turn, and pluck 'em;— bind 'em up,
In one fair volume, thus—
And what read you, pray?
The emblems of true virtues in each leaf,
Imprinted there, at nature's proper charges.
What think you of this Lily?
It figures innocence.
Wear it in your bosom.
Innocence indeed
Should be the breasts fair individual mate.
It will become you well.
So will this crown Imperial your head,
Pray stick it there.
I should be the envy of the Court then,
'tis a pretty flower, what think you if I carry it to the Princess?
Fit, very apt and fit, lady,— as fit
A gift, as this were for a Lord, an honeysuckle,
The amorous woodbine's offspring; it emblems love;
You would not have us make love?
This mystic way has been allowed of;
And practised?
Yes, and practised.
Sure I should never do't.
No madam? why are not men creatures
As worthy Courtship, as we?
Oh! but we are women!
Oh! but we are proud.
Shall I take't on your experience?
Or your own:— hall whose voice is that?
Hence my delight! thou art turned traitor to me:
Thy strings conveyed a poison to my ears,
And they drank deeply of it;— yet forbear,
Alas it was myself, my inward grief,
Thrown from the soul in often sighs, that made
Thy sound infectious; 'tis with that as guilt,
It grows still greater as 'tis borne about,
And poisons every thing should work its cure.
Is not this Sylvio, Calantha's Page?
A lover grown? 'las pretty innocence.
How finely sorrow shows there—! That, that passion
Is well expressed; now sigh, then knock the breast. Excellent.
Let's use the benefit of this shade, to hide
ourselves, and secretly acquainted grow
With the black story of his sad mishap.
Felicia.
How has thy name, thyself, thy friend deceived thee!
That only wert acquainted with the sound
Of happiness; mocked with a false report,
Into a real misery; whose easy nature
(The greatest foe unto itself, was flattered)
Out of a virgin treasure; and then left
Rifled of all; but (what grief now is preying on)
A hapless life— yet cruel thief, thoust left
So much of thee behind, as shall hereafter
Tell to the world a dark and gloomy tale
Of thy black perjury.
Ha! does he riddle,
Or play with grief?
No 'tis too like a truth.
methinks each thing
I meet withal upbraids my fond credulity;
The soaring lark hovers aloft i'th' air,
At distance from th'enchanting glass, that Courts
Her to her ruin! the fearful Quail
Suspects and shuns the music of the pipe
That sings her into fetters.
Only poor I am sillier than these;
Witness th'untimely swelling of this womb
Pregnant to my disgrace;— As I lay hid
In yonder thicket, the brambles gently swelled,
And hid my shame, which yet each trivial wind
But dallying with, persuaded from my covert!
And left me naked to heaven's eye; the boughs
Of the next willow clung about my head,
As if they'd knit themselves into a garland,
Which I should wear for my forsaken lover,—
Very pretty!
Were't not so sad.
Oh you the weak supporters of my woes,
Why d'ye fail me now at greatest need?
Bear me at least into some hollow cave
Where I may die, free from an after scorn;
And not when I am dead, be found the shame
Of our frail sex;— Oh! I faint, and fall,
Just like the early branches of some tree,
Whose hasty sap shoots into early fruit,
Till the o'er laden boughs crack with the weight,
Ere yet they be full ripe—
I am amazed, a woman!
Some Lady here o'th' Court, I'll lay my life on't;
Let's to the Princess and inform her of it.
Let me eternally perish to honour,
If their heads answer not for this foul insolence.
Though't be a sin of that portentous bulk,
That 't startles all the gods, and justice self
Wakes from a long dead lethargy to meet it:
Yet Kings are great as they, and spite of fate
Or rigorous laws, may triumph in their mercy.
Away with 'em to execution;
Him, and his fellow murderer, away:
Pardon a Traitor?
Though you might urge, 'twere treason of that height,
That none but they could think of, much less act:
That murder cries for murder, blood for blood:
That he whose innocence they sacrificed
To their mad fury, was your loyal subject;
This on your marriage day— to affront Hymen.
And when your nuptial torch burned brightest, dead it
With blood, into a sickly glimmmering taper:
That they should dare assault me!— i'th' Court—
One whom your goodness has been pleased to look
Into a life, and honours, placed i'th' state,
Only to interpose myself between,
And meet all dangers that are shot at you.
'Twas a murder
Intended on our person, but that Heaven—
Was just in the prevention; True it might be so,
And were it, yet upon submission
Such faults have been remitted.
Away with 'em, I'll hear no more.
Down holy anger!—
One word, and I'm gone— you are my Sovereign,
And there's divinity worn in that title,
Which I adore, and think myself as happy
In this so early doom, since you are pleased with't,
As heaven had spoke it; though not till old age,
When nature claimed it as a due! Yet Sir
Be gentle to my memory; and if
At any time my crimes appear before you,
Fresh in your thought, to stain my Heraldry,
The happy mention of my virtuous acts,
From some that love my dust, shall rise to plead
My innocence—; and may you never live
To curse th' untimely hand; or hour that robbed you
Of so much loyalty!— for you Ursini—
If ere your name shall fall in mention, when
I come i'th' other world, expect me not
Your friend; I fear me, I shall tell sad tales
In th'ears of heaven;— Farewell—
Impudent Traitor!
Yet still I dare be good; and spite of all
His hate, or malice to me, thus stand up
To beg his life.
Not after so much injury?
Yes, if Valenzo dare be sinful still
In wrongs, it shall be called my piety
To suffer.
thouart all goodness;— for thy sake
we'll mix some mercy with our doom,
He that submits first to thee, has his pardon,
See justice done on th'other; this sentence
Shall stand irrevocable;—
This sentence stand irrevocable?
Plague to your easy nature!—
Ha! this 'tis to overact; how have I almost fooled myself, out
Of my own plots;
I were in a fine case now, if Piero
Should not accept a life on this condition.
I'll send to him— Cassio! Grutti! who waits there?—
Ladies, pray absent yourselves a while;—
With child? impudent whore! to what cursed lump
Have thy sins swollen thee?
Oh, me miserable!
Hence ingrate wretch! that hast abused my favours
So far, till thou hast made a sin of charity:
Ha! dost weep?—
My rare dissembler! those tears which art hath taught
To flow, carry more sinful cunning in 'em,
Than those the flattering Syrens wear upon
Their cheeks, when they court man to ruin:
Yet tell me ere you go, whom have those looks
Beguiled, and trained into your sinful arms.
You must prepare yourself for a sad story then:
Yes, like enough, a tale as sad, and dismal
As that of Troy, and as much truth in't too!
Quickly, dispatch, before my anger prove
Too masculine!— and be modest inth' relation.
You'll wished untold.
Undone I do! but why
This tedious circumstance? it does involve
Your guilt.
Know then, that when I was myself
My name was—
What?
Felicia
Alberto's daughter?
Yes his— that was once Alberto
Durazzo's far-famed marquess; till
His cruel Master seized on's life, and honours,
At his return from Sicily i'th' first wars;
Where he received a fatal overthrow.
He was in action bold, and valiant!
However fortune wrought him this disgrace;
Here! here began my misery.
Proceed, trust me I now begin to pity thee.
Then let me die without your farther knowledge
Of my mishap; 'twill be injurious
Unto my ashes, and disturb their quiet;
I know it will;
Nay, prithee tell me, come, and I'll weep with thee.
You'll have cause enough ere I've done;
Therefore don't hear't;
Is there ought in't concerns me?
Too much
Nay, than I must, and will have all the story,
Or think thee a foul prostitute.
'Tis thus then!
Yet don't believe me, say that I was mad,
Distracted with my sorrows, that my words
Fell so uneven from me, you mistook
The sense; say any thing.—
Come, come, I know thou wilt tell truth!
Or may I never find peace hereafter!
How I fear
Whether this story tends?
The King madam.
Ferrando;— (Seize me Courteous death,
Or I shall poison all her joys;)
Ha! what of him?
Be sudden, or, I swear by my just anger,
I'll straight rip up the cradle of thy lust,
The den where all thy loose adulteries
Were acted; search each corner of thy womb.
That keeps a record of thy villainies!
Ferrando was the author of my fall:
More lying than that evil Genius
That wrought the first man's fall!
Ferrando! oh! oh! (Swoons)
Thou rebel passion jealousy! what mean'st thou
To tumult in my breast?— ha! yet why not?
Why may not he be false?
Oh! oh! oh!
'tis so!— Felicia!— she's gone, she's gone!
Help there, Florinda! Violetta! ladies!
So— she begins to breathe;— look up Felicia!
Where am I?
Here,— a medal? this confirms it;
Ferrando and Felicia!
Ha! the Princess!
Beshrew me but I've had a fearful dream!
I hope 'twas but a dream;
No; I know all,
Ferrando's false, as stained with sin, and perjury
As howling-Ghosts.
Good Madame don't affright me;
Your fancy's dark and gloomy.
Yes all hell
Is there at work contriving a revenge;
Revenge? for whom?
No matter whom;— But tell me
How, and with what false oaths, he won thee first
To his loose sheets.
I'll tell you; but you first
Shall promise me, to bread no other way
To your revenge and mine, than I shall lead you in.
I do:
Let's sir, and hear it all.
Whilst yet Alberto lived
As great in favour as in blood, the glory
O'th' Court of Naples, honoured with daily visits
From his Prince; 'twas my unhappy destiny,
(Fool that I was to be so credulous!)
To receive many favours from Ferrando;
Which I interpreted i'th' way of love;
meanwhile, this match was treated of between
Him, and yourself; your Father (Sicily's King)
After your plighted troths, and formal ceremonies
Used betwixt Prince, and Prince, would break it off,
Which caused a sudden war upon his Country;
In which expedition Alberto
Was sent chief general: the King being forced
Now to withdraw his public visits, employed
Ursini in the business; gets access
Privately to me i'th' might, and that too
Always i'th' dark, lest happily he might
Be known to any of my servants; Briefly
After his many oaths, and protestations
Of his fair meaning, I at last consented
To let him steal the fruit, he durst not own:
When ere I urged, he was engaged to you,
He answered, that was but a trick of state,
A fair pretence to colour his design;
And make't seem glorious, in the eye o'th' world;
That he warred for a Kingdom, not a Queen;
Only entreated me, that I'd be silent,
And not so much as in a sign betray
Toth' day, what only night was conscious of.
You condescended?
Willingly.
My father i'th' meanwhile returns defeated,
For which the King led on by passion, seized
His life and honours, these conferred on his
Now favourite Ursini: the fleet re enforced,
He himself the second time in person
Went general of the forces, conquered Sicily,
And slew your father on Messina's plains,
Last brought you away captive.
But how cam'st thou to Court in Sicily?
Thou told'st another story then:
For that
I crave your pardon, 'twas all the untruths
My life has ere been charged with; but 'twas thus:
Led partly by a jealous fear, to see
What he intended; partly to find out
My brother Frederico, who was left there
Commander in Mazara, which was took
In the first expedition, in this disguise,
'Mongst others whom desire of fame, or profit
Led to your shore, I crossed the seas; but failing
In quest of him I sought, I came to Court,
Where since I have remained.
But why Felicia
Didst not disclose thyself before this time,
Now things are grown so bad?
When first I saw
Your person, and how mutually you loved,
Knowing how far I was beneath your worth,
So dear I held you both, that I determined
For ever to be lost to memory;
And serve you thus in this disguise: which I
Had done, but that this hapless chance
Betrayed me to your knowledge.
Alas! thy piety has undone us both!
'Twas my too cruel destinies!
Methinks we two now seem to be set copies
Of griefs, to which wronged virgins will repair,
To take out patterns by.
Our wrongs and sorrows
Have made us just so like to one another,
That each seems the others counterfeit.
We'll sit, and descant on our miseries,
Count the extent of each, proportion tears,
And sighs unto them.
Her's that doth surmount,
Shall borrow grief of tother.
H'as robbed me of a father cruel Tyrant,
H'as robbed me of a father cruel Tyrant,
Bereaved me of my friends, and loving subjects,
Bereaved me of my Brother, and my friends.
ta'e away all my honours, and my dower.
Taken my virgin honour, all my dower.
H'as mocked me with the title of a Queen.
H'as mocked me with the title of a Queen.
But I am lost in Passion.
And I am lost in Passion.
Felicia come, and as our wrongs are equal,
So let our revenge be; we'll hand in hand
Assault this Tyrant; and in bloody Characters
Print on his body the story of our sufferings:
Yet this cannot cure our grief.
What though, wronged innocence?
In death it will entitle us to honours;
And though our bodies moulder to corruption,
Our better part shall survive fame; our names,
Free from decay, shall swell up numerous volumes;
Whilst our sad legends shall be made a pillow,
To every sleeping virgin.
O yet for my sake have some pity on him,
And for that part of him, that's cradled here,
'Las he may live to make us fair amends.
For thy sake I could spare him, but my wrongs
Sit heavy here, and urge me to revenge.
But say i've thought a way, how we may yet
Be both restored to happiness, would you not
Accept, and follow't?
Speak it (gentle soul.)
As yet (you know) your virgin treasure stands
Free from his ruder touch: those Ceremonies,
Which linked you in one Hymeneal knot,
Religion will make void, the precontract
'Twixt him and me being known, so that you then,
On this part are free from him; enjoy him thus
You cannot, neither would you (I suppose)
After these wrongs, (if you might be permitted:)
What hinders then, but that I take your place
This night? and show him, to what height his perjury
Has wrought our wrongs, whilst you in some disguise
May quit the Court, and ere next Sun appear,
From hence towards France, to whom you are allied
In blood, and wrongs.—
Content,— I'll in, and haste me to be gone,
To go there is some hope.
To stay there's none.
To me this?
Out of particular respect
He stood engaged to repay your merits.
Dare you
Promise so much for's Lordship?
The Contents
Of that will speak, how much he tenders goodness
In every noble breast.
No doubt Sir, but
You are familiar with the sense it carries,
And can inform me, better than the dark Character.
'Tis that you'd be pleased t'accept
A life, for which to's Piety you shall owe,
Only a fair acknowledgement.
Wondrous good!
'Tis a becoming charity this, and he
Wears it amongst the chiefest of his virtues.
Sir, it must needs be eminent in's Lordship,
Since exercised upon so noble a subject
As yourself
But stay?— now I think on't,
This is a benefit of that nature, it seldom comes
Alone, are there not honours too? preferments
That wait upon this gift? speak, shall I be
His Lordship's creature?
He's passionately yours.
Are we not for design?— ba, what dark trick
Is there i'th' State, that doth imply danger
Enough for us to manage, doth he think
Us fit to temper poisons, or use the benefit
O'th' night to seize on his State-rivals, are we
Potent enough for faction, or intended
Intelligencer to some foreign Prince?
What mean you?
Engagements of this nature urge a return
Of thanks proportionable to themselves,
And what we have of such rich values,
I cannot tell, lest t'be our souls forfeited
Toth' next occasion his Lordship has to use 'em.
This is strange language Sir, my understanding
Has not yet arrived at what it means.
Go home and study it then:— and d'ye hear,
Entreat my Lord, t'employ his favours to
Some further profit, he'll scarce be gainer by 'em else.
I shall acquaint him with your humour.
Do maggot, wriggle, wriggle, do:—
Piero.
madam! I am all joy, life, honours,
Preferment, and what not?
Then I'm undone!
Piero! didst not promise me to stand
The utmost of's temptations? didst thou boast
Thy virtuous strength, and fallest at the first onset?
Life madam is sweet.
If hitherto
It hath been so, hereafter 'twill be all
Bitterness, thou hast betrayed thy friend to death;
The thought of which will sour all thy content,
Make thy best pleasures relish worse than gall.
Life, with the worst that can befall us, is
A good exchange for death; but here are honours
Annexed to't Lady! I shall be great in favour.
Thou wilt grow big in sin too! thou must barter
Thy virtue for preferment; which being gone,
At best thou'lt be but painted ruins,
A glorious misery; thou must owe life
To him, that will infect and kill thy soul.
Yet you would be content, Valenzo should
Accept a life, on this condition.
Yet he may live, and still be virtuous.
Why? so may I.
Yet he's thy friend.
Am not I his too?
'twill be a glory to thee after death
That thou wert friendships martyr, a title
Will sit upon thy tomb, richer than all
Thy Heraldry; more lasting than thy marble.
To show how far, I can prefer him to
myself, I am content this honour should be his.
False to thy friend, and virtue! that only cam'st
To mock calamity, and midst our wrongs
Remain our greatest in jury.
Mistake me not,
I only did prepare you for a joy,
Which now you're ripe for:— know then, 'T returned
Him scorn for all his flattering promises;
And stood resolved t'encounter with his fury,
Made hot by my disdain.
Miracle of friendship.
Since 'tis decreed that one of us must fall,
And only one, my death shall free us both
From the law's rigour, enjoy your best Valenzo,
Enjoy him long, may you (a happy pair)
Grow like two neighbouring roses on one stalk,
Partaking mutually each others sweets;
Whence no rude hand approach to ravish you,
But when you are full blown, and ripe for heaven,
May you fall gently both into one grave,
There lie entombed in your own odours.
Piero, thou go'st
To heaven, to be the envy of the Saints;
For when thou com'st where those blessed troops reside,
No man shall ere direct a vow, or prayer,
But unto thee!— Valenzo take thy friend,
Take him unto thy bosom, he has so much
Of heaven in him, I fear he can scarce die.
Is it your fear, madam? can he deserve less in
Your fair opinion, than to be thought immortal?
That death at length should boast a victory
o'er so much goodness.— Methinks (Piero)
Thou shouldst for ever stand a rich example,
To all mankind, who in thy fall will sicken,
And die to virtue; enjoy the happiness
Of thine own fate; I will not rob thee of
One precious minute; live till time has poured
A reverend snow upon thy head.—
But justice must be satisfied.
I'll bow myself beneath the stroke.
To slay
The innocent, is not to expiate,
But make a crime, preserve thyself entire
To thy Charintha, King, and Country.
What!
And betray my friend to death?
To what
I have deserved.
'twas thy too forward zeal, and a ripe spirit.
That spurred thee on to action, thou didst it for
Thy friend, for me, and had not justice been
Wronged in't, the honour had been mine, why not
The shame?
You must not, shall not die.
No more!
'Twill prove a breach of friendship else, I must not,
Shall not die: my honour suffers double,
Thou wouldst foil me both in love, and valour.
Pity these tears.
Or in thy ruin I
Am lost.
Justice requires but one, her fate
Is so involved in yours, you cannot fall,
But in it she must find a certain death;
Think then, how can you satisfy the law?
Far easier than you, in whose sad loss
The whole world suffers, and in thy unripe fall
loses all goodness.
Stint this pious strife,
I have been too much woman, and betrayed
My name to infamy, in this tame passion:
Possess me a just anger, a spirit great
And noble as my birth; that I may shake,
And rouse this sleepy Prince, from his dull lethargy;
Who's wholly lost, in the bewitching flatteries
Of that bad man;— alas this is a danger
Too potent for your stars to free you from;
Henceforth I'll be your destinies: for since
This calm brings nothing but a certain fall,
A storm shall either save, or ruin all.
Contemn our pardon.
Return your favours too
With so much scorn.
Better they'd played with lightning,
Or hugged a thunderbolt.
Justice is slow
Of pace, and if not led by fury,
Seldom o'ertakes the crime, let your return
Of punishment be quick, and active, delay is worse
Than pity, and more dangerous: Valenzo
Is popular, and who knows, but he had rather,
Owe his life to the people's mutiny, than your pardon,
And therefore slighted it.
Oh the state of Princes!
How far are we from that security,
we dreamt of in th'expectance of our crown?
Were foreign dangers nothing, yet we nourish
Our ruin in our bosom: Valenzo is a traitor,
So is Piero too; and who is not in this age?
It is unsafe not to suspect ourself.
To torture with 'em; be noble in thy justice:—
Here draw a warrant for their execution;—
We'll sign't with our own signer;— hence pity,
Post from our breast; we banish thee our bosom
thouart a disease bred there to ruin Majesty:
And sink us below our subjects scotue.—
Our Princely cousin, welcome to Court; thou hast
Been too long absent, (I must chide thee for't,)
And envied us the boast of virtue.
Virtue!
Some malicious devil now, or other,
Has enticed her from her beads;
To undo me, and my plots, she carries anger
In her brow:— this I must mitigate, or I am
Lost.—
Thou art so eager after heaven,
Thou wilt o'er-buy thy happiness.
Never fear't Sir.
But thy devotion's seasoned with so much charity,
Thou pil'st a stock of merit up for us
At Court.
I believe you'd need on't.
As long as we live here we shall;—
So wicked!
Ha! what frown's that, whence these clouds, Charintha?
So rises the blushing morn, as thou wert wont
To smile, when thou appearedst, we owe
Our day unto thy eyes; and if thou think'st
Thy beauty's worn too cheap, we'll become tributaries
To thee for light; chase hence this sullen darkness,
Thy absence has already made too long
A night.
No Sir; 'twas your black deeds.
How's this?
doye know me, who I am?
Not well.
Your King.
A Tyrant
Of big, and grorious impieties,
A regal monster, the true head of that
Beast you rule, the multitude: more cruel
Than enraged lions, or robbed bears; who both
Will spare the innocent, and humble.
Look toth' Lady there, sure she's distracted.
My wrongs indeed would make me so.
What wrongs? whence? or from whom?
Raise not my anger higher with your scorn;—
By all that's.—
Or if't be ignorance of my sufferings,
It but betrays your want of reason, and
How far you're lost to man, by your fond dotage.
Grow more particular, or wonder ruins me.
Good God! I've suffered so long, till patience
Grew my greatest crime.—
Now, now the storm is coming this way,
But I'm prepared to meet it.
Whence? or from whom?
Ask this good man how often he has mourned
Over the ruins of my fame? how often
His ears have met with the report of my
Disgrace? how I was noised a strumpet? when
Each talking thing at Court, might freely act
A rape upon my virtue, till I was left
All a whole stain, black as the front of perjured
Sinners? while you, (as if I'd been a trifle
Cast from your blood, and kindred, or some dark thing,
Whose actions were so foully bad.
That report bettered 'em in the expression:)
Could sit as silent as the night; as calm
As seas, when the winds sleep; yet at last be just;
And say, how have I appeared to you, or him,
That calumny has thus been privileged,
To violate my honour?
madam,
I have always spoke you, chastities best example.
Innocence itself is not so white.
Yet he that would confirm this with his sword,
Must meet, with prisons, wracks, and tortures,
As a reward of so much virtue!
Ha!
Sweetest Princess!—
And ere he die, must suffer in's honour,
Be proclaimed traitor to the state:
Ursini, thou hast abused our trust.
My Lord.—
Too weak pretence, for your ingratitude
To so large merit; Naples calls him
Her chief preserver; he brought home victory,
By his own arm achieved, when the proud foe,
Threatened your Kingdom with a fatal downfall.
He, to whose arm you owe your life, your crown,
To whom in war, you'd sooner fly for help
Then to the Altar; now in peace must have
His temples robbed; his garlands from his brow
Transplanted. to adorn this useless statua.
madam, I have not so appeared in managing these affairs of yours.
Would thou hadst,
Or somewhat that carries less resemblance
Of man: Oh thou art bravely wicked.
I have not used the art to boast the virtue
Of mine own actions; yet heaven knows
They were all good, and aimed at ends as honourable
As your desires.
Ursini leave, till there is hope of pardon,
This impudence in sin,
bids a defiance to all mercy; did we not,
At your persuasion, give order for Valenzo's
Quick dispatch?
howe'er I seemed () to run down with the stream of your violent passion, yet my intents still bore up against it; witness this paper.
Ha! What's here a pardon?
Which you had sealed ere this, had not this Lady here interrupted it.
How?
your passion would not have permitted you,
To have o'er viewed what you consented too;
This I knew, as likewise how dangerous it
Would have been to the state, if he had fallen.
Again my own Ursini:—
Charintha, pardon our errors, we will deserve it,
By the future love, and honours we will throw
On our Valenzo,— here take my signer
Fetch 'em to Court.
You are noble.
Ursini Wait on her to the Castle.
You honour me.
Oh how near were we destruction.
Reason sit still enthroned in thine own state,
'tis passion only ruins Kings, not fate.
Hold up, hold up Sir, the Ladies are coming this way,— for shame,— God's me, they're here; why d'ye tremble so Sir?
A violent fit o'th' ague; oh! oh! oh! have me to bed gently, gently, or I shall scatter all my limbs;
Discredited for ever, (here take this staff Sir)— have I boasted your strength to them?— fortified you for th' encounter, and you fail me thus?— undone, undone!
Oh! oh! oh! for half a dozen of night caps.
Here Sir, on with 'em; they're somewhat dirty, they'll keep you the warmer;— now shall I be called mountebank; quacksalver, Pisspot-peeper: and all the ugly mangy names can be invented.— come in, come in.—
'Twill be a Scene of modest mirth, Ladies.
The Physician has cooled him.
Why Sir, you won't disgrace me? go towards 'em.
Some fire, some fire;— cold, cold, cold, cold.
Here, here, on with my gown:— this cap, so, so.
Ladies, we'll take leave to be bold here to vex him.
How d'ye my Lord?
We are come here to await your pleasure.
The very thought on't has cast him into a cold sweat.
Oh! oh!
Now for fifty virgins.
A monopoly of women.
Hey, for a wench, for a wench, to bumfiddle now; Ah! ha!
Oh! ho! oh!
doye remember you'd play the fool in my gown, and cap excellently.
Well said Doctor.
To him Doctor.
Then a noise of Musicians would do rarely.
Look he's nodding.
My Lord you intend no abuse to us?
Make us hazard our credits for nothing?
More clothes;— why hoe there, on my feet I say.
He's dreaming.
Fast, fast asleep, so, so, this charm lasts till Midnight, and then he wakes.
'Twill be good sport to see him then—
Dance up and down the Court like the ghost of old Hippocrates.
You must not expose him to the public view.
Mr Doctor you're sufficiently revenged, this is enough for you to boast on when you come i'th' University.
This, and the rare cures I've done upon you two shall be my theme.— Good night.— Ladies I'm your servant.— My doughty placket-hunter lie thee there, and e'en awake when thy stomach serves thee; tomorrow morning I'm for Padua.—
The night comes on apace, straight every thing
Will be as black as I, and alike terrible,
Nay outdo me too: each leaf that stirs
Affrights the fearful, makes the guilty tremble,
And yet this night, what is it but a shadow?
Yet I am less than that, for I do less:
I that have purposed so much, act nothing!
Horror! could but my thoughts be seen, they'd own
Murders, more than the basilisk could commit,
Were he all eye, more than revenge has acted,
Or than the trivial spite of plague, and war
Produce, in their full heat.— Ursini be speedy
Or I'll outrun design.—
Zisco.
My Lord.
The hours are favourable
And have brought opportunity along with 'em,
We must resolve for action.
I'm prepared.
But Zisco, art thou sure Felicia was.—
Sure? puh! would you know? I myself
Am the Moore he caused to ravish her.
And canst thou do't again?
Bravely.
This night than thou shalt— ravish his Mistress,
Calantha! this night! I've prepared all things ready
For thy conveyance into her chamber— thou wilt do't
Resolved.
And kill her too?
An she were my mother.
Obscure yourself a while.— how now?
My Lord, the French have kept their word,
And unespied have stolen from Genoa,
Entered our haven, and this night have set
Upon our fleet, the bold Sicilians too
I'th' town are up in arms.
There spoke my Genius.
My Lord! the city's in a mutiny,
The Court in wild distraction.
Well, beyond my hopes: excellent well; Grutti, Cassio, be near us, we must use your help tonight.
Valenzo plays from the Castle with his Canons,
And strikes both parties without distinction:
He's now marching up with a well ordered troop,
'tis thought he had intelligence of your intents.
O my fate! that man undoes me.
Thus early sins are blasted in the bud,
There is no safety but in being good.
'Tis late.
Each man retire to his quarter: Captains,
We entertain your merit with a serious welcome.
Our deserts, my Lord,
Are so slender, that were't not to prejudice
Your judgement, we would blush to own any.
Hang this flattery, merit quotha? is't such a piece of merit to cut a score or two of throats; knock down an hundred o'th' city herd? a gallant could do so much for's Cockatrice.
The King shall give you each particular thinks: He owes you both a trophy,
His acknowledgement
Of our duty, would raise our pride to sin,
We should forget to let heaven share i'th' victory.
Victories, by Mars's crest it deserves not to come i'th' Chronicle, though Hollinshead or Hall, those voluminous foreigners should write our annals, 'twill ne'er make us justle in among the Caesars, or own a name i'th' list o'th' worthies.
No Contareno, we will not have thee painted in vile ugly colours, and clapped upon chimneys, thou shalt be cut—
In brass? mine would make an excellent brazen face?
In Parian marble, we'll rob the Quarries
To rear thee up a glorious monument.
A glorious loam to set lazy spiders a work in, an office for birds to mute in, if these be your glorious monuments for men of arms, I'll e'en live to sin out my merit (as you call it) then when I die, the world and I will shake hands, and cry quit of all sides.
He that should hear thee talk thus, and not know thee well, would doubt thy valour.
Hercules! an he did he should try it.
'twere punishment enough.
Gonçales— I gratulate thy naval victory;
France will have cause hereafter to mention thee in sad story,
Thou giv'st them but a churlish salutation.
Such as they deserved,
It seems they came rather to steal than fight,
They were as ill prepared, as they had meant
To bear our empty hulks away unquestioned;
For soon as they perceived we descried 'em,
Pale, as the lilies in their trembling flags,
They turned their sails, and fled; we made after 'em,
With swift winged lightning from our canon's mouth,
Which sunk and fired 'em all, ere they could quit
The channel, or gain the wider Ocean;
Believe me, noble Soldier, thou art dear
To fame; as old in victory, as in years,
Yet still thou toil'st t'undo thyself, and benefit
Thy ingrateful soil, which never will be able
To requite thy meanest service.
Yet you for the same cause, i'th' pride of youth,
Opposed yourself betwixt the state and danger,
When their sick hopes, were as their fortunes, desperate;
Reduced a Kingdom to your sway, in whose
Rich spoils, your gawdy Soldier triumphs;
Whilst boasting of their rifled plumes, they drink
healths to victory; yet those so moderate,
Their bowls increase their fury, not their surfeits.
How these tall men o'th' sword claw one another?
They have an itch of pride runs through 'em.
The Hero's, when thou com'st into Elysium,
To give thee place, shall shift their blessed mansions.
And load thee with their laurels.
How my fears betray me! shunning
One toil, I run into another.
Che va la?
Oh me! I'm surprised.
Spirit of valour thouart my prisoner.
Ha! whom have you there?
(Valenzo! my voice betrays me.)
A young Sicilian, shall I draw my steel,
And give him a gentle stroke?
Lend me my sword— and be thou what thou wilt I dare thee to thy worst.
Bravely spoke,— set forward then.—
Traitor! the Princess! Calantha!
All the better; she's skilful at her weapon,
We'll but exchange a thrust in sport.
Ha! what means this flight?
Dare none of you fight?
Dear Lady, not with you.
Then you are cowards, they speak you so i'th' City,
And I came out thus purposely to try you.
If you please, you shall quickly see that,
Command us sheathe our swords in one another's
Bosoms— we'll fly like lightning to execute your
Commands;— you're our Princess.
No, I'm your Prince's murderess.
How?
I've killed your King: will none
Dispatch me yet?
Sure she's distracted.
We must disarm you Lady;— 'tis a duty to our Prince
Was never till now unwillingly performed!
You must back toth' Court, whither we'll wait upon you.
villains, cowards,
The Princess! what made she abroad so late?
Did she not say that she had killed the King too?
Come let's walk the round; things are yet unsettled.
'Tis so dark now, an the devil should lie perdieu I should go near to stumble on's horns.
Too much of this sad story, Oh these men
How are they degenerate from the goodness
Of their creation! they have been always false—
Silly as we are,
We know it; their vows and oaths are traitors
To us, and yet we hug them, let them into our bosoms,
Into our hearts, till they undo us?
But madam, why d'ye desire us to leave you?
Fear you not his fury, what it may prompt him too,
When he shall see you are not his Calantha.
He never was acquainted with that passion,
He's violent in nothing,— But in love.
And yet he may dissemble that too
As well as his vows.
Should he? were his hand
Lift up to strike me, I can charm it there!
Who can look on a lady's bended knees,
Wet cheeks, swollen eyes, hear her sighs, her prayers,
And yet be cruel: If there be one that can,
That one is not Ferrando; his bosom is
Passable to every groan; it strikes his heart:
He would tell me (when he was absent)
If I sigh't, or wept, for then he said
He wept and sighed by sympathy.
Yet now he loves you not.
Can he not love himself? here, here I bear him,
Himself in a less model, this I'll show him,
If he mistrust 'tis none of his; let him
But rip me up, there he shall see each limb
As like to his, as his one hand, one eye,
One cheek is like the other: besides there lies
Folded by his own name, he told me he
Would call it so, (Ferrando,) and lest I
Should chance forget, I wrote it in my heart,
There he will find it.
Good Lady!
'tis a sad nuptial night, this,
I'll tell him too how he
Would grieve if I were dead, go hanging down
His head, vailing his eyes from heaven, ashamed
To look up to the place, where his Felicia is:
Or poring on the ground, as he would find
Where my neglected ashes lay a sport
To th' winds; where some rude blast might blow me up
Into his eyes, and then he'd weep to find,
Me there; weep till the fretting brine had burned
His eyeballs out.
He told me of his dreams, what pleasure he
Had to find me in 'em: alas they will
Be terrible now: I shall affright him, appear
A thin pale ghost, make him start out in his sleep;
(Alas! I will not) yet he'll dream he heard me.
Cry out, Ferrando! revenge upon Ferrando:
This cannot choose but startle him.—
Heaven grant it may.
madam all joy that we can hope, or wish,
Be with you.
I'll go alone into the bedchamber.
There expect him,— pray leave me.
Good night, I hear him coming.
Our Navy victor.
The City quiet too I those clouds
Which threatened ruin to your Kingdom, all
Blown o'er; the sky serene and calm, as if
It laughed at your vain fears; the lamps of heaven
That now seemed all blown out, are trimmed a new
And brighter shine, to lead you to Elysium.
To Heaven, Elyzium's poor to what we shall
Enjoy tonight.
The land of some dull villager
Or doughty Poets dreams.
The birth of fancy,
A thin, fantastic, airy paradise;
With which they flatter their weak hopes, but mine
Is known to sense; we gather odours there; wealthy
In their native sweetness, flowers of a hue
As bright as lasting, roses and lilies
Blown from their stalks, meet here, and dwell upon
Her cheeks, as if there only they were privileged
To enjoy an everlasting spring. Ʋrs. Let your
Imaginations seed even to a surfeit, your senses
Are too too weak, and narrow t'entertain
The bounteous flowing of her pleasures:
You'll let so much pass by unknown,
As if you took but tribute of her blessings:
When the whole stock is yours.
We'll be her Mars, and meet her in soft skirmish,
In amorous duel, where we'll softly yield
And let her win: (to raise her to the pride
Of a new victory, as much upon ourselves
As we have done upon her Country,
Then shall she bind us gently in her hair
Fetters for Captive lovers, and in scorn
Of our trim youth, and temperate blood, when we
Begin to faint within her arms, shall then
Supply us with new strength from her own eyes;
Whence she will dart a soul at every glance
Rich as herself, and the blessed smiles 'tis made of;
Create an active flame within our breast
Able to give old statuas life and motion,
Make their stiff marble feet supple as the joints
Of love:— oh I'm lost! my Venus
Come; lead to my Venus.
Your Cynthia,— your Moon
With a man in her— there there's
Your way, why move you not?
How you stand.
Ursini, Ha! Seest thou that black thing there?
That ugly fiend, I'll out stare thee, devil.
Where are you Sir?
'Tis done.
Ravished! Calantha's ravished— oh torment!
Grim fury post to hell.
Pardon me Sir,
I've a little business to dispatch first—
This for Felicia, thus Alberto fell.
Oh I'm wounded.
Ha! d'ye know me Prince?
Frederico! just heavens.
Stay your hand— be innocent in your revenge,
Let me bear all the guilt.
Couldst thou think, dull Prince, that heaven so
Doted on thy royalty, thy crown, thy sceptre,
Or regal pall could bear thee out in sin?
Or the weak shine of trivial state dazzle
Their eyes that look upon the blessed sun!
Couldst thou flatter thyself into such a Security,
That vengeance would not find thee out?
When thou hadst forfeited thy luxurious palate
With all the dainties of Felicia's body
Thirsted her blood, quaffed off whole bowls of it,
Till thou were't drunk, and wild with fury
Of thy intemperate draughts— Am not I a rare villain now?
Mad, stark mad, besides himself,
Sure this is but a dream, and I asleep.
Thus, thus I'll wake you:—
Oh my blood scalds, h'has shot wild fire into my heart,
Ah traitor, thy steel is poisoned.
Frederico, let me embrace thee:
Now our revenge is perfect.
Your passage lies this way.
through us.
Treason, treason, raise the Court.
Break open the doors.
We are betrayed.
Villain I greet thy heart.
Where tends your business?
Slave to hell, and thou shalt carry't thither.
Fire, fire, the poison boils my entrails.
The Prince wounded!
Where are the traitors?
Here I am his murderer.
Frederico.
Valenzo, I am o'ercome.—
New miracles, Calantha, my best my dearest love:— Oh I am sick, stand off Calantha, my breath's so hot, 'twill singe thee else; and lick thy beauties up, like nimble flames; But dost thou live?
To curse thee false and perjured.
The spheres are out of tune; nature's distraught;
The orbs celestial have turned round so long
That they are giddy: the stars are in a mutiny,
The Intelligences are altogether byth' ears.
Heaven! I bless your justice:
Stern tyrant! that triumphest o'er the memory
Of my father, mockest me with love,
Till like a fool I doted on my fetters,
'Cause they were golden ones, that thus
Thy devilish art might make my soul a captive,
With my body.
Enigmatical.
Yet then a Lady mourned thy perjured vows.
Whom thou betrayd'st to loose adultery.
Thy speech, Calantha, is darker than an Oracle.
Truer it is, and dar'st thou yet dissemble it?
'Tis a truth precious to time, who will preserv't
To blast thy memory, and derive a stain
On all thy successors.
How? or when arrived this your knowledge madam?
How? or when arrived this your knowledge madam?
Felicia told me all herself
Confirmed it by religious oaths; besides
This medal which she gave me from her neck,
A pledge of his broke faith, with the sad fruits
Of his sate lust, within her womb.
She's a black whore: she lies; believe her not.
Thou wilt be damned:
So may I; and howl eternally
In those blue flames the devils bathe in,
If ever my vows were made to any other
Than thee; and those, as spotless as thy soul.—
But whom have we here?
Felicia! Sad Lady she entreated
This night's exchange of place; that she might show him
What an untimely mother he had made her,
And this 'twas caused my flight,
Felicia!
Ha! murdered.
My love.
My sister! ravished:
And murdered by! me, incestuous villain!
Didst thou not tell me that Ferrando ravished her,
And cast her to his slaves, a prey to their
Bold appetites and furies.
To incense you the more against him; I told you
What I only did imagine, because at my return
From Sicily, report whispered her lost,
Lost in the ruins of my Father,
Which made me think her murdered.
Ye Gods! I now acknowledge you supreme:
Your power is mighty over our fond arts.
Silly projectors we ensnare ourselves!
Whilst we spread nets for others.
This brain has wrought all these sad plots,
Calantha, take your Lord; who is as true,
And holy in his vows, as those blessed Saints
He invoked.
And yet Felicia wronged?
'Twas I by whom she swelled, and not Ferrando,
As 'twas supposed.
Supposed! she swore 'twas he.
Ursini, farewell; I'll hear the rest anon—
That aggravates my crime, who wrought her into
This false belief, for having long loved her,
Without return of mutual flames, and at length
Finding that the impediment was her fond
Dotage upon the Prince; I determined,
Rather than not to be possessed of her,
To part with faith and loyalty, feigned all
My visits for him, courted her acceptation
Of his love, which I so darkly brought about
That she consenting to private meetings
As oft as she expected the Prince,
I myself filled her arms.—
Then you conclude Ferrando innocent?
In act, or thought.
Felicia! sister! your brother Frederico calls,
She's gone, cold, cold! and pale, and yet methinks
She smiles, look up, Felicia—
But how came it to pass she ne'er descried you?
For reasons I then gave her: all our meetings
Were in the night, and that i'th' dark too, where I
Dissembled so the Prince in voice and gesture.—
This agrees right with her relation: villain thou haste undone me.
And myself too.
Death hangs upon her lids, 'tis eternal night with her. hoa, sister, stay, take me along with you; I'll follow you.
Pernicious traitor.
Rage chokes my utterance:— give me your sword.
Our hearts and hands are yours:
Our hearts and hands are yours:
I'll be an age in killing thee, dost tremble?
Thou look'st like one of those thin frozen ghosts,
That chattering lie on hills of thick-ribbed Ice,
Come meet my fury.
Here, here's my heart.
I: I'll dig it out,
And cast it to the hungry fiends.
My strength decays, I reel and totter like a cracked reed that leans against the winds.
Take your sword.—
madam.
Take it I say.
You do him too much honour.
Managed with skill and strength, or thou affront'st
My honour,— faint-hearted! coward, I'll follow thee to hell.
Mercy heavens!
Ho! Charon, more company, lie farther there jolt-head, what quarrelling you dogs? thy oar, thy oar ferryman: clap 'em o'th' sconce with't, there, there.
The Gods are just.
You wore their cause upon your sword.
'Tis poor revenge this, can he not live again?
Start up from th'earth with life, and double strength?
Were't centupled I'd meet him:— but oh my eyes!
Look here Valenzo: which is Prince, which subject,
Which is my loved Ferrando? I see there is
No ceremonious state, no pomp in death;
They all lie level, all quiet, the bad as well
As the good, why should this traitor here
This devilish arch, arch-traitor lie as silent
As his Lord? should he not stare, and foam,
Start up and howl, till he wakes all the dead?
Lady:
Her old passion returns again.
Roar, and curse heavens,
But they too have forgot to punish sinners,
And reward virtue, here's an example on't;
We were both virtuous, and deserved not this
Bad usage; let me embrace thee:—
Cold as the earth he lies on, and as dull too:
Where is the soul, that busy flame that lent
Him life and motion? affected such vain pomp
And glorious noise: whither is't fled? poor liveless trunk,
It was unkindly done to leave thee thus,
A prey to worms and rottenness.
Are you there fury, Megaera, Tisiphone, Allecto,
Howle, howl, furies, I'll lash you.
Kind death thouart welcome; I kiss thy dart.
The Princess! she's slain, unlucky hand.
Spite of our stars, and all rude opposition,
We are one in death: Valenzo see us interred,
Both in one tomb, that we may mingle ashes
And be securely lodged, you know our souls
Were one; our hearts were long united.
A FATAL UNION.
Draw, draw the curtains there, my love and I
Must sleep;— uncivil I protest, put out the lights,
We shall sleep best i'th' dark; pray don't disturb us,
You may fright him from mine arms,— but— I'll— hold— him— fast.
The ruined treasure of two Kingdoms
In one heap.
In the bedchamber! this way!
Yes Lady, the cry was full of horror.
'Twas the physician's potion this my Lord.
Done in revenge.
Would 'thad been poison.
Bless me! whence all these tragedies.
Astonishment seizes me.
The King:
Ursini dead. ha! whom have we here, Frederico,
Yes, and Felicia too.
All slain; by what dire hand?
I'll tell you that within.—
Charintha is your Queen.
May you be happy in her love.
Remove the bodies, i'th' morning we will take order for the state, and funeral rites.
Of these; the lasting story of whose wrongs
Shall be all royal lover's evening songs.
AFter these ruins, thus your Poet stands,
Expecting his own destiny from your hands,
By them he lives or dies; if it should hap
That stead of a mild doom, applause or clap.
(Your trivial allowance) his listening ears
Meet with harsh whispers, or half stifled jeers,
Such unkind censure kills him; his sad Muse
unless you give her bay, has vowed to use
The Cypress wreathes, her piety did allow
Those only to encircle her own brow:
Your candid acceptation will be
New life and soul to his lost Poesy;
His flame's but sickly yet, your breath no doubt
Will either blow't up higher, or quite out.