WHy Gentlemen, do you know what you do? ha'! would you ha' kept me out? Christmas, old Christmas? Christmas of London, and Captain Christmas? Pray you let me be brought before my Lord Chamberlain, i'll not be answered else: 'tis merry in hall when beards wag all: I ha' seen the time you ha' wished for me, for a merry Christmas, and now you ha' me; they would not let me in: I must come another time! a good jest, as if I could come more than once a year; why, I am no dangerous person, and so I told my friends, o' the Guard. I am old Gregory Christmas still, and though I come out of Popes-head-alley as good a Protestant, as any i' my Parish. The troth is, I ha' brought a Masque here, out o' the City, o' my own making, and do present it by a set of my Sons, that come out of the Lanes of London, good dancing boys all: It was intended I confess for Curryers' Hall, but because the weather has been open, and the Livery were not at leisure to see it till a frost came that they cannot work. I thought it convenient, with some little alterations, and the Groom of the Revels hand to it, to fit it for a higher place, which I have done; and though I say it, another manner of devise than your New years night. Bones o' bread, the King! Son Rowland, Son Clem, be ready there in a trice; quick, Boys.
NOw God preserve, as you well do deserve,
your Majesties all, too there;
Your Highness' small, with my good Lords all,
and Ladies, how do you do there?
Gi'me leave to ask, for I bring you a Masque
from little little little little London;
Which say the KING likes, I ha'passed the Pikes,
if not, old Christmas is undone.
OF peace, what's the matter there?
Here's one, o' Friday street would come in.
By no means, nor out of neither of the Fishstreets, admit not a man; they are not Christmas creatures: Fish, and fasting days, foh! Sons, said I well? look too't.
No body out o' Friday-street, nor the two Fish-streets there; do you hear?
Shall John Butter o' Milk-street come in? ask him.
Yes, he may slip in for a Torchbearer, so he melt not too fast, that he will last till the Masque be done.
Right Son.
Our Dances fraught, is a matter of eight,
and two, the which are Wenches;
In all they be ten, four Cocks to a Hen,
and will swim to the tune like Tenches.
Each hath his knight, for to carry his light,
which some would say are Torches;
To bring them here, and to lead them there,
and home again to their own porches.
Now their intent—
Now, all the Lords bless me, where am I trow? where is Cupid: serve the King? they may serve the Cobbler well enough, some of 'em, for any courtesy they have y'wisse; they ha' need o' mending: unrude people they are, your Courtiers, here was thrust upon thrust indeed! was it ever so hard to get in before, trow?
How now? what's the matter?
A place forsooth, I do want a place; I would have a good place to see my Child act in before the KING, and QUEEN'S Majesties (God bless 'em) to night.
Why, here is no place for you.
Right forsooth, I am Cupid's Mother, Cupid's own Mother: forsooth; yes forsooth: I devil in pudding-lane; I forsooth, he is Prentice in Love-lane with a Bugle-maker, that makes of your Bobs, and Bird-bolts for Ladies,
Good Lady Venus of Pudding-lane, you must go out for all this.
Yes forsooth, I can sit any where, so I may see Cupid act; he is a pretty Child, though I say it that perhaps should not, you will say: I had him by my first Husband, he was a Smith forsooth, we dwelled in Doe-little lane than, he came a month before his time, and that may make him somewhat imperfect: But I was a Fishmonger's daughter.
No matter for your Pedigree, your house; good Venus will you departed?
I forsooth, he'll say his part I warrant him, as well as ere a Play boy of 'em all: I could ha' had money enough for him, an I would ha' been tempted, and ha' let him out by the week, to the King's Players: Master Burbadge has been about and about with me; and so has old Mr. Hemings too, they ha' need of him, where is he tro'a? I would feign see him, pray God they have given him some drink since he came.
Are you ready Boys? strike up, nothing will drown this noise but a Drum: o' peace, yet, I ha' not done
Why? here be half of the properties forgotten, Father.
Post and Pair wants his pur-chops, and his pur-dogs.
Ha' you ne'er a Son at the Groomporters to beg, or borrow a pair of Cards quickly?
It shall not need, here's your Son Chrater without; has Cards in his pocket.
Odds so; speak to the Guard to let him in, under the name of a property.
And here's New-yeares-gift he's an Orange, and Rosemary, but not a clove to stick in't.
Why, let one go to the Spicery.
Fie, fie, fie; it's naught, it's naught boys.
Why, I have cloves, if it be cloves you want, I have cloves in my purse, I never go without one in my mouth.
And Mumming, has not his vizard neither.
No matter, his own face shall serve for a punishment, and 'tis bad enough; has Wassell her bowl, and Mince-pie her spoons?
I, I; but Misrule doth not like his suit: he says the Players have lent him one too little, on purpose to disgrace him.
Let him hold his peace, and his disgrace will be the less: what? shall we proclaim where we were furnished? Mum! Mum! a peace, be ready good Boys.
Now their intent, is above to present
with all the appurtenances
A right Christmas, as of old it was,
to be gathered out of the Dances.
Which they do bring, and afore the King,
the Queen, and Prince, as it were now
Drawn here by Love; who, over and above,
doth draw himself i'the gear too.
Hum drum, sauce for a Coney;
no more of your Martial music:
Even for the sake, o' the next new stake,
for there I do mean to use it.
And now to ye, who in place are to see,
with Roll and Farthingale hooped:
I pray you know, though he want his bow
by the wings, that this is Cupid.
He might go back, for to cry what you lack,
but that were not so witty:
His Cap, and Coat, are enough to note
that he is the Love o' the City.
And he leads on, though he now begun,
for that was only his-rule:
But now comes in, Tom of Bosom's Inn,
and he presenteth Misrule.
Which you may know, by the very show,
albeit you never ask it:
For there you may see what his Ensigns be,
the Rope, the Cheese, and the Basket.
This Carol plays, and has been in his days
a chirping boy, and a kill pot:
Kit Cobbler it is, I'm a Father of his,
and he dwells in the lane, called Fil-pot.
But who is this? O' my daughter Sis
Mince-pie, with her do not dally
On pain o' your life: She's an honest Cook's wife,
and comes out of Scalding-Alley.
Next in the trace, comes Gambol in place,
and to make my tale the shorter:
My Son Hercules, ta'en, out of Distaffe-lane
but an active man, and a Porter.
Now Post and Pair, old Christmasses heir
doth make, and a gingling Sally:
And wot you who, 'tis one of my two
Sons, Cardmakers in Pur-alley.
Next in a trice, with his box and his Dices,
Mac-pippin my Son, but younger,
Brings Mumming in; and the knave will win,
for of is a Costermonger.
But New-yeares-gift, of himself makes shifted
to tell you what his name is:
With Orenge on head, and his Gingerbread,
Clem Wasp of Honey-lane ' 'tis.
This I you tell, is our jolly Wassell,
and for Twelve-night more meet too:
She works by the Ell, and her name is Nell,
and she dwells in Thred-needle-street too.
Than Offering he, with his Dish, and his Tree,
that in every great house keepeth;
Is by my Son, young Littleworth done,
and in Penny-rich-street he sleepeth.
Last, Baby-cake, that an end doth make
of Christmas merry, merry vain a
Is Child Rowlan, and a strait young man,
though he come out of Crooked-lane ' a.
There should have been, and a dozen I ween,
but I could find but one more;
Child of Christmas, and a Log it was,
when I them all had gone over.
I prayed him, in a time so trim,
that he would make one to prance it:
And I myself, would have been the twelfe,
o' but Log was to heavy to dance it.
You worthy wights, King, Lords, and Knights,
or Queen, and Ladies bright:
Cupid invites, you to the sights
he shall present to night.
'tis a good child, speak out, hold up your head Love.
And which Cupid— and which Cupid, etc.
Do not shake so Robin, if thou be'st a'cold, I ha' some warm waters for thee, here.
Come, you put Robin Cupid out with your waters, and your fisling; will you be gone?
I forsooth; he's a child, you must conceive, and must be used tenderly; he was never in such an assembly before forsooth, but once at Warmoll Quest, forsooth, where he said grace as prettily as any of the Sheriff's Hinch-boyes forsooth.
Will you peace, forsooth?
And which Cupid, and which Cupid, etc.
I that's a good boy, speak plain, Robin: how does his Majesty like him, I pray? will he give eight pence a day think you? speak out Robin.
Nay, he is out enough, you may take him away, and begin your Dance; this it is to have speeches.
You wrong the Child, you do wrong the Infant; I' peal to his Majesty.
Well done Boys, my fine Boys, my bully Boys.
NOr do you think that their legs is all
the commendation of my Sons,
For at the Artillery-Garden they shall
as well (forsooth) use their Guns.
And march as fine, as the Muses nine,
along the streets of London:
And i'their brave tires, to gi'their false fires,
especially Tom my Son.
Now if the Lanes and the Allies afford,
such an ac-ativitie as this:
At Christmas next, if they keep their word,
can the children of Cheapside miss?
Though, put the case, when they come in place,
they should not dance, but hop:
Their very gold lace, with their silk would'em grace,
having so many knights, o'the Shop!
But were I so wise, I might seem to advice
so great a Potentate as yourself:
They should Sir, I tell ye, spared out o' their belly,
and this way spend some of their pelf.
I, and come to the Court, for to make you some sport,
at the lest once every year:
As Christmas hath done, with his seventh or eigth Son,
and his couple of Daughters dear.