COssin, I know what belongs to this place sym what petter then you; and therefore give mee leave to be pold to advise you. 'Is not a small matter to offer your selfe into presence of a king, and aull his Court? Be not too byssie and forward, till you be caulld, I tauke reason to you.
Cym, never talk any taukes: if the King of gread Prittaine keep it Assizes here, I will cym into Court: Loog you, do you see now, and please Got.
Taw, d yn ynbhyd, y, dhwyti-n abl i anabhy, pob p o'th' folineb, âgy tyny gwatwar are die wlac.
Gad vynl Lonyth. I say I will appear in Court.
Appear as you s'ud do than, Dab Jenkin in good sort; do not discredit the nation, and pit wrong upon us aull by your rassnes.
What do you cawl rassnesse Evan y Gynrn, is not aull the Cyntrie, and aull Welsh, and the Prince of Wales too abused in him? by this hand, I will tell it the Kings own ears every ' oord, do you see him now? Bless your ursip, pray God is in Heaven bless ever inch of your ursip; and Wales is commend it to your ursip, from top to toe, with aull his hearts aull over, by got'utch me, and would be glad as a shilling to see you in him. Come it down once a day and try; I tell you now, you s'all be as welcomely there, as where you were in your own Cyntries last two Symmers, and pershance we'll made you as good s'eere too; we'll promise' your ursip as good a piece of Seize, as you need pit in your head, and pleas'yow s'all bee toasted too. Go too, see him once upon a time your own sellive, is more good mean you, than is aware of: By got ' is very hard, but s'all make you a Shestice of Peace the first days you come; and pershance (say nothing) Knight o'the S'ire too:' Is not Worsters, nor Pembrokes, nor Mongymeries s'all carry him from you. But aull this while s'all I tell you a liddell now?' is a great huge deal of anger upon you, from aull Wales and the Nation; that your ursippe would suffer our young Master Sarles your 'ursips Son and Heir, and Prince of Wales, the first time he ever play Dance, to be pit up in a Mountain (got knows where) by a palterly Poet, how do you say him Evan?
Libya.
Vellhy! Libya. And how do you cawl him the Mountain; his name is
Adlas.
Hynno, hynno. Adlas? I please your ursip is a Welsse Attorney, and a preddilie scholars, a wear him his long coat, line with Seepes skin, as you see every days o'the week. A very sufficient litigious fellow's in the Terms, and a finely Poets out o'the Terms, he has a sprig of Laurel already towards his garlands. He was get in here at Twelve-night and see aull; what do you call it, your matters, and says is naught, naught, stark naught.
I do say'anded please his Madestee, I do not like him with aull his heart; he's plugd in by the ears, without all piddies, or mercies of propriedies or decorums. I will do injuries to no man before his Madestee; but ' is a very vile and absurd as a man would wiss, that I do say, to pit the Prince of Wales in an outlandis Mountain; when he is known, his Highness has as goodly Mountains and as tawll a Hills of his own (look you, do you see now) and of as good standing, and as good descent, as the proudest Adlas christened.
I good Evan, I pray you reckon his Madestee some of the Welsh Hills, the Mountains.
Why there is Talgar.
Well said.
Eliennieth.
Well said Evan.
Cadier Arthur.
Toudge him, toudge him.
Pen-maen-maur.
Is good boys, Evan.
And Craig-eriri.
Aw? vellhy? why law you now?' Is not Pen-maen-maur, and Craig-Eriri as good sound, as Adlas every whit of him.
Is caulld the British Aulpes, Craig-Eririri, a very sufficient Hills.
By got we will play with him Hills for Hills, for sixteen and forty s'illings when he dares.
I pray you let it alone your wachers a liddle while Cousin Davy ap Jenkin, and give it leave I may give his Madestee, and the Court informations toudging now the Reformations.
Why? cannot you and I talk too Cousin? the haul (God bless it) is big enough to hold both our taukes, and we were twice as much as we are.
Why, talk it aull than, if you think is reason in you.
Not; I know is no reason, Evan, I confess him; but every man would show himselve a good subject as he can to his means; I am a subject by my place, and two heads is better than one I imagine under correction.
Got's owns, here is no corrections man; imagine what you please, do in gots name, imagine, imagine, why do you not imagine? here is no pennyrths of corrections.
Aw dgwin Tawson.
Is so invincibles, so in mercifullies ignorant, a man knows not upon what inces of ground to stand to him; does conceive it no more as I am a true Welsh christian, than (sirreverence ' o the cympany) the-hilts of his dagger.
Go too, I will make the hilts conceive a knock upon your pate, and pershance a bumpe to if you talk.
How! upon my pate?
Yes upon your pate; your Poetlie pate, and your Law pate too.
Tawson, Tawson. Fore'got you will go ne'er to hazard a thumb, and a four finger of your best hand; if you knock him here, you may knock him better s'eape at Ludlow a great deal: do you know the place where it is?
Well, I can be patiented, I trust, I trust it is in a presence I presume that loves no quarrels, nor replies, nor the lies, nor the challenge, nor the Duels: but— I will do my byssinesse now, and make this a byssinesse for another days hereafter: Pleas ' your Madestee— By got I am out of my tempers terribly well, got forgive me, and pit me in my selive again. How does your Highness— I know not a ' oord or a syllable what I say;' is do me that vexations.
O Evan; for the honour of Wales.
I remember him now,' is enough, blessings upon me ' is out o'my head again; lost, quite lost: this knock, o'my pate has knock aull my wits out o'my brains I think, and turn my reasons out of doors. Believe it I will rub, and break your s'ins for this, I will not come so high as your head, but I will take your nose in my way, very sufficiently.
Hung your sufficiency.
'Tis well, very well; 'tis better, better, exceedingly well.
What?— you mean (hough) to make us so long tarry here, ha'?
Marry, here is aull undone with distempers me thinks, and angers, and passions.
Who is angry?
Why it is I is angry, and hungry too, if you mark me; I could eat his Flint-seere face now, offer to knock my pate in the hearing of aull these, and more too? well, before his Madestee I do yet forgive him now with aull my heart, and will be revenged another time.
Why that is good Evan, honest brave Evan.
Ha' you told the King's Madestee of the alterations.
I am now once again about him: peace; please your Madestee, the Welsh Nation hearing that the Prince of Wales was to come into the Hills again, afore your Madestee have a desire of his Highness for the honour of Wales, to make him a Welsh hills, which is done without any manner of sharshese to your Madestee, only shanging his name: He is cawl now Craig-Eriri, a Mountain in Carnarvan-Seere; has as grey beard, and as much snow upon his head aull the year long,
As Adlas for his guts.
He tells your Madestee true, for aull he is a liddle out of season: but cym every man tell as much as he cannow, my quality is I hope sufficiently known to his Madestee, that I am Rector Chori is aull my ambitions, and that I would have it aull Welsh; that is the s'ort and the long of the Requests. The Prince of Wales we know is aull over Welsh.
And than my Lord Marquis.
Both my Lord Marquis is as good, noble, true Briton, as any ever is come out of Wales.
My Lord Mongymerie is as sound Welsh too, as flese and blood can make him.
And the Howard's by got, is Welsh as strait as any arrow.
Houghton is a Town bear his name there by Pipidiauke.
And Erwin, his name is Wyn; but the Duts-men come here in Wales, and cawl him Heer-win.
Than Car is plain Welsh, Caerlton, Caermardin, Cardiff.
And Palmer, his Ancestors was call him Penmaure.
And Acmooty, is Ap mouth-wye of Llanmouthwye.
And Abercromy, is aull one as Abermarlys.
Or Abertau.
Or Aberdugled haw.
Or Abes hodney.
Or Abergevenny.
Or Aber conway.
Aberconway is very like Abercromy, a liddell hard s'ifte has pit'em aull into Wales; but our desires and petitions is, that the muisiques be aull Welsh, and the dances, and no Erculus brought in now with a gread staff, and a pudding upon him.
Aw; was his distaff, was not his club.
What need of Ercules, when Cadwallader—
Or Lluellin, or Reese ap Griphin, or Cradock, or Owen Glendower, with a Welsh hook, and a Goat's skin on his back, had done very better, and twice as well?
Nay, and to pit apparel on a pottle of hay, and cawl him Lantaeus.
The Bellie-gods too, was as proper a monster as the best of'hem.
I, stand to it, there was neither Poetries, nor Architectures, nor designs in that bellie-god; nor a note of musics about him. Come, bring forth our musics, you s'all hear the true Pritan strains now, the ancient Welsh Harp— you talk of their Pigmees too, here is a Pigmees of Wales now; set forth another Pigmees by him!
WO. Aw Diesus! what a bravely company is here? This's a finely Haull indeed!
What a deal of fine candle it is?
I, peace; let his Madestee hear the Music.
Blémae yr Brenin.
Docko ve.
Diesus blesse'him; Saint Davy blesse'him. I bring my boy o'my back ten mile here to loog upon him: Loog Hullin, loog Hullin, spewch humma ven nayd Dumma braveris: you s'all hear him play too.
Peace, no more pradling; begin set him down.
I'Is not come here to talk of Brut,
from whence the Welsh does take his root;
Nor tell long pedigree of Prince Camber,
whose lineage would fill aull this Chamber;
Nor sing the deeds of old Saint Davy,
the ursip of which would fill a Navy.
But hark you me now, for a liddell tales
s'all make a gread deal to the credit of Wales;
In which we'll toudg your ears,
with the praise of her thirteen S'eeres;
And make you as glad, and merry
as fourteen pot of Perrie.
Still, still we'll toudg your ears with the praise, etc.
'tIs true, was wear him Jerkin freeze,
but what is that? we have store of s'eize,
And Got his plenty of Goat's milk
that cell him well, will buy him silk
Enough to make him fine to quarrel
At Hereford-sizes in new apparel;
And get him as much green Melmet perhaps,
s'all give it a face to his Monmouth cap.
But than the ore of Lemster,
By got is never a Sempster;
That when he is spun, over did,
Yet match him with her third
Still, still, etc.
AVll this's the backs now, let us tell ye,
of some provisions for the belly:
As Cid, and Goat, and great Goat's mother,
and Runt, and Cow, and good Cowes Uther.
And once but taste o'the Welse-mutton,
your Englis-s'eep's not worth a button.
And than for your Fiss, s'all shoose it your diss.
look but about, and there is a Trout.
A Salmon, Cor, or Chevin,
Will feed you six, or seven,
As taull man as ever swagger,
With Welse-hooke, or long dagger.
Still, still, etc.
But aull this while was never think
a word in praise of our Welsh drink,
Yet for aull that, is a cup of Bragat,
all England S'eere, may cast his Cabat.
And what you say to Ale of Webley,
toudge him as well, you'll praise him trebly,
As well as Metheglin, or Sidar, or Meath,
S'all S'ake it your dagger quite out o'the seath.
And Oat-cake of Guarthenion,
With a goodly Leek, or Onion,
To give as sweet a Rellis
As ere did Harper, Ellis.
Still, still, etc.
ANd yet, is nothing now aull this,
if of our Musics we do miss;
Both Harps, and Pipes too; and the Crowd,
must aull come in and talk aloud,
As loud as Bangu, Davies bell,
of which is no doubt you have here tell,
As well as our louder Wrexham, Organ,
and rumbling Rocks in S'eere Glamorgan;
Where look but in the ground there,
And you s'all see a sound there,
That put him aull together,
Is sweet as measure pedder.
Still, still, etc.
AV, but what say you should it shance too,
that we should leap it in a Dance too,
And make it you as great a pleasure,
if but your eyes be now at leisure;
As in your ears s'all leave a laughter,
to last upon you six days after?
Ha! wella-goe too, let us try to do
as your old Britton, things to be writ on.
Come put on other looks now,
And lay away your hooks too;
And though yet you ha' no pump sirs,
Let'hem hear that you can jump sirs.
Still, still, etc.
Speak it your conscience now; did your Ursip ever see such a song in your days;' is not as finely a tunes as a man would wiss to put in his ears.
Come, his Madestee s'all hear better to your Dance.
Haw, well danced, very well danced.
Well played Howell, well played Rheese: Dawharry vellhee; well danced i'faith.
Good boys, good boys; bold, and Prittan, bold, and Prittan.
Is not better this now than Pigmies? this is men, this is no monsters, and you mark him: Well cawl forth you Goats now, your Ursip s'all see a properly natural devise come from the Welsh Mountains; Is no Tuns, nor no Bottils: Stand by there, s'ow his 'Ursip the Hills, was dronkenry in his eyes that make that devise in my mind. But now, marg, marg your Ursip I pray you now, and you s'all see natures and propriedies; the very beasts of Wales s'all do more than your men pit in bottills, and barrills, there was a tale of a tub i'faith.' Is the Goatheard and his dog, and his son, and his wife make musics to the Goats as they come from the Hills; give 'em rooms, give 'em rooms, now the cym: The elderly Goats is indifferently grave at first, because of his beard, and only tread it the measures; bit you will see him pit of his gravities by and by well enough, and frisk it as fine as ere a Kid on'em aull. The Welsh Goat is an excellent dancer by birth, that is written of him, and of as wisely carriage, and comely behaviours a beast (for his footing especially) as some one or two man, God bless him.
A haul, a haul; come a haul, Au vellhee.
Nay, and your Madestee bid the Welsh Goats welcome; The Welsh Wences s'all sing your praises, and dance your healths too.
AW, God bless it our good King S'ames,
His Wife, and his S ildrens, and aull his Reams,
And aull his 'ursipfull S'istice of peace about him,
And sand that his Court be never without him.
Owe, that her would come down into Wales,
Her s'ud be very welcome to Welsh Alice
I have a Cow,
And I have a hen;
S'all give it milk,
And eggs for aull his men.
It self s'all have venison, and other Sere,
And may it be sterved, that steal him his Deer,
there, there, and every where.
Cym dance now, let us hear your dance, dance.
Ha! well played Ales.
For the Honour of Wales.
DIggon. Enough, enough, Diggon, well now aull the absurdities is removed and cleared; the rest and'please your Grace s'all tarry still, and go on as it was; Virtue, and Pleasure was well enough, indifferently well enough: Only we will entreat Pleasure to cym out of Driffimdore, that is the Gilded Valley, or Gelthleedore, that is the Golden Grove, and is in Care Marden the Welsh Garden.' Is a thousand place in Wales as finely places as the Esperides every crumb of him: Merlin was borne there too, put we would not make him rise now and wake him, because we have his Prophecies already of your Madestee's name to as good purpose, as if he were here in presence, Pod hy geller Evan?
You will still pit your self to these plunses, you mean his Madestees Anagrams of Charles James Stuart.
I that is Claims Arthur's Seat, which is as much as to say, your Madestee s'ud be the first King of gread Prittan, and sit in Cadier Arthur, which is Arthur's Chair, as by God's blessing you do: And than your Son Master S'harles his, how do you cawl him? is Charles Stuart, calls true hearts, that is us, he calls us, the Welsh Nation to be ever at your service, and love you, and honour you, which we pray you understand it his meaning. And that the Musicians yonder, are so many Brittis' bards that sing o'pen the Hills to let out the Prince of Wales, and his Welsh friends to you, and all is done.
Very homely done it is I am well assured, if not very rudely: But it is hoped your Madestee will not interpret the honour, merits, love, and affection of so noble a portion of your people, by the poverty of these who have so imperfectly uttered it: You will rather for their saks, who are to come in the name of Wales, my Lord the Prince, and the others; pardon what is past, and remember the Cyntrie has always been fruitful of loyal hearts to your Majesty; a very garden and seed plot of honest minds and men: What lights of learning hath Wales sent forth for your Schools? What industrious Studients of your Laws? what able Ministers of your Justice? whence hath the Crown in all times better servitors, more liberal of their lives and fortunes? where hath your Court or Council (for the present) more noble ornaments or better aids? I am glad to see it, and to speak it, and though the Nation be said to be unconquered,, and most loving liberty, yet it was never mutinous (and please your Majesty;) but stout, valiant, courteous, hospitable, temperate, ingenious, capable of all good Arts, most lovingly constant, charitable, great Antiquaries, Religious preservers of their Gentry, and Genealogy, as they are zealous and knowing in Religion.
In a word, It is a Nation bettered by prosperity so far, as to the present happiness it enjoys under your most sacred Majesty, it wishes nothing to be added, but to see it perpetual in You, and your Issue.