THus, thus, begin the yearly rites
Are due to PAN on these bright nights;
His Morn now riseth, and invites
To sports, to dances, and delights:
All Envious, and Profane away,
This is the Shepherd's Holiday.
Strew, strew, the glad and smiling ground
With every flower, yet not confounded
The Primrose drop, the Springs own spouse,
Bright Dayes-eyes, and the lips of Cows,
The Garden-star, the Queen of May,
The Rose, to crown the Holiday.
Drop, drop you Violets, change your hues,
Now read, now pale, as Lovers use,
And in your death go out as well,
As when you lived unto the smell:
That from your odour all may say,
This is the Shepherd's Holiday.
Well done my pretty ones, rain Roses still,
Until the last be drapt: Than hence: and-fill
Your fragrant prickles for a second shower,
Bring Corn-flag, Tulips, and Adonis' flower,
Fair Oxe-eye, Goldy-locks, and Columbine,
Pinks, Goulands, King-cups, and sweet Sops-in-wine,
Blue Harebells, Pagles, Pansies, Calaminth,
Flower-gentle, and the faire-haired Hyacinth,
Bring rich Carnations, Floures-de-luce, Lilies,
The chequed, and purple-ringed Daffodillies,
Bright Crowne-imperiall, Kings-speare, Holyhocks,
Sweet Venus' Navel, and soft Lady-smocks,
Bring too, some branches forth of Daphne's hair,
And gladdest myrtle for these posts to wear
With Spikenard weaved, and Marjoram between,
And stared with yellow-golds, and Meadows Queen,
That when the Altar, as it aught is dressed,
Moore odour come not from the Phoenix nest;
The breadth thereof Panchaia may envy,
The colours China, and the light the sky.
Room for an old Trophy of Time; a Son of the sword, a Servant of Mars, the Minion of the Muses, and a Master of Fence. One that hath shown his quarters, and played his prizes at all the games of Greece in his time; as Fencing, Wrestling, Leaping, Dancing, what not? And hath now ushered hither by the light of my longsword certain bold Boys of Boeotia, who are come to challenge the Arcadians at their own sports, call them forth on their own holiday, and Dance them down on their own Greene-swarth.
'Tis boldly attempted, and must be a Baeotian enterprise by the face of it, from all the parts of Greece else, especially at this time when the best, and bravest spirits of Arcadia, called together by the excellent Arcas, are yonder sitting about the Fountain of light, in consultation of what honours they may do the great Pan by increase of anniversary rites fitted to the Music of his peace.
Peace to thy Pan, and mum to thy Music, Swain; There is a Tinker of Thebes a coming, called Epam, with his kettle will make all Arcadia ring of him; What are your sports for the purpose? say, if singing, you shall be sung down, if dancing, danced down. There is no more to be done with you, but know what; which it is; and you are in smoke, gone, vapoured, vanished, blown, and (as a man would say) in a word of two syllables, Nothing.
This is short, though not so sweet. Surely the better part of the solemnity here will be dancing.
Enough; They shall be met with instantly in their own sphere, the sphere of their own activity a dance. But by whom, expect: No Cynaetheian, nor Satyrs; but (as I said) Boys of Boeotia; things of Thebes, (the Town is ours, Shepherd) mad merry Greeks', Lads of life, that have no gall in us, but all air and sweetness. A Tooth-drawer is our Foreman, that if there be but a bitter tooth in the company, it may be called out at a twitch; he doth command any man's teeth out of his head upon the point of his Poniard; or tickles them forth with his riding rod: He draws teeth a horseback in full speed, yet he will dance a foot, he hath given his word: He is yeoman of the mouth to the whole Brotherhood, and is charged to see their gums be clean, and their breath sweet, at a minute's warning. Than comes my learned Theban, the Tinker I told you of, with his kettle Drum (before and after) a Master of Music, and a man of metal; He beats the march to the tune of Ticklefoot, Pam, pam, pam, brave Epam with a nondas. That's the strain.
A high one.
Which is followed by the trace, and tract of an excellent Juggler, that can juggle with every joint about him, from head to heel. He can do tricks with his toes, wind silk, and thread Pearl with them, as nimble a fine fellow of his feet, as his hands: For there is a noble Corn-cutter his companion, hath so pared, and finified them—. Indeed, he hath taken it into his care, to reform the feet of all, and fit all their footing to a form; only ones play-foot in the company, and he is a Bellows-mender, allowed who hath the looking to of all their lungs by patent, and by his place is to set that leg afore still, and with his puufs keeps them in breath during pleasure; A Tinder-box-man to strike new fire into them at every turn, and where he spies any brave spark that is in danger to go out, ply him with a match presently.
A most politic provision.
Nay, we have made our provisions beyond example, I hope. For to these there is annexed a Clock-keeper, a grave person, as Time himself, who is to see that they all keep time to a nick, and move every elbow in order, every knee in compass. He is to wind them up, and draw them down as he sees cause; Than is there a subtle shrewd-bearded Sir, that hath been a Politician, but is now a maker of Mousetraps, a great Engineer yet; and he is to catch the Lady's favours in the Dance with certain cringes he is to make; and to bait their benevolence. Nor can we doubt of the success, for we have a Prophet amongst us of that peremptory pate, a Tailor, or master Fashioner, that hath found it out in a painted cloth, or some old hanging (for those are his Library) that we must conquer in such a time, and such a half time, therefore bids us go on cross-legged, or however thread the needles of our own happiness, go throughstitch with all, unwind the clew of our cares, he hath taken measure of our minds, and will fit our fortune to our footing. And to better assure us; at his own charge, brings his Philosopher with him, a a great Clerk, who (they say) can writ, and it is shrewdly suspected but he can read too: And he is to take the whole Dances from the foot by brachygraphy, and so make a memorial, if not a map of the business. Come forth lads, and do your own turns.
How like you this Shepherd? was not this gear gotten on a holiday?
Faith, your folly may deserve pardon, because it hath delighted: But, beware of presuming, or how you offer comparison with persons so near Deities. Behold where they are, that are now forgiven you, whom should you provoke again with the like, they will justly punish that with anger, which they now dismiss with contempt, Away.
And come you prime Arcadians forth, that taught
By PAN the rites of true society,
From his loud Music, all your manners wrought
And made your Commonwealth a harmony
Commending so to all posterity.
Your innocence from that fair Fount of light
As still you sit without the injury
Of any rudeness, Folly can, or spite:
Dance from the top of the Lycaean mountain
Down to this valley, and with nearer eye
Enjoy, what long in that illumined Fountain
You did far of, but yet with wonder spy.
1. Of PAN we sing, the best of Singers Pan
That taught us swains, how first to tune our lays,
And on the pipe more airs than Phoebus can.
CHO. Hear O you groves, and hills resound his praise.
2. Of Pan we sing, the best of Leaders, Pan
That leads the Nayad's, and the Dryad's forth;
And to their dances more than Hermes can.
Hear O you groves, and hills, resound his worth.
3. Of Pan we sing, the best of Hunters, Pan
That drives the Heart to seek unused ways,
And in the chase more than Sylvanus can,
Hear, O you groves, and hills resound his praise.
4. Of Pan we sing, the best of Shepherds, Pan,
That keeps our stocks, and us, and both leads forth
To better pastures than great Pales can:
Hear O you groves, and hills resound his worth.
And while his powers, and praises thus we sing
The Valleys let rebound, and all the rivers ring.
PAN is our All, by him we breath, we live,
We move, we are; 'Tis he our lambs doth rear,
Our flocks doth bless, and from the store doth give
The warm and finer fleeces that we wear.
He keeps away all heats, and colds,
Drives all diseases from our folds:
Makes every where the spring to devil,
The Ewes to feed, their udders swell;
But if he frown, the sheep (alas)
The Shepherds whither, and the grass.
Strive, strive, to please him than by still increasing thus
The rites are due to him, who doth all right for us.
If yet, if yet
Pan's orgies you will further fit,
See where the silver-footed Fayes do sit,
The Nymphs of wood and water;
Each trees, and Fountain's daughter,
Go take them forth, it will be good
To see some wave it like a wood,
And others wind it like a flood;
In springs,
And rings,
Till the applause it brings,
Wakes Echo from her seat,
The closes to repeat.
(EACH. The closes to repeat)
Echo the truest Oracle on ground,
Though nothing but a sound.
(EACH. Though nothing but a sound.)
Beloved of Pan, the Valleys Queen
(EACH. The Valleys Queen)
And often heard, though never seen,
(EACH. Though never seen.)
Room, room there: where are you Shepherd? I am come again with my second part of my bold Bloods, the brave Gamesters: who assure you by me, that they perceive no such wonder in all is done here, but that they dare adventure another trial. They look for some sheepish devises here in Arcadia, not these, and therefore a hall, a hall they demand.
Nay, than they are past pity, let them come, and not expect the anger of a Deity to pursue them, but meet them. They have their punishment with their fact. They shall be sheep.
O spare me, by the law of Nations, I am but their Ambassador.
You speak in time Sir.
Now let them return with their solide heads, and carry their stupidity into Boeotia, whence they brought it, with an emblem of themselves, and their Country. This is too pure an air for so gross Brains.
End you the rites, and so be eased
Of these, and than great Pan is pleased.
Great Pan the Father of our peace, and pleasure,
Who giv'st us all this leisure,
Hear what thy hallowd troop of Herdsmen pray
For this their Holiday,
And how their vows to Thee, they in Lycaeum pay.
So may our Ewes receive the mounting Rams,
And we bring thee the earliest of our Lambs:
So may the first of all our fells be thine,
And both the beestning of our Goats, and Kine
As thou our folds dost still secure,
And keep'st our fountains sweet and pure
Driv'st hence the Wolf, the Toad, the Brock,
Or other vermin from the flock.
That we preserved by Thee, and thou observed by us
May both live safe in shade of thy loved Maenalus.
Now each return unto his Charge,
And though to day you have lived at large,
And well your flocks have fed their fill,
Yet do not trust your hirelings still.
See, yond they go, and timely do
The office you have put them to,
But if you often give this leave
Your sheep, and you they will deceive.