THis Rise is made, yet! and we now stand, ranked,
To view about us, all that were above us!
Naught hinders now our prospect, all are even,
We walk upon a Level. Mortimer
Is a great Lord of late, and a new thing!—
At what a divers price, do divers men
Act the same things! Another might have had
Perhaps the Hurdle, or at lest the Axe,
For what I have this Crownet, Robes, and Wax.
There is a Fate, that flies with towering spirits
Home to the mark, and never checks at conscience.
Poor plodding Priests, and preaching Friars may make
Their hollow Pulpits, and the empty Isles
Of Church's ring with that round word: But we
That draw the subtle, and more piercing air,
In that sublimed region of Court,
Know all is good, we make so, and go on
Secured by the prosperity of our crimes.
To day, is Mortimer made Earl of March.
For what? For that, the very thinking it
Would make a Citizen start! some politic Tradesman
Curl with the Caution of a Constable!
But I, who am not common Council man,
Knew, injuries of that dark nature done
Were to be throughly done, and not be left
To fear of a revenge. theyare light offences
Which admit that. The great ones get above it.
Man doth not nurse a deadlier piece of folly
To his high temper, and brave soul, than that
Of fancying goodness, and a seal to live by
So differing from man's life. As if with Lions,
Bears, Tigers, Wolves, and all those beasts of Prey,
He would affect to be a Sheep! Can man
Neglect what is, so, to attain what should be,
As rather he will call on his own ruin,
Than work t' assure his safety? I should think
When 'mongst a world of bad, none can be good,
(I mean so absolutely good, and perfect,
As our religious Confessors would have us)
It is enough, we do decline the rumour
Of doing monstrous things: And, yet, if those
Were of emolument, unto our ends,
Even of those, the wiseman will make friends
For all the brand, and safely do the ill,
As Usurers rob, or our Physicians kill.
My Lord! sweet Mortimer!
My Q. my Mistress!
My Sovereign! nay, my Goddess! and my Juno!
What name, or title, as a mark of Power
Upon me, should I give you?
Isabel,
Your Isabel, and you my Mortimer:
Which are the marks of Parity, not power
And these are titles, best become our love.
Can you fall under those?
Yes, and be happy.
Walk forth, my loved, and gentle Mortimer,
And let my longing eyes enjoy their feast,
And fill of thee; my faire-shaped, Godlike man:
Thou art a banquet unto all my Senses;
Thy form doth feast mine eye, thy voice mine ear,
Thy breath, my smell, thy every kiss my taste;
And softness of thy skin, my very touch:
As if I felt it dactile through my blood.
I ne'er was reconciled to these robes,
This garb of England, till I saw thee in them.
Thou makest, they seem not boisterous, nor rude,
Like my rough haughty Lords the Engleterre,
With whom I have so many years been troubled.
But now redeemed, and set at liberty,
Queen of yourself, and them.