NOT State-affairs, nor any politic Club,
Pretend we in our Tale, here, of a Tub.
But acts of Clowns and Constables, to day
Stuffe out the Scenes of our ridiculous Play.
A Cooper's wit, or some such busy Spark,
Illumining the high Constable, and his Clerk.
And all the Neighbourhood, from old Records,
Of antic Proverbs, drawn from Whitson-Lord's,
And their Authorities, at Wakes and Ales,
With country precedents, and old Wives Tales;
We bring you now, to show what different things
The Coats of Clowns, are from the Courts of Kings.
NOw o' my faith, old Bishop Valentine,
You ' ha' brought us nipping weather: Februere
Doth cut and shear; your day, and diocese
Are very cold. All your Parishioners;
As well your Layicks, as your Choristers,
Had need to keep to their warm Featherbeds,
If they be sped of loves: this is no season,
To seek new Makes in; though Sir Hugh of Pancras,
Be hither come to Totten, on intelligence,
To the young Lord o' the Manor, Squire Tripoli,
On such an errand as a Mistress is.
What, Squire! I say?
I should call him too:
Sir Peter Tub was his father, a Salt-peeter-man;
Who left his Mother, Lady Tub of Totten-
Court, here, to revel, and keep open house in;
With the young Squire her son, and's Governor Basket-
Hilts, both by sword, and dagger: Domine,
Armiger Tub, Squire Tripoli, Expergiscere.
I dare not call aloud, jest she should hear me;
And think I conjured up the spirither, son,
In Priests-lack- latine: O she is jealous
Of all mankind for him.
Cannon, is't you?
The Vicar of Pancras, Squire Tub! wa ' hoh!
I come, I stoop unto the call; Sir Hugh!
He knows my lure is from his Love: fair Audrey,
Th'high Constables Daughter of Kentish Town, here Mr.
Tobias Turf.
What news of him?
He has waked me,
An hour before I would, Sir. And my duty,
To the young worship of Totten-Court, Squire Tripoli;
Who hath my heart, as I have his: your Mrs.
Is to be made away from you, this morning,
Saint Valentine's day: there are a knot of Clowns,
The Counsel of Finsbury, so they are y-styled,
Met at her Fathers; all the wise o'th' hundred;
Old Basi ' Clench of Hamsted, petty Constable;
In-and-In Medlay, Cooper of Islington,
And Headborough; with loud Topan the Tinker,
Or Mettall-man of Belsise, the Thirdborough:
And D'ogenes Scriben, the great Writer of Chalcot.
And why all these?
Sir to conclude in Counsel,
A Husband, or a Make for Mrs. Audrey;
Whom they have named, and pricked down, Clay of Kilborne,
A tough young fellow, and a Tile-maker.
And what must he do?
Cover her, they say:
And keep her warm Sir: Mistress Audrey Turf,
Last night did draw him for her Valentine;
Which chance, it hath so taken her Father, and Mother,
(Because themselves drew so, on Valentine's Eve
Was thirty year) as they will have her married
To day by any means; they have sent a Messenger
To Kilborne, post, for Clay; which when I knew,
I posted with the like to worshipful Tripoli,
The Squire of Totten: and my advice to cross it.
What is't Sir Hugh?
Where is your Governor Hilts?
Basquet must do it.
Basquet shall be called:
Hilts, can you see to rise?
Ch'm not blind Sir
With too much light.
Open your t'other eye,
And view if it be day.
I can spy that
At's little a hole, as another, through a Millstone.
He will ha' the last word, though he talk Bilke for't.
Bilke? what's that?
Why nothing, a word signifying
Nothing; and borrowed here to express nothing.
A fine device!
Yes, till we hear a finer.
What's your device now, Cannon Hugh?
In private.
Lend it your ear; I will not trust the air with it;
Or scarce my Shire; my Cassock sha' not know it;
If I thought it did, I'll burn it.
That's the way,
You ha' thought to get a new one,
Is't worth it?
Let's hear it first.
Than harken, and receive it.
This 'tis Sir, do you relish it?
If Hilts
Be close enough to carry it; there's all.
It i'no sand? nor Buttermilk? If't be,
Ich'am no zive or watering pot, to draw
Knots i' your ' casions. If you trust me, so:
If not, praforme it your zelves.' Cham no man's wife,
But resolute Hilts: you'll vind me i'the Buttery.
A testy Clown: but a tender Clown, as wool:
And melting as the Wether in a Thaw:
he'll weep you, like all April: But he ' ull roar you
Like middle March afore: He will be as mellow,
And tipsy too, as October: And as grave,
And bound up like a frost (with the new year)
In Ianuary; as rigid, as he is rustic.
You know his nature, and describe it well;
I'll leave him to your fashioning.
Stay, Sir Hugh;
Take a good Angel with you, for your Guide:
And let this guard you homeward, as the blessing,
To our devise.
I thank you Squires-worship,
Most humbly (for the next, for this I am sure of.)
O for a Choir of these voices, now,
To chime in a man's pocket, and cry chink!
One doth not chirp: it makes no harmony.
Grave Justice Bramble, next must contribute;
His charity must offer at this wedding:
I'll bid more to the Basin, and the Bride-ale;
Although but one can bear away the Bride.
I smile to think how like a Lottery
These Weddings are. Clay hath her in possession;
The Squire he hopes to circumvent the Tile-Kill:
And now, if Justice Bramble do come of,
'Tis two to one but Tub may lose his bottom.
Why, 'tis thirty year, e'en as this day now:
Zin Valentine's day, of all days cursined, look you;
And the same day o' the month, as this Zin Valentine,
Or I am vowly deceived.
That our High Constable,
Mr. Tobias Turf, and his Dame were married.
I think you are right. But what was that Zin Valentine?
Did you ever know 'em, Goodman Clench? Cle. Zin Valentine,
He was a deadly Zin, and dwelled at Highgate,
As I have heard, but it was avore my time:
He was a Cooper too, as you are. Medlay,
An In-an-In: A woundy, brag young vellow:
As th' port went o'hun, than, and i' those days.
Did he not writ his name, Sim Valentine?
Vor I have met no Sin in Finsbury books;
And yet I have writ 'em six or seven times over.
O' you must look for the nine deadly Sims,
I' the Church books, Doge '; not the ' high Constables;
Nor i' the Counties: Zure, that same Zin Valentine,
He was a stately Zin: an he were a Zin,
And kept ' brave house.
At the Cock and Hen, in Highgate.
You ha' ' freshed my rememory well in't! neighbour Pan:
He had a place, in last King Harrie's time,
Of sorting all the young couples; joining 'em:
And putting 'em together; which is, yet,
Praformed, as on his day— Zin Valentine;
As being the Zin o' the shire, or the whole County:
I am old Rivet still, and bear a brain,
The Clench, the Varrier, and true Leech of Hamsted.
You are a shrewd antiquity, neighbour Clench!
And a great Guide to all the Parishes!
The very Bel-wether of the Hundred, here,
As I may zay. Mr. Tobias Turf,
High Constable, would not miss you, for of score unus,
When he do ' scorse of the great Charty to us.
What's that, a Horse? Can scorse naught but a Horse?
I near read o' hun, and that in Smith-veld Chartie:
I' the old Fabians Chronicles: nor I think
In any new. He may be a Giant there,
For I aught I know.
You should do well to study
Records, Fellow Ball, both Law and Poetry.
Why, all's but writing, and reading, is it Scriben?
An't be any more, it's mere cheating zure.
Ulat cheating: all your Law, and Poets too.
Mr. High Constable comes.
I'll zayed avore ' hun.
What's that, makes you'all so merry, and loud, Sirs, ha'?
I could ha' heard you to my privy walk.
A Contervarsie, 'twixt your two learned men here:
Annibal Puppy says, that Law and Poetry
Are both flat cheating; All's but writing and reading,
He says, be't verse or prose.
I think in conzience,
He do ' zay true? Who is't do thwart ' un, ha'?
Why my friend Scriben, and't please your worship.
Who D'oge? my D'ogenes? a great Writer, marry!
he'll face me down, me myself sometimes,
That verse goes upon veete, as you and I do:
But I can give 'un the hearing; zit me down;
And laugh at ' un; and to myself conclude,
The greatest Clerks, are not the wisest men
Ever. Here they ' are both! What Sirs, disputin,
And holdin Arguments of verse, and prose?
And no green thing afore the Door, that shows,
Or speaks a wedding?
Those were verses now,
Your worship spoke, and run upon vive feet.
Feet, urom my mouth, D'oge? Leave your ' zurd uppinions:
And get me in some boughs.
Let 'em ha' leaves first.
There's nothing green but Bays, and Rosemary.
And they're too good for strew, your Maids say.
You take up ' dority still, to vouch against me.
All the twelve smocks i'the house, zur, are your Authors.
Get some fresh hay than, to lay underfoot:
Some Holly and Ivy, to make vine the posts:
Is't not Son Valentine's day? and Mistress Audrey,
Your young Dame to be married? I wonder Clay
Should be so tedious: he's to play Son Valentine!
And the Clown sluggard's not come fro' Kilborne yet?
Do you call your Son i' Law Clown, and't please your worship?
Yes, and vor worship too; my neighbour Medlay.
A Midlesex Clowns and one of Finsbury:
They were the first Colon's o' the kingdom here:
The Primitory Colon's; my D'ogenes says.
Where's D'ogenes, my Writer now? What were those
You told me, D'ogenes, were the first Colon's
O' the Country? that the Romans brought in here?
The Coloni. Sir, Colonus is an Inhabitant:
A Clown original: as you'd zay a Farmer, a tiler o'th' Earth,
E'er sin ' the Romans planted their Colony first,
Which was in Midlesex.
Why so, I thank you hearty, good D'ogenes, you ha' zertified me.
I had rather be an ancient Colon, (as they zay) a Clown of Midlesex:
A good rich Farmer, or high Constable.
I'd play hun ' gain a Knight, or a good Squire;
Or Gentleman of any other County
I' the Kingdom.
Out cept Kent, for there they landed
All Gentlemen, and came in with the Conqueror,
Mad Iulius Caesar; who built Dover-Castle:
My Ancestor To Pan, beaten the first Ketle-drum,
Avore ' hun, here urom Dover on the March:
Which piece of monumental copper hangs
Up, scoured, at Hammersmith yet; for there they came
Over the Thames, at a low water mark;
Vore either London, I, or Kingston Bridge—
I doubt were kursind.
Zee, who is here: Iohn Clay●
Son Valentine, and Bridegroom! ha you zeene
Your Valentine-Bride yet, sin ' you came? Iohn Clay?
Not wiss. I lighted, I, but now i' the yard:
Puppy ha' scarce unswadled my legs yet.
What? wispes'o ' your wedding day, son? This is right
Originous Clay: and Clay o' Kilborne too!
I would ha' had boots o' this day, zure, son Iohn.
I did it to save charges: we must dance,
O this day, zure: and who can dance in boots?
Not, I got on my best straw-coloured stockings,
And swaddeld 'em over to save charges; I.
And his new chamois Doublet too with points;
I like that yet: and his long sawsedge-hose,
Like the Commander of four smoking Tile-kils,
Which he is Captain of; Captain of Kilborne:
Clay with his hat turned up, o' the leer side, too:
As if he would leap my Daughter yet ere night,
And spring a new Turf to the old house:
Look, and the wenches ha' not vound un out;
And do parzent un, with a van of Rosemary,
And Bays; to vill a Bow-pot, trim the head
Of my best vore-horse: we shall all ha' Bridelaces,
Or points, I zee; my Daughter will be valiant;
And prove a very Mary Anbry i' the business.
They zaid, your worship had served her to Squire Tub
Of Totten-Court here; all the hundred rings on't.
A Tale of a Tub, Sir; a mere tale of a Tub.
Lend it no ear I pray you: The Squire Tub
Is a fine man, but he is too fine a man,
And has a Lady Tub too to his Mother:
I'll deal with none o' these vine silken Tubs.
Iohn Clay, and Cloath-breech for my money, and Daughter.
Here comes another old Boy too, vor his colours
Will stroke down my wife's udder of purses, empty
Of all her milk money, this Winter Quarter;
Old Father Rosin, the chief Minstrel here:
Chief Minstrel too of High gate: she has hired him
And all, his two Boys for a day and a half,
And now they come for Ribbanding, and Rosemary;
Give 'em enough Girls, give 'em enough, and take it
Out in his tunes anon.
I'll ha' Tom Tiler,
For our Iohn Clay's sake, and the Tile kills, zure.
And I the jolly Joiner, for mine own sake.
I'll ha' the jovial Tinker for To. Pan's sake.
we'll all be jovy this day, vor son Valentine.
My sweet son John's sake.
There's another reading now:
My Mr. reads it Son, and not Sin Valentine.
Nor Zim: And he is i' the right: He is high Constable.
And who should read above un, or avore ' hun?
Son Iohn shall bid us welcome all, this day:
we'll zerve under his colours: Lead the troop Iohn,
And Puppy; see the Bells ring. Press all noises
Of Finsbury, in our name; D'ogenes Scriben
Shall draw a score of warrants vor the business.
Does any wight parzent her Majesty's person,
This Hundred, 'bove the high Constable?
Not, no.
Use our Authority than, to the utmost on't.
So, you are sure Sir to prevent 'em all;
And throw a block i' the Bridegroom's way, Iohn Clay,
That he will hardly leap over.
I conceive you,
Sir Hugh; as if your Rhetoric would say,
Whereas the Father of her is a Turf,
A very superficies of the earth;
He aims no higher, than to match in Clay;
And there hath pitched his rest.
Right Justice Bramble;
You ha' the winding wit, compassing all.
Subtle Sir Hugh, you now are i' the wrong,
And err with the whole Neighbourhood, I must tell you;
For you mistake my name. Justice Preamble
I writ myself; which with the ignorant Clowns, here
(Because of my profession of the Law,
And place o' the peace) is taken to be Bramble.
But all my warrants Sir, do run Preamble:
Richard Preamble.
Sir I thank you for't.
That your good worship, would not let me run
Longer in error but would take me up thus—
You are my learned, and canonic neighbour:
I would not have you stray; but the incorrigible
Knot-headed beast, the Clowns, or Constables,
Still let them graze; eat Salads; chew the Cud:
All the Towne-musicke will not move a log.
The Beetle and Wedges will, where you will have 'hem.
True, true Sir Hugh, here comes Miles Metaphor,
My Clerk: He is the man shall carry it, Cannon,
By my instructions.
He will do't add unguem,
Miles Metaphor: He is a pretty fellow.
I love not to keep shadows, or halfe-wits,
To foil a business. Metaphor! you ha' seen
A King ride forth in state.
Sir that I have:
King Edward our late Liege, and sovereign Lord:
And have set down the pomp.
Therefore I asked you.
Ha' you observed the Messengers o' the Chamber?
What habits they were in?
Yes; Minor Coats.
Unto the Guard, a Dragon, and a Greyhound,
For the supporters of the Arms.
Well marked;
You know not any of 'hem?
Here's one dwells
In Marrowbone.
Ha' you acquaintance with him?
To borrow his coat an hour?
Or but his badge,
'Twill serve: A little thing he wears on his breast.
His coat, I say, is of more authority:
Borrow his coat for an hour. I do love
To do all things completely, Cannon Hugh;
Borrow his coat, Miles Metaphor, or nothing.
The Taberd of his office, I will call it,
Or the Coat-Armour of his place: and so
Insinuate with him by that Trope—.
I know your powers of Rhetoric, Metaphor.
Fetch him of in a fine figure for his coat I say.
I'll take my leave Sir of your worship too:
Because I may expect the issue anon.
Stay my diviner Counsel, take your fee;
We that take fees, allow 'em to our Counsel;
And our prime learned Counsel, double fees:
There are a brace of Angels to support you
I' your foot-walke this frost, for fear of falling;
Or spraying of a point of Matrimony,
When you come at it.
I' your worship's service;
That the exploit is done, and you possessed
Of Mistress Audrey Turf—
I like your project.
And I, of this effect of two to one;
It worketh in my pocket, 'gainst the Squire,
And his half bottom here, of half a piece:
Which was not worth the stepping o'er the stile for:
His Mother has quite marred him: Lady Tub,
She's such a vessel of faeces: all dried earth!
Terra damnata, not a drop of salt!
Or Peter in her! All her Nitre is gone.
Is the Nag ready Marten? call the Squire.
This frosty morning we will take the air,
About the fields: for I do mean to be
Somebodies Valentine, i' my Velvet Gown,
This morning, though it be but a beggar-man.
Why stand you still, and do not call my son?
Madam, if he had couched with the Lamb,
He had no doubt been stirring with the Lark:
But he sat up at Play, and watched the Cock,
Till his first warning chid him of to rest.
Late Watchers are no early Wakers, Madam;
But if your Ladyship will have him called—.
Will have him called? Wherhfore did I, Sir, bid him
Be called, you Weasel, Vermin of an Usher?
You will return your wit to your first stile
Of Marten Polecat, by these stinking tricks,
If you do use 'em: I shall no more call you
Pol-marten, by the title of a Gentleman,
If you go on thus—
I am gone.
Be quick than,
I' your come of: and make amendss you Stote!
Was ever such a Full-mart for an Usher,
To a great worshipful Lady, as myself;
Who, when I heard his name first, Martin Poleat,
A stinking name, and not to be pronounced
In any Lady's presence; my very heart e'en earned, seeing the Fellow
Young, pretty and handsome; being than I say,
A Basket-Carrier, and a man condemned
To the Saltpetre works; made it my suit
To Mr. Peter Tub, that I might change it;
And call him as I do now, by Pol-marten,
To have it sound like a Gentleman in an Office,
And made him mine own Foreman, daily waiter,
And he to serve me thus! Ingratitude!
Beyond the Coarseness yet of any Clownage,
Shown to a Lady! what now, is he stirring?
Stirring betimes out of his bed, and ready.
And comes he than?
No Madam, he is gone.
Gone? whither? ask the Porter: Where's he gone?
I met the Porter, and have asked him for him;
He says he let him forth an hour ago.
An hour ago! what business could he have,
So early? where is his man, grave Basket Hilts?
His Guide, and Governor?
Gone with his Master.
Is he gone too? O that same surly knave,
Is his right hand: and leads my son amiss.
He has carried him to some drinking match, or other:
Pol-marten, I will call you so again;
I'am friends with you now. Go get your horse, and ride
To all the Towns about here, where his haunts are;
And cross the fields to meet, and bring me word;
He cannot be gone far, being a foot.
Be curious to inquire him: and bid Wisp
My woman come, and wait on me. The love
We Mothers bear our Sons, we ha' bought with pain,
Makes us often view them, with too careful eyes,
And overlook 'em with a jealous fear,
Out-fitting Mothers.
How now Wisp? Ha' you
A Valentine yet: I'm taking th'air to choose one.
Fate sand your Ladyship a fit one than.
What kind of one is that?
A proper man,
To please your Ladyship.
Out o' that vanity,
That takes the foolish eye: Any poor creature,
Whose want may need my alms, or courtesy;
I rather wish; so Bishop Valentine,
Left us example to do deeds of Charity;
To feed the hungry; cloth the naked, visit
The weak, and sick; to entertain the poor;
And give the dead a Christian Funeral;
These were the works of piety he did practise,
And bade us imitate; not look for Lovers,
Or handsome Images to please our senses.
I pray thee Wisp, deal freely with me now:
We are alone, and may be merry a little:
Thou art none o' the Court-glories; nor the wonders
For wit, or beauty i' the City: tell me,
What man would satisfy thy present fancy?
Had thy ambition leave to choose a Valentine,
Within the Queen's Dominion, so a subject.
Ye ha' give me a large scope, Madam, I confess,
And I will deal with your Ladyship sincerely:
I'll utter my whole heart to you. I would have him,
The bravest, richest, and the properest man
A Tailor could make up; or all the Poets,
With the Perfumers: I would have him such,
As not another woman, but should spite me:
Three City Ladies should run mad for him:
And Countri-Madams infinite.
You'd spare me,
And let me hold my wits?
I should with you—
For the young Squire, my Master's sake: dispense
A little; but it should be very little.
Than all the Court-wives I'd ha' jealous of me;
As all their husbands jealous of them:
And not a Lawyer's Puss of any quality,
But lick her lips, for a snatch in the Term time.
Come,
Let's walk: we'll hear the rest, as we go on:
You are this morning in a good vein, Dido:
Would I could be as merry. My son's absence
Troubles me not a little: though I seek
These ways to put it of; which will not help:
Care that is entered, once into the breast,
Will have the whole possession, ere it rest.
Son Clay, cheer up, the better leg avore:
This is a veat is once done, and no more.
And than 'tis done vor ever, as they say.
Right! vor a man ha' his hour, and a dog his day.
True neighbour Medlay, ye are still In-and-In.
I would be Mr. Constable, if ' ch' could win.
I zay, Iohn Clay, keep still on his old gate:
Wedding, and hanging, both go at a rate.
Well said Topan: you ha' still the hap to hit
The nail o' the head at a close: I think there ne ver
Marriage was managed with a more avisement,
Than was this marriage, though I say't, that should not;
Especially 'gain ' mine own flesh, and blood;
My wedded Wife. Indeed my Wife would ha' had
All the young Bachelors and Maids, forsooth,
O' the zixe Parishes hereabout: But I
Cried none, sweet Sibyl: none of that gear, I:
It would lick zalt, I told her, by her leave.
Not, three, or voure our wise, choice honest neighbours:
Substantial persons: men that ha' borne office:
And mine own Family, would be enough
To eat our dinner. What? Dear meat's a thief:
I know it by the Butchers, and the Mercat-volke;
Hum drum I cry. No halfe-Oxe in a Pie:
A man that's bid to Bride-ale, if he ha' cake,
And drink enough, he need not veare his stake.
'tis right: he has spoke as true as a Gun; believe it.
Come Sibyl, come: Did not I tell you o' this?
This pride, and muster of women would mar all?
Six women to one Daughter, and a Mother!
The Queen (God save her) ha' no more herself.
Why, if you keep so many, Mr. Turf,
Why, should not all present our service to her?
Your service? good! I think you'll writ to her shortly,
Your very loving and obedient Mother.
Come, sand your Maids of, I will have 'em sent
Home again wife: I love no trains o' Kent,
Or Christendom, as they say.
We will not back,
And leave our Dame.
Why should her worship lack
Her tail of Maids, more than you do of men?
What, mutinin Madge?
Zend back your C'lons again.
And we will vollow.
Else we'll guard our Dame.
I ha' zet the nest of wasps all on a flame.
Come, you are such another Mr. Turf:
A Clod you should be called, of a high Constable:
To let no music go afore your child,
To Church, to cheer her heart up this cold morning.
You are for Father Rosin, and his consort
Of fiddling Boys, the great Feats, and the less:
Because you have entertained 'em all from Highgate.
To show your pomp, you'd ha' your Daughter, and Maids
Dance over the fields like Fays, to Church this frost?
I'll ha' no rondels, I, i' the Queen's paths;
Let 'un scrape the Gut at home, where they ha' filled it
At afternoon.
I'll ha' 'em play at dinner.
She is i' th' right, Sir; vor your wedding dinner
Is starved without the Music.
If the Pies
Come not in piping hot, you ha' lost that Proverb.
I yield to truth: wife are you sussified?
A right good man! when he knows right, he loves it.
And he will know't, and show't too by his place
Of being high Constable, if no where else.
Well over-taken, Gentlemen! I pray you,
Which is the Queen's High Constable among you?
The tallest man: who should be else, do you think?
It is no matter what I think, young Clown:
Your answer favours of the Cart.
How? Cart? and Clown? Do you know whose team you speak to?
Not: nor I care not: Whose Jade may you be?
Jade? Cart? and Clown? O for a lash of whipcord!
Three-knotted cord!
Do you mutter? Sir, snorle this way;
That I may hear, and answer what you say,
With my schoole-dagger, 'bout your Costard Sir.
Look to't, young grouse: I'll lay it on, and sure;
Take't of who's will.
Nay, pray you Gentleman—.
Go too: I will not bate him an ace on't.
What? Rowle-powle? Mapleface? All fellows?
Do you hear friend, I would wish you, vor your good,
Tie up your brinded Bitch there, your don rusty
Pannyer-hilt poinard: and not vex the youth
With showing the teeth of it. We now are going
To Church, in way of matrimony, some on us:
Tha ' rung all in a'ready. If it had not,
All the horn beasts are grazing i' this close,
Sold not ha' pull ' me hence, till this Ash-plant
Had rung noon o' your pate, Mr. Broome-beard.
That would I feign zee, quoth the blind George
Of Holloway: Come Sir.
O their naked weapons!
For the passion of man, hold Gentleman, and Puppy.
Murder, O Murder!
O my Father, and Mother!
Husband, what do you mean? Son Clay for God's sake—
I charge you in the Queen's name, keep the peace.
Tell me o' no Queen, or Keysar: I must have
A leg, or a haunch of him, ere I go.
But sir,
You must obey the Queen's high Officers.
Why must I, Goodman Must?
You must, an you will.
Gentleman, I'm here for fault, high Constable—
Are you so? what than?
I pray you Sir put up
Your weapons; do, at my request: For him,
On my authority, he shall lie by the heels,
Verbatim continente, an I live.
Out on him for a knave, what a dead fright
He has put me into? Come Audrey, do not shake.
But is not Puppy hurt? nor the t'other man?
Not Bun; but had not I cried Murder, I wiss—
Sweet Goodman Clench, I pray you revise my Mr.
I may not zit i' the stocks, till the wedding be passed
Dame. Mistress Audrey: I shall break the Bridecake else.
Zomething must be, to save authority, Puppy.
Husband—
And Gossip—
Father—
Treat
me not.
It is i' vain. If he lie not by the heels,
I'll lie there for ' hun. I'll teach the Hine,
To carry a tongue in his head, to his subperiors.
This's a wise Constable! where keeps he school?
In Kentish Town, a very survere man.
But as survere as he is; Let me Sir tell him,
He sha' not lay his man by the heels for this.
This was my quarrel: And by his office leave,
If't carry ' hun for this, it shall carry double;
for he shall carry me too.
Breach of man!
He is my chattel, mine own hired goods:
An if you do abet ' un in this matter,
I'll clap you both by the heels, ankle to ankle.
You'll clap a dog of wax as soon, old Blurt?
Come, spare not me, Sir; I am no man's wife:
I care not, I, Sir, not three skips of a Louse for you,
And you were ten tall Constables, not I
Nay, pray you Sir, be not angry; but content:
My man shall make you, what amendss you'll ask ' hun.
Let ' hun mend his manners than, and know his betters:
It's all I ask ' hun: and 'twill be his own;
And's Master's too, another day. I vore ' hun.
As right as a Club, still. Zure this angry man
Speaks very near the mark, when he is pleased.
I thank you Sir, an I meet you at Kentish Town,
I ha' the courtesy o' hundred for you.
Gramercy, good high Constables Hine. But hear you?
Mass: Constable, I have other manner o' matter,
To bring you about, than this. And so it is,
I do belong to one o'the Queen's Captains;
A Gentleman o' the Field, one Captain Thums:
I know not, whether you know ' hun, or no: It may be
You do, and it may be you do not again.
Not, I assure you on my Constable-ship,
I do not know ' hun.
Nor I neither i' faith.
It skills not much; my Captain, and myself,
Having occasion to come riding by, here,
This morning, at the corner of Saint John's wood,
Some mile o' this Town, were set upon
By a sort of country fellows: that not only
Beaten us, but robbed us, most sufficiently;
And bond us to our behaviour, hand and foot;
And so they left us. Now, Don Constable,
I am to charge you in her Majesty's name,
As you will answer it at your peril,
That forthwith you raise Hue and Cry i' the Hundred,
For all such persons as you can dispect,
By the length and breadth, o' your office: vor I tell you,
The loss is of some value, therefore look to't.
As Fortune mend me, now, or any office
Of a thousand pound, if I know what to zay,
Would I were dead; or vaire hanged up at Tyburn,
If I do know what course to take; or how
To turn myself; just at this time too, now,
My Daughter is to bemarried: I'll but go
To Pancridge Church, hard by, and return instantly,
And all my Neighbourhood shall go about it.
Tut, Pancridge me no Pancridge, if you let it
Slip, you will answer it, and your Cap be of wool;
Therefore take heed, you'll feel the smart else, Constable.
Nay, good Sir stay. Neighbours! what think you o' this?
Faith, Man—. Odd precious woman, hold your tongue;
And mind your pigs o' the spit at home; you must
Have Over in every thing. Pray you Sir, what kind
Of fellows were they?
Theev's kind, I ha' told you.
I mean, what kind of men?
Men of our make.
Nay, but with patience, Sir, we that are Officers
Must 'quire the special marks, and all the tokens
Of the despected parties, or perhaps— else,
Be ne'er the ne'er of our purpose in ' prehending 'hem.
Can you tell, what ' apparel any of them wore?
Troth no: there were so many o' hun, all like
So one another: Now I remember me,
There was one busy fellow, was their Leader;
A blunt squat swad, but lower than yourself,
He ' had on a Leather Doublet, with long points.
And a pair of pin'd-up breech's, like pudding bags:
With yellow stockings, and his hat turned up
With a silver Clasp, on his leer side.
By these
Marks it should be Iohn Clay, now bless the man!
Peace, and be naught: I think the woman be phrensick.
Iohn Clay? what's he, good Mistress?
He that shall be
My husband—
How! your husband, pretty one?
Yes, I shall anon be married: That's he.
Passion o' me, undone!
Bless Masters son!
O you are well' prehended: know you me Sir?
No's my record: I never zaw you avore.
You did not? where were your eyes than? out at washing?
What should a man zay? who should he trust
In these days? Hark you Iohn Clay, if you have
Done any such thing, tell troth, and shame the Devil.
Vaith do: my Gossip Turf zaies well to you Iohn.
Speak man, but do not convesse, nor be auraid.
A man is a man, and a beast's a beast, look to't.
I' the name of men, or beasts! what do you do?
Hare the poor fellow out on his five wits,
And seven senses? Do not weep Iohn Clay.
I swear the poor wretch is as guilty from it,
As the Child was, was borne this very morning.
Not, as I am a kyrsin soul, would I were hanged
If ever I— alas I! would I were out
Of my life, so I would I were, and in again—
Nay, Mistress Audrey will say nay to that.
Not, In-and-out? an you were out o' your life,
How should she do for a husband? who should fall
Aboard o' her than, Ball? He's a Puppy?
Not; Hannibal has no breeding: well! I say little;
But hitherto all goes well, pray it prove no better.
Come Father; I would we were married: I am a cold.
Well, Mr. Constable, this your fine Groom here,
Bridegroom, or what Groom else, soe'er he be,
I charge him with the felony; and charge you
To carry him back forthwith to Paddington,
Unto my Captain, who stays my return there:
I am to go to the next Justice of peace,
To get a warrant to raise Hue and Cry,
And bring him, and his fellows all afore ' hun.
Far you well Sir, and look to ' hun I charge you,
As you'll answer it. Take heed; the business
If you defer, may prejudicial you
Moore than you thinke-for, zay I told you so.
Here's a Bride-ale indeed! Ah son Iohn, son Clay!
I little thought you would ha' proved a piece
Of such false metal.
Father, will you believe me?
Would I might never stir i' my new shoes,
If ever I would do so voule a fact.
Well Neighbours, I do charge you to assist me
With ' hun to Paddington. Be he a true man, so:
The better for ' hun. I will do mine office,
An he were my own begotten a thousand times.
Why, do you hear man? Husband? Mr. Turf!
What shall my Daughter do? Puppy, stay here.
Mother, I'll go with you, and with my Father.
Nay, stay sweet Mrs. Audrey: here are none
But one friend (as they zay) desires to speak
A word, or two, cold with you: How do you veele
Yourself this frosty morning?
What ha' you
To do to ask, I pray you? I am a cold.
It seems you are hot, good Mistress Audrey.
You lie; I am as cold as Ice is: Feel else.
Nay, you ha' cooled my courage: I am past it,
I ha' done feeling with you.
Done with me?
I do defy you. So I do, to say
You ha' done with me: you are a saucy Puppy.
O you mistake! I meant not as you mean.
Meant you not knavery; Puppy? Not: not I
Clay meant you all the knavery, it seems,
Who rather, than he would be married to you,
Chose to be wedded to the Gallows first.
I thought he was a dissembler; he would prove
A slippery Merchant i' the frost. He might
Have married one first, and have been hanged after,
If he had had a mind to't. But you men,
Fie on you.
Mistress Audrey, can you vind,
I your heart to fancy Puppy? me poor Ball?
You are disposed to jeer one, Mr. Hannibal.
Pity o' me! the angry man with the beard!
Put on thy hat, I look for no despect.
Where's thy Master?
Mary, he is gone
With the picture of despair, to Paddington.
Pray thee run after ' hun, and tell ' hun he shall
Found out my Captain, lodged at the read- Lion
In Paddington; that's the Inn. Let 'un ask
Vor Captain Thums; And take that for thy pains:
He may seek long enough else. Hi● thee again.
Yes, Sir you'll look to Mrs. Bride the while?
That I will: prithee haste.
What Puppy? Puppy?
Sweet Mistress Bride, he'll come again presently.
Here was no subtle device to get a wench.
This Cannon has a brave pate of his own!
A shaved pate! And a right monger, ye vaith!
This was his plot! I follow Captain Thums?
We robbed in Saint John's wood? I' my t'other hose!
I laugh, to think what a fine fool's finger they have
O this wise Constable, in pricking out
This Captain Thums to his neighbours: you shall see
The Tileman too set fire on his own Kill,
And leap into it, to save himself from hanging.
You talk of a Bride-ale, here was a Bride-ale broke,
I' the nick. Well: I must yet dispatch this Bride,
To mine own master, the young Squire, and than
My task is done. Gen'woman! I ' have in sort
Done you some wrong, but now I'll do you what right
I can: It's true, you are a proper woman;
But to be cast away on such a Clowne-pipe
As Clay; me thinks, your friends are not so wise
As nature might have made 'em; well, go too:
There's better fortune coming toward you,
A● ' you do not deject it. Take a voole's
Counsel, and do not stand i' your own light.
It may prove better than you think for: Look you.
Alas Sir, what is't you would ha' me do?
I'd feign do all for the best, if I knew how.
Forsake not a good turn, when 'tis offered you;
Fair Mistress Audrey, that's your name, I take it.
No Mistress, Sir, my name is Audrey.
Well, so it is, there is a bold young Squire,
The blood of Totten, Tub, and Tripoli—.
Squire Tub, you mean? I know him: he knows me too.
He is in love with you: and more, he's mad for you.
I, so he told me: in his wits, I think.
But he's too fine for me; and has a Lady
Tub to his Mother. Here he comes himself!
O you are a trusty Governor!
What ails you?
You do not know when youare well, I think:
You'd ha' the Calf with the white face, Sir, would you?
I have her for you here; what would you more?
Quietness, Hilts, and hear no more of it.
Not more of it, quoth you? I do not care,
If some on us had not heard so much of't,
I tell you true; A man must carry, and fetch,
Like Bungy's dog for you.
What's he?
A Spaniel.
And scarce be spit i' the mouth for't. A good Dog
Deserves, Sir, a good bone, of a free Master:
But, an your turns be served, the devil a bit
You care for a man after, ere a Lard of you.
Like will to like, i'faith, quoth the scabbed Squire
To th' mangy Knight, when both met in a dish
Of buttered vish. One bad, there's ne'er a good;
And not a barrel better Hearing among you.
Nay Hilts! I pray thee grow not frampul now.
Turn not the bad Cow, after thy good soap.
Our plot hath hitherto ta'en good effect:
And should it now be troubled, or stopped up,
'Twould prove the utter ruin of my hopes.
I pray thee haste to Pancridge, to the Cannon:
And give him notice of our good success;
Will him that all things be in readiness.
Fair Audrey, and myself, will cross the fields,
The nearest path. Good Hilts, make thou some haste,
And meet us on the way. Come gentle Audrey.
Vaith, would I had a few more geances on't:
An you say the word, sand me to Iericho.
Out-cept a man were a Post-horse, I ha' not known
The like on't; yet, an he had kind words,
'Twould never irk ' hun. But a man may break
His heart out i' these days, and get a flap
With a fox-taile, when he has done. And there is all.
Nay, say not so Hilts: hold thee; there are Crowns—
My love bestows on thee, for thy reward.
If Gold will please thee, all my land shall drop
In bounty thus, to recompense thy merit.
Tut, keep your land, and your gold too Sir: I
Seek neither— nother of ' hun. Learn to get
Moore: you will know to spend that zum you have
Early enough: you are assured of me.
I love you too too well, to live o' the spoil:
For your own sake, were there were no worse than I
All is not Gold that glisters: I'll to Pancridge.
See, how his love doth melt him into Tears!
An honest faithful servant is a Jewel.
Now th' adventurous Squire hath time, and leisure,
To ask his Audrey how she does, and hear
A grateful answer from her. She not speaks:
Hath the proud Tiran, Frost, usurped the seat
Of former beauty in my Love's fair cheek;
Staining the rose at tincture of her blood,
With the dull die of blew-congealing cold?
Not, sure the weather dares not so presume
To hurt an object of her brightness. Yet,
The more I view her, she but looks so, so.
Ha'? give me leave to search this mystery!
O now I have it: Bride, I know your grief;
The last nights cold, hath bred in you such horror
Of the assigned Bridegroom's constitution,
The Kilborne Clay-pit; that frostbitten marvel;
That lump in courage: melting cake of Ice;
That the conceit thereof hath almost killed thee.
But I must do thee good wench, and refresh thee.
You are a merry man, Squire Tub, of Totten!
I have heard much o' your words, but not o' your deeds.
Thou sayest true, sweet; I ha' been too slack in deeds.
Yet, I was never so straight-laced to you, Squire.
Why, did you ever love me, gentle Audrey?
Love you? I cannot tell: I must hate no body,
My Father says.
Yes, Clay, and Kilburne; Audrey,
You must hate them.
It shall be for your sake than.
And for my sake, shall yield you that gratuity.
Soft, and fair, Squire, there go two word's to a bargain.
What are those Audrey?
Nay, I cannot tell.
My Mother said, zure, if you married me,
You'd make me a Lady the first week: and put me
In, I know not what, the very day.
What was it?
Speak gentle Audrey, thou shalt have it yet.
A velvet dressing for my head, it is,
They say will make one brave: I will not know
Bess Moale, nor Margery Turne-up: I will look
Another way upon 'em, and be proud.
Troth I could wish my wench a better wit;
But what she wanteth there, her face supplies.
There is a pointed lustre in her eye
Hath shot quite through me, and hath hit my heart:
And thence it is, I first received the wound,
That rankles now, which only she can cure.
Feign would I work myself, from this conceit;
But, being flesh, I cannot. I must love her,
The naked truth is: and I will go on,
Were it for nothing, but to cross my Rival's.
Come Audrey: I am now resolved to ha' thee.
Nay, do it quickly, Miles; why shak'st thou man?
Speak but his name: I'll second thee myself.
What is his name?
Squire Tripoli or Tub.
Any thing—
Squire Tub, I do arrest you
I' the Queen's Majesty's name, and all the Counsels.
Arrest me, Varlet?
Keep the peace I charge you.
Are you there, Justice Bramble? where's your warrant?
The warrant is directed here to me,
From the whole table; wherefore I would pray you
Be patiented Squire, and make good the peace.
Well, at your pleasure, justice. I am wronged:
Sirrah, what are you have arrested me?
He is a Pursy'vant at Arms, Squire Tub.
I am a Purs'yvant, see, by my Coat else.
Well Purs'yvant, go with me: I'll give you bail.
Sir he may take no bail. It is a warrant,
In special from the Council, and commands
Your personal appearance. Sir, your weapon
I must require: And than deliver you
A Prisoner to this officer, Squire Tub.
I pray you to conceive of me no other,
Than as your friend, and neighbour. Let my person
Be severed from my office in the fact,
And I am clear. Here Purs'yvant, receive him
Into your hands; And use him like a Gentleman.
I thank you Sir: But whither must I go now?
Nay, that must not be told you, till you come
Unto the place assigned by his instructions.
I'll be the Maiden's Convoy to her father,
For this time, Squire.
I thank you Mr. Bramble.
I doubt, or fear, you will make her the balance
To weigh your Justice in. Pray ye do me right,
And lead not her, at lest out of the way.
Justice is blind, and having a blind Guide,
She may be apt to slip aside.
I'll see to her.
I see my wooing will not thrive. Arrested!
As I had set my rest up, for a wife?
And being so fair for it, as I was.—. Well, fortune,
Thou art a blind Bawd, and a Beggar too,
To cross me thus; and let my only Rival,
To get her from me? That's the spite of spites.
But most I muse at, is, that I, being none
O' th' Court, am sent for thither by the Council!
My heart is not so light, as't was I' the morning.
You mean to make a Hoiden, or a Hare
O me, t' hunt Counter thus, and makes these doubles:
And you mean no such thing, as you sand about?
Where's your sweetheart now, I marl?
O Hilts!
I know you of old! ne'er halt afore a Cripple.
Will you have a Caudle? where's your grief, Sir? speak?
Do you hear friend? Do you serve this Gentleman?
How than, Sir? what if I do? peradventure yea:
Peradventure nay, what's that to you Sir? Say.
Nay, pray you Sir, I meant no harm in truth:
But this good Gentleman is arrested.
How?
Say me that again.
Nay Basket, never storm;
I am arrested here, upon command
From the Queen's Council; and I must obey.
You say Sir very true, you must obey.
An honest Gentleman, in faith!
He must?
But that which most tormenteth me, is this,
That Justice Bramble hath got hence my Audrey.
How? how? stand by a little, sirrah, you
With the badge o' your breast. Let's know Sir what you are?
I am Sir (pray you do not look so terribly)
A Purs'yvant.
A Purs'yvant? your name Sir?
My name Sir—
What is't? speak?
Miles Metaphor;
And Justice Preambles Clerk.
What says he?
Pray you,
Let us alone. You are a Purs'yvant?
No faith, Sir, would I might never stir from you,
I is made a Purs'yvant against my william.
Ha! and who made you one? tell true, or my will
Shall make you nothing, instantly.
Put up
Your frightful Blade; and your dead-doing look,
And I shall tell you all.
Speak than the truth,
And the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
My Master, Justice Bramble, hearing your Master,
The Squire Tub, was coming on this way,
With Mrs. Audrey, the high Constable's Daughter;
Made me a Purs'yvant: and gave me warrant
To arrest him, so that he might get the Lady,
With whom he is gone to Pancridge, to the Vicar,
Not to her Fathers. This was the device,
Which I beseek you, do not tell my Master.
O wonderful! well Basket, let him rise:
And for my free escape, forge some excuse.
I'll post to Paddington, t' acquaint old Turf,
With the whole business, and so stop the marriage.
Well, bless thee: I do wish thee grace, to keep
Thy Master's secrets, better, or be hanged.
I thank you, for your gentle admonition.
Pray you, let me call you Godfather hereafter.
And as your Godson Metaphor I promise',
To keep my Master's privities, sealed up
I' the valleys o' my trust, locked close for ever,
Or let me be trussed up at Tyburn shortly.
Thy own wish, save, or choke thee; Come away.
PAssion of me, was ever man thus crossed?
All things run Arsie-Varsie; upside down.
High Constable! Now by our Lady o' Walsingham.
I had rather be mark'd out Tom Scavinger.
And with a shovel make clean the high ways,
Than have this office of a Constable,
And a high Constable! The higher charge
It brings more trouble, more vexation with it.
Neighbours, good neighbours,' advise me what to do:
How we shall bear us in this Hue and Cry.
We cannot found the Captain; no such man
Lodged at the Lion, nor came thither hurt.
The morning we ha' spent in privy search;
And by that means the Bride-ale is differred;
The Bride, she's left alone in Puppie's charge;
The Bridegroom goes under a pair of sureties;
And held of all as a respected person.
How should we bustle forward? Give some counsel,
How to bestir our stumps i' these cross ways.
Faith Gossip Turf, you have, you say, Remission,
To comprehend all such, as are dispected:
Now, would I make another privy search
Through this Town, and than you have zearched two towns.
Masters, take heed, let's not vind too many:
One's enough to stay the Hangman's stomach.
There is Iohn Clay, who is yvound already;
A proper man: A Tileman by his trade:
A man as one would zay, moulded in clay:
As spruce as any neighbour's child among you:
And he (you zee) is taken on conspition,
And two, or three (they zay) what call you 'hem?
Zuch as the Justices of Coram nobis
Grant— (I forget their names, you ha' many on 'em,
Mr. High Constable they come to you.)
I ha' it at my tongue's end— Cunni-borroughes,
To bring him strait avore the zessions house.
O you mean warrens, neighbour, do you not?
I, I, thick same! you know ' un well enough.
Too well, too well; would I had never known 'hem.
We good Vree-holders' cannot live in quiet,
But every hour new purcepts, Huy's and Cry's,
Put us to requisitions' night and day:
What should a man zay, should we leave the zearch?
I am in danger, to reburse as much
As he was robbed on; I, and pay his hurts,
If I should vollow it, all the good cheer
That was provided; for the wedding dinner
Is spoiled, and lost. O there are two vat pigs,
A zindging by the vi●r: Now by Saint Tomy,
Too good to eat, but on a wedding day;
And than, a Goose will bid you all, Come cut me.
Zun Clay, zun Clay (for I must call thee so)
Be of good comfort; take my Muckender;
And dry thine eyes. If thou be'st true, and honest;
And if thou findest thy conscience clear urom it,
Pluck up a good heart, we'll do well enough.
If not, confess a truth's name. But in faith
I durst be sworn upon all holy books,
Iohn Clay would ne'er commit a Robbery
On his own head.
Not; Truth is my rightful Judge:
I have kept my hands, here hence, fro' evil speaking,
Lying, and slandering; and my tongue from stealing.
He do not live this day can say, Iohn Clay
I ha' zeene thee, but in the way of honesty.
Faith neighbour Medlay, I durst be his burrow,
He would not look a true man in the face.
I take the town to concord, where I devil,
All Kilburne be my witness; If I were not
Begot in bashfulness, brought up in shamefacedness:
Let 'un bring a dog, but to my face, that can
Zay, I ha' beat' hun, and without a vault;
Or but a cat, will swear upon a book,
I have as much as zet a vier her tail;
And I'll give him, or her a crown for 'mends.
But to give out, and zay, I have robbed a Captain!
Receive me at the latter day, if I
E'er thought of any such matter; or could mind it—.
Not Iohn, you are come of too good personage;
I think my Gossip Clench, and Mr. Turf
Both think, you would ra ' tempt not such voule matter.
But how unhappily it comes to pass!
Just on the wedding day! I cry me mercy:
I had almost forgot the Hue and Cry:
Good neighbour Pan, you are the Third-burrow,
And D'ogenes Scriben, you my learned Writer,
Make out a new purcept— Lord, for thy goodness,
I had forgot my Daughter, all this while;
The idle knave hath brought no news from her.
Here comes the sneaking Puppy; What's the news?
My heart! my heart! I fear all is not well,
Some things misshaped, that he is come without her.
O, where's my Master? my Master? my Master?
Thy Master? what wouldst with thy Master, man?
There's thy Mr. Tur. What's the matter Puppy?
O Master! o Dame! o Dame! o Master!
What sayst thou to thy Master, or thy Dame?
O Iohn Clay! Iohn Clay! Iohn Clay!
What of Iohn Clay?
Luck grant he bring not news he shall be hanged.
The world forfend, I hope, it is not so well.
O Lord! o me! what shall I do? poor Iohn!
O Iohn Clay! Iohn Clay! Iohn Clay!
Alas,
That ever I was borne! I will not stay by't,
For all the Tiles in Kilburne.
What of Clay?
Speak Puppy, what of him?
He hath lost, he hath lost.
For luck sake speak, Puppy, what hath he lost?
O Audrey, Audrey, Audrey!
What of my daughter Audrey?
I tell you Audrey— do you understand me?
Audrey, sweet Master! Audrey, my dear Dame—
Where is she? what's become of her, I pray thee?
O the servingman! the servingman! the servingman!
What talk'st thou of the servingman? where's Audrey?
Gone with the servingman, gone with the servingman.
Good Puppy, whither is she gone with him?
I cannot tell, he bade me bring you word,
The Captain lay at the Lion, and before
I came again, Audrey was gone with the servingman;
I tell you, Awdrey's run away with the servingman.
'Od'socks! my woman, what shall we do now?
Now, so you help not, man, I know not, I
This was your pomp of Maids. I told you on't.
Six Maids to vollow you, and not leave one
To wait upo' your Daughter: I zaid, Pride
Would be paid one day, her old vi' pence, wife.
What of Iohn Clay, Ball Puppy?
He hath lost—
His life for velonie?
Not, his wife by villainy.
Now, villains both! o that same Hue and Cry!
O neighbours! o that cursed servingman!
O maids! O wife! But Iohn Clay, where's he?
How! fled for veare, zay ye? will he slip us now?
We that are sureties, must require ' hun out.
How shall we do to found the servingman?
Cock's bodikins! we must not loose Iohn Clay:
Audrey, my daughter Audrey too! let us zend
To all the towns, and seek her; but alas,
The Hue and Cry, that must be looked unto.
What, in a passion Turf?
I good Squire Tub.
Were never honest Varmers thus perplexed.
Turf, I am privy to thy deep unrest:
The ground of which, springs from an idle plot,
Cast by a Suitor, to your daughter Audrey—
And thus much, Turf, let me advertise you;
Your daughter Audrey, met I on the way,
With Justice Bramble in her company:
Who means to marry her at Pancridge Church.
And there is Cannon Hugh, to meet them ready:
Which to prevent you must not trust delay;
But winged speed must cross their sly intent:
Than high thee. Turf, haste to forbidden the Banes.
Hath Justice Bramble got my daughter Audrey?
A little while, shall he enjoy her, zure.
But O the Hue and Cry! that hinders me:
I must prusue that, or neglect my journey:
I'll even leave all: and with the patiented Ass,
The over-laden Ass, throw of my burden,
And cast mine office; pluck in my large ears
Betimes, jest some dis-judge 'em to be horns:
I'll leave to beaten it on the broken hoof,
And ease my pasterns. I'll no more High Constables.
I cannot choose, but smile, to see thee troubled
With such a bald, halfe-hatched circumstance!
The Captain was not robbed, as is reported;
That trick the Justice craftily devised,
To break the marriage with the Tileman Clay.
The Hue, and Cry, was merely counterfeit:
The rather may you judge it to be such,
Because the Bridegroom, was described to be
One of the thieves, first i' the velonie.
Which, how far 'tis from him, yourselves may guess:
'Twas Justice Bramble's fetch, to get the wench.
And is this true Squire Tub?
Believe me Turf,
As I am a Squire: or less, a Gentleman.
I take my office back: and my authority,
Upon your worship's words. Neighbours, I am
High Constable again: where's my son Clay?
He shall be son, yet, wife, your meat by leisure:
Draw back the spits.
That's done already man.
I'll break this marriage of: and afterwards,
She shall be given to her first betrothed.
Look to the meat, wife: look well to the roast.
I'll follow him aloof, to see the event.
Dame, Mistress, though I do not turn the spit;
I hope yet the Pigs-head.
Come up, Jack-sauce:
It shall be served in to you.
Not, no service,
But a reward for service.
I still took you
For an unmannerly Puppy: will you come,
And fetch more wood to the vier, Mr. Ball?
I would to the vier? I shall piss it out first:
You think to make me even your ox, or ass;
Or any thing. Though I cannot right myself
On you; I'll sure revenge me on your meat.
Madam, to Kentish Town, we are got at length;
But, by the way we cannot meet the Squire:
Nor by inquiry can we hear of him.
Here is Turfe's house, the father of the Maid.
Pol-Marten, see, the streets are strewed with herbs,
And here hath been a wedding, Wisp, it seems!
Pray heaven, this Bridal be not for my son!
Good Marten, knock: knock quickly: Ask for Turf.
My thoughts misgive me, I am in such a doubt—
Who keeps the house here?
Why the door, and walls
Do keep the house.
I ask than, who's within?
Not you that are without.
Look forth, and speak.
Into the street, here. Come before my Lady.
Before my Lady? Lord have mercy upon me:
If I do come before her, she will see
The handsomest man in all the Town, perdie!
Now stand I vore her, what zaith velvet she?
Sirrah, whoseman are you?
Madam, my Masters.
And who's thy Master?
What you tread on, Madam.
I tread on an old Turf.
That Turfe's my Master.
A merry fellow! what's thy name?
Ball Puppy
They call me at home: abroad, Hannibal Puppy.
Come hither, I must kiss thee, Valentine Puppy.
Wisp! ha you got you a Valentine?
None, Madam;
He's the first stranger that I saw.
To me
He is so, and such. Let's share him equally.
Help, help good Dame. A rescue, and in time.
In stead of Bills, with Colstaves come; in stead of Spears, with Spits;
Your slices serve for slicing swords, to save me, and my wits:
A Lady, and her woman here, their Usher eke by side,
(But he stands mute) have plotted how your Puppy to divide.
How now? what noise is this with you, Ball Puppy?
O Dame! And fellows o'the Kitchen! Arm,
Arm, for my safety; if you love your Ball:
Here is a strange thing, called a Lady, a Madam:
And a device of hers, yclept her woman;
Have plotted on me, in the King's highway,
To steal me from myself, and cut me in halves,
To make one Valentine to serve 'em both;
This for my rightside, that my lefthand love.
So saucy, Puppy? to use no more reverence
Unto my Lady, and her velvet Gown?
Turfe's wife, rebuke him not: Your man doth please me
With his conceit. Hold: there are ten old nobles,
To make thee merrier yet, half- Valentine.
I thank you rightside: could my left as much,
'Twould make me a man of mark: young Hannibal!
Dido, shall make that good; or I will for her.
Here Dido Wisp, there's for your Hannibal:
He is your Countryman. as well as Valentine.
Here Mr. Hannibal: my Lady's bounty
For her poor woman, Wisp.
Brave Carthage Queen!
And such was Dido: I will ever be
Champion to her, who Iuno is to thee.
Your Ladyship is very welcome here.
Please you, good Madam, to go near the house.
Turfe's wife, I come thus far to seek thy husband,
Having some business to impart unto him.
Is he at home?
O no, and't shall please you:
He is posted hence to Pancridge with a witness.
Young Justice Bramble has kept level coil
Here in our Quarters, stole away our Daughter,
And Mr. Turfe's run after, as he can,
To stop the marriage, if it will be stopped.
Madam, these tidings are not much amiss!
For if the Justice have the Maid in keep,
You need not fear the marriage of your son.
That somewhat easeth my suspicious breast.
Tell me, Turfe's wife, when was my son with Audrey?
How long is't, since you saw him at your house?
Dame, let me take this rump out of your mouth.
What mean you by that Sir?
Rump, and tail's all one.
But I would use a reverence for my Lady:
I would not zay surreverence, the tale
Out o' your mouth, but rather take the rump.
A well bred youth! and vull of favour you are:
What might they zay, when I were gone, if I
Not weighed my wordz? This Puppy is a voole!
Great Hanniballs an Ass; he had no breeding:
Not Lady gay, you shall not zay,
That your Val. Puppy, was so unlucky,
In speech to fail, as t'name a tail,
Be as be may be,' vore a fair Lady.
Leave jesting, tell us, when you saw our son.
Mary, it is two hours ago.
Sing you saw him?
You might have seen him too, if you had looked up.
For it shined, as bright as day.
Mean my son.
Your sun, and our sun are they not all one?
Fool, thou mistak'st; I asked thee, for my son.
I had thought there had been no more suns, than one.
I know not what you Ladies have, or may have.
Didst thou ne'er hear, my Lady had a son?
She may have twenty; but for a son, unless
She mean precisely, Squire Tub, her son,
He was here now; and brought my Mr. word
That Justice Bramble had got Mrs. Audrey.
But whither he be gone, here's none can tell.
Marten, I wonder at this strange discourse:
The fool it seems tells true; my son the Squire
Was doubtless here this morning. For the match,
I'll smother what I think, and staying here,
Attend the sequel of this strange beginning,
Turfe's wife; my people, and I will trouble thee:
Until we hear some tidings of thy husband.
The rather, for my party Valentine.
Well, I have carried it, and will triumph
Over this Justice, as becomes a Constable;
And a high Constable: next our Saint George,
Who rescued the King's Daughter, I will ride;
Above Prince Arthur.
Or our Shore ditch Duke.
Or Pancridge Earl.
Or Bevis, or Sir Guy.
Who were high Constables both.
One of Southampton—.
The t'other of Warwick-Castle.
You shall work it
Into a story for me, neighbour Medlay,
Over my Chimney.
I can give you Sir,
A Roman story of a petty-Constable,
That had a Daughter, that was called Virginia,
Like Mrs. Audrey, and as young as she;
And how her Father bore him in the business,
'Gainst Justice Appius, a Decemvir in Rome,
And Justice of Assize.
That, that good D'ogenes!
A learned man is a Chronikell!
I can tell you
A thousand, of great Pompey, Caesar, Trajan,
All the high Constables there.
That was their place:
They were no more.
Dictator, and high Constable
Were both the same.
High Constable was more, tho'!
He laid Dick: Tator by the heels.
Dick: Toter!
H'was one o'the Weights o'the City. I ha' read o'hun:
He was a fellow would be drunk, debauched—
And he did zet un i'the stocks indeed:
His name Vadian, and a cunning Toter.
Was ever silly Maid thus posted of?
That should have had three husbands in one day;
Yet (by bad fortune) am possessed of none?
I went to Church to have been wed to Clay;
Than Squire Tub he seized me on the way,
And thought to ha' had me: but he missed his aim;
And Justice Bramble (nearest of the three)
Was well nigh married to me; when by chance,
In rushed my Father, and broke of that dance.
I, Girl, there's ne'er a Justice on 'em all,
Shall teach the Constable to guard his own:
Let's back to Kentishtowne, and there make merry;
These news will be glad tiding to my wife:
Thou shalt have Clay, my wench. That word shall stand.
he's found by this time, sure, or else he's drowned:
The wedding dinner will be spoiled: make haste.
Husbands, they say, grow thick; but thin are sown,
I care not who it be, so I have one.
I? zay you so? Perhaps you shall ha' none, for that.
Now out on me! what shall I do than?
Sleep Mistress Audrey, dream on proper men.
O bone Deus! have you seen the like?
Here was, Hodge hold thine ear, fair, whilst I strike.
Body o' me, how came this gear about?
I know not, Cannon, but it falls out cross.
Nor can I make conjecture by the circumstance
Of these events; it was impossible,
Being so close, and politicly carried,
To come so quickly to the ears of Turf.
O Priest, had but thy slow delivery
Been nimble, and thy lazy Latin tongue,
But run the forms over, with that swift dispatch,
As had been requisite, all had been well!
What should have been, that never loved the Friar;
But thus you see th'old Adage verified,
Multa cadunt inter— you can guess the rest.
Many things fall between the cup, and lip:
And though they touch, you are not sure to drink.
You lacked good fortune, we had done out parts:
Give a man fortune, throw him i' the Sea.
The properer man, the worse luck: Stay a time;
Tempus edax— In time the stately Ox, etc.
Good counsels lightly never come too late.
You Sir will run your counsels out of breath.
Spur a free horse, he'll run himself to death.
Sancti Evangelistae! Here comes Miles!
What news man, with our new made Purs'yvant?
A Pursuyvant? would I were, or more pursy,
And had more store of money; or less pursy,
And had more store of breath: you call me Pursuivant!
But, I could never vaunt of any purse
I had, sin ' ye were my Godfathers, and Godmothers,
And ga'me that nickname.
What, now's the matter?
Nay, 'tis no matter. I ha' been simply beaten.
What is become o'the Squire, and thy Prisoner?
The lines of blood, ran streaming from my head,
Can speak what rule the Squire hath kept with me.
I pray thee Miles relate the manner, how?
Be't known unto you, by these presents, than,
That I Miles Metaphor, your worship's Clerk:
Have even been beaten, to an Allegory,
By multitude of hands. Had they been but
Some five or six, I had whipped 'em all, like tops
In Lent, and hurled 'em into Hoblers-hole;
Or the next ditch: I had cracked all their costards,
As nimbly as a Squirrel will crack nuts:
And flourished like to Hercules, the Porter
Among the Pages. But, when they came on
Like Bees about a Hive, Crows about carrion,
Flies about sweet meats; nay, like water-men
About a Fare: than was poor Metaphor
Glad to give up the honour of the day,
To quit his charge to them, and run away
To save his life, only to tell this news.
How indirectly all things have fall'n out!
I cannot choose bat wonder what they were
Rescued your rival from the keep of Miles:
But most of all I cannot well digest,
The manner how our purpose came to Turf.
Miles, I will see that all thy hurts be dressed.
As for the Squires escape, it matters not:
We have by this means disappointed him;
And that was all the main I aimed at.
But Cannon Hugh, now muster up thy wits,
And call thy thoughts into the Consistory.
Search all the secret corners of thy cap,
To found another quaint devised drift,
To disappoint her marriage with this Clay;
Do that, and He reward thee jovially.
Well said Magister Justice. If I fit you not
With such a new, and well-laid stratagem,
As never yet your ears did hear a finer,
Call me, with Lily, Bos, Fur, Sus, atque Sacerdos.
I hear, there's comfort in thy words yet, Cannon.
I'll trust thy regulars, and say no more.
I'll follow too. And if the dapper Priest
Be but as cunning, point in his de vice,
As I was in my lie: my Master Preamble
Will stalk, as led by the nose with these new promises,
And fatted with supposes of fine hopes.
Well Madam, I may thank the Squire your son:
For, but for him, I had been overreached.
Now heavens blessing light upon his heart:
We are beholden to him, indeed Madam.
But can you not resolve me where he is?
Nor about what his purposes were bend?
Madam, they no whit were concerning me:
And therefore was I less inquisitive.
Fair maid, in faith, speak truth, and not dissemble:
Does he not often come, and visit you?
His worship now, and than, please you, taketh pains
To see my Father, and Mother: But for me,
I know myself too mean for his high thoughts
To stoop at, more than ask a light question,
To make him merry, or to pass his time.
A sober Maid! call for my woman Marten.
The maids, and her half- Valentine have plied her
With curtsy of the Bridecake, and the Bowl,
As she is laid a while.
O let her rest!
We will cross over to Canterbury, in the interim;
And so make home. Farewell good Turf, and thy wife.
I wish your daughter joy.
Thanks to your Ladyship,
Where is Iohn Clay now? have you seen him yet?
Not, he has hid himself out of the way,
For fear o'the Hue and Cry.
What, walks that shadow
Avore'un still? Puppy go seek 'un out,
Search all the corners that he haunts unto,
And call' un forth. we'll once more to the Church,
And try our vortune's. Luck, son Valentine:
Where are the wisemen all of Finzbury?
Where wisemen should be; at the Ale, and Bride cake.
I would this couple had their destiny,
Or to be hanged, or married out o' the way:
Man cannot get the mount'nance of an Eggshell,
To stay his stomach. Vaith, vor mine own part,
I have zuped up so much broth, as would have covered
A leg o' Beef, o'er head and ears, i' the porridge pot:
And yet I cannot sussifie wild nature.
Would they were once dispatched, we might to dinner.
I am with child of a huge stomach, and long;
Till by some honest Midwife-peice of Beef,
I be delivered of it: I must go now,
And hunt out for this Kilburne Calf, Iohn Clay:
Whom where to found, I know not, nor which way.
Thus as a beggar in a King's disguise,
Or an old Cross well sided with a Maypole.
Comes Cannon Hugh, accoutred as you see
Disguised Soldado like: mark his devise:
The Cannon, is that Captain Thums, was robbed:
These bloody scars upon my face are wounds;
This scarf upon mine arm shows my late hurts:
And thus am I to gull the Constable.
Now have among you, for a man at arms:
Friends by your leave, which of you is one Turf?
Sir, I am Turf, if you would speak with me.
With thee Turf, if thou be'st High Constable.
I am both Turf, Sir, and High Constable.
Than Turf, or Scurf, high, or low Constable,
Know, I was once a Captain at Saint Quintin's,
And passing cross the ways over the country '
This morning betwixt this and Hamsted-Heath,
Was by a crew of Clowns robbed, bobbed, and hurt.
Not sooner had I got my wounds bound up,
But with much pain, I went to the next Justice,
One Mr. Bramble here, at Marrowbone:
And here a warrant is, which he hath directed
For you one Turf; if your name be Toby Turf;
Who have let fall (they say) the Hue, and Cry:
And you shall answer it afore the Justice.
Heaven, and Hell, Dogs, Devils, what is this?
Neighbours, was ever Constable thus crossed?
What shall we do?
Faith, all go hung ourselves:
I know no other way to scape the Law.
News, news, O news—
What, hast thou found out Clay?
No Sir, the news is that I cannot found him.
Why do you dally, you damned russet coat,
You Peasant, nay you Clown, you Constable;
See that you bring forth the suspected party,
Or by mine honour (which I won in field)
I'll make you pay for it, afore the Justice.
Fie, fie; O wife, I am now in a fine pickle.
He that was most suspected is not found;
And which now makes me think, he did the deed,
He thus absents him, and dares not be seen.
Captain, my innocence will pled for me.
Wife, I must go, needs, whom the Devil drives:
Pray for me wife, and daughter; pray for me.
I'll lead the way: Thus is the match put of,
And it my plot succeed, as I have laid it,
My Captainship shall cost him many a crown.
So, we have brought our eggs to a fair Market.
Out on that villain Clay: would he do a robbery?
I'll ne'er trust smooth-faced Tileman for his sake.
Mother, the still Sow eats up all the draff.
Thus is my Master, Toby Turf, the pattern
Of all the painful a'ventures, now in print.
I never could hope better of this match:
This Bride-ale: For the night before to day,
(Which is within man's memory, I take it)
At the report of it, an Ox did speak;
Who died soon after: A Cow lost her Calf:
The Belwether was flayed for't: A fat Hog
Was singed, and washed, and shaved all over; to
Look ugly 'gainst this day: The Ducks they quaked;
The Hens too cackled: at the noise whereof,
A Drake was seen to dance a headless round:
The Goose was cut i' the head, to hear it too:
Brave Chant-it-cleare, his noble heart was done;
His comb was cut: And two or three o' his wives,
Or fairest Concubines, had their necks broke,
E'er they would see this day: To mark the verven
Heart of a beast, the very Pig, the Pig,
This very mornin, as he was a roasting
Cried out his eyes, and made a show as he would
Ha' bit in two the spit, as he would say;
There shall no roast-meat be this dismal day.
And zure, I think, If I had not got his tongue
Between my teeth, and eat it, he had spoke it.
Well, I will in, and cry too; never leave
Crying, until our maids may drive a Buck
With my salt tears at the next washing day.
Keep out those fellows; I'll ha' none come in,
But the High Constable, the man of peace,
And the Queen's Captain, the brave man of war.
Now neighbour Turf, the cause why you are called,
Before me by my warrant, but unspecified,
Is this; and pray you mark it thoroughly!
Here is a Gentleman, and as it seems,
Both of good birth, fair speech, and peaceable,
Who was this morning robbed here in the wood:
You for your part a man of good report,
Of credit, landed, and of fair demeans,
And by authority, high Constable;
Are notwithstanding touched in this complaint,
Of being careless in the Hue and Cry.
I cannot choose but grieve a Soldiers loss:
And I am sorry too for your neglect,
Being my neighbour; this is all I object.
This is not all; I can allege far more,
And almost urge him for an accessory.
Good Mr Justice gi'me leave to speak,
For I am Plaintiff. Let not neighbourhood
Make him secure, or stand on privilege.
Sir, I dare use no partiality:
Object than what you please, so it be truth.
This more: and which is more, than he can answer,
Beside his letting fall the Hue, and Cry
He doth protect the man, charged with the felony,
And keeps him hid I hear, within his house,
Because he is affied unto his Daughter.
I do defy ' hun, so shall she do too.
I pray your worship's favour, le' me have hearing.
I do convesse, 'twas told me such a velonie,
an't not disgrieved me a little when 'twas told me,
Vor I was going to Church, to marry Audrey:
And who should marry her, but this very Clay,
Who was charged to be the chief thief o' hun all.
Now I (the halter stick me, if I tell,
Your worships any leazins did forethink 'un
The truest man, till he waz run away.
I thought, I had had 'un as zure as in a zaw-pit,
Or i' mine Oven. Nay, i' the Towne-pound.
I was za sure o' hun: I'd ha' gi'n my life for ' un,
Till he did start. But now, I zee 'un guilty,
Az var as I can look at ' un. Would you ha' more?
Yes, I will have Sir what the Law will give me.
You gave your word to see him safe, forth coming;
I challenge that: But, that is forfeited;
Beside, your carelessness in the pursuit,
Argues your slackness, and neglect of duty,
Which aught be punished with severity.
He speaks but reason
Bring forth the man,
And you are quit: But otherwise, your word
Binds you to make amendss for all his loss,
And think yourself befriended, if he take it
Without a farther suit, or going to law.
Come to a composition with him, Turf:
The Law is costly, and will draw on charge.
Yes, I do know, I vurst must vee a Returney,
And than make legs to my great man o' Law,
To be o' my counsel, and take trouble-vees,
And yet zay nothing vor me, but device
All district means, to ransackle me o' my money.
A Pest'lence prick the throats o' hun. I doe know hun
As well az I waz i' their bellies, and brought up there.
What would you ha' me do? what would you ask of me?
I ask the restitution of my money;
And will not bate one penny o' the sum:
Four score, and five pound. I ask, besides,
Amendment for my hurts; my pain, and suffering
Are loss enough for me, Sir, to sit down with,
I'll put it to your worship; what you award me,
I'll take; and give him a general release.
And what say you now, neighbour Turf?
I put it
Even to your worship's bitterment, hab, nab.
I shall have a chance o' the dices for't, I hope, let 'em even run: And
Faith than I'll pray you, 'cause he is my neighbour,
To take a hundred pound, and give him day.
Saint Valentine's day, I will, this very day,
Before Sun set: my bond is forfeit else.
Where will you ha' it paid?
Faith, I am a stranger
Here i' the country: Know you Cannon Hugh,
The Vicar of Pancras?
Yes, we who not him?
I'll make him my Attorney to receive it,
And give you a discharge.
Whom shall I sand for't?
Why, if you please, sand Metaphor my Clerk.
And Turf, I much commend thy willingness;
It's argument of thy integrity.
But, my integrity shall be my self still:
Good Mr. Metaphor, give my wife this key;
And do but whisper it into her hand:
(She knows it well enough) bid her, by that
Deliver you the two zealed bags o' silver,
That lie i' the corner o' the cupboard, stands
At my bedside, they ' are viftie pound a piece;
And bring 'em to your Master.
If I prove not
As just a Carrier as my friend Tom Long was,
Than call me his curtal, change my name of Miles,
To Guiles, Wiles, Piles, Bile's, or the foulest name
You can device, to cram with, for ale.
Come hither Miles, bring by that token, too,
Fair Audrey; say her father sent for her:
Say Clay is found, and waits at Pancras Church,
Where I attend to marry them in haste.
For (by this means) Miles I may say't to thee,
Thy Master must to Audrey married be.
But not a word but mum: go get thee gone;
Be wary of thy charge, and keep it close.
O super-dainty Cannon! Vicar in cóney,
Make no delay, Miles, but a way.
And bring the wench, and money.
Now Sir, I see you meant but honestly;
And, but that business calls me hence away,
I would not leave you, till the sun were lower.
But Mr. Justice, one word, Sir, with you.
By the same token, is your Mistress sent for
By Metaphor your Clerk, as from her Father.
Who when she comes, I'll marry her to you,
Unwitting to this Turf, who shall attend
Me at the parsonage. This was my plot:
Which I must now make good; turn Cannon, again,
In my square cap. I humbly take my leave.
Adieu, good Captain. Trust me, neighbour Turf,
He seems to be a sober Gentleman:
But this distress hath somewhat stirred his patience.
And men, you know, in such extremities,
Apt not themselves to points of courtesy;
I'm glad you ha' made this end.
You stood my friend:
I thank your Justice-worship; pray you be
Prezent anon, at tendering o' the money,
And see me have a discharge: for I ha' no craft
I' your Law quiblins.
I'll secure you, neighbour.
Indeed, there is a woundy luck in names, Sirs,
And a main mystery, an a man knew where.
To vind it. My God-sires name, I'll tell you,
Was In-and-In Shuttle, and a Weaver he was,
And it did fit his craft: for so his Shuttle
Went in, and in, still: this way, and than that way.
And he named me, Inand In Medlay: which serves
A Joiner's craft, because that we do lay
Things in and in, in our work. But, I am truly
Architectonicus professor, rather:
That is (as one would zay) an Architect.
As I am a Varrier, and a Visicarie:
Horse-smith of Hamsted, and the whole Town Leach—.
Yes, you ha' done woundy cures, Gossip Clench.
An I can see the stolen once, through a Vrine-hole,
I'll give a shrewd guess, be it man, or beast.
I cured an Alewife once, that had the staggers
Worse than five horses, without rowelling.
My God-phere was a Rabian, or a Iew,
(You can tell D'oge!) They called un Doctor Rasi.
One Rasis was a great Arabic Doctor.
He was King Harry's Doctor, and my God-phere.
Mine was a merry Greek, Topan, of Twyford:
A jovial Tinker, and a stopper of holes;
Who left me mettall-man of Belsise, his heir.
But what was yours D'oge?
Vaith, I cannot tell
If mine were kyrsind, or no. But, zure he had
A kyrsin name, that he left me, Diogenes.
A mighty learned man, but pestilence poor.
Vor, h'had no house, save an old Tub, to devil in,
(I vind that in records) and still he turned it
I' the winds teeth, as't blew on his backside,
And there they would lie routing one at other,
A week, sometimes.
Thence came A Tale of a Tub;
And the virst Tale of a Tub, old D'ogenes Tub.
That was avore Sir Peter Tub, or his Lady.
I, or the Squire their son, Tripoli Tub.
The Squire is a fine Gentleman!
He is more:
A Gentleman and a half; almost a Knight;
Within zixe inches: That's his true measure.
Zure, you can gauge ' hun.
To a streak, or less:
I know his d'ameters, and circumference:
A Knight is six diameters; and a Squire
Is vive, and zomewhat more: I know't by compass,
And scale of man. I have upo' my rule here,
The just perportions of a Knight, a Squire;
With a tame Justice, or an Officer, rampant,
Vpo' the bench, from the high Constable
Down to the Head-borough, or Tithing-man;
Or meanest Minister o'the peace, God save ' un.
Why, you can tell us by the Squire, Neighbour,
Whence he is called a Constable, and whaffore.
Not, that's a bookcase: Scriben can do that.
That's writing and reading, and records.
Two words,
Cyning and Staple, make a Constable:
As we'd say, A hold, or stay for the King.
All Constables are truly John's for the King,
What ere their names are; be they Tony, or Roger.
And all are sworn, as vingars o' one hand,
To hold together 'gainst the breach o' the peace;
The High Constable is the Thumb, as one would zay,
The holdfast o' the rest.
Pray luck he speed
Well i' the business, between Captain Thumbs,
And him.
I'll warrant' un for a groat:
I have his measures here in Rithmetique.
How he should bear un self in all the lines
Of's place, and office: Let's seek 'un out.
Hilts, how dost thou like o' this our good days work?
As good even ne'er a whit, as ne'er the better.
Shall we to Pancridge, or to Kentishtowne, Hilts?
Let Kentishtowne, or Pancridge come to us,
If either will: I will go home again.
Faith Basket, our success hath been but bad,
And nothing prospers, that we undertake;
For we can neither meet with Clay, nor Audrey,
The Cannon Hugh, nor Turf the Constable:
We are like men that wander in strange woods,
And lose ourselves in search of them we seek.
This was because we risen on the wrong side:
But as I am now here, just in the midway,
I'll zet my sword on the pommel, and that line
The point valles too, we'll take. whether it be
To Kentishtowne, the Church, or home again.
Stay, stay thy hand: here's Justice Brambles Clerk,
The unlucky Hare hath crossed us all this day.
I'll stand aside whilst thou pump'st out of him
His business, Hilts; and how he's now employed.
Let me alone? I'll use him in his kind.
O for a Pad-horse, Packhorse, or a Post-horse,
To bear me on his neck, his back, or his croupe!
I am as weary with running, as a Mill-horse
That hath led the Mill once, twice, thrice about,
After the breath hath been out of his body.
I could get up upon a pannier, a panel,
Or, to say truth, a very Packsadle,
Till all my honey were turned into gall;
And I could sit in the seat no longer,
O the legs of a lackey now, or a footman,
Who is the Surbater of a Clerk currant,
And the confounder of his treslesse dormant.
But who have we here, just in the nick?
I am neither nick, nor in the nick: therefore
You lie Sir Metaphor.
Lie? how?
Lie so Sir.
I lie not yet i' my throat.
Thou liest o' the ground.
Dost thou know me?
Yes, I did know you too late.
What is my name than?
Basket.
Basket? what?
Basket, the Great—
The Great? what?
Lubber—
I should say Lover, of the Squire his Master.
Great is my patience, to forbear thee thus,
Thou Scrape-hill, Scoundrel, and thou scum of man;
Uncivil, orenge-tawny-coated Clarke:
Thou cam'st but half a thing into the world,
And waste made up of patches, parings, shreds:
Thou, that when last thou wert put out of service,
Travaild'st to Hamsted Heath, on an Ash-we'nsday,
Where thou didst stand six weeks the jack of Lent,
For boys to hoorle, three throws a penny, at thee,
To make thee a purse: Seest thou this, bold bright blade?
As minced meat for a pie. I'll set thee in earth
All save thy head, and thy right arm at liberty,
To keep thy hat of, while I question thee,
What? why? and whether thou wert going now
With a face, ready to break out with business?
And tell me truly, jest I dashed in pieces.
Than Basket put thy smiter up, and hear;
I dare not tell the truth to a drawn sword.
'Tis sheathed, stand up, speak without fear, or wit.
I know not what they mean; but Constable Turf
Sends here his key; for moneys in his cupboard
Which he must pay the Captain, that was robbed
This morning. Smell you nothing?
Not, not I;
Thy breeches yet are honest.
As my mouth.
Do you not smell a rat? I tell you truth,
I think all's knavery: For the Cannon whispered
Me in the ear, when Turf had gi'n me his key,
By the same token to bring Mistress Audrey,
As sent for thither; and to say Iohn Clay
Is found, which is indeed to get the wench
Forth for my Master, who is to be married,
When she comes there: The Cannon has his rules
Ready, and all there to dispatch the matter.
Now on my life, this is the Chanon's plot!
Miles, I have heard all thy discourse to Basket.
Wilt thou be true, and I'll reward thee well,
To make me happy, in my Mistress Audrey?
Your worship shall dispose of Metaphor,
Through all his parts, even from the sole o' the head,
To the crown o' the foot, to manage of your service.
Than do thy message to the Mistress Turf,
Tell her thy token, bring the money hither,
And likewise take young Audrey to thy charge:
Which done, here, Metaphor, we will attend,
And intercept thee. And for thy reward,
You two shall share the money; I the Maid:
If any take offence, I'll make all good.
But shall I have half the money Sir, in faith?
I on my Squire-ship, shalt thou: and my land.
Than, if I make not, Sir, the cleanliest excuse
To get her hither, and be than as careful
To keep her for you, as't were for myself:
Down o' your knees, and pray that honest Miles
May break his neck ere he get over two styles.
Make haste than: we will wait here thy return.
This luck unlooked for, hath revived my hopes,
Which were oppressed with a dark melancholy.
In happy time, we lingered on the way,
To meet these summons of a better sound,
Which are the essence of my soul's content.
This heartless fellow; shame to serving-men;
Stain of all liveries; what fear makes him do!
How sordid, wretched, and unworthy things;
Betray his Master's secrets, open the closet
Of his devises, force the foolish Justice,
Make way for your Love, plotting of his own:
Like him that digs a trap, to catch another,
And falls into't himself!
So would I have it.
And hope 'twill prove a jest to twit the Justice with.
But that this poor white-livered Rogue should do't?
And merely out of fear?
And hope of money, Hilts.
A valiant man will nible at that bait.
Who, but a fool, will refuse money proffered?
And sent by so good chance. Pray heaven he speed.
If he come empty-headed, let him count
To go back empty-headed; I'll not leave him
So much of brain in's pate, with pepper and vinegar,
To be served in for sauce, to a Calf's head.
Thou servest him rightly, Hilts.
I'll seal az much
With my hand, as I dare say now with my tongue;
But if you get the Lass from Dargison,
What will you do with her?
we'll think o' that
When once we have her in possession, Governor.
You see we trust you, Mr. Metaphor,
With Mrs. Audrey: pray you use her well,
As a Gentlewoman should be used. For my part,
I do incline a little to the servingman;
We have been of a coat— I had one like yours:
Till it did play me such a sleeveless errand,
As I had nothing where to put mine arms in,
And than I threw it of. Pray you go before her,
Serving-man-like: and see that your nose drop not.
As for example; you shall see me: mark,
How I go afore her. So do you: sweet Miles,
She for her own part, is a woman cares not
What man can do unto her, in the way
Of honesty, and good manners. So farewell
Fair Mistress Audrey: Farewell Mr. Miles.
I ha' brought you thus far, onward o'your way:
I must go back now to make clean the rooms,
Where my good Lady has been. Pray you commend me
To Bridegroom Clay; and bid him bear up stiff.
Thank you good Hannibal Puppy; I shall fit
The leg of your commands, with the strait buskins
Of dispatch presently.
Farewell fine Metaphor.
Come gentle Mistress, will you please to walk?
I love not to be led: I'd go alone.
Let not the mouse of my good meaning, Lady,
Be snapped up in the trap of your suspicion,
To lose the tail there, either of her truth,
Or swallowed by the Cat of misconstruction.
You are too finical form; speak plain Sir.
Welcome again my Audrey: welcome Love:
You shall with me; in faith deny me not.
I cannot brook the second hazard Mistress.
Forbear Squire Tub, as mine own mother says;
I am not for your mowing. You'll be flown
E'er I be fledge.
Hast thou the money Miles?
Here are two bags, there's fifty pound in each.
Nay Audrey, I possess you for this time:
Sirs; Take that coin between you, and divide it.
My pretty sweeting give me now the leave
To challenge love, and marriage at your hands.
Now, out upon you, are you not ashamed?
What will my Lady say? In faith I think
She was at our house: And I think she asked for you:
And I think she hit me i' th' teeth with you,
I thank her Ladyship, and I think she means
Not to go hence, till she has found you. How say you?
Was than my Lady Mother at your house?
Let's have a word aside.
Yes, twenty words.
'Tis strange, a motion, but I know not what,
Comes in my mind, to leave the way to Totten,
And turn to Kentishtowne, again my journey:
And see my son Pol-marten with his Audrey:
E'er while we left her at her father's house:
And hath he thence removed her in such haste!
What shall I do? shall I speak faite, or chide?
Madam, your worthy son, with duteous care,
Can govern his affections: Rather than
Break of their conference some other way,
Pretending ignorance of what you know.
And this all, fair
I am thine.
Mine you were once, though scarcely now your own.
'Slid my Lady! my Lady!
Is this my Lady bright?
Madam, you took me now a little tardy.
At prayers, I think you were: what, so devout
Of late, that you will shrive you to all Confessors
You meet by chance? Come, go with me, good Squire,
And leave your linen: I have now a business,
And of importance, to impart unto you.
Madam, I pray you, spare me but an hour;
Please you to walk before, I follow you.
It must be now, my business lies this way.
Will not an hour hence, Madam, excuse me?
Squire, these excuses argue more your guilt.
You have some new device now, to project,
Which the poor Tileman scarce will thank you for.
What? will you go?
I ha' ta'en a charge upon me,
To see this Maid conducted to her Father,
Who, with the Cannon Hugh, stays her at Pancras,
To see her married to the same Iohn Clay.
'tis very well; but Squire take you no care.
I'll sand Pol-marten with her, for that office.
You shall along with me; it is decreed.
I have a little business, with a friend Madam.
That friend shall stay for you, or you for him.
Pol-marten; Take the Maiden to your care;
Commend me to her Father.
I will follow you.
Tut, tell not me of following.
I'll but speak
A word.
No whispering: you forget yourself,
And make your love too palpable: A Squire?
And think so meanly? fall upon a Cow-shard?
You know my mind. Come, I'll to Turfe's house,
And see for Dido, and our Valentine.
Pol-marten, look to your charge; I'll look to mine.
I smile to think after so many proffers
This Maid hath had, she now should fall to me:
That I should have her in my custody:
'tTwere but a mad trick to make the essay,
And jump a match with her immediately:
She's fair, and handsome: and she's rich enough:
Both time, and place minister fair occasion:
Have at it than: Fair Lady, can you love?
No Sir, what's that?
A toy, which women use.
If't be a toy, it's good to play withal.
We will not stand discoursing o'the toy:
The way is short please you to prove't Mistress?
If you do mean to stand so long upon it;
I pray you let me give it a short cut, Sir.
It's thus, fair Maid: Are you disposed to marry?
You are disposed to ask.
Are you to grant?
Nay, now I see you are disposed indeed.
I see the wench wants but a little wit;
And that defect her wealth may well supply:
In plain terms, tell me, Will you have me Audrey?
In as plain terms, I tell you who would ha' me.
Iohn Clay would ha' me, but he hath too hard hands;
I like not him: besides, he is a thief.
And Justice Bramble, he would feign ha' catched me:
But the young Squire, he, rather than his life,
Would ha' me yet; and make me a Lady, he says,
And be my Knight; to do me true Knight's service,
Before his Lady Mother. Can you make me
A Lady, would I ha' you?
I can give you
A silken Gown, and a rich Petticoat:
And a french Hood. All fools love to be brave:
I found her humour, and I will pursue it.
And as I told thee, she was intercepted
By the Squire here, my son: and this bold Ruffian
His man, who safely would have carried her
Unto her Father; and the Cannon Hugh;
But for more care of the security,
My Usher hath her now, in his grave charge.
Now on my faith, and holy-dom, we are
Beholden to your worship. She's a Girl,
A foolish Girl, and soon may tempted be:
But if this day pass well once o'er her head,
I'll wish her trust to herself. For I have been
A very mother to her, though I say it.
Madam, 'tis late, and Pancridge is i' your way:
I think your Ladyship forgets yourself.
Your mind runs much on Pancridge. Well, young Squire,
The black Ox never trod yet O your foot:
These idle Fantasies will forsake you one day.
Come Mistress Turf, will you go take a walk
Over the fields to Pancridge, to your husband?
Madam, I had been there an hour ago:
But that I waited on my man Ball Puppy.
What Ball I say? I think the idle avouch
Be fall'n asleep i' the barn, he stays so long.
Satin, i' the name of velvet Satin, Dame!
The Devil! O the Devil is in the barn:
Help, help, a legion—
Is in the barn! in every straw a Devil.
Why dost thou bawl so Puppy? Speak, what ails thee?
My name's Ball Puppy, I ha' seen the Devil
Among the straw: O for a Cross! a Collop
Of Friar Bacon, or a conjuring stick
Of Doctor Faustus! Spirits are in the barn.
How! Spirits in the barn? Basket, go see.
Sir, an you were my Master ten times over,
And Squire to boot; I know, and you shall pardon me:
Sand me 'mong Devils? I zee you love me not:
Hell be at their game: I'll not trouble them.
Go see; I warrant thee there's no such matter.
An they were Giants, it were another matter.
But Devils! Not, if I be torn in pieces,
What is your warrant worth? I'll see the Fiend
Set fire o' the barn, ere I come there.
Now all Zaints bless us, and if he be there,
He is an ugly spirit, I warrant.
As ever
Held flesh-hooke, Dame, or handled fire-fork rather:
They have put me in a sweet pickle, Dame:
But that my Lady- Valentine smells of musk,
I should be ashamed to press into this presence.
Basket, I pray thee see what is the miracle!
Come, go with me: I'll lead. Why standest thou man?
Cock's precious Master, you are not mad indeed?
You will not go to hell before your time?
Why art thou thus afraid?
Not, not afraid:
But by your leave, I'll come no near the barn.
Puppy! wilt thou go with me?
How? go with you▪
Wither, into the Barn? To whom, the Devil?
Or to do what there? to be torn 'mongst ' hum?
Stay for my Master, the High Constable,
Or In-and-In, the Head-borough; let them go,
Into the Barn with warrant, seize the Fiend;
And set him in the stocks for his ill rule:
'Tis not for me that am but flesh and blood,
To meddle with ' un. Vor I cannot, nor I will not.
I pray thee Tripoli, look, what is the matter?
That shall I Madam.
Heaven protect my Master.
I tremble every joint till he be back.
Now, now, even now they are tearing him in pieces▪
Now are they tossing of his legs, and arms,
Like Loggats at a Peartree: I'll to the hole,
Peep in, and look whether he lives or dies.
I would not be i' my Master's coat for thousands.
Than pluck it of, and turn thyself away.
O the Devil! the Devil! the Devil!
Where man? where?
Alas that ever we were borne. So near too?
The Squire hath him in his hand, and leads him
Out by the Collar.
O this is Iohn Clay.
Iohn Clay at Pancras, is there to be married.
This was the spirit reveld i' the Barn.
The Devil he was: was this he was crawling
Among the Wheat-straw? Had it been the Barley,
I should ha' ta'en him for the Devil in drink;
The Spirit of the Bride-ale: But poor Iohn,
Tame Iohn of Clay, that sticks about the bunghole—
If this be all your Devil, I would take
In hand to conjure him: But hell take me
If ere I come in a right Devils walk,
If I can keep me out on't.
Well meant Hilts.
But how came Clay thus hid here i' the straw,
When news was brought, to you all he was at Pancridge;
And you believed it?
Justice Brambles man
Told me so, Madam: And by that same token,
And other things, he had away my Daughter,
And two sealed bags of money.
Where's the Squire?
Is he gone hence?
HE was here Madam, but now.
Is the Hue and Cry passed by?
I, I, Iohn Clay.
And am I out of danger to be hanged?
Hanged Iohn? yes sure; unless, as with the Proverb,
You mean to make the choice of your own gallows.
Nay, than all's well, hearing your news Ball Pupy,
You ha' brought from Paddington, I even stole home here,
And thought to hid me, in the Barn ere since.
O wonderful! and news was brought us here,
You were at Pancridge, ready to be married.
No faith, I ne'er was further than the Barn.
Haste Puppy. Call forth Mistress Dido Wisp,
My Lady's Gentlewoman, to her Lady;
And call yourself forth, and a couple of maids,
To wait upon me: we are all undone!
My Lady is undone! her fine young son,
The Squire is got away.
Haste, haste, good Valentine.
And you Iohn Clay; you are undone too! All!
My husband is undone, by a true key,
But a false token: And myself's undone,
By parting with my Daughter, who'll be married
To some body, that she should not, if we haste not.
I Pray thee good Pol-marten, show thy diligence,
And faith in both: Get her, but so disguised,
The Cannon may not know her, and leave me
To plot the rest: I will expect thee here.
You shall Squire. I'll perform it with all care,
If all my Lady's Wardrobe will disguise her.
Come Mistress Audrey.
Is the Squire gone?
he'll meet us by and by, where he appointed:
You shall be brave anon, as none shall know you.
I wonder, where the Queen's High Constable is!
I veare, they ha' made ' hun away.
Not zure; The Justice
Dare not conzent to that. he'll zee ' un forth coming.
He must, vor we can all take corpulent oath,
We zaw 'un go in there.
I, upon record!
The Clock dropped twelve at Marrowbone.
You are right, D'oge!
Zet down to a minute, now 'tis a ' most vowre.
Here comes Squire Tub.
And's Governor, Mr. Basket.
Hilts, do you know ' hun, a valiant wise vellow!
Az tall a man on his hands, as goes on veet.
Bless you Mass ' Basket.
Thank you good D'oge.
who's that?
D'oge Scriben, the great Writer Sir of Chalcot.
And, who the rest?
The wisest heads o'the hundred.
Medlay the joiner, Head-borough of Islington,
Pan of Belsize, and Clench the Leech of Hamsted.
The High Constable's Counsel, here of Finsbury,
Prezent me to 'em, Hilts, Squire Tub of Totten.
Wise men of Finsbury: make place for a Squire,
I bring to your acquaintance, Tub of Totten.
Squire Tub, my Master, loves all men of virtue.
And longs (az one would zay) till he be one on you.
His worship's wel'cun to our company:
will't were wiser for ' hun.
Here be some on us,
Are called the witty men, over a hundred;
And zome a thousand, when the Muster day comes.
I long (as my man Hilts said, and my Governor)
To be adopt in your society.
Can any man make a Masque here i' this company?
A Masque, what's that?
A mumming, or a show.
With vizards, and fine clothes.
A disguise, neighbour,
Is the true word: There stands the man, can do't Sir.
Medlay the Joiner, In-and-In of Islington,
The only man at a disguise in Midlesex.
But who shall writ it?
Scriben, the great Writer.
he'll do't alone Sir, He will join with no man:
Though he be a Joiner, in design he calls it.
He must be sole Inventor: In-and-In.
Draws with no other in's project, he'll tell you,
It cannot else be feazeable, or conduce:
Those are his ruling words? Please you to hear ' hun?
Yes Mr. In-and-In, I have heard of you;
I can do nothing, I
He can do all Sir.
They'll tell you so.
I'd have a toy presented,
A Tale of a Tub, a story of myself,
You can express a Tub.
If it conduce
To the design, what ere is feazeable:
I can express a Washhouse (If need be)
With a whole pedigree of Tubs.
Not, one
Will be enough to note our name, and family:
Squire Tub of Totten, and to show my adventures
This very day. I'd have it in Tubs-Hall,
At Totten-Court, my Lady Mother's house,
My house indeed, for I am heir to it.
If I might see the place, and had surveyed it;
I could say more: For all Invention, Sir,
Comes by degrees, and on the view of nature;
A world of things, concur to the design,
Which make it feazible, if Art conduce.
You say well, witty Mr. In-and-In.
How long ha' you studied Engine?
Since I first
Joined, or did in-lay in wit, some forty year.
A pretty time! Basket, go you and wait
On Master In-and-In to Totten-Court,
And all the other wise Masters; show 'em the Hall:
And taste the language of the buttery to 'em;
Let 'em see all the Tubs about the house,
That can raise matter, till I come— which shall be a
Within an hour at lest.
It will be glorious,
If In-and-In will undertake it, Sir:
He has a monstrous medlay wit o' his own.
Spare for no cost, either in boards, or hoops,
To architect your Tub: Ha' you ne'er a Cooper
At London called Vitruvius? sand for him;
Or old Iohn Haywood, call him to you, to help.
He scorns the motion, trust to him alone.
O, here's the Squire! you slipped us finely son!
These manners to your Mother, will commend you;
But in an other age, not this: well Tripoli,
Your Father, good Sir Peter (rest his bones)
Would not ha' done this: where's my Usher Martin?
And your fair Mrs. Audrey?
I not see'hem,
No creature, but the four wise Masters here,
Of Finsbury Hundred, came to cry their Constable,
Who they do say is lost.
My husband lost?
And my fond Daughter lost? I fear me too.
Where is your Gentleman, Madam? Poor Iohn Clay,
Thou hast lost thy Audrey.
I ha' lost my wits,
My little wits, good Mother; I am distracted.
And I have lost my Mistress Dido Wisp,
Who frowns upon her Puppy, Hannibal.
Loss! loss on everyside! a public loss!
Loss o' my Master! loss of his Daughter! loss
Of Favour, Friends, my Mistress! loss of all!
What Cry is this?
My man speaks of some loss.
My Master is found: Good luck, and't be thy will,
Light on us all.
O husband, are you a live?
They said you were lost.
Where's Justice Brambles Clerk?
Had he the money that I sent for?
Yes,
Two hours ago, two fifty pounds in silver,
And Audrey too.
Why Audrey? who sent for her?
You Master Turf, the fellow said.
He lied.
I am cozened, robbed, undone: your man's a Thief,
And run away with my Daughter, Mr. Bramble,
And with my money.
Neighbour Turf have patience,
I can assure you that your Daughter is safe,
But for the moneys I know nothing of.
My money is my Daughter; and my Daughter
She is my money, Madam.
I do wonder
Your Ladyship comes to know any thing
In these affairs.
Yes, Justice Bramble
I met the maiden i' the fields by chance,
I' the Squire's company my son: How he
Lighted upon her, himself best can tell.
I intercepted her, as coming hither,
To her Father, who sent for her, by Miles Metaphor,
Justice Preambles Clerk. And had your Ladyship
Not hindered it, I had paid fine Mr. Justice
For his young warrant, and new Purs'yvant,
He served it by this morning.
Know you that Sir?
You told me, Squire, a quite other tale,
But I believed you not, which made me sand
Audrey another way, by my Pol-marten:
And take my journey back to Kentishtowne,
Where we found Iohn Clay hidden i' the barn,
To scape the Hue and Cry; and here he is.
Iohn Clay age'n! nay, than— set Cock a hoop:
I ha' lost no Daughter, nor no money, Justice.
Iohn Clay shall pay. I'll look to you now John.
Vaith out it must, as good at night, as morning.
I am even as vull as a Pipers bag with joy,
Or a great Gun upon carnation day!
I could weep Lions tears to see you Iohn.
'Tis but two viftie pounds I ha' ventured for you:
But now I ha' you, you shall pay whole hundred.
Run from your Burroughs, son: faith even be hanged.
An you once earth yourself, Iohn, i' the barn,
I ha' no Daughter vor you: Who did verret ' hun.
My Lady's son, the Squire here, vetched ' hun out.
Puppy had put us all in such a uright,
We thought the Devil was i' the barn; and no body
Durst venture o' hun.
I am now resolved,
Who shall ha' my Daughter.
Who?
He best deserves her.
Here comes the Vicar. Cannon Hugh, we ha' vound
Iohn Clay again! the matter's all come round.
Is Metaphor returned yet?
All is turned
Here to confusion: we ha' lost our plot;
I fear my man is run away with the money,
And Clay is found, in whom old Turf is sure
To save his stake.
What shall we do than Justice?
The Bride was met i' the young Squires hands.
And what's become of her?
None here can tell.
Was not my Mother's man, Pol-marten, with you?
And a strange Gentlewoman in his company,
Of late here, Cannon?
Yes, and I dispatched 'hem.
Dispatched 'hem! how do you mean?
Why married 'hem.
As they desired; But now.
And do you know
What you ha' done, Sir Hugh?
No harm, I hope.
You have ended all the Quarrel. Audrey is married.
Married! to whom?
My Daughter Audrey married,
And she not know of it!
Nor her Father, or Mother!
Whom hath she married?
Your Pol-marten, Madam.
A Groom was never dreamt of.
Is he a man?
That he is Turf, and a Gentleman, I ha' made him.
Nay, an he be a Gentleman, let her shifted.
She was so brave, I knew her not, I swear;
And yet I married her by her own name.
But she was so disguised, so Ladylike;
I think she did not know herself the while!
I married 'em as a mere p●●re of strangers:
And they gave out themselves for such.
I wish 'em
Much joy, as they have given me hearts ease.
Than Madam, I'll entreat you now remit
Your jealousy of me; and please to take
All this good company home with you, to supper:
we'll have a merry night of it, and laugh.
A right good motion, Squire; which I yield to:
And thank them to accept it. Neighbour Turf,
I'll have you merry, and your wife: And you,
Sir Hugh, be pardoned this your happy error.
By Justice Preamble, your friend and patron.
If the young Squire can pardon it, I do.
Stay my dear Dido, and good Vicar Hugh,
We have a business with you: In short, this
If you dare knit another pair of strangers,
Dido of Carthage, and her Countryman,
Stout Hannibal stands to't. I have asked consent,
And she hath granted.
But saith Dido so?
From what Ball-Hanny hath said, I dare not go.
Come in than, I'll dispatch you. A good supper
Would not be lost, good company, good discourse;
But above all where wit hath any source.
After the hoping of your pardon, Madam,
For many faults committed. Here my wife,
And I do stand expecting your mild doom.
I wish thee joy Pol-marten; and thy wife:
As much, Mistress Pol-marten. Thou hast tricked her
Up very fine, me thinks.
For that I made
Bold with your Ladyship's Wardrobe, but have trespassed
Within the limits of your leave— I hope.
I give her what she wears. I know all women
Love to be fine. Thou hast deserved it of me:
I am extremely pleased with thy good fortune.
Welcome good Justice Preamble; And Turf,
Look merrily on your Daughter: She has married
A Gentleman.
So me thinks; I dare not touch her
She is so fine: yet I will say, God bless h●●.
And I too, my fine Daughter. I could love her
Now, twice as well, as if Clay had her.
Come, come, my Mother is pleased. I pardon all,
Pol-marten in, and wait upon my Lady.
Welcome good Guests: see supper be served in,
With all the plenty of the house, and worship.
I must confer with Mr. In-and-In,
About some alterations in my Masque;
Sand Hilts out to me: Bid him bring the Council
Of Finsbury hither. I'll have such a night
Shall make the name of Totten-Court immortal:
And be recorded to posterity.
O Mr. In-and-In, what ha' you done?
Surveyed the place Sir, and designed the ground,
Or stand still of the work: And this it is.
First, I have fixed in the earth, a Tub;
And an old Tub, like a Salt-Peeter Tub,
Preluding by your Father's name Sir Peter,
And the antiquity of your house, and family,
Original from Salt-Peeter.
Good i'faith,
You ha' shown reading, and antiquity here, Sir.
I have a little knowledge in design,
Which I can varie Sir to Infinite.
Ad Infinitum Sir you mean.
I do.
I stand not on my Latin, I'll invent,
But I must be alone than, joined with no man.
This we do call the Stand-still of our work.
Who are those we? you now joined to yourself.
I mean myself still, in the plural number,
And out of this we raise our Tale of a Tub.
Not, Mr. In-and-In, my Tale of a Tub.
By your leave, I am Tub, the Tale's of me,
And my adventures! I am Squire Tub,
Subjectum Fabulae.
But I the Author.
The Workman Sir! the Artificer! I grant you.
So Skelton-Lawreat; was of Elinour Bumming:
But she the subject of the Rout, and Tunning.
He has put you to it, Neighbour In-and-In.
Do not dispute with him, he still will win.
That pays for all.
Are you revised o''at?
A man may have wit, and yet put of his hat.
Now, Sir this Tub, I will have capt with paper:
A fine oiled Lanterne-paper, that we use.
Yes every Barber, every Cutler has it.
Which in it doth contain the light to the business.
And shall with the very vapour of the Candle,
Drive all the motions of our matter about:
As we present 'hem. For example, first
The worshipful Lady Tub.
Right worshipful,
I pray you, I am worshipful myself.
Your Squire-ships Mother, passeth by (her Usher,
Mr. Pol-marten bareheaded before her)
In her velvet Gown.
But how shall the Spectators?
As it might be, I, or Hilts, know 'tis my Mother?
Or that Pol-marten there that walks before her.
O we do nothing, if we clear not that.
You ha' seen none of his works Sir?
All the postures
Of the trained bands o'the Country.
All their colours.
And all their Captains.
All the Cries o' the City:
And all the trades i' their habits.
He has his whistle
Of command: Seat of authority!
And verge to ' interpret, tipped with silver, Sir
You know not him.
Well, I will leave all to him:
Give me the brief o' your subject. Leave the whole
State of the thing to me.
Supper is ready, Sir.
My Lady calls for you.
I'll sand it you in writing.
Sir, I will tender feazible, and facile,
What you expect.
Hilts, be't your care,
To see the Wise of Finsbury made welcome:
Let 'em want nothing. Iz old Rosin sent for?
he's come within.
Lord! what a world of business
The Squire dispatches!
He is a learned man:
I think there are but view o' the Inns o' Court,
Or the Inns o' Chancery like him.
Care to fit' un than.
Yonder's another wedding, Master Basket,
Brought in by Vicar Hugh.
what are they, Iack?
The High Constable's Man, Ball Hanny; and Mrs. Wispes,
Our Lady's woman.
And are the Table merry?
There's a young Tile-maker makes all laugh;
He will not eat his meat, but cries at th' board,
He shall be hanged.
He has lost his wench already:
As good be hanged.
Was she that is Pol-marten,
Our fellow's Mistress, wench to that sneak- Iohn?
I faith, Black Iack, he should have been her Bridegroom:
But I must go to wait o' my wise Masters.
Iack, you shall wait on me, and see the Mask anon:
I am half Lord Chamberlin, i' my Master's absence.
Shall we have a Masque? Who makes it?
In-and-In.
The Maker of Islington: Come go with me
To the sage sentences of Finsbury.
Come, give us in the great Chair, for my Lady;
And set it there: and this for Justice Bramble.
This for the Squire my Master, on the right hand.
And this for the High Constable.
This his wife.
Than for the Bride, and Bridegroom, here Pol-marten.
And she Pol-marten, army Ladies feet.
Right.
And beside them Mr. Hannibal Puppy.
And his she Puppy, Mistress Wisp that was:
Here's all are in the note.
Not, Mr. Vicar:
The petty Cannon Hugh.
And Castby Clay:
There they are all.
Than cry a Hall, a Hall!
'Tis merry in Tota tenham Hall, when beards wag all.
Come Father Rozin with your Fiddle now,
And two tall-toters; Flourish to the Masque.
Neighbours, all welcome: Now doth Tottenhall
Show like a Court: and hence shall first be called so.
Your witty short confession Mr. Vicar,
Within hath been the Prologue, and hath opened
Much to my son's device, his Tale of a Tub.
Let my Masque show itself: And In-and-In,
The Architect, appear; I hear the whistle.
Thus rise I first, in my light linen breeches,
To run the meaning over in short speeches.
Here is a Tub; A Tub of Totten-Court:
An ancient Tub, hath called you to this sport:
His Father was a Knight, the rich Sir Peter;
Who got his wealth by a Tub, and by Salt-Peeter:
And left all to his Lady Tub; the mother
Of this bold Squire Tub, and to no other.
Now of this Tub, and's deeds, not done in ale,
Observe, and you shall see the very Tale.
Here Cannon Hugh, first brings to Tottenhall
The high Constable's council, tells the Squire all;
Which, though discovered (give the Devil his due:)
The wise of Finsbury do still pursue.
Than with the Justice, doth he counterplot,
And his Clerk Metaphor, to cut that knot:
Whilst Lady Tub, in her sad velvet Gown,
Missing her son, doth seek him up and down.
With her Pol-marten bore before her.
Yes, I have expressed it here in figure, and Mistress Wisp her woman, holding up her train.
I'the next page, report your second strain.
Here the high Constable, and Sages walk
To Church, the Dame, the Daughter, Bridemaids talk,
Of wedding business; till a fellow in comes,
Relates the robbery of one Captain Thums:
Chargeth the Bridegroom with it: Troubles all,
And gets the Bride; who in the hands doth fall
Of the bold Squire, but thence soon is ta'en
By the sly Justice, and his Clerk profane
In shape of Pursuyvant; which he not long
Holds, but betrays all with his trembling tongue:
As truth will break out, and show, etc.
O thou hast made him kneel there in a corner,
I see now: there is simple honour for you Hilts!
Did I not make him to confess all to you?
True; In-and-In hath done you right, you see.
Thy third I pray thee, witty In-and-In.
The Squire commends ' un. He doth like all well.
He cannot choose. This is gear made to cell.
The careful Constable, here drooping comes,
In his deluded search, of Captain Thums.
Puppy brings word, his Daughter's run away.
With the tall Servingman. He frights Groom Clay,
Out of his wits. Returneth than the Squire,
Mocks all their pains, and gives Fame out a Liar:
For falsely charging Clay, when 'twas the plot,
Of subtle Bramble, who had Audrey got,
Into his hand, by this winding device.
The Father makes a rescue in a trice:
And with his Daughter, like Saint George on foot,
Comes home triumphing, to his dear Hart root.
And tell's the Lady Tub, whom he meets there,
Of her son's courtesies, the Bachelor.
Whose words had made 'em fall the Hue and Cry.
When Captain Thum's coming to ask him, why
He had so done? He cannot yield him cause:
But so he runs his neck into the Laws.
The Laws, who have a noose to crack his neck,
As Justice Bramble tells him, who doth peck
A hundreth pound out of his purse, that comes
Like his teeth from him, unto Captain Thums.
Thum's is the Vicar in a false disguise:
And employs Metaphor, to fetch this prize.
Who tells the secret unto Basket-Hilts,
For fear of beating. This the Squire quilts
Within his Cap; and bids him but purloin
The wench for him: they two shall share the coin.
Which the sage Lady in her 'foresaid Gown
Breaks of, returning unto Kentishtowne,
To seek her Wisp; taking the Squire along,
Who finds Clay Iohn, as hidden in straw throng.
O, how am I beholden to the Inventor,
That would not, on record against me enter!
My slackness here, to enter in the barn,
Well In-and-In, I see thou canst discern!
On with your last, and come to a Conclusion.
The last is known, and needs but small infusion
Into your memories, by leaving in
These Figures as you sit. I, In-and-In,
Present you with the show: First of a Lady
Tub, and her son, of whom this Masque here, made I.
Than Bridegroom Pol, and Mistress Pol the Bride:
With the sub-couple, who sit them beside.
That only verse, I altered for the better, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 gratid.
Than Justice Bramble, with Sir Hugh the Cannon:
And the Bride's Parents, which I will not stan'on,
Or the lost Clay, with the recovered Giles:
Who thus unto his Master, him ' conciles,
On the Squire's word, to pay old Turf his Club,
And so doth end our Tale, here, of a Tub.
THis Tale of me, the Tub of Totten-Court,
A Poet, first invented for your sport.
Wherein the fortune of most empty Tubs
Rolling in love, are shown; and with what rubs,
W''re commonly encountered: When the wit
Of the whole Hundred so opposeth it.
Our petty Chanon's forked plot in chief,
Sly justice arts, with the High Constables Brief,
And brag Commands; my Lady Mother's care;
And her Pol-martens fortune; with the rare
Fate of poor Iohn, thus tumbled in the Cask;
Got In-and-In, to gi't you in a Masque:
That you be pleased, who come to see a Play,
With those that hear, and mark not what we say.
Wherein the Poet's fortune is, I fear,
Still to be early up, but ne'er the near.