HE that hath feasted you these forty years,
And fitted Fables, for your finer ears,
Although at first, he scarce could hit the bore;
Yet you, with patience hearkening more and more,
At length have grown up to him, and made known,
The Working of his Pen is now your own:
He prays you would vouchsafe, for your own sake,
To hear him this once more, but, sit awake.
And though he now present you with such wool,
As from mere English Flocks his Muse can pull,
He hopes when it is made up into Cloth;
Not the most curious head here will be loathe
To wear a Hood of it; it being a Fleece,
To match, or those of Sicily, or Greece.
His Scene is Sherwood: i And his Play a Tale
Of Robinhood's inviting from the Vale
Of Be'voir, all the Shep'ards to a Feast:
Where, by the casual absence of one Guest,
The Mirth is troubled much, and in one Man
As much of sadness shown, as Passion can.
The sad young Shep'ard, whom we here present,
Like his woes Figure, dark and discontent,
For his lost Love; who in the Trent is said,
To have miscarried; 'lasse! what knows the head
Of a calm River, whom the feet have drowned?
Hear what his sorrows are; and, if they wound
Your gentle breasts, so that the End crown all,
Which in the Scope of one day's chance may fall:
Old Trent will sand you more such Tales as these,
And shall grow young again, as one doth please.
But here's an Heresy of late let fall;
That Mirth by no means fits a Pastoral;
Such say so, who can make none, he presumes:
Else, there's no Scene, more properly assumes
The Sock. For whence can sport in kind arise,
But from the Rural Routs and Families?
Safe on this ground than, we not fear to day,
To tempt your laughter by our rustic Play.
Wherein if we distaste, or be cried down,
We think we therefore shall not leave the Town;
Nor that the Fore-wits, that would draw the rest
Unto their liking, always like the best.
The wise, and knowing Critic will not say,
This worst, or better is, before he weigh;
Where every piece be perfect in the kind:
And than, though in themselves he difference found,
Yet if the place require it where they stood,
The equal fitting makes them equal good.
You shall have Love and Hate, and jealousy,
As well as Mirth, and Rage, and Melancholy:
Or whatsoever else may either move,
Or stir affections, and your like prove.
But that no stile for Pastoral should go
Current, but what is stamped with Ah, and O;
Who judgeth so, may singularly err;
As if all Poesy had one Character:
In which what were not written, were not right,
Or that the man who made such one poor flight,
In his whole life, had with his winged skill
Advanced him upmost on the Muse's hill.
When he like Poet yet remains, as those
Are Painters who can only make a Rose.
From such your wits redeem you, or your chance,
Jest to a greater height you do advance
Of Folly, to contemn those that are known
Artificers, and trust such as are none.
HEre! she was want to go! and here! and here!
Just where those Daisies, Pinks, and Violets grow:
The world may found the Spring by following her;
For other print her airy steps near left:
Her treading would not bend a blade of grass!
Or shake the downy Blow-ball from his stalk!
But like the soft West-wind, she shot along,
And where she went, the Flowers took thickest root,
As she had sowed 'em with her odorous foot.
Know you, or can you guess, my merry men,
What 'tis that keeps your Master Robin-hood
So long both from his Marian, and the Wood?
Forsooth, Madam, he will be here by noon,
And prays it of your bounty as a boon,
That you by than have killed him Venison some,
To feast his jolly friends, who hither come
In threaves to frolic with him, and make cheer;
Here's Little Iohn hath harboured you a Deer,
I see by his tackling.
And a Hart of ten,
I trow he be, Madam, or blame your men:
For by his Slot, his Entries, and his Port,
His Fraying, Fewmets, he doth promise' sport,
And standing 'fore the Dogs; he bears a head,
Large, and well beamed: with all rights sommed, and spread.
Let's rouse him quickly, and lay on the Hounds.
Scathlock is ready with them on the grounds;
So is his brother Scarlet: now they'ave found
His Layre, they have him sure within the pound.
Away than, when my Robin bids a Feast,
'Twere sin in Marian to defraud a Guest.
And I, the Chaplain, here am left to be
Steward to day, and charge you all in fee,
To don your Liveries; see the Bowerdrest;
And fit the fine devises for the Feast:
You George must care to make the Baldric trim,
And Garland that must crown, or her, or him;
Whose Flock this year, hath brought the earliest Lamb!
Good Father Tuck, at your Commands I am
To cut the Table out O the green sword,
Or any other service for my Lord;
To carve the Guests large seats; and these laid in
With turf (as soft and smooth as the Moles skin:)
And hung the bulled Nose-gaies 'bove their heads,
The Pipers bank, whereon to sit and play;
And a fair Dial to meet out the day.
Our Master's Feast shall want no just delights:
His entertainments must have all the rites.
I, and all choice that plenty can sand in;
Bread, Wine, Acates, Fowle, Feather, Fish, or Fin,
For which my Father's Nets have swept the Trent.
And ha' you found her?
Whom?
My drowned Love.
Earine! the sweet Earine!
The bright, and beautiful Earine!
Have you not heard of my Earine?
Just by your Father's Mills (I think I am right)
Are not you Much the Miller's son?
I am.
And Baily to brave Robin-hood?
The same.
Close by your Father's Mills, Earine!
Earine was drowned! O my Earine!
(Old Maudlin tells me so, and Douce her Daughter)
Ha' you swept the River say you? and not found her?
For Fowl, and Fish we have.
O not for her?
You're goodly friends! right charitable men!
Nay, keep your way, and leave me: make your toys,
Your tales, your poesies, that you talked of; all
Your entertainments: you not injure me:
Only if I may enjoy my Cypress wreath!
And you will let me weep! ('tis all I ask;)
Till I be turned to water, as was she!
And troth what less suit can you grant a man?
His Fantasy is hurt, let us now leave him:
The wound is yet too fresh, to admit searching.
Searching? where should I search? or on what tract?
Can my slow drop of tears, or this dark shade
About my brows, enough describe her loss!
Earine, O my Earine's loss!
Not, no, no, no; this heart will break first.
How will this sad disaster strike the ears
Of bounteous Robin-hood, our gentle Master?
How will it mar his mirth, abate his feast;
And strike a horror into every guest!
If I could knit whole clouds about my brows,
And weep like Swithen, or those watery signs,
The Kids that rise than, and drown all the Flocks
Of those rich Shepherds, dwelling in this Vale;
Those careless Shepherds, that did let her drown!
Than I did something or could make old Trent
Drunk with my sorrow, to start out in breaches
To drown their Herds, their cattle, and their corn,
Break down their Mills, their Dams, o'erturn their weeres,
And see their houses, and whole livelihood
Wrought into water, with her, all were good:
I'd kiss the torrent, and those whirls of Trent,
That sucked her in, my sweet Earine!
When they have cast their body on the shore,
And it comes up, as tainted as themselves,
All pale and bloodless, I will love it still,
For all that they can do, and make 'em mad,
To see how I will hug it in mine arms!
And hung upon the looks, devil on her eyes:
Feed round about her lips, and eat her kisses!
Suck of her drowned flesh! and where's their malice?
Not all their envious sousing can change that:
But I will study some revenge passed this!
I pray you give me leave, for I will study.
Though all the Bells, Pipes, Tabors, Timburines' ring
That you can plant about me: I will study.
Welcome bright Clarion, and sweet Mellifleur,
The courteous Lionel, fair Amie; all
My friends and neighbours, to the Jolly Bower
Of Robin-hood, and to the greenewood Walks:
Now that the shearing of your sheep is done,
And the washed Flocks are lighted of their wool,
The smother Ewes are ready to receive.
The mounting Rams again; and both do feed,
As either promised to increase your breed
At eaning time; and bring you lusty twins.
Why should, or you, or we so much forget
The season in ourselves: as not to make
Use of our youth, and spirits, to awake
The nimble Hornpipe, and the Timburine,
And mix our Songs, and Dances in the Wood,
And each of us cut down a Triumph-bough.
Such were the Rites, the youthful Iune allow.
They were, gay Robin, but the sourer sort
Of Shepherds now disclaim in all such sport:
And say, our Flocks the while, are poorly fed,
When with such vanities the Swains are led.
Would they, wise Clarion, were not hurried more
With Covetise and Rage, when to their store
They add the poor man's Eaneling, and dare cell
Both Fleece, and Carcase, not gi'ing him the Fell.
When to one Goat, they reach that prickly weed,
Which maketh all the rest forbear to feed;
Or strew Tods hairs, or with their tails do sweep
The dewy grass, to d'off the simpler sheep;
Or dig deep pits, their Neighbours Neat to vex,
To drown the Calves, and crack the Heifers necks.
Or with pretence of chase thence the Brock,
Sand in a cur to worry the whole Flock.
O Friar, those are faults that are not seen,
Ours open, and of worst example been.
They call ours, Pagan pastimes, that infect
Our blood with ease, our youth with all neglect;
Our tongues with wantonness, our thoughts with lust,
And what they censure ill, all others must.
I do not know, what their sharp sight may see
Of late, but I should think it still might be
(As 'twas) a happy age, when on the Plains,
The Woodmen met the Damsels, and the Swains
The Neat'ards, Ploughmen, and the Pipers loud,
And each did dance, some to the Kit, or Crowd,
Some to the Bagpipe, some the Tabret-moved,
And all did either love, or were beloved.
The dextrous Shepherd than would try his sling,
Than dart his Hook at Daisies, than would sing.
Sometimes would wrestle.
I, and with a Lass:
And give her a new garment on the grass;
After a course at Barleybreak, or Base.
And all these deeds were seen without offence,
Or the lest hazard o' their innocence.
Those charitable times had no mistrust.
Shepherds knew how to love, and not to lust.
Each minute that we loose thus, I confess,
Deserves a censure on us, more or less;
But that a sadder chance hath given allay,
Both to the Mirth, and Music of this day.
Our fairest Shepherdess we had of late,
Here upon Trent, is drowned; for whom her mate
Young Aeglamour, a Swain, who best could tread
Our country dances, and our games did lead,
Lives like the melancholy Turtle, drowned
Deeper in woe, than she in water: crowned
With Yewgh and Cypressa, and will scarce admit
The Physic of our presence to his fit.
Sometimes he sits, and thinks all day, than walks,
Than thinks again; and sighs, weeps, laughs, and talks,
And, 'twixt his pleasing frenzy, and sad grief,
Is so distracted; as no sought relief,
By all our studies can procure his peace.
The passion finds in him that large increase,
As we doubt hourly we shall loose him too.
You should not cross him than what ere you do:
For Phantasy stopped, will soon take fire, and burn
Into an anger, or to a Frenzy turn.
Nay, so we are advised by Alhen here,
A good sage Shepherd, who alltho ' he wear
An old worn hat and cloak, can tell us more
Than all the forward Fry, that boast their Lore.
See, yonder comes the brother of the Maid,
Young Karolin! how curious, and afraid
He is at once! willing to found him out,
And loathe to'offend him.
Sure he's here about.
See where he sits.
It will be rare, rare, rare!
An exquisite revenge: but peace, no words!
Not for the fairest fleece of all the Flock;
If it be known afore, 'tis all worth nothing!
I'll carve it on the trees, and in the turf,
On every green sworth, and in every path,
Just to the Margin of the cruel Trent;
There will I knock the story in the ground,
In smooth great pebble, and moss fill it round,
Till the whole Country read how she was drowned,
And with the plenty of salt tears thereshed,
Quite altar the complexion of the Spring.
Or I will get some old, old Grandam, thither,
Whose rigid foot but dipped into the water,
Shall strike that sharp and sudden cold, throughout,
As it shall lose all virtue; and those Nymphs,
Those treacherous Nymphs pulled in Earine;
Shall stand curled up, like Images of Ice;
And never thaw! mark, never! a sharp Justice:
Or stay, a better! when the years at hottest,
And that the Dogstar foams, and the streams boil,
And curls, and works, and swells ready to sparkle:
To fling a fellow with a Fever in,
To set it all on fire, till it burn,
Blew as Scamander, 'fore the walls of Troy;
When Vulcan leapt in to him, to consume him.
A deep hurt Phantasy.
Do you not approve it?
Yes gentle Aeglamour, we all approve,
And come to gratulate your just revenge:
Which since it is so perfect, we now hope,
You'll leave all care thereof, and mix with us,
In all the proffered solace of the Spring.
A Spring, now she is dead: of what, of thorns?
Briars, and Brambles? Thistles? Burrs, and Dorks?
Cold Hemlock? Yewgh? the Mandrake, or the Box?
These may grow still; but what can spring beside?
Did not the whole Earth sicken, when she died?
As if there since did fall one drop of dew,
But what was wept for her! or any stalk
Did bear a Flower! or any branch a bloom;
After her wreath was made: In faith, in faith
You do not fair, to put these things upon me.
Which can in no sort be: Earine,
Who had her very being, and her name,
With the first knots, or buddings of the Spring,
Borne with the Prim risen, and the Violet,
Or earliest Roses blown: when Cupid smiled,
And Venus led the Graces out to dance,
And all the Flowers, and Sweets in Nature's lap,
leapt out and made their solemn Conjuration,
To last, but while she lived: Do not I know,
How the Vale withered the same Day? How Dove,
Deane, Eye, and Erwash, Idell, Snite, and Soar,
Each broke his Urn, and twenty waters more,
That swelled proud Trent, shrunk themselves dry; that since,
No Sun, or Moon, or other cheerful Star
Looked out of heaven! but all the Cope was dark,
As it were hung so for her Exequys!
And not a voice or sound, to ring her knell:
But of that dismal pair, the screeching Owl;
And buzzing Hornet! hark, hark, hark the foul
Bird! how she flutters with her wicker wings!
Peace you shall hear her screech.
Good Karolin sing,
Help to divert this Phantasy.
All I can.
Though I am young, and cannot tell,
Either what Death, or Love is well,
Yet I have heard, they both bear darts,
And both do aim at human hearts:
And than again, I have been told
Love wounds with heart, as Death with cold;
So that I fear, they do but bring
Extremes to touch, and mean one thing.
As in a ruin, we it call
One thing to be blown up, or fall;
Or to our end, like way may have,
By a flash of lightning, or a wave:
So Loves inflamed shaft, or brand,
May kill as soon as Death's cold hand;
Except Love's fires the virtue have
To fright the frost out of the grave.
Do you think so? are you in that good heresy?
I mean opinion? If you be, say nothing:
I'll study it, as a new Philosophy,
But by myself alone: Now you shall leave me I
Some of these Nymphs, here will reward you; this
This pretty Maid, although but with a kiss,
Lived my Earine, you should have twenty:
For every line here, one I would allow 'em
From mine own store, the treasure I had in her:
Now I am poor as you.
And I a wretch!
Yet keep an eye upon him, Karoline.
Alas that ever such a generous spirit,
As Aeglamours, should sink by such a loss.
The truest Lovers are least fortunate,
Looks all their Lives, and Legends; what they call
The Lover's Scriptures: Heliodores, or Tatij!
Longi! Eustathij! Prodomis! you'll found it!
What think you Father?
I have known some few,
And read of more; wh'have had their dose, and deep,
Of these sharp bitter-sweets.
But what is this
To jolly Robin? who the Story is,
Of all beatitude in Love?
And told
Here every day, with wonder on the world.
And with fame's voice.
Save that some folk delight
To blend all good of others, with some spite.
He, and his Marian, are the Sum and Talk
Of all, that breath here in the Greenewood Walk.
Or Be'voir Vale?
The Turtles of the Wood.
The billing Pair.
And so are understood
For simple loves, and sampled lives beside.
Faith, so much virtue should not be envied.
Better be so, than pitied Mellifleur!
For 'gainst all envy, virtue is a cure;
But wretched pity ever calls on scorns.
The Deers brought home: I hear it by their horns.
My Marian, and my Mistress!
My loved Robin!
The Moons at full, the happy pair are met!
How hath this morning paid me, for my rising!
First, with my sports; but most with meeting you!
I did not half so so well reward my hounds,
As she hath me to day: although I gave them
All the sweet morsels, called Tongue, Ears, and Dowcets!
What? and the inch-pin?
Yes.
Your sports than pleased you?
You are a wanton.
One I do confess
I wanted till you came, but now I have you,
I'll grow to your embraces, till two souls
Distilled into kisses, through our lips
Do make one spirit of love.
O Robin! Robin!
Breathe, breathe a while, what says my gentle Marian?
Can you so long be absent?
What a week?
Was that so long?
How long are Lovers weeks!
Do you think Robin, when they are asunder?
Are they not Prisoners years?
To some they seem so;
But being met again, theyare Schoolboys hours.
That have got leave to play, and so we use them.
Had you good sport i' your chase to day?
O prime!
A lusty Stag?
And hunted ye at force?
In a full cry.
And never hunted change!
You had staunch Hounds than?
Old and sure, I love
No young rash dogs, no more than changing friends.
What relays set you?
None at all; we laid not
In one fresh dog.
He stood not long than?
Yes,
Five hours and more. A great, large Deer!
What head?
Forked! A Hart of ten.
He is good Venison,
According to the season i' the blood,
I'll promise' all your friends, for whom he fell.
But at his fall there happed a chance.
Worth mark?
I! what was that sweet Marian
You'll not hear?
I love these interruptions in a Story;
They make it sweeter.
You do know, as soon
As the Assay is taken.
On my Marian.
I did but take the Assay.
You stop one's mouth,
And yet you bid 'em speak— when the Arbours made.
Pulled down, and paunch turned out.
He that undoes him;
Doth cleave the brisket-bone, upon the spoon
Of which, a little gristle grows, you call it—
the Ravens-bone.
Now, o'er head sat a Raven!
On a sear bough! a grown great Bird! and Hoarse!
Who, all the while the Deer was breaking up,
So crooked and cried for't, as all the huntsmen,
(Especially old Scathlock) thought it ominous!
Swore it was Mother Maudlin; whom he met,
At the Day-dawne; just as he roused the Deer,
Out of his Laire: but we made shifted to run him
Of his four legs, and sunk him e'er we left.
Is the Deer come?
He lies within o the dresser!
Will you go see him Mellifleur?
I attend you.
Come Amie, you'll go with us?
I am not well.
she's sick o' the young Shep'ard that be kissed her.
Friend, cheer your friends up, we will eat him merrily,
Saw you the Raven, Friend?
I, qu'ha suld let me?
I suld be afraid o you sir suld I?
Huntsman!
A Dram more of Civility would not hurt you?
Nay, you must give them all their rudenesses;
They are not else themselves, without their language.
And what do you think of her?
As of a Witch.
They call her a Wise-woman, but I think her
An arrant Witch.
And wherefore think you so?
Because, I saw her since, broiling the bone
Was cast her at the Quarry.
Where saw you her?
I' the Chimley nuik, within: she's there, now.
Your Hunt holds in his tale, still; and tells more!
My Hunt? what tale?
How! cloudy, Marian!
What look is this?
A fit one, Sir, for you.
Hand of rude Ranger! Sirrah, get you in
And bear the Venison hence. It is too good
For these course rustic mouths that cannot open,
Or spend a thank for't. A starved Muttons carcase
Would better fit their palates. See it carried
To Mother Maudlin's, whom you call the Witch, Sir.
Tell her I sent it to make merry with,
she'll turn us thanks at lest! why standest thou, Groom?
I wonder he can move! that he's not fixed!
If that his feeling be the same with mine!
I dare not trust the faith of mine own senses.
I fear mine eyes, and ears! this is not Marian!
Nor am I Robin-hood! I pray you ask her!
Ask her good Shep'ards! ask her all for me;
Or rather ask yourselves, if she be she;
Or I, be I
Yes, and you are the spy:
And the spied Spy, that watch upon my walks,
To inform what Deer I kill, or give away!
Where! when! to whom! but spy your worst, good Spy!
I will dispose of this where lest you like!
Fall to your cheesecakes, curds, and clawted cream,
Your fools, your flaunes; and of ale a stream
To wash it from your livers: strain ewes milk
Into your Cider sillabubs, and be drunk
To him, whose Fleece hath brought the earliest Lamb
This year; and wears the Baudrick at your board!
Where you may all go whistle; and record
This i' your dance: and foot it lustily.
I pray you friends, do you hear? and see, as I do?
Did the same accents strike your ears? and objects?
Your eyes, as mine?
We taste the same reproaches!
Have seen the changes!
Are we not all changed,
Transformed from ourselves?
I do not know!
The best is silence!
And to await the issue.
The dead, or lazy wait for't: I will found it.
HAve I not left 'em in a brave confusion?
Amazed their expectation? got their Venison?
Troubled their mirth, and meeting? made them doubtful,
And jealous of each other? all distracted?
And, i' the close, uncertain of themselves?
This can your Mother do my dainty Douce!
Take any shape upon her! and delude
The senses, best acquainted with their Owners!
The jolly Robin, who ' hath bid this feast,
And made this solemn invitation;
I ha' possessed so, with sick dislikes
Of his own Marian, that all-bee ' he know her,
As doth the vaulting hart, his venting hind,
He nêre fra' hence, shall neis her i' the wind,
To his first liking.
Did you so distaste him?
As far as her proud scorning him, could 'bate
Or blunt the edge of any Lover's temper.
But were ye like her mother?
So like Douce,
As had she seen me her sel', her sel' had doubted
Whether had been the liker of the twâ!
This can your Mother do, I tell you Daughter!
I ha' but dight ye, yet; i'the out-dresse;
And ' parraile of Earine! but this raiment,
These very weeds, shall make ye, as but coming
In view or ken of Aeglamour, your form
Shall show too slippery to be looked upon!
And all the Forest swear you to be she!
They shall rin after ye, and wage the odds,
Upo' their own deceived sights, ye ' are her!
Whilst she (poor Lass) is stocked up in a tree:
Your brother Lorells prize! For so my largess,
Hath lotted her, to be your brother's Mistress;
Give she can be reclaimed: give not, his Prey!
And here he comes, new claithed, like a Prince
Of Swine ards! sike he seems! dight i'the spoils
Of those he feeds! A mighty Lord of Swine!
He is command now, to woe. Let's step aside,
And hear his love-craft! See, he opes the door!
And takes her by the hand, and helps her forth!
This is true courtship, and becomes his ray.
Ye kind to others, but ye coy to me
Deft Mistress! whiter than the cheese, new pressed!
Smother than cream! and softer than the curds!
Why start ye from me, ere ye hear me tell
My wooing errand; and what rends I have?
Large herds, and pastures! Swine, and Kie, mine own!
And though my na'se be camused, my lips thick,
And my chin bristled! Pan, great Pan, was such!
Who was the chief of Herdsmen, and our Sire!
I am na ' Faith! na ' Incubus! na ' Changlin!
But a good man, that lives o' my awne geere.
This house! these grounds! this stock is all mine awne!
How better 'twere to me, this were not known!
She likes it not: but it is boasted well!
An hundred Udders for the pail I have,
That give me Milk and Curds, that make me Cheese
To cloy the Mercatts! twenty swarm of Bees,
Whilk (all the Summer) hum about the hive,
And bring me Wax, and Honey in by live.
An aged Oak the King of all the field,
With a broad Beech there grows afore my dur,
That mickell Mast unto the farm doth yield.
A Chestnut, whilk hath larded money a Swine,
Whose skins I wear, to fend me fra the Cold.
A Pop●●● green, and with a kerved Seat,
Under whose shade I solace in the heat;
And thence can see gang out, and in, my neat.
Twa trilland brooks, each (from his spring) doth meet,
And make a river, to refresh my feet:
In which, each morning ere the Sun doth rise,
I look myself, and clear my pleasant eyes,
Before I pipe; For, therein I have skill
'Bove other Swine'ards. Bid me, and I will
Strait play to you, and make you melody.
By no means. Ah! to me all minstrelsy
Is irksome, as are you.
Why scorn you me?
Because I am a Herdsman, and feed Swine!
I am a Lord of other gear! this sine
Smooth Bawsons' Cub, the young Grice of a Grey;
Twa tynie Urshins, and this Ferret gay.
Out on 'hem! what are these?
I give 'em ye;
As presents Mistress
O, the fiend, and thee!
Gar take them hence: they few manned all the claithes,
And prick my Coats: hence with 'em, limmer loon,
Thy vermin, and thyself, thy self art one;
I lock me up. All's well when thou art gone.
Did you hear this? she wished me at the fiend,
With all my presents!
A tu lucky end
She wishend thee, fowl Limmer! drittie Lowne!
Gud faith, it duills me that I am thy Mother!
And see, thy Sister scorns thee, for her Brother!
Thou woe thy Love? thy Mistress? with twa Hedge-hoggs?
A stinkand brock? a polecat? out thou houlet!
Thou shouldst ha'given her, a Madge-Owle! and than
Thou hadst made a present o' thyself, Owle-spiegle!
Why, Mother, I have heard ye bid to give;
And often, as the Cause calls.
I know well,
It is a witty part, sumtimes, to give.
But what? to whame? no monsters! nor to maidens!
He suld present them with mare pleasand things,
Things natural, and what all women covet
To see: the common Parent of us all!
Which Maids will twire at, 'tween their fingers, thus!
With which his Sire got him! he's get another!
And so beget posterity upon her!
This he should do! (false Gelden) gang thy gait
And du thy turns, betimes: or, I'is gar take
Thy new breikes fra' thee, and thy duib let tu.
The Talleur, and the souter sall undu '
All they ha' made; except thou manlier woe!
Gud Mother, give you chide him, he'll du wars.
Hung him: I geif him to the Devil's eirs.
But, ye my Douce, I charge ye, show your cell,
Tu all the Sheep'ards, baudly: gaing amang'hem.
Be mickell i' their eye, frequent, and fuge and.
And, give they ask ye of Earine,
Or of these claithes; say, that I give him ye,
And say no more. I ha' that wark in hand,
That web upo' the Luime, sall gar 'em think
By than, they feelin their own frights, and fears,
I'is pu ' the world, or Nature, 'bout their ears.
But, hear ye Douce, because, ye may meet me
In money shapes tu day; where ere you spy
This browdred belt, with Characters, 'tis I.
A Gypsan Lady, and a right Beldame,
Wrought it by Moonshine for me, and Starlight,
Upo' your Granam's grave, that very night
We earthed her, in the shades; when our Dame Hecat,
Made it her gaing-night, over the Kirk-yard,
Withal the bark and parish tykes set at her,
While I sat whyrland, of my brazen spindle:
At every twisted third my rock let fly
Unto the sew'ster, who did sit me nigh,
Under the towne-turne-pike; which ran each spell
She stitched in the work, and knit it well.
See, ye take tent to this, and ken' your Mother.
How do you sweet Amie? yet?
She cannot tell,
If she could sleep, she says, she should do well.
She feels a hurt, but where, she cannot show
Any lest sign, that she is hurt or no.
Her pain's not doubtful to her; but the seat
Of her pain is. Her thoughts too work, and beaten,
Oppressed with Cares: but why, she cannot say.
All matter of her care is quite away.
Hath any Vermin broke into your Fold?
Or any rot seized on your flock? or cold?
Or hath your feighting Ram, burst his hard horn?
Or any Ewe her fleece? or bag hath torn,
My gentle Amie? Am. Marian, none of these.
Ha' you been stung by Wasps, or angry Bees?
Or razed with some rude bramble, or rough briar?
Not Marian; my disease is somewhat nigher.
I weep, and boil away myself, in tears;
And than my panting heart would dry those fears:
I burn, though all the Forest lend a shade;
And freeze, though the whole Wood one fire were made.
Alas!
I often have been torn with thorn and briar;
Both in the Leg, and Foot, and somewhat higher:
Yet gave not than such fearful shrieks as these. Ah!
I often have been stung too, with cursed Bees,
Yet not remember that I than did quit
Either my Company, or Mirth for it. Ah!
And therefore, what it is that I feel now,
And know no cause of it, nor where, nor how,
It entered in me, nor lest print can see,
I feel afflicts me more, than Briar, or Bee. Oh!
How often, when the Sun heavens brightest birth
Hath with his burning fervour cloven the earth,
Under a spreading Elm, or Oak, hard by
A cool clear fountain, could I sleeping lie
Safe from the heat? but now, no shady tree,
Nor purling brook, can my refreshing be?
Often when the meadows, were grown rough with frost,
The rivers ice-bound, and their currents lost,
My thick warm fleece I wore, was my defence
Or large good fires, I made, drove winter thence.
But now, my whole flocks fells, nor this thick grove,
Inflamed to ashes, can my cold remove.
It is a cold, and heat, that doth out go
All sense of Winters, and of Summers so.
O, are you here, my Mistress?
I my Love!
Where should I be, but in my Robin's arms?
The Sphere which I delight in, so to move?
What the rude Ranger? and spied Spy? hand of:
You are for no such rustics.
What means this,
Thrice worthy Clarion? or wise Alken? know ye?
Alas no, not they! a poor starved Muttons carcase
Would better fit their palat's, than your Venison.
What riddle is this! unfold yourself, dear Robin.
You ha' not sent your Venison hence by Scathlock,
To Mother Maudlin?
I to Mother Maudlin?
Will Scathlock say so?
Nay, we will all swear so.
For all did hear it, when you gave the charge so.
Both Clarion, Alken, Lionel, myself.
Good honest Shep'ards, Masters of your flocks,
Simple, and virtuous men, no others hirelings;
Be not you made to speak against your Conscience,
That which may soil the truth. I sand the Venison
Away? by Scathlock? and to mother Maudlin?
I came to show it here, to Mellifleur,
I do confess; but Amies falling ill,
Did put us of it: Since we employed ourselves
In comforting of her. O, here he is!
Did I, Sir, bid you bear away the Venison,
To mother Maudlin?
I good faith, Madam,
Did you, and I ha' done it.
What ha' you done?
Obeyed your hests, Madam; done your Commands.
Done my Commands, dull groom? Fetch it again
Or kennel with the hounds. Are these the Arts
Robin, you read your rude ones o' the wood,
To countenance your quarrels, and mistake?
Or are the sports to entertain your friends
Those form jealousies? Ask of Mellifleur,
If I were ever from her, here, or Amie,
Since I came in with them; or saw this Scathlock,
Since I related to you his tale, o' the Raven?
I, say you so?
She never left my side
Since I came in, here, nor I hers.
This's strange!
Our best of Senses were deceived, our eyes, than!
And ears too.
What you have concluded on,
Make good I pray you.
O' my heart, my heart!
My heart it is, is wounded pretty Amie;
Report not you your griefs: I'll tell for all.
Some body is to blame, there is a fault.
Try if you can take rest. A little slumber
Will much refresh you (Amie).
What's her grief?
She does not know: and therein she is happy.
Here's Mother Maudlin come to give you thanks,
Madam, for some late gift, she hath received—
Which she's not worthy of, she says, but cracks,
And wonders of it; hops about the house;
Transported with the joy.
Sand me a Stag!
A whole Stag, Madam! and so fat a Deer!
So fairly hunted, and at such a time too!
When all your friends were here!
Do you mark this, Clarion?
Her own acknowledgement?
'Twas such a bounty
And honour done to your poor Bedes-woman,
I know not how to own it, but to thank you.
And that I come to du: I shall go round,
And giddy with the toy of the good turn.
Look out, look out, gay folk about,
And see me spin; the ring I am in
Of mirth, & glee, with thanks for fee
The heart puts on, for th' Venison
My Lady sent, which shall be spent
In draughts of Wine, to fume up fine
Into the brain, and down again
Fall in a Swoon, upo' thee grown.
Look to her, she is mad.
My Son hath sent you
A pot of Strawberries, gathered i' the wood
(His Hogs would else have rooted up, or trod)
With a choice dish of wildings here, to scald
And mingle with your Cream.
Thank you good Maudlin,
And thank your Son. Go, bear 'em into Much
Th' Acater, let him thank her. Surely, Mother
You were mistaken, or my Woodmen more,
Or most myself, to sand you all our store
Of Venison, hunted for ourselves, this day!
You will not take it, Mother, I dare say,
If wee'lld entreat you; when you know our guests:
Read Deer is head still of the forest feasts.
But I knaw ye, a right freehearted Lady,
Can spare it out of superfluity:
I have departed it 'mong my poor Neighbours
To speak your Largesse.
I not gave it, Mother;
You have done wrong. than; I know how to place
My gifts, and where; and when to found my seasons
To give, not throw away my Courtesies.
Count you this thrown away?
What's ravished from me
I count it worse; as stolen: I lose my thanks.
But leave this quest: they fit not you, not me,
Maudlin, Contentions of this quality.
How now?
Your Stag's returned upon my shoulders,
He has found his way into the Kitchen again:
With his two Legs, If now your Cook can dress him;
'Slid, I thought the Swine'ard would ha' be at me,
He looks so big! the sturdy Churl, lewd Lorel!
There Scathlock, for thy plines, thou hast deserved it.
Do you give a thing, and take a thing, Madam?
Not, Maudlin, you had imparted to your Neighbours;
As much good do't them: I ha' done no wrong.
The Spit stand still, no Broaches turn
Before the fire, but let it burn
Both sides, and haunches, till the whole
Converted be into one Coal.
What Devils Pater noster mumbles she?
Stay, you will hear more of her witchery
The Swilland Dropsy enter in
The Lazy Cuke, and swell his skin;
And the old Mort-malon his shin
Now prick, and itch, withouten blind.
Speak out Hag, we may hear your Devil's Matins.
The Paene, we call S. Antons fire
The Gout, or what we can desire,
To cramp a Cuke, in every limb,
Before they dine, yet; seize on him.
A soul ill Spirit hath possessed her.
O Karol, Karol, call him back again.
Her thoughts do work upon her, in her slumber.
And may express some part of her disease.
Observe, and mark, but trouble not her ease.
O, ô.
How is't Amie?
Wherefore start you?
O Karol, he is fair, and sweet.
What than?
Are there not flowers as sweet, and fair, as men?
The Lily is fair! and Rose is sweet!
I', so!
Let all the Roses, and the Lilies go:
Karol is only fair to me!
And why?
Alas for Karol, Marian, I could die.
He singeth sweetly too!
What than?
Are there not Birds sing sweeter far, than Men?
I grant the Linnet, Lark, and Bul-finchsing,
But best, the dear, good Angel of the Spring,
The Nightingale.
Than why? than why, alone,
Should his notes please you?
I not long ago
took a delight, with wanton kids to play,
And sport with little Lambs a Summer's Day!
And view their frisks! me thought it was a sight
Of joy, to see my two brave Rams to fight!
Now Karol, only, all delight doth move!
All that is Karol, Karol I approve!
This very morning, but— (I did bestow
(It was a little 'gainst my will, I know)
A single kiss, upon the silly Swain,
And now I wish that very kiss again.
His lip is softer, sweeter than the Rose
His mouth, and tongue with dropping honey flows.
The relish of it was a pleasing thing.
Yet like the Bees it had a little sting.
And sunk, and sticks yet in my marrow deep
And what doth hurt me, I now wish to keep.
Alas, how innocent her Story is!
I do remember, Marian, I have often
With pleasure kissed my Lambs, and Puppies, soft,
And once a dainty fine Roe-fawne I had,
Of whose out-skipping bounds, I was as glad
As of my health; and him I often would kiss:
Yet had his, no such sting, or pain, as this.
They never pricked or hurt my heart. And, for
They were so blunt, and dull, I wish no more.
But this, that hurts, and pricks doth please; This sweet,
Mingled with sour, I wish again to meet:
And that delay, me thinks, most tedious is
That keeps, or hinders me of Karols kiss.
we'll sand for him sweet Amie, to come to you.
But, I will keep him of if Charms will do it.
Do you mark the murmuring hag, how she doth mutter?
I like her not. And less her manners now.
She is a shrewd deformed piece, I vow.
As crooked as her body.
I believe
She can take any Shape; as Scathlock says.
She may deceive the Sense, but really
She cannot change herself.
Would I could see her,
Once more in Marian's form! for I am certain
Now, it was she abused us; as I think
My Marian, and my Love, now, innocent:
Which faith I seal unto her, with this kiss,
And call you all to witness of my penance.
It was believed before, but now confirmed,
That we have seen the Monster.
Hear you how
Poor Tom, the Cook, is taken! All his joints
Do crack, as if his Limbs were tied with points:
His whole frame slackens; and a kind of rack
Runs down along the Spondylls of his back;
A Gout, or Cramp, now seizeth on his head,
Than falls into his feet; his knees are lead;
And he can stir his either hand, no more
Than a dead stump, to his office, as before.
He is bewitched.
This is an Argument
Both of her malice, and her power, we see.
She must by some device restrained be,
Or she'll go far in mischief.
Advice how,
Sage Shep'ard, we shall put it strait in practice.
Sand forth your woodmen, than, into the walks,
Or let'em prick her footing hence; A Witch
Is sure a Creature of Melancholy,
And will be found, or sitting in her form,
Or else, at relief, like a Hare.
You speak
Alken, as if you knew the sport of Witch-hunting,
Or starting of a Hag.
Go sirs about it,
Take George here with you, he can help to found her;
Leave Tuck, and Much behind to dress the Dinner,
I' the Cook's stead.
we'll care to get that done.
Come Marian, let's withdraw into the bower.
Rare sport I swear! this hunting of the Witch
Will make us.
Let's advice upon't, like huntsmen.
And we can spy her once, she is our own.
First, think which way she formeth, on what wind:
Or North, or South.
For, as the Shep'ard said,
A Witch is a kind of Hare.
And marks the weather,
As the hare does.
Where shall we hope to found her?
I have asked leave to assist you, jolly huntsmen,
If an old Shep'herd may be heard among you;
Not jeered or laughed at.
Father, you will see
Robin-hoods household, know more Courtesy.
Who scorns at eld, peeles of his own young hairs.
Ye say right well. Know ye the Witches Dell?
Not more than I do know the walks of Hell.
Within a gloomy dimble, she doth devil
Down in a pit, o'ergrown with brakes and briers.
Close by the ruins of a shaken Abbey
Torn, with an Earthquake, down unto the ground,
'Mongst graves, and grotts, near an old Charnel house,
Where you shall found her sitting in her form,
As fearful, and melancholic, as that
She is about; with Caterpillars kells,
And knotty Cobwebs, rounded in with spells;
Thence she steals forth to relief, in the fogs,
And rotten Mists, upon the fens, and bogs,
Down to the drowned Lands of Lincolnshire;
To make Ewes cast their Lambs! Swine eat their Farrow!
The Housewifes' Tun not work! Nor the Milk churn!
Writhe Childrens wrists! and suck their breath in sleep!
Get Vials of their blood! And where the Sea
Casts up his slimy Owze, search for a weed
To open locks with, and to rivet Charms,
Planted about her, in the wicked feat,
Of all her mischiefs, which are manifold.
I wonder such a story could be told,
Of her dire deeds.
I thought a Witches banks
Had enclosed nothing, but the merry pranks
Of some old woman.
Yes, her malice more!
As it would quickly appear, had we the Store
Of his Collects.
I, this good learned Man
Can speak her right.
He knows, her shifts, and haunts!
And all her wiles, and turns. The venomed Plants
Wherewith she kill's! where the sad Mandrake grows,
Whose groans are deathful! the dead-numming Nightshade!
The stupifying Hemlock! Adder's tongue!
And Martagan! the shrieks of luckless Owls,
We hear! and croaking Night-crows in the air!
Greene-bellied Snakes! blew fire-drakes in the sky!
And giddy Flitter-mices, with leather wings!
The scaly Beetles, with their habergeons,
That make a humming Murmur as they fly!
There, in the stocks of trees, white Fays do devil,
And spanlong Elves, that dance about a pool!
With each a little Changeling, in their arms!
The airy spirits play with falling stars!
And mount the Sphere of fire, to kiss the Moon!
While, she fits reading by the Glow-worms light,
Or rotten wood (o'er which the worm hath crept)
The baneful schedule of her nocent charms,
And binding Characters, through which she wounds
Her Puppetts, the Sigilla of her witchcraft.
All this I know, and I will found her for you;
And show you'her sitting in her form; I'll lay
My hand upon her; make her throw her skutt
Along her back, when she doth start before us.
But you must give her Law: and you shall see her
Make twenty leaps, and doubles; cross the paths,
And than squatt down beside us.
Crafty Crone!
I long to be at the sport, and to report it.
we'll make this hunting of the Witch, as famous, As any other blast of Venery.
Hung her foul hag, she'll be a stinking Chase!
I had rather ha' the hunting of heir heir.
If we could come to see her, cry, so haw, once!
That I do promise, or I'm no good Hag-finder.
THe Fiend hath much to do, that keeps a School;
Or is the Father of a family;
Or governs but a country Academy:
His labours must be great, as are his cares,
To watch all turns, and cast how to prevent 'hem.
This Dame of mine here,
grows high in evil,
And thinks she does all, when 'tis I, her Devil,
That both delude her, and must yet protect her:
she's confident in mischief, and presumes
The changing of her shape will still secure her.
But that may fail, and divers hazards meet
Of other consequence, which I must look to.
Not let her be surprised on the first catch.
I must go dance about the Forest, now,
And firk it like a Goblin, till I found her.
Than will my service come worth acceptation;
When not expected of her, when the help
Meets the necessity, and both do kiss
'Tis called the timing of a duty, this.
Sure, you are very like her! I conceived
You had been she, seeing you run afore me:
For such a suit she made her 'gainst this Feast;
In all resemblance, or the very same;
I saw her in it; had she lived t' enjoy it
She had been there an acceptable Guest
To Marian, and the gentle Robin-hood,
Who are the Crown, and Ghirland of the Wood.
I cannot tell: my Mother gave it me,
And bade me wear it.
Who, the wise good Woman?
Old Maud. of Pappelwicke?
Yes, this sullen Man.
I cannot like him. I must take my leave
What said she to you?
Who? Aegl. Earine,
I saw her talking with you, or her Ghost;
For she indeed is drowned in old Trents bottom.
Did she not tell who would ha' pulled her in?
And had her Maidenhead upon the place?
The river's brim, the margin of the Flood?
No ground is holy enough, (you know my meaning)
Lust is committed in King's Palaces,
And yet their Majesties not violated!
Not words!
How sad, and wild his thoughts are! gone?
But she, as chaste, as was her name, Earine,
Died undeflowred; and now her sweet soul hovers,
Here, in the Air, above us; and doth haste
To get up to the Moon, and Mercury;
And whisper Venus in her Orb, than spring
Up to old Saturn, and come down by Mars,
Consulting Jupiter; and seat herself
Just in the midst with Phoebus; tempering all
The jarring Spheres, and giving to the World
Again, his first and tuneful planetting!
O' what an age will here be of new concord's!
Delightful harmony! to rock old Sages,
Twice infants, in the Cradle o'Speculation,
And throw a silence upon all the creatures!
A Cogitation of the highest rapture!
The loudest Seas, and most enraged Winds
Shall loose their clangor; Tempest shall grow hoarse;
Loud Thunder dumb; and every speece of storm
Laid in the lap of listening Nature, hushed;
To hear the changed chime of this eighth spheere!
Take tent, and hearken for it, lose it not.
O, here is Karol! was not that the sad
Shep'erd, slipped from him?
Yes, I guess it was:
Who was that left you, Karol?
The last man!
Whom, we shall never see himself again;
Or ours, I fear! He starts away from hand, so,
And all the touches, or soft stroke of reason!
Ye can apply. No Colt is so unbroken!
Or hawk yet half so haggard, or unmanned!
He takes all toys that his wild phantsy proffers,
And flies away with them. He now conceives
That my lost Sister, his Earine,
Is lately turned a Sphere amid the seven:
And reads a Musique-Lecture to the Planets!
And with this thought, he's run to call 'em, Hearers▪
Alas, this is a strained, but innocent fantasy!
I'll follow him, and found him, if I can:
Mean time, go you with Lionel, sweet Karol,
He will acquaint you with an accident
Which much desires your presence, on the place!
What is it, Lionel, wherein I may serve you?
Why do you so surveyed, and circumscribe me?
As if you stuck one Eye into my breast,
And with the other took my whole dimensions?
I wish you had a windo' i' your bosom
Or ' i your back: I might look through you,
And see your inparts, Karol, liver, heart;
For there the seat of Love is. Whence the Boy
(The winged Archer) hath shot home a shaft
Into my sister's breast, the innocent Amie,
Who now cries out, upon her bed, on Karol,
Sweet singing Karol! the delicious Karol!
That kissed her like a Cupid! In your eyes,
She says, his stand is! and between your lipp's
He runs forth his divisions, to her ears,
But will not bide there, less yourself do bring him
Go with me Karol, and bestow a visit
In charity, upon the afflicted Maid,
Who pineth with the languor of your love.
Wither intent you? Amy is recovered,
Feels not such grief as she complained of, lately:
This Maiden hath been with her from her Mother
Maudlin, the cunning Woman, who hath sent her
Herbs for her head, and Simples of that nature,
Have wrought upon her a miraculous Cure;
Settled her brain, to all our wish, and wonder!
So instantly? you know, I now but left her.
Possessed with such a fit, almost to he frenzy;
Yourself too feared her, Marian; and did urge
My haste, to seek out Karol, and to bring him.
I did so. But the skill of that wise woman
And her great charity of doing good
Hath by the ready hand of this deft lass
Her daughter, wrought effects, beyond belief,
And to astonishment; we can but thank
And praise, and be amazed, while we tell it.
'Tis strange, that any art should so help nature
In her extremes.
Than, it appears most real
When th'other is deficient.
Wherhfore, stay you
Discoursing here, and haste not with your succours
To poor afflicted Amie, that so needs them?
She is recovered well, your Marian told us
But now here: See, she is returned t' affirm it!
My Marian?
Robin-hood? Is he here?
Stay!
What was't you ha' told my friend?
Help, murder, help.
You will not rob me Outlaw? Thief, restore
My belt that ye have broken!
Yes, come near,
Not i' your gripe.
Was this the charmed circle?
The Copy that so cozened, and deceived us?
I'll carry hence the trophy of your spoils.
My men shall hunt you too upon the start,
And course you sound.
I shall make 'em sport
And sand some home, without their legs, or arms.
I'll teach 'em to climb Styles, leap Ditches, Ponds,
And lie i' the Waters, if they follow me.
Out murmuring Hag.
I must use all my powers,
Lay all my wits to piecing of this loss.
Things run unluckily, Where's my Puck-hairy?
Hath he forsook me?
At your beck, Madam.
O Puck, my Goblin! I have lost my belt,
The strong thief, Robin Outlaw, forced it from me.
They are other Clouds and blacker threat you, Dame;
You must be wary, and pull in your sails,
And yield unto the wether of the tempest.
You think your power's infinite as your malice;
And would do all your anger prompts you to:
But you must wait occasions, and obey them:
Sail in an eggshell, make a straw your mast,
A Cobweb all your Cloth, and pass, unseen,
Till you have scaped the rocks that are about you.
What rock's about me?
I do love, Madam,
To show you all your dangers, when you are passed 'hem.
Come, follow me, I'll once more be your pilot,
And you shall thank me.
Lucky, my loved Goblin!
Where are you gaang, now?
Unto my tree,
To see my Mistress.
Gang thy gait, and try
Thy turns, with better luck, or hung thy sel'.