GOd save you every chone both great and small
Of all degrees: right welcome by you all.
It is now long, at lest as seems to me,
Since here such press together I did see.
Would God we might each week through all the year
See such resort in Churches as is here.
You Gentlemen and Ladies, I ye pray
Give ear and hearken what I have to say.
To hold your peace alonely I require.
What ween you (some will say) by that desire
We nother can nor will away with that.
But yet you must, or else I tell you flat,
That both of us our labour loose together,
In speaking I, and you in coming hither.
Wherefore I crave but silence at your hand,
My words with patience for to understand.
Both great and small, alonely do but hear,
And I will tell you strange & wondrous gear.
Wherefore now hearken: for the thing is great
Whereof I mind this present time to treat.
You think yourselves perchance to be in place,
Where as you be not, now as stands the case.
For Lausan is not here, it is far hence.
But yet when need requires, I will dispense
With all of you, that hence within an hour
Each one may safely be within his bower.
As now this is the land of Palestine.
What? do you wonder at these words of mine?
I say yet further to you, see you well
Yond place? It is the house wherein doth devil
A servant of the living Gods, whose name
Hight Abraham the righteous man, the same
Whose lively faith hath wone him endless fame.
Anon you shall him tempted see and tried,
touched to quick with grefs that shall betide.
And lastly you shall see him justified
By faith, for kill (in a certain wise)
Isaac his dearest son in sacrifice.
And shortly, you shall see strange passions:
The flesh, the world his own affections
Not only shall be showed in lively hue,
But, (which more is) his faith shall them subdue
And that it is so, many a faithful wight,
Anon shall bear me record in your sight.
First Abraham, and Sara you shall see,
And Isaac eke shall with them both agreed.
Now are not these sufficient witnessings?
Who minds therfore to see so wōdrous thīgs,
We pray him only talking to forbear
And unto us to give attentive ear,
Assuring him that he shall see and hear
No trifling toys, but grave & wondrous gear,
And that we will his ears to him restore,
to use them as he listeth as before.
ALas my God, and was there ever any,
That hath endured of cumbrances so many,
As I have done by fleeting too and fro,
Since I my native country did forego?
Or is there any living on the ground,
Of benefits that hath such plenty found?
Lo how thou makest mortal men to see,
Thy passing goodness by calamity.
And as of naught thou madest every thing:
So out of ill thou causest good to spring.
Was never wight so blessed at thy hand,
That could thy greatness fully Understand.
Full threescore years and thereto fifteen more,
My life had lasted now in weal and woe.
According to the course in sundry wise
Appointed by thy heavenly destinies,
Whose will it was I should be bred and borne
Of parents rich in cattles, coin, and corn.
But unto him that richest is in fee,
What joy or comfort could his riches be,
When he compelled, compelled was (I say)
To see, to serve, and worship every day,
A thousand forged gods in steed of thee,
Which mad'st the heaven & earth which we do see?
Thou then eftsoons didst will me to convey
Myself from those same places quite away.
And I immediately upon thy call,
Left Parents, country, goods with gods & all.
Yea Lord, thou knowest I witted not whither then
Thou wouldst me lead, nor where me stay again:
But he that followeth thee, full well may say,
He goeth right: and while he holds that way
He never needs to fear that he shall stray.
In thinking and bethinking me what store
Of benefits I have had erst heretofore,
Of thee my God which ever hast provided
To keep my mind and body undefiled,
And furthermore according to thy word
(Which I took then as spoken but in board)
Hast blessed mine aged time above all other,
By giving me the happy name of mother.
I am so ravished in my thought and mind,
That (as I would full fain) no mean I found
The lest of all the benefits to commend,
Which thou my God dost daily still me sand.
Yet sith alone with thee Lord here I am,
I will thee thank at lest wise as I can.
But is not yw my husband whom I see?
I thought he had been further of from me.
Sara Sara, thy mind I well allow,
Naught hast thou said but I the same avow.
Come on, and let us both give thanks together
For Gods great mercy since our coming hither
The fruit thereof as both of us hath found:
Let praise & thanks from both of us resound.
Contented Sir, how might I better do,
Than you to please in all you set me too?
And even therefore hath God ordained me.
Again, wherein can time spent better be,
Than in the setting forth of God's dew praise,
Whose majesty doth show itself always,
Above and eke beneath before our eyes?
Of truth no better can a man devise,
Than of the Lord to sing the excellence,
For none can pay him other recompense
For all his gifts which daily he doth sand,
Than in the same, his goodness to commend.
Come on then, let us now begin to sing
with hearts in one accord,
The praises of the sovereign heavenly king
our only God and Lord.
His only hand doth give us whatsoever
We have, or shall hereafter have for ever.
It is alonely he that doth maintain
the heaven that is so high,
So large in compass and in space so main:
and eke the starry sky,
The course whereof he stablished hath so sure,
That aye withouten fail it doth endure.
The skorching heat of summer he doth make,
the harvest and the spring:
And winters cold that maketh folk to quake,
in season he doth bring.
Both wethers, fair, and fowl, both sea & land,
Both night and day be ruled by his hand.
Alas good Lord! and what are we that thou
didst choose and entertain
Alonely us of all the world, and now
doth safely us maintain
So long a time from all the wicked routs
In town & country where we come throughouts
Thou of thy goodness drewest us away
from places that are given
To serve false gods: and at this present day
hast wandringly us driven,
To travel still among a thousand dangers,
In nations unto whom we be but strangers.
The land of Egypt in our chiefest need
thou mad'st to have a care,
Thy servants bodies to maintain and feed
with fine and wholesome fare,
And in the end compelledst pharaoh,
Full sore against his will, to let us go.
Four mighty Kings that were already gone
away with victory,
I overtook and put to flight anon
before they could me spy.
And so I saw the fields all stained read
With blood of those which through my sword lay dead.
From God received well this benefit:
For he doth mind us still,
As his dear friends in whom he doth delight,
and we be sure he will,
Perform us all things in due time and place,
As he hath promised of his own free grace.
To us and unto our posterity
this land belongs of right,
To hold in honour and felicity
as God it hath behight,
And we believe it surely shall be so,
For from his promise God will never go.
Now tremble you ye wicked wights therefore,
which sowed are so thick
Throughout the world, & worship now such store
of gods of stone and stick,
which you yourselves with wicked hands do carve,
To call upon and vainly for to serve.
And thou O Lord whom we do know to be
the true and living God,
Come from thy place, that we may one day see
the vengeance of thy rood
Upon thy foes, that they may come to nowght
With all their gods devizd through wicked thought.
Go to my Sara, that great God of ours
Hath blessed us, to th'intent that we all hours
Should for his gifts which he alone doth give,
Him serve and praise as long as we do live.
Now let us hence and chief take good heed,
We hazard not our son to much in deed,
By suffering him to haunt the company
Of wicked folk, with whom you see we be.
A new made vessel holdeth long the scent
Of that that first of all is in it penned.
A child by nature near so well disposed,
By bringing up is quite and clean transpozed.
Sir, I do hope my duty for to do,
Therefore the thing that we must look unto,
Is that Gods will may be fulfilled in him.
Right sure I am we shall him wield so trim,
And that the Lord will bliss him so: as all
Shall in the end to his high honour fall.
I go, I come, I travel night and day,
I beat my brains, that by no kind of way
My labour be in any wise misspent.
Reign God aloft above the firmament,
The earth at lest to me doth wholly draw,
And that mislikes not God nor yet his law.
As God by his in heaven is honoured:
So I on earth by mine am worshipped.
God dwells in heaven, and I on earth likewize:
God maketh peace, and I do wars devise.
God reigns above, and I do reign below:
God causeth love, and I do hatred sow.
God made the starry skies and earthy clods:
I made much more: for I did make the gods.
God served is by Angels full of light:
And do not my fair Angels glister bright?
I trow there is not one of all my swine,
Whose grooyn I make not goldlike for to shine
These lechers, drunkards, glutton's overfedd,
Whose noses shine fair tipped with brazell red,
Which wear fine precious stones upon their
Are my upholders & my Cherubins. (skins,
God never made a thing so perfect yet,
That could the makers full perfection hit.
But I have made, (whereof I glory may)
A thousand worse than myself far way.
For I believe and know it in my thought,
therz but one God, & that myself am nowght.
But yet I know there are whose foolish mind
I have so turned quite against the kind,
That some (which now is common long agone)
Had liefer serve a thousand gods than one▪
And others have conceived in their brain,
That for to think there is a God is vain.
Thus since the time the man on mould was made,
With happy luck I followed have this trade
And follow will (come loss or come there gain)
So long as I this habit may maintain,
I say this habit wherewithal as now
The world is unacquainted: but I vow
The day shall come it shall be known so rife,
Of every wight, both child, yea man, and wife,
That nother town nor village shall scape free
From seeing it to their great misery.
O cowl, oh cowl, such mischief thou shalt work,
And such abuse shall underneath thee lurk
At high noon days: O Cowle, oh Cowle I say,
Such mischief to the world thou shalt convey,
That if it were not for the spitefulness,
Wherewith my heart is frawghted in excess:
Even I myself the wretched world shall rue,
To see the things that shall through thee ensue.
For I, than who, of all none worse can be,
Am made yet worse by putting on of thee.
These things shall in their time without all fail
Be brought to pass. As now I will assail
One Abraham, who only with his race
Withstands me, and defies me to my face.
In deed I have him often times assailed:
But ever of my purpose I have failed.
I never saw old fellow hold such tack.
But I will lay such load upon his back,
That (as I hope) ere long I shall him make
A son of mine. I know that he doth take
The true Creator for his only hold
To trust unto: and that doth make him bold.
In deed he hath alliance with the true
Creator, who hath promised him a new
Right wondrous things, according whereunto
He hath already done, and still will do.
But what for that? If steadfastness him fail
To hold out still: what shall his hope avail?
I trow I will so many blows him give,
That from his hold at length I shall him drive.
His elder son I fear not: and the other
Shall hardly scape these hands of mine: the mother
Is but a woman: as for all the meinie
That serve him, they be simple souls as any
Can lightly be: there is a ragged stout
Of silly shepherds, nother skilled nor stout
Enough against my wily sleights to stand.
But hence I will and work so out of hand,
To have them, that unless I miss my mark,
Anon I will deceive their greatest Clerk.
What ever thing I do or say,
I weighed am thereof straight way,
How meet so ever that it be,
So wicked nature reigns in me.
But most of all it me mislikes,
And to the heart with sorrow strikes,
That seeing God is never tired
In helping me, yea undezyrde:
I also likewise do not strain
Myself, unweerie to remain,
In dew and true acknowledgement
Of his great mercy to me sent,
As well with mouth as with my heart.
Abraham, Abraham.
Lord here I am.
Go take thine only deerebeloved son,
Even Isaac, and bring him to the place
which height the myrrh of God: which being done,
Slay him in sacrifice before my face:
And burn him whole upon a hill which I
Will show thee there, go high thee by and by.
What! burn him! burn him! well I will do so:
But yet my God, the thing thou putst me to
Seems very strange and irksome for to be:
Lord, I beseech thee, wilt thou pardon me?
Alas, I pray thee give me strength and power,
To do that thou commandest me this hour.
I well perceive and plainly now do found,
That thou art angry with me in thy mind.
Alas my Lord I have offended thee.
O God by whom both heaven & earth made be,
With whom intendest thou to be at war?
And wilt thou cast thy servant down so far?
Alas my son, alas, what shall I do?
This matter asks advised looking too.
High time it is Sirs as I trow
We hie us packing on a row
To our companions where they be.
Even so thinks me.
For if we all together were
We should the lesser need to fear.
How Sirs, I pray you tarry. Will
You leave me so behind you still?
Good child abide you there,
Or else our master your father
And our mistress your mother may,
Be angry for your going away:
The time will come by God's good grace,
That you shall grow and prove a pace:
And then ye shall perceive the charge,
Of keeping flocks in fields at large,
What dangers come from hill and dale,
By ravening beasts that lie in stolen,
Among the coverts of the wood,
To kill our cattle for their food.
And do ye think I would,
Go with you though I could,
Before I knew my father's mind?
In deed a child of honest kind,
And well brought up, aught evermore
His fathers and his mother's lore
In all his doings to obey.
I will not fail it (if I may)
To die therefore: but will ye stay
A while until I run and know
My father's will?
Yea, therefore go.
O happy is the wight
That grounds himself aright
On God, and maketh him his shield:
And lets the worldly wise,
Which look above the skies,
Go wander where they list in field.
Not rich, ne poor estate,
Can puff or yet abate,
The godly and the faithful heart:
The faithful goeth free
Although he martyred be
A thousand times with woe and smart.
The mighty God him leeds,
In chiefest of his needs,
And hath of him a special care,
To make him to abide,
Even at the point to slide,
When worst of all he seems to far.
Whereof a proof we see
Our master well may be:
For why, the more him men assail
And urge on every side:
Less fear in him is spied,
And less his courage doth him fail.
He left his native soil,
Hard famine did him foil,
Which drove him into Egypt land,
And there a king of might,
took Sara from his sight,
Unjustly even by force of hand.
But straight on suit to God,
The King through God's sharp rod,
Did yield to him his wife straight way,
And abraham never stayd,
But as the King him prayed,
Departed thence without delay.
And during this his flight,
He grew to so good plight,
That Loath to part away was feign:
Because, as stood the case,
To little was the place,
To keep the flocks of both them twain.
There fell a sudden jar
Between nine Kings through war,
Wherein five kings were put to flight,
And Loath himself, with all
His goods both great and small,
Away was carried clean and quite.
Our faithful Master straight,
On news of this conceit,
Made fresh pursuit immediately:
And having but as then
Three hundred eighteen men,
Did make the enemies all to fly.
And of the rescued pray
The tenth to the priest did pay.
And having done each man his right,
Returned home anon,
With commendation,
For putting so his foes to flight.
But nother son he had,
Nor daughter him to glad.
Which thing when Sara did perceive,
She put her maid in bed,
To serve her husband's stead,
Because herself could not conceive.
So Agar bore a son
A thirteen years outronne,
Whose name is called Ishmael.
And to this present day,
Our masters goods are aye
increased passing wondrous well.
Then for the covenants sake
Which God himself did make,
Between him and our master dear,
Our master and we all,
As well the great as small,
At once all circumcised were.
My fellows: God hath showed himself to us,
So good, so loving and so gracious,
That I can never any thing yet crave
Ne small ne great, but that I much more have,
Than I desire. I would have gone with you
(As you do know) to see full fain: but now
Behold my father cometh here at hand.
But it behoveth us to understand,
That if God will us any thing to do,
We must straightways obedient be thereto,
And nother strive nor speak against his william.
In deed Sir so I think and purpose still.
But yet I pray you think not strange, that I
Do take this matter some what heavily.
A good heart (wife) doth show itself at need▪
That's true:▪ therefore lets be sure in deed,
It is Gods will and mind we should do so.
We have but this child only and no more
Who yet is weak: in him stands all the trust
Of all our hope, with him it falls to dust.
Nay rather in God.
But give me leave to say.
Can ever God his word once said unsay▪
Not not, and therefore be you out of doubt,
That God will keep▪ prospero him throughout.
Yea, but will God have us to hazard him?
No hazarding it is where God doth guard him.
My heart misgiveth some mishap
I nother dread nor doubt of any hap.
There is in hand some secret enterpryze.
What ere it be, it doth from God aryze,
At lest, if what it were you witted.
I shall ere long, if God so list.
So long away the child will near abide.
For that our God will well enough provide.
Yea but the ways now full of dangers are.
Who dies in following God needs never care.
If he should dieth, est farewell our good days.
God doth foresett men's dying times always.
It were much better here to sacrifyze.
What ever you think, God thinks otherwise▪
Well then Sir, sith it must be so
The grace of God with both you go.
Adieu my son.
Good mother eke adieu.
My son obey thy father still,
And God thee save: that if it be his will
Thou mayst in health return right soon again.
My child I can not me refreyne
But that I needs must kiss the now.
Good mother, if it should not trouble you,
I would desire you one thing ere I went.
Say on my son: for I am well content
To grant thee thy request.
I humbly do you pray
To put this grief away.
These tears of yours refreyne,
I shall return again
(I hope) in better plight,
Than now I am in sight:
And therefore stay this grief and wo.
My fellows: we have now to go
Good six days journey ere we rest:
See that your carriages be priest
And all the things that we shall need.
Sir, as for that let us take heed.
Do you no more but only show your william.
On then: and God be with you still.
The mighty God who of his goodness aye,
From time to time even to this present day,
So kind and gracious unto us hath be,
Be helpful still both unto you and me.
Deal wisely howsoever that you far:
I hope this journey which we going are
Shall be performed happily.
Alas alas full little wot I
When I shall see you all again.
The Lord now with you all remain.
Good mother God you guide.
Farewell.
God guide, and keep you through his grace.
Gowe on Sirs, let us hence apace.
But is not this enough to make me mad,
That whereas I make every man to gad,
And all the world to follow after me,
If they my finger do but held up see,
And there withal set all things on a roar:
Yet for all that I never could the more
This false old fellow bring unto my lure,
For any thing that yet I can procure?
Behold he is departed from this place
Gods will full bend tobey in every case,
Although the matter never be so strange.
But yet it may be that his mind will change,
Or that he shall him sacrifyze in deed,
And so he shall if I may help him speed.
For if he do, than Isaac shall be dead,
Whereby my heart shall be delivered
Of that same fear lest God in him fulfil,
The threat whereby he promised me to spill.
And if he change his mind, then may I say
The gold is won. for may I once so play
My part, as for to make him disobey
Almighty God's commandment, or repine:
Then were he banished from the grace divine.
That is the mark whereat I always shoot,
Now high thee Cowle, set forth the better foot:
Let's run apace, and by some cunning drift
Foil him in field, or put him to his shift.
My children: this is now the third day
That we have traveled making little stay.
Here must you tarry: as for me, I will
With Isaac go yet further onward still,
Unto a place from hence yet distant more
Which God almighty showed me before,
Where I must pray and offer sacrifice
As he requires. Wherefore in any wise
Abide you here, and stir not hence. But thou
Son Isaac shalt go with me as now:
For God requires in this behalf thy presence.
Sir, sith you forbidden us we will not hence.
This bundle unto him betake,
And I the fire and knife will take.
We shall (God willing) come again right soon
But in the mean while, wots ye what to done?
Pray ye to God both for yourselves and us.
Alas, alas, was never wight, ywus.
We will not fail.
That had such need as I
Well Sirs, I say no more but God be wy.
And with you too.
It greatly mazeth me,
And me likewyze.
And me too, for too see
Him so dismayed which hath so stoutly borne
All haps that have befallen him heretooforne.
To say he is afraid of war
Debate, or strife, or any jar
It were no reason: for we know,
Abimelech the king did show
Such honour to our maisterward,
That he not only had regard
To visit him, but eke did knit
A league with him which lasteth yet,
And as for household matters, what
Can he desire which he hath not?
He lives in outward peace and rest:
But age perchance doth work unrest.
Of zunnes he hath but only one
But in the world more such are none.
His cattle thrive in such great store,
As God doth seem to give him more,
Than he himself can wish or crave.
Nothing ye can so perfect have,
But always somewhat is amiss.
I pray to God him so to bliss,
As soon to cure this his disease.
Amen, say I, if it him please.
Sure I suppoze how ere the case doth stand
He hath this time some weighty thing in hand.
As huge as is the world we see
With all the things that in it be,
Yet nothing is so strong and sure,
That can for ever here endure.
Almighty God which all maintains,
Can nothing spy that aye remains,
Except himself: all else each one
Endure short time, and soon are gone.
The sun with bright and burning beams
Goes casting forth his cheerful gleams,
As long as day in sky doth last.
Then darksome night doth over cast,
All kind of things both fowl and fair,
With coal-black wings aloft in air.
And of the moon what shall we say,
Which never keepeth at a stay?
Sometimes with horns she doth appear:
Sometime half 〈◊〉: now thick, now clear:
Anon with round and fulsome face
The night she fro the sky doth chase.
The twincling stars above on high
Run rolling round about the sky,
One while with wether fair and clear,
Another while with lowering cheer.
Two days together match, and ye
Them like in all points shall not see.
The one doth pass more swift away,
The other longer while doth stay.
The one, as though it did us spite,
Bereeves us of the cheerful light:
The other with his colour bright
Doth joy our heart and dim our sight.
One burns the world with heat from skies,
With frost and cold another dies.
With purple, green, blue, white, and read
The earth erewhile is overspread.
Anon a blast of nipping cold
Makes freshest things look sear and old.
The rivers with their waters moist
Above their banks are often hoist,
And pass their bounds with rage so far,
That they the ploughman's hope do mar.
And afterward they fall within
Their channels, running lank and thin.
And therefore whoso doth him ground,
On awght that in the world is found,
Beneath or in the starry skies,
I say I count him nothing wyze.
What then of him is to be said,
Whose hope on man is wholly stayed?
Each living creature subject is
To endless inconueniencis:
And yet among them all, the sun,
In all his course which he doth run,
Beholdeth not a feebler wight,
Than man is in his chiefest plight.
For he that is most wise and stout,
Is so besieged round about,
And so assailed with vices strong,
That often he is thrown along.
What a fool is he, whose heart
Thinks to be free from woe and smart,
So long as he doth live on mould?
But if that any creature wowld
Be sure taccumplish that desire:
He must go set his heart more higher.
Whereof our master rightly may
A good example be that way.
The best I think that can be now espied,
Is for too draw us one aside,
That each of us may by himself alone
Pray God to sand our master which is gone,
A safe return with gladness. gowe.
I will not be behind I trow.
My father.
Alas a poor father am I
Sir here is wood, with fire, and knife ready:
But as for sheep or lamb I see none here.
For you to offer.
O my son most dear,
God will provide. Abide thou here I say,
While I to God a little while do pray.
Good father go: but yet I pray you show
Me whereupon this grief of yours doth grow,
Which doth (I see) so greatly you appall.
At my return, my son, thou shalt know all.
But in the mean time pray thyself here too▪
It is good reason that I should so do.
And therewithal I will each thing address,
That first this wood may be in readiness.
This billet first shall gin the order here:
Then this, then that shall close together near.
Thus all these things are ready now and priest.
My father shall provide for all the rest.
And now O God I will aside retire,
To pray to thee, as reason doth require.
The more we live, the more we see, alas,
What life it is that in this world we pass.
Was never woman borne upon the mould,
That for her husband or her issue could
Herself with me in happiness compare.
But yet I have endured such grief and care
These last three days since they went hence, that well
I am not able for my life to tell,
Which of the twain hath greater to me been,
The former joy, or present pain I mean
Which I have felt these last 3. days, since they
Have been away: for nother night nor day
Have I ta'en rest, because my mind doth run
On nothing but my husband and my son.
And of a truth I was to blame as tho,
In that I suffered them away to go,
And went not with them. Of the six days three,
Alas but three my God, yet passed be,
And yet three more my patience still must prove.
Alas my God which seest me from above,
Both outwardly and inwardly always,
Uowtsafe to shorten these three years I say,
For were they much more shorter than they be,
They be not days, but months & years to me
My God, thy promise puts me out of doubt:
But if thou long delay the falling out,
I fear I shall have need of greater strength,
To bear the pain in holding out at length.
Wherefore my God, now grant thou unto me
I may with joy right soon my husband see,
And eke mine Isaac in mine arms embrace
Returned in health and safety to this place.
O God my God, thou seest my open heart,
And of my thowghts thou seest each secret part,
So that my case I need not to declare.
Thou seest, alas thou seest my woeful care.
Thou only canst me rid of my disease,
By granting me (if that it might thee please)
One only thing the which I dare not crave.
another song than this yet must we have▪
What? what? and is it possible that God's
Behest and deed should ever be at odds?
Can he deceive? even to this present day
He hath kept touch in all that he did say.
And can he now unsay his word? no, no.
But yet it would ensue he should do so,
If he my son should take away as now.
What say I? O my God, my God, sith thou
Dost bid me, I will do it. Is it right
That I so sinful and so wretched wight,
Should fall to scanning of the judgements
Of thy most perfect pure commandments?
My case goes ill. O Cowle we must yet found
Some other way tassault this hagards' mind.
It maybe that I have imagined
Amiss: the more it is examined,
The more the case seems strange. It was perchance
Some dream or wicked fiend that at a glance
Did put this matter in my head for why,
So cruel offerings please not God pardie.
He cursed Cain for kill of his brother:
And shall I kill mine Isaac and none other?
Not no. Never do so.
Alas alas what meant I so to say?
Forgive me, Lord, and pluck me back again
From this lewd race wherein my sin 'gan go:
O Lord my God deliver me from this wo.
This hand of mine shall certainly him smite.
For sith it is thy will, it is good right
It should be done. Wherefore I will obey.
But I will keep you from it if I may.
So doing I should make my God untrue.
For he hath told me that there should ensue,
So great a people out of this my son,
As over all the earth should spread and run.
And therefore if that Isaac once were killed,
I see not how this covenant could be held.
Alas Lord, hast thou made him then for nowght?
Alas Lord, is it vain that thou so often
Hast promised me such things in Isaake,
As thou would never do for other's sake?
Alas and can the things repealed be,
Which thou so often hast promised unto me?
Alas and shall my hope have such an end?
Whereto should then man's hope & trusting tend?
The sum of all I minded to have said,
Is that to thee I heartily have prayed,
To give me issue: hoping that when thou
Hadst granted it, I should have lived now
In joy and pleasure: but I see full well,
The contrary to my desire befell.
For of my sons, which were no more but twain,
To put away the one myself was fain:
And of the other (O hard extremity)
Both father I, and tormenter must be,
Yea tormenter, yea tormenter, alas.
But art not thou the self same God, which was
Contented for too hear me patiently,
When I did pray to thee so instantly,
Even in the mids of all thy wrath and ire,
When Sodom thou didst mind to burn with fire?
Now than my God and King, wilt thou say nay,
When for myself I unto thee do pray?
Whom I begat him must I now deface.
O God, at leastwise grant me yet this grace.
Grace? in my book that word I never found.
Some other man my son to death may wownd
Alas my Lord, and must this hand of mine
To such a stroke against all kind decline?
How will it touch his woeful mother near,
When of his violent death she needs shall here?
If I allege thy will for my defence,
Who will believe that thou wilt so dispense?
And if men do not credit it: what fame
Will fly abroad to my perpetual shame?
I shall be shunned of all men more and less,
As pattern of extremest cruelness.
And as for thee, who will unto thee pray,
Or on thy word and promise ever stay?
Alas, may these whore hears of mine abide
The sorrow that is likely to betide?
Have I already past so many dangers,
Have I so traveled countries that are strangers,
In heat and cold, in thirst and hunger still,
Continewally obedient to thy will:
Have I so long time lived lingeringly,
Now in the end to die unhappily?
O heart of mine, clive, clive, asunder clive:
And linger here no longer time alive.
The speedier death, the lesser is the grief.
Now is he down, if God sand no relief.
What said I? what intent I? O my God
Which didst created and make me of a clod,
Thou art my Lord, and I thy servant true.
Out of my native country thou me drew.
How oftentimes hast thou assured me,
That unto mine this land should lotted be?
And when thou gave me Isaac, didst not thou
Most faithfully and constantly avow,
That out of him such offspring should be bred,
As should this land throughout all overspread?
Then if thou wilt needs take him now away,
What should I thereunto against thee say?
He is thine own, I had him of thy gift.
Take him therefore. Thou knowest best how to
I know thou wilt to life him raze again,
Rather than that thy promise should be vain.
Howbeit Lord, thou knowest I am a man,
No good at all or do or think I can.
But yet thy power which aye is invincible,
Doth to belief make all things possible.
Hence flesh, hence fond affections every chone:
You human passions let me now alone.
Nothing to me is good or reasonable,
Which to God's will is not agreeable.
Well, well, than Isaac shall die: and we
What will ensue thereof shall after see.
O false old hag, thou mak'st me soft to groan.
See where my son walks up & down alone.
O silly child! O wretched men, death often
Within our bosoms lodgeth him full soft,
When furthest of we take him for too be.
And therefore right great need always have we
To lead such life, as if we fain would die.
But wottest thou my son (alas) what I
Intent to say?
What pleaseth you good father.
Alas, that word doth kill my heart the rather.
Yet must I better courage to me take.
Isaac my son: alas my heart doth quake.
Father, me thinks that fear hath you dismayed.
O my dear child: it is as thou hast said.
Alas my God.
Sir if it may you please,
Be bold to tell me what doth you diseaze.
Ah my dear child, witted thou what thing it were
Mercy good Lord, thy mercy grant us here.
My son my son, beholdest thou this line.
This wood, this fire, and eke this knife of mine?
This gear my Isac serveth all for thee.
Of God and nature enemy though I be:
Yet is this thing so hard a case to see,
That even almost it is a grief to me.
Alas my son.
Alas my father dear,
Upon my knees I humbly pray you here,
My youthful years to pity, if you may.
O of mine age the only staff and stay,
My darling, O my darling, feign would I
That I for thee a thousand times might die:
But God will have it otherwise as now.
Alas my father, mercy I kry you.
Alas alas I want both tongue and hand,
against you in mine own defence to stand.
But see, but see my tears for nature's sake,
None other fence I can or will now make
against you. I am Isaac, none other
But Isaac, your only by my mother.
I am your son that through yourself hath life
And will you let it be bereft with knife?
Howbeit, if you do't to ' hay the Lord,
Then on my knees I humbly do accord,
To suffer all that ever God and you,
Shall think expedient for too do as now.
But yet what deeds, what deeds of mine deserve
This death O God, my God my life preserve.
Alas my son, God hath commanded me
To make an offering unto him of thee,
To my great grief, to my great grief and pine,
And endless wo.
Alas poor mother mine▪
How many deaths shall my death give to thee?
But tell me yet, my killer who shall be?
Who? my dear son! my God my God grant grace,
That I may die now present in this place.
O father mine.
Alas, no whit that name
Agrees to me. yet should we be to blame
If we obeyed not God.
Sir I am ready.
Who would have thought he would have been so steady?
Now than my father, well I see in deed
That I must die. Lord help me at my need.
My God, my God, now strengthen thou my mind
And at thy hand such favour let me found,
That of myself I may the upper hand
Obtain, against this sudden death to stand.
Now bind me, kill me, burn me, I am priest
To suffer all, sith God so thinks it best.
Ah what a thing, a what a sight is here!
Mercy good God, now for thy mercy dear.
Thou Lord hast made me and created me,
Thou Lord upon the earth hast lodged me,
Thou hast me given the grace to knowledge thee:
Yet have I not so well obeyed thee
My Lord and God as duty doth require:
Which me to pardon loud I thee desire.
And whereas I to you my Lord and father
Have not always such honour yielded rather,
As your great kindness did deserve to have:
Therefore forgiveness humbly I do crave.
My mother: she is now a great way hence,
Wherefore my God vowtsafe her thy defence,
And so preserve her through thy special grace,
As she no whit be troubled at my case.
Alas, I go to deep and darksome night:
Farewell as now for aye all worldly light.
But sure I am I shall at God's hand found
far better things than these I leave behind.
Good father, I am ready at your william.
Was never child that spoke with better skill.
I am ashamed, and therefore take my flight.
Alas my son, before thou leave this light
And that my hand do give thunkindly blow,
Upon thy mouth let me a kiss bestow.
Isac my son, let this same arm of mine
Which must thee kill, embrace this neck of thine
With right good will and hearty thanks.
You skies the great gods work aye glistering in our eyes
Which well have seen how God (who still is true)
Did me with fruit by Isaac here indew:
And thou O land five times to me behight,
Bear witness that my fingers do not smite
This child of mine for hatred or for vengeance,
But only for to yield my dew obeisance,
To that great God which hath created me,
And all the things that live or move or be:
Who saves the good that put in him their trust,
And stroyes the bad that serve their wicked lust.
Bear witness that I faithful Abraham,
Through gods great goodness still so steadfast am
As notwithstanding all that human wit
Can say or think, to make me now to flit:
In one belief I ever do remain,
That not one word of God doth happen vain.
But now my hand, high time it is that thou
Do gather strength to execute thy vow.
That by thy kill of mine only son,
Thy deadly stroke may through my heart eke run,
What do I here?
Alas my father dear!
A, a, a, a.
I am at your william.
Am I now well? your pleasure then fulfil.
Did ever man so piteous case yet found?
Was ever any friendship yet so kind?
And was there ever yet so piteous case.
I die my son, I die before thy face.
Away with all this fear of yours I pray.
Will you from God yet longer time me stay?
Alas who ever yet so stout a mind
Within so weak a body erst did found?
Alas my son I pray thee me forgive
Thy death. It kills me that thou may not live.
Abraham, Abraham.
My God here I am.
Into the sheath put up thy knife,
And see thou do not take his life,
Nor hurt the child in any wise.
For now I see before mine eyes,
What love thou bearest to the Lord,
And honour unto him avord,
In that thou dost so willingly
Thy son thus offer even to die.
O God.
O God.
O Lord a man may see.
How good it is obedient for to be
To thee: the case is fitly furnished.
I will go take him tied by the head.
O Abraham.
Lord here I am.
Thus saith the Lord, I promise thee
By my eternal majesty,
And by my Godhead: sith that thou
Hast showed thyself so willing now,
Me to obey, as to forbear
Thy only Isaks life: I swear,
That maugre Satan to his face,
I will thee bliss and all thy race.
Considerest thou the lighsom sky,
And on the shore the gravel dry?
I will increase thine offspring more,
Than stars in heaven, or sand on shore.
Their enemies they shall overcome,
And of thy body one shall come,
By whom my blessing shall spread forth
On all the nations of the earth.
By him the treasures of my love
And mighty power, shall from above
Be shedded down on all mankind,
Because thou hast obeyed my mind.
SEE here the mighty power of earnest faith,
And what reward the true obedience payth
Wherefore ye Lords & Ladies I you pray▪
When you from hence shall go again away,
Let not this true and noble story part
Out of the mind and tables of your heart.
It is no lie, it is no painted tale,
It is no feigned jest nor fable stolen.
It is a deed, a deed right true, of one
That was Gods faithful servant long agone.
Wherefore ye masters and ye mistresses,
You Lords and Ladies all both more and less,
You rich and poor, ye sorry and ye sad,
And you also whose hearts with mirth are glad,
Behold, and look upon yourselves each one,
In this so fair example here foregone.
Such are true glasses, showing to our sight,
The fair, the fowl, the crooked, and the right.
For whoso doth unfeignedly endeavour
(As Abraham) to keep God's sayings ever,
And (notwithstanding all the reasons which
His mind allegeth backward him to twitch)
Doth still refer himself and all his deeds
To God: with much more happy issue speeds,
Than he can wish: for come there storms or winds,
Come grief, come death, come cares of sundry kinds,
Let earthquake come▪ let heaven & skies down fall,
Let dark confusion overcovet all:
The faithful heart so steadfastly is grounded,
As it abideth ever unconfownded.
Contrariwise the man that trust 〈◊〉
His own selfwit, thereafter for to do,
And standeth in his own conceit shall found,
The more he goes, the more he comes behind.
And every little puff and sudden blast
From his right course shall quite & clean him cast
Again, his own selfwilled nature will
Him overthrow and all his doings spill.
Now thou great God which makest us to know
The great abuses which do plainly show
The wretched world to be perverted quite,
Make all of us to take such warning by't,
As each of us may far the better by
The lively faith set forth before our eye
In Abraham that holy parsonage,
Whose doings have been played upon this stage.
Lo masters here the happy recompense
Which God doth give you for your gentle silence.