YOu Officers which now in Iulio stay,
Know you our leadge, the King of Hungary:
Scent me Promos, to join with you in sway:
That still we may to justice have an eye.
And now to show, my rule & power at large,
attentively, his Letters Patents hear:
Phallax, read out my Soueraines charge.
As you command, I will: give heedful ear.
Lo, here you see what is our Sovereign's will,
Lo, bear his wish, that right, not might, bear sway:
Lo, hear his care, to weed from good the ill,
To scoorge the wights, good Laws that disobey.
Such zeal he bears, unto the Common weal,
(How so he bids, the ignorant to save)
As he commands, the lewd do rigour feel.
Such is his wish, such is my will to have:
And such a judge, here Promos vows to be.
Not wilful wrong, sharp punishment shall miss,
The simple thrall, shallbe judged with mercy,
Each shall be doombde, even as his merit is:
Love shall not stay, nor hate revenge procure,
Ne yet shall Coin, corrupt or fester wrong:
I do protest, whilst that my charge endure,
For friend nor foe, to sing a partial song.
Thus have you heard, how my Commission goes,
He absent, I present our Sovereign still:
It answers then, each one his duty shows,
To me, as him, what I command and will.
Worthy Deputy, at thy charge we joy,
We do submit ourselves, to work thy hest:
receive the sword of justice to destroy,
The wicked imps, and to defend the rest.
Our City keys, take wished Liftenaunt hear,
We do commit our safety to thy head:
Thy wise foresight, will keep us void of fear,
Yet will we be assistant still at need.
Both Sword and Keys, unto my Prince's use,
I do receive and gladly take my charge.
It resteth now, for to reform abuse,
We point a time, of Council more at large,
To treat of which, a while we will departed.
To work your will, we yield a willing heart.
ALL a flaunt now vaunt it, brave wench cast away care,
With Lays of Love chant it, for no cost see thou spare:
Sigh Nature hath made thee, with beauty most brave,
Sigh Fortune doth lad thee, with what thou wouldst have.
Ere Pleasure doth vade thee, thyself set to sale:
All wantoness will trade thee, and stoop to thy stale.
All a flaunt, ut Supra.
Young Ruflers maintains thee, defends thee and thine,
Old Dotterels retains thee, thy Beauties so shine:
Though many disdains thee, yet none may thee touch:
Thus Envy refrains thee, thy countenance is such.
All a flaunt, ut Supra:
Triumph fair Lamia now, thy wanton flag advance,
Set forth thyself to bravest show, boast thou of happy chance:
Girl, account thou thyself the chief, of Lady Pleasure's train,
Thy face is fair, thy form content, thy Fortunes both doth strain.
Even as thou wouldst, thy house doth stand, thy furniture is gay,
Thy weeds are brave, thy face is fine, & who for this doth pay?
Thou thyself no, the rushing Youths, the bathe in wanton bliss,
Yea, old and dooting fools sometimes, do help to pay for this.
Free cost between them both I have, all this for my behove,
I am the stern, that gides their thoughts, look what I like, they love
Few of them stir, that I bid stay, if I bid go, they fly:
If I on foe pursue revenge, Alarm a hundred cry.
The bravest I their hearts, their hands, their purses hold at will,
joined with the credit of the best, to bowlster me in ill.
But see where as my trusty man, doth run, what news brings he?
Good people, did none of you, my mistress Lamia see?
Rosko, what news, that in such haste you come blowing?
Mistress, you must shut up your shops, & leave your occupying.
What so they be, foolish knave, tell me true?
O ill, for thirty? besides you.
For me good fellow, I pray thee why so?
Be patiented Mistress, and you shall know,
Go too, say on:
Marry, right now at the Sessions I was,
And thirty must to Trussum cord go.
Among the which (I weep to show) alas:
Why, what's the matter man?
O Andrugio,
For loving too kindly, must lose his head,
And his sweet heart, must we are the shameful weeds:
Ordained for Dames, that fall through fleshly deeds.
Is this offence, in question come again?
Tell, tell, no more,' 'tis time this tale were done:
See, see, how soon, my triumph turns to pain.
Mistress, you promised to be quiet,
For God's sake, for your own sake, be so
Alas poor Rosko, our dainty diet,
Our bravery and all we must forego.
I am sorry.
Yea, but out alas, sorrow will not serve:
thou must needs provide thee else where,
My gains are past, yea, I myself might starve:
Save that, I did provide for a dear year.
They reward fair (their harvest in the stack,)
When winter comes, that bid their servants pack.
Alas Mistress, if you turn me off now,
Better than a Rogue, none will me allow.
Thou shalt have a Passport,
Yea, but after what sort?
Why, that thou wart my man.
O the judge, sylde shows the favour,
To let one thief, bail another:
Tush I know, ere long you so will slip away,
As you, for yourself, must seek some testimony
Of your good life.
Never fear: honestly
Lamia now means to live, even till she die.
As jump as Apes, in view of Nuts to dance,
kit will to kind, of custom, or by chance:
Well, how so you stand upon this holy point,
For the thing you know, you will jeopard a joint.
Admit I would, my hazard were in vain.
Perhaps I know, to turn the same to gain.
Thou comforts me, good Rosko, tell me how?
You will be honest, 'tis syn to hinder you.
I did but jest, good sweet servant tell me.
Sweet servant now, and late, pack sir, Good bye ye.
Tush, to try thy unwillingness. I did but jest.
And I do but try, how long you would be honest.
I thought thy talk was too sweet to be true.
Yea, but meant yond, to bid honesty adieu?
Not, I did so long since, but enforced by need,
To bid him welcome home again, I was decreed.
Very good, Mistress, I know your mind,
And for your ease, this remedy I find:
Prying abroad, for play fellows and such,
For you Mistress, I heard of one Phallax,
A man esteemed, of Promos very much:
Of whose Nature, I was so bold to axe.
And I smealt, he loved lace mutton well.
And what of this?
Mary of this, if you the way can tell
To toll him home, he of you will be fain:
Whose countenance, will so excuse your faults.
As none for life, dare of your life complain.
A good device, God grant us good success:
But I pray thee, what trade doth he profess?
He is a paltry pettifogger.
All the better, suspicion will be the less.
Well, go thy ways, and if thou him espy,
Tell him from me, that I a cause or two.
Would put to him, at leisure willingly.
Her case is so common, that small pleading will serve,
I go (nay run) your commandment to observe.
Ay me alas, less Phallax help, poor wench undone I am:
My foes now in the wind, will lie to work my open shame:
Now envious eyes will pry abroad, offenders to entrap,
Of force now Lamia, must be chaste, to shun a more mishap.
And wanton girl, how wilt thou shifted, for garments fine and gay?
For dainty fare, can crusts content? who shall thy houserent pay?
And that delights thee most of all, thou must thy dalliance leave?
And can then the force of law, or death, thy mind of love bereave?
In good faith, no: the wight that once, hath taste the fruits of love,
Until her dying day will long, Sir Chaucer's jests to prove.
Forsooth Mistress your thrall stays for you at home,
Were you borne in a mill, curtole? you prate so high:
The gentleman, that came the last day with Captain Prie:
What young Hippolito?
Even he.
Lest he be gone, home high:
And will Dalia pop him in the neither room,
And keep the falling door close till I come
And tell my thrall his fortune will not stay?
Will you aught else?
Prating vixen away.
Gallant adieu. I venture must Hippolito to see.
He is both young and wealthy yet, the better spoil for me.
My hazard for his sake I true, shall make him pray and pay:
He: he: shall prank me in my plumes, and deck me brave and gay,
Of Courtesy, I pray you yet, if Phallax come this way,
Report to put a case with him, hear Lamia long did stay.
Ay me, unhappy wench that I must live the day,
To see Andrugio tymeles die, my brother and my stay.
The only mean, God wots. that should our house advance,
Who in the hope of his good hap, must die through wanton chance:
O blind affects in love, whose torments none can tell,
Yet wantous will hide fire, and frost, yea hazard death, nay hell:
To taste thy sour sweet fruits, digested still with care,
Fowl fall thee love, thy lightning joys, hath blasted my welfare
Thou fyerst affection first, within my brother's breast.
Thou mad'st Polina grant him (erst) even what he would request:
Thou mad'st him crave and have, a proof of Venus' meed,
For which foul act he is adjudged, ere long to loose his head.
The law is so severe, in scourging fleshly sin,
As marriage to work after mends doth seldom favour win.
A law first made of zeal, but wrested much amiss
Faults should be measured by desert, but all is one in this,
The lecher fired with lust, is punished no more,
Then he which fell through force of love, whose marriage salves his sore:
So that poor I despair, of my Audrugios' life,
O would my days might end with his, for to appease my strife.
My good Sister Cassandra?
Who calleth Cassandra?
Thy woeful brother Andrugio.
Andrugio, O dismal day, what griefs, do me assail?
Condemned wretch to see thee here, fast fettered now in jail,
Now haps thy wits were witched so, the knowing death was meed
Thou wouldst commit (to stay us both) this vile lascivious deed.
O good Cassandra, leave to check, and chide me thrall therefore
If late repentance, wrought me help I would do so no more.
But out alas, I wretch, too late, do sorrow my amiss.
Unless Lord Promos grant me grace: in vain is hady witted,
Wherefore sweet sister, whilst in hope, my damned life yet were,
Assault his heart, in my behalf, with battering tire of tears.
If thou by suit dost save my life, it both our joys will be,
If not it may suffice thou soughst, to set thy brother free:
Wherefore speed to prorogue my days, to morrow else I die.
I will not fail to plead and pray, to purchase the mercy,
Farewell a while, God grant me well to speed.
Sister adieu, till thy return, I live, tween, hope, and breed.
O happy time, see where Lord Promos comes?
Now tongue address thyself, my mind to wray.
And yet least haste work waste, I hold it best,
In covert, for some advantage, to stay.
'tis strange to think, what swarms of unthrifts live,
Within this town, by rapine spoil and theft:
That were it not, that justice oft them grieve,
The just man's goods, by Ruflers should be reft.
At this our Size, are thirty judged to die,
Whose falls I see, their fellows smally fear:
So that the way, is by severity
Such wicked weeds, even by the roots to tear:
Wherefore Sheriff, execute with speedy pace,
The damned wights, to cut of hope of Grace.
It shallbe done.
O cruel words they make my heart to bleed,
Now, now, I must, this doom seek to revoke,
Lest grace come short, when starved is the steed:
Most mighty Lord, & worthy judge, thy judgement sharp abate,
vail thou thine ears, to hear the plaint, that wretched I relate,
Behold the woeful Sister here, of poor Andrugio,
Whom though that law awardeth death, yet mercy do him show:
Way his young years, the force of love, which forced his amis,
Way, way, that Marriage, works amendss, for what committed is,
He hath defiled no nuptial bed, nor forced rape hath moved,
He fell through love, who never meant, but wive the wight he loved.
And wantoness sure, to keep in awe, these statutes first were made,
Or none but lust full lechers, should, with rygrous law be paid.
And yet to add intent thereto, is far from my pretence,
I sue with tears, to win him grace, that sorrows his offence.
Wherefore herein, renowned Lord, justice with pity poise:
Which two in equal balance weighed, to heaven your fame will raise.
Cassandra, leave of thy bootless suit, by law he hath been tried,
Law found his fault, Law judged him death:
Yet this may be replied,
That law a mischief often permits, to keep due form of law,
That law small faults, with greatest dooms, to keep men still in axe:
Yet Kings, or such as execute, regal authority:
If mends be made, may over rule, the force of law with mercy.
Here is no wilful murder wrought, which asketh blood again,
Andrugio's fault may valued be, Marriage wipes out his stain.
Fair Dame, I see the natural zeal, thou bearest to Andrugio,
And for thy sake (not his desert) this favour will I show:
I will reprieve him yet a while, and on the matter pause,
To morrow you shall licence have, a fresh to plead his cause:
Sheriff execute my charge, but stay Andrugio,
Until that you in this behalf, more of my pleasure know.
I will perform your will:
O most worthy Magistrate, myself thy thrall I find.
Even for this little lightning hope, which at thy hands I find.
Now will I go and comfort him, which hangs twixt death & life.
Happy is the man, that enjoys the love of such a wife,
I do protest, her modest words, hath wrought in me a maze.
Though she be far, she is not deackt, with garish shows for gaze,
Her beauty lures, her looks cut off, fond suits with chaste disdain.
O God I feel a sudden change, that doth my freedom chain.
What didst thou say? fie Promos fie: of her avoid the thought,
And so I will, my other cares will cure what love hath wrought,
Come away.
My trusty friends about your business strait,
With simple shows, your subtle meanings bait:
Promote all faults, up into my office,
Then turn me loose, the offenders to fleece.
Tush, to find law breakers let me alone,
I have eyes, will look into a millstone.
God a mercy Gripax.
And I am so subtle sighted I trow,
As I the very thoughts of men do know:
I faith Rapax, what thought thy wife when she,
To lie with the priest, by night stole from thee?
Mary she knew, you and I were at square,
And lest we fell to blows, she did prepare.
To arm my head, to match thy horned brow.
Go and a knave with thee.
I stay for you:
No harm is done, here is but blow for blue,
Birds of a feather, best fly together,
Then like partners, about your market go,
Marrows adieu, God sent you fair wether.
Far you well, for us take no care,
With us this broad speech seldom breedeth square.
Mary sir, welfare an office, what some ever it be,
The very countenance, is great, though slender be the see,
I thank my good Lord Promos now, I am an officer made,
In sooth more by hap then desert, in secret be it said:
Not force for that, each shift for one, for Phallax will do so,
Well far a head can take his time nay watch for time I trow.
I smile to think of my fell▪ wes; how some brave it, some weight,
And think reward, there service just, with offered shifts will bayght
When they (poor souls) in troth do fall a mile upon account,
For flattery and fervent plesing, are means to make men mount:
I speak on proof, Lord Promos, I have pleased many a day,
Yet am I neither learned, true, nor honest any way.
What skills for that, by wit or wile, I have an office got,
By force whereof every licence, warrant, patent, passport,
Leace, fine, fee, et cetera, pas and repas, through Phallax hands,
Disorored persons bribe me well, to escape from justice bands,
And wealthy churls for to promote, I now have set a work,
Such hungry lads, as soon will smell, where statute breakers lurk,
And if they come, within our Gripe, we mean to stripe them so,
As (if they scape from open shame) their bags with us shall go.
And trust me this, we officers, of this mild mould are wrought,
Agree with us, and sure your shame by us shall not be sought:
But soft a while, I see my Lord what makes him lower so▪
I will intrude into his sight, perhaps his grief to know.
Well met Phallax. I long have wysht to show.
A cause to thee which none but I yet know.
Say on my Lord, a happy man wear I:
If any way, your wish I could supply:
feign would I speak, but o, a chilling fear,
(The case is such) makes me from speech forbear.
These words my Lord (whom ever have been just)
Now makes, me think, that you my truth mistrust.
But cease suspect, my will with yours shall 'gree,
What so (or against whom) your dealing be.
Against a wight of small account it is,
And yet I fear, I shall my purpose miss:
Fear not my Lord, the old Proverb doth say.
Faint hearts doth steal fair Ladies seld away.
Fair Ladies O, no Lady is my love,
And yet the sure, as coy as they will prove.
I thought as much, love did torment you so.
But what is she that dare say Promos Noah?
Do what one can. fire will break forth I see,
My words unwares, hath shown what grieveth me:
My wound is such, as love must be my leech.
Which cure will bringing Gravity in speech,
For what may be, a folly of more note,
Then for to see, a man grey beard to dote.
No my Lord, Amor omnia vincit.
And Ovid saith, Forma numen habet.
And for to prove, loves service seems the wise,
Set Sallomon and Samson, before your eyes:
For wit, and strength, who won the chiefest prize.
And both lived by the laws love did devise,
Which proves in love, a certain godhead lies.
And Gods rule yearly, by wisdom from the skies:
Whose wills (think I) are wrought best by the wise.
In deed divine, I think loves working is,
From reason's use, in that my senses swerve,
In pleasure pain, in pain I find a bliss,
On woe I feed, in sight of food I stearue:
These strange effects, by love are lodged in me,
My thoughts are bound, yet I myself am free.
Well my Good Lord, I axe (with pardon sought)
Who she may be, that hath your thrauldome wrought?
The example is such, as I sigh to show,
Sister she is, to damned Andrugio.
All the better for you the game doth go.
The proverb saith, that kit will unto kind,
If it be true this comfort, than I find:
Cassandra's flesh is as her brothers, frail,
Then will she stoop, (in chief) when Lords assail.
The contrary (through fear) doth work my pain,
For in her face, such modesty doth reign,
As cuts of loving suits, with chaste disdain.
What love will not, necessity shall gain,
Her brother's life, will make her glad and fain.
What is it best, Andrugio free to set,
Ere I am sure, his sisters love to get?
My loving Lord, your servant means not so.
But if you will, elsewhere in secret go:
To work your will assist I hope to show.
With right good will, for such my sickness is.
As I shall die, if her good will I miss.
THe wind is ill, blows no man's gain, for cold I need not care,
Here is nine and twenty suits of apparel for my share:
And some berlady very good, for so standeth the case,
As neither gentleman, nor other Lord, Promos showeth Grace.
But I marvel much poor slaves, that they are hanged so soon,
They were wont, to stay a day or two, now scarce an after noon:
All the better for the hangman, I pardons dreaded sore,
Would cutters save, whose clothes are good, I never feared the poor:
Let me see, I must be dapper in this my faculty,
Hear are new ropes, how are my knots, I saith fyr slippery.
At fast or lose, with my Giptian, I mean to have a cast:
Ten to one I read his fortune by the Marymas fast,
A way, what a stur is this, to see men go to hanging?
Hark▪ Good bye ye, I must begun, the prisoners are a coming.
WIth heart and voice to thee O Lord,
At latter gasp, for grace we cry:
Unto our suits, good God accord,
Which thus appeal, to thy mercy.
Forsake us not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess:
Forsake us not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess.
All sorts of men beware by us, whom present death assaults,
Look in your conscience what you found, & sorrow for your faults:
Example take by our fresh harms, see here the fruits of pride,
I for my part deserved death, long ere my theft was spied.
O careless youth, lead, lead awry, with every pleasing toy,
Note well my words, they are of worth, the cause though my annoy.
Shun to be pranked, in peacocks plumes, for gaze which only are.
Hate, hate, the dice, even as the devil, of wanton Dames beware:
I was enticed by lawless men, on thievish spoils to feed.
And nuzzled once in wicked deeds, I feared not to offend,
From had, to worse, and worst I fell, I would at leisure mend.
But o presuming over much, still to escape in hope,
My faults were found, and I judged, to totter in a rope:
To which I go with these my mates, likewise for breach of laws.
For murder some, for thievery some, and some for little cause.
Bewared are friend of quarreling, thirst spoil of no man's breaths
Blood, ar blood, I shedding blood, untimely catch: y death.
Maids & women, shun pride, & sloth, the roots of every vice,
My death ere long, will show their ends, God grant it make you wise.
How now Giptian? All a mort knave, for want of company?
Be crusty man, the Hangman strait, will read Fortunes with thee.
With this thy scoffing speech, good friend offend him not,
His faults are scourged, thine escape (perhaps) that do deserve his lot?
Iesus save me, I am cast, for a purse with three halfpence.
Dispatch prating knave, and he hanged, that we were jogging hence.
Our secret thoughts, thou Christ dost know,
Whom the world, doth hate in thrall.
Yet hope we that, thou wilt not so,
On whom alone, we thus do call.
Forsake us not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess,
Forsake us not, etc.
Do what I can, no reason cools desire,
The more I strive, my fond affects to fame:
The hotter (o) I feel, a burning fire
Within my breast, vain thoughts to forge and frame.
O straying effects, of blind affected Love,
From wisdoms paths, which doth astray our wits:
Which makes us haunt, that which our harms doth move,
A sickness like, the Fever Etticke fits:
Which shakes with cold, when we do burn like fire.
Even so in Love, we freeze, through chilling fear,
When as our hearts, doth fry with hot desire:
What said I? like to Etticke fits, nothing near:
In sourest Love, some sweet is ever sucked.
The Lover findeth peace, in wrangling strife,
So that if pain, were from his pleasure plucked,
There were no Heaven, like to the lovers life.
But why stand I to plead, their joy or woe?
And rest unsure of her I wish to have.
I know not if Cassandra love, or no?
But yet admit, she grant not what I crave,
If I benyce, to her brother life to give:
Her brother's life, too much will make her yield,
A promise then, to let her brother live:
Hath force enough, to make her fly the field.
Thus though suit fail, necessity shall win,
Of Lordly rule, the conquering power is such:
But (o sweet sight) see where she enters in,
Both hope and dread, at once my heart doth touch.
I see two thralls, sweet seems a little joy,
For fancies free, Andrugio's breast hath scope:
But lest detract, doth raise a new annoy,
I now will seek to turn, to hap his hope.
See, as I wished, Lord Promos is in place,
Now in my suits, God grant I may find grace.
Renowned Lord, whilst life in me doth last,
In homage bonds, I bind myself to thee:
And though I did thy goodness lately taste,
Yet once again, on knees I mercy seek:
In his behalf, that hangs between death and life;
Who still is priest, if you the mends do leek:
His lawless love, to make his lawful wife.
Fair Dame, I well have weighed thy suit, & wish to do thee good,
But all in vain, all things conclude, to have thy brother's blood:
The strictness of the law condempnes, an ignorant abuse,
Then wilful faults are hardly helped, or cloaked with excuse:
And what may be more wilful, than a Maid to violate.
The force was small, when with her will, he wretch the conquest gate.
Law ever at the worst, doth construe evil intent.
And law even with the worst, awards them punishment:
And sith that rigorous law adjudged him to die,
Your glory will be much the more, in showing him mercy.
The world will think, how the you do, but grant him grace on cause,
And where cause is, there mercy should abate the force of laws.
Cassandra in thy brother's half, thou hast said what may be
And for thy sake, it is, if I do set Andrugio free:
Short tale to make, thy beauty hath, surprised me with love,
That maugre wit, I turn my thoughts, as blind affections move.
And quite subdued by Cupid's might, need makes me sue for grace
To thee Cassandra, which dost hold, my freedom in a lace.
Yield to my will, and then command, even what thou wilt of me,
Thy brother's life, and all that else, may with thy liking 'gree.
And may it be, a judge himself, the self same fault should use:
For which he domes, an others death, O crime without excuse.
Renowned Lord, you use this speech (I hope) your thrall to try,
If otherwise, my brother's life, so dear I will not buy.
Fair Dame my outward looks, my inward thoughts bewray,
If you mistrust, to search my heart, would God you had a kaye.
If that you love (as so you say) the force of love you know,
Which felt, in conscience you should, my brother favour show.
In doubtful war, one prisoner still, doth set another free.
What so war seeks, love unto war, contrary is, you see.
Hate fostreth war, love cannot hate, then may it covet force.
The Lover oft sues to his foe, and findeth no remorse:
Then if he hap to have a help, to win his froward foe,
Too kind a fool, I will him hold, that lets such vantage go.
Well, to be short, myself will die, ere I my honour stain,
You know my mind, leave off to tempt, your offers are in vain.
Bethink yourself, at price enough I purchase sweet your love,
Andrugio's life sufficed alone, your strangeness to remove:
The which I grant, with any wealth that else you will require,
Who buyeth love at such a rate, pays well for his desire.
Not Promos, not, honour never at value may be sold,
Honour far dearer is than life, which passeth price of gold:
To bnie this jewel at the full, my wife I may thee make:
For unsure hope, that peerless pearl, I never will forsake:
These suits seems strange at first I see, where modesty bears sway,
I therefore will set down my will, & for her answer stay.
Fair Cassandra, the jewel of my joy,
How so in show, my tale, seems strange to thee:
The same well weighed, thou needest not be so coy,
Yet for to give thee respite to agreed.
I will two days hope still of thy consent,
Which if thou grant (to clear my clouds of care)
Clothed like a Page (suspect for to prevent.)
Unto my Court, some night, sweet wench repair.
Till than adieu, thou these my words, in works performed shalt found.
Farewell my Lord, but in this suit, you bootless wast your wind:
Cassandra, O most unhappy, subject to every woe,
What tongue can tell, what thought conceive, what pen thy grief can show?
Whom to scourge, Nature, heaven & earth, do heaps of thrall ordain,
Whose words in waste, whose works are lost, whose wishes are in vain.
That which to others comfort yields, doth 'cause my heavy cheer,
I mean my beauty breeds my bale, which many hold so dear.
I would to God that kind else where, bestowed had this blaze,
My virtues then had wrought regard, my shape now gives the gaze:
This form so Promos fires with Love, as wisdom can not quench,
His hot desire, till he lust, in Venus' seas hath drenched.
Mistress Cassandra, my Master longs to hear of your good speed,
Poor Ganio his death-alas, fierce Fortune hath decreed:
His death: God forbid, all his hope should turn to such success,
For God's sake, go and comfort him, I sorrow his distress.
I needs must go, although with heavy cheer.
Sir, your sister Cassandra is here.
My Cassandra what news, good sister show?
All things conclude thy death Andrugio:
Prepare thyself, to hope it ware in vain.
My death, alas what raised this new disdain?
Not justice zeal, in wicked Promos sure:
Sweet, show the cause, I must this doom endure?
If thou dost live I must my honour loose,
Thy ransom is, to Promos fleshly will
That I do yield: than which I rather chose,
With torments sharp, myself he first should kill:
Thus am I bend, thou seest thy death at hand,
O would my life, would satisfy his ire,
Cassandra then, would cancel soon thy band.
And may it be a judge of his account,
Can spot his mind, with lawless love or lust?
But more, may he doom any fault with death?
When in such fault, he finds himself injust.
Sister, that wise men love we often see,
And where love rules, 'gainst thorns doth reason spurn.
But who so loves, if he rejected be,
His passing love, to peevish hate will turn.
Dear sister then, note how my fortune stands,
That Promos love, the like is often in use:
And sith he crave, this kindness, at your hands,
Think this, if you his pleasure do refuse.
I in his rage (poor wretch) shall sing Peccavi.
Here are two evils, the best hard to digest,
But where as things are driven unto necessity,
There are we bid, of both evils choose the lest:
And of these evils, the lest, I hold is death,
To shun whose dart, we can no mean device,
Yet honour lives, when death hath done his worst,
Thus fame then life is of far more emprise:
Nay Cassandra, if thou thyself submit,
To save my life, to Promos fleshly will,
justice will say, thou dost no crime commit:
For in forced faults is no intent of ill.
How so th'intent, is construed in offence,
The Proverb says that ten good turns lie dead,
And one ill deed, ten times beyond pretence,
By envious tongues, report abroad doth spread:
Andrugio so, my fame, shall valued be,
Despite will blaze my crime, but not the cause:
And thus although I fain would set thee free,
Poor wench I fear, the gripe of slanders paws.
Nay sweet sister more slander would insawe,
Your spotless life, to reave your brother's breath:
When you have power, for to enlarge the same,
Once in your hands, doth lie my life, and death,
Way that I am, the self same flesh you are,
Think I once gone, our house will go to wrack:
Know forced faults, for slander need not care:
Look you for blame, if I quail through your lack.
Consider well, my great extremity,
If other wise, this doom I could revoke:
I would not spare, for any ieberdye:
To free thee wench, from this same heavy yoke.
But ah. I see, else, no way saves my life.
And yet his hope, may further thy consent,
He said, he may percase make thee his wife,
And 'tis likely, he can not be content
With one night's joy: if love he after seeks,
And I discharged, if thou aloof then be,
Before be loose thyself, that so he leeks.
No dought but he, to marriage, will agreed.
And shall I stick to stoop, to Promos will,
Since my brother enjoyeth life thereby?
Not, although it doth my credit kill,
Ere that he should, myself would choose to die.
My Andrugio, take comfort in distress,
Cassandra is won, thy faunsome great to pay,
Such care she hath, thy thraldom to release:
As she consenteth, her honour for to slay.
Farewell, I must, my virgin's weeds forsake:
And like a page, to Promos lewd repair.
My good sister to God I thee betake,
To whom I pray, that comfort change thy care.
'tis more than strange to see Lord Promos plight,
He fryskes about, as birds beware in his breech.
Even now he seems (through hope) to taste delight,
And strait (through fear) where he claws it doth not itch.
He museth now, straight ways the man doth sing.
(A sight in sooth, unseemly for his age:)
He longing looks, when any news shall bring,
To speak with him, without there waits a page,
O worthy wit (fit for a judges head)
Unto a man to change a shiftles maid,
Wink not on me, 'twas his, and not my deed:
His, nay, his rule, this Metamorphos made,
But Holla tongue, no more of this I pray,
Non bonus est, ludere cum sanctis.
The quietest, and the thryftiest course they say,
Is, not to check, but praise great men's amiss,
I find it true, for soothing Promos vain:
None like myself, is lykte in his conceit,
While favour last, then good, I fist for gain:
(For Grace will not bite always at my bait)
And as I wish, at hand, good Fortune, see:
Here comes Phallax, and Gripax, but what's this,
As good, as fair handsel, God grant it be:
The knaves bring a Woman, Coram nobis.
Tear not my clothes my friends, they cost more than you are a ware,
Tush, soon you shall have a blue gown. for these take you no care
If she took thy offer poor knave, thy wife would starve with cold:
Well sir, whipping shall keep you warm.
What means these knaves to scold.
Master Phallax, we find you in good time,
A Woman here, we have brought afore you:
One to be charged with many a wanton crime.
Which trial will, with proof enough find true:
A knave of hers, we have stayed likewise,
Both to be used, as you shall us advise.
What call you her name?
Lamia.
Fair Dame, hereto what do you say?
Worshipful Sir, myself I happy reek,
With patience that my answer you will hear:
These naughty men, these words on malice speak,
And for this cause, ill will to me they bear.
I scorned to keep, their minds with money play,
I mean to keep, my life from open shame,
Yea, if I lived, as lewdly as they say:
But I that knew, myself unworthy shame:
Shrunk not, to come unto my trial now.
My tale is told, conceive as liketh you.
My friends, what proof have you against this dame?
Speak on sure ground, lest that you reap the shame:
The wrong is great, and craves great recompense.
To touch her honest name, without offence.
All Iulio Sir doth ring of her lewd life:
In deed she is known for an idle housewife.
He lies, she is occupied day and night.
To swear against her is there any wight?
Not, not present, but if you do detain her.
There willbe found by oath, some that will stain her,
I see she is then on suspicion stayed:
Whose faults to search, upon my charge is laid,
From charge of her I therefore will set you free,
Myself will search her faults if any be,
A God's name you may departed.
Good bye Syr.
In such shares as this, henceforth I will begin,
For all is his, in his claws, that cometh in.
Fair Lamia, since that we are alone,
I plainly will discourse to you my mind,
I think you not to be so chaste a one,
As that your life, this favour aught to find:
Not force, for that, since that you scot free go,
Unpunished, whose life is judged ill:
Yet think (through love) this grace the judge doth show,
And love with love aught to be answered still.
Indeed I grant (although I could reprove,
Their lewd Complaints, with goodness of my life)
Your courtesy, your debtor doth me prove,
In that you took▪ my honest fame in strife,)
My answer for discharge of their report:
For which good turn, I at your pleasure rest,
To work amendss, in any honest sort:
Away with honesty your answer then in sooth,
Fits me as jump as a pudding a Friar's mouth,
He is a crafty child, dally, but do not.
Tush, I warrant thee, I am not so hot,
Your words are too hard Sir, for me to construe.
Then to be short, your rare beauty my heart hath wounded so,
As (save your love, become my leech) I sure shall die with woe.
I see no sign of death, in your face to appear,
'tis but some usual qualm you have, pitiful Dames to fears.
Fair Lamia, trust me I feign not, betimes bestow some grace.
Well, I admit it so, only to argue in your case.
I am married, so that to set your love on me were vain:
It sufficeth me, that I may your secret friend remain.
A holy Hood, makes not a Friar devout,
He will play at small game, or he sit out.
Though for pleasure, or to prove me, these proffers you do move,
You are to wise, to hazard life, upon my yielding love:
The man is pained with present death, that useth wanton pleasure.
To scape such pain, wise men, these joys, without suspect can measure,
Furthermore, I have been (my Girl) a Lawyer to too long:
If at a pinch, I cannot wrist the Law from right to wrong.
If law you do profess. I gladly crave,
In a cause or two, your advise to have.
To resolve you, you shall command my skill,
Wherefore like friends, let's common in good will,
You are a merry man, but leave to jest,
To morrow night, if you will be my Jest:
At my poor house, you shall my causes know,
For good cause, which I mean not here to show.
Willingly, and for that, haste calls me hence,
My suit till then, shall remain in suspense:
Farewell Client, to morrow look for me:
Your good welcome Sir, your best cheer will be.
I told you erst, the nature of Phallax,
Money, or fair Women, works him as wax:
And yet I must commend your sober cheer,
You told your tale, as if a Saint you were.
Well (in seeréete, be it said) how so I seemed divine,
I feared once, a blue gown, would have been my shrine.
But now that pain is flayed, and pleasure keeps his hold,
I know that Phallax will, my Fame henceforth uphold:
To entertain which Jest, I will some dainty cheer prepare,
Yet ere I go, in pleasant Song, I mean to purge my care.
A due poor care, adieu,
Go, cloy some helpless wretch:
My life, to make me rue,
Thy forces do not stretch.
Thy harbour, is the heart,
Whom wrong, hath wrapped, in woe:
But wrong, doth take my part,
With cloak of right in shoe.
My faults, inquiry escape,
At them the judges wink:
Those for my fall that gape,
To show my lewdness shrink.
Then silly care go pack,
Thou art no Jest for me:
I have, and have, no lack,
And lack, is shroud for thee.
Unhappy wretch, I blush myself to see,
appareled thus monstrous to my kind:
But o, my weeds, will with my fault agree,
When I have pleased, lewd Promos fleshly mind.
What shall I do, go proffer what he sought?
Or on more suit, shall I give my consent?
The best is sure, since this must needs be wrought:
I go, and show, need makes me to his bent.
My floods of tears, from true intent which flow.
May quench his lust, or ope his muzzled eyen,
To see that I deserve to be his wife:
Though now constrained to be his Concubine.
But so, or not, I must the vent ere give,
No danger fears the wight, pricked forth by need:
And thus like one more glad to die, then live,
I forward set, God grant me well to speed.
With my Mistress, the world is changed well,
She feared of late, of whipping cheer to smell:
And now again, both gallant, fresh and gay.
Who in Iulio flauntes it out, like Lamia?
A lucky friend (yea, one that beareth sway)
Is now become, a prop, of such a stay▪
To her good name, as who is he dare say:
That Lamia doth offend, now any way?
This, her good friend, will be her Jest this night,
And that he may in his welcome delight.
To market I in haste, am sent to buy,
The best cheer, that, I fasten on my eye.
By proof I find, no reason cools desire,
Cassandra's suit, sufficed to remove
My lewd request, but contrary, the fire,
Her tears inflamed, of lust, and filthy love.
And having thus, the conquest in my hands,
No prayer served to work restraint in me:
But needs I would untie the precious bands,
Of this fair Dames spotless Virginity.
The spoil was sweet, and won even as I would,
And yet ungainde, till I had given my troth,
To marry her, and that her brother should
Be free from death, all which I bound with oath:
It resteth now (unless I wrong her much)
I keep my vow: and shall Andrugio live?
Such grace would me, with unindifferencie tuch.
To pardon him, that did commit a Rape,
To set him free, I to Cassandra swore:
But no man else, is privy to the same,
And rage of Love, for thousand oaths nill spare,
Moore than are kept, when gotten is the game.
Well, what I said, than Lover like I said,
Now reason says, unto thy credit look:
And having well, the circumstances weighed,
I find I must, unswear the oath I took:
But double wrong, I so should do Cassandra.
No force for that, my might, commandeth right,
Her privy man, her open cries will stay:
Or if not so, my frowning will her fright,
And thus shall rule, conceal my filthy deed.
Now forthwith, I will to the Jailor send,
That secretly Andrugio he behead,
Whose head he shall, with these same words commend.
Andrugio, as you love our lives, forthwith post you away.
For God's sake to no living friend, your safety yet bewray:
The proverb saith, two may keep counsel if that one be gone.
Assure thyself, most faithful friend, I willbe known to none:
To none alas, I see my escape yields me but small relief,
Cassandra, and Polina will destroy themselves, with grief:
Through thought that I am dead: they dead, to live what helpeth me?
Leave of these plaints of small avail, thank God that you are free,
For God it was, within my mind, that did your safety move,
And that same God, no doubt will work for your and their behove:
Most faithful friend, I hope that God, will work as you do say,
And therefore, to some place unknown, I will myself convey.
Gayler, far well: for thy good deed, I must remain thy debtor,
In mean while yet receive this gift, till fortune sends a better:
Good bye sir, but keep your money, your need you do not know.
I pass not now for fortunes threats, yea though her force she show
And therefore stick not to receive this small reward in part.
I will not sure, such proffers leave, 'tis time you do departed.
Since so thou wilt, I willbe gone adieu till fortune smile.
Sir, far you well, I will not fail to pray for you the while.
Well. I am glad, that I have sent him gone,
For by my faith, I lived in perilous fear:
And yet God wots, to see his bitter moan,
When he should die, would force a man forbear,
From harming him, if pity might bear sway:
But see how God hath wrought for his safety?
A dead man's head, that suffered th'other day,
Makes him thou'ht dead, through out the city.
Such a just, good and righted is God is he:
Although awhile he let the wicked reign,
Yet he relieves the wretch in misery,
And in his pride, he throws the tyrant down.
I use these words, upon this only thought,
That Promos long his rod can not escape:
Who hath in thought, a wilful murder wrought,
Who hath in act performed a wicked rape,
Gods will be done, who well Andrugio speed,
Once well I hope, to hear of his good luck,
For God thou knowest my conscience did this deed,
And no desire of any worldly muck,
In good sweet sooth, I fear I shallbe shent,
It is so long: since I to market went,
But trust me, wyldfowle are such costly gear,
Specially, woodcoks, out of reason dear,
That this hour, I have the market bet,
To drive a bargain to my most profit:
And in the end I chanced to light on one,
Hyt me as pat as a pudding Pope Ione,
Other market maids▪ pay down for their meat,
But that I have bought, on my score is set.
Well far credit when money runneth low,
Mary yet, Butchers, the which do credit so.
(As much Good meat, as they kill) may perchance,
Be glad and fain at hearing cobs to dance.
What force I that? every man shift for one,
For if I starve, let none my fortune moan,
Soft Dalia, a word with you, I pray.
What friend, Grimbal, welcome as I may say:
Sayest thou me so, then kiss me for acquaintance.
If I like your manhood, I may do so perchance.
Bate me an ace, quoth Boulton, Tush, your mind I know:
Ah sir, you would, be like, let my Cock Sparrows go.
I warrant thee Grimball.
Say off hands Dalia.
You powte me, if that you got, my Pudding away:
Nay good sweet, honey Grimball, this Pudding give me.
Iche were as good geetes her, for she will hate, I see.
Well, my noun good heart root, I freely give thee this,
Upon condition, that thou give me a kiss.
Nay, but first wash your lips, with sweet water you shall,
Why ych was rite now, for my Pudding, honey sweet Grimbal:
Well Dalia, you will flout so long, till (though I say)
With kindness you will cast a proper handsome man away,
Wherefore soot Conny, even a little spurt:
Say off hands Sir:
Good do not bite, for ych mean thee no hurt:
Come off Pyggesnie, prefer me not a jot,
What would the good fool have,
Why, you wot hot.
Hark in your ear:
You shall command, so proper a man ye are.
That for your sake, I will not stick to ware:
A blue Cassock, during my life for sooth,
Marry for my sake, I would be very loath:
So goodly a handsome man, should loose his head.
Nay, for my head, care not a Tinkers turd,
For so God judge me, and at one bore word:
Isle loose my death, yea, and my great brown Cow,
I love you so filthily: law ye now.
Thou sayest valiantly, now sing, aswell too:
And thou shalt quickly know, what I mean to do.
Yes by God's foot, to pleasure thee, ych shall,
Both sing, spring, fight and play, the dewl and all.
O lustily:
Come smack me, come smack me, I long for asmuch,
Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthy fine slouch.
Leard how I love thee,
This can not move me:
Why pretty Pygsney, my heart, and my honey?
Because goodman Hogsface, you woe without money.
I lack money, chy grant,
Then Grimball avaunt.
Chamyoung sweet heart, and feat, come kiss me for love,
Crokeshanke, your jowl is to great, such liking to move.
What mean you by this?
To leave thee by gys.
First smack me, first smack, I die for asmuch,
Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthy fine slouch.
Dalia, art thou gone? what wilt serve me so?
O God, cham ready to ray myself for woe:
Be valiant Grimball, kill thyself man?
Nay, hum Lady, I will not by Saint Anne.
Ich have beard my great Grandsire say:
Maid will say nay, and take it: and so she may,
And therefore i'll, to Mistress Lamia,
With these Puddings, and Cock sparrows, by and by:
And in the dark, again, ych will her try.
I marvel much what worketh so my Lord Promos unrest,
He fares as if a thousand Devils, were gnawing in his breast:
There is sure some worm of grief, that doth his conscience nip,
For since Andrugio lost his head, he hath hung down the lip.
And truth to say, his fault is such as well may grieve his mind,
The Devil himself could not have used, a practice more unkind.
This is once. I love a woman, for my life, as well as be,
But (fair dames) with her that loves me. I deal well with, trust me.
Well, leave I now my Lord Promos, his own deeds to answer,
Lamia I know looks, and double looks, when I come to supper:
I thought as much: see, to seek me, hear comes her Apple squire.
O that I could found Master Phallax. the meat burns at the fire:
And by your leave. Andrugio's death, doth make my mistress sweat.
How now Rosko?
Is't you sir? my Mistress doth entreat,
That with all speed, you worship will come away to supper:
The meat and all is ready to set upon the board sir.
Gramercy for thy pains, I was even. coming to her.
You are the welcom'st man alive to her I know,
And trust me at your commandment ren: ayneth poor Rosko.
It is honestly said, but now tell me,
What quality hast, that I may use thee?
I am a Barbour, and when you please sir,
Call (and spare not) for a cast of rose water.
But hear me, canst thou heal a green wound well?
Yea, green and old.
Then thy best were to dwell,
In some usual place or street, where, through frays,
Thou mayst be set a work with wounds always.
I thank my Mistress I have my hands full,
To trim gentlemen of her acquaintance:
And I trust Sir, if that your worship chance.
To have need of my help, I shall earn your money.
Afore an other.
That thou shalt truly:
But sirrah, where dwells Lamia?
Even hear sir, enter I pray.
That I will sure, if that my way be clear.
Yes sir, her doors be open all the year.
Polina cursed, what dame a live hath cause of grief like thee.
Who (won by love) hast yield the spoil of thy virginity?
And he for to repair thy fame, to marry thee, that vowed,
Is done to death for first offence, the second mends not loud.
Great shame redounds to thee, O Love, in leaving us in thrall:
Andrugio and Polina both, in honouring thee did fall.
Thou so didst witch our wits, as we from reason strayed quite,
Provockt by thee, we did refuse, no vantage of delight:
Delight, what did I say? nay death, by rash and fowl abuse,
Alas I shame to tell thus much, though love do work excuse,
So that (fair dames) from such consent, my accydents of barm,
Forewarneth you, to keep aloof though love your hearts do arm,
But ah Polina, whether runs thy words into advise,
When others harms, enforced by love, could never make thee wise.
The cause is plain, for that in love, no reason stands in stude,
And reason is the only mean, that others harms we dread.
Then, that the world hereafter may, to love infer my ill,
Andrugio's Tomb with daily tears, Polina worship will.
And further more I vowed, whilst life in me doth foster breath,
No one shall vaunt of conquered love, by my Andrugio's death,
These shameful weeds, which forced I were that men my fault may know:
Whilst that I live, shall show I morn for my Andrugio,
I will not bide the sharp assaults, from sugared words I sent.
I will not trust to careless oaths, which often win consent:
I will cut off occasions all, which hope of mirth may move,
With ceaseless tears I'll quench each cause, the kindleth coals of love:
And thus till death Polina will estrange herself from joy,
Andrugio, to reward thy love which did thy life destroy.
A Sir, in faith, the case is altered quite,
My mistress late that lived in wretched plight:
Bids care adieu and every cause of woe,
The feare is fled, which made her sorrow so,
Mas Phallax so vnder props her fame,
As none for life dare now her lewdness blame,
I fear (nay hope) she hath bewitched him so,
As half his bribes, unto her share will go:
Not force for that, who others doth deceive,
Deserves himself, like measure to receive.
Well, leave I Lamia, for herself to pray,
Better than I can show, who knows the way:
It stands me on, for my poor self to shift,
And I have found a help at a dead lift:
My old friend Grimbals purse, with pence is full,
And if I empty it not, Dalia will.
The slavering fool, what he can rap and rend,
(He loves her so) upon the filth will spend:
But by your leave, I'll bar her of this match,
My net and all is set, the fool to catch.
Forsooth before his amorous suit he move,
He must be trimmed to make her more to love.
And in good sooth, the world shall hardly fall,
But that he shallbe washed, pould, shaved and all:
And see the luck, the fool is fast I know,
In that with Rowke he doth so sadly go.
God bores, as sayst, when somewhat handsome ch'am,
I faith she will come off for very shame:
Yea without doubt for I swear by saint Anne:
Myself loves you, you are so clean a young man.
Nay, thou wilt say so, when my face is fair washed,
Good luck a God's name, the woodcock is mashed.
And who barbs ye Grimball.
A dapper knave, one Rosko.
Well letherface, we shall have you Ass ere you go.
I know him not, is he a deafed barber?
O, yea, why he is Mistress Lamia's powler.
And look sirrah, yen is the little knave.
How dost Rosko?
Whope, my eye sight God save,
What old Grimball, welcome, sit you down hear, Boy?
Anon.
Bay leaves in warm water, quick, bring clean gear,
Straight.
As thou saidst Grymball, this is a feat knave indeed.
How say'syr? ointments for a scab▪ do you need?
Scab, scurvy Iack, i'll set you a work Syr.
Nay gog's foot, good now, no more of this stur.
I faith Barber, I will pick your teeth strait.
Nay, to pick my purse, I fear thou dost weight,
Yea, gog's heart,
Nay, gog's foot,
Now come Ruffian.
Leave, if you be men,
Hear ye me now? be friends, and by my troth,
Ihill spend a whole quart of Ale on you both.
Well, mass Grimball, I little thought I was,
You would a brought a knave, to vie me thus.
Why, knowest him not? why it is lusty Rowke.
A strong thief, I warrant him by his look.
Go to Barber, no more, lest Copper you catch.
What? wilt give thy nose away? beware that match.
For chy see no Copper, unlest be there.
Master, here is delicate water, & clean gear.
Well, to quiet my house, and for Grimbals sake,
If it pleaseth you, as friends, we hands will shake.
I, I, do so:
And for his sake I agree.
Well then, that we may drink, straight ways wash me.
Good sir, here's water as sweet as a Rose,
Now whiles I wash, your eyes hard you must close.
Thus?
Harder yet:
O, thus:
Yea marry, so.
How sirrah, you know what you have to do:
Wink hard. Grimball.
Yes, yes, I shall.
hear's the tooth pick, and all.
Depart then till I call?
Very will sir, your face, is gaily clean,
Were your teeth now picked, you may kiss a quean.
Sayest thou me so? Good now dispatch and away?
I even fyssell, until I smooch Dalia.
O do you so? I am right glad you tell.
I else had thought, 't'ad been your teeth did smell.
O Lord, gog's foot, you pick me to the quick:
Quiet yourself, your teeth are furred thick.
O, o not more, O God, I spattell blood.
I have done, spit out, this doth you much good: Boy?
Anon.
Bring the drink in the Porringer.
To gargalis his teeth.
It is here sir.
Wash your feeths with this, good master Grimball.
I am poisoned, ah, it is bitter gall:
Eat these Comfyts, to sweeten your mouth with all.
Yea marry sir, these are gay sugared gear.
Their sweetness strait, will make you stink I fear:
Well now, what must I pay, that chy were gone?
What you will.
Sayest me so? O cham undone.
How now Grimball?
O Leard, my Purse is cut.
When? where?
Now, here.
Boy, let the door be shut,
If it be here, we will strait ways see,
Where's he, that came with you?
I can not tell.
What is he?
I know not.
Where doth he devil?
O Leard, I ken not I
You have done well.
This knave, your pence, in his pocket hath pursed:
Let's seek him out.
Nay hark, I must needs first:
O Learde, Learde, cham sick, my belly aches, too, too:
Thou look'st ill: well, I'll tell thee what to do.
Since thou art so sick, strait ways, get thee home,
To find this Iacke, myself abroad will roam.
The rather, for that he played the knave with me,
Chamsick in deed, and therefore ych thank thee:
I see sometime, the blind man hits a Crow,
He may thank me, that he is plagued so:
Well, well, Dalia, the Loan ych bore to thee,
Hath made me sick, and picked my purse from me.
A, is he gone? a fool company him,
In good sooth Sir, this match fadged frim:
Well, I will trudge, to find my tellewe Rowke,
To share the price, that my device hath took.
The heavy charge, that Nature binds me too,
I have performed, engraved my Brother is:
O would to God (to ease, my ceaseless woe)
My wretched bones, entombed were with his.
But O in vain, this bootless wish, I use,
I, poor I must live in sorrow, joined with shame:
And shall he live? that did us both abuse?
And quench through rule, the coals of just revenge?
O: not, I will now high me to the King:
To whom, I will, recount my wretched state,
Lewd Promos rape, my Brother's death and all:
And (though with shame, I may this tale relate)
To prove that force, enforced me to fall:
When I have shown, Lord Promos fowl misdeeds,
This knife forthwith, shall end my woe and shame,
My gored heart, which at his feet then bleeds,
To scourge his faults, the King will more inflame.
In deeds to do, that I in words pretend,
I now advise, my journey, to the King:
Yet ere I go, as Swans sing at their end,
In solemn Song, I mean my knell to ring.
SIth fortune thwart, doth cross my joys with care,
Sigh that my bliss, is changed to bale by fate:
Sigh froward chance, my days in woe doth wear,
Sigh I alas, must moon without a mate.
I wretch have vowed, to sing both day and night,
O sorrow slay, all motions of delight.
Come grisly grief, torment this heart of mine,
Come deep despair, and stop my loathed breath.
Come wretched woe, my thought of hope to pine:
Come cruel care, prefer my suit to death.
Death, end my woe, which sing both day and night,
O sorrow slay, all motions of delight.