Promise's is debt, and I my vow have past,
Andrugio's Tomb, to wash with daily tears:
Which Sacrifice (although God wots in waste)
I will perform, my Altar is of cares.
Of fuming sighs, my offering incense is,
My piteous plaints, in steed of Prayers are:
Yea, would to God in penance of my miss.
I with the rest, my loathed life might share.
But O in vain, I wish this welcomde end,
Death is to slow, to slay the wretched wight:
And all to soon, he doth his forces bend,
To wound their hearts, which wallow in delight.
Yet in my care, still goes, my passing Bell,
So oft as I Andrugio's death do mind:
So oft as men, with pointed fingers tell,
Their friends, my faults, which by my weeds they find.
But O the cause, with Death, which threats me most,
I wish to die, I die through wretched woe,
My dying heart, desires to yield the ghost,
My trances strange, a present death foreshow.
But as the reed doth bow at every blast.
To break the same, when rowghest storms lacks might,
So wretched I, with every woe do waste,
Yet care wants force, to kill my heart out right.
O gracious God and is my gilt so great.
As you the same, with thousand deaths must wreak?
You will it so, else care I could entreat?
With half these woes, my third of life, to break.
But what meanest thou Polina, most accursed,
To muse, why God, this penance joins thee to
Whose correction, although we take at worst,
To our great good he doth the same bestow.
So that, sith grése can not relieve my friend,
sith scorching sighs my sorrows cannot dry:
sith care himself, lacks force my life to end.
Sith still I live that every hour do die:
sith mighty God appoints my penance so,
In mournful song I will my patience show,
A Mid my bale, the lightning joy, that pining care doth bring,
With patience cheers my heavy heart, as in my woes I sing,
I know my Gilded, I feel my scourge: my ease is death I see:
And care (I find) by piecemeal wears, my heart to set me free.
O care, my comfort and refuge, fear not to work thy will,
With patience I thy corfives bide, feed on my life thy fill.
Thy appetite with sighs and tears, I daily will procure.
And wretched I, will vail to death, throw when thou wilt thy Lure.
I Have at length (though weary come in troth)
Obtained a fight of Iulios stately walls,
A King's message, can not be done with sloth:
Whom he bids goé, must run through mire and dirt,
And I am sent to Lord Promos in post.
To tell him that the king will see him straight.
But much I fear that Promos needs not boast:
Of any gain by his sovereigns receit,
But Holla tongue of lavish speech beware,
Though subjects often in Prince's meaning pry,
They must their words, and not their minds declare.
Unto which course I will my tongue apply,
Lord Promos shall my princes coming know.
My prince himself, the cause thereof shall show.
Is't possible that my Mistress Lamia,
Over the shoes should bayn love with Phallax?
Why by Ies●● as she herself doth say,)
With pure good ioyll, her heart doth melt like wax:
And this I am sure, every hour they themselves,
By their sweet selves, or by their letters greet,
But the sport is to see the loving elves,
Bill together when they in secret meet.
She lowers, he lauffes she sighs threw pure love.
Nay, nay, says he (good pugs) no more of this:
Well, says she, and weeps, my grief you do not prove.
Then straight this storm is cheered with a kiss,
And then a both sides, three words and asmuch:
Within her ear, then whispereth this slouch,
And by the way he stumbleth on her lips,
Thus either strives most loving signs to show,
Much good do it them, sith they are both content,
Once I am sure, how so the game doth go,
I have no cause their liking to repent:
I seldom do between them message bear,
But that I have an Item in the hand,
Well, I must trudge to do a certain char,
Which, take I time, cock for my gain doth stand.
Dispatch Dowson, up with the frame quickly,
So space your rooms, as the nine worthies may,
Be so instauld, as best may please the eye.
Very good, I shall:
Nay soft Dowson, stay:
Let your man at saint Anne's cross, out of hand,
Erect a stage, that the Wayghts in sight may stand.
Will you aught else?
Soft awhile, let me see,
On Iesus gate, the four virtues I trow,
Appointed are to stand:
I sir, they are so.
Well, then about your charge, I will foresee,
The Comfort of Music, well placed to be.
I am gone sir.
Hear you master Phallax?
The Wardens of the Marchantaylers are.
Where (with themselves) they shall their pageant place?
With what strange shows, do they their pageant graces
They have Hercules, of Monster's conquering,
Huge great Grants, in a forest fight,
With Lions, Bears, Wolves, Apes, Foxes, and Gray's,
Baiards, brocks. etc.
O woudrons frays,
Mary sir since they are provided thus,
Out of their ways, God keep Master Pediculus.
You are pleasant sir, but with speed I pray,
You answer me, I was charged not to stay.
Because I know, you have all things currant,
They shall stand where they shall no viewers want:
How say you to the end of Duck Alley?
There all the beggars in the town willbe.
O, most attendance is, where beggars are,
Farewell, away.
I will your will declare.
This gear fadgeth now, that these fellows pear,
Friends where weight you?
In Iesus street to keep a passage clear,
That the King and his train, may pass with ease.
O, very good,
Aught else Sir, do you please?
Not, not: about your charge.
We are gone:
A sir, hear is short knowledge, to entertain a king,
But O, O, quid non pecunia? yea, at a days warning?
The king in provision that thought to take us tardy,
As if we had a year been warned, shall by his welcome see:
I have yet one char to do: but soft, hear is Rotko,
I must needs deliver him a message before I go.
I saith, I have noble news for Lamia,
Nay soft, friend Rosko, take mine in your way.
Master Phallax, Osyd I cry you mercy.
Rosko with speed tell thy Mistress from me,
The King straight ways will come to the City:
In whose great train there is a company,
Within her house with more shall merry be,
Therefore, for my sake, will her to foresee,
To welcome them, that nothing wanting be,
This is all I will, for want of leisure.
I will not fail sir, to show your pleasure:
Marry, in faith, these news falls jump with the rest,
They shallbe welcome and far of the best:
But although they well fill their bodies thus,
Their purses will be driven to a non plus:
Not force a whit, each pleasure hath his pain,
Better the purse than body starve of wain.
Well, I will trudge, my welcome news to tell,
And then abroad, good company to smell.
Cassandra, we draw near unto the Town.
So that I will that you from us departed:
Till further of our pleasure you do hear.
Yet rest assured, that wicked Promos,
Shall abide such punishment, as the world,
Shall hold me just, and clear thee of offence.
Dread sovereign, as you will, Cassandra goeth hence.
I plainly see, it tends to great behove,
That Princes often do veil their ears to hear,
The Miser's plaint: for though they do appoint,
Such as they think will justice execute,
Authority is such a commander,
As, where as men by office beareth sway,
If they their rule by conscience measure not,
The poor man's right is overcome by might.
If love or hate from justice lead the judge,
Then money sure may over rule the case.
Thus one abuse is cause of many more:
And therefore none in judges aught to be,
How Rulers wrong, few tales are told the King:
The reason is, their power keeps in awe
Such men as have great cause for to complain.
If Cassandra her goods, nay, life preferred,
Before revenge of Promos treachery:
I had not known, his detestable rape,
The which he forced to save her brother's life.
And furthermore, Andrugio's ransom paid,
I had not known be put him unto death:
For when (good soul) she had this treason told.
Through very shame her honour so was spoiled:
She drew her knife to wound herself to death.
Whose pysious plight, my heart provockt to wrath,
At Promos wiles:
So that to use undifferency to both,
Even in the place where all these wrongs were none:
Myself am come, to sit upon the cause.
But see where Promos and the Mayor weight,
To welcome me with great solemnity:
With cheerful show I shadow will the hate,
I bear to him for his insolency:
Perhaps I may learn more of his abuse,
Whereby the more his punishment may be.
Come my Lords to the Town haste we apace:
We all are priest, to weight upon your Grace:
Renowned King, lo here your faithful subjects priest to show
The loyal duty, which (in right) they to your highness owe.
Your presence, cheers all sorts of us: yet ten times more we joy,
You think us stoarde, our warning short, for to receive a Roye.
Our will, is such, as shall supply, I trust in us all want,
And where good will the welcome gives, provision syld is scant.
Lo, this is all: yea, for us all, that I in words bestow,
Your Majesty, our further zeal, in ready deeds shall know.
And first, dread King, I tender you, the sword of justice hear,
Which as your Lieutenant I trust, uprightly I did hear.
Promos, the good report, of your good government I hear,
Or at the lest, the good conceit, that towards you I bear.
To encourage you the more, in justice to persever,
Is the chief cause. I did address, my Progress heather.
I thank your Highness.
Renowned King, our ready wills to show,
In your behalf, our goods (nay lives) to spend:
In all our names, I freely here bestow
On your Highness, this Purse: unto this end,
To po●● 〈◊〉 your most Royal Majesty,
In all our wealth, thereto bound by duty.
Your great good wills, and gifts with thanks I take:
But keep you still, your goods, to do you good.
It is enough, and all that I do crave,
If needs compels for your and our safety,
That you in part your proffers large perform:
And for this time as outward shows make proof,
It is enough (and all that I desire)
That your hearts and tongues (alike) bid me welcome.
Lord preserve your Majesty.
Forewards my Lords.
The match goes hard, which raiseth no man's gain,
The virtue rare, that none to vice may wrest:
And sure, the Law, that made me late complain:
Allureth me, many a wanton jest:
Dames of my Trade, shut up their shops for fear,
Their stuff proved Contra formam Statuti,
Then I, which lycenst am, to cell fine ware:
Am like to be well customed pardie:
And now Time serves, lest custom after fail,
At highest rate, my Toys I value must:
Let me alone, to set my Toys to sale:
Young Ruflers I, in faith, will serve of trust.
Who ways me not, him will I fayne to love,
Who loves me once, is limed to my hest:
My colours some, and some shall wear my glove,
And he my heart, whose payment likes me best.
And here at hand are customers I trow,
These are the friends, of Phallax, my sweet friend:
Now will I go, and set my wares to show,
But let them laugh, that winneth in the end.
Come on good friend: where dwells Lady Lamia?
Even by Syr.
Well then, go thy way,
Show who sent us, and what our meaning is:
Lest she not knowing us, do take amiss.
That thus boldly we come to visit her.
Not bolder than welcome, I warrant you Sir.
Well, thy Message do:
I go.
IF pleasure, be treasure,
Hark.
The golden world is here, the golden worlds is here.
Refuse you, or choose you:
But welcome who draws near, but welcome who draws near.
They be the Muse's sure,
Nay, Siren's lure.
Here lives delight,
Here dies despite:
Desire here, hath his will.
Here loves relief,
Destroyeth grief:
Which careful hearts doth kill.
Attend them still.
That, as you will.
Here wish in will, doth care destroy,
Play here your fill, we are not coy:
Which breeds much ill, we purge annoyed,
Our lives here still, we lead in joy.
If pleasure, be treasure,
The golden world is here, the golden world is here:
Refuse you, or choose you,
But welcome, who comes near, but welcome, who comes near.
Wantoness draw near.
Taste of our cheer:
Our Cates are fine and sweet.
Come be not coy,
To work your joy:
We fall will at your feet.
A, good kind worms:
Hark.
Lo, here we be, good will which move,
We live you see, for your behove:
Come we agreed, to let you prove.
Without a fee, the fruits of love.
If pleasure, be treasure, the golden world is here, etc.
Upon this large warrant, we may venture,
The door opes alone, come, let us enter.
Agreed.
crier, Make a noise.
O yes. And so thrice.
All manner of persons, here present,
All manner of persons, here present.
Be silent, on pain, of imprisonment,
Be silent, on pain, of imprisonment.
First, if any person, Officer, or other: hath wronged any of his true subjects, by the corruption of bribes, affecting or not favouring, of the person: through Usury, extortion, wrong imprisonment: or with any other unjust practice: His Majesty wills the party so grieved, to repair to Sir Vlrico, one of his highness privy Counsel: who (finding his, or their injuries) is commanded, to certify them, and their proof, unto the King's majesty: where incontinently, he will order the controversy, to the release of the party grieved, and the punishment of the offenders.
Further, if any of his faithful subjects, can charge any person, Officer, or other, with any notable or heinous offence as Treason, Murder, Sacrilege, sedition: or with any such notorious crime: for the safety of his Royal person, benefit and quiet of his Realm, and subjects. On Fridaye next, his most excellent Majesty (with the advise of his honourable Counsel) will in open Court sit, to hear and determine, all such offences. Therefore he straightly chargeth all and every of his subjects, that know any such heinous offenders: one the forenamed day, that he present, both the offender, and his fault.
See how we are croft: we thought the King for pleasure,
Came to visit us: when to his pain,
And our plagues, I fear he bestows his leisure.
To hear the wrongs, of such as will complain
Of any man: But the sport is to see
Us Officers, one look of another:
I at Lord Promos, Lord Promos at me,
The Lawyers, at the Sheriff and Mayor.
They gaze as much on the ruling Lawyer.
For to be plain, the clearest of all,
Peccavi sing, to hear the grievous call,
Against Usury, brybrie, and barrating,
Suborning, extortion, and boulstring.
Some faults are heard, some by Proclamation stay,
Before the King, to be heard on Fridaye.
I yet have scaped, and hope to go scot-free:
But so, or not, whilst leisure serves me.
To have my a answers fresh if I be cauld,
Of merry mates, I have a meeting stauld,
To whom my senses, to refresh I wend,
Who gets a pace as merrily may spend.
As thou complain'st, against all equity,
Holds Phallax thy house, by this extremity?
Yea sure, and he hath bound me so subtly,
As less you help, law yields me no remidy.
Well, what say you? is Phallax money paid?
Save five pound Sir:
For which your bend is stayed.
Nay marry, the same I would gladly pay,
But my bond for the forfeit he doth stay.
Summum Ius, I see, is Summa Imuria:
So these wrongs must be salved some other way.
Yea, more than this, most men say:
What?
To be plain, he keeps Mistress Lamia.
Admit be do, what help have you by this?
Yes marry, it proves, a doudle knave he is:
A covetous churl, and a lecher too.
Well, well, honest men, for your witness go,
And as on proof, I find your injuries.
So I will move, the king for remedies.
We thank your honour.
'tis more than strange, to see with honest show,
What fowl deceits, lewd officers can hide:
In every case, their craft, they colour so,
As still they have, stryckt law upon their side.
These cunning thieves, with law, can Lordships steal,
When for a sheep, the ignorant are trust:
Yea, who more rough, with small offenders deal,
Then these false men, to make themselves seem just?
The tyrant Phallaris, was praised in this,
When Perillus the brazen torment made:
He found the wretch, straight ways in some amiss,
And made him first, the scourge thereof taste:
A just reward for such as do present
An other's fault, himself, the guiltyest man.
Well, to our weal, our gracious king is bend,
To taste these thieves, to use what means he can.
But as at Cheastes, though skilful players play,
Skyllesse vewers, may see, what they omit:
So though our king, in searching judgement may,
Guess at their faults, which secret wrongs commit:
Yet for to judge, by truth, and not by aim,
Myself in chief, his highness doth auctorise,
On proof for to return who merits blame,
And as I find, so he himself will punish:
So that to use, my charge indifferently,
My clients wrongs, I will with witness try.
Sir Vlrico, I humbly crave to know,
What good success: my honest suit ensues?
Master Pimos, in breete, the same to show,
I fear, you both, my order will refuse:
Lyros, that thinks he gives more than he should,
And you, for that, you have not, what you would,
It shall go hard, if that your award mistikes me.
Well, go with me, and you the same shall see:
I weight on you.
My troubled heart with guiltiness aggrieved,
Like fire doth make my ears and cheeks to glow:
God Grant I scape this black day unreprieved,
I care not how the game go to morrow.
Well, I will set a face of brass on it,
And with the rest, upon the King attend:
Who even anon will hear in judgement sit,
To heaven or hell some officers to sand.
But soft, a prize, Gripax and Rapax I see,
A share of their venture belongs to me.
Nay, good honest Promoters let me go.
Tush Iohn Adroines, we must not leave you so:
What? an old hobclunch a wanton knave?
You shall to the King.
Mary Iohn Adroynes God save:
The king? why he will not look of poor men.
Yes, yes, and will spy a knave in your face.
Will he so? then, good you he gone apace.
And why?
Lest in my face, he spy you too,
Have you seen a daw, bebob two crows so?
Well, come away sir patch.
Leave, or by God I'll scratch.
What wilt thou so?
Yea, and bite too.
Help Rapax, play the man.
Nay, do both what you can.
If that in bobs, their bargain be,
In faith they share alone for me.
What bytest thou hobclunch,
Yea, that chull, and punch.
O Lord God, my heart.
Knaves, i'll make you fart.
Hold thy hands Job,
first, take this bob.
To part this fray, it is high time, I can tell, My Promoters else of the roast will smell.
O, my neck thou wilt break.
Yea, Gods ames, cryst thou creak?
How now my friends? why what a stur is this?
Mary.
What?
Care they part, I'll make them pys.
Hold, no more blows.
Knaves, this honest man thank,
That you scape so well.
Friend be not to crank,
I am an officer, and mean to know
The cause, why you brauld thus, before I go:
Your bobs show, that the same, you best can tell.
I would your worship, felt the same as well,
I then am sure, this blockhedded slave,
For both his faults, double punishment should have.
What faults?
Mary,
He will lie like a dog.
How now you churl, your tongue, would have a clog, Say on:
To show his first, and chiefest faughte:
His Father's maid, and he are nought.
What I?
I
By my Grandsire's soul, you lie.
Peace: Friend, for this fault, thou must die.
die, Learde save us: you sqawde know, I'll 〈◊〉 ye: For reforming a lie, thus against me.
Tush, tush, it helpeth not: if they can prove this.
For some proof, I saw him and the Maid kiss.
Can not foke kiss: but they are nought by and by?
This presumption friend, will touch thee shrewdly:
If thou scape with life, be thou sore of this,
Thou shalt be terribly whipped, for this kiss.
Whypt, marry God shield, chy had rather be hangde●
Growte noll, come to the King.
Art not well hanged.
Well, good fellows, let's take up this matter.
Nay, first Iohn Adroines, shallbe trust in a halter.
Why? helps it you, to see the poor man whypt?
I pray you friends, for this time let him go.
Stand still, and chull, whether they will or not:
Nay, but we charge him, in the King's name, stay thee.
Hark honest man, I warrant thee set free?
Grease them well, in their hands, and speak them fair:
O Leard God, our tallow pot is not here.
Tush, claw them with money:
Why so my nails are sharp.
I see, for Clowns, Pan's Pipe, is meeter, than Apollo's Harp. They can skill of no Music, but plain Song.
I pray let's go, we trifle time too long:
Straight. cocks soul knave, stop his mouth with money.
O, I ken you now sir, chy cry you mercy.
Come on slouch, wilt please you be jogging hence?
Here is all, ten shillings, and thirteen pence.
Hark ye my friends.
We must not let him go.
Hark once more.
Give them the money.
It shall be so.
Well, although he deserves great punishment,
For your sake, for this time we are content:
farewell, henceforth be honest,
And for this fault, will pass it over in jest.
Then gives our money.
Why?
Why, they did but jest:
Yea, but they took thy money in earnest.
Art gone, now the Dewle choke you all with it:
How chy kiss again, the knaves ha' taught me wit.
But by Saint Anne, chy do see her lady:
Men may do what them will, that have money.
Ich surely had been whipped, but for my gold,
But chull no more, with smouches be so bold.
Yea, and ych wish all Lovers to be wise,
There be learing knaves abroad, have cats eyes:
Why, by God's bores, they can both see and mark,
If a man steal, but asmuch in the dark.
And now the world is grown, to such jolly spy:
As if foke do kiss, they're nought by and by.
Well, ych will home, and tell my Father Droyne:
How that, two thieves robbed me of my Coin.
Sir Gonsago, if that we henceforth hear,
With will, or wealth, you do our subjects wrong:
Look not again, this favour for to find,
We use thy grace, to win you to amend:
If not, our wrath shall fear you to offend.
God spade you.
I see by proof, that true the prover be is,
Might masters right, wealth is such a canker,
As wounds the conscience, of his Master,
And devours the heart of his poor neighbour.
To cure which sore, justice his pride must pyve,
Which justice aught in Princes most to shine:
And sith subjects live by their prince's law,
Whose laws in chief, the rich should keep in awe:
The poor in wrouges, but seldom doth delight,
They have enough, for to defend their right:
It much behoves the maker of these laws,
(This money finds in them, so many flaws)
To see his laws, obsered as they are meant:
Or else good laws, will turn to evil intent.
Well, ere I leave, my poorest subjects shall,
Both live, and like: and by the richest stawll.
Regarded and most mighty Prince, your clemency herein,
Those hearts, your rule, commands through fear to faithful love shall win.
Renowned king, I am for to complain,
Of Phallax, Lord Promos secondary,
Whose heinous wrouges many poor men doth pain,
By me, who pray, your highness remedy.
My Lord Promise, it seems you rule at large,
When as your clerks are officers unjust.
Dread king, I think, he can these wrong discharge.
Do you but think sir: a sure spear to trust?
A dumb death, and blind judge, can do as much:
Well, well, God grant, your own life, bide the touch.
Sir Vlrice, your complaint continue:
Gracious King, his wrouges be these ensue:
first Phallax, is a coumon Barriter,
In office, a lewd extortioner:
The crafty man, often puts these wrongs in ure,
If poor men have, that likes his searching eye,
He showeth gold, the needy souls to lure:
Which if they take, so taste he doth them tie,
That by some bond, or covenant forfeited.
They are enforced (far beneath the value)
To let him have what his eye coveted:
And for to prove, that this report is true,
I show no more, then witness proved by oath,
Whose names and hands, defends it hear as troth,
How now Promos? how think you of your man?
Use both your wits, to clear him if you can.
Dread King, my heart to hear his faults doth bleed.
How far'de it then, to suffer it indeed?
It dyde, I trow, or now you speak in jest:
Thy Master's mute Phallax, I hold it best
That thou speak, for thyself.
I humbly crave,
Of your grace, for answer, respite to have.
Why? to devise a cloak to hide a knave?
Friend, veritas non querit angulos,
And if yourself, you on your truth repose,
You may be bold, these faults for to deny,
Some, little care, upon their oaths to lie:
See if any in your behalf will swear.
O Lord God, is there no knights of the post hear?
Well, then of force, I must sing Peccavi.
And cry out right, to the king for mercy.
O King, I am, in fault, I must confess,
The which I will with repentance redress.
Thy confession, doth merit some favour,
But repentance pays not thy poor neighbour:
Wherefore, Sir Vlrico, his goods seize you,
And those, he wronged, restore you, to their due.
Look what he gets, most think, he wastes straight way,
Upon a lewd harlot, named Lamia:
So that his goods, will scarce pay every wight.
Where nought is left, the king must loose his right.
Pay as you may, I hold it no offence,
If each pay somewhat for experience:
But by the way, you rule the city well,
That suffer, by your nose, such dames to devil.
And now Phallax, thy further penance is,
That forthwith, thou do resign thy office.
Vlrico, to his account likewise, see.
It shallbe done.
Phallax, further hear me:
Because thou didst, thy faults at first confess,
From punishment▪ thy person I release:
I most humbly, do thank your majesty.
Ah, out alas, Cassandra hear I see.
O would the tears, might tell my tale, I shame so much my fall,
Or else, Lord Promos lewdness shown, would death would end my thrall.
Welcome my sweet Cassandra.
Murderous varlet, away.
Renowned King, I pardon crave, for this my hold attempt,
In pressing thus so near your grace, my sorrow to present:
And lest my foe, false Promos hear, do interrupt my tale,
Grant gracious King, that uncontrolled, I may report my bale,
How now Promos? how like you, of this song?
Say on fair dame, I long to hear thy wrong.
Then know dread sovereign, that he this doom did geue,
That my Brother, for wantonness should loose his head:
And that the maid, which sinned, should ever after live
In some religious house, to sorrow her misdeed:
To save my brother iuged to die, with tears I sought to move
Lord Promos heart, to show him grace but he with lawless love,
Was fired by and by▪ and knowing necessity,
To save my brother's life, would make me yield to much,
He craned this ransom, to have my virginity:
Not tears could work restraint, his wicked lust was such,
Two evils here were, one must I choose, though bad were very best,
To see my brother put to death, or grant his lewd request:
In fine, subdued with natural love, I did agreed,
Upon these two points: that marry me he should,
And that from prison vile, he should my brother free.
All this with moustrous oaths, he promised he would.
But O this perjured Promos, when he had wrought his will,
first cast me of: and after caused the Jailer for to kill
My brother, raunsomde, with the spoil of my good name:
So that for companing, with such a hellish fiend,
I have condemned myself to wear these weeds of shame:
Whose cognisance doth show, that I have (fleshly) sinned.
Lo thus, high and renowned king, Cassandra ends her tale,
And this is wicked Promos that hath wrought her endless bale.
If this be true, so toll a deed, shall not unpunished go,
How sayst thou Promos, to her plaint? art guilty? yea, or no?
Why speak'st thou not? a faulty heart, thy silence sure doth show.
My guilty heart commands my tongue. O king, to tell a truth,
I do confess this tale is true, and I deserve thy wrath.
And is it so? this wicked deed, thou shalt ere long buy dear,
Cassandra, take comfort in care, be of good cheer:
Thy forced fault, was free from evil intent,
So long, no shame, can blot thee any way.
And though at full, I hardly can content thee,
Yet as I may, assure thyself I will.
Thou wicked man, might it not thee suffice,
By worse than force, to spoil her chastity,
But heaping sin on sin against thy oath,
Haste cruelly, her brother done to death.
This over proof, ne can but make me think,
That many ways thou hast my subjects wronged:
For how canst thou with justice use thy sway?
When thou thyself dost make thy will a law?
Thy tyranny made me, this progress make,
How so, for sport till now I coloured it
Unto this end, that I might learn at large,
What other wrongs by power, thou hast wrought,
And here, I hear: the Rich suppress the poor:
So that it seems, the best and thou art friends:
I placed thee not, to be a partial judge.
Thy officers are covetous I find,
By whose reports, thou over culest suits.
Then who that gives, an Item in the hand,
In right, and wrong, is sure of good success.
Well, Varlet, well: too slow I hither came,
To scourge, thy faults, and salve the sores thou mad'st:
On thee vile wretch, this sentence I pronounce.
That forth with, thou shalt marry Cassandra,
For to repair her honour, thou didst waste:
The next day thou shalt loose thy hated life.
In penance, that thou mad'st her Brother die.
My faults were great, O King, yet grant me mercy,
That now with bloody sighs, lament my sins too late.
Hac facias alteri, quod tibi vis fieri:
Pity was no plea Sir, when you in judgement sat,
Prepare yourself to die, in vain you hope for life.
My Lords, bring him with me: Cassandra come you in like case▪
Myself will see, thy honour salved, in making thee his Wife,
The sooner to shorten his days.
We wait upon your Grace.
Sir Vlrico, I wild, Commission should be made,
To Sir Anthony Alberto, and justice Diron,
To hear and determine, all suits to be had
Between Master Prostro, and this poor man: is it done?
Renowned King, it is ready:
Repair to Sir Vlrico, for thy Commission:
God preserve your Majesty.
Bones of me, a man were better speak to great Lords chy see,
Then to our proud, justlers of peace, that been in the country:
He that is rich, as my dame saith, goes away with the Hare.
This two year, they have hard my matter, & yet cham near the near.
And at first dash, a good fat Lord, God in heaven save his life.
faith, for nothing, teld the King of Mas Prostros, and my strife.
O Leard, ych thought the King could not bide, on poor men to look,
But God save his Grace, at first dash, my supplication he took:
And you hard, how gently, he called me poor man, and willed me go,
For my Passport, I ken not what, to good sir Vlrico.
Well, chull go for't, and hope to be with Master Prostros to bring:
But ere ych go, chul my Ballad, of good King Coruine sing.
YOu Barons bold, and lusty Lads,
Prepare to welcome, our good King:
Whose coming so, his Subjects glads,
As they for joy, the Bells do ring.
They fryske, and skip, in every place,
And happy he, can see his face.
Who checks the rich, that wrong by might,
And helps the poor, unto his right.
The love that rigour gets through fear,
With grace and mercy, he doth win:
For which we pray thus, every where,
Good Lord preserve, our King Coruin.
His favour reigns, in every place:
And happy he, can see his face.
Come loitering knaves, speed about your business.
Fetch me in, all idle vagabonds.
Yes sir yes:
Search Duck alley, Cock lane, and Sc●uldes corner,
About your charge, let's see, how you can stir.
Yes, I have wings in my heels to flee.
Who gives two pence, a strange Monster to see.
What Monster?
A horned Beast, with wings upon his heels.
Out drunken dreule?
What? runs your heads a wheels?
Be packing both, and that betimes you are best.
We are gone Sir, we did but speak in jest.
The King, I saith, hath set us all a work,
To search odd holes, where idle varlets lurk.
He so nipped, our Mayor for ill rule:
As ever since, he hath been like to whule.
And in a rage, the man is now so hot,
As lewd persons, tag, and rag, goes to pot.
But in chief, he storms, at fine Mistress Lamia.
She drinks, for all, come she once in his way.
And lest she scape, myself forsooth he wills,
Worshipfully to fetch her, with forty bills.
Well, I must go, and work our majors beast,
No force, for once, she will never be honest.
This savage life, were hard to brook, if hope no comfort gave:
But I (whose life, from Tyrant's wrath, God's providence did save,
Do take in worth this misery, as penance for my miss:
Still fed with hope to change this state, when Gods good pleasure is.
A hollow Cave for house, and bed, in worth Andrugio takes,
Such sorry food, as fortune sends, he seldom now forsakes.
I am myself forsooth, now Butcher, Cook, Cater and all:
Yea, often times I fall to sleep, with none, or supper small.
Then in my Den, I call to mind, the life I lived in bliss:
And by the want I freedom judge, the greatest joy that is.
The freeman is in view of friends, to have release in need:
The exile, though he have no lack, yet lives he still in dread
That his mysdéedes, will hardly scape, the punishment of law:
And living, he were better dead, that liveth in this awe,
Besides this fear, which never fails, the banished man in want,
As oft he is, is sure to find his succor's very scant.
Then who is he so mad, that friends, and freedom doth enjoy?
That will adventure breach of law, to live in this annoy?
And not annoy to him alone, but to his friends and kin:
Great be the cares, Cassandra, and Polina liveth in.
Through thought, of me, whom long agone, beheaded they suppose,
For my offence, thus are they scorgde, yet dare I not disclose
My safety, for their help: but hark, who cometh here?
This chance seems strange: God grant good news, I hope, and yet I fear.
If the could find my Mare, che would be rusty by the rood,
And cham sure the hoorechup, is peaking in this wood.
Thy will seek every corner, but che will found her.
This clown can hardly me bewray, and yet such dunghill churls,
Such news, as is in market towns, about the country whirls.
What seeks thou good fellow?
My sqawde Mare, dost her know?
No.
Then scummer me not, in haste ych go,
Seek my Mare, to see the sport at Iulio.
What sport?
A little sport.
What?
Nay skill not a whit?
What means this Ass?
T'wyll teach the hoorecup wit.
H'yll hung, handsome young men for the foot sin of love,
When so his knavery, himself, a bawdy jack doth prove.
His words seemeth strange, somewhat is a wry.
Well, Ihill see his shoulders, from's jowl to fly.
Whose shoulders friend?
As though you did know.
Whom?
Lord Promos.
Yes: my most accursed foe: But what of him?
Thou kenst.
No.
Sayest not, yes,
Yes:
So,
But friend thou took'st my words amiss,
I know nothing, in what state Promos is.
Thou know'st, and thou knowest not: out whoreson fool,
Leave stealing Cunnyes, and get thee to school,
Farewell.
Soft.
O to arte no fool good thief:
Save my money take my life.
Tush be brief.
Some news, of lewd Lord Promos tell me,
And with life and money, I'll set thee free.
I will thou know'st the King now at Iulio.
Very well.
Thou canst tell as well as I
Let me go:
Nay I'll see if thou dost lie.
If thou dost isle whip thee, when thou hast done.
Kissing and lying, ich see is all one:
And c have no money, chul tell true therefore.
Dispatch then.
Then, lying Promoter, this more:
Casgandra scusde, Promos of honesty:
And killing Ramstrugio for bawdry.
What more?
The king at Promos, great pleasure did take,
And Casgandra, an honest woman to make:
The King maunded him, her straight to marry,
And for killing her brother, he must die.
Is this true?
Why? how say you? do I lie?
Well, so or Noah, for thy news have this cony.
God's boors, give it me, to be sweet, 'tis to cheap,
But Lady yet, till sunday it will keep:
Well, now god bwye, Mass lying Promoter,
Wees see at the soort.
I peradventure.
Since can not find my Mare, on foot chull go:
Ych think, each day a nowre, to be at Iulio.
Strange are the news, the Clown hath shown to me:
Not strange a whit, if they well scanned be.
For God we see, still throws the Tyrant down:
Even in the height, and pride of his renown,
Lord Promos rule, nay, tyranny in deed,
For judges is a mirror, worthy heed.
The wretched man, with show of justice zeal,
Thoroughly did, with poor offenders deal.
The wicked man, both, knew, and judged, abuse:
And none so much, as he her faults did use.
He felons hanged, yet by extortion, stole:
He wantoness plagued, himself a doting fool.
He others checked, for suing for their right:
And he himself, maintained wrongs by might.
But see the rule of mischief, in his pride:
He headlong falls, when lest, he thought to slide.
Well, by his fall, I may perhaps arise:
Andrugio yet, in climbing be thou wise.
What? still unknown, shall I live in this wood?
Not so.
Go wray these news, no doubt, unto my good.
Yet ere I go, I will myself disguise,
As in the Town, in spite of Lynx's eyes.
I will unknown, learn how the game doth go,
But ere I go, sith eased is my woe:
My thanks to God, I first in song will show.
TO thee O Lord, with heart, and voice I sing,
Whose mercy great, from moan to sweet delight▪
From grief to joy, my troubled soul dost bring,
Yea, more thy wrath, hath foiled my foe in sight.
Who sought my life (which thou O God didst save)
Thy scourge hath brought, untimely to his grave.
Whose grief will gall, a thousand judges more,
And will them see, themselves, and sentence just:
When black reproach, this thundering shame shall show,
A judge condemned for murder, theft, and lust.
This scourge, O God, the lewd in fear will bring,
The just for joy, thy praises loud will sing.
Come on fair Dame, since fair words, works no heed,
Now fowl means shall: in you repentance breed.
Master Gresco, where you may help, hurt not.
And nothing but chastment, will help you to amend,
Well, I will not hurt you, your lewdness to defend.
My lewdness Sir: what is the difference,
Betwixt wantoness, and hoorders of pence?
Thou hast wind at will, but in thy eyes no water:
Thou art full of Grace, how she blusheth at the matter.
How sample I, your wife and daughter Sir?
Are me, when whipping hath changed thy Nature.
What whipping? why? am I a Horse, or a Mare?
Not, but a beast, that meetly well will bare.
In deed (as) now, perforce, I bear this flout:
But use me well, else I faith, get I out,
Look for quittance.
Bind her to the Peace Sir,
So may your Worship be out of danger.
Bring her away, I know how to tame her.
Perhaps Sir, no: the worst is but shame her.
Come ye drab.
How now scab? bands of my Gown.
Care not for this, use have a blue one soon.
Unhappy Wench, the more I seek, for to abandon grief,
The further off, I wretched find, both comfort and relief.
My Brother first, for wanton faults, condemned was to die:
To save whose life, my suit, wrought hope of Grace, but hapless I
By such request, my honour spoiled, and gained not his breath:
For which deceit, I have pursued, Lord Promos unto death.
Who is my Husband now become, it pleased our Sovereign so,
For to repair, my crazed Fame: but that now works my wo.
This day, he must (o) lose his head, my Brother's death to quite,
And therein Fortune hath alas, shown me her greatest spite.
Nature wild me, my Brother love, now duty commands me,
To prefer before kin, or friend, my Husband's safety.
But O, ay me, by Fortune, I, am made his chiefest foe:
'Twas I als, even only I that wrought his overthrow.
What shall I do, to work amendss, for this my heinous deed?
The time is short, my power small, his succours asketh speed.
And shall I seek, to save his blood, that lately sought his life?
O, yea I than was sworn his foe: but now as faithful Wife,
I must and will, prefer his health, God send me good success:
For now unto the King I will, my changed mind to express.
Was ever man, set more fréer than I?
First went my goods, than my Office did fly?
But had the King, set me free from flattery,
The next dear year, I might have starved, perdie.
But Lord Promos, hath a far more fréer chance:
He free from Lands, goods, and Office doth dance:
And shallbe free from life, ere long, with a Lance.
The Officers, and chief men of Iulio:
Vengeance liberal, themselves likewise shoe.
Poor knaves, and queans, that up and down do go,
These horesen kind crusts, in houses bestoe.
But yet, poor cheer, they have: marry for heat,
They whip them, until very blood they sweat.
But see, their cost bestowed of fine Lamia,
To save her feet, from hard stones, and cold way,
Into a Cart, they did the quean convey.
appareled, in colours very gay:
Both Hood, and Gown, of green, and yellow Say.
Her Guard wear Typstaves, all in blue array.
Before her a noise of Basins did play.
In this triumph, she rid well nigh a day.
Fie, fie, the City is so purged now:
As they of none, but honest men allow,
So that farewell my part, of thriving there:
But the best is, flatterers live every where.
Set cock on hoop, Domini est terra.
If thou can not where thou wouldst, live where thou may.
Yes, yes Phallax, knoweth whether to go:
Now, Good bye ye all, bonest men of Iulio
As the devils likes, the company of Friars,
So flatterers loves as life, to join with liars.
These two days, I have been in Court disguised:
Where I have learned, the scourge that is devised,
For Promos fault, he my Sister spoused hath,
To salve her Fame, cracked by his breach of faith.
And shortly he, must loose his subtle head:
For murdering me, whom no man thinks but dead.
His will, was good: and therefore beshrew me,
If (moved with ruth) I seek, to set him free.
But softly, with some news, these fellows come:
I will stand close, and hear both all and some.
Marshall, hear you warrant is: with speed,
The king commands, that Promos you behead.
Sir, his highness will, shallbe forthwith done.
The king well-nigh to pardon him was won,
His heavy wife, such storms of tears did shower,
As might, with ruth, have moist a stony heart.
But Promos guilt, did soon this grace devour.
Our gracious king, before her wretched smart,
Preferred, the health, of this our common weal:
But see again, to sue for him she comes,
Her ruthful looks, her grief, doth force me feel.
With hope, I must, her sorrows needs delay:
Till Promos be dispatched out of the way.
Sir Vlrico, if that my unknown grief,
May move good minds, to help me to relief,
Or bitter sighs, of comfort clean dismayed,
May move a man, a shiftless dame to aid:
Rue of my tears, from true intent which flow,
Unto the king, with me, yet once more go.
See if his grace, my husband's life will save,
If not, with his, death shall my corpse engrave.
What shall I do, her sorrows to decrease?
Feed her, with hope: fair dame, this moan surcease,
I see the king to grace is somewhat bend,
We once again thy sorrows will present:
Come we will weight for time, thy suit to show.
Good knight, for time, do not my suit foreslow.
Whilst grass, doth grow oft starves the silly steed.
Fear not, your Lord, shall not die with such speed.
Lord God, how am I tormented in thought?
My sister's woe, such ruth in me doth grave:
As fain I would (if aught save death I caught)
Bewray myself, Lord Promos life to save.
But life is sweet, and nought but death I eye,
If that I should, my safety now disclose:
So that I choose, of both the evils, he die:
Time will appease, no dought, Cassandra's woes,
And shall, I thus acquit Cassandra's love?
To work her joy? and shall I fear to die?
Whilst, that she live, no comfort may remove
Care from her heart, if that her husband die?
Then shall I stick, to hazard limb? nay life?
To salve her grief, since in my cure it rests.
Nay first, I willbe spoiled, with bloody knife,
Before, I fail, her, plunged in distress.
Death, is but death, and all in fine shall die
Thus (being dead) my fame, shall live always:
Well, to the king, Andrugio now will high,
Hap life, hap death, his safety, to bewray.
Room friends, what mean you thus to gaze on us,
A comes behind, makes all the sport I was.
Farewell, my friends, take warning by my fall,
Disdain my life, but listen to my end,
Fresh harms, they say, the viewers so appall,
As often they win, the wicked to amend.
I need not hear, my faults at large recite,
Untimely death, doth witness what I was:
A wicked man, which made each wrong seem right,
Even as I would, was wrested every case.
And thus long time, I lived and rule by will,
Where as I loved, their faults, I would not see:
Those I did hate, ten times beyond there ill
I did pursue, vile wretch, with cruelty.
Yea daily I, from bad, to worse did slide,
The reason was, none durst, control my life:
But see the fall, of mischeeve, in his pride.
My faults, were known, and lo with bloody Axe,
The headseman straight, my wrongs with death will quite:
The which, in worth I take, acknowledging,
The doom, was given, on cause, and not on spite,
Wishing my end, might serve for a warning.
For such as rule, and make their will a law,
If to such good, my fainting tale might tend,
Wretched Promos, the same would longer draw:
But if that words prevail, my woeful end
From my huge faults, than ten times more will warn.
forgiveness now, of all the world I crave,
Therewith that you, in zealous prayer, will
Beseech of God, that I the grace may have:
At latter gasp, the fear of death to kill.
Forwards my Lord, me thinks you faintly go.
O sir, in my case, yourself would be as slow.
Ay me, alas: my hope is untimely.
Whether goes my good Lord?
Sweet wife, to die.
O wretched wench, where may I first complain?
When heaven, and earth, agrees upon my pain?
This moan good wife, for Christ's sake, forsake:
I late resolved, through fear of death, now quake.
Not so much, for my heinous sins forepast:
As for the grief that present thou dost taste.
Nay, I vile wretch, should most aggrieved be,
Before thy time, thy death which hastened have:
But (O sweet husband) my fault forgive me.
And for amendss, I'll help to fill thy grave:
forgive thee, ab: nay, for my soul's relief,
Forget sweet wife, this thy most guyltles grief.
My Lord Promos, these plaints, but move her moan,
And your more grief, it is best you ware gone:
Good Madam way, by law, your Lord doth die,
Wherefore make virtue of necessity:
Delay, but works your sorrows, and our blames,
So that now, to the comfort of these dames:
And your wisdom, enforced, we leave you:
My Lord Promos, bid your wife and friends adieu.
Farewell, farewell, be of good cheer dear wife:
With joy for woe, I shall exchange this life.
Andrugio's death, Polina forgive me:
I do, and pray the Lord, to relieve ye.
Yet ere we part, sweet husband let us kiss,
O, at his lips, why faileth not my breath?
Leave moan, sweet wife. I do deserve this death.
Farewell, farewell.
My loving Lord, farewell,
I hope ere long, my soul with thine shall devil.
Now, good Madame, leave of this bootless grief.
O Polina, sorrow is my relief.
Wherefore, sweet wench, help me to rue my woe,
With me vile wretch, thy bitter plaints bestow:
To hasten lingering death, who wanteth might:
I see, alone, to slay, the wretched wight.
Nay, first power forth your plaints, to the powers Divine,
When hate, doth cloud, all worldly grace, whose mercies still do shine.
O, so or not, thy motion doth well,
Swan like, in song, to toll my passing Bell.
Dear Dames divorce, your minds from joy, help to bewail my woe,
Condole with me, whose heavy sights, the pangs of death do shoe;
Rend heairs, shed tears, poor wench distressed, to hast the means to die,
Whose joy, annoy: relief, whose grief, hath spoiled with cruelty.
My brother slain, my husband ah, at point to loose his head,
Why live I then unhappy wench, my suckers being dead?
O time, O crime, O cause, O laws, that judgd them thus to die:
I blame, you all, my shame, my thrall, you hate that harmless try.
This Tragedy they have begun, conclude I wretched must,
O welcome care, consume the thread, thereto my life doth trust:
Sound bell, my knell, away delay, and give me leave to die,
Les hope, have scope unto my heart, a fresh for aid to fly.
O sweet news, for Polina and Cassandra. Andrugio lives:
What doth poor Ganie say?
Andrugio lives: and Promos is reprieved.
Vain is thy hope, I saw Andrugio dead.
Well, then from death, he is again revived.
Even now, I saw him, in the market stead.
His words are strange.
Too sweet, God wots, for true.
I pray you, who are these here in your view?
The King.
Who more?
O. I see Andrugio.
And I my Lord Promos, adieu sorrow.
My good Andrugio?
My sweet Polina:
lives Andrugio, welcome sweet brother.
Cassandra?
I
How far, my dear Sister?
Andrugio, you shall have more leisure.
To greet one another: it is our pleasure,
That you forthwith, your Fortunes here declare,
And by what means, you thus preserved wear.
My fall, through love, and judgement for my fault.
Lord Promos wrongs, unto my Sister done.
My death supposed, dread King, were vain to tell.
Cassandra hear, those dealings all hath shown.
The rest are these.
When I should die, the Jailor moved to ruth,
Declared to me, what Promos pleasure was:
Amazed whereat, I told him all the truth,
What, between Cassandra, and him did pass.
He much aggrieved, Lord Promos guilt to hear,
Was very loath, me (woeful man) to harm:
At length, just God, to set me (wretched) clear,
With this defence, his willing mind did arm.
Two days afore, to death, were divers done,
For several faults, by them committed:
So that of them, he took the head from one,
And to Cassandra, the same presented:
Affirming it, to be by'r brother's head.
Which done, by night, he sent me post away,
None but supposed, that I in déde was dead:
When as in truth, in uncouth haunts I lay.
In fine, a Clown, came peaking through the wood,
Wherein I lived, your Graces being here:
And Promos death, by whom I understood,
Glad of which news, how so I lyud in fear.
I ventured to see his wretched fall:
To free suspect, yet stranger like arrayed,
I hither came: but lo, the inward thrall
Of Cassandra, the hate, so sore dismayed.
Which I conceived against my brother Promos,
That lo, I chewsed, to yield myself to death,
To set him free: for otherwise I knew,
His death ere long, would sure have stopped her breath.
Lo gracious king, in brief I here have shown,
Such adventures, as wretched I have passed:
Beseeching you with grace to think upon,
The wight that wails, his follies at the last.
A strange discourse, as strangely come to light,
God's pleasure is, that thou shouldst pardoned be:
To salve the fault, thou with Polina mad'st,
But marry her, and hear I set thee free.
Most gracious Prince, thereto I gladly 'gree:
Polina, the happiest news of all for thee.
Most gracious King, with these my joy to match,
Vouchsafe, to give my damned husband life.
If I do so, let him thank thee his Wife:
Cassandra, I have noted thy distress,
Thy virtues eke, from first, unto the last:
And glad I am, without offence it lies,
In me to ease, thy grief, and heaviness.
Andrugio saved, the jewel of thy joy,
And for thy sake, I pardon Promos fault.
Yea let them both, thy virtues rare commend:
In that their woes, with this delight doth end.
God preserve your Majesty.
Cassandra, how shall I discharge thy due?
I did, but what a Wife, should do for you.
Well, since all parts are pleased, as they would,
Before I part, yet Promos, this to thee:
Henceforth, forethink, of thy forepast faults,
And measure Grace, with justice evermore.
Unto the poor, have evermore an eye,
And let not might, out countenance their right:
Thy Officers, trust not in every tale.
In chief, when they are means, in strifes and suits,
Though thou be just, yet coin may them corrupt.
And if by them, thou dost unjustice show,
'tis thou shalt bear, the burden of their faults.
Be loving to good Cassandra, thy Wife:
And friendly to thy brother Andrugio,
Whom I command, as faithful for to be
To thee, as beseems the duty of a brother.
And now again, thy government receive,
Enjoy it so, as thou in justice joy.
If thou be wise, thy fall may make thee rise.
The lost sheep found, for joy, the feast was made.
Well, here an end, of my advise I make,
As I have said, be good unto the poor.
And justice join, with mercy evermore.
Most gracious King, I will not fail my best,
In these precepts, to follow your behest.