IF our wish should be granted unto us by the Almighty, what humane thing we would chiefly desire: we would account nothing more precious (most Royal Prince) than that the bright beam of your most chaste eye, which doth so cheer us, might penetrate the secret straight corners of our hearts: then surely should you see how great joys are despised there, and how the spirit and lively blood tickle in our arteries and small veins, in beholding thee the light of this Realm (as David was of Israel) now at length, after long hope and earnest petitions, to appear in these coasts. Truly on mine own part, which by your highness authority and clemency (with humble thanks be it spoken) do govern this famous City, and on the part of these my brethren and all these people which by your authority we rule (speaking as they mean, and as I myself do think) this only with all our hearts and humble prayers we desire, that we may so find your Majesty gracious and favourable unto us, as you for your part never came to any subjects better welcome than to us your poor subjects here. For most manifest token whereof, we present unto your Majesty here, these signs of honour and office, which we received of the most mighty Prince Henry the fourth, in the fift year of his reign, then to us granted in the name of Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, where as before time out of mind or mention, we were governed by Bailiffs (as they term them) which ever since have been both established and increased with continual privileges of Kings: And which by your only clemency (which with immortal thanks we shall never cease to declare) we have now these. xx. years enjoyed: and together with those signs, this treasure is a pledge of our good wills and ability: which all how great or little soever they be, we pour down at your pleasure, that if we have neglected any thing in all this course of your most happy reign, which becometh most loving, obedient, and well willing subjects to perform, for the preservation of your Crown, and advancement of your highness, you may then determine of us and all ours, at your most gracious pleasure. But if we have (God being our guide) so ordered the governance of this city, that we have kept the same in safety to your majesties use, and made the people therein (as much as in us lieth) first, most studious of God's glory and true religion, and next of your majesties health, honour, and pleasure, then ask we nothing of you, for that the singular clemency engraffed in your highness, will easily of itself grant that which is requisite for us to obtain. We only therefore desire, that God would abundantly bless your highness with all good gifts of mind and body.
Leave of to muse most gracious Prince of English soil,
What sudden wight in Martial wise approacheth near:
King Gurgunt I am height, King Belin's eldest son,
Whose sire Dunwallo first, the British crown did wear.
Whom truthless Gutlack forced to pass the surging seas,
His falsehood to revenge, and Denmark land to spoil.
And finding in return, this place a gallant vent,
This Castle fair I built, a fort from foreign soil:
To win a Conquest, gets renown and glorious name,
To keep and use it well, deserves eternal fame.
When brute through cities, towns, the woods and dales did sound
ELIZABETH this country peerless Queen drew near:
I was found out, myself in person noble Queen
Did haste, before thy face in presence to appear.
Two thousand years well-nigh in silence lurking still:
Hear, why to thee alone this service I do yield.
Besides that, at my City's suit, their founder first
Should gratulate most this joyful sight in open field.
four special points and rare concurring in us both
This special service have reserved to thee alone:
The glory though of each in thee doth far surmount,
Yet great with small compared, will like appear anon.
When doubtful wars the British princes long had wrong,
My grandsire first uniting all did wear the Crown.
Of York and Lancaster, who did conclude the broils?
Thy grandsire Henry seventh, a king of great renown.
Mine uncle Brennus eke, my father joining hands,
Old Rome did raze, and sack, and half consume with fire:
Thy puissant father so, new Rome that purple whore
Did sack, and spoil her near of all her glittering tire.
Lo Cambridge schools by mine assignment founded first,
By thee my Cambridge schools are famous through the world,
I thirty wandering ships of banished men relieved.
The throngs of banished souls that in this City dwell,
Do weep for joy, and pray for thee with tears untold.
In all these things thou noble Queen dost far excel.
But lo to thee I yield as duty doth me bind
In open field myself, my City, Castle, Key,
Most happy father's Kings in such a daughter Queen,
Most happy England were, if thou shouldest never die.
Go on most noble Prince, for I must haste away,
My City gates do long, their Sovereign to receive:
More true thou never couldst, nor loyal subjects find,
Whose hearts full fast with perfect love to thee do cleave.
Most gracious prince, undoubted sovereign Queen,
Our only joy next God, and chief defence:
In this small show, our whole estate is seen.
The wealth we have, we find proceed from thence,
The idle hand hath here no place to feed,
The painful wight hath still to serve his need.
Again, our seat denies our traffic here,
The Sea too near decides us from the rest,
So weak we were within this dozen year,
As care did quench the courage of the best:
But good advise, hath taught these little hands
To rend in twain the force of pining bands.
From Combed wool we draw this slender thread,
From thence the looms have dealing with the same,
And thence again in order do proceed,
These several works, which skilful art doth frame:
And all to drive Dame need into her cave,
Our heads and hands together laboured have.
We bought before the things that now we sell,
These slender imps, their works do pass the waves,
God's peace and thine we hold and prosper well,
Of every mouth the hands the charges saves.
Thus through thy help and aid of power divine,
Doth NORWICH live, whose hearts and goods are thine.
WHom Fame resounds with thundering Trump, which rends the rattling skies,
And pierceth to the haughty heavens, and thence descending flies
Through flickering air: and so conjoins the Sea and shore together,
In admiration of thy grace, good Queen thart welcome hither,
More welcome than Terpsichore, was to the town of Troy.
Seafaring men by Gemini conceive not half my joy:
Strong Hercules to Theseus was never such delight
Nor Nisus to Euryalus as I have in this sight,
Penelope did never thirst Ulysses more to see
Than I poor Norwich hungered have to gain the sight of thee.
And now that these my happy eyes behold thy heavenly face,
The Lord of Lords I humbly pray, to bliss thy noble grace
With Nestor's life, with Sibilles health, with Croesus' stock and store,
With all good gifts of Salomon, and twice as many more.
What should I say? thou art my joy next God, I have none other,
My princess and my peerless Queen, my loving nurse and mother.
My goods and lands, my hands and heart, my limbs and life are thine,
What is mine own in right or thought, to thee I do resign.
Grant then (oh gracious sovereign Queen) this only my request,
That that which shall be done in me, be construed to the best.
And take in part my slender shows, wherein my whole pretence
Is for to please you Majesty, and end without offence.
So shall I clap my hands for joy, and hold myself as rich
As if I had the gold of Jude, and double twice as much.
WHere princes sitting in their thrones set god before their sight
And live according to his law, and guide their people right,
There doth his blessed gifts abound, there kingdoms firmly stand
There force of foes cannot prevail, nor fury fret the land.
myself (oh peerless Prince) do speak by proof of matter past,
Which proof by practice I performed, and foiled his foes at last.
For Iabin king of Canaan, poor Israel did spite,
And meant by force of furious rage to overrun us quite.
nine hundred Iron Chariots, he brought into the field.
With cruel captain Sisera by force to make us yield.
His force was great, his fraud was more, he fought, we did defend,
And twenty winters long did last this war without an end.
But he that neither sleeps nor slacks such furies to correct,
Appointed me Debora for the judge of his elect:
And did deliver Sisera into a woman's hand.
I slew them all, and so in rest his people held the land.
So mighty prince, that puissant Lord, hath placed thee here to be,
The rule of this triumphant Realm alone belongeth to thee.
Continue as thou hast begun, weed out the wicked rout,
Uphold the simple, meek and good, pull down the proud & stout.
Thus shalt thou live and reign in rest, and mighty God shalt please.
Thy state be sure, thy subjects safe, thy common wealth at ease.
Thy God shall grant thee length of life, to glorify his name,
Thy deeds shall be recorded, in the book of lasting fame.
OH flower of Grace, oh prime of Gods elect,
Oh mighty Queen and finger of the Lord,
Did God sometime by me poor wight correct.
The Champion stout that him and his abhorred?
Then be thou sure thou art his mighty hand,
To conquer those which him and thee withstand.
The rage of foes Betbulia did besiege,
The people faint were ready for to yield:
God aided me poor widow ne'ertheless,
To enter into Holofernes field,
And with this sword by his directing hand,
To slay his foe, and quiet so the land.
If this his grace were given to me poor wight,
If widows hand could vanquish such a foe:
Then to a Prince of thy surpassing might.
What Tyrant lives but thou mayest overthrow.
Persever then his servant as thou art,
And hold for aye a noble victor's part.
The fretting heads of furious foes have skill,
As well by fraud as force to find their prey:
In smiling looks doth lurk a lot as ill,
As where both stern and sturdy streams do sway,
thyself oh Queen, a proof hath seen of this,
So well as I poor Esther have iwis.
As Jabin's force did Israel perplex,
And Holofernes fierce Betbuliel besiege,
So Hamon's slights sought me and mine to vex,
Yet showed a face a subject to his liege.
But Force nor Fraud, nor Tyrant strong can trap,
Those which the Lord in his defence doth wrap.
The proofs I speak by us have erst been seen,
The proofs I speak, to thee are not unknown.
Thy God thou knowest most dread and sovereign Queen,
A world of foes of thine hath overthrown,
And hither now triumphantly doth call
Thy noble Grace, the comfort of us all.
Dost thou not see the joy of all this flock?
Vouchsafe to view their passing gladsome cheer,
Be still (good Queen) their refuge and their rock,
As they are thine to serve in love and fear:
So Fraud, nor Force, nor foreign Foe may stand
Against the strength of thy most puissant hand.
WIth long discourse (oh puissant Prince) some tract of time we spend,
vouchsafe yet now a little more, and then we make an end.
The thundering blast of Fame, whereof Dame Norwich first did speak,
Not only shook the air and skies, but all the earth did break,
It rend up graves, and bodies raised, each spirit took his place,
And this alonely word was heard: Here cometh the pearl of Grace,
Here comes the jewel of the world, her peoples whole delight,
The Paragon of present time, and Prince of Earthly Might.
The voice was strange, the wonder more: For when we viewed the Earth
Each Prince that erst had reigned here, received again his breath,
And with his breath, a liberty to hold again his place,
If any one amongst us all exceed your noble Grace.
Some comfort every one conceived to catch again his own,
His utmost skill was trimly used, to have his virtues known.
The plays surpass my skill to tell, but when each one had said,
Apollo did himself appear and made us all dismayed.
will you contend with her (quoth he,) within whose sacred breast
Dame Pallas and myself have framed our sovereign seat of rest?
Whose skill directs the Muses nine, whose grace doth Venus stain:
Her eloquence like Mercurie: Like Iuno in her train?
Whose God is that eternal love which holds us all in awe?
Believe me, you exceed the bounds of equity and law.
Therewith they shrunk themselves aside, not one I could espy,
They couched them in their caves again and there full quiet lie,
Yet I that Martia hight, which sometime ruled this land,
As Queen for thirty three years space, gate licence at his hand,
And so Gurguntius did, my husband's father dear,
Which built this Town and Castle both, to make our homage here,
Which homage mighty Queen accept: The Realm and right is thine:
The Crown, the Sceptre, and the sword to thee we do resign.
And wish to God, that thou mayst reign, twice Nestor's years in peace,
Triumphing over all thy foes, to all our joys increase. Amen.
FRom slumber soft I fell asleep,
From sleep to dream, from dream to deep delight,
Each gem the Gods had given the world to keep
In Princely wise came present to my sight:
Such solace then did sink into my mind,
As mortal man on mould could never find.
The Gods did strive, and yet their strives were sweet,
Each one would have a Virtue of her own,
Dame Iuno thought the highest place most meet
For her, because of riches was her throne.
Dame Venus thought by reason of her love
That she might claim the highest place above.
The virgin's state DIANA still did praise,
And CERES praised the fruit of fertile soil:
And PRUDENCE did dame PALLAS chiefly raise.
MINERVA all for eloquence did strive,
They smiled to see their quarreling estate,
And JOVE himself decided their debate.
My sweets (quoth he) leave of your sugared strife,
In equal place I have assigned you all:
A sovereign wight there is that heareth life,
In whose sweet heart I have enclosed you all.
Of ENGLAND soil she is the sovereign Queen,
Your vigours there do flourish fresh and green.
They skipped for joy and gave their frank consent,
The noise resounded to the haughty sky:
With one loud voice they cried all, content,
They clapped their hands, and therewith waked I.
The world and they concluded with a breath,
And wished long reign to Queen ELIZABETH.
THE Orators (most gracious Queen) which lived in the age of them that won greatest renown; were highly commended, for that they could transform the judges minds partly, by eloquence, and partly by setting down before their eyes the calamity of the thing and person they spoke of, into what disposition them listed: the first part declareth unto us no common facility of men, in that they were so willing in following, and attentive in hearing, as they would suffer themselves to be led by eloquence: the last, obtained great favour amongst all nations, whose common weal was governed in good order, and far greater amongst the Christians: but greatest of all with thee O most excellent Queen, the nurse of Christ his church, whose mind obedient to God's word, the spirit of Christ, and zeal of Godliness, and not this profane kind of speech hath instructed: the very calamity of Godly men, and tears of the afflicted, the tears, I say, of faithful Christians have thoroughly moved thee to defend and protect the miserable and dispersed members of Christ object to every kind of injury, before beaten in pieces by a thousand deaths with the safety and preservation as well of mind as body: for these thy singular benefits of Godliness towards us, and that we live under so good a tutor being magistrate in this the City of Norwich, which thy majesty hath of clemency granted unto us for a mansion place, which were banished for Christ his religion, & moreover that we find the minds of the people favourable towards us, first we give immortal thanks, not such as we ought, but such as we are able unto God the father, and the Lord our only saviour Iesus Christ, and then unto thee most merciful Queen. Moreover it is our humble and yet our only petition to show unto your majesty the thankfulness of our mind: behold therefore dedicated to your most excellent majesty not any gift but our mind, no princely jewel but a monument of godliness and posterity, the which we hope will be so much the more acceptable to your majesty, for because the goodness of God towards your majesty is lively drawn out of the history of the innocent & most godly Iosephus, whom neither policy, strength nor desire of bearing rule, but constant faith, godliness of a Christian heart, and heavenly virtue by God's singular mercy, delivered from the bloody conspiracy of his brethren & fear of death, and brought unto high dignity and royal kingdom: to whose brethren that proverbial sentence of the Hebrews is very fitly alluded. Envy being the desire of evil things, and covetousness of transitory renown, is often times the occasion of man's destruction: but touching the mind of Iosephus, the same was endued with such temperance and fortitude, that he might be thought no less unjust than wicked, that would accuse him so much as with the least affection of revengement: so wholly did he commit himself and all the government of his life, his life, I say, put in hazard in a strange kingdom unto the providence of God, that he seemed to hang of no other thing than the only will of God. But to what end speak I this? Are not these self same things, and others their like (o most excellent Queen) by the eyes of all men clearly beholden in thee, and the order of thy kingdom? What man (I say) having his wits, can deny these things to be the most happy joy, spiritual crown, and chiefest ornament of Christ's church, and truly of this kingdom the princely beauty and perpetual renown? Thou surely dost follow most holily, the mind of Iosephus, by the singular goodness of God, as well in preserving thy kingdom, as in amplifying the kingdom of Christ (o thou most faithful nurse of the church of God:) for it is in God only to destroy this man by prosperity (as it seemeth unto man) and advance another by all kinds of adversity and humane danger: whom he acknowledgeth as the vessels of his mercy: and so by his goodness, together with the consolation and strength of his spirit, doth bring them to the happiness of eternal life, which our petition that good and merciful God grant may be ratified in establishing your majesty and governance of your kingdom with spiritual wisdom and understanding, in preserving the same for many years, and in enduing your majesties subjects more and more with true knowledge of him, for his sons sake our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen.
IT is reported (most gracious Queen,) that Egypt is watered with the yearly overflowing of Nilus, and Lidia with the golden stream of Pactolus, which thing is thought to be the cause of the great fertility of these countries: but upon us, & farther, over all England, even in the uttermost borders many and main rivers of godliness, justice, humility, and other innumerable good things, in comparison of the which, gold is vile & nought worth, do most plentifully gush out, and those not from Tmolus, or other hills I know not which, but from that continual and most abundant wellspring of your goodness. And that of those infinite goodnesses I may lightly touch one, for that neither place, time, nor my faculty doth permit to speak of many: with what praises shall we extol: with what magnificent words shall we express that notable mercy of your highness, most renowned Queen, & uncredible readiness to relieve the need of poor men, than the which of many virtues none can be more acceptable unto God, as Homer writeth, neither any virtue in a mighty Prince more wondered at amongst men. This hospital of poor men is most famous, which will be a monument of princely virtue and beneficence amongst all posterity, instituted by the most mighty King Henry your highness father, confirmed with the great seal, by the most noble King Edward your brother, but by your majesty which deserveth no less praise, of late notably increased and amplified by the lands & possessions of Cringleford, that you may not now worthily rejoice so much in others ornaments, as your own virtues. For you are said for your singular wisdom and learning, to have studied that divine law of the most wise Plato, which he left written in the eleventh book of laws. Such your great bounty therefore, so exceeding, and incredible mercy (O most virtuous Prince) in what books shall we comprehend? with what duties, or with what voice shall we testify the good will of a thankful mind? For when we diligently seek all the most exquisite and curious means of thanksgiving: we cannot so much as attain unto the greatness of this one benefit, by the which we acknowledge ourselves bound & straightly holden to your most royal majesty. We shallbe overcome, even with this one and singular benefit, so much the less hope have we then in any point to countervail the huge Sea of the rest of thy benefits which overfloweth on every side as well publicly and generally over all thy Subjects, as properly and particularly upon this City. We certainly now inhabit, and lead our lives in those most happy islands of the which Hesiodus maketh mention, which not only abound with all manner of grain, will, cattle, and other aids of man's life, but much more with the most precious treasure of true religion and the word of God, in the which only the minds of men have rest and peace. There be that call England another world, which I think may be most true in this our age: For whereas all lands on every side of us are afflicted with most grievous wars, & tossed with the floods of dissension, we only, your highness governing our stern, do sail in a most peaceable haven, and severed from the world of mischiefs, do seem after a sort to be taken up into a heaven of happiness. We therefore, according to our bounden duty, first give thanks unto God Almighty, unto whose goodness only with thanks we refer all this our happiness, how great soever it be, and pray that he would vouchsafe to make the same proper and perpetual unto us. And afterwards, unto your highness, (O most gracious Queen) by whose study, care and diligence we confess this blessedness to be gotten, & so many years preserved unto us.
We are glad in this beholding you, and we rejoice with desire more than may be believed, which as I speak of mine own thought, so also all these subjects of Norwich desire me to say the same in their behalf. And I would to God you could pierce these our breasts with your eyes, and thoroughly view the hidden and covered creeks of our minds: then undoubtedly should you behold an infinite heap of good will closely shut up within, which cannot break out of so narrow straits. All the faith, study, and obedience, which are due to so great a Prince, as hitherto we have most willingly employed, so will we always most diligently perform the same: and if at any time any chance shall happen (which fortune God turn from us) that the state of thy blessed majesty or of this flourishing realm should come in danger, or the worthiness thereof be in hazard, we do not only protest the effusion of all our goods and substance, but also the putting forth and brunt of our strengths and bodies therein. Finally we desire and beseech thy excellency (most renowned Queen) well to accept of this our duty, howsoever it be, proceeding from a singular good will, and a most thankful mind, and so to think of us Citizens of Norwich, that perhaps you have many times come to people more wealthy, but to more joyful never.
The good meaning Maior, and all his brethren, with the rest, have not rested from praying unto the Gods to prosper thy coming hither, and the Gods themselves moved by their unfeigned prayers, are ready in person to bid thee worthily welcome, and I MERCVRIE the God of Merchants and Merchandise, and therefore a favourer of these Citizens, being thought meetest and chosen fittest to signify the same. Gods there be also which cannot come, being tied by the time of the year, as CERES in Harvest, BACCHUS in Wines, POMENA in Orchards. Only HIMINEUS denieth his good will, either in presence, or in person: notwithstanding, DIANA hath so counterchecked him therefore, as he shall ever hereafter be at your commandment. For my part, as I am a rejoicer at your coming, so am I a furtherer of your welcome hither, and for this time I bid you farewell.
Fear not oh Queen, thou art beloved so,
As Subjects true, will truly thee defend:
Fear not my power to overthrow thy woe,
I am the God that can each miss amend.
Thou dost know, great JUPITER am I,
That gave thee first thy happy Sovereignty.
I give thee still, as ever thou hast had,
A peerless power, unto thy dying day:
I give thee rule to overcome the bad,
And love, to love thy loving Subjects aye.
I give thee here this small and slender wand,
To show, thou shalt in quiet rule the Land.
IS JUNO rich? no sure she is not so
She wants that wealth, that is not wanting here,
Thy good gets thee friends, my wealth wins many a foe,
My riches rusts, thine shine passing clear.
Thou art beloved of Subjects far and nigh,
Which is such wealth as money cannot buy.
Farewell fair Queen, I cannot give thee aught,
Nor take away thy good that is so bound:
Thou canst not give, that I so long have sought,
Ne can I hold the riches thou hast found.
Yet take this gift, though poor I seem to be,
That thou thyself shalt never poorer be.
WHere force doth fiercely seek to foster wrong,
There MARS doth make him make a quick recoil,
Nor can endure that he should harbour long,
Where naughty wights manure in goodly soil,
This is the use that aids the force of War,
That MARS doth mend, that force doth seek to mar.
And though oh Queen thou be'st a Prince of peace,
Yet shalt thou have me fastly sure at need:
The storms of strife, and blustering broils to cease,
Which foreign foes, or faithless friends may breed.
To conquer, kill, to vanquish and subdue,
Such feigned folk, as loves to live untrue.
IN vain (fair Queen) from Heaven my coming was,
To seek t'amend that is no way amiss:
For now I see thy favour so doth pass,
That none but thou, thou only she it is,
Whose beauty bids each wight to look on thee,
By view they may another VENUS see.
Where beauty boasts, and favour doth not fail,
What may I give to thee O worthy wight?
This is my gift, there shall no woe prevail,
That seeks thy will, against thy wills delight,
Not where they will, but where it likes thy mind,
Accept that friend, if loyal thou him find.
IT seemeth strange to see such strangers here,
Yet not so strange, but strangers knows you well:
Your virtuous thoughts to Gods do plain appear,
Your acts on earth bewrays how you excel:
You cannot die, Love here hath made your lease,
Which Gods have sent, and God sayeth shall not cease.
Virtuous desire desired me to sing,
No subjects suit, though suitors they were all,
Apollo's gifts are subjects to no King,
Rare are thy gifts, that did APOLLO call,
Then still rejoice, sithence God and Man say so,
This is my gift, thou never shalt have woe.
MOst worthy wight, what wouldst thou have of me?
Thou hast so much, thou canst enjoy no more:
I cannot give, that once I gave to thee,
Nor take away thy good I gave before.
I robbed was by Nature's good consent
Against my will, and yet I was content.
A PALLAS thou, a Princess I will be:
I Queen of loss, thou Goddess which haste got:
I sometime was, thou only now art she,
I take, thou gavest that luck that was my lot,
I give not thee this Book to learn thee aught,
For that I know already thou art taught.
WHat art thou (Queen) that Gods do love thee so?
Who won their wills to be so at thy will?
How can the world become thy cruel foe?
How can disdain or malice seek to kill?
Can Sea or Earth devise to hurt thy hap,
Since thou by Gods dost sit in Fortune's lap.
As Heaven and Earth have vowed to be thine,
So NEPTUNES Seas have sworn to drench thy foes,
As I am God, and all the waters mine,
Still shalt thou get, but never shalt thou lose:
And since on Earth my wealth is nought at all,
Accept good will, the gift is very small.
whoever found on Earth a constant friend,
That may compare with this my Virgin Queen?
whoever found a body and a mind
So free from stain, so perfect to be seen,
Oh Heavenly hew, that aptest is to soil,
And yet dost live from blot of any foil
Rare is thy gift, and given to few or none,
maliced therefore of some that dare not say,
More shines thy light, for that I know but one,
That any such show, to follow on their way.
Thou thou art she, take thou the only praise,
For chastest Dame in these our happy days:
Accept my Bow, since best thou dost deserve,
Though well I know thy mind can thee preserve.
AH ha, I see my mother out of sight,
Then let the boy now play the wag a while,
I seem but weak, yet weak is not my might,
My boyish wit can oldest folk beguile.
Who so doth think, I speak this but in jest,
Let me but shoot, and I shall quench his rest,
Mark here my shafts: This all is made of wood,
Which is but soft, and breeds but soft goodwill.
Now this is guilt, yet seems it gold full good,
And doth deceive blind loving people still.
But here is one is seldom felt or seen:
This is of Gold, meet for the noblest Queen.
Wherefore Dame fair, take thou this gift of me,
Though some deserve, yet none deserve like you,
Shoot but this shaft at King or Caesar: He,
And he is thine, and if thou wilt allow.
It is a gift, that many here would crave,
Yet none, but thou, this golden Shaft may have.
Terrestrial joys are tied with slender file,
Each happy hap full hastily doth slide,
As Summer season lasteth but a while,
So Winter storms do longer time abide:
Alas what bliss can any time endure?
Our Sunshine day is dashed with sudden shower.
Could tongue express our secret joys of heart,
(Oh mighty Prince) when thou didst come in place?
No no God wot, nor can express the smart
Thy Subjects feel in this departing case.
But gracious Queen, let here thy Grace remain
In gracious wise, till thy return again.
In lieu whereof, receive thy subjects hearts,
In fixed Faith continually thine own:
Who ready rest to lose their vital parts
In thy defence, when any blast is blown.
Thou art our Queen, our rock and only stay,
We are thine own to serve by night and day.
Farewell oh Queen, farewell oh Mother dear,
Let IACOBS God thy sacred body guard:
All is thine own that is possessed here,
And all in all is but a small reward
For thy great grace, God length thy life like NO,
To govern us, and eke thy Realm in joy. AMEN.
WHat vaileth life, where sorrow soaks the heart?
Who feareth Death that is in deep distress?
Release of life doth best abate the smart
Of him, whose woes are quite without redress.
Lend me your tears, resign your sighs to me,
Help all to wail the dolour which you see.
What have we done, she will no longer stay?
What may we do to hold her with us still?
she is our Queen, we subjects must obey.
Grant, though with grief to her departing will.
Conclude we then, and sing with sobbing breath,
God length thy life, (oh Queen ELIZABETH.)
THose things which at their coming are joyful, when they depart are the more sorrowful. For what (o mighty God) could this Sun at any time behold more happy, than we did seem to ourselves, either when first (o most merciful Prince) the brightness of thy Majesty did here shine out, or else in all the time we rested in your presence, as in a paradise or most happy abundance of all things. But woe to that changeable course of humane things, which suffereth nothing uncorrupt, nor any thing eternal: so pleasure bringeth after it sadness, and grief doth not only suddenly take away our delights, but most bitterly cut of the same. So that we that lately received thee approaching with all joys: should follow thee departing (if the renown of your highness and train would suffer it) with mourning garments. If you demand the cause of so great sorrow, I know not what part of his Majesty God hath endued your person withal, which doth stir up great reverence of thee, but full of a certain wonderful love, whereby it comes to pass that we hardly suffer ourselves to be severed from your presence. Add moreover, that we seem after a sort unto your highness (such is your clemency) to have satisfied every point of gratefulness: yet have we not, nor ever shall we satisfy ourselves in that behalf. We would wish a longer use of time (if it were profitable) that we might express, if not a greater, yet a more continual show of our love and obedience. But we must both yield to your pleasure, and to the common wealth, for that we know assuredly to our great and singular advancement, you never cease to seek out and afford the same to all your subjects. Go now therefore, go with lucky step thither, whether thy virtue calleth thee. And for us, this shall comfort us abundantly (which deserveth both immortal thanks and perpetual memory) that thou so renowned a Prince, hast vouchsafed so courteously to visit our dwellings. And finally, we here before thee, whom God hath anointed, and before all this famous assembly, take God (which now beholdeth us) to our witness, that we will keep our faith and obedience in him to thee only for ever. Thou Nurse of religion, Mother of the Common Wealth, Beauty of Princes, Solace of thy subjects, most happily (oh how I rue to speak it) Farewell.
GEllius in his Noctibus Atticis (most excellent Princess) doth write, that it was the saying of Phaevorinus the Philosopher, that the day was one while a mother, another while a stepdame: and that he used this verse, long time allowed, among men, in his accustomed communication, {non-Roman} {non-Roman} {non-Roman}. Which verse Gellius in this manner expoundeth: That of sorrows & pleasures there be changes, that it cannot be well every day with us, but this day well, and that day ill. And surely, that nothing hath been at any time more gallantly or truly spoken, both the continual course of man's uncertain estate, and the often alterations whereto he is subject, manifestly declare, beside that, this present day giveth evident proof thereof. For, the most joyful coming of your highness, did not so much recreate and comfort us in our daily desire and longing, as we are discouraged by this your departing, whereto we see preparation made on all hands. And as all ages and degrees received your Majesty, with joy and gladness at your coming: so there is not one but lamenteth and mourneth at your graces going. And doubtless for my part, because mine own heart is best known to myself, I protest that I never took upon me a greater charge, then that, wherewith at this present I am burdened: not only to speak face to face with a most learned lady and princess, which notwithstanding is, of itself, a hard and a busy matter: but, which is much more, that to me is befallen the sad and sorrowful office of leave taking. For, who would not be exceedingly grieved, to see the thing which he principally desired, in a very short time, and as it were {non-Roman} {non-Roman} {non-Roman}, at an instant taken away, before he might have thereof full fruition? How lamentable a thing is it, to pull away sucking babes from the breasts and bosoms of their most loving mothers? That sons and fathers, through some miserable misfortune, should be sundered? Yet I notwithstanding am of opinion, that nature hath not engendered in any man, such large love, and so great good will, no not toward them whom they have begotten, or of whom they themselves have been begotten, as is the love and good will wherewith we advance, obey, and reverence your Majesty, being the mother and nurse of this whole Common wealth, and Country. Great is the force of friendship and familiarity, which oftentimes bringeth to pass, that they, which either by some kind of fellowship, or by an accustomed condition of life, in tract of time have been closely knit, and so become both of one mind, and as it were grown together, that hard and scant they may be separated, & set in sunder. Hereof sprang the faithfulness of Theseus, commended by the mouth and monuments of all men: and the entire friendship of innumerable more, whom no dangers, nor labours, either by sea or land, could sequester from their sweet society & comfortable company, with whom they long had lived. And what desires, or what delights have anywhere been found, that may be compared with the sincere affection, and unfeigned good will, which we bear to your Highness, most excellent Princess? These are not sufficient shows of our faith and benevolence, which is much greater, than that the eloquence of any learned man, or that the slenderness of my wit and capacity may make it manifest. Nature at no time tied any thing with a straighter knot, or set several things at greater agreement, than the soul and the body: a declaration whereof is, the incredible consent and concord of them both, the mutual care and regard of succouring each other resting in them both: and the grievous departing, at the hour of death, the one from the other remaining in them both. But we which profess Christian religion and godliness, have learned this lesson, not only to love our country, but also her highness, in whom the health and safety of our country consisteth, far above the valiant Decij, the Scaevolae the Curtii, which ventured their lives for the Common wealth of Rome: yea, to love her grace much better than our own lives. For, what is he that would doubt to die for her sake, who if she were not, he should be constrained to abide a bondage much more bitter than death? Neither is this faithful love of us your subjects (most excellent Queen) lightly laid up in our hearts, and scarcely covered as it were in the ground, but deeply rooted, so that by no storms nor tempests of Fortune it can be shaken, by no engines overthrown, by no force or violence undertrodden. For how much maketh it for the establishment of faith and love, in that we know your Majesty hath obtained regiment and rule, not at the pleasure and appointment of wavering Fortune, but by right of inheritance, that is to say, {non-Roman} {non-Roman} {non-Roman}: nor that the Homerical Jupiter {non-Roman} {non-Roman} {non-Roman}, but that the maker and Creator of all things delivered it into your highness hands? And therefore a singular necessity of obedience is laid upon us, even by God himself, least in Giant guise as it is feigned, we set shoulder against God, and being at defiance with him most wickedly, bid him battle. When we behold those excellent and divine benefits, which your grace hath bestowed upon the common wealth, in so much that among many, yea innumerable countries, and nations under the Sun, none (I will not say may be preferred before us) but not so much as one may be compared with us. Ought not then a singular love and good will to be linked with that law, and necessity of obedience? For what should I make rehearsal of full twenty years, wherein we have lived in such peace and tranquillity, as not only this our age hath never seen the like, but as in old records and ancient Chronicles of all ages and people, is nowhere mentioned? What should I call to memory hurly-burlies foreseen afar off, as from an espial: exceeding great dangers, not only perceived by wisdom, but also prevented by counsel: secret snares, and privy practises disappointed, not to much by violence, as by policy: finally, all Treacherous attempts, and Rebellious enterprises, with great gladness and rejoicing extinguished, without any tumult at all, or very little (doubtless) ensuing among the people? These things might make us (although your Grace were otherwise than you are) perform all duty of faith and love, with most willing minds to your Majesty. Now, for so much as we have your highness, our merciful and bountiful Sovereign, who possessing principality and royal regiment, dost not swerve an hears breadth from justice and equity, what is he for a man so savage and obstinate, whom these so singular and rare virtues may not allure to all love and allegiance? Wherefore, if the surest safety of Princes is the faith of their subjects (as we have heard very wise men hold opinion) what can be more safe, what can be more sure, than your excellency, which the studies and endeavours of your people, being so great, have fenced and fortified? I have made mine Oration the longer (most noble Queen) to the intent we might the longer enjoy your comfortable presence, from the which, to our great grief and sorrow, we shall depart. But because luck must be borne, which can not be avoided, lest I might seem more than is meet to delay your grace's progress, whiles I am in hand to please mine own humour, I will make an end. Concerning your Majesty, whose presence this day will shut from our sight, we will notwithstanding in your absence behold and reverence, we will love your Highness with all our hearts, minds, and endeavours: we will most dutifully obey your grace's Laws and Commandments. Finally, your majesties good estate (whereupon likewise our safety dependeth) we will commend to Almighty God in our daily Prayers, that the same a long time may be continued, and also preserved. Amen.