THe dew of heaven drops this day
on dry and barren ground,
Wherefore let fruitful hearts I say
at Drum and Trumpet sound
Yield that is due, show that is meet,
to make our joy the more,
In our good hope, and her great praise,
we never saw before.
The Sun doth shine where shade hath been,
long darkness brought us day,
The Star of comfort now comes in,
and here a while will stay.
Ring out the bells, pluck up your spirits,
and dress your houses gay,
Run in for flowers to straw the streets,
and make what joy you may.
The dew of Heaven. etc.
Full many a Winter have we seen,
and many storms withal,
Since here we saw a King or Queen
in pomp and Princely pall.
Wherefore make feast, and banquet still,
and now to triumph fall,
With duty let us show good will,
to glad both great and small.
The dew of Heaven. etc.
The Realm throughout will ring of this,
and sundry Regions more
Will say, full great our fortune is,
when our good hap they know.
O Norwich, here the well spring runs,
whose virtue still doth flow,
And lo this day doth shine two Suns
within thy walls also.
The dew of Heaven. etc.
GReat things were meant to welcome thee (o Queen,)
If want of time had not cut off the same:
Great was our wish, but small is that was seen,
For us to show, before so great a Dame.
Great hope we have it pleased our PRINCE's eye,
Great were the harms that else our pains should reap:
Our grace or foil, doth in your judgement lie,
If you mislike, our griefs do grow on heap:
If for small things, we do great favour find,
Great is the joy, that Norwich feels this day:
If well we weighed the greatness of your mind,
Few words would serve, we had but small to say.
But knowing that your goodness takes things well
That well are meant, we boldly did proceed:
And so good Queen, both welcome and farewell,
Thine own we are, in heart, in word, and deed.
muse not good Queen at me that message brings
From love, or just Jehova, Lord of might,
No earthly God, yet governs mortal things,
And sprites divine, and shining Angels bright.
This Lord of late to show his mighty power,
Hath wonders wrought, when world looked lest therefore:
For at his beck, this day, and present hour,
The Heavens shaked, the thunder bolts did roar.
The earth did move, the dead therein did rise,
And out of grave, the Ghosts of men are gone,
The wandering Sprites that hovered in the Skies
Dropped down from air, for world to wonder on.
The Saints themselves, that sat in glory great,
Were sent in haste, to work Jehovah's will,
And I that oft my restless wings do beat,
Was called, to use my wings and office still.
A common post is Mercury you know,
When he commands that made the world of nought,
And flies as fast, as arrow out of bow,
When message may express Jehovah's thought.
Whose power divine full long ere this hath seen,
That in this place should lodge a sacred Queen.
And weighing well, the Prince whereof I speak,
Might weary wax of common pastimes here,
(For that he knows her judgement is not weak,)
Devised above, below there should appear
(To welcome her) some sights that rare should seem,
And careless stood, what world thereof did deem:
So that good Queen, you take them well in worth.
No sooner had Jehovah meant these things,
But Clouds clapped hands, and souls of men came forth
Of Heaven gates, yea goodly crowned Kings
Were flown abroad, from blessed Abraham's breast:
Some in the air, and tops of trees did rest,
Some fell on towers, and stately houses high,
Some sunk in Seas, whose names were drowned now,
And some did light on land where every eye
May them behold, and note their manners throw.
And therewithal, the black infernal sprites
Ran out of Hell, the earth so trembling than,
And like young lads they hopped about the streets.
The satires wild, in form and shape of man
Crept through the woods, and thickets full of briars,
The water Nymphs, and Fairies straight appears
In uncouth forms, and fashion strange to view:
The hags of Hell that hateful are of kind,
To please the time, had learned a nature new,
And all those things that man can call to mind,
Were glad to come, and do their duty throw.
I seeing this, called for my Coach in haste,
Abide sir Boy, then said Jehovah now,
Thou goest not yet, until a Prince be placed
Where I appoint, thou hast nothing to say.
Then still I stood, to know what should be done.
With that, a swarm of people every way
Like little Ants, about the fields 'gan run,
Some to provide for pomp and triumph great,
Some for good fare, yea household cates and meat,
And some they ran to seek where Poets dwell,
To pen forth shows, and paint our trifles well,
Some hauled and pulled, to bring the carriage in,
Some ran to gaze on triumph near at hand,
And some stood mute, as they amazed had been
To see a Court, and Princely noble band
Come marching on, and make here their abode:
But when I saw the carriage here unload,
And well had weighed the wonders I have told,
O mighty God (quoth I) now give me leave
To go from thee, some message to unfold,
That by my speech the hearers may conceive
Thy Godhead great, hath brought this Princess here.
It shall be so (quoth he) dispatch and part,
And tell her, that she is to me so dear,
That I appoint by man's device and art,
That every day she shall see sundry shoes,
If that she please to walk and take the air:
And that so soon as out of door she goes
(If time do serve, and weather waxeth fair)
Some odd device shall meet her highness straight,
To make her smile, and ease her burdened breast,
And take away the cares and things of weight
That Princes feel, that findeth greatest rest.
When I had thus received my charge at full,
My golden rod in lively hand I took,
And bad in haste my flying Horses pull.
But ear I passed, I 'gan about me look
To see that Coach, and each thing gallant were:
So down I came, all winged as you see.
And since I have espied that Princess there,
That greatest Kings do sue to by degree,
And many more that sues no whit, do fear,
I kiss her steps, and show my masters will,
And leave with her such graces from above,
As always shall command her people's love,
(Uphold her reign, maintain her regal state,
Find out false hearts, and make of subjects true,
Plant perfit peace, and root up all debate)
So with this grace, good Queen now here adieu,
For I may now on earth no longer stay,
Than Servants must to Masters will obey.
Alas poor boy, where shalt thou wander not,
I am thrust out of Heaven in despite,
My Mother too begins to bend the brow,
For both we walk, as we were banished quite.
She mourns and weeps, and blubbers like a child,
By which great grief, in rage now may she fall,
And I have leave to walk the wood so wild,
To howl, to cry, and sore complain withal.
For lo of late, where she and I did go,
A man we met, a father grave and wise,
Who told us both (if you the troth will know)
We were the dross, the scum of earth and skies.
Fond ,
A lewd delight, a flying fancy light,
A shadow fond, that bears no shape, but name.
The whole abuse of each good wit or wight,
An idle ground, whereon vain Poets walk,
A cause of care, a spring where folly floes
A wicked mean, to nourish wanton talk,
And to conclude, sharp nettle under Rose
We were: thus said the Father that we met.
My Mother blushed, these thundering words to hear,
And from them both, away in haste I get,
To see if I in Court find better cheer,
But if no friend, nor favour I may find,
Nor answer have of that which here I speak,
Farewell, I seek my fortune in the wind,
For Cupid hath in head a finer
If Heauen
In earth below, I mean to hide my face.
TO strive with boys that stands on brags and braves
I thought great scorn, till Cupid I espied,
But that proud lad, that makes so many slaves,
Must needs find one, to daunt his peacock's pride.
Dame Chastity is she that wins the field,
Whose breast is armed with thoughts of virtues rare,
Who to the fight doth bring no glittering shield,
But clean conceits, which pure and blessed are,
That strikes down lust, and tames the wilful mind,
maintains the just, and holds up learning both;
And wisdom great, through me the Sages find,
Philosophers, the lovers of the troth.
Yea Kings and Queens by me work wonders still,
Do conquer Realms, and Wisdom do attain.
The studious minds, whose knowledge, wit, and skill,
And all the world doth fame and glory gain
That chastened lives, it talks with God above,
It climbs the Clouds from pomp and pleasures vain.
It is a thing that shining Angels love,
And in the world to come shall live and reign.
It triumph makes of fickle fond desire,
It breeds great force and courage still in men,
It quencheth sparks and flames of fancies fire,
It quicks the wits, and helps the art of pen,
Yea all good gifts from Chastity doth rise
That worthy are of honour under Skies.
Then sith (o Queen) chaste life is thus thy choice,
And that thy heart is free from bondage yoke,
Thou shalt (good Queen) by my consent and voice,
Have half the spoil, take either bow or cloak.
The bow (I think) more fit for such a one
In fleshly form, that bears a heart of stone
That none can wound, nor pierce by any mean.
Wherefore take here the bow, and learn to shoot
At whom thou wilt, thy heart it is so clean,
Blind Cupid's bolts therein can take no root.
Now will I say in this poor Coach of mine,
To mount the Skies, and see the God's divine.
HOw now my friend, where hast thou bin, in other plight I trow
Thou wast, when lately I thee met, hath Cupid lost his bow?
His cloak? his Coach: his wit and all? and fled from mother's face?
Or else hath Cupid gone to School, to learn some pretty Grace?
To play the God, fie foolish boy, leave of these toys in time,
Thy Mother (as the Poets feign,) when beauty was in prime
A strumpet was, it may be so, as well appeareth yet,
Thou art not of the race of Gods, thou art some Beggars chit.
Nay doting fool, that still dost pore on Books,
Though Coach be gone, and golden cloak be lost,
Yet like a God, I tell thee Cupid looks,
When old grey beard shows like a rotten post.
It ill becomes an aged man to rail
On women thus, that are not now in place,
But sure thy words are spent to small avail,
They can not blot my mother, nor my race.
But dost thou think thou art a God: then show some proof thereof.
That can I do, but you old men, with boys will jest and scoff,
And either laugh to scorn our words, or taunt us past the nick.
Believe not that, but when in deed we enter near the quick,
Ye wink like Colts, and fling away from wit and feeling seen,
Well Cupid, prove thou art a God, and show some good defence,
To this thy talk, I will give ear, and silence keep a while,
Until thy words have gone so far, thy folly makes me smile.
The greatest Clerks that erst have been, three thousand years ago,
When they on Venus' talk or treat, takes Cupid's part ye know.
Their books, their scrolls, their pamphlets large, makes mention of my name,
You need no further search for proof, to try out Cupid's fame.
Boast not of books, for books they be, that plainly witness bears
How Cupid's art infects good minds, and cankers honest ears.
And though fond men in liables show on you a flourish fine,
Such gewgaws 'grees not with good rules, nor holds on gifts divine.
Why Sir, you will believe, that Ioue and many more
Of other Gods in Heaven are, where I have been before?
In Heaven? there you trip, why boy how came you thence?
You went abroad to take the air, and have been walking sense
Like daws along the coast, O boy, thy proof is bare,
In Heaven is but one that rules, no other Gods there are.
And doth not Ioue and Mars bear sway? tush that is true.
Then put in Tom and Tib, and all bears sway as much as you.
I told you Sir before, your taunting tongue would bite.
I come too near the sore, and please not your delight.
But since you fume for nought, and can not hear the truth,
I will not shame my hoary hears, to strive with wanton youth.
This Cupid, Venus' son, as men suppose to be,
Is neither God nor Man in form, nor monster as you see,
But such a kind of shade, as can no substance shoe,
Begot by brainless blind delight, and nursed with nature's foe.
Fed up with faithless food, and trained in trifling toys,
awaked with vice, and lulled asleep again with irksome joys.
ARt thou so fond to talk with doting age,
This Man did bring thy mother in a rage,
And told her plain, a Goddess feigned she was,
Most lewd of life, and brittle as the glass,
I wantonness know well that tale is true,
To this my friend now Riot what say you?
I could say much, but I will hold my peace,
Foul is that bird that his own nest defiles.
If Riot should not speak, that Venus knows so well,
(With whom since Cupid bore a name, did wanton Venus dwell)
Much pity were it sure, that Riot life should bear,
For I am father of delight and pleasure everywhere.
Without the help of whom, Dame Venus can not live,
For unto Lust and Riot both, doth Venus honour give.
And Lust is Riots joy, a sprite that pleads for place
In every soil, since world began to boast of Adam's race.
And now to tell you plain, from me, or from my stock,
(An endless swarm of idle of folk, a merry careless flock)
As prating Poets feign, at first did Venus spring,
But Venus was no strumpet sure; she was some finer thing
That always furthers Love, in French a Macreau plain,
A better of good bargains oft, and root of fancies vain.
Though Goddess were she not, yet fair and fine was she,
As I have heard good Clerks report, and you in Books shall see
Of her great stories made, and great account this day
We make of Venus' darlings still, wherefore in brief to say,
Both I and thousands more, with Venus needs must hold.
'twas she, to whom King Priam's son did give the apple of gold
That cost so many lives: but read the siege of Troy,
And you shall see what pretty pranks the mother and this boy
Hath played in many parts, my knowledge is but small,
I tell by hearsay many things, but am not learned at all
Good Wantonness thou know'st, but pass o'er that awhile
I could tell tales of Venus yet, would make the hearers smile.
O speak no more, come comfort Cupid now,
Let Venus go, that fate and saw with eye
The order great, and all the manner how
Dame Chastity did mount to Starry Sky
With such a Coach, and such a noble spoil,
As seldom hath in Heaven oft been seen.
She said, when she had Cupid put to foil,
She gave his bow and shafts unto a Queen.
And Cupid straight came running unto me.
I saw him bare, and sent him bare away,
And as we are in deed but bore all three,
So must we part as poorly as we may.
No reasoning here with him that learned is,
Philosophers knows more than wanton fools,
If we had once been beaten well ere this
And loud our Books, and truly plied our Schools,
We had been learned, yea lived, and felt no lack,
Where now our wealth is all upon our back.
By sweet Saint Iohn we are in goodly weeds,
To dance with bells a Morris through the Streets.
If any here, three idle people needs,
Call us in time, for we are fine for sheets:
Yea, for a shift, to steal them from the hedge,
And lay both sheets, and linen all to gauge.
We are best be gone, lest some do hear allege
We are but rogues, and clap us in the Cage.
Come Cupid come, if thou wilt hear a song,
Dame Chastity hath sent her Coach along,
To comfort those, that daily lives in woe.
NAy Cupid will, go hang himself I trow.
Much better were, to fall on point of knife,
Than from rich state, to lead a beggars life.
NOw world may iudge what fables are, & what vain gods ther b,
What names and titles foundlings give, to them, likewise you see,
And that one God alone doth rule, the rest no virtue show,
Vain Venus and blind Cupid both, and all the ragment row
And rabble of Gods, are feigned things, to make the season short,
As wisdom knows that well can weigh, the worth & weight of sport.
Through trifles light, sad things are seen, through vice is virtue found,
By hollow ways, and crooked paths, appears the plainest ground.
Thus leaving unto wisdoms reach, the things that here are done,
And fearing foil, if here we should, in further folly run,
We stay, save that, some Music comes, to knit in order due,
The substance of this silly Show, that we present to you.
DAme Chastity we serve, and wait upon her still,
Save now, that she is called to Clouds, to know Jehova's will.
She bade us walk abroad, and search, where might be seen
In stately troop, and royal Court, a worthy noble Queen.
Salute her in my name, and look in secret sort
(Quoth she) you do with all your force, maintain her princely port.
Good exercise as chief, thy humble duty do,
Let Shamefastness, and Modesty, and sober Temperance too,
Attend as handmaids still, upon that sacred dame.
We hearing what our mistress said, & marking well the same,
Did haste us hither straight, but ere we went at large,
Iebus sent vs Graces great, and gaue vs powre and charge,
(When pomp is most in place) to creep in princely heart,
And gide the mind, & thoroughly search, the soul & every part.
That still the fear of God, be burning in her breast,
There is the only house O Queen, where we four maids will rest,
There we will service show, there shall our virtues bud,
There is the plot, the seat, the soil, and place to do most good.
Yea under richest robes, we have a power to go,
In fairest weeds are cleanest thoughts, & purest minds I know.
The earlish Country cloyne, yea clad in smeared cloak,
With cankered heart, & currish looks, sits grinning in the smoke.
The comely clean attire, doth carry mind aloft,
Makes man think scorn to stoop to vice, & look to Virtue oft.
The Sun that shineth bright, hath virtues manifold,
A gallant flower hath pleasant smell, great goodness is in gold.
So gay and glittering Dame, thy graces are not small,
Thy heavenly gifts in greatest press, in deed surmounts then all.
MOst royal Prince, speed on thy comely pace,
Make haste in time, to do thy subjects good,
Go run with me, to stay this heavy case,
Take pains good Queen, to gain the guiltless blood.
In one man's life, save lives of many more,
Save him in whom, the state of others stays,
For I poor wretch, God knows am minded so,
With him to live, with him to end my days.
Who now in force, of tyrant's hands doth lie,
And vainly strives, to scape his helpless fate,
Who seeth his death, and doleful date so nigh,
Go haste to help, and yet perhaps too late.
YEt were I best, to kill this peevish Boy,
Whom now she makes, her chief and sole delight,
In whom she finds, such pleasure and such joy,
That causeless I, am clean defaced quite.
Such gaudies gay, are in his peacock's face,
And skin smooth up, with show of idle hue,
That I do lodge, and languish in disgrace,
Though she of me, hath proof of promise true.
Well, make thy choice, and see what likes thee best,
View he ere the death, of this thy darling now,
Or yield thy love, to fancy my request,
Whose manly force, shall win the conquest throw.
nought shalt thou win, by that which I shall lose,
Thou getst no gains, though I be thus bereft,
And though that I, between two mischiefs goes,
Where naught but bale, and wretched woe is les ▪
Yet thy reward, which dost assault my friend,
(In whose delight, my heart was fed long while)
Shall be disdain, and hatred in the end,
A guerdon fit, for such a Tyrant vile.
THis wretch is he, by whom I am annoyed,
He hath thy heart, though I deserve the same,
If wisely then, I do my harms avoid,
Why stay I sword, I can not purchase blame,
By cutting off, the cause of my distress,
When he is gone, my let shall be the less.
HOw canst thou say, thou dost deserve my heart,
Which kill'st my heart, and causest all my woe,
SInce that thou takest, my dealing in such part,
I will delight, to wreak my wrath on foe.
In grieving thee, most glad to hear me groan,
And art most pleased, when Manhood makes his moan.
O Gracious Prince, to thee my moan I make,
And prostrate fall, O Prince before thy foot,
With wonted grace, on me some pity take,
O salve my sore, let sorrow find some boot.
I swelled in sighs, and sure shall die to see
My friend dispatched, and murdered in this wise,
O bid the wretch, come thrust his sword in me,
For from my love, the cause of grief doth rise.
I made the fault, then punish me therefore,
Shall silly Lamb, be led to slaughter thus?
Do either help, with death my endless sore,
Or with remorse, and ruth the case discuss,
If he do die, by Mighty Jove I swear
I will not live, if sword or knife be found,
With scratched face, with rent
I know at first, my corpse will
And then adieu, my spirit shall steal away
O Queene, in hast,
SInce thou, O Prince, forbidst revenge to take,
And wilt that men, should lose their time in love,
Then mark my case, and give me leave to make
mine own defence, and so allege and prove,
And I will show my right and title good,
And that I do, deserve the thing I
Though this fond wretch, always my suit withstood,
As one who long, ,
Whom lewd delight, hath led out of the way,
(Which good advise, and ordered judgement keep)
Whom Beauty's blast hath bounced against the bay,
Where craggy tockes, and sands lie hid in deep,
A fond device to trust to painted face,
And fasten fayth vpon so fickle ly,
To whom Dame Hebe, lends often guiseful grace,
Which every year and day doth pluck away,
Whom sickness spoils, and many sorrows
Whom time doth eat and age at length
Whom cares of mind do shake and alter so,
As Winter winds defaceth summer flowers.
A snare for wit, a bait for wanton youth,
A false conceit, an error of the mind,
A fond delight, wherein there is no truth,
A poisoned dish, that doth the reason blind.
A colour cast on things that are but base,
A glorious show, to shroud a homely part,
A rule to run, a lewd and reckless race,
A deep deceit, which daunteth oft the heart.
In rage of youth, these pricking thistles grows,
Whiles Riot reigns, and Folly bears the sway
In hoarie age, ,
Where .
The weaker sex, in beauty doth
The infant hath, the, sleek and
The hurtful weed, which yields a
To view of eye, doth vaunt a
In outward shower, in deed the trust in small,
They are but cloaks, and visards of
The virtuous mind, and manlike sprite
Which gaynes .
Dame Venus loves, the fierce and warlike Knight,
Though once alas, she loud him to
And Ladies which, do love and judge
Love such as can, their cause with
What could thys ▪
Whom could this face, subdue
judge thou O Queen, which of us two could make
The better shift, and force the worst to yield.
YEt let me plead, my cause before my Queen
As thou hast done, and sentence after crave,
Then shall the truth, of our two suits be seen,
I crave no spoil, but wish the thing I have.
Why should my beauty, purchase my disgrace?
Why should my praise, become mine utter
Why should Dame Nature's gifts be thought so base,
Which heretofore have been in greater name?
Who ever could, enforce the Gods with might,
To yield themselves, as conquered with his strength?
Yet Beauty hath, subdued them with his sight,
And made them send, and bow to him at length.
Whom force subdues, with sad unwilling heart,
submits themselves, and grieve at every stroke:
Who beauty wins, and gains unto his part,
They gladly grant, to take the pleasant yoke.
Thy strength thou mayst, full many a Winter hide,
Till time doth serve, to show the same in place,
Sweet Beauty can, no moment be unspied,
But doth delight, each one with gladsome grace.
Dame Nature's show, and Riches Beauty is,
A Heavenly gift, to ravish every eye,
A perfit Pearl, wherein is nought but bliss,
Delight of men, delight of Gods on high.
Apollo pleased, himself with Golden hear,
Heabe delights, the Gods with comely hue,
God Venus oft, her tender breast did tear,
When she Adonis death was fain to rue.
Phoebus did mourn, when his delight was slain,
With great mishap, and error of his hand,
But Ganymede, above with Ioue doth reign.
And waiting on, his nectar's cup doth stand.
What should I speak, of him who at the brook,
The wanton nymphs, in love surprised away,
Or him whom Phoeb, in to her Chariot took,
Or him, whose beauty died the morning grey,
The Gods in beauty, pass each mortal wight,
And men surmount, in form the fairest beast,
And yet of them, some are more brave in sight,
Whose natures are, more fined than the rest.
The ugly Toad, swells out his poison cold,
A crabbed corpse, comes of a churlish kind,
No ragged mould, the virtue rare can hold,
A seemly face, declares a modest mind.
The fairest Horse will swiftest run his race,
The gallantest Hound, will soonest wind his game,
What need I more, to treat upon this case,
The hearers shall, be judgers of the same,
If Beauty's gifts, and favour you exile,
Than Manhood must, be here preferred the while.
STay judgement Prince, and let my case be know
Whose friendly toil, deserves to reap his gain
Mine earnest suit, may not be thus o'erthrown,
So long employed, in hope and endless pain.
I see these men, press boldly here in place,
Unfolds great words, and long debates the case:
And braves it out, with goodly gallant Shows,
Which I will not, eclipse nor blot at all,
My claim is good, and that just God he knows,
What need I then, my right in question call.
I have no force, nor skill in martial field,
I boast not of my fresh and flowering hue,
Nor yet need not, in any point to yield,
That can allege, deserts and service true.
My travel then, and truth may not be lost,
Nor my good will, be recompensed with wrong,
Nor he that hath, with tempests sore been tossed,
And tasted griefs, and bitter torments long,
May not so soon, be shaken off for nought,
I take fine terms, to show my secret thought:
The Gods accepts, our duty in good part,
The Prince rewards, the bills of our request,
The greatest men, consider but the heart,
The friendly means, can tame the wildest beast.
And Women who, in softest moulds be cast,
Whose tender hearts, rues on our careful cries,
Must needs be won, with loving means at last,
To ease our plaints, and wipe our watered eyes.
True love of right, must recompensed be,
Dezart must needs, fly far beyond the rest,
Then grant O Prince, this precious prize to me,
Whose loyal love, claims place above the best.
Much words are spent, where speech shall not prevail,
Long time is lost, in threats and fond dispute,
Though I good hap, have borne but simple sail,
And went aloof, 'tis I must end this suit,
And reason bring, as victor of the field,
Unto whose troth, your weak discourse shall yield.
Fair Beauty here, for whom you foundlings strive,
May move, I grant, a God to like her well,
But though she were, the fairest thing alive,
(As sure indeed, her beauty doth excel)
Is that a proof, that you in love must fall,
With that which nought pertains to you at all?
Admit her mind, by mean of some conceit,
With sweet delight, of fancy may be led,
Your eager eyes, most greedy of such bait,
In forward hope, a season hath been fed.
Shall she be spoiled, for favour she bestows
In friendly sort, and not in faithful wise?
Nay sure, she shall, ne fame nor freedom lose,
For frailties faults, or use of gracious eyes.
But to the point, and purpose of your strife,
One pleads good will, by shape and favour got,
(A gallant Boy, to please a pleasant wife)
Another tells a penned tale by rote,
Bedecked and field with inkhorn terms enough.
The third comes in, and calls himself Dezart,
And each of them are seen in stories throw,
And finely seeks to conquer Love by art.
Great sleight is used, and Clerkly cunning both,
To force a right, and judgement in this case,
Dezart, he tells a trim discourse of troth,
The tender twig makes boast of shining face.
And Courage he, by Manhood claimeth all.
Great points they are, that pleaded are this day,
And unto whom, the Lady now should fall,
Some doubts may rise, if reason bore the sway.
But to be brief, fair Shape and comely port,
The wise men hold, but outward blossoms vain,
And Manhood's force, may here be knit up short,
Stout hearts may not, alone the glory gain:
Nor yet Desert, that nearest goes the goal,
May win the prize, and thrust his better back,
For he it is, that hath the greatest dole,
That doth in deed, no piece of Fortune lack.
Good Fortune still, a Lord of worldly chance
Is only judge, himself, of all is done,
Bid Strength stand back, good Fortune leads the Dance,
Fine shape likewise, with Fortune dare not run.
Dezart is dead, where Fortune men advance.
So here I prove, since I good Fortune have,
This Dame is mine, her destiny wills it so,
In Mother's womb, the Gods this gift me gave,
She ordained was, with me away to go.
Each worldly grace, and rule with Fortune flies,
A wife must needs, then stoop to destiny's lot.
Wherefore I here, possess this noble prize,
As jewel rich, by hap and Fortune got.
Who strives to take, her now from me by force,
Shall have withal, my breath and vital corpse.
methinks most fond, and weakly comes be here
Alone to three, if we together stood:
And though in deed, we buy the quarrel dear,
And pay therefore, the sweetest of our blood,
Yet let us show, the noble hearts of men,
For since he sayth, we all our labour lose,
Not one of us, shall need to sorrow then,
Nor care a fig, howe'er the matter goes.
AGreed, though I Dezart have double wrong,
I will revenge the same by dint of sword,
And you shall see, I will not dally long
To do my best, sith I have spoke the word.
Despaired men, dare fight with Fortune still,
And scratch for life, as long as breath will last,
When hope is gone, I know no better skill,
But bide the brunt, till all the broil be passed.
Let love and life, together make an end,
The heart shall feel, and hand shall head defend.
THough I speak last, that first found special grace,
In foremost sight, look you for tender years,
And judge him not, a Milksop by his face,
That stoutly like a Man at need appears.
Great scorn I think, good Fortune should have all,
And reap the right, that labour long hath sown,
Yea, Favour hath perhaps more friends at call,
Than you would think, or to the world is known.
WE Water nymphs have time to sport, & skip in every place,
When days are long, & nights be short, & Phoebus hides his face,
And hearing that there came a Queen, along this water side,
So long as we poor silly nymphs, on land dare well abide,
We dance, we hop, and bounce it up, in honour of her name,
To whom Diana and her train, doth give immortal fame.
WE shun the Sun, yet love the Moon, & hate the open light,
We hide our heads amid the reeds, in blustering stormy night.
In calmest weather do we play, yet seldom seen we are,
We watch our times, and flee from those, that still do on us stare.
We harm no wight, yet fearful be, to those that have no spirit,
We are some hold of Women's sex, and glad with men to meet.
THe Fairies are another kind, of elves that dance in dark,
Yet can light Candles in the night, and vanish like a spark,
And make a noise and rumbling great, among the dishes oft,
And wake the sleepy sluggish Maids, that lies in Kitchen loft.
And when in field, they tread the grass, from water we repair,
And hop and skip, with them sometime, as weather waxeth fair.
WHat rule is this, what tales tell you, what babble do you make?
Will you tell secrets out of School? beware, if bugs awake
You will be shent, come high you hence, can ye abide the view,
The gaze, and staring such a while, of all this noble crew?
Though that we came to honour her, that Gods on high have blessed,
It is a shame for water nymphs, on earth so long to rest.
THough clean against the fairies kind, we come in open view,
(And that the Queen of fairies here, presents herself to you)
Some secret cause procures the same: the Gods at first, ye know,
In field to honour thee good Queen, did make a gallant show:
Should we that are but sprites of th'air, refuse to do the same?
No sure, for Gods and mortal men, shall serve thee noble Dame.
WHen Mercury came first in Coach, a message to unfold,
(And Mask of Gods amid the night, in chamber secrets told)
We warned were to shape ourselves, to do what Ioue assigned,
But water Nymphs stepped in the while, and so expressed their mind,
And thrust poor fairies out of place, yet we: for fear of soil,
Watched here our time, & for our sports, did chose this certain soil.
YEa out of hedge we crept in deed, where close in caves we lay,
And knowing by the brute of fame, a Queen must pass this way,
To make her laugh, we clapped on coats, of sedges and Bulrush both,
That she should know, & world should say, lo there the fairies goeth,
Like Furies mad, and satires wild yet lo, we have in store
Fine Timbrels, that the Ancients use, to make the show the more.
When saints & souls, & sprites of men, from Heaven down did fling,
(And Jehovah spoke, and Clouds did shake, & many a crowned King.
Crept out of grave, to honour thee, we ready were to wait,
But Hags of Hell, & damned Fiends, that feeds on false desayt
Did blush to see thy presence Queen, but we that harmless were,
Kept love in store, to show at length our duty void of fear.
But when that Cupid was condemned, and Venus fell in rage,
And Wantonness & Riot rude, for knacks were clapped in cage,
And all the ragment row of Gods, to one great God gave place,
We silly fairies were afeard, therewith to show our face.
Yet when we saw a Mask well liked, and Gods condemned appear,
We did consult, at last farewell, the fairies should be here.
But with Orations good and great, to wall the weak was thrust,
Yet when the strongest did their best, of force yet speak we must.
For Ioue that all commands, and doth, bade us to watch the hour,
And show no more at this adieu, than was in fairies power.
So keeping course of Ioues command, we speak that is in breast,
And leave the Queen and all the train, with wit to judge the rest.
WIth Gods, yea kings & queens, began your entry to this place,
With gentle Ghosts & merry sprites, we mind to end the case.
So in good sign of happy chance, to thee O sacred Queen,
To knit up all, we mean to dance with Timbrels on this green.
And then farewell, we can no more, salute thee in our gise,
All that is done, by great good will, is offered to the wise.