dear Daughter, unto Father blind
a Staff of steady stay,
To weary Sire, a comfort great,
and Guide in all his way:
And whom to have begotten, I
may glad and joyful be:
Yet leave me now, thy hapless Sire,
thus plunged in misery.
Why seekst thou means, still to direct
my stalking steps aright?
Let me I pray thee headlong slide
in breakneck tumbling plight.
I better shall and sooner find a way myself alone
To rid me out of all the thrall wherein I now am thrown.
Whereby both heaven shall eased be, and earth shall want the sight
Of me vile wretch, whom, guilt hath made a most abhorred wight.
Alas, what little trifling trick hath hitherto been wrought
By these my hands? what feat of worth or mastery have I sought?
In deed, they have me helped to pull mine eyes out of my head:
So that ne Sun, ne Moon I see, but life in darkness lead.
And though that I can nothing see, yet is my guilt and crime
Both seen and known, & pointed at, (woe worth the cursed time.)
Leave of thy hold, let lose thy hand, good daughter, let me go:
Let faltering foot light where it will, let it (this once) be so.
I'll trudge, and run, I'll scud, and range, I'll hasten to the hill
Of craggy steep Cithaeron, there I hope to work my will.
Where erst Actaeon lost his life by strange, and uncouth death,
Whom bawling Dogs, and hunting Hounds bereft of vital breath:
Where once Agave (bedlam-like) ranged up and down the wood
With sisters hers, inspired all with Bacchus raging mood.
And pleasing well herself in that her fact and mischief done,
Pitched on a pole the grisly head of him that was her Son.
Where Zethus with his ruffling Crew of Gallants young and stout
Dragged, hauled, and pulled, the hateful corpse of Dirce, all about.
Where bushy bloodied brambles show which way the Bull her drew:
near where dame Ino from a Rock herself in Sea down threw.
So that poor mother though she meant t'avoid one fault by flight:
Yet she thereby a worse procured, while like a silly wight
She bother self and eke her son from Scyron hurled down
Intending both herself and him in foaming Sea to drown.
Oh happy, yea thrice happy they, that had so good an bap:
And whom such mother's pitiful erst daudled in their lap.
Yea yet there is in these same woods another place to me
That's due by right, and rightly may me challenge as his fee.
Where I am Infant out was laid, all Fortunes to abide:
I thither will direct my course of try what may betide.
I'll neither stop ne stay till that I be arrived there,
For guide I reck not, neither force for Stumbling anywhere.
Why stay I thus like dastard drudge to hasten unto it?
Sith well I know it lotted is to be my grave and Pit?
Let me mine own Cithaeron mount enjoy in quiet state,
It is mine old and ancient bower, appointed me by fate.
I pray thee be not discontent that I should (aged) die,
Even there, where life I should have lost in puling infancy.
I yield me here with willing heart unto those tortures all
That erst to me were due, and which to others have befall:
To thee I speak O bloody mount, fierce, cruel, styepe and fell,
As well in that thou sparest some, as that thou some dost quell.
This carrion corpse, this sinful soul, this carcase here of mine
Long time agone by right good Law and property is thine.
Now yet at length perform the hest that erst enjoined was
To thee by those my parents both, now bring their doom to pass.
My heart even longeth till I may so fully satisfy
By this my death that their decree, that glad I am to die.
Ah Daughter, Daughter, why wouldst thou thus keep me 'gainst my mind?
In this so vile incestuous love? thou art but now to kind.
Oh stay me not I thee desire, behold, behold, I hear
My Father's ghost to bid me come apace, and not to fear.
O Father mine I come, I come, now father cease thy rage:
I know (alas) how I abused my Father's hoary age:
Who had to name King Laius: how he doth fret and fry
To see such lewd disparagement: and none to blame but I.
Whereby the Crown usurped is, and he by murder slain.
And Bastardly incestuous brood in Kingly throne remain.
And lo, dost thou not plainly see, how he my panting Ghost
With raking paws doth hale and pull, which grieves my conscience most?
Dost thou not see how he my face bescratcheth tyrant wise?
Tell me (my Daughter) hast thou seen Ghosts in such griefly guise?
I see & mark each thing full well. Good father leave this mind.
And take a better if you can: from this yourself unwind.
O what a beastly cowardice is in this breast of mine?
Was I so stout and venturous in pulling out mine Eyen?
And shall all courage be employed against one only part
Of Body, and from other parts shall valour wholly start?
Let none of all these puling tricks nor any faint excuse
Thus daunt thy sprites, let no delay to baseness thee induce:
Dispatch at once, why linger I, as one that's loath to die?
Why live I? is't because I can no longer mischiefs try?
Yes that I can, wretch though I be: and therefore tell I thee,
Dear Daughter, that the sooner thou mightst hence depart from me.
Depart a maid and Virgin hence, for fear of after claps:
Since villainy to Mother showed, its good to doubt mishaps.
No force, no power, no violence, shall make me to withdraw
My duty unto thee my Sire, to whom I vow mine awe.
I will not be dissevered, ne pulled from thy side.
I will assist thee, while that breath shall in this Breast abide.
My Brother's twain let them contend, and fight for Princely sway
Of wealthy Thebes: where whilom reigned King Labdack many a day.
The greatest share and portion that I do look to have
Out of my Father's Kingdom, is my Father's life to save.
Him neither shall Eteocles my elder brother take
Away from me, who now by force the Theban realm doth rake.
Ne Polynices, who as now is Mustering men apace.
From Argos Land: with full intent his brother to displace.
No, though the world went all on wheels: though Ioue should from above
Hurle flashing flakes upon the Earth, all shall not quail my love.
No, though his thumping thunderbolt (when we together stand)
Should light between us, where as we are plighted hand in hand)
Yet will I never thee forsake, but held my handfast still:
Therefore it's bootless father dear, to countermand my will
In this my full resolved mind. Forbid me if you please.
But surely I will be your guide in weal, woe, dole, & case.
And maugre all your sharp reproofs (though much against your mind)
I will direct your steps and gate, that you your way may find:
Through thick & thin, through rough and smooth I will be at an inch
In hill and dale, in wood & grove, I'll serve at every pinch.
If that you go where danger lies, and seek your own annoy,
You shall well prove, that I to lead the dance will not be coy.
Advise yourself therefore, of twain to which I guide shall be:
My count is cast, I am full bent with you to live and die.
Without me perish can you not: but with me, well you may,
It booteth not, in other sort to move me aught to say.
Here is an huge Promontory that elbows into Sea
Let us from thence throw down ourselves, and work our last decay,
If that ye will. Here also is a flinty Rock beside,
Which if you please shall serve our turns: Here beaten with the tide
be craggy Cliffs, let's go to them: Here runs a gulphy stream
With force afore it driving stones as big as mountain beam.
What say you? shall we drench ourselves within this foamy Flood?
Go where you will, take which you list, do as you deem it good.
Conditionally that I may first receive the wound of death:
I reck no whit, I ready stand to yield up vital breath.
I neither draw you to nor fro: but even as best you think
So do, so deal. Would you so fain deaths bitter cup to drink?
My lord and Father, take you death so great a boon to be?
If that you die (this I assure) die first you shall me see.
If life in show more pleasant seem, if so you rather choose,
I am to wait upon you still and never will refuse.
But change this mind wherein you rest, take heart a grace, and show
The noble magnanimity that erst in you did flow:
Resist these pangs, subdue these dumps by valour of the mind,
Let manly courage qualify these your affections blind.
'tis great dishonour thus to yield yourself to dolour thrall,
No storm of adverse hap thus ought a PRINCE's heart t'appall.
This gear surmounteth far the reach of my capacity:
I am astoned, I feel myself rapt with an ecstasy,
Is this not wonder of so lewd, and of so cursed a tree
Such fruit to grow? of graceless Sire so good a child to see?
Is it not strange that in a house distained in villainy
Such noble show of towardness and virtuous gifts should lie?
Let me some speech to thee direct, dame Fortune: how haps this
That here my daughter so unlike to wretched father is?
Degenerating from his steps, and with such virtue fraught,
As in her Father's cursed house she never yet was taught?
Is it (I pray thee) credible, that out of me should spring
Such issue, as should given be to any honest thing?
No truly, no: it cannot be (my fates full well I know)
None such, (unless to do me scart and mischief) would be so.
T'increase the heap of mine annoy no strange effect shall want.
Dame Nature in her Creatures will new affects emplant.
The River shall return his course to Fountain back again,
Dan Phoebus' Lamp shall bring the Night, and Night shall day remain,
So that my grievous miseries with surplusage may grow.
But be as 'tis: I for a while will play my part also,
And show some spark of piety, my fault to countervail:
With murderous knife, my woeful days to end I will not fail.
The only help for Oedipus, the only safety is
To rid himself, and so redeem that Hellish fact of his.
Let me take vengeance on myself for wrongs to father done,
Whose Death is yet unexpiate, by me his cursed son.
Why dost thou shake and tremble thus thou hand, not good for aught?
Why flaggrest thou to stab him in, who Sire to spoil hath brought?
That punishment which hither to by pulling out mine eyes
Thou hast inflicted on me, is but as a sacrifice,
Or guerdon due for villainy which I committed have
With mother mine. Now Daughter sloute, leave of pretences brave,
Allege no glosses: but with speed let go thy Father's hand:
Thou mak'st me die a lingering death within this loathed land.
Thou thinkst I am alive, but I am dead long while ago:
To this my hateful Corpse at length the rites of Burial show.
Thou meanest well, (I know) but yet therein thou dost offend:
Though colour for thy piety I see thou dost pretend.
But piety it cannot be, to drag thus up and down
Thy Father's Corpses unburied through City, Field, and Town.
For be that doth enforce a man against his will to die:
And he that stayeth him that would fain die, most willingly,
Are both alike in equal fault, and stand in equal plight.
To hinder one that would be dead is murdering him outright.
Yet not so great as tother is. I would be more content
To haue my death commaunded me, then from me to be ent.
Desist from this thy purpose (Maid) my life and death both are
To dispose at my liberty, with choice to spill or spare,
I willingly resigned the Crown of Theban soil: yet I
Do still retain upon myself the entire Sovereignty.
If I may make account of thee as of a trusty fear,
And true companion at assays: deliver even here
Into thy Father's hand a Sword: but tell me, dost thou reach
The Sword imbrued in father's blood, wherewith my sons impeach
The course of Law, possessing it and kingdom all by force?
Where so it is doubt is there none, but clean without remorse
There be the Floudgates opened wide, to all licentious lust.
And thriftless trades: I all my claim therein do rake in dust,
And clean forsake. Let both my Sons by Legacy enjoy
The same, wherewith they surely shall contrive none small annoy.
For me pile rather up a stack of wood set all on fire,
That I therein may thrust myself: that is my chief desire:
And make an end at once of all this carrion Carcase vile.
Where is the surging wavous Sea? why stay I all this while?
Bring me to some steep breakneck fall: bring me where Ismene flood
With swift and horned course doth run, bring me whereas my blood.
With goring push of savage beasts may out be let at once.
To some Gulf bring me, where the fall and tide may crush my Bones.
If needs thou wilt my guide remain, as oft thou dost me tell)
Bring me that am disposed to die, where Sphiox that Monster fell
With double shape opposed them that passed by the way,
Propounding Riddles intricate, and after did them slay.
There would I be, that place I seek: thy Father thither bring
Into that monster's Cabin dire thy Monstrous Father fling.
That though that Monster be dispatched, the place may be supplied
With one as bad or worse than be: there will I far and wide
In terms obscure report and tell my heavy luckless lot.
The mysteries whereof the bearers, understandeth not.
Give ear to that which I shall speak, mark thou Assyrian borne,
Consider this thou Theban, where Duke Cadmus men were torn
And slain in wood by serpent's rage: where Dirce silly trull
In humble sort at Altar lies: advert my tale at full
Thou, that in Lacedaemon dwells, and honour'st Castor's grace,
And Pollux eke, two brethren twins. Find out this doubtful case.
Or thou that dwellest in Elis town or by Parnassus hill,
Or thou that till'st Boeotia ground, there reaping gain at will.
Hark, listen well, and flatly say, if ever heretofore
That murderous monster Sphinx of Thebes that men in pieces tore,
In all his riddles asked the like, or of so strange a sort?
Or whether so insolubly his terms he could report?
The Son in Law to Grandfather, the Rival of his Sire:
The Brother of his little Babes: to Brethren, father dire:
The Grandmother at every birth to Husband (graceless Elf)
Brought forth a Son or Daughter, which was Nephew to herself.
How say you Sirs, in riddle dark, who hath so good insight,
That able is the sense hereof t'unfold and tell aright?
As for myself, although the Sphinx I whilom put to foil:
Yet mine own heavy destiny I scarcely can assoil.
Why dost thou (Daughter) labour loose in using further speech?
To alter this my stony heart why dost thou me beseech?
I tell thee plain. I fully mean this blood of mint to spill.
That long with Death hath struggling kept: and thereupon I will
Descend to dark infernal Lake: for this same darkness blind
Of both mine eyes is nothing such, as fact of mine should find.
It were my Bliss to be in Hell in deepest dungeon fast:
Now that which should long since have been, I will perform at last.
I cannot be debarred from Death: wilt thou deny me glaive
Or Sword, or knife? wilt thou no tool for mischief let me have?
Wilt thou both watch and ward each way, where danger lies in wait?
Shall such a sinful Caitiff wretch as I, be keep so strait?
Wilt thou not suffer me with cord to break my hateful Neck?
Canst thou keep me from poisonous herbs? hast thou them all at beck?
What shall it thee prevail to take for me such earnest care?
Death each where is: and ways to death in thousand corners are.
Herein hath God good order ta'en, that every selie Foe,
May take away another's life, but Death he cannot so.
I seek not any tool to have: this desperate mind of mine
Can use the service of my hand, my thread of life t'untwine.
Now hand, thy master at a pinch assist to work his feat,
Help him with all thy power and strength, t'exploit his purpose great.
I point thee not in this my Corpse unto one place alone:
Alas, each part of me with guilt is plaunch and overgrown.
In whichsoever part thou wilt, thy Massacre begin,
And seek to bring me to my death which way thou mayst it win.
In pieces crush this body all, this heart that harbours sin
Pluck out, out all my entrails pull, proceed, and never lin
To gash and cut my weazand pipe. My veins asunder scratch,
And make the Blood come spouting out, or use that other match,
Which heretofore thou used haste: dig where mine eyes erst stood:
And let these wounds gush out apace much mattry filth and blood.
Hale out of me this loathed soul that is so hard and stout:
And thou dear father Laius stand up and look about:
Behold wherever that thou standst: I Umpire do the make,
And eyed judge of all my plagues that justly here I take.
My Fact so lewd, so horrible, so loathsome to be told
I never thought with any price or torments manifold
Could have full expiation: ne thought I it enough
To die this death: or in one part to be slashed through.
By piecemeal I am well content to suffer torments all
And even by piecemeal for to die: for plagues to plague me call.
Exact the punishment that's due: I here most ready stand
To satisfy with any death that law and right hath scanned.
My former smarts, whenas mine eyes I raked out with paws,
Were but as tastes of sacrifice, somewhat to help my cause.
Come therefore (Father) near to me, and thrust this hand of mine
More nearer into every wound. It sweru'de and did decline
For fear, when first it took th'assay mine eyes to ransack out.
I bear it still in memory, my eyes then stared about
And seemed to dissuade the hand from doing of the charge
Whereto it was enjoined tho, and had Commission large.
Thou shalt well think that OEdipus dissembleth not a white
But what his word hath warranted, his deed hath firmly quit.
Thy stoutness then, was not so great when eyes thou pulledst out
As was thy man aboden, when thou threw'st them from thee round about.
Now, by those Eyeholes thrust thy hand into the very brain:
That part where death attempted was, let death be sought again.
Undaunted Prince, must noble Sire, with humble mind. I sue
That I your Daughter may be bold to use some speech to you:
And that you would with patience digest my poor advise:
My suit is not to draw your mind to things, that erst in price
You highly held, me to the view of glittering Palace old,
Ne bravery of your noble Realm, scarce able to be told:
But that you would these ireful fits, by trace of time now quailed,
With patient mind sustain and bear: this virtue never failed
I any Prynce of such a spright as in your noble Grace
Appeareth bright: it fitteth not that such should once abase
Themselves as thralls to sorrows check 〈◊〉 the conquest yield
To adverse hap like 〈...〉
It is no praise, sir, though perhaps you so your reckoning cast
To make of life so small account, and thus to be aghast
At every wagging of a leaf, and cumbersome mischance:
No, no, 'tis virtue in such case high courage to advance.
And when things are at worst, to show true magnanimity:
Not like a Mecock, cowardly at each alarm to flee.
He that hath tried all fortune's spite and worldly wealth despised,
And constantly hath borne all brunts that are to be devised,
methinks no cause hath, why he needs to end his breathing days
O wish himselfe in graue: for why, starcke crauens vse such wayes.
But as for him, that's drenched in dole and wrapped in carking care,
Whose pensive plight can be no worse, nor taste of sourer fare,
That man hath cause well plased to be: sith he in safety stands,
And pikes hath passed, and now is free from fear of further bands.
Put case the Gods would weave the web of further woe to thee,
What more can any of them do thy grieves to amplify?
Nay, thou thyself, (although thou wouldst) canst add thereto no more,
Unless thou think thyself, to have deserved death therefore.
And yet, thou art not worthy death: my reason is, because
Through ignorance thou didst a fact contrary to the laws.
And therefore Father think yourself most guiltless in the case,
And (maugre Gods) stand on your guard, my counsel sound embrace:
For doubtless you an innocent are deemed and thought to be,
And are in deed: what makes you thus in dumps and doleful glee?
What cause so great should so enchant your conscience, and your wits,
To seek your own decay and spoil? what mean faint hearted fits?
That thus in haste you would so feign abandon this your life
And go to hell, where torment dwells and grisly ghosts be rife.
You would not see Sun, Moon, ne Star: no more you can: your eyes
Are blind: you feign would leave your Court, and country's miseries.
Why so you may, and so you do. These all are put to sack,
That now alive, as well as dead you feel of these the lack.
You flee from Mother, Wife, and child, you see no man alive:
What more can death dispatch away but life doth now deprive?
your lords, your knights, your courtly train, your kingly state & crown
Your grand Affairs, your weighty charge is gone & brought abowne.
From whom, from what, do you thus flee.
From none but from myself
Who have a breast full fraught with guilt: who, wretched caitiff else
Have all imbrued my hands with blood. From these apace I flee
And from the heavens and Gods therein: and from that villainy
Which I most wicked wretch have wrought. Shall I tread on this ground?
Or am I worthy so to do, in whom such tricks abound?
Am I to have the benefit of any Element?
Of Air for breath, of water moist, or Earth for nourishment?
O Slave forlorn, O beastly wretch, O Incestmonger vile,
O Varlet most detestable, O Peasant full of guile.
Why do I with polluted Fist, and bloody paws presume
To touch thy chaste and comely hand? I foam, I fret, I fume
In hearing any speak to me. Ought I hear any tell
Or once of Son or Father speak, sith I did Father quell?
Would God it were within my power my Senses all to stop,
Would God I could these Ears of mine, even by the stumps to crop.
If that might be, then (daughter) I should not have heard thy voice.
ay, I thy Sire, that thee be got by most incestuous choice.
begetting of thee, makes my crimes more than they were before:
Remorse thereof both gnaw and gripe my conscience more and more.
oft-times that which mine Eyes not see, with Ears that do I hear,
And of my Facts afore time done the inward wound I bear.
Why is there stay made of my doom? Why am I spared so long?
Why is not this blind head of mine thrown damned ghosts among?
Why rest I on the Earth, and not among infernal spirits?
Why pester I the company of any mortal Wights?
What mischief is there more behind? to aggravate my care?
My Kingdom, Parents, Children, Wit and Virtue quailed are
By sturdy storms of froward Fate: nothing remained but tears,
And they be dried, and Eyes be gone: my hardened heart forbears
Such signs of grace: leave of therefore, and make no more add:
A mind so mated with despair no suits will slowpe unto.
I practise some strange punishments agreeing to my deed:
But what proportion can be found of plagues unto my meed?
Whose Fortune ever was so bad? I was in sooner borne,
But silly Infant judged I was in pieces to be torn.
My mother in whose womb I lay, forth had not me yet brought
And yet even then I feared was: and straight my death was sought.
Some Babes soon after they be borne, by stroke of death depart:
But I poor soul, before my birth adjudged was to dart
Of death: some yet in Mother's womb, ere any light they see
Do taste the dint of hasty Fate, while Innocents they be.
Apollo by his Oracle pronounced sentence dire
Upon me being yet unborn, that I unto my Sire
Should beastly parricide commit: and thereupon was I
Condemned straight by Father's doom. My Feet were by and by
Lanced through, & through with iron Pins: hanged was I by the Heels
Upon a Tree: my swelling plants the print thereof yet feels:
As pray to Beasts, cast out also, to cram their greedy jaws
In Mount Cytheron, and to fill the griping vultures Maws.
Such Sauce to taste full like was I, was other heretofore
Descended of the royal Sangue, with smart (perforce) have bore.
But see the chance: I thus condemned by Dan Apollo's hest
And cast to beasts by Father's doom, and every way distressed,
Could find no death: no death on me durst seize his lordly Paw,
But fled from me, as though I had not been within his Law.
I verified the Oracle, with wicked hand I killed
Mine own dear Father, and unwares his guiltless blood I spilled.
Shall any satisfaction redeem so vile an Act?
May any kind of Piety purge such a shameful fact?
I rested not contented thus. For Father being slain,
I fell in links of lawless Love with Mother: Oh what pain
And grudge of mind sustained I there? in thinking on the same,
To tell our wicked wedlock Yoke, I loathe, I blush, I shame.
I may not well this gear conceal, I'll tell it: out it shall:
Though to my shame it much redound, it may augment my thrall.
I will display strange villainies, and them in number many,
Most beastlike parts, most lewd attempts, to be abhorred of any.
So filthy, and so monstrous, that (sure I think) no Age
Will them believe to have been done: so cruel was my rage,
That even each cutthroat Patricide thereat may be ashamed
To hear it named: and with disdain straight ways will be inflamed.
My hands in Father's blood imbrued to Father's Bed I brought.
And have with Mother mine, his Wife, incestuous practise sought.
To mischief adding mischief more: I wis my fault to Sire,
Is slender in comparison: my graceless fond desire
Could not be staid, till solemnly the marriage Knot was knit
Twixt me and Mother mine, alas for want of grace and wit.
How plunged am I in mischief still? how is the measure full
Of horrors vile, which do my mind and heart asunder pull?
And lest the heap of these my woes might seem to be too scant,
My Mother (she my Wife that is) young issue doth not want.
Can any crime in all the World more heinous be surmised?
If any may: by wicked Imps the same I have devised.
My Realm and Crown I have resigned, which I received as hire
For murdering most unnaturally the king, my Lord, and Sire,
Which Crown now since, twixt both my sons hath kindled mortal war.
And all the country by the ears remains at deadly jar.
I know full well what destinies to this same Crown belongs.
None without Blood the same shall wear, and most accursed wrongs.
This mind of mine (who Father am) presageth many ills:
And gloomy days of slaughter dire: the plot that murder wills.
Already is contrived and cast: all truth of word and deed
Is quite exiled, all promise broke of pacts afore decreed.
Eteocles, th'one of my sons who now in princely throne
Beats all the sway, means still to keep the Diadem alone.
Poor Polynices the other son, thus being dispossessed,
And kept by force from Kingly rule his humble suit addressed
Unto the Gods this wrong to wreak, this breach of league and oath
T'avenge and plague: he Argos soil end Greekish Cities both
Persuades t'assist him in this wary, this quarrel to maintain:
That he in Thebes (as promise was) might have his turn to reign.
The ruin that to wearied Thebes shall grievously befall
And bring the pompous state thereof adown, shall not be small.
Fire, sword, glaive, wounds, & thwacking thumps, shall light unto their share,
And that ere long: and mischiefs worse (it any worse there are)
And this shall hap, that all the world may know it is the race
And issue of a curied Sire that darraygnes such a case.
Though other causes none there were to move you (sic) to live,
Yet is this one sufficient, that you by awe may drive
Your sons my Brethren taring thus to unity and peace:
For you their Father only may their Fury's cause to tease.
You and none else may turn away th'occasions of this war:
These brainsick youths from further rage you only may debar.
By this your means the country shall their quiet peace enjoy
And Brethren jointly reconciled shall work no more annoy.
If you therefore this mortal life thus to yourself deny:
You many thousands shall undo, whose states on you rely.
What? canst thou make me to believe, that any spark of grece
Or love to Sire, or honesty in them hath any place,
Which thirst for one on other's blood, which after kingdoms gape,
Whose whole delight is villainy, were, murder, guile and rape?
Such hateful imps on mischief set, such wicked Termagosites,
As to be sons of such a Sire with shame may wake their vaunts.
At one bare word to tell thee all: thy brethren two are bent
Upon all mischief, weighing not what looseness they frequent.
When fling-brain rage ensots their heads, they care not they a rush
Upon what Devilish vile attempts they give the desperate push.
And as they are conceived and borne in most abhorred sort,
So still devoid of Grace they think all villainy but sport.
Their Father's shame and wretched state moves them no whit at all,
To Country they no reckoning make what massacre befall.
Their minds are ravished with desire ambitiously to reign.
I know their drifts, and what they hope at length by shifts to gain.
And therefore sith the case so stands I liefer had to die
With posting speed while in my house there is none worse than I.
alas, dear Daughter what ado dost thou about me make?
Why liest thou prostrate at my knees? why dost thou travail take,
To conquer my resolved mind with this thy spiced phrase
Of fair entreaty? these thy words my flinty heart amaze.
Dame Fortune hath none other bait to bring me to her lure
Then this alone: till now I still unvanquished did endure.
No Creatures words but thine alone could pierce this heart of mine,
Ne from a purpose resolute my settled mind butwyne.
Thou conquer canst thaffections fond that in my breast do boil,
Thou teachest grace to father's house, and zeal to native soil.
Each thing to me delightful is which jumpeth with thy will:
Command me (Daughter) I thy hests am ready to fulfil.
Old Oedipus if thou enjoin, will pass th' Aegaean Sea:
And flashing flakes of Aetna Mount, with mouth he dare assay.
He boldly dare object himself to romping Dragons claw
Which raged, & swelled and venom spit apace, whenas he saw
Dan Hercules away to steal his golden Apples all
In Gardens of Hesperides. At thy command, he shall
His Entrails offer unto job of greedy vultures Bill:
At thy command, content he is in life to linger still.
Renowned Prince, of royal Race
and Noble line sprung:
The Thebans dreading much the drife
of this your children's throng,
And warlike garboil now in hand,
most humbly pray your Grace
For countries safety, down to set some order in the case.
They be not threats and menacies that thus their minds affright:
The mischief is more near than so: the Enemy is in sight.
For Polynices he that is your younger son of twain,
Doth claim the crown, and in his turn in Thebes requires to reign
According unto covenants made: which quarrel to decite
He purposeth the dene of sword, and marital force t'abide.
With him he brings a mighty Troop from every part of Greece,
Sir, seven Dukes, besieging Thebes are minded it to fleece.
Help noble King, else are we like to perish man and child,
These bloody broils of civil war from us protect and shield.
Am I one like to stop the rage of any wicked act?
Am I one like to cause these Youths to leave their bloody fact?
Am I a master like to teach what laws of love do mean?
Should I not then from former quise digress in nature clean?
They tread their Father's steps aright, they play my lawless pranks:
Like Sire, like Sons, like Tree, like fruit: I con them hearty thanks:
By this I know them for my Sons, and praise their towardness:
I would they should by peevish parts, whose Sons they be, express.
Show forth you noble Gallant imps, what mettled minds you bear,
Show forth by deeds your valour great, let lofty sprights appear.
Surmount and dim my praises all, Eclipse my glory quite:
Attempt some enterprise in which your Sire may have delight
To have till now remained in life: hereof I have no doubt:
For well I know your practice is strange feats to bring about.
Your birth and line from whence you sprung, assures me of no less
Such noble Bloods must needs achieve some doughty worthiness.
Your Weapons and Artillery for war bring out with speed,
Consume with flame your native Soil, and desolation breed
In every house within the Land: a hurly-burly make
Confusedly of every thing. Make all the Realm to quake,
And in exile their days let end make level with the ground
Each fenced Fort and walled Town: The Gods and all confound,
And throw their Temples on their heads: Their Images deface,
And melt them all: turn vpstdowne each house in every place.
Burn, spoil, make havoc, leave no jot of City free from fire,
And let the flame begin his rage within my Chamber dire.
Sir, banish these unpatient pangs, let plagues of Common wealth
Entreat your Grace, sith upon you stayeth all their hope and health.
Procure your sons to reconcile themselves, as brothers ought,
Establish peace between them both, let means of love be sought.
Oh daughter, see and well behold how I to peace am bent?
And how to end these garboils all I seem full well content?
My mind (I tell thee) swells with ire: within my entrails boils
Abundant store of Choler fell: such restless rage turmoils
My inward Soul, that I must yet some greater matter brew:
Which may the Realm enwrap in bale, and cause them all to rue.
That which my rash and heady sons have hitherto begun
Is nothing in respect of that which must by me be done.
This civil war is nothing like to that which I devise:
These trifling broils for such a Sea of harms cannot suffice.
Let brother cut the brother's throat with murderous knife in hand:
Yet is not this enough to purge the mischiefs of this lend.
Some heinous Fact, unheard of yet, some detestable deed
Must practised be: as is to me. and mine by Fates decreed.
Such custom haunts our cursed race: such guise our house hath caught:
My vice incestuous Bed requires, such pageants to be wrought.
To me your Father Weapons reach, myself here let me shroud
In covert of these queachy woods: and let me be allowed
To lurk behind this Craggy Rock, or else myself to hide
On backside of some thickset hedge: where lying unespied,
I hearken may what market-folks in passing to and fro
Do talk: and what the country Clowns speak, as by way they go.
There (sith with eyes, I cannot see) with ears yet may I bear
How cruelly my Sons by war do one the other tear.
A fortunate and happy Dame Agave may be thought,
Who (though with bloody hands) her son to fatal death she brought,
And from the shoulders chopped his head, and bore the same about
In bloody hand, at Bacchus' feast withau th'inspired rout
Of sacrificers, quartering poor Pentheus mangled limbs:
Though this her cruel fact, somewhat her commendation dims:
Yet even in these her frantic fits she stayed herself in time
From further harm, not adding more to aggravate her crime.
My guilt were light, if I had not some others guilty made:
And yet is this but matter light: I took a biler trade.
For, Mother I am unto those that in all vice excel,
And who in most abhorred sins condignly bear the bell.
To all my woes and miseries there wanted only this,
That I should love my countries foe, who Polynices is.
Three snowy Winters passed are, and summers three be gone,
Since be an exiled wretch abroad hath led his life in moan:
And sought his bread among the fremmd: till now compelled perforce.
He craves relief of Greekish Kings, on him to have remorse.
He married hath the Daughter of Adrastus, who at beck
Rules Argive people, swaying them with awe of Princely check:
And he t' advance his son in law to his most lawful right
Hath with him brought from seven Realms a warlike Crew to fight.
What doom I should in this case give, which side I wish to win,
I cannot tell: my mind amazed, yet doubtful rests therein.
Th'one of my Sons (as right it is) requires the Crown as due:
I know it so accorded was: his cause is good and true.
But in such sort, by force of Arms to rely mand the same,
Is ill and most unnatural, herein he is to blame.
What shall I do, what may I say? I mother am to both:
And thus my Sons at deadly feud to see I am full loath.
Without the breach of mother zeal I can no way devise:
For what good had I wish to th'one, thence th'other's harm doth rise.
But though I love them both alike, yet sure my heart inclines
To him that hath the better cause: though wronged thus, he pines:
As one by frowning fortune thrilled from pillar unto post:
His Credit, Country, friends, and wealth, and treasure being lost.
The weaker side I will support, and further all I can,
Most mercy always should vt showed unto th'oppressed man.
While (Madame) you waymenting here your heavy plaints declare
And waste the time, my Lords your Sons in ranged battle are:
Each Captains bright in Armour stands, the Trumpet sounds amain,
And Standard is advanced, amid the throng of either train.
In martial ray full priest to fight stand seven worthy Kings:
And each of them a warlike troop of valiant Soldiers brings.
With courage not behind the best, the Thebans march apace:
And like right imps of Cadmus brood, do slash at enemies face.
The soldiers force and willingness on either side to fight,
Appears: in that they nothing less pretend them shameful flight.
See how their trampling to and fro, the dust to Skies doth rear,
And what a Cloud of Smoke in Camp the horses make t'appear.
And if my fear dismay me not: It all be true I see:
methinks I view their glittering glaives begored with blood to be.
methinks I see the vaward thrill and shake their Pikes in hand:
methinks I see the Gydons gay, and Streamers where they stand:
Wherein is wrought by courteous skill, in Letters all of Gold
The Scutcheon, Post, Name and Arms of every captain bold.
Make haste, be gone, dispatch. (Madame) Cause Brethren to agree:
Betwixt them stay this quarrel, lest a slaughter great ye see.
So shall you to your Children love, to each side peace restore:
The mother's mediation may heal up all the soar.
Post, post, be gone, and trudge for life:
Queen mother make no stay:
That twixt my Brothers, perfect league
and truce continue may.
You that be Mother to them both,
use your authority:
Out of their hands their weapons wrest,
and make them wars defy.
Your bared Breasts which once they sucked,
hold out amid their swords:
Bear of the brunt of all their blows, or end this war with words.
Thy talk I like, I will be gone: I'll go with might and main:
This head of mine I jeopard will, between them to be slain.
In thickest throng of all the Troops I purposed am to stand,
And try what grace, or courtesy remains in either Bond.
If Brothers bear malicious minds each other to subdue,
Let them first onset give on we, and me to death pursue.
If either of them be endued with any spark of grace,
Or Nature's laws or Filial awe doth any whit embrace,
Let him at mother's suit lay down his Pikes and glaives of war,
And weapons of hostility let him abandon far.
And he that cankered stomach bears his Brother there to quell,
Forgetting Nature, let him first with me his Mother mell.
These heady youths from further rage I silly Trot will stay:
I wittingly will not behold such mischief carry sway.
Or if I live to see the same, it shall not be alone.
The Standards are displayed in field, the Enemies are prone
To fall to fight: the clashing noise of weapons hear you may.
Much murder, death, and dreadful dole, cannot be far away.
Their stony hearts go mollify, with sugared terms persuade
Their wilful minds O Queene, before they furiously invade
The one the other: yonder see how they in armour bright
Bestir themselves from place to place: (O dire and dismal sight.)
My trickling tears, my blubbering Eyes, may put you out of doubt
That all is true which I have said: look, look, how all the rout
O eyther part doth slowly march as loth (belike) to trye
By dent of Sword so strange a case: But both my brothers hie
Apace, to grapple force to force, and join with handy blows:
This day will breed the bitter smart of ever during woes.
What whirlwind swift might I procure to bear me through the air?
What monstrous flying Sphinx will help, that I were quickly there?
Of all the Birds Stimphalides (with wings so huge and large
That Phoebus' rays they shadowed quite) will any take the charge
To carry me to yonder place? what ravenous Harpy bird
With ugly talons all with filth, and dirty dung befured,
(Which hunger-starved King Phineus, that had put out the Eyes
Of children his) will at this pinch a mean for me devise,
That I aloft may hoist be, and with all speed be set,
Where yonder cruel armies two in open field be met?
she runs apace, like one of wit and senses all distract:
No Arrow swifter out of Bow: no Ship with Sail full thwacked
With wind at will more way can make with motion such she flies
As gliding Star whose leams do draw a Furrow long in Skies.
As much aghast she trots apace: and now in Camp she stands:
Her presence and arrival there hath parted both the Bands.
At mother's great entreaty made, the bloody broil is hushed:
And where before with goring Glaive the one at tother pushed,
With full intent to kill and slay, appeased is now their ire
And they well pleased to bend to peace, as she doth them require.
The Sword again in sheath is put, that lately out was drawn
To pash out Brains of Brother's skull: she ceaseth not to fawn
Upon them both, their strife to stint: her grey and hoary hairs,
Her Snow white locks with tears besprent in ruthful sort she ●eates.
She Motherlike seeks how to link their hearts in one assent,
With brinish tears she wets the cheeks of him that's malcontent.
That Child that staggering long doth stand, with mother to dispute,
May seem unwilling mind to bear to yield to Mother's suit.
Against me only turn the force
of wreckful Sword and Fire:
Let all the Youths with one accord
repay to me that hire,
That earned I have by due desert:
let both the gallant Band
Of them that come from Argos soil,
and them of Theban Land
Come run upon me all at once: let neither friend ne foe
Refrain a whit his bloody blade at this my womb to throw.
This womb, this womb, wherein I bore these wilful Brethren here
Beget by him that was my son, and eke my wedded fere.
Dismember this my Body vile: cast all my limbs abroad:
I am their mother: child wife throws for them I once abode.
You two, my sons, need I to speak, to will you leave your ire?
Is't not your parts, in such a case t'accomplish my desire?
will you not plight the faithful league of true and perfect love?
will you not jointly quarrels all at Mother's suit remove?
That this shallbe as I request, come, give me both, your hands
While yet they undistained be, and clean from murder stands.
What crime you heretofore have done, against your will it was.
And all that spot which stains your same, by Fortune came to pass.
This heinous Act, this frantic coil you can no wise excuse▪
But wittingly and willingly sound counsel ye refuse.
It resteth free within your choice: of these take which ye list:
If peace delight for mother's sake this brabbling broil untwist.
If such a lewd outrage as this more pleasant seem to be:
Behold, the same and greater too ye may commit on me.
Who being mother, here oppose myself between you twain:
Ere you do one another kill, I needs must first be slain.
Take either therefore quite away this strange ungodly jar.
Or if you will not: me dispatch, who stay your wished war?
alas in this my pensive plight to whom should I direct
My piteous plaint, and earnest suit? to whom might I detect
Mine inward grief and throbbed heart? which of them were I best
T'encounter first and fast embrace, to breed my surest rest?
I love them both even equally, affection like I bear
To either party: mother fond and partial else I wear.
The one of them these three years space bath lived in banishment.
But it all covenants may be kept, as at the first was meant,
The other now as turn doth fall, must trudge an otherwhile,
And learn to know what 'tis to live so long in like exile.
Wae worth this happiness heavy hap: shall I not live the day,
To see my sons together once in one self place to stay?
Shall never I behold them both to better concord bent?
Is all affection natural within them both so spent?
Then, Polynices, come thou first, embrace thy Mother dear?
Thou that hast travailed many a mile, and languished many a year.
That many a storm abidden haste, and many a brunt sustained,
And wearied long with sharp exile, from Mother's sight been weaned:
Come unto me, and nearer stand, put up thy Sword again
Into thy sheath: thy shivering Spear (that out of hand so feign
Would be discharged at Brother's throat) within this ground stick fast.
This Shield of thine lay also down. It makes me sore aghast.
It is so big, it will not let this loving breast of mine.
To join and debonairely meet with that sweet heart of thine:
Take of thy helmet from thine head, the Thong thereof vuty.
That I thy Vifuge may behold, and all thy face descry.
Why dost thou backward turn thy head? and glancest still thine Eye,
And takèst keep of brother's hand for fear of villainy?
Thy body all with these mine Arms I will defend and hide?
If he attempt thy blood to spill, his murderous blade shall glide
First through these tender sides of mine: why standst thou so amazed?
Dost thou distrust thy Mother's love? thinkst thou her kindness razed?
Poly. I fear in deed, distrusting sore, Sire, Dam & all my kin:
And think that truthless treachery in hearts of all hath been.
Dame Nature's lewes are flung at heel, and nought esteemed be:
No faith in kindred planted is, ne true sincerity.
Since I by proof have seen and felt what hurly-burly grows
Betwixt us Brethren: and from thence what Sea of mischief flows:
I may suspect no faster faith in Mother to remain:
It's not unlike, but she likewise will pranks as bad maintain.
Thy sword in hand fast clasped keep: On head thy Basnet tie:
On Left Atme hold thy target sure, and on thy Guard rely.
At all points armed prepared stand: all future doubts prevent:
Be sure to see thy Brother first t'unarm himself content.
And now to thee Eteocles some speech I am to use:
Thou first wast cause of all this war, do not therefore refuse
down first to lay thy brawling Blade, and yield to reason's lore:
If name of peace so hateful be, if that thou any more
intend'st this war to prosecute, in this so savage sort,
Let mother yet this courtesy from thee (her son) extort
That some small time of trusty truce thou wilt with willing mind
Consent unto: till I my Son thy Brother most unkind
May after flight go kiss end oel, now first or last of all.
While I for peace entreaty make, you men unarmed I call
To listen unto that I say: thy Brother feareth thee:
And thou fearest him: and I fear both. But this my fear you see
Is nothing for myself at all, but for th'avail of both.
Why seemest thou thy naked sword to put in sheath so loath?
Be glad to take the benefit of any little stay:
In matters lewd 'tis wisdom good to stand upon delay.
You enter into such a war, wherein he speedeth best
That vanquished is: both of you fear to be by fraud distressed
Through practised means and subtle plois of Brothers spiteful drift,
Or overreached by policy of some devised shift.
But if deceive or be deceived by him that is our Friend
we needs must be: in such a case we shall the less offend
In suffering wrong then doing harm: But fear thou not a whit,
You both from ambushed treacheries your Mother will acquit.
What say you Sons: shall this request of mine with you prevail.
Or shall I curse my luckless fate, and on my Fortune rail.
And judge your Sire an happy man, in that he liveth blind
And cannot see the thing which I behold with pensive mind?
In coming unto you, did I bring with me this intent,
To end these broils? or did I come to see some dire event?
Eteocles, some what appeased, hath pitched his Spear in ground,
And not a weapon blood to she'd, in hand of his is found.
Now Polynices, unto thee my former suit I bring,
Regard thy Mother's mournful plight, and yield unto the thing
That she with tears entreats to have. O Son, at length I see,
I hold with hands, I kiss with mouth, I touch with joyful glee
This Face of thine, the sight whereof I wanted have so long:
And have more often wished for, then can be told with tongue.
Thou hast from native Soil been chased to Coast of foreign king,
And crossed been with trouncing force of frowning Fortunes sting.
Thou many a Storm, and many a brunt in many a foaming Sea,
In wandering sort and banished guise, didst oftentimes assay.
Thy Mother at thy spousal feast was absent far away,
And could not do such nuptial Rites as tell for such a day.
Into thy wedding Chamber she brought thee, ne yet thy Bride,
Ne yet in solemn sort the house with herbs and odours plied:
Ne yet did with a Ribbon white the wedding Torches tie,
As use and custom wills to be at such solemnity.
Adrastus, Father to thy Wife, and father in law to thee,
With Daughter his, hath not defrayed much store of gold or Fee.
No Dower hath he bestowed on her, her wealth was very small,
Of Cities, Lands, and Revenues he gave her none at all.
War, War: is it thou only hadst, by taking her to Wife:
In lieu of other gifts, he helps to kindle all this Strife.
Thou Son in law art unto him, that is our countries Foe:
Thy Native soil thou leavest, and to foreign Courts dost go.
Thou feedest now at Strangers board, and makest more account
Of new acquaintance got abroad; as though it did surmount
The friendship of thy country here: thou art a banished wight,
And liv'st in exile, for no fault, but through thy brother's spite.
In thee appears resemblance plain of all thy Father's Fate,
In which there lacketh not so much as those of wedded Mate.
Whom with as ill mischance and hap as ever Fathers was,
Thou haste in luckless hour and time of marriage brought to pass.
O Son, thy mother's only hope, for whom such care I take:
Whose sight, now after many years, doth me most joyful make.
For whom I have full many a time to Gods devoutly prayed:
Whereas in deed, thy new return to me, may well be said
To take away as great a joy, and bring as great a grief,
As it to these mine aged years is comfort and relief.
I prostrate at the Oracle, besought Apollo's Grace
To tell me, when I should not need to further fear thy case.
Who flouting this my fond demand, anon did flatly tell,
And spoke these words, which yet (I trow) I do remember well.
Thou fearest thy son, lest harm he take, as is a mother's guise:
But thou I say more cause shalt have, to fear him otherwise.
For if this war unraised had been I should thy presence lack:
And if thou wert not, Theban Land might free remain from Sack.
The sight of thee doth cost us all a hard and nipping price,
Yet doth it like thy mother well: so that her sound advice
In this one thing thou follow will. Dispatch these Armies hence:
Even presently, while yet of blood there hath not been expense.
So foul a Fact to be so near, is heinous out of doubt:
I shake, I quake to think thereon, in every joint throughout.
My hair stands upright even for fear, two brethren thus to see
Aloof, and ready one to chop at th'other, cruelly.
How near was I (poor Mother theirs, a bloodier act t'have seen.)
Then father blind yet ever saw, or ever yet would ween?
And though my fear be overpast and th'act unbrought to pass:
myself yet do I wretched think, that done so near it was.
By all the throws for ten months' space, in womb when I thee bare,
And for thy sister's sake both twain, which shine in virtue rare:
And by those Eyeholes of thy Sire, for which with wreakful Paw
He pulled his Eyes, because (unwares) he stained Nature's law,
I thee beseech from Theban Walls sent back these armed Bands,
Which threatening all our throats to cut, against our Country stands:
Yea though you presently depart: yet are you much to blame,
And there is due unto you both, a lot of during shame:
Because this Country round about hath pestered been with power,
And troops of Soldiers stout and brave, it ready to devour.
With pensive hearts a mourning minds, these Eyes of ours have seen
Your prancing couriers with their Feet, spoil Theban Meadows green.
we oft have seen your houlty Peers in warlike Chariot ride:
And oft our houses to have brunt with wildfire have been spied.
And last of all. An act we saw (which even to Thebes is strange.)
Two Brethren warring mortally, all Nature's bonds to change.
Each one in th'Army saw this sight, the people witness be.
Your Sisters two, and Mother I this all did plainly see.
Your Father, he may thank himself: that he did not behold
This lamentable spectacle and havocs manifold.
Call now to thy remembrance here, thy Father OEdipus,
Whose doom, did Facts (by error done) even plague, & punish thus.
With Fire, & sword subvert not clean (good Son) thy country dear,
And Thebes whereof thou wouldst be king) surcease with force to tear.
What Bedlam pang enchants thy mind? what might thy meaning be?
Thou claim'st a Realm, which to subvert thou givest licence free.
In seeking thus a countries rule: a country thou destroyest:
Which thou thine own would make, thou marrest, & (as 'twere none) annoyest.
Hereby thou hind'rest much thyself, in that thou makest spoil,
And burnest up both Corn and Grass, and keep'st a shameful coil,
In chasting men out of their homes: (O desperate witless part)
What man alive, to waste his own, can thus find in his heart?
These things that thou commandest thus by rage of sword & flame
To be consumed: another man thou thinkst doth owe the same.
If thus for princely Chair you twain by th'ears your title try:
The state of Realm and Commonwealth will totter soon awry.
Seek it, while yet your Country stands unblemished by decay:
It so t'enjoy, and so to reign, I count the better way.
Ah, canst thou find in heart to burn, and spoil these houses brave?
The like whereof in all the world besides, thou canst not have:
Canst thou destroy and ruinate the noble Theban wall,
To whose first building stones apace at Dan Amphion's call
Came dancing of their own accord, through tunes of warbling harp:
And couched themselves in order right upon the turret's sharp,
Without all help of workman's hand, or Pully up to draw
Such pieces as most weighty were? Wilt thou by lawless law
Throw down these worthy Monuments? wilt thou from hence convey
And carry with thee all these spoils? wilt thou such pageants play?
Thy Father's old acquainted mates, wilt thou by force surprise
And lead as captive where thou goest in proud triumphing wise?
Shall these thy cutthroat soldiers drag and hale the mother's old?
Shal they, graūd Matrons ried in chaines, frō vnfold?
Shall Theban Maids, & Damsels chaste of fresh and lusty Age,
be mingled with the rascal rout, and hampered be in Cage?
Shall they as presents, forced be in dabbling dirt to toil
Unto the mincing Mistresses, and trulls of Argoa Soil?
Shall I thy silly Mother trudge with Pinyond hands behind?
Shall I this triumph of my Chiled to furnish be assigned?
Canst thou with grudgeless mind, behold thy Countryfolks a-row,
Slain, mangled, spoiled, in pieces hewn, thus to their deaths to got?
Canst thou bring in a deadly Foe, thy Country to subdue?
Shall streets of Thebes run all with blood? shall all the Country rue
Thy coming home with flame and fire? hast thou an heart so hard?
A breast so tipped with flint? a mind to rage so well prepared?
If thus thou fare, and swell with ire whiles yet thou art no King:
What wilt thou be in Princely throne, if thou shouldst win the Ring?
Surcease therefore and qualify this outrage of thy mind:
In thee let all thy Country, grace and Princely mildness find.
Would you me have, myself so much to loyal duties yield,
As that I should a Pilgrim's life like wandering Beast in field
Skud up and down from place to place, without both house & home,
And fleeing native soil, be forced in foreign Lands to roam?
What other plagues, could you award in justice unto me,
If I my faith or sacred Oath had broken caitiffly?
Shall I bear all the punishment for that vile villain's guile?
And shall he false deceitful wretch at my misfortunes smile?
Shall he in wealth still flaunt it out, and keep this jolly coil?
Shall he for sins rewarded be? and I still put to foil?
Well, well, go to, be as be may: you bid me wander hence:
I am content: your hard decree t'obey is my pretence.
But tell me whither shall I go? Assign me to some place:
belike, you would that brother mine should still with shameless face
Possess my stately Palaces, and revel in his ruff,
And I thereat to hold my peace, and not a whit to snuff,
But like a Country Mome to dwell in some poor thatched Cot:
Allow me poor Exile such one: I rest content, God wot.
You know, such Noddies as I am, are wont to make exchange
Of Kingdoms, for poor thatched Cots, be like this is not strange.
Yea more: ay, matched now to a Wife of noble line and race
Shall like a silly Dottipoll live there in servile case,
At beck and check of queenly Wife, and like a kitchen drudge
Shall at Adrastus lordly heels, (my Wives own Father) trudge.
From Princely Port to tumble down into poor servile state,
Is greatest grief that may betide by doom of frouncing fate.
If that thou gape so greedily a Kingly Crown to wear:
And that thou canst not rest content, till thou a Sceptre bear:
Behold each quarter of the world affordeth kingdoms store.
No doubt thou mayst win some of them, if that thou seek therefore.
On one side here, lies Tmolus' mount, a soil bethwact with Vines:
There runs Pactolus' noble stream with golden Sand and mines.
On that side crooked Maeander glides through midst of Phrygia fields:
On this side Hebrus swift of course much fruit to Thracia yields.
Near thereunto lies Gargarus, renowned each where for Corn,
And Trojan Xanthus swelling flood, that prick and price hath borne.
There Sestos and Abydos stand in mouth of Ionian Sea,
Which now is called Hellespont: and here another way
Are countries, which more Eastward lie. There Lycia full of Creeks
And havens strong is situate: these kingdoms, he that seeks,
Is like to win: these would I have thee conquer with thy Sword:
These, these to win let King Adrast to thee his aid afford.
In some of these, let him thee make a King: in Thebes as yet,
Suppose thy father Oedipus in seat of King to sit.
Thy banishment much better is to thee, than this return,
Sith all thy drift is cruelly to waste, to spoil, and burn.
Thy banishment reputed is to grow through other crime:
This thy return, in such a sort to Kingly state to climb,
Is ill and faulty every way: with this thy warlike crew
Thou shalt do better Realms to seek, where bloody guilt ne grew.
Yea, this thy Brother, whom thou dost pursue with deadly hate
Whose life, whose health, whose house thou dost with curses dire rahate
Will aid thee with all power he can: himself will also go
And serve in field for thine avail, 'gainst him that is thy foe.
Advance thy power, march boldly forth to take this war in hand.
Wherein thy parents wish thee good, and will thy helpers stand.
A Kingdom got mischievously, and snatched with grudge of mind,
More grievous is then exiles all, of whatsoever kind.
Of war, the doubtful hazards all set down before thy sight,
And thoroughly weigh thuncertain chance, that longs to martial fight.
Though all the power of Greece thou bring thy quarrel to maintain,
And though great armed multitudes of Soldiers thou remain:
Yet chance of war still doubtful hangs, and hard it is to know,
Who carry shall the victory, thou or thy vowed foe.
Mars to no party tied in: what he decrees, shall be,
As chance allots, so falls it out: this doom abideth free.
Sword, hope and fear makes equal those, between whom otherwise
Great odds there is: blind Fortune's lot the case between them tries.
Thy rash attempt with crime begun, gropes after doubtful gain:
And fond devices enterprised oft reap deserved pain.
Admit that all the Gods in heaven did further thy request,
And to promote thy hot desire both willing were, and priest:
Yet all thy friends are fled away, and all recoiled back,
And Soldiers here and there in Fields are come to deadly wrack.
Although thou joy hereat receive, although the spoils thou take
Of vanquished Brother, yet the palm of victory must slake,
And not to thee be given whole. What kind of war (alas)
Is this, thinkst thou? is't not more strange than ever any was?
Wherein if he that victor is, joy therein any whit,
Most execrable wickedness he (doubtless) doth commit.
This Brother thine, whom now so feign thou wouldst bereave of breath,
I wis, if he were once dispatched, thou wouldst bewail his death.
And therefore make no more ado, but cease from wicked brawl,
Rid country out of trembling fear, and parent's dole forestall.
What, shall my Brother for this vile and shameful breach of pacie
Go scotfree thus? shall he receive no guerdon for his fact?
Fear not my Son, he shall be paid, and paid again, I trow:
He shallbe King and reign in Thebes, his pain shall even be so.
A pain in grain I warrant him. And if thou doubtful be,
Let grandsire Laius and thy Sire examples be to thee.
Sir Cadmus will the same display, and Cadmus' offspring all
Can witness be that none in Thebes yet reigned without a fall.
None yet the Theban Sceptre swayed, that hath not felt the whip.
And promise breach made most of them from regal Crown to skip.
Now if thou wilt, thou mayst insert within this bedroll here
Thy Brother.
marry, that I will, in shame hath he no peer.
And unto me it seems a world of bliss to be a king
And die with Kings.
Thy case doth thee in rank of exiles bring.
Reign King, but yet a loathed wight unto thy Subjects all.
For that I neither reck ne care what shall to me befall.
That Prince that fears disdainful hate, unwilling seems to range.
The God that sways the Golden Globe, together hath these twain
Conjoined and coupled Hate and Rule: and him do I suppose
To be a noble King indeed, that can supplant his foes,
And subjects cankered hate suppress. A King is often stayed
From doing many things he would, when subjects love is weighed.
But unto them that do repine to see him sit aloft,
He may more rigour boldly show, and pare their pates more oft.
He that will love of Subjects win, with Clemency must reign:
A King that's hated, cannot long in Kingly seat remain.
For kingdoms Kings can best describe, what precepts needful are.
Mell thou in cases of Exile: for Kingdoms take no care.
To be a King, I would engage to force of flaming Fire,
Both Country, house, land, Wife, and Child, to compass my desire.
No Fee, to purchase Princely seat, ne labour count I lost:
A Kingly Crown is never dear, whatever price it cost.