Go range about the shady Woods,
beset on every side
With Nets, with Hounds, & toils, & running
out at random ride
About, about, the craggy crests
of high Cecrops' hill,
With speedy foot about the Rocks,
with coursing wander still.
That under Carpanetus Soil,
in Dale below doth lurk,
Whereas the Rivers running swift, their flapping waves do work,
And dash against the beaten Banks of Thrias valley low,
And clamber up the slimy cliffs, besmeared with hoary Snow,
(That falleth, when the Western wind from Riphes Mounts doth blow.)
Here, here away, let other wend, whereas with lofty head,
The Elm displays his branched arms, the wood to overspread.
Whereas the Meadows green do lie, where Zephyrus most mild
Out brays his balmy breath so sweet, to garnish up the field
With lusty springtide flowers fresh whereas Elysus slow
Doth fleet upon the Yste flakes, and on the Pastures low.
Maeander sheds his straggling stream, and shears the fruitless sand
With wrackful wave: ye whom the path on Marathon's left hand,
Doth lead unto the leavened lands, whereas the herd of beast
For Evening forage go to graze, and stalk unto their rest.
The rascal dear trip after fast, you thither take your way,
Where clottered hard Acarnan forced warm Southern winds t'obey
Doth slake the chilling cold, unto Hymettus icy clive
To Alphids little Villages, now let some other drive:
That plot where Sunion surges high do beat the sandy banks,
Whereas the marble Sea doth fleet with crooked compassed cranks,
Unhaunted lies too long, withouten race of any wight.
Who set agog with hunting brave, in woods doth take delight,
Philippis him allures: her haunts a foamy bristled Boar
That doth annoy with ghastly dread the husbandmen full sore:
We know him well: for he it is foiled with so many wounds,
But ere they do begin to ope, let slip, let slip your Hounds.
But in your leashes Sirs keep up your eager Mastiffs yet,
Keep on their collars still; that do their galled neekes fret:
The Spartan Dogs eiget of prey and of courageous kind,
That soon can single out their game, whereto they be assigned,
Tie shorter up within your leash: to pass time shall it bring,
That with the yelping noise of hounds the hollow rocks shall ring.
Now let the Hounds go find of it with nostril good of scent,
And trace unto the ugly den ere dawning day be spent.
while in the dewish stabby ground the prick of cleaze doth stick.
One bear the toil on cumbered neck, and some with nets full thick
Make speed: some with the arming cord by pencil painted red
By sleight, and subtle guileful fear shall make the Beasts adred:
Look thou to pitch thy thirling dart, and thou to try thy might,
Shalt cope him with broad 〈...〉 with hand both left & right.
Thou standing at receipt shalt chase the awayne.
With hallowing: thou with limere sharp undee him being slain.
Grant good success unto thy mate, Virago, thou Divine,
That secret deserts chosen haste for noble Empire thine:
Whose thirled Darts with level right do gore the Beast with Blood
That laps the lukewarm liquor of roxis fleeting Flood.
And eke the Beast that sports itself on frozen Ister's strand.
The ramping lions eke of Geate are chased by thy hand.
And eke the windy heeled Heart in candy thou dost chase.
Now with more gentle lance thou strik'st the do that trips apace.
To thee the Tiger fierce his divers spotted breast doth yield,
The rough shaghairy Bugle turns on thee his back in field.
Eke savage Buffs with branch & horns: all things thy quarrels fear,
That to the needy Garamas in Afric doth appear.
Or eye the wild Arabian enriched by his wood,
Or what the Brutish roches of Pyrene understood,
Or else what other Beasts do lurk in wild Hircanus' grove,
Or else among Sarmatians in desert fields that rove:
It that the Ploughman come to field, that standeth in thy grace,
Into his nets the roused beast full sure he is to chase.
No feet in sunder break the cords and home he brings the Boar
In totting wain, whenas the hounds with gubs of clottered gore,
Besmeared have their grimed snouts: and then the Country rout
To Cottages repair in ranks, with triumph all about.
Lo, Goddess grant us grace: the hounds already opened have,
I follow must the Chase: this gainer way my pains to save,
I take into the woods.
O Country Crete that bears the sway,
upon the Seas so vast.
Whose Ships so thick in every Shore,
the Seas do overcast,
whatever coast as far as is
Assyria land doth lie,
Where Nereus doth the piked Stem
to cut his course deny,
Why force ye me that yielded am, a pledge to those I hate?
And given in Bridal bed to be my enemies Spousal mate,
To languish out my time in tears, in woe to lead my life?
My husband lo, & runagate is gone from me his wife,
Yet Theseus still performs his O the alike unto his Spouse.
As erst to Ariadne, when he falsified his Vows:
He champion stout dare enterprise the darkness deep to pass
Of loathsome Lake, whence yet found out, no way returning was.
A soldier of the Wooer bold Proserpin home to bring,
Out pulled perforce from grisly throne of Dire infernal King.
Accompanied with fury fierce he marcheth forward still,
Whom neither dread nor shame could force forbear his wicked will.
With lawless wedlock's ravishments Hippolytus his Sire
Doth in the boiling bottom deep of Acheron require,
But yet another greater grief sways on my pensive breast,
No silent night, nor slumber deep can set my heart at rest.
My sorrow still is nourished, and still entreaseth it,
And rankles in my boiling breast, as out of Aetna's pit.
The stifling vapour upward sties and Pallas Web, it stands
At rest, my dropping distaff down doth drop between my hands.
My luskish mind it hath no lust my vowed gifts to pay
Unto the Temples of the Gods that live my Theseus may:
Nor rigging with Th'athenian Dames among the altars proud
To toss the fiery brands, unto the sacrifice aloud,
Nor yet devoutly praying at the Aares with godly guise
To Pallas precedent in earth to offer sacrifice:
It doth delight me to pursue the chased beasts in flight,
And toss my flashing Faucon fierce with nimble hand full light.
What ails thou mind this mad to take conceit in freight and fell?
My wretched mother's fatal vice a breeding now I smell:
To cloak our crime, our lust doth know, woods are the fittest place,
Alas good Mother, I lament the heavy luckless case:
Thou rash attaint with loathsome lust enamoured is thy breast.
even with the cruel head of all the herd of savage beast,
That churlish angry roaring Bull no yoke can be sustain.
And he among the wild, and eke untamed Neat doth reign.
Yet was inclined to love: what God can grant me my desire?
Or Dedalus with curious craft can ease my flaming fire?
Not if he might return, whom Ariadne hath instruct
From crooked compassed Labyrinth by thread that out he plucked
Among the lurking corners close, and wily winding way,
To grope his footing back again, and did deprive of day
Our monstrous Minotaur enclosed in Maze and Dungeon blind:
Although he promise to our sore, no salve yet can he find:
Through me Apollo's Progeny doth Venus quite again,
The filthy shame that she and Mars together did sustain.
Whom Phoebus taking at their task all naked in the Sky,
Hung up in Nets, a laughing stock to every gazing Eye:
For this all Phoebus stock, with vile and foul reproach she stains,
In some of Minos' family still loathsome lusting reins:
One mischief brings another in.
O Theseus' wife, and Child
Of Ioue, let vice be soon out of thine honest breast exiled:
And quench the raging heat: to dire despair do not up yield,
Who at the first repulseth love, is safe and wins the field,
Who doth by flattering fancy fond feed on his vicious vain,
To late doth grudge against the yoke which erst he did sustain:
Nor yet do I forget how hard, and void of reason clean:
A PRINCE's stately stomach yields unto the golden mean:
That end I will accept, whereto by Fortune I can lead
The neighbours weal great comfort brings unto the hoary head.
The first redress is to withstand, not willingly to slide,
The second is to have the fault by mean and measure tried:
O wicked wretch what wilt thou do? why dost thou burden more
The stained stock and dost excel thy mother's fault afore?
More heinous is thy guilt than yet thy mother's Monster was:
For monsters mayst thou think are brought by destiny to pass:
But let the cause of sin, to blame of manners lewd redound:
And if because thy husband doth, not breath above the ground.
Thou thinkst thou mayst defend thy fault, and make thy matter good
And free from fear? thou art beguiled, yet think the Stygian flood
In grisly gaping gulf for aye hath drenched Theseus deep,
But yet thy Sire, whose kingdoms large the Seas at will do keep:
Whose dreadful doom pronounceth pangs, and due deserved pain,
Two hundredth wailing souls at once. Will he thinkst thou maintain
So heinous crime to couch? the care of tender parents' breast
Full wise, and wary is to bring their children to the best.
Yet shall we think by subtle mean by craft and devilish guile,
In hugger-mugger close to keep our treachery so vile.
What shall thy mother's father Phoebe, whose beams so blazing bright,
With fiery gleed of every thing, doth shed his golden light?
Or Ioue the Grandsire great of Gods that all the world doth shake,
And brandisheth with flaming Fist, his fiery lightnings flake:
That Vulcan doth in Furnace hot, of dusky Aetna make
Thinkst thou this may be brought to pass, so heinous crime to hide?
Among thy Grandsire all that have each privy thing espied?
But though the favour of the Gods conceal the second time
Thy loathsome lust (unworthy name) and to thy bawdy crime,
Sure faithfulness annexed be, that ever barred was.
Each great offence, what will this work? a present plague, alas
Suspicion lest the guilty night bewray thy deed unjust:
And conscience burdened sore with sin that doth itself mistrust.
Some have commit offence full safe from any bitter blame,
But none without the stinging pricks of conscience did the same:
Assuage the boiling flames of this thy lewd ungracious love,
Such monstrous mischief horrible from modest mind remove.
Which never did Barbarian commit unto this day.
No not the Gadding Gothes that up and down the fyeldes do stray:
Nor craggy crested Taurus' mount whose hoary and frosty face
With numbing cold abandons all inhabitors the place.
Nor yet the scattered Scythian, thy mother have in mind,
And fear this foreign venery, so strange against thy kind:
The Father's wedlock with the sons thou seek'st to be defiled,
And to conceive in wicked womb a Bastard Mungrell Child:
Go too, and turn thy Nature to the flame of burning breast.
Why yet do Monsters cease? why is thy Brother's cave in rest.
That Minotaurus hideous hole and ugly couching den
Without another greedy fiend to munch up flesh of men?
misshapen, loathly monsters borne so oft the world shall bear,
So oft rebels against herself confused Nature dear,
As love entangles nymphs of Crete.
I know the truth ye teach
O Nurse, but fury forceth me at worser things to reach:
My mind even wittingly to vice falls forward prone and bent
To wholesome counsel back again in vain it doth relent:
As when the Norman tugs and toils to bring the freighted Bark
Against the striving stream, in vain he loseth all his cark
And down the shallow stream perforce the Ship doth headlong yield,
Where reason presseth forth, there fighting fury wins the field,
And bears the swinging sway, and crank Cupid's puissant might
triumpheth over all my breast this flighty winged wight
And puissant potestate throughout the world doth hear the stroke,
And with unquenched flames doth force Ioues kindled breast to smoke,
The Battle-beaten Mars hath felt these bitter burning brands,
And eke the God hath tasted these whose fervent fiery hands,
The thumping thunder bouncing bolts three forked wise doth frame,
And he that ever busted is about the furious flame,
In smouldering Furnace raging hot on dusky top so high
Of foggy Aetna mount: and with such slender heat doth fry,
And Phoebe himself that wields his dart upon his twanging string,
With aimed shaft directly driven the wimpled Lad doth sting.
With power he scours along the Earth and Marble Sky awane.
Lust favouring folly filth'ly did falsely forge and feign
love for a God: and that he might his freedom 〈...〉
Ascribes the name of feigned God to shittel bed lame rage.
Erycina about the world doth send her roving page,
Who gliding through the Azure skies with slender jointed arm
His perilous weapons wields at will, and working grievous vous harm.
Of bones and stature being least great might he doth display
Upon the Gods, compelling them to crouch and him obey.
Some Brainsick head did attribute these things unto himself,
And Venus' Godhead with the bow of Cupid little elf.
Who cockered is, triumphing much in fawning fortunes lap.
And floats in wealth, or seeks and sues for things that seldom hap,
Lust (mighty fortune's mischievous mate) assaulteth straight his breast,
His tooth condemneth wonted fare and victuals homely dressed.
Nor handsome houses pleaseth him, why doth this plague refuse.
The simple sort, and to annoy doth stately bowers choose?
How haps it matrimony pure to bide in Cottage base?
And honest love in middle sort of men doth purchase place?
And things that be of mean estate themselves restrain full well,
But they that wallow in their lust whose stately stomachs swell,
Puffed up and boistered big with trust of Kingly sceptre proud
Do greater matters enterprise then may be well aloud.
He that is able much to do, of power will also be
To do these things he cannot do. Now Lady dost thou see
What things do thee beseem thus staid on stately throne on high?
Mistrust the sceptre of thy spouse returning by and by.
In me I bear a violent and mighty poise of love,
And no man's coming home again to terror may me move.
He never stepped back again, the welkin sky to touch,
That swallowed once and sunk in gulf and glummy cave did couch
Shut up in shimering shade for ay.
Yet do not thou suppose,
Though dreadful Ditis' lock with bars, and bolt his dungeon close:
And though the hideous hell-like hound do watch the grisly gates.
Not Theseus alone shall have his passages stopped by fates,
Perhaps he pardon will the crime of loves procuring heat
Nay churlishly he would of old his honest wife entreat.
Antiope his bobbing buffets felt and heavy cuff:
Suppose, yet thou can qualify thy husbands raging ruff:
Yet who can move Hippolytus most stony stubborn mind?
He will abhor the very name detesting woman kind,
And faring frantically, will give himself to single life,
And shun the hated spousal bed of every married wife,
Then shall ye plainly understand his brutish Scythian blood
To follow him even through the hills, the Forest thick & wood,
That keeps among the clottered cliffs besmeared with silver Snow,
Whose nimble heels on craggy rocks are frisking to and fro:
I wish.
He will resist and not be dallied with nor coyed,
Nor change his chaste estate, for life of chastity devoid,
And turn perhaps his cankered hate to light on thee alone,
That now he bears to all.
will not he moved be with moan?
Stark wild he is,
and I have learned wild things by love to tame
he'll run away.
if by the Sea's hefty, I on the same
Will follow him.
Remember then thy father may thee take.
I may remember mine offence, my mother eke will slake.
Detesting womankind, he drives and courseth them away.
No strumpets bashful fear against my breast doth hold at bay:
Thy husband will be here.
I wis he comes I warrant him
Pyrothous companion in hell-like dungeon dim.
Thy Father also he will come,
A gentle hearted Sire
Forgiving Ariadne's fault, when she did him require.
For these my silver shining locks of hoary drooping age,
And breast bedulled with cloying cares restrain thy furious rage.
I humbly thee beseech even by these tender tears of mine,
Succour thyself, much health it is, if will to health incline.
Not every jot at honesty exiled is my breast,
I yield me Nurse, love that denies thus under rule to rest
In quietness, let him, let him perforce be battered down.
I will not let my fleeting fame and glorious bright renown
With stain to be dishonoured, this only is the gap,
To shun the perilous path that leads to Vice's training trap.
My spouse let me ensue with death this strive I shall subvert.
Dear daughter slake the ramping rage of thy unruly heart.
Pluck down thy stomach stout, for this I judge thee worthy breath,
In that thou dost confess thyself to have deserved death.
condemned I am to die, what kind of death now would I know,
As either strangled with a rope shall I my life forego?
Or run upon a bloody blade, with gory wound to die?
Or topsy-turvy headlong hurled down Pallas turret high,
In quarrel just of Chastity.
Now strengthen we our hand,
Alas shall not my feeble age thy desperate death withstand,
Forbear the sway of fury fierce.
No reason can restrain
Him that desireth death, when death he hath determined plain
And aught to die,
Sweet Lady mine (thou comfort of my age
And feeble years) if in thy breast prevails such mighty rage
Have not regard what sounding blast in trump of fame be blown
Whereby thy name in stained stock of black reproach be sown,
Or graft in spotless honesty: for fame doth favour small
The most upright, to better worse, to worse she's best of all,
Let us assay the froward mind of yonder stubborn Child
It is my part to set upon the clubbish young man wild
And to compel the sturdy lad with stony heart to yield.
O Goddess great that art the wondrous seed
Of frothy surge in stormy raging seas
Whom flamy Cupid armed with scorching gleed,
And Shafts, to call his Mother it doth please:
This wanton Elf forth putting sappy might
From steadfast Bow how surely doth he throw
His venomed shafts, through all thy marrow right
The foistering fire doth rankle in and glow
The secret flame that boileth in each vain
The stripe laid on shows not in open mark:
But inward marrow he sucketh out amain,
This boy to sound of peace doth never hark.
His scattered shafts full nimble everywhere
He darts about, the East that doth behold
The dawning sun himself aloft to rear,
From purple bed, and whether late he rolled.
With ruddy lamp, in Western wade doth glide:
If any coast lie under scorching claws
Of burning Crab, or people do abide,
Beneath the clime of icy frozen paws,
Of ugly gargle faced bigger Bear,
That wandering still from place to place doth go
The fervent Fumes, and stoving heat each where
That issues out from Cupid's burning bow,
The flashing flames of youngmen's burning breast,
He stirreth up, enkindling new the heat
Of quenched coals, that wonted was to rest
In drooping age: and virgins hearts do beat
With strange untasted brands: and doth compel
The Gods descending down from starry Sky,
With counterfeited Visages, to dwell
Upon the Earth to blind the lovers Eye.
Sir PHOEBUS whilom forced in Thessail Land
To shepherds state ADMETUS Herds did drive,
His mourning Harp deprived of heavenly Hand
With ordered Pipe his bullocks did revive.
even he that trails the dusky riding rack,
And wields the swaying Poles with swinging swift
How oft did he feigned forms put on his back
And heavenly Face with baser countenance shift.
Sometime a Bird with silver shining wings,
He fluttering flushed, and languishing the death
With sweet melodious tuned voice he sings,
When silly Cygnus gave up gasping breath.
Sometime also with curled for head grim
A dallying Bull, he bent his stooping back
To maidens sport, through deepest Seas to swim
While horny hove made shift like over slack
Through waters wild his brother's perilous cost
With forward glancing breast the stream he broke,
And lest he should his tender prey have lost,
Her troublous thought did cause his heart to quake
DIANA bright that sways in circle murk,
Of darkened Sky, with frying fits did burn,
And leaving of the Evening watch her work
Her fulgent Chariot bright, eke did she turn.
To PHOEBVS charge, to wield it otherwise
Her Evening wain APOLLO learned to guide,
And take his turn in lesser compassed size:
The dampish nights watched not their wonted tide
And late it was ere that AURORA fair
Set forth the morning Sun with gold array,
While that the Marble axle tree in th'air
The shogging Cart made crake with swagging sway,
Alcmena's boisterous Imp did lay aside
His clattering shafts, and also did refuse
To wear the ramping lions hairy hide
And Emeralds for his fingers did he choose,
And braided kept his ruffled staring Locks,
wore Garters wrought on knee with seams of Gold
And on his feet his dirty dabbled Socks,
And with the hand where whilom he did hold
His Clubbish bat, a thread he nimbly spun:
Both Persia and fertile Lidia knew
(Where golden sanded Pactolus doth run)
Alcides bid the lions case adieu
And thunder propping brawny shouldered sire
That heaved and bolstered up the Welkin throne,
In slender kirtle wrought by Web of Tyre
Did jet about to please his Love alone.
This flame (believe the heart that feels the wound)
Inspired with holiness excels in might,
Whereas the Land by Seas embraced round,
Where twinkling Stars do start in Welkin bright
This peevish Elf the countries all doth keep,
Whose quarrels sting the Marble faced rout
Of water nymphs, that with the Waters deep
The brand that burns in breast cannot quench out,
The flying fowl doth feel the foistering flames.
What cruel Skirmish do the Heifers make?
rickt up by lust that nice Dame VENUS frames.
In furious sort for all the Cattles sake?
If fearful Hearts their Hinds do once mistrust,
In love disloyal then gladly dare they fight,
And bellowings out, they bray to witness just
Their angry mood, conceived in ireful sprite.
The painted coast of India then doth hate
The spotty Hided Tiger, than the Boar
Doth whet his Tusks to combat for his mate,
And foams at mouth: the ramping lions roar
And shake their Manes, when Cupid's corsies move
With grunts and groans the howling firths do murn
The Dolphin of the raging Sea doth love:
The Elephants by Cupid's blaze do burn:
Dame nature all doth challenge as her own,
And nothing is that can escape her laws:
The rage of wrath is quenched and overthrown,
whenas it pleaseth Love to bid them paws:
Black hate that rusting frets in cankered breast,
And all old grudge is dashed by burning love.
What shall I make discourse more of the rest
Stout Stepdame's doth this gripe to mercy move.
DEclare what tidings bringst thou Nurse,
where is Hippolytus?
To cure this puissant breach of ills
no hope there is in us:
Nor yet to quench his flashing flame:
his furies fretting ire,
Doth fry in secret boiling breast,
and though the smothering fire
Be covert close, yet bursting forth in welked face it fries:
The sparkling flakes do glowing flash from blood-red rolling eyes
She hanging down her pouched groin, abhors the loathsome light,
Her skittish wits and wayward mind can fancy nothing right:
Her faltering legs do fail her now, down squatting on the ground
With sprawling limbs her shittell grief doth cast her in a swound:
Now scant she on her lithy neck holds up her giddy head,
Nor can commit herself to couch in rest upon her bed.
Nor harbouring quietness in heart with dreary dewle and plaint
She languisheth through out the night, and now her body faint
She bids them up to lift: and now her down again to lay,
And now her crispen locks undone abroad she bids display:
And straight to wrap them up again. Thus fickle fancy still
Doth fleet, nor is contented with his wayward wandering will.
No care she casteth on her health nor eats one crumb of bread,
With feeble fumbling foot upon the floor eke doth she tread,
Her strength alas is quite consumed, her favour sweet doth faint:
Nor ruddy sanguine purple die her cherry checks doth paint:
With greedy gripes of gnawing grief her pinched limbs do pine:
Her faltering legs do stagger now: the gloss of beauty tyne
In body Alabaster bright is shrunk away and waste
Those Crystal Eyes that wonted were resemblance clear to cast
Of radiant Phoebus gold arrays, now nothing gentry shine:
Nor bear a spark of Phoebus bright her father's beams divine:
The trickling tears tril down her cheeks, dew dampish dropping still,
Doth wet her warrye plants, as on the top of Taurus hill
The warry snows with lukewarm showers to moisture turned do drop
But lo the PRINCE's palace is set open in the top:
She lying down upon her golden bed of high estate
Hurls of her wonted royal robes which wounded heart doth hate:
Maids, have our purple garments hence, & vestures wrought with gold,
These crimson robes of scarlet red let not mine eyes behold.
And damask weeds, whereon the Seres embraudet branches brave,
Whose Silken substance gathered of their trees aloof they have,
My bosom shallbe swaddled in with cuttied gaberdine,
No golden collar on my neck nor Indian jewels fine,
The precious pearls so white shall hang no more now at mine ears,
Nor sweet perfumes of Siria shall powder more my hears.
My flaring ruffled locks shall dangling hang my neck about
And shoulder points: then then apace it shattering in and out.
Let winds even blow it where it list, in left hand will I take
A quiver of shafts, and in my right a boar-spear will I shake,
To cruel child Hippolytus such one his mother was,
As fleeting from the frozen Seas those country costs did pass,
And drove her herds that bet with trampling feet Th' Athenian soil
Or like the trull of Tanais, Or like her will I toil,
Of Meotis that on a knot wound up her crispen locks:
Thus will I trot with moon like targe among the woods and rocks.
Leave of thy bitter languishing unto the silly sort
(That walter thus in waves of woe) grief gives not testing port
Is any measure to be found in thy tormenting fire.
Some grace at wild Diana's hand with sacrifice require.
O Goddess great of Woods, in hills that only setst thy throne,
And Gods that of the craggy clives at worshipped alone,
Thy wrathful threatenings on us all now turn to better plight
O Goddess that in forests wild and groves obtainest might,
O shining lamp of heaven, and thou the diamond of the Night,
O threefold shapen Hecate that on the world his face
Dost render light with torch by turns, vouchsafe to grant thy grace
To further this our enterprise and help our piteous case,
O mollify Hippolytus his stubborn hardened heart,
And let him learn the pangs of love and taste like bitter smart:
And yield his light allured ears: entreat his brutish breast,
And change his mind, in Venus' bounds compel him once to rest.
So froward and untoward now so crabbed cursed and mad:
So shalt thou be with blandishing and smiling countenance clad.
Thy shimering cloud clean fading hence then brightly shalt thou bear
And glistering horns, than while by night upon the whirling sphere,
Thy cloudy heeled steeds thou guides, the raging witches charm
Of Thessal, shall not draw thee from the heavens nor do thy harm
No Shepherd purchase shall renown. Thou comest at our request:
Now favour dost thou grant unto the prayers of our Breast:
I do espy him worshipping the solemn Sacrifice,
Both place and time convenient by Fortune doth arise:
We must go craftily to work for fear we quaking stand,
Full hard it is the busy charge of guilt to take in hand:
But who of Princes stands in awe, let him defy all right,
Cast of the care of honesty from mind exiled quite,
A man unfit is for the hest of King a bashful wight.
O Nurse, how chance thy limping limbs do creep into this place?
With blubbered Cheeks, & leaden looks with sad and mourning face?
Doth yet my Father Theseus with health enjoy his life?
Doth Phaedra yet enjoy her health my stepdame and his wife.
forego these fears, and gently come thy blessed hap to take,
For care constraineth me to mourn with sorrow for thy sake,
That hurtfully thou looudes thyself with pangs of plunging pain:
Let him rub on in misery whom destiny doth constrain:
But if that any yield himself to waves of wilful woe,
And doth torment himself, deserves his weal for to forego
The which he knows not how to use: tush, be not so demure,
Considering how thy years do run, take part of sport and play,
Let merry Bacchus' cause thee cast these clogging cares away,
And reap the fruit of sweet delight belonging to thy years,
For lusty youth with speedy foot full fast away it wears.
Erst tender love, erst Venus feeds the young man's appetite,
Be blithe my Boy, why Widow like liest thou alone by night?
Shake of thy solemn sadness man that hearty youth doth spill:
Huff, roist it out courageously, take bridle at thy will
Let not the flower of blooming years all fruitless fade away.
God poynteth euery tyme his taske, and leades in dus aray
Each age by order lust, as mirth the sappy youthful years,
A forehead frayed with gravity becometh hoary hairs.
Why dust thou bridle thus thyself, and dulls thy pregnant wit?
The corn that did but lately sprout above the ground, if it
Be rank of root, yet in the lusk, with interest at large
Unto the hoping husbandman shall travel all discharge.
With branched bough above the Wood the tree shall raise his top,
Whom rusty hand of cankered hate, did never spill nor lop.
The pregnant wits are evermore more prone to purchase praise,
If noble hearts by freedom franked be nourished from decays.
Thou churlish country Clown Hodgelike not knowing Courtly life,
Delight in drowsy doting youth without a loving wife.
Dost thou suppose that to this end Dame Nature did us frame,
To suffer hardness in this world and to abide the same?
With courses and kerereyes fet the prancing Steeds to tame?
Or bicker else with battles fierce, and broils of bloody war?
That sovereign Sire of heaven and earth, when fates do us deter,
With signs and plagues prognosticate provided hath with heed,
For to repair the damage done with new begotten seed.
Go to, let bedding in the world be used once no more
(That still mankind from age to age upholds and doth restore)
The filthy world deformed would lie in irksome ugly stay,
No floating ships on wambling Seas should hoisted sails display.
No Foul should skoare in azure Sky, ne Beast to woods repair,
And only whisking winds should whirl amid the empty air.
What divers dreary deaths drive one mankind to dampish grave?
The Seas, the sword and traitorous trains whole countries wasted have:
Yet for to limit forth our league there is no destiny think,
So down to blackfast Stygian damps we of ourselves do sink.
Let youth that never felt the joys, in Venus' lap which lie,
Allow the solitary life, whatever thou espy,
An hut liburly shall become for term of one man's life.
And work it one destruction by mutual hate and strife.
Now therefore follow nature's course, of life the sovereign guide,
Resort unto the town: with men delight thee to abide.
No life is more devoid of sin, and free from grievous thralls,
And keeping fashions old, then that which leaving Townish walls,
Doth take delight in pleasant Woods, he is not set on fire,
Enraged sore with burning bile of covetous desire.
Who hath addict himself among the mountains wild to live,
Not pricked with prattling people's bruit, no credit doth he give.
toth' Vulgar sort disloyal still, unto the better part
Nor cankered rancour pale doth gnaw his black and fretting heart.
Nor fickle favour forceth he, he bound doth not obey
The poise of Sceptre proud: but wields the massy sceptre sway,
At ebbing honours gapes he not, nor moils for fleeting muck,
Removed far from hovering hope and dread of backward luck,
Not bitter gnawing Envy rank tears him with tooth unkind,
Not 'quainted with the mischief that in Cities and in mind
Of people presseth thick: nor quakes at every blast that flies
With guilty conscience to himself, nor frames himself to lies.
Nor covets rich with thousand pillars close his head to shroud,
Nor guilds his beams with glistering gold for fancy fond and proud
Nor gushing streams of blood upon his innocent Altars flow.
Nor Bullockets bright their hundred heads as white as flaky Snow,
Do yield to Axe, while scattered is on th'altar sacred grain,
But all the quiet country round at will he doth obtain.
And harmless walketh too and fro amid the open air,
And only for the brutish Beast contrives a trapping snare.
Another while upon the swift Alpheus banks he walks
Now up and down the briary Brakes of bushy woods he stalks
Where luke warm Lernas crystal flood with water clear doth shine,
And changing course his Channel out another way doth twine:
And hear the piteous plaining Birds with chirping charms do chide.
And Branches trembling shake whereon soft windy puffs do glide,
And spreading Beeches old do stand, to fast and shake my shanks:
To stamp and dance it doth me good on running Rivers banks:
Or else upon a withered clod to steal a nap of sleep,
Whereas the fountain flows amain with gushing waters deep.
Or else among the balmy flowers out braying savours sweet,
Whereas with pleasant humming noise the bubbling brook doth fleet.
The Apples beaten of the tree do ravening hunger staunch,
And strawberries gathered of the bush soon fill with hungry paunch.
He shuns assaults, that doth himself from regal royal hold.
Estates do quaff their dreadful drink in Bolles of massy Gold:
How trim it is water to lap in palm of naked hand:
The sooner drowsy Morpheus binds thy Brows with sleepy band:
The careless corpses doth rest at ease upon the hardest Couch:
The Cabin base haunts not by Nooks, to prig and filch a pouch:
In house of many corners blind his head he doth not hide,
He loves to come abroad and in the light to be espied:
The Heavens bear witness of his life, they lived in this wise.
I think, that scattered did of Gods in elder time arise.
No doting covetous blind desire of Gold in them was found:
No stones nor stakes set up in field did stint the parted ground:
The sailing Ship with brazen Stem cut not the weltering wave,
But every man doth know his coast and how much he should have.
No hugy Rampires raised were, nor Ditches delved deep,
Nor countermured Castle strong the walled Towns to keep.
The Soldier was not busied his blunted Tools to whet,
Nor rapping Pellets, Cannon shot the barred Gates down bet,
Nor soil with yoked Ox was strained to bear the eueting share,
The field even fertile of itself did feed the World with fare,
The plentiful abundant Woods great wealth by nature gave:
A house of nature take they had a dim and darksome Cave:
The covetous mind to scrape up wealth, and desperate furious ire,
And greedy Lust (that eggeth on the mind all set on fire.)
First broke the bands, and eager thirst of bearing sway stepped in,
To be the stronger's ravening pray the weaker did begin,
And might went for oppressed right: the naked Fist found out
To scratch and cuff, to box and bum, with dealing blows about.
The knarly Logs, and snaggy shive were framed weapons strong,
The gatten Tree ungrained was with Pikes of Iron long.
No nor the rusty falchion then did hang along the side,
Nor Helmet crest upon the head stood pe●●●ing up for pride,
Pale spiteful grief invented Tools, and warlick Mars his brain
Contrived new sleights a thousand kind of deaths he did ordain:
By means hereof each Land is filled with clottered gore yshed,
With streams of blood the Seas are dyde to hue of sanguine red,
Than Mischief wanting measure 'gan through every house to pass,
No kind of vicious villainy that practise wanted was.
By Brother, Brother reft of Breath, and take the Father's Life
By hand of Child, eke murdered was the husband of his Wife.
And Mother lewd on mischief set destroyed their bodies seed,
I overpass the Stepdame with her guilt and heinous deed,
And nowhere pity planted is, as in the brutish beast:
But womankind in mischief is ringleader of the rest,
The instrument of wickedness enkindling first desire,
Whose vile uncesteous whoredom see so many Towns on fire.
So many Nations fall to war, take Kingdoms overthrown,
And raised from the ground, to crush so many people down.
Let other pass: by Iasons Wife Medea may we find
By her alone, that Women are a plaguy crabbed kind.
Why, for one woman's fault of blame shall every one have part?
I hate, detest, abhor, I loathe, I curse them from my heart.
Be't reason, right, or Nature's law, or vengeance fury fell,
It likes me to abhor them still: the burning fire shall dwell,
And bide with quenching water first, the dangerous quick Sand
Shall promise Ships with safetyness upon thee should to land,
And Western Thetis sunk aloof and drenched in deepest nook,
Shall force the ruddy Morning Sun from scarlet Skies to look,
The Wolf shall yield his fleering Chaps to suck the Tet of Do
Ere won by woman's love, to her I crouch and stoop allow.
Love bridles oft with snaffling bits the stubborn wayward heart,
Behold thy Mother's native land in Scythia every part,
The savage women feel the force of Venus' yoking band.
Thou only Child thy Mother had dost this welt understand.
This only comfort of my Mother must I keep behind,
That leeful unto me it is to hate all Womankind.
even as the stiff and sturdy Rocks have waltering waves withstood,
And dasheth back from shore aloof the foamy flapping flood:
So lightly be contemns my talk: but Phaedra runneth mad
Because of this my long delay with crushing cares yclad:
What will she do? ay me alas how shall she now be speed?
Her breathless body to the ground drops suddenly down dead.
A sallow hue like ghastly death overstrikes her frenzy Face,
Look up and speak behold thy dear sweet heart doth thee embrace.
ALas to float in Waves of woe
who me revives again?
To pinch my mind with pining pangs
and bitter drunts of nayne.
What ease to me it was, whenas
I lay in trance at rest?
Why dost thou thus the pleasure of
renewed life detest:
O heart be bold, assay and seek thy purpose to attain,
Be not abashed, nor faced out with churlish words again.
Who faintly craveth any boon, gives courage to deny:
The greatest portion of my crime dispatched ere now have I:
Shame seeks to late to purchase place within our bashful brow,
Sith that in foul and loathsome love we have delight ere now,
If I obtain my will, then shall our wedlock cloak the crime:
Success corrupteth honesty with wickedness sometime:
Behold this secret place is void from any witness by.
My faltering tongue doth in my mouth my tale begun deny.
Great force constraineth me to speak, but greater hold my peace,
O heavenly Ghosts I you protest, 'tis this that doth me please.
Cannot the mind that covers talk in words at will out burst?
Light cares have words at will. but great do make us sore aghast.
Mother the grief that galls your heart come whisper in mine ear.
The name of Mother is to proud a name for me to bear,
Importing puissant power too much: the fancy of my mind
It doth behove, a baser name of less renown to find.
Me (if thou please) Hippolytus thy Loving Sister call.
Or waiting Maid, and rather so: no drudgery spare I shall,
If thou through thick and thin in snows to travail me desire,
Or else command me for to run through Coals of flaming fire,
Or set my foot on Pindus frozen Rocks, it irks me not.
Or if thou will me rashly run thorough scorching fire hot,
Or ravening routs of savage beasts I will not slowly rest,
With gory Lance of naked blade my bowels to unbreast.
These Kingdoms left to me in charge wield thou of them the sway,
And take me as thy humble Mate, it fits me to say,
And thee to give commandment, it is no woman's seat,
To claim her Title to the Crown, to reign in parents' seat.
Thou flourishing amid the pride of lusty youthful race
Supply a valiant Princes room with Father's golden Mace,
Protect thy humble suppliant, defend thy lowly Maid
Embraced in mercy's bosom, at thy Feet so meekly laid.
Take pity on a stely widows woe, and wretched plight.
The God that reigns aloft, forbid such luckless lot to light.
My Father Theseus safe in health will straight return again.
The lowering Lord that deep in strong infernal gail do reign,
And damned up always to pass from Stygian Puddle glum,
Whereby to breathing bodies left alone the ground to come,
Shall he let scape the Cloyner of his joys from spousal bed,
Unless that Pluto's fancy fond by doting love be led:
The righteous Gods will make for him a right returning way.
But while through fear our wavering wills in hovering Balance sway,
Upon my brethren will I cast a due and earnest care,
And thee defend: believe not that in widows plight ye are:
And I myself will unto the supply my Father's place,
O Love (alas) of credit light, O Love of flickering Face,
Is this enough that he hath said? entreatance will I try,
Dear child rue on my wretched woe, do not my suit deny,
That lurking close doth couch in secret mourning breast of me,
feign would I speak: yet loath I am.
What mischief may this be?
Such mischief as ye would not think, could light in Mother's mind.
With mumbling voice perplexed ye waste your words against the wind.
A vapour hot, and Love do glow within my bedlam breast:
It raging rank no inward juice undried leaves in rest:
The sir sonk in scalded guts through every vain doth fry,
And smothering close in seething blood as flashing flame doth fly,
With eager sweeping sway along up burning beams on high.
Enamoured thus with Love entiere of Theseus dost thou rage?
even so it is: the lovely looks of Theseus' former age
Which he a sweet well-favoured Boy did bear with comely grace,
When pretty dapper cutted Beard on clear complexioned Face
'gan sprout, on naked Chin, when he the kennels clottered blood
Beheld of mongrel Minotaur, and crooking Maze withstood
By groping long untwined threads the beams of beauty bright
That shone then in his Face, his crispen locks with labels bite,
Smooth stroked lay, his scarlet Cheeks by nature painted bright
Powdered with spots of golden gloss, and sharp assaults of Love
Prevailed in his fleshly arms: what grace doth shine above
In the Diana's Face, or fiery crested Phoebus mine,
Or else in comely countenance of this lovely face of thine,
Such Theseus had when Ariadne's Eye he did delight:
Thus portly pacing did he bear his noble head upright.
It is no counterfeited gloss that shineth in thy Face,
In thee appears thy manly Fathers starve and lowering Grace.
Thy Mother's crabbed countenance cake resembled in some part
Puts in full well a seemliness, to please the looker's heart.
The Scythian awful Majesty with Greekish favour sweet
Appears: if thou had with thy Sire attempt the Seas of Crete,
(One of those seven from Athens sent elect by luckless lot
To pay such bloody tribute, which King Minos of them got.
The ravening and bloodthirsty Minotaurus foul to feed)
My Sister Ariadne would, for thee have spun the thread.
Therewith in crafty compassed Maze to lead thee to and fro,
In ugly Laberynthus long returning from thy Fo.
Thee, thee O Sister dear whereso in all the Heaven thou are,
And shinest bright with blazing beams transformed into a Star,
I thee beseech come succour me with like distress now cloyed:
Alas us stely Sisters twain one kindred hath destroyed.
The Sire thy smart, the son hath brewed the bane that me doth lees.
Behold an Imp of royal race laid humbly at thy Knees,
Yet never stained, and undefiled, an harmless innocent,
To thee alone of all the World my crouching Knees are bent,
And for the nonce my haughty heart, and Princely courage stout
I did abate, that humbly thee with tears entreat I mought.
O sovereign Sire of Gods, dost thou abide so long to hear
This vile abomination? so long dost thou forbear
To see this heinous villainy? if now the Skies be clear,
Wilt thou henceforth at any time with furious raging hand
Dart out thy cracking thunder dint, and dreadful lightnings brand?
Now battered down with bouncing bolts the rumbling Skies let fall
That foggy Clouds with dusky drooping day may cover all,
And force the backward starring starts to slide aslope withal
Thou starry crested crown, and Titan pranked with beamy blaze
Come out, with staring bush upon thy kindred's guilt to gaze.
Dash out and drown thy leaming lamp eclipsed in glummy Skies,
To shrink in shimmering shape: why doth thy right hand not arise
O guide of Gods and men? how haps the world yet doth not burn,
Enkindled with three forked brand? on me thy thunder turn,
Dash out on me thy bobbing bolt, and let thy fiery flake
Whirled out with force, burned Cinders of my wasted Carcase make:
For guilty (Ioue) I guilty am, deserved death I have,
My Stepdame's Fancy I have fed: shall I most sinful slave,
Be worthy thought to blot my Father's honourable Bed?
Canst thou for mischief such through me alone be lightly sped?
O Caitiff thou of womankind for guilt that hears the bell,
Whose enterprised heinous evil doth passingly excel,
Thy Monster breeding Mother's fault with whoredom she alone
herself, when storming sighs with sorrow 'gan she groan,
Through beastly lust of Bull: till it the Minotaurus ster
In act of generation, had quenched her foul desire:
And yet the time concealed long, the grim twi-shaped seed
At length bewrayed with Bull-like brows, thy Mother's naughty deed,
The doubted Infant did disclose: that wicked womb she bore.
With thrice, yea, four times blessed Fate of life deprived ye are,
Whom swollen of waltering Seas have sunk, me cankered hate of breath
Despoiled hath, and traitorous trains have quelled by daunting death.
With Stepdame's banes and sorcery O Father, Father mine,
I rue thy lot, not to be slain of milder Stepdame thine.
This mischief greater, greater fair the wickedness doth pass
That by Medea desperate Dame of Colchis practised was.
And I do know, what uncouth luck upon our stock hath light,
The thing that we should shun, we seek, it is not in my might
To rule myself: through burning fire e'en after thee I shall,
Through raging Seas, & craggy Rocks, through fleeting Rivers all,
Which boiling waters ruffling raise, what way so go thou will,
I bedlam Wight with frantic fits will follow, follow still.
O stately Lord before thy feet yet fall I once again.
Do not with shameless fawning Paws my spotless body stain.
What meaneth this? with hawsing me t'embrace she doth begin:
Draw, draw my sword, with stripes deserved I'll pay her on the skin:
Her hair about my left hand wound, her head I backward write,
No blood Diana better spent thine Altar yet hath dyde.
Hippolytus, now dost thou grant to me mine own desire,
Thou cools my ramping rage, this is much more than I require,
That saving thus mine honesty I may be given to death,
By bloody stroke received of thy band to lose my breath.
avaunt, avaunt, preserve thy life, at my hand nothing crave,
This field Sword that thou hast touched no longer will I have.
What bathing lukewarm Tanais may I defiled obtain,
Whose cleansing watery Channel pure may wash me clean again?
Or what Meotis muddy mere, with rough Barbarian wave
That boards on Pontus roaring Sea? not Neptune grandsire grave
With all his Ocean folding flood can purge and wash away
This dunghill foul of sin: O wood, O savage beast I say:
Thy crime detected is: O soul, why droops thou all aghast?
Let us appeach Hippolytus with fault upon him cast:
And let us lay unto his charge, how he by might unjust
Deflower would his Fathers Wife with mischief, mischief must
Concealed be: the best it is, thy foe first to invade,
Sith that the crime is yet unknown who can be witness made,
That either first we enterprised, or suffered of him then?
Come, come, in haste Athenians, O troops of trusty men
Help, help, Hippolytus doth come, he comes, that Villain vile,
That Ravisher, and Lecher foul, perforce would us defile.
He threatens us denouncing death, and glittering Blade doth shake,
At her who chastened doth withstand, and doth for terror quake:
Lo headlong hence for life and death he took him to his flight,
And leaves his Sword in running rash, with ghastly fear affright:
A token of his enterprise detestable we keep,
Sirs cherish her, that storming sighs with pensive breast doth weep.
Her ruffled hair, and shattered Locks still let them dangle down,
This witness of his villainy so bear into the Town.
(O Lady mine be of good cheer. Pluck up your sprights again,)
Why dost thou tearing thus thyself abhor all people's sight?
Not blind Mischance but fancy wont to make a shameless Wight.
HIPPOLYTUS even as the raging
storm away doth fly,
More swift than whirling Western wind
uptumbling clouds in Sky,
More swift than flashing flames, that catch
their course with sweeping sway,
When Stars Ytossed with whisking winds
long fiery Drakes display.
Fame (wondering at of aldertime our Ancestors renown)
Fare well with thee, and bear away old worship from our Town.
So much thy beauty brighter shines, as much more clear and fair,
The golden Moon with glorious Globe full furnished in the Air
Doth shine, whenas her fiery tips of waning horns do close,
When lifting up her fulgent face in ambling Wain she goes,
Upon her night-watch to attend, the Stars of lesser light
Their darkened Faces hide, as he the Messenger of night
That watchword gives of th'evening tide and Hesperus he height,
That gladding erst was bathed in Seas, and he the same again
When shedes be shrunk. doth then the name of Lucifer obtain.
Thou Bacchus blessed barn of Ioue in warlike India borne,
Thou Lad that evermore dost wear thy hairy bush unshorn,
Whose javelin tuft with ivy bunch, the tigers makes adread,
And dost with labeled Mitre use to prank thy horny head,
Hippolytus his staring Locks thou Bacchus shalt not stain,
To wonder at thy loving looks too much do thou refrain,
Whom (as the people do report) the Ariadne bright,
For beauty's name preferred before Bacchus that Bromius height.
A brittle jewel beauty is on mortal men employed,
Thou gift that for a season short of Mankind art enjoyed,
How soon alas with feathered foot hence dost thou fading slide?
The parching summers vapour hot in Verse most pleasant pride
So withers not the Meadows green, (whenas the scorching sun)
In Tropic ligue of burning Crab full hot at Noon doth run,
And on her shorter cloudy Wheels unhorseth soon the night.
With wanny leaves down hang the heads of withered Lilies white
The balmy blooms and sprouting flower do leave the naked bed
As beauty bright whose radiant beams in coral Cheeks is spread,
Is dashed in the twink of Eye: no day as yet did pass,
In which not of his beauty reft some pearls person was.
For Favour is a fleeting thing: what wight of any wit
Will unto frail and fickle joy his confidence commit?
Take pleasure of it while thou mayst, for Time with stealing steps
Will under mint, on hour past straight in a worser leps:
Why fliest thou to the wilderness, to seek thy succour there?
Thy beauty bides not safer in the wayless woods then here.
If Titan hoist his tottering Cart on point of full midday,
Thee shrouded close among the brakes the Naids will assay,
A gadding troop that beauty's Boyes do lock in fountains fair.
To frame their seat then unto thee in senseless sleep repair,
Shall wanton Fairies, Nymphs of Frithes, that on the Hills do walk,
Which Dryad mountain Goblins haunt, that use on hills to stalk:
Or when from high Star-bearing pole Diana down did look
On thee that next old Arcades in heaven thy seat haste took,
She could not wield her weltering wain, and yet no foggy cloud.
Eclipsed her gleaming Globe, but we with tonking Pans aloud,
'gan make a noise, agrised at her dead and glowing light
We deemed her charmed with Magic verse of Thessant witch's sprite
But thou didst cause her business, and madest her in a maze,
While at thy pleasant lovely looks the Goddess stood in gaze,
That rules the rain of cloudy night she stopped her running race,
God grant that seldom biting frost may pinch this comely face.
Let seldom scorching Sunny beams thy Cheeks with freckles die:
The Marble blue in quarry pits of Parius that doth lie,
Bears not so brave a glimpsing gloss as pleasant seems thy face
Whose brows with manly majesty support an awful grace.
And forehead fraught with gravity of Father's countenance old:
His ivory coloured neck although compare to Phoebe ye would,
His locks (that never lacking knew) itself displaying wide
On shoulder points doth set them out, and also doth them hide.
Thy curled forehead seems thee well, and eke thy knotted hair,
That crumpled lies undight in thee a manly grace doth bear.
Thou Gods (though fierce and valiant) perforce dost chase, and far
Dost overmatch in length of limbs, though yet but young thou are.
Thou hears as big & boisterous brawns as Hercules: thy breast,
Than Champion Mars more burly bolstered out with broader chest:
On back of horned-hoofed Steeds if vaulting thou do ride,
With Bridle in thine arrive hand more handsome canst thou guide.
The trampling Cyllar horse of Spart, then Princely Castor could,
Thy leathern loop amid thy dart with former fingers hold,
And drive thy lance with all thy pith, the active men of Crete,
That with their pitched darts afar do learn the mark to bit.
They shall not hurl a slender Reed, but after Parthian guise
To shoot an arrow if they list into the open Skies,
Unsped without some Bird attaint it shall not light on ground,
Unbathed with lukewarm blood of guts in gory smoking wound,
And from amid the lofty Clouds down shalt thou fetch thy prey:
Few men (mark well the time) have borne beauty unplagued away.
God send thee better luck, and grant thy noble parsonage
May pass unto the happy steps and stretch to dampish age.
What mischief unattempt escapes a Woman's witless rage?
Most heinous crimes she means to lay to guiltless youngman's charge
And thinks to make her matter good with hair thus rent at large,
She towseth eke the pranking of her head with watered plants,
Her sly devise no crafty kind of woman's fetches wants.
But who is this that in his face such princely port doth bear?
Whose lofty looks with stately pace high vauntest his head doth rear?
Like lusty young Pyrithous, he looketh in the face,
But that a fainting fallow pale his bleakish Cheeks disgrace,
And filthy baggage hangeth on his hash hair raised upright,
Lo Theseus, it is again restored to earthly light:
AT length I scaped the glowing glades
of grim eternal Night,
And eke the underpropping pole,
that each infernal sprite
Doth muffle in, shut up in shades
lo how my dazzled eyes
Can scant abide the long desired
light of Marble Skies.
Eleusis now four offerings of Triptolemus divides,
And counterpoised Day with Night now four times Libra hides.
I earnest in my Perilous toil in doubt what luck to have
Twixt dread of ghastly Death, and hope my feeble life to save,
Some spark of life still in my breathless limbs abiding was,
whenas embarked on irksome Styx Alcides down did pass,
To succour me in dire distress, who when the hell-like hound
From Tartares grisly gates in Chains he dragged above the ground,
And also me he carried up into the World again
My tired limbs doth sappy pith of former strength restrain,
My feeble faltering legs do quake, what lugging toil it was
From bottom deep of Phlegethon to world aloof to pass?
What dreary dole & mourning noise is this that beats mine ears?
Let some declare it unto me: who blubbered so with tears
Lamenting loud and languishing within our gates appears?
This entertainment sit is for a guest that comes from Hell.
A stubborn heart and obstinate in Phaedra's breast doth dwell,
With desperate mind to slay herself our tears she doth despise,
And giving up the gasping Ghost, alas my Lady dies.
Why should she kill herself? why die, her spouse being come again
For this (my Lord) with hasty death she would her selfe haue slame.
These troublous words some perilous thing I wot not what to tell
Speak plain: what lump of glutting grief her laded heart doth quei
She doth complain her case to none, but pensively and sad
She keeps it secret to herself, determined thus she had,
To bear about with her the bane, wherewith she means to die.
Hie, hie thee fast, I pray thee now, now have we need to high.
Our Palace locked with stately stoulpes set open by and by.
O Madame Mate of Spousal bed
thus dost thou entertain
The coming of thy loving Spouse?
and welcome home again
Thy long desired Husband's face?
why takes thou not away
My Sword out of my hand, and dost not cheer my Sprites (I say)
Nor showest me what doth the breath out of the body chase?
Alas my valiant Theseus even for thy royal mace,
Wherewith thy Kingdom thou dost wield, and by the noble reign
Of thy belo'ud posterity, and coming home again,
And for the worship that is due unto my fatal grave,
O let me die and suffer me, deserved death to have.
What cause compelleth thee to die?
If I the cause of death
Disclose, then shall I not obtain the losing of my breath:
No worldly wight (save I myself alone) the same shall hear,
Art thou afraid to tell it in thy husbands bashful ear?
Speak out, thy secrets shroud I shall within my faithful breast.
What thou would other to conceal, keep thou it first in rest.
Thou shalt not suffered be to die:
From him that wisheth Death,
Death never can be separate.
The crime that loss of breath
Ought to revenge, show it to me.
Forsooth because I live.
Alas do not my trilling tears thy stony stomach grieve?
It is the sweetest death, when one doth loathsome life forsake,
Bereft of such as should for him most woeful weeping make.
Still stands she mum? the crooked, old, ill-favoured, hobbling Trot,
Her Nurse for stripes and clogging bands shall utter every jot,
That she forbid her hath to tell: in iron chains her bind,
Let tawing whips wring out perforce the secrets of her mind:
Now I myself will speak: stay yet.
Why dost thou ne asis
From me thy weeping Countenance? thy tears why dost thou hide
That gushing sudden from thine eyes stream down thy cheeks apace &
Why hidest thou thy flowing floods with Coat before thy Face?
Thee, thee, Creator of the Heavens to witness I do call,
And thee O glittering fiery gleed of Crystal Sky with all,
And Phoebus thou from whom at first our royal Race hath run.
With fawning face & flattering words in suit I was not won.
For naked sword, & thundering threats, appalled was I not:
My bruised bones abode the blow, and stripes when sore he smote:
This blemish black of foul defame my blood shall purge again.
Declare what villain is he that our honour so doth slain?
Whom least ye would mistrust.
To know who 'tis, full sore I long.
This Sword will tell, which sore affright when people thick in throng
Resorted fast, the lecher vile for haste did leave behind,
Because the people pressing fast he dreaded in his mind:
Ah out alas, O woe is me, what villainy see I?
Alas what uncouth Monster foul of mischief I espy?
Behold the royal ivory engraved and purired fine,
Embossed with golden studs, upon th'enameled Hast doth shine,
(The jewel of Actea land) but whither fled is he?
With light Heel running sore dismayed these servants did him see?
O sacred holiness, O Ioue between whose mighty hands
The Marble pole with weltering sway in course directed stands,
And thou that second sceptre wields in foamy fighting wave,
Why doth this cursed brood with such this wicked vengeance rave?
Hath he been fostered up in Greece? or craggy Taurus wild
Among hard rugged Rocks, and Caves, some savage Scythian Child?
Or else in brutish Colchis I'll by Desert Phasis flood?
Cat after kind he is, and will th'unkindly Bastard blood
Return unto his kindreds course, whence first his line he claims.
This frantic fury up and down comes of the warlike Dames,
To hate the loyal leagues of love, and shunning long the use
Of Cupid's camp, with tag, and rag, her body to abuse,
Become as good as ever twanged: O detestable kind,
No better Soil by any means can change thy filthy mind.
The brutish beasts themselves do Ioath th'abuse which Venus draws,
And simple shamefastness itself observeth Nature's laws:
Where is the brag of Majesty, and feigned portly grace
Of manly mind, that hateth new, and old things doth embrace?
O double dealing life, thou cloaks deceitful thoughts in breast,
And settest out a forehead fair where frounced mind doth rest:
The saucy Jack with bashful brow doth malapertness hide:
The rashness of the desperate Dick by stillness is unspied.
With show of right religion knaves villainy maintain,
And guileful meal-mouthed Gentlemen do hold with speaking plain:
The dainty wanton Carpet Knights of hardness boast and prate,
That Woodraunger, that brainsick beast who lived in chaste estate
An undefiled bachelor thou rude and homely clown,
Thus dost thou watch thy time, to breed this blot in my renown?
To make me Cuckold first of all did it delight thy mind,
First falling to thy spousal sport with mischief most unkind,
Now, now, to thee supernal Ioue most hearty thanks I yield,
That with my first Antiope to dreary death I quelled,
That gone to dampish Stygian Dens I left thee not behind
Thy Mother: go, go Vagabond range, range, about to find
Strange foreign soils, and outcast lands aloof at world his end,
And Isles enclosed with th'Ocean flood to hell thy soul shall send:
Beneath among th'Antipodes thyself of harbouring sped,
Though in the utmost lurking nook, thou shroud thy miching head,
Above the grisly Palaces thou climb of lofty pole,
Or mayst above the clottering Snow advance thy cursed Soul,
Beyond the brunt of Winter flaws and threatening rigour pass
And stormy wrath with rumbling rough of icy Boreas,
With pengeance, vengeance violent fast hurling after thee,
With daunting plagues and pestilence thy sins shall scourged be.
For life and death, about the world in every lurking hole.
O fugitive I shall not cease still to pursue thy soul.
But seek and search for thee I shall in lands that lie afar,
All corners blind and caves shut up, Dens locked with bolt and bar,
A thousand ways unpassable no place shall me withstand.
My cursings black shall light on thee there where revenging hand
With weapon can not work ye harm: thou knowest that Neptune great
My Sire who floats on floods, & waves, with forked Mace doth beat
Give licence freely unto me three bones to choose and crave,
Which willingly the God hath grant, and sworn I shall it have
Protesting ugsome Stygian Lake, and hallowed hath his vow:
O breaker of the wrestling waves, avouch thy promise now.
Let never more Hippolytus behold th'eclipsed light,
And for the Father's wrathful rage the cursed child down smite,
To wail among the ghastly sprites o Father bend thy might,
To give (alas) this loathsome aid unto thy needy Son,
I of thy Majesty divine exact not to be done.
This chiefest bone, till puissant poise of ills do us oppress:
In bottom deep of boiling Tartar pit, and sore distress,
In grisly limbo jaws nigh gargle-faced Ditis dim,
Amid the crumpled threatening brows of Hellick Pluto grim,
To claim thy promise made to me, as then I did refrain,
Now Sire thy faith by promise due perform to me again.
Yet dost thou stay, why rumble not the weltering waves yet bushed,
Through foggy cloud in dusky skits with stormy blasts outrushed.
Unfold the mantle black of Night, and roll away the Skies,
Enforce the fighting floods burst out with mounting waves to rise.
And conjure up the water hags that in the Rocks do keep,
The Ocean surges swelling him cast up from bottom deep.
O Nature grandam great of Heavenly Sprites,
eke Ioue that guides Olimpus mighty sway,
That rakes the race of twinkling heavenvly lights
On spinning Sphere and order dost for aye
The straggling course of roaming planets high,
And wields about the whirling axle-tree
The weltering poles, th'eternal course of Sky
To keep in frame, what works such care in thee
That erst the cold which hoary winter makes
unclothes the naked wood, and now again
shades return unto the briary brakes
Now doth the star of Summer Lion reign,
Whose scalded neck with boiling heat doth fry,
parbraking flames from fiery foaming jaws:
With scorching heat the parched corn do dry:
Each season so his kindly course in draws.
But thou that wields these things of massy might,
By whom the hugy world with equal poise
Even Balanced doth keep in compass right,
Each Sphere by measured weight that justly sways,
Alas why dost thou bear a reckless breast
Toward mankind? not casting any care
That wicked men with mischief be oppressed,
And eke to see that goodmen well do fare
Dame Fortune topsy-turvy turns at will
The world, and deals her dole with blinded hand,
And fosters vice maintaining mischief ill.
Foul lust triumphs on good men brought in band
Deceit in stately Court the sway doth wield,
In Lordings lewd the vulgar sort delight,
With glee to such the Mace of might they yield.
Some magistrates they do both love and spite,
And pensive virtue brought to bitter bale,
Receives reward that doth of right arise,
The continent to Prison need doth hale,
The lecher reigns enhanced by his vice.
O fruitless shame, O counterfeited port.
But what news may this messenger now bring,
Who with main pace comes posting in this sort,
And stays with mourning countenance at the King.
O Heavy hap and cruel chance
of Servants slavish state,
Why am I Post to bring the news
of this ill-favoured fate?
Be not abashed the ruthful wrack
with courage to declare:
My breast against the brunt of broils
still armed I prepare,
My faltering tongue doth speech unto
my glutting grief deny.
Our stock with sorrow shaken sore what cares do crush escry.
Hippolytus (ay woe is me) is slain by doleful death.
Now Father do I know my Son bereaved of his breath,
For why the lecher life is lost: show in what sort he died.
In all post haste as fugitive to shun the Town he hide
Once having caught his cutting course apace he scuds away,
His prancing Palfreys strait he doth with collar's close array:
With curbed bits their snaffled heads at will he bridles in,
Then talking much unto himself to curse he doth begin
His native soil: alas dear Father, Father still he cries:
And angry lasheth with his whip, while lose his Bridle lies:
Then suddenly a hugy swollen 'gan swell amid the deep,
And starteth up into the stars no pipling wind doth sweep
Along the Seas in Heaven so lithe no noise at all there was:
The Seas full calm even as their kindly Tide doth drive them, pass.
Nor yet no boisterous Southern wind the Sycill sand turmoils.
Nor yet with foamy ramping surge the raging gulf up boils,
Heaved up by Western puffs: whenas the rocks with flapping flash
Do shake and drowned Lucates clive the hoary foam doth dash.
The tumbling waves together tossed on hills are heaped high,
The swelling swollen with Monster much to land aloof doth fly,
Nor only shaken ships in Seas do suffer wrack hereby:
The land in hazard lies of storms a weltering wave is cold
In tottering wise a wallowing gulf with winding compass fold,
Drives down I know not what withal: a flat uprising new
An head above the water brim doth raise the Stars to view.
In foggy cloud eclipsed is Apollo's dusky gleed,
And Scyros' Rocks whom Trump of Fame advanced by dreary deed
Corynthus eke whom double Sea on either side assail:
While greatly we agriesh▪ these things do languishing bewail,
The belching Seas yell out the grunting Rocks with all do roar:
The slabby clive doth reek, fro whence the water ebbed before,
It froths, and keeping course by course it spews the waters out,
As doth Physeter fish (that flits the Ocean Coast about)
And gulping doth from yawning throat his floods of water spout.
The shaken surge did totter straight and broke itself in twain:
With wrack (more violent than we did fear) it rushed awane
Against the shore, beyond the banks it breaks into the land:
And hideous Monster follows: these for fear did quaking stand
What shape that uncouth Monster had and body vast declare.
A boasting Bull, his marble neck advanced high that bore,
Upraised his lofty bristled Main on curled forehead green
With shaggy ears pricked up his divers speckled horns were seen.
(Whom Bacchus erst possessed had, who tames the Cattle wild,
And eke the God that horn in floods was bred a water Child)
Now puffing he perbraketh flames, and now as leaming light
With sparkling beams his goggle eyes do glare and glister bright.
His greasy larded neck (a mark for to be noted well)
With rough and knobby kernels high out bumping big do swell.
His snorting Nostrils wide do grunt and yawning gulfs they sosse,
His breast and throatbag greenishly are daubed with clammy moss
His side along begrimed is with Lettuce red of hue,
On snarling knots his wrinkled rumps toward his face he drew,
His scaly haunch, and lagging tail most ugly drags he up,
As Priests in the deep of Seas the swallowed Keel doth sup,
Or else perbraketh out again the undigested pup.
The earth did quake, the Cattle feared about the field do ramp,
The hunter stark with chilling fear begins to stare and stamp,
The herdman had no mind his scattering Heifers to pursue,
The deer amazed broke the pale and bad the Lands adieu.
But only yet Hippolytus. devoid of fainting fear
His neighing horses with the reins of Bridles hard doth bear,
With wonted words he cheereth up his nimble nag's afraid:
A steep high way at Argos lies with stony cliffs decayed,
That nodding overhangs the Sea, which underfleets that ways:
That ugly roil here heats himself, and raging wrath doth raise,
And kindling courage hot, him force with burning breast assays,
And chauflag eft himself before 'gan fret with angry heart.
Lo then into a scouring course on sudden doth he start,
With whirling pace he girding forth doth scarcely touch the ground,
Lighting a-front the trembling Cart with glaring Eyes he bloomed.
Then also doth thy threatening Son with lowering brows upstart,
Nor changeth countenance, but speaks with stout courageous heart.
This foolish fear doth not appaule my bold and hardened breast,
It comes to me by kind, that Bulls by me should be oppressed.
His Steeds defying straight the reins plunge forward with the Cart,
As rage did prick them, sore affright bestoe the way they start.
This bias way among the Rocks they range, and wander wide,
But as the Pilot (lest the Bark should totter to one side)
Doth bear it even in wrestling waves: so while his horses skip,
He ruleth them, now rains them hard, and now with winding whip
Free lashes on their buttocks lays: his Foe doth him pursue,
Now step by step, now meeting full against his face he flew.
Provoking terror everywhere. No further fly they might:
The horned beast with butting brows 'gan run upon them right.
The trampling Gennets 'straught of wits do straight way break their ray,
The struggle striving hard to slip the Collar it they may.
And prancing on their hinder Feet, the burden hurl on ground:
Thy Son flat falling on his Face, his body fast was bound,
Entangled in the winding ropes, the more he strives to lose
The slipping knots, he faster sticks within the sliding noose.
The Horses do perceive the broil: and with the wagon light.
While none there is to rule the Reins, with skittish fear affright
At random out they ramping run, (even as the Welkin high
The Cart that missed his wonted weight, disdaining in the Sky
The dreary day that falsely was commit unto the Sun,
From off the fiery Marble pole that down askew doth run,
Flang Phaeton topsy-turvy tossed) his blood begdres the ground:
And dinged against the rugged Rocks his head doth oft rebound:
The brambles rent his haled hair: the edged flinty stones,
The beauty batter of his Face, and break his crashing bones:
At Mouth his blaring tongue hangs out with squeezed eyen out dashed,
His jaws & Skull do crack, abroad his spurting Brains are pashed,
His cursed beauty thus defoiled with many wounds is spent:
The jotting Wheels do grind his guts, and drenched sims they rent.
At length a Stake with Truncheon burned his ripped Paunch hath caught,
From rived groin toth' Navel stead within his womb it raught:
The Cart upon his Master paused against the ground crushed,
The Fellies stuck within the wounds, and out at length they rush:
So both delay and masters limbs are broke by stress of Wheels:
His draggling guts then trail about the wincing horses heels.
They thumping with their horny Hooves against his Belly kick,
From bursten Paunch on heaps his bloody bowels tumble thick:
The scratting briars on the Brakes with needle pointed pricks
His gory Carcase all to raze with spells of thorny sticks
And of his flesh each ragged shrub a gub doth snatch and rent,
His men (a mourning troop God knows) with brackish tears besprent
Do stray about the field, whereas Hippolytus was tore:
A piteous sign is to be seen by tracing long of gore:
His howling Dogs their masters limbs with licking follow still:
The earnest toil of woeful Wights can not the coars up fill,
By gathering up the gobbets spersed and broken lumps of flesh.
Is this the flaunting bravery that comes of beauty fresh?
Who in his Father's Empire erst, did reign as princely Pear
The Heir apparent to the Crown, and shone in honour clear,
Like to the glorious Stars of Heaven, his Limbs in pieces small
Are gathered to his fatal Grave, and swept to funeral.
O Nature that prevail'st too much, (alas) how dost thou bind
with bonds of blood the parent's breast? how love we thee by kind?
Maugre our Teeth whom gullty eke we would have rest of breath?
And yet lamenting with my tears I do bewail thy death.
None can lament with honesty that which he wished destroyed.
The hugiest heap of woes by this I think to be enjoyed,
When flickering Fortune's cursed wheel doc cause us cry alas,
To rue the wrack of things which erst we wished brought to pass.
If still thou keep thy grudge, why is the Face with seats besprent?
Because I slew him, not because I lost him, I repent.
WHat heap of haps do tumble upside down
Th'estate of man? less raging Fortune flies
On little things: less leaming lights are thrown
By hand of Ioue, on that which lower lies.
The homely couch safe merry hearts do keep:
The Cottage base doth give the Golden sleep.
The lofty turret's top that cleaves the cloud
Withstands the sturdy storms of Southern wind,
And Boreas boisterous blasts with threatening loud
Of blustering Corus shedding showers by kind.
The reeking Dales do seldom noyance take,
Biding the brunt of lightnings slashing flake.
Th'advanced crest of Caucasus the great
Did quake with bolt of lofty thundering Ioue:
When he from clouds his thunder dints did beat,
Dame Cybel's Phrygian frith did trembling move:
King love in haughty heaven full sore affright
The nighest things with weapons doth he smite.
The ridges low of Vulgar people's house
Stricken with storms do never greatly shake:
His kingdoms coast Ioues thundering thumps do souse:
With wavering wings that hour his flight doth take
Nor flitting Fortune with her tickle wheel
Let's any wight assured joy to feel.
Who in the World beholds the stars full bright,
And cheerful day forsaking ghastly Death,
His sorrowful return with groaning sprite
He rues, sith it deprived his Son of breath
He seeth his lodging in his court again,
More doleful is then sharp Auernus pain.
O. PALLAS unto whom all Athens land
Due homage oweth, because that THESEUS thine
Among us worldly Wights again doth stand,
And seeth the Heavens upon himself to shine.
And passed hath the perilous miry Mud
Of stinking Stygian Fen, and filthy Flood.
Unto thy ravening uncles dreary gail
O Lady chaste not one Ghost dost thou owe,
The Hellick Tyrant knows his perfect tale.
Who from the Court this shrieking shrill doth throw?
What mischief comes in frantic Phaedra's brain
With naked Sword thus running out amain.
THrough pierced with pangs of pensiveness
what fury pricks thy brain?
What means this bloody blade? what means
this shrieking out amain?
And languishing upon the Corpse
which was thy malice made?
O tamer of the wrestling waves
me, me, do thou invade.
The Monstrous hags of Marble Seas to ramp on me send out,
whatever Thetis low doth keep with folding arms about,
Or what the Ocean Seas aloof embrace with winding wave:
O Theseus that to thine allies dost still thyself behave
So Currishly, O thou that for thy loving Friends avail
Dost never yet return: thy Son and Father do bewail
Thy passport brought by death, and blood, thy stock thou dost destroy,
By love or hatred of thy wife thou workest still annoy:
O sweet Hippolytus thus I behold thy battered face,
And I it is, I wretch (alas) that brought thee to this case.
What Scinis forced thy limbs so torn his snatching boughs to feel?
Or what Procrustes racked and rent thee stretched on bed of Steel?
Or else what Minotaur of Crete that grim twi-shaped Bull
With horny head (that Dedalls ues with loing sleth
Hath thee in fitters torn? (aye me) where is thy beauty fled?
Where are our twinkling stars thine eyes? alas, and art thou dead?
Appear a while, receive my words, for speak I shall none ill.
This hand shall strike the stroke, wherewith thy vengeance quite I will.
And sith that I, I caitiff, ay, abridged have thy life,
Lo here I am content, to yield thee mine with bloody knife.
If ghost may here be given for ghost, and breath may serve for breath,
Hippolytus take thou my soul, and come again from death.
Behold my bowels yet are safe my limbs in lusty plight.
Would God that as they serve for me, thy body serve they might,
Mine eyes to render kindly light unto thy Carcase dead,
Lo for thy use this hand of mine shall pluck them from my head,
And set them in these empty cells and vacant holes of thine.
Thy weal of me a wicked Wight to win, do not repine.
And if a woman's woeful heart in place of thine may rest,
My bosom straight break up I shall, and tear it from my breast.
But courage stout of thine doth loathe faint woman's heart to have
Thy Noble mind would rather go with manly heart to grave.
Alas be not so manly now, this manliness forbear,
And rather choose to live a man with woman's sprite and fear,
Then as no man with manly heart in darkness deep to sit:
Have thou thy life, give me thy death that more deserveth it.
Can not my proffer purchase place? yet vengeance, shall thou have,
Hell shall not hold me from thy side nor death of dampish grave.
Sith fates will not permit thee life, though I behest thee mine,
myself I shall in spite of fate my fatal twist untwine.
This blade shall rive my bloody breast, myself I will despoil
Of soul, and sin at once: through floods and Tartar gulfs that boil,
Through Styx and through the burning Lakes I will come after thee:
Thus may we please the lowering shades, receive thou here of me
The parings of my Poll, and Locks cut off from forehead torn,
Our hearts we could not join in one, yet wretches now forlorn.
We shall together in one day our fatal hour close:
If thou be loyal to thy spouse, for him thy life then lose:
But if thou be uncestuous, die for thy lovers sake.
Shall I unto my husbands bed again my corpse betake,
Polluted with so heinous crime? O death the chiefest joy
Of wounding shame: Death only ease of stinging Loves annoy:
We run to thee: embrace our souls within thy gladsome breast:
Hark Athens, hark unto my talk, and thou above the rest,
Thou Father worse unto thy Child than bloody stepdame I.
False forged tales I told with shame, I feigning that did lie,
Which I of spite imagined, when raging breast did swerve.
Thou father falsely punished hast him that did not deserve.
The young man chaste is cast away for mine uncestuous vice,
Both bashful he and guiltless was, now play thy wonted guise.
My guilty breast with bloody Lance of Sword deserved is riven,
The Dirge toth' dead to purge my spouse shall with my blood be given.
Thou father of the stepdame learn, what things thy Son should have
Of life deprived, as to lay his carcase in a grave.
O wanny jaws of black Averne, ●ake Tartar dungeon grim,
O Lethe's Lake of woeful Souls the joy that therein swim,
And eke ye glummy Gulfs destroy, destroy me wicked wight
And still in pit of pangs let me be plunged day and night.
Now, now, come up ye goblin grim from water creeks allow,
whatever Proteus hugy swollen aloof doth overflow,
Come dowse me drowned in swallows deep, that triumph in my sin:
And father thou that evermore full ready priest hath been
To wreak mine ire, adventuring jam deed deserving death
With new found slaughter have bereft mine only Son of breath.
His tattered limbs I scattered have the bloody field about,
While th'innocent I punish do, by chance I have found out
The truth of all this wickedness: heaven, stars, and sprites of hell
I pester with my treachery that me doth overquell.
No mischiefs hap remaineth more: iii. kingdoms know me well:
We are returned to this World. For this did Hell unfold
His gates that burials twain I might and double death behold?
Whereby I both a wifeless Wight andeak● a Sonles Sire,
May with one brand to wise and Son inflame the funeral fire.
O tamer of black-faced light Alcides, now restore
Thy booty brought from Hell, redeem to me, to me therefore
These Ghosts that now be gone, ah sinful wretch to death in vain
I sue, most undiscrete by whom these wretched Wights were slain.
Imagining destruction sore about it will I go,
Now with thine own hands on thyself due vengeance do bestow:
A Pine tree bough down strained perforce unto the ground allow,
Let slip into the open air shall cut my corpses in twain.
From top of Scyrons Rocks I will be tumbled down amain.
More grievous vengeance yet I have in Phlegethon River found,
Tormenting guilty Ghosts enclosed with fiery Channel round.
What pit and pangs shall plunge my soul already have I known,
That tiring toil of Sisyphus that reckless rolling stone,
Let yield unto my guilty Ghost, and being laid on
These shoulders, these, these lifting hands of mine down let it sway:
And let the fleeting flood about my lips deluded play.
Yea let the ravening gripe come hear and Tytius' paunch forsake,
For glutting food with grasping Cleaze my liver let him take,
Increasing still to feed the Foul, and for my torments sake.
And pause thou my Pyrothous' Sire, and eke the snackle Wheel
That whirleth still enforce my limbs thy swinging swift to feel.
Gape, gape, thou ground and swallow me thou cruel Chaos blind,
This passage to th'infernal spirits is fit for me to find:
My Son I will ensue, thou Prince of ghastly ghosts in hell,
Dread not for chaste we come to thee: give thou me leave to dwell
Among thy dreadful dens for aye, and not to pass again.
Alas, my prayer at the Gods no favour can obtain,
But if that mischief crave I should how ready would they be?
O Theseus to thy plaint eternal time is granted thee:
Provide thy Son his Obit rites, and shroud in dampish grave
His broken limbs, which Monsters foul dispersed and scattered have.
The shreddings of this dear beloved carcase bring to me,
His mangled members hither bring on heaps that tumbled be:
This is Hippolytus, I do acknowledge mine offence,
For I it is, that have deprived thee of life and sense.
lest that but once, or only I should be a guilty Wight,
I Sire attempting mischief have besought my Father's might.
Lo I enjoy my father's gift, O solitariness,
A grievous plague when feeble years have brought us to distress,
Embrace these limbs, and that which yet doth of thy son remain,
O woeful wight in baleful breast preserve and entertain.
These scattered scraps of body torn O Sire in order fet,
The straying gobbets bring again, here was his right hand set:
His left hand here instructed will to rule the reins must be.
His left side ribs (full well I know to be bewailed of me
With bitter tears) as yet alas are lost and wanting still,
O trembling hands behold this woeful business to fulfil,
And withered Cheeks forbid your streams of flowing tears to run
While that the father do account the members of his Son.
And eke patch up his body rent, that hath his fashion lost,
Disfigured foul with gory wounds, and all about be tossed:
I doubt, if this of thee be piece, and piece it is of thee:
Here, lay it here, in th'empty place, here let it laid be,
Although perhaps it lie not right: (ay me) is this thy face?
Whose beauty twinkled as a star, and eke did purchase grace,
In sight of F●● procured to ruth. Is this thy beauty lost?
O cruel will of Gods, O rage in sin prevailing most.
Doth thus the Sire that great good turn perform unto his son?
Lo let thy father's last fare well within thine ears to run,
My child whom oft I bid farewell: the whilst the fire shall burn
These bones, set ope his burial bower, and let us fall to mourn
With loud lamenting Mopsus wise for both the corses sake:
With Princely Pomp his funeral fire see that ye ready make.
And seek ye up the broken parts in field dispersed round,
Stop her up hurled into a Pit, let heavy clods of ground
lie hard upon her cursed head.