COndemned soul Ate, from lowest hell,
And deadly rivers of the infernal love,
Where bloodless ghosts in pains of endless date
Fill ruthless ears with never ceasing cries,
Behold I come in place, and bring beside
The bane of Troie: behold the fatal fruit
Reached from the golden tree of Proserpine.
Proud Troy must fall, so bid the gods above,
And stately Ilium's lofty towers be racet
By conquering hands of the victorious foe:
King Priam's palace waste with flaming fire,
Whose thick and foggy smoke piercing the sky,
Must serve for messenger of sacrifice
t'appeaze the anger of the angry heavens,
And Priam's younger son, the shepherd swain,
Paris th'unhappy organ of the Greeks.
So loath and weary of her heavy load
The Earth complains unto the hellish prince,
Surcharged with the burden that she nill sustain.
Th'Unpartial daughters of Necessity
been aids in her suit: and so the twine
That holdes olde Priams house, the threede of Tr
Dame Atrops with knife in sunder cuts.
Done be the pleasure of the powers above,
Whose hests men must obey: and I my part
Perform in Ida vales: Lordings adieu,
Imposing silence for your task, I end,
Till just assembly of the goddesses
Make me begin the Tragedy of Troie.
SILVANUS, either Flora doth s ng
Or Faunus made vs tarrie all to longe,
For by this morning mirth to should appear
The 〈◊〉 or the goddesses be near
My 〈◊〉 was nimble, Pan, and whipped apace
Twashappie that we caught him vp at last.
The fattest fairest faune the chace
I wonder how the knaue could skip so fast.
And I have brought a twagger for the nonce
A bunting lamb: nay, pray you feel no bones.
Believe me now, my cunning much I miss,
If euer Pan felt fattr lambe then this.
Sirs, you may boast your flocks & herds that been both fresh & fair,
Yet hath Silvanus walks ywis that stand in wholesome air.
And lo the honour of the woods, the gallant Oak-bow,
Do I bestow laden with Acorns & with mast enough.
Peace man for shame, shalt have both lambs & dames & flocks and herds & all,
And all my pipes to make the glee, we meet not now to brawl.
There's no such matter, Pan▪ we are all friends assembled hither,
To bid Queen Iuno and her feres most humbly welcome hither.
Diana mistress of our woods, her presence will not want,
Her courtesy to all her friends we wot is nothing scant.
Ye Par, no farther yet, & had the start of me,
Why then Pomona wit her fruit comes time enough I see:
Come on a while, with country store like friends we vent- forth,
Thinkest Faunus that these goddesses will take our gifts in worth.
Yea doubtless, for shall tell thee dame, 'twere better give a thing,
A sign of love, unto a mighty person, or a king:
Then to a rude and barbarous swayne but bad and baselie borne,
For gentlie takes the gentleman that oft the clowne will scorne.
sayst truly Faunus, I myself have given good ready lambs,
To Mercurie may say to thee, to Phoebus and to Love:
When to a country mops forsooth, chase offered all their dames,
And piped and prayed for little worth and ranged about the grove.
God Pan that makes your flock so thin, & makes you look so lean,
To kisse in corners.
well-said wench some other thing you mean.
Yea iest it out till it goe alone, but maruell where we mysse
Fair Flora all this merry morn.
some news see where she is.
Flora well met, and for thy taken pain,
Poor country gods thy debtor we remain.
Believe me, Pan, not all thy lambs and ewes,
Nor, Faunus, all thy lusty bucks and does,
(But that I am instructed well to know,
What service to the hills and dales I owe,)
Could have enforced one to so strange a toil,
Thus to enrich this gaudy gallant soil.
But tell me wench hast don't so trick in deed,
That heaven itself may wonder at the deed.
Not Iris in her pride and bravery,
Adorns her arch with such variety:
Nor doth the milk white way in frosty night,
Appear so fair and beautiful in sight:
As done these fields, and groves, and sweetest bowers,
Bestrewed and decked with party coloured flowers.
Along the bubbling brooks & silver glide,
that at the bottom doth in silence slide,
The watery flowers and lilies on the banks,
Like blazing comets burgeon all in ranks:
Under the hawthorn and the Poplar tree,
Where sacred Phoebe may delight to be:
The Primrose and the purple Hyacinth,
The dayntie Ʋiolet and the holsome Minthe.
The double Daisy, and the Coweslip queen
Of summer flowers do ouer peere the
And round about the valley as ye pass,
Ye may ne see for peeping flowers the grass:
That well the mighty jove and the rest,
May boldly think to be a welcome guest
On Ida hills, when to approve the thing,
The queen of flowers prepares a second spring.
Thou gentle Nymph, what thanks shall we repay
To thee, that makest our fields and woods so gay?
Siluanus, when it is thy hap to see,
My workmanship, in portraying all the three,
First stately Juno with her port and grace,
Her robes, her lawns, her crownet and her mace:
Would make thee muse this picture to behold,
Of yellow oxtips bright as burnished gold.
A rare device, and Flora, well perdie,
Did paint her yellow for her jealousy.
Pallas in flowers of hue and colours red,
Her plumes, her helme, her , her he,
Her trailing tresses that hang flaring round,
Of julie-flowers so graffed in the ground,
That trust me Sirs, who did the cunning see,
Would at a blush suppose it to be she.
Good Flora, by my flock 'twere very good,
To dight her all in red resembling blood.
Fair Venus of sweet Violets in blue.
With other flowers infixed for change of hue,
Her plumes, her pendants, bracelets and her rings,
Her dainty fan and twenty other things:
Her lusty mantle waving in the wind,
And every part in colour and in kind:
And for her wreath of roses she nil dare,
With Flora's cunning counterfeit compare.
So that what living white shall chance to see,
These goddesses, each placed in her degree,
Portrayed by Flora's workmanship alone,
Must say that Art and nature met in one.
A dainty draft to lay her down in blue,
The colour commonly betokening true.
This piece of work compact with many a flower,
And well laid in at entrance of the bower,
Where Phoebe means to make this meeting royal.
Have I prepared to welcome them withal.
And are they yet dismounted, Flora, say:
That we may wend to meet them one the way.
That shall not need: they are at hand by this,
And the conductor of the train height Rhanis.
Iuno hath left her chariot long ago,
And hath returned her Peacocks by her rainbow.
And bravely as becomes the wife of Ioue,
Doth honour by her presence to our grove.
Fair Venus she hath let her sparrows fly,
To tend on her and make her melody:
Her turtles and her swans unyoked be,
And flicker near her side for company.
Pallas hath set her Tigers loose to feed,
Commanding them to wait when she hath need.
And Hitherward with proud and stately pace,
To do us honour in the Siluan chase
They march like to the pomp of heaven above,
Iuno the wife and sister of king Jove,
The warlike Pallas, and the Queen of love.
Pipe Pan for joy and let thy shepherds sing,
Shall never age forget this memorable thing.
Clio the sagest of the sisters nine,
To do observance to this dame divine,
I'll ad●e of learning and of chivalry,
here arrived in fair assembly,
And wandering up and down th'unbeaten ways,
Ring through the wood sweet songs of Pallas praise.
Hark Flora, Faunus, here is melody,
A charm of birds and more than ordinary.
The silly birds make mirth, then should we do them wrong,
Pomona, if we nil bestow an Echo to their song.
O Ida, o Ida; 〈...〉
This honour do
Ye country gods,
Bring down your gifts of welcome:
For honour done to Ida.
Behold in sign of 〈...〉
And signs of joyful well come bring.
For honour done to Ida.
The Muses give you melody to gratulate this chance,
And Phoebe chief of sylvan chase commands you all to dance.
The round in a circle our sportance must be,
Hold hands in a hornpipe all gallant in glee.
Reverence, reverence, most humble reverence.
Most humble reverence.
The God of shepherds and his mates,
With country cheer salutes your states▪
Fair, wise, and worthy as you be,
And thank the gracious Ladies three,
For honour done to Ida. The birds sing.
Venus, what shall I say, for though I be a dame divine,
This welcome and this melody exceeds these wits of mine.
Believe me, Iuno, as I height thee sovereign of Love,
These rare delights in pleasures pass the banquets of king Ioue.
Then, Venus, I conclude, it easily may be seen,
That in her chaste and pleasant walks fair Phoebe is a Queen.
Divine Pallas, and you sacred dames,
Iuno and Venus, honoured by your names:
Iuno, the wife and sister of king Ioue,
Fair Venus, Lady president of love:
If any entertainment in this place,
That can afford but homely, rude and base,
It please your godheads to accept in 'gree,
That gracious thought our happiness shallbe.
My mistress Dian, this right well I know,
For love that to this presence she doth owe,
Accounts more honour done to her this day,
Then ever whilom in these woods of Ida.
And for our country gods, I dare be bold,
They make such cheer, your presence to behold,
Such jouissance, such mirth and merry meant,
As nothing els their minde might more co:
And that you do believe it to be so,
Fair goddesses, your lovely looks do show.
It rests in fine, for to confirm my talk,
Ye deign to pass along to Diane's walk:
Where she among her troop of maids attends.
The fair arrival of her welcome friends.
And we will wait with all observance due,
And do just honour to this heavenly crew.
The god of shepherds, Iuno, ere thou go,
Intends a lamb on thee for to bestow.
Faunus, high ranger in Diana's chase,
Presents a fawn to lady Venus' grace.
Syluanus gives to Pallas deity,
This gallant bow wrought from the Oaken tree.
To them that doth this honour to our fields,
Her mellow apples poor Pomona yields.
And gentle gods, these signs of your goodwill
we take in worth, and shall accept them still.
And Flora, this to thee among the rest,
Thy workmanship comparing with the best,
Let it suffice thy cunning to have,
To call king Ioue from forth his heavenly bower:
Hadst thou a lover, Flora, credit me,
I think thou wouldst bedeck him gallantly.
But wend we on, and, Rhanis, lead the way,
That kens the painted paths of pleasunt Ida.
Onone, while ,
Tell me what shall be subject
Thou hast a sort of 〈...〉
Dare say no Nymph in Ida woods
Again, beside thy sweet alluring
In telling them thou hast a
Then prithee sweet, afford some pretty thing,
Some toy that from thy pleasant witte
Paris, my hearts contentment, and my choice,
Use thou thy pipe, and I will use my voice,
So shall thy just request not be denied.
And time well spent and 〈...〉
Well gentle Nymph although thou do me wrong,
That can ne tune pipe unto a song,
Me lift this once,
This idle talk 〈...〉.
And whereon then shall be my Roundelay:
For thou hast hard my store long since, dare say,
How Saturn did divide his kingdom tho,
To Ioue, to Neptune, and to Dis below.
How mighty men made fool,
Against the gods and state of
How Phorcias ympe ,
That tangled Neptune in her golden hair,
Became a Gorgon for her lewd misdeed,
A pretty fable Paris for to read.
A piece of cunning trust me for the
That wealth and beauty alter men to stones.
how Salmacis resembling idleness,
Turns men to women all through wantonness.
How Pluto raught Queen Ceres' daughter thence,
And what did follow of that love offence.
Of Daphne turned into the laurel tree,
That shows a mirror of virginity.
How fair Narcissus tooting on his shade,
Reproves disdain, and 〈...〉.
How cunning Philomela's
What force in love, what wit in sorrow
What pains unhappy souls abide in hell,
They say because on earth they lived not well.
Ixion's wheel, proud Tantal's paining woe.
Prometheus' torment, and a many more.
How Danaus daughters ply their endless task.
What toil the toil of Sisyphus doth ask.
All these are old and known I know, yet if thou wilt have any,
Choose some of these, for trust me else Oenone hath not many.
Nay what thou wilt: but sith my cunning not compares with thine,
Begin some Toy, that I can play upon this pipe of mine.
There is a pretty sonnet then, we call it Cupid's curse:
They that do change old love for new, pray gods they change for worse.
The note is fine and quick withal, the 〈◊〉 will agree,
Paris, With that same vow of thine upon our Poplar tree:
No better thing, begine it then, Oenone thou shalt see
Our music, figure of the love that grows twixt thee and me.
Fair and fair and twice so fair,
As fair as any may be:
The fairest shepherd on our green,
A love for any Lady.
Fair and fair and twice so fair,
As fair as any may be:
Thy love is fair for thee alone,
And for no other Lady.
My love is fair, my love is gay,
As fresh as been the flowers in May,
And of my love my roundelay,
My merry merry merry roundelay
Concludes with Cupid's curse:
They that do change old love for new,
Pray Gods they change for worse.
They that do change, etc.
Fair and fair, etc.,
Fair and fair, etc. Thy love is fair etc.
My love can pipe, my love can sing,
My love can many a pretty thing,
And of his lovely praises ring
My merry merry roundelays: Amen to Cupid's curse:
They that do change, etc.
They that do change, etc.
Fair and fair, etc.
Sweet shepherd, for Oenone's sake be cunning in this song,
And keep thy love, and love thy choice, or else thou dost her wrong.
My vow is made and witnessed, the Poplar will not start,
Nor shall the nymph Oenone's love from forth my breathing heart.
I will go bring the one thy way, my flock are here behind,
And I will have a lovers fee: they say, unkissed, unkind.
But pray you tell me, Iuno, was it so,
As Pallas told me here the tale of Echo.
Shee was a nympe indeede, as Pallas ls,
A walker, such as in these thickets dwell:
And as she told what subtle juggling pranks
She played with Iuno, so she told her thanks:
A tattling trull to come at every call,
And now forsooth nor tongue nor life at all.
And though perhaps she was a help to Ioue,
And held me chat, while he might court his love▪
Believe me, dames, I am of this opinion,
He took but little pleasure in the minion.
And whatsoe'er his scapes have been beside,
Dare say for him a never strayed so wide:
A lovely nutbrown lass, or lusty trull,
Have power perhaps to make a god a bull.
Gramercy gentle Iuno for that jest,
i'faith that item was worth all the rest.
No matter, Venus, howsoe'er you scorn,
My father Ioue at that time wore the horn.
Had every wanton god above, Venus, not better luck,
Than heaven would be a pleasant park, & Mars a lusty buck.
Tut Mars hath horns to butt withal although no bull a shows.
A never needs to mask in nets, a fears no jealous froes.
Forsooth the better is his turn, for if a speak to loud,
Must find some shift to shadow him, a net, or else a cloud.
No more of this, fair goddesses, unrip not so your shames,
To stand all naked to the world, that been such heavenly dames.
Nay, Pallas, that's a common trick with Venus well we know,
And all the Gods in heaven have seen her naked, long ago.
And then she was so faire and bright, and louelie and so tm,
As Mars is but for Venus' tooth, and she will sport with him.
And but me list not here to make comparison with Ioue,
Mars is no ranger, Iuno, he in every open grove.
too much of this: we wander far, the skies begin to scowl,
Retire we to Diana's bower, the weather will be foul.
Pallas, the storm is past and gone, and Phoebus clears the skies,
And lo, behold a ball of gold, a fair and worthy prize.
This posy wills, the apple to the fairest given be,
Then is it mine: for Venus height the fairest of the three.
The fairest here as fair is meant, am I, ye do me wrong:
And if the fairest have it must, to me it doth belong
Then Iuno may it not enjoy, so every one says no,
But I will prove myself the fairest, ere I lose it so.
The brief is this, 〈...〉.
Let this unto the fairest given tree,
The fairest of the three, and I am she.
Detur Pulche
The fairest 〈...〉.
Detur Pulcherrima.〈 〈...〉
The fairest of the three, and I am she.
My face is fair, 〈...〉
That all the gods in heaven 〈...〉,
have made them choose me of the 〈◊〉,
To be the wife of Jove, and Queen of heaven.
Y then this prize be to beautye,
The only she that wins this prize am I.
That Venus is the fairest▪ this doth prove,
That Venus is the lovely Queen of love.
The name of Venus is in deed but beauty,
And men me fairest call, per excellency.
If then this prize be but bequeathed to beauty,
The only she that wins this prize, am I.
To stand on terms of beauty as yow take it,
believe me, Ladies, is but to mistake it:
The beauty that this subtle prize must win,
No outward beauty hight, but dwells within.
And sift it as you please, and you shall find,
This beauty, is the beauty of the mind.
This fairness, Virtue hight, in general,
That many branches hath in special:
This beauty wisdom height, whereof am I,
By heaven appointed, goddess worthily.
And look how much the mind, the better part,
Doth overpass the body in desert:
So much the mistress of those gifts divine,
Excels thy beauty, and that state of thine.
Then if this prize be thus bequeathed to beauty,
The only she that wins this prize, am I.
Nay, Pallas, by your leave, you wander clean,
we must not construe hereof as you mean:
But take the sense as it is plainly meant,
And let the fairest hate, I am content.
Our reasons will be infinite, I trow,
Unless unto some other point we grow.
For first here's none methinks disposed to yield,
And none but will with words maintain the field.
Then if you will to avoid a tedious grudge,
Refer it to the sentence of judge,
Who ere he be that cometh next in place,
Let him bestow the ball, and end the case.
So can it not go wrong with me not at all.
I am agreed however it befall.
And yet by common doom, so may it be,
I may be said the fairest of the three.
Then yonder lo that shepherd swain is he,
That must be umpire in this controversy.
Iuno, in happy time, I do accept the man,
It seemeth by his looks, some skill of love he can.
The nymph is gone, and I all solitary,
Must wend to tend my charge, oppressed with melancholy.
This day (or else me fails my shepherd's skill)
Will tide me passing good, or passing ill.
shepherd, abash not, though, at sudden thus,
Thou be arrived by ignorance among us,
Not earthly but divine, and goddesses all three,
Juno, Pallas, Venus, these our titles be.
Nor fear to speak, for reverence of the place,
Chosen to end a hard and doubtful case.
This apple lo (nor ask thou whence it came)
Is to be given unto the fairest dame.
And fairest is, nor she, nor she, but she,
Whom, shepherd, thou shalt fairest name to be.
This is thy charge, fulfil without offence,
And she that wins shall give thee recompense.
Dread not to speak for we have chosen thee,
Sith in this case, we can no judges be.
And, shepherd, say that I the fairest aim,
And thou shalt win good guerdon for the same.
Nay, shepherd, look upon my state grace,
Because the pomp that longs to 〈...〉
They mayst not see; and think Queen Juno's name,
To whom old shepherd's title works of fame,
Is mighty, and may easily suffice,
At Phoebus' hand to game a golden prize.
And for thy meed, sith I am Queen of riches,
Shepherd, I will reward thee with great monarchies,
Empires, and kingdoms, heaps of massy gold,
Sceptres and diadems, curious to behold,
rich robes, of sumptuous workmanship and cost,
And thousand things whereof I make no boast
The mould whereon thou treadest shall be of Tagus sands,
And Xanthus shall run liquid gold for thee to wash thy hands:
And if thou like to tend thy flock, and not from them to she,
Their fleeces shallbe curled gold to please their master's eye.
And last, to set thy heart one fire, give this one fruit to me,
And, shepherd, lo this Tree of Gold will I bestow on thee.
The ground whereon it grows, the grass, the root of gold,
The body and the bark of gold, all glittering to behold,
The leaves of burnished gold, the fruits that thereon grow
Are diadems set with pearl in gold in gorgeous glistering show:
And if this Tree of Gold, in lieu may not suffice,
Require a grove of golden trees, so, Iuno bear the prize.
Me list not tempt thee with decaying wealth,
Which is embased by want of lusty health:
But if thou have a mind to fly above,
Ycrowned with fame near to the seat of Ioue:
If thou aspire to wisdom's worthiness.
Whereof thou mayst not see the brightness
If thou desire honour of chivalry,
To be renowned for happy victory,
To fight it out, and in the champain field,
To shroud thee under pallas warlike shield,
To prance on barbed steeds, this honour lo,
myself for guerdon shall on thee bestow.
And for encouragement, that thou mayst see,
What famous knights dame Pallas warriors be,
Behold in Pallas honour here they come,
Marching along with found of thundering drum.
Come shepherd, come, sweet shepherd look on me,
These been to hot alarums these for thee:
But if thou wilt give me the golden ball,
Cupid my boy shall hate to play withal,
That whensoe'er this apple he shall see,
The god of love himself shall think on thee,
And bid thee look and choose, and he will wound,
Whereso thy fancies object shallbe found,
And lightly when he shoots he doth not miss:
And I will give the many lovely kiss,
And come and play with thee on Ida here,
And if thou wilt a face that hath no peer,
A gallant girl, a lusty minion trull,
That can give sport to thee thy bellyful,
To ravish all thy beating veins with joy,
Here is a lass of Venus' court, my boy,
Here gentle shepherd, here's for thee a piece,
The fairest face, the flower of gallant Greece.
SI Diana nel cielo è una stella
Chiara, è lucente piena di splendore
Che porge luc' all' affanato cuore:
Si Diana, nel ferno è una dea,
Che deconforto all' anime dannate,
Che per amor son morte desperate:
Si Diana ch' in 〈◊〉 è delle nymph
Reina, imperative di dolce fiori
Tra bosch'e Selve da morte a pastori.
Io son un Diana dolce e rara
Chle con Le guardi Io posso far guerra
A Dian' infern' in cielo, et in terra.
Most heavenly dames, was never man as I
Poor shepherd swain, so happy and unhappy:
The least of these delights, that you devise.
Able to wrap and dazzle humane eyes.
But since my silence may not pardoned be,
And I appoint which is the fairest she,
Pardon, most sacred dames, sith one not all,
By Paris doom must have this golden ball.
Thy beauty, stately Juno, dame divine,
That like to Phoebus golden beams doth shine,
Approves itself to be most excellent,
But that fair face that doth me most content,
Sith fair, fair dames, is neither she nor she,
But she whom I shall fairest deem to be.
That face is hers that height the Queen of Love,
Whose sweetness doth both gods and creators move.
And if the fairest face deserve the ball,
Fair Venus, Ladies, bears it from ye all.
And in this ball doth Venus more delight,
Then in her lovely boy fair Cupid's sight.
Come shepherd come, sweet Venus is thy friend,
No matter how thou other gods offend.
But he shall rue, and ban the dismal day
wherein his Venus bore the ball away:
And heaven and earth just witnesses shall be,
I will revenge it on his progeny.
well Iuno, whether we be lief or loath,
Venus hath got the apple from us both.
O gentle love, ungentle for thy deed,
Thou makest my heart
A bloody mark
With piercing shot to bleed.
Shoot soft sweet love, for fear thou shoot amiss,
For fear too keen.
Thy arrows been,
And hit the heart, where my beloved is.
To fair that fortune were, nor never I
shallbe so blessed
Among the rest
That love shall cease on her by sympathy.
Then since with love my prayers bear no boot,
This doth remain
To cease my pain,
I take the wound, and die at Venus' foot.
Poor Colin woeful man, thy life forespoke by love,
What uncouth fit, what malady is this, that thou dost prove.
Or love is void of physic clean, or loves our common wrack,
That gives us bane to bring us low, and let us medicine lack.
That ever love had reverence 'mong silly shepherd swains,
Belike that humour hurts them most that most might be their pains.
Hobin, it is some other god that cherisheth her sheep,
For sure this love doth nothing else but make our herdsmen weep.
And what a hap is this I pray, when all our woods rejoice,
For Colin thus to be denied his young and lovely choice.
She height in deed so fresh and fair that well it is for thee,
Colin and kind hath been thy friend, that Cupid could not see.
And whether wends you thriveless swain, like to the stricken deer,
Seeks he Dictamum for his wound within our forest here.
He wends to greet the Queen of love, that in these woods doth won,
With mirthless lays to make complaint to Venus of her son.
A Colin thou art all deceived, she dallies with the boy,
And winks at all his wanton pranks, and thinks thy love a toy.
Then leave him to his luckless love, let him abide his fate,
The sore is rankled all to far, our comfort comes to late.
Though Thestilis the Scorpion be that breaks his sweet assault,
Yet will Rhamnusia vengeance take, on her disdainful fault.
Lo yonder comes the lovely Nymph, that in these Ida vales,
Plays with Amintas lusty boy, and coys him in the dales.
Thenot, methinks her cheer is changed, her mirthful looks are laid,
She frolics not: pray god the lad have not beguiled the maid.
Beguiled, disdained, and out of love: live long thou Poplar-tree,
And let thy letters grow in length, to witness this with me.
A Venus, but for reverence, unto thy sacred name,
To steal a silly maidens love, I might account it blame.
And if the tales be true I hear, and blush for to receit,
Thou dost me wrong to leave the plains, and dally out of sight.
False Paris, this was not thy vow, when thou and I were one,
To range & change old love for new: but now those days be gone.
But I will find the goddess out, that she thy vow may read,
And fill these woods with my laments, for thy unhappy deed.
So fair a face, so foul a thought to harbour in his breast,
Thy hope consumed, poor Nymph, thy hap is worse than all the rest.
A shepherds, you been full of wiles, & whet your wits on books,
And wrap poor maids with pipes and songs, and sweet alluring looks.
Misspeak not all, for his amiss, there been that keepen flocks,
That never chose but once, nor yet beguiled love with mocks.
False Paris he is none of those, his trothless double deed,
Will hurt a many shepherds else that might go nigh to speed.
Poor Colin, that is ill for thee, that art as true in trust
To thy sweet smart, as to his Nymph Paris hath been unjust.
A well is she hath Colin won, that nill no other love:
And woo is me, my luck is less, my pains no pity move.
Farewell fair Nymph, sith he must heal alone that gave the wound.
There grows no herb of such effect upon dame nature's ground.
Here is a Nymph that sadly sits, and she belike
Can tell some news, Pyracmon, of the jolly swain we seek.
Dare wage my wings the lass doth love, she looks so bleak & thin,
And 'tis for anger or for grief: but I will talk begin.
Break out poor heart, & make complaint the mountain flocks to move,
What proud repulse & thankles scorn thou hast received of love.
She singeth, sires, be hushed awhile.
Melponie, the muse of tragic songs,
With mournful tunes in stole of dismal hue,
Assist a silly Nymph to wail her woe,
And leave thy lusty company behind.
Thou luckless wreath, becomes not me to wear
The Poplar tree for triumph of my love.
Then as my joy my pride of love is left,
Be thou unclothed of thy lovely green.
And in thy leaves my fortune written be,
And them some gentle wind let blow abroad,
That all the world may see how false of love,
False Paris hath to his Oenone been.
Good-day fair maid, weary belike with following of your game,
I wish thee cunning at thy will, to spare or strike the same.
I thank you sir, my gain is quick and rids a length of ground,
And yet I am deceived or else a had a deadly wound.
Your hand perhaps did swerve awarie. Oen. or else it was my heart.
Then sure a plied his footmanship.
a played a ranging part.
You should have given a deeper wound.
I could not that for pity.
You should haue eyd him better thē.
blind love was not so witty.
Why tell me sweet, are you in love.
or would I were not so.
Ye mean because a does ye wrong.
perdie the more my woe.
Why mean ye love, or him ye loved?
well may I mean them both.
Is love to blame?
the queen of love hath made him false his troth.
mean ye indeed the queen of love.
even wanton Cupid's dame.
Why was thy love so lovely then?
his beauty height his shame,
The fairest shepherd one our green.
is he a shepherd
And sometime kept a bleating flock.
enough, this is the man.
Where wons he than?
about these woods: far from the Poplar tree.
What Poplar mean ye?
witness of the vows betwixt him & me.
And come and wend a little way and you shall see his skill.
Sirs tarry you.
nay let them go.
nay not unless you will.
Stay Nymph, and hark what I say of him thou blamest so,
And credit me, I have a sad discourse to tell thee ere I go.
Know then, my pretty mops, that I height Mercurie,
The messenger of heaven, and hither fly
To cease upon the man whom thou dost love,
To summon him before my father Jove,
To answer matter of great consequence,
And Ioue himself will not be long from hence.
Sweet Mercurie, and have poor Oenon's cries,
For Paris fault, ypierced th'unpartial skies.
The same is he, that jolly shepherd's swain.
His flock do graze upon Aurora's plain,
The colour of his coat is lusty green,
That would these eyes of mine had never seen,
His 'ticing curled hair, his front of ivory,
Then had not I poor I been unhappy.
No marvel wench, although we cannot find him,
When all to late the queen of heaven doth mind him.
But if thou wilt have physic for thy sore,
Mind him who list, remember thou him no more:
And find some other game, and get thee gone.
For here will lusty suitors come anon,
To hot and lusty for thy dying vain,
Such as were monte to make their suits in vain.
I will go sit and pine under the Poplar tree,
And write my answer to his vow, that every eye may see.
Shepherds, I am content, for this sweet shepherd's sake,
A strange revenge upon the maid and her disdain to take.
Let Colin's corpse be brought in place, and burned in the plain,
And let this be the verse. The love whom Thestilis hath slain.
And trust me I will chide my son for partiality,
That gave the swain so deep a wound, and let her scape him by.
Alas that ever love was blind, to shoot so far amiss.
Cupid my son was more to blame, the fault not mine, but his.
O madam, if yourself would deign the handling of the bow,
Albeit it be a task, yourself more skill, more justice know.
Sweet shepherd, didst thou ever love.
Lady, a little once.
And art thou changed.
fair queen of love I loved not all at once.
Well wanton, were thou wounded so deep as some have been,
It were a cunning cure to heal and rueful to be seen.
But tell me, gracious goddess, for a flaw and false offence,
Hath Venus' or her son the power, at pleasure to dispense.
My boy, I will instruct thee in a piece of poetry,
That haply erst thou hast not heard: in hell there is a tree,
Where once a day do sleep the souls of false forsworn lovers,
With open hearts, and there about in swarms the number hovers
Of poor forsaken ghosts, whose wings from of this tree do bear
Round drops of fiery Phlegethon to scorch false hearts with heat.
This pain did Venus and her son, entreat the prince of hell,
T'impose to such as faithless were, to such as loved them well.
And therefore this, my lovely boy, fair Venus doth advise thee,
Be true and steadfast in thy love, beware thou do disguise thee.
For he that makes but love a jest, when pleaseth him to start,
Shall feel those fiery water drops consume his faithless heart.
Is Venus and her son so full of justice and severity.
Pity it wear that love should not be linked with indifferency.
How ever lovers can exclaim for hard success in love,
Trust me, some more than common cause that painful hap doth move.
And Cupid's bow is not alone his triumph, but his rod,
Nor is he only but a boy: he height a mighty god.
And they that do him reverence, have reason for the same,
His shafts keep heaven and earth in awe, and shape rewards for flame.
And hath he reason to maintain why Colin died for love.
Yea reason good I warrant thee, in right it might behoove.
Then be the name of Jove adored, his bow is full of might.
His wounds are all but for desert, his laws are all but right:
well for this once me list apply my speeches to thy sense,
And The stilis shall feel the pain for loves supposed offence.
Welladay Welladay: Poor Colin thou art going to the ground.
The love whom Thestis hath slain,
Hard heart, fair face fraught with disdain:
Disdain in love a deadly wound.
Wound her sweet love so deep again,
That she may feel the dying pain
Of this unhappy shepherd's swain,
And die for love as Colin died. is Colin died finis Camaenae.
shepherds abide, let Colin's corpse be witness of the pain
That Thestilis endures in love, a plague for her disdain.
Behold the organ of our wrath, this rusty churl is he,
She dotes on his Ill-favoured face, so much accursed is she.
A poor unhappy Thestilis, unpitied is thy pain.
Her fortune not unlike to his whom cruel thou hast slain.
The strange effects of my tormented heart,
Whom cruel love hath woeful prisoner caught,
Whom cruel hate hath into bondage brought,
Whom wit no way of safe escape hath taught,
Enforce me say in witness of my smart,
There is no pain to foul disdain in hardy suits of love.
There is no pain etc.
Cruel, farewell. Shep Cruel, farewell.
Most cruel thou, of all that nature framed.
Most cruel etc.
To kill thy love with thy disdain.
To kill thy love with thy disdain.
Cruel disdain so live thou named.
Cruel disdain etc.
And let me die of Iphis pain.
A life to good for thy disdain.
sith this my stars to me allot,
And thou thy love hast all forgot.
And thou etc.
Now shepherds, bury Colin's corpse, perfume his hearse with flowers,
And write what justice Venus did amid these woods of yours.
How now, how cheers my Lovely boy, after this dump of love.
Such dumps, sweet Lady, as been these are deadly dumps to prove.
Cease shepherd, these are other nues, after this melancholy.
My mind presumes some tempest toward upon the speech of Mercurie
Fair lady Venus, let me pardoned be
That have of long been well-beloved of thee,
If as my office bid my self first brings
To my sweet Madam these unwelcome tidings.
What news, what tidings, gentle Mercurie,
In midst of my delights to trouble me.
At Juno's suit, Pallas assisting her,
Sith both did join in suit to Iupiter,
Action is entered in the court of heaven,
And me, the swiftest of the Planets seven,
With warrant they have thence dispatched away,
To apprehend and find the man, they say,
That gave from them that selfsame ball of gold,
Which I presume I do in place behold,
Which man, unless my marks be taken wide,
Is he that sits so near thy gracious wide.
This being so, it rests he go from hence.
Before the gods to answer his offence.
What tale is this, doth Iuno and her mate
Pursue this shepherd with such deadly hate.
As what was then our general agreement,
To stand unto they nil be now content.
Let Iuno jet, and Pallas play her part,
What here I have, I won it by desert:
And heaven and earth shall both confounded be,
Ere wrong in this be done to him or me.
This little fruit, if Mercury can spell,
Will send I fear a world of souls to hell.
What mean these Cyclops, Mercurie, is vulcan waxed so fine,
To send his chimnysweepers forth, to fetter any friend of mine.
Abash not shepherd at the thing, myself thy bail willbe,
He shallbe present at the court of Ioue I warrant thee.
Venus, give me your pledge.
my ceston, or my fan, or both.
Nay this shall serve: your word to me as sure as is your oath,
At Diana's bower, and Lady, if my wit or policy
May profit him for Venus' sake, let him make bold with Mercury.
Sweet Paris, whereon dost thou muse?
The angry heavens for this fatal jar,
Name me the instrument of dire and deadly war.
Why nymph, what need ye run so fast? what though but black I be?
I have more pretty knacks to please, than every eye doth see,
And though I go not so upright, and though I am a smith,
To make me gracious you may have some other thing therewith.
Ye Vulcan, will ye so in deed may turn and tell him, trull,
He hath a mistress of his own to take his belly full.
Why sir, if Phoebe's dainty nymphs please lusty Vulcan's tooth,
Why may not Vulcan tread awry, as well as Venus doth?
Ye shall not taint your troth for me: you wot it very well,
All that be Diane's maids are vowed to halter apples in hell.
i'faith i'faith, my gentle mops, but I do know a cast,
Lead apes who list, that we would help t'unhalter them as fast.
Fie fie, your skill is wondrous great, had thought the god of wine,
Had tended but his tubs and grapes, and not been half so fine.
Gramercy for that quirk, my girl. Bac. That's one of dainties frumps.
I pray sir take't with all amiss, our cunning comes by lumps.
Sh'ath capped his answer in the Q.
how says, a, has she so?
aswell as she that kept your head to keep you warm below.
Yea then you will be cursed I see. Bac. best let her even alone.
Yea gentle gods, and find some other string to harp upon.
Some other string, agreed i'faith, some other pretty thing,
'twere shame fair maids should idle be, how say you, will ye sing.
Some rounds or merry rondelays, we sing no other songs,
Your melancholic notes not to our country mirth belongs.
Here comes a crew will help us trim.
Yea now our task is done.
Then merry Mercurie more than time, this round were well begone.
A harlotry I warrant her.
a peevish elvish shroe.
Have seen as far to come as near, for all her ranging so.
But, Bacchus, time well spent I wot, our sacred father Ioue,
With Phoebus and the god of war are met in Diane's grove.
Then we are here before them yet, but stay the earth doth swell,
God Neptune to, (this hap is good) doth meet the prince of hell.
What jars are these, that call the gods of heaven and hell below.
I is a worke of wit and toyle to rule a sustie shroe.
Bring forth the man of Troie that he may hear,
Whereof he is to be arraigned here.
Lo where 'a comes prepared to plead his case,
under conduct of lovely Venus' grace.
I have not seen a more alluring boy.
So beauty height the wrack of Priam's Troy.
lo sacred Ioue, at Juno's proud complaint,
As erst I gave my pledge to Mercurie,
I bring the man whom he did late attaint,
To answer his indictment orderly:
And crave this grace of this immortal senate,
That ye allow the man his advocate.
That may not be, the laws of heaven deny,
A man to plead or answer by attorney.
Pallas, thy doom is all too peremptory.
Venus, that favour is denied him flatly,
He is a man and therefore by out laws,
himself, without his aid, must plead his cause.
Then bash not, shepherd, in so good a case,
And friends thou hast as well as foes in place.
Why, Mercurie, why do ye not indite him.
Soft gentle, Iuno, I pray you do not bite him.
Nay, gods, I trow you are like to have great silence,
Unless this parrot be commanded hence.
Venus, forbear, be still: speak, Mercurie.
If Iuno jangle Venus will reply.
Paris, king Priam's son, thou art arraigned of partiality,
Of sentence partial and unjust, for that without indifferency,
Beyond desert or merit far, as thine accusers say,
From them, to Lady Venus here, thou gavest the prize away.
What is thine answer?
Sacred and just, thou great and dreadful Ioue,
And you thrice reverend powers, whom love nor hate,
May wrest awry, if this to me a man,
This fortune fatal be, that I must plead,
For safe excusal of my guiltless thought,
The honour more makes my mishap the less,
That I a man must plead before the gods,
Gracious forbearers of the worlds amiss,
For her, whose beauty how it hath enticet,
This heavenly senate may with me aver.
But sith nor that, nor this may do me boot,
And for myself, myself must speaker be,
A mortal man, amidst this heavenly presence;
Let me not shape a longe defence, to them,
That been beholders of my guiltless thoughts.
Then for the deed, that I may not deny,
Wherein consists the full of mine offence,
I did upon command: if then I erred,
I did no more than to a man belonged.
And if in verdict of their forms divine,
My dazzled eye did swerve or surfeit more
On Iunus face, than any face of theirs:
It was no partial fault, but fault of his
Belike, whose eyesight not so perfect was,
As might decern the brightness of toe rest.
And if it were permitted unto men
(Ye gods) to parley with your secret thoughts,
There been that sit upon that sacred seat,
That would with Paris err in Venus' praise.
But let me cease to speak of error here:
Sith what my hand, the organ of my heart,
Did give with good agreement of mine eye,
My tongue is void with process to maintain.
A jolly shepherd, wise and eloquent.
First then arraigned of partiality.
Paris replies unguilty of the fact▪
His reason is, because he knew no more
Fair Venus' Ceston, than dame Juno's mace,
Nor never saw wise Pallas crystal shield.
Then as I looked I loved and liked at once,
And as it was referred from them to me,
To give the prize to her, whose beauty best
My fancy did commend, so did I praise
And judge as might my dazzled eye decern.
A piece of art, that, cunningly pardie,
Refers the blame to weakness of his eye.
Now (for I must add reason for my deed)
Why Venus rather pleased me of the three:
First, in the entrails of my mortal ears,
The question standing upon beauty's blaze,
The name of her that height the queen of love,
My thought in beauty should not be excelled.
Had it been destined to majesty,
(Yet will I not rob Venus of her grace,)
Then stately Iuno might have borne the ball.
Had it to wisdom been entitled,
My humane wit had given it Pallas then.
But sith unto the fairest of the three,
That power, that threw it for my father ill,
Did dedicate this ball: and safest durst
My shepherd's skill adventure, as I thought,
To judge of form and beauty, rather than
Of Juno's state, or Pallas worthiness,
That learned to ken the fairest of the flock,
And praised beauty but by nature's aim:
Behold to Venus Paris gave this fruit,
A dayman chosen there by full consent,
And heavenly powers should not repent their deeds.
Where it is said, beyond desert of hers,
I honoured Venus with this golden prize:
(Ye gods) alas what can a mortal man
Decern, betwixt the sacred gifts of heaven.
Or, if I may with reverence reason thus:
Suppose I gave, and judged corruptly then,
For hope of that, that best did please my thought,
This apple not for beauty's praise alone:
I might offend, sith I was pardoned,
And tempted, more than ever creature was,
With wealth, with beauty and with chivalry:
And so preferred beauty before them all,
The thing that hath enchanted heaven itself.
And for the one, contentment is my wealth:
A shell of salt will serve a shepherd swain,
A slender banquet in a homely skrip,
And water running from the silver spring.
For arms, they dread no foes that sit so low,
A thorn can keep the wind from off my back,
A sheepcoat thatched, a shepherd's palace height.
Of tragic Muses shepherds con no skill,
Enough is them, if Cupid been displeased,
To sing his praise on slender oaten pipe.
And thus, thrice reverend, have I told my tale,
And crave the torment of my guiltless soul
To be measured by my faultless thought.
If warlike Pallas, or the queen of heaven
Sue to reverse my sentence by appeal,
Be it as please your majesties divine,
The wrong, the hurt not mine, if any be,
But hers whose beauty claimed the prize of me.
Venus, withdraw your shepherd for a space,
Till he again be called for into place.
Iuno, what will ye after this reply
But doom with sentence of indifferency.
And if you will but justice in the cause,
The man must quited be by heavens laws.
Yea gentle Ioue, when Juno's suits are moved,
Then heaven may see how well she is beloved.
But, Madam, fits it majesty divine,
In any sort from justice to decline?
Whether the man be guilty yea or Noah,
That doth not hinder our appeal, I trow?
Phoebus, I wot, amid this heavenly crew,
There be that have to say as well as you
And Iuno, I with them, and they with me,
In law and right, must needfully agree:
I grant ye may agree, but be content
To doubt upon regard of your agreement.
And if ye marked, the man in his defence.
Said thereof as a might with reverence.
And did ye very well I promise ye.
No doubt, sir, you could note it cunningly.
Well, Iuno, if ye will appeal ye may,
But first dispatch the shepherd hence away.
Then Vulcan's dame is like to have the wrong.
And that in passion doth to Mars belong.
Call Venus and the shepherd in again.
And rid the man that he may know his pain.
His pain, his pain, his never dying pain,
A cause to make to many more complain.
shepherd, thou hast been hard with equity and law,
And for thy stars do thee to other calling draw.
We here dismiss thee hence, by order of our senate:
Go take thy way to Troie, and there abide thy fate.
Sweet shepherd, with such luck in love while thou dost live,
As may the Queen of Love to any Lover give.
My luck is loss howe'er my love do speed,
I fear me Paris shall but rue his deed.
From Ida woods now wends the shepherd's boy,
That in his bosom carries fire to Troy.
Venus, these Ladies do appeal yow see,
And that they may appeal the gods agree,
It resteth then that yow be well content
To stand in this unto our final judgement:
And if king Priam's son did well in this,
The Law of heaven will not lead amiss.
But, sacred Iupiter, might thy daughter choose,
She might with reason this appeal refuse:
Yet, if they be unmoved in their shames,
be it a stain and blemish to their names:
A deed to far unworthy of the place,
Unworthy Pallas Lance, or Juno's mace:
And, if to beauty it bequeathed be,
I doubt not but it will return to me.
Venus, there is no more ado than so,
It resteth where the gods do it bestow.
But, Ladies, under favour of your rage,
howe'er it be, yow play upon the vantage.
Then dames, that we more freely may debate,
And here th'indifferent sentence of this senate,
Withdraw yow from this presence for a space,
Till we have thoroughly questioned of the cace:
Dian shallbe your guide, nor shall yow need
yourselves t' inquire how things do here succeed,
we will, as we resolve give yow to know,
By general doom, how every thing doth go.
Thy will, my wish, fair Ladies, will ye wend?
Beshrew her whom this sentence doth offend.
Now Ioue be just, and gods you that be Venus' friends,
If yow have ever done her wrong, then may yow make amends.
Venus is fair, Pallas and Iuno toe.
But tell me now without some more ado,
Who is the fairest she, and do not flatter.
Vulcan, upon comparison hangs all the matter:
That done the quarrel and the strife were ended.
Because 'tis known, the quarrel is pretended.
Mars. you have reason for your speech perdie:
My dame (I trow) is fairest in your eye.
Or (Vulcan) I should do her double wrong.
About a toy we tarry here so long.
give it by voices, voices give the odds:
A trifle so to to trouble all the gods.
Believe me, Saturn, be it so for me.
For me. Pluto. for me Mars. for me, if Ioue agree.
And gentle gods, I am indifferent:
But then I know whose's likely to be shent.
Thrice reverend gods, and thou immortal Ioue.
If Phoebus may, as him doth much behove,
Be licenced, according to our Laws,
To speak uprightly in this doubted cause,
(Sith women's wits work men's unceasing woes)
To make them friends, that now been friendless foes,
And peace to keep with them, with us, and all
That make their title to this golden ball:
(Nor think ye gods my speech doth derogate
From sacred power of this immortal senate,)
Refer this sentence where it doth belong,
In this say I fair Phoebe hath the wrong.
Not that (I mean) her beauty bears the prize:
But that the holly Law of heaven denies,
One god to meddle in another's power.
And this befell so near Diana's bower,
As for th'appeasing this unpleasant grudge,
(In my conceit) she height the fittest judge.
If Ioue control not Pluto's hell with charms,
If Mars have sovereign power to manage arms:
If Bacchus bear no rule in Neptune sea
Nor Vulcan's fire doth Saturn's sith obey:
Suppress not then, 'gainst law and equity,
Diana's power in her own territory:
Whose regiment, amid her sacred bowers,
As proper height as any rule of yours.
Well may we so wipe all the speech away,
That Pallas, Iuno, Venus hath to say,
And answer that by justice of our laws,
We were not suffered to conclude the cause.
And this to me most equal doom appears,
A woman to be judge among her feres.
Apollo hath found out the only mean,
To rid the blame from us and trouble clean.
We are beholding to his sacred wit.
I can commend and well allow of it.
And so derive the matter from us all,
That Dian have the giving of the ball.
So Ioue may clearly excuse him in the case,
Where Iuno else would chide and brawl apace.
And now, it were some cunning to divine,
To whom Diana will this prize resign.
sufficeth me, it shall be none of mine.
Vulcan, though thou be black, thart nothing fine.
Go bathe thee, Bacchus, in a tub of wine,
The balls as likely to be mine as thine.
Lo, Ladies, far beyond my hope and will, you see,
This thankless office is imposed to me:
Wherein if you will rest as well content,
As Dian willbe judge indifferent,
My equal doom shall none of you offend,
And of this quarrel make a final end:
And therefore, whether you belief of loath,
Confirm your promise with some sacred oath.
Phoebe, chief Mistress of this sylvan chase,
Whom gods have chosen to conclude the case,
That yet in balance undecided lies.
Touching bestowing of this golden prize.
I give my promise and mine oath withal,
By Stix, by heavens power imperial,
By all that longs to Pallas deity,
Her shield, her lance, ensigns of chivalry,
Her sacred wreath of Olive, and of Bay,
Her crested helm, and else what Pallas may,
That wheresoe'er this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand doth hold,
Unpartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike or quarrel any more,
Pallas shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there abide.
And here I promise and protest withal,
By Styx, by heavens power imperial,
By all that longs to Juno's deity,
Her crown, her mace, ensigns of majesty:
Her spotless marriage-rites, her league divine,
And by that holy name of Proserpine,
That wheresoe'er, this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand doth hold,
Unpartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike or quarrel any more,
Iuno shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there abide.
And lovely Phoebe, for I know thy doom
willbe no other than shall thee become,
Behold I take thy dainty hand to kiss,
And with my solemn oath confirm my promise,
By Styx, by Ioues immortal empery,
By Cupid's bow, by Venus' myrtle-tree,
By Vulcan's gift, my Ceston, and my fan,
By this red rose, whose colour first began,
When erst my wanton boy (the more his blame)
Did draw his bow awry and hurt his dame,
By all the honour and the sacrifice,
That from Cithaeron and from Paphos rise:
That wheresoe'er, etc.
Venus shall rest, etc.
It is enough, and goddesses attend:
There wons within these pleasant shady woods,
Where neither storm nor sun's distemperature
Have power to hurt by cruel heat or cold,
Under the climate of the milder heaven,
Where seldom lights Ioues angry thunderbolt,
For favour of that sovereign earthly peer:
Where whistling winds make music 'mong the trees,
Far from disturbance of our country gods,
Amids the Cypress springs a gracious Nymph,
That honour Dian for her chastity,
And likes the labours well of Phoebe's groves:
The place Elysium height, and of the place,
Her name that governs there Eliza is,
A kingdom that may well compare with mine.
An ancient seat of kings, a second Troie,
Ycompast round with a commodious sea:
Her people are yclept Angeli,
Or if I miss a letter is the most.
She giveth laws of justice and of peace,
And on her head as fits her fortune best,
She wears a wreath of laurel, gold, and palm:
Her robes of purple and of scarlet dye,
Her veil of white, as best befits a maid.
Her ancestors live in the house of fame,
She giveth arms of happy victory,
And flowers to deck her lions crowned with gold.
This peerless nymph whom heaven and earth beloves,
This Paragon, this only this is she,
In whom do meet so many gifts in one,
On whom our country gods so often gaze,
In honour of whose name the Muses sing.
In state Queen Juno's peer, for power in arms,
And virtues of the mind Minerva's mate,
As fair and lovely as the queen of love:
As chaste as Dian in her chaste desires.
The same is she, if Phoebe do no wrong,
To whom this ball in merit doth belong.
If this be she whom some Zabeta call,
To whom thy wisdom well bequeathes the ball
I can remember at her day of birth,
How Flora with her flowers strewed the Earth,
How every power with heavenly majesty,
In person honoured that solemnity.
The lovely graces were not far away,
They threw their balm for triumph of the day.
The fates against their kind began a cheerful song,
And vowed her life with favour to prolong
Then first 'gan Cupid's eyesight wexen dim,
Belike Eliza's beauty blinded him.
To this fair Nymph, not earthly but divine:
Contents it me my honour to resign.
To this fair Queen so beautiful and wise,
Pallas bequeathes her title in the prize.
To her whom Juno's looks so well become,
The queen of heaven yields at Phoebus' doom.
And glad I am Diana found the art,
Without offence so well to please desert.
Then mark my tale the usual time is nigh,
When wont the denies of life and destiny,
In robes of cheerful colours to repair,
To this renowned Queen so wise and fair,
With pleasant songs this peerless nymph to greet,
Clotho lays down her distaste at her feet.
And Lachesis doth pull the thread at length,
The third with favour gives it stuff and strength
And for contrary kind affords her leave,
As her best likes her web of life to weave
This time we will attend, and in the meanwhile
With some sweet song the tediousness beguile.
Gracious and wise, fair Queen of rare renown,
Whom heaven and earth beloves amid thy train,
Noble and lovely peers: to honour thee
And do thee favour, more than may belong,
By nature's law to any earthly wight,
Behold continuance of our yearly due,
Th'Unpartial dames of destiny we meet,
As have the gods and we agreed in one,
In reverence of Eliza's noble name,
And humbly lo her distaff Clotho yields.
Her spindle Lachesis and her fatal reel,
Lays down in reverence at Eliza's feet.
Te tamen in terris unam tria numina Divam
invita statuunt naturae lege sorores,
Et tibi non aliis didicerunt parcere Parcae.
Dame Atrops according as her 〈◊〉
To thee fair Queen resigns her fatal knife:
Live long the noble Phoenix of our age,
Our fair Eliza our Zabeta fair.
And lo beside this rare solemnity,
And sacrifice these dames are wont to do,
A favour far in deed contrary kind,
Bequeathed is unto thy worthiness.
she delivereth the ball of gold to the queen's own hands
This prize from heaven and heavenly goddesses,
Accept it then, thy due by Diane's doom,
Praise of the wisdom, beauty and the state,
That best becomes thy peerless excellency.
So fair Eliza, Venus doth resign,
The honour of this honour to be thine.
So is the queen of heaven content likewise,
To yield to thee her title in the prize.
So Pallas yields the praise hereof to thee▪
For wisdom, princely state, and peerless beauty.
Vive diu foelix votis hominúmque Deûmque.
Corpore, mente, libro, doctissima, candida, casta.