ATtend my Lord, and mark the tale I tell,
Whose form you see is monstrous, strange and rare.
Before a manlike shape, behind a fishes fell,
this strange disguise doth make full many stare,
And since they press to know why I come here,
Let them be still, the cause shall soon appear.
WIthin this common wealth (my Lord) all those the live in awe
Do seek each-daie for to perform & keep the stablished law,
Yea such do keep the sabbath day in reverence as they ought
And fish days too as well as flesh, which many set at nought
Yet if the same were well observed, flesh seldom would be dear,
And fish abound at each man's board more plenty in each year,
Then England's store would be increased with butter, cheese & beef
And thousands set to work for fish, that now beg for relief.
This shape so strange, show they are strange, & do digres from reason
That shun in eating fish and flesh, to keep both time and season,
Which fault reformed, our common wealth would flourish in such wise,
As never any did behold the like with mortal eyes.
OH worthy City now rejoice in Christ,
for through his grace with peace he hath thee bless
He sends thee still such godly magistrates,
as daily seeks to keep thee from unrest.
Muse not my Lord, to see the Sun doth shine
on England's peace, who sits in princely throne,
It doth presage her Sun shine still shall last,
and make her foes afeard at every blast.
So long as peace directed is by truth,
and Gods pure word received as it ought,
So long the Lord will bless this little land,
and make it flow with plenty in each place.
Rule now my Lord and keep this City well,
reform abuses crept into the same,
So shall your fame eternized be for aye,
and London still preserved from decay.
And I that do support the Goldsmith's arms,
which long in love to you have been united,
Will do my best to shadow you from harms,
and find the means your loves may be requighted.
THe blessed peace which England doth possess,
and so hath done this thirty two years space.
I Fame am sent and charged to do no less,
with trumpets sound, but spread it in each place.
That all may wish with hearts which do not feign,
our royal peace in England still may rain.
I Represent your peace and chiefest good,
that every hour doth pray for your defence,
I sit as shadow for that royal blood,
whose life is pure, and still hath this pretence,
That whilst she lives even with her heart and might,
she seeks in peace for to defend your right.
Wisdom supporteth still the public state,
Wisdom foreseeth ere it be too late.
YEa policy prevents each traitorous fact,
And doth perform full many a famous act,
Both Policy and Wisdom will not cease,
Each night and day for to preserve this peace.
GOds sacred truth lo here I represent,
whom England's peace doth still maintain in place,
I bring you comfort for your soul's content,
which England's peace doth willingly embrace:
And for her sake by whom God's truth doth stand,
the God of heaven doth bless this little land.
Prudence and virtue shades our peace each day,
chaste is her life, and therewith rests content,
In vain delights she shuns to run astray,
her virtues are most rare and excellent.
Long may she live still to preserve this peace,
Lord still I pray her health and joys increase.
THis famous fleece doth so adorn our land,
which daily doth with milk and honey flow,
That Fame doth make all nations understand,
like peace and plenty never man did know,
For wool and lead, for tin, corn, beer and beef,
Of Christian nations England is the chief.
Muse not to see this famous fleece doth stand
upon a wool pack, fixed at pieces feet,
The reason is, as you may understand,
worthy Iohn Allot for his place most meet.
Is Mayor of London and the Staple too,
And will perform in both what he should do.
Faithful and loyal are her subjects seen,
Concord unites them still in loyal bands,
Their tender hearts is linked to our Queen,
and concord craves no other at their hands,
Thus loyalty and concord doth agree,
That London still therein shall famous be,
AMbition still p●●t up with hate and pride,
Doth daily seek to work sweet England's fall,
He never rests, but seeks each time and tide,
How England's peace might soon be brought in thrall.
And common wealth plunged into civil broils,
That foreign foes might triumph in our spoils.
OUr Senate's grave and worthy magistrates,
Shall still endeavour to maintain our peace,
By banishing ambition from our gates,
And seeking means this peace may never cease:
Yea virtue so by him advanced shall be,
That vice shall fly and not be seen in me.
SCience still seeks those things we daily wish,
and Labour toils to bring us flesh and fish,
Yea Science sure doth practise every day,
that Labour might keep England from decay,
Science and Labour still preserves man's health,
and are chief props of this our common wealth.
Help Walworth now to daunt this rebel's pride.
Ask what thou wilt thou shalt not be denied.
IAcke Straw the rebel I present, Wat Tyler was my aid,
Hob Carter and Tom Miller too; we all were not afraid,
For to deprive our sovereign king, Richard the second named,
Yet for our bad ambitious minds by Walworth we were tamed,
He being Mayor of London then, soon daunted all our pride,
He slew me first, the rest soon fled, and then like traitors died.
I Represent sir William Walworth's place,
A fishmonger, and Mayor of London twice,
I slew Iacke Straw, who sought my king's disgrace,
and for my act reaped honours of great price,
First Knight was I of London you may read,
and since each Mayor gains knighthood by my deed.
Yea for that deed to London I did gain,
this dagger here in arms given as you see,
I won my company this crest which doth remain,
this to myself and my posterity.
Thus did the King with honours me adore,
and Fame herself still laudeth me therefore.
Time serves for all things,
Time runneth fast,
We crave your patience, for the time is past.