WHo would think that a God lay lurking under a grey cloak,
Silly Shepherds grey cloak, & armed with a paltry sheephook?
And yet no petty God, no God that god's by the mountains,
But the triumphantst God that bears any sway in Olympus:
Which many times hath made man-murdring Mars to be cursing
His bloodsucking blade; and prince of watery empire
Earth-shaking Neptune, his threeforckt mace to be leaving,
And Ioue omnipotent, as a poor and humble obeissant,
His three-flaked lightnings and thunderbolts to abandon.
And I believe, thus shaped, and thus with a mantle adorned
Lady Venus will scarce find out her wily Cupid,
Mine own mother, I hope, will scarce take me for her own son.
She makes me run away, and thus compels me to hide me,
For that still she bids, and still commands as a mother
Boy, and bow, and all: and still persuades as a woman
Proud-harted woman, that I bend my bow to the Court still,
And, as a Lord, with Lords and Ladies still be a dwelling:
As for parks and woods, such wooden stuff she referreth
Unto the wanton wags that wait on Lordly Cupid.
But let a woman talk, let boys be afraid of a woman,
Lord of love's no boy, although that he seem to be boy-like:
I'll bestow myself, as best shall seem to my owneself;
Doves be my mother's birds, but destiny gave to Cupid
All-inflaming lamp and golden bow for a weapon.
Oftentimes do I hide myself, and fly fro my mother
(Not that I own any suit as a servile slave to my mother,
But that I can not abide to be daily desired by my mother
For to renounce Hoblobs, and aim at a King or a Kaiser)
Oftentimes do I fly, and shroud myself in a thicket,
Leaving Crystal thrones for bowers and rustical harbours:
But no sooner I can convey myself from Olympus,
But she begins to demand and ask for lovely Cupid,
where's that wandering boy, that vile boy, lovely Cupid?
Seek and search my boy, my wag, my lovely Cupid:
Look for a curldpate boy, his wings will quickly bewray him,
Look for a boy with a lamp and bow and quiver about him:
Whoso finds my boy, my joy, my lovely Cupid,
And brings back my boy, shall have for a friendly remembrance,
Either a sweet sweet kiss, or somewhat more than a sweet kiss:
As though Lovely Cupid to a friend that love's to be silent,
Neither could nor would allow for a fryendly remembrance
Either a sweet sweet kiss, or somewhat more than a sweet kiss.
And, I believe, my kiss, (if love intent to be lovely)
Will be a sweeter kiss to a lass then Queen Cytheraeaes.
Thus, many times in vain she seeks for lovely Cupid,
Loving girls are loath to bewray their lovely Cupid.
Yet, to be more secure, my curledlocks I do curtal,
My wings are laid down, my bow and quiver abandoned,
Weapons all set aside; and yet love stands not unarmed.
For this staff, that seems but a toy, that I bear for a fashion,
Is loves lamp indeed, and bears but a show of a sheephook,
Lou'es transformed lamp, with most invincible ardour,
Most invisible heat, and secret ardour abounding,
Though in form but rude, and goldhead seems to be wanting,
Whoso feeles his force shall find it not to be poyntles,
Where it lights it works, and leaves impression endless:
This blunt dart shall give that cureless wound to the hartroote
Of loveles damsel, most loveles damsel amongst all
Those loveles damsels that wait on mighty Diana.
Phillis (that's her name) disdainefulst wench of a thousand
Shall in her hardest heart conceive as mighty a loves-wound,
As was that, that I made in tender breast of Amyntas.
Now many pleasant springs are past, since young Lad Amyntas
And young girl Phillis, themselves were wont to be sporting,
Now to be gathering flowers, and filberts now to be cracking,
Now to be laying begins for birds, and now to be angling:
And yet, that this blow may make more forcible entrance
And more speedily pierce, i'll stay and look for a fit time:
When pity moves her mind, and makes her breast to be tender,
Then will I strike and wound; and that this lovely beginning
May as luckyly end, i'll talk and walk as a herdsman,
And so insinuate myself to the company rural
Of these jolly Shepherds which hither now be repairing,
All in a brave merriment dame Flora'es wakes to be keeping,
With their garlands green, and boughs of Myrtle adorned.
Here, even here will I make that most incurable harts-wound
Which no mortal eye shall see: then lovely Cupid
Lovely Cupidoe's fame in these woods shallbe resounding,
These woods than shall feel a triumphant power to be present,
And perceive that I work by myself, and not by my servants:
Noble thoughts will I send, and high conceits will I breathe forth
Into the lowli'est minds, and frame their voice to a sweeter
And more sugared tune: for wheresoever I harbour,
Wheresoever I keep, i'll still be the lovely Cupid,
aswell in Hoblobs' heart, as in heart of a King or a Kaiser,
And as I list, I do make an unaequall mind to be equal:
And this is only my joy, and herein most do I glory,
That by the quyckning heat, by the fire of lovely Cupid
Oaten pipe contends with learned Lute of a Lording.
Which if my Mother (who scorns that I am thus a wandering
Here and there by the woods) can not conceive to be wondrous,
Then she's blind herself, and not sweet lovely Cupid,
Whom some blind fools have blind boy unworthily called.
WHat? Will Phillis then consume her youth as an anckresse,
Scorning dainty Venus? will Phillis still be a Modder,
And not care to be called by the deare-sweete name of a Mother?
Will not Phillis joy to behold herself in a Phillis,
And her trueloves' face in a young boy's face to be shining?
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.
Seek the delltes of love, who list, (if love be delightful)
This life is my love, my bow and shafts be my treasure,
Hunting is my joy; with stubborn beasts to be striving,
Until I fell them down, and fearful beasts to be chase.
And, till woods want beasts, and quiver feathered arrows,
Phillis shall not want any sweet sports or pretty pastimes.
Fine sweet sports indeed for a girl, and wise pretty pastimes,
Still to be killing beasts, and still by the woods to be ranging.
This life, toilsome life, for a while doth seem to be pleasant,
Only because as yet thou hast not tried any other.
So those simple souls that lived when Ioue was an infant,
took for pleasant drink, and meat well worthy a man's mouth,
Streams of purling brooks, and nutbrown kernel of accorne:
But now, streams of brooks, and nutbrown kernel of accorne
Are contemned as drink and meat but fit for a beasts mouth,
Since that corn and grapes were once known how to be used.
If thou couldst, nay wouldst (and who would not, but a fonkin?)
Only but one time taste, and but taste only the thousandst
Part of those pleasures and joys, which still be abounding
In true-lovers soul, when he feels himself to be loved,
Thou wouldst quickly repent, and quickly bewray thy repentance,
And say thus with tears; Each loveles life is a luckless
And accursed life: my best days vainly be ended,
Flowering time is gone, and age creeps hastily onward.
How-many fruitless nights, poor fool, did I waste as a Widow?
How-many joyless days as a Nun did I draw to the euning?
Days, to be passed away with winged boys pretty pastimes,
Nights to be spent with toys and joys of lovely Cupid,
Pastimes, toys, and joys, which more ioy'de breed me the more joy.
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.
When that I seem to repent, or seem to bewray my repentance,
Or say so with tears; let floods run back to the fountains,
Let Wolves fly fro the Lamb, and trembling Hare to the greyhound,
Let Bears range by the sea, and Dolphin swim by the desert.
See what it is to be young; girls always use to be peevish:
So was I in times past, (Good time il passed) when I wanted
Age and experience, and so did I trudg to the forest.
Golden locks, cherylips, red-white face, ivory fingers,
Proud as a praised Peacock, and so did I trudg to the forest.
Nets were then my delight, and bended bow my rejoicing,
Pointed darts my joy, and slaughtered beasts my triumphing.
If that I saw myself (myself unluckily selfwilde)
But by a glance, one glance of a lovers eye to be noted,
Down did I hang my head, and bow mine eyes to my bosom,
Sore displea'sd forsooth, and, God wots, greatly abashed
When my pleasing face to a loves look brought any pleasure,
As though it were some fault, or shame, or mock to my ownself,
For to be looked upon, to be loved, and sought for of others.
But what can not time effect? What can not a lovers
Continual wooing, long serving, daily deserving
Bring by degrees at length, at length, to a fortunate ending?
Phillis, I must confess, at last I began to be yielding
Unto a loves conquest: and these arms made me be yielding,
Long patience, kindness, sighs, tears, importunate askings.
Then did a night, one night, one short night teach me a lesson,
Which many thousand days would never let me be learning:
Then did I quickly repent, and quickly bewray my repentance,
And say thus with tears: Now farewell mighty Diana,
Bowes and shafts I renounce, and brutish life I abandon.
So, I do hope, one day, thy gentlemynded Amyntas
Shall with abundant tears make thy hard heart to be tender;
And why should not I hope, when I see just matter of hoping?
Is not Amyntas fair? is he not loved of many Lasses?
Doth not he love Phillis? yet Phillis love's not Amyntas:
And yet, alas, neither thy hate, nor love of an other
Can withdraw his love: And, if thou look to thy gentry,
As sweet Cydippe is known to be truly thy mother,
Cydippe daughter to the sacred God that abideth
In this silver brook; so, father of hapless Amyntas
Was good Sylvanus, Sylvanus son to the great Pan,
Pan the shepherds great God, that rul's and reign's by the forest.
And, if Phillis chance to behold her face in a fountain,
Phillis will not seem more fair than fair Amaryllis:
And Amaryllis fair loves gentleminded Amyntas;
And Amaryllis love is still contemned of Amyntas,
For that, Phillis love still rests in soul of Amyntas,
Although Phillis alas hates her truelover Amyntas.
Now suppose for a while (God grant it prove but a suppose)
That Phillis sour looks drive of this love of Amyntas,
And Amaryllis love draw on this love of Amyntas,
And that Amyntas kiss, kiss and embrace Amaryllis,
And laugh at Phillis: what then will Phillis imagine?
Well: let Amyntas deal as seemeth best to Amyntas,
And love somewhere else; his love hath made me to hate him.
Loue breed hate? Sweet Sire of a most unnatural offspring
And vile degenerate bastard: but when will a white swan
Hatch any coal-black crow? or meek sheep foster a Tiger?
Daphne leave this talk, or look no more for an answer:
His love breeds my hate, when I hate to afford what he loveth:
he's not a friend, but a foe, that my virgynyty seeketh:
Why then, stifneckt bull is a foe, not a friend to a heifer,
And to a Turtledove, not a friend, but a foe is a Turtle.
Why then sweet springetyme breeds hate and works many mischifs,
Sweetesmyling spring-time, that wills each thing to be loving,
World and all in world; o see how sweetly the Pigeon
There with a murmur sweet his copsemate sweet is a wooing.
Mark that Nightingale, which hops fro the bry'r to the hawthorn,
Hark, how bravely she sings, I do love, and love to be lovely,
Nay even sell serpents with cursed poison abounding,
Strong and stoordy Lions, and Tigers fierce be a loving:
And yet Phillis alas Phillis more fierce than a Tiger,
Worse than a wild Lioness, and more vnkyn'de than a serpent,
Phillis lives still alone, and can not abide to be lovely.
But strong stoordy Lions, fierce Tigers, slippery serpents
Have sense and feeling, therefore no wonder at all, if
Serpents, stoordy Lions, and Tigers fierce be a loving:
O then look to the trees, and learn of them to be lovely,
Look to the senseless trees, and mark how dearly the vinetree
Loves her loving elm, and clipps him fast with a thousand
Thousand embracements, and beech-tree cleaves to the beech-tree,
And wil'de ash to the ash, and pine-tree leane's to the pine-tree.
Yea that broadebrauncht oak which stands so stoordyly pitched,
And seems rude and rough, not moved with a storm or a tempest,
Yields to a kind of love; and, if thou were but a little
Touched with love, thou mights perceive his lovely bewailings,
And secret groanings: and wilt thou then be for all this
Worse than a senseless tree, and never learn to be lovely?
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.
Well: when I see trees weep, and hear their lovely bewailings
And secret groanings, i'll frame myself to be loving.
'tis but a folly I see, to be wasting wyn'de on a proud girl,
That knows nought herself, and will not learn of another.
Thou that makest but a jest of love, hereafter, I doubt not,
Wilt full sore lament, and fyn'de all true that I tell thee:
When thou shalt for shamesly back fro the watery fountains,
Back fro the springs where now thou see'st thy face to be shining,
For very shame and grief to behold thy beauty decayed
And face all wrynckled: that's bad, but that's but a common
mischief, look in time that a worse plague light not upon thee.
I'll say nought; but I woe what news were truly reported
By sage Elpinus last day, to the lovely Lycoris:
And he reported afore Corydon and Alphesiboeus
Twooe greatest masters of loves laws, and he reported
In fair Aurora's great Cave, whose beautiful entrance
Hath these words engraned by the hand of lovely Cupid,
(This place is sacred, for lovers only appointed)
There Elpinus said, and said that he heard it of old time
Of that great pastor, (great man, whose sweetly resounding
Pipe did pass fro the fyelds and sang of martial horrors,)
How that in hell's deep pit, foul fyends have framed a dungeon,
All as black as pitch, and all as dark as an oven,
Hard by the joyless banks where smokes and fogs be arising
From wailing Acheron: and there these no-pyty-taking
Dames and scornful girls are all condemned to be plagued,
All tormented there in dungeons ugly for ever.
There fit place, fair walks for Phillis shallbe prepared:
There shall fogs, and mists, and smokes, and palpable horror
Wring out tears from her eyes, and force her still to be wailing,
Whom no lovers smart, no grief could make to be weeping.
Good sweet Daphne peace, and tell this again to Lycoris,
Terrify babes with bugs: its time to be gone to the hunting
Solemn great hunting which this same day is appointed
In that pleasant park, that sweetest park of a thousand
Yuychurches park, pretty Yuychurch, that on hill top
Flowering hill top sits, and looketh down to the valleys,
There, o there, I do heare (for so Philoveuia told me)
There that Nymph, brave Nymph, that peerless Pembrokiana
Yuychurches Nymph doth mean herself to be present,
And with her own person give grace and life to the pastime.
I'll to my wont well with Crystal water abounding,
There will I leave this dust and sweat that I gate by my toiling
Yesterday, when I made that lightfoot Do to be tumbling.
And i'll home, for an hour or two: and then to the hunting,
Then to the park we'll go: in mean time mark what I told thee
More than parcks and wells, and, if symplicity blind thee,
Know thy not knowing; so, mayst thou know of an other.
Hollow caves, raged rocks, waste hills, green watery fountains
For pity, sweetly reply, and answers make to my mourning:
Strong oak, tall pine-tree, green laurel, beautiful Yuy
For pity, sweetly reply, and answers make to my mourning,
Shake their leaves for grief, and bend their bows to my groaning▪
Only that one in whom my joys are only reposed
Yields no lovely reply, no answer makes to my mourning,
Phillis fair and fierce; Phillis more fierce to Amyntas
Than strong oak, tall pine, green laurel, beautiful ivy,
Hollow caves, raged rocks, waste hills, green watery fountains.
When blackmantled night makes every thing to be silent,
Every thing at rest, then wandereth restless Amyntas:
Silver moon, bright stars, you knew these heavy bewailings,
And for grief your course and due revolution altered:
But she alas grieves not, take's no compassion on me,
Whose hart-chearing face, and sweet illuminat eisight
Silver moon, bright stars, and all your bravery stained,
And made you for shame, your due revolution alter.
Harmless sheep and lambs eat grass: and greedy devouring
Wolves eat harmless sheep and lambs: but surly Cupid
Surly Cupido feeds himself on streams of abounding
Tears, and's never filled, and yet stands ever a feeding.
No, no, Thyrsis, alas: Love lacks no tears of Amyntas,
Surly Cupido's full, stuftfull with tears of Amyntas,
And thirsts now for blood, seeks blood of woeful Amyntas,
And what he seeks, he shall have; I'll quench their thirst by my hartblood,
Blind boys, proud girls thirst: and glut their eyes with abundant
Streams of purpled gore of too too wretched Amyntas.
O bloody word, fowl word, o God forbidden that Amyntas
Should or think, or work any outrage unto Amyntas.
Cast of these fancies, leave these toys, pluck up a mans-hart:
If bony Phillis scorn, and make but a mock of Amyntas,
Yet shall Amyntas find as brave gyrls as bony Phillis.
Find brave gyrls? o grief: if Amyntas find not Amyntas,
How can he find others? o how shall he find bony Lasses,
If that he lose himself? o how shall I seek any other,
Since my settled soul and heart are like to an aged
And well grounded tree, which now is come to the full groat,
And will rather break, than bend, or yield to be turned.
Hate augments my love; her frowns give fire to my fancy,
As gentle spaniel, whom beating makes to be loving.
Fear in a fearful man frets more than plagues that he feareth:
Hope, and have, in time any man may gain any woman.
Long time mighty Lions at length hath brought to the bridle,
And wildest Tigers at length are tamed in a long tyme.
Yea, but alas long time's too long for wretched Amyntas:
Death must speedily speed, no wretch can abide any long tyme.
Stay but a while, no doubt these things will mend in a short time:
Thou know'st that women by kind are mutable ever,
Soon hot, and soon cold, like and mislike in a moment,
Change as a weathereock, and all as light as a feather.
But let Thyrsis now know more at large of Amyntas
His distressed state; for though thou toldst me a great while
Since, that Love gave first occasion unto thy torments,
And that proud Phillis gave fresh increase to thy sorrows,
Yet whence this love sprang, who was that Phillis I knew not.
And sith soemany years w'have lived so friendly together,
And applied ourselus to the lores of learned Apollo,
there's cause why Thyrsis should know those things of Amyntas,
Which his Amyntas knows, and will show only to Thyrsis.
Know o Thyrsis then, know this mine infinite anguish,
Which these hills well know, which these sweet watery wells know,
And yet no man knows: my fatal hour is approaching,
My death draws so near, that now its time to provide some
Time to provide some friend, which may and willbe reporter
Of death and death's cause, which will for a friendly remembrance
Death and cause of death engrave in bark of a beech tree,
Hard by the damned place, where corpse of murdered Amyntas
Bloodless corpse shall lie, that when that brave bony damsel
That pytiles Phillis shall chance that way to be passing,
Her proud foot, and yet sweet foot may joy to be treading
Treading and trampling these baleful bones of Amyntas.
And that serpent's tongue, thus take a delight to be vaunting,
This death is my triumph, these bruised bones my trophaeum;
That such strange travelers as this way chance to be wandering,
And foreign Pastors that pass by the grave of Amyntas,
May know this conquest, and make it known to the country.
And perchance (o Noah, that's too too good for Amyntas)
Yet perchance one day may once come, when bony Phillis
When bony sweet Phillis, now moved with a lovely repentance,
Lovely remorse, may take some small compassion on me,
And, when 'tis too-late, lament this loss of Amyntas,
Shedding some sweet tears for death of murdered Amyntas,
His death; whom when he lived, herself did cause to be dying;
Saying, O that he were, that he were not a murdered Amyntas,
O that he lived now, and were my lover Amyntas.
But now hark and mark of cares and woe the beginning.
Say on then, for I hark and mark perchance to a better
End, than thou thyself canst yet conceive or imagine.
When that I was but a wag, young wag, so young, that I could scarce
Reach mine outstretched arm to the bending bows of a plum-tree;
'Twas my luck (ill luck) t'acquaint myself with a brave girl,
Bravest girl that spreads her golden locks to the tender
Wind, fair Phillis I mean, but alas what meant I to mean her?
Phillis a flame to the soul, and Phillis a flower to the forest,
Phillis a Townish gyrls disgrace, and grace to the country,
Phillis a fame to the Park, and Phillis a shame to the Palace,
Phillis that first made Cydippe for to be mother,
Phillis that first made that rich Montanus a father:
With that Phillis I was (most woeful was, when I am not)
With that Phillis I lived (o luckless lived, when I live not)
Phillis a turtle dove, and faithful turtle Amyntas:
Both our bowers were nigh, which made us both to be neighbours,
Both our minds more nigh, which caused us both to be fryendly:
Both our ages like, which first was cause of a liking,
Both our lives more like, which still gave fire to a fancy.
If that Amyntas were disposed for to be fishing,
Phillis a fishing went: if Amyntas meant to be fowling,
Phillis a fowling went: if Phillis longed for a filbert,
Younker Amyntas clymbde: if Phillis would be a hunting,
Who but Amyntas then, but greene-coate Huntsman Amyntas?
Either's sport was like, and either's portion equal.
But when Amyntas thus bestowed himself on his angling,
Other baits and hooks took secret hold of Amyntas:
Whilst that Amyntas thus laid traps and snares for a redbreast,
White-brest laid new snares and hidden traps for Amyntas:
Whilst that Amyntas I say ran pricking after a Pricket,
far more poisoned darts have pricked hartroote of Amyntas.
For, by degrees there grew (as an herb that grows of her own self)
In my breast there grew, but I witted not whence, a desiring
Still to be with Phillis, poor fool, and still to be gazing
On those burning lamps, whence still still I sucked a sweetness,
Strange kind of sweetness which ended still with a sourness.
Oftentimes did I sigh, yet knew no cause of a sighing,
And was a lover afore that I knew what 'twas to be loving:
But now Thyrsis, I know, and mark, I'll tell thee the manner.
Say on Amyntas then; this matter's worthy the marking.
Once on a day (o day, o dismallst day of a thousand)
Once on a summers day (o summer worse than a winter)
Under a beech (o beech of Amyntas woe the beginning)
Phillis sat her down, and down sat Cassiopoea,
And I between them both: when a Bee that gathered honey
Here and there fro the flowers, conueys herself in a moment
Unto the red-rose cheek of smiling Cassiopoea,
And there bites and bites fair cheek of Cassiopoea,
Thinking sure, (as I think) her red-rose cheeks to be roses.
Bee bites, biting smarts, and smarting Cassiopoea
Wringeth her hands and cries: But, peace, qd my bony Phillis,
Cassiopoea, be still, cry not sweet Cassiopoea:
I'll with a word or two soon cause thy pain to be ceasing,
I'll soon charm thy cheek; this secret lately I learned
Of beldame Sagane, for an ivory comb that I gave her.
Then sh'applyes her lips (life-geeving lips to a Lover,
And yet alas, yet alas life-taking lips from a Lover)
Unto the smarting cheek of whining Cassiopoea,
And with a sweet sweet sound her spells she begins to be mumbling:
By and by (strange thing) her pain was passed in a moment,
Whether charming words did work so mighty a wonder,
Or that Phillis mouth (which rather may be believed)
Heals where it toucheth by some great grace of Apollo.
Then then, whereas afore I desired but to be seeing
Hart-inflaming eyes, I desired but to be hearing
Soul-inuading voice, sweet voice, and like to the purling
Streams of a silver brook that creeps with a lovely resounding
Murmur among small stones, or like to the dayntyly warbling
Noise of a gentle wind, that makes green leaves to be trembling,
Then then alas did I long and look and wish to be joining
This my mournful mouth to the mouth of my bony Phillis:
And in fine I devised (Love finds out wily devices)
How t' obtain my desire: for I feigned, that a wasp fro the bushes
Flew to my face in a rage, and poor lips all to be stinged;
And my doleful looks did look and crave to be charmed,
Though my tongue was afraid, and made no suit to the charmer,
Then simple Phillis, who took my tale for a Gospel,
Came of her own accord and joined her lips to my sore-lipp,
Sore-sick lip God knows: But alas, whilst Phillis a feigned
Wound with sweet lips healed, her sweet lips gave me a true-wound,
Gave me a mortal wound that ran fro the lips to the liver,
Nay, immortal wound that pierced fro the mouth to the marrow.
No busy Bee can suck more sweet and sugared honey
From sweet-smelling flowers, than was distilled fro the roses
Of chery-lipt Phillis by the boiling breath of Amyntas;
Although bashful fear was somewhat a curb to my kisses,
And restrained my joys: which made me the more to desire that
Poisoned bitter-sweet, and feign yet again that I smarted,
That with Phillis lips my lips might freshly be charmed:
And so charmed I was, so stinged, so deadly bewitched,
So sore enchanted with spill-soule spells, that I must needs
Either break my heart, or break my love to my Phillis:
This breaking of love was a loves-breake; better it had been
Harts-breake or necks-breake to the sore hart-wounded Amyntas.
Once on a time when Nymphs and Pastors chanced to be sporting.
Standing all in a round, and each one whispered a secret
Into an others ear, poor fool I began to be buzzing,
Phillis, I burn with love, o take compassion on me,
Help or I die Phillis: But Phillis strait with a lowering
Look and frowning face, and downcast eyes to the ground-ward,
Blushed for spite and shame, and gave not a word for an answer,
But coweyd her away, and flew fro the place in a fury.
From that time, no time would Phillis abide with Amyntas,
Lend no eyes to the tears, no ears to the plaints of Amyntas.
And now flaxen wheat his ripened stalk to the sickle
Hath threetimes yielded, now cheerful spring, to the forest
Flowering bows hath brought threetimes, and flowers to the meadow,
And each thing but death long since was tried by Amyntas
For t'appease Phillis; my death now only remaineth
For t'appease Phillis: which death should soon be procured,
So that I were once sure that I should by my deadly departure
Wring any tears from her eyes, or bring any joy to her hard heart,
Make her weep or laugh; and whether should I be wishing?
Indeed Phillis tears and mind with mercy relenting
Were far better amends for death of murdered Amyntas,
And more friendly reward for luckless love of Amyntas,
But that I may not wish sweet Phillis mind to be grieved,
Nor Phillis fair face and eyes with tears to be blubbered.
And what man, madman, can think it possible, if that
Once she do hear these plaints, but that she'll yield to be loving?
O good Thyrsis, I doubt, for I never gi'en to be speaking,
But she recoils fro my words, as subtle snake fro the charmer.
Doubt not, I hope ere long, I'll cause her friendly to hear thee.
If thou get that I speak, than nought shall I get by my speaking.
Mopsus alas Mopsus foretold me my destiny long-since,
Soothsayer Mopsus that knows what mystery secret
And hidden virtues in stones and herbs be abiding,
And by the flight and chirp of birds can tell many wonders.
What? that cozening squire, that broke and sells to the old wives
Pelting pills in a box, and so scrapes coin fro the country?
Hope yet Amyntas a while; for I know there's matter of hoping:
Only because Mopsus says there's no matter of hoping:
Hope, and meet me again in this same place: for I doubt not
But that in one half hour, I'll bring good news to Amyntas.
O Sweet age of gold, not sweet, for that by the pastures
Every brook and bush with milk and honey abounded;
Nor that fertile ground untilled, untutcht was afording
Fresh increase of fruit to the poorman's daily rejoicing;
Nor that stingles snakes and harmless slippery serpents
slided abroad by the fields and never breathed any poison;
Nor that clowdles skies seemed evermore to be smiling,
And aeternal Spring her spring-time daily renewing;
Nor that no pine-trees as yet cut down fro the mountains
Ranged abroad by the rocks with salt waves all to be dashed:
But sweet age of gold, for that this name of a noething,
Idle name of nought, and daily deceivable Idol,
Which fools afterward, fine-fooles have made to be Honour,
Was nor named, nor known, nor brought new laws to the country
And poor countrymen, whose lives were only directed
By sweet Nature's law, sweet Nature taught them a lesson,
If you will, you may: and straitlaced rules did abandon.
Then by the greene-mantled pastures and watery fountains
Loves young wanton wags were always wont to be singing,
And had no light lamps, and had no dangerous arrows.
Then brave jolly Shepherds and Nymphs sat sweetly together,
Tempering words with smiles; and every smile with a kissing.
Nymphs were not so nice, but that they yielded a full view
Of their bared breasts to the searching eyes of a lover.
Girls were not so coy, but that they would with a younker
Friendly together wash, and bathe themselves in a river.
Honour first covered wellspring of lovely Cupid,
Honour plucked water from scorched mouth of a Lover,
Honour taught fair eyes their glittering beams to be hiding,
And to the darkened soul their light unkindly denying.
Honour caught in nets those golden locks, that in old time
Were left lose to the wind dispersed along by the shoulders.
Honour marred our mirth, and lovelayes turned to a silence,
And all our pastimes to a solemn gravity changed.
Honour taught us first our mouths by art to be moving,
Looks by a looking glass, and gate with skill to be framing.
Honour called it a theft, which first was counted a free gift,
Honour made it a crime, which first was thought but a pastime.
But thou supreme Lord of Love, thou only Monarcha,
Which rul'st mighty Monarches, what dost thou here in a corner,
For so great a Godhead o too too simple a corner?
Go to a proud Diadem, to a golden crown, to a sceptre,
Break those great men's sleep; so shall thy fame be the greater:
Disgrace not thy-self with poor contemptible abjects,
But let Countrey-fooles live as they used to be living,
Let them live in love, whilst they have time to be loving.
Sun sets, and riseth; goes down, and quickly reviveth,
But man's light once out, aeternal darkness abideth:
Then let Countrey-fooles live as they used to be living,
Let them live in love, whilst they have time to be loving.
THis same foolish Bees but a Bee, and Bees but a small thing,
Yet this buzzing Bee with a small mouth maketh a great wound:
But what's less than Love, that lurketh in every corner,
Every small small nook; and hides himself as a false-thiefe
Sometimes under an hair, and sometimes under an ey-lidd?
Yet this lest least Love, when he smiteth, maketh a great-wound,
Great great mortal wound, great cureless wound in a lover.
My flesh's nought but a mark all overprickt with her arrows,
My body nought but a wound, my bowels nought but a bleeding.
O Love, nay not Love, that love unlovely requiteth,
Love was as ill called Love, as this proud paltry Phillis
Was well called Phillis; (disdainful Phillis an ill is,
Ill to her owneself first, and always ill to an other:)
As this Mountaine-byrd, Montanus daughter I should say,
Was well called Phillis; since hill-borne Phillis a hill is:
Wild waste hills and woods and mountains serve for a harbour
Unto the ravenous brood of wolves, bears, slippery serpents;
And hillish Phillis makes her fair breast, as a lodging
For fowl pride, fell spite, and most implacable anger,
Worse beasts, far more worse, than wolves, bears, slippery serpents,
These with a pray are pleased, but she's not moved with a prayer.
If that I fetch her flowers, fresh fragrant flowers fro the forest,
My fresh fragrant flowers, o spite, with a scorn she rejecteth,
For cause her fair cheeks with fairer flowers be adorned.
If that I bring in a dish queene-apples unto my dear Queen,
Dish and queene-apples, o grief, with a mock she renounceth,
For cause her bosom with fruit far sweeter aboundeth.
If that I range by the woods and fyelds, and gather her honey,
Honn' and honnyes comb, o death, with a flout she refuseth,
For cause her sweet mouth more sugared honey afordeth,
O then Phillis, alas, if my poor state can afford thee
nought, but what thyself mayst have more lovely within thee,
Take myself for a guyft, i'll give myself to my Phillis,
And why should Phillis disdain this gift that I give her?
My face is not fowl, my looks are not to be loathed,
Yesterday I beheld myself when I walked by the seashore,
When seas were calmed, when winds their rage had omitted
My sanguine countenance with moisture lively replenished,
Bristled breast, braund arms, and shoulders stoordyly squared
Are all signs of strength, and marks of manliness only,
And if Phillis doubt, let Phillis try what is in me.
What should Phillis do with a curldpate paltry cockney?
What with a smooth-faced fool, with a carpet squire, with a mylksop?
What with a piping goose, with a whistling boy, with a minstrel?
Girls indeed, and girls in show, effoeminat each way?
If perchance Phillis, (this chance may easily happen)
Should encounter a Wolf, or a fell she Bear, or a wild Boar,
Then farewell minions, than bristled breasts be the best men.
O but alas, Phillis doth know right well, that I want not
Man's face or man's heart; but gold and silver I have not,
Gold and silver I want, and this makes Phillis abhor me
Country learns of town to be bought, and every Malkin
Looks for a purse of silk, or a ring, no less than a Lady.
Here is an age of gold indeed, gold only triumpheth,
Gold rul's and o'er ruls from a milkmaid unto an Empress.
Thou, thou wicked wight that first taughtst maids to be Merchants,
And mad'st girls sell love; o let thy grave be a dungeon
For foul spirits and snakes; o let thy damnable ashes
Feel both wind and rain, and bones lie all to be scattered
Here and there by the fyelds, bones bruised of every footman,
Trodden of every beast, accursed of all the beholders,
This wretch, noble love did abase, when he made it a hireling,
Made it a slave of gold, and made it a monsterus Hydra,
Monster of all monsters that land or water afordeth.
But what mean I to curse in vain? since every creature
Useth such weapons, as nature gave, to defend him?
Claws to the greedy Lions, and foaming tusk to the wild Boar,
Winged eggs to a heart, and pleasing face to a woman,
Why doel not then deal according unto my nature?
Why do I not show force, since nature fram'es me to forcing?
I'll take by violence and rape those joys fro the proud girl
Which are due to my love, and Phillis stoutly denieth.
When she begins herself in wonted well to be washing,
(Silent showed me the well, fair well, well worthy a fair lass)
I'll rush out from a bush (where first i'll lie as in ambush)
And take her napping, when I see occasion offered.
If that I once can roll my hand in her hair, let her hardly
Scratch and bite and whine, she'll never scape fro my clutches,
Till, for a worthy revenge, her blood, my blade be a bathing.
Thyrsis, I know too well, that tender-mynded Amyntas
Hath long loved this girl; and long may love her, I fear me.
And, as I told thee before, my helping hand did I always,
And will now much more for thy sake, lend to Amyntas.
But more soon may one make gentle a Bear or a Tiger,
And tame young wild Bulls, then learn young gyrls any reason,
Gyrls as fond as fair: whose rude symplycyty knows not,
How their eye-arrowes can pierce men's hearts in a moment.
Simple? I never yet could see so simple a woman,
But was most expert, though but new crept fro the cradle,
In these cosn'ing tricks; and knew her face to be framing,
Now with a smile t'allure, and now to repel with a frowning.
What skilful Mistress taught them this mystery, Thyrsis?
As though thou knewst not: that Mistress, which did in old time
Take young birds fro the nest, and taught them for to be flying,
Bull to rebut with a horn, and scaled fish to be swimming,
And proudhart Peacock her painted train to be spreading.
What's her name? Thy. Daphne. Dap. Fie, that's impossible. Thy. And why?
Is not dame Daphne trow you, to be deemed a Mistress
Sufficient t'enstruct ten thousand such bony lasses?
Though in truth they want no skill, nor need any mistress,
Coy by kind, and proud by birth, and surly by nature.
Yet nurse and mother contend this folly to further,
And so make in time young cockerel like to the old crow.
Well crowed, gentle Cock: your song may chance be requited:
But to the matter in hand, in truth, in truth I remember
One odd toy, Thyrsis, that makes me scarcely resolved,
Whether Phillis fain and make but a show of a simplesse,
Or for a truth doth mean as in outward show she pretendeth.
For, last day when I went to the green field near to the cytty,
Phillis sat her down by the brook that runs by the green field,
And so her countenance composed, as though she required
Counsel from that brook, and would, b'aduisd by the water,
How to be disposing, and how to be dayntyly ordering
Gold wyr'de hair on her head, and how with skill to be setting
Call on gold wyr'de hair, and how at last to be sticking
Flowers in a golden call, (her lap with flowers was abounding)
And now takes up a Rose, and straight way takes up a lily:
And compares her cheeks to the Rose, and neck to the Lily:
And then smiles for joy, seeing her lowly triumphant
Cheeks more red than a Rose, and neck more white than a Lily,
And disdaigns poor flowers, and thus seems them to be scorning,
Foolish paltry herbs, your pied coat's nought to my countenance,
Your flowers nought to my face, your bravery nought to my beauty,
Foolish paltry weeds, I do bear you often about me,
For your own disgrace, and not for a grace to my person,
That your fading flowers may serve as a foil for a Phillis.
As she was all this while pruning herself by the water,
Princking and pranking, at last by chance she reflected
Her bright beams sydeward, and then saw well, that I saw her,
And was ashamed and blushed, and let fair Lily be falling.
More that Daphne laughed, more Phillis still was a blushing,
More that Phillis blushed, more Daphne still was a laughing.
Buy yet, her hair half trest, half untrest well she remembered,
And with a stealing eye to the waterglasse she repaired,
Spying whether I spied; and see's herself to be undressed,
And yet likes herself, seeing herself to be seemly
Though undressed, for I saw, yet would not seem to be seeing.
Peace, peace, good Daphne: this no news, come to Amyntas.
No news? yes mary ist: for no such matter in old time
Ever afore was seen: When Daphne was but a Damsel
Dapne was not so: but world now waxeth an old world,
Grows to be wayward now, and peevish like to an old man.
In those days, Townebyrds flew not so fast to the country,
Nor country lasles did gad so much to the Cytty.
Now all's confounded, now fashions all to be mingled
All to be mangled quite, and every Madge is a Mistress,
All's turned upside down. But may not, may not Amyntas,
And bonnilass Phillis yet talk once fryendly together
By Daphne's good means, and condescend to a parley?
Thyrsis, I am not sure; she's too too flatly denying.
And he, alas, poorefoole, is too too fond desiring.
Then let him ask, entreat, importune, nay let him offer,
Yea offer violence, and take no nay; for a woman
loves to be wooed of a man: thou knowst well, Thyrsis, a woman
Runs, and yet so runs, as though she desired to be o'errun;
Says, Noah, Noah; yet so, as no, Noah, seems to be no Noah;
strives, and yet so strives as though she desired to be vanquished.
Woeman's like to a shade, that flies, yet lies by the subject,
Like to a Bee, that never strives, if sting be removed.
Thou seest, Thyrsis, I talk as a plain wench unto a plain friend.
Then good plain Daphne, it's more than time to be plain now,
Help me to help our friend poor helpless fryendles Amyntas.
Well to be plain indeed, and end this matter in one word,
Phillis goes with me now by and by to the brave well,
Mighty Diana's well, where largearmed ash to the hunting
Nymphs gives cooling shade; there Phillis shallbe presented
Naked, starcknaked to the open view of Amyntas.
And what then? Daph. What then? then I think thus much to a wiseman
Will seem sufficient, and is too much for a fonkyn.
Now I do know thy mind: but I doubt least fearful Amyntas
Have not so much heart, as boldly to offer an onset.
Then let Amyntas stay, till an other seek to prevent him.
If that he were so served, he deserved well so to be served.
But to thyself Thyrsis, wilt still be a boy or a bachelor?
Were't not far better to be husband or to be lover?
When that Thyrsis see's, that loves not a plague to a lover,
Then shall Daphne see, that Thyrsis willbe a lover.
But whilst hateful love with tears and fears is abounding,
Love who will for me: let another learn to be mourning,
Thyrsis enough hath mourned. Daph. But he hath not joyed enough yet.
No such joys I desire. Daph. But love can force the resister.
No force; i'll keep back. Daph. And then love hasteneth onward.
I'll run. Daph. Love hath wings. Thyrs. But short wings in the beginning.
lovers feel not love, when love is first a beginning,
And when love's once felt, it's too late then to be running.
But let my love rest, till again we chance to be meeting,
And let Amyntas now, for he most needs, first be relieved.
I'll seek him straight way▪ and bring, if I can, the retiring
Bear to the stake. Daph. I'll go, but this was far fro my meaning.
And, if I guess not amiss, lo yonder he comes, with a downcast
Look, and wandering pace, pace and look fit for Amyntas.
THyrsis gave good words: I'll see what's done for Amyntas;
And, if no thing's done, then afore that I seem to be undone,
Myself-murdring hand shall reave this breath from Amyntas
Even in Phillis sight, that like as now she delighteth
Herself with this wound, loves wound, that cleaves to my heart root,
Wound of her own fair eyes: so may she be freshly triumphing
At this gaping wound with purpled gore that aboundeth
Wound of mine own hands, last wound of murdered Amyntas.
Leave of thy mourning: Thyrsis brings news to Amyntas.
What news? life, or death?
Life, love, bliss, joy to Amyntas,
If that Amyntas dare joy, bliss, love, life be a meeting.
But then he must be a man, not a mome, man fully resolved,
And not shrynck with a shower, as a faint heart fool or a dastard.
And what great cowrrage, or what resolution is this?
If that thy Phillis should wander alone in a desert,
Desert walled about with rocks of monsterus hugeness,
Where sharpe-tusked Boars, and Tigers only resorted,
Wouldst thou go to thy love by this so fearful a passage?
Yea, with a better will, than girls or boys to the stooleball.
If thy Phillis were with a thievish company compassed,
And saw nought but swords and glistering armour about her,
Wouldst thou go to thy love through this same company thievish?
Yea, with a greater joy, than thirsting Hart to the fountain,
Yet for such exploit, more courage willbe required.
I'll with a good will go through scorching flames of a furnace,
I'll through swelling streams increased with snow fro the mountains,
I'll through damnable hell, through loathsome Styx, to my Phillis,
If that can be a hell where heu'ns-ioy Phillis abideth:
But say, show me all.
Hark then.
Tell speedily, Thyrsis,
Thy love sits by a well, sits naked, alone, by a wellspring.
Phillis sits by a well, and stays for gentle Amyntas,
Darest thou go to thy love, and wilt thou go to thy Phillis?
What? doth my dear life, doth my love sit by a wellspring?
What? doth Phillis alone and naked stay for Amyntas?
None else but Daphne; and Daphne works for Amyntas,
Otherwise she alone, and naked stays for Amyntas,
Naked, but. Amynt. But what? this vile, But, murdereth Amyntas.
But Phillis knows not that Amyntas comes to the wellspring.
O wellspring of woe; this cold conclusion endeth
All my hope conceived, and draws confusion onward;
O pytyles Thyrsis, was sowl-tormented Amyntas
Not yet plagued enough, but thou must heap on a new plague?
If thou mean to be ru'ld, thou mayst be a happy Amyntas.
How ru'ld? Thyr. Take that good, which opportunyty offereth.
God forbidden, that I take such opportunyty offered
As t'attempt any thing displeasing unto my Phyills.
Yet did I never thing offensive unto my Phillis,
But that I loved her alas, yet alas she'enforced me to love her,
That fault's hers, not mine, and beauty to blame, not Amyntas.
If thou couldst leave love, wouldst thou leave of to be loving,
That by not loving, thou mightst please thy bony Phillis?
That, will I never say Thyrsis, nor never imagine,
Love will not consent, that I ever leave to be loving.
Thou wilt love her then, though in despite of her own heart.
In despite? o Noah, yet needs needs must I be loving.
What then? against her will. Amynt. Loue wills so, if she be wilful.
Take then against her will that, which though in the beginning
Seems to be painful a while, yet proves to be joyful in ending.
Thy long experience, o Thyrsis, makes the be talking,
Makes the be discoursing of love: but freshman Amyntas
Is possessed with love, and love must frame him an answer,
Love, that clogs harttyed and tongtyed lover Amyntas.
Why then, wilt not go? Amy. Yes. Thyr. Whether? Amy. Strait to my long home,
If no help, but this, can bring any joy to Amyntas.
And is this nothing? would Daphne send for Amyntas,
Unless that Phillis seemed in some part to be willing?
And perchance Phillis doth know herself, that Amyntas
Comes to the well indeed, but will not seem to be knowing.
Now if thou wouldst have her full consent to be uttered,
And mind expressed, which every woman abhorreth,
Where is then thy desire, thy Phillis still to be pleasing?
And if Phillis will, that Amyntas joy, be Amyntas
Theft, not Phillis guyfte; what further seeketh Amyntas?
O but alas who knows, that Phillis liketh Amyntas?
And who knows for truth, that Phillis lyks not Amyntas?
And in an equal doubt, that part is best to be taken,
Which to the party's mind is most conformable always;
Therefore come. Amy. Stay yet. Thyr. For what? time passeth Amyntas.
O stay good Thyrsis, let's here consult for a while yet.
we'll consult by the way of things that seem to be needful.
Who so thinks many things▪ brings seaw to a fortunate ending.
O Heart-ennobling great love, where shall we be learning
These thy sacred laws? in what school must we be trained
Up to thy high conceits? or what so skilful a master
Possibly may unfold those supreme thoughts of a lover
Which his soul possess, whilst with thy wings in a moment
His mind mounts to the skies, and Christall-mantled Olympus?
Neither learned Athens, nor great fame-worthy Lycoeus.
Can loves force express, or loves perfection utter;
Neither Castalian Muses, nor great-God Apollo,
Nor rymewright singers could once aspire to the thousandst
Part of those joys, which in a lovers breast be abounding:
Their voice is not a voice of fire, they sing but a cold song,
Song and voice unfit for loves unspeakable ardour:
So then loves own voice is a fittest voice for a loves-lay,
So then Love himself is best expressed by his owneself.
Love learns rural wits, and base-born breasts to be reading
Hart-burning secrets and wonders, daintily written
In faire-flaming eyes, by the hand of lovely Cupid.
Love (o strange eloquence of Love) with a sigh, with an half-speach,
Interrupted speech, confused speech of a Lover,
Sooner a tigers heart to a true compassion urgeth,
Better a secret smart and inward passion uttreth,
Than trope-turned tale, or rhyming ditty, derived
From foolhardy Poets, or vaine-head Rhetoricasters.
Nay, those silent looks, and lovely regards of a Lover
More, than a thousand words, express those pangs of a Lover.
Let those famous Clerks with an endless toil be perusing
Socratical writings; two fair eyes teach me my lesson:
And what I read in those, I do write in a bark of a beech-tree,
Beech-tree better book, than a thousand Dainty devices.
O Extreme disdaigne, o most unmerciful hard-hart,
O unthankful girl, o proud, and no-pity-taking
Women, cursed by kind, unkind kind, kin to a Tiger,
Kin to a poisoned snake. O dame, nay rather a stepdame,
Bungling artificer Nature, which framed a woman's
external countenance, and outward parts to be cheerful,
But th'internal soul, and inward part to be spiteful.
O perchance, poor wretch, himself hath murdered his ownself.
Every place do I seek and search out every corner,
Every bush, each cave, each bank, and every fountain
All these three hours long, by the well where lately I left him;
Yet no sight can I get,, no hearing, no not a footestepp
Wherein he trod of late, not a footestepp yet can I light on:
Sure he's killed, he's dead, himself hath murdered his owneself.
I'll ask these Pastors, if they can show any tidings:
Good friends, have you seen, do ye know any news of Amyntas?
Some bad misfortune thy mind seems greatly to trouble:
What mean's this sweeting and blowing? Fearest any mischif?
Mischif I fear indeed of Amyntas: show me Amyntas.
Nobody here saw him, since you two lately departed.
But what mischif fearest? Thyrs. That Amyntas murder Amyntas.
Murder Amyntas. Why? What works so desperate outrage?
Hate and Loue. Chor. Two foes, th'one th'other deadly maligning▪
Either sufficient, but both more mighty to murder:
Yet make this more plain. Thyrs. To be too too heartily loving,
And of a loved Lass to be too too spytefuly hated.
But show all at large: this place is an ordinary thoroughfare:
Here some man may pass that may bring news of Amyntas,
And some wind himself may hither chance to be driving.
I'll show all indeed, for I should unjustly be dealing,
If that I blaze not abroad so shameful a fact to the whole world.
Wretched Amyntas knew, and knew by my only relating,
(Now I repent too late, that I was so fond a relator)
That Daphn ' and Phillis would wash themselves in a wellspring:
Thither Amyntas went, but went very faintily thither,
All unwilling went, and backwards oft he retired,
But that I still still drove him most unluckily forward.
Forward thus we went, and now came near to Diana's
Well, when alas we heard some doleful sound of a damsel,
That still cried, Alas; and saw how woefuly Daphne
Wringed her hands and wept, and seeing us to be coming,
Lifted her hands and voice; O run run quickly to Phillis,
Phillis alas is forced, o run run quickly to Phillis.
Lover Amyntas leapt, as a Rowe-buck pricked with an arrow,
At these words, and flew, and quickly I hastened after:
When we came, we saw fair Phillis bound to a willow,
Naked, starknaked, bound head hand foot to a willow.
Her locks served for a cord, her gold-locks leapt in a thousand
knots, (no true-love's knots) were all tied fast to the willow:
Her brave Belt, which first that pure virginity guarded,
Bound both hands to to the trunk, and this fowl villainy furthred:
And winding willow, unwilling foe to be winding,
(And yet glad those legs with tender twigs to be tutching)
Lends her slips to be strings (each thing can further a mischif)
Strings those trembling legs (o rueful case) to be binding.
And that beastly Satire, which caused this monsterus outrage,
Stood with lusting rage, and raging fury before her,
And now, even just now had left of fully to bind her.
Phillis strove as much as Phillis might be a striving,
But for a naked girl with an armed foe to be striving,
Bootless it had been sure, if sharpened dart of Amyntas
'Gainst that fleshly Satire had not been timely directed:
And I myself mean while my lap with stones was a filling,
Which made lusting beast at last for fear to be flying.
When this flight gave leave to the loving eyes of Amyntas
For to behold his joys, those limbs so daintily trembling,
Trembling yet for fear; at last, at last he approached
Unto the naked Nymph, and yet yet somewhat abashed:
Pardon, fair Phillis, qd Amyntas, pardon I pray thee
This my too bold hand, which too too rashly presumeth,
And to thy spotless limbs, limbs never touched yet, approacheth,
Sith so extreme need, so great a necessity forceth
Forceth Amyntas his hands fair Phillis her hands to be losing▪
Let not then this grace which fortune seems to afford them,
Seem any fowl disgrace, or work any woo to my Phillis.
Words well worthy to make any heart of flint to be tender:
But what said Phillis? Thyrs. Not a word; but scornfuly blushing
Looks down, hiding all that bands would have to be hidden.
Gentle Amyntas comes, and golden locks he releaseth,
And as he unknits knots, thus golden-locks he beespeaketh,
Golden locks too good this senseless tree to be chaining,
What shall Lovers have, wherein they may be triumphing,
If loves-lace can abide to be stretched from a Nymph to a willow?
Paltry willow breaks with rude and boysterus handling,
Golden chain, which gave such grace to the paltry willow.
Then those hard-held hands in such odd manner he loosed,
As that he wished and feared hart-holding hands to be handling.
Lastly, to free her feet, himself he begins to be kneeling:
But when Phillis her hands from bands felt fully released,
His loving service with these proud words she refused,
Touch me not, hence Pastor, mine own hands shall be my own legs
Freedom, touch not a Nymph, that's consecrat unto Diana.
O graceless guerdon for service dutiful offered,
How can a Nymphs sweet breast harbour so filthy a monster?
Gentle Amyntas strait with these words mildly retired,
And withdrew himself, not daring once to be lifting
Up those lovesick eyes, himself unkindly denying
joys to his own poor self, that he might ease his bony Phillis
Of that pain, small pain, of giving him the denial.
All this I heard and saw, whilst under an oak I did hide me,
All this I heard and saw, and once I began to be speaking
For very grief; yet I stayed: But mark yet, mark yet a wonder.
After long toiling her feet at last she released,
And scarce, scarce her feet from bands at last she released,
But those winged feet she bestyrs as fast as a young Hind,
And to Amyntas gives no not so much as a farewell:
Yet no cause of flight, for Amyntas made not an offer.
What did he then poor man, when Phillis left him alone thus?
That can I noeway guess; for I was so mad to behold this
Scornful pride, that I ran t'have brought her back to Amyntas,
Ran with might and main, in vain: for I feared her away still;
And when I came backward to the well, than I miss Amyntas.
Surely I fear he's dead, for I know that he fully resolved
Ere that he came to the well, himself t'have speedily murdered.
That's but an ordinary thing, for a lover death to be threatening,
But not an ordinary thing any man for love to be dying.
God grant it prove so in Amyntas. Chor. Doubt not. Thyrs. I fear it.
Yet to the Cave I'll go, where sage Elpinus abideth:
There, if he live, its like, that Amyntas willbe recounting
His forepast pains to the rocks and watery fountains,
And with pleasant pipe, with voice so sweetly resounding
Make those rocks to resound, and wring out tears fro the fountains.
THy pity was pityles, Daphne, my dart to be plucking
From this doleful breast, my pains and pangs be redoubled
By differing death: what meanest thou thus to be turning,
Turning and winding my troubled mind with a thousand
fruitless discourses? thou think'st perchance that Amyntas
Will dispatch himself: if he do, that's best for Amyntas.
Fie for shame: leave of these wicked words; for I know, that
Bashfulness, not pride, made Phillis run from Amyntas.
Owretch; sole despair, that drives all hope from Amyntas,
Is my sole comfort: fond hope first wounded Amyntas;
And fond hope, even now (o endless grief) is a budding
In my baleful breast, and only because that I live yet,
Which is of all others the devourïngst worm to the wretched.
Live yet wretched a while, and keep thyself for a comfort;
Think thou see'st Phillis sit naked still by the wellspring.
Had not fell fortune and lewd love plagued Amyntas
With pains sufficient, but wellsprings must be presented
Unto my eyes: and then to my scorched tongue be denied?
What? shall I then be the Crow, whose never-lucky resounding
Still brings baleful news? shall I first bring death to the aged
Father Montanus, whose gray-hairs now be deprived
Of their chief comfort, fair Phillis, brave bony Phillis?
Old Father, chyldles Father, nay, now not a Father.
Some sad voice I do hear. Amynt. I do hear most dolefuly sounded
Phillis dearest name, which ears and heart is a wounding:
who's that which name her? Daph. Fair Fulvia, Fulvia dearest
Nymph to the high Huntress of forests mighty Diana.
Know it he must▪ and shall, that he may with speed be procuring,
That those lovely relics of Phillis may be preserved;
If those lovely relics of Phillis yet be remaining,
Luckless' Phillis. Amynt. Alas, what? yet more plagues for Amyntas?
O Daphne. Daph. What's that? Say on, sweet Fulvia, what's that
Which thou spak'st to thyself? What made fair Fulvia still still
After Phillis name our ears with sighs to be filling?
How can I choose but sigh, so rueful a sight to remember?
O that rueful sight makes my cold heart to be rueful:
Is my Phillis alive? Daph. Good Fulvia kill not Amyntas
With so long suspense, let's know what may be the matter.
O God, why shall I tell such dead news? and yet I must tell.
Phillis came naked to my house, and told me the cause of
Her coming naked: new dressed, she desired me of all loves
Loving girl, that I would accompany her to the pleasant
Yuychurches' park, and frame myself to the hunting.
Both content, both went, and met with a company gallant
Of flowering damsels waiting on Pembrokiana,
With bows and arrows on prince like Pembrokiana.
Much time with pastimes was past, sports drew to an ending,
And on a sudden lo, where erst no wolf was abiding,
Ravening wolf runs forth with blood-red mouth fro the bushes,
And on a sudden lo, whilst others bows be a bending,
Phillis sent her shaft from her own ear unto the woolus ear:
Soemuch wrought in her heart sweet sight of Pembrokiana,
Soemuch did she desire to be praised of Pembrokiana.
Wounded wolf to the wood, stout Phillis runs to the wounded
Wolf with a dart in her hand. Amynt. O dreadful dart to Amyntas,
How can a pleasant end come from so deadly beginning?
And with an other dart to the self same place I repaired;
But Wolf and Phillis (grief spurred th'one, glory the other)
Were quite out of sight: yet I traced them both to the thickest
And most desert place: there, (o dear dart to my Phillis)
There lay Phillis dart, and not far thence was a white lawn
Wherein Phillis locks enwrapped were by my own hands.
And as I turned about, seven other woolus by the naked
Bones of a mangled corpse, gore blood were greedily licking:
And as chanced (would God such chance had Phillis) I saw them,
Yet they saw not me, they were so greedily gorging,
And so bend to the pray: So thence for fear I retired:
And this is all that I know: and here's that lawn, that I spoke of.
And is this not enough? o lawn of my bony Phillis:
O bony Phillis blood, thou'rt dead my sweet bony Phillis.
O double death's wound: dead Phillis murdereth Amyntas.
'tis but a swoon; for he breath's; and lo, he's quickly revived.
Grief, leave of lingering: make quick dispatch of Amyntas:
Grief, thou'rt too too slow; if death be reserved for Amyntas
Hand, he'll take it in hand. For alas, if nought be a wanting
Unto the highest point of grief, if nought's to be added
Unto Amyntas woe, for what then stayeth Amyntas▪
O Daphne, Daphne, was Amyntas lately repelled
From death, sweet death's door by Daphne's means? Was Amyntas
Kept saulf for these joys? O, then, than I might in a good time
Have discharged myself of a huge and horrible Aetna:
But Daphne would not, but cursed Destiny would not,
Lest that I might by death those plagues have timely prevented,
Which accursed Fates for Amyntas lately prepared.
But now, since my woes at last are come to a full groat,
Destiny and Daphne may well, well let me be dying.
Yet differ thy death till certain news be received
Whether Phillis live or die; and then be resolved.
Live or die? who doubts? would God that were to be doubted.
And would God my tongue had clou'n to my roof, when I blabbed.
Geane me the lawn, good Nymph, white lawn, which only remaineth
Of sweete-white Phillis, that I may in stead of a Phillis
Kiss my Phillis lawn, and so my joys be prolonging,
So my shortened days with contentation ending.
What? shall I give or keep? Lewd cause wherefore he desir's it
Wills me to keep it still, lest it bring fancy to fury.
Nymph extremely cruel, that thinks it much to be gewing
One poor piece of lawn, even at last gasp of Amyntas.
Well, than I yield to my death, and destiny noe-pity-taking:
Let lawn stay with you, and you stay here for Amyntas.
Hark, come back, here, take, o stay, and run not Amyntas.
And yet Amyntas runs, enraged, desperate, headlong.
Yea, and runs so fast, that he is not like to be outrun.
Therefore better I were to my journeys end to be hasting:
And yet I grieve myself, Montanus mind to be grieving,
Lest these news inflict as deadly a wound in a father,
As they gave even now to the fainting heart of a Lover.
But what a dart was that, which mightily flew fro the fingers
Of brave Lady Regent of these woods, Pembrokiana,
Unto the foreign Bear, which came with greedy devouring
jaws to the harmless game? Whose dying hour was a birthday
Unto her own young whelps, whose groans thus lastly resounded,
Death's dart, (yet sweet dart, as thrown by Pembrokiana)
Make my wound more wide, give larger scope to my young ones,
give them a free passage, herself hath given them a passport.
Phillis, for your sports I do much joy, but yet a thousand
Times more for yourself, sith you so quickly revived
Live yet safe and sound: for Fulvia lately reported
Strange news of your death: would God that Fulvia had been
Dumb, or an other deaf: one mischif draws on an other.
And in truth just cause had Fulvia for to believe so,
Sith that I was not like from death's door so to be scaping.
But yet no just cause had Fulvia for to report so.
Now let's hear at large, thy dangers and thy delyu'ries.
Whyl'st I ran after a wolf, I was all enclosed on a sudden
With dark dens and groves, and forced that chase to be leaving:
But when I sought to retire and company lost to recover,
There did I see this wolf (for I knew this Wolf by an arrow
Which myself did shoot, and gave her a wound by the left care)
There did I see this Wolf and more Woolus greedily praying
On some beasts carcase late slain by them, but I could not
Well discern what beast: this wounded Wolf in a fury
Comes with a gored mouth, (it seems my face she remembered)
And so makes onward, who had been worthily welcomed,
Had not a tree by a chance my dart unworthily hindered.
My dart mislighting, fell Woolf more fiercely approaching
Drew so near, that I saw 'twas bootless now to be shooting,
And darts were all spent: Therefore at last I retired
And fled back for fear, but wyled Woolf hastened onward:
Now mark what chanced, my lawn hanged down to my shoulders
And stuck fast to a bush, and stayed my flight, but I plucked,
Yet bush held it fast; at last my lawn I relinquished
For to reserve my life, and tore it away with a great part
Of my scattered hair▪ and fear so forcibly urged
Lightfooted Phillis, that a fearful death she avoided.
As to my house full glad for joy I repaired, I met thee
Daphne, there full sad by the way, and greatly amazed.
Phillis alas is alive, but an other's gone to be dying.
And what mean's this, Alas? am I now so lightly regarded,
That my life with, Alas, of Daphne must be remembered?
Phillis, I love thy life, but I like not a death of an other.
Whose death? Daph. Death of Amyntas. Phil. Alas how died Amyntas?
How? that I can not tell; nor yet well whether it is so:
But no doubt, I believe; for it is most like that it is so.
What strange news do I hear? what caused that death of Amyntas?
Thy death. Phil. And I alive? Daph. Thy death was lately reported,
And he beleeus thy death, and therefore seeketh his own death.
Fear of Phillis death proved vain, and fear of Amyntas
Death will prove vain too: life each thing lively procureth.
O Phillis Phillis, thou know'st not what be the torments
Of truelovers heart, heart made of flesh as Amyntas,
Not flint heart, as thine; else wouldst thou love that Amyntas,
Which loved Phillis more than life or soul of Amyntas.
Phillis, I know, for I saw, then when thou fledst from Amyntas,
Fledst, when by reason thou shouldst have kissed Amyntas:
Then did Amyntas turn his pointed dart to his own breast,
And thrust breast on dart: and vile dart pierced in a moment
Through his coat, skin, flesh; and would have speedily pierced
That same heart, which thou hadst more unluckily pierced,
But that I grasped his arm, and stayed that desperate outrage.
And now that small wound perchance will serve for a first proof
Of cursed courage, and mind unkindly resolved,
And that dart make way, and passage show to a damned
Knife, or a baleful sword, with freer scope to be murdering.
Is this true? Daph. No doubt. Phil. But alas would noebody stay him?
O let's go, let's run, let's seek and search for Amyntas.
If that Amyntas died, when Phillis seemed to be dying,
Then, sith Phillis lives, let Amyntas truly be living.
Yes yes, quickly Iran; But who can deal with a madman?
Rage and grief fro my sight conveyed him away in a moment.
Therefore now too late, it's too late now to be running,
And thank thy running that it is too late to be running.
O, this frets my soul Daphne, this deadly remembrance
Of my scornful pride, that I then my Chastyty called,
And it Chastyty was, but Chastyty noe-pyty-taking,
Now I repent it alas, but now too late I repent yt.
Good God, what do I hear? can Phillis now be repenting?
Can she relent or yield? What plaint, what passion is this?
Can proud Phillis love? Phil. No love, but yet pyty-taking.
When pity runneth afore, love always hasteneth after:
And now Phillis loves, since Phillis now pyty-taketh.
But too late, Phillis, too late. O wretched Amyntas,
Thou (even like to a Bee, that stings, yet dies as he stingeth,
And his wounding life doth leave in place that he woundeth)
Hast by thy death at last pierced Phillis through to the hartroote,
Whereas in all thy life thou couldst not possibly move her.
Now if Amyntas soul from flesh and blood be released,
And here wandereth abroad (as I think it for to be wandering)
Let that soul now see, and joy her pains to be seeing,
Sowle, that living loved, and by death, bought, to be loved.
Price to the buyer dear, and shameful price to the seller.
O that my love might once purchase life for Amyntas,
O that Amyntas life with my life might be redeemed.
When steeds are stolen, than Phillis looks to the stable.
MY heart with pity melts, my sowl's so drowned in anguish,
That no sight, no sound objects itself to my senses,
But draws tears fro my eyes, and horror brings to my hearing.
What's this new man's news, that makes him look thus amazed?
News of Amyntas death. Phil. This deaths-newes brings me to death's door.
Most noble Pastor, that these woods lately frequented,
Gentle, loved of all, to the Nymphs dear, dear to the Muses,
And but a stripling died, and what death?
O, let us hear it,
O, let us hear it alas, that we may all be a mourning
His mischance, our grief. Phil. O dear God, I dare not approach him,
Lest that I hear these news, yet these news must I be hearing.
heart of stone, hard heart, cursed heart, what makes thee be fearing?
Go and encounter these knives, these darts that he bringeth
In sowle-wounding tongue, there show thyself to be stony.
Pastor, I come for part of these news rightly belonging
Unto my damnable heart, and due, more due to my hearing
Than thou canst conceive; then spare not freely to give it.
Phillis, I surely believe, that I heard this wretched Amyntas
With thy name his life and lamentation ending.
Il news differing, is a plague as great as an ill news.
Late as I mended nets on a hill, foretroubled Amyntas,
Horribly vexed and chafed, in face and action altered,
Past by my side in a rage: but I stepped and hastened after,
And overtook him; for I mused what might be the matter.
Good friend Ergastus, qd he then, now do me a pleasure,
Come with Amyntas now, and mark what he do's as a witness,
Stand as a witness by; but first swear, so to be standing,
And my deeds so marked, in no respect to be hindering.
Here I alas poor fool (for who would ever imagine
Such a detestable act, as he purposed then to be working?)
Rapt out horrible oaths straight way, and swore by the mighty
Nightwandring Hecate, Pallas, Pomona, Priapus,
And Pan Pastors God, that I would perform what he willed me.
Then did he lead me along to a steep and horrible hill top,
All abrupt and rough, and made so fearful a downfall,
That my limbs all quaked, when I looked fro the hill to the valley.
Here did he pause for a while, and somewhat seemed to be smiling,
Which rather made me no mischif for to be deeming.
Then, qd he, what thou see'st, that tell to the Nymphs, to the Pastors,
And at last, these words with a down cast look he resounded,
If that I could aswell command those greedy devouring
Throats and teeth of Wolves, as I can soon leap from a hilltopp;
As my life did die, o then so would I be dying;
Then should these my limbs and cursed corpse be divided,
As those tender joints, o grief, were all to be mangled.
But since frowning skies wiled beasts now will not afford me,
(Which yet I know in time will come this flesh to be tearing)
This must serve, short death, though sharper death I deserved.
Phillis, I come strait way, I'll come to thy company, Phillis,
If thou dost not yet disdain my company, Phillis.
If that I were but sure, that death brought end to thy anger,
And that my coming would give no cause to molest thee,
Then should life with joy leave well contented Amyntas;
Phillis, I come, scorn not, scorn not my company, Phillis.
Thus said, lightly he leapt, and headlong fell to the valley;
My soul quaked for fear. Daph. O grief. Phil. O woeful Amyntas.
And why staydst him not? waste fear, thy oath to be breaking?
O Noah, for when I saw his mind thus bend to that outrage,
Oaths (in such case vain) I began to be lightly regarding,
And caught hold (nought hold) caught hold by a paltry girdle;
Paltry girdle broke by the swing, and weight of Amyntas:
Part with Amyntas went, and th'other part I reteigned.
O but where's that corpse, and bruised bones of Amyntas?
God knows; for by the fall my senseless soul was amazed,
Neither durst I behold his corpse unluckily quashed.
O strange news indeed, break-neck, breakheart of Amyntas.
O pytyles Phillis, well may thy heart be a stony
heart, if breakeneck news can not yet break it a sunder.
If false tales of death, her death, who hated Amyntas,
took his life yet away; good reason then that Amyntas▪
True death, too true death, who my hate lovely requited,
Should take life from me; and so it shall, with an endless
Grief of troubled soul, or a too too slowly revenging
Stroke of a murdering hand, or this same piece of a girdle,
Piece of a girdle alas: that left his master Amyntas
For good cause, that so proud Phillis might be rewarded,
And his masters death with Phillis death be requited.
Luckless' girdle alas of too too luckless Amyntas,
Take no scorn for a while in a bosom vile to be lodged,
Sith to requite, to revenge thou meanest therein to be lodged.
Phillis should have been true turtle-dove to Amyntas
In this lightsome world, but Phillis proudly denied;
Therefore by thy means Phillis shall meet with Amyntas
In those darksome dens, as Phillis rightly deserved.
Poor distressed soul, forbear thyself to be plaguing:
His fact, not thy fault, drew his confusion onward.
Pastors, why do ye mourn? What mean these heavy bewailings?
If you mourn Phillis; Phillis no mercy deserveth,
Sith this merciless heart to Amyntas mercy denied:
If you mourn his death, who had no cause to be dying,
No such mourning can suffice for murdered Amyntas.
Dry those tears, Daphne, and wipe thy watery fountains,
And come, yet come not for me, but come for Amyntas,
Help me to seek and find, t'entomb those bones of Amyntas;
For this I stay yet alive: this funeral obsequy only
Phillis can perform for baleful love of Amyntas.
And though murdering hand pollute so sacred an office,
Yet sith Phillis her hand performs so sacred an office,
This will Amyntas take as a most acceptable office.
Phillis, I yield my help his scattered bones to be searching,
But so that Phillis make no more talk of a dying.
All this while to myself did I live; but now to Amyntas,
Or to Amyntas bones, crushed bones so long will I live yet,
And live no longer; my life, his funeral ending.
Pastors: But yet where's that way which leads to the downfall?
There: and t'hill stands thence but a little more than a furlong,
Come, let's go, and search: I'll guide thee; the place I remember.
Pastors all farewell; farewell fair Pembrokianaes
Yuy churches park, and fountains watery, farewell.
This Nymph takes her leave, as though these so many farewells
Were her last farewell, which should cause deadly departure.
Loves aeternal laws are most unworthily blamed,
Upright laws in deed, in show though somewhat unaequall.
And great Lord of love his men with mercy protecteth,
And yet▪ with justice, with due moderation ordereth.
O by what strange means and wondrous ways, fro the dungeon
Of despair, to the bower of bliss doth he bring in a moment
His loving subjects? lo, gentlemynded Amyntas
Even to the highest point of joy hath clymbd by a downfall,
Unto a loves Paradise, by a hell full of infinite horror.
Blessed Amyntas now; soemuch more blessed Amyntas
Now, by how much than more wretch more cursed Amyntas.
Now may Elpinus conceive some matter of hoping
By thine example, that he shall have fortunate ending
Of these loveles toils, and most unluckily begynnyngs.
Sage Elpinus comes, and speaks strange words of Amyntas,
As, that he were yet alive; and thinks his state to be happy,
For that he died for love, and by death, bought to be loved.
Bitter bower of bliss, where monstrous murder aboundeth,
Loving fools Paradise, that leaves his life to be loved.
What means Elpinus so woeful an end to be wishing?
Fryends leave of mourning: you heard false news of Amyntas.
What, did he not leap down? Elp. Yes down to his only desired
joys, and past by the shade of a fearful death, to a heaven,
And now leaneth his head on breast of sweet bony Phillis,
Sweet bony Phillis now, more loving now by a thousand
Parts, then loveles afore; and sucks those sweetly beseeming
Tears from Phillis her eyes, with a mouth with Nectar abounding.
And now nothing else is wanting unto the full joy
Of these loving sowls, but that Montanus is absent;
And Montanus I seek, whose word makes absolute ending.
their years are equal, and their affections equal,
And both learned alike: o, now Montanus is happy
Happy to have this stay and comfort unto his old age.
But show yet, what luck, what God so saved Amyntas.
Hear, o hear then that, whereof these eyes the beholders
Were, and whereof now this tongue may well be reporter.
By my cave did I sit with Thyrsis down by the downfall,
Talking of my love, loveles yet lovely Lycoris:
When from an high we saw some man fall down on a soddayn.
There was a heap of thorns and bows compact on a cluster
Somewhat above our heads; 'twas his hap there first to be lighting:
Which although by the swing and weight it bursted a sunder,
And all came tumbling, and fell down flatly before us,
Yet by this encounter that fall proved not to be mortal,
Though sore and painful, making him lie as amazed
One whole hour and more, as unable his eyes to be opening.
We twooe, astonied to behold so fearful an object,
Stood stark dumb for a while, although we knew 'twas Amyntas;
But perceiving that this fall seemed not to be mortal,
Our whole endeavours w'apply'de, his woe to be swaging,
And sent one forthwith, for cunning Alphesiboeus,
Alphesiboeus whom that great God learned Apollo
Made to be skilful in herbs, when he gave me the guyft to be singing.
But now in mean time, when Thyrsis 'gan to rehearse me
All those secret woes and forepast pangs of Amyntas,
Daphne and Phillis did meet us there on a sudden,
Daphne and Phillis, who sought bruysd bones of Amyntas
Whom they thought to be dead, as then was told me by Daphne.
But when Phillis saw her longlookt lover Amyntas,
Discolored, bruised, sorewounded then with a raging
Voice, and beaten breast on Amyntas flatly she falleth,
Face to Amyntas face, and mouth to the mouth of Amyntas:
Was not Phillis abashed, unseemly to lie on Amyntas?
Shame to a feynthart love doth sometimes serve for a bridle;
But true love indeed contemns so bashful a bridle.
Afterward with tears his bloodless cheeks she bewashed,
And those tears so wrought that Amyntas quickly revived,
opened his eyes, and breathed; which breath so luckily uttered
Encountering Phillis sweet breath was lovely received.
With what an endless joy these twooe lay sweetly together,
Either in others arms, and either sure of an others
Life and love, lovers may think, none else can imagine.
Is then Amyntas safe, that he needs not fear any danger?
Saulfe and sound, but that those thorns have partly defaced
His fair cheeks, and sides did somewhat chance to be bruised:
But that's just nothing, and works no woe to Amyntas,
(Happy Amyntas now, that showed such sign of a loving
heart, and so at last obteynd to be loved of a loving
Soul, his passed pains, make present joys to be greater)
As yourselves shall see: for Phillis comes with Amyntas
hitherward hard by: myself must first to the lodging
Of rich Montanus, persuading him to be yielding
Unto the purposed match; and thither they be appointed
Shortly to come, this way: and now its time to be walking.
Dear life, when shall I once have full possession of you?
When time comes, I'll tell: fruit too-soon plucked, is a sowre-fruyte.
If too-late, rotten.
Then pluck when time is appointed.
Oyet, come sweet light of these mine eyes to the harbour,
And ten-thousand woes with a good-turne once be requiting.
What good-turne would you?
That which cost you not a dodkin,
And yet would content my mind much more than a treasure.
What's that? I understand not yet what may be the meaning.
Hark in your ear then.
Fie, no: is that but a trifle?
Yet let's sleep for a while; for your sake long was I watching.
Content. Amynt. O sweet Nymph.
But stay, and stir not a finger:
As you sleep, I'll tell, what flowers I do keep for a brydes-wayne.
How can I hear in sleep? Phil. What pleasure then can Amyntas
Take, when he sleeps by my side, if he feel noething when he sleepeth?
And yet I can not sleep, for joy, that I found my Amyntas.
Then let's kiss: kissed mouth is nothing worse for a kissing:
So Bee sucks sweet flowers, flowers noething worse for a sucking;
And you kiss roses, then think my lips to be roses.
Well: but these roses so kissed, ask not to be kissed:
Then let Amyntas stay, till Phillis mean to be kissing.
If nought else, yet give me leave those eyes to be kissing,
Those fair eyes, and so shall I seem fair soul to be kissing.
You would kiss mine eyes: which ever afore, with a thousand
Sighs and sobs you cursed, for throwing darts at Amyntas.
Now I desire your eyes of purpose for to be kissing,
Thereby so to declare by this so lovely a token,
That your murdering eyes, my cursing lips be for ever
Now made faithful fryends, and all contention ended.
And, if Phillis think herself not fully revenged,
Then let her own teeth bite these lying lips of Amyntas.
If that Amyntas cease mine eyes any more to be cursing,
Why should Phillis then for spite his lips be a biting?
If no kind of kiss from Phillis may be procured,
Yet let an embracement to Amyntas his arms be aforded.
With good will.
Most good; what better will to Amyntas?
But yet stay: Phillis must first get a boon of Amyntas.
O what guyft shall I grant? what boon seeks my bony Phillis?
Four or five apples fro the tree that grows by the hil-topp.
How can I come to the tree for bry'rs and soemany bushes?
I'll bring you so near, as you may easily touch it.
If that I may clasp it, then doubt not, Phillis, Amyntas
Will climb up to the tree, or shake down foemany apples.
Is't true? clipped Phillis must then look so to be served.
My life, give me the leave, this fair red rose to be putting
In this bosom, where my heart hath made his abiding,
O so might you prick your heart with thorns of a red rose,
Or take it fro my breast perchance, and give it an other.
Grant me this one grace yet: this favour do me for all this,
give me thy snow-white hand, to be clipped and kissed of Amyntas.
So by the hard-gryping, hoate-kissing Lover Amyntas,
Phillis snow-white hand may melt, or chance to be bruised.
What kind of love's this, that Phillis bear's to Amyntas.
discreet and sober. Amynt. Well, than this shallbe my sober,
And yet lovely request; Sat down, that I may be beholding
That fair Phillis face, and hear her sweetly resounding,
Phillis must needs yield, when Amyntas duly demandeth.
They sing these Asclepiades.
Sweet face, why be the heu'ns so to the bountiful,
Making that radiant beauty of all the stars
Bright-burning, to be fair Phillis her ornament?
And yet seem to be so spytefuly partial,
As not for to afford Argus his eyes to me,
Eyes too few to behold Phillis her ornament?
First and lastly beloved, only my only joy,
Why hath not thy beloved soemany lou'ly hearts
As those Partridges have of Paphlagonia?
One breast is not enough for to retain my joy,
More hearts would that I had for to receive my love,
As those Partridges have of Paphlagonia.
Let come fair Helen, Troy's tribulation,
Or brave Endymion's sweet speculation,
Or Nymph Idalian friendly to passion;
None but Phillis alone holdeth Amyntas hands:
None but Phillis alone pleaseth Amyntas eyes:
None but Phillis alone woundeth Amyntas heart.
Let come that pretty Boy, fond of his own image,
Or goddess Minion killed by an ugly Boar,
Or youthful Ganymede rapt by the Thunderer:
Phillis stretcheth alone hands to Amyntas hands▪
Phillis turneth alone eyes to Amyntas eyes,
Phillis joineth alone heart to Amyntas heart.
O, this Amyntas name enchants my soul, that I can not
Leave this Amyntas name: my tongue still runs on Amyntas,
And my heart, and mind, and soul still thinks on Amyntas:
And yet, Amyntas, I know, it's more than time to be going:
Elpinus long since hath made all known to my father,
And my father, I know, his new son longs to be knowing.
Let me help you up: your hand is in hand of Amyntas
Now at last surprysde: yet I ask but a kiss for a ransom.
IF that such sour sauce for sweetest meats be reserved;
If that Amyntas must serve, love, weep, die for a Phillis,
If those great pleasures with great pains must be procured,
Then, good love, give those great matters unto the greate-men.
Let my Love soon love; let a sawdrey lace, or a thimble,
Or young nightingale suffice my fancy to further:
Let not such torments and martyrdoms be required
My poor simple joys, and pleasures lowly to season:
But sweete-bitter words, but kind and lovely repulses,
And such falling out, as may be a speedy renewing
And fresh increasing of love: let such be the loving
Wars, and wars, as peace and truce may end in a moment.