SEE lovely Lords, and you my Lord behold
How Time hath turned his restless wheel about
And made the silver moon: & heavens bright eye
Gallop the Zodiac and end the year
Whose revolution now begets anew
The days that have created and confirmed
A worthy Governor for London's good,
To underbear under his sovereign's sway
Unpartial justice beam, and weaved a Web
For your content, and her command in all,
You Citizens of this Metapolis
Whose honour and whose oath to gratulate
Lordings behold what Emblem I present.
Astraea daughter of the immortal Ioue,
Great Ioue defender of this ancient town,
Descended of the Trojan Brutus' line:
Offspring of that courageous conquering king.
Whose pure renown, hath pierced the world's large ears,
In golden scrolls, rolling about the heavens
Celestial sacred Nymph, that tends her flock
With watchful eyes, and keep this fount in peace:
Guarded with Graces, and with gracious trains,
virtues divine, and gifts incomparable.
Nor lets blind superstitious ignorance,
Corrupt so pure a spring: O happy times
That do beget such calm and quiet days,
Where sheep & shepherd breath in such content.
Honour attends her throne, in her bright eyes
Sits Majesty: Virtue, and Steadfastness
Possess her heart, sweet mercy sways her sword.
Her champion armed with resolution,
Sits at her feet to chastise malcontents,
That threat her honours wrack. And Time & Kind
Produce her years to make them numberless
While Fortune for her service and her sake,
With golden hands doth strengthen and enrich
The Web that they for fair Astraea weave.
Long may she live, long may she govern us
In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars
Our fair Astraea, our Pandora fair,
Our fair Eliza, or Zabeta fair.
Sweet Cynthia's darling, beauteous Cypria's peer
As dear to England and true English hearts,
As Pompey to the Citizens of Rome:
As merciful as Caesar in his might.
As mighty as the Macedonian king,
Or Trojan Hector, terror to the Greeks.
Goddess live long, whose honours we advance,
Strengthen thy neighbours, propagate thine own:
Guide well thy helm, lay thine anointed hand
To build the temple of triumphant Truth,
That while thy subjects draw their peace from thee,
Thy friends with aid of arms may succoured be.
Feed on my flock among the gladsome green
Where heavenly Nectar flows above the banks.
Such pastures are not common to be seen,
Pay to immortal Ioue immortal thanks:
For what is good fro heavens high throne doth fall.
And heavens great Architect be praised for all.
Stir Priest, and with thy beads poison this spring,
I tell thee all is baneful that I bring.
It is in vain her eye keeps me in awe,
Whose heart is purely fixed on the law:
The holy law, and bootless we contend,
While this chaste nymph, this fountain doth defend,
Whilom when Saturn's golden reign did cease,
and iron age had kindled cruel wars:
Envy in wrath, perturbing common peace,
engendering cankered hate and bloody jars:
Lo than Olympus king, the thundering Ioue,
raught hence this gracious nymph Astraea fair,
Now once again he sends her from above,
descended through the sweet transparent air:
And here she sits in beauty fresh and sheen,
Shadowing the person of a peerless Queen.
A peerless Queen, a Royal princely dame,
Enrolled in register of eternal fame.
The Graces through their balm about her sacred head,
Whose government her realms true happiness hath bred.
That happiness continue in her land,
Great Israel's God, spring of all heavenly peace:
And let thine angels in her rescue stand,
With her lives wane done England's joys decrease
O let her princely days never have fine,
Whose virtues are immortal and divine.
Such virtues as her throne do beautify,
And make her honours mount and scale the sky.
Where hope of her eternal bliss doth rest,
Conceived in her sweet & sacred breast.
With radiant beams, reflecting on the earth,
Even from the snowy brows of Albion,
Beyond the utmost verge of Christendom,
As bright as is the burning lamp of heaven,
Shineth my mistress honour, in whose fame
The heathen carols sing and all admire,
From Icy Tanais to the sevenfold Nile,
Her glory that commands this Western I'll.
In whose defence my colours I advance,
And girt me with my sword, and shake my lance:
These British Lions rampant in this field,
That never learned in battles rage to yield:
Breath terror to the proud aspiring foe,
Ranging the world commanding where they go.
Therefore in vain this misproud Malcontent,
Threatens her state whose harms the heavens prevent
Sit safe sweet Nymph among thy harmless sheep,
Thy sacred person angels have in keep.
What meaneth this, I strive and cannot strike,
She is preserved by miracle belike:
If so then, wherefore threaten we in vain,
That Queen, whose cause the gracious heavens maintain.
No marvel then although we faint and quail,
For mighty is the truth and will prevail.
Thus while my wheel with ever turning gyres,
At heavens high hest serves earthly men's desires,
I wind the Web that kind so well begins:
While Fortune doth enrich what Nature spins.
List gentle Lords, and bubbling stream be still
And whistling winds your angry murmur cease
Let Thetis Nymph unfold the goddess hest:
Behold embarked thus bravely as you see,
Laden with treasure and with precious ore
From where in Tellus veins the parching sun,
Doth gold and glittering murals create,
Are come these strangers lovingly inflamed
To gratulate to you my lovely Lord.
This gladsome day wherein your honours spring.
And by the bar that thwarts this silver stream,
Even to the beauteous verge of Troynovant
That decks this Thamesis on either side,
Thus far these friends have pierced, & all by me;
Salute your honour and your company.
Thrice worthy Praetor of this ancient town.
The mortar of these walls tempered in peace,
Yet holds the building sure, as are the sprigs
Woven from the spreading root in knotty box.
Labour fair Lord as other Majors of yore
To beautify this city with deserts.
So wish these friendly strangers, man by man
Pass with advisement to receive thy oath:
Keep it inviolate for thy sovereign's hope,
Virtues pure mirror, London's great mistress,
unsheath the sword committed to thy sway,
With merciful regard of every cause.
So go in peace happy by sea and land,
Guided by grace, and heavens immortal hand.