THe walls of Thebes were raised by Music: by music these are kept from falling. It was a prophesy since the first stone was laid, that these walls should shake, and the roof totter, till the wisest, the fairest and most fortunate of all creatures, should by her first step make the foundation stayed: and by the glance of her eyes make the Turret steady. I have been here a Porter many years, many Ladies have entered passing amiable, many very wise, none so happy. These my fellow Porters thinking there could be none such, fell on sleep, and so incurred the second curse of the prophesy, which is, never again to awake: Mark how they look more like posts than Porters, retaining only their shapes, but deprived of their senses. I thought rather to cut off my eye lids, then to wink till I saw the end. And now it is: for the music is at an end, this house immovable, your virtue immortal. O miracle of time, Nature's glory, Fortune's Empress, the world's wonder! Soft, this is the Poet's part, and not the Porters. I have nothing to present but the crest of mine office, this key: Enter, possess all, to whom the heavens have vouchsafed all. As for the owner of this house, mine honourable Lord, his tongue is the key of his heart: and his heart the lock of his soul. Therefore what he speaks you may constantly believe: which is, that in duty and service to your Majesty, he would be second to none: in praying for your happiness, equal to any.
BEhold her locks like wires of beaten gold,
her eyes like stars that twinkle in the sky,
Her heavenly face not framed of earthly mould,
Her voice that found'st Apollo's melody,
The miracle of time, the world's story,
Fortune's Queen, loves treasure, Nature's glory.
No flattering hope she likes, blind Fortunes bait
nor shadows of delight, fond fancies glass,
Nor charms that do enchant, false arts deceit,
nor fading joys, which time makes swiftly pass
But chaste desires which beateth all these down,
A Goddess look is worth a Monarch's crown.
Goddess and Monarch of his happy Isle,
vouchsafe this bow which is an huntress part
Your eyes are arrows though they seem to smile
which never glanced but galled the stateliest heart,
Strike one, strike all, for none at all can fly,
They gaze you in the face although they die.
FAirest of all creatures vouchsafe to hear the prayer of a Pilgrim, which shall be short, and the petition which is but reasonable. God grant the world may end with your life, and your life more happy than any in the world: that is my prayer. I have traveled many Countries, and in all Country's desire antiquities. In this Island (but a span in respect of the world) and in this Shire (but a finger in regard of your Realm) I have heard great cause of wonder, some of complaint. Hard by, and so near as your Majesty shall almost pass by, I saw on Oak, whose stateliness nailed mine eyes to the branches, and the ornaments beguiled my thoughts with astonishment. I thought it free, being in the field, but I found it not so. For at the very entry I met I know not with what rough-hewed Ruffian, whose arms were carved out of knotty box, for I could receive nothing of him but boxes, so hasty was he to strike, he had no leisure to speak. I thought there were more ways to the wood than one, and finding another passage, I found also a Lady very fair, but passing froward, whose words set me in a greater heat than the blows. I asked her name, she said it was Peace. I wondered that Peace could never hold her peace. I cannot persuade myself since that time, but that there is a wasps nest in mine ears. I returned discontent. But if it will please your Highness to view it, that rude Champion at your fair feet will lay down his foul head: and at your beck that Lady will make her mouth her tongues mue. Happily your Majesty shall find some content: I more antiquities.
Mighty Princess, whose happiness is attended by the heavens, and whose government is wondered at upon the earth: vouchsafe to hear why this passage is kept, and this Oak honoured. The whole world is drawn in a map: the heavens in a Globe: and this Shire shrunk in a Tree: that what your Majesty hath often heard off with some comfort, you may now behold with full content. This Oak, from whose body so many arms do spread: and out of whose arms so many finger's spring: resembles in part your strength & happiness. Strength, in the number and the honour: happiness, in the truth and consent. All hearts of Oak, than which nothing surer: nothing sounder. All woven in one root, than which nothing more constant, nothing more natural. The wall of this Shire is the sea, strong, but rampired with true hearts, invincible: where every private man's eye is a Beacon to discover: every noble man's power a Bulwark to defend. Here they are all differing somewhat in degrees, not in duty: the greatness of the branches, not the greenness. Your majesty they account the Oak, the tree of Iupiter, whose root is so deeply fastened, that treachery, though she undermine to the centre, cannot find the windings, and whose top is so highly reared, that envy, though she shoot on copheigth, cannot reach her, under whose arms they have both shade and shelter. Well not they that your enemy's lightnings are but flashes, and their thunder which fills the whole world with a noise of conquest, shall end with a soft shower of Retreat. Be then as confident in your steps, as Caesar was in his Fortune. His proceed but of conceit: yours of virtue. Abroad courage hath made you feared, at home honoured clemency. Clemency which the owner of this Grove hath tasted: in such sort, that his thoughts are become his heart's labyrinth, surprised with joy and loyalty. joy without measure, loyalty without end, living in no other air, then that which breathes your majesties safety.
For himself, and all these honourable Lords, and Gentlemen, whose shields your Majesty doth here behold, I can say this, that as the veins are dispersed through all the body, yet when the heart feeleth any extreme passion, send all their blood to the heart for comfort: so they being in divers places, when your Majesty shall but stand in fear of any danger, will bring their bodies, their purses, their souls, to your Highness, being their heart, their head, and their Sovereign. This passage is kept strait, and the Pilgrim I fear hath complained: but such a disguised world it is that one can scarce know a Pilgrim from a Priest, a ●●●●er from a Gentleman, nor a man from a woman Every one seeming to be that which they are not, only do practise what they should not. The heavens guide you, your Majesty governs us: though our peace be envied, by you we hope it shall be eternal.
THere is a bird that builds her nest with spice, and built, the Sun to ashes doth her burn,
Out of whose cinders doth another rise. & she by scorching beams to dust doth turn:
Thus life a death, and death a life doth prove,
The rarest thing on earth except my love.
My love that makes his nest with high desires, and is by beauty's blaze to ashes brought,
Out of the which do break out greater fires, they quenched by disdain consume to nought,
And out of nought my clearest love doth rise,
True love if often slain but never dies.
True love which springs, though Fortune on it tread as camomel by pressing down doth grow
Or as the Palm that higher rears his head, when men great burrhens on the branches throw
Love fancies birth, Fidelity the womb, the Nurse Delight, Ingratitude the tomb.
NExt rowing in a Western barge well far Angling, I have been here this two hours and cannot catch an oyster. It may he for lack of a bait, & that were hard in this nibbling world, where every man lays bait for another. In the City merchants bait their tongues with a lie and an oath, and so make simple men swallow deceitful wares: and fishing for commodity is grown so far, that men are become fishes, for Land lords put such sweet baits on racked rents, that as good it were to be a perch in a pikes belly, as a Tenant in their farms. All our trade is grown to treachery, for now fish are caught with medicines: which are as unwholesome as love procured by withchcraft unfortunate. We Anglers make our lines of divers colours, according to the kinds of waters: so do men their loves, aiming at the complexion of the faces. Thus Merchandise, Love, and Lordships suck venom out of virtue. I think I shall fish all day and catch a frog, the cause is neither in the line, the hook, nor the bait, but some thing there is over beautiful which stayeth the very minnow (of all fish the most eager) from biting. For this we Anglers observe, that the shadow of a man turneth back the fish. What will then the sight of a Goddess? 'tis best angling in a lowering day, for here the Sun so glisters, that the fish see my hook through my bait. But soft here be the Netters, these be they that cannot content them with a dish of fish for their supper, but will draw a whole pond for the market.
Be there any maids there?
Maids fool, they be sea fish.
Why?
Venus was borne of the Sea, and 'tis reason she should have maids to attend her.
MADAM, it is an old saying, There is no fishing to the sea, nor service to the King: but it holds when the sea is calm & the king virtuous. Your virtue doth make Envy blush, and Envy stands amazed at your happiness. I come not to tell the art of fishing, nor the natures of fish, nor their daintiness, but with a poor Fisher man's wish, that all the hollow hearts to your Majesty were in my net, and if there be more than it will hold, I would they were in the sea till I went thither a fishing.
There be some so muddy minded, that they can not live in a clear river but a standing pool, as camels will not drink till they have troubled the water with their feet: so can they never staunch their thirst, till they have disturbed the state with their treacheries. Soft, these are no fancies for fisher men. Yes true hearts are as good as full purses, the one the sinews of war, the other the arms. A dish of fish is an unworthy present for a prince to accept: there be some carp amongst them, no carpers of states, if there be, I would they might be handled like carp, their tongues pulled out. Some perches there are I am sure, and if any perch higher than in duty they ought, I would they might suddenly pick over the perch for me. What so ever there is, if it be good it is all yours, most excellent Lady, that are best worthy of the greatest good.
THE fish that seeks for food in silver stream is unawares beguiled with the hook,
And tender hearts when lest of love they dream, do swallow beauty's bait, a lovely look.
PDF PAGE 124 The fish that shuns to bite, in net doth hit,
The heart that escapes the eye is caught by wit.
The thing called Love, poor Fisher men do feel rich pearls are found in hard & homely shells
Our habits base, but hearts as true as steel, sad looks deep sighs, flat faith are all our spells,
And when to us our loves seem fair to be.
We court them thus Love me and I'll love thee.
And if they say our love is fond made, we never leave till on their hearts we light,
Anglers have patience by their proper trade, and are content to tarry till they bite,
Of all the fish that in the waters move,
We count them lumps that will not bite at love.