IOS and Smyrna were two sweet cities, the first named of the Violet, the latter of the Myrrh: Homer was borne in the one, and buried in the other; Your majesties judgement and favour, are our Sun and shadow, the one coming of your deep wisdom, the other of your wonted grace. we in all humility desire, that by the former, receiving our first breath, we may in the latter, take our last rest.
Augustus Caesar had such piercing eyes, that who so looked on him, was constrained to wink. Your highness hath so perfect a judgement, that whatsoever we offer, we are enforced to blush; yet as the Athenians were most curious, that the Lawn wherewith Minerva was covered, should be without spot or wrinkle, So have we endeavoured with all care, that what we present your Highness, should neither offend in Scene nor syllable, knowing that as in the ground where Gold groweth, nothing will prosper but Gold, so in your Majestes mind, where nothing doth harbour but virtue, nothing can enter but virtue.
THE Sun doth beat upon the plain fields, wherefore let us sit down Galathea, under this fair Oak, by whose broad leaves, being defended from the warm beams, we may enjoy the fresh air, which softly breathes from Humber floods.
Father, you have devised well, and whilst our flock doth roam up and down this pleasant green, you shall recount to me, if it please you, for what cause this Tree was dedicated unto Neptune, and why you have thus disguised me.
I do agree thereto, and when thy state and my care be considered, thou shalt know this question was not asked in vain.
I willingly attend.
In times past, where thou seest a heap of small pebble, stood a stately Temple of white Marble, which was dedicated to the God of the Sea, (and in right being so near the Sea) hither came all such as either ventured by long travel to see Countries, or by great traffic to use merchandise, offering Sacrifice by fire, to get safety by water; yielding thanks for perils past, & making prayers for good success to come; but Fortune, constant in nothing but inconstancy, did change her copy, as the people their custom, for the Land being oppressed by Danes, who instead of sacrifice, committed sacrilege, in steed of religion, rebellion, and made a prey of that in which they should have made their prayers, tearing down the Temple even with the earth, being almost equal with the skies, enraged so the God who binds the winds in the hollows of the earth, that he caused the Seas to break their bounds, sith men had broke their vows, and to swell as far above their reach, as men had swerved beyond their reason: then might you see ships sail where sheep fed, anchors cast where ploughs go, fishermen throw their nets, where husbandmen sow their Corn, and fishes throw their scales where fowls do breed their quills: then might you gather froth where now is dew, rotten weeds for sweet roses, & take view of monstrous mermaids, instead of passing fair Maids.
To hear these sweet marvels, I would mine eyes were turned also into ears.
But at the last, our Countrymen repenting, and not too late, because at last, Neptune either weary of his wrath, or wary to do them wrong, upon condition consented to ease their miseries.
What condition will not miserable men accept?
The condition was this, that at every five years day, the fairest and chastest virgin in all the Country, should be brought unto this Tree, & here being bound, (whom neither parentage shall excuse for honour, nor virtue for integrity) is left for a peace offering unto Neptune.
Dear is the peace that is bought with guiltless blood.
I am not able to say that, but he sendeth a Monster called the Agar, against whose coming the waters roar, the fowls fly away, and the Cattle in the field for terror, shun the banks.
And she bound to endure that horror?
And she bound to endure that horror.
Doth this Monster devour her?
Whether she be devoured of him, or conveyed to Neptune, or drowned between both, it is not permitted to know, and incurreth danger to conjecture; Now Galathea here endeth my tale, & beginneth thy tragedy.
Alas father, and why so?
I would thou hadst been less fair, or more fortunate, then shouldest thou not repine that I have disguised thee in this attire, for thy beauty will make thee to be thought worthy of this God; to avoid therefore destiny (for wisdom ruleth the stars) I think it better to use an unlawful means (your honour preserved) then intolerable grief, both life and honour hazarded, and to prevent (if it be possible) thy constellation by my craft. Now hast thou heard the custom of this Country, the cause why this Tree was dedicated unto Neptune, and the vexing care of thy fearful Father.
Father, I have been attentive to hear, and by your patience am ready to answer. Destiny may be deferred, not prevented; and therefore it were better to offer myself in triumph, than to be drawn to it with dishonour. Hath nature (as you say) made me so fair above all, and shall not virtue make me as famous as others? Do you not know, (or doth overcarefulness make you forget) that an honourable death is to be preferred before an infamous life. I am but a child, and have not lived long, and yet not so childish, as I desire to live ever: virtues I mean to carry to my grave, not grey hairs. I would I were as sure that destiny would light on me, as I am resolved it could not fear me. Nature hath given me beauty, Virtue courage, Nature must yield me death, Virtue honour. Suffer me therefore to die, for which I was borne, or let me curse that I was borne, sith I may not die for it.
Alas Galathea, to consider the causes of change, thou art too young, and that I should find them out for thee, too too fortunate.
The destiny to me cannot be so hard as the disguising hateful.
To gain love, the Gods have taken shapes of beasts, and to save life art thou coy to take the attire of men?
They were beastly gods, that lust could make them seem as beasts.
In health it is easy to counsel the sick, but it's hard for the sick to follow wholesome counsel. Well let us depart, the day is far spent.
Fair Nymph, are you strayed from your company by chance, or love you to wander solitarily on purpose?
Fair boy, or god, or whatever you be, I would you knew these woods are to me so well known, that I cannot stray though I would, and my mind so free, that to be melancholy I have no cause. There is none of Diana's train that any can train, either out of their way, or out of their wits.
What is that Diana a goddess? what her nymphs virgins? what her pastimes hunting?
A goddess? who knows it not? Virgins? who thinks it not? Hunting? who loves it not?
I pray thee sweet wench, amongst all your sweet troup, is there not one that followeth the sweetest thing. Sweet love?
Love good sir, what mean you by it? or what do you call it?
A heat full of coldness, a sweet full of bitterness, a pain full of pleasantness, which maketh thoughts have eyes, and heart's ears, bred by desire, nursed by delight, weaned by jealousy, killed by dissembling, buried by ingratitude, and this is love, fair Lady will you any?
If it be nothing else, it is but a foolish thing.
Try, and you shall find it a pretty thing.
I have neither will nor leisure, but I will follow Diana in the Chase, whose virgins are all chaste, delighting in the bow that wounds the swift Heart in the Forest, not fearing the bow that strikes the soft heart in the Chamber. This difference is between my Mistress Diana, and your Mother (as I guess) Venus, that all her nymphs are amiable and wise in their kind, the other amorous and too kind for their sex; and so farewell little god.
Diana, and thou, and all thine, shall know that Cupid is a great god, I will practise a while in these woods, and play such pranks with these nymphs, that while they aim to hit others with their Arrows, they shall be wounded themselves with their own eyes.
Come Phillida, fair Phillida, and I fear me too fair being my Phillida, thou knowest the custom of this Country, & I the greatness of thy beauty, we both the fierceness of the monster Agar. Every one thinketh his own child fair, but I know that which I most desire, and would least have, that thou art fairest. Thou shalt therefore disguise thyself in attire, lest I should disguise myself in affection, in suffering thee to perish by a fond desire, whom I may preserve by a sure deceit.
Dear father, Nature could not make me so fair as she hath made you kind, nor you more kind than me dutiful. whatsoever you command I will not refuse, because you command nothing but my safety, and your happiness. But how shall I be disguised?
In man's apparel.
It will neither become my body, nor my mind.
Why Phillida?
For then I must keep company with boys, and commit follies unseemly for my sex, or keep company with girls, and be thought more wanton then becometh me. Besides, I shall be ashamed of my long hose and short coat, and so unwarely blab out something by blushing at every thing.
Fear not Phillida, use will make it easy, fear must make it necessary.
I agree, since my father will have it so, and fortune must.
Come let us in, and when thou art disguised, roam about these woods till the time be past, and Neptune pleased.
Now Mariner, what callest thou this sport on the Sea?
It is called a wrack.
I take no pleasure in it. Of all deaths I would not be drowned, ones clothes will be so wet when he is taken up.
What call'st thou the thing we were bound to?
A rafter.
I will rather hang myself on a rafter in the house, then be so haled in the Sea, there one may have a leap for his life; but I marvel how our Master speeds.
I'll warrant by this time he is wet-shod. Did you ever see water bubble as the Sea did? But what shall we do?
You are now in Lincolnshire, where you can want no foul, if you can devise means to catch them, there be woods hard by, and at every miles end houses: so that if you seek on the Land, you shall speed better than on the Sea.
Sea, nay I will never sail more, I brook not their diet: their bread is so hard, that one must carry a whetstone in his mouth to grind his teeth: the meat so salt, that one would think after dinner his tongue had been powdered ten days.
O thou hast a sweet life Mariner to be pined in a few boards, and to be within an inch of a thing bottomless. I pray thee how often hast thou been drowned?
Fool thou seest I am yet alive.
Why be they dead that be drowned, I had thought they had been with the fish, and so by chance been caught up with them in a Net again. It were a shame a little cold water should kill a man of reason, when you shall see a poor minnow lie in it, that hath no understanding.
Thou art wise from the crown of thy head upwards; seek you new fortunes now, I will follow mine old. I can shift the Moon and the Sun, and know by one Card, what all you cannot do by a whole pair. The Loadstone that always holdeth his nose to the North, the two and thirty points for the wind, the wonders I see would make all you blind: you be but boys, I fear the Sea no more than a dish of water. Why fools it is but a liquid element, farewell.
It were good we learned his cunning at the Cards, for we must live by cozenage, we have neither Lands nor wit, nor Masters, nor honesty.
Nay I would fain have his thirty two, that is, his three dozen lacking four points, for you see betwixt us three there is not two good points.
Let us call him a little back that we may learn those points. Sirrah a word, I pray thee show us thy points.
Will you learn?
I.
Then as you like this I will instruct you in all our secrets: for there is not a clout nor card, nor board, nor post, that hath not a special name, or singular nature.
Well begin with your points, for I lack only points in this world.
North. North & by East. North North East. North-east and by North, North-east. North-east and by East. East North-east, East and by North. East.
I'll say it, North, north-east, North-east, Nore nore and by north-east. I shall never do it.
This is but one quarter.
I shall never learn a quarter of it. I will try. North, North-east, is by the West side, North and by North.
Passing ill.
Hast thou no memory. Try thou.
North North and by North. I can go no further.
O dullard, is thy head lighter than the wind, and thy tongue so heavy it will not wag. I will once again say it.
I will never learn this language, it will get but small living, when it will scarce be learned till one be old.
Nay then farewell, and if your fortunes exceed not your wits, you shall starve before ye sleep.
Was there ever such cozening? Come let us to the woods, and see what fortune we may have before they be made ships: as for our Master he is drowned.
I will this way.
I this.
I this, & this day twelvemonth let us all meet here again: it may be we shall either beg together, or hang together.
It skills not so we be together. But let us sing now, though we cry hereafter.
BLush Galathea that must frame thy affection fit for thy habit, and therefore be thought immodest, because thou art unfortunate. Thy tender years cannot dissemble this deceit: nor thy sex bear it. O would the gods had made me as I seem to be, or that I might safely be what I seem not. Thy Father doteth Galathea, whose blind love corrupteth his fond judgement, and jealous of thy death, seemeth to dote on thy beauty, whose fond care carrieth his partial eye as far from truth, as his heart is from falsehood. But why dost thou blame him or blab what thou art, when thou shouldest only counterfeit what thou art not. But whist, here cometh a lad: I will learn of him how to behave myself.
I neither like my gate, nor my garments, the one untoward, the other unfit, both unseemly. O Phillida, but yonder stayeth one, and therefore say nothing. But o Phillida.
I perceive that boys are in as great disliking of themselves as maids, therefore though I wear the apparel, I am glad I am not the person.
It is a pretty boy and a fair, he might well have been a woman, but because he is not, I am glad I am, for now under the colour of my coat, I shall decipher the follies of their kind.
I would salute him, but I fear I should make a curtsy instead of a leg.
If I durst trust my face as well as I do my habit, I would spend some time to make pastime, for say what they will of a man's wit, it is no second thing to be a woman.
All the blood in my body would be in my face, if he should ask me (as the question among men is common) are you a maid?
Why stand I still, boys should be bold, but here cometh a brave train that will spill all our talk.
God speed fair boy.
You are deceived Lady.
Why, are you no boy?
No fair boy.
But I see an unhappy boy.
Saw you not the dear come this way, he flew down the wind, & I believe you have blanched him.
Whose Dear was it Lady?
Diana's dear.
I saw none but mine own dear.
This wag is wanton or a fool, ask the other, Diana.
I know not how it cometh to pass, but yonder boy is in mine eye too beautiful, I pray gods the Ladies think him not their dear.
Pretty lad, do your sheep feed in the Forest, or are you strayed from you flock, or on purpose come ye to mar Diana's pastime?
I understand not one word you speak.
What art thou neither Lad nor shepherd?
My mother said I could be no lad till I was twenty year old, nor keep sheep till I could tell them; and therefore Lady neither lad nor shepherd is here.
These boys are both agreed, either they are very pleasant or too perverse: you were best Lady make them tusk these Woods, whilst we stand with our bows, and so use them as Beagles since they have so good mouths.
I will. Follow me without delay, or excuse, & if you can do nothing, yet shall you hallow the dear.
I am willing to go, not for these lady's company, because myself am a virgin, but for that fair boy's favour, who I think be a God.
You sir boy shall also go.
I must if you command, and would if you had not.
Now Cupid, under the shape of a silly girl show the power of a mighty God. Let Diana and all her coy nymphs know, that there is no heart so chaste but thy bow can wound, nor eyes so modest, but thy brands can kindle, nor thoughts so stayed, but thy shafts can make wavering, weak and wanton: Cupid though he be a child, is no baby. I will make their pains my pastimes, & so confound their loves in their own sex, that they shall dote in their desires, delight in their affections, and practise only impossibilities. Whilst I truant from my mother, I will use some tyranny in these woods, and so shall their exercise in foolish love, be my excuse for running away. I will see whither fair faces be always chaste, or Diana's virgins only modest, else will I spend both my shafts and shifts, and then Ladies if you see these dainty Dames entrapped in love, say softly to yourselves, we may all love.
Do silly Shepherds go about to deceive great Neptune, in putting on man's attire upon women: and Cupid to make sport deceive them all, by using a woman's apparel upon a God, than Neptune that hast taken sundry shapes to obtain love, stick not to practise some deceit to show thy deity, and having often thrust thyself into the shape of beasts to deceive men be not coy to use the shape of a shepherd, to show thyself a God. Neptune cannot be overreached by Swains, himself is subtle, and if Diana be overtaken by craft, Cupid is wise. I will into these woods and mark all, and in the end will mar all.
Call you this seeking of fortunes when one can find nothing but birds nests? would I were out of these Woods, for I shall have but wooden luck, here's nothing but the screeking of Owls, croaking of Frogs, hissing of Adders, barking of Foxes, walking of Hags. But what be these?
I will follow them, to hell I shall not go, for so fair faces never can have such hard fortunes. What black boy is this.
What a life do I lead with my Master nothing but blowing of bellows, beating of spirits, & scraping of crosslets? it is a very secret Science, for none almost can understand the language of it. Sublimation, Amalgamation, Calcination, Rubification, incorporation, Circination, Sementation, Albification, and fermentation. With as many terms unpossible to be uttered, as the Art to be compassed.
Let me cross myself, I never heard so many great devils in a little monkeys mouth.
Then our instruments, crosslets, Sublivatories, Cucurbits, Limbecks, Decensores, viols, manual and mural, for imbibing and conbibing, Bellows, mollificative and endurative.
What language is this? do they speak so?
Then our Mettles, Saltpetre, Vitriol, Sal tartar, Sal perperat, Argon, Resagar, Sal Armonic, Egrimony, Lumany, Brimstone, Valerian, Tartar alum, breemwort, Glass, unsleeked lime, Chalk, Ashes, hair; and what not, to make I know not what.
My hair beginneth to stand upright, would the boy would make an end.
And yet such a beggarly Science it is, and so strong on multiplication, that the end is to have neither gold, wit, nor honesty.
Then am I just of thy occupation. What fellow, well met.
Fellow, upon what acquaintance?
Why thou sayst, the end of thy occupation is to have neither wit, money, nor honesty: & methinks at a blush, thou shouldest be one of my occupation.
Thou art deceived, my Master is an alchemist.
What's that, a man?
A little more than a man, and a hairs breadth less than a God. He can make of thy cap gold, and by multiplication of one groat, three old Angels. I have known him of the tag of a point, to make a silver bowl of a pint.
That makes thee have never a point, they be all turned to pots: but if he can do this, he shall be a god altogether.
If thou have any gold to work on, thou art then made for ever: for with one pound of gold, he will go near to pave ten acres of ground.
how might a man serve him and learn his cunning?
Easily. First seem to understand the terms, and specially mark these points. In our Art there are four Spirits.
Nay I have done if you work with devils.
Thou art gross; we call those Spirits that are the grounds of our Art, & as it were the mettles more incorporative for domination. The first Spirit is Quicksilver.
That is my Spirit, for my silver is so quick; that I have much ado to catch it, and when I have it, it is so nimble that I cannot hold it; I thought there was a devil in it.
The second, orpiment.
That's no Spirit, but a word to conjure a Spirit.
The third, Sal ammoniac.
A proper word.
The fourth, Brimstone.
That's a stinking Spirit, I thought there was some spirit in it because it burned so blue. For my Mother would often tell me that when the candle burned blue, there was some ill Spirit in the house, and now I perceive it was the spirit Brimstone.
Thou cast remember these four spirits.
Let me alone to conjure them.
Now are there also seven bodies, but here cometh my Master.
This is a beggar.
No, such cunning men must disguise themselves, as though there were nothing in them for otherwise they shall be compelled to work for Princes, and so be constrained to bewray their secrets.
I like not his attire, but am enamoured of his Art.
An ounce of Silver limed, as much of crude Mercury, of Spirits four, being tempered with the bodies seven, by multiplying of it ten times, comes for one pound, eight thousand pounds, so that I may have only Beechen coals.
Is it possible?
It is more certain than certainty.
I'll tell thee one secret, I stole a silver thimble; dost thou think that he will make it a pottle pot?
A pottle pot, nay I dare warrant it a whole Cupboard of plate: why of the quintessence of a leaden plummet, he hath framed xx, dozen of silver Spoons. Look how he studies, I durst venture my life he is now casting about, how of his breath he may make golden bracelets, for oftentimes of smoke he hath made silver drops.
What do I hear?
Didst thou never hear how Iupiter came in a golden shower to Danae?
I remember that tale.
That shower did my Master make of a spoonful of tartar-alum, but with the fire of blood, & the corrosive of the air, he is able to make nothing infinite, but whist he espieth us.
What Peter do you loiter, knowing that every minute increaseth our Mine?
I was glad to take air, for the mettle came so fast, that I feared my face would have been turned to silver.
But what stripling is this?
One that is desirous to learn your craft.
Craft sir boy, you must call it mystery.
All is one, a crafty mystery, and a mystical craft.
Canst thou take pains?
Infinite.
But thou must be sworn to be secret, and then I will entertain thee.
I can swear though I be a poor fellow as well as the best man in the Shire. But Sir I much marvel that you being so cunning, should be so ragged.
O my child, Gryphs make their nests of gold though their coats are feathers, and we feather our nests with Diamonds, though our garments be but freeze. If thou knewest the secret of this Science, the cunning would make thee so proud that thou wouldest disdain the outward pomp.
My Master is so ravished with his Art, that we many times go supperless to bed, for he will make gold of his bread, and such is the drought of his desire, that we all wish our very guts were gold.
I have good fortune to light upon such a Master.
When in the depth of my skill I determine to try the uttermost of mine Art, I am dissuaded by the gods, otherwise, I durst undertake to make the fire as it flames, gold, the wind as it blows, silver, the water as it runs, lead, the earth as it stands, iron, the sky, brass, and men's thoughts, firm mettles.
I must bless myself, and marvel at you.
Come in, and thou shalt see all.
I follow, I run, I fly; they say my Father hath a golden thumb, you shall see me have a golden body.
I am glad of this, for now I shall have leisure to run away; such a bald Art as never was, let him keep his new man, for he shall never see his old again; God shield me from blowing gold to nothing, with a strong imagination to make nothing any thing.
How now Galathea? miserable Galathea, that having put on the apparel of a boy, thou canst also put on the mind. O fair Melebeus, I too fair, and therefore I fear, too proud. Had it not been better for thee to have been a sacrifice to Neptune, than a slave to Cupid? to die for thy Country, than to live I thy fancy? to be a sacrifice, than a Lover? O would when I hunted his eye with my heart, he might have seen my heart with his eyes. Why did Nature to him a boy give a face so fair, or to me a virgin a fortune so good? I will now use for the distaff the bow, and play at quoits abroad, that was wont to sow in my Sampler at home. It may be Galathea, foolish Galathea, what may be? nothing. Let me follow him into the Woods, and thou sweet Venus be my guide.
Poor Phillida, curse the time of thy birth and rareness of thy beauty, the unaptness of thy apparel, and the untamedness of thy affections. Art thou no sooner in the habit of a boy, but thou must be enamoured of a boy, what shalt thou do when what best liketh thee, most discontenteth thee? Go into the Woods, watch the good times, his best moods, and transgress in love a little of thy modesty, I will, I dare not, thou must, I cannot. Then pine in thine own peevishness. I will not, I will. Ah Phillida do something, nay any thing rather than live thus. Well, what I will do, myself knows not, but what I ought I know too well, and so I go resolute, either to bewray my love, or suffer shame.
How now? what new conceits, what strange contraries breed in thy mind? is thy Diana become a Venus, thy chaste thoughts turned to wanton looks, thy conquering modesty to a captive imagination? Beginnest thou with Piralis to die in the air and live in the fire, to leave the sweet delight of hunting, and to follow the hot desire of love? O Telusa, these words are unfit for thy sex being a virgin, but apt for thy affections being a Lover. And can there in years so young, in education so precise, in vows so holy, and in a heart so chaste, enter either a strong desire, or a wish, or a wavering thought of love? Can Cupid's brands quench Vesta's flames, and his feeble shafts headed with feathers, pierce deeper the Diana's arrows headed with steel? Break thy bow Telusa that seekest to break thy vow, and let those hands that aimed to hit the wild Hart, scratch out those eyes that have wounded thy tame heart. O vain and only naked name of Chastity, that is made eternal, and perish by time: holy, and is infected by fancy: divine, and is made mortal by folly. virgin's hearts I perceive are not unlike Cotton trees, whose fruit is so hard in the bud, that it soundeth like steel, and being ripe, poureth forth nothing but wool, and their thoughts like the leaves of Lunary, which the further they grow from the Sun, the sooner they are scorched with his beams. O Melebeus, because thou art fair, must I be fickle, and false my vow because I see thy virtue? Fond girl that I am to think of love, nay vain profession that I follow to disdain love, but here cometh Eurota, I must now put on a red mask and blush, lest she perceive my pale face and laugh.
Telusa, Diana bid me hunt you out, & saith that you care not to hunt with her, but if you follow any other Game than she hath roused, your punishment shall be to bend all our bows, and weave all our strings. Why look ye so pale, so sad, so wildly.
Eurota the Game I follow is the thing I fly: my strange disease my chief desire.
I am no Oedipus to expound riddles, and I muse how thou canst be Sphinx to utter them. But I pray thee Telusa tell me what thou ailest, if thou be sick, this ground hath leaves to heal: if melancholy, here are pastimes to use: if peevish, wit must wean it, or time, or counsel. If thou be in love (for I have heard of such a beast called love) it shall be cured, why blushest thou Telusa?
To hear thee in reckoning my pains to recite thine own. I saw Eurota how amorously you glanced your eye on the fair boy in the white coat, and how cunningly (now that you would have some talk of love) you hit me in the teeth with love.
I confess that I am in love, and yet swear that I know not what it is. I feel my thoughts unknit, mine eyes unstaid, my heart I know not how affected, or infected, my sleeps broken and full of dreams, my wakeness sad and full of sighs, myself in all things unlike myself. If this be love, I would it had never been devised.
Thou hast told what I am in uttering what thyself is: these are my passions Eurota my unbridled passions, my intolerable passions, which I were as good acknowledge and crave counsel, as to deny and endure peril.
How did it take you first Telusa?
By the eyes, my wanton eyes which conceived the picture of his face, and hanged it on the very strings of my heart. O fair Melebeus, o fond Telusa, but how did it take you Eurota?
By the ears, whose sweet words sunk so deep into my head, that the remembrance of his wit, hath bereaved me of my wisdom, o eloquent Tityrus, o credulous Eurota. But soft here cometh Ramia, but let her not hear us talk, we will withdraw ourselves, and hear her talk.
I am sent to seek others that have lost myself.
You shall see Ramia hath also bitten on a love leaf.
Can there be no heart so chaste, but love can wound? nor vows so holy but affection can violate. Vain art thou virtue, & thou chastity but a by word, when you both are subject to love, of all things the most abject. If Love be a God, why should not lovers be virtuous? Love is a God, and Lovers are virtuous.
Indeed Ramia, if Lovers were not virtuous, then wert thou vicious.
What are you come so near me?
I think we came near you when we said you loved.
Tush Ramia, 'tis too late to recall it, to repent it a shame: therefore I pray thee tell what is love?
If myself felt only this infection, I would then take upon me the definition, but being incident to so many, I dare not myself describe it, but we will all talk of that in the Woods. Diana stormeth that sending one to seek another, she loseth all. Servia of all the nymphs the coyest, loveth deadly, and exclaimeth claimeth against Diana, honoureth Venus, detesteth Vesta, and maketh a common scorn of virtue. Clymene, whose stately looks seemed to amaze the greatest Lords, stoopeth, yieldeth, and fawneth on the strange boy in the Woods. myself (with blushing I speak it) am thrall to that boy, that fair boy, that beautiful boy.
What have we here, all in love? no other food than fancy; no no, she shall not have the fair boy.
Nor you Telusa.
Nor you Eurota.
I love Melebeus, and my deserts shallbe answerable to my desires. I will forsake Diana for him. I will die for him.
So saith Clymene, and she will have Him. I care not, my sweet Tityrus though he seem proud, I impute it to childishness: who being yet scarce out of his swath-clouts, cannot understand these deep conceits; I love him.
So do I, and I will have him.
Immodest all that we are, unfortunate all that we are like to be; shall virgins begin to wrangle for love, and become wanton in their thoughts, in their words, in their actions. O divine Love, which art therefore called divine, because thou over-reachest the wisest, conquerest the chastest, and dost all things both unlikely and impossible, because thou art Love. Thou makest the bashful impudent, the wise fond, the chaste wanton, and workest contraries to our reach, because thyself is beyond reason.
Talk no more Telusa, your words wound. Ah would I were no woman.
Would Tityrus were no boy.
Would Telusa were nobody.
It is pity that Nature framed you not a woman having a face so fair, so lovely a countenance, so modest a behaviour.
There is a Tree in Tylos, whose nuts have shells like fire, and being cracked, the kernel is but water.
What a toy is it to tell me of that tree, being nothing to the purpose: I say it is pity you are not a woman.
I would not wish to be a woman, unless it were because thou art a man.
Nay I do not wish to be woman, for then I should not love thee, for I have sworn never to love a woman.
A strange humour in so pretty a youth, and according to mine, for myself will never love a woman.
It were a shame if a maiden should be a suitor, (a thing hated in that sex) that thou shouldest deny to be her servant.
If it be a shame in me, it can be no commendation in you, for yourself is of that mind.
Suppose I were a virgin (I blush in supposing myself one) and that under the habit of a boy were the person of a maid, if I should utter my affection with sighs, manifest my sweet love by my salt tears, and prove my loyalty unspotted, and my griefs intolerable, would not then that fair face, pity this true heart?
Admit that I were, as you would have me suppose that you are, and that I should with entreaties, prayers, oaths, bribes, and whatever can be invented in love, desire your favour, would you not yield?
Trush you come in with admit.
And you with suppose.
What doubtful speeches be these? I fear me he is as I am, a maiden.
What dread riseth in my mind, I fear the boy to be as I am a maiden.
Tush it cannot be, his voice shows the contrary.
Yet I do not think it, for he would then have blushed.
Have you ever a Sister?
If I had but one my brother must needs have two, but I pray have you ever a one?
My Father had but one daughter, and therefore I could have no sister.
ay me, he is as I am, for his speeches be as mine are.
What shall I do, either he is subtle or my sex simple.
I have known divers of Diana's nymphs enamoured of him, yet hath he rejected all, either as too proud to disdain, or too childish not to understand, or for that he knoweth himself to he a Virgin.
I am in a quandary, Diana's nymphs have followed him, and he despised them, either knowing too well the beauty of his own face, or that himself is of the same mould. I will once again try him. You promised me in the woods, that you would love me before all Diana's nymphs.
ay, so you would love me before all Diana's nymphs.
Can you prefer a fond boy as I am, before so fair Ladies as they are.
Why should not I as well as you?
Come let us into the Grove, and make much one of another, that cannot tell what to think one of another.
Rafe, my boy is run away, I trust thou wilt not run after.
I would I had a pair of wings that I might fly after.
My boy was the veriest these, the arrantest liar, and the vildest swearer in the world, otherwise the best boy in the world, he hath stolen my apparel, all my money, and forgot nothing but to bid me farewell.
That will not I forget, farewell Master.
Why thou hast not yet seen the end of my Art.
I would I had not known the beginning. Did not you promise me, of my silver thimble to make a whole cupboard of plate, and that of a Spanish needle you would build a silver steeple?
I Rafe, the fortune of this Art consisteth in the measure of the fire, for if there be a coal too much, or a spark too little, if it be a little too hot, or a thought too soft, all our labour is in vain; beside, they that blow, must beat time with their breathes, as Musicians do with their breasts, so as there must be of the metals, the fire and workers a very harmony.
Nay if you must weigh your fire by ounces, & take measure of a man's blast, you may then make of a dram of wind a wedge of gold, and of the shadow of one shilling make another, so as you have an Organist to tune your temperatures.
So is it, and often doth it happen, that the just proportion of the fire and all things concur.
Concur, condog. I will away.
Then away.
An art quoth you, that one multiplieth so much all day, that he wanteth money to buy meat at night? But what have we yonder? what devout man? he will never speak till he be urged. I will salute him. Sir, there lieth a purse under your feet, if I thought it were not yours, I would take it up.
Dost thou not know that I was calculating the nativity of Alexander's great horse?
Why what are you?
An Astronomer.
What one of those that makes Almanacs.
Ipsissimus. I can tell the minute of thy birth, the moment of thy death, and the manner. I can tell thee what wether shall be between this and Octogessimus octaws mirabilis annus. When I list I can set a trap for the Sun, catch the Moon with lime-twigs, and go a batfowling for stars. I can tell thee things passed, and things to come, & with my cunning, measure how many yards of Clouds are beneath the Sky. Nothing can happen which I foresee not, nothing shall.
I hope sir you are no more than a God.
I can bring the twelve signs out of their Zodiacs, and hang them up at Taverns.
I pray you sir tell me what you cannot do, for I perceive there is nothing so easy for you to compass as impossibilities. But what be those signs?
As a man should say, signs which govern the body. The Ram governeth the head.
That is the worst sign for the head.
Why?
Because it is a sign of an ill Ewe.
Tush, that sign must be there. Then the Bull for the throat, Capricornus for the knees.
I will hear no more signs, if they be all such desperate signs: but seeing you are, (I know not who to term you) shall I serve you? I would fain serve.
I accept thee.
Happy am I, for now shall I reach thoughts, and tell how many drops of water goes to the greatest shower of rain. You shall see me catch the Moon in the clips like a coney in a pursnet.
I will teach thee the Golden number, the Epact, and the Prime.
I will meddle no more with numbering of gold, for multiplication is a miserable action; I pray sir what wether shall we have this hour threescore year?
That I must cast by our judicials Astronomical, therefore come in with me, and thou shall see every wrinkle of my Astrological wisdom, and I will make the Heavens as plain to thee as the high way, thy cunning shall sit cheek by jowl with the suns Chariot; then shalt thou see what a base thing it is, to have others thoughts creep on the ground, whenas thine shall be stitched to the stars.
Then I shall be translated from this mortality.
Thy thoughts shall be metamorphosed, and made hail fellows with the Gods.
O fortune. I feel my very brains moralised, and as it were a certain contempt of earthly actions is crept into my mind, by an aetherial contemplation. Come let us in.
What news have we here Ladies, are all in love? are Diana's nymphs become Venus' wantons? is it a shame to be chaste, because you be amiable? or must you needs be amorous, because you are fair? O Venus, if this be thy spite, I will require it with more than hate, well shalt thou know what it is to drib thine arrows up and down Diana's leies. There is an unknown Nymph that straggleth up and down these woods, which I suspect hath been the weaver of these woes, I saw her slumbering by the brook side, go search her & bring her, if you find upon her shoulder a burn, it is Cupid: if any print on her back like a leaf, it is Medea: if any picture on her left breast like a bird, it is Calipso; whoever it be, bring her hither, and speedily bring her hither.
I will go with speed.
Go you Larissa and help her.
I obey.
Now Ladies, doth not that make your cheeks blush, that makes mine ears glow? or can you remember that without sobs, which Diana can not think on without sighs? What greater dishonour could happen to Diana, or to her nymphs shame, then that there can be any time so idle, that should make their heads so addle? Your chaste hearts my nymphs, should resemble the onyx, which is hottest when it is whitest, and your thoughts, the more they are assaulted with desires, the less they should be affected. You should think love like Homer's Moly, a white leaf & a black root, a fair show, and a bitter taste. Of all Trees the Cedar is greatest, and hath the smallest seeds: of all affections, love hath the greatest name, & the least virtue. Shall it be said, and shall Venus say it? nay shall it be seen, and shall wantonness see it? that Diana the goddess of chastity, whose thoughts are always answerable to her vows, whose eyes never glanced on desire, and whose heart abateth the point of Cupid's arrows, shall have her virgins to become unchaste in desires, immoderate in affection, untemperate in love, in foolish love, in base love. Eagles cast their evil feathers in the Sun, but you cast your best desires upon a shadow. The birds ibis lose their sweetness when they lose their sights, and virgins all their virtues with their unchaste thoughts, unchaste, Diana calleth that, that hath either any show or suspicion of lightness. O my dear nymphs, if you knew how loving thoughts stain lovely faces, you would be as careful to have the one as unspotted as the other beautiful.
Cast before your eyes the loves of Venus' trulls, their fortunes, their fancies, their ends. What are they else but Silenus pictures, without, Lambs & Doves, with in, Apes, and Owls, who like Ixion embrace clouds for Iuno, the shadows of virtue in steed of the substance. The Eagles feathers consume the feathers of all others, and loves desire corrupteth all other virtues. I blush Ladies that you having been heretofore patient of labours, should now become prentices to idleness, and use the pen for Sonnets, not the needle for Samplers. And how is your love placed, upon pelting boys, perhaps base of birth, without doubt weak of discretion. I but they are fair. O Ladies do your eyes begin to love colours, whose hearts was wont to loathe them? is Diana's Chase become Venus' Court? and are your holy vows turned to hollow thoughts?
madam, if love were not a thing beyond reason, we might then give a reason of our doings, but so divine is his force, that it worketh effects as contrary to that we wish, as unreasonable against that we ought.
Lady, so unacquainted are the passions of love, that we can neither describe them nor bear them.
Foolish girls, how willing you are to follow that which you should fly, but here cometh Telusa.
We have brought the disguised Nymph, etc. have found on his shoulder Psyche's burn, and he confesseth himself to be Cupid.
how now sir, are you caught, are you Cupid?
Thou shalt see Diana that I dare confess myself to be Cupid.
And thou shalt see Cupid that I will show myself to be Diana, that is, Conqueror of thy loose & untamed appetites. Did thy mother Venus under the colour of a Nymph, send thee hither to wound my nymphs? Doth she add craft to her malice, and mistrusting her deity, practise deceit: is there no place but my Groves, no persons but my nymphs? Cruel and unkind Venus, that spiteth only chastity, thou shalt see that Diana's power shall revenge thy policy, and tame this pride. As for thee Cupid, I will break thy bow, and burn thine arrows, bind thy hands, clip thy wings, and fetter thy feet. Thou that fattest others with hopes, shalt be fed thyself with wishes, & thou that bindest others with golden thoughts, shalt be bound thyself with golden fetters. Venus' rods are made of Roses, Diana's of briars. Let Venus that great Goddess, ransom Cupid that little God. These Ladies here whom thou hast infected with foolish love, shall both tread on thee and triumph over thee. Thine own arrow shall be shot into thine own bosom, and thou shalt be enamoured, not on Psyche's, but on Circe's. I will teach thee what it is to displease Diana, distress her nymphs, or disturb her Game.
Diana, what I have done, cannot be undone, but what you mean to do, shall. Venus hath some Gods to her friends, Cupid shall have all.
Are you prating? I will bridle thy tongue & thy power, and in spite of mine own thoughts, I will set thee a task every day, which if thou finish not, thou shalt feel the smart. Thou shalt be used as Diana's slave, not Venus' son. All the world shall see that I will use thee like a captive, and show myself a Conqueror. Come have him in, that we may devise apt punishments for his proud presumptions.
We will plague ye for a little God.
We will never pity thee though thou be a God.
Nor I.
Nor I.
THis is the day wherein you must satisfy Neptune and save yourselves, call together your fair Daughters, and for a Sacrifice take the fairest, for better it is to offer a Virgin then suffer ruin. If you think it against nature to sacrifice your children, think it also against sense to destroy your Country. If you imagine Neptune pitiless to desire such a prey, confess yourselves perverse to deserve such a punishment. You see this tree, this fatal Tree, whose leaves though they glister like gold, yet it threateneth to fair virgin's grief. To this Tree must the beautifullest be bound do until the Monster Agar carry her away, and if the Monster come not, then assure yourselves that the fairest is concealed, and then your country shall be destroyed, therefore consult with yourselves, not as fathers of children, but as favourers of your Country. Let Neptune have his right if you will have your quiet; thus have I warned you to be careful, and would wish you to be wise, knowing that who so hath the fairest daughter, hath the greatest fortune, in losing one to save all, and so I depart to provide ceremonies for the Sacrifice, and command you to bring the Sacrifice.
They say Tityrus that you have a fair daughter, if it be so, dissemble not, for you shall be a fortunate father. It is a thing holy to preserve one's Country, and honourable to be the cause.
In deed Melebeus I have heard you boast that you had a fair daughter, than the which none was more beautiful. I hope you are not so careful of a child, that you will be careless of your Country, or add so much to nature, that you will detract from wisdom.
I must confess that I had a daughter, and I know you have, but alas my Child's cradle was her grave, and her swath-clout her winding sheet. I would she had lived till now, she should willingly have died now; for what could have happened to poor Melebeus more comfortable, then to be the father of a fair child and sweet Country.
O Mellebeus, dissemble you may with men, deceive the Gods you cannot, did not I see, (and very lately see) your daughter in your arms, whenas you gave her infinite kisses, with affection I fear me more than fatherly. You have conveyed her away, that you might cast us all away, bereaving her the honour of her beauty, and us the benefit, preferring a common inconvenience, before a private mischief.
It is a bad cloth Tityrus that will take no colour, and a simple Father that can use no cunning, you make the people believe that you wish well, when you practise nothing but ill, wishing to be thought religious towards the Gods, when I know you deceitful towards men. You cannot overreach me Tityrus, overshoot yourself you may. It is a wily Mouse that will breed in the cat's ear, and he must halt cunningly, that will deceive a Cripple. Did you ever see me kiss my Daughter? you are deceived, it was my wife. And if you thought so young a piece unfit for so old a person, and therefore imagined it to be my child, not my spouse, you must know that silver hairs delight in golden locks, and the old fancies crave young Nurses, and frosty years must be thawed by youthful fierce. But this matter set aside, you have a fair daughter Tityrus, and it is pity you are so fond a Father.
You are both either too fond or too froward: for whilst you dispute to save your Daughters, we neglect to prevent our destruction.
Come let us away and seek out a sacrifice. we must sift out their cunning, and let them shift for themselves.
Come Cupid to your task. First you must undo all these lovers knots, because you tied them.
If they be true love knots, 'tis unpossible to unknit them, if false, I never tied them.
Make no excuse but to it.
Loue knots are tied with eyes, and cannot be undone with hands, made fast with thoughts, and cannot be unloosed with fingers, had Diana no task to set Cupid to but things impossible, I will to it.
Why how now? you tie the knots faster.
I cannot choose, it goeth against my mind to make them lose.
Let me see, now 'tis unpossible to be undone.
It is the true love knot of a woman's heart, therefore cannot be undone.
That falls in sunder of itself.
It was made of a man's thought which will never hang together.
You have undone that well.
ay, because it was never tide well.
To the rest, for she will give you no rest. These two knots are finely untied.
It was because I never tide them, the one was knit by Pluto, not Cupid, by money, not love, the other by force, not faith, by appointment, not affection.
Why do you lay that knot aside.
For death.
Why?
Because the knot was knit by faith, and must only be unknit of death.
Why laugh you?
Because it is the fairest and the falsest, done with greatest art and least truth, with best colours, and worst conceits.
Who tide it?
A man's tongue.
Why do you put that in my bosom?
Because it is only for a Woman's bosom.
Why what is it?
A woman's heart.
Come let us go in, and tell that Cupid hath done his task, stay you behind Larissa, and see he sleep not, for Love will be idle, and take heed you surfeit not, for love will be wanton.
Let me alone I will find him somewhat to do.
Lady, can you for pity see Cupid thus punished.
Why did Cupid punish us without pity?
Is love a punishment?
It is no pastime.
O Venus, if thou sawest Cupid as a captive, bound to obey that was wont to command, fearing ladies' threats, that once pierced their hearts, I cannot tell whether thou wouldest revenge it for despite, or laugh at it for disport. The time may come Diana, and the time shall come, that thou that settest Cupid to undo knots, shall entreat Cupid to tie knots, and you Ladies that with solace have beheld my pains, shall with sighs entreat my pity.
He offereth to sleep.
How now Cupid begin you to nod?
Come Cupid, Diana hath devised new labours for you that are God of loves, you shall weave Samplers all night, and lackey after Diana all day. You shall shortly shoot at beasts for men, because you have made beasts of men, & weight on ladies' trains, because thou entrappest Ladies by trains. All the stories that are in Diana's Arras, which are of love, you must pick out with your needle, & in that place sow Vesta with her Nuns, and Diana with her nymphs. How like you this Cupid.
I say I will prick as well with my needle, as ever I did with mine arrows.
Diana cannot yield, she conquers affection.
Diana shall yield, she cannot conquer destiny.
Come Cupid, you must to your business.
You shall find me so busy in your heads, that you shall wish I had been idle with your hearts.
This day is the solemn Sacrifice at this Tree, wherein the fairest virgin (were not the inhabitants faithless) should be offered unto me, but so over careful are Fathers to their children, that they forget the safety of their Country, & fearing to become unnatural, become unreasonable; their slights may blear men, deceive me they cannot, I will be here at the hour, and show as great cruelty as they have done craft, & well shall they know that Neptune should have been entreated, not cozened.
I marvel what virgin the people will prepresent, it is happy you are none, for then it would have fallen to your lot because you are so fair.
If you had been a Maiden too I need not to have feared, because you are fairer.
I pray thee sweet boy flatter not me, speak truth of thyself, for in mine eye of all the world thou art fairest.
These be fair words, but far from thy true thoughts, I know mine own face in a true Glass, and desire not to see it in a flattering mouth.
O would I did flatter thee, and that fortune would not flatter me. I love thee as a brother, but love not me so.
Noah I will not, but love thee better, because I cannot love as a brother.
Seeing we are both boys, and both lovers, that our affection may have some show, and seem as it were love, let me call thee Mistress.
I accept that name, for divers before have called me Mistress.
For what cause?
Nay there lie the Mistress.
will not you be at the sacrifice?
Noah.
Why?
Because I dreamed that if I were there, I should be turned to a virgin, and then being so fair (as thou sayst I am) I should be offered as thou knowest one must. But will not you be there.
Not unless I were sure that a boy might be sacrificed, and not a maiden.
Why then you are in danger.
But I would escape it by deceit, but seeing we are resolved to be both absent, let us wander into these Groves, till the hour be passed.
I am agreed, for then my fear will be passed.
Why, what dost thou fear?
Nothing but that you love me not.
I will. Poor Phillida, what shouldest thou think of thyself, that lovest one that I fear me, is as thyself is; and may it not be, that her Father practised the same deceit with her, that my Father hath with me, and knowing her to be fair, feared she should be unfortunate, if it be so, Phillida how desperate is thy case? if it be not, how doubtful? For if she be a Maiden there is no hope of my love, if a boy, a hazard: I will after him or her, and lead a melancholy life, that look for a miserable death.
NO more Masters now, but a Mistress if I can light on her. An Astronomer? of all occupations that's the worst, yet well fare the alchemist, for he keeps good fires though he gets no gold, the other stands warming himself by staring on the stars, which I think he can as soon number as know their virtues. He told me a long tale of Octogessimus octaws, and the meeting of the conjunctions & Planets, and in the meantime he fell backward himself into a pond. I asked him why he foresaw not that by the stars, he said he knew it, but contemned it. But soft, is not this my brother Robin?
Yes as sure as thou art Rafe.
What Robin? what news? what fortune?
Faith I have had but bad fortune, but I prithee tell me thine.
I have had two Masters, not by art but by nature, one said, that by multiplying he would make of a penny ten pound.
ay but could he do it?
Could he do it quoth you? why man, I saw a pretty wench come to his shop, where with puffing, blowing, and sweating, he so plied her, that he multiplied her.
how?
Why he made her of one, two.
What by fire?
No, by the philosopher's stone.
Why, have Philosophers such stones?
ay, but they lie in a privy cupboard.
Why then thou art rich if thou have learned this cunning.
Tush this was nothing, he would of a little fasting spital, make a hose & doublet of cloth of silver.
Would I had been with him, for I have had almost no meat, but spital since I came to the woods.
How then didst thou live?
Why man I served a fortune-teller, who said I should live to see my Father hanged, and both my brothers beg. So I conclude the Mill shall be mine, and I live by imagination still.
Thy Master was an Ass, and looked on the lines of thy hands, but my other Master was an Astronomer, which could pick my nativity out of the stars. I should have half a dozen stars in my pocket if I have not lost them, but here they be. Sol, Saturn, Iupiter, Mars, Venus.
Why these be but names.
ay, but by these he gathereth, that I was a jovalist, borne of a Thursday, & that I should be a brave Venerean, and get all my good luck on a Friday.
'tis strange that a fish day should be a flesh-day.
O Robin, Venus orta mari, Venus was borne of the Sea, the Sea will have fish, fish must have wine, wine will have flesh, for Caro carnis genus est muliebre: but soft, here cometh that notable villain, that once preferred me to the alchemist.
So I had a Master, I would not care what became of me.
Robin thou shalt see me fit him. So I had a servant, I care neither for his conditions, his qualities, nor his person.
What Rafe? well met. No doubt you had a warm service of my Master the alchemist.
'twas warm indeed, for the fire had almost burnt out mine eyes, and yet my teeth still watered with hunger: so that my service was both too hot & too cold. I melted all my meat, and made only my slumber thoughts, and so had a full head and an empty belly. But where hast thou been since?
With a brother of thine I think, for he hath such a coat, and two brothers (as he saith) seeking of fortunes.
'tis my brother Dick, I prithee let's go to him.
sirrah, what was he doing that he came not with thee?
He hath gotten a Master now, that will teach him to make you both his younger brothers.
ay, thou passest for devising impossibilities, that's as true as thy Master could make silver pots of tags of points.
Nay he will teach him to cozen you both, & so get the Mill to himself.
Nay if he be both our cousins, I will be his great Grandfather, and Robin shall be his Uncle, but I pray thee bring us to him quickly, for I am great bellied with conceit till I see him.
Come then and go with me, and I will bring ye to him straight.
Bring forth the virgin, the fatal virgin, the fairest virgin, if you mean to appease Neptune, and preserve your Country.
Here she cometh, accompanied only with men, because it is a sight unseemly (as all virgins say) to see the misfortune of a maiden, and terrible to behold the fierceness of Agar that Monster.
Miserable and accursed Hebe, that being neither fair nor fortunate, thou shouldest be thought most happy and beautiful. Curse thy birth, thy life, thy death, being borne to live in danger, and having lived, to die by deceit. Art thou the sacrifice to appease Neptune, and satisfy the custom, the bloody custom, ordained for the safety of thy Country. I Hebe, poor Hebe, men will have it so, whose forces command our weak natures, nay the Gods will have it so, whose powers dally with our purposes. The Egyptians never cut their Dates from the tree, because they are so fresh and green. It is thought wickedness to pull Roses from the stalks in the Garden of Palestine, for that they have so lively a red: and who so cutteth the incense Tree in Arabia before it fall, committeth sacrilege.
Shall it only be lawful amongst us in the prime of youth, and pride of beauty, to destroy both youth and beauty: and what was honoured in fruits and flowers as a virtue, to violate in a virgin as a vice? But alas destiny alloweth no dispute, die Hebe, Hebe die, woeful Hebe, and only accursed Hebe. Farewell the sweet delights of life, and welcome now the bitter pangs of death. Farewell you chaste virgins, whose thoughts are divine, whose faces fair, whose fortunes are agreeable to your affections, enjoy and long enjoy the pleasure of your curled locks, the amiableness of your wished looks, the sweetness of your tuned voices, the content of your inward thoughts, the pomp of your outward shows, only Hebe biddeth farewell to all the joys that she conceived, and you hope for, that she possessed, and you shall; farewell the pomp of PRINCE's Courts, whose roofs are embossed with gold, and whose pavements are decked with fair Ladies, where the days are spent in sweet delights, the nights in pleasant dreams, where chastity honoureth affections, and commandeth, yieldeth to desire and conquereth.
Farewell the Sovereign of all virtue, and Goddess of all virgins, Diana, whose perfections are impossible to be numbered, and therefore infinite, never to be matched, and therefore immortal. Farewell sweet Parents, yet to be mine, unfortunate Parents. how blessed had you been in barrenness? how happy had I been if I had not been. Farewell life, vain life, wretched life, whose sorrows are long, whose end doubtful, whose miseries certain, whose hopes innumerable, whose fears intolerable. Come death, and welcome death whom nature cannot resist, because necessity ruleth, nor defer because destiny hasteth. Come Agar thou unsatiable Monster of maiden's blood, & devourer of beauty's bowels, glut thyself till thou surfeit, & let my life end thine. Tear these tender joints with thy greedy jaws, these yellow locks with thy black feet, this fair face with thy foul teeth. Why abatest thou thy wonted swiftness? I am fair, I am a virgin, I am ready. Come Agar thou horrible monster, & farewell world thou viler Monster.
The Monster is not come, and therefore I see Neptune is abused, whose rage will I fear me, be both infinite and intolerable: take in this Virgin, whose want of beauty hath saved her own life, and all yours.
We could not find any fairer.
Neptune will. Go deliver her to her father.
Fortunate Hebe, how shalt thou express thy joys? Nay unhappy girl that art not the fairest. Had it not been better for thee to have died with fame, than to live with dishonour, to have preferred the safety of thy Country and rareness of thy beauty, before sweetness of life, & vanity of the world? But alas, destiny would not have it so, destiny could not, for it asketh the beautifullest, I would Hebe thou hadst been beautifullest.
Come Hebe, here is no time for us to reason, it had been best for us thou hadst been most beautiful.
We met the virgin that should have been offered to Neptune, belike either the custom is pardoned, or she not thought fairest.
I cannot conjecture the cause, but I fear the event.
Why should you fear, the God requireth no boy.
I would he did, then should I have no fear.
I am glad he doth not tho, because if he did, I should have also cause to fear. But soft, what man or God is this? Let us closely withdraw ourselves into the Thickets,
And do men begin to be equal with Gods, seeking by craft to overreach them that by power oversee them? Do they dote so much on their daughters, that they stick not to dally with our deities, well shall the inhabitants see, that destiny cannot be prevented by craft, nor my anger be appeased by submission. I will make havoc of Diana's nymphs, my Temple shall be died with maidens blood, and there shall be nothing more vile than to be a Virgin. To be young and fair, shall be accounted shame & punishment, in so much as it shall be thought as dishonourable to be honest, as fortunate to be deformed.
O Neptune, hast thou forgotten thyself, or wilt thou clean forsake me? Hath Diana therefore brought danger to her nymphs, because they be chaste? shall virtue suffer both pain and shame which always deserveth praise and honour?
Praise and honour (Neptune) nothing less, except it be commendable to be coy, and honourable to be peevish. Sweet Neptune, if Venus can do any thing, let her try it in this one thing, that Diana may find as small comfort at thy hands, as Love hath found courtesy at hers.
This is she that hateth sweet delights, envieth loving desires, masketh wanton eyes, stoppeth amorous ears, bridleth youthful mouths, and under a name, or a word constancy, entertaineth all kind of cruelty: she hath taken my son Cupid, Cupid my lovely son, using him like a prentice, whipping him like a slave, scorning him like a beast, therefore Neptune I entreat thee by no other God, than the God of love, that thou evil entreat this Goddess of hate.
I muse not a little to see you two in this place, at this time, and about this matter, but what say you Diana, have you Cupid captive?
I say there is nothing more vain, then to dispute with Venus, whose untamed affections have bred more brawls in heaven, then is fit to repeat in earth, or possible to recount in number, I have Cupid, and will keep him, not to dandle in my lap, whom I abhor in my heart, but to laugh him to scorn, that hath made in my virgin's hearts such deep scars.
Scars Diana call you them that I know to be bleeding wounds? alas weak deity, it stretcheth not so far, both to abate the sharpness of his Arrows and to heal the hurts. No, loves wounds when they seem green, rankle, and having a smooth skin without, fester to the death within. Therefore Neptune, if ever Venus stood thee in stead, furthered thy fancies, or shall at all times be at thy command, let either Diana bring her Virgins to a continual massacre, or release Cupid of his martyrdom.
It is known Venus, that your tongue is as unruly as your thoughts, and your thoughts as unstaid as your eyes, Diana cannot chatter, Venus cannot choose.
It is an honour for Diana to have Venus mean ill, when she so speaketh well, but you shall see I come not to trifle, therefore once again Neptune, if that be not buried, which can never die, fancy, or that quenched which must ever burn, affection, show thyself the same Neptune that I knew thee to be when thou wast a Shepherd, and let not Venus' words be vain in thine ears, since thine were imprinted in my heart.
It were unfit that Goddesses should strive, and it were unreasonable that I should not yield, and therefore to please both, both attend; Diana I must honour, her virtue deserveth no less, but Venus I must love, I must confess so much.
Diana, restore Cupid to Venus, and I will for ever release the sacrifice of Virgins, if therefore you love your nymphs as she doth her Son, or prefer not a private grudge before a common grief, answer what you will do.
I account not the choice hard, for had I twenty Cupids, I would deliver them all to save one Virgin, knowing love to be a thing of all the vainest, virginity to be a virtue of all the noblest. I yield, Larissa, bring out Cupid: and now shall it be said, that Cupid saved those he thought to spoil.
I agree to this willingly: for I will be wary how my Son wander again. But Diana cannot forbid him to wound.
Yes, chastity is not within the level of his bow.
But beauty is a fair mark to hit.
Well I am glad you are agreed: and say that Neptune hath dealt well with Beauty and Chastity.
Here take your son.
Sir boy where have you been? always taken, first by Sapho, now by Diana, how happeneth it you unhappy elf?
Coming through Diana's woods, and seeing so many fair faces with fond hearts, I thought for my sport to make them smart, and so was taken by Diana.
I am glad I have you.
And I am glad I am rid of him.
Alas poor boy, thy Wings clipped? thy brands quenched? thy Bow burnt? and thy Arrows broke?
ay but it skilleth not, I bear now mine Arrows in mine eyes, my Wings on my thoughts, my brands in mine ears, my bow in my mouth, so as I can wound with looking, fly with thinking, burn with hearing, shoot with speaking.
Well you shall up to heaven with me, for on earth thou wilt lose me.
But soft, what be these?
Those that have offended thee to save their daughters.
Why, had you a fair daughter?
ay, and Melebeus a fair daughter.
Where be they?
In yonder Woods, and methinks I see them coming.
Well, your deserts have not gotten pardon, but these Goddesses jars.
This is my Daughter, my sweet Phillida.
And this is my fair Galathea.
Unfortunate Galathea if this be Phillida.
Accursed Phillida if that be Galathea.
And wast thou all this while enamoured of Phillida, that sweet Phillida?
And couldst thou dote upon the face of a Maiden, thyself being one, on the face of fair Galathea?
Do you both being Maidens love one another?
I had thought the habit agreeable with the Sex, and so burned in the fire of mine own fancies.
I had thought that in the attire of a boy, there could not have lodged the body of a Virgin, & so was inflamed with a sweet desire, which now I find a sour deceit.
Now things falling out as they do, you must leave these fond fond affections, nature will have it so, necessity must.
I will never love any but Phillida, her love is engraven in my heart, with her eyes.
Nor I any but Galathea, whose faith is imprinted in my thoughts by her words.
An idle choice, strange, and foolish, for one Virgin to dote on another, and to imagine a constant faith, where there can be no cause of affection. how like you this Venus?
I like well and allow it, they shall both be possessed of their wishes, for never shall it be said that Nature or Fortune shall overthrow Love, and Faith. Is your loves unspotted, begun with truth, continued with constancy, and not to be altered till death?
Die Galathea if thy love be not so.
Accursed be thou Phillida if thy love be not so.
Suppose all this Venus, what then?
Then shall it be seen, that I can turn one of them to be a man, and that I will.
Is it possible?
What is to Love or the Mistress of love unpossible? Was it not Venus that did the like to Iphis and Ianthe; how say ye are ye agreed, one to be a boy presently?
I am content, so I may embrace Galathea.
I wish it, so I may enjoy Phillida.
Soft Daughter, you must know whether I will have you a Son.
Take me with you Galathea, I will keep you as I begat you, a Daughter.
Tityrus, let yours be a boy and if you will, mine shall not.
Nay mine shall not, for by that means my young son shall lose his inheritance.
Why then get him to be made a Maiden and then there is nothing lost.
If there be such changing, I would Venus could make my wife a Man.
Why?
Because she loves always to play with men.
Well you are both fond, therefore agree to this changing, or suffer your Daughters to endure hard chance.
how say you Tityrus, shall we refer it to Venus.
I am content, because she is a Goddess.
Neptune you will not dislike it.
Not I.
Nor you Diana.
Not I.
Cupid shall not.
I will not.
Then let us depart, neither of them shall know whose lot it shall be till they come to the church-door. One shall be, doth it suffice?
And satisfy us both, doth it not Galathea?
Yes Phillida.
Come Robin, I am glad I have met with thee, for now we will make our Father laugh at these tales.
What are these that so malapertly thrust themselves into our companies?
Forsooth madam we are fortune tellers.
Fortune tellers; tell me my fortune.
We do not mean fortune tellers, we mean fortune tellers: we can tell what fortune we have had these twelve months in the Woods.
Let them alone, they be but peevish.
Yet they will be as good as Minstrels at the marriage, to make us all merry.
I Ladies we bear a very good Consort,
Can you sing?
Basely.
And you?
Meanly.
And what can you do?
If they double it, I will treble it.
Then shall ye go with us, and sing Hymen before the marriage. Are you content?
Content? never better content, for there we shall be sure to fill our bellies with Capons rumps, or some such dainty dishes.
Then follow us.
GO all, 'tis I only that conclude all. You Ladies may see, that Venus can make constancy fickleness, courage cowardice, modesty lightness, working things impossible in your Sex, and tempering hardest heart's like softest wool. Yield Ladies, yield to love Ladies, which lurketh under your eyelids whilst you sleep, and playeth with your heart strings whilst you wake: whose sweetness never breedeth satiety, labour weariness, nor grief bitterness. Cupid was begotten in a mist, nursed in Clouds, and sucking only upon conceits. Confess him a Conqueror, whom ye ought to regard, sith it is unpossible to resist, for this is infallible, that Love conquereth all things but itself, and Ladies all hearts but their own.