WHat, Death and Fortune cross the way of Love?
Why, what is Love, but Fortune's tennis-ball?
Nay, what are you both, but subjects unto Death?
And I command you to forbear this place:
For here the mouth of sad Melpomene,
Is wholly bent to tragedy's discourse;
And what are Tragedies but acts of death?
Here means the wrathful muse in seas of tears,
And loud laments to tell a dismal tale:
A tale wherein she lately hath bestowed,
The husky humour of her bloody quill,
And now for tables takes her to her tongue.
Why thinks Death, Love knows not the history?
Of brave Erastus and his Rhodian dame:
'twas I that made their hearts consent to love,
And therefore come I now as fittest person,
To serve for chorus to this Tragedy.
Had not I been, they had not died so soon.
Had I not been, they had not died so soon.
Nay then it seems you both do miss the mark,
Did not I change long love to sudden hate?
And then rechange their hatred into love:
And then from love deliver them to death?
Fortune is chorus. Love and death be gone.
I tell thee Fortune, and thee wanton Love,
I will not down to everlasting night,
Till I have moralized this Tragedy,
Whose chiefest actor was my sable dart.
Nor will I up into the brightsome sphere,
From whence I sprung, till in the chorus place,
I make it known to you and to the world,
What interest Love hath in Tragedies.
Nay then though Fortune have delight in change,
I'll stay my flight, and cease to turn my wheel,
Till I have shown by demonstration,
What interest I have in a Tragedy.
Tush, Fortune can do more than Love or Death.
Why stay we then, let's give the Actors leave.
And as occasion serves, make our return.
Why when Perseda wilt thou not assure me?
But shall I like a mastless ship at sea,
Go every way and not the way I would:
My love hath lasted from mine infancy,
And still increased as I grew myself,
When did Perseda pastime in the streets,
But her Erastus overeyed her sport:
When didst thou with thy sampler in the Sun,
Sit sowing with thy feres, but I was by
Marking thy lily hands dexterity:
Comparing it to twenty gracious things.
When didst thou sing a note that I could hear,
But I have framed a ditty to the tune,
Figuring Perseda twenty kind of ways.
When didst thou go to Church on holidays,
But I have waited on thee to and fro:
Marking my times as Falcons watch their flight.
When I have missed thee how have I lamented,
As if my thoughts had been assured true.
Thus in my youth, now since I grew a man,
I have persevered to let thee know,
The meaning of my true heart's constancy:
Then be not nice Perseda as women wont,
To hasty lovers whose fancy soon is fled:
My love is of a long continuance,
And merits not a stranger's recompense.
Enough Erastus thy Perseda knows,
She whom thou wouldst have thine, Erastus knows,
Nay my Perseda knows, and then 'tis well.
I watch you vantages, thine be it then,
I have forgot the rest, but that's the effect:
Which to effect, accept this carcanet,
My grandam on her death bed gave it me,
And there, even there I vowed unto myself,
To keep the same until my wandering eye,
Should find a harbour for my heart to dwell.
even in thy breast do I elect my rest,
Let in my heart to keep thine company.
And sweet Perseda accept this ring,
To equal it, receive my heart to boot,
It is no boot, for that was thine before?
And far more welcome is this change to me.
than sunny days to naked Savages,
Or news of pardon to a wretch condemned,
That waiteth for the fearful stroke of death.
As careful will I be to keep this chain,
As doth the mother keep her children,
From water pits, or falling in the fire.
Over mine armour will I hang this chain,
And when long combat makes my body faint,
The sight of this shall show Perseda's name,
And ad fresh courage to my fainting limbs.
This day the eager Turk of Tripolis,
The Knight of Malta, honoured for his worth,
And he that's titled by the golden spur.
The Moore upon his hot barbarian horse,
The fiery Spaniard bearing in his face,
The empress of a noble warrior.
The sudden Frenchman, and the big-boned Dane,
And English Arthur's hardy men at arms,
yclept lions of the western world:
Each one of these approved combatants,
Assembled from several corners of the world,
Are hither come to try their force in arms,
In honour of the Prince of Cyprus nuptials.
Amongst these worthies will Erastus' troop,
Though like a Gnat amongst a hive of Bees:
Know me by this thy precious carcanet,
And if I thrive, in valour as the glass
That takes the sunbeams burning with his force:
I'll be the glass, and thou that heavenly Sun,
From whence I'll borrow what I do achieve.
And sweet Perseda unnoted though I be,
Thy beauty yet shall make me known ere night.
Young slips are never graft in windy days,
Young scholars never entered with the rod,
Ah my Erastus there are Europe's Knights,
That carry honour graven in their helms,
And they must win it dear that win it thence.
Let not my beauty prick thee to thy bane,
Better sit still then rise and overtaken.
Counsel me not, for my intent is sworn,
And be my fortune as my love deserves.
So be thy fortune as thy features serves.
And then Erastus lives without compare.
Here comes a Messenger to haste me hence,
I know your message, hath the Princess sent for me?
She hath, and desires you to consort her to the triumphs.
Who saw my Master?
O sir, are you here?
The Prince and all the outlandish Gentlemen,
Are ready to go to the triumphs, they stay for you.
Goe sirra, bid my men bring my horse, and a dosen slaues.
You shall haue your horses and two dosen of slaues.
Wish me good hap Perseda and I'll win
Such glory, as no time shall e'ere race out,
Or end the period of my youth in blood.
Such fortune as the good Andromache,
Wished valiant Hector wounded with the Greeks,
I wish Erastus in his maiden wars.
o'ercome with valour these high minded Knights,
As with thy virtue thou hast conquered me,
Heavens hear my hearty prayer and it effect.
Brave knights of Christendom, and turkish both,
Assembled here in thirsty honours cause,
To be enroled in the brass leaved book,
Of never wasting perpetuity.
Put Lamblike mildness to your lions strength,
And be our tilting like two brothers' sports,
That exercise their war with friendly blows.
Brave Prince of Cyprus, and our son in law,
Welcome these worthies by their several countries,
For in thy honour hither are they come,
To grace thy nuptials with their deeds at arms.
First welcome thrice renowned Englishman,
Graced by thy country, but ten times more
By thy approved valour in the field,
Upon the onset of the enemy,
What is thy motto when thou spurs thy horse.
In Scotland was I made a Knight at arms,
Where for my country's cause I charged my Lance:
In France I took the Standard from the King,
And give the flower of Gallia in my crest.
Against the light foot Irish have I served,
And in my skin bear tokens of their skins:
Our word of courage all the world hath heard,
Saint George for England, and saint George for me.
Like welcome unto thee fair Knight of France,
Well famed thou art for discipline in war,
Upon the encounter of thine enemy,
What is thy mot renowned Knight of France.
In Italie I put my knighthood on,
Where in my shirt but with my single Rapier,
I combated a Roman much renowned,
His weapon's point empoisoned for my bane,
And yet my stars did bode my victory,
Saint Denis is for France and that for me.
Welcome Castilian too amongst the rest,
For fame doth sound thy valour with the rest:
Upon thy first encounter of thy foe,
What is thy word of courage brave man of Spain?
At fourteen years of age was I made Knight,
When twenty thousand Spaniards were in field,
What time a daring Rutter made a challenge
To change a bullet with our swift flight shot,
And I with single heed and level hit,
The haughty challenger and struck him dead.
The golden Fleece is that we cry upon,
And Iaques, Iaques, is the Spaniard's choice.
Next, welcome unto thee renowned Turk,
Not for thy lay, but for thy worth in arms:
Upon the first brave of thine enemy,
What is thy noted word of charge, brave Turk?
Against the Sophy in three pitched fields,
Under the conduct of great Soliman,
Have I been chief commander of an host,
And put the flint heart Persians to the sword.
The desert plains of Afric have I stained,
With blood of Moores, and there in three set battles fought,
Marched conqueror through Asia,
Along the coasts held by the Portuguese,
Even to the verge of gold, aboarding Spain
Hath Brusor led a valiant troup of Turks,
And made some Christians kneel to Mahomet:
Him we adore, and in his name I cry,
Mahomet for me and Solyman.
Now signior Basilisco you we know,
And therefore give not you a stranger's welcome,
You are a Rutter borne in Germanie,
Upon the first encounter of your foe:
What is your brave upon the enemy?
I fight not with my tongue, this is my Oratrix.
Laying his hand upon his sword.
Why signior Basilisco is it a she sword?
ay, and so are all blades with me: behold my instance
Perdie, each female is the weaker vessel,
And the vigour of this arm infringeth,
The temper of any blade, quoth my assertion,
And thereby gather, that this blade being approved weaker than this limb, may very well bear a feminine Epitheton.
'tis well proved, but what's the word that glories your Country?
Sooth to say, the earth is my Country,
As the air to the fowl, or the marine moisture,
To the red gilled fish: I repute myself no coward:
For humility shall mount. I keep no table
To character my forepassed conflicts.
As I remember, there happened a sore drought
In some part of Belgia, that the juicy grass,
Was seared with the Sun God's Element.
I held it policy, to put the men children
Of that climate to the sword,
That the mother's tears might relieve the parched earth.
The men died, the women wept, and the grass grew,
Else had my Friesland horse perished,
Whose loss would have more grieved me,
Than the ruin of that whole Country.
Upon a time in Ireland I fought,
On horseback with an hundred Kerns,
From Titan's Eastern uprise, to his Western downfall:
Insomuch that my Steed began to faint:
I conjecturing the cause to be want of water, dismounted:
In which place there was no such Element,
Enraged therefore with this scimitar,
All on foot like an Herculean offspring,
Endured some three or four hours combat,
In which process, my body distilled such dewy showers of sweat,
That from the warlike wrinkles of my front,
My Palfrey cooled his thirst.
My mercy in conquest, is equal with my manhood in fight,
The tear of an infant, hath been the ransom of a conquered city,
Whereby I purchased the surname of pity's adamant.
Rough words blow my choler,
As the wind doth Mulciber's work house,
I have no word, because no country,
Each place is my habitation,
Therefore each country's word mine to pronounce.
Princes, what would you?
I have seen much, heard more, but done most,
To be brief, he that will try me, let him waft me with his arm.
I am his, for some five lances.
Although it go against my stars to jest,
Yet to gratulate this benign Prince,
I will suppress my condition.
He is beholding to you greatly sir:
Mount ye brave Lordings, forwards to the tilt,
myself will censure of your chivalry,
And with impartial eyes behold your deeds,
Forward brave Ladies, place you to behold
The fair demeanour of these warlike Knights.
I am melancholy: an humour of Venus beleaguereth me.
I have rejected with contemptible frowns,
The sweet glances of many amorous girls, or rather ladies:
But certes, I am now captivated with the reflecting eye
Of that admirable comet Perseda.
I will place her to behold my triumphs,
And do wonders in her sight,
O heavens, she comes, accompanied with a child,
Whose chin bears no impression of manhood,
Not an hair, not an excrement.
My sweet Perseda.
Peace Infant thou blasphemest.
You are deceived sir, he swore not,
I tell thee jester he did worse, he called that Lady his,
jester: O extempore, o flores!
O harsh uneducate, illiterate peasant,
Thou abusest the phrase of the Latin.
By God's fish friend, take you the Latins part, i'll abuse you to.
What sans dread of our indignation?
sans: what language is that?
I think thou art a word maker by thine occupation.
ay, termest thou me of an occupation,
Nay then this fiery humour of choler is suppressed,
By the thought of love. Fair Lady,
Now by my troth she is gone.
ay, hath the Infant transported her hence,
He saw my anger figured in my brow,
And at his best advantage stole away,
But I will follow for revenge.
Nay, but hear you sir,
I must talk with you before you go.
O if thou be'st magnanimous, come before me.
Nay, if thou be'st a right warrior, get from under me.
What wouldst thou have me a Typhon,
To bear up Peleon or Ossa?
Typhon me no Typhons,
But swear upon my dudgeon dagger,
Not to go till I give thee leave,
But stay with me, and look upon the tilters.
O thou seekst thereby to dim my glory.
I care not for that, wilt thou not swear?
O I swear, I swear.
By the contents of this blade,
By the contents of this blade,
I the aforesaid Basilisco,
I the aforesaid Basilisco,
Knight good fellow, knight, knight.
Knave good fellow, knave, knave.
Will not offer to go from the side of Piston.
Will not offer to go from the side of Piston,
Without the leave of the said Piston obtained,
Without the leave of the said Piston,
Licenced, obtained and granted.
Enjoy thy life and live, I give it thee.
I enjoy my life at thy hands, I confess it,
I am up, but that I am religious in mine oath,
What would you do sir, what would you do,
Will you up the ladder sir, and see the tilting.
Better a Dog fawn on me, than bark,
Now sir, how likes thou this course.
Their Lances were couched too high,
And their Steeds ill borne.
It may be so, it may be so,
Now sir, how like you this course.
Pretty, pretty, but not famous,
Well for a learner, but not for a warrior.
By my faith, methought it was excellent.
ay in the eye of an infant, a peacock's tail is glorious.
O well run, the bay horse with the blue tail,
And the silver knight, are both down,
By Cock and Pie, and Mouse foot,
The English man is a fine Knight.
Now by the marble face of the Welkin,
He is a brave warrior.
What an oath is there, fie upon thee extortioner.
Now comes in the infant that courts my mistress,
Oh that my lance were in my rest,
And my Beaver closed for this encounter.
O well run, my master hath overthrown the Turk.
Now fie upon the Turk,
To be dismounted by a Child it vexeth me.
O well run Master, he hath overthrown the Frenchman.
It is the fury of his horse, not the strength of his arm
I would thou wouldst remit my oath,
That I might assail thy master.
I give thee leave, go to thy destruction,
But sirrah where's thy horse?
Why my Page stands holding him by the bridle.
Well go mount thee, go.
I go, and Fortune guide my Lance.
Take the braggin'st knave in christendom with thee:
Truly I am sorry for him,
He just like a knight, he'll justle like a jade.
It it a world to here the fool prate and brag,
He will jet as if it were a Goose on a green:
He goes many times supperless to bed,
And yet he takes Physic to make him lean.
Last night he was bidden to a Gentlewoman's to supper,
And because he would not be put to carve,
He wore his hand in a scarf, and said he was wounded:
He wears a coloured lath in his scabbard,
And when 'twas found upon him, he said he was wrathful,
He might not wear no iron. He wears Civet,
And when it was asked him, where he had that musk,
He said, all his kindred smelled so:
Is not this a counterfeit fool?
Well i'll up and see how he speeds.
Now by the faith of a squire, he is a very faint knight,
Why my master hath overthrown him
And his Curtal, both to the ground,
I shall have old laughing,
It will be better than the Fox in the hole for me.
Brave Gentlemen, by all your free consents,
This Knight unknown, hath best demeaned himself,
According to the proclamation made,
The prize and honour of the day is his,
But now unmask thyself, that we may see,
What warlike wrinkles time hath charactered,
With age's print upon thy warlike face.
Accord to his request, brave man at arms,
And let me see the face that vanquished me.
Unmask thyself, thou well approved knight.
I long to see thy face brave warrior.
Nay valiant sir, we may not be denied,
Fair Ladies should be coy to show their faces,
lest that the sun should tan them with his beams,
I'll be your page this once, for to disarm you.
That's the reason, that he shall help
Your husband to arm his head,
Oh the policy of this age is wonderful.
What young Erastus, is it possible?
Erastus be thou honoured for this deed.
So young, and of such good accomplishment,
Thrive fair beginner as this time doth promise,
In virtue, valour, and all worthiness:
Give me thy hand, I vow myself thy friend.
Thanks worthy sir, whose favourable hand,
Hath entered such a youngling in the war,
And thanks unto you all, brave worthy sirs,
Impose me task, how I may do you good,
Erastus will be dutiful in all.
Leave protestations now, and let us hie,
To tread lavolta, that is women's walk,
There spend we the remainder of the day,
Though overborne, and foiled in my course,
Yet have I partners in mine infamy.
'tis wondrous, that so young a toward warrior,
Should bide the shock of such approved knights,
As he this day hath matched and mated too,
But virtue should not envy good desert,
Therefore Erastus happy, and thy fortune,
But my Lucina, how she changed her colour,
When at the encounter I did lose a stirrup,
Hanging her head as partner of my shame,
Therefore will I now go visit her,
And please her with this Carcanet of worth,
Which by good fortune I have found today,
When valour fails, than gold must make the way.
O cursed Fortune enemy to Fame,
Thus to disgrace thy honoured name,
By overthrowing him that far hath spread thy praise,
Beyond the course of Titan's burning rays,
Page set aside the gesture of my enemy,
Give him a fiddlers fee, and send him packing.
Ho, God save you sir, have you burst your shin,
I villain, I have broke my shin bone,
My back bone, my channel bone, and my thigh bone,
Beside two dozen small inferior bones.
A shrewd loss by my faith sir,
But where's your courser's tail.
He lost the same in service.
There was a hot piece of service, where he lost his tail
But how chance his nose is slit.
For presumption, for covering the Emperor's Mare.
Marry a foul fault, but why are his ears cut?
For neighing in the emperors Court.
Why then thy Horse hath been a Colt in his time,
True, thou hast said.
O touch not the cheek of my palfrey,
lest he dismount me while my wounds are green,
Page, run, bid the surgeon bring his incision.
Yet stay i'll ride along with thee myself.
And i'll bear you company,
Come sirrah, let me see how finely you'll cry this chain
Why what was it worth?
It was worth more, than thou and all thy kin are worth,
It may be so, but what must he have that finds it?
Why a hundred Crowns.
Why then i'll have ten for the crying it.
Ten Crowns, and had but six pence,
For crying a little wench of thirty years old & upwards,
That had lost herself betwixt a tavern & a baw die house.
I that was a wench, but this is Gold,
She was poor, but this is rich.
Why then by this reckoning, a Hackneyman
Should have ten shillings for horsing a Gentlewoman,
Where he hath but ten pence of a beggar.
Why and reason good,
Let them pay, that best may,
As the Lawyers use their rich Clients,
When they let the poor go under Forma pauperis.
Why then I pray thee cry the Chain for me,
Sub forma pauperis,
For money goes very low with me at this time.
ay sir, but your master is, though you be not.
I but he must not know
That thou cry criest the Chain for me,
I do but use thee to save me a labour,
That am to make inquiry after it,
Well sir, you'll see me considered, will you not?
I marry will I, why what lighter payment can there be, than consideration.
O yes.
How now sirrah, what are you crying?
A chain sir, a chain, that your man bade me cry.
Get you away sirrah, I advise you
Meddle with no Chains of mine,
You paltry knave, how durst thou be so bold,
To cry the chain, when I bid thou shouldst not,
Did I not bid thee only underhand,
Make privy inquiry for it through the town,
lest public rumor might advertise her,
Whose knowledge were to me a second death?
Why would you have me run up and down the town? and my shoes are done.
What you want in shoes, i'll give ye in blows.
I pray you sir hold your hands,
And as I am an honest man,
I'll do the best I can to find your chain.
Ah treacherous Fortune, enemy to Love,
Didst thou advance me for my greater fall,
In dallying war, I lost my chiefest peace,
In hunting after praise, I lost my love,
And in loves shipwreck will my life miscarry,
Take thou the honour, and give me the chain,
Wherein was linked the sum of my delight.
When she delivered me the carcanet,
Keep it quoth she, as thou wouldst keep myself:
I kept it not, and therefore she is lost,
And lost with her is all my happiness,
And loss of happiness is worse than death.
Come therefore gentle death and ease my grief,
Cut short what malice Fortune misintends,
But stay a while good Death, and let me live,
Time may restore what Fortune took from me:
Ah no, great losses seldom are restored.
What if my Chain shall never be restored,
My innocence shall clear my negligence.
Ah! but my love is ceremonious,
And looks for justice at her lovers hand,
Within forced furrows of her clouding brow,
As storms that fall amid a sun shine day,
I read her just desires, and my decay.
I long till Brusor be returned from Rhodes,
To know how he hath borne him 'gainst the Christians,
That are assembled there to try their valour,
But more to be well assured by him,
How Rhodes is fenced, and how I best may lay,
My never failing siege to win that plot,
For by the holy Alcaron I swear,
I'll call my Soldiers home from Persia,
And let the Sophy breath, and from the Russian broils
Call home my hardy, dauntless janissaries,
And from the other skirts of Christendom,
Call home my bassoes and my men of war,
And so beleaguer Rhodes by sea and land.
That Key will serve to open all the gates,
Through which our passage cannot find a stop,
Till it have pricked the heart of Christendom,
Which now that paltry Island keeps from scathe.
Say brother Amurath, and Haleb, say,
What think you of our resolution?
Great Soliman, heavens only substitute,
And earth's commander under Mahomet:
So counsel I, as thou thyself hast said.
Pardon me dread Sovereign, I hold it not
Good policy, to call your forces home
From Persia and Polonia, bending them
Upon a paltry isle of small defence.
A common press of base superfluous Turks,
May soon be levied for so slight a task.
Ah Soliman, whose name hath shaked thy foes,
As withered leaves with autumn thrown down,
Fog not thy glory with so foul eclipse,
Let not thy Soldiers sound a base retire,
Till Persia stoop, and thou be conqueror.
What scandal were it to thy mightiness,
After so many valiant bassoes slain,
Whose blood hath been manured to their earth,
Whose bones hath made their deep ways passable.
To sound a homeward, dull, and harsh retreat,
Without a conquest, or a mean revenge,
Strive not for Rhodes, by letting Persia slip,
The one's a Lion almost brought to death,
Whose skin will countervail the hunter's toil;
The other is a Wasp with threatening sting.
Whose Honey is not worth the taking up.
Why Haleb didst thou not hear our brother swear
Upon the Alcaron religiously:
That: he would make an universal Camp
Of all his scattered legions: and darest thou
Infer a reason why it is not meet,
After his Highness swears it shall be so,
Were it not thou art my father's son,
And striving kindness wrestled not with ire,
I would not hence, till I had let thee know,
What 'twere to thwart a monarch's holy oath.
Why, his highness gave me leave to speak my will,
And far from flattery I spoke my mind,
And did discharge a faithful subjects love,
Thou Aristippus-like didst flatter him,
Not like my brother, or a man of worth,
And for his highness vow I crossed it not,
But gave my censure, as his highness bad,
Now for thy chastisement, know Amurath,
I scorn them as a reckless Lion scorns,
The humming of a gnat in Summer's night,
I take it Haleb thou art friend to Rhodes.
Not half so much am I a friend to Rhodes,
As thou art enemy to thy Sovereign.
I charge thee say wherein, or else by Mahomet,
I'll hazard duty in my sovereign's presence.
Not for thy threats, but for myself I say,
It is not meet, that one so base as thou,
Shouldst come about the person of a King.
Must I give aim to this presumption?
Your Highness knows, I speak in duteous love.
Your Highness knows I spoke at your command,
And to the purpose, far from flattery.
Thinks thou I flatter, now I flatter not,
What dismal Planets guides this fatal hour,
Villain, thy brother's groans do call for thee.
To wander with them through eternal night.
Oh Soliman for loving thee I die,
No Amurath, for murdering him thou diest:
Oh Haleb how shall I begin to mourn,
Or how shall I begin to shed salt tears.
For whom no words nor tears can well suffice.
Ah that my rich imperial Diadem,
Could satisfy thy cruel destiny:
Or that a thousand of our Turkish souls,
Or twenty thousand millions of our foes,
Could ransom thee from fell death's tyranny,
To win thy life would Soliman be poor,
And live in servile bondage all my days,
Accursed Amurath, that for a worthless cause,
In blood hath shortened our sweet Haleb's days,
Ah what is dearer bond than brotherhood,
Yet Amurath thou wert my brother too,
If wilful folly did not blind mine eyes,
ay, ay, and thou as virtuous as Haleb,
And I as dear to thee as unto Haleb,
And thou as near to me as Haleb was,
Ah Amurath: why wert thou so unkind to him
For uttering but a thwarting word?
And Haleb, why did not thy heart's counsel,
Bridle the fond intemperance of thy tongue?
Nay wretched Solyman, why didst not thou
Withhold thy hand, from heaping blood on blood,
Might I not better spare one joy than both,
If love of Haleb forced me on to wrath,
Cursed be that wrath that is the way to death,
If justice forced me on, cursed be that justice
That makes the brother, Butcher of his brother,
Come janissaries, and help me to lament,
And bear my joys on either side of me:
ay, late my joys, but now my lasting sorrow,
Thus, thus, let Soliman pass on his way,
Bearing in either hand his heart's decay.
Now Death and Fortune which of all us three,
Hath in the Actors shown the greatest power.
Have not I taught Erastus and Perseda,
By mutual tokens to seal up their loves?
I but those tokens, the Ring and carcanet,
Were Fortune's gifts, Love gives no gold or jewels.
Why what is jewels, or what is gold but earth,
An humour knit together by compression,
And by the world's bright eye, first brought to light,
Only to feed men's eyes with vain delight.
loves works are more than of a mortal temper,
I couple minds together by consent.
Who gave Rhodes' princess to the Cyprian Prince: but Love.
Fortune that first by chance brought them together,
For till by Fortune persons meet each other,
Thou canst not teach their eyes to wound their hearts.
I made those Knights of several sect and countries
Each one by arms to honour his beloved,
Nay one alone to honour his beloved,
The rest by turning of my tickle wheel,
Came short in reaching of fair honours mark:
I gave Erastus only that days prize,
A sweet renown, but mixed with bitter sorrow:
For in conclusion of his happiness,
I made him lose the precious Carcanet,
Whereon depended all his hope and joy.
And more than so: for he that found the chain,
Even for that Chain shall be deprived of life.
Besides, Love hath enforced a fool,
The fond Bragardo to presume to arms.
I but thou seest how he was overthrown.
By Fortune's high displeasure:
I and by Death had been surprised,
If Fates had given me leave:
But what I missed in him and in the rest,
I did accomplish on Haleb and Amurath,
The worthy brethren of great Soliman,
But wherefore stay we, let the sequel prove,
Who is greatest, Fortune, Death, or Love.
As fits the time, so now well fits the place,
To cool affection with our words and looks.
If in our thoughts be semblance sympathy.
My words, my looks, my thoughts are all on thee.
Ferdinando is Lucina's only joy.
What pledge thereof?
An oath, a hand, a kiss.
O holy oath, fair hand, and sugared kiss:
Oh never may Fernando lack such bliss,
But say my dear, when shall the gates of heaven?
Stand all wide ope for celestial Gods,
With gladsome looks to gaze at Hymen's robes.
When shall the graces, or Lucina's hand,
With Rosy chaplets deck thy golden tresses,
And Cupid bring me to thy nuptial bed,
Where thou in joy and pleasure must attend.
A blissful war with me thy chiefest friend.
Full fraught with love, and burning with desire,
I long have longed for light of Hymen's lights.
Then that same day, whose warm & pleasant sight,
Brings in the spring, with many gladsome flowers,
Be our first day of joy and perfect peace:
Till when, receive this precious Carcanet,
In sign, that as these links are interlaced,
So both our hearts are still combined in one,
Which never can be parted but by death.
And if I live this shall not be forgot:
But see Ferdinando where Perseda comes,
Whom women love for virtue, men for beauty,
All the world loves, none hates but envy.
All hail brave cavalier: God morrow Madam,
The fairest shine that shall this day be seen.
Except Perseda's beauteous excellence,
Shame to loves Queen, and Empress of my thoughts.
Marry thrice happy is Perseda's chance,
To have so brave a champion to her Squire.
Her Squire: her Knight, and who so else denies,
Shall feel the rigour of my Sword and Lance.
O Sir, not I.
Here's none but friends, yet let me challenge you,
For gracing me with a malignant style,
That I was fairest, and yet Perseda fairer.
We Ladies stand upon our beauties much.
Herein Lucina let me buckler him.
Not Mars himself had e'er so fair a Buckler.
Love makes him blind,
And blind can judge no colours.
Why then the mends is made, and we still friends,
Still friends, still foes, she wears my Carcanet,
Ah false Erastus, how am I betrayed.
What ails you madam, that your colour changes.
A sudden qualm, I therefore take my leave.
we'll bring you home,
No, I shall soon get home.
Why then farewell: Fernando let's away.
Say world's bright star,
Whence springs this sudden change,
Is it unkindness at the little praise
I gave Lucina with my glozing style?
No, no, her beauty far surpasseth mine,
And from my neck, her neck hath won the praise.
What is it then, if love of this my person,
By favour and by justice of the heavens,
At last have pierced through thy tralucent breast,
And thou misdoubts, perhaps that i'll prove coy,
Oh be assured 'tis far from noble thoughts,
To tyrannize over a yielding foe.
Therefore be blithe, sweet love abandon fear,
I will forget thy former cruelty.
Ah false Erastus full of treachery.
I always told you that such coward knights,
Were faithless swains and worthy no respect,
But tell me sweet love, what is his offence?
That I with words and stripes may chastise him,
And bring him bound for thee to tread upon.
Now must I find the means to rid him hence,
Go thou forthwith arm thee from top to toe,
And come an hour hence unto my lodging,
Then will I tell thee this offence at large,
And thou in my behalf shalt work revenge.
I thus should men of valour be employed,
This is good argument of thy true love,
I go, make reckoning that Erastus dies,
Unless forewarned, the weakening coward flies,
Thou foolish coward flies. Erastus lives,
The fairest shape, but foulest minded man,
That e'ere sun saw within our hemisphere,
My tongue to tell my woes is all to weak,
I must unclasp me, or my heart will break:
But inward cares are most pent in with grief,
Unclasping therefore yields me no relief.
Ah that my moist and cloud compacted brain,
Could spend my cares in showers of weeping rain.
But scalding sighs like blasts of boisterous winds,
Hinder my tears from falling on the ground,
And I must die by closure of my wound.
Ah false Erastus, how had I misdone,
That thou shouldst quit my love with such a scorn.
Here comes the Sinon to my simple heart,
I'll frame myself to his dissembling art.
Desire persuades me on, fear pulls me back.
Tush I will to her, innocence is bold,
How fares Perseda my sweet second self?
Well, now Erastus my heart's only joy
Is come to join both hearts in union.
And till I came whereas my love did dwell,
My pleasure was but pain, my solace woe.
What love means my Erastus, pray thee tell?
Matchless Perseda, she that gave me strength,
To win late conquest from many victors' hands,
Thy name was conqueror, not my chivalry:
Thy looks did arm me, not my coat of steel,
Thy beauty did defend me, not my force.
Thy favours bore me, not my light foot Steed,
Therefore to thee I owe both love and life.
But wherefore makes Perseda such a doubt,
As if Erastus could forget himself:
Which if I do, all vengeance light on me.
ay me, how graceless are these wicked men?
I can no longer hold my patience.
Ah how thine eyes can forge alluring looks,
And feign deep oaths to wound poor silly maids,
Are there no honest drops in all thy cheeks,
To check thy fraudful countenance with a blush:
call'st thou me love, and lovest another better,
If heavens were just, thy teeth would tear thy tongue,
For this thy perjured false disloyalty.
If heavens were just, men should have open breasts,
That we therein might read their guileful thoughts.
If heavens were just, that power that forceth love,
Would never couple Wolves and Lambs together.
Yes, heavens are just, but thou art so corrupt,
That in thee, all their influence doth change.
As in the Spider good things turn to poison.
Ah false Erastus, how had I misdone?
That thou shouldst pawn my true affection's pledge,
To her whose worth will never equal mine.
What, is Lucina's wealth exceeding mine?
Yet mine sufficient to encounter thine.
Is she more fair than I? that's not my fault,
Nor her desert: what's beauty but a blast?
Soon cropped with age, or with infirmities.
Is she more wise? her years are more than mine,
whate'er she be? my love was more than hers,
And for her chastity let others judge.
But what talk I of her? the fault is thine,
If I were so disgracious in thine eye,
That she must needs enjoy my interest,
Why didst thou deck her with my ornament?
Could nothing serve her but the Carcanet?
Which as my life I gave to thee in charge,
Couldst thou abuse my true simplicity?
Whose greatest fault was over loving thee,
I'll keep no tokens of thy perjury.
Here give her this, Perseda now is free,
And all my former love is turned to hate.
Ah stay my sweet Perseda hear me speak.
What are thy words? but Syrens guileful songs:
That please the ear, but seek to spoil the heart.
Then view my tears, that plead for innocence,
What are thy tears? but Circe's magic seas,
Where none scape wracked, but blindfold Mariners.
If words & tears displease, then view my looks,
That plead for mercy at thy rigorous hands.
What are thy looks? but like the Cockatrice,
That seeks to wound poor silly passengers.
If words, nor tears, nor looks, may win remorse,
What then remains for my perplexed heart?
Hath no interpreters but words, or tears, or looks.
And they are all as false as thou thyself.
Hard doom of death before my case be known,
My judge unjust, and yet I cannot blame her,
Since Love and jealousy mislead her thus.
myself in fault, and yet not worthy blame,
Because that Fortune made the fault, not Love.
The ground of her unkindness grows, because I lost
The precious Carcanet she gave to me:
Lucina hath it, as her words import,
But how she got it, heavens knows, not I,
Yet this is some allegement to my sorrow,
That if I can but get the Chain again,
I boldly then shall let Perseda know,
That she hath wronged Erastus and her friend:
Ah Love, and if thou be'st of heavenly power,
Inspire me with some present stratagem,
It must be so, Lucina's a frank gamester,
And like it is, in play she'll hazard it,
For if report but blazons her aright,
she's a frank gamester, and inclined to play, Ho Piston?
Here sir, what would you with me,
Desire Guelpio & signor Iulio come speak with me
And bid them bring some store of crowns with them,
And sirrah, provide me four vizards,
four Gowns, a box, and a Drum,
For I intend to go in mummery,
I will sir.
Ah virtuous Lamps of ever turning heavens,
Incline her mind to play, and mine to win,
Nor do I covet but what is mine own,
Then shall I let Perseda understand,
How jealousy had armed her tongue with malice,
Ah were she not Perseda whom my heart,
No more can fly, than iron can Adamant,
Her late unkindness would have changed my mind.
How now Erastus, wherein may we pleasure thee?
Sirs thus it is, we must in mummery,
Unto Lucina, neither for love nor hate,
But if we can, to win the chain she wears,
For though I have some interest therein,
Fortune may make me master of mine own,
Rather than i'll seek justice 'gainst the Dame,
But this assure yourselves it must be mine,
By game, or change, by one device or other.
The rest i'll tell you when our sport is done.
Why then let's make us ready and about it,
What store of Crowns have you brought?
Fear not for money man, i'll bear the Box,
I have some little reply, if need require.
I but hear you Master, was not he a fool?
That went to shoot, and left his arrows behind him.
Yes, but what of that?
marry that you may lose your money,
And go without the chain, unless you carry false dice.
Mass the fool says true, let's have some got.
Nay I use not to go without a pair of false Dice.
Here are tall men and little men.
Hie men and low men, thou wouldst say.
Come sirs let's go, Drummer pray for me,
And i'll reward thee: and sirrah Pistrn,
Mar not our sport with your foolery.
I warrant you sir, they get not one wise word of me,
I marry, this shows that Charlemagne is come,
What shall we play here? content,
Since signor Ferdinand will have it so.
I were it Cleopatra's union:
signor Fernando, I am sure 'tis you,
And Gentlemen, unmask ere you depart,
That I may know to whom my thanks is due,
For this so courteous and unlooked for sport:
No wilt not be, then sup with me tomorrow,
Well then i'll look for you, till then farewell.
Gentlemen, each thing hath sorted to our wish,
She took me for Fernando, marked you that:
Your gold shall be repaired with double thanks,
And fellow Drummer, I'll reward you well.
But is there no reward for my false dice?
Yes sir, a guarded suit from top to toe.
dazzle mine eyes, or is't Lucina's chain,
False treacher, lay down the chain that thou hast stole,
He lewdly lies that calls me treacherous.
That lie my weapon shall put down thy throat:
Fly Erastus, ere the Governor have any news,
Whose near ally he was, and chief delight,
Nay Gentlemen, fly you and save yourselves,
lest you partake the hardness of my fortune.
Ah fickle and blind guidress of the world,
What pleasure hast thou in my misery?
Wast not enough when I had lost the Chain,
Thou didst bereave me of my dearest love,
But now when I should repossess the same,
To cross me with this hapless accident:
Ah if but time and place would give me leave,
Great ease it were for me to purge myself,
And to accuse fell Fortune, Love and Death.
For all these three conspire my tragedy,
But danger waits upon my words and steps,
I dare not stay, for if the Governor
Surprise me here, I die by martial law,
Therefore I go. But whether shall I go?
If into any stay adjoining Rhodes,
They will betray me to Philippo's hands,
For love, or gain, or flattery.
To Turkey must I go, the passage short,
The people warlike, and the king renowned,
For all heroical and kingly virtues,
Ah hard attempt, to tempt a foe for aid,
Necessity yet says it must be so,
Or suffer death for Ferdinando's death,
Whom honours title forced me to misdo,
By checking his outrageous insolence.
Piston, here take this chain, and give it to Perseda,
And let her know what hath befallen me,
When thou hast delivered it, take ship and follow me,
I will be in Constantinople.
Farewell my country dearer than my life;
Farewell sweet friends, dearer than country soil,
Farewell Perseda, dearest of them all,
Dearer to me, than all the world beside.
Now am I growing into a doubtful agony
What I were best to do, to run away with this Chain,
Or deliver it, and follow my master.
If I deliver it and follow my master, I shall have thanks.
But they will make me never the fatter,
If I run away with it, I may live upon credit
All the while I wear this chain,
Or domineer with the money when I have sold it,
Hitherto all goes well, but if I be taken,
I marry sir, than the case is altered, I and haltered to,
Of all things I do not love to preach
With a halter about my neck,
Therefore for this once, i'll be honest against my will,
Perseda shall have it, but before I go, i'll be so bold
As to dive into this Gentleman's pocket, for good luck's sake.
If he deny me not: how say you sir, are you content?
A plain case, Qui tacet consentire videtur.
See where his body lies.
ay, ay, I see his body all to soon,
What barbarous villain is't that rifles him.
Ah Ferdinand, the stay of my old age,
And chief remainder of our progeny,
Ah loving cousen how art thou misdone,
By false Erastus, ah no by treachery,
For well thy valour hath been often tried,
But whilst I stand and weep, and spend the time
In fruitless plaints, the murderer will escape,
Without revenge, sole salve for such a sore,
Say villain, wherefore didst thou rifle him?
Faith sir for pure good will,
Seeing he was going towards heaven,
I thought to see, if he had a passport to S. Nicholas or no,
Some sot he seems to be, 'twere pity to hurt him:
Sirrah canst thou tell who slew this man?
ay sir very well, it was my master Erastus.
Thy master, and whether is he gone now?
To fetch the Sexton to bury him I think.
'twere pity to imprison such a sot,
Now it fits my wisdom to counterfeit the fool.
Come hither sirrah, thou knowest me
For the Governor of the city, dost thou not?
I forsooth sir.
Thou art a bondman, and wouldst feign be free?
I forsooth sir.
Then do but this, and I will make thee free,
And rich withal, learn where Erastus is,
And bring me word, and i'll reward thee well.
That I will sir, I shall find you at the Castle, shall I not?
Yes.
Why i'll be here, as soon as ever I come again.
But for assurance that he may not scape,
we'll lay the ports and havens round about,
And let a proclamation straight be made,
That he that can bring forth the murderer,
Shall have three thousand Ducats for his pains,
myself will see the body borne from hence,
And honoured with Balm and funeral.
God sends fortune to fools.
Did you ever see wise man escape as I have done,
I must betray my master: I but when can you tell?
See where Perseda comes, to save me a labour.
After my most hearty commendations,
This is to let you understand,
That my master was in good health at the sending hereof,
Yours for ever and ever and ever.
In most humble wise Piston.
This makes me think that I have been to cruel,
How got he this from of Lucina's arm?
Faith in a mummery, and a pair of false dice,
I was one of the mummers myself, simple as I stand here.
I rather think it cost him very dear.
I so it did, for it cost Ferdinando his life.
How so?
After we had got the chain in mummery,
And lost our box in counter cambio,
My master wore the chain about his neck,
Than Ferdinando met us on the way,
And reviled my master, saying he stole the chain,
With that they drew, & there Ferdinando had the prickado.
And whether fled my poor Erastus then?
To Constantinople whether I must follow him,
But ere he went, with many sighs and tears,
He delivered me the chain, and bade me give it you,
For perfect argument that he was true,
And you too credulous.
Ah stay, no more, for I can here no more.
And I can sing no more.
My heart had armed my tongue with injury,
To wrong my friend, whose thoughts were ever true,
An poore Erastus how thy starres maling:
Thou great commander of the swift winged winds,
And dreadful Neptune bring him back again,
But Aeolus and Neptune let him go,
For here is nothing but revenge and death,
Then let him go, i'll shortly follow him,
Not with slow sails, but with loves golden wings,
My ship shall be borne with tears, and blown with sighs
So will I soar about the Turkish land,
Until I meet Erastus my sweet friend.
And then and there, fall down amid his arms,
And in his bosom there pour forth my soul,
For satisfaction of my trespass past.
Fair Love, according unto thy command,
I seek Erastus and will combat him.
I seek him, find him, bring him to my sight,
For till we meet, my heart shall want delight.
My petty fellow, where hast thou hid thy master,
Marry sir in an armourer's shop,
Where you had not best go to him.
Why so, I am in honour bound to combat him,
ay sir, but he knowing your fierce conditions,
Hath planted a double cannon in the door,
Ready to discharge it upon you, when you go by,
I tell you for pure good will.
In Knightly courtesy, I thank thee,
But hopes the coistrel to escape me so,
Thinks he bore cannon shot can keep me back:
Why wherefore serves my targe of proof, but for the bullet
That once put by, I roughly come upon him,
Like to the wings of lightning from above,
I with a martial look astonish him,
Then falls he down poor wretch upon his knee,
And all to late, repents his surquedry.
Then do I take him on my finger's point,
And thus I bear him through every street,
To be a laughing stock to all the town.
That done, I lay him at my mistress feet,
For her to give him doom of life or death.
I but hear you sir, I am bound
In pain of my masters displeasure,
To have about at cuffs, afore you and I part,
Ha, ha, ha, Eagles are challenged by paltry flies,
Thy folly gives thee privilege, begone, begone,
No, no sir, I must have about with you sir that's flat,
That for retaining one so virtuous,
lest my master turn me out of service.
Why, art thou weary of thy life?
No by my faith sir.
Then fetch thy weapons, and with my single fist,
I'll combat thee, my body all unarmed.
Why lend me thine, and save me a labour.
I tell thee, if Alcides lived this day,
He could not wield my weapons.
Why wilt thou stay till I come again?
I upon my honour.
That shall be when I come from Turkey.
Is this little desperate fellow gone,
Doubtless he is a very tall fellow,
And yet it were disgrace to all my chivalry,
To combat one so base:
I'll send some Crane to combat with the pigmy,
Not that I fear, but that I scorn to fight.
Fortune thou madest Fernando find the chain,
But yet by loves instruction he was taught,
To make a present of it to his Mistress,
But Fortune would not let her keep it long,
Nay rather Love, by whose suggest power,
Erastus used such dice, as being false,
Ran not by Fortune, but necessity.
Mean time I brought Fernando on the way,
To see and challenge what Lucina lost.
And by that challenge I abridged his life,
And forced Erastus into banishment,
Parting him from his love, in spite of Love,
But with my golden wings i'll follow him,
And give him aid and succour in distress.
And doubt not to, but Fortune will be there,
And cross him too, and sometimes flatter him,
And lift him up, and throw him down again.
And here and there in ambush Death will stand,
To mar what Love or Fortune takes in hand.
How long shall Soliman spend his time,
And waste his days in fruitless obsequies,
Adds but a trouble to my brother's ghost:
Perhaps my grief and long continual moan,
Which but for me would now have took their rest,
Then farewell sorrow, and now revenge draw near.
In controversy touching the isle of Rhodes,
My brothers dyde, on Rhodes i'll he revenged,
Now tell me Brusor what's the news at Rhodes?
Hath the young prince of Cyprus married
Cornelia, daughter to the Governor.
He hath my Lord, with the greatest pomp,
That e'ere I saw at such a festival.
What greater than at our coronation?
Inferior to that only.
At tilt, who won the honour of the day?
A worthy Knight of Rhodes, a matchless man,
His name Erastus, not twenty years of age,
Not tall, but well proportioned in his limbs,
I never saw, except your excellence,
A man whose presence more delighted me,
And had he worshipped Mahomet for Christ,
He might have borne me through out all the world,
So well I loved and honoured the man.
These praises Brusor touch me to the heart,
And makes me wish that I had been at Rhodes,
Under the habit of some errant knight,
Both to have seen and tried his valour.
You should have seen him foil and overthrow,
All the Knights that there encountered him.
whate'er he be, even for his virtues sake,
I wish that fortune of our holy wars,
Would yield him prisoner unto Soliman:
We may ourselves be famed for virtues.
But let him pass, and Brusor tell me now,
How did the Christians use our Knights?
As if that we and they had been on sect,
What thinkst thou of their valour and demeanour?
Brave men at arms, and friendly out of arms,
Courteous in peace, in battle dangerous,
Kind to their foes, and liberal to their friends,
And all in all, their deeds heroical.
Then tell me Brusor, how is Rhodes fenced,
For either Rhodes shall be brave Soliman's,
Or cost me more brave Soldiers
than all that I'll will bear.
Their fleet is weak:
Their horse, I deem them fifty thousand strong,
Their footmen more, well exercised in war,
And as it seems, they want no needful victual.
however Rhodes be fenced by sea or land,
It either shall be mine, or bury me:
What's he that thus boldly enters in?
His habit argues him a Christian,
I worthy Lord a forlorn Christian.
Tell me man, what madness brought thee hither?
Thy virtuous fame, and mine own misery.
What misery? speak, for though you Christians,
Account our Turkish race but barbarous,
Yet have we ears to hear a just complaint,
And justice to defend the innocent,
And pity, to such as are in poverty,
And liberal hands to such as merit bounty,
My gracious Sovereign, as this Knight,
Seems by grief tied to silence,
So his deserts binds me to speak for him.
This is Erastus the Rhodian worthy,
The flower of chivalry and courtesy,
Is this the man that thou hast so described?
Stand up fair knight, that what my heart desires,
Mine eyes may view with pleasure and delight,
This face of thine should harbour no deceit.
Erastus i'll not yet urge to know the cause,
That brought thee hither,
lest with the discourse, thou shouldst afflict thyself,
And cross the fullness of my joyful passion,
But that we are assured,
Heavens brought thee hither for our benefit,
Know thou that Rhodes, nor all that Rhodes contains,
Shall win thee from the side of Soliman,
If we but find thee well inclined to us.
If any ignoble or dishonourable thoughts,
Should dare attempt, or but creep near my heart:
Honour should force disdain to root it out,
As air bred Eagles, if they once perceive,
That any of their brood but close their sight,
When they should gaze against the glorious Sun,
They straight way seize upon him with their talents,
That on the earth it may untimely die,
For looking but askew at heavens bright eye.
Erastus, to make thee well assured,
How well thy speech and presents liketh us,
Ask what thou wilt, it shall be granted thee.
Then this my gracious Lord is all I crave,
That being banished from my native soil,
I may have liberty to live a Christian.
I that, or any thing thou shalt desire,
Thou shalt be Captain of our janissaries,
And in our counsel shalt thou sit with us,
And be great Soliman's adopted friend.
The least of these surpass my best desert,
Unless true loyalty may seem desert.
Erastus, now thou hast obtained thy boon,
Deny not Soliman this own request;
A virtuous envy pricks me with desire,
To try thy valour, say art thou content?
ay, if my Sovereign say content, I yield.
Then give us Swords and Targets,
And now Erastus think me thine enemy,
But ever after thy continual friend,
And spare me not, for then thou wrong'st my honour.
Nay, nay Erastus, throw not down thy weapons,
As if thy force did fail, it is enough
That thou hast conquered Soliman by strength,
By courtesy let Soliman conquer thee.
And now from arms to counsel sir thee down:
Before thy coming I vowed to conquer Rhodes,
Say wilt thou be our Lieutenant there,
And further us in manage of these wars?
My gracious Sovereign, without presumption,
If poor Erastus may once more entreat,
Let not great Soliman's command,
To whose behest I vow obedience,
Enforce me sheath my slaughtering blade,
In the dear bowels of my countrymen:
And were it not that Soliman hath sworn,
My tears should plead for pardon to that place:
I speak not this to shrink away for fear,
Or hide my head in time of dangerous storms,
Employ me else where in thy foreign wars,
Against the Persians or the barbarous Moore,
Erastus will be foremost in the battle.
Why favourest thou thy countrymen so much,
By whose cruelty thou art exiled?
'tis not my country, but Phylippos wrath,
It must be told, for Ferdinando's death,
Whom I in honour's cause have reft of life,
Nor suffer this or that to trouble thee,
Thou shalt not need Phylippo nor his I'll,
Nor shalt thou war against thy Countrymen,
I like thy virtue in refusing it,
But that our oath may have his currant course,
Brusor, go levy men,
Prepare a fleet, to assault and conquer Rhodes,
Mean time Erastus and I will strive,
By mutual kindness to excel each other.
Brusor be gone, and see not Soliman,
Till thou hast brought Rhodes in subjection.
And now Erastus come and follow me.
Where thou shalt see what pleasures and what sports,
My Minions and my Eunuchs can devise,
To drive away this melancholy mood.
Oh master, see where I am,
Say Piston what's the news at Rhodes,
Cold and comfortless for you,
Will you have them all at once?
I.
Why the Governor will hang you & he catch you.
Ferdinando is buried, your friends commend them to you:
Perseda hath the chain, and is like to die for sorrow.
I that's the grief, that we are parted thus.
Come follow me and I will hear the rest,
For now I must attend the Emperor.
Accursed Chain, unfortunate Perseda.
Accursed Chain, unfortunate Lucina,
My friend is gone, and I am desolate.
My friend is gone, and I am desolate,
Return him back fair stars or let me die.
Return him back fair heavens, or let me die,
For what was he but comfort of my life?
For what was he but comfort of my life?
But why was I so careful of the Chain.
But why was I so careless of the chain,
Had I not lost it, my friend had not been slain.
Had I not asked it, my friend had not departed,
His parting is my death.
His deaths my lives departing,
And here my tongue doth stay, with swollen heart's grief,
And here my swollen heart's grief doth stay my tongue.
For whom weep you?
Ah, for Fernando's dying.
For whom mourn you?
Ah, for Erastus flying,
Why Lady is not Basilisco here?
Why Lady doth not Basilisco live?
Am not I worth both these for whom you mourn:
Then take one half of me, and cease to weep,
Or if you gladly would enjoy me both,
I'll serve the one by day, the other by night,
And I will pay you both your sound delight.
Ah how unpleasant is mirth to melancholy.
My heart is full, I cannot laugh at folly.
See, see, Lucina hates me like a Toad,
Because that when Erastus spoke my name,
Her love Fernando died at the same,
So dreadful is our name to cowardice.
On the otherside, Perseda takes it unkindly,
That ere he went I brought not bound unto her,
Erastus that faint hearted run away:
Alas how could I, for his man no sooner
Informed him, that I sought him up and down,
But he was gone in twinkling of an eye:
But I will after my delicious love,
For well I wot, though she dissemble thus,
And cloak affection with her modesty,
With love of me her thoughts are over gone,
More than was Phillis with her Demophon.
Brave prince of Cyprus, and our son in law,
Now there is little time to stand and talk,
The Turks have passed our Galleys and are landed,
You with some men at arms shall take the Tower,
I with the rest will down unto the strain:
If we be beaten back we'll come to you,
And here in spite of damned Turks, we'll gain
A glorious death or famous victory.
About it then.
Drum sound a parley to the citizens.
What parley craves the Turkish at our hands.
We come with mighty Soliman's command,
Monarch and mighty Emperor of the world,
From East to West, from South, to Septentrion,
If you resist, expect what war affords,
Mischief, murder, blood, and extremity,
What wilt thou yield and try our clemency?
Say I, or no; for we are peremptory.
Your Lord usurps in all that he possesseth,
And that great God which we do truly worship,
Shall strengthen us against your insolence.
Now if thou plead for mercy, 'tis to late:
Come fellow Soldiers, let us to the breach,
That's made already on the other side.
Now Rhodes is yoked, and stoops to Soliman,
There lies the Governor, and there his son:
Now let their souls tell sorry tidings to their ancestors,
What millions of men oppressed with ruin and scathe,
The Turkish armies did in Christendom,
What say these prisoners, will they turn Turk, or no?
First Iulio will die ten thousand deaths.
And Guelpio, rather than deny his Christ.
Then stab the slaves, and send their souls to hell.
I turn, I turn, oh save my life I turn.
For bear to hurt him: when we land in Turkey
He shall be circumcised and have his rites.
Think you I turn Turk,
For fear of servile death that's but a sport,
i'faith sir no:
'tis for Perseda whom I love so well,
That I would follow her, though she went to hell.
Now for these Ladies: their lives privilege
Hangs on their beauty, they shall be preserved,
To be presented to great Soliman,
The greatest honour Fortune could afford.
The most dishonour that could e'ere befall.
Now Fortune, what hast thou done in this later passage
I placed Erastus in the favour,
Of Solyman the Turkish Emperor.
Nay that was Love, for I couched myself
In poor Erastus eyes, and with a look
o'erspread with tears, bewitched Solyman,
Beside I sat on valiant Brusor's tongue,
To guide the praises of the herodian knight.
Then in the ladies' passions, I showed my power,
And lastly Love made Basilisco's tongue,
To countercheck his heart by turning Turk,
And save his life, in spite of death's despite.
How chance it then, that Love and Fortune's power
Could neither save Philippo nor his son,
Nor Guelpio, nor signor Iulio,
Nor rescue Rhodes from out the hands of Death.
Why Brusor's victory was Fortune's gift.
But had I slept, his conquest had been small.
Wherefore stay we, there's more behind, which proves
That though Love wink, Loves not stark blind.
Faith master, methinks you are unwise.
That you wear not the high sugarloaf hat,
And the gilded gown the Emperor gave you,
Peace fool, a sable weed fits discontent, Away, be gone.
I'll go provide your supper,
A shoulder of mutton, and never a Salad.
I must confess that Solyman is kind,
Past all compare, and more than my desert,
But what helps gay garments, when the minds oppressed,
What pleaseth the eye, when the sense is altered,
My heart is over whelmed with thousand woes,
And melancholy leads my soul in triumph,
No marvel then if I have little mind,
Of rich embroidery or costly ornaments,
Of honours titles, or of wealth, or gain,
Of music, viands, or of dainty dames,
No, no, my hope full long ago was lost,
And Rhodes itself is lost, or else destroyed,
If not destroyed, yet bound and captivate,
If captivate, then forced from holy faith:
If forced from faith, for ever miserable,
For what is misery, but want of God,
And God is lost, if faith be overthrown.
Why how now Erastus, always in thy dumps?
Still in black habit fitting funeral?
Cannot my love persuade thee from this mood,
Nor all my fair entreats and blandishments,
Wert thou my friend, thy mind would jump with mine,
For what are friends, but one mind in two bodies.
Perhaps thou doubts my friendship's constancy,
Then dost thou wrong the measure of my love,
Which hath no measure, and shall never end,
Come Erastus sit thee down by me,
And i'll impart to thee our Brusor's news,
News to our honour, and to thy content:
The Governor is slain that sought thy death.
A worthy man though not Erastus' friend,
The Prince of Cyprus to, is likewise slain.
Fair blossom, likely to have proved good fruit.
Rhodes is taken, and all the men are slain.
Except some few that turn to Mahomet.
I there it is, now all my friends are slain,
And fair Perseda murdered or deflowered.
Ah gracious Solyman now show thy love,
In not denying thy poor suppliant:
Suffer me not to stay here in thy presence,
But by myself lament me once for all,
Here if I stay, I must suppress my tears,
And tears suppressed will but increase my sorrow.
Go then, go spend thy mournings all at once,
That in thy presence Soliman may joy.
For hitherto have I reaped little pleasure,
Well well Erastus, Rhodes may bless thy birth,
For his sake only will I spare them more,
From spoil, pillage, and oppression,
Than Alexander spared warlike Thebes
For Pindarus: or then Augustus
Spared rich Alexandria for Aria's sake.
My gracious Lord, rejoice in happiness:
All Rhodes is yoked, and stoops to Solyman.
First thanks to heaven, and next to Brusor's valour,
Which i'll not guerdon with large promises,
But straight reward thee with a bounteous largesse:
But what two Christian Virgins have we here?
Part of the spoil of Rhodes, which were preserved
To be presented to your mightiness.
This present pleaseth more than all the rest,
And were their garments turned from black to white,
I should have deemed them Juno's goodly Swans,
Or Venus' milk white Doves, so mild they are,
And so adorned with beauty's miracle.
Here Brusor this kind Turtle shall be thine,
Take her and use her at thy pleasure:
But this kind Turtle is for Soliman,
That her captivity may turn to bliss.
Fair looks resembling Phoebus radiant beams,
Smooth forehead like the table of high Ioue,
Small penciled eye brows, like to glorious rainbows,
Quick lamplike eyes, like heavens two brightest orbs,
Lips of pure Coral breathing ambrosia,
Cheeks, where the Rose and lily are in combat,
Neck whiter than the Snowy Apenines,
Breasts like two overflowing Fountains,
Twixt which a vale leads to the Elysian shades,
Where under covert lies the fount of pleasure,
Which thoughts may guess, but tongue must not profane.
A sweeter creature nature never made,
Love never tainted Solyman till now,
Now fair Virgin let me hear thee speak.
What can my tongue utter, but grief and death.
The sound is honey, but the sense is gall:
The sweeting bless me with a cheerful look.
How can mine eyes dart forth a pleasant look,
When they are stopped with floods of flowing tears.
If tongue with grief, and eyes with tears be filled,
Say Virgin, how doth thy heart admit,
The pure affection of great Soliman?
My thoughts are like pillars of Adamant,
Too hard to take an new impression.
Nay then I see my stooping makes her proud,
She is my vassal, and I will command,
Coy Virgin knowest thou what offence it is,
To thwart the will and pleasure of a king?
Why thy life is done, if I but say the word.
Why that's the period that my heart desires.
And die thou shalt, unless thou change thy mind.
Nay then Perseda grows resolute,
Soliman's thoughts and mine resemble,
Lives paralyse that never can be joined.
Then kneel thou down,
And army hands receive the stroke of death,
doomed to thyself by thine own wilfulness.
Strike, strike, thy words pierce deeper than thy blows.
Brusor hide her, for her looks withhold me,
O Brusor thou hast not hid her lips,
For there sits Venus with Cupid on her knee,
And all the Graces smiling round about her,
So craving pardon that I cannot strike.
Her face is covered over quite my Lord.
Why, so.
O Brusor, seest thou not her milk white neck,
That Alabaster tower,
'twill break the edge of my keen scimitar,
And pieces flying back will wound myself.
Now she is all covered my Lord.
Why now at last she dies.
O Christ receive my soul.
Hark Brusor she calls on Christ,
I will not send her to him,
Her words are music,
The self same music that in ancient days,
Brought Alexander from war to banqueting,
And made him fall from skirmishing to kissing.
No my dear Love would not let me kill thee,
Though Majesty would turn desire to wrath,
There lies my sword, humbled at thy feet,
And I myself that govern many kings,
Entreat a pardon for my rash misdeed.
Now Soliman wrongs his imperial state,
But if thou love me, and have hope to win,
Grant me one boon that I shall crave of thee,
whate'er it be, Perseda I grant it thee,
Then let me live a Christian Virgin still,
Unless my state shall alter by my will,
My word is past, and I recall my passions,
What should he do with crown and Empery,
That cannot govern private fond affections,
Yet give me leave in honest sort to court thee,
To ease, though not to cure, my malady:
Come sit thee down upon my right hand here,
This seat I keep void for another friend:
Go janissaries call in your Governor,
So shall I joy between two captive friends,
And yet myself be captive to them both,
If friendship's yoke were not at liberty:
See where he comes my other best beloved.
My sweet and best beloved.
My sweet and best beloved:
For thee my dear Erastus have I lived.
And I for thee, or else I had not lived.
What words in affection do I see?
Ah pardon me great Soliman, for this is she,
For whom I mourned more than for all Rhodes,
And from whose absence I derived my sorrow.
And pardon me my Lord, for this is he,
For whom I thwarted Soliman's entreats,
And for whose exile I lamented thus.
even from my childhood have I tendered thee,
Witness the heavens of my unfeigned love.
By this one accident I well perceive,
That heavens and heavenly powers do manage love,
I love them both, I know not which the better,
They love each other best, what then should follow,
But that I conquer both by my deserts,
And join their hands, whose hearts are knit already,
Erastus and Perseda come you hither,
And both give me your hands,
Erastus, none but thou couldst win Perseda,
Perseda, none but thou couldst win Erastus
From great Soliman, so well I love you both:
And now to turn late promises to good effect,
Be thou Erastus Governor of Rhodes,
By this thou shalt dismiss my garrison.
Must he reap that for which I took the toil?
Come envy then and sit in friendship's seat,
How can I love him that enjoys my right.
Give me a crown, to crown the bride withal,
Perseda, for my sake wear this crown:
Now is she fairer than she was before,
This title so augments her beauty as the fire,
That lay with honour's hand racked up in ashes,
revives again to flames, the force is such,
Remove the cause, and then the effect will die,
They must depart, or I shall not be quiet,
Erastus and Perseda, marvel not,
That all in haste I wish you to depart,
There is an urgent cause, but privy to myself,
Command my shipping for to waft you over.
My gracious Lord, when Erastus doth forget this favour,
Then let him live abandoned and forlorn.
Nor will Perseda slack even in her prayers
And still solicit God for Soliman,
Whose mind hath proved so good and gracious.
Farewell Erastus, Perseda farewell to.
methinks I should not part with two such friends,
The one so renowned for arms and courtesy,
The other so adorned with grace and modesty:
Yet of the two Perseda moves me most,
ay and so moves me, that I now repent,
That ere I gave away my hearts desire,
What was it but abuse of Fortune's gift,
And therefore Fortune now will be revenged.
What was it but abuse of loves command,
And therefore mighty Love will be revenged:
What was it but abuse of heavens that gave her me,
And therefore angry heavens will be revenged:
Heavens, Love, and Fortune, all three have decreed,
That I shall love her still, and lack her still,
Like ever thirsting wretched Tantalus:
Foolish Soliman, why did I strive,
To do him kindness, and undo myself?
Well governed friends do first regard themselves.
I now occasion serves to stumble him,
That thrust his sickle in my harvest corn,
Pleaseth your Majesty to hear Brusor speak.
To one past cure, good counsel comes too late,
Yet say thy mind.
With secret letters woe her, and with gifts,
My lines and gifts will but return my shame.
hear me my Lord, let me go over to Rhodes,
That I may plead in your affection's cause,
One woman may do much to win another.
Indeed Lucina were her husband from her,
She happily might be won by thy persuades,
But whilst he lives there is no hope in her.
Why lives he then to grieve great Soliman,
This only remains, that you consider,
In two extremes the least is to be chosen,
If so your life depend upon her love,
And that her love depends upon his life,
Is it not better that Erastus die
Ten thousand deaths, than Soliman should perish?
I sayst thou so? why then it shall be so,
But by what means shall poor Erastus die?
This shall be the means,
I'll fetch him back again,
Under colour of great consequence,
No sooner shall he land upon our shore,
But witness shall be ready to accuse him,
Of treason done against your mightiness,
And then he shall be doomed by martial law,
Oh fine device, Brusor get thee gone,
Come thou again, but let the lady stay,
To win Perseda to my will, meanwhile,
Will I prepare the judge and witnesses,
And if this take effect, thou shalt be Viceroy,
And fair Lucina Queen of Tripoli,
Brusor be gone, for till thou come I languish.
And now to ease my troubled thoughts at last,
I will go sit among my learned Eunuchs,
And here them play, and see my minions dance,
For till that Brusor bring me my desire,
I may assuage, but never quench loves fire.
Since the expugnation of the Rhodian I'll,
methinks a thousand years are overpast,
More for the lack of my Perseda's presence,
than for the loss of Rhodes that paltry I'll,
Or for my friends that there were murdered,
My valour everywhere shall purchase friends,
And where a man lives well, there is his country.
Alas the Christians are but very shallow,
In giving judgement of a man at arms,
A man of my desert and excellence.
The Turks whom they account for barbarous,
Having foreheard of Basilisco's worth,
A number under prop me with their shoulders,
And in procession bore me to the Church,
As I had been a second Mahomet,
I fearing they would adore me for a God,
Wisely informed them that I was but man,
Although in time perhaps I might aspire,
To purchase Godhead, as did Hercules,
I mean by doing wonders in the world:
A midst their Church they bound me to a pillar,
And to make trial of my valiancy,
They lopped a collop of my tenderest member.
But think you basilisk squicht for that,
Even as a Cow for tickling in the horn,
That done, they set me on a milk white Ass,
Compassing me with goodly ceremonies,
That day methought, I sat in Pompey's Chair,
And viewed the Capitol, and was Rome's greatest glory.
I would my master had left
Some other to be his agent here:
Faith I am weary of the office already,
What signior Tremomundo,
That rid a pilgrimage to beg cakebread.
O take me not unprovided, let me fetch my weapons.
Why I meant nothing but a Basolus Manus.
No, didst thou not mean to give me the privy stab?
No by my troth sir.
Nay if thou hadst, I had not feared thee I,
I tell thee my skin holds out Pistol proof.
Pistol proof? i'll try if it will hold out pin prove,
O shoot no more great God I yield to thee.
I see his skin is but pistol proof from the girdle upward
What sudden agony was that?
Why sawst thou not, how Cupid God of love,
Not daring look me in the martial face,
Came like a coward stealing after me,
And with his pointed dart pricked my posteriors.
Then here my opinion concerning that point,
The Ladies of Rhodes hearing that you have lost,
A capitol part of your Lady ware,
Have made their petition to Cupid,
To plague you above all other,
As one prejudicial to their muliebrity,
Now sir, Cupid seeing you already hurt before,
Thinks it a greater punishment to hurt you behind,
Therefore I would wish you to have an eye to the back door
Sooth thou sayest, I must be fenced behind,
I'll hang my target there.
Indeed that will serve to bear of some blows,
When you run away in a fray.
Sirrah, sirrah, what art thou?
That thus encroachest upon my familiarity,
Without special admittance.
Why do you not know me? I am Erastus' man.
What art thou that petty pigmy,
That challenged me at Rhode;:
Whom I refused to combat for his minority,
Where is Erastus I owe him chastisement in Perseda's quarrel.
Do not you know that they are all friends,
And Erastus married to Perseda,
And Erastus made governor of Rhodes,
And I left here to be their agent?
O coelum, O terra, O maria Neptune,
Did I turn Turk to follow her so far,
The more shame for you.
And is she linked in liking with my foe?
That's because you were out of the way.
O wicked Turk for to steal her hence.
O wicked turn coat that would have her stay.
The truth is, i'll be a Turk no more.
And I fear thou wilt never prove good christian.
I will after to take revenge.
And i'll stay here about my masters business.
Farewell Constantinople, I will to Rhodes.
Farewell counterfeit fool,
God send him good shipping:
'tis noised about, that Brusor is sent,
To fetch my master back again,
I cannot be well till I hear the rest of the news,
Therefore I'll about it straight.
Now Fortune what hast thou done in this latter act?
I brought Perseda to the presence,
Of Soliman the Turkish Emperor,
And gave Lucina into Brusor's hands.
And first I stung them with consenting love,
And made great Soliman sweet beauty's thrall,
Humble himself at fair Perseda's feet,
And made him praise love and captives beauty:
Again, I made him to recall his passions,
And give Perseda to Erastus hands,
And after make repentance of the deed.
Mean time I filled Erastus sails with wind,
And brought him home unto his native land.
And I suborned Brusor with envious rage,
To counsel Soliman to slay his friend,
Brusor is sent to fetch him back again,
Mark well what follows, for the history
Proves me chief actor in this tragedy.
Perseda, these days are our days of joy.
What could I more desire than thee to wife,
And that I have: or then to govern Rhodes,
And that I do, thanks to great Soliman,
And thanks to gracious heavens, that so
Brought Soliman from worse to better,
For though I never told it thee till now,
His heart was purposed once to do thee wrong.
I that was before he knew thee to be mine,
But now Perseda, let's forget old griefs,
And let our studies wholly be employed,
To work each other's bliss and hearts delight.
Our present joys will be so much the greater,
whenas we call to mind fore passed griefs,
So sings the Mariner upon the shore,
When he hath passed the dangerous time of storms:
But if my Love will have old griefs forgot,
They shall lie buried in Perseda's breast.
Welcome Lord Brusor.
And Lucina to.
Thanks Lord governor.
And thanks to you madam.
What hasty news brings you so soon to Rhodes?
Although to me you never come to soon.
So it is my Lord, that upon great affairs,
Importuning health and wealth of Soliman,
His highness by me entreateth you,
As ever you respect his future love,
Or have regard unto his courtesy,
To come yourself in person and visit him,
Without inquiry what should be the cause.
Were there no ships to cross the Seas withal,
My arms should frame mine oars to cross the seas,
And should the seas turn tide to force me back.
Desire should frame me wings to fly to him,
I go Perseda thou must give me leave.
Though loath, yet Soliman's command prevails,
And sweet Perseda I will stay with you,
From Brusor my beloved, and I'll want him,
Till he bring back Erastus unto you.
Lord Brusor come 'tis time that we were gone.
Perseda farewell, be not angry,
For that I carry thy beloved from thee,
We will return with all speed possible,
And thou Lucina, use Perseda so,
That for my carrying of Erastus hence,
She curse me not, and so farewell to both.
Come Lucina let's in, my heart is full.
Lord marshal, see you handle it cunningly,
And when Erastus comes our perjured friend,
See he be condemned by martial law,
Here will I stand to see and not be seen.
Come fellows see when this matter comes in question,
You stagger not: and janissaries,
See that your strangling cords be ready.
Ah that Perseda were not half so fair,
Or that Soliman were not so fond,
Or that Perseda had some other love,
Whose death might save my poor Erastus' life,
See where he comes, whom though I dearly love,
Yet must his blood be spilled for my behoof,
Such is the force of morrow burning love.
Erastus, Lord Governor of Rhodes,
I arrest you in the king's name.
What thinks Lord Brusor of this strange arrest,
Hast thou entrapped me to this treachery:
Intended well I wot without the leave
Or licence of my Lord great Soliman.
Why then appeal to him, where thou shalt know
And be assured that I betray thee not.
Yes, thou, and I, and all of us betray him.
No, no, in this case no appeal shall serve.
Why then to thee, or unto any else,
I here protest by heavens unto you all,
That never was there man more true or just,
Or in his deeds more loyal and upright,
Or more loving, or more innocent,
Than I have been to gracious Soliman,
Since first I set my feet on Turkish land.
myself would be his witness if I durst,
But bright Perseda's beauty stops my tongue.
Why sirs, why face to face express you not,
The treasons you revealed to Soliman?
That very day Erastus went from hence,
He sent for me into his Cabinet,
And for that man that is of my profession.
I never saw them I until this day.
His Cabin door fast shut, he first began
To question us of all sorts of fireworks,
Wherein, when we had fully resolved him,
What might be done, he spreading on the board,
A huge heap of our imperial coin,
All this is yours quoth he, if you consent,
To leave great Soliman and serve in Rhodes.
Why that was treason, but onwards with the rest.
What have we here, my master before the marshal?
We said not I, nor durst we say him nay,
Because we were already in his galleys,
But seemed content to fly with him to Rhodes,
With that he pursed the gold, and gave it us.
The rest I dare not speak it is so bad.
heavens hear you this, and drops not vengeance on them
The other wit. The rest, and worst, will I discourse in brief,
Will you consent quoth he to fire the fleet,
That lies hard by us here in Bosphoron,
For be it spoke in secret here quoth he,
Rhodes must no longer bear the turkish yoke,
We said the task might easily be performed,
But that we lacked such drugs to mix with powder,
As were not in his galleys to be got,
At this he leapt for joy, swearing and promising,
That our reward should be redoubled:
We came a-land not minding for to return,
And as our duty and allegiance bound us,
We made all known unto great Soliman,
But ere we could summon him aland,
His ships were past a kenning from the shore,
Belike he thought we had bewrayed his treasons.
That all is true that here you have declared.
Both lay your hands upon the Alcaron.
Foul death betide me if I swear not true,
And mischief light on me, if I swear false.
Mischief and death shall light upon you both.
Erastus thou seest what witness hath produced against thee,
What answerest thou unto their accusations?
That these are Sinon's and myself poor Troy.
Now it resteth, I appoint thy death,
Wherein thou shalt confess i'll favour thee,
For that thou wert beloved of Soliman,
Thou shalt forthwith be bound unto that post,
And strangled as our Turkish order is.
Such favour send all Turks I pray God.
I see this train was plotted ere I came,
What boots complaining where's no remedy:
Yet give me leave before my life shall end,
To moan Perseda, and accuse my friend.
O unjust Soliman, O wicked time,
Where filthy lust must murder honest love.
Dispatch, for our time limited is past.
Alas, how can he but be short, whose tongue
Is fast tide with galling sorrow.
Farewell Perseda, no more but that for her:
Inconstant Soliman, no more but that for him,
Unfortunate Erastus, no more but that for me:
Lo this is all, & thus I leave to speak.
Marie sir this is a fair warning for me to get me gone.
O save his life, if it be possible,
I will not lose him for my kingdoms worth,
Ah poor Erastus art thou dead already,
What bold presumer durst be so resolved,
For to bereave Erastus' life from him,
Whose life to me was dearer than mine own,
Wast thou and thou, Lord marshal bring them hither,
And at Erastus' hand let them receive,
The stroke of death, whom they have spoiled of life:
What is thy hand to weak? than mine shall help,
To send them down to everlasting night,
To wait upon thee through eternal shade,
Thy soul shall not go mourning hence alone:
Thus die and thus, for thus you murdered him,
But soft methinks he is not satisfied,
The breath doth murmur softly from his lips,
And bids me kill those bloody witnesses,
By whose treachery Erastus died:
Lord Marshall, hale them to the tower's top,
And throw them headlong down into the valley,
So let their treasons with their lives have end.
yourself procured us.
Is this our hire?
Speake not a word, least in my wrathfull surie,
I doom you to ten thousand direful torments:
And Brusor see Erastus be interred,
With honour in a kingly sepulchre,
Why when Lord marshal? great Hector's son,
Although his age did plead for innocence:
Was sooner tumbled from the fatal tower.
than are those perjured wicked witnesses.
Why now Erastus' Ghost is satisfied:
ay, but yet the wicked judge survives,
By whom Erastus was condemned to die,
Brusor, as thou lovest me stab in the martial,
lest he detect us unto the world,
By making known our bloody practises,
And then will thou and I hoist sail to Rhodes,
Where thy Lucina and my Perseda lives.
I will my lord: lord Marshal, it is his highness pleasure
That you commend him to Erastus' soul.
Here ends my dear Erastus' tragedy,
And now begins my pleasant Comedy,
But if Perseda understand these news,
Our scene will prove but tragicomical.
Fear not my Lord, Lucina plays her part,
And woos apace in Soliman's behalf.
Then Brusor come, and with some few men,
Let's sail to Rhodes with all convenient speed,
For till I fold Perseda in mine arms,
My troubled ears are deft with loves alarms.
Now signor Basilisco, which like you,
The Turkish or our nation best.
That which your ladyship will have me like,
I am deceived but you were circumcised,
Indeed I was a little cut in the purpose.
What means made you to steal back to Rhodes?
The mighty pinckanied brand bearing God,
To whom I am so long true servitor,
When he espied my weeping floods of tears,
For your depart, he bade me follow him:
I followed him, he with his fire brand,
Parted the seas, and we came over dry-shod.
A matter not unlikely: but how chance,
Your turkish bonnet is not on your head?
Because I now am Christian again,
And that by natural means, for as
The old Cannon says very prettily,
Nihill est tam naturali, quod eo modo colligatum est.
And so forth: so I became a Turk to follow her,
To follow her, am now returned a Christian.
O Lady and mistress, weep and lament,
And wring your hands, for my Master
Is condemned and executed.
Be patient sweet Perseda, the fool but jests,
Ah ho, my nightly dreams foretold me this,
Which foolish woman fondly I neglected,
But say what death died my poor Erastus?
Nay, God be praised, his death was reasonable,
He was but strangled,
But strangled, ah double death to me,
But say, wherefore was he condemned to die?
For nothing but high treason.
What treason, or by whom was he condemned?
Faith two great knights of the post, swore upon the
Alcaron, that he would have fired the Turks Fleet.
Was Brusor by?
I.
And Soliman?
No but I saw where he stood,
To here and see the matter well conveyed.
Accursed Soliman, profane Alcaron,
Lucina, came thy husband to this end?
To lead a Lamb unto the slaughterhouse,
Hast thou for this, in Soliman's behalf?
With cunning words tempted my chastity,
Thou shalt abye for both your treacheries,
It must be so, Basilisco doest thou love me, speak,
I more than I love either life or soul,
What shall I stab the Emperor for thy sake.
No, but Lucina if thou lovest me, kill her,
The point will mar her skin.
What darest thou not, give me the dagger then,
There's a reward for all thy treasons past,
Yet dare I bear her hence, to do thee good.
No let her lie, a prey to ravening birds:
Nor shall her death alone suffice for his,
Rhodes now shall be no longer Soliman's,
we'll fortify our walls, and keep the town,
In spite of proud insulting Soliman,
I know the lecher hopes to have my love,
And first Perseda, shall with this hand die,
Then yield to him and live in infamy.
I will ruminate. Death which the poets
feign to be pale and meager;
Hath deprived Erastus' trunk from breathing vitality,
A brave cavalier, but my approved foeman:
Let me see: where is that Alcides, surnamed Hercules?
The only Club man of his time: dead.
Where is the eldest son of Priam?
That abraham coloured Troion: dead.
Where is the leader of the Myrmidons,
That well knit Achill: dead.
Where is that furious Ajax, the son of Telamon,
Or that fraudful squire of Ithaca, yclept Ulysses? dead,
Where is tipsy Alexander, that great cup conqueror,
Or Pompey that brave warrior? dead:
I am myself strong, but I confess death to be stronger,
I am valiant, but mortal,
I am adorned with nature's gifts,
A giddy goddess, that now giveth and anon taketh,
I am wise, but quiddits will not answer death:
To conclude in a word, to be captious virtuous, ingenious,
Or to be nothing when it pleaseth death to be envious.
The great Turk, whose seat is Constantinople,
Hath beleaguered Rhodes, whose chieftain is a woman.
I could take the rule upon me,
But the shrub is safe when the Cedar shaketh:
I love Perseda as one worthy,
But I love Basilisco as one I hold more worthy.
My father's son, my mother's solace, my proper self.
Faith he can do little that cannot speak,
And he can do less that cannot run away.
Then sith man's life is as a glass, and a fillip may crack it,
Mine is no more and a bullet may pierce it:
Therefore I will play lest in sight.
The gates are shut, which proves that Rhodes revolts,
And that Perseda is not Soliman's.
Ah Brusor see where thy Lucina lies
Butchered despitefully without the walls.
Unkind Perseda, couldst thou use her so?
And yet we used Perseda little better.
Nay gentle Brusor stay thy tears a while,
lest with thy woes thou spoil my comedy,
And all to soon be turned to Tragedies.
Go Brusor, bear her to thy private tent,
Where we at leisure will lament her death,
And with our tears be wail her obsequies:
For yet Perseda lives for Soliman.
Drum sound a parle, were it not for her,
I would sack the town ere I would sound a parley.
At whose entreaty is this parley sounded?
At our entreaty, therefore yield the town.
Why what art thou that boldly bids us yield?
Great Soliman, Lord of all the world.
Thou art not Lord of all, Rhodes is not thine.
It was, and shall be maugre who says no.
I that say no will never see it thine.
Why what art thou that dares resist my force?
A Gentleman and thy mortal enemy,
And one that dares thee to the single combat:
First tell me, doth Perseda live or no?
She lives to see the wrack of Soliman,
Then i'll combat thee whate'er thou art.
And in Erastus' name i'll combat thee,
And here I promise thee on my Christian faith,
Then will I yield Perseda to thy hands.
That if thy strength shall over match my right,
To use, as to thy liking shall seem best,
But ere I come to enter single fight,
First let my tongue utter my heart's despite,
And thus my tale begins: thou wicked tyrant,
Thou murderer, accursed homicide,
For whom hell gapes, and all the ugly fiends
Do wait for to receive thee in their jaws:
Ah perjured and in humane Soliman,
How could thy heart harbour a wicked thought?
Against the spotless life of poor Erastus?
Was he not true? would thou hadst been as just,
Was he not valiant? would thou hadst been as virtuous,
Was he not loyal? would thou hadst been as loving:
Ah wicked tyrant in that one man's death,
Thou hast betrayed the flower of Christendom,
Died he because his worth obscured thine,
In slaughtering him thy virtues are defamed,
Didst thou misdo him, in hope to win Perseda,
Ah foolish man, therein thou art deceived,
For though she live, yet will she near live thine,
Which to approve, i'll come to combat thee.
Injurious foul mouthed knight, my wrathful arm
Shall chastise and rebuke these injuries.
I but hear you, are you so foolish to fight with him?
I sirrah, why not, as long as I stand by?
I'll not defend Erastus' innocence,
But thee, maintaining of Perseda's beauty,
I now I lay Perseda at thy feet,
But with thy hand first wounded to the death,
Now shall the world report that Soliman,
Slew Erastus in hope to win Perseda,
And murdered her for loving of her husband.
What my Perseda, ah what have I done,
Yet kiss me gentle love before thou die.
A kiss I grant thee, though I hate thee deadly,
I loved thee dearly and accept thy kiss,
Why didst thou love Erastus more than me,
Or why didst not give Soliman a kiss
Ere this unhappy time, than hadst thou lived:
Ah let me kiss thee too before I die,
Nay die thou shalt for thy presumption,
For kissing her whom I do hold so dear,
I will not kiss her sir, but give me leave
To weep over her, for while she lived,
she loved me dearly, and I loved her.
If thou didst love her villain as thou saidst,
Then wait on her through eternal night.
Ah Perseda, how shall I mourn for thee?
Fair springing rose, ill plucked before thy time.
Ah heavens that hitherto have smiled on me,
Why do you unkindly lower on Soliman?
The loss of half my Realms, nay crowns decay,
Could not have pricked so near unto my heart,
As doth the loss of my Perseda's life:
And with her life, I likewise lose my love,
And with her love my heart's felicity,
Even for Erastus' death, the heavens have plagued me.
Ah no the heavens did never more accurse me,
than when they made me Butcher of my love,
Yet justly how can I condemn myself,
When Brusor lives that was the cause of all.
Come Brusor, help to lift her body up,
Is she not fair?
even in the hour of death.
Was she not constant?
As firm as are the poles whereon heaven lies.
Was she not chaste?
As is Pandora or Diana's thoughts.
Then tell me? his treasons set aside,
What was Erastus in thy opinion?
Fair spoken, wise, courteous, and liberal:
Kind, even to his foes, gentle and affable,
And all, in all, his deeds heroical.
Ah, was he so? how durst thou then ungracious counsellor,
First cause me murder such a worthy man,
And after tempt so virtuous a woman,
Be this therefore the last that ere thou speak:
janissaries, take him straight unto the block,
Off with his head, and suffer him not to speak.
And now Perseda here I lay me down,
And on thy beauty still contemplate,
Until mine eyes shall surfeit by my gazing:
But stay let me see what paper is this.
Tyrant my lips were sawst with deadly poison,
To plague thy heart that is so full of poison.
What am I poisoned? then janissaries,
Let me see Rhodes recovered ere I die,
Soldiers, assault the town on every side,
Spoil all, kill all, let none escape your fury,
Say Captain, is Rhodes recovered again.
It is my Lord, and stoops to Soliman.
Yet that alleys the fury of my pain,
Before I die, for doubtless die I must,
I, fates, injurious fates, have so decreed,
For now I feel the poison 'gins to work,
And I am weak even to the very death,
Yet some thing more contentedly I die,
For that my death was wrought by her device,
Who living was my joy, whose death my woe.
Ah janissaries now dies your Emperor,
Before his age hath seen his mellowed years,
And if you ever loved your Emperor,
Affright me not with sorrows and laments,
And when my soul from body shall depart,
Trouble me not but let me pass in peace,
And in your silence let your love be shown:
My last request for I command no more,
Is that my body, with Perseda's be,
Interred, where my Erastus lies entombed,
And let one Epitaph contain us all:
Ah now I feel the paper told me true,
The poison is dispersed through every vain,
And boil like Aetna in my frying guts,
Forgive me dear Erastus my unkindness:
I have revenged thy deaths with many deaths,
And sweet Perseda fly not Soliman,
whenas my gliding ghost shall follow thee,
With eager mood, thorough eternal night:
And now pale Death sits on my panting soul,
And with revenging ire doth tyrannize:
And says for Soliman's too much amiss,
This day shall be the period of my bliss.
I gave Erastus woe and misery,
Amidst his greatest joy and jollity.
But I that have power in earth and heaven above,
Stung them both with never failing love.
But I bereft them both of love and life.
Of life, but not of love, for even in death,
Their souls are knit, though bodies be disjoined,
Thou didst but wound their flesh, their minds are free,
Their bodies buried, yet they honour me.
Hence foolish Fortune, and thou wanton Love,
Your deeds are trifles, mine of consequence,
I give world's happiness, and woes increase.
By joining persons, I increase the world.
By wastning all, I conquer all the world,
And now to end our difference at last,
In this last act, note but the deeds of death,
Where is Erastus now but in my triumph?
Where are the murderers but in my triumph?
Where's judge and witness but in my triumph?
Where's false Lucina but in my triumph?
Where's fair Perseda but in my triumph?
Where's Basilisco but in my triumph?
Where's faithful Piston but in my triumph?
Where's valiant Brusor but in my triumph?
And where's great Soliman but in my triumph?
Their loves and fortunes ended with their lives,
And they must wait upon the Car of death:
Pack Love and Fortune, play in Comedies,
For powerful death best fitteth Tragedies.
I go, yet Love shall never yield to Death.
But Fortune shall, for when I waste the world,
Than times and kingdoms Fortunes shall decay.
Mean time will Fortune govern as she may.
I now will Death in his most haughty pride,
Fetch his imperial Car from deepest hell,
And ride in triumph through the wicked world,
Sparing none but sacred Cynthia's friend,
Whom Death did fear before her life began,
For holy fates have graven it in their tables,
That Death shall die if he attempt her end,
Whose life is heavens delight and Cynthia's friend.