I Followed this sound, as enchanted; neither knowing the reason why, nor how to bee rid of it: unusual to these Woods, and (I fear) to our gods prodigious. Syluanus whom I honour, is run into a cave: Pan, whom I envy, courting of the shepherdess: envy I thee Pan? No, pitty thee, an eie-sore to chast nymphs; yet still importunate: Honour thee Syluanus? No, contemn thee: fearful of music in the Woods, yet counted the god of the Woods. I, it may bee more stout, than wise, asked, who passed that way? what he or shee? none durst answer, or would vouchsafe, but passionate echo, who said Shee. And Shee it is, and you are Shee, whom in our dreams many yeares wee satires haue seen, but waking could never find any such. every one hath told his dream and described your person, all agree in one, and set down your virtues: in this onely did wee differ, that some said your portraiture might be drawn, other said impossible: some thought your virtues might be numbered, most said they were infinite: Infinite, and impossible, of that side was I: and first in humility to salute you most happy I: my untamed thoughts wax gentle, & I feel in myself civility, A thing hated, because not known, and unknown, because I knew not you. Thus virtue tameth fierceness, Beauty, madness. Your majesty on my knees will I follow, bearing this Club, not as a Saluage, but to beate down those that are.
pretty souls and bodies too, faire shephardisse, or sweet mistress, you know my suite, love, my virtue, music, my power, a godhead. I cannot tickle the sheeps guts of a Lute, bydd, bydd, bydd, like the calling of chickens, but for a Pipe that squeeketh like a Pigg, I am he. How do you burn time, & drown beauty in pricking of clouts, when you should bee penning of Sonnets? You are more simplo then the sheep you keep, but not so gentle. I love you both, I know not which best, and you both scorn me, I know not which most. Sure I am, that you are not so young as not to understand love, nor so wise as to withstand it, unless you think yourselves greater than gods, whereof I am one. Howe often haue I brought you Chestnuts for a love token, & desired but acceptance for a favour. Little did you know the mystery, that as the husk was thornye and tough, yet the meate sweet, so though my hide were rough and vnkempt, yet my heart was smooth and loving: you are but the Farmers daughters of the Dale, I the god of the flocks that feed vpon the hills. Though I cannot force love, I may obedience, or else send your sheep a wandring, with my fancies. coyness must be revenged with curstnesse, but be not agaste sweet mice, my godhead cometh so fast vpon me, that majesty had almost ouerrunn affection, Can you love? will you?
Alas poor Pan, look how he looketh Sister, fitter to draw in a harvest wain, then talk of love to chased Virgins, would you haue us both?
I, for oft I haue heard, that two Pigeons may bee caught with one bean.
And two Woodcocks with one sprindge.
And many Dotterels with one dance.
And all fools with one faire word.
Nay, this is his meaning; as he hath two shapes, so hath he two harts, the one of a man wherewith his tongue is tipped, dissembling; the other of a beast, wherewith his thoughts are poisoned, lust. Men must haue as many loues, as they haue hart-strings, and study to make an Alphabet of mistresses, from A. to Y. which maketh them in the end cry, Ay. Against this, experience hath provided us a remedy, to laugh at them when they know not what to say, and when they speak, not to beleeue them.
Not for want of matter, but to know the meaning, what is wrought in this sampler?
The follies of the Gods, who became beasts, for their affections.
What in this?
The honour of Virgins who became Goddesses, for their chastity.
But what be these?
Mens tongues, wrought all with double stitch but not one true.
What these?
Roses, Eglentine, harts-ease, wrought with queens stitch, and all right.
I never hard the odds between mens tongues, and weomens, therefore they may be both double, unless you tell me how they differ.
Thus, weomens tongues are made of the same flesh that their harts are, and speak as they think: Mens harts of the flesh that their tongues, and both dissemble, But prythy Pan be packing, thy words are as odious as thy fight and we attend a fight which is more glorious, then the sun rising.
What doth Iupiter come this ways?
No, but one that will make Iupiter blushy as guilty of his vnchast iugglings, and Iuno dismayed as wounded at her majesty. What our mother hath often told us, and famed the whole world, cannot be concealed from thee; if it be, we will tell thee, which may hereafter make thee surcease thy suite, for fear of her displeasure, and honour virginitye, by wondering at her virtues.
Say on sweet soul?
This way cometh the queen of this island, the wonder of the world, and natures glory, leading affections in fetters, Virginities slaves: embracing mildness with Iustice, majesties twins. In whom nature hath imprinted beauty, not art painted it; in whom wit hath bread learning, but not without labour; labour brought forth wisdom, but not without wonder. By her it is (Pan) that all our Carttes that thou seest, are laden with corn, when in other countries they are filled with Harneys, that our horses are led with a whipp: theirs with a lance, that our Riuers flow with fish, theirs with blood: our cattle feed on pastures, they feed on pastures like cattle: One hand she stretcheth to Fraunce, to weaken Rebels; the other to Flaunders, to strengthen Religion; her heart to both Countries, her virtues to all. This is shee at whom envy hath shot all her arrows, and now for anger broken her bow, on whom God hath laid all his blessings, & we for ioy clap our hands, heedless treason goeth hedlesse; and close treachery restless: danger looketh pale to behold her majesty; & tyranny blusheth to hear of her mercy. Iupiter came into the house of poor Baucis, & she vouchsafeth to visit the bare farms of her subiects. We vpon our knees, will entreat her to come into the valley, that our houses may be blessed with her presence, whose hartes are filled with quietness by her government. To her wee wish as many yeares, as our fields haue ears of corn, both infinite: and to her enemies, as many troubles, as the Wood hath leaves, all intolerable. But whist, here shee is, run down Pan the hill in all hast, and though thou break thy neck to give our mother warning, it is no matter.
No, give me leave to die with wondering, & trippe you to your mother. Here I yield all the flocks of these fields to your highnes: green be the grass where you tread: calm the water where you row: sweet the air, where you breath: long the life that you live, happy the people that you love: this is all I can wish. During your abode, no theft shal be in the woods: in the field no noise, in the valleys no spies, myself will keep all safe: that is all I can offer. And hear I break my pipe, which Apollo could never make me do; and follow that sound which follows you.
Swel Ceres now for other Gods are shrinking,
Pomona pineth,
fruitless her three;
Faire Phoebus shineth
Onely on me.
conceit doth make me smile whilst I am thinking,
How every one doth red my story,
How every bough on Ceres lowreth,
Cause heauens plenty on me poureth,
And they in leaves do onely glory,
All other Gods of power bereuen,
Ceres only queen of heaven.
With Robes and flowers let me be dressed.
Cynthia that shineth,
Is not so clear,
Cynthia declineth,
When I appear,
Yet in this Ile shee reigns as blessed,
And every one at her doth wonder,
And in my ears still fonde famed whispers,
Cynthia shal be Ceres mistress,
But first my car shall rive asunder,
help Phoebus help my fall is sudden,
Cynthia, Cynthia, must be sovereign.
GReater then Ceres, receive Ceres crown, the ornament of my plenty, the honour of your peace, here at your highnes feet, I lay down my feigned deity, which Poets haue honoured, truth contemned. To your majesty whom the heauens haue crwoned with happiness, the world with wonder, birth with dignity, nature with perfection, we do all Homage, accounting nothing ours but what comes from you. And this much dare we promise for the Lady of the farm, that your presence hath added many daies to her life, by the infinite joys shee conceyues in her heart, who presents your highnesse with this toy and this short prayer, poured from her hart, that your daies may increase in happiness, your happiness haue no end till there be no more daies.
VOuchsafe to hear, a simplo shepherd, shephards and simplicity cannot part, your highnes is come into Cotshold, an vneuen country, but a people, that carry their thoughts level with their fortunes, low spirites, but true harts, using plain dealing, once counted a jewel now beggary, these hills afoorde nothing but cottages, and nothing can we present to your highnes, but shephards. The country healthy, and harmless, a fresh air, where there are noe dampes, and where a black sheep is a perilous beast, no monsters, we carry our harts, at our tongues ends, being as far from dissembling, as our sheep from fierceness, and if in any thing, we shall chance to discover our leudnes, it willbe in over boldness, in gazinge at you, who fills our harts with joy, and our eyes with wonder, as for the honourable Lord and Lady of the Castle, what happiness they conceive, I would it were possible for themselves to express, then should your majesty see, that al outward entertainment, were but a smoke rising from their inward affections, which as they cannot be seen, being in the hart, so can they not be smoothred, appearing in their countenance, this lock of wool Cotsholdes best fruit, and my poor gift, I offer to your highnes, in which nothing is to be esteemed, but the whiteness, virginities colour, nor to be expected but duty, shepherds religion.
Nescis temeraria; nescis,
Quem fugias; idioque fugis.
A short tale, but a sorrowful, a just complaint, but remedelesse, I loved, (for shephardes haue their Saints) long I loved (for beauty bindeth prentices) a Nymph most faire & as chast as faire, yet not more faire, then I unhappy, Apollo who calleth himself a god (a title among men, when they will commit injuries) term themselves gods, pursued my Daphne with bootless love, and me, with endless hate, her he wooed; with faire words, the flatteries of men, with great gifts, the sorceries of gods, with cruel threats, the terrefiing of weak damosels Néc prece néc pretio néc movet ille minis. me; he terrified with a monstrous word metamorphosing, saying that he would turn me into a wolf and of a shepherd make me a sheep-biter, or into a Cockatrice and cause mine eyes which gazed on her, to blind hers which made mine dazzle, or to a mould that I should hear his flattering speech, but never behold her faire face, tantaené animis caelestibus irae? sometimes would he allure her with sweet music, but harmony is harsh when it is lusts broker, often with promise of immortality, but chastetye is of itself immortal, ever pursuing her with swiftness, but virtue tying wings to the thoughts of Virgins, swiftness becometh surbated; thus lived he twixt love and jealousy; I twixt love and danger; she twixt fear and virtue. At last and alas, this day I fear of all my joys the last, I cannot as a Poet (who describing the morning, and before he tell what it is, make it night,) stand on the time, love coyneth no circumloquutions, but by the sun, a shepherds dial, which goeth as true as our harts, it was four of the clock, when she flying from his treason was turned into a three; which made me stand, as though I had been turned into a ston, and Apollo so enchanted as wounded with her loss, or his own cruelty, the fingers which were wont to play on the Lute, found no other instrument then his own face, the golden hair the pride of his head pulde off in locks and stamped at his feet, his sweet voice, turned to howling; and there sitteth he, (long may he sorrow,) wondering, and weeping, and kissing the laurel, his late love, and mine ever. Pleaseth your majesty to view the melancholy of Apollo, my distress, and Daphnes mischance, it may be the sight of so rare perfection, will make him die for grief, which I wish, or Daphne return to her old shape, which must be your wonder; if neither, it shal content me that I haue revealed my griefs, and that you may behold his.
SIng you, play you, but sing and play my truth,
This three my Lute, these sighs my notes of ruth:
The laurel leaf for ever shall bee green,
And chastety shalbe Apolloes queen.
If gods may dye, here shall my tomb be plaste,
And this engraven, fonde Phoebus, Daphne chased.
MY hart and tongue were twins, at once conceived,
The eldest was my hart, born dumb by destiny,
The last my tongue, of all sweet thoughts bereaved,
Yet strung and tunde, to play harts harmony.
Both knit in one, and yet asunder placed,
What hart would speak, the tongue doth still discover,
What tongue doth speak, is of the hart embraced,
And both are one to make a new found lover:
New found, and onely found in Gods and Kings,
Whose words are deeds, but deeds nor words regarded:
chased thoughts do mount and fly with swiftest wings,
My love with pain, my pain with loss rewarded:
engrave vpon this three, Daphnes perfection,
That neither men nor gods, can force affection.
NImpha mane, per me concordant carmina neruis.
Faire Daphne stay, too chased because too faire,
Yet fairer in mine eyes, because so chased,
And yet because so chased, must I despair?
And to despair, I yielded haue at last.
Shepheard possess thy love, for me too cruel,
possess thy love, thou knowest not how to measure,
A dunghill cock doth often find a jewel,
enjoying that, he knows not to be treasure.
When broomy beard, to sweep thy lips presume,
When on thy neck, his rough hewn arms shall move,
And gloate on thee with eyes that drizell rheum,
When that his toothless mouth shall call thee love,
Noght will I say of him, but pity thee,
That btauty might, but would no wiser bee.
I stay, for whether should chastety fly for succour, but to the queen of chastety, by thee was I interred in a three, that by craft, way might be made to lust, by your highnes restored, that by virtue, there might be assurance in honor: these tables, to set down your praises long since Sibillas prophesies I humbly present to your majesty, not thinking, that your virtues can be deciphered in so slight a volume, but noted; the whole world is drawn in a small map, Homers Illiades in a nutshell, and the riches of a Monarch, in a few ciphers, and so much odds, betwixt explaining of your perfections, and the touching, as is betwixt painting and thinking, the one, running over a little table in a whole day, the other over the whole world in a minute, with this vouchsafe a poor virgins wish, that often wish for good husbands, mine, only for the endless prosperity of my sovereign.