MAy it please your highnes, this is the great Constable and commandadore of Cotsholde, he speaks no language, but the Rammish tongue, such sheepishe gouernours there are, that can say no more to a messenger then he, (Bea), this therfore, as signifying his duty to your majesty, and al our desires, I am commanded to be his interpreter, or shepherds star, pointing directly to Cotshold, and in Cotshold, to Sudley, made us expect some wonder, and of the eldest, ask some counsel, it was resolved by the ancientst, that such a one should come, by whom all the shepherds should haue their flocks in safety, & their own lives, all the country quietness, & the whole world astonishment: our Constable commands this day to be kept holiday, all our shepherds are assembled, and if shepherds pastimes may please, how joyful would they be if it would please you to see them; which if you vouchsafe not, as pastimes too mean for your majesty, they mean to call this day the shepherds black day; in all humility we entreat, that you would cast an eye to their rude devices, and an ear to their harsh words, and if nothing happen to be pleasing, the amends is, nothing shal be tedious.
CVT the Cake, who hath the bean; shal be King, and where the peaze is, shee shalbe queen.
I haue the peaze, and must be queen.
I the bean and King, I must cammaunde.
Not so, the queen, shall and must command, for I haue often heard of a King that could not command his subiects, and of a queen that hath commanded Kings.
I yield, yet is it within compass of my authority to ask questions and first I will begin with you in love, I mean shepherds love, for I will not meddle with Gentlefolkes love, which is most constant, the man or the woman?
It is no question, no more then if you should ask whether on a steep hill, a square ston, or a globe stood most steady.
Both loving, which is most loving?
The woman if she haue her right, the man, if he be his own judge.
Why doth the man ever woe the woman, the woman never the man?
Because men are most amorous and least chased, women careless of fonde affections, and when they embrace them, fearful. But unless your questions were writer, I command you to silence. You sirra, that sit as though your wits were a woole-gathering will you haue a question, or a commandment?
No question of a queen, for they are hard to be answered, but any commandment, for that must be obeied.
Then sing, and you sir, a question, or commandment?
A commandment I, and glad that I am?
Then play:
I haue played so long with my fingers that I haue beaten out of play al my good fortunes
herbs, words, and stones, all maladies haue cured,
herbs, words, and stones, I used when I loved,
herbs smells, words, wind, stones hardness haue procured,
By stones, nor words, nor herbs her mind was moved;
I asked the cause, this was a womans reason,
'mongst herbs are weeds, and thereby are refused,
deceit, as well as truth speaks words in season,
False stones by foils haue many one abused,
I sight, and then shee said my fancy smoked,
I gazed, shee said my looks were follies glancing,
I sounded deade, shee said my love was choked,
I started up, shee said my thoughts were dancing,
O sacred love if thou haue any Godhead,
Teach other rules to win a maidenheade.
Well song, & well played, seldom so well among shepherds, but call me the Cutter of Cotsholde, that looks as though he only knew his leripoope, amorous he is, and wise, carrying a sheeps eye in a calfs head.
Will you 3 questions, or 3 commandments?
half a dozen of each. My wits work like new bear, and they will break my head, unless it vent at the mouth.
Sing,
I haue forsworn that since cuckow-time, for I heard, one sing all the summer, and in the winter was all bald.
Play on the Lute.
tailors craft, a knock on the knuckles, will make one fast a fortnight, my belly and back shall not be retainers to my fingers.
What question shall I ask?
Any so it be of love.
Are youe amorous?
No, but fantastical.
But what is love?
A single accidence. In love there are eight partes. Ioy Hope Truth Constancy all tolerable. Sorrow Anger jealousy despair all intolerable.
These contain all, till you come to the rules, and then in love, there are three concords. 1 The first, betwixt a bachelor, and a maid, 2 The second, betwixt a man and his wife, 3 The third, betwixt any he and she, that loveth straggling.
The fool bleeds, it is time to stop his vain, for having wet his foot, he careth not how deep he wades. Let us attend that, which we most expect. the star, that directs us hither, who hath in almanac?
What mean you, a starmonger, the quipper of the firmament, here is one. I ever carry it, to know the hye waies, to every good town, the fairs, and the faire weather.
Let me see it. The seventh of September, happiness was born into the world, it may be the eleventh is some wonder. The moon at the full, tis true, for Cynthia never shined so bright, the twelfth the weather inclined to moisture & shepherds devises to dryenes, the thirteenth, summer, goeth from hence, the sign in virgo, vivat clarissimae virgo. The diseases shalbe melancholies, some proceeding of necessity, some of superfluity, many shalbe studying how to spend what they haue, more, beating their brains to get what they want. Malice shalbe more infectious then the pestilence, and Drones more favoured then Ants, as for Bees, they shal haue but their labour for their pains, and when their combs be full, they shalbe stilde; the war shal be, twixt hemlock and honey. At four of the clock this day, shal appear the worlds wonder that leads England into every land, and brings all lands into England.
THis is the day, this the hour, this the star, pardon dread sovereign, poor shepherds pastimes, and bold shepherds presumptions. We call ourselves Kings and queens to make mirth, but when we see a King or queen, we stand amazed. The sun warms the earth, yet looseth no brightness; but sheweth more force, & Kings names that fall vpon shepherds, loose no dignity, but breed more fear. Their pictures are drawn in colours, and in brass their portraytures engraven. At chests, there are Kings, and queens, & they of wood. shepherds are no more, nor no less, woodden. In theatres, artificers haue played Emperours, yet the next day forgotten, neither their dueties nor occupations. For our boldness in borrowing their names, and in not seeing your majesty for our blindness, we offer these shepherds weeds, which, if your majesty vouchsafe at any time to wear, it shall bring to our hearts comfort, and happiness to our labours.