VOVCHSAFE dread sovereign, after so many smooth speeches of Muses, to hear a rough hewn tale of a soldier, wee use not with words, to amplify our conconceites, and to plead faith by figures, but by deeds, to show the loyalty of our harts, and to make it good with our lives. I mean not to recount any service, all proceeding of duty, but to tell your majesty, that I am past al service, save only devotion. My horse, mine armour, my shield, my sword, the riches of a young soldier, and an old souldiers relics, I should here offer to your highnesse, but my four boys haue stolen them from me, vowing themselves to arms, and leaving me to my prayers, fortune giveth success, fidelitye courage, chance cannot blemish faith, nor truth prevent destinye, whatever happen, this is their resolution, and my desire, that their lives may, be employed wholly in your service, and their deaths, bee their vows sacrifice. Their deaths, the rumour of which, hath so often affrighted the crow my wife, that her hart, hath been as black as her feathers. I know not whether it be affection, or fondness, but the crow thinketh her own birds the fairest, because to her they are dearest. What joys we both conceive, neither can express, sufficeth they be, as your virtues, infinite. And although, nothing be more unfit to lodge your majesty, then a crows nest, yet shall it be most happy to us, that it is by your highnesse, made a Phoenix nest. Quicolor after erat, nunc est contrarius atro. Vouchsafe this trifle, and with this my heart, the greatest gift I can offer, and the chiefest, that I ought.
PArdon dread sovereign, the greatness of my presumption, who having nothing to say, must follow stil to wonder, but saft, some news out of Irelande.
MY deuty humbly remembered. It is said, the wind is unconstant, I am glad it is, otherwise had not I heard that, which I most wished, and least looked for. The wind blowing stiffly in the west, on the sudden turned easterly, by which means I received letters, that her majesty would bee at Rycort, nothing could happen to me more happy, unless it were myself to be thereto do my duty. But I am a stranger in mine own country, and almost unknown to my bestfrends, onely remembered by her majesty, whose late favours, haue made me more than fortunate. I should accūot my ten years absence a flat banishment, were I not honoured in her majesties service, which hath bound all my affections, prentices to patience. In all humility, I desire this Dart to be delivered, an Irish weapon, and this wish of an English heart, that in whose hart faith is not fastened, a dart may. I can scarce writ for ioy, and it is likely, this lacque cannot speak for wondering. If he do not, this is all that I should say, that my life is my dueties bondman, duty my faiths sovereign.
MY duty remembered, The enemy of late hath made many braueadoes, even to the gates of Ostend, but the success was onely a flourish. myself walking on the Ramparts, to over see the Sentenels, descried a pink, of whom I inquired, where the Court was, he said he knew not, but that the 28. of September, her majesty would be at Rycort. I was ouer-ioyed, & in making hast to remember my duty, I had almost forgot it, for I was shipping myself for England, with this Skipper, but to come without leave, might be to return without welcome. To signify that my hart is there, I most humbly entreat, that this Key may be presented, the Key of Ostende, & Ostend the Key of Flaunders, the wards are made of true harts, treachery cannot counterfeit the Key, nor treason herself pick the lock. None shal turn it, but whom her majesty commands, none can. For myself, I can but wish, all happiness to her highnes, & any occasion, that what my tongue delivers, my blood may seal, the end of my service, that in her service, my life may end.
FAire Lady and sweet Mistris, I seldom writ, because I writ not well, if I speak, you say I chatter, because I speak so fast, & when I am silent, you think me careless. You say love cannot be in soldiers, I swear it is, only this the difference, that we prove it by the sword, others, by their sonnets theirs ink, black for cold, ours blood, red for heat. often haue you told me, that I know not what love is, & often haue I told you, that this it is, that which makes the head ache, and the hart to; the eyes jealous, and the ears to, the liver black, & the Splen to, the veins shrink & the purse to. Wit is but loues wire drawer, making of a short passion an endless persuasion, yet no more mettall. You object, that I haue many Mistrisses, I answer, you haue ten times as many seruants, and if you should pick a quarrel, why should not I bring my Mistresses into the field against your seruants? But inconstancy is a souldiers scar, it is true, but the wound came by constancy; what a patient virtue is staidnes? like a nail in a door, rusty, because never removed, I cannot be so superstitious as these nice louers, who make the pax of their mistris hands, tis flat popery. I would not purchase love in fee simplo, a lease of two years to me were tedious. I mean not, to haue my tongue ringed at my Mistris ear like a jewel, always whispering of love, I am no earewigg, nor can I endure still to gaze on her face, as though my eyes were bodkins to stick in her hair. Let me haue my love answered, and you shall find me faithful, in which if you make delays, I cannot be patient, the wind calls me away, and with the wind, away shall my affections.
MY duty to your L. remembered &c. Being ready to take shipping, I heard that her majesty would honor Ricort, with her presence, which wrought no small content, but to haue made it full, I wished I might haue seen it. In this place is no choice of any thing, whereby I might signify my dutiful affection, but that which a soldier maketh his chiefest choice, a sword, which most humbly I desire to haue presented to her highnes. With this protestation pourde from my hart, that in her service, I will spend the blood of my hart. Eloquence & I, am vowde enemies, loyalty & I, sworn brothers, what my words cannot effect, my sword shall.
MY duty humbly remembered, the same time that I received letters that her majesty would be at Ricort, the wind served for Britaigne, I was over ioied with both, yet stood in a mamering whether I should take the opportunity of the wind, which I long expected or ride post to do my duty, which I most desired, necessity controlled affection, that bid me unless I could keep the wind in a bag, to use the winds when they blew, I obaide yet, wishing that they would turn for a while, to serve my turn, being unfurnished, of al fit presents. I would haue this my excuse that cheapside is not in my ship, & therefore haue nothing to offer but my Trunchion the honour which I received of her majesty, by whom I am only to be commanded, & ever else let me be only miserable and ever.
THat my sons, haue remembered their dueties, it is my harts comfort, that your majesty accepteth thē, their harts heaven. If fortune, & fidelity had been twins, they might haue been as rich, as faithful, but this is the Iubyle of my life, that their faiths, are without spot, and your majesty I hope, confident, without suspicion. Among my joys, there is one grief, that my daughter, the Mistris of a Moole hil, hath so much forgotten; that most she should remember, duty. I doubt not her excuse, because shee is a woman, but fear the truth, of it, because it must be to her sovereign. For myself, my crow, and all our birds, this I promise, that they are all; as faithful in their feathers, as they were in their shells.
AT length, though very late, I am come, from the lady of the Moold hill, sent long since, but the passage troublesone, at every miles end, a lover, at every sentence end a lye, I staide to hear, the conclusions, and found nutbrowne girls to be cheapned. But none to be bought, but the amiable. Thus much for my excuse, now for my Mistris, who hearing that your majesty would enter this cabin, was astonished, with joy, and doubt, joy, for so great honour done to her father. Doubt, by what means shee might show her duty to your majesty. At the last, sitting vpon the top of a moole hill, she espied, a read Daysie, the fairest flower, that barren place doth yield, which, with all humility she presents to your majesty, it hath no sweetness, yet many virtues, her hart no tongue, but infinite affections, In you she saith are all virtues, and towards you all her affections.