AS by your high imperial majesties command,
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As Procurator for your excellence,
To marry Princes Margaret for your grace,
So in the ancient famous City Towers,
In presence of the Kings of France & Cyssile,
The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Britain, and Alonson.
Seven Earls, twelve Barons, and then the reverend Bishops,
I did perform my task and was espoused,
And now, most humbly on my bended knees,
In sight of England and her royal Peers,
Deliver up my title in the Queen,
Unto your gracious excellence, that are the substance
Of that great shadow I did represent:
The happiest gift that ever marquess gave,
The fairest Queen that ever King possessed.
Suffolk arise.
Welcome Queen Margaret to English Henry's Court,
The greatest show of kindness yet we can bestow,
Is this kind kiss: O gracious God of heaven,
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness,
For in this beauteous face thou hast bestowed
A world of pleasures to my perplexed soul.
Th'excessive love I bear unto your grace,
Forbids me to be lavish of my tongue,
Lest I should speak more than beseems a woman:
Let this suffice, my bliss is in your liking,
And nothing can make poor Margaret miserable,
Unless the frown of mighty England's King.
Her looks did wound, but now speech doth pierce,
Lovely Queen Margaret sit down by my side,
And uncle Gloster, and you lordly Peers,
With one voice welcome my beloved Queen.
Long live Queen Margaret England's happiness.
We thank you all.
My lord Protector, so it please your grace,
Here are the Articles confirmed of peace,
Between our sovereign and the French King Charles,
Till term of eighteen months be full expired.
Inprimis, It is agreed between the French king Charles, and William de la Poole, marquess of Suffolk, ambassador for Henry king of England, that the said Henry shall wed and espouse the lady Margaret, daughter to Raynard King of Naples, Cyssels, and Ierusalem, and crown her Queen of England, ere the 30. of the next month.
It is further agreed between them, that the Duchess of Anjoy and of Maine, shallbe released and delivered over to the King her sa.
How now uncle, what's the matter that you stay so suddenly.
Pardon my Lord, a sudden qualm came over my heart,
Which dims mine eyes that I can see no more,
Uncle of Winchester I pray you read on.
Item, It is further agreed between them, that the Duchess of Anjoy, and of Maine, shall be released and delivered over to the King her father, and she sent over of the King of England's own proper cost and charges without dowry.
They please us well, lord marquess kneel down, we here create thee first Duke of Suffolk, and girt thee with the sword. Cousin of York, we here discharge your grace from being Regent in the parts of France, till term of 18 months be full expired.
Thanks uncle Winchester, Gloster, York, and Buckingham, Somerset, Salisbury, and Warwick.
We thank you all for this great favour done,
In entertainment to my princely Queen,
Come let us in, and with all speed provide
To see her Coronation be performed.
Brave Peers of England, Pillars of the state,
To you Duke Humphrey must unfold his grief,
What did my brother Henry toil himself,
And waste his subjects for to conquer France?
And did my brother Bedford spend his time
To keep in awe that stout unruly Realm?
And have not I and mine uncle Bewford here,
Done all we could to keep that land in peace?
And is all our labours then spent in vain,
For Suffolk haveth new made duke that rules the roast,
Hath given away for our King Henry's Queen,
The Duchess of Anjoy and▪ same unto her father.
Ah lords, fatal is this marriage canselling our states,
Reversing Monuments of conquered France,
Undoing all, as none had near been done.
Why how now cousin Gloster, what needs this?
As if our King were bound unto your will,
And might not do his will without your leave?
Proud Protector, envy in thine eyes I see,
The big swollen venom of thy hateful heart,
That dare presume 'gainst that thy sovereign likes.
Nay my Lord, 'tis not my words that troubles you,
But my presence, proud Prelate as thou art:
But i'll be gone, and give thee leave to speak,
Farewell my Lords, and say when I am gone,
I prophesied France would be lost ere long.
There goes our protector in a rage,
My lords, you know he is my great enemy,
And though he be Protector of the land,
And thereby covers his deceitful thoughts,
For well you see, if he but walk the streets,
The common people swarm about him strait,
Crying, Iesus bless your royal excellence,
With, God preserve the good Duke Humphrey.
And many things besides that are not known,
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Humphrey,
But I will after him, and if I can,
I'll lay a plot to heave him from his seat.
But let us watch this haughty Cardinal,
cozen of Somerset, be ruled by me,
we'll watch Duke Humphrey and the Cardinal too,
And put them from the mark they fain would hit.
Thanks cousin Buckingham, join thou with me.
And both of us with the Duke of Suffolk,
we'll quickly heave Duke Humphrey from his seat.
Content, come let us about it strait,
For either thou or I will be Protector.
Pride went before, Ambition follows after,
Whilst these do seek their own preferments thus,
My lords, let us seek for our country's good,
Oft have I heard this haughty Cardinal
Swear, and forswear himself, and brave it out,
More like a Ruffian then a man of church.
cozen York, the victories thou hast won,
In Ireland, Normandy, and in France,
Hath won thee immortal praise in England.
And thou brave Warwick, my thrice valiant son,
Thy simple plainness and thy housekeeping,
Hath won thee credit amongst the cownon sort,
The reverence of mine age, and Nevels name,
Is of no little force if I command,
Then let us join all three in one for this,
That good Duke Humphrey may his state possess,
But wherefore weeps Warwick my noble son?
For grief that all is lost that Warwick won.
Sons. Anjoy and Maine, both given away at once,
Why Warwick did win them, & must that than which we won with our swords, be given away with words?
As I have read, our Kings of England were wont to have large dowries with their wives, but our king Henry gives away his own.
Come sons, away, and look unto the main.
Unto the Main, oh father, Maine is lost,
Which Warwick by main force did win from France,
Maine chance father you meant, but I mean Maine,
Which I will win from France, or else be slain.
Anjoy and Maine, both given unto the French,
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England.
A day will come when York shall claim his own,
And therefore I will take the Nevels parts,
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey:
And when I spy advantage, claim the Crown,
For that's the golden mark I seek to hit:
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
Nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist,
Nor wear the Diadem upon his head,
Whose church-like humours fits not for a Crown:
Then York be still a while till time do serve,
Watch thou, and wake when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the state,
Till Henry surfeiting in joys of love,
With his new bride, and England's dear bought Queen,
And Humphrey with the Peers be fallen at jars,
Then will I raise aloft the milk-white Rose,
With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed,
And in my Standard bear the Arms of York,
To graffle with the house of Lancaster:
And force perforce, I'll make him yield the Crown,
Whose bookish rule hath pulled fair England down.
Why droops my Lord like over ripened corn,
Hanging the head at Cearies plenteous load?
Whatseest thou Duke Humphrey King Henry's Crown?
Reach at it, and if thine arm be too short,
Mine shall lengthen it. Art not thou a Prince,
Uncle to the King and his Protector?
Then what shouldst thou lack that might content thy mind?
My lovely Nell, far be it from my heart,
To think of Treasons 'gainst my sovereign lord,
But I was troubled with a dream to night,
And God I pray, it do betide no ill.
What dreamed my lord? Good Humphrey tell it me,
And i'll interpret it, and when that's done,
I'll tell thee then what I did dream to night.
This night when I was laid in bed, I dreamt that
This my staff mine Office badge in Court,
Was broke in two, and on the ends were placed,
The heads of the Cardinal of Winchester,
And William de la Pool first Duke of Suffolk.
Tush my Lord, this signifies nought but this,
That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove,
Shall for th'offence make forfeit of his head.
But now my lord, i'll tell you what I dreamt,
Me thought I was in the Cathedral Church
At Westminster, and seated in the chair
Where the Kings and Queens are crowned, and at my feet
Henry and Margaret with a crown of gold,
Stood ready to set it on my princely head.
Fie Nell, ambitious woman as thou art,
Art thou not second woman in this land,
And the Protectors wife, beloved of him,
And wilt thou still be hammering treason thus?
Away I say, and let me hear no more.
How now my Lord! what, angry with your Nell
For telling but her dream? the next I have
I'll keep to myself and not be rated thus.
Nay Nell, i'll give no credit to a dream,
But I would have thee to think on no such things.
And it please your grace the King and Queen tomorrow morning will ride a hawking to Saint Alban's, and craves your company along with them.
With all my heart I will attend his grace:
Come Nell, thou wilt go with us I am sure.
I'll come after you, for I cannot go before,
But ere it be long i'll go before them all,
Despite of all that seek to cross me thus,
Who is within there?
What sir Iohn Hum, what news with you?
Iesus preserve your majesty.
My majesty, why man I am but grace,
Yea, but by the grace of God and Hums advise,
Your grace's state shall be advanced ere long.
What hast thou conferred with Margery Iordane, the cunning witch of Ely, with Roger Bullinbrooke and the rest, and will they undertake to do me good?
I have Madam, and they have promised me to raise a spirit from the depth of under ground, that shall tell your grace all questions you demand.
Thanks good sir Iohn, some two days hence I guess
Will fit our time, then see that they be here:
For now the King is riding to Saint Albon,
And all the Dukes and Earls along with him:
When they be gone, then safely they may come,
And on the backside of my Orchard here,
There cast their spells in silence of the night,
And so resolve of the thing we wish,
Till when, drink that for my sake, and so farewell.
Now sir Iohn Hum, no words but mum,
Seal up your lips, for you must silent be,
These gifts ere long will make me mighty rich,
The Duchess she thinks now that all is well,
But I have gold comes from another place,
From one that hired me to set her on,
To plot these treasons 'gainst the King and Peers,
And that is the mighty duke of Suffolk,
For he it is, but I must not say so,
That by my means must work the Duchess fall,
Who now by conjurations thinks to raise:
But whist sir Iohn, no more of that I trow,
For fear you lose your head before you go.
Come sirs, let us linger here about a while,
Until my Lord Protector come this way,
That we may show his grace our several causes.
I pray God save the good Humphries life,
For but for him, a many were undone,
That can get no succour in the Court,
But see where he comes with the Queen.
Oh we are undone, this is the Duke of Suffolk.
Now good fellows, whom would you speak withal?
If it please your majesty, with my Lord Protectors Grace.
Are your suits to his grace? let us see them first,
Look on them my Lord of Suffolk.
A complaint against the cardinals man,
What hath he done?
Mary my lord, he hath stolen away my wife,
And theyare gone together, and I know not where to find them,
Hath he stolen thy wife, that's some injury indeed,
But what say you?
Mary sir I come to tell you that my master said, that the Duke of York was true heir unto the Crown, and that the King was an usurer.
An usurper thou wouldst say.
Yea forsooth an usurper.
Didst thou say the King was an usurper?
No forsooth, I said my master said so, th'other day when we were scouring the Duke of York's armour in our garret.
Yea mary this is something like,
Who's within there?
Sirrah take this fellow and keep him close,
And send out a Pursuivant for his master strait,
we'll hear more of this before the King.
Now sit what's yours? let me see it,
What's here?
A complaint against the Duke of Suffolk for enclosing the commons of long Melford.
How now sir knave?
I beseech your grace to pardon me, I am but a messenger for the whole towneship
So now show your pension to Duke Humphrey.
Villames get ye gone, and come not near the Court,
Dare these peasants write against me thus?
My Lord of Suffolk you may see by this,
The Commons loves unto that haughty Duke,
That seeks to him more than to King Henry,
Whose eyes are always poring on his book,
And ne'er regards the honour of his name,
But still must be protected like a child,
And governed by that ambitious Duke,
That scarce will move his cap nor speak to us,
And his proud wife, high minded Elinor,
That ruffles it with such a troup of ladies,
As strangers in the Court takes her for the Queen.
The other day she vaunted to her maids,
That the very train of her worst gown,
Was worth more wealth than all my father's lands,
Can any grief of mind be like to this?
I tell thee Pool when thou didst run at Tilt,
And stolst away our ladies hearts in France,
I thought King Henry had been like to thee,
Or else thou hadst not brought me out of France.
Madame, content yourself a little while,
As I was cause of your coming to England,
So will I in England work your full content:
And as for proud Duke Humphrey and his wife,
I have set lime-twigs that will entangle them,
As that your grace ere long shall understand.
But stay madame, here comes the King.
My lords, I care not who be Regent in France, or York, or omerset, all's one to me.
My lord, if York have ill demeande himself,
Let Somerset enjoy his place, and go to France.
Then whom your grace think worthy, let him go,
And there be made the Regent over the French.
Whom soever you account worthy,
York is the worthiest.
Peace Warwick, give thy betters leave to speak.
The Cardinal's not my better in the field.
All in this place are thy betters far.
And Warwick may live to be the best of all.
My lord in mine opinion, it were best that Somerset were regent over France.
Madame, our King is old enough himself,
To give his answer without your consent.
If he be bold enough, what needs your grace
To be protector over him so long?
Madame, I am but Protector over the land.
And when it please his grace, I will resign my charge.
Resign it then, for since that thou wast King,
As who is King but thee? the common state
Doth (as we see,) all wholly go to wrack,
And millions of treasure hath been spent,
And as for the Regent ship of France,
I say Somerset is more worthy than York.
I'll tell thee Suffolk why I am not worthy,
Because I cannot slatter as thou canst.
And yet the worthy deeds that York hath done,
Should make him worthy to be honoured bare.
Peace headstrong Warwick.
Image of pride, wherefore should I peace?
Because here is a man accused of Treason,
Pray God the Duke of York do clear himself.
Ho, bring hither the Armourer and his man.
If it please your grace, this fellow here, hath accused his master of high Treason, and his words were these.
That the duke of York was law full heir unto the crown, and that your grace was an usurper.
I beseech your grace let him have what punishment the law will afford, for his villainy.
Come hither fellow, didst thou speak these words?
An't shall please your majesty, I never said any such matter, God is my witness, I am falsely accused by this villain here.
'tis no matter for that, you did say so.
I beseech your grace let him have the law.
Alas my Lord, hang me if ever I speak these words, my accuser is my prentice, and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon his knees that he would be even with me, I have good witness of this, and therefore I beseech your majesty do not cast away an honest man for a villains accusation.
Uncle Gloster, what do you think of this?
The law my Lord is this by case, it rests suspicious,
That a day of combat be appointed,
And there to try each others right or wrong,
Which shall be on the thirtieth of this month,
With Eben staves, and Standbags combating
In Smithfield before your Royal Majesty.
And I accept the combat willingly.
Alas my Lord, I am not able to fight.
You must either fight sirrah, or else be hanged:
Go take him hence again to prison.
Give me my glove, why minion can you not see
I cry you mercy Madam, I did mistake,
I did not think it had been you.
Did you not, proud French-woman,
Could I come near your dainty visage with my nails,
I'd set my ten commandments in your face.
Be patient gentle Aunt,
It was against her will.
Against her will good King she'll dandle thee,
If thou wilt always thus be ruled by her:
But let it rest, as sure as I do live,
She shall not strike dame Elinor vnreuengde.
Believe me my love, thou wert much to blame,
I would not for a thousand pounds of gold,
My noble uncle had been here in place.
But see where he comes, I am glad he met her non
Uncle Gloster, what answer makes your grace
Concerning our Regent for the Realm of France?
Whom thinks your grace is meetest for to send?
My gracious Lord, than this is my resolve,
For that these words the Armourer doth speak,
Doth breed suspicion on the part of York,
Let Somerset be Regent over the French,
Till trial's made, and York may clear himself.
Then be it so my Lord of Somerset,
We make your grace Regent over the French,
And to defend our rights 'gainst foreign foes,
And so do good unto the Realm of France,
Make haste my Lord, 'tis time that you were gone,
The time of truce I think is full expired.
I humbly thank your royal majesty,
And take my leave to post with speed to France.
Come uncle Gloster, now let's have our horse,
For we will to Saint Alban's presently,
Madam, your hawk, they say is swift of flight,
And we will try, how she will fly to day.
Here sir Iohn take this scroll of paper here,
Wherein is writ the questions you shall ask,
And I will stand upon this Tower here,
And hear the spirit what it says to you,
And to my questions, write the answers down.
Now sirs begin and cast your spells about,
And charm the fiends for to obey your wills,
And tell Dame Elinor of the thing she asks.
Then Roger Bullenbrooke, about thy task,
And frame a circle here upon the earth,
Whilst I thereon all prostrate on my face,
Do talk and whisper with the devils below,
And conjure them for to obey my will.
Dark night, dread night, the silence of the night,
Wherein the Furies mask in hellish troops,
Send up I charge you from Sosetus lake,
The spirit Askalon to come to me,
To pierce the bowels of this centric earth,
And hither come in twinkling of an eye,
Askalon, Ascenda, Ascenda.
Now Bullenbrooke, what wouldst thou have me do?
First, of the King, what shall become of him?
The Duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,
Yet him out live, and die a violent death.
What fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
By water he shall die, and take his end.
What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun castles, safer shall he be upon the sandy plains, where castles mounted stand. Now question me no more, for I must hence again.
Then down I say, unto the damned pool,
Where Pluto in his fiery wagon sits,
Riding amidst the singed and parched smokes,
The Road of Dytas by the river Styx,
There howl and burn for ever in those flames,
Rise Iordane, rise, and stay thy charming spells:
Sons, we are betrayed.
Come sirs, lay hands on them, and bind them sure,
This time was well watched: what Madam, are you there?
This will be great credit for your husband,
That you are plotting treasons thus with Conjurers,
The King shall have a notice of this thing.
See here my Lord what the devil hath writ.
Give it me my Lord, i'll show it to the King:
Go sirs, see them fast locked in prison.
My Lord, I pray you let me go post unto the King,
Unto Saint Alban's, to tell this news.
Content away then, about it strait.
Farewell my Lord.
Who's within there?
My Lord.
Sirra, go will the Earl of Salisbury and Warwick to sup with me to night.
I will my lord.
My lord, how did your grace like this last flight?
But as I cast her off the wind did rise,
And 'twas ten to one old Ione had not gone out.
How wonderful the Lords works are on earth.
Even in these silly creatures of his hands!
Uncle Gloster, how hie your hawk did soar,
And on a sudden soused the partridge down.
No marvel, if it please your majesty,
My lord Protectors hawk do tower so well,
He knows his master loves to be aloft.
Faith my Lord it is but a base mind,
That can soar no higher than a falcons pitch.
I thought your grace would be above the clouds.
Yea my lord Cardinal, were it not good
Your grace could fly to heaven.
Thy heaven is on earth, thy words and thoughts beat on a crown, proud Protector, dangerous Peer, to smooth it thus with King and commonwealth.
How now my lord, why this is more than needs, churchmen so hot! good uncle can you dote?
Why not? having so good a quarrel, and so bad a cause.
As how, my lord?
As you, my lord, and it like your Lordly lords Protectorship.
Why Suffolk, England knows thy insolence.
And thy ambition Gloster.
Cease gentle Queen, and whet not on these furious Lords to wrath, for blessed are the peacemakers on earth.
Let me be blessed for the peace I make,
Against this proud Protector with my sword.
Faith holy uncle, I would it were come to that.
Even when thou darest.
Dare! I tell thee Priest, Plantagenets could never brook the dare
I am Plantaganet as well as thou, and son to Iohn of Gaunt.
In Bastardy.
I scorn thy words.
Make up no factious numbers, but even in thine own person meet me at the East end of the grove.
Here's my hand, I will.
Why how now Lords?
Faith cousin Gloster, had not your man cast off so soon, we had had more sport to day, come with thy sword and buckler.
Faith priestile shave your crown.
Protector, protect thyself well.
The wind grows high, so doth your colour, lords.
How now! now sirrah, what miracle is it?
And it please your grace, there is a man that came blind to saint Albon, and hath received his fignt at his shrine.
Go fetch him hither, that we may glorify the Lord with him.
Thou happy man give God eternal praise,
For he it is that thus hath helped thee.
Where wast thou borne?
At Berwick sir, in the North.
At Berwick and come thus far for help?
Yea sir, it was told me in my sleep,
That sweet saint Albon, should give me my sight again.
What art thou lame too?
Yea indeed sir, God help me.
How cam'st thou lame?
With falling off on a plum-tree.
Wart thou blind, and would climb plum-trees?
Never but once sir in all my life,
My wife did long for plums.
But tell me, wart thou borne blind?
Yea truly sir.
Yea indeed sir, he was borne blind.
What art thou, his mother?
His wife sir.
Hadst thou been his mother,
Thou couldst have better told:
Why let me see I think thou canst not see yet.
Yes truly master, as clear as day.
sayst thou so! what colour's his cloak?
Why red master, as red as blood.
And his cloak?
Why that's green.
And what colour's his hose?
Yellow master, yellow as gold.
And what colours my gown?
Black sir, as black as jet.
Then belike he knows what colour jet is on.
And I think jet did he never see.
But cloaks and gowns ere this day many a one?
But tell me sirrah, what's my name?
Alas master I know not.
What's his name?
I know not.
Nor his?
No truly sir.
Nor his name?
No indeed master.
What's thine own name?
Saunder, and it please you master.
Then Saunder sit there, the lyingest knave in Christendom. If thou hadst been borne blind, thou mightst aswell have known all our names, as thus to name the several colours we do wear. Sight may distinguish of colours but suddenly to nominate them all it is impossible. My lords, same Albon here hath done a miracle, and would you not think his cunning to be great, that could restore this cripple to his legs again?
Oh master I would you could.
My masters of Saint Albon,
Have you not Beadles in your Town,
And things called whips?
Yes my lord, if it please your grace.
Then send for one presently
Sirrah go fetch the Beadle hither strait.
Now fetch me a stool hither by and by.
Now sirrah, if you mean to save yourself from whipping.
Leap me over this stool, and run away.
Alas master I am not able to stand alone,
You go about to torture me in vain.
Well sir, we must have you find your legs,
Sirrah Beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.
I will my Lord, come on sirrah, off with your doublet quickly.
Alas master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.
A miracle, a miracle, let him be taken again, and whipped through every market Town till he comes at Berwick where he was borne.
It shall be done my Lord.
My lord Protector hath done wonders to day,
He hath made the blind to see and the halt to go.
Yea but you did greater wonders, when you made whole Dukedoms fly in a day.
Witness France.
Have done I say, and let me hear no more of that.
What news brings Duke Humphrey of Buckingham?
Ill news for some my lord, and this it is,
That proud dame Elinor our Protectors wife,
Hath plotted Treasons 'gainst the King and Peers,
By witchcrafts, sorceries, and conjurings,
Who by such means did raise a spirit up,
To tell her what hap should betide the state,
But ere they had finished their devilish drift,
By York and myself they were all surprised,
And here's the answer the devil did make to them.
First of the King, what shall become of him?
The Duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose,
Yet him out live, and die a violent death,
Gods will be done in all:
What fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
By water shall he die and take his end.
By water must the duke of Suffolk diet
It must be so, or else the devil doth lie.
Let Somerset shun castles,
For safer shall he be upon the sandy plains,
Then where castles mounted stand.
Here's good stuff: how now my lord protector?
This news I think hath turned your weapon's point,
I am in doubt you'll scarcely keep your promise.
Forbear ambitious prelate to urge my grief,
And pardon me my gracious sovereign,
For here I swear unto your majesty,
That I am guiltlesle of these heinous crimes,
Which my ambitious wife hath falsely done:
And for she would betray her sovereign lord,
There renounce her from my bed and board,
And leave her open for the law to judge,
Unless she clear herself of this foul deed.
Come my lords this night we'll lodge in S. Albon,
And to morrow we will ride to London,
And try the utmost of these treasons forth,
Come uncle Gloster along with us,
My mind doth tell me thou art innocent.
My lords, our simple supper ended, thus
Let me reveal unto your honours here,
The right and title of the house of York,
To England's Crown by lineal descent.
Then York begin, and if thy claim be good,
The Neuills are thy subjects to command.
Then thus my lords.
Edward the third had seven sons,
The first was Edward the black Prince,
Prince of Wales.
The second was Edmund of Langley,
Duke of York.
The third was Lionel Duke of Clarence.
The fourth was Iohn of Gaunt,
The Duke of Lancaster.
The fifth was Roger Mortemer, Earl of March.
The sixth was sir Thomas of Woodstock.
William of Winsore was the seventh and last.
Now, Edward the black prince he died before his father, & left behind him Richard, that afterwards was King, crowned by the name of Richard the second, and he died without an heir. Edmund of Langly duke of York died, and left behind him two daughters, Anne and Elinor.
Lyonel duke of Clarence died, and left behind, Alice, Anne, and Elinor, that was after married to my father, and by her I claim the Crown, as the true heir to Lionel Duke of Clarence the third son to Edward the third. Now sir. In the time of Richard's reign, Henry of Bullenbrooke, son and heir to Iohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster, fourth son to Edward the third, he claimed the crown, deposed the mirthful King, and as you both know, in Pomfret Castle harmless Richard was shamefully murdered, and so by Richard's death came the house of Lancaster unto the Crown.
Saving your tale my lord, as I have heard, in the reign of Bullenbrook, the Duke of York did claim the Crown, and but for Owen Glendor, had been King.
True, but so it fortuned then, by means of that monstrous rebel Glendor, the noble Duke of York was done to death, and so ever since the heirs of Iohn of Gaunt have possessed the Crown. But if the issue of the elder should succeed before the issue of the younger than am I lawful heir unto the kingdom.
What plain proceedings can be more plain? he claims it from Lyonel duke of Clarence, the third son to Edward the third, and Henry from Iohn of Gaunt the fourth son. So that till Lyonels issue fails, his should not reign. It fails not yet, but flourisheth in thee and in thy sons, brave slips of such a stock. Then noble father, kneel we both together, and in this private place be we the first to honour him with birthright to the Crown.
Long live Richard England's royal King.
I thank you both: but lords, I am not your king, until this sword be sheathed even in the heart blood of the house of Lancaster.
Then York advise thyself, and take thy time,
Claim thou the Crown, and set thy standard up,
And in the same advance the milk-white Rose,
And then to guard it, I will rouse the Bear,
Environed with ten thousand ragged-staves
To aid and help thee for to win thy right,
Maugre the proudest lords of Henry's blood,
That dares deny the right and claim of York,
For why, my mind presageth I shall live
To see the noble Duke of York to be a King.
Thanks noble Warwick, and York doth hope to see The Earl of Warwick live, to be the greatest man in England, but the King. Come let's go.
Stand forth dame Elinor Cobham duchess of Gloster, & hear the sentence pronounced against thee for these treasons, that thou hast committed 'gainst us, our States, and Peers. First; for thy heinous crimes, thou shalt two days in London do penance barefoot in the streets, with a white sheet about thy body, & a wax taper burning in thy hand: that done, thou shaltbe banished for ever into the I'll of Man, there to end thy wretched days, and this is our sentence irrevocable. Away with her.
Grieve not noble uncle, but be thou glad,
In that these treasons thus are come to light,
Lest God had poured his vengeance on thy head,
For her offences that thou heldst so dear.
Oh gracious Henry, give me leave awhile,
To leave your grace, and to depart away.
For sorrows tears hath gripped my aged heart,
And makes the fountains of mine eyes to swell,
And therefore good my Lord let me depart.
With all my heart good uncle, when you please,
Yet ere thou goest, Humphrey resign thy staff,
For Henry will be no more protected,
The Lord shall be my guide, both for my land and me.
My staff, yea noble Henry, my life and all,
As erst thy noble father made it mine,
And even at willing at thy feet I leave it,
As others would ambitiously receive it,
And long hereafter when I am dead and gone,
May honourable peace attend thy throne.
Uncle Gloster, stand up and go in peace,
No less beloved of us, then when
Thou wert Protector over my land.
Take up the staff, for here it ought to stand,
Where should it be but in King Henry's hand?
Please it your majesty, this is the day
That was appointed for the combating,
Between the Armourer and his man, my Lord,
And they are ready when your grace doth please.
Then call them forth, that they may try their rights.
Here neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup of sack.
And fear not neighbour, you shall do well enough.
And here neighbour, here's a cup of Charneco.
Here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour drink and be merry, and fear not your man.
Let it come, i'faith I'll pledge you all,
And a fig for Peter.
Here Peter, I drink to thee, and be not afeard.
Here Peter, here's a pint of Claret wine for thee.
And here's a quart for me, and be merry Peter,
And fear not thy master, fight for credit of the prentices.
I thank you all, but I'll drink no more,
Here Robin, and if I die, here I give thee my hammer,
And Will, thou shalt have my apron, and here Tom,
Take all my money that I have.
O Lord bless me, I pray God, for I am never able to deal with my master, he hath learned so much fence already.
Come leave your drinking, and fall to blows:
Sirrah what's thy name?
Peter forsooth.
Peter, what more?
Thump.
Thump, then see that thou thump thy master.
Here to thee neighbour, fill all the pots again, for before we fight, look you, I will tell you my mind, for I am come hither, as it were of man's instigation, to prove myself an honest man, & Peter a knave, & so have at you Peter, with down right blows, as Bevis of Southampton fell upon Askapart.
Law you now, I told you he's in his fence already.
Alarm: and Peter hits him on the head and fells him
Hold Peter, I confess, treason, treason.
O God I give thee praise.
Ho well done Peter: God save the King.
Go take hence that triator from our sight,
For by his death we do perceive his guilt,
And God in justice hath revealed to us,
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murdered wrongfully:
Come fellow follow us for thy reward.
Sirrah, what's a clock?
Almost ten my Lord.
Then is that woeful hour hard at hand,
That my poor lady should come by this way.
In shameful penance wandering in the streets,
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrooke,
The abject people gazing on thy face,
With envious looks laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud Chariot wheels,
When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
My gracious Lord, see where my lady comes,
Please it your grace, we'll take her from the sheriffs?
I charge you for your lines stir not a foot,
Nor offer once to draw a weapon here,
But let them do their office as they should.
Come you my Lord to see my open shame?
Ah Gloster, now thou dost penance too,
See how the giddy people look at thee,
Shaking their heads, and pointing at thee here,
Go get thee gone, and hide thee from their sights,
And in thy penned up study rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies: Ah mine and thine.
Ah Nell, sweet Nell, forget this extreme grief,
And bear it patiently to ease thy heart
Ah Gloster, teach me to forget myself,
For whilst I think I am thy wedded wife,
Then thought of this, doth kill my woeful heart,
The ruthless flints do cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the cruel people laugh,
And bids me be advised how I tread,
And thus with burning Tapor in my hand,
Malde up in shame with papers on my back,
Ah Gloster, can I endure this and live?
Sometime I'll say I am Duke Humphreys wife,
And he a Prince, Protector of the land,
But so he ruled, and such a Prince he was,
As he stood by, whilst I his forlorn Duchess,
Was led with shame, and made a laughing stock,
To every idle rascal follower.
My lovely Nell, what wouldst thou have me do?
Should I attempt to reseve thee from hence,
I should incur the danger of the law,
And thy disgrace would not be shadowed so.
Be thou mild, and stir not at my disgrace,
Until the axe of death hang oven thy head,
As shortly sure it will: For Suffolk he,
The new made Duke▪ that may do all in all
With her that loves him so, and hates us all,
And impious York and Beviford that false priest,
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings,
And fly thou how thou can they will entangle thee.
I summon your grace, unto his highness Parliament holden at saint Edmunds bury, the first of the next month.
A Parliament and our consent never craude
Therein before. This is so deine.
Well, we will be there.
Please it your grace, my office here doth end,
And I must deliver her to sir Iohn Standly,
To be conducted into the I'll of man..
Must you sir Iohn conduct my lady?
Yea my gracious lord, for so it is decreed,
And I am so commanded by the King.
I pray you sir Iohn, use her near the worse,
In that I entreat you to use her well,
The world may smile again, and I may live,
To do you favour if you do it her,
And so sir Iohn farewell.
What? gone my lord, and bid not me farewell?
Witness my bleeding heart, I cannot stay to speak.
Then is he gone, is noble Gloster gone,
And doth duke Humphrey now forsake me too?
Then let me haste from out fair England's bounds,
Come Standloy, come, and let us haste away.
Madame, let's go unto some house here by.
Where you may shift yourself before we go.
Ah good sir Iohn, my shame cannot be hid,
Nor put away, with casting off my sheet:
But come, let us go, master Sheriff farewell,
Thou hast but done thy office as thou shouldst.
I wonder our uncle Gloster stays so long.
Can you not see, or will you not perceive,
How that ambitious duke doth use himself?
The time hath been, but now that time is past,
That none so humble as Duke Humphrey was:
But now let one meet him even in the mome,
When every one will give the time of day,
And he will neither move nor speak to us,
See you not the Commons follow him
In troops, crying, God save the good Duke Humphrey,
And with long life Iesus preserve his grace,
Honouring him as if he were a King:
Gloster is no little man in England,
And if he list to stir commotions,
'tis likely that the people will follow him:
My lord, if you imagine, there is no such thing,
Then let it pass, and call it a woman's fear,
My lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Disprove my allegations if you can,
And by your speeches, if you can reprove me,
I will subscribe and say, I wrong de the Duke.
Well hath your grace foreseen into that Duke,
And if I had been licensed first to speak,
I think I should have told your grace's tale,
Smooth runs the brook whereas the stream is deepest.
No, no my sovereign, Gloster is a man
Unsounded yet, and full of deep deceit.
Welcome Lord Somerset, what news from France?
Cold news my lord, and this it is,
That all your holds and Towns within those Territories.
Is over come my Lord, and all is lost.
Cold news indeed Lord Somerset,
But Gods will be done.
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England.
Pardon my liege, that I have stayed so long.
Nay Gloster, know, that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou prove more loyal than thou art,
We do arrest thee on high treason here.
Why Suffolk's duke thou shalt not see me blush
Nor change my countenance for thine arrest,
Whereof am I guilty, who are my accusers?
'tis thought my lord, your grace took bribes from France,
And stopped the soldiers of their pay,
By which his majesty hath lost all France.
Is it but thought so, and who are they that think so?
So God help me, as I have watched the night,
Ever intending good for England still,
That penny that ever I took from France,
Be brought against me at the judgement day,
I never robbed the soldiers of their pay,
Many a pound of mine own proper cost
Have I sent over for the soldiers wants,
Because I would not rack the needy Commons.
In your Protectorship you did devise,
Strange torments for offenders, by which means
England hath been defamed by tyranny.
Why 'tis well known that whilst I was protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me:
A murderer, or foul felonious thief,
That robs and murders silly passengers,
I tortured above the rate of common law.
Tush my lord, these be things of no account.
But greater matters are laid unto your charge,
I do arrest thee on high treason here,
And commit thee to my good Lord Cardinal,
Until such time as thou canst clear thyself.
Good uncle obey to his arrest,
I have no doubt but thou shalt clear thyself,
My conscience tells me thou are innocent.
Ah gracious Henry these days are dangerous,
And would my death might end these miseries,
And stay their moods for good King Henry's sake,
But I am made the Prologue to their play,
And thousands more must follow after me,
That dreads not yet their lives destruction,
Suffolk's hateful tongue blabs his heart's malice.
Gewfords fiery eyes shows his envious mind,
Buckingham's proud looks bewrays his cruel thoughts,
And dogged York that levels at the Moon.
Whose overweening arm I have held back:
All you have joined to betray me thus:
And you my gracious lady, and Sovereign mistress,
Causeless have laid complaints upon my head,
I shall not want false witnesses enough,
That so amongst you, you may have my life.
The proverb no doubt will be well performed,
A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.
Doth he not twit our Sovereign lady here,
As if that she with ignominious wrong,
Had suborned or hired some to swear against his life?
Yea but I can give the loser leave to speak.
Far truer spoke than meant, I lose indeed,
Beshrew the winners hearts, they play me false.
he'll wrest the sense and keep us here all day,
My Lord of Winchester see him sent away.
Who's within there? take in Duke Humphrey,
And see him guarded sure within my house.
O! thus king Henry casts away his crouch,
Before his legs can bear his body up,
And puts his watchful shepherd from his side,
Whilst wolves stand snarring who shall bite him first.
Farewell my sovereign, long mayst thou enjoy,
Thy father's happy days free from annoy.
My lords, what to your wisdoms shall seem best,
Do and undo, as if ourself were here.
What will your highness leave the Parliament?
Yea Margaret, my heart is killed with grief,
Where I may sit and sigh in endless moan,
For who's a traitor? Gloster he is none.
Then sit we down again my lord Cardinal,
Suffolk, Buckingham, York and Somerset,
Let us consult of proud duke Humphries fall,
In mine opinion it were good he died,
For safety of our King and common wealth.
And so think I madame, for as you know.
If our King Henry had shook hands with death,
Duke Humphrey then would look to be our King,
And it may be, by policy he works,
To bring to pass the thing which now we doubt,
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb,
But if we take him ere he do the deed,
We should not question, if that he should live,
No, let him die, in that he is a fox,
Lest that in living he offend us more.
Then let him die before the Commons know,
For fear that they do rise in Arms for him.
Then do it suddenly my Lords.
Let that be my lord cardinals charge and mine.
Agreed, for he's already kept within my house.
How now sirrah, what news?
Madame, I bring you news from Ireland,
The wild Only my lord, is up in Arms,
With troops of Irish Kerns that uncontrolled,
Do plant themselves within the English pale,
And burn and spoil the Country as they go.
What redress shall we have for this my Lords?
'twere very good, that my Lord of Somerset
That fortunate champion were sent over.
To keep in awe the stubborn Irishmen,
He did so much good when he was in France.
Had York been there with all his far fetched
Policies he might have lost as much as I.
Yea, for York would have lost his life, before
That should have revolted from England's rule.
Yea, so thou mightst, and yet have governed worse than I.
What worse than nought, than a shame take all.
Shame on thyself, that wisheth shame.
Somerset for bear, good York be patient,
And do thou take in hand to cross the seas,
With troops of armed men to quell the pride,
Of those ambitious Irish that rebel.
Well Madam, sith your grace is so content,
Let me have some bands of chosen soldiers,
And York shall try his fortune 'gainst those Kerns.
York thou shalt, my lord of Buckingham,
Let it be your charge to muster up such soldiers,
As shall suffice him in these needful wars.
Madam I will, and levy such a band
As soon shall overcome those Irish rebels:
But York, where shall those soldiers stay for thee?
At Bristol, I will expect them ten days hence.
Then thither shall they come, and so farewell.
Adieu my Lord of Buckingham.
Suffolk remember what you have to do,
And you Lord Cardinal concerning Duke Humphrey.
'twere good that you did see to it in time.
Come let us go, that it may be performed.
Now York bethink thyself and rouse thee up,
Take time whilst it is offered thee so fair,
Lest when thou wouldst, thou canst not it attain,
'twas men I lacked, and now they give them me,
And now whilst I am busy in Ireland,
I have seducde a head strong Kentish man,
Iohn Cade of Ashford,
Under the title of sir Iohn Mortimer,
To raise commotion, and by that means,
I shall perceive how the common people,
Do affect the claim and house of York,
Then if he have success in his affairs,
From Ireland then comes York again,
To reap the harvest which that coystril sowed,
Now if he should be taken and condemned,
he'll near confess that I did set him on,
And therefore ere I go, i'll send him word,
To put in practice and to gather head,
That so soon as I am gone, he may begin
To rise in Arms with troops of country swains:
To help him to perform this enterprise,
And then Duke Humprhey, he well made away,
None then can stop the light to England's crown,
But York can tame and headlong pull them down.
How now sirs, what have you dispatched him?
Yea my Lord, he is dead I warrant you.
Then see the clothes laid smooth about him still,
That when the King comes, he may perceive
No other, but that he died of his own accord.
All things is handsome now my Lord.
Then draw the curtains again, and get you gone,
And you shall have your firm reward anon
My lord of Suffolk go call our uncle Gloster,
Tell him, this day we will that he do clear himself.
I will my Lord.
And good my lords, proceed no further against our uncle Gloster,
Then by just proof you can affirm,
For as the sucking child or harmless lamb,
So is he innocent of treason to our state.
How now Suffolk, where's our uncle?
Dead in his bed, my Lord, Gloster is dead.
Ay me, the King is dead: help, help, my lords
Comfort my Lord, gracious Henry, comfort.
What doth my Lord of Suffolk bid me comfort?
Came he even now to sing a ravens note,
And thinks he that the cherping of a Wren,
By crying comfort through a hollow voice,
Can satisfy my griefs, or ease my heart?
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight,
For even in thy eie-balls murder sits,
Yet do not go: come Basaliske
And kill the silly gazer with thy looks.
Why do you rate my lord of Suffolk thus,
As if that he had caused Duke Humphreys death?
The Duke and I too, you know were enemies,
And you had best say that I did murder him.
Ah woe is me, for wretched Gloucester's death.
Be we for me, more wretched than he was,
What dost thou turn away and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome leper, look on me,
Was I for this nigh wracked upon the sea?
And thrice by awkward winds driven back from England's bounds,
What might it bode but that well foretelling
Winds said, seek not a scorpions nest.
My lord, the Commons like an angry hive ofbees,
Run up and down, caring not whom they sting,
For good Humphreys death, whom they report
To be murdered by Suffolk and the Cardinal here.
That he is dead (good Warwick) is too true,
But how he died, God knows, not Henry.
Enter his privy chamber my lord, and view the body.
Good father stay you with the rude multitude till I return.
I will son.
Ah uncle Gloster, heaven receive thy soul,
Farewell poor Henry's joy, now thou art gone.
Now by his soul, that took our shape upon him,
To free us from his father's dreadful curse,
I am resolved that violent hands were laid,
Upon the life of this famous Duke.
A dreadful oath sworn with a solemn tongue,
What instance gives Lord Warwick for these words?
Oft have I seen a timely parted ghost,
Of ashy semblance, pale and bloodless:
But lo, the blood is settled in the face,
More better coloured, then when he lived,
His well proportioned beard made rough and stern,
His fingers spread abroad as one that grasped for life,
Yet was by strength surprised, the least of these are probable,
It cannot choose but he was murdered.
Suffolk and the Cardinal had him in charge.
And they I trust sir, are no murderers.
Yea, but 'twas well known they were not his friends,
And 'tis well seen he found some enemies.
But have you no greater proofs than these?
Who sees a heifer dead and bleeding fresh,
And sees hard by a butcher with an axe,
But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the partridge in the puttocks nest,
But will imagine how the bird came there,
Although the Kite soar with unbloody beak?
Even so suspicious is this Tragedy.
Are you the Kite Bewford, where's your talants?
Is Suffolk the butcher, where's his Knife?
I wear no Knife to slaughter sleeping men,
But here's a vengeful sword rusted with case,
That shall be scoured in his 〈…〉 heart,
That slanders me with murders crimson badge,
Say if thou dare proud Lord of Warwickshire,
That I am guilty in Duke Humphreys death.
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?
He dares not calm his contumelious spirit,
Nor cease to be an arrogant controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty hundredth times.
Madame be ye still, with reverence may I say it,
That every word you speak in his defence,
Is slander to your royal majesty.
Blunt witted lord, ignoble in thy words,
If ever Lady wronged her lord so much,
Thy mother took unto her blameful bed,
Some stern vntutred churl, and noble stock,
Was grafted with crabtree slip, whose fruit thou art,
And never of the Nevil's noble race.
But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee,
And I should rob the death's man of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my sovereign's presence makes me mute,
I would false murderous coward on thy knees,
Make thee crave pardon for thy passed speech,
And say it was thy mother that thou meantst,
That thou thyself wast borne in bastardy,
And after all this fearful homage done,
Give thee thy hire, and send thy soul to hell,
Pernicious bloodsucker of sleeping men.
Thou shouldst be waking whilst I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou dare go with me.
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence.
Why how now lords?
The traitorous Warwick with the men of Berry,
Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.
My Lord, the Commons sends you word by me,
That unless false Suffolk here be done to death,
Or banished fair England's territories,
That they will err from your highness person,
They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died,
They say, by him they fear the ruin of the Realm:
And therefore, if you love your subjects weal,
They wish you to banish him from forth the land.
Indeed 'tis like the Commons rude unpolished hinds,
Would send such message to their sovereign,
But you my lord were glad to be employed.
To try how acquaint an Orator you were,
But all the honour Salisbury hath got,
Is, that he was the Lord Ambassador,
Sent from a sort of tinkars to the King.
Good Salisbury go back again to them.
Tell them we thank them for all their loving care,
And had not I been cited thus by their means,
Myself had done it: therefore here I swear,
If Suffolk be found to breath in any place,
Where I have rule, but three days more, he dies.
Oh Henry, reverse the doom of gentle Suffolk's banishment.
Ungentle Queen, to call him gentle Suffolk,
Speak not for him, for in England he shall not rest,
If I say, I may relent, but if I swear it is irrevocable:
Come Warwick, and go thou in with me,
For I have great matters to impart to thee.
Hell fire and vengeance go along with you,
There's two of you, the devil make the third,
F womanish man, canst thou not curse thy enemies?
A plague upon them: wherefore should I curse them?
Could curses kill as do the Mandrake's groans,
I would invent as many bitter terms,
Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth,
With twice so many signs of deadly hate,
As lean faced Envy in her loathsome cave,
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,
Mine etes should sparkle like the beaten flint,
My hair be fixed on end, as one distraught,
And every joint should seem to curse and ban,
And now me thinks my burdened heart would break.
Should I not curse them: poison be their drink,
Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest thing they taste,
Their sweetest shade, a grove of sypris trees,
Their softest touch, as smart as lyzards stings,
Their music frightful, like the serpent's hiss.
And boding scrike-owles make the consort full,
All the foul terrors in dark seated hell.
Enough sweet Suffolk, thou torment'st thyself.
You bade me ban, and will you bid me ceased
Now by this ground that I am banished from,
Well could I curse away a winter's night,
And standing naked on a mountain top,
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.
No more, sweet Suffolk, hie thee hence to France,
Or live where thou wilt within this worlds globe,
I'll have an Irish that shall find thee out,
And long thou shalt not stay, but i'll have thee repealed,
Or venture to be banished myself,
Oh let this kisle be printed in thy hand.
That when thou seest it, thou mayst think on me:
A way, I say, that I may feel my grief,
For it is nothing whilst thou standest here.
Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
Once by the King, but three times thrice by thee.
How now, whither goes Vawse so fast?
To signify unto his majesty,
That Cardinal Bewford is at point of death,
Sometimes he raves and cries as he were mad,
Sometimes he calls upon Duke Humphreys ghost,
And whispers to his pillow as to him,
And sometime he calls to speak unto the King,
And I am going to certify unto his grace,
That even now he called aloud for him.
Go then good Vawse, and certify the King.
Oh what is worldly pomp! all men must die.
And woe am I for Bewfords heavy end,
But why mourn I for him, whilst thou art here?
Sweet Suffolk hie thee hence to France,
For if the King do come, thou sure must die.
And if I go, I cannot live: but here to die,
What were it else, but like a pleasant slumber
In thy lap?
Here could I, could I, breeath my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the new borne babe,
That dies with mother's dug between his lips,
Where from thy sight I should be raging mad,
And call for thee to close mine eyes,
Or with thy lips to stop my dying soul,
That I might breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elyziam;
By thee to die, were but to die in jest,
From thee to die, were torment more than death,
O let me stay, befall what may befall.
Oh mightst thou stay with safety of thy life,
Then shouldst thou stay, but heavens deny it,
And therefore go, but hope ere long to be repealed.
I go.
And take my heart with thee.
A jewel locked into the woefull'st cask,
That ever yet contained a thing of worth;
Thus like a split bark so sunder we:
This way fall I to death.
This way for me.
O death, if thou wilt let me live but one whole year,
He give thee as much gold as will purchase such another Island.
Oh see my lord of Salisbury how he is troubled,
Lord Cardinal, remember Christ must have thy soul.
Why died he not in his bed?
What would you have me to do then?
Can I make men live whether they will or no?
Sirrah, go fetch me the strong poison which the Apothecary sont
Oh see where Duke Humphreys ghost doth stand, (me:
And stars me in the face: look, look, comb down his hair,
So now he's gone again: Oh, oh, oh.
See how the pangs of death doth gripe his heart,
Lord Cardinal, if thou diest assured of heavenly bliss,
Hold up thy hand, and make some sign to us.
Oh see, he dies, and makes no sign at all,
Oh God forgive his soul.
So bad an end did never none behold,
But as his death, so was his life in all.
Forbear to judge, good Salisbury forbear,
For God will judge us all:
Go take him hence, and see his funerals be performed.
Bring forward these prisoners that scorned to yield,
Unlade their goods with speed, and sink their ship,
Here master, this prisoner I give to you:
This other, the Master's Mate shall have,
And Walter Whickmore, thou shalt have this man,
And let them pay their ransoms ere they pass.
Walter!
How now, what dost thou fear me?
Thou shalt have better cause anon.
It is thy name affrights me, not thyself:
I do remember well, a cunning wizard told me,
That by Walter I should die:
Yet let not that make thee bloody minded,
Thy name being rightly sounded,
Is Gualther, not Walter.
Gualther or Walter, all's on to me,
I am the man must bring thee to thy death.
I am a Gentleman look on my Ring,
Ransom me at what thou wilt, it shall be paid.
I lost mine eye in boarding of the ship,
And therefore ere I marchantlike sell blood for gold,
Then cast me headlong down into the sea.
But what shall our ransoms be?
A hundredth pounds a piece, either pay that, or die.
Then save our lives, it shall be paid.
Come sirrah, thy life shall be the ransom
I will have.
Stay villain, thy prisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Poole.
The Duke of Suffolk folded up in rags?
Yea sir, but these rags are no part of the duke,
Ioue sometime went disguised, and why not I?
Yea but Ioue was never slain as thou shalt be.
Base jady groom, King Henry's blood,
The honourable blood of Lancaster,
Cannot be shed by such a lowly swain,
I am sent Ambassador for the Queen to France,
I charge thee waff me cross the channel safe.
I'll waff thee to thy death, go Walter take him hence
And on our long boats side, chop off his head.
Thou dar'st not for thine own.
Yes Poole.
Poole?
Yea, Poole, puddle, kennel, sink and dirt,
I'll stop that yawning mouth of thine,
Those lips of thine that so oft have kissed the Queen,
Shall sweep the ground, and thou that
Smildst at good duke Humphreys death,
Shalt live no longer to infect the earth.
This villain being but Captain of a Pinnais,
Threatens more plagues then mighty Abradas,
The great Macedonian Pirate,
Thy words adds fury and not remorse in me.
Yea but my deeds shall stay thy fury soon.
Hast not thou waited at my trencher,
When we have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Hast not thou kissed thine hand and held my stirrup?
And barehead plodded by my foot-cloth Mule,
And thought thee happy when I smiled on thee?
This hand hath writ in thy defence,
Then shall I charm thee, hold thy lavish tongue.
Away with him Walter, I say, and off with his head.
Good my lord, entreat him mildly for your life.
First let this neck stoop to the axe's edge,
Before this knee do bow to any,
Save to the God of heaven, and to my King,
Suffolk's imperial tongue cannot plead
To such aiady groom.
Come, come, why do we let him speak?
I long to haue his head, for ransome of mine cie.
A sworder and band to slave,
Murdered sweet Tully:
Brutus bastard hand stabbed Iulius Caesar,
And Suffolk dies by Pirates on the sees.
Off with his head, and send it to the Queen,
And ransomless this prisoner shall go free,
To see it safe delivered unto her:
Come let's go.
Come away Nick, and put a long staff in thy pike, and provide thyself, for I can tell thee, they have been up this two days.
Then they had more need to go to bed now,
But sirrah George, what's the matter?
Why sirrah, Iack Cade the Diar of Ashford here,
He means to turn this land, and set a new nap on it.
Yea mary he had needso, for 'tis grown threedbare,
'twas never merry world with us, since these gentlemen came up
I warrant thee, thou shalt never see a lord wear a leather apron, now adays.
But sirrah, who comes more beside Iacke Cade?
Why there's Dick the Butcher, & Robin the Saddler, and Will that came a wooing to our Nan last sunday, & Harry and Tom, & Gregory that should have your Pa●nil, & a great sort more is come from Rochester, & from Maidstone, & Can terbury, & all the towns here about, and we must all be lords or squires, assoon as Iacke Cade is King.
Hark, hark, I hear the Drum, they coming.
Proclaim silence.
Silence.
I Iohn Cade so named for my valiancio.
Or rather for stealing of a Cade of sprats.
My father was a Mortimer.
He was an honest man, and a good Bricklaier.
My mother came of the Brases.
She was a peddlers daughter indeed, and sold many laces.
And now being not able to occupy her furred pack,
She washeth bucks up and down the country.
Therefore I am honourable borne.
Yea, for the field is honourable, for he was borne
Under a hedge, for his father had no house but the Cage.
I am able to endure much.
That's true, I know he can endure any thing,
For I have seen him whipped two market days together.
I fear neither sword nor fire.
He need not fear the sword, for his coat is of proof.
But me thinks he should fear the fire, being so often burnt in the hand for stealing of sheep.
Therefore be brave, for your captain is brave and vows reformation: you shall have seven halfpenny loaves for a penny, and the three hooped pot, shall have ten hoops, and it shallbe felony to drink small beer, and if I be the King, as King I will be.
God save your majesty.
I thank you good people, you shall all eat & drink of my score, and go all in my livery, and we'll have no writing, but the score and the tally, and there shall be no laws, but such as comes from my mouth.
We shall have sore laws then, for he was thrust into the mouth the other day.
Yea and stinking law too, for his breath stinks so, that one cannot abide it.
Oh Captain, a prize.
Whose that, Will?
The Clerk of Chattam, he can write and read & cast account, I took him setting of boys copies, and he has a book in his pocket with red letters.
Sounes, he's a conjuror, bring him hither,
Now sir, what's your name?
Emanuel sir, and it shall please you.
It will go hard with you, I can tell you,
For they use to write that o'th' top of letters.
And what do you use to write your name?
Or do you as ancient forefathers have done,
Use the score and the tally?
Nay true sir, I praise God I have been so well brought up, that I can write mine own name.
Oh he has confessed, go hang him with his penny inkhorn about his neck.
Captain: news, news, sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are coming with the King's power & men to kill us al.
Let them come, he's but a Knight is he?
No, no, he's but a Knight.
Why then to equal him, i'll make myself Knight
Kneel down Iohn Mortimer,
Rise up sir Iohn Mortimer.
Is there any more of them that be Knights?
Yea his brother.
Then kneel down Dick Butcher,
Rise up sir Dick Butcher.
As for these silken coated slaves, I pass not a pin,
'tis to you good people that I speak.
Why countrymen, what mean you thus in troops,
To follow this rebellious traitor Cade?
Why his father was but a Bricklaier.
Well, Adam was a Gardnar, what then?
But I come of the Mortimers.
Yea, the Duke of York hath taught you that.
The Duke of York, nay, I learned it myself.
For look you, Roger Mortimer the Earl of March,
Married the Duke of Clarence daughter.
Well, that's true, but what then?
And by her he had two children at a birth.
That's false.
Yea, but I say, 'tis true.
Why then 'tis true.
And one of them was stolen away by a beggarwoman,
And was my father, and I am his son,
Deny it and you can.
Nay look you, I know 'twas true,
For his father built a chimney in my father's house,
And the bricks are alive at this day to testify.
But dost thou hear Stafford tell the King, that for his father's sake, in whose time boys played at spanne-counter with French crowns, I am content that he shall be King as long as he lives: mary always provided, I'll be Protector over him.
O monstrous simplicity!
And tell him, we'll have the Lord Says head, & the duke of Somersets, for delivering up the dukedoms of Anjoy and Maine, and selling the towns in France, by which means England hath been maimed ever since, and gone as it were with a crouch, but that the puissance held it up. And beside, they can speak French, and therefore they are traitors.
As how I prithee?
Why the French men are our enemies, be they not? And then can he that speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good subject?
Answer me to that.
Well sirrah, wilt thou yield thyself unto the King's mercy, and he will pardon thee and these, their outrages and rebellious deeds?
Nay, bid the King come to me and he will, and then i'll pardon him, or otherways i'll have his crown tell him, ere it be long.
Go Herald, proclaim in all the King's towns,
That those that will forsake the Rebel Cade,
Shall have free pardon from his majesty.
Come sirs, saint George for us and Kent.
Sir Dick Butcher, thou hast fought to day most valiantly, and knocked them down as if thou hadst been in thy slaughter house, and thus I will reward thee: the Lent shall be as long again as it was: thou shalt have licence to kill for four score and one a week: drum strike up, for now we'll march to London, for to morrow I mean to sit in the King's seat at Westminster.
Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother is slain,
And the rebels march amain to London,
Go back to them, and tell them thus from me,
I'll come and parley with their general.
Yet stay, i'll read the letter once again:
Lord Say, Iacke Cade hath solemnly vowed to have thy head.
Yea, but I hope your highness shall have his.
How now Madam, still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death, I fear my love, if I had been dead, thou wouldst not have mourned so much for me.
No my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.
Oh fly my Lord, the rebels are entered
Southwark, and have almost won the bridge,
Calling your grace an usurper,
And that monstrous rebel Cade, hath sworn
To crown himself King in Westminster,
Therefore fly my Lord, and post to Killing worth.
Go old Buckingham and Clifford gather
An Army up, and meet with the rebels:
Come Madam let us haste to Killingworth,
Come on Lord Say, go thou along with us,
For fear the rebel Cade do find thee out.
My innocence my Lord shall plead for me:
And therefore with your-highnes leave, I'll stay behind.
Even as thou wilt my Lord Say:
Come Madam, let us go.
How now, is lack Cade slain?
No my Lord, nor likely to be slain,
For they have won the bridge,
Killing all those that withstand them,
The Lord Maior craveth ●●d of your honour from the Towes,
To defend the city from the rebels.
Such aid as I can spare, you shall command,
But I am troubled here with them myself,
The Rebels have attempted to win the Tower,
But get you to Smithfield and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe.:
Fight for your King, your country, and your lives,
And so farewell, for I must hence again.
Now is Mortimer Lord of this city,
And now sitting upon London stone, we command,
That the first year of our reign,
The pissing conduit run nothing but red wine,
And now henceforth, it shall be treason
For my that calls me otherwise then
Lord Mortimer.
Iacke Cade, Iacke Cade.
Zounds, knock him down.
My Lord, there's an Army gathered together
Into Smithfield.
Come then, let's go fight with them,
But first go on and set London bridge on fire:
And if you can, burn down the Tower too,
Come let's away.
So sirs, now go some and pull down the Sanoy,
Others to the Inns of the court, down with them all.
I have a suit unto your Lordship.
Be it a lordship Dick, and thou shalt have it
For that word.
That we may go burn all the Records,
And that all writing may be put down,
And nothing used but the score and the tally.
Dick it shall be so, and henceforward all thing shallbe in common, and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass. Why ist not a miserable thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb, should parchment be made, and then with a little blotting over with ink, a man should undo himself?
Some says 'tis the bees that sting but I say, 'tis their wax, for I am sure I never sealed to any thing but once, and I was never mine own man since.
But when shall we take up those commodities
Which you told us of?
Mary he that will lustily stand to it,
Shall go with me and take up these commodities following:
Item, a gown, a kirtle, a petticoat and a smock.
My Lord, a prize, a prize, here's the Lord Say,
Which sold the towns in France.
Come hither thou Say, thou George, thou buckrum lord, What answer canst thou make unto my mightiness, For delivering up the towns in France to monsieur buss mine cue the Dolphin of France?
And more than so, thou hast most traitorously erected a grammar school, to infect the youth of the realm, & against the king's Crown and dignity, thou hasl built up a paper-mil, nay it will be said to thy face, that thou keep'st men in thy house that daily reads of books with red letters, and talks of a Noun and a Verb, and such abominable words, as no christian care is able to endure it: and besides all that, thou hast appointed certain justices of peace in every shire to hang honest men that steal for their living, and because they could not read, thou hast hung them up: only for which cause they were most worthy to live: thou ride on a foothcloth, dost thou not?
Yes, what of that?
Mary I say thou oughtest not to let thy horse wear a cloak, when an honester man than thyself goes in his hose and doublet.
You men of Kent.
Kent what of Kent?
Nothing but terra bona.
Bonum terum, sounds what's that?
He speaks French.
No, 'tis Dutch.
No, 'tis Outtalian, I know it well enough.
Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar wrote,
Termed it the ciuilest place of all this land,
Then noble countrymen, hear me but speak,
I sold not France, I lost not Normandy.
But wherefore dost thou shake thy head so?
It is the palsy, and not fear that makes me.
Nay thou nodst thy head, as who say, thou wilt be even with me, if thou getst away, but i'll make thee sure enough, now I have thee: go take him to the standard in Cheapside & chop off his head, & then go to Milend-green, to sir Iames Cromer his son in law, and cut off his head too, and bring them to me upon two poles presently.
There shall not a nobleman wear a head on his shoulders,
But he shall pay me tribute for it:
Nor there shall not a maid be married, but he shall see to me for her:
Maiden head or else, i'll have it myself,
Mary I will that married men shall hold of me in capite,
And that their wives shall be as free as heart can think, or tongue can tell.
O captain! London bridge is a fire.
Run to Billingsgate, and fetch pitch and flax and squench it.
justice, justice, I pray you sir, let me have justice of this fellow here.
Why, what has he done?
Alas sir, he has ravished my wife.
Why my lord he would have rested me,
And I went and entered my Action in his wives paper house.
Dick follow thy suit in her common place,
You whoreson villain, you are a sergeant, you'll
Take any man by the throat for twelve pence,
And rest a man when he's at dinner,
And have him to prison ere the meat be out of his mouth:
Go Dick, take him hence, cut out his tongue for cogging,
Hough him for running, and to conclude,
Brave him with his own mace.
So, come carry them before me, and at every lanes end, let them kiss together.
Why country men and warlike friends of Kent,
What means this mutinous rebellion,
That you in troops do muster thus yourselves,
Under the conduct of this traitor Cade?
To rise against your sovereign lord and King,
Who mildly hath his pardon sent to you,
If you forsake this monstrous rebel here?
If honour be the mark whereat you aim,
Then haste to France, that our forefathers won,
And win again that thing which now is lost,
And leave to seek your country's overthrow.
A Clifford, a Clifford.
Why how now, will you forsake your general,
And ancient freedom which you have possessed,
To bend your necks unto their servile yokes,
Who if you stir, will straightways hang you up?
But follow me, and you shall pull them down,
And make them yield their livings to your hands.
A Cade, a Cade.
Brave warlike friends hear me but speak a word,
Refuse not good, whilst it is offered you,
The King is merciful, then yield to him,
And I myself will go along with you,
To Winsore castle whereas the King abides,
And on mine honour you shall have no hurt.
A Clifford, a Clifford, God save the King.
How like a feather is this rascal company
Blown every way,
But that they may see there wants no valiancy in me,
My staff shall make way through the midst of you,
And so a pox take you all.
Go some and make after him, and proclaim,
That those that can bring the head of Cade,
Shall have a thousand crowns for his labour.
Come march way.
Lord Somerset, what news hear you of the rebel Cade?
This my gracious lord, that the lord Say is done to death,
And the city is almost sacked.
God's will be done, for as he hath decreed, so it must be:
And be it as he please, to stop the pride of those rebellious men.
Had the noble Duke of Suffolk been alive,
The rebel Cade had been suppressed ere this,
And all the rest that do take part with him.
Long live King Henry, England's lawful King,
Lo here my Lord, these rebels are subdued,
And offer their lives before your highness feet.
But tell me Clifford, is their captain here?
No, my gracious lord, he is fled away, but proclamations are sent forth, that he that can but bring his head, shall have a thousand crowns. But may it please your majesty, to pardon these their faults, that by that traitor's means were thus misled.
Stand up you simple men, and give God praise,
For you did take in hand you know not what,
And go in peace obedient to your King,
And live as subjects, and you shall not want,
Whilst Henry lives, and wears the English crown.
God save the King, God save the King.
Come let us haste to London now with speed,
That solemn processions may be sung,
In laud and honour of the God of heaven,
And triumphs of this happy victory.
Good Lord how pleasant is this country life?
This little land my father left me here,
With my contented mind, serves me as well,
As all the pleasures in the court can yield,
Nor would I change this pleasure for the court.
Sounes here's the Lord of the soil stand villain, thou wilt betray me to the King, and get a thousand crowns for my head, but ere thou goest, i'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow my sword like a great pin.
Why saucy companion, why should I betray thee?
Is't not enough that thou hast broke my hedges,
And entered into the ground without the leave of me the owner,
But thou wilt brave me too?
Brave thee and beard thee too, by the best blood of the realm, look on me well, I have eat no meat this five days, yet and I do not leave thee and thy five men as dead as a door nail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.
Nay, it never shallbe said whilst the world doth stand, that Alexander Eiden an Esquire of Kent, took odds to combat with a famished man, look on me, my limbs are equal unto thine, and every way as big, than hand to hand i'll combat thee. Sirra fetch me weapons, and stand you all aside.
Now sword, if thou hewst not this burly-boned churl into chines of beef, I beseech God thou mayst fall into some smith's hand and be turned into hobnails.
Come on thy way.
Oh villain, thou hast slain the flower of Kent for chivalry, but it is famine & not thee that has done it, for come ten thousand devils, & give me but the ten meals that I wanted this five days, and I'll fight with you all, and so a pox rot thee, for Iacke Cade must die.
Iack Cade, & was it that monstrous rebel which I have slain: oh sword I honour thee for this, and in my chamber shalt thou hang as a monument to after age, for this great service thou hast done to me, i'll drag him hence, and with my sword cut off his head and bear it with me.
In Arms from Ireland comes York amain,
Ring bells aloud, bonfires perfume the air,
To entertain fair England's royal King:
Ah sancta Maiesta, who would not buy thee dear?
But soft, who comes here? Buckingham, what news with him?
York, if thou mean well, I greet thee so.
Humphrey of Buckingham, welcome I swear,
What comest thou in love, or as a messenger?
I come as a messenger from our dread lord & sovereign
Henry, to know the reason of these Arms in peace?
Or that thou being a subject as I am,
Shouldst thus approach so near with colours spread,
Whereas the person of the King doth keep?
A subject as he is!
O how I hate these spiteful abject terms,
But York, dissemble till thou meet thy sons,
Who now in Arms expect their father's sight,
And far hence I know they cannot be:
Humphrey Duke of Buckingham, pardon me,
That I answered not at first, my mind was troubled,
I came to remove that monstrons' rebel Cade,
And heave proud Somerset from out the Court,
That basely yielded up the towns in France.
Why that was presumption on thy behalf,
But if it be no otherwise but so,
The King doth pardon thee, and grants to thy request,
And Somerset is sent unto the Tower.
Upon thine honour is it so?
York, he is upon mine honour.
Then before thy face, I here dismiss my troops,
Sirs, meet me to morrow in saint George's fields,
And there you shall receive your pay of me.
Come York, thou shalt go speak unto the King,
But see, his grace is coming to meet with us.
How now Buckingham, is York friends with us
That thus thou bringst him hand in hand with thee?
He is my lord, and hath discharged his troops
Which came with him, but as your Grace did say,
To heave the duke of Somerset from hence,
And to subdue the rebels that were up.
Then welcome cousin York, give me thy hand,
And thanks for thy great service done to us,
Against those traitorous Irish that rebelled.
Long live Henry in triumphant peace,
Lo here (my Lord) upon my bended knees,
I here present the traitorous head of Cade,
That hand to hand in single fight I slew.
First, thanks to heaven, and next, to thee my friend,
That hast subdued that wicked traitor thus,
Oh let me see that head that in his life
Did work me and my land such cruel spite:
A visage stern, coal black his curled locks,
Deep trenched furrows in his frowning brow,
Presageth warlike humours in his life.
Here take it hence, and thou for thy reward,
Shalt be immediately created Knight:
Kneel down my friend, and tell me what's thy name.
Alexander Eyden, if it please your grace,
A poor Esquire of Kent.
Then rise up sir Alexander Eyden Knight,
And for thy maintenance, I freely give
A thousand marks a year for to maintain thee,
Beside the firm reward that was proclaimed,
For those that could perform this worthy act,
And thou shalt wait upon the person of the King.
I humbly thank your grace, and I no longer live.
Then I prove just and loyal unto my King.
O Buckingham, see where Somerset comes.
Bid him go hide himself till York be gone.
He shall not hide himself for fear of York,
But beard and brave him proudly to his face.
Who's that? proud Somerset at liberty?
Base fearful Henry that thus dishonor'st me,
By heaven, thou shalt not govern over me,
I cannot brook that traitor's presence here,
Nor will I subject be to such a King,
That knows not how to govern, nor to rule,
Resign thy crown proud Lancaster to me,
That thou usurped haste so long by force,
For now is York resolved to claim his own,
And rise aloft into fair England's Throne.
Proud traitor, I arrest thee on high treason,
Against thy Sovereign Lord, yield thee false York.
For here I swear thou shalt unto the Tower,
For these proud words which thou hast given the King.
Thou art deceived, my sons shall be my bail,
And send thee there in spite of him.
Ho, where are you boys?
Call Clifford hither presently.
Long live my noble Lord and sovereign King.
We thank thee Clifford:
Nay, do not affright us with thy looks,
If thou didst mistake, we pardon thee, kneel again.
Why, I did no way mistake, this is my King:
What is he mad? to Bedlam with him.
Yea, a bedlam frantic humour drives him thus,
To levy Arms against his lawful King.
Why do not your grace send him to the Tower?
He is arrested, but will not obey,
His sons he saith shall be his surety.
How say you boys, will you not?
Yes noble father, if our words will serve
And if our words will not, our swords shall.
Call hither to the stake, my two rough bears.
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
Both thou and they shall curse this fatal hour.
Are these thy bears? we'll bait them soon,
Despite of thee and all the friends thou hast.
You had best go dream again,
To keep you from the tempest of the field.
I am resolved to bear a greater storm,
Then any thou canst conjure up to day,
And that i'll write upon thy Burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
Now by my father's age old Neuells crest,
The Rampant bear chained to the ragged staff,
This day i'll wear aloft my burgonet,
As on a mountain top the Cedar shows,
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm,
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
And from thy burgonet will I rend the bear,
And tread him underfoot with all contempt,
Despite the Bearward that protects him so.
And so renowned sovereign to arms,
To quell these traitors, and their complises.
Fie, charity for shame, speak it not in spite,
For you shall sup with Iesus Christ to night.
Fowl Stigmatic, thou canst not tell.
No, for if not in heaven, you le surely sup in hell.
So, lie thou there and breath thy last.
What's here, the sign of the Castle?
Then the prophesy is come to pass,
For Somerset was forewarned of Castles,
The which he always did observe,
And now behold, under a paltry alehouse sign,
The Castle in S. Albon,
Somerset hath made the Wissard famous by his death.
Clifford of Comberland, 'tis warwicke calls,
And if thou dost not hide thee from the Bear,
Now whilst the angry Trumpets sound Alarms,
And dead men's cries do fill the empty auret
Clifford I say, come forth and fight with me,
Proud Northern Lord, Clifford of Comberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
Warwickestand still, and view the way that Clifford haws with his murdering curtle-axe, through the fainting troops to find thee out.
Warwick stand still, and start not till I come.
How now my Lord, what a foot?
Who killed your horses
The deadly hand of Clifford, noble lord,
Five horse this day, slain under me,
And yet brave Warwick I remain alive,
But I did kill his horse he lou'de so well,
The boviest grey that ere was bred in North.
Hold War wick, and seek thee out some other chase
Myself will hunt this Dear to death.
Brave lord, 'tis for a crown thou fightest,
Clifford farewell, as I intend to prosper well to day.
It grieves my soul to leave thee vnassaild
Now Clifford, since we are singled here alone,
Be this the day of Doom to one of us,
For now my heart hath sworn immortal hate
To thee, and all the house of Eancaster.
And here I stand, and pitch my foot to thine,
Vowing never to stir, till thou or I be slain,
For never shall my heart be safe at rest,
Till I have spoiled the hateful house of York.
Now Lancaster sit sure, thy sinews shrink,
Come fearful Henry groveling on thy face,
Yield up thy Crown unto the Prince of York.
Father of Comberland,
Where may I seek my aged father forth?
O dismal sight! see where he breathless lies,
All smeared and weltered in his lukewarm blood,
Ah, aged pillar of all Comberlands true house,
Sweet father, to thy murdered Ghost I swear,
Immortal hate unto the house of York,
Nor never shall I sleep secure one night,
Till I have furiously revenged thy death,
And left not one of them to breatheon earth.
And thus as old Ankises son did bear
His aged father on his manly back,
And sought with him against the bloody Greekes:
Even so will I: but stay, here's one of them,
To whom my soul hath sworn immortal hate.
Out croorktbacke villain, get thee from my sight,
But I will after thee, and once again,
When I have borne my father to his tent,
I'll tue my fortune better with thee.
Away my Lord, and sly to London strait,
Make haste, for vengeance comes along with them,
Come, stand not to expostulate, let's go.
Come then fair Queen, to London let us haste,
And summon a parliament with speed,
To stop the fury of these dire events.
How now boys, fortunate this fight hath been,
I hope to us and ours for England's good,
And our great honour, that so long we lost,
Whilst faintheart Henry, did usurp our rights:
But did you see old Salisbury since we
With bloody minds did buckle with the foe,
I would not for the loss of this right hand,
That ought but well betide that good old man.
My Lord, I saw him in the thickest throng,
Charging his lance with his old weary arms,
And thrice I saw him beaten from his horse,
And thrice this hand did set him up again,
And still he fought with courage 'gainst his foes,
The boldest spirited man that ere mine eyes beheld.
See noble father where they both do come,
The only props unto the house of York.
Well hast thou fought this day, thou valiant Duke,
And thou brave bud of York's increasing house,
The small remainder of my weary life,
I hold for thee, for with thy warlike arm,
Three times this day thou hast preserved my life.
What say you Lords, the King is fled to London▪
There (as I hear) to hold a Parliament.
What says Lord Warwick, shall we after them?
After them, nay before them if we can:
Now by my Faith Lords 'twas a glorious day,
Saint Albon's battle won by famous York,
Shall be eternizd in all age to come,
Sound Drums and Trumpets, and to London all,
And more such days as these to us befall.