YOu whoreson drunken slave you had best be gone,
And empty your drunken paunch somewhere else,
For in this house thou shalt not rest to night.
Tilly valley, by crisee Tapster I'll feeze you anon,
Fills the other pot, and all's paid for: look you,
I do drink it of mine own instigation,
Hear I'll lie awhile: why Tapster I say,
Fills a fresh cushion here,
Heigh ho, here's good warm lying.
Now that the gloomy shadow of the night,
Longing to view Orion's drizzling looks,
Leaps from th'antarctic world unto the sky,
And dims the welkin with her pitchy breath,
And darksome night o'ershades the crystal heavens,
Hear break we off our hunting for to night.
Couple up the hounds and let us 〈…〉
And bid the huntsman lee them 〈…〉
For they have all deserved it well to day.
But soft, what sleepy fellow is this ●res here?
Or is he dead, see one what he 〈…〉
My Lord, 'tis nothing but a drunken sleep
His head is too heavy for his body,
And he hath drunk so much that he can go no further.
Fie, how the slavish villain stinks of drink.
Ho, sirrah arise. What so found asleep?
Go take him up, and bear him to my house,
And bear him easily for fear he wake,
And in my fairest chamber make a fire,
And set a sumptuous banquet on the board,
And put my richest garments on his back,
Then set him at the Table in a chair:
When that 〈◊〉 done, against he shall awake,
Let heavenly music play about him still,
Go two of you away, and bear him hence,
And then I'll tell you what I have devised,
But see in any case you wake him not.
Now take my cloak, and give me one of yours,
All fellows now, and see you take me so:
For we will wait upon this drunken man,
To see his countenance when he doth awake,
And find himself clothed in such attire,
With heavenly music sounding in his ears,
And such a banquet set before his eyes,
The fellow sure will think he is in heaven,
But we will about him when he wakes,
And see you call him Lord at every word,
And offer thou him his horse to ride abroad,
And thou his hawks and hounds to hunt the dear▪
And I will ask what suits he means to wear,
And what so ere he saith see you do not laugh,
But still persuade him that he is a Lord.
And it please your honour your players be come
And do attend your honour's pleasure here.
The fittest time they could have chosen out,
Bid one or two of them come hither strait,
Now will I fit myself accordingly,
For they shall play to him when he awakes.
Now sirs, what store of plays have you?
Mary my lord you may have a Tragical,
Or acommoditie, or what you will.
And what's the name of your Comedy?
Marry my lord 'tis called The taming of a Shrew.
'tis a good lesson for us my L. for us that are married men
The taming of a shrew, that's excellent sure,
Go see that you make you ready strait,
For you must play before a lord to night,
Say you are his men and I your fellow,
he's something foolish, but what so ere he says,
See that you be not dashed out of countenance.
And sirrah, go you make you ready strait,
And dress yourself like some lovely lady,
And when I call, see that you come to me,
For I will say to him thou art his wife,
Dally with him and hug him in thine arms,
And if he desire to got to bed with thee,
Then feign some excuse and say thou wilt anon.
Be gone I say, and see thou dost it well.
Fear not my Lord, I'll handle him well enough
And make him think I love him mightily.
Now sirs, go you and make you ready too,
For you must play assoon as he doth wake.
O brave, sirrah Tom, we must play before
A foolish Lord, come let's go make us ready▪
Go get a dishclout to make clean your shoes,
And I'll speak for the properties, My Lord, we must
Have a shoulder of mutton for a property,
And a little vinegar to make our Devil roar.
Very well sirrah, see that they want nothing.
So sirrah, now go call my Lord,
And tell him that all things are ready as he willed it.
Set thou some wine upon the board,
And then I'll go fetch my Lord presently.
How now, what is all things ready?
Yea my Lord.
Then sound the music and I'll wake him straight,
And see you do as erst I gave in charge.
My Lord, my Lord, he sleeps sound, my Lord.
Tapster, gives a little small ale: Heigh ho.
here's wine, my Lord, the purest of the grape.
For which Lord?
For your honour, my Lord.
Who I, am I a Lord? Iesus what fine apparel have I got.
More richer far your honour hath to wear,
And if it please you I will fetch them strait.
And if your honour please to ride abroad,
I'll fetch your lusty steeds more swift of pace
Then winged Pegasus in all his pride,
That ran so swiftly over Persian plains.
And if your honour please to hunt the dear,
Your hounds stands ready coupled at the door,
Who in running will o'ertake the Row,
And make the long breathed Tiger broken wound.
By the mass I think I am a Lord indeed,
What's thy name?
Simon and if it please your honour.
Sim, that's as much to say Simion or Simon
Put forth thy hand and fill the pot.
Give me thy hand, Sim am I a lord indeed?
I my gracious Lord, and your lovely lady
Long time hath mourned for your absence here.
And now with joy behold where she doth come
To gratulate your honours safe return.
Sim. Is this she?
I my Lord.
Mass 'tis a pretty wench, what's her name?
Oh that my lovely Lord would once vouchsafe
To look on me, and leave these frantic fits,
Or were I now but half so eloquent,
To paint in words what I'll perform in deeds,
I know your honour then would pity me.
Hark you mistress, will you eat a piece of bread?
Come sit down on my knee, Sim drink to her Sim,
For she and I will go to bed anon.
May it please you, your honours players be come
To offer your honour a play.
A play Sim, O brave, be they my players?
I my Lord.
Is there not a fool in the play?
Yes my Lord.
When will they play Sim?
Even when it please your honour, they be ready.
My Lord, I'll go bid them begin their play.
Do, but look that you come again.
I warrant you my lord, I will not leave you thus.
Come Sim, where be the players? Sim stand by me,
And we'll flout the players out of their coats.
I'll call them my lord. Ho where are you there?
Sound Trumpet's.
Welcome to Athens my beloved friend,
To Plato's school and Aristotle's walks,
Welcome from Cestus' famous for the love
Of good Leander and his Tragedy,
For whom the Hellespont weeps brinish tears,
The greatest grief is I cannot as I would
Give entertainment to my dearest friend.
Thanks noble Polidor my second self,
The faithful love which I have found in thee
Hath made me leave my father's princely court,
The Duke of Cestus thrice renowned seat,
To come to Athens thus to find thee out,
Which, since I have so happily attained,
My fortune now I do account as great
As erst did Caesar when he conquered most,
But tell me noble friend, where shall we lodge,
For I am unacquainted in this place.
My Lord, if you vouchsafe of scholars far,
My house, myself, and all is yours to use,
You and your men shall stay and lodge with me.
With all my heart, I will requite thy love.
But stay; what dames are these so bright of hue
Whose eyes are brighter than the lamps of heaven?
Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone,
More lovely far than is the morning sun,
When first she opes her oriental gates.
Daughters, be gone, and hie you to the church,
And I will high me down unto the key
To see what merchandise is come ashore.
Why how now my Lord, what, in adump,
To see these damsels pass away so soon?
Trust me my friend I must confess to thee,
I took so much delight in these fair dames
As I do wish they had not gone so soon:
But if thou canst, resolve me what they be,
And what old man it was that went with them,
For I do long to see them once again.
I cannot blame your honour, good my Lord,
For they are both lovely, wise, fair, and young,
And one of them, the youngest of the three
I long have loved (sweet friend) and she loved me,
But never yet we could not find a means
How we might compass our desired joys.
Why, is not her father willing to the match?
Yes trust me, but he hath solemnly sworn,
His eldest daughter first shall be espoused,
Before he grants his youngest leave to love:
And therefore he that means to get their loves▪
Must first provide for her, if he will speed,
And he that hath her shall be fretted so,
As good be wedded to the devil himself,
For such a scold as she did never live,
And till that she be sped, none else can speed:
Which makes me think, that all my labours lost,
And who soe'er can get her firm good will,
A large dowry he shall be sure to have,
For her father is a man of mighty wealth,
And an ancient Citizen of the town,
And that was he that went along with them.
But he shall keep her still by my advise,
And yet I needs must love his second daughter
The image of honour and nobility,
In whose sweet person is comprised the sum
Of Nature's skill and heavenly majesty.
I like your choice, and glad you chose not mine,
Then if you like to follow on your love,
We must devise a means to find some one
That will attempt to wed this devilish scold,
And I do know the man. Come hither boy,
Go your ways sirrah, to Ferando's house,
Desire him to take the pains to come to me,
For I must speak with him immediately.
I will sir, and fetch him presently.
A man I think will fit her humour right,
As blunt in speech as she is sharp in tongue,
And he I think will match her every way,
And yet he is a man of wealth sufficient,
And for his person worth as good as she:
And if he compass her to be his wife,
Then may we freely visit both our loves.
O might I see the censer of my loule
Whose sacred beauty hath enchanted me,
More fair than was the Grecian Helena
For whose sweet sake so many princes died;
That came with thousand ships to Tenedos.
But when we come unto her father's house,
Tell him I am a Merchant's son of Cestus,
That comes for traffic unto Athens here,
And here sirrah, I will change with you for once,
And now be thou the Duke of Cestus' son,
Revel and spend as if thou wert my self,
For I will court thy love in this disguise.
My Lord, how if the Duke your father should
By some means come to Athens for to see
How you do profit in these public schools,
And find me clothed thus in your attire,
How would he take it then think you my Lord?
Tush fear not Valeria, let me alone,
But stay, here comes some other company.
Here comes them an that I did tell you of.
Good morrow gentleman to all at once.
How now Polidor, what man still in love?
Ever wooing and canst thou never speed?
God send me better luck when I shall woe.
I warrant you master and you take my council.
Why sirrah, are you so cunning?
Who I 'ttwere better for you by siue make
And you could tell how to do it as well os I
I would thy master once were in the vain,
To try himself how he could woe a wench.
Faith I am even now a going.
I faith sir, my master's going to this gear now
Whither in faith Ferando? tel me true.
To bonny Kate, the patientest wench alive,
The Devil himself dares scarce venture to woe her,
Signior Alfonso's eldest daughter,
And he hath promised me six thousand crowns
If I can win her once to be my wife,
And she and I must woe with scolding sure,
And I will hold her to't till she be weary,
Or else i'll make her yield to grant me love.
How like you this Aurelius, I think he knew
Our minds before we sent to him,
But tell me, when do ye mean to speak with her?
Faith presently, do you but stand aside,
And I will make her father bring her hither:
And she, and I, and he, will talk alone.
With all my heart, come Aurelius,
Let us be gone and leave him here alone.
Ho Signior Alfonso, who's within there?
Signior Ferando you're welcome heartily,
You are a stranger sir unto my house,
Hark you sir, look what I did promise you
I'll perform, if you get my daughter's love.
Then when I have talk a word or two with her,
Do you step in and give her hand to me,
And tell her when the marriage day shall be,
For I do know she would be married feign,
And When our nuptial rites be once performed
Let me alone to tame her well enough,
Now ●●ll her forth that I may speak with her.
Ha Kate, Come hither wench and list to me,
Use this gentleman friendly as thou canst.
Twenty good morrows to my lovely Kate.
You jest I am sure, is she yours already?
I tell thee Kate I know thou lov'st me well.
The Devil you do, who told you so?
My mind sweet Kate doth say I am the man,
Must wed, and bed, and marry bonny Kate.
Was ever seen so gross an ass as this.
I, to stand so long and never get a kiss.
Hands off I say, and get you from this place;
Or I will set my ten commandments in your face.
I prithee do Kate, they say thou art a shrew.
And I like thee the better, for I would have thee so.
Let go my hand, for fear it reach your ear.
No Kate, this hand is mine, and I thy love.
Y faith sir no, the woodcoke wants his tail.
But yet his bill will serve, if the other fail,
How now Feranda, what, my daughter?
she's willing sir, and loves me as her life.
'tis for your skin then, but not to be your wife.
Come hither Kate, and let me give thy hand
To him that I have chosen for thy love,
And thou to morrow shalt be wed to him.
Why father, what do you mean to do with me,
To give me thus unto this brainsick man,
That in his mood cares not to murder me?
But yet I will consent and marry him,
(For I me thinks have lived too long a maid,)
And match him too, or else his manhood a good.
Give me thy hand, Ferando loves thee well,
And will with wealth and ease maintain thy state.
Here Ferando, take her for thy wise.
And sunday next shall be our wedding day.
Why so, did I not tell thee I should be the man?
Father, I leave my lovely Kate with you,
Provide yourselves against our marriage day,
For I must high me to my country house
In haste, to see provision may be made,
To entertain my Kate when she doth come.
Do so, come Kate, why dost thou look
So sad? be merry wench, thy wedding daie's at hand,
Son, far you well, and see you keep your promise
So, all thus far goes well. Ho Saunder.
Saunder, I faith you are a beast, I cry God heartily
mercy, my hearts ready to run out of my belly with
laughing, I stood behind the door all this while,
And heard what you said to her.
Why, dost thou think that I did not speak well to her?
You spoke like an ass to her, i'll tell you what,
And I had been there to have wooed her, and had this
Cloak that you have, I'd have had her before she
Had gone a foot further, and you talk of Woodcoks for all this.
With her, and I cannot tell you what.
Well sirrah, and yet thou seest I have got her
I mary, 'twas more by hap then any good cunning,
I hope she'll make you one of the head men of the parish shortly.
Well sirrah, leave your jesting and go to Polidor's house,
The young gentleman that was here with me,
And tell him the circumstance of all thou know'st,
Tell him on sunday next we must be married,
And if he ask thee whither I am gone,
Tell him into the country to my house,
And upon Sunday i'll be here again.
I warrant you master, fear not me▪
For doing of my business.
Now hang him that has not a livery cote
To slash it out and swash it out amongst the proudest
On them. Why look you now, i'll scarce put up
Plain Saunder now at any of their hands, for and any
Body have any thing to do with my master, strait
They come crouching upon me, I beseech you good M.
Saunder speak a good word for me, and then I am so
Stout and take it upon me, and stand upon my pantofles
To them out of all cry, why I have a life like a giant
Now, but that my master hath such a pestilent mind
To a woman now of late, and I have a pretty wench
To my sister, and I had thought to have preferred my
Master to her, and that would have been a good
Deal in my way, but that he's sped already.
Friend, well met.
Souns friend, well met. I hold my life he ●ee●
not my master's livery coat,
Plain friend hop of my thum, know you who we are?
Trust me sir it is the use where I was borne,
To salute men after this manner, yet notwithstanding
If you be angry with me for calling of you friend,
I am the more sorry for it, hoping the style
Of a Fool will make you amends for all.
The slave is sorry for his fault, now we cannot be
angry, well what's the matter that you would do with us?
Marry sir, I hear you pertain to signior Ferando.
I and thou be'st not blind thou mayst ●ee,
Ecce signum, here.
Shall I entreat you to do me a message to your Master?
I, it may be, & you tell us from whence you come.
Marry sir I serve young Polidor your masters friend
Do you serve him, and what's your name?
My name sirrah? I tell the sirrah is called Catapie.
Cake and pie, O my teeth waters to have a piece of thee.
Why slave, wouldst thou eat me?
San Eat thee, who would not eat Cake and pie?
Why villain my name is Catapie,
But wilt thou tell me where thy master is.
Nay thou must first tell me where thy master is.
For I have good news for him, I can tell thee.
Why see where he comes.
Come sweet Aurelius my faithful friend,
Now will we go to see those lovely dames,
Richer in beauty than the orient pearl,
Whiter than is the Alpine Crystal mould,
And far more lovely than the terrene plant,
That blushing in the air turns to a stone.
What Saunder, what news with you?
Marry sir my master sends you word
That you must come to his wedding to morrow.
What, shall he be married then?
Faith I, you think he stands as long about it as you do.
Whither is thy master gone now?
Marry he's gone to our house in the Country
To make all things in a readiness against my new
Mistress comes thither, but he'll come again to morrow.
This is suddenly dispatched belike:
Well, sirrah boy, take Saunder in with you,
And have him to the buttery presently.
I will sir: come Saunder.
Valeria, as erst we did devise,
Take thou thy lute and go to Alfonso's house,
And say that Polidor sent thee thither.
I Valeria, for he spoke to me,
To help him to some cunning Musician,
To teach his eldest daughter on the lute,
And thou I know wilt fit his turn so well,
As thou shalt get great favour at his hands,
Be gone Valeria, and say I sent thee to him.
I will sir, and stay your coming at Alfonso's house.
Now sweet Aurelius, by this device
Shall we have leisure for to court our loves,
For whilst that she is learning on the lute,
Her sisters may take time to steal abroad,
For otherwise she'll keep them both within.
And make them work whilst she herself doth play.
But come, let's go unto Alfonso's house,
And see how Valeria and Kate agrees
I doubt his music scarce will please his scholar,
But stay, here comes Alfonso.
What M. Polidor! you are well met,
I thank you for the man you sent to me,
A good Musician I think he is;
I have set my daughter and him together,
But is this gentleman a friend of yours?
He is, I pray you sir bid him welcome,
He's a wealthy merchants son of Cestus.
You're welcome sir, and if my house afford
You any thing that may content your mind,
I pray you sir make bold with me.
I thank you sir, and if what I have got
By merchandise or travel on the seas,
Satins, or lawns, or azure coloured silk,
Or precious fiery pointed stones of India,
You shall command, both them, myself, and all.
Thanks gentle sir, Polidor take him in,
And bid him welcome unto my house,
For thou I think must be my second son;
Ferando, Polidor dost thou not know
Must marry Kate, and to morrow is the day.
Such news I heard, and I came now to know.
Polidor 'tis true, go let me alone,
For I must see against the bridegroom come,
That all things be according to his mind,
And so i'll leave you for an hour or two.
Come then Aurelius, come in with me,
And we'll go sit a while and chat with them,
And after bring them forth to take the air.
Sim, when will the fool come again?
he'll come again my Lord anon.
Gis some more drink here, 'zounds where's
The Tapster, here Sim, eat some of these things.
So I do my Lord.
Hear Sim, I drink to thee.
My Lord here comes the Players again.
O brave, here's two fine gentlewomen.
The senseless trees by music have been moved,
And at the sound of pleasant tuned strings,
Have savage beasts hung down their listening heads,
As though they had been cast into a trance.
Then it may be, that she to whom nought can please,
With Musics sound, in time may be surprised.
Come lovely Mistress, will you take your lute,
And play the lesson that I taught you last?
It is no matter whether I do, or no,
For trust me, I take no great delight in it.
I would, sweet Mistress, that it lay in me,
To help you to that thing that's your delight.
In you with a pestilence, are you so kind?
Then make a nightcap of your fiddles case,
To warm your head, and hide your filthy face.
If that (sweet Mistress) were your heart's content,
You should command a greater thing than that,
Although it were ten times to my disgrace.
You're so kind 'twere pity you should be hanged,
And yet me thinks the fool doth look asquint.
Why Mistress, do you mock me?
No, but I mean to move thee.
Well, will you play a little?
Yea, give me the Lute.
That stop was false, play it again.
Then mend it thou, thou filthy ass.
What, do you bid me kiss your arse?
How now jack sauce? you're a jolly mate,
You're best be still lest I cross your pate,
And make your music fly about your cares▪
I'll make it and your coxcomb meet.
Hold Mistress, sowns will you break my Lute?
Yea on thy head and if thou speak to me,
There, take it up, and fiddle somewhere else,
And see you come no more into this place,
Lest that I clap your fiddle on your face.
Sowns, teach her to play on the Lute?
The devil shall teach her first, I am glad she's gone,
For I was ne'er so afraid in all my life,
But that my Lute should fly about mine ears:
My master shall teach her himself for me,
For I'll keep me far enough without her reach,
For he and Polidor sent me before,
To be with her, and teach her on the Lute,
Whilst they did court the other gentle women,
And here me thinks they come together.
How now Valeria, where's your Mistress?
At the vengeance, I think, and no where else.
Why Valeria, will she not learn apace?
Yes berladie, she has learned too much already,
And that I had felt, had I not spoke her fair,
But she shall ne'er be learned for me again.
Well Valeria go to my chamber,
And bear him company that came to day
From Cestus, where our aged father dwells.
Come fair Emelia, my lovely love,
Brighter than the burnished palace of the Sun,
The eyesight of the glorious firmament,
In whose bright looks sparkles the radiant fire.
Wily Prometheus slily stole from Ioue,
Infusing breath, life, motion, soul,
To every object stricken by thine eyes.
Oh fair Emelia, I pine for thee,
And, either must enjoy thy love, or die.
Fie man, I know you will not die for love,
Ah Polider, thou needest not to complain,
Eternal heaven sooner be dissolved,
And all that pierceth Phoebus' silver eye,
Before such hap befall to Polidor.
Thanks fair Emelia for these sweet words:
But what saith Philena to her friend?
Why I am buying merchandise of him.
Mistress, you shall not need to buy of me:
For when I crossed the bubbling Canibey,
And sailed along the crystal Hellispont,
I filled my coffers of the wealthy mines,
Where I did cause millions of labouring Moors
To undermine the caverns of the earth,
To seek for strange and new found precious stones,
And dive into the Sea to gather pearl,
As fair as Iuno offered Priam's son,
And you shall take your liberal choice of all.
I thank you sir, and would Philena might
In any courtesy requite you so,
As she with willing heart could well bestow.
How now daughters, is Ferando come?
Not yet father, I wonder he stays so long.
And where's your sister that she is not here?
She is making of her ready, father,
To go to church, and if that he were come.
I warrant you he'll not be long away.
Go daughters, get you in, and bid your
Sister provide herself against that we do come,
And see you go to church along with us.
I marvel that Ferando comes not away.
His Tailor, it may be, hath been too slack
In his apparel which he means to wear:
For no question but some fantastic suits
He is determined to wear to day,
And richly powdered with precious stones,
Spotted with liquid gold, thick set with pearl,
And such he means shall be his wedding suits.
I cared not I, what cost he did bestow,
In gold, or silk, so he himself were here,
For I had rather lose a thousand crowns,
Than that he should deceive us here to day:
But soft, I think I see him come.
Good morrow father: Polidor well met,
You wonder, I know, that I have staid so long.
Yea mary son, we were almost persuaded,
That we should scarce have had our Bridegroom here:
But say, why art thou thus basely attired?
Thus richly father you should have said,
For when my wife and I are married once,
she's such a shrew, if we should once fall out,
she'll pull my costly suits over mine ears,
And therefore am I thus attired a while:
For many things I tell you's in my head,
And none must know thereof, but Kate and I:
For we shall live like Lambs and Lions sure,
Nor Lambs to Lions never were so tame,
If once they be within the Lion's paws,
As Kate to me, if we were married once,
And therefore, come, le●● to church presently.
Fie Ferando, not thus attired for shame,
Come to my Chamber, and there 〈◊〉 thyself,
Of twenty suits that I did never wear.
Tush Polidor, I have as many suits
Fantastic made to fit my humour so,
As any in Athens, and as richly wrought
As was the Massy rob that late adorned
The stately legate of the Persian King,
And this from them have I made choice to wear.
I prithee Ferando let me entreat
Before thou go'st unto the church with us,
To put some other suit upon thy back.
Not for the world, if I might gain it so,
And therefore take me thus, or not at al.
But soft, see where my Kate doth come,
I must salute her: how fares my lovely Kate,
What, art thou ready? shall we go to church?
Not I with one so mad, so basely tired,
To marry such a filthy slavish groom,
That as it seems sometimes is from his wits,
Or else he would not thus have come to us.
Tush Kate these words add greater love in me,
And makes me think thee fairer than before:
Sweet Kate, thou lovelier than Diana's purple to be,
Whiter than are the snowy Apenis,
Or icy hair that grows on Boreas' chin.
Father, I swear by Ibis' golden beale,
More fair and Radiant is my bony Kate,
Then silver Xanthus when he doth embrace
The ruddy Simieses at Ides feet,
And care not thou, sweet Kate, how I be clad,
Thou shalt have garments wrought of Median 〈◊〉,
Enchased with precious jewels fetched from far,
By Italian merchants that with Russian stems,
Ploughs up huge furrows in the 〈◊〉 Main,
And better far my lovely Kate shall wear:
Then come sweet love, and let us to the church,
For this I swear shall be my wedding suit.
Come gentlemen go along with us,
For thus, do what we can, he will be wed.
Come hither sirrah, boy.
Boy, oh disgrace to my person! son's, boy
Of your face, you have many boys with such
Pickadenaunts I am sure, 'zounds would you
Not have a bloody nose for this?
Come, come, I did but jest, where is that
Same piece of pie that I gave thee to keep?
The pie? I, you have more mind of your belly
Then to go see what your master does.
Tush, 'tis no matter man, I prithee give it me,
I am very hungry I promise thee.
Why you may take it, and the devil burst
You with it, one cannot save a bit after supper,
But you are always ready to munch it up.
Why come man, we shall have good cheer
Anon at the bridehouse, for your master's gone to
Church to be married already, and there's
Such cheer as passeth.
O brave, I would I had eat no meat this week,
For I have never a corner left in my belly
To put a venison pasty in, I think I shall burst myself
With eating, for i'll so cram me down the tarts
And the marchpanes out of all cry.
I, but how wilt thou do now thy master's
Married, thy mistress is such a devil, as she'll make
Thee forget thy eating quickly, she'll beat thee so.
Let my master alone with her for that, for
he'll make her tame well inongh ere long I warrant thee,
For he's such a churl waxed now of late, that and he be
Never so little angry he thumbs me out of all cry,
But in my mind sirrah, the youngest is a very
Pretty wench, and if I thought thy master would
Not have her, I'd have a fling at her
Myself, i'll see soon whether 'twill be a match
Or no: and it will not, i'll set the matter
Hard for myself I warrant thee.
Souns you slave, will you be a Rival with
My master in his love? speak but such
Another word and i'll cut off one of thy legs.
Oh cruel judgement, nay then sirrah,
My tongue shall talk no more to you, marry my
Timber shall tell the trusty message of his master
Even on the very forehead on thee, thou abusious
Villain, therefore prepare thyself.
Come hither thou imperfectious slave, in
Regard of thy beggary, hold thee, there's
Two shillings for thee, to pay for the
Healing of thy left leg which I mean
Furiously to invade, or to maim at the least.
O supernodical fool! well, i'll take your
Two shillings, but i'll bar striking at legs.
Not I, for i'll strike any where.
Here take your two shillings again,
I'll see thee hanged ere i'll fight with thee,
I got a broken shin the other day,
'tis not whole yet, and therefore i'll not fight.
Come, come, why should we fall out?
Well sirrah, your fair words have something
Alaid my choler: I am content for this once
To put it up, and be friends with thee,
But soft, see where they come all from church,
Belike they be married already.
Father farewell, my Kate and I must home,
Sirrah, go make ready my horse presently.
Your horse! what son, I hope you do but jest,
I am sure you will not go so suddenly.
Let him go or tarry, I am resolved to stay.
And not to travel on my wedding day.
Tut Kate I tell thee we must needs go home,
Villain, hast thou saddled my horse?
Which horse, your c●●all?
Souns you flave, stand you prating here?
Saddle the bay gelding for your mistress.
Not for me, for I will not go.
The Ostler will not let me have him, you own ten pence
For his meat and 6 pence for stuffing my mistress saddle.
Here villain, go pay him straight.
Shall I give them another peck of lavender?
Out slave, and bring them presently to the door.
Why son, I hope at least you'll dine with us.
I pray you master let's stay till dinner be done.
Souns villain, art thou here yet?
Come Kate, our dinner is provided at home.
But not for me, for here I mean to dine:
I'll have my will in this as well as you,
Though you in madding mood would leave your friends,
Despite of you i'll tarry with them still.
I Kate so thou shalt, but at some other time,
Whenas thy sisters here shall be espoused,
Then thou and I will keep our wedding day,
In better sort than now we can provide,
For here I promise thee before them all,
We will ere long return to them again:
Come Kate, stand not on terms, we will away,
This is my day, to morrow thou shalt rule,
And I will do what ever thou commands.
Gentlemen, farewell, we'll take our leaves,
It will be late before that we come home.
Farewell Ferando, since you will be gone.
So mad a couple did I never see.
they're even aswell matched as I would wish.
And yet I hardly think that he can tame her:
For when he has done, she will do what she list.
Her manhood then is good I do believe.
Aurelius, or else I miss my mark:
Her tongue will walk, if she do hold her hands.
I am in doubt ere halfe a month be past
he'll curse the Priest that married him so soon,
And yet it may be she will be reclaimed,
For she is very patiented grown of late.
God hold it, that it may continue still,
I would be loath that they should disagree,
But he (I hope) will hold her in a while.
Within these two days I will ride to him,
And see how lovingly they do agree.
Now Aurelius, what say you to this?
What, have you sent to Cestus as you said?
To certify your father of your love,
For I would gladly he would like of it,
And if he be the man you tell to me,
I guess he is a Merchant of great wealth:
And I have seen him oft at Athens here,
And for his sake assure thee thou art welcome.
And so to me whilst Polidor doth live.
I find it so, right worthy gentlemen,
And of that worth your friendship I esteem,
I leave censure of your several thoughts,
But for requital of your favours past
Rests yet behind, which when occasion serves,
I vow shall be remembered to the full,
And for my father's coming to this place,
I do expect within this week at most.
Enough Aurelius: but we forget
Our marriage dinner now the Bride is gone,
Come, let us see what there they left behind.
Come sirs, provide all things as fast as you can,
For my master's hard at hand, and my new mistress
And all, and he sent me before to see all things ready.
Welcome home Saunder: sirrah how looks our new mistress, they say she's a plaguy shrew?
Yea and that thou shalt find, I can tell thee and if thou dost not please her well: why my master has such ado with her, as it passeth, and he's even like a mad man.
Why Saunder, what doth he say?
Why I'll tell you what: when they should
Go to church to be married, he puts on an old
jerkin, and a pair of canvas breeches down to the
Small of his leg, and a red cap on his head, and he
Looks as thou wouldst burst thyself with laughing
When thou seest him: he's e'en as good as a
Fool for me: and then when they should go to dinner,
He made me saddle the horse, and away he came,
And ne'er tarried for dinner, and therefore you had best
Get supper ready against they come, for
They be hard at hand I am sure by this time.
Sowns, see where they be already.
Now welcome Kate. Where's these villains
Hear? what, not supper yet upon the board?
Nor table spread, nor nothing done at all,
Where's that villain that I sent before?
Now, adsum, sir.
Come hither you villain, I'll cut your nose,
You rogue, help me off with my boots: wilt please
You to lay the cloth? Sowns the villain
Hurts my foot: pull easily I say, yet again?
Sowns, burnt and scorched, who dressed this meat?
Forsooth Iohn Cook.
Go you villains, bring me such meat?
Out of my sight I say, and bear it hence:
Come Kate, we'll have other meat provided,
Is there a fire in my chamber sir?
I forsooth.
Servingmen and eat up all the meat.
'Sounds, I think of my conscience my master's mad since he was married.
I laft what a box he gave Saunder
For pulling off his boots.
I hurt his foot for the nonce man.
Did you so, you damned villain?
This humour must I hold me to a while,
To bridle and hold back my head strong wife,
With curbs of hunger, ease, and want of sleep:
Nor sleep, nor meat shall she enjoy to night,
I'll mew her up as men do mew their Hawks,
And make her gently come unto the Lewre,
Were she as stubborn, or as full of strength,
As was the Thracian Horse Alcides tamed,
That king Egeus fed with flesh of men,
Yet would I pull her down, and make her come,
As hungry Hawks do fly unto their Lewre.
Valeria attend, I have a lovely love,
As bright as is the heaven crystalline,
As fair as is the milk white way of Ioue,
As chaste as Phoebe, in her summer sports,
As soft and tender as the azure dowlne,
That circle's Citherea's silver Doves.
Her do I mean to make my lovely Bride,
And in her bed to breath the sweet content,
That I, thou knowst, long time have aimed at.
Now Valeria, it rests in thee to help
To compass this, that I might gain my love,
Which easily thou mayst perform at will,
If that the merchant which thou told'st me of,
Will (as he said) go to Alfonsoes' house,
And say he is my father, and therewithal
Pass over certain deeds of land to me,
That I thereby may gain my hearts desire,
And he is promised reward of me.
Fear not my Lord, I'll fetch him straight to you,
For he'll do any thing that you command,
But tell me, my Lord, is Ferando married then?
He is, and Polidor shortly shallbe wed,
And he means to tame his wife ere long.
He says so.
Faith he's gone unto the taming school.
The taming school! why is there such a place?
I: and Ferando is the master of the school.
That's rare: but what decorum doth he use?
Faith I know not: but by some odd device
Or other, but come Valeria I long to see the man,
By whom we must comprise our plotted drift,
That I may tell him what we have to do.
Then come my Lord and I will bring you to him strait.
Agreed then, let's go.
Come mistress.
Saunder I prithee help me to some meat,
I am so faint that I can scarcely stand.
I marry mistress, but you know my master
Has given me a charge that you must eat nothing,
But that which he himself giveth you.
Why man, thy master needs never know it.
You say true indeed. Why look you mistress,
What say you to a piece of bieffe and mustard now?
Why I say 'tis excellent meat, canst thou help me to some?
I, I could help you to some, but that
I doubt the mustard is too choleric for you.
But what say you to a sheeps head and garlic?
Why any thing, I care not what it be
I but the garlic I doubt will make your breath
Stink, and then my master will coarse me for letting
You eat it But what say you to a fat Capon?
That's meat for a king, sweet Saunder help me to some of it.
Nay berlady then 'tis too dear for us, we must
Not meddle with the King's meat.
Our villain, dost thou mock me,
Take that for thy sauciness.
Sounes are you so light fingered with a murrain,
I'll keep you fasting for it these two days.
I tell thee villain, i'll tear the flesh off
Thy face and eat it, and thou prate to me thus.
Here comes my master now, he'll coarse you.
Enter Ferando with a piece of meat upon his. dagger point and Polidor with him.
See here Kate, I have provided meat for thee,
Here take it: what, be't not worthy thanks?
Go sirrah, take it away again, you shall be
Thankful for the next you have.
Why I thank you for it.
Nay now 'tis not worth a pin, go sirrah and take it hence I say.
Yes sir i'll carry it hence: Master let her
Have none, for she can fight as Hungry as she is.
I pray you sir let it stand, for i'll eat
Some with her myself.
Well sirrah, set it down again.
Nay nay I pray you let him take it hence,
And keep it for your own diet, for i'll none,
I'll ne'er be beholding to you for your meat,
I tell thee flatly here unto thy teeth,
Thou shalt not keep me nor feed me as thou list,
For I will home again unto my father's house.
I, when you're meek and gentle, but not
Before, I know your stomach is not yet come down.
Therefore, no marvel thou canst not eat,
And I will go unto your Father's house,
Come Polidor let us go in again,
And Kate come in with us, I know ere long,
That thou and I shall lovingly agree.
Now Signior Phylotus, we will go
Unto Alfonso's house, and be sure you say
As I did tell you, concerning the man
That dwells at Cestus, whose son I said I was,
For you do very much resemble him,
And fear not: you may be bold to speak your mind.
I warrant you sir, take you no care,
I'll use myself so cunning in the cause,
As you shall soon enjoy your heart's delight.
Thanks sweet Phylotus, then stay you here,
And I will go and fetch him hither straight.
Ho, Signior Alfonso: a word with you.
Who's there? what Aurelius what's the matter
That you stand so like a stranger at the door?
My father sir is newly come to town,
And I have brought him here to speak with you,
Concerning these matters that I told you of,
And he can certify you of the truth.
is this your father? you are welcome sir.
Thanks Alfonso, for that's your name I guess,
I understand my son hath set his mind
And bend his liking to your daughter's love,
And for because he is my only son,
And I would gladly that he should do well,
I tell you sir, I not mislike his choice,
If you agree to give him your consent,
He shall have living to maintain his estate,
Three hundred pounds a year, I will assure
To him and to his heirs, and if they do join,
And knit themselves in holy wedlock band,
A thousand massy ingots of pure gold,
And twice as many bars of silver plate,
I freely give him, and in writing strait
I will confirm what I have said in words.
Trust me, I must commend your liberal mind,
And loving care you bear unto your son,
And here I give him freely my consent.
As for my daughter, I think he knows her mind,
And I will enlarge her dowry for your sake,
And solemnize with joy your nuptial rites.
But is this gentleman of Cestus too?
He is the Duke of Cestus thrice renowned son,
Who for the love his honour bears to me,
Hath thus accompanied me to this place.
You were too blame you told me not before,
Pardon me my Lord, for if I had known
Your honour had been here in place with me,
I would have done my duty to your honour.
Thanks good Alfonso. but I did come to see
When these marriage rites should be performed.
And if in these nuptials you vouchsafe,
To honour thus the prince of Cestus' friend,
In celebration of his spousal rites,
He shall remain a lasting friend to you,
What says Aurelius father?
I humbly thank your honour, good my Lord,
And ere we part, before your honour here,
Shall articles of such content be drawn,
As twixt our houses and posterities,
Eternally this league of peace shall last
Inviolate and pure on either part.
With all my heart, and if your honour please
To walk along with us unto my house,
We will confirm these leagues of lasting love.
Come then Aurelius I will go with you.
Master, the Haberdasher has brought my
Mistress home her cap here.
Come hither sirrah: what have you there?
A velvet cap sir, and it please you.
Who spoke for it? didst thou Kate?
What if I did? come hither sirrah, give me
The cap, i'll see if it will fit me.
O monstrous: why it becomes thee not,
Let me see it Kate: here sirrah take it hence,
This cap is out of fashion quite.
The fashion is good enough: belike you
Mean to make a fool of me.
Why true, he means to make a fool of thee,
To have thee put on such a curtailed cap:
Sirrah, be gone with it.
Here is the Tailor too with my mistress gown.
Let me see it Tailor: what, with cuts and jags?
Sounes thou villain, thou hast spoiled the gown.
Why sir, I made it as your man gave me direction,
You may read the note here
Come hither sirrah: Taylor read the note.
Item a fair round compassed cape.
I that's true.
And a large trunk sleeve.
That's a lie master, I said two trunk sleeves.
Well sir, go forward.
Item a lose bodied gown,
Master if ever I said lose bodies gown,
Sew me in a seam, and beat me to death
With a bottom of brown thread.
I made it as the note bade me.
I say the note lies in his throat and thou too,
And thou sayst it.
Nay, nay, ne'er be so hot sirrah, for I fear you not.
Dost thou hear Tailor, thou hast braved
Many men: brave not me.
thoust faced many men.
Well sir.
Face not me, i'll neither be faced nor braved
At thy hands I can tell thee.
Come, come, I like the fashion of it well enough,
here's more ado than needs, I'll have it, I,
And if you do not like it, hide your eyes,
I think I shall have nothing by your will.
Go I say, and take it up for your masters use.
Souns villain, not for thy life, touch it not:
Souns, take up my mistress gown to his
masters use!
Well sir, what's your conceit of it?
I have a deeper conceit in it than you
Think for, take up my mistress gown
To his masters use.
Tailer, come hither, for this time make it:
Hence again, and I'll content thee for thy pains.
I thank you sir.
Come Kate, we now will go see thy father's house,
Even in these honest mean habiliments,
Our purses shallbe rich, our garments plain,
To shroud our bodies from the winter rage,
And that's enough, what should we care for more?
Thy sisters, Kate, to morrow must be wed.
And I have promised them thou shouldst be there,
The morning is well, up, let's haste away,
It will be nine aclocke ere we come there.
Nine aclocke, why 'tis already past two
In the afternoon by all the clocks in the town.
I say 'tis but nine aclocke in the morning.
I say 'tis two aclocke in the afternoon.
It shall be nine then ere you go to your fathers:
Come back again, we will not go to day:
Nothing but crossing me still?
I'll have you say as I do ere I go.
Fair Emelia, summer's bright sun Queen,
Brighter of hue than is the burning clime,
Where Phoebus in his bright Aequator sits,
Creating gold and precious minerals,
What would Emelia do if I were forced
To leave fair Athens, and to range the world?
Should thou assay to scale the fear of Ioue,
Mounting the subtle airy regions,
Or be snatched up as erst was Ganymede,
Love should give wings unto my swift desires,
And prune my thoughts that I would follow thee,
Or fall and perish as did Icarus.
Sweetly resolved, fair Emilia,
But would Philema say as much to me,
If I should ask a question now of thee?
What if the Duke of Cestus' only son,
Which came with me unto your father's house,
Should seek to get Philema love from me,
And make thee Duchess of that stately town,
Wouldst thou not then forsake me for his love?
Not for great Neptune, no not Ioue himself,
Will Philema leave Aurelius' love,
Can he install me Empress of the world,
Or make me Queen and guidress of the heaven,
Yet would I not exchange my love for his,
Thy company is poor Phylemaes heaven,
And without thee, heaven were hell to me.
And should my love, as erst did Hercules,
Attempt the burning vaults of hell,
I would with piteous looks, and pleasing words,
As once did Orpheus with his harmony,
And ravishing sound of his melodious Harp,
Entreat grim Pluto, and of him obtain
That thou mightst go, and safe return again.
And should my love as erst Leander did,
Attempt to swim the boiling Hellesspont
For Heros love: no Towers of brass should hold,
But I would follow thee through those raging floods,
With locks dis-shevered, and my breast all bare,
With bended knees upon Abidaes' shore,
I would with smoky sighs and brinish tears,
Importune Neptune and the warry gods,
To send a guard of silver scaled Dolphins,
With sounding Tritons to be our convoy,
And to transport us safe unto the shore,
Whilst I would hang about thy lovely neck,
Redoubling kiss on kiss upon thy cheeks,
And with our pastime still the swelling waves.
Should Polidor as Aehilles did,
Only employ himself to follow Arms,
Like to the warlike Amazonian Queen,
Pentheselea Hector's paramour,
Who foiled the bloody Pyrrhus' murderous Greek,
I'll thrust myself amongst the thickest throngs,
And with my utmost force assist my love.
Let Eole storm: be mild and quiet thou,
Let Neptune swell, be Aurelius calm and pleased,
I care not, I, betid what may betide,
Let fates and fortune do the worst they can,
I reck them not: they not discord with me,
Whilst that my love and I do well agree.
Sweet Phylema beauties mineral,
From whence the sun exhales his glorious shine,
And clad the heaven in thy reflected rays,
And now my liefest love, the time draws nigh,
That Hymen mounted in his saffron rob,
Must with his torches wait upon thy train,
As Helen's brothers on the horned moon.
Now Iuno to thy number shall I add,
The fairest bride that ever merchant had.
Come fair Emelia, the priest is gone,
And at the church your father and the rest
Do stay to see our marriage rites performed,
And knit in sight of heaven this Gordian knot,
That teeth of fretting Time may ne'er untwist,
Then come fair love and gratulate with me
This days content and sweet solemnity.
Sim, must they be married now?
I my Lord.
Look Sim, the fool is come again now.
Sirrah, go fetch our horses forth, and bring
Them to the back gate presently.
I will sir I warrant you.
Come Kate, the moon shines clear to night, me thinks.
The moon? why husband you are deceived,
It is the sun.
Yet again, come back again, it shall be
The moon ere we come at your fathers.
Why i'll say as you say, it is the moon.
Iesus, saveth glorious moon.
Iesus, save the glorious moon.
I am glad Kate your stomach is come down,
I know it well thou know'st it is the sun,
But I did try to see if thou wouldst speak,
And cross me now as thou hast done before,
And trust me Kate hadst thou not named the moon,
We had gone back again as sure as death.
But soft, who's this that's coming here?
Thus all alone from Cestus am I come,
And left my princely court and noble train,
To come to Athens, and in this disguise,
To see what course my son Aurelius takes.
But stay, here's some it may be travels thither,
Good sir can you direct me the way to Athens?
Fair lovely maid, young and affable,
More clear of hue and far more beautiful
Than precious Sardonix or purple rocks,
Of Amethysts or glistering Hiasinth,
More amiable far than is the plain,
Where glistering Cepherus in silver bowers,
Gazeth upon the Giant Andromede,
Sweet Kate entertain this lovely woman.
I think the man is mad he calls me a woman.
Fair lovely lady, bright and Crystalline,
Beauteous and stately as the eye-trained bird,
As glorious as the morning washed with dew,
Within whose eyes she takes her dawning beams,
And golden summer sleeps upon thy cheeks,
Wrapped up thy radiations in some cloud,
Lest that thy beauty make this stately town
Inhabitable like the burning Zone,
With sweet reflections of thy lovely face.
What is she mad too? or is my shape transformed
That both of them persuade me I am a woman,
But they are mad sure, and therefore i'll be gone,
And leave their companies for fear of harm,
And unto Athens haste to seek my son.
Why so, Kate, this was friendly done of thee,
And kindly too▪ why thus must we two live,
One mind, one heart, and one content for both,
This good old man does think that we are mad,
And glad is he I am sure, that he is gone,
But come sweet Kate, for we will after him,
And now persuade him to his shape again.
Come lovely sons, your marriage rites
Performed,
Let's high us home to see what cheer we have,
I wonder that Ferando and his wife
Come not to see this great solemnity.
No marvel of Ferando be away,
His wife I think hath troubled so his wits,
That he remains at home to keep them warm,
For forward wedlock as the proverb says,
Hath brought him to his nightcap long ago.
But Polidor, let my son and you take heed,
That Ferando say not ere long as much to you.
And now Alfonso, more to show my love,
If unto Cestus you do send your ships,
Myself will fraught them with Arabian silks,
Rich Afric spices, Arras counter points,
Musk, Cassia, sweet smelling Ambergris,
Pearl, curtol, Crystal, jet, and ivory,
To gratulate the favours of my son,
And friendly love that you have shown to him.
And for to honour him and his fair bride.
I'll yearly send you from your father's court,
Chests of refined sugar severally,
Ten tun of tunis wine, sucket, sweet drugs,
To celebrate and solemnize this day,
And custom-free, your merchants shall commerce
And interchange the profits of your land,
Sending you gold for brass, silver for lead,
Casses of silk for packs of will and cloth,
To bind this friendship and confirm this league.
I am glad sir that you would be so frank
Are you become the Duke of Cestus' son,
And revels with my treasure in the town,
Base villain that thus dishonerest me?
Sounes it is the Duke, what shall I do?
Dishonour thee? why know'st thou what thou sayst?
Her's no villain: he will not know me now,
But what say you? have you forgot me too?
Why sir, are you acquainted with my son?
With thy son? no trust me, if he be thine,
I pray you sir, who am I?
Pardon me father, humbly on my knees
I do entreat your grace to hear me speak.
Peace villain, lay hands on th●●,
And send them to prison strait.
I say we'll have no ●●nding to prison.
My Lord this is but the play, the'y'r but in jest.
I tell thee Sim we'll have no sending,
To prison that's flat: why Sim, am not I Don Christo Vari?
Therefore I say, they shall not go to prison.
No more they shall not, my Lord,
They be run away.
Are they run away Sim? that's well,
Then gis some more drink, and let them play again.
Here my Lord.
drinks and then falls asleep.
Ah treacherous boy that durst presume,
To wed thyself without thy father's leave,
I swear by fair Cinthia's burning rays,
By Merops' head, and by seven mouthed Nile,
Had I but known ere thou hadst wedded her,
Were in thy breast the world's immortal soul,
This Angry sword should rip thy hateful chest,
And hewed thee smaller than the Libyan sands,
Turn hence thy face, oh cruel impious boy.
I did not think you would presume,
To match your daughter with my princely house,
And ne'er make me acquainted with the cause.
My Lord, by heavens I swear unto your grace,
I knew none other but Valeria your man,
Had been the Duke of Cestus' noble son,
Nor did my daughter I dare swore for her.
That damned villain that hath deluded me,
Whom I did send for guide unto my son,
Oh that my furious force could cleave the earth,
That I might muster bands of hellish fiends,
To rack his heart and tear his impious soul.
The ceaseless turning of celestial orbs,
Kindles not greater flames in flitting air,
Then passionate anguish of my raging breast.
Then let my death sweet father end your grief,
For I it is that thus have wrought your woes,
Then be revenged on me, for here I swear
That they are innocent of what I did,
Oh had I charge to cut off Hydra's head,
To make the to pless Alps a champain field,
To kill untamed monsters with my sword,
To travel daily in the hottest sun,
And watch in winter when the nights be cold.
I would with gladness undertake them all,
And think the pain but pleasure that I felt,
So that my noble father at my return,
Would but forget and pardon me my offence.
Let me entreat your grace upon my knees,
To pardon him and let my death discharge
The heavy wrath your grace hath vowed against him.
And good my Lord, let us entreat your grace
To purge your stomach of this Melancholy,
Taint not your princely mind with grief my Lord,
But pardon and forgive these lovers faults,
That kneeling crave your gracious favour here.
Great prince of Cestus, let a woman's words
Entreat a pardon in your Lordly breast,
Both for your princely son, and us my Lord.
Aurelius stand up, I pardon thee,
I see that virtue will have enemies,
And fortune will be thwarting honour still.
And you fair virgin too, I am content
To accept you for my daughter since 'tis done,
And see you princely used in Cestus' court.
Thanks good my Lord, and I no longer live,
Then I obey and honour you in al.
Let me give thanks unto your royal grace,
For this great honour done to me and mine,
And if your grace will walk unto my house,
I will in humblest manner I can, show
The eternal service I do owe your grace.
Thanks good Alfonso: but I came alone,
And not as did beseem the Cestian Duke,
Nor would I have it known within the town,
That I was here, and thus, without my train:
But as I came alone, so will I go,
And leave my son to solemnize his feast,
And ere't be long I'll come again to you,
And do him honour as beseems the son
Of mighty Ierobel the Cestian Duke,
Till when i'll leave you, farewell Aurelius.
Not yet my Lord, i'll bring you to your ship.
Who's within there? come hither sirs, my Lords
Asleep again, go take him easily up,
And put him in his own apparel again,
And lay him in the place where we did find him,
Just underneath the alehouse side below,
But see you wake him not in any case.
It shallbe done my Lord, come help to bear him hence.
Come Gentlemen, now that supper's done,
How shall we spend the time till we go to bed?
Faith if you will, in trial of our wives
Who will come soon at their husbands call.
Nay then Ferando he must needs sit out,
For he may call I think till he be weary,
Before his wife will come before she list.
'tis well for you that have such gentle wives,
Yet in this trial will I not sit out,
It may be Kate will come as soon as I do send.
My wife comes soon for a hundred pound.
I take it. I'll lay as much to yours,
That my wife comes as soon as I do send.
How now Ferando, you dare not lay belike.
Why true, I dare not lay indeed:
But how, so little money on so sure a thing,
A hundred pound: why I have laid as much
Upon my Dog, in running at a Deer,
She shall not come so far for such a trifle,
But will you lay five hundred marks with me,
And whose wife soon comes when he doth call,
And shows herself most loving unto him,
Let him enjoy the wager I have laid,
Now what say you? dare you adventure thus?
I, were it a thousand pounds I durst presume
On my wives love: and I will lay with thee.
How now sons, what in conference so hard,
May I without offence, know where about?
Faith father a weighty cause, about our wives,
Five hundred marks already we have laid,
And he whose wife doth show most love to him,
He must enjoy the wager to himself.
Why then Ferando he is sure to lose it,
I promise thee son, thy wife will hardly come,
And therefore I would not wish thee lay so much.
Tush father, were it ten times more
I durst adventure on my lovely Kate,
But if I lose i'll pay, and so shall you.
Upon mine honour, if I lose I'll pay.
And so will I upon my faith I vow.
Then sit we down and let us send for them:
I promise thee Ferando I am afraid thou wilt lose.
I'll send for my wife first, Valeria,
Go bid your mistress come to me.
I will my Lord.
Now for my hundred pound,
Would any lay ten hundred more with me
I know I should obtain it by her love.
I pray God you have not laid too much already.
Trust me Ferando I am sure you have,
For you I dare presume have lost it al.
Now sir ha, what says your mistress?
She is something busy but she'll come anon.
Why so, did not I tell you this before,
She was busy and cannot come.
I pray God your wife send you so good an answer
She may be busy, yet she says she'll come.
Well, well: Polidor, send you for your wife.
Agreed, Boy desire your mistress to come hither.
I will sir.
I, so, so, he desires her to come.
Polidor, I dare presume for thee,
I think thy wife will not deny to come,
And I do marvel much Aurelius,
That your wife came not when you sent for her.
Now, where's your mistress?
She bade me tell you that she will not come,
And you have any business, you must come to her.
O monstrous intolerable presumption,
Worse than a blazing star, or snow at Midsummer,
Earthquakes, or any thing unseasonable,
She will not come: but he must come to her.
Well sir, I pray you let's hear what
Answer your wife will make.
sirrah, command your mistress to come
To me presently.
I think my wife for all she did not come,
Will prove most kind, for now I have no fear,
For I am sure S' wife, she will not come.
The more's the pity, than I must lose.
But I have won, for see where Kate doth come.
Sweet husband did you send for me.
I did my love, I sent for thee to come,
Come hither Kate, what's that upon thy head?
Nothing husband but my cap I think.
Pull it off and tread it under thy feet,
'tis foolish, I will not have thee wear it.
She takes off her cap and treads on it.
Oh wonderful metamorphosis.
This is a wonder, almost past belief.
This is a token of her true love to 〈◊〉
And yet I'll try her further you shall see,
Come hither Kate, where are thy sisters?
They be sitting in the bridal chamber.
Fetch them hither, and if they will not come,
Bring them perforce and make them come with thee.
I will.
I promise thee Ferando I would have sworn,
Thy wife would ne'er have done so much for thee.
But you shall see she will do more than this,
For see where she brings her sisters forth by force.
See husband, I have brought them both.
'tis well done Kate.
I sure, and like a loving piece, your worthy
To have great praise for this attempt.
I for making a fool of herself and us,
Beshrew thee Phylema thou hast
Lost me a hundred pound to night,
For I did lay that thou wouldst first have come.
But thou Emelia hast lost me a great deal more.
You might have kept it better then,
Who bade you lay?
Now lovely Kate, before their husbands here,
I prithee tell unto these headstrong women,
What duty wives do owe unto their Husbands.
Then you that live thus by your pampered wills,
Now list to me, and mark what I shall say,
Th'eternal power that with his only breath,
Shall cause this end, and this beginning frame,
Not in time, nor before time, but with time confused,
For all the course of years, of ages, months,
Of seasons temperate, of days and hours,
Are tuned and stopped by measure of his hand,
The first world was, a form without a form,
A heap confused, a mixture all deformed,
A gulf of gulfs, a body bodiless.
Where all the elements were orderless,
Before the great Commander of the world.
The King of kings, the glorious God of heaven,
Who in six days did frame his heavenly work,
And made all things to stand in perfect course,
Then to his image he did make a man
Old Adam, and from his side asleep
A rib was 〈◊〉, of which the Lord did make
The woe of man so termed by Adam then,
Woman, for that by her 〈◊〉 sin to us,
And for her sin was Adam doom to die.
As Sara to her husband so should we,
Obey them, love them, keep and nourish them,
If they by any means do want our helps,
Laying our hands under their feet to tread,
If that by that we might procure their ease,
And for a precedent I'll first begin;
And lay my hand under my husband's feet.
She lays her hand under her husband's feet.
Enough sweet, the wager thou hast won,
And they I am sure cannot deny the same.
I Ferando, the wager thou hast won,
And for to show thee how I am pleased in this,
A hundred pounds I freely give thee more.
Another dowry for another daughter,
For she is not the same she was before.
Thanks, sweet father, gentlemen, good night,
For Kate and I will leave you for to night,
'tis Kate and I am wed, and you are sped:
And so farewell, for we will to our beds.
Now Aurelius, what say you to this?
Believe me father, I rejoice to see
Ferando and his wife so lovingly agree.
How now Polidor? in a dump? what sayst thou man?
I say thou art a shrew.
That's better than a sheep.
Well, since 'tis done, come, let's go.
Now that the darksome night is overpast,
And dawning day appears in crystal sky,
Now must I haste abroad: but soft, who's this?
What Sly, O wondrous! hath he lain here all night?
I'll wake him, I think he's starved by this,
But that his belly was so stuffed with ale:
What now Sly, awake for shame.
Sim, gives some more wine, what all the Players gone? am not I a Lord?
A Lord with a murrain: come, art thou drunken still?
Who's this? Tapster, O Lord sirrah, I have had the bravest dream to night, that ever thou heardest in all thy life.
Yea mary, but you had best get you home, For your wife will coarse you for dreaming here to night.
Will she? I know now how to tame a shrew,
I dreamt upon it all this night till now,
And thou hast waked me out of the best dream
That ever I had in my life: but I'll to my wife presently, and tame her too if she anger me.
Nay tarry Sly, for I'll go home with thee,
And hear the rest that thou hast dreamt to night.