Right far to long as now were to recite
The ancient estate wherein ourself hath rained
What honour what laud given us of very right
What glory we have had duty unfaind
Of each creature which duty hath constrained
For above all goods sins our father's tale
We Iupyter were ever princypale.
If we so have been as truth it is in deed
Beyond the compass of all comparison
Who could presume to show for any meed
So that it might appear to human reason
The high renown we stand in at this season
For sins that heaven and earth were first created
Stood we never in such triumphant estate.
As we now do where of we would report
Such part as we see meet for time present
Chiefly concerning your perpetual comfort
As the thing self shall prove in experiment
Which highly shall bind you on knees lowly beute
Soolly to honour our highness day by day
And now to the matter give ear and we shall say.
Before our presence in our high parliament
Both gods and goodesses of all degrees
Hath late assembled by comen assent
For the redress of certain enormities
Bred among them thorough extremities
Abusede in each to other of them all
Namely to purpose in these most special.
Our foresaid father's Saturny and Phoebus
Aeolus and Phebe these four by name
Whose natures not only so far contrarious
But also of malice each other to defame
Have longe time abused right far out of frame
The dew course of all their constellations
To the great damage of all earthly nations.
Which was debated in place said before
And first as became our feather most ancient
With beard e white as snow, his locks both cold & hot
Hath entered such matter as served is intent
Lauding his frosty mansion in the firmament
To air and earth as thing most precious
purging all humours that are courageous.
How be if he allegeth that of long time passed
Little hath prevailed his great dilygens
Full oft upon earth his fair frost he hath cast
All things hurtful to banish out of presence
But Phoebus' intending to keep him in silence
When he hath laboured all night in his powers
His glaring beams maryth all in two hours,
Phoebus' to this made no manner answering
Where upon they both than Phebe defied
Each for his part laid in her reproving
That by her showers superfluous they have tried
In all that she may their powers be denied
Where unto Phebe made answer no more
Than Phoebus to Saturn had made before.
Anon upon Aeolus all these did flee
Complaining their causes each one a row
And said to compare none was so even as he
For when he is disposed his blasts to blow
He suffereth neither son shine, rain nor snow
They each against other, and he against all three
Thus can these four, in no manner agree.
Which seen in themself and further considering
The same to the redress was cause of their assemble
And also that we evermore being
Beside one puissant power of deite
Of wisdom and nature so noble and free
From all extremities the mean dividing
To peal and plente each thing attempering.
They have in conclusion wholly sundered
Into our hands as much concerning
All manner of wethers by them engendered
The full of their powers for term everlasting
To set such order as standeth with our pleasing
Which things of our part no part required
But of all their parts right humble desired.
To take upon us whereto we did assent
And so in all things with one voice agreeable
We have clearly finished our foresaid parleament
To your great wealth which shallbe firm and stable
And to our honour far inestimable
For sing their powers as ours added to our own
Who can we say know us as we should be known.
But now for fine the rest of our intent
Wherefore as now we hither are descended.
Is only to satisfy and content
All manner people which have been offended
By any wether meet to be amended
Upon whose complaints declaring their grief
We shall shape remedy for their relief.
And to give knowledge for their hither resort
We would this afore proclaimed to be
To all our people by some one of this sort
Whom we list to choose here amongst ally
Wherefore each man advance and we shall see
Which of you is most meet to be our eryer.
Brother hold up your torch a little higher
Now I beseech you my lord look on me first
I trust your lordship shall not find me the worst.
Why what art thou that approachest so nigh.
Forsooth and please your lordship it is I.
All that we know very well, but what I.
What I, some lay I am I pierce I
But what manner I so ever be I
I assure your good lordship I am I.
What manner man art thou show quickly.
By god a poor gentleman dwelleth her by.
A gentleman thyself bringeth witness nay
Both in thy light behaviour and array
But what art thou called where thou dost resort.
Forsooth my lord master Merry report.
Thou art no meet man in our business.
For thine appearance is of to much lightness.
Why can not your lordship like my name
Mine apparel nor my name neither.
To none of all we have devotion.
A proper lycklyhod of promotion
Well than as wise as ye seem to be
Yet can ye see no wisdom in me
But sins ye dispraise me for so light an elft
I pray you give me leave to praise myself
And for the first part I will begin
In my behaviour at my coming in
Wherein I think I have little offended
For sewer my courtesy could not be amended
And as for my seure your servant to be
Might ill have been mist for your honesty
For as I be saved if I shall not lie
I saw no man sew for the office but I
Wherefore if ye take me not or I go
Ye must anon whether ye will or no
And sins your intent is but for the wethers
What skies our appyrell to be fryse or fathers
I thynhe it wisdom sins no man forbade it
With this to spate a better if I had it
And for my name reporting all way truly
What hurt to report a sad matter merely
As be occasion for the same intent
To a certain widow this day was I sent
Whose husband departed without her witting
A special good lover and she his own sweating
To whom at my coming I cast such a figure
mingling the matter according to my nature
That when we departed above all other things
She thanked me heartily for my merry tidings
And if I had not handled it merely
Perchaunche she might have take it heavily
But in such fashion I conjured and bound her
That I left her merrier than I found her
What man may compare to show the like comfort
That daily is showed by me Merry report
And for your purpose at this time meant
For all wethers I am so indifferent
Without affection standing so up right
Son light, moan light, star light, twylyght, torch light,
Cold heat most dry, hail rain frost snow, lightning thund
Cloudy, misty, windy, fair, foul above heed or under
Temperate or distemperate what ever it be
I promise your lordship all is one to me.
Well son considering thine indyfferency
And partly the rest of thy declaration
We make the our servant and immediately
Well would thou depart and cause proclamation
publishing our pleasure to every nation
Which thing once done with all deligens
Make thy returns again to this presence.
Here to receive all suitors of each degree
And such as to the may seem most meetly
We will thou bring them before our majesty
And for the rest that be not so worthy
Make thou report to us effectually
So that we may here each manner sewte at large
Thus see thou depart, and look upon thy charge.
Now good my lord god our lady be with ye
Friends, a felyshype let me go by ye
Think ye I may stand thrusting among you there
Nay by god I must thrust about other gear
Now sins we have thus far set forth our purpose
A while we will withdraw our godly presence
To enbolde all such more plainly to disclose
As here will attend in our foresaid pretense
And now according to your obediens
Rejoice ye in us with joy most joyfully
And we ourself shall joy in our own glory
Now sirs take heed for here cometh god's servant
Avaunt cartely keytyfs avaunt
Why ye drunken horesons will it not be
By your feaythe have ye neither cap nor knee
Nat one of you that will make courtesy
To me that am squire for god's body
Regard ye nothing mine authority
No welcome home nor where have ye be
How be it if ye axed I could not well tell
But sure I think a thousand mile from hell
And on my faith I think on my conscience
I have been from heaven as far as heaven is hens
At Lovyn, at London, and in Lombary
At Baloocke, at Barforde, and in Barbary
At Canturbery, at coventry, at Colchester
At Wansworth, and at Welbecke, at Westchester
At Fullam, at Faleborne, and at Fenlowe
At wallyngeforth, at wakefelde, and at waltanstowe
At Tawcon, at Typtre, and at Totnam
At Glouceter, at Gylforde, and at Gotham
At Hartford, at Harwyche, at Harcowe on the hill
At Sutbere, at Suthampton, at shooters hill
At Wallyngham, at wittam, and at werwycke
At Boston, at Brystowe, and at Berwycke
At Gravelyn, at Grauesende, and at Glastenbery
Ynge Gyngyange Iabyerde the parish of Butlbery
The devil himself without more leisure
Could not have gone half thus much I am sure
But now I have warned them let them even chose
For in faith I care not who win or lose.
Now by my troth this was a goodly hearing
I wont it had been the gentlewomen's blowing
But it is not so as I now suppose
For women's horns sounds more in a man's nose.
Stand ye merry my friends every one.
Say that to me and let the rest alone
Syrye he welcome and all your meinie.
Now in good sooth my friend god a mercy
And sins that I meet the here thus by chance
I shall require the of further acquaintance
And privily to show the this is the matter
I come to sew to the great god Iupiter
For help of things concerning my recreation
According to his late proclamation,
Marry I am he that this must speed
But first tell me what be ye in deed.
Forsooth good friend I am a gentleman.
A goodly occupation by saint Anne
On my faith your mashype hath a merry life
But who maketh all these horns yourself or your wife
Nay even in earnest I ask you this question.
Now by my truth thou art a merry one.
In fatyhe or us both I think never one sad
For I am not so merry but ye seem as mad
But stand ye stylt and take a little pain
I will come to you by and by again
Now gracious god if your will so be
I pray ye let me speak a word with ye,
My son say on let us here thy mind.
My lord there standeth a suitor even here behind
A gentleman in yonder corner
And as I think his name is master horner
A hunter he is and cometh to make you sport
He would hunt a sow or twain out of this sort.
What so ever his mind be, let him appear.
Now good master horner I pray you come near,
I am no horner knave I will you know it.
I thought ye had, for when ye did blow it
Hard I never whoreson make horn so go
As lief ye kiss mine arse as blow my hole so
Come on your way before the god Iupyter
And there for yourself ye shallbe sewter.
Most mighty prince and god of every nation
Pleaseth your highness to vouchsafe the hearing
Of me which according to your proclamation
Doth make appearance in way of beseeching
Nat sole for myself but generally,
For all came of noble and ancient stock
Which fort above all doth most thankfully
Daily take pain for wealth of the comen flock
With diligent study always devising
To keep them in order and unite
In peace to labour the increases of their living
Whereby each man may prosper in plenty
Wherefore good god this is our hole desiring
That for ease of our pains at times vacant
In our recreation which chiefly is hunting
It may please you to send us wether pleasant
dry and not misty the wind calm and sryll
That after our hounds yourning so merely
chasing the dear over pale and hill
In hearing we may follow and to comfort the cry
Right well we do perceive your hole request
Which shall not fail to rest in memory
Wherefore we will ye set yourself at rest
Till we have hard each man indifferently
And we shall take such order universally
As best may stand to our honour infinite
For wealth in common and each man's singular profit
In heaven and earth honoured be thy name
Of Iupyter whom of his godly goodness
Hath set this matter in so goodly frame
That every wight shall have his desire doubtless
And first for us nobles and gentlemen
I doubt not in his wisdom to provide
Such wether as in our hunting now and then
We may both tayse and receive on every side
Which thing once had for our said recrearyon
Shall greatly prevail you in proferring our health
For what thing more needful than our preservation
Being the weal and heads of all comen wealth
Now I beseech your mashype whose head be you.
Whose head am I, thy head what sayest thou now.
Nay I think it very true so god me help
For I have ever been of a little whelp
So full of fancies and in so many fits
So many small reasons and in so many wits
That even as I stand I pray god I be deed
If ever I thought them all meet for heed
But sins I have one head more than I knew
Blame not my rejoicing I love all things new
And sure it is treasure of heads to have store
One fear can I now that I neve could before.
What is that.
By god sins ye came hither
I can set my heed and my tail together
This head shall save money by saint Mary
from henceforth I will no apothecary
For at all times when such things shall mister
My new head shall give mine old tail a glister
And after all this then shall my head wait
Upon my tail and there stand at receit
Sir for the rest I will not now move you
But if we live shall smell how I love you
And sir touching pour suit, here depart when it please you
For be ye sure as I can I will ease you.
Then give me thy hand that promise I take
And if for my sake any suit thou do make
I promise thy pain to be required
More largely than now shall be recited.
Alas my neck, god's pity where is me head
By saint Ive I fear me I shall be dead
And if I were me think it were no wonder
sins my head and my body is so far asunder
Master person now welcome by my life
I pray you how doth my master your wife
Sir for the priesthood and wife that ye allege
I see ye speak more of dotage than knowledge
But le pas sir I would to you be suitor
To bring me if ye can before Iupyter.
Yes marry can I, and will do it in deed
Tarry and I shall make way for your speed
In faith good lord if it please your gracious godshype Merry re.
I must have a word or twain with your loldshyhe
Sir yonder is another manin place
Who maketh great suit to speak with your grace
Your pleasure once known he cometh by and by.
Bring him before our presence soon hardly
Why where be you shall I not find ye
Come away I pray god the devil blind ye.
Most mighty prince and lord of lords all
Right humbly be secheth your majesty
Your merchant men thorough the world all
That it may please you of your benignity
In the daily danger of our goods and life
first to consider the desert of our request
What wealth we bring the rest to our great care & gryfe
And then to reward us as ye shall think best
What were the surplusage of each commodity
Which groweth and increaseth in every land
Except exchange by such men as ye be
By way or inteecourses that lieth on our hand
We fraught from home things whereof there is plents
And home we bring such things as there be scant
Who should afore us Merchants accounted be
For were not we, the world should wish and want
In many things, which now shall lack rehearsal
And privily to conclude we beseech your highness
That of the benefit proclaimed in general
We may be part takers for comen entries
Stably shing weather thus pleasing your grace
Stormy nor misty the wind measurable
That safely we may pass from place to place
bearing our sells for speed most valeable
And also the wind to change and to turn
East, West, North, and South, as best may be set
In any one place not to long to sojourn
For the length of our voyage may lose our market.
Right well have ye said and we accept it so
And so shall we reward you or we go hens
But ye must take paciens till we have hard more
That we may indifferently give sentens
There may pass by us no spot of negligence
But justly to judge each thing so upright
That each man's part may shine in the self right
Now sir by your faith if ye should be sworn
Hard ye ever god speak so sins ye were borne
So wise to gelitelly his words be showed.
I thank his grace my sewt is well bestod.
Sir what voyage intend ye next to go.
I trust or inydlent to be at Syo.
Ha ha is it your mind to sail at Syo
Nay then when ye will, by lady ye may go
And let me alone with this, be of good cheer
Ye may trust me at Syo as well as here
For though ye were fro me a thousand mile space
I would do as much as ye were here in place
For sins that from hens it is so far thither
I care not though ye never come again hither.
Sir if ye remember me when time shall come
Though I requite not all, I shall deserve some.
Now far you well & god thank you by saint Anne
I pray you mark the fashion of this honest man
He putteth me in more trust at this meeting here
Then he shall find cause why this twenty year.
God be here, now Chryst keep this company.
In faith ye be welcome even very scantly
Sir for your coming what is the matter.
I would fain speak with the god Iupyter.
That will not be but ye may do this
Tell me your mind I am an office of his
B ye so, marry I cry you mercy
Your maystershype may say I am homely
But sins your mind is to have reported
The cause wherefore I am now resorted
Pleaseth it your maystershype it is so
I come for myself and such other more
Rangers and keepers of certain places
As forests, parks, purlieus and chases
Where we be charged with all manner game
Small is our profit and great is our blame
Alas for our wages what be we the near
What is forty shillings or five mark a year
Many times and oft where we be fletting
We spend forty pens a piece at a sitting
Now for our vantage which chiefly is wyndefale
That is right nought there bloweth no wind at all
Which is the thing wherein we find most grief
And cause of my coming to sew for relief
That the god of pity all this thing knownuge
May send us good rage of blustering and blowing
And if we can not get god to do some good
I would higher the devil to run thorough the wood
The roots to turn up, the tops to bring under
A mischief upon them and a wild thunder.
Very well said I set by your charity
As much in a manner as by your honesty
I shall set you some what in ease anon
Ye shall put on your cap when I am gone
For I see well ye care not who win or lose
So ye may find means to win your fees
Sir as in that ye speak as it please ye
But let me speak with the god if it may be
I pray you let me pass ye.
Why nay sir by the mass ye
Then will I leave you even as I found ye.
Go when ye will no man here hath bound ye.
What the devil should skill though all the world were d●̄
sins in all our speaking we never be hard
We cry our for rain the devil sped drop will cumme
We water millers be nothing in regard
No water have we to grind at any stint
The wind is so strong the rain can not fall
Which keepeth our myldams as dry as a fint
We are undone we grind nothing at all
The greater is the pity as thinketh me
For what availeth to each man his corn
Till it be ground by such men as we be
There is the loss if we be forbonre
For tourhing ourselves we are but drudges
And very beggars save only our toll
Which is right small and yet many grudges
For grynden of a bushel to give a quart bull
Yet were not reparations we might do weal
Our mylstons, our wheel, with her kogges, & our tryndyl
Our floodgate, our mylpole, our water wheel
Our hopper, our extre, our iron spyndell
In this and much more so great is our charge
That we would not reck though no water ware
Save only it toucheth each man so large
And each for our neighbour Chryst biddeth us care
Wherefore my conscience hath pricked me hither
In this to sew according to the cry
For plente of rain to the god Iupyter
To whose presence I will go even boldly.
Sir Idoute nothing your audacity
But I fear me ye lack capacity
For if ye were wise ye might well espy
How rudely ye err from rules of courtesy
What ye come in revelling and reheyting
Even as a knave might go to a bear beyting.
All you bear record what favour I have
Hark how familearly he calleth me knave
Doubtless the gentleman is universal
But mark this lesson sir you should never call
Your fellow knave nor your brother whoreson
For nought can ye get by it when ye have done.
Thou art neither brother nor fellow to me
For I am god's servant mayst thou not see
Would ye presume to speak with the great god
Nay discretion and you be to far odd
By'r lady these knaves must be tied shorter
Sir who let you in, spoke ye with the porter.
Nay by my troth nor with none other man
Yet I saw you well when I first began
how be it so help me god and halidom
I took you but for a knave as I am
But marry now syus I know what ye be
I must and will obey your authority
And if I may not speak with Iupyter.
I beseech you be my solyciter,
As in that I will be your well willer
I perceive you be a water miller
And your hole desire as I take the matter
Is plenty of rain for increases of water
The let where of ye affirm determynately
As only the wind your mortal enemy.
Troth it is for it bloweth so aloft
We never have rain or at the most not oft
Wherefore I pray you put the god in mind
clearly for ever to banish the wind.
How is all the wether gone or I come
For the passion of god help me to some
I am a wind miller as many more be
No wretch is wretchedness so wretched as we
The hold sort of my craft be all marred at ones
The wind is so weak it sturrerh not our stones
Nor scantly can shatter the shytren sail
That hangeth shatering at a woman's tail
The rain never resteth so long be the showers
from time of beginning till four and twenty hours
And end when it shall at night or at none
Another beginneth as soon as that is done
Such revel of rain ye know well enough
Destroyeth the wind be it never so rough
Whereby sins our mills be come to still standding
Now may we wind millers go even to hanging
A miller with a moryn and a mischief
Who would be a miller, as good be a thief
Yet in time past when grinding was plente
Who were so like god's fellows as we
As fast as god made corn we millers made meal
Which might be best forborn for comone weal
But let that gear pass for I fear our pride
Is cause of the care which god doth us provide
Wherefore I submit me intending to see
What comfort may come by humility
And now at this time they said in the cry
The god is come down to shape remedy.
No doubt he is here even in yonder throne
But in your matter he trusteth me alone
Wherein I do perceive by your complaint
Oppression of rain doth make the wind so faint
That ye wind millers be elene cast away.
If Iupyter help not it is as ye say
But in few words to tell you my mind round
Upon this condition I would be bound
Day by day to say our ladies sauter
That in this world were no drop of water
Nor never rain but wind continual
Then should we wind millers be lords over all.
Come on and assay how you twain can agree
A brother of yours a miller as ye be.
By mean of your craft we may be brothers
But whiles we live shall we never be lovers
We be of one craft but not of one kind
I live by water, and ye by the wind.
And sir as ye desire wind continual
So would I have rain ever more to fall
Which two in experience right well ye see
Right seld or never together can be
For as long as the wind ruleth it is plain
Twynty to one ye get no drop of rain
And when the Element is to far oppressed
Down cometh the rain and setteth the wind at rest
By this ye see we can not both obtain
For ye must lack wind or I must lack rain
Wherefore I think good before this audience
Each for ourself to lay or we go hens
And whom is though weyken when we have fynysht
Leave of his suit and content to be banished.
In faith agreed but then by your licens
Our mills for a time shall hang in suspens
sins water and wind is chief our suit
Which best may be spared we will first dispute
Wherefore to the see my reason shall resort
Where ships by mean of wind try from port to port
From land to land in distance many a mile
Great is the passage and small is the while
So great is the profit as to me doth seem
That no man's wisdom the wealth can exteme
And sins the wind is conveyer of all
Who but the wind should have thank above all.
Amity in this place a tree here to grow
And thereat the wind in great tag to blow
When it hath all blown this is a clear case
The tree removeth no hear bred from his place
No more would the ship blows the best it could
All though it would blow down both mast & shroud
Except the ship fleet upon the water
The wind can right nought do a plain matter
Yet may ye on water without any wind
row forth your vessel where men will have her sinned
Nothing more rejoiceth the mariner
Then mean cools of wind and plenty of water
For commonly the cause of every wrache
Is excess of wind where water doth lack
In rage of these storms the peril is such
That better were no wind then so far to much.
Well if my reason in this may not stand
I will forsake the see and leapt to land
In every church where god's service is
The organs bear brunt of half the quere I iwis
Which causeth the sound of water or wind
More over for wind this thing I find
For the most part all manner minstrelsy
By wind they deliver their sound chiefly
Fill me a bagpipe of your water full
As sweetly shall it sound as it were stuffed with will.
On my faith I think the moon be at the full
For frantic tansyes be then most plenty full
Which are at the pride of their spring in your head
So far from our matter he is now fled
As for the wind in any instrument
It is no parcel of our argument
We spoke of wind that cometh naturally
And that is wind forced artyfycyally
Which is not to purpose but if it were
And water indeed right nought could do there
Yet I think organs no such commodity
Whereby the water should banished be
And for your bagpyppes I take them as nyfuls
Your matter is all in fancies and tryfuls.
By god but ye shall not tryfull me of so
If these things serve not I will rehearse more
And now to mind there is an old proverb come
One bushel of marche dust is worth a kings ransom
What is a hundredth thousand bushels worth than.
not one mite for the thing self to no man.
Why shall wind every where thus be object
Nay in the high ways he shall take a effect
Where as the rain doth never good but hurt
For wind maketh but dust and water maketh dirt
Powder or syrup sir which lick ye best
Who licketh not the tone may lick up the rest
But sure who ever hath assayed such syppes
Had liefer have dusty eyes then dirty lips
And it is said sins afore we were borne
That drught doth never make dearth of corn
And well it is known to the most fool here
How rain hath pryced corn within thy. vii. year.
Sir I pray the spare me a lyteell season
And I shall privily conclude the with reason
Put case on summer's day without wind to be
And ragious wind in winter days two or three
Much more shall dry that one calm day in summer
Then shall those three windy days in winter
Whom shall we thank for this when all is done
The thank to wind nay thank chiefly the son
And so for drought of corn thereby encres
The son doth comfort and ripe all doubtless
And oft the wind so layeth the corn god wots
That never after can it ripe but rot
If drought took place as ye say yet may ye see
little helpeth the wind in this commodity
But now sir I deny your principal
If drought ever were it were impossybyll
To have any grain for, or it can grow
Ye must plough your land harro we and sow
Which will not be except ye may have rain
To temper the ground and after again
For springing and pluming all manner corn
Yet must ye have water or all is forlorn
If ye take water for no commodity
Yet must ye take it for things of necessity
For washing for showering all filth cleansing
Where water lacketh what bestly being
In brewing, in baking, in dressing of meat
It ye lack water what could ye drink or eat
Without water could live neither man nor beast
For water preserveth both most and least
For water could I say a thousand things more
Saving as now the time will not serve so
And as for that wind that you do sew fore
Is good for your wyndemyll and for no more
Sir sith all this in experience is tried
I say this matter standeth clear on my side.
Well sins this mill not serve I will allege the rest
Sir for our will I say mine is the best
My wyndmyll shall grind more corn in one hour
Then the water mill shall in three or four
Ye more than thine should in a hole year
If thou mightest have as thou hast wished here
For thou desirest to have excess of rain
Which thing to the were the worst thou couldst obtain
For if thou didst it were a plain induction
To make thine own desire thine own destruction
For in excess of rain at any flood
Your mills must stand still they can do no good
And when the wind doth blow the uttermost
Our wyndemylles walled a main in every cost
For as we see the wind in his estate
We moderour sails after the same rate
sins our mills grind so far faster than yours
And also they may grind all times and hours
I say we need no water mills at all
For wyndemylles be sufficient to serve al.
Thou spekeste of all and considerest not half
In boast of thy gryste thou art wise as a calf
For though above us your mills grind far faster
What help to those from whom ye be much farther
And of two sorts if the tone should be conserved
I think ye meet the most number be served
In vales and wields where most commodity is
There is most people ye must grant me this
On hills and downs which parts are most varain
There must be fewyt can no more sustain
I dare well say if it were tried even now
That there is ten of us to one of you
And where should chiefly and necessaries be
But there as people are most in plenty
More reason that you come. vii. mile to mill
Then all we of the vale should climb the hill
If rain came rasonable as I require it
We should of your wind mills have need no whit.
Stop foolish knave, for your reasoning is such
That ye have reasoned even ynonght and to much
I hard all the words that ye both have had
So help me god the knaves be more than mad
Nother of them both that hath wit nor grace
To perceive that both mills may serve in place
Between water and wind there is no such set
But each mill may have time to use his fet
Which thing I can tell by experiens
For I have of mine own not far from hens
In corner together a couple of mills
Standing in a mars between two hills
Nat of wherytaunce but by my wife
She is feofed in the tail for term of her life
The one for wind the other for water
And of them both I thank god there standeth neither
For in a good hour be it spoken
The water gate is no sooner open
But clap sathe the wyndemyll even straight behind
There is good sped, the devil and all they grind
But whether that the hopper be dusty
Or that the millstones be somewhat rusty
By the mass the meal is mischievous musty
And if ye think my tale be not trusty
I make ye true prompse come when ye list
We shall find mean ye shall taste of the gryste
The corn at receipt happily is not good
There can be no sweeter by the sweet rood
Another thing yet which shall not be cloaked
My water mill many times is choked.
So will she be thought ye should burst your bones
Except ye be perfit in setting of stones
Fere not the lydger beware your conner
Yet this for the lydger or ye have won her
Perchance your lydger doth lack good pecking
So saith my wife and that maketh all our checking
She would have the mill pecked, pecked pecked every day
But by god millers must peck when they may
So oft have we pecked that our stones wax right thin
And all our other gear not worth a pin
For with pecking and pecking I have so wrought
That I have peck a good pecking iron to nought
How be it if I stick no better till her
My wife saith she will have a new miller
But let it pass and now to our matter
I say my mills lack neither wind nor water
No more do yours as far as need doth require
But sins ye can not agree I will desire
Iupyter to set you both in such rest
As to your wealth and his honour may stand best.
I pray you heartily remember me.
Let not me be for gotten I besecheye
If I remember you not both a like
I would ye were over the ears in the dyke
Now be we rid of two knaves at one chance
By saint Thomas it is a knavish ryddaunce.
Now good god what a folly is this
What should I do were so much people is
I know not how to pass into the god now.
No but ye know how he may pass into you.
I pray you let me in at the back side.
Ye shall I so, and your forsyde so wide
Nay not yet but sins ye love to be alone
We twain will into a corner anon
But first I pray you come your way hither
And let us twain chat a while together.
Sir as to you I have little matter.
My coming is to speak with Iupyter.
Stand ye still a while and I will go prove
Whether that the god will be brought in love
My lord how now look up lustily
Here his a derling come by saint Antony
And if it be your pleasure to marry
Speke quickly for she may not tarry
In faith I think ye may win her anon
For she would speak with your lordshypen alone.
Son that is not the thing at this time meant
If her suit concern no cause of our hither resort
Send her out of place, but if she ve bend
To that purpose, he are her, and make us report.
I count women lost if we love them not well
For ye see god loveth them never a deal
masters ye can not speak with the god.
No, why.
By my faith for his lordship is right busy
With a piece of work that needs must be done
Even now is he making of a new moon
He saith your old moons be so far tasted
That all the goodness of them is wasted
Which of the great weet hath been most matter
For old moons be like, they hold no water
But for this new moon I durst lay my gown
Except a few drops at her going down
Ye get no rain till her arising
Without it need and then no man's devising
Could wish the fashion of rain to be so good
Not gushinge out like gutters of Noyes flood
But small drops sprynkling sortely on the ground
Though they fell on a sponge they would give no sound
This new moon shall make a thing spring more in this while
Then a old moae shall while a man may go a mile
By that time the god hath all made an end
Ye shall see how the wether will amend
By saint Anne he goeth to work even boldly
I think him wise enough for he looketh holdely
Wherefore master be ye now of good cheer
For though in his presence ye can not appear
Tell me your matter and let me alone
May hap I will think on you when you be go en
Forfoth the cause of my coming is this
I am a woman right tayre as ye see
In no creature more beauty then in me is
And sins I am fair, fair would I keep me
But the son in summer so sore doth burn me
In winter the wind on every side me
No part of the year wot I where to turn me
But even in my house am I sayne to hide me
And so do all other that beauty have
In whose name at this time this suit I make
Bescching Iupyter to grant that I crave
Which is this that it may please him for our sake
To send us wether close and temperate
No son shine no frost nor wind to blow
Then would we get the streets trim as a parate
Ye should see how we would set ourself to show.
Yet where ye will I swear by saint quintine
Ye passed them all both in your own conceit and mine
If we had wether to walk at our pleasure
Our lives would be merry out of measure
One part of the day for our appareling
Another part for eating and drinking
And all the teste in streets to be walking
Orin the house to passed time with talk ynge.
When serve ye god.
Who boasteth in virtue are but daws.
Ye do the better namely sins there is no cause
How spend ye this night
In dancing and singing
Till midnight and then fall to sleeping.
Why sweet heart by your false faith can ye sing
Nay nay but I love it all thing.
Now by my troth for the love that I own you
You shall here what pleasure I can show you
One song I have for you such as it is
And if it were better ye should have it by gys.
Marry sir I thank you even heartily.
Come on sirs but now let us sing lustily.
Sir this is well done I heartily thank you
Ye have done me pleasure I make god a vow
Ones in a night I long for such a fit
For longe time have I been brought up in it.
Oft time is seen both in court and town.
Long be women a bringing up & soon brought down
So feet it is, so neat it is, so nice it is,
So trick it is, so quick it is, so wise it is
I fear myself except I may entreat her
I am so far in love I shall forget her.
Now good master I pray ye let me kiss ye
Kys me quoth a why nay sir I iwis ye.
What yes hardly kiss me once and no more
I never desired to kiss you before.
Why have ye always kiss her behind
In faith good enough if it be your mind
And if your appetite serve you so to do
By lady I would you had kiss my arse to.
To whom dost thou speak foul hore canst thou tell.
Nay by my troth I sir not very well
But by coniectour this ges I have
That I do speak to an old bawdy knave
I saw you dally with your symper de cocked
I read you beware she pick not your pocket
Such idle husyfes do now and than
Think all well won that they pick from a man
Yet such of some men shall have more favour
Than we that for them daily tail and labour
But I trust the god will be so indifferent
That she shall fail some part of her intent
No doubt he will deal so graciously
That all folk shall be served indifferently
How be it I tell the truth my office is such
That I must report each suit little or much
Wherefore with the god sins thou caused not speak
Trust me with thy suit I will not fail it to break.
Then lean not to much to gender gyglet
For here desire contrary to mine is set
I heard by her tale she would banish the sone
And then were we poor launders all undone
Except the son shine that our clothes may dry
We can do right nought in our laundry
Another manner loss if we should miss
Then of such nyreby ceters as she is.
I think it better that thou envy me
Then I should stand at reward of thy pit
It is the guise of such gross queynes as thou art
With such as I am evermore to thwart
By cause that no beauty ye can obtain
Therefore ye have us that be fair in disdain.
When I was as young as thou art now
I was within little as fair as thou
And so might have kept meyf I had would
And as dearly my youth I might have sold
As the tryckest and fairest of you all
But I feared parels that after might fall
Wherefore some belines I did me provide
Lest vice might enter on every side
Which hath tree entre where ydylnesse doth reign
It is not thy beauty that I disdain
But thine idle life that thou hast rehearsed
Which any good woman's heart would have pierced
For I perceive in dancing and singing
In eating and drinking and thine appareling
Is all the joy wherein thy heart is set
But nought of all this doth thine own labour get
For hadst thou nothing but of thine own travail
Thou mightest go as naked as my nail
Me think thou shouldest abhor such idleness
And pass the time in some honest business
Better to lose some part of thy beauty
Then so oft to ieoberde all thine honest
But I think rather than thou wouldest so do
Thou hadst liefer have us live ydylly to
And so no doubt we should if thou mightest have
The clear son banished as thou dost crave
Then were we launders marred and unto the
Thine own request were small commodity
For of these twain I think it far better
Thy face were son burned and thy clothes the swetter
Than that the son from shining should he smytter
To keep thy face fair and thy smock be shytter
Sir how lick ye my reason in her case.
Such a railing whore by the holy mass
I never hard in all my tyfe till now
Iu dede I loue ryght wel the tone of you
But or I keep you both by god's mother
The devil shall have the tone to fet the other.
Promise me to speak that the son may shine bright
And I will be gone quyikly for all night.
Get you both hens I pray you heartily
Your suits I perceive and will report them truly
un to Iupiter at the next leisure
And in the same desire to know his pleasure
Which knowledge had even as he doth show it
Fere ye not time enough ye shall know it.
Sir if ye medyll remember me first
Then in this meddling my part shallbe the worst.
Now I beseech our lord the devil the burst
Who meddleth with many I hold him accursed
Thou whore can I meddle with you both at ones.
By the mass knave I would I had both thy stones
In my purse if thou meddle not indifferently
That both our matters in issue may be likely.
Many words little matter and to no purpose
such is the effect that thou disclose.
The more ye byb, the more ye babble.
The more ye babyl, the more ye fabyl
The more ye fabyl, the more unstabyl.
The more unstable, the more unabyll
In any manner thing to do any good
No hurt though ye were hanged by the holy rood.
The less your silence, the less your credence
The less your credence, the less your honesty
The less your honesty the less your assistance
The less your assistance the less ability
In you to do aught wherefore so god me save
No hurt in hanging such a railing knave.
What monster is this I never hard none such
For look how much more I have made her to much
And so far at last she hath made me to little
Where be ye Launder I think in some spittle
Ye shall wash me no gear for fere of fretting
I love no launders that shrink my gear in wetting
I pray the go hens and let me be in rest
I will do thine errand as I think best.
Now would I take my leave if I wist how
The longer I live the more knave you,
The longer thou livest the pity the greater
The sooner thou be rid the tidings the better
Is not this a sweet office that I have
When every drab shall call me knave
Every man knoweth not what god's service is
Nor I myself knew it not before this
I think god's servants may live holily
But the devil servants live more merely
I know not what god giveth in standing fees
But the devil servants have casweltees
A hundredth times more than god's servants have
For though ye be never so stark a knave
It ye lack money the devil will do worse
But bring you straight to another man's purse
Then will the devil promote you here in this world
As unto such ryche it doth most accord
first Pater noster quies in celis
And then ye shall since the strife with your heels
The greatest friend ye have in field or town
Sanding a typ to shall not reach your crown.
This same is even he by allycklyhod
Sir I pray you be not you master god.
No in good faith son but I may say to the
I am such a man that god may not miss me
Wherefore with the god if thou wouldest have aught done
Tell me thy mind and I shall show it soon.
Forsooth sir my mind is this at few words
All my pleasure is in catsing of vyrdes
And making of snow bails and throwing the same
For the which purpose to have set in frame
With my god father god I would fain have spoken
desiring him to have sent me by some token
Where I might have had great frost for my pytfalles
And plenty of suowe to make my snow balls
This once had boys lives be such as no man leddes
O to se my snow balls light on my fellows hedes
And to here the birds how they slyckere there wings
In the pytfale I say it passeth all things
Sir if ye be god's servant or his kinsman
I pray you help me in this it ye can.
Alas poor boy who sent the hither.
A hundred boys that stood together
Where they heard one say in a cry
That my god father god almighty
Was come from heaven by his own accord
This night to sup here with my lord
And farther he said come whose will
They shall sure have their bills full
I fall wethers who list to crave
Each sort such wether as they list to have
And when my fellows thought this would be had
And saw me so pretty a prateling lad
Upon agreement with a great noys
Send little Dick cried all the boys
By whose assent I am purveyed
To sew for the wether a foresaid
Wherein I pray you to be good as thus
To help that god may give it us.
give boys weather quoth a nonny nonny.
If god of his wether will give nonny
I pray you will ye sell any
Or send us a bushel of snow or twain.
And point us a day to pay him again.
I can not tell for by this light.
I chepte nor barowed none of him this night
But by such shift as I will make
Thou shalt see soon what way he will take.
Sir I thank you then I may depart.
The farewell good son with all my heart
Now such an other sort as here hath been
In all the days of my life I have not seen
No suitors now but women knaves and boys
And all their suits are in fancies and toys
If that there come no wiser after this cry
I will to the god and make an end quickly
Oyes, if that any knave here
Be willing to appear
For whether foul or clear
Come in before this flock
And be he hole or syckly
Come show his mind quickly
And if his tail be not lyckly
Ye shall lick my tail in the neck
All his time I perceive is spent in waist
To wait for more suitors I see none make hast
Wherefore I will show the god all this process
And be delivered of my simple offes
Now lord according to your commandment
Attending suitors I have been diligent
And at beginning as your will was I should
I come now at end to show what each man would
The first suitor before yourself did appear
A gentleman desiring wether clear
Cloudy, nor misty, nor no wind to blow
For hurt in his huntynge and then as ye know
The Merchant sued for as of that kind
For wether clear and measurable wind
As they may best bear their sails to make speed
And straight after there came to me in deed
Another man who named himself a ranger
And said all of his craft be far brought in danger
For lack of living which chiefly is wind fall
But he plainly saith there bloweth no wind at all
Wherefore he desireth for increase of their fleeses
Extreme rage of wind trees to tear in pieces
Then came a water miller and he cried out
For water and said the wind was so stout
The rain could not fall wherefore he made request
For plenty of rain to set the wind at rest
And then sir there came a wind miller in
Who said for the rain he could no wind win
The water he wysht to be banish all
beseeching your grace of wind continual
Then came there another that would banish all this
A goodly dame an ydyll thing ywys
Wind, rain, nor frost, nor son shine would she have
But fair close wether her beauty to save
Then came there another that liveth by laundry
Who must have wether hot and clear here clothes to dry
Then come there a boy for trost and snow continual
Snow to make snow balls and frost for his pitfall
For which god wot he sueth full greedily
Your first man would have cools to blow meanly
The second the same save weather clear and not windy
The third desired storms and wind most extermely
The fourth all in water and would have no wind
The fift no water but all wind to grind
The sixth would have none of all these nor no bright son
The seventh extremely the hot soon would have won
The eight and the last for the frost and snow he prayed
By lady we shall take shame I am afraid
Who marketh in what manner this sort is led
May think it impossible all to be speed
This number is small there lacketh twain of ten
And yet by the mass among ten thousand men
No one thing could stand more wide from the other
Nat one of their suitors agreeth with an other
I promise you here is a shrew piece of work
This gear will try weather ye be a clerk
If ye trust to me it is a great folly
For it passeth my brains by goods body.
Son thou hast best diligent and done so well
That thy labour is right much thank worthy
But be thou sure we need no whit thy counsel
For in ourself we have foreseen remedy
Which thou shalt see but first depart hens quickly
To the gentleman and all other suitors here
And command them all before us to appear
That shall be no longer in doing
Then I am in coming and going
such debate as from above he have hard
Such debate beneath among yourselves ye see
As long as heads from temperance be defarde
So long the bodies in distemperance be
This perceive ye all but none can help save we
But as we there have made peace concordantly
So will we here now give you remedy.
If I had caught them
Or ever I taught them
I would have taught them
To be near me.
Full dear have I bought them
Lord so I sought them
Yet have I brought them
Such as they be.
Pleaseth it your majesty lord so it is
We as your subjects and humble suitors all
According as we here your pleasure is
Are pressed as your presence being principal
Head and governor of all in every place
Who joyeth not in your sight no joy can have
Wherefore we all commit us to your grace
As lord of lords us to perish or save.
As long as discretion so well doth you guide
Obediently to use your duty
Doubt ye not we shall your safety provide
Your grievous we have hard wherefore we send for ye
To receive answer each man in his degree
And first to content most reason it is
The first man that sued wherefore mark ye this
Oft shall ye have the wether elere and still
To hunt in for recompense of your pain
Also you merchants shall have much your will
For oft times when no wind on land doth remain
Yet on the see pleasant cools you shall obtain
And sins your hunting may rest in the night
Oft shall the wind then rise and before day light.
It shall ratell down the wood in such case
That all ye rangers the better live may
And ye water millers shall obtain this grace
Many times the rain to fall in the valley
When at the self times on hills we shall purvey
Fair wether for your windmills which such cools of wind
As in one instant both kinds of mills may grind.
And for ye fair women that close wether would have
We shall provide that ye may sufficiently
Have time to walk in and your beauty save
And yet shall ye have that liveth by laundry
The hot son oft enough your clothes to dry
Also ye pretty child shall have both frost and snow
Now mark this conclusion we charge you arrow.
Much better have we now devised for ye all
Then ye all can perceive or could desire
Each of you sued to have continual
Such wether as his craft only doth require
All wethers in all places if men all times might higher
Who could live by other what is this negligence
Us to attempt in such inconvenience.
Now on the other side if we had granted
The full of the some one suit and no more
And from all the rest the wether had forbid
Yet who so had obtained had won his own woe
There is no one craft can preserve man so
But by other crafts of necessity
He must have much part of his commodity.
All to serve at ones and one destroy an other
Or else to serve one and destroy all the rest
Nother will we do the tone nor the other
But serve as many or as few as we think best
And where or what time to serve most or lest
The dyrectyon of that doubtless shall stand
Perpetually in the power of our hand.
Wherefore we will the hole world to attend
Each sort on such wether as for them doth fall
Now one now other as liketh us to send
Who that hath it ply it and sure we shall
So guide the wether in course to you all
That each with other ye shall hole remain.
In pleasure and plentiful wealth certain.
Blessed was the time wherein me were borne
first for the blissful chance of your godly presence
Next for our suit was there never man before
That ever hard so excellent a sentence
As your grace hath given to us all arrow
Wherein your highness hath so bountyfully
distributed my part that your grace shall know
Yourself foole possessed.
Likewise merchants shall yield us holy
Only to laud the name of Iupyter
As god of all gods you to serve soolly
For of every thing I see you are norysher.
No doubt it is so for so we now find
Wherein your grace us rangers so doth bind
That we shall give you our hearts with one accord
For knowledge to know you only as our lord
Well I can no more but for our water
We shall give your lordship our ladies sauter
Much have ye bound us for as I be saved
We have all obtained better than we craved.
That is true, wherefore your grace shall truly
The hearts of such as I am have surely.
And such as I am who be as good as you
His highness shall be sure on I make a vow.
Godfather god I will do somewhat for you again
By Christ ye may hap to have a bird or twain
And I promise you if any snow come▪
When I make my snow balls you shall have some