HOw now fellow Frantic, what all a mort? Doth this sadness become thy madness? What though we have lost our way in the woods, yet never hang the head, as though thou hadst no hope to live till tomorrow: for Fantastic and I will warrant thy life tonight for twenty in the hundred.
Antic and Fantastic, as I am frolic franion, never in all my life was I so dead slain. What? to lose our way in the wood, without either fire or candle so uncomfortable? O coelum! O terra! O maria! O Neptune!
Why makes thou it so strange, seeing Cupid hath led our young master to the fair Lady and she is the only Saint that he hath sworn to serve.
What resteth then but we commit him to his wench, and each of us take his stand up in a Tree, and sing out our ill fortune to the tune of O man in desperation.
Desperately spoken fellow Frollicke in the dark: but seeing it falls out thus, let us rehearse the old proverb.
Three merry men, and three merry men,
And three merry men be we.
I in the wood, and thou on the ground,
And Jack sleeps in the tree.
Hush a dog in the wood, or a wooden dog, O comfortable hearing! I had even as live the Chamberlain of the white Horse had called me up to bed.
Either hath this trotting Cur gone out of his circuit, or else are we near some village, which should not be far off, for I perceive the glimmering of a glow-worm, a Candle, or a cat's eye, my life for a half penny. In the name of my own father, be thou Ox or Ass that appearest, tell us what thou art.
What am I? Why I am Clunch the Smith, what are you, what make you in my territories at this time of the night?
What do we make dost thou ask? why we make faces for fear: such as if thy mortal eyes could behold, would make thee water the long seams of thy side slops, Smith.
And in faith Sir unless your hospitality do relieve us, we are like to wander with a sorrowful heigh ho, among the owlets, & Hobgoblins of the Forest: good Vulcan, for Cupid's sake that hath cozened us all: befriend us as thou mayest, and command us howsoever, wheresoever, whensoever, in whatsoever, for ever and ever.
Well Masters it seems to me you have lost your way in the wood: in consideration whereof, if you will go with Clunch to his Cottage, you shall have house room, and a good fire to sit by, although we have no bedding to put you in.
O blessed Smith, O bountiful Clunch.
For your further entertainment, it shall be as it may be, so and so.
Hark this is Ball my Dog that bids you all welcome in his own language, come take heed for stumbling on the threshold, open door Madge take in guests.
Welcome Clunch & good fellows all that come with my good man for my good man's sake come on sit down here is a piece of cheese & a pudding of my own making.
Thanks Gammer a good example for the wives of our town.
Gammer thou and thy good man sit lovingly together, we come to chat and not to eat.
Well Masters if you will eat nothing take away: Come, what do we to pass away the time? Lay a crab in the fire to roast for Lambswool; what shall we have a game at Trump or Ruff to drive away the time, how say you?
This Smith leads a life as merry as a King with Madge his wife; sirrah Frolic, I am sure thou art not without some round or other, no doubt but Clunch can bear his part.
Else think you me ill brought up, so set to it when you will.
whenas the Rye reach to the chin,
And chopcherry chopcherry ripe within,
Strawberries swimming in the cream,
And school boys playing in the stream:
Then O, then O, then O my true love said,
Till that time come again,
She could not live a maid.
This sport does well: but methinks Gammer, a merry winter's tale would drive away the time trimly, come I am sure you are not without a score.
i'faith Gammer a tale of an hour long were as good as an hours sleep.
Look you Gammer, of the Giant and the king's Daughter, and I know not what, I have seen the day when I was a little one, you might have drawn me a mile after you with such a discourse.
Well, since you be so importunate, my good man shall fill the pot and get him to bed, they that ply their work must keep good hours, one of you go lie with him, he is a clean skinned man I tell you, without either spavin or windgall, so I am content to drive away the time with an old wives winter's tale.
No better hay in Devonshire, a my word Gammer, I'll be one of of your audience.
And I another that's flat.
Then must I to bed with the good man, Bonanox Gammer, God night Frolic.
Come on my Lad, thou shalt take thy unnatural rest with me.
Yet this vantage shall we have of them in the morning, to be ready at the sight thereof extempore.
Now this bargain my Masters must I make with you, that you will say hum & ha to my tale, so shall I know you are awake.
Content Gammer that will we do.
Once upon a time there was a King or a Lord, or a Duke that had a fair daughter, the fairest that ever was; as white as snow, and as red as blood: and once upon a time his daughter was stolen away, and he sent all his men to seek out his daughter, and he sent so long, that he sent all his men out of his Land.
Who dressed his dinner then?
Nay either hear my tale, or kiss my tail.
Well said, on with your tale Gammer.
O Lord I quite forgot, there was a conjuror, and this conjuror could do anything, and he turned himself into a great Dragon, and carried the kings Daughter away in his mouth to a Castle that he made of stone, and there he kept her I know not how long, till at last all the kings men went out so long, that her two Brothers went to seek her. O I forget: she (he I would say) turned a proper young man to a Bear in the night, and a man in the day, and keeps by a cross that parts three several ways, & he made his Lady run mad: gods me bones who comes here?
Soft Gammer, here some come to tell your tale for you.
Let them alone, let us hear what they will say.
Upon these chalky Cliffs of Albion
We are arrived now with tedious toil,
And compassing the wide world round about
To seek our sister, to seek fair Delia forth,
Yet cannot we so much as hear of her.
O fortune cruel, cruel & unkind,
Unkind in that we cannot find our sister;
Our sister hapless in her cruel chance:
Soft who have we here.
Now father God be your speed, What do you gather there?
Hips and haws, and sticks and straws, and things that I gather on the ground my son.
Hips and haws, and sticks and straws, why is that all your food father?
Yea son.
Father, here is an Alms penny for me, and if I speed in that I go for, I will give thee as good a Gown of grey as ever thou didst wear.
And Father here is another alms penny for me, and if I speed in my journey, I will give thee a Palmer's staff of ivory, and a scallop shell of beaten gold.
Was she fair?
I the fairest for white, and the purest for red, as the blood of the dear, or the driven snow:
Then hark well and mark well, my old spell:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside at every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
For when one flame of fire goes out,
Then comes your wishes well about:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of England's wood.
Brother heard you not what the old man said:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside for every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of England's wood.
Well if this do us any good,
Welfare the white Bear of England's wood.
Now sit thee here & tell a heavy tale.
Sad in thy mood, and sober in thy cheer,
Here sit thee now and to thyself relate,
The hard mishap of thy most wretched state.
In Thessalie I lived in sweet content,
Until that Fortune wrought my overthrow;
For there I wedded was unto a dame,
That lived in honour, virtue, love, and fame:
But Sacrapant that cursed sorcerer,
Being besotted with my beauteous love:
My dearest love, my true betrothed wife,
Did seek the means to rid me of my life.
But worse than this, he with his chanting spells,
Did turn me straight unto an ugly Bear;
And when the sun doth settle in the west,
Than I begin to don my ugly hide:
And all the day I sit, as now you see,
And speak in riddles all inspire with rage,
Seeming an old and miserable man:
And yet I am in April of my age.
See where Venelia my betrothed love,
Runs madding all enraged about the woods;
All by his cursed and enchanting spells.
But here comes Lampriscus my discontented neighbour. How now neighbour, you look toward the ground as well as I, you muse on something.
Neighbour on nothing, but on the matter I so often moved to you: if you do any thing for charity, help me; if for neighbourhood or brotherhood, help me: never was one so cumbered as is poor Lampriscus: and to begin, I pray receive this pot of Honey to mend your fare.
Thanks neighbour, set it down,
Honey is always welcome to the Bear.
And now neighbour let me here the cause of your coming.
I am (as you know neighbour) a man unmarried, and lived so unquietly with my two wives, that I keep every year holy the day wherein I buried them both; the first was on saint Andrew's day; the other on saint Luke's.
And now neighbour, you of this country say, your custom is out: but on with your tale neighbour.
By my first wife, whose tongue wearied me alive, and sounded in my ears like the clapper of a great Bell, whose talk was a continual torment to all that dwelled by her, or lived nigh her, you have heard me say I had a handsome daughter.
True neighbour.
she it is that afflicts me with her continual clamours, and hangs on me like a burr: poor she is, and proud she is, as poor as a sheep new shorn, and as proud of her hopes, as a Peacock of her tail well grown.
Well said Lampriscus, you speak it like an Englishman.
As cursed as a wasp, and as froward as a child new taken from the mother's teat, she is to my age, as smoke to the eyes, or as vinegar to the teeth.
Holily praised neighbour, as much for the next.
By my other wife I had a daughter, so hard favoured, so foul and ill faced, that I think a grove full of golden trees; and the leaves of Rubies and Diamonds, would not be a dowry answerable to her deformity.
Well neighbour, now you have spoke, hear me speak; send them to the Well for the water of life: there shall they find their fortunes unlooked for; Neighbour farewell.
Farewell and a thousand, and now goeth poor Lampriscus to put in execution this excellent counsel.
Why this goes round without a fiddling stick; but do you hear Gammer, was this the man that was a Bear in the night, and a man in the day?
I this is he; and this man that came to him was a beggar, and dwelled upon a green. But soft, who comes here? O these are the harvest men; ten to one they sing a song of mowing.
All ye that lovely lovers be, pray you for me,
Lo here we come a sowing, a sowing,
And sow sweet fruits of love:
In your sweet hearts well may it prove.
Gammer, what is he?
O this is one that is going to the conjuror, let him alone, here what he says.
Now by Mars and Mercury, Iupiter and Ianus, Sol and Saturnus, Venus and Vesta, Pallas and Proserpina, and by the honour of my house Polimackeroeplacydus, it is a wonder to see what this love will make silly fellows adventure, even in the wane of their wits, and infancy of their discretion. Alas my friend what fortune calls thee forth to seek thy fortune among brazen gates, enchanted towers, fire and Brimstone, thunder and lightning. Beauty I tell thee is peerless, and she precious whom thou affectest: do off these desires good countryman, good friend run away from thyself, and so soon as thou canst, forget her; whom none must inherit but he that can monsters tame, labours achieve, riddles absolve, loose enchantments, murder magic, and kill conjuring: and that is the great and mighty Huanebango.
Hark you sir, hark you; First know I have here the flirting feather, and have given the Parish the start for the long stock: Now sir if it be no more but running through a little lightning and thunder, and riddle me riddle me what's this, I'll have the wench from the conjuror if he were ten Conjurers.
I have abandoned the Court and honourable company, to do my devoir against this sore Sorcerer and mighty Magician: if this Lady be so fair as she is said to be, she is mine, she is mine, Meus, mea, meum, in contemptum omnium Grammaticorum.
O falsum Latinum! the fair maid is minum, cum apurtinantibus giblets and all.
If she be mine, as I assure myself the heavens will do somewhat to reward my worthiness; she shall be allied to none of the meanest gods; but be invested in the most famous stock of Huanebango Polimackeroeplacidus, my Grandfather: my father Pergopolyneo: my mother, Dyonora de Sardinia: famously descended.
do you hear sir; had not you a cozen, that was called Gustecerydis?
Indeed I had a cozen, that sometime followed the Court infortunately, and his name Bustegustecerydis.
O Lord I know him well: he is the knight of the neats feet.
O he loved no Capon better, he hath oftentimes deceived his boy of his dinner, that was his fault good Bustegustecerydis.
Come shall we go along? Soft, here is an old man at the Cross, let us ask him the way thither. Ho, you Gaffer, I pray you tell where the wise man the conjuror dwells?
Where that earthly Goddess keepeth her abode; the commander of my thoughts, and fair Mistress of my heart.
Fair enough, and far enough from thy fingering son.
I will follow my Fortune after mine own fancy, and do according to mine own discretion.
Yet give some thing to an old man before you go.
Father methinks a piece of this Cake might serve your turn.
Yea son.
Huanabango giveth no Cakes for Alms, ask of them that give gifts for poor Beggars. Fair Lady, if thou wert once shrined in this bosom, I would buckler thee haratantara.
Father do you see this man, you little think he'll run a mile or two for such a Cake, or pass for a pudding, I tell you father he has kept such a begging of me for a piece of this Cake, who he comes upon me with a superstantial substance, and the foison of the earth, that I know not what he means: If he came to me thus, and said, my friend Booby or so, why I could spare him a piece with all my heart; but when he tells me how God hath enriched me above other fellows with a Cake: why he makes me blind and deaf at once: Yet father here is a piece of Cake for you as hard as the world goes.
Thanks son, but list to me,
He shall be deaf when thou shalt not see;
Farewell my son things may so hit,
Thou mayst have wealth to mend thy wit.
Farewell father, farewell; for I must make haste after my two hand sword that is gone before.
The day is clear, the Welkin bright and grey,
The Lark is merry, and records her notes;
Each thing rejoiceth underneath the Sky,
But only I whom heaven hath in hate:
Wretched and miserable Sacrapant,
In Thessalie was I borne and brought up,
My mother Meroe hight a famous Witch,
And by her cunning I of her did learn,
To change and alter shapes of mortal men.
There did I turn myself into a Dragon,
And stole away the Daughter to the King;
Fair Delia, the Mistress of my heart:
And brought her hither to revive the man,
That seemeth young and pleasant to behold,
And yet is aged, crooked, weak and numb.
Thus by enchanting spells I do deceive,
Those that behold and look upon my face;
But well may I bid youthful years adieu:
See where she comes from whence my sorrows grow,
How now fair Delia where have you been?
At the foot of the Rock for running water, and gathering roots for your dinner sir.
Ah Delia, fairer art thou than the running water, yet harder far than steel or Adamant.
Will it please you to sit down sir.
I Delia, sit & ask me what thou wilt, thou shalt have it brought into thy lap.
Then I pray you sir let me have the best meat from the king of England's table, and the best wine in all France, brought in by the veriest knave in all Spain.
Delia I am glad to see you so pleasant, well sit thee down.
Spread table spread; meat, drink & bred
Ever may I have, what I ever crave:
When I am spread, for meat for my black cock,
And meat for my red.
Here Delia, will ye fall to.
Is this the best meat in England?
Yea.
What is it?
A chine of English beef, meat for a king
And a king's followers.
Is this the best wine in France?
Yea.
What Wine is it?
A cup of neat wine of Orleans,
That never came near the brewers in England.
Is this the veriest knave in all Spain?
Yea.
What is he a friar?
Yea a Friar indefinite, & a knave infinite.
Then I pray ye sir friar tell me before you go, which is the most greediest Englishman?
The miserable and most covetous Usurer.
Hold thee there Friar,
But soft who have we here, Delia away begone.
Delia away, for beset are we,
But heaven or hell shall rescue her for me.
Brother, was not that Delia did appear?
Or was it but her shadow that was here?
Sister, where art thou? Delia come again
He calls, that of thy absence doth complain.
Call out Calypha that she may hear,
And cry aloud, for Delia is near.
near.
near, O where, hast thou any tidings?
Tidings.
Which way is Delia then, or that, or this?
This.
And may we safely come where Delia is
Yes.
Brother remember you the white
Bear of England's wood:
Start not aside for every danger,
Be not afeard of every stranger;
Things that seem, are not the same.
Brother, why do we not than courageously enter.
Then brother draw thy sword & follow me.
What brother dost thou fall?
ay, and thou to Calypha.
away with them,
Go carry them straight to Sacrapanto's cell,
There in despair and torture for to dwell;
These are Thenore's sons of Thessaly,
That come to seek Delia their sister forth:
But with a potion, I to her have given,
My arts hath made her to forget herself.
He removes a turf, and shows a light in a glass.
See here the thing which doth prolong my life
With this enchantment I do any thing.
And till this fade, my skill shall still endure,
And never none shall break this little glass,
But she that's neither wife, widow, nor maid.
Then cheer thyself, this is thy destiny,
Never to die, but by a dead man's hand.
Tell me Time, tell me just Time,
When shall I Delia see?
When shall I see the lodestar of my life?
When shall my wandering course end with her sight?
Or I but view my hope, my heart's delight.
Father God speed, if you tell fortunes, I pray good father tell me mine.
Son I do see in thy face,
Thy blessed fortune work apace;
I do perceive that thou hast wit,
Beg of thy fate to govern it,
For wisdom governed by advise,
Makes many fortunate and wise.
Bestow thy alms, give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
Farewell my son, dream of no rest,
Till thou repent that thou didst best.
This man hath left me in a Labyrinth,
He biddeth me give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
He biddeth me dream of no rest,
Till I repent that I do best.
You may be ashamed, you whoreson scald Sexton and Churchwarden, if you had any shame in those shameless faces of yours, to let a poor man lie so long above ground unburied. A rot on you all, that have no more compassion of a good fellow when he is gone.
What would you have us to bury him, and to answer it ourselves to the parish?
Parish me no parishes, pay me my fees, and let the rest run on in the quarters accounts, and put it down for one of your good deeds a God's name, for I am not one that curiously stands upon merits.
You whoreson sodden headed sheeps-face, shall a good fellow do less service and more honesty to the parish, & will you not when he is dead let him have Christmas burial.
Peace Corebus, assure as Iack was Iack, the frollickst frannion amongst you, and I Wiggen his sweet sworn brother, Iack shall have his funerals, or some of them shall lie on God's dear earth for it, that's once.
Wiggen I hope thou wilt do no more than thou darest answer.
Sir, sir, dare or dare not, more or less, answer or not answer, do this, or have this.
Help, help, help, Wiggen sets upon the parish with a Pike staff.
Hold thy hands good fellow.
Can you blame him sir, if he take jacks part against this shake rotten parish that will not bury Iack.
Why what was that Iack?
Who Iack sir, who our Iack sir? as good a fellow as ever trod upon neat's leather.
Look you sir, he gave four score and nineteen mourning gowns to the parish when he died, and because he would not make them up a full hundred, they would not bury him; was not this good dealing?
Oh Lord sir how he lies, he was not worth a half penny, and drunk out every penny: and now his fellows, his drunken companions, would have us to bury him at the charge of the parish, and we make many such matches, we may pull down the steeple, sell the Bells, and thatch the chancel: he shall lie above ground till he dance a galliard about the churchyard for Steven Loach.
Sic argumentaris domine Loach; and we make many such matches, we may pull down the steeple, sell the Bells, and thatch the chancel: in good time sir, and hang yourselves in the Bell ropes when you have done, Domine oponens praepono tibi hanc questionem, whether will you have the ground broken, or your pates broken: first, for one of them shall be done presently, and to begin mine, i'll seal it upon your coxcomb.
Hold thy hands, I pray thee good fellow be not too hasty.
You Capons face, we shall have you turned out of the parish one of these days, with never a tatter to your arse, than you are in worse taking than Iack.
Faith and he is bad enough: this fellow does but the part of a friend, to seek to bury his friend; how much will bury him?
Faith, about some fifteen or sixteen shillings will bestow him honestly.
I even thereabouts sir.
Here hold it then, and I have left me but one poor three half pence; now do I remember the words the old man spoke at the cross; bestow all thou hast, and this is all, till dead men's bones comes at thy call, hear hold it, and so farewell.
God, and all good, be with you sir; nay you cormorants, i'll bestow one peal of Iack at mine own proper costs and charges.
You may thank God the long staff and the bilbo blade, crossed not your coxcomb; well we'll to the church style, and have a pot, and so tryll lyll.
Come let's go.
But hark you gammer, methinks this Iack bore a great sway in the parish.
O this Iack was a marvelous fellow, he was but a poor man, but very well beloved: you shall see anon what this Iack will come to.
Soft, who have we here? our amorous harvest stars.
ay, ay, let us sit still and let them alone.
Lo here we come a reaping, a reaping,
To reap our harvest fruit,
And thus we pass the year so long,
And never be we mute.
Soft, who have we here?
O this is a choleric gentleman, all you that love your lives, keep out of the smell of his two hand sword: now goes he to the conjuror.
methinks the conjuror should put the fool into a juggling box.
Fee, fa, fum, here is the Englishman,
Conquer him that can, came for his lady bright,
To prove himself a knight,
And win her love in fight.
Who haw master Bango are you here? hear you, you had best sit down here, and beg an alms with me.
Hence base cullion, here is he that commandeth ingress and egress with his weapon, and will enter at his voluntary whosoever saith no.
No.
So with that they kissed, and spoiled the edge of as good a two hand sword, as ever God put life in; now goes Corebus in, spite of the conjuror.
Away with him into the open fields,
To be a ravening prey to Crows and Kites:
And for this villain let him wander up & down
In nought but darkness and eternal night.
here hast thou slain Huam a slashing knight
And robbed poor Corebus of his sight.
Hence villain hence.
Now I have unto Delia given a potion of forgetfulness,
That when she comes she shall not know her Brothers:
Lo where they labour like to Country slaves,
With spade and mattock on this enchanted ground.
Now will I call her by another name,
For never shall she know herself again,
Until that Sacrapant hath breathed his last.
See where she comes.
Come hither Delia take this good,
Here hard at hand two slaves do work and dig for gold,
Gore them with this & thou shalt have enough.
Good sir I know not what you mean.
She hath forgotten to be Delia,
But not forgot the same she should forget:
But I will change her name.
Fair Berecynthia so this Country calls you,
Go ply these stranger's wench they dig for gold
O heavens! how am I beholding to this fair young man.
But I must ply these strangers to their work.
See where they come.
O Brother see where Delia is.
O Delia happy are we to see thee here.
What tell you me of Delia prating swains?
I know no Delia nor know I what you mean,
Ply you your work or else you are like to smart.
Why Delia know'st thou not thy Brothers here?
We come from Thessalie to seek thee forth,
And thou deceivest thyself for thou art Delia.
Yet more of Delia, then take this and smart:
What feign you shifts for to defer your labour?
Work villains work, it is for gold you dig.
Peace brother peace, this vild enchanter
Hath ravished Delia of her senses clean,
And she forgets that she is Delia.
Leave cruel thou to hurt the miserable;
Dig brother dig, for she is hard as steel.
Here they dig & descry the light under a little hill.
Stay brother what hast thou descried?
Away & touch it not, it is some thing, that my Lord hath hidden there. she covers it again.
Well said, thou pliest these Pioneers
well, go get you in you labouring slaves.
Come Berecynthia, let us in likewise,
And hear the Nightingale record her notes.
Now for a husband, house and home, God send a good one or none I pray God: My father hath sent me to the well for the water of life, and tells me if I give fair words I shall have a husband. But here comes Celanta my sweet sister, I'll stand by and hear what she says.
My father hath sent me to the well for water, and he tells me if I speak fair, I shall have a husband and none of the worst: Well though I am black I am sure all the world will not forsake me, and as the old proverb is though I am black, I am not the devil.
Marry gup with a murrain, I know wherefore thou speakest that, but go thy ways home as wise as thou camest, or I'll set thee home with a wanion.
I think this be the cursedest quean in the world, you see what she is, a little fair, but as proud as the devil, and the veriest vixen that lives upon God's earth. Well I'll let her alone, and go home and get another Pitcher, and for all this get me to the well for water.
Once again for a husband, & in faith Celanta I have got the start of you; Belike husbands grow by the Well side; now my father says I must rule my tongue: why alas what am I then? a woman without a tongue, is as a soldier without his weapon; but i'll have my water and be gone.
Gently dip, but not too deep,
For fear you make the golden bird to weep,
Fair maiden white and red,
Stroke me smooth, and comb my head,
And thou shalt have some cockle bread.
What is this, fair maiden white & red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head:
And thou shalt have some cockle bread.
cockle callest thou it boy, faith i'll give you cockle bread.
Phylyda phylerydos, Pamphylyda floryda flortos,
Dub dud a dub, bounce quoth the guns, with a sulphuroous huff snuff:
waked with a wench, pretty peat, pretty love, and my sweet pretty pigsney;
Just by thy side shall sit surnamed great Huanebango
Safe in my arms will I keep thee, threat Mars or thunder Olympus.
Foe, what greasy groom have we here? He looks as though he crept out of the backside of the well; and speaks like a Drum perished at the West end.
O that I might but I may not, woe to my destiny therefore;
Kiss that I clasp but I cannot, tell me my destiny wherefore?
Whoop now I have my dream, did you never hear so great a wonder as this? Three blue beans in a blue bladder, rattle bladder rattle.
I'll now set my countenance and to her in prose, it may be this rim ram ruff, is too rude an encounter.
Let me fair Lady if you be at leisure, revel with your sweetness, and rail upon that cowardly conjuror, that hath cast me or congealed me rather into an unkind sleep and polluted my Carcase.
Laugh, laugh Xanthippe, thou hast thy fortune, a fool and a husband under one.
Truly sweet heart as I seem, about some twenty years, the very April of mine age.
Why what a prating Ass is this?
Her Coral lips, her crimson chin,
Her silver teeth so white within:
Her golden locks her rolling eye,
Her pretty parts let them go by:
heigh ho hath wounded me,
That I must die this day to see.
By gog's bones thou art a flouting knave, Her Coral lips, her crimson chin: ka wilshaw.
True my own and my own because mine, & mine because mine ha ha: Above a thousand pounds in possibility, and things fitting thy desire in possession.
The Sot thinks I ask of his lands, Lob be your comfort, and Cuckold be your destiny: Hear you sir; and if you will have us, you had best say so betime.
True sweet heart and will royalize thy progeny with my pedigree.
Wretched Eumenides, still unfortunate,
Envied by fortune, and forlorn by Fate;
Here pine and die wretched Eumenides.
Die in the spring, the April of my age?
Here sit thee down, repent what thou hast done
I would to God that it were near begone.
You are well overtaken sir.
Who's that?
You are heartily well met sir.
Forbear I say, who is that which pincheth me?
Trusting in God good Master Eumenides, that you are in so good health as all your friends were at the making hereof: God give you God morrow sir, lack you not a neat handsome and cleanly young Lad, about the age of fifteen or sixteen years, that can run by your horse, and for a need make your masterships shoes as black as ink, how say you sir.
Alas pretty Lad, I know not how to keep myself, and much less a servant, my pretty boy, my state is so bad.
Content yourself, you shall not be so ill a Master but i'll be as bad a servant: Tut sir I know you though you know not me; Are not you the man sir, deny it if you can sir, that came from a strange place in the land of Catita, where jackanapes flies with his tail in his mouth, to seek out a Lady as white as snow, and as red as blood; ha, ha, have I touched you now.
I think this boy be a spirit,
How know'st thou all this?
Tut are not you the man sir, deny it if you can sir, that gave all the money you had to the burying of a poor man, and but one three-half-pence left in your purse: Content you sir, I'll serve you that is flat.
Well my Lad since thou art so importunate, I am content to entertain thee, not as a servant; but a copartner in my journey. But whither shall we go for I have not any money more than one bare three halfpence.
Well Master content yourself, for if my divination be not out, that shall be spent at the next Inn or alehouse we come too: for master I know you are passing hungry; therefore i'll go before and provide dinner until that you come, no doubt but you'll come fair and softly after.
ay, go before, i'll follow thee.
But do you hear master, do you know my name?
No I promise thee not yet.
Why I am Iack.
Iack, why be it so then.
How say you sir, do you please to sit down?
Hosts I thank you, I have no great stomach.
Pray sir, what is the reason your master is so strange, doth not this meat please him.
Yes Hosts, but it is my masters fashion to pay before he eats, therefore a reckoning good hostess.
Marry shall you sir presently.
Why Iack what dost thou mean, thou knowest I have not any money: therefore sweet Iack tell me what shall I do.
Well master look in your purse.
Why faith it is a folly, for I have no money.
Why look you master, do so much for me.
Alas Iack my purse is full of money.
Alas, master, does that word belong to this accident? why methinks I should have seen you cast away your cloak, and in a bravado danced a galliard round about the chamber; why master, your man can teach you more wit than this, come hostis, cheer up my master.
You are heartily welcome: and if it please you to eat of a fat Capon, a fairer bird, a finer bird, a sweeter bird, a crisper bird, a neater bird, your worship never eat off.
Thanks my fine eloquent hostess.
But hear you master, one word by the way, are you content I shall be halves in all you get in your journey?
I am Iack, here is my hand.
Enough master, I ask no more.
Come Hostess receive your money, and I thank you for my good entertainment.
You are heartily welcome sir.
Come Iack whether go we now?
marry master to the conjurers presently.
Content Iack: Hostis farewell.
Come my duck come: I have now got a wife, thou art fair, art thou not?
My Corebus the fairest alive, make no doubt of that.
Come wench, are we almost at the well.
I Corebus we are almost at the Well now, i'll go fetch some water: sit down while I dip my pitcher in.
Gently dip: but not too deep;
For fear you make the golden beard to weep.
Fair maiden white and red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head:
And thou shalt have some cockle bread.
Gently dip, but not too deep,
For fear thou make the golden beard to weep.
Fair maid, white, and red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head;
And every hair, a sheaf shall be,
And every sheaf a golden tree.
Oh see Corebus I have combed a great deal of gold into may lap, and a great deal of corn.
Well said wench, now we shall have just enough, God send us coiners to coin our gold: but come shall we go home sweet heart?
Nay come Corebus I will lead you.
So Corebus' things have well hit,
Thou hast gotten wealth to mend thy wit.
Come away master come,
Go along Iack, i'll follow thee, Iack, they say it is good to go cross legged, and say his prayers backward: how sayest thou?
Tut never fear master, let me alone, here sit you still, speak not a word. And because you shall not be enticed with his enchanting speeches; with this same wool i'll stop your ears: and so master sit still, for I must to the conjuror.
How now, what man art thou that sits so sad
Why dost thou gaze upon these stately trees,
Without the leave and will of Sacrapant?
What not a word but mum,
Than Sacrapant thou art betrayed.
What hand invades the head of Sacrapant?
What hateful fury doth envy my happy state?
Then Sacrapant these are thy latest days,
Alas my veins are numbed, my sinews shrink,
My blood is pierced, my breath fleeting away,
And now my timeless date is come to end:
He in whose life his actions hath been so soul,
Now in his death to hell defends his soul.
Oh Sir are you gone: now I hope we shall have some other coil. Now master how like you this; the conjuror he is dead, and vows never to trouble us more. Now get you to your fair Lady, and see what you can do with her: Alas he heareth me not all this while; but I will help that.
How now Iack, what news?
Here master, take this sword and dig with it, at the foot of this hill.
How now Iack, what is this?
Master, without this the conjuror could do nothing, and so long as this light lasts, so long doth his art endure, and this being out, then doth his art decay.
Why then Iack I will soon put out this light.
I master, how?
Why with a stone i'll break the glass, and then blow it out.
No master you may as soon break the smith's anvil, as this little viol; nor the biggest blast that ever Boreas blew, cannot blow out this little light; but she that is neither maid, wife, nor widow. Master, wind this horn; and see what will happen.
So master, how like you this; this is she that ran madding in the woods, his betrothed love that keeps the cross, and now this light being out, all are restored to their former liberty. And now master to the Lady that you have so long looked for.
God speed fair maid sitting alone there is once.
God speed fair maid; there is twice:
God speed fair maid, that is thrice.
Not so good sir, for you are by.
Enough master, she hath spoke, now I will leave her with you.
Thou fairest flower of these western parts:
Whose beauty so reflecteth in my sight,
As doth a Crystal mirror in the son:
For thy sweet sake I have crossed the frozen Rhine,
Leaving fair Po, I sailed up Danuby,
As far as Saba whose enhancing streams,
Cuts twixt the Tartars and the Russians,
These have I crossed for thee fair Delia:
Then grant me that which I have sued for long.
Thou gentle knight, whose fortune is so good:
To find me out, and set my brothers free,
My faith, my heart, my hand, I give to thee.
Thanks gentle madam: but here comes Iack, thank him, for he is the best friend that we have.
How now Iack, what hast thou there?
marry master, the head of the conjuror.
Why Iack that is impossible, he was a young man.
Ah master, so he deceived them that beheld him: but he was a miserable, old, and crooked man; though to each man's eye he seemed young and fresh, for master; this conjuror took the shape of the old man that kept the cross: and that old man was in the likeness of the conjuror. But now master wind your horn.
Welcome Erestus, welcome fair Venelia,
Welcome Thelea, and Kalepha both,
Now have I her that I so long have sought,
So saith fair Delia, if we have your consent.
Valiant Eumenides thou well deservest
To have our favours: so let us rejoice,
That by thy means we are at liberty.
Here may we joy each in others sight,
And this fair Lady have her wandering knight.
So master, now ye think you have done: but I must have a saying to you; you know you and I were partners, I to have half in all you got.
Why so thou shalt Iack.
Why then master draw your sword, part your Lady, let me have halfe of her presently.
Why I hope Iack thou dost but jest, I promised thee half I got, but not half my Lady.
But what else master, have you not gotten her, therefore divide her straight, for I will have half there is no remedy.
Well ere I will falsify my word unto my friend, take her all, here Iack i'll give her thee.
Nay neither more nor less Master, but even just half.
Before I will falsify my faith unto my friend, I will divide her, Jack thou shalt have half.
Be not so cruel unto our sister gentle Knight.
O spare fair Delia she deserves no death.
Content yourselves, my word is passed to him, therefore prepare thyself Delia for thou must die.
Then farewell world, adieu Eumenides.
Stay Master, it is sufficient I have tried your constancy: Do you now remember since you paid for the burying of a poor fellow.
I very well Jack.
Then Master thank that good deed, for this good turn, and so God be with you all.
Jack what art thou gone?
Then farewell Jack.
Come brothers and my beauteous Delia,
Erestus and thy dear Venelia:
We will to Thessalie with joyful hearts.
Agreed, we follow thee and Delia.
What Gammer, asleep?
By the Mass son 'tis almost day, and my windows shuts at the cock's crow.
do you hear Gammer, methinks this Jack bore a great sway amongst them.
O man, this was the ghost of the poor man, that they kept such a coil to bury, & that makes him to help the wandering knight so much: But come let us in, we will have a cup of ale and a tossed this morning and so depart.
Then you have made an end of your tale Gammer?
Yes faith: When this was done I took a piece of bread and cheese, and came my way, and so shall you have too before you go, to your breakfast.