I Wonder how the king escaped our hands.
Whilst we pursued the horsemen of the North,
He slily stole away and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Charged our main battles front, and therewith him
Lord Stafford and Lord Clifford all abrest 〈…〉
Broke in and were by the hands of common Soldiers slain.
Lord Staffords father Duke of Buckhingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerously,
I cloven his Beaver with a down right blow:
Father that this is true behold his blood.
And brother here's the Earl of Wiltshire's
Blood, whom I encountered as the battles ioind.
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.
What is your grace dead my L▪ of Summerset?
Such hope haue all the line of Iohn of Ga .
Thus do I hope to shape king Henry's head.
And so do I victorious prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heavens these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of that fearful king,
And that the regal chair? Possess it York:
For this is thine and not king Henry's heirs.
Assist me then sweet Warwick, and I will:
For hither are we broken in by force.
we'll all assist thee, and he that flies shall die.
Thanks gentle Norfolk. Stay by me my Lords,
and soldiers stay you here and lodge this night:
And when the king comes offer him no
Violence, unless he seek to put us out by force.
Armed as we be, let's stay within this house?
The bloody parliament shall this be called,
unless Plantagenet Duke of York be king
And bashful Henry be deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us by words to our enemies.
Then leave me not my Lords: for now I mean
To take possession of my right.
Neither the king, nor him that loves him best,
The proudest bird that holds up Lancaster.
Dares stir a wing if Warwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet: and root him out who dares?
Resolve thee Richard: Claim the English crown.
Look Lordings where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means
Backed by the power of Warwick that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown, and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland▪ he slew thy father.
And thine Clifford: and you both have vowed revenge,
On him, his sons, his favourites, and his friends.
And if I be not, heavens be revenged on me.
The hope thereof, makes Clifford mourn in steel.
What? shall we suffer this, let's pull him down.
My heart for anger breaks, I cannot speak.
Be patiented gentle Earl of Westmoreland.
Patience is for pultrouns such as he
He durst not sit there had your father lived?
My gracious Lord: here in the Parliament,
Let us assail the family of York.
Well hast thou spoken cozen, be it so.
O know you not the City favours them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
But when the D. is slain, they'll quickly sly.
Far be it from the thoughts of Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the parliament house.
cozen of Exeter, words, frowns, and threats,
Shall be the wars that Henry means to use.
Thou facetious duke of York, descend my throne,
I am thy sovereign.
Thou art deceived: I am thine.
For shame come down he made thee D. of York.
TTwas mine inheritance as the kingdom is.
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
Exeter thou art a traitor to the crown.
In following this usurping Henry.
Whom should he follow but his natural king.
TRUE Clif and that is Richard Duke of York.
And shall I stand while thou sittest in my throne?
Content thyself it must and shall be so.
Be Duke of Lancaster, let him be king.
Why? he is both king & Duke of Lancaster,
And that the Earl of Westmoreland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those that chaste you from the field
And slew your father, and with colours spread,
Marched through the City to the pallas gates.
No Warwick I remember it to my grief,
And by his soul thou and thy house shall rue it.
Plantagenet of thee and of thy sons,
Thy kinsmen and thy friends, I'll have more lives,
Then drops of blood were in my father's veins.
Urge it no more, least in revenge thereof,
I send thee Warwick such a messenger,
As shall revenge his death before I stir.
Poor Clifford, how I scorn thy worthless threats
Will ye we show our title to the crown,
Or else our swords shall plead it in the field?
What title hast thou traitor to the Crown?
Thy father was as thou art Duke of York,
Thy grandfather Roger Mortimer earl of March,
I am the son of Henry the Fift who tamed the French,
And made the Dolphin stoop, and seized upon their
Towns and provinces.
Talk not of France since thou hast lost it all.
the Lord protector lost it and not I,
When I was crowned I was but nine months' old.
You are old enough now and yet me thinks you lose,
Father tear the Crown from the usurpers head▪
Do so sweet father, set it on your head.
Good brother as thou lov'st & honour'st arms,
Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.
Sound drum's and trumpets & the king will sly.
Peace sons:
Peace thou and give king Henry leave to speak.
Ah Plantagenet, why seekest thou to depose me?
Are we not both both Plantagenets by birth,
And from two brother's line ally descent?
Suppose by right and equity thou be king,
Thinkest thou that I will leave my kingly seat
wherein my father and my grandsire sat?
No, first shall war unpeople this my realm,
I and our colours often borne in France,
And now in England to our hearts great sorrow
Shall be my winding sheet, why saint you Lords?
My titles better far than his.
Prove it Henry and thou shalt be king?
Why Henry the fourth by conquest got the Crown.
'Twas by rebellion 'gainst his sovereign.
I know not what to say my titles weak,
Tell me may not a king adopt an heir?
What then?
Then am I lawful king For Richard
The second in the view of main Lords
Resigned the Crown to Henry the fourth,
Whose heir my Father was, and I am his.
I tell thee he rose against him being his
Sovereign, & made him to resign the crown perforce.
Suppose my Lord he did it vnconstrainde,
Think you that were prejudicial to the Crown?
No▪ for he could not so resign the Crown,
But that the next heir must succeed and reign.
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
All will revolt from me and turn to him.
Plantagenet for all the claim thou layst,
Think not king Henry shall be thus deposed?
Deposed he shall be in despite of thee.
Tush Warwick, Thou art deceived? 'tis not thy
Southern powers of Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and of
Kent that makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the Duke up in despite of me.
King Henry be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence.
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I do kneel to him that slew my father.
O Clifford, how thy words revive my soul.
Henry of Lancaster resign thy crown.
What mutter you? or what conspire you Lords?
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state where now he sits,
Wright up his title with thy usurping blood.
O Warwick, hear me speak.
Let me but reign in quiet whilst I live,
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs
And thou shalt reign in quiet whilst thou hu'st.
Convey the soldiers hence, and then I will.
Captain conduct them into Tuthill fields.
What wrong is this unto the Prince your son?
What good is this for England and himself?
Base, fearful, and despairing Henry.
How hast thou wronged both thyself and us?
I cannot stay to hear these Articles.
Nor I, Come cozen let's go tell the Queen.
Be thou a pray unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unkingly deed.
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandoned and despised.
They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield my Lord.
Ah Exeter?
Why should you sigh my Lord?
Not for myself Lord Warwick, but my soone,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may: I here entail the Crown
To thee and to thine heirs, conditionally,
That here thou take thine oath, to cease these civil
Broils, and whilst I live to honour me as thy king and Sovereign.
That oath I willingly take and will perform.
Long live king Henry. Plantagenet embrace him?
And long live thou and all thy forward sons.
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.
Accuist be he that seeks to make them so's,
My Lord I'll take my leave, for I'll to Wakefield
To my castle.
Exit York and his sons.
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.
And I'll to Norfolk with my followers.
And I to the sea from whence I came.
My Lord here comes the Queen, I'll steal away.
And so will I.
Nay stay, or else I follow thee.
Be patiented gentle Queen, and then I'll stay.
What patience can there? ah timorous man,
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son, and me,
And given our rights unto the house of York.
Art thou a king and wilt be worst to yield?
Had I been there, the soldiers should have tossed
Me on their lances points, before I would have
Granted to their wills. The Duke is made
Protector of the land: Stern Fawconbridge
Commands the narrow seas. And thinkest thou then
To sleep secure? I here divorce me Henry
From thy bed, until that Act of Parliament
Be recalde, wherein thou yieldest to the house of York.
The Northern Lords that have forsworn thy colours,
Will follow mine if once they see them spread,
And spread they shall unto thy deep disgrace.
Come son, let's away and leave him here alone.
Stay gentle Margaret, and here me speak.
Thou hast spoke too much already, therefore be still.
Gentle son Edward, wilt thou stay with me?
I, to be murdered by his enemies.
When I return with victory from the field,
I'll see your Grace, till then I'll follow her.
Poor Queen, her love to me and to the prince Her son,
Makes her in 〈…〉 thus forget herself.
Revenged may she be on that accursed Duke.
Come cozen of Exeter, stay thou here,
For Clifford and those Northern Lords be gone
I fear towards Wakefield, to disturb the Duke.
Brother and cozen Montague, give me leave to speak.
Nay, I can better play the Orator.
But I have reasons strong and forcible.
How now sons what at a jar amongst yourselves?
No father, but a sweet contention, about that which concerns yourself and us, The crown of England father.
The crown boy, why Henries yet alive,
And I have sworn that he shall reign in quiet till
His death.
But I would break an hundred oaths to reign one year.
And if it please your grace to give me leave,
I'll show your grace the way to save your oath,
And dispossess king Henry from the crown.
I prithee Dick let me hear thy device.
Then thus my Lord. An oath is of no moment
Being not sworn before a lawful magistrate.
Henry is none but doth usurp your right,
And yet your grace stands bound to him by oath.
Then noble father resolve yourself,
And once more claim the crown.
I, sayst thou so boy▪ why then it shall be so.
I am resolved to win the crown, or die.
Edward, thou shalt to Edmund Brooke Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
Thou cozen Montague, shalt to Norfolk strait,
And bid the Duke to muster up his soldiers,
And come to me to Wakefield presently.
And Richard thou to London straight shalt post,
And bid Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick
To leave the city, and with his men of war,
To meet me at Saint Albon ten days hence.
Myself here in Sandall castle will provide
Both men and money to further our attempts.
Now, what news?
My Lord, the Queen with thirty thousand men,
Accompanied with the Earls of Cumberland,
Northumberland and Westmoreland, and others of the
House of Lancaster, are marching towards Wakefield,
To besiege you in your castle here.
A God's name, let them come. cozen Montague post you hence: and boys stay you with me.
Sir Iohn and sir Hugh Mortemers mine uncles,
Your welcome to Sandal in an happy hour,
The army of the Queen means to besiege us.
She shall not need my Lord, we'll meet her in the field.
What with five thousand soldiers uncle?
I father, with five hundred for a need,
A woman's general, what should you fear?
Indeed, many brave battles have I won
In Normandy, when as the enemy
Hath been ten to one▪ and why should I now doubt
Of the like success? I am resolved Come lets go.
Let's march away, I hear their drums.
Oh fly my Lord, let's leave the Castle,
And fly to Wakefield strait.
O Tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes.
Chaplin away, thy Priesthood saves thy life,
As for the brat of that accursed Duke
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
Oh Clifford spare this tender Lord, lest
Heaven revenge it on thy head: Oh save his life.
Soldier's away and drag him hence perforce:
Away with the villain.
How now, what dead already? or is it fear that
Makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.
So looks the penned up Lion on the lamb,
And so he walks insulting over his pray,
And so he turns again to rend his limbs in sunder,
Oh Clifford, kill me with thy sword, and
Not with such a cruel threatening look,
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath,
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
In vain thou speakest poor boy: my father's
Blood hath stopped the passage where thy words should enter.
Then let my father's blood open it again? he is a Man, and Clifford cope with him.
Had I thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me.
Or should I dig up thy forefather's graves,
And hang their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor case my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York,
Is as a fury to torment my soul.
Therefore till I root out that cursed line
And leave not one on earth, I le live in hell therefore.
Oh let me pray, before I take my death.
To thee I pray: Sweet Clifford pity me.
I, such piteous my rapiers point affords.
I never did thee hurt, wherefore wilt thou kill me?
Thy father hath.
But ttwas ere I was borne▪
Thou hast one son, for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, 〈◊〉 God is just▪
He be as miserably slain as I.
Oh, let me live in prison all my days,
And when I give occasion of offence,
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
No cause? Thy Father slew my father, therefore Die.
Plantagenet I come Plantagenet,
And this thy sons blood cleaving to my blade,
Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood
Congealed with his, do make me wipe off both.
Ah York, post to thy castle, save thy life,
The goal is lost thou house of Lancaster,
Thrice happy chance is it for thee and thine,
That heaven abridged my days and calls me hence,
But God knows what chance hath betide my sons:
But this I know they have demeaned themselves,
Like men borne to renown by life or death:
Three times this day came Richard to my sight,
And cried courage Father: Victory or death.
And twice so oft came Edward to my view,
With purple Faulchen painted to the hilts,
In blood of those whom he had slaughtered.
Oh hark, I hear the drums? No way to fly:
No way to save my life? And here I stay:
And here my life must end.
Come bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more blood:
This is the But, and this abides your shot.
Yield to our mercies proud Plantagenet.
I, to such mercy as his ruthful arm
With down right payment lent unto my father,
Now Phaeton hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noon tide prick.
My ashes like the Phoenix may bring forth
A bird that will revenge it on you all,
And in that hope I cast mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning what ere you can afflict me with:
Why stay you Lords? what, multitudes and fear?
So cowards fight when they can fly no longer:
So Doves do peck the ravens piercing talents:
So desperate thieves all hopeless of their lives,
Breath out invectives 'gainst the officers.
Oh Clifford, yet bethink thee once again,
And in thy mind o'errun my former time:
And bite thy tongue that slanderst him with cowardice,
Whose very look hath made thee quake are this.
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows twice two for one.
Hold valiant Clifford for a thousand causes,
I would prolong the traitor's life a while.
Wrath makes him death, speak thou Northumberland.
Hold Clifford do not honour him to much,
To prick thy finger though to wound his heart:
What valour were it when a cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
'tis wars prize to take all advantages,
And ten to one, is no impeach in wanes.
I, I▪ so strives the Woodcock with the gin.
So doth the cunnie struggle with the net.
So triumphs thieves upon their conquered
Booty: So true men yield by robbers overmatcht.
What will your grace have done with him?
Brave warriors Clifford & Northumberland
Come make him stand upon this molehill here,
That armed at mountains with outstretched arm,
And parted but the shadow with his hand.
Was it you that revelde in our Parliament▪
And made a prechment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
Or where is that valiant Crookbackt prodigy?
Dickey your boy, that with his grumbling voice,
Was wont to cheer his Dad in mutinies?
Or amongst the rest▪ where is your dawning Rutland?
Look York? I dipped this napkin in the blood,
That valiant Clifford with his rapiers point,
Made issue from the bosom of thy boy.
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks with all.
Alas poor York: But that I hate thee much,
I should lament thy miserable state?
I prithee grieve to make me merry York?
Stamp▪ rave and fret, that I may sing and dance.
What: hath thy fiery heart so parched thine entrails,
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
Thou wouldst be feed I see to make me sport.
York cannot speak, vnlesle he wear a crown.
A crown for York? and Lords bow low to him.
So: hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
I, now looks he like a king?
This is he that took king Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted air.
But how is it that great Plantagenet,
Is crowned so soon, and broke his holy oath,
As I bethink me you should not be king,
Till our Henry had shook hands with death,
And will you empale your head with Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of the Diadem
Now in his life against your holy oath?
Oh 'tis a fault too too unpardonable.
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head,
And whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
That's my office for my father's death.
Yet stay: & let's here the Orisons he makes.
She wolf of France, but worse than Wolves of France:
Whose tongue more poisoned than the Adder's tooth:
How ill beseeming is it in thy sex,
To triumph like an Amazonian trull
Upon his woes, whom Fortune captivates?
But that thy face is vizard like, unchanging,
Made impudent by use of evil deeds:
I would assay, proud Queen to make thee blush:
To tell thee of whence thou art, from whom derived,
TTwere shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of king of Naples,
Of both the Siss●les and Ierusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor Monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, or it boots thee not proud Queen,
Unless the Adage must be verified:
That beggars mounted, run their horse to death.
'tis beauty, that oft makes women proud,
But God he wots thy share thereof is small.
'tis government, that makes them most admired,
The contrary doth make thee wondered at.
'tis virtue that makes them seem divine.
The want thereof makes thee abominable.
Thou art as opposite to every good,
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the Septentrion.
Oh Tigers heart wrapped in a woman's hide?
How couldst thou drain the life blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are mild, pitiful, and flexible.
Thou indurate, stern, rough, remorseless.
Bids thou me rage? why now thou hast thy will
Wouldst have me weep? why so thou hast thy wish.
For raging winds blows up a storm of tears,
And when the rage allied the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies,
And every drop begs vengeance as it falls,
On thee fell Clifford, and the false French woman.
Beshrew me but his passions move me so,
As hardly can I check mine eyes from tears.
That face of his the hungry Cannibals
Can not have touched, would not have stained with blood
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O ten times more than Tugers of Arcadia.
See ruthless Queen a hapless father's tears.
This cloth thou dipts in blood of my sweet boy,
And lo with tears I wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin and go boast of that,
And if thou tell the heavy story well,
Upon my soul the hearers will she'd tears,
I, even my so's will she'd fast falling tears,
And say, alas, it was a piteous deed.
Here, take the crown, and with the crown my curse,
And in thy need such comfort come to thee,
As now I reap at thy two cruel hands.
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world,
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads.
Had he been slaughterman of all my kin,
I could not choose but weep with him to see,
How inly anger gripes his heart.
What weeping ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all.
And that will quickly dry your melting tears.
there's for my oath there's for my father's death.
And there's to right our gentle hearted kind.
Open thy gates of mercy gracious God,
My soul flies forth to meet with thee.
Off with his head and set it on York Gates,
So York may overlook the town of York.
After this dangerous fight and hapless war,
How doth my noble brother Richard far?
I cannot joy until I be resolved,
Where our ●●ght valiant father is become.
H●● 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 I see him bear himself,
As 〈…〉 didst a heard of neat,
So 〈…〉 our valiant father,
Me thinks 'tis 〈◊〉 enough to be his son.
the 〈◊〉 opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun,
Da doe I see three suns?
Three glorious suns, 〈◊〉 separated by a racking
Cloud, but 〈◊〉 in a pale clear shining sky.
they join, embrace, and seem to kiss.
vowed some league inviolate:
are they but one lamp, one light, one sun,
In this the heavens doth figure some event.
I think it cities us brother to the field,
That we the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Already each one shining by his meed,
May join in one and overpeere the world,
As this the earth, and therefore hence forward,
I'll bear upon my Target, three fair shining suns.
But what art thou? that lookest so heavily?
Oh one that was a woeful looker on,
When as the noble Duke of York was slain.
O speak no more, for I can hear no more.
Tell on thy tale, for I will hear it all.
When as the noble Duke was put to slight,
And then pursued by Clifford and the Queen,
And many soldiers m●●:, who all at once
Let drive at him and forced the Duke to yield:
And then they set him on a molehill there,
And crowned the gracious Duke in high despite,
Who then with tears began to wail his fall.
The 〈◊〉 Queene believing he did weep,
Gave him a handkerchief to wipe his eyes,
D●pt in the blood of sweet young Rutland
By rough Clifford slain: who weeping took it up.
Then through his breast they thrust their bloody swords,
Who like a lamb fell at the butcher's feet.
Then on the gates of York they set his head,
And there it doth remain the piteous spectacle
That ere mine eyes beheld.
Sweet Duke of York our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone there is no hope for us:
Now my soul's palace is become a prison.
Oh would she break from compass of my breast,
For never shall I have more joy.
I cannot weep, for all my breasts moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnace burning heart:
I cannot joy till this white rose be died,
Even in the heart blood of the house of Lancaster.
Richard▪ I bore thy name, and I'll revenge thy death,
Or die myself in seeking of revenge.
His name that valiant Duke hath left with thee,
His chair and Dukedom that remains for me.
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun.
For chair, and dukedom, Throne and kingdom say:
For either that is thine, or else thou wert not his?
How now fair Lords: what sare? what news abroad?
Ah Warwick? should we report the baleful
N●●●●, 〈◊〉 at each words deliverance stab poinyardes
In our flesh till all were told, the words would add
More 〈◊〉 than the wounds,
Ah valiant Lord the Duke of York is slain.
Ah Warwick Warwick, that Plantagenet,
Which held thee dear: I, even an his soul's redemption,
Is by the ●●●●ne L. Clifford, done to death.
Ten days a go I drowned those news in tears.
And now to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things since then befallen.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings as swiflie as the post could run,
Was brought me of your loss, and his departure.
I then in London keeper of the King,
Mustered my Soldiers, gathered flocks of friends,
And very well appointed as I thought,
Marched to saint Albon to intercept the Queen,
Bearing the King in my behalf along,
For by my scouts I was advertised,
That she was coming, with a full intent
To dash your late decree in parliament,
Touching king Henry's heirs and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Albon met,
Our battle's joined, and both sides fiercely fought.
But whether ttwas the coldness of the king,
He looked full gently on his warlike Queen,
That robbed my soldiers of their heated spleen.
Or whether ttwas report of his success,
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour,
Who thunders to his captains blood and death,
I cannot tell. But to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightnings went and came.
Our soldiers like the might Owls lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fel gently down as if they smote their friends.
I cheered them up with justice of the cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards,
But all in vain, they had no hearts to fight,
Nor we in them no hope to win the day,
So that We fled. The king unto the Queen,
Lord George your brother, Norfolk, and myself,
In haste, post haste, are come to join with you,
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.
Thanks gentle Warwick.
How far hence is the Duke with his power?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?
Some five miles off the Duke is with his power,
But as for your brother he was lately sent
From your kind Aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers 'gainst this needful war.
TTwas odds belike, when valiant Warwick fled.
Oft have I heard thy praises in pursuit,
But near till now thy scandal of retire.
Nor now my scandal Richard dost thou hear,
For thou shalt know that this right hand of mine,
Can pluck the Diadem from Saint Henry's head,
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist:
Were he as famous and as bold in war,
As he is famed for mildness, peace and prayer.
I know it well Lord Warwick blame me not,
TTwas love I bore thy glories made me speak.
But in this troublous time, what's to be done?
Shall we gothrow away our coats of steel,
And clad our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-maries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes,
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last say I▪ and to it Lords.
Why therefore Warwick came to find ● you out,
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me Lords, the proud insulting Queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the Parliament.
But now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate his oath or what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power I guess them fifty thousand strong.
Now if the help of Norfolk and myself,
Can but amount to 48. thousand,
With all the friends that thou brave earl of March,
Among the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Why via, To London will we march amain,
And once again betrayed our foaming steeds,
And once again cry charge upon the foe,
But never once again turn back and flee.
I, now me thinks I hear great Warwick speak:
Near may he live to see a sunshine day,
That cries retire, when Warwick bids him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean,
And when thou faints, must Edward fall:
Which peril heaven forefend.
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York,
The next degree, is England's royal king:
And king of England and shalt thou be proclaimed,
In every burrow as we pass along:
And he that casts not up his cap for joy,
Shall for the offence make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer dreaming of renown,
But forward to effect these resolutions.
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The Queen is coming with a puissant power,
And craves your company for speedy council.
Why then it sorts brave Lords. Let's march away.
Welcome my Lord to this brave town of York,
Yonder's the head of that ambitious enemy,
That sought to be impaled with your crown.
Doth not the object please your eye my Lord?
Even as the rocks please them that fear their wrack.
Withhold revenge dear God 'tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringde my vow.
My gracious Lord, this too much lenity,
And harmful pity must be laid aside,
To whom do Lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp his den.
Whose hand is that the savage Bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils his young before his face.
Whose scapes the lurking serpents mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
And Doves will peck, in rescue of their brood.
Ambitious York did level at thy Crown,
Thou smiling, while he knit his angry brows.
He but a Duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue like a loving sire.
Thou being a king blessed with a goodly son,
Didst give consent to disinherit him,
Which argude thee a most unnatural father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young.
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet in protect on of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them even with those same wings
Which they have sometime used in fearful flight,
Make war with him, that climbs unto their nest,
Offering their own lives in their yongs defence?
For shame my Lord, make them your precedent,
Were it not pity that this goodly boy,
should lose his birth right through his father's fault?
And long hereafter say unto his child,
What my great grandfather and grandsire got,
My careless father fondly gave away?
Look on the boy and let his manly face,
Which promiseth successful fortune to us all,
Steel thy melting thoughts,
To keep thine own, and leave thine own with him.
Full well hath Clifford played the Orator,
Inferring, arguments of mighty force.
But tell me, didst thou never yet hear tell.
That things evil got had ever bad success,
And happy ever was it for that son,
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
I leave my son my virtuous deeds behind,
And would my father had left me no more,
For all the rest is held at such a rate,
As asks a thousand times more care to keep,
Then may the present profit countervail.
Ah cozen York, would thy best friends did know,
How it doth grieve me that thy head stands there.
My Lord this harmful pity makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to your princely sonne.
unsheath your sword and strait do dub him knight.
Kneel down Edward.
Edward Plantagenet 〈…〉 knight,
And learn this lesson boy▪ draw ●●y sword in right
My gracious father by your kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that 〈…〉 to the death.
Why that is spoken like a toward prince.
Royal commanders be in readiness,
For with a band of fifty thousand men,
Comes Warwick backing of the Duke of York.
And in the towns whereas they pass along,
Proclaims him king, and many flies to him,
Prepare your battles, for they be at hand.
I would your highness would departed the field,
The Queen hath best success when you are absent.
Do good my Lord, and leave us to our fortunes.
Why that's my fortune, therefore I'll stay still.
Be it with resolution then to fight.
Good father cheer these noble Lords,
unsheath your sword, sweet father cry Saint George.
Pitch we our battle here, for hence we will not move.
Now perjury Henry wilt thou yield thy crown,
And kneel for mercy at thy sovereign's feet?
Go rate thy minions proud insulting boy,
Becomes it thee to be thus malapert,
Before thy king and lawful sovereign?
I am his king and he should bend his knee,
I was adopted hear by his consent.
Since when he hath broke his oath.
For as we hear you that are king
Though he do wear the Crown,
Have caused him by new act of Parliament
To blot our brother out, and put his own son in.
And reason George. Who should succeed the father but the son?
Are you their butcher?
I Crookbacke, here I stand to answer thee, or any of your sort.
TTwas you that killed young Rutland, was it not?
Yes, and old York too, and yet not satisfied.
For Gods sake Lords give synald to the fight.
What sayest thou Henry? wilt thou yield thy crown?
What, long tongued War, dare you speak?
When you and I met at saint Alban's last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.
I, than ttwas my turn to flee, but now 'tis thine.
You said so much before, and yet you fled.
TTwas not your valour Clifford, that drove me thence.
No nor your manhood Warwick, that could make you stay.
Northumberland Northumberland, we hold
Thee reverently Break off the party, for scarce
I can refrain the execution of my big swollen
heart, against that Clifford there, that
Cruel child-killer.
Why I killed thy father, call'st thou him a child?
I like a villain, and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland.
But ere sun set I'll make thee curse the deed.
Have done with words great Lords, and Hear me speak.
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
I prithee give no limits to my tongue,
I am a king and privilege to speak.
My Lord the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be crued with words, therefore be still.
Then executioner unsheath thy sword,
By him that made us all I am resolved,
That Clifford's manhood hangs upon his tongue.
What sayst thou Henry, shall I have my right or no?
A thousand men have broke their fast to day,
That near shall dine, unless thou yield the crown.
If thou deny their bloods be on thy head,
For York in justice puts his armour on.
If all be right that Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong but all things must be right.
Whosoever got thee, there thy mother stands,
For well I wots thou hast thy mother's tongue.
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam,
But like a soul misshapen stygmaticke
Marked by the destinies to be avoided,
As venom Toads, or Lizards fainting looks.
Iron of Naples, hid with English gilt,
Thy father bears the title of a king.
As if a channel should be called the Sea;
Shames thou not, knowing from whence thou art derived,
to parley thus with England's lawful heirs?
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
To make that shameless callet know herself,
Thy husband's father reveld in the heart of France,
And tamed the French, and made the Doiphin stoop:
And had he matched according to his state,
He might have kept that glory till this day.
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal day,
Then that sunshine bred a shower for him
Which washed his father's fortunes out of France,
And heaped seditions on his crown at home.
For what hath moved these tumults but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title yet had slept?
And we in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipped our claim until an other age.
But when we saw our summer brought the gain,
And that the harvest brought us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root,
And though the edge have something hit ourselves,
Yet know thou we will never cease to strike,
Till we have hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.
And in this resolution, I defy thee,
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
Sound trumpet's, let our bloody colours wave,
And either victory or else a grave,
Stay Edward stay.
Hence wrangling woman, I'll no longer stay,
Thy words will cost ten thousand lives to day.
Sore spent with toil as runners with the race,
I lay me down a little while to breath,
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Hath robbed my strong knit sinews of their strength,
And force perforce needs must I rest myself.
Smile gentle heavens or strike ungentle death,
That we may die unless we gain the day:
What fatal star malignant frowns from heaven
Upon the harmless line of York's TRUE house?
Come brother, come, let's to the field again,
For yet there's hope enough to win the day:
Then let us back to cheer our fainting Troops,
Lest they retire now we have left the field.
How now my lords: what hap, what hope of good▪
Ah Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy noble father in the thickest throngs,
Cried still for Warwick his thrice valiant son,
Until with thousand swords he was beset,
And many wounds made in his aged breast,
And as he tottering sat upon his sleede,
He wa●t his hand to me and cried aloud▪
Richard, commend me to my valiant son,
And still he cried Warwick revenge my death,
And with those words he tumbled off his horse,
And so the noble Salisbury gave up the ghost.
Then let the earth be drunken with his blood,
I'll kill my horse because I will not she:
And here to God of heaven I make a vow,
Never to pass from forth this bloody field
Till I am full revenged for his death.
Lord Warwick, Idle bend my knees with thine,
And in that vow now join my soul to thee,
Thou setter up and puller down of kings,
vouchsafe a gentle victory to us,
Or let us die before we lose the day:
Then let us haste to cheer the soldiers hearts,
And call them pillars that will stand to us,
And highly promise to remunerate
Their trusty service, in these dangerous wars.
Come, come away, and stand not to debate,
For yet is hope of fortune good enough.
Brothers, give me your hands, and let us part
And take our leaves until we meet again,
Where ere it be in heaven or in earth.
Now I that never wept, now melt in woe,
To see these dire mishaps continue so.
Warwick farewell.
Away away, once more sweet Lords farewell.
A Clifford a Clifford.
A Richard a Richard.
Now Clifford, for York & young Rutland's death,
This thirsty sword that longs to drink thy blood,
Shall lop thy limbs, and slice thy cursed heart,
For to revenge the murders thou hast made.
Now Richard, I am with thee here alone,
This is the hand that stabbed thy father York▪
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland,
And here's the heart that triumphs in there deaths,
And cheers these hands that slew thy 〈◊〉 and brother,
To execute the like upon thyself,
And so have at thee.
Oh gracious God of heaven look down on us,
And set some ends to these incessant griefs,
How like a mastless ship upon the seas,
This woeful battle doth continue still,
Now leaning this way, now to that side drive,
And none doth know to whom the day will fall.
O would my death might stay these civilliars!
Would I had never rained, nor near been king.
Margaret and Clifford, chide me from the field,
Swearing they had best success when I was thence.
Would God that I were dead so all were well,
Or would my crown suffice, I were content
To yield it them and live a private life.
Il blows the wind that profits no body,
This man that I have slain in fight to day,
May be possessed of some store of crowns,
And I will search to find them if I can,
But stay. Me thinks it is my father's face,
Oh I 'tis he whom I have slain in fight,
From London was I priest out by the king,
My father he came on the part of York,
And in this conflict I have slain my father:
Oh pardon God, I knew not what I did,
And pardon father, for I knew thee not.
Lie there thou that foughtst with me so stoutly,
Now let me see what store of gold thou haste,
But stay, me thinks this is no famous face:
Oh no it is my son that I have slain in sight,
O monstrous times begetting such events,
How cruel bloody, and ironious,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget,
Poor boy thy father gave thee life too late,
And hath bereaved thee of thy life too soon.
woe above woe, grief more than common grief,
Whilst lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor lambs do feel the rigour of their wraths:
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our striving houses,
Whither one rose, and let the other flourish,
For if you strive, ten thousand lives must perish.
How will my mother for my father's death,
Take on with me and near be satisfied?
How will my wife for slaughter of my son,
Take on with me and near be satisfied?
How will the people now misdeem their king,
Oh would my death their minds could satisfy.
Was ever son so rude his father's blood to spill?
Was ever father so unnatural his son to kill?
Was ever king thus grieved and vexed still?
I'll bear thee hence from this accursed place,
For woe is me to see my father's face.
I'll bear thee hence & let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Weep wretched man, I'll lay thee tear for tear,
Here sits a king as woebegone as thee.
Away my Lord to Berwick presently,
The day 〈…〉, our friends are murdered,
No hope is left for us, therefore away▪
Oh father fly, our men have left the field,
Take horse sweet father, let us save ourselves.
Away my Lord for vengeance comes along with him:
Nay stand not to expostulate make haste,
Or else come after, I'll away before.
Nay stay good Exeter, for I'll along with thee.
Hear burns my candle out,
That whilst it lasted gave king Henry light▪
Ah Lancaster, I fear thine overthrow,
More than my bodies parting from my soul.
My love and fear glude many friends to thee,
And now I die, that tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry strengthened misproud York,
The common people swarm like summer flies,
And whither flies the Gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemy?
Oh Phoebus hadst thou never given consent,
That Phaeton should check thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car had never scorched the earth.
And Henry hadst thou lived as kings should do,
And as thy father and his father did,
Giving no foot unto the house of York,
I and ten thousand in this woeful land,
Had left no mourning Widows for our deaths,
And thou this day hadst kept thy throne in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds,
No way to fly, no strength to hold our flight,
The foe is merciless and will not pity me,
And at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air is got into my bleeding wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint,
Come York and Richard, Warwick and the rest,
I stabbeth your fathers, now come split my breast.
Thus far our fortunes keeps an upward
Course, and we are graced with wreaths of victory.
Some troops pursue the bloody minded Queen,
That now towards Barwike 〈…〉 amain,
But think you that Clifford is sled away with them?
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
For though before his face I speak the words,
Your brother Richard marked him for the grave.
And where so ere he be I warrant him dead.
Hark what soul is this that takes his heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like life and death's departure.
See who it is, and now the battles ended,
Friend or foe, let him be friendly used.
Reverse that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford.
Who killed our tender brother Rutland,
And stabbed our princely father Duke of York.
From off the gates of York fetch down the
Head, Your father's head which Clifford placed there,
Instead of that, let his supply the room.
Measure for measure must be answered.
Bring forth that fatal skrichowle to our house,
That nothing sung to us but blood and death,
Now his evil boding tongue no more shall speak.
I think his understanding is bearest.
Say Clifford dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
Oh would he did, and so perhaps he doth,
And 'tis his policy that in the time of death,
He might avoid such bitter storms as he
In his hour of death did give unto our father.
Richard if thou thinkest so, vex him with eager words.
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
Clifford device excuses for thy fault.
Whilst we devise fell tortures for thy fault.
Thou pittiedst York, and I am son to York.
Thou pittiedst Rutland, and I will pity thee.
Where's captain Margaret to hence you now?
They mock thee Clifford, swear as thou wast wont.
What not an oath? Nay, than I know he's dead.
'tis hard, when Clifford cannot ford his friend an oath.
By this I know he's dead, and by my soul,
Would this right hand buy but an hours life,
That I in all contempt might rail at him.
I'd cut it off and with the issuing blood,
Stifle the villain whose iust inched thirst,
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.
I, but he is dead, off with the traitor's head,
And rear it in the place your fathers stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England's lawful king.
From thence shall Warwick cross the seas to France,
And ask the lady Bona for thy Queen,
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together,
And having France thy friend thou needst not dread,
The scattered foe that hopes to rise again.
And though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them busy to offend thine ears.
First I'll see the coronation done,
And afterward I'll cross the seas to France,
To effect this marriage if it please my Lord.
Even as thou wilt good Warwick let it be.
But first before we go, George kneel down.
We here create thee Duke of Clarence, and girt thee with the sword.
Our younger brother Richard Duke of Gloucester.
Warwick as myself shall do & undo as him pleaseth best.
Let me be Duke of Clarenco, George of Gloster,
For Gloster's Duke doom is too ominous.
Tush that's a childish observation.
Richard be Duke of Gloster. Now to London.
To see these honours in possession.
Come let's take our stands upon this hill,
And by and by the dear will come this way.
But stay, here comes a man, let's listen him a while.
From Scotland am I stolen even of pure love,
And thus disguised to greet my native land.
No, Henry no It is no land of thine,
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors sues to thee for right,
For how canst thou help them and not thyself?
I marry sir, here is a dear, his skin is a
Keeper's fee▪ Sirrah stand close, for as I think,
This is the king, king Edward hath deposed.
My Queen and son poor souls are gone to
France, and as I hear the great commanding Warwick,
To entreat a marriage with the lady Bona,
If this be true, poor Queen and son,
Your labour is but spent in vain,
For Lewis is a prince soon won with words,
And Warwick is a subtle Orator.
He laughs and says, his Edward is installed,
She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed,
He on his right hand ask a wise for Edward,
She on his left side craving aid for Henry.
What art thou that talks of kings and queens?
More than I seem, for less I should not be.
A man at least, and more I cannot be,
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?
I but thou talkest as if thou wert a king thyself.
Why so I am in mind though not in show.
And if thou be a king where is thy crown?
My crown is in my heart, not on my head.
My crown is called content, a crown that
Kings do seldom times enjoy.
And if thou be a king crowned with content,
Your crown content and you, must be content
To go with us unto the officer, for as we think
You are our quondam king, K. Edward hath deposed,
And therefore we charge you in God's name & the kings
To go along with us unto the officers.
God's name be fulfilled, your king's name be
Obeyed, and be you kings, command and I'll obey.
Brothers of Clarence, and of Gloucester,
This lady's husband here sir Richard Grace,
At the battle of saint Alkones did lose his life,
His lands then were seized on by the conqueror.
Her suit is now to repossess those lands,
And sith in quarrel of the house of York,
The noble gentleman did lose his life,
In honour we cannot deny her ●●te.
Your highness shall do well to grant it then.
I, so I will, but yet I'll make a pause.
I is the wind in that door?
Clarence, I see the Lady hath some thing to grant,
Before the king will grant her humble lute.
He knows the game, how well he keeps the wind.
Widow come some other time to know our mind.
May it please your grace I cannot brook delays,
I beseech your highness to dispatch me now.
Lords give us leave, we mean to try this widows wit.
I, good leave have you.
For you will have leave till youth take leave,
And leave you to your crouch.
Come hither widow, how many children haste thou?
I think he means to beg a child on her.
Nay whip me then, he'll rather give her two.
Three my most gracious Lord.
You shall have four and you will be ruled by him.
Were it not pity they should lose their father's lands?
Be pitiful then dread L. and grant it them.
I'll tell thee how these lands are to be got.
So shall you bind me to your highness service.
What service wilt thou do me if I grant it them?
Even what your highness shall command.
Naic then widow I'll warrant you all your
Husband's lands, if you grant to do what he
Commands, Fight close or in good faith
You catch a clap.
Nay I sear her not unless she fall.
Marie godsforbot man, for he'll take vantage then.
Why stops my Lord, shall I not know my task?
An easy task, 'tis but to love a king.
That's soon perfounde, because I am a subject.
Why then thy hushandes' lands I freely give thee.
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
The match is made, she seals it with a curtsy.
Stay widow stare, what love dost thou think
I sue so much to get?
My humble service, such as subjects owes and the laws commands.
No by my troth, I meant no such love,
But to tell thee the troth, I aim to lie with thee.
To tell you plain my Lord, I had rather lie in prison.
Why then thou canst not get thy husbands lands.
Then mine honesty shall be my dower,
For by that loss I will not purchase them.
Herein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.
Herein your highness wrongs both them and
Me, but mighty Lord this merry inclination
Agrees not with the sadness of my suit.
Please it your highness to dismiss me either with I or no.
I, if thou say I to my request,
No, if thousaie no to my demand.
Then no my Lord, my suit is at an end.
The widow likes him not, she bends the brow.
Why he is the bluntest wooer in christendome.
Her looks are all replete with majesty,
One way or other she is for a king,
And she shall be my love or else my Queen.
Say that king Edward took thee for his Queen.
'tis better said then done, my gracious Lord,
I am a subject sit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a Sovereign.
Sweet widow, by my state I swear, I speak
No more than what my heart intends,
And that is to enjoy thee for my love.
And that is more than I will yield unto,
I know I am too bad to be your Queen,
And yet too good to be your Concubine.
You cavil widow, I did mean my Queen.
Your grace would be loath my sons should call you father.
No more than when my daughters call thee
Mother. Thou art a widow and thou hast some children,
And by God's mother I being but a bachelor
Have other some Why 'tis a happy thing
To be the father of many children.
Argue no more, for thou shalt be my Queen.
The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.
When he was made a shriver ttwas for shift.
Brothers you muse what talk the widow
And I have had, you would think it strange
If I should marry her.
Marry her my Lord, to whom?
Why Clarence to myself.
That would be ten days wonder at the least.
Why that's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
And so much more are the wonders in extremes.
Well, jest on brothers, I can tell you, her
Suit is granted for her husband's lands.
And it please your grace, Henry your foe is
Taken, and brought as prisoner to your palace gates.
Away with him and send him to the Tower,
And let us go question with the man about
His apprehension. Lords along, and use this
Lady honourably.
I, Edward will use women honourably,
Would he were wasted marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins no issue might succeed
To hinder me from the golden time I look for,
For I am not yet looked on in the world.
First is there Edward, Clarence, and Henry
And his son, and all they looked for issue
Of their loins ere I can plant myself,
A cold premeditation for my purpose,
What other pleasure is there in the world beside?
I will go clad my body in gay ornaments,
And lull myself within a lady's lap,
And with sweet Ladies with my words and looks.
Oh monstrous man, to harbour such a thought▪
Why love did scorn me in my mother's womb.
And for I should not deal in her astaires,
She did corrupt frail nature in the flesh,
And plasle an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits deformity to mock my body,
To dry mine arm up like a withered shrimp.
To make my legs of an unequal size,
And am I then a man to be beloved?
Easier for me to compass twenty crowns.
Tut I can smile, and murder when I smile,
I cry content, to that that grieves me most.
I can add colours to the Chameleon,
And for a need change shapes with Protheus,
And set the aspiring Catalin to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get the crown?
Tush were it ten times higher, I'll pull it down.
Welcome Queen Margaret to the Court of France,
It sits not Lewis to sit while thou dost stand,
Sat by my side, and here I vow to thee,
Thou shalt have aid to repossess thy right,
And be at proud Edward from his usurped seat.
And place king Henry in his former rule.
I humbly thank your royal majesty,
And pray the God of heaven to bless thy state,
Great king of France, that thus regards our wrongs.
How now, who is this?
Our Earl of Warwick Edward's chiefest friend.
Welcome brave Warwick, what brings thee to France?
From worthy Edward king of England,
My Lord and Sovereign and thy vowed friend,
I come in kindness and unfeigned love,
First to do greetings to thy royal person,
And then to crave a league of amity,
And lastly to confirm that amity
With nuptial knot if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous lady Bona thy fair sister,
To England's king in lawful marriage.
And if this go forward all our hope is done.
And gracious Madam, in our king's behalf,
I am commanded with your love and favour,
Humbly to kiss your hand and with my tongue,
To tell the passions of my sovereign's heart,
Where same late entering at his heedful cares,
Hath placed thy glorious image and thy virtues.
King Lewes and Lady Bona hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick or his words,
For he it is hath done us all these wrongs.
Injurious Margaret.
And why not Queen?
Because thy father Henry did usurp,
And thou no more art Prince than she is Queen.
Then Warwick disannuls great Ioha of Gaunt,
That did subdue the greatest part of Spain,
And after Iohn of Gaunt wise Henry the fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the world.
And after this wise prince Henry the fift,
Who with his prowess conquered all France,
From these our Henry's lincallie descent.
Oxford, how haps that in this smooth discourse
You told not how Henry the sixth had lost
All that Henry the fift had gotten.
Me thinks these peers of France should smile at that,
But for the rest you tell a pedigree
Of three score and two years a silly time,
To make prescription for a kingdoms worth.
Why Warwick, canst thou deny thy king,
Whom thou obeyedst thirty and eight years,
And bewray thy treasons with a blush?
Can Oxford that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame leave Henry and call Edward king.
Call him my king by whom mine elder
Brother the Lord Aubray Vere was done to death,
And more than so, my father even in the
Downfall of his mellowed years,
When age did call him to the door of death?
No Warwick no, whilst life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
And I the house of York.
Queen Margaret, prince Edward and
Oxford, vouchsafe to forbear a while,
Till I do talk a word with Warwick.
Now Warwick even upon thy honour tell me true;
Is Edward lawful king or no?
For I were loath to link with him, that is not lawful heir.
Thereon I pawn mine honour and my credit.
What is he gracious in the people's eyes?
The more, that Henry is unfortunate.
What is his love to our sister Buna?
Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him some and swear,
That this his love was an eternal plant,
The root whereof was fixed in virtues ground,
The leaves and fruit maintained with beauties sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the lady Bona quite his pain.
Then sister let us hear your firm resolve.
Your grant or your denial shall be mine,
But ere this day I must confess, when I
Have heard your king's deserts recounted,
Mine ears have tempted judgement to desire.
Then draw near Queen Margaret and be a
Witness, that Bona shall be wife to the English king.
To Edward but not the English king.
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where having nothing nothing can be lose,
And as for you your seife our quondun Queen,
You have a father able to maintain your state,
And better ttwere to trouble him them France.
Here comes some post Warwick to thee orus,
My Lord ambassador this letter is for you,
Sent from your brother Marquis Montague.
This from our king unto your Majesty.
And these to you Madam, from whom I know not.
I like it well that our faire Queen and mistress,
Smiles at her news when Warwick frets as his.
And mark how Lewes stamps as he were nettled.
Now Margaret & Warwick, what are your news?
Mine such as fills my heart full of joy.
Mine full of sorrow and hearts discontent.
What hath your king married the Lady Grace,
And now to excuse himself sends us a post of papers?
How dares he presume to use us thus?
This proveth Edward's love, & Warwick's honesty.
King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly blisle,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's.
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
And most himself▪ if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York.
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Did I empale him with the regal Crown,
And thrust king Henry from his native home,
And most ungrateful doth he use me thus?
My gracious Queen pardon what is past,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor.
I will revenge the wrongs done to lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.
Yes Warwick I do quite forget thy former
Faults, if now thou wilt become king Henry's friend.
So much his friend, I his unfeigned friend,
That if king Lewes vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I'll undertake to land them on our coast,
And force the Tyrant from his seat by war,
'tis not his new made bride shall secure him.
Then at the last I firmly am resolved,
You shall have aid: and English messenger return
In post, and tell false Edward thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over Maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride.
Tell him in hope he'll be a Widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.
Tell him my mourning weeds be laidle aside,
And I am ready to put armour on.
Tell him from me, that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere be long.
there's thy reward, begun.
But now tell me Warwick, what assurance
I shall have of thy true loyalty?
This shall assure my constant loyalty,
If that our Queen and this young prince agree,
I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlocks bands.
Withal my heart, that match I like full well,
Love her son Edward, she is faite and young,
And give thy hand to Warwick for thy love.
It is enough, and now we will prepare,
To levy 〈…〉 for to go with you.
And you Lord Bourbon our high Admiral,
Shall waft them safely to the English coast,
And chase proud Edward from his slumbering trance,
For mocking marriage with the name of France.
I came from Edward as Ambassador
But I return his sworn and mortal foe:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stolen but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again,
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
Brothers of Clarence and of Gloucester.
What think you of our marriage with the lady Grace?
My Lord, we think as Warwike and Lewes
That are so slack in judgement▪ that they'll take
No offence at this sudden marriage.
Suppose they do, they are but Lewes and
Warwick, and I am your king and Warwikes,
And will be obeyed.
And shall, because our king but yet such
Sudden marriages seldom proveth well.
Yea brother Richard are you against us too?
Not I my Lord, no, God forefend that I should
Once gain s●●e your highness pleasure,
ttwere a pity to sunder them that yoke so well together.
your scorns and your dislikes aside,
Show me some reasons why the Lady Grace,
Mare not be my love and England's Queen?
Speak freely Clarence, Gloster,
Montague and Hastings.
My Lord then this is my opinion,
That Warwick being dishonoured in his embassage,
Doth seek revenge to quite his injuries.
And Lewes in regard of his sister's wrongs,
Doth join with Warwick to supplant your state.
Suppose that Lewis and Warwick be appease,
By such means as I can best devise.
But yet to have joined with France in this
Alliance, would more have strengthened this out
Common wealth, 'gainst forward storms,
Then any home bred marriage.
Let England be true within itself,
We need not France not any alliance with them.
For this 〈◊〉 speech the Lord Hastings well deserves,
To have the daughter and heir of the Lord Hungerford.
And what then? It was our will it should be so?
I, and for such a thing too the Lord Scales
Did well deserve at your hands, to have the
Daughter of the Lord Bonsield and left your
Brothers to go seek elsewhere, but in
Your madness, you butie brotherhood.
Alas poor Clarence, is it for a wife,
That thou art malcontent,
Why man be of good cheer, I will provide thee one.
Nay you played the broker soul for yourself,
That you shall give me leave to make my
Choice as I think good, and to that intent,
I shortly mean to leave you.
Leave me or tarry I am full resolved.
Edward will not be tied to his brother's wills.
My Lords do 〈◊〉 but right and you must
Confess, before it pleased his highness to advance
My state to title of a Queen,
That I was not ignoble in my birth.
Forthcare my love to ●iwne upon their frowns,
For thee they must obay, shall ob ,
And if they look for favour at my hands.
My Lord, here is the messenger returned from France.
Now s●●a, What letters or what new●●●
No letters my Lord, and such 〈…〉 without your highness special pardon I dare not dilate.
We pardon thee, and as near as thou canst
Tell me, What said Lewis to our letters?
At my departure these were his vetie words.
Go tell false Edward thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over Maskers,
To reuill it with him and his new bride.
Is Lewis so brave, belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to these wrongs?
Tell him quoth she, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.
She had the wrong, indeed she could say
Little less. But what said Henry's Queen, for as
I hear, she was then in place?
Tell him quoth she my mourning weeds be
Done, and I am ready to put armour on.
Then be like she means to place the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?
He more incensed than the rest my Lord,
Tell him quoth he, that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere be long.
Ha, Durst the traitor breath out such proud words?
But I will arm me to prevent the worst.
But what is Warwick friends with Margaret?
I my good Lord▪ there so 〈◊〉 in friendship,
That young Prince Edward marries Warwikes daughter.
The elder, belike Clarence shall have the
Younger. All you that love me and Warwick
Follo v me.
Clarence and Summerset fled to Warwick.
What say you brother Richard, will you stand to us?
I my Lord in despite of all that shall
Withstand you For why hath Nature
Made me halt down right, but that I
Should be valiant and stand to it, for if
I would, I cannot run away.
Pembroke, go raise an army presently,
Pitch up my tent, for in the field this night
I mean to rest, and on the morrow morn,
I'll march to meet proud Warwick ere he land
Those straggling troops which he hath got in France.
But ere I go Montague and Hastings,
You of all the rest are nearest allied
In blood to Warwick, therefore tell me, if
You favour him more than me or not:
Speak truly, for I had rather have you open
Enemies, then hollow friends.
So God help Montague as he proves true.
And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause.
It shall suffice, come then let's march away.
Trust me my Lords all hitherto goes well,
The common people by numbers swarm to us,
But see where Somerset and Clarence comes,
Speak suddenly my Lords, are we all friends?
Fear not that my Lord.
Then gentle Clarence welcome unto Warwick.
And welcome Summerset, I hold it cowardice,
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart,
Hath pawned an open hand in sign of love,
Else might I think that Clarence▪ Edwards brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceed,
But welcome sweet Clarence my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but in night's coverture,
Thy brother being carelessly encamped,
His soldiers lurking in the town about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure,
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy,
Then cry king Henry with resolved nundes,
And break we presently into his tent.
Why then let's on our way in silent sort,
For Warwick and his friends God and saint George.
This is his tent, and see where his guard doth
Stand, Courage my soldiers, now or never,
But follow me now, and Edward shall be ours.
All▪ A Warwick, a Warwick
Who goes there?
Richard and Hastings let them go, here is the Duke.
The Duke, why Warwick when we parted
Last, thou calld'st me king?
I, but the case is altered now.
When you disgraced me in my embassage,
Then I disgraced you from being king,
And now am come to create you Duke of York,
alas how should you govern any kingdom,
That knows not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to use your brother's brotherly,
No●how to shroud yourself from enemies.
Well Warwick, let fortune do her worst,
Edward in mind will bear himself a king.
Then for his mind be Edward England's king,
But Henry now shall wear the English crown.
Go convey him to our brother archbishop of York,
And when I have fought with Pembroke & his followers,
I'll come and tell thee what the lady Bona says,
And so for a while farewell good Duke of York.
What follows now, all hitherto goes well,
But we must dispatch some letters to France,
To tell the Queen of our happy fortune,
And bid her come with speed to join with us.
I that's the first thing that we have to do,
And free king Henry from imprisonment,
And see him seated in his regal throne,
Come let us haste away, and having past these cares,
I'll post to York, and see how Edward fares.
Lord Hastings▪ and 〈◊〉 William Stanley,
Know that the cause I sent for you is this.
I look my brother with a slender train,
Should come a hunting in this forest here.
The Bishop of York be friends him much,
And lets him use his pleasure in the chase,
Now I have privily sent him word,
How I am come with you to rescue him.
And see where the huntsman and he doth come.
This way my Lord the dear is gone.
No this way huntsman, see where the
Keepers stand. Now brother and the rest,
What, are you provided to departed?
I, I▪ the horse stands at the park corner,
Come, to Linne▪ and so take shipping into Flanders▪
Come then: Hastings, and Stanley, I will
Requite your loves. Bishop farewell,
Shield thee from Warwikes frown,
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
Now huntsman what will you do?
Marry my Lord, I think I had as good
Go with you, as tarry here to be hanged.
Come then let's away with speed.
Tell me good madam, why is your grace
So passionate of late?
Why brother Rivers, hear you not the news,
Of that success king Edward had of late?
Whats loss of some pitched battle against Warwick,
Tush, fear not fair Queen, but cast those cares aside.
King Edward's noble mind his honours doth display▪
And Warwick may lose, though then he got the day.
If that were all, my griefs were at an end:
But greater troubles will I fear befall.
What, is he taken prisoner? by the foe,
To the danger of his royal person then:
I, there's my grief, king Edward is surprised,
And led away, as prisoner unto York.
The news is passing strange. I must confess:
Yet comfort yourself, for Edward hath more friends,
Then Lancaster at this time must perceive,
That some will set him in his throne again▪
God grant they may, but gentle brother come,
And let me lean upon thine arm a while,
Until I come unto the sanctuary,
There to preserve the fault within my womb,
K. Edward's seed true heir to England's crown.
Thus far from Belgia have we passed the seas,
And marched from Raunspur haven unto York:
But soft the gates are shut, I like not this.
Sound up the drum and call them to the walls.
Enter the Lord Maire of York upon the walls.
My Lords we had notice of your coming,
And that's the cause we stand upon our guard,
An I shut the gates for to preserve the town.
Henry now is king, and we are sworn to him.
Why my Lord Maire, if Henry be your king,
Edward I am sure at least, is Duke of York.
Truth my Lord, we know you for no less.
I crave nothing but my Dukedom.
But when the Fox hath gotten in his head,
he'll quickly make the body follow after.
Why my Lord Maire, what stand you upon points?
Open the gates, we are king Henry's friends.
Say you so, then I'll open them presently.
So my Lord Maire, these gates must not be shut,
But in the time of war, give me the keys:
What, fear not man for Edward will defend
the town and you, despite of all your foes.
How now Richard, who is this?
Brother, this is sir Iohn Mountgommery,
A trusty friend unless I be deceived.
Welcome sir Iohn▪ Wherefore come you in arms?
To help king Edward in this time of storms,
As every loyal subject aught to do.
Thanks brave Mountgommery,
But I only claim my Dukedom,
Until it please God to send the rest.
Then sa●e you well▪ Drum strike up and let us
March away, I came to serve a king and not a Duke.
Nay sta●e sir Iohn, and let us first debate,
With what security we may do this thing.
What stand you on debating to be brief,
Except you presently proclaim yourself our king,
I'll hence again, and keep them back that come to
Succour you, why should we fight when
You pretend no title?
Fie brother, fie, stand you upon terms?
Resolve yourself, and let us claim the crown.
I am resolved once more to claim the crown,
And win it too▪ or else to lose my life.
I now my sovereign speaketh like himself,
And now will I be Edward's Champion,
Sound Trumpets, for Edward shall be proclaimed.
Edward the fourth by the grace of God, king of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, and whosoever gainsa●es king Edwards Might: by this I challenge him to single sight, long live Edward the fourth.
Long live Edward the fourth.
We thank you all. Lord Maire lead on the way.
For this night we'll harbour here in York,
And then is early as the morning sun,
lifts up his beams above this horizon
we'll march to London, to meet with Warwick:
And pull sal●e Henry from the Regal throne.
Thus from the prison to this prince lie seat,
By God's great mercies am I brought
Again, Clarence and Warwick do you
Keep the crown, and govern and protect
My realm in peace, and I will spend the
Remnant of my days, to sins rebuke
And my Creator's praise.
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?
Clarence agrees to what king Henry likes.
My Lord of Summerset, what pretty
Boy is that you seem to be so careful of?
And it please your grace, it is young Henry,
Earl of Richmond.
Henry of Richmond, Come hither pretty Lad.
If heavenly powers do aim aright
To my divining thoughts, thou pretty boy,
Shalt prove this Country's bliss,
Thy head is made to wear a princely crown,
Thy looks are all replete with Majesty,
Make much of him my Lords,
For this is he shall help you more,
Than you are hurt by me.
What Counsel Lords, Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Is passed in safety through the narrow seas,
And with his troops do march amain towards London,
And many giddy people follow him.
'tis best to look to this betimes,
For if this ●ue do kindle any further,
It will be hard for us to quench it out.
In Warwick shire I have true hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war,
Them will I muster up, and thou son Clarence shalt
In Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
Stir up the knights and gentlemen to come with thee▪
And thou brother Montague, in Leister shire,
Buckingham and Northampton shire shalt find,
Men well inclined to do what thou commands,
And thou brave Oxford wondrous well beloved,
Shalt in thy countries muster up thy friends.
My sovereign with his loving Citizens,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair Lords take leave and stand not to reply,
Farewell my sovereign.
Farewell my Hector, my Troy's true hope,
Farewell sweet Lords, let's meet at Coventrie.
Agreed.
Sease on the shamefast Henry,
And once again convey him to the Tower,
Away with him, I will not hear him speak.
And now towards Coventry let us bend our course
To meet with Warwick and his confederates.
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy Lord my honest fellow?
By this at Daintrie marching hitherward.
Where is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?
I left him at Donsmore with his troops.
Say Summerfield where is my loving son?
And by thy guess, how far is Clarence hence?
At Southham my Lord I left him with
His force, and do expect him two hours hence.
Then Oxford is at hand, I hear his drum.
See brother, where the surlv Warwick man's the wall.
O unbid spite, is spotfull Edward come!
Where slept our scouts or how are they sedus●e,
That we could have no news of their repair?
Now Warwick wilt thou be sorry for thy faults,
And call Edward king and he will pardon thee.
Nay rather wilt thou draw thy forces back?
Confess who set thee up and pulled thee down?
Call Warwick patron and be penitent,
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.
I had thought at least be would have said the king.
Or did he make the best against his will.
TTwas Warwick gave the kingdom to thy brother.
Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwikes gift.
I but thou art no Atlas for so great a weight,
And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again,
Henry is my king, Warwick his subject▪
I prithee gallant Warwick tell me this,
What is the body when the head is off?
Alas that Warwick had no more foresight,
But whilst he sought to steal the single ten,
The king was finely fingered from the deck?
You left poor Henry in the Bishop's palace,
And ten to one you'll meet him in the Tower.
'tis even so, and yet you are old Warwick still.
O cheerful colours, see where Oxford comes.
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster. Exit.
The Gates are open, see they enter in,
Let's follow them and bid them battle in the streets.
No, so some other might set upon our backs,
we'll stay till all be entered, and then follow them.
Summerset, Summerset for Lancaster.
Two of thy name both Dukes of Summerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York,
And thou shalt be the third and my sword hold.
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster. Exit.
Traitorous Montague, thou and thy brother
Shall dearly abye this rebellious act.
And lo where George of Clarence sweeps
Along, of power enough to bid his brother battle.
Clarence, Clarence, for Lancaster.
Et tu Brute, wilt thou stab Caesar too?
A parley sirrah to George of Clarence.
C●m Clarence come, thou wilt if Warwick call.
Father of Warwick, know you what this means▪
throw mine infamy at thee,
I will not ruinated my father's house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Thinkest thou
That Clarence is so harsh unnatural,
To lift his sword against his brother's life,
And so proud hearted Warwick I defy thee,
And to my brothers turn my blushing cheeks?
Pardon me Edward, for I have done amiss,
And Richard do not frown upon me,
For hence forth I will prove no more unconstant.
Welcome Clarence, and ten times more welcome,
Then if thou never hadst deserved out hate.
Welcome good Clarence, this is bretherlie.
Oh passing traitor, perjured and unjust.
Now Warwick, wilt thou leave
The town and fight? or shall we beat the
Stones about thine ears?
Why I am not cooped up here for defence,
I will away to Barnet presently,
And bid thee battle Edward it thou darest.
Yes Warwick he dares, and leads the way,
Lords to the field, saint George and victory.
Alarms, and then enter Warwick wounded.
Ah, who is ●? Come to my friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my ma glad body shows,
That I must yield my body to the earth.
And by my fall the conquest to my foes,
Thus yields the Cedar to the axes edge.
Whose arms give shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose 〈◊〉 add the ramping Lion slept,
Whose top branch overpeerd Ioues sreading tree.
The wrinkles in my brows now filled with blood,
Were likened oft to kingly sepulchres.
For who lived king, but I could dig his grave?
And who durst smile, when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo now my glory smeerd in dust and blood,
My parks my walks, my manors that I had,
Even now forsake me and of all my lands,
Is nothing left me but my body's length.
Ah Warwick, Warwick, cheer up thyself and liue,
For yet there's hope enough to win the day.
Our warlike Queen with troops is come from France,
And at South-Hampton landed all his train,
And mightst thou l●ue then would we never fly.
Which then I would not fly nor have I now,
But Hercules himself must yield to odds,
For m●●e wounds received, and many more repaid,
Hath robbed my strong knit ●●news of their strength,
And spite of spites needs must I yield to death.
Thy brother Montague hath breathed his last,
And at the pangs of death I heard him cry
And say, commend me to my valiant brother,
And more he would have spoke and 〈◊〉 he said,
Which sounded like a 〈…〉 a vault,
That could not be distinguished for the sound,
And so the valiant Montague gave up the ghost.
What is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust▪
And live we how we can, yet the w● must.
Sweet rest his soul, she Lords and 〈◊〉 yourselves,
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meeten heaven.
Come noble Summerset, let's take our horse,
And cause retreat be sounded through the camp,
That all our friends that yet remain alive▪,
May be awarned and ●aue themselves by flight.
That done, with them we'll post unto the Queen,
And once mo●eui● our fortune in the field
Thus still our fortune 〈◊〉 us victory,
And gnats our temples with triumphant
The bigboond traitor Warwick hath breathed his last,
An I heaven this day hath smilde vpon v●●all,
But in this clear and brightsome ●a●e,
I see a black suspicious cloud appear
That will encounter with our glorious sun
Before he gain his easeful w● ste●e be ●●es,
I mean those powers which the Queen hath got in France
Are landed, and mean once more to menace us.
Oxford and Summerset are sled to hi●,
And 〈◊〉 likely if she have time to breath,
Her fact on will be full as strong as ours.
We are advertisde by our loving friends,
That they do hold their course towards Tow●burie.
Th●ther will we 〈◊〉 for willingness rids way,
And in every county as we pass along,
O●● stir engthes shall be augmented.
Come let's go, for if we slack this fair
B●●ght Summers' day, sharp winter's
Showers will make our hope for haie.
Welcome to England, my loving friends of France,
And welcome Summerset, and Oxford too.
Once more have we spread our sails abroad,
And though our tackling be almost consumed,
And Warwick as our main mast overthrown,
Yet warlike Lords raise you that sturdy post,
That bears the sails to bring us unto rest,
And Ned and I as willing Pilots should
For once with careful minds guide on the stern,
To bear us through that dangerous gulf
That heretofore hath swallowed up our friends.
And if there be, as God forbidden there should,
Amongst us a timorous or fearful man,
Let him departed before the battles join,
least he in time of need entice another,
And so withdraw the soldiers hearts from us.
I will not stand aloof and bid you fight,
But with my sword press in the thickest throngs,
And single Edward from his strongest guard,
And hand to hand enforce him for to yield,
Or leave my body as witness of my thoughts.
Women and children of so high resolve,
And Warriors faint, why ttwere perpetual
Shame? Oh brave young Prince, thy
Noble grandfather doth live again in thee,
Long mayest thou live to bear his image,
And to renew his glories.
And he that turns and flies when such do fight,
Let him to bed, and like the Owl by day
Be hist, and wondered at if he arise.
My Lords, Duke Edward with a mighty power,
Is marching hitherwards to fight with you.
I thought it was his policy, to take us unprovided,
But here will we stand and fight it to the death.
See brothers, yonder stands the thorny wood,
Which by God's assistance and your prowess,
Shall with our swords yer night be clean cut down.
Lords, Knights & gentlemen, what I should say,
My tears gainsay, for as you see, I drink
The water of mine eyes. Then no more
But this. Henry your king is prisoner
In the tower, his land and all our friends
Are quite distressed, and yonder stands
The Wolf that makes all this,
Then on God's name Lords together cry saint George.
All Saint George for Lancaster.
Lo here a period of tumultuous broils,
Away with Oxford to Hames castle strait,
For Summerset off with his guilty head.
Away I will not hear them speak.
For my part I'll not trouble thee with words.
Not I, but stoop with patience to my death.
Now Edward what satisfaction canst thou make,
●or stirring up my subjects to rebellion?
Speak like a subject proud ambitious York,
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth,
Resign thy chair▪ and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the self-same words to thee,
Which traitor thou wouldst have me answer to.
Oh that thy father had been so resolved▪
That you might still have kept your
Petticoat, and near have slolne the
Brh from Lancaster.
Let Aesop fable in a winter's night.
His cuttish Riddles sorts not with this place.
By heaven brat I'll plague you for that word.
I▪ thou wast borne to be a plague to men.
For God's sake take a way this captive scold.
Nay take away this skolding Crooktbacke rather.
Peace wilful boy, or I will tame your tongue.
Untutored lad thou art too malapert.
I know my duty, you are all undutiful.
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou misshapen Dick, I tell you all,
I am your better, traitors as you be.
Take that, the litnes of this railer here.
Oh kill me too.
Marry and shall.
Hold Richard hold, for we have done too much already.
Why should she live to fill the world with words?
What doth she swoon: make means for Her recovery?
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother,
I must to London on a serious matter,
Ere you come there▪ you shall hear more news.
About what, prithee tell me?
The Towerman, the Tower, I'll root them out
Ah Ned, speak to thy mother boy? ah
Thou canst not speak.
Traitors, Tyrants, bloody Homicides,
They that stabbed Caesar shed no blood at all,
For he was a man, this in respect a child,
And men near spend then fury on a child,
What's worse than tyrant that I may name,
You have no children Devils, if you had,
The thought of them would then have stopped your rage,
But if you ever hope to have a son,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off,
As Traitors you have done this sweet young prince.
Away, and bear her hence.
Nay near bear me hence, dispatch
Me here, here sheathe thy sword,
I'll pardon thee my death. Wilt thou not?
Then Clarence, do thou do it?
By Heaven I would not do thee so much ease.
Good Clarence do, sweet Clarence kill me too.
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
I, but thou usest to forswear thyself,
TTwas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
Wheats the devils butcher, hardfavored Richard,
Richard where art thou? He is not here,
Murder is his alms deed, petitioners
For blood he near put back.
Away I say, and take her hence perforce.
So come to you and yours, as to this prince.
Clarence, whither's Gloster gone?
Marry my Lord to London, and as I guess, to
Make a bloody supper in the Tower.
He is sudden if a thing come in his head.
Well, discharge the common soldiers with pay
And thanks, and now let us towards London,
To see our gentle Queen how she doth far,
For by this I hope she hath a son for us.
Good day my Lord. What at your book so hard?
I my good Lord. Lord I should say rather,
'tis sin to flatter, good was little better,
Good Gloster, and good Devil, were all alike,
What scene of Death hath Rosius now to act?
Suspicion always haunts a guilty mind.
The bird once limed doth fear the fatal bush,
And I the hapless mail to one poor bird,
Have now the fatal object in mine eye,
Where my poor young was limed, was caught & killed.
Why, what a fool was that of Creede?
That taught his son the office
Of a bird, and yet for all that the poor
Fowl was drowned.
I Dedalus, my poor son Icarus,
Thy father Minos that denied our course,
Thy brother Edward, the sun that ●earde his wings,
And thou the envious gulf that swallowed him.
Oh better can my breast abide thy dagger's point,
Then can mine cares that tragic history.
Why dost thou think I am an executioner?
A persecutor I am sure thou art,
And if murdering innocents be executions,
Then I know thou art an executioner.
Thy son I killed for his presumption.
Hadst thou been killed when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine,
And thus I prophesy of theo.
That many a Widow for her husband's death,
And many an infant's water standing eye,
Widows for their husbands, children for their fathers,
Shall curse the time that ever thou wert borne.
The owl s●●ikt at thy birth, an evil sign,
The night Crow cried, aboding luckless tune,
Dogs howled and hideous tempests shook down trees,
The Raven rooked her on the chimneys top,
And chattering Pi●s in dismal discord sung,
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
To wit▪ an undigest created lump.
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree,
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast borne,
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat,
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither Bess, and let me kiss my boy,
Young Ned, for thee, thine Uncles and myself,
Have in our armours watched the Winter's night,
Marched all a foot in summer's scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace,
And of out labours thou shalt reap the gain.
I'll blast his harvest and your head were laid,
For yet I am not looked on in the world.
This shoulder was ordained so thick to heave,
And heave it shall some weight or break my back,
Work thou the way, and thou shalt execute.
Edward, Clarence and Gloster, love my lovely Queen,
And kiss your princely nephew brothers both.
The duty that I own unto your, Majesty,
I seal upon the rosiate lips of this sweet babe.
Thanks noble Clarence worthy brother thanks.
And that I love the fruit from whence thou
Sprangst, witness the loving kiss I give the child.
To say the truth so Iudas kissed his master,
And so he cried all hail▪ and meant all haste.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country's peace, and brother's loves.
What will your grace have done with Margaret▪
Ranard her father to the king of France,
Hath pawned the Cyssels and Ierusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
Away with her, and waste her hence to France,
And now what rests but that we spend the time,
With stately Triumphs and mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasures of the Court.
Sound drums and Trumpets, farewell to sour annoy,
For here I hope begins our lasting joy.