HEre walk Menalchus on this grassy plain,
And while the wanton lambs feed on these downs,
And hide them in the thickets from the Sun,
That shine on Venus' stately builded towers,
Discourse to aged Antimon and me,
The doleful history and that dreary tale,
That erst befell in fatal Arcady,
How poor Amintas perished in his love.
You will me call to memory sweet friends
The countless sorrows which will fetch forth tears
From hardest rocks, and move a marble heart,
But though my mind in recolecting tears,
With horror dumb, and eke would choke my tongue
From telling tragic news, I will begin.
Stay Menalchus, and hide thee in these thickets,
For here come strangers, who with ireful brows,
Threatens some stormy troubles to succeed.
Hear is a place convenient Lelio,
Yonder's a plain whereon our steeds may graze,
Here is a grove backed with cressend hills,
But save these trees none else behold our fight.
Have I retained thee caitiff in my house,
And made thee Lord of all my best delights,
And could thy impious heart so lewdly think,
Dishonour to defile my wedding bed,
Had Venus no other strumpet to content
Sempronios mind, but thou must choose my wife,
To make a stolen to thy unbridled lust,
Wretch, why do I thus expostulate?
Come, come, I'll act revenge, and talk no more,
Even for our ancient love I'll give thee law,
Disrobe thee if thou wilt, speak no more,
For Lelio hath inexorable ears.
If words 'mongst faithful friends may not be borne,
Believe me Lelio thou deservest the horn,
Come sir, for kindness I will let you blood,
And seek to cool your fire of jealousy.
And I'll revenge my mortal injury,
Now is his lustful insolence,
Drowned in the sea of bloody tragedy,
How now Sempronio?
Fly Lelio, fly, thy jealous fury robs thee of a friend,
I pay thee with my blood for lewd desire,
Go hie thee hence, prevent pursuit,
My miseries are done, when I am dead,
Thy miseries are too near.
Too late remorse, why dost thou follow me?
Ah sweet Sempronio, speak but one word more.
I speak these few words more, fly Lelio fly,
'mongst friends it is too much for one to die.
Murder my friends, pursue the murderer,
Hast Coridon, hie the Antimon.
Fly Lelio fly, and save thy life.
'tis Lelio shepherds, hast and follow him.
And Lelios' sword hath slain Sempronio,
Pursue you shepherds that lewd murderer,
Whilst I do bear this bloody garment hence,
To Seruio, tutor to this noble man,
And give him notice of his kinsman's death,
Down with the murderers, fellows kill his horse.
What noise is this before my hold of peace?
A little breach of peace to men of zeal,
Is held a world of grief to cross his mind:
Behold a young man weltering in his blood,
High thee old Philip, show thy charity,
Bear him to thy cell, and if thou canst, recure his wounds,
If not, go bury him, the badge of contemplations charity.
Ho Gnatto open.
Open, what should I open, the cupboard.
No knave the door.
No knave the door, what rascals that?
O master is it you, I cry you mercy.
Sirrah speak, where's your mistress?
Maty she is making would speak, and guts sing:
Would speak, and guts sing, how meanest thou that?
Are you such a fool you know not that?
Why, she's playing on the lute.
And where is my daughter Lucida?
She is killing a pride.
As how?
She is combing of her head, she will not have it frizle.
jest not sirrah, but call them hither quickly.
Ho mistress quickly, you must come hither
quickly, or else my master will beat me quickly.
How now my Lord?
Annetta call me wretch.
Why what is befallen?
The worst of harms.
Where is Sempronio?
Ah, ask not where he is,
Thou must be husbandless through my misdeeds,
Thou must be fatherless through my disgrace:
Farewell, I dare not stay to tell my mind,
I have no time Annetta to embrace thee,
Unless I hazard life to stay so long,
Annetta, in a word Sempronio's dead,
His friends pursue me, and to save my life,
I needs must fly: you for your maintenance
Must presently the chiefest jewels seize,
Farewell, my sighs and tears must tell the rest.
Whether cruel fortune? my sweet love.
Captives sweet souls, in chains of misery.
Who shall relieve me when my husband's fled.
He that relieves poor souls when hope is dead.
Who shall endow me in my father's absence?
True virtue daughter, if he be in presence:
Ah look on these you care desiring eyes,
These cannot speak, for woe clogs up their tongues
Thus silent misery tells mourning grief,
Go to poor souls and hide you from a storm,
The hands are priest to rob you of your own,
Go in poor souls, weep less, endeavour more,
Hast forceth grief, danger keeps the door.
Seruio stand forth, if thy important wrongs be such,
Discourse to me and to these aged peers,
Thy cause of grief, and what thou dost require.
Most mighty Duke, most worthy Senators,
I come before this sacred judgement seat,
Not trained by hate, as many worldlings be,
But these old years injoind me charity,
But urged by wrongs, compelled by heinous deeds,
To quicken justice in your reverent ears,
Call to remembrance Prince and worthy peers,
The faithful service for these many years,
That stout Sempronio did unto the State,
In remembrance whereof,
Old Seruio humbling him upon his knees,
Beseecheth justice 'gainst proud Lelio,
Who cruelly hath slain in single fight,
The sole and only heir of that stout race.
Seruio come hither and possess thy place,
We will consider of thy injuries.
Still let these knees be wedded to the earth,
Still let these tears run floud-like from mine eyes,
Until your grace do execute the wretch,
That thus hath slain my dear Sempronio.
Thou dost demean too much intemperance,
Thou foolish man arise, do not slain the badge of age
And wisdom by misgovernment:
Our senators in Venice are well schooled in such haps,
And can doom of things, not by thy tears,
Or sorrow working words,
But by the truth and estimate of acts,
Thou sayest that Lelio slew Sempronio,
But that assertion Seruio must not serve,
To prove him guilty in these reverend ears.
What proofs produceth Seruio to the state,
To prove Lord Lelio guilty of the murder,
When as through Venice nothing was more found,
Then faithful friendship plighted twixt them twain.
That love which was twixt them before,
Doth make the murder far more monstrous,
But princes, in a word, behold the man
That saw the murder and can witness it,
Examine him, and let his proofs prevail.
Lords, let not Lelios' honour blear your eyes,
Speak sirrah, Did Lelio kill Sempronio.
And shall please your honours grace and worships
I for fault of a better shepherd to Lord Seruio here,
And upon a time, let me see, O 'twas yesterday,
when my master's sheep & I were at breakfast together
I saw Lelio and Sempronio fight so long,
That Lelio thrust his sword into Sempronios belly,
Whereupon he died, and it shall please your worshipful worships,
All this will I be forsworn to, with my neighbour Menalchus & good man Coridon, & the rest that followed the cry, with Slip my dog & others forsooth.
This homely tale doth savour of truth.
Truth soundeth sweetly in a silly tongue.
Craft often lurketh in a shepherds coat.
Sir you do abuse our profession,
For Craft, goodman Coridon's dog
Near wore coat nor breeches, I'll stand to it.
My Lord and father, break contention off,
The proofs are found, then let it not be said,
Your mightiness should be miscarried,
By contradiction of two Senators.
My son, my silence tells me many things,
By it I find the depth of each man's drift,
And gathering things by certain circumstance,
Am better able to discern the truth,
Lords take your places, and resolve on this,
That Lelio by approved truth is found
To be the murderer of Sempronio,
His lands and goods be seized to public use,
We doom him dead. Besides, whatever man
Can bring his head unto the Senate house,
Shall have a thousand crowns for recompense,
Paid him forth of our treasury,
Further, least private friends should succour him,
We do enact that whatsoever man,
Shall dare conceal or hide the murderer,
Shall be banished, and his goods confiscate.
Senators allow you this.
justice this sentence great Venetian Duke.
Remit thou yet thy stern austerity,
Most mighty prince, and be not so severe,
Though Lelio by the law do merit death,
There is no law that may defraud his wife,
Or leave his daughter without maintenance,
O grant thou this just favour mighty Duke,
That they may keep possession of his house,
Although the commonwealth command his goods.
A lawful plea which may not be denied,
Thy suit is granted, register it down.
Now let our guard beset the city round,
Search every house to find out Lelio:
Mean while grave Senators, bethink yourselves,
Of some strict law against our Sessions,
That may repulse these insolent debates.
Sirrah Franco, what said old Seruio to my money.
Marry sir, as soon as his fore eyes had overlooked it
And his fingers trembling had overtolde it,
He took it up, and very furiously cast it into hell.
Into hell knave, what meanest thou by that?
Marie sir, into his chest I mean, the very bottomless pit of usury, where I am sure God never came, but the devil & his angels fill it up to the brim.
Well sirrah, leave your jesting, and go will the master of my bark to unload the wares, and see that at the crane you hoist them up.
I will sir.
Where shall I hide me from too searching eyes?
Oh whether may I go to save my life?
Me thinks I see my Lelio quite dismayed,
What aileth thee my son?
O stay me not Brishio for thy daughter's sake,
Be not thou the means to bring me to my end.
Be not so foolish to mistrust thy friend,
Thy troubles taint my weal.
Father by marriage, friend in my misdeed,
Thus fortune hath depressed my weak estate,
Sempronio found in Venice for my friend,
Dear to my soul while he held virtue dear,
Incensed thy daughter and my wedded wife,
Who scorning to defame her ancient stock,
Disburdened his lewd suit within my ears,
Hereon in a rage I drew him to the field,
There he lies slain, I fly to save my life.
Now as thou art a father, for my sake
Pity thy daughter and my woeful child,
For by the law I am condemned to die:
Farewell, the rest who cannot tell, if you inquire.
Stay Lelio, stay, if for my daughter's sake thou slewest thy friend,
I for thy virtues sake will keep thee close within my house,
And ship thee privily this present night,
So unperceived thou shalt escape away.
Hast thou not heard the sentence of the Duke?
That who so succours me must lose his goods,
And live a banished life.
Why thinkest thou threats shall make me leave my friend?
When is the time for friends to show themselves,
But in extremity.
I bless sweet fortune that gives me such means,
To show how much I favour true nobility.
What God will have, folly may not withstand.
Go in my son, I will be day, the night, the evening, the morning to thee my son,
The day to help thee fly from foes pursuit,
The even to give thee rest from all thy toil,
No day nor night shall I retain my rest,
Till Brishio know that thou art safely fled.
Here leave me father, walk no further forth,
Leave me supposed dead, revived by thee,
Hid thou my name, and cover from the world,
My fortunes and my birth, and all misdeeds,
Here is that Venice that beheld me fond,
Here is that Venice that shall behold me wise,
Look how thy science hath disguised these looks,
So hath thy council reconciled my heart,
I hate all worldly pomp, I scorn lewd lust,
This tongue from tempting in dishonest love
Shall labour to relieve the innocent,
Farewell, thou knowest my vow,
Which I have sworn to keep irrevocable,
Never to disclose my name,
Until such time as thou releasest me.
I will conceal thy name, thy fortune & thy birth,
Thy friends, and what thou wilt I will conceal,
And now redeemed from the jaws of death,
Love deeds of virtue worthy Gentleman,
And every day discovering of thy wound,
Think how thy God hath thus preserved thee.
Philip farewell, and welcome poverty,
From sinful proud, I wax a cynic pure,
Die fortune, fly deceit, flourish true repent,
Sin folly breeds, a good man's discontent.
Marchetto, if thou lovest me, grant me this,
That if thou enter Lelios' house thyself,
I may accompany or tend on thee.
Your Lordship cannot will or wish the thing,
Wherein Marchetto will not pleasure you,
The guard already hath beset the house,
And I will knock and call for entrance.
Tell me Marchetto ere thou go,
What precious thing is hid in Lelios' house,
That likes thee best.
I long to be the Lord of all his coin.
And I long and labour for his daughter's love.
But by your patience, worthy Lord,
I deem my choice is best,
For who so gaineth wealth,
Hath beauty tied as captive to his coin,
And worldly pleasure tendeth on his train.
But in respect of beauty, it is vain,
Riches are baits to teach us nigardines,
But beauty to be bounty teacheth meanest men.
Ioue first won Dania in a golden shower.
But Dalia's overpress with power,
Wealth is the body's slave, but beauty guides the mind
And feeds the sense, and animates the wit.
But wealth by golden gifts commandeth it,
The fairest Ladies for a little bribe,
Will let Diogenes disport awhile,
Gold is a God in this desired age.
The more corrupter men that use it so.
Why what art thou that listens our debate?
Even he that scorns the world, & spurns at fates,
He that thinks wealth a burden to the soul,
And he too fond that fond useth it,
He that thinks beauty but a frail delight,
The nurse of idleness, a bait for fools,
Unmeet for Princes, who should only think,
To beautify their souls,
Not to infect their hearts with outward shows.
What new bred Cynic doth disturb us thus?
He that can teach thee how to choose thy goods,
join both thy hands, and blow them mightily.
To what intent?
Do what I bid thee man.
I pray thee please the cynic, fit his vain.
Fellow behold, I will effect thy will.
What profit hast thou by that breath of wind?
Why, it warms my hands.
But now the heat is laid.
It is.
Such is the gold, and so it doth abide,
A breath of pleasure wavering but a space,
Maintained by mighty care, but quickly lost.
Now Fortunio let us see what beauty is,
Seest thou not this sprig, be't not fresh and green,
Now look again, a little violence makes it deformed:
Why such is beauty sir, a bait wherewith the world
Doth angle arts, entangle towardness,
Enforceth reason, traverseth advice:
I pray thee let me serve thee Fortunio.
To what intent?
Because I hate thy course, and will instruct thee,
If thou be wise to mark, and prove, and know an honest man.
Well, I entertain thee, thou shalt tend on me,
But first tell me, whence art thou?
Where wast thou borne?
I first was borne to be gentle,
Nature enforced the seed of good and bad in me,
Till death threatened to whip me for my sins,
Mercy stepped in, Repent shed tears and kissed me,
Devotion healed me, and new christened me,
In my own blood that dropped from this wound,
And called me Penitent experience.
Eta serva vostra fettisima seruidore siniore.
Speaks in parables.
Let him attend, 'tis time to knock up Lelios' household train.
Who knocks there?
The prince's guard.
Guard, we have no need of guards, go to the tailors,
Keep out I say.
Sir, if I catch you.
I and you can.
What a fool is this?
What an ass is that?
What noise is this?
What mean this troop of armed men about my door?
Madame, the Senate by a late decree,
Hath sent us to make search for Lelio,
And if we find him not, to seize his goods.
All what is his, my Lord, you may command,
The scourge which God afflicteth on our heads,
Is for our sins, we take our harms in gree,
Go when you will, search where you please,
And leave the rest for this poor maid and me.
Did ever eyes behold so fair a face?
Look not Fortunio, eyes are arrows keen,
That wounds all unawares, and are not seen.
Why weeps this tender maid, why grieves the mother
'tis I should weep, and I will weep for both,
Fie on Sempronio that was so unkind.
Fond man, why dost thou torment thyself?
I beat Sempronio for abusing thee,
Thou lose unbridled man, the cause of harms,
Pardon Annetta, pardon Lucida.
What ails this aged man he stormeth so?
Some lunacy surpriseth me I fear,
Art thou Sempronio?
This is Annetta, that Lucida, thou Fortunio,
But I am not Sempronio, but penitent experience
Fair Lucida, as bright as is the morning star.
Dry up thy tears, let not thy father's fall
Depress thy courage, but revive thy spirits,
And think thy beauty sufficient to wed thee presently
Fortunio, now my wedding days be past
I have that husband which contents me best.
Words sounding death, may I thy husband know.
Why sir, I late am wedded to my woe,
With him I live, he doth enjoy my heart.
Tush madame, that marriage may be quickly mad,
Beauty to dwell with woe were to to bad.
Hear me a word.
Madame, I see your husband hath pruented us,
Well, let him fly, his chests are sealed up,
The house and some small helps are left for you,
But if in this your extreme misery,
●ou will vouchsafe to follow mine advice,
I will assure you good and wealth enough.
As how my Lord?
Forget thy Lelios' love,
Grant me possession of thy private bed.
avant unreverend pailard, touch me not.
Here's first a knack to know an honest Lady.
'tis but a trick of youth, refuse not me.
Away dishonest man, abuse not me,
My poverty is happiness to me,
So long as virtue guides and govern it,
Come Lucida, beware of subtle men.
Fly from these sirens that enchant chaste hearts,
Come let our toiling fingers get us bread,
Before suspect should prejudice our names.
Good madame but a word, and then no more.
Sir, in a word you shalt not tempt me more,
I am too noble to forget myself,
Too chaste to be a prince's concubine:
Offer your lewd assaults among your courtesans,
I am no stolen for your unhonest lust: and so farewell.
Do so as thou hast said,
Thou shalt be crowned with honour, courteous maid.
Despised and scorned, what should I but despair,
Use force, my Lord, & win what you would have.
I, here's a knack to know an arrant knave,
Virtue near taught thee that.
She sets a bit upon her bridled lust,
She hath a water of a holy zeal,
To drown the shame of vain affection in.
Peace foolish fool, thou dost abuse our talk.
What do these flatterers where free men walk?
Hark my Fortunio, I will tell a tale,
An ox in Memphes with his poring tongue,
Licking in doctious weeds did so foretell
His following death: a wretch like to myself,
Beating Marchettos cloak, doth prophesy
His following shame, unless he mend his life.
'tis true my friends, I heard the pulley creak,
The stirring crane did make a mighty noise,
And by a rope I saw descending down,
The cursed murderer, Lord Lelio.
'tis Brishio succours Lelio, none else.
What news my friends, what makes Seruio up?
Captain, Lord Lelio hitherto hath kept in Brishios' house,
And this night from his lee is slipped away,
I saw the anchor fished, the sails new hoist,
Ask of this peasant if I tell not true.
Sirrah, didst thou see Lelio?
I marry did I sir.
What need we more?
Marie to know when I saw him last,
For the first time I saw him was at his marriage.
Unbend thy musket soldier in the lock.
Press me his thumbs, and make the slave confess,
O I confess Lelio was shipped at our crane this night,
My master Brishio took him in,
I agreed with the shipmaster, made clcane his shoes,
And so laid him in the rope of our crane,
And let him down into the ship;
And he is gone into the Florentine camp.
So now let him loose, the truth apparent is.
Marchetto, go prosecute the Senate's will,
Attach Lord Brishio, seize upon his goods,
Come break up the door.
Soft gentle friend, a word or two with you,
From whence proceed these troubles that arise?
For young Sempronios death, my honest friend.
Why gentle sir, is young Sempronio dead?
Why doubts thou that, I tell thee I have sought and found it so.
Where was he buried?
Why Sepheards brought me tidings of his death
Some ravenous beast did seize him for his pray.
And what hast thou lost or gotten by his death?
I have annual rents two thousand pounds,
The worth in plate of twice so many more,
A few such breakfasts friend, would make me rich,
I'll tell thee, every day throughout the year,
I'll lose a kinsman to possess so much.
Than not for love thou bearest Sempronio,
But for a colour of thy honest mind,
Thou dost pursue Lord Lelio in this sort.
A fool were I so to accuse myself,
Think like a worldly man, that so it is,
And so it is in deed, who longeth to be rich,
Let him forget God but for a dozen years,
He shall be rich, well landed, stout, and brave.
Wipe out that water from thy eyes my friend.
What aileth me?
Why thou art blind and canst not see.
Thou wilt not make me mad, I'll take my spectacles
Tush they avail thee not, for thou art blind in deed,
Look in thy heart and find an honest thought,
Then will I say thy eyes are perfect clear,
Look in thy conscience, find it not corrupt,
Then thou shalt see without thy spectacles.
Away, thou art a knave I say, tempt me not.
Yes, but thou art an arrant covetous knave, for all mine uncle.
'tis true my Lord, I favoured Lelios' flight,
My love hath crossed the rigour of your laws.
Did you foreknow the penalty my Lord,
That dooms you banishment and loss of goods.
All this I knew, but none of this I fear,
True friendship lighteneth all these burdenous harm
If Lelio be escaped I fear no wants,
My exile to me is liberty,
Go fruits of nature, I will leave you here,
Go toward children, thrive among my friends,
Glut you with my excess of Vanities,
Feed your unclean desires by spoiling me,
I wreak them not, so Lelio live to me.
Not irksome age, not limbs with sickness tired,
Nor you my sons, nor all my other friends,
Not fortune nor entreat shall keep me back.
Whence grows thy resolution so austere?
From honesty, my friends, which governs me,
First Lelio 'mongst our chiefest citizens,
Made me his father, and his vowed friend:
Next, to defend my daughter from defame.
He ventured life, And shall a little pelf,
These two young boys, make me forget my friend,
That ventured life and virtue for my sake?
No, I love my Lelio, do what fortune can.
Why here's a knack to know an honest man,
Keep him in Venice my Fortunio,
When he is gone few such will stay behind,
For here our wont faith is turned to fraud,
Our perjuries are counted policies,
Our oaths are gates to catch the simple sort,
Our courtesy is but nodding of the head,
Discovering the cap, or bending of the knee,
Swearing I love your honour good my Lord:
The best dissembler hath the bravest wit,
Come let me love thee for thy Lelios' sake,
And when I meet him next I'll tell him more.
Dear father, who shall succour us when you are dead?
Your diligence, which can command the proudest misery.
What if your friends repine, and will not give?
Your hands, my sons, must teach you how to live
Courage and industry can never want,
Vain idleness grows wretched by itself,
But diligence enableth poorest men.
Well, must I to prison Lords, or must I hence,
Tell me the Senate's sentence speedily.
High thee from Venice speedily, for if thou stay
But two hours space, thou art adjudged death.
Farewell my Lord, and farewell gentle friend,
Adieu my sons nay weep not,
Commend me to your sister, love her well,
Defend her honour as you love your lives.
Where nature parteth us, there sorrow thrives.
Come, let us let the Duke and Senate know,
The whole success and fortune we have had.
What Franco, well met, whether art thou going?
Faith my master is gone away, and I am going a begging.
A begging, why 'tis the best occupation thou canst use,
A beggar hath five of the seven liberal sciences
At his finger's ends: he hath music to sing for his dinner, he hath logic to cavil with the constable, he hath rhetoric to persuade that he should not go to the stocks, he hath Geometry to measure out his bed in the plain field, and he hast Astronomy to show a warm sun from a cold shade. Nay, I'll prove that a beggar devours the four moral virtues at one breakfast: he's valiant when he must needs fight, he is liberal when he hath any money to spend, and he is true if there be nothing to steal. A beggar, why 'tis the ancientest occupation that is, it began at Adam, & will never end till dooms day. But sirrah Franco, I'll tell thee what thou shalt do, go & profess thine old occupation again.
What's that?
O 'tis the best occupation that is for thee.
Why what profit can that yield?
Why, by being always drunk thou shalt learn never to be sober. O the virtue of a drunkard is much, he speaks little because he sleeps much, he stands not upon opinion, for every little straw throws him not down: he is not proud, for his head is ready to salute every post: nor he is not envious, for he tears his stomach open to every man, and sleeps as sound on a dunghill as on a down bed. Mary one thing, he is subject to impatience, for once a day he sees the devil.
And truly for that cause I'll bless myself,
I'll to the Duke of Millane camp to my master,
And there profess beggary: stay thou here
To profess drunkenness: and so farewell.
Go thou to beggary, I'll to the butchery,
The proverb is true that I tell to you,
'tis better to be drunken and drowsy,
Than hunger starved and lousy.
Come Lucida, here let us sit a while,
My father is banished, and my husband is fled,
And that which grieves my heart, my brethren poor,
And we not able for to succour them.
Good mother cease your plaints, for here comes one.
Fortunio my master mad in love,
Must have this Lucida, or he will die,
And I supposed to be a worldly man,
Must be a mean, and stolen to win his love:
But whereas penitent experience pleads for lewd lust,
The lecher never thrives,
But here bring I the sacred chest of gold,
Gifts, which if proverbs lie not, will tempt the Gods:
Yonder sits chastity at beauty's feet,
Madams, God speed your works, & speed your friends
And speed your foes, but speed your virtues more.
welcome honest friend.
soft, first prove mine honesty,
And hear my message ere you prais me much,
And this is it, A lewd and lusty Lord,
Trained up in idleness, hath late beheld fair Lucida,
And longs to lie with her,
And hoping by rewards to win her love,
He sends this casconet clogged with gold and pearl,
First to Annetta to make her a bawd,
Next to fair Lucida to make her a whore,
But if Annetta be as chaste and wise,
As when she counterchecked Sempronio,
If Lelios' virtue live in Lucida,
Return me back with strokes and railing words,
Scratch out my eyes for bringing lewd attempts,
But if you mean to try a trick of youth,
And vain necessity kills honesty,
Here take this gold, but herewithal receive
A thousand curses from Sempronios ghost,
This halter to dispatch thee, lest thy guilt,
Should breed more dishonour in thy father's ears.
Who sent thee fellow, to seduce us thus?
Fortunio Lucida, a mighty man,
But if true virtue govern thy affects,
Make thou a marble rock of this white breast,
Against the sea of every loved assault.
The strangest message that I ever heard,
Fortunio showed but little wit in this,
To trust his secrets with so severe a man.
Why Annetta, I have dealt in honesty,
I have discoursed my master's mind at large,
And therein showed the duty that I own:
Next like a councillor and friend beside,
I give thee this advice, and therein let thee know,
How much I honour noble Lelio.
Ah but when I think upon Sempronio.
Why what of him?
How imperiously he sought to win thy love.
Tell me the rest.
I cannot choose but weep amain.
Why didst thou know the man?
O no, not I, for I am penitent Experience,
Madams, I know gold cannot conquer you,
Fair Lucida doth scorn Fortunio's lust,
And for that virtue which I see in both,
Receive the gifts I will bestow on you:
To thee chaste madame, Lelio's best beloved,
I give this scalp, and pray thee every day,
Beholding it, to think upon thy end:
Which sight will so restrain all worldly lust,
As thou shalt die to sin, and live to God.
To thee fair Lucida I do present
This book, whereon is written,
Thy father's pedigree and famous line,
Each morning when the golden Sun appears,
And glides the mountain tops, peruse it well,
There reading mark but honour of thy race,
Take heed least lewdness do thy fame deface,
Reply not, get you in, the Crocodile is coming forth
That weeping will devour you.
This is the festival of holy Mark,
Yond come the pompious show.
Vanitas vanitatum, & omnia vanitas,
Vain ceremonies, customs of the world,
This day our Lords of Venice wont be,
To sacrifice in triumph to the sea,
And march in pomp unto the Arcedan,
For this great state built in a starry nook,
An angle of the Andrie arctike sea,
For happiness and long continuance,
More blest than Rome itself,
Vain customs doth observe,
But yond come my master and Marchetto forth,
Now you that long to see the guise of sin,
How one makes two, and two increaseth four,
And sin in gathering head grows infinite,
Let him behold examples in these loves.
Here comes my cynical attendance
We shall have news what Lucyda intends.
Go cast thee headlong from a mounttaine top,
Or in the deepest seas go drown thyself,
Go live thou wretch among the barbarous beasts,
Where Italy may never hear thy name.
For virtue vows to laugh in looking on,
To see you perish in your peevishness,
A dreadful entrance to a doleful tale,
Speak man, what news from Lucyda?
she spies thy poyssoned message in thy face,
She scorns thy gifts, and vows to hate thee ever,
To thee lewd lozel fair Annetta sends,
A troup of curses chained with bitter sighs,
Come Lords let's lighten us of heavy things,
There lies my cloak & cap, now throw your swords aside,
And let us three like fleeting unycornes,
Run blushing through the streets in to the wood,
There let Fortunio cut Marchettos throat,
That counseled him to ravish chastity,
There penitent experience with his bat,
Shall beat Fortunio's tender wanton sides,
That sought to spoil holy virginity,
Lastly myself will sit and tear my hair,
And weep until I choke myself with wet,
To see nobility so much disguised.
Hence sorrow, boding messenger be gone,
Rage's now shall over rule discretion,
Gather thy friends Marchetto follow me,
This night we will surprise them in their beds,
And teach them kindness who will learn no love.
Here is perfect valour in a noble man,
here is perfect villainy sprung from thy lips.
Now gentlemen what seek you at my hands?
My Lord we hope that for the aunient league,
Betwixt our Father and your worthy self,
You will vouchsafe somewhat to secure us.
What gentlemen and begeres, fie for shame,
Pay not our hopes with scorns,
Our father used you better in your wants.
Thou talkest of matters forty years ago,
The world that's now differs from that was then,
Men are more near and dearer to themselves
But if you want a cup of drink or so,
Stand at my door my man shall bring it you.
Ha ha ha, a worldling right, the poet's song
Was well applied in this,
For like the ants they eat the gain of men's wealth,
But fly them like the fiends when they are fallen,
These Cicero and Aristotle termed a troup of servile
Base dishonest men,
Stay here, here cometh more, stand by awhile.
We shall behold the world anatomized,
The Florentiens of late have fought a field,
Wherein Lord Lelio hath deserved well,
For why, his country scorns to secure him,
Lord Brishio tendeth on the Milan camp,
And hath achieved many a worthy deed.
I joy to hear of Brishio's good success,
Your merchandise are sold, and we have sent
Bills of Exchange to receive the money,
A merrier heart hath Treverey for that.
How now you saucy youths, stand back I say,
What make you linger here about my doors?
I hope your Lordship knows us well.
I would you knew yourselves as well as I,
Go get you hence, it is for young men to ply their books,
To practise music, and delight in arms,
And not to loiter up and down the streets.
Dishonest Lord, our father in thy wants Did use thee better,
And wilt thou leave his sons in misery?
When Brishio and I meet, we'll talk of that?
Let him come crave himself, I'll answer him.
Why he is banished, and may not return.
The better cause have I to cast him off,
I will not raze my house to raise you up,
Let me see, you are two good tall youths,
And fit for soldiers, go you to Milan to,
Where your father is, live by the wars,
And do not vex us in peace, for you get not a penny of me.
These strange repulses make me desperate,
Speak brother Zephyrus, what shall we do?
How now young gallants, what distempers you?
But grieve not thus at worldly chances,
If sin were dead virtue were never seen.
Are you the sons of Brishio gentle friends?
We are the sons of hapless Brishio.
And these rank churls whom erst your father tide,
By many great deserts unto his house,
Have left you thus in your extremities.
Give me your hands you relics of renown:
Now have I got an Empire to my mind,
A vent for my religious charity,
Hold take these jewels, buy you what you want,
But heedfully beware of gormandize,
Led you a sober decent comely life,
Remember truly the effects of things,
Before you shall affect and make your choice.
Hear in a word, who made the planets seven,
First sent down love and charity from heaven,
But avarice was christened in hell,
Speak holy men, have I not counselled well?
What man art thou that favourst misery?
Even he that thanks my God,
That sends me ought whereby to secure you,
And call me Penitent experience,
Who gives thee thanks for what thy father did,
Who gives thee thanks for what thy brother did.
And charge you both, as you are noble borne,
To let me see your weapons presently.
Take them and use them gentle minded man.
Here are the blades well polished fair and bright.
Were it not pity Sirs that these swords
Should rust within their sheaths of bliss?
While some Venetian lecher and his mate,
Should ravish thy sister and deflower thy niece.
What swords are these friend, report the truth?
This night Annetta, and fair Lucida,
If gods and friends forsake them in their wants:
By lawless ravishers will be surprised:
I mean to secure them, if you refuse
Give me my jewels, for I will secure none
That leaves their sisters in extremity.
God leave us, if we forsake our friends,
Or leave our sister in extremity.
Then take more jewels, heir tall men:
And underneath this wall, watch all this night:
If any man shall attempt to break your sister's door,
Be stout, assail him, kill him, for his cause is bad.
Led us the way, and we will follow thee,
For in our sister's cause we'll spend our blood.
The gain is yours, the glory must be Gods,
Who made you to defend the innocenets.
Now Brishio, since thy country Venice scorneth thee.
And thou an abject wretch exiled from thence:
Yet I have made thee champion of my right,
If thou expect the cause, it is for dowry,
The which the Florentines denies to pay:
In right of marriage, with fair Orrelio my wedded wife.
For this thou fights, now get the victory,
And thou hast purchased Country, life and friends,
Reason no more my Lord,
For virtue plucketh occasion ere he draweth his sword.
Look on great Princes, and see an old man fight.
Even as the candle falling down aside,
Then burneth brightest when it 'gins to fail,
In age, so I will show great valour,
And will not now submit,
I take thy word, God maintain now the right,
Now Lelio I have laid the burden of my war on thee:
Thou art the champion of my weal or woe:
Deceive not my firm hope, but in a manly fight?
Attempt the winning of this happy day,
By those moist tears which with a mournful heart,
I often shed upon Sempronios herst:
And by the love I bear Annetta fair:
nought but my death, shall make me lose thy right,
More than my life, I cannot hazard mighty Florentine
I like thy courage gentleman: charge the combatants.
Whom do my eyes behold, art thou not Brishio my father?
Who forsaking weal and friends,
Madest thy choice of baleful banishment,
Rather than live and seem banished.
Art not thou Lelio whom my zealous prayers,
Have always wished, and wild thy greatest good,
Cease trumpets cease, we two must never fight.
What meaneth thy champion Medesa to faint.
What means thy champion Forsa that he faints.
To combat with my son were worse than death.
To combat with my father were my death?
Father and sons, both champions in our wars.
Brother and brother, causer of the same
What favour merit they, who love so well?
What infamy deserve we that contend?
See Forsa these champions are so kind they cannot fight.
Shall we contend for titles wretchedly,
While meaner men contend in perfectt love.
A pardon Medesa all the world beside.
Had not this man, this father of my wife:
Encountered me, I would have died and perished in thy cause.
A pardon Forsa, had not this virtuous husband of my child.
Encountered me, I would have died and perished in thy cause.
Rise combatants, you teach us what to do,
Come Medesa, join you hands,
And let these two which love so well,
Be judges of our wars, and let it end.
Brother content. Now champions end debate:
What you conclude, shall make a peace with us:
See see, my son, our love hath well nigh made their peace.
Princes, are you agreed to determine war by us?
I Brishio, now we are agreed.
Then tell me mighty Duke, but dally not.
Lovest thou Orelio as a husband should?
I love and honour her in word and soul
Then nothing is to dear for her my leech.
I'll hazard life, and all to do her good.
Perform her jointure then, and keep thy word.
Then let the Florentine pay me her dowry.
Fear not my Lord, the Florentines are men that honour right.
Speak great Italian Duke, shall it be bruited in the ears of men?
That Forsa grants all duty unto thee,
And thou deny her right of marriage.
'tis pity that gold should part two noble minds,
Here Forsa take my hand, this night one tent
Shall lodge us both, & here a legare, shall my money lie,
Until my treasurer hath brought thy dew.
Then march in peace, here endeth all our hate.
Thus poor men's love, doth great men's harms debate.
This is the place now fellows, stand close a while,
If any shall attempt to scale these walls,
Assault him, and kill him if you can,
For death is too good an end for him that favours dishonesty.
I hear them coming: brother now stand close.
Now sleeps the Sun in Thetis lickored lap:
And watery eyes are pleased with pleasant rest:
Now plays the silver Moon upon the Sea,
And all the train of twinkling stars adorn:
The hollow compass of our heavens sphere,
This is the place where I must purchase life, or end my days.
Marchetto boldly knock, to see if by permission
We may enter in, lest rumour will bewray us this darksome night.
How now what scabis at the door at this time of the night.
Sirrah, tell thy mistress Fortunio is at hand to speak with her.
Soft sir, keep out I say, lest I make garters of your guts, foot balls of your faces, ho let forth the dogs there.
Sirrah dispatch, and call your Mistress forth,
Or with my Sword I'll send thy soul to hell.
Way way, you may carry the message thither yourself, for poor men's souls were made for heaven, and the rich for hell.
What noise is this, what meaneth you thus to assault a hapless Lady's house?
Annetta my fair love, my hearts sole Queen,
Avaunt dishonest man, disturber of the poor:
I know thy drift, I know Fortunio comes,
To heap dishonour on my hapless house:
But you may be gone and get you to your rest,
For no man entereth these doors this night.
Seize I this haggard I'll make her stoop.
Heave me the doors from of the hinges strait.
Who lifts his hands to force these barred doors.
Shall buy his rashness with his dearest blood.
What hath she champions to resist us then?
I, such as scorn to be disgraced by thee:
Down with the slaves, fellows beat them down. Give light.
Fortunio is slain Soldiers, go raise the watch.
The Prince is hurt, Zepheronus and Orphinio fly a pace.
My senses fails, O help me to my bed.
Lean on my shoulder and let us go.
These are the Traitors Seruio, lay hands on them.
Who's this, Orphinio and Zepheronus.,
The sons of Brishio, performers of this deed.
Go Seruio keep them close, tell I inform the Duke.
And visit young Fortunio in his bed.
What ho Phillyda my girl come forth here.
What would my father?
Go take these prisoners, & see thou keep them close
Lock them in the upper loft till I return.
Use us like gentlemen we crave no more.
Use you like knaves, for you deserve no less, go get you hence.
So now shall I see the end of Brishioes race,
Now shall Sempronioes' death be well revenged.
First will I go to the Duke, and there procure their death,
And hast again to see their execution done.
Whether will love and duty lead me now?
To whom shall I submit in these extremes.
If to my father, than my Lord must die:
Lovely Orphinio, and young Zepheronio:
My cruel father now, doth seek their deaths:
And now in haste is gone unto the Duke,
That both of them this morn may lose their heaads.
But I'll prevent him, for here I'll set them free,
And hazard all their peril on myself.
Orphinio come forth.
What seeks thou lovely maid, amongst wretched men?
I seek for love, saw you not him of late.
He never keeps, where wretched men abide.
Yes, yes Orphinio down in thy eyes he keeps:
But now to tell you dangers that are priest,
And you must seek prevention out of hand,
For Corrodino by Marchettoes' mouth,
Hath taken order that to morrow morn,
Young Zepheronio and you shall lose your heads.
O cruel sentence upon Innocents',
For what we did was in our sister's cause.
How doth Fortunio?
Like the dying man: but grieve not Orphinio:
Hardest not thou what love did promise late:
Wilt thou protest if I do set thee free,
And thou return to Venice safe again,
Vouchsafe to take me to thy wedded wife.
I vow before the mighty God of heaven,
To wed and honour none but Phillida.
I take thy word, and soon shall set thee free:
Here take my father's signet,
Give it to the Porter of the gates, and he will let you pass: and so farewell my sweet Orphinio: I cannot stay, and in thy journey think on Phillyda.
Danger then must hasten our departure:
Farewell sweet Phillida, Queen of my heart.
Welcome sweet morn, the means of my delight:
God and my industry hath wrought thus much:
In just revenge of my Sempronios death.
First Lelio banished, next Brishio to live in misery:
And last, his sons to day must suffer death:
Have I not four for one.
Good morrow, and good fortune to my Lord.
How now Porter, what news?
I bring your honours signet back again,
Which gave me warrant for two gentlemen.
To pass the gate & watch some two hours since.
My signet knave, to pass two gentlemen:
Alas poor slave hast thou been over watched?
Why look on the ring my Lord?
Why thou wilt not make me mad I am sure?
Come let me see, the mark is mine:
I fear me heers some villainy.
What Phillida come forth, my heart misgives,
I pray thee hold my head.
Father did you call?
Thou Challet carrine drab, who took this signet from my finger, speak?
You ask me questions past my knowledge.
Where are the keys that locked the upper loft?
Fast underneath the pillow where you sleep.
Go fetch them hither, let's see them strait,
Go call up my neighbours: Fairies haunt my house.
This ring was yesterday night upon this thumb,
Yet hath two devils gotten it abroad:
And gotten passage through my castle gates:
And here a worse than Lucifer himself,
Doth bring it back, to haunt me with suspect.
High thee good Gnatto, bring us to the house,
If yet my brothers bide with Seruio:
I'll to the Duke and move Fortunio,
For what they did was in my honours right.
See where old Seruio sits.
'tis such a would fraud fool, I am loath to speak
Father here are the keys.
Fetch forth the prisoners let me see their looks,
God speed you Sir in the way of honistie. My mistress would know, whether her brethren be prisoners in your house, or no.
I, tell her, and I hope ere noon to see them hanged.
I told you what would come out,
He spoke as though he would spit his stomp in my mouth.
Alas alas father, we are all undone,
Orphinio and Zepherius are fled.
Tell me that my soul hath left my flesh:
How, when, where, whether, how should they be gone?
Fine and brave mistress, your brethren are gone.
Villain why did they pass, you minks, you
Minion, you have let them loose.
Good father do not censure me amiss.
Hence callet, harlot, worse than nought:
For thou hast lost me and my prisoners:
I am undone, my credit's cracked, my honour's lost & gone
I am a reprobate and cast away, I'll to the Duke,
Pack thou to hell thou wretch, come not in my sight,
But get thee gone.
How glad am I my brethren are escaped,
Come sirrah, vex the silly wretch no more.
Good fortune to our brother Lelio.
O happy relics of a worthy man,
Young Zepherius, and kind Orphinio.
How wends the word, in Venice with our friends:
How fares Annetta, how lives Lucida.
The worse doth still prevail,
Marchetto hath attempted thy fair wife.
Fortunio sought, to ravish Lucida:
And we rescuing them have hardly scaped with life,
Like as the Palm unto the Egyptian sags,
That in three hundred days, and sixty five:
Is seemliest and fully brought to pass,
Even so your tidings to sad Lelio,
Importeth my excreding year of grief.
That hath three hundred woes and sixty five,
And sixty five, three hundred sorrows more.
To grieve thy sorrows without mending them is vanity,
Lelio, behold occasion favours thee.
Why are your swords unsheathd you noble friends?
Doth pity move you by a blessed death to end my woes.
O welcome is that sword that slits this heart.
Tho u seest our Father in declining age,
Is banished quite for saving of thy life,
And we his sons, unless he doth return,
Are never like to visit Venice more:
Resolve you then to high you back again,
And by thy head, revoke our exiled Sire,
Or by our swords, prepare thyself to die.
Is this the cause that makes you so unkind:
Will Lelios head, or heart, or any part,
Be comforters to Brishio and his sons?
Put up your swords, we will not square for this.
That I may see my father ere I go,
And thank him for his many courtesies.
See where he comes, occasion favours thee.
God bless my sons, rise rise, & speak to me:
Have you not some Venetian friends unkind.
Their friendship, with thy fortunes took an end.
I thought on less, but why is Lelio so discontent:
Tut give over man, the stream will run with us at last.
I come to thank my father for his love,
And pray him by those arms he honours most,
To deign my dutiful and kind adieu.
Why whether goes my son so suddenly?
To Venice father, to redeem your banishment.
I am not banished, you wrong my fames?
Living for him, I live at liberty.
But Lelio must not live, unless he be resolved
To high to Venice, that thou mayest return.
These are thy children Brishio, these exceed
In kindness towards thee, and towards me.
Oh honours to your father and to me:
Let me embrace you for your courtesy.
Brishio far well, accept a thousand thanks.
Why, who wills thee hence?
Father, they will him hence, that will be actors
In his Tragedy, unless he to Venice go speedily,
And quit thee from this exile with his head,
These are not Brishios' sons, bids Lelio hence:
These are not Brishios' sons that draw their swords:
Thou art my son, these two are fortunes slaves;
Avaunt vain boys, come not in my sight,
By heaven and heavens adorning sun,
These are no sons of mine that sin so much.
Ashamed, we beg a pardon at thy hands,
Ashamed, I beg a pardon at thy hands,
In rendering nature, that hath lost thy power,
To breed such manslayers in an honest stock.
O bend not those knees, to which nature bends.
O Lelio sue our pardons, plead for us,
Our judgements were disgraced by our loves.
Rise father of kind sons, sons kind to father,
Brother's unkind, in kindness to your brother:
I kind to churlish of my kind,
Do yield kind death, to save your lives
Swear puytence, lewd boys,
Submit to Lelio humbly on your knee,
Else will I never bless you graceless youths.
We humbly crave submission of our brother.
And thou my son, nay more than son my friend
Here plight thy faith to bide and stay with me,
Or I shall think my love but spent in vain.
I vow to be as sequest to my Father,
And with my heart I do forgive my brothers.
Then will I now incorporate these Lads,
And hug them in my arm, and hold them dear.
Now will I hold a festival to day,
For Lelio, Zepherius and Orphinio:
And I with favour of my noble Lord,
Will first give order to my soldiers,
And then return to Brishio in his tent.
Be careful of thy charge my noble son,
I will not hinder thee in virtuous things,
But let us meet again before we march,
For I have many things for to impart to thee.
My business passed I will revisit thee.
In what a world of troubles am I tossed,
To Venice Lelio, rid thy father's cares:
I but Brishio will accuse thy breach of faith.
But while I here remain his griefs increase,
I am resolved, father, friends, farewell,
I will to Venice with a merry heart.
And in what ear disguise I can provide,
Visit Annetta my distressed wife,
And so redeem my father's banishment.
Bring tortures forth, bring me a cord,
Stretch me the villains limbs, force him to confess.
What, have I made thee the marquis of Saint Marks
And gave thee charge of all the City keys,
And hast thou played me such a part,
To let those caitiff boys escape my hands.
Just God great Duke, can witness it with me,
With what great griefs I lost the prisoners.
Who doubts but God beholds thy treachery,
And therefore the minister of God,
Will punish thee and make thee to confess
Whether corruption or affliction
Made thee discharge the prisoners of my wrath.
Rack me to death, show all extremities,
You shall but wreck your wraths on Innocence.
This is but delaying, rack him I say.
Work no injustice great Venetian Duke,
Unbind my aged father cruel man,
These pangs belongs to none but guilty souls:
Inflict them then on those that merit them.
What art thou that hinders justice so.
The hapless daughter, of this hapless man:
I stole my father's keys by night:
I freed Orphinio, and Zepheronio.
And if this deed do merit death my Lord,
Let lose my father, wreck your hate on me.
If you be she that set my prisoners free,
I am the judge, and sentence thee to die:
Slaves strangle her, let Seruio be released.
Oh pardon the daughter, let the father die,
Why stay you ministers, is not the sentence past,
Must I not die?
No marry must you not you foolish girl.
Good Lord how apt the world is now adays,
To find invention to destroy a man:
When as the greatest arts of our age,
Can never make or hardly mend a man.
Great Corridino, let me council thee,
If thou wilt punish damned and wretched men:
Put me these grey beards quickly from their seats,
And rack them sound, and they will confess,
How they prefer their gold before their God,
Their lands and honours, before their honesty,
Or if thou wilt conceive the truth of things,
See here the man, who drawn by lawless lust:
Did seek sinisterly in time of night,
In company of that lewd lecher there,
To ravish Lucida Lord Lelios' daughter,
And force the mother, in whose just defence,
Orphinio and Zepherius drew their swords.
Then were these young men justifiers of right:
And this lewd man, was he deserved death.
Look on this prisoner's face, you know him well,
The world esteems him next a kin to you.
Fortunio what my son, what means these bands?
What else but bands belong to guilty men,
Why should my greatness cover my miss deeds?
Or poor men suffer for a great man's sin?
O Father root from forth your royal Court,
This cursed flatterer, that seduced me:
We two deserve to die.
These prisoners have done thee honour, for by wounding me
They have preserved their sister from a rape,
Me from perpetual shame, thee from much grief:
Therefore if justice punish any one, begin with us:
Else will the proverb hold, smallest flies are tangled in thy twist
When greater far breaks through and force the web.
Seruio and Phillida, your judgement is,
To lose Fortunio's bands:
Fortunio's pains is to embrace old Corodinos neck:
I thank my God that hath reclaimed thee,
And made thee fly the vanities of youth,
Now without fear shall I encounter death,
When I am sure thy wanton days are past.
But thou ungracious man, pass from my Court,
And exiled to the world:
Come my Fortunio let us enter in
And establish this perpetual law hence forth,
That but in causes merely capital,
A noble man submitting of himself,
And after being reconciled to God,
Shall have his pardon without prejudice.
This likes me well, now grows the world to frame,
Fortunio now hath learned to know a knave:
And is expert to prove an honest man.
Will you buy any Coals, fine small Coals.
Thus have I entered Venice in disguise,
And through the streets have gotten unespied,
Silence Lelio, my thinks my door doth ope,
Ah yonder comes my wife and daughter forth,
How fares Annetta, how doth Lucida.
What Lelio, my Lord in this disguise?
A happy sight to, see my father's face.
O comfort of my erst esteemed life:
How do your sighs revive my drooping mind?
But wherefore doth my Lord thus venture life?
And come to Venice for to fetch his death?
I come to rid thy father from his banishment,
And to endow my daughter Lucida.
come reselud to Venice here to die:
Come hither daughter, thou know'st it is proclaimed,
That who so brings me to the Senate house,
Shall have a thousand Crowns for recompense.
Now therefore Lucida I yield to thee:
Take thou the gold, and yield me to them strait,
And let my death, end all your miseries.
Cursed be that gold that's bought with blood.
Happy be that death that doth so many good.
Ah Lelio, we are betrayed, here cometh the Guard.
Buy any Coals, small Cools, fine Cools.
How now, who walks here in this disguise?
Let's see thy face?
This is our Collier.
This is a Courtier's feat: what Lelio, you are welcome Sir, you come in happy time to bring me Crowns.
Sir I am Lelio, I'll not deny my name,
And I am prisoner to my Lucida,
To her belongs the ransom of my head,
Not to thee son of hate and nygardie.
Well Sir, whosoever claim you,
I seize thee for my prisoner.
Who will present thee to the Senators.
Ah gentle Seruio grant me but one thing,
Then take all the profit if thou wilt for me.
What sounds of profit pleaseth Seruio:
Speak gentle maid, I like thy manners well.
Reserve my father in thy prison close,
But three days space, and I ask no more.
Well I grant thy suit, it shallbe so:
Come bear him in hence.
Father time shall discover all, till then farewell.
Come murderers of my joy, go fly my sight:
Bring me my Lelio or you both shall die.
Father, the Soldiers tending in his tent,
Reports that he is gone to Venice,
Ha ha, midst all these melancholy griefs.
And with resolved mind to end his days.
Ah traitorous boys, 'tis you have driven him hence,
Thus villains have you cozened me of fame.
And made him conquer me in courtesy,
Run post, hie with speed, bring him to me:
Redeem my Lelio though you lose your lives,
Or I will hate the ground where on you tread,
And curse the womb that brought me forth such sons.
If we return to Venice we are but dead.
Tut villains, tell not me of death.
I'll lose you both to have my friend again:
Stay but on minute, we are mortal foes,
This sword shall soon revenge me on your heads.
We go, but father.
What wilt thou dally yet?
Kill us before we perish by your foes?
O misery of man, you will not go,
Then stay and see your father with his sword?
We go my Lord, O spare your reverent age.
Nay spare your words, and spend your feet with haste.
What are they gone, ah cruel and unkind,
In seeking to save my friend, I lose my sons:
Stay, stay my sons, leave me some comfort in my age:
Whether wilt thou transport my zealous mind,
Let me surfeit in the sin of love:
They shall not die, if all must perish, I must perish too.
I will to Venice and redeem their lives,
Else father, friends, and sons will die together.
Usher let those that seek for audience
Enter the Court, and move the Senators.
Most mighty Duke, most worthy Senators,
Walking abroad as is my usual wont:
I found Lelio clothed in a base disguise:
Him when I saw, I seized and seizing brought,
To be presented to your honours here:
And in humble wise request the largesse which the state allows
Which is a thousand Crowns to him that brings
The head of Lelio to the Senators.
The Treasurer shall pay thee straight:
Scribe give him a warrant, let him be dispatched:
Lelio stand forth, art thou the hapless man that slew Sempronio
My Lord I confess the fault, and am willing with my death to recompense the deed.
I cry in all men's ears with eager words,
That many seek their danger by despair,
That many die for murders yet undone,
I speak to thee, alas that men were wise,
To know their good, as their infirmity.
Tell me Lelio, what moveth thee free from justice hands
To seek out death with desperate intent?
That which would move the best and wisest man
Had he but self same causes as I had.
Discourse and let these aged fathers know them all.
What shall they know, in knowing my mishap,
That will not mollify their marble minds,
Who first having slain his dearest friend?
Next caused his father's banishment,
And last his wife to live in misery,
And would not seek ease for their disgrace,
First pay his slaughtered friend with dearest blood,
Next call his father home from banishment,
And seeing his wife and daughter once oppressed,
To get endowment and relief for both:
But all my hope is lost, I die in vain,
Which yields a double torment to my pain.
Give sentence Prince, delay not by my death,
To rid me from a world of miseries.
Law must have course, though pity plead for thee:
Scribe read the sentence.
Whereas by sufficient testimony & public confession
Lord Lelio is found guilty for the murder of Sempronio,
It is adjudged and ratified by the noble Duke of Venice,
And the most worthy Senators his assistants,
That for his offence in public place of justice,
Lord Lelio shall lose his head.
Seruio take the brief, see execution done.
Stay cruel man, trained up in cruelty,
Annetta woeful wife, with earnest tears,
Publish some sorrow for her zealous mind:
Great judges of the state, hear me but speak:
Pity for Lelio, grant my husband life.
It may not be, justice will have no pause.
Yet mercy Prince, should moderate the Laws.
Who spares the guilty, anymates the bad.
Who spareth none, doth hate to justice add.
Pity with justice never well agrees.
Yes when it moderates severe decrees.
What cause of plea hath this audacious maid?
Such cause as virtuous men may wonder at:
I claim the pension of a thousand crowns,
For I my Lords present my father's head.
I claim a revocation noble Lords,
For Brishio, for he doth merit it,
By sending Lelio home to you alive,
And tendering him to justice by our means.
So than unless you ratify your laws,
And call my father home from banishment,
And pay the thousand Crowns to Lucida.
Ad this to your justice cruel Lords:
That both the wife and daughter may be lead,
To die with him that doth unjustly die.
Seruio presented Lelio unto us,
And he deserves the pension of the state.
Lelio discovered unto us,
And we deserve the pension of the state.
Lelio first discovered unto us,
And we deserve the pension of the state:
He to endow me, sought his danger forth.
He to redeem his father did return.
The issue of his forwardness was zeal:
And Seruioes' service was but treachery:
Your laws command, that on the first surprise,
Who met with Lelio should disclose him straight,
But Seruio three days space did keep him close.
And therefore Seruio merits not the gold.
This was the certain hope of my desire:
And didst thou Seruio keep him three days close.
I did my lord upon Annettas' humble suit.
I, so the Fox was taken in the net,
And nygardnes was caught by subtlety.
Then do the Senate presently decree,
That Lucida shall have the promised coin,
And Seruio for breaking of the law,
Shall be imprisoned for a twelvemonth space.
This pretty accident doth make me laugh.
Now Seruio you have good time to cast account,
What interest and profit you have raised,
By young Sempronios plate and coin.
I hope your grace will pardon this misdeed.
A way with him, I will not hear him speak.
Shall innocenth great Lords kill guilty men?
Led me to death, and if my brother die.
No man shall lead my Lelio to his death,
Except by self same sword we perish too.
O life thou feedest me with continual death,
When wilt thou end and ease my heinous harms?
What men are these that hinder justice so?
The men that had thy life and sought thy death.
These are old Brishios' sons I know them well.
Lay hands on them and bind the fugitives.
Bind, break our bones, spare neither life nor limbs,
We come to die, and merit not to live,
We bend no knees, for mercy mighty Duke,
Only our suit is for our brother's life,
Whose danger we unhappy men have wrought.
How wrought you Lelios' danger, tell us true?
When from the City speedily we fled,
Werey to see our father's hard distress,
We hied us to the Duke of Florentines camp,
And sought out Lelio, and with naked swords,
Forced him to high to Venice and redeem our sire.
Hereon through fear of us he came,
And in his rescue both of us will die.
Take two for one great Duke it is enough,
Blood shall have blood, then be thou satisfied.
You wrong me brothers. Voluntary intent
Brought me to Venice, not your words.
Thou art too piteous to ingrateful men,
We forced thee hither, we must ransom thee,
If Lelio die, our father will not live,
He prizeth Lelio more than both his sons.
Go, since you long to die, dispatch them two,
Lelio for murder censured by himself,
These for assalting my Fortunio.
Fit we to censure wrongs done to ourselves,
I'll be their advocate, they must not die,
Whom hath they wronged? not law, for none is slain.
They did but punish me,
If any wrong were done, 'twas done to these,
If any death be due, 'tis due to me.
By breach of prison they have forfeited.
No my Lord, for they were unjustly punished.
I pardon thee Fortunio for all thy wrongs,
For pleading zealously for innocents.
But if thou keep my father from the sword,
I'll pay thee further kindness than I owe.
Prevent not zealous faith you angry heavens,
Let raging rigour stay till Brishio come,
What live they yet, lives Lelio, live my sons,
Bound, censured, priest to die, the headsman here,
Come let me make the fourth, thou minister,
Lead me to death with these, if these must die.
How dares thy child Brishio visit us?
Fearest thou not law?
Yes prince I honour law,
And for the love I bear to justice now,
I come to pay my ransom of contempt,
And leave my life in Venice for my crime.
Thy fault deserves not death,
The law requires a hundred crowns for penalty from thee
I have no crowns, my head must be my coin,
I had one friend, and you will rob me of him,
I have two sons, and they are bound to die,
Thus all my wealth is in your hands my Lords
Give these to me, give me these living joys,
For whom I have adventured breach of law,
Then take this hand, cut it off for one,
And take this other, cut it off for him,
But take for this my body, heart, and all,
Ah Lelio, Lelio, couldst thou serve me so.
We look for money Brishio, not for plaints.
You shall have money, here receive my dowry,
I'll pay my grandsires penalty myself.
No, no, redeem the younger sort, let me die.
Mighty, magnificent, and gracious lord,
Why stay you silly souls with dalliance,
Command these murdering hands to cut my throat,
And if that justice flourish in this state,
Pity my father, friend, my joy and weal.
Call not for death my son, he calls not thee,
For pity Corrodino censure me,
For if I lose these, I must lose my life,
And if I lose him, I lose my soul,
Then let us all have life, or lets all die,
Taxing this state with inhumanity.
Draw all these soldiers presently apart,
The Senators will counsel of these events.
Let virtue live, let villainy be slain,
let Lelio live, for virtue lives in him,
O pity thy camp is pitched here,
But grief and sorrow that remaineth here,
But faith and honesty that remaineth here,
Come Charity and lend to me a tongue,
Else Penitent Experience is quite undone.
Thou hast a tongue, then rave not so.
I have no tongue because I cannot show,
Nor tell to thee the secrets of my thoughts,
I have no speech but such as help me not,
But such as sings thy virtue, thy deserts,
Thy bounty, thy true heart, thy honesty,
O were there one could find Sempronio out,
How might we make a famous comedy.
Shall this conclusion stand, you noble peers?
We ratify the same by our consent.
Bring forth the prisoners, Brishio march thou forth,
Weighing the wondrous working of the heavens,
We thus conclude,
That Brishio shall be free from his supposed exile:
and enjoy the goods and fortune he enjoyed before,
We likewise do release his forward sons,
and pardon their defaults what ere they be,
We grant the pension of a thousand crowns
To Lucida, as we have promised,
Only in this our justice stands in force,
That Lelio must for murder suffer death.
Nay my lord, spare all or none, we crave no further grace.
Let Fortune spite, or hate do what she can,
Here is a knack to know an honest man,
Not age, not life, not sons, not wealth, nor friend,
Can draw thee from affecting thy dear friend,
O let me make the third, if Lelio die,
High thee kind charity, lend me a tongue.
Bear hence the prisoner, we dissolve the court.
Stay & suffer Penitent Experience enjoy one boon
Dispatch then and tell us what it is.
Let none but I be executioner to cut off Lelios' head.
We grant thy suit.
Then give me this keen sword
Since none but Experience
Hath power to cut off virtues noble head,
Thou shalt not die.
Do not delude our trust.
Nor do you condemn a guiltless man.
O Charity is come, I see him now.
Headsman dispatch, except Sempronio live, Lelio must die.
Sempronio lives, my Lord, see where he stands.
Hermit why dalliest thou?
Sempronio was young, but this is old,
Sempronio was dead, but he doth live:
Old Sempronio now is young again,
And dead Sempronio now doth live,
Behold him Lelio, dost thou know him now?
Sempronio.
Ah dear Lelio.
This Lord left dead by shepherds in the field,
Was found again, and healed thus by me,
And by my art having his hair disguised,
He passed a solemn oath to hide his name,
And do good deeds where he had lived lose,
Since when, called Penitent Experience,
He hath remained, and lived a pensive life.
Speak my Sempronio, for I discharge thy vow,
Tell thou the rest, for why my vision
Foretold and promised such an accident,
As never Venice had, or saw the like.
Sempronio lives, and Lelio now must live,
Grieved for my breach of faith, grieved for my crime,
Hear are the tokens of my fatal wounds,
Which when I eyed Annetta, I have wept,
To think upon my lose unbridled love.
Let us not joy in words, but joy in hearts,
And let our arms our tongues discourse embrace,
Where our three lives are heard of again,
Call them three knacks to find out honest men.
God wrought these things, we do applaud his works
See how by mute embrace these friends embrace,
Mark how they whisper in each others ears,
Their troublous fortunes, cares, & discontents,
And now love works, see how Lelio hand in hand
joins Sempronio with his Lucida,
The holy hermit knitteth up the knot,
And all applaud this unity of peace.
How now? what seeks this maid?
Pardon for my father.
comest thou to plead for Seruio Phillida?
Go fetch him forth, joy shall have fullness now:
Sempronio stand aside, we'll make some sport.
Now Seruio, for thy forfeit to the state,
What fine wilt thou afford for liberty.
Dread Lord, those lands and profits fell to me,
By dear Sempronios death, my near a kin,
I frankly give in lieu of my contempt.
What wilt thou make bequeath of others lands:
Why man he lives again.
First tell me I am dead my Lord.
Thou must restore to him his goods again.
O misery, Is he restored to life, to take away my goods
Command me death, nay prisonment, and what ye will,
So he revive not, so I meet him not.
See here the picture of true avarice,
Where men prefer their goods before their friends,
How far you uncle?
Iesus bless me, a spirit. What cousin?
I uncle, the same, and grieve not to yield your kinsman his right.
Nay force perforce he shall restore thy own.
Phillida behold, thy uncle lives:
See my Lords, no care of kindred holdeth her,
She runs to meet Orphinio, love conducteth her.
Are you returned my Lord, what safe returned?
Returned to keep my faith with Phillida.
Knit up that knot within with jollity,
And Register record this commodity.
Nay stay my Lord, before this comic end,
Let, measure knacks to find out honest men,
For all these listening ears would find them out.
Who list to know a perfect honest man,
Shall see his purse still open to the poor,
His tongue detesting lewd detractions,
He scorns to grieve the needful heart with grief,
But lives as borne to every man's relief:
A knave will gain by all unlawful means,
But good men still their goods by virtue gleans.
A knave makes shift his thrift, forswears and lies,
An honest man on love and faith relies:
A knave makes lust his love, respects no friend,
An honest man for friendship life will spend.
Oh how I should tyre both tongue, thought, and pen,
To scan out knaves from perfect honest men:
Point where I list, if so my finger light
On honesty, I swear I point aright.
Thanks good Sempronio for this worthy skill,
To register the memory of this,
Henceforth where ere this history is heard,
The world shall praise thee, in whose life began,
The perfect knack to know an honest man.