Our Poet slumbering in the muse's laps,
Hath seen a Woman seated in the Moon,
A point beyond the ancient Theoric:
And as it was so he presents his dream.
Here in the bounds of fair Utopia,
Where lovely Nature being only Queen,
Bestows such workmanship on earthly mould:
That Heavens themselves envy her glorious work.
But all in vain: for (malice being spent)
They yield themselves to follow Nature's doom,
And fair Pandora sits in Cynthia's orb.
This but the shadow of our author's dream,
Argues the substance to be near at hand:
At whose appearance I most humbly crave,
That in your forehead she may read content.
If many faults escape in her discourse,
Remember all is but a poet's dream,
The first he had in Phoebus holy bower,
But not the last, unless the first displease.
NAture descends from far above the spheres,
To frolic here in fair Utopia,
Where my chief works do flourish in their prime,
And wanton in their first simplicity.
Here I survey the pictured firmament,
With hurtless flames in concave of the Moon,
The liquid substance of the welkin's waste:
Where moistures treasury is clouded up,
The mutual jointure of all swelling seas,
And all the creatures which their waves contain,
Lastly the rundle of this Massive earth,
From utmost face unto the centre's point,
All these, and all their endless circumstance,
Here I survey, and glory in myself.
But what means Discord so to knit the brows,
With sorrows cloud eclipsing our delights?
It grieves my heart, that still in every work,
My fellow Concord frustrates my desire,
When I to perfect up some wondrous deed,
Do bring forth good and bad, or light and dark,
Pleasant and sad, moving and fixed things,
Frail and immortal, or like contraries:
She with her hand unites them all in one,
And so makes void the end of mine attempt.
I tell thee Discord while you twain attend
On Nature's train, your work must prove but one,
And in yourselves though you be different,
Yet in my service must you well agree.
For Nature works her will from contraries,
But see where our Utopian Shepherds come.
Thou Sovereign Queen and Author of the world,
Of all that was, or is, or shall be framed.
To finish up the heap of thy great gifts,
Vouchsafe thy simple servants one request.
Stand up, and tell the sum of your desire,
The boon were great that Nature would not grant:
It ever was and shall be still my joy,
With wholesome gifts to bless my workmanship.
We crave fair goddess at thy heavenly hands,
To have as every other creature hath,
A sure and certain means among ourselves,
To propagate the issue of our kind:
As it were comfort to our sole estate,
So were it ease unto thy working hand.
Each Fish that swimmeth in the floating sea,
Each winged fowl that soareth in the air,
And every beast that feedeth on the ground,
Have mates of pleasure to uphold their brood:
But thy Utopians, poor and simple men,
As yet bewail their want of female sex.
A female shall you have my lovely swains,
Like to yourselves, but of a purer mould:
meanwhile go hence, and tend your tender flocks,
And when I send her, see you hold her dear.
Now Virgins put your hands to holy work,
That we may frame new wonders to the world.
When I arrayed this lifeless Image thus,
It was decreed in my deep providence,
To make it such as our Utopians crave,
A mirror of the earth, and heavens despite,
The matter first when it was void of form,
Was purest water, earth, and air, and fire,
And when I shaped it in a matchless mould,
(Whereof the like was never seen before)
It grew to this impression that you see,
And wanteth nothing now but life and soul.
But life and soul I shall inspire from heaven.
So hold it fast, till with my quickening breath,
I kindle inward seeds of sense and mind.
Now fire be turned to choler, air to blood,
Water to humour purer than itself,
And earth to flesh more clear than Crystal rock.
And Discord stand aloof, that Concord's hands,
May join the spirit with the flesh in league.
Now do I feel how life and inward sense,
Imparteth motion unto every limb.
Then let her stand or move or walk alone.
Herein hath Nature gone beyond herself,
And heaven will grudge at beauty of the earth,
When it espies a second son below.
Now every part performs her functions due,
Except the tongue whose strings are yet untied.
Discord, unlose her tongue, to serve her turn,
For in distress that must be her defence:
And from that root will many mischiefs grow,
If once she spot her state of innocence.
Hail heavenly Queen, the author of all good,
Whose will hath wrought in me the fruits of life,
And filled me with an understanding soul,
To know the difference twixt good and bad.
I make thee for a solace unto men,
And see thou follow our commanding will.
Now art thou Nature's glory and delight,
Compact of every heavenly excellence:
Thou art endowed with Saturn's deep conceit,
Thy mind as haught as Jupiter's high thoughts,
Thy stomach Lion-like, like Mauors heart,
Thine eyes bright beamed, like Sol in his array,
Thy cheeks more fair, then are fair Venus' cheeks,
Thy tongue more eloquent than Mercury's,
Thy forehead whiter than the silver Moons:
Thus have I robbed the Planets for thy sake.
Besides all this, thou hast proud Juno's arms,
Aurora's hands, and lovely Thetis foot:
Use all these well, and Nature is thy friend,
But use them ill, and Nature is thy foe.
Now that thy name may suit thy qualities,
I give to thee Pandora for thy name.
What creature have we here? a new found god?
A second man, less perfect than the first?
A woman this forsooth, but made in haste,
To rob us Planets of our ornaments.
Is this the Saint, that steals my Juno's arms?
Mine eyes? then govern thou my daylight car.
My cheeks? then Cupid be at thy command.
My tongue? thou pretty parrot speak a while,
My forehead? then fair Cynthia shine by night,
What foul contempt is this you Planets use,
Against the glory of my words and work?
It was my will, and that shall stand for law,
And she is framed to darken all your prides.
Ordained not I your motions, and yourselves?
And dare you check the author of your lives?
Were not your lights contrived in Nature's shop?
But I have means to end what I begun.
And make Death triumph in your lives decay:
If thus you cross the meed of my deserts,
Be sure I will dissolve your harmony,
When once you touch the fixed period:
meanwhile I leave my worthy workmanship
Here to obscure the pride of your disdain.
Then in revenge of Nature and her work,
Let us conclude to show our Empery:
And bend our forces 'gainst this earthly star.
Each one in course shall signorize awhile,
That she may feel the influence of her beams,
And rue that she was formed in our despite:
My turn is first, and Saturn will begin.
And I'll begin where Saturn makes an end,
And when I end, then Mars shall tyrannize,
And after Mars then Sol shall marshal her.
And after Sol each other in his course:
Come let us go, that Saturn may begin.
I shall instill such melancholy mood,
As by corrupting of her purest blood,
Shall first with sullen sorrows cloud her brain,
And then surround her heart with froward care:
She shallbe sick with passions of the heart,
self-willed, and tongue-tied, but full fraught with tears.
Gracious Pandora: Nature thy good friend
Hath sent Gunophilus to wait on thee,
For honours due that appertains her will,
And for the graces of thy lovely self,
Gunophilus will serve in humble sort,
And is resolved to live and die with thee.
If Nature wild, then do attend on me,
But little service have I to command,
If I myself might choose my kind of life,
Nor thou, nor any else should stay with me,
I find myself unfit for company.
How so fair Mistress in your flowering youth,
When pleasures joy should sit in every thought?
avaunt sir sauce, play you the Questionest?
What's that to thee, if I be sick or sad?
Either demean thyself in better sort,
Or get thee hence and serve some other where.
A sour beginning: but no remedy,
Nature hath bound me, and I must obey:
I see that servants must have Merchants ears,
To bear the blast and brunt of every wind.
What throbs are these that labour in my breast?
What swelling clouds, that overcast my brain?
I burst, unless by tears they turn to rain.
I grudge and grieve, but know not well whereat:
And rather choose to weep then speak my mind,
For fretful sorrow captivates my tongue.
See where she sits, in whom we must delight,
Beware she sleeps: no noise for waking her.
asleep? why see how her alluring eyes,
With open looks do glance on every side.
O eyes more fair than is the morning star.
Nature herself is not so lovely fair.
Let us with reverence kiss her Lily hands,
And by deserts in service win her love.
Sweet Dame, if Stesias may content thine eye,
Command my Neat, my flock, and tender Kids:
Whereof great store do overspread our plains,
Grant me sweet Mistress but to kiss thy hand.
No Stesias no, Learchus is the man:
Thou mirror of Dame Nature's cunning work,
Let me but hold thee by that sacred hand,
And I shall make thee our Utopian Queen,
And set a guilded chaplet on thy head,
That Nymphs and Satyrs may admire thy pomp.
These twain and I have fortunes all alike.
Sweet Nature's pride, let me but see thy hand,
And servant like, shall Melos wait on thee:
And bear thy train: as in the glorious heavens,
Perseus supports his love Andromeda:
Whose thirty stars, whether they rise or fall.
He falls or riseth, hanging at her heels.
O then to bless the love of Iphicles,
Whose heart doth hold thee dearer than himself?
Do but behold me with a loving look,
And I will lead thee in our solemn dance,
Teaching thee tunes, and pleasant lays of love.
No kiss? nor touch? nor friendly look?
What churlish influence deprives her mind?
For Nature said, that she was innocent,
And fully fraught with virtuous qualities:
But speak sweet love: thou canst not speak but well.
She is not tongue tied, that I know by proof.
Speak once Pandora to thy loving friends.
Rude knaves, what mean you thus to trouble me?
She spoke to you my masters, I am none of your company.
Alas she weeping sounds: Gunophilus
O help to rear thy Mistress from the ground.
This is the very passion of the heart,
And melancholy is the ground thereof.
O then to sift that humour from her heart,
Let us with roundelays delight her ear:
For I have heard that Music is a mean,
To calm the rage of melancholy mood.
What songs? what pipes? & fiddling have we here?
Will you not suffer me to take my rest?
What shall we do to vanquish her disease?
The death of that were life to our desires:
But let us go, we must not leave her thus.
Saturn hath laid foundation to the rest:
Whereon to build the ruin of this dame:
And spot her innocence with vicious thoughts,
My turn is past, and Iupiter is next.
A Ioue principium, sunt & iovis omnia plena.
Now Iupiter shall rule Pandora's thoughts,
And fill her with Ambition and Disdain:
I will enforce my influence to the worst,
Least other Planets blame my regiment.
Though rancour now be rooted from my heart,
I feel it burdened in another sort:
By day I think of nothing but of rule,
By night my dreams are all of Empery.
Mine ears delight to hear of sovereignty,
My tongue desires to speak of princely sway,
My eye would every object were a crown.
Danae was fair, and Leda pleased me well,
Lovely Calisco set my heart on fire:
And in mine eye Europa was a gem,
But in the beauty of this Paragon,
Dame Nature far hath gone beyond herself,
And in this one are all my loves contained.
And come what can come, Iupiter shall prove,
If fair Pandora will accept his love:
But first I must discuss this heavenly cloud:
That hides me from the sight of mortal eyes.
Behold Pandora where thy lover sits,
High Ioue himself, who ravished with thy blaze,
Receives more influence than he powers on thee,
And humbly sues for succour at thy hands.
Why what art thou? more than Utopian swains?
The king of Gods, one of immortal race,
And he that with a beck controls the heavens.
Why then Pandora doth exceed the heavens,
Who neither fears nor loveth Iupiter.
Thy beauty will excuse whate'er thou say,
And in thy looks thy words are privileged.
But if Pandora did conceive those gifts,
That Ioue can give, she would esteem his love,
For I can make thee Empress of the world,
And seat thee in the glorious firmament.
The words of Empress and of firmament,
More please mine ears than Iupiter mine eyes:
Yet if thy love be like to thy protest:
Give me thy golden sceptre in my hand.
But not as purchase of my precious love,
For that is more than heaven itself is worth.
There, hold the sceptre of Eternal Ioue,
But let not Majesty increase thy pride.
What lack I now but an imperial throne,
And Ariadne's starlight Diadem.
False perjured Iupiter and full of guile,
Are these the fruits of thy new governments?
Is Juno's beauty and thy wedlock vow,
And all my kindness trodden under foot?
was't not enough to fancy such a trull.
But thou must yield thy sceptre to her hand?
I thought that Ganymede had weaned thy heart,
From lawless lust of any woman's love:
But well I see that every time thou strayest,
Thy lust but looks for strumpet stars below.
Why know, Pandora scorns both Ioue and thee,
And there she lays his sceptre on the ground.
This shall with me to our Celestial court,
Where gods (fond Iupiter) shall see thy shame:
And laugh at Love for tainting Majesty,
And when you please, you will repair to us,
But as for thee, thou shameless counterfeit:
Thy pride shall quickly lose her painted plumes,
And feel the heavy weight of Juno's wrath.
Let Iuno fret, and move the powers of heaven,
Yet in herself Pandora stands secure:
Am I not Nature's darling and her pride?
Hath she not spent her treasure all on me?
Yet be thou wise (I counsel thee for love)
And fear displeasure at a goddess hand.
I tell thee Iupiter, Pandora's worth
Is far exceeding all your goddesses:
And since in her thou dost obscure my praise,
Here (to be short) I do abjure thy love.
I may not blame thee for my beams are cause,
Of all this insolence and proud disdain:
But to prevent a second raging storm,
If jealous Iuno should by chance return,
Here ends my love: Pandora now farewell.
And art thou clouded up? fare as thou list,
Pandora's heart shall never stoop to Ioue:
Gunophilus, base vassal as thou art,
How haps when Iuno was in presence here,
Thou didst not honour me with kneel and crouch,
And lay thy hands under my precious foot?
To make her know the height of my desert.
Base peasant, humbly watch my stately looks,
And yield applause to every word I speak:
Or from my service I'll discard thee quite.
Fair and dread Sovereign, Lady of the world,
Even then when jealous Iuno was in place:
As I behold the glory of thy face,
My feeble eyes admiring majesty,
Did sink into my heart such holly fear,
That very fear amazing every sense,
Withheld my tongue from saying what I would:
And freezed my joints from bowing when they should.
I now Gunophilus thou pleasest me,
These words and curtsies prove thee dutiful.
Now Stesias speak.
Learchus, plead for love.
Now Cyprian Queen, guider of loving thoughts, Help Iphicles.
Melos must speed, or die.
Whether now my masters in such post haste?
Her excellence is not at leisure now.
O sweet Gunophilus further our attempts.
And we shall make thee rich with our rewards.
Stay here until I know her further pleasure:
Stesias & his fellows humbly crave access to your excellence.
I now thou fittest my humour: Let them come.
Come on masters.
Tell on my dear, when comes that happy hour,
Whereon thy love shall guerdon my desire.
How long shall sorrows winter pinch my heart?
And lukewarm hopes be child with freezing fear,
Before my suit obtain thy sweet consent?
How long shall death, encroaching by delays,
A bridge the course of my decaying life:
Before Pandora love poor Iphicles?
How long shall cares cut off my flowering prime,
Before the harvest of my love be in?
O speak sweet love.
Some gentle words sweet love.
O let thy tongue first salve Learchus' wound,
That first was made with those immortal eyes
The only promise of thy future love,
Will drown the secret heaps of my despair,
In endless Ocean of expected joys.
Although my breast, yet never harboured love,
Yet should my bounty free your servitude:
If love might well consort our Majesty,
And not debase our matchless dignity.
Sweet honey words, but sawst with bitter gall.
They draw me on, and yet they put me back.
They hold me up, and yet they let me fall.
They give me life, and yet they let me die.
But as thou wilt, so give me sweet or sour:
For in thy pleasure must be my content.
Whether thou draw me on, or put me back,
I must admire thy beauty's wilderness.
And as thou wilt, so let me stand or fall:
Love hath decreed thy word must govern me.
And as thou wilt, so let me live or die,
In life or death I must obey thy will.
I please myself in your humility,
Yet will I make some trial of your faith,
Before I stoop to favour your complaints:
For wot ye well Pandora knows her worth,
He that will purchase things of greatest prize,
Must conquer by his deeds, and not by words:
Go then all four, and slay the savage Boar,
Which roving up and down with ceaseless rage,
Destroys the fruit of our Utopian fields,
And he that first presents me with his head,
Shall wear my glove in favour of the deed.
We go Pandora.
Nay we run.
We fly.
Thus must Pandora exercise these swains,
Commanding them to dangerous exploits:
And were they kings my beauty should command,
Sirrah Gunophilus bear up my train.
Mars comes entreated by the Queen of heaven,
To summon Ioue from this his regiment:
Such jealous humour croweth in her brain,
That she is mad till he return from hence.
Now Sovereign Ioue king of immortal kings,
Thy lovely Iuno long hath looked for thee,
And till thou come thinks every hour a year.
And Ioue will go the sooner to assuage,
Her frantic, idle, and suspicious thoughts,
For well I know Pandora troubles her,
Nor will she calm the tempest of her mind,
Till with a whirlwind of outrageous words,
She beat mine ears, and weep cursed heart away.
Yet will I go, for words are but a blast,
And sunshine will ensue when storms are passed.
Now bloody Mars begins to play his part,
I'll work such war within Pandora's breast,
(And somewhat more for Juno's fair request)
That after all her churlishness and pride:
She shall become a vixen Martialist.
Here let us stay till fair Pandora come,
And then shall Stesias have his due reward.
And why not Iphicles as well as you?
The prize is mine, my sword cut off his head.
But first my spear did wound him to the death.
He fell not down till I had gored his side.
Content you all, Learchus did the deed,
And I will make it good who ear says nay.
Melos will die before he lose his right.
Nay then 'tis time to snatch, the head is mine.
Lay down, or I shall lay thee on the earth.
ay, so, fair and far off, for fear of hurt,
See how the cowards counterfeit a fray:
Strike home you dastard swains, strike home I say,
Fight you in jest? let me bestir me then,
And see if I can cudgel ye all four.
What? is my mistress mankind on the sudden?
Alas why strikes Pandora her best friends?
My friends, base peasants,
My friends would fight like men:
avaunt, or I shall lay you all for dead.
See cruel fair, how thou hast wronged thy friend.
To spill his blood that kept it but for thee,
there's my desert: And here is my reward,
I dare not say of an ingrateful mind:
But if Pandora had been well advised,
This dare I say, that Stesias had been spared.
begone I say, before I strike again.
O stay sweet mistress and be satisfied.
Base vassal how darest thou presume to speak?
Wilt thou encounter any deed of mine,
How long have you been made a counsellor?
Here strike thy fill make lavish of my life,
That in my death my love may find relief:
Lance up my side, that when my heart leaps out,
Thou mayst behold how it is scorched with love,
And every way crosswounded with desire,
There shalt thou read my passions deep engraven,
And in the midst only Pandora's name.
What tell'st thou me of love and fancy's fire?
Fire of debate is kindled in my heart,
And were it not that thou art all unarmed,
Be sure I should make trial of thy strength,
But now the death of some fierce savage beast:
In blood shall end my furies tragedy,
For fight I must, or else my gall will burst.
Ah ruthless heart, harder than Adamant,
Whose ears are deaf against affections plaints.
And eyes are blind, when sorrow sheds her tears:
Neither contented that I live nor die.
But fondling as I am, why grieve I thus?
Is not Pandora mistress of my life?
Yes, yes, and every act of hers is just.
Her hardest words are but a gentle wind:
Her greatest wound is but a pleasing harm,
Death at her hands is but a second life.
Mars hath enforced Pandora 'gainst her kind,
To manage arms and quarrel with her friends:
And thus I leave her, all incensed with ire:
Let Sol cool that which I have set on fire.
In looking down upon this baser world,
I long have seen and rude Pandora's harms,
But as myself by nature am inclined,
So shall she now become, gentle and kind,
Abandoning all rancour, pride, and rage,
And changing from a Lion to a Lamb,
She shallbe loving liberal and chaste,
Discreet and patient, merciful and mild,
Inspired with poetry and prophesy,
And virtues appertaining womanhood.
Tell me Gunophilus how doth Stesias now?
How fares he with his wound? unhappy me,
That so unkindly hurt so kind a friend,
But Stesias if thou pardon what is past,
I shall reward thy sufferance with love,
These eyes that were like two malignant stars,
Shall yield their comfort with their sweet aspect.
And these my lips that did blaspheme thy love,
Shall speak thee fair and bless thee with a kiss,
And this my hand that hurt thy tender side,
Shall first with herbs recure the wound it made,
Then plight my faith to thee in recompense.
And thou Gunophilus I pray thee pardon me,
That I misdid thee in my witless rage,
As time shall yield occasion be thou sure,
I will not fail to make thee some amends.
I so content me in this pleasant calm.
That former storms are utterly forgot.
We follow still in hope of grace to come,
O sweet Pandora deign our humble suits.
O grant me love or wound me to the death.
Stand up: Pandora is no longer proud,
But shames at folly of her former deeds,
But why stands Stesias like a man dismayed?
Draw near I say and thou with all the rest.
Forgive the rigour of Pandora's hand,
And quite forget the faults of my disdain.
Now is the time if you consent all four,
Wherein I'll make amends for old offence.
One of you four shallbe my wedlock mate,
And all the rest my well-beloved friends:
But vow you here in presence of the Gods,
That when I choose, my choice shall please you all.
Then make I vow, by Pallas shepherds Queen,
That Stesias will allow Pandora's choice.
But if he speed that less deserves than I,
I'll rather die, than grudge or make complaint.
I swear the like by all our country gods,
And I by our Diana's holy head.
And I by Ceres and her sacred Nymphs.
Then love and Hymen bless me in my choice.
You all are young and all are lovely fair,
All kind, and courteous and of sweet demean,
All right and valiant, all in flowering prime,
But since you grant my will his liberty,
Come Stesias take Pandora by the hand,
And with my hand I plight my spotless faith.
The word hath almost slain me with delight.
The word with sorrow killeth me outright.
O happy Stesias, but unhappy me,
Come let us go and weep our want else where
Stesias hath got Pandora from us all.
Their sad depart would make my heart to earn,
Were not the joys that I conceive in thee:
Go, go, Gunophilus without delay,
Gather me balm and cooling Violets,
And of our holly herb Nicotian,
And bring with all pure honey from the hive,
That I may here compound a wholesome salve,
To heal the wound of my unhappy hand.
I go.
Blessed be the hand that made so happy wound,
For in my sufferance have I won thy love,
And blessed thou, that having tried my faith,
Hast given admittance to my heart's desert,
Now all is well, and all my hurt is whole,
And I in paradise of my delight.
Come lovely spouse, let us go walk the woods,
Where warbling birds record our happiness:
And whistling leaves make music to our mirth,
And Flora strews her bower to welcome thee.
But first sweet husband, be thou ruled by me,
Go make provision for some holy rites:
That zeal may prosper our new joined love,
And by and by myself will follow thee.
Stay not my decree, for in thy looks I live.
I feel myself inspired, but wot not how,
Nor what it is, unless some holy power:
My heart foretells me many things to come,
And I am full of unacquainted skill:
Yet such as will not issue from my tongue,
But like Sibylla's golden prophecies,
Affecting rather to be clad in verse,
(The certain badge of great Apollo's gift)
Then to be spread and soiled in vulgar words,
And now to ease the burden of my bulk,
Like Sibyl, thus Pandora must begin,
Come my Pandora, Stesias stays for thee.
Peace man, with reverence here & note my words,
For from Pandora speaks the laureate God.
Utopiae Stesias Phoenici solvit amorem,
Numina caelorum dum pia praecipiunt.
And backward thus the same, but double sense.
Praecipiunt pia dum celorum Numina, amorem
solvit Phoenici Stesias Utopiae.
He soberly repeating these verses, first forward and then backward, sayeth.
If solvere amorem signify to love,
Then means this prophesy good to Stesias:
But if it signify to withdraw love,
Then is it ill abodement to us both:
But speak Pandora while the God inspires.
Idaliis prior hic pveris est: aequoris Altò
Pulchrior hec nymphis, & prior Aoniis.
And backward thus, but still all one in sense.
Aoniis prior, & nymphis hec pulchrior alti
Aequoris est: pveris hic prior Idaliis.
He soberly repeating these also, backward and forward, sayeth:
Forward and back, these also are alike
And sense all one, the pointing only changed:
They but import Pandora's praise and mine.
even now beginneth my fury to retire,
And now with Stesias hence will I retire.
Phoebus away, thou mak'st her too precise,
I'll have her witty, quick, and amorous,
Delight in revels and in banqueting,
Wanton discourses, music and merry songs.
Bright Cyprian Queen entreat Pandora fair.
For though at first Phoebus envied her looks,
Yet now doth he admire her glorious hue.
And swears that neither Daphne in the spring,
Nor glistering Thetis in her orient rob,
Nor shamefast morning girt in silver clouds.
Are half so lovely as this earthly saint.
And being so fair my beams shall make her light,
For Lenity is Beauty's waiting maid.
Make Chastity Pandora's waiting maid,
For modest thoughts beseems a woman best.
Away with chastity and modest thoughts,
Quo mihi fortuna si non conceditur uti?
Is she not young? then let her to the world,
All those are strumpets that are over chaste,
Defying such as keep their company,
'tis not the touching of a woman's hand,
Kissing her lips, hanging about her neck.
A speaking look, no nor a yielding word,
That men expect, believe me Sol 'tis more,
And were Mars here he would protest as much.
But what is more than this is worse than nought,
I dare not stay lest she infect me too.
what is he gone, then light foot Ioculus,
Set me Pandora in a dancing vain,
Fair mother I will make Pandora blithe,
And like a Satire hop upon these plains.
Go Cupid give her all the golden shafts.
And she will take thee for a forester.
I will and you shall see her straight in love.
Here Venus sit, and with thy influence,
Govern Pandora, Nature's miracle.
Prithee be quiet wherefore should I dance?
Thus dance the Satyrs on the even lawns.
Thus pretty satire will Pandora dance.
And thus will Cupid make her melody.
Were I a man I could love thee.
I am a maiden wilt thou have me?
But Stesias saith you are not.
What then? I care not.
Nor I.
Nor I,
Then merely farewell my maiden head.
These be all the tears I'll shed,
Turn about and trip it.
Venus'. Cupid and Ioculus, come leave her now.
The boys are gone and I will follow them.
I will not follow them they are to young.
What honey thoughts are in Pandora's brain?
Hospitis est tepedo nocte recepta sui.
Ah I envy her, why was not I so?
And so will I be, where is Iphicles,
Melos, Learchus? any of the three?
I cure the sick? I study Poetry?
I think of honour and of chastity?
No: love is fitter than Pandora's thoughts,
Yet not the love of Stesias alone,
Learchus is as fair as Stesias,
And Melos lovelier than Learchus far.
But might I chose, I would have Iphicles,
And of them all Stesias deserves the least.
Must I be tied to him? no I'll be loose,
As loose as Helen, for I am as fair.
Mistress, here be the herbs for my masters wound?
Pretty Gunophilus, give me the herbs:
Where didst thou gather them my lovely boy?
Upon Learchus plain.
I fear me Cupid danced upon the plain,
I see his arrow head upon the leaves.
And I his golden quiver and his bow.
Thou dost dissemble, but I mean good sooth,
These herbs have wrought some wondrous effect,
Had they this virtue from thy Lily hands?
Let's see thy hands my fair Gunophilus.
It may be they had, for I have not washed them this many a day.
Such slender fingers hath Ioues Ganymede,
Gunophilus, I am love sick for thee.
O that I were worthy you should be sick for me.
I languish for thee, therefore be my love.
Better you languish then I be beaten,
Pardon me, I dare not love, because of my Master.
I'll hide thee in a wood, and keep thee close.
But what if he come a hunting that way.
I'll say thou art a Satire of the woods.
Then I must have horns.
I so thou shalt, I'll give thee Stesias horns.
Why he hath none,
But he may have shortly,
Ye say true, and of that condition I am yours.
I may not speak of love, for I have vowed,
near to solicit her, but rest content.
Therefore only gaze eyes to please yourselves,
Let not my inward sense know what you see,
lest that my fancy do ate upon her still.
Pandora is divine, but say not so,
lest that thy heart hear thee and break in twain,
I may not court her, what a hell is this?
Gunophilus: I'll have a banquet straight,
Go thou provide it, and then meet me here.
I will? but by your leave I'll stay a while.
Happy are those that be Pandora's guests,
Then happy is Learchus, he is my guest.
And greater joy do I conceive therein,
Than Tantalus that feasted with the Gods.
Mistress, the banquet.
What of the banquet?
You have bid nobody to it,
What's that to you? Go and prepare it.
And in the mean time you will be in love with him.
I pray let me stay and bid him prepare the banquet.
A way ye peasant.
Now she begins to love me.
Learchus had I marked this golden hair,
I had not chosen Stesias for my love,
But now.
Lovely Pandora, if a shepherd's tears,
May move thee unto ruth, pity my state,
Make me thy love, though Stesias be thy choice,
And I in stead of love will honour thee.
Had he not spoke I should have courted him:
Wilt thou not say Pandora is to light,
If she take thee instead of Stesias?
Rather i'll die then have but such a thought.
Then shepherd this kiss shallbe our nuptials.
This kiss hath made me wealthier than Pan.
Then come again: Now be as great as Ioue.
Let Stesias never touch these lips again.
None but Learchus: Now sweet love begone,
lest Stesias take thee in this amorous vain,
But go no farther than thy bower my love,
I'll steal from Stesias and meet thee straight.
I will Pandora, and against thou comest.
strew all my bower with flags and water mints.
A husband? what a foolish word is that?
Give me a lover, let the husband go.
O Iphicles, behold the heavenly Nymph.
We may behold her but she scorns our love.
Are these the shepherds that made love to me?
Yea and the shepherds that yet love thee still.
O that Pandora would regard my suit.
They look like water Nymphs, but speak like men,
Thou should be Nature in a man's attire,
And thou young Ganymede Minion to Ioue.
Then would I make a world and give it thee.
Then would I leave great Ioue, to follow thee.
Melos is loveliest, Melos is my love,
Come hither Melos I must tell thee news,
News tragical to thee and to thy flock.
Melos I love thee, meet me in the vale,
I saw him in the wolves mouth, Melos fly.
O that so fair a Lamb should be devoured:
I'll go and rescue him.
Could Iphicles go from thee for a Lamb,
The wolf take all my flock, so I have thee,
Will me to dive for pearl into the sea,
To fetch the feathers of the Arabian bird,
The Golden Apples from the Hesperian wood,
mermaid's glass, Flora's habiliment,
So I may have Pandora for my love.
He that would do all this, must love me well,
And why should he love me and I not him?
Wilt thou for my sake go into yond grove?
And we will sing unto the wild birds notes.
And be as pleasant as the Western wind,
That kisses flowers and wantons with their leaves.
Will I? O that Pandora would.
I will and therefore follow Iphicles.
Did base Learchus court my heavenly love?
Pardon me Pan if to revenge this deed,
I shed the blood of that dissembling swain,
With jealous fire my heart begins to burn.
Ah bring me where he is Gunophilus,
lest he entice Pandora from my bower.
I know not where he is, but here he'll be:
I must provide the banquet, and be gone.
What will the shepherd's banquet with my wife.
O light Pandora canst thou be thus false?
Tell me where is this wanton banquet kept?
That I may hurl the dishes at their heads,
Mingle the wine with blood and end the feast,
With Tragic outcries like the Theban Lord,
Where fair Hippodamia was espoused.
Here in this place, for so she pointed me.
Where might I hide me to behold the same.
O in this cave for over this they'll sit.
But then I shall not see them when they kiss,
Yet you may here what they say, if they kiss i'll hollow,
But do so then my sweet Gunophilus
And as a strong wind bruising from the earth,
So will I rise out of this hollow vault:
making the woods shake with my furious words.
But if they come not at all, or when they come do use themselves honestly, then come not out, lest you seeming jealous make her over hate you.
Not for the world unless I hear thee call,
Or else their wanton speech provoke me forth.
Well in then, wert not a pretty jest to bury him quick, I warrant it would be a good while ere she would scratch him out of his grave with her nails, and yet she might too, for she hath digged such vaults in my face that ye may go from my chin to my eyebrows betwixt the skin and the flesh, wonder not at it good people I can prove there hath been two or three merchants with me to hire rooms to lay in wine, but that they do not stand so conveniently as they would wish, for indeed they are every one too near my mouth, and I am a great drinker, I had had a quarter's rent before hand. Well be it known unto all men that I have done this to cornute my master, for yet I could never have opportunity. You would little think my neck is grown away with looking back as I have been a kissing, for fear he should come, and yet it is a fair example, beware of kissing brethren. What doth the cave open? ere she and he have done he'll pick the lock with his horn.
Now have I played with wanton Iphicles.
Yea and kept touch with Melos, both are pleased,
Now were Learchus here? but stay methinks
here is Gunophilus I'll go with him.
Mistress my master is in this cave thinking to meet you and Learchus here.
What is he jealous? come Gunophilus
In spite of him I'll kiss thee twenty times.
O look how my lips quiver for fear.
Where is my husband speak Gunophilus.
He is in the woods and will be here anon.
ay but he shall not.
His fellow swains will meet me in this bower,
Who for his sake I mean to entertain,
If he knew of it he would meet them here.
Ah wheresoe'er he be, safe may he be,
Thus hold I up my hands to heaven for him,
Thus weep I for my dear love Stesias.
When will the shepherds come?
immediately, prepare the banquet straight,
Mean time I'll pray that Stesias may be here,
Bring Iphicles and Melos with thee and tell them
Of my husband. Descendit ad inferos.
You'll love them then?
No, only thee, yet let them sit with me,
Content, so you but sit with them.
Why hath Pandora thus deluded me?
Learchus whist my husbands in this cave,
Thinking to take us together here.
Shall I slay him, and enjoy thee still?
No, let him live but had he Argos eyes,
He should not keep me from Learchus' love,
Thus will I hang about Learchus' neck:
And suck out happiness from forth his lips.
And this shallbe the heaven that I'll aim at.
Sic vos non vobis, sic vos non vobis.
what meanst thou by that?
Here is a comment upon my words,
Wherefore dost thou break the glass.
I'll answer it, shall I provide a banquet and be cozened of the best dish? I hope sir you have said grace, and now may I fall too.
Away base swain.
Sir as base as I am I'll go for currant here.
What? will Pandora be thus light?
O you stand upon the weight, well if she were twenty grains lighter I would not refuse her provided always, she be not clipped within the ring.
Gunophilus thou art too malapert.
Think nothing, for I can not shift him off,
Sirrah provide the banquet you are best.
I will and that incontinently for indeed I cannot abstain.
Here take thou Melos favours, keep it close,
For he and Iphicles will straight be here,
I love them not, they both importune me,
Yet must I make as if I love them both.
Here they come.
Welcome Learchus to Pandora's feast.
What makes Learchus here?
wherefore should Melos banquet with my love?
My heart riseth against this Iphicles.
Melos my love. Sit down sweet Iphicles.
She daunts Learchus with a strange aspect.
I like not that she whispers unto him.
I warrant you.
Hers to the health of Stesias my love,
Would he were here to welcome you all three.
I will go seek him in the busky groves.
You lose your labour then, he is at his flock.
I he ways more his flock then me. she weeps.
weep not Pandora for he loves thee well.
And I love him.
But why is Melos sad?
For thee I am sad, thou hast injured me,
Knows not Melos I love him.
Thou injurest me and I willbe revenged.
Hath Iphicles forgot my words.
If I should hollow they were all undone.
They both are jealous yet mistrust me not.
Here Melos.
I pledge thee Iphicles.
Learchus go thou know'st my mind.
Shall I sit here thus to be made a stale.
Lovely Pandora means to follow me:
Farewell this feast, my banquet comes not yet.
Let him go.
Pandora go with me to Stesias.
No, rather go with me.
Away base Iphicles.
Coward hand of, or else I'll strike thee down,
My husband here's you, will you strive for wine.
Give us a fresh cup, I will have ye friends.
I defy thee Iphicles.
I thee Melos.
Both of them are drunk.
Is this thy love to me?
Nay if you fall out farewell,
Now will I go meet Learchus.
I see thy juggling, thou shalt want thy will.
Follow me if thou darest, and fight it out.
If I dare, Yes I dare and will? Come thou.
Hollow, hollow.
where is the villain that hath kissed my love
nobody master.
why strive they then?
'ttwas for a cup of wine, they were all drunk.
whither is my wife gone?
To seek you.
Ah Pandora pardon me thou art chaste,
Thou mad'st me to suspect her, take thou that.
O master I did for good will to you.
And I beat thee for good will to her.
What hast thou to do betwixt man and wife.?
Too much with the man, too little with the wife.
Empress of love give Hermes leave to reign,
My course comes next therefore resign to me.
Ascend thou winged pursuivant of Ioue.
Now shall Pandora be no more in love,
And all these swains that were her favourits,
Shall understand there mistress hath played false,
And loathing her blab all to Stesias.
Now is Pandora in my regiment,
And I will make her false and full of slights,
Thievish, lying, subtle, eloquent.
For these alone belong to Mercury.
Unkind Pandora to delude me thus.
Too kind Learchus that hath loud her thus.
Too foolish Melos that yet dotes on her.
Black be the ivory of her 'ticing face,
dimmed be the sunshine of her ravishing eyes.
Fair may her face be, beautiful her eyes,
O Iphicles abjure her, she is false.
To thee Learchus and to Melos false,
Nay to us all too false and full of guile,
How many thousand kisses gave she me.
And every kiss mixed with an amorous glance.
How oft have I leaned on her silver breast,
She singing on her Lute, and Melos being the note.
But waking, what sweet pastime have I had,
For love is watchful, and can never sleep.
But ere I slept.
When I had list.
What then?
Caetera quis nescit?
Melos prevents me that I should have said.
Blush Iphicles and in thy Rosy cheeks.
Let all the heat that feeds thy heart appear.
Droop not fair Iphicles for her misdeeds:
But to revenge it haste to Stesias.
Yea he shall know she is lascivious.
In this complaint I'll join with thee, let us go.
Stay here he comes.
O Stesias what a heavenly love hast thou?
A love as chaste as is Apollo's tree:
As modest as a vestal virgin's eye,
And yet as bright as Glow worms in the night:
With which the morning decks her lovers hair.
O fair Pandora, blessed Stesias.
O foul Pandora, cursed Stesias.
What meanst thou Iphicles?
Ah is she fair that is lascivious?
Or that swain blessed that she makes but a stale.
He means thy love unhappy Stesias.
My love? no Shepherds this is but a stale,
To make me hate Pandora whom I love,
So whispered late the false Gunophilus,
Let it suffice that I believe you not.
Love is deaf, blind, and incredulous,
I never hung about Pandora's neck,
She never termed me fair and thee black swain.
She played not unto Melos in her bower,
Nor is his green bower strewed with Primrose leaves.
I kissed her not, nor did she term me love,
Pandora is the love of Stesias.
Sirrah, bid your Mistress come hither.
I shall sir.
I never hung about Pandora's neck,
She played not unto Melos in her bower,
I kill her not, nor did she term me love.
These words argue Pandora to be light.
She played the wanton with these amorous swains,
By all these streams that interlaced these floods.
Which may be venom to her thirsty soul.
I'll be revenged as never shepherd was,
Now foul Pandora, wicked Stesias.
Mistress 'tis true I heard them, venture not.
Fence with her tongue, and guarded with her wit.
Thus goeth Pandora unto Stesias.
Detested falsor that to Stesias eyes.
Art more incestuous than the Basilisk
Gunophilus, Pandora is undone,
Her love, her joy, her life hath lost his wits,
Offer a Kid in Esculapias' fane,
That he may cure him, lest I die outright,
I'll offer it Esculapius, but he shall not have him, for when he comes to himself I must answer it.
Go I say.
Stay I am well 'tis thou that mak'st me rave,
Thou play'dst the wanton with my fellow swains.
Then die Pandora: art thou in thy wits.
And call'st me wanton?
O Master what have you done.
Divine Pandora rise and pardon me.
I cannot but forgive thee Stesias,
But by this light, if.
Look how she winks.
O stay my love I know 'twas their device
He that will win me must have Stesias shape.
Such golden hair, such Alabaster looks,
Wilt thou know why I loved not Iupiter?
Because he was unlike my Stesias.
Was ever silly shepherd thus abused?
All three affirmed Pandora held them dear.
It was to bring me in disgrace with thee,
That they might have some hope I would be theirs.
I cannot walk but they importune me.
How many amorous letters have they sent.
What gifts? yet all in vain to prove which true,
I'll bear this slander with a patient mind,
Speak them all fair and ere the sun go down,
I'll bring thee where they use to lie in weight,
To rob me of my honour in the groves,
Do so sweet wife, and they shall buy it dear
I cannot stay my sheep must to the fold.
Go Stesias as simple as a sheep,
And now Pandora summon all thy wits,
To be revenged upon these long tongued swains,
Gunophilus bear Iphicles this ring:
Tell him I rave and language for his love.
Will him to meet me in this mead alone,
And swear his fellows have deluded him,
Bear this to Melos say that for his sake,
I stabbed myself, and hadst not thou been near,
I had been dead, but yet I am alive.
Calling for Melos whom I only love,
And to Learchus bear these passionate lines,
Which if he be not flint will make him come.
I will, and you shall see how cunningly I'll use them stay here and I will send them to you one after another, and then use them as your wisdom shall think good.
That letter did I pen doubting the worst,
And dipped the napkin in the lambkin's blood.
For Iphicles were he compact of Iron,
My ring is Adamant to draw him forth,
Let women learn by me to be revenged.
I'll make them bite their tongues and eat their words,
Yea swear unto my husband all is false.
My wit is pliant and invention sharp,
To make these novices that injure me.
Young Iphicles must boast I favoured him,
Here I protest as Helen to her love:
Oscula luctanti tantummodo pauca proternus
abstulit: ulterius, nil habet ille mei.
And what's a kiss? too much for Iphicles?
Melos is wily, and Learchus false,
Here is Pandora's ring, and she is mine:
It was a stratagem laid for my love,
O foolish Iphicles what hast thou done?
Must thou betray her unto Stesias.
Here will I sit till I see Iphicles,
Sighing my breath, out weeping my heart blood,
Go soul and fly unto my liefest love,
A fairer subject than Elysium.
Can I hear this? can I view her? O no.
But I will view thee my sweet Iphicles,
Thy looks are physic, suffer me to gaze,
That for thy sake am thus distempered.
Pale be my looks to witness my amiss.
And mine to show my love: lovers are pale.
And so is Iphicles.
And so Pandora let me kiss my love,
And add a better colour to his cheeks.
O bury all thy anger in this kiss,
And mate me not with uttering my offence.
Who can be angry with one whom she loves?
Rather had I to have no thoughts at all.
Then but one ill thought of my Iphicles:
Go unto Stesias and deny thy words,
For he hath thrust me from his cabinet.
And as I have done, I will love thee still,
Delay no time, hast gentle Iphicles,
And meet me on Enepeus sedgy banks.
When shall I meet thee, tell me my bright love.
At midnight Iphicles, till then farewell.
Farewell Pandora, I'll to Stesias.
Thus will I serve them all, now Melos come,
I love thee too, as much as Iphicles.
This is Pandora's blood, hast Melos haste,
And in her presence lance thy flesh as deep:
Wicked Learchus, subtle Iphicles:
You have undone me by your reaching wit.
Gunophilus, where is Gunophilus?
Give me the knife thou pulledst from my breast:
Melos is gone, and left Pandora here,
Witness ye wounds, witness ye silver streams,
That I am true, to Melos only true,
And he betrayed me unto Stesias.
Forgive me love, it was not I alone,
It was Learchus, and false Iphicles.
'tis not Learchus, nor that Iphicles,
That grieves me, but that Melos is unkind,
Melos for whom Pandora strained her voice,
Playing with every letter of his name:
Melos, for whom Pandora made this wound,
Melos, for whom Pandora now will die.
Divine Pandora, stay thy desperate hand,
May summer's lightning burn our Autumn crop,
The thunder's teeth plough up our fairest groves,
The scorching sunbeams, dry up all our springs,
And ruff winds blast the beauty of our plains,
If Melos love not thee, more than his heart.
So Melos swears, but 'tis a lovers oath.
Once guilty, and suspected evermore,
I'll near be guilty more, suspect me not.
Nor I suspect thee more, mistrust me not,
Learchus never touched Pandora's lips,
Nor Iphicles received a friendly word:
Melos hath all my favours and for all,
Do only this and I'll be only thine,
Go unto Stesias and deny thy words,
And as the sun goes down I'll meet thee hear.
I will Pandora, and to cure thy wound,
Receive these virtuous herbs which I have found.
A pretty swain worthy Pandora's love,
But I have written to Learchus I,
And I will keep my promise though I die,
which is to cozen him as he did me,
Learchus my love Learchus,
O the iteration of my name argues her affection,
Was it my desert? thine alas Pandora,
It was my destiny to be credulous to these miscreants.
Look, look she is writing to you again.
What is he come then shall my tongue declaim,
Yet am I bashful and afeard to speak.
Blush not Pandora who hath made most fault?
I that solicit thee which loves me not.
I that betrayed thee, which offended not.
Learchus pardon me.
Pandora pardon me.
All friends and so they kissed.
I can but smile to think thou wast deceived,
Learchus thou must to my husband straight,
And say that thou art sorry for thy words,
And in the evening i'll meet thee again,
Under the same grove where we both sat last.
I will Pandora, but look where he comes.
Then give me leave to dissemble.
'tis not thy sorrow that can make amends,
Were I a man thou shouldst repent thy words.
Learchus will you stand unto your words.
O Stesias pardon me 'twas their deceit.
I am sorry that I injured her,
They lay the fault on thee, and thou on them,
But take thee that.
Ah Stesias leave: you shall not fight for me,
Go, go Learchus I am Stesiasses.
Art thou?
No no Learchus, she doth but say so.
Out of my ground Learchus, from my land,
And from hence forward come not near my lawns,
Pandora come: Gunophilus away.
Learchus meet me straight, the time draws nigh.
The time draws nigh, O that the time were now,
I go to meet Pandora at the grove.
When will the sun go down? fly Phoebus fly,
O that thy steeds were winged with my swift thoughts:
Now shouldst thou fall in Thetis azure arms,
And now would I fall in Pandora's lap.
Wherefore did Iupiter create the day?
Sweet is the night when every creature sleeps,
Come night, come gentle night, for thee I stay.
Wherefore doth Iphicles desire the night?
whose's that Melos? thy words did make me afeard,
I wish for midnight but to take the Wolf,
Which kills my sheep, for which I made a snare:
Melos farewell, I must go watch my flocks.
And I my love? here she will meet me straight,
See where she comes hiding her blushing eyes.
My love Pandora for whose sake I live?
Hide not thy beauty which is Melos sun.
Here is none but us too, lay aside thy vale.
Here is Stesias, Melos you are deceived.
Pandora hath deceived me I am undone.
So will not I sir, I mean simply.
Come hast thou all his jewels and his pearls?
I all, but tell me which way shall we go?
Unto the sea side, and take shipping straight.
Well I am revenged at last of my Master, I pray God I may be thus even with all mine enemies: only to run away with their wives.
Gunophilus, for thee I have done this.
I and for yourself too, I am sure you will not beg by the way.
For thee I'll beg and die Gunophilus.
I so I think, the world is so hard, that if ye beg ye may be sure to be starved.
I prithee be not so churlish.
O this is but mirth, do you not know
Comes facetus est tanquam vehiculus in via:
A merry companion is as good as a Wagon,
For you shallbe sure to ride though ye go a foot.
Gunophilus, setting this mirth aside,
Dost thou not love me more than all the world?
Be you as steadfast to me as I'll be to you, and we two will go to the world's end, and yet we cannot, for the world is round, and seeing 'tis round, let's dance in the circle, come turn about.
When I forsake thee, than heaven itself shall fall.
No, God forbid, then perhaps we should have Larks.
This is Enip 〈…〉, here she should be,
What is it midnight? time hath been my friend,
Come sweet Pandora all is safe and whist,
Whither flies my love.
Follow me, follow me, here comes Stesias.
She hath betrayed me whither shall I fly?
Either to the river, or else to thy grave.
The evenings past, yea midnight is at hand.
And yet Pandora comes not at the grove.
But Stesias is her deputy he comes.
And with his shephook greets Learchus thus.
Pardon me Stesias, 'twas Pandora's wiles,
That hath betrayed me, trust her not, she is false.
Why dost thou tell me the contrary take that,
She is honest but thou wouldst seduce her.
Away from my grove, out of my land,
Did I not give thee warning?
Now other planets influence is done,
To Cynthia lowest of the erring stars,
Is beauteous Pandora given in charge.
And as I am so shall Pandora be,
New fangled, fickle, slothful, foolish, mad,
inspite of nature that envies us all.
Come, come Pandora, we must make more haste,
Or Stesias will overtake us both.
I cannot go no faster, I must rest.
We are almost at the the sea side I pray thee rise.
O I am faint and weary, let me sleep.
Pandora if thou love me let us go.
Why dost thou waken me i'll remember this.
What are you angry with me.
No with myself for loving such a swain,
What fury made me dote upon these looks,
Like winter's picture are his withered cheeks,
His hair as ravens plumes, ah touch me not.
His hands are like the sins of some foul fish,
Look how he mows like to an aged ape,
Over the chain Jack, or i'll make thee leap.
What a sudden change is here?
Now he swears by his ten bones, down I say.
Did I not tell you I should have Larks,
where is the larks, come we'll go catch some straight?
No let us go a fishing with a net?
With a net? no, an angle is enough:
An angle, a net, no none of both.
I'll wade into the water, water is fair,
And stroke the fishes underneath the gills.
But first I'll go a hunting in the wood,
I like not hunting, let me have a hawk
What wilt thou say and if I love thee still?
Any thing, what you will.
But shall I have a gown of oaken leaves,
A chaplet of red berries, and a faun.
Made of the morning dew to cool my face.
How often will you kiss me in an hour,
And where shall me sit till the sun be down,
For Nocte latent mendae.
what then?
I will not kiss thee till the sun be down,
Thou art deformed, the night will cover thee,
We women must be modest in the day,
O tempt me not until the evening come.
Lucretia tota sis licet vsque die. Thaida nocte volo.
Hate me adays, and love me in the night,
call'st thou me Thais? go and love not me,
I am not Thais I'll be Lucretia I,
Give me a knife and for my chastity,
I'll die to be canonised a saint.
But you will love me when the sun is down?
No but I will not.
Did you not promise me.
No I, I saw thee not till now.
Do you see me now.
I and loathe thee.
Belike I was a spirit all this while?
A spirit, a spirit, whither may I fly.
I see Pandora and Gunophilus.
And I see Stesias welcome Stesias.
Gunophilus thou hast inveigled her,
And robbed me of my treasure and my wife.
I'll strip thee to the skin for this offence,
And put thee in a wood to be devoured,
Of empty Tigers, and of hungry Wolves,
Nor shall thy sad looks move me unto ruth,
Pardon me master she is Lunatic,
Foolish and frantic, and I followed her.
Only to save the goods and bring her back:
Why think you I would run away with her?
He need not for I'll run away with him,
And yet I will go home with Stesias,
So I shall have a white lamb coloured black,
Two little sparrows, and a spotted fawn.
I fear it is too true that he reports.
Nay stay a while and you shall see her dance.
No, no, I will not dance, but I will sing,
Stesias hath a white hand, but his nails are black,
His fingers are long and small, shall I make them crack.
One two and three, I love him, and he loves me.
Beware of the shephook,
I'll tell you one thing,
If you ask me why I sing,
I say ye may go look.
Pandora speak, lovest thou Gunophilus?
ay, if he be a fish, for fish is fine,
Sweet Stesias help me to a whiting mop.
Now I perceive that she is lunatic,
What may I do to bring her to her wits?
Speak gentle master and entreat her fair.
Pandora, my love Pandora.
I'll not be fair. why call you me your love.
Love is a little boy, so am not I.
I will allure her with fair promises,
And when I have her in my levy bower,
Pray to our water nymphs and Sylvan gods,
To cure her of this piteous lunacy,
Give me a running stream in both my hands,
A blue king's fisher, and a pibble stone,
And I'll catch butter flies upon the sand,
And thou Gunophilus shalt clip their wings.
I'll give thee streams whose pebble shallbe pearl,
Love birds whose feathers shallbe beaten gold.
muskflies with amber berries in their mouths,
Milk white Squirrels, singing Popinjays,
A boat of dear skins, and a fleeting I'll,
A sugar cane, and line of twisted silk.
Where be all these.
I have them in my bower, come follow me?
Streams with pearl? birds with golden feathers?
Musk flies, and amber berries? white Squirrels,
And singing Popinjays? a boat of dear skins?
Come I'll go, I'll go.
I was near in love with her till now, O absolute Pandora, because foolish, for folly is women's perfection. To talk Idly, to look wildly, to laugh at every breach and play with a feather, is that would make a Stoyke in love, yea thou thyself.
O Marcifili annum iam audientem Cratippum idque Athaenis. Gravity in a woman, is like to a grey beard upon a breaching boys chin, which a good Schoolmaster would cause to be clipped, and the wise husband to be avoided.
Gunophilus, where is thy Mistress?
A catching a blue king's fisher.
Tell us where is she?
A gathering little pebbles.
What dost thou mock us.
No: but if she were here she would make mows at the proudest of you.
What meanest thou by this.
I mean my mistress is become foolish.
A just reward for one so false as she.
Such hap betide those that intend us ill.
Never were simple shepherds so abused.
Gunophilus thou hast betrayed us all.
Thou broughtest this ring from her which made me come.
And thou this bloody napkin unto me.
And thou this flattering letter unto me.
Why I brought you the ring thinking you and she should be married together. And being hurt as she told me. I had thought she had sent for you as a surgeon.
But why broughtest thou me this letter?
Only to certify you that she was in health,
As I was at the bringing hereof.
And thus being loath to trouble you, I commit you to God.
Yours as his own Gunophilus.
The wicked youngling flouteth us, let him go.
Immortal Pan where ere this lad remains,
Revenge the wrong that he hath done thy swains.
O that a creature so divine as she,
Whose beauty might enforce the heavens to blush,
And make fair Nature angry at the heart,
That she hath made her to obscure herself,
Should be so fickle and so full of slights,
And feigning love to all, love none at all.
Had she been constant unto Iphicles,
I would have clad her in sweet Flora's robes:
Have set Diana's garland on her head,
Made her sole mistress of my wanton flock,
And sing in honour of her deity,
where now with tears I curse Pandora's name.
The springs that smiled to see Pandora's face,
And leapt above the banks to touch her lips,
The proud plains dancing with Pandora's weight,
The jocund trees that vald when she came near
And in the murmur of their whispering leaves,
Did seem to say Pandora is our Queen,
witness how fair and beautiful she was,
But now alone how false and treacherous.
Here I abjure Pandora, and protest,
To live for ever in a single life.
The like vow makes Learchus to great Pan.
And Iphicles though soar against his will.
In witness of my vow I rend these lines,
O thus be my love dispersed into the air.
Here lie the bloody Napkin which she sent,
And with it my affection, and my love.
Break, break, Pandora's ring, and with it break,
Pandora's love, that almost burst my heart.
Ah whither runs my love Pandora? stay,
Gentle Pandora stay, run not so fast.
Shall I not stamp upon the ground? I will,
Who sayth Pandora shall not rend her hair?
Where is the grove that asked me how I did?
Give me an angle for the fish will bite.
Look how Pandora raves, now she is stark mad.
For you she raves, that meant to ravish her,
Help to recover her or else ye die.
May she with raving die? do what thou darest.
She over reached us with deceitful guile,
And Pan, to whom we prayed hath wrought revenge.
I'll have the Ocean put into a glass,
And drink it to the health of Stesias.
Thy head is full of hedgehogs Iphicles,
So shake them of, now let me see thy hand,
Look where a blazing star is in this line,
And in the other two and twenty sons.
Come come Pandora sleep within my arms,
Thine arms are firebrands, where's Gunophilus,
Go kiss the echo, and bid love untruss,
Go fetch the black Goat with the brazen heel,
And tell the Bell-wether I hear him not.
Not, not, not, that you should not come unto me
This night, not at all, at all, at all.
She is asleep, master shall I wake her?
O no Gunophilus there let her sleep,
And let us pray that she may be recured.
Stesias thou pitiest her that loves thee not
The words we told thee Stesias were too true.
Never did Iphicles dissemble yet,
Believe me Stesias she hath been untrue.
Yet will you slay me with your slanderous words
Did you not all swear for her chastity.
It was her subtle wit that made us swear,
For Stesias know she showed love to us all,
And severally sent for us by this swain,
And unto me he brought such honey lines,
As overcomed, I flew unto her bower.
Who when I came, swore she loud me alone.
willing me to deny the words I spoke,
And she at night would meet me in the grove.
Thus meaning simply, lo I was betrayed,
Gunophilus brought me a bloody cloth,
Saying for my love she was almost slain,
And when I came she used me as this swain,
Protesting love, and pointing me this place,
And by this bearer I received a ring,
And many a loving word that drew me forth,
O that a woman should dissemble so.
She then for swore Learchus and this swain,
Saying that Iphicles was only hers,
Whereat I promised to deny my words.
And she to meet me at Enepius' banks,
Wert thou the messenger unto them all.
I was, and all that they have said is true,
She love not you, not them, but me alone,
How oft hath she run up and down the lawns.
Calling aloud where is Gunophilus.
Ah how my heart swells at these miscreants words.
Come let us leave him in this pensive mood.
Fret, Stesias fret, while we dance on the plain.
Such fortune happen to incredulus swains.
Sweet is a single life, Stesias farewell.
Go life, fly soul, go wretched Stesias,
Cursed be Utopia for Pandora's sake,
Let wild boars with their tusks blow up my lawns,
Devouring wolves come shake my tender lambs,
Drive up my goats unto some steepy rock,
And let them fall down headlong in the sea,
She shall not live, nor thou Gunophilus,
To triumph in poor Stesias overthrow.
Stay shepherd, stay.
Hurt not Pandora lovely Stesias.
What means my love to look so pale and wan.
For thee base strumpet am I pale and wan.
Speak mildly, or I'll make thee crabbed swain.
Take her again, and love her Stesias.
Not for Utopia, no, not for the world.
Ah canst thou frown on her that looks so sweet?
Have I offended thee? I'll make amends.
And what canst thou demand more at her hand?
To slay herself that I may live alone.
Flint hearted shepherd thou deservest her not.
If thou be Ioue convey her from the earth,
And punish this Gunophilus her man.
O Ioue, let this be my punishment, to live still with Pandora.
Envious planets you have done your worst.
Yet in despite of you Pandora lives,
And seeing the shepherds have abjured her love,
She shallbe placed in one of your seven orbs.
But thou that hast not served her as I wild,
Vanish into a hawthorn as thou standst▪
Near shalt thou wait upon Pandora more.
O Nature place Pandora in my sphere,
For I am old, and she will make me young.
With me, and I will leave the Queen of heaven.
With me, and Venus shall no more be mine.
With me, and I'll forget fair Daphne's love.
With me, and i'll turn Cupid out of doors.
with me, and i'll forsake Aglauros' love.
No fair Pandora stay with Cynthia,
And I will love thee more than all the rest:
Rule thou my star, while I stay in the woods,
Or keep with Pluto in the infernal shades.
Go where thou wilt so I be rid of thee,
Speak my Pandora where wilt thou be?
Not with old Saturn for he looks like death.
Nor yet with Iupiter lest Iuno storm.
Nor with thee Mars, for Venus is thy love,
Nor with thee Sol, thou hast two paramours.
The sea borne Thetis and the ruddy morn.
Nor with thee Venus' lest I be in love,
With blindfold Cupid or young Ioculus
Nor with thee Hermes, thou art full of slights,
And when I need thee Ioue will send thee forth.
Say Cynthia, shall Pandora rule thy star,
And wilt thou play Diana in the woods?
Or Hecate in Pluto's regiment?
I Pandora.
Fair Nature let thy hand maid dwell with her,
For know that change is my felicity,
And fickleness Pandora's proper form,
Thou mad'st me sullen first, and thou Ioue proud,
Thou bloody minded, he a Puritan.
Thou Venus mad'st me love all that I saw,
And Hermes to deceive all that I love,
But Cynthia made me idle, mutable, forgetful,
Foolish, fickle, frantic, mad,
These be the humours that content me best,
And therefore will I stay with Cynthia.
And Stesias since thou setst so light on her,
Be thou her slave, and follow her in the Moon.
I'll rather die than bear her company,
Nature will have it so attend on her.
I'll have thee be her vassal, murmur not.
Then to revenge me of Gunophilus,
I'll rend this hawthorn with my furious hands▪
And bear this bush, if ear she look but back,
I'll scratch her face that was so false to me.
Now rule Pandora in fair Cynthia's steed,
And make the moon inconstant like thyself,
Reign thou at women's nuptials, and their birth,
Let them be mutable in all their loves.
Fantastical, childish, and foolish, in their desires,
Demanding toys: and stark mad
When they cannot have their will.
Now follow me ye wandering lights of heaven,
And grieve not, that she is not placed with you,
All you shall glance at her in your aspects,
And in conjunction dwell with her a space.
O that they had my room.
I charge thee follow her, but hurt her not.