SO shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breath short wound accents of new broils
To be commencte in strands a far remote:
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood,
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flourets with the armed hooves
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
Which like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery,
Shall now in mutual welbeseeming ranks,
March all one way, and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master: therefore friends,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were moulded in their mother's womb,
To chase these pagans in those holy fields,
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet,
Which 1400. years ago were nailed,
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go.
Therefore we meet not now: then let me hear
Of you my gentle cozen Westmoreland,
What yesternight our counsel did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
A post from Wales, loaden with heavy news,
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herdforshire to fight
Against the irregular, and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpses there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation
By those Welchwomen done, as may not be
Without much shame, retould, or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil,
Broke off our business for the holy land.
This matched with other did, my gracious L.
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the North, and thus it did import,
On holly road day the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibold,
That ever valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmedon met, where they did spend
A sad and bloody hour:
As by discharge of their artillery,
And shape of likelihood the news was told:
For he that brought them in the very heat
And pride of their contention, did take horse
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is dear, a true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt new lighted from his horse,
Stained with the variation of each soil,
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours:
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news,
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited,
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights
Balked in their own blood. Did sir Walter see
On Holmedons' plains, of prisoners Hotspur took
Mordake Earl of Fife, and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,
Of Murrey, Angus, and Menteith:
And is not this an honourable spoil?
A gallant priz? Ha cousin, is it not? In faith it is.
A conquest for a Prince to boast of.
Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
In envy, that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blessed a son:
A son, who is the theme of honours tongue,
Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant,
Who is sweet fortune's minion and her pride,
Whilst I by looking on the praise of him
See riot and dishonour stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved
That some night tripping fairy had exchanged,
In cradle clothes our children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet,
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine:
But let him from my thoughts. What think you cousin
Of this young Percies pride? The prisoners
Which he in this adventure hath surprised
To his own use, he keeps and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
This is his uncles teaching. This is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all aspects,
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this:
And for this cause a while we must neglect
Out holy purpose to Ierusalem.
Cousin on wednesday next our council we will hold
At Windsor, so inform the Lords:
But come yourself with speed to us again,
For more is to be said and to be done,
Then out of anger can be uttered.
I will my liege.
Now Hal, what time of day is it lad?
Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old sack, and unbuttoning thee after supper, and sleeping upon benches afternoon; that thou hast forgotten to demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know. What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the day? unless hours were cups of sack, and minutes capons, and clocks the tongues of Bawds, and dials the signs of leaping houses, and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in flame-couloured taffeta; I see no reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand the time of the day.
Indeed you come near me now Hal, for we that take purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not by Phoebus, he, that wandering knight so fair: and I prithee sweet wag when thou art a king as God save thy grace: majesty I should say, for grace thou wilt have none.
What none?
No by my troth, not so much as will serve to be prologue to an egg and butter.
Well, how then? come roundly, roundly.
Marry then sweet wag, when thou art king let not us that are squires of the night's body, be called thieves of the days beauty: let us be Diana's foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon, and let men say we be men of good government, being governed as the sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.
Thou sayest well, and it holds well to, for the fortune of us that are the moons men, doth ebb and flow like the sea, being governed as the sea is by the moon, as for proof. Now a purse of gold most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most dissolutely spent on tuesday morning, got with swearing, lay by, and spent with crying, bring in, now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder, and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.
By the Lord thou sayst true lad, and is not my hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?
As the honey of Hibla my old lad of the castle, and is not a buff Jerkin a most sweet rob of durance?
How now, how now mad wag, what in thy quips and thy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with a buff jerkin?
Why what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a time and oft.
Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?
No, i'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.
Yea and else where, so far as my coin would stretch, and where it would not, I have used my credit.
Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent that thou art heir apparent. But I prithee sweet wag, shall there be gallows standing in England when thou art king? and resolution thus subd as it is with the rusty curb of old father Antic the law, do not thou when thou art king hang a thief.
No, thou shalt.
Shall I? O rare! by the Lord i'll be a brave judge.
Thou judgest false already, I mean thou shalt have the hanging of the thieves, and so become a rare hangman.
Well Hall well, and in some sort it jumps with my humour, as well as weighting in the Court I can tell you.
For obtaining of suits?
Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman hath no lean wardrobe. 'Zblood I am as melancholy as a gyb Cat, or a lugd bear.
Or an old lion, or a lovers Lute.
Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
What sayest thou to a Hare, or the melancholy of Mooreditch?
Thou hast the most unsavoury smiles, and art indeed the most comparative rascalliest sweet young Prince. But Hal, I prithee trouble me no more with vanity, I would to God thou and I knew where a commodity of good names were to be bought: an old Lord of the council rated me the other day in the street about you sir, but I marked him not, and yet he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not, and yet he talked wisely and in the street to.
Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in the streets and no man regards it.
O thou hast damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a saint: thou hast done much harm upon me Hal, God forgive thee for it: before I knew thee Hal I knew nothing, and now am I, if a man should speak truly, little better than one of the wicked: I must give over this life, and I will give it over: by the Lord and I do not, I am a villain, i'll be damned for never a king's son in Christendom.
Where shall we take a purse to morrow Iacke?
Zounds where thou wilt lad, i'll make one, an I do not call me villain and baffle me.
I see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying to purse-taking.
Why Hall, 'tis my vocation Hall, 'tis no sin for a man to labour in his vocation.
poins now shall we know if Gadshill have set a match. O if men were to be saved by merit, what hole in hell were hot enough for him? this is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried, stand, to a true man.
Good morrow Ned.
Good morrow sweet Hal. What says Monsieur remorse? what says sir Iohn Sack, and Sugar Iacke? how agrees the Devil and thee about thy soul that thou souldest him on good friday last, for a cup of Medera and a cold capon's leg.
Sir Iohn stands to his word, the devil shall have his bargain, for he was never yet a breaker of proverbs: he will give the devil his due.
Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.
But my lads, my lads, to morrow morning, by four a clock early at Gadshill, there are pilgrims going to Canturburie with rich offerings, and traders riding to London with fat purses. I have vizards for you all you have horses for yourselves, Gadshill lies to night in Rochester, I have bespoke supper to morrow night in Fastcheape: we may do it as secure as sleep, if you will go I will stuff your purses full of crowns: if you will not tarry at home and be hanged.
Hear ye Edward, if I tarry at home and go not, i'll hang you for going.
You will chaps.
Hal wilt thou make one?
Who I rob, I a thief? not I by my faith.
There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.
Well then, once in my days i'll be a madcap.
Why that's well said.
Well, come what will, i'll tarry at home.
By the lord, i'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.
I care not.
Sir Iohn, I prithee leave the prince and me alone, I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure that he shall go.
Well God give thee the spirit of persuasion, and him the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest, may move, and what he hears, may be believed, that the true prince may for recreation sake) prove a false thief, for the poor abuses of the time want countenance: farewell, you shall find me in Eastcheap
Farewell the latter spring, farewell Alhallowne summer.
Now my good sweet honey Lord, ride with us to morrow. I have a jest to execute, that I cannot manage alone. Falstalffe Harvey, Rossill, and Gadshil, shall rob those men that we have already waylaid, yourself and I will not be there, and when they have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut this head off from my shoulders.
How shall we part with them in setting forth?
Why, we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have no sooner achieved but we'll set upon them.
Yea but 'tis like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits, and by every other appointment to be ourselves.
Tut, our horses they shall not see, i'll tie them in the wood, our vizards we will change after we leave them: and sirrah, I have cases of Buckram for the nonce, to immaske our noted outward garments.
Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true bred cowards as ever turned back: and for the third, if he sight longer than he sees reason, i'll forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be the incomprehensible lies, that this same fat rogue will tell us when we meet at supper, how thirty at least he fought with, what wards, what blows, what extremities he endured, and in the reproof of this lives the jest.
Well, i'll go with thee, provide us all things necessary, and meet me to morrow night in Eastcheap, there i'll sup: farewell.
Farewell my Lord.
I know you all, and will a while uphold
The unyokt humour of your idleness,
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted he may be more wondered at
By breaking through the soul and ugly mists
Of vapours that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holly-dayes,
To sport would be as tedious as to work;
But when they seldom come, they wished for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents:
So when this lose behaviour I throw off,
And pay the debt I never promised,
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes,
And like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My reformation glittering o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly, and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend, to make offence a skill,
Redeeming time when men think lest I wil.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me, for accordingly
You tread upon my patience, but be sure
I will from henceforth rather be myself
Mighty, and to be feared, than my condition
Which hath been smooth as oil soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect,
Which the proud soul near pays but to the proud.
Our house (my sovereign liege) little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it,
And that same greatness to, which our own hands
Have holp to make so portly.
My Lord.
Worcester get thee gone for I do see
Danger, and disobedience in thine eye:
O sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And Majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow,
You have good leave to leave us, when we need
Your use and counsel we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.
Yea my good Lord.
Those prisoners in your highness name demanded.
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were as he says, nor with such strength denied
As is delivered to your majesty.
Either envy therefore, or misprision,
Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners,
But I remember when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage, and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain Lord, neat and trimly dressed,
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new rept,
Showed like a stubble land as harvest home,
He was perfumed like a Milliner,
And twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose, and took't away again,
Who therewith angry, when it next came there
took it in snuff, and still he smiled and talked:
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He called them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome coarse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility:
With many holiday and lady terms
He questioned me, amongst the rest demanded
My prisoners in your majesties behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
To be so pestered with a popinjay,
Out of my grief and my impatience
Answered neglectingly, I know not what
He should or he should not, for he made me mad
To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet,
And talk so like a waiting gentlewoman,
Of guns, and drums, and wounds, God save the mark:
And telling me the soveraignest thing on earth
Was Parmacitie, for an inward bruise,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpetre, should be digged
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his (my Lord)
I answered indirectly (as I said)
And I beseech you, let not his report
Come currant for an accusation
Betwixt my love and your high majesty.
The circumstance considered, good my lord,
What ere Lord Harry Percy then had said
To such a person, and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest reto;d,
May reasonably die, and never rise
To do him wrong, or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why yet he doth deny his prisoners,
But with proviso and exception,
That we at our own charge shall ransom strait
His brother in law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who on my soul, hath wilfully betrayed
The lives of those, that he did lead to fight
Against that great Magician, damned Glendower,
Whose daughter as we hear, that Earl of March
Hath lately married: shall our coffers then
Be emptied, to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason? and indent with fears
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve;
For I shall never hold that man my friend,
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer,
Revolted Mortimer:
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege
But by the chance of war, to prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue: for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Seuerns siedgie bank,
In single opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour,
In changing hardiment with great Glendower,
Three times they breathed, & three times did they drink
Upon agreement of swift Seuerns flood,
Who then affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds.
And hide his crispe-head in the hollow bank,
Bloudstained with these valiant combatants,
Never did bare and rotten policy
Colour her working with such deadly wounds,
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly,
Then let not him be slandered with revolt.
Thou dost belly him Percy, thou dost belly him,
He never did encounter with Glendower:
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone,
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? but sirrah, hence forth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer:
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland:
We licence your departure with your son,
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
And if the devil come and roar for them
I will not send them: I will after strait
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What? drunk with choler, stay, & pause a while,
Here comes your uncle.
Speak of Mortimer?
Zounds I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy if I do not join with him:
Yea on his part i'll empty all these veins,
And shed my dear blood, drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the downtrod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and cankered Bullingbrooke.
Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?
He will forsooth have all my prisoners,
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wives brother, than his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him, was not he proclaimed
By Richard that dead is, the next of blood?
He was, I heard the proclamation:
And then it was, when the unhappy king,
(Whose wrongs in us God pardon) did set forth
Upon his Irish expedition;
From whence he intercepted, did return
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.
And for whose death, we in the world's wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
But soft, I pray you did king Richard then
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
Heir to the crown?
He did, myself did hear it.
Nay then I cannot blame his cousin king,
That wished him on the barren mountains starve,
But shall it be that you that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetfulman,
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murderous subornation? shall it be
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the agents, or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather,
O pardon me, that I descend so low,
To show the line and the predicament,
Wherein you range under this subtle king!
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Orfil up Chronicles in time to come,
That men of your nobility and power
Did gauge them both in an unjust behalf,
(As both of you, God pardon it, have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely Rose,
And plant this thorn, this canker Bullingbrooke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fold, discarded, and shook off
By him, for whom these shames ye underwent?
No, yet time serves, wherein you may redeem
Your banished honours, and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again:
Revenge the jeering and disdained contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you,
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths:
Therefore I say.
Peace cousin, say no more
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick conceiving discontents
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventurous spirit,
As to over walk a Current roaring loud,
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
If he fall in, good-night, or sink, or swim,
Send danger from the East unto the West.
So honour cross it, from the North to South,
And let them grapple: O the blood more stirs
To rou'e a lion than to start a hare.
Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven me thinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honour from the palefaced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks,
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Without corrival all her dignities,
But out upon this half faced fellowship.
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend,
Good cousin give me audience for a while.
I cry you mercy.
Those same noble Scots that are your prisoners
I'll keep them all;
By God he shall not have a Scot of them,
No, if a Scot would save his soul he shall not.
I'll keep them by this hand.
You start away,
And lend no care unto my purposes:
Those prisoners you shall keep.
Nay I will: that's flat:
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer,
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his care i'll hollow Mortimer:
Nay, i'll have a starling shallbe taught to speak
Nothing but Mortimer, and give it him
To keep his anger still in motion.
Hear you cozen a word.
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bullenbrooke,
And that same sword and buckler Prince of Wales,
But that I think his father loves him not,
And would be glad he met with some mischance:
I would have him poisoned with a pot of ale.
Farewell kinsman, i'll talk to you
When you are better tempered to attend.
Why what a waspe-stung and impatient fool
Art thou? to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine care to no tongue but thine own?
Why look you, I am whipped and scourged with rods,
Nettled, and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician Bullingbrooke,
In Richard's time, what do you call the place?
A plague upon it, it is in Glocestershire;
TTwas where the madcap duke his uncle kept
His uncle York, where I first bowed my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bullenbrooke:
'Zblood, when you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.
At Barkly castle.
You say true.
Why what a candy deal of courtesy,
This fawning greyhound than did proffer me,
Look when his infant fortune came to age,
And gentle Harry Percy, and kind cousin:
O the devil take such coosoners, god forgive me,
Good uncle tell your tale, I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to it again,
We will stay your leisure.
I have done I'faith.
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners,
Deliver them up without their ransom strait,
And make the Douglas son your only mean
For Powers in Scotland, which for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted you my Lord.
Your son in Scotland being thus employed,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate well-beloved,
The Archbishop.
Of York, is it not?
True, who bears hard
His brother's death at Bristol the lord Scroop,
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.
I smell it. Upon my life it will do well.
Before the game is afoot thou still lettest slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot,
And then the power of Scotland, and of York,
To join with Mortimer, ha.
And so they shall.
In faith it is exceedingly well aimed.
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads by raising of a head,
For bear ourselves as even as we can,
The king will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home.
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
He does, he does, we'll be revenged on him.
Cousin farewell. No further go in this,
Then I by letters shall direct your course
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower, and Lo: Mortimer,
Where you and Douglas, and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it shall happily meet,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Farewell good brother, we shall thrive I trust.
Uncle adieu: O let the hours be short,
Till fields, and blows, and groans applaud our sport.
Heigh ho. An it be not four by the day i'll be hanged, Charles wain is over the new Chimney, and yet our horse not packed. What Ostler.
Anon, anon.
I prithee Tom beat Cuts saddle, put a few flocks in the point poor jade is wrong in the withers, out of all cease.
Pease and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the next way to give poor jades the bots: this house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.
Poor fellow never ioied since the prize of Oats rose, it was the death of him.
I think this be the most villainous house in all London road for fleas, I am stung like a Tench.
Like a Tench, by the Mass there is near a King christian could be better bit than I have been since the first cock.
Why they will allow us near a Iordane, and then we leak in your chimney, and your chamber-lye breeds fleas like a loach.
What Ostler, come a way and be hanged, come a way.
I have a gammon of bacon, and two razes of Ginger, to be delivered as far as Charing cross.
God's body, the Turkeys in my Panier are quite starved: what Ostler? a plague on thee, hast thou never an ere in thy head? canst not hear, and ttwere not as good deed as drink to break the pate on thee, I am a very villain, come and be hanged, hast no faith in thee?
Good morrow carriers, what's a clock?
I think it be two a clock.
I prithee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding in the stable.
Nay by God soft, I know a trick worth two of that I faith.
I pray thee lend me thine.
I when canst tell? lend me thy lantern (quoth he) marry i'll see thee hanged first.
Sirrah Carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant thee, come neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the Gentlemen, they will along with company for they have great charge.
What ho: Chamberlain.
At hand quoth pick purse.
That's even as fair as at hand quoth the Chamberlain: for thou variest no more from picking of purses, then giving direction doth from labouring: thou layest the plot how.
Good morrow master Gadshill, it holds currant that I told you yesternight, there's a Frankelin in the wild of Kent hath brought three hundred Marks with him in gold, I heard him tell it to one of his company last night at supper, a kind of Auditor, one that hath abundance of charge too, God knows what, they are up already, and call for Eggs and butter, they will away presently.
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas clerk, i'll give thee this neck.
No, i'll none of it, I pray thee keep that for the hangman, for I know thou worshippest Saint Nicholas, as truly as a man of falsehood may.
What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang, i'll make a fat pair of Gallows: for if I hang, old sir Iohn hangs with me, and thou knowest he is no starveling tut, there are other Troyans' that thou dreamest not of, the which for sport sake are content to do the profession, some grace, that would (if matters should be looked into) for their own credit sake make all whole. I am joined with no footlande rakers, no long-staffe sixpenny strikers, none of these mad mustachio purplehewd maltworms, but with nobility, and tranquillity, Burgomasters and great Oneyres, such as can hold in such as will strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than drink, and drink sooner than pray, and yet (zounds) I lie, for they pray continually to their Saint the Commonwealth, or rather not pray to her, but pray on her, for they ride up and down on her, and make her their boots
What, the Commonwealth their boots? will she hold out water in foul way?
She will, she will, justice hath liquored her: we steal as in a Castle cocksure: we have the receit of Ferneseede, we walk invisible.
Nay by my faith, I think you are more beholding to the night then to Ferneseed, for your walking invisible.
Give me thy hand, thou shalt have a share in our purchase, as I am a true man.
Nay rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.
Go to, homo is a common name to all men: bid the Ostler bring my gelding out of the stable, farewell you muddy knave.
Come shelter, shelter, I have removed Falstalffes horse, and he frets like a gumd Velvet.
Stand close.
Poynes, Poynes and be hanged Poynes.
Peace ye fat-kidneyd rascal, what a brawling dost thou keep?
Where's Poynes Hall?
He is walked up to the top of the hill, I'll go seek him.
I am accursed to rob in that thieves company, the rascal hath removed my horse, and tied him I know not where, if I travel but four foot by the squire further a foot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, if I scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have forsworn his company hourly any time this xxii. years, and yet I am bewitched with the rogues company. If the rascal have not given me medicines to make me love him, i'll be hanged. It could not be else, I have drunk medicines, Poynes, Hall, a plague upon you both. Bardoll, Peto, i'll starve ere i'll rob a foot further, and ttwere not as good a deed as drink to turn trueman, and to leave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth: eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles a foot with me, and the stony hearted villains know it well enough, a plague upon it when thieves can not be true one to another: Whew, a plague upon you all, give me my horse you rogues, give me my horse and be hanged:
Peace ye fat guts, lie down, lay thine care close to the ground, and list if thou canst hear the tread of travelers.
Have you any levers to lift me up again being down, 'zblood i'll not bear mine own flesh so far a foot again for all the coin in thy father's Exchequer: What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
Thou liest, thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.
I prithee good prince, Hal, help me to my horse, good kings son.
Out ye rogue shall I be your Ostler?
Hang thyself in thine own heir apparent garters, if I be ta'en, i'll peach for this: and I have not Ballads made on you all, and sung to filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison, when a jest is so forward and a foot too I hate it.
Stand.
So I do against my will.
O 'tis our setter, I know his voice, Bardoll, what news.
Case ye, case ye on with your vizards, there's money of the kings coming down the hill, 'tis going to the King's Exchequer.
You lie ye rogue 'tis going to the king's Tavern.
There's enough to make us all:
To be hanged.
Sirs you four shall front them in the narrow lane: Ned Poines, and I will walk lower, if they scape from your encounter, than they light on us.
How many be there of them?
Some eight or ten.
Zounds will they not rob us?
What, a coward sir Iohn paunch.
In deed I am not Iohn of Gaunt your grandfather, but yet no coward, Hall.
Well, we leave that to the proof.
Sirrah Iacke, thy horse stands behind the hedge, when thou needst him, there thou shalt find him: farewell & stand fast.
Now can not I strike him if I should be hanged.
Ned, where are our disguises?
Here, hard by, stand close.
Now my masters, happy man be his dole, say I, every man to his business.
Come neighbour, the boy shall lead our horses down the hill, we'll walk a foot a while and ease our legs.
Stand.
Iesus bless us.
Strike, down with them, cut the villains throats, a whoreson Caterpillars, bacon-fed knaves, they hate us youth, down with them, fleece them.
O we are undone, both we and ours for ever.
Hang ye gorbellied knaves, are ye undone, no ye fat chuffs, I would your store were here: on bacons on, what ye knaves young men must live, you are grand jurors, are ye, we'll iure ye faith.
The thieves have bound the true men, now could thou and I rob the thieves, and go merrily to London, it would be argument for a week, laughter for a month, and a good jest for ever.
Stand close, I hear them coming.
Come my masters, let us share and then to horse before day, and the Prince and Poines be not two arrant cowards there's no equity stirring, there's no more valour in that Poynes, then in a wild duck.
Your money.
Villains.
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse: the thieves are all scattered, and possessed with fear so strongly, that they dare not meet each other, each takes his fellow for an officer, away good Ned, Falstalffe sweats to death, and lords the lean earth as he walks along, were t not for laughing I should pity him.
How the rogue roared.
But for mine own part my Lord I could be well contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear your house.
He could be contented, why is he not then? in the respect of the love he bears our house: he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than he loves our house. Let me see some more.
The purpose you undertake is dangerous, Why that's certain, 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink, but I tell you (my Lord fool) out of this nettle danger, we pluck this flower safety.
The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain, the time itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light, for the counterpoise of so great an opposition.
Say you so, say you so, I say unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and you lie: what a lack brain is this? by the Lord our plot is a good plot, as ever was laid, our friends true and constant: a good plot, good friends, and full of expectation: an excellent plot, very good friends; what a frosty spirited rogue is this? why my Lord of York commends the plot, and the general course of the Action. Zounds and I were now by this rascal I could brain him with his Lady's fan. Is there not my father, my uncle, and myself; Lord Edmond Mortimer, my Lord of York, and Owen Glendower is there not besides the Dowglas, have I not all their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the next month, and are they not some of them set forward already? What a pagan rascal is this, an infidel? Ha you shall see now in very sincerity of fear and cold heart, will he to the King, and lay open all our proceed? O I could divide myself, and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skim milk with so honourable an action. Hang him let him tell the king, we are prepared: I will set forward to night. How now Kate, I must leave you within these two hours.
O my good Lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offence have I this fortnight been
A banished woman from my Harry's bed?
Tell me sweet Lord, what is't that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth?
And start so often when thou sitst alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks?
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick eyed musing, and cursed melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watched,
And heard the murmur, tales of iron wars,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Cry courage to the field. And thou hast talked
Of sallies, and retires of trenches tents,
Of pailsadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of canon, culverin,
Of prisoner's ransom, and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war,
And thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleeepe,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
Like bubbles in a late disturbed stream
And in thy face strange motions have appeared,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath,
On some great sudden hest. O what portents are these?
Some heavy business hath my Lord in hand,
And I must know it else he loves me not.
What ho, is Gilliams with the packet gone?
He is my Lord, an hour ago.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the Sheriff?
One horse my Lord he brought even now.
What horse Roan? a cropeate is it not?
It is my Lord.
That roane shall be my throne. Well, I will back him strait: O Esperance, bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
But hear you my Lord.
What sayst thou my Lady?
What is it carries you away?
Why, my horse (my love) my horse.
Out you madhedded ape, a weazel hath not such a deal of spleen as you are tossed with. In faith i'll know your business Harry that I will, I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir about his title, and hath sent for you to line his enterprise, but if you go.
So far a foot I shall be weary love.
Come, come you Parakeet, answer me directly unto this question that I ask, in faith i'll break thy little finger Harry and if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Away, away you trifler, love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee Kate, this is no world
To play with mammets, and to tilt with lips,
We must have bloody noses, and cracked crowns.
And pass them currant too: gods me my horse:
What sayst thou Kate? what wouldst thou have with me?
Do you not love me? do you not indeed?
Well, do not then, for since you love me not
I will not love myself. Do you not love me?
Nay tell me if you speak in jest or no?
Come, wilt thou see me ride?
And when I am a horseback I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you Kate,
I must not have you henceforth question me
Wither I go, nor reason where about,
Wither I must, I must, and to conclude
This evening must I leave you gentle Kate,
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Than Harry Percies wife, constant you are,
But yet a woman, and for secrecy
No Lady closer, for I well believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
And so far will I trust thee gentle Kate.
How, so far.
Not an inch further, but hark you Kate,
Wither I go, thither shall you go too:
To day will I set forth, to morrow you,
Will this content you Kate?
It must of force.
Ned, prithee come out of that fat room, and lend me thy hand to laugh a little.
Where hast been Hal?
With three or four loggerheades, amongst three or fourscore hogsheads. I have sounded the very base string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by their christian names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis, they take it already upon their salvation, that though I be but prince of Wales, yet I am the king of Courtesy, and tell me flatly I am no proud Iacke like Falstalffe, but a Corinthian, a lad of metal, a good boy (by the Lord so they call me) and when I am king of England I shall command all the good lads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, dying scarlet, and when you breath in your watering they cry 'em, and bid you play it off. To conclude, I am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour that I can drink with any Tinker in his own language, during my life. I tell thee Ned thou hast lost much honour, that thou wert not with me in this action; but sweet Ned, to sweeten which name of Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped even now into my hand by an under-skinker, one that never spoke other English in his life then eight shillings and six pence, and you are welcome, with this shrill addition, anon, anon sir; score a pint of bastard in the half moon, or so. But Ned, to drive away the time till Falstalffe come: I prithee do thou stand in some by-room, while I question my puny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar, and do thou never leave calling Frances, that his tale to me may be nothing but anon, step aside and i'll show thee a present.
Frances.
Thou art perfect.
Frances.
Anon, anon sir. Look down into the pomegranate, Ralphe.
Come hither Frances.
My Lord.
How long hast thou to serve Frances?
Forsooth five years, and as much as to.
Frances.
Anon, anon sir.
Five year, berlady a long lease for the clinking of pewter; but Frances, darest thou be so valiant, as to play the coward with thy Indenture, and show it a fair pair of heels, and run from it?
O Lord sir, i'll be sworn upon all the books in England, I could find in my heart.
Frances.
Anon sir.
How old art thou Frances?
Let me see, about Michaelmas next I shall be.
Frances.
Anon sir, pray stay a little my Lord.
Nay but hark you Frances, for the sugar thou gavest me, ttwas a pennyworth, wast not?
O Lord, I would it had been two.
I will give thee for it a thousand pound, ask me when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it,
Frances.
Anon, anon.
Anon Frances, no Frances, but to morrow Frances: or Frances a Thursday; or indeed Frances when thou wilt. But Frances.
My Lord.
Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal button, non-pated, agate ring, puke stocking, Caddice garter, smooth tongue, spanish pouch?
O Lord sir, who do you mean?
Why then your brown bastard is your only drink? for look you Frances, your white canvas doublet will fulley. In Barbary sir, it cannot come to so much.
What sir?
Frances.
Away you rogue, dost thou not hear them call.
What stand'st thou still and hearst such a calling: look to the guests within. My Lord, old sir Iohn with half a dozen more are at the door, shall I let them in?
Let them alone a while, and then open the door: Poines.
Anon, anon sir.
Sirrah, Falstalffe and the rest of the thieves are at the door, shall we be merry?
As merry as Crickets my lad, but hark ye, what cunning match have you made with this jest of the Drawer: come what's the issue?
I am now of all humours, that have showed themselves humours since the old days of good man Adam, to the pupil age of this present twelve a clock at midnight. What's a clock Frances?
Anon, anon sir.
That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a Parrot, and yet the son of a woman. His industry is up stairs and down stairs, his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's mind, the Hotspur of the North, he that kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast: washes his hands, and says to his wife, fie upon this quiet life, I want work. O my sweet Harry says she how many hast thou killed to day? Give my roane horse a drench (says he) and answers some fourteen an hour after: a trifle, a trifle. I prithee call in Falstalffe, i'll play Percy, and that damned brawn shall play dame Mortimer his wife. Rivo says the drunkard: call in Ribs, call in Tallow.
Welcome Iacke, where hast thou been?
A plague of all cowards I say, and a vengeance too, marry and Amen: give me a cup of sack boy. Ear Head this life long i'll sow neatherstocks and mend them, and foot them too. A plague of all cowards. Give me a cup of sache rogue, is there no virtue extant?
Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter, pitiful hearted Titan that melted at the sweet tale of the sons, if thou didst, then behold that compound.
You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is nothing but roguery to be found in villainous man, yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime in it. A villainous coward. Go thy ways old Iacke, die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a shotten herring: there lives not three good men vnhangde in England, and one of them is fat, and grows old, God help the while, a bad world I say, I would I were a weaver. I could sing psalms, or any thing. A plague of all cowards I say still.
How now Wolsacke, what mutter you?
A king's son, if I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock of wild geese, i'll never wear hair on my face more, you prince of Wales.
Why you whoreson roundman, what's the matter?
Are not you a coward? answer me to that, and Poines there.
Zounds ye fat paunch, and ye call me coward by the Lord i'll stab thee.
I call thee coward, I le see thee damned ere I call thee coward, but I would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou canst. You are straight enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: call you that backing of your friends, a plague upon such backing, give me them that will face me give me a cup of sack. I am a rogue if I drunk to day.
O villain, thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drunkst last.
All is one for that.
A plague of all cowards still say I.
What's the matter?
What's the matter, there be four of us here have ta'en a thousand pound this day morning
Where is it Iacke, where is it?
Where is it? taken from us it is: a hundred upon poor four of us.
What, a hundred, man?
I am a rogue if I were not at half sword with a dozen of them two hours together. I have scaped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through the doublet, four through the hose, my buckler cut through and through, my sword hacked like a handsaw, ecce signum. I never dealt better since I was a man all would not do. A plague of all cowards, let them speak, if they speak more or less than truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness.
Speak sirs, how was it?
We four set upon some dozen.
Sixteen at least my Lord.
And bond them.
No, no, they were not bound.
You rogue they were bound every man of them, or I am a Iew else: an Hebrew Iew.
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
What, fought you with them all?
Al, I know not what you call all, but if I fought not with fifty of them I am a bunch of radish: if there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old Iacke, then am I no two legged Creature.
Pray God you have not murdered some of them.
Nay, that's past praying for, I have peppered two of them. Two I am sure I have paid, two rogues in buckram suits: I tell thee what Hall, if I tell thee a lie, spit in my face; call me horse, thou knowest my old ward: here I lay, and thus I bore my point, four rogues in buckram let drive at me.
What four? thou saidst but two even now.
Four Hal, I told thee four.
I, I, he said four.
These four came all a front, and mainly thrust at me, I made me no more ado, but took all their seven points in my target, thus.
Seven, why there were but four even now.
In Buckram.
I four in Buckram suits.
Seven by these hilts, or I am a villain else.
Prithee let him alone we shall have more anon.
Dost thou hear me Hal?
I, and mark thee to jack.
Do so for it is worth the listening to, these nine in Buckram that I told thee of.
So, two more already.
Their points being broken.
Down fell their hose.
Began to give me ground: but I followed me close, came in, foot, and hand, and with a thought, seven of the eleven I paid.
O monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two.
But as the devil would have it, three misbegotten knaves in Kendal green came at my back, and let drive at me, for it was so dark Hal, that thou couldst not see thy hand.
These lies are like their father that begets them, gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why thou clay brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thou whoreson obscene greasy tallow-catch.
What art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth the truth?
Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand, come tell us your reason. What sayest thou to this?
Come your reason, Iacke your reason.
What, upon compulsion: Zounds, and I were at the strappado, or all the racks in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on compulsion? if reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon compulsion, I.
I'll be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine coward this bed presser, this horse-backe-breaker, this huge hill of flesh.
'Zblood you starveling, you elsskin you dried neatssong, you bulspizzle, you stockfish: O for breath to utter what is like thee, you tailors yard, you sheath, you bowcase, you vile standing tuck.
Well, breathe a while, and then to it again, and when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons hear me speak but this.
Mark Jack.
We two saw you four set on four and bound them and were masters of their wealth: mark now how a plain tale shall put you down, then did we two set on you four, and asunder word, outfaced you from your prize, & have it, yea & can show it you here in the house: and Falstalffe you carried your guts away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, & roared for mercy, and still run and roared, as ever I heard bul-calf. What a slave art thou to hack thy sword as thou hast done? and than say it was in fight. What trick? what device? what starting hole canst thou now find out, to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?
Come, let's hear jack, what trick hast thou now?
By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why hear you my masters, was it for me to kill the heir apparent? should I turn upon the true prince? why thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: but beware instinct, the lion will not touch the true prince, instinct is a great matter. I was now a coward on instinct, I shall think the better of myself, and thee during my life; I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince: but by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the money, Hostess clap to the doors, watch to night, pray to morrow, gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to you. What shall we be merry, shall we have a play extempore?
Content, and the argument shall be thy running away.
A, no more of that Hall and thou lovest me.
O Iesu, my Lord the prince!
How now my lady the hostess, what sayst thou to me?
Marry my Lo there is a noble man of the court at door would speak with you: he says he comes from your father.
Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and send him back again to my mother.
What manner of man is he?
An old man.
What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall I give him his answer?
Prithee do jack.
Faith and i'll send him packing.
Now sirs birlady you fought fair, so did you Peto, so did you Bardol, you are lions to, you ran away upon instinct, you will not touch the true prince, no fie.
Faith I ran when I saw others run.
Faith tell me now in earnest, how came Falstalffs' sword so hacked?
Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he would swear truth out of England, but he would make you believe it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.
Yea, and to tickle our noses with spearegrasse, to make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments with it, and swear it was the blood of true men. I did that I did not this seven year before, I blushed to hear his monstrous devices.
O villain, thou stolest a cup of Sack eighteen years ago and wert taken with the manner, and ever since thou hast blushed extempore, thou hadst fire and sword on thy side, and yet thou ranst away, what instinct hadst thou for it?
My Lord do you see these meteors? do you behold these exhalations?
I do.
What think you they portend?
Hot livers, and cold purses.
Choler, my Lord, if rightly taken.
No if rightly taken halter. Here comes lean jack, here comes bare bone: how now my sweet creature of bombast, how long is't ago jack since thou sawest thine own knee?
My own knee, when I was about thy years (Hal.) I was not an eagle's talon in the waste, I could have crept into any Alderman's thumb ring: a plague of sighing and grief it blows a man up like a bladder. there's villainous news abroad, here was sir Iohn Bracy from your father: you must to the court in the morning. That same mad fellow of the North Percy, and he of Wales that gave Amaimon the bastinado and make Lucifer cuckold, and swore the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh hook: what a plague call you him?
O Glendower.
Owen, Owen, the same, and his son in law Mortimer, and old Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot of Scots, Dowglas, that runs a horseback up a hill perpendicular.
He that rides at high speed, and with his pistol kills a sparrow flying.
You have hit it.
So did he never the sparrow.
Well, that rascal hath good metal in him, he will not run.
Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so for running?
A horseback (ye cuckoo) but a foot he will not budge a foot.
Yes Iacke, upon instinct.
I grant ye upon instinct: well he is thereto, and one Mordacke, and a thousand blue caps more. Worcester is stolen away tonight, thy father's beard is turned white with the news, you may buy land now as cheap as stinking Mackrel.
Why then, it is like if there come a hot Iune, and this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hob nails, by the hundreds.
By the mass lad thou sayest true, it is like we shall have good trading that way: but tell me Hall, art not thou horrible afeard? thou being heir apparent, could the world pick thee out three such enemies again? as that fiend Dowglas, that spirit Percy, and that devil Glendower, art thou not horribly afraid? doth not thy blood thril at it?
Not a whit faith, I lack some of thy instinct.
Well thou wilt be horrible chid to morrow when thou comest to thy father, if thou love me practise an answer.
Do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the particulars of my life.
Shall I: content. This chair shall be my state, this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.
Thy state is taken for a joined stool, thy golden sceptre for a leaden dagger, and thy precious rich crown for a pitiful bald crown.
Well, and the fire of grace be not quite out of thee now shalt thou be moved. Give me a cup of Sack to make my eyes look red, that it may be thought I have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do it in king Cambyses vain.
Well, here is my leg.
And here is my speech; stand aside Nobility.
O Iesu, this is excellent sport i'faith.
Weep not sweet Queen, for trickling tears are vain.
O the father, how he holds his countenance?
For God's sake Lords, convey my trustful Queen,
For tears do stop the floudgates of her eyes.
O Iesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as ever I see.
Peace good pint-pot, peace good tickle-braine.
Harrie, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy time, but also how thou art accompanied. For though the camomile, the more it is trodden on, the faster it grows: so youth the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears: that thou art my son I have partly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion, but chiefly a villainous trick of thine eye, and a foolish hanging of thy neither lip, that doth warrant me. If then thou be son to me, here lies the point, why being son to me, art thou so pointed at? shall the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher, and eat blackberries? a question not to be asked. Shall the son of England prove a thief, and take purses? a question to be asked. There is a thing Harry, which thou hast often heard of, and it is known to many in our land by the name of pitch. This pitch (as ancient writers do report) doth defile, so doth the company thou keepest: for Harrie, now I do not speak to thee in drink, but in tears; not in pleasure but in passion: not in words only, but in woes also: and yet there is a virtuous man, whom I have often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.
What manner of man and it like your Majesty?
A goodly portly man i'faith, and a corpulent of a cheerful look, a pleasing eye, and a most noble carriage, and as I think his age some fifty, or birladie inclining to threescore, and now I remember me, his name is Falstalffe, if that man should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me. For Harry, I see virtue in his looks: if then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in that Falstalffe, him keep with the rest banish, and tell me now thou naughty varlet, tell me where hast thou been this month?
Dost thou speak like a king, do thou stand for me, and i'll play my father.
Depose me, if thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a rabbit sucker, or a poulter's Hare
Well, here I am set.
And here I stand, judge my masters.
Now Harry, whence come you?
My noble Lord from Eastcheap.
The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.
'Zblood my Lord they are false: nay i'll tickle ye for a young prince I faith.
Swearest thou ungracious boy, hence forth near look on me, thou art violently carried away from grace, there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of an old fat man, a tun of man is thy companion: why dost thou converse with that trunk of humours, that bolting hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffed cloak-bag of guts, that roasted Manningtre Ox with the pudding in his belly, that reverent vice, that grey iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity in years, wherein is he good, but to taste sack and drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a capon and eat it? wherein cunning, but in craft? wherein crafty, but in villainy? wherein villainous, but in all things? where in worthy, but in nothing?
I would your grace would take me with you, whom means your grace?
That villainous abominable misleader of youth, Falstalffe, that old white bearded Satan.
My Lord, the man I know.
I know thou dost.
But to say I know more harm in him then in myself, were to say more than I know: that he is old the more the pity, his white hairs do witness it, but that he is saving your reverence, a whoremaster, that I utterly deny: if sack and sugar be a fault, God help the wicked; if to be old and merry be a sin, than many an old host that I know is damned: if to be fat be to be hated, than Pharaos' lane kine are to be loved. No my good lord banish Peto, banish Bardoll, banish Poines, but for sweet Iacke Falstalffe, kind Iacke Falstalffe, true Iacke Falstalffe, valiant Iacke Falstalffe & therefore more valiant being as he is old Iacke Falstalffe, banish not him thy Harry's company, banish not him thy Harry's company, banish plump Iacke, and banish all the world.
I do, I will.
O my Lord, my Lord, the Sheriff with a most monstrous watch is at the door.
Our ye rogue, play out the play, I haue much to say in the behalfe of that Falstalffe.
O Iesu, my Lord, my Lord!
Heigh, heigh, the Devil rides upon a fiddle stick, what's the matter?
The Sheriff and all the watch are at the door, they are come to search the house, shall I let them in?
Dost thou hear Hal? never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit, thou art essentially made without seeming so.
And thou a natural coward without instinct.
I deny your Mayor, if you will deny the Sheriff so, if not, let him enter. If I become not a Cart as well as another man a plague on my bringing up, I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.
Go hide thee behind the Arras, the rest walk up above, now my masters for a true face, and good conscience.
Both which I have had, but their date is out, and therefore i'll hide me.
Call in the Sheriff.
Now master Sheriff, what is your will with me?
First pardon me my Lord. A hue and cry hath followed certain men unto this house.
What men?
One of them is well known my gracious Lord, a gross fat man.
As fat as butter.
The man I do assure you is not here,
For I myself at this time have employed him.
And Sheriff, I will engage my word to thee,
That I will by to morrow dinner time
Send him to answer thee or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal,
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
I will my Lord: there are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost 300. marks.
It may be so: if he have robbed these men
He shall be answerable and so far well.
God night my noble Lord.
I think it is god morrow is it not?
Indeed my Lord I think it be two a clock.
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's: go call him forth.
Falstalffe: fast asleep behind the Arras, and snorting like a horse.
Hark how hard he fetches breath, search his pockets.
What hast thou found?
Nothing but papers my Lord.
Let's see what they be, read them. Item a capon. 2. s, two, d. Item sauce. iiij, d. Item sack two gallons. v. s, viii, d. Item anchaves and sack after supper. 2, s, uj, d. Item bread. ob.
O monstrous! but one half pennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack? what there is else keep close, we'll read it at more advantage; there let him sleep till day, i'll to the court in the morning. We must all to the wars, and thy place shall be honourable. I'll procure this fat rogue a charge of foot, and I know his death will be a march of twelve score, the money shall be paid back again with advantage; be with me betimes in the morning, and so good morrow Peto.
Good morrow good my Lord.
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower will you sit down? and Uncle Worcester; a plague upon it I have forgot the map.
No here it is; sit Cousin Percy, sit good Cousin Hotspur, for by that name as oft as Lancaster doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale, and with a rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
And you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
I cannot blame him; at my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes
Of burning cressets, and at my birth
The frame and huge foundation of the earth
Shaked like a coward.
Why so it would have done at the same season if your mother's cat had but kittened, though yourself had never been borne.
I say the earth did shake when I was borne.
And I say the earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble,
Oh than the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity,
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth,
In strange eruptions, oft the teeming earth
Is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed,
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within herwombe, which for enlargement striving
Shakes the old Beldame earth, and topples down
Steeples and mossegrown towers. At your birth
Our Grandam earth, having this distemperature
n passion shooke.
Cousin of many men
I do not bear these cross, give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men:
Where is he living clipped in with the sea,
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son?
Can trace me in the tedious ways of Art,
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh:
I'll to dinner.
Peace cousin Percy, you will make him mad.
I can call spirits from the honestly deep.
Why so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them
Why I can teach you cousin to command the Devil.
And I can teach thee coz to shame the devil,
By telling truth. Tell truth and shame the devil:
If thou have power to raise him bring him hither,
And i'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence:
Oh while you live tel truth and shame the devil.
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bullenbrooke made head
Against my power, thrice from the banks of Wye,
And sandy bottomd Severne have I sent him
Bootless home, and weather beaten back.
Home without boots, and in foul weather too,
How escapes she agues in the devils name?
Come here is the map, shall we divide our right?
According to our three fold order ta'en.
The Archdeacon hath divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England from Trent, and Severne hitherto,
By South and East is to my part assigned:
All westward, Wales beyond the Severne shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound
To Owen Glendower: and dear cousin to you
The remnant Northward lying off from Trent,
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
Which being sealed interchangeably,
(A business that this night may execute:)
To morrow cousin Percy you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days,
Within that space you may have drawn together
Your tenants, friends, and neighbouring gentlemen.
A shorter time shall send me to you Lords,
And in my conduct shall your Ladies come,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed,
Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Me thinks my moiety North from Burton here,
In quantity equal not one of yours,
See how this river comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my land,
A huge half moon, a monstrous scantle out,
I'll have the currant in this place damned up,
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel fair and evenly,
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Not wind it shall, it must, you see it doth.
Yea, but mark how he bears his course, and runs me up with like advantage on the other side, gelding the opposed continent as much as on the other side it takes from you.
Yea but a little charge will trench him here,
And on this Northside win this cape of land,
And then he runs strait and even.
I'll have it so a little charge will do it.
I'll not have it altered.
Will not you?
No nor you shall not.
Who shall say me nay?
Why that will I
Let me not understand you then, speak it in Welsh.
I can speak English Lord as well as you,
For I was trained up in the English court,
Where being but young I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well,
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament,
A virtue that was never seen in you.
Marry and I am glad of it with all my heart,
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew,
Then one of these same mitre ballet mongers,
I had rather hear a brazen can stick turned,
Or a dry wheel grate on the exle tree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge.
Nothing so much as mincing poetry,
'tis like the forced gate of a shuffling nag.
Come, you shall have Trent turned.
I do not care, i'll give thrice so much land
To any well deserving friend:
But in the way of bargain mark ye me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair,
Are the Indentures drawn, shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair, you may away by night
I'll haste the writer, and withal
Break with your, wives of your departure hence,
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.
Fie cousin Percy, how you cross my father.
I cannot choose, sometime he anger's me
With telling me of the Mould warp and the Ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a Dragon and a finles fish,
A clipwingd Griffin and a molten raven,
A couching Leon and a ramping Cat,
And such a deal of skimble scamble stuff,
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what,
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils names
That were his lackeys, I cried hum, and well go to,
But marked him not a word O he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife,
Worse than a smoky house. I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a Windmill far,
Then feed on cates and have him talk to me,
In any summer house in Christendom.
In faith he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read and profited
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion,
And wondrous affable; and as bountiful
As mines of India; shall I tell you cousin,
He holds your temper in a high respect
And curbs himself even of his natural scope,
When you come cross his humour, faith he does,
I warrant you that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done,
Without the taste of danger and reproof,
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith my Lord you are too wilful blame,
And since your coming hither have done enough
To put him quite besides his patience,
You must needs learn Lord to amend this fault,
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,
And that's the dearest grace it renders you,
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain,
The least of which haunting a noble man,
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts beside,
Beguiling them of commendation.
Well I am schooled good manners be your speed,
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
This is the deadly spite that anger's me,
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps, she'll not part with you,
she'll be a soldier to, she'll to the wars.
Good father tell her, that she and my Aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
She is desperate here,
A peevish self wild harlotry, one that no persuasion can do good upon.
I understand thy looks, that pretty Welsh,
Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens,
I am too perfect in, and but for shame
In such a parley should I answer thee.
I understand thy kisses, and thou mine,
And that's a feeling disputation,
But I will never be a truant love,
Till I have learned thy language, for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned,
Sung by a fair Queen in a summer's bower,
With ravishing division to her Lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
O I am ignorance itself in this.
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down,
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you,
And on your eyelids crown the God of sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference twixt wake and sleep,
As is the difference betwixt day and night,
The hour before the heavenly harnessed team
Gins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart i'll sit and hear her sing,
By that time will our book I think be drawn.
Do so, & those musicians that shall play to you,
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
And strait they shallbe here, sit and attend.
Come Kate, thou art perfect in lying down,
Come quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.
Go ye giddy goose.
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous,
b'yr lady he is a good musician.
Then should you be nothing but musical,
For you are altogether governed by humours,
Lie still ye thief, and hear the Lady sing in Welsh.
I had rather hear lady my brach howl in Irish.
Wouldst thou have thy head broken?
No.
Then be still.
Neither, 'tis a woman's fault.
Now God help thee.
To the Welsh Ladies bed.
What's that?
Peace, she sings.
Come Kate, i'll have your song too.
Not mine in good sooth.
Not yours in good sooth. heart, you swear like a comfit-makers wife, not you in good sooth, and as true as I live, and as
God shall mend me, and as sure as day:
And givest such sarsenet surety for thy oaths,
As if thou never walkest further than Finsbury.
Swear me Kate like a lady as thou art,
A good mouthfilling oath, and leave in sooth,
And such protest of pepper ginger bread
To velvet guards, and Sunday Citizens.
Come sing.
I will not sing.
'tis the next way to turn tailor, or be redbreast teacher, and the indentures be drawn i'll away within these two hours, and so come in when ye will.
Come come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow,
As Hot. Lord Percy is on fire to go:
By this our book is drawn, we'll but seal,
And then to horse immediately.
With all my heart.
Lords give us leave, the Prince of Wales and I,
Must have some private conference, but be near at hand,
For we shall presently have need of you.
I know not whether God will have it so
For some displeasing service I have done,
That in his secret doom out of my blood,
he'll breed revengement and a scourge for me:
But thou dost in thy passages of life,
Make me believe that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance, and the rod of heaven,
To punish my mistread. Tell me else
Can such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barten pleasures, rude society
As thou art matched withal, and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offences with as clear excuse,
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal,
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
As in reproof of many tales devised,
Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear
By smiling pickthanks, and base news mongers,
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Hath faulty wandered, and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.
God pardon thee yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors,
Thy place in counsel thou hast rudely lost
Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
And art almost an allien to the hearts
Of all the Court and princes of my blood,
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the soul of every man
Prophetically do forethink thy fall:
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common hackneid in the eyes of men,
So stolen and cheap to vulgar company.
Opinion that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputelesse banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a Comet I was wondered at
That men would tell their children this is he:
Others would say, where, which is Bullingbrooke?
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dressed myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts, and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned king.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
My presence like a robe pontifical,
Near seen but wondered at, and so my state
Seldom, but sumptuous showed like a feast,
And wan by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping king, he ambled up and down,
With shallow jesters, and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled, and soon burnt, carded his state,
Mingled his royalty with capering fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns,
And gave his countenance against his name
To laugh at gibing boys, and stand the push
Of every beardless vain comparative,
Grew a companion to the common streets,
Enfe oft himself to popularity,
That being daily swallowed by men's eyes,
They surfeited with honey, and began to loathe
The taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little, is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the Cuckoo is in Iune,
Heard, not regarded: Scene, but with such eyes
As sick and blunted with community,
Afford no extraordinary gaze.
Such as is bend on sunlike majesty,
When it shines seldom in admirring eyes,
But rather drowzd, and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face, and rendered such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorge, and full.
And in that very line Harry standest thou,
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation. Not an eye
But is a weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more,
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
I shall hereafter my thrice gracious Lord,
Be more myself.
For all the world,
As thou art to this hour was Richard then,
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was than, is Percy now,
Now by my sceptre, and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Then thou the shadow of succession.
For of no right, nor colour like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
Turns head against the lions armed jaws,
And being no more in debt to years, than thou
Leads ancient Lords, and reverend Bishops on
To bloody battles, and to bruising arms.
What never dying honour hath he got
Against renowned Dowglas? Whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions, and great name in arms,
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
And military title capital.
Through all the kingdom that acknowledge Christ,
Thrice hath this Hotspur Man in swaddling clothes,
This infant warrior in his enterprises,
Discomfited great Dowglas, ta'en him once,
Enlarged him, and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up,
And shake the peace and safety of our throne,
And what say you to this? Percy Northumberland,
The Archbishop's grace of York, Dowglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against us, and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why Harry do I tell thee of my foes,
Which art my nearest and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough through vassal fear,
Base inclination, and the start of spleen,
To fight against me under Percies pay,
To dog his heels, and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Do not think so, you shall not find it so,
And God forgive them that so much have swayed
Your majesties good thoughts away from me.
I will redeem all this on Percies head,
And in the closing of some glorious day
Be bold to tell you that I am your son,
When I will wear a garment all of blood,
And stain my favours in a bloody mask,
Which washed away shall scour my shame with it,
And that shall be the day when ere it lights,
That this same child of honour and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all praised knight,
And your unthought of Harry chance to meet,
For every honour sitting on his helm
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled. For the time will come
That I shall make this Northern youth exchange
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my Lord,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf.
And I will call him to so strict account,
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This in the name of God I promise here,
The which if he be pleased I shall perform:
I do beseech your majesty may salve
The long grown wounds of my intemperance,
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this,
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
How now good blunt thy looks are full of speed.
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word,
That Dowglas and the English Rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury,
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand,
As ever offered foul play in a state.
The Earl of Westmoreland set forth to day,
With him my son Lord Iohn of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next, Harry you shall set forward,
On thursday we ourselves will march. Our meeting
Is Bridgenorth, and Harry, you shall march
Through Glocestershire, by which account
Our business valued some twelve days hence,
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet:
Our hands are full of business, let's away,
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay.
Bardoll, am I not fallen away vilely since this last action? do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why, my skin hangs about me like an old Ladies lose gown. I am withered like an old apple Iohn. Well, i'll repent and that suddenly, while I am in some liking, I shall be out of heart shortly, and then I shall have no strength to repent. And I have not forgotten what the inside of a Church is made of, I am a Pepper come, a brewer's Horse, the inside of a Church Company, villainous company, hath been the spoil of me.
Sir Iohn, you are so fretful you cannot live long.
Why, there is it; come sing me a bawdy song, make me merry. I was as virtuously given as a gentleman need to be, virtuous enough, swore little, diced not above seven times a week, went to a bawdy house not above once in a quarter of an hour, paid money that I borrowed three or four times, lived well, and in good compass, and now I live out of all order, out of all compass.
Why, you are so fat sir Iohn, that you must needs be out of all compass: out of all reasonable compass, sir Iohn.
Do thou amend thy face, and i'll amend my life: thou art our Admiral, thou bearest the lantern in the poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee: thou art the knight of the burning lamp.
Why, sir Iohn, my face does you no harm.
No i'll be sworn, I make as good use of it as many a man doth of a death's head, or a momento mori. I never see thy face, but I think upon hell fire, and Dives that lived in Purple: for there he is in his robes burning burning. If thou wert any way given to virtue, I would swear by thy face: my oath should be by this fire that God's Angel. But thou art altogether given over: and went indeed but for the light in thy face, the son of utter darkness. When thou ranst up Gadshill in the night to catch my horse, if I did not think thou hadst been an ignis fatuus, or a ball of wildfire, there's no purchase in money. O thou art a perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire light, thou hast saved me a thousand Marks in Links, and Torches, walking with thee in the night betwixt taveme and tauerne; but the sack that thou hast drunk me, would have bought me lights as good cheap, at the dearest Chandler's in Europe. I have maintained that Salamader of yours with fire any time this two and thirty years, God reward me for it.
'Zblood, I would my face were in your belly.
God a mercy, so should I be sure to be hartburnt. How now dame Partlet the hen, have you enquired yet who picked my pocket?
Why sir Iohn, what do you think sir Iohn, do you think I keep thieves in my house, I have searched, I have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy by boy, servant by servant, the tied of a hair, was never lost in my house before.
Ye lie Hostess, Bardoll was shaved, and lost many a hair, and i'll be sworn my pocket was picked: go to, you are a woman, go.
Who I No, I defy thee: God's light I was never called so in mine own house before.
Go to. I know you well enough.
No, sir Iohn you do not know me, sir Iohn, I know you sir Iohn, you own me money sir Iohn, and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it, I bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.
Doulas, filthy Doulas. I have given them away to Baker's wives, they have made boulters of them.
Now as I am a true woman, holland of viii s. an ell, you own money here, besides sir Iohn, for your diet, and by drink, and money lent you xxiiii. pound.
He had his part of it, let him pay.
He, alas he is poor, he hath nothing.
How? poor? look upon his face. What call you rich? let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks, i'll not pay a denier: what will you make a younker of me? shall I not take mine ease in mine Inn, but I shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a seal ring of my grandfathers worth forty mark.
O Iesu, I have heard the Prince tell him I know not how oft, that that ring was copper.
How? the prince is a jack, a sneakeup, 'Zblood and he were here, I would cudgel him like a dog if he would say so.
How now lad, is the wind in that door i'faith, must we all march?
Yea, two, and two, Newgate fashion.
My Lord, I pray you hear me.
What sayst thou mistress quickly, how doth thy husband? I love him well, he is an honest man.
Good my Lord hear me?
Prithee let her alone, and list to me.
What sayst thou jack.
The other night I fell a sleep here, behind the Arras, and had my pocket picked, this house is turned bawdy house, they pick pockets.
What didst thou lose jack?
Wilt thou believe me Hall, three or four bonds of forty pound a piece, and a seal ring of my grandfathers.
A trifle, some eight penny matter.
So I told him my Lord, and I said I heard your grace say so: & my lord he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul mouthed man as he is, and said he would cudgel you.
What he did not?
There's neither faith, truth, not womanhood in me else.
There's no more faith in thee then in a stewed prune, nor no more truth in thee then in a drawn fox, and for womandood maid marion may be the deputies wife of the ward to thee. Go you thing, go.
Say what thing, what thing?
What thing? why a thing to thank God on.
I am nothing to thank God on, I would thou shouldst know it, I am an honest man's wife, and setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to call me so.
Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say otherwise.
Say, what beast, thou knave thou?
What beast? why an Otter.
An Otter sir Iohn, why an Otter?
Why? she's neither fish nor flesh, a man knows not where to have her.
Thou art an unjust man in saying so, thou or any man knows where to have me, thou knave thou.
Thou sayst true hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.
So he doth you my Lord, and said this other day you ought him a thousand pound.
Sirrah, do I own you a thousand pound?
A thousand pound Hall? a million, thy love is worth a million, thou owest me thy love.
Nay my Lord, he called you jack, and said he would cudgel you.
Did I Bardol?
Indeed sir Iohn you said so.
Yea, if he said my ring was copper.
I say 'tis copper, darest thou be as good as thy word now?
Why Hall? Thou knowest as thou art but man I dare, but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I fear the roaring of the lions whelp.
And why not as the Lion?
The king himself is to be feared as the Lion, dost thou think i'll fear thee as I fear thy father? nay and I do, I pray God my girdle break.
O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees? but sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, nor honesty, in this bosom of thine. It is all filled up with guts▪ and midriff. Charge an honest woman with picking thy pocket, why thou whoreson impudent embossed rascal, if there were any thing in thy pocket but tavern reckonings, memorandums of bawdy houses, and one poor pennyworth of sugar-candy to make thee long wound, if thy pocket were enriched with any other injuries but these; I am a villain, and yet you will stand to it, you will not pocket up wrong, art thou not ashamed?
Dost thou hear Hall, thou knowest in the state of innocency Adam fell, & what should poor jack Falstalfe do in the days of villainy? thou seest I have more flesh than another man, & therefore more frailty. You confess then you picked my pocket.
It appears so by the story.
Hostess, I forgive thee, go make ready breakfast, love thy husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy guess, thou shalt find me tractable to any honest reason, thou seest I am pacified still, nay prithee be gone. Now Hal, to the news at court for the robbery lad, how is that answered?
O my sweet beoffe, I must still be good angel to thee, the money is paid back again.
O I do not like that paying back, 'tis a double labour.
I am good friends with my father and may do any thing
Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou dost, and do it with unwashed hands too.
Do my Lord.
I have procured thee Iacke a charge of foot.
I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find one that can steal well. O for a fine thief of the age of xxii. or thereabouts: I am heinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked for these rebels, they offend none but the virtuous; I laud them, I praise them.
Bardoll.
My Lord.
Go bear this letter to Lord Iohn of Lancaster,
To my brother Iohn, this to my lord of Westmoreland.
Go Peto to horse, to horse, for thou and I
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time,
Iacke, meet me to morrow in the temple haule
At two of clock in the afternoon,
There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive
Money and order for their furniture,
The land is burning, Percy stands on high,
And either we or they must lower lie.
Rare words, brave world hostess, my breakfast come,
Oh I could wish this tavern were my drum.
Well said my noble Scot, if speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
As not a soldier of this seasons stamp,
Should go so general currant through the world
By God, I cannot flatter, I do defy
The tongues of soothers, but a braver place
In my heart's love hath no man then yourself,
Nay task me to my word, approve me Lord.
Thou art the King of honour,
No man so potent breaths upon the ground,
But I will beard him.
Do so, and 'tis well. What letters hast thou there?
I can but thank you.
These letters come from your father.
Letters from him, why comes he not himself?
He cannot come my lord, he is grievous sick.
Zounds, how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a justling time, who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?
His letters bears his mind, not I my mind.
I prithee tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He did my Lord, four days ere I set forth,
And at the time of my departure thence,
He was much feared by his Physicians.
I would the state of time had first been whole,
Ear he by sickness had been visited,
His health was never better worth than now.
Sick now, droop now, this sickness doth infect
The very life blood of our enterprise,
'tis catching hither even to our camp,
He writes me here that inward sickness,
And that his friends by deputation
Can not so soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed but on his own,
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement,
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how fortune is disposed to us,
For as he writes there is no quailing now,
Because the king is certainly possessed
Of all our purposes, what say you to it?
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopped off,
And yet in faith it is not, his present want
Seems more than we shall find it: were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? to set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.
Faith, and so we should,
Where now remains a sweet reversion,
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what 'tis to come in,
A comfort of retirement lives in this.
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto
If that the Devil and mischance look big
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
But yet I would your father had been here:
The quality and hair of our attempt
Brooks no division, it will be thought
By some that know not why he is away,
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceed kept the Earl from hence,
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction,
And breed a kind of question in our cause :
For well you know we of the offering side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement,
And stop all sight-holes every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us,
This absence of your fathers draws a curtain
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
Before not dreamt of.
You strain too far.
I rather of his absence make this use,
It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
A larger dare to our great enterprise
Then if the Earl were here, for men must think
If we without his help can make a head
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall oreturne it topsy-turvy down,
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.
As heart can think, there is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear,
My cousin Vernon, welcome by my soul.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome lord,
The Earl of Westmoreland seven thousand strong
Is marching hitherwards, with him prince Iohn.
No harm, what more?
And further I have learned,
The King himself in person is set forth,
Or hitherwards intended speedily
With strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too: where is his son?
The nimble footed madcap prince of Wales,
And his comrades that daft the world aside
And bid it pass?
All furnished all in Arms:
All plumde like Ostriches that with the wind
Baited like Eagles having lately bathed,
Glittering in golden coats like images,
As full of spirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the sun at Midsummer:
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls,
I saw young Harry with his beaver on,
His cushes on his thighs gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
As if an Angel drop down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more, worse than the sun in March,
This praise doth nourish agues, let them come,
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyd maid of smoky war,
All hot and bleeding will we offer them,
The mailed Mars shall on his altars sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh,
And yet not ours: Come let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt,
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales,
Harry to Harry shall hot horse to horse,
Meet and near part till one drop down a coarse,
Oh that Glendower were come.
There is more news,
I learned in Worcester as I road along,
He can draw his power this fourteen days.
That's the worst tidings that I hear of it.
I by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the kings whole battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.
Forty let it be,
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day,
Come let us take a muster speedily,
dooms day is near, die all, die merely.
Talk not of dying, I am out of fear
Of death or death's hand for this one half year.
Bardol get thee before to Coventry, fill me a bottle of Sack, our soldiers shall march through. we'll to Sutton cophill to night.
Will you give me money captain?
Lay out, lay out.
This bottle makes an angel.
And if it do, take it for thy labour, and if it make twenty take them all, i'll answer the coinage, bid my Lieutenant Peto meet me at towns end▪
I will captain, farewell.
If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a souct gurnet, I have misused the kings press damnably. I have got in exchange of 150. soldiers 300. and odd pounds. I press me none but good householders, Yeoman's sons, inquire me out contracted bachelors, such as had been asked twice on the banes, such a commodity of warm slaves, as bad as lief hear the Devil as a drum, such as fear the report of a Caliver, worse than a struck foul, or a hurt wild duck: I priest me none but such toasts and butter with hearts in their bellies no bigger than pins heads, and they have bought out their services, and now my whole charge consists of Ancients, Corporals, Lieutenants, gentlemen of companies: slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his sores, and such as indeed were never soldiers, but discarded, unjust servingmen, younger sons to younger brothers, revolted tapsters, and Ostlers, tradefalne, the cankers of a calm world, and a long peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged than an old fazd ancient, and such have I to fill up the rooms of them as have bought out their services, that you would think that I had a hundred and fifty tottered prodigals, lately come from swine keeping, from eating draff and husks. A mad fellow met me on the way, and told me I had unloaded all the Gibbets, and priest the dead bodies. No eye hath seen such skarcrowes. I'll not march through Coventry with them, that's flat: nay, and the villains march wide betwixt the legs as if they had gives on, for indeed I had the most of them out of prison, there's not a shirt and a half in all my company, and the half shirt is two napkins tacked together, and thrown over the shoulders like a Herald's coat without sleeves, and the shirt to say the truth stolen from my host at S. Alban's, or the red-nose Innkeeper of Davintry, but that's all one, they'll find linen enough on every hedge.
How now blown rack? how now quilt?
What Hal, how now mad wag? what a devil dost thou in Warwickshire? My good Lo. of Westmoreland, I cry you mercy, I thought your honour had already been at shrewesburie.
Faith sir Iohn 'tis more than time that I were there, and you too, but my powers are there already, the king I can tell you looks for us all, we must away all night.
Tut never fear me, I am as vigilant as a Cat to steal Cream.
I think to steal Cream indeed, for thy theft hath already made thee butter, but tell me jack, whose fellows are these that come after?
Mine Hall, mine.
I did never see such pitiful rascals.
Tut, tut, good inongh to toss, food for powder, food for powder, they'll fill a pit as well as better; rush man, mortal men, mortal men.
I but sir Iohn, me thinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too beggarly.
Faith for their poverty I know not where they had that, and for their bareness I am sure they never learned that of me.
No i'll be sworn, unless you call three fingers in the ribs bare, but sirrah make haste, Percy is already in the field.
What is the king encamped?
He is sir Iohn, I fear we shall stay too long.
Well, to the latter end of a fray, and the beginning of a feast fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
we'll fight with him to night.
It may not be.
You give him then advantage.
Not a whit.
Why say you so, looks he not for supply?
So do we.
His is certain, ours is doubtful.
Good cousin be advisd, stir not to night.
Do not my Lord.
You do not counsel well,
You speak it out of fear, and cold heart.
Do me no slander Douglas, by my life,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
If well respected honour bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear,
As you my Lord, or any Scot that this day lives,
Let it be seen to morrow in the battle which of us fears:
Yea or to night.
Content.
To night say I.
Come, come, it may not be.
I wonder much being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition, certain horse
Of my cousin Vernons are not yet come up,
Your Uncle Worcester's horses came but to day,
And now their pride and metal is a sleep,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
That not a horse is half the half of himself.
So are the horses of the enemy
In general journey bated and brought low,
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the King exceedeth our,
For God's sake cousin stay till all come in.
I come with gracious offers from the king,
If you vouchsafe me hearing, and respect.
Welcome sir Walter Blunt: and would to God
You were of our determination,
Some of us love you well, and even those some
Envy your great deservings and good name,
Because you are not of our quality,
But stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so,
So long as out of limit and true rule
You stand against anointed Majesty.
But to my charge. The king hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility: teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the king
Have any way your good deserts forgot
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed,
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself, and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.
The king is kind, and well we know the king
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay:
My father, and my uncle and myself,
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the world's regard: wretched and low
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore:
And when he heard him swear and vow to God,
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his livery, and beg his peace
With tears of innocency, and terms of zeal,
My father in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performed it too.
Now when the Lords and Barons of the realm,
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
Met him in Borroughs, Cities, Villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffered him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs, as Pages followed him,
Even at the heels, in golden multitudes,
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father while his blood was poor
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh,
And now forsooth takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts, and some straight decrees,
That lie too heavy on the Commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his Country wrongs, and by this face
This seeming brow of justice did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for:
Proceeded further, cut me off the heads
Of all the favourits that the absent king
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was personal in the Irish war.
Tut, I came not to hear this.
Then to the point.
In short time after he deposed the king,
Soon after that deprived him of his life,
And in the neck of that tasked the whole state,
To make that worse, suffered his kinsman March
(Who is if every owner were well placed
Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited,
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated mine uncle from the counsel board,
In rage dismisd my father from the Court,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety, and withal to pry
Into his title, the which we find
Too indirect for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the king?
Not so sit Walter. we'll withdraw a while.
Go to the king, and let there be impawnde
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall mine uncle
Bring him our purposes, and so farewell.
I would you would accept of grace and love.
And may be so we shall.
Pray God you do.
High good sir Mighell, bear this sealed brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshall,
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do import you would make haft.
My good Lord I guess their tenor.
Like enough you do.
To morrow good sir Mighell is a day,
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch. For sir at Shrewsbury
As I am truly given to understand,
The king with mighty and quick raised power
Meets with Lord Harry And I fear sir Mighell
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendowers absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too.
And comes not in overrulde by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the king.
Why my good Lord, you need not fear,
There is Douglas, and Lord Mortimer.
No, Mortimer is not there.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy.
And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
And so there is: but yet the king hath drawn
The special head of all the land together,
The Prince of Wales, Lord Iohn of Lancaster,
The noble Westmoreland, and warlike Blunt,
And many more corivals and dear men
Of estimation and command in arms.
Doubt not my Lo: they shallbe well opposed.
I hope no less; yet needful 'tis to fear,
And to prevent the worst, sir Mighell speed:
For if Lord Percy thrive not ere the king
Dismiss his power, he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him,
Therefore make haste, I must go writ again
To other friends and so farewell sir Mighel.
How bloodily the sun begins to pear
Above yon bulky hill, the day looks pale
At his distemperature.
The Southern wind
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
Foretells a tempest and a blustering day.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now my Lord of Worcester, 'tis not well,
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doff our easy robes of peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel,
This is not well my Lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all abhorred war?
And move in that obedient orb again,
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhalde meteor,
A prodigy of fear, and a portent
Of broached mischief to the unborn times.
Hear me my liege:
For mine own part I could be well content,
To entertain the lag end of my life
With quiet hours. For I protest
I have not sought the day of this dislike.
You have not sought it, how comes it then?
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
Peace chewet, peace.
It pleased your majesty to turn your looks
Of favour from myself, and all our house,
And yet I must remember you my Lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends,
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard's time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place, and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother and his son,
That brought you home and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swore that oath at Dancaster,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
Nor claim no further than your new fallen right,
The seat of Gaunt, Dukedom of Lancaster:
To this we swore our aid: but in short space
It rained down fortune showering on your head,
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent king,
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the king
So long in his unlucky Irish wars,
That all in England did repute him dead:
And from this swarm of fair advantages,
You took occasion to be quickly wooed
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your oath to us at Dancaster,
And being fed by us, you used us so
As that ungentle gull the Cuckoos bird
Useth the sparrow, did oppress our nest,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk,
That even our love durst not come near your sight,
For fear of swallowing: but with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety sake to fly
Out of your sight, and raise this present head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means,
As you yourself have forged against yourself
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth,
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulate,
Proclaimed at market Crosses, read in Churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With some fine colour that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
Of hurly burly innouation,
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water colours to impaint his cause
Nor moody beggars starving for a time,
Of pell-mell havoc and confusion.
In both your armies there is many a soul,
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter
If once they join in trial, tell your nephew
The prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy, by my hopes
This present enterprise set of his head,
I do not think a braver Gentleman,
More active, valiant, or more valiant young,
More daring, or more bold is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds,
For my part I may speak it to my shame,
I have a truant been to Chivalry,
And so I hear he doth account me too;
Yet this before my father's majesty,
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will to save the blood on either side
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
And prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit, considerations infinite
Do make against it: no good Worcester no,
We love our people well, even those we love
That are misled upon your coosens part,
And will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he, and they, and you, yea every man
Shall be my friend again, and i'll be his,
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction weight on us,
And they shall do their office. So be gone:
We will not now be troubled with reply,
We offer fair, take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted on my life,
The Dowglas and the Hotspur both together,
Are confident against the world in arms.
Hence therefore, every leader to his charge,
For on their answer will we set on them,
And God befriend us as our cause is just.
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle
And bestride me, so, 'tis a point of friendship.
Nothing but a Colossus can do thee that friendship,
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
I would ttwere bed time Hal, and all well.
Why, thou owest God a death.
'tis not due yet, I would be loath to pay him before his day, what need I be so forward with him that calls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter, honour pricks me on yea, but how if honour prick me off when I come on? how then can honour set to a leg? no, or an arm? no, or take away the grief of a wound? no, honour hath no skill in surgery then? no, what is honour? a word, what is in that word honour? what is that honour? air, a trim reckoning. Who hath it? he that died a Wednesday, doth he feel it? no, doth he hear it? no, 'tis insensible them? yea, to the dead, but will not live with the living; no, why? detraction will not suffer it, therefore i'll none of it, honour is a mere skutchion, and so ends my Catechism.
O no, my nephew must not know sir Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the king.
TTwere best he did.
Then are we all under one.
It is not possible, it cannot be
The king should keep his word in loving us,
He will suspect us still, and find a time
To punish this offence in other faults,
Supposition all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes,
For treason is but trusted like the Fox,
Who never so tame, so cherished and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors,
Look how we can, or sad or merely,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
The better cherished still the nearer death,
My nephews trespass may be well forgot,
It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
And an adopted name of privilege,
A hair-braind Hotspur governed by a spleen,
All his offences live upon my head
And of his fathers. We did train him on,
And his corruption being ta'en from us,
We as the spring of all shall pay for all:
Therefore good cousin, let not Harry know
In any case the offer of the King.
Deliver what you will, i'll say 'tis so. Here comes your cousin.
My uncle is returned,
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland,
Uncle, what news?
The king will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
Lord Douglas go you and tell him so.
Marry and shall, and very willingly.
There is no seeming mercy in the king.
Did you beg any? God forbidden.
I told him gently of our grievances,
Of his oath breaking, which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn,
He calls us rebels traitors, and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Arm gentlemen, to arms, for I have thrown
A brave defiance in king Henry's teeth,
And Westmorland that was engaged did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the king,
And nephew, challenged you to single fight.
O would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath to day
But I and Harry Monmouth; tell me tell me,
How showed his tasking? seemed it in contempt?
No, by my soul I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare,
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man,
Trimmed up your praises with a Princely tongue,
Spoke your deservings like a Chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise,
By still dispraising praise valued with you,
And which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing citall of himself,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he mastered there a double spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly,
There did he pause, but let me tell the world
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Coosen I think thou art enamoured
On his follies, never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a liberty,
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldiers arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy,
Arm, arm with speed, and fellows, soldiers, friends,
Better consider what you have to do
Then I that have not well the gift of tongue
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.
My Lord, here are letters for you.
I cannot read them now,
O Gentlemen the time of life is short,
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dials point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour,
And if we live we live to tread on kings,
If die, brave death when princes die with us,
Now for our consciences, the arms are fair
When the intent of bearing them is just.
My Lord prepare, the king comes on a pace.
I thank him that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking only this,
Let each man do his best, and here draw I a sword,
Whose temper I intent to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal.
In the adventure of this perilous day,
Now esperance Percy and set on,
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
And by that Music let us all embrace▪
For heaven to earth some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.
What is thy name that in battle thus thou crossest me,
What honour dost thou seek upon my head?
Know then my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
They tell thee true.
The Lord of Stafford dear to day hath bought
Thy likeness, for in steed of thee king Harry
This sword hath ended him, so shall it thee
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
I was not borne a yeelder thou proud Scot,
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
Lord Staffords death.
O Douglas hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus
I never had triumphed upon a Scot
all's done, als won here, breathless lies the king.
Where?
Here.
This Douglas? no, I know this face full well,
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the king himself.
Ah fool, go with thy soul whither it goes,
A borrowed title hast thou bought too dear.
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
The king hath many marching in his coats.
Now by my sword I will kill all his coats.
I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece
Until I meet the king.
Up and away,
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
Though I could scape shot-free at London, I fear the shot here, here's no skoring but upon the pate. Soft, who are you? sir Walter Blunt, there's honour for you, here's no vanity, I am as hot as molten lead, & as heavy too: God keep lead out of me, I need no more weight than mine own bowels. I have led my rag of Muffins where they are peppered, there's not three of my 150. left alive, and they are for the towns end, to beg during life: but who comes here?
What, stands thou idle here? lend me thy sword,
Many a noble man lies stark and stiff,
Under the hooves of vaunting enemies,
whose deaths are yet unrevengd, I prithee lend me thy sword.
O Hal, I prithee give me leave to breathe a while, Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I have done this day, I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.
He is indeed, and living to kill thee:
I prithee lend me thy sword.
Nay before God Hal, if Percy be alive thou gets not my
sword, but take my pistol if thou wilt.
Give it me, what? is it in the case?
I Hal, 'tis hot, 'tis hot, there's that will sack a City.
What is it a time to jest and dally now?
Well if Percy be alive, i'll pierce him; if he do come in my way so, if he do not, if I come in his willingly, let him make a Carbonado of me. I like not such grinning honour as sir Walter hath▪ give me life, which if I can save, so: if not, honour comes unlooked for, and there's an end.
I prithee Harry withdraw thyself, thou bleedest too much,
Lord Iohn of Lancaster go you with him.
Not I my Lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beseech your majesty make up,
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
I will do so. My Lord of Westmoreland lead him to his tent.
Come my Lord, i'll lead you to your tent.
Led me my Lord? I do not need your help,
And God forbidden a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stained nobility lies trodden on,
And rebels arms triumph in massacres.
We breathe too long, come cousin Westmoreland
Our duty this way lies: For God's sake come.
By God thou hast deceived me Lancaster,
I did not think thee Lord of such a spirit,
Before I loved thee as a brother Iohn,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point,
With lustier maintenance than I did look for
Of such an ungrown warrior.
O this boy lends metal to us all.
Another king they grow like Hydra's heads,
I am the Douglas fatal to all those
That wear those colours on them. What art thou
That counterfetst the person of a King?
The king himself, who Douglas grieves at heart,
So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very king, I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field,
But seeing thou fallst on me so luckily
I will assay thee and defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit,
And yet in faith thou bearest thee like a king,
But mine I am sure thou art who ere thou be,
And thus I win thee.
Hold up thy head vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again, the spirits
Of Valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms,
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
Cheerly my Lord, how fares your grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for secure sent,
And so hath Clifton, i'll to Clifton strait.
Stay and breathe a while,
Thou hast redeemed thy lost opinion,
And showed thou mak'st some tender of my life,
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O God they did me too much injury,
That ever said I hearkened for your death,
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world,
And saved the treacherous labour of your son.
Make up to Clifton, i'll to S. Nicholas Gawsey.
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth:
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.
My name is Harry Percy.
Why then I see a very valiant rebel of the name;
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not Percy
To share with me in glory any more:
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
Now shall it Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us, and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine.
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,
And all the budding honours on thy crest
I'll crop to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
Well said Hall, to it Hall. Nay you shall find no boys play here I can tell you.
Oh Harry thou hast robbed me of my youth,
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Then those proud titles thou hast won of me,
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh,
But thoughts the slaves of life, and life times fool,
And time that takes suruey of all the world
Must have a stop. O I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue: no Percy thou art dust
And food for.
For worms, brave Percy. Far thee well great heart
Ill woven ambition, how much art thou shrunk,
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound,
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough, this earth that bears the dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman,
If thou wert sensible of courtesy
I should not make so dear a show of zeal,
But let my favours hide thy mangled face,
And even in thy behalf i'll thank myself,
For doing these fair rights of tenderness,
Adieu and take thy praise with thee to heaven,
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remembered in thy Epitaph.
What old acquaintance, could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? poor Iacke farewell,
I could have better spared a better man:
O I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with vanity:
Death hath not struck so fat a Deer to day,
Though many dearer in this bloody fray,
Inboweld will I see thee by and by,
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
Inboweld, if thou inbowel me to day, i'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too to morrow. 'Zblood ttwas time to counterfeit, or that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit, to die is to be a counterfeit, for he is but the counterfeit of a man, who hath not the life of a man: but to counterfeit dying when a man thereby liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true & perfect image of life indeed. The better part of valour is discretion, in the which better part I have saved my life. Zounds I am afraid of this gunpowder Percy, though he be dead, how if he should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith I am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit, therefore i'll make him sure, yea, and i'll swear I killed him. Why may not he rise aswell as I? nothing confutes me but eyes, and no body sees me: therefore sirrah, with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.
Come brother Iohn, full bravely hast thou fleshed
Thy maiden sword.
But soft, whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I did, I saw him dead,
Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art thou alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee speak, we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears, thou art not what thou seemest.
No that's certain, I am not a double man: but if I be not Iacke Falstalffe, then am I a Iacke: there is Percy, if your father will do me any honour, so: if not, let him kill the next Percy himself: I look to be either Earl or Duke, I can assure you.
Why Percy, I killed myself, and saw thee dead.
Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to lying, I grant you I was down, and out of breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant, and fought a long hour by Shrewesburie clock, if I may be beleeude so: if not, let them that should reward valour, bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll take it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the thigh, if the man were alive, and would deny it, zounds I would make him eat a piece of my sword.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother Iohn,
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
The Trumpet sounds retreat, the day is our,
Come brother let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
I'll follow as they say for reward. He that rewards me God reward him. If I do grow great, i'll grow less, for i'll purge and leave Sack, and live cleanly as a noble man should do.
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke,
Ill spirited Worcester, did not we send grace,
Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust.
Three knights upon our party slain to day,
A noble Earl and many a creature else,
Had been alive this hour,
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
What I have done my safety urged me to▪
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too:
Other Offenders we will pause upon.
How goes the field?
The noble Scot Lord Dowglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The noble Percy slain and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised,
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is: and I beseech your grace
I may dispose of him.
With all my heart▪
Then brother Iohn of Lancaster,
To you this honourable bounty shall belong,
Go to the Douglas and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free,
His valours shown upon our Crests to day
Have taught us how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains that we, divide our power,
You son Iohn, and my cousin Westmoreland
Towards York shall bend, you with your dearest speed
To meet Northumberland and the Prelate Scroop,
Who as we hear are busily in arms:
Myself and you son Hatry will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March,
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day,
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.