Leave me a while my Lords and wait for me,
At the black fountain, by Osiris' grove,
I'll walk alone to holy Irus' cave,
Talking a little while with him and then return.
Ianthe begone.
Now Irus Let thy minds eternal eye,
Extend the virtue of it past the Sun.
Ah my Cleanthes where art thou become,
But since I saved thy guiltless life from death,
And turned it only into banishment,
Forgive me love, me pity comfort me.
Master.
Pego.
Wipe your eyes and you had them.
Why Pego.
The Queen is here to see your blindness.
Her Majesty is well come, Heavens preserve,
And send her highness an immortal rain.
Thanks reverent Irus for thy gentle prayer,
Dismiss thy man a while and I will lead thee,
For I have weighty secrets to impart.
Would I were blind that she might lead me.
Irus thy skill to tell the drifts of fate,
Our fortunes and things hid from sensual eyes,
Hath sent me to thee for advertisement.
Where Duke Cleanthes lives that was exiled,
This kingdom for attempting me with love,
And offering stain to Egypt's royal bed.
I hope your majesty will pardon me,
I Conscience make me vtter what I thinke,
Of that high love affairs twixt him and you.
I will sweet Iris being well assured,
That whatsoever thy sharp wisdoms sees,
In my sad frailty thou wilt have regard,
To my estate and name and keep it close—
Of that your highness may be well assured,
Than I am bound madam to tell you this,
That you yourself did seek Cleanthes love,
And to aspire it, made away his Duchess,
Which he well knowing and affecting her,
Dear as his life denied to satisfy,
That kindness offered twixt your self and him.
Therefore did you in rage inform the Duke,
He sought your love, and so he banished him.
too true it is grave Irus thou hast told,
But for my loves sake which not Gods can rule,
Strike me no more of that wound yet too green,
But only tell me where Cleanthes is,
That I may follow him in some disguise,
And make him recompense for all his wrong.
Cleanthes is about this City off,
With whom your majesty shall meet ere long:
And speak with him, if you will use such means,
As you may use for his discovery.
What shall I use then what is in my power,
I will not use for his discovery,
I'll bind the wings of love unto mine arms,
And like a Eagle prying for her prey,
Will overlook the earths round face for him,
Were this sufficient.
Or I will moorlike learn to swim and dive.
Into the bottom of the Sea for him.
Least being the son of Egypt and now set,
Thetis in rage with love would ravish him.
Were this sufficient.
But Madam this must be the likeliest mean
To seek him out, and have him at your will
Let his true picture through your land be sent.
Opposing great rewards to him that finds him,
And threaten death to them that succour him,
So I'll assure your grace shall meet with him ere long.
Happy and blessed be Irus for his skill
He sweetly plants in my contentious mind,
For which most reverent and religious man,
I give this jewel to thee richly worth.
A quintal or an hundred weight of gold,
Bestow it as thou list on some good work,
For well I know thou nothing dost reserve,
Of all thy riches men bestow on thee,
But wouldst thou leave this place and poor man's life,
The count of Egypt should embrace thy feet,
And Topless honours be bestowed on thee,
I thank your highness for thus raising me,
But in this barrenness I am most renowned.
For wisdom and the sight of heavenly things,
Shines not so clear as earthly vanities.
Most rich is Irus in his poverty
Oh that to find his skill my crown were lost.
None but poor Irus can of riches boast,
Now my Cleanthes I will straight advance
Thy lovely pictures on each monument
About the City and within the land.
Proposing twice five thousand Crowns to him,
That finds him to be tendered by my hands,
And a kind kiss at my imperial lips,
To him that succours him, I'll threaten death,
But he that doth not threaten him shall die,
For who is worthy, life will see him want.
To all his pictures when they be dispersed.
Will I continual pilgrimages make,
As to the saints and Idols I adore,
Where I will offer sighs, and vows, and tears.
And sacrifice a hecatomb of beast,
On several altars built where they are placed,
By them shall Isis' stature gently stand,
And I'll pretend my jealous rites to her
But my Cleanthes shall the object be,
And I will kneel and pray to none but he.
See Earth and Heaven where her Cleanthes is.
I am Cleanthes and blind Irus too,
And more than these, as you shall soon perceive,
Yet but a shepherds son at Memphis borne,
And I will tell you how I got that name,
My Father was a fortune teller and from him I learned his art,
And knowing to grow great, was to grow rich,
Such money as I got by palmistry,
I put to use and by that means became
To take the shape of Leon. by which name,
I am well known a wealthy Usurer,
And more than this I am two noble men,
Count Hermes is another of my names,
And Duke Cleanthes whom the Queen so loves,
For till the time that I may claim the crown,
I mean to spend my time in sports of love,
Which in the sequel you shall plainly see,
And joy I hope in this my policy.
Oh master here comes the three wenches now strike it dead for a fortune.
These are the nymphs of Alexandria.
So called because there beauties are so rare.
With two of them at once am I in love
Deeply and Equally the third of them,
My silly brother here as much affects,
Whom I have made the burgomaster of this rich town,
With the great wealth, I have bestowed on him,
All three are maids kept passing warily,
Yet lately being at their Father's house as I was Leon the rich usurer
I fell in love with them, and there my brother too,
This fitly chanceth that they have liberty,
To visit me alone: now will I tell their fortunes so,
As may make way to both their loves at once,
The one as I am Leon the rich usurer,
The other as I am the mad brain Count,
And do the best too, for my brother's love,
Thanks good master brother, but what are they that
Talk with them so long are they wooers trow,
I do not like it, would they would come near.
O those are three servants that attend on them,
Let them alone, let them talk a while.
Tell us Menippus, Druso, and Polydor,
Why all our parents gave you three such charge,
To wait on us and over see us still,
What do they fear, think you that we would do.
There fear is least you should accompany,
Such as love wanton talk, and dalliance,
Why what is wanton talk.
To tell you that were to offend ourselves,
And those that have forbidden you should hear it.
Why what is dalliance says my servant then,
You must not know because you must not dally.
How say you by that, well do you keep it from us, as much as you can, we'll desire it nevertheless I can tell ye,
Lord what strait keepers of poor maids are you,
You are so chaste you are the worse again:
Pray you good servants will you do us the service,
To leave us alone a while.
We are commanded not to be from you,
And therefore to lean you alone,
Were to wrong the trust your parents put in us.
I cry you mercy sir, yet do not stand all on the
Trust our parents puts in you, but put us in a little to I pray.
Trust us good servants by ourselves a while.
Let's my masters and you say the word,
They'll but to Irus for to know their fortunes,
And he's a holy man all Egypt knows.
Stay not to long, than mistress and content,
That's my good servant we will straight return.
And you mistress.
And I trusty servant.
Faith then I'll venture my charge among the rest.
A mighty venture you shall be chronicled in Abraham's asses,
Catalogue of coxcombs for your resolution.
Now the great fool take them all who could have,
Picked out three such lifeless puppies,
Never to venture on their mistresses.
One may see by them it is not meet choice men should have offices,
A pretty moral work it in the sampler of your heart,
But are we by ourselves.
I think so unless you have alone in your belly.
Not I God knows I never came where they grew yet,
Since we are alone let's talk a little merrily,
methinks I long to know what wanton talk and dalliance is
I'll lay my life 'tis that my mother uses when she and others,
Do begin to talk and that she says to me maid,
Get ye hence fall to your needle: what a maid and Idle.
A maid and Idle why maids must be Idle but not another thing.
then do not name it for I fear 'tis nought.
For yesterday I heard Menippus as he was talking,
With my mother's maid and I stood hearkening at the chamber door,
Said that, with that word a maid was got with child.
How with the very word.
I mean with that the word seems to express.
Nay if you be so fine you will not name it now,
We are all alone, you are much too nice.
Why let her choose, let us two name it,
Do then Elimine.
Nay do you Martia.
Why woman I dare.
Do then I warrant thee.
I'll warrant myself if I list, but come let it alone,
Let us to Irus for our fortunes.
God save grave Irus.
Welcome beauteous Nymphs.
How know you Irus we are beautiful and cannot see.
Homer was blind yet could he best discern,
The shapes of every thing and so may I,
Indeed we hear your skill can beautify,
Beauty itself, and teach dames how to deck,
Their heads and Body's fittest to their forms,
To their complexions and their countenances.
So can I beauteous nymphs, and make all eyes,
Sparkle with love fire from your excellence.
How think you we are tired to tempt men's looks,
Being thus nymph-like is it not too strange,
It is the better so it doth become.
But that I may disclose to you your fortunes
Tell me first Pego their true faces forms.
marry sir this that speaks to you has a face thin like unto water gruel, but yet it would do your heart good if you could see it
I know and see it better than thyself,
The blaze whereof doth turn me to a fire.
Burning mine Entrails with a strong desire.
Why turnst thou from us Irus tell my fortune.
I wonder at the glory it presents,
To my soul's health that sees upon your head,
A coronet, and at your gracious feet,
Nobles and princes in their highest state,
Which state shall crown your fortune ear you die,
And ere the heart of Heaven, the glorious sun,
Shall quench his roseate fires within the west.
You shall a husband have noble and rich.
Happy Elimine, oh that I might too.
Thanks for this news good Irus but disclose,
The means to this, if it be possible.
When you come home ascend your Father's tower
If you see a man come walking by,
And looking up to you, descend,
And Issue, for you shall have leave,
And if he woe, you choose him from the world,
Though he seem humorous and want an eye,
Wearing a velvet patch upon the same,
Choose him your husband, and be blessed in him,
I'll do as thou advisest gentle Irus,
And proving this isle love thee whilst I live.
My fortune now sweet Irus.
What face hath this Nymph Pego.
marry sir a face made in form like the ace of hearts.
And well compared for she commands all hearts,
Equal in beauty with that other Nymph,
And equally she burns my heart with love,
Say, say sweet Irus what my fortune is,
Thou turnst from me, as when thou diddest admire.
The happy fortune of Elimine.
So might I well, admiring yours no less.
Then when the light cround monarch of the hea-
Shal quench his fire within the Oceans brest (ues
Rise you and to your father's garden high,
There in an arbour doe a banquet s,
And if there come a man that of himself,
Sits down and bids you welcome to your feast,
Accept him for he is the richest man,
That Alexandria or Egypt hath,
And soon possessing him with all his wealth,
In little time you shall be rid of him,
Making your second choice 'mongst mighty kings.
Blessed be thy lips sweet Irus, and that light,
That guides thy bosom with such deep foresight,
Sleep shall not make a closet for these eyes,
All this succeeding night for haste to rise.
My fortune now sweet Irus, but I faith,
I have some wrong to be the last of all,
For I am old as they, and big enough,
To bear as great a fortune as the best of them,
What face hath this Nymph Pego.
Oh master what face hath she not, if I should beg a face I would have her face.
But is it round, and hath it near a blemish,
A mouth to wide a look too impudent.
Oh master 'tis without all these, and without all cry.
Round faces and thin skinned are happiest still.
And unto you fair Nymph.
Shall fortune be exceeding gracious too,
When the next morning therefore you shall rise,
Put in your bosom rosemary time and rue.
And presently stand at your father's door,
He that shall come offering kindness there,
And crave for favour those same wholesome herbs,
bestow them on him, and if meeting him,
He keep the nuptial Rosemary and time,
And tread the bitter rue beneath his feet,
Choose him your husband and be blessed in him.
I will sweet Irus nothing grieves me now,
But that Elimine this night shall have,
Her happy husband, and I stay till morning.
Nought grieves me Irus but that we are maids.
Kept short of all things and have nought to give thee,
But take our loves and in the wished proof,
Of these high fortunes thou foretellest us.
Nothing we have shall be to dear for thee.
we that are sisters Irus by our vow,
Will be of one self blood and thankful mind,
To adore so clear a sight in one so blind.
farewell most beauteous nymphs your loves to me.
Shall more than gold or any treasure be,
Now to my wardrobe for my velvet gown, now doth the sport begin,
Come gird this pistol closely to my side,
By which I make men fear my humour still,
And have slain two or three as 'twere my
When I have done it most advisedly (mood
To rid them as they were my heavy foes,
Now am I known to be the mad brain Count,
Whose humours twice, five summers I have held,
And said at first I came from stately Rome,
Calling myself Count Hermes and assuming
The humour of a wild and frantic man,
Careless of what I say or what I do,
And so such faults as I of purpose do,
Is buried in my humour and this gown I wear,
In rain or snow or in the hottest summer,
And never go nor ride without a gown,
which humour doth not fit my frenzy well,
But hides my person's form from being known,
When I Cleanthes am to be descried,
How now master brother.
Oh sir you are very well suited. Now M. burgomaster.
I pray you remember to seize on all Aleantisthenes his goods
His lands and cattles to my proper use,
As I am Leon the rich usurer.
The sun is down and all is forfeited.
It shallbe done my noble Count.
And withal sir I pray you forget not your love,
Tomorrow morning at her father's door.
Ah my good Count I cannot that forget,
For still to keep my memory in order,
As I am burgomaster, so love is my recorder.
Now see a morning in an evening rise.
The morning of my love and of my joy,
I will not say of beauty, that were pride,
With in this tower I would I had a torch,
To light like hero my leander heather,
Who shall be my leander let me see,
Rehearse my fortune.
When you see one clad in a velvet gown
And a black patch upon his eye,
A patch, patch that I am, why that may be a patch of cloth,
Of buckram, or a fustian cloth, say with a velvet patch,
Upon his eye & so my thoughts may patch up love the better
See where he comes, the Count, what girl a countesse,
See, see, he looks as Irus said he should go not away my love,
I'll meet thee straight.
Oh I thank you I am much beholding to you,
I saw her in the tower and now she is come down,
Luck to this patch and to this velvet gown.
How now shall I be troubled with this rude spaniard now,
One word sweet nymph.
How now sirrah what are you,
I am signior Braggadino the martial spaniardo the aid of Egypt in her present wars, but lesu what art thou that hast the guts of thy brains gripped with such famine of knowledge not to know me.
How now sir I'll try the proof of your guts with my pistol if you be so saucy sir.
Oh I know him well it is the rude Count the uncivil Count, the unstaid Count, the bloody Count, the Count of all Counts, better I were to hazard the dissolution of my brave soul against an host of grants then with this loose Count, otherwise I could tickle the Count, I faith my noble Count, I do descend to the craving of pardon, love blinded me I knew thee not.
Oh sir you are but bonaventure not right spanish I perceive but do you hear sir are you in love.
Surely the sudden glance of this lady Nymph hath suppled my spanish disposition with love that never before dreamt of a woman's concavity.
A woman's concavity, 'sblood what's that,
Her hollow disposition which you see sweet nature will supply or otherwise stop up in her with solid or firm faith.
Give me thy hand wear lovers both, shall we have her both
No good sweet Count pardon me.
Why then thus it shallbe we'll strike up a drum, set up a tent, call people together, put crowns a piece let's rifle for her.
Nor that my honest Count.
Why then thus it shallbe, we'll woo her both and him she likes best shall lead her home thorough streets holding her by both her hands, with his face towards her, the other shall follow with his back towards her biting of his thumbs, how sayest thou by this.
It is ridiculous, but I am pleased for upon my life I do know this the shame will light on the neck of the Count.
Well to it lets hear thee.
Sweet Nymph a spaniard is compared to the to the great elixir or golden medicine.
What dost thou come upon her with medicines dost thou think she is sore.
Nay by thy sweet favour do not interrupt me.
Well sir go forward.
I say a spaniard is like the philosopher's stone.
And I say another man's stone may be as good as a philosopher's at all times.
By thy sweet favour.
Well sir go on.
Sweet nymph I love few words you know my intent my humour is in sophistical & plain I am spaniard a borne, my birth speaks for my nature, my nature for your grace, and should you see a whole Battle ranged by my skill you would commit your whole self to my affection, and so sweet nymph I kiss your hand.
To see a whole battle ha ha ha what a jest is that, thou shalt see a whole battle come forth presently of me sa sa sa.
Put up thy pistol 'tis a most dangerous humour in thee.
Oh is that all why see 'tis up again, now thou shalt lee I'll come to her in thy humour, sweet lady I love sweet words, but sweet deeds are the noble sounds of a noble spaniard, noble by country, noble by valour, noble by birth, my very foot is nobler than the head of another man, upon my life I love, and upon my love I live, and so sweet Nymph I kiss your hand, why lo here we are both, I am in this hand, and he is in that handy dandy prickly prandy, which hand will you have.
This hand my Lord if I may have my choice
Come spaniard to your penance bite your thumbs.
Oh base woman.
'sblood no base woman but bite your thumbs quickly.
Honour commands I must do it.
Come on sweet lady give me your hands if you are mine, I am yours, if you take me now at the worst I am the more beholding to you, if I be not good enough, I'll mend what would you more.
It is enough my Lord and I am yours.
Since I well know my fortune is to have you
Now must I leave the pleasant maiden chase,
In hunting savage beasts with Isis' nymphs,
And take me to a life which I God knows,
Do know no more than how to scale the heavens.
Well I'll teach you fear not you, what signor not bite your thumbs,
Pardon me sir, pardon me.
By God's blood I will not pardon you therefore bite your thumbs.
By thy sweet let me speak one word with thee, I do not like this humour in thee in pistolling men in this sort, it is a most dangerous and stigmatical humour, for by thy favour 'tis the most finest thing of the world for a man to have a most gentlemanlike carriage of himself, for otherwise I do hold thee for the most tall resolute and accomplished gentleman on the face of the earth, hark ye we'll meet at Corrucus and we'll have a pipe of Tobacco adieu adieu.
Do you hear sir, put your thumbs in your mouth without any more ado, by the heavens I'll shoot thee through the mouth.
It is base and ridiculous.
Well thou shalt not do it, lend me thy thumbs I'll bite them for thee
Pardon me.
Swoons and you had I would have made such a woeful parting betwixt your fingers and your thumb that your spanish fists should never meet again, in this world will you doit sir.
I will, I will presto and I will follow thee.
Why so oh that we had a noise of musicians to play to this antic as we go, come on sweet lady give me your hands we'll to Church and be married straight, bear with my haste now, I'll be slow enough another time I warrant you, come spaniola questo, questo, spaniola questo.
Advance that picture on this fatal spring,
And Herald speak uttering the kings edict.
Ptolomie the most sacred king of Egypt first of that name, desiring peace and amity with his neighbour princes hath caused this picture of Cleanthes to be set up in all places, proposing great rewards to him that finds him, and threatening death to him that succours him.
Which Gods forbid, and put it in his mind.
Not so to stomach his unjust exile.
That he convert the fury of his arm,
Against forsaken Egypt taking part,
With those four neighbour kings that threaten him,
And have besieged his most Imperial town.
Now may it please your highness to leave your discontented passions, and take this morning's pride to hunt the Boar.
We have attended on our grace thus far,
Out of the City being glad to hear,
Your highness had abandoned discontent.
And now will bend yourself to merriment,
So will I lovely Ianthe come then.
Let us go call forth sacred Isis nymphs,
To help us keep the game in ceaseless view,
That to the busy brightness of his eyes.
We may so intervent his shifts to scape.
That giddy with his turning he may fall,
Slain with our beauties more than swords on darts.
Now am I Leon The rich usurer and here according
To the kings command and mine own promise.
I have brought my sword and fix it by the statue,
She set up, by this am I known to be Cleanthes,
Whose sudden sight I now will take upon me,
And cause the nobles to pursue my shadow,
As for my substance they shall never find,
Till I myself, do bring myself to light.
Cleanthes, Cleanthes, stop Cleanthes, see Cleanthes,
Pursue Cleanthes, follow Cleanthes.
where is Cleanthes, Leon sawest thou him.
I why should I else have thus cried out on him,
I saw him even now here did he fix his sword
And not for dastard fear or cowardice,
For know all Egypt rings of his renown.
But fearing for his noble service done,
To be rewarded with ingratitude, he fled
From hence fearing to be pursued,
Come on my Lords then let's follow him
And pursue him to the death.
Oh do not hurt him gentle Citizens,
See how they fly from him whom they pursue.
I am Cleanthes, and whilst I am hear,
In vain they follow for to find him out,
But here comes my love Bright Psamathis,
Whom I love Equally with fair Elimine,
See here she comes as I appointed her.
But I faith mistress is this for a wooer.
Not for a wooer only my Jaquine,
But a quick speeder girl for this is he,
That all my fortune runs upon I tell thee,
O dainty mistress send for some more banquet.
No my fine wench this and myself is well.
And let him not sit down like the ox and the ass,
But give God thanks for we are worthy of it though we faite.
Mistress 'tis true.
And that he may be good,
I conjure him by these three things a cross,
Now let him come he shallbe good I warrant ye,
Nay do not fly me gentle Samathis,
Pardon me sir for if I see a man,
I shall so blush still that I warrant you,
I could make white wine claret with my looks,
But do not blush and fly an old man's sight.
From whom if not from old men should I fly
From young men rather that can swift pursue,
And then it is some credit to out go them,
Yet though my years would have me old I am not,
But have the gentle jerk of youth in me,
As fresh as he that hath a maiden's chin.
Thus can I bend the stiffness of my limbs,
Thus can I turn and leap and hoist my gate,
Thus can I lift my love as light as air,
Now say my Samathis am I old or young.
I would have my love neither old nor young
But in the middle Just between them both.
Fit am I then for matchless Samathis.
And will be bold to sit. For bachelors
Must not be shamefast when they meet with maids,
Sweet love now let me entreat you sit,
And welcome you to your own banquet here,
even thus did Irus say that he should say,
Then by your leave sir I will sit with you,
Welcome as gold into my treasury,
And now will I drink unto my love.
With the same mind that drinking first began to one another.
And what was that I pray sir.
I'll tell my love the first kind cause of it.
And why 'tis used as kindness still amongst us,
If it be used aright 'tis to this end,
When I do say I drink this love to you,
I mean I drink this to your proper good,
As if I said what health this wine doth work in me,
shallbe employed for you at your command & to your proper use
And this was first th'intent of drinking to you.
'tis very pretty is it not Jaquine.
Oh excellent Mistress he's a dainty man.
Now to your use sweet love I drink this wine,
And with a merry heart that makes long life,
Over the cup I'll sing for my loves sake.
Health, fortune, mirth, and wine,
To thee my love divine.
I drink to my darling,
Give me thy hand sweeting.
With cup full ever plied,
And hearts full never dried.
Mine own, mine own dearest sweeting.
Oh oh mine own dearest sweeting.
What frolic love mirth makes the banquet sweet.
I love it sir as well as you love me.
That is as well as I do love myself,
I will not joy my treasure but in thee,
And in thy looks I'll count it every hour,
And thy white arms shallbe as bands to me,
Wherein are mighty Lordships forfeited,
And all the dames of Alexandria,
For their attire shall take there light from thee,
Well sir I drink to you & pray you think
You are as welcome to me as this wine,
Thanks gentle Samathis, but delicious love,
Hath been the fig I eat before this wine,
Which kills the taste of these delicious cates,
Will you bestow that banquet love on me,
Nay gentle Leon talk no more of love
If you love God or a good countenance,
For I shall quite be out of countenance then,
Love decks the countenance, spiriteth the eye,
And tunes the soul in sweetest harmony,
Love then sweet Samathis.
What shall I do Iaquine.
Faith Mistress take him.
Oh but he hath a great nose.
'tis no matter for his nose, for he is rich.
Leon I love and since 'tis forth farewell.
Then triumph Leon richer in thy love.
Then all the heaps of treasure I possess,
Never was happy Leon rich before,
Nor ever was I covetous till now,
That I see gold so fined in thy hair.
Impart it to my Parents gentle Leon,
And till we meet again at home farewell.
Soon will I talk with them and follow thee,
So now is my desire accomplished.
Now was there ever man so fortunate.
To have his love so sorted to his wish,
The joys of many I I'm one enjoy.
Now do I mean to woe them crossly
The one as I am Leon the rich usurer. (both,
The other as I am the mad brain Count.
Which if it take effect, and rightly prove,
'twill be a sport for any emperors love.
Prince of Arcadia lovely Doricles,
Be not discouraged that my daughter here,
Like a well fortified and lofty tower,
I so repulsiue and vnapt to yeelde,
The royal siege of your heroic parts,
In her achievement will be more renowned,
And with the greater merit is employed.
The beauteous queen my wife her mother here
Was so well manned and yet had never man,
So mayne a rock of chaste and cold disdain.
My Lord what mean ye, go Aspasia,
Send for some Ladies to go play with you,
At chess, at billiards, and at other game,
Ianthe attend her.
You take a course my Lord to make her coy,
To urge so much the love of Doricles,
And frame a virtue of her wanton hate,
We must persuade her that he loves her not,
But that his services and vows of love,
Are but the gentle compliments of court,
So would she think that if she would have loud,
She might have won him.
And with that conceit of hardness to be won,
His merit's grace will shine more clearly,
In her turning eyes,
Things hard to win with ease makes love incited,
And favours won with ease are hardly quited,
Then make as If you loud her not my Lord.
Love that hath built his temple on my brows
Out of his Battlements into my heart,
And seeing me to burn in my desire,
Will be I hope appeased at the last.
Be ruled by me yet, and I warrant you,
She quickly shall believe you love her not,
What shall I do Madam.
Look not on her so much.
I cannot choose my neck stands never right,
Till it be turned aside and I behold her.
Now trust me such a wry necked love was never seen,
But come with me my Lord and I'll instruct you better
So madam I leave you now from our love sports,
To Antistenes and his great suit with Leon,
See the burgomaster Antistenes and Leon.
Comes together stay master burgomaster.
What reason made you use your office on the
Lord Antistenes seizing on all his movables,
And goods at the suit of Leon.
I will tell your grace the reason of it or any
Thing else for I know you are a wise prince,
And apt to learn.
I thank you for your good opinion sir,
But the reason of your office done upon this noble man
And his lands.
The reason why I have put in office or execution,
My authority upon this nobleman consisteth,
in three principal points or members,
Which indeed are three goodly matters.
I pray you let's hear them.
The first is the credit of this honest man because he is rich.
Why is he honest because he is rich.
Oh I learn that in any case, the next is the forfeit of his assurance and the last I will not trouble your grace with all.
But this it is whereof I most complain unto your grace,
That having occasion in your grace's service,
To borrow money of this Leon here,
For which I mortgaged all my lands and goods
He only did agree that paying him four
thousand pound at the day I should receive
safely, in which now not only falsely he denies. (my statute
But that he hath received one penny due,
Which this my friend can witness I repaid,
Upon the stone of Irus the blindman,
four thousand pound in jewels and in gold,
And therefore crave I justice in this case,
Vouchsafe dread sovereign an unpartial ear.
To that I have to say for my reply,
He pleads the payment of four thousand pound,
Upon the stone before blind Irus' cave,
To which I answer and do swear by heaven,
He spoke with me at the foresaid place,
And promised payment of four thousand pound,
If I would let him have his statutes in,
And take other assurance for another thousand,
Some three months to come or thereabouts.
Which I refusing he repaid me none,
But parted in a rage and card not for me.
Oh monstrous whoever hard the like.
My Lord I will be sworn he paid him,
On poor Irus' stone four thousand pound,
Which I did help to tender and hast thou
A hellish conscience and such a brazen forehead,
To deny it against my witness,
And his noble word.
Sir against your witness and his noble word,
I plead mine own and one as good as his,
That then was present at our whole conference.
My Lord there was not any but ourselves,
But who was it that thou affirmest was there,
Count Hermes good my Lord a man
Well known though he be humorous to be honourable,
And will he say it.
He will my gracious Lord I am well assured,
And him will I send hither presently,
Entreating your gracious favour if the impediment,
Of a late sickness cause me not return,
For I am passing ill.
Well send him hither and it shall suffice.
I will my gracious Lord and stand
To any censure passing willingly,
Your highness shall set down or command,
Worshipful master burgomaster your officer,
To see performed betwixt us.
We Thank you heartily, alas poor soul,
How sick he is.
Truly I cannot choose but pity him,
In that he loves your gracious officers,
Oh I thank you sir.
King by your leave, and yet I need not ask leave,
Because I am sent for if not I'll begone again.
without leave, say am I sent for yea or no,
You are to witness twixt Antistenes and wealthy Leon.
I know the matter and I come from that old miser
Leon, who is suddenly fallen sick of a knaves evil,
Which of you are troubled with that disease masters.
Well say what you know of the matter, betwixt them.
Then thus I say my Lord, Antistenes came,
To the stone of the blind fool Irus,
That day when four thousand pounds were to be paid,
Where he made proffer of so much money if Leon would return the mortgage of his lands, and take assurance for another thousand to be paid I trow some three months to come or there about, which Leon like an old churl as he was most uncourteously refused: my Lord Antistenes as he might very well departed in a rage but if it had been to me I would have pistoled him I faith.
But you are wondrously deceived my Lord.
And was not by when he and we did talk.
Swoons then I say you are deceived my Lord,
For I was by now by my honour and by all the gods.
Then you stood close my Lord unseen to any,
Why I stood close to you and seen of all, and if You think I am too mad a fellow to witness such a weighty piece of work the holy beggar shall perform as much, For he was by at our whole conference.
But say Count Hermes was the beggar by.
I say he was and he shall say he was.
But he is now they say locked in his cave,
Fasting and praying talking with the Gods,
And hath an Iron door twixt him and you,
How will you then come at him,
I'll fetch him from his cave in spite of all his Gods and Iron doors, or beat him blind whenas I do catch him next, farewell my Lords you have done with me, I'll send the beggar presently for I am now riding to Corrucus.
I know not what to think in these affairs
I cannot well condemn you my Lord,
And your sufficient witness being a gentleman,
Nor yet the other two, both men of credit,
Though in his kind this Count be humorous,
But stay we shall here straight what Irus will depose,
Oh who disturbs me in my holy prayers,
Oh that the king were by that he might here,
What thundering there is at my farther door,
Oh how the good of Egypt is disturbed in my devotion.
I am here Irus and it was Count Hermes.
That was so rude to Interrupt thy prayers,
But I suppose the end of thy repair,
Being so weighty could not have displeased,
For on thy witness doth depend the living
Of Lord Antistenes, who doth affirm,
That three days past he tendered at thy stone,
four thousand pounds to Leon, and desired
His mortgage quited which he promising
On such assurance, more as he proposed,
Received at that time his four thousand pounds.
I then was in the hearing of them both.
Bnt hard noe penny tendred, onely proposed
By Lord Antistenes, if he would bring him in,
His mortgage and take assurance for another thousand
Some three months to come or there abouts,
Which Leon most uncourteously refused,
My Lord was angry and I heard no more,
And thus must I crave pardon of your grace.
Farewell graue Is.
Gods are become oppressors of the right.
Never had right so violent a wrong.
For let the thunder strike me into hell.
If what I have reported be not true,
This holy man no doubt speaks what he heard
And I am sorry for Antistenes.
But I'll relieve your low estate my Lord,
And for your service done me guerdon you,
Master burgomaster let the Lord have liberty,
And I will answer Leon what is due.
Soft Mistress burgomaster, pray you stay, your heart is
greater than your parson far or your state either, do we not
know ye trow, what woman you are but a Burgomasters wife,
And he no wiser than his neighbours neither,
Give me the place according to my calling.
What skill for places, do we not all call sisters,
Noah by my faith I am a countesse now,
I should have one to go before me bare,
And say stand by there to the best of them,
And one to come behind and bear my train,
Because my hands must not be put unto it.
My husband is a Lord and past a Lord,
And past a Lord what is that past I pray,
Why he's a what you calllt.
A what you call it can you not name it.
I think I must not name it.
And why so I pray.
because it comes so near a thing that I know,
Oh he is a Count that is an Earl.
And yet he is not known to have much land.
Why therefore he is an unknown man.
ay but my husband is the king's officer.
ay but my husband is able to buy both yours,
You say husband, I may say my Lord.
And methinks husband is worth ten of Lord.
Indeed I love my Lord to call me wife,
Better than Madam yet do I not mean,
To lose my Ladies, titles at your hands,
I may for courtesy and to be termed,
A gentle Lady call you sisters still,
But you must say and please your ladyship,
'tis thus and so, and as your honour please,
Yet shall my husband call me wife like yours,
For why made god the husband and the wife,
But that those terms should please us more than others
New fashion terms I like not for a man,
To call his wife coney, forsooth, and Lamb,
And Pork, and Mutton, he as well may say,
Well Madam then and please your ladyship,
What gowns and head tires will your honour wear.
twenty are making for me head tires and gowns,
Head tires enchased in order like the stars,
Which perfect great and fine cut precious stones,
One hath bright Ariadne's Crown in it,
Even in the figure it presents in heaven,
Another hath the fingers of Diana,
And Berenice's ever burning hair,
another hath the bright Andromica,
With both her silver wrists bound to a rock,
And Perseus that did lose her and save her life,
All set in number and in perfect form,
Even like the asterisms fixed in heaven,
And even as you may see in Moon shine nights,
The Moon and Stars reflecting on their streams
So from my head shall you see stars take beams,
Oh brave God willing I will have the like.
And so will I by God's grace if I live.
Come up to supper it will become the house wonderful well
Well if my husband will not, let him not look for one good look of me.
Nor mine I swear.
I'll ask my husband when I am with child,
And then I know I shall be sped I faith.
But every pleasure hath a pain they say
My husband lies each other night abroad,
and so doth mine which I like but little,
Well time I hope and change of company,
Will teach us somewhat to bear out the absence,
I know not what to say,
My husband makes as if each other night he had occasion,
To ride from home at home serves not his turn,
To my good turn it, cupid I beseech you,
Now will I try to make myself the Count.
An arrant Cuckold and a wittol too.
Now may I chance to prove a cunning man,
And tell my mistress where my master haunts,
Bright Nymph I come in name of all the world,
That now sustains dead winter in the spring,
To have a graces from thy summer darted,
Thy love sweet soul is all that I desire,
To make a general summer in this heart,
Where winter's double wrath hath tyrannized.
How dare you Leon thus solicit me,
Where if the Count my husband should come now,
And see you courting you were sure to die.
Oh but he is safe, for at my house,
Booted and spurred and in his velvet gown,
He took his horse and rode unto Corrucus,
And therefore beauteous Lady make not strange,
To take a friend and add unto thy joys,
O happ wedlocke: the end of euery acte,
Is to increase contentment and renown,
Both which my love: shall amply joy in you,
How can renown ensue an act of shame,
No act hath any shame within itself,
But in the knowledge and ascription.
Of the base world from whom shall this be kept,
As in a labyrinth or a brazen tower.
But virtues sole regard must hold me back.
The virtue of each thing is in the praise,
And I will rear thy praises to the skies,
Out of my treasury choose the choice of gold,
Till thou find some matching thy hair in brightness,
But that will never, be so choose thou ever.
Out of my Jewelry choose thy choice of Diamonds,
Till thou find some as bright some as thine eyes,
But that will never be, so choose thou ever,
Choose Rubies out until thou match thy lips,
Pearl till thy teeth, and ivory till thy skin,
Be matched in whiteness but that will never be.
Nor never shall my treasury have end,
Till on there beauty's Ladies loath to spend,
But that will never be so choose thou ever.
Now what a God's name would this vain man have,
Do you not shame to tempt a woman thus,
I know not what to say nor what to do,
He would have me do that I fear I should not,
Some thing it is he seeks that he thinks good,
And methinks he should be more wise than I,
I am a foolish girl though I be married
And know not what to do, the Gods do know.
Are you content sweet love to grant me love,
and what then sir.
To grant me lodging in your house this night,
I think the man be weary of his life,
Know you the Count my husband.
marvelous well and am of him,
Faith that you are as sure as I myself,
So you did talk of gold and Diamonds,
I and gold and Diamonds shall my sweet love have,
Well I'll not bid you sir but if you come,
At your own peril for I'll wash my hands.
A plague of all sanguine simpliciti
But do you hear sir pray you do not think that I granted you.
No I warrant you, I'll have no such thought. (in any case
Oh this is old excellent.
Now who can desire better sport.
This night my other wife must lie alone,
And next night this wife must do the like.
Now will I woo the other as the Count,
Which if she grant and they do break their troth,
I'll make myself a cuckold twixt them both.
I'll follow him until he take the earth, and then i'll leave him.
Now if my husband be not all alone,
He is from home and hath left me alone,
So I must learn to lie, as children go,
All alone, all alone, which lesson now.
I am able to bear a child is worse to me then when I was a child
The moral this strength without a health a disadvantage is.
Mistress what will you say if I can tell you where my master is,
Where Druso I pray thee.
even close with the young countesse I faith.
Out on her strumpet doth she brag so much,
Of her great Count, and glad to take my husband
Hence comes her head tires and her fair gowns,
Her train borne up and a man bare before her,
Was this my fortune that should be so good,
I faith you beggar you, you old false knave,
You holy villain you prophetic ass,
Know you no better what shall come to pass,
I'll be revenged I faith, I faith I'll be revenged.
Oh Irus shall thy long approved skill,
Fail in my fortunes only, when shall I meet,
With my Cleanthes what a world of time,
Is it for me to lie as in a sound,
Without my life Cleanthes, can it be,
That I shall ever entertain again,
Having the habit of cold death in me,
My life Cleanthes.
Let me come in you knaves, I say let me come in,
Sir, we are set to guard this place as our lives and None without a warrant from the King or the Queen must enter here.
'swounds tell not me of your warrants, let me come in I say,
My Lord we are commanded to keep out all comers, because of the branch wherein the king's life remains,
Let me come in you knaves, how dare you keep me out, 'twas my gown to a mantle of rug, I had not put you all to the pistol.
Shall we be troubled now with this rude Count
How now Queen what art thou doing, passioning over the picture of Cleanthes I am sure for I know thou lovest him,
What's that you traitor.
No traitor neither but a true friend to you, for had I been otherwise I should have disclosed the secret talk thou hadst with Cleanthes in the arbour, the night before he was banished, whilst I stood close and hard all.
The man is mad chains and a whip for him.
Be patient my wench and I'll tell thee the very words, oh my Cleanthes, love me, pity me, hate me not for love, and it is not lust hath made me thus importunate, for then there are men enough besides Cleanthes, go to tell me were not these your words, & I like no traitor to you but a trusty friend now by this pistol which is God's angel I never uttered them till now
I spoke them not but had you been so bad,
As some men are you might have said as much,
By fictions only therefore I must needs,
Think much the better of you to conceal it,
Oh your a cunning wench and am not I a mad slave to have such virtue as secrecy in me and none never looked for any such thing at my hands, and here's a branch forsooth of your little son turned to a mandrake tree, by Hella the sorceress.
'tis true and kills me to remember it.
Tut tut remember it and be wise thou wouldst have Cleanthes, come again wouldst thou not,
The king is so advised to give him death.
The King, come come 'tis you rule the King now would any wise woman in the world be so hunger-starved for a man and not use the means to have him, thinkst thou Cleanthes will come again to have his head chopped of so soon as he comes, but had you plucked up this branch wherein the King thy husbands life consists and burnt it in the fire, his old beard would have stunk for't in the grave ere this, and than thou shouldst have seen whether Cleanthes would have come unto thee or no.
Oh execrable counsel.
Go to 'tis good counsel, take the grace of God before your eyes, and follow it to it wench corragio, I know I have gotten thee with child of a desire, and thou longest but for a knife to let it out, hold there 'tis serve God and be thankful, now you knaves will you let me come out trow.
Please your Lordship to bestow something on us for we are poor knaves.
Hark you be even knaves still, and if you be poor long your foolish knaves, and so I'll leave you.
Nay swoons my Lord no knaves neither.
Then he was a knave that told me so, what dost thou tell me that.
This serpent's counsel stings me to the heart.
Mounts to my brain and binds my prince of sense.
My voluntary motion and my life,
Sitting itself triumphing in their thrones,
And that doth force my hand to take this knife,
That bows my knees and sets me by thy branch,
Oh my diones oh my only son,
Canst thou now feel the rigour of a knife,
No thou art senseless and I'll cut thee up,
I'll shroud thee in my bosom safe from storms,
And trust no more my trustless guard with thee,
Come then return unto thy mother's arms, and when I pull thee forth to serve the fire, turn thyself wholly into a burning tongue, invoking furies and infernal death, to cool thy torments with thy father's breath.
Now madam countesse do you make account.
To take up husbands by your countyship.
Have you the broad seal for it, are you so high, and stoop,
To one so low as is my husband,
Hence come your head-tires and your costly gowns,
Your train borne up and a man bare before you,
Now fie on pride when woman go thous naked.
I ever thought that pride would have a fall
But little thought it would have such a fall.
What fall I pray you.
There you lay last, forsooth there you lay last.
Be not so angry woman you are deceived
I know I am deceived for thou deceivedst me,
Thou mightest as well have picked my purse I tell thee,
Oh would my mother say, when you have a husband.
Keep to him only but now one may see,
How horrible a thing it is to change,
Because it angers one so horribly,
You must have Ushers to make way before you,
The dame is mad, I'll stay no longer with her.
Well madam short heels I'll be even with you,
See where the mad brain Count her husband comes,
I will begone.
Hear you usurers wife stay, a plague on you stay, whither go you so fast, why did I ever hurt any of your sex yet.
Why no my Lord.
Why no my Lord, why the devil do you turn tail when you should not, when you should you will not be half so hasty, a man must love you, woe you, spend upon you and the devil of one of you is worthy to kiss the hem of my riding gown here.
Is this your riding gown my Lord.
'tis no matter what it is, talk not to me, what the devil did I mean to call thee back again,
Why, my Lord I mean not to trouble you,
Go to stay I say, 'tis against my will that I use you so kindly I can tell you.
Why you may choose my Lord.
ay but I cannot choose, there you lie now, 'tis love forsooth that Intails me to you, for if it had not been for love, I had not been here now, for the Gods do know I hold thee dearer than the pomegranate of mine eye, and that's better by three pence then the apple of mine eye.
My Lord I am sorry for your heaviness.
Nay 'tis no matter I am not the first ass that hath borne Cupid's treasury.
My Lord 'tis enough to make an ass wise to bear treasure.
Why then be you that wise ass, and bear me for
I have some treasure about me will you love me.
Love you my Lord it is strange you will ask it.
I am not the first hath desired you,
Nor you shall not be the last I will refuse.
Nor are you the fairest I have seen,
Nor the foulest you have loud.
Nor the fittest to be beloved.
Nor the unfittest to hate.
Do and you dare but sirrah and thou wilt not love,
I pray thee be proud
Why so my Lord.
Because I would have thee fall, for pride must have a fall.
Do you delight in my fall so much.
As much as in mine own rising I faith, but do not you think it strange that I do love you, for before I did love you, Cupid pinked me a spanish leather jerkin with shooting at me, and made it so full of holes that I was fain to leave it of, and this loss have I had for your sake.
My Lord I'll bestow an old jerkin on you,
Nay that shall not serve your turn, for I have had a greater loss than that, I lost my left eye for your sake.
I do not think so.
ay but I'll tell you how as I was hunting in the park, I saw Cupid shooting a cockhye into your face, and gazing after his arrow it fell into mine eye.
A pretty fiction.
ay but I find this no fiction, and you shall make me amends with love or by this patch of mine eye, and the patch thou wottest where I will swear to all the City I have lain with thee.
I hope your Lordship will not do me that wrong.
Then do you me right and let me lie with you, I have made the bottle nosed knave your husband so drunk that he is not able to stand go get you home I'll follow you.
Why my Lord what will you do there.
Go to make no more questions but say I shall be welcome or by mine honour I'll do as I say, otherwise be as secret as death.
twenty to one he will, well my Lord if you come you come.
Oh I thank you heartily, oh excellent or never trust me.
Madam your honour is come somewhat to soon.
Why so Menippus.
Had you stayed never so little longer you should have met my Lord coming out of Leon's house and out of his movables,
How out of his movables.
even in plain troth, I see him woe her, win her, and went in with her.
Now of mine honour I will be revenged fetch me the burgomaster Menippus I'll have them both whipped about the town.
Nay madam you must not dishonour him so,
What shall mine honour do then.
Do but tongue whip him madam and care not,
And so I leave him to the mercy of your tongue,
My tongue shall have hell and no mercy in it
Excellent music excellent music.
And the Devil take the Instrument,
What art thou so nigh.
I and it were a good deed to be a little nigher too, you make a Count ass of me indeed, as if I were too little for you, but bigness is my fault unless I were a little better used at your hands.
Why thou wilt be to perfect if I should use thee much for use makes perfitness.
ay but I cannot be too perfect and therefore I'll spoil her perfections that helps to spoil mine I warrant her.
Why may not I lie with her as well as thou layest with her husband.
I defy you and all the world that can say black is mine eye.
I think so indeed, for thine eye is grey, but thou didst lie with him by that same token he gave thee a carcanet, and thou toldst me that thy mother sent it thee, thou didst promise to banquet him when I was next abroad, thou didst say he could not be so old as he made himself to be, thou didst say 'twas pity of his nose, for he would have been a fine man else, and that God did well to make him a rich man, for a was a good man too, and these tokens I think are sufficient, for these a told me with his own mouth.
He lied like an old knave as he was and that he shall know the next time these lips open in faith, oh wicked perjured man would a disclose my secrets I faith what woman would trust any man alive with her honesty.
Ha ha ha, I haue snt her in a pelting chfe,
But I'll follow her and make her mad with anger.
Thus have we trod the sandy vales of Egypt,
Adjoining to the plains of Alexandria,
Where proud king' Ptolemy keeps his residence,
Securely trusting to his prophecies,
Which hath foretold him many years ago,
That if the young Arcadian Doricles,
Should link in marriage with his lovely daughter.
He then should conquer all our bordering lands,
And make us subject to his tyranny.
Trusting to his fond fantastic dreams,
He hath exiled the warlike Duke Cleanthes.
Whose name was terror to our valiant troops.
Cleanthes exiled gives us easy way,
To our attempts where had he stayed,
Aud beene afreind to him, yet should he not
Escape subjection.
We will divide his kingdom twixt us four,
And reave from him his four chief ornaments,
And for to grieve his aged mind the more,
He shall be kept in lasting servitude.
So to fulfil what fates to him assigned,
Come let us march and brave him at the walls,
If Porus live to wield his martial sword,
His City walls shall not preserve him safe,
But he shall die by Porus and his friends.
Sweet madam grant me once a cheerful look
To glad my dying heart with sorrow killed,
Your father hath resigned his free consent.
You bound by duty to obey his will,
Nay rather let him hail me to my death
Then 'gainst my will constrain me match myself.
Die thou vile wretch and live Aspasia,
even now I heard thy father Ptolemy
With words that still do tingle in mine ears,
Pronounce him heir to Alexandria,
'tis time for me to stir when such young boys,
Shall have their weak necks over poised with crowns
Which must become resolved champions,
That for a crowns exchange will sell their souls, He kills him.
Wicked Count Hermes for this monstrous deed,
Egypt will hate thee. and thou sure must die,
Then high thee to the hills beyond the Alps,
Fly to unknown and unfrequented climes,
Some desert place that never saw the sun,
For if the king or any of his friends,
Shall find Count Hermes thou art surely dead.
I'll fly no more than doth a settled rock,
No more than mountains or the steadfast poles,
But come sweet love if thou wilt come with me,
We two will live amongst the shadowy groves,
And we will sit like shepherds on a hill,
And with our heavenly voices 'tice the trees,
To echo sweetly to our celestial tunes.
Fls will I angle in the running brookes,
Seasoning our toils with kiss, on the banks,
Sometime I'll dive into the murmuring springs,
And fetch thee stones to hang about thy neck,
Which by thy splendour will be turned to pearl,
Say fair Aspasia wilt thou walk with me.
No bloody Count but I will clear myself,
And tell thy murders to the amazed court.
Nay if thou wilt not choose you peevish girl
Thou canst not say but thou wert offered fair,
But here must end Count Hermes strange disguise,
My velvet gown my pistol and this patch,
No more must hide me in the counts attire,
Now will I turn my gown to usurers Coats,
And thus appear unto the world no more,
Farewell Aspasia.
Go wretched villain hide thy hated head,
Where never heavens light may shine on thee,
whose's there, Come forth for here is murder done,
Murder Murder of good prince Doricles.
Who calls out murder Lady was it you.
As I was walking in the pleasant weeds,
With Doricles the young Arcadian prince,
rushed in Count Hermes and in desperate words,
Hath slain this prince.
A baleful deed pursue the murderer,
And tell the King of this foul accident
Oh tell no more in stead of tears,
M beating hart dissolues in droppes of blood,
And from mine eyes that stars upon this corpse.
Leaps out my soul and on it I will die,
Oh Doricles oh dear Arcadian prince,
The bulwark and supporter of my life.
That by decree of fates was promised,
To add four neighbour kingdoms to my crown,
And shield me from a most abhorred death,
Now shall my kingdom leave me with my life,
And suddenly look for some monstrous fate,
Shall fall like thunder on my wretched state.
Arm arm my Lord, my Lords to instant arms,
four mighty kings are landed in thy coast,
And threaten death and ruin to thy land,
Black Porus the AEthiopian king,
Comes marching first with twenty thousand men,
Next Rhesus king of sweet Arabia,
In warlike manner marcheth after him,
In equal number and in battle ray,
Next Bion king of rich Phasiaca,
And stern Bebritius of Bebritia,
With each of them full twenty thousand strong
All which hath vowed the death, of Ptolemy, and thus they hither bend their speedy feet.
How suddenly is weather over cast,
How is the face of peaceful Egypt changed,
Like as the smiling flowers above the ground,
By keenest edge of Eura's breath is cut.
To arms my Lord and gather up your strength,
Your bands in Memphis and in Caspia,
Joined with your power of Alexandria,
Will double all the forces of these kings,
All shallbe done we may meanwhile,
Bury the body of this slaughtered prince,
lest with the view my senses follow his,
Cursed be his hand that wrought the damned deed,
Cold and uncovered may his body lie.
Let stormy hail and thunder beat on him
And every bird and beast run over him,
That robbed poor Ptolemy of such a hope,
Pursue the desperate Count that murdered him,
A thousand kingdoms shall not save his life
A miracle a miracle, a dreadful miracle.
What miracle, oh what will heavens do more,
To punish Egypt and her hapless king,
As I was walking through the sirian groves
I saw the desperate Count the murderer,
Of good prince Doricles as I hear say,
Fly through the deserts to the mimphick shades
Where hell to interrupt his passage thither,
Raving beneath the ground work of the earth
As if ten thousand vapours burst in her,
severed her womb and swallowed quick,
The miserable Count.
Just are the heavens in his most dreadful end,
But come my Lords let us to instant arms,
To drive away more mischiefs from our land.
So get you gone and perish all with him,
Now shall you know what want you have of me,
Now will I gather up my sums of money,
And of my creditors borrow what I can,
Because as Leon I'll be seen no more,
This day they promised for to meet me here,
And here comes some of them.
My master sir your friend Calatius, Hath sent you sir your five hundredth crowns for the rich jewel that he bought of you. I thank him heartily, this jewel of so many thousand crowns The Queen of Egypt did bestow on me, when that I told her in poor Iris' shape where her Cleanthes was, but soft who have we here.
Druso the Italian Merchant here by me,
Hath sent you sir in Diamonds and in Pearls,
So much as mounteth to five thousand crowns,
And craves no more assurance but your word,
There's my bill and thank thy master he shall have more than word.
Never shall he nor they see this again,
Nor me neither as I am this present man,
This with the rest I have will make a pretty somme
With this will I employ me in these wars,
Now will I take on me the form and shape,
Of Duke Cleanthes, but what intends this alarum.
Where may I seek to find Cleanthes out,
That martial prince whom Ptolemy unkind,
Hath banished from out the Egyptian Land,
Our warlike troops are scattered and over throne,
And his dear friends Acatos and Acanthes,
Lie in the field besmired in their bloods,
I'll run through all these groves to find him out.
My sweet Acates and Acanthes slain,
Grief to my heart and sorrow to my soul,
Then rouse thyself Cleanthes and revenge.
Their guiltless blood on these base miscreants
Oh let the cankered trumpet of the deep,
Be rattled out and ring into their ears,
The dire revenge Cleanthes will inflict,
One these four Kings and all there complices,
Thus have you strove in vain against those Gods,
That rescues Egypt in Cleanthes arms,
Come yield your crowns and homages to me,
Though Ptolomie is dead yet I survive,
Elect and chosen by the pears to scourge,
The vile presumption of your hated lives,
Then yield as vanquished unto Egypt's king.
First by thy valour and the strength of arms,
Porus the wealthy Aethiopian king,
Doth yield his crown and homage unto thee,
Swearing by all my Gods whom I adore,
To honour Duke Cleanthes whilst he live,
And in his aid with twenty thousand men,
Will always march 'gainst whom thou meanst to fight,
Bion whose neck was never forced to bow
Doth yield him captive to thy warlike sword,
Command what so thou list, we will perform,
And all my power shall march at thy command.
Rhesus doth yield his crown and dignity,
To great Cleanthes Egypt's only strength,
For if Cleanthes lives, whoever lived,
More likelier to be monarch of the world,
Then here accept my vowd allegiance,
Which as the rest I render unto thee.
So sayth Bebritius of Bebritia.
And lays his crown and homage at thy feet,
Hold take your crowns again and keep your oaths and fealties to me,
So shal you liue as free as here to foe
And near hereafter stoop to conquest more.
Here comes the two widows of the beggar and the king, little know they that both their husbands are turned into one king, there would be old striving who should be Queen I faith.
Pity dread sovereign.
Pity gracious Lord.
What are your suits.
I the poor countesse and the widow left,
Of late Count Hermes having all my goods,
seized to our late kings use for murder done,
Of young prince Dorule's humbly pray your grace,
I may have somewhat to maintain my state,
And this poor burden then which I go withal.
The hapless Infant of a hapless father.
And I my Lord humbly entreat your grace.
That where my husband Leon is deceased,
And left me much in debt, his creditors
Having seized all I have into their hands,
And turned me with this hapless burden here,
Into the streets your highness will descend,
To my relief by some convenient order.
Poor souls I most extremely pity them,
But say is Leon dead,
Men say my Lord he cast his desperate body,
From th'alexandrian tower into the sea.
Who saw the sight, or gave out this report,
You master burgomaster.
I did my gracious Lord.
So I devised indeed that he should say,
That none should never look for Leon more
But these my widows here must not be left,
unto the mercy of the needy world,
Nor mine own Issue that they go withal,
Have such base fortunes and there fire so great,
Widows in pity of your widowhood,
And untimely ends of both your husbands,
The slaughter of the Count your husband madam,
shallbe remitted, and yourself enjoy,
The utmost of the living he possessed,
So will I pay your husband Leon's debt,
And both shall live fitting there wonted states,
Kings in there mercy come most near the Gods,
And can no better show it then in ruth,
Of widows and of children fatherless,
myself will therefore be to both your births,
A careful father in there bringing up.
The Gods for ever bless your majesty,
But tell me were your husbands such bad men,
That every way they did deserve such ends,
Mine was a husband to my hearts content.
But that he used the privilege of men.
What privilege of men,
To take some other love besides his wife
Which men think by their custom they may do,
Although their wives be strictly bound to them.
With whom suspect you he was great with all.
With this poor widow here the world supposeth.
So thinks the world my husband was with you.
Fair dames what will you say to me,
If I can tell you where your husbands be.
What can you sir.
Nay nothing sir I did but jest with you, I feared him
I faith but I'll be secret that's flat.
Well master burgomaster see that you restore,
The goods and lands you ceased.
Both of the countesse and rich Leon's wife,
Not pity of their widowhoods alone,
But their rare beauties move me to this good.
Oh Master Burgomaster see here's your wife come to
welcome you home from war.
Oh husband husband will you go to war, and leave me in this taking.
This taking why this is a very good taking how say you is it not and like your Majesty.
'tis very well Master burgomaster.
But Shall I entreat one boon of your Majesty.
What's that Master burgomaster.
marry even to be god father to my young burgomaster here.
withal my heart sir.
Come on sweet husband for my time draws near.
Fear not thou shalt be a joyful mother I warrant thee.
How say you my Lords is not our burgomaster a tall man every way, did you not mark how manfully he behaved himself in our late Battle,
We did my Lord and wonder at his courage
His merit doth deserve a better place.
Then to be burgomaster of Alexandria.
Then say my Lords how shall we deal with him.
Had he been widower he might have wedded with this countesse here.
Oh I have one of mine own I thank you sir, here's one has the sweet of them I faith:
My Lord the offer had been to high a grace for him
For near did eye behold a fairer face.
So sayth mine eye that hath my heart incensed.
And Rhesus methinks this exceeds her far,
No question of it as the son a star.
As suddenly as lightning beauty wounds.
None ever loud but at first sight they loud.
loves darts are swift as is the lightning fire.
See he shoots arrows burning from her eyes.
Why which loves Rhesus.
This celestial dame.
And which loves Bion.
even the very same.
Then may I freely joy the countesse here.
No Porus for Bebritius loves her too
Are they in love oh God's would that were true
My loving joy the fresh desire of kings.
How now my Lords doth beauty startle you.
More than dead stocks would startle at such beauty,
In vain do I resist my passions,
Mighty Cleanthes to annex my heart,
In love to thee as well as victory,
Grant this fair countesse here may be my queen.
No great Cleanthes give her to my hand,
Whose heart was first the subject of her graces.
Then let the Arabian king make this his queen.
Nay this Cleanthes let my love enjoy.
How fatal are these loves now I perceive,
Their fortunes that I told as I was Irus.
Will now in force I see be come to pass.
Oh holy Irus blessed be thy tongue,
That like an orator hath told our fortunes.
He told us we should soon lose our first loves,
Making our second choice 'mongst greatest kings.
I did indeed, but God knows knew not how.
How say you master brother, am not I secret now,
Thou art and be so still for not the world,
Shall ever know the mad pranks I have played,
Now stand fair my Lords and let these Ladies view you,
In my eye now the blackest is the fairest,
For every woman chooseth white and red,
Come martial Perus thou shalt have my love.
Out on thee foolish woman thou hast chose a devil.
Not yet sir till he have horns.
'tis not the face and colour I regard,
But fresh and lovely youth allures my choice.
And thee most beauteous Bion I affect.
Hapless is Rhesus.
accursed Bebritius.
Have patience gentle Lords I will provide,
Other Egyptian Ladies for your turn,
So will we link in perfect league of love
So shall the victory you lost to me,
Set double glory on your conquered heads.
So let us go to frolic in our Court.
Carousing free whole bouls of greekish wine,
In honour of the conquest we have made,
That at our banquet all the Gods may tend,
Plauding our victory and this happy end.