WHy so? thus do I hope to please:
Music revives, and mirth is tolerable.
Comedy play thy part, and please,
Make merry them that comes to joy with thee:
joy then good gentiles, I hope to make you laugh.
Sound forth Bellona's silver tuned strings.
Time fits us well, the day and place is ours.
Nay stay minion, there lies a block.
What all on mirth; I'll interrupt your tale.
And mix your music with a tragic end.
What monstrous ugly hag is this,
That dares comtrowle the pleasures of our will?
Vaunt churlish cur, besmearde with gory blood,
That seemest to check 〈…〉
And stifle the 〈…〉
Blush, monster blush, and post away with shame,
That seekest disturbance of a goddess deeds.
Post hence thyself, thou counterchecking trul,
I will possess this habit spite of thee
And gain the glory of thy wished port,
I'll thunder music shall appall the nymphs,
And make them shever their clattering strings:
Flying for succour to their danes caves.
Hearken, thou shalt hear a noise
Shall fill the air with a shrilling sound,
And thunder music to the gods above:
Mars shall himself breath down
A peerless crowene upon brave envies head,
And raise his chivall with a lasting fame
In this brave music Envy takes delight,
Where I may see them wallow in there blood,
To spurn at arms and legs quite shivered off,
And hear the cries of many thousand slain,
How lik'st thou this my ●r●ll, this sport alone for me?
Vaunt bloody cur, nursed up with tigers sap,
That so dost seek to quail a woman's mind,
Comedy is mild gentle, willing for to please,
And seeks to gain the love of all estates:
Delighting in mirth, mixed all with lovely tales,
And bringeth things with treble joy to pass,
Thou bloody, Envious, disdainer of men's joy,
Whose name is fraught with bloody stratagems,
Delights in nothing but in spoil and death,
Where 〈…〉 blood,
And 〈…〉
Yet vail thy mind, revenge thou not on me,
A silly woman begs it at thy hands,
Give me the leave to utter out my play,
Forbear this place, I humbly crave thee hence,
And mix not death amongst pleasing comedies,
That treats nought else but pleasure and delight.
If any spark of humane rests in thee,
Forbear, be gone, tender the suit of me.
Why so I will, forbearance shall be such
As treble death shall cross thee with despite,
And make thee mourn where most thou ioiest,
Turning thy mirth into a deadly dole:
Whirling thy pleasures with a peal of death,
And drench thy methods in a sea of blood:
This will I do, thus shall I bear with thee
And more to vex thee with a deeper spite,
I will with threats of blood begin thy play:
Favouring thee with envy and with hate.
Then ugly monster do thy worst,
I will defend them in despite of thee:
And thought thou thinkest with tragic fumes
To brave my play unto my deep disgrace.
I force it not, I scorn what thou canst do
I'll grace it so, thyself shall it confess:
From tragic stuff to be a pleasant comedy
Why then Comedy send thy actors forth
And I will cross the first steps of their tread:
Making them fear the very dart of death.
And I'll defend them maugre all thy spite
So ugly fiend frewell, tell time shall serve,
That we may meet to parley forth best
Comedy, I'll go spread my branch,
And scattered blossoms from mine envious tree.
Oh fly Madam, fly or else we art but dead.
Help Segasto help, help sweat Segasto or eel I die.
Alas madam, there is no way but flight,
Then haste and save yourself.
Why then I die, ah help me in distress,
Stay Lady stay, and be no more dismayed,
That cruel beast most mercelesse and fell,
Which have bereaved thousands of their lives,
Affrighted many with his hard pursues,
Prying from place to place to find his pray,
Prolonging thus his life by others death,
His carcase now lies headless void of breath.
That fowl deformed monster is he dead?
Assure yourself thereof, behold his head;
Which if it please you Lady to accept,
With willing heart I yield it to your majesty.
Thanks worthy shepherd, thanks a thousaud times
This gift assure thyself contents me more,
Then greatest bounty of a mighty prince:
Although he were the monarch of the world.
Most gracious goddess, more than mortal wight,
Your heavenly hew of right imports no less,
Most glad am I in that it was my chance,
To undertake this enterprise in hand.
Which doth so greatly glad your princely mind.
No goddess shepherd, but a mortal wight
A mortal wight distressed as thou seest:
My father here is king of Arragon.
I Amadine his only daughter am:
And after him sole heir unto the crown.
Now where as it is my father's will,
To marry me unto Segasto,
On whose wealth through father's former usury
Is known to be no less than wonderful,
We both of custom oftentimes did use,
Leaving the court to walk within the fields,
For recreation esecially the spring,
In that it yields great store of rare delights:
And passing further than our wont walks,
Scarce were entered within these luckless woods,
But right before us down a steep fall hill
A monstrous ugly bear did high him fast,
To meet us both, I faint to tell the rest,
Good shepherd, but suppose the ghastly looks,
The hideous fears, the thousant hundred woes,
Which at this instant Amadine sustained.
Yet worthy princes let thy sorrow cease,
And let this sight your former joys revive.
Believe me shepherd so it doth no less.
Long may they last unto your hearts content.
But tell me Lady what is become of him,
Segasto called, what is become of him?
I know not I, that know the powers divine
But God grant this that sweet Segasto live.
Yet heard hearted he in such a case,
So cowardly to save himself by flight:
And leave so brave a princess to the spoil
Well shepherd for thy worthy valour tried,
Endangering thyself to set me free:
Unrecompensed sure thou shalt not be.
In court thy courage shallbe plainly known:
Throughout the Kingdom will I spread thy name,
To thy renown and never dying fame:
And that thy courage may be better known.
Bear thou the head of this most monstrous beast
In open sight to every courtiers view
So will the king my father thee reward.
Come let's away, and guard me to the court.
With all my heart.
When heaps of harms do hover over head,
'tis time as then, some say to look about,
And so ensuing harms to choose the least:
But hard, yea hapless is that wretchesse chance,
Luckless his lot and caitiff like acourste,
At whose proceed fortune ever frowns.
Myself I mean most subject unto thrall,
For I the more I seek to shun the worst:
The more by proof I find myself accursed:
Ere whiles assaulted with an ugly bear,
Fair Amadine in company all alone,
Forthwith by flight I thought to save myself,
Leaving my Amadine unto her shifts:
For death it was for to resist the bear.
And death no less of Amadines' harms to hear.
Accursed I in lingering life thus long,
In leeving thus each minute of an hour
Doth pierce my heart with darts of thousand deaths:
If she by flight her fury do escape,
What will she think;
Will she not say; yea flatly to my face,
Accusing me of mere disloyalty,
A trusty friend is tried time of need:
But I when she in danger was of death
And needed me, and cried Segasio help:
I turned my back and quickly ran away.
Unworthy I to bear this vital breath:
But what, what needs these plaints
If Amadine do live then happy I,
She will in time forgive and so forget,
Amadine is merciful, not Iuno like.
In harmful heart to harbour hatred long.
Clubs, prongs, pitchforks, bills, O help, a bear, a bear, a bear.
Still bears, and nothing else but bears.
Tell me sirrah where she is;
O sir, she is run down the woods:
I see her wit head and her white belly.
Thou talkest of wonders, to tell me of white bears.
But sirrah didst thou ever see any such;
No faith I never saw any such,
But I remember my father's words,
He bade me take heed I was not caught with a white bear
A lamentable tale no doubt.
I tell you what sir as I was going a field to serve my father's great horse, & carried a bottly of hay upon my head, now do you see sir, I fast hoodwinked, that I could see nothing, perceiving the bear coming, I threw my hay into the hedge and ran away.
What from nothing;
I warrant you yes, I saw something, for there was tow load of thorns besides my bottle of hay, and that made three.
But tell me sirrah, the bear that thou didst see,
Did she not bear a bucket on her arm;
Ha ha, ha, I never saw bear go a milking in all my life.
But hark you sir, I did not look so high as her arm:
I saw nothing but her whit head, and her whit belly.
But tell me sirrah, where dost thou dwell;
Why, do you not know me.
Why no, how should I know thee,
Why then you know no body, and you know not me ' I tell you sir I am the goodman rats son of the next parish over the hill.
Goodman rats son why what's thy name,
why I am very near kin unto him.
I think so, but what's thy name?
My name, I have very pretty name I'll tell you what my name is: my name is Mouse,
what plain Monse.
I, plain mouse with out either welt or guard.
But do you hear sir I am but a very young mouse,
For my tail is scarce grown out yet, look you here else.
But I pray thee, who gave thee that name?
faith sir I know not that, but if you would feign know, ask my father's great horse, for he hath been halfe a year longer with my father then I have.
This seems to be a merry fellow,
I care not if I take him home with me,
Mirth is a comfort to a troubled mind,
A merry man, a merry master makes.
How sayst thou sirrah, wilt thou dwell with me?
Nay soft sir, tow words to a bargain, pray you what occupation are you?
No occupation, I live upon my lands.
Your lands, a way, you are no master for me, why do you think that I am so mad, to go seek my living in the lands amongst the stones, briers, and bushes, and tear my holy day apparel, not I by your leave.
Why, I do not mean thou shalt.
How then?
Why thou shalt be my man, and wait upon me at the court.
What's that?
Where the King lies.
What's that same King a man or woman?
A man as thou art.
As I am, hark you sir pray you what kin is he to good man king of our parish the church warden?
No kin to him, he is the King of the whole land.
king of the land, I never see him.
If thou wilt dwell with me, thou shalt see him every day.
shall I go home again to be torn in pieces with bears, no not I, I will go home & put on a clean shirt, and then go drown myself.
Thou shalt not need, if thou wilt dwell with me, thou shalt want nothing.
Shall I not? then hears my hand, i'll dwell with you, And hark you sir, now you have entertained me, I will tell you what I can do, I can keep my tongue from picking and stealing, and my hands from lying and slandering, I warrant you, as well as ever you had man. in all your life.
Now will I to court with sorrowful heart, rownded with doubts, if Amadine do live, then happy I: yea happy I if Amadine do live.
Now brave Lords, our wars are brought to end,
Our foes the foil and we in safety rest,
It us behoves to use such clemency in peace
As valour in the war.
It is as great honour to be bountiful at home,
As to be conquerors in the field.
Therefore my Lords the more to my content,
Your liking, and your country's safeguard,
We are disposed in marriage for to give
Our daughter to Lord Segasto hear,
Who shall succeed the diadem after me:
And reign hereafter as I tofore have done
Your sole and lawful King of Arragon:
What say you Lordings, like you of my advise?
And please your Majesty, we do not only allow of your highness pleasure, but also vow fathfully in what we may to further it.
Thanks good my Lords, if long Adrostus
Me will at full requite your courtesies.
Tremelio in recompense of thy late valour done,
Take unto thee the Catalone a prince,
Lately our prisoner taken in the wars
Be thou his keeper, his ransom shallbe thine,
we'll think of it when leisure shall afford:
Meanwhile do use him well, his father is a King.
Thanks to your Majesty, his usage shallbe such,
As he thereat shall think no cause to grutce.
Then march we on to court, and rest our wearied limbs
But Collen, I have a tale in secret kept for thee:
When thou shalt hear a watch word from thy king,
Think then some weighty matter is at hand
That highly shall concern our state,
Then Collen look thou be not far from me:
And for thy service thou tofore hast done,
Thy truth and valour proud in every point,
I shall with bounties thee enlarge therefore:
So guard us to the court.
What so my sovereign doth command me do,
With willing mind I gladly yield consent
Tell me sirrah, how do you like your weapons;
O very well, very well, they keep my sides warm.
They keep the dogs form your shins very well do they not;
How, keep the dogs from my shins, I would scorn but my shins should keep the dogs from them.
Well sirrah, leaving idle talk, tell me:
Dost thou know captain Tremelioes' chamber;
I very well, it hath a door
I think so, for so hath every chamber●
But dost thou know the man.
I forsooth he hath a nose on his face.
Why so hath every one
That s more than I know.
But dost thou remember the captain, that was here with the king even now, that brought the young prince prisoner?
O very well.
Go unto him and bid him come to me,
Tell him I have a matter in secret to impart to him,
I will master, master what's his name?
Why captain Tremelio.
O the meal man, I know him very well,
He brings meal every satturday: but hark you master must I bid him come to you or must you come to him
No sir, he must come to me.
Hark you master, how if he be not at home.
What shall I do then?
Why then leav'st word with some of his folks.
Oh master, if there be no body within,
I will leave word with his dog.
Why can his dog speak,
I cannot tell, wherefore doth he keep his chamber else.
To keep out such knaves as thou art.
Nay be lady then go yourself.
You will go sir, will ye not;
Yes marry will I, O 'tis come to my head,
And a be not within, I'll bring his chamber to you.
What wilt thou pluck down the King's house?
Nay be lady I'll know the price of it first.
Master it is such a hard name, I have forgotten it again I pray you tell me his name,
I tell thee captain Tremelio.
Oh captain triple knave, captain triple knave
How now sirrah, dost thou call me?
You must come to my master captain triple knave
My Lord Segasto. did you send for me.
I did Tremelio, sirrah about your business.
I marry, what's that can you tell
No not well.
Marry than I can, strait to the kitchen dresser, to Iohn the cook, and get me a good piece of beef and brewis, and then to the buttery hatch to Thomas the butler, for a inch of bear, and there for an hour ileso be labour myself, therefore I pray you call me not till you think I have done, I pray you good master.
well, sir aways.
Tremelio this it is, thou knowest the valour of Segasto
Spread through all the kingdom of Arragon,
And such as hath found triumph and favours,
Never daunted at any time, but now a shepherd,
Admired at in court for worthiness.
And Segasto's honour laid a side.
My will therefore is this, that thou dost find some means to work the shepherds death, I know thy strength sufficient to perform my desire, & thy love no other wise then to revenge my injuries.
It is not the frowns of a shepherd that Tremelio fears.
Therefore account it accomplished, what I take in have
Thanks good Tremelio, and assure thyself,
What I promise that will I perform.
Thanks my good Lord, and in good time
See where he cometh, stand by a while.
And you shall see me put in practise your intented, drifts.
Have at thee swain, if that I hit thee right.
Vild coward, so without cause to strike a man.
Turn coward turn, now strike and do thy worst.
Hold shepherd hold, spare him, kill him not,
ccursed villain, tell me what hast thou done.
Ah Tremelio, trusty Tremelio, I sorrow for thy death,
And since that thou living, didst prove faithful to
Segasto, so Segasto now living shall honour the dead corpses of Tremlio with revenge.
Blood thirsty villain, borne and bred to merciless murder,
Tell me how durst thou be so bold.
As once to lay thy hands upon the least of mine.
Assure thyself, thou shalt be used according to the law.
Segasto cease, these threats are needless
Accuse not me of murder, that have done nothing but in mine own defence.
Nay shepherd reason not with me.
I'll manifest thy fact unto the King:
Whose doom will be thy death as thou deservest,
What ho, Mouse come away.
Why how now, what's the matter.
I thought you would be calling before I had done.
Come help away with my friend.
Why is he drunk, cannot he stand on his feet.
No, he is not drunk, he is slain.
Slain, no by Lady he is not slain.
he's killed I tell thee.
What, do you use to kill your friends.
I will serve you no longer.
I tell thee the shepherd killed him.
O did a so, but master, I will have all his apparel if I carry him away.
Why so thou shalt.
Come then I will help, mass master I think his mother song looby to him he is so heavy.
behold the fickle state of man, always mutable, never at one.
Sometimes we feed on fancies with the sweet of our desires.
Sometimes again we feel the heat of extreme misery.
Now am I infavour about the court and country.
To morrow those favours will turn to frowns,
To daie I live revenged on my foe,
To morrow I die, my foe revenged on me,
No passengers this morning, what not one.
A chance that seldom doth befall.
What not one, then lie thou there,
And rest thyself till I have further need:
Now Bremo sith thy leisure so affords.
An endless thing, who knows not Bremo's strength
Who like a king commander within these woods,
The bear, the boar, dares not abide my sight,
But hastes away to save themselves by flight:
The crystal waters in the bubbling brooks,
When I come by doth swiftly slide away,
And claps themselves in closerts under banks,
Afraid to look bold Bremo in the face:
The aged oaks at Bremo's breath do bow,
And all things else are still at my command,
Else What would I?
Rend them in pieces and pluck them from the earth,
And each way else I would revenge myself,
Why who comes here with whom I dare not fight,
Who fights with me & doth not die the death; not on:
What favour shows this sturdy stick to those,
That here within these woods are combataines with me?
Why death and nothing else but present death,
With restless rage I wander through these woods,
No creature here but feareth Bremo's force,
Man, woman, child, beast and bird,
And every thing that doth approach my sight,
Are forced to fall if Bremo once but frown,
Come cudgel come, my partner in my spoils,
For here I see this day it will not be,
But when it falls that I encounter any,
One pat sufficed for to work my wil.
What comes not one? then let's begun,
A time will serve when we shall better speed.
Shephard, thou hast heard thine accusers,
Murder is laid to thy charge,
What canst thou say, thou hast deserved death;
Dread sovereign, I must needs confess,
I slew this captain in mine own defence,
Not of any malice but by chance,
But mine accuser hath a further meaning.
words will not here prevail,
I seek for justice, & justice craves his death.
Shepheard thine own confession hath condemned thee.
Sirrah take him away, & do him to execution strait.
So he shall I warrant him, but do you hear master King, he is kin to a monkey, his neck is bigger than is head.
Come sirrah away with him, and hang him about the middle.
Yes forsooth I warrant you, come on sir, a so like a sheep biter a looks.
Dread sovereign and well-beloved sire.
On bended kees I crave the life of this condemned shepherd, which heretofore preserved the life of thy sometime distressed daughter.
K. preserved the life of my sometime distressed daughter
How can that be; I never knew the time
Whrein thou wast distressed, I never knew the day
But that I have maintained thy state,
As best beseemed the daughter of a king
I never saw the shepherd until now,
How comes it then that he preserved thy life?
Once walkeing with Segasto in the woods,
Further than our accustomed manner was,
Right before us down a steep fall hill,
A monstrous ugly bear doth high him fast
To meet us both, now whether this be true,
I refer it to the credit of Segasto.
Most true and like your majesty.
How then?
The bear being eager to obtain his pray;
Made forward to us with an open mouth,
As if he meant to swallow us both at once,
The sight whereof did make us both to dread,
But specially your daughter Amadine,
Who for I saw no succour incident
But in Segasto's valour, I grew desperate,
And he most cowardlike began to fly.
Left me distressed to be devoured of him,
How say you Segasto is it not true?
His silence verifies it to be true, what then;
Then I amasded stressed all alone,
Did high me fast to scape that ugly bear,
But all in vain, for why he reached after me,
And hardly I did oft escape his paws,
Till at the length this shepherd came,
And brought to me his head.
Come hither boy, lo here it is, which I present unto your majesty.
The slaughter of this bear deserves great fame.
The slaughter of a man deserves great blame.
Indeed occasion oftentimes so falls out.
Tremelio in the wars. O King preserved thee,
The shepherd in the woods o king preserved me.
Tremelio fought when many men did yield.
So would the shepherd had he been in field
So would my master, had he not run aways.
Tremelioes' force saved thousands from the foe.
The shepherds force have saved thousand, more.
Ay shipstickes, nothing else.
Segasto cease to accuse the shepherd,
His worthiness deserves a recompense,
All we are bound to do the shepherd good:
Shepherd, whereas it was my sentence, thou shouldst die,
So shall my sentence stand, for thou shalt die.
Thanks to your majesty.
But soft Segasto, not for this offence,
Long mayst thou live, and when the sisters shall decree
To cut in twain the twisted thread of life,
Then let him die, for this I set thee free,
And for thy valour I will honour thee.
Thanks to your majesty.
Come daughter let us now depart, to honour the worthy valour of the shepherd with our rewards.
O master hear you, you have made a fresh hand now you would be allow you, why what will you do now? you have lost me a good occupation by the means, Faith master now I cannot hang the shepherd, I pray you let me take the pains to hang you, it is but half an hours exercise.
You are still in your knavery, but sith I cannot have his life I will procure his banishment for ever. Come on sirrah.
Yes forsooth I come laugh at him I pray you.
From Amadine and from her father's court,
With gold and silver and with rich rewards,
Flowing from the banks of golden tresuries,
More may I boast and say but I,
Was never shepherd in such dignity,
All hail worthy shepherd.
All rain lousy shepherd.
Welcome my friends, from whence come you;
The King and Amadine greets thee well,
And after greetings done, bids thee departed the court, shepherd begun.
Shepheard take law legs, fly away shepherd
Whose words are these? came these from Amadine?
Ay from Amadine.
Ay from Amladine.
Ah luckless fortune worse than Phaeton's tale,
My former bliss is now become my bale.
What wilt thou poison thyself?
My former heaven is now become my hell.
The worst ale house that I ever came in, in all my life.
What shall I do.
Even go hang thyself half an nower.
Can Amadine so churelishly command.
To banish the shepherd from her Father's court?
What should shepherds do in the court.
What should shepherrdes do amongst us, have we not Lords enough on us in the court?
Why shepherds are men, and kings are no more.
shepherds are men and masters over their flock
That's a lie who pays them their wages then?
Well you are always interrupting of me,
But you are best look to him lest you hang for him when he is gone.
And you shall hang for company,
For leaving me alone.
Shepheard stand forth and hear thy sentence,
Shepherd begun within three days in pain of,
My displeasure, shepherd begun, shepherd begun, begun, begun, begun, shepherd, shepherd, shepherd
And must I go, and must I needs departed?
Ye goodly groves partakers of my songs
In time tofore when fortune did not frown,
power forth your plaints and wail a while with me
And thou bright sun my comfort in the cold,
Hid, hide thy face and leave me comfortless,
Ye wholesome herbs, and sweet smelling savours,
Ye each thing else prolonging life of man,
Change, change your wont course,
That I wanting your aid, in woeful sort may die,
Arinea if any body ask for me,
Make some excuse till I return.
What and Segasto call.
Do thou the like to him, I mean not to stay long.
This voice so sweet my pining spirits revives
Shepherd, well met tell me how thou dost.
I linger life yet wish for speedy death.
Shepherd, although thy banishment already be decreed and all against thy will, yet Amadine.
Ah Amadine, to hear of banishment is death,
I double death to me, but since I must departed, one thing I crave.
Say on with all my heart.
That in absence either far or near.
You honoor me as servant with your name.
Not so.
And why?
I honour thee as sovereign with my heart.
A shepherd and a sovereign nothing like.
Yet like enough where there is no dislike.
Yet great dislike or else no banishment.
Shepherd, it is only Segasto that procures thy banishment.
Unworthy wights are most in jealousy.
Would God they would freethe from banishment, or likewise bamish me.
Amen say I, to have your company.
Well shepherd, sith thou sufferest this for my sake, with thee in exile also let me live.
On this condition shepherd thou canst love.
No longer love no longer let me live.
O flat I loved one indeed, now love I none but only thee.
Thanks worthy princes I borne likewise,
Yet smother up the blast,
I dare not promise what I may perform,
Well shepherd, hark what I shall say,
I will return unto my Father's court.
Therefore to provide me of such nescessaries,
As for our journey I shall think most fit,
This being done I will return to thee,
Do thou therefore appoint the place where we may meet.
Down in the valley where I slew the bear,
And there doth grow a fair broad branched beach,
That overshades a well, so who comes first
Let them abide the happy meeting of us both.
How like you this?
I like it very well.
Now if you please you may appoint the time,
Full three hours hence God willing, I will return.
The thanks that paris gave the graecian queen the like doth Mucedorus yield.
Then Mucedorus forthreee hours farewell.
Your departure lady breeds a privy pain.
'tis well Segasto that thou hast thy will,
Should such a shhephard, such a simple swain
As he, eclipse thy credit famous through the court.
No ply Segasto ply; let it not in Arragon be said,
A shepherd hath Segatoes' honour won.
What ho master will you come away;
Will you come hither I pray you, what's the matter?
Why, is it not past a leaven a clock.
How then sir.
I pray you come away to dinner:
I pray you come hither.
Here's such a do with you, will you never come.
I pray you sir what news of the message I sent you about,
I tell you all the messes be on the table already,
There wants not so much as a mess of mustard half an nower ago.
Come sir, your mind is all upon your belly.
You have forgotten what I did bid you do,
Faith I know nothing, but you bade me go to breakfast.
Was that all;
Faith I have forgotten it, the very sent of the meat made me hath forget it quite.
You have forgotten the arrant I bid you do.
What arrant, an arrant knave, or arrant whore;
Why thou knave, did I not bid thee banish the shepherd.
O the shepherds bastard.
I tell thee the shepherds banishment.
I tell you the shepherds bastard shallbe well kept i'll look to it my self else, but I pray you come away to dinner.
Then you will not tell me whether you have banished him or Noah.
Why I cannot say banishment and you would give me a thousand pounds to say so,
Why you whoreson slave, have you forgotten, that
I sent you, and another to drive away the shepherd.
What an ass are you. here's a stir in deeed here's message, arrant, banishment, and I cannot tell what.
I pray you sir, shall I know whether you have drove him away.
Faith I think I have, and you will not believe me ask my stafe.
Why can thy staff tell.
Why he was with me to.
Then happy I that have obtained my will.
And happier I, if you would go to dinner.
Come sirrah, follow me.
I warrant you I will not lose an inch of you now you are going to dinner, I promise you I thought seven year before I could get him aways.
God grant my long delay procures no harm
Nor this my taring frustrate my pretence,
My Mucedorus surely stays for me,
And thinks me over long, at length I come
My present promise to perform:
Ah what a thing is firm unfeigned love,
What is it which true love dares not tempt
My father he may make but I must match,
Segasto loves but Amadine must like,
Where likes her best compulsion is a thrall,
No, no, the hearty choice is all in all,
The shepherds virtue Amadine esteems.
But what me thinks my shepherd is not come?
I muse at that, the hour is sure at hand,
Well here ile rest till Mucedorus come.
A happy prey, now Bremo feed on flesh,
Dainties Bremo dainties thy hungry paunch to fill,
Now glut thy greedy guts with lukewarm blood,
Come fight with me, I long to see thee dead.
How can she fight that weapons cannot wield?
What canst not fight? then lie thou down and die.
What must I die?
What needs these words. I thirst to suck thy blood
Yet pity me and let me live a while.
No pity I, i'll feed upon thy flesh,
I'll tear thy body piecemeal joint from joint.
Ah now I want my shepherds company.
i'll crush thy bones betwixt tow oaken trees.
Hast shepherd haste or else thou comest to lat.
i'll suck the sweetness from thy marie bones.
Ah spare ah spare to shed my guiltless blood
With this my bat will I beat out thy brains
Down, down I say, prostrate thyself upon the ground
Then Mucedorus farewell. my hoped joys farewell.
Yea farewell life, and welcome present death,
To thee O God I yield my dying ghost.
Now Bremo play thy part,
How now what sudden chance is this.
My limbs do tremble and my sinews shake
My unweakened arms have lost their former force:
Ah Bremo, Bremo, what a foil hast thou,
That yet at no time ever waste afraid
To dare the greatest gods to fiight with thee,
And now want strength for one down driving blow
Ah how my courage fails when I should strike,
Some new come spirit abiding in my breast,
Shall I spare her Bremo, spare her, do not kill,
Saith spare her which never spared any?
To it Bremo to it, say again.
I cannot wield my weapons in my hand,
Me thinks I should not strike so fair a one,
I think her beauty hath bewitched my source
Or else with in me altered nature's course,
ay woman, wilt thou live in woods with me;
Feign would I live, yet loath to live in woods,
Thou shalt not choose, it shallbe as I say & therefore follow me.
It was my will an hour a go and more,
As was my promise for to make return,
But other business hindered my pretence.
It is a world to see when man appoints,
And purposely one certain thing decrees
How many things may hinder his intent.
What once would wish the same is farthest off:
But yet th'appointed time cannot be passed,
Nor hath her presence yet prevented we,
Well here ile stay, and expect her coming.
Some one or other is pursued no doubt
Perhaps some search for me, 'tis good to doubt the worst, therefore i'll begun.
Hold him, hold him hold him, here's a stur in deed
Hear came hew after the crier, and I was set close
At mother Nips house, and there I called for three
Pots of ale, as 'tis the manner of us courtiers, now sirrah,
I had taken the maiden head of tow of them.
Now as I was lifting up the third to my mouth, there came hold him, hold him, now I could not tell whom to catch hold on, but I am sure I caught one perchance a may be in this pot, well i'll see, mass I cannot see him yet, well i'll look a little further, mass he is a little slave if a be here, why here's no body, all this goes well yet: but if the old trot should come for her pot, I marry there's the matter but I care not, i'll face her out, and call her old rusty dusty musty fusty crustkie firebran, and worse than all that, and so face her out of her pot: but soft here she comes.
Come on you gnaw where's my pot you knave?
Go look your pot, come not to me for your pot twe●e good for you.
Thou liest thou knave thou hast my pot.
You lie and you say it, I your pot, I know what i'll say
Why what will't thou say.
But say I have him and thou dar'st,
Why thou knave. thou hast not only my pot but my drink unpaide for.
You lie like an old I will not say whore.
dost thou call me whore, i'll cap thee my for pot.
Cap me & thou darest, searce me whether I have it or no.
How now sirrah, what's the matter;
Oh flies master flies.
Flies where are they?
Oh here master, all about your face.
Why thou liest I think thou art mad.
Why master, I have killed a duncart full at the least
Go to sirrah, leaving this idle talk give ear to me.
How, give you one of my ears? not & you were ten masters.
Why sir I bid you give ear to my words,
I tell you I will no be made a curtal for no man's pleasure
I tell thee attend what I say go thy ways strait and rear the whole town.
How rear the town even go yourself, it is more than I can do, why do you think I can rear a town, that can scarce rear a pot of ale to my head? I should rear a town should I not;
Go to the constable and make a privy search, for the shepherd is run away with the King's daughter.
How? is the shepherd run away with the king's daughter. or is the king's daughter run away with the shepherd.
I cannot tell, but they are both gone together
What a fool is she to run away with the shepherd, why I think I am a little handsomer man than the shepherd myself, but tell me master, must I make a privy search, or search in the privy;
why dost thou think they will be there;
I cannot tell.
Well then search every where. leave no place unsearched for them.
Oh now am I in office, now will I to that old firbrands house & will not leave one place unsearched, nay i'll to her ale stand & drink as long as I can stand, & when I have done i'll let out all the rest, to see if he be not hid in the barrel, & I find him not there, i'll to the cubord, i'll not leave one corner of her house unsearched, ye faith ye old crust I willbe with you now.
Now Mucedorus whither will't thou go,
Home to thy father to thy native soil,
Or try some long abode within these woods;
Well I will hence departed and high me home,
What hie me home said I? that may not be.
In Amadine rests my felicity
Then Mucedorus do as thou didst decree,
Attire thee hermit like, within these grovees,
Walk often to the beach and view the well.
Make settles there and seat thy self thereon,
And when thou feelest thyself to be a thirst,
Then drink a hearty draft to Amadine,
No doubt she thinks on thee,
And will one day come pleg. at this wel:
Come habit thou art fit for me,
No shepherd now, a hermit I must be:
methinks this fits me very well,
Now must I learn to bear a walking staff,
And exercise some gravity withal.
here's throw the woods, and throw the woods, to look out a shepherd & a stray king's daughter, but soft who have we here, what art thou?
I am an hermit.
An emmet, I never saw such big emmet in all my life before.
I tell you sir I am an hermit, one that leads a solitary life within these woods.
O I know the now, thou art her that eats up all the hips and haws, we could not have one piece of fat bacon for thee all this year.
Thou dost mistake me, but I pray thee tell me what dost thou seek in these wood?
What do I seek, for a stray King's daughter run away with a shepherd:
A stray King's daughter run away with a shepherd. Wherefore canst thou tell?
Yes that I can, 'tis this, my master and Amadins walking one day abroad, nearer to these woods than they were used, about what I can not tell, but toward them comes running a great bear, now my master he played the man and run away, & Amadine crying after him: now sir comes me a shepherd & strikes off the bears head, now whether the bear where dead before or no I cannot tell for bring twenty bears before me and bind their hands & feet and i'll kill them all: now ever since Amadine hath been in love with the shepherd, and for good will she's even run away with the shepherd.
What manner of man was a, canst describe him unto me;
Scrib him aye I warrant you that I can, a was a little, low, broad, tall, narrow, big well favoured fellow, a jerkin of whit cloth, and buttons of the same cloth
Thou describest him well, but if I chance to see any such pray you where shall I find you, or what's your name
My name is called master mouse,
Oh master mouse, I pray you what office might you bear in the court?
Marry sir I am a rusher of the stable.
O usher of the table-
Nay I say rusher and i'll prove mine office good, for look sir when any comes from under the sea or so, and a dog chance to blow his nose backward, then with a whip I give him the good time of the day, and straw rushes presently, therefore I am a rusher, a high office I promise ye.
But where shall I find you in the Court?
Why where it is best being, either in he kitchen a eating or in the buttery drinking: but if you come I will provide for thee a piece of beef & brew is knockle deep in fat, pray you take pains remember master mouse.
Ay sir, I warrant I will not forget you.
Ah Amadine, what should become of the.
whither shouldst thou go so long unknown.
with watch and ward each passage is beset,
So that she cannot long escape unknown:
Doubtless she hath lost her self within these woods out
And wandering too and fro she seeks the well,
Which yet she cannot find, therefore will I sack hers,
Amadine, how like you Bremo & his woods?
As like the woods of Bremo's cruelty,
Though I were dumb and could not answer him,
The beasts themselves would with relenting tears
Bewail thy savage and unhumaine deeds.
My love, why dost thou murmur to thyself?
Speak louder, for thy Bremo hears thee not.
My Bremo, no the shepherd is my love.
Have I not saved thee from sudden death,
Giving thee leave to live that thou mightst love?
And dost thou whet me on to cruelty;
Come kiss me sweet for all my favours past.
I may not Bremo and therefore pardon me.
See how she flings away from me;
I will follow and give a rend to her,
Deny my love, ah worm of beauty
I will chastise thee: come, come, prepare thy head upon the block
Oh spare me Bremo love should limit life,
Not to be made a murderer of himself
If thou wilt glut thy loving heart with blood,
Encounter with the lion or the bear,
And a like wolf pray not upon a lamb.
Why then dost thou repine at me?
If thou wilt love me thou shalt be my queen,
I will crown thee with a complete made of ivory,
And make the rose and lily wait on thee,
I'll rend the burley branches from the oak,
To shadow thee from buring sun.
The trees shall spread themselves where thou dost go,
And as they spread, i'll trace along with thee,
You may, for who but you?
Thou shalt be fed with quails and partridges
With black birds, larks, thrushes and nightingales.
Thy drink shall be goats milk and crystal water,
Distilled from the fountains & the clearest springs.
And all the dainties that the woods afford.
I'll freely give thee to obtain thy love.
You may, for who but you?
The day i'll spend to recreate my love,
With all the pleasures that I can devise,
And 〈…〉 thy bedfellow,
An 〈…〉 thee in mine arms.
, o may not you.
The satires & the woodnimphs shall attend on the
And lull thee a sleep with musics sound,
And in the morning when thou dost awake
The lark shall sing good morn to my queen,
And whilst he singes i'll kiss my Amadine.
You may, for who but you.
When thou art up, the wood lanes shallbe strawed
With violets, cowslips and sweet marigolds.
For thee to trampel and to trace upon,
And I will teach thee how to kill the dear,
To chase the hart and how to rouse the roe,
If thou wilt live to love and honour me.
You may for who but you?
Welcomed sir, an hour ago I looked for such a gest
Be merry wench, we'll have a frolic feast,
here's flesh enough for to suffice us both,
Stay sirrah, wilt thou fight or dost thou yeel to die?
I want a weapon, how can I fight?
Thou wants a weapon, why then thou yeelst to die.
I say not so, I do not yield to die.
Thou shalt not choose, I long to see thee dead
Yet spare him Bremo spare him
A way, I say, I will not spare him.
Yet give me leave to speak.
Thou shalt not speak.
Yet give him leave to speak for my sake.
Speak on, but be not over long.
In time of yore when men like brutish beasts,
Did lead their lives in loathsome cells and woods
And wholly gave themselves to witless will,
A rude unruly rout, than man to man became
A present pray, than might prevailed,
The weakst went to walls,
Right was unknown, for wrong was all in all,
As men thus lived in his great outrage,
Behold one Orpheus came as poets tell,
And them `from rudeness unto reason brought,
Who led by reasonson some forsook the woods,
Instead of caves they built them castles strong,
Cities and towns were founded by them then,
Glad wrethey, they found such ease,
And in the end they grew to perfect amity
Weighing their former wickedness,
They termed the time wherein they lived then
A golden age, a goodly golden age.
Now Bremo, for so I hear thee called.
If men which lived tofore as thou dost now,
Wily in wood, addicted all to spoil,
Returned were by worthy Orpheus' means,
Let me like Orpheus cause thee to return
From murder, bloodshed and like cruelty,
What should we fight before we have a cause
No, let's live and love together faithfully.
I'll fight for thee.
Fight form me or die, or fight or else thou diest.
hold Bremo hold,
Away I say, thou troublest me,
You promised me to make me your queen.
I did, I mean no less.
You promised that I should have my will,
I did I mean no less.
Then save this hermits life, for he may save us both:
A thy request i'll spare him, but never any after him
Say hermit what canst thou do?
I'll wait on thee, sometime upon the queen, such srevice shalt thou shortly have as Bremo never had.
Come sirs what shall I never have you find out Amadine and the shepherd)
And I have been through the woods, and through the woods, and could see nothing but an emet.
Why I see thousand emmets, thou meanest a little one,
Nay that emet that I saw was bigger than thou art
Bigger than I what a fool have you to your man, I pray you master turn him away?
But dost thou hear, was he not a man.
think he was, for he said he did lead a saltseller life about the woods.
Thn wouldest say a solitarie lie about the woods
I think it was so indeed.
I thought what a fool thou art.
Thou art a wise man, why he did nothing but sleep since he went
But tell me Mouse, how did he go;
In a whit gown and a whit hat on his head, and a staff in his hand.
I thought so, it was a hermit that walked a solitary life in the woods.
Well, get you to dinner, and after never leave seeking till you bring some news of them, or i'll hang you both.
How now Rombelo, what shall we do now;
Faith i'll home to dinner, and afterward to sleep.
Why then thou wilt be hanged.
Faith I care not, for I know I shall never find them well i'll once more abroad, & if I cannot find them, i'll never come home again.
I tell thee what Rombelo, thou shalt go in at one end of the wood and I at the other, and we will meet both together at the midst.
Content, let's away to dinner.
Unknown to any here within these woods
With bloody Bremo do I lead my life,
The monster he doth murder all he meets,
He spareth none and none doth him escape,
Who would continue, who but only I
In such a cruel cutthroates company.
Yet Amadine is there how can I choose:
Ah silly soul how often times she sits
And sighs, and calls come shepherd come,
Sweet Mucedorus, come and set me free,
When Mucedorus pesent stands hereby:
But here she comes, what news fair Lady as you walk. these woods.
Ah hermit, none but bad & such as thou knowest.
How do you like your Bremo and his woods;
Not my Bremo nor his Bremo woods;
And why, not yours, me thinks he loves you well
I like him not, his love to me is nothing wrath
Lady, in this methinks you offer wrong,
To hate the man that ever loves you best.
Ah hermit, I take no, pleasure in his love.
Neither yet doth Bremo like me best.
pardon my boldness fair lady, sith we both
May safely talk now out of Bremos' sight,
Unfold to me if so you please, the full discourse
How, when and why you came into these woods,
And fell into this bloody burchers hands.
Hermit I will, of late a worthy shepherd I did love you.
A shepherd lady, sure a man unfit to match with
Hermit this is true, and when we had.
Stay there, the wild men comes
Refer the rest until another time.
What secret tale is this, what whispering have we here;
Villain I charge the tell thy tale again,
I needs I must, lo here it is again,
When as we both had lost the sight of thee
It grieved us both, but specially thy queen,
Who in thy absence ever fears the worst,
Lest some mischance befall your royrll grace.
Shall my sweet Bremo wander through the woods.
toil to and fro for to redress my want,
Hazard his life and all to cherish me,
I like not this quoth she
And thereupon craude to know of me
If I could teach her handle weapons well.
My answer was I had small skill therein,
But gladmost mighty king to learn of thee.
And this was all.
Whast so, none can dislike of this.
I'll teach you both to fight, but first my queen begin,
Here take this weapon, see how thou canst use it.
This is to big, I cannot wield it in my arm.
Is't so, we'll have a knotty crabtree staff for thee:
But sirrah tell me, what sayst thou.
With all my heart I willing am to learn.
Then take my stafe & see how canst wield it.
First teach me how to hold it in my hand.
Thou houldest it well, look how he doth thou mayst the sooner learn.
Next tell me how and when 'tis best to strike.
'tis best to strike when time doth serve, 'tis best to lose no time.
Then now or never is my time to strike.
And when thou strikest, be sure thou hit the head
The head;
The very head.
Then have at thine, so lie there and die,
A death no doubt according to desert.
Or else a worse as thou deservest a worse.
It glads my heart this tyrants death to see.
Now lady it remains in you to end the tale you lately had begun, being enterrupted by this wicked wight.
You said you loved a shepherd.
I so I do, and none but only him.
And will do still as long as life shall last
But tell me lady, sith I set you free,
What course of life do you intent to take?
I will disguised wander through the world
Till I have found him out,
How if you find your shepherd in these woodsy?
Ah none so happy then as Amadine.
In tract of time a man may alter much,
Say Lady do you know your shepherd well?
My Mucedorus hath he set me free?
he hath set thee free.
And lived so long unknown to Amadine.
Ay that's a question where of you may not be resolved,
You know that I am banished from the court,
I know likewise each passage is beset,
So that we cannot long escape unknown,
Therefore my will is this, that we return
Right through the thickets to the wild man's cave:
And there a while live on his provision,
Until the search and narrow watch be past.
This is my counsel, and I think it best.
I think the very same.
Come let's begun.
Nay soft sir are you here. abots on you,
I was like to be hanged for not finding you,
We would borrow a certain stray king's daughter of you, a wench, a wench sir we would have.
A wench of me i'll make the eat my sword.
Oh Lord, nay and you are so lusty I'll call a cooling card for you, ho master, master come away quickly.
What's the matter;
Look master, Amadine & the shepherd, oh brave
What minion, have I found you out;
Nay that's alley lie, I found her out my slfe.
Thou gadding housewife, what cause hadst thou to gad abroad,
When as thou knowest our wedding day so nigh?
Not so Segasto, no such thing in hand, show your assurance, then i'll answer you.
Thy father's promise my assurance is.
But what he promised he hath not performed,
It rests in thee for to perform the same:
Not I.
And why;
So is my will and therefore even so.
Master with anon, none no.
A wicked villant art thou here?
What needs these words we way them not?
We way them not proud shepherd, I scorn thy company.
we'll not have a corner of thy company.
I scorn not thee, nor yet the least of thine.
That's a lie, a would have killed me with his pugs nondo.
This stoutness Amadine contents me not.
Then seek an other that may you better please
Well Amadine, it only rests in thee
Without delay to make thy choice of three,
There stands Segasto, here a shepherd stands,
There stands the third, now make thy choice,
A Lord at the lest I am.
My choice is made, for I will none but thee.
A worthy mate no doubt for such a wife.
And Amdine, why wilt thou none but m?
I cannot keep thee as thy father did,
I have no lands for to maintain thy state.
moreover if thou mean to be my wife,
Commonly this must be thy use,
To bed at midnight, up at four,
Drudge all day and trudge from place to place,
Whereby our daily vittel for to win:
And last of all which is the worst of all,
No princes then but plain a shepherds wife.
Then god ge you god morrow goody shepherd
It shall not need if Amadine do live,
Thou shalt be crowned king of Arragon,
Oh master laugh, when he's King then i'll be a queen.
Then know that which near tofore was known
I am no shepherd, no Arragonian I,
But borne of Royal blood, my fathers of Valentia
King, my mother queen, who for thy secret sake
took this hard task in hand.
Ah how I joy my fortune is so good,
Well now I see, Segasto shall not speed
But Mucedorus, I as much do joy
To see thee here within our Court of Arragon,
As if a kingdom had befallen me this time,
I with my heart surrender it to thee.
And look what right to Amadine I have.
What barns door and borne where my father
Was constable. abots on thee, how dost thee.
Thanks Segasto, but yet you leveled at the crown.
master bear this and bear all.
Why so sir.
He sees sees you take a goose by the crown.
Go to sir, away, post you to the king,
Whose heart is fraught with careful doubts,
Glad him up and tell him these good news,
And we will follow as fast as we may.
I go master, I run master.
Break heart and end my paled woes,
My amadine the comfort of my life,
How can I joy except she were in sight.
Her absence breeds sorrow to my soul
And with a thunder breaks my heart in twain.
Forbear those passions gentle King,
And you shall see 'twill turn unto the best,
And bring your soul to quiet and to joy.
Such joy as death, I do assure me that,
And nought but death, unless of her I hear,
And that with speed, I cannot sigh thus long
But what a tumult do I hear within.
I hear a noise of overpassing joy
Within the court, my Lord be of good comfort.
And here comes one in haste,
A King, a King, a King.
Why how now sirrah, what's the matter?
O 'tis news for a king'tis worth money.
Why sirrah, thou shalt have silver and gold if it be good.
O 'tis good, 'tis good, Amadine.
Oh what of her, tell me? & I will make thee a knight
How a spirit? no by lady, I will not be aspirit●
Masters get ye away, if I be a spirrit, I shall be so lean
I shall make you all afraid.
Thou sot, the King means to make thee a gentleman.
Why I shall want apparel.
Thou shalt want for nothing.
Then stand away, trick up thyself, here they come.
My gracious father pardon thy disloyal daughter
What do mine eyes be hold my daughter Amadine
Rise up dear daughter & let these my embracing arms
Show some token of thy father joy,
Which ever since thy departure hath lauguished in sorrow:
Dear father, never were your sorrows
Greater than my griefs,
Never you so deloate as I comfortless,
Yet nevertheless acknowledging myself
To be the cause of both, on bended knees
I humbly crave your pardon.
i'll pardon thee dear daughter; but as for him.
Ah father what of him,
Assure as I am a king, and wear the crown,
I will revenge on that accursed wretch.
Yet worthy prince work not thy will in wrath show favour.
I, such favour as thou deservest.
I do deserve the daughter of a king.
Oh impudent, a shepherd and so insolent.
No shepherd I, but a worthy prince.
In far conceit, not princely borne.
Yes princely borne my father is a king.
My mother Queen, and of Valentia both.
What Mucedorus, welcome to our court,
What cause hadst thou to come to me disguised?
No cause to fear, I caused no offence,
But this desiring thy daughter's virtues for to see
Disguised myself from out my father's court,
Unknown to any in secret I did rest,
And passed many troubles near to death,
So hath your daughter my partaker been,
As you shall know hereafter more at large,
Desiring you, you will give her to me,
Even as mine own and sovereign of my life
Then shall I think my travels are well spent.
With all my heart: but this.
Segasto claims my promise made tofore,
That he should have her as his only wife,
Before my counsel when we came from war
Segasto, may I crave thee let it pass.
And give Amadine as wife to Mucedorus;
With all my heart, were it far a greater thing,
And what I may to furnish up there rites,
With pleasing sports and pastimes you shall see.
Thanks good Segasto, I will think of this.
Thanks good my Lord, & while I live
Account of me in what I can or may.
And good Segasto these great courtesies
Shall not be forgot.
Why hark you master, bones what have you done?
What given away the wench you made me take such pains for, you are wise indeed, mass and I had known of that I would have had her myself. faith master now we may go to breakfast with a woodcoke pie.
Go sir you were best leave this knavery.
Come on my Lords, let's now to court
Where we may finish up the joyfulest day
That ever happed to a distressed King,
With mirth and joy and great solemnity,
we'll finish up these hymen's rights most pleasant lie,
Ho Lords at the first, I am one to, but hear master King by your leave a cast, now you have done with them, I pray you begin with me.
Why what wouldst thou have;
O you forgot, now, a little apparel to makes
handsome what should Lords go so beggarly as I do?
What I did promise thee, I will perform, attend on me, come let s departed.
we'll wait on you with all our hearts.
And with a piece of my liver to.
How now Envy, what blushest thou all ready,
Peep forth, hide not thy head with shame,
But with a courage praise a woman's deeds,
Thy threats were vain, thou couldst do me no hurt
Although thou seemest to cross me with despite,
I ouerwhelmde, and turned upside down thy block
And made thyself to stumble at the same.
Though stumbled yet not overthrown,
Thou canst not draw my heart to mildness,
Yet must I needs confess thou hast done well,
And played thy part with mirth and pleasant glee:
Say all this, yet canst thou not conquer me,
Although this time thou hast got yet not the conquest neither.
A double revenge another time i'll have:
Then caitiff cursed, stoop upon thy knee,
Yield to a woman, though not to me,
And pray we both together with our hearts,
That she thrice Nestor's years may with us rest,
And from her foes high God defend her still.
That they against her may never woke their will.
envy were he never so stout
Would beck and bow unto her majesty,
indeed Comedy thou hast overrun me now.
And forced me stoop unto a woman's sway.
God grant her grace amongst us long may reign,
And those that would not have it so,
Would that by envy soon their hearts they might forego.
The Counsel, Noble, and this Realm,
Lord guide it still with thy most holy hand,
The Commons and the subjects grant them grace,
Their prince to serve, her to obey, & rreason to deface:
Long may she rain, in joy and great felicity,
Each Christian heart do say amen with me,