son, I tell ye you have done you know not what:
I have married a woman, else I am deceived mother.
Married a woman? married indeed,
Here is a marriage that befits a King:
It is no matudile it was done in haste,
Here is a Bridal and with hell to boot,
You have made work?
Faith mother some we have indeed, but ere long you shall see us make work for an heir apparent I doubt not, nay, nay, come-come, Gods will what chiding still
O God that e'er I lived to see this day.
B my faith mother, I hope you al see the night too, and in the morning I wil be bold to ld you to the Christing Grndmother, and Godmother to a Prince of Wales, tut mother, tis a sting world.
Have you sent Warwick into France for this?
No by my faith mother I sent Warwick into France for another, but this by chance being nearer hand, and coming in the way I cannot tell how, we concluded, and now (as you see) are going about to get a young King.
But tell me son how will you answer this?
Is't possible your rash unlawful act,
Should not breed mortal hate betwixt the Realms
What may the French King think when he shall hear
That whilst you send to entreat about his daughter,
Basely to take a subject of your own?
What may the Princess Bona think of this?
Our noble cousin Warwick that great Lord,
That Center-shaking thunderclap of war,
That like a Colum propped the house of York:
And boar our white Rose bravely in his top,
When he shall hear his embassage abuser,
In this but made an instrument by you,
I know his soul will blush within his bosom,
And shame will sit in Scarlet on his Brew,
To have his honor touched with this foul blemish
Son, son I tell you that is done by you,
Which yet the child that is unborn shall rue.
sh mother you are deceude, all true subiectes shall haue use to thanke God, to haue their King borne of a true Engl woman, I tell you it was neuer ull since wee imatched wih strangers, so our children haue béene still lke Chickens of the halfe kind but where the rocke and the hen be both of one reede, there is like to be birdes of the game: hre you mother, heare you, had I gone to it by fortune, I d made your sonnes George and Dicke to haue stoode gaping after the crowne: this wench mother is a widow, and hath made proofe of her valour, and for any thing I know, I am as like to do the deed as John Gray her husband was, I had rather the people praied to blesse mine heire, then selide me an heire: hold your peace, if you can see, there was neuer mother had a to warder sonne, why Cosin Howard and Tom Sellinger heard you euer such a coyle about a wife?
My soueraigne Lord with patience beare her spl
Your princely mother's zeal is like a river,
That from the free abundance of the waters,
Breaks out into this inundation,
From her abundant care this rage proceeds,
O'er swollen with the extremity of love.
My Lord, my Lord, avoid a woman's humour,
If you resist this tumour of her will,
Here you shall have her dwell upon this passion,
Until she lade and dull our ears again:
Seem you but sorry for what you have done,
And straight she'll put the finger in the eye,
With comfort now, since it cannot be helped:
But make you show to justify the act
If ever other language in her lips,
Then out upon it, it is abominable, I dare be hanged,
Say any thing it makes no matter what,
Than thus be wearied with a woman's chat.
ay, ay, you are the spaniels of the Court,
And thus you fawn and soothe your wanton king,
But Edward hadst thou prizde thy maicie,
Thou never wouldst have stained thy princely state,
with the base leavings of a subjects bed:
Nor borne the blemish of her Bigamy.
A widow, is't not a goodly thing?
Gray's children come ask blessing of the King.
Nay I beseech your Grace my Lady York,
Even as you are a Princess and a widow,
Think not so meanly of my widowhood,
A spotless virgin came I first to Grey,
With him I lived a true and faithful wife:
And since his high imperial majesty,
Hath pleased to bless my poor dejected state
With the high Sovereign title of his Queen,
I here protest before the host of heaven,
I came as chaste a widow to his bed,
As when a virgin I to Grey was wed.
Come, come have done, now have you chid enough, God's foot, we were as merry ere she came, as any people in Christendom, I with the mistress, and these with the maids: only we have no fiddlers at our feast, but mother you have made a fit of mirth: welcome to Grafton mother, by my troth you are even just come as I wished you here, let us go to supper, and in Charity give us your blessing ere we go to Bed.
O Edward, Edward, fly and leave this place,
Wherein poor Gllie King thou art enchanted,
This is her dam of Bedford's work her mother,
That hath bewitched thee Edward my poor child,
Dishonour not the Princes of thy land,
To make the them kneel with reverence at her feet,
That ere thou dost empale with sovereignty,
They would have scorned to have looked upon,
There's no such difference twixt the greatest Peer,
And the poor silliest kitchen maid that lives,
Als bet wirt thy worthines and hers.
I do confess it, yet my Lady York,
M mother is a duchesse as you are,
A Princess borne, the Duke of Bedford's wife,
And as you know, a daughter and a sister,
Unto the royal blood of Burgundie.
But you cannot so basely think on me,
As I do think of these vain worldly titles,
God from soul my sin as far divide.
As I am far from boasting in this pride,
Madam, she is the mirror of her kind,
Had she but so much spleen as hath a gnat,
Her spirits would startle to abide your taunts,
She is a Saint, and Madam you blaspheme,
o wrong so sweete a Ladie.
Thou art a minion and a flatterer.
Madam but that you are my sovereign's mother,
I would let you know you wrong a Gentleman,
Good cousin Sellinger have patience,
Her grace's rage by too much violence,
Hath spent it selfe alreadie into re:
Dear Madam I beseeth you on my knee,
Tender that loving kindness to the Queen,
That I dare swear she doth in soul to you.
Well said good coz, I pray thee make them friends, why how now Bess, what weep? nay then i'll chide you: what sudden news comes by this messenger?
My sovereign Lord, the bastard Falconbridge,
Of late hath stirred rebellion in the South,
Encouraging his forces to deliver,
King Henrie late deposed out of the Tower,
To him the malcontented commons flock,
From every part of Sussex, Kent, and Esier,
His army waxed twenty thousand strong.
And as it is supposed by circumstance,
Mean to take London, if not well defended.
Well let this Phaeton that is mounted thus,
Look he sit surely, or by England's George,
I'll break his neck, this is no new evasion,
I surely thought that one day I should see,
That bastard Falcon take his wings to mount,
Into our Eagle airy, methought I saw,
Black discontent sit ever on his brow,
And now I see I calculated well,
Good cousin Howard, and Tom Sellinger,
This night we'll spend in feast and jollity,
With our new Queen, and our beloved mother,
Tomorrow you shall have commission,
To raise up power against this haughty rebel:
Sirrah depart not till you know our pleasure,
You shall convey us letters back to London,
Unto the Maior, Recorder, and our friends,
Is supper ready? come by my bonny Bess,
Welcome mother, we are all your guests.
Hold drum,
Hold drum and be hanged,
Hold drum hold, peace then ho, silence to the 3 proclamation.
You lie you rogue, 'tis to the Oration,
Nay then you all lie, it is to the coblication,
True hearted English and our valiant friends,
Do brave general i'faith.
Peace there you rogues, or I will split your chaps:
De are countrymen, I publicly proclaim,
If any wronged discontented English,
Touched with true feeling of King Hens wrongs,
Henrie the firt the lawful King of England,
Who by that tyrant Edward the usurper,
Is held a wretched prisoner in the Lower,
If any man that fain would be enfranchised,
From the sad yoke of Yorkish servitude,
Under which we toil like naked galley-slaves,
Know he that Thomas Nevill the Lord Falconbridge:
I &, a Falconbridge a falconbridge:
Peace ye clamorous rogues, on General on with poor
Oration, peace there,
Pitying King Henry's poor distressed case,
Armed with his title, and a subjects zeal,
Takes up just arms against the house of Yorks:
And do proclaim our ancient liberty:
Liberty, liberty, liberty, general liberty.
We do not rise like Tiler, Cade, and Straw,
Blewbeard, & other of that rascal rout,
Bascly like Linkers, or such mnddle anes,
For mending measures, or the price of corn,
Or for some common in the wild of Kent,
That's by some greedy Cormorant enclosed:
But in the true and ancient lawful right,
Of the redoubted house of Lancaster.
Our blood is noble, by our birth a Nevill,
And by our lawful line Lord Falconbridge,
whose's here that's of so dull a leaden temper,
That is not fired with a Nevil's name?
A Nevill, a Nevill, a Nevill.
Our quarrel like ourself is honourable,
The law our warrant.
ay, ay, the law is on our side.
ay, the law is in our own hands,
Peace you rogues.
And more, a blessing by the word proposed,
To those that aid a true anointed King,
Courage brave spirits and cry a Falconbridge,
A Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.
We will be masters of the mint ourselves,
And set our own stamp on the golden coin:
we'll shoe our neighing coursers with no worse
Than the purest silver that is sold in Cheap.
At Leaden hall we'll sell pearls by the peck,
As now the mealemen use to sell their meal:
In Westminster we'll keep a solemn court,
And build it bigger to receive our men,
Cry Falconbridge my heart's liberty,
Falconbridge and liberty, &c.
Peace ye slaves, or I will smoke ye else,
Peace ye slaves, or I will chub your chaps, but indeed thou mayst well smoke them, because thy name is Smoke.
Why sirrah, I hope Smoke the Smith of Chepsted, is as good a man as Chubb the Chandler of Sandwich.
Peace ye rogues, what are you quarreling? and now list to Captain Spicing.
You know Cheapside there are the mercer's shops,
Where we will measure velvet by the pikes:
And Silks and satins by the streets whole breadth:
we'll take the Tankards from the Conduit cocks,
To fill with hippocras and drink carouse.
Where chains of gold and plate shall be as plenty,
As wooden dishes in the wild of Kent:
Oh bravely said Ned Spicing, the honestest Lad that ever pounded spice in a mortar, now speaks Captain Smoke.
Look Lads for from this hill ye may discern,
The lovely town which we are marching to,
That same is London Lads ye look upon,
Range all a-row my hearts and stand at gaze,
As do the herds of Dear at some strange sight:
Or as a troop of hungry travelers,
That fire their eyes upon a furmentied feast,
Look how the Tower doth 'tice us to come on,
To take out Henry the sixth there prisoner,
See how S. Katherine's smokes, wipe slaves your eyes
And whet your stomachs for the good malt pies.
Why then belike I am nobody: room and avoidance, for now speaks Captain Chubb:
No sooner in London will we be,
But the Bakers for you, the Brewers for me,
Birchin lane shall suit us, the costermonger's fruit us:
The Poulters send us in soul,
And butcher's meat without control:
And ever when we sup or dine,
The Vintners freely bring us in wine:
If anybody ask who shall pay,
Cut off his head and send him away.
This is Captain Chubb's law whosoever say nay.
Bravely resolved, so march we forward all,
And boldly say, good luck shall us befall.
This is well done, thus should good Citizens,
Fashion themselves as well for war as peace:
Have ye commanded that in every street,
They hang forth lights as soon as night comes one
Say Colin Shore that was referred to you.
Shore 〈◊〉 have my Lord, beside from every hall
There is at least two hundred men in arms.
It cheers my heart to hear this readiness,
Let never rebels put true Subjects down,
Come when they will, their welcome shall be such,
As they had better kept them further off.
But where is M. Recorder? his advise,
Must not be wanting in these high affairs.
About an hour ago, and somewhat more,
I left him fortifying the bridge my Lord,
Which done he purposed to meet you here:
A discreet painful Gentleman he is,
And we must all of us be so inclined:
If we intend to have the City safe,
Or look for thanks, and credit with the King,
I tell ye masters, aged though I be,
I (for my part) will to no bed this night.
Why is it thought the Bastard is so near?
How mean ye M. Iosseline by near?
He neither comes from Italy nor Spain:
But out of Kent, and Essex which you know,
Are both so near, as nearer cannot be.
Nay, by your patience good my Lord a word,
Simple though I am, yet I must confess,
A mischief further off, would, and so forth,
You know my meaning, things not seen before,
Are, and so forth, yet in good sadness,
I would that all were well, and perchance,
It may be so, what, were it not for hope,
The heart, and so forth, but to the matter,
You mean and purpose, ay, ay, am sure ye do?
Well M. Iosseline, we are sure ye mean well
Although somewhat defective in your utterance.
ay, ay, my Lord Maior, I am you know,
Willing ready, & so forth, tut, tut, for me, ha, ha,
My Manston is at Ham, and thence you know,
I come to help you in this needful time:
When rebels are so busy, and so forth,
What masters, age must never be despised,
You shall find me my Lord, still, and so forth.
My Lord, now here comes M. Recorder.
Good even my good Lord Maior, the streets are chained,
The bridge well manned & every place prepared,
Shall we now go together and consult.
What else there is to be determined of?
Your coming M. Recorder was the thing
We all desired, therefore let us consult,
And now what say ye, if with half our power,
we issue forth, and give the rebels fight?
Before they do provoke us nearer hand
There were no way to that, if all be pleased,
What's your opinion M. Iosseline?
Good sooth my L. Maior, and M. Recorder,
You may take your choice, but in my conceit,
Issue if you will, or else stay if you will,
A man can never be too wary and so forth,
Yet as to issue will not be the worst,
Even so to tarry, well, you may think more on't,
But all is one, we shall be sure to fight,
And you are wise enough, to see your time, ay, ay, a God's name.
My Lord accept his meaning better than his counsel.
ay, so we do, or else we were to blame,
What if we stop the passage of the Thames,
With such provision as we have of ships?
Its doubtful yet my Lord, whether the rebels,
Purpose that way to seek our detriment,
Rather me seemeth they will come by land,
And either make assault at London bridge,
Or else at Algate, both which entrances,
Were good they should be strongly fortified.
Well said master Recorder, you do, I I, isle warrant
As for the other, the whole companies
Of Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, and the rest,
Are drawn together for their best defence,
Beside the Tower, a neighbour to that place,
As on the one side it will clear the river,
So on the other with their ordinance,
It may repulse and beat them from the gate,
What noise is this? provide ye suddenly:
And every man betake him to his charge.
Soft who is this, how now my friend what news?
My master the Lieutenant of the Tower, gives ye to understand, he hath descried the army of the rebels.
Which may come they?
From Essexward, and therefore 'tis his mind,
You guard both Algate well, and Bishopsgate.
Saint George away, and let us all resolve,
Either to vanquish this rebellious rout,
Preserve our goods, our children and our wives,
Or seal our resolution with our lives.
Summon the City, and command our entrance,
Which if we shall be stubbornly denied,
Our power shall rush like thunder through the walls,
Open your gates slaves when I command ye,
Spicing beats on the gates, and then enters the Lord Maior and his associates with prentices.
What's he that beats thus at the City gates,
commanding entrance as he were a King?
He that will have releasement for a King:
I Thomas Nevell the Lord Falconbridge.
H sirra, you, clappn, che, olt,
Or I'll bolt you if I get in, stand you preaching with a poor?
We have no warrant I ho. Falconbridge,
To let your armed troops into our City,
Considering you have taken up these arms,
Against our sovereign and our country's peace.
I tell thee Mawr, and know he tells thee so,
That cometh armed in a king's defence,
That I crave entrance in Kings Henry's name,
In right of the true line of Lancaster,
methinks that word spoke from a Nevil's mouth
Should like an earthquake rend your chained gates,
And tear in pieces your portcullises,
I thunder it again into you ears,
You stout and brave courageous Londoners,
In Henry's name I crave my entrance in.
Should Henry's name command thee entrance here
We should deny allegiance unto Edward,
Whose true and fthfull subiects we are uorne,
And in whose presence is our sword up borne.
I tell thee traitor than thou bear'st thy sword
Against thy true undoubted King.
Nay then I tell thee bastard Falconbridge,
My Lord Major bears his sword in his defence,
That put the sword into the arms of London,
Made the Lord Maiors for ever after Knights,
Richard, deposed... Henrie Bolingbroke,
From whom the house of York doth claim their right.
What's he that answers us thus saucily
Sirrah your name, that we may know ye hereafter,
My name is Shore, a Goldsmith by my trade,
What not that Shore that hath the dainty wife,
Shoares wife, the flower of London for her beauty.
Yes rebel even the very same.
Run rascal and fetch thy wife to our General presently, or else all the Gold in Cheapside cannot ransom her: wilt thou not stir when I bid thee.
Shore listen me, thy wise is mine that's flat,
This night in thine own house she sleeps with me,
Now Crosbie Lord Maior shall we enter in?
Crosbie the Lord Maior tells thee proud rebel no.
No Crosbie shall I not: then doting Lord,
I cram the name of rebel down thy throat,
There's not the poorest rascal of my camp,
But if he chance to meet thee in Cheapside
Upon thy foot-cloth, he shall make thee light,
And hold his stirrup while he mount thy horse,
Than lackey him which way he please to go,
Crosbie I'll make the Citizens be glad,
To send thee and the Aldermen thy brethren,
All manacled, and chained like Galley slaves,
To ransom them, and to redeem the City.
Nay then proud rebel, pause & hear me speak,
There's not the poorest and meanest Citizen,
That is a faithful subject to the King.
But in despite of thy rebellious rout,
Shall walke to Bowe, a small wand in his d
Although thou lie encamped at Mile-end Green,
And not the proudest rebel of you all,
Shall dare to touch him for his damned soul.
Come, we will pull up our portcullises,
And let me see thee enter if thou dare.
Spoken like a man, and true Velvet jacket,
And we will enter or strike by the way.
Where's master Recorder, and master Iosseline?
Here my Lord Maior, we now have mand the walls, and fortified such places as were needful,
Why it is well, brothers and Citizens,
Stick to your City as good men should do,
Think that in Richard's time even such a rebel,
Was then by Walworth the L. Maior of London,
Stabbed dead in Smithfield:
Then show yourselves as it be fits the time.
And let this find a hundredth Walworth, now,
Dare stab a rebel were he made of brass,
And Prentices stick to your officers,
For you may come to be as we are now,
God and our King against an arrant rebel,
Brothers away, let us defend our walls:
My Lord your words are able to infuse,
A double courage in a coward's breast,
Then fear not us although our chins be bare,
Our hearts are good, the trial shall be seen,
Against these rebels on this champion green.
We have no tricks nor policies of war,
But by the ancient custom of our Fathers,
we'll soundly lay it on, takte off that will.
And London Prentices be ruled by me,
Die ere ye lose fair London's liberty.
How now my flatcaps, are you grown so brave?
'tis but your words, when matters come to propose
You'll scud as 'twere a company of sheep,
My counsel therefore is to keep your shops,
What lack you, better will beseem your mouths,
Than terms of war, in sooth you are too young:
Sirrah go too, you shall not find it so,
Flatcaps thou call'st us, we scorn not the name,
And shortly by the virtue of our swords,
we'll make your cap so sit unto your crown,
As sconce and cap and all kiss the ground.
You are those desperate idle swaggering mates,
That haunt the suburbs in the time of peace,
And raise up alehouse brawls in the street,
And when the rumor of the war begins,
You hide your heads, and are not to be found,
Thou termest it better that we keep our shops,
It's good indeed we should have such a care,
But yet for all our keeping now and then,
Your pilfering fingers break into our locks,
Until at Tyburn you acquit the fault:
Go to, albeit by custom we are mild,
As those that do profess civility,
Yet being moved, a nest of angry hornets
Shall not be more offensive then we will,
we'll fly about your ears and sting your hearts.
He tells you truth my friends, and so forth.
Who can endure to be so vrauce by boys?
Nay scorn us not that we are Prentices,
The Chronicles of England can report,
What memorable actions we have done,
To which this days achievement shall be knit,
To make the volume larger than it is.
Now of mine honour, ye do cheer my heart
Brave English offsprings, valiantly resolved.
My Lord return you back, let us alone,
You are our Masters, give us leave to work,
And if we do not vanquish them in fight,
Let us go supperless to bed at night.
Get thee up on the top of S. Buttolph's steeple, and make a proclamation.
What a plague should I proclaim there?
That the hells be rung backward,
And cutting of throats be cried havoc,
No more calling of lantern and candlelight,
That maidenheads be valued at just nothing:
And Sack be sold by the Salad.
That no piddling slave stand to pick a lock, but slash me off the hinges, as one would slit up a cows paunch.
Let no man have less than a warehouse to his wardrobe: cry a fig for a Sergeant, and walk by the Counter like a Lord, pluck out the clapper of Bow bell, and hang up all the Sextons in the City.
Rantam-scantam, Rogues follow your leader, Cavalero Spicing the maddest slave that ere pund spice in a mortar.
Take me an Usurer by the greasy pouch, and shake out his Crowns, as a hungry dog would shake a haggis, Bar foul play Rogues, and live by honest filching and stealing, he that hath a true finger, let him forfeit his face to the frying-pan.
Follow your Leader Rogues, follow your Leader.
Assault, Assault, and cry a Falconbridge.
Sirrah Spicing, if Spicing be thy name, we are here for matters and causes as it might ●me for the King, therefore it were good, and so forth.
Open the gates, or if we be the picklocks, ye Rogues we'll play the Mastiff dogs amongst you: If I worry not a thousand of you with my teeth, let me be hanged in a packthread, and so forth.
Fond fellow, justice is to be used, I marry is it, and law in some sort as it were is to be followed, oh God forbid else, this our Magistrate hath power as might seem, and so forth, for duty is to be observed, and Officers must be obeyed, in sort and calling, and so forth.
we'll talk more anon, good M. and so forth.
Why this it is to trust to these base Rogues.
This dirty scum of rascal peasantry:
This heartless rout of base rascality;
A plague upon you all, you cowardly Rogues;
You cravand curs, you say muddy clowns,
Whose courage but consists in multitude,
Like sheep and neat that follow one another,
Which if one run away, all follow after:
This hedge-bred rascal, this filthy fry of ditches,
A vengeance take you all, this 'tis to lead you,
Now do you cry and shriek at every shock,
A hot consuming mischief follow you.
'swounds scale rogues, scale, a Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.
Set open the gates, nay then we'll sally out,
It never shall be said when I was Maior,
The Londoners were shut up in the City,
Then cry King Edward, and let's us issue out.
Now if ye be true hearted Englishmen,
The gates set open and the portcullis up:
Let's Pel Mel in, to stop their passage out,
He that first enters, be possessed of Cheap,
I give him it freely, and the chiefest wench.
That he can find, let that lie in the bargain.
Hear'st thou General, there's hot drinking at the mouth of Bishopsgate, for our soldiers are all Mouth, they lie like Rascals with their brains beaten out, therefore since we are all like to feed hogs in Houndsditch, let us retire our troops, and save our maimed men, or if we issue further, we are put to the sword every mother's son of us.
Art thou that villain in whose damned mouth,
Was never heard of any word but wounds?
Whose recreant limbs are notched with gaping scars,
Thicker than any carking craftman's score,
Whose very scalp is scratched and crazed and broken,
Like an old mazzer beaten on the stones,
And standest thou now to save our maimed men?
A plague upon thee coward.
Why how now base Thomas? 'swounds, wert thou a base Vial, thou art but a rascal and a rebel as I am, hearest thou, if I do not turn true subject and leave thee, let me be worried with dogs, 'swounds dost thou impeach my manhood? Tom Nevill thou hadst as good to have damned thyself as uttered such a word, flatly I forsake thee, and all that love Ned Spicing follow me.
Come come ye testy soul, thou seest me grieved,
Yet canst not bear with mine infirmity,
Thou knowest I hold thee for as tall a man
As any lives or breathes our English air,
I know there lives not a more fiery spirit,
A more resolved dalliant, a plague upon it,
Thou knowest I love thee, yet if a word escape
y lips in anger, how teastie then thou art?
I had rather all men left me then thyself,
Thou art my soul, thou art my Genius:
I cannot live without thee not an hour,
Thus must I still be forced against my will,
To soothe this dirty slave, this cowardly rascal.
Come, come be friends, ye tasty firebrand,
We must retire there is no remedy.
Nay Tom, if thou wilt have me mount on the walls,
And cast myself down headlong on their pikes,
He do it, but to impeach my valour,
Had any man but thou spoke half so much,
I would have spilled his heart, still be ware
My valour, such words go hardly down,
Well, I am friends, thou thoughtest not as thou spak'st.
No on my soul, thou thinkest not that I did,
Sound a retreat there I command ye straight,
But whither shall we retire
To Mile-end Green, there's no fitter place.
Then let us back retire to Mile-end Green,
And there expect fresh succour from our friends,
With such supply as shall ere long assure
The city is our own, march on, away.
Ye have bestead ye like good Citizens,
And she wne yourselves true subjects to your king,
You worthily prentice bestirred yourselves,
That it did there my heart to see your valour,
The rebels are retired to Mileend Green,
Where so we may not suffer them to rest.
But issue forth upon them with fresh force.
My L. Maior, diligence doth well, and so forth. Matters must be looked into as they ought, indeed should they, when things are well done, they are, and so forth, for causes and things must indeed be looked into.
Well sir, we very well conceive your meaning,
And you have shown yourself a worthy gentleman:
See that our walls be kept with courts of guard,
And well defended against the enemy,
For we will now withdraw us to Guildhall,
To take advise what further must be done.
Be not afraid (sweet heart) the worst is past,
God have the praise, the victory is ours,
We have prevailed, the rebels are repulsed,
And every street of London soundeth joy,
Canst thou then (gentle Iane) be sad alone?
I am not sad now you are here with me,
My toy, my hope, my comfort, and my love,
My dear, dear husband, kindest Mathew shore,
But when these arms the circles of my soul,
Were in the fight so forward as I heard,
How could I choose, sweet heart, but be afraid?
Why dost thou tremble now, when peril's past
I think upon the horror of the tune,
But tell me why you fought so desperately?
First to maintain King Edward's royalty,
Next to defend the City's liberty,
But chiefly ta'en to keep thee from the foil,
Of him that to my face did how thy spoil,
Had he prevailed, where then had been our lives,
Dishonoured our daughters, ravished our fair wives,
Possessed our goods, and set our servants free,
Yet all this nothing to the loss of thee.
Of me sweet heart? why how should I be lost?
Were I by thousand storms of fortune tossed?
And should endure the poorest wretched life,
Yet Iane will be thy honest loyal wife,
The greatest Prince the sun did ever see,
Shall never make me prove untrue to thee:
I fear not fair means, but a rebel's force,
These hands shall make this body a dead corpse,
ere force or flattery shall mine honour stain,
True fame survives, when death the flesh hath slain.
God save ye master Shore, and mistress by your leave,
Sir my L. Maior sends for ye by Major,
And prates your speedy presence at Guildhall,
There's news the rebels have made head again,
And have ensconced themselves upon Mile-end,
And presently our armed men must out,
You being Captain of two companies
In honour of your valour and your skill,
Must lead the vaward, God & right stand with ye.
Friend tell my Lord i'll wait upon him straight.
Friend tell my Lord he does my husband wrong,
To set him foremost in the danger still,
Ye shall not go if I may have my will,
Peace wife, no more, friend I will follow ye,
i'faith ye shall not, prithee do not go.
Not go sweet heart? that were a coward's trick,
A traitor's part to shrink when others fight,
Envy shall never say that Mathew Shore
The Goldsmith stayed, when other men went out,
To meet his Kings and country's enemy,
No Iane 'gainst all the rebels on Mile-end,
I dare alone K. Edward's right defend.
If you be slain, what shall become of me?
Kite well my wench, I now will marry thee,
I leave thee worth at least five thousand pound.
Marry again. that word my heart doth wound,
I'll never marry, nor I will not live,
If thou be killed, let me go with thee Mat.
'tis idle talk good Iane, no more of that,
Go to my Lady Majoress and the rest,
As you are still companion with the best,
With them be merry, and pray for our good speed,
To part from thee my very heart doth bleed.
Yet stand we in the sight of upreared Troy,
And suck the air she draws: our every breath
Flies from our nostrils warm unto the walls,
We beard her bristling spires, her battled towers,
And proudly stand and gaze her in the face,
Look on me, and I doubt not ye imagine,
My worth as great as any one of yours,
My fortunes, would I basely fawn on Edward,
To be as fair as any man's in England,
But he that keeps your sovereign in the Tower,
Hath seized my land, and robbed me of my right:
I am a Gentleman as well as he,
What he hath got, he holds by tyranny,
Now if you faint, or cowardly should fly,
There is no hope for any one to live,
We hear the Londoners will leave the City,
And bid us battle here on Mile-end Green,
Whom if we vanquish, than we take the town,
And ride in triumph thorough Cheap to Paul's,
The Mint is ours, Cheap, Lombard street our own
The meanest soldier wealthier than a king.
March fair ye rogues, all kings or capknitters: dost thou hear Tom Falconbridge? I pray thee grant me one boon I shall ask thee.
What is it Ned: it's hard I should deny thee.
Why that when we have won the Cry, as we cannot choose but win it, that I may have the knighting of all these rogues and rascals.
What then?
What then? Zounds I scorn your scurvy way mouthed, what then? now a poor take me it I fight a blow.
Why this is fine, go to, knight whom thou wilt:
Who, I knight any of them? I'll see them hanged first for a company of tattered ragged rascals, if I were a king, I would not knight one of them?
What not me Cavalero Chubb?
Yes, I care not if I knight thee: and yet i'll see thee hanged ere i'll honour thee so much: I care not so much for the matter, but I would not be denied my humour.
Why what a perverse fellow art thou Ned?
Ho my fine Tom, my brave Falconbridge, my mad Greek, my lusty Nevill: thou art a king, a Cesar, a plague on thee, I love thee not, and yet i'll die with thee.
See how rebellion can exalt itself,
ing the feathers of sicke discipline.
They think they can outlook our truer looks,
Mark but the scornful eye of Falconbridge.
I rather think 'tis fear upon his cheek,
Deciphers pale disturbance in his heart.
Our coming forth hath, well, I say no more,
But shall we take occasion, and so forth,
Rebellion should have no respite, oh my Lord,
The time hath been, but all is one for that.
How like a troop of rank o'erridden jades,
You husse bearded Citizens appear?
Nay, rather so many men in the Moon,
And every one a frozen bush in his mouth.
The so and wards? now faire befall them,
Would any one have thought before this hour,
There had been such increase of muddy slaves?
Peace soldiers, they are resolute you see,
And not to flatter us, nor favour them,
Such haughty sto●hs seldom have been seen,
Embodied in the breasts of Citizens,
How sternly in their own peculiar strength,
Without the assistance of their lingering king,
Did they of late repulse us from their walls?
And now again how expeditiously,
And unexpected they have met us here?
Were we more deadly incensed than we are,
I would not but commend their chivalry.
Captain, shall we go challenge them to fight?
'sblood we burn daylight, they'll think anon,
We are afraid to see their glittering swords.
Tell them they come in steed of pudding pies,
And Stratford cakes to makes a banquet here.
Soft give me leave, I will devise with words,
To weaken and abash their fortitude,
The bastard offers to come forth my Lord.
I am the man intend to answer him.
Crosbie.
Traitor.
Traitor? zounds down with him.
Be patient, give me leave I say to speak,
I doubt not but the traitor's name shall rest
With those that keeps their lawful K. in bonds:
Mean time ye men of London once again,
Behold my warlike colours are displayed,
Which I have vowed shall never be wrapped up,
Until your lofty buildings kiss our feet,
Unless you grant me passage through your streets.
Passage, sayst thou? that must be o'er our breasts,
If any passage thou art like to have.
Why then upon your bodies will I tread,
And wade through standing pools of your lost blood.
We know thy threats, and reckon them as wind,
Not of sufficient power to shake a reed.
But we shook your gates not long ago,
And made your walls to shake like Irish bogs.
ay, and so terrified ye, that not one of ye darest come to fetch a pint of sack at the mouth at Bishopsgate, no not for your lines.
ay but you know what followed, and so forth.
Etcetera? are you there? methinks the sight of the dun Bull, the Nevils honoured crest, should make you leave your broken sentences, and quite forget ever to speak at all.
Nay then look thou upon our cities arms.
Wherein is a bloody dagger, that is it,
Where with a rebel like to Falconbridge,
Had his desert, meet for his treachery,
Can you behold that, and not quake for fear?
Since when, it is successfully decreed,
Traitors with us shall never better speed.
Captain and fellow soldiers talk no more,
But draw your meaning forth in down right blows.
Sound then alarum.
Do the like for us, and where the right is, there attend success.
Stay and be better advised, why countrymen,
What is this Falconbridge you follow so?
I could instruct you, but you know my mind.
And Falconbridge what are these rusticals,
Thou shouldst repose such confidence in glass,
Shall I inform thee? no, thou art wise enough,
Edward of York delays the time you say,
Therefore he will not come, imagine so,
The city's weak, hold that opinion still,
And your pretence King Henry's liberty.
True, but as how? shall I declare you? no.
What then? you'll fight, a God's name take your choice,
I can no more but give you mine advise.
Away with this parentheses of words,
Crosbie courage thy men, and on this green,
Whose cause is right, let it be quickly seen.
I am as ready as thou canst desire,
On then a God's name.
This was well fought, now Spicing list to me.
The Citizens thus having given us ground,
And therefore somewhat daunted, take a band
Of Essex soldiers, and with all the speed
Thou possibly canst make, withdraw thyself,
And get between the City gates and them.
Oh brave Tom Nevill, gallant Falconbridge,
Aim at thy intended policy,
This is thy meaning, while thou art employed,
And hold'st them battle here on Mile-end Green,
I must provide as harbinger before,
There be not only clear and open passage,
But the best merchants houses to receive
Us and our retinue, I am proud of that,
And will not sleep upon thy just command.
Away than I will follow as I may,
And doubt not but that ours will be the day.
We have recovered what before we lost,
And heaven stands with the justice of our cause,
But this I noted in the fight even now,
That part of this rebellious crew is sent,
By what direction, or for what intent,
I cannot guess, but may suspect the worst,
And as it seems, they compass it about,
To hem us in, or get the gate of us,
And therefore cousin Shore, as I repose
Trust in thy valour and thy loyalty,
Draw forth three hundred bowmen, and some pikes,
And presently encounter their assault.
I have your meaning, and effect my Lord,
I trust shall disappoint them of their hope.
Come on my hearts, we will be kings tonight,
Carouse in Gold, and sleep with merchants wives,
While their poor husbands lose their lives abroad,
We are now quite behind our enemies' backs,
And there's no let or hindrance in the way,
But we may take possession of the town,
Ah you mad rogues, this is the wished hour,
Follow your leader, and be resolute.
ay, my good friend, so certify his grace,
The Rebels are dispersed all and fled,
And now his Highness meets with victory.
Marshal your sclues, and keep in good array:
To add more glory to this victory:
The King in person cometh to this place,
How great an honour have you gained today?
And how much is this City famed for ever,
That twice without the help, either of King,
Or any, but of God, and our own selves,
We have prevailed against our countries foes?
Thanks to his majesty assisted us,
Who always helps true subjects in their need.
Where is my Lord Maior?
Here dread Sovereign.
I hold no Lordship nor no dignity,
In presence of my gracious Lord the King,
But all I humble at your highness feet,
With the most happy conquest of proud rebels,
Dispersed and fled, that now remains no doubt,
Of ever making head to vex us more.
You have not ta'en the bastard Falconbridge:
Or is he slain?
Neither my gracious Lord.
Although we laboured to our uttermost,
Yet all our care came over short,
For apprehending him or Spicing either
But some are taken, others on proffered grace
Yielded themselves, and at your mercy stand.
Thanks good L. Maior, you may condemn us
Of too much slackness in such urgent need:
But we assure you on our royal word,
So soon as we had gathered us a power,
We dallied not, but mane all haste we could,
What order have ye ta'en for Falconbridge,
And his confederates in this rebellion?
Under your leave my Liege, we have proclaimed
Who bringeth Falconbridge alive or dead,
Shall be requited with a thousand marks,
As much for Spicing, others of less worth
At easier rates are set.
Well have ye done,
And we will see it paid from our exchequer.
Now leave we this and come to you,
That have so well deserved in these affairs,
Affairs, I mean of so main consequence.
Kneel down and all of you receive in field,
The honour you have merited in field.
Arise Sir Iohn Crosbie, L. Maior of London & Knight.
Arise up Sir Ralph Iosseline knight.
Arise Sir Thomas Urswick our Recorder of London, and Knight.
Now tell me which is M. Shore.
This same my Lord,
And hand to hand he fought with Falconbridge.
Shore kneel thou down.
What call ye else his name?
His name is Mathew Shore my Lord.
Shore, why kneelest thou not, and at thy sovereign's hand receive thy right?
Pardon me gracious Lord,
I do not stand contemptuous or despising
Such royal favour of my Sovereign,
But to acknowledge mine unworthiness:
Far be it from the thought of Mathew Shore,
That he should be advanced with Aldermen,
With our L. Maior, & our right grave Recorder.
If any thing hath been performed by me,
That may deserve your Highness mean'st respect,
I have enough, and I desire no more.
Then let me crave that I may have no more.
Well, be it as thou wilt, some other way
We will devise to quittance thy deserts,
And not to fail therein upon my word.
Now let me tell ye all my friends at once,
Your King is married, since you saw him last,
And haste to help you in this needful time,
Made me on sudden to forsake my bride.
But seeing all things are fallen out so well,
And there remains no further doubt of ill,
Let me entreat you would go boot yourselves,
And bring your King a little on his way.
How say you my Lord, shall it be so?
Now God forbid but that my Lord the King
Should always have his Subjects at command.
Forbid quotha? I in good sadness, your majesty shall find us always ready, and so forth.
Why then set forward Gentlemen,
And come L. Maior, I must confer with you.
Art thou the man whose victories drawn at sea,
Filled every heart with terror of thy name?
Art thou that Nevill whom we took thee for?
Thou art a louse, thou bastard Falconbridge?
Thou baser than a bastard, in whose birth
The very dregs of servitude appears,
Why tell me, liver of some rotten sheep,
After by thy allurements we are brought,
To undertake this course, after thy promises
Of many golden mountains to ensue,
Is this the greatest comfort thou canst glu?
Hast thou ensnared our heedless feet with death,
And brought us to the gibbet of defame,
And now dost bid us shift and save ourselves?
No craven were I sure I should be ta'en,
I would not stir my feet, until this hand
Had venged me on thee for misguiding us.
Opprobrious villain, stable excrement,
That never dreamest of other manhood yet,
But how to jerk a horse, until my words
ensued into thee resolutions sire.
control'st thou me for that wherein thyself,
Art only the occasion of mishap?
Hadst thou and they stood to it as well as I,
The day had been our own, and London now,
That laughs in triumph, should have wept in tears,
But being backed by such faint hearted slaves
No marvel if the Lion go to wrack,
As though it were not incident to Kings,
Sometime to take repulse, mine is no more:
Nor is not for that muddy brain of thine
To tutor me how to digest my loss,
Then fly with those that are already fled,
Or stay behind, and hang all but the head.
Oh prejudice to Spicings conquering name,
Whose valour even the hacks this sword has made
Upon the flint, and iron bars at Aldgate:
Like mouths will publish whiles the City stands
That I shrunk backe●... that I was never seen
To show my manly spleen, but with a whip.
I tell thee Falconbridge the least of these,
Do challenge blood before they be appeased,
Away ye scoundrel, tempt not my resolve,
The courage that survives in Falconbridge,
Scorns the encounter of so base a drudge.
By the pure temper of this sword of mine,
By this true flesh and blood that gripes the same,
And by the honour I did win of late,
Against those frosty bearded Citizens,
It shall be tried before we do depart,
Whether accuseth other wrongfully,
Or which of us two is the better man.
I shall but quit the Hangman of a labour,
Yet rather than to be upbraided thus,
The Eagle once will stoop to feed on carrion.
Hold if ye be men, if not, hold as ye are: rebels & strong thieves: I bring you news of a proclamation, the King hath promised that whosoever can bring the head of Falconbridge, or Spicing, shall have for his labour a thousand crowns, what mean you then to swagger? save yourselves.
This proclamation comes in happy time,
I'll vanquish Falconbridge, and with this sword
Cut off his head, and bear it to the King,
So not alone shall I be pardoned,
But have the thousand crowns is promised.
This rascal was ordained to save my life,
For now when I have overthrown the wretch,
Even with his head I'll yield me to the King,
His princely word is past to pardon me,
And though I were the chief in this rebellion,
Yet this will be a means to make my peace.
Oh that I knew how to betray them both.
How sayst thou Spi. wilt thou yield thyself?
For I have vowed either alive or dead
To bring thee to King Edward?
And I have vowed the like by thee.
How will these two bad contraries agree?
And I the same by both of you.
Come sir, i'll quickly c●d you of that care.
And what thou 'lottest me, shall be thy share.
Here comes a miller, help to part the fray,
These are the rebels Falconbridge and Spicing,
The worst of them is worth a thousand crowns.
Marry and such a booty should I have,
Submit, submit, it is in vain to strive,
Why what art thou:
One that will hamper yond,
But what's the other that is fled away?
Oh miller, that was Falconbridge,
And this is Spicing his companion.
I tell thee miller thou hast been the means,
To hinder the most charitable deed,
whatever honest Christian undertook.
Thou canst bear nigh witness I had fane
That most notorious rebel but for him.
But I have taken thee, and the world knows,
That Spicing is as bad as who is best.
Why thou mistakst, I am a true subject.
Miller he lies, be sure to hold him fast.
Dost thou accuse me? apprehend him too,
For he's as guilty as any of us.
Come you shall both together answer it,
Before my Lord Maior, and here he comes.
Sir Ralph Iosseline, have you ever seen a Prince more affable than Edward is? what merry talk he had upon the way.
Doubtless my Lord he'll prove a royal King.
But how now what are these?
God save your honour,
Here I present unto you my Lord Maior,
A pair of rebels, whom I did espy
As I was busy grinding at my mill,
And taking them for vagrant idle kucs,
That had beset some trueman from his house,
I came to keep the peace, but afterward,
Found that it was the bastard Falconbridge,
And this his mate together by the ears,
The one, for all that I could do, escaped,
The other standeth at your mercy here.
It is the rebel Spicing.
It is indeed?
I see you are not blind, you know me then.
Well miller, thou hast done a subjects part,
And worthily deservest that recompense
Is publicly proclaimed by the King,
But what's this other? I have seen his face,
And as I take it, he is one of them.
I must confess, I took them both together,
he aided me to apprehend the rest.
A tells you true my Lord, I am Chubb the Chandler, and I curse the time that ever I saw their faces, for if they had not been, I had lived an honest man in mine own country, and never come to this,
Out rogue, dost thou recant for fear of death?
I Major, I am he that sought to cut your throat,
And since I have miscarried in the fact,
I'll near deny it, do the worst you can.
Bring him a way, he shall have martial law, and at the next tree we do come unto,
Be hanged to rid the world of such a wretch.
Miller thy duty is a thousand marks,
Which must be shared betwixt thee and this poor fellow, that did reveal him. And sirrah, your life is saved on this condition, that you hang up Spicing, how sayst thou, wilt thou do it?
Will I do it? what a question is that?
I would hang him if he were my father to save mine own life.
Then when ye have done it, come home to my house, and there ye truly shall have your reward.
Well sirrah, than thou must be my hangman?
I by my troth sir, for fault of a better.
Well, commend me to little Pim, and pray her to redeem my pande hose, they lie at the blue Boar for eleven pence, and if my hostess will have the other odd penny, tell her she is a damned bawd, and there is no truth in her score.
Take no thought sir for your panned hose, they are lousy, and not worth the redeeming.
There is a Constable sticks in my mind, he got my sword from me, that night I should have killed black Ralph, if I had lived, I would have been meet with him.
ay sir, but here's a thing shall take an order for that.
commend me to black Luce, bouncing Bess, & lusty Kate, and the other pretty morsels of man's flesh. Farewell Pink and Pinnace, Flibote, and carvel, Turnbull, and Spittle, I die like a man.
Oh Captain Spicing, thy vain enticing, brought me from my trade,
From good candles making, to this pains taking, a rebel to be made,
Therefore Ned Spicing, to quit thy enticing, this must be thy hope,
By one of thy fellows, to be led to the Gallows, to end in a rope.
Dudgeon, dost thou he are, look well to Brocke my mare, drive Dunne and her fair and softly down the hill, and take heed the thorns tear not the horns of my Cow hides, as thou goest near the hedges: ha what sayst thou knave? is the Bulls hide down? why lay it up again, what rare I? He meet thee at the style, and help to set all straight. And yet God help, it's a crooked world, and an unthrifty, for some that have near a shoe, had rather go barefoot, then buy clout-leather to mend the old, when they can buy no new, for they have time enough to mend all, they sit so long between the cup and the wall, well God amend them, God amend them. Let me see by my executor here, my leather pouch, what I have taken, what I have spent, what I have gained. what I have lost, & what I have laid cut: my taking is more than my spending, for here's store left. I have spent but a groat, a penny for my two jades, a penny to the poor, a penny pot of ale, and a penny cake for my man and me, a dicker of cowhides cost me.
Snails who comes here? mistress Ferries, or mistress what call ye her? Put up Iohn Hobs, money tempts beauty.
Well met good fellow, sawest thou not the heart?
My heart? God bless me from seeing my heart.
Thy heart? the déereman, we demand the decree.
Do you demand what's dear? mary corn and cow hides, Mass a good smug lass, well like my daughter Nell, I had rather than a bend of leather she and I might smutch together.
camest thou not down the wood?
Yes mistress that I did.
And sawst thou not the dear embossed?
By my hood ye make me laugh, what the dickens is it love that makes ye prate to me so fondly, by my father's soul I would I had iobd faces with you.
Why how now Hobs, so saucy with the Duchess and the Queen?
Much Queen I trow, these be but women, and one of them is like my wench, I would she had her rags, I would give a load of hair and horns, and a fat of leather, to match her to some justice, by the meghollie.
Be silent Tanner, and ask pardon of the Queen.
And ye be the Queen, I cry ye mercy good mistress Queen.
No fault my friend, Madam let's take our bows,
And in the standing seek to get a shoot.
Come bend our bows, and bring the herd of dere.
God send ye good standing, and good striking, and fat flesh, see if all Gentle women be not alike when their black face be on, I took the Queen, as I am true Tanner, for mistress Ferris.
Soft, who comes here, more knaves yet?
Ho good fellow, sawst thou not the King?
No good fellow, I saw no King, which King dost thou ask for.
Why King Edward, what King is there else?
There's another King and ye could hit on him, one Harrie, one Harrie, and by our Lady they say, he's the honester man of the two.
Sirrah beware you speak not treason.
What if I do?
Then thou'lt be hanged.
A dog's death, I'll not meddle with it, for by my troth I know not when I speak treason, when I do not, there's such halting betwixt two Kings, that a man cannot go upright, but he shall offend tone of them, I would God had them both for me.
Well, thou sawst not the King?
No, is he in the country?
es hunting here at Drayton Basset.
The devil he is, God bless his Mastership: I saw a woman here that they said was the Queen, she's as like my daughter, but my daughter is the fairer, as ever I see.
Fare well fellow, speak well of the King,
God make him an honest man, I hope that's well spoken, for byth' mouse foot, some give him hard words, whether be serves 'em or not, let him look to that, i'll meddle of my cow hide, and let the world slide.
The devil in a dung cart, how these roisters swarm in the country now the King is so near? God liver me from this, for this looks like a cheese, but a man cannot tell amongst these Courtnoles whose true.
Holla my friend, good fellow pray thee stay.
No such matter, I have more haste of my way.
If thou be a good fellow, let me borrow a word.
My purse thou meanest, I am no good fellow, and I pray God thou be'st not one.
Why? dost thou not love a good fellow?
No, good fellows be thieves.
Dost thou think I am one?
Thought is free, and thou art not my ghostly father.
I mean thee no harm.
Who knows that but thyself? I pray God he spy not my purse.
On my troth I mean she none.
Upon thy oath i'll stay: now, what sayst thou to me? Speak quickly, for my company stays for me beneath at the next style.
The King is hunting hereabouts, didst thou see his Majesty?
His majesty, what's that? his horse, or his mare?
Tush, I mean his Grace.
Grace quotha? pray God he have any: which King dost thou choir for?
Why for King Edward, know'st thou any more Kings than one?
I know not so many, for I tell thee I know none, marry I hear of King Edward.
Didst thou see his Highness?
By my holidame, that's the best term thou gav'st him yet, he's high enough, but he has put poor King Harry low enough.
How low hath he put him?
Nay, I cannot tell, but he has put him down, for he has got the crown, much good do't him with it.
Amen, I like thy talk so well, I would I knew thy name.
Dost thou not know me?
No.
Then thou knowest nobody: didst never hear of Iohn Hobs the Tanner of Tamworth?
Not till now I promise thee, but now I like thee well.
So do not I thee, I fear thou art some out-rider, that lives by taking of purses here on Basset's heath, but I fear thee not, for I have wared all my money in Cowhides, at Colesill market, and my man & my mare are hard by at the hill foot.
s that thy grey mare thats tide at the stile with the hes on her backe':
That's Brocke my mare, and there's Dun my nag, and Dadgeon my man.
There's neither man nor horse, but only one mare.
God's blue bodkin, has the knave served me so? farewell, I may lose his, horns, and mare & all, by prating with thee.
Tarry man, tarry, they'll sooner take my gelding than thy gray mare, for I have tide mine by her.
That will I see afore i'll take your word.
I'll bear thee company.
I had as lief go alone:
Now on my troth the Queen shoots passing well.
So did the Duchess when she was as young.
Age shakes the hand, and shoots both wide & short:
What have they given us?
S●re rose nobles lust:
The Queen gave four.
True, and the Duchess twain.
O were we ever so paid for our pain.
Tut, had the King come, as they said he would, he would have rained upon us showers of gold.
Why he is hunting somewhere here about, let's first go drink, and then go seek him out.
How sayst thou Tanner, wilt thou take my courser for thy mare?
Courser callst thou him? so ill mought I fare, thy skittish jade will never abide, to carry my leather, my horns nor hide. But if I were so mad to scorce, what boot wouldst thou give nice?
May boot, that's boot worthy, I look for boot of thee.
Ha, ha, a merry jig, why man, Brocke my mare knows ha and ree, and will stand when I cry ho, and let me get up and down, and make water when I do.
I'll give thee a Noble if I like her pace, lay thy Cowhides in my saddle, and let's jog towards Drayton.
It's out of my way, but I begin to like thee well.
Thou wilt like me better before we do part,
I pray thee tell me, what say they of the King?
Of the kings thou mean'st, art thou no blab if I tell thee.
If the King know't not now, he shall never know it for me.
Mass they say King Harrie's a very adultery man.
A devout man, and what's King Edward?
he's a frank franion, a merry companion, and loves a wench well, they say he has married a poor widow because she's fair.
Dol thou like him the worse for that?
No by my feckens, but the better, for though I be a plain Tanner, I love a fair lass myself.
pray tell me, how love they King Edward?
Faith as poor folks love holidays, glad to have them now and then, but to have them come too often, will undo them, so to see the king now and then t's comfort, but every day would beggar us, and I may to thee, we fear we shallbe troubled to lend him no money, for we doubt he's but needy.
Wouldst thou lend him no money if he should need?
By my halidom yes, he shall have half my store, and I'll sell sole leather to help him to more.
Faith whether lovest thou better Harry or Edward.
Nay, that's coúnsel, & two may keep it, if one be a way.
Shall I say my conscience? I think Harry is the true king.
Art advised of that? Harrie's of the old house of Lancashire, and that progenity do I love.
And thou dost not hate the house of York?
Why no, for I am just a kin to Sutton windmill, I can grind which way soe'er the wind blow, if it be Harrie I can say well fare Lancaster, if it be Edward I can sing, York, York for my monse.
Thou art of my mind, but I say Harrie's the lawful King, Edward is but an usurper, and a fool and a coward.
Nay there thou liest, he has wit enough, and courage enough, do thou not speak treason?
ay, but I know to whom I speak it.
Dost thou? well if I were Constable, I should be forsworn if I set thee not in the stocks for it.
Well let it go no further, for I did serve King Harrie and I love him best, though now I serve King Edward.
Thou art the arranter knave to speak ill of thy master, but sirrah what's thy name, what office hast thou? and what will the King do for thee?
My name is Ned, I am the king's Butler, and he will do more for me, then for any Noble man in the Court.
The devil he will, he's the more fool, and so i'll tell him, if ere I see him, & I would I might see him in my poor house at Tamworth.
Go with me to the Court and i'll bring thee to the king, & what suit soe'er thou have to him, the warrant thee to speed
I ha' nothing to do at Court, i'll home with my cowhides, and if the King will come to me he shall be welcome.
Hast thou no suit touching thy trade, to transport hides or sell leather only in a certain circuit, or about Bark, or such like, to have letters patents?
By the Mass and the matins I like not those Patents, sirrah they that have them, do as the Priests did in old time, buy and sell the sins of the people, so they make the King believe they mend what's amiss, and for money they make the thing worse than it is, there's another thing in too, the mor is the pity?
What pity Iohn Hobs? I pray thee say all.
Faith 'tis pity that one subica should have in his hand that might do good to many through the land.
Satest thou me so Tanner well let's cast lots whether thou shalt go with me to Drayton, or I go home with thee to Tamworth.
Lot me no lotting, i'll not go with thee, if thou wilt go with me, cause thart my lieges man (and yet I think be has many honester) thou shalt be welcome to Iohn Hobs, thou shalt be welcome to beef and bacon, and perhaps a bag-pudding, and my daughter Nell shall pop a posset upon thee when thou ghost to bed.
Here's my hand, i'll but go & see the King served, and I'll be at home as soon as thyself.
Dost thou hear me Ned? if I shall be thy host,
Make haste thou art best, for fear thou kiss the Post.
Farewell Iohn Hobs, the honest true Tanner
I see plain men by observation,
Of things that alter in the change of times,
Daughter knowledge, and the meanest life,
Proportioned with content sufficiency,
Is merry then the mighty state of Kings.
Now now? what news bring ye sirs,
Where's the Queen?
Her Highness and your mother my dread Lord,
Are both invited by Sir Humphrey Bows,
Where they intend to feast and lodge this night,
And do expect your grace's presence there.
Tom Sellinger I have other business;
Astray from you and all my other train,
I met a Tanner, such a merry mate,
So frolic, and so full of good conceit,
That I have given my word to be his guest,
Because he knows me not to be the King:
Good cozen Howard grudge not at the lest,
But greet my mother and my wife from me,
Bid them be merry, I must have my humour,
Let them both sup and sleep when they see time,
Commend me kindly to Sir Humphrey Bows,
Tell him at breakfast I will visit him.
This night Tom Sellinger and I must feast
With Hobs the Tanner, there plain Ned & Tom.
No King nor Sellinger for a thousand pound.
The Queen & Duchess will be discontent,
Because his Highness comes not to the feast.
Sir Humphrey Bows may take the most conceit,
But what's the end, the King will have his pleasure?
Good news my boys, Harrie the sixth is dead, peruse that letter: sirrah, drink you that, gives his purse, and stay not but post back again for life, and thank my brother Gloster for his news, commend me to him, i'll see him tomorrow night. How like ye it sirs?
O passing well my Liege, you may be merry for these happy news.
The merrier with our host the Tanner Tom,
My Lord take you that letter to the Ladies,
Bid them be merry with that second course,
And if we see them not before we go,
Pray them to journey easily after us,
we'll post to London, so good night my Lord.
Come Nell, come daughter, is your hands and your face washed?
I forsooth Father.
Ye must be cleanly I tell ye, for there comes a courtnoll hither tonight, the king's master ships Butler, Ned, a spruce youth, but beware ye be not in love nor overtaken by him, for Courtiers be slippery lads.
No forsooth father.
God's blessing on thee, that half years schooling at Lichfield, was better to thee then house and land, it has put such manners into thee, I forsooth and no forsooth at every word, ye have a clean smock on. I like your apparel well, is supper ready?
I forsooth father.
Have we a good barley bagpudding, a piece of fat Bacon, a good cow heel, a hard cheese, and a brown loaf.
All this forsooth, and more, ye shall have a posset, but indeed the rats have spoiled your hard cheese.
Now the devil choke them, so they have eat me a farthing candle the other night.
What master master.
How now knave, what fairest thou Dudgeon?
Here's guests come, where's Helen?
What guests be they?
A courtnoll, one Ned the king's Butcher he says, and his friends too.
Ned the king's butcher? ha, ha, the king's butler, take their horses, and walk them, and bid them come near house, Nell lay the cloth, and clap supper o'th' board.
Mas here's Ned indeed and another misproud ruffian,
Welcome Ned, I like thy honesty, thou keepest promise.
i'faith honest Tanner, i'll ever keep promise with thee, pray thee bid my friend welcome.
By my troth ye are both welcome to Tamwoorth: friend I know not your name.
My name is Tom Twist?
Believe ye that list: but ye are welcome both, and I like you both well but for one thing.
What's that?
Nay that I keep to myself, for I sigh to see and think, that pride brings many one to extraction.
Pre thee tell us thy meaning.
Troth I doubt ye near came truly by all these gay rags. 'tis not your bare wages and thin fees ye have of the King, can keep ye thus fine, but either ye must rob the King privily, or his subjects openly, to maintain your probicality.
Thinkest thou so Tanner:
'tis no matter what I think, come let's go to supper,
What Nell, what Dudgeon, where be these folks?
Daughter bid my friends welcome.
Ye are welcome Gentlemen as I may say.
I thank ye fair maid.
A pretty wench be my fay.
How likest her Ned?
I like her so well, I would ye would make me your son in law.
And I like thee so well Ned, that hadst thou an occupation, for service is no heritage, a young courtier, an old beggar, I could find in my heart to cast her away upon thee, and if thou wilt forsake the court and turn Tanner, or vind thyself to a shoemaker in Lichfield, I'll give thee twenty nobles ready money, with my Nell, and trust thee with a dicker of leather, to set up thy trade.
Ned he offers ye fair, if ye have the grace to take it.
He does indeed, Tom, and hereafter i'll tell him more.
Come sit down to supper: go to Nell, no more sheeps eyes, ye may be caught I tell ye, these be irish lads.
I warrant ye father, yet in truth Ned is a very proper man, and other may serve, but Ned's a pearl in mine eye.
Daughter, call Dudgeon and his fellows, we'll have a three men song, to make our guests merry.
Nails what courtnolls are ye? ye'll neither talk nor eat, What news at the court? do somewhat for your meat.
Heavy news there, King Henrie is dead.
That's light news & merry for your master king Edward.
But how will the commons take it?
Well, God be with good King Henrie, faith the commons will take it as a common thing, deaths an honest man, for he spares not the King: for as one comes, another's ta'en away, and seldom comes the better, that's all we say.
Shrewdly spoken Tanner by my fay.
Come fill me a cup of mother Whetstone's ale, I may drink to my friends, and drive down my tale.
Here Ned and Tom I drink to ye: and yet if I come to the court, I doubt you'll not know me.
Yes, Tom shall be thy surety Tanner I will know thee.
If thou dost not Ned, by my troth I beshrew thee.
I drink to my wife that may be.
Faith Ned thou mayst live to make her a Lady.
Tush, her father offers nothing, having no more children but her.
I would I had not, condition she had all. But I have a knave to my son, I remember him by you, even such an ●thrist as one of you two, that spends all on gay clothes and new fashions, and no work will down with him, that I fear he'll be hanged, God bless you from a better fortune, yet you wear such filthy breeks, Lord, were not this a good fashion? yes, and would save many a fair penny.
Let that pass, and let us hear your song.
Agreed, agreed, come, sol, sol, sol, fa, fa, fa, say Dudgeon.
Agincourt, Agincourt, know ye not Agincourt.
Where the English slew and hurt,
all the French foemen:
With our Guns and bills brown,
O the French were beaten down,
Morris pikes and bowmen, &c.
Well sung good fellows, I would the King heard ye.
So should i'faith, I should strain a note for him: Come take away, and let's to bed, ye shall have clean sheets Ned, but they be course, good strong hemp, of my daughters own spinning and I tell thee, your Chamber pot, must be a fair horn, a badge of our occupation, for we buy no bending pewter, nor bending earth.
No matter Hobs, we will not go to bed.
What then?
even what thou wilt, for it is near day.
Tanner, Gramercies for our hearty cheer,
If ere it be thy chance to come to court,
inquire for me Ned the king's butler,
Or Tom of the king's chamber my companion,
And see what welcome we will give thee there.
I have heard of courtiers have said as much as you, and when they have been tried, would not bid their friends drink.
We are none such, let our horses be brought out,
For we must a way, and so with thanks farewell.
Farewell to ye both, commend me to the king, & tell him I would have been glad to have seen his worship here.
Come Tom for London, horse, and hence away.
Thomas Nevil, yet hast thou gracious time
Of dear repentance, now discharge thy conscience,
Lay open thine offences to the world,
That we may witness thou dost die a Christian.
Why sir Harry Morton have you arraigned,
Condemned, and brought me to this place,
Of bloody execution, and now ask,
If I be guilty, therein doth appear,
What justice you have used, call you this law?
Thou dost mistake our meaning Falconbridge,
we do not ask as being ignorant,
Of thy transgression, but as urging thee,
To hearty sorrow for thy vile misdeeds,
That heaven may take compassion on thy soul.
How charitable you would seem to be't:
I fear anon you'll say it is for love,
You bind me thus, and bring me to the block,
And that of mere affection you are moved
To cut my head off, cunning policy:
Such butchers as yourselves never want,
A colour to excuse your slaughterous minds.
We butcher thee? canst thou deny thyself,
But thou hast been a pirate on the sea?
Canst thou deny but with the commonalty
Of Kent and Essex, thou didst rise in arms,
And twice assault the City London, where
Thou twice didst take repulse, and since that time,
Canst thou deny, that being fled from hence,
Thou joinedst in conferacy with France,
And camest with them to burn Southampton here,
Are these no faults, thou shouldst so much presume,
To clear thyself, and lay thy blood on us?
Hear me sir Harrie, since we must dispute.
Dispute uncivil wretch, what needs dispute,
Did not the vice-admiral here, and I
Encountering with the Navy of the French,
Attach thee in a ship of Normandie,
And wilt thou stand upon thine innocence?
Dispatch, thou art as rightfully condemned
As ever rebel was. And thou shalt die.
I make no question of it, I must die,
But let me tell you how I scorn your threats,
So little do I reckon of the name
Of ugly death, as were he visible,
I'd wrestle with him for the victory,
And tug the slave, and tear him with my teeth,
But I would make him stoop to Falconbridge,
And for this life, this paltry brittle life,
This blast of wind which you have laboured foe,
By juries, sessions, and I know not what,
To rob me off, is of so vile repute:
That to attain that I might live mine age,
I would not give the value of a point,
You cannot be so cruel to afflict,
But I will be as forward to endure.
Go to, leave of these role braves of thine:
And think upon thy soul's health Falconbridge.
Submit and ask forgiveness of thy King.
What King?
Why Edward of the house of York.
He is no King of mine, he does usurp,
And if the destinies had given me leave,
I would have told him so before this time,
And pulled the Diadem from off his head.
Thou art a traitor, stop thy traitor's mouth.
I am no traitor, Lancaster is King,
If that be treason to defend his right,
What is't for them that do imprison him?
If insurrection to advance his sceptre,
What fault is theirs that step into his throne?
Oh God, thou pouredst the balm upon his head,
Can that pure unction be wiped off again?
Thou once didst crown him in his infancy,
Shall wicked men now in his age depose him?
Oh pardon me, if I expostulate,
More than becomes a sinful man to do,
England I fear thou wilt thy folly rue.
Thou triflest time, and dost but weary us
With dilatory questions, make an end,
Indeed the end of all kingdoms must end,
Honour and riches, all must have an end.
And he that thinks he doth the most prevail,
His head once laid, there resteth but a tale:
Come fellow, do thy office, what methinks,
Thou lookest as if thy heart were in thy hose,
Pull up thy spirits, it will be quickly done,
A blow or two at most will serve the turn.
Forgive me sir your death.
Forgive thee? I and give thee too,
Hold, there is some few crowns for thee to drink,
Tush weep not man, give losers leave to plain,
And yet i'faith my loss I count a gain,
First let me see, is thy are sharp enough,
I am indifferent, well a God's name to this gear,
Come & yield your head gently to the block,
Gently sayst thou: thou wilt not use me so:
But all is one for that, what strength hast thou,
Throughout the whole proportion of thy limbs,
Revoke it all into thy manly arms,
And spare me not, I am a Gentleman,
A Nevill and a Falconbridge beside,
Then do thy work, thou mayst get credit by it,
For if thou dost not, I must tell thee plain,
I shall be passing angry when 'tis done.
I warrant you sir, none in the land shall do it better.
Why now thou pleasest me, England farewell
And old Plantagenet, if thou survive,
Think on my love, although it did not thrive.
As for his head, it shall be sent with speed
To London, and the promised reward,
Allotted for the apprehending him,
Be given unto the poor of Southampton here:
How say you Captain are you so content?
With all my heart, but I do marvel much
We hear not of the messenger we sent,
To give the King intelligence of this?
Take truce with your surmises, here he comes.
Follow it seems that thou art slow of gate,
Or very negligent in our affairs,
What says King Edward to our service done?
To answer you directly and as briefly,
I spoke with him, for when I was come
To Drayton Basset, where they said he was,
'twas told me there, that even the night before,
His highness in all haste, was rid towards London:
The occasion, Henry's death within the Tower,
Of which the people are in sundry tales,
Some thinking he was murdered, some again
Supposing that he died a natural death.
Well how so ere, that concernes not s,
We have to do with no man's death, but his,
That for his treason here hath lost his head.
Come let us give direction as before,
And afterward make back unto the shore.
I marry Crosbie this befits thee well,
But some will marvel that with a scarlet gown,
I wear a guilded rapier by my side:
Why let them know, I was knighted in the field
For my good service to my Lord the king,
And therefore I may wear it lawfully,
In Court, in City, or at any royal banquet.
But soft Iohn Crosbie, thou forgettest thyself,
And dost not mind thy birth and parentage,
Where thou wast born, & whence thou art derived,
I do not shame to say, the Hospital
Of London was my chiefest fostering place,
There did I learn, that near unto a Cross,
Commonly called Cow Cross near Islington,
An honest Citizen did chance to find me,
A poor Shoemaker by trade he was,
And doubting of my Christendom or no,
Called me according to the place he found me,
Iohn Crosbie, finding me so by a Cross.
The Masters of the Hospital at further years,
Bound me apprentice to the grocer's trade,
Wherein God pleased to bless my poor endeavours
That by his blessings I am come to this.
The man that found me I have well requited,
And to the Hospital my fostering place,
An hundred pound a year I give for ever,
Likewise in memory of me Iohn Crosbie
In Bishopsgate street a poor house have I built,
And as my name have called it Crosbie house,
And whenas God shall take me from this life,
In little S. Helen's will I be buried:
All this declares, I boast not of my birth,
But found on earth, I must return to earth.
But God for his pity I forget myself,
The King my Sovereign Lord will come anon,
And nothing is as yet in readiness.
Where are ye cousin Shore? nay where is Mistress Shore?
Oh I am sorry that she stays so long,
See what it is to be a widower,
And lack a Lady Majoress in such need.
Oh are ye come? welcome good cousin Shore,
But you indeed are welcome gentle Niece.
Needs must you be our Lady Majoress now,
And help us, or else we are shamed for ever,
Good cousin still thus am I bold with you.
With all my heart my Lord, & thank ye too,
That you do please to use our homely help.
Why see how neatly she bestirs herself,
And in good sooth makes housewifery to shine?
Ah had my Lady Majoress lived to see
Fair Mistress Shore thus beautify her house,
She would have been not little proud thereof.
Well my Lord Maior I thank you for that flout,
But let his Highness now come when he please,
All things are in a perfect readiness.
The more am I beholding Niece to you,
That take such pains to save our credit now:
My servants are so slack, his Majesty,
Might have been here before we were prepared,
But peace here comes his Highness.
Now my Lord Maior, have we not kept our word?
Because we could not stay to dine with you:
At our departure hence, we promised,
First food we tasted at our back return,
Should be with you, still yielding hearty thanks,
To you and all our London Citizens,
For the great service which you did perform
Against that bold faced rebel Falconbridge.
My gracious Lord what then we did,
We did account no more than was our duty,
Thereto obliged by true subic as zeal,
And may he never live that not defends,
The honour of his king and country:
Next thank I God, it likes your Majesty,
To bless my poor roof, with your royal presence,
To me could come no greater happiness.
Thanks good Lord Maior, but where's my Lady Majoress, I hope that she will bid us welcome too.
she would my Liege, and with no little joy,
Had she but lived to see this blessed day,
But in her freed this Gentle woman here,
My Cousin's wife, that office will supply:
How say you mistress Shore?
How? mistress Shore? what not his wife
That did refuse his knighthood at our hand?
The very same my Lord and here he is.
What M. Shore, we are your debtor still,
But by God's grace intend not so to die:
And Gentlewoman, now before your face,
I must condemn him of discourtesy,
Yea, and of great wrong that he hath offered you,
For you had been a Lady but for him.
He was in fault, trust me he was to blame,
To hinder virtue of her due by right.
My gracious L. my poor & humble thoughts,
near had an eye to such unworthiness,
And though some hold it as a maxim,
That women's minds by nature do aspire,
Yet how both God and M. Shore I thank
For my continuance in this humble state,
And likewise how I love your Majesty:
For gracious sufferance that it may be so:
Heaven bear true record of my inward soul:
Now it remains, on my Lord majors behalf,
I do such duty as becometh me,
To bid your Highness welcome to his house,
Were welcomes virtue powerful in my word,
The King of England should not doubt thereof.
Nor do I mistress Shore, now my Lo. Maior
Edward dare boldly swear that he is welcome,
You spoke the word well, very well i'faith,
But mistress Shore her tongue hath guilded it,
Tell me cousin Howard and Tom Sellinger,
Had ever Citizen so fair a wife?
Of flesh and blood I never did behold,
A woman every way so absolute.
Nor I my Liege, were Sellinger a King,
He could afford Shoares wife to be a Queen.
Why how now Tom? Nay rather how now Ned?
What change is this? proud, saucy roving eye,
What whisper'st in my brain, that she is fair?
I know it, I see it, fairer than my Queen?
oulost thou maintain it? what & thou traitor heart,
Wouldst thou shake hands in this conspiracy?
Down rebel, back base treacherous conceit,
I will not credit thee, my Bess is fair,
And Shoares wife but a blouze, compared to her,
Come let us sit, here will I take my place.
And my Lord Maior, fill me a bowl of wine,
That I may drink to your elected Majoress,
And M. Shore tell me how like you this,
My L. Maior makes your wife his L. Majoress?
So well my Lord as better cannot be,
All in the honour of your Majesty.
Nay drink to us L. Maior, we'll have it so,
Go to I say, you are our Taster now,
Drink then, and we will pledge ye.
All health & happiness to my sovereign.
Fill full our cup, and Lady Majoress,
This tall carouse we mean to drink to you,
And you must pledge us, but yet no more,
Than you shall please to answer us withal.
Nay you must drink to somebody, yea Tom to thee?
Well sirrah, see you do her right:
For Edward would, oh would to God he might.
Yet idle eye, wilt thou be gadding still?
Keep home, keep home, for fear of further ill.
How now? letters to us, from whom?
My Liege, this from the D. of Burgundy.
And this is from the Constable of France.
What news from them?
To claim our right in France?
And they will aid us, yea, will ye so?
But other aid must aid us ere we go.
A woman's aid, that hath more power than France
To crown us, or to kill us with mischance.
If chaste resolve be to such beauty tied,
Sue how thou canst, thou wilt be still denied,
Her husband hath deserved well of thee,
Tut, love makes no respect where'er it be,
Thou wrong'st thy Queen: every enforced ill,
Must be endured, where beauty seeks to kill:
Thou seemst to read, only to blind their eyes,
Who knowing it, thy folly would despise.
Thanks for my cheer L. Maior, I am not well,
I know not how to take these news. This fit I mean,
That hath bereft me of all reason clean.
God shield my Sovereign.
Nay nothing I shall be well anon.
May it please your Highness sit.
ay, fain with thee, nay we must needs be gone,
cousin Howard convey these letters to our counsel,
And bid them give us their advise of them,
Thanks for my cheer L. Maior, farewell to you
And farewell Mistress Shore, La. Majoress I should say,
It's you have caused our parting at this time.
Farewell M. Shore, farewell to all,
we'll meet once more to make amends for this.
Oh God here to be ill?
My house to cause my sovereign's discontent?
cousin Shore I had rather spent.
Content yourself my L. kings have their humours,
The letters did contain somewhat no doubt,
That did displease him.
So my Lord think I,
But by God's help he will be well again.
I hope so too, well cousin for your pains,
I can but thank ye, chiefly you fair Niece,
At night I pray ye both come sup with me.
How say ye? will ye?
Yes my Lord we will.
So for this time we humbly take our leave.
Oh now the sudden sickness of my Liege,
afflicts my soul with many passions?
His Highness did intend to be right merry,
And God he knows how it would glad my soul,
If I had seen his Highness satisfied
With the poor entertainment of his Maior,
His humble vassal, whose lands, whose life and all
Are, and in duty must be always his.
Well, God I trust will bless his grace's health,
And quickly ease him of his sudden fit.
Take away there ho, rid this place,
And God of heaven bless my sovereign's Grace.
Sirrah Jack, come set out.
You are the elder Prentice, I pray you do it, lest my mistress talk with you when she comes down, what is it o'clock?
Sir by All-hallows.
Lying and stealing will bring ye to the Gallows.
Is here all the plate?
I that must serve today,
Where is the weights and balance?
All ready, hark my mistress comes.
Sir boy, while I attend the shop myself,
See if the workman have dispatched the Cup,
How many ounces weighs it:
twenty forsooth.
What said the Gentleman to the fashion?
He told my master I was not within.
Go sir make haste, your M. is in Cheapside:
Take heed ye were best your loitering be not spied.
Well fare a case to put a King in yet,
Good mistress Shore this doth your love procure,
This shape is secret, and I hope t's sure,
The watermen that daily use the Court,
And see me often, knew me not in this,
At Lion key I landed in their view,
Yet none of them took knowledge of the King,
If any gallant strive to have the wall,
I'll yield it gently: Soft here must I turn,
here's Lombard street, and here's the Pelican,
And there's the Phoenix in the Pelicans nest,
O rare perfection of rich nature's work,
Bright twinkling spark of precious Diamond,
Of greater value than all India,
Were there no Sun, by whose kind lovely heat
The earth brings forth those stones we hold of prize,
Her radiant eyes dejected to the ground,
Would turn each pebble to a Diamond.
Gaze greedy eyes and be not satisfied,
Till you find rest, where hearts desire doth bide.
What would you buy sir that you look on here?
Your fairest jewel, be it not too dear.
First how this sapphire mistress that you wear?
Sir it is right that will I warrant ye,
No jeweller in London shows a better.
No, nor the like, you praise it passing well.
Do I no?, if some Lapidary had the stone, more would not buy it then I can demand. 'tis as well set I think as ere ye saw.
'tis set indeed upon the fairest hand, that ere I saw.
You are disposed to jest, but for value, his majesty might wear it.
Might he i'faith?
Sir 'tis the ring I mean.
I meant the hand.
You are a merry man,
I see you come to cheap, and not to buy.
Yet he that offers fairer than i'll do, shall hardly find a partner in his bargain.
Perhaps in buying things of so small value?
Rather because no wealth can purchase it.
He were too fond, that would so highly prize,
The thing which once was given away for love.
His hap was good that came so easily by it.
The gift so small, that asked, who could deny it?
Oh she gave more, that such a gift then gave,
Then earth ere had, or world shall ever have.
His hap is ill, should it be as you say,
That having given him what you rate so high,
And yet is still the poorer by the match.
That easily proves he doth not know the worth.
Yet having had the use of it so long,
It rather proves you over rate the thing,
He being a chapman, as it seems you are.
Indeed none should adventure on the thing,
That's to be purchased only by a King.
If Kings love that, which no man else respects,
It may be so, else do I see small reason,
A King should take delight in such course stuff.
Lives there a King, that would not give his crown,
To purchase such a kingdom of content?
In my conceit, right well you ask that question.
The world I think contains not such fond king.
Why mistress Shore, I am the man will do it.
It's proudly spoke, although I not believe it,
Were he King Edward that should offer it.
But shall I have it?
Upon what acquaintance?
Why since I saw thee last.
Where was that?
At the L. Majors, in the presence of the King.
I have forgotten that I saw you there,
For there were many that I took small note of.
Of me you did, and we had some discourse.
You are deceived Sir, I had then no time,
For my attendance on his majesty.
I'll gauge my hand unto your hand of that,
Look well upon me.
Now I beseech you let this strange disguise
Excuse my boldness to your majesty.
whatever we possess is all your highness,
Only mine honour, which I cannot grant,
Only thy love (bright angel) Edward craves,
For which I thus adventured to see thee.
But here comes one, to whom I only gave it.
And he I doubt will say you shall not have it.
Am I so soon cut off? oh spite.
How say ye mistress, will ye take my offer?
Indeed I cannot sir afford it so.
You'll not be offered fairlier I believe.
Indeed you offer like a Gentleman,
But yet the jewel will not so be left.
Sir, if you bid not too much underfoot,
I'll drive the bargain twixt you and my wife.
Alas good Shore, myself dare answer no.
Nothing can make thee such a jewel forego.
She faith you shall be too much looser by it.
See in the row then, if you can speed better.
See many worlds a-row, affords not like.
Why look'st thou Mat? know'st thou the gentleman?
Alas what ails thee that thou look'st so pale?
What there sweet heart? alas, where hast thou been?
Nay nothing Iane, know you the Gentleman?
Not I sweet heart, alas why do you ask?
Is he thine enemy?
I cannot tell,
What came he here to cheapen at our shop?
This jewel love.
Well I pray God he came for nothing else.
Why who is it? I do suspect him Shore.
That you demand thus doubtedly of me.
Ah Iane, it is the King.
The king? what then? is't for that thou sighest?
Were he a thousand kings thou hast no cause
To fear his presence, or suspect my lout.
I know I have not, see he comes again.
Still is my hindzer there? be patient heart,
Some fitter season must assuage the smart.
What will ye take that mistress which I offered ye?
I come again sir, as one willing to buy.
Indeed I cannot sir, I pray ye
Deal with my husband, hear what he will say.
I'll sell it worth your money, if you please,
I pray you come near sir.
I am too near already, thou so near.
Nay, nay, she knows what I did offer her,
And in good sadness, I can give no more,
So fare ye well sir, I will not deal with you.
You are deceived (sweet heart) 'tis not the king,
Think you he would adventure thus alone?
I do assure thee Iane it is the King.
Oh God, twixt the extremes of love and fear,
In what a shivering ague sits my soul?
Keep we our treasure secret, yet so fond,
As set so rich a beauty as this is,
In the wide view of every gazer's eye.
Oh traitor beauty, oh deceitful good,
That dost conspire against thyself and love,
No sooner got, but wished again of others,
In thine own self, injurious to thyself,
Oh rich poor portion, thou good evil thing?
How many joyful woes still dost thou bring?
I pray thee come, sweet love, and sit by me,
No king that's under heaven I love like thee.
Neighbours and friends, the cause that you are called,
Concerns the Kings most excellent majesty,
Whose right you know by his progenitors,
Unto the Crown and sovereignty of France,
Is wrongfully detained by the French,
Which to revenge and royally regain.
His Highness means to put himself in Arms.
And in his princely person to conduct
His warlike troops against the enemy.
But for his Coffers are unfurnished,
Through civil discord and intestine war,
(Whose bleeding scars our eyes may yet behold)
He prays his faithful loving subjects help,
To further this his just great enterprise.
So the feck and meaning, whereby as it were of all your long purgation Sir Humphrey is no more in some respect, but the king wants money & would have some of his Comentie.
Tanner you rightly understand the matter.
Note this withal, where his dread Majesty,
(Our lawful sovereign, and most royal King)
Might have exacted or imposed a Tax
Or borrowed greater sums than we can spare,
(For all we have is at his dread command,)
He doth not so, but mildly doth entreat
Our kind benevolence, what we will give,
With willing minds to wards this mighty charge.
Which to receive, his noble Counsellor
And kinsman the Lord Howard here is come.
Now good sir Humphrey Bowes, and M. As,
Have ye declared the kings most gracious pleasure?
We have my Lord.
His highness will not force,
As loan or tribute, but will take your gift,
In grateful part and recompense your love.
To show my love, though money now be scarce
A hundredth pound i'll give his Majesty.
'tis well sir Humphrey.
I a hundred marks.
Thanks M. Aston, you both show your love,
Now ask your neighbours what they will bestow?
Come master Hadland your benevolence.
O good sir Humphrey do not rack my purse,
You know my state, I lately sold my land.
Then you have money, let the king have part.
ay, do master Hadland do, they say ye sold a foul deal of dirty land for fair gold and silver, let the king have some now while you have it, for if ye be forborn a while, all will be spent, for he that cannot keep land that lies fast, will have much ado to hold money, it's slippery ware, 'tis melting ware, 'tis melting ware.
Gramercy Tanner.
Say, what shall we have?
My forty shillings.
Robert Goodfellow.
I know you will be liberal to the King.
O M. Aston be content I pray ye,
You know my charge, my household very great,
And my housekeeping holds me very hare:
threescore uprising, and down lying Sir,
Spends no final store of victuals in a year,
Two brace of Greyhounds, tt. couple of hounds,
And then my jades devour a deal of Corn,
My Christmas cost, & then my friends that come
Amounts to charge, I am Robin Goodfellow,
That welcomes all and keeps a frolic house,
I have no money pray ye pardon me.
here's a plain Tanner can teach you how to thrive,
Keep fewer dogs, and then ye may feed men:
Yet feed no idle men, 'tis needles charge,
You that on hounds and hunting mates will spend,
No doubt but something to your King you'll lend.
My brace of Angels, by my troth that's all.
Mass and 'tis well thy Curs have left so much, I thought they would have eaten up thy house and land ere this.
Now Harrie Grudgen.
What would you have of me? Money I have none, and i'll sell no stock, here's old polling, subsidy, fifteen, soldiers, and to the poor, and you may have your will, you'll soon shut me out a door.
Hear ye worships, will ye let me answer my neighbour Grudgen? By my halidom Harry Grudgen, thou'rt but a grumbling, grudging Churl, thou hast two ploughs going, and near a Cradle rocking, thou'st a peck of money, go to, turn thee loose, thou'lt go to law with the Micat for a tithe goose, and wilt not spare the King four or five pound.
Gep goodman Tanner, are ye so round? your prolicatenes has brought your son to the gallows almost, you can be frank of another man's cost.
Thart no honest man to twit me with my son, he may out live thee yet for aught that he has done, my sons i'th' jail, is he the first has been there, and thou art a man, as thart a beast, I would have thee by the ears.
Friend thou want'st nurture, to upbraid a Father Weeping.
With a suns fault, we sit not here for this;
What's thy benevolence towards his majesty?
His benegligence? hang him he'll not give a pennis willingly.
I care not much to cast away forty pence.
Out grudging peasant, base ill nurtured groom,
Is the the love thou bearest unto the King?
Gentlemen take notice of the slave,
And if he fault let him be soundly plagued?
Now frolic Ianner, what wilt thou afford?
twenty old Angels and a score of hides, if that be too little, take twenty Nobles more, while I have it my king shall spend of my store.
The King shall know thy loving liberal heart.
Shall he i'faith, I thank ye heartily, but hear ye Gentleman, you come from the Court?
I do.
Lord how does the King, and how does Ned the king's Butler, and Tom of his Chamber, I am sure ye know them?
They do very well.
For want of better guests they were at my house one night.
I know they were.
They promised me a good turn for kissing my daughter Nell, and now I ha' cagion to try them, my sons in Die hell here in Caperdoche, itha Jail for peeping into another man's purse, and outstep the King be miserable, he's like to totter, can that same Ned the Butler do any thing with the King?
More than myself, or any other Lord.
A halter he can, by my troth ye rejoice my heart to hear it.
Come to the Court I warrant thy sons life,
Ned will save that, and do thee greater good.
I'll wean Brocke my maressole, and come up to the King, and it shall go hard but two fat hens for your pains I will bring.
My Lord this fellow gladly now will give,
five pounds so you will pardon his rude speech.
For five and five I cannot brook the beast.
What gives the Tanner, I am as able as he
He gives ten pound.
Take twenty then of me.
I pray ye my Lord forgive my rough heaved speech
I wis I meant no hurt unto my Liege.
Let us entreat your Lordship's patience.
I do at your request remit the offence,
So let's depart, here's all we have to do.
'Tis for this time and place my Lord, sirrah bring your money.
What have you saved now goodman Grudgen, by your hinching and your pinching, not the worth of a black pudding.
Now mistress Shore, what urgent cause is that, Which made ye send for me in such great haste? I 〈◊〉 it made me half afraid, you were not well.
Trust me, nor sick, nor well, but troubled still with the disease I told ye: here is another letter from the King, was never poor soul so importuned.
But will no answer serve?
No mistris Blage, no answere will sustize,
He, he it is, that with a violent siege
Labours to break into my plighted faith,
Oh what am I, he should so much forget
His royal State, and his high majesty?
Still doth he come disguised to my house,
And in most humble terms bewrays his love,
My husband grieves, alas how can he choose,
Fearing the dispossessment of his Iane?
And when he cannot come (for him) he writes,
Offering beside incomparable gifts,
And all to win me to his princely will.
Believe me M. Shore, a dangerous case,
And every way repeat with doubtful fear,
If you should yield, your virtuous name were foiled
And your beloved husband made a scorn,
And if not yield, it's likely that his love,
Which now admires ye, will convert to hate,
And who knows not a PRINCE's hate is death?
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.
Then counsel me what I were best to do.
You know his greatness ran dispense with ill,
Making the sin seem lesser by his worth,
And you yourself, your children & your friends,
Be all advanced to worldly dignity,
And this world's pomp you know is a goodly thing,
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.
Alas I know that I was bound by oath,
To keep the promise that I made at first,
And virtue lives, when pomp consumes to dust.
So we do say, dishonour is no shame,
When slander does not touch th'offenders name,
You shall be folded in a prince's arms,
Whose beck disperseth even the greatest harms,
Many that sit themselves in high degree,
Will then be glad to stoop, and bend the knee,
And who is't, having plenty in the hand,
Never commanded, but doth still command,
That cannot work in such excess of things,
To quit the guilt one small transgression brings?
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.
Here do I live, although in mean estate,
Yet with a conscience free from all debate,
Where higher footing may in time procure,
A sudden fall, and mix my sweet with sour.
True, I confess a private life is good,
Nor would I otherwise be understood,
To be a goldsmith's wife is some content,
But days in court more pleasantly are spent,
A household's government deserves renown,
But what is a companion to a crown?
The name of mistress is a pretty thing,
But Madam at each word doth glory bring.
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for nice.
Oh that I knew which were the best of twain,
Which for I do not, I am sick with pain.
How now sir boy, what is the news with you?
The Gentleman forsooth the other day,
That would have bought the jewel at our stall,
Is here to speak with ye.
Oh God it is the King.
Good mistress Blague withdraw ye from this place,
Oh come anon, so soon as he is gone,
And sirrah get you to the shop again.
Now mistress Shore bethink ye what to do.
Such suitors come not every day to woo.
Thou mayst convict me (beauty's pride) of boldness,
That I intrude like an unbidden guest,
But love being guide, my fault will seem the less.
Most welcome to your subjects homely roof,
The foot my Sovereign, seldom doth offend,
Unless the heart some other hurt intend.
The most thou seest is hurt unto myself
How for thy sake, is majesty disrobed?
Riches made poor, and dignity brought low,
Only that thou mightst our affection know.
The more the pity, that within the sky,
The sun that should all other vapours dry,
And guide the world with his most glorious light
Is muffled up himself in wilful night.
The want of thee, fair Cinthia is the cause,
Spread thou thy silver-brightness in the air,
And straight the gladsome morning will appear.
I may not wander, he that guides my car,
Is an immoved, constant, fixed star,
But I will give that star a comets name,
And shield both thee and him from further blame.
How if the host of heaven at this abuse
Kepine? who can the prodigy excuse?
It lies within the compass of my power,
To dim their envious eyes, dare seem to lower,
But leaving this our enigmatic talk,
Thou must sweet Iane repair unto the Court,
His tongue entreats, controls the greatest peer,
His hand plights love, a royal sceptre holds,
And in his heart be hath confirmed thy good,
Which may not, must not, shall not be withstood.
If you enforce me, I have nought to say,
But wish I had not lived to see this day.
Blame not the time, thou shalt have cause to soy.
Iane in the evening I will send for thee,
And thou and thine shall be advanced by me.
In sign whereof receive this true-Love kiss,
Nothing ill meant, there can be no amiss.
Well I will in, and ere the time begin,
Learn how to be repentant for my sin.
But cousin Shore, are ye assured it was the King you saw in such disguise?
Do I know you the uncle to my wife? know I Frank Emersley her brother here? so surely do I know that counterfeit to be King.
Well, admit all this. And that his Majesty in such disguise, please to survey the manner of our City, or what occasion else may like himself. methinks you have small reason brother Shore, to be displeased thereat.
Oh I have sound him now.
Because my Niece his wife is beautiful,
And well reputed for her virtuous parts:
He in his fond conceit misdoubts the King,
Doth dote on her in his affection.
I know not cousin how she way be changed,
By any cause in you procuring it,
From the fair carriage of her wonted course:
But well I wot, I have oft heard you say,
She merited no scruple of mislike.
If now some giddy fancy in your brain,
Make you conceive sinisterly of her,
And with a person of such difference.
I tell you cousin, more for her respect,
Then to soothe you in such sottishness,
I would reveal ye open to the world,
And let your folly justly plague yourself.
Uncle you are too forward in your rage,
And much mistake me in this suddenness,
Your Niece's reputation have I prized,
And shrined as devoutly in my soul
As you, or any that it can concern.
Nor when I tell you that it is the King,
Comes muffled like a common Servingman,
Do I infer thereby my wife is false?
Or swerves one jot from wonted modesty.
Though in my shop she sit, more to respect,
Her servants duty, then for any skill,
She doth, or can pretend in what we trade,
Is it not strange, that ever when he comes,
It is to her, and will not deal with me?
Ah Uncle Frank, nay, would all her kin,
Were here to censure of my cause aright:
Though I misdeem not her, yet give me leave,
To doubt what his sly walking may intend.
And let me tell ye, he that is possessed,
Of such a beauty, fears undermining guests:
Especially a mighty one, like him,
Whose greatness may guild over ugly sin.
But say his coming is not to my wife,
Then hath he some sly aiming at my life,
By false compounded metals, or light gold,
Or else some other trifle to be sold.
When kings themselves so narrowly do pry
Into the world, men fear, and why not I?
Believe my brother in this doubtful case
I know not well how I should answer ye,
I wonder in this serious busy time,
Of this great gathered benevolence,
For his regaining of his right in France,
The day and nightly turmoil of his Lords,
Yea of the whole estate in general,
He can be spared from these great affairs,
And wander here disguised in this sort.
But is not this your boy?
Yes marry is it: how now, what news with thee?
Master, my mistress by a Nobleman,
Is sent for to the King in a close Coach,
she's gone with him, these are the news I bring.
How? my niece sent for to the King?
By a Nobleman, and she is gone with him?
Nay, than I like it not?
How, gone sayst thou?
Be patient Uncle, storm not gentle Frank:
The wrong is mine, by whom? a king,
To talk of such it is no common thing.
She is gone thou sayst?
Yes truly sir, 'tis so.
I cannot help it, a God's name let her go,
You cannot help it Uncle, no, nor you,
Where kings are meddlers, meaner men must rue.
I storm against it? no, farewell lane Shore.
Once thou wast mine, but must be so no more.
Gone to the Court?
Yet uncle will ye rage?
Let mine example your high heat assuage.
To note offences in a mighty man,
It is enough, amend it he that can,
Frank Emersley, my wife thy sister was,
Lands, goods and all I have, to thee I pass,
Save that poor portion must along with me,
To bear me from this badge of obloquy,
It never shall be said that Mathew Shore,
A king's dishonour in his bonnet wore.
Good brother.
Strive not to change me, for I am resolved,
And will not tarry. England fare thou well,
And Edward, for requiting me so well,
But dare I speak of him? forbear, forbear,
Come Frank I will surrender all to thee,
And then abroad, where ere my fortune be
And have our country subjects been so frank
And bountiful in their benevolence,
Toward our present expedition?
Thanks cousin Howard for thy pains herein:
We will have letters sent to every Shire
Of thankful gratitude, that they may know,
How highly we respect their gentleness.
One thing my L. I had well near forgot,
Your pleasant host the Tanner of Tamworth.
What of him cousin?
He was right liberal,
I twenty old Angels did he send your Grace,
And others seeing him so bountiful,
Stretched further than otherwise they had done.
Trust me I must requite that honest Tanner.
Oh had he kept his word, and come to Court,
Then in good sadness we had had good sport.
That is not long my L. which comes at last
he's come to London, on an earnest cause,
His son lies prisoner in Safford jail,
And is condemned for a robbery.
Your highness pardoning his sons offence,
May yield the Tanner no mean recompense.
But who hath seen him since he came to town?
My Lord in Holborn 'twas my hap to see him
Gazing about, I sent away my men,
And clapping on one of their livery cloaks,
Came to him, and the Tanner knew we strait,
How dost thou Tom? and how doth Ned quoth he
That honest merry hangman, how doth he?
I knowing that your Majesty intended
This day in person to come to the Tower,
There bade him meet me, where Ned and I,
Would bring him to the presence of the King,
And there procure a pardon for his son.
Have then a care we be not seen of him,
Until we be provided for the purpose,
Because once more we'll have a little sport,
Tom Sellinger, let that care be yours.
I warrant ye my Lord let me alone.
Welcome L. Maior, what have you signified
Our thankfulness unto our Citizens,
For their late gathered benevolence?
Before the Citizens in our Guildhall,
Master Recorder made a good Oration,
Of thankful gentitude unto them all,
Which they received with so kind respect,
And love unto your royal majesty,
As it appeared to us they sorrowed,
Their bounty to your highness was no more,
Lord Maior, thanks to yourself and them,
And go ye with us now into the Tower,
To see the order that we shall observe,
In this so needful preparation,
The better may you signify to them,
What need there was of their benevolence.
I'll wait upon your gracious majesty,
Yet there is one thing that much grieveth me. aside.
Go honest fellow, bear my trunks aboard,
And tell the master i'll come presently.
We will sir, but what Lady have we here?
Belike she is of no mean countenance,
That hath so many suitors waiting on her.
Go one of you I pray ye, inquire her name,
My honest friend, what Lady call ye this?
Her name is mistress Shore, the king's beloved,
A special friend to suitors at the court.
Her name is mistress Shore the kings beloved,
Where shall I hide my head, or stop mine ears.
But like an owl I shall be wondered at?
When she with me was wont to walk the streets,
The people then as she did pass along,
would say, there goes fair modest mistress Shore,
When she attended like a City Dame,
Was praised of matrons. So that Citizens,
When they would speak of aught unto their wives
Fetched their example still from mistress Shore,
But now she goes decked in her courtly robes,
This is not she, that once in seemly black,
Was the chaste sober wife of Mathew Shore,
For now she is King Edward's Concubine,
Oh great ill title, honourable shame,
Her good I had, but King her ill is thine,
Once Shoares true wife, now Edward's Concubine,
Amongst the rest i'll note her new behaviour.
Good mistress Shore remember my son's life.
What is thy name?
My name is Thomas Air.
There is his pardon signed by the King.
In sign of humble hearty thankfulness,
Take this in Angels twenty pound.
What think ye, that I buy & sell for bribes,
His highness favour, or his subjects blood?
No, without gifts God grant I may do good,
For all my good cannot redeem my ill,
Yet to do good I will endeavour still.
Yet all this good doth but guild over thy ill.
Mistress the restitution of my lands,
Taken perforce by his highness officers.
The King is content your goods shall be restored,
But the officers will hardly yield thereto,
Yet be content, i'll see ye have no wrong.
Thou canst not say to me so, I have wrong.
Mistress good faith gin ye'll help me till my land, whilk the faulse loune Billie Grime of Glendale hauds wranfully frea me: i'll white your goodness with a bonny nag, sall swum away so deftly as the wind.
Your suit my friend, requires a longer time,
Yet since you dwell so far off, to ease your charge,
Your diet with my servants you may take,
And some relief i'll get thee of the King.
Its cold relief thou getst me from the King.
Now God's blessing light on that goodly fair face, i'll be your true beadsman mistress, I indeed, shall I.
God bless the care you have of doing good.
Pity she should miscarry in her life,
That bears so sweet a mind in doing good.
So say I too, ah Iane this kills my heart,
That thou recks others, and not rue'st my smart.
Mistress I fear you have forgot my suit?
Oh, 'tis for a licence to transport corn from this land. and lead to foreign Realms, I had your bill, but I have torn your bill, and 'ttwere no shame I think, to tear your ears, that care not how you wound the commonwealth. The poor must starve for food to fill your purse. And the enemy bandy bullets of our lead. No master Rufford, i'll not speak for you, except it be to have you punished.
By the mess a deft lass, Christ benison light on her.
Is that another suitor? I have no bill of his,
Go one of you, and know what he would have.
Yes Iane, the bill of my obliged faith,
And I had thine, but thou hast canceled
Oh God it is my husband, kind Mathew Shore.
Ah Iane, what's he dare say he is thy husband?
Thou wast a wife, but now thou art not so,
Thou wast a maid, a maid when thou wast wife,
Thou wast a wife even when thou wast a maid,
So good, so modest, and so chaste thou wast,
But now thou art divorced, whiles yet he lives,
That was thy husband, while thou wast his wife.
Thy wifehood stained, by thy dishonoured life,
For now thou art nor widow, maid, nor wife.
I must confess I yielded up the Fort,
Wherein lay all the riches of my y,
But yet sweet Shore, before I yielded it,
I did endure the longest and greatest siege,
That ever battered on poor chastity,
And but to him that did assault the same,
For ever it had been invincible,
But I will yield it back again to thee.
He cannot blame me, though it be so done,
To lose by me, what first by me was won.
No Iane, there is no place allowed for me,
Where once a King hath ta'en possession,
Mean men brook not a Rival in their love,
Much less so high unrivaled Majesty,
concubine to one so great as Edward.
Is tar too great to be the wife of Shore,
I will refuse the pleasures of the Court,
Let me go with thee Shore, though not as a wife,
Yet as thy slave, since I have lost that name,
I will redeem the wrong that I have done thee,
With my true service, if thou wilt accept it.
Thou go with me Iane, oh God forbid,
That I should be a traitor to my King,
Shall I become a felon to his pleasures,
And fly away as guilty of the theft?
No my dear Iane, I say it may not be,
Oh what have subjects that is not their kings,
He not examine his prerogative.
Why then sweet Mat. let me entreat thee stay,
What is't with Edward that I cannot do?
I'll make thee wealthier than ere Richard was,
That entertained the three greatest kings in Europe,
And feasted them in London on a day
Ask what thou wilt, were it a million,
That may content thee, thou shalt have it Shore.
Indeed this were some comfort to a man,
That tasted want or worldly misery,
But I have lost what wealth cannot return,
All worldly losses are but toys to mine,
Oh, all my wealth, the loss of thee was more,
Than ever time or Fortune can restore.
Therefore sweet Iane farewell, once thou wast mine,
Too rich for me, and that King Edward knew,
Adieu, oh world, he shall deceived be,
That puts his trust in women or in thee.
Ah Shore farewell, poor heart in death i'll tell,
I ever loud thee Shore, farewell, farewell.
Having awaked forth of their sleepy dens,
Our droury Cannons, which ere long shall charm
The watchful French, with deaths eternal sleep,
And all things else in readiness for France,
A while we will give truce unto our care,
There is a merry Tanner near at hand,
With whom we mean to be a little merry.
Therefore Lord Maior, and you my other friends,
I must entreat you not, to knowledge me,
No man stand bare, all as companions,
Give me a Cloak, that I may be disguised,
Tom Sellinger, go thou and take another,
So Tanner, now come when ye please, we are provided,
And in good time, see he is come already.
Tom Sellenger, go thou and meet him.
What Iohn Hobs? welcome i'faith to court,
Gramercies honest Tom, where is the hangman
Ned? where is that mad rascal, shall I not see him?
See where he stands, that same is he.
What Ned? a plague found thee, how dost thou for a villain? how dost thou mad Rogue, and how, and how?
In health Iohn Hobs, and very glad to see thee,
But say, what wind drove thee to London.
Ah Ned, I was brought hither with a whirlwind man, my son, my son, did I not tell thee I had a knave to my son?
Yes Tanner, what of him?
Faith he's in Caperdoche Ned, in Stafford Goal, for a robbery, and is like to be hanged, except thou get the King to be more miserable to him.
If that be all Tanner, i'll warrant him,
I will procure his pardon of the King.
Wilt thou Ned? for those good words, see what my Daughter Nell hath sent thee, a handkercher wrought with as good Couentrie silk blue thread as ever thou sawest.
And I perhaps may wear it for her sake,
In better presence than thou art aware off,
How Ned, a better present? that canst thou not have for silk, cloth, and workmanship, why Nell made it man. But Ned? is not the King in this company, what he in the long beard and the red petticoat? before God I misdoubt Ned that is the King, I know it by my Lord what ye calls players.
How by them Tanner?
Ever when they play an interlude or a Commodity at Tamworth, the King always is in a long beard, and a red gown like him, therefore I 'spect him to be the King
No trust me Tanner, this is not the King, but thou shalt see the King before thou goest, and have a pardon for thy son too with thee.
This man is the Lord Maior, Lord Maior of London, here was the Recorder too, but he is gone.
What nicknames these courtnolls have? Mare and Corder quotha? we have no such at Lichfield, there is the honest Bailiff and his brethren, such words 'gree best with us.
My Lord Maior, I pray ye for my sake, to bid this honest Tanner welcome.
You are welcome my honest friend,
In sign whereof I pray you see my house,
And sup with me this night.
I thank ye good goodman Masor, but I care not for no meat, my stomach is like to a sick swine's, that will neither eat nor drink, till she know what shall become of her pig. Ned and Tom, you promised me a good turn when I came to Court, either do it now, or go hang yourselves.
No sooner comes the King, but I will do it.
I warrant thee Tanner, fear not thy sons life.
Nay, I fear not his life, I fear his death.
All health and happiness to my Sovereign.
The Master of Saint Katherine's hath marred all:
Out alas that ever I was borne.
Look to the Tanner there, he takes no harm,
I would not have him (for my crown) miscarry.
Let me come to him by my king's good leave,
Here's ginger honest man, bite it.
Bite ginger, bite ginger, bite a dog's date, I am but a dead man, ah my Liege, that you should deal so with a poor well meaning man, but it makes no matter, I can but die.
But when Tanner canst thou tell?
Nay even when you please, for I have so defended ye, by calling ye plain Ned, mad rogue and rascal, that I know you'll have me hanged. Therefore make no more ado, but send me down to Stafford, and there a God's name hang me with my son. And here's another as honest as yourself, you made me call him plain Tom, I warrant his name is Thomas, and some man of worship too, therefore let's to it, even when and where ye will.
Tanner attend, not only do we pardon thee,
But in all princely kindness welcome thee,
And thy sons trespass do we pardon too,
o'er go and see that forthwith it be drawn,
Under our seal of England, as it ought,
And forty pounds we give thee to defray
Thy charges in thy coming up to London.
Now Tanner, what sayst thou to us?
Marry you speak like an honest man, if you mean as you say.
we mean it Tanner, on our royal word.
Now master of S. Katherine's, what would you?
My gracious Lord, the great benevolence,
(Though small to that your subjects could afford,
Of poor S. Katherine's do I bring your grace,)
Five hundred pounds here have they sent by me.
For the easier portage, all in Angel gold,
What this good widow mistress Norton will,
She comes herself, and brings her gift with her.
Pardon me gracious Lord, presumption,
Nor over weening in mine own conceit,
Makes me thus bold to come before your Grace,
But love and duty to your majesty:
And great desire to see my Lord the King,
Our master here spoke of benevolence,
And said my twenty Nobles was enough,
I thought not so, but at your highness feet,
A widows mite, a token of her zeal,
In humble duty gives you twenty pound.
Now by my crown, a gallant Iustie Girl,
Of all the exhibition yet bestowed,
This woman's liberality likes me best.
Is thy name Norton?
I my gracious Liege.
How long hast thou been a Widow?
It is my Lord,
Since I did bury Wilkin my goodman,
At Shrovetide next even just a dozen years.
In all which space, couldst thou not find a man.
On whom thou mightst bestow thyself again?
Not any like my Wilkin whose dear love,
I know is matchless, in respect of whom,
I think not any worthy of a kiss.
No widow? that i'll try, how like you this?
Beshrew my heart, it was a honey kiss,
Able to make an aged woman young:
And for the same most sweet and lovely Prince,
See what the widow gives you from her store,
forty old Angels but for one kiss more.
Marie Widow and thou shalt have it,
Iohn Hobs thou art a widower,
Lackest thou such a wife?
Snails, twenty pound a kiss? had she as many twenty pound bags as I have knobs of bark in my tansat she might kiss them away in a quarter of a year. I'll no Saint Katherine's widows, if kisses be so dear.
Clubs and clouted shoes, there's none enamoured here.
Lord Maior, we thank you and entreat withal,
To recommend us to our Citizens:
We must for France, we bid you all farewell,
Come Tanner thou shalt with us to Court,
To marrow you shall dine with my Lord Maior,
And after ward set homeward when ye please:
God and our right that only fights for us,
Adieu, pray that our toil prove prosperous.