SHall I call in th'ambasssadors my Liege?
Not yet my Cousin, till we be resolved
Of some serious matters touching us and France.
God and his Angels guard your sacred throne,
And make you long become it.
Sure we thank you. And good my Lord proceed
Why the Law Salic which they have in France,
Or should or should not, stop us in our claim:
And God forbidden my wise and learned Lord,
That you should fashion, frame, or wrest the same.
For God doth know how many now in health,
Shall drop their blood in approbation,
Of what your reverence shall incite us too.
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person.
How you awake the sleeping sword of war:
We charge you in the name of God take heed.
After this conjuration, speak my Lord:
And we will judge, note, and believe in heart,
That what you speak, is washed as pure
As sin in baptism.
Then hear me gracious sovereign, and you peers,
Which own your lives, your faith and services
To this imperial throne.
There is no bar to stay your highness claim to France
But one, which they produce from Faramount,
No female shall succeed in salicke land,
Which salicke land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France:
And Faramont the founder of this law and female bar:
Yet their own writers faithfully affirm
That the land salicke lies in Germany,
Between the floods of Sabeck and of Elm,
Where Charles the fift having subdued the Saxons,
There left behind, and settled certain French,
Who holding in disdain the German women,
For some dishonest manners of their lives,
Established there this law. To wit,
No female shall succeed in salicke land:
Which salicke land as I said before,
Is at this time in Germany called Mesene:
Thus doth it well appear the salicke law
Was not devised for the realm of France,
Nor did the French possess the salicke land,
Until 400. one and twenty years
After the function of king Faramount,
Godly supposed the founder of this law:
Hugh Capet also that usurped the crown,
To fine his title with some show of truth,
When in pure truth it was corrupt and nought:
Conveyed himself as heir to the Lady Inger,
Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lorain,
So that as clear as is the summers Sun,
King Pippins title and Hugh Capet's claim,
King Charles his satisfaction all appear,
To hold in right and title of the female:
So do the Lords of France until this day,
Howbeit they would hold up this salick law
To bar your highness claiming from the female,
And rather choose to hide them in a net,
Then amply to embrace their crooked causes,
Usurped from you and your progenitors.
May we with right & conscience make this claim▪
The sin upon my head dread sovereign.
For in the book of Numbers is it writ,
When the son dies, let the inheritance
Descend unto the daughter.
Noble Lord stand for your own,
Unwind your bloody flag,
Go my dread Lord to your great grandsire's grave,
From whom you claim:
And your great Uncle Edward the black Prince,
Who on the French ground played a Tragedy
Making defeat on the full power of France,
Whilst his most mighty father on a hill,
Stood smiling to behold his lions whelp,
Foraging blood of French Nobility.
O Noble English that could entertain
With half their Forces the full power of France:
And let an other half stand laughing by,
All out of work, and cold for action.
We must not only arm us against the French,
But lay down our proportion for the Scot,
Who will make road upon us with all advantages.
The Marches gracious sovereign, shallbe sufficient▪
To guard your England from the pilfering borderers.
We do not mean the coursing sneakers only,
But fear the mayne intendment of the Scot,
For you shall read, never my great grandfather
Unmasked his power for France,
But that the Scot on his unfurnished Kingdom,
Came pouring like the Tide into a breach,
That England being empty of defences,
Hath shook and trembled at the brute hereof.
She hath been then more feared then hurt my Lord:
For hear her but examplified by herself,
When all her chivalry hath been in France
And she a mourning widow of her Nobles,
She hath herself not only well defended,
But taken and impounded as a stray, the king of Scots,
Whom like a caitiff she did lead to France,
Filling your Chronicles as rich with praise
As is the owse and bottom of the sea
With sunken wrack and shiplesse treasury.
There is a saying very old and true,
If you will France win,
Then with Scotland first begin:
For once the Eagle, England being in pray,
To his unfurnish nest the weazel Scot
Would suck her eggs, playing the mouse in absence of the cat:
To spoil and havoc more than she can eat.
It follows then, the cat must stay at home,
Yet that is but a cursed necessity,
Since we have traps to catch the petty thieves:
Whilst that the armed hand doth fight abroad
The advised head controls at home:
For government though high or low, being put into parts,
Congrueth with a mutual consent like music.
True: therefore doth heaven divide the fate of man in divers functions.
Whereto is added as an aim or but, obedience:
For so live the honey Bees, creatures that by awe
Ordain an act of order to a peopeld Kingdom:
They have a King and officers of sort,
Where some like Magistrates correct at home:
Others like Merchants venture trade abroad:
Others like soldiers armed in their stings,
Make boot upon the summers velvet bud:
Which pillage they with merry march bring home
To the tent royal of their Emperor,
Who busied in his majesty, behold
The singing masons building roofs of gold:
The civil citizens lading up the honey,
The sad eyed justice with his surly hum,
Delivering up to executors pale, the lazy caning Drone.
This I infer, that 20. actions once a foot,
May all end in one moment.
As many Arrows loosed several ways, fly to one mark:
As many several ways meet in one town:
As many fresh streams run in one self sea:
As many lines close in the dial centre:
So may a thousand actions once a foot,
End in one moment, and be all well borne without defect.
Therefore my Liege to France,
Divide your happy England into four,
Of which take you one quarter into France,
And you withal, shall make all Gallia shake,
If we with thrice that power left at home,
Cannot defend our own door from the dog,
Let us be beaten, and from henceforth lose
The name of policy and hardiness.
Call in the messenger sent from the Dolphin,
And by your aid, the noble sinews of our land,
France being ours, we'll bring it to our awe,
Or break it all in pieces:
Either our Chronicles shall with full mouth speak
Freely of our acts,
Or else like toonglesse mutes
Not worshipped with a paper Epitaph:
Now are we well prepared to know the Dolphin's pleasure,
For we hear your coming is from him.
Pleaseth your Majesty to give us leave
Freely to render what we have in charge:
Or shall I sparingly show a far off,
The Dolphin's pleasure and our Embassage?
We are no tyrant, but a Christian King,
To whom our spirit is as subject,
As are our wretches fettered in our prisons.
Therefore freely and with uncurbed boldness
Tell us the Dolphin's mind.
Then this in fine the Dolphin saith,
Whereas you claim certain Towns in France,
From your predecessor king Edward the third,
This he returns.
He saith, there's nought in France that can be with a nimble
Galliard won: you cannot revel into Dukedoms there:
Therefore he sendeth meeter for your study,
This tun of treasure: and in lieu of this,
Desires to let the Dukedoms that you crave
Hear no more from you: This the Dolphin saith.
What treasure Uncle?
Tennis balls my Liege.
We are glad the Dolphin is so pleasant with us,
Your message and his present we accept:
When we have matched our rackets to these balls,
We will by God's grace play such a set,
Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler,
That all the Courts of France shall be disturbed with chases.
And we understand him well, how he comes o'er us
With our wilder days, not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valued this poor seat of England.
And therefore gave ourselves to barbarous licence:
As 'tis common seen that men are merriest when they are from home.
But tell the Dolphin we will keep our state,
Be like a King, mighty and command,
When we do rouse us in throne of France:
For this have we laid by our Majesty
And plodded lied a man for working days.
But we will rise there with so full of glory,
That we will dazzle all the eyes of France,
I strike the Dolphin blind to look on us,
And tell him this, his mock hath turned his balls to gun stones,
And his soul shall sit sore charge for the wasteful vengeance
That shall fly from them. For this his mock
Shall mock many a wife out of their dear husbands.
Mock mothers from their sons, mock Castles down,
I some are yet ungotten and unborn,
That shall have cause to curse the Dolphin's scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God, to whom we do appeal,
And in whose name tell you the Dolphin we are coming on
To venge us as we may, and to put forth our hand
In a rightful cause: so get you hence, and tell your Prince,
His lest will savour but of shallow wit,
When thousands weep, more than did laugh at it.
Convey them with safe conduct: see them hence.
This was a merry message.
We hope to make the sender blush at it:
Therefore let our collection for the wars be soon provided:
For God before, we'll check the Dolphin at his father's door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair action may on foot be brought.
Godmorrow Corporal Nim.
Godmorrow Lieutenant Bardolfe.
What is ancient Pistol and thee friends yet?
I cannot tell, things must be as they may:
I dare not fight, but I will wink and hold out mine Iron:
It is a simple one, but what tho; it will serve to toast cheese,
And it will endure cold as an other man's sword will,
And there's the humour of it.
I'faith mistress quickly did thee great wrong,
For thou wert troth plight to her.
I must do as I may, though patience be a tired mare
Yet she'll plod, and some say knives have edges,
And men may sleep and have their throats about them
At that time, and there is the humour of it.
Come i'faith, I'll bestow a breakfast to make Pistol
And thee friends. What a plague should we carry knives
To cut our own throats.
I'faith I'll live as long as I may, that's the certain of it.
And when I cannot live any longer, I'll do as I may,
And there's my rest, and the rendezvous of it.
Godmorrow ancient Pistol.
Here comes ancient Pistol, I prithee Nim be quiet.
How do you my Host?
Base slave, callest thou me host?
Now by gads lugges I swear, I scorn the title,
Nor shall my Nell keep lodging.
No by my troth not I,
For we cannot bed nor board half a score honest gentlewomen
That live honestly by the prick of their needle,
But it is thought strait we keep a bawdy-house.
O Lord here's Corporal Nims, now shall
We have wilful adultery and murder committed:
Good Corporal Nim show the valour of a man,
And put up your sword.
Push.
What dost thou push, thou prick-eared cur of Iseland:
Will you shog off? I would have you solus.
Solus egregious dog, that solus in thy throat,
And in thy lungs, and which is worse, within
Thy mesfull mouth, I do retort that solus in thy
Bowels, and in thy jaw, perdie: for I can talk,
And Pistols flashing fiery cock is up.
I am not Barbasom, you cannot conjure me:
I have an humour Pistol to knock you indifferently well,
And you fall foul with me Pistol, I'll scour you with my
Rapier in fair terms. If you will walk off a little,
I'll prick your guts a little in good terms,
And there's the humour of it.
O braggart vile, and damned furious wight,
The Grave doth gape, and groaning
Death is near, therefore exall.
Hear me, he that strikes the first blow,
I'll kill him, as I am a soldier.
An oath of much might, and fury shall abate.
I'll cut your throat at one time or an other in fair terms,
And there's the humour of it.
Couple gorge is the word, I thee defy again:
A damned hound, thinkest thou my spouse to get?
No, to the powdering tub of infamy,
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cresides kind,
Doll Tear-sheete, she by name, and her espouse
I have, and I will hold, the quandom quickly,
For the only she and Paco, there it is enough.
Hosts you must come strait to my master,
And you Host Pistol. Good Bardolfe
Put thy nose between the sheets, and do the office of a warming pan.
By my troth he'll yield the crow a pudding one of these days,
I'll go to him, husband you'll come?
Come Pistol be friends.
Nim prithee be friends, and if thou wilt not be
Enemies with me too.
I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at beating?
Base is the slave that pays.
That now I will have, and there's the humour of it.
As manhood shall compound.
He that strikes the first blow,
I'll kill him by this sword.
Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.
I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at beating?
A noble shalt thou have, and ready pay,
And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
And friendship shall combined and brotherhood:
I'll live by Nim as Nim shall live by me:
Is not this just? for I shall Sutler be
Unto the Camp, and profit will occrue.
I shall have my noble?
In cash most truly paid.
Why there's the humour of it.
As ever you came of men come in,
Sir Iohn poor soul is so troubled
With a burning tashan contigian fever, 'tis wonderful.
Let us condoll the knight: for lamkins we will live.
Before God my Lord, his Grace is too bold to trust these traitors.
They shallbe apprehended by and by.
I but the man that was his bedfellow
Whom he hath cloyed and graced with princely favours
That he should for a foreign purse, to sell
His Sovereign's life to death and treachery.
O the Lord of Massham.
Now sirs the winds fair, and we will aboard;
My Lord of Cambridge, and my Lord of Massham,
And you my gentle Knight, give me you thoughts,
Do you not think the power we bear with us,
Will make us conquerors in the field of France?
No doubt my Liege, if each man do his best.
Never was Monarch better feared and loved then
is your majesty.
Even those that were your father's enemies
Have steeped their galls in honey for your sake.
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hands:
Sooner than reward and merit,
According to their cause and worthiness.
So service shall with steeled sinews shine,
And labour shall refresh itself with hope
To do your Grace incessant service.
Uncle of Exeter, enlarge the man
Committed yesterday, that railed against our person,
We consider it was the heat of wine that set him on,
And on his more advice we pardon him.
That is mercy, but too much security:
Let him be punished Sovereign, lest the example of him,
Breed more of such a kind.
O let us yet be merciful.
So may your highness, and punish too.
You show great mercy if you give him life,
After the taste of his correction.
Alas your too much care and love of me
Are heavy orisons 'gainst the poor wretch,
If little faults proceeding on distemper should not be winked at,
How should we stretch our eye, when capital crimes,
Chewed, swallowed and digested, appear before us:
Well yet enlarge the man, though Cambridge and the rest
In their dear loves, and tender preservation of our state,
Would have him punished.
Now to our French causes.
Who are the late Commissioners?
Me one my Lord, your highness bade me ask for it to day.
So did you me my Sovereign.
And me my Lord.
Then Richard Earl of Cambridge there is yours.
There is yours my Lord of Masham.
And sir Thomas Grace knight of Northumberland, this same is yours:
Read them, and know we know your worthiness.
Uncle Exeter I will aboard to night.
Why how now Gentlemen, why change you colour?
What see you in those papers
That hath so chased your blood out of appearance?
I do confess my fault, and do submit me
To your highness mercy.
To which we all appeal.
The mercy which was quit in us but late,
By your own reasons is forestald and done:
You must not dare for shame to ask for mercy,
For your own conscience turn upon your bosoms,
As dogs upon their masters worrying them.
See you my Princes, and my noble Peers.
These English monsters:
My Lord of Cambridge here,
You know how apt we were to grace him,
In all things belonging to his honour:
And this wild man hath for a few light crowns,
Lightly conspired and sworn unto the practices of France:
To kill us here in Hampton. To the which,
This knight no less in bounty bound to us
Then Cambridge is, haah likewise sworn.
But oh what shall I say to thee false man,
Thou cruel ingrateful and inhuman creature,
Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsel,
That knewst the very secrets of my heart,
That almost mightest a coined me into gold,
wouldst thou a practised on me for thy use:
Can it be possible that out of thee
Should proceed one spark that might annoy my finger?
'tis so strange, that though the truth doth show as gross
As black from white, mine eye will scarcely see it.
Their faults are open, arrest them to the answer of the law,
And God acquit them of their practices.
I arrest thee of high treason,
By the name of Richard, Earl of Camhridge.
I arrest thee of high treason,
By the name of Henry, Lord of Masham,
I arrest thee of high treason,
By the name of Thomas Grace, knight of Northumberland.
Our purposes God justly hath discovered,
And I repent my fault more than my death,
Which I beseech your majesty forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.
God quit you in his mercy. Hear your sentence.
You have conspired against our royal person,
joined with an enemy proclaimed and fixed.
And from his coffers received the golden earnest of our death
Touching our person we seek no redress.
But we our kingdoms safety must so tender
Whose ruin you have sought,
That to our laws we do deliver you.
Get ye therefore hence: poor miserable creatures to your death,
The taste whereof, God in his mercy give you
Patience to endure, and true repentance of all your deeds amiss:
Bear them hence.
Now Lords to France. The enterprise whereof,
Shall be to you as us, successively.
Since God cut off this dangerous treason lurking in our way
Cheerly to sea, the signs of war advance:
No King of England, if not King of France.
I prithee sweet heart, let me bring thee so far as Stanes.
No fur, no fur.
Well sir Iohn is gone. God be with him.
I, he is in Arthors bosom, if ever any were:
He went away as if it were a crysombd child,
Between twelve and one,
Just at turning of the tide:
His nose was as sharp as a pen:
For when I saw him fumble with the sheets,
And talk of flowers, and smile upon his finger's ends
I knew there was no way but one.
How now sir Iohn quoth I?
And he cried three times, God, God, God,
Now I to comfort him, bade him not think of God,
I hope there was no such need.
Then he bade me put more clothes at his fear:
And I felt to them, and they were as cold as any stone:
And to his knees, and they were as cold as any stone.
And so upward, and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.
They say he cried out on Sack.
I that he did.
And of women.
No that he did not.
Yes that he did: and he said they were devils incarnate.
Indeed carnation was a colour he never loved.
Well he did cry out on women.
Indeed he did in some sort handle women,
But then he was rheumatic, and talked of the whore of Babylon.
Hosts do you remember he saw a Flea stand
Upon Bardolfes Nose, and said it was a black soul
Burning in hell fire?
Well, God be with him,
That was all the wealth I got in his service.
Shall we shog off?
The king will be gone from Southampton.
Clear up thy cristalles,
Look to my chattels and my movables.
Trust none: the word is pitch and pay:
men's words are wafer cakes,
And holdfast is the only dog my dear.
Therefore cophetua be thy counsellor,
Touch her soft lips and part.
Farewell hosts.
I cannot kiss: and there's the humour of it.
But adieu.
Keep fast thy buggle boe.
Now you Lords of Orleans,
Of Bourbon, and of Berry,
You see the King of England is not slack,
For he is footed on this land already.
My gracious Lord, 'tis meet we all go forth,
And arm us against the foe:
And view the weak & sickly parts of France:
But let us do it with no show of fear,
No with no more, then if we heard
England were busied with a Moris dance.
For my good Lord, she is so idly kinged,
Her sceptre so fantastically borne,
So guided by a shallow humorous youth,
That fear attends her not.
O peace Prince Dolphin, you deceive yourself,
Question your grace the late Ambassador,
With what regard he heard his Embassage,
How well supplied with aged counsellors,
And how his resolution answered him,
You than would say that Harry was not wild.
Well think we Harry strong:
And strongly arm us to prevent the foe.
My Lord here is an Ambassador
From the King of England.
Bid him come in.
You see this chase is hotly followed Lords.
My gracious father, cut up this English short,
Self love my Liege is not so vile a thing,
As self neglecting.
From our brother England?
From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wils you in the name of God Almighty,
That you divest yourself and lay apart
That borrowed title, which by gift of heaven,
Of law of nature, and of nations, longs
To him and to his heirs, namely the crown
And all wide stretched titles that belongs
Unto the Crown of France, that you may know
'tis no sinister, nor no awkward claim,
Picked from the wormhole of old vanished days,
Nor from the dust of old oblivion rack,
He sends you these most memorable lines,
In every branch truly demonstrated:
Willing you overlook this pedigree,
And when you find him evenly derived
From his most famed and famous ancestors,
Edward the third, he bids you then resign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the native and true challenger.
If not, what follows?
Bloody constraint, for if you hide the crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it:
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
In thunder, and in earthquake, like a Ioue,
That if requiring fail, he will compel it:
And on your heads turns he the widows tears,
The Orphans cries, the dead men's bones,
The pining maidens groans.
For husbands, fathers, and distressed lovers,
Which shall be swallowed in this controversy.
This is his claim, his threatening, and my message▪
Unless the Dolphin be in presence here,
To whom expressly we bring greeting too.
For the Dolphin? I stand here for him,
What to hear from England.
Scorn & defiance, slight regard, contempt,
And any thing that may not misbecome
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at:
Thus saith my king. Unless your father's highness
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
he'll call you to so loud an answer for it,
That caves and wombely vaults of France
Shall chide your trespass, and return your mock,
In second accent of his ordinance.
Say that my father render fair reply,
It is against my will:
For I desire nothing so much,
As odds with England.
And for that cause according to his youth
I did present him with those Paris balls.
he'll make your Paris Lover shake for it,
Were it the mistress Court of mighty Europe,
And be assured, you'll find a difference
As we his subjects have in wonder found:
Between his younger days and these he musters now,
Now he weighs time even to the latest grain,
Which you shall find in your own losses
If he stay in France.
Well for us, you shall return our answer back
To our brother England.
Before God here is hot service.
'tis hot indeed, blows go and come,
God's vassals drop and die.
'tis honour, and there's the humour of it.
Would I were in London:
Ide give all my honour for a pot of Ale.
And I. If wishes would prevail,
I would not stay, but thither would I high.
Gods plud up to the breaches
You rascals, will you not up to the breaches?
Abate thy rage sweet knight,
Abate thy rage.
Well I would I were once from them:
They would have me as familiar
With men's pockets, as their gloves, and their
Handkerchiefs, they will steal any thing.
Bardolfe Stole a Lute case, carried it three mile,
And sold it for three hapences.
Nim stole a fire shovel.
I knew by that, they meant to carry coals:
Well, if they will not leave me,
I mean to leave them.
Gaptain Flewellen, you must come straight
To the Mine, to the Duke of Gloster.
Look you, tell the Duke it is not so good
To come to the mines: the concuaveties is otherwise,
You may discuss to the Duke, the enemy is digged
Himself five yards under the countermines:
By Iesus I think he'll blow up all
If there be no better direction.
How yet resolves the Governor of the Town?
This is the latest parley we'll admit:
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves,
Or like to men proud of destruction, defy us to our worst,
For as I am a soldier, a name that in my thoughts
Becomes me best, if we begin the battery once again
I will not leave the half achieved Harflew,
Till in her ashes she be buried,
The gates of mercy are all shut up.
What say you, will you yield and this avoid,
Or guilty in defence be thus destroyed?
Our expectation hath this day an end:
The Dolphin whom of succour we entreated,
Returns us word, his powers are not yet ready,
To raise so great a siege: therefore dread King,
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy:
Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,
For we no longer are defensive now.
Alice venecia, vous aves cates en,
You part fort bon Angloys englatara,
Coman sae palla vou la main en francoy.
La main madam de han.
E da bras.
De arma madam.
Le main da han la bras de arma.
Owy e madam.
E Coman sa pella vow la menton a la coll.
De neck, e de cin, madam.
E de neck, e de cin, e de code.
De cudie ma foy je oblye, mais je remember,
Le tude, o de elbow madam.
Ecowte je rehersera, towt cella que jac apoandre,
De han, de arma, de neck, du cin, e de bilbo.
De elbow madam.
O Iesu, Iea obloye ma foy, ecoute je recontera
De han, de arma, de neck, de cin, e de elbow, e ca bon.
Ma foy madam, vow parla au se bon Angloys
Asie vous aves ettue en Englatara.
Par la grace de deu an petty tanes, je parle milleur
Coman se pella vou le peid e le rob.
Le foot, e le con.
Le for, e le con, o Iesu! je ne view point parley,
Sie plus devant le che chevalires de franca,
Pur one million ma foy.
Madam, de foot, eel con.
O et ill ausie, ecowte Alice, de han, de arma,
De neck, de cin, le foot, e de con.
Cet fort bon madam.
A loves a dinner.
'tis certain he is past the River Some.
Mordeu ma via: Shall a few spranes of us,
The emptying of our father's luxerie,
Outgrow their grafters.
Normanes, bastard Normanes, mor du
And if they pass unfoughtwithall,
I'll sell my Dukedom for a foggy farm
In that short nook I'll of England.
Why whence have they this metal?
Is not their climate raw, foggy and cold.
On whom as in disdain, the Sun looks pale?
Can barley broth, a drench for swollen jades
Their sodden water decockt such lively blood?
And shall our quick blood spirited with wine
Seem frosty? O for honour of our names,
Let us not hang like frozen Iicesickles
Upon our houses tops, while they a more frosty climate
Sweat drops of youthful blood.
Constable dispatch, send Montioy forth,
To know what willing ransom he will give?
Son Dolphin you shall stay in Rone with me.
Not so I do beseech your Majesty.
Well, I say it shallbe so.
How now Captain Flewellen, come you from the bridge?
By Iesus there's excellent service committed at the bridge.
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?
The duke of Exeter is a man whom I love, & I honour,
And I worship, with my soul, and my heart, and my life,
And my lands and my livings,
And my uttermost powers.
The Duke is look you,
God be praised and pleased for it, no harm in the worell.
He is maintain the bridge very gallently: there is an Ensign
There, I do not know how you call him, but by Iesus I think
He is as valiant a man as Mark Anthony, he doth maintain
the bridge most gallantly: yet he is a man of no reckoning:
But I did see him do gallant service.
How do you call him?
His name is ancient Pistol.
I know him not.
Do you not know him, here comes the man.
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favour,
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
I, and I praise God I have merited some love at his hands.
Bardolfe a soldier, one of buxom valour,
Hath by furious fate
And giddy Fortune's fickle wheel,
That Gods blind that stands upon the rolling restless stone.
By your patience ancient Pistol,
Fortune, look you is painted,
Plind with a muffler before her eyes,
To signify to you, that Fortune is plind:
And she is moreover painted with a wheel,
Which is the moral that Fortune is turning,
And inconstant, and variation; and mutabilities:
And her fate is fixed at a spherical stone
Which rolls, and rolls, and rolls:
Surely the Poet is make an excellent description of Fortune.
Fortune look you is and excellent moral.
Fortune is Bardolfes foe, and frowns on him,
For he hath stolen a packs, and hanged must he be:
A damned death, let gallows gape for dogs,
Let man go free, and let not death his windpipe stop.
But Exeter hath given the doom of death,
For packs of petty price:
Therefore go speak the Duke will hear thy voice,
And let not Bardolfes vital thread be cut,
With edge of penny cord▪ and vile approach.
Speak Captain for his life, and I will thee requite.
Captain Pistol, I partly understand your meaning.
Why then rejoice therefore.
Certainly Ancient Pistol, 'tis not a thing to rejoice at,
For if he were my own brother, I would wish the Duke
To do his pleasure, and put him to executions: for look you,
Disciplines ought to be kept, they ought to be kept.
Die and be damned, and fig a for thy friendship.
That is good.
The fig of Spain within thy jaw.
That is very well.
I say the fig within thy bowels and thy dirty maw.
Captain Gour, cannot you hear it lighten & thunder?
Why is this the Ancient you told me of?
I remember him now, he is a bawd, a cutpurse.
By Iesus heeis utter as brave words upon the bridge
As you shall desire to see in a summers day, but it's all one,
What he hath said to me, look you, is all one.
Why this is a gull, a fool, a rogue that goes to the wars
Only to grace himself at his return to London:
And such feliowes as he,
Are perfect in great Commanders names.
They will learn by rote where services were done,
At such and such a sense, at such a breach,
At such a convoy: who came off bravely, who was shot,
Who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on.
And this they con perfectly in phrase of war,
Which they trick up with new tuned oaths, & what a beard
Of the generals cut, and a horrid shout of the camp
Will do among the foaming bottles and ale washed wits
Is wonderful to be thought on: but you must learn
To know such slanders of this age,
Or else you may marvelously be mistook.
Certain captain Gower, it is not the man, look you,
That I did take him to be: but when time shall serve,
I shall tell him a little of my desires: here comes his Majesty.
How now Flewellen, come you from the bridge?
I and it shall please your Majesty,
There is excellent service at the bridge.
What men have you lost Flewellen?
And it shall please your Majesty,
The partition of the adversary hath been great,
Very reasonably great: but for our own parts, like you now,
I think we have lost never a man, unless it be one
For robbing of a church, one Bardolfe, if your Majesty
Know the man, his face is full of whelks and knubs,
And pumples, and his breath blows at his nose
Like a coal, sometimes red, sometimes plew:
But god be praised, now his nose is executed, & his fire out.
We would have all offenders so cut off,
And we here give express commandment,
That there be nothing taken from the villages but paid for,
None of the French abused,
Or abraided with disdainful language:
For when cruelty and lenity play for a Kingdom,
The gentlest gamester is the sooner winner.
You know me by my habit.
Well then, we know thee, what should we know of thee?
My masters mind.
Unfold it.
Go thee unto Harry of England, and tell him,
Advantage is a better soldier than rashness:
Although we did seem dead, we did but slumber.
Now we speak upon our cue, and our voice is imperial,
England shall repent her folly: see her rashness,
And admire our sufferance. Which to ransom,
His pettinesse would bow under:
For the effusion of our blood, his army is too weak:
For the disgrace we have borne, himself
Kneeling at our feet, a weak and worthless satisfaction.
To this, add defiance. So much from the king my master.
What is thy name? we know they quality.
Montioy.
Thou dost thy office fair, return thee back,
And tell thy King, I do not seek him now:
But could be well content, without impeach,
To march on to Calais: for to say the sooth,
Though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage.
My soldiers are with sickness much enfeebled,
My Army lessoned, and those few I have,
Almost no better than so many French:
Who when they were in heart, I tell thee Herald,
I thought upon one pair of English legs,
Did march three French mens.
Yet forgive me God, that I do brag thus:
This your heir of France hath blown this vice in me.
I must repent, go tell thy master here I am,
My ransom is this frail and worthless body,
My Army but a weak and sickly guard.
Yet God before, we will come on,
If France and such an other neighbour stood in our way:
If we may pass, we will: if we be hindered,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood discolour.
So Montioy get you gone, there is for your pains:
The sum of all our answer is but this,
We would not seek a battle as we are:
Nor as we are, we say we will not shun it.
I shall deliver so: thanks to your Majesty.
My Liege, I hope they will not come upon us now.
We are in God's hand brother, not in theirs:
To night we will encamp beyond the bridge,
And on to morrow bid them march away.
Tut I have the best armour in the world.
You have an excellent armour,
But let my horse have his due.
Now you talk of a horse, I have a steed like the
Palfrey of the sun, nothing but pure air and fire,
And hath none of this dull element of earth within him.
He is of the colour of the Nutmeg.
And of the heat, a the Ginger.
Turn all the sands into eloquent tongues,
And my horse is argument for them all:
I once writ a Sonnet in the praise of my horse,
And began thus. Wonder of nature.
I have heard a Sonnet begin so,
In the praise of ones Mistress.
Why then did they imitate that
Which I writ in praise of my horse,
For my horse is my mistress.
Ma foy the other day, me thought
Your mistress shook you shrewdly.
I bearing me. I tell thee Lord Constable,
My mistress wears her own hair.
I could make as good a boast of that,
If I had had a sow to my mistress.
Tut thou wilt make use of any thing.
Yet I do not use my horse for my mistress.
Will it never be morning?
He ride too morrow a nule,
And my way shallbe paved with English faces.
By my faith so will not I,
For fear I be outfaced of my way.
Well i'll go arm myself, hay.
The Duke of Bourbon longs for morning
I he longs to eat the English.
I think he'll eat all he kills.
O peace, ill will never said well.
I'll cap that proverb,
With there is flattery in friendship.
O sir, I can answer that,
With give the devil his due.
Have at the eye of that proverb,
With a jog of the devil.
Well the Duke of Bourbon, is simply,
The most active Gentleman of France.
Doing his activity, and he'll still be doing.
He never did hurt as I heard off.
No I warrant you, nor never will.
I hold him to be exceeding valiant.
I was told so by one that knows him better than you.
Whos's that?
Why he told me so himself:
And said he cared not who knew it.
Well who will go with me to hazard,
For a hundred English prisoners?
You must go to hazard yourself,
Before you have them.
My Lords, the English lie within a hundred
Paces of your Tent.
Who hath measured the ground?
The Lord Granpeere.
A valiant man, a. an expert Gentleman.
Come, come away:
The Sun is high, and we wear out the day.
Ke ve la?
A friend.
Discus unto me, art thou Gentleman▪
Or art thou common, base, and popeler?
No sir, I am a Gentleman of a Company.
Trails thou the puissant pike?
Even so sir. What are you?
As good a gentleman as the Emperor.
O than thou art better than the King?
The king's abago, and a heart of gold.
A lad of life, an imp of fame:
Of parents good, of fist most valiant:
I kiss his dirty shoe: and from my heart strings
I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?
Harry le Roy.
Le Roy, a Cornish man:
Art thou of Cornish crew?
No sir, I am a Wealchman.
A Wealchman: know'st thou Flewellen?
I sir, he is my kinsman.
Art thou his friend?
I sir.
Figa for thee then: my name is Pistol.
It sorts well with your fierceness.
Pistol is my name.
Captain Flewellen.
In the name of Iesu speak lewer.
It is the greatest folly in the worell, when the ancient
Prerogatives of the wars be not kept.
I warrant you, if you look into the wars of the Romans,
You shall find no tittle tattle, nor bible babble there:
But you shall find the cares, and the fears,
And the ceremonies, to be otherwise.
Why the enemy is loud: you heard him all night.
Gods sollud, if the enemy be an Ass & a Fool,
And a prating cocks-come, is it meet that we be also a fool,
And a prating cocks-come, in your conscience now?
I'll speak lower.
I beseech you do, good Captain Gower.
though it appear a little out of fashion,
Yet there's much care in this.
Is not that the morning yonder?
I we see the beginning,
God knows whether we shall see the end or no.
Well I think the king could wish himself
Up to the neck in the middle of the Thames,
And so I would he were, at all adventures, and I with him.
Now masters god morrow, what cheer?
I faith small cheer some of us is like to have,
Ere this day end.
Why fear nothing man, the king is frolic.
I he may be, for he hath no such cause as we
Nay say not so, he is a man as we are.
The Violet smells to him as to us:
Therefore if he see reasons, he fears as we do.
But the king hath a heavy reckoning to make,
If his cause be not good: when all those souls
Whose bodies shall be slaughtered here,
Shall join together at the latter day,
And say I died at such a place. Some swearing:
Some their wives rawly left:
Some leaving their children poor behind them.
Now if his cause be bad, I think it will be a grievous matter to him.
Why so you may say, if a man send his servant
As Factor into another Country,
And he by any means miscarry,
You may say the business of the master,
Was the author of his servants misfortune.
Or if a son be employed by his father,
And he fall into any lewd action, you may say the father
Was the author of his sons damnation.
But the master is not to answer for his servants,
The father for his son, nor the king for his subjects:
For they purpose not their deaths, when they crave their services:
Some there are that have the gift of premeditated
Murder on them:
Others the broken seal of Forgery, in beguiling maidens.
Now if these outstrip the law,
Yet they cannot escape God's punishment.
War is God's Beadel. War is God's vengeance:
Every man's service is the kings:
But every man's soul is his own.
Therefore I would have every soldier examine himself,
And wash every moth out of his conscience:
That in so doing, he may be the readier for death:
Or not dying, why the time was well spent,
Wherein such preparation was made.
I'faith he says true:
Every man's fault on his own head,
I would not have the king answer for me.
Yet I intent to fight lustily for him.
Well, I heard the king, he would not be ransomed.
I he said so, to make vs fight:
But when our throats be cut, he may be ransomed,
And we never the wiser,
If I live to see that, I'll never trust his word again.
Mass you'll pay him then, 'tis a great displeasure
That an elder gun, can do against a cannon,
Or a subject against a monarch.
You'll near take his word again, your a nasse go.
Your reproof is somewhat too bitter:
Were it not at this time I could be angry.
Why let it be a quartel if thou wilt.
How shall I know thee?
Here is my glove, which if ever I see in thy hat,
I'll challenge thee, and strike thee.
Here is likewise another of mine,
And assure thee i'll wear it.
Thou darest as well be hanged.
Be friends you fools,
We have French quarrels enough in hand:
We have no need of English broils.
'tis no treason to cut French crowns,
For to morrow the king himself will be a clipper.
O God of battles steel my soldiers hearts,
Take from them now the sense of rekconing,
That the opposed multitudes which stand before them,
May not appall their courage.
O not to day, not to day o God,
Think on the fault my father made,
In compassing the crown.
I Richard's body have interred new,
And on it hath bestowed more contrite tears,
Then from it issued forced drops of blood:
A hundred men have I in yearly pay,
Which every day their withered hands hold up
To heaven to pardon blood,
And I have built two chanceries, more will I do:
though all that I can do, is all too little.
My Lord.
My brother Gloster's voice.
My Lord, the Army stays upon your presence.
Stay Gloster stay, and I will go with thee,
The day my friends, and all things stays for me.
My Lords the French are very strong.
There is five to one, and yet they all are fresh,
Of fight men they have full forty thousand.
The odds is all too great. Farewell kind Lords:
Brave Clarence, and my Lord of Gloster,
My Lord of Warwick, and to all farewell.
Farewell kind Lord, fight valiantly to day,
And yet in truth, I do thee wrong▪
For thou art made on the true sparks of honour.
O would we had but ten thousand men
Now at this instant, that doth not work in England.
Whos's that, that wishes so, my Cousin Warwick?
God's will, I would not lose the honour
One man would share from me,
Not for my Kingdom.
No faith my Cousin, wish not one man more,
Rather proclaim it presently through our camp,
That he that hath no stomach to this feast,
Let him departed, his passport shall be
And crowns for convoy put into his purse,
We would not die in that man's company,
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is called the day of Cryspin,
He that outlives this day, and sees old age,
Shall stand a-tiptoe when this day is named,
And rouse him at the name of Cryspin.
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Shall yearly on the vygill feast his friends,
And say, to morrow is S. Cryspines' day:
Then shall we in their flowing bowls
Be newly remembered. Harry the King,
Bedford and Exeter, Clarence and Gloster,
Warwick and York.
Familiar in their mouths as household words.
This story shall the good man tell his son,
And from this day, unto the general doom:
But we in it shall be remembered.
We few, we happy few, we bond of brothers,
For he to day that sheds his blood by mine,
shallbe my brother: be he near so base,
This day shall gentle his condition.
Then shall he strip his sleeves, and show his scars,
And say, these wounds I had on Crispines' day:
And Gentlemen in England now a bed,
Shall think themselves accursed,
And hold their manhood cheap,
While any speak that fought with us
Upon Saint Crispines' day.
My gracious Lord,
The French is in the field.
Why all things are ready, if our minds be so.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now.
Thou dost not wish more help from England cousin?
God's will my Liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, might fight this battle out.
Why well said. That doth please me better,
Then to wish me one. You know your charge,
God be with you all.
Once more I come to know of thee king Henry,
What thou wilt give for ransom?
Who hath sent thee now?
The Constable of France.
I prithee bear my former answer back:
Bid them achieve me, and then sell my bones.
Good God, why should they mock good fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the Lion's skin,
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find graves within your realm of France:
though buried in your dunghills, we shallbe famed,
For there the Sun shall greet them,
And draw up their honours reeking up to heaven,
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime:
The smell whereof, shall breed a plague in France:
Mark then abundant valour in our English,
That being dead, like to the bullets crasing,
Breaks forth into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of mortality:
Let me speak proudly,
there's not a piece of feather in our camp,
Good argument I hope we shall not fly:
And time hath worn us into slovendry.
But by the mass, our hearts are in the trim,
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
they'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new clothes o'er your French soldiers ears,
And turn them out of service. If they do this,
As if it please God they shall,
Then shall our ransom soon be levied.
Save thou thy labour Herald:
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle Herald.
They shall have nought I swear, but these my bones:
Which if they have, as I will leave am them,
Will yield them little, tell the Constable.
I shall deliver so.
My gracious Lord, upon my knee I crave,
The leading of the vaward.
Take it brave York. Come soldiers let's away:
And as thou pleasest God, dispose the day.
O diabello.
Mor du ma vie.
O what a day is this!
O lour dei houte all is gone, all is lost.
We are enough yet living in the field,
To smother up the English,
If any order might be thought upon.
A plague of order, once more to the field,
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Let him go home, and with his cap in hand,
Like a base leno hold the chamber door,
Why least by a slave no gentler than my dog,
His fairest daughter is contamuracke.
Disorder that hath spoiled us, right us now,
Come we in heaps, we'll offer up our lives
Unto these English, or else die with fame.
Come, come along,
Let's die with honour, our shame doth last too long.
Eyld cur, eyld cur.
O Monsire, ie vous en pray aves petty de moy.
Moy shall not serve. I will have forty moys.
Boy ask him his name.
Comant ettes vous apelles?
monsieur Fer.
He says his name is Master Fer.
I'll Fer him, and ferret him, and firk him:
Boy discus the same in French.
Sir I do not know, what's French
Forfer, ferret and fearkt.
Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.
Feat, vou preat, ill voulles coupele votre gage.
Onye ma foy couple la gorge.
Unless thou give to me egregious ransom, die.
One point of a fox.
Qui dit ill monsiere.
Ill ditye si vou ny vouly pa domy luy.
La gran ransom, ill vou tueres.
O lee vous en pri petrit gentelhome, parle
A cee, gran capataine, pour avez mercy
A moy, ey Iee donerees pour mon ransom
Cinquante ocios, je suyes ungentelhome de France.
What says he boy?
Marry sir he says, he is a Gentleman of a great
House, or France: and for his ransom,
He will give you 500. crowns.
My fury shall abate,
And I the Crowns will take.
And as I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Fellow me cur.
What the French retire?
Yet all is not done, yet keep the French the field.
The Duke of York commends him to your Grace.
lives he good Uncle, twice I saw him down,
Twice up again:
From helmet to the spur, all bleeding ore.
In which array, brave soldier doth he lie,
Larding the plains, and by his bloody side,
Yoke fellow to his honour dying wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first dyde, and York all hasted over,
Comes to him where in blood he lay steeped,
And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yane upon his face,
And cried aloud, tarry dear cousin Suffolk:
My soul shall thine keep company in heaven:
Tarry dear soul awhile, then fly to rest:
And in this glorious and well fought field,
We kept together in our chivalry.
Upon these words I came and cheered them up,
He took me by the hand, said dear my Lord▪
Commend my service to my sovereign.
So did he turn, and over Suffolk's neck
He threw his wounded arm, and so espoused to death,
With blood he sealed. An argument
Of never ending love. The pretty and sweet manner of it,
Forced those waters from me, which I would have slopped,
But I not so much of man in me,
But all my mother came into my eyes,
And gave me up to tears.
I blame you not: for hearing you,
I must convert to tears.
What new alarm is this?
Bid every soldier kill his prisoner.
Couple gorge.
Gods plud kil the boys and the lugyge,
'tis the errands piece of knavery as can be desired,
In the worell now, in your conscience now.
'tis certain, there is not a Boy left alive,
And the cowerdly rascals that ran from the battle,
Themselves have done this slaughter:
Beside, they have carried away and burnt,
All that was in the king's Tent:
Whereupon the king caused every prisoner's
Throat to be cut. O he is a worthy king.
I he was born at Monmorth.
Captain Gower, what call you the place where
Alexander the big was borne?
Alexander the great.
Why I pray, is not big great?
As if I say, big or great, or magnanimous,
I hope it is all one reckoning,
Save the phrase is a little variation.
I think Alexander the great
Was borne at Macedon.
His father was called Philip of Macedon,
As I take it.
I think it was Macedon indeed where Alexander
Was borne: look you captain Gower,
And if you look into the maps of the worell well,
You shall find little difference between
Macedon and Monmorth. Look you, there is
A River in Macedon, and there is also a River
In Monmorth, the rivers name at Monmorth,
Is called Wye.
But 'tis out of my brain, what is the name of the other:
But 'tis all one, 'tis so like, as my fingers is to my fingers,
And there is Samons in both.
Look you captain Gower, and you mark it,
You shall find our King is come after Alexander.
God knows, and you know, that Alexander in his
Bowls, and his alles, and his wrath, and his displeasures.
And indignations, was kill his friend Clitus.
I but our King is not like him in that,
For he never killed any of his friends.
Look you, 'tis not well done to take the tale out
Of a man's mouth, ere it is made an end and finished:
I speak in the comparisons, as Alexander is kill
His friend Clitus: so our King being in his ripe
Wits and judgements, is turn away, the fat knit
With the great belly double: I am forget his name.
Sir Iohn Falstaff.
I, I think it is Sir Iohn Falstaff indeed,
I can tell you, there's good men borne at Monmorth.
I was not angry since I came into France,
Until this hour.
Take a trumpet Herald,
And ride unto the horsemen on yond hill:
If they will fight with us bid them come down,
Or leave the field, they do offend our sight:
Will they do neither, we will come to them,
And make them skyr away, as fast
As stones enforced from the old Assyrian slings.
Besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have,
And not one alive shall taste our mercy.
God's will what means this? know'st thou not
That we have fined these bones of ours for ransom?
I come great king for charitable favour,
To sort our Nobles from our common men,
We may have leave to bury all our dead,
Which in the field lie spoiled and trodden on.
I tell thee truly Herald, I do not know whether
The day be ours or no:
For yet a many of your French do keep the field.
The day is yours.
Praised be God therefore.
What Castle call you that?
We call it Agincourt.
Then call we this the field of Agincourt.
Fought on the day of Cryspin, Cryspin.
Your grandfather of famous memory,
If your grace be remembered,
Is do good service in France.
'tis true Flewellen.
Your Majesty says very true.
And it please your Majesty,
The Wealchmen there was do good service,
In a garden where Leeks did grow.
And I think your Majesty will take no scorn,
To wear a Leak in your cap upon S. Davies day.
No Flewellen, for I am wealch as well as you.
All the water in Wye will not wash your wealch
Blood out of you, God keep it, and preserve it,
To his graces will and pleasure.
Thanks good countryman.
By Iesus I am your majesties countryman:
I care not who know it, so long as your majesty is an honest man.
God keep me so. Our Herald go with him,
And bring us the number of the scattered French.
Call yonder soldier hither.
You fellow come to the king.
Fellow why dost thou wear that glove in thy hat?
And please your majesty, 'tis a rascals that swagard
With me the other day: and he hath one of mine,
Which if ever I see, I have sworn to strike him.
So hath he sworn the like to me.
How think you Flewellen, is it lawful he keep his oath?
And it please your majesty, 'tis lawful he keep his vow.
If he be perjured once, he is as arrant a beggarly knave,
As treads upon too black shoes.
His enemy may be a gentleman of worth.
And if he be as good a gentleman as Lucifer
And Belzebub, and the devil himself,
'tis meet he keep his vow.
Well sirrah keep your word.
Under what Captain servest thou?
Under Captain Gower.
Captain Gower is a good Captain:
And hath good littrature in the wars.
Go call him hither.
I will my Lord.
Captain Flewellen, when Alonson and I was
Down together, I took this glove off from his helmet,
Here Flewellen, wear it. If any do challenge it,
He is a friend of Alonsons',
And an enemy to me.
Your majesty doth me as great a favour
As can be desired in the hearts of his subjects.
I would see that man now that should challenge this glove:
And it please God of his grace. I would but see him,
That is all.
Flewellen know'st thou Captain Gower?
Captain Gower is my friend.
And if it like your majesty, I know him very well.
Go call him hither.
I will and it shall please your majesty.
Fellow Flewellen closely at the heels,
The glove he wears, it was the soldiers:
It may be there will be harm between them,
For I do know Flewellen valiant,
And being touched, as hot as gunpowder:
And quickly will return an injury.
Go see there be no harm between them.
Captain Gower, in the name of Iesu,
Come to his Majesty, there is more good toward you,
Than you can dream off.
Do you hear you sir? do you know this glove?
I know the the glove is a glove.
Sir I know this, and thus I challenge it.
Good plut, and his. Captain Gower stand away:
I'll give treason his due presently.
How now, what is the matter?
And it shall please your Majesty,
Here is the notablest piece of treason come to light,
As you shall desire to see in a summers day.
Here is a rascal, beggarly rascal, is strike the glove,
Which your Majesty took out of the helmet of Alonson:
And your Majesty will bear me witness, and testimony,
And avouchments, that this is the glove.
And it please your Majesty, that was my glove.
He that I gave it too in the night,
Promised me to wear it in his hat:
I promised to strike him if he did.
I met that Gentleman, with my glove in his hat,
And I think I have been as good as my word.
Your Majesty hears, under your majesties
Manhood, what a beggarly lousy knave it is.
Let me see thy glove. Look you,
This is the fellow of it.
It was I indeed you promised to strike.
And thou thou hast given me most bitter words.
How canst thou make us amends?
Let his neck answer it,
If there be any marshal's law in the worell.
My Liege, all offences come from the heart:
Never came any from mine to offend your Majesty.
You appeared to me as a common man:
Witness the night, your garments, your lowliness,
And whatsoever you received under that habit,
I beseech your Majesty impute it to your own fault
And not mine. For yourself came not like yourself:
Had you been as you seemed, I had made no offence.
Therefore I beseech your grace to pardon me.
Uncle, fill the glove with crowns,
And give it to the soldier. Wear it fellow,
As an honour in thy cap, till I do challenge it.
Give him the crowns. Come Captain Flewellen,
I must needs have you friends.
By Iesus, the fellow hath metal enough
In his belly Hark you soldier, there is a shilling for you,
And keep yourself out of brawls & brabbles, & dissensions,
And look you, it shall be the better for you.
I'll none of your money sir, not I
Why 'tis a good shilling man.
Why should you be queamish? Your shoes are not so good:
It will serve you to mend your shoes.
What men of sort are taken uncle?
Charles Duke of Orleans, Nephew to the King,
Iohn Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bowchquall.
Of other Lords and Barons, Knights and Squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
This note doth tell me often thousand
French, that in the field lies slain.
Of Nobles bearing banners in the field,
Charles de le Brute, high Constable of France.
Iaques of Chattillian, Admiral of France.
The Master of the crossbows, Iohn Duke Alonson.
Lord Ranbieres, high Master of France.
The brave sir Gwigzard, Dolphin. Of Nobelle Charillas,
Gran Prie, and Rosse, Fawconbridge and Foy.
Gerard and Verton. Vandemant and Lestra.
Here was a royal fellowship of death
Where is the number of our English dead?
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk▪
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam Esquire:
And of all other, but five and twenty.
O God thy arm was here,
And unto thee alone, ascribe we praise.
When without strategem,
And in even shock of battle, was ever heard
So great, and little loss, on one part and an other.
Take it God, for it is only thine.
'tis wonderful.
Come let us go on procession through the camp:
Let it be death proclaimed to any man,
To boast hereof, or take the praise from God,
Which is his due.
Is it lawful, and it please your Majesty,
To tell how many is killed?
Yes Flewellen, but with this acknowledgement,
That God fought for us.
Yes in my conscience, he did us great good.
Let there be sung, Novoues and te Deum.
The dead with charity interred in clay:
we'll then to Calais, and to England then,
Where near from France, arrived more happier men.
But why do you wear your Leek to day?
Saint Davies day is past?
There is occasion Captain Gower,
Look you why, and wherefore,
The other day look you, Pistols
Which you know is a man of no merits
In the worell, is come where I was the other day,
And brings, bread and salt, and bids me
Eat my Leek: 'twas in a place, look you,
Where I could move no dissensions:
But if I can see him, I shall tell him,
A little of my desires.
Here a comes, swelling like a Turkecocke.
'tis no matter for his swelling, and his turkecocks,
God plesse you Ancient Pistol, you scall,
Beggarly, lousy knave, God plesse you.
Ha, art thou bedlam?
Dost thou thirst base Trojan,
To have me fold up Parca's fatal web▪
Hence, I am qualmish at the smell of Leek.
Ancient Pistol. I would desire you because
It doth not agree with your stomach, and your appetite,
And your digestions, to eat this Leek.
Not for Cadwalleder and all his goats.
There is one goat for you Ancient Pistol.
Base Trojan, thou shall die.
I, I know I shall die, mean time, I would
Desire you to live and eat this Leek.
Enough Captain, you have astonished him.
Astonished him, by Iesu, I'll beat his head
Four days, and four nights, but I'll
Make him eat some part of my Leek.
Well must I bite?
I out of question or doubt, or ambiguities
You must bite.
Good good.
I Leeks are good, Ancient Pistol.
There is a shilling for you to heal your bloody coxkome.
Me a shilling.
If you will not take it,
I have an other Leek for you.
I take thy shilling in earnest of reckoning.
If I own you any thing, i'll pay you in cudgels,
You shallbe a woodmonger,
And by cudgels, Good bye you,
Ancient Pistol, God bless you,
And heal your broken pate.
Ancient Pistol, if you see Leeks an other time.
Mock at them, that is all: Good bye you.
All hell shall stir for this.
Doth Fortune play the huswye with me now?
Is honour cudgeled from my warlike lines?
Well France farewell, news have I certainly
That Doll is sick. One mally die of France,
The wars affordeth nought, home will I trug.
Bawd will I turn, and use the sleight of hand:
To England will I steal,
And there I'll steal.
And patches will I get unto these scars,
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.
Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met.
And to our brother France, Fair time of day.
Fair health unto our lovely cousin Katherine.
And as a branch, and member of this stock:
We do salute you Duke of Burgundy.
Brother of England, right joyous are we to behold
Your face, so are we Princes English every one.
With pardon unto both your mightiness.
Let it not displease you, if I demand
What rub or bar hath thus far hindered you,
To keep you from the gentle speech of peace?
If Duke of Burgundy, you would have peace,
You must buy that peace,
According as we have drawn our articles.
We have but with a cursenary eye,
Oreviewd them: pleaseth your Grace,
To let some of your Counsel sit with us,
We shall return our peremptory answer.
Go Lords, and sit with them,
And bring us answer back.
Yet leave our cousin Katherine here behind.
Withal our hearts.
Now Kate, you have a blunt wooer here
Left with you.
If I could win thee at leapfrog,
Or with vaulting with my armour on my back,
Into my saddle,
Without brag be it spoken,
I'd make compare with any.
But leaving that Kate,
If thou takest me now,
Thou shalt have me at the worst:
And in wearing, thou shalt have me better and better,
Thou shalt have a face that is not worth sun-burning.
But dost thou think, that thou and I,
Between Saint Denis,
And Saint George, shall get a boy,
That shall go to Constantinople,
And take the great Turk by the beard, ha Kate?
Is it possible dat me shall
Love de enemy de France.
No Kate, 'tis unpossible
You should love the enemy of France:
For Kate, I love France so well,
That I'll not leave a Village,
I'll have it all mine: then Kate,
When France is mine,
And I am yours,
Then France is yours,
And you are mine.
I cannot tell what is dat.
No Kate,
Why I'll tell it you in French,
Which will hang upon my tongue, like a bride
On her new married Husband.
Let me see, Saint Dennis be my speed.
Quan France et mon.
Dat is, when France is yours.
Et vous ettes amoy.
And I am to you.
Douck France ettes a vous:
Den France shall be mine.
Et je suyues a vous.
And you will be to me.
Wilt believe me Kate? 'tis easier for me
To conquer the kingdom, them to speak so much
More French.
A your Majesty has false France enough
To deceive de best Lady in France.
No faith Kate not I But Kate,
In plain terms, do you love me?
I cannot tell.
No, can any of your neighbours tell?
I'll ask them.
Come Kate, I know you love me.
And soon when you are in your closet,
You'll question this Lady of me.
But I pray thee sweet Kate, use me mercifully,
Because I love thee cruelly.
That I shall die Kate, is sure:
But for thy love, by the Lord never.
What Wench,
A strait back will grow crooked.
A round eye will grow hollow.
A great leg will wax small,
A curled pate prove bald:
But a good heart Kate, is the sun and the moon,
And rather the Sun and not the Moon:
And therefore Kate take me,
Take a soldier: take a soldier,
Take a King.
Therefore tell me Kate, wilt thou have me?
Dat is as please the King my father.
Nay it will please him:
Nay it shall please him Kate.
And upon that condition Kate I'll kiss you.
O mon du je ne voudroy fair quelke chosse
Pour toute le monde,
Ce ne point votree fachion en fovor.
What says she Lady?
Dat it is not de fashion en France,
For de maids, before da be married to
May foy ie oblye, what is to bassie?
To kiss, to kiss. O that 'tis not the
Fashion in Frannce, for the maids to kiss
Before they are married.
Owye see votree grace.
Well, we'll break that custom.
Therefore Kate patience perforce and yield.
Before God Kate, you have witchcraft
In your kisses:
And may persuade with me more,
Then all the French Council.
Your father is returned.
How now my Lords?
Brother of England,
We have orered the Articles,
And have agreed to all that we in schedule had.
Only he hath not subscribed this,
Wh're your majesty demands,
That the king of France having any occasion
To write for matter of grant,
Shall name your highness, in this form:
And with this addition in French.
Nostre tresher filz, Henry Roy D'anglaterre,
E hear de France. And thus in Latin:
Preclarissimus filius noster Henricus Rex Anglie,
Et heres Francie.
Nor this have we so nicely stood upon,
But you fair brother may entreat the same.
Why then let this among the rest,
Have his full course: And withal,
Your daughter Katherine in marriage,
This and what else,
Your majesty shall crave.
God that disposeth all, give you much joy.
Why then fair Katherine,
Come give me thy hand:
Our marriage will we present solemnize,
And end our hatred by a bond of love.
Then will I swear to Kate, and Kate to me:
And may our vows once made, unbroken Bee.