OPen your ears; for which of you will stop
The vent of hearing, when loud Rumour speaks?
I from the Orient to the drooping West,
(Making the wind my post-horse) still unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth,
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in every language I pronounce,
Stuffing the ears of men with false reports,
I speak of peace while covert enmity,
under the smile of safety, wounds the world:
And who but Rumour, who but only I,
Make fearful musters, and prepared defence,
Whiles the big year, swollen with some other grief,
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant War?
And no such matter Rumour is a pipe,
Blown by surmizes, jeolousies conjectures,
And of so easy, and so plain a stop,
That the blunt monster, with uncounted heads,
The still discordant wavering multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
(My well known body) to anothomize
Among my household? why is Rumour here?
I run before King Harry's victory,
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury,
Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops▪
Quenching the flame of bold rebellion,
Even with the rebels blood. Put what mean I
To speak so true at first▪ my office is
To noise abroad, that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the wrath of noble Hotspurs sword,
And that the King before the Douglas rage,
Stoop his anointed head as low as death.
This have I rumoured through the peasant towns,
Between that royal field of Shrewsbury,
And this worm-eaten hole of ragged stone,
When Hotspurs father old Northumberland
Lies crafty sick, the posts come trying on,
And not a man of them brings other news,
Than they have learned of me, from rumours tongues,
They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs.
Who keeps the gate here ho? where is the Earl?
What shall I say you are?
Tell thou the Earl,
That the Lord Bardolfe doth attend him here.
His Lordship is walked forth into the orchard,
Please it your honour knock but at the gate,
And he himself will answer.
Here comes the Earl.
What news Lord Bardolfe? every minute now
Should be the father of some Stratagem,
The times are wild, contention like a horse,
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loof,
And bears down all before him.
Noble Earl,
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.
Good, and God will.
As good as heart can wish:
The King is almost wounded to the death,
And in the fortune of my Lord your son,
Prince Harry slain outright, and both the Blunts
Killed by the hand of Dowglas, young prince Iohn,
And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field,
And Harry Monmouthes brawn the hulk sir Iohn,
Is prisoner to your son: O such a day!
So fought, so followed, and so fairly won,
Came not till now to dignify the times
Since Caesar's fortunes.
How is this derived?
Saw you the field? came you from Shrewsbury?
I spoke with one, my lord, that came from thence,
A gentleman well bred, and of good name,
That freely rendered me these news for true.
Here comes my servant Travers who I sent
On tuesday last to listen after news.
My lord, I over-rode him on the way,
And he is furnished with no certainties,
More than he haply may retale from me.
Now travers, what good tidings comes with your
My lord, sir Iohn Vmfrevile turned me back
With joyful tidings▪ and being better horsed,
Out road me, after him came spurring hard,
A gentleman almost forespent with speed,
That stopped by me to breath his bloodied horse,
He asked the way to Chester, and of him
I did demand what news from Shrewsbury,
He told me that rebellion had bad luck,
And that young Harrie Percies spur was cold:
With that he gave his able horse the head,
And bending forward, struck his armed heels,
Against the panting sides of his poor jade,
Up to the rowel head, and starting so,
He seemed in running to devour the way,
Staying no longer question.
Ha● again,
Said he, young Harry Percies spur was cold,
Of Hotspur, Cold-spurre, that rebellion
Had met ill luck?
My lord, I'll tell you what,
If my young Lord your son, have not the day,
Upon mine honour for a silken point,
I'll give my Barony, never talk of it.
Why should that gentleman that road by Travers,
Give then such instances of loss?
Who he?
He was some hilding fellow that had stolen
The horse he road on, and upon my life
Spoke at a venture. Look, here comes more news.
Yea this man's brow, like to a title leaf,
Foretells the nature of a tragic volume,
So looks the strand, whereon the imperious flood,
Hath left a witnessed usurpation.
Say Mourton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?
I ran from Shrewsbury my noble lord,
Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask,
To fright our party.
How doth my son and brother?
Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek,
Is apt than thy tongue to tell thy errand,
Even such a man, so faint, so spirritlesse,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe begun,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night,
And would have told him, half his Troy was burnt:
But Priam found the fire, ere he, his tongue,
And I, my Percies death ere thou reportest it.
This thou wouldst say, Your son did thus and thus,
Your brother thus: so fought the noble Dowglas,
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds,
But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,
Ending with brother, son, and all are dead.
Douglas is living, and your brother yet,
But for my Lord your son:
Why he is dead?
See what a ready tongue Suspicion hath!
He that but fears the thing he would not know,
Hath by instinct, knowledge from others eyes,
That what he feared is chanced: yet speak Mourton,
Tell thou an Earl, his divination lies,
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace,
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.
You are too great to be by me gainsaid,
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.
Yet for all this, say not that Percie's dead,
I see a strange confession in thine eye,
Thou shak'st thy head, and hold'st it fear or sin,
To speak a truth: if he be slain,
The tongue offends not that reports his death,
And he doth sin that doth bely the dead,
Not he which says the dead is not alive,
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
Hath but a losing office, and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a sullen bell,
Remembered tolling a departing friend.
I cannot think, my Lord, your son is dead▪
I am sorry I should force you to believe,
That which I would to God I had not seen,
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
Rendering faint quittance, wearied, and out-breathd,
To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The never daunted Percy to the earth,
From whence with life he never more sprung up.
In few his death, whose spirit lent a fire,
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp,
Being bruited once, took fire and heat away,
From the best tempered courage in his troops,
For from his mett●l was his party steeled,
Which once in him abated, o● the rest
Turned on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
And as the thing that's heavy in itself,
Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed:
So did our men, heavy in Hotspurs loss,
Lend to this weight such lightnosse with their fear,
That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim,
Than did our soldiers aiming at their safety,
Fly from the field: then was that noble Worcester,
So soon ta'en prisoner, and that furious Scot,
The bloody Douglas whose well labouring sword▪
Had three times slain th'appearance of the King,
Can vail his stomach and did grace the shame
Of those that turned their backs, and in his flight,
Stumbling in fear, was took: the sum of all
Is, that the King hath won, and hath sent out,
A speedy power to encounter you my lord,
Under the conduct of young Lancaster,
And Westmoreland: this is the news at full.
For this I shall have time enough to mourn▪
In poison there is physic, and these news,
Having been well, that would have made me sick:
Being sick, have (in some measure) made me well:
And as the wretch whose feuer-weakned joints,
Like strengthless hinges buckle ●●der life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper's arms; even so my limbs,
Weakened with grief being ●ow enraged with grief,
Are thrice themselves: hence therefore thou nice crutch,
A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel
Must glove this hand and hence thou sickly co●●e,
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head,
Which princes, fleshy with conquest, aim to hit:
Now bind my brows 〈◊〉 iron, and approach
The raggedst hour 〈…〉 and Spite dare bring,
To frown upon th' 〈◊〉 Northumberland,
Let heaven kiss earth, now let not Nature's hand
Keep the wild flood confined, let Order die,
And let this world no longer be a stage,
To feed contention in a lingering act:
But let one spirit of the first borne Cain
Reign in all bosoms, that each heart being set
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead.
This strained passion doth you wrong my lord.
Sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honour,
The lives of all your loving complices,
Leave on you health, the which if you give over,
To stormy passion must perforce decay.
We all that are engaged to this loss,
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas,
That if we wrought out life, 'twas ten to one,
And yet we ventured for the gain proposed,
Choked the respect of likely peril feared,
And since we are oreset, venture again:
Come, we will all put forth body and goods.
'tis more than time, and my most noble lord,
I hear for certain, and dare speak the truth.
I knew of this before, but to speak truth,
This present grief had wiped it from my mind,
Go in with me and counsel every man,
The aptest way for safety and revenge,
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed,
Never so few, and never yet more need.
Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
He said sir, the water itself was a good healthy water, but for the party that owed it, he might have more diseases than he knew for.
Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me: the brain of this foolish compounded clay-man is not able to invent any thing that intends to laughter, more than I invent, or is invented on me, I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men. I do here walk before thee, like a sow that hath overwhelmd all her litter but one, if the prince put thee into my service for any other reason then to set me off, why then I have no judgement thou whoreson mandrake, thou art sitter to be worn in my cap, then to wait at my heels I was never manned with an agate till now, but I will in-set you, neither in gold nor silver, but in vile apparel, and send you back again to your master for a jewel, the juvenal the prince your master, whose chin is not yet fledge, I will sooner have a beard grow in the palm of my hand, than he shall get one off his cheek, & yet he will not stick to say his face is a face royal, God may finish it when he will, 'tis not a hair amiss yet, he may keep it still at a face royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it, and yet he'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his father was a bachelor, he may keep his own grace, but he's almost out of mine I can assure him: what said master Dommelton about the satin for my short cloak and my slops?
He said sir, you should procure him better assurance than Bardolfe, he would not take his band and yours, he liked not the security.
Let him be damned like the glutton, pray God his tongue be hotter, a whoreson A chitophella rascal: yea forsooth knave, to bear a gentle man in hand, and then stand upon security, the whoreson smoothy-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes and bunches of keys at their girdles, and if a man is through with them in honest taking up, than they must stand upon security, I had as live they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with security, I looked a should have sent me two and twenty yards of satin (as I am a true knight,) and he sends me security: well he may sleep in security, for he hath the horn of abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through it: where's Bardolf, & yet can not he see though he have his own lantern to light him.
he's gone in Smithfield to buy your worship a horse.
I bought him in Paul's, and he'll buy me a horse in Smithfield, and I could get me but a wife in the stews, I were man●d, horsde, and wiued.
Sir, here comes the noble man that committed the prince for striking him about Bardolfe.
Wait close, I will not see him.
What's he that goes there?
Falstaffe and't please your lordship.
He that was in question for the rob'ry?
He my Lord, but he hath since done good service at Shrewsbury, & (as! hear,) is now going with some charge to the lord Iohn of Lancaster.
What to York? call him back again.
Sir Iohn Falstaff.
Boy, tell him I am deaf.
You must speak louder, my master is deaf.
I am sure he is to the hearing of any thing good, go pluck him by the elbow, I must speak with him.
Sir Iohn?
What? a young knave and begging? is there not wars? is there not employment? doth not the King lack subjects? do not the rebels need soldiers, though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg then to be on the worst side, were it worse than the name of Rebellion can tell how to make it.
You mistake me sir.
Why sir, did I say you were an honest man, setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, I had lied in my throat if I had said so.
I pray you sir then set your knighthood, and your soldiership aside, and give me leave to tell you, you lie in your throat, if you say I am any other than an honest man.
I give thee leave to tell me, so I lay aside that which grows to me, if thou getst any leave of me, hang me, if thou tak'st leave, thou wert better be hanged, you hunt counter, hence, avaunt.
Sir, my Lord would speak with you.
Sir Iohn Falstaff, a word with you.
My good Lord, God give your lordship good time of day, I am glad to see your lordship abroad, I heard say your lordship was sick, I hope your lordship goes abroad by advise, your lordship, though not clean past your youth, have yet some smack of an aguein you, some relish of the saltness of time in you, and I most humbly beseech your lordship to have a reverend care of your health.
Sir Iohn, I sent for you before your expedition to Shrewsbury.
An'dt please your lordship, I hear his majesty is returned with some discomfort from Wales.
I talk not of his majesty, you would not come when I sent for you.
And I hear moreover, his highness is fallen into this same whoreson a poplexi.
Well, God mend him, I pray you let me speak with you.
This appoplexi as I take it? is a kind of lethargy, and't please your lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a whoreson tingling.
What tell you me of it, be it as it is.
It hath it original from much grief from study▪ and perturbation of the brain, I have read the cause of his effects in Galen, it is a kind of deafness.
I think you are fallen into the disease, for you hear not what I say to you.
Very well my lord, very well, rather and't please you it is the disease of not listening the malady of not marking that I am troubled withal.
To punish you by the heels, would amend the attention of your ears, and I care not if I do become your physician.
I am as poor as Iob my lord, but not so patient, your Lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me, in respect of poverty, but how I should be your patient to follow your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple or indeed a scruple itself.
I sent for you when there were matters against you for your life to come speak with me.
As I was then advised by my learned counsel in the laws of this land service, I did not come.
Well, the truth is sir Iohn, you live in great infamy.
He that buckles himself in my belt cannot live in less.
Your means are very slender, and your waste is great.
I would it were otherwise, I would my means were greater and my waste slender.
You have misled the youthful prince.
The young prince hath misled me, I am the fellow with the great belly, and he my dog.
Well, I am loath to gall a new healed wound, your days service at Shrewsbury, hath a little guilded over your night's exploit on Gadshill, you may thank th'unquiet time, for your quiet oreposting that action.
My lord.
But since all is well, keep it so, wake not a sleeping wolf.
To wake a wolf, is as bad as smell a fox.
What you are as a candle, the better part, burnt out.
A wassail candle my lord, all tallow, if I did say of wax, my growth would approve the truth.
There is not a white hair in your face, but should have his effect of gravity.
His effect of grauy, gravy, gravy.
You follow the young prince up and down, like his ill angel.
Not so my lord, your ill angel is light, but I hope he that looks upon me will take me without weighing, and yet in some respects I grant I cannot go. I cannot tell, virtue is of so little regard in these costermongers times, that true valour is turned herod, Pregnancy is made a Tapster, & his quick wit wasted in giving reckonings, all the other gifts appertinent to man, as the malice of his age shapes the one not worth a goosbery, you that are old consider not the capacities of us that are young, you do measure the heat of our livers with the bitterness of your galls, and we that are in the vaward of our youth, I must confess are wags too.
Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth, that are written down▪ old with all the characters of age? have you not a moist eye, a dry hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing leg, an increasing belly? is not your voice broken, your wind short, your chin double, your wit single, and every part about you blasted with antiquity, and will you yet call yourself young? fie, fie, fie, sir Iohn.
My Lord, I was borne about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a white head, and something a round belly, for my voice, I have lost it with hallowing, and singing of Anthems: to approve my youth further, I will not: the truth is, I am only old in judgement and understanding: and he that will caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him for the box of the ●e●re that the Prince gave you, he gave it like a rude Prince, and you took it like a sensible Lord: I have checked him for it, and the young lion reputes, mary not in ashes and sackcloth, but in new silk, and old sack.
Well, God send the prince a better companion.
God send the companion a better prince, I cannot rid my hands of him.
Well, the King hath severed you: I hear you are going with lord Iohn of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of Northumberland.
Yea, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it: but look you pray, all you that kiss my lady Peace at home, that our armies join not in a hot day, for, by the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I mean not to sweat extraordinarily: if it be a hot day, & I brandish any thing but a bottle. I would I might never spit white again: there is not a dangerous action can peep out his head▪ but I am thrust upon it. Well, I cannot last ever, but it was alway yet the trick of our English nation, if they have a good thing, to make it too common. If ye will needs say I am an old man you should give me rest: I would to God my name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is, I were better to be eaten do death with a rust, than to be scoured to nothing with perpetual motion.
Well, be honest▪ be honest, and God bless your expedition.
Will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me forth?
Not a penny, not a penny, you are too impatient to bear crosses: far you well: commend me to my coosine Westmoreland.
If I do, fillip me with a three man beetle: A man can no more separate age and covetousness, than a can part young limbs and lechery, but the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the other, and so both the degrees prevent my curses, boy.
Sir.
What money is in my purse?
Seven groats and two pence.
I can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse, borrowing only lingers and lingers it out, but the disease is incurable: Go bear this letter to my lord of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl of Westmoreland, and this to old mistress Ursula, whom I have weekly sworn to marry since I perceived the first white hair of my chin: about it, you know where to find me: a pox of this gout, or a gout of this pox, for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great toe. 'tis no matter if I do halt, I have the wars for my colour, and my pension shall seem the more reasonable: a good wit will make use of any thing; I will turn diseases to commodity.
Thus have you heard our cause, and known our means,
And my most noble friends, I pray you all
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes,
And first Lord Marshall, what say you to it?
I well allow the occasion of our arms,
But gladly would be better satisfied,
How in our means we should advance ourselves,
To look with forehead, bold, and big enough,
Upon the power and puissance of the King.
Our 〈…〉 musters grow upon the file,
To five and twenty thousand men of choice,
And our supplies live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed fire of injuries.
The question then Lord Hastings standeth thus,
Whether our present five and twenty thousand,
May hold up head without Northumberland.
With him we may.
Yea mary, there's the point,
But if without him we be thought too feeble,
My judgement is we should not step too far.
'tis very true lord Bardolfe, for indeed
It was young Hotspurs cause at Shrewsbury.
It was my Lord, who lined himself with hope,
Eating the air, and promise of supply,
Flattering himself in project of a power,
Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts,
And so with great imagination,
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death,
And winking, leapt into destruction.
But by your leave it never yet did hurt,
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.
We fortify in paper and in figures,
Using the names of men in steed of men,
Like on that draws the model of an house,
Beyond his power to build it, who (half through)
Gives over, and leaves his part-created cost,
A naked subject to the weeping clouds,
And waste for churlish winter's tyranny.
Grant that our hopes (yet likely of fair birth)
Should be still borne, and that we now possessed
The utmost man of expectation,
I think we are so, body strong enough,
Even as we are to equal with the King.
What, is the King but ●iue and twenty thousand?
To us no more, nay not so much 〈◊〉 Bardolfe,
For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
And in three heads, one power against the French,
And one against Glendower perforce a third
Must take up us, so is the unfirme King
In three divided, and his coffers sound
With hollow poverty and emptiness.
That he should draw his several strengths together,
And come against us in full puissance,
Need not to be dreaded.
If he should do so, French and Welsh he leaves his back unarmeded, they baying him at the heels, never fear that.
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?
The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland:
Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth:
But who is substituted against the French
I have no certain notice.
Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?
We are Times subjects, and Time bids be gone.
Master Phang, have you entered the action?
It is entered.
Where's your yeoman? be't a lusty yeoman? will a stand to't?
Sirrah, where's Snare?
O Lord I, good master Snare.
Here, here.
Snare, we must arrest sir Iohn Falstaff.
Yea good master Snare, I have entered him and all.
It may chance cost some of us our lives, for he will stab.
Alas the day, take heed of him, he stabbed me in mine own house, most beastly in good faith, a cares not what mischief he does, if his weapon be out, he will foin like any devil, he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.
No nor I neither, le be at your elbow.
And I but fist him once, and a come but within my view.
I am undone by his going, I warrant you, he's an infinitive thing upon my score, good master Phang hold him sure, good master Snare let him not scape, a comes continually to Pie corner (saving your manhoods) to buy a saddle, and he is indicted to dinner to the Lubbers head in Lumbert street to master Smooths the silk man, I pray you since my exion is entered, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be brought in to his answer, a hundred mark is a long one, for a poor lone woman to bear and I have borne, and borne, and borne, and have been fobbed off, and fobbed off, and fobbed off from this day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on, there is no honesty in such dealing, unless a woman should be made an ass, and a beast, to bear every knaves wrong: yonder he comes, and that arrant malmsie-nose knave Bardolfe with him, do your offices do your offices master Phang, & master Snare, do me, do me, do me your offices.
How now, whose mare's dead? what's the matter?
I arrest you at the suit of mistress, quickly.
Away varlets, draw Bardolfe, cut me off the villains head, throw the quean in the channel.
Throw me in the channel? I'll throw thee in the channel, wilt thou, wilt thou, thou bastardly rogue, murder murder, a thou honisuckle villain, wilt thou kill God's officers and the Kings? a thou honiseed rogue, thou art a honiseed, a man queller, and a woman queller.
Keep them off Bardolfe.
A rescue, a rescue.
Good people bring a rescue or two, thou wots, wots thou, thou wots, wots ta, do do thou rogue, do thou hempseed.
Away you scullion, you rampallian, you fustilarian, i'll tickle your catastrophe.
What is the matter? keep the peace here, ho.
Good my lord be good to me, I beseech you stand to me.
How now sir Iohn, what are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time, and business?
You should have been well on your way to York:
Stand from him fellow wherefore hangest thou upon him.
O my most worshipful Lord, and't please your grace I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.
For what sum?
It is more than for some my Lord, it is for all I have, he hath eaten me out of house and home, he hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his, but I will have some of it out again, or I will ride thee a nights like the mare.
I think I am as like to ride the mare if I have any vantage of ground to get up.
How comes this sir Iohn? what man of good temper would endure this tempest of exclamation, are you not ashamed to enforce a poor widow, to so rough a course to come by her own.
What is the gross sum that I own thee?
Mary if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money too: thou didst swear to me upon a parcel guilt goblet, sitting in my dolphin chamber, at the round table by a sea coal fire, upon wednesday in Whitsun week, when the prince broke thy head, for liking his father to a singing man of Windsor, thou didst swear to me them, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me, and make me my lady thy wife, canst thou deny 〈◊〉 did not goodwife Keech the butcher's wife come in then and call me gossip Quickly, coming in to borrow a mess of vinegar, telling us she had a good dish of prawns, whereby thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told thee they were ill for a green wound, and didst thou not, when she was gone down stairs, desire me, to be no more so familiarity, with such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me madam, and didst thou not kiss me, and bid me fetch thee thirty shillings, I put thee now to thy book oath, doom it if thou canst.
My lord this is a poor made●oule, and she says up and down the town, that her eldest son is like you, she hath been in good case and the truth is poverty hath distracted her, but for these foolish officers, I beseech you I may have redress against them.
Sir Iohn sir Iohn, I am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching the true cause, the false way: it is not a confident brow, nor the throng of words that come with such more than impudent sauciness from you can thrust me from a level consideration: you have as it appears to me practised upon the easy yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your uses both in purse and in person.
Yea in truth my Lord.
Pray thee peace, pay her the debt you own her, and unpay the villainy you have done with her, the one you may do with sterling money, and the other with currant repentance.
My Lord I will not undergo this snepe without reply, you call honourable boldness impudent sauciness, if a man will make curtsy and say nothing, he is virtuous, no my Lord my humble duty remembered, I will not be your suitor, I say to you I do desire deliverance from these officers, being upon hasty employment in the King's affairs.
You speak as having power to do wrong, but answer in th'effect of your reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.
Come hither hostess.
Now master Gower, what news.
The King my Lord, and Harry prince of Wales,
Are near at hand, the rest the paper tells.
As I am a gentleman!
Faith you said so before.
As I am a gentleman, come, no more words of it.
By this heaunly ground I tread on, I must be feign to pawn both my plate, & the tapestry of my dining chambers-
Glasses glasses is the only drinking, and for thy walls a pretty sleight drollery, or the story of the prodigal, or the jarman hunting in waterworke, is worth a thousand of these bed-hangers, and these fly bitten tapestry, let it be x. ● if thou canst: come, and 'ttwere not for thy humours, there's not a better wench in England, go wash thy face and draw the action, come thou must not be in this humour with me, dost not know me, come, come, I know thou wast set on to this.
Pray thee sir Iohn let it be but twenty nobles, i'faith I am loath to pawn my p●●te so God save me law.
Let it alone, i'll make other shift, you'll be a fool stil.
Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown, I hope you'll come to supper, you'll pay me altogether.
Will I live? go with her, with her, hook on, hook on.
Will you have Doll Tere-sheet meet you at supper.
No more words, let's have her.
I have heard better news.
What's the news my lord?
Where lay the King to night?
At Billingsgate my Lord.
I hope my Lord als well, what is the news my lord?
Come all his forces back?
No, fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse
Are marched up to my lord of Lancaster,
Against Northumberland, and the Archbishop.
Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?
You shall have letters of me presently,
Come, go along with me, good master Gower.
My lord.
What's the matter?
Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?
I must wait upon my good lord here, I thank you good sir Iohn.
Sir Iohn, you loiter here too long,
Being you are to take soldiers up
In Counties as you go.
Will you sup with me master Gower?
What foolish master taught you these manners, sir Iohn?
Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that taught them me: this is the right fencing grace, my Lord, tap for tap, and so part fair.
Now the Lord lighten thee, thou art a great fool.
Before God, I am exceeding weary.
Is't come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have attached one of so high blood.
Faith it does me, though it discolors the complexion of my greatness to acknowledge it: doth it not show vildly in me to desire small beer?
Why a Prince should not be so loosely studied, as to remember so weak a composition.
Belike than my appetite was not princely goat, for by my troth, I do now remember the poor creature small beer. But indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name? or to know thy face to morrow? or to take note how many pair of silk stockings thou hast with these, and those that were thy peach coloured once, or to bear the inventory of thy shirts, as one for superfluity, and another for use. But that the Tennis court keeper knows better than I, for it is a low ebb of linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, because the rest of the low Countries have eat up thy holland: and God knows whether those that bal out the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his kingdom: but the Midwines say, the children are not in the fault whereupon the world increases, and kindreds are mightily strengthened.
How ill it follows, after you have laboured so hard, you should talk so idly! tell me how many good young princes would do so, their father's being so sick, as yours at this time is.
Shall I tell thee one thing Poynes?
Yes faith, and let it be an excellent good thing.
It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.
Go to, I stand the push of your one thing that you will tell.
Mary I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad now my father is sick, albeit I could tell to thee, as to one it pleases me for fault of a better to call my friend, I could be sad, and sad indeed too.
Very hardly, upon such a subject.
By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devils book, as thou and Falstaff, for obduracy and persistancie, let the end try the man, but I tell thee, my heart bleeds inwardly that my father is so sick, and keeping such vile company as thou art, hath in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.
The reason.
What wouldst thou think of me if I should weep?
I would think thee a most princely hyprocrite.
It would be every man's thought, and thou art a blessed fellow, to think as every man thinks, never a man's thought in the world, keeps the road way better than thine, every man would think me an hypocrite indeed, and what accites your most worshipful thought to think so?
Why because you have been so lewd and so much engrafted to Falstaff.
And to thee.
By this light I am well spoke on, I can hear it with mine own ears the worst that they can say of me is that I am a second brother, and that I am a proper fellow of my hands, and those two things I confess I cannot help: by the mass here comes Bardolf.
And the boy that I gave Falstaff, a had him from me Christian, and look if the fat villain have not transformed him Ape.
God save your grace.
And yours most noble Bardolfe.
Come you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be blushing, wherefore blush you now? what a maidenly man at arms are you become? be't such a matter to get a pottle-pots maidenhead?
A calls me enough my Lord, through a red lattice, and I could discern no part of his face from the window▪ at last I spied his eyes, and me thought he had made two holes in the ale wives petticoat and so peeped through.
Has not the boy profited?
Away you whoreson upright rabble, away.
Away you rascally Althaea's dream, away.
Instruct us boy, what dream boy?
Mary my lord, Althear dreamt she was delivered of a firebrand, and therefore I call him her dream.
A crowns worth of good interpretation there 'tis boy.
O that this blossom could be kept from cankers▪ well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.
And you do not make him hanged among you, the gallows shall have wrong.
And how doth thy master Bardolfe?
Well my Lord, he heard of your graces coming to town, there's a letter for you.
Delivered with good respect, and how doth the martlemasse your master?
In bodily health sir.
Mary the immortal part needs a physician, but that moves not him, though that be sick, it dies not.
I do allow this Wen to be as familiar with me, as my dog and he holds his place, for look you how he writes.
Iohn Falstaff Knight, every man must know that as oft as he has occasion to name himself: even like those that are kin to the King for they never prick their finger, but they say, there's some of the King's blood spilled: how comes that (says he) that takes upon him not to conceive the answer is as ready as a borrowed cap: I am the Kings poor cousin, sir.
Nay they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from Iaphet, but the letter, Sir Iohn Falstaff knight, to the son of the king, nearest his father, Harry prince of Wales, greeting.
Why this is a certificate.
Peace.
I will imitate the honourable Romans in brevity.
He sure means brevity in breath, short wound, I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and, I leave thee, be not too familiar with Poynes, for he misuses thy favours so much, that he swears thou art to marry his sister Nell, repent at idle times as thou mayst, and so farewell.
Thine by yea▪ and no, which is as much as to say, as thou usest him, Iacke Falstaff with my family, Iohn with my brothers and sisters, and sir Iohn with all Europe.
My Lord, I'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.
That's to make him eat twenty of his words, but do you use me, thus Ned? must I marry your sister?
God send the wench no worse fortune, but I never said so.
Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us, is your master here in London?
Yea my Lord.
Where sups he? doth the old boar feed in the old Frank?
At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.
What company?
Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
Sup any women with him?
None my lord, but old mistress Quickly, and mistress Dol Tere-sheet.
What Pagan may that be?
A proper gentlewoman sir, and a kinswoman of my masters.
Even such kin as the parish Heiffors are to the town ●ull, shall we steal upon them Ned at supper?
I am your shadow my Lord, i'll follow you.
Sirrah▪ you boy and Bardolfe, no word to your master that I am yet come to town; there's for your silence.
I have no tongue sir.
And for mine sir, I will govern it.
Far you well: go, this Doll Tere-sheete should be some road.
I warrant you, as common as the way between S. Albon and London.
How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to night in his true colours, and not ourselves be seen?
Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at his table as drawers.
From a god to a bull, a heavy descension, it was Ioues case, from a pince to a prentice, a low transformation, that shall be mine, for in every thing the purpose must weigh with the folly, follow me Ned.
I pray thee loving wife and gentle daughter,
Give even way unto my rough affairs,
Put not you on the visage of the times,
And be like them to Percy troublesome.
I have given over, I will speak no more,
Do what you will, your wisdom be your guide.
Alas sweet wife, my honour is at pawn,
And but my going, nothing can redeem it.
O yet for God's sake go not to these wars,
The time was father, that you broke your word,
When you were more endear to it then now,
When your own Percy, when my hearts dear Harry,
Threw many a Northward look, to see his father
Bring up his powers, but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two honours lost, yours▪ and your sons,
For yours, the God of heaven brighten it,
For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
In the grey vault of heaven, and by his light
Did all the Chivalry of England move
To do brave acts, he was indeed the glass
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.
Beshrew your heart,
Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me,
With new lamenting ancient oversights,
But I must go and meet with danger there,
Or it will seek me in an other place,
And find me worse provided.
O fly to Scotland,
Till that the nobles and the armed commons,
Have of their puissance made a little taste.
If they get ground and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them like a rib of steel,
To make strength stronger: but for all our loves,
First let them try themselves, so did your son,
He was so suffered, so came I a widow,
And never shall have length of life enough,
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven,
For recordation to my noble husband.
Come, come▪ go in with me, 'tis with my mind,
As with the tide, swelled up unto his height,
That makes a still stand, running neither way,
Feign would I go to meet the Archbishop,
But many thousand reasons hold me back,
I will resolve for Scotland, there am I,
Till time and vantage crave my company.
What the devil hast thou brought there apple Iohns? thou knowest sir Iohn cannot endure an apple Iohn.
●as thou sayst true, the prince once set a dish of apple Iohns before him, and told him there were five more sir Iohns, and putting off his hat, said, I will now take my leave of these six daie, round, old, withered Knights, it angered him to the heart, but he hath forgot that.
Why then cover and set them down, and see if thou canst find out Sneak's Noise, mistress Tere-sheet would feign hear some music.
Dispatch, the room where they supped is too hot, they'll come in strait.
Sirrah, here will be the prince and master poins anon, and they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons, and sir Iohn must not know of it, Bardolfe hath brought word.
By the mass here will be old utis, it will be an excellent stratagem.
I'll see if I can find out Sneake.
I'faith sweet heart, me thinks now you are in an excellent good temperalitie. Your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as heart would desire, and your colour I warrant you is as red as any rose, in good truth law: but i'faith you have drunk too much cannaries, and that's a marvelous searching wine, and it perfumes the blood ere one can say, what's this, how do you now?
Better than I was: him.
Why that's well said, a good heart's worth gold: lo here comes sir Iohn.
When Arthur first in court empty the jourdan and was a worthy King: how now mistress Doll?
Sick of a calm, yea good faith.
So is all her sect, and they be once in a calm they are sick.
A pox damn you, you muddy rascal, is that all the comfort you give me?
You make fat rascals mistress Dol.
I make them? gluttony, and diseases make, I make them not.
If the cook help to make the gluttony you help to make the diseases Doll, we catch of you Doll, we catch of you grant that my poor virtue, grant that.
Yea joy, our chains and our jewels.
Your brooches, pearls, & ouches for to serve bravely, is to come halting off, you know to come off the breach, with his pike bend bravely, and to surgery bravely, to venture upon the charged chambers bravely.
Hang yourself, you muddy Cunger, hang yourself.
By my troth this is the old fashion, you two never meet but you fall to some discord, you are both ygood truth as rue matique as two dry toasts, you cannot one bear with another's confirmities, what the goodyere one must bear▪ & that must ●e you, you are the weaker vessel, as they say▪ the emptier vessel.
Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogshead? there's a whole merchants venture of Bordeaux stuff in him, you have not seen a hulk better stuffed in the hold. Come, i'll be friends with thee jack, thou art going to the wars, and whether I shall ever see thee again or no there is no body cares.
Sir, Ancient pistols below, and would speak with you.
Hang him swaggering rascal, let him not come hither it is the foule-mouthd'st rogue in England.
If he swagger, let him not come here, no by my faith I must live among my neighbours, i'll no swaggerers, I am in good name, and same with the very best: shut the door, there comes no swaggerers here, I have not lived all this while to have swaggering now, shut the door I pray you.
Dost thou hear hostess?
Pray ye pacify yourself sir Iohn, there comes no swaggerers here.
Dost thou hear? it is mine Ancient.
Tilly fally, sir Iohn, near tell me: & your ancient swaggrer comes not in my doors: I was before master Tissick the deputy other day, & (as he said to me) 'twas no longer ago than wedsday last, I good faith neighbour Quickly, says he, master Dumbe our minister was by then, neighbour Quickly (says he) receive those that are civil, for (said he) you are in an ill name: now a said so▪ I can tell whereupon. For (says he) you are an honest woman, and well thought on, therefore take heed what guests you receive, receive (says he) no swaggering companions: there comes none here: you would bless you to hear what he said: no, I'll no swaggrers.
he's no swaggrer hostess, a tame cheter yfaith, you may struck him as gently as a puppy greyhound, he'll not swagger with a Barbary hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of resistance, call him up Drawer.
Cheter call you him? I will bar no honest man my house, nor no cheater, but I do not love swagering by my troth, I am the worse when one says swagger: feel masters, how I shake, look you, I warrant you.
So you do hostess.
Do I? yea in very truth do I, and 'ttwere an aspen leaf, I cannot abide swaggrers.
God save you sir Iohn.
Welcome ancient Pistol, here Pistol, I charge you with a cup of sack, do you discharge upon mine hostess.
I will discharge upon her sir Iohn, with two bullets.
she is pistol proof: sir, you shall not hardly offend her.
Come, I'll drink no proofs, nor no bullets, I'll drink no more than will do me good, for no man's pleasure, I.
Then, to you mistress Dorothy, I will charge you.
Charge me? I scorn you, scurvy companion: what you poor base rascally cheating lacke-linnen mate? away you mouldy rogue, away, I am meat for your master.
I know you mistress Dorothy.
Away you cutpurse rascal, you filthy boung, away, by this wine I'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps and you play the saucy cuttle with me. Away you bottle ale rascal, you basket hilt stolen juggler, you. Since when, I pray you sir: God's light, with two points on your shoulder? much.
God let me not live, but I will murder your ruff for this.
No more Pistol, I would not have you go off here, discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.
No, good captain Pistol, not here, sweet captain.
Captain, thou abominable damned cheter, art thou not ashamed to be called Captain? and Captains were of my mind, they would truncheon you out, for taking their names upon you, before you have earned them: you a captain? you slave, for what? for teareing a poor whores ruff in a bawdy house: he a captain! hang him rogue, he lives upon mowldy stewed pruins, and dried cakes: a captain? God's light these villains will make the word as odious as the word occupy, which was an excellent good word before it was il sorted, therefore captains had need look toost.
Pray thee go down good Ancient.
Hark thee hither mistress Dol.
Not I, I tell thee what corporal Bardolfe, I could tear her, I'll be revenged of her.
Pray thee go down.
I'll see her damned first, to Pluto's damned lake by this hand to th'infernal deep, with erebus & tortures vile also: hold hook and line, say I: down, down dogs, down faters have we not Hiren here?
Good captain Pistol be quiet, 'tis very late i'faith, I beseek you now aggravate your choler.
These be good humours indeed, shall packhorses, and hollow pampered jades of Asia which cannot go but thirty mile a day, compare with Caesars and with Cannibals, and troiant Greeks'? nay rather damn them with King Cerberus, and let the Welkin roar, shall we fall foul for toys?
By my troth captain, these are very bitter words.
Be gone good Ancient, this will grow to a brawl anon.
Men like dogs give crowns like pins, have we not Hiren here?
A my word Captain, there's none such here, what the goodyeare do you think I would deny her? for God's sake be quiet.
Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis, come gives some sack, si fortune me torment sperato me contento, fear we broad sides? no, let the fiend give fire, give me some sack, and sweet heart, lie thou there, come we to full points here? and are & caeteraes, no things?
Pistol, I would be quiet.
Sweet Knight, I kiss thy neaffe, what, we have seen the seven stars.
For God's sake thrust him down stairs, I cannot endure such a fustian rascal.
Thrust him down stairs, know we not Galloway nags?
Quaite him down Bardolfe like a shove-groat shilling, nay, and a do nothing but speak nothing, a shall be nothing here.
Come, get you down stairs.
What shall we have incision? shall we embrew? then death rock me a sleep, abridge my doleful days: why then let grievons ghastly gaping wounds untwined the sister's three, come Atropose I say.
Here's goodly stuff toward.
Give me my rapier, boy.
I pray thee Iacke, I pray thee do not draw.
Get you down stairs.
Here's a goodly tumult, i'll forswear keeping house afore i'll be in these tirrits and frights, so, murder I warrant now, alas, alas, put up your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.
I pray thee Iack be quiet, the rascal's gone, ah you whoreson little vliaunt villain you.
Are you not hurt i'th' groin? me thought a made a shrewd thrust at your belly.
Have you turned him out a doors?
Yea sir, the rascal's drunk, you have hurt him sir i'th' shoulder.
A rascal to brave me?
A you sweet little rogue you, alas poor ape how thou sweat'st, come let me wipe thy face, come on you horsone chaps: a rogue, i'faith I love thee, thou art as valorous as Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, & ten times better than the nine Worthies, a villain!
Ah rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.
Do and thou darest for thy heart, and thou dost, i'll canvas thee between a pair of sheets.
The music is come sir.
Let them play, play sirs, sit on my knee Doll, a rascal bragging slave! the rogue fled from me like quicksilver.
I'faith and thou followdst him like a church, thou whoreson little tydee Bartholemew borepigge, when wilt thou leave sighting a days and foining a nights, and begin to patch up thine old body for heaven.
Peace good Doll, do not speak like a deaths head, do not bid me remember mine end.
Sirrah, what humour's the prince of?
A good shallow young fellow, a would have made a good pantler, a would a chipped bread well.
They say Poines has a good wit.
He a good wit▪ hang him baboon, his wit's as thick as Tewksbury mustard, there's no more conceit in him then is in a mallet.
Why does the prince love him so then?
Because their legs are both of a bigness▪ and a plays at quoites well, and eats cunger and fennel, and drinks off candle's ends for slappe-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon joind-stooles, and swears with a good grace, and wears his boots very smooth like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds no bate with telling of discreet stories, and such other gambole faculties a has that show a weak mind, and an able body for the which the prince admits him: for the prince himself is such another, the weight of a hair will turn scales between their haber de poiz.
Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?
Let's beat him before his whore.
Look where the withered elder hath not his poule clawed like a parrot.
Is it not strange that desire should so many years out live performance.
Kiss me Doll,
Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction? what says th'almanac to that?
And look whether the fiery Trigon his man be not lisping to his master, old tables, his note book, his counsel keeper?
Thou dost give me flattering busses.
By my troth I kiss thee with a most constant heart.
I am old, I am old.
I love thee better than I love, ere a scurvy young boy of them all.
What stuff wilt have a kirtle of? I shall receive money a thursday, shalt have a cap to morrow: a merry song come it grows late, we'll to bed, thou●t forget me when I am gone.
By my troth thou'lt set me a weeping and thou sayst so, prove that ever I dress myself handsome till thy return, well hearken a▪ th' end.
Some sack Francis.
Anon anon sir.
Ha? a bastard son of the Kings? and art not thou poins his brother?
Why thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou lead?
A better than thou, I am a gentleman, thou art a drawer.
Very true sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.
O the Lord preserve thy grace: by my troth welcome to London, now the Lord bless that sweet face of thine, O Iesu, are you come from Wales?
Thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, by this light, flesh, and corrupt blood, thou art welcome.
How? you fat fool I scorn you.
My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge, and turn all to a merriment if you take not the heat.
You whoreson candlemine you, how vildly did you speak of me now, before this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman?
God's blessing of your good heart, and so she is by my troth.
Didst thou hear me?
Yea and you knew me as you did, when you ran away by Gadshil▪ you knew I was at your back, and spoke it, on purpose to try my patience.
No, no, no, not so, I did not think thou wast within hearing.
I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and then I know how to handle you.
No abuse Hall a mine honour, no abuse.
Not to dispraise me, and call me pantler and bread-chipper, and I know not what?
No abuse Hall.
No abuse?
No abuse Ned i'th' world, honest Ned, none, I dispraisde him before the wicked, that the wicked might not fall in love with thee: in which doing, I have done the part of a careful friend and a true subject, and thy father is to give me thanks for it, no abuse Hall, none Ned, none, no faith boys none.
See now whether pure fear and entire cowardice, doth not make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us: is she of the wicked, is thine hostess here of the wicked, or is thy boy of the wicked or honest Bardolfe whose zeal burns in his nose of the wicked?
Answer thou dead elm, answer.
The fiend hath pricked down Bardolfe irrecoverable, and his face is Lucifer's privy kitchen, where he doth nothing but roast mault-worms, for the boy there is a good angel about him, but the devil blinds him too.
For the women.
For one of them she's in hell already, and burns poor souls: for th'other I own her money, and whether she be damned for that I know not.
No I warrant you.
No I think thou art not, I think thou art quit for that, mary there is another indictment upon thee, for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy house contrary to the law, for the which I think thou wilt howl.
All victuallers do so, what's a joint of mutton or two in a whole Lent?
You gentlewoman.
What says your grace?
His grace says that which his flesh rebels against.
Who knocks so loud at door? look to'th door there Francis.
Peyto, how now, what news?
The King your father is at Westminster,
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts,
Come from the North, and as I came along
I met and overtook a dozen captains,
Bareheaded, sweeting, knocking at the Taverns,
And ask every one for sir Iohn Falstaff.
By heaven Poines, I feel me much too blame,
So idly to profane the precious time,
When tempest of commotion like the south.
Born with black vapour doth begin to melt,
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads,
Give me my sword and cloak: Falstaff good night.
Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, & we must hence and leave it unpickt: more knocking at the door, how now, what's the matter?
You must away to court sir presently,
A dozen captains stay at door for you.
Pay the musicians sirrah, farewell hostess, farewell Dol, you see my good wenches how men of merit are sought after, the undeseruer may sleep, when the man of action is called on, farewell good wenches, if I be not sent away post, I will see you again ere I go.
I cannot speak, if my heart be not ready to burst: well sweet Iacke, have a care of thyself.
Farewell, farewell.
Well, far thee well, I have known thee these twenty nine years, come pease-cod time, but an honester, and truer hearted man: well, far thee well.
Mistress Tere-sheete.
What's the matter?
Bid mistress Tere-sheete come to my master.
O run Doll, run, run good Doll, come, she comes blubbered, yea? will you come Doll?
Come on, come on, come on, give me your hand sir, give me your hand sir, an early stirrer, by the Rood: and how doth my good cousin Silence?
Good morrow good coosine Shallow.
And how doth my cousin your bedfellow? and your fairest daughter and mine, my goddaughter Ellen?
Alas, a black woosel, cousin Shallow.
By yea, and no sir, I dare say my cousin William is become a good scholar, he is at Oxford still, is he not?
Indeed sir to my cost.
A must then to the Inns a court shortly: I was once of Clement's Inn, where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.
You were called Lusty Shallow then, cousin.
By the mass I was called any thing, and I would have done any thing indeed too, and roundly too: there was I, and little Iohn Doyt of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickebone, and Will Squele a Cotsole man, you had not four such swinge bucklers in all the Inns a court again, and I may say to you; we knew where the bona robes were, and had the best of them all at commandment: then was Iacke Falstaff, now sir Iohn, a boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolk.
This sir Iohn cousin, that comes hither anon about soldiers?
The same sir Iohn, the very same, I see him break Skoggins head at the Court gate, when a was a Crack, not thus high: and the very same day did I fight with one Samson Stockfish a Fruiterer behind Greyes' Inn: Iesu, Iesu, the mad days that I have spent! and to see how many of my old acquaintance are dead.
We shall all follow, cousin.
Certain, 'tis certain, very sure, very sure, death (as the Psalmist saith) is certain to all all shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at Samforth fair?
By my troth I was not there.
Death is certain: Is old Double of your town living yet?
Dead sir.
Iesu, Iesu, dead! a drew a good bow, and dead? a shot a fine shoot: Iohn a Gaunt loved him well, and betted much money on his head. Dead? a would have clapped i'th' clout at twelve score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen and a half, that it would have done a man's heart good to see. How a score of Ewes now?
Thereafter as they be, a score of good ewes may be worth ten pounds.
And is old Double dead?
Here come two of sir Iohn Falstaffes men, as I think.
Good morrow honest gentlemen.
I beseech you, which is justice Shallow?
I am Robart Shallow, sir, a poor Esquire of this County, and one of the King's justices of the peace: what is your good pleasure with me?
My Captain, sir, commends him to you, my Captain sir Iohn Falstaff, a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant Leader.
He greets me well, sir, I knew him a good backsword man: how doth the good Knight? may I ask how my Lady his wife doth.
Sir, pardon, a soldier is better accommodate then with a wife.
It is well said infaith sir, and it is well said indeed too, better accommodated, it is good, yea indeed is it, good phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable, accommodated, it comes of accommodo, very good, a good phrase.
Pardon sir, I have heard the word, Phrase call you it? by this day I know not the phrase, but I will maintain the word with my sword to be a soldierlike word, and a word of exceeding good command by heaven, accommodated, that is when a man is as they say, accommodated, or when a man is being whereby, a may be thought to be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.
It is very just, look, here comes good sir Iohn, give me your good hand, give me your worships good hand, by my troth you like well, and bear your years very well, welcome good sir Iohn.
I am glad to see you well, good master Robert Shallow, master Soccard (as I think.)
No sir Iohn, it is my cozen Scilens in commission with me.
Good master Scilens, it well befits you should be of the peace.
Your good worship is welcome.
Fie this is hot weather gentlemen, have you provided me here half a dozen sufficient men?
Mary have we sir, will you sit?
Let me see them I beseech you.
Where's the roll? where's the roll? where's the roll? let me see, let me see▪ let me see, so, so, so, so, so, (so, so) yea mary sir, Ralph Mouldy let them appear as I call, let them do, so, let them do, so, let me see, where is Mouldy?
Here, and it please you.
What think you sir Iohn, a good limbde, fellow, young, strong, and of good friends.
Is thy name Mouldy?
Yea, and it please you.
'tis the more time thou wert used.
Ha, ha, ha, most excellent i'faith, things that are mouldy lack use: very singular good, infaith well said sir Iohn very well said.
I was pricked well enough before, and you could have let me alone, my old dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry, and her drudgery, you need not to have pricked me, there are other men fit to go out then I.
Go to, peace Mouldy, you shall go, Mouldy it is time you were spent.
Spent?
Peace fellow, peace, stand aside, know you where you are? for th'other sir Iohn: let me see Simon Shadow.
Yea mary, let me have him to sit under, he's like to be a cold soldier.
Where's Shadow?
Here sir.
Shadow, whose son art thou?
My mother's son sir.
Thy mother's sons like enough, and thy father's shadow, so the son of the female is the shadow of the male: it is often so indeed, but much of the father's substance.
Do you like him sir Iohn?
Shadow will serve for summer, prick him, for we have a number of shadows fill up the muster book.
Thomas Wart.
Where's he?
Here sir.
Is thy name Wart?
Yea sir.
Thou art a very ragged wart.
Shall I prick him sir Iohn?
It were superfluous, for apparel is built upon his back, and the whole frame stands upon pins▪ prick him no more.
Ha, ha, ha, you can do it sir, you can do it, I commend you well: Francis Feeble.
Here sir.
What trade art thou Feeble?
A woman's tailor sir.
Shall I prick him sir?
You may, but if he had been a man's tailor he'd a pricked you: wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy's battle, as thou hast done in a woman's petticoat.
I will do my good will sir, you can have no more.
Well said good woman's tailor, well said courageous Feeble, thou wilt be as valiant as the wrathful dove, or most magnanimous mouse, prick the woman's tailor: well M. Shallow, deep M. Shallow.
I would Wart might have gone sir.
I would thou wert a man's tailor, that thou mightst mend him and make him fit to go, I cannot put him to a private soldier, that is the leader of so many thousands, let that suffice most forcible Feeble.
It shall suffice sir.
I am bound to thee reverend Feeble, who is next?
Peter Bulcalfe o'th' green.
Yea mary, let's see Bulcalfe.
Here sir.
Fore God a likely fellow, come prick Bulcalfe till he roar again.
O Lord, good my lord captain.
What, dost thou roar before thou art pricked?
O Lord sir, I am a diseased man.
What disease hast thou?
A whoreson cold sir, a cough sir, which I caught with ringing in the King's affairs upon his coronation day sir.
Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown, we will have away thy cold, and I will take such order that thy friends shall ring for thee. Is here all?
Here is two more called than your number, you must have but four here sir, and so I pray you go in with me to dinner.
Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner: I am glad to see you, by my troth master Shallow.
O sir Iohn, do you remember since we lay all night in the windmill in saint George's field?
No more of that master Shallow.
Ha, 'twas a merry night, and is lane Nightwork alive?
She lives master Shallow.
She never could away with me.
Never never, she would always say, she could not abide master Shallow.
By the mass I could anger her too●th heart, she was then a bona roba, doth she hold her own well?
Old old master Shallow.
Nay she must be old, she cannot choose but be old, certain she's old, & had Robin night-work by old night-work, before I came to Clement's inn.
That's fifty five year ago.
Ha cousin Scilens that thou hadst seen that that this Knight and I have seen, ha sir Iohn, said I well?
We have heard the chimes at midnight M. Shallow.
That we have that we have, that we have, in faith sir Iohn we have, our watchword was Hemboys, come let's to dinner, come let's to dinner, Iesus the days that we have seen, come, come.
Good master corporate Bardolfe, stand my friend, & here's four Harry tenshillings in french crowns for you, in very truth sir,. I had as live be hanged sir as go, and yet for mine own part sir I do not care, but rather because I am unwilling, and for mine own part have a desire to stay with my friends, else sir I did not care for mine own part so much.
Go to, stand aside.
And good M. corporal captain, for my old dames sake stand my friend, she has no body to do any thing about her when I am gone, and she is old and cannot help herself, you shall have forty sir.
Go to, stand aside.
By my troth I care not, a man can die but once, we own God a death, i'll near bear a base mind, and't be my destiny: so, and't be not, so, no man's too good to serue's prince, and let it go which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the next.
Well said, thou'rt a good fellow.
Faith i'll bear no base mind.
Come sir, which men shall I have?
Four of which you please.
Sir, a word with you, I have three pound to free Mouldy and Bulcalfe.
Go to, well.
Come sir Iohn, which four will you have?
Do you choose for me.
Mary then, Mouldy, Bulcalfe, Feeble, and Sadow.
Mouldy and Bulcalfe, for you Mouldy stay at home, till you are past service: and for your part Bulcalfe, grow till you come unto it, I will none of you.
Sir Iohn, sir Iohn, do not yourself wrong, they are your likeliest men, and I would have you served with the best.
Will you tell me (master Shallow) how to choose a man? care I for the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk and big assemblance of a man: give me the spirit M. Shallow: here's Wart, you see what a ragged appearance it is, a shall charge you, and discharge you with the motion of a pewterers hammer, come off and on swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer's bucket: and this same half faced fellow Shadow, give me this man, he presents no mark to the enemy, the fo-man may with as great aim level at the edge of a penknife, and for a retreat how swiftly will this Feeble the woman's Tailor run off? O give me the spare men, and spare me the great ones, put me a caliver into Warts hand Bardolfe.
Hold Wart, travers t'has, t'has, t'has.
Come manage me your caliver: so, very well, go to, very good, exceeding good, O give me always a little lean, old chopped Ballde, shot: well said i'faith Wart, thou'rt a good scab, hold, there's a tester for thee.
He is not his craftsmaster, he doth not do it right; I remember at Mile-end-greene, when I lay at Clement's Inn, I was then sir Dagonet in Arthur's show, there was a little quiver fellow, and a would manage you his piece thus, and a would about and about, and come you in, and come you in, rah, tah, tah, would a say, bounce would a say, and away again would a go, and again would a come: I shall near see such a fellow.
These fellows wool do well M. Shallow, God keep you M. Scilens, I will not use many words with you, far you well gentlemen both, I thank you, I must a dozen mile to night: Bardolfe, give the soldiers coats.
Sir Iohn, the Lord bless you, God prosper your affairs, God send us peace at your return, visit our house, let our old acquaintance be renewed, peradventure I will with ye to the court.
Fore God would you would.
Go to, I have spoke at a word, God keep you
Far you well gentle gentlemen.
On Bardolfe, lead the men away, as I return I will fetch off these justices, I do see the bottom of justice Shallow, Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying, this same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me, of the wildness of his youth, and the feats he hath done about Turnbull street, and every third word a lie, dewer paid to the hearer than the Turks tribute, I do remember him at Clement's Inn, like a man made after supper of a cheese paring, when a was naked, he was for all the world like a forked radish with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife, a was so forlorn, that his dimensions to any thick sight were invincible, a was the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey, & the whores called him mandrake, a came over in the rearward of the fashion, and sung those tunes to the overschutcht housewives, that he heard the Carmen whistle, and swore they were his fancies or his good-nights, and now is this vices dagger become a squire, and talks as familiarly of Iohn a Gaunt, as if he had been sworn brother to him, and i'll be sworn a near saw him but once in the tyltyard, and then he burst his head for crowding among the marshals men, I saw it and told Iohn a Gaunt he beat his own name, for you might have thrust him and all his apparel into an eel-skin, the case of a triple oboe was a mansion for him a Court, and now has he land and beeves. Well▪ I'll be acquainted with him if I return, and 'tshall go hard, but i'll make him a philosophers two stones to me, if the young Dase be a bait for the old Pik●, I see no reason in the law of nature but I may snap at him, till Time shape, and there an end.
What is this forest called?
'tis Gaultree forest, and't shall please your grace.
Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth▪
To know the numbers of our enemies:
We have sent forth already.
'tis well done,
My friends and brethren (in these great affairs)
I must acquaint you, that I have received
New dated letters from Northumberland,
Their cold intent, tenure, and substance thus:
Here doth he wish his person, with such powers,
As might hold sortance with his quality,
The which he could not levy: whereupon
He is retired to ripe his growing fortunes,
To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers,
That your attempts may overlive the hazard
And fearful meeting of their opposite.
Thus do the hopes we have in him, touch ground,
And dash themselves to pieces.
Now, what news?
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form comes on the enemy,
And by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon, or near the rate of thirty thousand.
The just proportion that we gave them out,
Let us sway on, and face them in the field.
What well appointed Leader fronts us here?
I think it is my lord of Westmoreland.
Health and fair greeting from our General,
The prince lord Iohn and duke of Lancaster.
Say on my lord of Westmoreland in peace,
What doth concern your coming?
Then my L. unto your Grace do I in chief address
The substance of my speech: if that rebellion
Came like itself, in base and a abject routs,
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage,
And countenaunst by boys and beggary.
I say, if damned commotion so appear,
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You, reverend father, and these noble Lords,
Had not been here to dress the owgly form
Of base and bloody Insurrection
With your fair Honours. You (lord Archbishop)
Whose Sea is by a civil peace maintained,
Whose beard the silver hand of Peace hath touched,
Whose learning and good letters Peace hath tutored,
Whose white investments figure innocence,
The Dove, and very blessed spirit of peace.
Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself
Out of the speech of peace that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boisterous tongue of war?
Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine,
To a loud trumpet, and a point of war?
Wherefore do I this? so the question stands:
Briefly, to this end we are all diseased:
The dangers of the daie's but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the earth,
With yet appearing blood, and the examples
Of every minute's instance (present now,)
Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms,
Not to break peace or any branch of it,
But to establish here a peace indeed,
Concurring both in name and quality.
When ever yet was your appeal denied
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What peer hath been subornde to grate on you?
That you should seal this lawless bloody book
Offorgde rebellion with a seal divine,
And consecrate commotions bitter edge.
My brother General, the common wealth
To brother borne an household cruelty,
I make my quarrel in particular.
There is no need of any such redress,
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.
why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before?
And suffer the condition of these times,
To lay a heavy and unequal hand
Upon our honours.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general,
To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace,
That he will give you audience, and wherein
It shall appear that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, every thing set off
That might so much as think you enemies.
But he hath for●de us to compel this offer,
And it proceeds from policy, not love.
Mowbray, you overween to take it so:
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear:
For lo, within a ken our army lies:
Upon mine honour, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear:
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
Our armour all as strong▪ our cause the best:
Then Reason will our hearts should be as good:
Say you not then, our offer is compelled.
Well, by my will, we shall admit no parley.
That argues but the shame of your offence,
A rotten case abides no handling.
Hath the prince Iohn a full commission,
In very ample virtue of his father,
To hear, and absolutely to determine
Of what conditions we shall stand upon?
That is intended in the generals name,
I muse you make so slight a question.
Then take, my lord of Westmoreland, this schedule,
For this contains our general grievances,
Each several article herein redressed.
All members of our cause both here and hence,
That are ensinewed to this action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form,
And present execution of our wills,
To us and our purposes confined,
We come within our awful banks again,
And knit our powers to the arm of peace.
This will I show the General, please you Lords,
In sight of both our battles we may meet,
At either end in peace, which God so frame,
Or to the place of difference call the swords,
Which must decide it.
My lord, we will do so.
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.
Fear you not, that if we can make our peace,
Upon such large terms, and so absolute,
As our conditions shall consist upon,
Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
Yea but our valuation shall be such,
That every slight, and false derived cause,
Yea every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
Shall to the King taste of this action,
That were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
We shall be winnowed with so rough a wind,
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partition.
No, no, my lord, note this, the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking grievances,
For he hath found, to end one doubt by death,
Revives two greater in the heirs of life:
And therefore will he wipe his tables clean,
And keep no tell tale to his memory,
That may repeat, and history his loss,
To new remembrance: for full well he knows,
He cannot so precisely weed this land,
As his misdoubts present occasion,
His foes are so enrooted with his friends,
That plucking to unfix an enemy,
He doth unfasten so, and shake a friend,
So that this land, like an offensive wife,
That hath enraged him on to offer strokes,
As he is striking, holds his infant up,
And hangs resolved correction in the arm,
That was upreard to execution.
Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods,
On late offenders, that he now doth lack
The very instruments of chastisement.
So that his power, like to a phanglesse lion,
May offer, but not hold.
'tis very true,
And therefore be assured, my good Lord Marshall,
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our peace will like a broken limb united,
Grow stronger for the breaking.
Be it so, here is returned my lord of Westmoreland.
The prince is here at hand, pleaseth your Lordship
To meet his grace just distance tween our armies.
Your grace of York, in God's name then set forward.
Before, and greet his grace (my lord) we come.
You are well encountered here, my cousin Mowbray,
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,
And so to you Lord Hastings and to all.
My Lord of York, it better showed with you,
When that your flock assembled by the bell,
Encircled you, to hear with reverence,
Your exposition on the holy text,
That now to see you here, an iron man talking,
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
Turning the word to sword, and life to death.
That man that sits within a monarchs heart,
And ripens in the sunshine of his favour,
Would he abuse the countenance of the King:
Alack what mischiefs might he set abroach,
In shadow of such greatness? with you Lord bishop
It is even so, who hath not heard it spoken,
How deep you were within the books of God,
To us the speaker in his parliament,
To us th'imagine voice of God himself,
The very opener and intelligencer,
Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven,
And our dull workings? O who shall believe,
But you misuse the reverence of your place,
Imply the countenance and grace of heaven,
As a false favourite doth his prince's name:
In deeds dishonourable you have ta'en up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
The subjects of his substitute my father,
And both against the peace of heaven and him,
Have here upswarmd them.
Good my Lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against your father's peace,
But as I told my lord of Westmoreland,
The time misordred doth in common sense,
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form,
To hold our safety up: I sent your grace,
The parcels and particulars of our grief,
The which hath been with scorn shoved from the court,
Whereon this Hydra, son of war is borne,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep,
With grant of our most just, and right desires,
And true obedience of this madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes,
To the last man.
And though we here fall down,
We have supplies to second our attempt,
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them,
And so success of mischief shall be borne,
And heir from heir shall hold his quarrel up,
Whiles England shall have generation.
You are too shallow Hastings, much too shallow,
To ●ound the bottom of the after times.
Pleaseth your grace to answer them directly,
How far forth you do like their articles.
I like them all, and do allow them well,
And swear here by the honour of my blood,
My father's purposes have been mistook,
And some about him have too lavishly,
Wrested his meaning and authority.
My Lord, these griefs shall be with s●●●ed redressed,
Upon my soul they shall, if this may please you,
Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
As we will ours, and here between the armies,
Let's drink together friendly and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those tokens home,
Of our restored love and amity.
I take your princely word for these redresses,
I give it you, and will maintain my word,
And thereupon I drink unto your grace.
Go Captain, and deliver to the army
This news of peace, let them have pay, and part.
I know it will well please them, hie thee captain.
To you my noble lord of Westmoreland.
I pledge your grace, and if you knew what pains,
I have bestowed to breed this present peace,
You would drink freely, but my love to ye
Shall show itself more openly hereafter.
I do not doubt you.
I am glad of it,
Health to my Lord, and gentle cousin Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am on the sudden something ill.
Against ill chances men are ever merry,
But heaviness foreruns the good event.
Therefore be merry cousin, since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus, some good thing comes to morrow.
Believe me I am passing light in spirit.
So much the worse if your own rule be true.
The word of peace is rendered hark how they shout.
This had been cheerful after victory.
A peace is of the nature of a conquest,
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party loser.
Go my lord,
And let our army be discharged too,
And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains
March by us, that we may peruse the men,
We should have coaped withal.
Go, good Lord Hastings,
And ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
I trust Lords we shall lie to night together:
Now cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
The Leaders having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off until they hear you speak.
They know their duties.
My lord, our army is dispersed already,
Like youthful steers unyoakt they take their courses,
East, west, north, south, or like a school broke up,
Each hurries toward his home, and sporting place.
Good tidings my lord Hastings, for the which
I do arrest thee traitor of high treason,
And you lord Archbishop, and you lord Mowbray,
Of capital treason I attach you both.
Is this proceeding just and honourable?
Is your assembly so?
will you thus break your faith?
I pawned thee none,
I promised you redress of these same grievances
Whereof you did complain, which by mine honour
I will perform, with a most christian care.
But for you rebels, look to taste the due
Meet for rebellion:
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
Fond brought here, and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our drums, pursue the scattered stray:
God, and not we, hath safely fought to day:
Some guard this traitor to the block of death,
Treasons true bed, and yeelder up of breath.
what's your name sir, of what condition are you, and of what place?
I am a Knight sir, and my name is Coleuile of the Dale.
well then, Collevile is your name, a Knight is your degree, and your place the dale: Colevile shallbe still your name, a traitor your degree, & the dungeon your place, a place deep enough, so shall you be still Colleuile of the Dale.
Are not you sir Iohn Falstaff?
As good a man as he sir, who ere I am: do ye yield sir, or shall I sweat for you? if I do sweat, they are the drops of thy lovers, and they weep for thy death, therefore rouse up fear and trembling, and do observance to my mercy.
I think you are sir Iohn Falstaff, and in that thought yield me.
I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name and I had but a belly of any indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in Europe: my womb, my womb, my womb undoes me, here comes our General.
The heat is past, follow no further now,
Call in the powers good cousin Westmoreland.
Now Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When every thing is ended, than you come:
These tardy tricks of yours will on my life
One time or other break some gallows back.
I would be sorry my lord, but it should be thus: I never knew yet but Rebuke and Check, was the reward of Valour: do you think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet? have I in my poor and old motion the expedition of thought? I have sped hither with the very extremest inch of possibility, I have foundered ninescore and odd posts, and here travel tainted as I am, have in my pure and immaculate valour, taken sir Iohn Colleuile of the Dale, a 〈◊〉 furious Knight and valorous enemy,: but what of that 〈…〉 and yielded, that I may justly say with the ho●●● 〈…〉 there cousin, I came, saw, and overcame.
It was more of his courtesy then your deserving.
I know not, here he is, and here I yield him, and I beseech your grace let it be bookte with the rest of this days deeds, or by the Lord, I will have it in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture on the top on't, (Colevile kissing my foot) to the which course, if I be enforced, if you do not all show like guilt two pences to me, and I in the clear sky of Fame, ore-shine you as much as the full moon doth the cinders of the element, (which show like pins heads to her) believe not the word of the noble: therefore let me have right, and let Desert mount.
Thine's too heavy to mount.
Let it shine then.
Thines too thick to shine.
Let it do some thing, my good lord, that may do me good, and call it what you will.
Is thy name Collevile?
It is my Lord.
A famous rebel art thou Colleuile.
And a famous true subject took him.
I am my lord but as my betters are,
That led me hither, had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer than you have.
I know not how they sold themselves, but thou like a kind fellow gavest thyself away gratis, and I thank thee for thee.
Now, have you left pursuit?
Retraite is made, and execution stayed.
Send Collevile with his confederates
To York to present execution,
Blunt lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the court my lords,
I hear the King my father is sore sick,
Our news shall go before us to his majesty,
Which cousin you shall bear to comfort him,
And we with sober speed will follow you.
My Lord, I beseech you give me leave to go through Glostershire, and when you come to court, stand my good lord in your good report.
Far you well Falstaff, I, in my condition shall better speak of you than you deserve.
I would you had the wit 'ttwere better than your dukedom, good saith this same young sober blooded ●oy doth not love me, nor a man cannot make him laugh, but that's no marvel, he drinks no wine, there's never none of these demure boys come to any proof▪ for 〈◊〉 drink doth so ever-coole their blood, and making many 〈…〉, that they fall into a kind of male green sickness, and then when they marry▪ they give wenches, they are generally fools and cowards, which some of us should be too but for inflammation a good 〈◊〉 ●acke hath a two fold operation in it, it ascends me into the brain, dries me there all the foolish, and dull and ●rudy vapours which environ it, makes it apprehensive▪ quick, forgetive▪ full of nimble, fiery, and delectable shapes▪ which delivered over to the voice, the tongue, which is the birth; becomes excellent wit. The second property of your excellent sherris is the warming of the blood▪ which before (cold & settled) left the liver white & pale, which is the badge of pusilanimitie and cowardice: but the sherris warms it, and makes it course from the inwards to the parts extremes, it illumineth the face, which as a beacon, gives warning to all the rest of this little kingdom man to arm, and then the vital commoners, and inland petty spirits, muster me all to their captain, the heart: who great and puffed up with this retinue, doth any deed of courage: and this valour comes of sherris, so that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack (for that sets it awork) and learning a mere whoord of gold kept by a devil, till sack commences it, and sets it in act and use. Hereof comes it, that Prince Harry is valiant, for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father, he hath like lean▪ sterile, and bare land, manured, husbanded and tilld, with excellent endeavour of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris, that he is become very hot and valiant. If I had a thousand sons, the first human principle I would teach them, should be, to forswear thinpotations, and to addict themselves to sack. How now Bardolfe?
The army is discharged all, and gone.
Let them go, i'll through Glostershire, and there will I visit M. Robert Shallow Esquire▪ I have him already tempering between my finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal with him come away.
Now lords, if God doth give successful end,
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors.
We will our youth lead on to higher fields,
And draw no swords but what are sanctified:
Our navy is addressed, our power collected,
Our substitutes in absence well invested,
And every thing lies level to our wish,
Only we want a little personal strength:
And pause us till these rebels now afoot,
Come underneath the yoke of government.
Both which we doubt not, but your majesty
Shall soon enjoy.
Humphrey my son of Gloster, where is the prince your brother?
I think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.
And how accompanied?
I do not know, my lord.
Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?
No, my good lord, he is in presence here.
What would my lord and father?
Nothing but well to thee Thomas of Clarence,
How chance thou art not with the prince thy brother?
He loves thee and thou dost neglect him, Thomas,
Thou hast a better place in his affection
Then all thy brothers, cherish it my boy:
And noble offices thou mayst effect
Of mediation after I am dead,
Between his greatness and thy other brethren:
Therefore omit him not, blunt not his love,
Nor lose the good advantage of his grace,
By seeming cold, or careless of his will,
For he is gracious if he be obseru'de,
He hath a tear for pity, and a hand,
Open as day for meeting charity,
Yet notwithstanding being incensed, he is flint.
As humorous as winter, and as sudden
As flaws congealed in the spring of day:
His temper therefore must be well observed,
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclined to mirth:
But being moody, give him time and scope,
Till that his passions, like a whale on ground
Confound themselves with working learn this Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
That the united vessel of their blood,
(Mingled with venom of suggestion,
As force perforce, the age will power it in,)
Shall never leak, though it do work as strong,
As Aconitum, or rash gunpowder.
I shall observe him with all care and love.
Why art thou not at Winsore with him Thomas?
He i● not there to day he dines in London.
And how accompanied?
With Poynes and other his continual followers.
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds,
And he the noble image of my youth,
Is overspread with them, therefore my grief
Stretches itself beyond the hour of death:
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape,
In forms imaginary, th'unguided days,
And rotten times that you shall look upon,
When I am sleeping with my ancestors:
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
When rage and hot blood are his counsellors,
When means and lavish manners meet together,
Oh with what wings shall his affections she,
Towards fronting peril and opposed decay?
My gracious Lord, you look beyond him quite,
The prince but studies his companions,
Like a strange tongue wherein to gain the language:
'tis needful that the most immodest word,
Be looked upon and learned, which once attained,
Your highness knows comes to no further use,
But to be known and hated: so, like gross terms,
The prince will in the perfectness of time,
Cast off his followers, and their memory
Shall as a pattern, or a measure live,
By which his grace must meet the lives of other,
Turning past-euils to advantages.
'tis seldom when the Bee doth leave her comb,
In the dead carrion: who here▪ Westmoreland?
Health to my sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that that I am to deliver,
Prince Iohn your son doth kiss your grace's hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop, Scroop, Pastings, and all,
Are brought to the correction of your law:
There is not now a rebels sword vnsheathd,
But Peace puts forth her olive every where,
The manner how this action hath been borne,
Here at more leisure may your highness read,
With every course in his particular.
O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird,
Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
The lifting up of day: look here's more news.
From enemy's heavens▪ keep your majesty,
And when they stand against you▪ may they fall
As those that I am come to tell you of:
The Earl Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolfe,
With a great power of English, and of Scots,
Are by the sheriff of Yorkshire overthrown,
The manner, and true order of the fight,
This packet, please it you, contains at large.
And wherefore should these good news make me sick?
Will Fortune never come with both hands full.
But wet her fair words still in foulest terms?
She either gives a stomach, and no food,
Such are the poor in health: or else a feast,
And takes away the stomach, such are the rich
That have abundance, and enjoy it not:
I should rejoice now at this happy news,
Aud now my sight failes, and my braine is giddy,
O me, come near me, now I am much ill.
Comfort your majesty.
O my royal father!
My sovereign Lord, cheer up yourself, look up.
Be patiented princes, you do know these fits
Are with his highness very ordinary.
Stand from him, give him air, he'll strait be well.
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs,
Th●incessant care and labour of his mind,
Hath wrought the Mure that should confine it in,
So thin that life looks through.
The people fear me, for they do observe
Vnfathered heirs, and loathly births of nature,
The seasons change their manners, as the year
Had found some months a sleep, and leapt them over.
The river hath thrice flowed, no ebb between,
And the old folk, (Times doting chronicles,)
Say, it did so a little time before
That our great grandsire Edward, sickt and died.
Speak lower, princes, for the King recovers.
This apoplexi will certain be his end.
I pray you take me up and bear me hence,
Into some other chamber.
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends,
Unless some dull and favourable hand
Will whisper music to my weary spirit.
Call for the music in the other room.
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
His eye is hollow, and he changes much.
Less noise, less noise.
Who saw the duke of Clarence?
I am here brother, full of heaviness.
How now, rain within doors, and none abroad?
How doth the King?
Exceeding ill.
Herd he the good news yet? tell it him.
He altered much upon the hearing it,
If he be sick with joy, he'll recover without physic.
Not so much noise my Lords, sweet prince, speak low, the King your father is disposed to sleep.
Let us withdraw into the other room.
Wilt please your Grace to go along with us?
No, I will sit and watch here by the King.
Why doth the Crown he there upon his pillow,
Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
O polished perturbation! golden care!
That keep'st the ports of Slumber open wide
To many a watchful night, sleep with it now!
Yet not so sound, and half so deeply sweet,
As he whose brow (with homely biggen bound)
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich armour worn in heat of day,
That scaldst with safety (by his gates of breath)
There lies a dowlny feather which stirs not,
Did he suspire, that light and weightless dowlne
Perforce must move my gracious lord my father:
This sleep is sound indeed, this is a sleep,
That from this golden Rigoll hath divorced
So many English Kings, thy dew from me,
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness
Shall (O dear father) pay thee plenteously:
My due from thee is this imperial Crown,
Which as immediate from thy place and blood,
Derives itself to me: lo where it sits,
Which God shall guard, and put the world's whole strength
Into one giant arm, it shall not force,
This lineal honour from me, this from thee
Will I to mine leave, as 'tis left to me.
Warwick, Gloucester, Clarence.
Doth the King call?
What would your Majesty?
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
We left the prince my brother here my liege, who undertook to sit and watch by you.
The prince of Wales, where is he? let me see him: he is not here.
This door is open, he is gone this way.
He came not through the chamber where we staid.
Where is the Crown? who took it from my pillow?
When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
The Prince hath ta'en it hence go seek him out:
Is he so hasty, that he doth suppose my sleep my death?
Find him, my lord of Warwick, chide him hither.
This part of his conjoines with my disease,
And helps to end me: see, sons, what things you are,
How quickly nature falls into revolt,
When gold becomes her object?
For this, the foolish over-careful fathers
Have broke their sleep with thoughts,
Their brains with care, their bones with industry:
For this they have engrossed and piled up,
The cankered heaps of strange atcheeved gold:
For this they have been thoughtful to invest
Their sons with arts and martial exercises,
When like the be tolling from every flower,
Our thigh, packed with wax our mouths with honey,
We bring it to the hive: and like the bees,
Are murdered for our pains, this bitter taste
Yields his engrossements to the ending father,
Now where is he that will not stay so long,
Till his friend sickness hands determined me.
My Lord, I found the prince in the next room,
Washing with kindly tears, his gentle cheeks,
With such a deep demeanour in great sorrow,
That tyranny, which never quaffed but blood,
Would by beholding him, have washed his knife,
With gentle eie-drops, he is coming hither
But wherefore did he take away the crown?
E●ewhere he comes, come hither to me Harry,
Depart the chamber, leave us here alone.
I never thought to hear you speak again.
Thy wish was father (Harry,) to that thought
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee,
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair,
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours▪
Before thy hour be ripe! O foolish youth,
Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee,
Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity
Is held from falling with so weak a wind,
That it will quickly drop: my day is dim,
Thou hast stolen that, which after some few hours.
Were thine, without offence, and at my death▪
Thou hast sealed up my expectation,
Thy life did manifest thou lov'dst me not,
And thou wilt have me die, assured of it,
Thou hidst a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,
Whom thou hast whetted on thy stony heart,
To stab at half an hour of my life.
What, canst thou not forbear me halfe an hour?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself,
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear,
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead:
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
Be drops of Balm to sanctify thy head,
Only compowd me with forgotten dust.
Give that which gave thee life, unto the worms,
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
For now a time is come to mock at Form:
Harry the fift is crowned, up vanity,
Down royal state, all you sage counsellors, hence,
And to the English Court assemble now
From every region, apes of idleness:
Now neighbour confines, purge you of your scum
Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance,
Revel the night rob, murder, and commit
The oldest sins, the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more.
England shall double gild his treble gilt,
England shall give him office honour, might:
For the fift Harry, from curbed licence, plucks
The mussel of restraint, and the wild dog
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
O my poor kingdom! sick with civil blows:
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
O thou wilt be a wilderness again,
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants.
O pardon me, my liege, but for my tears,
The moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestald this dear and deep rebuke,
Ere you with grief had spoke, and I had heard
The course of it so far: there is your crown:
And he that wears the crown immortally,
Long guard it yours: if I affect it more,
Then as your honour, and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise,
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit,
Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending,
God witness with me. When I here came in,
And found no course of breath within your majesty,
How cold it struck my heart! if I do feign,
O let me in my present wildness die,
And never live to show th'incredulous world,
The noble change that I have purposed.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
I spoke unto this crown as having fence,
And thus upbraided it: the care on thee depending,
Hath fed upon the body of my father,
Therefore thou best of gold, art worse than gold,
Other less fine, in karrat more precious,
Preserving life in medicine potable:
But thou, most fine, most honoured, most renowned,
Hast eat thy bearer up: thus my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head,
To try with it as, with an enemy,
That had before my face murdered my father,
The quarrel of a true inheritor,
But if it did infect my blood with joy,
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride,
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine,
Did with the least affection of a welcome,
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God for ever keep it from my head,
And make me as the poorest vassal is,
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it.
God put in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
Pleading so wisely in excuse of it:
Come hither Harry, sit thou by my bed,
And hear (I think) the very latest counsel
That ever I shall breath. God knows (my son)
By what bypaths, and indirect crooked ways,
I met this crown, and I myself know well,
How troublesome it sat upon my head:
To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
Better opinion, better confirmation,
For all the soil of the achievement goes,
With me into the earth, it seemed in me,
But as an honour snatched with boisterous hand,
And I had many living to upbraid
My gain of it, by their assistances,
Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
Wounding supposed peace: all these bold fears
Thou seest with peril I have answered:
For all my reign hath been but as a Scene,
Acting that argument: and now my death
Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased,
Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort.
So thou the garland wear'st successively,
Yet though thou stand'st more sure than I could do,
Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green,
And all thy friends which thou must make thy friends,
Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out:
By whose fell working I was first advanced,
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear
To be again displacde: which to avoid,
I cut them off, and had a purpose, now
To lead out many to the Holy Land,
Lest rest, and lying still, might make them look,
Too near unto my state: therefore, my Harry,
Be it thy course to busy giddy minds
With foreign quarrels, that action hence borne out,
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so,
That strength of speech is utterly denied me:
How I came by the crown, O God forgive,
And grant it may with thee in true peace live.
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me,
Then plain and right must my possession be,
Which I with more than with a common pain,
'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.
Look, look, here comes my Iohn of Lancaster.
Health, peace and happiness to my royal father.
Thou bringst me happiness and peace son Iohn,
But health (alack) with youthful wings is flown
From this bare withered tru●ke: upon thy sight,
My worldly business makes a period:
Where is my lord of Warwick?
My Lord of Warwick.
Doth any name particular belong
Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?
'tis called Ierusalem, my noble Lord.
Laud be to God, even there my life must end.
It hath been prophecide to me many years,
I should not die, but in Ierusalem,
Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land:
But bear me to that chamber, there i'll lie,
In that Ierusalem shall Harry die.
By cock and pie sir, you shall not away to night, what Davy I say?
You must excuse me master Robert Shallow.
I will not excuse you, you shall not be excused, excuses shall not be admitted, there is no excuse shall serve, you shall not be excused: why Dauy.
Here sir.
Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see Davy, let me see Davy, let me see, yea mary William Cook, bid him come hither, sir Iohn, you shall not be excused.
Mary sir thus, those precepts can not be served, and again sir, shall we sow the hade land with wheat?
With red wheat Davy, but for William Cook are there no young pigeons?
Yes sir, here is now the Smith's note for shoeing and plow-yrons.
Let it be cast and paid: sir Iohn, you shall not be excused.
Now sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had: and sir, do you mean to stop any of William's wages, about the sack he lost at Hunkly Fair?
A shall answer it: some pigeons Davy, a couple of short legged hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little tinie Kick-shawes, tell william Cook.
Doth the man of war stay all night sir?
Yea Davy, I will use him well, a friend i'th' court is better than a penny in purse: use his men well Davy, for they are arrant knaves, and will backbite.
No worse than they are backbitten sir, for they have marvels foul linen.
Well conceited Davy, about thy business Dauy.
I beseech you sir to countenance William Visor of Woncote against Clement Perkes a'th' hill.
There is many complaints Davy against that Visor, that Visor is an arrant knave on my knowledge.
I grant your worship that he is a knave sir: but yet God forbidden sir, but a knave should have some countenance at his friend's request, an honest man sir is able to speak for himself, when a knave is not: I have served your worship truly sir this eight years and I cannot once, or twice in a quarter bear out a knave against an honest man, I have little credit with your worship: the knave is mine honest friend sir, therefore I beseech you let him be countenaunst.
Go to I say ●e shall have no wrong, look about Davy: where are you sir John? come, come, come, off with your boots, give me your hand master Bardolfe.
I am glad to see your worship.
I thank thee with my heart kind master Bardolfe, and welcome my tall fellow, come sir Iohn.
I'll follow you good master Robert Shallow: Bardolfe, look to our horses: if I were sawed into quantities, I should make four dozen of such berded hermits staves as master Shallow: it is a wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men's spirits, and his, they, by observing him, do bear themselves like foolish justices: he, by conversing with them, is turned into a lustice-like servingman, their spirits are so married in conjunction, with the participation of society, that they flock together in consent, like so many wild-geese. If I had a suit to master Shallow, I would humour his men with the imputation, of being near their master: if to his men, I would curry with master Shallow, that no man could better command his servants. It is certain, that either wise bearing, or ignorant carriage is caught, as men take diseases one of another: therefore let men take heed of their company. I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow, to keep prince Harry in continual laughter, the wearing out of six fashions, which is four terms, or two actions, and a shall laugh without interuallums. O it is much that a lie, with a slight oath, and a jest, with a sad brow, will do with a fellow that never had the ache in his shoulders: O you shall see him laugh till his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up.
Sir Iohn.
I come master Shallow. I come master Shallow.
How now, my lord chief justice, whither away?
How doth the King?
Exceeding well, his cares are now all ended.
I hope not dead.
he's walked the way of nature,
And to our purposes he lives no more.
I would his Majesty had called me with him:
The service that I truly did his life,
Hath left me open to all injuries.
Indeed I think the young King loves you not.
I know he doth not, and do arm myself
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me,
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.
Hear come the heavy issue of dead Harry:
O that the living Harry had the temper
Of he, the worst of these three gentlemen!
How many Nobles than should hold their places,
That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort?
O God, I fear all will be overturnd.
Good morrow cousin Warwick, good morrow.
Good morrow cousin.
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.
We do remember, but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk.
Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy.
Peace be with us, lest we be heavier.
O good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed,
And I dare swear you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own.
Though no man be assured what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation,
I am the forier, would 'ttwere otherwise.
Well, you must now speak sir Iohn Falstaff fair,
Which swims against your stream of quality.
Sweet princes, what I did, I did in honour,
Led by th●impartiall conduct of my soul.
And never shall you see that I will beg
A ragged and forestald remission,
If truth and upright innocency fail me.
I'll to the King my master that is dead,
And tell him who hath sent me after him▪
Here comes the Prince.
Good morrow, and God save your majesty.
This new and gorgeous garment Majesty
Sits not so easy on me, as you think:
Brothers, you mixed your sadness with some fear,
This is the English, not the Turkish court.
Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,
But Harry Harry: yet be sad, good brothers,
For by my faith it very well becomes you:
Sorrow so royally in you appears,
That I will deeply put the fashion on,
And wear it in my heart: why then be sad.
But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
Then a joint burden laid upon us all,
For me, by heaven (I bid you be assured)
I'll be your father, and your brother too,
Let me but bear your love, I'll bear your cares:
Yet weep that Harry's dead, and so will I,
But Harry lives, that shall convert those tears
By number into hours of happiness.
We hope no otherwise from your majesty.
You all look strangely on me, and you most▪
You are I think assured I love you not.
I am assured, if I be measured rightly,
Your majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
No? how might a prince of my great hopes forget,
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison,
Th'▪ immediate heir of England? was this easy?
May this be washed in lethy and forgotten?
I than did use the person of your father,
The image of his power lay then in me,
And in th'administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the common wealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgement,
Whereon, as an offendor to your father,)
I gave bold way to my authority,
And did commit you: if the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at nought?
To pluck down justice from your awful bench?
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword,
That guards the peace and safeve of your person?
Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image,
And mock your workings in a second body?
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours,
Be now the father, and propose a son,
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold yourself so by a son disdained:
And then imagine me taking your part,
And in your power soft silencing your son,
After this cold considerance sentence me,
And as you are a King, speak in your state,
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.
You are right justice, and you weigh this well,
Therefore still bear the Balance and the Sword,
And I do wish your honours may increase,
Till you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you, and obey you as I did:
So shall I live to speak my father's words,
Happy am I that have a man so bold,
That dares do justice on my proper son:
And not less happy, having such a son,
That would deliver up his greatness so,
Into the hands of justice you did commit me:
For which I do commit into your hand,
Th'unstained sword that you have used to bear,
With this remembrance, that you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit,
As you have done 'gainst me: there is my hand,
You shall be as a father to my youth,
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear▪
And I will stoop and humble my intents,
To your well practizde wise directions.
And princes all, believe me I beseech you,
My father is gone wild into his grave:
For in his tomb lie my affections,
And with his spirits sadly I survive,
To mock the expectation of the world,
To frustrate prophecies, and to race out,
Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming, the tide of blood in me
Hath proudly slowd in vanity till now:
Now doth it turn, and ebb back to the sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods,
And flow henceforth in formal majesty.
Now call we our high court of parliament,
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel,
That the great body of our state may go,
In equal rank with the best governed Nation,
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be,
As things acquainted and familiar to us,
In which you father shall have foremost hand:
Our coronation done, we will accite,
(As I before remembered) all our state,
And (God consigning to my good intents,)
No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
God shorten Harry's happy life one day.
Nay you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour we will eat a last years pippin of mine own graffing, with a dish of caraways and so forth: come cousin Scilens, and then to bed.
Fore God you have here goodly dwelling, and rich.
Barren, barren, barren, beggars all, beggars all sir Iohn, mary good air: spread Davy, spread Davy, well said Dauy.
This Davy serves you for good uses, he is your serving-man, and your husband.
A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet sir Iohn: by the mass I have drunk too much sack at supper: a good varlet: now sit down, now sit down, come cousin.
A sirrah quoth a, we shall do nothing but eat and make good cheer and praise God for the merry year, when flesh is cheap and females dear, and lusty lads roam here and there so merely, and ever among so merrily.
There's a merry heart, good M. Silens i'll give you a health for that anon.
Give master Bardolfe some wine, Dauy.
Sweet sir sit, i'll be with you anon, most sweet sir sit, master Page good master Page sit: proface, what you want in meat, we'll have in drink, but you must bear, the heart's al.
Be merry master Bardolfe, and my little soldier there, be merry.
Be merry, be merry, my wife has all, for women are shrew's both short and tall, 'tis merry in hall when beards wags all, and welcome merry shrovetide, be merry, be merry.
I did not think master Scilens had been a man of this metal.
Who I? I have been merry twice and once ere now.
There's a dish of Lether-coates for you.
Davy?
Your worship: I'll be with you strait, a cup of wine sir.
A cup of wine that's brisk and fine, and drink unto the leman mine, and a merry heart lives long a.
Well said master Scilens.
And we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet a'th' night.
Health and long life to you master Scilens.
Fill the cup, and let it come, i'll pledge you a mile too th' bottom.
Honest Bardolfe, welcome, if thou want'st any thing, and wilt not call, be shrew thy heart, welcome my little tiny thief, and welcome indeed too, I'll drink to master Bardolfe, and to all the cavaleroes about London.
I hope to see London once ere I die.
And I might see you there Davy!
By the mass you'll crack a quart together, ha will you not master Bardolfe?
Yea sir, in a pottle pot.
By God's liggens I thank thee, the knave will stick by thee, I can assure thee that a will not out, a 'tis true bred!
And i'll stick by him sir.
Why there spoke a King: lack nothing, be merry, look who's at door there ho, who knocks?
Why now you have done me right.
Do me right, and dub me Knight, samingo●ist not so?
'tis so.
Is't so, why then say an old man can do somewhat.
And t please your worship, there's one Pistol come from the court with news.
From the Court? let him come in, how now Pistol?
Sir Iohn God save you.
What wind blew you hither Pistol?
Not the ill wind which blows no man to good: sweet Knight, thou art now one of the greatest men in this Realm.
Birlady I think a b●, but goodman Puff of Barson.
Puff? Puff i'th' thy teeth, most recreant coward, base▪ sir Iohn, I am thy Pistol and thy friend, and helter skelter, have I road to thee, and tidings do I bring, and lucky joys, and golden times, and happy news of price.
I pray thee now deliver them like a man of this world.
A footre for the world and worldlings base, I speak of Africa and golden joys.
O base Assyrian Knight! what is thy news? let King Covetua know the truth thereof.
And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and Iohn.
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons? and shall good news be baffled? then Pistol lay thy head in Furies lap.
Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.
Why then lament therefore.
Give me pardon sir, if sir you come with news from the court, I take it there's but two ways, either to utter them, or conceal them, I am sir under the King in some authority.
Under which King, Bezonian? speak, or die.
Under King Harry.
Harry the fourth, or fift?
Harry the fourth.
A fowtre for thine office: sir Iohn, thy tender lambkin now is King: Harry the fifts the man: I speak the truth: when Pistol lies, do this, and fig me, like the bragging spaniard.
What is the old King dead?
As nail in door, the things I speak are just.
Away Bardolfe, saddle my horse, M. Robert Shallow, choose what office thou wilt in the land, 'tis thine: Pistol, I will double charge thee with dignities.
O joyful day! I would not take a Knight for my fortune.
What? I do bring good news.
Carry master Scilens to bed: master Shallow, my lord Shallow, be what thou wilt, I am fortune's steward, get on thy boots, we'll ride all night: o sweet Pistol, away Bardolf, come Pistol, utter more to me, and withal, devise something to do thyself good, boot, boot master Shallow, I know the young King is sick for me: let us take any man's horses, the laws of England are at my commandment, blessed are they that have been my friends, and woe to my Lord chief justice.
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also: where is the life that late I led, say they, why here it is, welcome these pleasant days.
No, thou arrant knave, I would to God that I might die, that I might have thee hanged, thou hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.
The Constables have delivered her over to me, and she shall have whipping cheer I warrant her, there hath been a man or two killed about her.
Nut-hooke, Nut-hooke, you lie, come on, I'll tell thee what, thou damned tripe visaged rascal, and the child I go with do miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou paper-facde villain.
O the Lord, that sir Iohn were come! I would make this a bloody day to some body: but I pray God the fruit of her womb miscarry.
If it do, you shall have a dozzen of cushions again, you have but eleven now: come, I charge you both go with me, for the man is dead that you and Pistol beat amongst you.
I'll tell you what, you thin man in a censor, I will have you as sound swinged for this, you blue bottle rogue, you filthy famished correctioner, if you be not swinged, I'll forswear half kirtles.
Come, come, you she Knight-arrant, come.
O God, that right should thus overcome might! well, of sufferance comes ●ase.
Come you rogue, come bring me to a justice.
I come, you starved bloodhound.
Goodman death, goodman bones.
Thou Atomy, thou.
Come you thin thing, come you rascal.
Very well.
Stand here by me master Shallow, I will make the King do you grace, I will leer upon him as a comes by, and do but mark the countenance that he will give me.
God bless thy lungs good Knight.
Come here Pistol, stand behind me. O if I had had time to have made new liveries: I would have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you, but 'tis no matter, this poor show doth better, this doth infer the zeal I had to see him.
It doth so.
It shows my earnestness of affection.
It doth so.
My devotion.
It doth, it doth, it doth.
As it were to ride day & night, and not to deliberate, not to remember, not to have patience to shift me.
It is best certain: but to stand stained with travail, and sweeting with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else, putting 〈◊〉 affairs else in oblivion, as if there were nothing else to be done, but to see him.
'tis semper idem, for, obsque hoc nihil est, 'tis in every part.
'tis so indeed.
My Knight, I will inflame thy noble liver, and make thee rage, thy Dol, and Helen of thy noble thoughts, is in base durance, and contagious prison, halde thither by most mechanical, and dirty hand: rouse up revenge from Ebon den, with fell Alectoesnake, for Doll is in: Pistol speaks nought but truth.
I will deliver her.
There roared the sea, and trumpet Clang or sounds.
God save thy grace King Hall, my royal Hall.
The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal ●mpe of feign.
God save thee, my sweet boy.
My Lord chief justice, speak to that vain man.
Have you your wits? know you what 'tis you speak?
My King my Ioue, I speak to thee, my heart.
I know thee not old man, fall to thy prayers,
How ill white heirs becomes a fool and jester,
I have long dreamt of such a kind of man,
So surfet-sweld, so old, and so profane:
But being awaked, I do despise my dream,
Make less thy body (hence) and more thy grace,
Leave gormandizing know the grave doth gape
For thee, thrice wider then for other men,
Reply not to me with a foole-borne jest,
Presume not that I am the thing I was,
For God doth know, so shall the world perceive,
That I have turned away my former self,
So will I those that kept me company:
When thou dost hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots:
Till than I banish thee on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
Not to come near our person by ten mile:
For competence of life, I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evils,
And as we hear you do reform yourselves,
We will according to your strengths and qualities,
Give you advancement. Be it your charge, my lord,
To see performed the tenure of my word: set on.
Master Shallow I owe you a thousand pound.
Yea mary sir Iohn, which I beseech you to let me have home with me.
That can hardly be, master Shallow: do not you grieve at this, I shall be sent for in private to him, look you, he must seem thus to the world: fear not your advauncements, I will be the man yet that shall make you great.
I cannot perceive how, unless you give me your doublet, and stuff me out with straw: I beseech you good sir Iohn let me have five hundred of my thousand.
Sir I will be as good as my word, this that you heard was but a colour.
A colour that I fear you will die in sir Iohn.
Fear no colours, go with me to dinner:
Come lieutenant Pistol, come Bardolfe.
I shall be sent for soon at night.
Go carry sir Iohn Falstalfe to the Fleet,
Take all his company along with him.
My lord, my lord.
I cannot now speak, I will hear you soon, take them away.
Si fortuname tormenta spero contenta.
I like this fair proceeding of the Kings,
He hath intent his wont followers
Shall all be very well provided for,
But all are banished till their conversations
Appear more wise and modest to the world.
And so they are.
The King hath called his parliament my lord.
He hath.
I will lay odds, that ere this year expire,
We bear our civil swords and native fire,
As far as France, I heard a bird so sing,
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the King:
Come, will you hence?
First my fear then my curtsy, last my speech. My fear, is your displeasure, my curtsy, my duty, & my speech, to beg your pardons: if you look for a good speech now, you undo me, for what I have to say is of mine own making, and what indeed (I should say) will (I doubt) prove mine own marring: but to the purpose, and so to the venture. Be it known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the end of a displeasing play, to pray your patience for it, and to promise you a better: I meant indeed to pay you with this, which if like an ill venture it come unluckily home, I break, and you my gentle creditors lose, here I promised you I would be, and here I commit my body to your mercies, bate me some, and I will pay you some, and (as most debtors do) promise you infinitely: and so I kneel down before you; but indeed, to pray for the Queen.
If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will you command me to use my legs? And yet that were but light payment, to dance out of your debt, but a good conscience will make any possible satisfaction, and so would I: all the Gentlewomen here have forgiven me, if the Gentlemen will not, than the Gentlemen do not agree with the Gentlewomen, which was never seen in such an assembly.
One word more I beseech you, if you be not too much cloyed with fat meat, our humble Author will continue the story, with sir Iohn in it, and make you merry with fair Katherine of France, where (for any thing I know) Falstaff shall die of a sweat▪ unless already a be killed with your hard opinions; for Olde-castle died Martyr, and this is not the man: my tongue is weary, when my legs are too, I will bid you, good night.