IF profit may grow, most Christian audience.
By knowledge of things, which are 〈…〉,
And here for a time. Of much more 〈…〉
Advantage might spring, by the ser 〈…〉 ses heavenly.
As those matters are, that the Gospel specify.
Without whose knowledge, no man to the truth 〈…〉
Nor ever attain, to the life perpetual.
For he that knoweth not, the living God eter〈…〉
The father, the son, and also the holy Ghost,
And what Christ suffered, for redemption of us all▪
What he commanded, and taught in every coast.
And what he forbade. That man must needs be lost.
And clean secluded, from the faithful chosen sort.
In the heavens above, to his most high dysconfo 〈…〉
You therefore (good friends) I lovyngel 〈…〉 〈…〉
To way such matters, as will be uttered h 〈…〉
Of whom ye may lo●e, to have no tryfelin 〈…〉
In fantasies feigned, nor such life gaudying,
But the things that shall, your inward stoma 〈…〉
To rejoice in God, for your justification,
And alone in Christ, to hope for your salvation.
Yea, first ye shall have, the eternal generation.
Of Christ like as Iohan, in his first chapt●● write▪
And consequently, of man the first creation,
The abuse and fall, through his first oversight,
And the raise again, through God's high grace & myg 〈…〉
By promises first, which shall be declared all,
Then by his own son, the worker principal.
After that Adam, bywayleth here his fall,
God will show mercy, to every generation.
And to his kingdom, of his great goodness call,
His elected spouse, or faithful congregation,
shall apere, by open protestation,
from Christ's birth, shall to his death conclude.
ne that thereof, will show the certitude,
IN the beginning, before the heavens were create,
In me and of me, was my son sempyternall.
With the holy Ghost, in one degree or estate,
Of the high Godhead, to me the father coequal.
his my son was, with me one God essential,
Without separation, at any time from me.
God he is, of equal dignity.
the beginning, my son hath ever be,
s father, in one essential being.
e create, by him in yche degree,
earth, and have their diverse working.
power, was never made any thing,
wrought. But through his ordinance,
e his strength, and whole continuance.
him is the life, and the just recoverance,
Adam and his, which nought but death deserved.
And this life to men, is an high perseverance,
Or a light of faith, whereby they shall be saved.
And this light shall shine, among the people darkened,
With unfaithfulness: Yet shall they not with him take.
but of wilful heart, his liberal grace forsake.
Which will compel me, against man for to make,
In my displeasure. And send plagues of correction,
Most grievous and sharp, his wanton lusts to slake,
By water and fire, by sickness and infection.
Of pestilent sores, molesting his complexion
By troublous war, by dearth and painful fearsenesse,
And after this life, by an extreme heaviness,
I well first begin, with Adam for his lewdness,
Which for an apple, neglected my commandment.
He shall continue, in labour for his rashness,
His only sweat shall, provide his food and raiment.
Yea, yet must he have, a greater punishment.
Most terrible death, shall bring him to his end.
To teach him how he, his lord God. shall offend.
Merciful father, thy pitiful grace extend,
To me careful wretch, which have me sore abused.
Thy precept breaking. O lord, I mind to amend,
If thy great goodness, would now have me excused,
Most heavenly maker, let me not be refused,
Nor taste from thy sight, for one poor sinful cr 〈…〉
Alas I am frail, my whole kind is but slime▪
I wot it is so, yet art thou no less faulty,
Than thou hardnest been made, of matter much more worthy,
I gave the reason, and wit to understand,
The good from the evil. And not to take on hand,
Of a brainless mind, the thing which I forbade the.
Soch heavy fortune, hath chiefly chanced me,
For that I was left, to mine own liberty.
Then thou art blameless, and the fault thou layest to me?
Nay, all I ascribe, to my own imbecility.
No fault in the lord, but in my infirmity,
And want of respect, in such gifts as thou gavest me.
For that I put thee, at thine own liberty,
Thu oughtest my goodness, to have in more regard.
Avoid it I can not, thou layest it to me so hard.
Lord now I perceive, what power is in man,
And strength of himself, when thy sweet grace is absent.
He must needs but fall, do he the best he can,
And danger himself, as appeareth evident.
For I sinned not, so long as thou wert present.
But when thou wert gone, I fell to sin by and by,
And the disposed. Good lord I axe the mercy.
Thu shalt die for it, with all thy posterity.
fault good lord, avenge not thyself on me.
but a worm, or a fleshly vanity.
I say thou shalt die, with thy whole posterity.
Yet mercy sweet lord, if any mercy may be.
I am immutable, I may change no decree.
Thu shalt die (I say) without any remedy.
Yet gracious father, extend to me thy mercy,
And throw not away, the work which thou hast create,
To thine own Image, But avert from me thy hate.
But art thou sorry, from bottom of thy heart?
Thy displeasure is, to me most heavy smart.
Than will I tell thee, what thou shalt stick unto,
Life to recover, and my good favour also.
Tell it me sweet lord, that I may thereafter go.
This is my covenant, to the and all thy offspring.
For that thou hast been, deceived by the serpent,
I will put hatred, betwixt him for his doing,
And the woman kind. They shall hereafter dissent.
His seed with her seed, shall never have agreement▪
Her seed shall press down, his head unto the ground,
Slay his suggestions, and his whole power confound,
Cleave to this promise, with all thy inward power,
firmly enclose it, in thy remembrance fast.
Fold it in thy faith, with full hope day and hour,
And thy salvation, it will be at the last.
That seed shall clear thee, of all thy wickedness past,
And procure thy peace, with most high grace in my sigh,
See thou trust to it, and hold not the matter light.
Sweet lord the promise, that thyself here hath made me,
Of thy mere goodness, and not of my deserving,
In my faith I trust, shall so established be,
By help of thy grace, that it shall be remaining,
So long as I shall, have here continuing,
And show it I will, to my posterity,
That they in like case, have thereby felicity,
For a closing up, take yet one sentence with the.
At thy pleasure lord, all things might ever be,
For that my promise, may have the deeper effect,
In the faith of thee, and all thy generation.
Take this sign with it, as a seal thereto connect,
Creep shall the Serpent, for his abomination.
The woman shall sorrow, in painful propagation.
Like as thou shalt find, this true in outward working.
So think the other, though it be an hidden thing.
Incessant praising, to the most heavenly lord,
For this thy succour, and undeserved kindness.
Thu bindest me in heart, thy gracious gifts to record,
And to bear in mind, now after my heaviness,
The brute of thy name, with inward joy and gladness,
Thu disdainest not, as weal appeareth this day,
To fetch to thy fold, thy first sheep going a stray.
Most mighty maker, thou castest not yet away,
Thy sinful servant, which hath done most offence.
It is not thy mind, for ever I should decay,
But thou reservest me, of thy benevolence,
And hast provided, for me a recompense,
By thy appointment, like as I have received,
In thy strong promise, here openly pronounced,
This goodness dear lord, of me is undeserved,
I so declining, from thy first institution,
At so light motions. To one that thus hath swerved,
What a lord art thou, to give such retribution?
I damnable wretch, deserved execution,
Of terrible death, without all remedy,
And to be put out, of all good memory.
I am enforced, to rejoice here inwardly,
An imp though I be, of hell, death, and damnation,
Through my own working. For I consider thy mercy.
And pitiful mind, for my whole generation.
It is thou sweet lord, that workest my salvation,
And my recover. Therefore of a congruence,
From hens thou must have, my heart and obedience.
Thought I be mortal, by reason of my offence,
And shall die the death, like as God hath appointed.
Of this am I sure, through his high influence,
At a certain day, again to be revived.
From ground of my heart, this shall not be removed.
I have it in faith, and therefore I will sing,
This Anthem to him, that my salvation shall bring.
Oeternal sapience, that procedest from the mouth of highest, reaching fourth with a great power from the beg 〈…〉 ning to the end, with heavenly sweetness disposing and creatures, come now and instruct us the true way of thy godly prudence.
I have been moved, to strike man diversly,
Sens I left Adam, in this same earthly mansion.
For whye he hath done, to me displeasures many,
And will not amend, his life in any condition.
No respect hath he, to my word nor monition.
But doth what him lust, without discrete advisement,
And will in no wise, take mine advertisement.
Cain hath slain Abel, his brother an innocent,
Whose blood from the earth, doth call to me for vengeance
My children with men's, so carnally consent,
That their vain working, is unto me much grievance.
Mankind is but flesh, in his whole dalliance.
All vice increaseth, in him continually,
Nothing he regardeth, to walk unto my glory.
My heart abhorreth, his wilful misery,
His cankered malice, his cursed covetousness,
His 〈◊〉 lecherous, his vengeable tyranny,
merciful mourther, and other ungodliness.
●yll destroy him, for his outragyousnesse.
and not him only, but all that on earth do steer,
for it repenteth me, that ever I made them here.
Most gentle maker, with his frailness somewhat bear
Man is thy creature, thyself can not say nay.
Though thou punish him, to put him somewhat in fear,
His fault to knowledge, yet seek not his decay.
Thu mayest reclaim him, though he goeth now astray,
And bring him again, of thy abundant grace,
To the fold of faith, he acknowledging his trespass.
Thu knowest I have given, to him convenient space.
With lawful warnings, yet he amendeth in no place.
The natural law, which I wrote in his heart,
He hath outraced, all goodness putting a part,
Of health the covenant, which I to Adam made,
He regardeth not, but walketh a damnable trade,
All this is true lord, I can not thy words reprove,
let his weakness yet, thy merciful goodness move.
No weakness is it, but wilful working all,
That reigneth in man, through mind diabolical.
He shall have therefore, like as he hath deserved.
Lose him not yet lord, though he hath deeply swerved,
I know thy mercy, is far above his rudeness,
Being infinite, as all other things are in the.
His folly therefore, now pardon of thy goodness,
And measure it not, beyond thy godly pity.
Esteem not his fault, farther than help may be,
But grant him thy grace, as he offendeth so deeply,
The to remember, and abhorrre his misery.
Of all goodness lord, remember thy great mercy,
To Adam and Eve, breaking thy first commandment.
Them thou relevedest, with thy sweet promise heavenly,
sinful though they were, and their lives negligent.
I know that mercy, with the is permanent,
And will be ever, so long as the world endure,
Than close not thy hand, from man which is thy creature.
Being thy subject, he is underneath thy cure,
Correct him thou mayest, and so bring him to grace.
All lieth in thy hands, to leave or to allure,
Bitter death to give, or grant most suffren solace.
Utterly from man, avert not then thy face,
But let him saver, thy sweet benevolence,
somewhat though he feel, thy hand for his offence.
My true servant Noah, thy righteousness doth move me,
somewhat to reserve, for man's posteryte.
Though I drown the world, yet will I save the lives,
Of the and thy wife, thy iij. sons and their wives,
And of yche kind two, to maintain you hereafter.
Blessed be thy name, most mighty merciful maker.
With the to dispute, it were unconuenyent.
Why dost thou say so: Be bold to speak thy intent.
Shall the other die, without any remedy?
I will drown them all, for their wilful wicked folly,
That man hereafter, thereby may know my power,
And fear to offend, my goodness day and hour.
As thy pleasure is, so might it always be,
For my health thou art, and souls felicity.
After that this flood, have had his raging passage,
This shall be to thee, my covenant everlasting.
The sees and waters, so far nevermore shall rage's,
As all flesh to drown, I will so temper their working.
This sign will I add, also to confirm the thing.
In the clouds above, as a seal or token clear,
For safeguard of man, my rainbow shall apere.
Take thou this covenant for an earnest confirmation,
Of my former promise, to Adam's generation.
I will blessed lord, with my whole heart and mind.
Farewele than just Noah, here leave I the behind.
Most mighty maker, ere I from hens depart,
I must give the praise, from the bottom of my heart.
Whom may we thank lord, for our health & salvation?
But thy great mercy and goodness undeserved.
Thy promise in faith, is our justification,
As it was Adams, when his heart therein rested,
And as it was theirs, which therein also trusted.
This faith was grounded, in Adam's memory,
And clearly declared, in Abel's innocency.
Faith in that promise, Old Adam did iustyfye,
In that promise faith, made Eva to prophecy.
Faith in that promise, proved Abel innocent,
In that promise faith, made Seth full obedient.
That faith taught Enos, on God's name first to call,
And made Mathusalah, the oldest man of all.
That faith brought Enoch, to so high exercise,
That God took him up, with him into paradise,
Of that faith the want, made Cain to hate the good,
And all his offspring, to perish in the flood.
Faith in that promise, preserved both me and mine,
So will it all them, which follow the same line.
Not only this gift, thou hast given me sweet lord,
But with it also, thine everlasting covenant,
Of truce for ever, thy rainbow bearing record,
Nevermore to drown, the world by flood inconstant,
Making the waters, more peaceable and pleasant.
Alac I can not, to the give praise condygne,
Yet will I sing here, with heart meek and benign.
O most orient clearness, and light shining of the sempiternal brightness. O clear sun of justice and heavenly righteousness, come hither and illumine the prisoner, sitting now in the dark prison and shadow of eternal death.
Mine high displeasure, must needs return to man,
considering the sin, that he doth day by day:
For neither kindness, nor extreme handling can,
Make him to know me, by any faithful way.
But still in mischief, he walketh to his decay.
If he do not soon, his wickedness consider,
●t is like doubtless, to perish all together.
In my sight he is, more venom than the spider
Through such abuses, as he hath exercised,
From the time of Noah, to this same season hither.
An uncomely act, without shame Cham commised,
When he of his father, the secret parts revealed.
In like case Nemrod, against me wrought abusion
As he raised up, the castle of confusion,
Ninus hath also, and all by the devils illusion,
Through image making, up raised idolatry,
Me to dishonour. And now in the conclusion,
The vile Sodomytes, live so unnaturally
That their sin vengeance, asketh continually▪
For my covenants sake, I will not drown with water.
Yet shall I visit, their sins with other matter.
Yet merciful lord, thy gracyousnesse remember,
To Adam and Noah, both in thy word and promise.
And lose not the souls, of men in so great number,
But save thine own work, of thy most discrete goodness.
I wore thy mercies, are plentiful and endless.
Never can they die, nor fail, thyself enduring,
This hath faith fixed, fast in my understanding.
Abraham my servant, for thy most faithful meaning.
Both thou and thy stock, shall have my plentouse blessing.
Where the unfaithful, under my curse evermore,
For their vain working, shall rue their wickedness sore.
Tell me blessed lord, where will thy great malice light,
My hope is, all flesh, shall not perish in thy sight?
No truly Abraham, thou chancest upon the right.
The thing I shall do, I will not hide from thee,
Whom I have blessed, for thy true fidelity.
For I know thou wilt, cause both thy children & servants.
In my ways to walk, and trust unto my covenants,
That I may perform, with the my earnest promise.
All that will I do, by assistance of thy goodness.
From Sodom and Gomor, the abominations call,
For my great vengeance, which will upon them fall.
Wild fire and brimstone, shall light upon them all.
pitiful maker, though they have kindled thy fury,
Cast not away yet, the just sort with the ungodly.
peradventure there may, be fifty righteous persons,
Within those cities, wilt thou lose them all at once?
And not spare the place, for those fifty righteous sake?
Be it far from thee, soch rigour to undertake.
I hope there is not, in the so cruel hardness,
As to cast away, the just men with the reckless,
And so to destroy, the good with the ungodly.
In the judge of all, be never such a fury.
At Sodom if I, may find just persons fifty,
The place will I spare, for their sakes verily.
I take upon me, to speak here in thy presence,
More than become me, lord pardon my negligence.
I am but ashes, and were loath the to offend.
say fourth good Abraham, for ill dost thou none intend.
happily there may be, five less in the same number.
For their sakes I trust, thou wilt not the rest accombre?
If I among them, might find but five and forty
Them would I not lose, for that just company.
What if the city, may forty righteous make?
Then will I pardon it, for those same fortyes sake.
Be not angry lord, though I speak undyscretelye.
Utter thy whole mind, and spare me not hardly.
peradventure there may, be thirty found among them.
May I find thirty, I will nothing do unto them▪
I take upon me, to much lord in thy sight?
No, no, good Abraham, for I know thy faith is right.
No less I suppose, than twenty can it have?
Could I find twenty, that city would I save.
Ones yet will I speak, my mind, and than no more,
Spare not to utter, so much as thou hast in store.
And what if there might, be x. good creatures found?
The rest for their sakes, might so be safe and sound,
And not destroyed, for their abomination,
O merciful maker, moche is thy toleration,
And sufferance of sin. I see it now in deed,
Wit save yet of favour, out of those cities to lead,
Those that be faithful, though their flock be but small.
Loath and his household, I will deliver all,
For righteousness sake which is of me and not them.
Great are thy graces, in the generation of Sem.
Well Abraham well, for thy true faithfulness,
Now will I give thee, my covenant or third promise.
Look thou believe it, as thou covetyst righteousness,
Lord so regard me, as I receive it with gladness.
Of many people's, the father I will make thee,
All generations, in thy seed shall be blessed.
As the stars of heaven, so shall thy kynered be,
And by the same seed, the world shall be redressed.
In circumcision, shall this thing be expressed,
As in a sure seal, to prove my promise true,
print this in thy faith, and it shall thy soul renew,
I will not one jote, Lord from thy will dissent,
But to thy pleasure, be always obedient,
Thy laws to fulfil, and most precious commandment.
Farwele Abraham, for hear in place I leave the.
Thanks will I render, like as it shall behove me.
everlasting praise, to thy most glorious name.
Which savedyst Adam, through faith in thy sweet promise,
Of the woman's sede. And now confirmest the same,
In the seed of me. Fosoth great is thy goodness
I can not perceive, but that thy mercy is endless.
To such as fear thee, in every generation,
For it endureth, without abbreviation.
This have I printed in deep consideration,
No worldly matter, can raze it out of mind.
For ones it will be, the final restoration,
Of Adam and Eve, with other that hath sinned.
Yea, the sure health, and raise of all mankind.
Help have the faithful, thereof, though they be infect,
They condemnation, where as it is reject.
Merciful maker, my crabbed voice direct,
That it may break out, in some sweet praise to thee,
And suffer me not, thy due lauds to neglect,
But let me show forth, thy commendations free.
Stop not my wind pipes, but give them liberty,
To sound to thy name, which is most gracious,
And in it rejoice, with heart melodyouse.
O most mighty governor, of thy people, and in heart most desired, the hard rock and true corner stone, that of two maketh one, uning the Iewes with the gentiles in one church, come now and relieve mankind whom thou haste formed of the vile earth.
Still so increaseth, the wickedness of man,
That I am moved, with plagues him to confound▪
His weakness to aid, I do the best I can,
Yet he regardeth me, no more than doth an hound.
My word and promise, in his faith taketh no ground,
He will so long walk, in his own lusts at large,
That nought he shall find, his folly to discharge.
Sens Abraham's time, which was my true elect,
Ishmael have I found, both wicked, fierce, and cruel,
And Esau in mind, with hateful muther infect,
The sons of Iacob, to lusts unnatural fell,
And into Egypte, did they their brother sell.
Laban to idols, gave faithful reverence,
Dina was corrupt, through Sichems violence.
Reuben abused his father's concubine,
Iudas gate children, of his own daughter in law.
Yea, her in my sight, went after a wicked line,
His seed Onanspylte, his brother's name to withdraw.
Achan lived here, without all godly awe.
And now the children, of Israel abuse my power,
In so vile manner, that they move me every hour.
pacify thy wrath, sweet lord I the desire,
As thou art gentle, benign and patient.
Lose not that people, in fierceness of thine ire,
For whom thou hast showed, such tokens evident,
Converting this rod, into a lively serpent,
And the same serpent, into this rod again,
Thy wonderful power, declaring very plain.
For their sakes also, puttest Pharaoh to pain,
By ten diverse plagues, as I shall here declare.
By blood, frogs, & lice, by flies, death, botch, & blain.
By hail, by grassoppers, by darkness, and by care.
By a Soden plague, all their first gotten ware,
Thu flewest in one night, for his fierce cruelness.
From that thy people, withhold not now thy goodness.
I certify thee, my chosen servant Moses.
That people of mine is full of unthankefuln 〈…〉
Dear lord, I know it, alas yet way their weaken 〈…〉
And bear with their faults, of thy great bounteousness.
In a flaming bush, having to them respect,
Thu appoyntedest me, their passage to direct.
And through the read see, thy right hand ded us lead.
Where Pharaoh's host, the flood overwhelmed in deed.
Thu wentest before them, in a shining cloud all day,
And in the dark night, in fire thou shewedest their way,
Thu sentest them Manna, from heaven to be their food,
Out of the hard stone, thou gavest them water good.
Thu appoyntedest them, a land of milk and honey,
let them not perish, for want of thy great mercy,
Content they are not, with foul nor yet with fair,
But mumur and grudge, as people in despair,
As I sent Manna, they had it in disdain,
Thus of their welfare, they many times complain.
Over Amalech, I gave them the victory.
Most glorious maker, all that is to thy glory.
Thu sentest them also, a law from heaven above,
And daily showdest them, many tokens of great love.
The brazen serpent, thou gavest them for their healing,
And Balaam's curse, thou turnedest into a blessing.
I hope thou wilt not, disdain to help them still,
I gave them precepts, which they will not fulfil.
Nor yet knowledge me, for their God and good lord,
So do their vile deeds, with their wicked hearts accord,
whiles thou hast talked, with me famylyarlye.
mountain, the space but of days forty,
〈…〉ghts all, they have forgotten clearly,
are turned, to shameful idolatry.
For their God they have, set up a golden calf.
let me say somewhat, sweet father in their behalf.
I will first conclude, and then say on thy mind,
For that I have found, that people so unkind,
Nor one of them shall, enjoy the promise of me,
For entering the land, but Caleb and Iosue.
Thy eternal will, evermore fulfilled be.
For disobedience, thou showest the sons of Aaron,
The earth swellowed in, both Dathan and Abiron.
The adders did sting, other wicked persons else,
In wonderful number. Thus haste thou ponnyshed rebels.
Never will I spare, the cursed iniquity,
Of idolatry, for no cause, thou mayst trust me.
forgive them yet lord, for this time if it may be.
thinkest thou that I will, so soon change my decree?
No, No, friend Moses so light thou shalt not find me.
I will punish them, all Israel shall it se.
I wot, thy people, hath wrought abomination,
worshipping false gods, to thy honour's derogation,
Yet mercifully, thou mayest upon them look.
And if thou wilt not, thrust me out of thy book.
Those great blasphemers, shall out of my book clean,
But thou shalt not so, for I know what thou dost mean.
Conduct my people, mine Angel shall assist thee,
That sin a● a day, will not uncorrected be.
And for the true zeal, that thou to my people haste,
I add this covenant, unto my promises past.
Raise them up I will, a prophet from among them,
Not onlyke to thee, to speak my words unto them,
Who so heareth not, that he shall speak in my name,
I will revenge it, to his perpetual shame.
The pass over lamb, will be a token just,
Of this strong covenant. This have I clearly dyscust,
In my appointment, this hour for your deliverance.
Never shall this thing, depart from my remembrance.
Laude be for ever, to the most merciful lord,
Which never with drawest, from man thy heavenly comfort.
But from age to age, thy benefits doth record,
What thy goodness is, and hath been to his sort.
As we find thy grace, so ought we to report.
And doubtless it is, to us most bounteous,
Yea, for all our sins, most ripe and plenteous.
Abraham our father, found the benyvolouse,
So did good Isaac, in his distress among.
To Iacob thou wert, a guide most gracious,
Ioseph thou savedst, from dangerous deadly wrong.
Melchisedech and Iob, felt thy great goodness strong,
So did good Sara, rebecca, and fair Rachel,
With Sephora my wife, the daughter of Raguel.
To praise the sweet lord my faith doth me compel,
For thy covenants sake, wherein rest our salvation.
The seed of promise, all other sedes excel,
For therein remaineth, our full justification,
From Adam and Noah, in Abraham's generation.
That seed procureth, God's mighty grace and power,
For the same sedes sake, I will sing now this hour.
O high king Emanuel, & our league lord, the long expectation of gentiles, and the mighty saver of their multitude, the health and consolation of sinners, come now for to save us, as our lord and our redeemer.
FOr all the favour, I have showed Israel,
delivering her, from Pharaoh's tyranny,
And giving the land fluentem lac & mell,
Yet will she not leave, her old idolatry,
Nor know me for God. I abhor her misery.
Vexed her I have, with battles and decays,
Still must I plague her, I see non other ways.
Remember yet lord, thy worthy servant Moses,
Walking in thy sight, without rebuke of the.
Both Aaron, Ietro, Eleazar, and Phinees.
Evermore feared, to offend thy majesty.
Much thou acceptedest, thy servant Iosue,
Caleb and Othoniel, sought the with all their heart,
Aioth end Sangar, for thy folk did their part.
Gedeon and Thola, thy enemies put to smart,
Iayr and Iephte, gave praises to thy name.
These to leave idols, thy people did coart,
Samson the strongest, for his part did the same.
Samuel and Nathan, thy messages did proclaim,
What though fierce Pharaoh, wrough mischief in thy sight?
He was a pagan, lay not that in our sight.
I wot the Beniamytes, abused the ways of right,
So did Hely's sons, and the sons of Samuel.
Saul in his office, was slothful day and night,
Wicked was Semei, so was Achirophel.
Measure not by them, the faults of Israel,
Whom thou hast loved, of long time so inteyrlye,
But of thy great grace, remit her wicked folly,
I can not abide, the vice of idolatry▪
Though I should suffer, all other villainty.
When Iosue was dead, that sort from me did fall,
To the worshipping of Asteroth and Baal,
Full unclean idols, and monsters bestial.
For it they have had, thy righteous punishment.
And for as much as they, did wickedly consent,
To the Palestynes, and Chananytes ungodly,
Idolaters taking, to them in matrimony,
Thu threwest them under, the king of Mesopotamye.
After thou subduedest them, for their idolatry.
eighteen years to Eglon, the king of Moabites,
And xx. years to Iabin, the king of Chananytes.
Oppressed they were, vij. years of the Madyanytes,
And xviij. years vexed, of the cruel Ammonytes.
In three great battles, of iij. score thousand and five,
Of this thy people, not one was left alive.
Have mercy now lord, and call them to repentance.
So long as they sin, so long shall they have grievance.
David my servant, somewhat must I say to thee,
For that thou lately, hast wrought such vanity.
Spare not blessed lord, but say thy pleasure to me.
Of late days thou haste, misused Bersabe,
The wife of Vrye, and slain him in the field.
Mercy lord mercy, for doubtless I am defyelde:
I constytute thee, a king over Israel,
And the preserved, from Saul which was thy enemy.
Yea, in my favour, so much thou didst excel.
That of thy enemies, I gave the victory.
Palestynes and Syrians, to the came tributary.
Why hast thou then wrought, such folly in my sight?
Despising my word, against all godly right.
I have sinned lord, I beseech thee, pardon me.
Thu shalt not die David, for this iniquity,
For thy repentance, But thy son by Bersabe,
Shall die, for as much, as my name is blasphemed.
Among my enemies, and thou the worse esteemed.
From thy house for this, the sword shall not departed,
I am sorry lord, from the bottom of my heart.
To further anger, thou dost me yet compel.
For what matter lord? I beseech thy goodness tell.
Why didst thou numbered, the people of Israel?
Supposest in thy mind, therein thou hast done well?
I can not say nay, but I have done undyscretelye,
To forget thy grace, for a human policy.
Thu shalt of these iij. chose which plague thou wilt have,
For that sinful act, that I thy soul may save.
A scarceness vij. years, or else iij. months exile,
Either for iij. days, the pestilence most vile.
For one thou must have, there is no remedy,
Lord at thy pleasure, for thou art full of mercy,
Of a pestilence, than iij. score thousand and ten,
In iij. days shall die of thy most puissant men.
Oh lord, it is I, which have offended thy grace,
Spare them and not me, for I have done the trespass.
Though thy sins be great, thy inward hearts contrition.
Doth move my stomach, in wonderful condition.
I find the a man, according to my heart,
Wherefore this promise, I make the ere I depart.
A fruit there shall come, forth issuing from thy body,
Whom I will advance, upon thy seat for ever.
His throne shall become, a seat of heavenly glory,
His worthy sceptre, from right will not dissever,
His happy kingdom, of faith, shall perish never,
Of heaven and of earth, he was author principal,
And will continue, though they do perish all.
This sign shalt thou have, for a token special,
That thou mayst believe, my words unfeignedly.
Where thou hast minded, for my memorial,
To build a temple, thou shalt not finish it truly.
But Solomon thy son, shall do that action worthy,
In token that Christ, must finish every thing,
That I have begun, to my praise everlasting.
Immortal glory, to thee, most heavenly king,
For that thou hast given, continual victory,
To me thy servant, ever since my anointing,
And also before, by many conquests worthy,
A bear and lion, I slew through thy strength only,
I slew Golias, which was vj. cubits long.
Against thy enemies, thou madest me ever strong.
My fleshly frailness, made me do deadly wrong,
And clean to forget, thy laws of righteousness.
And thouh thou vysytedest, my synnefulnesse among,
With pestilent plagues, and other unquietness.
Yet never tookest thou, from me the plenteousness,
Of thy godly spirit, which thou in me diddest plant,
I having remorse, thy grace could never want.
For in conclusion, thy everlasting covenant.
Thu gavest unto me, for all my wicked sin.
And hast promised here, by protestation constant,
That one of my seed, shall such high fortune win,
As never did man, sens this world did begin.
By his power he shall, put Satan from his hold,
In rejoice whereof, to sing will I be bold.
O lord God Adonai, & guide of the faylhfull house of Israel, which sometime aperedest in the flaming bush to Moses, and to him didst give a law in mount Syna, come now forto redeem us in the strength of thy right hand.
I Brought up children, from their first infancy,
Which now despiseth, my godly institutions.
An ox knoweth his lord, an ass his master's duty,
But Israel will not, know me nor my conditions,
Oh froward people, given all to superstitions.
Unnatural children, expert in blasphemies,
Provoketh me to bate, by their idolatries.
Take heed to my words, ye tyrants of Sodoma,
In vain ye offer, your sacrifice to me.
discontent I am, with you beasts of Gomorra,
And have no pleasure, when I your offerings se.
I abhor your fasts, and your solemnity.
For your traditions, my ways ye set a part,
Your works are in vain, I hate them from the heart.
Thy city sweet lord, is now become unfaithful,
And her conditions, are turned up so down.
Her life is unchaste, her acts be very hurtful,
Her murder and theft, hath darkened her renown.
covetous rewards, doth so their conscience drown,
That the fatherless, they will not help to right,
The poor widows cause, come not afore their sight,
Thy peceable paths, seek they neither day nor night,
But walk wicked ways, after their fantasy.
Convert their hearts lord, and give them thy true light.
That they may perceive, their customable folly.
Leave them not helpless, in so deep misery,
But call them from it, of thy most special grace,
By thy true prophets, to their souls health and solace.
First they had fathers, than had they patryarkes,
Than dukes, than judges, to their guides and monarch,
Now have they stout kings, yet are they wicked still,
And will in no wise, my pleasant laws fulfil.
Always they apply, to idols worshipping,
From the vile beggar, to the anointed king.
For that cause thou haste, in two divided them,
In Samaria the one, the other in Jerusalem.
The king of Iuda, in Jerusalem did dwell,
And in Samaria, the king of Israel.
Ten of the twelve tribes, became Samarytanes,
And the other two, were Hierosolymytanes.
In both these countries, according to their doings,
Thu permyttedest them, to have most cruel kings.
The first of Iuda, was wicked king Roboam,
Of Israel the first, was that cruel Hieroboam.
Abia than followed, and in the other Nadab,
Then Basa, than Hela, than Zambri, Ioram and Achab.
Then Ochosias', then Athalia, then Ioas,
On the other part, was Ioathan and Achas.
To rehearse them all, that have done wretchydlye,
In the sight of thee, it were long verily.
For the wicked sin, of filthy idolatry,
Which the x, tribes did, in the land of Samarye,
In space of one day, fifty thousand men I slew,
Three of their cities, also I overthrew.
And left the people, in such captivity,
That in all the world, they wist not whither tefle.
The other ij. tribes, when they from me went back,
To idolatry, I left in the hand of Sesack.
The king of Egypt, which took away their treasure,
Conveyed their cattle, and slew them without measure.
In time of Achas, an hundred thousand and twenty,
Were slain at one time, for their idolatry.
Two hundred thousand, from thence were captive led.
Their goods dispersed, and they with penury fed.
Seldom they fail it, but either the Egyptians,
Have them in bondage, or else the Assyreanes.
And alone they may, thank their idolatry.
we'll, yet blessed lord, relieve them with thy mercy.
Though they have been ill, by other princes days▪
Yet good Ezechias, hath taught them godly ways.
When the prince is good, the people are the better.
And as he is nought, their vices are the greater.
heavenly lord therefore, send them the consolation,
Which thou hast covenanted, with every generation.
Open thou the heavens, and let the lamb come hither,
Which will deliver, thy people all together.
Ye planets and clouds, cast down your dews and rain,
That the earth may bear, out healthful saver plain.
May the wife forget, the child of her own body?
Nay that she can not, in any wise verily.
No more can I them, which will do my commandments,
But must preserve them, from all inconuenyentes.
Blessed art thou lord, in all thy acts and judgements.
we'll, Esaias, for this thy fidelity,
A covenant of health, thou shalt have also of me.
For Zion's sake now, I will not hold my peace,
And for Jerusalem, to speak will I not cease.
Till that righteous lord, be come as a sun beam bright,
And their just saver, as a lamp extend his light.
A rod shall shut fourth, from the old stock of Iesse,
And a bright blossom, from that rote will arise.
Upon whom always, the spirit of the lord shall be,
The spirit of wisdom, the spirit of heavenly practise,
And the spirit that will, all godliness devise,
Take this for a sign, A maid of Israel,
Shall conceive and bear, that lord Emanuel.
Thy praises condygne, no mortal tongue can tell,
Most worthy maker, and king of heavenly glory.
For all capacytees, thy goodness doth excel,
Thy plenteous graces, no brain can cumpas truly,
No wit can conceive, the greatness of thy mercy,
Declared of late, in David thy true servant,
And now confirmed, in this thy latter covenant.
Of goodness thou madest, Solomon of wit most pregnant,
Asa and Iosaphat, with good king Ezechias,
In thy sight to do, that was to the right pleasant.
To quench idolatry, thou raysedest up Helias,
Iehu, Hellseus, Micheas, and Abdias.
And Naaman Syrus, thou pourgedest of a lepry,
Thy works wonderful, who can but magnify?
Aryse Hierusalem, and take faythe by and bye,
For the very light, that shall save thee, is coming.
The son of the lord, apere will evidently,
When he shall resort, see that no joy be wanting,
He is thy saver, and thy life everlasting,
Thy release from sin, and thy whole righteousness.
Help me in this song, to knowledge his great goodness▪
O fruitful rote of Iesse, that shall be set as a sign among people, against the worldly rulers shall fiercely open their mouths. Whom the gentiles shall worship as their heavenly lord, come now for to deliver us, and delay the time no longer.
I Have with fierceness, mankind oft times corrected.
And again I have, alured him by sweet promise.
I have sent sore plagues, when he hath me neglected.
And then by and by, most comfortable sweetness.
To win him to grace, both mercy and righteousness.
I have exercised, yet will he not amend.
Shall I now lose him, or shall I him defend?
In his most mischief, most high grace will I send.
To overcome him, by favour, if it may be.
With his abusions, no longer will I contend.
But now accomplish, my first will and decree.
My word being flesh, from hens shall set him free.
Him reaching a way, of perfect righteousness.
That he shall not need, to perish in his weakness.
Manasses (lord) is passed, which turned from the his heart,
Achas and Amon, have now no more a do.
Iechonias with other, which did themselves avarte.
From the to idols, may now no farther go.
The two false judges, and Bells wicked priests also.
Phassur and Semeias, with Nabuchodonosore,
Antiochus and Triphon shall the displease no more.
Three score years and ten, thy people into Babylon,
Were captive and thrall, for idols worshipping.
Jerusalem was lost, and left void of dominion,
Brent was their temple, so was their other building,
There high priests were slain, their treasure came to nothing
The strength and beauty, of thine own heritage,
Thus didst thou leave then, in miserable bondage.
Oft had they warnings, sometime by Ezechiel,
And other prophets, as Esaye and Hieremye,
sometime by Daniel, sometime by Ose and Iohel,
By Amos and Abdias, by Ionas and by Sophonye,
By Nahum and Micheas, by Agge and by Zacharye,
By Malachias, and also by Abacuch,
By Olda the widow, and by the prophet Baruch.
Remember Iosias, which took the abomination.
From the people then, restoring thy laws again.
Of Rechab consydre, the faithful generation,
Whom to wine drinking, no fryndshyppe night constrain.
Remember Abdemelech, the friend of truth certain,
Zorobabel the prince, which did repair the temple,
And Iesus Iosedech, of virtue the example,
Consydre Nehemias, and Esdras the good scribe,
Merciful Tobias and constant Mardocheus.
Iudith and queen Hester, of the same godly tribe,
devout Mathathias, and Iudas Machabeus.
Have mind of Eleazar, and then Ioannes Hircanus,
Waye the earnest faith, of this godly company,
Though the other clean, fall from thy memory.
I will Iohan I will, for as I said afore,
Rigour and hardness, I have now set a part,
minding from hens fourth, to win man evermore,
By wonderful kindness, to break his stubborn heart,
And change it from sin. For Christ shall suffres make,
In man's frail nature, for his iniquity,
This to make open, my massinger shalt thou be.
As thy pleasure is, so blessed lord appoint me,
For my health thou art, and my souls felicity.
Long ere I made thee, I the predestinate.
Before thou wert borne, I the endued with grace.
In thy mother's womb, wert thou sanctyfycate,
By my godly gift, and so confirmed in place,
A Prophet to show, a way before the face,
Of my most dear son, which will come the until,
Apply the apace, thine office to fulfil.
Preach to the people, rebuking their negligence,
Doppe them in water, they knowledging their offence.
And say unto them. The kingdom of God doth cum.
Vnmete lord I am, Quia puer ego sum.
An other than that, Alac I have no science,
Fyt for that office, neither yet clean eloquence.
Thu shalt not say so, for I have given the grace,
Eloquence and age, to speak in the desert place,
Thu must do therefore, as I shall the advise,
My appointed pleasure, fourth utter in any wise.
My strong mighty words, put I into thy mouth,
Spare not by speak them, to east, west, north and south.
Go now thy way fourth, I shall the never fail.
The spirit of Helias, have I given the already.
Persuade the people, that they their sins bywayle.
And if they repent, their customable folly,
Long shall it not be, ere they have remedy.
Open thou their hearts, tell them their health is coming.
As a voice in desert, see thou declare the thing.
I promise the sure, thou shalt was he him among them,
In Jordan a flood, not far from Jerusalem.
Show me yet good lord, whereby shall I know that man.
In the multitude, which will resort to Iordan?
In thy mother's womb, of him hadst thou cognition.
Yea, that was in spirit, I would now know his person.
Have thou no fear Iohan, him shalt thou know full well.
And one special token, afore will I the tell.
Super quem videris spiritum descendentem & manentem
Super eum, hic est qui baptizat spiritu sancto
Among all other, whom thou shalt baptize there.
Upon whom thou sayst, the holy Ghost descend,
In shape of a dove, resting upon his shuldere.
Hold him for the same, that shall the world amend.
By baptism of spirit, and also to man extend,
Most special grace. For he must repair his fall,
Restoring again, the justice original.
Take now thy journey, and do as I the advise,
First preach repentance, and than the people baptize.
High honour, worship, and glory be unto the.
My God eternal, and patron of all purity.
Repent good people, for sins that now are past,
The kingdom of heaven, is at hand very nigh.
The promised light, to you approacheth fast,
Have faith, and apply, now to receive him boldly.
I am not the light, but to bear testimony,
Of him, am I sent, that all men may believe,
That his blood he will, for their redemption give.
He is such a light, as all men doth illumine,
That ever were here, or shall be after this.
All the world he made, by his mighty power divine,
And yet that rude world, will not know what he is.
His own he entering, is not regarded of his.
They that receive him, are Gods true children plain,
In spirit regenerate and all grace shall attain.
Many do reckon, that I Iohan baptist am he.
deceived are they, and that will apere in space.
Though he come after, yet was he long afore me,
We are weak vessels, he is the well of grace,
Of his great goodness, all that we have we purchase.
By him are we like, to have a better increes,
Than ever we had, by the law of Moses.
In Moses hard law, we had not else but darkness,
figure and shadow. All was not else but night,
punishment for sin, much rigour, pain and roughness,
An high change is there, where all is turned to light,
Grace and remission, anon will shine full bright.
Never man lived, that ever see God afore,
Which now in our kind, man's ruin will restore.
Help me to give thanks, to that lord evermore,
Which am unto Christ, a crier's voice in the desert,
To prepare the paths, and high ways him before,
For his delight is, on the poor simple heart.
That innocent lamb, from such will never departed,
As will faithfully, receive him with good mind.
let our voice then sound, in some sweet musical kind.
O perfect key of David, and high sceptre of the kindred of Iacob, which openest and no man speareth, thou spearest and no man openeth, come & deliver thy servant 〈◊〉 kind bound, in prison sitting in the darkness of 〈◊〉 and bitter damnation.
THe matters are such, that we have uttered here,
As ought not to slide, from your memorial.
For they have opened, such comfortable gear,
As is to the health, of this kind universal,
Graces of the lord, and promises liberal,
Which he hath given, to man for every age,
To knit him to Christ, and so clear him of bondage.
As Saint Paul doth write, unto the Corinth's plain,
Our fore fathers were, under the cloud of darkness,
And unto Christ's days, did in the shadow remain.
Yet were they not left, for of him they had promise,
All they received, one spiritual feeding doubtless,
They drunk of the rock, which them to life refreshed,
For one saving health, in Christ, all they confessed.
In the woman's seed, was Adam first justified,
So was faithful Noah, so was just Abraham.
The faith in that sede, in Moses fourth multiplied,
Like wise in David, and Esaye, that after came.
And in Iohan baptist, which showed the very lame.
Though they see a far, yet all they had one justice,
One Mass (as they call it) and in Christ one sacrifice,
A man can not here, to Good do better service,
Than on this to ground, his faith and understanding.
For all the worlds sin, alone Christ paid the price,
In his only death, was man's life always resting,
And not in will wor●●, nor yet in men's deserving.
The light of our faith, make this thing evident,
And not the practise of other experiment.
Where is now free will, whom the hypocrite a comment.
Whereby they report, they may at their own pleasure,
Do good of themselves, though grace and faith be absent.
And have good intentes their madness with to measure.
The will of the flesh, is proved here small treasure,
And so is man's will, for the grace of God doth all.
More of this matter, conclude hereafter we shall