Go, walk the horses, wait me on the hill,
This is the Hermit's Cell, go out of sight:
My business with him must not be revealed,
To any mortal creature but himself.
I'll wait your honour in the cross highway.
Do so: Hermit devout and reverend,
If drowsy age keep not thy stiffened joints,
On thy unrestful bed, or if the hours
Of holy Orisons detain thee not,
Come forth.
Good morrow son, good morrow, & God bless thee Huntingdon,
A brighter Gleam of true Nobility
Shines not in any youth more than in thee.
Thou shalt be rich in honour, full of speed,
Thou shalt win foes by fear, and friend, by meed.
Father, I come not now to know my fate,
Important business urgeth Princely Richard,
In these terms to salute thy reverent age.
Read and be brief, I know some cause of trust,
Made him employ me for his messenger.
A cause of trust indeed true honoured youth,
Princes had need in matters of import,
To make nice choice fair Earl, if I not err,
Thou art the Prince's ward.
Father I am his ward, his Chamberlain & bedfellow.
Fair fall thee honourable Robert Hood,
Wend to Prince Richard, say though I am loath,
To use my skill in Conjuration:
Yet Skinke that poisoned red cheeked Rosamond,
Shall make appearance at the Parliament,
He shall be there by noon assure his Grace.
Good morrow Father, see you fail him not,
For though the villain did a horrible deed,
Yet hath the young King Richard, and Earl Iohn,
Sworn to defend him from his greatest foes.
God's benison be with thee noble Earl.
A dew good father, holla there, my horse?
Up, spur the kicking jade, while I make speed
To Censure Skinke out of his Hermit's weed;
Lie there religion keep thy M. grave,
And on the fair trust of these Prince's word
To Court again Skinke: but before I go,
Let mischief take advise of villainy,
Why to the Hermit letters should be sent,
To post Skinke to the Court incontinent:
Is there no trick in this? ha let me see?
Or do they know already I am he?
If they do so, faith westward then with Skinke:
But what an ass am I to be thus fond,
Hear lies the Hermit whom I dying found
Some two months since, when I was hourly charged
With Hugh the Crier and with Constables,
I saw him in the ready way to heaven,
I helped him forward, 'twas a holy deed;
And there he lies some six foot in the ground,
Since when, and since, I kept me in his weeds.
O what a world of fools have filled my Cell;
For Fortunes, runaway, stolen goods; lost cattle,
Among the number, all the faction
That take the young King's part against the old;
Come to myself to hearken for myself,
So did the adverse party make inquire,
But either fall full of contrary desire:
The old King's part would kill me being stained,
The young Kings keep me from their violence.
So then thou needst not fear, go boldly on,
Brave Hall, Prince Dick, and my spruce hot spur John,
here's their safe conduct: O but for Rosamond!
A fig for Rosamond, to this hope I'll lean:
At a Queen's bidding I did kill a quean.
Why doth not Gloster take his honoured seat?
In faith my Liege Gloster is in a land
Where neither surety is to sit or stand.
I only do appear as I am summoned,
And will await without till I am called.
Why hear you Gloster?
Henry I do hear you.
And why not King?
What's he that sits so near you?
King too.
Two Kings? ha ha.
Gloster sit we charge thee.
I will obey your charge, I will sit down,
But in this house, on no seat but the ground.
The seats too good.
I know it brother Iohn.
Thy brother?
Silence there.
Pass to the bills Sir Richard Faukenbridge.
My Liege's both, old Faukenbridge is proud
Of your right honoured charge. He that worst may
Will strain his old eyes, God send peace this day.
A bill for the releasement of the Queen preferred,
By Henry the young King, Rich. the Prince, John Earl
Of Murton, Bohmine Earl of Leicester and the commons:
Did you prefer this bill?
We did.
Ye did not well.
Why this is good, now shall we have the hell.
3. Bro Chester and Lanchaster you wrong the King.
Our King we do not.
Do not you seem crowned?
But whilst he lives we to none else are bound.
Is it not wrong think you, when all the world
Troubled with rumour of a captive Queen,
Imprisoned by her husband in a Realm,
Where her own son doth wear a Diadem?
Is like an head of people mutinous.
Still murmuring at the s●●●●e done her and us?
Is't not more wrong when her mother zeal
Sounded through Europe. Africa, Assia,
Tells in the hollow of news thirsting ears,
Queen Elinor lives in a dungeon,
For pity and affection to 〈◊〉 son:
But when the true cause, Clifford's daughter's death
Shall be exposed to stranger nations:
What volumes will be writ. what libels spread?
And in each line our state dishonoured.
My Lord speaks to the purpose, mary it may be so,
Pray God it prove not so.
Hear me conclude, and there withal conclude,
It is an heinous and unheard of sin:
Queen Elinor daughter to Kingly France,
King Henry's wife and royal Henry's mother,
Is kept close prisoner for an act of justice,
Committed on an odious Concubine,
Thou wrong'st her Leicester.
lechers ever praise the cause of their confusion, she was vile
She was ill spoken of its true, true.
Yonder sits one would do as much for you
Old fool, young Richard hath a gift I know it,
And on your wife my sister would bestow it.
here's a good world men hate adulterous sin,
Count it a gulf, and yet they needs will in.
What answer for the Queen?
The King replies your words are foul slanderous forgeries
His highness says not so.
His highness doth,
Tells you its a shame for such wild youth,
To smother any impiety,
With show to chastise lose adultery.
Say Rosamond was Henry's Concubine,
Had never King a Concubine but he?
Did Rosamond begin the fires in France?
Made she the Northern borders reek with flames?
Unpeopled she the towns of Picardy?
Left she the wives of England husbandless?
O no: she sinned I grant, so do we all,
She fell herself, desiring none should fall;
But Elinor whom you so much commend,
Hath been the bellows of seditious fire,
Either through jealous rage or mad desire;
Is't not a shame to think that she hath armed
Four Sons right hands, against their father's head,
And not the children of a low-prized wretch,
But one whom God on earth hath deified?
See where he sits with sorrow in his eyes,
Three of his Sons and hers tutored by her,
Smiles whilst he weeps, and with a proud disdain,
Embrace blithe mirth, while his sad heart complain.
Ha laugh they? nay by the rood that is not well,
Now fie young Princes fie.
Peace doting fool.
Be silent ass.
With all my heart my Lords, my humble leave my Lords
Gods mother ass and fool for speaking truth,
'tis terrible, but far ye well my Lords.
Nay stay good Faukenbridge, impute it rage,
That thus abuses your right reverend age,
My brothers are too hot.
Too hot indeed, fool, ass, for speaking truth? it's more than need.
Nay good Sir Richard at my kind entreat
For all the love I bear your noble house,
Let not your absence kindle further wrath,
Each side's at counsel now sit down I pray,
I'll quite it with the kindest love I may.
I to his wife.
Prince Richard I'll sit down,
But by the faith I own fair England's Crown,
Had you not been I would have left the place,
My service merits not so much disgrace.
Good Faukenbridge I thank thee.
And you'll think of him, if you can step into his bower at Stepney.
Prince Richard's very kind, I know his kindness,
He loves me, but he loves my Lady better,
No more, I'll watch him, I'll prevent his game,
Young Lad, it's ill to halt before the lame.
I'll not subscribe to this indignity,
I'll not be called a King but be a King;
Allow me halfe the Realm, give me the North,
The Provinces that lie beyond the Seas,
Wales and the Isles that compass in the main.
Nay give him all and he will scant be pleased.
Brother you ask too much.
To much, too little, he shall have that and more, I swear he shall.
I will have Nottingham and Salisbury,
Stafford and Derby, and some other Earldom,
Or by S. Iohn (whose blessed name I bear)
I'll make these places like a wilderness.
Is't not a plague, an horrible abuse,
A King, a King of England should be Father
To four such proper youths, as Hall, and Dick,
My brother Geffrey and my proper self,
And yet not give his sons such maintenance,
As he consumes among his minions.
Be more respective Iohn.
Respective Richard, are you turned pure? a changing weathercock?
I say its reason Henry should be King,
Thou Prince, I Duke, as Ieffry is a Duke.
What shall your Father do?
Live at his prayers, have a sufficient pension by the year,
Repent his sins because his end is near.
A gracious son, a very gracious son.
Will this content you? I that have sat still,
Amazed to see my sons devoid of shame;
To hear my subjects with rebellious tongues,
Wound the kind bosom of their Sovereign,
Can no more bear, but from a bleeding heart
Deliver all my love, for all your hate:
Will this content thee cruel Elinor?
Your savage mother, my uncivil Queen;
The Tigress that hath drunk the purple blood,
Of three times twenty thousand valiant men;
Washing her red chaps, in the weeping tears,
Of widows, virgins, nurses, sucking babes.
And lastly sorted with her damned consorts,
Entered alaborinth to murder love.
Will this content you? she shall be released,
That she may next seize me she most envies.
Our mother's liberty is some content.
What else would Henry have?
The Kingdom.
Peruse this bill, draw near let us confer.
Hall be not answered but with Sovereignty,
For glorious is the sway of Majesty.
What would content you John?
Five Earldoms Sir.
What you son Richard?
Pardon gracious father, & th'furtherance for my vow of penance
For I have sworn to God and all his Saints,
These arms erected in rebellious brawls,
Against my Father and my Sovereign,
Shall fight the battles of the Lord of hosts,
In wronged Iudea and Palestina,
That shall be Richard's penance for his pride,
His blood a satisfaction for his sin,
His patrimony men, munition,
And means to waft them into Syria.
Thou shalt have thy desire heroic Son,
As soon as other homebred brawls are done.
Why weeps old Faukenbridge?
I am almost blind, to hear sons cruel, and the father's kind,
Now well a near that ere I lived to see,
Such patience and so much impiety.
Brother content thee this is but the first,
Worse is a brewing, and yet not the worst.
You shall not stand to this.
And why my Lord?
The lands of Morton doth belong to Iohn.
What's that to me, by Act of Parliament,
If they be mine confirmed, he must be pleased.
Be pleased King puppet? have I stood for thee,
Even in the mouth of death? opened my arms
To sercle in seditious ugly shape?
shook hands with duty, bad adieu to virtue,
Profaned all Majesty in heaven and earth;
Writ in black Characters on my white brow,
The name of rebel Iohn against his Father:
For thee, for thee, thou Otimie of honour,
Thou worm of Majesty thou froth, thou puble.
And must I now be pleased in pease to stand,
While statutes make thee owner of my land?
Good pastime good, now will the thieves fall out?
O if I do, let me be never held
Royal King Henry's son pardon me father,
Pull down this rebel that hath done thee wrong.
Dick, come and leave his side, assail him Lords,
Let's have no parley but with bills and swords.
Peace Iohn, lay down thy arms, hear Henry speak,
He minds thee no such wrong.
He were not best.
Why hayre-brained brother can ye brook no jest?
I do confirm you Earl of Nottingham.
And Morton too?
I and Morton too.
Why so, now once more I'll sit down by you.
Blow wind, the youngest of King Henry's stock,
Would fitly serve to make a weathercock.
Gape earth, challenge thine own as Gloster lies,
Pity such muck is covered with the skies.
Be quiet good my Lords, the Kings command
You should be quiet, and 'tis very mere,
It's most convenient, how say you Prince Richard?
It is indeed.
Why that is wisely said, you are a very kind indifferent man,
Mary a God and by my holidame,
Were not I had a feeling in my head,
Of some suspicion twixt my wife and him,
I should affect him more than all the world.
Take heed old Richard, keep thee there mad lad,
My Sister's fair, and beauty may turn bad.
Room there, make room for young Huntingdon.
A gallant youth, a proper Gentleman.
Richard I have had wrong about his wardship.
You cannot right yourself.
He can and shall.
Not with your help but honourable youth
Have ye performed the business I enjoined?
I have, and Skinke is come, here is his bill,
No matter for his bill let him come in.
Let him not enter, his infectious breath
Will poison the assembly.
Never doubt, there's more infectious breaths about your Throne,
Leyster is there, your envious Sons is there;
If them you can endure, no poison fear.
Content thee Gloster.
I must be content, when you that should mend all are patiented,
Welcome good Skinke thou justly dost complain,
Thou stand'st in dread of death for Rosamond,
Whom thou didst poison at our dread command,
And the appointment of our gracious Mother;
See here my Father's hand unto thy pardon.
I receive it graciously, wishing his soul sweet peace, in heaven for so meritorious a work, for I fear me I have not his heart though his hand.
Be sure thou hast not, murderous bloodsucker,
To jealous envy executioner.
Besides thou suest to have some maintenance,
We have bethought us how we will reward thee,
Thou shalt have Rowden Lordship.
Shall he so? will you reward your murderers with my lands
Your lands? it is our gift and he shall have it.
I'll give him seizure first with this and this.
Lay hold on Gloster.
Hold that murderous Skinke.
villains hands off, I am a Prince, a Peer,
And I have borne disgrace while I can bear.
Knaves leave your rudeness, how now brother
Gloster? nay be appeased, be patiented brother.
Shift for thyself good Skinke, there's gold, away:
Hear will be parts.
'Swounds I'll make one and stay.
I prithee be gone since thus it faileth out,
Take water, hence, away, thy life I doubt.
Well, farewell, get I once out of door,
Skinke never will put trust in warrants more.
Will Gloster not be bridled?
Yes my Liege and saddled too, and rid, and spurred, & rained,
Such misery (in your Reign) falls your friends,
Let go my arms, you dunghyls let me speak.
where's that knave Skinke? I charge you see him stayed.
The swift heeled knave is fled, body a me here's rule,
here's work indeed.
Fellow that Skinke, let privy search be made,
Let not one pass except he be well known,
Let posts be every way sent speedily,
For ten mile's compass round about the City.
Take Gloster to you Lieutenant of the Tower,
Keep him aside till we confer a while,
Father you must subscribe to his committing.
Why must he Henry?
Mary for this cause, he hath broke peace and violated laws.
So have you all done, rebels as you be.
Good words good brother, hear me gracious Lords,
I prithee Faukenbridge be patiented,
Gloster must of force answer this contempt.
I will not yield he shall unto the Tower,
Warden of th'fleet take you the charge of Gloster.
Why be it so, yet stay with him a while,
Till we take order for the company
That shall attend him, and resort to him.
Warden of the Fleet I see I am your charge,
Be friend me thus, least by their command,
I be prevented of what I intent.
Command me any service in my power.
I pray you call some nimble footed fellow,
To do a message for me to my sister.
Call in Redcap, he waiteth with a Tipstaffe,
He stammers, but he's swift and trusly Sir.
No matter for his stammering, is this he?
I jam am Re Redcap s s sir.
Run Redcap to Stepney.
I'll be at Stepney p p presently.
Nay stay, go to the Lady Faukenbridge my sister.
The La La Lady Fau Fau Faukenbreech, I r r run sir.
But take thy errand, tell her I am prisoner,
Committed to the Fleet.
I am g g glad of th' th' that, my fa fa father the p p porter sha' shall ge ge get a f f fee by you.
Stand still a while, desire her to make means
Unto Prince Richard for my liberty,
At thy return (make speed) I will reward thee.
I am g g gone si sir.
Commend me to her gentle Huntingdon,
Tell her in these affairs I'll stand her friend,
Her brother shall not long be prisoner:
Say I will visit her immediately.
Be gone sweet boy to Marian Faukenbridge,
Thou lookest like love persuade her to be loving.
So far as honour will I will persuade,
I'll lay loves battery to her modest ears,
Second my mild assault, you may chance win,
Far parley at the least, may hap pass in.
Hear take your charge, let no man speak with him,
Except ourself, our brethren, or Earl Leicester.
Not I my Lord, may not I speak with him?
Yes Faukenbridge thou shalt.
And why? he is his wives brother.
Earl Iohn, although I be, I am true unto the State, & so is he.
What, shall I have no servant of my own?
No but the household servants of the Fleet.
I thank you kinsman King, your father knows,
Gloster may boldly give a base slave blows.
O but not here, it was not well done here.
Farewell good Gloster, you shall hear from us.
Even what your Sons will suffer you to send;
Is't not a misery to see you stand,
That some time was, the Monarch of this land,
Entreating traitors for a subjects freedom?
Let him not speak, away with him to prison.
here's like to be a well stayed common wealth,
Where in proud Leicester, and licentious Iohn,
Are pillars for the King to lean upon.
we'll hear your railing Lecture in the Fleet.
On our displeasure see he speak no more.
On thy displeasure, well ye have me here;
O that I were within my Fort of Bungye
Whose walls are washed with the clear streams of Aueney
Then would not Gloster pass a halfpenny,
For all these rebels, and their poor King too.
Laughst thou King Henry? thou knows my words are true,
God help thee good old man, adieu adieu.
That Castle shall be mine, where stands it Faukenbridge
Far from your reach sure, under Feckhill ridge,
Five hundred men (England hath few such wight)
Keeps it for Gloster's use both day and night:
But you may easily win it, wantonness words
Quickly can master men, tongues out brawl swords.
Ye are an idiot.
I prithee Iohn forbear.
What shall old winter with his frosty jests,
Cross flowery pleasure?
I and nip you too, God mary mother I would tickle you
Were there no more in place but I and you.
Seize these contentions, forward to the Tower,
Release Queen Elinor, and leave me there
Your prisoner I am sure, if ye had power,
there's nothing lets you but the Commons fear:
Keep your State Lords, we will by water go,
Making the fresh Thames, salt with tears of woe.
And we'll by land through the City ride,
Making the people tremble at our pride.
Black Heath quoth he, and I were King of all Kent,
I would give it for a commodity of Apron-strings, to
Be in my cottage again. Prince's warrants, mary Skinke
Finds them as sure as an obligation sealed with butter.
At King's Bridge I durst not enter a boat, through
London the stones were fiery, I have had a good
Cool way through the fields, and in the high way
To Ratcliff stands a heater: Mile-end's covered with
Who goes there. 'tis for me sure; O Kent, O Kent,
I would give my part of all Christendom to feel
Thee as I see thee. If I go forward I am stayed,
If I go backward, there's a rogue in a red cap, he's run
From S. Iohnes after me: I were best stay here,
Lest if he come with hue and cry, he stop me yonder,
I would slip the collar for fear of the halter;
But here comes my runner, and if he run for me,
His race dies, he is as sure dead, as if a Parliament
Of Devils had decreed it.
Ste Ste Stepney chi church yonder, but I have forgot
The La La Lady Fau Fau Fau plague on her,
I mu must b back to the Fleire Fleire Fleet to kn kn know it.
The la the la la Lady Fau, plague on't; G Gloster
Will gone near to st stab me, fo for forgetting
My errand, he is such a ma ma mad Lord, the
La Lady Fau Fau Fau.
Help me devise, upon my life this fool is sent
From Gloster to his sister Marian.
In must nee needs go back, the La Lady
Fau Fau Fau.
God speed good fellow.
Go go god sp sp speed you sir.
Why runnest thou from me?
Ma mary sir, I have lo lost a La ladies name, and I am running ba back to see se seek it.
What Lady? I prithee stay.
Why the la Lady Fau Fau Fau.
Faukenbridge?
I the s s same, f f farewell, I th' th' thank you ha' heartily
If thou wouldst speak with her she is in Kent,
I serve her, what's thy business with my Lady?
I sh sh should do an errand to her f f. my Lord
Of Gloster, but a a and she be in k Kent, I'll s send it by you.
Where is my Lord?
Mary p p prisoner in the Fl Fleet, a a and w would have her speak to P Prince R Richard for his re re release.
I have much business, hold there's thy fare by water, my Lady lies this night.
Wh wh where I pray?
At Gravesend at the Angel.
'tis devilish co co cold going by water.
Why there's my cloak and hat to keep thee warm,
Thy cap and jerkin will serve me to ride in
By the way, thou hast wind and tyde, take Oars.
My Lady will reward thee royally.
G God a mercy, f fa faith and everth thou co co come to the Fl Fl Fleet, I'll give the tu tu turning of the ke key f for n no nothing.
high thee, to morrow morning at Gravesend I'll wash thy stammering throat with a mug of ale merrily.
God be w with you till s so soon; what call you the Lady? O now I re remember the La Lady Fa Faukenbridge at what s sign?
At the Angel.
A Angel, the la la Lady fa fa Falconbridge, Fa Fau Faukenbridge.
Farewell and be hanged good stammering ninny, I think I have set your Redcaps heels a running, would your Pyanet chattering humour could as sa safely see set me fr from the searchers walks. Yonder comes some one, him: Skink to your tricks this tytty tytty, a the tongue I believe will fail me.
Come make up to this fellow, let th'other go, he seems a gentleman, what are you sir?
Would I had kept my own suit, if the countenance carry it away.
Stand sirrah, what are you?
The po po Porters Son of the FFl Fleet, going to Stepney about business to the La La Lady Fa Fa Faukenbridge.
Well bring him thither, some two or three of ye honest neighbours, and so back to the Fleet, we'll show ourselves diligent above other Officers.
Wh wh why le le let me run I am Re Redcap.
Well, sure you shall now run no faster than I lead you, hear ye neighbour Simmes, I leave my staff with ye, be vigilant I pray you, search the suspicious houses at the towns end, this Skink's a trouncer; come, will you be gone sir?
Yes sir, and the devil go with you and them,
Well, yet have hope mad ha heart, co co come your way.
Sweet nobility in reversion, Block by the commission of his head, Conjures you and withal binds you, by all the tricks that pages pass in time of Parliament, as swearing to the pantable, crowning with Custords, paper whiffs to the sleeper's noses, cutting of tags, stealing of torches, cum multis aliis tell Block, what Block you have cast in the way of my Ladies content.
Block by the antiqivity of your ancestry, I have given your Lady not so much as the least cause of dislike, if she be despleased at any news I bring, it's more than I must blab.
Zounds these pages be so proud, they care not for an old Servingman, you are a ward and so, an Earl, and no more: you disquiet our house that's the most: and I may be even with thee that's the least.
What Block, what Block I say what do you there?
Making the young Lord merry Madam,
Go attend the gate, see if you can let in more grief thereat,
Zounds and grief come in there, and I see him once I'll Conjure his gaberdine.
will you be gone sir?
Him, these women, these women, and she be not in love either with Prince Richard or this lad, let blocks head be made a chopping block.
Fair Madam, what reply you to my suit,
The prince excepts smiles, welcomes, loving looks,
The Prince, if he give heed to Marrians suit,
Must hear heart-sighs, see sorrow in my eyes,
And find cold welcome to calamities,
And why for god's sake?
Even for Gloster's sake,
why by mine honour, and Prince Richard's faith,
Your brother Gloster shall have liberty,
Upon condition you release a prisoner
That you have long held in captivity.
I have no prisoner,
Yes a world of eyes, your beauty in a willing bondage ties
Go to, you are disposed to jest my Lord,
In earnest I must be an earnest suitor
To you for love, yet you must be my tutor.
Are you in love?
I dearly love Prince Richard.
Then do you love the loveliest man alive.
The Princeliest person of King Henry's sons,
I like this well.
he is virtuous in his mind his body fair,
His deeds are Just, his speeches debonair,
Better and better still.
In deed he is what no body can deny.
All lovely, beauty all, all Majesty.
I'll tell his excellence what you report,
No doubt he will be very thankful, for't,
Nay hear you young Lord? God's pity stay.
What have you more in Richard's praise to say?
I have said to much if you misconstrue me.
Duty bids praise him, not unchastity.
Unchastity holy heavens forfend it,
That he or I, or you should once intend it,
They are there sir, close at it, I leave you sir, the more Room the less company.
Drink that, farewell,
If that sir Richard comes, this ties, this binds,
O gold, thy power converteth servants minds.
How now fair Madam who hath angered you?
Grief at my brother's durance anger's me.
I had thought my Ward young Huntingdon had vexed you
who he? alas good Gentleman he wronged me not.
No matter for all this, I'll tell your tale.
Sir there comes no more of you in with him then the Constable. Zounds hear's a beadroll of Bills at the gate indeed, back ye base
Now sirrah what's the matter?
Marry hear's a stammerer taken clipping the King's English, and the Constable and his watch hath brought him to you to be examined.
No Madam we are commanded by the King to watch, and meeting this fellow at Mile-end, he tells us, he is the Porter's son of the Fleet, that the Earl of Gloster sent him to you.
Iff forsooth h he desire you to speak to the p Prince for him.
O I conceive thee, bid him blithely far,
Bear him this Ring in token of my care.
If I be rid of this evil Angel that haunts me, many rings, much Fleet will Skinke come unto.
Madam, if you know this fellow we'll discharge him.
Madam, and you be wise, trust your honest neighbours here, let them bring this ca ca ca ca to the Fleet, and s see your ring delivered.
A plague upon you for a damned rogue,
The Porter of the Fleet will surely know me.
Good neighbours bring this honest fellow thither,
there's for his pains a crown if he say true,
And for your labour there's as much for you.
Why Ma Ma Madam, I am Re Re Redcap the Porter's son.
Thou hast no wrong in this, farewell good fellow.
Best speaking to Prince Richard? no I'll try
And face out Redcap if the slave were by.
Make them drink Block.
Come to the Buttery bar, stitty stitty stammerer, come honest Constable, hay the watch of our town, we'll drink trylill I saith.
Lupus in fabula my Noble Lord,
See the old fox Sir Richard Faukenbridge.
We'll fit him well enough, second us Robin.
I'll fit you well enough for all your hope,
Leave quaffing sirrah, listen to their talk.
O while you live beware, two are sooner seen than one: beside, bear a brain Master, if Block should be now spied, my Madam would not trust this sconce neither in time nor tide.
Well leave me, now it buds; see see, they kiss.
Adieu good old sinner, you may recover it with a sallet of parsley, and the herb patience, if not sir you know the worst, it's but even this.
Madam, what you desire I not deny,
But promise Gloster's life and liberty,
I beg but love.
When doth she give her alms?
Fair honourable Prince.
Nay then they speed.
My soul hath your deserts in good esteem.
Witness these goodly times that grace my head.
But were you the sole Monarch of the earth,
Your power were insufficient to invade,
My never yielding heart of chastity.
Sayest thou so Mall, I promise thee for this,
I'll owe thy cherry lips an old man's kiss;
Look how my Cockerill droops, 'tis no matter,
I like it best when women will not flatter.
Nay but sweet Lady.
Nay but gracious Lord, do not so much forget your Princely worth,
As to attempt virtue to unchastity.
O noble youth!
Let not the ladies dead grief for her brother,
Give life to shameless and detested sin.
Sweet child.
Consider that she is of high decent.
Most virtuous Earl.
Wife to the noblest Knight that ever breathed.
Now blessing on thee blessed Huntingdon.
And would you then first stain your Princely stock,
Wrong beauty, virtue, honour, chastity,
And blemish Faukenbridges untainted arms?
By adding horns unto our Falcones' head,
Well thought on noble youth, 'twas well put in.
Besides my gracious Lord.
Tickle him Mall, plague him on that side for his hot desire.
however secretly great Princes sin,
Oh now the spring she'll do it sercretly.
The King of all hearts will have all sins known.
Ah than she yields not.
Lady here's my hand, I did but try your honourable faith
He did but try her, would she have been tried
It had groan hard on this and on this side.
And since I see your virtue so confirmed,
as vice can have no entrance in your heart,
I vow in sight of heaven never again,
To move like question but for love,
My heart is eased, hold Block take up my cloak.
And your cap to sir.
Sir Richard?
What sweet Prince welcome i'faith,
I see youth quickly gets the start of age;
But welcome welcome and young Huntingdon.
Sweet Robin hude, honours best flowering bloom,
Welcome to Faukenbridge with all my heart,
How cheers my love, how fares my Marrian, ha?
Be merry chuck, and Prince Richard welcome,
Let it go Mall I know thy grievances.
Away away, tut let it pass sweet girl,
We needs must have his help about the Earl.
Let it not be delayed dear Faukenbridge.
Sir Richard, first make suit unto my father,
I'll follow you to Court and second you,
Fellow to Court, ha? then I smell a rat,
It's probable he'll have about again,
Long siege makes entrance to the strongest fort,
It must not be I must not leave him here,
Prince Richard, if you love my brother's good,
Let's ride back to the Court, I'll wait on you,
He's jelious, but I must observe the time,
We'll ride unto the Court, I'll leave my boy
Till we return, are you agreed to this?
Oh I he is an honourable youth,
Vertwos and modest, Huntington's right heir,
His father Gilbert was the smoothst faced Lord
That ere bare Arms in England or in France,
Solicitie Robin, Lady give good ear,
And of your brother's freedom never fear,
Marrian farewell, where's Block? open the gate,
Come Prince God send us to prove fortunate?
why do you stay sir?
Madam as a Leaguer to solicit for your absent love
Walk in the Garden I will follow you.
I faith I faith you are a noble wag.
An honourable wag, and wagish Earl.
Even what you will sweet Lady I must bear,
Hoping of patience, profit will ensue.
That you will bear the Prince as I bear you.
Well said well said, I'll have these toys amended,
Go, will you walk into the Garden sir,
But will you promise me to bring no maids,
To set upon my little manship there?
You threatened whipping, and I am in fear,
Upon my word I'll bring none but myself,
You see I am weapned, do not I beseech you,
I'll stab them come there twenty ere they breech me.
This youth and Richard, think me easily won,
But Marrian rather will embrace,
The bony carcase of dismaying death,
Than prove unchaste to Noble Faukenbridge,
Richard's king Henry's son, is light,
Wanton and loves not humble modesty,
Which makes me (much contrary to my thoughts)
Flatter his humour for my brother's safety,
But I protest I'll dwell among the dead,
Ere I pollute my sacred nuptial bed.
Porter what Porter where's this drowsy ass?
Who calls? my Lord of Gloster all alone?
Alone and have your wisdoms company,
Pray where's the stammering chatterer your son?
He's ever running but he makes small haste,
I'll bring his lither legs in better frame,
And if he serve me thus another time.
Hark sir your clients knock, and't be your pie,
Let him vouchsafe to chatter us some news.
Tell him we dance attendance in our chamber.
This Iohn and Henry are so full of hate,
That they will have my head by some device,
Gloster hath plotted means for an escape,
And if it fadge, why so; if not, then well,
The way to heaven is death, this life's a hell.
Why should the Watchmen come along with thee?
there's such a que question for yond s same r rogue Skink p plague keep far enough from him, that a an honest f fellow ca cannot which w walk the streets.
Well sir dispatch your business with the Earl,
He's angry at your stay I tell ye that.
'Sblood what a frown this Gloster casts at me,
I hope he means to lend me no more cuffs,
Such as he paid me at the Parliament.
What mutter you, what tidings from my sister?
Co commendations and s she hath s sent ye this r ring.
Hold there's two Angels, shut the chamber door,
You must about some business for me straight;
Come nearer man,
I fear I am to near,
Hast thou no tidings for my liberty?
No b but ye sh shall he hear f from her p p presently.
And p presently sir off with your coat.
Nay quick, uncase, I am bold to borrow it,
I'll leave my gown, change is no robbery.
Stutterer it's so, near flinch, ye cannot pass,
Cry, and by heaven I'll cut thy coward's throat,
Quickly cashyre yourself, you see me stay,
N n nay, b b but wh wh what m mean ye?
To scape I hope, sir with your privilege,
How now, who's this, my fine familiar Skinke?
Queen Beldame's minion,
Zounds you see ti's I
Time sorts not now to know these mysteries.
How thou camest by this ring, or stolest this coat,
They are mine now in possession, for which kindness
If I escape I'll get thee Liberty,
Or fire the fleet about the Wardens ears,
Mum budgit not a word as thou lovest thy life,
I mum mum fair, pray God may chance it,
My Lord, but that my state is desperate,
I'd see your eyes out ear I would be cheated.
Walk like an Earl villain some are coming.
Where is this Gloster?
Y y yonder he walks. Fa fa father, I let me out.
Why whether must you now?
To je Iericho I th' think, 'tis such a h h humorous Earl.
Well sir wilt please you hasten home again.
I I'll be h hear in a trice; b but p pray have ca care of th' this madcap, if he g give us the s s slip, s s some of us a are like to m make a sl sl slippery occupation on't.
Look to your business sir let me alone.
Alone? never trust me if I trouble thee.
Mad Gloster mute, all mirth turned to despair?
Why now you see what 'tis to cross a King,
Deal against Princes of the Royal blood,
You'll snarl and rail, but now your tongue is bedryed,
Come caper hay, set all at six and seven,
What musest thou with thought of hell or heaven?
Of neither Iohn I muse at my disgrace,
That I am thus kept prisoner in this place.
O sir, a number are here prisoners,
My Cousin Morton whom I came to visit,
But he good man is at his morrow mass,
But I that neither care to say nor sing,
Come to seek that preaching hate and prayer,
And while they mumble up their Orisons,
We'll play a game at bowls, what sayst thou Gloster?
I care not if I do,
You do not care, Let old men care for graves, we for our sports,
Off with your gown, there hes my hat and Cloak,
The bowls there quickly, he?
No my gown stirs not, it keeps sorrow warm,
And she, and I am not to be divorced,
Yes there's an axe must part your head and you,
And with your head, sorrow will leave your heart.
But come shall I begin? a pound a game,
More pounds and we thus heavy? well begin.
Rub rub rub rub.
Amen God send it short enough, and me
A safe running with them clothes from thee.
Play Robin, run run run.
Far enough and well, fly one foot more,
Would I were half so far without the door.
Now Porter what's the news?
Your Cousin Morton humbly craves,
Leaving your game, you would come visit him,
Bowl Gloster I'll come presently.
So near mad Robin? then have after you,
Would I were gone, make after as you may,
Well sir 'tis yours, one all, throw but the Iacke
While I go talk with Morton: I'll not stay,
Keep Cloak and hat in pawn I'll hold out play,
I would be sorry Iohn but you should stay,
Until my bias run another way,
Now pass, and hay pass, Skink unto your tricks,
'tis but a chance at hazard: there lies Gloster,
and hear stands Skinke, now Iohn play thou thy part,
And if I scape I'll love thee with my heart.
So porter let me forth.
God bless your grace, ye spoke with the L. Morton.
I have and must about his business to the Court.
It grieves me to break my sport with Gloster,
The melancholy Earl is comfortless,
I would your grace would comfort him from hence,
The Fleet is weary of his company,
Drink that, some knocks, I prithee let me cut,
His head shall off ere long, never make doubt.
Now madcap thou winstall; where art thou Robin?
uncased: nay then he means to play in earnest.
But where's my Cloak, my rapier, and my hat?
I hold my birthright to a beggars scrip,
The bastard is escaped in my clothes.
'tis well, he left me his to walk the streets,
I'll fire the City but I'll find him out,
Perchance he hides himself to try my spleen,
I'll to his chamber, Gloster? hallo Gloster?
I wonder how thou camest so strangely changed?
'tis not an hour since thou wents from hence,
By my Ch Ch Christendom I ha have not b b been h here this three nights, a p p plague of him, that made me such a ch chanting, and s sent me such a Ia Ia jaunt, blood I was saint stayed for Skinke, that ill fa fa faced rogue.
I pray God there be no practice in this change.
Now I remember these are Skinkes clothes,
That he wore last day, at the Parliament,
Porter? you Porter?
Do you not hear them knock, you must stay sir,
Blood I could eat these rogues.
Wh wh what raw, 'tis a very harsh more morsel,
Ne next your he heart
A plague upon your jaunts, what porter slave?
I have been at g gravesend sir.
What's that to me?
And at Ca Ca Canterbury.
And at the gallows: zounds this frets my soul.
But I c could not f find your s s sister the La Lady Fau Faukenbridge.
You stammering slave hence, chat among your Daws,
Come ye to mad me? while the rogue your father.
My f fa father.
Porter? you damned slave.
Is't Midsummer do you begin to rave?
Hark how the traitor flouts me to my teeth.
I would entreat your knaveship let me forth,
For fear I dash your branes out with the keys,
What is become of Gloster and my garments?
Alas in your apparel Gloster's gone,
I let him out, even now I am undone,
It was your practice, and to keep me back
You sent Iacke Daw. son with ca ca ca,
To tell a sleveles tale: lay hold on him,
To Newgate with him and you tut atut,
Run red cap and trudge about,
Or bid your father's portership farewell.
He hears a go good je je jest by the L Lord to more mock an ape withal: my fa fa father has brought his ho ho hogs to a fa fa fair m m market. Po po porter quoth you? p po porter that will for me, and I po po porter it, let them po po post me to heaven in this qua quarter. But I must s s seek this Gl Gl Gloster and Sk Sk Skinke that co coney catching ra ra rascal, a pa pa plague co co confound him, Re re redcap must ru run he cannot tell when whether.
Mother and Leicester add not oil to fire.
Wrath's kindled with a word, and cannot hear
The number less persuasions you infort,
O but my son thy father favours him.
Richard that vile abortive changeling brat,
And Faukenbridge, are fallen at Henry's feet.
They woo for him, but entreat my son
Gloster may die for this that he hath done,
If Gloster live thou wilt be overthrown,
If Gloster live thy mother dies in moan,
If Gloster live Leyster will fly the realm,
If Gloster live thy kingdom's but a dream,
Have I not sworn by that eternal arm
That puts just vengeance sword in monarch's hands,
Gloster shall die for his presumption?
What needs more conjuration gracious Mother?
And honourable Leyster mark my words.
I have a Beadrole of some threescore Lords,
Of Gloster's faction,
Nay of Henry's faction.
Of thy false father's faction, speak the truth,
He is the head of factions; were he down:
Peace, plenty, glory will empale thy crown.
I there's the But; whose hart-white if we hit,
The game is ours. Well we may rage's and rove,
At Gloster, Lancaster, Chester, Faukenbridge,
But he is the upshot.
Yet begin with Gloster.
The destinies run to the book of Fates,
And read in never-changing Characters
Robert of Gloster's end he dies to day,
So fate, so heaven, so doth King Henry say.
Emperially resolved.
The old King comes,
Then comes Luxurious lust,
The King of Concubines, the King that scorns
The undefiled, chaste and numptiall bed,
The King that hath his Queen Imprisoned.
For my sake scorn him, son call him not father,
Give him the style of a competitor,
Pride seize upon my heart, wrath fill mine eyes,
Sat lawful majesty upon my front
Duty fly from me, pity be exiled,
Senses forget that I am Henry's child,
I kiss thee, and I bless thee, for this thought.
O Lancaster bid Henry yield some reason
Why he desires so much the death of Gloster,
I hear thee Henry, and I thus reply.
I do desire the death of Bastard Gloster.
For that he spends the Treasure of the Crown.
I do desire the death of bastard Gloster,
For that he doth desire to pull me down.
Or were this false (I purpose to be plain)
He loves thee, and for that I him disdain.
Therein thou showest a hate corrupted mind,
To him the more unjust, to me unkind,
He loves you as his father loved his mother.
Fie, fie upon thee hateful Elinor.
I thought thou hadst been long since scarlet dyde,
She is and therefore cannot change her colour.
You are to strict, Earl Gloster's fault Merits not death,
By th'rood the Prince says true.
Hear is a statute from the Confessor,
The Confessor was but a simple fool.
Away with books my word shall be a law,
England her breath shall from this bosom draw,
Gloster shall die,
Let Gloster die the death.
Leyster he shall not, he shall have law, despite of him and thee.
What law, will you be Traitors? what's the law?
His right hands loss, and that is such a loss,
As England may lament, all Christians weep.
That hand hath been advanced against the Moors,
Driven out the Saracens from Gads and Cicile,
Fought fifteen Battles under Christ's red cross,
And is it not (think you) a grievous loss,
That for a slave (and for no other harm)
It should be sundered from his Princely Arm?
More for example Noble Lancaster, but 'tis great pity,
To to great a pity.
I'll have his hand & head.
Thou shalt have mine them.
Well said stubborn Dick, Iack would not serve me so,
Were the boy here:
Both Iohn and I have served your will too long;
Mother repent your cruelty and wrong:
Gloster you know is full of mirth and glee,
And never else did your grace injury.
Gloster shall die.
Fetch him here I'll see him dead.
He that stirs for him shall lay down his head.
O quiet good my Lords, patience I pray,
I think he comes unsent for by my faith.
What meanest thou Gloster?
Who brought Gloster hither?
Let Gloster hang and them that
There lies his case, a mischief on his carcase.
My dear son Jack?
Your dear son Iack an apes, your monkey, your baboon, your ass, your gull.
What ails Earl Iohn?
Hence further from my sight,
My fiery thoughts and wrath have work in hand;
Le curse ye blacker than the Levarnian Lake,
If you stand wondering at my sorrow thus;
I am with child, big, hugely swollen with rage,
Who'll play the Midwife, and my throbs assuage?
I will my Son.
I will high hearted brother.
You will, and you, tut, tut all you are nothing,
'twill out, 'twill out, myself my self can ease:
You chafe, you swell, ye are commanding King,
My father is your footstool when he please,
Your word's a law, these Lords dare never speak,
Gloster must die, your enemies must fall.
What means our brother?
He means that thou art mad she frantic, Leyster foolish
I the babe, these grind us, bite us, vex us, charge,
And discharge, Gloster, O Gloster!
Where is Gloster son?
Where is Glo. brother?
I hope he be escaped.
O I could tear my hair, & falling thus upon the
Solide earth, dig into Gloster's grave, so he were dead
And gone into the depth of under worlds.
Or get seditious hundredth thousand hands,
And like Briareus, battle with the Stars,
To pull him down from heaven if he were there,
Look to Earl Iohn the Gentleman is mad.
O who would not be mad at this disgrace?
Gloster the fox is fled, there lies his case,
He cozened me of mine, the porter helped him,
The porter shall be hanged let's part and seek him,
Gloster shall die all Europe shall not save him.
He is wise, too wise for us, yet I'll go with you,
To get more fools into my company.
This is your father's plot, revenge it son.
Father by heaven if this were your advice,
Your head or heart shall pay the bitter price,
Come mother, Brother, Leyster, let's away,
I, I'll be one, in hope to meet the bastard,
And then no more myself will be his headsman.
Richard and Faukenbridge follow the search,
You may prevent mischance by meeting Gloster,
If ye find Skinke see that you apprehend him,
I hear there is a wizard at black heath,
Let some inquire of him where Skinke remains,
Although I trust not to those fallacies,
Yet now and then such men prove Soothsayers.
Will you be gone?
Withal my heart, withal my heart my Lord,
Come Princely Richard, we are ever yoked.
Pray God there be no mystery in this,
Be not suspicious where there is no cause,
Nay nothing, nothing, I am but in jest.
Call in a Pursuivant.
hear's one my Liege,
There is a Porter likely to be hanged,
For letting Gloster scape, sirrah attend,
You shall have a repreive to bring him us,
These boys are to to stubborn Lancaster,
But 'tis their mother's fault, if thus she move me,
I'll have her head though all the world reprove me.
Do not deny me gentle Huntingdon.
My Lord will miss me.
Tut let me excuse thee.
Turn woman, O it is intolerable!
Except you promise me to play the Page:
Do that, try one night, and you'll laugh for ever,
To hear the Orisons that lovers use;
Their ceremonious sighs, their idle oaths,
To hear how you are praised and prayed unto.
For you are Richard's Saint, they talk of Mary
The blessed Virgin, but upon his beads
He only prays to Marian Faukenbridge.
The more his error, but will you agree
To be the Lady Faukenbridge one day?
When is't?
On Monday.
Wherefore is't?
Nay then you do me wrong with inquisition.
And yet I care not greatly if I tell thee.
Thou seest my husband full of jealousy;
Prince Richard in his suit importunate,
My brother Gloster threatened by young Henry;
To clear these doubts, I will in some disguise,
Go to black Heath unto the holy Hermit,
Whose wisdom in foretelling things to come,
Will let me see the issue of my cares.
If destinies ordain me happiness,
I'll chase these mists of sorrow from my heart,
With the bright Sun of mirth: if fate agree,
It, and my friends, must suffer misery,
Yet I'll be merry too, till mischief come.
only I long to know the worst of ill.
I'll once put on a scarlet countenance.
Be wary lest ye be discovered Robin.
Best paint me then, be sure I shall not blush.
Beat an Officer, Red cap I'll have ye talked withal,
Beat Sir Richard's Porter? help Madam, help,
Peace you damned rogue.
Brother I pray you forbear.
'Zounds a hundredth at my heals almost,
And yet the villain stands on complaiment.
Abots one you, is't you?
Will you to the door you fool? and bar the gate,
Hold there's an angel for your broken pate;
If any knock let them not in in haste.
Well I'll do as I see cause, blood thou art dear to me, but here's a sovereign plaster for the sore: gold healeth wounds, gold easeth hearts: what can a man have more?
Dear brother, tell us how you made escape?
You see I am hear, but if you would know how:
I cannot scape and tell the manner too,
By this I know your house is compassed
With hellhound search.
Brother I'll furnish you with beard & hair, and Garments like my husband, how like you that?
Well, when I have them: quickly then dispatches blood turn grey beard and hair?
Robin conceal, this dyeteth my mind,
Mirth is the object of my humorous spleen,
Thou high commanding fury! further device,
jests are conceited, I long to see their birth,
What come ye sister? Robin a thieves hand,
But prithee where hadst thou this beard and hair?
Prince Richard wore them hither in a mask,
sayst thou me so, faith love the Princely youth,
Tut you must taste stolen pleasure now and than,
But if she steal and jelious eyes espy:
She will be sure condemned of Burglary,
Ha crack? can your low stumps venture so deep
Into affections stream? go to you wanton.
What want we now? my nightcap, O 'tis hear,
So now no Gloster, but old Faukenbridge,
Hark, the search knocks, i'll let them in myself;
Welcome good fellow; ha, what is't you lack?
Ma master Co constable, se se search you th' that way, a and you ho honest man th' that way. I'll ru run th' this way m my own se self.
What search you for? what is it you would have?
Madam, what shall I do to these brown-bill fellows? some run into the wine seller, some here, some there.
Let them alone, let them search their filles.
I'll look to their fingers for all that.
Do so good Block, be careful honest Block.
Sir stammerer & your wa watch, you're pa past i'faith.
Will you not speak knaves, tell me who you seek?
Ma mary sit we s seek a va va vagabond, a fu fugitive, my La Ladies own b brother; but and he were the po po Popes own b brother, I would ssearch f f for him; for I have a p poor fatherr ready to be ha ha hanged f f for him.
O 'tis for Gloster! mary search a gods name,
Seek peace, will he break prison too?
It's pity he should live, nay I defy him.
Come look about, search every little corner,
Myself will lead the way, pray you come,
Seek, seek, and spare not, though it be labour lost:
He comes not under my roof, hear ye wife,
He comes not hither, take it for a warning.
You sp sp speak like an honest ge ge Gentleman, re re rest you me me merry, co co come my f f friends, I be believe h h he r ran by the g g garden w wall toward the wa water side.
This fellow is of the humour I would choose my wife,
Few words and many paces, a word and a way, and so
Must I: Sister adieu, pray you for me, I'll do the like for you.
Robin farewell, commend me to the Prince.
Can ye not stay here safe?
No, I'll not trust the changing humours of old Faukenbridge,
Adieu young Earl, Sister let's kiss and part;
Tush, near mourn, I have a merry heart.
Farewell all comfort.
What weeping Lady?
Then I perceive you have forgot Blackheath.
No, there I'll learn both of his life and death.
Till Monday Madam I must take my leave.
You will not miss then:
Nay, if Robin fail ye, let him have never favour of fair Lady.
Mean while I'll spend my time in prayers & tears,
That Gloster may escape these threatened fears.
Thus jets my noble Skinke along the streets,
To whom each bonnet veils, and all knees bend;
And yet my noble humour is too light,
By the six shillings▪ here are two cracked groats
To helter skelter, at some vawting house.
But who comes yonder? ha, old Faukenbridge?
Hath a brave-chaine, were Iohn and he good friends,
That chain were mine, and should unto Blackheath
I'll venture, it's but trial, luck may fall.
Good morrow good sir Richard Faukenbridge.
Good morrow my sweet Prince, hearty good morrow,
This greeting well becomes us, marry does it;
Better iwis then strife and jangling.
Now can I love ye, will ye to the sheriffs?
Your brother Richard hath been there this hour.
Yes I am plodding forward as you do;
What cost your chain? it's passing strongly wrought,
I would my Goldesmith had a pattern of it.
'tis at your grace's service, show it him.
Then dare ye trust me?
Who the Princely Iohn?
My Sovereign's son, why what a question's that?
I'll leave you, ye may know I dare trust you.
I'll bringed ye to the sheriffs, excuse my absence.
I will my noble Lord, adieu sweet Prince.
Why so, this breakfast was well fed upon,
When Skinkes devices on Black heath do fail,
This and such cheats, would set me under sail.
I'll to the water side, would it were later,
For still I am afraid to meet Prince Iohn.
But what a mischief meant Faukenbridge
To come again so soon? that way he went,
And now comes peaking; upon my life
The buzzard hath me in suspitition,
But whatsoever chance, I'll filch a share.
Yonder's Prince Iohn I hope he cannot know me,
there's nought but Gloster Gloster in their mouths;
I am half strangled with the Garlic breath,
Of rascals that exclaims as I pass by,
Gloster is fled, once taken he must die.
But I'll to Iohn, how does my gracious Lord?
What tattles rumour now? what news of Gloster?
What news could I hear since you left me last?
Were you not here even now? lent me your chain,
I think you dote.
Sweet Prince, age, age forgets, my brother's chain? a pretty accident,
I'll have't and be but in the spite of Iohn▪
there's more, and more, I'll geld it ear it go.
This same shall keep me in some saverne merry,
Till night's black hand curtain this to clear sky.
My sweet Prince, I have some cause to use my chain,
Another time (when ere your Lordship please)
'tis at your service, o mary God it is.
Hear palsy, take your chain, stoop and be hanged,
Yet the fish nibbled, when she might not swallow;
Gout I have kirtled what I could not borrow.
He's gone away in frets, would he might meet
My brother Faukenbridge in this mad mood,
There would be rare ado; Why this fits me,
My brain flows with fresh wit and policy.
But Gloster look about, who have we yonder?
Another Iohn Prince, Richard and the Sheriff?
Upon my life, the slave that had the chain,
Was Skinke, escaped the Fleet by some mad sleight,
Well, farewell he, better and better still,
These seek form, yet I will have my will.
Sheriff, in any case be diligent.
Whos's yonder, Faukenbridge?
How now sweet chuck, how fares my lovely Prince?
What carest thou? or well, or ill, we crave no help of thee.
God's mother do you scorn me?
Gout, what then?
Fie, leave these idle brawls, I prithee Iohn
Let's follow that we are enjoined unto.
I mary Prince, if now you slip the time,
Gloster will slip away; tut though he hate me
I have done service, I have found him out.
A shame confound thee for thy treachery,
Inconstant dotard, timorous old ass,
That shakes with cowardice not with years.
Go, I have found him, I have wound him.
O let me hug thee gentle Faukenbridge,
Forgive my oft ill using of thine age,
I'll call thee Father, i'll be penitent,
Bring me where Gloster is I'll be thy slave,
All that is mine, thou in reward shalt have.
Soft, not too hasty, I would not be seen in't,
Mary a god my wife would chide me dead,
If Gloster by my means should lose his head.
Princely Richard at this corner make your stand:
And for I know you love my sister well,
Know I am Gloster and not Faukenbridge.
Heaven prosper thee sweet Prince in thy escape.
Sheriff, make this your quarter, make good guard.
Iohn, stay you here, this way he means to turn,
By Thomas I lack a sword, body a me.
What wouldst thou with a sword old Faukenbridge?
O sir to make show in his defence,
For I have left him yonder at a house
A friends of mine, an honest Citizen.
we'll fetch him thence.
Nay then you injure me, stay till he come; he's in a russet cloak
And must attend me like a Servingman.
Hold there's my sword, and with my sword my heart,
Bring him for Godsake, and for thy desert,
My brother King and mother Queen shall love thee.
Mark me good Prince, yonder away we come,
I go afore and Gloster follows me;
Let not the Sheriff nor Richard meddle with us,
Begin you first, seize Gloster and arrest him;
I'll draw and lay about me here and here,
Be heedful that your watchmen hurt me not,
I'll hang him that doth hurt thee, prithee away,
I love thee, but thou kill'st me with delay.
Well keep close watch, i'll bring him presently.
Away then quickly.
Gloster, close master Sheriff, Prince Richard,
Gloste radieu.
I trust you.
By my Knighthood I'll prove true.
Revenge, I'll build a Temple to your name;
And the first offering shall be Gloster's head,
Thy Altars shall be sprinkled with the blood,
Whose wanton current his mad humour fed;
He was a rymer and a Ridler,
A scoffer at my mother, praised my father,
I'll fit him now foral, escape and all.
Take heed spite burst not in his proper gall.
How now, what way took Faukenbridge I wonder?
That is not Gloster sure that attends on him.
He came not at the sheriffs by the morrow mass,
I sought the goldsmiths row and found him not;
Sirrah, you're sure he sent not home my chain?
Who should send your chain sir?
The Prince, Prince Iohn I lent it him to day.
What's this they talk?
By my truth Sir, and ye lent it him, I think you may go look it: for one of the Drawers of the Salutation told me even now, that he had took up a chamber there till evening, and then he will away to Kent.
Body of me, he means to spend my chain,
Come Block I'll to him.
Hear you Faukenbridge?
Why what a knave art thou? yonder's Prince Iohn.
Then the Drawer's a knave, he told me Prince Iohn was at the Salutation.
Where's Gloster Faukenbridge?
Sweet Prince I know not.
Come, jest not with me, tell me where he is?
I never saw him since the Parliament.
Impudent liar, didst thou not even now
Say thou wouldst fetch him? hadst thou not my sword?
Wert thou a King, I will not bear the lie,
Thy sword? no boy, thou seest this sword is mine.
My Master a liar? Zounds wert thou a potentate,
I scorn to wear thy arms untutred child,
I fetch thee Gloster? shameless did I see thee
Since as I went this morning to the Siriffes,
Thou borrowedst my gold chain?
Thy chain?
I hope thou wilt not cheat me princocks Iohn.
I'll cheat thee of thy life if thou charge me
With any chain.
Come, let him come I pray, I'll whip ye boy, I'll teach you to out face.
Come, come, come, but one at once, ye dasterds come
Keep the King's peace, I see you are both deceived,
He that was last hear, was not Faukenbridge.
They slander me, who says that I was hear?
We do believe ye sir; nor do you think
My brother Iohn deceived you of a chain.
He did, I did deliver it with this hand.
I'll die upon the slanderer,
Let the boy come.
I, let him come, let him come.
Fellow, thou spak'st even now, as if prince Iohn
Had been at some old Tavern in the town.
I sir, I came up now, but from the Salutation,
And a drawer that doth not use to lie, told me
Prince Iohn hath been there all this after noon.
The Devil in my likeness then is there.
The Devil in thy likeness or thyself,
Had my gold chain.
Thou art the Devil, for thou
Hadst my good sword, all these can witness it.
God's Mother thou bely'st me.
Give me the lie?
Nay calm this fury, lets down to the Tavern,
Or one, or both, these counterfeits are there.
I know him well enough that had my chain,
And there be two Iohns, if I find one there,
be'r Lady, I will lay him fast.
It is this Skinke that mocks us I believe.
Alas poor Skink it is the Devil Gloster;
Who if I be so happy once to find,
I'll give contentment, to his troubled mind.
I hope he's far enough, and free enough:
Yet these conseytes I know delight his soul.
Follow me Block, follow me honest Block.
Much follow you, I have another piece of work in hand; I hear say Redcaps father shall be hanged this after noon, I'll see him slip a string though I give my service the slip; beside my Lady bade me hear his examination at his death: I'll get a good place, and pen it word for word, and as I like it, set out a mournful Ditty to the tune of Labandalashot, or row well ye Mariners, or somewhat as my muse shall me invoke.
A charitable deed, God bless the King,
He shall be then repreeved.
I sir, some day or two, till the young King and Prince Iohn change it, especially if the good Earl be not found which God forbidden.
What house is this that we are stepped into to read this warrant in?
A Tavern sir, the Salutation,
A Tavern? then I will turn prodigal,
Call for a pint of Sack good fellow.
Drawer?
Anan sir.
A pint of thy best Sack my pretty youth.
God bless your worship sir, ye shall have the best in London sir.
What know'st thou me? know'st thou old Faukenbridge?
I am no Tavern hunter I can tell thee.
But my Master hath taken many a fair pound of your man Block; he was here to day sir, and filled two bottles of nippitate sack.
Well, fill us of your nippitate sir.
This is well chaunest, but here ye boy?
Bring Sugar in white paper, not in brown;
For in white paper I have here a trick,
Shall make the Pursuivant first swoon, then sick.
Thou honest fellow what's thy name?
My name is Winterborne sir.
What countryman I prithee?
Berkshire and please ye.
How long hast thou been sworn a messenger?
But yesterday and please your worship,
This is the First employment I have had.
A good beginning, here have too thee fellow;
Thou art my fellow now thou servest the King,
Nay take Sugar too, God's Lady dear,
I put it in my pocket, but it's here:
Drink a good draft I prithee Winterborne.
O Lord Sir Richard, the man, the man.
What a forgetful beast am I? peace boy,
It is his fashion ever when he drinks.
Fellow he hath the falling sickness,
Run fetch two cushions to raise up his head,
And bring a little Key to open his teeth.
Pursuivant, your warrant and your box,
These must with me, the shape of Faukenbridge
Will hold no longer water here about.
Gloster will be a proteus every hour,
That Elinor and Leyster, Henry, Iohn,
And all that rabble of hate loving curs,
May minister me more mirth to play upon.
here's a key sir, and one of our folk to help.
No matter for a key, help him but in,
And lay him by the fire a little while,
He'll wake immediately, but be heart sick,
there's money for a candle and thy wine,
I'll go but up unto your Alderman's,
And come down presently to comfort him.
Drawer? what Drawer? with a vengeance Dra.
Speak in the Crown there.
They be come, the devil crown ye one by one,
Skinke though art betrayed, that master Faukenbridge
Missing some of his chain, hath got thee dogged.
Drawer? what Drawer?
Anan, anon sir.
Was not sir Richard Faukenbridge below?
Yes and please ye.
It does not please me well, knows he that I am here?
No I protest.
Come hither sirrah, I have little money,
But there's some few links of a chain of gold:
Upon your honesty knows not sir Richard,
That I am here?
No by my halidom.
Who's that was with him?
Why a Pursuivant.
Where is sir Richard?
At the Alderman's.
A Pursuivant and at the Alderman's.
What Pig, or Goose, or Capon have you killed,
Within your Kitchen new?
A pig new sticked.
Fetch me a saucer of the blood, quick run;
I'll sit the Pursuivant, and Alderman,
And Faukenbridge, if Skinke have any wit.
Well Gloster, I did never love thee yet,
But thou'rt the maddest Lord that ere I met,
If I scape this, and meet thee once again,
Curse Skinke, if he die penny in thy det.
O my Lord the house is full of halberts, and a great many Gentlemen ask for the room where Prince Iohn is?
Lend me thy Apron, run and fetch a pot from the next room.
Betrayed, 'swounds betrayed, by gout, by palsy, by dropsy;
O brave boy, excellent blood: up, take my cloak
And my hat to thy share, when I come from Kent, i'll pay
Thee like a King.
I thank you my Lord.
Now fortune help or never: they come, and ye were a Prince as ye say ye are, ye would be ashamed to abuse a poor servant thus, but and if you were not of the blood Royal, I'd break the neck of ye down the stairs, so would I, I'd teach you to hurt prentices.
Who hurt thee fellow?
Prince devil or his dam, Prince Iohn they call him.
Gloster I hope.
I doubt not but its Skinke.
Where is he?
Up them stairs, take heed of him.
He's in the Crown.
Alas poor fellow, he hath crowned thee shrewdly.
In recompense, if it be him I seek,
I'll give thee his whole head to tread upon.
Fellow me brother, come old Faukenbridge,
Keep the stairs sheriffs, you see it waxeth dark,
Take heed he slip not by you.
Hang yourselves, this darkness shall convey me out, of doors
I'll swim the Thames, but I'll attain Blackheath,
London farewell, curse Iohn, rave Faukenbridge,
Skinke 'scapes you all by twy lights privyledge.
Where is he? lights, bring lights, drag out that boy.
This is my cloak, my hat, my rapier,
And either it was Skinke or Gloster.
I know not who 'twas sir, he said he was Prince Iohn, he took away my apron and a pottle pot with him, and all to bloodied his head and face.
We met him, by S. Anthony, we met him.
The fire of S. Anthony confound
This changing counterfeit whatsoever he be.
It makes me laugh at envious greediness,
Who feeds upon her own heart's bitterness.
Sirrah you that were borne to cry anon,
What other copesmates have you in the house?
Sir, my Masters guess be none of my copesmates,
Well your guess, can ye guess who they be?
Marry here's a pursuivant, that this Gentleman sir
Richard Faukenbridge left sick even now.
Marry of God did I, thou lying knave?
I am a poor boy sir, your worship may say your pleasure, our maids have had a foul hand with him, you said he would be sick: so he is with a witness.
Look about Faukenbridge, here's work for you,
You have some evil Angel in your shape,
Go sirrah, bring us forth that Pursuivant?
Gloster, thou wilt be too too venturous,
Thou dost delight in those odd humours so,
That much I fear they'll be thy overthrow.
O O O not too fast; O I am sick, O very sick.
What picture of the pestilence is this?
A poor man sir, a poor man sir: down I pray ye, I pray let me sit down. A sir Richard, sir Richard, a good sir Richard: what have I deserved to be thus dealt with all at your worship's hands? a ha, ah, ah.
At my hands knave? at my hands paltry knave?
And I should be brought to my book oath sir:
What Ieffrey?
Anan, anon.
A plague upon your jeffring, is your name Ieffrey?
I and't please you sir.
Why gentle Ieffrey then stay you awhile,
What can you say, if you come to your book?
If I be posed upon a book sir, though I be a poor prentice, I must speak the truth, & nothing but the truth sir.
And what's your truth sir?
O, O my heart.
Mary sir this Knight, this man of worship.
Well, what of me? what did my worship do?
Mary ye came into the Bell, our room next the Bar, with this honest man as I take it.
As thou tak'st it?
O sir 'tis too true, too true, too true O Lord.
And there he called for a pint of Sack, as good Sack
(I'll be posed upon all the books that ever opened and shut) as any is in all Christendom.
Body of me, I come and call for Sack?
O ye did, ye did, ye did, O O.
Well forward sirrah.
Gloster hath done this jest.
And you called then for Sugar sir, as good Sugar and as wholesome, as ever came in any cup of Sack: you drunk to this man, and you do well God be thanked, but he no sooner drunk:
But I, but I, but I, O my head, O my heart.
I cannot choose but smile at these conseites.
I am mad, and yet I must laugh at Faukenbridge:
Brother, look how sir Richard acts his rage?
I came? I call? the man is like to die,
Practise by th'emafse, practise by the marry God,
Iohn loves me not, Prince Richard loves my wife,
I shall be charged here, for a poisoned knave.
Practise by th'Lord, practise I see it clear.
And more Sir Richard, O Lord O Sir Richard,
What more? what hast thou more? what practise more?
O my box, my box, with the King's arms, O my box,
O my box, it cost me, O Lord every penny O, my box,
And what of your box sir.
Mary sir it's lost, & 'tis well known my Master keeps no thieves in his house, O there was none but you and he.
O then belike thou thinkest I had his box,
O sir Richard I will not, O Lord I will not charge you for all the world, but, but, but for the warrant the old King signed to reprieve the Porter of the fleet, O God, O God
The Porter of the Fleet, the old king signed,
I my good Lord, oh, oh,
Is he repreived then?
No my Lord, O sir Richard took it from me with his own hand, O.
here's a device to bring me in contempt
With the old King, that I ever loved,
Princes and Sheriff, you can witness with me,
That I have been with you, this after noon,
Only with you, with no body but you,
And now a fellow whom the King would save,
By a repreive, this fellow says is hanged,
If thou hadst done it, I'd have justified it,
But Richard I conceit this jest already,
This mad mate Skinke, this honest merry knave,
Meeting this Pursuivant, and hearing tell
He had a warrant to reprieve a slave,
Whom we would hang: stole it away from him.
This is sure the jest, upon my life it is,
O but my warrant, how shall I do? O,
But look about you, hot brained brother Iohn,
And I believe you'll find it otherwise,
Gloster hath got the warrant in disguise,
And saved the fellow you so feign would hang.
No, no, how say you M. Sheriff, is he not hanged?
My Lord, the gibbet was set up by noon
In the old Bayly, and I charged my men,
If I return not, though it were by Torch light,
To see him executed ere they come.
I am greedy to hear news.
Robbed of my chain, outfaced I had a sword,
Accused of poisoning, cozenage, seeking blood?
Not to be borne: it is untolerable.
Sir Richard, I prithee have some patience.
I'll to Blackheath, talk not of patience,
It is intolerable, not to be borne.
It is intolerable not to be borne,
A warrant brother, Faukenbridge a warrant?
I saw no warrant, I defy you all.
A slave, a Pursuivant, one winter borne.
I care not for thee that winter borne.
O it is I sir, that's my warrant.
Is't you? you rogue, you drunkard; year cheated,
And we are cheated of the prisoner,
Out dog, dog.
O o o o my Lord.
Have patience and we will have a privy search.
Go hang ye blockheads, get ye from my sight,
O would I were a Basilisk, to kill
These gleare eyed villains.
Come away let's leave him,
We have a warrant let him do his worst.
I'll to Blackheath, I'll to the holy Hermit,
There shall I know not only these deceivers,
But how my wife plays fast and lose with Richard.
Ha, I shall fit them, I'll tickle them,
I'll do't, I'll hence, I'll to the Heath amain,
There shall I know, where this damned Gloster is,
I'll have the Devils roused to find that Devil,
Or else I'll conjure the old conjuror.
I'll to Blackheath, and there with friends conspire,
But I'll have Gloster's head my hearts desire.
Would mad Earl Robin saw these humouristes.
'twol'd feed him fat with Laughter; O 'twold sit him,
Where ever he is, I know the bate conceit
Is better to him than his daintiest food,
Well, and it fits me well, now I have time,
To coort my Lady Faukenbridge at leisure,
Love I implore thy aid fair Cipria,
Thou seaborn mother at affections ring,
Shine brightly in thy sphere, that at my star,
My planet thou of all lights most beauteous,
Be thou to my desires Auspicious.
O for this Lady, was never poor Gentleman troubled with Gentlewoman as I am with myself, my Lady Faukenbridge hath fitted me a turn, here I am visited with sleeveless errands and with ask for this thing Madam and that thing Madam, that they make me almost mad in earnest, whoop here's another Client.
here's my Lady Rawfords' Page attends to speak with your Ladyship.
I pray ye bid her Lordship's Page come into my
Ladyship: well Robin Hood, part with these pettycoates,
And cast these lose devices from thy back,
I'll near go more untrust, never be kercheft.
Never have this ado, with what do you lack?
Madam my Lady greets your honour kindly,
And sends you the first grapes of her young vine.
I am much indepted to her honour, there's an angel for you to drink; set them up till after supper. Humphrey, pray look about for Block. Humphrey? trust me I think the fool be lost.
No forsooth, Madam he's upon the green jesting with a stammerer, one Redcap.
It is a lewd fellow, pray bid him come in youth, I'll give him his welcome at the door: commend me to your Lady, I pray ye heartily.
Humphrey, I marvel where sir Richard is so late? truly, truly he does not as beseems a gentleman of his calling, pray let some go forth to meet him on the green, and send in that blockhead Block.
Will ye tell tales ye ass, will ye?
I'll te te tell your La La Lady or I would to g God we were ha' hanged else, as my fa father should have been.
Now what's the matter there I pray you? what company have you there a gods name? where spend you the day I pray?
Why where you gave me leave, at the gallows I was, no farther.
A a and you be his La Lady, you are the La Lady Fau Faukenbridge, the Earl of glo Gloster's sister.
I am so fellow.
Y y your man b b Block here, does no nothing but f f. m me, a and cr cries r run Re Redcap ad s s see your f f father ha ha hanged. I sh shall g go near to m make m murder and he v use it.
Well sirrah, leave your mocking you were best, I'll bob your beetle head and if you mock him.
He's run Redcap.
La la law ma Madam.
Away ye saucy fool, go wait within.
Run Redcap, run Redcap.
Art thou the Porter's son, that was condemned about my brother Gloster?
I g g God be with ye, I am the p p Porters son, I m must r run to s s seek your b br brother.
Well, drink that fellow, if thou find my brother be not too violent, and I'll reward thee.
I th' th' thank ye h heartily, and I had not been cozened with Sk Skinke, I had no nee need of these jam iaunts, for Gl Gloster was s safe enough.
Ah farewell Redcap.
Fa far we well and be ha hang.
You'll never leave your knavery, whose there more?
One Madam that hath commendations to you from your brother.
Comest thou from Gloster? thou art welcome friend
O its one of the kindest Ladies (though she will now & then have about with Block) that ever breathed and she had been in her mood now, Redcap would have made her such sp sp sport as't a pa pa past.
Will you make sport and see who knocks again?
Our gates are like an anvil, from four to ten, nothing but knicke a knock upon't.
Will you be gone sir? honest friend I am glad
My brother Gloster got thy liberty,
Whose flight was cause of thy captivity:
Nor shall there be in us such negligence,
Though thou have lost thy Office and thy house,
But we will see thee better far provided,
Than when thou wert porter in the Fleet.
Madam your old friend Prince Richard,
All alone, making moan, fetching many a grievous groan.
Prince Richard come so late? lights to his chamber,
Sirrah, in any case say I am sick.
Very sick, sick and like to die: I'll sing it and you wil.
Away ye knave, tell him, in the morning
I'll humbly wait upon his excellence.
That's all his desire to have ye lowly and humble, and 'tis a courteous thing in a Lady.
Hence, or else i'll set you hence: go in good friend.
Come Lady Faukenbridge, it's time to come,
Robin can hold out no longer I see,
Hot wooers will be tempters presently.
Now holy Skinke in thy religious weed,
Look out for purchase, or thy wont client's:
Warrant quoth you, I was fairly warrented,
Young Robin Hood the Earl of Huntingdon,
Shall never fetch me more unto his Prince.
But pauca verba Skinke, a prize, a prize,
By th'mass a pretty girl, close Hermit close,
O'erhear if thou canst, what she desires,
For so my cunning and my credit spreads.
See how affection arms my feeble strength,
To this so desperate journeying all alone,
While Robin Hood young Earl of Huntingdon,
Plays Lady Faukenbridge for me at home.
What mystery is this? the Lady Faukenbridge,
It's she, sweet fortune thou hast sent her well,
I will entice this morsel to my Cell:
Her husband's jealous, I will give him cause,
As he believes, I hope it shall succeed;
Nay 'swounds it shall, she's mine in scorn of speed.
By this broad beaten path, it should appear,
The holy Hermit's Cave cannot be far,
And if I err not, this is he himself.
What honoured tongue enquereth for the Hermit?
What honoured tongue?
I Lady Faukenbridge,
I know ye, and I know for what you come.
For Gloster and your husband's jealousy.
O thou, whose eye of contemplation,
Looks through the windows of the highest heavens,
Resolve thy Handmaid, where Earl Gloster lives:
And whether he shall live, and scape the hate,
Of proud young Henry and his brother Iohn?
I'll have you first in, I'll tell you more anon.
Madam, they say bushes have ears and eyes,
And these are matters of great secrecy:
And you'll vouchsafe enter my holy Cell,
There what you long to know, i'll quickly tell.
Stay here are strangers.
A plague upon them, come they in the nick,
To hinder Raynald of his Fox's trick?
Good day old Hermit.
So to you fair Dame.
By Elinor's grey eye she's fair indeed;
Sweet heart come ye for holy benizons?
Hermit hast thou good custom with such Cliants?
I cannot blame your feats, your juggling tricks,
Plague juggle you.
Why curse ye sacred worth?
Ill done in sooth my Lord, very ill done,
Wrong holiness: a very pretty woman.
Mock gravity; by the mass a cherry lip,
A it's not well done, deride a holy Hermit?
I have it in my purse shall make amends.
His purse and yours, shall make me some amends,
For hindering me this morning from the Lady;
For scaring me at Tavern yesternight,
For having back your chain, I'll fit you both.
Hermit, a word.
A word with you fair mistress.
Where lie your devils that tell all your news?
Would you would trouble them for half an hour,
To know what's become of traitor Gloster,
That in my clothes broke prison in the Fleet?
No, it was Skinke.
Come old fool ye dote.
But hear me.
Hear him Prince.
'Swounds who hears you? I'll make your Lady graft ye for this work: but to your tale sir.
Know thrice honoured Prince, that Skinke did cousin
Redcap of his clothes.
Gloster did cozen Skinke, and so escaped.
Well done Faukenbridge?
My Lord, he tells you true.
You find it on her lips: but forward sir.
'twas Skinke in Gloster's gown, whom you did visit,
That played at bowls and after stole your cloths,
While you went into the Lord Moortons' chamber.
This savours of some truth,
'tis very like,
Well Faukenbridge by heaven I'll tell your wife,
She'll much believe you: you will come?
Tell me of my wife: this evening fail me not.
My wife quoth you: I'll send my wife from home,
Do, tell my wife prince Iohn, by my dear mother,
I love her too too well to like another.
It seems so fox, O what a world is this,
There most sin raynes where least suspicion is,
You'll come.
I will not fail, I warrant you,
Hermit is all this true,
Himself deliver not so much before ye sleep,
Root me from out the borders of this Realm.
Well by your leave sir Richard Faukenbridge,
Hence free from fear, you'll melt you'll melt old man,
Nay take her to you, she is a shrew I warrant,
I'll to the holy Hermit, and inquire,
About my chain your sword, the Pursuivant
And other matters that I have to ask.
Your welcome good sir Richard,
Nay do not stand on terms, I am fire, all life,
Nor never tell me that I have a wife.
I do not mean to marry, ye think so,
But to be merry, you the manner knowe.
And you will have me, have me, point a meeting,
I'll be your true love, you shall be my sweeting,
If you deny to promise, this is plain
I'll have my will ear you get home again.
most gracious Lord.
Tut tell not me of grace I like no goodness but a beauteous face.
Be therefore brief, give me your hand & swear,
Or I'll away with you into the heath,
Neither shall Faukenbridge nor Hermit help,
And what I do I'll answer well enough.
Why, then my Lord.
Nay do not stand on then,
But tell me when my Lord shall have you Lady,
It's presently, i'll venture for a baby.
This night at stepney by my summer house,
There is a tavern which I sometime use,
When we from London come a gossoping,
It is the Hind,
Give me thy pretty hand.
Thou'lt meet me at the Hind, I'll by thy Roe,
One word's enough,
Suffice then be it so,
I'll fit my old adulterer and your grace,
I'll send the Princess thither in my place.
Prince Iohn, Prince Iohn the Hermit tells me wonders.
He says it was Skinke that scaped us at the Tavern,
Skink had my chain: nay sure that Skinke did all.
I say go but to yonder corner,
And ere the Sun be half an hour higher,
There will the thief attempt a robbery,
Who Skinke?
Will Skinke?
I Skinke upon my word.
Shall we go seize upon him good Prince Iohn?
Nay we will have him that's no question.
And yet not hurt the honest rogue.
he'll help us well in quest of changing Gloster,
Hermit farewell, Lady keep your hour.
Adeiu old Hermit: soon in th'evening Lass,
I'll meet you both, and meet with both of you.
Father what answer do you give to me?
Lady start down I must into my cell,
Where I am curing of a man late hurt,
He dressed, I must unto my Orisons,
In half an hour all will be dispatched,
And then I will attend your Ladyship.
At your best leisure father, O the life
That this thrice reverend Hermit leadeth here.
How far remote from mortal vanities,
Baits to the soul, enticements to the eye?
How far is he unlike my lustful Lord?
Who being given himself to be unchaste,
Think all men like himself, in their effects,
And injures me, that never had a thought,
To wrong the sacred rites of spotless faith.
Hermit farewell, i'll pay ye or speak with ye next time I see ye. Sweet mouse the Hermit bids you stay here, he'll visit you anon. Now Iohn and Faukenbridge, I'll match ye, and I do not say Skinke's a wretch, a wren, a worm, when I have tricked them, Madam I will trim you. Commodity is to be preferred before pleasure. About profit Skink, for crowns for crowns, that make the kingly thoughts.
I am assured that man's some murderer,
Good Father Hermit speak and comfort me,
Are ye at prayers good old man? I pray ye speak,
What's here a beard? a counterfeited hair?
The Hermit's ports? garments and his beads?
Iesus defend me I will fly this den,
It's some thieves cave, no haunt for holy men.
What if the murderer, (as I ge him one)
Set on my husband, tush Prince Iohn and he
Are able to defend them noble selves,
How ear, I will not tarry, I'll away,
Lest unto theft and rape, I prove apray.
Yonder they are I'll fit them, here's my ground:
Wa ha how, wa ha how, wa ha how?
I warrant ye my Lord some man's distressed.
Why man 'tis a Falconer.
Mary of me good fellow, I did think thou hadst been robbed.
Robbed, sir no, he that comes to rob me shall have a hard match on't, yet two good fellows had like to been robbed by one tall thief, had not I stepped in: abots on him, I lost a hawk by him, & yet I cared not to send another after him, so I could find the thief; and here about he is. I know he is squatted.
Sayest thou me so? we'll find him by S. Mary.
An honest fellow, a good common wealths man.
There are caves hereabout good fellow, are there not?
Yes sir, tread the ground sir, & you shall hear their hollowness, this way sir this way.
Help Faukenbridge.
O help me good prince Iohn.
I'll help you both, deliver sir deliver, 'Swounds linger not: Prince Iohn put up your purse, or i'll throw ponniards' down upon your pate. Quickly, when? I am Skink that scaped ye yesternight, and fled the Fleet in your cloak, carrying me clean out of wind and rain. I broke the bonds and links that fettered your chain amity, this cheat is mine: Farewell I cannot stay, sweet Prince, old Knight, I thank ye for this pray.
God's mary mother, here's a jest indeed,
We came to take, a thief takes us:
Where are ye good my Lord?
No matter where, I think I was forespoken at the teat,
This damned rogue served me thus? Gloster and he
Upon my life conclude in villainy.
He was not wont to plot these stratagems,
Lend me your hand a little, come away,
Let's to the Cell again, perchance the Hermit
Is Skinke, and thief, and Hermit all in one.
Mary a God then ten to one it's so,
Well thought on Princely Iohn,
He had my chain, no doubt he had your sword.
If there be now no Hermit at the Celestina,
I'll swear by all the Saints it's none but he.
This accident hath hit thy humour Gloster,
From pursuivant i'll turn a Hermit now.
Sure he that keeps this Cell is a counterfeit,
Else what does he here with false hair and beard?
Well how so ear it be, I'll seem to be
The holy Hermit: for such fame there is,
Of one accounted reverend on this heath.
I'll feign unto my cell, to my fair Lady,
But Iohn and Faukenbridge are at my heels.
And some odd mate is got into my gown,
And walks devoutly like my counterfeit,
I cannot stay to question with you now,
I have another gown, and all things fit,
These guests once rid, new mate? I'll bum, I'll mark you.
What's he a gods name? he is quickly gone,
I am for him, were he Robin-goodfellow,
Whose yonder the Prince Iohn and Faukenbridge?
I think they haunt me like my genii,
One good the other ill, by th'mass they pry
And look upon me but suspiciously.
This is not Skinke, the Hermit is not Skinke:
He is a learned reverend holy man.
He is he is a very godly man.
I warrant ye, he's at his book at's prayers,
We should have took you, by my hollydam
Even for a very thief.
Now God forfend such noblemen as you should guess me so,
I never gave such cause for aught I know.
Yet thou didst tell us Skinke should do a robbery,
Appointed us the place, and there we found him,
And he felt us, for he hath robbed us both.
He's a lewd fellow, but he shall be taken.
I had rather here of Gloster then of him.
Gloster did cheat him, of the same gold chain,
That deceived Sir Richard Faukenbridge.
He got your sword Prince Iohn: 'ttwas he that saved
The porter, and beguiled the Pursuivant,
A vengeance on him.
Do not curse good Prince, he's bad enough, 'ttwere better pray for him.
I'll kill thee, and thou bid me pray for him.
I'll fallen woods, and ring thee round with fire,
Make thee an offering unto fierce revenge,
If thou have but a thought to pray for him.
I am bound to pray for all men, chiefly christians.
Ha ha, for christians, thinkest thou he is one?
For men: hast thou opinion he is a man?
He that changes himself to sundry shapes,
Is he a christian? can he be a man?
O, Irreligious thoughts,
Why worthy Prince I saw him christened, dept into the font
Then nine times like the northern laplanders,
He backward circled the sacred Font,
And nine times backward said his Orisons,
As often cursed the glorious host of heaven,
As many time's invocke the fiends of hell,
And so turned witch, for Gloster is a witch.
Have patiented Gentle Prince, he shall appear,
Before your Kingly father speedily.
Shall he indeed? sweet comfort kiss thy cheek,
Peace circle in thy aged honoured head,
When he is taken: Hermit I protest
I'll build thee up a chapel and a shrine:
I'll have thee worshipped, as a man divine,
Assure he shall come, and Skinke shall come.
I that same Skinke, I prithee send that Skinke,
Send both, and both as prisoners crimminate
Shall forfeit their last lives to England's state,
Which way will Faukenbridge?
Over the water, and so with all speed I may to Stepney
I must to Stepney too, and revile, and be blithe,
Old wink at my mirth, 'tmay make amends,
So thou, and I, and our friends, may be friends,
Withal my heart, withal my heart Prince,
Old Faukenbridge will wait upon your grace,
Be good to Gloster for my Marrians sake,
And me and mine you shall your servants make,
Of that anon my pleasure being served,
Gloster shall have what Gloster hath deserved.
Why, that's well said, adieu good honest Hermit,
Hermit farewell, if I had my desire,
I'll make the world thy wondrous deeds admire,
Still good, still passing good, Gloster is still
Henry's true hate, foe to Iohns froward will.
No more of that for them in better time,
If this same Hermit be an honest man,
He will protect me by this simple life,
If not I care not, I'll be ever Gloster,
Make him my foot stole if he be a slave,
For Baseness over worth can have no power.
Robin be think thee, thou art come from Kings.
Then scorn to be slave to underlings,
Look well about thee Lad and thou shalt see,
Them burst in envy that would injure thee.
Hermit I'll meet you in your Hermit's gown,
Honest, I'll love you: worse, I'll knock you down.
Kind friends, we have troubled Lady Faukenbridge,
And either she's not willing to be seen,
Or else not well: or with our boldness grieved,
To ease these I have brought you to this window,
Knowing your are in music excellent,
I have penned a ditty here: and I desire
You would sing it for her love and my content,
With all my heart my Lord.
Your excellence forgets your Princely worth,
If I may humbly crave it at your hands,
Let me desire this music be dismissed.
For bear I pray and with draw yourselves.
Be not offended gracious Marrian,
Under the upper heaven, nine goodly spheres,
Turn with a motion ever musical,
In Palaces of Kings, meliodious sound
Offer pleasures to their sovereign's ears.
In Temples, milk white clothed queristors,
Sing sacred Anthems bowing to the shrine,
And in the fields whole quires of winged clerks,
Salutes the morning bright and Crystalline,
Then blame not me, you are my heaven, my Queen,
My saint, my comfort, brighter than the morn,
To you all music, and all praise is due.
For your delight you for delight was borne,
The world would have no mirth, no joy, no day,
If from the world your beauty were away.
Fie on loves blasphemy and forgery,
To call that in, that's only misery,
I that am wedded to suspicious age,
Solicited by your lascivious youth,
I that have one poor comfort living,
Gloster my brother, my high hearted brother,
He flies for fear, lest he should faint and fall
Into the hands of hate tyrannical.
What would you I should do?
I would full feign, my brother Gloster had his peace again.
Shall love be my reward if I do bring
A certain token of his good estate.
And after pacify my brother's wrath?
Say you'll love, we'll be fortunate,
I will.
No more, I vow to die unblessed
If I perform not this inposed quest,
But one word Madam pray can you tell,
Where Huntingdon my ward is?
I was bold to send young Robin Hood your noble ward
Upon some business of import for me.
I am glad he is employed in your affairs,
Farewell kind fair, let one cloudy frown
Shadow the bright sun of thy beauty's light.
Be confident in this, i'll find thy brother,
Raise power but we'll have peace, only perform
Your gracious promise at my back return.
Well, here's my hand, Prince Richard that same night
Which secondeth the day of your return,
I'll be your bedfellow, and from that hour
Forswear the loathed bed of Faukenbridge:
Be speedy therefore, as you hope to speed.
O that I were as large winged as the wind,
Then should you see my expeditious will:
My most desire, adieu, guess by my haste,
Of your sweet promise the delicious taste.
Why so: I am rid of him by this device,
He would else have tired me with his sighs and songs,
But now I shall have ease, here comes the Saint,
To whom such suit was made.
My Lady Gentlewoman is even here in her privitye walk, Madam here's the merchants wife was here yesterday would speak with ye; O I was somewhat bold to bring her in.
Well leave us sir; you're welcome gentlewoman.
These women have no liberality in the world in them,
I never let in man to my Lady, but I am rewarded.
Please ye to walk sir? wherefore mumble ye?
Robin what news? how hast thou done this night?
My Ladyship hath done my part, my task,
line all alone for lack of company,
I might have had Prince Richard,
Was he here?
He went away but now; I have been loved & wood too simply,
God rid me of the woman once again,
I'll not be tempted so for all the world,
Come, will you to your chamber and uncase?
Nay keep my habit yet a little while,
Old Faukenbridge is almost at the gate,
I met him at Black heath just at the Hermits,
And taking me to be a Merchant's wife,
Fell mightily in love, gave me his ring,
Made me protest that I would meet him here.
I told him of his Lady, O tut quoth he,
I'll shake her up, i'll pack her out of sight,
He comes kind Robin Hood, hold up the jest.
God's mary knave, how long hath she been here?
Sir she came but even in afore you.
A cunning quean, a very cunning quean,
Go to your business Block, i'll meet with her.
Ah old Muttonmounger I believe here's work towards.
Do not believe her Mall, do not believe her:
I only spoke a word or two in jest,
But would not for the world have been so mad,
Do not believe her Mall, do not believe her:
What should I not believe? what do you mean?
Why good Sir Richard, let me speak with you,
Alas will you undo me? will you shame me?
Is this your promise? came I here for this?
To be a laughing stock unto your Lady
How now Sir Richard, what's the matter there?
I'll talk with you anon, come hither woman?
Didst not tell my wife what match we made:?
I tell your wife? think ye I am such a beast?
Now God forgive ye, I am quite undone.
Peace duck, peace duck, I warrant all is well.
What's the matter? I pray ye sir Richard tell me?
Mary Mall thus, about some twelve months since,
Your brother Gloster, that mad prodigal,
Caused me to pass my word unto her husband,
For some two thousand pound: or more perchance,
No matter what it is, you shall not know,
Nay ye shall never ask to know.
And what of this?
Mary the man's decayed,
And I believe a little thing would please her;
A very little thing, a thing of nothing.
Go in good Mall, and leave us two alone,
I'll deal with ye as simply as I can.
Fox look about ye, ye are caught i'faith.
Deal with her simply, o ho; what kind of dealing?
Can ye not deal with her and I be by?
Mary a God, what are ye jealous?
Ye teach me what to do: in, get you in.
O I have heard Prince Richard was your guest,
How dealt you than? In get you in I say,
Must I take care about your brother's debts,
And you stand crossing me, in, or i'll send you in.
Ha sirrah, you'll be master, you'll wear the yellow,
You'll be an overseer: mary shall ye.
Ye are too cursed (me thinks sir) to your Lady;
Ah wench content thee, I must bear her hard,
Else she'll be prining into my dalliances:
I am an old man sweet girl I must be merry,
All steel, all sprite, keep in health by change,
Men may be wanton, wowen must not range.
You have given good counsel sir, i'll repent me,
here's your ring, i'll only love my husband.
I mean not so, I think to day thou toldes me
Thy husband was an unthrift, and a bankrupt,
And he be so, tut thou hast favour store,
Let the knave beg, beauty cannot be poor.
Indeed my husband is a bankrupt,
Of faith, of love, of shame, of chastity,
Dotes upon other women more than me.
Ha do he so? then give him tit for tat,
Have one so young and fair, and loves another,
He's worthy to be coockolded by the mass.
What is he old or young?
About your age.
An old knave and cannot be content with such a peat,
Come to my closet girl, make much of me,
We'll appoint a meeting place some twice a weak,
And i'll maintain thee like a Lady, ha?
O but you'll forget me presently,
When you look well upon your Lady's beauty.
Who upon her? why she is a very dowdy,
A dishclout, a foul Iipsie unto thee,
Come to my closet lass, there take thy earnest
Of love, of pleasure and good maintenance.
I am very fearful.
Come fool never fear I am Lord heat, who shall disturb as then?
Nay come, or by the rood I'll make you come,
Help Madam Faukenbridge for god's sake.
How now, what meanest?
Help Gentle Madam help,
How now what ail'st thou?
Nay and't be a woman, near fear my master Madam
Why speak'st thou not, what ail'st thou?
Why nothing, by the rood nothing she ails.
O Madam this vile man would have abused me,
And forced me to his closet,
Ah old coal, now look about, you are catched,
Call in your fellows block,
Do not thou knave,
Do or I'll crack your crown,
Nay I'll do't, I know she means to shame you.
Why Mall wilt thou believe this paltry woman?
housewife I'll have you whipped for slandering me.
What Lecher, no she is an honest woman,
Her husband's well known, all the household knows.
here's some now, to tell all the town your mind,
Before ye all I must sure complain,
You see this wicked man, and ye all know
How oft he hath been jealous of my life,
Suspecting falsehood being false himself;
O master, O master,
She slanders me, she is a cozening quean,
Fetch me the Constable, I'll have her punished,
The Constable for me fie, fie upon ye.
Madam do you know this ring?
It is sir Richards.
O I, that's my masters too sure.
I mary, I did lend it to the false drab
To fetch some money for that bankrupt knave
Her husband, that lies prisoner in the Fleet.
My husband bankrupt? my husband in the Fleet prisoner?
No, no, he is as good a man as you.
I that he is, and can spend pound for pound
With thee i'faith, wert richer then thou art,
I know the gentleman.
Nay Madam he is hard by, there must be Revels at the Hind to night;
Your copesmate there, Prince Iohn.
there's a hot youth.
O, afierce Gentleman.
He was fierce as you, but I have matched him,
The Princess shall be there in my attire.
A plaguy crafty quean, mary a God
I see Prince Iohn, coorted as well as I,
And since he shall be mocked as well as I,
It's some contentment.
Mass he droops, fellow Humphrey, he is almost taken,
Look about ye old Richard?
Hence knaves, get in a little, prithee Mall
Let thou and I and she, shut up this matter.
Away sirs, get in.
Come, come let's go, he will be baited now, farewell old Richard.
Now sir, what say you now?
Mary sweet Mall I say I met this woman, liked her, loved her,
For she is worthy love I promise thee;
I say I coorted her: tut make no brawl
Twixt thou and I, we'll have amends for all.
Had I done such a trick, what then? what then?
Ah prithee Mall, tut bear with men.
I, we must bear with you; you'll be excused,
When women undeserved are abused.
Nay do not weep, pardon me gentle Lady,
I know thee virtuous, and I do protest,
Never to have an evil thought of thee.
I, I, ye swear, who's that that will believe ye?
Now by my holy dam and honest faith,
This Gentlewoman shall witness what I swear.
Sweet Duck a little help me?
Trust him Madam.
I will be kind, credulous, constant ever,
Do what thou wilt, i'll be suspicious never.
For which I thank noble Faukenbridge.
Body of me who's this? young Huntingdon?
And I your Lady whom you coorted last,
Ye looked about you ill, fox we have caught ye,
I met ye at Black heath, and ye were hot.
I knew thee Mall, now by my sword I knew thee,
I winked at all, I laughed at every jest.
I, he did wink, the blind man had an eye.
Peace Robin, thou'lt once be a man as I.
Well, I must bear it all.
Come, & ye bear, it's but your office, come forget sweet Mall.
I do forgive it and forget it sir.
Why that's well said, that's done like a good girl:
Ha sirrah, ha' you matched me pretty Earl?
I have, ye see sir I must unto Black heath,
In quest of Richard, whom I sent to seek
Earl Gloster out, I know he's at the Hermits;
Lend me your Coach; I'll shift me as I ride,
Farewell sir Richard.
Farewell England's pride, by the matins Mall it is a pretty child;
Shall we go meet Iohn? shall we go mock the Prince?
We will.
O than we shall have sport anon,
Never wear yellow Mall, 'twas but a trick,
Old Faukenbridge will still be a mad Dick.
Do ye s s say fa fa father Hermit, th' that Gl Gloster is about this Heath?
He is upon this Heath Son look about it,
Run but the compass, thou shalt find him out,
R r run? i'll r run the co compass of all k Kent but I'll f find him out, my f f. (where ere he lays his head) dare ne never co come home I know, t t till he be fo fo found.
Well thou shalt find him, know'st thou who's a hunting?
M m mary 'tis the Earls of La La Lancaster and Le Leyster. Fa fa farewell f father, and I find Skink or Glow Gloster, I'll g g give thee the pr prize of a penny p p pudding for thy p pains.
Adieu good friend: this is sure the fellow
I sent on message from the Parliament.
The Porter's son, he's still in quest of me,
And Skinke that cozened him of his red cap.
But look about thee Gloster, who comes yonder?
O a plain servingman, & yet perhaps his bags are lined,
And my purse now grows thin: if he have any I must share with him.
And who's on yond side? O it is my Hermit,
Hath got his other suit since I went forth.
'Sblood yonder's company, i'll back again,
Else I would be with you counterfeit,
I'll leave the rogue till opportunity,
But never eat till I have quit my wrong.
I saw two men attend like holy Hermits,
One's slipped away, the other at his beads,
Now Richard for the love of Marian,
Make thy inquiry where mad Gloster lives.
If England or the verge of Scotland hold him,
I'll seek him thus disguised: if he be passed
To any foreign part; i'll follow him.
Love thou art Lord of hearts, thy laws are sweet,
In every troubled way, thou guidst our feet.
Lovers enjoined to pass the dangerous Sea
Of big swollen sorrow, in the Bark affection;
The winds and waves of woe need never fear,
While Love, the helm doth like a pilate steer.
here's some lover come, a mischief on him,
I know not how to answer these mad fools,
But i'll be brief, i'll mar the Hermit's tale;
Off gown, hold Buckler, slice it bilbo blade.
What's this? what should this mean? old man, good friend
Young fool deliver else see your end.
I thought thou hadst been holy and a Hermit.
What ere you thought, your purse? come quickly sir?
Cast that upon the ground, and then confer.
There it is.
Falls it so heavy? then my heart is light.
Thou't have a heavy heart before thou touch it,
Theft shrined in holy weeds? stand to't you're best.
And if I do not, seeing such a pray,
Let this be to me a disaster day.
Art thou content to breath?
With all my heart, take half thy money & we'll friendly part.
I will not cherish theft.
Then I defy thee.
Alas for pity, that so stout a man,
So reverend in aspect, should take this course.
This is no common man with whom I fight,
And if he be, he is of wondrours' sprite,
Shall we part stakes?
Fellow take the purse upon condition thou wilt follow me▪
What wait on you? wear a turned Livery?
Whose man's your master? If I be your man,
My man's man's office will be excellent:
There lies your purse again, win it and wear it.
Clashing of weapons at my welcome hither?
Bickring upon Blackheath, well said old man,
I'll take thy side, the younger hath the odds.
Stay, end your quarrel, or I promise ye
I'll take the old man's part.
You were not wont young Huntingdon, still on Richard's side
Pardon gracious Prince I knew ye not.
Prince Richard: then lie envy at his foot,
Pardon thy cousin Gloster, valiant Lord,
I knew no common force confronted mine,
O heaven I had the like conceit of thine.
I tell thee Robin Gloster thou art met,
Bringing such comfort unto Richard's heart.
As in the foil of war when dust and sweat,
The thirst of weak, and the suns fiery heat,
Have seized upon the soul of valiance,
And he must faint except he be refreshed.
To me thou comest as if to him should come,
A perry from the North, whose frosty breath
Might fan him coolness in that doubt of death.
With me then meets, as he a spring might meet,
Cooling the earth under his toil parched feet,
Whose crystal moisture in his Helmit ta'en,
Comforts his spirits, makes him strong again.
Prince, in short terms if you have brought me comfort
Know if I had my pardon in this hand
That smit base Skinke in open Parliament,
I would not come to Court, till the high feast
Of your proud brother's birth day be expired,
For as the o●●e King as he made a vow
At his unlucky Coronation,
Must wait upon the boy and fill his cup,
And all the Peers must kneel while Henry kneels
Unto his cradle; he shall hang me up,
Ear I commit that vile Idolatry.
But when the feast is past if you'll befriend me,
I'll come and brave my proud foes to their teeth,
Come Robin, and if my brother's grace deny,
I'll take thy part, them and their threats defy,
Gramercy Princely Dick,
I have some power, I can raise two thousand Soldiers in an hour,
Gramercy Robin, gramercy little wag,
Prince Richard, pray let Huntingdon
Carry my sister Faukenbridge this ring,
I'll carry it myself, but I had rather
Had thy kind company, thou mightst have moved
Thy Sister, whom I long have vainly loved,
I like her that she shunes temptation
Prince Richard, but I bear with doting lovers,
I should not take it well, that you urge me
To such an office: but I bear with you,
love's blind and mad, high to her boldly, try her;
But if I know she yield, faith I'll defy her.
I like thy honourable resolution,
Gloster I pray thee pardon my entreat,
it's men's custom; part part Gentle Prince,
Farewell good Robin this gold I will borrow,
Meet you at stepney pay you all to morrow,
A dew Gloster,
Farewell, be short; you gone, I hope to have a little sport
Take heed mad Cousin.
Tut tell not me of heed,
He that's too wray never hath good speed.
Whos's this old Lancaster my honoured friend?
These knaves have served me well, left me alone,
I have hunted fairly, lost my purse, my chain,
My jewels, and been bangd by a bold knave,
Clad in a Hermit's gown like an old man,
O what a world is this?
It's ill my Lord.
he's come again, O knave 'tis the worse for thee,
Keep from me, be content with that thou hast,
And see thou fly this heath, for if I take thee,
I'll make thee to all thieves aspectacle,
Had my staff held, thou hadst not scaped me so,
But come not near me, follow not thou art best,
Holla, Earl Leyster, holla Huntsman ho?
Upon my life, old Lancaster a Hunting,
Hath met my fellow Hermit, could I meet him,
I'd play rob thief, at least part stakes with him.
Zounds he is yonder alone,
Skinke now revenge thyself on yonder slave.
Znayles still prevented? this same Redcap rogue
Runs like hobgoblin up and down the heath.
Wh wh wh whope He Hermit, ye ha' ha ma ma made
Re Redcap run a fine co co compass, ha have you not?
I made thee run?
yonder's my evil Angel, were redcap gone, Gloster would conjure him.
je je Iesus bl bless me, whop to to two Hermits? I'll ca ca caperclaw to to tone of ye, for more more mocking me, and I d d do not ha ha hang me: wh wh which is the fa fa false k k k knave? for I am s s sure the old He He Hermit woe would never more mock an honest man.
he is the counterfeit he mocked thee fellow.
I did not see thee in my life before,
He wears my garments, and has coussoned me,
Have you co co cozened the he Hermit and m made
Redcap run to no pu pu purpose?
No he's counterfeit I will tell no lies,
As sure as Skinke deceived thee of thy clothes,
Sent thee to Kent, gave thee thy fare by water,
So sure he's false, and I the perfect Hermit,
This villain is a conjuror I doubt,
Were he the devil yet I would not budge,
Si si sirrah, you are the co countefeite, O this is the tr tr true He Hermit, sta sta stand still g good man at that, i'll bu bombast you i'faith, i'll make you g give the old m m man his gown.
G g gods lid are ye go good at that? i'll cum cudgel ye f f. this tr tr trick.
It was not I 'twas he that cast thee down,
You li li li lie you ra ra rascal you, I le left ye saint standing he hear.
Zounds hold you stammerer, or I'll cut your stumps.
He's for me he's weaponed, I like that.
O here's a ro ro rogue in ca ca carnat, help, mu murder murder.
Lay hold upon that thievish counterfeit,
Why hears another Hermit Lancaster:
I am the Hermit sir, that wretched man
Doth many a robbery in my disguise:
It's he that robs, he slanders me, he lies.
Which set on thee?
Th' this f f fellow has a s s sword and a buckler.
Search him; this is the thief, o hears my purse,
My chain, my jewels: oh thou wicked wretch,
How darest thou under show of holiness,
Commit such actions of impiety?
Bind him, I'll have him made a public scorn.
Lay hold upon that other hermit.
He is a counterfeit as well as I,
He stole those clothes from me, for I am Skinke,
Search him, I know him not, he is some slave.
Thou liest base varlet.
O g God he has a sword too, S Skink are you ca catched?
Villain thou shalt with me unto the Court.
And this with me, this is the traitor Gloster.
Thou liest proud Leyster I am no traitor.
G gloster? O b brave, now m my father sh shall be f free
Earl Gloster I am sorry thou art taken.
I am not taken yet, nor will I yield
To any hear but noble Lancaster,
Let Skinke be Leister's prisoner I'll be thine.
Thou shalt be mine.
First through a crimson sluice, I'll send thy hated soul to those black fiends
That long have hovered gaping for their part,
When tyrant life should leave thy traitor heart.
Come Lancaster keep Skinke i'll go with thee,
Let loose the mad knave, for I praise his shifts,
He shall not start away, i'll be his guide,
And with proud looks outface young Henry's pride.
Look to them Lancaster upon thy life.
Well i'll r r run and get a p pardon of the K K KKing, Gl Gloster and Skinke ta ta taken? O b b brave, r r r run re Re Red ca cap a and ca ca carry the first n n news to co co court.
Lancaster i'll help to guard them to the Court.
Do as you please.
Leyster do not come near me, for if thou do, thou shalt buy it dearly.
I'll have thy hand for this.
Not for thy heart.
Brave Earl, had Skinke known thou hadst been the Noble Gloster (whose mad tricks have made me love thee) I would have died Black heath red with the blood of millions, ere we would have been taken; but what remedy, we are fast & must answer it like Gentlemen, like Soldiers, like resolutes.
I ye are a gallant, come old Lancaster,
For thy sake will I go; or else by heaven
I'd send some dozen of these slaves to hell.
Your travail and your comfortable news,
This Ring, the certain sign you met with him,
Binds me in duetyous love unto your grace:
But on my knees I fall, and humbly crave,
Importune that no more, you near can have.
Nay then ye wrong me Lady Faukenbridge,
Did you not join your fair white hand?
Swore that ye would forswear your husband's bed,
If I could but find out Gloster?
I swear so?
By heaven
Take heed, it's a high oath my Lord.
What meanest thou Huntingdon?
To save your soul, I do not love to have my friends forsworn,
She never promised that you urge her with.
Go to, provoke me not.
I tell you true, 'twas I in her attire that promised you,
She was gone unto the wizard at Black heath,
And there had suitors more than a good many.
Was I deluded then?
No not deluded, but hindered from desire unchaste and rude:
O let me woo ye with the tongue of ruth,
Dewing your Princely hand with pities tears,
That you would leave this most unlawful suit,
If ere we live till Faukenbridge be dead,
(As God defend his death I should desire)
Then if your highness deign so base a match,
And holy laws admit a marriage,
Considering our affinity in blood,
I will become your Handmaid not your harlot.
That shame shall never dwell upon my brow.
I faith my Lord she's honourably resolved,
For shame no more, importune her no more.
Marian I see thy virtue, and commend it,
I know my error seeking thy dishonour,
But the respectless, reasonles command
Of my inflamed love, bids me still try,
And trample under foot all piety.
Yet for I will not seem too impious,
Too inconsiderate of thy seeming grief,
Vouchsafe to be my Mistress: use me kindly,
And I protest i'll strive with all my power,
That lust himself may in his heat devour.
You are my servant then.
Thanks sacred Mistress.
What am I?
You are my fellow Robert.
What Prince Richard? noble Huntingdon?
Welcome, i'faith welcome, by the morrow Mass
You are come as fitly as my heart can wish:
Prince Iohn this night will be a Reveller,
He hath invited me and Marian.
God's mary mother go along with us,
It's but hard by, close by, at our town Tavern.
Your Tavern?
O I I I 'tis his own made match,
I'll make you laugh, i'll make you laugh i'faith;
Come, come, he's ready, O come, come away.
But where's the Princess?
He's ready too, Block Bl. my man, must be her waiting man,
Nay will ye go? for god's sake let us go.
Is the jest so? nay then let us away.
O 'twill allay his heat, make dead his fire.
Ye bobbed me first, ye first gave me my hire,
But come a gods name, Prince Iohn stays for us.
This is the word, ever at spendthriftes feasts,
They are gulled themselves, and scoffed at by their guests.
Buffild and scoffed, Skinke, Gloster, women, fools, and boys abuse me?
I'll be revenged,
Revenged, and why good child?
Old Faukenbridge hath had a worse basting.
I, they have banded from chase to chase;
I have been their tennis ball, since I did coort,
Come Iohn, take hand with virtuous Isabella,
And lets unto the Court like loving friends,
Our Kingly brother's birth days festival,
Is forthwith to be kept, thither we'll high,
And grace with pomp that great solemnity.
Whether ye will, I care not where I go:
If grief will grace it, i'll adorn the show.
Come Madam, we must thither we are bound.
I am loath to see the Court, Gloster being from thence,
Or kneel to him that gave us this offence.
Body of me peace woman. I prithee peace.
Go go god ye, go god s speed ye,
Whether run you sir knave?
R r run ye sir knave? why I r run to my La Lady Fa Faukenbridge, to te te tell her Sk Skinke and Gl Gloster is t taken, and are gg one to the CC Court with L Lord Leyster, and L Lord la la Lancaster.
Is Gloster taken? thither will I fly
Upon wrath's wings, not quiet till he die.
Is Gloster taken?
I he is ta taken I wa warrant ye with a widow witness,
Then will I to Court, & either set him free, or die the death,
Fellow me Faukenbridge, fear not fair Madam:
You said you had the Porter in your house,
Some of your servants bring him, on my life
One hair shall not be taken from his head,
Nor he, nor you, nor Gloster injured.
Come Mall, and Richard say the word near fear.
Madam, we have twenty thousand at our call,
The most, young Henry dares, is but to brawl.
Pray God it prove so.
Fellow Huntingdon: sir Rich. do not fail to send the Porter.
Block, bring the Porter of the Fleet to Court.
I will sir.
The p p Porter of the fl fl Fleet to Court? what p p porter of the fl fl Fleet?
What Redcap, run redcap, wilt thou see thy father?
My fa father? I that I w wold s see my f father, & there be a p porter in your ho house, its my f far.
Fellow me Redcap then.
And you were two to twenty b Blocks, i'd f f follow ye s so I would, and r run to the co co court too, and k kneel before the k k King f f for his pa pardon.
Come away Redcap, run Redcap.
I I I r r run as f f fast as I I ca ca can run I wa warrant ye.
Herald, fetch Lancaster and Leyster Coronets,
Suffer no marquess, Earl, nor Countess enter,
Except their temples circled are in gold,
Show them our vize-roys: by our will controlled
As at a coronation, every Peer
Appears in all his pomp, so at this feast
Held for our birthright, let them be adorned.
Let Gloster be brought in, crowned like an Earl,
This day we'll have no parley of his death,
But talk of Iouisanes and gleefull mirth.
Let Skinke come in, give him a Baron's seat,
High is his spirit, his deserts are great.
You wrong the honour of Nobility,
To place a robber in a Baron's stead,
It's well ye term him not a murderer.
Had I mistearmed him?
I that had you Henry.
He did a piece of justice at my Bidding.
Who made you a justice?
I that had the power.
You had none then.
Yes he was crowned before.
Why does not Gloster wear a Coronet?
Because his Sovereign doth not wear a Crown.
By heaven put on thy Coronet, or that heaven
Which now with a clear, lends us this light,
Shall not be curtained with the vail of night,
Ear on thy head I clap a burning Crown,
Of red hot Iron that shall sear thy brains.
Good Gloster Crown thee with thy Coronet.
Do gentle Earl.
'Swounds do, would I had one.
Do not I prithee keep thy proud heart still.
I'll wear it but to cross thy froward will.
Sat down and take thy place.
It's the low earth.
To her I must, from her I had my breath.
We are pleased thou shalt sit there, Skinke take thy place among my nobles.
Thanks to King Henry's grace.
Iohn Earl of Morton and of Nottingham,
With Isabella his Countess, bow themselves
Before their brother Henry's Royal Throne.
Assend your seats live in our daily love.
Richard the Prince of England, with his Ward
The noble Robert Hood, Earl Huntingdon,
Present their service to your Majesty.
You're welcome too, though little be your love.
Old Richard Faukenbridge, Knight of the cross,
Lord of the Cinque ports, with his noble wife
Dame Marrian Countess of west Hereford,
Offer their duties at this Royal meeting.
Sat down, thou art a neuter, she a foe,
Thy love we doubt her heart too well we know.
What suitors are without, let them come in.
And have no justice where contempt is King.
Mad man I give no ear to thy lose words.
O sir you're welcome, you have your old seat.
Though thou sit hire yet my heart's as great.
Great heart we'll make you lesser by the head.
Ill comes not ever to the threatened.
What are you two?
M ma mary and't please you I am re re Redcap.
And what's your mate?
A poor Porter sir.
The Porter of the fleet that was condemned.
No truly sir I was Porter last, when I left
The door open at the Tavern.
O is't you sir?
And what would you two have?
I co co come to re re re qui quire the young K K King of his go go goodness, since Glow Gloster is t taken, that he woe woe would let my fa fa father have his pa pa pardon.
Sirrah your father has his pardon signed,
Go to the office it shall be delivered.
And shall he be p p Porter a ga gain?
I that he shall, but let him be advised
Hereafter, how lets out prisoners,
I wa warrant ye my Lord.
What hast thou more to say?
Marry I woe would have Skinke pu punished for co co Coney-catching me.
Is that your business?
I by my t t troth is it.
Then get away.
Against Skinke (poor knave)
Thou gets no right this day.
O but run back Redcap for the Pursuivant.
O I Lord s sir, I have another s suit for the p p Pursuivant, that has l l lost his b b box, and his wa wa warrant.
What means the fellow?
Why the pu pu Pursuivant sir and the po po Porter.
The box that I had from him, there it is.
Mary a me, and I was charged with it.
Had you it brother Gloster? God's good mercy,
And what have you to say?
Nothing sir but God bless you, you are a goodly company, except sir William or my Lady will command me any more service.
A way you prating knave, hence varlet, hence.
Put forth them fellows there.
A f foe fore I go go I b b be s s seech you let Sk Skinke and gl Gloster be lo lo looked too, for they have p p played the k k knaves to to to b b bad.
Take hence that stuttering fellow, shut them forth.
Nay I'll ru ru run, faith you shall not n n need to b b b bid him ta ta take m me away, for re re Redcap will r ru run rarely.
The sundry misdemeanours late committed,
As thefts and shifts in other men's disguise,
We now must (knave Skinke) freely tell thy faults.
Sweet King by these two terrors to mine enemies, that lend light to my body's darkness: Cavilero Skinke being beleagerd with an host of leaden heels, armed in ring Irish: cheated my hammerer of his Red cap and Coat; was surprised, brought to the fleet as a person suspected, past currant, till Gloster stripped me from my counterfeit, clad my back in silk and my heart in sorrow, and so left me to the mercy of my mother wit: how Prince Iohn released me, he knows: how I got Faukenbridges chain, I know: but how he will get it again, I know not.
Where is it sirrah, tell me where it is?
I got it from him, and I got Iohns sword,
I would 'ttwere to the hilts up in thy heart.
O be more charitable brother Iohn.
My Liege, you need not by particulars
Examine what the world knows too plain,
If you will pardon Skinke, his life is saved,
If not, he is convicted by the Law.
For Gloster: as you worthily resolved,
First take his hand, and afterward his head.
Skinke thou hast life, our pardon and our love.
And your forgiveness for my robbery?
Tut never trouble me with such a toy.
Thou hind'rest me from hearing of my joy.
Bring forth a block, wine, water and towel,
Knives, and a Surgeon to bind up the veins,
Of Gloster's arm: when his right hand is off,
His hand that struck Skinke at the Parliament:
I shall bear his blows to my grave my Lord.
Son Henry see thy father's palzie hands,
Joined like two suppliants, pressing to thy thrown?
Look how the furrows of his aged cheek,
Filled with the revolets of wet eyed moan,
Begs mercy for Earl Gloster? weigh his gilt,
Why for a slave, should Royal blood be spilled?
You wrong mine honour: Skink may be revenged,
Father I do commend your humble course.
But quite dislike the project of your suit,
Good words in an ill cause makes the fact worse,
Of blood or Baseness, justice will dispute,
The greater man the greater his transgression,
Where strength wrongs weakness, it is mere oppression,
O but King Henry hear a sister speak,
Gloster was wronged, his lands were given away,
They are not justly said. Just laws to break,
That keep their own right, with what power they may,
Think then thy Royal self began the wrong,
In giving Skinke what did to him belong.
Hear me Son Henry, while thou art a King,
Give, take, prison, thy subjects are thy slaves,
Life, need, thrones proud hearts in dungions fling.
Grace men to day, to morrow give them graves.
A King must be like Fortune; ever turning,
The world his football, all her glory spurning.
Still your old counsel Beldame policy,
You're a fit Tutoress in a Monarchy.
Mother you are unjust, savage, too cruel,
Unlike a woman: gentleness guides their sex,
But you to furies fire add more fuel,
The vexed spirit, will you delight to vex?
O God when I conceit what you have done,
I am a shamed to be esteemed your son.
Base Richard I disdain to call thee brother,
Takest thou a traitors part in our disgrace?
For Gloster, wilt thou wrong our sacred mother?
I scorn thee and defy thee to thy face.
O that we were in field, then shouldst thou try,
How fast Earl Iohn would from Prince Richard fly
Thou meet a Lion in field? poor mouse,
All thy Careers are in a Brothel house.
Zounds boy.
Now man:
Richard you wrong Prince Iohn.
Leyster 'twear Good you proved his Champion.
Hasten the execution Royal Lord,
Let deeds make answer for their worthless words.
I know if I respected hand or head,
I am encompassed with a world of friends,
And could from fury be delivered.
But then my freedom hazards many lives.
Henry perform the utmost of thy hate,
Let thy hard hearted mother have her will,
Give Frantic Iohn no longer cause to prate,
I am prepared for the worst of ill,
You see my knees kiss the could pavements face,
They are not bend to Henry nor his friends,
But to all you whose blood fled to your hearts,
Shows your true sorrow in your ashy cheeks:
To you I bend my knees, you I entreat,
To smile on Gloster's Resolution.
Who ever loves me will not shed a tear,
Nor breath a sigh, nor show a cloudy frown,
Look Henry, hears my hand, I lay it down,
And swear as I have Knighthood here't shall lie,
Till thou have used all thy tyranny.
Has no man heart to speak?
Let all that love me keep silence, or by heaven I'll hate them dying.
Harry off with his hand, then with his head.
By the red rood I cannot choose but weep.
Come love or hate my tears I cannot keep.
When comes this lingering executioner?
An executioner: an executioner:
Call none till we have drunk: father fill wine,
To day your Office is to bear our cup.
I'll fill it Henry.
Dick you are too mean, so bow unto your sovereign,
Kneel to his child? O hell! O torture! (Gloster learn:
Who would love life, to see this huge dishonour?
Saturn kneeled to his Son the God was feign
To call young Ioue his ages Sovereign.
Take now your seat again and wear your Crown;
Now shineth Henry like the Middayes' Son,
Through his Horizon, darting all his beams,
Blinding with his bright splendour every eye,
That stars against his face of Majesty.
The Comets, whose malicious gleams
Threatened the ruin of our Royalty,
Stands at our mercy, yet our wrath denies
All favour, but extreme extreamityes.
Gloster, have to thy sorrow chafe thy arm
That I may see thy blood (I longed for oft)
Gush from thy veins, and stain this Palace roof.
'twould exceed gilding.
I as gold doth Oaker.
It's well ye count my blood so precious.
Leyster reach Gloster wine.
I reach it him?
Proud Earl i'll spurn thee, quickly go & bear it
I'll count it poison if his hand come near it.
Give it him Leyster upon our displeasure.
Thus Gloster takes it, thus again he flings it,
In scorn of him that sent it, and of him that brought it.
O brave spirit▪
Bravely resolved brother, I honour thee.
Hark how his sister joys in his abuse?
Wilt thou endure it Hall?
Peace good Marian.
Avoid there every under Officer.
Leave but us, our Peers and Ladies here.
Richard you love Earl Gloster look about
If you can spy one in this company,
That hath not done as great a sin as Gloster;
Choose him, let him be the executioner.
Thou hast done worse then, like rebellie us head,
Hast armed ten thousand hands against his life
That loved thee so, as thou wert made a King,
Being his child, now he's thy underling.
I have done worse: thrice I drew my sword,
In three set battles for thy false defence.
Iohn hath done worse, he still hath took thy part,
All of us three have smitte our father's heart;
Which made proud Leyster bold to strike his face,
To his eternal shame, and our disgrace.
Silence, I see thou leanst to find none fit.
I am sure, nor Lancaster nor Huntingdon,
Nor Faukenbridge, will lay a hand on him.
Mother, wife, brother, let's descend the Throne
Where Henry is the Monarch of the West,
Hath set amongst his Princes dignified.
Father take you the place, see justice.
It's injust justice I must tell thee Son.
Mother hold you the Basin, you the Towel,
I know your French hearts thirst for English blood;
Iohn, take the Mallet, I will hold the knife,
And when I bid thee smite, strike for thy life:
Make a mark Surgeon, Gloster now prepare thee.
Tut, I am ready, to thy worst I dare thee.
Then have I done my worst, thrice honoured Earl,
I do embrace thee in affections arms.
What means thou Henry? O what means my Son?
I mean no longer to be lullabyed,
In your seditious arms.
Mordieu Henry.
Mordieu nor devil, little tit of France,
I know your heart leaps, at our heart's mischance,
'Swounds Henry thou art mad:
I have been mad; what stampst thou Iohn? know'st thou not who I am?
Come stamp the devil out, sucked from thy Dam.
I'll curse thee Henry.
Your best be quiet, lest where we find you, to the Tower we bear you,
For being abroad, England hath cause to fear ye.
I am struck dumb with wonder.
I amazed, imagine that I see a vizion.
Gloster, I give thee first this Skinke, this slave,
It's in thy power, his life to spill or save,
He's a noble gentleman, I do not doubt his usage.
Stand not thus wondering, Princes kneel all down,
And cast your Coronets before his Crown.
Down stubborn Queen, kneel to your wronged King,
Down Mammet; Leyster i'll cut of thy legs,
If thou delay thy duty: when proud Iohn?
Nay if all kneel, of force I must be one.
Now by my holydom a virtuous deed.
Father you see your most rebellious son,
Stricken with horror of his horrid guilt,
Requesting sentence fitting his desert,
O tread upon his head, that trod your heart.
I do deliver up all dignity,
Crown, Sceptre, sword unto your Majesty.
My heart surfeits with joy in hearing this.
And dear Son i'll bless thee with a kiss.
I will not rise, I will not leave this ground,
Till all these voices joined in one sound:
Cry, God save Henry second of that name,
Let his friends live, his foes see death with shame.
God save Henry second of that name,
Let his friends live, his foes see death with shame.
Amen, Amen, Amen.
Hark mother hark?
My brother is already turned Clerk.
He is a recreant, I am mad with rage.
Be angry at your envy gracious mother,
Learn patience and true humility
Of your worst tutored Son, for I am he.
Send hence that Frenchwoman, give her her dowry,
Let her not speak, to trouble my mild soul,
Which of this world hath taken her last leave:
And by her power, will my proud flesh control.
Off with these silks, my garments shall be grey,
My shirt hard hair, my bed the ashey dust,
My pillow but a lump of hardened clay:
For clay I am, and unto clay I must,
O I beseech ye let me go alone,
To live, where my lose life I may bemoan.
Son?
Son?
Brother?
Brother?
Let none call me their Son, I am no man's brother,
My kindred is in heaven, I know no other,
Farewell, farewell, the world is yours, pray take it,
I'll leave vexation, and with joy forsake it.
Wondrous conversion.
Admirable good: now by my halidom Mall passing good.
H'ath fired my soul I will to Palestine,
And pay my vows before the Sepulchre,
Among the multitude of misbelief.
I'll show myself the Soldier of Christ,
Spend blood, sweat tears, for satisfaction
Of many many sins which I lament:
And never think to have them pardoned,
Till I have part of Sirria conquered.
He makes me wonder, and inflames my spirits,
With an exceeding zeal to Portugal,
Which Kingdom the unchristned Sarisons,
The black faced Africans, and tawny Moors,
Have got unjustly in possession:
Whence I will fire them with the help of heaven.
Skinke will scotrch them brave Gloster
Make Carbonadoes of their Bacon fletches;
Deserve to be counted valiant by his valour,
And Ryvo will he cry, and Castille too,
And wonders in the land of Civil do.
O that I were a man to see these fights,
To spend my blood amongst these worthy Knights.
Mary ay me, were I a boy again,
I'd either to Ierusalem or Spain.
Faith I'll keep England, mother you and I
Will live, for all this fight and foolery.
Peace to us all, let's all for peace give praise,
Unlooked for peace, unlooked for happy days.
Love Henry's birth day, he hath been new borne,
I am new crowned, new settled in my seat.
Let's ' all to the Chapel, there give thanks and praise,
Beseeching grace from heavens eternal Throne,
That England never know more Prince than one.