AFter his baptism▪ Christ was God's son declared.
By the father's voice, as ye before have heard,
Which signifieth to us, that we once baptized
Are the sons of God, by his gift & reward▪
And because that we, should have Christ in regard,
He gave unto him, the mighty authority,
Of his heavenly word, our only teacher to be.
Now is he gone fourth, into the desert place,
With the holy Ghost, his office to begin.
Where Satan the devil, with his assaults apace,
With colours of craft, and many a subtle gin,
Will undermined him, yet nothing shall he win,
But shame and rebuke, in the conclusion final,
This tokenneth our raise, and his unrecurable fall.
Learn first in this act, that we whom Christ doth call.
Ought not to follow, the fantasies of Man,
But the holy Ghost, as our guide special,
Which to defend us, is he that will and can,
To persecution, let us prepare us than,
For that will follow, in them that seek the truth.
Mark in this process, what troubles to Christ ensueth.
Satan assaulteth him, with many a subtle drift,
So will he do us, if we take Christ's part.
And when that helpeth not, he seeketh an other shift,
The rulers among, to put Christ unto smart,
With so many else, as bear him their good heart.
Be ye sure of this, as ye are of daily meat▪
If ye follow Christ, with him ye must be beat.
For assaults of Satan, learn here the remedy▪
Take the word of God, let that be your defence.
So will Christ teach you, in our next Comedy,
Earnestly prent it, in your quick intelligence.
resist not the world, but with meek patience,
If ye be of Christ. Of this hereafter ye shall,
perceive more at large, by the story as it fall.
IN to this desert, the holy Ghost hath brought me,
After my baptism, of Satan to be tempted▪
Thereby to instruct, of Man the imbecility,
That after he hath, God's holy spirit received,
Dyuersely he must, of Satan be impugncd,
Lest he for God's gift, should fall into a pride.
And that in apparel, he take me for his guide.
Think not me to fast, because I would you to fast,
For than ye think wrong, and have vain judgement▪
But of my fasting, think rather this my cast,
Satan to provoke, to work his cursed intent,
And to teach you ways, his mischiefs to prevent,
By the word of God, which must be your defence,
Rather than fastings, to withstand his violence.
I have fasted here, the space of forty days,
Performing that fast, which Moses had in figure,
To stop their mouths with, which babble & prate always
Thus did our fathers, My name and fame to dysuygure.
Therefore now I taste, of fasting here the rygure,
And am right hungry, after long abstinence.
This mortal body, complaineth of indigence.
No where I fourther, but every where I noye,
For I am Satan, the comen adversary,
An enemy to Man, him seeking to destroy
And to bring to nought, by my assaults most crafty.
I watch every where, wanting no policy,
To trap him in snare, and make him the child of hell.
What number I win, it were very long to tell.
I heard a great noise, in Jordan now of late,
Upon one Iesus, sounding from heaven above.
This is mine own son, which hath withdrawn all hate,
And he that doth stand, most highly in my love.
My wits the same sound, doth not a little move.
He cometh to redeem, the kind of Man I fear,
High time is it than, for me the cools to steer.
I will not leave him▪ till I know what he is,
And what he intendeth, in this same border hear.
subtlety must help, else all will be amiss,
A godly pretence, outwardly must I bear,
Seeming religious, devout and sad in my gear.
If he be come now, for the redemption of Man,
As I fear he is, I will stop him if I can.
It is a great joy, by my holydome to see,
So virtuous a life, in a young man as you be.
As here thus to wander, in godly contemplation.
And to live alone, in the desert solitary.
Your pleasure is it, to utter your fantasy.
A brother am I, of this desert wilderness,
And full glad would be, to talk with you of goodness▪
If ye would accept, my simple company.
I disdain nothing, which is of God truly.
Than will I be bold, a little with you to walk.
Do so if ye list, and your mind freely talk.
Now forsooth and God, it is joy of your life,
That ye take sech pains, and are in virtue so rife.
Where so small joys are, to recreate the heart.
Here are for pastime, the wild beasts of the desert,
With whom much better, it is to be conversant,
Than with sech people, as are to God repugnant.
Ye speak it full well, it is even as ye say,
But tell me how long, ye have been here, I you pray.
Forty days and nights, without any sustenance.
So much I judged, by your pale countenance.
Then is it no marvel, I trow, though ye hungry.
My stomach declareth, the weakness of my body.
Well, to be plain with you, abroad the rumour doth run
Among the people, that ye should be God's son.
If ye be God's son, as it hath great likelihood,
Make of these stones bread, and give your body his food.
No offence is it, to eat when men be hungry,
But to make stones bread, it is unnecessary.
He which in this fast, hath been my special guide,
Food for my body, is able to provide.
I thank my lord God, I am at no such need,
As to make stones bread, my body so to feed.
When I come in place, where God hath appointed meat,
giving him high thanks, I shall not spare to eat,
Not only for that, this similitude I bring,
But my purpose is▪ to conclude an other thing.
At the father's voice, ye took this life in hand,
minding now to preach, as I do understand.
In case ye do so, ye shall find the office hard.
My mind is in this, ye should your body regard,
And not undyscretelye, to cast yourself away.
Rather take some ease, than ye should so decay.
I put case ye be, God's son, what can that further?
Preach ye once the truth, the bishops will ye murder.
Therefore believe not, the voice that ye dead hear,
Though it came from God, for it is unsavoury gear.
Beyond your cumpas, rather than ye so run,
Forsake the office, and deny yourself God's son.
Ye speak in that point, very unadvisedly,
For it is written, in the eight of deuteronomy,
Man liveth not by bread, or corporal feeding only,
But by God's promise, and by his scriptures heavenly.
Here ye persuade me, to recreate my body,
And neglected Gods word, which is great blasphemy.
This caused Adam, from innocency to fall,
And all his offspring, made miserable and mortal.
Where as is God's word, there is both spirit and life,
And where that is not, death and damnation is rife.
The strength of God's word, mightily sustained Moses,
For forty days space, thereof such is the goodness.
It fortified Helias, it preserved Daniel,
And holp in the desert, the children of Israel.
Sore plagues do follow, where God's word is reject,
For no persuasion, will I therefore neglect,
That office to do, which God hath me commanded,
But in all meekness, it shall be accomplished.
I had rather nay, considering your feebleness,
For ye are but tuly, ye are no strong person doughtlesse.
Well, it is not the bread, that doth a man uphold,
But the lord of heaven, with his graees manifold.
He that Man create, is able him to nourish,
And after weakness, cause him again to flourish.
God's word is a rule, for all that man should do,
And out of that rule, no creature ought to go.
He that it followeth, can not out of the way,
In meat not in drink, in sadness nor in play.
je are stiffnecked, ye will follow no good counsel.
Yes, when it is such, as the holy scripture tell.
Scriptures I know non, for I am but an hermit I▪
I may say to you, it is no part of our study.
We religious men, live all in contemplation,
Scriptures to study, is not our occupation.
It longeth to doctors. howbeit I may say to you,
As blind are they as we, in the understanding now.
Well shall it please ye, any farther, with me to walk,
Though I little profit, yet doth it me good to talk.
To tarry or go, it is all one to me.
let us then wander, into the holy city,
Of Jerusalem, to see what is there a do.
I shall not say nay, but am agreeable thereto.
My purpose is this, A voice in your ear did ring,
That ye were Gods son, and well-beloved darling,
And you believe it, but ye are the more unwise,
For to deceive you, it was some subtle practise.
Well, upon that voice, ye are given to persyghtnesse
Not else regarding, but to live in ghostlynesse.
Ye watch, fast and pray, ye shine in contemplation,
Leading here a life, beyond all estimation,
No meat will ye eat, but live by God's word only▪
So good are ye w●●t, so perfect and so holy.
I will bring ye (I trow) to the well of ghostlynesse,
Where I shall fill ye, and glut ye with holiness.
What, holy, quoth he? Nay, ye were never so holy,
As I will make ye, if ye follow handsomely.
Here is all holy, here is the holy city,
The holy temple, and the holy priests here be.
Ye will be holy? well, ye shall be above them all,
Because ye are God's son, it doth ye so befall.
Come here, on the pinnacle, we will be by and by.
What mean ye by that? show fourth your fantasy,
When ye were hungry, I did ye first persuade,
Of stones to make bread, but ye would none of that trade.
Ye laid for yourself, that scripture would not serve it,
That was your buckler, but now I am for ye fit.
For the suggestion, that I now shall to ye lay,
I have scripture at hand, ye shall it not denay.
Keep it not secret, but let it than be hod.
If ye do believe, that ye are the son of God,
Believe this also, if ye leap down here in scoff,
From this high pinnacle, ye can take no harm theroff.
And therefore be bold, this enterprise to jeopardy
If ye be God's son, cast down yourself here backward.
Truly that need not, here is other remedy,
To the ground to go, than to fall down foolishly.
Here are gresynges made, to go up and down thereby,
What need I than leap, to the earth presumptuously.
say that ye dead it, upon a good intent.
That were neither good, nor yet convenient.
Dangers are doubtful, where such presumption is.
Tush, scripture is with it, ye can not far amiss.
For it is written, how God hath given a charge,
Unto his Angels, that if ye leap at large,
They shall receive ye, in their hands tenderly,
Lest ye dalhe your foot, against a stone thereby.
If ye do take scathe, believe God is not true,
Nor just of his word, And than bid him adieu.
In no wise ye ought, the scriptures to deprave,
But as they lie whole, so ought ye them to have.
no more take ye here, than serve for your vain purpose
Leaving out the best, as ye should trifle or gloze
Ye mind not by this, towards God to edify,
But of sincere faith, to corrupt the innocency.
Why, is it not true, that such a text there is?
Yes, there is such a text, but ye wrest it all amiss.
As the Psalm doth say, God hath commanded Angels,
To preserve the just, from dangerous plagues and perils.
Well, than I said true, and as it lieth in the text.
Yea, but ye omitted, four words which followeth next,
As (in all thy ways) which if ye put out of sight,
Ye shall never take, that place of scripture a right.
Their ways are such rules, as God hath them commanded,
By his living wo●de, justly to be observed.
If they pass those rules, the Angels are not bound,
To be their safeguard, but rather them to confound.
To fall down backward, of a wanton penyshnes,
Is none of those ways, that God ever taught doubtless.
Then if I did it, I should tempt God very sore,
And deserve to have, his anger evermore.
I will not so do, for their fathers in the desert,
Deed so tempt him once, and had the hate of his heart▪
The clause that ye had, maketh for non outward working,
If ye mark the Psalm, thoroughly from his beginning.
But what is the cause, ye went not fourth with the next verser
It made not for me, if ye will, ye may it rehearse.
Thu shalt (saith the Psalm) subdue the cruel serpent,
And tread under foot, the lion and dragon pestilent.
No nyghar (I say) for there ye touch free hold.
Some love in no wise, to have their rudeness told.
To walk in God's ways, it becometh a mortal man,
And therefore I will, obey them if I can.
For it is written, in the sixth of deuteronomy,
Thu shalt in no wise, tempt God presumptuousely.
What is it to tempt God? after your judgement.
To take of his wo●de, an outward experiment,
Of an idle brain, which God neither thought not meant.
What persons do so? Make that more evident.
All such as forsake, any grace or remedy,
Appointed of God, for their own policy.
As they that do think, that God should fill their belly,
Without their labours, when his laws are contrary.
And they that will say, the scripture of God doth slay,
They never searching, thereof the verity.
Those also tempt God, that vow presumptuously,
Not having his gift, to keep their continency.
With so many else, as follow their good intentes.
Not grounded on God, nor yet on his commandments.
These throw themselves down, into most deep damnation.
little good get I, by this communication.
Will ye walk farther, and let this prattling be?
A mountain here is, which I would you to see,
Trust me and ye will, it is a commodyouse thing.
If it be so good, let us by thither going.
Lo, how say ye now, is not here a pleasant sight?
If ye will ye may, have here all the worlds delight.
Here is to be scene, the kingdom of Arabye,
With all the regions, of Affryck, Europe; and Asye,
And their whole delights, their pomp, their magnificence▪
Their riches▪ their honour, their wealth, their concupiscence.
Here is gold and silver, in wonderful abundance,
Sylkes, velvets, tissues, with wines & spices of pleasance.
Here are fair women, of countenance ameable,
With all kinds of meats, to the body delectable.
Here are camels, stout horses, & mules that never will tire,
With so many pleasures, as your heart can desire.
Well, he be praised, which is of them the giver.
Alas it grieveth me, that ye are such a believer.
Nothing can I lay, but ever ye avoid me,
By the word of God. Leave that point ones I pray ye▪
If I bid ye make, of stone's bread for your body,
Ye say man liveth not, in temporal feeding only.
As I bid ye leap, down from the pinnacle above,
Ye will not tempt God, otherwise than you behove.
Thus are ye still poor, thus are ye still weak and needy,
And what suppose ye, will that need remedy?
Forsake the believe, that ye have in God's word,
That ye are his son, for it is not worth a turd,
Is he a father, that see his son thus famish?
If ye believe it, I say ye are to foolish.
Ye see these pleasures. If you be ruled by me,
I shall make ye a man. To my words therefore agree.
Look on these kingdoms, and incomparable treasure,
I the lord of them, may give them at my pleasure.
Forsake that father, which leaveth the without comfort,
In this desolation, and hens fourth to me resort.
Knowledge me for head, of this world universal.
And I will make thee, possessor of them all.
Thu shalt no longer, be desolate and hungry,
But have all the world, to do the obsequy.
Therefore kneel down here, and worship me this hour,
And thou shalt have all, with their whole strength and pour.
Avoid thou Satan, Thu devil, thou adversary,
For now thou persuadest, most damnable blasphemy.
As thou art wicked, so is thy promise wicked,
Not thine is the world, but his that it created.
Thu cannyst not give it, for it is not thine to give,
Thus dedyst thou corrupt, the faith of Adam and Eue.
Thus dedyst thou deceive, both Moses and Aaron,
Causing them to doubt, at the lake of contradiction.
Get the hens thou fyende, and cruel adversary,
For it is written, in the tenth of deuteronomy.
God thou shalt worship, and magnify alone,
Hold him for thy lord, and make to him thy moan.
He is the true God, he is the lord of all,
Not only of this, but the world celestial.
Thy persuasion is, I should not his word regard,
O venomous serpent, damnation is thy reward.
provide will I so, that thy kingdom shall decay,
God's word shall be heard, of the world though thou say nay.
Well, than it helpeth not, to tarry here any longer,
Advantage to have, I see I must go farther.
So long as thou livest, I am like to have no profit,
If all come to pass, I maye sit as much in your light,
If ye preach God's word, as me think ye do intend,
Ere four years be passed▪ I shall you to your father send,
If pharysees and scribes, can do any thing thereto,
False priests and bishops, with my other servants more.
Though I have hindrance, it will be but for a season,
I dow not, thine own, hereafter will work some treason
Thy vicar at Rome, I think will be my friend,
I defy the therefore, and take thy words but as wind.
He shall me worship, and have the world to reward,
That thou here forsakest, he will most highly regard.
God's word will he tread, underneath his foot for ever,
And the hearts of men, from the truth thereof dyssener,
Thy faith will he hate, and slay thy flock in conclusion.
All this will I work, to do the utter confusion.
Thy cruel assaults, shall hurt neither me nor mine,
Though we suffer both, by the providence divine.
Soch strength is ours, that we will have victory,
Of sin death and hell, and of the in thy most fury.
For God hath promised, that his shall tread the dragon,
Underneath their feet, with the fierce roaring lion.
The father of comfort, and heavenly consolation,
Hath sent us hither, to do our administration.
We come not to help, but to do our obsequy,
As servants becometh, to their lord and master meekly.
If our office be, to wait on creatures mortal,
Why should we not serve, the master and lord of all?
It is our comfort, it is our whole felicity,
To do our service, and in your presence to be.
We have brought ye food, to comfort your weak body,
After your great fast, and notable victory.
Unto all the world, your birth we first declared,
And now these victuals, we have for you prepared.
Come nyghar to me. Sweet father thanks to thee,
For these gracious gifts, of thy liberality.
How meek art thou lord, to take that nature on thee?
Which is so tender, and full of infirmity.
As Mannys nature is, both feeble faint and weary,
Weak after labour, and after fasting hungry.
Forsooth heaven and earth, yea, hell may be astonied,
The godhead to see, to so frail nature joined,
In his own he is, for he the world first create,
Yet seemeth the world, to have him in great hate.
About thirty years, hath he been here among them,
Some time in Iewrye, and some time in Jerusalem.
But few to this day, have done him reverence,
Or as to their lord, showed their obedience.
My coming hither, is for to seek no glory,
But the high pleasure, and will of my father heavenly.
He will require it, at a certain day, no dought,
And shall revenge it, look they not weal about.
The lord here for you, was borne and circumcised,
For you here also, he was lately baptized.
In the wilderness, this lord for you hath fasted,
And hath overremen, for you the devil that tempted.
For you friends for you, this heavenly lord doth all,
Only for your sake, he is become man mortal.
Take the shy eld of faith, and learn to resist the devil▪
After his teachings, that he do you non evil,
Full sure shall ye be, to have us on your side,
If ye be faithful, and hold him for your guide.
If they follow me, they shall not walk in darkness,
But in the clear light, and have felicity endless,
For I am the way, the life and the verity,
No man may attain, to the father but by me.
In man's frail nature, ye have conquerred the enemy.
That man over him, should always have victory.
Our manner is it, most highly to rejoice,
When Man hath comfort, which we now declare in voice.
let it not grieve you, in this world to be tempted,
considering your lord, and your high bishop Iesus,
Was here without sin, in every purpose proved,
In all our weakness, to help and succour us,
furthermore to bear, with our fragility thus.
He is unworthy, of him to be a member,
That will not with him, some persecution suffer.
The life of Man is, a proof or hard temptation,
As Iob doth report, and Paul confirmeth the same.
Busy is the devil, and laboureth his damnation,
Yet have no despair, for Christ hath got the game.
Now is it easy, his cruelness to tame▪
For Christ's victory, is theirs that do believe.
Where saith take roting, the devil can never grieve.
resist (saith Peter) resist that roaring lion,
Not with your fastings, Christ never taught ye so.
But with a strong faith, withstand his false suggestion,
And with the scriptures, upon him over go,
Then shall he no harm, be able you to do.
Now may ye be bold, ye have Christ on your side,
So long as ye have, his verity for your guide.
What enemies are they, that from the people will have,
The scriptures of God, which are the mighty weapon,
That Christ left them here, their souls from hell to save.
And throw them headlondes, into the devils dominion.
If they be no devils, I say there are devils non,
They bring in fasting, but they leave out, Scriptum est,
Chalk they give for gold, such friends are they to the Be'st.
let non report us, that here we condemn fasting.
For it is not true, we are of no such mind.
But this we cover, that ye do take the thing,
For a fruit of faith, as it is done in kind,
And only God's word, to subdue the cruel find.
Follow Christ alone, for he is the true shepherd,
The voice of strangers, do never more regard.