IN ych comen wealth, most high prchemynence,
Is due unto laws for such commodity,
As is had by them, For as Cicero giveth sentence
Where as is no law, can no good order be,
In nature, in people, in house nor yet in city.
The bodies above, are underneath a law,
Who could rule the world, were it not under awe?
Like as Chrysippus, full clarkly doth define,
Law is a teacher, of matters necessary,
A knowledge of things, both natural and divine
Persuading all truth. dysswading all injury.
A gift of the lord, devoid of all obprobry,
An wholesome doctrine, of men discrete and wise,
A grace from above and a very heavenly practise.
Our heavenly maker, man's living to direct,
The laws of Nature, of Bondage, and of Grace,
Sent into this world, with vycyousnesse infect,
In all righteousness, to walk before his face.
But infidelity, so worketh in every place,
That under the heavens, no thing is pure & clean,
So much the people, to his perverse ways lean.
The law of Nature, his filthy disposition.
Corrupteth with idols, and stinking Sodometry.
The law of Moses, with Avarice and ambition.
He also polluteth. And ever continually,
Christ's law he defileth. with cursed hypocrisy,
And with false doctrine, as will apere in presence,
To the edifying, of this Christian audience.
Of infidelity, God royll himself revenge.
With plagues of water, of wild fire and of sword.
And of his people, due homage he will challenge.
Ever to be known. for their God and good lord,
After that he hath, those laws again restored,
To their first beauty committing them to faith.
He is now in place, mark therefore what he saith.
I Am Deus pater, a substance invisible,
All one with the son, & holy ghost in essence.
To Angel and Man. I am incomprehensible,
A strength infinite, a righteousness, a prudence,
A mercy, a goodness, a truth, a life, a sapience.
In heaven and in earth, we made all to our glory,
Man ever having, in a special memory.
Man I say again, which is our own elect,
Our chosen creature, and servant over all,
Above the others, peculiarly select,
To do us homage and onour name to call,
Acknowledging us for his author principal.
Endued him we have, with gifts of special grace
And laws will we send, to govern him in place.
Step fourih ye three laws, for gydaunce of Mankind
Whom most inteyrly, in heart we love and favour.
And teach him to walk, according to our mind,
In cleanness of life, and in a gentle behaviour.
Deeply instruct him, our mysteries to saver,
By the works of faith, all vices to seclude,
And preserve in him, our godly similitude.
Of duty we ought, always to be obeissant,
To your commandment, for just it is and pleasant,
Your precepts are true, & of perpetual strength
On justice grounded, as will apere at length.
Proudenesse ye abhor, with like inconvenients,
All they are cursed, who go from your commaunedementes
Our laws are all one, though you do three apere
Like wise as our will, is all one in effect.
But because that Man, in himself is not clear
To time and person, as now we have respect,
And as three teachers, to him we you direct,
Though ye be but one. In token that we are three,
distinct in person, and one in the deyte.
We consydre that, for as concerning Man,
Four several times, are much to be respected.
Of Innocency first, of his transgression than,
Than the long season, wherein he was afflicted,
Finally the time, wherein he was redeemed.
Of pleasure is the first, the second of exile.
The third doth punish, the fort doth reconcile,
When Angel was made, this law he had by & by,
To serve you his lord, and with laudes to prosecute
This law was given Man, in time of innocency,
In no wise to eat, of the forbidden fruit.
These two laws broken, both they were destitute,
Of their first freedom, to their most high decay,
Till your only son, ded man's whole ransom pay
When Angel in heaven, and Man in paradise,
Those laws had broken. The law of wicked Satan
Impugned your laws, by craft & subtle practise.
Where you said. Eat not. He said unto the woman,
Eat, Ye can not die, As Gods ye shall be than.
By this first of all, your lauds Man proved true.
And Satan's law false, which he now daily rue.
let him than beware, how he our laws neglect
Only to Angel, and Man we gave liberty,
And they only fell, becoming a froward sect.
Not by our motion. but their own vanity.
For that we gave them, to their felicity,
Abused they have, to their perpetual evil.
Man is now mortal and Angel become a devil.
Lose Man we will not, though he from us doth fall
Our love towards him, will be much better than so
Thu law of Nature, teach thu him first of all,
His lord God to know, and that is right to do.
Charge and enforce him, in the ways of us to go,
Thu law of Moses, And Christ's law finally
Raise him and save him, to our perpetual glory▪
For time of exile, than I must be his teacher.
Yea, for three ages, both guide and governor.
From Adam to Noah, from Noah, to Abraham,
And than to Moses, which is the son of Amram,
Where must I remain, for the time I shall be here?
In the heart of Man, his conscience for to steer,
To righteous living, and to a just believe,
In token whereof, this heart to the I give.
Thu shalt want no grace, to comfort him with all,
If he to the faith, of my first promise fall.
Then my course is next, for time of his pōnishment●
For three ages more, to the must he consent.
From Moses to David from thence to the Iewes exile
And so fourth to Christ, which will Man reconcile
Where shall I sweet lord, for that same season dewell
With such hard rulers, as will the people compel.
Our mind to fulfil, withuot vain gauds of fables
For a sign of this, hold these same stony tables.
All they that observe, our laws invyolablye,
Shall every where prosper, increase and multiply
Then I perceive well, my course is last of all.
What though it be so? yet art thu principal,
Our all the world, thy beams shalt thu extend,
And still continue, till the world be at an end.
Where shall I father, for that same time persever?
With the faithful foet, must thu continue ever.
Thu shalt my people, return from far exile,
And for evermore, to my grace reconcile.
Take this precious book, for a token evident.
A seal of my covenant, and a living testament.
They that believe it shall live forevermore,
And they that do not, will rue their folly sore,
Blessed shall he be, that you my laws will keep.
In city and field, whether he do work or sleep,
His wife shall increase, his land shall frutyfye.
And of his enemies, he shall have victory.
The sky will give rain, when seasonable time shall be,
The works of his hands, shall have prosperity.
Cursed shall they be, that will not our laws fulfil,
Without and within, at market and at mill.
Of corn and cattle, they shall have non increase,
Within their own house, shall sorrows never cease
Never shall they be, without bile, botch, or blain,
The pestilence & pox, will work them deadly pain,
Show this unto Man, & bid him take good heed,
Of our righteousness, to stand always in dread.
We visit the sin. and the great abomination▪
Of the wicked sort, to third and fort generation.
Thu law of Nature, instruct him first of all,
Thu law of Moses, correct him for his fall,
And thu law of Christ, give him a godly mind.
Raise him unto grace, & save him from the find.
Our heavenly blessing, be with you every chone,
All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.
Here still to tarry, I think it be your mind.
My office ye know, is to instruct Mankind.
Than God be with you, we leave ye here behind,
THe law in effect. is a teacher general,
What is to be done. & what to be laid aside
But as touching me the first law natural
A knowledge I am whom God in Man doth hide,
In his whole working, to be to him a guide,
To honour his God and seek his neighbour's health,
A great occasion, of peace and public wealth,
A sore charge I have, Mankind to over se.
And to instruct him, his lord God to obey.
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my duty
That he be pleased, and Man brought to a stay.
His brittle nature, his slyppernesse to way,
Much doth provoke me. But if God set to hand,
He shall do full well. For none may him withstand,
Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. buy brom buy buy. Brome's for shoes and pow●h●rynges, botes and buskyns for new bromes/ Brom, brom, brom.
Marry God give ye good even,
And the holy man saint Steven,
Send ye a good new year.
I would have brought ye the pax.
Or else anymage of wax.
If I had known ye hear.
I will myself so handle.
That ye shall have a candle,
When I come hither again.
At this your sudden motion.
I was in such devotion,
I had near broke a vain.
That might have done ye smart.
No, no, it was but a fart,
For pastime of my heart,
I would ye had it forsooth.
In serupp or in sowse,
But for noyance of the house,
For easement of your tooth,
Now have I my dream in deed,
God send me weal to speed,
And sweet saint Antony.
I thought I should meet a knave,
And now that fortune I have
Among this company.
Why dost thu call me knave?
I said. I would be your slave,
If your grace would me have▪
And do your work anon,
I would so rub your botes,
Therofe should from the roots,
When ye should do them on,
Thu art disposed to mock,
soon mayst thu have a knock,
If thu with me so game.
Your mouth shall kiss my dock,
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?
I am the law of Nature.
I thought so by your stature,
And by your ancient gature,
Ye were of such a rature,
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately,
And now ye are his bailie,
Mankind to rule discreetly,
Welcome sir huddy peke.
If thu use soch villainty.
I shall displease the truly.
By the mass I the defy,
With thy whole cuckoldrye,
And all that with the hold.
Why dost thu me blaspheme,
And so ungodly deem?
For by this blessed book,
I went ye had been a coke,
And that made me so bold,
For a coke once having age
With ● face demure and sage,
And ancient to behold.
As you have here in place,
With a heard upon your face,
What is he but a coke old?
Ye are disposed to dally,
To leap and oversallye,
The compass of your wit?
I counsel ye yet in season,
somewhat to follow reason,
And gnaw upon the byrte,
Then after our great madness,
let us fall to some sadness,
And tell me what ye in tend,
God sent me unto Man,
To do the best I can,
To cause him to amend.
Soche creatures as want reason.
My rules obye yche season,
And that in every bondre.
The sun and moan doth moan,
With the other bodies above,
And never break their order.
The trees and herbs doth grow,
The see doth ebb and flow,
And varieth not a nail.
The floods and wholesome springs,
With other natural things,
Their course do never fail
The beasts and birds engender,
So do the fishes tendre,
According to their kind
alonely man doth fall,
From good laws natural,
By a froward wicked mind.
Now will I prove ye a liar,
Next cousin to a friar,
And on the gall ye rub.
Ye say thy follow your law,
And varyee not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tub/
The sun once in the clyppes
Away the clearness slips
And darkened is the day,
Of the planetee influence,
Ariseth the pestilence.
To many one's decay,
Doth not the see so rage,
That none can it assuage,
And swellowe in town and street?
The air which giveth breath,
sometime infecteth to death,
By his most pestilent heat.
The beasts oft undemure,
Which were left to man's cure,
Will him sometime devour.
Thus are your rules forgot,
As things of slender note,
In creatures day and hour,
It is the will of God,
To use them as a rod,
Of his just punishment.
When Man doth not regard,
The lord nor his reward,
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh,
But when God doth Man punish.
For his unhappiness.
From God they never fall,
Nor from laws natural,
Doing his business.
And you are the same law,
That keep them under awe,
By yovy most politic wit?
God hath appointed me,
Mankind to oversee,
And in his heart to sit.
To teach him, for to know,
In the creatures high and low,
His glorious majesty,
And on his name to call,
Or power celestial,
In his necessity,
To think him everlasting,
And wonderful in working,
And that he createth all,
Both govern and conserve.
From them he never swerve,
That to such faith will fall.
In deed here is good sport.
But why do you resort,
Unto this present place?
Man always to exhort,
To seek all health and comfort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice,
And than with open voice,
To worship him alone.
Knowledging his deyte,
His power and eternyte.
When he shall make his moan▪
I shall keep ye as well from that,
As my grandam kept her cat,
From licking of her cream.
What wilt thu keep me fro?
Tell me ere thu farther go,
Me think thu art in a dream.
From causing of Mankind.
To give to God his mind,
Or his obedience.
What is thy name? tell me.
Marry infidelity,
Which never will agree,
To your benevolence.
Thu cannyst not keep me from man.
Yet will I do the best I can.
To trouble ye now and than.
That ye shall not prevail.
I will cause idolatry.
And most vile sodomy,
To work so on graciously,
Ye shall of your purpose fail.
I defy the wicked find,
With thy whole venomous find,
God putteth now in my mind,
To flee thy company.
Ye are so blessed a Saint,
And yourself so weal can paint,
That I must me acquaint,
With you no remedy.
Avoid thu cruel enemy,
I will none of the truly,
But shurne thy company,
As I would the devil of hell.
And are ye gone in deed?
Small wyttam be your speed,
Except ye take good heed,
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work soch mastery,
By crafts and sutyle policy,
The law of nature to poison.
With pestilent idolatry,
And with most stinking sodomy,
That he shall have no Foison.
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The devils own kyd●yn slaves,
That them I can not se.
I conjure you both here,
And charge ye to apere,
Like two knaves as ye be.
Ambo is a name full clean,
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clerk.
By Tetragrammaton,
I charge ye, apere anon,
And come out of the dark.
Have in than at a dash,
With swash miry annet swash,
Yet may I not be to rash,
For my holy order's sake.
Nor I son by my troth,
Cha caute a courage of sloth,
And such a cumbrous couth,
Ych wot not what to do.
At Christmas and at Paske.
ye may dance the devil a mask,
whiles his great cauldron plawe.
you such a prati minion.
And you now in religion,
Soch two I never saw.
Is not thy name idolatry?
Yes, an wholesome woman verily.
And weal scene in philosophy,
Mennys fortunes she can tell.
She can by saying her ave Mary,
And by other charms of sorcery,
Ease men of toth ake by and bye,
Yea, and fetch the devil from hell.
She can milk the cow and hunt the fox,
And help men of the ague and pox,
So they bring money to the box,
When they to her make moan.
She can fatch again all that is lost,
And draw drink out of a rotten post,
Without the help of the holy Ghost.
In working she is alone.
What, sometime thu wert an he,
Yea, but now ych am a she,
And a good midwife per de,
Young children can I charm.
With whysperynges and whysshynges.
With crossynges and with kissings
With blasynges and with blessings,
That spretes do them no harm.
Then art thu like to Clisthenes,
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules,
Which themselves oft transformed.
Into a woman's likeness,
With agility and quickness,
But they had Venus' sickness,
As writers have declared.
let her tell fourth her matter.
With holy oil and water,
I can so cloyne and clarter,
That I can at the latter,
Many suttylters contrive.
I can work wiles in battle,
If I do ones but spittle,
I can make corn and cattle,
That they shall never thrive.
When ale is in the fat,
If the bruar please me nart,
The east shall fall down flat.
And never have any strength.
No man shall ton nor bake,
Nor meat in season make,
If I against him take,
But lose his labour at length.
Their wells I can up dry,
Cause trees and herbs to die.
And slay all pullerye,
Whereas men doth me move.
I can make stoles to dance,
And earthen pots to prance.
That none shall them enhance,
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plough,
And also for the cough,
She shall give milk enough,
So long as I am pleased.
Apace the mill shall go,
So shall the credle do,
And the mustered querrie also,
No man therewith diseased.
Thou art thu for me fit.
The woman hath a wit,
And by her gear can sixth,
Though she be somewhat old.
It is mine own sweet bully,
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelover and my cullye,
Yea, mine own sweet heart of Gold.
I say yet not to hold.
Peace fondelinge, tush a button,
What wilt thu fall to mutton?
And play the hungry glutton,
Afore this company?
Rank love is full of heat,
Where hungry dogs lack meat,
They will dirty puddings eat,
For want of beef and conye.
High, minion for money,
As good is draff as honey,
When the day is hot and sonnye,
By the blessed road of kent.
say fourth your mind good mother,
For this man is none other,
But our own loving brother.
And is very we'll content.
I never miss but palter,
Our blessed ladies psaulter,
Before saint Savours altar,
With my beads once a day.
And this is my comen cast,
To hear Mass first or last.
And the holy frydaye fast,
In good time mote I it say.
With blessings of Saint Germyne,
I will me so determine,
That neither fox nor vermin,
Shall do my chuckens harm.
For your gese seek saint Legearde,
And for your ducks saint Lenarde,
For horse take Moses' yard,
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkin folte,
With the bias of a bolt,
For the healing of a colt,
No better thing can be.
For lamps and for botts,
Take me saint Wylfrides knots.
And holy saint Thomas lots,
On my life I warande ye.
For the cough take Iudas care,
With the paring of a pear,
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy,
Three syppes are for the hyckock,
And vj. more for the chyckock,
Thus may my praty pyckock,
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber.
give oats unto saint Vncumber,
And beans in a certain number.
Unto saint Blaze and saint Blythe▪
give onions to saint Cutlake,
And garlic to saint Cyryake,
If ye will shurne the head ache,
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a sheeps tyrdle.
And good saint Frances girdle,
With the hamlet of an hyrdle,
Are wholesome for the pyppe.
Besyden these charms afore,
I have feats many more,
That I keep still in store,
Whom now I over hip.
It is a spoart I trow,
To hear how she out blow,
Her witch crafts on a row,
By the Mass I must needs smile.
Now I pray the let me know,
What sedes that thu cannyst sow.
Mankind to over throw,
And the law of nature beguile.
Myself I so behave,
And am so vile a knave.
As nature doth deprave,
And utterly abheire.
I am soche a vice truly,
As God in his great fury.
Deed punish most terryblye,
In Sodom and in Gomoire.
In the flesh I am a fire,
And such a vile desire,
As bring men to the mire,
Of fowl concupiscence.
We two together began,
To spring and to grow in man,
As Thomas of Aquyne scan,
In the fort book of his sentence.
I dwelled among the Sodomytes,
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes,
And now the popish hypocrites,
Embrace me every where.
I am now become all spiritual,
For the clergy at Rome and over all,
For want of wives to me doth fall,
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I ded so move,
That they the daughters of men ded love,
Working such ways as ded not behove,
Till the flood them over went.
With Noes son Than I was half joined,
When he his drunken father scorned.
In the Gomorytes I also reigned,
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Onan not unacquainted,
When he on the ground his increase shed,
For me his brethren Ioseph accused,
As Genesis doth tell.
David once warned all men of us two,
Do not as mules and horses will do,
Confounded be they that to images go,
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiel.
Both Hieremy and Daniel,
Of us the abominations tell,
With the prophets everyone,
For us two God struck with fire & water.
With battle, with plagues & fearful matter,
With painful exile, than at the latter,
Into Egypt and Babylon.
As Paul to the Romans testify,
The gentiles after idolatry,
Fell to such bestial sodomy,
That God ded them forsake.
Who followeth us as he confess,
The kingdom of God shall never possess,
And as the Apocalyps express,
Shall sink to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles,
Thamiras, Nero, Agathocles,
Tibernius and Aristoteles,
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fulmus,
Semiramis and Hortensius,
Crathes, Hyliscus, and Pontius,
Beasts to abuse most monstru●uslye.
Marry thu art the devil himself,
If ye knew how he could pelf,
Ye would say he were such an elf.
As non under heaven were else
The fellow is weal decked,
disguised and weal necked.
Both knave bald and pyepecked.
He lacketh nothing but beles.
In the first age I began,
And so perseverde with man,
And still will if I can,
So long as he endure.
If monkish sects renew,
And popish priests continue,
Which are of my retinue.
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marriage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hid,
Men know what hath betid,
When they have been in apparel.
Oft have they buried quick,
Soch as were never sick,
Full many a proper trick,
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall,
Both bishop and cardinal.
Monk, friar, priest and all,
More rank they are than ants.
Example in pope Iulye,
Which sought to have in his fury,
Two lads, and to use them beastly,
From the cardinal of Nantes.
Well, you two are for my mind,
Step fourth and do your kind.
Leave never a point be hind,
That may corrupt in man,
The law writ in his heart.
In his flesh do thy heart.
And his soul to pervert,
Do thu the best thu can.
Here have I pratye gins.
Both brouches, beads and pins,
With such as the people wins,
Unto idolatry.
Take thu part of them here,
Beads, rings, and other gear,
With their abomination.
Idolatry with wickedness,
And Sodomy with filthiness.
To his most utter damnation.
These two will him so use,
Ich one in their abuse,
And wrap him in such evil.
That by their wicked cast,
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now underneath her noynge,
Idolatry hath kings,
With their nobility.
Both dukes, lords, knights and earls.
Fair ladies with their pearls.
And the whole commenalte.
Within the bounds of sodomy.
Doth dwell the spiritual clergy,
Pope, Cardinal and priest.
Nun, Cannon, Monk and friar,
With so many else as do desire,
To reign under Antichrist.
Detesting matrimony,
They live abhomynablye,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I fell ye farthernewes?
At Rome for prelate's are stewed,
Of both kinds. This is just.
The law of Nature I think,
Will not be able to wink,
Against the assaults of them.
They having so high prelate's.
And so many great estates,
From hens to Jerusalem.
Pause now a little while,
Mine ears doth me beguile,
If I hear not a sound.
eyes folk hath sped I guess,
It is so by the Mess,
Away now will I round,
I think ye marvel, to see such alteration,
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure▪
Of me it cometh not, but of man's operation,
Whom daily the devil, to great sin doth allure,
And his nature is, full brittle and unsure.
By him have I got this fowl disease of body.
And as ye see here, am now thrown in a lepry.
I wrought in his heart, as God bade earnestly,
Him oft provoking, to love God over all.
With the inner powers, But that false idolatry.
Hath him perverted, by slayghtes diabolical.
And so hath sodomy, through his abuses carnal.
That he is now lost, offending without measure.
And I corrupted, to my most high displeasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusions bestial.
That they daily use, which boast their chastity.
Some at the altar, to incontynency fall,
In confession some, full beastly occupied be.
Among the close nuns, reigneth this enormity.
Soch children slay they, as they chance for to have.
And in their prevyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christian rulers, so you for this a way,
Be not illuded, by false hypocrisy.
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
permit priests rather, God's lawful remedy
Than they should incur, most bestial sodomy.
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorish kingdom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodom.
With Man have I been, which hath me thus defiled▪
With idolatry, and unclean sodomy.
And worthy I am, from God to be exiled,
Pity me yet lord, of thy most bownteouse mercy.
I will fourth & mourn, till thu send remedy
Promise haste thu made, to a glorious liberty,
To bring heaven & earth, than wilt thou (I trust) restore me.
THe lord perceiving, his first law thus corrupted,
With unclean vices, sent me his law of Moses,
To see him for sin, substancyallye corrected.
And brought in again, to a trade of godliness.
For I am a law, of rigour and of hardness.
I straightly command, and if it be not done.
I threaten. I curse, and slay in my anger soon.
To God I require, a perfect obedience,
condemning all such, as do it not in effect.
I show what sin is, I burden sore man's conscience
To him am I death, when his life is infect.
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him direct,
forgiveness to have. with light, health & salvation,
Lest he should despair, & fall into damnation.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastime quoth A, I know not the time nor when,
I ded laugh so much, seen I was an honest man.
Believe me and ye will, I never saw such a spot,
I would ye had been there, that ye might have made the fort.
Where wouldest have had met tell me good brother 〈◊〉.
At the Mynorasse ser, late yester night at compline.
At the Mynorasse? Us what was there a do?
For such an other, would I to Southampton go.
In deed yesterday, it was their dedication
And thither in God's name, came I to see the fashion.
An old friar stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
Beginning this Anteme, a my faith I do not gloze
Lapides preciosi.
And what ded follow of this?
I shall tell ye ser by God's bliss.
Then came Dame Isbell, an old Nun & a calm,
Crowing like a capon, and thus began the Psalm.
Saepe expugnaverunt me a iuuentute mea.
And what includeth this mystery?
A simple problem of bytcherye.
When the friar begun, Afore the Nun,
To sing of precious stones.
From my youth say she, They have comfort me,
As it had been for the nonce.
I assure the plain, I set not by soch gaudee,
Thy usage show thee, to be brought up among bawds
It was a good world, when we had such wholesome stories
Preached in our church, on sundays & other feryes.
With us was it merry,
When we went to bury.
And to our lady of grace,
To the blood of hails,
Where no good cheer fails,
And other holy place.
When the priests might walk.
And with young wives talk.
Than had we children plenty.
Than cuckolds might leap,
A score on a heap,
Now is there not one to twenty.
When the Monks were fat.
And rank as a rat.
With bellies like a Boar.
Then all things were dear,
Both beef, bread and bear,
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When bishops might burn.
And from the truth turn.
The syllye simple soul.
Than durst no man creak,
Open mouth nor speak.
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
Now are the knaves bold.
With Scriptures to hold,
And teach them every where.
The carter, the souter.
The bodger, their clowter,
That all will away I fear.
At us so they pull.
Our livings are dull,
We are now like to fall.
If we do not fight,
For the churches right,
By the Mess we shall lose all.
But I pray ye sir, tell me what is your name▪
The law of Moses, to lie I were to blame.
In these same parties, what do ye now intend?
Mankind to reform, that he his life amend.
I show what sin is, & what thing pleaseth god,
I comfort the just, and the ill I punish with rod.
The comen people, have thought it commodyouse,
diverse Gods to have, with rites superstitious.
My commandment is, to seek one God alone,
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan.
Among the gentiles, was it thought non injury,
If a man were hurt, to slay his adversary.
This thing I forbid, and say, thu shalt not kill,
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordynatlye love.
Those are persuaded, all things them to behove.
Which I inhybyte, saying continually,
No rape shalt thu do, nor yet commit adultery.
Thu shalt do no theft, nor covet that is not thine.
Against thy neighbour, shalt thu not falsely define.
We may do nothing, if we be pinned in thus.
Neither you nor God, to that hardetrade shall bring us.
We must have one God, & worship him alone?
Marry that in deed, would make a Turk to groan.
If we be stricken, we may not strike again?
A proper bargain, and dyscretelye uttered plain.
For cumpanyes sake, ye say we may not love?
I defy your worst, and to you there is my glove.
What, thu wilt not fight? thy wits are better than so
In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go,
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your fence.
Thu were much better, to keep thy patience.
Nay by cocks soul frynd, I must lay ye on the coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may soon have me a float
Nay, have at your pysche, defend ye if ye may.
Soch a fool art thu, as seek thine own decay.
If Iones meddle, to the it will be death.
diddest thu never hear that law sleath in his wreath
By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.
Why, what part wilt thu play?
By cocks soul give over. so soon as I sele smart.
It will be to late, if I ones couple with the.
Then let me alone, and we shall soon agree,
And I shall be glad, to be acquainted with ye.
Acquaintance good fellow, thu master soon have of me.
The worst fault I have, I am hasty now and than,
But it is soon gone, I took it of a woman.
But what mean those tables, that ye have in your hand?
Keep silence a while, and thu shalt understand.
Three things I declare, the first are the precepts moral.
Next, the laws iudycial, & last the rites ceremonyal
The moral precepts, are God's commandments ten.
Which ought evermore, to be observed of all men.
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare,
And the pleasant works, to God they teach & prepare
They stir man to faith, & provoke him also to love
To obey, to sorne, and to worship God above.
In two stony tables, God wrote them first of all,
That they should remain, as things continual.
The first hath but three, which tend to God's high honour,
Given hath the second, & they concern our neighbour.
The first doth expound, the first law natural.
The next the other, making them very formal.
In spirit is the first, that we should God honour & love.
To outward working, the second doth us move.
forbidding all wrongs, preserving just marriage,
Norryshing true peace, and other godly usage.
What is the effect, of your laws judicial?
Soch things to command, as are civil or temporal.
From vice to refrain, and outward injury,
Quiet to conserve, and public honesty.
These are to support, the laws of the second table.
ceremonial rites are also commendable,
In holy days, garments, temples & consecrations,
sacrifices & vows, with offerings & expiacyons
Which are unto Christ, as fygurs, types & shadows
As Paul doth declare, in his pistle to the Hebrues.
These are only figures, & outward testymonyes,
No man is perfect, by such dark ceremonies.
Only pertain they, unto the third commandment,
Of the Sabbath day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death ending, the whole Judaical priesthood.
Good days might ye have, ye speak it full weal by the road.
I am a poor lad, & by my troth bent earnestly,
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackye.
What art thu called, I pray the heartily.
Graye friar am I none, by the Mess I can not flatter.
I am infidelity, to tell the truth of the matter.
And hast thu so long, dissembled thus with me▪
Yea, for advantage, to smell out your subtlety.
Avoid hens I say, thu false infidelity.
Nay that I will not, by Yngham trinity.
Wilt thu not in deed, than will I fet hither the power
Of judges & kings, to subdue the within this hour.
Soch knights will I have, as shall confound them all
As Sadducees & scribes, with the sect pharysayeal
By help of my children Idolatry and sodomy.
The law of Nature, I kest once in a lepry.
I have yet two more, ambition & Covetousness.
Which will do as much, to the law of Moses.
Where are my whoresons, that they come not away.
Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array.
I will thu know it, I am a worshipful Doctor.
A Scribe in the law, and a profitable proctor.
By wresting the text, to the scriptures sore decay.
And what wilt thu do, my fellow Covetousness?
A veil will I spread, upon the face of Moses,
That none shall perceive, the clearness of his countenance.
Which is of the law, the meaning & true ordinance.
Why, what will ye say, unto the ten commandments?
We must poison them, with will works & good intentes.
Where as God doth say, No siraunge gods thu shalt have,
With Saints worshipping, that clause we will deprave.
And though he command, to make no carved image,
For a good intent yet will we have pilgrimage.
Though he will us not, to take his name in vain,
With traditions yet, thereunto will we constrain.
No Sabbath will we, with God's word sanctify,
But with lip labour, and idle ceremony.
To father and mother, we may owe non obedience,
Our religion is, of so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we heretics burn,
If they will not soon, from holy scripture turn.
What though it be said. Thu shalt do no fornication,
Yet will we maintain, much greater abomination
Though theft be forbid, yet will we continually,
Rob the poor people, through prayer & purgatory
God hath inhybyted, to give false testimony,
Yet we will condemn, the Gospel for heresy.
We should not covet, our neighbour's house nor wife,
His servant nor beast, yet are we therein most rife.
Of men make we swine, by the draff of our traditions
And cause them nothing, to regard but superstitions.
As dogs unreasonable, on most vile carrion feed,
So will we cause them, seek idols in their need.
And always their ground, shall be, for a good intent.
More mischiefs I trow, the devil could not invent
Than your two can do by the Mess ye are alone,
little could I do, were ye once from me gone,
To the corrupting. of the law of Moses,
Go forward therefore, in your deceitfulness.
With superstitions, the Iewes ceremonial laws,
I will so handle, they shall not be worth ij. straws.
The laws judicial. through cawtels and delays.
I will also drown, to all righteous men's decays
To set this forward, we must have sophistry,
philosophy and Logyck, as science necessary.
The bishops must hold, their priests in ignorance
With long latin hours, lest knowledge to them chance.
let them have longe matins, long even songs & long Masses.
And that will make them, as dull as ever were asses.
That they shall never, be able to prophecy,
Or yet preach the truth, to our great injury.
let the cloisterers, be brought up ever in silence,
Without the scriptures, in pain of disobedience.
See the lay people, pray never but in latin,
let them have their Crede, and service all in latin
That, a latin believe, may make a latin soul,
let them nothing know, of Christ nor yet of powle
If they have English, let it be for advantage,
For pardons, for Syrges, for offerings and pilgrimage.
I reckon to make them, a new Crede in a while,
And all in English, their conscience to beguile.
Rehearse unto me, the articles of that Crede.
The articles are these, give ear and take good heed
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope,
Next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then in holy church. with fencer, cross and cope.
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacramentals.
In purgatory then, in pardons and in trentals,
In praying to saints, and in saint Frances hood,
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed rood.
They shall believe also, in relics and religion,
In our ladies psalter, in free will and good wurkes.
In the ember days, and in the pope's remission,
In beads and in bells, not used of the turkes.
In the golden Masses, against such spretes as lurks
With charms and blessings. This creed will bring in money.
In English therefore, we will it clarkly convey.
Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe that, crede,
That into the ditch, the blind the blind may lead
Then I hold it best, that we always condemn,
The Bible readers, lest they our acres contemn.
Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bytar,
Expressing always, the tropes and types of thy mitre.
Why, what dost thu think, my mitre to signify?
The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by & by.
If thu stoup downward. loo, see how the wolf doth gape.
Ready to devour, the lambs, lest any escape.
But thy woluyshnesse, by three crowns will I hide,
Making the a pope, & a captain of all pride.
That when thu dost slay, such as thy laws contemyne
Thu mayst say, Nor I, but the powers ded them condemn.
These Labels betoken the laws of senon & cannon
I trow thu wouldest say, the ij. laws civil & Canon.
As I spoke I thought, & still think by saint Iohan
Yea, persecute still the instructors of the people.
And thu Covetousness, let no bell ring in steeple,
Without a profit. Tush, take money every where
So nigh clip and shave, that thu leave never a hear?
I caused the pope, to take but now of late,
Of the Graye fryres, to have canonyzate,
Franciscus de pola, three thousand ducats and more,
And as much besides he had not long afore,
For a cardinal heart, of the same holy order,
Thus draw we to us, great goods from every border.
Pope Clement the seventh paid once for his papacy
Three hoored thousand, good ducats of lawful money
I marvel how he, could come to so much good.
Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedding Christian blood.
Crosers and mytars, in Rome are good merchandyce
And all to little, to maintain their pomp and vice.
The pope for whoredom, hath in Rome and Viterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substance yearly
Tush they be in England, that much rather would to dwell,
Whores in their dioceses, than the readers of Christ's Gospel.
They do the better, for by them they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night,
Well, now step forward, and go do your business.
To the corrupting, of the law of Moses.
Doubt not but we shall, make him a crepple blind.
Sing then at our farewell, to recreate our mind.
Now am I left alone. And these, two. merchants gone,
Their mischiefs to conclude.
I think within a while, They will trap & beguile
The worthy law of Iude.
ambition first of all, With his rites bestial,
will make the people swine.
In draff will he then lead, And with traditions feed
Where they shall sup or dine.
Covetousness will work, That many one shall bark,
Like dogs against the truth.
Some shall God's word defile, & some will it revile
Soch beastliness ensueth.
ambition hath this hour All the whole spiritual, pour
And may do what him lust.
Now covetousness doth rule, And hath both horse & mule.
All matters by him dyscust.
Now byshopryckes are sold, & the holy ghost for gold
The pope doth buy and sell.
The truth may not be told, under pains manifold
With sendynges down to hell.
The people priests do famish, And their goods from them ravish.
Yea, and all the world they blind.
All princes do they mock, And rob the syllye flock
Nothing they leave behind.
On the face of Moses, A veil they have cast doubtless.
The light of the law to hide.
Lest Men to Christ should come, from ceremonies dumb
As to their heavenly guide.
The law can never be, at any liberty.
Where such two enemies reign.
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk,
when I come hither again.
If pity may move, your gentle christian hearts,
let it now stir ye, to mourn this heavy chasice.
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked parts.
And left me stark blind, God knoweth to my sore grievance,
And I think also, to your more hindrance.
To lead you to Christ sometime, a guide I was.
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, Alas.
Most rygorouslye, those enemies now of late.
Deed fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight.
One was ambition, which ever ought me hate,
And Covetousness, the other enemy height.
Now forsooth and God, in their most cruel spite.
The one made me blind, the other made me lame,
And when they had done, there at they had great game
Thus a blind crypple, I wander here alone,
Abiding the time, and grace of restoration,
By the son of God To whom I make my moan,
My cause to pity, and grant me supportation,
Lest I be left here, to utter desolation,
And extreme decay, without any remedy.
If he did not help, of goodness and of mercy,
Ye christian princes, God hath given you the pour,
With sceptre and sword, all vices to correct.
Let not ambition, nor Covetousness devour,
Your faithful subjects, nor your officers infect.
Have to your clergy, a diligent respect
And see they do not▪ corrupt the laws of God,
For that doth require, a terrible heavy rod.
God gave me to man, and left me in tables of stone,
That I of hardness, a law should specify,
But the pharysees, corrupted me anon,
And took from me clean, the quyvernesse of body,
With clearness of sight, & other pleasures many.
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore,
To more perfection, than ever I had afore.
unfaithfulness hath, corrupted every Law,
To the great decay, of Adam's posterity.
Were is not for me, which now do/ hither draw,
All flesh would perish, no man should saved be.
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallible verity,
Soch a power of God, as saveth all that believe,
No burden nor yoke, that any man will grieve.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgiveness,
Where faith is grounded, with a sure confidence.
I am soch a grace, and so high tidings of gladness,
As raise the sinner, and pacify his conscience.
I am spirit and life, I am necessary science.
I require but love for man's justification,
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation,
God's been son have ye, it is joy of your life,
I have heard of ye, and of my masters your wife,
If thu heardest of me, it was by the voice of God.
Nay, he that spoke of ye, was selling of a Cod,
In an oyster boat, a little beyond queen hythe,
A northern man was he, & besought ye to be blithe,
If he spoke of me, he was some godly preacher,
Nay ser by the rood, nor yet a wholesome teacher.
After what manner, ded he speak of me? tell.
He swore like a man, by all contententes of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he ded swear & swear again.
That speaking is such, as procureth eternal pain.
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And is so damnable? To hear it I am sorry.
But what diddest thu mean, when thu spakest of my wife?
Nothing, but I thought, it was joy of your life,
That ye were so good, to your neybers as ye are.
Why, how good am I? thy fantasy declare.
Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear,
When ye are a broad, there is fine miry cheer.
As thu art, thu speakest, after they hearts abundance
For as the man is, such in his utterance.
My wife is the church, or christian congregation,
Regenerate in spirit, doing no vile operation,
Both clean and holy, without either spot or wrinkle
The lamb with his blood, ded her wash & be sprinkle,
This is not the church, of disguised hypocrites
Of apysh shavelings, or papistical sodomytes.
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lime and stone.
But, a livish building, grounded in faith alone,
On the hard rock Christ, which is the sure foundation.
And of this church some, do reign in every nation,
And in all contrayes, though their number be but small
Their number is such, as hath run over all
The same Danes are they, men prophesy of plain,
Which should over run, this realm yet once again.
What Danes speakest thou of? thy meaning show more clerlye.
Dane Iohan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane harrye.
These same are those Danes, that lay with other men's wives.
And occupyco their lands, to the detriment of their lives.
These are accounted, a great part of the church,
For in God's service, they honourably wurche,
yelling and crying, till their throats are full sore.
That church was describe, of Esaye long afore.
This people (saith God) with their lips honour me
In vain worship they teaching men's fatuyte.
Apparent is that church, and open to the eyes,
Their worshippings are, in outward ceremonies.
That counterfeit church standeth all by men's traditions
Without the scriptures, and without the hearts affections.
My church is secret, and evermore will be,
Adoring the father, in spirit, and in verity.
By the word of God, this Church is ruled only,
And doth not consist, in outward ceremony.
This congregation, is the true Church militant
These counterfeit demands, are the very Church malignant.
To whom Christ will say, I know non of your sort.
Much are they to blame, that their brethren so report
Soch are no brethren, but enemies to Christ's blood.
As put salvation, in shaven crown, mitre, or whode.
I pray ye how long, have your sweet spouse continued
Sens the beginning, and now is in Christ renewed.
Adam had promise, of Christ's incarnation,
So had Abraham, with his whole generation.
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel,
Into salvation, and deliverance from hell.
By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?
She is not barren, but beareth and never cease.
The Corinth's first epistle, hath this clear testimony
In Christo Iesu, per Euangelum vos genui.
I have begot you, in Iesu Christ saith powle,
By the Gospel preaching, to the comfort of yur soul
Than are ye a cuckold, by the blessed holy mass,
As I said afore, so cometh it now to pass.
For I am a prophet, by high inspiration led.
Now like I myself, much better than I ded.
Ye beat that saint paule, begat your wife with child
By mysunderstanding, thu art ungraciously beguiled
An only minister, was paule in that same doing,
That he therein ded, was by the gospel preaching.
His mind is the Gospel to have done that operation
And this must thy hold, for no carnal generation
Marry so they say, ye fellows of the new lering.
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wyning,
Nay, they forsake whoredom, with other damnable usage.
And live with their wives, in lawful marriage,
whiles the pope's oiled swarm, reign styll in their, old buggerage
Yea, poor married men, have very much a do,
I count him wisest, that can take a snatch and to go.
Thu seemest one of them, that detesteth matrimony,
Which is afore God, a state both just and holy.
Of such as thu art, saint paule ded prophecy,
By the holy Ghost, that a certain company,
In the latter days from the truth of God should fall
A rending to spretes, of error diabolical.
Which in hypocrisy, will teach lies for advantage,
W●●h marked consciences, inhybyting marriage.
Thu aperest by thy fruits to be infidelity.
I am non other, but even the very he,
And hither now come I, to comen the matter with ye
Avoid cursed find, and get the out at the gates.
Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your mates
And he●e will I not for this place is for me?
Who should here remain, but infidelity?
Well, than for a time, I must departed from hens,
But this first will I say, before this audyens.
Easier will it be, concerning punishment,
To Sodom and Gormor, in the day of judgement,
Than to those cities, that resist the verity,
At the suggestions, of infidelity.
That people will be, for ever and ever lost,
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost.
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed,
Than came his son Christ, & made it more manifest.
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme damnation will fall.
No prayer remaineth, nor expiation for sin,
To them that no profit, or the word of God will win.
Take good heed therefore, & say that ye have warning
God send your mother, of you to have a fondeling.
By the mass I think, he is weal out of the way,
Now will I contrive, the drift of an other play.
I must work such ways, Christ's law may not continue,
In a while am I like, to have none else of my retinue.
Companions I want, to begin this tragedy,
Namely false doctrine, and his brother hypocrisy.
They will not belong, I suppose now verily,
By cocks fowl me think, I see such a company.
Him I say children, will not my voice be heard?
As good is a beck, as is a dew vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own companions both.
Thu shalt sure have, a livery of the same cloth,
Gramercyes by God, my old friend infidelity.
What, brother snyp snap, how go the word with thee?
What, friar flyp flap, how say ye to, Benedicite?
Marry nothing but well, for I cry now advantage
At her purse or arse, tell me good friar fuccage?
By the Mess at both, for I am a great penytensar,
And sit at the pardon, Tush, I am the pope's own vicar
If thu lackest a piece, I know where thu mayst be sped.
With coyse of a score, & brought even to thy bed.
Art thu not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?
No, for it is such gear, as the holiest of us will have,
Pope, cardinal, bishop, monk, canon priest & friar,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.
Our orders permit us not▪ to have them in marriage
No, but ye fatche them in, by an other carriage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.
By the Mess I laugh, to hear this whoreson prate
What fashion use ye, to us here intymate.
Ego distinguo, whether ye will have lions or parys.
Of them both to show, it will not be far amiss.
In parys we have, the mantel of Saint lewes,
Which women seek much, for help of their barrenness.
For be it once laid, upon a womannys belly,
She go thence with child, the miracles are scene there Saylye.
And besides all this, ye would marvel in confession.
What our fathers do, to assoil them of transgression
Iohan Thessecclius, assoiled a young woman ones.
Behind the high altar, till she cried out of hes bones.
And as for lions, there is the length of our lord,
In a great pillar. She that will with a coorde,
Be fast bound to it, and take such chance as fall,
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all.
Tush, I could tell ye, of much more wondre than this,
In course to hear them, I think ye would bliss.
As thu hast begun, go forward in it and tell.
Soch a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.
In our religion, was an holy popish patriarch,
Which of all bawdry, might be the great monarch.
The nuns to confess, he went from place to place,
And two hundred of them, he broached in that space.
Many spices he eat, his courage to prwoke.
Soch a fellow was he, as of that gear had the stroke.
Now, somewhat will I tell to confirm thy tale withal
In king ferdynands time, in Spain was a cardinal
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean.
Of some as he had, great number besides the queen.
One of his bastards, was earl, an other was duke,
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Ioannes Cremons', an other good cardinal,
For reformation of the clergy spiritual,
Came once into England, to damn priests matrimony.
And the next night after, was taken doing bytcherye.
E●fius also, which fiercely came to dispute,
In lipsia with luther, minding there him to confute
For marriage of priests, three children had that year.
By this may ye see that sometime we make merry cheer.
Marry that ye do, I shall bear ye record now.
But how will ye answer, for breaking of your vow?
We never break vow, so long as we do not marry,
Though we in whoredom, be never so bold & busy.
By your order than, ye may walk much at large.
What hast thu hypocrisy? to lay for thy discharge.
Saint Frances habit, with the holy girdle & whode,
Non can go to hell, that therein die by the road,
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side,
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide.
For I read of one, that should have gone to the devil
But the spretes of hell, could do to him none evil.
Till saint Frances came, & took from him his cowl,
Then went he to hell, the fryres ded hear him howl.
I will therefore serve, S. Frances with heart & mind
With daily memories, that he may be my friend.
And than I care not, for all the devils in hell,
That I have told you, is more true than the Gospel.
Then are ye more sure, than monks for your heritage,
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for advantage.
Yet is it to them a very pleasant thing,
Their abbot at home, to be called lord and king.
Nay, monk and churl, for here is no king butone.
If he be a king. his mace is a marry bone,
Any his crown a cow torde. Soch knaves as come from the carr,
Must be called kings, for playing a popish part,
It become not thee, the romish pope so to lurch.
considering he is, the highest of the church.
If he be the highest, than is he the wether cock,
Ah, now I perceive, thu art disposed to mock,
Of all holy church, he is the principal head.
Marry that is true, he sendeth out bulls under lead
And he hath two keys, the one to open hell,
The other speareth heaven, thus do new heretics tell
They report also, that dogs have no devotion,
To his holy laws, not to his old instruction.
Why should dogs hate him? make that more evident.
They love no peses porrege, nor yet read herrings in lent,
Stock fish nor oysters, but curse him body and bone,
And would his read sprottes, & rottenfysh were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that maketh me full sad.
Either thu dost mock, or else thou art sure mad.
I hear the people, complain very much of the.
What is their prattling, I pray the heartily tell me.
They say, thu teachest, nothing but lousy traditions
And lies for lucre, with damnable superstitions.
And thus they conclude, that the draff of popish priests
Is good enough for swine, by whom they mean the papystes.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all.
To most vile carrion, the dogs will soonest fall.
Than do they compare, the papystes unto dogs.
Marry that they do, & to such swinish hogs.
As in swyll & soffe, are brought up all their life.
Soch are the papystes, they say both man and wife.
They say of the also, that thu art a naughty knave,
By prowling and lying, ye friars would all have.
Thine order they say, is sprung even out of hell,
And all this knowledge, they have now of the Gospel.
Why, where is he now, I besych the heartily tell,
By the mess abroad, & I warande ye maketh revel.
I commoned with him, and he ded us despise,
Against him therefore, somewhat must we devise.
Marry that must we, or else it will be wrong,
He will sure destroy us, if we do suffer him long.
Needs must we serve him, as we once served Christ.
Why mad brained whoresons, how ded ye handle Christ?
As he preached here, we followed from place to place,
To trap him in snare, and his doctrine to deface.
Than found we the means, to put him so to death,
Lest he against us, should open any more breath.
And we set four knights, to keep him down in his grave.
That he never more, our living should deprave.
And thus must we serve, the Gospel, no remedy,
Else will be destroy, our living perpetually.
Better one were loft, than we should perish all,
As Cayphas once said, in counsel pharysaycall.
By God & weal said. When ye have him this grave,
Stamp him down till he shit. & serve him like a knave.
We must so order him, that he go no more at large.
Four knights will we hire, whom we shall straightly charge,
To keep him down hard. The first are ambitious prelate's,
Then covetous lawyers, that God's word spitefully hates,
Lords without learning, & iustyces unrightful,
These will keep him down, and rap him on the skull.
There someners & their scribes, I warande ye shall steer
With balyves and catch poles, to hold him down every where.
I trow Rugge & Corbet, At Norwych will do their part.
With wharton of Bongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.
And I will raise up, in the universities,
The seven slepers there, to advance the pope's decrees
As Dorbel & Duns, Durande & Thomas of Aquyne
The master of sentens▪ with Bachon the great divine
Henricus de Gandauo. And these shall read ad clerum,
Aristotle and Albert, de secretis mulierum,
With the commentaries, of Avicen and Aueroyes.
And a Phoebo Phebe, which is very good for boys.
Yea, and let the pope, as Gods own vicar here,
In his hand three crosses, & iij, crowns on his head here.
His power betokening, in heaven, in earth, & in hell
That he may command, all kings to subdue the Gospel.
His self may do that, he need command non other.
Is not he the head, of the holy church our mother?
May not he make saints, and devils at his own pleasure?
Which hath in his hands, the keys & churches treasure?
So we'll as he made, S. Herman first a saint,
And twenty years after, of heresy him attain?
First he sent him to heaven, by his canonization,
And from thence to hell, by an excommunication,
We read of Formosus, that after he was dead,
One pope his fingers, an other cut of his head.
And threw his carcase, into the flood of Tiber,
With the head & fingers, as Platina doth remember.
In token that he, is judge over quick and dead,
And may damn & save, by his pardons under lead,
Sylvester the second, to the devil himself once gave
For that high office, that he might damn & save.
He offered also, his stones to Satan, they say,
For priests chastity, and so went their marriage away.
Here is one coming, inquire what he intend.
Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God us defend.
Show me brother mine, who ded the hither send.
The father of heaven, of his mere benevolence,
I desire therefore, to have free audience.
Ye mind than to preach, afore this company?
In the laws of God, would I instruct them gladly.
For non other way, there is unto salvation,
But the word of God, in every generation,
That quickeneth, that saveth, that bringeth unto heaven
As before his death, Christ taugh the Apostle eleven.
Preach here thu shalt not, without the authority,
Of pope or bishop, or of some of their affinity.
God's word never taketh, his authority of man.
Thu shalt not here preach, do thu the best thu can.
God's blessing on your good heart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye know this day sir, we have a full holy feast,
And must go processyon, with the blessed road of rest.
We have longe matins, longe laudes, longe hours long pyyme.
Mass, even song, compline, & all must be done in tyme.
Sensing of the altars, & casting of holy water.
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.
Have God commanded, any such things to be done?
What is that to thee? go meddle thu with old shone.
Cannyst thu say but they, are good significations?
I say they are fruits, of your imaginations
To bring in lucre, & darken Gods high glory,
Of you God doth axe. no such vain beggery.
Christ never sent his, to show significations,
But his living, word to all the christian nations.
Ye forsake the lord, as Esaias doth tell,
And highly blaspheme, the holy of Israel.
In his first chapter, this horrible sentence is,
Quis haec frustranea quaesivit de manibus vestris.
Who hath required, of you such sacrifice?
In vain offer you, that uncommanded service.
Your incense to me, is great abomination,
I fore abhor it, and much detest your fashion.
When ye pray to me, I give ye non attendance,
But avert my face (saith God) & my countenance.
By this ye may see, that the lord doth not regard,
Your mangy muttering, neyher grant it any reward
No man willeth Paul, to speak in the congregation
In a strange language, without interpretation.
In your latin hours, the flock do ye not consider,
But declare yourselves, to be Romish all together.
Be not led about (saith Paul) by any strange learning,
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popish thing?
He testifieth also, Non enim ut baptizarem,
Misit me Christus, sed ut evangelizarem.
Christ hath not me sent, that I should baptize, saith Paul.
But to preach his word, to the comfort of man's soul.
Loo, though baptism be, a thing very necessary,
Yet must it give place, to God's word, no remedy.
Why than prefer ye, your draffysh ceremonies?
To the gospel preaching▪ O damnable injuries.
Why suffer ye him, to prattle here so long?
Get the hens shortly, or with the it will be wrong.
Peace be here & God, Mastre doctor, by your leave,
That I may declare, a pardon here in my sleeve.
Of our lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Iohannes frarye,
With the indulgence of blessed saint Antonye.
We'll, take thy pleasure, and do it hardly.
Sir he doth me wroge for this day it is my nacyon.
To preach my brotherhood, & gather my limitation
Who first speak first speed, step fourth and read thy pardon,
And when he hath done, your course is father warden
What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel
I would thy Gospel, & thu were both now in hell.
Why, & shall this baggage, put by the word of God?
Thu wilt not be answered, till thu feel a sharper rod.
Good christian people, I am come hither verily,
As a true poctour, of the house of saint Antonye.
Of clean remission, I have brought ye indulgence,
A pena & culpa, for all your sin and offence.
By the authority, of pope Leo & pope Clement,
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Iohan & pope Innocent.
And here I bless ye, with a wing of the holy Ghost.
From thunder to save ye, & from spretes in every coost.
Lo, here is a bell, to hang upon your hog,
And save your cattle, from the biting of a dog.
So many as will come, to this holy fraternity,
Come pay your money, & ye shall have letters of me
let me have a letter, for I will be a brother.
Then give me a bell, for I will be an other.
O damnable leading, of babylonical sodomytes,
Yourselves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrites.
Lord pity thy people, and take away these guides,
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homicides
Soch prophets are they, as God ded never send,
As Hieremy saith, they damnable ways pretend.
Woe hypocrites woe, for here ye trifle and mock,
With christian people, & the kingdom of heaven uplocke
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ hath bought,
With his precious blood. & here most dearly sought
Oh ye are wretches, and pestilent Antichrist's,
ministers of Dagon, and most deceitful papystes.
Like ravenous wolves, poor widows ye devour,
By tittle of prayer, eternal damnation is your,
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter much more weighty,
Ye do not esteem, as judgement, faith, and mercy.
Woe pharysees woe, ye make clean outwardly,
But inwards ye are full, of covetousness & bawdry,
Painted tombs are ye, a pryenge right beautiful,
But within ye stink, & have thoughts very shameful
Ye slew the prophets, your doings yet bear witness,
How think ye to avoid, that point of unrighteousness?
Oh raging serpents, and vyperouse generation,
How can ye escape, the danger of damnation?
Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? An heretic art thu sure?
If due search were made, we should find thee (I think) no priest.
Yes, anointed of God, but no popish Antichrist.
let me see, where are, the letters of thy orders?
Where Christ his self is, & not in these same borders
No such priest am I, as is anointed with only,
But the holy Ghost, for I am non of this soil.
Here I attach thee, for a busy schismatic.
And will the accuse, for an heinous heretic.
Say hands upon him, & deprive him of this apparel.
Loo, thus will I handle, all them that shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this gear, & lay it fourth a side.
Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shalt thu not slide
I am not going, why dost thu slander me?
Burn him to ashes, and show to him no pity.
Brent shall he not be, if he will no more do so.
Fellawe how sayest thu? wilt thou here abjure or no?
I will neither abjure, nor yet recant God's glory.
I offered the reason, and thereto thou wilt not apply,
We'll get the forward, for thu shalt sure die.
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire,
At our accusement, and holy religious desire.
Though you for my sake, imprison men cruelly,
famish them, stock them, & them with fagotesfrye
Hurt me ye shall not for I can never die,
And they foy my sake, shall live perpetually.
Here is a prating, with a very vengeance hens.
This horrible heretic, now shall we well recompense
Yea, burn him weal friar, and let him no longer reign,
Say on green fagotes, to put him to the more pain.
By the mess I laugh, to see how this gear doth work
He is like of them, to have no more grace than a turke,
For such knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find,
And take hell over. Companions they are to my mind
My business all, is now at a good conclusion,
That I have here brought, these. iij. laws to confusion
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceably,
And make frowlyke cheer, with hay how fryska Iolye.
The law of Nature, I kest first in a lepry.
By the secret help, of idolatry and sodomy.
The law of Moses, I made a crypple blind,
Avarice & ambition, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have brent for heresy,
By help of false doctrine, & my cousin hypocrisy,
On these same. iij. laws, all other laws depend,
And can not prevail, now these are at an end.
If christian governors, do not these laws uphold,
Their civil ordinances, will soon be very cold.
Well, this valiant George, hath made them all to stoop
Cheer now may I make, & set cock on the hoop.
Fill in all the pots, and bid me welcome hostess,
And go call me hither, mine own sweet mynyon Bess
QVid gloriaris in malicia? qui potens es in iniquitate.
Thu vengeable wretch, replete with poison and vice,
Why dost thu thus rejoice, in cruelty and malice?
thinkest thu that God sleepeth, & will not his defend
And that thy mischief, shall never have an end?
The blood of innocentes, to him for vengeance call
And therefore this hour. must I fiercely upon the fall
Thu spirit of the air, I straightly conjure the here.
By panton & Craton, and charge the to come no near.
thinkest thu to stop me, with thy foolish conjuration
Whom God sendeth hither, for thy abomination?
What art thu called? thy name to me rehearse.
I am vindicta Dei, in ponnyshment most fierce,
With water, with sword, and with fire I must the pierce.
Be good in thy office, and thu shalt have money and meat.
By filthy rewards, thu cannyst not me entreat,
But that I will do, as God hath me commanded.
For if worldly gifts, my fury might have changed.
The universal world, had not been drowned with water,
Nor Sodom and Gomor, with so fiery fearful matter.
Nor yet the Israelytes, with terror of the sword,
With hunger and pestilence, in the anger of God's word.
Pharaoh in Egipte, the plagues had never felt,
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for gelte.
Into Egipte I brought, ten terrible ponnyshmentes
Upon the people for breaking his commandments
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood,
I multiplied frogs, to poison therewith their fond
I made wasps & dranes, them grievously to sting,
And all kinds of flies, soon after ded I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the foul pestilence,
Both borche, bile & blain, they had for their offence.
lightenings and haylynges, destroyed their corn and fruit,
A swarm of hungry locusts, their pastors destitute
The space of three days, I gave them palpable darkness,
I slew the first gooten, of man & beast for thy rudeness
For I never strike, but for thee, infidelity.
Strike for me quoth A? By the marry Mass I defy the.
What, thu wilt not so, thy brains are not so light.
Anger me not to much, for if thu do, I fight.
All that will not help, thy wicked workings now,
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thu hast with a lepry?
Nay, it was not I, but that witch idolatry,
And that polled shorn knave, that men call sodomy
Of whom sprung they first? but of infidelity?
Therefore thou shalt have that plague of penalty,
Which they first tasted, for their inyquyre.
For those two vices, I drowned the world with water.
In token whereof, I plague the with the same matter.
Tush, I defy thy worst. This shall not drive me hence
For after the flood, with Cham had I residence.
And so continued, till Moses' law came in.
With his jolly tricks, a new rule to begin.
And him thu corruptedest, with Avarice & Ambition,
And so diddest leave him, in miserable condition,
Thu shalt have therefore, that than to them was due,
Most terrible barrayle, the Israelytes untrue,
That time ded suffer, for their infidelity,
Wherefore with this sword, I justly bannysh the.
Because thu shalt hear, give place to Christ's gospel
Yet will I not hens, but against once rebel.
Sed not I remain, with Iudas and other more?
When Christ preached here, & taught them in vexed him sore?
Yes, & after that, was I with Simon Magus.
With Saunder Copper smith, with Elimas and Demetrius.
And now I persever, among the rank rabble of papystes
Teaching there shorlynges, to play the antichrists.
The innocent blood, of saints continually,
Doth call unto God, to revenge their injury,
Against false doctrine, and cursed hypocrisy.
Whom thu hast raised, the glory of the Gospel,
To darken, and his friends, most miserably to quell.
Wherefore thu shalt have, like as thu hast deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy punishment now doubled.
Ignis ip sum precedet, the Prophet David saith thus
Arque inflam mabit in circuitu inimicos eius.
A consuming fire, shall run before the judge,
His enemies consuming, they shall find no refuge.
Ob scelera & culpas hominum, ritusque nephandos
In cineres ibit tellus, tenuemque favillam.
As Mantuan writeth, for the wickedness of the.
The earth to ashes, by fire shall turned be.
Credo, credo, credo, I say, Credo, credo, credo,
To the devil of hell, by the Mess I ween I go.
As ye have scene here, how I have stricken with fire
The pestilent vice, of infidelity.
So will I destroy, in the fierceness of mine ire,
All sects of error, with their enormity,
Which hath risen out, of that iniquity.
For as it is said, that my hand hath not set,
Shall up by the rote, no power may it let.
The Apostle Iohan, in the Apocalyps doth say,
He saw a new heaven, & a new earth appearing.
The old earth & see, were taken clean a way,
That heaven is man's faith, that earth his understanding,
Whom we have renewed by our most secret working.
The old cankered earth, exiling with the see.
Which is superstition, and infidelity.
A new Jerusalem, the said Iohan also see,
As a beautiful bride, prepared to her husband.
Our true faithful church, is that same fair city,
Whom we have cleansed, by the power of our right hand.
As a spouse to Christ, in every christian land.
banishing the sects, of babylonical popery,
That she in the spirit, may walk to our glory.
Resort ye three laws, for you will I clear also,
Of such infections, as by infidelity,
Ye have received, That ye with her may go,
Declaring the ways, of Christian liberty,
That us she may take, without perplexite,
For her only God, and be our people still.
In our laws walking, according to our will.
At your commandment, we are most blessed lord.
Approach nyghar than, and ye shall be restored.
Thu law of Nature, we first begin with thee,
Restoring the again, to thy first purity.
Avoid idolatry, Avoid vile sodomy,
We charge ye no more, this law to putrefy.
Keep still that same heart, for a sign perpetual.
That thu were written, in man's heart first of all.
Thu law of Moses, give me that veil from thee,
No longer shalt thu, neither blind nor crooked be.
Hen's thu ambition, and cursed Covetousness,
I here bannysh you, from this law ever doubtless.
Lose not those tables, which are a token true,
That thu in the flesh, shalt evermore continue.
Thu law of the Gospel, though thu be last of all.
In operation yet, thu art the principal.
From the I exile, hypocrisy and false doctrine,
With all that depend, upon the papistical line.
Reserve the same book, for a sign of heavenvly power.
For that book thu art, that Iohan from heaven ded devour.
everlasting praise, to thy glorious majesty.
Our heavenvly governor, great is thy gracious pity
Of mankind thu art, the eternal felicity.
Now leavest thy servants, in thy perpetual peace.
To do the service, from hens will we not cease.
For our eyes have scene, what thu hast now prepared.
For thy people's health. which hath been here declared
A light thu hast sent, which is thy joyous Gospel.
To the consolation of the house of Israel.
In rejoice of this, make we some melody.
The name of our God, to praise and magnify.
I assent thereto, and will sing very gladly.
Now have we destroyed, the kingdom of Babylon,
And thrown the great whore, into the bottomless pit,
Restoring again, the true faith and religion,
In the christian church, as we have thought it fit,
Depurynge these lawes, so to contynue yt.
Man is our creature, & hath grace in our sight,
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delight
Man is our people, his God we are again,
With him will we have, continual residence.
Away will we wipe, from him all sorrow & pain:
He shall no longer, despair for his offence,
Nor have in his soul, any careful doubt of conscience
The old popyshnesse, is past which was damnation,
We have now renewed, our christian congregation,
Grande fourth christian faith, & take our advertisement
We here appoint thee, to govern our congregation.
Se thu do nothing, without the admonyshment,
Of these three laws here. Enprent their declaration
Of my sweet promises, and than make thu relation,
To my folk again, that they may walk to me.
Without popish dreams, in a perfygt liberty.
Most heavenly maker, in that thu dost command me,
Evermore will I, full prompt and diligent be.
Thu law of Nature, shalt teach man God to know
And that to refuse, whereby any ill may grow.
From this your precept, shall I not vary I trow.
The ache thu him also, to worship one God above,
And his poor neighbour, to prosecute with love.
I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behove.
And thu shalt teach him, to love God in his heart.
And those to forgive, by whom he suffereth smart.
In your appointments, will I do also my part.
Work thu in the heart, a knowledge necessary,
In the flesh work thu, by outward ceremony.
Change thou to the spret, the workings of these two,
And cause our people, in a perfect way to go.
Take heed christian faith, to the teachings of these three
And move our people, to walk in the verity.
The promises we made, in all these three at Gospel,
We would thu shouldest so, to our congregation tell.
Our everlasting blessing, be with you evermore.
To thy sweet name lord, praise & perpetual honour.
It hath pleased God, to put me in this office,
To govern his church, and christian congregation,
And therein to do, as ye shall me entice.
give me I pray you, such wholesome exhortation,
As may be to Man, a clear edification.
And I will be glad, to take your advertisement.
As it shall become, any child obedient.
Ye speak it full weal, than mark what shall be said
And diligently, look that it be obeyed.
The effect of me, is for to know the lord.
everlasting, strong, most gracious and godly.
And as touching Man, to have fraternal concord.
Faver to norrysh, and to do non injury.
To keep covenants made, and love true matrimony.
These noble effects so temper you in Man.
That them to fulfil, he do the best he can.
The effect of me, is for to worship the lord.
As one God alone, and to flee from idolatry.
Nor to slay nor steal, nor yet to bear false record,
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy,
Public peace to hold, & sore to ponnysh the guilty.
From these good effects, see that Man never swerve,
Than shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.
The effect of me, is for to love the lord,
In the innar spirit, and to favour friend & enemy,
And in all points else, with God's will to accord
To preach remission, to save and to justify,
In Christ all to seek, life, justice, peace and mercy.
These heavenly effects, in Man so incorporate,
That he may in spirit, be newly regenerate.
More sweet than honey, are your three exhortations,
And registered they be, in my momoryall.
Now will I forward, to all the christian nations,
And sem effect, these laws observed all,
To the abolishment, of the dreams papistical.
Now the light is come, the darkness dieth away,
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good christian people, to these three laws apply,
First know that ye have, a living God above,
Than do him honour, and his name magnify,
Worship him in spret. as the Gospel you doth move
Than obey your king, like as shall you behove,
For he in his life, that lord doth represent,
To safeguard of the just, & sinners punishment.
See that ye regard, such laws as he doth make,
For they are of God, as Solomon doth report.
Of these laws doubtless, those laws their groundynges take.
To the public wealth, to give aid, strength & comfort
For preservation, of all the christian sort.
In no case follow, the ways of Reygnolde Pole,
To his damnation, he doubtless playeth the fool.
Save a due respect, unto your country native,
Which hath brought ye up, & given ye norryshment.
Even from your cradles, to these days nutritive.
So that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment,
My master to her, no hateful detriment.
A dog to his friend, will never be unloving,
let reason in ye, not lose his natural working.
Who liveth without law, shall perish without law
And▪ therefore we have, three laws to you describe,
That after their live, ye should in your living draw
We▪ have also showed, how they have been corrupted,
By fowl idolaters, and sodomytes polluted,
By covetous priests, and by ambitious prelate's,
Hypocryticall fryres, false doctors & false curates
Who hath restored, these same three laws again?
But your late Iosias, & valiant king Henrye.
No prince afore him, took ever yet such pain,
England to bamnysh, idolatry & fowl sodomy
Covetousness. ambition, false doctrine & hypocrisy,
It was he that brought, Christ's verity to light,
When he put the pope, with his filthiness to flight.
damnable darkness, as my bother here doth say,
He hath delivered, this realm of England godly
bringing his subjects, into the true path way,
Of their souls safeguard, if they now follow it wisely.
And left them he hath, the same way still to fortify,
His noble son Edward, such a kings of god elect
As questyonles will, perform it in effect.
Pray all to the lord, for the long continuance,
Of his grace's life, in this worlds habitation.
And that of his nobles, he have true maintenance,
In the principles, of this most worthy foundation.
That he may to Christ, bring us from desolation.
Pray for queen Bateryne, & the noble lord protector
With the whole counsel, that God be their director,
BEnedictus dominus, Deus Israel,
Which hath overthrown, the mighty Idol Bel,
The false god of Rome, by power of the Gospel,
And hath prepared, from the deep lake of hell,
Redemptionem plebis sue.
Et erexit cornu, of mercy health and grace,
That cruel tyrant, now clearly to deface,
Whose bloody kingdom, demynysheth apace,
By the word of God, which lately hath take place.
In domo david pueri sui,
Sicut locutus est, the lord celestial,
That Romish Antichrist, is like to have a fall,
With his whole table, of sects diabolical,
And now the number, will flourish over all,
Prophetarum eius.
Salutem exinimicis, now we may daily hear,
The enemies of Christ with him doth witness bear
Saul is become a paule, and preacheth every where,
Now may we receive, most heavenly wholesome gear
De manu eorum qui derunt nos.
Ad faciendam, misericordiam,
The son of our God, from his high glory came,
To redeem the sin. of the children of Adam,
And to remember, to faithful Abraham,
Testamenti sui sancti.
jusiurandum, which God hath made afore,
Unto our fathers, he will keep evermore,
Promesed he hath, if we regard his lore,
forsaking the pope, with his damnable store,
Daturum se nobis.
Vt sine timore, from Romish tyrants free,
The lord grant us grace, that we may speakers be,
Of his holy word, and therein to agree,
That in the Gospel, and christian liberty,
Seruiamus illi.
In sanctitate, and pureness of life,
let us now travail, both maiden man and wife,
All rightwise doings, in us be ever rife,
That we persever, without debate or strife,
Omnibus diebus nostris.
To puer propheta, elected of the lord,
King Edward the sixth, to have God's law restored,
Folowest Iosias, thereof to take record,
In all thy doings, and in God's holy word,
Parare vias eius.
Ad dandam scientiam, for men's health & safeguard
Christ's holy Gospel, by these freely heard,
Wherein doth consist, their life and full reward,
With preservation, from dangerous icoparde,
Peccatorum eorum.
Per viscera, misericordiae,
Christ our dear master, us daily oversee,
Lest we here perish, in our myquyte.
Our mediator, continually is he,
Oriens exalto.
Illuminare, sweet lord we the desire,
To men in darkness, and in the popish mire,
let not his baggage, thy faithful servants tire,
But us deliver, from them and from hell fire.
In viam pacis.