I Have in vain passed through each stately street,
And blindfold turning of this happy town,
For wealth, for peace, and goodly government,
Yet can I not find out a mind, a heart
For blood and causeless death to harbour in;
They all are bent with virtuous gainful trade,
To get their needments for this mortal life,
And will not soil their well addicted hearts:
With rape, extortion, murder, or the death,
Of friend or foe, to gain an Empery.
I cannot glut my blood delighted eye;
With mangled bodies which do gasp and groan,
Ready to pass to fair Elysium,
Nor bathe my greedy hands in reeking blood,
Of fathers by their children murdered:
When all men else do weep, lament and wail,
The sad exploits of fearful tragedies,
It glads me so, that it delights my heart,
To ad new torments to their bleeding smarts.
But here comes Avarice, as if he sought,
Some busy work for his pernicious thought:
Whether so fast all griping Avarice?
Why what hearst thou, I seek for one I miss.
I may supply the man you wish to have.
Thou seems to be a bold audacious knave,
I do not like intruding company,
That seek to undermine my secrecy.
Mistrust me not I am thy faithful friend.
Many say so, that prove false in the end.
But turn about and thou wilt know my face,
It may be so, and know thy want of grace,
What Homicide thou art the man I seek:
I reconcile me thus upon thy cheek.
Hadst thou named blood and damned iniquity,
I had forborne to bite so bitterly.
know'st thou a heart wide open to receive,
A plot of horrid desolation,
Tell me of this, thou art my chiefest good,
And I will quaff thy health in bowls of blood.
I know two men, that seem two innocents,
Whose looks surveyed with judicial eyes:
Would seem to bear the marks of honesty,
But snakes find harbour 'mongst the fairest flowers,
Then never credit outward semblances:
I know their hearts relentless merciless,
And will perform through hope of benefit:
More dreadful things then can be thought upon.
If gain will draw, I prithee then allure,
Their hungry hearts with hope of recompense,
But tie despair unto those moving hopes,
unleashed a deed of murder farther it,
Than blood on blood, shall overtake them all,
And we will make a bloody festival.
The plots are laid, the keys of golden coin,
Hath oped the secret closets of their hearts,
Inter, insult, make captive at thy will,
Themselves, and friends, with deeds of damned ill:
Yonder is truth, she cometh to bewail,
The times and parties that we work upon.
Why let her weep, lament, and morn for me,
We are right bred of damned iniquity,
And will go make a twofold Tragedy.
Go you disturbers of a quiet soul,
Sad, greedy, gaping, hungry cannibals,
That joy to practise others miseries:
Gentles, prepare your tear bedecked eyes,
To see two shows of lamentation,
Besprinkled everywhere with guiltless blood,
Of harmless youth, and pretty innocents,
Our Stage doth wear habiliments of woe,
Truth rues to tell the truth of these laments:
The one was done in famous London late,
Within that street whose side the river Thames
Doth strive to wash from all impurity:
But yet that silver stream can never wash,
The sad remembrance of that cursed deed,
Performed by cruel Merry on just Beech,
And his true boy poor Thomas Winchester,
The most here present, know this to be true:
Would truth were false, so this were but a tale,
The other further off, but yet too near,
To those that felt and did the cruelty:
Near Padua this wicked deed was done,
By a false Uncle, on his brother's son,
Left to his careful education,
By dying Parents, with as strict a charge,
As ever yet death-breathing brother gave:
Look for no mirth, unless you take delight,
In mangled bodies, and in gaping wounds,
Bloodily made by mercy wanting hands,
Truth will not feign, but yet doth grieve to show,
This deed of ruth and miserable woe.
I live in mean and discontented state,
But wherefore should I think of discontent:
I am beloved, I have a pretty house,
A loving sister, and a careful man,
That do not think their days work well at end,
Except it bring me in some benefit:
And well frequented is my little house,
With many guests and honest passengers,
Which may in time advance my humble state,
To greater wealth and reputation.
And here comes friends to drink some bear or ale,
They are my neighbours, they shall have the best,
Ne. Come neighbour Beech let's have our morning's draft
And we'll go drink it at young Merry's house:
They say he hath the best in all this town,
Besides they say he is an honest man,
And keeps good rule and orders in his house.
He's so indeed, his conversation,
Is full of honest harmless courtesy:
I dare presume, if that he be within,
He'll serve us well, and keep us company,
See where he is, go in, i'll follow you.
Nay strain no courtesy you shall go before.
Your welcome neighbour, you are welcome sir,
I pray sit down, your very welcome both:
We thank you for it, and we think no less,
Now fill two cans of your old strongest bear:
That make so many lose their little wits,
And make indentures as they go along.
Hoe sister Rachel:
I come presently.
Go draw these gentlemen two Cans of bear,
Your negligence that cannot tend the shop,
Will make our customers forsake the house.
Where's Harry William's that he stays not here.
myself was busy dressing up the house,
As for your man he is not very well:
But sitteth sleeping by the kitchen fire.
If you are busy get you up again,
I'll draw my neighbours then their drink myself,
I'll warrant you as good as any man's,
And yet no better, many have the like.
This shows him for a plain and honest man,
That will not flatter with too many words:
Some shrill-tongued fellows would have cogged and feigned,
Saying i'll draw the best in Christendom.
he's none of those, but bears an honest mind,
And shames to utter what he cannot prove.
But here he comes, is that the best you have,
It is the best upon mine honest word.
Then drink to us.
I drink unto you both.
We pledge you both, and thank you heartily.
Here's to you sir.
I thank you,
'tis good indeed and I had rather drink,
Such bear as this as any Gascoine wine:
But 'tis our English manner to affect
Strange things, and price them at a greater rate,
Then homebred things of better consequence.
'tis true indeed, if all were of your mind,
My poor estate would sooner be advanced:
And our French Merchants seek some other trade.
Your poor estate, nay neighbour say not so,
For God be thanked you are well to live.
Not so good neighbour, but a poor young man,
That would live better if I had the means:
But as I am, I can content myself,
Till God amend my poor ability.
In time no doubt, why man you are but young,
And God assure yourself hath wealth in store,
If you await his will with patience.
Thanks be to God I live contentedly,
And yet I cannot boast of mighty wealth:
But yet God's blessings have been infinite,
And far beyond my expectations,
My shop is stored, I am not much in debt;
And here I speak it where I may be bold,
I have a score of pounds to help my need,
If God should stretch his hand to visit me,
With sickness, or such like adversity.
Enough for this, now neighbour what's to pay,
Two pence good sir.
Nay pray sir forbear,
I'll pay this reckoning for it is but small.
I will not strive since ye will have it so.
Neighbour farewell.
Farewell unto you both.
His shop is stored he is not much indebt.
He hath a score of pounds to help his need,
I and a score too if the truth were known:
I would I had a shop so stored with wares,
And forty pounds to buy a bargain with,
whenas occasion should be offered me,
I'd live as merry as the wealthiest man;
That hath his being within London walls,
I cannot buy my bear, my bread, my meat:
My faggots, coals, and such like necessaries,
At the best hand, because I want the coin,
That many misers coffer up in bags,
Having enough to serve their turns beside:
Ah for a trick to make this Beech's trash,
Forsake his coffer and to rest in mine,
I marry sir, how may that trick be done:
Marry with ease and great facility,
I will invent some newfound stratagem,
To bring his coin to my possession;
What though his death relieve my poverty,
Gain waits on courage, loss on cowardice.
Brother and sister, pray you both draw near,
And here my will, which you have promised
Shall be performed with wished providence,
This little orphan I must leave behind,
By your direction to be governed.
As for my wife and I, we do await,
The blessed hour when it shall please the Lord,
To take us to the just Ierusalem.
Our chiefest care is for that tender boy,
Which we should leave discomfortless behind,
But that we do assure us of your love,
And care to guide his weak unable youth,
In paths of knowledge grace and godliness:
As for the riches of this mortal life,
We leave enough four hundredth pounds a year,
Besides two thousand pounds to make a stock,
In money, jewels, Plate, and household stuff,
Which yearly rents and goods we leave to you,
To be surrendered into his hands,
When he attains to years of discretion.
My Will imports thus much, which you shall hear,
And you shall be my sole Executor.
Brother and sister how my heart laments,
To see your weak and sick afflicted limbs,
near overcome with direful maladies,
The God of heaven can truly testify,
Which to speak plain, is near a whit at all.
Which knows the secret corners of my heart,
But for the care you do impose on me,
For the tuition of your little son,
Think my kind brother, I will meditate,
Both day and night, how I may best fulfil,
The care and trust, reposed in your Will,
And see him posted quickly after you.
Enough kind brother, we assure us so,
Else would we seek another friend abroad,
To do our wills and dying Testament,
Nature and love will have a double care,
To bring him up with careful diligence,
As best beseems one of such parentage.
Assure yourself the safest course I can,
Shall be provided for your little son,
He shall be sent unto the King of heaven.
Fear not good brother, and my loving sister,
But we will have as tender care of him,
As if he were our own ten thousand times:
God will be father of the fatherless,
And keep him from all care and wretchedness.
Uncle and Aunt take comfort, I will see,
My little cousin have no injury.
We thank you all, come let the Will be read.
If it were sealed, I would you both were dead.
Then give attention, I will read the Will.
Thus if my son miscarry, my dear brother,
You and your son shall then enjoy the land,
And all the goods which he should have possessed,
If he miscarry, brother God forbid,
God bless mine Nephew, that thine eyes may see,
Thy children's children with prosperity:
I had rather see the little urchin hanged,
Then he should live, and I forego the land.
Thanks gentle brother, husband seal the Will.
Give me a Pen and Ink, first to subscribe,
I write so ill through very feebleness,
That I can scarcely know this hand for mine,
But that you all can witness that it is.
Give me the seal: I pray sir take it of,
This you deliver for your latest Will,
And do confirm it for your Testament.
With all my heart: here brother keep my Will,
And I refer me to the will of God,
Praying him deal as well with you and yours,
As you no doubt will deal with my poor child:
Come my Pertillo, let me bless thee boy,
And lay my half dead hand upon thy head,
God grant those days that are cut off in me,
With joy and peace may multiply in thee:
Be slow to wrath, obey thy Uncle still,
Submit thyself unto Gods holy will,
In deed and word, see thou be ever true,
So brother, child, and kinsfolks all adieu.
Ah my dear mother, is my father dead?
I my sweet Boy, his soul to heaven is fled,
But I shall after him immediately,
Then take my latest blessing ere I die,
Come let me kiss thy little tender lips,
Cold death hath ta'en possession of thy mother.
Let me embrace thee in my dying arms,
And pray the lord protect thee from all harms:
Brother, I fear, this child when I am gone,
Will have great cause of grief & hideous fear:
You will protect him, but I prophecy,
His share will be of woe and misery:
But mother's fears do make these cares arise,
Come boy and close thy mother's dying eyes.
Brother and sister, here the latest words,
That your dead sister leaves for memory:
If you deal ill with this distressed boy,
God will revenge poor orphans injuries,
If you deal well, as I do hope you will,
God will defend both you and yours from ill.
Farewell, farewell, now let me breathe my last,
Into his dearest mouth, that wanteth breath,
And as we loved in life embrace in death;
Peace conscience, peace, thou art too scrupulous,
Gain doth attended this resolution,
Hence dastard fear, I must, I can, I will,
Kill my best friend to get a bag of gold:
They shall die both, had they a thousand lives,
And therefore I will place this hammer here,
And take it as I follow Beech up stairs,
That suddenly before he is aware,
I may with blows dash out his hateful brains,
Hoe Rachel, bring my cloak, look to the house,
I will return again immediately.
Here it is brother, I pray you stay not long,
guess will come in, 'tis almost supper time.
Let others sup, i'll make a bloodier feast,
Then ever yet was dressed in Merry's house,
Be like thyself, then have a merry heart,
Thou shalt have gold to mend thy poverty,
And after this, live ever wealthily.
What neighbour Beech, so godly occupied?
I master Merry it were better read,
Then meditate on idle fantasies.
You speak the truth: there is a friend or two
Of yours, making merry in my house,
And would desire to have your company.
Know you their names?
No truly nor the men.
I never stood to question them of that,
But they desire your presence earnestly.
I pray you tell them that I cannot come,
'tis supper time, and many will resort,
For ware at this time, above all other times;
'tis Friday night beside, and Bartholmew eve,
Therefore good neighbour make my just excuse.
In truth they told me that you should not stay,
Go but to drink, you may come quick again,
But not and if my hand and hammer hold.
I am unwilling, but I do not care,
And if I go to see the company.
Come quickly then, they think we stay too long.
I'll cut a piece of Cheese to drink withal.
I take the farewell of your cutting knife,
Here is a hand shall help to cut your throat:
And give myself a fairing from your chest:
What are you ready will you go along?
I now I am, boy look you tend the shop,
If any ask, come for me to the Bull:
I wonder who they are that ask for me.
I know not that, you shall see presently,
Go up those stairs, your friends do stay above,
Here is that friend shall shake you by the head,
And make you stagger ere he speak to you.
Now you are safe, I would the boy were so,
But wherefore wish I, for he shall not live,
For if he do, I shall not live myself.
Let's see what money he hath in his purse,
Mass here's ten groats, here's something for my pain,
But I must be rewarded better yet.
Who was it Rachel that went up the stairs?
It was my brother, and a little man
Of black complexion, but I know him not.
Why do you not then carry up a light,
But suffer them to tarry in the dark.
I had forgot, but I will bear one up.
Do so I prithee, he will chide anon.
Oh brother, brother, what have you done?
Why murdered one that would have murdered me.
The world doth know thy brother but resign'd,
The lands and goods, until his son attained,
To riper years to wield and govern them,
Then openly thou canst not do him wrong,
He living: there's the burden of the song.
Call it a burden, for it seems so great
And heavy burden, that the boy should live,
And thrust me from this height of happiness:
That I will not endure so heavy weight,
But shake it off, and live at liberty,
Free from the yoke of such subjection,
The boy shall die, were he my father's son,
Before I'll part with my possession.
I'll call my son, and ask his good advice,
How I may best dispatch this serious cause:
Hoe sir Allenso?
Father.
Hearken son,
I must entreat your furtherance and advise,
About a thing that doth concern us near,
First tell me how thou dost affect in heart,
Little Pertillo, thy dead uncles son.
So well good father, that I cannot tell,
Whether I love him dearer than myself:
And yet if that my heart were called to count,
I think it would surrender me to death,
Ere young Pertillo should sustain a wrong.
How got his safety such a deep regard
Within your heart, that you affect it so?
Nature gave root, love, and the dying charge,
Of his dead father, gives such store of sap,
Unto this tree of my affection,
That it will never wither till I die.
But nature, love, and reason, tells thee thus,
thyself must yet be nearest to thyself.
His love doth not estrange me from myself,
But doth confirm my strength with multitudes,
Of benefits, his love will yield to me.
Beware to foster such pernicious snakes,
Within thy bosom, which will poison thee.
He is a Dove, a child, an innocent,
And cannot poison, father though he would.
I will be plainer, know Pertillo's life,
Which thou dost call, a Dove, an innocent:
A harmless child, and, and I know not what,
Will harm thee more, than any Serpent can,
ay, than the very sight of Basilisks.
Father, you tell me of a strange discourse,
How can his life produce such detriment,
As Basilisks, whose only sight is death?
hearken to me, and I will tell thee how:
Thou know'st his father's goods, his houses, lands,
Have much advanced our reputation,
In having but their usage for a time,
If the boy live, then like to senseless beasts,
Like longed eared Asses, and rich laden Mules,
We must resign these treasures to a boy,
And we like Asses feed on simple Hay:
Make him away, they shall continue ours,
By virtue of his father's Testament,
The jewels, castles, meadows, houses, lands,
Which thy small cousin, should defeat thee of,
Be still thine own, and thou advance thyself,
Above the height of all thine Ancestors.
But if I mount by murder and deceit,
justice will thrust aspiring thoughts below,
And make me caper for to break my neck:
After some woeful lamentation,
Of my obedience to unlawfulness:
I tell you plain, I would not have him die,
Might I enjoy the sultan's Empery.
What wilt thou bar thyself of happiness,
Stop the large stream of pleasures which would flow,
And still attend on thee like servingmen:
Prefer the life of him that loves thee not,
Before thine own, and my felicity.
I'd rather choose to feed on carefulness
To ditch, to delve, and labour for my bread,
Nay rather choose to beg from door to door,
Then condescend to offer violence,
To young Pertillo in his innocence,
I know you speak, to sound what mighty share,
Pertillo hath in my affection.
In faith I do not, therefore prithee say,
Wilt thou consent to have him made away.
Why then in faith, I am ashamed to think,
I had my being from so foul a lump
Of adulation and unthankfulness,
Ah, had their dying prayers no avail
Within your heart? no, damned extortion,
Hath left no room for grace to harbour in,
Audacious sin, how canst thou make him say,
Consent to make my brother's son away.
Nay if you gin to brawl, withdraw yourself,
But utter not the motion that I made,
As you love me, or do regard your life.
And as you love my safety, and your soul,
Let grace, and fear of God, such thoughts control
Still prattling, let your grace and fear alone,
And leave me quickly to my private thoughts,
Or with my sword I'll open wide a gate,
For wrath and bloody death to enter in.
Better you gave me death and burial,
Than such foul deeds should overthrow us all.
Still are you wagging that rebellious tongue,
I'll dig it out for Crows to feed upon,
If thou continue longer in my sight.
He loves him better than he loves his life,
Here's repetition of my brother's care,
Of sister's charge, of grace, and fear of God,
fear dastards, cowards, faint heart runaways,
I'll fear no colours to obtain my will,
Though all the fiends in hell were opposite
I'd rather lose mine eye, my hand, my foot,
Be blind, want senses, and be ever lame,
Then be tormented with such discontent,
This resignation would afflict me with,
Be blithe my boy, thy life shall sure be done,
Before the setting of the morrow sun.
Make haste, run headlong to destruction,
I like thy temper, that canst change a heart,
From yielding flesh, to Flint and Adamant,
Thou hitst it home, where thou dost fasten hold,
Nothing can separate the love of gold.
Fear no relenting, I dare pawn my soul,
(And that's no gage, it is the devils due)
He shall embrew his greedy griping hands,
In the dead bosom of the bloody boy,
And wind himself, his son, and harmless wife,
In endless folds of sure destruction.
Now Homicide, thy looks are like thyself,
For blood, and death, are thy companions,
Let my confounding plots but go before,
And thou shalt wade up to the chin in gore.
I find it true, for where thou art let in,
There is no scruple made of any sin,
The world may see thou art the root of ill,
For but for thee, poor Beech had lived still.
Oh my dear brother, what a heap of woe,
Your rashness hath poured down upon your head:
Where shall we hide this trumpet of your shame,
This timeless ugly map of cruelty?
Brother, if William's do reveal the truth,
Than brother, then, begins our scene of ruth.
I fear not William's but I fear the boy,
Who knew I fetched his master to my house.
What doth the boy know whereabouts you dwell?
I that torments me worse than pangs of hell,
He must be slain to, else he'll utter all.
Hark brother, hark, methinks I hear on call.
Go down and see, pray God my man keep close:
If he prove long-tongued then my days are done,
The boy must die, there is no help at all:
For on his life, my very life depends,
Besides I cannot compass what I would,
Unless the boy be quickly made away,
This that abridged his hapless masters days,
Shall leave such sound memorials one his head,
That he shall quite forget who did him harm,
Or trained his master to this bloody feast:
Why how now Rachel? who did call below?
A maid that came to have a penny loaf.
I would a penny loaf cost me a pound,
Provided Beech's boy had eat his last.
Perchance the boy doth not remember you.
It may be so, but i'll remember him.
And send him quickly with a bloody scroll,
To greet his master in another world.
I'll go to Beeches on a feigned excuse,
To see if he will ask me for his master.
No, get you up, you shall not stir abroad,
And when I call, come quickly to the door.
Brother, or that, or any thing beside,
To please your mind, or ease your misery.
I am knee deep, i'll wade up to the waist,
To end my heart of fear, and to attain,
The hoped end of my intention?
But I may see, if I have eyes to see,
And if my understanding be not blind,
How many dangers do already weight,
Upon my steps of bold security,
Williams is fled, perchance to utter all,
That's but perchance, nay rather flatly no,
But should he tell, I can but die a death,
Should he conceal, the boy would utter it,
The boy must die, there is no remedy
I wonder that my master stays so long,
He had not wont to be abroad so late
Yonder comes one, I think that same is he.
I see the boy sits at his masters door,
Or now, or never, Merry stir thyself,
And rid thy heart from fear and jealousy:
Thomas Winchester go quickly to your shop,
What sit you still your master is at hand.
Oh God I think there's thieves in Beech's shop.
What cruel hand hath done so foul a deed,
Thus to bemangle a distressed youth:
Without all pity or a due remorse,
See how the hammer sticketh in his head,
Wherewith this honest youth is done to death,
Speak honest Thomas, if any speech remain,
What cruel hand hath done this villainy:
He cannot speak, his senses are bereft,
Hoe neighbour Loney, pray come down with speed,
Your tenant Beech's man is murdered.
What would you have some Mustard?
Your tenant Beech's man, is murdered.
Whose smothered, I think you lack your wit,
What neighbour? what make you here so late?
I was affrighted by a sudden cry,
And coming down found master Beech's man,
Thus with a hammer sticking in his head.
Ah woe is me for Thomas Winchester,
The truest soul that ever master had,
Where's master Beech?
Nay, nobody can tell:
Did you see any running from the door,
When you looked out and heard the young man cry,
Yes I saw two truly to my thinking, but they
Ran away as fast as their hands could bear them:
By my troth 'twas so dark I could see nobody,
Pray God master Beech hath not hurt his boy in his patience
And if he have he must be hanged in his choler.
I dare be sworn he would not strike him thus,
Pray God his master be no slain himself.
The night grows late, and we will have this course
Be watched all night, tomorrow we shall see,
Whence sprang this strange uncivil cruelty.
Neighbour good night.
neighbours all good night.
Pray God I never see so sad a sight.
Oh sister, sister, now I am pursued,
The mighty clamour that the boy did make,
Hath raised the neighbours round about the street:
So that I know not where to hide myself.
What brother, have you killed Beech's boy?
No, no, not I, but yet another hath,
Come, come to bed, for fear we be descried:
The fearfullest night that ever Merry knew.
Seem it not strange resolved gentleman,
That I thus privately have severed you,
To open secret sorrows of my heart:
Think not I do intend to undermine,
Your passed lives, although you know I am,
A man to whom the true unpartial sword,
Of equal justice is delivered,
Therefore swear both, as you respect your souls,
At the last dreadful sessions hold in heaven,
First to conceal, and next to execute,
What I reveal, and shall enjoin you to.
So you reward us, whatsoever it be,
We vow performance, and true secrecy.
There go aside, ye seeming semblances,
Of equal justice, and true piety,
And lay my hearts corrupted citadel,
Wide open to your thoughts to look into.
Know I am named Fallerio, to deceive
The world with show of truth and honesty,
But yet nor truth, nor honesty abides,
Within my thoughts, but falsehood, cruelty,
Blood sucking Avarice, and all the sins,
That hale men on to bloody stratagems,
Like to yourselves, which care not how you gain,
By blood, extortion, falsehood, perjury,
So you may have a pleasing recompense:
Start not aside, depart not from yourselves,
I know your composition is as mine,
Of blood, extortion, falsehood, perjury,
True branded with the mark of wickedness.
Be not so bitter, we are they indeed,
That would deprive our fathers of their lives,
So we were sure to have a benefit:
I weigh no more the murdering of a child,
Dragged from the sucking bosom of his mother,
Than I respect to quaff a bowl of wine,
Unto his health, that dearly loveth me.
Where gold rewardeth, were apparent death
Before mine eyes, bold, hearty, visible,
I'd wrestle with him for a deadly fall,
Or I would lose my guerdon promised:
I'd hang my brother for to wear his coat,
That all that saw me might have cause to say,
There is a heart more firm than Adamant,
To practise execrable butcheries.
I know that well for were I not assured,
Of your performance in this enterprise,
I would not ope the closet of my breast,
To let you know my close intention,
There is a little boy, an urchin lad,
That stands between me and the glorious rays,
Of my soul-wishing sun of happiness:
There is a thicket ten miles from this place,
Whose secret ambush, and unused ways,
Doth seem to join with our conspiracy,
There murder him, and when the deed is done,
Cast his dead body in some dirty ditch,
And leave him for the Fowls to feed upon:
Do this, here is two hundredth marks in gold,
To hearten on your resolution:
Two hundredth more, after the deed is done,
I'll pay you more for satisfaction.
'swounds her's rewards would make one kill himself,
To leave his progeny so rich a prize,
Were twenty lives engaged for this coin,
I'd end them all, to have the money mine,
Who would not hazard life, nay soul and all,
For such a frank and bounteous paymaster,
'sblood, what labour is't to kill a boy,
It is but thus, and then the task is done,
It grieves me most, that when this task is past,
I have no more to occupy myself,
Two hundredth marks to give a paltry stab,
I am impatient till I see the brat.
That must be done with cunning secrecy,
I have devised to send the boy abroad,
With this excuse, to have him fostered,
In better manners than this place affords,
My wife, though loath indeed to part with him,
Yet for his good, she will forego her joy,
With hope in time to have more firm delights,
Which she expects from young Pertillo's life.
Call you him Pertillo, faith leave out the T.
Why so?
Because Perillo will remain,
For he shall surely perish if I live:
What do you call the father of the child?
Why man, he hath no father left alive.
Yes such a father, that doth see and know,
How we do plot this little infant's woe.
Why then his little son is much to blame,
That doth not keep his father company.
When shall we have delivery of the boy?
Tomorrow morning by the break of day,
And you must swear you'll see him safely brought,
Unto the place that I do send him to.
That may we safely, for you mean to send
Him to the wood, and there his journey ends:
Both soul and limbs shall have a place to rest,
In earth the last, the first in Abraham's breast.
Come gentlemen, this night go rest with me,
Tomorrow end Pertillo's tragedy.
Sister, now all my gold expected hopes,
Of future good, is plainly vanished,
And in her stead, grim visaged despair,
Hath ta'en possession of my guilty heart,
Desire to gain, began this desperate act,
Now plain appearance of destruction,
Of soul and body, weights upon my sin,
Although we hide our sins from mortal men,
Whose glass of knowledge is the face of man,
The eye of heaven beholds our wickedness,
And will no doubt revenge the innocent.
Ah, do not so disconsolate yourself,
Nor add new streams of sorrow to your grief,
Which like a spring tide over-swells the banks,
lest you do make an inundation,
And so be borne away with swiftest tides,
Of all my friends Allenso loves me best.
I think thou art inspired with prophesy,
He loves thee better than I would he did:
Why wherefore think you so my pretty Nephew?
Because he taught me how to say my prayers,
To ride a horse, to start the fearful Hare,
He gave this dagger to me yesternight,
This little Ring, and many pretty things:
For which, kind coz, I rest your true debtor,
And one day I will make you recompense.
ay, with thy lands and goods thou leav'st behind.
Pray father let me go along with him:
Now by the saviour of my sinful soul,
I do not like those fellows countenance.
Son be content, we'll go a sevennight hence,
And see him in his university weeds:
These will conduct him safely to the place,
Be well assured they'll have a care of him,
That you shall never see Pertillo more.
Father, I pray you to withdraw yourself,
I'd have a word or two in secrecy.
Come living image of thy dead mother,
And take my loving farewell, ere we part,
I love thee dearly for thy father's sake,
But for thy mothers, dote with jealousy,
Oh I do fear, before I see thy face,
Or thou, or I, shall taste of bitterness:
Kiss me sweet boy, and kissing fold thine Aunt,
Within the circle of thy little arms,
I need not fear, death cannot offer wrong,
The majesty of thy presaging face,
Would vanquish him though near so terrible,
The angry Lioness that is bereaved,
Of her imperious crew of forest kings,
Would leave her fury and defend thee safe,
From Wolves, from Panthers, Leopards, and she Bears,
That live by rapine, stealth, and cruelty,
Therefore to God I do commend thy state,
Who will be sure to guard thee tenderly.
And now to you, that carry hence this wealth,
This precious jewel, this unprized good,
Have a regard to use him carefully,
When he is parted from that serious care,
Which was employed for his security:
I urge it not, that I misdoubt your truth,
I hope his Uncle doth persuade himself,
You will be courteous, kind and affable,
there's some reward for hoped carefulness.
Now by my soul I do suspect the men,
Especially the lower of the two:
See what a hollow discontented look
He casts, which brings apparent cause of fear,
The other, though he seem more courteous,
Yet doth his looks presage this thought in me,
As if he scorned to think on courtesy.
Upon my life, my son you are to blame,
The gentlemen are honest, virtuous,
And will protect Pertillo happily:
These thoughts proceed out of abundant love,
Because you grieve to leave his company:
If ought betide him otherwise than well,
Let God require due vengeance on my head,
And cut my hopes from all prosperity.
A heavy sentence, full of wondrous fear,
I cannot choose but credit such a vow,
Come hither then, my joy, my chiefest hopes.
My second self, my earthly happiness,
Lend me thy little pretty cherry lip,
To kiss me cozen, lay thy little hand
Upon my cheek, and hug me tenderly,
Would the clear rays of thy two glorious suns,
Could penetrate the corners of my heart,
That thou might see, how much I tender thee.
My friends behold within this little bulk,
Two perfect bodies are incorporate,
His life holds mine, his heart contains my heart,
His every limb, contains my every part:
Without his being, I can never be,
He being dead, prepare to bury me.
Oh thou immortal mover of the spheres,
Within their circled revolutions,
Whose glorious image this small orphan bears,
Wrought by thy all sufficient Majesty,
Oh never suffer any wicked hand,
To harm this heavenly workmanship of thine,
But let him live, great God to honour thee,
With virtuous life, and spotless piety.
Cease my kind coz, I cannot choose but weep,
To see your care of my security.
Knewst thou my reason, that persuades my heart,
Thou wouldst not wonder, why I grieve to part:
But yet I would suspect my father's vow,
Did any other make it by your leave.
What have you done, this loathness to depart,
Seems you were trained up in tediousness,
That know not when and where to make an end:
Take him my friends, I know you will discharge,
The hope and trust that I repose in you.
Assure yourself, in every circumstance.
Then to your horses, quickly, speedily,
Else we shall put our fingers in the eye,
And weep for kindness till tomorrow morn.
Farewell good Uncle, Aunt, and loving coz.
Farewell, I fear me everlastingly.
You mean not now to have him murdered?
Not murdered, what else? kill him I say,
But wherefore makest thou question of my will?
Because you wished that God should be revenged
If any ill betide the innocent.
Oh that was nothing but to blind the eyes,
Of my fond son, which loves him too too well.
It is enough, it shall be surely done.
What hast thou sped? have you bought the bag?
I brother, here it is, what is't to do?
To beat hence Beech's body in the night.
You cannot bear so great a weight yourself,
And 'tis no trusting of another man.
Yes well enough, as I will order it,
I'll cut him piece-meal, first his head and legs
Will be one burden, than the mangled rest,
Will be another, which I will transport,
Beyond the water in a Ferry boat,
And throw it into Paris-garden ditch.
Fetch me the chopping-knife, and in the mean
I'll move the Faggots that do cover him.
Oh can you find in heart to cut and carve,
His stone cold flesh, and rob the greedy grave,
Of his dissevered blood besprinkled limbs?
I marry can I fetch the chopping knife.
This deed is worse, than when you took his life.
But worse, or better, now it must be so,
Better do thus, then feel a greater woe.
Here is the knife, I cannot stay to see,
This barbarous deed of inhumanity.
Ye glorious beams of that bright-shining lamp,
That lights the star bespangled firmament,
And dimness the glimmering shadows of the night,
Why dost thou lend assistance to this wretch,
To shamble forth with bold audacity,
His limbs, that bears thy maker's semblance.
All you the sad spectators of this Act,
Whose hearts do taste a feeling pensiveness,
Of this unheard of savage Massacre:
Oh be far off, to harbour such a thought,
As this audacious murderer put in ure,
I see your sorrows flow up to the brim,
And overflow your cheeks with brinish tears,
But though this sight bring surfeit to the eye,
Delight your ears with pleasing harmony,
That ears may countercheck your eyes, and say,
Why shed you tears, this deed is but a play:
His work is done, he seeks to hide his sin,
I'll wail his woe, before his woe begin.
Now will I high me to the water side,
And fling this heavy burden in a ditch,
Whereof my soul doth feel so great a weight,
That it doth almost press me down with fear,
Hark Rachel: I will cross the water straight,
And fling this middle mention of a man,
Into some ditch, then high me home again,
To rid my house of that is left behind.
Where have you laid the legs & battered head?
Under the faggots, where it lay before,
Help me to put this trunk into the bag.
My heart will not endure to handle it,
The sight hereof doth make me quake for fear.
I'll do't myself, only dry up the blood,
And burn the clothes as you have done before.
I fear thy soul will burn in flames of hell,
Unless repentance wash away thy sin,
With cleansing tears of true contrition:
Ah did not nature oversway my will,
The world should know this plot of damned ill.
I am so weary in this cumbrous wood,
That I must needes go sit me downe and rest
What were we best to kill him unawares,
Or give him notice what we do intend?
Why then belike you mean to do your charge
And feel no taste of pity in your heart.
Of pity man, that never enters here,
And if it should, I'd threat my craven heart,
To stab it home, for harbouring such a thought,
I see no reason why I should relent:
It is a charitable virtuous deed,
To end this princock from this sinful world.
Such charity will never have reward,
Unless it be with sting of conscience:
And that's a torment worse than Sisipus,
That roll a restless stone against the hill.
My conscience is not pricked with such conceit.
That shows thee further off from hoped grace.
Grace me no graces, I respect no grace,
But with a grace, to give a graceless stab,
To chop folks legs and arms off by the stumps,
To see what shift they'll make to scramble home:
Pick out men's eyes, and tell them that's the sport,
Of hoodman-blind, without all sportiveness,
If with a grace I can perform such pranks,
My heart will give mine agents many thanks.
Then God forbid I should consort myself,
With one so far from grace and piety:
lest being found within thy company,
I should be partner of thy punishment.
When we have done what we have vowed to do,
My heart desires to have no fellowship,
With those that talk of grace or godliness:
I named not God unless 'twere with an oath,
Sense the first hour that I could walk alone,
(And you that make so much of conscience,
By heaven thou art a damned hypocrite:
For thou hast vowed to kill that sleeping boy,
And all to gain two hundredth marks in gold,
I know this pureness comes of pure deceit,
To draw me from the murdering of the child,
That you alone might have the benefit,
You are too shallow, if you gull me so,
Chop of my head to make a Sousing-tub,
And fill it full of tripes and chitterlings.
That thou shalt see my heart is far from fraud,
Or vain illusion in this enterprise,
Which doth import the safety of our souls,
There take my earnest of impiety.
Only forbear to lay thy ruder hands,
Upon the poor mistrustless tender child,
As for our vows, fear not their violence,
God will forgive on hearty penitence.
Thou Eunuch, Capon, dastard, fast and loose,
Thou weathercock of mutabilitie,
White livered peasant, wilt thou vow and swear,
Face and make semblance with thy bagpipe oaths,
Of that thou never meanst to execute?
Pure cowardice for fear to crack thy neck,
With the huge chaos of thy Body's weight,
Hath sure begot this true contrition,
Then fast and pray, and see if thou canst win,
A goodly pardon for thy heinous sin,
As for the boy, this fatal instrument,
Was marked by heaven to cut his line of life,
And must supply the knife of Atropos,
And if it do not, let this master piece,
(Which nature lent the world to wonder at)
Be slit in Carbonadoes for the jaws,
Of some men-eating hungry cannibal:
By heaven i'll kill him only for this cause,
For that he came of virtuous Ancestors,
But by that God, which made that wondrous globe,
Wherein is seen his powerful deity,
Thou shalt not kill him maugre all thy spite:
Swear, and forswear thyself ten thousand times,
Awake Pertillo, for thou art betrayed,
This bloody slave intends to murder thee.
Both him, and all, that dare to rescue him.
Wherefore? because I slept without your leave?
Forgive my fault, I'll never sleep again.
No child, thy wicked Uncle hath suborned,
Both him and me to take thy life away:
Which I would save, but that this hellish imp,
Will not consent to spare thy guiltless blood.
Why should Falleria seek to have my life.
The lands and goods, thy father left his son,
Do hale thee on to thy destruction.
Oh needy treasure, harm begetting good,
That safely should procure the loss of blood.
Those lands and goods, thy father got with pain,
Are swords where with his little son is slain.
Then let our swords let out his guiltless life.
Sweet, sour, kind, cruel, hold thy murdering knife,
And hear me speak, before you murder me.
Fear not sweet child, he shall not murder thee.
No, but my sword shall let his puddings forth.
First hear me speak, thou map of Butchery,
'tis but my goods and lands my Uncle seeks,
Having that safely, he desires no more,
I do protest by my dead parents souls,
By the dear love of false Fallerio's son,
Whose heart, my heart assures me, will be grieved,
To hear his father's inhumanity:
I will forsake my country, goods, and lands,
I and myself, will even change myself,
In name, in life, in habit, and in all,
And live in some far moved continent,
So you will spare my weak and tender youth,
Which cannot entertain the stroke of death
In budding years, and very spring of life.
Leave of these bootless protestations,
And use no ruth enticing arguments,
For if you do, i'll lop you limb by limb,
And torture you for childish eloquence.
Thou shalt not make his little finger ache.
Yes every part, and this shall prove it true.
Oh I am slain, the Lord forgive thy fact,
And give thee grace to die with penitence.
A treacherous villain, full of cowardice,
I'll make thee know that thou hast done amiss.
Teach me that knowledge when you will or dare.
Swoons I am peppered, I had need have salt,
Or else tomorrow I shall yield a stink,
Worse than a heap of dirty excrements:
Now by this Hilt, this gold was earned too dear:
Ah, how now death, wilt thou be conqueror?
Then vengeance light on them that made me so,
And there's another farewell ere I go.
Enough, enough, I had my death before.
How now my Lords, was't not a gallant course,
Believe me sirs, I never saw a wretch,
Make better shift to save her little life:
The thickets full of busks and scratching briars,
A mighty dew, a many deep mouthed hounds,
Let loose in every place to cross their course,
And yet the Hare got cleanly from them all:
I would not for a hundred pound in faith
But that she had escaped with her life,
For we will wind a merry hunter's horn,
And start her once again tomorrow morn.
In troth my Lord, the little flocked hound,
That had but three good legs to further him,
'twas foremost still, and surer of his scent,
Than any one in all the cry besides
But yet Pendragon gave the Hare more turns.
That was because he was more politic,
And eyed her closely in her coverts still:
They all did well, and once more we will try,
The subtle creature with a greater cry
But say, what well accomplished Gentleman,
Is this that comes into our company?
I know him well, it is Fallerio son,
Pandino's brother (a kind Gentleman)
That died, and left his little pretty son,
Unto his father's good direction.
Stand close awhile, and over hear his words,
He seems much overgone with passion.
Ye timorous thoughts that guide my giddy steps,
In unknown paths of dreadful wilderness,
Why traitorlike do you conspire to hold,
My pained heart, twixt fear and jealousy,
My too much care hath brought me carelessly,
Into this woody savage labyrinth,
And I can find no way to issue out,
Fear hath so dazzled all my better part,
That reason hath forgot discretion's art:
But in good time, see where is company.
Kind Gentlemen, if you unlike myself,
Are not encumbered with the circling ways,
Of this erroneous winding wilderness,
I pray you to direct me forth this wood,
And show the path that leads to Padua.
We all are Paduans, and we all intend,
To pass forthwith, with speed to Padua.
I will attend upon you presently.
Come then away, but gentlemen behold,
A bloody sight, and murderous spectacle.
Oh God forgive me all my wickedness,
And take me to eternal happiness.
Hark one of them hath some small spark of life,
To kindle knowledge of their sad mishaps.
Ah gracious Lord, I know this wretched child,
And these two men that here lie murdered.
Do you Alenso?
I my gracious Lord
It was Pertillo my dead uncles son:
Now have my fears brought forth this fearful child,
Of endless care, and everlasting grief.
Lay hands upon Alenso Gentlemen,
Your presence doth confirm you had a share,
In the performance of this cruelty.
I do confess I have so great a share,
In this mishap, that I will give him thanks,
That will let forth my sorrow wounded soul,
From out this goal of lamentation.
'tis now too late to wish for had I
Had you withheld your hand from this attempt,
Sorrow had never so imprisoned you.
Oh my good Lord, you do mist my se,
And yet my grief is sure infallible,
The Lord of heaven can witness with my soul,
That I am guiltless of your wrong suspect,
But yet not griefless that the deed is done.
Nay if you stand to justify yourself,
This Gentleman whose life doth see me to stay,
Within his body tell he tell your shame,
Shall testify of your integrity:
Speak then thou sad Anatomy of death,
Who were the agents of your woefulness.
O be not blinded with a false surmise,
For least my tongue should faile to end the al.
Of our untimely fate appointed death:
Know young Allenso is as innocent,
As is Fallerio guilty of the crime.
He, he it was, that with four hundredth marks,
Whereof two hundred he paid presently,
Did hire this damned villain and myself,
To massacre this harmless innocent:
But yet my conscience touched with some remorse,
Would fain have saved the young Pertillo's life,
But he remorseless would not let him live,
But unawares thrust in his harmless breast,
That life bereaving fatal instrument:
Which cruel deed I seeking to revenge,
Have lost my life, and paid the slave his due
Reward, for spilling blood of Innocents:
Surprise Fallerio author of this ill,
Save young Allenso, he is guiltless still.
Oh sweetest honey mixed with bitter gall,
Oh Nightingale combined with ravens notes,
Thy speech is like a woodward that should say,
Let the tree live, but take the root away.
As though my life were aught but misery,
Having my father slain for infamy.
What should incite Fallerio to devise,
The overthrow of this unhappy boy.
That may be easily guessed my gracious Lord
To be the lands Pandino left his son,
Which after that the boy were murdered,
Descend to him by due inheritance.
You deem aright, see gentlemen the fruits
Of coveting to have another's right,
Oh wicked thought of greedy covetise
Could neither nature, fear of punishment,
Scandal to wife and children, nor the fear,
Of God's confounding strict severity,
Allay the headstrong fury of thy will,
Beware my friends to wish unlawful gain,
It will beget strange actions full of fear,
And overthrow the actor unawares,
For first Fallerio's life must satisfy,
The large effusion of their guiltless bloods,
Trained on by him to these extremities,
Next, wife and children must be disposest,
Of lands and goods, and turned to beggary,
But most of all, his great and heinous sin,
Will be an eye sore to his guiltless kin.
Bear hence away these models of his shame,
And let us prosecute the murderer,
With all the care and diligence we can.
Forbear a while, to bear away my joy,
Which now is vanished, since his life is fled,
And give me leave to wash his deadly wound,
With hearty tears, outflowing from those eyes,
Which loved his sight, more than the sight of heaven:
Forgive me God for this idolatry.
Thou ugly monster, grim imperious death,
Thou raw-boned lump of foul deformity.
Regardless instrument of cruel fate,
Unpartial Sergeant, full of treachery,
Why didst thou flatter my ill boding thoughts,
And flesh my hopes with vain illusions:
Why didst thou say, Pertillo should not die,
And yet, oh yet, hast done it cruelly:
Oh but behold, with what a smiling cheer,
He entertained thy bloody harbinger:
See thou transformer of a heavenly face,
To Ashy paleness and unpleasing looks,
That his fair countenance still retaineth grace,
Of perfect beauty in the very grave,
The world would say such beauty should not die,
Yet like a thief thou didst it cruelly:
Ah, had thy eyes deep sunk into thy head,
Been able to perceive his virtuous mind,
Where virtue sat enthroned in a chair,
With awful grace, and pleasing majesty:
Thou wouldest not then have let Pertillo die,
Nor like a thief have slain him cruelly.
Inevitable fates, could you devise,
No means to bring me to this pilgrimage,
Full of great woes and sad calamities,
But that the father should be principal,
To plot the present downfall of the son:
Come then kind death and give me leave to die,
Since thou hast slain Pertillo cruelly.
Forbear Allenso hearken to my doom,
Which doth concern thy father's apprehension,
First we enjoin thee upon pain of death,
To give no succour to thy wicked sire,
But let him perish in his damned sin,
And pay the price of such a treachery:
See that with speed the monster be attached,
And bring him safe to suffer punishment,
Prevent it not, nor seek not to delude,
The officers to whom this charge is given,
For if thou do, as sure as God doth live:
thyself shall satisfy the laws contempt,
Therefore forward about this punishment.
Thanks gracious God that thou hast left the means
To end my soul from this perplexity,
Not succour him on pain of present death:
That is no pain, death is a welcome guest,
To those whose hearts are overwhelmed with grief,
My woes are done, I having leave to die,
And after death live ever joyfully.
Now Avarice I have well satisfied,
My hungry thoughtes with blood and creltie:
Now all my melancholy discontent,
Is shaken of, and I am throughlie pleased,
With what thy policy hath brought to pass,
Yet am I not so throughly satisfied:
Until I bring the purple actors forth,
And cause them quaff a bowl of bitterness,
That father, son, and sister brother may,
Bring to their deaths with most assured decay.
That willbe done without all question,
For thou hast slain Allenso with the boy:
And Rachel doth not wish to overlive,
The sad remembrance of her brother's sin,
Leave faithful love, to teach them how to die,
That they may share their kinsfolks misery.
I have bestowed a watery funeral,
On the half body of my butchered friend,
The head and legs I'll leave in some dark place,
I care not if they find them yea or no.
Where do you mean to leave the head and legs,
In some dark place near to Baynard's castle,
But do it closely that you be not seen,
For all this while you are without suspect.
Take you no thought, i'll have a care of that,
Only take heed you have a special care,
To make no show of any discontent,
Nor use too many words to any one.
I will return when I have left my load,
Be merry Rachel half the fear is past.
But I shall never think myself secure,
This deed would trouble any quiet soul,
To think thereof, much more to see it done,
Such cruel deeds can never long be hid,
Although we practise near so cunningly,
Let others open what I do conceal,
Lo he is my brother, I will cover it,
And rather die then have it spoken rife,
Lo where she goes, betrayed her brother's life.
Why how now Harry what should be the cause,
That you are grown so discontent of late:
Your sighs do show some inward heaviness,
Your heavy looks, your eyes brimful of tears,
Bears testimony of some secret grief,
Reveal it Harry, I will be thy friend,
And help thee to my poor ability.
If I am heavy, if I often sigh,
And if my eyes bear records of my woe,
Condemn me not, for I have mighty cause,
More than I will impart to any one.
Do you misdoubt me, that you dare not tell
That woe to me, that moves your discontent.
Good master Cowley you were ever kind,
But pardon me, I will not utter it,
To any one, for I have passed my word,
And therefore urge me not to tell my grief.
But those that smother grief too secretly,
May waste themselves in silent anguishment,
And bring their bodies to so low an ebb,
That all the world can never make is flow,
Unto the happy height of former health:
Then be not injurious to thyself,
To waste thy strength in lamentation,
But tell thy case, we'll seek some remedy.
My cause of grief is now remediless,
And all the world can never lessen it,
Then since no means can make my sorrows less,
Suffer me wail a woe which wants redress.
Yet let me bear a part in thy laments,
I love thee not so ill, but I will moan,
Thy heavy haps, thou shalt not sigh alone.
Nay, if you are so curious to intrude,
yourself to sorrow, where you have no share,
I will frequent some unfrequented place,
Where none shall here nor see my lamentations.
And I will follow wheresoever thou go,
I will be partner of thy helpless woe.
Will is't not time we should go to our boats,
And give attendance for this Bartlemew tide:
Folks will be stirring early in the morning.
By my troth I am indifferent whether I go or no.
If a fare come why so, if not, why so, if I have not their money, they shall have none of my labour.
But we that live by our labours, must give attendance,
But where lies thy Boat?
At Baynard's castle stairs.
So does mine, then let's go together.
Come, I am indifferent, I care not so much for going,
But if I go with you, why so: if not, why so.
'sblood what rascal hath laid this in my way?
'a was not very indifferent that did so, but you are so peremptory, to say, why so, and why so, that every one is glad to do you injury, but let's see, what is it? Good Lord deliver us, a man's legs, and a head with many wounds.
What's that so much, I am indifferent, yet for mine own part, I understand the misery of it, if you do, why so, if not, why so.
By my troth I understand no other mystery but this,
It is a strange and very rueful sight,
But prithee what dost thou conceit of it.
In troth I am indifferent, for if I tell you, why so, if not why so.
If thou tell me, I'll thank thee, therefore I prithee tell me.
I tell you I am indifferent, but to be plain with you,
I am grieved to stumble at the hangman's budget.
At the hangman's budget, why this is a sack.
And to speak indifferently, it is the hangman's Budget, and because he thought too much of his labour to set this head upon the bridge, and the legs upon the gates, he flings them in the street for men to stumble at, but if I get him in my boat, I'll so belabour him in a stretcher, that he had better be stretched in one of his own halfpenny halters: if this be a good conceit, why so, if not, why so.
Thou art deceived, this head hath many wounds,
And hose and shoes remaining on the legs,
Bull always strips all quartered traitors quite.
I am indifferent whether you believe me or no, these were not worth taking off, and therefore he left them on, if this be likely why so, if not, why so.
Nay then I see you grow from worse to worse,
I heard last night, that one near Lambert hill
Was missing, and his boy was murdered,
It may be this is a part of that same man:
whate'er it be, I'll bear it to that place.
Mass I am indifferent, I'll go along with you,
If it be so, why so, if not why so.
Hoe master Loney, hear you any news,
What is become of your Tenant Beech?
No truly sir, not any news at all.
What hath the boy recovered any speech,
To give us light of these suggestions,
That do arise upon this accident.
There is no hope he should recover speech,
The wives do say, he's ready now to leave
This grievous world full fraught with treachery,
methinks if Beech himself be innocent,
That then the murderer should not dwell far off,
The hammer that is sticking in his head,
Was borrowed of a Cutler dwelling by,
But he remembers not, who borrowed it:
He is committed that did owe the hammer,
But yet he stands upon his innocence,
And Beech's absence causeth great suspicion.
If Beech be faulty, as I do not think,
I never was so much deceived before,
Oh had you known his conversation,
You would not have him in suspicion.
devils seem Saints, and in this hateful times,
Deceit can bear apparent signs of truth,
And vice bear show of virtues excellence.
I pray is this master Beech's house?
My friend this same was master Beech's shop,
We cannot tell whether he live or no.
Know you his head and if I show it you,
Or can you tell what hose or shoes he wore,
At that same time when he forsook the shop.
What have you head, and hose, and shoes to show,
And want the body that should use the same.
Behold this head, these legs, these hose and shoes,
And see if they were Beeches yea or no.
They are the same, alas what is become,
Of the remainder of this wretched man.
Nay that I know not, only these we found,
As we were coming up a narrow lane,
Near Baynard's Castle, where we two did dwell,
And hearing that a man was missing hence,
We thought it good to bring these to this place,
Thanks my good friends, there's some thing for your pains,
We are indifferent, whether you give us any thing or nothing, and if you had not, why so, but since you have, why so.
Leave your repining sir we thank you heartily.
Farewell good fellows, neighbour now be bold,
They dwell not far that did this bloody deed,
As God no doubt will at the last reveal:
Though they conceal it near so cunningly,
All houses, gutters, sinks and crevices,
Have carefully been sought for, for the blood.
Yet there's no instance found in any place.
But who is that, that brings a heavy load,
Behind him on a painful porters back.
Pray gentlemen which call you Beech's shop?
This is the place, what would you with the man?
Nothing with him, I hear the man is dead,
And if he be not, I have lost my pains.
he's dead indeed, but yet we cannot find,
What is become of half his hopeless body,
His head and legs are found; but for the rest,
No man can tell what is become of it.
Then I do think I can resolve your doubt,
And bring you certain tidings of the rest,
And if you know his doublet and his shirt:
As for the body it is so abused.
That no man can take notice who's it was,
Set down this burden of another's shame,
What do you know the doublet and the shirt.
This is the doublet, these the severed limbs,
Which late were joined to that mangled trunk:
Lay them together see if they can make,
Among them all a sound and solid man.
They all agree, but yet they cannot make,
That sound and whole, which a remorseless hand
Hath severed with a knife of cruelty:
But say good sir, where did you find this out?
Walking betime by Paris-garden ditch,
Having my Water Spaniel by my side,
When we approached unto that hapless place,
Where this same trunk lay drowned in a ditch,
My Spaniel 'gan to sent, to bark, to plunge,
Into the water, and came forth again,
And fawned on me, as if a man should say,
Help out a man that here lies murdered.
At first I took delight to see the dog,
Thinking in vain some game did there lie hid,
Amongst the Nettles growing near the bank:
But when no game, nor any thing appeared,
That might produce the Spaniel to this sport,
I 'gan to rate and beat the harmless Cur,
Thinking to make him leave to follow me,
But words, nor blows, could move the dog away,
But still he plunged, he dived, he barked, he ran
Still to my side, as if it were for help:
I seeing this, did make the ditch be dragged,
Where then was found this body as you see,
With great amazement to the lookers on.
Behold the mighty miracles of God,
That senseless things should propagate their sin,
That are more bestial far than beastliness,
Of any creature most insensible.
Cease we to wonder at God's wondrous works,
And let us labour for to bring to light,
Those masked fiends that thus dishonour him:
This sack is new, and lo behold his mark
Remains upon it, which did sell the bag,
Amongst the Salter's we shall find it out,
When, and to whom, this bloody bag was sold.
'tis very likely, let no pains be spared,
To bring it out, if it be possible,
'twere pity such a murder should remain
Unpunished, 'mongst Turks and Infidels.
Sirs, I do know the man that sold this bag,
And if you please, I'll fetch him presently?
With all our hearts, how say you Gentlemen?
Perchance the murderer thus may come to light.
I pray you do it, we will tarry here:
And let the eyes of every passenger
Be satisfied, which may example be,
How they commit so dreadful wickedness.
And please your masterships the boy is dead.
'tis very strange, that having many wounds,
So terrible, so ghastly, which is more,
Having the hammer sticking in his head,
That he should live and stir from Friday night,
To Sunday morning, and even then depart,
When that his masters mangled course were found,
Bring him forth too, perchance the murderers
May have their hearts touched with due remorse,
Viewing their deeds of damned wickedness.
Here is the Salter's man that sold the bag,
My friend, how long since did you sell that bag?
And vnto whom, if you remember i?
I sold the bag good sir but yesterday,
Unto a maid, I do not know her name.
Nor where she dwells.
No certainly.
But what apparel had she on her back?
I do not well remember what she wore,
But if I saw her I should know her sure.
Go round about to every neighbours house,
And will them show their maids immediately:
God grant we may find out the murderers.
Bring forth such maids as are within your house.
I have but one, i'll send her down to you.
Is this the maid.
No sir, this is not she.
How many maids do dwell within this house?
Her's near a woman here, except my wife.
Whose house is this?
An honest civil man's, called Master Merry,
Who I dare be sworn, would never do so great a murder
But you may ask here to for fashion sake.
How now fair maid, dwells any here but you?
Thou hast too true a face for such a deed.
No gentle sir, my brother keeps no more.
This is not she?
No truly gentleman.
This will not serve, we cannot find her out,
Bring in those bodies, it grows towards night,
God bring these damned murderers at length to light.
Why go the neighbours round about the street
To every house? what hast thou heard the cause?
They go about with that same Salter's man,
Of whom I bought the bag but yesterday,
To see if he can know the maid again
Which bought it, this I think the very cause.
How were my senses overcome with fear,
That I could not foresee this jeopardy:
For had I brought the bag away with me,
They had not had this means to find it out.
Hide thee above lest that the Salter's man,
Take notice of thee that thou art the maid,
And by that knowledge we be all undone.
That fear is past, I saw, I spoke with him,
Yet he denies that I did buy the bag:
Besides, the neighbours have no doubt of you,
Saying you are an honest harmless man,
And made inquiry here for fashion sake.
My former life, deserves their good conceits,
Were it not blemished with this treachery.
My heart is merrier than it was before,
For now I hope the greatest fear is past,
The hammer is denied, the bag unknown,
Now there is left no means to bring it out,
Unless ourselves prove Traitors to ourselves.
When saw you Harry Williams?
Why today
I met him coming home from Paul's Cross,
Where he had been to hear a Sermon.
Why brought you not the man along with you
To come to dinner, that we might persuade
Him to continue in his secrecy.
I did entreat him, but he would not come,
But vowed to be as secret as myself.
What, did he swear?
What need you ask me that?
You know we never heard him swear an oath.
But since he hath concealed the thing thus long,
I hope in God he will conceal it still.
Pray God he do, and then I have no doubt,
But God will overpass this grievous sin,
If you lament with true unfeigned tears,
And seek to live the remnant of your years,
In God's true fear with upright conscience.
If it would please him pardon this amiss,
And rid my body from the open shame,
That doth attend this deed, being brought to light,
I would endeavour all my coming days,
To please my maker, and exult his praise:
But it grows late, come bring me to my bed,
That I may rest my sorrow charged head.
Rest still in calm secure tranquillity,
And overblow this storm of mighty fear,
With pleasant gal of hoped nsse,
Go when you will, I will attend, and pray,
To send this woeful night a cheerful day.
Pass o'er these rugged furrows of laments,
And come to plainer paths of cheerfulness,
Cease thy continual showers of thy woe,
And let my pleasing words of comfort chase,
This dusky clouds of thy unjust despair,
Far from thy heart, and let a pleasing hope,
Of young Pertillo's happy safe return,
Establish all your ill divining thoughts,
So shall you make me cheerful that am sad,
And feed your hopes with fond illusions.
I could be so, but my divided soul,
Twixt fear and hope of young Pertillo's life,
Cannot arrive at the desired port,
Of firm belief, until mine eyes do see,
Him that I sent to know the certainty.
To know the certainty, of whom, of what,
Whom, whether when, or whereabout I pray,
Have you dispatched a frustrate messenger,
By heaven, and earth, my heart misguideth me,
They will prevent my cunning policy.
Why speak you not what winged Pegasus,
Is posted for your satisfaction.
methinks my speech reveals a hidden fear,
And that fear tells me, that the child is dead.
By sweet S. Andrew and my father's soul,
I think the peevish boy be too too well:
But speak, who was your passion's harbinger.
One that did kindle my misdoubting thoughts,
With the large flame of his timidity.
Oh then I know the tinder of your fear,
Was young Allenso your white honey son:
Confusion light upon his timorous head,
For broaching this large stream of fearfulness,
And all the plagues that damned furies feel,
For their forepast bold iniquities:
Afflict you both for thus preventing me.
Preventing you, of what, Fallerio speak,
For if you do not, my poor heart will break.
Why of the good that I had purposed,
To young Pertillo, which I would conceal,
From you, and him, until the deed were done.
If it were good, than we affect him dear,
And would add furtherance to your enterprise.
I say your close eavesdropping policies,
Have hindered him of greater benefits,
Than I can ever do him after this:
If he live long, and grow to riper sin,
he'll curse you both, that thus have hindered
His freedom from this goal of sinful flesh:
But let that pass, when went your harebrained son,
That Cuckoo virtue-singing, hateful bird,
To guard the safety of his better part,
Which he hath penned within the childish coop,
Of young Pertillo's sweet security.
That lovely son, that comfort of my life,
That root of virtuous magnanimity,
That doth affect with an unfeigned love,
That tender boy, which under heavens bright eye,
Deserveth most to be affected dear,
Went some two hours after the little boy
Was sent away, to keep at Padua.
What is a lovely? he's a loathsome toad,
A one eyed Cyclops, a stigmatic brat,
That durst attempt to contradict my will,
And pry into my close intendments.
Mas here 'a comes, his downcast sullen look,
Is over weighed with mighty discontent,
I hope the brat is posted to his sire,
That he is grown so lazy of his pace:
Forgetful of his duty, and his tongue,
Is even fast tied with strings of heaviness.
Come hither boy, sawst thou my obstacle,
That little Dromus that crept into my son,
With friendly hand, removed and thrust away,
Say I, and please me with the sweetest note,
That ever relished in a mortal's mouth.
I am a Swan that sing before I die,
Your note of shame and coming misery.
Speak softly son, let not thy mother hear,
She was almost dead before for very fear.
Would I could roar as instruments of war,
Wall battering Cannons, when the Gunpowder
Is touched with part of Aetna's Element,
Would I could bellow like enraged Bulls,
Whose hearts are full of indignation,
To be captived by humane policy:
Would I could thunder like Almighty Ioue,
That sends his far heard voice to terrific,
The wicked hearts of earthly citizens:
Then roaring, bellowing, thundering, I would say,
Mother lament, Pertillo's made away.
What is he dead, God give me leave to die,
And him repentance for his treachery.
Never the like impiety was done,
A mother slain, with terror of the son:
Help to repair the damage thou hast made,
And seek to call back life with diligence.
Call back a happy creature to more woe,
That were a sin, good Father let her go:
O happy I, if my tormenting smart,
Could rend like her's, my grief afflicted heart,
Would your hard heart extend unto your wife,
To make her live an everdying life.
What is she dead? oh then thrice happy she,
Whose eyes are bar from our calamity.
I all too soon, thou viper, parricide,
But for thy tongue thy mother had not dyde,
That belching voice, that harsh night-raven sound,
Untimely sent thy mother to the ground,
Upbraid my fault, I did deceive my brother,
Cut out thy tongue, that slew thy careful mother.
God love my soul, as I in heart rejoice,
To have such power in my death bringing voice,
See how in stead of tears and hearty sighs:
Of folded arms and sorrow speaking looks,
I do behold with cheerful countenance,
The lifeless root of my nativity:
And thank her hasty soul that thence did go,
To keep her from her son and husbands woe.
Now father give attention to my tale:
I will not dip my grief deciphering tongue,
In bitter words of reprehension,
Your deeds have thrown more mischiefs on your head
Then wit or reason can remove again;
For to be brief, Pertillo, oh that name
Cannot be named without a hearty sigh,
Is murdered, and,
What and, this news is good.
The men which you suborned to murder him.
Better and better, than it cannot out,
Unless your love will be so scrupulous,
That it will overthrow yourself and me.
The best is last, and yet you hinder me,
The Duke of Padua hunting in the wood:
Accompanied with Lords and gentlemen,
'swounds what of that? what good can come of that?
Was made acquainted by the one of them,
(That had some little remnant of his life:)
With all your practice and conspiracy?
I would that remnant had fled quick to hell,
To fetch fierce finds to rend their carcases,
Rather than bring my life in jeopardy:
Is this the best, 'swounds do you mock me son,
And make a jest at my calamity
Not I good father, I will ease your woe,
If you but yield unto my policy.
Declare it then, my wits are now to seek,
That piece of life hath so confounded me,
That I am wholly overcome with fear.
The duke hath vowed to prosecute your life,
With all the strict severity he can,
But I will cross his resolution:
And keep you from his fury well enough,
I'll wear your habit, I will seem the man,
That did suborn the bloody murderers,
I will not stir from out this house of woe,
But weight the coming of the officers,
And answer for you fore the angry Duke,
And if need be suffer your punishment.
I'll none of that, I do not like the last,
I love thee dearer than I do my life,
And all I did, was to advance thy state,
To sun bright beams of shining happiness.
Doubt not my life, for when I do appear
Before the duke, I being not the man,
He can inflict no punishment on me.
Mas thou sayest true, a cannot punish thee,
Thou wert no actor of their tragedy:
But for my beard thou canst not counterfeit,
And bring grey hairs upon thy downy chin,
White frosts are never seen in summer's spring.
I bought a beard this day at Padua,
Such as our common actors use to wear:
When youth would put on age's countenance,
So like in shape, in colour, and in all,
To that which grows upon your aged face,
That were I dressed in your habiliments,
yourself would scarcely know me from yourself.
That's excellent, what shape hast thou devised,
To be my vizard to delude the world.
Why thus, i'll presently shave off your hair,
And dress you in a lowly shepherds weed,
Than you will seem to have the careful charge,
Of some wealth bringing rich and fleecy flock,
And so pass currant from suspicion.
This care of thine my son doth testify,
Nature in thee hath firm predominance,
That neither loss of friend, nor vile reproach,
Can shake thee with their strongest violence:
In this disguise, i'll see the end of thee,
That thou acquitted, then mayst succour me.
I am assured to be exempt from woe.
This plot will work my certain overthrow.
I will bear hence thy mother, and my wife,
Untimely murdered with true sorrows knife.
Untimely murdered, happy was that grief,
Which hath abridged whole numbers, numberless:
Of heart surcharging deplorations.
She shall have due and christian funeral,
And rest in peace amongst her ancestors,
As for our bodies, they shall be interred,
In ravening maws, of Ravens, Puttocks, Crows,
Of tatlin Magpies, and deaths harbingers,
That willbe glutted with wind shaken limbs,
Of blood delighting hateful murderers:
And yet these many winged sepulchres,
Shall turn to earth so I, and father shall,
At last attain to earth by funeral,
Well I will prosecute my policy,
That wished death may end my miseries.
Still in your dumps, good Harry yet at last,
Utter your motive of this heaviness:
Why go you not unto your masters house?
What are you parted? if that be the cause,
I will provide you of a better place.
Who roves all day, at length may hit the mark,
That is the cause, because I cannot stay,
With him whose love, is dearer than my life.
Why fell you out? why did you part so soon?
We fell not out, but fear hath parted us.
What did he fear your truth or honest life?
No, no, your understanding is but dim,
That far removed, cannot judge the fear,
We both were fearful, and we both did part,
Because indeed we both were timorous.
What accident begot your mutual fear?
That which my heart hath promised to conceal.
Why now you fall into your ancient vain.
'tis vain to urge me from this silent vain,
I will conceal it, though it breed my pain.
It seems to be a thing of consequence,
And therefore prithee Harry for my love,
Open this close fast clasped mystery.
Were I assured my heart should have release,
Of secret torment, and distemperature,
I would reveal it to you specially,
Whom I have found my faithful favourite.
Good Harrie William's make no doubt of that,
Besides, your grief revealed may have relief,
Beyond your present expectation:
Then tell it Harry, whatsoe'er it be,
And ease your heart of horror, me of doubt.
What have you heard of Beech of Lambert hill?
And of his boy which late were murdered.
I heard, and saw, their mangled carcases.
But have you heard of them that murdered them?
No, would I had, for then I'd blaze their shame,
And make them pay due penance for their sin.
This I misdoubted, therefore will forbear,
To utter what I thought to have revealed.
know'st thou the actors of this murderous deed,
And wilt conceal it now the deed is done?
Alas poor man, thou knowest not what thou dost,
Thou hast incurred the danger of the law,
And thou 'mongst them must suffer punishment,
Unless thou do confess it presently.
What? shall I then betray my masters life?
Better than hazard both thy life and soul,
To bolster out such barbarous villainy.
Why then belike your master did the deed.
My master unawares escaped my mouth,
But what the Lord doth please shall come to light,
Cannot be hid by humane policy:
His hapless hand hath wrought the fatal end,
Of Robert Beech and Thomas Winchester.
Could he alone do both those men to death?
Hadst thou no share in execution?
Nor knew not of it, till the deed was done.
If this be true, thou mayst escape with life:
Confess the truth unto the officers,
And thou shalt find the favour of the law.
If I offended, 'twas my masters love,
That made me hide his great transgressions:
But I will be directed as you please,
So save me God, as I am innocent.
Part of myself, now seemst thou wholly me,
And I seem neither like myself, nor thee:
Thanks to thy care, and this unknown disguise.
I like a shepherd now must learn to know,
When to lead forth my little bleating flock,
To pleasing pastures, and well fatting walks,
In stormy time to drive them to the lee,
To cheer the pretty Lambs, whose bleating voice,
Doth crave the wished comfort of their dams,
To sound my merry Bagpipe on the downs,
In shearing times poor shepherds festivals,
And lastly, how to drive the Wolf away,
That seek to make the little Lambs their prey.
Ah have you care to drive the Wolf away,
From silly creatures wanting intellect,
And yet would suffer your devouring thoughts,
To suck the blood of your dead brother's son,
As pure and innocent as any lamb,
Pertillo was, which you have fed upon,
But things past help may better be bewailed
With careful tears, then find a remedy,
Therefore for fear our practice be espied,
Let us to question of our husbandry,
How many Lambs fell from the middle flock,
Since I myself did take the latter view.
Some vive and twenty, whereof two are dead,
But three and twenty scud about the fields,
That glads my heart to ze their jollity.
This is the man, conferring of his Lambs,
That slew a Lamb worth all his flock beside.
When is the time to let the weather's blood,
The forward spring, that had such store of grass,
Hath filled them full of rank unwholesome blood,
Which must be purged, else when the winter comes,
The rot will leave me nothing but their skins.
Ihill let 'em blood, but yet it is no time,
Until the zygne be gone below the heart.
Forbear a while this idle business,
And talk of matters of more consequence.
Che tell you plain, you are no honest man,
To call a shepherds care an idle toy,
What though we have a little merry sport,
With flowery girlands, and an Oaten pipe,
And jolly friskins on a holiday,
Yet is a shepherds cure, a greater cark,
Then sweating ploughmen with their busy work.
Hence leave your sheepish ceremonial,
And now Fallerio, in the PRINCE's name,
I do arrest you, for the cruel murder
Of young Pertillo left unto your charge,
Which you discharged with a bloody writ,
Signed by the hands of those you did suborn:
Nay look not strange, we have such evidence,
To ratify your Stygian cruelty,
That cannot be deluded any way:
Alas my Lords, I know not what you say,
As for my Nephew, he I hope is well,
I sent him yesterday to Padua.
ay, he is well, in such a venger's hands,
As will not wink at your iniquity.
By heaven and earth my soul is innocent,
Say what you will, I know my conscience.
To be afflicted with a scourge of care,
Which my over weening rashness did inflict.
Come bear him hence, expostulate no more,
That heart that could invent such treachery,
Can teach his face to brave it cunningly.
I do defy your accusations,
Let me have justice I will answer it.
So bear him hence, I mean to stay behind,
To take possession of his goods and lands:
For the Duke's use, it is too manifest.
I hope you'll answer any thing you do,
My Lord Veswio you shall answer it:
And all the rest that use extremities.
I to the Duke's exchequer not to you.
Thus shades are caught when substances are fled,
Indeed they have my garments, but myself,
Am close enough from their discovery,
But not so close but that my very soul,
Is racked with torments for Pertillo's death;
I am Actaeon, I do bear about
My horns of shame and inhumanity,
My thoughts, like hounds which late did flatter me:
With hope of great succeeding benefits.
Now 'gin to tear my care-tormented heart,
With fear of death and torturing punishment,
These are the stings whenas our consciences,
Are stuffed and clogged with close concealed crimes,
Well I must smother all these discontents,
And strive to bear a smother countenance:
Then rugged care would willingly permit,
I'll to the Court to see Alenso free,
That he may then relieve my poverty.
Who would have thought of all the men alive,
That Thomas Merry would have done this deed:
So full of ruth and monstrous wickedness.
Of all the men that live in London walls.
I would have thought that Merry had been free,
Is this the fruits of Saintlike Puritans,
I never like such damned hypocrisy.
He would not lose a sermon for a pound,
An oath he thought would rend his jaws in twain,
An idle word did whet God's vengeance on:
And yet two murders were not scrupulous,
Such close illusions God will bring to light,
And overthrow the workers with his might.
This is the house, come let us knock at door,
I see a light they are not all in bed:
How now fair maid, is your brother up?
He's not within sir, would you speak with him?
You do but lest, I know he is within,
And I must needs go up and speak with him.
In deed good sir, he is in bed asleep,
And I was loath to trouble him tonight.
Well sister, I am sorry for your sake,
But for your brother, he is known to be
A damned villain and an hypocrite,
Rachel, I charge thee in her highness name,
To go with us to prison presently.
To prison sir, alas what have I done?
You know that best, but every one do know,
You and your brother murdered master Beech,
And his poor boy that dwelled at Lambert hill.
I murdered, my brother knows that I
Did not consent to either of their deaths.
That must be tried, where doth your brother lie?
Here in his bed, methinks he's not asleep.
Now master Merry, are you in a sweat.
No verily, I am not in a sweat.
Some sudden fear affrights you, what's the cause?
Nothing but that you waked me unawares.
In the queen's name I do command you rise,
And presently to go along with us.
With all my heart, what do you know the cause?
We partly do, when saw you master Beech?
I do not well remember who you mean.
Not Beech the chandler upon Lambert hill.
I know the man, but saw him not this fortnight.
I would you had not, for your sister's sake,
For yours, for his, and for his harmless boy,
Be not obdurate in your wickedness,
Confession draws repentance after it.
Well master Constable I do confess,
I was the man that did them both to death:
As for my sister and my harmless man,
I do protest they both are innocent.
Your man is fast in hold, and hath confessed,
The manner how, and where, the deed was done:
Therefore 'twere vain to colour any thing,
Bring them away.
Ah brother woe is me,
I comfortless will help to comfort thee.
Weep, weep poor souls, & interchange your woes,
Now Merry change thy name and countenance:
Smile not, thou wretched creature, lest in scorn,
Thou smile to think on thy extremities,
Thy woes were countless for thy wicked deeds,
Thy sister's death need not increase the count,
For thou couldst never number them before:
Gentles help out with this suppose I pray,
And think it truth for Truth doth tell the tale.
Merry by law convict, as principal,
Receives his doom, to hang till he be dead,
And afterwards for to be hanged in chains:
Williams and Rachel likewise are convict
For their concealment, William's craves his book,
And so receives a brand of infamy.
But wretched Rachel's sex denies that grace,
And therefore doth receive a doom of death,
To die with him, whose sins she did conceal.
Your eyes shall witness of their shaded types,
Which many here did see performed indeed:
As for Fallerio, not his homely weeds,
His beardless face, nor counterfeited speech,
Can shield him from deserved punishment:
But what he thinks shall rid him from suspect,
Shall drench him in more waves of wretchedness,
Pulling his son into relentless jaws,
Of hungry death, on tree of infamy:
Here comes the Duke that dooms them both to die,
Next Merry's death shall end this Tragedy.
Where is that Siren, that incarnate fiend,
Monster of Nature, spectacle of shame,
Blot and confusion of his family,
False seeming semblance of true-dealing trust,
I mean Fallerio bloody murderer:
Hath he confessed his cursed treachery,
Or will he stand to prove his innocence.
We have attached Fallerio gracious Lord,
And did accuse him with Pertillo's death:
But he remote, will not confess himself,
Neither the means, nor author of the same,
His mighty vows and protestations,
Do almost seem to plead integrity,
But that we all do know the contrary.
I know your error strikes your knowledge blind,
His seeming me, doth so delude your mind.
Then bring him forth, to answer for himself,
Since he stands stoutly to deny the deed:
His son can witness, that the dying man,
Accused Fallerio for his treachery.
Stand forth thou close disguised hypocrite,
And speak directly to these articles,
First, didst thou hire two bloody murderers
To massacre Pertillo in a wood?
I never did suborn such murderers,
But ever loved Pertillo as my life.
Thy son can witness to the contrary.
I have no son to testify so much.
No, for his gravity is counterfeit,
Pluck of his beard, and you will swear it so.
Have you no son? doth not Alenso live?
Alenso lives, but is no son of mine.
Indeed his better part had not his source,
From thy corrupted vice affecting heart,
For virtue is the mark he aimeth at.
I dare be sworn that Sostrata would blush,
Shouldst thou deny Alenso for thy son.
Nay did she live, she would not challenge me,
To be the father of that hapless son.
Nay, than anon you will deny yourself,
To be yourself, unjust Fallerio.
I do confess myself, to be myself,
But will not answer to Fallerio.
Not to Fallerio, this is excellent,
You are the man was called Fallerio.
He never breathed yet that called me so,
Except he were deceived as you are now.
This impudence shall not excuse your fault,
You are well known to be Fallerio,
The wicked husband of dead Sostrata,
And father to the virtuous Alenso,
And even as sure as all these certainties,
Thou didst contrive thy little nephews death.
True, for I am nor false Fallerio,
Husband, nor father, as you do suggest,
And therefore did not hire the murderers:
Which to be true acknowledge with your eyes.
How now my Lords, this is a miracle,
To shake off thirty years so suddenly,
And turn from feeble age to flourishing youth.
But he my Lord that wrought this miracle,
Is not of power to free himself from death,
Through the performance of this sudden change.
No, were he the chiefest hope of Christendom,
He should not live for this presumption:
Use no excuse, Alenso for thy life,
My doom of death shall be irrevocable.
Ill fare his soul, that would extenuate
The rigor of your life confounding doom:
I am prepared with all my heart to die,
For that's th'end of humane misery.
Then thus, you shall be hanged immediately,
For your illusion of the Magistrates,
With borrowed shapes of false antiquity.
Thrice happy sentence, which I do embrace,
With a more fervent and unfeigned zeal,
Than an ambitious rule desiring man,
Would do a gem bedecked Diadem,
Which brings more watchful cares and discontent,
Then pomp, or honour, can remunerate:
When I am dead, let it be said of me,
Alenso died to set his father free.
That were a freedom worse than servitude,
To cruel Turk, or damned Infidel:
Most righteous judge, I do appeal for justice,
justice on him that hath deserved death,
Not on Alenso, he is innocent.
But I am guilty of abetting him,
Contrary to his majesties Edict,
And therefore death is meritorious.
I am the wretch that did suborn the slaves,
To murder poor Pertillo in the wood,
Spare, spare Alenso, he is innocent.
What strange appeal is this, we know thee not,
None but Fallerio is accused hereof.
Then father get you hence, depart in time,
lest being known you suffer for the crime.
Depart, and leave thee clad in horror's cloak,
And suffer death for true affection:
Although my soul be guilty of more sin,
Then ever sinful soul were guilty of:
Yet fiends of hell would never suffer this,
I am thy father, though unworthy so:
Oh still I see these weeds do sear your eyes:
I am Fallerio, make no doubt of me.
Though thus disguised, in habit, countenance,
Only to scape the terror of the law.
And I Alenso that did succour him,
'gainst your commandment, mighty Sovereign:
Ponder your oath, your vow, as God did live,
I should not live, if I did rescue him:
I did, God lives, and will revenge it home,
If you defer my condign punishment.
Assure yourselves you both shall suffer death:
But for Fallerio, he shall hang in chains,
After he's dead, for he was principal.
unsavoury Worm wood, Hemlock, bitter gall,
Brings no such bad, unrelished, sour taste,
Vo the tongue, as this death boding voice,
Brings to the ears of poor Fallerio.
Not for myself but for Alenso's sake,
Whom I have murdered by my treachery:
Ah my dread Lord, if any little spark,
Of melting pity doth remain alive,
And not extinguished by my impious deeds,
Oh kindle it unto a happy flame,
To light Allenso from this misery;
Which through dim death he's like to fall into.
That were to overthrow my soul and all,
Should you reverse this sentence of my death:
myself would play the death man on myself,
And overtake your swift and winged soul,
Ere churlish Charon had transported you,
Unto the fields of sad Proserpina.
Cease, cease Fallerio, in thy bootless prayers,
I am resolved, I am inexorable,
Veswio, see their judgement be performed,
And use Alenso with all clemency:
Provided that the law be satisfied.
It shall be done with all respectiveness,
Have you no doubt of that my gracious Lord.
Here is a mercy mixed with equity,
To show him favour, but cut off his head.
My reverend father, pacify yourself,
I can, and will, endure the stroke of death,
Were his appearance near so horrible,
To meet Pertillo in another world.
Thou shouldst have tarried until nature's course
Had been extinct, that thou over grown with age,
Mightst die the death of thy progenitors,
'twas not thy means he died so suddenly,
But mine, that causing his, have murdered thee.
But yet I slew my mother, did I not?
ay, with reporting of my villainy,
The very audit of my wickedness,
Had force enough to give a sudden death:
Ah sister, sister, now I call to mind,
Thy dying words now proved a prophesy,
If you deal ill with this distressed child:
God will no doubt revenge the innocent,
I have dealt ill, and God hath ta'en revenge.
Now let us leave remembrance of past deeds
And think on that which more concerneth us.
With all my heart thou ever wert the spur,
Which pricked me on to any godliness:
And now thou dost endeavour to incite,
Me make my parting peace with God and men:
I do confess even from my very soul,
My heinous sin and grievous wickedness,
Against my maker many thousand ways:
Ab imo cordis I repent myself,
Of all my sins against his majesty:
And heavenly father lay not to my charge,
The death of poor Pertillo and those men,
Which I suborned to be his murderers,
When I appear before thy heavenly throne,
To have my sentence, or of life or death.
Amen, amen, and God continue still,
These mercy moving meditations.
And thou great God which art omnipotent,
Powerful enough for to redeem our souls:
Even from the very gates of gaping hell,
Forgive our sins, and wash away our faults;
In the sweet river of that precious blood,
Which thy dear son did shed in Golgotha,
For the remission of all contrite souls.
Forgive thy death my thrice beloved son.
I do, and father pardon my misdeeds,
Of disobedience and unthankfulness.
Thou never yet wert disobedient,
Unless I did command unlawfulness,
Ungratefulness did never trouble thee,
Thou art too bounteous thus to guerdon me.
Come let us kiss and thus embrace in death,
Even when you will come bring us to the place:
Where we may consummate our wretchedness,
And change it for eternal happiness.
Now sister Rachel is the hour come,
Wherein we both must satisfy the law,
For Beech's death and harmless Winchester:
Weep not sweet sister, for that cannot help,
I do confess fore all this company,
That thou wert never privy to their deaths,
But only helpest me when the deed was done,
To wipe the blood and hide away my sin,
And since this fault hath brought thee to this shame,
I do entreat thee on my bended knee,
To pardon me for thus offending thee.
I do forgive you from my very soul,
And think not that I shed these store of tears,
For that I price my life, or fear to die,
Though I confess the manner of my death,
Is much more grievous than my death itself;
But I lament for that it hath been said,
I was the author of this cruelty,
And did produce you to this wicked deed,
Whereof God knows that I am innocent.
Indeed thou art, thy conscience is at peace,
And feels no terror for such wickedness,
Mine hath been vexed but is now at rest,
For that I am assured my heinous sin:
Shall never rise in judgement 'gainst my soul,
But that the blood of Iesus Christ hath power,
To make my purple sin as white as Snow.
One thing good people, witness here with me,
That I do die in perfect charity,
And do forgive, as I would be forgiven,
First of my God, and then of all the world:
Cease publishing that I have been a man,
Trained up in murder, or in cruelty,
For fore this time, this time is all too soon,
I never slew or did consent to kill,
So help me God as this I speak is true:
I could say something of my innocence,
In fornication and adultery,
But I confess the justest man alive
That bears about the frailty of a man,
Cannot excuse himself from daily sin,
In thought, in word, and deed, such was my life,
I never hated Beech in all my life,
Only desire of money which he had,
And the inciting of that foe of man,
That greedy gulf, that great Leviathan,
Did hall me on to these calamities,
For which, even now my very soul doth bleed:
God strengthen me with patience to endure,
This chastisement, which I confess too small
A punishment for this my heinous sin:
Oh be courageous sister, fight it well,
We shall be crowned with immortality.
I will not faint, but combat manfully,
Christ is of power to help and strengthen me.
I pray make haste, the hour is almost past.
I am prepared, oh God receive my soul,
Forgive my sins, for they are numberless,
Receive me God, for now I come to thee.
Nay shrink not woman, have a cheerful heart.
ay, so I do, and yet this sinful flesh,
Will be rebellious 'gainst my willing spirit.
Come let me climb these steps that lead to heaven,
Although they seem the stairs of infamy
Let me be mirror to ensuing times,
And teach all sisters how they do conceal,
The wicked deeds, of brethren, or of friends,
I not repent me of my love to him,
But that thereby I have provoked God,
To heavy wrath and indignation,
Which turn away great God, for Christ's sake.
Ah Harry Williams, thou wert chiefest cause,
That I do drink of this most bitter cup,
For hadst thou opened Beech's death at first,
The boy had lived, and thou hadst saved my life:
But thou art branded with a mark of shame,
And I forgive thee from my very soul,
Let him and me, learn all that hear of this,
To utter brothers or their masters miss,
Conceal no murder, lest it do beget,
More bloody deeds of like deformity.
Thus God forgive my sins, receive my soul,
And though my dinner be of bitter death,
I hope my soul shall sup with Iesus Christ,
And see his presence everlastingly.
The Lord of heaven have mercy on her soul,
And teach all other by this spectacle,
To shun such dangers as she ran into,
By her misguided taciturnity:
Cut down their bodies, give hers funeral,
But let his body be conveyed hence,
To Mile-end green, and there be hanged in chains.
See here the end of lucre and desire
Of riches, gotten by unlawful means,
What monstrous evils this hath brought to pass,
Your scarce dry eyes give testimonial,
The father, son; the sister, brother brings,
To open scandal, and contemptuous death.
But here come they that wrought these deeds of ruth,
As if they meant to plot new wickedness:
Whether so fast, you damned miscreants?
Ye vain deluders of the credulous,
That seek to train men to destruction.
Why we will on, to set more harms a float,
That I may swim in rivers of warm blood,
Outflowing from the sides of Innocents.
I will entice the greedy minded soul,
To pull the fruit from the forbidden tree:
Yet Tantal like, he shall but glut his eye,
Nor feed his body with salubrious fruit,
Hence stigmatics, you shall not harbour hear,
To practise execrable butcheries:
myself will bring your close designs to light,
And overthrow your wild conspiracies,
No heart shall entertain a murderous thought,
Within the sea embracing continent,
Where fair Eliza Prince of piety,
Doth wear the peace adorned Diadem.
maugre the worst, I will have many hearts,
That shall affect my secret whisperings,
The chink of gold is such a pleasing cry,
That all men wish to hear such harmony,
And I will place stern murder by my side,
That we may do more harms than haughty pride.
Truth, now farewell, hereafter thou shalt see,
I'll vex thee more with many tragedies.
The more the pity, would the heart of man,
Were not so open wide to entertain,
The harmful baits, of self-devouring sin,
But from the first unto the latter times,
It hath and will be so eternally,
Now it remains to have your good advice,
Unto a motion of some consequence,
There is a Bark that's newly rigged for sea,
Unmanned, unfurnished with munition:
She must encounter with a greater foe,
Then great Alcides slew in Lerna Lake,
Would you be pleased to man this willing bark,
With good conceits of her intention,
To store her with the thundering furniture,
Of smoothest smiles, and pleasing plaudiats,
She shall be able to endure the shock,
Of snarling Zoilus, and his cursed crew,
That seeks to sink her in reproaches waves,
And may perchance obtain a victory,
'gainst curious carps, and fawning Parasites:
But if you suffer her for want of aid,
To be o'erwhelmed by her insulting foes,
Oh then she sinks, that meant to pass the flood,
With stronger force to do her country good:
It resteth thus, whether she live or die,
She is your Beadsman everlastingly.