Our heavenly blessing, be with you every one
All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.
Here still to tarry, I think it be your mind.
My office ye know, is to instruct Mankind.
Than God be with you, we leave you here behind.
THe law in effect, is a teacher general
What is to be done, and what to be laid aside
But as touching me▪ the first law natural
A knowledge I am, whom God in Man doth hide
In his whole working, to be to him a guide
To honour his God, and seek his neighbours health
A great occasion, of peace, and public wealth.
A sore charge I have, Mankind to oversee
And to instruct him, his lord God to obey
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my duty
That he be pleased and Man brought to a stay
His brittle nature, his slyppernes to way
Moche doth provoke me, but if God set to his hand
He shall do full well, for none may him withstand.
He cometh in singing.
Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. buy brom buy buy. bromes for shoes and powchrynges, boats and busayus for new bromes. Brom, brom, brom.
Marye God give ye good even
And the holy man saint Steven
Send ye a good new year
I would have brought ye the pax
Or else an image of wax
If I had known ye here.
I will myself so handle
That ye shall have a candle
When I come hither again
At this your sudden mooyon
I was in such devotion
I had near broke a vain.
That might have done ye smart.
No, no it was but a fart
For pastime of my heart
I would ye had it forsooth
In syroppe or in sowse
But for noyance of the house
For easement of your tooth,
Now have I my dream in deed
God send me weal to speed,
And sweet saint Antony
I thought I should meet a knave
And now that fortune I have
Among this company.
Why dost thou call me knave?
I said I would be your slave
If your grace would me have
And do your work anon.
I would so rub your boats
The roof should from the roots
When ye should do them on.
Thou art disposed to mock
Sun mayst thou have a knock
If thou with me so game.
Your mouth shall kiss my dock
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?
I am the law of Nature
I thought so by your stature
And by your ancient gature
Ye were of such a nature
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately
And now ye are his bailie
Mankind to rule discreetly
Welcome sir huddyp●ke.
If thou use such villainty.
I shall displease the truly.
By the mass, I the defy
With thy whole Cukoldrye
And all that with the hold.
Why dost thou me blaspheme
And so ungodly dame?
For by this blessed book
I wend ye had been a Cook
And that made me so bold,
For a Cook ones, having age
With a face demure and sage
And ancient to behold.
As you have here in place
With a beard upon your face
What is he but a Cook old?
Ye are disposed to dally.
To leap and oversallye
The compass of your wit
I counsel ye yet in season
Somewhat to follow reason
And gnaw upon the bit.
Then after our great madness
Let us fall to some sadness
And tell me what ye intend.
God sent me unto Man
To do the best I can
To cause him to amend.
Such creatures as want reason
My rules obey each season
And that in everyborder
The son and moan doth move
With the other bodies above
And never break their order.
The trees and herbs doth grow
The sea doth ebb and flow
And varieth not a nail
The floods and wholesome springs
With other natural things
Their course do never fail.
The beasts and birds engender
So do the fishes tender
According to their kind
Alonely man doth fall
From good laws natural
By a froward wicked mind.
Now will I prove ye a liar
Next cosynto a friar
And on the gall ye rub
Ye say they follow your law
And vary not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tub.
The sun once in the clyppes
Away the clearness slips
And darkened is the day
Of the planets influence
Ariseth the pestilence.
To many one's decay.
Doth not the sea forage
That none can it assuage,
And swallow in town and street
The air which giveth breath
Someyme infecteth to death
By his most pestilent heat.
The beasts of undemure
Which were left to man's cure
Will him sometime devour
Thus are you rulers forgot
As things of slender note
In Creatures day and hour.
It is the will of God
To use them as a rod
Of his just punishment
When Man doth not regard
The lord nor his reward
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh
But when God doth Man punish
For his unhappiness
From God they never fall.
Nor from laws natural
Doing his business.
And you are the same law
That kept them under awe
By your most politic wit?
God hath appointed me
Mankind to oversee
And in his heart to sit
To teach him for to know
In the Creatures high and low
His glorious majesty
And on his name to call,
Or power celestial,
In his necessity.
To think him everlasting
And wonderful in working
And that he createth all
Both govern and conserve
From them he never swerve
That to such faith will fall.
In deed here is good sport.
But why do you resort
Unto this present place?
Man always to exhort
To seek all health and comfort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice
And than with open voice
To worship him alone
Knowledging his deity
His power and eternytie
When he shall make his moan.
I shall keep ye as well from that
As my grandam kept her cat
From licking of her cream.
What wilt thou keep me fro?
Tell me ere thou farther go
Me think thou art in a dream.
From causing of Mankind
To give to God his mind
Or his obedience.
What is thy name? tell me.
Marye infidelity
Which never will agree
To your benevolence.
Thou canst not keep me from man.
Yet I will do the best I can
To trouble ye now and than
That ye shall not prevail
I will cause idolatry
And most vile sodomy
To work so ungracyouslye
Ye shall of your purpose fail.
I defy the wicked find
With thy whole venomous kind
God putteth now in my mind
To flee thy company.
Ye are so blessed a Saint
And yourself so well can paint
That I must me aquaynt
With you no remedy.
Avoid thou cruel enemy
I will none of the truly
But shurne thy company
As I would the devil of hell.
And are ye gone indeed?
Small wyttam be your speed.
Except ye take good heed
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work such mastery
By crafts and subtle policy
The law of nature to poison
With pestilent idolatry
And with most stinking sodomy
That he shall have no foison
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The devils own kytchyu slaves
That them I can not see
I conjure you both here
And charge ye to appear
Like two knaves as yebe.
Ambo is a name full clean
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clerk.
By Terragramaton
I charge ye appear anon
And come out of the dark
Have in than at a dash
With swasshe merry annetswasshe
Yet may I not be to rash
For my holy order's sake.
Nor I son by my troth
Tha cau●●a courage of sloth
And such a cumbrous caught.
Yeh wot not what to do.
At Christmas and at Paske
Ye may dance the devil a mask
Whiles his great cauldron place
you such a pretty minion
And you now in religion
Such two I never saw
Is not thy name idolatry▪
Yes, an wholesome woman verily,
And wallsend in philosophy
men's fortunes she can tell
She can by saying her ave marye
And by other charms of sorcery
Ease men of the loth ake by and bye
Yea, and farche the devil from hell
She an c●nyike the Cow and hunt the fox
And help men of the ague and pox
So they bring money to the box
When they to her make mdne.
She can fetch again all that is lost
And draw drink out of a rotten post
Without the help of the holy Ghost
In working she is alone.
What sometime thou wert an he.
Yea, but now yeh am a she
And a good mydwyfe perdie
Young children can Icharme▪
With whisperings and whishings
With crossings and with kissings
With blazings and with blessings
That spirits do them no harm.
Then art thou like to Clysthenes.
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules
Which themselves oft transformed
Into a woman's likeness
With agility and quickness
But they had venus sickness
As writers have declared.
Let her tell forth her matter.
With holy oil and water
I can so cloyne and clatter
That I can at the latter
Many sutelties contrive
I can work wiles in battle
If I do ones but spittle
I can make corn and cattle
That they shall never thrive.
When ale is in the fat
If the Oruar please me not
The cast shall fall down flat
And never have any strength
No man shall ton nor bake
Nor meat in inseason make
If I against him take
But lose his labour at length.
Their wells I can up dry
Cause trees and herbs to die.
And slay all pullerye
Where as men doth me move
I can make stoles to dance,
And earthen pots to prance
That none shall them enhance
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plough
And also for the cough
She shall give milk enough
So long as I am pleased
Apace the myl● shall go.
So shall the credle do
And the mustered querne also
No man therewith diseased.
Than art thou for me fit.
The woman hath a wit
And by her gear can sit.
Though she be somewhat old?
It is mine own sweet bully
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelover and my cullye
Yea mine own sweet heart of Gold.
I say yet not to bold.
Peace fondelinge, tush a button
What wilt thou fall to mutton?
And play the hungry glutton
Afore this company?
Rank love is full of heat
Where hungry dogs lack meat
They will dirty puddings eat
For want of beef and conye.
Heyghe minion for money
As good is draff as honey.
When the day is hot and sonnye,
By the blessed road of kent.
say forth your mind good mother
For this man is none other
But our own loving brother
And is very well content.
I never miss but palter
Our blessed ladies psaulter
Before saint Savours altar
With my beads once a day
And this is my comoncast
To here Mass first or last
And the holy frydaye fast
In good time mought I it say.
With blessings of Saint Germyne
I will me so determine
That neither for nor vermin
Shall do my chickens harm
For your gese seek saint Legearde
And for your ducks saint Leonarde
For horse take Moses' yard
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkin folte
With the bias of a bolt
For the healing of a folte
No better thing can be
For lamps and for botts
Take me saint Wylfrides' knots
And holy saint Thomas lots
On my life I warrande ye.
For the cough take Iudas ●are
With the paring of a pear
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy
Three syppes are for the hyckocke
And. vi. more for the chyckocke
Thus my pretty pyckocke
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber
give Oats unto saint Un●umber
And beans in a certain number
Unto saint Blaze and saint Blythe
give onions to saint Cutlake
And garlic to saint Cyryake
If ye will shurne the head ache.
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a sheeps tyrdle
And good saint trances girdle
With the hamlet of an hyr●le
Are wholesome for the pyppe
Besides these charms afore
I have feats many more
That I keep still in store
Whom now I over hip.
It is a sport I trow
To heat how she out blow
Her witchcrafts on a row
By the Mass I must needs smile.
Now I pray the let me know
What sedes that thou canst sow
Mankind to overthrow
And the law of nature beguile.
Myself I so behave
And am so vile a knave
As nature doth deprave
And utterly abhor
I am such a vice truly
As God in his great rye
Did punish most terribly
In Sodom and in Gomorr▪
In the flesh I am a fire
And such a vile desire
As bring men to the mire
Of fowl concupiscence.
We two together began
To spring and to grow in man,
As Thomas of Aquyne scan
In the fourth book of his sentence.
I dwelled among the Sodomytes
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes
And now the popish hypocrites
Embrace me every where
I am now become all spiritual
For the clergy at Rome and over all
For want of wives to me doth fall
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I did so move
That they the daughters of men did love
Working such ways as did not behove
Till the flood them over went.
With Noes son Cham I was half joined
When he is drunken father scorned
In the Sodomytes I also reigned.
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Man not unacquainted
When he on the ground his increase shed
For me his brethren Ioseph accused
As Genesis doth tell
David once warned all men of us two.
Do not as mules and horses will do.
Confounded be they, that to images go
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiell
Both H●etemy and Daniel
Of us the abominations tell
With the prophets everychou
For us two God struck with fire and water
With battle, with plagues, & fearful matter
With painful ertle, than at the latter
Into Egypt and Babylon.
As Paul to the Romans testify
The gentiles after idolatry
Fell to such be stiall sodomy
That God did them forsake
Who followeth us as he confess
The kingdom of God shall never possess
And as the Aparalyps' express
Shall sink to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles
Thamiras, Nero, Agathocles
Tiberius and Iristoteles
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fuluius
Semiramis and Hortensius
Crathes Hyliscus, and Pontius
Beasts to abuse most monstrously.
Marry thou art the devil himself
If ye knew how he could pelf
Ye would say he were such an elf
As none under heaven were else.
The fellow is well decked
disguised and well necked
Both knave bald and pypecked
He lacketh nothing but help.
In the first age I began
And so perseverde with man
And still will if I can
So long as he endure
If monkysshe sects renew
And popish preestes continue
Which are of my retinue
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marriage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hid,
Men know what hath betid
When they have been in apparel
Oft have they buried quick
Such as were never sick
Full many a proper trick
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall
Both bishop and cardinal
Monk, friar, priest, and all
More rank they are then ants
Example in hope Iulye
Which sought in his fury
Two lads, and to use them beastly.
From the cardinal of Nautes.
Well, you two are for my mind
Step forth and do your kind
Leave never a point behind
That may corrupt in man
The law writ in his heart
In his flesh, do thy part
And his soul so pernart
Do thou the best thou can.
Here have I pretty gins
Both brooches beads and pins
With such as the people wins
Unto idolatry
Take thou part of them here
Beads, rings, and other gear
And shortly the begete
To deceive Man properly
Take this same staff and scrip
With a God here of a chyppe
And good beldame forward hip
To set forth pilgrimage
Set thou forth sacramentals
Say dyrge, and sing trentals
Study the pope's Decretals
And mixed them with buggerage
Here is a stole for the
A ghostly father to be
To here, Benedicite
A box of cream and oil
Here is a purse of relics
bags, rotten boves, and sticks
A taper with other tricks
Show them in every soil
I will corrupt God's Image
With most unlawful usage
And bring him into dotage
Of all concupiscence.
Within the flesh thou art
But I dwell in the heart.
And will the soul pervert
From God's obedience.
Spare none abomination
Nor detestable fashion
That man's imagination
By wit may comprehend
To quicken our spirits among
Sing now some metysonge
But let it not be long
least we to moche offend.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram formasti laicos, da quesumus, ut sicut corum sudoribus divimus, ita corum uxoribus filiabus et domicellis perpetuo frui mereamur. Per domin● nostrum Papam,
Now are these horesons forth
It will be somewhat worth
To see how they will work
The one to poison the heart
The other the outward part
Ingeniously will luck.
The law of Nature they will
Infect, corrupt and spill
With their abomination
idolatry with wickedness
And sodomy with filthiness
To his most utter damnation.
These two will him so use
Each one in their abuse
And wrap it in such evil
That by their wicked cast
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now underneath her wings
idolatry hath kings
With their nobility
Both dukes, lords, knights and earls
Fair ladies with their pearies
And the whole communalty.
Within the bounds of sodomy
Doth dwell the spiritual clergy
Pope, cardinal and priest
Nun, canon, Monk and friar
With so many else as do desire
To reign under Antichrist.
Detesting matrimony
They live abominably,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I tell ye farther news?
It Rome for Prelates are stews
Of doth kinds. This is just.
The law of nature I think
Will not be able to wink
Against the assaults of them
They having so high prelate's,
And so many gteat estates
From hens to Ierusalem.
Pause now a little while
Mine ears doth me beguile
If There not a sound
Yon folk hath sped I guess
It is to by the Mess
Away now will I round.
I think ye marvel, to see such alteration
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure
O me it cometh not, but of mannes operacion
Whom daily the devil, to great sin doth allure
And his nature is full brittle and unsure
By him have I got this fowl disease of body
And as ye see here, am now thrown in a lepry.
I wrought in his heart, as God bade tr●estlye.
Him oft provoking, to love God over all
With the inner powers, but that false idolatry
Hath him perverted, by slayghtes diabolical
And so hath sodomy, through his abuses carnal
That he is now lost, offending without measure
And I corrupted to my most high displeasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusions bestial
That they daily use, which boast their chastity
Some at the altar, to incontyvencye fall
In confession some, full beastly occupied be
Among the close nuns, reigneth this enormity
Such children s●eythey, as they chance for to have
And in their prevyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christian rulers, see ye for this a way
Be not illuded, by false hypocrisy
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
permit priests rather, God's lawful remedy
Than they should i●c●r●●, most bestial sodomy
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorish kingdom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodom
With Man have I been, which hath me thus defiled
With idolatry, and unclean sodomy
And worthy I am, from God to be exiled
Pity me yet lord of thy most bounteous mercy
I will forth and mourn, till thousende remedy
Promise haste thou made, to a glorious lybercie
To bring heaven & earth, them wilt thou (I trust) restore me.
THe lord perceiving, his first law thus corrupted
With unclean vices, sent me his law of Moses
To see him for sin, substancyallye corrected
And brought in again, to a trade of godliness
For I am a law of rygout and of hardness
I straightly command, and if it be not done
I threti●, I curej, and slay in my anger soon.
To God I require a perfect obedience
condemning all sache, as do it not in effect
I show what sin is, I but den sore man's conscience
To him am I death, when his life is infect
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him direct
forgiveness to have, with like health and salvation.
least he shuloe despair, and fall into damnation.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastime quoth a, I know not the time nor when
I did laghe so moche, sense I was an honest man
Believe me and ye will, I never saw such a sport
I would ye had been there, lie might have made the fort.
Where wouldest thou have had me, tell me good brother mine.
At the Mynorasse sir, late yester night at compline.
At the Mynorasse? why what was there a do?
For such an other, would I to Southampton go
In deed yesterday was their dedication
And thither in God's name, came I to see the fashion
An old friar stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
beginning this Anteme, a my faith, I do not gloze.
Cupides preciosi.
And what did follow of this?
I shall tell ye by God's bliss
Then came Dame Isbell an old Noun and a calpe
Crowing like acapon, and thus began the Psalm.
Sepe expugnauetun● me a iuuentute 〈…〉
And what includeth this mystery?
A simple problem of bytcherye
When the friar begun, afore the Nun
to sing of precious stones
From my youth saith she/ they have comfort me
As it had been for the nonce
I assure the plain, I set not by such gauds
Thy usage show thee, to be brought up among bauder
It was a good world, when we had such wholesome stories
Preached in out church, on sundays and other feryes
With us was it in●rye
When we went to bury
And to our lady of grace
To the blood of hails
Where no good cheer fails
And other holy place.
When the pryestes might walk
And with young wives talk
Than had we children plenty
Then Cuckolds might leap
A score on a heap
Now is there not one to twenty.
When the Monks were fat
And rank as a rat
With bellies like a Boar.
Then all things were dear
Both beef, bread and bear
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When bishops might burn
And from the truth turn
The syllye simple soul.
Than duties no man creak
Open mouth nor speak
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
No we are the knaves bold
With Scriptures to bold
And teach them every where
The carter, the souter
The bodger, the clowter
That all will away I fear.
At us so they pull
Our livings are dull
We are now like to fall
If we do not fight
For the churches right
By the Mess we lose all.
But I pray ye sir, tell me what is your name▪
The law of Moses, to lie were I to blame
In the same parties, what do you intend?
Mankind to reform, that he his life amend
I show what sin is, & what thing pleaseth God
I comfort the just, and the ill, I punish with rod
The common people, have thought it commodious
divers Gods to have, with rites superstitious.
My commandment is, to seek one God alone
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan
Among the gentiles, was it thought none injury
If a man were hurt, to slay his adversary
This thing I forbid, and say, thou shalt not kill
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordynatlye love
Those are persuaded, all things them to behove
Which I inhybyte, saying continually
No rape shalt thou do, nor yet commit advouteye
Thou shalt do no theft, nor covet that is not thine
Against thy neighbour, shalt thou not falsely define.
We may do nothing, if we be pinned in thus
Neither you nor God, to that hard trade shall bring us
We must have one God, and worship him alone
Matye that in deed, would make a Turk to g●●ne
If we be stricken, we may not strike again?
Aprope●●●gyne▪ and dyscretlye unto r●d playne
For companies sake, ye say we may not love
I defy your worst, and to you there is my glove.
What? thou wilt not fight thy wits are better than so.
In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your four.
Thou were much better, to keep thy patience.
Nay by cocks soul frynd, I must lay ye on the coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may soon have m●a for are
Nay but have at your py●ch●, defend ye if ye may.
Such a fool art thou, as seeks thine own decay
If I once meddle, to thee, it will be death
didst thou never here, that law slayeth in his wrath.
By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.
Why what part wilt thou play?
By cocks soul give over, so soon as I feel smart
It will be to late, it I one scupple with the
Then let me alone, and we shall soon agree
And I shall be glad to be acquainted with ye.
Acquaintance good fellow, thou mayst soon have of me
The worst fault I have, I am hasty now & than
But it is soon gone, I took it of a woman
But what mean those tables, that ye have in your hand.
Keep silence a while, and thou shalt understand
Three things I declare, the first are the precepts moral
Next, the laws judicial, and last the rites ceremonial
The moral precepts, are God's commandments ten
Which ought evermore to be observed of all men
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare
And the pleasant works, to God they teach & prepare
They stir man to faith & provoke him also to love
To obey, to serve, and to worship God above
Into stony tables, God wrote them first of all
That they should remain, as things continual▪
The first hath but three, which tend to God's high honour,
Seven hath the second, & they concern our neighbour.
The first doth expound, the first law natural
The next the other, making them very formal
Inspryt● it the first, that we should God honour and love
To outward working the second doth us move
For●ydoynge all wrongs preserving just marriage
nourishing true peace, and other godly usage.
What is the effect, of your laws judyciall?
Such things to command, as are civil or temporal
From vice to refrain, and outward injury
Quiet to conserve, and public honesty
These are to support, the laws of the second table
ceremonial rites are also commendable
In holy days, garments, temples & consecta●ions
sacrifices & vows, with offerings and expi●acions
Which are unto Christ, as figures, types, & shadows
As Paul doth declare, in his Epistle to the Hebrues
These are only figures, and outward testimonies
No man is perfect, by such dark ceremonies
Only pertain they, unto the third commandment
Of the Sabbath day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death ending, the whole judicial priesthood.
Good days might ye have, ye speak full well by the rood.
I am a poor lad, and by my troth bent earues●lye▪
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackye.
What art thou called, I pray the heartily.
Graye friar am I none, by the Mess I can not flatter.
I am infidelity, to tell the truth of the matter.
And hast thou so long dissembled thus with me?
Yea, for advantage to smellout your subtlety.
Avoid hens I say, thou false infidelity.
Nay that I will not, by yngham trinity.
Wilt thou not in deed, than will I fet hither the power
Of judges & kings, to subdue the within this hour.
Such knights will I have, as shall confound them all▪
Is Saducees & scribes, with the sect pharysaycal●
By help of my children idolatry and Sodomye
The law of Nature, I cast ones in a lepry
I have yet two more, ambition & Coneytousnes
Which will do as much to the law of Moses
Where are my whoresons, that they come not away.
Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array
I will thou know it, I am a worshipful Doctor
A Scribe in the law, and a profitable proctor.
gup with a vengeance, how comest thou so aloft.
I shall tell the man, if thou wilt comen more solte
By feigned flatterye, and by coloured adulation
ambition here also, rose of a like foundation.
Come, are me blessing, pretty boys apace
I will not bow sure▪ to such a foolish face.
Axe blessing I say, and make me no more ado.
Unsemely were it, we Prelates should do so.
For no compulsion will I do it by sweet Marye.
I must fetch ye in, there is no remedy
A naughty horsons, have I brought ye up hitherto?
And know not your father, ye shall drink both ere I go
No more at this time, forsooth we cry amercye.
Down on your knees than, & axe me blessing shortly.
Bless me gentle father, for sweet saint charity.
Arise noughtyknaves, God let ye never to the
Though among ourselves, we murmure, brag, & face
Sometime for lucre, sometime for the higher place
Yet for advantage, in this we all agree
To blind the rulers, and deceive the commonalty.
Art advised of that, by the Mess we are in deed
Yet of our knaveries, the foul & will nevertake heed.
To labour with a spade
Our colour would it fade
We may not with that trade
We love so much our ease
We must live by their sweat,
And have good drink and meat
When they have not to eat
The substance of a pease.
We lead them in the dark
And so their conscience mark
That stutdye they are and stark,
In every wicked evil
We teach idolatry
And laughed full merely
To see each company
Run headlongs to the devil.
Ifwe may have the tithings
And profitable offeryages
We came not to what doings
They customably fall
We are such mercenaries
And subtle proprietaries
As from the flock all carries
The wolle, skin, flesh and all.
In our perambulations
We look for commendations
And lowly salutations
In temple, house and street.
Our lousy latin hours
In boroughs and in bowers
The poor people devours
And tread them under feet.
I am ambition, whose bysposycyan
Is honour to appete
I gape for empire, and worship desire
As Minos did in Crete
I look up Aloft, and love to lie soft
Not caring for my flock
Have Iones the fleece, with pigs, lambs, and gese
They may go turn a Sock.
Lucifer I made, so highly to wade,
To God he would be equal
Of Adam and Eve, I slew the believe
And caused them to fall
What need I rehearse, the giants most fierce
With the builders of Babel
Nemrod the tyrraunt, with them there applyaunt,
Agreed to my counsel.
From me would not go, cruel Pharaoh
No more would Amalech
Saul, Achitophel, Absolon, Iesabel
Nor Adonisedech.
I made Roboam, and Hierobeam
With Nabuchodovosor
Triphon, Alchmius, and Simon magus
To abuse them evermore.
Inpryde I exceed, and no people feed
But with lies for advantage
As Mantuane tell, to lead men to hell
Is my most common usage.
High things I attempt, and will in exempt
From princes iurisdition
A am such an enyll, as bring men to the devil
Without any contradiction.
Here is a prelate even for mine own tooth
Such an other is, not in the whole South
Clap thou somewhat more, as thou hast begun
I like weal your talking, by the holy Nun.
I Coutyse am, the bevyll or his dam
For I am insacyate
I ravish and pluck, I draw and I suck
After, a wolvish ra●e.
Father nor mother, Sister nor brother
I spare not in my mood.
I fear neither God, nor his rightful rod
In gathering of good.
But house and meadow, from the poor widow
I spare not forto take
Right heirs I rob, and as bare as Iob
The fatherless I make.
With me took Nadab, Nabal and Achab
With all the clergy of Bell
Iudas and Giezi, with the sons of Hel●
And the sons of Samuel.
Iannes and Jambres, also Diotrephes
Wrought wilful wickedness
So did Menelaus, with false Andronicus
And all for covetousness.
With vices seven, I close up heaven
And spear up paradise
I open hell, by my counsel
Maintaining every vice.
For Silver and gold, with falsehood I hold
Supporting every evil
I have it in awe, for to thoke the law
And bring all to the devil.
By the blessed trinity, no men more fit for me
To do my business.
ambition to beguile, and Avarice to defile
The law of Moses.
Tell me first of all, what wilt thou do ambition.
I am thine own child, thou knowest my disposition
I will sure do, as did the Phylystynes.
Why what did those knaves?
They stopped up Abraham's pits, as Genesis diffynes
With mud and with mire, & left them full unclean
By the same practise, tell me what thou dost mean.
With filthy gloss, and dirty exposition,
Of God's law will I hide, the pure dispositions
The key of knowledge, I will also take away
By wresting the text, to the scriptures sore decay.
And what wyste thou, my fellow covetousness?
A veil will I spread, upon the face of Moses
That none shall perceive, the clearness of his countenance
Which is the law, the meaning & true ordinance.
Why what will ye say, unto the ten commandments
We must poison them, with wilworks, & good intentes
Where as God doth say, No strange gods thou shalt have
With Saints worshipping, that clause we will deprave.
And though he command, to make no graved image
For a good intent, yet will we have pilgrimage
Though he will us not, to take his name in vain
With traditions yet, thereunto will we constrain.
No Sabbath will we, with God's word sanctify
But with lip labour, and idle ceremony.
To father and mother, we may owe none obedience
Our religion is, of so so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we hertyckes burnè
If they will not soon from holy Scripture turn
What though it be said, thou shalt do no fornication
Yet will we maintain, much greater abomination
Though theft be forbid yet will we continually
Rob the poor people, through prayer & purgatory
God hath inhibited▪ to give false testimony
Yet we will condemn the Gospel for Heresy.
We should not covet our neighbours house nor wife
His servant nor beast, yet are we therein most rife
Of men make we swine, by the draff of our traditions
And cause them nothing to regard but superstitions
As Dogs unreasonable, on mos●vyle carrion feed
So will we cause them, seek idols in their need.
And always their ground, shallbe for a goodintent
More mischievous I trow, the devil could not invent
Than you two can do, by the Mess ye are alone
little could I do, were ye once from me gone
To the corrupting, of the law of Morses
Go forward therefore, in your deceitfulness
With superstitions, the Iewes ceremonial laws
I will so handle, they shall not be worth▪ two. straws
The laws judicial through cawtels and delays
I will also drown, to all righteous men's decay
To set this forward, we must have sophistry
philosophy and Logycke, as science necessary
The bishops must hold their priests in ygnoraunee
With long latin hours, lest knowledge to them chance
Let them have long matins, long even songs & long Masses
And that will make them as dull as ever were asses
That they shall never be able to prophecy
Or yet preach the truth, to our great injury.
Let the cloisterers be brought up everin silence
Without the Scriptures, in pain of disobedience
See the lay people, pray never but in latin
Let them have their Crede, and service all in latin
That a latin believe, may make a latin soul
Let them nothing know, of Christ, nor yet of powle
If they have english▪ let it be for advantage
For pardons, for Dirges, for offerings & pilgrimage
I teken to make them, a new Crede in a while
And all in english, their conscience to beguile.
Rehearse unto me, the articles of that Crede.
The articles are these, give ear and take good heed
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope
next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then holy church, with fencer, cross and cope
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacramentals
In purgatory then, in pardons and intrentals
In praying to saints, and in saint Frances hood
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed rood
They shall believe also, in relyckes and religion
In our ladies psalter, in free-will and good works
In the ember days, and in the pope's remission
In bedes and in bells, not used of the turkes
In the golden Masses, against such spirits as lurks
With charms and blessings. This creed will bring in money
In english therefore, we will it clerkly convey.
Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe the crede
That into the ditch, the blind the blind may lead.
Then I hold it best, that we always condemn
The Bible readers, lest they your acts contempue.
Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bytar
Expressing always, the tropes and types of thy mitre
Why, what dost thou think, my mitre to signify.
The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by & by
If thou stoop downward, lo, see how the wolf doth ga●e
Ready to devour the lambs, least any escape
But thy woluyshnes, by three crowns will I hide
Making the apope & a captain of all pride
That when thou dost slay, such as thy laws contemn
Thou mayst say, not I, but the powers did them condemn
The cables betoken, the laws of se non & cannon
I trow thou wouldest say, the. two. laws civil & Canon
As I spoke I thought, & still think by saint Iohan
Yea, persecute still the instructors of the people
And thou covetousness, let no bell ring in steeple
Without a profit. tush, take money every where
So nigh clyppe and shave, that thou leave never a here
I caused the Pope, to take but now of late
Of the grey friars, to have a canonyzate
Franciscus de pola, three thousand ducats and more
And as much besides/ he had not long afore
For a cardinal hat, of the same holy order
Thus draw we to us, great goods from every border
Pope Clement the seventh paid once for his papacy
Three hundred thousand, good ducats of lawful money
I marvel how he could come to so much good.
Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedding Christian blood.
Crosers and Mytars, in Rome are good merchandyce
And allto little, to maintain their pomp and vice
The pope for whoredom, hath in Rome and Uiterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substance yearly
Tush they be in England that much rather would to dwell
Whores in their dioceses, than the readers of Christ's Gospel.
They do the better, for by them they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night
Well, now step forward, and go do your business
To the corrupting, of the law of Moses.
Doubt not but we shall, make him a crepple blind.
Sing then at our farewell, to recreate our mind.
Now am I left alone, And these. two. merchants gone
Their mischief to seclude
I think within a while, they will trap and beguile
The worthy law of jude.
ambition first of all, with his rites bestial
Will make the people swine
In draff will he them lead, and with traditions feed
Where they shall sup or dine
covetousness will work, that many one shall bark
Like dogs against the truth
Some shall gods word defile, and some will it revile
Such beastliness ensueth.
Ambition hath this hour, all the whole spiritual power
And may do what him lust
Now covetousness doth rule, & hath both horse & mule
All matters by him dyseust
Now bysshopryt●es are sold, & the holy ghost for gold
The pope doth buy and sell
The truth may not be told, under pains manifold
With sendings down to hell
The people priests do famish, and their goods from them ravish
Yea and all the world they blind
All princes do they mock, and rob the sellye flock
Nothing they leave behind
On the face of Moses, a veil they have cast doubtless
The light of the law to hide
Lest men to christ should come, from ceremonies dumb
As to their heavenly guide
The law can never be, at any liberty
Where such two enemies rain
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk
When I come hither again.
If pity may move, your gentle christian hearts
Let it now stir ye, to mourn this heavy chance
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked parts
And left me stark blind, God knoweth to my sore grievance.
And I think also to your moth hindrance
To lead you to Christ, sometime a guide I was
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, alas.
Most rigorously those enemies now of late
Did fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight
One was ambition, which ever ought me hate
And Coveyeousnesse, the other enemy height
Now forsooth and God, iutheyr most cruel spite
The one made me blind, the other made me lame
And when they had done, thereat they had great game.
Thus a blind cryple, I wander here alone
Abiding the time and grace, of restoration
By the son of God, to whom I make my moan
My cause to pity, and grant me supportation
Lest I be left here, to utter desolation
And extreme decay without any remedy,
If he did not help of goodness and of mercy.
Ye christian princes, God hath given you the pour
With sceptre and sword, allvyces to correct
Let not ambition, nor covetousness devour
Your faithful subjects, nor your officers infect
Have to your clergy, a diligent respect
And see they do not corrupt the laws of God
For that doth require, a terrible heavy rod.
God gave me to man, and left me in tables of stone
That I of hardness, a law should specify
But the Pharisees, corrupted me anon
And took from me clean, the quyueru●s of body
With clearness of sight, and other pleasures many
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore
To more perfection, than ever I had afore.
un faithfulness hath, corrupted every law.
To the great decay, of Adam's posterity
were it not for me, which now do hither draw
All flesh would perish, no man should saved be
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallible verity
Such a power of God, as saveth all such as believe
No burden nor yoke, that any man will grave.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgiveness
Where faith is grounded, with a sure confidence
I am such a grace, and so high tidings of, gladness
As raise the sinner, and pacify his conscience.
I am spirit and life, I am necessary science
I require but love, for man's justification
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation.
God's benison have ye, it is joy of your life
I have heard of ye, and of my mistress your wife.
If thou hardest of me, it was by the boyle of God.
Nay, he that spoke of ye, was telling of a God
In an Oystre boat, a little beyond queen hythe
A Northern man was he, & he besought ye to be blithe
If he spoke of me, he was some godly preacher.
Nay sir by the roode, nor yet a wholesome teacher.
After what manner dydhe speak of me? tell.
He swore like a man, by all contents of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he did swear & swear again.
That speaking is such, as procureth eternal pain
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And it so damnable, to hear it I am sorry
But what didst thou mean, whan thouspakest of my wife?
Nothing, but I thought it was joy of your life
That ye were so good to your neighbours as ye are
Why, how good am I? thy fantasy declare.
Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear
When ye are abroad, there is fine merycheare.
As thou art, thou speakest after thy hearts abundance
For as the man is, such is his utterance.
My wife is the church, or christian congregation
Regenerate inspyryte, doing no vile operation
Both clean and holy, without either spot or wrinkle
The lamb with his blood, did her wash & bespryncle.
This is not the church, of disguised hypocrites
Of apish shavelings, or papistical Sodomytes
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lime and stone
But a lyvysh building, grounded in faith alone
On the hard rock Christ, which is the sure fosidation
And of this church, some do reign in every nation
And in all countries, though their number be but small
Their number is such, as hath run over all
The same Danes are they, men prophecy of plain
Which should over run this realm yet once again.
What Danes speakest thou of? thy meaning show more clearly.
Dane Iohan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane Harrye.
The same are those Danes, that lay with other men's wives.
And occupied their lands, to the detriment of their lives.
These are accounted, a great part of the church
For in God's service, they honourably wurche
yelling and crying, till their throats are full sore.
That Church was describe, of Esaye long afore
This people (saith God) with their lips honour me
In vain worship, they teaching men's fatuyte
Apparent is that church, and open to the eyes
Their worshippings are, in outward ceremonies
That counterfetchurch standeth all by men's traditions
Without the scriptures, & without the hearts affections
My church is secret, and evermore will be
Adoring the father, in spirit and in verity
By the word of God, this church is ruled only
And doth not consist, in outward ceremony
This congregation, is the true Church militant
Those counterfeit Desardes, are the very Church malignant.
To whom Christ will say, I know none of your sort
Moche are they to blame, that brethren so report
Such are no brethren, but enemies to Christ's blood
As put salvation, in shaven crown mitre, or hood.
I pray ye how long, have your sweet spouse continued
Sens the beginning, and now is in Christ renewed.
Adam did promise, of Christ's incarnation
So had Abraham, with his whole generation
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel
Into salvation, and deliverance from hell.
By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?
She is not barren, but beareth and never cease
The Corinth's first epistle, hath this clear testimony
In Christo Iesu, per Euangilium vos genui
I have begot you, in Iesu Christ saith Powle
By the Gospel preaching, to the comfort of your soul.
Than are ye a ouckolde, by the blessed holy mass
As I said afore, so cometh it now to pass
For I am a prophet, by high inspiration led
Now like I myself, much better than I did
Ye say that saint Paul, begat your wife with child.
By misunderstanding, thou art ungraciously beguiled
An only minister, was paule in that same doing
That he therein did, was by the gospel preaching
His mind is the Gospel, to have done that operation
And this must thou hold, for no carnal generation.
Marry so they say, ye fellows of the new learning
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wyving.
Nay they forsake whoredom, with other dampnableusage
And live with their wives, in lawful marriage
Whiles the pope's oiled swarm, reign still in their old buggerage
Yeà, poor married men, have very much a do
I count him wisest, that can take a snatch and to go?
Thou seemest one of them, that detesteth matrimony▪
Which is afore God, a slate both just and holy.
Of such as thou art, saint Paul did prophecy
By the holy Ghost, that a certain company
In the latter days from the truth of God should fall
Attending to spirits, of error diabolical
Which in hypocrisy, will teach lies for advantage
With marked conseyences, inhabiting marriages
Thou apperest by thy fruits, to be infidelity
I am none other, but even the very he
And hither now come I, to commenthe matter with ye
Avoid cursed fiend, and get the out at the gates.
Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your mates
And hence will I not, for this place is for me
Who should here remain, but I infidelity?
Well, than for a time, I must depart from hens
But this first will I say, before this andyens
Easier will it be, concerning punishment
To Sodom and Gomor, in the day of judgement,
Than to those Cities, that resist the verity
At the suggestions of infidelity.
That people will be forever and ever lost
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed
Then came his son Chryst, & made it more manifest
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme damnation will fall
No prayer remaineth, nor expiration for sin
To them that no profit, of the word of God will win.
Take good heed therefore, & say that ye have warning
God send your mother, of you to have a fondeling.
By the mass I think, he is well out of the way
Now will I contrive the drift of an other play
I must work such ways, Christ's law may not continue,
In a while am I like, to have none else of my retinue
Come anyons I have, to begin this tragedy,
Namely false Doctrine, and his brother hypocrisy
They will not belong, I suppose now verily
By cocks soul me think, I see such a company
Him, I say children, will not my voice be heard
As good is a beck, as is adieu vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own companions both
Thou shalt have a livery of the same cloth,
Gramatcyes by God, my old friend infidelity.
What brother su●psuap, how go the world with thee▪
What, friar ●●ypflap, how say ye to, Bendicite?
Marry nothing but well, I cry now advantage
At her purse or arse, tell me good friar fuccage?
By the Mess at both for I am a great penytensar
And sit at the pardon, tush I am the pope's own vicar
If thou lackest a piece, I know where thou mayst be sped
With choice of a score, and brought even to thy be●▪
Art thou not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?
No, for it is such gear, as the holiest of us will have
Pope, cardinal, bishop, monk, canon priest & friar,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.
Our orders permit us not, to have them in marriage
No, but ye fatche them in, by an other carriage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.
By the Mess I laugh, to here this whoreson prate▪
What fashion use ye, to us here intimate.
Ego distingue, whither ye will have Lions or Paris.
Of them both to show, it will not be far amiss▪
In Paris we have, the mantel of saint Lewes
Which women seek moche, for help of their barrenness.
For be it once laid, upon a woman's belly
She go thence with child, the miracles are seen there daily
And besides all this, ye would marvel in confession
What our fathers do, to assoil them of transgression
Iohan Thessecelius, assoiled a young woman ones
Behind the high altar, till she cried out of her bones
And as for lions, there is the length of our lord
In a great pillar, she that will with accord
Be fast bound to it, and take such chance as fall
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all
Tush, I could tell ye, of moche more wondre than this
In course to hear them, I think ye would ye bliss.
As thou hast begonne, go forwarde in it and te.
Such a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.
In our religion, was an holy popish patriarch
Which of all bawdry, might be the great monarch.
The Nuns to confess, he went from place to place
And two hundred of them, he broached in that space
Many spices he eat, his courage to provoke
Such a fellow was he, as of that gear had the stroke
Now somewhat will I tell, to confirm thy tale withal
In king ferdinand's time, in Spain was a cardinal
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean
Of lemans he had, great number besides the queen
One of his bastards, was an earl, an other was duke
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Ioannes Cremona an other good cardinal
For reformation, of the clergy spiritual
Came once into England, to damn priests matrimony
And the next night after, was taken, doing bytcherye
Doctor Eckius also, which fiercely came to dispute
In ●psia with luther, minding there him to confute.
For marriage of pryestes, three children ●ad that year
By this may ye see, that sometime we make merry cheer
Marry that do ye, I shall bear ye record now
But how will ye answer, for breaking of your vow.
We never break vow, so long as we do not marye
Though we in whoredom, be never so bold and busy.
By your order then, ye may walk moche at large
What hast thou hypocrisy, to lay for thy discharge
Saint Frances habit, with the holy girdle & hood
Nove can go to hell, that therein die by the rood
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide
For I teade of one that should have gone to the devil
But the spirits of hell, could do no him no evil.
Till saint Frauces came, & look from him this cowl
Then went he to hell, the friars did here him howl.
I will therefore serve S Frances, with heart and mind
With daily memories, that he may be my friend
And than I care not for all the devils in hell
That I have told you, is more true than the Gospel.
Then are ye more sure, than monks for your heritage
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for advantage.
Yet is it to them, a very pleasant thing
Their Abbot at home, to be called lord and king.
Nay monk and churl, for here ●s no king but one,
If he be a king, his mace is a marry bone
And his crown a cowtorde, such knaves as come from the cart
Must be called kings, for playing a popish part.
It becometh not thee, the romish pope, so to lurch
considering he is the highest of the church.
If he be the highest, than is he the Wethercock
Ah, now I pertain, thou art disposed to mock
Of all holy Church, he is the principal head.
Marry that is true, he sendeth out bulls under lead
And he hath two ways, the one to open hell
The other speaketh heaven, thus do new heretics tell
They report also that Dogs have no devotion
To his holy laws, nor his old instruction.
Why should dogs hate him? make that more evident
They love no p●se portege, nor yet red herrings in lent
Steckfysshe nor oysters, but curse him body and bone
And would his red sprottes, & rotten fish were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that maketh me full sad.
Either thou dost mock, or else thou art sure mad.
There the people complayve very moche of the.
What is their prattling, I pray the heartily tell me.
They say thou teachest, nothing but lousy tradictons.
And lies for lucre, with damnable superstitions
And thus they conclude, that the draff of popish prysies
Is good enough for Swine, by whom they do mean the Papystes.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all
To most bile carrion, the dogs will soon fall
Than do they compare, the papists unto dogs.
Marye that do they, and to such swynies she hogs
As in swyllandsosse, are brought up all their life
such are the Papists, they say both man and wife
They say also, that thou art a naughty knave
By prowling and lying, ye friars would all have
Thine order they say, is sprung even out of hell
And all this knowledge, they have now of the Gospel.
Why, where is he now, I beseech the heartily tell.
By the mess abroad, & I warrande ye maketh revel.
I commoned with him, and he did us despise
Against him therefore, somewhat we must devise.
Marry that must we, or else it will be wrong
He will sure destroy us▪ if we do suffer him long
Needs must we serve him, as we once served Christ.
Why mad brained whoresons, how did ye handle Christ
As he preached here, we followed from place to place
To trap him in snare, and his doctrine to deface
Than found we the means, to put him so to death
least he against us, should open any more breath
And we set four knights, to kept him down in his grave
That he never more, our living should deprave.
And thus must we serve the Gospel, no remedy
Else will he destroy our livings perpetually.
Better one were lost, than we should perish all
As Cayphas once said, in Counsel pharisaical.
By god well said, when ye have him in his grave
Stamp him down, till he shit, & serve him like & knave
We must so order him, that he go no more at large.
Four knights wyllwe hire, whom we shall streyghtlye charge.
To keep him down hard, the first are ambitious Prelates.
Then covetous lawyers, that God's word spite fuliye hates.
Lords without learning, and justices unrightful
These will keep him down, & rap him on the skull.
Their Summoner's and their scribes, I warrande ye shall steer
With baylyurs and catchpoles, to hold him down every where
I trow Rug & Corbet, at Norwitch will do their part
With wharton of bongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.
And I will raise up in the universities
The seven sleepers there, to advance the pope's decrees
As Dorbell and Duns, Durand & Thomas of Aquyne
The master of sentens, with Bachon the great deuyue
Henricus de Gandavo, and these shall read ad cletum.
Aristotle and Albert, de secretis mulierum
With the Commentaries, of Auicen and Aueroyes
And a Phoebo Phebe, which is very good for boys
Yea and let the pope, as Gods own Uicat here
In his hand▪ iii. crosses, &. three crowns on his head were
His power betokening in heaven, in earth, & in hell
That he may command all kings, & subdue the gospel
His self may do that he need command none other
Is not he the head of the holy church out mother
May not be make sayuts & devils at his own pleasure
Which hath in his hands, the keys & church's treasure
So well as he made saint Herman first a saint
And twenty years after, of Heresy him attaint.
first he sent him to heaven, by his canonization
And from thence to bell, by avexcommunycation
We read of formosus, that after he was dead
One pope his fingers, another cut of his head
And threw his Carcase, into the flood of Tiber
With the head and fingers, as Platina doth remember
In token that he, is judge over quick and dead
And may damn and save, by his pardons under lead
Sylvester the second, to the devil himself once gave
For that high office, that he might damn and save
He offered also his stones to Satan, they say
For priests chastity, and so went their marriage away
Here is one coming, inquire what he intend.
Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God us defend.
Show me brother mine, who did the hither send.
The father of heaven, of his mere beuyu●lence
I desire therefore, of free audience.
Ye mind than to preach afore this company?
In the laws of God, would I instruct them gladly
For none other way, there is unto salvation
But the word of God, in every generation
That qayckeveth, that saveth, that bringeth unto heaven.
As before his death, Christ taught the Apostle eleven.
Preach here thou shalt not, without the authority
Of pope or bishop, or some of their affynytie.
God's word, never taketh his authority of man.
Thou shalt not here preach, do thou the best thou can.
God's blessing on your heart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye knowethis day sir, we have a full holy feast
And must go procession, with the blessed rood of rest
We have longe matins, longe laudes, longe hours, long prime.
Mass, evensong, compline, & all must be done in time
Sensing of the Altars, and casting of holy-water
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.
Have God commanded any such things to be done
What is that to thee? go meddle with old shone
Canst thou say, but they are good significations?
I say they are fruits of your imaginations.
To bring in luere, and darken Gods high glory.
Of you God doth axe, no such vain beggary
Christ never sent his, to she we significations
But his living word, to all the Christian nations
Ye forsake the Lord, as Esaias doth tell
And highly blaspheme, the holy of Israel.
In his first chapter, this horrible sentence is
Quis hec frusteanea quesivit, be manibus Bestris,
Who hath required, of yousuche sacrifice
In vain offer you, that unto manded service
Your incense to me, is great Abhomyvation
I sore abhorred it, and moche detest your fashion
When ye pray to me, I give ye none attendance
But avert my face (saith God) & my countenance
By this ye may see, that the lord doth not regard
your maugre muttering, neither grant it any reward
No man willeth Paul, to speak in the congregation
In a strange language, without interpretation.
In your latin hours, the flock do ye not consider
But declare yourselves, to be Romish all together
Be not led about (saith Paul, by any strange letuing
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popish thing?
He testifieth also, Non enim ut baptizatem
Dis●t tu● Christue, sed ut Euangeliz●rem.
Christ hath not me sent, that I should baptize, saith Paul
But to preach his word, to the comfort of man's soul
Loo, though baptism be a thing very necessity
yet must it give place, to God's word, no remidye
Why than preferreye, your draffies she ceremonies
To the gospel preachyuge, O dampuable injuries.
Why suffer ye him, to prattle here so long?
Get the hence shortly, or with thee, it will be wrong.
Peace be here and God, master Doctor by your leave
That I may declare, a pardon here in my slene
Of our Lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Iohannes Frarye
With the indulgence, of blessed saint Antonye
Well, take thy pleasure, and do it hardly.
Sir he doth me wrong, for this day it is my station
To preach my brotherhood, and gather my limitation
Who first spoke, first speed, step forth and read thy pardon
And when he hath done, your course is, father warden.
What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel
I would thy Gospel, and thou, were both now in hell
Why and shall this baggage, put by the word of God
Thou wilt not be answered, till thou feel a sharper rod
Good Christian people, I am come hither berelye
As a true poctour, of the house of saint Antony
Of clean remission, I have brought ye indulgence
A pena et culpa, for all your sin and ●ff●ure
By the Authority of pope Leo and pope Clement
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Iohan, and pope Innocent.
And here I bless ye, with the wing of the holy ghost
From thunder to save ye, and from spirits in every coole
Lo, here is a bell, to hang upon your hog
And save your cattle, from the biting of a dog
So many as wyllcome, to this holy frater●ytie
Come pay your money, and ye shall have letters of me
Let me have a letter, for I will be a brother
Then give me a bell, for I will be an other.
O damnble leadyuge, of babylonical sodomytes
Yourselves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrites
Lord pity thy people, and take away these guides
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homicides
Such prophets are they, as God did never send
As Heir my saith, they damnable ways pretend.
Woe hypocrites woe, for here ye tryfie and mock
With christian people, & the kingdom of heaven up lock
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ hath bought
With his precious blood, & here most dearly sought
O ye are wretches, and pestilent Antichristes'
ministers of Dagon, and most deceitful papists.
Like tavenouse Wolves, poor Widows ye devour
By title of prayer▪ eternal damnation is your
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter moche more weighty
Ye do not esteem, as judgement, faith, and mercy
Woe Pharyses woe, ye make clean outwardly
But inwards ye are full, of coveytousues & bawdry.
Painted tombs are ye, apryenge tight beautiful
But within ye stink, & have thoughts very shameful
Ye slew the prophets, your doing yet bear witness.
How think ye to avoid, that point of unrighteousness
Oh raging serpents, and vyperouse generation
How can ye escape, the danger of damnation
Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? an heretic art thou sure
If due search were made, we should find thee (I think) no priest
Yes, anointed of God, but no popish Antichrist.
Let me see, where are the letters of thy ordres?
Where Chryste his self is, & not in the same borders
No such priest am I, as is anointed with oil
But the holy Ghost, for I am none of this soil.
Here I attach thee, for a buysye scismatyke
And will the accuse, for an heinous heretic
Say hands upon him, & deprive him of this apparel
Hic best spotiatum sordidioribus induunt.
Loo, thus will I handle all them, that shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this gear, and lay it forth aside.
Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shalt thou not slide
I am not going, why dost thou slander me?
But ne him to ashes and show to him no pity.
Brent shall he not be, if he will no more do so.
Fellow how sayest thou? wilt thou here abjure or no?
I will neither abjure, nor yet recant God's glory.
I offered the reason, and thereto thou wilt not applied,
Well get the forward for thou shalt sure die
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire
At our Accusement, and holy religious desire.
Thought you for my sake imprison men cruelly
Famysshe them, stock them, and them with faggots fry
Hurt me ye shall not, for I can never die
And they for my sake, shall live perpetually.
Here is a prating, with a very vengeance hennce.
This horrible hetetycke, now shall we well recompense
Yea, hurne him well friar, and let him no longer reign
Say on grieve faggots, to put him to more pain
By the mess I laugh, to see how this ge●e doth work
He is like of them, to have no more gra●r than a turke
For such knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find.
And take over hell, companions they are to my mind
My business all, is now at good conclusion
That I have brought these. three laws to confusion
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceably
And make frolic cheer, with hay how frysfa Iolye
The law of Nature, I cast first in a lepry
By the secret help, of idolatry and sodomy.
The law of Moses, I made a cripple blind
Avarice and ambition, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have brout for heresy
By help of false doctrine, and my cousin hypocrisy
On these same three laws, all other laws depend
And can not prevail, now these are at an end.
If Christian governors, do not these laws uphold
Their Cyuple ordinances, will soon be very cold
Well, this valiant George, hath made them all to stoop.
Cheer now may I make, and set cock on the hoop
Fill in all the pots, and bid me welcome hostess
And go call me hither, mine own sweet minion Bess▪
QUid gloriaris in malicia? qui potens es in iniquitate.
Thou vengeable wretch, replete with poison and vice
Why dost thou thus, rejoice in cruelty and maiyte?
thinkest thou that God sleepeth, & will not his defend
And that thy mischief, shall never have an end
The blood of Innocentes, to him for vengeance call
And therefore this hour, must I fiercely upon the fall
Thou spirit of the air, I straygtly conjure the here
By Panton & Craton, and charge the to come no near.
thinkest thou to stop me, with thy foolish consuration
Whom God sendeth hither, for thy abomination.
What art thou called? thy name to me rehearse.
I am Uindicta Dei, in punishment most fierce,
With water, with sooerde, and with fire I must thee pierce
Be good in thy office, & thou shalt have money & meat
By filthy rewards, thou canst not me entreat
But that I will do, as God hath me commanded
For if worldly gifts, my fury might have changed
The buyvetfall world, had been drowned with water
Nor Sodom & Gomor, with so fiery fearful matter
Nor yet the Israelyties, with terror of the sword
With hunger & pestilence, in the anger of God's word
Pharaoh in Egypte, the plagues had never felt
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for gold
Into Egipte I brought, ten terrible punishments
Upon the people, for breaking his commandments
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood
I multiplied frogs, to poison therewith their food.
I made wasps and Dranes, them grievously to sting
And all kinds of flies, soon after did I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the fowl pestilence
Both botch, bile, and blain, they had for their offence
lightenings and hailings, destroyed their Corn and fruit.
A swarm of hungry locusts, their pastors destitute
The space of three days, I gave them palpable darkness
I slew the first gotten, of man and beast, for thy rudeness
For I never strike, but for the infidelity.
Strike for me quoth ●? By the marry Mass I defy them
What thou wilt not so, thy brains are not so light
Anger me not to much, for if thou do, I fight
All that will not help, thy wicked workings now
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thou hast, with a lepry.
Nay, it was not I, but that witch idolatry
And that polled shorn knave, that men call sodomy
Of whom syronge they first? but of infidelity?
Therefore thou shalt have, that plague of penalty
Which they first tasted, for their Iniquity
For those two vices, I drowned the world with water
In token whereof, I plague thee, with the same matter.
Hic Infidelitatem ●●●●pha percutit,
Tusshe, I defy thy worst, this shall not drive me hē●●
For after the flood, with Cham had I residence
And so continued, till Moses' law came in
With his jolly tricks, a new rule to begin
And him thou cortuptest, with Avarice and Ambition
And so didst leave him in miserable condition
Thou shalt have therefore, that than to them was due
Most terrible battle, the Israelties untrue
That time did suffer, for their infidelity
Wherefore with this sword, I justly banish the.
Because thou shalt here, give place to Christ's gospel
Gladio Infidelitatem denuo cedit.
Yet will I not hence, but again one's rebel.
Did not I remain, with Iudas, and other more?
When Christ preached here, and taught them to very him sore.
Yes, and after that, was I with Simon Magus
With Saunder Coppersmyth, with Elimas and Demetrius.
And now I persever, among the rank rabble of Papists
teaching their shearlings, to play the Antichriste●●
The Innocent blood, of saints continually
Doth all unto God to revenge their injury▪
Against false doctrine and cursed hypocrisy
Whom thou hast raised the glory of the Gospel
To darken, and his friends most miserably to quell.
Wherefore thou shalt have like as thou hast deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy punishment now doubled.
Ignis ipsum precedet. The Prophet David saith thus.
Atque inflammabit in citcuitu inimicos eiue.
A consuming fire, shall run before the judge
His enemies consuming, they shall find no refuge.
Ob scesera et culpas hominum, titusque nephandes
In cineres ibit tissus, tenuimque favillam
As Mantuan writeth, for the wickedness of the
The earth to ashes, by fire, shall turned be.
Ignis flamnia Infidelitatem 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 coget.
Credo, credo, credo. I say, credo, credo, credo,
To the denill of hell, by the Mess I ween I go.
As we have seen here▪ how I have stricken with fire
The pestilent vice of infidelity
Sowyll I destroy, in the fierceness of my●tyre▪
All sects of error, with their enormity
Which hath risen out of that iniquity
For as it is said, that my hand hath no set
Shall up by the root, no power may it let.
The Apostle Iohan, in the Apocalypse doth say
He saw ● new he even, and a new earth appearing
The old earth and see, were taken clean away
That heaven is man's faith, that earth his understanding.
Whom we have renewed, by our most sexxet working
The old cavered earth, exiling with the see
Which is superstition, and infidelity.
A new Jerusalem, the said Iohn also see
As a beautiful 〈…〉 to her husband
Our ●●ue faithful church is that same fair City
Whom we 〈…〉, by the power of our right hand
As a spouse to Christ, in every Christian land
the decrees, of babylonical popery
Thatche in spirit, may walk to our glory.
three laws, for you will I clere also
Of such infections, as by infidelity
Ye have reciyved, that ye with her may go
Declaring the ways, of Christian liberty
she may take, 〈…〉
For her only God, and be our people still
In our laws walking, according to our will.
At your commandment, we are most blessed lord,
Approach nyghar than, and ye shall be restored.
Thou law of Naturewe first begin with the
restoring the again, to thy first purity
Avoid idolatry, Avoid vile sodomy.
We charge ye no more, this law to putrefy
Keep still that same heart for a sign perpetual
That thou wert written, in man's heart first of all.
Thou law of Moses▪ give me that veil from the
No longer shalt thou, neither blind nor crooked be
Hence thou ambition, and cut said covetousness
I here banysche you, from this law ever doubtless
Lose not those tables, which are a token ture
That thou in the flesh, shalt ever more continue.
Thou law of the Gospel, though thou be last of all
In operation yet, thou art the pryacypall
From the I exile, hypoetysye and false doctrine
With all that depend, upon the papisticall●yne
Reserve the came book, for a sign of heavenly power
For the book thou art, that Iohn from headuen did devour.
Everlasting praise, to thy glorious majesty.
Our heavenly governor, great is thy gracious pity,
Of mankind thou art, the eternal felicity.
Now leavest thy servants, in thy perpetual peace
To do the service, from hence, will we notcease.
For your eyes have seen, what thou hast now prepared
For thy people's health, which hath benhere declared.
A light thou hast sent, which is thy joyous Gospel
To the consolation of the house of Israel.
In rejoice of this, make we some melody.
The name of our God, to praise and magnify.
I assent thereto, and will sing very gladly.
Hic ad Dei gloriam canta●unt. In exitu Israel de Aegipto, ●●l aliud simile.
Now have we destroyed, the kingdom of Babylon
And thrown the great whore, into the bottomless pit
Restoring agayae, the true faith and religion
In the Christian church, as we have thought it fit
Depuring these laws, so to continue it
Man is our creature, and hath grace in our sight
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delight.
Man is our people, his God we are again
With him will we have, continual residence
A way will we wipe, from all sorrow and pain
He shall no longer despair, for his offence
Nor have in his soul, any carefuldoubte of conscience
The old popyshnes is past, which was dampuation
We have now renewed, our Christian congregation.
Stand forth Christian faith, and take our advertisement
We here appoint thee, to govern our congregation
See thou do nothing, without the admonishment
Of these three laws here, Imprynt their declaration
Of my sweet promises, and than make thou relation
To my folk again, that they may walk to me
Without popish dreams, in a perfect liberty.
Most heavenly maker, in it thoudoest command me
Evermore will I, full prompt and diligent be.
Thou law of Nature, shalt teach man God to know
And thatto refuse, whereby any ill may grow.
From this your precept, shall I not vary I crow▪
Teach thou him also, to worship one God about
And his proper neighbour, to persecute with love.
I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behove.
And thou shalt teach him, to love God in his heart.
And those to forgive, by whom he sufferethsmarte.
In your appointments, will I do also my part.
Work thou in the heart, a knowledge necessary
In the flesh, work thou, by outward ceremony.
Change thou notto the spret▪ ● workings of these two
And cause our people, in a perfect way to go
Take heed christian faith, to the teachings of these three
And move our people, to walk in the verity.
The promises we made, in all these three are Gospel
We would thou shouldest so, to our Congregation tell
Our everlasting blessing, be with you ever more.
To thy sweet name lord, be praise & perpetual honour▪
It hath pleased God, to put me in this office
To govern his church, and christian Congregation
And therein do, as ye shall me entice
give me I pray you, such wholesome exhortation
As may be to Man, aclere edification
And I will be glad, to take your adurttyshment
As it shall become, any child obedient.
Ye speak it full weal, than mark what shallbe said
And diligently, look that it be obeyed.
The effect of me, is for to know the lord
everlasting, strong, most gracious and godly
And as touching Man, to have fraternal concord
F 〈…〉 r to nourish, and to do non injury
To 〈…〉 ●●uenasites made, and love true matrimony
These noble effects, so temper you in man..
That them to fulfil, he do the best he can.
The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
As one God alone, and to fly from Idolatry
Not to flee nor steel, nor yet to bear false record
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy
Public peace to hold▪ and sore to punish the guilty
From these good effects, see that man never soo●rue
then shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.
The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
In the inward spirit, and to favour friend & eumye
And in all points else, with God's will to accord
To preach remission, to save and to justify
In Christ all to se●elyfe, justice, peace and mercy
These heavenly effects, in man so incorporate
That he may in spirit, be newly regenerate.
More sweet than honey, are your three exhortations
And registered they be, in my memorial
Now will I forward, to all the Christian nations
And see in effect, these laws observed all
To the abolishment, of the dreams papistical
Now the light is come, the darkness dieth away
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good Christian people, to these three laws apply
First know that ye have, a living God above
Than do him honour, and his name magnify
Worship him in sprite, as the Gospel you doth move
Than obey your queen, like as shall you behove
For she in her life, that lord doth represent
To safeguard of the just, and sinners' punishment.
See that ye regard, such laws as she doth make
For they are of God, as Solomon doth report
Of these laws doubtless, those laws their groundings take
To the public wealth, to give aid, strength, and comfort
For preservation, of all the christian sort
In no case follow, the ways of ●eygnolde Pole
To his damnation, he doubtless playeth the fool.
Have ● due respect, unto your country native
Which hath brought ye up, and given ye nourishment
Even from your cradles, to these days nutritive
Do that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment
Mynyster to bet, no hateful detriment
A dog to his friend, will never be unloving
Let reason in ye, not lose his natural working.
Who liveth without law, shall perish without law
And therefore we have, three laws to you describe
That after their lives, ye should in your living draw
We have also showed, how they have been corrupted
By fowl Idolaters, and Sodomytes polluted.
By covetous priests, and by ambitious prelate's
Hypocrytall friars, false Doetours and false Cutates
Who hath restored, these same thyr laws again
But your late Iosias, and valiant king Henrye
No prince afore him, took ever yet such pain
England to banish, idolatry & fowl sodomy
covetousness, ambition, false Doctrine & hypocrisy
It was he that brought, Christ's verity to light
When he put the pope, with his filthiness to flight.
damnable darkness, as my brother here doth say
He hath delivered, this realm of England godly
bringing his Subjects, into the true path way
Of their soul's safeguard▪ if they now follow it wisely
And left them he hath, the same way still to fortify
His noble son Edward, such a king of God elect
As questionless, while helyved, did perform it in effect
Pray we to the lord, for the long continuance
Of Queen Elizabeth, in this worlds habitation
And that of her Noblesse, she have true maintenance
In the principles of this most worthy foundation
that she may to Christ, bring us from desolation
And for her noble counsellors, to god let us all pray
That in the true faith, their hearts direct he may.
Loue thy Lord God. Swear thou no oath
Thy sobbeth keep. Please thy friends both.
witness none ill. Hold no man's wife.
Bribe man's good. Slay not with knife
Wysshe no man's house. Nor Ox nor Ass
As thou wilt have. Do thou like case.
BEnedictus dominus, Deus Israel Which hath over thrown, the mighty Idol Bell
The false God of Rome, by power of the Gospel
And hath prepared from the deep lake of hell.
Redemptionem ple●i● suc.
●t erexit cornu, of mercy, health and grace
That cruel Tyrant, now clearly to deface
Whose bloody kingdom, dymynyssheth apace
By the word of God, which lately hath take place.
In Homo David, pueti sui▪
Sicut jocutus est, the Lord celestial
That Romish Antichrist, is like to have a fall
With his whole rabble, of sects diabolical
And now the number, will flourish over all
Prophetatum
Salutem ex inimicis, now we may daily hear
The enemies of Christ, with him doth witness bear
Saul is become a Paul, and preaching every where
Now may we receive, most heavenly wholesome gear
De manu corum qui advocate nos.
Ad faciendam misericodiam
The son of our God, from his high gloryecam
To redeem the sin, of the children of Adam
And to remember, to faithful Abraham
Testamentisui sancti.
Ad iusiurandum, which God hath made afore
Unto our fathers he will keep evermore
Promised he hath if we regard his lore
For saking the Pope, with his damnable store
Daturum se nobis.
Ut sine timore, from Romish tyrants free
The lorde graunt vs grace, that we maye speakers b
Of his holy word, and therein to agree
That in the Gospel and Christian liberty
Seruiam ii.
In sanctitate, and pureness of life
Let us now travail, both maiden man and wife
All tyghtrous doings, in us be ever rife
That we persevet, without debate orstryfe
Omnibus dicbus nostril.
Tupuer Propheta, elected of the lord
Our Queen Elizabeth, to have God's law restored
followest Iosias, therofto take record
In all thy doings, and in God's holy word
Patate via●●iu●.
Ad dandam scicentiam, for men's health and save guard
Christ's holy Gospel, by the is freely heard
Wherein doth cousyst, their life and full reward
With preservation, from dangerous i●oba●dye.
Peccatorum corum.
P●t viscera misericordie
Christ our dear master, us daily ouerse
Lest we here perish, in our iniquity
Our mediator, continually is he.
Orions ex afto.
Illuminare, sweet lord we the desire
To menin darkness, and in the popish mire
Let not his baggage, thy faithful servants tire
But us deliver, from them and from hell fire.
In viam pacis.