WHat thundering power grown jealous of my state,
Which (having daunted th'earth) perchance heaven fears
Thus armed with lightning, breathing flames of hate,
Big with disdain, high indignation bears?
Long smoothed of all, whilst I (pale cares despised)
In fortune's lap asleep, of greatness dreamed,
Even in that calm, my state a storm surprised,
And ere I waked, my ruin was proclaimed;
Thus I, whose only name did terror give
(As Idol of the world,) adored over all,
(With crosses compassed,) such a wretch do live,
That who admired my might, admire my fall;
Ah, then indeed I fell, when gallants stood,
And Phoenix like renewed their lives by death;
Who having sealed their force, and faith, with blood,
Would rather dye, then draw a borrowed breath;
Yet I, not I, did view, not venge (though near)
Those monstrous mountains of my Subjects slain,
Though even my enemies must my courage clear,
Which flames of fury lightened forth in vain;
Through greatest dangers, death I did pursue,
Till heaps of slaughtered bodies barred my way,
And changed my Chariot to a scarlet hue,
Ere wounded honour could be drawn away;
O how I envy yet their happy Ghosts,
Who died whilst hope of victory remained,
And in the presence of two famous hosts,
To praise their valour, even their foes constrained:
Shall I survive that memorable shame,
Which Persia's glory with disgrace confined?
No, rather let me dye, and let my name
As vain, quite vanish, razed from every mind.
Starre-boasting Babylon, all Asia's Queen,
Blush to behold thy King in such a state,
That by the gazing world he now is seen,
(A scorned futer) humbly to entreat;
But not turned vassal, as by power appalled;
Though all my Empire to a period come,
Yet none shall vaunt that ever I was thralled:
Hearts holding courage, are not quite overcome.
Should I whose Sovereignty so oft was sworn,
Be seen submiss to scape a minute's pains,
No, let them bow, who but to bow were borne:
For Darius this indignity disdains,
Since I was once judged worthy to command,
Shall I descend a Subjects state to try?
No, whilst a sword yields homage to this hand,
I scorn to grant a greater man than I.
Brave spirits, who now possess the pleasant bowers,
And glorious Gardens of th'Elysian Plains,
(For, (if deserts may move th' infernal powers)
That happy shade your shadows now contains)
Those fatal fields where I did lead you forth,
Your bodies bury, but enlarge your fames,
Men shall adore the relics of your worth,
And Trophies rear to your immortal names;
I'll sacrifice as Incense to your souls,
His dying sighs, and sorrowing Parents tears,
Who now, whilst none his prospering pride controls,
Our conquered Ensigns in his triumph bears:
For, it may ease your Ghosts to hear his groans,
Whilst burdened earth rebounding back doth send
A wailing echo (raised from woods and stones,)
With wounded words to show that Army's end.
Why spend I speeches to disturb your rest,
As but with words (an idle speaker) pleased?
A mighty fury hath inflamed my breast,
And I will rage's, till by revenge appeased.
Did I that strong Cadusian first affront,
Who durst advance himself to brave our bands,
Then turned applauded, and in high account,
Charged with his spoils, the honour of my hands?
What, could I then (all kind of doubt removed)
Alone adventure to an Army's shame?
And should I now (that ancient praise disproved)
With squadrons compassed, lose that glorious name?
Blind fortune, O! thy stratagems are strange!
Which spoil my power, and stain my honour too,
And (having made my state the stage of change)
Hast acted all was in thy power to do;
Lo, I, who late of swarming troops did boast,
near left alone, have fortunes fraud disclosed;
And those made captives whom I fancy most,
To vaunting Victors are by fates exposed:
O torment but to think, death to believe,
That any may my dearest part annoy,
And I, wretched I, not able to relieve
Mine eyes chief jewel, and my hearts chief joy,
Dear object of my thoughts, my life, my love,
Sweet Spring of my delights, my one, my all,
Bright image of th'excellencies above,
What? dost thou breath, and comest not when I call?
And can I be, and not be where thou art?
Hath heaven the force me from thy face to bar?
Or are my hands grown traitors to my heart?
That they should shrink from doing what it dare:
O! could my mind but distribute a space
Those emulating thoughts which toss my breast,
To pointless cyphers, who but spend a place,
Then I alone might animate the rest;
Since in this great disgrace, I chanced to fall,
Now nothing rests to raise my fame forlorn,
But by some desperate course to hazard all;
I'll live with praise, or by my death fly scorn;
Some prosperous issue afterward may purge
This crime which fortune hath imposed on me,
This crime that carries with itself a scourge:
No greater torment than the want of thee;
But fortune's course, what mortal can restrain,
Who Diadems through dust for sport doth roll?
A stranger now o'er my delights doth reign,
And may extort the treasures of my soul;
Now, not till now, I apprehend my harms,
When I imagine how my best beloved
Must entertain mine enemy in her arms,
And I so far from offering ay de removed;
A host of furies in my breast I find,
Which do my soul with dreadful horrors fill,
Whilst Melancholy musters in my mind
Strange apprehensions that affright me still;
And this surmised disgrace, grown throughly strong,
Reads hourly in mine ears a hateful scroll
Of an imagined, yet a helpless wrong,
Such poisoned thoughts like Serpents sting my soul;
Blind love beguiles me not, sharp sighted fears
With reason fed, do make suspicion live:
Would God that I had neither eyes nor ears,
Which to the heart intelligence might give;
This aggravates the weight of my despair,
When doubt objects to break loves last defence,
How he is young and fierce, she young and fair,
He to offend, she subject to offence;
From wronging me, both cannot long abstain:
Her beauty is sufficient to allure,
His bravery is sufficient to obtain.
Captains will force, and Captives must endure.
O Alexander, tender my renown,
Though thus thou travel to usurp my throne,
I rage's to have a rival in my Crown,
But in my love I can comport with none,
That boundless flame which in thy bosom boyles,
If quenched with aught save blood (as base) I blame:
My fortunes take, but spare her honour's spoils,
Which not thy glory, yet must breed our shame.
But pardon dear that which grieved thoughts burst forth,
More bright thy fame, that darkened is my state,
By many means men may approve their worth▪
A woman only with a wretched mate:
Chast minds still pure, do then most firmly stand,
When fortified with wedlock's sacred band.
Yet let me doubt, or let me leave to love,
To fear the worst it is affection's part:
I doubt not of thy truth; yet it may prove
Thy face betray thy faith, thy hap thy heart;
But on thy worth my confidence relies,
This doth dissolve suspicions power again;
I will repel reports as stand'rous lies,
Which would my judgement, or thy virtue stain.
Though fortune now my ruin doth design,
Yet, with that traitress scorn to be conjured,
She soon may help her fault, thou never thine:
No help for honours wounds, all else are cured.
O More than miserable mind,
Which of all things itself worst knows!
And through presumption made quite blind,
Is puffed up with every wind,
Which fortune in derision blows.
The man no stable bliss can find,
Whose heart is guided by his eye,
And trusts too much betraying shows,
Which make a cunning lie;
Oft short prosperity
Breeds long adversity:
For, who abuse the first, the last o'erthrows.
What thing so good which not some harm may bring?
Even to be happy is a dangerous thing.
Who on himself too much depends,
And makes an Idol of his wit:
For every favour fortune sends,
Selfe-flatterer still himself commends,
And will no sound advice admit,
But at himself begins and ends,
And never takes a moment's leisure
To try what fault he may commit:
But, drunk with froths of pleasure,
Thirsts for praise above measure,
Imaginary treasure,
Which slowly comes, and flies at every fit;
And what is most commended at this time,
Succeeding ages may account a crime.
A mighty man who is respected,
And by his Subjects thought a God,
Thinks as his name on high erected,
Hath what he list at home effected,
It may like wonders work abroad,
O how this folly is detected!
For, though he sit in Royal seat,
And as he list his vassals load,
Yet others who are great,
Live not by his conceit,
Nor weigh what he doth threat,
But plague his pride oft ere he fear therod;
There are rare qualities required in Kings,
A naked name can never work great things.
They who themselves too much esteem,
And vainly vilipend their foe,
Oft find not fortune as they deem,
And with their treasure would redeem
Their error past; bebold even so
Our King of blame doth worthy seem,
His adversary who did scorn
And thought who in his name did go,
The laurel should have worn,
His triumphs to adorn,
But he with shame hath shorn
The fruits of folly ever ripe with woe:
An enemy (if it be well advised)
Though seeming weak,) should never be despis
But what? the Minions of our Kings
Who speak at large, and are believed,
Dare brag of many mighty things,
As they could fly, though wanting wings,
And deeds by words might be achieved;
But time at length their lies to light,
Their Sovereign to confusion brings:
Yet Sovereign to confusion brings:
But charm their Prince's sight,
And make what's wrong, seem right,
Thus ruin they his might:
That when he would, he cannot be relieved,
More Kings in chambers fall by flatteries charms,
Then in the field by th' adversaries Arms.
Lo, though the success hath approved
What Charidemus had foreshown,
Yet with his words no man was moved,
For good men first must be removed,
Before their worth can well be known;
The King would hear but what he loved,
And what him pleased not, did despise,
So were the better sort o'erthrown,
And Sycophants unwise,
Who could the truth disguise,
Were suffered high to rise,
That him who raised them up, they might cast down:
Thus Princes will not hear, though some deceive them,
Things as they are, but as themselves conceive them.
BEhold, the heavens with a benign aspect,
To prosper this brave enterprise intent,
And with propitious Stars seem to direct
This great beginning to a glorious end.
Who would be famous, must of force aspire,
All those (astorished) who my Troops do view,
Doubt of these two, which most they should admire,
My coming, or my conquering with so few;
So mighty minds whilst for great actions bend,
Force fortune oft to favour them in all,
Where breasts more base divining bad event,
Through superstitious fears procure their fall.
O how I wonder, when I call to mind
That monstrous camp, which not so much as doubted,
Dim seemed the sun, while as their armour shined,
Men had not heard the thunder, whilst they shouted.
Avant-couroures advanced to examine,
W en they so mean my numbers had perceived,
Did think them small to satisfy the famine
That their huge host of slaughter had conceived,
And yet in end this proved a poisoned food,
Which of their own to their confusion yields,
Huge mounts of murdered corpses; and seas of blood:
Unburied bodies buried all the fields.
So now, that few whom they contemned so far,
(See how mortality itself deceives)
Have quite o'ermatched their multitudes in war;
And made the world near waste to people graves.
Then, dear Parmenio, since the fates afford
So fair an entry to our first designs,
Let us go follow (lanterned by the sword,)
That fortune which the heavens our hopes assigns.
This high attempt, as we would wish succeeds,
What hosts have we o'erthrown, what Cities razed?
Lo, populous Asia trembles at our deeds,
And martial Europe doth remain amazed;
Greece, (which both Mars and Pallus did defend:)
A humble supplicant before thee falls,
Rebellious Thebes, which durst with thee contend;
Lies now entombed within her broken walls;
That Sea-commanding Tyre, reposing much
In liquid Towers that Neptune reared in vain,
Hath now confirmed thy forces to be such,
That nothing can resist thy just, disdain.
No doubt the ancient Grecians, Ghosts are glad
To see the fierce Barbarians brought so low,
Yet are for envy of thy fortune sad,
And though un-bodied blush at this overthrow:
Miltiades by all men was admired,
Who once in Greece their flying troops pursued,
And he who with a stratagem retired,
And Salamina's straits with blood imbrued;
But yet for all the Captains of that age,
The eastern Monarch's Empire was enlarged,
Who in their Country (flaming all with rage,)
The Sea with ships, the land with Armies charged▪
He with more swarms of men than Autumn's clusters,
Drank Rivers dry, and marched on Neptune's back,
By measure, not by number, made his musters,
Did scourge the winds, strived mountains plains to make;
All Europe feared then to be forced to bow,
Whilst th' earth did groan to bear so great an host,
But thou hast come, seen, and over-comed them now,
Even in the bounds wherein their power was most.
That haughty foe, who vilipended oft
Our predecessors force, and scorned our own,
Now laid as low, as he was once aloft,
With his disgrace, must make thy valour known;
He doth by this acknowledge his distress,
In labouring thus to have his friends restored,
This message (mighty Prince) imports no less,
By his request thy conquest is decored;
For the recovery of his captived Queen,
He offered hath innumerable gold;
A mass so great, that such was never seen,
More (as they brag) than Maccdon can hold:
My counsel is, that you aceept his offers,
And with his daughters render her again,
Who would make war, must not have empty coffers,
Where one for glory, thousands sight for gain;
And if those Lady's guarded Captives stay,
It cost and trouble breeds to fit their state;
Thus more to charge, or charges to defray;
To vex or ease, advise, and not too late.
If come to traffic in a servile sort,
And like a Merchant bend but to embrace
(All else despised) that which might gains import,
Then your opinion purchase might a place:
But soon I surfeit of such melting things,
And famish but for fame, and Crowns of Kings.
If Alexander, I, so would I do.
If I Parmenio were, so would I too.
So you bind Soldiers, let them Dames redeem.
Save thankes, or praise, no treasure I esteem.
Even good proves ill when done unto a foe.
What greater glory then to conquer so?
Gold is the God that conquers in all parts.
True magnanimity doth ravish hearts.
Wars sinews treasures are which most not fail.
Stout breasts, strong hands (not basely given) prevail.
The want of wages makes a mutinous band.
But who dare disobey when I command?
Those are thought fools, who riches do disdain.
A gallant mind likes glory more than gain.
But who delights in such an eiery store:
If I be ●●gular, I seek no more.
The truth by Princes is not understood:
But yet I hear your Soldiers oft exclaim,
That your ambition but ex●●austs their blood,
Who perish all to purchase you a name;
Yet careless what they lose, so you may win,
That like your mind, your kingdom may want bounds,
One battles end, another doth begin,
Whilst you the glory gain, they nought but wounds;
Such rash reports oft blown in every ear,
Do breed base grudge, and lofty tumults too,
When leaving reverence, duty, love and fear,
What dare not mutinous troops attempt to do:
Retire in time while as the heavens are clear;
You have performed, performed, and that even soon,
More than your own could hope, your foes could fear,
Yea (yet more strange) then some can trust, though done;
Your worth in war (as bright as glory) shown,
Which even by envy never could be stained,
Your skill in peace would likewise now be known:
Calm virtue guiding, what stern valour gained:
A State well ruled, the same of Kings doth raise,
No less than fought fields, or battered Towns.
More hard it is, and doth deserve more praise
To guide, then get, to keep, then conquer Crowns:
In Fortune's spheres chief height your glory placed,
Can now not move unless it be more low,
And if it once descend, than quite disgraced,
Each Artisan your Statues will o'erthrow;
For in the war as you may well perceive,
There doth no little part depend on Fame;
If we but once the least small check receive,
The world will gather to procure our shame;
Then tempt not Fortune further than you need,
Your rashly mounting thoughts let reason rain,
Lest whilst your hopes with Trophies feigned you feed,
A moment lose what many days did gain.
Let Darius prove all Monarch's pattern now
(What wand ring Star doth sway the course of Crowns)
That Prince to whom the Orient once did bow,
Him only now his misery renowns.
Scarce moved to call you King, though twice o'erthrown,
At last to match with you he doth agree,
And with his daughter hath for dowry shown
That great Euphrates shall your border be;
Or otherwise he condescends to give
Great store of gold, or what yourself desires
If that his mother, wife, and children live,
To have them rendered, as he oft requires:
And let not lofty thoughts cloud Reasons eyes,
Remember what strange Realms will him embrace,
Which scarce he knows, by name, nor never tries,
Where if he fled, your troops would tire to chase.
Peace, peace Parmenio, now thou makest me rage,
With those thy words not worthy of our ears;
It seems the coldness of declining age
Hath killed thy courage with a frost of fears:
Did I abandon thee my native soil,
And made my Ensigns shadow foreign fields,
As feared for danger, or else flying toil,
That I should turn whilst yet our foe not yields:
Then all my labours, are but lost at last,
Which have but bred an appetite of praise,
That I might dye displeased, the time once past,
When means remained, a state like Jove's, to raise▪
No, I will reign, and I will reign alone,
Disdaining to admit of more Commanders:
For (as the Heavens can hold no Sun but one)
The Earth cannot contain two Alexanders;
The spacious circuit of this peopled Round,
Seems not sufficient to confine my thought,
And, O, would God there could more worlds be found,
That many might to grace our deeds be brought;
O! I could wish that th'ocean were firm Land,
Where none but hideous Giants had retreat,
Such as at Phlegra field in strife did stand
Against the gods for the ethereal seat:
These could encourage martial minds to strike,
Who when subdued, would yield eternal praise.
I conquer men, but many did the like,
And after-ages may my equal raise:
But since none such my triumphs are to grace,
Such as there are, I'll to subjection bring,
And as a pest, I vow to fly all peace,
Till all the world adore me for their King:
Let them retire in time who danger dread,
Yet think on this (whilst glory bend to wed)
That ye abandoned me in time of need,
And that I stayed to fight when as ye fled;
Pass home in darkness, servile rest to find,
I measure not my courage by my numbers.
Your majesty doth much mistake my mind,
You know what I endured, what cares, what cumbers;
And for my part, I to your eyes appeal,
Which well can witness what my hands have wrought.
All what I spoke, proceeded of clear zeal,
And not of cowardice, or fear of aught;
Nor match I vile repose with honest pains,
My courage (ofttimes tried) is not grown cold,
Nor yet that vigour hath not left my veins,
Which spurred my spirit in youth, though I be old.
'tis not enough, that you yourself be so,
To be the same you should the rest exhort;
Is he returned, who was ordained to go
And view the captives? what doth he report?
As we have heard of him who thither went,
While they as yet not of support despaired,
And courteously were led unto a Tent
Which we of purpose caused to be prepared:
Even in the way one fortuned there to spy
The Diadem which Darius ear'st had borne,
(Though glorious once) which low on th'earth did lie;
As erst for pomp, than wondered at with scorn.
Strait they imagined from his Royal head,
Whose dignity it sometime did decore,
None could it cast except himself were dead,
And if so were, they wished to live no more:
When they had entered in the Tent to weep,
Your Servant came, and at the entry knocked,
Who (finding them so quiet) thought a sleep
Had closed their eyes, or else that he was mocked,
At length by force he made a patent way,
And was advanced them lovingly to greet,
When (lo) the Ladies prostrated all lay,
And with a flood of tears bedewed his feet.
Then said (by death expecting to be free)
Let us entomb great Darius like a King;
Then when we first his funeral honour see,
Death must to us a great contentment bring;
This oft they urged, though he attested there
That Darius was not dead (as they supposed)
But lived with hope, his ruins to repair,
And in the power of other Realms reposed.
Then did he urge what comfort and relief
They might attend, depending on your Grace;
Thus having toiled to mitigate their grief,
It seemed they longed to see my Sovereign's face,
I pity still, and not insult o'er such,
(Though once mine Enemies) who are humbled so,
And lest weak fear oppress their minds too much,
To comfort them, strait to their Tent I'll go.
OF all the passions which possess the soul,
None so disturbs vain Mortals minds,
As vain Ambition which so blinds
The light of them, that nothing can control,
Nor curb their thoughts who will aspire;
This raging vehement desire
Of Sovereignty no satisfaction finds,
But in the breasts of men doth ever roll
The restless stone of Sisyph to torment them,
And as his heart who stole the heavenly fire,
The Vulture gnaws, so doth that monster rend them:
Had they the world, the world would not content them.
This race of Ixion to embrace the clouds,
Contemn the state wherein they stand,
And save themselves, would all command;
As one desire is quenched, another buds,
When they have traveled all their time,
Heaped blood on blood, and crime on crime,
There is an higher power that guides their hand:
More happy he whom a poor Cottage shrouds
Against the tempest of the threatening heaven;
He stands in fear of none, none envies him;
His heart is upright, and his ways are even,
Where others states are still 'twixt six and seven.
That damned wretch up with Ambition blown,
Then whilst be turns the wheel about,
Thrown high, and low, within, without,
In striving for the top is tumbling down.
Those who delight in climbing high,
Oft by a precipice do dye,
So do the Stars skie-climbing worldlings flout;
But this disease is fatal to a Crown:
Kings, who have most, would most augment their bounds,
And if they be not all, they cannot be,
Which to their damage commonly redounds,
The weight of too great states themselves confounds.
The mighty toiling to enlarge their state,
Themselves exceedingly deceive,
In hazarding the thing they have
For a felicity which they conceive;
Though their Dominions they increase,
Yet their desires grow never less,
For though they conquer much, yet more they crave,
Which fatal Fortune doth attend the great,
And all the outward pomp that they assume
Doth but with shows disguise the Minds distress;
And who to conquer all the earth presume,
A little earth shall them at last consume.
And if it fortune that they die in peace,
(A wonder wondrous rarely seen)
Who conquer first, heavens find a mean
To raze their Empire, and ofttimes their race,
Who coming to the Crown with rest,
And having all in peace possessed,
Do strait forget what bloody broils have been,
Ere first their Fathers could attain that place;
As Seas do flow and ebb, States rise, and fall,
And Princes when their actions prosper best,
For fear their greatness should oppress the small,
As of some hated, envied are of all.
We know what end the mighty Cyrus made,
Whom whilst he strived to conquer still,
A woman (justly grieved) did kill,
And in a bloody vessel rolled his head,
Then said (whilst many wondering stood)
Since thou didst famish for such food,
Now quench thy thirst of blood with blood at will;
Some who succeeded him, since he was dead,
Have reigned a space with pomp, and yet with pain,
Whose glory now can do to us no good;
And what so long they laboured to obtain,
All in an instant must be lost again.
Lo, Darius once so magnified by fame,
By one whom he contemned overcome,
For all his bravery now made dumb,
With downcast eyes must signify his shame;
Who puffed up with ostentive pride,
Think Fortune bound to serve their side,
Can never scape, to be the prey of some;
Such spend their prosperous days, as in a dream,
And as it were in Fortune's bosom sleeping,
Then in a dull security abide,
And of their doubtful state neglect the keeping,
Whilst fearful ruin comes upon them creeping.
Thus the vicissitude of worldly things
Doth oft to us itself detect,
When heavenly powers exalt, deject,
Confirm, confound, erect, and ruin Kings.
So Alexander mighty now,
To whom the vanquished world doth bow,
With all submission, homage, and respect,
Doth fly a borrowed flight with Fortune's wings;
Nor enters he his dangerous course to ponder;
Yet if once Fortune bend her cloudy brow,
All those who at his sudden success wonder,
May gaze as much to see himself brought under.
O Dismal day detested be thy light,
And would the Gods (but Gods neglect our case)
The world were wrapped in a Cymmerian Night,
That no proud eye might gaze on our disgrace.
Why did the Heavens reserve my feeble age
To make my burden more, when strength grows less?
Can nothing but my harms their wrath assuage,
Thus offered up on th'Altar of distress?
Ah! have I spent my youth in pomp, and pleasure,
And had my spring-time graced with pleasant flowers
That th'autumn which should reap the Summer's treasure▪
Might be distempered with such stormy showers?
And did smooth calms and Sunshines for a space,
Make all my voyage through the world a sport,
That I should fall when near to end my race,
(And tossed with storms) even perish at my port?
Yet for all this, were I exposed alone,
The wretched object of Jove's thundering arms,
I should not think I had just cause to moan,
When I but wailed mine own, not others harms;
Ah me! on those whom more than life I love
The state-disturbing blasts of Fortune fall,
Yet each of them some several loss doth move,
But I in anguish bear a part with all:
I suffered when I saw Oxatre slain,
My loving Son, and most entirely loved;
I died in Darius, when he tried in vain
What Fates would do, yet still their hatred proved;
The heavens to plague me more, yet make me breath,
O rigour rare! what tortures rack my breast?
Who feel the sour; but not the sweet of death,
Still coursed, not killed, lest that should breed me rest;
Yet, Iove, if this may dis-enflame thine ire,
Let all thy lightning light upon my head,
To be consumed with a celestial fire,
Some comfort were, since that I must be dead.
Leave mother those complaints, as fit for me,
Who still must grieve my friends, and grace my foes:
Whose fortune is so wretched still to be,
That all the world may wonder at my woes.
Lo, that dear Lord and treasure of my thought,
Whose presence I my Paradise esteemed,
To such a precipice is headlong brought,
That he from ruin cannot be redeemed;
Ah! on what prop can I repose my trust,
When of his state I first the greatness ponder?
Next, how his Diadem (drenched in the dust)
Was Fortunes Trophy, and all Asia's wonder?
He whose imperious speech the world respected,
And as an Oracle had in regard,
He vanquished now, and with contempt neglected,
(Even as a supplicant) can scarce be heard;
And yet I know this more doth grieve his soul
Then all the harm which happened to his state,
His power o'er me that any can control,
Who (as his Idol) was adored of late;
Shall he (pure quintessence of my best part)
Then only testify the love he bears?
No, by mine eyes I will distil my heart,
And for his sake dissolve myself in tears;
Would God my breast might still transparent be,
That as through Crystal all might mark my mind,
And of my loyal thoughts the secrets see,
Whose great affection cannot be confined.
This prisons worst hath bounded but mine eyes,
And banished them the object of their joy,
My fiery heart well winged with fancies flies,
And where thou go'st dost still thy steps convoy;
Dear, whilst thou dost enjoy this common air,
Those who me captive think, do grossly err:
For whilst thou liv'st, how can thy Queen despair,
Whom thou to soul, and Sceptre, dost prefer;
Yet flatter I myself who am accursed?
Of those mishaps which make my thoughts to stray,
The memory may serve to make me burst,
Ah, ah, I faint, I feel my spirits decay.
Help, help, alas, alas the Empress falls.
O day of darkness! what a world of woes?
This heavy sight my panting heart appalls:
Heaven, earth, and all, are now become our foes.
No creature hath more cause to moon than I,
Whose Fathers Fortune oft afflicts mine ears,
Whilst I my mother's misery must spy,
So that of both my breast the burden bears.
What inhuman humanity is this,
With such a cruel pity to oppress,
To bring pale ghosts back from the fields of bliss,
Yet to be plunged in th'ocean of distress?
O unkind kindness that by saving slays,
And would with lovelesse love, my love control:
Ah! of this braving Sun the loathsome rays
Do clear mine eyes, but to confound my soul.
Dear daughter, strive your passions to restrain,
Lest that the torrent of your grief grow such,
That both it carry you where horiours reign;
And him o'erwhelm for whom you mourn so much;
No doubt but he, if we rest captives thus
Disdaining those indignities of ours,
To venge himself in reobtaining us,
Will hazard all his oriental powers;
But ah, what comfort can a wretch afford,
Whose care-worn breast the worst of woe contains:
Yet though my heart would fain impugn my word,
I hopeless speak of hope, to ease her pains.
Plagued with what is, what may be never pause,
Since we must hold our grief our greatest good,
And do not feed false hopes, for we have cause
Even to sigh out our souls, and weep our blood.
I wail my Son.
And I my husband's fall.
I wail my Father, and in him us all.
No woe like mine, mine cannot be relieved,
I wail his woe who should my woe assuage,
Who lives by me, by whom I should have lived,
Sport of my youth, and pillar of mine age.
No woe like mine, who for my Mate mourn here,
For love ot whom, I had all others left;
But what a Mate? myself, or one more dear,
Yet from myself, myself by force am reft.
So woe like mine, who born a Monarch's child,
Hoped by my birth of Fortune's best to boast,
Yet are my hopes even at the height beguiled,
And what I hoped in most, hath harmed me most.
I mourn for him who in my womb was formed.
I mourn for him in whom love me transformed.
I mourn for him who did give form to me.
Shall I no more in him my Image see?
Ah! shall I never in his joy rejoice?
Ah! shall I never hear his cheerful voice?
Would God my ruin might his ransom be.
Would God my life my life's life might set free.
Would God the life he gave him life might give.
Must those grey hairs my Sons green youth survive?
Lest twice made dye, I'll first prevent his fall.
Shall I live last to suffer for you all?
But whilst our wretched state we justly moon,
We may lament this Infant too a space,
Who in mishap inferior were to none,
If he could apprehend his Tragic case.
O then how can my heart but bursted be,
Whom Nature moves most to bemoan his harms?
I think the hosts of heaven I thundering see
On me, my husband▪ and him in my arms:
Dear Image of myself, in whom I live,
Thy shape not shames the greatness of thy Sire,
But of thy birth clear evidence doth give,
Thy sowre-sweet sight adds coals to my desire.
Thou who shouldst comfort most, tormentest thou me?
Huge hosts of passions now my soul assembles;
O how I grieve, and yet am glad to see
Thee, though not him, whom thy sweet face resembles!
Go bear this Babe from hence, a wound too deep
Hath piereed me with compassion of his part,
Yet let him stay, I joy to hear him weep;
This mother's passion melts my bursting heart;
Of many woes this last is not the least,
That unbegun thy glory thus must end:
Thy Fortune's Sun (my Son) set in the East,
Whilst all the world thy rising did attend;
Ah! must this Innocent taste of mishap,
Whose tender age cannot discern his state,
And thus be plagued, yea, in his Nurse's lap,
Inherit woe by birth? ah cruel fate!
If thou couldst hope, what great hopes hast thou lost
Who art defrauded of so high a Throne?
Ah! in thy cradle must I see thee crossed
Whom I designed so great when we were gone?
Yet happy hapless child, who canst not know
From whence the fountain of our sorrow flows,
Nor what it is that men call high, or low,
Nor on what thorn the rose of honour grows.
Yet hast thou felt the prick before the smoll;
Is this the benefit thy birthright brings,
A captive here in misery to dwell?
Then better not be borne, nor come of Kings.
O! what a noise is this that thus affrights?
I think of tears the torrent to restrain,
(Since souls when sad a just complaint delights)
They still would plague, yet stop me to complain;
Or is it one who doth lament our case,
And is (a rare thing) in affliction kind?
Who would behold how we can death embrace!
Death sovereign physic for a troubled mind.
By many signs we may ourselves assure
'tis Alexander whom we longed not for.
What? ah I die, and must mine eyes endure
That hateful object which I most abhor?
Spare, spare such speeches now, lest all go wrong,
We are environed with outrageous hosts;
Those who are weak must yield unto the strong:
For, Victor's rage when as the vanquished boasts;
I will entreat him too, not for myself
(Age bows my body to embrace pale death)
But that you yet may shun this wrackful shelf,
Whose youth and beauty worthy are of breath.
RIse Mother, rise, and calm those needless cares,
I come to cure, not to procure your woe;
The duty which I own those silver hairs,
Doth grieve my mind to see you humbled so.
Most gracious Prince, forgive me if I erred
In taking him for you, who stands you by.
I find no fault to see my friend preferred,
Even to myself; this is another I.
My sorrows so confounded have my mind
That scarce I know myself, another less;
My soul in such an agony I find,
As words, nor tears, nor groans cannot express.
I pray you mother set those plaints apart,
They vex me more than stern Bellona's broils.
This tender name of Mother wounds my heart,
Whilst named by him, who of that name me spoils:
I was (woe that I was) a Mother late
Of two fair Sons (fair Suns) lights of my life,
But one is dead, and in a worse estate,
The other lives, involved in woe, and strife;
Like to the trunk of some disbranched tree
Which Aeolus hath to confusion brought,
Since spoiled of those brave Imps which sprung from me
Unprofitable stock, I serve for nought.
I serve for nought, since serving him no more,
Who only may my blasted hopes revive,
Lo (quite confounded) far from what before,
Who him of me, me of myself deprive.
I live without my half, without my whole,
Prodigious Monster, whom the world admires,
I want the point, the pilot, and the pole
Which drew, addressed, and bounded my desires:
Tossed by sad sighs in floods of bitter tears,
I (save from ruin) look for no relief,
By what I feel still plagued, but worse with fears,
All comfort loathed, my glory is my grief:
My soul feemes to presage disastrous chances,
And warring with itself hath never peace,
My heart surcharged doth faint in deadly trances,
My eyes must grace the ground of my disgrace.
Hell hath assembled all her horrors here;
Ah! in the dungeons of this desp'rate breast,
As in the dark Tartarian groves, appear
A thousand shadows to bereave my rest.
Fair Princess, spare those passionate complaints,
Which may augment, but not amend your harms;
This voice which with your woe the world acquaints,
Doth move me more than all the Persians Arms.
Take courage (Madam) be afraid of none:
That you may hope what help I can afford,
I swear by Jove's inviolable Throne,
And do protest by my Imperial word;
Though for a while barred from your royal seat,
You compassed here with troops of strangers stand,
Yet shall you still be used as fits your state,
And may (as erst in your own Court) command,
Ah! how can I command whilst I am thrall?
What can I have, who wanting one, want all?
Though brave it seem in some proud victor's sight,
To plague their captives, and triumph in ill:
The larger grow the limits of my might,
The more I labour to rest rain my will.
What can be feared by them whom I defend?
Foes have not power, and who with me remain.
They dare not wrong, nor offer to offend
The least in rank who doth attend your train;
If any would impugn what I appoint,
Or would in ambush for your honour lie,
Or discontent you but in any point,
As Alexander lives, that wretch shall dye.
O what an host of evils where ere I go
Are still encroaching to o'erthrow my state?
Ah! must I be beholding to my foe,
And own him love, to whom my love owes hate?
Should he help me who still his ruin plies?
Heavens curse my heart, if stained with treason thus,
Let death in darkness first entomb mine eyes,
Ere such a sight accepted be by us.
I (Lord) am thine, and thine I will remain,
Thy love was planted in a fertile field,
Which grateful now thee to reward again
From flourished faith chaste flames for fruits doth yield.
Yet doth misfortune this good fortune bring,
My constancy shall now be clearly known;
Another might have loved an happy King:
But I will love thee, though thou be o'erthrown.
I labour much to comfort in some measure
This grieved Queen, that was a Monarch's choice,
Whose woe doth make my victory no pleasure,
For whilst she mourns, I cannot well rejoice.
Most mighty King thou dost deserve indeed,
That (as for Darius) we should pray for thee,
Who dost so much in clemency exceed,
That thou bewail'st our loss, no less than he;
Not only thou surmount'st all other Kings,
In glory rising from thy labours gone;
And for those benefits which Fortune brings,
But in all virtues worthy of a Throne;
Thou dost vouchsafe on me (more than I crave)
The title of a Queen, and Mother still,
But I confess myself thy humble slave,
Whose life hath now no limits but thy will;
The dreamt good, that Greatness gave, forgot,
My countenance shall be free from clouds of cares,
And I'll allow of this my present lot,
As one who for my fate my force prepares;
Yea, if this woeful woman here were free,
Who hath no heaven except her husband's face;
I could content myself (great Prince) to be
The meanest handmaid that attends your Grace.
As if your Sons, command all that is mine,
And I will seek to second your desire.
Heaven's recompense this courtesy of thine,
Which in all ages thousands shall admire.
Those captived Princesses have pierced my soul,
Which even amidst our heaven, have found a hell.
His passions so what Stoic could control,
Whom now to weep, their tears would not compel?
What age could erst such stately beauties show,
Which of perfection hold the highest place,
And borne to bring, though now they be brought low,
Do Beauty beautify, give Grief a grace?
Sir, such a victory hath not been seen
As you have gained, since conquering (as appears)
The largest kingdom, and the fairest Queen,
That Asia vaunted of, these many years.
Durst Leda's, or Agenor's brood compare
With that sweet Queen, the honour of her kind?
But as she is above all others fair,
As far her daughters make her go behind;
It seemed at first that sorrow had been sleeping,
Then whilst those Virgins in their Grand-dames bosom,
With weeping beauty, and with beauteous weeping,
Did with a hail of pearl, blast Beauty's blossom:
So large a power, no Prince on Earth can have,
As hath Love's Empire in their face confined.
What, what. Hephestion, what doth thee deceive?
Dare folly seek to brag so brave a mind?
Dare Cupid enter in an armed Camp,
And them who Mars have matched for sport appall?
Must his soft seal even through hard metal stamp,
And make who conquer men, to women thrall?
We dare resist (whilst many a thousand dyes)
The steely tempests of a world of men,
But if from ivory orbs two Sunny eyes
Do charge the soul (I know not how) O then
A secret power (composed of hopes and fears)
So charms the mind, that it strange thoughts conceives,
And strait the heart (quassed drunk by th'eyes and th'ears)
Doth staggering reel, and full of fancies raves.
But yet, in my conceit, I scorn all such,
And do disdain to yield myself at all;
Yea, in that sort to bow I loathe so much,
Let rather Mars then Cupid make me fall:
Should I be bound with frail affections chains,
As one oblivious of my former fame?
No, no, this purpose still my soul retains,
To balance nothing with a noble name;
O! what a great indignity is this?
To see a Conqueror to his lust a slave!
Who would the title of true worth were his,
Must vanquish vice, and no base thoughts conceive:
The bravest Trophy ever man obtained
Is that, which o'er himself, himself hath gained.
I'm glad (my Sovereign) that as you excel,
Not only men, but Mars himself in arms,
That from your mind, you likewise may repel
The flattering power of love's alluring charms,
That virtue rare, whose rays shine in your words,
With generous ardour doth inflame my soul,
And o'er myself to me such power affords;
That some brave deeds must strait this course control▪
NArbazanes, now ere the time be gone,
Let us accomplish that which we intent,
And join our wit, our force, and all in one,
(Ere known begun) that it may quickly end
You see th'occasion (if our course we, keep)
To raise rare fortunes, points us out the way,
Yea, blames our sluggishness that as a sleep,
So great a purpose do so long delay.
Lo, angry Iove our Prince's part disproves:
For, Fortune's worst what ever he attempt
From following him, the people's mind removes:
Distress still is attended by contempt,
A ground for so great hopes who ere did see,
As heavens so happily breed in our mind,
For, since our King confounded is to be,
We by his fall, a means to rise may find.
I will most willingly perform my part,
For, I the same exceedingly allow:
Dear wealth and honour, Idols of my heart,
If you I may enjoy, I care not how;
Yet that this course may best be kept obscure,
Our care must seem all for our Country bend;
When masked with zeal; crimes are reputed pure,
A show of good doth vulgar minds content,
In dangerous plots where courage joins with Art,
Let slow advice, a quick dispatch be used:
What can (save success) justify our part,
Who must command, or come to be accused?
To Alexander one was sent of late,
To speak of peace, whose speech was spent in vain,
So that (thus tossed) most desp'rate is his state,
Who peace cannot obtain, nor war maintain;
To clear his thoughts which many doubts do sway,
He now craves each man's mind who squadrons leads;
This for our purpose must prepare the way:
Those who would compass Kings, need crafty heads:
And that to gain which we so much esteem,
We can upon no means more safe conclude,
Then crooked counsels that do upright seem
To mask ourselves, and others to delude;
He must (advised by some) renounce a space
The show of power, and from affairs retire,
That for a fashion one may use his place,
Not as usurped, but at his own desire:
So may he try if others can bring back
That which his fortune's ebb hath borne away,
Then he again his Diadem shall take,
And (as before) the regal Sceptre sway.
Well, then amongst ourselves to fly debate,
Which such great actions ofttimes under-mines,
I yield that you possess the highest seat,
And will my faction frame for our designs.
All that is one, which of us two receive it,
Since every thing doth equally belong us,
I'll take it for the form, 'tis one who have it,
For we will part his kingdoms all among us.
But if he condescend to this we crave,
To judgements rash, which would at first seem good,
Let him not think us two such fools to leave,
That which so many else have bought with blood;
Who once advanced, would willingly go down,
And (propped with power,) not love in state to stand?
This not the custom is to quite a Crown,
When one hath known how sweet it's to command;
This name of faith but to get credit feigned,
Is (weighed with kingdoms) lighter then a Crown,
And even in them whose thoughts are most restrained,
A Sceptres weight would press all goodness down.
Yet of my thoughts some doubt new counsel claims,
And with huge honour aggravates disgrace:
The stain of treason still attends our names,
And with our error burdens all our race;
Our purpose must accomplished be with pain,
And we (though pomp a space appease our souls)
Shall find afflictions to disturb our reign,
And be when dead, defamed by famous scrolls.
The sacred title of a Sovereign King
Doth work a terror more than can be thought,
And Majesty to brave my mind doth bring,
Whose countenance only strange effects hath wrought.
To idle sounds and frivolous reports,
Give strait a passport, for they last not long,
And what thou dost allege, not much imports:
A Crown may cover any kind of wrong;
What heinous thing so odious is by nature,
Which for a Kingdom not committed is?
To be a King, let me be called a traitor,
Faith (if for aught) may broken be for this.
Those are but feeble brains which fancies load,
With timorous dreams which bore surmising brings;
Who fear vain shadows, must not walk abroad,
Too wary wits dare never work great things.
If our brave project happily succeed,
(As now I doubt not but it shall do soon)
We strait will numbers find to praise our deed,
And soothe us up in all that we have done.
Now that the time and manner may be sure,
The Bactrian bands shall all attend in Arms,
Yet fain a cause that he may live secure,
And be surprised not looking for alarms.
Then through the camp a rumour must be spread,
That hopeless Darius hath despair'dly gone,
By violence to dwell amongst the dead,
Which (as much grieved) we must appear to moon:
The Persians may promises be pleased,
So to disarm him of his native powers,
Then taking him, our thoughts may all be eased,
For whilst he is his own, we are not ours:
Till strong with titles, we with power command,
His shadow shrouds, while rights are forced, or feigned,
And his to daunt, or strangers to gainstand,
To raise our state, his show must be, maintained.
To Alexander after we will send,
And offer him his foe to bondage bought,
Then crave that us his favour may defend,
As those who all things for his good have wrought;
Then if we thus his grace cannot procure,
But that he us with rigour do pursue,
With Darius' death we will our states assure,
Than first our force, and next the wars renew.
Let us henceforth for nothing be dismayed,
But strive ourselves courageously to bear.
This dangerous action would not bedelayed,
Lest time make him to doubt, and us to fear.
TIme, through Jove's judgement just,
Huge alterations brings:
Those are but fools who trust
In transitory things,
Whose tails be are mortal stings,
Which in the end will wound;
And let none think it strange,
Though all things earthly change:
In this inferior round
What is from ruin free?
The Elements which be
At variance, (as we see)
Each th'other doth confound:
The Earth and Air make war,
The fire and water are
Still wrestling at debate,
All those through cold and heat,
Through drought and moisture jaure.
What wonder though men change and fade,
Who of those changing Elements are made?
How dare vain worldlings vannt
Of fortunes goods not lasting,
Evils which our wits enchant?
Exposed to loss and wasting?
Lo, we to death are hasting,
Whilst we those things discuss:
All things from their beginning,
Still to an end are running,
Heaven hath ordained it thus;
We hear how it doth thunder,
We see th' earth burst asunder,
And yet we never ponder
What this imports to us:
These fearful signs 〈◊〉 prove,
That th' angry pow'rs above
Are moved to indignation
Against this wretched nation,
Which they no longer love:
What are we but a pass of breath
Who live assured of nothing but of death?
Who was so happy yet
As never had some cross?
Though on a Throne he sit,
And is not uted with loss,
Yet fortune once will toss
Him, when that least he would;
If one had all at once
Hydaspes' precious stones,
And yellow Tagus' gold;
The Orientall treasure,
And every earthly pleasure,
Even in the greatest measure,
It should not smake him bold:
For while he lives secure,
His state is most unsure;
When it doth least appear,
Some heavy plague draws near,
Destruction to procure.
World's glory is but like a flower,
Which both is bloomed, and blasted in an hour.
In what we most repose,
We find our comfort light,
The thing we soon lose
That's precious in our sight;
For honour, riches, might,
Our lives in pawn we lay;
Yet all like flying shadows,
Or flowers enamelling meadows,
Do vanish and decay.
Long time we toil to find
Those Idols the mind,
Which had, we cannot bind
To bide with us one day:
Then why should we presume
On treasures that consume,
Difficult to obtain,
Difficult to retain,
A dream, a breath, a fume?
Which vex them most, that them possess,
Who starve with store, and famish with excess.
AH! must I poison now my Prince's ears,
With news the worst that ever burdened fame:
Had I as many tongues as I have tears,
All would not serve my sorrows to proclaim.
Great signs of grief I in thy face discern,
And spare not to report this heavy cross
To one (I fear) whom it doth most concern:
Is't death, disgrace, destruction, treason, loss?
Tell on the sum of horror at the first;
With no ambiguous words my pain prolong;
A wretch for comfort craves to know the worst,
And I have learned to be unhappy long;
What least I speak, and yet suspect too much,
Art thou the Trumpet to proclaim my scorn
Which must wound me? (but ah) no torment such
As this to her who that disgrace hath borne.
She was not wronged, as you have wrong conceived;
The Gods from harm did study to preserve her;
She from your foe such favour hath received,
As from her Subjects who were bound to serve her;
But what a volley doth my voice prepare
Of woes to charge your cares? woes full of dread,
Would God ere I my message can declare,
That I may dye in saying she is dead.
And was it not enough (poor wretch alas)
That I beheld her dye, and would have died?
But that I must (armed with sad tidings) pass
To wound all them who hear what I have spied?
See how he stands (moved with those words of mine,)
As if by grief arrested unto death.
Yet doth the Sun on my affliction shine,
And clear the air though tainted by my breath?
And can I live, and look them in the face,
Who have my o'erthrow (shameful o'erthrow) seen?
And how I vanquished, vanquished with disgrace,
Did lose at once my Kingdom and my Queen?
Heaven bruise me all to powder with thy thunder,
That I no more may in the world remain
The object of thy wrath, and fortunes wonder,
Spoiled of all hope, yet kept for greater pain.
Ah, art thou dead? and do I live behind thee?
Thy faulty husband, thinkest thou so to fly?
If it be thin, then know I where to find thee,
This only grieves me that too late I die.
O Alexander, what such heinous ill
Have I done thee, that thou requit'st me thus?
Whom of thy friends or kindred did I kill?
This cruelty comes undeserved of us,
Though justly thou intended had this war,
Mars from his rage made women always free,
This tyranny shall all thy Trophies mar,
And still to thy reproach reported be.
Thus of that Prince, you without cause esteem,
I know her death him grievously displeased,
A woodrous thing which few or none would deem,
He wailed it long, and could not be appeased.
Even as my Sovereign now, then did he smart,
And when he came to calm your mother's grief,
As acting not his own, but even your part,
He seemed to need, and not to give relief.
If any sparks of that respect remain,
Which much with thee should (duly weighed) import,
I pray thee (Tiriotes) now be plain,
Or else strange torments shall the truth extort;
I loathe to let this question scape my mouth,
Which both I blush to crave, and long to know,
And can it be, that this transported youth
Not urged to have that which I only own?
Can this fierce Prince even in his flaming age,
Have such a beauty purchased by his toils,
And yet not seek (forced by affections rage)
Her honour's ruin, and my pleasures spoils?
Speak frankly now, and tell what fatal shelf
Hath crushed my treasure's Bark, and me defaced:
The fear of ill is worse than ill itself,
They twice do dye, who die, and dye disgraced.
Let not those love-bred fears abuse your thought;
By all the world no fable I contrive;
If partially I speak, or lie in aught,
Earth open wide, and swallow me alive:
He whom your grace so wrongfully suspects,
Hath not in any sort your Queen abused,
But as his sister still (in all respects)
As chastely and as honourably used;
When angry Iove subverted had our state,
And viewed our thundered troops disordered flight,
Light fortune then who flattered us of late,
Did make our state a mirror of her might,
For, having found a Crown foiled on the ground.
O endless shame which never can be cured▪
We strait imagined that some cruel wound
Had killed our Lord, and wailed it as assured.
Would God I then had died, as I desired,
To have prevented those ensuing barmes,
Whilst ere my hohour and my hap expired
A Crown my head, a Queen enriched my arms.
But Alexander having heard our cries,
Sent one to learn the cause that moved our woe;
Who finding whence our error did arise,
Gave full assurance that it was not so.
Then he himself did to our Tent resort,
And with the mildest words he could conceive,
Your Mother, Wife, and Children did exhort
Such terrors vain (since but surmised) to leave;
And he protested that they should expect
No harm of him their courage to appall,
Then all things did with great regard direct,
That no man might endamage them at all.
Thus when they were against all dangers armed,
(I think, for fear (for who would not have feared▪)
Jest such rare graces might his mind have charmed)
He never more before her face appeared;
Else generous virtue, jealous of each thing,
Which (tempting reason) senses might allure,
(What rare restraint in a victorious King)
He fled what fault, or scandal could procure.
He doth his fame above all things prefer,
And will not be where it may blemish find,
Nor give his eyes commodity to err,
Lest thoughts impure might strive to stain his mind.
He whilst that she was sick, did loath delight,
And (gravely grieyed) all pomp and pleasure left.
O hateful heaven! that with such hellish spite
The world's chief treasure, Nature's glory reft.
When he beheld deaths triumph in that face,
Which had triumphed o'er such a Monarch's heart,
With witnessed woe, even passionate a space,
The lookers on did much commend his part;
And when some time his dolour had overcome,
Her funeral rites solemnly to decore,
He used such honour, as might well become
The Persian pomp in prosperous times before.
O power supreme that of great states disposest,
And ratifi'st thy will with fearful thunder,
Who as thou pleasest, placest, and deposest
Uncertain worldlings, now above, now under:
I pray thy Deity in my soul's distress,
If that th'inhabitants of heaven can hear
The plaints of them who this low point possess,
Or that th' immortals can give mortals care,
This favour last I only do require,
Establish first the Sceptre in my hand;
But if through my desert, or thy desire,
The race of Cyrus must no more command,
Since angry heaven so high a hate contracts,
That I must needs my Diadem forgo,
Let him succeed, who proves in all his acts,
So mild a Victor, and so just a foe.
IF joined by fates with men of dastard minds,
Who to a noble death, base life preferred,
I should not waste my words amongst the winds,
But labour would that time might be deferred;
Though still resolved, your course confirms me much,
Whom no disaster could divorce from me,
What man can doubt whom heavens do back by such,
When (bragged with bondage) fight to be free?
My courage swells to see you marching forth,
Whose force and faith, which all the world doth sing,
(Oft cleared by proof, though fortune envy worth)
Might serve to make, far more to keep a King.
He gives our rebels Towns, not moved by love:
Each Prince (though using them,) all traitors hates.
But that their course to take, this might you move,
His turn once served, so forfeiting your states.
Ye to my fortune have not had regard,
As of my peace, so partners of my wars,
Which, though that I might not, Iove would reward,
And all the world extol you to the stars.
How long shall I a vagabond remain,
And fly a stranger who my right would reave,
Since by one battle we may reobtain
All that we lost, or lose all that we have?
Like some vile traitors, whom I will arraign,
To hold me up, shall I go cast me down?
Must Darius only by entreaty reign?
No, none hath power to give, or take my Crown.
I shall not my authority survive,
Nor will I proffer a submissive breath,
My hand shall hold a Sceptre while I live,
My hand shall bear a Diadem till death;
If those frank thoughts which do possess my soul,
Such flames of courage kindled have in you,
A Macedonian shall not us control,
Nor with disdainful smiles brag whilst we bow:
My state may testify frail fortunes change,
May she not him o'erwhelm, as well as me?
At least our hands bear death, if not revenge,
Brave minds when no more rests may still dye free.
Now call your valorous ancestors to mind,
Whom from the Grecians tribute still required,
And of whose deeds rare monuments we find,
Whose merits make their memories admired;
Shall of your deeds, posterity be dumb,
Which doth your father's names (though dead) adore?
I am resolved, my triumph, or my tomb,
A Laurel, or a Cypress shall decore.
What doubtful silence thus your thoughts detains?
We need advise with nought but with our swords;
He who the Persians wont worth retains,
Will answer now with deeds, and not with words.
Let us accompany our King in Arms,
Through bloody squadrons to this fatal strife:
No profit can be had without some harms,
By slaughter only we must look for life;
And when our host (as I hope) doth prevail,
Our Country shall have peace, we praise of right;
And if our fortune (not our courage) fail,
We die with honour in our Sovereign's sight;
Let us (if vanquished) scorn base breath to buy,
A noble death may greater glory give,
Do to overcome, and yet not fear to dye:
'Tis needful that we fight, not that we live.
My words will first your Majesty displease,
Yet duty makes me speak where silence spill;
The best Physician cures a sharp disease,
With some sour potion that corruption kills;
And skilful Pilots when they fear a storm,
To save the ship, will cast out precious things,
You in some sort may imitate their form,
For else a tempest total ruin brings.
Since bend against the Gods, how can we speed?
To all our actions, fortune is opposed,
We must of force some other way proceed,
So have the heavens of our affairs disposed:
Give (Sir,) the state, at least your titles place
On some more happy man, not in effect,
But with your shadow cloath him for a space,
Till he your Realms from ruin may protect.
This storm once calmed, that now disturbs your state,
And Asia free from any foreign host,
He shall with haste resign the Sovereign seat,
These Kingdoms gained again, which you have lost:
All Bactria yet abides at your command,
The Indians, lo, would dye to do you good,
Yea, many thousand thousands armed stand,
Bend for your State to offer up their blood;
What? should we rush like beasts to needless strife?
Be well prepared, and then your fortune try,
Brave minds should death despise, not loathing life:
For fear of danger cowards crave to dye.
But virtue first all hopes accounts doth cast,
And of each mean to help maturely thinks,
Then, when all else is done, death is the last,
The which to meet true courage never shrinks.
Now for the time, let Bactria be our seat,
To Bessus for the form your Crown resign,
Who, when he once hath re-advanced your state,
Shall with your foes o'erthrow his charge confine.
Wretch travel'st thou thy Sovereign to betray?
Such treason darest thou to our ears impart?
Such treason under trust? stay traitor stay,
My sword shall search what lurks within thy heart.
Sir, rein your rage: this but new trouble breeds;
And weigh well what they are, what is the time;
It may be this from ignorance proceeds,
In thought, and not in word, consists a crime;
Since that against your enemies you go,
Be not severe in censuring Subjects parts,
But tolerate your own, to grieve your foe,
Now must we strive to gain, not lose men's hearts.
It by all means shall be exactly tried,
How first his brain such fancies did embrace,
And if but simply, not puffed up with pride,
He must be pardoned, and restored to grace.
And of my Subjects I would rather have
Then one to punish, them to guerdon all.
If I have erred, no pardon (Sir) I crave.
First hear, and if I fail, then let me fall;
I call the Gods to testify my part,
Who can (commenting thoughts) clear truth afford,
If ever treason harboured in my heart,
Strait let me dye, not pitied, but abhorred;
I counsel gave according to my skill,
It was my upright mind that made me bold,
And though my wit not answered to my will,
Still zeal what it conceives, must needs unfold.
We should be loath to speak in great affairs,
Where words are damned, or balanced by th' event:
For, if things fail, the fault is still thought theirs,
Who gave advice, though of a good intent,
Great Prince forget this not well grounded grudge▪
Who dare be free if thus for words rejected?
At least examine first before you judge,
I rather dye absolved, then live suspected.
Your fond opinion justly might be feared,
Which seemed indeed sinistrously inclined;
For, at the first your speech to me appeared
The poisoned birth of some malicious mind.
But your purgation now hath taken place,
And of your faith I will no further doubt,
But hold you in the same degree of grace,
That you enjoyed, before those words chanced our.
I think that Patron looks with speaking eyes,
As if his mind were mightily perplexed,
Come, Patron, tell what in thy bosom lies,
By which thou seem'st so wonderfully vexed.
Sir, I would speak in private if I could,
That which affection fired with zeal affords,
Let silence seal what friends with fear unfold,
Take you my thoughts, none else shall have my words:
Though only bound by voluntary choice,
We follow you (all other hopes quite lost)
Your body's shadows, th' Echoes of your voice,
As faithful now as when you flourished most;
For where you are, we must remain with you,
Since both our lots are in one vessel thrown,
I wish our Tent were made your lodging now,
For, we will save your life, or lose our own.
We have abandoned Greece our native soil,
And our retreat no Bactria now attends,
But those who us would of your person spoil,
Spoil us of all, whose all on you depends.
Would God all yours were bend to do their due,
Fame big by fear doth bring forth rumours rife;
I grant it gross, if that his own were true,
To trust a strange with a Monarch's life.
What sudden danger doth of late dismay you,
Such inconveniences that you forecast?
Sir, Bessus and Narbazanes betray you,
This day to you, or them will be the last:
They fain repentance only for the form,
Till every thing be for the fact prepared,
The clouds are gathering which do boast a storm,
And they ere night, mind to invade your guard.
I trust thy words, but yet I cannot wrong
Those who by nature love to me should bear,
Shall I leave them who followed me so long?
Then they may think, I merit what I fear.
I will await on what the heavens will send,
For, who can stand when fates his fall conspire,
And with mine own, at least, least grieved will end;
I live too long if they my death desire.
Take heed in time (Sir) to this subtle Greek,
The Grecian faith to all the world is known,
I am informed he by all means doth seek
To gratify your foe, as borne his own;
And marvel not, though mercenary men,
Who sell themselves, sell all, this is not strange,
They have no God but gold, nor house, how then
Can they be constant, who do live by change?
Though this vain man pre-occupy you thus,
And such as would themselves abuse your grace,
Faith shall be found untainted still in us,
When our accuser dare not show his face.
Of Alexander those who hope for gain,
By traitorous means do but themselves deceive,
Since none in earth doth Traitors more disdain,
Nor treason can in greater horror have.
Well, Sir, you shall know shortly what we are,
I will go see your Ensigns all displayed.
It better is since things are gone so far,
Then seem but to mistrust, to be betrayed.
Lo, Artabazus I have acted here
My part of greatness, and my glass is run,
Now Patron's speech doth evident appear,
I see my end, yet can their course not shun.
The Bactrians only have embarked in this,
Go to the Greeks, which if with courage done,
When once your danger manifested is,
The Persians all will follow after soon.
And what if I were gone to Patron's Tent,
And had the Greeks for guard as you desire?
He hath but thousands four which are well bend,
T●●y thirty thousand who my fall conspire;
And (doing this) I should their deed excuse,
In giving them a cause who have most might;
They may indeed my lenity abuse,
But by my deed they shall pretend no right.
O Prince to be bemoaned, who can but weep
To ●ee thee thus involved in such a state?
Retire you all, and seek yourselves to keep,
●●ere attend the issue of my fate.
Y●●on●●● that a wretch yet breathing stands,
●o whom the heavens no comfort can impart:
F●●●e shall not make me fall by mine own hands,
No, let another sin though I must smart;
None of you all have falsified your truth,
But loyal still unto the end abide,
Now I you all disburden of your oath,
Leave me alone, and for yourselves provide.
O Stormy state of Kings, vain Mortals choice,
The glorious height whence greatness groans to fall!
Ah! we (who courting fame, do hunt each voice)
To seem but Sovereign must be slaves to all:
Yet blown like bladders, with Ambition's wind,
On envied Sceptres weakly we rely;
And (whilst swollen fancies do betray the mind)
Not only th'earth, but heavens themselves defy.
Whilst lofty thoughts tumultuous minds do toss,
Which are passed up with popular applause,
A state extended by our Neighbour's loss,
For further trouble but procures a cause;
If Fortunes dark eclipse cloud glories light,
Than what avails that pomp which pride doth claim?
A mere illusion made to mock the sight,
Whose best was but the shadow of a dream;
Of glassy Sceptres, let frail greatness vaunt,
Not Sceptres, no, but reeds, which (raised up) break,
And let eye-flatt'ring shows our wits enchant,
All perished are, ere of their pomp men speak,
Those golden palaces, those gorgeous Halls,
With furniture superfluously fair,
Those stately Courts, those skie-encountring walls
Do vanish all like vapours in the air.
O! what affliction jealous greatness bears,
Which still must travel to hold others down,
Whilst all our guards not guard us from our fears,
Such toil attends the glory of a Crown?
Where are they all who at my feet did bow,
Whilst I was made the Idol of so many?
What joy had I not then? what have I now?
Of all once honoured, and now scarce of any.
Our painted pleasures but apparel pain:
We spend our nights in fear, our days in dangers,
Balls tossed by Stars, thralls bound to Fortune's reign,
Though known to all, yet to ourselves but stranges.
A golden Crown doth cover leaden cares;
The Sceptre cannot lull their thoughts asleep,
Whose souls are drowned with floods of cold despairs,
Of which base vulgars' cannot sound the deep.
The Bramble grows, although it be obscure,
Whilst lofty Cedars feel the blust'ring winds,
And mild Plebeian souls may live secure,
While mighty tempests toss Imperial minds;
What are our days but dreams, our reign a glance,
Whilst Fortunes fever makes us rage and rave,
Which with strange fits doth to a height advance,
Till, ere pain us, we first our life must leave?
For glistering greatness by Ambition loved,
I was the wonder of all gazing eyes,
But free from shadows (real essence proved)
State's just proportion ruin only tries.
Lo, charged with chains which (though they be of gold)
My state's distress diminish not the more,
When this preposterous honour I behold,
It but upbraids me what I was before,
And what was I before (as now I see)
(Though what afflicted was not clearly known)
But still in fetters, whilst appearing free,
And in a labyrinth of labours thrown.
Was I not forced to serve a thousand humours,
To scape the censure of a Critic story,
Still clogged with cares, enraged with many rumours;
O glorious bondage, and o burdenous glory!
That dignity which deified me late,
And made the world do homage to my name,
Doth not oppose that which pursues my state,
But by fall gives feathers unto fame;
My best was but a momentary bliss,
Which leaves behind this everlasting sting,
That of all woes no woe is like to this,
To think I was, and am not now a king.
No man with me in all th'accomplished joys
That satisfy the soul, could once compare;
No man may match me now in sad annoys,
Or any cross which can provoke despair.
Thrice fortune did my gallant troops entrap,
And I to fall did desperately stand,
Yet could not be so happy in mishap,
As to have died by some renowned hand;
But for my greater grief, disgrace, and scorn
(The minds of men so apt are to deceive)
They whom aloft my favours wings had borne,
Ev●● they have made their Master thus a slave.
Ah! did nor death in prison from me reave,
The ●●●●red Sovereign of my soul's desires?
And I (wretched I) not present to receive,
The 〈◊〉 ●ol● kiss that should have quenched my fires?
Yet, o thrice happy thou, who hast not lived
To bear a burden of this great disgrace!
More than a thousand deaths this had thee grieved,
To know I died, and died in such a case.
Ah! do the pledges of our mutual love,
(The only comfort that the fates have left)
Rest prisoned yet? and may I not remove
M● mother thence, as of all power quite reft?
My pains are more than with my pleasures even,
Since first my head was burdened with a Crown;
Was I exalted once up to the Heaven,
That to the Centre Iove might throw me down?
My ample Empire, and my Princely birth,
My great magnificence, and vain excess,
All cannot yield my mind one minutes mirth,
To ease me now in this my great distress.
Lo here reduced unto the worst of ills,
Past help, past hope, and only great in grief,
Two abject vassals make me wait their wills,
Not looking, no, nor wishing for relief.
If that my honour had been first repaired,
Then what though death had this fraild fortress won?
I wail my life (since for disgrace prepared)
Not that it ends, but that it was begun:
What fatal conflict can my countenance mar,
Though me to brag, death all his horrors bring?
I never shall wrong Majesty so far,
As aught to do that not becomes a king.
SOme new disaster daily doth fore-show
Our coming ruin: we have seen our best:
For, fortune bend as wholly to o'erthrow,
Throws down our king from her wheel's height so low,
That by no means his state can be redressed:
For, since by arms his power hath been repressed,
Both friends and servants leave him all alone;
Few have compassion of his state distressed,
To him themselves a number false doth show;
So foes and faithless friends conspired in one,
Frail fortune and the fates with them agree:
All run with Hatchets on a falling tree:
This Prince in prosperous state hath flourished long,
And never dreamed of ill, did think far less,
But was well followed whilst his state was strong;
Him flattering Sirens with a charming song
Strived to exalt, then whilst he did possess
This earthly dross, that with a vain excess
He might reward their mercenary love;
But now when fortune drives him to distress,
His favourites whom he remained among,
They strait with her (as hers) their faith remove;
And who for gain to follow him were wont,
They after gain by his destruction hunt.
O more than happy ten times were that king,
Who were unhappy but a little space,
So that it did not utter ruin bring,
But made him prove (a profitable thing)
Who of his train did best deserve his grace;
Then could, and would of those the best embrace;
Such vultures fled as follow but for prey,
That faithful Servants might possess their place.
All gallant minds it must with anguish fling,
Whilst wanting means their virtue to display;
This is the grief which bursts a generous heart;
When favour comes by chance, not by desert.
Those minions oft to whom kings do extend
Above their worth, immoderate goodwill,
(The butts of common hate oft hit in end)
In prosperous times they only do depend,
Not upon them, but on their fortune still,
Which if it change, they change, them though they fill
Their hopes with honour, and their chests with Coin;
Yet if they fall, or their affairs go ill,
Those whom they raised will not with them descend,
But with the side most strong all strait do join,
And do forget all what was given before,
When once of them they can expect no more.
The truth hereof in end this strange event,
In Bessus and Narbazenes hath proved,
On whom their Prince so prodigally spent
Affection, Honour, Titles, Treasure, Rent,
And all that might an honest mind have moved.
So bountiful a Prince still to have loved.
Who so benignly tendered had their state;
Yet Traitors vile (all due respects removed)
They him to strike the strength he gave have bend,
So as he now may rue, although too late,
That sly Chameleons changing thus their hue,
To servants were preferred, who still were true.
But though those Traitors for a space do speed,
No doubt the Heavens once vengeance will exact;
The very horror of this heinous deed,
Doth make the hearts of honest men to bleed:
Yea, even the wicked hate this barbarous act:
The Heavens no higher choler can contract,
Then for the forcing of a sacred king,
Whose state (if rage do not their minds distract)
Must fear and reverence in inferiors breed,
To whom from him all what is theirs doth spring;
But though on th'earth men should neglect this wrong▪
Heavens will those Traitors plague ere it be long.
WHAT Story or what fable can record
Of such a numb'rous troop so strangely lost?
I know they quaked to know it was my lord,
Whose name alone is worth another's host:
It scarce can trusted be in many parts;
But Traitors fear, though all the world them back,
They were but bodies destitute of hearts:
More prisoners they were then men to take.
Who would believe so few durst strive to meet
So great an Army, and the Army shrinks?
But Glories flattery, and fames sounds are sweet:
True valour dare attempt all that it thinks.
In this encounter to have had the best,
It would content more than a common mind;
But since we want the chief, what of the rest?
I must in all a satisfaction find;
Those Traitors thought to finish thus the war,
By giving me their Lord whom they have bound,
But I who march with confidence so far
Do scorn to build upon so base a ground;
To venge my wrongs dare others than design?
Since Darius was ordained my prey to be,
How dared they but have aimed at aught of mine?
His o'erthrows glory did belong to me.
Whilst in himself he only did confide,
I by all means did strive to make him bow,
But since his hard estate abates that pride,
My fury turned is to compassion now;
Though he contemned me oft, and did me wrong,
Yet am I grieved that he was thus deceived,
If but acknowledged once to be more strong,
I not his blood, nor yet his kingdom craved;
And if those Traitors have not killed him strait,
Yet his delivery shall my name renown,
I would not lose a Subject of such weight,
By which my clemency might be made known.
Sir, now your coming cannot do him good.
What? all are fled, none have my force withstood?
Yet can not Darius be redeemed again.
Why, have they set him free, or is he slain?
Now he enjoys a liberty at last;
But ransomed is by offering up his breath.
Then is all Asia's expectation passed?
Tell on at length the manner of his death.
The boiling ardour of the rising Sun
(All moisture gone) did breed so great a drought,
That from the way I had a little run,
To find some fountain to refresh my mouth;
There, by the borders of a rising brook,
Which shadowed was from Titan's rising beams,
From liquid crystals I a tribute took,
Which seemed to murmur, that I forced their streams:
When (lo) I saw (a lamentable sight)
Two wounded horses draw a bloody Coach,
Which clad with skins, show horror at the height;
And it to spy when as I did approach,
One was within, who could not long time scape,
The fatal passage of th'infernal gates;
Yet Majesty triumphing o'er mishap,
He seemed to brag both fortune and the fates,
And to so base a state as first not borne,
Then whilst his blood abundantly did fall,
He bursted forth those words in fortunes scorn,
As one whose courage nothing could appall:
You gaze to see (and have good cause wherefore)
A man no man, a king no king: what change?
Now less than nought who once was both, and more;
This would seem wondrous; but no state is strange;
And yet a midst my evils I must rejoice,
That this last comfort doth forgo my end.
I speak to one who can conceive my voice,
And not in vain my dying speeches spend;
I am, but how? in name, and not in power,
That wretched Darius (which I should suppress)
Once happy (as was thought) but at this hour,
A lively pattern of extreme distress.
Then having paused (he said) my grief is great,
Tell Alexander (as the world may spy)
That though of me he never had but hate,
Yet am I forced far in his debt to die:
The favour passed extended to my Queen,
And that poor remnant my surviving rest,
(When weighing well what I to him have been)
I wish continued, but can scarce request;
They to his foe belong, and yet he strives
To have them honoured now, as in times past;
But those who held of me both states, and lives,
Of state and life have me deprived at last.
Entreat him too that unrevenged below
I wander not as hapless in all things:
Let men his justice, and their treason know;
This (as a common cause) doth touch all kings.
Beside the honour which he shall acquire
In plaguing them who have betrayed my trust,
His magnanimity men shall admire,
And fear to grieve him whom they find so just.
As watery rounds which rise and reel in rain,
Do swell, and float, yet when they break (though bright)
Last, leave (when fallen) no token save a stain,
Pomp quickly thus both courts and scorns the sight:
And since my glass is run, my glory gone,
I dead unto the world, the world to me,
I wish (save his) that th'earth adore no throne:
For, from his reign what subject would be free?
Then drooping down, faint, bloodless, and half dead,
He prayed me for some water that ran by,
(A small request by such a monarch made)
Which when that he had got: yet, ear I die
This cross must come (said he) to kill me quite;
Though Nations once to me as Sovereign sought,
I have not now the power but to requite
This little benefit, that thou hast brought:
But Alexander shall reward thee well,
And him the Heavens, still yielding his desires,
Since that his foes (though envy burst) must tell
That courtesy which all the world admires.
Now none hath power his pleasure to control,
But if he use them well whom he retains,
It will procure contentment to my soul,
And make him famous whilst the world remains.
When breath abandoned hath this brittle clay,
Then cause some friend defray my funeral cost,
That churlish Charon force me not to stray
Where darkness dwells, an unregarded Ghost.
Last, give my corpses to her who brought it forth,
Who may it with my Ancestors entomb,
And since she loved me much, though little worth,
May wail this burden which once graced her womb;
And to that Prince whose state I wish to stand,
In sign of love which all my thoughts do send,
My soul gives him my heart, it thee my hand:
Thus though I lived his foe, I die his friend.
I had but held his hand a little space,
When dying like a Torch whose wax is spent,
In spite of pain, even with a princely grace,
His hands still seemed directing as he went.
Who could refrain from tears to hear declared
The huge mishaps, which all at once did light;
Have subjects slain their Prince, whom strangers spared?
Us hath he fled, that perish thus he might!
I for his fall am wonderfully sorry,
Whom first I forced, but last would have maintained:
I envy death, because it robbed the glory
Which I (by giving him his life) had gained.
Since death hath put a period to his woes,
That favour which to him you would extend,
Let it with fury flame against his foes,
For your designs can have no fairer end:
So shall you both the people's love obtain,
Whilst by your means revenged their Sovereign rests,
And likewise may the more securely reign,
The state well purged from such contagious pests,
If but one virtue did adorn a king,
It would be justice; many great defects
Are veiled thereby, whereas each virtuous thing
In one who is not just, the world suspects.
Though this your Counsel, nor yet his request,
Had not the power to penetrate my ear,
A generous stomach could not well digest,
So great a wrong which courage storms to bear.
My spirit (impatient of repose) disdains,
That they so long their infamy survive:
But I will punish with most grievous pains
The monstrous Treason that they did contrive.
What? do they think (though backed with numbrous bands)
That Bactria is a bulwark for mine Ire?
Fly where they list, they cannot scape my hands,
My wrath shall follow like consuming fire.
Such damned souls the heaven cannot receive,
I'll force Hell's dungeons, as Alcides did,
And they on th'earth no bounds but mine can have,
I'll search them out though in the centre hid,
And when as threatening now I once may strike,
Betwixt the bending boughs of some strong tree,
To Traitors terrors who intent the like,
They shall by violence dismembered be.
Sir, may it please you to extend your care,
That some his funeral offices perform.
Go presently, and every thing prepare,
As best becomes the military form.
THIS look alas, hath charged my soul with fears:
Speak, for my life doth on thy lips depend,
Thy countenance (ah) a doleful copy bears
Of some sad summons to denounce my end.
Starve not my ears, which famish for thy words,
Though they when swallowed may but make me burst.
The message (madame) which my soul affords
Must once be known, and once known still accursed.
Be not a niggard of ill news.
And why?
Fame will tell all the world.
But first to you.
Tell soon.
Your son is dead.
Then let me die.
Her joys and pleasures all are perished now.
Why opens not the Earth strait to devour
A hopeless caitive who all good hath lost?
The longer that I live, my grief grows more,
As but to mischief borne, kept to be crossed;
Would God this mass where misery remains,
A weight of Earth from sight of men might keep;
Or that the Seas all raging through the plains
Would make my tomb amidst their tumid deep.
O Alexander! hast thou robbed his life,
Yet entertained me still in hope to find him?
Why didst thou not first kill this poor old wife,
Who was not worthy to have lived behind him?
That I should live till thou my Son hadst slain,
Was all thy kindness for this cause employed?
You wrong that Prince, for he with haste in vain
Came him to help whom others had destroyed.
What impious thoughts durst dream so vile a deed,
A monarches murder, Asia's glories end?
Two whom he raised did his confusion breed,
He found his friend his foe, his foe a friend.
Tell on thy message, messenger of death,
And load my mind with mountains of distress,
That tears may drown my sight, sighs choke my breath,
Whilst sorrow all my senses doth possess.
When Alexander (who at peace repined)
Did (save submission) hold all offers vain,
Bend of stern Mars to try the doubtful mind;
A general muster Darius did ordain,
And (in one battle bend to venture all)
He caused his will be publicly proclaimed,
Whilst two vile Traitors did conspire his fall,
Who Bessus and Narbazanes were named;
Those two in council did discover first
Some portion of the poison of their heart,
Which caused the king suspect, but not the worst,
Yet with a sword he sought to make them smart.
But having scaped what first was feared from rage,
They seemed so much their error to lament,
His indignation that they did assuage,
(False hypocrites) pretending to repent.
Whilst Artabazus as an honest man
Who judged of others by his upright mind,
(No fraud conceived) sought more to scape then scan,
What they with craft to compass Crowns designed.
A mind sincere is ever least suspicious:
These think all faulty, who themselves are vicious.
They urged him with the king to intercede,
That in his favour he would give them place,
And did protest that by some valorous deed,
They labour would to gain again his grace;
Then Artabazus came and told the king,
That in the battle he might try their faith,
And both before his majesty did bring,
Who (when submiss) did quickly calm his wrath.
With hands stretched up to Heaven, and humbled knees,
With tears like those which Crocodiles do shed,
Woe in their face and pity in their eyes,
Did for compassion (though from rigour) plead.
The king of nature mild did them receive,
And them (who thus but for the form complained)
Not only all (relenting) quite forgave;
But wept in earnest too whilst they but feigned;
When in his Coach from all suspicion free,
With countenance sad long following on behind
(As still pretending supplicants to be)
They bowed to him whom they were bend to bind;
The Grecian Captain curiously near
(When marked a suitor) craved what he required,
By pregnant proofs did evidently clear,
What treason was against his state conspired:
He told what way their purpose might be tried,
And how the Bactrians were for trouble bend,
Then for his safety prayed him to provide,
By strait with him retiring to his Tent;
But in the King who did neglect his state,
No kind of care this friendly offer bred:
So that (it seemed) he by some powerful fate
Was headlong forward to confusion led:
The Greek past thence despairing him to save,
Who thus all means to help himself refused;
With subtle words than Bessus there did crave
To purge himself, and errors passed excused;
Old Artabazus happening to approach,
The King to him did Patron's speech report,
Who then perceived what danger did encroach,
And wished he would where Greeks were strong resort.
But in his breast this purpose firmly placed,
That from his Subjects he would never fly,
With mutual tears they tenderly embraced,
And parted there, like two who went to dye.
Now silent night in pitchy vapours clad,
Had must'red mists, and marched out of the West;
(Days beauties darkening, shadowy horrors spread)
The Sentinels were set, and all at rest,
When (lo) a terror did distract the host!
Whose bands to murmur were dispersed in parts,
With sounds resembling ships in storms near lost,
Whilst each to other cause of fear imparts.
Those who their King appointed were to guard,
From what was due by fraud or fear did stray;
And (to his danger having no regard)
His Fortune's Minions fled with heraway.
The desolation then grown wondrous great,
With some few Eunuches Darius left alone,
(No strength remaining, nor no sign of state)
He thus them spoke, who for his fall did moon:
Go, part in peace ere further harm be had,
Lest that my ruin likewise you surprise.
They hearing those sad words (as men gone mad)
Went howling through the host with dolorous cries;
So that all those who heard what plaints they made,
Thought that they had their Sovereign's death bewailed;
And (forcing trust) some forged reports were spread,
That he had killed himself, all hope quite failed.
The Persians grieved whilst these things did occur,
Did first encourage all their Country bands
To help their Prince, but yet they durst not stir
For fear of falling in the Bactrians hands;
Even in the time when this confusion was,
The Traitors to defer the fact no more,
Did to their Sovereign's Tent with Squadrons pass,
And took, and bound, him whom they served before;
Who in a golden Coach once proudly road,
Was thrown in one for common carriage used,
And who of late was honoured like a God,
Two of his own (as if their slave) abused:
Those royal hands to bear a Sceptre borne,
Were basely bound, and which the more him grieved,
(Thus misery can hardly scape from scorn)
With bands of gold, which burdened, not relieved.
When Alexander (great with courage) spied
Our Armies fly, he (who in hope them chased)
To follow us with diligence did ride,
Base seemed the Conquest which no danger graced;
But when at last at length by some informed
How he was made a captive to his own,
At this indignity he highly stormed,
As if by it his hopes had been o'erthrown.
Out of his host he did select a few
Who were best horsed, and fit for such a fight,
With whom his foes he did so fast pursue,
That e'er they could suspect, he came in sight;
The Traitors vexed when spying him appear,
Came to the Cart whereas the King did stay,
And called to horse in haste, since foes were near,
Lest that they else might find him for a prey.
He looked aloft, and cried aloud, I see
That Nemesis is frowning from above;
Should I with Traitors as a captive be?
And fly from him, who but brave wars doth move?
Then those in whom impiety abounds,
Throwed Darts at him (vile beasts to be abhorred)
And hurt the horses with an hundred wounds,
Then men more trusty, dying for their Lord;
As false in hearts, so feeble with their hands,
When Gild and Danger doubled had despairs,
The Traitors first, than all their traitorous bands
Fled from a number less by half than theirs.
But to the bounds of Death's pale kingdom brought.
The King retired where lest by people spied,
More wounded with ingratitude than ought,
Did leave the world, whose folly he had tried;
The last divorce which lasts, was scarcely made
Twixt soul and body whilst the eyes grew dim,
When Alexander came and found him dead,
Who laboured had so long to ruin him,
And (whilst his tears a general mourning moved)
That stately vesture which himself arrayed,
(Much feared for valour, more for virtue loved)
With his own hand on Darius' corpse he laid;
Then wailing long as for a brother lost
To have his funerals furnished like a Kings,
He bids you use his wealth, and spare no cost;
For, you shall want no necessary things.
He hath his body hither sent by me,
And funerall rites solemnly bend to do,
He thinks that they may best accomplished be,
Whilst who him bred doth see him buried too▪
Behold how grief hath her of sense bereft,
Whilst breath for passage struggling is with groans,
No will, nor power to live, just grief hath left,
Since what she value vanished is at once.
Ah! shall I see (no, let me first be blind)
That body breathless, which I brought to light?
Where would my soul a force sufficient find
That could encounter with so sad a sight?
O flinty heart! what hinders thee to break,
Since (crushed with cares) a stranger to repose?
Why partest thou not (poor soul) that whilst I speak
In opening of my lips, mine eyes may close?
This heritage of death, this withered stock
Is but a place appointed for despairs,
A torture to itself, a stumbling block,
Whose aged furrows fertile are in cares.
Once for good Fortunes, now for bad designed,
(To state betrayed) drawn forth from calm repose,
To have been happy most afflicts my mind,
Who, raised to fall, got much, the more to lose.
Ah me! malicious fates have done me wrong,
Who first come to the world, should first departed,
And ah! why should the old o're-live the young?
This Nature wrongs by a preposterous art;
Ah! why should Death so indiscreet be found
To spare a caitive, and to spoil a Prince?
My half-dead body, bending to the ground,
Through grief is grown ripe for the grave long since.
WHat makes vain worldlings so to swell with pride,
Who come of th'earth, and soon to th'earth return?
So hellish furies with their firebrands burn
Proud and ambitious men, that they divide
Them from themselves, and so turmoil their minds;
That all their time they study still
How to content a boundless will,
Which never yet a full contentment finds;
Who so this flame within his bosom smothers,
He many fancies doth contrive,
And even forgets himself alive,
To be remembered after death by others;
Thus while he is, his pains are never ended,
That whilst he is not, he may be commended.
What can this help the happiness of Kings
So to subdue their Neighbours as they do?
And make strange Nations tributaries too?
The greater state, the greater trouble brings;
Their pomps and triumphs stand them in no stead;
Their Arches, Tombs, Pyramids high,
And statues are but vanity:
They die, and yet would live in what is dead;
And while they live, we see their glorious actions
Oft wrested to the worst, and all their life
Is but a stage of endless toil, and strife,
Of tumults, uproars, mutinies, and factions;
They rise with fear, and lie with danger down,
Huge are the cares which wait upon a Crown.
And as Ambition Prince's under-mynes;
So doth it those who under them rule all:
We see in how short time they rise and fall,
How oft their light eclipsed but dimmely shines;
They long time labour by all means to move
Their Prince to value much their parts,
And when advanced by subtle arts,
O what a danger is't to be above!
For, strait exposed to hatred, and despite,
With all their skill they cannot march so even;
But some opprobrious scandal will be given:
For all men envy them who have most might;
And if the King dislike them once, then strait
The wretched Courtiers fall with their own weight.
●●me of a spirit more poor, who would be praised,
And yet have nought for which to be esteemed,
What they are not in deed would fain be deemed,
And indirectly labour to be raised.
This crew each public place of honour haunts,
And (changing garments every day)
Whilst they would hide, do but bewray
With outward ornaments their inward wants;
And men of better judgement justly loathe
Those, who in outward shows place all their care,
And deck their bodies, whilst their minds are bare,
Like to a shadow, or a painted cloth,
The multitude which but th'apparel notes,
Doth homage, not to them, but to their coats.
Yet Princes must be served, and with all sorts:
Some both to do, and counsell what is best,
Some serve for Ciphers to set out the rest,
Like life less pictures which adorn the ports;
Fair Palaces replenished are with fears,
Those seeming pleasures are but snares,
The royal robe doth cover cares;
Th' Assyrian die dear buys he who it bears;
Those dainty delicates, and farre-fetched food,
Oft (through suspicion) savour out of season,
Embroidered beds, anatapestries hatch treason;
The golden Goblets mingled are with blood.
Such shows the shadows are when Greatness shines,
Whose state by them the gazing world divines.
O happy he who far from Fame at home,
Securely sitting by a quiet fire,
(Though having little) doth not more desire,
But first himself, than all things doth o'ercome;
His purchase weighed, or what his parents left,
He squares his charge to his store,
And takes not what he must restore,
Nor eats the spoils that from the poor were reft:
Not proud, nor base, he (scorning creeping Art)
From jealous thoughts and envy free,
No poison fears in cups of tree;
No treason harbours in so poor a part:
No heavy dream doth vex him when he sleeps,
A guiltless mind the guardlesse cottage keeps▪
He doth not study much what storms may blow,
Whose poverty can hardly be impaired;
He fears no foreign force, nor craves no guard;
None doth desire his spoil, none looks so low,
Whereas the great are commonly once crossed,
As Darius hath been in his flower,
Or Sisigambis at this hour,
Who hath scaped long, and now at length is lost:
But how comes this, that Potentates oft fall,
And must confess this trouble of their soul?
There is some higher power that can control,
The Monarches of the Earth, and censure all:
Who once will call their actions to account,
And them repress who to oppress were prompt.