TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the a Brittane stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman a yoke,
This point of Time hath done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest Gems; Teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: Set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows; and in every street,
Let thronging joy, Love, and Amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with shouts, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally
As Thunder; For, thou now art blessed to see
That sight, for which thou didst begin to be.
When b Brutus' plough first gave thee infant bounds,
And I, thy GENIUS walked auspicious rounds
In every c furrow; Then did I forelook,
And saw this day d marked white in e Clotho's book.
The several f Circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabits you? Shall Office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More than you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That Article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspired? Now heaven avert an ill
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of plagues:" Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be Zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber shake:
Thou drownest thyself in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather than flow. Up, rise, and swell with pride
Above thy banks." Now is not every Tide.
TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when Seas of pomp o'erflow
The cities face: and cover all the shore
With sands more rich than a Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the flood of joy, that comes with him,
He drowns the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: Not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
Of these bright streams. No less may b These, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
Indeed, true Gladness doth not always speak:
joy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the fervour of so pure a flame
As this my City bears, might lose the name,
Without the apt eventing of her heat)
Know greatest JAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous Sons,
Whereof my a eldest there, thy pomp foreruns,
(A Man without my flattering, or his Pride,
As worthy, as he's b blessed to be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his brethren's right,
(Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight)
The Council, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever King had to his c empire's seat:
Never came man, more longed for, more desired:
And being come, more reverenced, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: In a Prince it is
No little virtue, to know who are his.
With like devotions, do I stoop t'embrace
This springing glory of thy d Godlike race;
His country's Wonder, Hope, Love, Ioy and Pride:
How well doth he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade, may Britain ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot o'er the Main, and knit with every shore
In bonds of Marriage, Kindred, and Increase;
And style this Land, the a Navel of their peace.
This is your servants wish, your cities vow,
Which still shall propagate itself, with you;
And free from spurs of Hope, that slow minds move:
He seeks no hire, that owes his life to Love.
And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queens, and b Glory of your Name,
Whose Graces do as far outspeak your Fame,
As Fame doth silence, when her Trumpet rings
You c Daughter, Sister, Wife of several Kings:
Besides Alliance, and the style of Mother,
In which one Title you drown all your other.
Instance, be d that fair shoot, is gone before
Your eldest joy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to us is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This City can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good Advocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sour mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greet your Grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.
STay, what art thou, that in this strange attire,
darest kindle stranger, and unhallowed fire
Upon this Altar?
Rather what art thou
That darest so rudely interrupt my vow?
My habit speaks my name.
A flamen?
Yes,
And a Martialis called.
I so did guess
By my short view, but whence didst thou ascend
Hither? or how? or to what mystic end?
The noise, and present tumult of this Day,
roused me from sleep, and silence, where I lay
Obscured from light; which when I waked to see,
I wondering thought what this great pomp might be.
When (looking in my Calendar) I found
The b Ides of Marche were entered, and I bound
With these, to celebrate the Genial feast
Of c ANNA styled PERENNA, d MARS his guest;
Who, in this month of his, is yearly called
To banquet at his Altars; and installed;
A Goddess with him, since she fills the Year,
And f knits the oblique scarf that girts the sphere.
Whilst four faced JANUS turns his g vernal look
Upon their meeting hours, as if he took.
High pride and pleasure.
Sure thou still dost dream,
And both thy tongue, and thought rides on the stream
Of fantasy: Behold here He nor She,
Have any Altar, Fane, or Deity.
Stoop; read but this h inscription: and then view
To whom the Place is consecrate. 'tis true
That this is JANUS Temple, and that now
He turns upon the Year his freshest brow;
That this is MARS his month; and these the Ides,
Wherein his ANNE was honoured; Both the Tides,
Titles, and Place, we know: But these dead rites
Are long since buried, and new power excites
More high and hearty flames. Lo, there is he,
Who brings with him a i greater ANNE than she:
Whose strong and potent virtues have k defaced
Stern MARS his Statues, and upon them placed
His, l and the world's blessed blessings: This hath brought
Sweet Peace to sit in that bright state she ought
Unbloody, or untroubled; hath forced hence
All tumults, fears, or other dark portents
That might invade weak minds; hath made men see
Once more the face of welcome Liberty:
And doth (in all his present acts) restore
That first pure world, made of the better Ore.
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoil
Of ravenous Greatness, or to steep the soil
Of raised Peasantry with tears, and blood;
No more shall rich men (for their little good)
Suspect to be made guilty; or vile Spies
Enjoy the lust of their so murdering eyes:
Men shall put off their Iron minds, and hearts;
The Time forget his old malicious arts
With this new minute; and no print remain
Of what was thought the former age's stain.
Back flamen, with thy superstitious fumes,
And cense not here; Thy ignorance presumes
Too much, in acting any Ethnic rite
In this translated Temple: Here no wight,
To sacrifice, save my devotion comes,
That brings instead of those thy m Masculine gums.
My cities heart; which shall for ever burn
Upon this Altar, and no Time shall turn
The same to ashes: Here I fix it fast,
Flame bright, flame high, and may it ever last.
Whilst I, before the figure of thy Peace,
Still tend the fire; and give it quick increase
With prayers, wishes, vows; whereof be these
The least, and weakest: that no Age may lose
The Memory of this so rich a day;
But rather, that it henceforth yearly may
Begin our Spring and with our spring the prime,
And n first account of Years, of Months, o of Time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to p Caesar fatal were.
Be all thy Thoughts borne perfect, and thy Hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide Heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow.
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou seek'st it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen Gates
Make haste to close, as urged by thy Fates;
Here ends my City's office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower than thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains doth greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.
THe long a Laments, I spent for ruined Troy,
Are dried; and now mine eyes run tears of joy.
No more shall men suppose Electra dead,
Though from the consort of her sisters fled
Unto the b Arctic circle, here to grace,
And guild this day with her c serenest Face:
And see, my d daughter Iris hasts to throw
Her Rose at wings, in compass of a bow,
About our state, as e sign of my approach
Attracting to her seat from f Mithras coach,
A thousand different, and particular hews,
Which she throughout her body doth diffuse.
The Sun, as loath to part from this half sphere,
Stands still; and Phoebe labours to appear
In all as bright (if not as rich) as he:
And, for a note of more serenity,
My six g fair Sisters hither shift their lights;
To do this hour the utmost of her Rites.
Where lest the captious, or profane might doubt,
How these clear heavenly bodies come about
All to be seen at once; yet neithers light
Eclipsed, or shadowed by the other's sight:
Let Ignorance know, great King, this Day is thine,
And doth admit no Night; but all do shine
As well nocturnal, as diurnal fires,
To add unto the flame of our desires.
Which are (now thou hast closed up h JANUS gates,
And given so general peace to all estates)
That no offensive mist, or cloudy stain
May mix with splendour of thy golden reign;
But, as th' hast freed thy i Chamber, from the noise
Of War and Tumult; thou wilt power those joys
Upon k this Place, which claims to be l the Seat
Of all thy Kingly race: the Cabinet
To all thy Counsels; and the judging Chair
To this thy special Kingdom. Whose so fair
And wholesome Laws, in every Court, shall strive
By equity, and their first Innocence to thrive;
The base and guilty bribes of guiltier men
Shall be thrown back, and justice look, as when
She loved the earth, and feared not to be sold
For that, m which worketh all things to it, Gold.
The Dam of other evils, Avarice
Shall here lock down her jaws, and that rude vice
Of ignorant, and pitied Greatness, Pride,
Decline with shame; Ambition now shall hide
Her face in dust, as dedicate to sleep,
That in great Portals wont her watch to keep.
All ills shall fly the light: Thy Court be free
No less from Envy, then from Flattery;
All Tumult, Faction, and harsh Discord cease,
That might perturb the music of thy Peace:
The querulous Nature shall no longer find
Room for his Thoughts: One pure consent of mind
Shall flow in every breast, and not the Air,
Sun, Moon, or Stars shine more serenely fair.
This from that loud, blessed Oracle, I sing
Who here, and first pronounced, thee Britain's King
Long mayst thou live, and see me thus appear,
As ominous n a Comet, from my Sphere,
Unto thy reign; as that o did auspicate
So lasting glory to Augustus' state.