WHy is there no courtesy now I am come
I trow that all the people be d●me
Or else so god help me and halyd●●●
They were almost a sleep.
No words I hard, no● yet no ●●lking
No instrument went nor ballattes singing
What ails you all thus ●● sit dreaming
Of whom take ye care?
Of my coming ye may be ●l●d
Therefore I pray you 〈...〉
For all your desire shall be had
I can amend your che●●e
By God I think ye have forgotten me.
I am wealth of this realm look upon me
For I am to every man loving and freendly
For wealth hath no peer.
Brother wealth have ye not yet done?
ye praise yourself above the moon
Every man may perceive thereby soon
That you lack discresyo●
Wherefore, by god I cannot say to much
I am so wealthy of substance and rich
In all the world where is one such
As I am of comparison.
Wealth is good I cannot denay
Yet praise yourself so much ye may
For wealth oftentimes doth decay
And wealth is nothing s●re.
Wealth hath been ever in thi● country
And here I purpose still for to be
For this is the land most meet for me
And here I will endure.
Therein ye speak●full lovingle
For in this realm wealth should be
yeth no displeasure I pray you heartily
But in the way of communication.
And for pastime I would speak some ways
Of no comparison, nor to you no dyspayre,
I do not intend that manner always,
But for a recreation,
Brother wh●t soever ye say to me.
I will hear yo● paciently
I am content and I 〈◊〉 you heartily
Begin and say your pleasure
I thanke you hly th wyll I
Some what unto my purpose apply
Though wealth be praised maru●lu●ly
yet to mine understauding.
Wealth is mutable, and th●t in shame
And wealth is haughty and proud of name
Wealth to cruel, and in great blame
For wealth is ●●er wavering.
To whom have I done any harm can ye say,
ye slander me no●e, yet I trust I may
Answer for myself in every manner way
ye will not deny that?
God forbid but ye should d● so
And ye may do it whether I will or no
Inlykewise, I must answer you als●
When ye say not true.
Though I be but to you a poor man
yet health I height, the same I am
That is desired universally than
Some calls me as good as you
As I, marry there in deed ye do compare.
Such words might bring you soon in care
Lewd parson, thou art not ware
Of what substance I am
Yes I can tell what you are, be not disposed
wealth is of great substance, that cannot be denied
yet show your commodities, and ye shallbe answered
I promise you wellh is fugitive.
What sayest thou`am I a tagetyve
I was never so taken up in my life
Nor called unsure, well I will make no strife
yet where as thou dost lay,
Thai I should show my commodities always
The best for myself whereof I ask praise
if I should stand her all my life days
yet I could not say.
Nor half the benefits that cometh of me
it cannot be told nor recited shortly
Wealth is the 〈◊〉 of allthing earthly
That you cannot deny.
Ferste god save, our sovereign Lady the Queen
With all the counsel and all that wish them b●ne
Am not I wealth with them ever at eve
Who should be there but I?
Men of the law, and jolly rich merchants
There be wealthy both of goods and lands,
Without comparison is in their hands
I walth hatg all freasure.
O good sir, of whom cometh all this
Of god only, to yo● no thank I wis
And yet man's wealth stands not all in riches
I dare say that boldly,
W●an a man hath a cempetent living
with the grace of god that passeth all thing
Love of his neighbour, and good reporting
Then is he wealthy,
Wealth of goods is but a fame
Ye is wealthy that hath a good name
Every wise man will covet the same
For other wealth I not reach
if a man have never so much good name
Every wise man will coueyte the same
if his dispositions be nought and would
Then he is but a wretch,
Nay thou art a wretch, and a fool vuwyse
wealth of riches thus to despise
Dost thou not see all the world arise
By goods and substance
He that hath plenty of silver and gold
May have all thing whatsoever he would
when can wealth lack, seeing all thing is sold
And wealth is of assurance.
I deny that, your saying is nought
Graces heaven, nor cunning, cannot be bought
without great pain, and good deeds wrought
Else man cannot them have.
Stop thereat, and hold thy peace
May not men by hea●en with richesses
As to build churches and make bye ways
Such deeds man's soul doth sans
Yea, but yet ye ●ust mark one s●ynge
if these goods came with wrong doing
Shall ye have heaven for so spending
Or yet a●y meed.
Nay nay except that ma● himself do meek
And make resysta●ce the right honour to seek
Else all such good deeds is not woth a leek
wealth hereof take heed.
Why thinkest thou that all men which h●th wealth
Getteth their goods with brybry and stealeth
Thy report is nought therefore health
I counsel thee to ●ay the best.
So I will, but yet I must say true
And ●ow a little more I will say to you
Much sorrow and care walth doth trewe
He is seldom in rest.
when a man is a little hit and wealthy
And hath in his ●hes●e treasures plenty
Then will he wrangle, and do shrewdly
By his power and might.
With his neighbours he will go to law
And a wreak his malice for value of straw
wealth is fykle and out of awe
wilful in wrong or right
Thou speakest with a slanderous tonge
All of evil will, and yet it is wronge
wealth in this realm hath been louge
Of me cometh great honour.
Because that I wealth ●ath great port.
All the world, hither doth resort
Therefore I w●l●h, am this realms comfort,
And here I will endure.
So I would ye should, and I shall do the same
Health I am called, and that is my name
If I would not abide hear I were to blame
For here I am well cherished
Yet say yourself, nhw indifferently
And if every man do not love me
Health as well as wealth, yes verily
Thereof I dare be reported
Why should they love thee that wo●lde I know
As well as me, I pray you show
I am the superior of hi● and low
No man may compare with me.
To show why I will not be afraid
For I can bide by that I ●aue said
If wealthy men be very well apaid
Or much they set you by.
But of wealth, if they have never so much
Goods, tryasure and gold, and be called rich
Yet if they lack health, there pain is such
That they were better die.
A man to were gold, and be in payne
What joy hath he? none, but would be fain
To give all his treasure for health plain
Or else he were very mad:
For if a man be never so pour
Yet if he have health, that is a treasure,
Then for his living, he may labour
And in his heart be glad,
I never marked thus much, nor understood
That Health was such a treasure, and to man so good
Wherefore I am sorry, and I will change my mood
Now I pray you forgive me.
I will forgive or else I were to blame
And I pray you to forgive me the same
I love you heartily, and will praise your name
if it please you to keep my company.
Why tarry sirs whether are ye going
I see well ye looked not for my coming
Lo, out of sight out of remembryng
Absence's is cause of straungnes,
What look ye on werwhy are ye so strange
From your fellow liberty, doth your minds change
I● your company I was wont to range
What needs all this business,
By liberty now I do not set
Seeing that health and I am met
As feloweh together no man shall let
Me for to love him best.
Let me hear what ye do say
Then ye are about to cast me away
How haps this? marry than I may
Go pike straws and take me rest.
I pray you tell me whom I have offended
if I have made a fault it shalde amended
with so short warning let me not be voided
I crow yet ye do but jest.
Why do ye make this cavelation
we intend to make no alteration
wealth and I have had communication
He is my friend of old.
What was the matter, I pray you tell
Me thinks I ought to be of counsel
Or else I promise you ye do not well
With you I should behold.
The matter is done we are agreed
To reason it more it shall not need
O brother health, thou art in deed
More preciouser than gold.
God's body how cometh this gear to pass
I am cast out at the carts arse
The world is nothing as it was
For I am here refused
Why be you angry that we do agree
Then are ye not wy●e, for if ye love me
I will love him again, so it should be
Or else I were mysaduised
Then of my love ye set no store
My company I see well ye looked notfore
Farewell I will get me out of the door
yet I am your betters and so am I called.
Such presumptuous words will have a fall
your comparison is but feeble and small
What can ye do nothing at all
As you have reputed.
What were ye both two, were not I
Wretches and caitiffs, look not so high
Think no scorn hardly
For I may be your pear
if wealth have never so much substance
Lacking Liberty and we●r in durance
Within a white, I am in assurance
ye would pray me come near.
If Health be never so lust and strong
yet if Liberty were kept from him long
Then sorrow and care would be his song.
it would abate your cheer.
Fie of wealth which lacketh lybertye
Fie of Health and be in captivity
Fie of riches and lack good company
Liberty hath no peer,
Will ye hear how he doth clatter?
What need ye to rehearse all this matter.
ye know that we twain afore any other.
Liberty must needs have still.
Liberty of us is glade to wait
ye staude to far i● your own conceit
I wis liberty ye ran make no bait
To catch us at your will.
Now there ye lie, I can suffer no longer
Wealth for Liberty doth loboure ever
Aud helth for Libertye is a great store
Therefore set me not so light
Liberty I pray the reason no more
ye are welcome to us as ye were before
In deed of liberty it is great suitor
Therefore welcome by this light
Now I thank you both full kindly
your strange words a little did green me
And now at your commandment I am ready
Aud at your owne wyll.
Marry I am come at the first call
Will, your own man have me who shall
For I am will servant to you all
Ye shall not need to send for me.
Who is acquanted with this man
He is very homely and little good he can
To come in here so boldly, then
D●●ue him away quickly,
Why, I came not till C was called
your own will opeuly ye named
Then I came a pace lest I should be blamed
Therefore I pray you let me hide still,
Whose will, or what will, doth he mean
Thou art not my will, I forsake thee clean
My will and their wills is often seen
Our wills can none ill
Alas good masters I can none ill
yet by my troth I am your evil will
your will, & your will, & your will, therefore keep m●
I love ye by god's mother,
This is a strange saying unto me
My will, your will, and his will, this cannot be
For in our wiles is great diversity
For one is not like another,
Yet by Christ your own will I am
The maddest will, and the merriest, than
For god's sake now, let me be your man
Till ye have better acquaintance.
I perceive this fellow is kind
And oweth to us good will and mind
Some kinds again then let him find
Let him have some furderawce
By god ●ir and I durst be so bold
Acquaintance of this man claim I would
and ky●ted to, if the troth were told
we be of one consangnynitie
How so? let me here that I pray thee heartily
Wyl and lyberty●is, of aunci●erie old
with ont lybertye, wil● dare not behold
And where will lacketh, liberty is full cold
Thyrfore will and liberty must needs be of kin.
In deed as he saith it may well be
For will ever longeth unto lybrtye
Therefore good friend welcome to me
I pray you all be good to him
For your sake he is welcome to b● all
Let him come to our place and than he shall
Have succour of us and help withal
now we will depart. And wealth & health goth out.
Will ye go hence. I thank ye masters with all my heart
I will s●ke you out I warrant you fear not
Now they be gone I am glad by saint marry
A little while hear I purpose to tarry
How to deceive wealth, health, and liberty
Now must I devise.
For I am a child that is pas grace
I will I am called that in every place
Doth much mischief this is a plain case
Virtue I do utterly despise,
But if they wist what I were
Then of my purpose I should be never y●●ere
I will keep my ●onge leave that I ●●r.
My whole intent and will.
But now I marvel by this day
Where shrewd wit is gone a stray
Some crafty touch is in his way
I hear him, peace, stand still
Dien vous guard pleasance
On seven or no meschaunce, what youkers dare avaunt
To play a groat or twain.
Lo hear I have in store
Two or three groats and no more
I take great thought therefore
For to keep it, it is much pain
I come vow out of a place
where is a company of small grace
thieves and hores that spends a pace
They were drunken all the sort.
One of their purces I did a spy
Out of his sleeve where it did lie
And one winked on me with his eye
But there began the sport
Their false falsehood, and I crafty wit
got the purse lo, hear I have it
I ran my way and let him sit
Smoke and shitten arse together.
And if that I had ill will here
with this money we would make good cheer
Gentle brother will, I pray the appear
For thou art in some corner.
I would come in but I am a feared
Lest that I be taken by the beard
With some catchepol, I have heard
How thou hast stolen a purse
Thou horsou art thou mad, cum in I say
This is not the first hazard that I have scaped
if I make au hand to deck my self gay
what am I the worse.
From thy company I cannot abide
I must ●edes hold upon ●hy side
y●●wyll and shrewd wit who ca● hide
For they will be together.
Now welcome wyll and what cha:
By god I thought for thee a thousand year
P●ace for god's body who cometh there
Hauce bear pot Ascon router.
Gut nyven soone rutters by the mother got
It ●eist onwne s●hon, for s●aue ye ne●e
De qus●eker man iche buy do do
Uan the groat bnmbarde well ic we●e
Dartyck dowsant van enhebit meet
Ic best de mavikin van de keining dangli●er
De grot kaiser kind ic been his ●usket●r
Her● ye not drunken hance how he be gius to praye
The ma low part slemi●ge is a little to cheek mate
Let the knave alone, for his name is war.
Such drunken sl●miniuges your company wilmar
Ic bes● nen emond, ic best in such
ye sect neat well ic fors●aue ye in doche
Cumpt hore lief with your gound stand near
it benumbs you better to handle a pot of bear
Dat maght ic well dan, ic can skynke fr●lyck
Tab. fr●w, ic bringes brore, begot●s nemerick
The horsey k●a●● by the ●es●e is drunk
A winking for dep● his eyen be clean lonck
Ic worlde ye well ye seg dac ic ●●ope
Ne nike, u● nike, ic compta ho●e for an and or cope.
Well coppin I pray the heartily tell us true
Wherefore comest thou hither for any thing to sew
ye icke figur en bumbardere van de koyni●g wei it be
Heb two skelling de dagh ic c●n scote de culueryn
Nay ye shall walk a fleming knave, will ye not see
We have English gunner's enough, there is no room empty
Ic best en ●om●erde money to m● spreken
what segye ye bones, it shall ye yode sta●n
We speak not to thee thou art a soone man
But go thy way they be not here that promote y● can
Cant ye me a de house dragen van degrot here.
Hauce ye must go to the court & for wealth inquire
What segre ye wealth nenyke he is net hoar
wealth best in slaunders, it myself brought him door
Be shrew your whoreson s●eminges heart therefore.
in deed as he saith, by war in ●launders theris wealth store
Segt ye dat brower, by the mother got dan
Gut nought it mote waft, to sent cafrin to mi laninam
Is he gone, farewell hanykin house
I pray god give him a hounded drouse
For I trow a knave brought him to house
But now brother wit.
We must deuo●e how that we may
Be in service with wealth alway
Let me here what thou canst do or say
To help for to contrive it.
For thy pleasure that I shall
This will I do first of all
Flatter and lie, and evermore call
Them my good masters still.
Then with swearing, lying and powlinge
Brybry theft, and privy pyking
Thus I shred wet, will ever be doing
I warrant there ill will.
I ●un thee thank, this is well devised
And I ill will, would have every man despised
B●● now another thing must be contrived
O els al wilbe nought
There is one they call good remedy
I● this realm, he hath geest actor●●y
He is a noble m●● and much worthy
M●ny thiuges he hath wrought
He is called l●st, discreet and indifference
Willing to fulfil his soueraines commandment
H● is not frayed to do right punishment
Therefore of him I am afraid
So an I to this maketh me very sad
Yet oftentimes I h●●e been hard bestead
N●w that I ●m ●a●ned of him I am v●ry glad
crafty w●le for him shalde ha●e
Peace no more words but 〈◊〉
M● think I ●eare mast wealth ca●●
Knele do●●e 〈...〉 devout orison
T●●t they may hear us pr●y
N●w 〈...〉 Wealth, Helth, and liberty.
Liberty and health returns back with wealth
S●rs you shall have boy-god's blessing
Space ●e worth for ●our praying
ye are well disposed and of good living
I w●ll love you the ●erteral way
Sir this do we use every day
For w●●th health and liberty 〈◊〉 ●ray
This sa●● is m● brother, 〈...〉
He is an hard honest man.
Forsooth maister I am his brother
To be 〈◊〉 servant, was my cunning hither
A● longe as we two be to gethers
ye shall not perish than
To have you both 〈◊〉 service I am content
How say you liberty will you thereto consent
Will and wit, god hath us lent
We may be glade of them
If we should refuse will and wit
we were to blame for they be fit
Therefore by my well they shall not ●lye
They be welcome to me,
God thank you masters all three
ye shall find us poor but 〈◊〉 we cannot be
My tongue stom●les, I cry you mercy
We will be true I should ●ay,
Sirs go your way home unto one place
And w● will high us after space
And when we come we shall set you in case
To hau● a living alway.
Th●n look ye do both truly and just
For we must put you in great 〈◊〉
All our houshoulde guide y● must
Behave you self well.
masters fear not for I h●●e wit enough
To beguile myself, and 〈◊〉 beguile you
I have beguiled many one I may say to you
I pray you keep that in councelll
Beware of that, what doth he say?
Beguile us all, yet I charge ye ●ay
Ye shall not beguile us if I may
I will beware betime.
Sir be not angry I you pray
●he fool woteth not he doth say
He meaneth that he will be profitable always
And save you many things.
What he meaneth I cannot te●●
But his saying is not well
Depart hence sirs by my council
And tarry us at our lodging.
Now and it please ye, will ye ●ere any singing
Therein I tell you I am sumwhat ●o●nyng
ye shall hear and ye list.
Sir I pray you sing and ye ran
Now will I begin like a lusty blood than.
Sirs now go your way of you I am glad
As of any ser●auntes that ever I had
For these can do doth good ●●o bad
We must needs have such men
What were we if we lacked will:
And without ●yt we should live ill
Therefore will and wit I will ●epe still.
I promise you I love them
Sir your mastership is hartely welcome
T●ke your place here above as it is reason.
I pray you pardon us, we know not what ye be
ye seem a man of honour, and of great anctority
S●r to know wherefore ye come we are desyrons
I am be that aught for to be well known
Of you three specially, and of duty
Great pain and business as for mine own
For you I have taken because I lo●e you heartily
To maintain you is all my desire and faculty
yet hard it is to do, the people be so variable
And many be so wilful, they will not be reformable.
Sir I pray you pardon us of our ignorance now
I see well ye know us better tha● we do yo●
I pardon you, for I do know you w●l both
wel●h, and ●●l●h, is your 〈...〉
Th● which England to forbere were very lot●
For by wealth and health cometh ●re all sa●●es
Many other ●e●●●nes ●or our great wealth ●●ames
T●a● they ●a●e not presume, nor thy dare noble bold
To stryfe again England or a●y right with hold.
Sir ye be welcome, I dealeth you show ●s your name
Good remedy forsooth I 〈◊〉 the s●me
if I 〈◊〉 ●o bolder I would pray you heartily
To sh●we us apart of you● great actoritie,
My actoritie is given to ●e most special
To maintain you three, in this realm to be
What mine intent is. I will tell, ●u● not all
For that were to long to rehearse of a surety
And I desire you all or to be loving to me
For your own ease, come walth and profit
Good remedy, than we canst desire your aiding
For by good remedy cometh all ou● preferring.
All that I do intend, if ye● will thereto agreed
And to be reformable for your own case
It is not the thing that lieth only in me
But my good will, therefore I will not cease
To have your love and favour, and thereby to please
All the world over, and to promote this realm
That you three may prosper, ye perceive what I mean
The chief part of all wealth lieth in great estates
Their substance and lands. is right commendable
Prelates of the church is wealthy of riches
merchants hath merchandise & goods iucomperable
Men of ●aw & franklins is wealthy which is laudable
Th●s wealth of riches is divided diverse ways
And to these ma●● charges, come now a days
My heart rejoiceth to ●er● your good reporting
are we bound to god, which provideth allthing
Forsooth here is 〈◊〉 half that I could re●erse
The benefits of god that ●e showeth to you wealth
Consider English men, how valiant they be & ferce
O al nacious one such, when they haue their elth
No land can do us harme, b●● with falle●●d or velth
remember what number of m●● or a●●●erie● good ordinance
Specially the grace of god, which is our 〈◊〉 forderance
If there be any that will grudge, surmise or ●●o
Again wealth, health & liberty, than ●●st I for ye●●●e
Sh●w ●ine authority and power, for to remedy it ●o
That no●e of you shall diminish nor amiss be ●ane
I good remedy therefore may & will speake won● blame
For the comen wealth, & health both of the soul & body
y• is mi office & power, & therfore I haue my actoritie
Our lord continued ye, & we thank you hardly
Both for your good instruction, and for your kindness
That you intends so well for us good remedy
when we have need we will desire your goodness
When we be infect in the soul or body
Then will I seek good remedy for secure
As yet I thank god I have no need greatly
if I have then will I seek to have your favour
Sir now we will depart hence with your licence
For other divers business that we mus● have tohether
Sirs I am content, now when ye will departed
To god I commit yo● I will not make you tarry
But yet I pray with all my mind and heart
Take heed in any wise eschew ill & shrewd company
y● a man be never so ●ood & vs● 〈...〉 be ●ut●rist●̄
He shall be his name, & to some vice they will him temp
●herfore beware of such people, & heom them be exempt
yes yes I warrant you of s●c● I will beware.
Farewell good remedy & well to far.
I pray god be ●our speed & preserve you from pain
it is mi mind ye should prosper I would have it so ●ain.
Here is none of our acquaiutaunce will retourneth
we have made to louge tar●aunce
that will ye say perchance
Aud they begone home come away apar
Nay by god not so ●astie
A little while we will larye
Good even s●r to you marry
Dwell ye in this place?
Nay good fellow I dwell not ●eare
Wherefore dost thou that inquire:
wouldest thou aught with any ●eare
Speak ●e not afryde
By God I would I had your gown
Aud were a myle without the towne
thereon A would borrow a crown
It is I that so said
Hue lookest thou one him half a scorn
I promise's you he is a scant gentleman borne
What sūy●st thou in his face
For somewhat in his face I lokke
Iu dede his mastership standes a crook
For false shrews both of you I took
And children that be past grace.
I will swear for him, as ●or this years twenty
that he hath been ever as true as I
yet sometime he will steal and make a 〈◊〉
He is of my alliance.
In good faith the same think I
That ye be both like, full unthrifty
Sirs how do ye live, show me quickly
Or I shall put you in durance
How live we? marry our meat
Cummest thou hither for to threat:
So lordly sir wittam doth speak
From whence doth he come can ye show
What dost thou ail canst thou tell?
Hast thou any thing with us to mell?
By the mass thy hands doth tykell
Thou shalt bear me a blow.
you false thieves I know ye well
I shall let your purpose ●u●y deal
ill will, and shrewd wit, the devil of hell
Take ye both for me.
Marry thou liest, our names be not so
Call us but wit, and will, add no more thereto,
if thou dost thou were as good no
We shall handle you shrewdly
Sirs farewell here I will no longer abide
For you both shortly I will provide
that all your false craft shallbe out tried
And our subtility known
To go so soon the whoreson was wise
therefore some now I must devise
that each man may wealth, health and liberti despise
Or else he will mar all our mateer.
Brother what, let me alone
When they come you shall see me a none
Complain of him. unto them echone
And put him out of favour
Peace no more word's, for they come yonder
Sirs I am glad that you h● hear
How doth all our houshold● with them what chere●
Is every thing in order there
A●ir● our intent?
ye sir they be all merry and glad
With revel and rout sometime they be mad
Pipe whore bo●t heef, every knave and drab
Is at our commaundement.
What do ye say, then ●e are to blame
And we put you in trust for the same
To keep such rule, it is a shame
It is not for our honour's
By the mass the whoreson doth lie
There is no such rule by god's body
A man may break his ●eck as lightly
As his fast in your kitchen, or seller truly.
With that neither I am ●o● content
I wolde there should be liberaitie compeēt
And with honesti it is convenient
That our neighbour far the better
you be angry with all that we have done
Cum away brother let us go ●eus soon
I know a n●w maister where we shallbe welcum●
God be with ●ou gentle master
Why will ye begun ●or a word
Peraduenture we did but board
Me think ye should your master ford
For to speak my mind.
Nay ●ay, I can tell what was the matter
Remedy was here, and he did ●latter
ye trust he more than us and better
But mark the end, what ye shall find
With good remedy we spoke in deed
To ●●low his counsel we had need
He warned us that we should take heed
Of excess and prodigality.
I marvel ye speak so of good remedy
It is I that can do more than be
Wit can make shift at necessity
When Remedi cannot be heard
I know some that hath this thousand year
Sought god remedy and yet never the near
wit can put remedy by, yea this is clear
For wit is a crafty lad.
And will is an ungracious stay
Will hath done many things me● say
And if ye let wit and will go his way
ye will repent it soon.
Why what cause have you to go your way
ye shall abide which us though you say nay
I will follow will, and wit always
And so I have ever done
if I wilt all my masters would so do
Then from your service I would ●ot go
Speak ●ow whether ye will or no
And let us know your mind
Sirs ye be welcome to me plain
And for your company I am full fain
I had liefer suffer great pain
Then to leave my wit and will,
Then let us go hence, with kindness my herye do kill
I pray you let us go, wherefore do we bide still.
As touching my first purpose hither I am come again
I trow ye know me, good remedy is my name
That every day doth take greate abor or pain
To amend all faults, I am chosen to the same
if any ma●s conscience here doth grudge or shame
Having in himself remorse, & mends in time & space
I am good remedy, and god is full of mercy and grace
Therefore I will stand aside, & a little while remain
Of wealth, Health and liberty, for to inquire
How they be ordered, and if any man complain
I will be glad to show me remedy, my think I see one appear.
Begots drowse it myself been cumpt hay scon lansiu●
Ic mot in ander land lo●en, all is quade dan
Thou fleming from whence comest thou & what dost thou here●
Ic myself cumt from sent Katryns' door mot ic skin de can beer
Get y● thither again, & tarry here no longer
Sir ic mot mid ye spreken ic myself be en scomaker
What and thou be therewith I have nothing a do.
Ic dost all forlore, copin is dod, ic maght aot do thereto
I pray thee go hence, for thou dost trouble me ill.
Nen ic seker, ic will not gone, ic would fain live hore still
There is to meinie allaunts in this real, but now I
good remedy have so provided that English men shall
live the better daily.
What segt ye by got● drowse, day is de quade man
Be de moro goi, ic myself love descone Englishmau.
Fie on the flattering knane, fie ou you aliaunts all I ●ay
ye can with craft & subtle diget engl●shmēs wealth away
O skon mester, ic heb hore been, this datten yeore
ic ●●nskote de colue●in● & ic can be or bear droer●
trust see so provide that wealth fromy●n have I shall
Ic seg to you dat wealth is lopen in an away country
wat he beg● dare borough, for●tan ye net, segt me
Ic understand the well, yet thou liest like a knave
wealth is here in England, & wealth still i trust we shall have
Ic meant no quad ic love de english man 〈◊〉 min ●ere
Cump up sent Katrin and ic shall ye given two slope bear,
Get the hence drōkē●leming thou shalt tarry no lenger here
Mor it net mare here been, woder shall ic gewest kiskin
Ic will to de Kaizer 'gan, dare sall ic wall skinkin
Is he gon● I pray god the devil go with him
where is wealth, health & liberty. I would see them come i●
Health cometh in with a kercher on his head.
O good lord help me, by your licence my sovereign
I am homely to come her in your presence thus diseased
Need constraineth me, for remedy I would have feign
I am infect both body & soul, I pray you be not displeased
Why what ail you show me, yet you I do not know
Glad I am to remedy any man, that is affirmity
I perceive by your phisnamy, that ye are veri week feeble & low
yet show me your grief, & I will help you gladly.
Gracious remedi I thank you, yet I am half ashamed
to show you mi maladi & mi name, I was called health
Therefore I am well worthy to be punished & blamed
Because I have not followed your counsel, but all thing
may be suffered save wealth.
Are you health, this maketh me very pe●●i●e and sad
yet be of good cheer, & show how you were infect
To remedy you a●d secure you I would be very glad
For god will punish the people when they be de●elt
Sir I thank god thereof for well worthy I am
My conscience doth judge, some trouble have I must
A mends I will make to god and if I can
Will and wit hath deceived me in them I put my trust.
if thou have ●oone amiss, and be sorry therefore
Then helfe amendss is made, for that is contrission
Let that pass, now will I axe you one thing more
Where be wealth and Liberty, be they of good disposition
As for wealth is fallen in decay, and necessity
By waist & war, thorough ill will, and shrewd wit
And liberty is kept in durance and captivity
God help us all, and send us good remedy for it
For to hear this tale it maketh my heart heavy
yet be of good comfort, god is full of grace, & I am good
Sir, then I beseech you help us in the way of charity
I would feign but I cannot tell which way to begin
Except I might catch will & wi●, than I trow I could
Tie them shorter, for they destroy wealth, health & liberty by sin
if I had the thieves, punish them extremely I will.
You may soon catch them, if ye will stand a side
From this place they two, will uot●onge abide.
Me thinketh I here them come, help to hold them fast will turneth
Cum in wit for here is no body
We may ve bold and talk largely
Our hearts to ease and show plainly
What we have done.
I must needs laugh I cannot forbear
To remember warre that knave will ye hear
The whoreson fleming was be ●●itten for fear
Because he should voyde so soon.
Hark now do I marvel by this bread
For I we●● surely that health be dead
I saw saw him go with a kercher on his head
As he should go to hanging.
Hark in thine Ear, if t●●e whoreson hap
To complain to him that wears the red cap
I fear theu shortly he will us cla●
By the heel's from out livings
Nay nay, there is no doubt
By him I have reported all about
that he doth not well, his good name to put out
ylwyl cannot say well,
Friend therein thou art the more to blame
Cos●au●der me wrongfully, and vudesr●ued
But or thou drpart thou shalt answer for the same.
where is Wealth & liberty, how hast thou them ordered?
Qury cicis quest is vn malt ombre
Me is un spy & nardo compoco pa●lauere.
Thou folse thief is thine English tongue gone
as mischievous il will & shrewd wit, ye have destroyed many on
Sir hurt not me, & I will tell you troth anon
This same is as false a knave as ever came within saint Iohens
Per amorde my as pica un poco
Eo queris and a● pour lagthing creae so
I can not tell what thou dost meae blabbler:
But thou shalt speak English & confess an other matter,
Sir I beseech your lordship, in the way of charity
Let not these thieves escape your hands they have destroyed us utterly.
Sir, believe him not he speaks but of malice only
we be true men, thereof we shall fetch good witness
An honest man that shallbe bound for him and me
The law saith plain, nulla fides con●●●●estes
that is troth, but who willbe witness or bound for the
There is three among you in this house
I Iyf●o to fetch them quickly
They will come unsend for I warrant you if they will
what be their names, tell me what they be,
That on is Iohn Irische and Iohn stoler
But ful these be honest men all thr
Trust not their words they will dissemble still
They are so false and crafty, all their intent is ill.
ye lie falsely, I speak but right and reason
And by the law of arms ye must nedes be ●ane
you are called good remedy which a● all feason
Should leave to man's life, and maintaine the same
we be he●e ●oth your prisoners wrongfully accused by defame
Keep ou● of us fast let him lie for all
That other for friends and witness go shall.
Sir let him not go and le●e me behind
He will ever be a false knave, for I know his mind
Hold thy tongue foolish knaue I do not mean so
I here now ye cānot agree, which of you should go
No by god's body there shall none go but I
Tho● playest the knave it must needs be I
Keep them safe I pray you for if they scap again
Many me● shall repent it, it shalde to our payne
They be here yet, to keep them fast is mine inteut,
Have them away both to prison in continent.
Lo false knave this is for thy crafty wi●.
Now fast by the heels we are lake to sit.
I am consent so that I may have company
if I should be hanged, I would be hanged honest
Go bence with them & bring wealth & liberty.
Come away ye thenes, now I shall keep you surely,
Lock us up & keep us as fast as ye can
yet ill will and ●●rewd wit shallbe with many a man.
I am half ashamed, that long i● hath been said
That noble men by such wretches hath been deceived
they did rejoice and jest, and were very well apaid
Trusting to scape cleane, and still for to have reigned
But now they shall not so, let them be well assured
That ylwyl and shrewd wit shall have but ill rest
For wheresoever they be I will breaks their nest
In the honour of god we ask you forgeuenes all th●e
we ought to be ashamed to look you in the face
By our folly & negligence, we have done so unwisely
we were toll deceived, we p●t us to your grace
This shallbe a good warding for us along space
when man is well punished than he will beware
who that knoweth what need is, well after dread ●are
I may not blame you greatly for by mine own reason
I know ylwyl and shrewd wit deceiveth great & small
if ye can remambre thys● and beware a mother season
This is a good example and learning to you all
Now serve god and love him, & for grace ever call
And ylwyl and shrewd wit, from yo● I shall abstain
ye have used them to long to your damage and pain.
Forsooth sir ye sai troth, they did us great disp●esur
Full hard it is to banquishe the ungracious ylwyl
He is so crooked, by flattery, dissula●ion & such other
Man's mind is so variable, & glad to report ill
I fear many one yet would have him rain still
For some unto their own will hath so much affection
yet the devil and ill will is both of o●e complexion
ill will is nought, but worse is shrewd wit
For he contriveth all subtle ymanginacien
it were unpossible for a man else to do it
shrewd wit breweth myscef● & false conspiration
He hath put me liberty in prison, and great at tribulation
if it had not been for your good remedi & fortheraunce
I ● other that hath liberty, should have been in durance.
Be all of good cheer, and have no mistrust
The e●de of ill will and shrewd wit is but shame
Though they reygue a while, wrongfully and unjust
yet truth will appear and their misdeeds blame
Then wrong 〈◊〉 subdued, and good remedy ta●●
Though ●alsehodeloke, and hide his matters all
Craft w●●l out and disce●te will have a fall
Whereas ye are now, in distress all three
Near were ye brought in case like to mar
Now have ye no doubt, if ye will be ruled after m●
I shall restore ye again as well as ever ye were
Wealth keep still this realm, look ye stray not fa●●
And Health be of good cheer, your disease I ca● soon mend
Liberty now ye ●e released do no more offend,
Now let us all thank god the good remedy hath stude
Trust to him only for his grace and goodness
we are forgiveness of our trespass I trust we will amend
And clean forsake sin, folly, and unthriftiness
we will here conclude, sovereign of your graciousness
we beseech you to remit our negligence, & misbehavior
There we have said amins, we commit also your favour
And for your preservation heartily we will pray
your realm to increase, w●th ●oy and tranquillity
That wealth, health & liberty, may continne here always
By the oversight and aid of him that is good remdy
which willingly doth his deu●●, under your actoritye
As part here appeareth your purpose to maintain
God continue his goodies, that long he may riagne
Iesu preserne queen Elizabeth the noble princis worthy
Iesu continue her health long for to endure
Ies● endue her w virtue grace & honour
Iesu maintain the lords of the counsel to execute good remedi ever
Iesu speed and help all them gods honour to further
Iesu increase the communalty to prosper and do well.