TIme, Fate, and Fortune haue at length conspir'd,
To giue our Age the day so much desir'd.
What all the minutes, houres, weekes, months, and yeares,
That hang in file vpon these siluer haires,
Could not produce, beneath the Britaine stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman yoke,
This point of Time hath done. Now London reare
Thy forehead high, and on it striue to weare
Thy choisest gems; teach thy steepe Towres to rise
Higher with people: set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windowes; and in euery street,
Let thronging ioy, loue, and amazement meet.
Cleaue all the ayre with showtes, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and vniuersally,
As thunder; for, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou didst begin to be.
When BRVTVS plough first gaue thee infant bounds,
And I, thy GENIVS walk't auspicious rounds
In euery furrow; then did I forelooke,
And saw this day mark't white in CLOTHO'S booke.
The seuerall circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figur'd lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happinesse we tast.
Why keepe you silence daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabites you? Shall office cease
Vpon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspi'rd? Now heauen auert an ill
Of that blacke looke. Ere pause possesse your brests
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeale when it rests,
Leaues to be zeale. Vp thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from the liquid limbes this slumber shake:
Thou drown'st thy selfe in inofficious sleepe;
And these thy sluggish waters seeme to creepe,
Rather than flow. Vp, rise, and swell with pride
Aboue thy bankes. "Now is not euery tyde.
TO what vaine end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when seas of pompe o'reflow
The cities face: and couer all the shore
With sands more rich than TAGVS wealthy ore?
When in the flood of ioy, that comes with him,
He drownes the world; yet makes it liue and swimme,
And spring with gladnesse: not my fishes heere,
Though they be dumbe, but doe expresse the cheere
Of these bright streames. No lesse may these, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
INdeede, true gladnesse doth not alwayes speake:
"Ioy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weake.
Yet (lest the feruor of so pure a flame
As this my citie beares, might lose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heate)
Know greatest IAMES (and no lesse good, than great.)
In the behalfe of all my vertuous sonnes,
Whereof my eldest there, thy pompe forerunnes,
(A man without my flattering, or his pride,
As worthy, as he's blest to be thy guide)
In his graue name, and all his brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drinke the nectar of thy sight)
The councell, commoners, and multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long deny'd, is view'd)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That euer king had to his empires seate:
Neuer came man, more long'd for, more desir'd:
And being come, more reuerenc'd, lou'd, admir'd:
Heare, and record it: "In a prince it is
"No little vertue, to know who are his.
With like deuotions, doe I stoope t'embrace
This springing glory of thy godlike race;
His countries wonder, hope, loue, ioy and pride:
How well dooth he become the royall side
Of this erected, and broade spreading Tree,
Vnder whose shade, may Brittaine euer be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoote o're the maine, and knit with euery shore
In bonds of marriage, kinred, and increase;
And stile this land, the nauill of their peace.
This is your seruants wish, your cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it selfe, with you;
And free from spurres of hope, that slow minds moue:
"He seekes no hire, that owes his life to loue.
And heere she comes that is no lesse a part
In this dayes greatnesse, then in my glad heart.
Glory of queenes, and glory of your name,
Whose graces doe as farre out-speake your fame,
As fame doth silence, when her trumpet rings
You daughter, sister, wife of seuerall kings:
Besides alliance, and the stile of mother,
In which one title you drowne all your other.
Instance, be that faire shoote, is gone before,
Your eldest ioy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to vs is yet deni'd,
But not our zeale to them, or ought beside
This citie can to you: For whose estate
Shee hopes you will be still good aduocate
To her best lord. So, whilst you mortall are,
No taste of sowre mortalitie once dare
Approch your house; nor fortune greete your grace
But comming on, and with a forward face.
Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
And first accompt of yeeres, of months, of time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appeare
To thee, as they to CAESAR fatall were.
Be all thy thoughts borne perfect, and thy hopes
In their euents still crown'd beyond their scopes.
Let not wide heauen that secret blessing know
To giue, which shee on thee will not bestow.
Blind Fortune be thy slaue; and may her store
(The lesse thou seek'st it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen gates
Make haste to close, as vrged by thy fates;
Here ends my cities office, here it breakes:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, shee speakes
A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
With feruent thankes, thy royall paynes doth greet.
Pardon, if my abruptnesse breed disease;
,,He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.
All ills shall flie the light: Thy court be free
No lesse from enuie, then from flatterie;
All tumult, faction, and harsh discord cease,
That might perturbe the musique of thy peace:
The querulous nature shall no longer find
Roome for his thoughts: One pure consent of mind
Shall flow in euery brest, and not the ayre,
Sunne, moone, or starres shine more serenely faire.
This from that loud, blest Oracle, I sing,
Who here, and first, pronounc'd, thee Brittaines king
Long maist thou liue, and see me thus appeare,
As omenous a comet, from my spheare,
Vnto thy raigne; as that did auspicate
So lasting glory to AVGVSTVS state.