STay: we conjure you, by that Potent Name,
of which each Letter's (now) a triple charm:
Stay; and deliver us, of whence you are,
And why you bear (alone) th'ostent of War,
When all hands else rear Olive boughs and Palm:
And Halcyonean days assure all's calm.
When every tongue speaks Music: when each Pen
(Dulled and dyde black in Gall) is white again,
And dipped in Nectar, which by Delphic fire
Being heated, melts into an Orphean-quire.
When Troy's proud buildings show like Fairie-bowers,
And Streets (like Gardens) are perfumed with Flowers:
And Windows glazde only with wondering eyes;
(In a Kings look such admiration lies!)
And when soft handed Peace, so sweetly thrives,
That Bees in Soldiers Helmets build their Hives:
When loy a-tiptoe stands on Fortune's Wheel,
In silken Robes: How dare you shine in Steel?
Lady, What are you that so question us?
I Am the places Genius, whence now springs
A Vine, whose youngest Branch shall produce Kings:
This little world of men; this precious Stone,
That sets out Europe: this (the glass alone,)
Where the neat Sun each Morn himself attires,
And gilds it with his repercussive fires.
This jewel of the Land; England's right Eye:
Altar of Love; and Sphere of Majesty:
Green Neptune's Minion, bout whose Virgin-waste,
Isis is like a Crystal girdle cast.
Of this are we the Genius; here have I,
Slept (by the favour of a Deity)
Fortie-foure Summers and as many Springs,
Not frighted with the threats of foreign Kings.
But held up in that gowned State I have,
By twice twelve-fathers politic and grave:
Who with a sheathed Sword, and silken Law,
Do keep (within weak Walls) Millions in awe.
I charge you therefore say, for what you come? What are you?
Knights at Arms.
Saint George.
Saint Andrew
For Scotland's honour I.
For England's I
Both sworn into a League of Unity.
I Clap my hands for joy, and seat you both
Next to my heart: In leaves of purest gold,
This most auspicious love shall be enrolled.
Be joined to us: And as to earth we bow,
So, to those royal feet, bend your steeled brow.
In name of all these Senators, (on whom
Virtue builds more, than these of antic Rome)
Shouting a cheerful welcome: Since no clime,
Nor Age that has gone o'er the head of Time,
Dide're cast up such joys, nor the like Sum
(But here) shall stand in the world, years to come,
Dread King, our hearts make good, what words do want,
To bid thee boldly enter Troynovant.
Rerum certa salus, Terrarum gloria Caesar!
Sospite quo, magnos credimus esse Deos:
Dilexere prius pueri, juvenesque senelque,
At nunc Infantes te quoque Caesar amant.
Qvae tot Sceptra tenes forti, Rex maxim, dextra,
Provida Mens summi Numinis illa dedit,
Aspice ridentem per gaudia Plebis Olympum.
Reddentem et plausus ad sua verba suos,
Tantus honos paucis, primi post secula mundi
Obtigit, et paucis, tantum unus incubuit,
Nam Regere imperijs populum faelicibus unum,
Arduares, magnis res tamen apta viris.
At non unanimes nutu compescere gentes,
Non homines pensum, sed labor ille Dei,
Ille ideò ingentes qui temperet orbis habenas,
Adiungit longas ad tua fraena manus.
Et menti de mente sua praelucet, et Artem
Regnandi, regnum qui dedit illa, docet.
Crescentes varijs Cumulat virtutibus annos,
Quas inter pietas, culmina summa tenet.
Hac proavos reddis patriae, qui barbara Gentis
Flexêre inducto Namine, corda ferae.
Hac animos tractas rigidos, subigisque rebels,
Et leave persuades quod trahis ipse jugum,
Illi fida comes terram indignata profanam,
Aut nunc te tanto Regereversa Themis.
Assidat et robusta soror, ingentibus ausis
Pro populo carum tradere prompta caput.
Quin et Regis amor, musae et dilectus Apollo,
Regali gaudent subdere plectra manu.
Aurea et ubertas solerti nata labour,
Exhibet aggestas Ruris et vrbis opes.
Sunt haec dona Poli, certa quae prodita fama
Miratum vt veniat, venit uterque polus,
Venimus et Belgae, patrijs Gens exul ab oris
Quosfovit tenero matter Eliza sinu.
Matri sacratum, Patri duplicamus amorem,
Poscimus et simili posse fauore frui.
Sic Deum Panthaeci tibi proferat alitis aewm,
Sceptra per junumeros qui tibi tradit Auos,
Sic Regina tua pars altera, et altera proles,
Spes populi longum det, capiatque decus.
Turn into Ice mine eyeballs, whilst the sound
Flying through this brazen trump, may back rebound
To stop Fame's hundred tongues, leaving them mute,
As in an untouched Bell, or stringless Lute,
For virtues Fount, which late ran deep and clear,
Dry, and melts all her body to a tear.
You Graces! and you hours that each day run
On the quick errands of the golden Sun,
O say! to virtues Fount what has befell,
That thus her veins shrink up.
We cannot tell.
Behold the five-folde guard of Sense which keeps
The sacred stream, sit drooping: near them sleep
Two horrid Monsters: Fame! summon each Sense,
To tell the cause of this strange accidence.
Great Monarch of the West, whose glorious Stem,
Doth now support a triple Diadem,
Weighing more than that of thy grand Grandsire Brute,
Thou that mayst make a King thy substitute,
And dost besides the Red-rose and the white,
With the rich flower of France thy garland dight,
Wearing above Kings now, or those of old,
A double Crown of Laurel and of gold,
O let my voice pass through thy royal ear,
And whisper thus much, that we figure here,
A new Arabia, in whose spiced nest
A Phoenix lived and died in the suns breast,
Her loss, made sight, in tears to drown her eyes,
The Ear grew deaf, Tastelike a sick-man lies,
Finding no relish: every other Sense,
Forgot his office, worth and excellence,
Whereby this Fount of Virtue 'gan to freeze,
Threatened to be drunk by two enemies,
Snaky Detraction, and Oblivion,
But at thy glorious presence, both are gone,
Thou being that sacred Phoenix, that dost rise,
From th'ashes of the first: Beams from thine eyes
So virtually shining, that they bring,
To England's new Arabia, a new Spring:
For joy whereof, Nymphs, Senses, Hours, & Fame,
Echo loud Hymns to his imperial name.
Troynovant is now no more a City:
O great pity! is't not pity?
And yet her Towers on tiptoe stand,
Like Pageants built on Fairy land,
And her Marble arms,
Like to Magic charms,
bind thousands fast unto her,
That for her wealth & beauty daily woo her,
yet for all this, is't not pity?
Troynovant is now no more a City.
Troynovant is now a Summer Arbour,
or the nest wherein doth harbour,
The Eagle, of all birds that fly,
The Sovereign, for his piercing eye,
If you wisely mark,
'tis beside a Park,
Where runs (being newly borne)
With the fierce Lion, the fair Unicorn,
or else it is a wedding Hall,
Where four great Kingdoms hold a Festival.
Troynovant is now a Bridal Chamber,
whose roof is gold, floor is of Amber,
By virtue of that holy light,
That burns in Hymen's hand, more bright,
Than the silver Moon,
or the Torch of Noon,
Hark what the Echoes say!
Britain till now near kept a Holiday:
for love dwells here: And 'tis no pity,
If Troynovant be now no more a City.
High Imperial Majesty, it is not yet a year in days since with acclamation of the People, Citizens, and Nobles, auspiciously here at this Cross was proclaimed your true succession to the Crown. If then it was joyous with Hats, hands, and hearts, lift up to heaven to cry King Iames, what is it now to see King Iames? Come therefore O worthiest of Kings as a glorious Bridegroom through your Royal chamber: But to come near, Adest quem querimus. Twenty and more are the Sovereigns we have served since our conquest, but Conqueror of hearts it is you and your Posterity, that we have vowed to love and wish to serve whilst London is a City. In pledge whereof my Lord Maior, the Aldermen, and Commons of this City, wishing a golden Reign unto you, present your Greatness with a little cup of gold.
Stay Syluans, and let the loudest voice of Music proclaim it (even as high as Heaven) that he is come.
Most happy Prince, pardon me, that being mean in habit, and wild in appearance, (for my richest livery is but leaves, and my stateliest dwelling but in the woods,) thus rudely with piping Syluanes. I presume to intercept your royal passage. These are my walks: yet stand I here, not to cut off your way, but to give it a full and a bounteous welcome, being a Messenger sent from the Lady Eirene my Mistress, to deliver an errand to the best of all these Worthies, your royal self. Many Kingdoms hath the Lady sought out to abide in, but from them all, hath she been most churlishly banished: not that her beauty did deserve such unkindness, but that (like the eye of Heaven) hers were too bright, and there were no Eagles breeding in those nests, that could truly behold them.
At last here she arrived, Destiny subscribing to this Warrant, that none but this Land should be her Inheritance. In contempt of which happiness, Envy shoots his empoisoned stings at her heart, but his Adders (being charmed) turn their dangerous heads upon his own bosom. Those that dwell far off, pine away with vexing to see her prosper, because all the acquaintauce which they have of her, is this, that they know there is such a goodly Creature as Eirene, in the world, yet her face they know not: whilst all those that here sleep under the warmth of her wings, adore her by the sacred & Celestial name of Peace, for number being (as her blessings are) infinite.
Her daughter Euporia (well known by the name of Plenty, is at this present with her, (being indeed never from her side) under yonder Arbour they sit, which after the daughter's name is called, Hortus Euporiae (Plenties Bower:) chaste are they both, and both maidens in memory of a Virgin, to whom they were nurse children: for whose sake (because they were bound to her for their life,) me, have they charged to lay at your imperial feet, (being your hereditary due) the tribute of their love: And with it thus to say.
That they have languished many heavy months for your presence, which to them would have been, (& proud they are that it shall be so now,) of the same operation and influence, that the Sun is to the spring, and the spring to the earth: hearing therefore what treble preferment you have bestowed upon this day, wherein besides the beams of a glorious Sun, two other clear and gracious stars shine cheerfully on these her homely buildings: Into which (because no duty should be wanting) she hath given leave even to Strangers, to be Sharers in her happiness, by suffering them to bid you likewise welcome. By me (once hers now your vassal,) she entreats, and with a knee sinking lower than the ground on which you tread, do I humbly execute her pleasure, that ere you pass further, you would deign to walk into yonder Garden: the Hesperides live not there but the Muses, and the Muses no longer than under your protection. Thus far am I sent to conduct you thither, prostrately begging this grace, (since I dare not, as being unworthy, lackey by your royal side) in that yet these my green Followers and myself may be joyful forerunners of your expected approach, away Sylvanus.
Shine Titan shine.
Let thy sharp rays be hurled
Not on this under world,
For now 'tis none of thine.
No, no 'tis none of thine.
But in that sphere,
Where what thine arms enfold,
Turns all to burnished gold,
Spend thy guilt arrows there,
Do, do, shoot only there.
Earth needs thee not:
Her childbed days are done,
And She another Sun,
Fair as thyself has got.
A new new Sun is got.
O this is had!
Whose new beams make our Spring,
Men glad and birds to Sing,
Hymns of praise, joy, and glee.
Sing, Sing, O this is he!
That in the North
First rising: shun (so far)
Bright as the morning Star,
At his gay coming forth.
See, see, he now comes forth.
How soon joys vary?
Here staid had still! O then
Happy both place and men,
But here had list not tarry.
O grief! had list not tarry.
No, no, his beams,
Must equal divide,
Their heat to Orbs beside,
Like nourishing silver streams.
joys slide away like streams.
Yet in this lies
Sweet hope: how far soever,
He bides, no clouds can sever,
His glory from our eyes.
Dry, dry, your weeping eyes.
And make heaven ring,
His welcomes shouted loudly,
For Heaven itself looks proudly,
That earth has such a King.
Earth has not such a King.
THe populous Globe of this our English I'll,
Seemed to move backward, at the funeral pile,
Of her dead female Majesty. All states
From Nobles down to spirits of meaner Fares,
Moved opposite to Nature and to Peace,
As if these men had been Th' Antipodes,
But see, the virtue of a Regal eye,
Th'attractive wonder of man's Majesty,
Our Globe is drawn in a right line again,
And now appear new faces, and new men.
The Elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire,
(Which ever clipped a natural desire,
To combat each with other, being at first,)
Created enemies to fight their worst,
See at the peaceful presence of their King,
How quietly they moved, without their sting:
Earth not devouring, Fire not defacing,
Waternot drowning, & the Air not chasing:
But proping the quaint Fabric that here stands,
Without the violence of their wrathful hands.
Mirror of times, lo where thy fortune sits,
Above the world, and all our humane wits,
But thy high Virtue above that: what pen,
Or Art, or brain can reach thy virtue then?
At whose immortal brightness and true light,
envies infectious eyes have lost their sight,
Her snakes (not daring to shoot-forth their stings
'Gainst such a glorious object) down she flings
Their forks of Venom into her own maw,
Whilst her rank teeth the glittering poisons chaw,
For 'tis the property of envies blood,
To dry away at every kingdoms good,
Especially when she had eyes to view,
These four main virtues figured all in you,
justice in causes, Fortitude gainstfoes,
Temperance in spleen, and Prudence in all those,
And then so rich an Empire, whose fair breast,
Contains four Kingdoms by your entrance blessed
By Brute divided, but by you alone,
All are again united and made One,
Whose fruitful glories shine so far and even,
They touch not only earth, but they kiss heaven,
From whence Astraea is descended hither,
Who with our last Queen's Spirit, fled up thither,
Foreknowing on the earth, she could not rest,
Till you had locked her in your rightful breast.
And therefore all Estates, whose proper Arts,
Live by the breath of Majesty, had hearts
Burning in holy Zeals immaculate fires,
With quenchless ardours, and unstained desires,
To see what they now see, your powerful Grace,
Reflecting joys on every subject's face:
These painted flames and yellow burning Stripes,
Upon this robe, being but as shows and types,
Of that great Zeal. And therefore in the name
Of this glad City, whither no Prince ever came,
More loved, more longed for, lowly I entreat,
You'd be to her as gracious as you're great:
So with reverberate shouts our Globe shall ring,
The Musics close being thus: God save our King.
Where are all these Honours owing?
Why are seas of people flowing?
Tell me, tell me Rumour,
Though it be thy Humour
More often to be lying,
Than from thy breath to have truth flying:
Yet alter, now that fashion,
And without the stream of passion,
Let thy voice swim smooth and clear,
When words want gilding, than they are most dear
Behold where Ioue and all the States,
Of Heaven, through Heavens seven silver gates,
All in glory riding
(Backs of Clouds bestriding)
The milky way do cover,
With starry Path being measured over,
The Deities convent,
In Ioues high Court of Parliament.
Rumour thou dost lose thine aims,
This is not Ioue, but One, as great, King JAMES.