TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the Britane stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman yoke,
This point of Time bath done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest Gems Teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: Set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows: and in every street,
Let thronging Joy, Love, and Amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with shouts, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally
As thunder; For, thou now art blessed to see
That sight, for which thou didst begin to be.
When Brutus' plough first gave thee infant bounds,
And I, thy GENIUS walks auspicious rounds
In every furrow; Then did I forelook,
And saw this day marked white in Clotho's book.
The several Circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabits you? Shall office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
Shall TIME know,
That Article, wherein your flame stood still,
An〈…〉 Now heaven avert an i'd
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of Plagues:" Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake,
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber shake:
Thou drownest thyself in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather them flow. Uprise, and swell with pride
Above thy banks." Now is not every Tide.
TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when Seas of pomp o'erflow
The cities face: and cover all the shore
With sand is more rich than Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the stood of Joy, that comes with him,
He drowns the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: Not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
o these bright streames. No lesse may These, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
INdeed, true Gladness doth not always speak:
" joy bred and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the fervour of so pure a flame,
As this my City bears, might lose the name,
Without the apt eventing of her heat)
Know greatest JAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous Sons,
Whereof my eldest there, thy pomp foreruns,
(A Man without my flattering, or his Pride,
As worthy, as he's blessed to be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his brethren's right,
(Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight)
The Council, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever King had to his empire's seat:
never came man, more longed for, more desired
And being come, more reverenced, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it:" In a Prince it is
" No little virtue, to know who are his.
With like devotions, do I stoop t'embrace
This springing glory of thy Godlike race;
His country's wonder, Hope, Love, Ioy and Pride:
How well doth he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade may Britain ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot o'er the Main, and knit with every shore
In bonds of Marriage, Kindred, and Increase;
And style this Land, the Navel of their peace.
This is your servants wish, your City's vow,
Which still shall propagate itself, with you;
And free from spurs of Hope, that slow minds move:
He seeks no hire, that owes his life to Love.
And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queens, and Glory of your Name,
Whose Graces do as far outspeak your Fame,
As Fame doth silence, when her Trumpet rings
You Daughter, Sister, Wife of several Kings:
Besides Alliance, and the style of Mother,
In which one title you drown all your other.
Instance, be that fair shoot, is gone before
Your eldest joy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to us is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This City can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good Advocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sour mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greet your Grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.
ALL hail mighty Monarch! we (the Italians) full of joy to behold thy most happy presence, and full of hopes to enjoy a felicity under thy Royal wing, do wish and pray for the health of thy Majesty. Behold, here we are all; mean in merit: few in number: but towards thy Sovereign self, in our loves great, in our duties more. For neither Atlas, who bears up heaven, no nor the Arched roof itself of heaven, can by many-many degrees reach to the top and glorious height of a good and virtuous kings deservings. And such a one is he, whom (Good God!) most lively, most wisely, and in wonderful colours, thou didst then pencil down in thine own person, when thou saidst those people were blessed, where a Philosopher rules, and where the Ruler plays the Philosopher. All hail thou royalest of Kings; live thou mightiest of Princes: Reign thou wisest of Monarchs in all prosperity: these are the wishes of us Italians: the hearty wishes of us all: All, even All.
GREAT King, those so many Sceptres, which even fill thy right hand, are all thine own, only by the Providence of heaven. Behold, heaven itself laughs to see thy Subjects smile, and thunder out loud Plaudities, to hear their Aves. This honour of Sovereignty being at the beginning of the world bestowed but upon few; upon the heads of few were the cares of a Crown set, for to sway only but one Empire (happily) as it is a labour hard: So none can undergo the weight but such as are mighty: But (with a beck as it were) to control many Nations (and those of different dispositions too) O! the Arm of man can never do that, but the finger of God. God therefore (that guides the Chariot of the world) holds the Reins of thy Kingdom in his own hand: It is he whose beams lend a light to thine. It is he that teacheth thee the Art of Ruling, because none but he made thee a King. And therefore as thou growest in years, thou waxest old in Virtues: of all thy Virtues, Religion sitting highest. And most worthy; for by Religion, the hearts of barbarous Nations are made soft: By Religion, Rebellion hath a yoke cast about her neck, and is brought to believe, that those Laws to which thou submittest even thy royal self, are most easy. With Religion justice keeps company, who once fled from this profane world, but hearing the name of King Iames she is again returned. By her side sits her sister Fortitude, whose life is ready (in Heroic actions) to be spent for the safety of thy people. Besides to make these Virtues full, Apollo and the Muses, resign, the one his Golden lyre, the other their Laurel, to thy royal hands, whilst Plenty (daughter to Industry) lays the blessings both of Country and City in heaps at thy feet. These are the gifts of heaven: the fame then spreading itself so far, that (to wonder at them) both the Poles seem to come together. We (the Belgians) likewise come, to that intent: a Nation banished from our own Cradles, yet nursed and brought up in the tender bosom of a Princely mother, Eliza. The love which we once dedicated to her (as a Mother) doubly do We vow it to thee, our Sovereign, and Father: Entreating we may be sheltered under thy wings now, as under hers: Our Prayers being, that he who through the loins of so many Kingdoms, may likewise multiply thy years, and lengthen them out to the age of a Phoenix: And that thy Queen (who is one part of thyself) with thy Progeny (who are the second hopes of thy people,) may both give too, and receive from, thy Kingdom Immortal glory.
turn into ice mine eyeballs whilst the sound,
Flying through this brazen tromp, may back rebound,
To stop Fame's hundred tongues, leaning them mute,
As is an untouched bell, or stringless Lute,
For virtues Fount, which late ran deep and clear,
Dries: and melts all her body to a tear:
You Graces: and you Hours that each day run,
On the quick errands of the Golden Sun,
Great Monarch of the West, whose glorious Stem,
Does new support a triple Diadem,
Wearing more than that of thy grand Grandsire, Brute.)
Thou that mayst make a King thy Substitute,
And dost besides the Red-rose and the white,
With the rich flower of France, thy garland dight,
Wearing about kings now, or those of old,
A double Crown, of Laurel and of Gold,
O let my voice pass through thy Royal care,
And whisper thus much, that we figure here.
A new Arabia, in whose spiced Nest,
A Phoenix lived, and died in the suns breast,
Her loss made Sight, in Tears to drown her eyes,
O say? to virtues Fount what has befell,
That thus her Veins shrink up.
We cannot tell.
Behold the fivefold guard of Sense, which keeps
the sacred stream, sits drooping: near them sleep,
Two horrid monsters: Fame, summon each sense,
To tell the cause of this strange Accidence.
The Ear grew deaf, Taste like a Sick-man lies,
Finding no relish: Every other Sense
Forgot his office, Worth and excellence,
Whereby this Fount of Virtue 'gan to freeze,
Threatened to be drunk up by two enemies,
Snaky Detraction, and Oblivion,
But at thy glorious presence both are gone.
Thou being that sacred Phoenix, that doth rise,
From th'ashes of the first; Beams from thine eyes
So virtually shining, that they bring
To England's new Arabia, a new spring:
For joy whereof, Nymphs, Senses, Hours and Fame,
Echo-loud Hymns to his Imperial name.
MOST happy Prince, pardon me, that being mean in habit, and wild in appearance (for my richest livery is but leaves, and my stateliest dwelling but in the woods) thus rudely with piping Sylvans, I presume to intercept your Royal passage. These are my walks, yet stand I not here to cut off your way, but to give it a full and a bounteous welcome, being a messenger sent from the Lady Eirene my mistress; those that sleep under the warmth of her wings adore her by the Sacred and Celestial name of Peace; her daughter Euporia (well known by the name of Plenty) is at this present with her, (being indeed never from her side:) Under yonder Arbour they sit, which after the daughter's name is called Hortus Euporiae (Plenties Bower.) Chaste are they both, and both maidens, in memory of a Virgin to whom they were Nurse-children, for whose sake (because they were bound to her for their life) me have they charged to lay at your Imperial feet, (being your hereditary due) the tribute of their love. And with it thus to say. That they have languished many heavy months for your presence, which to them would have been, (and proud they are that it shall be now so) of the same operation and influence, that the Sun is to the Spring, and the Spring to the Earth; hearing therefore what treble preferment you have bestowed upon this day, wherein besides the beams of a glorious Sun, two other clear and gracious Stars shine cheerfully on these her homely buildings; Into which (because no duty should be wanting) she hath given leave even to Strangers, to be sharers in her happiness, by suffering them to bid you likewise welcome: By me (once hers, now your vassal) she entreats, and with a knee sinking lower than the ground on which you tread, do I humbly execute her pleasure, that ere you pass further, you would deign to walk into yonder Garden. The Hesperides live not there, but the Muses, and the Muses no longer than under your protection. Thus far am I sent to conduct you thither, prostrately begging this grace (since I dare not, as being unworthy, Lackey by your Royal side) that yet these my green Followers and myself may be Joyful forerunners of your expected approach. Away Syluans.
THe populous Globe of this our English I'll.
Seemed to move backward at the funeral pile
Of her dead female Majesty: All states
From Nobles down to Spirits of meaner Fates,
Moved opposite to Nature and to Peace,
As if these men had been Th'antipodes.
But see, the virtue of a regal eye,
Th'attractive wonder of man's Majesty,
Our Globe as drawn in a right line again,
And now appear new faces and new men:
The Elements, Earth, Water, Air and Fire,
(Which ever clipped a natural desire,
To combat each with other) being at first
Created enemies, to fight their worst,
See: as the peaceful presence of their King,
How quietly they move without their Sting.
Earth not devouring: Fire not defacing,
Water not drowning: and the Air not chasing:
But propping the quaint Fabric that here stands,
Without the violence of their wrathful hands.
Mirror of times, lo, where they Fortune sits
Above the world, and all our humane wits,
But thy high Virtue above that: what pen
Or Art, or Brain, can reach thy Virtues then?
At whose Immortal brightness and true light,
envies infectious eyes have lost their sight:
Her Snakes (not daring to shoot forth their stings,
'gainst such a glorious Object) down she flings
Their forks of Venom into her own maw,
Whilst her rank teeth the glittering poisons chaw,
For 'tis the property of envies blood,
To dry away at every Kingdoms good,
Especially when she had eyes to view
These four Main Virtues which here figure you,
justice in causes: Fortitude 'gainst foes,
Temperance in spleen; and Prudence in all those:
And then so rich an Empire, whose fair breast
Contains four Kingdoms by your entrance blessed,
By Brute divided, but by you alone,
All are again united, and made One:
Whose fruitful glories shine so far and even,
They touch not only earth, but they kiss heaven,
From whence Astraea is descended hither,
Who with our last queen's Spirit fled up thither,
Foreknowing on the earth she could not rest,
Till you had locked her in your rightful breast,
And therefore all estates, whose proper Arts
Live by the breath of Majesty, had hearts,
Burning in holy Zeals Immaculate sires,
With quenchless ardours and unstained desires.
To see what they now see, your powerful Grace,
Reflecting joys on every subjects face.
These painted flames and yellow-burning stripes,
Upon this robe being but as shows and types,
Of that great Zeal; And therefore in the name,
Of this glad City, whither no Prince ever came,
More loved, more longed for, lowly I entreat
You'd be to her as gracious as you're great:
So with reverberate shouts our Globe shall ring,
The musics close being thus, God save our King.
STay, what art thou, that in this strange attire,
darest kindle stranger, and unhallowed fire
Upon this Altar?
Rather what art thou
That darest so rudely interrupt my vow?
My habit speaks my name.
A flamen?
Yes,
And Martialis called.
I so did guess
By my short view, but whence didst thou ascend
Hither? or how? or to what mystic end?
The noise, and present tumult of this Day,
roused me from sleep, and silence, where I lay
Obscured from light; which when I wake to see,
I wondering thought what this great pomp might be.
When (looking in my Calendar) I found
The Ides of Marche were entered, and I bound
With these, to celebrate the Genial feast
Of Anna styled Perenna, Mars his guest;
Who, in this Month of his, is yearly called
To banquet at his Altars; and installed,
A Goddess with him, since she files the Year,
And knits the oblique scarce that girds the sphere.
Whilst four faced Ianus turns his vernal look
Upon their meeting hours, as if he took
High pride and pleasure.
Sure thou still dost dream.
And both thy tongue, and thought rides on the stream
Of Fantasy: Behold here He nor She,
Have any Altar, Fane, or deity.
Stoop; read but this Inscription: and then view
To whom the place is consecrate. 'tis true
That this is Ianus Temple, and that now
He turns upon the Year his freshest brow;
That this is Mars his month; and these the Ides,
Wherein his Anne was honoured; Both the Tides,
Titles, and Place, we know: But these dead rites
Are long since buried, and new power excites
More high and hearty flames. Lo, there is he,
Who brings with him a greater Anne than she:
Whose strong and potent virtues have defaced
Stern Mars his statues, and upon them placed
His, and the world's blessed blessings: This hath brought
Sweet Peace to sit in that bright state she ought
Unbloody, or untroubled; hath forced hence
All tumults, fears, or other dark portents,
That might invade weak minds; hath made men see
Once more the face of welcome Liberty:
And doth (in all his present acts) restore
That first pure world, made of the better Ore.
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoil
Of ravenous Greatness, or to sleep the soil
Of raised Peasantry with tears, and blood;
No more shall rich men (for their little good)
Sul to be made guiltie; or vile Spes
Emoy the lust of their so murdering eyes:
Men shall put off their Iron minds, and hearts;
The Time forget his old malicious artes
With this new minute; and no print remain
Of what was thought the former age's stain.
Back flamen, with thy superstitious fumes,
And sense not here; Thy ignorance presumes
Too much, in acting any Ethnic rite
In this translated Temple: Here no wight,
To sacrifice save my devotion comes,
That brings instead of those thy Masculine gums.
My City's heart, which shall for ever burn
Upon this Altar, and no Time shall turn
The same to ashes: Here I fix it fast,
Flame bright, flame high, and may it ever last.
Whilst I, before the figure of thy Peace,
Still tend the fire; and give it quick increase
With prayers, wishes, vows; whereof be these
The least, and weakest: that no Age may lose
The memory of this so rich a day;
But rather, that it henceforth yearly may
Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
And first account of Years, of Months, of Time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to Caesar fatal were.
Be all thy Thoughts borne perfect, and thy Hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide Heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow:
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou seest it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen Gates
Make haste to close, as urged by thy Fates;
Here ends my City's office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower than thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains doth greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
He merits not t'offend, that hasts to please.