Lo, how the stormy world doth worldlings toss,
Twixt sandy pleasures, and a rocky will,
Whilst them that Court it most, it most doth cross,
To vice indulgent, virtue's stepdame still:
This mass of thoughts, this animated slime,
This dying substance, and this living shadow,
The sport of Fortune, and the prey of Time,
Soon raised, soon razed, as flowers are in a meadow.
He toils to get (such is his foolish nature)
A constant good in this inconstant ill:
Unreasonable reasonable creature,
That makes his reason subject to his will!
Whilst on the height of contemplation placed,
I weigh fond earthlings, earnest idle strife,
All (though they all have diverse parts embraced)
Would act a comic Scene of tragic life:
The mind (which always at some new things aims)
To get for what it longs, no travel spares;
And loathing what it hath of better dreams,
Which (when enjoyed) doth procreate but cares:
Yet to a Sovereign bliss which they surmise,
By diverse means, all pregnant wits aspire,
But with strange shapes the same so much disguise,
That it we scarce can know, much less acquire:
Some place their happiness (unhappy beasts,
Whose minds are drunk with momentary joys)
In gorgeous garments, and in dainty feast,
To pamper breath-toss'd-flesh with pleasures toys;
Some more austere, no such delights allow,
But rein their passions with advised respects,
And by no fortune moved to brag nor bow,
Would make the world enamoured of their sects;
Some bathing still in virtue's purest springs,
Do draw Ideas of a heavenly brood,
And search the secrets of mysterious things,
As most undoubted heirs of that high good:
Thus with a dreamed delight, and certain pain,
All seek by several ways a perfect blisses;
And let none wonder though they toil in vain,
Who cannot well discern what thing it is,
What happiness can be imagined here,
On painted grounds though we our hopes repose,
Who dearly first do gain, what we hold dear,
Than what we once must lose, still fear to lose?
Think (though 'mongst thousands scarcely one of all,
Can at this point of happiness arrive)
One fortune have (whilst so to fortune thrall)
To get the thing for which a world doth strive:
What though he swim in Oceans of delights,
Have none above him, and his equals rare;
Ears joying pleasant sounds, eyes stately sights,
His treasures infinite, his buildings fair?
Yet fortunes course which cannot be controlled,
Must mount some mean men up, throw down the great,
And (still in motion) circularly rolled,
From what it is, must alter every state.
Though of his wealth, the greedy man doth boast,
Whilst treasures vain his drossy wits bewitch,
What hath he gained, but what another lost?
And once his loss may make another rich.
But ah, all lose who seek to profit thus,
To found their trust on trustless grounds whilst made:
We may be robbed from them, they robbed from us,
Grieved for their loss, as when first purchased, glad:
Those are but fools, who hope true rest to find
In this frail world, where for a while we range:
Which doth (like Seas exposed to every wind)
Ebb, flow, storm, calm, still moving, still in change;
Each wave we see doth drive the first away,
And still it whitest foams where rocks are near,
While as one grows, another doth decay,
The greatest danger oft doth least appear.
Their seeming bliss, who trust in frothy shows,
Whose course with moment's fickle fortune dates,
As to a height, so to confusion grows:
A secret fate doth manage mighty states.
But I scorn fortune, and was ever free
From that dead wealth, depending to her power;
My treasure still I bear about with me,
Which neither time nor tyrants can devour:
That Lady of events, though still she rave,
Scarce can her course to mock my mind advance,
For (if not trusted first) none can deceive,
And I attend no certainty from chance;
Then I have learned to moderate my mind,
Still with contentment crowning my desires.
My garments course, my food such as I find:
He hath enough, who to no more aspires.
What satisfaction doth o'erflow my soul,
(The world all weighed) while high accounts I cast,
And in my memories unblotted scroll,
Do match the present time with others passed?
Those worldly minds, whose weakness wealth doth cloak,
(Though others happy) I them wretched think;
For, whilst that passions base all reason choke,
The body's slaves, their souls surcharged, do sink;
Yet loathe I not the world as loathed by it,
Like those who when disdained, pretend disdain;
No, no, I had (as Athens must admit)
What riches, birth, or reputation gain.
And if that I would vaunt of mine own deeds,
Fair City, where mine eyes first sucked the light,
I challenge might what most thy glory breeds,
For fame or power, as due to me of right:
When Salamina had our yoke removed,
Wit● follies garments, wisdom to disguise,
What none durst else attempt, I boldly moved,
And seemed a fool to make the people wise.
Then having thus by policy prevailed
My Country's squadrons leading to the field,
Whilst both by strength and stratagems assailed,
I forced that I'll (though walled with waves) to yield;
But when renowned, by that adventurous deed,
And turned victorious, charged with stranger's spoils,
(No perfect bliss below) worse did succeed,
The peace that was abroad, bred civil broils;
What with more violence doth fury lead,
Then mutinous commons when they want a head?
The meaner sort could not their minds conform,
Those things to do which great men did command:
And (whilst distracted with a dangerous storm,)
All joined to place the Rudder in my hand;
I reunited that divided state,
And with good success managed matters well,
Which further kindled, had been quenched too late,
That Hydra-headed tumult did so swell.
When I my worth by those two works had proved,
And trod the path of power (as Prince) a space,
The people's Minion, by the Nobles loved,
None could be great, save such as I would grace.
Thus carried with the force of fortune's stream,
I absolutely acted what I would;
For, the democracy was but a name,
The Cities raines my hand in trust did hold;
I might (a tyrant) still have ruled in state,
But my clear mind could no such clouds conceive,
But gladly left what others urge of late,
If I may rule myself, no more I crave;
Yet some whose thoughts but for frail glory cared,
Said that my spirit could not aspire to reign,
And that my error could not be repaired,
Since so to err means come not oft again.
My soul in this a more contentment finds,
Then if a Diadem adorned my brow,
I chained th'affections of undaunted minds,
(Though barbarous erst) which did to order bow,
Yet hardly could rich Citizens advise
To keep the statutes which my laws contained,
Whilst what one praised, another did despise:
Some loved, some loathed, even as they thought they gained.
At last, at least in show, all rest content,
Even those who hate me most, lend their applause:
A worthy mind needs never to repent,
The suffering crosses for an honest cause.
Whilst travelling now with a contented mind,
The memory of this my fancy feeds,
Though to great states their periods are assigned:
Time cannot make a prey of Virtue's deeds.
Where seven-mouthed Nile from a concealed source,
Inunding o'er the fields, no banks can bind,
I saw their wonders, heard their wise discourse;
Rare sights enriched mine eyes, rare lights my mind.
And if it were but this, yet this delights:
Behold how Croesus here the Lydian King,
To be his guest me earnestly invites,
The which to some would great contentment bring;
But I bemoan that world-bewitched man,
Who makes his gold his god, the earth his heaven;
And I will try by all the means I can,
To make his judgement with his fortune even.
WHat can man's wand'ring thoughts confine,
Or satisfy his fancies all?
For whilst he wonders doth design,
Even great things than do seem but small;
What terror can his spirit appall,
Whilst taking more than it can hold,
He to himself contentment doth assign;
His mind which monsters breeds,
Imagination feeds,
And with high thoughts quite headlongs rolled,
Whilst seeking here a perfect ease to find,
Would but melt mountains, and embrace the wind.
What wonder though the soul of man,
(A spark of heaven that shines below)
Doth labour by all means it can,
Like to itself, itself to show?
The heavenly essence, heaven would know,
But from this mass, (where bound) till free,
With pain both spend life's little span;
The better part would be above:
And th'earth from th'earth cannot remove;
How can two contraries agree?
Thus as the best part or the worst doth move,
Man of much worth, or of no worth doth prove.
O! from what fountain do proceed
These humours of so many kinds?
Each brain doth diverse fancies breed,
As many men, as many minds:
And in the world a man scarce finds
Another of his humour right,
Nor are there two so like indeed,
If we remark their several graces,
And lineaments of both their faces,
That can abide the proof of sight?
If th'outward forms than differ as they do,
Of force th'affections must be different too.
Ah! passions spoil our better part,
The soul is vexed with their dissensions;
We make a God of our own heart,
And worship all our vain inventions;
This braine-bred missed of apprehensions
The mind doth with confusion fill;
Whilst reason in exile doth smart,
And few are free from this infection,
For all are slaves to some affection,
Which doth oppress the judgement still:
Those partial tyrants, not directed right,
Even of the clearest minds, eclipse the light.
A thousand times, O happy he!
Who doth his passions so subdue,
That he may with clear reasons eye,
Their imperfections fountains view,
That so he may himself renew,
Who to his thoughts prescribing laws,
Might set his soul from bondage free,
And never from bright reason swerve,
But making passions it to serve,
Would weigh each thing as there were cause:
O greater were that Monarch of the mind!
Then if he might command from Thule to Ind.
WHat Prince hath been so favoured by the fates,
As could like me of full contentment boast?
Loved of mine own, and feared of foreign states,
My foes have fallen, my friends were never crossed;
For having that (which thousands seek, at will)
My happiness in all things hath been such,
Heaven's favourite, and fortune's Minion still,
I know not what to wish, I have so much;
Mine eyes no way did ever grieve my heart
With any object that their sight did draw,
My name applauded is in every part,
My word an Oracle, my will a law:
What breast can well confine this flood of joys?
Whose swelling current doth o'erflow my mind,
Which never dreamed that which the soul annoys,
But did in all a satisfaction find;
I scorn vain shadows of conceited fears,
As one whose state is built on marble grounds:
In all my horoscope no cloud appears,
My bliss abounds, my pleasures pass all bounds.
That Grecian (Sir) is at the Court arrived,
Whole wisdom fame through all the world records.
And to extol my state, have you not strived,
Whilst bent to soothe his ears with courteous words?
In all the parts where he hath chanced to be,
In foreign bounds, or where he first saw light,
He never did such stately wonders see,
As since this Court enriched hath his sight;
When regal shows had ravished first his eye,
As mountains nurslings, little simple swains,
Who used with infant floods them never spy
Sport, portative (like Serpents) through the Plains,
When one of them first comes to view the veils,
And wanton water-Nymphs there (wondering) sees,
The rareness of the sight so much prevails,
That rillets rivers seem, the rivers Seas:
So all the guards that garnished Solon's way,
Did to his mind a great amazement bring,
The gallants (golden statues) made him stay;
Each Groom a Prince, each Esquire seemed a King,
And now he comes to gain your longed-for sight;
Whom in his mind no doubt he doth adore,
He gazed on those who held of you their light,
Sun of this soil, he must admire you more;
Now he o'er all will spread your praises forth,
A famous witness of your glorious reign:
The record of one wise man is more worth,
Than what a world of others would maintain.
Great Prince, do not the loving zeal reject,
Which a mean man, yet a good mind affords:
And who perchance doth more your good affect,
Then those who paint their love with fairer words.
Thy love (sage Grecian) grateful is to us,
Whom fame long since acquainted with thy worth,
So that we long longed for thy presence thus,
To spy the Spring which sent such treasures forth;
Would God that many such would here resort,
Whose virtues beams would shine in every breast,
Whose countenance grave, would grace so great a Court,
And like a Lamp give light unto the rest.
Spare (courteous King) that undeserved praise,
I am but one who do the world despise,
And would my thoughts to some perfection raise,
A wisedome-lover, willing to be wise:
Yet all that I have learned (huge toils now past)
By long experience, and in famous Schools,
Is but to know my ignorance at last;
Who think themselves most wise, are greatest fools.
This is the nature of a noble mind,
It rather would be good, then be so thought,
As if it had no aim, but fame to find,
Such as the shadow, not the substance sought:
Yet forced to give that which thou wilt not take:
The world, what thou hold'st down, doth raise more high,
That which thy face thus shuns, shines on thy back:
Praise follows them, who what they merit fly:
And how I think, on th'earth no creature lives,
Who better can instruct what I would learn,
Then thou to whom frank Nature largely gives
A mind to see, a judgement to discern.
To satisfy your suit, my duteous care
Shall it, or then my ignorance disclose.
Lo, you have seen my pomp, my treasures rare,
And all the strength on which my thoughts repose.
Those be but dreams of bliss which fortune brings,
To break (by bending) foolish mortals minds,
I saw but senseless heaps of melting things;
A waving wealth, exposed to many winds:
This but the body serving to decore,
As foolish owners it, it th' owners spends,
Where minds more circumspect seek better store
Of wealth from danger free that never ends.
I wots not what you mean, whilst thus in love,
With feigned Ideas of imagined bliss;
By fancies drawn, such portraits do but move
Sick brains to dream, that which indeed they miss;
But more I have then their conceits can show,
Whose rich conjectures breed but poor effects,
And (I beseech you) did you ever know
A man more blessed than I in all respects?
I, Tellus knew, a man whom Athens loved,
Who to do good, at no occasion failed,
And in my judgement hath most happy proved,
Since while he lived, beloved, whilst dead, bewailed;
And last (that he might reap all fruits of bliss)
His Country's beaten bands, near put to flight,
By him encouraged, scorned to be submiss,
Who died victorious in two Armies sight;
More glorious now then when he was alive,
As he in heaven, on earth his happy rest,
To trace his steps, who led by Virtue strive,
Heirs of his worth, and honoured by the best.
Since this first place a private person gains,
Whose fortunes treasure in short time was told,
Now next in rank, who registered remains,
Whose happiness you most accomplished hold?
Of Cleobis, and Bitons virtuous way,
The prosperous course doth to my thoughts approach:
Their mother wanting on a solemn day,
The horses which were used to draw her Coach,
Them to supply the place, love kindly raised,
Who drew her to that place of public mirth,
Whilst both of them abundantly were praised,
They for their piety, she for her birth:
This charitable work, when brought to end,
Both died, whilst offering incenie to the Gods,
Who (favoured so) to draw them did intent,
From further danger of afflictions rods:
O happy mother! who (with true delight)
Of labours past such pleasant fruits enjoyed,
And happy children! who did thus acquit
The mother's pain, and died whilst well employed.
Ah, ah, our lives are frail, do what we can,
And like the brittle glass, break whilst they glance,
Then oft the heavens to curb the pride of man,
Do inter-sowre our sweets with some sad chance.
Is there no place appointed then for me?
Or is my state so abject in thine eyes,
That thou dost think me blessed in no degree,
As one, whose best in fortune's balance lies?
Or thinkest thou me (of judgement too remiss)
A wretch exposed to want, to scorn, or pains,
The bastard child of fortune, barred from bliss,
Whom heavens do hate, and all the world disdains?
Are those poor creatures then to be compared,
With one who may consume such in his wrath?
Who (as I please) do punish or reward,
Whose words, nay even whose looks give life or death.
Let not your judgement thus from reason shrink,
To gloze on that which simply comes from me;
They who do freely speak, no treason think,
One cannot both your friend and flatterer be.
To us who Grecians are, the Gods do grant
A moderate measure of an humble wit,
So that our Country yet did never want
Some whom the world for wise men did admit.
And yet amongst us all the greatest number
(Whilst living) look not for a perfect rest,
Though Fortune's minions in her bosom slumber,
And seem to some, whom this world blinds, most blessed:
Yet o'er all mortal states, change so prevails,
We alterations daily do attend,
And hold this for a ground that never fails,
None can be throughly blessed before the end:
I may compare our state to table-plays,
Whilst judges that are blind, give only light;
Their many doubt the earnest mind dismays,
Which must have happy throws, then use them right:
So all our days in doubt, what things may chance,
Time posts away, our breath seems it to chase,
And when th'occasion comes us to advance,
It of a thousand, one can scarce embrace.
When by a generous indignation moved,
Two fight with danger, for a doubtful praise;
Whilst valour blindly, but by chance is proved,
That one's disgrace, another's fame must raise:
O! what a fool his judgement will commit,
To grace the one, with a not gained applause?
Where fortune is but to give sentence yet,
Whilst bloody agents plead a doubtful cause:
This world a field is, whereas each man fights,
And armed with reason, resolutely goes
To war, (till death close up the body's lights)
Both with external, and internal foes;
And how can he the Victor's title gain,
Who yet is busied with a doubtful fight?
Or he be happy who doth still remain
In fortune's danger for a small delight?
The wind-winged course of man, away fast wears,
Course that consists of hours, hours of a day,
Day that gives place to night, night full of fears:
Thus every thing doth change, all things decay:
Those who do stand in peace, may fall in strife,
And have their fame by infamy suppressed:
The evening crownes the day, the death the life;
Many are fortunate, but few are blessed.
I see this Grecians spirit but base appears,
Which cannot comprehend heroic things:
The world of him more than he merits hairs,
At least he knows not what belongs to Kings:
Yet fame his name so gloriously arrayed,
That long I longed to have him in my house;
But all my expectations are betrayed,
I think a Mountain hath brought forth a Mouse.
THis King hath put his trust in trustless toys,
Whilst courting only temporary things,
And like a hooded Hawk, gorged with vain joy:
At random flies, born forth on follies wings:
O how this makes my grief exceeding great,
To see one's care, who lives for dead things such,
Whilst shew-transported minds admire his state:
Which I not envy, no, but pity much.
Thus worms of th'earth (whilst low-placed thoughts prevail)
Love melting things, whose show the body fits,
Where soul's of clearer sight do never fail,
To value most the treasure of good wits.
Those worldly things do in this world decay,
Or at the least we leave them with our breath,
Where to eternity this leads the way,
So differ they as far as life and death.
And yet what wonder though he wander thus,
Whom still by success treacherous fortune blinds?
Though this indeed seem somewhat strange to us,
Who have with learning purified our minds;
Was he not borne heir of a mighty state?
And used with fortunes smiles, not feared for frowns,
Doth measure all things by his own conceit?
A great defect, which fatal is to Crowns;
Then from his youth still trusting in a Throne,
With all that pride could crave, or wealth could give,
Used with entreaties, and controlled by none,
He would the tongue of liberty deprive;
Though to his sight I dare not thus appear,
Whose partial judgement, far from reason parts;
I grieve to see your entertainment here
So far inferior to your own deserts;
That matchless wisdom which the world admires,
And (ravished with delight,) amazed hears,
Since not in consort with his vain desires,
Did seem impleasant to distempered ears:
Ears which can entry give to no discourse,
Save that which enters fraughted with his praise;
He can love none but them that love his course,
And thinks all fools who use no flattering phrase:
This with the great ones doth the gods displease,
Though spreading all her heavenly treasures forth,
They (if not in their livery them to please)
Do virtue vilify, as of no worth.
I care not, Aesop, how the King conceived
Those my frank words which I must always use;
I came not here till he my coming craved,
And now when come, will not my name abuse;
Should I his poisonous Sycophants resemble,
Whose silken words their Sovereign do o'erthrow?
I for his Diadem would not dissemble,
What hearts do think, the tongues were made to show.
And what if I, his humour to content,
The world's opinion lost by gaining once?
He can but give me gifts which may be spent,
But nought can clear my fame if darkened once;
That so he might my reputation raise,
If I soothed him, it would procure my shame;
Whilst those who vicious are, our virtue's praise,
This in effect is but a secret blame.
Though as a simple man he me despise,
Yet better simply good, then doubly ill;
I not my worth by others praises prise,
Nor by opinions doc direct my will.
That praise contents me more which one imparts,
Of judgement sound, (though of a mean degree)
Then praise from Princes void of princely parts,
Who have more wealth, but not more wit than he.
Who come to Court, must with King's faults comport.
Who come to Court, should truth to King's report.
A wise man at their imperfections winks.
An honest man will tell them what he thinks.
So should you lose yourself, and them not save.
But for their folly▪ I no blame would have.
By this you should their indignation find.
Yet have the warrant of a worthy mind.
It would be long ere you were thus preferred.
Then it should be the King, (not I) that erred.
They guerdon as they love, they love by guess.
Yet when I merit well, I care the less.
It's good to be still by the Prince approved.
It's better to be upright, though not loved.
But by this mean, all hope of honour fails.
Yet honesty in end ever prevails.
I think they should excel (for virtue rare)
All men in wit, who unto men give laws;
Kings of their kingdoms, as the centres are,
To which each weighty thing by nature draws:
For as the mighty rivers, little streams,
And all the liquid powers which rise or fall,
Do seek in sundry parts by several seams,
The Ocean's bosom that receives them all.
It as a Steward of the tumid deeps
Doth send them back by many secret veins,
And (as the earth hath need of moisture) keeps
These humid treasures to refresh the Plains.
Thus are Kings breasts the depths where daily flow
Clear streams of knowledge with rare treasures charged,
So that continually their wisdoms grow,
By many helps, which others want, enlarged:
For those who have intelligence o'er all,
Do commonly communicate to Kings,
All th'accidents of weight that chance to fall;
Which great advantage, Greatness to them brings.
They (jealously disposed) comment on minds,
And these who Arts, or Nature's gifts enhance,
(Whose value no where else a Merchant finds▪)
Do come to Kings, as who may them advance.
No doubt great Iove, since they supply his place,
(So with their charge to make their virtues even)
Doth give to them some supernatural grace,
Vice-gods on th'earth, great Lieutenants ot heaven.
As you have shown, King's good occasion have
To sound the deeps and mysteries of wit,
And those who so their stairs from r●i●e save,
Do well deserve upon a Throne to sit,
But ah those rivers are not ever pure,
Through tainted channels which oft times conveyed,
By flatteries poison rendered are impure;
Oft Prince's hearts are by their ears betrayed:
For impudent effronted persons dare
Court with vain words, and detestable lies,
Whilst men of minds more pure must stand afar,
The light is loath some to diseased eyes.
But with amazement this transports my mind,
Some who are wise gross flattery can digest,
And though they know how all men are inclined,
Yet please the bad, and do but praise the best.
Is't that such men no error can control,
Nor will not cross their appetite in aught,
But (nothing censuring) every thing extol,
Where better wits would argue as they thought;
Or since the world of worth in all esteems,
They never like a pregnant spirit to raise,
So to have none who but to help them seems,
Or may pretend an interest in their praise:
This self-conceit is a most dangerous shelf,
Where many have made shipwreck unawares,
He who doth trust too much unto himself,
Can never fail to fall in many snares.
Of all men else great Monarches have most need
To square their actions, and to weigh their words,
And with advice in all things to proceed;
A faithful Counsel oft great good affords.
Lo, how th'inferior spheres of force do bend
As the first mover doth their courses drive,
The Commons customs on the Prince depend,
His manners are the rules by which they lives;
As for himself none only is brought forth,
Kings for the use of many are ordained,
They should like Sun's clear Kingdoms with their worth,
Whose life a pattern must be kept unstained:
All virtuous Princes have a spacious field
To show their worth, though even in Fortune's spite,
Where mean men must to their misfortune yield,
Whilst want of power doth cloud their virtue quite;
As precious stones are th'ornaments of rings,
The stone decores the ring, the ring the hand,
So Countries are conform unto their Kings,
The King decores the Court, the Court the Land;
And as a crop of poison spent alone,
Infected fountains doth with venom fill,
So mighty states may tainted be by one:
A vicious Prince is a contagious ill.
It easy is another's fault to spy,
And paint in th'air the shadows of our minds,
Whilst apprehending with the inward eye
A high perfection which no practice finds.
I grant, those grounds which we imagine may,
Will move no charmed man, much less a Prince,
To disenchant himseife, and seek some way
At Reason's Court, his passions to convince;
Ere Croesus can refrain from this his fury,
He must forsake himself (as one renewed)
And in the lethe of oblivion bury
The vanities that have his soul subdued;
Those his prerogatives he first must bound,
And be a man, a man to be controlled,
Then all his faults (as in another found)
An arbiter with equal eyes behold;
Can he cast off this veil of fond self-love,
Through which each object Pride too grossly spies,
He would these ravenous Parasites remove,
Vile instruments of shame that live by lies;
The only means to make such people part,
That he might judge more freely of his state,
Were to cast out the Idol of his heart,
Which (when overthrown) he must disclaim too late:
For, foreign flatterers could find no access,
If not that weighing his own worth too much,
He first concludes (to sooth himself inclined)
That all their praises should of right be such;
And when those hireling Sycophants have found
A Prince whom too secure opinion makes,
His noblest part they by smooth weapons wound,
All spoil by pleasing them whom flattery takes:
o'er rulers, rule when such a person bears,
Of virtuous men the rising to prevent,
From wholesome counsel they close up his ears
To cross the better sort in all things bend.
If you at Court to credit would arise,
You must not seek by truth to gain renown,
But sometime must applaud what you despise,
And smile in show whilst in effect you frown.
From hence in haste I will myself retire,
I hate Courts slavery, it my freeness scorns,
Nor am I one whom Croesus doth desire,
Since I detest what him (he thinks) adorns;
O how light Fortune doth his folly flout,
While as he glories in this flying show!
With greedy harpies hedged in round about,
Which gape to be made rich by his overthrow.
Not all the wealth that his great kingdom shows,
Can make me from my resolution shrink;
Nor can the terror of a Tyrant's blows
Enforce my tongue to speak more than I think;
Nothing so much as doubts doth vex the mind,
Whilst anxious thoughts to fix nowhere can come,
Yet every one the way to rest may find,
A resolution all things doth overcome.
And since my thoughts in Innocency rest,
No outward war can inward peace surprise,
What can imagied be to brave a breast,
That both doth death, and poverty despise?
OF all the Creatures bred below,
We must call Man most miserable,
Who all his time is never able
To purchase any true repose;
His very birth may well disclose
What miseries his bliss o'erthrow:
For, first (when borne) he cannot know,
Who to his state is friend or foe,
Nor how at first he may stand stable,
But even with cries, and tears, doth show
What dangers do his life enclose;
Whose griefs are sure, whose joys a fable;
Thus still his days in dolour so
He to huge perils must expose;
And with vexation lives, and dies with woe,
Not knowing whence he came, nor where to go.
Then whilst he holds this lowest place,
O! how uncertain is his state?
The subject of a constant fate,
To figure forth inconstancy,
Which ever changing as we see,
Is still a stranger unto peace:
For if man prosper but a space,
With each good success fond bold,
And puffed up in his own conceit,
He but abuses Fortune's grace;
And when that with adversity
His pleasure's treasures end their date,
And with disasters are controlled,
Strait he begins for grief to dye:
And still the top of some extreme doth hold,
Not suffering Summers' heat, nor Winter's cold▪
His state doth in most danger stand,
Who most abounds in worldly things,
And scares too high with Fortune's wings,
Which carry up aspiring minds,
To be the object of all winds;
The course of such when rightly scanned,
(Whilst they cannot themselves command)
Transported with a● empty name,
Oft unexpected ruin brings;
There were examples in this Land,
How worldly bliss the senses blinds,
From which at last oft trouble springs,
He who presumes upon the same,
Hid poison in his pleasure finds;
And sailing rashly with the winds of fame,
Doth oft times sink down in a Sea of shame.
It may be feared our King at last,
Whilst he for nothing is afraid,
Be by prosperity betrayed:
For, growing thus in greatness still,
And having worldly things at will,
He thinks though time should all things waste,
Yet his estate shall ever last
The wonder of this peopled round;
And in his own conceit hath said:
No course of heaven his state can cast,
Nor make his fortune to be ill;
But if the gods a way have laid
That he must come to be uncrowned,
What sudden fears his mind may fill,
And in an instant utterly confound
The state which stands upon so slippery ground?
When such a Monarch's mind is bend
To follow most the most unwise,
Who can their folly well disguise
With sugared speeches, poisonous baits?
The secret canker of great States,
From which at first few disassent
The which at last all do repent,
Then whilst they must to ruin go;
When Kings begin thus to despise
Of honest men the good intent;
Who to assure their Sovereign's seats,
Would feign in time some help devise,
And would cut off all cause of woe,
Yet cannot second their conceits:
These dreadful Comets commonly forego
A King's destruction, when miscarried so.
WHat fancies strange with terror strike my soul,
The tortured captive of distrustful fears?
Huge cares (suggesting harm) my joys control,
Whose mind some coming cross charactered bears;
And credulous suspicion (too too wise)
To fortify my fears doth means invent;
Whilst sudden trouble doth my spirit surprise,
A presage sad which boasts some bad event;
I think the soul (since an immortal brood)
Hath by inheritance an heavenly power,
Which some foreknowledge gives of ill, and good,
But not the means to scape a fatal hour;
Though with this mortal veil, when made half blind,
Not well foreseeing what each time forth brings,
Yet it communicates unto the mind
In cloudy dreams true (though mysterious) things;
Imagination wonderful in force,
The judgement oft foils with confusion so,
That (than they prove things presupposed worse)
Ere time distressed, man multiplies his woe:
For as the shadow seems more monstrous still,
Then doth the substance whence the shape it takes,
So the conjecture of a threatened ill,
More than itself some to be troubled makes;
This alteration too seems more than strange,
Which suddenly so moved hath my mind.
I see (more than I thought) all states may change,
When heaven pursues, th'earth no defence can find;
My soul all pleasure is already loathing,
This hath indeed so deep impression left,
A dream, a fancy, froth, a shadow, nothing
Hath all my mirth even in a moment reft.
Whence (mighty Sovereign) can this change proceed,
Which doth obscure the rays of Princely grace?
Those who are schooled in woe, may clearly read
A mighty passion written in your face;
And (if a stranger may presume so far)
What friend is false, or who are feared as foes?
For I imagine in what state you are:
A secret sympathy imparting woes;
Two strings in diverse Lutes set in accord,
(Some say) th'one only touched both give a sound,
Even so souls tuned to grief, the like afford,
Whose airy motions mutually do wound.
No doubt, it must disburden much the mind,
A Secretary in distress to have;
Who by his own, another's grief can find,
Where glad minds scorn what they cannot conceive:
And I (Adrastus) would the cause declare,
With which I so torment my soul in vain,
But yet I blush to tell my foolish care:
The fond illusion of a drowsy brain.
As bodies tempered are, or souls inclined,
All dreams by ●ight th'imagination makes,
Or else th'impression thought work in the mind,
By which (when wakening) one most travel takes.
By sleep arrested as overcome by death,
In Nature's bosom I embraced true rest,
And in that Mass where nothing moved but breath,
Life's faculties sleep for a time suppressed;
Then whilst the spirit most powerful did remain,
Since least distressed by this terrestrial part.
Souls at such times their strength so strongly strain,
That oft their burdens as astonished start.
To rarefy the air from vapours powers,
When first Aurora rose from Tithonus' bed,
Ere Phoebus blushing stole from Thetis bowers,
This apprehension in my brain was bred:
I only have two sons, and th'one (you see)
The sign of Nature's indignation bears,
And from his birthday dumb is dead to me,
Since he can give no comfort to mine ears;
The other Atis (all my life's delight)
In whom the treasures of my soul are kept,
I thought (vain be my thought) in the twilight,
(I know not whether yet I waked or slept)
Whilst he was sporting, void of worldly cares,
And not in danger, which could threaten death,
A pointed tool of iron fell unawares,
And from his body banish did his breath;
Whilst the pale carcase did upbraid mine eyes,
The horror of the sight my sense recalled,
Which when I think of, yet my courage dies,
Such an exceeding fear my spirit appalled;
This touched my state so much, it hath me moved
To match my Son in marriage at this time
With virtuous Celia, whom he dearly loved,
That both might reap the pleasure of their prime;
And if the heavens his o'er- throw have decreed
By destiny which cannot be revoked,
So may we have behind some of his seed,
Ere in his blossom all our hopes be choked;
Thus, ere his soul lodge in the lightlesse shade,
Some of his offspring may content my mind,
I cannot hold him altogether dead,
Who leaves his Image in some one behind;
And though we do what ever seems the best
To disappoint those but surmised annoys,
Yet for all this my mind hath never rest,
Some secret terror doth disturb my joys.
Ah (Sir) if such a dreamt ill as this,
Hath plunged your soul even in the depths of grief,
Unhappy I, who wail a thing that is,
Whilst hope (though racked) dare promise no relief;
Though all those dreadful fancies took effect,
(Which heavy chance th'almighty Iove withhold)
None can compare them, no, in no respect
With those misfortunes which my state enfold:
For though your Son dye by another's hand,
You shall but wail his death, and not your crime;
The heavens of me my brother's blood demand,
His fate, my fault, mourn must I all my time.
In what strange form could this disaster fall,
From which there flow salt floods of just distress?
Tell on at length the fatal cause of all,
A greater grief makes one forget the less.
My sorrows ground I smothered still till now,
As too offensive food for dainty cares,
But since of such discourse you do allow,
I'll tell a tale that may move stones to tears;
Of Phrygian Princes my great Father come,
Had in my growing age a tender care,
That all my education might become
One whom he might for mighty hopes prepare;
As yet four lustres scarcely had begun
To grace my witnessed sex with blooming cheeks,
When I (fond youth) that labyrinth could not shun,
Whence back in vain the straying Entrer seeks.
I loved, O fatal love, unlovely fate!
The virtuously fair, yet fairest Dame
That ever was enshrined in soul's conceit,
Or ditties gave to grace the sounds of fame;
Strait were my fancies to her beauties tied,
None can paint passions, but in feeling minds,
I burned, freezed, doubted, hoped, despaired, lived, died,
With actions changed as oft as Autumn's winds;
Yet many conflicts passed 'twixt hopes and fears,
To feast, at least to nurse my starved desires;
She granted had a truce unto my tears,
And temper did with equal flames my fires:
For as she was the most esteemed Saint,
Whose image Love erected in my mind,
So when her cares had harboured once my plaint,
It pity first, and then did favour find;
But ah triumphing in mine own conceit
As one whose love his Lady did prefer,
I was corrivalled (O disastrous fate!)
By one who loved, but was not loved by her,
He looking as I looked, faugh what I saw,
Saw Nature's wonder, and the world's delight,
And strait as that blind god (blind guide) did draw,
Still (like a Lizard) lived upon her sight.
Then laboured he that jewel strait to won,
Whose matchless worth he prized above his breath,
And loathed all light which flowed not from that Sun,
As life without her had been worse than death;
Yea, Fortune seemed to favour his desire,
And where to build high hopes did give him grounds:
The Nymph her parents daily did require,
That she might furnish physic for his wounds;
Of my distracted thoughts strange was the strife,
Who threatened thus with eminent mishap,
Was like to lose a thing more dear than life,
Whilst others strived my treasure to entrap;
The man who sought my joys to undermine,
I could not justly wish his state o'erthrown,
Nor blame the spirit that sympathised with mine;
I envied not his lot, but wailed mine own.
Now in my beast a mighty rage did reign,
Which forced my soul with inward wounds to bleed,
Some fancies feared what once his love might gain,
Since it was possible that he might speed,
Than others called her constancy to mind,
Which would not yield by such assaults though proved,
Yet forced to fear the frailty of her kind,
A hearing woman may in time be moved;
Thus tossed with doubts amidst a deep of woe,
Which with suspicion did my joys supplant,
I blamed the thoughts that durst accuse her so,
As virtue's pattern could one virtue want;
And, ●or I hoped, his toils no further wrought,
(Affliction oft affection doth inflame)
She of her sex who was the wonder thought,
Would thus not wrong the glory of her name,
Though in my absence they had oft assayed,
That from her mind they might have me removed,
(The Sun burns hottest when his beams are stayed)
The more they crossed her love, the more she loved;
For finding that delay no end affords,
And how fair Generals only flowed from Art,
She did upbraid him with disdainful words,
To raze those hopes that had abused his heart;
Love is a joy which upon pain depends,
A drop of sweet, drowned in a sea of sours;
What folly doth begin, oft fury ends,
They hate for ever, who have loved for hours:
When all his arguments proved of no force,
Strait with disdain his soul in secret burned,
And what he thought was ill, to make far worse,
That Apostate to fury favour turned;
Through love preposterous procreating hate,
His thoughts amongst themselves could not agree,
Whilst what was best he deeply did debate,
To see her dead, or then enjoyed by me:
What (said he) when he first had mused a space,
(So hard it is to quench affections fires)
Shall I disfigure that Angelic face,
And cloud those beauties which the world admires?
Shall she by me be to confusion brought,
To whom I vows, and prayers did impart?
To whom I sacrificed each secret thought,
And on her beauty's altar burned my heart?
Or shall I see her in another's power,
And in his bosom laid, upbraid my loss,
Whilst both with scornful smiles; then death more sour,
To point me out for sport, report my cross?
That sight which sometime did me sweetly charm,
Should it become a cause of grief to me?
No, none who live shall glory in my harm,
Since she will not be mine, she shall not be.
The hateful love having vowed her death,
Did with a cup of poison drown my joys;
The fairest body from the sweetest breath
Was parted thus (O ocean of annoys!)
That Monster Fame, whose many mouths and ears
Must know, but not conceal a rare thing long,
And prodigal of ill, most chief bears
The worst news first, informed me of this wrong:
For neighbouring near the most unhappy part,
That had been spoiled of such a noble guest,
As death had hers, the furies seized my heart,
Whose pain did spring from that which bred her rest;
How huge a weight did first confound my soul
No tongue can tell; it still my mind torments,
Rage did of grief the outward signs control:
When great winds blow the fire, the smoke worst vents;
Whilst generous fury did disguise my grief,
I ran transported with a mighty rage,
Bent (by revenge, or death to get relife)
A tragic actor for a bloody stage:
For I was come no sooner to the place,
Whereas I thought the Murderer to have found,
But I did meet (O ruin and disgrace!)
Too dear a friend to catch and enemy's wound;
Ah! passions dimmed mine eyes, wrath led my hand,
I was no more myself, Grief had me killed;
The first by Night, who did before me stand,
(As one whose breast with rage Allecto filled)
By chance encountering, ere he spoke a word,
I bathed his bosom with a crimson flood,
And in his breast did drown the cruel sword,
That in another's body drank my blood;
But when a Torch had partly robbed the night,
Proud of supposed revenge (ah bitter gain)
I saw, I knew, black knowledge, cruel sight,
My brother was the man, whom I had slain;
O bitter loss, which nothing can repair!
My soul with tow such monstrous deeds annoyed,
Grief, rage, spite, shame, amazement, and despair,
Galled, tossed, burned, dashed, astonished, and destroyed;
The thought of my offence doth grieve me most,
Yet am I sometime by love's verdict cleansed;
And strait my brother's violated ghost,
By dreadful dreams doth brag to be revenged.
Now whilst this great disaster did occur,
What had the author of your anguish done?
He having heard this lamentable stir,
Who self-accusing thoughts convicted soon,
Strait (wounded by a wonderful remorse)
Led by mad love, or desp'rate fear to death,
He bent to follow her, or dreading worse,
(Stabbed by himself) died to defraud my wrath.
Those strange mishaps your enemies eyes must weet,
And force compassion from your greatest foe,
Since many monstrous circumstances meet
To make a horrid harmony in woe;
But what doth touch one's self, most force doth find,
For ills when felt, then heard, grief more abounds;
This ecstasy hath so o'erwhelmed my mind,
A melancholy huge all mirth confounds;
Yet such disasters past, we must omit,
At least no more immoderately lament,
And as for those which are but coming yet,
Use ordinary means them to prevent.
No wonder (Sir) though by all means you strive,
From dangerous actions Atis to restrain.
I will unto his youth attendance give,
Which in my age may guerdoned be again,
If it be possible for mortal states
To strive against the Stars, and be more strong;
I Fortune must unarm, and cross the fates,
By barring both all means to do me wrong:
I have commanded under pain of death,
That no such weapon be within my walls,
As I supposed extinguish might his breath,
To scape a storm which oft by Fortune falls;
He to frequent the field must oft defer;
And without guards his lodging never leave;
Lo where with Countrymen he doth confer,
We will go try what they of him would have.
LEnd (Sir) a willing ear to humble words,
Let not our baseness bar us from your grace,
Which still itself alike to all affords,
Who bless their sight with that Majestic face;
For simple subject's Monarches must take care,
Though this our state be thought but abject now,
You are our head, and we your members are,
And you must care for us, we care for you;
Our poverty to us is no reproach,
Which innocent integrity adorns,
On others states we never do encoach,
But live by labours, pricked with many thorns;
And ever busied for the Country's good,
We have no time to must of vain conceits,
But (earning with continual toil our food)
Must entertain the pomp of prouder states;
And (Sir, though plain) think not our meaning ill,
Who thus dare speak so freely as we do,
Whilst Mediators do dilate our will,
They wrist it as they will, and spoil us too;
To countenance such as us, you need not shun:
A great man too well graced may do more harm;
And it stains not the glory of the Sun,
Though oft his beams an abject object warm.
Be not discouraged by your base estate,
Ye are my people, and I'll hear your plaint,
A King must care for all, both small and great,
And to do good (like God) should never faint;
The Sceptre such as those should chief shroud,
Not Cottages, but Castles spoil the Land,
To spare the humble, and to plague the proud,
A virtue is that doth make Kings to stand.
Sir, our estate some hasty help requires:
In Misia near the celebarted rounds
Of great Olympus which the world admires,
There haunts a Boar the horror of these bounds:
His body big, and hideous is his form,
Whose foamy jaw with tusks like javelins strikes,
And in deformity all parts conform,
His back hath bristles like to iron pikes.
This Nature's Monster, wondered at by men,
The forest's Tyrant, and the Country's terror,
Doth murder all, and draws them to his den,
Who chance to cross his way by fatal error;
In tears whilst melting, tender mothers wail,
(The gored infants tumbling in their blood;)
This beast to be abhorred doth them assail,
And in his bowels buries both for food;
Then when we fly the field where he doth haunt,
To have his hunger, or his rage allayed,
He all our labours quickly doth supplant,
And poor men's hopes are strangely thus betrayed;
Ere this, of true repose we were the types,
And pasturing on each plain our fleecy flocks,
Did make a consort of our warbling pipes
With moving Crystals, playing on the rocks;
And oft to ease our toils (all ranged in bands)
With garlands guarded from Apollo's beams,
We gazed upon Pactolus' golden sands,
Glassed, bathed, and quenched our thirst, with his pure streams;
Whilst we preferred, the river seemed amazed,
Even to his golden bed his grassy bank,
And lay and looked whereas our cattle grazed,
far from all envy of a greater rank;
That to repress oppression you take care,
Though we were dumb, the public rest may speak:
Your Laws, like Spider's webs are not a snare
For little flies, that them the big may break;
Mean men by them from great men's pride are saved,
The heavens continue long your prosperous reign,
And let us not by such a beast be braved,
Which by our ruin would your Sceptre stain.
What would you then that should be done by me,
That may repay your loss, repair this wrong?
We crave none of your wealth, but wish to see
This Boar be-bloud the staff of the most strong:
Let valorous Atis worth ily your Son,
With Lydian youth incapable of fears,
Go to the fields before the rising Sun,
To quench his thirst have drunk Sun,
To quench his thirst have drunk the morning's tears,
And we shall lead them crowned with laurel forth,
Where in strict bounds, yet a theatre large
For men to make a trial of their worth,
They with advantage may this Monster charge;
So shall we reap repose, and they delight,
Whilst that prodigious body justly smarts,
Though fearful once, then made a pleasant sight,
When like a wood it planted is with darts.
I may not spare my Son for a respect,
Which is not needful now to be made known,
But others shall be sent for that effect,
That this outrageous beast may be overthrown;
The stately gallants who attend our grace
(That by the world their valour may be viewed)
This enterprise will willingly embrace,
And not return, till with his blood imbrued;
I swear, this monster shall when he is dead,
A memorable monument remain;
IN Phebe's church men shall admire his head,
As Python's spoils, when by her brother slain.
Ah! wherein Father did I thus offend?
Or what vile sign of a degenered mind
Have you but marked in me, whose course may tend
To the reproach of our imperial kind?
And abject dastard, who for nought avails,
Whose worth the world must trust, but never tries
As one whose strength, or then his Courage fails▪
Must I in vile repose inglorious lie!
Lie like a wanton by vain thoughts bewicthed!
Who spoilt of force, effeminately lives,
A Peacok poor, with painted pens enriched▪
Yet bare of every thing that glory gives;
What glory give those titles unto me,
Which by succession fall, not by desert?
Should but my fame with borrowed feathers fly?
For, come of kings a kingdom is my part;
Who honour as hereditary claims,
Like bastard's base, doth but his birthright bloat,
I scorn to beg my worth from dead men's names,
Or to gain credit only by my Coat;
What comfort's this to have the highest seat,
And all the bliss that Majesty imparts,
If those whom only we exceed in State,
Be our Superiors in far better parts?
More than a Crown true worth should be esteemed▪
Th'one fortune's gift, the other is our own,
By which the mind from anguish is redeemed,
When fortunes goods are by herself o'erthrown.
I see what brave desires boil in thy soul,
And make thee thus magnanimous to be,
This high-bent courage nothing can control,
All Lydia is not large enough for thee:
Go, seek an Empire equal with thy mind,
Of which a Crown is due to every thought;
But Glories love whilst courting in this kind,
I fear by thine, our ruin may be wrought:
And pardon me (dear Son) great is the love
Which makes me watch so warily thy ways;
A Father's care what kind of thing can move,
Whom such a danger not in time dismays?
The Heaven of late advertised me by dreams,
That some sad fortune threatened thee too soon,
Each day some ominous sign attendance claims,
Which out of time are marked, when all is done:
This was the cause that hastened us so much,
To have thee bound to Hymen's, sacred law,
This was the cause that all our care was such,
Out of our sight all weapons to withdraw:
Scorn not those Comets which amazement notes,
The stars to mortal states a bounds design,
And do not think 'tis but my love that dotes,
For if thou fall, my fate depends on thine.
Would God I had some means once ere my death,
To satisfy that infinite desert,
Which I shall hold, so long as I have breath,
Deep registered with reverence in my heart;
Yet (sir) we see this is a natural thing,
That too excessive love engenders fears:
A sport like this can no great peril bring,
Where either all delights the eyes, or th'ears.
If from my former deeds I now should shrink,
(As void of virtue) to soft pleasure thrall,
Of your two Sons what might your Subjects think,
Th'one wanting but one sense, the other all?
What fancies might my late spoused love possess,
To see her husband hateful in men's sights,
And honours bounds thus basely to transgress,
As womanized still wallowing in delights?
Though women would have men at their devotion,
They hate base minds that hatch no noble notion.
Well, well, my Son, I see thou must prevail:
Go, follow forth the chase, use thine own form,
Yet stay, or let my words this much avail,
Walk with more care to scape this threatened storm;
Thy haughty spirit to tempt all hazards bend,
I fear transports thee to a fatal strife,
I wish to err, yet the event prevent,
Lest that thy courage but betray thy life;
And (dear Adrastus) I must let him know,
What benefits I have bestowed on thee,
Not to upbraid thee, no, but so to show
How I may trust thee best thus bound to me;
When thou from Phrygia cam'st defiled with blood,
And a fraternal violated love,
When desp'rate quite thou as distracted stood,
Fled from thy Father's face, cursed from above,
Thou foundst me friendly, and my Court thy rest,
A Sanctuary which thy life did save;
And dangers 'scaped (when one hath been distressed)
A wary wisdom by experience leave;
Yet all that favour past, was but a sign
Of generous greatness, which would gracious prove;
But in thy hands my soul I'll now consign,
And give the greatest pledge that can bind love.
Behold how Atis of our age the shield,
Whose harm as you have heard, I feared ere now,
Is for his pastime to go range the field,
And with his custody I will trust you;
I must (my friend) even fervently exhort,
Wait on my Son, remember of my dream.
This dangerously delectable sport,
Doth make me fear the grief exceeds the game.
I never shall those courtesies neglect:
It grieves me not to think, nor hear the same,
For whilst this spirit those members doth direct,
All shall concur to celebrate your fame;
Yet were you pleased, I would not hence departed,
Who do all things that mirth may move abhor,
But with my passions here (retired a part)
Woe past would wail, and shun all cause of more;
If to converse where not one cross annoys,
I fear my fellowship infect with woe,
Those who themselves would recreate with joys▪
Still strange mishaps attend me where I go,
But since you will commit this charge to me,
Your Majesty I'll study to content,
At least my faith shall from defects be free,
And all my pains shall as you please be spent.
Now bend to see this monsters ugly shape,
With an inflamed desire my thought do burn,
And Father fear not, dream of no mishap,
I hope with speed victorious to return.
Return? from whence dear love? O deadly word▪
That doth import thy parting from my sight,
I heard the name mishap, Ah! (my dear Lord)
Should such strict limits bound so large delight?
O cruel to thyself, unkind to me!
And canst thou condescend to leave me so?
If (ere in doubt) abandoned thus I be,
It may defer, but not defraud my woe;
This might indeed to thee yield some relief,
To have thy ears not wounded by my moan,
But would wound me with a continual grief,
To fear all things, where I should fear but one;
Desist in time from this intended strife,
A course too rash, and not approved, by me,
Remember I have interest in thy life,
Which thus to venture I do not agree;
Hast thou not given a proof in thy green prime,
That may content the most ambitious heaps?
Whilst Atis was his own, than was it time
To follow fancies unconfined Scopes;
Thyself then only camped in fortunes bounds,
Thou dost endanger Celia likewise now;
You sigh her breath, she suffers in your wounds,
You live in her, and she must die in you.
Life of my soul, how do such broken speeches,
From troubled passions thus abruptly rise?
I know (my love) thy love my mind o'erreaches:
Affection (Schooled with fears) is too too wise;
I go alongst the fields, for sport to range;
Thy sighs do but my soul with sorrow fill;
And pardon (dear) I find this wondrous strange,
That thou beginst now to resist my will;
If I trespass in aught against my duty,
Which makes thee thus my constancy mistrust;
Mistrust not yet the Chains of thine own beauty,
Which bind all my desires, and so they must;
Are we not now made one? such fears o'ercome,
Though I would fly, myself my self do fetter,
And if that I would fly, from whom? to whom?
I can love none so well, none loves me better;
Have pity of those pearls, (sweet eyes, souls pleasures)
Lest they presage what thou wouldst not have done;
The Heavens had not give me those precious treasures,
Of such perfections to be spoiled so soon.
THose who command above,
High precedents of Heaven,
By whom all things do move,
As they have order given,
What worldling can arise,
Against them to repine?
Whilst castelled in the skies,
With providence divine;
They force this peopled round,
Their judgements to confess,
And in their wrath confound
Proud mortals who transgress
The bounds to them assigned
By Nature in their mind.
Base brood of th'earth, vain man,
Why brag'st thou of thy might?
The Heavens thy courses scan,
Thou walkest still in their sight;
Ere thou wast borne, thy deeds
Their registers dilate,
And think that none exceeds
The bounds ordained by fate;
What Heavens would have thee to,
Though they thy Ways abhor,
That thou of force must do,
And thou canst do no more:
This reason would fulfil,
Their work should serve their will.
Are we not heirs of death,
In whom there is no trust?
Who tossed with restless breath,
Are but a dram of dust;
Yet fools when as we err,
And heavens do wrath contract,
If they a space defer
Just vengeance to exact,
Pride in our bosom creeps,
And misinformes us thus,
That Iove in pleasure sleeps,
Or take no care of us:
The eye of heaven beholds,
What every heart enfoldes.
The Gods digest no crime,
Though they (delaying long)
In the offender's time,
Seem to neglect a wrong,
Till others of their Race,
Fill up the cup of wrath,
Whom Ruin and disgrace,
Long time attended hath;
And Gyges' fault we fear,
To Croesus' charge be laid,
Which Iove will not forbear,
Though it be long delayed:
For, O! sometimes the Gods
Must plague sin with sharp Rods.
And lo how Croesus still,
Tormented in his mind,
Like to Reeds on a hill,
Doth quake at every wind!
Each step a terror brings;
Dreams do by Night afflict him;
And by day many things;
All his Thoughts do convict him;
He his Star would control,
This makes ill not the worst,
Whilst he wounds his own soul●,
With apprehensions first:
Man may his fate foresee,
But not shun heavens decree.
CAN Heaven behold one stand to stain these times,
Yet to the Stygian streams not headlong hurled?
And can th'arth bear one burdened with such crimes,
As may provoke the wrath of all the world?
Why sends not Iove, to have my course confined,
A death-denouncing flash of rumbling Thunder?
Else (roaring terror) clouds of circling wind,
By violence to tear me all a sunder?
What corner yet unknown from men removed,
Both burned with rage, and freezing in despair,
Shall I go now possess, to be approved,
Where none but monsters like myself repair?
I'll go indeed whom all the world detests,
Who have no interest in the fields of bliss,
And barbarise amongst the brutish beasts,
Where Tigers rage, Toads spew, and Serpents hisse:
But though in some vast Zone, I find a field,
Where melancholy might a monarch be,
Whilst silent deserts not one person yield
To shrink for horror, when beholding me;
Yet of my deeds which all the world do tell,
This cannot raze the still proclaimed Scroll,
Since in my breast I bear about my hell,
And cannot scape the terrors of my soul.
Those fearful Monsters of confused aspects,
Chimaera, Gorgon, Hydra, Pluto's Apes,
Which in the world wrought wonderful effects,
And borrowed from th'infernal shades their shapes,
Their devilish forms which did the world amaze,
Not half so monstrous as myself I find,
When on mine own deformities I gaze,
Amidst black depths of a polluted mind;
No, but my mind untainted still remains,
My thoughts in this delict have had no part,
Which but by accident this foul fact stains,
My hands had no commission from my heart;
Yet, whether it was fortune, or my fate,
Or some Hel-hag, that did direct my arm,
The Lydians plague, I have undone this State,
And am the instrument of all their harm:
Then mountains fall, and bruise me by your rounds,
Your heights may hide me from the wrath of Heaven;
But this not needs, since me my fault confounds:
With my offence no torment can be even.
Ah! of what desert shall I now make choice,
To fly the countenance of an angry King?
I know the venging sword of Croesus' voice,
To wound my soul, hosts of rebukes doth bring;
The pattern of distress, I'll stand alone,
A memorable monster of mishap;
For, though Pandora's plagues were all in one,
All were too few, so vile a wretch to trap.
O how the king is moved at Atis death!
His face the portrait of a passion bears,
With bended eyes, crossed arms, and quivering breath,
His Princely robe he desperately tears;
Lo, with a silent pity-pleading look,
Which shows with sorrow mixed a high disdain,
He (whilst his soul seems to dissolve in smoke)
Strays 'twixt the corpses, and him who hath it slain.
Thou ruthless tyrant ruin of my bliss,
And didst thou so disguise thy devilish nature,
To recompense my courtesies with this▪
Ah cruel wretch, abominable creature!
Thy Tigrish mind what wit could well detect,
immortal breasts so great barbarity?
What froward Spirit could but such spite suspect,
In hospitality hostility?
Did I revive thee when thy hopes were dead,
When as thy life thy parents had not spared?
And having heaped such favours on thy head,
Is this? Is this?
He would say the reward.
I grant what you allege and more is true;
I have unto the height of hatred run:
A bloodstained wretch, who merit not to view
The rolling Circles, nor the Rayie Sun;
No kind of art I purpose now to use,
To colour this my crime, which might seem less,
Whilst painted with a pitiful excuse:
No, it is worse than words can well express;
Nor go I thus to aggravate my crime,
And damn myself to be absolved by others,
No, no, such Rhetoric comes out of time.
I'll not survive his death, as erst my brothers.
O! had that high disaster killed me strait,
(As then indeed I died from all delight)
I had not groaned, charged with this inward weight,
But slept with shadows in eternal night:
Yet must I die, at last (though late) grown wise▪
This in my mind most discontentment breeds,
A thousand torturing deaths cannot suffice,
To plague condignly for so hay nous deeds.
If that revenge th'Elysian Guests delights,
The tomb of Atis shall exhaust my blood:
No fit offering for infernal spirits,
Then one in whom they reigned, while as he stood:
The furies oft in me infused their Rage,
And in my bosom did their Serpent's place,
Whose indignation labouring to assuage,
Huge hellish horrors spoiled my thoughts of peace.
I find (poor wretch!) when I have searched, and seen
The fatal means which did inflict this wound,
That not thy malice, but my fault hath been,
Of that which grieves us both the real ground.
Whilst barely with a superficial wit,
We weigh the outside of such strange events,
If but the mediate means our judgements hit,
We seek not the first cause, that much contents:
But when prodigious accidents fall out,
Though they amaze our minds, and so they must,
The cause of all comes from ourself no doubt:
Ah! man hath erred; the Heavens are always Just:
In judgement now whilst entering with my soul,
(Those partial thoughts which flattered me declined)
Lo, marking of past wrongs the burdenous scroll,
Free from false colours, which did mock my mind:
O! than I see how heaven in plagues exceeds,
Whilst vengeance due save ruin nought can end;
Thus once the Gods must balance worldlings deeds,
Both what we did, and what we did intent:
Son, Son, my faults procured have thy fall,
For, guilty of thy blood, I gave the wound
Which gave thee death, and whose remembrance shall
My life each day with many deaths confound.
Of Iove injust the Statutes I contemn,
And if I were confronted with the Gods,
Their providence (as partial) would condemn,
Who in such sort do exercise their rods.
He thus now killed, with life to let me go,
May breed reproach to all the powers divine:
But ah! they knew no death could grieve me so,
As that, which through his heart was aimed at mine;
Now all the world those deities may despise,
Which strike the guiltless, and the guilty spare;
Cease hapless man to plague thyself thus wise,
I pardon thee, and pity thy despair.
O rigorous judgement! O outrageous fate!
Must I suruive the funerals of my fame?
All things which I behold, upbraid my state,
Too many monuments of one man's shame;
All (and none more than I) my deeds detest,
Yet some wail want of friends, and I of f●es,
To purge the world of such a dangerons pest,
(Which still contagious) must taint hearts with woes;
To wound this breast where all hell's hosts do reign,
Seized with just fear none dare a hand forth stretch,
Else this base charge (as odious) do disdain,
To deal with Death in favour of a wretch;
Or must I yet (till more detested) stand,
And fill the world with horror of my name?
What further mischief can require my hand?
Must it engrave on others graves my shame?
Or would some bastard thought life's cause debate,
Which in the blasted field of comfort gleans?
No, no, in spite of Heaven I'll force my fate,
One, when resolved to die, cannot want means:
Proud Tyrant Death, and must thou make it strange,
To wrap my wearied soul in further strife?
Unless my courage with my fortune change,
(Though nothing else) I can command my life;
But this (ay me!) all hope of help devowres;
What gains my soul by death in those sad times,
If potent still in all her wont powers,
She must remember of my odious crimes?
What though un-bodied she the world forsake,
Yet from her knowledge cannot be divorced?
This will but vex her at the shadowy lake,
Till even to groan the God of Ghosts be forced;
But welcome death, and would the Gods I had
Less famous, or more fortunately lived;
Then known if good, and kept obscure if bad;
Of comfort quite I had not been deprived;
Ah! have I lived (unnatural I) to be
My brother's murderer, who me dearly loved?
Ah! have I lived with my own hands to kill
A gallant Prince committed to my charge?
And do I gaze on the dead body still,
And in his father's sight my shame enlarge?
Ah! have I lived whilst men my deeds do scan,
To be the object of contempt and hate?
Of all abhorred as a most monstrous man,
Since thought a Traitouror (far worse) ingrate?
Yet with my blood I'll wash away this stain,
Which grief to you, to me disgrace hath brought,
Would God my name from minds ●ight ●a●'d remain,
To make my life as an unacted thought;
Brave Atis now I come to plead for grace,
Although thou frownest on my affrighted Ghost,
And to revenge thy wrong this wound embrace;
Thus, thus, I toil to gain the Stygian coast.
Lo, how he wounds himself despising pain,
With leaden lights, weak legs, and head declined,
The body beats the ground, as in disdain,
That of her members one hath proved unkind;
The fainting hand falls trembling from the Sword,
With his self slaughtering blow for shame grown red,
Which strait the blood pursues, with vengeance stored,
To drown the same with the same floods it shed;
Who of those parties can the combat show,
Where both but one, one both stroke and sustained?
Or who triumphs for this most strange o'erthrow,
Where as the victor lost, the vanquished gained?
Cursed eyes, what sudden change hath drowned your lights,
And made your mirthful objects mournful now?
Ye that were still enured to stately sights,
Since seated under an imperial brow,
Ah! clouded now with vapours drawn from cares,
Are low thrown down amidst a hell of grief,
And have no prospect, but my soul's despairs,
Of all the furies which afflict me, chief.
O dead Adrastus, I absolve thy Ghost,
Whose hand (I see) some destiny did charm,
Thou (hated by the heavens) wast to thy cost
A casual actor, not intending harm;
No doubt some angry God hath laid this snare,
And whilst thy purpose was the Boar to kill,
Did intercept thy shaft▪ amidst the Air,
And threw it at my Son, against thy will,
Ah! Son, must I be witness of thy death,
Who view thee thus by violence to bleed,
And yet want one on whom to pour my wrath,
To take just vengeance. for so vile a deed?
This wretch, whose guiltless mind hath cleared his hand,
Lo▪ for his error grieved, unforced doth fall,
And not as one who did in danger stand:
For still he lived till I forgave him all.
Thus have I but the heavens on whom I may
Blast forth the tempest of a troubled mind;
And in my soul's distress I grieve to say,
That greater favour I deserved to find.
WHy spend you (Sir) with sighs that Princely breath,
Whence Sovereignty authority should take?
O weak revenge for one when wronged by death,
To yield him homage prostrated in black!
That Tyrant pale (so hateful unto us)
Whose fatal shaft so great a grief hath bred,
Where he triumphs should you rear trophies thus,
And wear his livery, as his captive led?
No, though he might this outward bliss o'erthrow,
And you (save you) of all things else might spoil,
Yet whilst of one, who yields, no sign you show,
You are victorious, and he gets the foil;
Those floods of sorrow, which would drown your soul▪
In breasts more base might better be excused,
Since wanting spirit their passions to control,
As from their birth still to subjection used.
But you, in whom high thoughts by nature grow,
To this decay, how is your virtue come?
I blush to see my Sovereign brought so low,
And Majesty by misery o'ercome,
Nor do I thus to make you stupid strive,
As one unnatural, wanting sense to smart,
No, none a Prince of kindness can deprive,
The honoured badge of an Heroic heart.
That power supreme, by which great States do stand,
Affections order should, but not undo;
And I could wish you might yourself command,
Which though you may not well, yet seem to do▪
I will not here rehearse, enlarging woes,
On what just reasons now my grief I ground,
But still will entertain my comforts foes,
Whilst many a thousand thoughts my soul do wound;
What pensive pencil ever limned aright
The sad conceits of soul-consuming grief?
Ah! words are weak to show the swelling height
Of th'inward anguish desperate of relief,
Though many monarches jealously despise
The rising Sun that their declining stains,
And hate the Heir who by their fall must rise,
As grieved to hear of death, or others reigns;
My love to Atis otherwise appeared,
Whom, whilst for him I did my cares engage,
I as a Father loved, as king not feared,
The comfort not th'encumbrance of mine age;
And had he me (as reason would) survived,
Who glanced, and vanished like to lightning flashes,
Then death could me not have of life deprived,
Whilst such a Phoenix had revived my ashes.
Let not those woes eclipse your virtue's light.
Ah! Rage and grief must once be at a height.
Strive of your sorrows (Sir) to stop the source.
These salt eye-floods must flow, and have their course.
That is not kingly.
And yet it's kindly,
where passions domineer, they govern blindly.
Such woeful plaints cannot repair your state.
Unhappy souls at least may wail their fa●e
The meanest comfort that you can return,
Is in calamity a leave to mourn.
what Stoic strange, who most precise appears,
Can that youth's death with tearless eyes behold,
In all perfections ripe, though green in years,
A hoary judgement under locks of gold?
No, no man lives, but must lament to see
The world's chief hope even in the blossom choked,
But men cannot control the Heaven's decree,
And what is done, can never be revoked.
Let not this loss with grief torment you more;
Of which a part with you your Country bears:
If wailing could your ruined state restore,
Souls charged with grief should sail in Seas of tears;
Lest all our comfort dash against one shelf,
And his untimely death but hasten yours.
Have pity of your people, spare yourself,
If not to your own use, yet unto ours.
When Sandanis I first thy faith did find,
Thou dived so deeply in my bosom then,
That since▪ thou still (entrusted with my mind)
Didst know what I concealed from other men:
Behold I go to open up to you,
(Chief treasurer of all my secrets still)
What high design my Thoughts are hatching now,
A physic in some sort to ease my ill;
This may unto my soul yield some relief,
And for displeasures past may much content,
Or else must purchase partners in my grief,
If not for me, yet with me to lament.
This benefit must bind me with the rest
To serve your Majesty, and hold you dear,
And I'll be free with you, yet I protest,
That what I friendly speak, you freely hear.
Since that it hath not pleased the heavenly powers,
That of my offspring I might comfort claim,
Yet lest the ravenous course of flying hours
Should make a prey of my respected name,
I would engender such a generous brood,
That the unborn might know how I have lived,
And this no doubt would do my Ghost great good,
By famous victories to be revived:
I hope to soar with fames Immortal wings,
Unless my high-bent thoughts themselves deceive,
That having acted admirable things,
I death may scorn, triumphing o'er the grave;
Yet have I not so settled my conceit,
That all opinions are to be despised;
A good advice can never come too late;
This is the purpose that I have devised:
Some Scythian Shepherds in a high disdain,
As trusted fame yet constantly relates,
To plague some Medes with horror and with pain,
Did entertain them with prodigious meats,
And to content their more than Tigrish wishes,
They with the Infant's flesh, the Parents fed,
Who not suspecting such polluted dishes,
Did in their bowels bury whom they bred.
Then after this abominable crime,
They fled with hasted unto my father's Court,
And (first informers courting trust in time)
Did as they pleased, of what was past report;
Whilst they (save what them helped) all things suppressed,
Mild pity pleading for afflictions part,
His generaous mind still tendering the distressed,
Was won to them by this deceiving Art.
Oft men of judges thence have parties gone,
Where both their ears were patent but to one.
Then Cyaxare, Monarch of the Medes,
To prosecute those fugitives to death,
In indignation of my father's deeds,
Did brag them both with all the words of wrath;
My father thinking that his Court should be
A Sanctuary supplicants to save,
Did levy men to make the world then see,
In spite of power that weakness help should have.
Thus mortal wars on every side proclaimed,
With mutual trouble did continue long,
Till both the Armies by Bellona ●aa●'d,
Did irk to venge, or to maintain a wrong:
It chanced whilst peace was at the highest dearth,
That all their forces did with fury fight,
A sudden darkness curtained up the earth,
And did by violence displace the light.
I think the Sun for Phaeton looked sad,
Else blushed (reflecting blood) like them he saw:
For (as when wronged of old) with grief gone mad,
He from the world his chariot did withdraw;
Yet Ignorance, which doth confusion breed,
By wresting nature's course, found cause of fears,
Which error did so happily succeed,
That it a concord wrought, and truce from tears;
Then strait there was a perfect peace begun,
And that it might more constantly endure,
Astyages the King of Media's son,
To be his Queen my sister did procure.
A deadly rancour reconciled again,
With consanguinity would sealed remain.
He, since his father's age-worn course expired,
Hath ruled his people free from blood or strife,
Till now a Viper hath his death conspired,
Who from his loins extracted had his life;
I mean this Cyrus, (base Cambyses brood,)
Who by a Bitch, nursed with the Country swains,
(No sign observed importing Princely blood:)
The doggish nature of his Nurse retains.
He came against his Grandfather to field,
And unexpected with a mighty power,
His forces forced, did force himself to yield,
Who (captive kept) now waits for death each hour.
That you may mark how great my in t' rest is,
This ruthful story I did largely touch;
Those circumstances show that shame of his
Doth from our glory derogate too much;
Dare any Prince presume to trouble thus
One whom our kingdom's favour should defend?
In strict affinity combined with us,
Yet not regarded for▪ so great a friend.
This with some joy doth smooth my stormy mind,
Whilst I for Medes against the Persians go,
I hope that both by brave effects shall find
How kind a friend I prove, how fierce a foe.
Though nature's law you cared not to transgress,
Nor this your wronged ally would not repair;
Yet the regard to Monarches in distress,
Should move the mighty with a mutual care;
Those terrors too which thunder in your ear,
I think the Lydians will not well allow:
For when the Cedar falls, the Oak may fear,
That which o'erthrows the Medes may trouble you.
And when a neighbour's house they burning view,
Then their own dangers men may apprehend;
It better is with others to pursue,
Then be when but alone, forced to defend.
Ah! this is but the outside of your course,
A dangerous ambush which ambition plants:
There may come Rivers raging from this source,
To drown your state, whilst such high thoughts nought daunts;
I know those newborn monsters of your mind
Have armed your ravished heart with fair conceits,
Yet may those wonders which you have divined,
Prove traitorous projects, painted for deceits;
And (pardon Sir) it is not good to be
Too rashly stout, nor curiously wise,
Lest that you leave that which we certain see,
And not attain to that which you devise.
I grant indeed (this very few shall know)
Though I profess but to relieve my friend,
My thoughts conceive, as success best may show,
And not without great cause, a greater end:
You see how fortune nought but change affects,
Some are reproached, that others may be praised,
And every age brings forth some strange effects,
Some men must fall, that others may be raised:
I doubt not, you have heard who was the first,
For warring with the world, whom fame revives,
Who had of sovereignty, so great a thirst,
That it could not be quenched with thousands lives
Even he who first obtained the name of Iove,
And rests reputed for his glorious acts,
The most imperious of the powers above,
Who vows and offerings of the world exacts;
He all his time in state did terror breath,
Borne to acquaint the world with war and dearth,
Whilst fertile still in misery and death,
Two fatal furies that afflict the earth;
Yet since his course (the world's first plague) was past,
When his proud race had many ages reigned,
That Empire too did perish at the last,
And what it lost, by martial Medes was gained;
This was the cause of that great kingdom's fall;
A Prince who could not judge of Princely parts,
With loss of Sceptre, honour, life, and all,
To buy base joys, sold all his Subjects hearts;
To that disastered Monarchies decay,
Th' aspiring Persians purpose to succeed:
But I intent their lofty course to stay,
And that in time, ere that it throughly speed;
The Persians once the Lydians force must prove,
And O! who knows but that it is ordained
At the tribunal of the States above,
That I should reign where famous Ninus reigned?
This all the host of heaven ofttimes foretells,
To this the Gods of Greece my mind have moved,
And he that in Arabia's desert dwells,
By his response this enterprise approved.
Thus still in love with what we mind to do,
What we affect, we fairest still conceive,
This feeds our humour, whilst (selfe-flatterers) lo,
To show our wit, we would ourselves deceive;
Vain hopes so mask all doubts, you cannot spy
What secret danger this design doth bear;
But whilst well viewed with an indifferent eye,
There want not grounds, where foresight may find fear:
You unadvis'dly purpose to pursue
A barbarous people opposite to peace,
Who but by robbery to their greatness grew,
And would for each light cause, the wars embrace;
No dainty silks, dipped in Assyrian die,
Do deck their bodies, to abase their minds:
Skins reft from beasts them cloath, who danger ply,
Not moved by flattering Suns, nor bragging winds;
They simply feed, and are not grieved each day,
With stomachs clody, decocting diverse meats,
They far not as they would, but as they may,
Of judgement sound, not carried with conceits.
Those ancient customs which they strictly hold,
Make all things easy, that they feel no pain,
This cools the summer's heat, kills winter's cold:
This makes the Rivers dry, the Mountains plain.
They whose ambition poverty did bound,
Of Lydia's dainties if they once do taste,
Will have in hatred strait their barren ground,
And all our treasures insolently waste;
To govern such, although that we prevail,
You shall but buy vexation with your blood,
And do yourself, and yours, if fortune fail,
From Sovereignty (by time secured) seclude;
Yea, though this rash desire your judgement blinds,
I for my part must praise the Gods for you,
Who have not yet inspired the Persians minds,
To waste with war all Lydia long ere now.
Those flames, which burn my breast, must once burst out,
Your counsel for more quiet minds I leave,
And be you still thought wise, so I prove stout,
I'll conquer more, or lose the thing I have.
AH! am I forced out of afflictions store,
For my minds ease a few sad words to strain?
But yet unload it now, to load it more,
I empty but mine eyes to fill again;
My soul must sound even as my passions strike,
Whilst sighs and tears would fain afford relief;
My breast and eyes are both accursed alike,
The Cabinet of care, the Springs of grief;
O cruel heaven, fierce star, unhappy fate,
Too foul injustice of celestial powers!
Whose high disdain to me with partial hate
The comfort of the world (poor world) devours:
Cursed be the day in which I first was borne,
When lying tongues affirmed I came to light,
A monstroves blasphemy, a mighty scorn,
Since where dark sorrow breeds an endless night;
Would God I then had chanced this life to leave,
The tomb strait taking what the womb did give,
Then always buried, changing but the grave,
I had not lived to dye, but died to live.
What profited to me my Parent's joys,
Who with such pomp did solemnize my birth,
Since still my soul must float amidst annoys,
So to defray one dram of tasted mirth?
And it did only serve to make me know
The height of horror, threatening to succeed;
I was but raised up high, to be brought low,
That short lived joys might endless anguish breed;
Whilst nothing did for my confusion lack,
All my best deeds did but betray my State,
My virtues too were guilty of my wrack,
And warred against me, banded with my fate;
For whilst my Virgin-years with praise I passed,
Which did (ah that it did) too much import,
My modest eye told that my mind was chaste,
Which gained the warrant of the world's report:
And all should have a great respect to fame,
No greater dowry than a spotless name.
Fair beauties God desk, thou canst bear record,
My offering never made thine Altar rich;
Lascivious fancies highly I abhorred,
Whose freeborn thoughts no folly could bewitch;
Till happily (ah so it seemed to some)
O but unhappily the end hath proved,
All this, and more, to Atis ears did come,
Who strait did like, and after liking loved;
He to our ears, his purpose did impart,
Not lip-sicke-lover-like, with words far sought,
Whose tongue was but an agent for his heart,
Yet could not tell the tenth part that it thougth;
And lest his travels should have seemed to tend
My honour's fame by fancies to betray,
He brought his wishes to a lawful end,
And in effect, affection did bewray;
There Iuno, precedent of wedlock's vow,
And Hymen with his odoriferous cote,
With sacred customs did our love allow,
Whilst th'ominous Owls no crosses did devote;
The blessing that this marriage did procure,
It was too great to have continued long:
A thing too vehement cannot endure,
Our joys far past the reach of any tongue;
We ever did full satisfaction find,
Yet with satiety were never cloyed,
But seemed two bodies, managed by one mind,
Such was the happiness that I enjoyed;
He loved me dearly, I obeyed his will,
Proud of myself, because that I was his,
A harmony remained betwixt us still,
Who each in th'other placed their souls chief bliss:
This moved th'immortals to a high disdain,
That thus two worldlings, who of death were heirs,
Should in a Paradise of joys remain,
Which did exceed, at least did equal theirs;
But chief Iuno did despite it most,
Who through a jealousy still jars with Iove,
That body-prisoned souls of that could boast,
Which she (although heavens Queen) had not above;
Thus even for envy of our rare delights,
The fatal Sisters (by the heavens suborned)
Of my soul's treasure closed the lovely lights,
By which they thought the earth too much adorned.
O but he is not dead, he lives in me.
Ah, but I live not: for I died in him:
How can the one without the other be?
If death have set his eyes, mine must look dim;
Since to my sight that Sun no more appeared,
From whom my beauties borrowed all their rays:
A long eclipse, that never shall be cleared,
Hath darkened all the points of my sad days;
Ay me, I live too long, he died too soon,
Thus still the worst remain, the best depart,
Of him who told how this cursed deed was done,
The words (like swords) shall ever wound my heart.
Fierce tyrant death, who in thy wrath didst take
One half of me, and left one half behind:
Take this to thee, or give me th' other back,
Be wholly cruel, or be no way kind;
But whilst I live (believe) thou canst not dye,
O! even in spite of death, yet still my choice,
Oft with the inward al-beholding eye,
I think I see thee, and I hear thy voice;
And to content my languishing desire,
To ease my mind, each thing some help affords;
Thy fancied form doth oft such faith acquire,
That in all sounds I apprehend thy words:
Then with such thoughts my memory to wound,
I call to mind thy looks, thy words, thy grace,
Where thou didst haunt, yet I adore the ground,
And where thou stepped, O sacred seems that place!
My solitary walks, my widowed bed,
My driry sighs, my sheets oft bathed with tears,
These shall record what life by me is led,
Since first sad news breathed death into mine ears.
Though for more pain, yet spared a space by death,
Thee first I loved, with thee all love I leave:
For my chaste flames, which quenched were with thy breath,
Can kindle now no more but in thy grave.
By night I wish for day, by day for night,
Yet wish far more, that none of both might be;
But most of all, that banished from the light
I were no more, their constant change to see.
At night whilst deeply musing of my State,
I go to sum with sighs my wont joys,
An agony then (in a sad conceit)
Doth blot the blubbered count with new annoys;
When Sleep, the brother most resembling death,
Of darkness child, and father unto rest,
Doth bound (though not restrain) confused breath,
That it may vent, but not with words expressed;
Then with my spirit thou dost begin to speak,
With sugared speeches to appease my grief;
And my bruised heart which laboured long to break;
Doth in this comfort feigned, find some relief;
Yea, if our souls remained united so,
This late divorce would no way vex my mind,
But when awaking, it augments my woe▪
Whilst this a dream, and me a wretch I find.
If never happy, O thrice happy I!
But happy more had happiness remained,
Yet then excessive joy had made me dye;
Since such delights, what heart could have sustained?
Why waste I thus, whilst vainly I lament,
The precious treasure of that swift past-time?
Ah, pardon me (dear love) for I repent
My lingering here, my fate, and not my crime:
Since first thy body did enrich the Tomb,
In this spoiled world, my eye no pleasure sees,
And Atis, Atis, Lo I come, I come,
To be thy mate, amongst the Myrtle trees.
lo all our time even from our birth,
In misery almost exceeds:
For, where we find a moment's mirth,
A month of mourning still succeeds;
Besides the evils that Nature breeds,
Whose pains do us each day appall,
Infirmaties which frailty sends,
The loss of that which fortune lends;
And such disasters as oft fall,
Yet to far worse our states are thrall,
Whilst wretched man with man contends,
And every one his whole force bends,
How to procure another's losses,
But this torments us most of all:
The mind of man, which many a fancy tosses,
Doth forge unto itself a thousand crosses.
O how the soul with all her might,
Doth her celestial forces strain,
That so she may attain the light
Of nature's wonders, which remain
Hid from our eyes! we strive in vain
To seek out things that are unsure:
In Sciences to seem profound,
We dive so deep, we find no ground;
And the more knowledge we procure,
The more it doth our minds allure,
Of mysteries the depth to sound;
Thus our desire we never bound;
Which by degrees thus drawn on still,
The memory may not endure;
But like the Tubs which Danaus' daughters fill,
Doth drink no oftener then constrained to spill.
Yet how comes this? and O how can
Clear knowledge thus (the soul's chief treasure)
Because of such a cross to man,
Which should afford him greatest pleasure?
This is, because we cannot measure
The limits that to it belong,
But (bend to tempt forbidden things)
Do soar too high with Nature's wings,
Still weakest whilst we think us strong;
The heavens which hold, we do them wrong
To try their grounds, and what thence springs,
This cross upon us justly brings:
With knowledge, knowledge is confused,
And grows a grief ere it be long;
That which a blessing is when rightly used,
Doth grow the greatest cross when once abused.
Ah! what avaiels this unto us,
Who in this veil of woes abide,
With endless toils to study thus
To learn the thing that heaven would hide?
And trusting to too blind a guide,
To spy the Planets how they move,
And too (transgressing common Bars)
The constellation of the stars,
And all that is decreed above,
Whereof (as oft the end doth prove)
A secret sight our welfare mars,
And in our breasts breeds endless wars,
Whilst what our horoscopes foretell,
Our expectations do disprove:
Those apprehended plagues prove such a hell,
That then we would unknown them till they fell.
This is the pest of great estates,
They by a thousand means devise
How to foreknow their doubtful fates;
And like new Giants, scale the skies,
Heaven's secret store-house to surprise;
Which sacrilegious skill we see
With what great pain they apprehend it,
And then how foolishly they spend it.
To learn the thing that once must be;
Why should we seek our destiny?
If it be good, we long attend it;
If it be ill, none may amend it:
Such knowledge but torments the mind;
Let us attend the heaven's decree:
For those whom this ambiguous Art doth blind,
May what they seek to fly, the rather find.
And lo of late, what hath our King
By his preposterous travels gained,
In searching out each threatened thing,
Which Atis horoscope contained?
For what the heavens had once ordained,
That by no means he could prevent;
And yet he labours to find out
Through all the Oracles about,
Of future things the hid event.
This doth his raging mind torment:
(Now in his age unwisely stout)
To fight with Cyrus, but no doubt
The heavens are grieved thus to hear told
Long ere the time their dark intent.
Let such of Tantalus the state behold,
Who dare the secrets of great Iove unfold.
LEt us triumph o'er them (though proud of late)
Whose glory now doth with their greatness fail:
Since with their fortune forfeiting their state:
No war's approved unless that it prevail:
The world, that whilst we fought, did doubtful stand,
As for the one, ordained to be a prey,
Saw how the heavens placed lightning in my hand,
Those thundering down, who would not us obey:
Go pay our vows, ere enterprising more;
The Gods detest a mind that is ingrate;
And who delight their Deities to adore,
Are always bend to establish their estate;
Cause burden Altars, smoke each sacred place
With Bullocks, Incense, Odours of all kinds;
But none can give the Gods (still great in grace)
A sacrifice more sweet, than thankful minds.
Though all who partners are of th' earth and air,
Still whilst tapestried with this azure pale,
If for nought else, yet for those gifts least rare,
To serve th' all-pow'rfull powers, should never fail;
Yet there are some whom success hath designed,
Whose names are written in respected scrolls,
WHom benefits (not ordinary) bind
To love them more than life, yea, than their souls:
Of those that you are one, your deeds declare,
Of whom amidst innumerable broils,
Even from your cradle they have had a care,
And led you safe through many dangerous toils;
Though of the troubles of your youth I see,
You have not heard the wonderful discourse,
I them remember, who did chance to be
An actor in your Tragicke-Comicke course.
The accidents which in our nonage chance,
A ripened age not to remembrance brings,
Like fabulous dreams which darkness doth advance,
That are by day disdained as frivolous things:
For, our conceptions are not then so strong
That they can leave impressions long behind,
Yet mix (dear friend) old griefs new joys among,
And call afflicted infancy to mind.
Who would not wonder at thy wondrous fate,
Whom (even or borne) destruction did attend,
Whilst ere thou couldst offend, pursued by hate,
Even then to end what now shall never end?
Your mother first her father's mind did sting,
Whilst once he dreamed, which yet his soul confounds,
That of a tree which from her womb did spring,
Th'umbrageous branches, darkened Asia's bounds;
Then to the Magies strait he gave in charge
To try what this strange vision did presage,
Who having studied their dark Art at large,
Gave this response with a prophetic rage:
That once his daughter should a son bring forth,
Who should (by valour gaining great renown)
Make vanquished Asia witness of his worth;
But from his grandfather first reave the Crown.
This to Astyages a terror bred,
Who (vainly bend to scorn the heaven's decree)
His daughter (out of policy) would wed,
To some weak stranger of no great degree.
And to Cambyses, who of her made choice,
He, for his Country (then contemned) gave ear,
Whom by your birth the Princess did rejoice,
And gave her father further cause of fear,
Thus tyranny (their brood whose courage fails)
Doth force the Parents in despair to fall,
To fight a dastard, proud when it prevails,
But yet (as feared of all,) doth still fear all;
And tyrants no security can find,
For every shadow frights a guilty mind.
This Monarch then who could not dream of harms,
Whose guards did glance all still with steel arrayed,
Then whilst he lived secure from foreign Arms,
A babe, scarce borne, and his, did make afraid.
And whilst Lucina the last help did make,
As if some ugly monster had been borne,
A Minotaur, a Centaur, or a Snake,
The people's terror, and the Mother's scorn;
The Grand-childes' birth, which justly should impart,
To grandfathers the greatest cause of joys,
Did (long ere wounded, making him to smart)
Involve him in a maze of sad annoys;
And to prevent what did him fond fright,
By giving cause of a deserved hate,
He sought by robbing you the newfound light,
To make your birth and burial of one date.
Soon after this he sent for me in haste,
Whom at that time (and not in vain) he loved,
And told the sum of all things that were passed,
By which his marble-minde seemed nothing moved;
Yet in the same, as he would let me know,
Though pity none, some horror did remain,
Whilst damned in substance, to seem clear in show,
Your blood his heart, but not his hand should stain.
Thus having lulled asleep their judgement still,
The wicked would extenuate their crimes,
Not knowing those who but allow of ill,
As actors guilty, differ but in times.
With his vile fault he would have burdened me,
Whom strait he charged an Innocent to slay;
I promised to perform his rash decree,
Well weighing whom, not what I should obey;
When I had parted from his Highness' face,
And carried you (then swaddled) with me too,
Whilst horror did congeal my blood, a space
I stood perplexed, not knowing what to do,
And as to purge my part) even shedding tears,
By troops of passions grief, my soul assailed,
Thus (when distressed for easing others fears,)
Th'intended death of you, your murderers wailed;
For him I sent a servant of mine own,
Who for the time was herdsman to the King,
To whom I made all my Commission known,
But as enjoined to him, showed every thing;
Delivering you with an unwilling breath,
WHom of pure gold, a glistering robe arrayed,
I threatened him with many a cruel death,
If that your death were any way delayed;
Strait then to execute the Tyrant's doom,
He from my sight did all astonished go,
Too great a charge for such a simple Groom,
The show of Majesty amazed him so;
What man (not wondering) can by deeds behold
The providence of all-commanding Iove,
Whose brazen edicts cannot be controlled:
Firm are the Statutes of the States above:
That mortal whom a Deities favour shields,
No worldly force is able to confound,
He may securely walk through dangers fields,
Times and occasions are to serve him bound:
For lo, before the herdsman was come home,
His wife had chanced a breathless child to bear,
Who wondered so to see her husband come,
While by his conscience crushed, he quaked for fear;
And strait she curious grew to know the form,
How he a babe so beautiful obtained;
Who her of all did suddenly inform,
And to what cruelty he was constrained;
She quickly than th' occasion to embrace,
(No doubt inspired by some celestial power)
Prayed that her infant might supply your place,
Yet where no beasts his body might devoure,
So shall we have (saith she) a double gain,
Since our own child shall get a stately tomb,
And we a Princely brood, which may remain,
Still nursed with us as th'issue of my womb.
The husband liked so well his wife's design,
That he performed all what she did require,
And when I had directed one of mine,
This Tragedies last act, who might inquire:
My man who spied a babe there breathless lie,
With that rich funeral furniture arrayed,
Told what the fellow told, (a generous lie)
So that thus tried, I trusted what they said.
I end, Time (posting with houre-feathered wings)
Had given you strength, with others of your years
You haunted games, not nephews unto Kings,
But for that time admitted for your Peers,
They fail call fortune blind, she sight bewrayed,
And your authority by lot enlarged,
In pastoral sport, who still the Sceptre swayed,
And as but borne for that, that best discharged:
With other children then, as once it chanced,
A Nobleman of Medea's Son remained,
Who swollen with envy to see you advanced,
Your childish charge with scornful words disdained;
You raging at that proud attempt of his,
Did punish him, as it became a Prince,
I doubt now (Sir) if that you think of this:
The rest of rashness did your deed convince.
Though now my breast doth greater thoughts embrace,
Of youthful sport, yet do not spare to speak;
Let cares alternatly give pleasure place:
That which is bended still, must sometime break.
The child's great Father did inform the King,
How that so base a boy his Son abused,
And of the guard one hasted you to bring,
As for an odious crime to be accused;
But when the King (expostulating long)
By terrors strived to cast your courage down:
You boldly said, that you had done no wrong,
To punish one who had contemned your Crown;
You so magnanimous amazed to find,
Whilst pausing long with an attentive Eye,
That speech imperious told the King your kind:
Whose brood but th'Eagles durst have soared so high?
The feigned Father to the King was brought,
Who (feared for torture) telling truth in time,
Where he reward deserved, but pardon sought,
As if the saving you had been a crime.
Then (as it seemed) delighted with the rest,
The King did cause a sumptuous feast prepare,
And me desired as his most special guest,
That with my Son I would to Court repair;
When I was come, the King great joy disclosed,
And soothed my words which did his chance applaud,
But for another end than I supposed:
What fairer cloak than courtesy for fraud?
When th'absence of the Sun did darkness breed,
The Candle's light inheriting his place,
On my Son's flesh they caused myself to feed,
Then did upbraid me with his bloodless face;
What anguish, or what rage overflowed my soul,
A loving Father may imagine best,
Yet at that time I did my rage control,
But laid it high up in a stormy breast.
Some of the wisemen than I heard remained,
Who from their former sentence did recoil,
And said▪ no danger was, since I had reigned,
Then did dismiss me for my native soil;
Where when I had my blooming season spent,
To weakened wrath your lines did strength afford,
Informing us that many Medes were bend
For his great cruelty to leave their Lord;
And wished (if to their Sceptre I aspired)
That I should move the Persians to rebel,
Which did succeed even as my soul desired:
For they disdained in bondage base to dwell;
When my encouraged troops all armed did stand,
Ere they from Strangers could attend relief,
I quickly marched, encountering with that band,
Of which the King had chanced to make you chief.
lo how those wretches whom the heavens would wrack,
(To plagues exposed) of judgement are unarmed:
The King of me his Captain strait did make,
And looked for help of him whom he had harmed;
Yet was th'old wrong so rooted in my heart,
My Country's thraldom, and mine own disgrace,
That all the horrors mischief could impart
Seemed nought to me, so my disdain took place.
On those whom they have wronged, none should rely:
Just rancour unrevenged, can never dye.
This enterprise at first so well did speed,
That since, your Greatness still began to rise,
Which may by time to brave a story breed,
As may be precious in all Prince's eyes.
Behold how Croesus with his riches blind,
Durst even encounter with my warlike band;
And whilst a prosperous course betrayed his mind,
Did not suspect what power was in my hand;
But he and his confederates have seen
How victory doth still my troops attend,
And Persia must be once all Asia's Queen,
On whom for servants Princes shall depend;
Now Croesus is o'ercome, this Town surprised,
And Lydia charged with gold, doth yield rich spoils;
The League unprosp'rous, Egypt hath despised,
This is the happy end of all our toils.
But ah! one sour unseasons all my sweets,
Whose praise through all the peopled circuit fleets,
And with his love each generous courage warms;
Then when (though weak in troops) in courage strong,
Th' Egyptian Chariots desperately he charged
There (whilst he fought infortunately long)
Mars from terrestrial bands his soul enlarged.
No doubt that Dame this trouble hardly bears,
Who only seemed for him to like of life,
I heard him (whilst she bathed his breast with tears)
Oft wish by proof to merit such a wife.
When their farewell was sealed, last speeches spent,
She kissed the Coach that did contain her trust,
And with eyes big with pearl, gazed where he went,
Still till her sight was choked with clods of dust.
And have you then not heard, his death but proved
The black beginning of a bloody Scene?
His wife Panthea at the first not moved,
Seemed as she had some marble image been;
The body that had oft her fancies fired,
She caused bear out of sight, still dear, though dead;
But where the River ran, when once retired,
She 'twixt her bosom's Rounds entombed his head;
And then from Rage she borrowed some relief:
For sorrow by degrees, a passage seeks,
Vapouring forth sighs, which made a cloud of grief,
A mighty storm of tears rained down her cheeks;
Then, whilst her Eyes the wont object missed,
With heavy looks resolving fatal haste,
Pale senseless lips she prodigally kissed,
With as great ardour then as in times past.
I posted thither, bend to have relieved
This Lady of a portion of her woes.
Heaven bear me witness! I was greatly grieved,
Who would to save one friend, spare hosts of foes,
She first a space me passionately eyed,
Then with those words, her lips did slowly move,
My husband, lo, hath valorously died,
As of your friendship, worthy of my love.
My coming but increased griefs starving store:
For, till that passion of itself expire,
All kind of comfort but augments it more,
Like drops of oil thrown on a mighty fire.
A constant countenance though I strived to make,
And what her woes diminish might, did tell;
That comfort which I gave, I could not take,
And scarcely could throw forth my last farewell;
When I had left her but a little space,
She did discharge the Eunuches from her sight,
Then prayed her Nurse to bury in one place
Her and her Lord, as they deserved of right;
Last, looking on his corpse, she drew a sword,
And even as if her soul had flown in him,
(Pure snows in Crimson died) embraced her Lord,
Whilst beauties blubbered Stars were waxing dim;
Then bend to fall, when her they could not raise,
(As scorning to survive their prosperous state)
In emulation of their Lady's praise,
The Eunuches did precipitate their fate.
O sweet Panthea, rich in rarest parts,
I must admire thy ghost though thou be gone!
Who mightst have made a Monarchy of hearts,
Yet loathed unlawful loves, and loved but one;
O wondrous wonders, wonders wondrous rare!
A woman constant, such a beauty chaste,
A mind so pure, joined with a face so fair,
With virtue beauty in one person placed;
Both were well matched as any could devise,
Whose death confirms the union of their life;
He valorous, she virtuous, both wise,
She worthy such a Mate, he such a wife.
And Harpagus, lest that it should be thought,
That of brave minds the memory may dye,
'Cause build a stately Tomb with Statues wrought,
Where both their bodies with respect may lie.
I'll raise a Pyramid of Croesus' spoils,
Where of their worth each part shall be comprised,
But how to do in these tumultuous broils,
Now time requires that you were well advised:
Your adversary doth attend your will;
This haughty Town for fear to fall doth bow,
And therefore pardon, ransom, quite, or kill,
Do what you please, none can control us now.
As for old Croesus, I am else resolved,
He with some captives whom I keep in store
Shall have their bodies by the fire dissolved,
As offerings to the Gods whom I adore.
My Soldiers' pains this City shall defray,
Since by their means it hath been gained for us,
I yield it unto them, as their just prey,
Who taste the sweetness of their travels thus;
Of other things we shall so well dispose
That our renown through all the world shall shine,
Till Cyrus' name give terror to all those,
Who dare against his Sovereignty repine.
AH! to what part shall I my steps address,
Of bondage base the burden to eschew?
Lo, desolation, ruin, and distress
With horror do my native home pursue;
And now poor Country, take my last farewell,
Farewell all joy, all comfort, all delight.
What heavy tidings hast thou now to tell,
Who tearest thy garments thus? what forced thy flight?
I tell the wrack of us, and all who live
Within the circuit of this wretched soil.
A hideous shout we heard the City give,
Have foes prevailed, do they her beauty spoil?
They may it spoil.
And is our Sovereign slain?
No, but scarce 'scaped doth live in danger still.
Then let our minds no more in doubt remain,
And must we yield to that proud Strangers will?
You know how Croesus at advantage lay,
Still seeking means to curb the Persians pride,
And how th' Assyrians had assigned a day
When led by him, they battle would abide;
But Cyrus having heard how that they would
Against his State so great an army bring,
Strait raising forces, providently bold,
Prevents, invades, o'ercomes, and takes our King.
This shows a Captain both expert and brave,
Who wisely doth advise, perform with speed,
No circumstance (friend) unrelated leave,
Which with our Kings did our confusion breed.
When Croesus saw that Cyrus came so soon,
He stood a while with a distracted mind,
Yet what time would permit, left nought undone,
But made his musters, marched his foe to find.
Our stately troops that for rich arms excelled,
And with umbragious feathers fanned the air,
With insolency, not with courage swelled,
A triumph dreamed, scarce how to fight took care.
The Lydian horsemen never stained, but true,
And for their worth, through all the world renowned,
Them chief Cyrus laboured to subdue,
And this device for that effect was found:
Untrussing all their baggage by the way
Each of the Camels for his charge did bear
A grim-faced Groom, who did himself array
With what in Persia horsemen use to wear;
To them th'infantry did follow next,
A solid squadron like a brazen wall;
But those in whom all confidence was fixed,
The brave Cavalry came last of all,
Then Cyrüs by the raines his Courser took,
And bravely mounted, holding out his hands
With an assured, and imperious look
Went kindling courage through the flaming bands?
He them desired, who at death's game would strive
To spare none of their foes in any form;
But as for Croesus to take him alive,
And keep him captive for a greater storm:
Where famous Hellus doth to Hermus' post,
To give another both his strength, and name;
Our army ran against a greater host,
To grace it likewise with our force and same.
Each troop a time with equal valour stood,
Till giving place at length we took the chase,
While as the River ran to hide our blood,
But still his borders blushed at our disgrace;
For when the Camels to the field were come,
Our horses all affrighted at their sight,
Ran raging back again, and of them some
Disordering ranks, put many to the flight;
Yet some who had been used with martial trains
The stratagem (though out of time) perceived,
And lighting down (red heights raised from green plains)
Did vengeance urge of those who them deceived;
There whilst the world proved prodigal of breath,
The headless tronks lay prostrated in heaps;
This field of funerals sacred unto death,
Did paint out horror in most hideous shapes:
Whilst men unhorsed, horses unmastred, strayed,
Some called on those whom they most dearly loved,
Some raged, some groaned, some sighed, roared, promised, prayed,
As blows, falls, faintness, pain, hope, anguish moved.
Those who then scaped (like beasts unto a den)
A fortress took where valour none renowns,
Walls are for women, and the fields for men,
No Town can keep a man, but men keep Towns;
And we were scarcely entered at the Ports,
When strait the Enemies did the Town enclose,
And quickly reared huge artificial Forts,
Which did to the besieged more pain impose:
All martial Engines were for battery found,
At like encounters, which had ear'st prevailed,
Whilst both they used the vantage of the ground,
And borrowed help from Art, where Nature failed;
They always compassing our Trench about,
Still where the walls were weak, did make a breach,
Which (strait repairing) darts were hurled out,
To kill all those who came where we might reach;
There all the bolts of death, edged by disdain,
Which many curious wits inclined to ill,
Whilst kindled by revenge, or hope of gain,
Had skill to make, were put in practice still;
Yet as we see it ofttimes hath occurred,
That in Fame's rolls our fall might be comprised:
That side of Sardis, far from all regard,
Which doth next Tmolus' lie, thought most secure,
Through this presumption, whilst without a guard,
All Lydia's o'erthrow did with speed procure:
As one of ours (unhappily it chanced)
To reach his helmet, that had 'scaped his hand,
A longest that steepy part his steps advanced,
And was returning back unto his band;
He was well marked by one, who had not spared
To tempt all dangers which might make us thralls:
For Cyrus had proclaimed a great reward
To him whose steps first trod the conquered walls;
And this companion seeing without stay
One in his sight that craggy passage clime,
Strait on his footsteps followed all the way,
And many a thousand hasted after him;
Then all that durst resist, were quickly killed,
The rest who fled, no where secure could be:
For every street was with confusion filled;
There was no corner from some mischief free.
O what a piteous clamour did arise
Of ravished virgins, and of widowed wives!
Who pierced the heavens with lamentable cries,
And having lost all comfort, loathed their lives.
Whilst those proud Victors would themselves have stained
With all the wrongs that Pride, or power could use,
They by a charge from Cyrus were restrained,
And durst no more their captives thus abuse.
No doubt but high mishaps did then abound,
Whilst with disdain the Conqueror's bosom boiled,
As some the sword, disgrace did some confound,
Not only houses, Temples too were spoilt.
What misery more great can be devised,
Then is a Cities when by force surprised?
But whilst that stately Town was thus distressed,
What did become of our unhappy King?
Then when the Enemy had his state possessed,
And that confusion seized on every thing:
He scarcely first could trust his troubled sight,
(The Fortune passed transported had him so)
Yet having eyes who can deny the light?
He saw himself inferior to his foe;
And apprehending there whilst left alone,
How that his judgement long had been betrayed,
(As metamorphosed in a marble stone)
His ravished thoughts in admiration strayed;
But such a weight of woes not used to bear,
He first was grieved, then raged, and last despaired,
Till through excessive fear, quite freed from fear,
He for his safety then no further cared;
And never wished he so to have long life,
But death far further was affected now,
Still seeking danger in the bounds of strife,
So he were sure to dye, he cared not how;
Whilst furies thus were fostered in his breast,
Him suddenly a Soldier chanced to meet,
As insolent as any of the rest,
Who drunk with blood, ran raging through the street;
And wanting but an object to his ire,
He sought to him, and he to him again;
I know not which of them did most desire,
The one to slay, the other to be slain;
But whilst so base a hand towering aloft,
Did to so great a Monarch threaten death,
His eldest Son, who (as you have heard oft)
Was barred from making benefit of breath:
I cannot tell you well, nor in what form,
If that the destinies had so ordained,
Or if of passions an impetuous storm
Did raze the strings that had his tongue restrained;
But when he saw his Sire in danger stand,
He with those words a mighty shout did give:
Thou furious Stranger stay, hold, hold thy hand,
Kill not King Croesus, let my Father live;
The other hearing this, his hand retired,
And called his King's commandment to mind;
High were those aims to which his thoughts aspired,
Whom for great fortunes this rare chance designed;
Now when that Croesus, who for death long longed,
Was quite undone, by being thus preserved,
As both by life, and death, then doubly wronged,
Whilst but by fates for further harm reserved;
He with sad sighs those accents did accord:
Now let the heavens do all the ill they can,
Which would not unto me the grace afford,
That I might perish like a private man,
Ah, must I live to sigh that I was borne,
Charactering shame in a dejected face?
Ah, must I live, to my perpetual scorn,
The abject object, pointed for disgrace?
Yet this unto his soul more sorrow bred,
He (scorn pretending state) as King arrayed,
Was with great shouts ridiculously led
Back to the Tent, whereas their Emperor stayed:
Then that he might his misery conceive,
Those robes so rich, were all exchanged with chains,
And prisons strictness bragged him with the grave,
So soon as death could make a choice of pains;
They caused in haste a pile of wood to make,
And in the midst where all men might him spy,
Caused bind the captive King unto a stake,
With fourteen others of the Lydians by;
There (as if offerings fit to purge the state)
Foes sought with flames their ruin to procure,
Though Iove preposterous piety doth hate:
No sacrifice is sweet, which is not pure.
Now whilst the fire was kindling round about,
As to some powerful God, who prayed, or vowed,
With eyes bend up, and with his hands stretched out:
O! Solon, Solon, Croesus cried aloud;
Some hearing him to utter such a voice,
Who said that Cyrus' curious was to know
(When dying now) what deity was his choice,
Did him request his last intent to show:
His exclamation was (said he) on one,
With whom he wished (their frailty so to see)
That all who ever trusted in a Throne,
Had but conferred a space as well as he;
Then there he told what Solon had him shown,
Whilst at his Court (which flourished then) arrived;
How worldly bliss might quickly be o'erthrown,
And not accomplished was, while as one lived;
Whilst forth salt floods attending troops did pour;
He show how much the wiseman did disdain
Those who presumed of wealth, or worldly power,
By which none could a perfect bliss obtain;
This speech did Cyrus move to ponder much
The great uncertainty of worldly things,
As thinking that himself might once be such,
Since thralled to Fortune's throne, like other Kings;
Then such a pattern standing him before,
Whom envy once, than pity did attend,
He to our King did liberty restore,
And with his life did Solon's fame extend;
Yet him the fire still threatened to devour,
Which (rising high) could hardly be controlled,
But O devotion! then appeared thy power,
Which to subdue the heavens makes worldlings bold!
To quench the flames, whilst diverse toiled in vain,
(Iove moved by prayer) as Croesus did require,
The azure Cisterns opened did remain,
And clouds fell down in floods to quench the fire.
Then whilst the Soldiers did the City sack,
To save the same (as to his Country kind)
The hopeless Croesus thus to Cyrus spoke,
With words which pity melted from his mind:
Great Prince, to whom all Nations now succumb,
And do thy yoke so willingly embrace,
That it some comfort gives to be overcome
By one whose glory graces' our disgrace;
Since now I am constrained your thrall to be,
I must conform myself unto my fate,
And cannot hold my peace, whereas I see,
That which may wrong the greatness of your state;
Your state is spoiled by not suspected powers,
If this rich City thus do rest o'erthrown,
Which now no more is mine, but is made yours:
And therefore (Sir) have pity of your own;
Yea, though the loss of such a populous Town,
Both rich, and yours, your mind could nothing move,
Yet think of this, which may import your Crown,
A piece of policy which time will prove:
The haughty Persians borne with stubborn minds,
Who but for poverty first followed you,
Their matchless worth in arms large Asia finds,
Their fear is fall'n upon all Nations now;
But if you suffer them in such a sort
To be made rich with plenteous Lydia's spoils,
Not able than their conquest to support,
The vanquished by their fall the victor foils;
Let not vain pleasures entertain their sights:
Rest wealth, wealth pride, pride war, war ruin breeds,
Whilst (faint through pleasures, weakened with delights)
No thought of honour from base breasts proceeds.
Then Cyrus strait approving what he spoke,
His soldiers were from precious spoils restrained,
Whilst he the tenth part did pretend to take,
A fatal offering for the Gods ordained;
This is the sum of our disastrous state,
We must a Stranger serve, as thralled long since;
With loss of all which he possessed of late
Our King bought breath, a poor thing for a Prince,
O wretched people! O unhappy King!
Our joys are spoiled, his happiness expired,
And no new chance can any comfort bring,
Where destinies to ruin have conspired,
Go woeful messenger, hold on thy course,
For, to have heard too much, it irks our ears;
And we shall note of this thy sad discourse,
With sighs each accent, and each point with tears.
Lo! I who late did thunder from a Throne,
Am now a wretch whom every one disdains;
My treasure, honour, state, and freedom gone;
No kind of comfort, no, nor hope remains,
And after me, let none whom greatness shrouds,
Trust tumid titles, nor ostentive shows:
Sails swollen with winds, whilst emulating clouds,
That which puffs up, oft at the last o'erthrows.
O! had this precious wit enriched my mind,
Which by experience I have dearly bought,
Whilst fortune was within my Court confined,
And that I could not think a bitter thought;
Then satisfied with Sovereignty ear'st proved,
I had disdained new dangers to embrace,
And clothed with majesty, admired, and loved,
Had lived with pleasure, and had died in peace.
But what more wonderful in any State,
Than power (when courted) that is free from pride?
But chief those who live securely great,
They oft may err, since Fortune is their guide,
What could the world afford, or man affect,
Which did not smooth my soul, whilst I was such?
Whom now the changing world doth quite neglect,
By prospr'ing plagued, starved only with too much;
Long lulled asleep with scornful Fortune's lies,
A slave to pleasure, drowned in base delights,
I made a covenant with my wand'ring eyes,
To entertain them still with pleasant sights;
My heart enjoyed all that was wished of late,
Whilst it the height of happiness did cloy,
Still served with dainty, but suspected meat,
My soul with pleasure sick, was faint for joy;
All, which much care what might procure mine ease:
(My will divined) obsequiously devised,
And who my fancy any way could please,
As praised by me, was by all others prized.
Save serving me none else could have deserved,
Of whom what ever came, was held of weight,
My words and looks were carefully observed,
And whom I graced, were had in honour strait;
For pomp and power, far passing other Kings,
Whilst too secure with drowsy thoughts I slumbered,
My coffers still were full of precious things,
Of which (as wealth least weighed) gold scarce was numbered;
I reared rare buildings, all embossed with gold;
Made ponds for fishes, forests for wild beasts;
And with vain thoughts which could not be controlled,
Oft spent the day in sport, the night in feasts.
I tossed the Elements with power like Jove's,
Drived water up, air down, a pleasant change;
For, stately fountains, artificial groves,
As common things were not accounted strange.
With me (what more could any Monarch crave?)
In all the parts of pomp, none could compare:
My Minions gallant, Counselors were grave,
My guards were strong, my Concubines were fair;
Yea, whilst light Fortune my defects supplied,
I had all that could breed (as now I find)
In others wonder, in the owner pride,
So puffing up the flesh to spoil the mind.
Thus with delight (long pressing pleasures grapes)
With Fortune I carrowsed what men dear hold,
But ah! from misery none always escapes,
One must be wretched once, or young, or old;
Then weary to be well, and tired of rest,
To waken trouble, I th'occasion sought;
And yet to cloak the passions of my breast,
Did with devotion long cloud what I thought:
Of all the Oracles I did inquire
What was to come of this intended war,
Who said (as seemed to second my desire)
That I a mighty Monarchy should mar.
Those doubtful words I wresting to my will,
In hope to break the haughty Persians powers,
Did ruin quite (whilst all succeeded ill)
What many a age had gained, even in few hours,
And this may be admired as more than strange,
I who disdained an equal of before,
(What cannot Fortune do, when bend to change?)
Then servants less, must dream content no more;
What eye not big with scorn my state surveys,
Whom all do pity now; or worse, do blame,
And bound even to my foe for some few days,
Which borrowed are with th'interest of my fame.
Though this sweet gale of life-bestowing winds
Would seem a favour (so it seems to some)
Who by the baseness of their muddy minds
Show from what vulgar stock their kind doth come;
I scorn unlike myself thus to be seen,
Though to my comfort this appeared to tend,
As if misfortunes past had only been
A Tragic entry to a Comic end.
Of all that plague my State, what greater pest
Then servile life, which faints from th'earth to part?
And hath in one united all the rest
To make me dye each day, yet live to smart;
Life in my breast no comfort can infuse:
An Enemies' gift could never come for good,
It but gives time of misery to muse,
And bathe my sorrows in a bitter flood:
Ah! had my breath strait vanished with my bliss,
And closed the windows that gave light to life,
I had not borne (to misery submiss)
The height of those mishaps, which now are rife:
Whilst with a thousand sighs I call to mind
The death of Atis, and mine own disgrace,
In such an agony my soul I find,
That life to death would willingly give place;
But since I see reserved for further spite,
I with sad thoughts must burden yet my soul,
My memory to my distracted spirit
Of all my troubles shall present a scroll,
Of which, while as th'accounts I go to cast,
When numbering my misfortunes all of late,
I will look back upon my pleasures past,
And by them balance my (now) hapless state.
IS't not a wonder thus to see
How by experience each man reeds
In practised volumes penned by deeds,
How things below inconstant be;
Yet whilst ourselves continue free,
We ponder oft, but not apply
That precious oil, which we might buy,
Best with the price of others pains,
Which (as what not to us pertains)
To use we will not condescend,
As if we might the fates defy,
Still whilst untouched our state reamines;
But soon the heavens a change may send
No perfect bliss before the end.
When first we fill with fruitful seed,
The apt conceiving womb of th' earth,
And seem to banish fear of dearth,
With that which it by time may breed,
Still dangers do our hopes exceed:
The frosts may first with cold confound
The tender greene's which deck the ground,
Whose wrath though April's smiles assuage,
It must abide th' Eolian rage,
Which too o'er comed, whilst we attend
All Ceres' wand'ring tresses bound,
The reines let from their cloudy cage
May spoil what we expect to spend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
Lee, whilst the Vine-tree great with Grapes,
With nectared liquor strives to kiss
Embracing Elms not loved d amiss,
Those clusters lose their comely shapes,
Whilst by the thunder burned, in heaps
All Bacchus hopes fall down and perish
Thus many things do fairly flourish,
Which no perfection can attain,
And yet we worldlings are so vain,
That our conceits too high we bend,
If fortune but our Spring time cherish,
Though diverse storms we must sustain,
To harvest ere our years ascend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
By all who in this world have place,
There is a course which must be run,
And let none think that he hath won,
Till first he finished hath his race;
The Forests through the which we trace,
Breed ravenous beasts, which do abhor us,
And lie in wait still to devour us,
Whilst brambles do our steps beguile,
The fear of which though we exile,
And to our mark with gladness tend,
Then balls of gold are laid before us,
To entertain our thoughts a while,
And our good meaning to suspend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
Behold how Croesus long hath lived,
Throughout this spacious world admired,
And having all that he desired,
A thousand means of joy contrived;
Yet suddenly is now deprived
Of all that wealth; and strangely falls:
For every thing his spirit appals,
His son's decease, his country's loss,
And his own state, which storms do toss:
Thus he who could not apprehend,
Then whilst he slept in marble walls,
No, nor imagine any cross,
To bear all those his breast must lend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
And we the Lydians who designed
To reign over all who were about us,
Behold how fortune too doth flout us,
And utterly hath us resigned;
For, to ourselves we that assigned
A Monarchy, but knew not how,
Yet thought to make the world to bow,
Which at our forces stood afraid,
We, we by whom these plots were laid,
To think of bondage must descend,
And bear the yoke of others now,
O, it is true that Solon said!
While as he yet doth breath extend,
No man is blessed; behold the end.