COme Vallen. lets to Sir God-fries house,
I know there will be reveling to night
This is his birth day: and he welcomes all,
Fair Anabell his daughter is my love,
There shalt thou see the Idol of my thought,
Fair Bristows miror and my heart's delight.
Friend Challener, I wonder at thy humour,
To dote so much over this female kind,
That charms thy senses makes thy eye sight blind.
Thou art an enemy to women still,
I prithee what doth best agree with thee.
To see my hounds, to chase the fallow dear,
to see my fathon strike the partridge dead.
to hear my horse Caréere, to drink full healths,
and not live puling for an nounce of Beauty,
I love to see my hounda as well as thee,
My horse, my falcon, and healths when time serves,
But above all my mistress I prefer,
She is the Fuel that doth heat my blood,
And therefore Vallenger, for my sake go
and see, the gallants will be here to night,
Y faith you bind me to a mighty task
I'll see your Lady, and your Lady's mask,
then prithee peace here will we keep our stand.
For by the Drum the Maskers are at hand.
Now gentlemen, your welcome to my house,
Good master Challener and your honest friend,
So are you all young gallants every one,
But we forget ourselves, body of me,
Where be these Lads, what shall we have
No dancing after dinner? Ho, up with the tables,
If they have dined within, and come
young Lads now to your dance again.
False tongue that spoke such blasphemy before,
That I dispraised, now doth my soul adore.
How dost thou like my love now Vallenger.
O she's divine and I become her thrall.
Doth Bristol yield her fellow, prithee speak,
A thousand, I must hence or else my heart will break.
What means my friend in such a humour go,
I'll know the cause before I leave him so,
Gentlemen I thank you all,
Let's in to supper the the cheer be small,
Vallinger thou art a traitor to thy friend.
Not to my friend but always to my foe.
Why dost thou love the faint I do adore.
To anger thee I swear to love her more.
I loved her first, when thou didst love disdain.
I love her now, therefore thy love is vain.
For swear to name her else thou art my foe.
For wear my Anabell, hence dotard go,
Prepare thee Vallener it is decreed.
For Anabell, or thou or I must bleed?
On Sir 'tis welcome pair not but thrust home.
Some Gracious Body help me I am slain.
Whose that which calls for help, gods pity wife,
The Gentleman, lies bleeding here that came
with master Challen.
I pray Sir peak who hath hurt ye thus.
The villain Chalener hath almost slain me.
Challener, why I thought you had been friends.
What was the matter Sir may I know it?
About your daughter, and while she was dancing
I praised her gesture and her comely grace,
But Vallenger most like a liberal villain,
Did give her scandelus Ignoble terms,
Which I rebuked him for whereupon,
We drew our weapons, I by chance being down,
The coward villain thus hath wounded me.
How say you wife, did not I say so much,
He was a Cutter and a swaggerer,
He have my child, no, no, he aims amiss,
Go presently make search throughout the City,
Where ere you find him carry him strait to prison,
Look to him, come Sir, since your hurt
Was about my girl, you shall not from
my house till you are thorough whole.
And for the motion which you made to me,
Touching my child, I promise you truly Sir,
I do not know the man in Bristo,
That I affect more than I do your self,
Sir I have found it, and I wish I may
Make satisfaction for your good regard,
And loving care that you have had of me,
So please you Sir to know your daughter's mind,
Which way her maiden thoughts are most inclined,
From whom the Letter.
From your father Sir,
Come hither wife, daughter a word with you,
I know that once thou diddest love Challener,
But he is fled, thou seest a wagering fellow,
Tell me my girl wilt thou be ruled by me,
And i'll provide a man fit for thy turn.
Faith whosoever you shall think meet.
Why that's well said my wench, there spoken an angel
Look yonder what mayst thou to young Vallenger,
He is a man as 'ttwere complete of wax,
His ather is an honourable knight,
A Challener, a very stock to this,
Love him my girl, say as I say, do.
I never heard a father labour more,
To win his daughter that was won before.
Daughter what say you to your father.
Why wife I know what she would say already,
She hath loved Challener. And would think,
Her fond in leaving him so soon to choose another,
And thinks we would be angry,
If she loved Vallenger, tut use thy mind
Father, I know these words are all but jests,
Dispose even as it likes you best.
Well ●ed my girl then Vallenger is he,
What say you Ellen do you not agree.
What licks you two, is never Cross,
Mine is the care, but yours is the loss.
Now master Vallenger, good news a gods name
From whence is that letter Sir may I know,
You may Sir God-Frey, this letter is from my
Father Sir, who to morrow comes to Bristoe,
And means to sojourn here all the winter time.
He shall be welcome, I would my house
Were thought fit for his entertainment,
But on, so may I call you now,
And if that you agree how say you Sir.
Sir I wish it were to night before to morrow,
And by your daughter's leave, seal it with this kiss.
Wel●ed hearts you'll never be younger,
Let's in to get all things in readiness.
Good master Chambers, your welcome Sir to
London, how far our friends at Bristo Mal. chambers,
M. Challener, all well, your friends at Bristo,
Would be glad to see you.
Indeed I dare swear that I have some friends
There, but among all, how doth young Vallenger?
O the man you hurt.
Even he.
Exceeding well, he is at Sir Godfrey's house,
And is on thursday next to be espoused,
To beutious Anabell the old knight's daughter.
Is't possible?
'tis as I tell you Sir,
But master Challener I am in some haste,
And pleaseth you soon to come and sup with me,
I'll tell you then the matter more at large.
Fair Anabell married to Vallenger,
The news doth run like ice through all my veins,
Is Anabell married to Vallenger?
A faithless woman, trothless, and unkind,
Won with a word o labour, lost like wind.
O I could rend my flesh, and teace my hair,
Married to Vallenger, what to my ●oe?
By heaven if all my wealth were in the Sea,
And I left Desperate, ●uckerles, and bare,
It would not half so much have galled my heart,
As this same news, this fatal deadlines.
What cheer you master never be so sad,
Tut let her go more wenches may be had.
No none like her, but I will strait from hence,
With my own parsonage I will dispense?
I prithee Iaques get me a Doctors weed,
For unto Bristol will we with all speed,
There will we be the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Get strait post horses, for this night i'll ride,
And presently get me a Doctors tyre,
Till I am at Bristol, each part is one fire.
Did Master Herbert then send you to me.
How think you, he told me he set it in the letter.
Dost thou know what he hath written here.
Not I, nor I greatly do not care.
Hear he desires me as ere I tendered him
That I would entertain thee as my man.
You may if you will, if you will not you may choose,
I prithee what is thy name?
Blunt.
Blunt name? Blunt nature?
Here my friend doth write,
though he be somewhat stubborn in his words,
Yet he is of confirmed honesty,
Well Blunt I entertain you Sir,
How now, sweet love, whose that.
Mary sweet heart 'tis Sir godfreys man,
That comes to bid us to his daughter's marriage.
I Sir my name is Frog: good man Frogs son
O Frog Hall, that am●ent from my master,
To desire you and the Gentlewoman,
To make a step to walk, or as it were to
Come, or approach, to dinner? This is all Sir.
Do you hear Sir, is this my mistress.
I Blunt.
Is she not a Whore? she looks like one?
Peace Sirrah on your life.
What fauste merchant have you got there,
Frog break his pate?
No by my saith, he's like one would sooner break mine.
Well Frog tell thy Master I will not fail.
Sweet heart shall 〈◊〉 go in this gown?
The time is to short to make another.
●s not that gown good enough for a whore?
By heaven if you maintain this Rascal slave,
To abuse me, keep him and let me go.
Before an honest servant, let him.
Go to, peace sirrah, no more.
I have done sir: Harbeit, whether wilt thou?
Thy love unto thy friend makes thee forget
thyself, therefore no more.
I prithee sweet lamb content thyself,
This fellow was sent me from a special friend
though he be blunt yet is very honest.
I could be content to love him well enough,
So he could afford me better words.
Well I will speak no more what shall offend you
Lets go sweet heart, therefore blunt come go you along,
Sir godfrey stays, therefore we do him wrong,
Thou wrongest thyself, god send thee to amend
And wouldst do further wert not for thy friend.
Sir Godfrey umphrevile, & my honoured Sister.
My bony bride, and this fair company,
How it glades old Eustace vallenger
To●ee this good occasion of our mirth.
Had my old true hearted Sara lived,
To have seen the maraige of her dear son
And in so good and worshipful a stock,
As old vmphrevilles: well 'twas a woman
Few such live now: you old foolish eyes
Will you be watering still.
she was a wise and virtuous gentle woman
The poor will say so.
I hope my child will imitate her steps,
Come anaball thou now must be my wife,
My housewife, and my house keeper, and all,
I know thou hast been broad up for a housewife,
Thy husbands a wild boy I confess.
But let him stay and keep thee company
Or by the holy rood he roostes not here.
But brother, here's an Itallian doctor that's commended to us by especial friends,
Whom we must entertain with good regard.
Ho, who e with in there?
Do you call Sir?
Fie, Fie, Ned you trifle out the time.
Sir I was welcoming this gentleman,
This Gentelwoman, and this doctor,
Being strangers here in Bristol.
Signior Iulio I understand your called sir.
That is my name Sir.
Right reverent Doctor your most welcome hither,
My house, or what el e, is at your command.
The like say I sir, be bold thereof
Most honoured knights whatsoever lies in me,
Command my best endeavour.
Commistresse Florance you must know
That your come to Bristol.
And must now help to grace our Bride,
With all my heart Sir Eustace at her service
Sir, master Sentloe is the man I choose,
To entertain the bride, he gives me leave
To welcome Mistress Florance.
Come brother you and I'll confer with M. Doctor.
What on your wedding day and change,
Is your bride's beauty les esteemed than mine,
The Bee that Sucks the bitter Hemlock flowers,
When that he comes to taste the Violet
Doth count his former food as trash and weeds
Thou art the Violet the bitter Hemlock she,
I blind before, but now mine eyes doth see.
I overhard thee, thou base Vallenger.
That such an angel should endure the evil,
To link her self to that insatiate devil
Come we discourse to long, we shall have
Time enough for conference.
What will you be so Coy,
Y faith you men are so deceitful,
That she's a fool will credit what you say,
Why Ned what meanest thou
Sir but one word with Master Doctor, I come,
Well I will Compass thee whatsoever befall.
Well since the bride doth give me leave.
I'll be so bold as to have a Dance.
Doctor, a word.
With me Sir, I with thee.
Men of thy sort are sworn to secrecy,
But further me and keep my counsel.
In that which I shall here impart to thee,
And I'll give thee a Hundred pounds in gold.
Sir here's my hand, whatsoever lies in me,
You shall command my heart and secrecy,
It is enough then Doctor thus much know,
though happily it may seem stranng to thee.
That on my marriage day I should transgress
So far as now I must reveal to thee,
But think 'tis love, blind love that leads me on,
That conquers Gods, and much more mortal men.
Delay not 〈◊〉 but speak your mind at full.
Then thus in Brief Anabel is my wife,
But florence is the Mistress of my heart,
I love her Doctor, Dost thou conseave me now,
How would you I should help you in her love,
Why now thou comest unto the very main.
Thou knowest her sweet heart Sentlove, he's the let.
And what way would you have him removed.
Why poisoned man, a little dram will doote.
Poisoned Sir, alas you know 'tis death.
I if it be known but that shall never be,
Speak honest Doctor wilt thou doote for me,
Sir for your sake although it touch me near,
here's my handile doote.
Cut Doctor never fear.
Gold will salve all, and that thou shalt not want.
Sir I'll stretch mine art to do you good,
though venturing so it cost my dearest blood,
thanks gentle Doctor go to florence straife,
With in this hour I'll in the garden wait,
there bring her alone, Sentloe is sure,
And as for Anabal her thoughts be pure,
Sentloe once dead, Doctor thou knowest my mind,
Faith anabell she stays not long be hind,
Good Doctor fail not, I must now to dinner,
Now heaven forgive thee thy pernicious sins
I poison Sentloe, now the lord forfend.
that such a thought should enter in my breast,
Blessed be the time I took a Doctors shape,
For by this means Sentloe his death shall scape,
And lovely Anabell her life set free,
False Vallenger shall be deceived by me,
And that deceit is lawful kind and just,
That doth prevent his murder and his lust,
And though I have fair Anabels love lost,
Yet Vallenger shall in this suit be crossed.
Come douse. Now we have time and place as
They say, I prithee use me with no delay,
But still say, do not say you will not have me,
Now because I am none of your burghers,
But Douce as I am hasty yet I am not the hastiest,
And though I am resty, Yet I am not lousy,
And of one that cannot talk much,
So I love to speak little, for as that
Worthy Philosopher Hector says, the words
Of the wise do offend the foolish, so
Douce in few words and in tedious talk,
Tell me when is this day.
What day Frog.
What day Frog? dost thou ask what day,
why Douce this day of wedlock Douce,
This day of going together Douce,
This day of wearing out sheeets and
Throwing down blanckets Douce.
I saith Frog you know I have little,
And for your own part your as poor as Iob,
But not so scabed I thank God Douse,
Well, I see you regard not the wisdom
But the wealth, not the man: but the money,
O Dowse, Dowse, much hast thou to answer for.
Besides I think you do not love me.
Not love thee, why I cannot dress my masters
Horses for thinking of thee: I cannot dream ●or
Sleeping of thee: but for a certainty,
I love thee indeed, when 〈◊〉 go to bed
And pluck of my shoes, there you may smell
Love out of me: and then 〈◊〉 sigh and then I pause,
And say that Dowce is the only cause.
Well Frog, I have but jested all this while
Y faith Frog haddest thou been ruled by me,
Thou haddest not been Froging out of the well
So long: but Frog 'twas thy fault.
The more is to come Dowce, than you will
Have me, we shall to this gear?
I sweet heart, name you the time,
The sooner the better.
So say I dowse, for as the old saying is,
He that hath a good dinner, knows better the way
To supper: but ●ows●, we will be married a sunday,
And that we will be spoken to be liberal,
we'll give ten groats to the poor: with this
Provisso, that if we need it, we'll have our ten groats again.
but afterwards will you not prove unkind?
How dowse unkind?
When tinkers leave to drink good ale,
And Soldiers of their weapons fail,
When peddlers go without there pack,
And water is more dear than sack,
When Shoemakers drinks that is small,
And Lawyers have no tongues at all,
When Fencers leave of giving knocks,
And young men hate fair Maidens smocks,
When drunkards scorn a copar nose,
And Butchers near mend lousy hose,
Or when the cat shall hate a mouse.
then Frog shall prove unkind to Dowse,
and so sweet heart let's go and wed,
and after to dinner and then to bed.
Go Sirrah at the back door,
Bring mistress Anabel, make haste away.
I warrant you Sir.
Well Vallenger if all things fall out right:
You shall have little cause to thank
The Doctor, but here he comes.
How now Doctor, what will Florence come,
She will be here Sir, presently, and see
You can no sooner speak but she is come.
Go Sirrah, do you tend at door,
Let none come in unless I call to you.
I will, strait fetch Sentloe, to this match,
Are you there Doctor, y saith i'll be even with you.
Sweet mistress welcome.
vallenger now by this light
Thou art the welcomest man in Christendom.
Thanks gentle mistress, but how if Sentlove come.
Hang him I never loved him in my life,
Only I gull the Rascal for his money.
The more villain vallenger
To leave his true wife for a common stall.
Now by this hand, I wonder vallenger,
What delight thou takest in such a wife,
But that she is somewhat wise, and modest,
But to content a gallant spirit indeed,
By this light she is a very block to me.
hang her, I care not for her, our fathers made the match
Now with a devil what whirl wind blew you hither?
How now minks, what make you here.
I hard my Vallenger was all alone,
If I offend thee love, i'll strait begun,
yet I had rather stay and if you please.
Vallenger, what makes your minion here,
What are you ieallious housewife with a pox?
I pray you gentlewoman be not offended,
Please you my husband and all shall be mended.
Gosip get home, or I shall set you packing.
I have a trick and if it fall out right,
Shall move her patience ere she part from hence.
thou art to me, as body to the soul,
My life is death without thy company.
By my troth here is an excellent rabato.
Would I had such a one.
Likes it thee mistress?
Hear take it, a worse will serve your furne.
Withall my hart, héere mistris take t,
at home I have a better, please you to go
With me i'll give it you.
here's a wonderful good fashioned gown,
I'd ride my horse twenty mills for such another.
housewife, uncase, a worse will serve your turn.
All that I have sweet Vallenger is thine,
and what is thine, thou boldly mayst bestow,
Give all I have, only reserve thyself.
and gentlewoman pity my estate,
think that I am a woman as yourself,
Had you a husband that you loved so dear,
And see another rob you of his heart,
Would it not grieve you? Yes I know it will,
But yet I pray, for My sake use him kind,
I am sure he'll deserve it at your hands,
Go, get you hence, or else i'll send you packing.
I will sweet love, and where so ere thou art,
God send thee never a less loving heart.
vallenger, your a villain to use me thus.
Sentlove, the villain I throw back again,
And will maintain mine honour with my sword,
Draw vallenger, one of our deaths is nigh.
Go too, put up vallenger, or i'll make you.
Well sentlo another time shall serve for us.
I prithee gentle love be patiented.
Out ye Whore come not in my sight,
For if thou dost by heaven i'll martyr thee.
Caulest thou me whore, now by this light
I'll have thee murdered, and if gold can do it.
Gold can do much, but devil can do more,
Here is a true pattern, of a common whore.
Mistress what means my master to part in such a rage.
Forsooth the Gentleman is jellious,
But I would quickly rid him of that Fever,
And if thou wouldst Blunt but content with me.
What is if Mistress, it shall go hard
Shall make me stack in what may profit you,
Although you still thought that I loved you not.
Now Blunt I see it, and will report thy love,
And for asigne here take this purse of gold,
And now but mark the issue of my purpose.
Thou Seest that Sentloes' coin: begins to wear,
And Vallenger is even now on the spur,
And for my sake will empty all his treasure,
And what I have I will impart to thee,
But murder Sentlove, then is Florence free.
Mistress if this should be done,
a crash of your office were not cast away.
Fear not Blunt we will not stick for that.
Then here's my hand, before the sun go down,
I'll do the deed Sentlove shall shortly die.
The deed being done come presently to me,
And we will frolic in his tragedy.
O Sentlove, wert not for thy friend,
How many dangers haddest thou fallen into,
The mischief now abroach I did foretell,
For by my means thy life in safety dwells.
O my dear daughter how could he use thee thus?
My son rob thee of thy fair Ornaments.
And for a strumpet's love, O God, O God.
Split soul a sunder, that thy sons so vild.
Give me my child (Sir Eustice) as she is,
A virtuous maid dishonoured by thy son.
Give me my son, that I may punish him,
For wronging this fair slower thy worthy child.
Alack good knight, I make my moan to thee,
And thou in true love canst but pity me.
Alas good knight, my griefs so jumps with thine,
That as I weep for thee, so pity mine.
Where is my child, where is my Anabell?
Here wife, let us hold hands, and in three parts,
Let's sing around, and so weep out our hearts.
How could the wretch (dear soul) abuse thee so.
Call him not wretch, he is wretched but by me.
In me consists the cause of all this woe,
Fair Florence is the mistress of his heart,
To her I am but as a Counterfeit,
Rather I am an ethyop, foul, deformed
And therefore hated of my Vallenger.
O Beauteous maid, blemish not thy name,
Thou art Heavenly bright, and she as black as hell.
Should any but my Anabell say so,
though age hath set his foot upon my back,
I would maintain thy Beauty,
Swear thou wert fair,
Nay more than that, defend it with my sword.
Sir God-frey, so would I, by heaven I would,
I, wert against that fugetive my son,
Fugetive in forsaking of his wife
To lead the race of an intemprat life.
Here me but one word, gentle master Doctor,
The Lord be with the virtuous Challener where ere he
Be, Sir he should have had my child,
Good honest Gentleman he should,
And I repent me twenty hundred times,
So my goodman forsooth would needs
Make up the match with this same unthrift,
And now you see how he doth use my child, alas.
This is some comfort in this depth of woe,
Thy virtue is preferred before thy foe,
Why then tell them boldly who thou art,
No be still the Doctor, hold thy course begun,
There is more a foot, then will in haste be done.
Brother, it shall be so, he shall not have
A grave room of my Land.
He spends no goods of mine upon his trull.
Cut off all maintenance, that is the way
To make him see his sin.
O say not so, dear father he'll repent,
And I shall have a husband o● new birth.
Girl, thou art to foolish, so are we to long,
Sufferance in this may grow to further wrong.
To further wrong indeed, for Vallenger
Hath hired me to poison Anabell.
What his true hearted wife?
Delay is worse to danger, credit me,
And by that plot Sentlove must likewise die.
Blessed be the hour that ever thou camest to bristo.
A Doctor of more honesty there lives not.
Were he our son a thousand times,
We must not let him be a murderer.
Good Father let it suffice you know it,
And may prevent it follow it then no further.
O thou that rules the lottery of life,
Why should a bad man have a virtuous wife,
Or a bad wife, have a husband that is good,
Dost thou delight in contraryeties,
Then Wherefore do we strive for virtue still,
When we are mastered by a greater will,
Come good old man, come mirror of true wives,
O let my heart with your hearts sympathize,
although I am no kinsman to lament,
In your distress i●●gruf● as deeply spent.
Doctor, brother, what's to be done.
God's me we must go apprehend him straight.
There is no dallying in a matter of such wait,
And therefore let us not be slack in this,
No, no, brother with your men,
Beset you Sentloes' house he may be there,
I and my men, will post another way,
No place shall be unsought,
But we will have him.
Good mother stay them
This their journey forth,
May breed some mischief,
Therefore call them back again.
Thou art to foolish girl, let them go,
thou seeks his love, that is thy mortal foe.
O thou art framed of constancy thyself,
Challener what a jewel diddest thou loss,
By shoing it unto thy faithless friend,
and how like dross doth he account of it,
Come virtuous maiden wipe those crystiall eyes,
thou weeps for love of him which love defies,
Let's in to counsel what may best relieve,
Where tears and sorrow gives men cause to grieve.
What spiteful fortune Vallenger is this,
this villain Doctor hath betrayed my trust,
and to my father all my plots revealed,
Who flat denies me succour or relief,
I dare not I be seen within the city,
For then there is no way but strait to prison,
I'll call to mistress Florence I know that she is kind,
to her i'll show my grief and my sick mind,
Ho, mistress Florence.
Whose there, sweet Vallenger ist thee,
Why dost thou look so sad, how fairs my dear?
Y faith never worse, but all my hopes in thee,
What is it sweet I will not do for thee?
My Father and my wife knows all my drift,
And all enraged, threatens to be revenged,
And will not let me have no maintenance,
But swears to plague me for my wickedness.
Is the wind in that door,
What would you have me do?
To let me live with thee a little space,
Until I have obtained my Father's grace,
Than what I have sweet mistress shall be thine.
And what shall I do, beg the while,
No Vallenger your deceived in me,
think you that i'll be privy to your plotes,
to bring myself in danger of the Law,
Go to your wife and cherish her at home,
I do not like these wanton humours I.
I hope sweet Florence that you do but jest.
Be shrew my heart then, do not take it so,
Pray leave my house, lest your father come.
Give me house-room Florence but to night,
Not an hour, shall I have my reputation
Touched for thee, if you linger here,
I'll send for the Officers to discharge myself.
It is even thus, well what remedy:
Lie in the fields wretch, there despair and die.
Pray God that Sentloe be not murdered now,
Then all my hopes are lost.
How now Blunt what news?
Sentlove hath drunk his last, the deed is done.
Then are we undone Blunt?
Why, wherefore.
The poor dejected Vallenger was here,
As dry as dust not left a single doit,
His father vows to follow law of him,
Well, would that Sentlove were alive again.
'tis done, and therefore now there is no help.
Yes Blunt, there's help, but mark a woman's wit,
Vallenger is but new gone out of doors,
Go follow him, and mark where he lies down,
And if thou seest he is inclined to sleep,
Lay Sentloes' murdered body hard by him,
Pluck out his sword, and all be bloody it,
And then cry murder as if he did the deed,
About it Blunt, do not the same neglect,
And then we two are free from all suspect.
Fear not this shallbe done effectually.
Then farewell, come to me when 'tis done,
Mean while i'll home, and stir not out of door.
The devil take thee for a filthy whore,
Thou art apt enough in murder, and in lust,
But like a stone in any thing is honest,
Well, ere to morrow many things will change,
That dead men should revive, it would seem strange,
Now after Vallenger I mean to go,
To see in what place he doth himself bestow.
I wonder that I am so dull and heavy,
My feet doth stumble, as I go along,
Mine eyes hangs down, as if I had not slept
This twenty days, pray god it be for good.
Still more and more: well, I must needs lie down,
And make my pillow of the grass and ground.
How irksome is the day unto my eyes,
My cheeks do blush for to behold the skies,
Methinks the heavens doth frown upon my sin,
And to repentance bids my heart begin,
the earth do burn my feet with scorching fire,
Because that all as hot was my desire,
So heaven and earth, my practice doth confound,
Yet must I be beholding to the ground,
My grief is here, sleep doth follow sorrow,
here rest thy wretched carcase till to morrow.
This way he went, and here he is laid to sleep,
And Sentlove by him, this is excellent:
Now Harbart since thou hast done him all this good,
For once be a little lavish of thy blood.
The Potion I gave sentloe to drink,
Doth make him seem to all as he were dead,
And yet his time is not come to wake:
Now will I raise the wach. Murder, murder.
What noise is that affrights mine ears
With murder, I laid me down to sleep,
What's here: My sword drawn out and bloody
And here's a gentleman new murdered,
Some villain surely that hath done this deed,
Hath laid this murdered body here by me,
So by that means himself might be thought free.
If it be so, why then most happy I,
that hates to live, and hath such means to die.
See here's the murdered body, and here the murderer,
I charge you in the king's name
Deliver up your weapons: And go along with us
With all my heart, see there my weapons are,
And carry me wheresoe'er you please
Go to prison with him presently,
the rest bring in this murdered body.
God save you sir, I here it rumoured,
a gentleman is slain.
I sir a proper man, and here he lies.
O noble sentloe dostly so low,
Break heart assonder that thy friend is slain.
Sir, do you know the gentleman.
Yes sir, he was my loving friend,
And we at oxford fellow Pupels were,
Then good sir let me in kindness crave,
That as I always loved him in his life,
so I may have his body at his death.
That I may give him Christian burial,
With all my heart, we'll leave him with you sir,
and I am sorry far for your heaviness.
So this goes well, once
I'll be blunt again.
For now the times draws on of his awake.
I never slept more sound in my life,
But stay, how comes my hands so bloody,
So is my face, me thinks, stay here's my man.
Why how now blunt why stars thou so upon me,
are you alive sir,
Didst thou set any body to kill me.
Not I sir but wicked Florance did,
And haddest been slain, had it not been for me,
Sentloe behold thou Harbert and thy friend,
That thus hath waited on thee like thy man,
To save thee from a thousand miseries,
I am a amazed, and know not what to say
O my dear Harbart: O my loving friend.
Leave of imbracments till some other time,
The king is come to Bristol, newly landed,
Come as we go along I'll tell thee all,
Things wonderful that yet thou dreamest not off.
All hail thou blessed bosom of my peace,
Richard finds instance of his home return,
Bristol, thou happy road where first Island,
Doth welcome me now from the holy land.
Send word to London of our safe arrival,
While we awhile in Bristol here repose us.
Fame with her brazen trump hath born this tidings hither.
And Bristol with their Citizens express,
Their gladness by their triumph, at your safety.
And we with you will put these triumphs on,
But for this unlucky accident,
Which makes old Eustice and Vmphrevil sad
Which grieves me for the noble gentlemen.
By blessed Saint Paul my liedg I cannot brook it
to see my child, my air, my Anabell,
this here: what a wretch was this?
Now by saint Charity if I were judge,
a halter were the least should hamper him.
though nature wrassels with my stayed reason,
and wills me plead for mercy for my son,
yet justice with impartial wings directs,
My thoughts from pity, and my words for right,
My liedg to make an entrance to your fame,
Regard Vmphreviles wrong, punish my son,
I cannot lose him better than by law,
Nor is he lost that doth example give,
Of sweet amends to such as lewdly live.
Virtue commends thy course, and patience his,
In both I pity, what you both desire,
If justice could be glazed with pities wings,
Call for the prisoner, let us crown the time,
With justice, for these honourable men.
Have mercy Richard, mercy in a king,
Is like the peerless Diamond set in gold,
he out of envy and of fury speaks,
I out of love and passion plead for him.
What pleasing advocate hath pity raised,
To plead the prisoners cause, himself not there.
One that doth bear the greatest grief of all,
The hapless wife of woeful Vallenger.
Why thou art wronged, therefore shouldest claim,
Revenge for thee, and justice for thy husband.
Revedg for me my Lord, nay that cannot be,
unless a strange devission may be had,
For I that am as nearly knit to Vallenger
as body to the soul, cannot suppose
an injury, But think his loss,
To be my misery and chiefest cross.
Hath he not sought thy blood thou foolish girl?
He sought no more than I can freely give,
and sacrifice to death so he may live.
Did he not keep a harlot to despite thee.
And if he mend that fault he soon may right me.
He gave thy ornaments to deck his trull.
And my consent did ratify his gift.
Well he hates thee.
To try my patience, all that he did or gave,
Or did contrive conserneth me,
his act was my allowance.
Now since myself, accuse not, but excuse.
Since she that was supposed to be wronged,
Doth right that wrong, be just and set him free,
For I protest I know no injury.
She knows no injury, my Lord she lies,
Sir God-frey since your daughter doth
Remit his fault, methinks you should forgive him,
Forgive him, no not I the wretch shall never boast,
That he hath braved old God-frey in a just
And honest cause. I'll touch him I,
I and touch him to the quick,
No less then for his neck verse will I touch him,
Doctor stand forth and to my prince and peers,
Say what thou knowst of Sentloes' bloody death
Then this I bow before your Majesty,
That Vallenger corrupted me by gold,
to poison Anabel, and Sentloe to.
Intents are nothing till they come to acts.
and mistress is not Sentloe dead in act.
Sentloe is dead, my masters bloody death,
should quicken justice in your majesty.
thou shalt have justice to thy own content.
O how I grieve to see her brinish tears,
Water the Crimson roses of her cheeks.
Had not my wit prevented this before,
Nor you nor she, had never sorrowed more.
You come my son: what said I? No my shame:
O let his blood my liege redeem the same.
Young Vallenger thou art here,
Accused for Anabell,
And murdering Sentloe that is dead,
Speak, art thou guilty. I or Noah.
Guilty in both my Lord, and here for both
Ready to pay the penallty of my life,
though in my soul and conscience I am clear,
Of Sentloes' death, yet welcome happy lot,
That so shall rid my life of that foul spot.
Alas poor soul, how grief and his disgrace,
Doth make him desperate, behold his face.
From thence speaks truth, as from an Orackle,
That he is innocent, though his words accu e him.
Well Vallenger attend thy sentence.
Pronounce not sentence yet, right royal king.
What lawful stay canst thou impart to us.
A stay to straighten justice and the truth,
My conscience charged with this heinous crime,
Makes me confess though to my hearts true grief,
That by thenticements of lewd Florence and her jousts,
I should have murdered Sentlove, my dear master,
I therefore think that through her wickedness
She is the cause of all these villainies.
Post officers, and fetch her to our presence.
A weak delay to hinder my strong faith.
I ever thought that Harlot would be one.
See how that bold ●ace ieats it like a bride.
Health to the king, good fortune to the peers.
A bolder quean there lived not this many years.
My piercing judgement, through the brittle glass,
Of that frail beauty, doth deserve her looseness,
Lady stand forth.
I entertain that name most royal king,
And boldly come here to clear myself,
Of any thing that shall be laid against me.
You are here acused as accessary,
Unto Sentloes' death, speak are you guilty I or no.
Doth this disgraced son of that proud man,
Charge me with these surmises before the king.
Thou hast not murdered him, but my renown,
His death, this hand my death of fame doth wound.
Thus lust makes young men's missery her law.
Who then dares touch my reputation?
Look there on thy accuser, that is he.
This corish lump of flesh, this shaghaird slave,
Aplie thy speech proud woman to the place,
Speak reverently in presence of the King.
Lady we stand not upon words,
But one the proof, and estimate of right,
Sirtha, stand forth: and freely speak the truth.
The wretch my Lord that never did offend,
Fears not to die, I charge thee Florence
Of my masters death: Moreover, I charge thee
That with this purse of massy gold
Thou didst bribe me,
To murder Sentloe, Sentlove that is dead.
I bribe thee, with what falsehood dost thou urge me.
Let Vallenger be asked what purse this is,
Look on it Ladies, mark it, for you know it.
This purse was mine.
This purse I gave to Florence.
Then with this purse, we boldly may conclude
that she did bribe Blunt to murder Sentloe.
Look on her face my Lord, her colour changeth.
Am I descried, shall yonder corish slave,
By blabing tongue bring me to infamy,
No though I assure my death, i'll further his.
Your answer Florence, what debate you there▪
My answer shall be resolute and true,
Worthy the valour of a woman's mind,
To bad for thee, thou lump of infamy.
Nothing but badness is from bad derived.
Most mighty king, I freely do confess,
That cursed Blunt consented to murder Sentloe,
This is the truth of all, live I or die.
Lewd is her life my Lord, and lose her tongue.
Well take them aside,
In Florence I observe her impudence,
In Vallenger despair, in Blunt remorse,
In these three last front terror,
Call them again, attend your sentence all,
First Vallenger, thou soughtest to poison Anabell thy wise,
Since by apparent proof Sentlove is slain,
Our sentence is respective for thy good,
A noble death: the loss of thy lewd head,
Blunt, and this honest Florence,
Both for committing and concealing murder,
Must one the gallowes die, this is our sencence.
No act is proved in me right royal king.
Her words approve thy act, thy act her will.
My faults is in consealment, not attempt.
His fault is murder, hang us all my Lord.
Harbart for all your kindness to my son,
I'll see you shortly caper in a cord.
See than you hang us closely, than my Lord
To kiss in death, as we have kissed in life.
boast not thy shame, nor shame thou womanhood,
Alack good god, how holy is she grown,
she loves the flesh, yet dares not make it known.
I do embrace the law, as pleased to die,
Father forgive the follies of my youth,
Vmphrevill, let me bear to heaven
Upon the wings of my unfeigned repentance,
My sorrow here indented in my tears,
And thou endued wonder of thy sex,
Forgive the wrongs that I have done to thee,
That I may go with peace unto my death.
Away with them,
To morrow ●ée execution be performed,
O mercy Richard, show some mercy,
Will Vallenger in silence loss his son,
And harder than the Penerian rocks,
Never be pierced,
Although the Father will not, Richmond plead:
And if that Richmond dare not, Liestor speak,
O see the time fléets hence with Swolloes' wings,
Time runs: O Gracious king be merciful.
Lady I cannot break the limits of the law,
A wilful murder must be paid with death,
Yet bring me a man that willingly will yield
Sufferance of death, to save young Vallenger,
And he shall live, else hope no further grace:
Attend our further pleasures at the court.
This is some comfort, happy Anabell,
Now show thy ready and thy woman's wit.
How shall he live in one will die for him,
Well Vallenger, if thou have such a friend:
Thou art happy, but I mean to see the end.
Thus like a friar I have disguised myself,
To see my dear friend, that hath saved my life,
And that same strumpet that
Would have caused my death.
A harlot's love, is like a chimney smoke,
Quivering in the air between two blasts of wind,
Borne here and there by either of the same,
And properly to none of both inclined,
Hate, and despair, is painted in their eyes,
Deceit, and treason, in their bosom lies:
Their promises, are made of brittle glass,
Ground like a phillip, to the finest dust,
Their thoughts like streaming rivers swiftly pass,
Their words are oil, and yet they gather rust,
True are they never found, but in untruth:
Constant in nought, but in unconstancy:
Devouring cankers of man's liberty,
But stay: I am at the prison gate,
Where are you keeper, let me speak with you?
Who knocks there?
A friar come to confess your prisoners.
Stay i'll bring them to you presently.
Health to this place: sir, let me speak with you.
Do you not sorrow inward at your heart,
For your lose life you have so wanton spent.
Yes: from my heart Sir, and do think it long,
That this vild life of mine doth breath so long.
Do not despair, although your death be nigh,
Heaven look upon you with a Gracious eye.
Now gentlewoman: let me speak with you,
Now good fellow, what wouldst thou have with me?
To confess truly your offences past.
Well: shall I confess one thing truly to thee,
One thing, and every thing.
Why then I confess truly that before
This time never confessed any thing truly,
But in brief father i'll tell thee,
All that I couseaned, I defrauded:
Those I have slandered, I have defamed,
Whom I hated, I loved not:
And this hath been the manner of my life.
Are you not sorry for that you have done.
No by my troth, near a whit at all.
I hope your mind will change before you die.
Perhaps you know so much: trust me, not I
God turn your heart: friend let me speak with you,
The time draws near of execution,
What is it meet I go along with you?
I gentle Sentloe, and thy self shall see,
The deference twixt lust, and chastity
You must bring the prisoners away,
the king and peers are already set.
Say we make all the speed we may.
Come noble hearts, let's fearless march away,
A little hanging will dispatch us all.
Sir Godfrey, and Sir Eustice vallenger,
Your Silver hairs should teach you patience.
My ledge, God be my record I do not repine,
Alack good knight, thou wéeps in vain,
But now there is no help.
I, I, my Sovereign justice on my son,
He hath deserved death, and let him have it.
Sir godfrey, hath your daughter yet
Found out a man will die for Vallenger,
Such was our promise in regard of her,
And since our word is past, we grant it him.
No, no, my Sovereign, I have hard,
A man urged by nes●esity to lead his friend,
Or to redeem his person with his own,
But to find one will die for a friend,
This age we live in doth not now a word.
Dispose young Vallenger the first to death,
That done, send hence the other to their sentence domd
Ere I amend this stage where I must act,
The latest period of this life of mine,
First let me do my duty to my prince.
Next unto you, to much by me offended,
Now step, by step, as I attend this place,
Mount thou my soul into the thrown o grace,
I my offence might be forgiven on earth,
I would ask pardon of my dread king.
My parents, and my wife,
That must forgive me,
But my hateful life
Hath so be bloated and besmered my fault,
That when I come to ask the last forgiveness,
They will not list my suit,
Nor yet regard it.
Stay: here is one will die for vallenger.
Nay here is one will die for Vallenger.
Be blínd mine eyes, O virtuous Challener.
Come to redeem his enemy from death.
O Challener, by the deep wrongs that I have done to thee,
O hide thy face, thy looks are far more keen,
Then is the axe, must strike the fatal stroke:
For thee sweet youth, thou canst allege no reason
Why thou shouldst die for me,
Be just O king.
No torment worse, then fruitless linger.
Dispatch them executioner: dispatch.
Stay executioner: do me justice king,
thy word is passed that vallenger shall live,
If any one will lose his life for him,
And that will I: i'll die for vallenger,
Nay here is one, that for the love he bears,
to Anabell, but not to him, will die for vallenger.
My plea was entered first, my claim must stand.
Tell me but what thou art, rash youngman,
that dares enter into this place before me:
humannity doth teach thee thou ever shouldst
Give place unto thine elders, in all asays,
how rude then and unmannerly art thou,
To forget this common courtesy,
that parents teach their children every hour.
Sir, in humanity I must confess,
So much as you allege but not in death.
the grave is as the public theatre,
the room being taken up, by them first enter,
the second sort must sit but as they come.
Besides you say you die for anabell,
She near deserved death: therefore give your plea
to him that hath true title for the same.
That's not by thee fond girl,
Kneel Eustice, kneel, do not accept
Against her folly, do not good my ledge.
Why you amaze me, what's the matter?
Why my ledge, this is my child, my anabell?
Came in this disguise,
to save his life, that was the spoil of hers,
Now aforegod girl thou art much to blame.
What is that other?
My Lord, this is virtuous Challener,
Come to redeem his enemy from death.
a conflickt of exceeding consequence,
and much renowns that worthy gentleman,
though let me tell you we are much displeased,
that anabell should baffel thus our laws,
We asked a man, and she a woman to delude us.
therefore we are content her husband have his life,
But she shall lay her head upon the block,
and she shall have no executioner,
But vallenger himself, shall strike it off:
this is our sentence, and we will not change.
pray god thou dost not king, for I accept it.
Come Vallenger, that happy hand of thine,
Shall ave thy li e and make an end of mine.
To strike the stroke, to murder Anabell,
First let my soul sink to the pit of hell.
A man the executioner of his widow e,
Is so unhumaine that a mortal eye
Would even be bloodshed to behold the same,
There o'er dread king let me die or both,
But to defend so scandelus an act:
And as for thee, I hate thee Vallenger,
And could be well content withal my heart,
To be thy deaths man for thou hatest me,
Besides, yet Valenger consider this,
Having a wife so fair as Anabell,
Beloved of me thy foe, and to entirely,
That I do offer up my life for hers,
Should mercy pardon now what law doth threaten,
Thou must immagin if that we too live,
I still should go about to murder thee,
To enjoy thy wife, whom I so much do love,
therefore beg of the king that only I may die,
to save her honour, and thy infamy.
Hark you housewife, do you hear all this:
Doth not your heart melt at this amis.
Melt Blunt yes, and doth weep brinish tears,
to see what james them, and doth me confound,
Here is a glass for such as lives by lust,
See what 'tis to be honest, what 'tis to be just,
Why this is well: now Sovereign hear me speak,
I he that is upposed slaine doth liue,
Then friendly may we reconsile these jars,
Our law doth light on none, but guilty crimes:
And that it punisheth as justice wills.
Why then vouchsafe all in this princely presence,
This gentleman and I brought all to pass,
He in a Doctors shape, hath saved the life
O my frend Sentloe, and o Anabell,
I in like sort have aved Vallenger,
And Sentloe which by me should have been slain,
I saved him by an honest policy.
And now alive present him to your sight,
To make a pleasing end of these sad sights.
This breathes new life into my hated heart.
Sweet beauteous lets the causer of my smart,
Forget in me, what I have done amiss,
And seal my pardon with one balmy kiss
My soul reputes her lewd impiety.
My bloods dear solace, and my best content,
My only dear esteemed Vallenger,
Not all the world being turned into pleasure,
Can give my soul such sweet contented treasure,
Thou art more dear, more pleasing to my mind,
then at the first: before thou provest unkind,
'tis incident for young men to offend,
And wives must stay their leisures to amend.
This kind contryssion of young vallenger,
More joys my heart, than rest to travelers,
Live long together, and may never fate,
this new joined league of marriage separate.
The like say I, to thee that now hath tried,
A friends firm faith, that nothing can divide.
the which I will endeavour to deserve,
And not so much as once in thought to swerve.
Since all things sorteth to this happiness,
And pining care, is turned to joyful mirth,
I will be partner in your merriment,
Away with that same tradgike monument,
For that same Florence there, because we see,
she sorrows something for her follies past,
Let her be had among the Conuertines.
And as her faults shall vanish or else stay,
Let her be used accordingly. Away with her,
Glad parents, and glad friends,
In Bristol here a while ourselves will stay,
And spend some sportful hours to crown your joy
After so many troubles, and tired annoy.