GEntlemen give leave: you great ambassadors,
From Francis the most christian king of France:
My Lord of Paris, and Lord Bonevet,
Welcome to England: since the king your master
entreats our furtherance to advance his peace;
Giving us titles of high dignity,
As next elect to Rome's Supremacy.
Tell him we have so wrought with English Henry
(Who, as his right hand loves the Cardinal)
That undelayed, you shall have audience:
And this day will the king in person sit
To hear your message, and to answer it.
Your grace hath done us double courtesy:
For so much doth the king our master long,
To have an answer of this embassage.
As minutes are thought months till we return.
And that is the cause his highness moves your grace,
To quick dispatch betwixt the king and him:
And for a quittance of your forwardness,
And hopeful kindness to the crown of France,
twelve reverent Bishops are sent post to Rome,
Both from his highness and the Emperor,
To move Campeus and the Cardinals,
For your election to the papal throne,
That Wolsey's head may year the triple Crown.
We thank his highness for remembering us.
And so salute my Lord the Emperor,
Both which (if Woolsie be made Pope of Rome)
Shall be made famous through all Christendom.
How now .
Sir William Cumpton from his highness comes,
To do a message to your excellence,
Delay him a while, and tell him we are busy,
Mean time my Lords you shall with draw yourselves,
Our private conference must not be known,
Let all your gentlemen in their best array,
Attend you bravely to king Henry's court,
Where we in person presently will meet you:
And doubt not we'll prevail successfully.
But hath your grace yet moved his highness sister,
For kind acceptance of our sovereign's love.
I have, and by the king's means finished it,
And yet it was a task, I tell ye Lords,
That might have been imposed to Hercules,
To win a Lady of her spirit and years.
To see her first love crowned with silver hairs,
As old king Lewes is, that bedrid lies,
Unfit for love, or worldly vanities.
But 'tis is country's peace the king respects,
We think no less, & we have fully wrought it,
The emperors forces that were levied,
To invade the frontiers of lo Burgundy,
Are stayed in Brabant by the king's command,
The Admiral Hayward that was lately sent,
With threescore sail of ships and pinnaces,
To Batter down the towns in Normandy,
I by our care for him, cald home againe:
Then doubt not of a fair successful end;
Since Wolsey is esteemed your sovereign's friend.
We thank your excellence, and take our leaves,
Hast ye to court, lie meet ye presently.
God morrow to your grace.
God morrow Lords, go call Sir William Cumpton in,
We must have narrow eyes, and quick conceit,
To look into these dangerous stratagems,
I will effect for France, as they for me:
If Woolsie to the pope's high state attain,
The league is kept, or else herebreakt again,
Now good Sir William
The king my Lord entreats your reverent grace,
There may be had some private conference,
Betwixt his highness and your excellence,
Before he hear the French Ambassadors,
And wils you hasten your repair to him,
We will attend his highness presently,
Bonner, see all our train be set in readiness,
That in our state and pomp pontificial,
We may pass on to grace king Henry's court,
I have a message from the Queen my Lord,
Who much commends, & humbly thanks your grace,
For your exceeding love, and zealous prayers,
By your directions through all England sent:
To invocate for her sound prosperous help,
By heavens fair hand in childbed passions.
We thank her highness that accepts our love,
In all Cathedral Churches through the land,
Are Masses, dirges, and Processions sung:
With prayers to heaven to bless her Majesty,
And send her joy, and quick delivery:
And so Sir William do my duty to her,
Queen Iane was ever kind and courteous,
And always of her subjects honoured.
I take my leave my Lord.
Adieu good knight we'll follow presently,
Now Woolsie work thy wits like gads of steel,
And make them pliable to all impressions,
That King and Queen and all may honour thee:
So toiled not Caesar in the state of Room,
As Woolsie labours in the affairs of Kings:
As Hannibal with oil did melt the Alps:
To make a passage into Italie:
So must we bear our high pitched Eminence
To dig for glory in the hearts of men.
Till we have got the papal diadem:
And to this end have I composed this plot,
And made a League betweene the French and v
And match their Aged King in holy Marriage,
With Lady Mary Royal Henry's sister:
That he in peace complotting with the Emperor
May plead for us within the Courts of Rome:
Wherefore was Alexander's fame so great,
But that he conquered and deposed Kings,
And where doth Woolsie fail to follow him,
That thus common death Kings and Emperors,
Great England's Lord have I so won with words:
That under colour of advising him,
I overrule both Counsel, Court, and King:
Let him command, but we will execute.
Making our glory to outshine his fame
Till we have purchased an eternal name.
Now Boner, are those proclamations sent
As we directed to the sheriffs of London,
Of certain new devised Articles,
For ordering those brothels called the Stews?
They are ready my Lord, and the Shrieve attends for them,
Dispatch him quickly, and haste after me;
We must attend the Kings high Majesty.
Charles Brandon, Dudly, and my good Lord Grey,
Prepare yourselves, and be in readiness,
To entertain these French Ambassadors,
Meet them before our royal Palace Gate:
And so conduct them to our Majesty.
We mean this day to give them Audience.
Grey, We will my Lord.
Le tone attend without.
And bring us word when they are coming on:
How now Queen Iane (Mother of God) my love
Thou wilt never be able to sit half this time:
Ladies, I fear she'll wake ye, yer be long,
methinks she bears her burden very heavily,
And yet good sister and my honoured Lords,
If this fair hour exceed not her expect.
And pass the calendar of her accounts,
She will hear this Embassage, Iane wilt thou nor
Yes my dear Lord, I cannot leave your sight.
So long as life retains this Mansion?
In whose sweet looks bright sovereignties in throned,
That make all Nations love and honour thee,
Within thy frame sits Awful Majesty,
Wreathed in the curled furrows of thy front:
Admired and feared even of thine enemies;
To be with thee, is my felicity.
Not to behold the state of all the world,
Could win thy Queen, thy sick unwieldy Queen,
To leave her Chamber, in this mother's state.
But sight of thee unequal potentate,
God a-mercy Iane, reach me thy princely hand.
Thou art now a right woman, goodly, chief of thy sex;
methinks thou art a Queen superlative,
Mother, a God this is a woman's glory,
Like good September Vines loaden with fruit.
How ill did they define the name of women,
Adding so soul a preposition:
To call it woe to man, 'tis woe from man.
If woe it be, and then who does not know,
That women still from men receive their woe.
Yes, heigh love men for it, but what's their gain,
Poor souls no more but travail for their pain;
Come, love thou art sad, call Will Sommers in, to
Make her merry, where is the fool today,
He was met my Liege they say at London
Early this morning with Doctor Skelton,
has never from him, go let a groom be sent,
And fetch him home, my good Lord Cardinal:
Who are the chief of these Ambassadors?
Lord Bonevet the French high Admiral,
And Iohn de Mazo reverent Bishop of Paris.
Let their welcome be thy care good Woolsey.
It shall my Liege.
Spare for no cost, Compton, what news?
ambassadors my Liege.
Enough, go give them entertainment Lords,
Charles Brandon, hearst thou, give them courtesy
Enough, and state enough, go conduct them.
I go my Lord.
How now William, what? post, post, where have you been riding.
Out of my way old Harry, I am all on the spur,
I can tell ye, I have tidings worth telling.
Why, where hast thou been:
Marry I rise early, and ride post to London, to know what news was here at Court.
Was that your nearest way William?
O ay, the very foot path, but yet I rid the horse way to here it, I warrant there is near a Cundhead keeper in London, but knows what is done in all the Courts in Christendom
And what is the best news there William?
Good news for you my Lord Cardinal, for one of the old women water-bearers told me for certain, that last Friday all the bells in Rome Rang backward, there was a thousand dirges sung, six hundred ave-maries said, every man washed his face in holy water, the people crossing and blessing themselves to send them a new Pope, for the old is gone to purgatory.
Ha, ha, ha,
Nay, my Lord you'd laugh, if't were so indeed, for everybody thinks if the Pope were dead; you gape for a benefice, but this news my Lord is called too good to be true.
But this news came apace Will, that came from Rome to London since Friday last,
For, 'twas at Billingsgate by Saturday Morning, 'twas a full Moon, and it came up in a spring tide.
Then you here of the Ambassadors that are come.
ay, ay, & that was the cause of my riding to know what they came for, I was told it all at a barbers.
Ha, ha, what a fools this, Iane, and what do they say he comes for, Will:
Marry they say he comes to crave thy aid against the great Turk that vows to overrun all France within this fortnight, he's in a terrible rage belike, & they say, the reason is, his old god Mamet that was buried i'th' top on's Church at Meca, his Tomb fell down, and killed a Sow and seven Pigs, whereupon they think all Swine's flesh is new sanctified, and now it is thought the Jews will fall to eating of pork extremely after it.
This is strange indeed, but is this all.
No there is other news that was told me, among the women at a back house, and that is this, they say, the great Bell in glassenberie. Tor has told twice, and that king Arthur, and his Knights of the round Table that were buried in Armour, are alive again, crying Saint Gorge for England, and mean shortly to conquer Rome, marry this is thought to be but a moral,
The Ambassadors are coming, and hear William see that you be silent, when you see them hear.
I'll be wise and say little I warrant thee, and therefore till I see 'em come, I'll go talk with the Queen; how dost thou lane, sirrah. Harrie, she looks very big upon me, but I care not, and she bring thee a young Prince, Will summers may 'haps be his fool, when you two are both dead and rotten:
Go to William, how now Iane what groaning,
Gods me thouhast an Angry soldiers frown:
I think to Harry, thou hast priest her often:
I am sure this two years she has served under thy standard.
Good faith my Lord I must entreat your grace
That with your favour I may leave the presence:
I cannot stay to hear this Embassage,
God's holy mother, Ladies leave her to her chamber,
Go bid the Midwives, and the nurse's v. aight,
Make hole some fierce and take her from the Air,
Now Iane God bring me but a chopping boy,
Be but the Mother to a Prince of Wales
Add a ninth Henrie to the English Crown,
And thou mak'st full my hopes, fair Queen adieu:
And may heavens helping hand our joys renew:
God make your Majesty a happy Mother,
And help you in your weakest passions,
With zealous prayer we all will invocate:
The powers divine for your delivery:
We thank you all, and in fair interchange
We'll pray for you: now on my my humble knees,
I take my leave of your high Majesty,
God send your highness long and happy Reign,
And bless this kingdom, and your subjects lives:
And to your gracious heart all joy restore,
I fear I shall never behold you more,
Do not think so fair Queen, go to thy bed,
Let not my love be so discomforted.
No. no, I warrant thee Iane, make haste & dispatch this
That thou mayst have another against next Christmas
Ladies attend her, Countess of Salisburie, sister Mary
Who first brings word that Harrie hath a Son
Shall be rewarded well:
ay, I'll be his surety: but do you hear wenches, she that brings the first tidings howsoever it fall out lot her be sure to say the Child's like the father or else she shall have nothing.
Welcome Lord Bonnevet, welcome Bishop
What from our brother brings this Embassage.
Most fair commends great & renowned Hen.
We in the person of our Lord and King,
Here of your highness, do entreat a League
And to re-edify the former peace:
Held betwixt the Realms of England and of France,
Of late disordered for some petty wrongs:
And pray your Majesty to stay your powers;
Already levied in low Burgandie,
Which to maintain our oaths, shall be engaged,
And to confirm it with more surety,
He craves your fair consent unto his love,
And give the Lady Mary for his Queen,
The second sister to your Royal self.
So may an heir springing from both your bloods.
Make both Realms happy by a lasting league,
we kindly do receive your masters love,
And yet our grant stands strong unto his suit,
If that no following censure feeble it:
For we herein must take our Counsels aid.
But howsoever our answer shall be swift,
Mean time we grant you fair access to woe,
And win her (if you can) to be his Queen.
ourself will second you. Right welcome both,
Lord Cardinal, these Lords shall be your Guests,
But let our Treasure waste to welcome them:
Banquet them, how they will, what cheer, what sport,
Let them see Harry keeps a kingly Court:
I shall my Sovereign.
Ki With draw a while ourselves will follow ye.
Now will are you not deceived in this Embassage,
You heard they came for aid against the Turk.
Well then, now I see there is loud lies told in London
But als on for their coming's to as much purpose as the other:
And why I pray,
Why dost thou think thy sister such a fool, to marry such an old dies veneris, he get her with Prince? ay, when either I, or the Cardinal prove Pope, and that will never be, I hope:
How knowest thou him to be old, thou never sawest him?
No, nor he me, but I saw his picture with ne'er-a tooth the head out, and all his beard as well favoured as a white frost, but it is no matter, if he have her, he will die shortly, and then she may help to bury him,
Run, Run, good Madam, call the Ladies in.
Call for more Women's help, the Queen is sick.
For God's love go back again, and warm more clothes,
O let the wine be well burned I charge ye.
ay, In any case, or I cannot drink it, dost thou hear Harry, what a coil they keep: I warrant, these women will drink thee up more wine, with their gossiping, then was spent in all the Conduits at thy Coronation.
I is no matter ill, How now Ladies,
I beseech your grace command the fool forth of the presence,
Away William you must be gone, her's women's matters in hand
Let them speak lo then, I'll not out of the room, sure,
Come, come let's thrust him out, he'll not stir else:
Thrust me, nay and ye go to thrusting, i'll thrust some of you down I warrant ye:
Nay, go good William:
I'll out of their company Harry, they will scratch worse than cats, if they catch me, therefore I'll hence and leave them, God boy Ladies do you hear Madam Mary, you had need to be wary, my news is worth a white-cake, you must play at tennis with old Saint Dennis, and your maidenhead must lie at the stake.
Ha, ha, the fool tells you true (my gentle sister)
But to our business, how fares my Queen?
How fares my Iane, has she a son for me?
To raise again our kingdoms sovereignty
That yet rests doubtful, O my princely Lord.
Your poor distressed Queen lies weak and sick,
And be it son or daughter, dear she buys it,
Even with her dearest life, for one must die:
All Women's help is past. Then good my Liege,
Resolve it quickly, if the Queen shall live,
The Child must die, or if it life receives,
You must your hapless Queen of life bereave,
You pierce me with your news, run, send for help.
Spend the revenues of my Crown for aid,
To save the life of my beloved Queen:
How happed she is so ill attended on.
That we are put to this extremity,
To save the Mother or the child to die.
I beseech your grace resolve immediately,
Immediately (sayst thou) O, 'tis no quick resolve
Can give good verdict in so sad a choice:
To lose my Queen, that is my some of bliss,
More virtuous than a thousand Kingdoms be;
And should I lose my Son (if Son it be)
That all my subjects to desire to see.
I lose the hope of this great Monarchy.
What shall I do?
Remember the Queen my Lord:
I not forget her (Sister) O poor soul,
But I forget thy pain and misery,
Goe, let the Childe die; let the Mother liue,
heavens powerful hand may more children give:
Away, and comfort her with our reply,
Harry will have his Queen though thousands die.
I know no issue of her princely womb:
Why then should I prefer't before her life.
Whose death ends all my hopeful loys on earth.
God's will be done, for sure it is his will,
For secret reasons to himself best known:
Perhaps he did mould forth a Son for me,
And seeing (that sees all) in his creation,
To be some impotent and coward spirit,
Unlike the figure of his Royal Father:
Has thus decreed, lest he should blur out fame,
As Whilom did the sixth king of my name
Lose all his Father (the first Henrie) won.
I'll thank the Heavens for taking such a Son.
whose's within there?
My Lord.
Go Compton, bid Lord Seimer come to me,
The honoured Father of my woeful Queen
Now now what news?
We did deliver what your highness wild,
Which was no sooner by her grace received:
But with the sad report, she seemed as dead,
Which caused us stay, after recovery.
She sent us back t'entreat your Majesty,
As ever you did take delight in her,
As you prefer the quiet of her soul,
That now is ready to forsake this life,
As you desire to have the life of one,
She doth entreat your grace that she may die,
lest both doth perish in this agony:
For to behold the infant suffer death,
Were endless tortures, made to stop her breath,
Then to my Lord (quoth she) thus gently say,
The child is fair, the mother earth and clay,
Sad messenger of woe; oh my poor Queen,
Canst thou so soon consent to leave this life,
So precious to our soul, so dear to all,
To yield the hopeful issue of thy loins,
To raise our second comfort, well, be it so:
Ill, be it so: stay, I revoke my word,
But that you say helps not, for she must die:
Yet if ye can save both, i'll give my crown:
Nay, all I have, and enter bonds for more,
Which with my conquering sword with fury bent,
I'll purchase in the farthest continent,
Use all your chiefest skill, make haste away,
Whilst we for your success devoutly pray.
All joy and happiness betide my Sovereign.
joy be it good Lord Seymer noble father,
Or joy, or grief, thou hast a part in it,
Thou commit to greet us in a doubtful hour,
Thy daughter and my Queen lies now in pain,
And if I lose, Seymer thou canst not gain.
Yet comfort, good my Liege, this woman's woe,
Why? 'tis as certain to her as her death,
Both given her in her first creation:
It is a sour to sweet, given them at first,
By their first mother, then put sorrow hence:
Your grace, ere long shall see a gallant Prince,
Be thou a Prophet Seymer in thy words,
Thy love some comfort to our hopes affords,
How now.
My gracious Lord, here I present to you,
A goodly son: see here your flesh, your bone,
Look here royal Lord, I warrant 'tis your own.
See here my Liege, by the rood a gallant Prince,
Ha little cakebread, fore-god a chopping boy.
even now I wept with sorrow, now with joy,
Take that for thy good news, how fares my Queen.
O my good Lord, the woeful.
Tell no more of woe, speak, doth she live?
What? weep ye all, nay, than my heart misgives,
Resolve me sister, is the news worth hearing.
Nor worth the telling, royal Sovereign.
Now, by my crown, thou dim'st my royalty,
And with thy cloudy looks eclipsed my joys,
Thy silent eye bewrays a ruthful sound,
Stopped in the organs of thy troubled spirit:
Say, is she dead.
Without offence she is.
Without offence, sayst thou, heaven take my soul,
What can be more offensive to my life:
Then sad remembrance of my fair queen's death,
Thou woeful man, that camest to comfort me:
How shall I ease thy heart's calamity?
That cannot help thyself, how one sad minute
Hath raised a fount of sorrows in his eyes,
And bleared his aged cheeks, yet Seymer see,
She hath left part of herself, a son to me:
To thee a grandchild, unto the land a Prince,
The perfect substance of his royal mother,
In whom her memory shall ever live:
Phoenix Iana obit vato Phaenice,
Dolendum secula phaenices nulla tulisse dvas.
One Phoenix dying, gives another life,
Thus must we flatter our extremest grief.
What day is this.
Saint Edward's even my Lord.
Prepare for christening, Edward shall be his name,
My Lords of France you have had small cheer with us,
But you must pardon us, the times are sad,
And focits not now for mirth and banqueting:
Therefore I pray make your swift return,
Commend me to your king, and kindly tell him,
The English Cardinal will remain his friend,
The Lady Mary shall be forthwith sent,
And overtake ye ere you reach to Dover:
And for the business that concerns the league,
Urge it no more, but leave it to my care,
We thank your grace, my good Lord Cardinal,
And so with thankfulness we take our leaves.
Happily speed my honourable Lords,
My heart, I swear, still keeps you company,
Farewell to both, pray your king remember,
My suit betwixt him and the Emperor,
We shall be thankful, if they think on us.
We will be earnest in your cause my Lord,
So of your grace we once more take our leaves.
Again farewell, Bonner conduct them forth,
Now Gardner, what thinkst thou of these times.
Well, that the leagues confirmed, my gracious Lord,
Ill, that I fear the death of good Queen Iane,
Will caute new troubles in our state again.
Why thinkst thou so?
I fear false Luther; doctrines spread so far,
I cast that his highness now unmarried,
Should match amongst that sect of Lutherans,
You saw how soon his majesty was won,
To scorn the Pope, and Rome's religion,
When Queen Anne Bullen wore the diadem.
Gardner 'tis true, so was the rumor spread:
But Woolsie wrought such means she lost her head,
Tush fear not thou whilst Harry's life doth stand,
He shall be king, but we will rule the land.
Bonner come hither, you are our trusty friend:
See that the treasure we have gathered,
The Copes, the Vestments, and the Chalices,
The smoke pence, and the tributary fees,
That English chimneys pay the Church of Rome:
Be barreled close within the inner seller,
We'll send it over shortly to prepare,
Our swift advancement to Saint Peter's chair,
Be trusty, and be sure of honours speedily,
The king hath promised at the next election,
Bonner shall have the Bishopric of London.
I humbly thank your grace.
And Gardner shall be Lord of Winchester:
Had we our hopes, what shall you not be then,
When we have got the Papal diadem.
How now Sir William Cumpton, where is the king.
His grace is walking in the gallery,
As sad and passionate as ere he was.
'twere good your grace went in to comfort him.
Not I Lord Dudley, by my George I swear,
Unless his Highness first had sent for me,
I will not put my head in such a hazard,
I know his anger, and his spleen too well.
'tis strange, this humour hath his highness held,
Ever since the death of good Queen Iane,
That none dares venture to confer with him.
Here comes the Cardinal.
ay, and two fools after him, his Lordship is well attended still
Let's win this prelate to salute the king,
It may perhaps work his disgrace with him,
How now William, what? are you here to,
I my Lord, all the fools follow you, I come to bid my cousin Patch welcome to the court, and when I come to York house, he'll do as much for me, will ye not Patch?
Yes cousin, heigh, da, tere, dedell, day, day.
What, are you singing sirrah.
I'll make him cry as fast anon I hold a penny.
God morrow to your grace my good Lord Cardinal.
We thank your honour.
What Cumpton, Carew.
Hark, the king calls.
Mother of God, how are we attended on: who weights without.
Go in Sir William, and if you find his grace
In any milder temper than he was last night,
Let us have word, and we will visit him.
I Will my Lord.
What is the occasion, that the kings so moved.
His grace hath taken such an inward grief,
With sad remembrance of the Queen that's dead:
That much his highness wrongs his state and person,
Besides in Ireland, do the Burkes rebel,
And stout Percy that disclosed the plot,
Was by the Earl of Kildare late put to death.
And Martin Luther out of Germanie.
Has writ a book against his Majesty,
For taking part with proud Pope Iulius,
Which being spread by him through Christendom,
Hath thus incensed his royal majesty.
Tush, I have news, my Lord, to salve that sore,
And make the king more feared through Christendom,
Then ever was his famous ancestors:
Nor can base Luther with his heresies,
Backed by the proudest German potentate,
Heretically blur king Henry's fame:
For honour that he did Pope Julius,
Who in high favour of his Majesty,
Hath sent Campeus with a bull from Rome,
To add unto his title this high style:
That he and his fair posterity,
Proclaimed defenders of the faith shall be:
For which intent the holy Cardinals come,
As Legates from the Imperial court of Rome.
This news, my Lord, may something ease his mind,
'twere good your grace would go and visit him.
I will, and doubt not but to please him well.
So, I am glad he's in, and the king be no better pleased than he was at our last parting, he'll make him repent his sauciness.
How now old William, how chance you go not to the king, and comfort him.
No by’r lady, my Lord, I was with him too lately already, his fist is too heavy for a fool to stand under, I went to him last night, after you had left him, seeing him chase so at Charles, here to make him merry; and he gave me such a box on the ear, that stroke me clean through three chambers, down four pair of stairs, fell over five barrels, into the bottom of the seller, and if I had not well liquor myself there, I had never lived after it.
Faith Will, i'll give thee a velvet coat, and thou canst but make him merry.
Will ye my Lord, and i'll venture another box on the ear but i'll do it.
Clear the presence there, the king is coming,
Gods me, my Lords, what meant the Cardinal,
So unexpected thus to trouble him.
Is the king moved at it.
Judge by his countenance, see he comes.
I'll not endure the storm.
Nor I.
Run fool your master will be field else.
Did we not charge that none should trouble us,
Presumptuous priest, proud prelate as thou art,
How comes it you are grown so saucy sir,
Thus to presume upon our patience,
And cross our royal thought disturbed and vexed,
By all your negligence in our estate,
Of us and of our country's happiness.
My gracious Lord.
Fawning beast stand back:
Or by my crown, i'll foot thee to the earth,
Where's Brandon, Surrey, Seymer, Grey,
Where is your counsel now, O now ye crouch,
And stand like pictures at our presence door,
Call in our guard, and bear them to the Tower,
Mother of God, i'll have the traitor's heads,
Go hale them to the block, up, up, stand up,
I'll make you know your duties to our state,
Am I a cipher, is my sight grown stale,
Am I not Harry, am I not England's king, Ha.
So la, now the watch words given, nay and he once cry ha, near a man in the court dare for his head speak again, lie close cousin Patch.
I'll not come near him cousin, has almost killed me with his countenance.
We have been too familiar, now I see,
And you may dally with our majesty:
Where are my pages there.
My Lord.
truss sirrah, none to put my garter on,
Give me some wine, here stuff a the other side,
Proud Cardinal who followed our affairs in Italy,
That we that honoured so Pope Iulius,
By dedicating books at thy request,
Against that upstart sect of Lutherans,
Should by that heretic be banded thus,
But by my George, I swear, if Henry live,
I'll hunt base Luther through all Germany,
And pull those seven electors on their knees:
If they but back him against our dignities.
Base slave tie soft, thou hur'st my leg,
And now in Ireland the Burkkes rebel,
And with his stubborn kerns makes hourly roads,
To burn the borders of the English pale,
And which of all your counsels helps us now.
Here's wine, my Lord.
Drink, and be damned, I cry thee mercy Cumpton,
What the devil meantst thou to come behind me so,
I did mistake, i'll make thee amends for it,
By holy Paul, I am so crossed and vexed,
I knew not what I did, and here at home,
Such careful statesmen do attend us,
And looks so wisely to our common weal,
That we have ill May-day's, and riots made:
For lawless rebels do disturb our state,
twelve times this term, have we in person sat,
Both in the star chamber, and Chancery courts,
To hear our subjects suits determined:
Yet 'tis your office Woolsie, but all of you
May make a packhorse of king Henry now:
Well, what would ye say.
Nothing that might displease your majesty,
I have a message from the Pope to you.
Then keep it still, we will not hear it yet,
Get all of you away, avoid our presence
We cannot yet command our patience,
Reach me a chair.
Now will, or never, make the king but smile,
And with thy mirthful toys allay his spleen,
That we his counsel, may confer with him,
And by my Honour, i'll reward thee well,
Too him good Will.
Not too fast, I pray, least will Sommers here be seen again, I know his qualities as well as the best an ye: for ever when he's angry, and nobody dare speak to him, ye thrust me in by the head and shoulders, and then we fall to buffets, but I know who has the worst aunt: but go, my Lord, stand aside, and stir not till I call ye, let my cousin Patch and I alone, and he go to boxing, we'll fall both upon him, that's certain: but and the worst come, be sure the cardinal's fool shall pay for't.
Use your best skill, good william, i'll not be seen, Unless I see him smile.
Where art thou cousin, alas poor fool, he's crept under the table, up cousin, fear nothing, the storms past, I warrant thee.
Is the king gone, cousin?
No, no, yonder he sits, we are all friends now,
The Lords are gone to dinner, and thou and I must wait at the king's table.
Not I by’r lady, I would not wait upon such a Lord, for all the livings in the land, I thought he would have killed my Lord Cardinal, he looked so terribly.
Foe, he did but jest with him, but i'll tell the cousin the rarest trick to be revenged as'st passes, and i'll give thee this fine silk point and thou'lt do it.
O brave, o brave, give me it cousin, and i'll do whatsoe'er 'tis.
I'll stand behind the post here, and thou shalt go softly stealing behind him, as he sits reading yonder, and when thou comest close to him, cry boo, and we'll scar him so, he shall not tell where to rest him.
But will he not be angry?
No, no, for then i'll show myself, and after he sees who 'tis he'll lafe and be as merry as a mag pie, and though't be a mayd man by it, for all the house shall see him hug thee in his arms, & dandle thee up and down with hand & foot an thou wert a football,
O fine come cozen, give me the pint first, & i'll roar so loud that i'll make him believe that the devils come.
So do and fear nothing, for an thou wert the devil himself, he'll conjure thee I warrant thee, I would not have such a conjuring for twenty crowns: but when he has made way, i'll make him merry enough, I doubt it not, so so now cousin look to your coxcomb:
Boe.
Mother of God what's that.
Boe.
Out ass take that and tumble at my feet.
For thus I'll spurn thee up an down the house:
Help cousin help:
No cousin now he's conjuring. I dare not come near him.
Who set this natural here to trouble me.
whose's that stands laughing there, the fool, ha, ha, Where's Compton. Mother a God I have found his drift, 'tis the craftiest old villain in Christendom, mark good Sir William, because the fool durst not come near himself, seeing our anger, sent this silly Ass, that we might wreak our royal spleen on him: whilst he stands laughing to behold the left, byth' blessed La (Copton) I'll not leave the fool, to gain a million, he contents me so, come hither Will,
I'll know whether ye have done knocking first, my cozen patch looks pitifully, ye had best be friends with us I can tell you, we'll scare ye out of your skin else
Alas, poor patch hold sirrah there's an Angel to buy you points.
la cousin, did not I say he'll make much on ye,
I cousin but has made such a singing in my head
I cannot see where I am.
All the better cousin and your head fall a singing, your feet may fall a dancing & so save charges to the piper:
Will Sommers, prithee tell me why didst thou send him first.
Because i'll have him have the first fruits of thy fury. I know how the matter stood with the next that disturbed thee, therefore I kept i'th' rearward, that if the battle grew too hot, I might run presently,
But wherefore came ye.
To make thee leave thy melancholy and turn merry man again, thou hast made all the Court in such a pitiful case as passes, the Lords has attended here this four days, and none dares speak to thee, but thou art ready to chop of their heads sort: and now I seeing what a fretting fury thou continuest in, and every one said 'twol'd kill thee if thou keep'st it, pulled e'en up my heart, and vowed to lose my head, but i'll make thee leave it,
Well William I am beholding to ye.
Ye shall have a new Coat and a cap for this.
Nay then, I shall have two new coats and caps, for Charles Brandon promised me one before, to perform this enterprise:
He shall keep his word will, go call him in,
Call in the Lords tell them our spleen is calmed:
Mother a God we must give way to wrath.
That chafes our Royal blood with anger thus:
And use some mirth I see to comfort us.
Draw near us Lords, Charles Brandon lift to me:
Will Sommers here must have a Coat of you,
But Patch has earned it dearest where's the fool?
he's enne creeping as near the door as he can,
he'll fain begone I see, and he could get out,
Wouldest thou not cousin?
Yes cousin Will. I'd fain be walking, I am afraid,
I am not as I should be:
Come, i'll help thee out then, dost thou hear my Lord Cardinal, your fool is in a pitiful taking, he smells terribly.
You are too crafty for him William,
So is he Woolsey credit me.
I think so my Lord, as long as will live, the cardinal's fool must give way to the king's fool:
Well sir be quiet, and my reverent Lords,
I thank you for your patient suffering,
We were disturbed in our thoughts we swear,
We now entreat you speak and we will hear,
Then may it please your sacred Majesty,
Legate to his holiness,
Attends with letters from the Court of Rome.
Let him draw near, we'll give him Audience,
and Grey Attend the Cardinal,
And bring
to our presence here:
Grey, We go my Lord:
Brandon and Seymer, place yourselves by us,
To hear this message from his holiness,
You reverent princes pillars of the Church:
Legates, apostolic, how fares the Pope,
In health great King and from his sacred lips:
I bring a blessing Apostolical.
To English Henrie and his subjects all:
And more to manifest his love to thee,
The prop and pillar of the church's peace:
And gratify thy love made plain to him,
In learned books 'gainst Luther's heresy,
He sends me thus to greet thy Majesty:
With style and titles of high dignity,
Command the Heralds and the Trumpets forth:
Gentlemen dispatch and call them in:
Lord bless us, what's here to do now,
Receive this Bull sent from his holiness.
For confirmation of his dignity
To thee, and to thy fair posterity.
'tis well the Kings a widower, and he had put forth your Bull with his horns forward, I'd have marred your message. I can tell ye.
Peace
heralds attend him:
Trumpets prepare whilst we allowed pronounce
This sacred message from his Holiness,
And in his reverent name I hear proclaim
Henrie the Eight by the grace of God,
King of England, France and Ireland.
And to this title, from the Pope we give:
Defender of the faith, in peace to live:
Sound Trumpets, and God save the King.
We thank his holiness for this princely favour,
Receiving it with thanks and reverence:
In which whilst we have life, his grace shall see,
Our sword defender of the faith shallbe,
Go one of you salute the Maior of London,
Bid him with heralds and with Trumpets sound,
Proclaim our Titles through his government,
Go Grey, see it done, attend him fellows:
I go my Lord, Trumpets follow me,
What more Lord legate doth his holiness will?
That Henry joining with the Christian Kings
Of France and Spain, Denmark and Portugal
would send an army to assail the Turk,
That now invades with War the I'll of Rhodes,
Or send twelve thousand pound to be disposed,
As his holiness thinks best for their relief.
I thought so, I knew 'twould be a monnie matter, when als done, now thart defender of the faith, the Pope will have thee defend every thing himself and all.
Take hence the fool.
ay, when can ye tell? dost thou think any oath Lords will take the fool, none here, I warrant, except the Cardinals.
What a knavish fools this, Lords you must bear with him come hither Will, what sayst thou to this new title given us by the Pope, speak, is't not rare?
I know not how rare it is, but I know how dear 'twill be, for I perceive 'twill cost thee twelve thousand' pounds, at least, besides the Cardinals cost in coming.
All these nothing; the title of defender of the faith is worth ye, twice as much, say, is it not.
No by my troth, dost hear old Harry; I am sure, the true faith is able to defend itself without thee, and as for the pope's faith (good faith's) not worth a farthing, and therefore give him not a penny.
Go to sirrah meddle not you with the pope's matters:
Let him not meddle with thy matters then, for, and he meddle with thee, He middle with him that's certain and so farewell, I'll go and meet my little young Master Prince Edward, they say he comes to Court tonight, I'll to horseback, Prithee Harry send one to hold my stirrup: shall I tell the Prince what the Pope has done.
I and thou wilt Will, he shall be defender of the faith too, one day.
No, and he and I can defend ourselves we care not,
For we are sure the faith can.
Lord legate, so we reverence Rome and you,
As nothing you demand, shall be denied:
The Turk will we expel from Christendom,
Sending stout soldiers to his holiness,
And money to relieve distressed Rhodes:
So if you please, pass in to banqueting,
Go Lords attend them, Brandon and Compton stay,
We have some business to confer upon.
We take our leave.
Most hearty welcome to my reverent Lords.
So, now to our business, Brandon say,
Hear ye no tidings from our sister Mary,
Since her arrival in the Realm of France?
Thus much we heard my Lord, at Cales met her
The youthful Dolphin, and the Peers of France:
And bravely brought her to the King at Towers,
Where he both married her, and crowned her Queen
'tis well, but Brandon and
Compion list to me,
I must employ your aid and secrecy,
This night we mean in some disguised shape;
To visit London, and to walk the round,
Pass through their watches, and observe the care
And special diligence to keep our peace.
They say night-walkers, hourly pass the streets,
Committing theft, and hated sacrilege:
And slightly pass unstaid, or unpunished,
Go Compton, go, and get me some disguise,
This night we'll see our City's government:
Brandon, do you attend at Baynard's. Castio,
Compton shall go disguised along with me,
Our swords and bucklers shall conduct us safe,
But if we catch a knock to quit our pain,
we'll put it up, and buy us home again.
Come neighbours, we have a straight command.
Our watches be severely looked into:
Much theft and murder was committed lately,
There are two strangers, merchants of the Stillyard
Cruelly slain, found floating on the Thames:
And greatly are Stews had in suspect,
As places fitting for no better use,
Therefore be careful and examine all,
Perhaps we may attach the murderer.
Nay I assure ye master Constable, those stew houses are places of much slaughter and redemption and many cruel deeds of equity and wickedness are committed there, for divers good men lose both their money and their computation by them, I abjure ye; how say you neighbour Prichall?
Neighbour Capcase, I know you're a man of courage, and for the merry cobbler of Lune street, though I sit as low as Saint faiths, I can look as high as Paul's: I have in my days walked to the stew as as well as my neighbours, but if the mad wenches fall to burdening once, and cast men into the Thames, I have done with them, there's no dealing, if they carry fire in one hand, and water i'th' other.
Well masters we are now placest about the King's business.
And I know ye all sufficient in the knowledge of it,
I need not to repeat your charge again:
Good neighbours, use your greatest care I pray,
And if unruly persons trouble ye,
Call and i'll come: so sirs good-night.
Godyegodnight and twenty sir, I warrant ye, ye need not reconcile to our charge, vor some on us has discharged the place this forty year I am sure. Neighbours what think you best to be done?
Every man according to his calling neighbour, if the enemy come, here lies my town of Garrison, I set on him as I set on a patch, if he tread on this side, I underlay him on this side, or prick him through both sides, I yerk him, and trick him, pare him and piece him, then hang him up beth heels till Sunday.
How say ye, by my faith neighbour Prichall ye speak to the purpose, for indeed neighbours, every sensible watchman is to seek the best reformation to his own destruction.
But what think ye neighbours, if every man take a nap now, eth forehand eth night, and go to bed afterward.
That were not a miss neither, but and you'll take but every man his pot first, you'll sleep like the man eth Moon i'faith.
Do ye think neighbour, there is a man eth Moon?
I assure ye in a clear day, I have seente at midnight.
Of what occupation is he trow?
Some thinks he's a shepherd, because on's dog, some says he's a baker going to heat his oven with a bavin at's back, but the plain truth is, I think he was a cobbler, for ye know what the song says, I see a man eth Moon, fie man, fie, I see a man eth Moon, clouting Saint Peter's shone, and so by this reason, he should be a cobbler.
By my fekins he saith true, alas, alas, goodman Dormouse hath even given up the ghost already, us an honest quiet soul I warrant ye.
It behoves us all to be so how do ye neighbour Darmonse?
Godspeed ye, Godspeed ye, nay and ye go a godssleepie, name, I have nothing to say to ye.
Law ye, his minds on's business, though he be near so
Come let's all join with him and steal a nap, every man masters to his several stall.
Agreed, Goodnight good neighbours.
Nay, lets take no leaue, ile but winke a while, and see you againe. ward
Come sir William,
We may now stand upon our guard you see,
The watch has given vz leave to arm ourselves,
They fear no danger, for they sleep secure:
Go carry those bills we took to Baynard's Castle,
And bid Charles Brandon to disguise himself,
And meet me presently at Grace Church Corner,
We will attempt to pass through all the watches,
And so I take's will be an easy task,
Therefore make haste.
I will my Liege.
The watchword if I chance to send to ye,
Is the great Stag of Baydon, so my name shall be.
Enough, we'll think on it.
So, now we'll forward, soft yonder's light,
I and a watch, and all asleep by’r lady:
These are good peaceable subjects, here's none
Beckons to any, all may pass in peace: Ho sirrah.
Stand, who goes there?
good fellow. Stands a heinous word the Kings
High way you have been at Noddy, I see.
ay, and the first card comes to my hand's a Knave.
I am a Coatercard indeed.
Then thou must needs be a Knave, for art neither King nor Queen, (I am sure) But whether goest thou?.
About a little business that I have in hand.
Then good night, prithee trouble me no longer.
Why this is easy enough, here's passage at pleasure,
What wretch so wicked, would not give fair words
After the foulest fact of Villainy?
That may escape unseen so easily,
Or what should let him that is so resolved
To murder, rapine, theft, or sacrilege:
I see the City are the sleepy heads,
To do it, and pass thus unexamined.
Fond heedless men, what boots it for a King,
To toil himself in this high state affairs,
To summon Parliaments, and call together
The wisest heads of all his Provinces:
Making statutes for his subjects peace,
That thus neglecting them, their woes increase.
Well, we'll further on, soft here comes one,
I'll stay and see, how he escapes the watch.
So, how I am got within the City, I am as safe as in a Sanctuarieat is a hard world, when Black Will, for a venture of five pound, must commit such petty robberies at Mile-end, but the plain truth is, the Stews from whence I had my quartaridgeas now grown too hot for me: there's some suspection of a murder lately done upon two Merchants of the stillyard, which indeed as far as some five or six stabs comes too, I confess I had a hand in. But mum-budget, all the Dogs in the town must not bark at it. I must withdraw awhile till the heat be over, remove my lodging, and live upon dark nights and misty mornings. Now let me them see, the strongest watch in London intercept my passage.
Such a Fellow would I fain meet withal:
Well overtaken sir.
'sblood come before me sir:
What a Devil art thou?
A man at least.
And art thou valiant?
I carry a sword and a bucklerye see.
A sword and a buckler, and know not me, Not Black Will?
No trust me.
Slave, than thou art neither traveler, nor Purse-taker: for I tell thee, Black will is known and feared through the seventeen provinces: there's not a sword and Buckler man in England nor Europe, but has had a taste of my manhood. I am tole-free in all Cities, & the Suburbs about them: this is my Sconce, my Castle, my Citadel, and but King Harry, God bless his Majesty, I fear not the proudest.
O ves, some of his guard.
Let his guard eats beef and be thankful, give me a man will cover himself with his buckler, and not budge and the devil come.
methinks thou wert better live at Court as I do, King Harry loves a man, I can tell ye.
Would thou and all the men he keeps were hanged, and ye love not him then: but I will not change my revenues for all his guards wages.
Hast thou such store of ruing?
Art thou a good fellow?
May I speak freely, and wilt not tell the king on't?
Keep thine own counsel, and fear not,
For of my faith the King shall know no more for me, than thou tell'st him.
And I tell him any thing let him hang me: but for thyself, I think if a fat purse come i'th' way, thou wouldest not refuse it. Therefore leave the Court and shark with me, I tell thee, I am chief commander of all the Stews, there's not a whore shifts a smock but by my privilege, nor opens her shop before I have my weekly tribute: And to assure thee my valour carries credit with it, do but walk with me through the streets of London, and let me see the proudest watch disturb us.
I shall be glad of your conduct syr.
Follow me then, and i'll tell thee more.
Stand, who goes there?
A good fellow: come close, regard them not.
How shall we know thee to be a good fellow?
My names Black Will.
Oh, God give ye good night, good Master Black William.
God boy sir, God boy,
I am glad we are so well rid on him.
la sir, you see here's egress enough,
Now follow me, & you shall see we'll have regress back again,
Hoe comes there?
Come afore the Constable.
Will What have ye forgot me so soon? 'tis I.
O, 'tis M. Black William,
God bless ye sir, God bless ye.
How lik'st thou now?
Faith excellent: but prithee tell me, dost thou face the world with thy manhood, that thus they fear thee, or art thou truly valiant?
'sfoot, dost thou doubt of my manhood? Nay then defend yourself, i'll give you a try all presently, betake ye to your tools sir, i'll teach ye to stand upon Intergatories.
I am for ye, there's near a man the King keeps shall refuse ye: but tell me, wilt thou keep the king's Act for fighting.
As ye please sir: yet because thouart his man, i'll observe it, and neither thrust nor strike beneath the knee.
I am pleased, have at you sir.
Help neighbours, O take ye to your brown Bills, call up the Constable, here's a piece of chance-medley ready to be committed: set on goodman Sprichall.
I'll firk them a both sides, lie close neighbour Dormouse, keep the king's peace, I charge ye, help M. Constable.
Keep the peace, or strike them down.
'sounds, I am hurt, hold I say.
Let them not pass neighbours, here's bloodshed drawn upon one of the king's Officers.
Take away their weapons, and since you are so hot, I'll set you where you shall be cool enough.
'sounds the Moons a waning harlot, with the glimpse of her light I lost his point, & mistook my ward, had near brought my blood else.
pray sir what are you?
I am the king's man sir, and of his Guard.
More shame you should so much forget yourself,
For as I takte, 'tis parcel of your oath,
As well to keep his peace, as guard his person:
And if a Constable be not present by,
You may as well as he, his place supply:
And seeing ye so neglect your oath and duty,
Go bear them to the Counter presently,
There shall ye answer for these misdemeanours.
Has broke my head sir, and furthermore it bleeds.
Away with them both, they shall pay thee well ere they come forth, I warrant thee.
I beesech ye sir.
Never entreat man, we shall have bail I doubt it not, But master Constable, I hope you'll do me this favour, to let one of your watchmen go of an arrant for me, if I pay him?
With all my heart sir, here's one shall go.
Hold thee good fellow, here's an angel for thee, go thy way to Baynard's Castle, & ask for one Brandon, he serves the Duke of Suffolk, and tell him his bedfellow, or the great stag of Baydon this night is clapteth Counter, and bid him come speak with me. Come Constable let's go, sirrah make haste.
I warrant you sir, and this be all, i'd have done it for half the money: well, I must inquire for one Brandon, and tell him the great stag of Baydon is eth Counter, by’r lady I doubt they be both crafty knaves, and this is some watchword between them: beth mass I doubt he near come well by his money, he's so liberal, well i'll forward.
Sir William, are you sure it was at Graces-Church
His Majesty appointed we should meet him?
We have been there and missed him, what think ye sir?
Good faith I know not.
His Highness is too venturous bold, my Lord
I know he will forsake himself in this,
Opposing still against a world of odds.
Good faith 'tis true: but soft here comes one,
How now good fellow, whether goest thou?
It lies in my authority sir,
To ask you that question.
For I am one of the king's watch, I can tell ye.
Then perhaps thou canst tell us some tidings:
Didst thou not see a good lusty tall big set man, pass through your watch tonight?
Yes sir, there was such a man came to our watch to tonight, but none that passed through, for he behaved himself so, that he was laid hold on quickly, and now he is forth coming in the Counter.
And whether art thou going?
Faith sir, has given me an Angel, to do an errand for him at Baynard's Castle, to one Brandon, that serves the Duke of Suffolk: he says he is his Bedfellow, and I must tell him, the great Stag of Baydon, is eth Counter.
If thine errand be to Brandon, I can save thee a labour, for I am the man thou look'st for, we have been seeking him almost all this night: hold thee there's an Angel for thy news, i'll bail him I warrant thee.
I thank you sir: but he's not so soon bailed, as you think for, there's two of the king's watch has their heads broke, and that must be answered for, but all's won to me, let them shuffle as they will, the Angels has flown about tonight, and two gulls are light into my hands, and these i'll keep, let him get out as he can.
Hoe Porter, whose's without there?
What's the matter now? will ye not go to bed tonight?
No trust me, 'twill be morning presently,
And I have hope I shall be bailed ere then:
I prithee if thou canst, entreat some of the prisoners to keep me company a pair of hours, or so: and we'll spend them: ethe rouse of healths, and all shall be my cost.
Say wilt thou pleasure me?
If that will pleasure ye sir, ye shall not want for company, here's I now that can tend it, they have hunger and ease enough at all times.
There's a couple of Gentlemen in the next room, I prithee let them come in, and there's an Harry Sovereign for thee.
I thank you sir, I am as much beholding to you, as to King Harry for it.
ay, I assure thee thou art.
Well M. Constable, you have made the Counter
This night, the royal Court of England's King:
And by my crown I swear, I would not for
A thousand pound 'twere otherwise.
The Officers in Cities, now I see,
Are like an Orchard set with several Trees,
Where one must cherish one, rebuke the other:
And in this wretched Counters I perceive,
Money plays fast and loose, purchases favour,
And without that, nought but misery.
A poor Gentleman hath made complaint to me,
I am undone (quoth he) and kept in prison,
For one of your fellows that serves the King,
Being bound for him, and he neglecting me.
Hath brought me to this woe and misery.
Another Citizen there is, complains
Of one belonging to the Cardinal,
That in his masters name hath taken up
Commodities, valued at a thousand pound:
The payment being deferred hath caused him break,
And so is quite undone. Thus kings & Lords I see,
Are oft abused by servants treachery.
But whist a while, here comes my fellow prisoners.
Where's this bully Grig, this lad of life, that will scour the counter with right renish tonight? Oh Sir you are welcome.
I thank ye sir, nay we'll be as great as our word, I assure ye. Here Porter, there's money, fetch wine I prithee: Gentlemen you cannot be merry in this melancholy place; but here's a Lad has his heart as light as his purse. Sirrah, thou art some mad slave I think, a regular companion: won that that uses to walk a-nights, or so. Art thou not?
Hark ethen ear, thart a good fellow.
I am right borne I assure thee.
King Harry loves a man, and thou a woman:
Shall I teach thee some wit?
And tell thee why I met thee here?
I went and set my limb-twigs, and I think
I got some hundred pound,
B a crooked measure at Cooe Parke:
And now seeing there was watch laid,
And much search for suspicious persons:
I got won as honest as myself to arrest me,
By a contrary name, and lay me eth counter,
And here I know they'll near seek me,
And so when the heats over, I am at liberty,
And mean to spend my crowns lustily:
How lik'st thou this my Bully?
An excellent policy.
But mum, no words: use it for yourself, or so.
O sir, fear it not, be merry Gentlemen: Is not this wine come yet? God's me, forget our chief guest, where's my sword and buckler-man? where's Black will? how now man, melancholy? let not a little wipe make us enemies, clap hands, and be friends.
My bloods up still.
When 'tis at highest 'twill fall again, come hands, hands.
I'll shake hands with thee, because thou carriest a Sword and Buckler, yet thart not right cavalier, thou know'st not how to use them, thaste a heavy arm.
I a good smart stroke.
Thou cutst my head indeed, but 'twas no play, thou layest open enough, I could have entered at my pleasure.
Nay I have stout guard I assure ye.
Childish to a man of valour, when thou shouldst have borne thy Buckler here, thou lettest it fall to thy knee, thou gavest me a wipe, but 'twas mere chance: but had we not been parted, I had taught ye a little School play I warrant ye.
What hoe, porter: who keeps the gates there?
Who knocks so fast?
Stand by sirrah.
Keep back I say, whither will ye press amongst the prisoners?
Sirrah to the Court, and we must in.
Why sir, the courts not kept eth Counter today.
Yes when the king is there,
All happiness betide our Sovereign.
'sounds king Harry.
Lord I beseech thee no.
We all entreat your grace to pardon us.
Stand up good men: beshrew ye Brandon for discovering us, we shall not spend our time so well this month: but there's no remedy now, the worst is this,
The court good fellows must be removed the sooner,
Ye all are courtiers yet. Nay, nay, come forward,
Even now you know we were more familiar:
You see policies holds not always currant,
I am found out, and so I think will you be:
Go Porter let him be removed to Newgate
This place I see is too secure for him:
we'll send you further word for his bestowin.
I beseech your Grace.
There's no grace in thee, nor none for thee:
Go, away with him.
'sounds I shall to Tyburne presently.
Gentlemen, you that have been wronged by my servants and the Cardinals, shall give me nearer notes of it,
Both what they are, and how much debt they owe ye:
Send your petitions to the Court to me.
And doubt not but you shall have remedy:
There's forty Angels, drink to King Harry's health,
And think withal, much wrong Kings men may do:
The which their masters near consent unto.
God bless your Majesty with happy life;
That thus respect; your woeful subjects grief,
Where's Black Will, nay come nearer man,
I came nearer you, though ye misliked my play.
Beth Lord, your Maiesties the best sword and buckler man in Europe, ye lie as close to your wards, carry your point as fair, that no Fencer comes near ye for gallant Fence-play.
Nay now ye flatter me.
fore-god ye broke my head most gallantly.
I But 'twas but by chance ye know, but now your heads broke, you look for a plaster I am sure.
And your grace will give me leave, I'll put it up and go my ways presently.
Nay soft sir, the Keeper will deny ye that privilege, Come hither sirrah, because ye shall know King Harrie loves a man, & I perceive there's some metal in thee, there's twenty Angels for thee, marry it shall be to keep ye in prison still, till we have further use for ye. If ye can break through watches with egress and regress so valiantly, ye shall dov amongst your country's enemies.
The wars sweet King, 'tis my delight, my desire, my chair of state, create me but a tattered Corporal, and give me some pre-eminence over the vulgar Hotshots, and I beat them not forward to as brave attempts, and march myself i' th' Vanguard, as ere carried against a Castle wall, break my head in two places more, and consume me with the mouth of a double culvering, I'll live and die with thee sweet King.
'twill be your best course sir, go take him in,
When we have need of men, we'll send for him.
God bless your majesty, i'll go drink to your health.
begone: sir, keeper I thank you for our lodging,
Nay indeed I do, I know had ye known us, it had been better,
Pray tell the Constable that brought us hither,
We thank him, and commend his faithful service,
Gentlemen let's hear from you, & so God morrow,
Keeper, there's for my fees, discharge the offices:
And give them charge that none discover us,
Till we are past the city: in this disguise we came.
we'll keep us still, and so depart again.
Once more God morrow, you may now report,
Your connter was one night king Henry's court.
Away and leave us, Brandon what further news?
The old king of France is dead my Liege,
And left your sister Mary a young widow.
God forbid man, what not so soon I hope,
She has not yet been married forty days:
Is this news certain?
Most true my Lord.
Alas poor Mary, so soon a widow,
Before thy wedding robes be half worn out:
We must then prepare black funeral garments too,
Well, we'll have her home, the league is broke:
And we'll not trust her safety with the French.
Charles Brandon, you shall go to France for her,
See that your train be richly furnished,
And if the daring French, brave thee in attempts
Of honour, Barriers, Tilt, and & tournament:
So to retain her, bore thee like thyself,
An English man, dreadless of the proudest:
And highly scorning lowly hardiness
I shall my Sovereign, and in her honour,
I'll cast a challenge through all the court:
And dare the proudest Peer in France for her.
Commend me to the Lady Catherine Parry,
Give her this Ring, tell her on sunday next
She shall be Queen, and crowned at Westminster:
And Anne of Cleve shall be sent home again:
Come sirs, we'll leave the city, and the counter now,
The day begins to break, let's high to court.
And once a quarter we desire such sport.
My reverent Lord of London,
Our trusty friend, the king of France is dead,
And in his death, our hopes are hindered:
The Emperor too, mislikes his praises,
But we shall cross him for't I doubt it not:
And tread upon his pomp imperial,
That thus hath wronged the English Cardinal.
Your grace's letters by Campeus sent,
I doubt not but shall work your full content.
I that must be our safest way to work,
Money will make us men, when men stand out:
The Bastard Fredericks to attain the place,
Hath made an offer to the Cardinals,
Of threescore thousand pound, which we will pay,
Three times thrice double, ere we lose the day.
Come cousen William, I'll bring ye to my Lord Cardinal presently.
I thank ye cousen, and when you come to the court, I'll bring you to the King again, ye know cousen, he gave ye an angel.
ay but he gave me such a blow o'th' ear for it, as I care not for coming In's sight again while I live.
How now Patch, who have you got there? what Will Summer's welcome good William.
I thank your grace, I heard say your Lordship had made two new Lords here, and so the two old fools are come to wait on them.
We thank ye William.
Your Lordship will be well guarded, & we follow ye, The king's fool, and the Cardinals, and we are no small fools I assure ye.
No indeed, my cousen Patch here is something too square to be set on your shoe, marry and you'll wear him on your shoulder, the fool shall ride ye.
A shrewd fool Bonner, come hither William, I have a quarrel to you since our last rhyming.
About your fair Leman at Charlton my Lord, I remember.
You speak plain William.
Ye never knew fool a flatterer I warrant ye.
Well Will, I'll try your rhyming wits once more,
What say you to this?
The bells hang high, and loud they cry, what do they speak?
If you should die, there's none would cry, though your neck should break.
You are something bitter William: But come on, once more I am for ye. A rod in school, a whip for a fool, is always in season.
A halter and a rope, for him that would be pope,
Against all right and reason.
he's too hard for me still, I'll give him over, come tell me Will, what's the news at Court?
Marry my Lord, they say the King must be married this morning.
Married Will, to whom I prithee?
Why to my Lady Catherine Parry, I was once by, when he was wooing on her, and then I doubted they would go together shortly.
Holy Saint Peter shield his Majesty,
She is the hope of Luther's heresy:
If she be Queen, the Protestants will swell,
And Cranmer, Tutor to the Prince of Wales,
Will boldly speak 'gainst Rome's Religion,
But Bishops we'll to Court immediately,
And plot the downfall of these Lutherans:
You two are Tutors to the Princes Mary,
Still ply her to the Pope's obedience,
And make her hate the name of Protestant;
I do suspect that Latimer and Ridly,
Chief teachers of the fair Elizabeth,
Are not sound Catholics, nor friends to Rome,
It it be so, we'll soon remove them all.
'tis better they should die, than thousands fall.
Come follow us. Manet, Wil, and Patch.
Your Lords mad, till he be at the wedding, 'twas marvel the King stole it so secretly and near told him on't, but all's one, if he be married, let him play with his Queen tonight, and than tomorrow he'll call for me, there's no fool tooth wilful still. What shall we do cousen?
I'll go get the key of the wine-cellar, and thou and I'll keep a passage there tonight.
We have but a little wit between us already cousen, and so we should have none at all.
When our wits be gone, we'll sleep eth cellar, and lie without our wits for one night.
Content, and then eth morning we'll but wet them with another cup more, and they'll shave like a razor all day after. Come close good coz, let nobody go with us, lest they be drunk before us, for fools are innocents, and must be accessary to no man's overthrow.
Welcome Queen Katherine, seat thee by our side,
Thy sight fair Queen, by us thus dignified,
Earls, barons, Knights, and Gentlemen,
Against ye all, we'll be chief challenger,
To fight at barriers, Tilt, and Tournament,
In honour of the fair Queen Katherine,
We thank your highness, and beseech your grace,
Forbear such hazard of your royal person,
Without such honours is your handmaid pleased,
Obediently to yield all love and duty,
That may beseem your sacred Majesty.
God a mercy, but where are our children?
Prince Edward, Mary, and Elizabeth,
The royal Issue of three famous Queens,
How haps we have not seen them here today?
They all my Liege attend your majesty,
And your fair queen, so within the presence here.
'tis well, Dudlie call Cranmer in,
He is chief Tutor to our Princely son,
For precepts that concern divinity.
And here he comes, Cranmer, you must ply the Prince,
Let his waste hours be spent in getting learning:
And let those linguists for choice languages,
Be careful for him in their best endeavours,
Bid Doctor Tie, ply him to Music hard,
he's apt to learn, therefore be diligent,
He may requite your love when we are gone.
Our care and duty shall be had my Lord.
We thank ye.
I tell thee Cranmer he is all our hopes,
That what our age shall leave unfinished,
In his fair reign shall be accomplished.
Go and attend him, how now Will Sommers, what's the news with you?
I come to bid thee and thy new Queen God-morrow. Look to him Kate lest he cozen thee, provide civil Oranges enough, or he'll have a Lemon shortly.
Godamercy Will, thou tell me then, wilt thou not?
I and watch him too, or let him near trust me: but dost hear Harry, because I'd have thee have the poors prayers, I have brought thee some petitions, the Friars and Priests pray too, but I think us as children say grace, more for fashion than devotion, therefore the poors' prayers ought to be soonest heard, because they beg for Godsake, therefore I prithee dispatch them.
read them Semer.
The humble petition of the Lady Seaton, for her distressed son, that in his own defence, unhappily hath slain a man.
The Lady Seaton, God's holy mother,
Her son has had our pardon twice already,
For two stout subjects that his hand hath slain.
And any had said so but thou Harry, I'd have told him a lied, he near killed but one, thou killed'st the tother: for and thou hadst hanged him for the first, the two last had been alive still.
The fool tells true, they wrong our Majesty
That seek our pardon for such cruelty:
A way with it.
Give me it again, It shall near be seen more I assure ye: and I had known 'thas come for that purpose, It should near have been brought for well I warrant ye.
This other comes from two poor prisoners eth counter.
We know the inside then, come give them me,
Lord Cardinal, here's one is dedicated to you.
How! read it: whose's there? Compton inquire for Rookesbie a
Groom of the wardrobe, and bring him hither.
I will.
Cardinal, what find ye written there?
Mine own discredit, and the undoing of an honest citizen, by a false servant.
'tis not your fool my Lord I warrant ye.
No will?
I thought so, I knew 'twas one of your knaves, for your fools are harmless.
well said Will thou lovest thy masters credit I know.
I Kate, as well as any Courtier he keeps:
I had rather he should have the poors' prayers, than the Popes.
Faith I am of thy mind Will, I think so too.
Take heed what ye say Kate, what a Lutheran?
'tis Heresy fair Queen, to think such thoughts.
And much uncharity to wrong the poor?
Well, and when the Pope is at best, he is but Saint Peter's deputy, but the poor, present Christ, and therefore should be something better regarded.
Go to fool.
sirrah, you'll be whipped for this.
Would the King wood whip thee and all the pope's whelps out of England once, for between ye, ye have racked and pulled it so, we shall be all poor shortly, you have had four hundred threescore pound within this three year for smokepence, you have smoked it i'faith: dost hear Harry, next time they gather them, let them take the chimneys, and leave the coin behind them, we have clay enough to make brick, though we want silver mines to make money.
Well William your tongue is privileged.
But my good Liege, I fear there's shrewder heads
Although kept close, has set this fool a work,
Thus to extirp against his holiness.
Do not you think so my Lord, nor stomach nobody about it: ye know what the old Proverb says, therefore be patient great quarrelers small credit wins:
When fools set stools, and wise men break their shins: therefore think not on it, for I'll sit down by thee Kate and say nothing, for here comes one to be examined.
O sir, you're welcome, Is your name Kookesbie?
your poor servant is so called my Lord.
Our servant we geffe ye by the cloth ye wear, but for Your poverty 'tis doubtful, your credit is so good. Let's see what's the man's name, ha! Hopkins, do you know the man? Rookesby, Hopkins? No my Lord.
Had you never no dealings with such a man?
No, if it like your Majesty.
No, if it like our Majesty, saucy varlet:
It likes not our Majesty, thou shouldst say no:
It likes us not thou liest, for that we know.
You know him not, but he too well knows you,
And lies imprisoned slave, for what's thy due.
Sure some envious man hath misinformed.
darest thou deny it still, outfacing knave,
Mother a God, i'll hang thee presently.
Sirrah ye lie: and though ye wear the king's cloth,
Yet we dare tell ye so before the king:
Slave thou dost know him.
He here complains he is undone by thee,
And the king's man hath caused his misery.
Yet you'll outface it still, deny, forswear, and lie sir, ha?
Not a word more, if thou lovest thy life, unless thou'lt confess all, and speak fair.
I do beseech your Grace.
Out perjured knave, what dost thou serve the King.
And dar'st thou thus abuse our Majesty:
And wrong my subjects by thy treachery?
Thinkst thou false thief, thou shalt be privileged
Because thart my man, to hurt my people:
Villain, those that guard me, shall regard mine honour:
Put off that coat of proof, that strong security:
Under which ye march like a halberdier,
Passing through purgatory, and none dare strike:
A Sergeants mace must not presume to touch
Your sacred shoulders with the kings own writ,
Gods dear Lady, does the cloth ye wear,
Such privilege and strong prevention bear.
Ha, is't Rookesby?
My royal Lord.
Take that, and know your time to tell your
Message: Sirrah, I am busy.
So, there's one served: I think you would take two more with all your heart, so you were well rid on him.
Your pardon good my Liege.
Ha, pardon these I tell thee did it touch thy life in aught, more than mine own displeasure, not the world should purchase it, wild caitiff: hadst thou neglected this thy duty to our persons danger: Hadst thou thyself against me ought attempted, I might be sooner won to pardon thee, then for a subjects hateful injury.
Let me entreat your Grace to pardon him.
Away Kate speak not for him,
Out of my lenity I let him live,
Discharge him from my cloth and countenance,
To the Counter to redeem his creditor,
Where he shall satisfy the utmost mite
Of any debt, default or hindrance:
I'll keep no man to blur my credit so,
My cloth shall not pay what my servants owe.
Away with him.
Now my Lord Cardinal, speaks not your paper so?
Yes my good Lord, your Grace hath shown a pattern, to draw forth mine by, I assure your Highness,
The punishment inflicted on your man,
Is meant for mine servants that bears such minds,
Their Masters thus but serves them in their kinds.
Where's this fellow now that brings this news?
He is gone with a flea in his ear: But has left his Message behind with my Lord Dudley, here.
And whats the nowe.
Duke Brandon my Liege.
Oh, he's returned from France:
And who comes with him?
His royal wife, my Lord.
Ha! royal wife: whose's that?
Your highness sister, the late Q. of France.
Our sister Q. his wife: who gave him her?
'tis said they were married at donor, my liege.
I were better he had near seen the Town.
Dares any Subject mix his blood with ours, without our leave?
He comes himself my Liege, to answer it.
Health to my Sovereign.
And our brother king, your Message is before ye sir: off with his head.
I beseech your Grace give me leave.
Nay you have taken leave, away with him, bid the Captain of our Guard, convey him to the Tower.
Hear me my Lord.
Audacious Brandon, thinkst thou excuse shall serve.
Right gracious Lord.
Go to, your prayers will scarce save yourself,
Durst ye contract yourself without our knowledge?
Hence with that harebrain, Duke to the Tower I say,
And bear our careless sister to the Fleet:
I know sir, you broke a Lance for her,
And bravely did unhorse the Challengers:
Yet was there no such prize set on her head,
That you without our leave should marry her.
Oh my Lord, let me entreat for them.
Tut Kate, though thus I seem
A while to threaten them,
mean not to disgrace my sister so:
A way with them. What say ye Lords,
Is he not worthy death for his misdeed?
Unless your Grace shall please to pardon him.
He deserves it then?
He does my Liege.
You are knaves and fools, and ye flatter me:
God's holy Mother, I'll not have him hurt, for all your heads:
Dear Brandon, I embrace thee in mine arms:
Kind sister, I love you both so well.
I cannot dart another angry frown
To gain a kingdom: here take him Marie,
I hold the happier in this English choice,
Then to be Q. of France: Charles, love her well.
And tell on Brandon, what's the news in France.
The league is broke betwixt the Emperor
And the young king of France: Forces are mustering
On either part my Lord, for horse and foot.
Hot variance is expected speedily.
The Emperor is marching now to Landersey,
There to invade the towns of Burgondie.
God and S. George, we'll meet his Majesty,
And strike a league of Christian amity.
Lord Cardinal, you shall to France with speed,
And in our name salute the Emperor,
we'll give direction for your Embassage.
The next fair wind, shall make us France to greet,
Where Charles the Emperor, and king shall meet.
How now young brown, what have you there?
The PRINCE's cloak and hat, my Lord.
Where is his Grace?
At Tennis, with the marquis Dorset.
You and the marquis, draw the PRINCE's mind
To follow pleasure, & neglect his book:
For which the King blames us. But credit me,
You shall be soundly paid immediately.
I pray ye good my I. i'll go call the Prince away.
Nay, now ye shal not, whose within there ho? straie
My Lord.
Go bear this youngster to the Chappel
And bid the M. of the Children whip him well:
The Prince will not learn sir, and you shall smart for it.
O good my L. I'll make him ply his book tomorrow.
That shall not serve your turn, away I say.
So sir, this policy was well devised: Since he was whipped thus for the PRINCE's faults,
His Grace hath got more knowledge in a month,
Than he attained in a year before,
For still the fearful boy to save his breech,
Doth hourly haunt him whereso ere he goes.
'tis true my Lord, and now the Prince perceives it,
As loath to see him punished for his faults,
Plays it of purpose to redeem the boy,
But pray my Lord, let's stand aside awhile,
And note the greeting twixt the Prince and him,
See where the boy comes and the king's Fool with him; Let's not be seen, but list their conference.
Nay boy, and ye cry you'll spoil your eye sight, come, come truss up your hose, you must hold fast your wind, both before and behind, and blow your nose.
For what Fool?
Why for the mote in thine eye, is there not won in't, wherefore dost thou cry else?
I prithee Will go call the Prince from the Tennis-court.
Dost thou cry for that? nay then I smell a Rat, the Prince has played the truant today, and his Tutors has drawn blood of thy buttocks for't: why boy 'tis honourable to be whipped for a Prince.
I would he would either leave the Tennis-court and ply his Book, or give me leave to be no Courtier.
ay, for i'll be sworn thy breech lies i'th' Hassard about it, but look little Ned, yonder he comes.
Some Rubbers for the Prince.
Here my good Lord.
One take our Rackets, and reach my Cloak,
By my faith marquess, you are too hard for me.
Your Grace will say so, though ye over match me.
Why ?
Your Grace loiters, and will not ply your book, and your Tutors has whipped me for it.
Alas poor Ned, I am sorry for it, I'll take the more pains, and entreat my Tutors for thee: yet in troth, the lectors they read me last night out of Virgil and Ovid, I am perfect in: only I confess I am something behind in my Greek Authors.
And for that speech, they have declined it upon his breech.
And for my logic, thou shalt witness thyself I am perfect: for now will I prove, that though thou wert whipped for me, yet this whipping was good for thee.
I'll hardly believe you my Lord, though Ramus himself should prove it: well, probe.
Mark my Problem.
Bona virga facit bonum pverum:
Bonum est, te esse bonum pverum:
Ergo bona vorga, res bona est: And that's this, Ned.
A good rod makes a good boy: 'tis good that thou shouldst be a good boy: (ergo) therefore a good rodis good.
Nay by’r lady, the better the rod is, it's the worse for him, that's certain: but dost hear me, boy; since he can prove a rod to be so good, let him take't himself next time.
In truth, I pity thee, and inwardly I feel the stripes thou barest, and for thy sake, Ned, I'll pile my book the faster; in the mean time, thou shalt not say, but the Prince of Wales will honourably reward thy service: come, brown, kneel down.
What, wilt thou knight him, Ned?
I will; my father has knighted many a one, that never shed drop of blood for him; but he has often for me.
O brave! he looks like the mirror of knighthood already.
Clear the presence, Gentlemen, the King is coming.
The King? gods me, reach me my book: call my Tutors in: come Browne, I'll confirm thy knighthood afore the King.
Here be your Tutors, my Lord, and yonder the King comes.
Health to your Majesty.
Godamercy Ned; ay, at your book so hard, 'tis well, 'tis well; now Bishop Cranmer, and good doctor Tie, I was going to the gallery, and thought to have had your Scholar with me, but seeing you're so busy, I'll not trouble him, come on Will, come, go you along with me, what make you among the scholars here?
I come to learn my quy que quod to keep me from the rod: mar here's one was whipped in pudding time for he has gotten a knighthood about it: look old Harry, does he not look more furious than he was wont.
Who Wil, young Browne, Gods Mary mother, his father is a gallant Knight, as any these sooth parts of England holds.
He cannot compare with his son tho, if he were right donsal delphebus, or the very knight of the Sun himself, yet this knight shall unhorse him.
When was he made a knight Wil.
Marry i'th' last action, I can assure you, there was hot service, and some on 'em came so near him, they had like to smelled on't: but when all was done, the poor gentleman was pitifully wounded in the back parts, as may appear by the scar, if his knightship would but untruss there.
But who knighted him, William?
That did Ned here: and he has earned it too, for I am sure, this two year he has been lashed, for his learning.
Ha, how, come hither Ned, is this true?
It is, my Lord, and I hope your highness will confirm my deed.
Confirm it, God's holy mother, what shrewd boys are these? Cranmer and Tye, do ye observe the Prince, now by my Crown young Ned thou hast honoured me.
I like thy kingly spirit that loves to see
Thy friends advanced to types of dignity.
Young Knight come hither, what the Prince hath done
We here confirm, be still Sir Edward Browne:
But hear ye Ned, now you have made him Knight,
You must give him some living, or else 'tis nothing.
I by my troth, he is now but a Knight under Forma papris, for a Knight without living is no better than an ordinary Gallant.
Well, what will ye give him Ned?
When I have heard of something that may do him good, I will entreat your Majesty for him, and i'th' mean time from mine own allowance I'll maintain him.
'tis well said: but for your sake Son Edward, we'll provide for him; Cranmer, see presently a Patent drawn, wherein were will confirm to him from our exchequer a Thousand Marks a year.
I thank your Majesty.
And as I am true Knight, I'll fight and die for ye.
Now if your Tutors come to whip ye, you may choose whether you'll untruss byth' order of arms.
Well Ned, see ye ply your learning, and let's have no more Knights made in this Action, look to him brown, if he loiter, his Tutors will have you up for't.
I hope my Lord, they dare not whip me now.
berladie Sir, that's doubtful.
If they do, he shall make thee a Lord, and then they dare not.
Well Cranmer we'll leave ye, when your pupil has done his task ye set him now, let him come and visit us: on Gentlemen into the Gallery.
Heaven keep your Majesty.
Gentlemen draw near.
God morrow to your Grace.
God morrow Tutors at noon, 'tis God even, is it not?
We saw not your Grace today.
O ye quip me cunningly for my Truantship, that I was not at my Book today, but I have thought of that ye read last night, I assure ye.
We doubt it not fair Prince: Lords, Gentlemen give leave.
All void the room, there's but Scholars and Fools.
I hope your excellence can answer me in that axiom of Philosophy, I propound to ye.
I promise ye Tutor, 'tis a Problem to me, for the difference of your author's opinions, makes me differ in mine own: some say, Omne animalest, aut homo, aut bestia, that every living creature is, or man, or beast.
Then a woman's a beast, for she's no man.
Peace William you'll be expulsed else: And again some Authors affirm, that every beast is four-footed.
Then a fool's no beast, for he has but two.
Yet again Will.
Mum Ned, no words, I'll be as still as a small bagpipe.
Omne Animal est, aut homo, aut bestia: And thus 'tis proved my Lord, Omne Animal, est rationalis, vel irrationalis, homo est rationalis, Bestia irrationalis,
Ergo omne Animal homo est, vel Bestis:
'mongst all the creatures in this Universe,
Or on the earth, or flying in the air,
Man only reason hath, others only sense,
So what is only sensual, in not man, but beast:
For man both sense and reason hath:
So every creature, having one of these, is sure or man, or best: and though all beasts are not four-footed.
That's certain a louse has six.
I beseech your Grace.
A way William.
Not a word more as I am William.
For many beasts have wings serving in stead of feet, and some have horns, of which we thus esteem, Animal cornutum non habet dentes supremas, No horned beast hath teeth above the roof.
That's a lie, a Cuckold has.
Thrust the Fool out of the presence there.
Well, Cedant arma toge, The scholars shall have the fools place.
Well Cranmer, you have made me able to prove a man no beast, if he prove not himself so, we'll now leave this: And now resolve me for Divinity, Cranmer I love ye, and I love your Learning, speak and we'll hear ye:
God give ye truth that you may give it me,
This Land ye know stands wavering in her Faith,
Betwixt the Papists and the Protestants,
You know we all must die, and this flesh
Part, with her part of immortality,
Tutor, I do believe both Heaven and Hell:
Do you know any third place for the soul's abode
Called Purgatory, as some would have me think,
For from my Sister Marie and her Tutors,
I have oft received Letters to that purpose:
I love ye Cranmer, and shall believe whate'er ye speak,
Therefore I charge ye tell the truth.
How thinks your Grace, is there a place of Purgatory or no?
P. Truly I think none, yet must I urge to you what's laid
To me, this world you know hath been five Thousand years
Still increasing, still decreasing, still replenished,
How long it will be, none knows but he that made it,
We all do call our selves Gods children, yet sure some are not,
But think ye Tutor that the compass of that heaven & hell,
Is able to contain those souls so numberless,
That ever breathed since the first breath was given,
Without a Tertium, or a third place.
Who puts these doubts within your Graceshead
Are like their own belief, slight, and unregarded,
And is as easily answered and confuted:
Quod est infinitum, non habet finem,
Calum est opus Dei, opus Dei est infinitum:
Ergo Calum, est infinitum.
That which is infinite hath no end at all,
For that eternity, that everlasting essence,
That did concord heaven, earth, and hell to be
Is of himself all infinite, that heaven and hell are so,
His power, his works, and words do witness it,
For what is infinite, hath in it sell no-end,
Then must the heavens which is his glorious seat,
Be incomprehensible containing him,
Then what should need a third place to contain,
A world of Infinites so vast and main.
I thank ye Cranmer, and do believe ye
What other proofs have been maintained to me
Or shallbe, you shall know and aid me in them:
Enough for this time, who's there? Doctor Tie
Our musics Lecturer pray draw near: Indeed I take much
In Music may your Grace ever delight, (delight in ye Though not in me, Music is fit for Kings,
And not for those knows not the chime of strings.
Truly I love it yet there are a sort
Seeming more pure than wise, that will upbraid at it,
Calling it idle, vain, and frivolous.
Your Grace hath said, indeed they do upbraid
That term it so, and those that do are such
As in themselves no happy Concord's hold,
All Music jars with them, but sounds of good.
But would your Grace a while be patient,
In Musics praise, thus will I better it.
Music is heavenly, for in Heaven is Music,
For there the Seraphins do sing continually,
And when the best was borne, that ever was man,
A Choir of Angels sang for joy of it,
What of Celestial was revealed to man,
Was much of Music, 'tis said the beasts did worship
And sang before the Deity supernal,
The kingly Prophet sang before the Ark,
And with his Music charmed the heart of Saul,
And if the Poet sail us not my Lord,
The dulcet tongue of Music made the stones
To move, irrational beast, and birds to dance
And last, the trumpet's Music shall awake the dead,
And cloth their naked bones in coats of flesh,
T'appear in that high house of Parliament,
When those that gnash their Teeth at Music sound,
Shall make that place where Music near was found.
Thou givest it perfect life, skilful Doctor
I thank thee for the honoured praise thou givest it,
I pray thee let's hear it too.
'tis ready for your Grace, give breath to your loud tuned instruments.
'tis well, methinks in this sound I prove a complete age,
As Music, so is man governed by stops,
Awed by dividing notes, sometimes aloft,
Sometime below, and when he hath attained,
His high and lofty pitch, breathed his sharpest and most
Shrillest air, yet at length 'tis gone,
And falls down flat to his conclusion,
Another sweetness, and harmonious sound,
A milder strain, another kind agreement,
Yet 'mongst these many strings, be one untuned
Or jarreth low, or higher than his course
Not keeping steady mean amongst the rest,
Corrupts them all, so doth bad men the best.
Enough; let voices now delight his princely care.
Doctor, I thank you and commend your cunning.
I est have heard my Father merrily speak,
In your high praise, and thus his Highness sayth,
England, one God, one truth, one Doctor hath
For musics Art, and that is Doctor tie,
Admired for skill in Musics harmony.
Your Grace doth honour me with kind acceptance,
Yet one thing more, I do beseech your Excellence
To deign, to Patronize this homely work,
Which I unto your Grace have dedicated.
What is the Title?
The Acts of the holy Apostles turned into verse,
Which I have set in several parts to sing,
Worthy Acts, and worthily in you remembered.
I'll peruse them, and satisfy your pains,
And have them sung within my father's Chapel.
I thank ye both. Now I'll crave leave a while
To be a little idle: pray let our linguists,
French and Italians, tomorrow morn be ready,
I must confer with them, or I shall lose
My little practice. so God-den good Tutors.
Health to your Highness, God increase your days:
The hope of England, and of learning's praise.
What have ye here my Lord of Winchester?
Heretical and damned heresies,
Precepts that Cranmer's wisdom taught the Prince,
The Pope and we are held as heretics,
What thinkst thou Bonner of this wavering age?
As Seamen do of storms, yet hope for fair wether,
by’r lady Gardener we must look about,
The Protestants begin to gather head,
Luther hath sown well, and England's ground
Is fat and fertile to increase his seed,
Here's lofty plants, what, bishops and Prelates,
I nobility temporal, but we shall temper all
At the return of our high Cardinal.
Bonner 'tis true, but in mean time we must
Prevent this rancour that now swells so big,
That it must out or break, they have a dangerous head,
And much I fear.
What not the King I hope?
'tis doubtful he will bend, but sure
Queen Katherine's a strong Lutheran hard ye not
How in presence of the King and Cardinal,
She did extirp against his Holiness.
But had our English Cardinal once attained,
The high possession of Saint Peter's Chair,
Heed bar some tongues than now have scope too much,
'tis he must do't Gardener,' 'tis a perilous thing,
Queen Katherin can do much with England's King.
I Bonner, that's the sum of all,
There must be no Queen, or the Abbeys fall,
See where she comes with the king's Sister,
And from the PRINCE's lodging, let's salute her.
God morrow to your Majesty.
God morrow to my reverent Lords of London and of Winchester, saw ye the King today?
His Highness was not yet abroad this morning.
But here we will attend his excellence.
Come sister we'll go see his Majesty.
We will attend ye Madam.
Gentlemen set forward, God morrow Lords.
Ill morrow must it be to you or us,
Conspirators 'gainst men religious,
Bonner, these Lutherans do conspire I see,
And scoff the Pope and his supremacy.
Let's strike in time then, and incense the King,
And suddenly their stars to ruin bring:
The Trumpets sounds, it seems the Queen is coming.
we'll watch and take advantage cunningly.
Where's Brandon?
My liege.
Come hither Kate.
Did your grace call?
I'll speak we anon, I'll speak we anon: Come Kate let's walk a little, whose's there? my Lords of London and of Winchester, welcome, welcome: by this your master the Cardinal I trow, has parted with the Emperor, & set a league between the French and him, Mother of God,
I would ourself in person had been there,
But Wolsey's diligence we need not fear,
Ha think ye he will not.
No doubt he will my Lord.
I Gardner 'twill be his best policy,
Their friendship must advance his dignity.
If ere he get the Papal governance.
And that will never be I hope.
'twere pity it should.
he's proud enough already.
Haw, what's that ye talk there.
They say my Lord he's gone with such a train, As if he should be elected presently.
Fore-god 'tis a gallant Priest, come hither Charles prithee let me lean a thy shoulder, by Saint George, Kate I grow stiff methinks.
willt please your Highness sit and rest yourself?
No, no Kate, I'll walk still, Brandon shall stay mine arm, I me fat and pursy, and 'twill get me a stomach: Sawst the Prince today Kate?
I my good Lord.
God bless him, and make him fortunate, I tell ye Lords, the hope that England hath, is now in him, fore-god I think old Harry must leave ye shortly; well, Gods will be done, heerle be old shuffling then, ha will there not; well, you say nothing, pray God there be not, I like not this difference in religion I, God's dear Lady, and I live but seven year longer, we'll take order thoroughly.
We hear that Luther out of Germanie
Hath with a book unto your Majesty,
Wherein he much repents his former deeds,
Craving your highness pardon, and withal,
Submits himself unto your grace's pleasure.
Bonner 'tis true, and we have answered it,
Blaming at first his haughty insolence,
And now his lightness and inconstancy,
That writ he knew not what so childishly.
Much bloodshed there is now in Germanie,
About this difference in religion,
With Lutherans, Arians, and Anabaptists
As half the Province of Helvetia,
Is with their tumults almost quite destroyed.
methinks 'twere well my royal Sovereign,
Your Grace, the Emperor, and the Christian kings,
Would call a Counsel and peruse the books,
That Luther writ against the Catholics,
And superstitions of the Church of Rome:
And if they teach a truer way to heaven,
Agreeing with the Hebrew Testament,
Why should they not be read and followed?
Thou sayst well Kate, so they agree with the scriptures, I think 'tis lawful to peruse and read them, speak Bishops?
Most unlawful my dear Sovereign,
Unless permitted by his Holiness.
How prove ye that my Lord?
Well said Kate, to them again good wench, Lords give us leave awhile, avoid the Presence there, we'll hear the Bishops and my Queen dispute.
I am a weak Scholar my Lord,
But on condition that your Highness, not these reverent Lords,
Will take no exceptions at my woman's wit,
I am content to hold them Argument:
And first with reverence to his Majesty.
Pray tell me, why would ye make the King believe.
His Highness and the people under him,
Are tied so strictly to obey the Pope?
Because fair Queen he is God's Deputy.
So are all Kings; and God himself commands
The King to rule, and people to obey.
And both to love and honour him:
But you that are sworn servants unto Rome,
How are ye faithful subjects to the King,
When first ye screw the Pope then after him?
madam these are that sects of Lutherans,
That makes your Highness so mistake the Scriptures,
Your slender arguments thus answered
Before the King, God must be
'tis true, but pray ye answer this:
Suppose, the King by Proclamation,
Commanded you and every of
To spurn against the pope's authority:
Ye know the Scripture binds ye to obey him,
But this I think, if that his Grace did so,
Your slight obedience all the world should know.
Godsmother Kate, thou'dst touched them there,
What say ye to that Bonner?
Were it to any but her Majesty,
These questions were confuted easily.
Pray tell the King then, what Scripture have ye,
To teach religion in an unknown language?
Instruct the ignorant to kneel to Saints,
By barefoot pilgrimage to visit shrines,
For money to release from Purgatory,
The vildest villain, thief, or murderer,
All this the people must believe you can,
Such is the dregs of Rome's religion.
ay, those are the speeches of those heretics,
Cranmer, Ridley, and blunt Lattimer,
That daily rail against his Holiness,
Filling the land with hateful heresies.
Nay be not angry, nor mistake them Lords,
What they have said or done, was mildly followed,
As by their Articles are evident.
Where are those Articles Kate?
I'll go and fetch them to your Majesty,
And pray your Highness view them graciously.
Go fetch them Kate: a sirta, we have women doctors,
Now I see, Mother a God, here's a fine world the whilst,
That twixt so many men's opinions,
The holy Scriptures must be banded thus.
God grant it breed no farther detriment,
Unto your crown and sacred dignity:
They that would alter thus Religion,
I fear they scarcely love your royal person.
Ha! take heed what you say Gardener.
My love and duty to your Majesty,
Bids me be bold to speak my conscience,
Unless your safety and your life they hate,
Why should they daily thus disturb the state.
To smooth the face of false rebellion,
Proud traitors will pretend religion.
For under colour of reformation
The upstart followers of Wickliff's doctrine,
In the fift Henry's days arise in arms:
And had nor diligent care prevented them,
Their powers had suddenly surprised the King.
And good my Liege who knows their proud intent,
That thus rebel against your government.
shrewd proofs by’r lady and by saint Peter,
I swear we will not trust their gentleness,
Speak Gardner and resolve us speedily,
whose's the ringleader of this lusty crew?
Unless your highness please to pardon us,
We dare not speak nor urge your majesty.
We pardon what ye speak, resolve us speedily.
Then if your royal person will be safe,
Your life preserved and this fair Realm in peace.
And all these troubles smoothly pacified,
The Queen dear Lord must be removed from you.
Haw, the Queen, bold Sir advise ye well,
Take heed ye do not wrong her loyalty.
See here my liege are proofs too manifest,
Her highness with a sect of Lutherans:
Have private meetings, secret conventicles,
To wrest the grounds of all religion:
Seeking by tumults to subvert the state,
The which without your majesties consent,
Is treason capital against the Crown.
And seeing without the knowledge of your grace,
They dare attempt these dangerous stratagems,
'tis to be feared, which heaven we pray prevent,
They do conspire against your sacred life.
Why else, should all these private meetings be without the knowledge of your majesty.
Mother a god these proofs are probable,
And strong presumptions do confirm your words, within there, ho?
Sir William Compton see the doors made fast,
Double our guard let none come near our person,
Summon the counsel to confer with us,
Bid them attend us in the privy chamber,
Here is a letter for your majesty,
From Martin Luther out of Germany.
damned Schismatic still will he trouble us with books and letters, leave it and be gone:
The villain thinks to smooth his treachery,
By fawning speeches to our majesty,
But by my George Lord Bishops if I live,
I'll root his favourits from England's bounds
What writes his worship?
Now Bonner stir, the game is set afoot,
The king is now incensed, let's follow close
To have Queen Katherne shorter by a head,
These heresies will cease when she is dead.
Holy saint Peter what a knave is this,
Ere while he writ submissively to us;
And now again repents his humbleness,
Bishops it seems being touched with our reply
He writes thus boldly to our majesty,
Gardner look here he was deceived he says
When he thought to find Iohn Baptist in the
Courts of princes, or resident with those that are
Clothed in purple, Mother a god, Is't not a dangerous knave.
False luther knaves he has great friends in England:
Else durst he not thus move your Majesty.
we'll cut his friends off, ere they grow too strong
And sweep these vipers from our state ere long,
No marvel though Queen Katherne plead for him,
That is I see the greatest Lutheran,
How is your counsels we proceed in these?
'ttwere best your grace did send her to the Tower.
Before they further do consit with her.
Let it be so, go get a warrant drawn,
And with a strong guard bear her to the Tower.
Our hand shall sign your large commission,
Let Cranmer from the Prince be straight removed,
And come not near the Court on pain of death,
Mother a God, shall I be baffled thus,
By traitors, rebels and false heretics:
Get Articles for her arraignment ready,
If she of treason be convict, I swear,
Her head goes off, were she my kingdoms air.
Cranmer.
My Lord.
Where is Francisco our Italian Tutor?
He does attend your Grace without my Lord.
Tell him anon we will confer with him,
we'll ply our learning brown lest you be beaten,
We will not have your Knighthood so disgraced.
I thank ye good my Lord,
And your Grace would but a little ply your learning,
I warrant ye I'll keep my Knighthood from breeching.
Faith Ned I will: how now what letter's that?
From your grace's sister the Lady Mary.
Come give it me, we guess at the contents.
Cranmer, my sister oft hath writ to me,
That you and Bishop Bonner might confer,
About these points of new Religion,
Tell me Tutor will ye dispute with him.
With all my heart my Lord, and wish the king,
Would deign to hear our disputation.
What hast thou there?
A Letter from your royal sister, young Elizabeth.
Another Letter ere we open this,
Well we will view them both immediately,
I pray ye attend us in the next Chamber,
And Tutors if I call ye not before,
Give me some notice, if the king my Father
Be walked abroad, I must go visit him.
We will fair Prince.
What says my sister Mary? she is eldest,
And by due course must first be answered,
Alas good sister still in this opinion,
These are thy blinded Tutors, Bonner, Gardner,
That wrong thy thoughts with foolish heresies,
He read no farther: to him will Edward pray
For preservation, that can himself preserve me,
Without the help of Saint or ceremony.
What writes Elizabeth, sweet sister thou hast my heart.
And of Prince Edward's love hast greatest part.
salute thee with a sister's love,
Be in thy such, and let thy prayers
Be dedicate to God only for 'tis he alone
Can strengthen thee, and confound thine enemies,
a settled assurance of thy hopes in heaven,
God strengthen thee in all temptations,
give thee grace to shun Idolatry,
send thee life to inherit thy election,
To God I commend thee, who still I pray preserve thee.
Loving thou art, and of me best beloved.
Thy lines shallbe my contemplations cures,
And in thy virtues will I meditate,
To Christ I'll only pray for me and thee:
This I embrace, away Idolatry,
How now Cranmer, where's the King?
Conferring with his counsel gracious Prince,
There is some earnest business troubles him:
The Guards are doubled, and commandment given,
That none be suffered to come near the presence,
God keep his Majesty from traitor's hands.
Amen good Cranmer, what should disturb him thus?
Is Cardinal Wolsey yet returned from France?
I my good Lord, and this day comes to court.
Perhaps this hasty business of the King,
Is touching Wolsey and his Embassage.
Pray God it be no worse my Lord.
Here comes sir William Compton from his highness.
Health to your excellency.
What news sir William?
The King expects your grace's company,
And wils vout Highness come and speak with him,
And doctor Cranmer, from his Majesty,
I charge ye speedily to leave the Court,
And come not near the Prince on pain of death,
Without direction from the King and Peers.
Sir I obey ye God so deal with me,
As I have wished unto his Majesty.
Cranmer banished the Court for what I pray?
I know not gracious Lord, pray pardon me,
'tis the king's pleasure; and trust me I am sorry
It was my hap to bring this heavy message.
Nay good sir William, your message moves not me,
My service to his royal Majesty
Was always true and just, so help me heaven:
Only I pray your Grace to move the King,
That I may come to trial speedily,
And if in aught I have deserved death,
Let me not draw another minute's breath.
Will ye go my Lord.
Not yet, we are not your prisoner, are we sir?
No my dear Lord.
Then go before, and we will follow ye,
Your worship will forget yourself I see,
My tutor thrust from court so suddenly, this is strange.
The Queen my Lord is come to speak with you.
Avoid the presence then, and conduct her in,
I'll speak with her, and after see the King,
Leave us alone I pray ye.
Your grace is welcome, how fares your Majesty.
Never so ill dear Prince, for now I fear,
Even as a wretched caitiff killed with care,
I am accused of treason, and the king
Is now in counsel to dispose of me,
I know his frown is death, and I shall die.
Who are your accusers.
I know not.
How know ye then his Grace is so incensed.
One of my Gentlemen passing by the presence,
Took up this bill of accusations,
Wherein twelve Articles are drawn against me,
It seems my false accusers lost it there,
Here they accuse me of conspiracy,
That I with Cranmer, Lutimer and Ridley,
Do seek to raise rebellion in the state,
Alter religion, and bring Luther in,
And to new government enforce the king,
Then that's the cause that Cranmer was removed,
But did your Highness e'er confer with them?
As they have here accused ye to the king.
Never nor ever had I one such thought,
As I have hope in him my soul hath bought.
Then fear not gracious Madam, I'll to the king,
And doubt not but I'll make your peace with him.
O plead for me, tell him my soul is clear,
Never did thought of treason harbour here,
As I intended to his sacred life,
So be it to my soul or joy or grief.
Stay here till I return, I'll move his majesty,
That you may answer your accusers presently.
O I shall never come to speak with him,
The Lion in his rage is not to stern,
As Royal Herry in his wrathful spleen,
And they that have accused me to his grace,
Will work such means I near shall see his face,
Wretched Queen Katherin, would thou hadst been
Kate Parr still, and not great England's Queen,
Health to your Majesty.
Wish me good Compton woe and misery,
This giddy flattering world I hate and scoff,
Ere long I know Queen Katherine's head must off.
Came ye from the King?
I did fair Queen, and much sad tidings bring,
His grace in secret hath revealed to me
What is intended to your Majesty,
Which I in love and duty to your highness,
Am come to tell ye and to counsel ye
The best I can in this extremity.
Then on my knees I dare entreat your grace,
Not to reveal what I shall say to you,
For then I am assured that death's my due.
I will not on my faith, good Compton speak,
That with thy sad reports my heart may break.
Thus then at your fair feet my life I lay,
In hope to drive your highness cares away:
You are accused of high conspiracy
And treason 'gainst his royal majesty.
So much they have incensed his excellency,
That he hath granted firm commission
To attach your person and convey ye hence,
Close prisoner to the Tower, Articles are drawn,
And time appointed for arraignment there.
Good madam be advised by this I know,
The officers are sent to arrest your person:
Prevent their malice, haste ye to the King.
I'll use such means that you shall speak with him,
There plead your Innocency, I know his grace
Will hear ye mildly therefore delay not,
If you be taken ere you see the king,
I fear ye never more shall speak to him.
Oh Compton twixt thy love and my sage fear,
I feel ten thousand sad vexations here,
Lead on I pray, I'll be advised by thee,
The King is angry and the Queen must die.
Come Boner now strike sure the irons hot.
Urge all thou canst, let nothing be forgot.
We have the king's hand here to warrant us,
'twas well the Cardinal came and so luckily.
Who urged, the state would quite be ruined,
If that religion thus were altered.
Which made his highness with a fiery spleen,
Direct out warrants to attach the Queen.
'twas excellent, that Cedar once o'erthrown,
To crop the lower shrubs let us alone.
Those Articles of accusations,
We framed against her being lost by you
Had like to overthrow our policy,
Had we not stoutly urged his majesty.
Well well, what's now to be done.
A guard must be provided speedily,
To bear her prisoner unto London Tower,
And watch convenient place to arrest her person.
Tush any place shall serve for who dare contradict
His highness hand, even from his side we'll hale her,
And bear her quickly, to her longest home,
Lest we and ours by her to ruin come.
About it then, let them untimely die, that scorn the Pope and Rome's supremacy.
Guard, watch the doors and let none come near us,
But such as are attendant on our person
Mother a God 'tis time to stir, I see,
When traitors creeps so near our majesty:
Must English Harry walk with armed Guards,
Now in his old age, must I fear my life,
By hateful treason of my Queen and wife.
I do beseech your royal majesty,
To hear her speak ere ye condemn her thus.
Go to Ned, I charge ye speak not for her, she's a dangerous traitor how now, who knocks so loud there.
'tis Cardinal Wolsey my Lord.
And it be the Devil tell him he comes not here.
Bid him attend us till our better leisure:
Come hither Ned let me confer with you.
Didst ever hear the disputation
Twixt Cranmer and the Queen about Religion.
Never my Lord, I think they never yet,
At any time had speech concerning it.
O thou art deceived Ned, It is too certain,
Heyday more knocking, knock irons an his heels,
And bear him hence whate'er he be disturb us, who is't?
S. William Compton my liege.
Is't he, well let him in, God's holy mother, here's a stur indeed, Compton ye knock too loud for entrance here.
You care not though the king be near so near, say ye sir haw.
I do beseech you pardon for my boldness.
Well what's your business.
The Queen my Lord entreats to speak with you,
Body a me, is she not rested yet.
Why do they not convey her to the Tower,
We gave commission to attach her presently.
Where is she?
At the door my Sovereign.
So near our presence, keep her out I charge ye.
Bend all your Holbeards points against the door,
If she presume to enter strike her through,
Dare she presume again to look on us.
Upon my knees, I do beseech your highness
To hear her speak.
Up Ned, stand up I will not look on her,
Mother a god, stand close and guard it sure,
If she come in, i'll hang ye all I swear.
I do beseech your Grace.
Sir boy no more i'll here no more of her,
Proud slut, bold traitoress, and forgetful beast,
Yet dare she further move our patience.
I'll pawn my princely word, right royal father,
She shall not speak a word to anger ye.
Will you pawn your word for her mother a god
The Prince of Wales his word is warrant for a king,
And we will take it Ned, go call her in.
Sir William let the guard attend without,
Reach me a chair, all but the prince depart.
How now, what do you weep and kneel,
does your black soul the guilt of conscience feel,
Out, out, your a traitor.
A traitor, O you all seeing powers,
Here witness to my Lord my loyalty
A traitor. O then you are too merciful,
If I have treason in me, why rip ye not
My ugly heart out with your weapon's point,
O my good Lord, If it have traitors blood,
It will be black, deformed, and tenebrous,
If not, from it will spring a scarlet fountain,
And spit defiance in their perjured throats
That have accused me to your majesty,
Making my state thus full of misery.
Canst thou deny it.
Else should I wrongfully accuse myself,
Of my dear Lord I do beseech your highness
To satisfy your wronged Queen in this,
Upon what ground grows this suspicion,
Or who thus wrongfully accuseth me.
Of cursed treason 'gainst your majesty.
Some probable effects myself can witness,
Others our faithful subjects, can testify:
Have you not oft maintained arguments,
Even to our face against religion:
Which joined with other complots show itself,
As it is gathered by our loyal subjects,
For treason Capital against our person,
God's holy mother you'll remove us quickly,
And turn me out, old Harry must away,
Now in mine age, lame and half bedrid,
Or else you'll keep me fast enough in prison,
Haw, mistress, these are no hateful treasons these.
Heaven on my forehead write my worst intent,
And let your hate against my life be bent,
If ever thought of ill against your majesty,
Was harboured here refuse me gracious God,
To your face, my ledge, if to your face I speak it.
It manifests no complot, nor no treason,
Nor are they loyal that so injure me;
What I did speak, was as my woman's wit,
To hold out Argument could compass it,
My puny scholarship is held too weak
To maintain proofs about religion,
Alas I did it but to waste the time,
Kowug as then your grace was weae and sickly,
So to expel part of your pain and grief:
And for my good intent they seek my life,
O God, how am I wronged.
Ha, sayst thou so, was it no otherwise.
What should I say, that you might credit me,
If I am false, heaven strike me suddenly.
Body a me, what everlasting knaves are these that wrong thee thus, alas poor Kate, come stand up stand up, wipe thine eyes, wipe thine eyes, fore-god 'twas told me that thou wert a traitor: I could hardly think it, but that it was applied so hard to me, Godsmother Kate I fear my life I tell ye, King Harry would be loath to die by treason now, that has bid so many brunts unblemished, yet I confess that now I grow stiff, my legs fail me first but they stand furthest from my heart, and that's still sound, I thank my God, give me thy hand, come kiss me Kate, so now i'm friends again, hurson knaves, crafty varlets, make thee a traitor to old Harry's life, well, well, i'll meet with some on them, 'sfoot come sit on my knee Kate. Mother a god he that says thouart false to me by England's crown i'll hang him presently.
When I have thought of ill against your state,
Let me be made the vildest reprobate.
That's my good Kate, but byth' marry God, Queen Katherne you must thank prince Edward here.
For but for him thou'dst gone tooth tower I swear,
I shallbe ever thankful to his highness.
And pray for him and for your majesty,
Come Kate we'll walk a while eth garden here, who keeps the dote there?
My Lord.
Sir William Compton, here take my ring,
Bid Doctor Cranmer haste to Court again,
Give him that token of king Henry's love,
Discharge our guards, we fear no traitors hand.
Our State, beloved of all doth firmly stand:
Go Compton.
I go my Lord.
Bid Wolsey haste him to our royal presence,
Great Charles the mighty Roman Emperor,
Our Nephew, and the hope of Christendom
Is landed in our fair Dominion,
To see his Uncle and the English Court;
we'll entertain him with imperial port:
Come hither Ned.
fellows, stay there, and when I call, come forward,
The service you pursue, is for the kings
Therefore I charge you to perform it boldly,
We have his hand and seal to warrant it.
we'll fellow you with resolution sir,
The Church is on our side, what should we fear?
See yonder, she's talking with his Majesty,
Think you we may attempt to take her here?
Why should we not, have we not firm commission
To attach her anywhere? be bold, and fear not:
Fellows come forward.
How now, what's here to do?
The Bishops it seems my Lord would speak with you.
With bills and halberds, well, tarry there Kate,
I'll go myself; Now wherefore come you?
As loyal subjects to your state and person,
We come to apprehend that traitorous woman.
Y are a couple of
God's holy mother, she is more true and just,
Than any Prelate that suborns the Pops:
Thus to usurp upon our government?
Call you her traitor? you're lying beasts and false conspirators.
Your Majesty hath seen what proofs we had.
Here you Bonner, you are a whoreson coxcomb, What proofs had ye, but treasons of your own inventions?
O my dear Lord, respect the reverend Bishops.
Bonner and Gardner loves your Majesty.
Alas poor Kate, thou think'st full little what they come for;
Thou hast small reason to commend their loves,
That falsely have accused thy harmless life.
O God, are these mine enemies?
We have your highness hand to warrant it.
Let's see it then.
'tis here my Liege.
So, now ye have both my hand to contradict what one hand did: and now our word again shall serve as warrant to bear you both as prisoners to the Fleet, Where you shall answer this conspiracy.
You fellows that came to attack the Queens,
Lay hands on them, and bear them to the Fleet.
O I beseech your highness on my knees,
Remit the doom of their imprisonment.
Stand up good Kate, thou wrong'st thy Majesty,
To plead for them that thus have injured thee
I have forgotten it, and do still entreat
Then humble pardons at your gratious et.
Mother of God, what a foolish woman's this,
Well, for her sake we revoke our doom,
But come not near us as you love your lives:
Away and leave us, you are knaves and miscreants,
Whoreson Caitiffs, come to attach my Queen!
Vex not my Lord it will distemper you.
Mother a God, I'll temper some on them for't
How now Branden?
The Emperor my Lord.
Get a traine readie there, Charles Branden, co c
we'll meet the Monarch of imperial Rome:
Go Ned, prepare yourself to meet the Emperor,
we'll send you further notice of our pleasure.
Attend the Prince there: Welcome Lord Cardinal,
Hath not our tedious journey into France,
Disturbed your grace's health and reverent person?
No, no, ne'er fear him Harry, he has got
More by the journey, he'll be Pope shortly.
What, William, how chance I have not seen you today? I thought you would not have been the hindmost man to salute me.
No more I am not Harry, for yonder is Patch behind me, I could never get him before me, since thou conjur'st him i'th' great chamber, all the horse i'th' town cannot haul him into thy presence I warrant thee.
Will he not come in?
Not for the world, he stands watching at the door.
he'll not stir while the Cardinal come;
Then the fool will follow him everywhere.
I thank you William, I am beholding to you still.
Na my Lord, I am more beholding unto you, I thank your fool for it, we have ransacked your winesellers since you went into France: Do you blush my Lord? nam, that's nothing, you have wine there, is able to set a colour in any man's face I warrant it.
Why William, is the cardinals wine so good?
Better then thine I'll be sworn, I'll take but two handfuls of his wine, and it shall fill four hogsheads of thine (look here else)
Mordieu.
more devil; is't not? for without commuting, you could never do it: But I pray you my Lord call upon Mor dieu no longer, but speak plain English, you have deceived the king in French and Latin long enough a conscience.
Is his wine turned into gold, Will?
The fool mistakes, my gracious Sovereign.
ay, I my Lord, ne'er set your wit to the fools, Will Summers will be secret now, and say nothing, if I would be a blab of my tongue, I could tell the King how many barrels full of gold and silver there was six times filled with plate and jewels, twenty great trunks with Crosses, Crosiers, Copes, Mitres, Maces, golden Crucifixes, besides the four hundredth and twelve thousand pound that poor Chimneys paid for Peter pence. But this is nothing, for when you are Pope, you may pardon yourself for more knavery then this comes to.
Go to fool, you wrong the Cardinal,
But grieve not Woolsey, William will be bold:
I pray you set on to meet the Emperor,
The Maior and Citizens are gone before,
The Prince of Wales shall follow presently,
And with our George and collar of estate,
Present him with the order of the Garter:
Great Maximilian his progenitor,
Upon his breast did wear the English Cross,
And underneath our Standard marched in arms,
Receiving pay for all his warlike host;
And Charles with knighthood shall be honoured:
Begin Lord Cardinal, greet his Majesty,
And we ourself will follow presently.
I go my Sovereign.
Fair weather after ye:
Well, and ere he come to be Pope, I shall be plunged for this.
Queen William, you have angered the Cardinal I can tell you.
'tis no matter Kate, I'll anger him worse are long,
Though for a while I smooth it to his face:
I did suspect what here the fool hath found,
He keeps forsooth; a high Court Legantine,
Taxing our subjects, gathering sums of gold,
Which he belike hath hid to make him Pope;
A God's name let him, that shall be our own.
But to our business, come Queen Katherin,
You shall with us to meet the Emperor,
Let all your Ladies be in readiness:
Go, let our guard attend the Prince of Wales,
Upon ourself, the Lords and Pensioners
Shall give attendance in their best array,
Let all estates be ready; come fair Kate,
The Emperor shall see our English state.
Your Majesty is welcome into England,
The king our Master, will rejoice to see
Great Charles the royal emperors Majesty.
We thank your pains my good L. Cardinal,
And much our longing eyes desires to see
Our kingly uncle and his princely son,
And therefore, when you please I pray set on.
On gentlemen, and meet the Prince of Wales.
That comes forerunner to his royal father,
To entertain the Christian Emperor:
meanwhile, your Majesty may here behold
This warlike kingdom fair Metropolis,
The City London, and the river Thames,
And note the situation of the place.
We do my Lord, and count it admirable:
But see Lord Admiral, the Prince is coming.
Well met young cousin.
I kiss your highness hand.
And bid you welcome to my father's lands
I shall not need infer comparisons,
Welcome beyond compare, for so your excellency
Hath honoured England, in containing you,
As with all princely pomp and state we can,
we'll entertain great Charles the Austrian:
And first, in sign of honour to your grace,
I here present this collar of estate,
This golden garter of the knighthood's order,
An honour to renown the Emperor:
Thus as my father hath commanded me,
I entertain your royal majesty.
True honoured offspring of a famous King
Thou dost amaze me, and dost make me wish
I were a second son to England Lord,
In interchange of my imperial seat;
To live with thee fair hope of Majesty,
So well our welcome we accept of thee,
And with such princely spirit pronounce the word,
Thy father's state, can no more state afford.
Yes my good Lord, in him there's Majesty,
In me there's love with tender infancy.
The trumpets sound my Lord, the King is coming.
Go all of you attend his royal person,
Whilst we observe the emperors Majesty.
Hold, stand I say.
Stand gentlemen.
Cease those trumpets there.
Is the Emperor yet come in sight of us?
His Majesty is hard at hand my Lord.
Then Branden, sheath our Sword and bear our Maces down,
In honour of my Lord, the Emperor:
Forward again.
On Gentlemen afore, sound trumpets and set forwards.
Behold my father, gracious Emperor.
we'll meet him Cousin:
Uncle of England, King of France and Ireland, defender of the ancient Christian faith;
With greater joy I do embrace thy breast,
Then when the seven Electors crowned me,
Great Emperor of the Christian Monarchy.
Great Charles, the first Emperor of Almaigne, King of the Romans, Semper Augustus, warlike king of Spain and Sicily, both Naples, Navarre and Arragon, king of Crete and great lerusalem, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Milan, Brabant, Burgundy, Tyrrell and Flanders, with this great title I embrace thy breast,
And how thy sight doth please, suppose the rest,
Sound trumpets, while my fair Queen Katerne
Gives entertainment to the Emperor.
Welcome again to England princely Cousin,
We dwell here, but in an outward continent,
Where winters icicles hangs on our beards,
Bordering upon the frozen Orcades,
Our mother-point, compassed with the Arctic sea,
Where raging Boreas sties from winter's mouth,
Yet are our bloods as hot, as where the Sun doth rise,
We have no golden mines to lead you to,
But hearts of proof, and what we speak, we'll do.
We thank you Uncle & now must chide you;
If we be welcome to your Country,
Why is the ancient league now broke betwixt us?
Why have your Heralds in the French king's cause.
Breathed defiance 'gainst our dignity,
When face to face, we met at Landersey?
My Heralds to desire your Majesty?
Your grace mistakes, we sent Ambassadors
To treat a peace between the French and you,
Not to defy you as an enemy.
Yet Uncle in king Henry's name he came,
And boldly to our face did give the same.
Hell stop that fatal boding Emperor's throat,
That sings against us this dismal raven's note.
Mother of God, if this be true, we see,
There are more kings in England now then we:
Where's Cardinal Woolsey?
Heard you this news in France?
I did my Liege, and by my means 'twas done,
I'll not deny it; I had Commission
To join a league between the French and him,
Which he withstanding as an enemy.
I did defy him from your Majesty.
Durst thou presume so, base-born Cardinal,
Without our knowledge to abuse our name;
Presumptuous traitor, under what pretence
Didst thou attempt to brave the Emperor?
Belike thou meantst to level at a crown,
But thy ambitious crown shall hurl thee down.
With reverence to your Majesty, I did no more
Than I can answer to the holy sea.
villain, thou canst not answer it to me,
Nor shadow thy insulting treachery:
How durst ye sirrah, in your embassage,
Unknown to us stamp in our royal coin
The base impression of your Cardinal hat.
As if you were copartner in the Crown?
Ego & Rex meus: you and your king must be
In equal state, and pomp, and Majesty:
Out of my presence hateful impudency.
Remember my Liege, that I am Cardinal
And deputy unto his holiness.
Be the devils Deputy, I care not I,
I'll not be baffled by your treachery;
You're false abusers of religion,
You can corrupt it and forbid the King,
Upon the penalty of the pope's black curse.
If he ,
Not to suppress an old religious Abbey,
Yet you at pleasure have subverted foute,
Seizing their lands, tunning up heaps of gold,
Secret conveyance of our royal Seal,
To raise Collections to enrich thy state,
For which sir, we command you leave the Court.
We here discharge you of your offices:
You that are Caiphas, or great Cardinal,
Haste ye with speed unto your Bishopric,
There keep you till you hear further from us:
Away and speak not.
Yet will I proudly pass as Cardinal,
Although this day define my heavy fall.
I fear king Henry, and my royal Uncle,
The Cardinal will curse my progress hither.
No matter cousin, beshrew his treacherous heart.
has moved my blood to much impatience.
Where's will Summers? come on wise, William,
We must use your little wits, to chase this
Anger from our blood again:
What art thou doing?
I am looking round about the Emperor, methinks 'tis a strange fight for though he have seen more fools than I, yet I never saw no more Emperors but him.
Is this Will Summers? I have heard of him in all the PRINCE's Courts in Christendom.
Law foole of mee,
tell yee.
Will summers is known far and near ye see.
William, then I am for ye, I have not rhymed with ye a great while, and now I'll challenge ye, and the Emperor shall be judge between us.
Content my Lord, I am for ye all, come but one at once
Say yee
we'll put you to an unplus presently.
To him Wil.
I warrant you Madam.
Answer this sir,
The bud is spread the Rose is
A wench 'tis sed, was found in your bed, besides the Queen.
godamercy for that Will,
There's two angels for thee:
I my Lord I am glad I know it.
Gods mother Kate, wilt thou believe the fool? he lies, he lies, a sirrah William, I perceive and't had been so, you would have shamed me before the Emperor, yet William have at you once more,
In yonder Tower, there's a flower, that hath my heart.
Within this hour, she pissed full sour, & let a fart.
he's, too hard for you my Lord, I'll try him one venye myself, what say you to this William?
An Emperor is great, high is his fear, who is his foe?
The worms that shall eat, his carcase for meat whether he will or no.
Well answeed wil, yet A uddy lip,
Who comes next than?
The Queen William, took to yourself,
To him Kate.
Come on William, answer to this,
What could I take, my head doth ache, what physic's good?
Heeres will and warne your blood.
I am not repulsed at first William, again sir, Women and their wills, are dangerous ills, as some man suppose.
She that puddings fills, when snow lies o'th' hills, must keep clean her nose.
Enough good William, you're too hard for all:
My Lord the Emperor, we delay too long,
Your promised welcome to the English Court,
The honourable order of the garter,
Your Majesty shall take immediately,
And sit installed therewith in Windsor Castle,
I tell ye there are lads girt with that order,
That will ungirt the proudest Champion:
Set forwards there regard the emperors state,
First in our Court we'll banquet merrily,
Then mount on steeds, and girt in complete steel,
we'll tug at Barriers, Tilt and tournament:
Then shall ye see the Yeomen of my guard
Wrestle, shoot, throw the sledge, or pitch the bar,
Or any other active exercise:
Those triumphs past, we'll forthwith haste to Windsor,
S. George's knight shall be the Christian Emperor