WHat fury fell enforceth me to flee thunhappy seat,
That gape and gasp with greedy jaw, the fleeing food to eat?
What god to Tantalus the bowers where breathing bodies dwell
Doth show again? is aught found worse than burning thirst of hell
In lakes allow? or yet worse plague than hunger is there one,
In vain that ever gapes for food? shall Sisyphus his stone,
That slipper restless rolling poise upon my back be borne?
Or shall my lymmꝭ with swyfter swinging of whirling wheel be torn?
Or shall my pains be Tityus' pangꝭ th'increasing liver still,
Whose growing guttis the gnawing gripes and filthy fowls do fill?
That sryll by night repairs the paunch that was devowrde by day,
And wondrows womb unwasted lieth a new prepared pray.
What ill am I appointed for? O cruel judge of syrights,
Who so thou be that torments new among the soul's delights
Still to dispose, add what thou canst to all my deadly woe,
That keeper even of dungeon dark would sore abhor to knot,
Or hell itself it quake to see: for dread wheroflykewyse
I tremble would, that plague seek out: Lo now there doth arise
My brood, that shall in mischief far the grandsires guilt out go,
And guiltless make: that first shall dare unventured ills to do.
What ever place remaineth yet of all this wicked land,
I will fill up: and never once while Pelops house doth stand
Shall Minos' idle be.
go forth thou de●…estable sprite,
And vex the god of wicked house with rage of furies might.
Let them contend with all o●…fence, by turns and one by one
Let swords be drawn: and mean of ire procure there may be none,
Nor shame: let fury blind inflame their minds and wrathful will,
Let yet the parentis rage endure, and longer lasting ill,
Through children's children spread: nor ye●… let any leisure be
The former fault to hate, but still more mischief new to see,
Nor one in one: but ere the guilt with vengeante be acquit,
Increase the crime: from brethren proud let rule of hyngdome flit,
To runagat●…s: and swerving state of all unstable things,
Let it by doubtful doom be toast, between thuncertain kings.
Let mighty fall to misery, and miser climb to might,
Let chance turn th'empire up so down both give and take the right.
The banished for guilt, wh●…n god restore their country shall,
Let them to mischief fall a fresh: as hateful then to all,
As to themselves: let Ire think nought unlawful to be done.
Let brother dread the brother's wrath, and father fear the soon,
And eke the soon his parentis power. let babes be murdered ill,
But worse begot: her spouse betrapped in treasons train to kill,
Let hateful wife await. and let them bear through seas their war,
Let blood shed lie the lands about and every field afar:
And over conquering captains great, of countries far to see,
Let lust triumph: in wicked house let whoredom coun●…d be
The lightest offence: let trust that in the breastꝭ of bre●…hern breeds,
And truth be gone: let not from sight of your so heinous deeds
The heavens be hid, about the pole when shine the starts on high,
And flames with wonted beams oflight do deck the painted sky.
Let darkest night be made, and let the day the heavens forsake.
Disturb the god of wicked house, hate, slaughter, murder make.
Fill up the house of Tantalus with mischiefs and debates.
Idorned be the pillars high, with bay and let the gates
Be garnished green: and worthy there for thy return to sight,
Be kindled fire: let mischief done in Thracia onse, there light
More manifold. wherefore doth yet the uncles hand delay?
Doth yet Tyestes not be wail his children's fatal day?
Shall he not find them where with heat of fires that under glow
The cawdern boils? their lymmꝭ each one a pieces let them go
Dysperste: let father's fires, with blood of children filed be:
Let dainties such be dressed: it is no mischief new to thee,
To banquet so: behold, this day we have to the released,
And hunger starved womb of thine we send to such a feast.
With foulest food thy famine fill, let blood in wine be drowned,
And drunk in sight of thee: lo now such dishes have I found,
●…s thou wouldest shun. stay whither dost thou ●…dlong way now take?
To pools and floodꝭ of hell again, and still declining lake,
And flight of ●…ree full freight with fruit that from the lips doth flee,
To dungeon dark of hateful hell Let leeful be for me
To g●…: or if to light be thought the pains that there I have,
Remove me from those lakes again: in midst of worse wave
Of Phleghethon to stand, in seas of fire beset to be.
Who so beneath thy pointed pains by destinies decree
Dooste still endure, who so thou be that underliest allow
The hollow den, or ruin who that fears and overthrow
Of falling hill, or cruel cries that sound in caves of hell
Of greedy roaring lions throats, or flock of furies fell
Who quakes to know, or who the brandꝭ of fire, in direst pain
Half burnt throws of, hark to the voice of Tantalus: again
That hastes to hell. and (whom the truth hath taught) bel●…ue well me
Love well your pains, they are but small. when shall my hap so be
To flee the light?
disturb thou first this house with dire discord:
Debates and battles bring with thee, and of th' unhappy sword
Ill love to kings: the cruel breast strike through and hateful heart,
With tumult mad.
To suffer payne●… it seemeth well my part,
Not woes to work: I am sent forth like vapour dire to rise,
That breaks the ground, or poison like the plague, in wondrowse wise
That slaughter makes. shall I to such detested ●…rymes, apply
My nephews hearts? o parentis great of god above the sky,
And mine, (though shamed I be to grant,) although with greater pain
My tongue be vexed, yet this to speak I may no whit refrain,
Nor hold my peace: I warn you this, least sacred hand with blood
Of slaughter dire, or frenzy fell of 〈◊〉 fury wood
The altars stain, I will resist: And guard such guilt away.
With stripes why dost thou me affright? why threaist thou me to fray
Those crawling ●…uakes? or famine fixed in empty womb, wherefore
dost thou revive? now fries within with thirst enkyndled sore
My heart: and in the bowels burnt, the boiling flames do glow.
I follow thee: through all this house now rage and fury throw.
Let them be driven so, and so let either thirst to see
Each others blood. full well hath ●…elte the coming in of thee
This house: and all with wicked touch of the begun to quake.
Enough it is. repair again to dens and loathsome lake,
Of flood well known. the sadde●… soil with heavy foot of thine
Aggrieved is. seest thou from springs how waters do decline
And inward sink? or how the banks lie void by droughty heat?
And hotter blast of fiery wind the fewer clouds doth beat?
The trees be spoyllde, and naked stand to sight in withered woodds,
The barren bows whose fruits are fled: the land between the floodds,
With surge of seas on either syd●… that wonted to resound,
And nearer fords to separate sometime with lesser ground,
Now broader spread, it heareth how aloof the waters rise.
Now Lerna turns against the stream, Phoronides likewise,
His pores be stopp●…e. with customde course Alpheus drives not still,
His holly wau●…s. the trembling tops of high Cithaeron hill,
They stand not sure: from height adown they shake their silver snow,
And noble fields of Argos fear, their former drought to know.
Yea Titan doubts himself, to roll the world his wonted way,
And drive by force to former course The backward drawing day.
THis Argos town if any God be found, and Pisey bowers that famous yet remain,
Or kingdoms else to love of Corinthꝭ ground, the double havens, or soondred seas in twain,
If any love Taygetus his snows, (by winter which when they on hillꝭ be cast,
By Boreas' blasts that from Sarmatia blows, with yearly breath the summer melts as fast,)
Where clear Alpheus roons, with flood so cold, By plays well known that there olimpikꝭ hight:
Let pleasant power of his from hence withhold such turns of strife, that here they may not light:
Nor nephew worse than grandsire spring from us, or direr deeds delight the younger age.
Let wicked stock of thirty Tantalus, at length leave of, and weary be of rage.
Enough is done, and nought prevailed the just, or wrong: b●…trayde is Myrtilus and drowned,
That did betray his dame: and with like trust borne as he bore, himself hath made renounde
With changed name the sea: and better known to mariners thereof no fable is.
On wicked sword the little infant thrown, as ran the child to take his fathers his,
●…nripe for th'altars offering fell down dead: and with thy hand (o Tantalus) was rend,
With such a meat for gods thy boards to spread. eternal famine for such food is sent,
And thirst: nor for those dainty meats unmild, might meeter p●…ne appointed ever be.
With empty throat stands Tantalus beguiled, above thy wicked head there leans to thee,
Then Phiney's fowls in flight a swifter pray. with burdened bows declined on every side,
And of his fruits all bend to bear the sway, the tree deludes the gapes of hunger wide.
Though he full greedy, feed thereon would feign, so oft disceyude neglects to touch them yet:
He turn●…s his eyes, his jaws he doth refrain, and famine fi●… in closed gums doth shut.
But then each branch his plenteous riches all, let's lower down: and apples from on high
With lither leaves they flatter like to fall, and famine stir: in vain that bids to try
His hands: which when he hath wrought forth anon to be beguiled, in higher air again
The harvest hangs, and fickle fruit is gone. then thirst him grieves no less than hunger's pain:
Wherewith when kindled is his boiling blood like fire, the wretch the waves to him doth call,
That meet his mouth: which strait the fleeing flood withdraws, and from the dried ford doth fall:
And him forsakes that follows them. He drinks the dust so deep of gulf that from him shrinks.
O Dastard, coward, o wretch, and (which the greatest yet of all
To tyrant's check, I count that may in weighty things befall,)
O unrevenged: after guilts so great, and brother's guile,
And truth tr●…de down, dost thou provoke with vain complaints the while
Thy wrath? already now to rage's all Argos town through out
In armour ought of thine, and all the double seas about
Thy fleet to ride: now all the fields with fervent flames of thine,
And towns to flash it well beseemed: and every where to shine,
The bright drawn sword: all under foot of horse let every side
Of Argos land●… resound: and let the woods not serve to hide
Our foes, nor yet in haughty top of hills and mountains hie,
The builded towers. The people all let them to battle cry,
And clear forsake Mycenae's town. who so his hateful head
Hides and defends, with slaughter dire let blood of him be shed.
This princely Pelops palace proud and bowers of high renown,
On me so on my brother too, let them be beaten down.
Go to, do that which never shall no after age allow,
Nor none it wished: some mischief great there must be ventured now,
Both fierce and bloody: such as would my brother rather long
To have been his. Thou never dost enough revenge the wrong,
Except thou pass. And fiercer fact what may be done so dire,
That his exceeds? doth ever he lay down his hateful ire?
doth ever he the modest mean in time of wealth regard?
Or quiet in adversity? I know his nature hard
●…ntractable, that ●…roke may be, but never will it bend.
For which ere he prepare himself, or force to fight intend,
Se●… first on him: lest while I rest he should on me arise.
He will destroy or be destroyed, in midst the mischief lies,
Prepared to him that takes it first.
doth fame of people nought
Adverse thee fear?
The greatest good of kingdom may be thought,
That stil●… the people are constrained their prince's deeds as well
To praise, as them to suffer all.
Whom feat●… doth so compel
To praise, the same his foes to be, doth fear enforce again:
But who in deed the glory seeks of favour true tobtayne,
He rather would with hearts of ●…che be praised, than tongues of all.
The tr●… praise full oft hath hapt●… to meaner men to fall:
The false but unto mighty man. what ●…ill they, let them will.
Let first the king will honest things, and no●… the same dare nill.
Where leeful are to him that rules but honest things ●…lone,
There reigns the king by others leave.
And where that shame is none,
Nor care of right, faith, 〈◊〉, nor holiness none staythe,
That kingdom swerves.
Such holiness, such p●…tie, and faith thee,
Are private goods: let kings run on in that that likes their will.
The brother's hurt a mischief count, though he be near so ill.
It is but right to do to him, that wrong to brother were.
What heinous hurt hath his offence let pass to prove? or where
Refraind the gilt? my spouse he stolen away for ●…echerie,
And reign by stealth: the ancient note and sign of impetie,
By fraud he got: my house by fraud to vex he never ceaste.
In Pelops house there fostered is a noble worthy beast,
The close kept R●…mme: the goodly guide of r●…tche and fairest flocks.
By whom through out on every side depend a down the locks
Of glittering gold, with fleece of which the new kings wonted wear
Of Tantal's ●…locke their sceptre's guil●… and mace of might to bear.
Of this the owner reigneth he: with him of house so great
The fortune fleeth: this sacred Rā●… a loof in safety shut,
In secret mead is wont to graze, which stone on every side
With rocky wall encloseth round the fatal beast to hide.
This beast (adventring mischi●…fe great) adjoining yet for pray
My spoused mate, the traitor false hath hens conveyed awa●…e.
From hens the wrongs of mutual hate, and mischief all up sprung:
In exile wandered he, through out my kingdoms all a long:
No part of mine remaineth safe to me, from trains of ●…is.
My fierce deflowered, and loyalty of empire broken is:
My house all vexed, my blood in doubt, and nought that trust is in,
But brother foe. What stayest thou yet? at length l●… now begin,
Take heart of Tantalus to th●…, to Pelops ca●…t thine eye:
To such examples well beseems, I should my hands apply.
Tell thou which way were best to 〈◊〉 that cruel head to death.
Through perste with sword let him be 〈◊〉 and yield his hateful breath.
Thou speak'st of th'end: but I him would oppress with greater pain.
Let tyrantꝭ vex with torment more: should ever in my rain
Be gentle death?
Doth 〈◊〉 in thee preua●… no whit?
Depart thou hens all piety, if in this house as yet
Thou ever weary: and now let all the flock of furies dire,
And full of strife Erinnys come, and double brandꝭ of fire
Megaeta shaking: for not yet enough with fury great
And rage doth burn my boiling breast: it ought to be replete,
With monster more.
What mischief new
thou in ●…age provide?
Not such a one as may the mean of wonted gree●… abide.
No gilt will I forbear, nor none may be enough despite.
What sword?
To little that.
what fire?
And that is yet to light.
What weapon then shall sorrow such find fit to work thy will?
Thyestes self.
Then ire itself yet that's a greater ill.
I grant: a tumbling tumult quakes, within my bosoms lo,
And round it rolls: I moved am and wot not whereunto.
But drawn I am: from bottom deep the roaring soil doth ●…rie
The day so fair with thunder sounds, and house as all from high
Were rend, from roof, and rafters craks: and lares turned about
Have wried their sight: so beete, so beete, let mischief such be sought,
As ye O gods would fear.
What thing see●…e thou to bring to pass?
I note what greater thing my mind, and more than wont it was
Above the reatche that men are wont to work, begins to swell:
And staythe with slothful hands. What thing it is I can not tell:
But great it is. Beete so, my mind now in this feat proceed,
For Atreus and Thyestes both, it were a worthy deed.
Let each of us the crime commit. The Thracian house did see
Such wicked tables once: I graunt●… the mischief great to be,
But done ere this: some greater gilt and mischief more, let ire
find out. The stomach of thy son o father thou e●…spyre,
And sister e●…e, like is the cause: assist me with your power,
And drive my hand: let greedy parents all his babes devour,
And glad to rend his children be: and on their limbs to feed.
Enough, and well it is devysde: this pleaseth me in deed.
In mean time where is he? so long and innocent wherefore
Doth Atreus walk? before mine eyes already more and more
The shade of such a slaughter walks: the want of children cast,
In father's jaws. But why my mind, ●…et dreadst thou so at last,
And fayn●…st before thou enterprise? it must be done, let be.
That which in all this mischief is the greatest gilt to see,
Let him commit.
but what disobeyed may we for him prepare,
Whereby be●…rapt he may be drawn, to fall into the snare?
He wots f●…ll well we are his foes.
He could not taken be,
Except himself would take: but now my kingdoms hopeth he.
For hope of this he would not fear to meet the mighty Ioue,
Though him he threatened to destroy, with lightning from above.
For hope of this to pass the threatꝭ of waves he will not fail,
Nor dread no whit by doubteull shelves, of Lybic seas to sail.
For hope of this (which thing he doth the worst of all believe,)
He will his brother see.
Who shall of peace the promise give?
Whom will he trust?
His evil hop●… will soon believe it well.
Yet to my sons the charge which they shall to their uncle tell,
We will commit: that home he would from exple come again,
And miseries for kingdom change, and o●…er Argos reign
A king of half: and though to hard of heart our prayers all
Himself despise, his children yet nought w●…tyng what may fall,
With travels ●…ierde, and apt to be e●…tysde from misery,
Requestis will move: on th'one side his desire of empery,
On ●…hother side his poverty, and labour hard to see,
Will him subdue and make to yield, although full stout he be.
His travels now the time hath made to seem to him but small.
Not so: for day by day the grief of ill increaseth all.
'tis light to suffer miseries, but ●…euy them t'endure.
Yet other messengers to s●…nde, in such affairs procure.
The younger sort the worse preceptis do easily hearken to.
What thing against their uncle now, you them enstru●…te to do,
Perhaps with you to work the like, they will not be a dread.
Such mischie●…e wrought hath of●…e returned upon the workers head.
Though neu●…r man to them the ways of guil●… and gil●… have taught,
Yet kingdom will. Fearest thou they should be made by counsel ●…aught?
They are so borne. That which thou 〈◊〉 a cruel en●…erpryse,
And direly deemest do●…ne to be, and wickedly likewise,
Pe●…haps is wrought against me there.
And shall your sons of this
be ware that work you will? no secretness there is
In their so g●…eene and tender ye●…es: they will your trains disclose.
A privy counsel close to keep, is lea●…nde with many woes.
And will ye them, by whom ye would he should beguiled be,
Themselves beguiled?
Nay let them both from fault and blame be free.
For what shall need in mischiefs such as I to work intend,
To mingle them? let all my hat●… by me alone take end.
Thou leauste thy purpose ill my mind: if thou thine own forbear,
Thou sparest him. Wherefore of this let Agamemnon hear
Be minister: and client eke of mine for such a deed,
Let Menelâu●… present be: truth of 〈◊〉 seed,
By such a practice may be tried: if it refuse they shall,
Nor of debate will bearers be, if they him uncle call,
He is their father: let them go. but much the fearful face
bewrays itself: even him that feigns the secret weighty case,
Doth oft betray: let them therefore not know, how great a guyl●…
They go about. And thou these thy●…gs in secret keep the while.
I need not warned be, for these within my bosom deep,
Both faith, and fear, but chiefly ●…aythe, doth shut and closely keep.
THe noble house at length of high renown, the famous stock of ancient Inathus,
Appeasoe and laid the threats of brethren down. but now what fury 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 you thus,
Each one to thirst the o●…hers blood again, or get by gyl●… the golden ma●… in hand?
Ye little wo●…e that so desire to ●…ne, in what estate or place doth kingdom stand.
Not 〈◊〉 make a king or high renown, not 〈◊〉 weed with purple ●…an ●…ie,
Not 〈◊〉 looks, or head 〈◊〉 with crown, not g●…yng 〈◊〉 with gold and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
king he is, that fear hath laid aside, and all 〈◊〉 that in the breast are bred:
●…home impotent ambition doth not guide, nor fickle favour ●…he of people led.
Nor all that west in metals mines hath found, or ●…hanell 〈◊〉 of golden Tagus' shows,
Nor all the grain that 〈◊〉 is on ground, that with the heat of 〈◊〉 ●…uest glows.
Nor whom the 〈◊〉 of lightning flame shall beat, nor eastern wind that 〈◊〉 upon the seas,
Nor swelling surge with rage of wind replete, or gr●…edie 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 displease.
Whom not the prick of soldiers sharpest spear, or pointed pike in hand hath made to ●…ue,
Nor whom the glimpse of sword might cause to fear, or bright drawn blade of glittering steel subdue.
Who in the seat of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 his feet, beholds all haps how under him they lie,
And gladly runs his fatal day to meet, nor aught complains or grudgeth for to die.
Though present were the princes every chone, the scattered Dakes to chase that wonted be,
That shining seas beset with precious stone, and red sea coasts do hold, like blood to see:
Or they which else the ●…an mountains high, from Sarmats strong with all their power withhold:
Or he that on the flood of Danuby. in frost a foot to travail dare be bold:
Or Seres in what ever place they lie, renounde with fleece that there of silk doth spring,
They never might the truth hereof deny, it is the mind that only makes a king.
There is no need of sturdy steeds in war, no need with arms or arrows else to fight,
That Parthus woontꝭ with bow to fling from far, while from the field he falsely feigneth flight.
Nor yet to siege no need it is to bring, great goons in cartis to ouer●… we the wall,
That from far of their battering pellets 〈◊〉. a king he is that feareth nought at all.
man himself this kingdom gives at hand. let who so list with mighty mace to ●…ygne,
In ●…yckle top of court delight to stand. let me the sweet and quiet rest obtain.
So set in place obscure and low degree, of pleasant rest I shall the sweetness kno●….
My life unknown to them that noble be, shall in the step of secret silence go.
Thus when my da●…es at length are 〈◊〉, and time without all troublous tumult spent,
An aged man I shall depart at l●…, In mean estate, to die ●…ull well content.
But grievous is to him the death, that when so farr●… abroad the ●…ruyte of him is blown,
That known he is to much to other men: departeth yet vnt●… himself unknown.
MY country bowers so long wysht for, and Argos riches all,
Chief good that unto banysh●… me●…, and misers may b●…ll,
The touch of soil where borne I was, and god of natyu●… land,
(If god they be,) and sacred towr●… I see of 〈◊〉 h●…nde:
That represent then all man's work, a greater majesty.
Renowned stades to my youth, where noble sometime I
Have not so seld as onse, the palm●… in father's chariot won.
All Argos now to meet with me, and people fast will run:
But A●…eus to. yet rather lead in woods again thy flight,
And bushes thick, and hid among the brutish beasts from sight,
Like life to theirs: where splendent pomp of court and princely pride,
May not with flattering fulgent face, allure thine eyes aside.
With whom the kingdom given is, behold, and well regard,
Bese●… but late with such mishaps, as all men count full hard,
I stout and joyful was: but now again thus into fear
I am returned. my mind mysdontes, and backward seeks to bear
My body hens: and forth I draw my pace against my will.
With slothful step (what 〈◊〉 this?) my father standeth still,
And turns his face and holds himself, in doubt what thing to do.
What thing (my mind) consyderst thou? or else so long whert●…
dost thou so easy counsel wrest? wilt thou to things unsure
Thy brother and the kingdom trust? fearest thou those ils tendure
Now overcome, and mield●… made? and travails dooste thou flee
That well were placed? it the ●…yles, a miser now to be.
Turn hens thy pace while leeful is, and keep thee from his hand.
What cause the drives (o father dear) thus from thy native land,
Now seen to shrink? what makes thee thu●… from things so good at last
Withdraw thyself? thy brother comes whose ●…res be overpast,
And halfe the kingdom gives, and of the house ●…ylacerate,
Repairs the parts: and thee restores again to former state.
The cause of fear that I know not, thou dost require to hear.
I see nothing that makes me dread, and yet I greatly fear.
I would go on, but yet my lymmꝭ with we●…y leggis do slack:
And other way than I would pass, I am withholden back.
So oft the ship that driven is with wind and eke with ore,
The swelling surge resisting both, beats back upon the shore.
Yet overcome what ever stays, and thus doth let your mind,
And see what are at your return, prepared for you to find.
You may o father reign.
I may but then when die I mought.
●…heefe thing is power.
nought worth at all, if thou desire it nought.
You shall it to your children leave.
the kingdom takes not twain.
Who may be happy, rather would he miser yet remain?
Believe me well, with titles false the great things v●… delight:
And heavy happꝭ in vain are feared, while high I stood in sight,
I never styn●…ed then to quake, and self same sword to fe●…re,
That hanged by mine own side wa●…, Oh how great good it were,
With none to strive, but careless food to e●…te and rest to know?
The greater gylts they enter not in cottage set allow:
And safer ●…oode is fed upon, at narrow board alway,
While drunk in gold the poison is: by proof well taught I say,
That evil haps before the good to love it likes my will.
Of haughty house that stands aloft in tickle top of hill,
And sways aside, the city low need never be affright:
Nor in the top of roof above, there shines no ivory bright,
Nor watchman none defends my sleeps by night, or guards my rest:
With fle●…te I fish not, nor the se●… I have not backward priest,
Nor turned to flight with builded wall: nor wicked belly I
With taxes of the people fed: nor parcel none doth lie,
Of ground of mine beyond the Getes: and Parthians fa●… about:
Nor worshipped with francausence I am, nor (Ioue she●… out)
My Altars decked are: nor none in top of house doth stand
In garden trees, nor kindled yet with help of each man's hand,
The baths do smoke: nor yet are days in slothful slumbers led,
Nor nights paste forth in watch and wine, without the rest of bed.
We nothing fear, the house is safe without the hidden knife,
And poor estate the sweetness feels, of rest and quiet life.
Great kingdom is to be content, without the same to live.
Yet should it not refused be, if god the kingdom give.
Not yet desyerd it ought to be.
your brother byddꝭ you rain.
Bydds he? the more is to be feared: there lurketh there some train.
From whence it fell, yet piety is wont to turn at length:
And love unfaind, repairs agayn●… his erst omitted strength.
Doth Atreus then his brother love? each Ursa first on high,
The seas shall wash, and swelling surge of seas of S●…ylye
Shall rest and all assuaged be, and corn to ripeness grow
In bottom of Ionian seas, and darkest night shall show
And spread the light about the soil: the waters with the fire,
The life with death, the wind with seas, shall friendship first require,
And be at league.
of what deceit are you so dreadful here?
Of every chone: what end at length might I provide of fear?
In all he can he hateth me.
to you what hurt can he?
As for myself I nothing dread: you little babes make me
Afraid of him.
dread ye to be beguiled when caught ye are?
To late it is to shoes the train in middle of the snare.
But go we on, this (father) is to you my last request.
I follow you. I lead you not.
god turn it to the best,
That well devised is for good, pass forth with cheerful pace.
Entrapped in train the beast is taught and in the snare doth fall:
Both him, and eke of ha●…d sto●… with him the offspring all,
About the father's side I ●…e: and now in safety stands
And surest ground my wrathful hate: now comes into my han●…
At length Thyestes: ye he comes and all at ones to me.
I scant refrain myself, and scant may anger bridled be.
So when the bloodhound seeks the beast, by step and quick of scent
Draws in the leame, and pace by pace to wind the ways he went,
With nose to soil doth hunt, while he the boar aloof hath found
far of by sent, he yet refrains and wanders through the grounds
With silent mouth: but when at hand he once perceives the pray,
With all the strength he hath he strives, with voice and calls away
His lyng●…ing master, and from him by force out breaketh he.
When Ire doth hope the present blood, it may not hidden be.
Yet let it hidden be. behold, with ugly hear to sight
How irksomely defourmde with filth his foulest face is dight,
How loathsome lies his beard unkempt: but let us friendship feign.
To see my brother me delightꝭ: give now to me again
Embracing long desired for: what ever strife there was
Before this time between us twain, forget and let it pass:
From this day forth let brothers love, let blood, and law of kind
Regarded be, let all debate be slaked in either's mind.
I could excuse myself, except thou wert as now thou art.
But Atreus) now I grant, the fault 〈◊〉 mine in ●…uery part:
And I offended have in all. my cause the worse to be,
Your this days kindness makes: in deed a guilty wight 〈◊〉 he,
That would so good a brother hurt as you, in any whit.
But now with tears I must entreat, and first I me submit.
These hands that at thy feet do lie, do thee beseech and pray,
That ire an●… hate be laid aside, and from thy bosom may
Be scraped out: and clear forgot. for pledges take thou these
O brother dear, these guiltless babes.
thy hands yet from my knees
Remove, and rather me to take in arms, upon me fall.
And ye o aids of elders age, ye little infantis all.
Me clip and coll ●…bout the neck: this fowl ●…yre forsake,
And spare mine eyes that pity it, and fresher vesture take
Like mine to see. and you with joy, the half of empery
Dear brother take: the greater praise shall come to me thereby,
Our father's seat to yield to you, and brother to relieve.
To have a kingdom is but chance, but virtue it to give.
A lust reward for such desertis, the god (o brother dear)
repay to thee: but on my head a regal crown to wear,
My loathsome life denies: and far doth from the sceptre flee
My hand unhappy: in the midst let leeful be for me
Of men to lurke●…
this kingdom can with ●…wayne full well agree.
What ever is (o brother) yours,
I count it mine to be.
Who would dame fortune's gyfiꝭ refuse, if she him raise to reign?
The gifts of her each man it wots, how soon they pass again.
ye me depry●… of glory great, except ye th●…●…mpyre take.
You have your praise in offering 〈◊〉, and I it to forsake.
And full persuaded to refuse the kingdom, am I still.
Except your part ye will sustain mine own forsake I will.
I take it then. and bear I will the name thereof alone:
The rights and arms, as well as mine they shall be yours each one.
The regal crown as you beseems upon your head then take:
And I th'appointed sacrifice for gods, will now go make.
Would any man it ween? that cruel wight Atreus, of mind so impotent to see
Was soon astonished with his brother's sight. no greater force than piety may be:
Where kindred is not, lasteth every threat, whom true love holds, it holds eternally.
The wrath but late with causes kindled great all favour broke, and did to battle cry,
When horsemen did resound on every side, the swords each where, then glistered more and more:
Which raging Mars with often stroke did guide the fresher blood to shed yet thirsting sore.
But love the sword against their wills doth suage, and them to peace persuades with hand in hand.
So sodeyn●… rest, amid so grea●…e a rage what god hath made? throughout Mycenae's land
The harness clinked, but late of civil strife: and for their babes did fearful mothers quake,
Her armed spou●…e to lose much feared the wife. when sword was made the scabberd●… to forsake,
That now by ●…est with rust was overgrown. come to re●…ayre the walls that did decay,
And some to strength the ●…owres half overthrown, and some the gates with begins of iron to stay
Full busy were, and dreadful watch by night from turret high did overlook the town.
Worse is than war itself the fear of fight. now are the threats of cruel sword laid down,
And now the rumour 〈◊〉 of battles sown, the noise of crooked trumpet silent lies,
And quiet peace returns to loyfull town. so when the waves of swelling surge arise,
While Corus' wind the Brutian seas doth smite, and Scylla sounds from hollow caves within,
And shipmen are with wafting waves affright, Charybdis casts that erst it had drunk in:
And Cyclops fierce his father yet doth dread, in Aetna bank that fervent is with heats,
lest quenched be with waves that overshed the fire that from eternal furnace beats:
And poor Laertes thinks his kingdoms all may drowned be, and Ithaca doth quake:
If once the force of winds begin to fall, the sea lieth down more mild than standing lake.
The deep, where ships so wide full dreadful were to pass, with sails on either side out spread
Now fallen adown, the lesser boat doth bear: and leisure is to view the fishes dead
Even there, where late with tempest bette upon the shaken Cyclades were with seas aghast.
No state endures, the pain and pleasure, one to other yields, and joys be soonest passed.
One hour settꝭ up the things that lowest be. he that the crowns to princes doth divide,
Whom people please with bending of the knee, and at whose beck their battles lay aside
The Meads, and Indians eke to Phoebus nigh, and Dakes that Parthians do with horsemen threat,
Himself yet holds his sceptres doutfullye, and men of might he fears and chances great
(That each estate may turn) and doubtful hour. o ye, whom lord of land and waters wide,
Of life and death grauntꝭ here to have the power, lay ye your proud and lofty looks aside:
What your inferior fears of you amiss, that your superior threats to you again.
To greater king, each king a subject is. whom dawn of day hath seen in pride to reign,
Him over thrown hath seen the evening late. let none rejoice to much that good hath got,
Let none despair of best in worst estate. for Clotho mingles all, and suffereth not
Fortune to stand: but fates about doth drive. such friendship find with god yet no man might,
That he the morrow might be sure to live. the god our things all toast and turned quite
Rolls with a whirl wind.
WHat whirlwind may me headlong drive and up in air me fling,
And wrap in darkest cloud, whereby it might so heinous thing,
Take from mine eyes? o wicked house that even of Pelops ought
And Tantalus abhor●…ed be.
what new thing hast thou brought?
What land is this? lieth Sparta here, and Argos, that hath bred
So wicked brethren? and the ground of Corinth lying spread
Between the seas? or Ister else where wont to take their flight,
Are people wild? or that which woontꝭ with snow to shine so bright
Hircana laud? or else do here the wandering Srythians dwell?
What monstrous mischief is this place then guilty of? that tell,
And this declare to us at large what ever be the ill.
If once my mind may stay itself, and quaking limmꝭ I will.
But yet of such a cruel deed before mine eyes the fear
And Image walks: ye raging storms now far from hens me ●…eare
And to that place me drive, to which now driven is the day
Thus drawn from hens.
Our minds ye hold yet still in doubtful stay.
Tell what it is ye so abhorred. The author thereof show.
I ask not who, but which of them: that quickly let us know.
In Peloppꝭ Turret high, a part there is of palace wide
That to ward the south erected leans, of which the utter side
With equal top to mountain stands, and on the city ●…es,
And people proud against their prince if once the traitors rise
Hath underneath his battering stroke: there shines the place in sight
Where wont the people to frequent, whose golden beams so bright
The noble spotted pillars grey, of marble do support.
Within this place well known to men, where they so oft resort,
To many other rooms about the noble court doth go.
The privy Palace underlieth in secret place aloe,
With ditch full deep that doth 〈◊〉 the wood of privity,
And hidden parts of kingdom old: where never grew no tree
That cheerful bows is wont to bear, with knife or lopped be,
But Tax, and Cypress, and with tree of holm●… full black to see
Doth beck and bend the wood so 〈◊〉 aloft above all these
The higher oak doth overlook, surmounting all the trees.
From hens with luck the ●…ne to take, accustomed are the kings,
From hens in danger aid to ask, and doom in doubtful things.
To this affixed are the gifts, the sounding 〈◊〉 bright,
The Chariots broke, and spoils of sea that now Myrtoon hight,
There hang the wheels once won by craft of falset axle tree,
And every other conquests note: here leeful is to see
The 〈◊〉 tire of Pelops head: the spoil of enemies here,
And of Barbarian triumph left, the painted gorgeous gear.
A loathsome spring stands under shade, and slothful course doth take,
With water black: even such as is, of ●…some Stygian lake
The ugly wave, whereby are wo●…, to swear the gods on high.
Here all the night the grisly ghosts and gods of death to cry
The fame reports: with clinking chains resounds the wood each where,
The sprights 〈◊〉 out: and every thing that dreadful is to hear,
May there be seen: of ugly shapes from old Sepulchres sent
A fearful flock doth wander there, and in that place frequen●…
Worse things than ever yet were known: ye all the wood full oft
With flame is wont to flas●…e, and all the higher trees aloft
Without a fire do burn: and oft the wood beside all this
With triple barking roars at once: full oft the palace is
Affright with shapes, nor light of day may once the terror quell.
Eternal night doth hold the place, and darkness there of hell
In mid day reigns: from hens to them that pray, out of the ground
The certain answers given are, what time with dreadful sound
From secret place the fates be told, and dungeon roars within
While of the God breaks out the voice: whereto when entered in
Fierce Atreus was, that did with him his brother's children trail,
Decked are the ●…ultets: who (alas) may it enough bewail?
Behind the infant's backꝭ anon he knit their noble hands,
And eke their heavy heads about he bound with purple bands:
There wanted there no Frankincense, nor yet the holy wine,
Nor knife to cut the sacrifice, besprinked with levens fine.
Kept is in all the order due, lest such a mischief great
Should not be ordered well.
who doth his hand on sword then set?
He is himself the priest, and he himself the deadly verse
With prayer dire from fervent mouth doth sing and oft rehearse.
And he at th'altars standꝭ himself, he them assygnde to die
Doth handle, and in order set, and to the knife apply,
He lightꝭ the fires, no rights were lefts of sacrifice undone.
The wood tken quakte, and all at ones from trembling ground anon
The Palace beckte, in doubt which way the poise thereof would fall,
And shaking as in waves it stood: from thair and therewithal
A blazing star that foulest train drew after him doth go:
The wines that in the fires were cast, with changed licourfloe,
And turn to blood: and twice or thrice that tire fell from his head,
The jucrie bright in Temples seemed to weep and tears to shed.
The sights amazed all other men, but steadfast yet always
Of mind, unmoved Atreus stands, and even the gods doth fray
That threaten him, and all delay forsaken by and bye
To th'altars turns, and therewithal a side he looks awry.
As hungry tiger wonts that doth in gangey woods remain
With doubtful pace to range and roam between the bullocks twain,
Of either pray full covetous, and yet uncertain where
She first may bite, and roaring throat now turns the tone to tear
And then to ●…hother straight returns, and doubtful famine holds:
So Atreus dire, between the babes doth stand and them beholds
On whom he points to slake his ire: first slaughter where to make,
He doubts: or whom he should again for second offering take,
Yet skills it nought, but yet he doubts, and such a cruelty
It him deligths to order well.
Whom take he first to die?
First place, least in him think ye might no piete to remain
To grandsire dedicated is, first Tantalus is slain.
With what a mind and countenance, could the boy his death sustain?
All careless of himself he stood, nor once he would in vain
His prayers lose. But Atreus fierce the sword in him at last
In deep and deadly wound doth hide to hilts, and gripping fast
His throat in hand, he thrust him through. The sword then drawn away
When long the body had upheld itself in doubtful stay,
Which way to fall, at length upon the uncle down it falls.
And then to th'altars cruelly Philisthenes he tralles,
And on his brother throws: and straygh●… his neck of cutteth he.
The carcase headlong falls to ground: apite●…us thing to see,
The mourning head, with murmur yet uncertain doth complain.
What after double death doth h●… and slaughter then of twain?
Spares he the child? or gilt on gilt again yet heapeth he?
As long maned Lion fierce amid the wood of Armenia,
The drove pursues and conquest makes of slaughter many one,
Though now defiled be his jaws with blood, and hunger gone
Yet slaketh not his Ireful rage, with blood of bulls so great,
But slothful now, with weighed tooth the lesser calves doth threat:
None other wise doth Atreus' rage, and swells with anger strained,
And holding now the sword in hand●… with double slaughter stained,
Regarding not where fell his rage, with cursed hand unmild
He struck it through his body quite: at bosom of the child
The blade goeth in, and at the back again out went the same.
He falls, and quenching with his blood the altars sacred flame,
Of either wound at length he dieth.
O heinous hateful act.
Abhor ye this? ye hear not yet the end of all the fact,
There follows more.
A fiercer thing, or worse than this to see
●…ould nature bear?
why think ye thi●… of gilt the end to be?
It is but part.
what could he more? to cruel beast●… he cast
Perhaps their bodies to be torn, and kept from tires at last.
Would god he had: that never tomb●… the dead might over hide,
Nor flames dissolve, though them for food to fowls in pastures wide
He had out thrown, or them for pray to cruel beasts would fling.
That which the worst was wont to be, were here a wished thing,
That them their father saw ●…utombde, but oh more cursed crime
Uncredible, the which deny will men of after time:
From bosoms yet alive out drawn the trembling ●…owells shake,
The veins yet breath, the fearful heart doth yet both pant and quake:
But he the strings doth turn in h●…nde, and destinies behold,
And of the guts the signs each one doth view no●… fully cold.
When h●… the sacrifice had pleased, his diligence he puts
To dress his brother's banquet now: and straight a s●…onder cuts
The bodies into quarters all, and by the stumps anon
The shoulders wide, and brawns of arms, he strikes of every ●…hone.
He la●…es abroad their naked lymms, and cuts away the bones:
The only heads he keeps, and hands to him committed once.
Some of the gutt●… are broachte, and in the fires that burn full slow
They drop: the boiling liccout some doth tumble to and f●…oe
In mourning cawdern: from the fless●… that over stands 〈◊〉
The fire doth f●…. and scatter out, and into chimney of●…e
Up heaped again, and there 〈◊〉 by force to ●…ary yet
Unwilling burns: the lyvet makes grea●… noise upon the spit,
Nor easily wot I, if the fless●…, or flames they be that cry,
But cry they do: the fire like pitc●… it fumeth by and by:
Nor yet the smoke itself so sad, like 〈◊〉 mist in sight
Ascendeth up as wont it is, nor takes his way upright,
But even the Gods and house it doth with filthy fume defile.
O patient Phoebus though from henc●… thou backward flee the while,
And in the midst of heaven above dooste drown the broken day,
Thou fleest to la●…: the father eats his children well away,
And lymmꝭ to which he onse gave life, with cursed jaw do●…he tear●….
He shines with ointment shed full sweet all round about his heat,
Replete with wine: and often times so cursed ●…ynde of food
His mouth hath held that would not down●… but yet this one thing good
In all thy ills (Thyestes) is, that them thou dost not 〈◊〉.
And yet shall that not long endure, though Titan backward go
●…nd chariots turn against himself, to meet the ways he went,
And heavy night so heinous deed to keep from sight be sent,
And out of time from east arise, so foul a fact to hide,
Yet shall the whole at length be seen: thy ills shall all be spied.
Which way O prince of lands and gods on high, at whose uprise eftsoons of shadowde night
All beauty fleeth, which way turnst thou awry? and drawste the day in midst of heaven to flight?
Why dost thou (Phoebus) hide from us thy sight? not yet the watch that later hour bryng●… in,
Doth ●…esper warn the stars to kindle light. not yet doth turn of Hesper's wheel begin
To lose thy char his well deserved way. the Trumpet third not yet hath blown his blast
While toward the night begins to ●…elde the day. great wonder hath of sudden suppers haste
The ploughman, yet whose oxen are untierde. from wonted course of heaven what draws thee back?
What causes have from certain race conspi●…de to turn thy horse? do yet from dungeon black
Of hollow Hell, the conquered Giants prove a 〈◊〉 assault? doth Tityus yet assay
With trenched heart and wounded womb to move the former ires? or from the hill away
Hath now Typheous wound his side by might? is up to heaven the way ●…rected high
Of phlegrey ●…oes by mountains set upright? and now doth Ossa Pelion overly?
The wonted turns are gone of day and night. the rise of sun, nor fall shallbe no more.
Aurora dewysh mother of the light that wonts to send the horses out before,
Doth wonder much again returned to see her dawning light: she wottꝭ not how to ease
The weary wheels, nor manes that smoking be of horse with sweat, to bathe amid the seas.
Himself unwonted there to lodge likewise, doth setting Sun again the morning see,
And now commands the darkness up to rise, before the night to come prepared be.
About the pole yet glowthe no fire in sight: nor light of Moon the shades doth comfort yet.
What so it be, God grant it be the night. our hartis do quake with fear oppressed great,
And dreadful are lest heaven and earth and all with ●…atall ruin shaken shall decay:
And lest on gods again, and men shall fall disfigured 〈◊〉: and the land away
The ●…eas, and ●…yres, and of the glorious 〈◊〉 the wandering lamps, lest nature yet shall hide.
Now shall no more with blaze of his uprise, the lord of stars that leads the world so wide,
Of Summer both and winter give the marks. nor yet the Moon with 〈◊〉 ●…ames that burns,
Shall take from us by night the dreadful carks, with swifter course or pass her brother's turns,
While compass less she setts in crooked race: the Gods on heaps shall out of order fall
And each with other mingled be in place. the wr●…ed way of holy planets all,
With path a slope that doth divide the Zones, that bears the signs and years in course doth bryns,
Shall see the stars with him fall down at ones. and he that first not yet with gentle spring,
The temper●…te gale doth give to sails, the Ram shall he●…long fall a down to seas again,
Through which he once with ●…atfull helen swam. next him the bull that doth with horn sustain
The sisters seven, with him shall ou●…rturne the 〈◊〉, and arms of crooked cancer all.
The Lion hot, (that wonts the soil to burn) of Hercul●…s, again from heaven shall fall.
To lands once left the virgin shallbe thrown, and levelde poise of balance sway allow,
And drew with them the stinging Scorpion down. so likewise he that holds in Thassale bow
His swift well feathered arrows Chiron old, shall break the same and eke shall leess his shot.
And Capricorn that brings the winter cold shall overturn, and break thy water pot
Who so thou be: and down with thee to ground, the last of all the signs shall Pisces fall.
And monsters eke in seas yet never drowned, the water gulf shall over whelm them all.
And he which doth between each Ursa glide, like croaked flood, the slipper serpent twinned:
And lesser Beat by greater Dragons side, full cold with frost congealed hard by kind,
And carter dull that slowly guides his wain, unstable shall boôtes fall from high,
We are thought meet of all men whom again, should hugy heap of Chaos over lie,
And world oppress with over turned mass. the latest age now falleth us upon.
With evil hap we are begot alas, if wretches we have lost the sight of son,
Or him by fought enforced have to fly. let our complaints yet go, and fear be passed:
He greedy is of life, that will not die when all the world shall end with him at last.
Now equal with the starr●… I go, beyond each other wight, with haugh●…ie h●…d the heavens about, and highest Poa●… I smite.
The kingdom now & ●…eate I held, where once my father reigned.
I now let go the gods: for all my will I have obtained.
Enough and well, ye even enough for me I am a●…quit.
But why enough? I will proceed, and fill the father yet
With blood of his: lest any shame should me restrain at all,
The day is gone: go to therefore, wh●…e thee the heaven doth call.
●…o 〈◊〉 god I could against their wills 〈◊〉 hold the gods that flee,
●…nd of revenging dish, constrain them witnesses to be:
But yet (which well enough is wrought,) let it the father see.
In spite of all the drowned day, I will remove from thee
The darkness all, in shade whereof do luck●… thy miseries.
And guest at such a banquet now to long he careless lies,
With merry face: now eat and drunk enough he hath: at last
'tis best himself should know his ills. ye servants all, in haste
Und●… the temple doors: and let the house be open all:
●…ayne would I see, when look upon his children's heads he shall
What countenance he then would make: or in what words break out
Would first his grief, or how would quake his body round about
With sprite amazed sore: of all my work the fruit were this.
I would him not a miser see, but while so made he is.
Behold the temple opened now, doth shine with many a light:
In gly●…ryng gold and purple seats he sytt●… himself upright,
And staying up his heavy head with wine, upon his hand,
He belcheth out. now chief of god, in highest place I stand,
●…nd king of kings: I have my 〈◊〉 and more than I could think:
He tilled is, he now the wine in silver bull doche drink.
And spare 〈◊〉 not, th●… ye●… 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 worser draft for 〈◊〉
That sprung out of the bodies late of sacrifices ●…ee,
Which wine shall hide: 〈◊〉 therewithal the boards be ●…aken up.
The father (mingled with the wine) his children's blood shall sup,
That would have drunk of●…. behold, he now begins to 〈◊〉
His voice and sings, nor yet for ●…oye his mind he may refrain.
Obeaten bosoms dulled so long with wo●…, 〈◊〉 down you●… 〈◊〉, at l●…gth your griefs relent:
Let sorrow pass, and all your dread let go, and fellow eke of fearful banishment,
Sad pou●… and ill in misery the shame of cares. more whence thy ●…ll thou haste,
Then whether, skills. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to him, from high that falls, it is in 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 be 〈◊〉
Beneath. and great it is to him again that priest with storm, of 〈◊〉 feels the smart,
Of kingdom lost the payses to sustain with neck unbowde: nor yet deject of heart
Nor overcome, his heavy haps always to bear upright. but now of careful carks
Shake of the showers, and of thy wretched days away with all the miserable marks.
To joyful state return thy cheerful face. put fro thy my●…de the old 〈◊〉 hence.
It is the woo●… of wight in woeful case, in state of joy to have no confidence.
Though better 〈◊〉 to them returned be, th'afflicted yet to joy it irketh sore.
Why call'st thou me ●…backe, and hind'rest me this happy day to celebrate? wherefore
Bid'st thou me (sorrow) weep without a cause? who doth me let with flowers so fresh and gay●…
To deck my hears? it lettis, and me withdraws. down from my head the roses fall away●…:
My moisted 〈◊〉 with ointment over all, with sudden maze stands up in woondrows wise.
From face that would not weep the streams 〈◊〉 fall. and howling cries amid my words arise.
My sorrow yet tha●…omde tears doth love. and wretches still delight to weep and cry.
Unpleasant plaints it pleaseth them to move: and florysht fair it likes with 〈◊〉 dy●…
Their robes to rend: to w●…yle it likes them still. for sorrow, sends (in sign that woes draw nigh)
The mind, that wottꝭ before of after ill. the sturdy storms the shipmen overlye,
When void of wind th'assuaged se●…s do rest. what tumult yet or countenance to see
Mak'st thou mad man? at length a trustful bre●…t to brother ge●…ue, what ever now it be,
or else to late thou art a dread. I wretch would not so fear, but yet me draws
A trembling terror: down mine eyes do shed their sudden tears, and yet I know no cause.
Is it a grief, or fear? or else hath 〈◊〉 great ●…oy itself?
LEt us this day with one consen●… (o brother) celebrate.
This day my steptor●… may confirm and stablish my estate,
And faythf●…ll bond of peace and lo●…e between us 〈◊〉.
Enough with meat and eke with wine, now satysfyde am I.
But yet of all my joys it were 〈◊〉 great increase to me,
If now abou●… my side I might my little children see.
Believe that here even in thine arme●… thy children present be.
For here they are, and shallbe here, no part of them fro thee
Shall be withheld: their loved looke●… now give to the I will,
And with the heap of all his babes, the father fully fill.
Thou shalt be glutted, fear thou not: they with my boys as yet
The joyful sacrifices make at board where children sit.
They shallbe called: the friendly cup now take of courtesy
With wine upfylde.
of brother's feast I take full willingly
The final gift, shed some to godis of this our father's land,
Then let the rest be drunk. whatꝭ thi●…? in no wise will my hand
Obey: the poise incre●…seth sore, and down mine arm doth sway.
And from my lypps the wafting wynt itself doth fi●…e away,
And in deceived mouth, about my jaws it runneth round:
The table to, itself doth shake, and leap from trembling ground.
Scant burns the fire: the air itself with heavy ●…here to sight
Forsook of sun amazed is between the day and night.
What meaneth this? yet more and more of backward beaten sky
The compass falls: and thicker mist the world doth overlye
Than blackest darkness, and the night in night itself doth hide.
●…ll stars be fled: what so it be, my brother god provide
And sons to spare: the godis so grant that all this tempest fall
On this vile head. but now restore to me my children all.
I will, and never day again shall them from the withdraw.
What tu●…ulte tumbleth so my guttis, and doth my bowels gnaw?
What quakes within? with heavy poise I feel myself oppressed,
And with an other voice than mine ●…wayles my dole●…ull breast.
Come near my sons, for you now doth th'unhappy father call:
Come near, for you once seen, this grief would soon assuage and fall.
Whence murmur they?
with father's ●…rmes embrace them quickly now,
For here they are lo come to thee: dost thou thy children know?
I know my brother: such a guilt yet canst thou suffer well
o earth to bear? nor yet from hens to Stygian lake of hell
dost thou both drown thyself and us? nor yet with broken ground
dost thou these kingdoms and their king with Chaos rude confound?
Nor yet uprenting from the soil the bowers of wicked land
dost thou Mycenae overturn? with Tantalus to stand,
And auncyters of ours, if there in hell be any one,
Now ought we both. now from the frames on either side anon
Of ground, all here and there rend up, out of thy bosom deep
Thy dens and dungeons set abroad, and us enclosed keep,
In bottom low of Acheron: above our heddis aloft
Let wander all the guilty ghosts, with burning frete full oft
Let fiery Phlegeton that drives his sands both to and fro,
To our confusion ovetroon, and violently flow.
O slothful soil unshaken poise, unmoved yet art thou?
The godis are fled.
but take to thee with joy thy children now,
And rather them embrace: at length thy children all, of thee
So long wy●… for, (for no delay there standeth now in me,)
Enjoy and kiss, embracing arms divide thou unto three.
Is this thy league? may this thy loue and faith of brother be?
And dost thou so repose thy hate? the father doth not crave
His sons alive (which might have been without the guilt,) to have:
And eke without thy hate, but this doth brother brother pray:
That them he may ent●…mbe, restore, whom see thou shalt strait way
Be burnt: the father nought requires, of the that have he shall,
But soon forego.
what ever part yet of thy children all
Remains, he●…e shalt thou have: and what remaineth not, thou haste.
Lie they in fields, a food out flung for fleeing fowls to waste?
Or are they kept a pray, for wild and brutish beasts to eat?
Thou hast deuou●…de thy sons, and fyld●… thyself with wick●…d meat.
Oh this is it that shamed the god: and day from hens did drive
Turned back to east. alas I wretch what wailings may I give?
Or what complaints? what woeful words may be enough for me?
The●…r heads cu●…e of, and hands of torn, I from the●…r bodies see,
And wrenched fe●…te from broken thyghe●…, I here behold again.
●…ys this that greedy father could not suffer to sustain.
In belly roll my ●…owels round, and closed crime so great
Without a passage strives within, and seeks away to get.
Thy sword (o brother) lend to me: much of my blood alas
It hath: let us therewith make way for all my sons to pass.
Is yet the sword fro me withheld? thyself thy bosoms tear.
And let thy breasts resound with strokes: yet wretch thy hand forbear,
And spare the dead. who ever saw such mischief put in proof?
What rude Heniochus, that dwells by ragged coast aloof,
Of Caucasus unapt for men? or fear to Athens, who
Procustes wild? the father I oppress my children do
And am oppressed, is any means of guilt or mischief yet?
A mean in mischief ought to be, when guilt thou dost commit,
Not when thou quit'st: for yet even this, to little seems to me.
The blood yet warm even from the wound I should in sight of thee
Even in thy saws have shed, that thou the blood of them mightst drink
That lived yet: but while to much to haste my hate I think,
My wrath beguiled is. myself with sword the wounds them gave,
I struck them down, the sacred fires with slaugh●…er vowed I have
Well pleased, the carcase cutting th●… and lyutles lymms on ground
I have in little parcels chopped, and some of them I drowned
In boiling cawderns, some to ●…yres that burnt full slow I put,
And made to drop: their sinews all and lymms atoo I cut
Even yet alive, and on the spit that thrust was through the same
I hard the liver wail and cr●…e, and with my hand the flame
I oft kept in: but every wh●… the father might of this
Have better done, but now my wrath to lightly ended is.
He rend his sons with wicked gum, himself yet woting nought,
Nor they thereof.
o ye, encloa●… with bending banks about
All seas me hear, and to this 〈◊〉 ye gods now hearken well
What ever pla●… ye fl●…dde are to: ●…eare all ye sprights of hell,
●…nd here ye lands, and night so 〈◊〉, that them dooste overlye
With cloud so black, to my complaints do thou thyself apply.
To thee now left I am, thou dost alone me miser see,
And thou art left without thy starts: I will nut make for me
P●…ions yet. nor ought for me r●…quyre, may aught yet be
That me should veil? for you shall all my wishes now fo●…esee.
Thou guider great of skies above, and prince of highest might,
Of he 〈◊〉 place, now all with clouds full horrible to sight,
enwrap the world, and let the winds on every syd●… break out,
And send the dreadful thunder clap, through all the world about.
Not with what hand thou guiltless hous●… and undeserved wall
With less volte art wont to beat, but with the which did fall
The three upheaped mountains once, and 〈◊〉 to hills in height
Stood equal up, the ●…yantꝭ huge: throweout such weapons straight,
●…nd fling thy ●…yres, and therewithal revenge the drowned day.
●…et flee thy flames, the light thus lost and hid from heaven away,
With flashes fill: the cause, (lest long thou shouldst doubts whom to hit,)
Of each of us is ill: if not at least let mine be it,
Me strike: with triple edged foole thy brand of flaming fire
Beat through this breast: if father I my children do desire
To lay in tomb, or corpses cast to fire as doth behove,
I must be burnt: i●… nothing now the gods to wrath 〈◊〉 move,
Nor power from skies with thunder bolt none strikes the wyched men.
Let yet eternal night remain, and hide with darkness than
The world about: I (Titan) nought complain, as now it stands,
If still thou hide thee thus away.
now praise I well my hands,
Now got I have the palm: I had been overcome of thee,
Except thou sorowdst so: but now even children borne to me
I count, and now of bridebed cha●…e the faith I do repeat.
In what offended have my sons?
In that, that thine they wear.
Setst thou the sons for father's food?
I do, and (which is best)
The certain soons.
the gods that guide a ●…infantes, I protest.
what wedlocke godꝭ?
who would the guilt with guilt so ●…yght again?
I know thy grief prevented now with wrong, thou dost complain:
Nor this thee irks, that fed thou art with food of cursed kind,
But that thou hadst not it prepared: for so it was thy mind,
Such meats as these to ●…ette before thy brother wo●…yng nought,
And by the mother's help, to have likewise my children caught,
And them with such like death to slay: this one thing l●…tted thee,
Thou thoughtst them thine.
the gods shall all of this reuenge●…s be:
●…nd unto them for vengeance due, my vows thee render shall.
But vexed to be I thee the while, ●…eeue to thy children all.
O King of Dytis dungeon dark, and grisly ghosts of hell,
That in the deep and dreadful dens, of blackest Tartarus dwell,
Where lean and pale diseases lie where fear and famine are,
Where discord stands with bleeding brows, where every kind of care,
Where furies fight in beds of steel, and hears of crawling snakes,
Where Gorgon grim, where Harpies are, and loathsome Limbo lakes,
Where most prodigious ugly things, the hollow hell doth hide,
If yet a monster more myschapte than all that there do bide,
That makes his brood his cursed food, ye all abhor to see,
Nor yet the deep Avernus itself, may bide to cover me,
Nor grisly gates of Pluto's place, yet dare themselves to spread,
Nor gaping ground to swallow him, whom gods and day have fled:
Yet break ye out from cursed seats, and here remain with me,
Ye need not now to be afraid, the air and heaven to se.
Nor triple headid Cerberus, thou needst not be affright,
The day unknown to thee to see, or else the loathsome light.
They both be fled: and now doth dwell none other countenance here,
Then doth beneath the foulest face, of hateful hell appear.
Come see a meetest match for thee, a more than monstrous womb,
That is of his unhappy brood, become a cursed tomb.
Flock here ye foulest fiends of hell, and thou O grandsire great,
Come see the glutted guts of mine, with such a kind of meat,
As thou didst once for gods prepare let torments all of hell
Now fall upon this hateful head, that hath deserved them well.
Ye all be plagued wrongfully, your gylts be small, in sight
Of mine, and meet it were your pangs on me alone should light.
Now thou O grandsire guiltless art, and meeter were for me,
With fleeing flood to be beguiled, and fruit of fickle tree.
Thou slewst thy son, but I my sons, alas have made my meat.
I could thy famine better bear, my paunch is now replete
With food: and with my children three, my belly is extent.
O filthy fowls and gnawing gripes, that Tityus' bosom reut
Behold a fit pray for you, to fill yourselves upon
Then are the growing guts of him: four wombs enwrapped in one.
This paunch at ones shall fill you all: yfye abhor the food,
Nor may yourselves abide to bathe, in such a cursed blood:
Yet lend to me your clinching claws, your prey a while forbear,
And with your talons suffer me, this monstrous maw to tear.
Or whirling wheels, with swinging of which
Ixion still is rolled, Your hooks upon this glutted gorge, would catch a surer hold.
Thou filthy flood of Lymb●… lake, and Stygian pool so dire,
From choked channel belch abroad. thou fearful fret of fire,
Spew out thy flames O Phlegeton: and over shed the ground.
With vomit of thy fiery stream, let me and earth be drowned.
Break up thou soil from bottom deep, and give thou room to hell,
That night, where day, that ghosts, were gods were wont to reign, may dwell.
Why gapste thou not? Why do you not O gates of hell unfold?
Why do ye thus thinfernal fiends, so long from hens withhold?
Are you likewise afraid to see, and know so wretched wight,
From whom the gods have wried their looks, and turned are to flight?
O hateful head, whom heaven and hell, have shunned and left alone,
The Sun, the Starts, the light, the day, the Gods, the ghosts be gone.
Yet turn again ye Skies a while, ere quite ye go fro me,
Take vengeance first on him, whose fault enforceth you to f●….
If needs ye must yo●… flight prepare, and may no lenget bide,
But roll ye must with you forth with, the Gods and Sun a side,
Yet slowly flee: that I at length, may you yet overtake,
While wandering ways I after you, and speedy journey make.
By seas, by lands, by woods, by rockꝭ, in dark I wander shall:
And on your wrath, for right reward●… to due deserts, will call. ye scape not fro me so ye Gods, still after you I go,
And vengeance ask on wicked wight, your thunder bolt to throw.