All hail fair London, to behold thy Towers,
After our voyage long and dangerous:
Is seaman's comfort, thanks unto those powers.
That in all perils have preserved us.
Our Royal Exchange hath made a rich return,
Laden with Spices, Silks, and indigo,
Our wines that for our absence long did mourn,
Now find release from all their former woe.
Master good news, our Owner, as I hear,
Is this day sworn in London's Mayoralty:
Master 'tis true, for, see what troops appear,
Of Citizens, to bear him company.
Hark how the Drums and Trumpets cheerly sound,
To solemnize the triumph of this day,
Shall we do nothing, but be idle found,
On such a general mirthful Holiday?
Take of our Pepper, of our Cloves and Mace,
And liberally bestow them round about,
'tis our ship's luggage, and in such a case,
I know our Owner means to bear us out.
Then, in his honour: And that company,
Whose love and bounty this day doth declare,
Hurl Boy, hurl Mate. And Gunner, see you ply
Your Ordinance, and of fireworks make no spare,
To add the very uttermost we may,
To make this up a cheerful Holiday.
I that sometime was termed Albion,
After the name of Neptune's valiant Son:
Albion the Giant, and so had still held on,
But that my conquest, first by thee begun,
Hath in fame's Chronicle such honour won,
That thy first setting from Albania,
Crowned me thy virgin Queen Britannia.
Wherein, recount thy height of happiness,
Thou that before my honoured victory,
Wert as a base and o'ergrown wilderness,
Peopled With men of incivility,
Huge and stern Giants, keeping company
With savage monsters, thus was Albion then,
Till I first furnished thee with civil men.
Goentagot, and all his barbarous brood,
(When he was foiled by Corineus' hand,)
Were quite subdued, and not one withstood
My quiet progress over all thy land,
But, as sole Conqueror, I did command:
And then from Albion did I change thy name,
To Brute's Britannia, still to hold the same.
Then built I my New Troy, in memory
Of whence I came, by Thanesis fair side,
And nature giving me posterity,
Three worthy sons, not long before I died,
My kingdom to them three I did divide.
And as in three parts I had set it down,
Each named his seat, and each did wear a Crown.
But she whom thou hadst made one Monarchy
To be so severed, to thy sons might show
Some sign of love, to her small courtesy,
When three possess what one did solely owe,
It makes more ways to harm then many know.
And so proved that division of the land,
It brought in wary that hellish firebrand.
The king of Hunnes entered Albania,
Slew Albanact thy Son, and there bare sway,
Till Locrine rose with valiant Cambria,
And to revenge their Brother's death made way,
Which instantly they did without delay,
And made that River bear the proud king's name,
That thus intruded, drowned him in the same.
Fair Elstrid taken in that fatal fight,
And Locrine's love to her, wrong to his wife,
Duke Corineus daughter, dear delight,
That reft both her and Locrine of his life,
Opened a gap to much more dismal strife,
Of all which heavy haps there had been none,
Had Brute left me one governor alone.
See, after so long slumbering in our tombs
Such multitudes of years, rich poesy
That does revive us to fill up these rooms
And tell our former age's History,
(The better to record Brutus' memory,)
Turns now our accents to another key,
To tell old Britain's new borne happy day.
That separation of her sinewed strength,
Weeping so many hundred years of woes
Whereto that learned bard dated long length
Before those ulcered wounds again could close,
And reach unto their former first dispose.
Hath run his course through times sandy glass,
And brought the former happiness that was.
Albania, Scotland, where my son was slain
And where my folly's wretchedness began,
Hath bred another Brute, that gives again
to Britain her first name, he is the man
On whose fair birth our elder wits did scan,
Which Prophet-like seventh Henry did foresee,
Of whose fair child comes Britain's unity.
And what fierce war by no means could effect,
To reunite those sundered lands in one,
The hand of heaven did peacefully elect
By mildest grace, to seat on Britain's throne
This second Brute, than whom there else was none.
Wales, England, Scotland, severed first by me:
To knit again in blessed unity.
For this Britannia tides in triumph thus,
For this these Sister-kingdoms now shake hands,
Brute's Troy, (now London) looks most amorous
And stands on tiptoe, telling foreign lands,
So long as Seas bear ships, or shores have sands:
So long shall we in true devotion pray,
And praise high heaven for that most happy day.
England, that first was called Loegria,
After my name, when I commanded here:
Gives back her due unto Britannia,
And doth her true born son in right prefer,
Before divided rule, irregular.
Wishing my brethren in like sort resign,
A sacred union once more to combine.
I yielded long ago, and did in heart,
Allow Britannia's first created name,
My true born Brutes have ever took her part
And to their last hour will maintain the same.
It is no marvel though you gladly yield,
When the all-ruling power doth so command,
I bring that Monarch now into the field,
With peace and plenty in his sacred hand,
To make Britannia one united land:
And when I brought him, after times will say
It was Britannia's happy Holiday.
Then you fair Swans in Thamesis that swim,
And you chose o●se Nymphs that do delight to play
On Humber and fair Saverne, welcome him
In Canz Canzons, ligges and many a roundelay
that from the North brought you this blessed day.
And in one tuneful, harmony let's sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome bright Britain's King.
I that am Queen of all Britannia's streams,
The Ocean's darling and endear delight,
that want on daily with the suns guilt beams
and o'er my bosom suffer day and night,
Fair floats of ships to sail in goodly sight:
Unto my second Brute shall homely sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britain's King.
Fair Elstrid's and Sabrina's fatal grave,
(Whereby the name of Severn fell to me:)
When Locrine's Guendolen in anger gave,
My womb to be their dismal tragedy,
Whereof my Nymphs (as yet) talk mournfully,
Unto my second Brute do likewise sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britain's King.
Proud Scythians Humber that slew Albanact,
Whose brethren forest him to a shameful flight,
When in my watery arms his light I wracked,
I took his name, and kept it as my right,
For which my Nymphs still dancing in delight,
With me these paeans and sweet Canzoni sing,
Welcome King Iames, our second Brute and king.
FAME that attends on Britain's Monarchy,
Thus reunited to one state again,
Ushers this Chariot of true dignity,
Wherein seven kings that did in England reign,
These Royal virtues in their shields contain,
Expressing what great grace each Majesty,
Gave to the Marchant-Taylors Company
When they were first a Guild, and bore the style
Of tailors, and of Armourers beside
Of the Linen armory: for no little while
Were they so known, and daily did provide,
Those coats of arms that quailed our foe-men's pride
When England's bent-Bow, and the gray-goose wing
Our many victories abroad did sing.
From this employment for the state's defence,
Their ancient title first unto them came,
and then their following care and diligence,
squared them the way to order well and frame,
all means to keep their Guild in honest fame.
Now gracious virtues unto you I leave,
What further fortunes Time did them bequeath.
EDward the third, whose Noble name I bear,
Hearing the Love and royal amity,
That good report gave of them everywhere,
Preserving peace and kind society,
In his first year unto this Company,
He gave this Charter to confirm their Guild:
And they enjoyed it, as his Highness wild.
To build this body on a stronger frame,
Richard the second gave authority,
A Master and four keepers they should name,
and full elect to sway their mystery,
Granting them power to have a Livery,
and hold a Feast on saint Iohn Baptist day,
Yearly for ever, as they do and may.
To fortify a work so well begun,
Henrie the fourth did liberally create:
(Beside the former favours to them done,)
Their Guild a Brotherhood incorporate,
And thought it no disgrace to his high state,
To wear the Clothing of the Company,
A most majestic royal courtesy.
Henry the fift my warlike Lord maintained
His father's love to this society,
Of my sixth Henry they as freely gained,
all former grants in self-same quality,
He wore their clothing, mild and graciously:
For Princes lose no part of dignity,
In being affable, it adds to Majesty.
Thus long a Master and four keepers stood.
Till my fourth Edward changed the keeper's name
To Wardens: for the strength of Brotherhood,
And thus at first Master and Wardens came.
And for they traded, as no men did more,
With foreign Realms, by clothes and Merchandise,
Returning hither other country's store,
Of what might best be our commodities,
Henry the seventh a gracious king, and wise,
To Merchant-Taylors did exchange their name:
Since when, with credit they have kept the same.
But sacred Lady, deign me so much grace,
As tell me, why that seat is unsupplied,
Being the most eminent and chiefest place,
With State, with Crown and Sceptre dignified?
Have our discourses (Pheme) let thee know,
That seven Kings have borne free brethren's name,
Of this Society, and may not time bestow
an eight, when Heaven shall so appoint the same?
I find recorded in my Register,
seven Kings have honoured this Society:
fourteen great Dukes did willingly prefer,
Their love and kindness to this Company,
Threescore eight Lords declared like amity,
terming themselves all brethren of this band,
The very worthiest Lords in all the Land.
Three Dukes, three Earls, four Lords of Noble name
all in one year did join in Brotherhood:
IN the year 1390. Edward Duke of York. Thomas, Duke of Glocester. Henry Duke of Hereford and Earl of Derby, who afterward was K. Henry the fourth. Edward, Earl of Rutland. Thomas Earl of Warwick. Iohn Holland, Earl of Huntingdon. Iohn, Lord Rose. Rafe Lord Nevill. Thomas L. Furnival. Reignald, Lord Grey of Rithin.
I find beside great Lords from France there came
To hold like league, and do them any good:
Gaylard, Lord Danvers. Barard, Lord Delamote, Barard, Lord Montferrant, etc.
Yet no embasing to their height in blood:
For they accounted honour then most high,
When it was held up by community.
Of Bishops, Knights and Deans, to those before,
(Not spoke in vaunt, or any spirit of pride)
My Records could afford as many more,
All Brethren, Merchant-Taylors signified
That lived in love with them, and when they died
Left me their names, to after-times to tell,
Thus then they did, and thought it good and well.
MY borrowed name of Neptune now I leave,
the like doth Amphitrita my fair Queen,
And worthy Lord, grant favour to receive
What in these mysteries we seem to mean,
Britannia's glory hath been heard and seen,
Revived from her old Chaos of distress,
and now united in firm happiness.
Blessed be that second Brute Iames our dread king,
that set this wreath of Union on her head,
Whose very name did heavenly comfort bring,
When in despair our hopes lay drooping dead,
When comfort from most hearts was gone and fled,
Immediately the trumpet's tongue did say,
God save king Iames: Oh 'twas a happy day.
Our latest phoenix whose dead cinders shine,
In Angels spheres, she, like a mother mild,
yielding to Nature, did her right resign
To times true heir, her Godson, and loved child,
When giddy expectation was beguiled:
And Scotland yielded out of Teudors race,
a true borne bud, to sit in Teudors place.
Which seat to him and his, heaven ever bless,
that we near want a Rose of Teudors tree,
to maintain Britain's future happiness,
to the worlds end in true tranquillity.
Sir Leonard Holiday, now unto thee,
My love in some mean measure let me show,
Since heaven hath called thee to this dignity,
Which (then myself) far better thou doest est know,
I make no doubt thou wilt thy time bestow,
A fits s so great a subjects place as this,
To govern justly, and amend each miss.
Bethink thee how on that high Holiday,
Which bears God's Champion, th'archangels name,
When conquering Sathan in a glorious fray,
Michael hells-monster nobly overcame,
And now a sacred Sabbath being the same,
A free and full election on all parts,
Made choice of thee, both with their hands and hearts.
Albeit this day is usual every year,
For new election of a Magistrate,
Yet, now to me some instance doth appear,
Worth note, which to myself I thus relate,
Holiday, called on Holiday to state,
requires methinks a year of Holidays,
To be disposed in good and virtuous ways.
For I account 'tis a Lord's Holiday,
When justice shines in perfect Majesty,
whenas the poor can to the rich man say,
The Magistrate hath given us equity,
And lent no ear to partiality,
When sin is punished, lewdness bears no sway:
All that day long, each day is Holiday.
When good provision for the poor is made,
Sloth set to labour, vice curbed everywhere,
When through the City every honest trade,
Stands not of might or insolence in fear,
But justice in their goodness does them bear:
then, as before, in safety I may say:
All that year long, each day is Holiday.
Now in behalf of that Society,
Whereof thou bear'st a loving brother's name,
What hath been done this day to dignify,
they pray thee kindly to accept the same,
More circumstance I shall not need to frame:
But from the Merchant-Taylors this I say,
They wish all good to Leonard holiday.