THe Scene is Lybia, and the subject thus.
Whilst Carthage stood the only awe of Rome,
As most imperial seat of Lybia,
Governed by Statesmen each as great as Kings
(For 17. Kings were Carthage feodars)
Whilst thus she flourished, whilst her Hannibal
Made Rome to tremble, and the Walls yet pale:
Then in this Carthage Sophonisba lived
The far famed daughter of great Asdrubal!
For whom ('mongst others) potent Syphax sues
And well graced Massinissa rivals him
Both Princes of proud Sceptres: but the lot
Of doubtful favour Massinissa graced
At which Syphax grows black: For now the night
Yields loud resoundings of the nuptial pomp:
Apollo strikes his Harp: Hymen his Torch
Whilst lowering Iuno with ill-boding eye
Sits envious at too forward Venus: Lo
The instant night: And now ye worthier minds
To whom we shall present a female glory
(The wonder of a constancy so fixed
That Fate itself might well grow envious)
Be pleased to sit such as may merit oil
And holy dew styled from diviner heat,
For rest thus knowing, what of this you hear,
The Author lowly hopes, but must not fear.
For just worth never rests on popular frown,
To have done well is fair deeds only crown.
Syphax, Syphax, why wast thou cursed a King?
What angry God made thee so great, so vile?
contemned, disgraced, think, wert thou a slave
Though Sophonisba did reject thy love
Thy low neglected head unpointed at
Thy shame unrumoured and thy suit unscoffed
Might yet rest quiet: Reputation
Thou awe of fools and greatmen: thou that chok'st
Freest addictions, and mak'st mortals sweat
Blood and cold drops in fear to lose, or hope
To gain thy never certain seldom worthy gracings.
Reputation!
Wert not for thee Syphax could bear this scorn
Not spouting up his gall among his blood
In black vexations: Massinissa might
Enjoy the sweets of his preferred graces
Without my dangerous Envy or Revenge
Wert not for thy affliction all might sleep
In sweet oblivion: But (O greatness scourge!)
We cannot without Envy keep high name
Nor yet disgraced can have a quiet shame.
Scipio:—
Some light in depth of hell: Vangue what hope?
I have received assured intelligence
That Scipio Rome's sole hope hath raised up men
Drawn troops together for invasion—
Of this same Carthage.
With this policy
To force wild Hannibal from Italy—
And draw the war to Afric.
Right.
And strike
This secure country with unthought of arms
My letters bear he is departed Rome
Directly setting course and sailing up.—
To Carthage, Carthage, O thou eternal youth
Man of large fame great and abounding glory
renownful Scipio, spread thy two-necked Eagles,
Fill full thy sails with a revenging wind,
Strike through obedient Neptune, till thy prows
Dash up our Lybian ouse, and thy just arms
Shine with amazeful terror on these walls,
O now record thy Fathers honoured blood
Which Carthage drunk, thy Uncle Publius' blood
Which Carthage drunk, 30000. souls
Of choice Italians Carthage set on wing:
Remember Hannibal, yet Hannibal
The consul-queller: O then enlarge thy heart
Be thousand souls in one, let all the breath
The spirit of thy name and nation be mixed strong
In thy great heart: O fall like thunder shaft
The winged vengeance of incensed Ioue
Upon this Carthage: for Syphax here flies off
From all allegiance, from all love or service
His (now freed) sceptre once did yield this City
Ye universal Gods, Light, Heat, and Air
Prove all unblessing Syphax if his hands
Once rear themselves for Carthage but to curse it.
It had been better they had changed their faith,
Denied their Gods, then slighted Syphax love
So fearfully will I take vengeance.
I'll interleague with Scipio. Vangue.
Dear Ethiopian Negro, go wing a vessel
And fly to Scipio. say his confederate
Vowed and confirmed is Syphax: bid him haste
To mix our palms and arms: will him make up
Whilst we are in the strength of discontent
Our unsuspected forces well in arms
For Sophonisba, Carthage, Asdrubal
Shall feel their weakness in preferring weakness
And one less great than we, to our dear wishes
Haste gentle Negro, that this heap may know strong
Me, and their wrong:
Wrong?
ay, though 'twere not, yet know while Kings are
What they'll but think and not what is, is wrong
I am disgraced in, and by that which hath
No reason, Love, and Woman, my revenge
Shall therefore bear no argument of right
Passion is Reason when it speaks from Might
I tell thee, man, nor Kings, nor Gods exempt
But they grow pale if once they find Contempt: haste.
Watch at the dors: and till we be reposed
Let no one enter: Zanthia undo me.
With this motto under your girdle
You had been undone if you had not been undone humblest service.
I wonder Zanthia why the custom is
To use such Ceremony such strict shape
About us women: forsooth the Bride must steal
Before her Lord to bed: and then delays
Long expectations all against known wishes
I hate these figures in locution
These about phrases forced by ceremony
We must still seem to fly what we most seek
And hide ourselves from that we feign would find us
Let those that think and speak and do just acts
Know form can give no virtue to their acts
Nor detract vice.
'las fair Princes, those that are strongly formed
And truly shaped may naked walk, but we
We things called women, only made for show
And pleasure, created to bear children
And play at shuttlecock, we imperfect mixtures
without respective ceremony used
And ever complement, alas what are we?
Take from us formal custom and the courtesies
Which civil fashion hath still used to us
We fall to all contempt, O women how much
How much are you beholding to Ceremony,
You are familiar. Zanthia my shoe,
'Tis wonder Madam you tread not awry.
Your reason Zanthia.
You go very high.
Hark, Music, Music.
The Bridegroom.
The Bridegroom
Hast good Zanthia, help, keep yet the doors
Fair fall you Lady, so, admit admit.
You powers of joy: Gods of a happy bed
Show you are pleased, sister and wife of Ioue
High fronted Iuno and thou Carthage Patron
Smooth chinned Apollo, both give modest heat
And temperate graces.
draws a white ribbon forth of the
bed as from the waste of Sopho.
Lo I unloose thy waste
She that is just in love is Godlike chaste:
A modest silence thote be thought
A virgin's beauty and her highest honour
Though bashful feignings nicely wrought
Grace her that virtue takes not in, but on her
What I dare think I boldly speak
After my word my well bold action rusheth
In open flame then passion break
Where Virtue prompts, think word, act never blusheth.
Revenging Gods whose Marble hands
Crush faithless men with a confounding terror
Give me no mercy if these bands
I covet not with an unfeigned fervour
Which zealous vow when aught can force me t'lame
Load with that plague Atlas would groan at, shame.
Live both high parents of so happy birth
Your stems may touch the skies and shadow earth
Most great in fame more great in virtue shining
Prosper O powers a just, a strong divining.
To bold heart's Fortune, be not you amazed
Carthage O Carthage: be not you amazed.
Ioue made us not to fear, resolve, speak out
The highest misery of man is doubt: Speak Carthalo.
The stooping Sun like to some weaker Prince
Let his shades spread to an unnatural hugeness
When we the camp that lay at Utica
From Carthage distant but five easy leagues
Descried from of the watch three hundred sail
Upon whose tops the Roman Eagles stretched
Their large spread wings, which fanned the evening air
To us cold breath, for well we might discern
Rome swam to Carthage.
Hannibal our anchor is come back, thy slight
Thy Stratagem to lead war unto Rome
To quite ourselves, hath taught now desperate Rome
T'assail our Carthage, Now the war is here.
He is nor blessed nor honest that can fear.
ay but to cast the worst of our distress.--
To doubt of what shall be is wretchedness
Desire, Fear, and Hope, receive no bond
By whom, we in ourselves are never but beyond. On.
Th'Alarum beats necessity of fight
Th'unsober evening draws out reeling forces
Soldiers half men, who to their colours troop
With fury, not with valour: whilst our ships
unrigged, unused, fitter for fire than water
We save in our bard haven from surprise.
By this our army marcheth toward the shore,
Undisciplined young men most bold to do
If they knew how, or what, when we descry
A mighty dust beat up with horses hooves
Straight Roman ensigns glitter: Scipio.
Scipio.
Scipio advanced like the God of blood
Leads up grim war, that father of foul wounds
Whose sinewy feet are steeped in gore, whose hideous voice
Makes turrets tremble, and whole Cities shake
Before whose brows flight and disorder hurry
With whom March Burnings, murder, wrong, waste, rapes
Behind whom a sad train is seen, Woe, Fears
Tortures, Lean, Need, Famine, and helpless tears
Now make we equal stand in mutual view
We judged the Romans 18. thousand foot
5000. Horse, we almost doubled them
In number not in virtue: yet in heat
Of youth and wine jolly and full of blood.
We gave the sign of battle: shouts are raised
That shook the heavens: pell-mell our arms join
Horse, targets, pikes all against each opposed
They give fierce shook, arms thundered as they closed
Men cover earth which straight are covered
With men and earth: yet doubtful stood the fight
More fair to Carthage; when lo as oft you see
In mines of gold, when labouring slaves delve out
The richest ore, being in sudden hope
With some unlooked for vain to full their buckets
And send huge treasure up, a sudden damp
Stifles them all, their hands yet stuffed with gold
So fell our fortunes for look as ye stood proud
As hopeful victors, thinking to return
With spoils worth triumph, wrathful Syphax lands
With full ten thousand strong Numidian horse
And ions to Scipio, then lo we all were damned
We fall in glusters and our wearied troops
Quit all: slaughter ran throw us straight, we fly
Romans pursue, but Scipio sounds retreat
As fearing trains and night: we make amain
For Carthage most, and some for Utica
All for our lives: new force, fresh arms with speed
You have said truth of all: no more. I bleed.
O wretched fortune.
Old Lord spare thy haynes
What dost thou think baldness will cure thy grief
What decree the Senate?
Ask old Gelosso who returns from them
Informed with fullest charge strong Asdrubal
Great Massinissa Carthage General
So speaks the Senate: Counsel for this war
In Hanno magnus, Bytheas, Carthalon.
And us Gelosso rests: Embrace this charge
You never yet dishonoured. Asdrubal
High Massinissa by your vows to Carthage
By God of greatmen Glory, fight for Carthage
Ten thousand strong Massulians ready trouped
Expect their King, double that number waits
The leading of loud Asdrubal; beat loud
Our Afrique drums, and whilst our o'ertoiled foe
Snores on his unlaced cask, all faint though proud
Through his successful fight strike fresh alarms
Gods are not if they grace not bold just arms.
Carthage thou straight shalt know
Thy favours have been done unto a king.
My Lords t, is most unusual such sad haps
Of sudden horror, should intrude 'mong beds
Of soft and private loves; but strange events
Excuse strange forms. O you that know our blood
Revenge if I do feign: I here protest
Though my Lord leave his wife a very maid,
Even this night instead of my soft arms
Clasping his well strong limbs with glossful steel,
What's safe to Carthage shall be sweet to me.
I must not, nor I am once ignorant
My choice of love hath given this sudden danger
To yet strong Carthage: 'twas I lost the fight,
My choice vexed Syphax enraged Syphax struck
Arms fate: yet Sophonisba not repents,
O we were Gods if that we knew events.
But let me Lord leave Carthage, quit his virtue
I will not love him, yet must honour him,
As still good Subjects must bad Princes: Lords
From the most ill-graced Hymeneal bed
That ever Iuno frowned at, I entreat
That you'll collect from our loose formed speech
This firm resolve: that no lo Appetite
Of my sex weakness, can or shall o'ercome
Due grateful service unto you, or virtue.
Witness ye Gods I never until now
Repined at my creation; now I wish
I were no woman, that my arms might speak
My heart to Carthage: but in vain, my tongue
Swears I am woman still: I talk to long.
Ye Carthage Lords: know Massinissa knows
Not only terms of honour: but his actions
Nor must I now enlarge how much my cause
Hath dangered Carthage but how I may show
myself most priest to satisfaction
The loathsome stain of king's Ingratitude
From me O much be far, and since this torrent
wars rage admits no Anchor: since the billow
Is risen so high we may not hull but yield
This ample state to stroke of speedy swords
What you with sober haste hath well decreed
we'll put to sudden arms: no not this night
These dainties this first fruits of nuptials
That well might give excuse for feeble lingerings
Shall hinder Massivissa. Appetite
Kisses, loves, dalliance and what softer joys
The Venus of the pleasingst ease can minister
I quit you all: Virtue perforce is Vice
But he that may, yet holds, is manly wise
Lo then ye Lords of Carthage, to your trust
I leave all Massinissa's treasure by the oath
Of right good men stand to my fortune just.
Most hard it is for great hearts to mistrust.
We vow by all high powers.
No do not swear.
I was not borne so small to doubt or fear.
Worthy my Lord.
Peace my ears are steel
I must not hear thy much enticing voice.
By Massinissa, Sophonisba speaks
Worthy his wife: go with as high a hand
As worth can rear, I will not stay my Lord
Fight for our country, vent thy youthful heat
In field not beds, the fruit of honour Fame
Be rather gotten then the oft disgrace
Of hapless parents, children, go best man
And make me proud to be a soldier's wife
That values his renown above faint pleasures
Think every honour that doth grace thy sword
Trebles my love: by thee I have no lust
But of thy glory: best lights of heaven with thee
Like wonder stand, or fall, so though thou die
My fortunes may be wretched, but not I.
Wondrous creature, even fit for Gods not men
Nature made all the rest of thy fair sex
As weak essays, to make thee a pattern
Of what can be in woman. Long Farewell.
he's sure unconquered in whom thou dost dwell
Carthage Palladium. See that glorious lamp
Whose lifeful presence giveth sudden flight
To fancies, fogs, fears, sleep, and slothful night
Spreads day upon the world: march swift amain
Fame got with loss of breath is godlike gain.
My hand? my hand? rot first, wither in aged shame
will you be so unseasonably wood?
Hold such preposterous zeal as stand against
the full decree of Senate? all think fit.
Nay most unevitable necessary
For Carthage safety, and the now sole good
Of present state, that we must break all faith
With Massinissa: whilst he fights abroad
Let's gain back Syphax, making him our own
By giving Sophonisba to his bed.
Syphax is Massinissa's greater, and his force
Shall give more side to Carthage; as for'rs queen
And her wise father, they love Carthage fate,
Profit, and Honesty, are one in state.
And what decrees our very virtuous senate
Of worthy Massinissa that now fights
and (leaving wife and bed) bleeds in good arms
For right old Carthage?
Thus 'tis thought fit
Her father Asdrubal on sudden shall take in
Revolted Syphax; so with doubled strength
Before that Massinissa shall suspect,
Slaughter both Massinissa and his troops,
And likewise strike with his deep stratagem
A sudden weakness into Scipio's arms,
By drawing such a limb from the main body
Of his yet powerful army: which being done
Dead Massinissa's kingdom we decree
To Sophonisba and great Asdrubal
For their consent, so this swift plot shall bring
Two crowns to her, make Asdrubal a king.
So first faiths breach, adultery, murder, theft,
What else? Gel. Nay all is done no mischief left
Pish prosperous success gives blackest actions glory,
The means are unremembered in most story.
Let me not say Gods are not.
This is fit
Conquest by blood is not so sweet as wit,
For howsoe'er nice virtue censures of it,
He hath the grace of war, that hath wars profit.
But Carthage well advised, that states comes on,
With slow advice, quick execution,
Have here an engineer long bred for plots,
Called an empoisoner, who knows this sound excuse,
The only dew that makes men sprout in Courts, is use,
Be't well or ill, his thrift is to be mute,
Such slaves must act commands, and not dispute.
Knowing foul deeds with danger do begin
But with rewards do end: Sin is no sin
But in respects—
Politique Lord, speak low though heaven bears
A face far from us, Gods have most long ears,
Ioue has a hundred marble marble hands
O ay, in Poetry or Tragic scene.
I fear Gods only know what Poets mean.
Yet hear me: I will speak close truth and cease,
Nothing in Nature is unserviceable,
No, not euen Inutility it selse,
Is then for nought dishonesty in being,
And if it be sometimes of forced use,
Wherein more urgent than in saving nations
State shapes are soldered up, with base, nay faulty
Yet necessary functions; some must lie,
Some must betray, some murder, and some all,
Each hath strong use, as poison in all purges
Yet when some violent chance shall force a state,
To break given faith, or plot some stratagems,
Princes ascribe that vile necessity
Unto heavens wrath: and sure though't be no vice,
Yet 'tis bad chance: states must not stick to nice
For Massinissa's death sense bids forgive
Beware to offend great men and let them live
For 'tis of empire's body the mayne arm,
He that will do no good shall do no harm: yow have my mind
Although a stagelike passion & weak heat
Full of an empty wording might suit age
Know I'll speak strongly truth: Lords near mistrust
That he who'll not betray a private man
For his country, will near betray his country
For private men; then give Gelosso faith
If treachery in state be serviceable,
Let hangmen do it: I am bound to lose
My life but not my honour for my country;
Our vow, our faith, our oath, why theyare ourselves
And he that's faithless to his proper self,
May be excused if he break faith with princes:
The Gods assist just hearts, & states that trust,
Plots before Providence are tossed like dust.
For Massinissa: (O let me slake a little
Austere discourse and feel Humanity)
methinks I hear him cry. O fight for Carthage,
Charge home, wounds smart not, for that so just so great
So good a City: methinks I see him yet
Leave his fair bride even on his nuptial night
To buckle on his arms for Carthage: Hark-
Yet, yet, I hear him cry— Ingratitude
Vile stain of man. O over be most far
From Massinissa's breast: up, march amain,
Fame got with loss of breath, is godlike gain.
And see by this he bleeds in doubtful fight:
And cries for Carthage, whilst Carthage— Memory
Forsake Gelosso, would I could not think:
Nor hear, nor be, When Carthage is
So infinitely vile: see see look here,
Who speaks? what mute? fair plot: what? blush to break it?
How lewd to act when so shamed but to speak it.
Is this the senate's firm decrees
It is.
Is this the senate's firm decree?
It is
Hath Syphax entertained the stratagem?
No doubt he hath, or will.
My answers thus,
What's safe to Carthage, shall be sweet to me
Right worthy
Royalest
O very woman!
But 'tis not safe for Carthage to destroy,
Be most unjust, cunningly politic,
Your heads still under Heaven, O trust to fate,
Gods prosper more a just then crafty state.
'tis less disgrace to have a pitied loss
Then shameful victory.
O very Angel!
We all have sworn good Massinissa faith,
Speech makes us men, and there's no other bond
Twixt man and man, but words: O equal Gods
Make us once know the consequence of vows—
And we shall hate faith-breakers worse than man-eaters
Ha! good Gelosso is thy breath not here?
You do me wrong as long as I can die,
Doubt you that old Gelasso can be vile?
States may afflict, tax, torture, but our minds
Are only sworn to Ioue: I grieve and yet am proud
That I alone am honest: high powers you know
Virtue is seldom seen with troops to go.
Excellent man Carthage & Rome shall fall
Before thy fame: our Lords know I the worst.
The Gods foresaw, 'tis fate we thus are forced.
Gods nought foresee, but see, for to their eyes
nought is to come, or past, Nor are you vile
Because the Gods foresee: for Gods and We
See as things are things are not, for we see
But since affected wisdom in us Women
Is our sex highest folly: I am silent,
I cannot speak less well, unless I were
More void of goodness: Lords of Carthage, thus
The air and earth of Carthage owes my body,
It is their servant; what decree they of it?
That you remove to Cirta, to the palace
Of well formed Syphax, who with longing eyes
Meets you: he that gives way to Fate is wise.
I go: what power can make me wretched? what evil
Is there in life to him, that knows life's loss
To be no evil: show, show thy ugliest brow
O most black chance: make me a wretched story
Without misfortune Virtue hath no glory
Opposed trees makes tempests show their power
And waves forced back by rocks makes Neptune tower
Tearless O see a miracle of life
A maid, a widow, yet a hapless wife.
A prodigy! let nature run cross legged
Ops go upon thy head, let Neptune burn
Cold Saturn crack with heat for now the world
Hath seen a Woman:
Leap nimble lightning from Ioues ample shield
And make at length, an end, the proud hot breath
Of thee contemning Greatness, the huge drought
Of sole self loving vast Ambition.
Th'unnatural scorching heat of all those lamps
Thou rearedst to yield a temperate fruitful heat
Relentless rage whose heart hath no one drop
Of human pity: all all loudly cry
Thy brand O Ioue, for know the world is dry
O let A general end save Carthage fame
When worlds do burn unseen's a cities flame.
Phoebus in me is great: Carthage must fall
Ioue hats all vice but vow's breach worst of all.
Mount us again, give us another horse
Uncle your blood flows fast, pray ye withdraw
O Iugurth I cannot bleed too fast. too much
For that so great, so just so royal Carthage
My wound smarts not, bloods loss makes me not faint
For that loved City, O Nephew let me tell thee,
How good that Carthage is: it nourished me,
And when full time gave me fit strength for love,
The most adored creature of the city.
To us before great Syphax did they yield,
Fair, noble, modest, and 'bove all, my,
My Sophonisba, O Iugurth my strength doubles
I know not how to turn a coward, drop
In feeble baseness, I cannot: give me horse,
Know I am Carthage very creature, and I am graced,
That I may bleed for them: give me fresh horse.
He that doth public good for multitude,
Finds few are truly grateful.
O Iugurth, fie you must not say so, Iugurth,
Some common weals may let a noble heart,
Too forward bleeds abroad and bleed bemond,
But not revenged at home, but Carthage, fie
It cannot be ungrate, faithless through fear,
It cannot Iugurth: Sophonisba's there,
Beat a fresh charge.
Sound the retreat, respect your health brave Prince,
The waste of blood throws paleness on your face,
By light, my hearts not pale: O my loved father,
We bleed for Carthage balsam to my wounds,
We bleed for Carthage: shall's restore the fight?
My squadron of Massulians yet stands firm.
The day looks off from Carthage cease all arms
A modest temperance is the life of arms,
Take our best surgeon Gisco, he is sent
From Carthage to attend your chance of war,
We promise sudden ease.
Thy comforts good
That nothing can secure us but thy blood:
Infuse it in his wound, 'twill work amain,
O Ioue,
What Ioue? thy God must be thy gain
And as for me.
Thou know'st, a statist must not be a man.
Forbear, how art thou called?
Gisco my Lord.
umh, Gisco, ha, touch not mine arm, most only man,
Sirrah, sirrah, art poor?
not poor.
Nephew command
Our troops of horse make indisgraced retreat,
Trot easy off: not poor: Iugurth give charge,
My soldiers stand in square battalia,
Entirely of themselves: Gisco thouart old,
'tis time to leave off murder, thy faint breath.
Scarce heaves thy ribs, thy gummy bloodshot eyes,
Are sunk a great way in thee, thy lank skin,
Slides from thy fleshless veins: be good to men,
judge him ye Gods, I had not life to kill
So base a Creature, hold Gisco () live,
The Godlike part of Kings is to forgive,
Command astonished Gisco.
No return.
Haste unto Carthage: quit thy abject fears,
Massinissa knows no use of murderers.
Speak, speak, let terror strike slaves mute.
Much danger makes great hearts most resolute,
Uncle I fear foul arms, myself beheld,
Syphax on high speed run his well breathed horse,
Direct to Cirta that most beauteous City,
Of all his kingdom: whilst his troops of horse
With careless trot pace gently toward our camp,
As friends to Carthage, stand on guard dear uncle
For Asdrubal with yet his well ranked army,
Bends a deep threatening brow to us as if,
He waited but to join with Syphax horse
And hew us all to pieces: O my King
My Uncle, Father, Captain O over All
Stand like thyself or like thyself now fall
Thy troops yet hold good ground: Unworthy wounds
Betray not Massinissa.
Iugurth pluck
Pluck, so, good cuz.
O God do you not feel?
Not Iugurth no, now all my flesh is steel.
Of base disguise: High lights scorn not to view
A true old man: up Massinissa throw
The lot of battle upon Syphax troops
Before he join with Carthage: then amain
Make through to Scipio, he yields safe abodes
Spare treachery, and strike the very Gods.
Why wast thou borne at Carthage, O my fate
Divinest Sophonisba! I am full
Of much complaint, and many passions,
The least of which expressed would sad the Gods
And strike compassion in most ruthless hell
Up unmaimed heart spend all thy grief and rage
Upon thy foe: the fields a soldier's stage
On which his action shows: If you are just
And hate those that contemn you, O you God's
Revenge worthy your anger, your anger, O,
Down man, up heart, stoup Ioue and bend thy chin
To thy large breast, give sign thouart pleased, and just
Swear, good men's for heads must not print the dust
What Carthage hath decreed, Hanno is done
Advanced and borne was Asdrubal for state
Only with it his faith, his love, his hate
Are of one piece: were it my daughter's life
That fate hath song to Carthage safety brings
What deed so red but hath been done by Kings?
Ephiginia, he that's a man for men,
Ambitious as a God, must like a God
Live clear from passions, his full aimed attend
Immense to others, sole self to comprehend
Round in's own globe, not to be clasped but holds
Within him all, his heart being of more folds
Than shield of Telamon not to be pierced though struck
The God of wisemen is themselves, not luck.
See him by whom now Massivissa is not
Gisco is't done?
Your pardon worthy Lord,
It is not done, my heart sunk in my breast,
His virtue mazed me, faintness seized me all,
Some Gods in Kings that will not let them fall.
His virtue mazde thee, (umh) why now I see
Thart that just man that hath true touch of blood,
Of pity and soft piety: Forgive?
Yes honour thee, we did it but to try
What sense thou hadst of blood: go Bytheas
Take him into our private treasury
And cut his throat, the slave hath all betrayed.
Are you assured? As. A feared for this I know
Who thinketh to buy villainy with gold,
Shall ever find such faith so bought so sold.
Reward him thoroughly.
What means this shout?
Hanno 'tis done: Scyphax revolt by this
Hath secured Carthage: and now his force come in
And joined with us give Massinissa charge,
And assured slaughter: O ye powers forgive,
Through rottenst dung best plants both sprout & live
By blood vines grow.
But yet think Asdrubal
'tis fit at least you bear griefs outward show,
It is your kinsman bleeds: what need men know.
Your hand is in his wounds, 'tis well in state,
To do close ill; but void a public hate.
Tush Hanno let me prosper let routs prate,
My power shall force their silence or my hate.
Shall scorn their idle malice: men of weight
Know, he that fears envy let him cease to reign,
The people's hate to some hath been their gain.
For howsoe'er a Monarch feigns his parts,
Steal any thing from Kings but subjects hearts.
Guard, guard the camp, make to the trench stand firm
The Gods of boldness with us, how runs chance?
Think, think how wretched thou canst be, thou art,
Short words shall speak long woes:
mark Asdrubal.
Our bloody plot to Massinissa's ear
Untimely by this Lord was all betrayed.
By me, it was, by me vile Asdrubal,
oy to speakt.
Down slave.
I cannot fall.
Our trains disclosed, straight to his well used arms
He took himself, rose up with all his force,
On Syphax careless troops (Syphax being hurried
Before to Cirta fearless of success
impatient Sophonisba to enjoy.)
Gelosso rides to head of all our squadrons
Commands make stand in thy name Asdrubal,
In mine, in his, in all: dull rest our men,
Whilst Massinissa now with more than fury,
Chargeth the loose and much amazed ranks,
Of absent Syphax: who with broken shout,
(In vain expecting Carthage secondings)
Give faint repulse: a second charge is given
Then look as when a falcon towers aloft
Whole shoals of foul and flocks of lesser birds,
Crouch fearfully and dive some among sedge,
Some creep in brakes: so Massinissa's sword
Brandished aloft, tossed 'bout his shining cask,
Made stoop whole squadrons, quick as thought he strikes,
Here hurls he darts? and there his rage strong arm,
Fights foot to foot: here cries he strike: they sink
And then grim slaughter follows, for by this
As men betrayed, they curse us, die, or fly, or both
Often six thousand fell: Now was I come
And straight perceived all Bled by his vile plot.
Vile? good plot, my good plot Asdrubal.
I forced our army beat a running march,
But Massinissa struck his spurs apace
Upon his speedy horse, leaves slaughtering
All fly to Scipio who with open ranks
In view receives them: All I could effect
Was but to gain him.
Die.
Do what thou can,
Thou canst but kill a weak old honest man.
scipio and Massinissa's by this strike
Their clasped palms, then vow an endless love,
straight a joint shout they raise, then turn they breasts
Direct on us march strongly toward our camp
As if they dared us fight, O Asdrubal.
I fear they'll force our camp.
Break up and fly,
This was your plot.
But 'twas thy shame to choose it.
He that forbids not offence he does it.
The curse of women's words go with you: fly,
You are no villains, Gods and men, which way?
Advise vile things.
Vile?
I.
Not?
you did all
Did you not plot?
Yielded not Asdrubal?
But you enticed me.
How?
With hope of place.
He that for wealth leaves faith is abject.
base
Do not provoke my sword, I live.
More shame.
T'outlive thy virtue and thy once great name.
upbraid ye me?
Hold.
Know that only thou
Art treacherous: thou shouldst have had a crown.
Thou didst all, all he for whom mischiefs done
He does it.
Broad scorn open feigned powers
Make good the camp, no, fly, yes, what? wild rage,
To be a prosperous villain yet some heat some hold,
But to burn temples and yet freeze, O cold,
Give me some health, now your blood sinks: thus deeds
Ill nourished rot, without love nought succeeds.
Must we entreat? sue to such squeamish ears,
Know Syphax has no knees, his eyes no tears,
Enraged love is senseless of remorse,
Thou shalt, thou must. king's glory is their force.
Thou art in Cirta, in my Palace Fool
Dost think he pitieth tears, that knows to rule.
For all thy scornful eyes thy proud disdain,
And late contempt of us now we'll revenge,
Break stubborn silence: look I'll tack thy head
To the low earth, whilst strength of too black knaves,
Thy limbs all wide shall strain: prayer fitteth slaves.
Our courtship be our force: rest calm as sleep,
Else at this quake, hark, hark, we cannot weep.
Can Sophonisba be enforced?
Can? see.
Thou mayest enforce my body but not me.
Not?
No.
No?
No off with thy loathed arms
That lie more heavy on me then the chains,
That wear deep wrinkles in the captives limbs
I do beseech thee.
What?
Be but a beast,
Be but a beast.
Do not offend a power
Can make thee more than wretched: yield to him
To whom fate yields: Know Massinissa's dead,
dead?
dead.
To Gods of goodmen shame
Help vangue my strong blood boil.
O save
thine own (yet) fame.
All appetite is deaf, I will I must.
Achilles armour could not bear out lust.
Hold thy strong arm and hear my Syphax know,
I am thy servant now: I needs must love thee
For (O my sex forgive) I must confess,
we not affect protesting feebleness.
entreats faint blushings, timorous modesty,
We think our lover is but little man,
Who is so full of woman: Know fair Prince
Loves strongest arms not rude: for we still prove
Without some fury there's no ardent love.
We love our loves impatience of delay,
Our noble sex was only borne t'obey
To him that dares command.
Why this is well.
Th'excuse is good: wipe thy fair eyes our Queen,
Make proud thy head now feel: more friendly strength
Of thy lords arm: come touch my rougher skin.
With thy soft lip Zanthia dress our bed,
Forget old loves and clip him that through blood,
And hell acquires his Wish think not but kiss,
The flourish fore loves fight is Venus' bliss.
Great dreadful Lord by thy affection
Grant me one boon, know I have made a vow,
Vow? what vow? speak.
Nay if you take offence
Let my soul suffer first and yet.
offence?
Not Sophonisba, hold, thy vow is free,
As:— come thy lips.
Alas cross misery
As I do wish to live I long to enjoy,
Your warm embrace, but O my vow 'tis thus,
If ever my Lord died I vowed to him,
A most, most private sacrifice, before
I touched a second spouse: all I implore.
Is but this liberty:
This go obtain
What time
One hour.
sweet good speed speed adieu
Yet Syphax trust no more than thou mayst view.
Vangue shall stay
He stays.
Zanthia, Zanthia
Thou art not foul, go to, some Lords are oft
So much in love with their known ladies bodies,
That they oft love their vails, hold, hold thou'st find,
To faithful care kings bounty hath no shore,
You may do much.
But let my gold do more.
I am your creature.
Be, get, 'tis no stain
The God of service is however gain.
Zanthia, where are we now? speak worth my service
ha' we done well?
Nay in height of best.
I feared a superstitious virtue would spoil all,
But now I find you above women rare,
She that can time her goodness hath true care
Of her best good. Nature at home begins
She whose integrity herself hurts sins.
For Massinissa, he was good and so,
But he is dead, or worse, distressed, or more
Than dead, or much distressed, O sad, poor
whoever held such friends: no let him go
Such faith is praised, then laughed at, for still know,
Those are the living women that reduce,
All that they touch unto their ease and use.
Knowing that wedlock, virtue or good names,
Are courses and varieties of reason
To use or leave as they advantage them
And absolute within themselves reposed,
Only to Greatness Ope, to all else closed.
Weak sanguine fools, are to their own good nice
Before I held you virtuous but now wise.
Zanthia victorious Massinissa liu's.
My Massinissa lives: O steady powers
Keep him as safe as heaven keeps the earth.
Which looks upon it with a thousand eyes,
That honest valiant man and Zanthia,
Do but record the justice of his love,
And my for ever vows, for ever vows.
I true Madam: nay think of his great mind
His most just heart his all of excellence
And such a virtue as the Gods might envy
Again this Syphax is but;— and you know.
Fame lost what can be got that's good: for:
hence
Take nay with one hand.
My service.
Prepare
Our sacrifice.
But yield you, I or no?
When thou dost know.
what then?
then thou wilt know
Let him that would have counsel void th'advice
Of friends made his with weighty benefits
Whose much dependence only strives to fit
Humour not reason, and so still devise
In any thought to make their friend seem wise
But above all O fear a servants tongue,
Like such as only for their gain to serve
Within the vast capacity of place
I know no vileness so most truly base.
Their Lords, their gain: and he that most will give,
With him (they will not die: but) they will live.
Traitors and these are one: such slaves once trust
Whet swords to make thine own blood lick the dust.
Withdraw, withdraw All but Zanthia & Vangue depart
I not invoke thy arm thou God of sound
Nor thine, nor thine, although in all abound.
High powers immense: But jovial Mercury
And thou O brightest female of the sky
Thrice modest Phoebe, you that jointly fit
A worthy chastity and a most chaste wit
To you corruptless Honey, and pure dew
upbreathes our holy fire. Words just and few
O deign to hear if in poor wretches cries
You glory not: if drops of withered eyes
be not your sport, be just: all that I crane
Is but chaste life or an untainted grave.
I can no more: yet hath my constant tongue
Let fall no weakness, tho'my heart were wrung
With pangs worth hell: whilst great thoughts stop our tears
Sorrow unseen, unpitied in ward wears.
You see now where I rest, come is my end.
Cannot heaven, virtue, against weak chance defend?
When weakness hath outborn what weakness can,
What should I say 'tis Ioues, not sin of man.
Some stratagem now let wits God be shown,
Celestial powers by miracles are known.
I have't 'tis done. Zanthia prepare our bed
Vangue
Your servant.
Vangue we have performed
Due rites unto the dead.
Now to thy Lord great Syphax healthful cups: which done,
The King is right much welcome.
Were it as deep as thought off it should thus— he drinks
My safety with that draft.
Close the vaults mouth lest we do slip in drink,
To what use gentle Negro serves this cave
Whose mouth thus opens so familiarly,
Even in the king's bedchamber?
O my Queen
This vault with hideous darkness and much length
stretcheth beneath the earth into a grove
One league from Cirta (I am very sleepy)
Through this when Cirta hath been strong begirt
With hostile siege the King hath safely scaped
To, to,
The wine is strong.
strong?
Zanthia
What means my princes?
Zanthia rest firm
And silent, help us: Nay do not dare refuse.
The Negroes dead.
No drunk.
Alas.
Too late,
Her hand is fearful whose minds desperate.
It is but sleepy Opium he hath drunk,
Help Zanthia, They lay Vangue in Syphax bed & draw the curtains, there lie Syphax bride, a naked man is soon undressed;
There bide dishonoured passion they knock within, forthwith Syphax comes.
Way for the King.
Straight for the King: I fly
Where misery shall see nought but itself.
Dear Zanthia close the vault when I am sunk
And whilst he slips to bed escape be true
I can no more, come to me: Hark Gods, my breath
Scorns to crave life grant but a well famed death she descends
Each man withdraw, let not a creature stay
Within large distance.
Sir?
hence Zanthia,
Not thou shalt hear, all stand without ear-reach
Of the soft cries nice shrinking brides do yield
When—
But Sir—
Hence— stay, take thy delight by steps,
Think of thy joys, and make long thy pleasures,
O silence thou dost swallow pleasure right,
Words take away some sense from our delight;
Music: be proud my Venus, Mercury thy tongue,
Cupid thy flame, 'bove all O Hercules
Let not thy back be wanting: for now I leap
To catch the fruit none but the Gods should reap
Hah! can any woman turn to such a Devil?
Or: or: Vangue, Vangue—
Yes, yes.
speak slave,
How camest thou here?
Here?
Zanthia, Zanthia,
where's Sophonisba? speak at full, at full,
Give me particular faith, or know thou art not—
Your pardon just moved prince & private ear
Ill actions have some grace, that they can fear
How came I laid? which way was I made drunk?
Where am I? think, or is my state advanced?
O Ioue how pleasant is it but to sleep
In a king's bed!
Sleep there thy lasting sleep
Improvident, base, o'er-thirsty slave.
Die pleased a king's couch is thy too proud grave.
Through this vault sayst thou?
As you give me grace
To live, 'tis true.
We will be good to Zanthia;
Go cheer thy Lady, and be private to us.
As to my life.
I'll use this Zanthia,
And trust her as our dogs drink dangerous Nile,
only for thirst, the Fly the Crocodile:
Wise Sophonisba knows loves tricks of art,
Without much hindrance, pleasure hath no heart;
Despite all virtue or weak plots I must
seven walled Babel cannot bear out lust
Let not the virtue of the world suspect
Sad Massinissa's faith: nor once condemn
Our just revolt: Carthage first gave me life,
Her ground gave food, her air first lent me breathe
The Earth was made for men, not men for Earth.
Scipio I do not thank the Gods for life,
Much less vile men, or earth: know best of Lords,
It is a happy being breath well famed,
For which Ioue sees these thus; Men be not fold
With piety to place: traditions fear,
A just man's country Ioue makes everywhere.
Well urgeth Massinissa, but to leave
A City so ingrate, so faithless, so more vile
Than civil speech may name, fear not, such vice
To scourge is heavens most grateful sacrifice.
Thus all confess first they have broke a faith
To the most due, so just to be observed
That barbarousness itself may well blush at them
Where is thy passion? they have shared thy crown
Thy proper right of birth; contrived thy death.
Where is thy passion? given thy beauteous spouse.
To thy most hated rival: statue, not man,
And last thy friend Gelosso (man worth Gods)
With tortures have they rent to death.
O Gel.
For thee full eyes
No passion for the rest.
O Scipio my grief for him may be expressed by tears
But for the rest silence & secret anguish
Shall waste: shall waste:— Scipio he that can weep,
Grieves not like me private deep inward drops
Of blood: my heart— for God's rights give me leave
To be a short time Man.
stay prince.
I cease;
Forgive if I forget thy presence: Scipio
Thy face makes Massinissa more than man,
And here before your steady power a vow
As firm as fate I make: when I desist
To be commanded by thy virtue, (Scipio)
Or fall from friend of Rome's, revenging Gods
Afflict me worth your torture: I have given
Of passion and of faith my heart.
To counsel then
Grief fits weak hearts, revenging virtue men.
Thus I think fit, before that Syphax know
How deeply Carthage sinks, let's beat swift march
Up even to Cirta, and whilst Syphax snores
With his, late thine—
With mine? no Scipio,
Libya hath poison, asps, knives, & to much earth
To make one grave, with mine? not, she can die,
Scipio, with mine? Ioue say it thou dost lie.
Temperance be Scipio's honour.
Cease your strife
She is a woman.
But she is my wife.
And yet she is no god.
And yet she's more
I do not praise God's goodness but adore.
God's cannot fall, and for their constant goodness
(Which is necessited) they have a crown
Of never ending pleasures: but faint man
(Framed to have his weakness made the heavens glory
If he with steady virtue holds all siege
That power, that speech, that pleasure, that full sweets
A world of greatness can assail him with,
Having no pay but self wept misery,
And beggar's treasure heaped, that man I'll praise
Above the Gods.
The Libean speaks bold sense
By that by which all is, Proportion,
I speak with thought.
No more.
Forgive my admiration
You touched a string to which my sense was quick,
Can you but think? do, do; my grief! my grief
Would make a Saint blaspheme: give some relief,
As thou art Scipio forgive that I forget,
I am a Soldier; such woes Ioues ribs would burst,
Few speak less ill that feel so much of worst.
My ear attends
Before than Syphax join
With new strengthened Carthage, or can once unwind
His tangled sense from out so wild amaze
Fall we like sudden lightning fore his eyes;
Boldness and speed are all of victories.
Scipio, let Massinissa clip thy knees;
May once these eyes view Syphax? shall this arm
Once make him feel his sinew? O ye Gods
My cause, my cause! justice is so huge odds
That he who with it fears, Heaven must renounce
In his creation.
Beat then a close quick march
Before the morn shall shake cold dews through skies,
Syphax shall tremble at Rome's thick alarms.
Ye powers I challenge conquest to just arms.
With a full flourish of cornets they depart.
Where are we Zanthia?
Vangue said the cave
opened in Belos forest.
Lord how sweet
I sent the air? the huge longe vaults close vain,
What dumps it breathed? In Belos forest sayst?
Be valiant Zanthia; how far's Utica
From these most heavy shades?
Ten easy leagues.
there's Massinissa, my true Zanthia
shalls venture nobly to escape, and touch
My Lords just arms: loves wings so justly heave
The body up, that as our toes shall trip
Over the tender and obedient grass,
Scarce any drop of dew is dashed to ground.
And see the willing shade of friendly night
Makes safe our instant haste: Boldness and speed
Make actions most impossible succeed.
But Madam know the forest hath no way
But one to pass the which holds strictest guard.
Do not betray me Zanthia.
I Madam.
No
I not mistrust thee, yet, but,
Here you may
Delay your time.
I Zanthia delay
By which we may yet hope, yet hope, Alas
How all benumbed's my sense Chance hath so often
I scarce cā feele: I should now curse the Gods ▪struck
Call on the furies: stamp the patient earth
cleave my stretched cheeks with sound speak from all sense
But loud and full of player's eloquence
No, no, What shall we eat.
Madam i'll search
For some ripe Nuts which Autumn hath shook down
From the unleaved hazel, than some cooler air
Shall lead me to a spring: Or I will try
The courteous pale of some poor foresters,
For milk.
Do Zanthia, O happiness,
Of those that know not pride or lust of city,
there's no man blessed but those that most men pity.
O fortunate poor maids, that are not forced,
To wed for state nor are for state divorced!
Whom policy of kingdoms doth not marry,
But pure affection makes to love or vary,
You feel no love, which you dare not to show,
Nor show a love which doth not truly grow:
O you are surely blessed of the sky,
You live, that know not death before you die,
You are:
In Syphax arms, thing of false lip,
What God shall now release thee,
Art a man?
Thy limbs shall feel, despite thy virtue know
I'll thread thy richest pearl: this forests deaf,
As is my lust: Night and the God of silence,
Swells my full pleasures, no more shalt thou delude,
My easy credence Virgin of fair brow,
Well featured creature, and our utmost wonder,
Queen of our youthful bed be proud,
I'll use thee,
Look thee, view this, show but one strain of force
Bow but to seize this arm, and by myself,
Or more by Massinissa this good steel,
Shall set my soul on wing, thus formed Gods see,
And men with God's worth envy nought but me.
Do strike thy breast, know being dead, I'll use,
With highest lust of sense thy senseless flesh,
And even then thy vexed soul shall see,
Without resistance, thy trunk prostitute,
Unto our appetite.
I shame to make thee know,
How vile thou speakest: Corruption then as much,
As thou shalt do: but frame unto thy lusts,
imagination's utmost sin: Syphax,
I speak all frightless, know I live or die
To Massinissa, nor the force of fate
Shall make me leave his love, or slake thy hate.
I will speak no more,
Thou hast amazed us, Woman's forced use,
Like unripe fruits, no sooner got but waste,
They have proportion, colour but no taste,
Think Syphax— Sophonisba rest thine own,
Our Guard,
Creature of most astonishing virtue,
If with fair usage, love and passionate courtings,
We may obtain, the heaven of thy bed,
We cease, no suit from other force be free.
We dote not on thy body, but love thee,
Wilt thou keep faith?
By thee & by that power
By which thou art thus glorious, trust my vow,
Our guard, convey the royal'st excellence
That ever was called Woman, to our Palace,
Observe her with strict care:
Dread Syphax speak
As thou art worthy: is not Zanthia false?
To thee she is.
As thou art then thyself
Let her not be.
she is not.
Thus most speed when two foes are grown friends
Partakers bleed.
When Plants must flourish
Their manure must rot.
Syphax be recompensed.
I hate thee not.
A wasting flame feeds on my amorous blood
Which we must cool or die? what way all power,
All speech full Opportunity can make,
We have made fruitless trial. Infernal Ioue,
You resolute Angels that delight in flames,
To you all wonder working spirits I fly
Since heaven helps not, deepest hell we'll try.
Here in this desert the great soul of Charms,
Dreadful Erichtho lives whose dismal brow,
contemns all roofs or civil coverture.
Forsaken graves and tombs the Ghosts forced out
She joys to inhabit.
A loathsome yellow leanness spreads her face
A heavy hell-like paleness loads her cheeks
Unknown to a clear heaven: but if dark winds.
Or thick black clouds drive back the blinded stars
When her deep magic makes forced heaven quake
And thunder spite of Ioue. Erichtho then
From naked graves stalks out, heaves proud her head
With long unkempt hair loaden, and strives to snatch
The night's quick sulphur: than she bursts up tombs
From half rot cerecloths then she scrapes dry gums
For her black rites: but when she finds a corpse
New graved whose entrails yet not turn
To fly my filth with greedy havoc than
she makes fierce spoil: & swells with wicked triumph
To bury her lean knuckles in his eyes
Then doth she knaw the pale and o'ergrown nails
From his dry hand: but if she find some life
Yet lurking close she bites his gelled lips,
And sticking her black tongue in his dry throat,
She breathes dire murmurs, which enforce him bear
Her baneful secrets to the spirits of horror.
To her first sound, the Gods yield any harm,
As trembling once to hear a second charm,
She is:
Here Syphax here, quake not, for know
I know thy thoughts, thou wouldst entreat our power,
Nice Sophonisba's passion to enforce
To thy affection be all full of Ioue,
'tis done, 'tis done, to us heave earth, sea, air,
And Fate itself obeys, the beasts of death,
And all the terrors angry Gods invented,
(T'afflict th'ignorance of patient man),
Tremble at us: the rolled up snake uncurled,
His twisted knots at our affrighting voice,
Are we incensed? the King of flames grows pale,
lest he be choked with black and earthy fumes,
Which our charms raise: Be joyed, make proud thy lust
I do not pray you Gods, my breathes: You must.
Deep knowing spirit, mother of all high
Mysterious science, what may Syphax yield,
Worthy thy art, by which my soul's thus eased,
The Gods first made me live, but thou live pleased.
Know then our love, hard by the reverent ruins
Of a once glorious temple reared to Ioue,
Whose very rubbish (like the pitied fall,
Of Virtue much unfortunate) yet bears,
A deathless Majesty though now quite razed,
Hurled down by wrath, and lust of impious Kings
So that where holy flamens wont to sing,
Sweet hymns to heaven, there the daw and crow,
The ill voiced Raven, and still chattering Pie:
Send out ungrateful sound, and loathsome filth,
Where statues and Ioues acts were vively limned
Boys with black coals, draw the veiled parts of nature,
And lecherous actions of imagined lust,
Where tombs and beauteous urns of well dead men.
Stood in assured rest, the shepherd now,
Unloads his belly: Corruption most abhorred
Mingling itself with their renowned ashees,
ourself quakes at it.
There once a Charnel house, now a vast cave,
Over whose brow a pale and untrod grove
Throws out her heavy shade, the mouth thick arms
Of darksome Ewe, (Sun proof) for ever choke
Within rests barren darkness, fruitless drew
Pines in eternal Night: The steam of Hell
Yields not so lazy air: there that's my cell
From thence a charm which Ioue dare not here twice
Shall force her to thy bed: but Syphax know
Love is the highest rebel to our art.
Therefore I charge thee by the fear of all
Which thou knowest dreadful, or more, by ourself;
As with swift haste she passeth to thy bed,
And easy to thy wishes yields: speak not one word,
Nor dare as thou dost fear thy loss of joys
T'admit one light, one light,
As to my Fates
I yield my guidance.
Then when I shall force
The air to music and the shades of night
To form sweet sounds: make proud thy raised delight.
Mean time behold I go a charm to rear
Whose potent sound will force ourself to fear.
Whither is Syphax heaved? at length shall's joy
Hope's more desired than Heaven? Sweet labouring Earth
Let Heaven be unformed with mighty charms,
Let Sophonisba only fill these arms.
Joan we'll not envy thee: bloods appetite
Is Syphax God: My wisdom is my sense,
Without a man I hold no excellence.
Give me long breath young beds and sickless ease
For we hold firm that's lawful which doth please
Hark, hark, now rise infernal tones
The deep fetched groans
Of labouring spirits that attend
Erichtho.
Erichtho.
Now crack the trembling earth and send
Shrieks that portend
Affrightment to the Gods which hear
Erichtho.
Erichtho
Hark hark, now softer melody strikes mute
Disquiet nature: O thou power of sound
How thou dost melt me. Hark, now even Heaven
Gives up his soul amongst us: Now's the time
When greedy expectation strains mine eyes
For their loved object: now Erichtho willed
Prepare my appetite for loves strict gripes
O you dear founts of pleasure Blood and Beauty
Raise active Venus' worth fruition
Of such provoking sweetness. Hark: she comes,
Now nuptial Hymen's enforced Spirits sing
Hark, (Syphax) hark:
Now Hell and Heaven rings
With Music spigh of Phoebus: Peace:
she comes:
Fury of bloods impatient: Erichtho
'bove thunder sit; to thee egregious soul
Let all flesh bend. Sophonisba thy flame
But equal mine, and we'll joy such delight
That Gods shall not admire, but even spite.
Ha, ha, ha,
Light, light,
Ha, ha,
Thou rotten scum of Hell—
O my abhorred heat! O loathed delusion!
Why fool of kings, could thy weak soul imagine
That 'tis within the grasp of Heaven or Hell
To enforce love? why know Love dotes the Fates
Ioue groans beneath his weight: more ignorant thing,
Know we Erichtho, with a thirsty womb
Have coveted full threescore Suns for blood of kings,
We that can make enraged Neptune toss
His huge curled locks without one breath of wind:
We that can make Heaven slide from Atlas' shoulder:
We in the pride and height of covetous lust
Have wished with woe man's greediness to fill
Our longing arms with Syphax well strong limbs:
And dost thou think if philtre or hell's charms
Could have enforced thy use, we would ha' damned
Brain sleights? no, no, Now are we full
Of our dear wishes: thy proud heat well wasted
Hath made our limbs grow young: our love farewell,
Know he that would force love, thus seeks his Hell.
Can we yet breath? is any plagued like me?
Are we? let's think: O now contempt, my hate
To thee, thy thunder, sulphur and scorned name.
He whose life's loathed, and he who breathes to curse
His very being; let him thus with me
Fall fore an Altar sacred to black powers,
And thus dare Heavens: O thou whose blasting flames
Hurl barren droughts upon the patient earth,
And thou gay God of riddles and strange tales
Hot-brained Phoebus, all add if you can
Something unto my misery; if aught
Of plagues lurk in your deep trenched brows
Which yet I know not: let them fall like bolts
Which wrathful Ioue drives strong in into oh my bosom,
If any chance of war, or news ill voiced,
Mischief unthought of lurk, come gift us all,
Heap curse on curse, we can no lower fall.
Lower, lower,
What damned air is formed
Into that shape? speak, speak, we cannot quake,
Our flesh knows not ignoble tremblings, speak,
We dare thy terror: methinks Hell and fate
Should dread a soul with woes made desperate.
Know me the spirit of great Asdrubal
Father to Sophonisba, whose bad heart
Made justly most unfortunate: for know
I turned unfaithful, after which the field
Chanced to our loss, when of thy men there fell
6000 souls next fight of Lybeans ten.
After which loss we unto Carthage flying,
Th'Enraged people cried their army fell
Through my base treason: straight my revengeful fury
Makes them pursue me, I with resolute haste,
Made to the grave of all our Ancestors
Where poisoned, hoped my bones should have long rest.
But see the violent multitude arrives
Tear down our monument, and me now dead
Deny a grave: hurl us among the rocks
To staunch beasts hunger; therefore thus ungraved
I seek slow rest: now dost thou know more woes
And more must feel: Mortals O fear to sleight
Your Gods and vows: Ioues arm is of dread might.
Yet speak shall I o'ercome approaching foes.
Spirits of wrath know nothing but their woes.
My liege, my liege, the scouts of Cirta bring intelligence
Of sudden danger, full ten thousand horse
Fresh and well rid strong Massinissa leads
As wings to Roman legions that march swift
Led by that man of conquest, Scipio,
Scipio
Direct to Cirta.
Hark their march is heard even to the city.
Help, our guard, my arms, bid all our leaders march.
Beat thick alarms, I have seen things which thou
Wouldst quake to hear,
Boldness and strength the shame of slaves be fear.
Up heart, hold sword: though waves roll thee on shelf,
Though fortune leave thee leave not thou thyself.
Stand.
Give the word stand.
Part the file.
give way
Scipio by thy great name, but greater virtue,
By our eternal love give me the chance
Of this days battle: Let not thy envied fame
Vouchsafe t'oppose the Roman legions
Against one weakened Prince of Libya
This quarrels mine: mine be the stroke of fight
Let us and Syphax hurl our well forced darts
Each unto others breast, O (what should I say)
Thou beyond epithet thou whom proud Lords of fortune
May even envy: (alas my joys so vast
Makes me seem lost let us thunder and lightning
Strike from our brave arms, look, look, seize that hill.
Hark he comes near: From thence discern us strike
Fire worth Ioue, mount up, and not repute
Me very proud though wondrous resolute.
My cause: my cause, is my bold heartening odds,
That seven fold shield, just arms should fright the Gods
Thy words are full of honour take thy fate,
Which we do scorn to fear, to Scipio state
Worthy his heart. Now let the forced brass
Sound on.
Iugurth clasp sure our cask
Arm us with care, and Iugurth if I fall
Through this days malice, or our father's sins
If it in thy sword lie, break up my breast
And save my heart that never fell nor's adieu
To aught but Ioue and Sophonisba. Sound
Stern hartners unto wounds and blood, sound loud
For we have named Sophonisba.
So.
Hark hark, he comes, stand blood, now multiply
Force more than fury, sound high, sound high, we strike
For Sophonisba.
For Sophonisba.
Syphax.
Massinissa.
Be twixt us too
Let single fight try all.
Well urged,
Well granted
Of you my stars as I am worthy you
I implore aid, and O if angels wait
Upon good hearts my Genius be as strong
As I am just.
kings glory is their wrong.
He that may only do just act's a slave
My Gods my arm, my life, my heaven, my grave
To me all end.
Give day Gods, life and death
To him that only fears blaspheming breath
For Sophonisba.
For Sophonisba.
Unto thy fortune not to thee we yield
Lives Sophonisba yet unstained, speak just
Yet ours unforced?
Let my heart fall more low
Than is my body, if only to thy glory
She lives not yet all thine.
Rise, rise, cease strife.
Hear a most deep revenge, from us take life.
To you all power of strength: and next to thee
Thou spirit of triumph borne for victory.
I heave these hands: March we to Cirta straight,
My Sophonisba with swift haste to win
In honour & in love all mean is sin. Ex. Ma. & Iug..
As we are Rome's great General thus we press
Thy Captive neck, but as still Scipio
And sensible of just humanity
We weep thy bondage: speak thou ill chanced man
What spirit took thee when thou wert our friend
(Thy right hand given both to Gods and us
With such most passionate vows and solemn faith)
Thou fledst with such most foul disloyalty
To now weak Carthage strengthening their bad arms
Who lately scorned thee with all loathed abuse
Who never entertain for love but use
Scipio my fortune is captived not I
Therefore I'll speak bold truth: nor once mistrust
What I shall say, for now being wholly yours
I must not feign, Sophonisba 'twas she
'twas Sophonisba that solicited
My forced revolt, 'twas her resistless suit
Her love to her dear Carthage enticed me break
All faith with men: 'twas she made Syphax false
She that loves Carthage with such violence
And hath such moving graces to allure
That she will turn a man that once hath sworn
Himself on's father's bones her Carthage foe
To be that cities Champion and high friend
Her hymenaeal torch burnt down my house
Then was I captived when her wanton arms
There moving clasped about my neck, O charms
Able to turn even fate: but this in my true grief
Is some just joy, that my love sotted foe
Shall seize that plague, that Massinissa's breast
Her hands shall arm, and that ere long you'll try
She can force him your foe as well as I,
Lelius, Lelius, take a choice troop of horse
And spur to Cirta. To Massinissa thus
Syphax palace crown, spoil cities sack
Be free to him but if our new laughed friend
Possess that woman of so moving art
Charge him with no less weight than his dear vow
Our love, all faith, that he resign her thee
As he shall answer Rome will him give up
A Roman prisoner to the senate's doom
She is a Carthaginian, now our laws
Wise men prevent not actions, but ever cause
Good malice, so, as liberty so dear
Prove my revenge: what I cannot possess
Another shall not: that's some happiness.
Princes O fly, Syphax hath lost the day,
And captived lies, the Roman legions
Have seized the town, and with inveterate hate,
Make slaves or murder all: Fire and steel,
Fury and night hold all: fair Queen O fly,
We bleed for Carthage, all of Carthage die.
March to the Palace. So. whate'er man thou art
Of Libya, thy fair arms speak: give heart,
To amazed weakness, hear her, that for long time,
Hath seen no wished light. Sophonisba,
A name for misery much known, 'tis she,
entreats of thy graced sword, this only boon,
Let me not kneel to Rome, for though no cause,
Of mine deserves their hate, though Massinissa,
Be ours to heart, yet Roman Generals
Make proud their triumphs, with whatever captives
O 'tis a Nation which from soul I fear,
As one well knowing the much grounded hate,
They bear to Asdrubal and Carthage blood,
Therefore with tears that wash thy feet, with hands
Unused to beg I clasp thy manly knees,
O save me from their fetters and contempt,
Their proud insults, and more than insolence,
Or if it rest not in thy grace of breath,
To grant such freedom, give me long wished death,
For 'tis not much loathed life, that now we crave,
Only an unshamed death, and silent grave
We will now deign to bend for.
Rarity
By thee and this right hand thou shalt live free.
We cannot now be wretched.
Stay the sword.
Let slaughter cease, Sounds soft as Leda's breast, Soft Music.
Slide through all ears, this night be loves high feast,
o'er whelm me not with sweets, let me not drink,
Till my breast burst, O love thy Nectar, think
She is o'ercome with joy.
Help, help to bear
Some happiness ye powers, I have joy to spare,
Enough to make a God, O Massinissa.
Peace,
A silent thinking makes full joys increase.
Massinissa.
Lelius.
Thine ear.
Stand off
From Scipio thus: by thy late vow of faith,
And mutual league of endless amity,
As thou respects his virtue or Rome's force,
Deliver Sophonisba to our hand,
Sophonisba?
Sophonisba.
My Lord,
Looks pale, and from his half burst eyes a flame,
Of deep disquiet breaks, the Gods turn false,
My sad presage.
Sophonisba?
even she,
she killed not Scipio's father nor his uncle,
Great Cneius.
Carthage did.
to her what's Carthage?
Know 'twas her father Asdrubal struck off
His father's head, give place to faith and fate,
'tis cross to honour.
But 'tis just to state,
So speaketh Scipio, do not thou detain,
A Roman prisoner, due to this great triumph,
As thou shalt answer Rome and him.
Lelius.
We now are in Rome's power, Lelius,
View Massinissa do, a loathed act,
Most sinking from that state his heart did keep,
Look Lelius look, see Massinissa weep,
Know I have made a vow more dear to me,
Than my soul's endless being: she shall rest,
Free from Rome's bondage.
But dost thou forget,
Thy vow yet fresh thus breathed: When I desist:
To be commanded by thy virtue: Scipio,
Or fall from friend of Rome, Revenging Gods,
Afflict me with your torture.
Lelius enough:
Salute the Roman, tell him we will act
What shall amaze him.
Wilt thou yield her then?
She shall arrive there straight.
Best fate of men,
To thee.
and Scipio: Have I lived O Heavens,
To be enforcedly perfidious?
What unjust grief afflicts my worthy Lord,
Thank me ye Gods, with much beholdings,
For mark, I do not curse you:
Tell me sweet
The cause of thy much anguish.
Ha, the cause?
Let's see, wreath back thine arms, bend down thy neck,
practice base Prayers, make fit thyself for bondage,
Bondage.
Bondage, Roman bondage.
No, No.
How then have I vowed well to Scipio?
How then to Sophonisba?
Right which way
Run mad impossible distraction,
Dear Lord thy patience; let it maze all power,
And list to her in whose sole heart it rests,
To keep thy faith upright.
Wilt thou be slaved,
No free.
How then keep I my faith?
My death
Gives help to all: From Rome so rest we free,
So brought to Scipio, faith is kept in thee.
Thou darest not die, some wine, thou darest not die.
How near was I unto the curse of man, joy,
How like was I yet once to have been glad:
He that near laughed may with a constant face,
Contemn Ioues frown. Happiness makes us base.
Behold me Massinissa, like thyself,
A king and soldier, and I pray thee keep,
My last command,
Speak sweet.
Dear do not weep
And now with undismayed resolve behold,
To save You, you, (for honour and just faith.
Are most true Gods, which we should much adore)
With even disdainful vigour I give up,
An abhorred life.
You have been good to me,
And I do thank thee heaven, O my stars,
I bless your goodness, that with breast unstained,
Faith pure: a Virgin wife, tried to my glory,
I die of female faith, the long lived story,
Secure from bondage, and all servile harms,
But more most happy in my husband's arms.
Massinissa, Massinissa,
Covetous
Fame greedy Lady, could no scope of glory,
No reasonable proportion of goodness
Fill thy great breast, but thou must prove immense
Incomprehence in virtue, what wouldst thou,
Not only be admired, but even adored?
O glory ripe for heaven? Sirs help, help, help,
Let us to Scipio with what speed you can.
For piety make haste, whilst yet we are man.
What answers Massinissa will he send,
That Sophonisba of so moving tongues
Full of dismayed unsteadiness he stood,
His right hand looked in hers, which hand he gave
As pledge from Rome, she ever should live free
But when I entered, and well urged this vow
And thy command his great heart sunk with shame:
His eyes lost spirit, and his heat of life,
Sank from his face, as one that stood benumbed,
All mazde, t'effect, impossibilities,
For either unto her or Scipio,
He must break vow, long time he tossed his thoughts
And as you see a snow ball being rolled
At first a handful, yet long bold about,
Insensible acquires a mighty globe,
So his cold grief through agitation grows,
And more he thinks, the more of grief he knows
At last he seemed to yield her.
Mark Scipio,
Trust him that breaks a vow?
How then trust thee?
O misdoubt him not, when he's thy slave like me
Scipio,
Massinissa,
General.
King.
Liu's there no mercy for one soul of Carthage
But must see baseness?
Wouldst thou joy thy peace,
Deliver Sophonisba straight and cease,
Do not grasp that which is too hot to hold,
We grace thy grief, and hold it with soft sense.
Enjoy good courage, but void insolence.
I tell thee Rome and Scipio deign to bear,
So low a breast as for her say, we fear.
Do not, do notilet not the fright of Nations
Know so vile terms. she rests at thy dispose
To my soul joy, shall Sophonisba then
With me go bound and wait on Scipio's wheel?
When th'whole world's giddy one man cannot reel,
Starve thy lean hopes, and Romans now behold
A sight would sad the Gods? make Phoebus' cold.
Look Scipio, see what hard shift we make
To keep our vows; here, take I yield her thee,
And Sophonisba I keep vow thou art still free.
Burst my vexed heart, the torture that most racks
An enemy, is his foes royal acts.
The glory of thy virtue live for ever,
Brave hearts may be obscured, but extinct never.
Take from the General of Rome this crown,
This robe of triumph, and this conquests wreathe
This sceptre, and this hand for ever breath,
Rome's very minion: Live worth thy fame
As far from faintings as from now base name.
Thou whom like sparkling steel the strokes of Chance
Made hard and firm; and like wild fire turned
The more cold fate, more bright thy virtue burnt,
And in whole seas of miseries didst flame.
On thee loved creature of a deathless fame
Rest all my honour: O thou for whom I drink
So deep of grief, that he must only think,
Not dare to speak) that would express my woe,
Small rivers murmur, deep gulfs silent flow,
My grief is here, not here, heave gently then,
Women's right wonder, and just shame of men.
And now with lighter passion, though with most just fear
I change my person, and do hither bear
Another's voice, who with a phrase as weak
As his deserts now willed me, (thus formed) speak,
If words well sensed, best suiting subject grave,
Noble true story may once boldly crave,
Acceptance gracious, if he whose fierce,
Envy not others nor himself admires.
If scenes exempt from ribaldry or rage,
Of taxings indiscreet, may please the stage,
If such may hope applause, he not commands
Yet craves as due, the justice of your hands
But freely he protests howe'er it is,
Or well or ill, or much, not much amiss,
With constant modesty he doth submit,
To all, save those, that have more tongue than wit.