THe prudent Prince Solomon, doth say,
He that spareth the rod, the child doth hate
He would youth should be kept in awe alway
By correction in time at reasonable rate,
To be taught to fear god and their parents obey
To get learning and qualities, thereby to maintain
An honest quiet life, correspondent always,
To gods law and the kings, for it is certain.
If children be nuzzled in idleness and ill,
And brought up therein, it is hard to restrain,
And draw them from natural wont evil,
As here in this Interlude, ye shall see plain.
By two children brought up wanton in play,
Whom the mother doth excuse, when she should chastise
They delight in dalliance and mischief always,
At last they end their lives in miserable wise.
The mother persuaded by worldly shame,
That she was the cause of their wretched life,
So pensive, so sorrowful, for their death, she became,
That in despair she would ●lea her sel● wi●h a kinfe
Then her son Barnabas, (by interpretation,
The son of comfort,) her ill purpose do stay,
By the scriptures he giveth her godly consolation
And to concludeth, all these parts will we play.
MY master in my lesson yesterday,
Did recite this text of Ecclesiasticus,
man is prone, to evil, from his youth, did he say
Which sentence may well be verified in us
Myself, my brother, and sister Dalila,
Whom our parents to their cost to school do find
I tarry for them here, time passeth away,
I lose my learning, they ever loiter behind,
If I go before, they do me threat,
To complain to my mother, she for their sake,
Being her tender tidlynges, will me beat:
Lord, in this perplexit you, what way shall I take?
What will become of them? grace god them send,
To apply their learning, and their manners amend.
Here we comen, and here we loven,
And here we will abide abide ay.
Fie brother fie, & specially you sister Dalila,
Sobrenes becometh maids always
What ye dolt ye be ever in one song,
yea sir it shall cost you blows ere it be long,
Be ye not ashamed the treavandes to play?
Losing your time & learning, & that every day
Learning bringeth knowledge of god, & honest living to get
Yea marry, I warrant you, master hodypeke,
Learn a pace sister, and after to spin and sow,
And other honest huswifely points to know.
spin quod ha, yea by the mass, & with your heel's up wind
For a good mouse hunt, is cat after king
Lewd speaking corrupteth good manners s. Paul doth sai
Come, let us go, if ye will to school this day
I shall be shent for taring so long,
Go get the hence, thy mouth full of horse dung.
Now pretty sister, what sport shall we devise?
Thus palting to school, I think us unwise
In summer die for thirst, in winter for cold,
And still to live in fear of a churl, who would?
Not I by the mass, I had rather he hanged were
Then I would sit quaking like a mome for fear
I am son burned in summer, in winter the cold,
Maketh my limbs gross, and my beauty decay,
If I should use it, as they would I should,
I should never be fair woman I dare say.
No sister no, but I can tell,
Where we shall have good cheer,
Lusty companions two or three,
At good wine, ale and bier.
Oh good brother let us go,
I will never go more to to school,
Shall I never know,
What pastime meaneth?
yes, I will not be such a fool.
Have with the Dalila,
Far well our school,
Away with book and all,
I will set my heart,
On a merry pin,
What ever shall be fall.
Lord what folly is in youth?
How unhappy be children now a days?
And the more pity, to say the truth.
Their parents maintain them in evil ways:
Which is a great cause that the world decays,
For children brought up in idleness and play,
Unthrifty and desobedient, continue always,
A neighbour of mine hath children here by,
Idle, desobedyent, proud, wanton and nice.
As they come by, they do shrewd turns daily,
Their parents so to suffer them surely, be not wise
They laugh me to scorn, when I tell them mine advise,
I will speak which their elders & warn them neighbourly
Never in better time, their mother is here by,
God save you gossip, I am very fain,
That you chance now to come this way,
I long to talk with you a word or twain,
I pray you take it friendly that I shall say:
Ishmael your son, and your daughter Dalila.
Do me shrewd turns, daily more and more,
Chide and beat my children, it grieveth me sore.
They swear, curse & scold, as they go by the way,
Giving other ill ensample to do the same,
To gods displeasure, and their hurt an other day,
chastise them for it, or else ye be to blame:
tush tush, if ye have no more than that to say,
Ye may hold your tongue and get ye a way,
Alas poor souls, they sit a school all day,
In fear of a churl, & if a little they play,
He beateth them like a devil: when they come home
Your mestresship would have me lay on,
If I should beat them so oft as men complain,
By the mass with in this month, I should make them lame
Be not offended I pray you, I must say more,
your son is suspect, light fyngered to be.
your daughter hath nice tricks three or four,
See to it in time, least worse ye do see,
He that spareth the rod, hateth the child truly,
yet Solomon sober correction doth mean,
Not to beat and bounce them to make them lame:
God thank you mestres, I am well at ease
Such a fool to teach me, preaching as she please,
Damn ye belie them deadly I know plain,
Because they go handsomely ye disdain,
Then on the other as well would I complain,
But your other son is good, and no thank to you
These will ye make nought by sweet jesu.
Eupliade, my children nought ye lie,
By your malice they shall not set a sly,
I have but one mome, in comparison of his brother
Him the fool praiseth, and despiseth the other.
Well Xantippe, better in time, then to late,
Seing ye take it so, here my leave I take.
Marry good leave have ye, the great god be with you
My children or I be cursed I think,
They be complained on where ever they go,
That for their pleasure they might drink.
Nay by this the poor fowls be come from serle weary,
I will go get them meat to make them mercy,
Lo, lo, here I bringer
What is she now ye have her?
A lusty minion lover.
For no gold will I give her
welcome my honey ay.
Oh my heart.
This wench can sing,
And play her part,
I am yours (and you mine) with all my heart.
By the mass it is well song,
were ye not sorry ye were a maid so long?
Fie master iniquity fie, I am a maid yet,
No sister no, your maiden head is sick:
That knave your brother will be a blab still,
I wiss Dalila ye can say as much by him, if ye wil.
By him quoth ha, he hath whores two or three,
But iche tell your minion doll, by gog's body:
It skilleth not she doth hold you as much
ye lie falsely, she will play me no such touch,
Not she? yes to do your heart good
I could tell you who putteth a bone in your hood.
Peace whore, or ye bear me a box an there,
Here is mine ear knave, strike and thou dare.
To suffer him thus ye be no man,
If ye will not revenge me, I will find one,
To set so little by me, ye were not wont,
Well, it is no matter.
Though ye do ceteri nolunt,
Peace Dalila, speak ye latin poor fool,
No no, but a proverb I learned at school.
yea sister, you went to school till ye were past grace
yea, so didst thou by thy knaves face.
Well, no more a do, let all this go,
We kinsfolk must be friends, it must be so.
Come on come on come on,
Here they be that will do us all good,
If ye use it long, your hair will grow through your
Come on knave with Christ's curse.
I must have some of the money,
Thou hast picked out of thy father's purse,
He, by the mass if he can get his purse,
Now and then he maketh it by half the worse.
I defy you both whore and knave
What ye pryncockes, begin ye to rave?
Come on.
Master Iniquity, by your leave,
I will play a crown or two here by your sleeve
Then be ye servant to a worshipful mon.
Master Iniquity, a right name by saint Iohn.
What can ye say by master iniquity?
I love him and his name most heartily,
God a mercy Dalila, good luck, I warrant thee,
I will shrive you both by and by,
Come on, but first let us have a song,
I am content, so that it be not long.
Gold locks,
She must have knocks,
Or else I do her wrong,
When ye have your will,
Ye were best lie still,
The winter nights be long
When I ne may,
a other assay,
I will take it for no wrong:
Then by the rood,
A bone in your hood.
I shall put ere it be long.
She macheth you sirrah.
By gog's blood she is the best whore in England.
It is knavishly praised, give me your hand,
I would thou haddes such in other,
By the mass rather than .xl. pound brother.
Here sirs come on seven.
A leaven at all.
Do ye nycke us be knave your noly,
Ten mine
Sire mine,
Have at it, and it were for all my father's kine,
It is lost by his wounds, and ten to one,
Take the dice Dalila, cast on.
Come on fy●e,
thrive at fairest,
Gup whore, and I at rest,
Bigogs' blood, I ween god & the devil be against me
If th'one forsake thee, tother will take thee,
Then is he a good fellow, I would not pass,
So that I might bear a rule in hell by the mass,
to toss firebrands at these penyfathers' pates,
I would be porter and receive them at the gates,
In boiling lead & brimstone, I would seethe them each one
The knaves have all the money, good fellows have none
Play brother, have ye lost all your money now?
yea, I thanke that knaue and suche a whore as yu,
'tis no martyr, I will have money or I will sweet,
Bygogs' blood I will rob the next I meet.
yea, and it be my father.
Thou boy, by the mass ye will climb the ladder,
Ah sirrah, I love a wench that can be wylye●
She perceived my mind, with a twink of mine eye,
If we two play boody on any man,
We will make him as bare as Iob anon,
Well Dalila, let see what ye have won,
Sir, I had ten shillings when I begun,
And here is all, every farring,
ye lie like a whore, ye have won a pound,
Then the devil strike me to the ground,
I will feel your pocket, by your leave mestres,
A way knave, not mine by the mass,
Yes by god, & give you this to boot,
Out whoreson knave, I beshrew thy heart root
Wilt thou rob me & breat me to?
In the way of correction but a blow or two,
Correct thy dogs thou shalt not beat me,
I will make your knaves flesh cut I warrant thee,
Ye think I have no friends, yes I have in store,
A good fellow or two percaunce more.
yea, by the mass they shall box you for this gear,
A knave I found thee, a knave I leave the here.
Gup whore, do ye hear this jade?
Loving when is pleased,
When she is angry thus shrewd,
Chief brother, sylter whore,
Two grasses of an ill tree,
I will tarry no longer here,
Far well, god be with ye.
Alas wretched wretch that I am,
Most miserable caitiff that ever was borne,
Full of pain and sorrow, crooked and lame.
Stuffed with diseases in this world forlorn.
My sinews be shrunken, my flesh eaten with pocius
My bones fin of ache, & great pain,
My head is bald, that bare yellow locks,
Crooked I creep to the earth again,
Mine eye sight is dim, my hands tremble & shake
My stomach abhorreth all kind of meat:
For lack of clothes, great cold I take●
When appetide serveth, I can get no meat.
Where I was fair and amiable of face,
Now am I foul and horrible to see,
All this I have I deserved for lack of grace,
justly for my sins god doth plague me.
My parents did tidle me, they were to blame,
In stead of correction, in ill did me maintain:
I fell no nought, and shall die with shame
Yet all this is not half of my grief and pain.
The worm of my conscience that shall never die,
Accuseth me daily more and more:
So oft have I sinned wilfully,
That I fear to be damned for evermore.
What woeful wight art thou? tell me,
That here most grievously dost lament,
Confess the truth, and I will comfort thee,
By the word of god omnipotent:
Although your time ye have misspent,
Repent and amend while ye have space,
And god will restore you to heatlh and grace.
To tell you who I am I dare not for shame,
But my filthy living hath brought me in this case,
Full oft for my wantonness you did me blame,
yet to take your council I had not the grace,
To be restored to health, alas it is past,
Disease hath brought me into such decay,
Help me with your almose, while my life doth last
That like a wretch as I am, I may go my way.
Show me your name sister I you pray,
And I will help you now at your need,
Both body and soul will I feed.
your have named me already, if I dust be so bold
you sister Dalila, that wretch I am,
My wanton nice toys ye knew of old,
Alas brother they have brought me to this shame,
When you went to school, my brother & I would play
Swear, chide, & scodle weth man and woman,
To do shrewd turns, our delight was alway,
Yet were we tidled, and you beaten now & than,
Thus our parents let us do what we would,
And you by correction they kepthe under awe:
When we grew big, we were sturdy and bold
By father and mother we set not a straw,
Small matter for me, I am past,
But your brother and mine is in gread jeopardy:
In danger to come to shame at the last,
He frameth his living so wickedly.
Well sicker, I ever feared ye would be nought,
your lewd behaviours sore grieve my heart:
to train you to goodness, all means have I sought,
But in vain, yet will I play a brotherly part.
For that the soul is more precious, most dearly bought
with the blood of Christ, dying therefore:
To save it first, a mean must be sought,
At god's hand by Chryste, man's only saviour.
Consider Dalila, gods fatherly goodness,
Which for your good, hath brought you in this case.
Scourged you with his rod of pure love doubtless.
that ones knowing yourself, ye might call for grace,
Ye seem to repent, but I doubt whater,
For your sins, or for the misery ye be in:
Earnestly repent for your sin rather,
For these plagues be but the reward of sin,
But so repent that ye sin no more,
And then believe with steadfast faith:
That god will forgive you for evermore,
For Christ'S sake, as the scripture saith.
As for your body, if it be curable,
I will cause to be healed, or during your life:
I will cloth you, and feet you as I am able,
Come sister, go with me, ye have need of relief.
As a judge of the countreye here am I come,
Sent by the kings Majesty, justice to do:
Chief to proceed in judgement of a Felon,
I tarry for the verdict of the quest ●re I go.
Go bailie, know whether they be all a greed or no
If they be so, bid them come away
And bring their prisoner, I would hear what they say
I go my Lord, I go, to soon for one,
He is like to play a cast, will break his neck bone,
I beseech your lordship be good to him,
The man is come of good kynne●
If your Lordship would be so good to me,
As for my sake to set him free,
I could have twenty pount in a purse,
Yea, and your Lordship a right fair horse,
Well worth ten pound.
Get the a way thou hell hound,
If ye were well examined and tried,
Perchance a false knave ye would be spied,
Bribes (saith Solomon) blind the wise man's sight
That he can not see to give judgement right,
Should I be a bribar● nay he shall have the law
As I own to god and the king obedience and awe.
Ye be tied fair enough for running away
If ye do not after me, ye will be hanged I dare say
If thou tell no tales, but hold thy tongue,
I will ●e●the at liberty ere it be long.
Though thou be judged to die anon,
Come on sirs, I pray you come on,
Be you all agreed in one?
yea my Lord, every chone,
Where Ishmael was intided by .xii. men,
Of Felony, burglary, and murdre,
As thenditement declareth, how, where, and when
ye heard it read to you lately in order:
you with the rest, I trust all true men,
Be charged upon your oaths to give verdict directly,
Whether Ishmael thereof be guilty or not guilty,
Guilty (my Lord) and most guilty,
Wilt thou hang my Lord, whoreson noddy?
The lord have mercy upon thee,
Tusshe, hold thy tongue and I warrant the
Thou shalt go to the place thou camest fro,
Till to morrow ix of the clock, there to remain,
To the place of execution then shalt thou go●
There be hanged to death, and after again,
Being dead, for ensample, to be hanged in a chains
Take him away, and see it be done,
At your peril that may fall thereupon.
Though I be judged to die, I require respite,
For the kings advantage in things I can recite,
A way with him he will speak but of spite,
well we will hear you say what you can.
But see that ye wrongfully accuse no man,
I will be lie no man, but this I may say,
Here standeth he that brought me to this way:
My Lordes he lieth like a damned knave,
The fear of death doth make him rave,
His naughty company and play at dice,
Did me first to stealing entice.
He was with me at robberies, I say it to his face,
yet can I say more in time & space,
Thou hast said to much, I beshrew thy horsons face
Hang him my Lord, out of the way,
The thief careth not what he doth say
Let me be hangman, I will teeth him a sleight,
For fear of talking. I will strangle him straight,
Tarry here that list, for I will go.
No no my friend, not so,
I thought always ye should not be good,
And now it will prove, I see by the rood,
Take him and lay him in irons strong,
We will talk with you more ere it be long,
He that layeth hands on me in this place,
Iche lay my brawling iron on his face:
By gog's blood I defy thy worst,
If thou shouldest hang me I were a cursed.
I have been at as low an ebb as this,
And quickly a loft again by gisse:
I have more friends than ye think I have,
I am entertained of all men like no slave:
Yea, within this month I may say to you,
I will be your servant, and your master to.
ye, creep into your breast, will ye have it so?
A way with them both, lead them away,
At his death tell me what he doth say,
For then be like he will not lie,
I care not for you both, no not a sly:
If no man have here, more matter to say
I must go hence some other way.
Ha ha, though I come in rudely be not aghast,
I must work a feat in all the haste.
I have caught two birds, I will set for the dame,
If I catch her in my clutche, I will her tame.
Of all this while know ye not my name?
I am right worshipful master worldly shame,
The matter that I come now about,
Is even this, I put you out of dought.
There is none Xantippe, a cursed shrew,
I think all the world doth her know,
Such a jade she is, and so cursed a queen,
She would out scold the devil's dame I ween.
Sirs this fine woman, had babes three,
Twain the dearest darlings that might be,
Ishmael and fair Dalila, these two,
With the lout Barnabas, I have nothing to do.
Always good, that these tidlynges do might,
Swear, lie, steal, scold or fight:
Cards, dice, kiss, clip and so forth,
All this our Mammy would take in good worth.
Now sir, Dalila my daughter is dead of the pocks
And my son hanged in chains, & waveth his locks
These news will I tell her, and the matter so frame
That she shall be thine own master worldly shame,
Ha ha ha.
Peace, peace, she comweth hereby,
I spoke no word of her, no not I,
Oh mistress Xantippe, I can tell you needs,
The fair wench your dear daughter Dalila,
Is dead of the pocks, taken at the stews,
And thy son Ishmael, that preaty boy
Whom I dare say you loved very well,
Is hanged in chains, ever man can tell.
Every man saith thy daughter was a strong whore
And thy son a strong thief, & a murderer to
It must needs grieve you wondrous s●ro,
That they died so shamefully both two:
Men will taunt you and mock you, for they say now
The cause of their death, was even very you●
I the cause of their death?
Will ye sown, the devil stop thy breath?
Thou shalt die (I trow) with more shame
I will get me hence out of the way,
If the whore should die, men would me blame●
That I killed her, knaves should say.
Alas alas, and weal aways
I may curse the time that I was borne,
Never woman had such fortune, I dare say,
Alas two of my children be forlorn.
My fair daughter Dalila is dead of the pocks,
My dear son Ishmael hanged up in chains,
Alas the wind waveth his yellow locks,
It flayeth my heart, and breaketh my brains.
Why should god punish & plague me so sore?
To see my children die so shamefully,
I will never eat bread in this world more
wt this knife wyl A sley my self by & by
Beware what ye do, fie mother fye●
Will ye spill yourself for your own offence
And seem for ever to exclude gods mercy,
God doth punish you for your negligence:
Wherefore take his correction with patience,
And thank him heartily, that of his goodness
He bringeth you in knowledge of your trespass.
For when my brother & sister were of young age,
You saw they were given to idleness and play,
Would apply no learning, but live in outrage,
And mencomplagned on them every day.
Ye winked at their faults, and tidled them always.
By maintenance they grew to mischief and ill,
So at last god's justice did them both spill.
In that god preseruerued me, small thank to you
If god had not given me special grace,
To avoid evil, and do good, this is true,
I had lived and died in as wretched case:
As they did, for I had both sufferance and space,
But it is an old proverke, you have herd it I think
That god will have se, shall not wink.
Yet in this we may all take comfort,
They took great repentance I heard say,
And as for my sister, I am able to report,
She lamented for her sins, to her ding day:
To repent and believe I exorthed her always,
Before her death she believed that god of his mercy
For Christ's sake, would save her eternally.
If you do even so, ye need not despair,
For god will freely remit your sins all,
Christ hath paid the ransom, why should ye fear.
To believe this and do well, to god for grace call.
All worldly cares let pass and fall,
And thus comfort my father, I pray you heartily,
I have a little to say, I will come by and by.
Right gentle audience, by this Interlude ye may se
How dangerous it is, for the frailty of youth,
Without good governance, to live at liberty,
Such chances as these, oft happen of truth
Many miscarry, it is the more ruth,
By negligence of their elders, & not taking pain.
In time good learning & qualities to attain.
Therefore exhorting all parents to be diligent,
In bringing up their children, yea to be circumspect
Lest they fall to evil, be not negligent,
But chastise them before they be sore infect:
Accept their well doing in ill them reject,
A young plant ye may plat & bow as the will,
Where it groweth strong, there will it abide still
Even so by children, in their tender age,
Ye may work them like waxe● to your own intent
But if ye suffer them long to live in outrages
They will be sturdy and stiff, and will not relent:
O ye children, let your time he well spent,
Apply your learning and your elders obey,
It will be your profit an other day.
Now, for the queens Royal majesty let us pray,
That god (in whose hands is the heart of all Queens,)
May endue her highness with godly puissance alway
that her grace may long reign & prosper in all things
In gods word & justice may give light to all Queens
Let us pray for the honourable council & nobility,
that they may always counsel in wisdom with tranquillity,
God save the Queen, the Realm and commonalty.
It is good to be merry,
But who came me merry?
He that hath a pure conscience,
He may well be merry.
Who hath a pure conscience tell me?
No man of himself, I ensure thee,
Then must it follow of necessity,
That no man can be merry.
Purity itself may pureness give,
you must ask it of God in true believe,
Then will he give it, and none reprove,
And so we may be merry.
What is the practice of a conscience pure?
To love and fear God, and other allure,
And for his sake, to help his neighbour,
Then may he well be merry.
What shall he have, that can and will do this
After this life, everlasting bliss,
yet not by desert, but by gift iwis,
There god make us all merry.