HOW now gallants, what ist? what ist?
The I'll of Guls.
The I'll of Gulls, what should that be?
A play by the name, but come shals quarter ourselves?
If some had had the wit to do so in time, they might have saved the hangman a labour. But come boy, furnish us with stools.
Pardon me sir, my office is to speak a Prologue, not to provide you stools.
And you were the Epilogue to sir—
Fie be not incivill: dost hear youth, prithee what's he that discovered your new found Land, the I'll of Gulls? what is he?
A mere stranger sir.
A stranger? the better welcome: comes he Eastward, Westward, or Northward ho?
None of the three ways I assure you.
Prithee where is he?
Not on his knees in a comer to Apollo, praying that his play may hold in a good hand at Passage, nor on the stage amongst gallants, preparing a bespoke Plaudite; but close in his study writing hard, to get him a handsome suit against Summer.
And where sit his friends? hath he not a prepared company of gallants, to applaud his jests, and grace out his play?
None I protest▪ Do Poets use to bespeak their Auditory?
The best in grace do, and but for that, some that I know, had never had their grace in Poetry till this day.
Then must our Author looké for a certain disgrace, for he is altogether unfurnished of such a friendly audience.
Then he must lay his trial upon God and good wits But why doth he call his play The I'll of Gulls? it begets much expectation.
Not out of any dogged disposition, nor that it figures any certain state, or private government: far be that supposition from the thought of any indifferent Auditor: and the argument being a little string or rivulet, drawn from the full strain of the right worthy Gentleman Sir Philip Sydnies well known Arcadia, confirms it: only a Duke, to make trial of certain experiments, retires with his retinue into a nameless desert. Now as well for fashion sake, as that all those which have to do in that desert, are gulled in the reach of their hopes; therefore he calls it, (and as he presumes, not improperly) The I'll of Gulls.
Out a question he hath promised thee some fee, thou pleadest so hard for him, but and he be a right Poet he will never perform it. But what method observes he in his Play, ist any thing Critical? Are Lawyers fees, and Citizens wives laid open in it? I love to hear vice anatomizd, and abuse let blood in the master vain, is there any great man's life charactered in't?
None I protest sir, only in the person of Dametas, he expresses to the life the monstrous and deformed shape of vice, aswell to beget a loathing of abuse, as that his villainy may give the greater lustre to the virtuous dispositions of trueborn gentility.
All that's nothing to me, and there be not Wormwood water and Copperes in't, I'll not like it, should Apollo write it, and Rosius himself act it.
Fie upon thee, thou art too too critical: is there any good bawdry in't, jests of an ell deep, and a fathom broad, good cuckolding, may a couple of young-setters-up learn to do well in't? Give me a Scene of venery, that will make a man's spirits stand on their tiptoes, and die his blood in a deep scarlet, like your Ovid's Ars Amandi, there flows the true Springhead of Poetry, and the very Crystal fount of Parnassus.
chaste ears would never endure it fir.
chaste ears? now deafness light upon them, what should chaste ears do at a play?
'tis strange now, I am of neither a both your opinions, I like neither railing nor bawdry: no, give me a stately penned history, as thus: The rugged winds, with rude and ragged ruffs, etc.
Fie upon't, more fustian; I had rather hear two good bawdy jests, than a whole play of such teare-cat thunderclaps.
Alas Gentlemen, bow ist possible to content you? you will have railing, and invectives, which our Author neither dares, nor affects: you bawdy and scurrile jests, which neither becomes his modesty to write, nor the ear of a generous Auditory to hear: you must have swelling comparisons, and bombast Epithets, which are as fit for the body of a Comedy▪ as Hercules shoe for the foot of a pygmy: yet all these we must have, and all in one play, or 'tis already condemned to the hell of eternal disgrace.
Look to't, if there be not gall in't, it shall not pass.
If it be not bawdy, 'tis impossible to pass:
If it be both critical and bawdy, if it be not high written, both your Poet and the house too, lose a friend of me.
Nay I beseech you sir, if you be his friend, stand so to him still, for he hath too many enemies already, in whose judgements, he and his labours stand excommunicate, as though unworthy to present themselves in this assembly.
Enemies? nays foot than there's some hope in his play, for Envy never works but against desert and merit. If he be envied there's some worth in him, and i'll see out his play for that only.
Faith and I'll see an act or two out, but I tell you aforehand I cannot see it out.
Not see it out? your reason.
Fore God I lay in bed till past three a clock, slept out my dinner, and my stomach will toll to supper afore five, therefore you must pardon me.
Either see it all or none; for 'tis grown into a custom at plays, if any one rise (especially of any fashionable sort) about what serious business soever, the rest thinking it in dislike of the play, though he never thinks it, cry mew, by Iesus vild; and leave the poor heartless children to speak their Epilogue to the empty seats.
Why dost think thy audience like a flock of sheep, that one cannot leap over a hedge, but all the rest will follow? they have more of reason in them then so.
Well, I'll sit out the play, an't be but to avoid that sheepish imputation, but see it be bawdy, or by this light I and all my friends will hiss.
You should not deal gentlemanlike with us else.
THe misery that waits upon the pen
Of the best Writers, judge it Gentlemen,
Let them express the very soul of wit,
And want Opinions voice to countenance it,
'tis like the idle buzzing of a Fly,
Herd, not regarded: wretched Poetry!
If he write mirth, 'tis ribaldry, and mean,
Scorned of chaste ears: If he compose a Scene
Of high writ Poesy, fitting a true stage,
'tis counted sustian: If Poetickerage
Strike at abuse, or ope the vein of sin,
he's strait informed against for libelling.
Neither quick mirth, invective, nor high state
Can content all, such is the boundless hate
Of a confused Audience: Then we
That scarcely know the rules of Poesy
Cannot scape check. Yet this our comfort is,
The wise will smile to hear th'impartial hiss.
We neither brag, nor tremble, faint nor entreat,
Our merits nothing, yet our hopes are great,
Yet this our Author bade me boldly speak,
His play shall pass, let Envy swell and break,
Detraction he scorns, honours the best,
Tanti for hate; thus low to all the rest.
WElcome gallants, welcome honoured bloods; the reason that we have unclothed us of our princely government in Arcadia, and have to do with this private retirement here in this desert I'll, you shall find in that schedule, only thus much for public satisfaction: 'tis not strange to you, that the choicest treasure Nature endowed us with, is mined up in the veins of my two daughters: how much their quiet, and the smooth stream of our government in Arcadia, was troubled by the impetuous concourse of untruly suitors, is familiar with your knowledge; this to avoid, I have for my Image there in my absence appointed my brother, and undertook this private retirement.
Why my Lord, are you so covetous of your daughter's beauties, that their perfections shall be a means to hinder their preferment?
Rather to further it fair Queen: they are the only pearls of our age, and to see them well set in honourable and well-befitting Marriage, is our wishes happiness.
To which effect we have sent a general challenge
To all the youthful bloods of Africa,
That whosoever (borne of princely stem)
Dares foot the bosom of this desert I'll,
(The stage where I'll perform this lover's prize)
And by his wit and active policy,
Woo, win, entice, or any way defeat
Me of my charge, my daughters of their hearts,
Shall with their loves wear my imperial crown
Wreath of their conquest.
A prize, a prize, rare work for Fencers.
What coward would not venture a cracked crown for such a booty?
To that intent our Island is fenced in
By sea and land, and at each corner built
A Castle for defence, which like great men,
Do overlook Arcadia: over which,
We have appointed Captains. More to desire,
Is more than we are willing to discover.
Well then sister, I see we must to haphazard for husbands.
God send me one with a good face and I care not.
Love an't be thy will, send me one with a fair table in his forehead, like Time.
Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to trick his forehead, a country-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder how you dare undertake such a peremptory challenge against all comers, considering you have been so long troubled with ●● Ague.
An ague? what ague?
Why your quotidian, Dametas the Court surfeit, he that dwells in your eye, like a disease in your blood.
And the Presence were not exceeding empty-stomackt, it would never digest such Almes-basket-scraps, the very fall and garbage of gentry; fie upon him, he becomes the great chamber worse than a Gentleman-usher with wry legs.
He is the most misshapen suit of gentility that ever the Court wore.
Had he not been of my fathers own making, I should have condemned his tailor for an exceeding botcher.
If you retain the love of children, or the duty of subjects, express it in your obedience, we know Dametas loves us▪
As Captains and Courtiers do old widows, for profit and preferment.
In sign whereof we make him.
Nay, you have bestowed too much of the making of him up already.
The very making of him up, has stood you in more than the whole outside's worth.
In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to express our love, and to give the world public note of his loyalty, we create him your Guardian.
How father, my Guardian?
I minion, yours.
Do you hear father, bid him bespeak spectacles, for my fingers have vowed to have a blind match with his eyes.
Well said Haggart, I'll make your proud heart stoop to the lure of obedience. But come, by this time our challenge is published, and our gallants wits sweeting in the field of Invention, and it behoves us not to rest unexercised.
So to our lodge, in the mean time be it known,
Our breath has power to raise, or cast men down.
Now Captain Observation, times bawd, thou that hast kept the Age's door, whilst upstart baseness crept into the bed of greatness, what dost thou think of this change?
That it pleased the Duke, and becomes not subjects to examine his actions.
That's no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly be better instructed why the Duke broke up his Court in Arcadia, and removed it into this Island.
I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the general rumour is, that out of the freeness of his spirit, he hath sent a challenge to all his neighbour Princes, that whosoever (within a twelve month) can defeat him of his daughters, shall with their loves enjoy his Dukedom, the garland proposed for the victors.
Your words throw sense into me, and that's the cause the Island is so surely guarded with Watchtowers, over which ourselves and other Captains have the charge.
And to the end that not affection, but desert may prove victor, are the two Ladies so narrowly observed, the one never out a the eye of her Father, the other continually in the lodge of Dametas, the Duke's chief director.
If inquisitive be not too bold a guest, what do you think of Dametas?
As of a little hillock, made great with others ruins.
Your comparison holds, for by report, his avarice has unmade many to make him up.
How did he first stumble on the Prince's favour?
As some do upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as truth says, the Prince having one day lost his way, wand'ring in the woods, found this Dametas, affected his discourse, took him along to the Court, and like great men in love with their own doings, countenanced his defects, gave him offices, titles, and all the additions that go to the making up of a man worshipful.
I cannot commend the Duke for raising him, nor yet praise him, that he proportions not his carriage answerable to his fortunes.
Your thoughts and mine are twins in that: but I hear the warning bell, some strangers are arrived.
Le's to our office then, and conduct them to Dametas, whose custom is to spit and hem, whilst his Scribe Major takes their Examinations.
Manasses, how dost like my play at Tennis?
You play well, but you lose still.
Policy Manasses, policy; for when any man upbraids me with my gettings at Court, I may swear truly, I have lost more than I have got by't.
By the Tennis-court I think you have.
If by any Court, 'tis enough to save mine oath. But what do our spruce-witted gallants say of my bounty?
Faith sir, according to the proportion of it, little or nothing, they say 'tis a bankrupt, and dares not show his head.
Then let 'em leave jesting at me, though it please the Duke for some few good parts that he sees in me, to make me his familiar, I scorn to be public, or every Courtier's companion: but who comes here?
The Captains of the watchtowers? what news with you?
A couple of petitioners, an't like your worship.
Had I best take their Petitions, Manasses?
O in any case, though you never peruse 'em, 'tis the only course in request.
Fellows, deliver your petitions to my Scribe Major, and dost hear? put 'em up Manasses, they may be wrongs to us.
And they be, I hope they be not the first wrongs I have put up for your worship.
That fellow's pocket is like a Tailor's hell, it eats up part of every man's due: 'tis an Executioner, and makes away more innocent petitions in one year, than a redheaded hangman cuts ropes in an age.
Now, what are you sirrah?
A poor soldier, an't like your Worship.
Poor soldiers do not like my worship, they are bad members.
Then if they had a woman to their judge, they should be sure to be cut off, for they cannot endure bad members in a Commonwealth.
What are you?
A poor scholar, an't like your Worship.
Poor scholars do not like our worship neither, they rail against rich Cormorants, they are bad members too.
Cut them off both sir, and make the land an Eunuch.
I'll take order with 'em I warrant thee; and I may have my will, i'll neither ha' poor scholar nor soldier about the Court.
The next way to make it the I'll of fools.
What's he talks of fools there? why how now sir, know you to whom you speak?
Cry your worship mercy, I had forgot your authority.
But I remember well enough I warrant you; I command you in my name and the Dukes, to attend your guard, and you regard me no more than a careless Lawyer doth an undone client, but i'll inform: the Duke shall know, out, pack.
Command your slave's sir, we are gentlemen.
Why so I hope are we sir, and of the best and last edition, of the Dukes own making.
Cry your authority mercy, will you discharge us of these passengers?
You are discharged, about your business.
Bad fate, that wrong should set his foot on right, And true borne Eagles stoop to this base Kite.
What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, i'll have more officers, and one shallbe to keep scholars and soldiers out of the Court, for they dare not come in the great Chamber already, for want of good clothes. But gods me Manasses, go tell the Duke I must speak with him.
Presently sir, I'll go fetch the head to give the foot a posset: and my master had wit to his villainy, he would make an excellent dish for the hangman.
Right worshipful.
I sir, I know my place is worshipful; I tell thee Knave, I could hang thee by my patent, if it were granted once, i'll tell thee how it runs, it allows me 24. knaves, 6 knights, 10. fools, 13. felons, and 14. traitors by the year, take them how, why, when, and where I please.
I do not think the Duke will ever grant it.
Why not grant it? why should you think he will not grant it? Such another word and i'll send you to Limbo instantly.
We thank you good Dametas. Discover themselves.
I hope you'll take reasonable bail for our forth coming.
The case is altered with you since you came out of Arcadia.
My honourable friends, Iulio and Aminter, myself and the best ability of my power, lies at your service.
You see how confidently we presume upon your Letters promise, in furthering us to attain the lover's prize.
The Duke's daughters are your own, and in a word thus shall you attain them, some 3 days hence I will appoint a hunting, to which I will invite the Duke & both his daughters: in this hunt will I upon some sudden occasion divide the train, and having singled out the two Does, I hope you have wit enough to strike.
To strike, how mean you?
As headsmen do, off with their maidenheads, or if the Duke offer resistance, off with his crown too.
That were violence, and clean opposite to the intent of the challenge.
Come ye are shallow, to't vi & armis, to't, I'll be your second, think of the Crown, have my Letters travailed for you, my wit wrought for you, and my invention sweat for you, to possess you of your loves, and seat you in the Dukedom, and come you now with 'tis violence, and against the intent of the challenge? I am ashamed to hear you.
Nay Dametas, and your resolution be so forward, ours shall overtake you, we doubted lest the preferments your Lord hath heaped upon you, had smothered your affection to us-ward.
That was the father that begot the doubt in us, you will appoint the hunt.
Sever the Duke, divide the train, and then—
We have your meaning.
Put it in execution then, but first entertain some new disguise, as at our next meeting I'll inform you. Adieu, I shall think long till I see you again.
As a Lawyer doth for his Client for a second fee. Here's no Iudas?
Yes, and a damned one too, for he would betray and sell his Master.
'tis common in such base fellows, such Court-spiders, that wove their webs of flattery in the ears of greatness, if they can once entangle them in their quaint-treachery, they poison them strait.
They are like unnecessary worms, whom the sun of greatness creates of the gross and slimy multitude, as soon as they recover strength, they eat into the credit of true borne gentry, undermine and work out the true nobility, to enroot and establish themselves.
And in the end, like Esop's starved snake, having leapt the sweet milk of greatness, made themselves strong in authority and friends, they turn their stings of envy into their preservers bosom.
The example lives in this Dametas, who notwithstanding the Duke hath raised him to that height that he looks equal with himself, yet for the base hope of incertain government, he offers him to sale; but let his treason live to the last minute.
For my part I'll make that use of him that Physicians do of poison, use as much of him as serves for mine honest intent, and cast down the rest, as unfit for any necessary employment.
Let our carriage in this attempt put on no show of violence, either to the Duke, or his daughters.
And let our discourse go so smoothly apparelled, that it move not the patience of the most tender ear.
About it then, though his intent be base,
Our enterprise shall wear a noble face.
Arcadia, thou heaven, within whose sphere
The star that guides my motion is fixed,
I court thy gracious bosom with a kiss
For this admittance: in thine amorous arms,
Fair Violetta, fairer than the flower
That christened her, and graced her with that name,
Does play the wanton:
Only her Father like a covetous churl,
Owner of that unvalewed Diamond,
Hath made this desert I'll th'unwilling chest
In which he locks her. But the fair advantage
Of this large Challenge, and my stars to friend,
Aided by this disguise, I shall break open
His iron Casket, and enlarge my hope.
This way she went sir, this way.
But I say this way, I would thou shouldst know, we old Courtiers can hunt a Coney, and put her to the squeak, and make her cry out like a young married wife of the first night.
For more help, as some of them have done: But there she is.
I'll upon her presently: dost hear me sirrah? thou vessel of infirmity, woman, and by thy outside little better than one of the wicked, come hither and show thyself before us, show thyself before Dametas.
Dametas? Lisander then dissemble,
For he's the man must work thy entrance.
What art thou? speak.
My mother is the Queen of Amazons,
Myself a Virgin, married unto Arms,
And bold achievements, who have paced the world
In quest of fair Antioste my sister:
And turning homeward, the unconstant winds,
And wrathful Neptune cast me on this shore.
And what's your business now you are landed?
My business is in private with the Duke.
The Duke is busy, and shall speak with no body.
I beseech you sir.
'tis no beseeching matter I assure you.
No, never beseech for the matter, for except you could beseech with the tongue of Angels, 'tis to no purpose with him.
'tis strange, I have heard thy master is a very good man where he takes.
True, where he takes he is, but he takes nothing of you, and therefore look for no kindness from him.
Good, and dost thou take after thy Master?
No Madam, I take commonly afore my Master, for where he takes, he takes all, and leaves nothing for me to take.
Oh, I feel your meaning.
Let my master have some feeling of yours, and he'll prefer your suit.
'tis not the Duke's pleasure Petitioners should buy their access.
All's one, 'tis my master's pleasure, and usual fashion.
And I must maintain the fashion. Worshipful Dametas, my late shipwreck as you see, hath made a defeat both of my friends and treasure; notwithstanding, Fortune hath referved me one jewel, which if I might request your Worship in love to accept, and be a means to work my admittance to the Duke, I should become a true debtor to your love.
Well Madam, though I hate nothing more than a man that takes bribes, yet pressed by your importunity, and that you tender it in love, lest I might seem too nice to withstand a Lady's favour, I'll wear it for your sake, and if the Duke be not too busily employed, work your access.
So doing, you shall perform the office of a dear-bought friend.
How quickly the tide's turned! but do you hear Madam? though I take neither afore nor after my Master, yet take my counsel, and do not trust my master: if you have a suit to the Duke, keep it to yourself, for if you trust my master with it, he'll prefer it for you, but he'll beged for himself.
That's plain cozenage.
Fie no, 'tis cunning in him, marry 'twould be thought little better than cozenage in a country gentleman: but he returns.
Madam, I have been earnest, very earnest with the Duke for your admittance.
And have you wrought it?
I have, marry you must think I bestowed much labour in't.
'Tmay be you did.
'Tmay be you did: and look a scance like a Apothecary's wife pounding Colliquintida; have my brains sweat for this?
Why the jewel is right Dametas, had I but an Ass that would sweat me such pearl.
An Ass? and sweat such pearl? I'll bar her admittance, here take your jewel, the Duke will allow no admittance, and I will keep you back.
Keep me back? thou couldst do no more and I were a poor man's petitioner.
And I'll do so much being a rich petitioner.
You cannot sit, you Court spaniel, you unnecessary mushroom, that in one night art sprung out of the root of greatness, I have bought my admittance, and I'll have't in despetto del fato.
I must admit her, these Ladies are so inward with our tricks, there's no good to be done upon them: well Madam, your admittance is open, will you follow?
With all my heart sir, I'll be the blind man and poor petitioner, and thou shalt play the Court-spaniell with the silver bell, and lead me into the Presence.
Court-spaniell? mum: I'll bosom what I think, Old Gib's not blind, I see, although I wink.
BOy, how dost like me in this attire?
As the Audience doth a bad play, scurvily.
Is it not strange a Prince should be thus metamorphosed?
Not so strange as the Metamorphosis of Ajax, an't like your Grace.
Grace you Aggot, hast not forgot that yet?
No, and yet 'tis a wonder I ha' not, grace being so seldom used, I'm sure they say none at some Ordinaries, for at sitting down they cannot intend it for hunger, and at rising up, they are either drunk, or have such mind a dice, they never remember, my Lord then.
No more Lord, sirrah.
Indeed there are too many already, but is not this strange, that rich men should forsake their titles? master then.
Your will sir.
You have left many Countries behind you in seeking your friend Lisander, and yet you cannot find him.
True sir.
I have seen much gold lying upon Lombard's stalls, and could never finger penny of it.
Very well.
Nay, 'twas not well sir.
What conclude you then?
That you were best sit down, and see what you have got by your journey.
I have seen a face as beautiful as heaven.
That's nothing, a prisoner sees the face of heaven itself, when he looks but out at the prison-gate, i'll stand to't, a man were as good be hanged, so a meet a handsome hangman, & a strong rope, as be in love.
Your reason for that.
Marry this sir, hanging is end of all troubles, and love the beginning: Nay further, I think a Lover cannot be saved, for he is of all religions.
Your proof for that.
This; he thinks with the Atheist there's no God but his Mistress, with the Infidel no heaven but her smiles, with the Papist no Purgatory but her frowns, and with the family of love, holds it lawful to lie with her, though she be another man's wife.
So sir, what follows?
Servingmen sir, the Master goes in before his wife, and the Servingman follows his master.
Sirrah forbear, I must meditate.
As the Usurer before he parts with money, meditates upon the assurance.
If Violetta's presence ha'not quenched
The memory of all things but herself,
I should be more familiar with that face.
I have left my country to seek my friend.
And I my country and my friend for love.
And in the search of him have lost myself
In the strange Region of a woman's eye.
In love, and in Arcadia.
As much as heaven transcends the humble earth,
So towers her praise her face differs as far
From others, as a glow-worm from a star.
She is a Princess that my soul affects.
And rich.
Half heir unto this Dukedom.
And she were whole heir to the four moral virtues, 'twere nothing: when shall I see the time that men will love for virtue, or a rich heir marry a poor wench without a portion? never I think.
Had not my friend Lisander.
What of me?
Left me in Thrace.
We had never met in love,
His syllables betray him. I arrest you.
At whose suit?
Not at his Tailors in any case, for there's no greater stitch to a younger brothers conscience, then to pay for a suit of apparel when 'tis worn out.
Lisander or his ghost?
Demetrius,
Or some illusive tenant in his shape?
Unkind, why didst thou lean my company?
For that which made the amorous Gods leave heaven, ●or love: but why is Demetrius thus disguised?
For that which would make a jackanapes a Monkey, and he could get it: a tail.
Peace rogue.
Why wag, is thy master in love?
Faith sit he hath entered his action in Cutids' Court, and means to proceed in the suit it should seem.
Why didst not take my counsel in thy choice?
Because I feared a chiding, for doubting their honourable thoughts would not have not have consented to my effeminate attempts, I stole this secret course, and manner of disguise, as best helping to access, which it hath begot, now what access will bring forth, I commit to unborn industry.
It cannot but be prosperous: only the strict observance of our loves hinders the passage of our hopes.
Indeed that's not the least hindrance, yet the Duke himself, and my acquaint disguise hath removed it out of my way, who not only takes me for a woman, but hath allowed me for my love's companion.
Fortune deals kindly with thee, I am as far from access to my love, as when I was in Thrace.
Dametas is the oystershell that holds thy pearl, our wits must fish for him.
Will the Cod's head bite?
Like an old Usurer at a young heir's inheritance, and I have it ready hooked for him: and here he comes, my plot is to prefer thee to his service.
Prithee do, and i'll serve him in his right kind.
Dametas, my love is yours.
Which madam I am as proud of—
As a malcontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new fashion.
To be round, I have a suit to you in the behalf of this woodman
To me sweet blossom, though I be somewhat strict in mine office, I cannot be stony to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawn?
Petition?
Your only way to move a foot by: Humbly complaining to your good worship, O 'tis most patheticke, & indeed, without money, can do just nothing with authority.
Come hither stripling, whose son wert thou?
I am not so wise a child as you take me for, I never knew my father.
Didst not know thy father?
A common fault, his betters forget themselves when they grow rich, then blame not him to forget his father.
What was his name?
If I may give credit to my mother, they called him Menalchas, who on his deathbed made me his heir, with this charge, to seek your worship's service, and gave me this gold as a remembrance to purchase your favour.
Gold? him.
Now doth my Master long more to singer that gold, than a young girl, married to an old man, doth to run her husband ashore at Cuckold's haven.
Well, I could do for this fatherless youth.
As many Executors and Overseers have done, cheat him of his portion, and then turn him out of doors a begging.
But for I have the Gardianship of the Princess, I dare do nothing without the consent of the Duke.
Come, come sir, your worship shall not refuse him.
Well then I woe not, but 'tis for your sake I assure you.
Meaning the gold.
What shall I call thy name?
Dorus an't like your worship.
Ah, good Dorus, be an honest youth Dorus, reverence your Master, and love yourself: be sure to get under me, and you shall lose nothing in my service. Madam, the Duke and Duchess expect you at the hunt, and await your coming at Diana's oak.
●e attend them presently, be a good servant Dorus.
'twill be his own another day Madam.
In the mean time let it be yours to lead the way.
My service doth attend you.
As the Pursuivant doth the prisoner for a double fee.
Welcome slave to a slave, a fair presage,
The hope of love sweetens loves vass lage.
Now and Dametas be the mettle he was stamped for, a right villain.
And he be not, hang him.
Nay he deserves hanging too if he be: but will you trust him?
Yes as far as I see him, and he that trusts him further, my trust is he will be deceived.
Indeed, he that will prove false to his maker, will be true to no man.
Yes, for the present time, like a bawd to him that gives most
That's not for love.
Yes of the money: he that looks for other love in this age— This is the place his Letter speaks of, and here he comes himself.
Why so lo: now is the web of my hopes upon the Loom of perfection, and in this quench of lashes Aminter & Iulio,
See and see not, all mum, you know your cue,
The game's your own, if you can hunt it true.
Dametas, were thine cares ever at a more musical banquet? how the hounds mouths like bells are tuned one under another like a slothfulness, the speed of the cry outran my sense of hearing.
Cross over the Forest to Diana's oak my liege, & there your grace advantaged by the height of the ground, shall not only at pleasure hear, but be eyewitness of their musical contention.
Thanks good Dametas, be thy directions our wife's convoy.
Where is his highness Dametas?
At Adonis' bower Madam, where he expects your presence, to see the fleshing of a couple of Spartan hounds, in the wasting blood of the spent Dear.
Thanks good Dametas, mine eyes would not be good friends with my feet, should they not bring 'em to that kingly sport.
Sweet Ladies, to save you the expense of much breath, which must be laid out in the purchase of the game, I have provided you this stand, from whence your eyes may be commanders of the sport: such sport as you little dream of.
We are your love's debtors kind Dametas.
As I love virtue I pity these poor beasts,
These Sylvan commoners, to see what tasks
Our covetous Foresters impose upon them,
Who not content with impost of their breath,
(Poor hearts) pursue them smiling to their death.
'twas the end of their creation Madam.
So was the end of ours to live in peace,
And not to tyrannize on harmless beasts,
But Foresters, like Images set forth
The tyranny of greatness without pity,
As they the Dear, so covetous wealth pursues
The trembling state of their inferiors,
And to clasp up the volume of their sins,
They drink their blood, and clothe them with their skins:
Then cease to press poor beasts with tyranny,
You love your lives, think they are loath to dye.
You are too tenderhearted to be a good huntswoman Lady.
And some of you too hardhearted, but leaving this discourse of hunting, have all our gallantry of Lacedaemon and Greece, spent the vigour of their wits, that not one dares venture.
For our love's sister, you may see, the properer women, the worse luck.
Tush you shall have suitors, fear not Madam.
No at any hand sister, for with a fear it comes.
Then i'll fear of purpose, because I would have 'em come.
And they do not, they are notable cowards.
Then let them keep away still, for I have vowed my maidenhead shall never do homage to the bed of a coward.
Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this discourse, till I step up to the top of the hill▪ and make discovery of the game.
Let your return be speedy good Dametas.
I'll put on wings and fly.
Out of the Court, and the whole Country shall have a good riddance.
So, he hath put'em fair to the stand, le's issue & surprise them.
Be resolute and sudden.
Aminter and Iulio issue out, and bear them away.
Murder, treason, rescue, help.
Yes much rescue, much help, much Dametas: why so, this jest was drawn home close to the head, it cannot choose but cleave the very white of our hopes, the Duke's wit: to thy tackle good wit, some sudden sea room, or our stratagem is run a ground.
Tell me Dametas, was not the Dear a prodigal? did he not spend his breath freely amongst us?
And his blood too my liege, but did you observe how the hounds like politicians nosed out the game?
True: and coming to the loss, Melampus, but where are our daughters?
Did you observe that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound is ever horse cheered or hollow, yet he kept time too.
Certain Dametas, but where are our daughter's man?
Busy my Lord under a brake bush, disputing of the virtue of sweet water, and ground ivy.
What cry of treason's that Dametas?
Pray God no danger sets upon my daughters,
Seek out our wife, i'll haste unto their rescue.
And my sword un-employd? allegiance says nay to that my ●i●ge, I am for the adventure myself, if they be surprised (I am a mad man) your grace shall hear more: if not (I am the more sorry) your grace shall hear more too: make peace with your thoughts till my return, and doubt not their recovery.
Speak, where's the Duke?
Here my Gynetia. What mean these weapons, are our daughters ●afe?
As a thief in a mill father, we thank our redeemers▪
The more my grief, were you surprised then madam?
Yes faith Dametas.
And how sweet Ladies, and how were you rescued?
Being surprised, this gallant Amazon
Pressed to their rescue, had you seen what worth
She and this woodman spent in our defence,
Wonder would ha' bereft you of all sense,
She rais'd her sword with such a manly grace,
As had not her mild sex controlled my thoughts,
I could have fall'n in love with her high worth.
You overprise us madam, not our desert,
But the weak spirits of our opposites,
Gave lustre to the dimness of our worth.
It pleaseth your modesty to lesson it,
But it shall still live great in our regard. What woodman's that?
My follower, my liege.
What ere he be, he hath deserved our love,
Fellow be near us, and for this desert,
Performed against those Traitors to our blood,
Under thy master we give thee an attendant,
To guard the life and safety of our daughter.
Thank you good father, who ever loose by the bargain,
I have got me a servant by the match: wilt serve me fellow?
In the best I can.
In heart your fellow, though in show your man.
I'll try your duteous service: I command
Your knee to kisse the ground, your lip my hand.
Pardon me Madam.
Here's hot love no doubt,
I may command my man, and go without.
Truce to this airy war, these paper bullets
Better become a Closet then a Park,
The Forest music is to hear the hounds
Rend the thin air, and with a lusty cry
Awake the drowsy Echo, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled sound,
Then to the Court, our Forest sport being done,
A second chase of lovelier sports begun.
If fortune cross not what our hopes pursue,
Our fears have met their deaths, our loves their due.
Crossed in my hopes, the Ladies rescued, and the Princes like cravens beat out of the game-place, my invention must turn traveller for more stratagems: what & I should discover their plot to the Duke, attach 'em for traitors, and beg their lands for my labour, though they be my friends, 'twere a pretty parcel of policy.
All things are lawful that do profit bring,
A wise man's bow goes with a twofold string.
Did ever two Princes meet such strange changes in their loves? now we have wrought our admittance, and in a manner got 'em into our possessions, our hopes like false fires having brought us within ken, vanish, and leave us out of all comfort.
That the Duke should dote upon thee for a woman, makes for our purpose, but that the Duchess should be enamoured on thee for a man, is preposterous.
Whether my valour shown in the rescue of the Ladies, or the ardent glances her daughter's beauty steals from my eyes, give her thoughts encouragement, I know not, but her hopes stand confident I am a man, and for that cause am I barred from access.
I weigh thy cumbrances by my own, for though by the duke's allowance I am her privileged attendant, yet such is the devilishnes of Dametas, that I cannot joy so much access as to confer with her.
I can compare my lord & his friend to nothing in the world so fitly, as to a couple of water buckets, for whilst hope winds the one up, despair plunges the other down, whilst I, like a Harlakene in an Italian Comedy, stand making faces at both their follies.
Well, since the shape of our proceeding grows so monstrous, le's cast our inventions in a new mould, and having so firm a foundation as this disguise to build upon, le's draw the model, and raise the whole frame of our attempts anew.
Indeed, lovers should be conditioned like tyrants, who having the aim of a crown in their eye once, run violently over all lets that intervent their course, and so must we.
And so will we, my resolution is already bend, and if I shoot not, the next level I take, Love I beseech thee break thy bow about mine ears, and strike thy horns in my forehead, for married men to hang their cape on.
I have met a means fit for my purpose already: Mopsa Dametas only daughter is overshooes in love with me, & to her ●le feign extreme ardour of affection, and make her the shadow under which I'll court the true substance of my divine Hippolita.
About it then, I'll sweat my invention to death but I'll overtake thee; but here comes one of my Burrs▪ I must bear his importunity, for no reasonable denial will brush him off.
Zelmane.
My Liege.
My thoughts come like a sail afore the wind, swollen big with news, and thine ears the midwife must deliver me of this burden: my Duchess is sick, heartsick for thee Zelmane.
For me? why my Lord, I am no Rosa solis, nor Aqua mirabilis to recover sick folks.
Shall I be short with thee? My lady's in love with thee.
With me my Lord?
With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accusers, her very looks write Sonnets in thy commendations, she carves thee at board, and cannot sleep for dreaming on thee in bed, she's turned sun-riser, haunts private walks, and like a disgraced Courtier, studies the Art of melancholy.
Now alas good Lady.
Nay never pity her, she deserves none, rather le's bend our endeavours to entangle her more. To see the kindness of fortune, who fearing we should be acquainted with solitude in this our 12 month retirement, hath begot a domestical merriment, and made our own thoughts Actors in't, and as bad a Poet as I am, I'll ha' one scene in't of my own invention.
Dametas will storm at that, for he cannot abide Poetry should be countenanced; but how is't my Liege?
'tis ready plotted already, and that the Duchess may not find thee unprovided when she comes to court thee.
Court me, court a woman my Liege?
Why that's the very happiness of the jest, but in any case confess thyself a man.
A man my Liege? I ha' no colour for't.
Tush, I'll furnish thee, say thou art a Prince, no matter who, and hast to do with this disguise of purpose to court my daughter Violetta.
Is this scene of your own inventing my Liege?
Mine own i'faith, and to confirm't the rather, use more oft and private conference with my daughter, interchange discourse & amorous dalliance, oh 'twill set my Duchess affections afire, to think her rivalld by her daughter, and give us smooth passage to our love.
How occasion plays the wanton with me. Well my liege, do but you work my admittance to your daughter, and ●le bestow all the art I am worth in courting her; and see, as if Fortune had a hand in our Comedy, she hath entered the Duchess just at her cue, shadow yourself in your Ark, and leave me to give her entertainment.
Forget not to personate some Prince in any case.
I warrant you, I'll play the Prince with much art.
This way he went, on this sweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his enamoured tread,
The depressed flowers have strengthened their sweet
By stealing amorous kisses from his feet.
Absolute Poet. Penelope was a ballad-maker to her.
Oh do not fly my presence, gentle wanton stay,
What have I found you, faith you runaway
I'll tie a chain about your waist for this,
And make you buy your freedom with a kiss.
Fie Madam, this courtesy is more than needs.
Be not so coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee less kind than senseless elements,
Thou never walkest, but the enamoured air
Like an officious lover bears thy train,
Whilst the cool wind doth with his velvet wing
Fan the thin air upon thy sweaty cheek,
Stealing sweet kisses from thy silken lip.
Shield this vain breath, beat at some Lady's ear.
But you are none, you are not, come you are not.
Your valour, looks, and gesture show you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where war and fortune dwell in majesty,
Your private walks, and varied passions,
Your glances to my daughter, sure you are not,
And my firm love is confident you are not.
There's a lover of a right temper, she'll outface the name of her sex instantly.
Well Madam, sith your observation hath discovered me, upon promise of your secrecy, I confess myself a man.
Good, excellent, how truly she takes my directions.
I knew my judgement could not be deceived,
Nor durst proud love have done me so much wrong
To cast my thoughts unto a woman's eye.
Love durst not, good, good, excellent, what next?
But Madam, now I am known to you, what further request you?
Exchange of looks, and freedom of thy bed,
Thy presence, thy embracements, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long lain sick.
Thank you good wife; nay, and a Duchess long to give her husband the horning, let it never grieve Butchers to do homage at Cuckold's haven.
Well Madam, to give content to your affections, and in a strong hope you will mediate my suit to your daughter, sort out but fit time and opportunity, and master your desires.
And he were a man now I might be rarely tupped.
Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiss I seal thee mine.
And I confirm't with this.
Rare, rare, rare, she's his, sealed and delivered in the presence of her husband.
Now lest my husband should suspect our love.
Now, what for that now?
Hear a good jest, persuade him thou art a woman.
That's not to do now Madam, for he as confidently believes and ardently courts me for a woman as you for a man.
Good, excellent, maintain that humour still,
Seem coy, look nice, and as we women use,
Be mild, and proud, embrace, and yet refuse.
Excellent virtues in a woman.
I prithee do, 'twill be a scene of mirth
For me to quote his passions and his smiles,
His amorous behaviour, and how his eye
Will beget strange variety of looks,
And shoot 'em into thine; but the chief sport's this,
To see an old man with a young man kiss.
To see an old Duchess a young Lady kiss.
Now the plot packs, the scene's all comical,
I cannot speak for laughter, to see these women,
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themselves, silly conceit.
To take me for a man.
And arm herself
To laugh at me, make jests and scoffs at me,
But soothe her humour, the revenge she'd throw
Upon my head, shall fall on her own brow.
Upon you both, so, so, so, how greedily their inventions like bugles follow the sent of their own gullery, yet these are no fools, God forbid, not they: but to the drift, mirth in my warm blood sits Laughing at this division of their wits.
Wilt believe me sister? I never eat a cherry, but it puts me in mind of a husband, it kisses my lips with such a harmless prettiness.
Now in good deed lo I love 'em a lise too, I think I shall never ha' my belly full on 'em.
Of what, not of husbands Violetta?
No, of cherries Hippolita, but take heed of 'em, they be a very filling meat, and dangerous things for us Maids I can tell you, we may surfeit after 'em presently.
Surfeit after what, a husband?
ay, and after cherries too Hippolita.
I warrant you sister, an old Lady in Lacedaemon taught me a preservative against that.
For the love of cherries what?
Marry this it was, still said she, betwixt every cherry said she, be sure to crack a stone said she.
Then let me alone, I'll crack a couple of stones betwixt every cherry, rather than surfeit on them.
You must take heed you crack not too many too, for you may surfeit of the stone as well as of the cherry.
Nay and they be such dangerous things, I ha' done with 'em.
So have I too for this time, but sister, is it not a strange kind of servile liberty that we live in here in Arcadia?
For all the world as Englishmen keep their felons, and Italians their wives, we never stir abroad without our laylors.
And for what cause forsooth? only to keep us from marriage.
Sure it is either some high content, or extreme discommodity, that our father debars us of it.
By this stone, me thinks I long like a woman with child, till I know the difference betwixt a Maid and a wife.
Well, god a mercy of all cursen souls, I was near the knowledge on't last night I can tell you.
O that I had been with thee I might ha' been so too: for the love of marriage how?
Why thus: As I lay slumbering in my bed,
No creature with me but my maidenhead.
Is that a creature?
Some maintain it is,
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiss;
Others, whose speech seems near akin to truth,
Say 'tis a passion, bred i'th' heat of youth,
Some call't a sigh, and some an amorous groan,
All differ in the definition:
But in th'allowed opinion of most,
'tis never truly had till it be lost.
But lying thus alone, as Maids do use,
Me thought I dreamt, as Maids can hardly choose,
And in my dream me thought 'twas too much wrong
A pretty Maid should lie alone so long;
With that a gallant comes, gallants can do
Much with young Maids.
And with old women too.
He courted me once, and again, and thrice,
'tis virtue to say nay, to be too nice
Agrees not with my humour, yet some say,
We Maids wish things, to which we answer nay;
Briefly, me thought he stood so long a wooing,
I rather could ha' wished he had been doing
Some other business, yet at last we'greed,
'twere strange if earnest suters should not speed.
In what agreed you?
In our Wedding-ring,
Time, place, and hour, indeed in every thing;
The day appointed, and each thing in frame,
I thought each hour an age until it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in sight,
I thought it ten times longer till 'twas night.
At dinner time me thought I swelled with pride
To be drunk to by name of Mistress bride,
Music spoke loud, no delicates were scant,
Yet still me thought another thing did want,
For sure thought I, there's something in a man
That wife's love well, hope brides may wish it than.
Long looked for comes at last, to bed we go.
Would I had dreamt I might ha' done so too.
My bed-mate turned, and as he would ha' spoke,
I sweat with fear, and in that fear I work,
But seeing my kind bedfellow was gone,
Lord how it chafed me that I waked so soon,
One minutes dreaming longer, I had tried,
The difference 'twixt a virgin and a bride.
Otwould ha' vexed a Saint, my blood would burn
To be so near, and miss so good a turn.
And so did mine too I warrant you, nay though I be but a little pot, I shall be as soon hot as another.
You should not be my sister else.
Nor my mother's daughter neither.
And in good earnest we are not fathers 〈…〉 amiss.
Are you advised of that, and I'faith tell●… what think you of your servant Dorus.
As of a sweet Almond in a rugged shell, the Sun in a cloud, or a wealthy Diamond in a rock, indeed clean contrary to the world, he wears the worst side outward, and is much better than he seems: but what think you of your manly Amazon??
Nay the sport is I know not what to think, Zelmane's humour would afford project for a pretty Court Comedy, my father courts her for a woman, and as I fear she is, my mother dotes upon her for a man, and as I wish he were, and that with such an ardour of affection, that I could find in my heart to turn my mother out of the company, and play the lovers part myself.
How ever man or woman, the jest holds currant in one.
I know not what knavish motion hath had to do with my thought, but my mind tells me that your servant Dorus and my Amazon, are other then they seem: and here he comes.
Why how now madam, Ladies gadding, is this the obedience of your father's charge.
Pardon Mistress Miso, 'twas my doing and the Dukes.
But the Duchess will like neither the Duke's doings nor yours, neither in this case I can tell you. The Duke stays your coming, and yet the Duchess is very desirous on't, my husband is in the next Arbour to man you. For you Lady, my presence be your privilege.
Miso should be either a hang man or a Herald, for she never comes amongst us, but she quarter's our company and arms.
Excellent beauty, & therefore more excellent, because situate in so fair a creature.
You are a merry man Dorus, but all this cannot make me love me, how say you mother doth he?
Marry let him choose daughter, when I was as thou art—
You were as she is? but faith madam Mopsa, I perceive my servant Dorus bears a month's mind to you, be not so strait laced to him.
Strait laced? sgod mend me I am not laced at all, am I Dorus? no in sooth, I go wide open wensday, I never lace myself but on sundays, & that for fear I should burst with eating of plumporridge.
I mean let fall some comfortable looks on your suitor.
Sgod mend me, i'll let fall or take up any thing I have to do him good.
Why that's kindly said, and Dorus your love is very ambitious, to climb so high as the beautiful Mopsa.
O are you advised of that, 'twould make a horse break his bridle to hear how the youth of the village will commend me, oh the pretty little pinking nies of Mopsa says one, oh the fine flat lips of Mopsa says another, and then do I bridle my head like a malt-horse thus, set mine arms a kembo thus, wreath my neck and my body thus, wink with one eye thus, and spread my peacocks tay le as broad as the proudest minx of 'em all.
These extraordinary graces must not want admiration, but where's your mother?
Speak softly in the Lobby there, for waking my Ladies foisting hound.
Godsme, my mother's stealing of a nap.
Nay, she cannot be said to steal a nap, for the noise she makes herself would discover her theft: but Dorus sith your fortunes are poor, you should study to ennoble your deserts, and beget effects worthy to court and win your Lady's acceptance.
Lass madam, I choose no better moderator than yourself, betwixt me & my unworthy services, suppose yourself though but a Cuckoo compared with this sweet singing Nightingale, should be sued to by a Prince like me, I mean like me in love, for love in Princes & peasants admits comparison: suppose Demetrius should in like disguise court you as I do, Mopsa, sigh for you, as I do, for Mopsa, kneel to you thus, as I do, to Mopsa, lay down his life to you, as I do, to Mopsa, prefer your good before his own, as I protest I do, Mopsa's, suppose he should show you the known mark of his neck, to assure you he were Demetrius, as I do this to Mopsa, to witness I am the son of Menalchas, could your disdain stand out like Mopsa's?
What a keenes' necessity sets upon the edge of invention, trust me Mopsa your servant speaks well, and if he can prove himself the man he speaks of, and my wishes well hope, Demetrius, you have no reason to think scorn of him.
Why what should I do Madam? my mother tells me I must not say as I think.
I am no counsellor, but should Demetrius in like disguise court me, thus would I embrace him, thus seal my affections with a kiss, and thus argue: think not Demetrius that the clouds of baseness could so muffle thee, but that the Sun of valour shined through them long since, and in regard of thy serviceable duty in concealing, and unprevented policy in thus making known thy love, sort but out fit opportunity, and in despite of all guardians strict observance, go where thou wilt, the worth of Demetrius shall draw Hippolita, this would I vow, and this will I perform.
And were I Demetrius and you Hippolita, I would deceive Dametas, outreach Miso, forswear Mopsa, and forsake Arcadia, to share the fortunes of divine Hippolita.
And what should I do then?
I do but speak in the person of Demetrius, and under Hippolita shadow what I intent to the rare, and never enough wondered at Mopsa, the black swan of beauty, and madg-howlet of admiration.
Do not you flout me Dorus? and you do not, provide a Priest and i'll marry you, and my father and mother shall never know on't.
Manasses is the man.
And i'll be the woman, whosoever say nay to't, little dreams my mother of what we have done.
'Tmay be she did, for she sighed & groaned much in her sleep.
'tis well she was so quiet, for she eat pease-poridge to breakfast, and they'll make mebreake wind in my sleep like a horse, and see as the devil will have't she wakes, and here comes my father, no words and ye love me.
Why God a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the servant of Dametas, and i'll prefer thee for't.
You were worse than the devil else, for they say he helps his servants, than you may do little and you cannot help yours.
Will you break your jests against the bars of your chamber window, and clear the green? the Duke is coming to bowls, and I would not for half mine office you should be a rub in the way of his patience: daughter and wife, conduct her to the Lodge, Exit. And Dorus, make you haste about your business.
I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly placed, You will condemn me for my too much haste.
Why so: this 'tis to be in authority: Inferior persons, I and the Princes themselves, fly from my presence, like the chirping Birds from the sight of the Falcon: my very breath like a mighty wind blows away inferior Officers (the Court rubbish) out of my way, and gives me a smooth passage: I am the morning star, I am seldom seen but about the rising of the Sun: indeed I am never out of the Duke's eye; and here he comes.
Doth our match hold?
Yes, whose part will you take?
Zelmane's.
Soft, that match is yet to make.
Le's cast a choice, the nearest two take one.
My choice is cast, help sweet occasion.
Come, here's agood.
Well, bettered.
Best of all.
The Duke and I.
The weakest go to the wall.
I'll lead.
I'll follow.
We have both one mind.
In what?
In leaving the old folk behind.
Well jested daughter, and you lead not fair,
The hindmost hound, though old, may catch the hare.
Your last bowl, come.
By the faith a me, well lead.
Would I might lead you.
Whither?
To my bed.
I am sure you would not.
By this air I would.
I hope you would not hurt me, and you should.
I'd love you sweet.
Sour, so I heard you say.
A cept it then.
Of what acquaintance pray?
Of loves and mine.
Daughter, your bowl wins one.
None of my Maidenhead father, I am gone,
The Amazon hath won one.
Yield to that.
The cast I do.
Yourself?
Nay scrape out that.
Whose is it yet?
The Dukes: play smooth and fine.
The smallest help that is will make you mine.
Me yours?
You mine, for though the cast I lose,
I ha' won your love.
Much: in my other hose.
Come, the last mark; this cast is worth all the rest,
The leader as the follower.
Bad's the best.
I win her for ten Crowns, and there they be.
I take your lay.
A match 'twixt you and me.
I'll be your half.
That were unkindly done.
Pardon me mother, I'll bear all or none.
I ha' won you Madam.
Me?
I mean your bet.
Then take your win, I'll not die in debt.
Madam believe me, I am, as I protest, a Prince, my name Lisander.
Look to the Duke's standing Madam.
So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.
Thus clouded as you see for your love, my soul speaks in my tongue; I appointed this match at Bowls a purpose to acquaint you with it.
Bar stealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Here's one would steal a piece of flesh to night.
Dear Madam.
No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as you can express with your tongue, and as far as my mother's jealousy would give me leave, answered it with kind looks: your bias stands wrong mother.
Why? it stands toward Zelmane's.
Hath it stood so long?
All the game through.
Then all your game's bowled wrong: furnish you with necessaries befitting an escape, and my will shall be as ready to take wing as yours: put in a cast now mother, or the game is gone indeed.
Whose is the throw?
Ours, till the last bowl came;
But that hath won't 'em clear, both cast and game.
Our win, come, a kiss and bate the rest.
What, do you kiss in eanest or in jest?
In earnest in good truth.
Troth kindly said,
Take heed you kiss not out your Maidenhead.
In jest?
In earnest.
'tis the fashion,
Much in request among our nation.
To kiss away their Maidenheads?
Now and then,
And being gone, to kiss it back again:
For lovers indentures ne'er are fairly drawn,
Until the Maidenhead be left in pawn,
As earnest of the match, so mothers said,
And so will daughters do when mams be dead.
What pawn their Maidenheads?
Yes, and lose 'em too.
And you maintain that fashion?
Signior Noe.
Lay by this homebred mirth, and prepare your ears to entertain strangers.
Strangers? why father strangers are as welcome to me, as mine own Countrymen, if they bring good manners and civil humanity in their company; otherwise, they are like foul weather, come afore they be sent for.
Dametas? nay then we shall have news enough, for he never comes into the presence, but he brings a whole sack full of lies, of news I should say.
Welcome Dametas: what officious fellow is that?
A pure well willer of your Majesties, and a follower of mine.
O 'tis Manasses, and he could make arms as well as he mars legs, he would grow in great request for Heraldry: What's your news?
These Lacedæmonians, subjects to your Majesty, having a message to deliver to your Majesty's instruments of hearing, commonly yclept ears.
How, hath any one here clipped ears?
Sweet Feminine, clip off the tail of thy discourse with the Scissors of attention, as I say, these Lacedæmonians have chosen me their tongue.
Of a long tongue thou speakest very little.
That proves me no woman, for they speak over much.
What grievances oppress them? briefly speak.
Merchandise (my Liege) through the avarice of purchasing Officers, is wracked with such unmerciful impost, that the very name of Traffic grows odious even to the professor.
towns so oppressed for want of wont and natural liberty, as that the native Inhabitanus seeme Slaves, and the Foreigners free Denizens.
Offices so bought and sold, that before the purchaser can be said to be placed in his office, he is again by his covetous Patron displaced.
Common Riots, Rapes, and wilful Homicide in great men's followers, not only not punished, but in a manner countenanced and applauded.
Indeed since your Majesty left the Land, the whole body of the Commonwealth runs clean against the bias of true and pristine government.
And your honourable Brother, like a ship tossed upon the violent billows of this insurrection, by us entreats your Majesty's Letters of speedy reformation, for fear the whole Kingdom suffer inevitable shipwreck.
Which after short deliberation with our Council, yourself shall return. Dametas' reward their travels with two hundred Crowns: in the mean time, let them taste the best entertainment of our Court.
Proud Rebels, they shall see that a Duke's frown,
Can at his pleasure, turn Rebellion down:
See them rewarded.
Manasses, see the fellows entertained; I must attend of the Duke.
Boy, see the fellows entertained; I must wait of my Lord.
Fellows, be as merry as you may, I must follow my M.
So, here's Petitioners attendance right; good words, and short Commons: But 'tis not their entertainment we come for. I made a simple shift to get entertainment into the Court.
Well Cupid, pray for our lives, for and we were gone, I know not where thou wouldst have two such statesmen again.
His Commonwealth could not stand without us; and that his Mother knows well enough: and he sends no better success than we had at our hunting, he loses a friend of me.
'Twill not sink in my thought yet, but that old musty slave Dametas played the slave with us.
Would I could prove it once: but since we are again admitted our Realm, shall we be idle? somewhat we'll do, though they'll give us but small thanks for our labour.
The Duke shall not say his Daughters are so ill beloved, but we'll change a thrust or two with his intent for'em.
T'would put the poor Wenches out of conceit with themselves, and there should not be some contending for them.
We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim 〈…〉.
We are i'faith: Invention could not weave, 〈…〉, Suspicion to deceive.
Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a Lovers 〈…〉 must be ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base 〈…〉 where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky of 〈…〉, and overpeere all hindrances:
The Ladies themselves are willing.
Ready to embark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.
Let me alone to work it then▪ But here comes my Boy.
'Twere more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.
I am of thy belief in that Boy.
Would my Lord were so too sir.
Suppose I were Sir, what then?
I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I believe you would make me your heir.
Is that part of your belief?
A principal point sir.
Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never be saved by't.
I am sure I cannot lose by't. I believe further, that many Knights, and some Ladies, were never of Gods making.
Of whose then, wag?
I'll tell you: the Minters coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Herald's maketh Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.
And what do Ladies?
They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many Gentlemen.
Ladies are good workwomen too, then?
far better than any Tailor: they'll make you an end of a suit, especially a Court suit, when all the Tailors in a Country know not how to set a stitch in't▪
I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.
I had no faith, should I say you were not?
Well, what a Knave?
In a Knave's belief sir.
Because in yours?
Do you say't, and i'll swear it, my Lord.
No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.
That confirms them to be good sir.
Your reason for that, sir?
Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.
Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this highway of circumstance; I sent you for Manasses.
The learned Scribe attends you.
Will you fall off sir?
Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking.
Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must borrow—
Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security and pawns.
'Tis not money (Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.
Good counsel is worth good money Madam.
Thou shalt be well considered; there's twenty Crowns in earnest.
Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest, if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put me in trust to execute it.
Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lord's daughter Madam Mopsa, are man and wife.
Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have a will to be Ladies, like my Lord's wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to be a wife, as my Lord's Daughter. But what good can I do in this?
Overy much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation, the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing that you have tane orders.
That I have: I have ta'en order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these two beagles, Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of love, you would ha' me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.
We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim deceives not.
We are i'faith: Invention could not weave,
A quainter web, Suspicion to deceive.
Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a Lover's thoughts must be ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base air where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky of Invention, and overpeere all hindrances:
The Ladies themselves are willing.
Ready to embark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.
Let me alone to work it then, But here comes my Boy.
'Twere more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.
I am of thy belief in that Boy.
Would my Lord were so too sir.
Suppose I were Sir, what then?
I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I believe you would make me your heir.
Is that part of your belief?
A principal point sir.
Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never be saved by't.
I am sure I cannot lose by't. I believe further, that many Knights, and some Ladies, were never of Gods making.
Of whose then, wag?
I'll tell you: the Minters coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Herald's maketh Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.
And what do Ladies?
They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many Gentlemen.
Ladies are good workwomen too, then?
far better than any Tailor: they'll make you an end of a suit, especially a Court suit, when all the Tailors in a Country know not how to set a stitch in't.
I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.
I had no faith, should I say you were not?
Well, what a Knave?
In a Knave's belief sir.
Because in yours?
Do you say't, and i'll swear it, my Lord.
No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.
That confirms them to be good sir.
Your reason for that, sir?
Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.
Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this highway of circumstance; I sent you for Manasses.
The learned Scribe attends you.
Will you fall off sir?
Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking. Exit.
Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must borrow—
Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security and pawns.
'Tis not money (Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.
Good counsel is worth good money Madam.
Thou shalt be well considered; there's twenty Crowns in earnest.
Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest, if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put me in trust to execute it.
Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lord's daughter Madam Mopsa, are man and wife.
Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have a will to be Ladies, like my Lord's wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to be a wife, as my Lord's Daughter. But what good can I do in this?
O very much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation, the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing that you have tane orders.
That I have: I have ta'en order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these two beagles, Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of love, you would ha' me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.
You are in the right.
And you in the wrong, i'll keep your jest, but in any case take back again your earnest: i'll not purchase my Lord's displeasure with your gold.
Thy Lord shall never know't.
Oh sir! though my Mahath but bad eyes, he hath exceeding long ears: and though a Foreigner may play with a Citizens wooden Dagger, I would not wish any to jest with a Courtiers steeled Sword; 'tis seldom drawn but it draws blood.
Tush man, be not so timorous, my credit shall countenance thee: be not an Ass, make use of thy time: thy master's service is no heritage; the world knows he gets under the Duke, thou art a fool, and thou wilt lose under him: there's a hundred Crowns for thee; tush man, thy betters will strain courtesy with allegiance for a bribe
Madam, could you to every one of these Crowns give me a Kingdom?
What then?
I should have more ground then half the Kings in Christendom: here's my hand, I'll do't: my M. is my M. and I love him; but my gold's my God, and I honour it: I'll do't; the time and place?
Soon in the evening at Adonis' Chapel. Art resolute?
As your Adamant: think you 'twas fear made me keep out? no 'twas hope of these flattering sweet lipped drabs. I fear to marry my Lady's daughter? no nor to go to bed with her neither, Why, I have counterfeited his hand and seal. He has been content with me, to come nearer to him, at his entertainment of the last Ambassador, when he was heat with drinking of healths. As I led him to his Chamber, I nimd●his Chain, and drew his Purse, and next morning persuaded him he lost it in the great Chamber at the Revels. He puts me in trust with his whole estate: he buys Manners, I purchase Farms: he builds houses, I pluck down Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the Commons: he beggars the Court, and I beggar the whole Country.
These are notable knavish courses. What breeding hast had?
Very good breeding sir: My great Grandfather was a Rat-catcher, my Grandsire a Hangman, my father a Promoter, and myself an Informer.
Thou wert a knave by inheritance.
And by education too: but bawdy Informations growing stale, I gave up my cloak to a Broker, and crept into credit for a Gown, and of Manasses a penurious Informer, I turned Copy, and became Manasses, a most precise and illiterate expositor.
Were you a Reader then?
And a Writer too Bully, I set some of my Parishioners wives such copies, as their husbands might cast their caps at it, but could never come near.
But and you used such a high and elevate style, your auditories low and humble understandings should never crawl over't.
Tush, I could fashion the body of my discourse fit to the ear of my auditory: for to cast Eloquence amongst a company of Stinkards, is all one as if a man should scatter pearl amongst the hoggish animals yclept Swine: no, I had paraphrastical admonitions of all sorts; Some against covetous Landlords, and that would I squirt amongst beggarly Tenants; Some against Usurers, and that would I throw in at Prison Grates amongst prodigal Bankrupts; Some against the pride of the Court, and that honeys the ear of the Citizen; Some against the fraud of the city, and that's cake and cheese to the Country; Some against Protestants, and that plumps the lazy Catholic; against Papist and Protestant, and that fattens the ranke-witted Puritan; against Papist, Puritan, and Protestant, and that tickles the ear of the luxurious Atheist.
Why you never light upon any Atheists, do you?
Oh very many.
In the country perhaps, and the out-skirts of the City.
In the very bosom of the City, and by your leave, here and there one in the Court too: But we fit 'em all; for indeed we wand'ring Lights have (as other Tradesmen have) Commodities of all sorts and prices.
How do they come by them?
As many do by Offices, steal into them ere the Duke be aware of 'em. Some buy 'em at Booksellers stalls, but the best they bespeak of Poets.
Me thinks Poets of all men should not edify, they are so envious.
One to another, to nobody else: a Proud Poet is for all the world like a Punk in request, covetous of many Clients, when she hath more than she can handsomely play off: You shall have some Poet (Apollo's Vicar especially) write you a Comical, Pastoral, Tragical, Musical history in Prose, will make the Auditors eyes run a water like so many water-spouts; I had one of them myself, and your ears be in case, I'll give you a taste on't; his argument was fet out of the Poem called, The lost sheep, and thus it is.
Prithee be brief.
Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake the best men in the parish, for commonly they sleep the beginning, because they love not division: but to the lost Sheep. Beloved, you must imagine this Sheep was a Sheep, a lost Sheep, a Sheep out a the way; but my dear Flock and loving Sheep, whom like a careful Shepherd I have gathered together, with the whistle or pipe, as it were of mine Eloquence, into this Fold of peaceful Community, do not you stray, do not you fly out, do not you wander, do not you lose yourselves; but like kind Sheep and valiant Rams, I speak to you the better part and head of my Flock: As I say, you shall see the valiant Rams turn all their horns together, and oppose themselves against the Wolf, the hungry Wolf, the greedy Wolf, the Lambes-devouring Wolf, the Wolf of all Wolves, to defend their Ewes and young ones. Durst you lay all your heads together, and with the horns of your Manhood defend your Families, your own Wives, and your neighbour's children: Was not this stinging gear?
A good Sheepish admonition.
The fitter for my audience; while you live have a care to fit your audience.
Thou speakest like a Christian, prithee what Religion art of?
How many soever I make use of, I'll answer with Piavano Orlotto the Italian; I profess the Duke's only.
What's his reason for that?
A very sound reason: for says he, I came raw into the world, and I would not willingly go roasted out: so close up the stomach of your discourse with that dry answer, and every man about his business.
You'll be mindful of tomorrow night?
As your Lawyer of the Term, or your Landlord of the Quarter-day.
Why so: the mettle I must forge my plot on, lies a warming in the furnace of my brain; and I must fashion it instantly, for fear it burst with heat. Give my conceit way, for here comes one must help to proportion it.
How now Demetrius, what wind hath blown up this storm of melancholy? thy countenance was not wont to be thus cloudy; Whence proceeds this sudden alteration?
From mine own hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-starred nativity should continue thus opposite.
Art crossed in a suit at Court? or what's the matter? speak.
I'll acquaint your Honour: I hope no other ear over-heares us. Under Diana's Oak I found an inscription upon a stone, which told me, that wealthy Aristomones sometimes brought into Arcadia, had there under hid a massy sum of treasure.
Under Diana's Oak? Dorus shall have my daughter Mopsa: no more words on't, and thou lovest me Dorus: smother thy golden hopes a day or two; thou shalt have Mopsa, but ●le have all the Gold, then marry my daughter to some great man, though he be poor, 'tis the fashion: I'll be nobly allied what ere it cost me: shalt be my Son in law Dorus. have an eye to the Princess, fall close to my daughter Mopsa,
Court her and spare not: now begins the sport,
Kiss her, do, kiss her; thou shalt pay sweetly for't:
I can gull you, know what fair words can do,
I'm an old Knave, and a young Courtier too.
So, so; how violently he devours his bane, and steals himself into the order of Gullery: me thinks I see how betwixt hope and fear he sweats in his practice, and like a foolish dreamer, casts how to lay out his wealth before it comes in▪ So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife; and as the Devil would hast, here she comes.
Dorus, how now Dorus? What time a day is't with you?
What time a day soever it be with me, 'tis sleeping time with my Lord, I am sure of that.
Sleeping time Dorus, what dost thou mean by that?
Nay nothing, he is troubled with a kind of malady called Insurrectio carnis.
How, a dish of Crevices? nay and that be the worst, good enough; I am glad a falls to Fish, for he was given to Flesh a late too too bad.
Mass I thought as much, for I saw him go a angling.
I hold my Ladyship, to some strumpet.
Life a jealousy, I think you are a witch, 'twas so indeed.
Nay I thought as much; he was wont to kiss me, and do all kindness a man could do, till he came to the Court, and now he will not lie with me for sooth, and why? 'tis the Court fashion: he will not love me, and why? 'tis the Court fashion: I must not come near him at his downe-●ing, nor his uprising, etc. And this be the Court fashion, would I were an honest woman of the Country again, be Courtiers who list: I, I, Dorus, I tell thee in tears, he hath not dealt by me as a husband should do.
'tis nothing to me, I cannot do withal Madam, would I could.
Yes marry mayst thou Dorus; thou mayst, and shalt do withal too and thou wilt: but as thou lookest to enjoy my daughter Mopsa, acquaint me with the old Foxes starting hole.
That's past my cunning, the old Fox has more holes than one to hide's head in: But not to go long about the bush with you.
No good Dorus, I do not love a man should go long about my Bush: what is she for a woman?
I know not what she is for a woman, marry I fear she's little better than a whore for your husband; hark in your ear, she's Manasses wife.
Manasses wife? marry fire master gunner, a Puritan turned Punk: Gods my precious. I'll slit her nose, as I am a Lady will I; is she the party you wot on?
Yes faith Madam, she is the Mare the man rid on.
I'll spoil their sport, saddle my Mule there, have an eye to the Princess; shaltha my daughter, an't be but to spite him withal, faith Fox I'll ha' you out of your hole, or I'll fire you out.
Nay that will do no good, but for your own good Madam, take heed you do not scold.
Why, may not a Lady scold Dorus?
Scold? O in no case, 'twill mar a Lady's beauty clean, and make her look as hard-favoured as any ordinary woman.
Godamercy for that Dorus, I'll not lose my beauty for twenty on 'em: saddle my Mule, bring me my chopping-knife, I'll geld the lecherous Goat, and mince his Trull as small as herbs to the pot. This is not scolding Dorus, is't?
No this is tolerable.
Nay then I care not, saddle my Mule I say, let her pray God her feeling be good, for as I am a Lady, I'll not leave her an eye to see withal, and yet I will not scold neither.
Oh take heed of that at any hand. So, so, so; now it begins to quicken, me thinks I see already how she runs a-tilt at the wench's eyes, calls the Maid Bawd, the woman whore, and her husband Lecher; and when all comes to all, like an Irish wolf, she barks at her own shadow; but committing her and her Ass to their wild-goose chase, now to my sweetheart Mopsa, for she's all the blocke's last in my eye to stumble on; and God bless my wits, for the fool haunts me.
Dorus, where's my Father Dorus?
Your father? O my dear Mopsa.
Nay now you flout me.
Flout you? Oh the fair heavens! but this 'tis for a man to cast away himself in violence of passion, and extremity of sighs, on a piece of beauty that cares not for him, but it is the tricks of you all.
Tricks? no as God mend me; and I should not have a husband till I got him with tricks, I should lead Apes in hell: but faith tell me, dost thou love me Dorus?
Do I love you quoth ye? It cuts my very heartstrings, do I love you? why 'tis the only mark my endeavours shoot at.
If thou dost not hit the mark then, thou art a very bungler: but where is my father?
Why I have sent him and your mother out of the way of purpose, and appointed Manasses to meet us this evening at Adonis' Chapel, in the Amazons apparel, to marry us; I think these are signs I love you.
I but you jest, I doubt you will not marry me.
Will you meet me there?
As I am a virgin I will.
And come with an intent to marry me?
As I hope to be a wife I will.
You must take heed you keep our purpose close.
As I did the loss of my Maidenhead.
Why have you lost it then?
Many a dear day ago, yet I told no body on't but my Mother and our Horsekeeper, and they say I am ne'er the worse maid for that, and I can keep my own counsel, as I hope I shall; but will you meet me soon?
Just in the midway, as Tilters do.
I'll go afore and stay, but do not deceive me, and you do, i'll show my Father's Horsekeeper all as God mend me.
So tria sequuntur tria, now am I rid of a triumviry of fools, and by their absence have won a free access to an escape.
If my Lisander's hope prove like to this,
This night shall crown us monarchs of our bliss.
No more of these delays sweet Madam, your love hath broken day oft with my expectance, I dare give it trust no longer.
I confess it my Liege, and like a spent Dear, not able to maintain longer flight, I cast myself down breathless at your love's mercy: yet I beseech your Majesty, let not your eager desires practise any present violence upon my yielding chastity: 'twas only possession of my love you had in chase, which with convenient time and place purchased, I put your grace in full possession of.
Although thy breath be never but musical, yet it never reached the string of true happiness till now: and to approve thy heart sets hand to thy word, appoint the time.
Then this present evening (and yet my Virgin blood is ashamed to consent to the betraying of my modesty) meet me at Adonis' bower, where i'll make tender of subdued chastity to your high Majesty, as my first and most victorious conqueror.
By my Imperial Globe, and hope of those joys, thy presence shall bring to enrich me with, I'll meet thee, and make thee Queen over the most submiss Captive that ever love took prisoner.
If you deceive me—
Not except warm life,
Deceive my veins of their innative heat.
Then haste slow time, exchange thy leaden feet
For Hermes wings till I my fair hopes meet.
But locked once in the arms of my delight,
Cloth all the world in an eternal night.
And steed of morning when the Sun should rise,
They shall see two in my Zelmane's eyes.
So farewell thought I, I have prepared you a Zelmane's answerable to your expectation.
Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaim a jubilee: my teeming hopes
Are now delivered of a gracious birth,
Which I have christened, opportunity,
Unto whose shrine in honour of this day,
My thoughts shall hold a monthly sacrifice.
Love grant Demetrius meet the like success,
Our pains are crowned with double happiness.
Only our disguises hold firm, but all other attempts meet untimely deaths, even in their cradles.
What and we should acquaint the Ladies with our intents?
'Twould argue a kind of cowardice in our wits, that have such suspectless admittance to their presence, as this disguise hath purchased us, we should not have that ability of inventure to entangle them in their own security.
Well howsoever, we must not dwell long determining for the liberty of stay with Dametas, who out of his covetous disposition in detaining our reward allowed us, the eldest day of our licenced abode at Court, is run out.
'tis very true, and for my part, I'll rather go home with a private repulse, then managing any unlikely attempt, become sufferer under a public disgrace.
That's my very thought, yet that our second arrival be not altogether empty of employment, le's practise something upon Dametas, and acquaint the world with his coward baseness; in which, he not only detracts from his master's bounty, but look how as a Conduit head or master-spring that is poisoned, doth his best, to infect the whole body of the Court, with the leprosy of his covetousness.
There's no action of his begetting can be said to be truly honourable.
How can they when their Father is a mongrel? the Duke out of his honourable bounty commanded him to reward our travels with 100L. Crowns: and now after two months attendance, and enforced delays, In which time an ordinary Petitioner might have spent the value of the reward, he packs us off with fifty Crowns, his excuse being that his master hath forgot us, and what he doth, is of his own bounty, as if the Moon should brag she gave the world light, when all the lustre she hath, comes from the heat of the Sun.
Should his villainies be suffered to prosper, they would grow to such height, as the Duke's authority should have much trouble to prune them.
To prevent which, his Majesty shall have private note of it, knew we in whose trust to conduct it.
'tis an office very few dare undertake, he is so riveted to the Duke's good opinion.
Lies there no jar 'twixt none of the Nobility and him, what say you of Zelmane?
The gallant Amazon: you could not have cast your choice fitter, for her honourable mind maintains deadly feud against his base proceedings; and here she comes, attended by Dameta's servant, le's wait on opportunity.
Lisander.
Demetrius.
Lisander and Demetrius? stand close, of my life we are come to the birth of some notable knavery.
How blows the winds of our hopes?
Fair to the point of our expectation, I have made away the Duke and the Duchess.
How made away them? poisoned them?
With a confection of love, which I have so tempered with fair promises, as their minds are in love's haven already, Videlicet in Adonis' bower, where this evening I have given them my word to meet them; but I have so cast it, that Manasses shall meet them in my steed.
'Twill be a rare Scene of mirth, to hear what costly discourse they'll bestow upon the fool in thy outside.
Do you hear that?
Yes, thank love and my ears, but list the conclusion.
I have cleared the way to Violetta, but what order hast thou tane with thy burbolts, Dametas, Miso, and amorous Mopsa?
Shot them away, at three several marks, yet so conveyed it, that in the end they shall all meet at Adonis' Chapel.
This project cannot but bring forth some notable deceit.
My hopes should want of their will, and it do not—
Now we have made a smooth passage to our escape, how shall we convey our loves out of the Island?
I have determined of that sir, and better to effect, my boy this time hath cast such a bait of knavery to the two Captains, Kalander and Philanax, as we may pass without suspicion.
But how for transportation.
I am furnished of that too, you remember the two Lacedaemon intelligencers.
Now what of us?
Hold my life, we shall be put in this Scene of Gullery.
Oh in any case.
For the love of Cupid do, inquiry is past, le's take our entrance, and pass over the stage like mutes, to furnish out a show.
And see occasion like a kind wench presents them in the very instant, my honest friend welcome, have you not your dispatch with a letter to Lacedaemon.
Madam we have, and stay only to take our leaves of your Ladyship, and know what service your honour will command.
You have my thanks, for the truth is, I must commit business of much import unto your trust, and to prevent much circumstances take my word, your are not ignorant of the King's general challenge.
About his daughters.
You understand me, with these few crowns receive my mind, which is to convey the two Ladies, whom we in these disguises have won to Lacedaemon.
Were we but confirmed of your estates.
we'll give you sufficient assurance of that, and the Princesses themselves shall confirm it.
We crave no better Madam, but shall we not have your honour's company?
No: having brought them aboard, we'll make return to the Duke, to let him understand we stole not our prizes but won them manfully at the point of wit.
A noble resolution.
His foil will appear the more palpable, and your conquest the more applausible, where shall we receive the Ladies?
Be that our care, but on your lives be heedful of their▪ safeties.
More than of our own my Lord.
Enough, whilst you attend we'll to the Duke, and play all Gulls or none.
All Gulls indeed since you had follies whip,
No Gulls, to all Gulls, fools love fellowship.
Look well to mine Ass there, Lord how I sweat with anger; this same's the house sure, and now like a wise Lady let me count my hurts, and see how I shall be revenged: it shall be so, i'll have them both carted, and Manasses shall go afore like a whiffler, and make way with his horns: where be these whores? open the door, where be these panders? O that I were not a Lady, I could scold like a butter-whore.
Whose there a God's name? Lord for his mercy is the woman mad?
Yes I thank ye foxed▪ horn mad, where's your companion, where's the old lecherous Goat my husband? open the door I say.
Iesus for thy mercy sake, Madam what do you want?
What do I want? the chief implement a woman should have; I want that as a woman cannot be without, I mean my husband I want.
Your husband? I saw him not as I am an honest woman.
Not as you are an honest, so I think, but as you are an arrant whore you did, you must have your Crevishes with a pox, cannot City Manchet and fresh God serve your turn, but you must have Court Cakebread and Crevishes with a vengeance? but come give me my husband, or I'll have him out of the flesh on thee, and yet I will not scold neither.
Pray madam ha' patience: what should your husband do here?
That which he should do at home with his wife, and he were worth his ears.
Lady I protect I do not know him.
Not know him? thou liest in every ve●e i'th' heart, thou liest thou knowest him, and as Adam knew Eve thou knowest him, he hath been as in ward with thee, as ever he was with me, he hath, by his own confession he hath, and thou deniest it, thou liest in thy throat like a Puritanical whore as thou art, O that I were a butter who●e for an hour I might scold a little.
Madam they are no honest men that bring these tales to you.
Men bring tales to me? I defy thee in thy guts, I defy thee. men bring tales to me? thou takest me to be one of thine own Church dost? they are no honest men that bring tales to thee and ha' wives of their own, & my husbands one of them, go thy ways now.
I beseech you Madam do but hear me.
Hear thee? I have heard too much of thee, too too much, too much, where's my husband? bring forth my husband, i'll teach him to put a difference betwixt Ioan and my Lady I hold him ten pound on't, and yet I will not scold neither, and I had been an old hag past teeming, as his whore is a puritan, it had been somewhat, but being a woman of Gods making, & a Lady of his own, and wearing mine own hair which is much in a Lady of my standing I can tell you, to use me thus, flesh and blood cannot endure it, let me come in, open the door let me come in, O that I were any vile thing in the world but a Lady that I might scold a little.
So, so, so, take your places, for this same bald pated oak is the stage, where ye shall see the part of a doting fool performed by an old man and a young wench.
Who worshipful Dametas?
The same man.
Hath he no fellow Actors in his most lamentable, comical, historical, tragical, musical, pasto●a'l?
None that require any mouthing but his Ass and himself, marry then he has Signior Mattocke, a very sharp satirical humorist, and monsieur le spade, but he goes somewhat more bluntly to his business, yet he'll serve for mutes, and as good as the best to furnish out the stage.
But dares Dorus being but Dametas' servant so abuse his mad master thus grossly.
O Lord Sir, there have been serving men have done their Masters far greater abuse, yet had their wives concealed it, their ears should never have been acquainted with it.
Is that a fashion in request?
Altogether i'll assure you, but obedience, Gentlemen the Scene begins.
Pray God it be good he stays so long, Ridiculous enough, and good enough.
So, stand Ass, stand gentle Ass.
What Countryman is his Ass, he speaks so familiarly to him?
A'th' City breed, marry he picks up his living ath burrs and nettles that grow about the Court gate.
Be in readiness good mattock, play thy part sweet spade, let me see; Diana's oak? I held Diana's oak divine, true pure gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Dametas.
An excellent comedian, what life he puts into his part.
So, by thy leave stone, by thy patience honest stone, the very gravel savours of treasure, this same's the bedchamber of my Lady Pecunia, and see, see some of her golden hairs, more, more, more yet divine tree, pure gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, softly, softly, not too fast, let me not devour my content too greedily, lest like a cormorant I take a surfeit on't.
Oh take heed of that master in any case.
Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me see now, I shall by computation have some three millions of 'em, ● some three or four millions, how shall I employ them to make the most profit of them
That would be known indeed.
I'll put out one million to use, after the rate of seven score to the hundreth: and yet I want, no fie, for than you will have my humour brought ath stage for a usurer; to prevent with scandalous report, i'll put it into my Scribe-majors hand, & he shall deale for me.
There's a simple cloak▪ to cover his villainy.
'tis a very short one: and passing slate to hide his knavery.
It cannot choose but be seen through.
An other million i'll lay to beslow in Offices. I will have wealth, or i'll rake it out ath kennels else, chimneys ha' smoked for't already, and now i'll deal upon sea-coal and salt, now, now, now, it comes, sweet gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, divine gold, how, how shall I adore thee? O let me do the homage of my knees: now, now, for the tongue of a Poet, though I hate poetry worse than any of the seven deadly sins, I could wish myself a Poet for some hour, to write a Poem in the praise of my divine mistress; and see he very bed wherein her divinity is lodged: happy, happy, thrice happy Dametas, now like an o'er joyed lover, let me open the sheets of my heavenly mistress with reverence, so with humble reverence, and like a blushing lover that puts out the light ere he presumes to touch the bed of his love, so let me darken the candles of my body, mine eyes, and first bless my hands with touching, next every mine ears with hearing, and lastly make happy my eyes with seeing, and let them convey the joy down into the bosom of my thoughts by degrees, softly by degrees.
Did you ever see Ass make such a ceremonious preparation?
Be not offended sweet mistress that I presume to touch.
A fool's head of your own.
Has a been at any cost of all this invocate for a coxcomb and a bell.
Beshrew my judgement but he deserves it.
And his desert were ne'er so much, he could but bear away the bell, and so you say he doth.
A coxcomb and a bell, oh indignity: damnable oak, vile and evil accursed Dorus, unfortunate Dametas; Diana I tell thee thou art no honest goddess to use a Gentleman thus. What's here a writing, your help good spectacles, lend me your help good spectacles, some comfortable news good spectacles:
Who hath his hire, hath well his labours placed,
Earth thou didst seek, and store of earth thou hast.
He that vain hopes pursues for love of pelf,
Shall lose his wits and likely find himself.
Then think thy pains rewarded well,
Thou broughst the fool, bear back the bell:
Of other matters what ensues,
Adonis' bower shall tell thee news,
Villainous poetry, I am made a flat fool by poetry; But though I can do them no▪ further disgrace, my fatal curse, A wronged gentleman's fatal curse devil ever upon them: Diana here me, and let my words find gracious acceptance.
Hide your heads, the terrible curse comes like a stone upon you.
Rancour, spite, malice, hate, and all disasters,
Strengthen my faith against all poetastors.
May their intents though pure as crystal glasses,
Be counted salt and capital Trespasses,
O may their lines and laboured industry,
Though worthy of Apollo's plaudite,
The clearest thought in loyalty excelling,
Be by some Dor presented for libelling;
When they have writ a Scene, in which their brains
Have dropped their dearest sweets, and their swollen veins
Emptied the Conduit of their purest spirit,
As they stand gaping to receive their merit,
In stead of Plaudities, their chiefest blisses,
Let their deserts be crowned with mews and hisses:
Behind each post, and at the Gallery corners,
Sat empty gulls, slight fools, and false Informers;
Let some sly Fox out of discretion's embers,
Term them the Lands unnecessary members;
And like the Deer, when they have spent their breath
To make King's sport, let them be torn to death,
Even by their friends; 'twould set my thoughts a twanging,
Might I but ●e one of them go to hanging.
A passing strange curse, and no question he has traveled far for some of the times.
He must travel further that finds any reason in't.
No matter for reason, there's rhyme enough if that be good.
Some of it is no better than it should be, or my judgement deceives me.
Sure he had some reason to make this rhyme, and a man could pick it out.
Rather than I'll be counted inquisitive, mine ears shall content themselves with the rhymes only, and leave the reason to the scanning of Poets, whom it more nearly concerns.
But where's the wag that invited us to this banquet of mirth, shrunk in the wetting?
I were a rare jest now, if whilst the Boy keeps us here in expectation of Dametas gullery, his Master has made an escape with the Duke's daughters.
That, or some knavery else upon my life: I had the boy in shrewd suspicion at the first.
And this his sudden and stolen departure confirms it currant.
Then we are sped, for in suspicions face
I see some subtle stratagem in chase.
Will your Ladyship believe me now? nay and I say't your worship may swear't, though I have but a (poor as to say) hole of mine own, I hope the spirits have more denomination over me, then to make it a common Slaughter-house of carnality, where every Iacke may command flesh for his money.
No more words sweet woman, I confess I was in the wrong, this is not the hole the Fox hides his head in, and therefore for the love of womanhood conceal mine errors; for howsoever I complained, 'tis thy forehead aches, thy temples have the terrible blow as they say, thy husband is a bad man.
My husband?
ay, I, good woman, thy husband; he is, as I say, a fleshly member, and I fear he has overcome the foolish thing my daughter.
Your daughter? I'll slit her nose by this light, and she were ten Ladies, 'twas not for nothing my husband said he should meet her this Evening at Adonis' Chapel: but and I come to the God-speed on't, I'll tell 'em on't sound.
I do good woman, tell 'em on't and spare not, but in any case do not scold.
Why, may not a Gentlewoman scold in a good case?
I know not what a Gentlewoman may do in a good case, but a Lady must not in any case.
Though I may not scold, I may tell 'em roundly on't I hope.
That you may do law.
And I'll not be mealy mouthed I warrant 'em: will you bear me company to the Chapel Madam?
With all my heart Mistress: What Dorus hath given me, I'll give my friend, No fool to company.
FArewell bright Sun, thou lightner of all eyes,
Thou fallest to give a brighter beam to rise.
Each tree and shrub wear trammells of thy hair,
But these are wires for none but Kings to wear,
And my rude tongue, striving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad Artsman, does disgrace her worth:
But here's the place, upon this Crystal stream,
Where Citharea did unyoake her team
Of silver Doves to interchange a kiss
With young Adonis, shall I meet my bliss?
The gentle minutes crowned with crystal flowers,
Losing their youths, are grown up perfect hours,
To hasten my delight: The bashful Moon,
That since her dalliance with Endymion
Durst never walk by day, is under sail,
In stead of sheets has spread her silver veil,
Each gliding Brook and every bushy tree,
Being tipped with silver, wear her livery;
And the dim night, to grace our amorous wars,
Hath stuck nine Spheres full of immortal stars,
In stead of pearls; the way on which she treads
Is strewed with crystal dew and silver beads:
She comes, her feet make music with the ground,
And the chaste air is ravished with the sound,
My soul flies forth to meet her: hell, my wife,
Her presence like a murderer drives the life
Out of my pleasure's breast, her jealous eye
Envies the heaven of my felicity.
Zelmane, or my husband? life, or hate?
What makes old Autumn out a bed so late?
That snow should go a wooing to the Sun,
When one warm kiss works her confusion!
I have the jest, suspicion that keeps
Court in my husband's thoughts, seeing my Love
Elect this walk, hath brought him after him.
She dog's her sure, and she to shake her off
Hath ta'en some other walk, I'll place mine care
In distance of her will.
Could I but hear the innocent delivery of his breath,
'Twould be a second jubilee of mirth.
Here comes my Love.
Your Love? Alas poor Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren spring,
My Sun appears.
Fie, your love speaks too loud,
Your sun's eclipsed, you dote upon a cloud.
See how his arms, like precious Phoenix wings, Spread to embrace me.
Now the Cuckoo sings;
Those amorous arms do make a golden space
To hug a Duke.
But I'll fill up the place.
Those fingers tipped with curious Porphery,
Staining Pygmalion's matchless imagery,
Like amorcus twins all of one mother nurst,
Contend in courtesy who should touch me first.
Should touch me first; their strife is undertook,
To twine a young Bay, not a stooping Oak.
Young Bay? stale jest, that a dry sapless rind
Should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind:
Were she but gone now.
Were the Duke away,
My hopes had got the better of the day.
This is Adonis' Chapel, I wonder they come not; though I bear but a little learning about me, and a few good clothes, I would not wish 'em to make Balams Ass of me: for though many fools take no felicity but in wearing good clothes (though they be none of their own) I have a further reach in me.
I could ban my stars.
my fate.
That cross me thus.
Makes me unfortunate.
Alas good Lady, how her pretty feet
Labour to find me.
Such black events.
Darken herself.
That in the bosom of some foggy cloud
I might embrace my love.
That my hopes should meet
O would the friendly night
Would the Moon lose her light,
But night is purblind,
To make a Duke a slave.
To make e Duchess
Wrestle with amorous passions.
Life a spleen,
Could my rough breath like a temptstuous wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leave the world stark blind,
That it might either have no eyes to see,
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me.
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me?
Who would have thought the cold had been so good a musician? how it plays upon my chaps? and maketh my teeth skip up and down my mouth like a company of virginal jacks, but I find small music in it, and Mopsa should come now I could do her little good, yet and she were here, she and I would have about at cob-nut or at chery-pit, or some what to keep ourselves from idleness, though she be but a fool, the bable's good enough to make sport withal in the dark, and that very word hath started her.
Whose there Manasses?
Yes Mopsa.
Plain Mopsa, I might be Madam Mopsa in your mouth, goodman— where's Dorus?
Why? because he will not be said to make too much haste to a bad bargain, he is not come yet.
Not come? a peascod on him, but all's one, I thought at first he would make but a fool on me.
Would you have him mend God's workmanship?
But choose him, since he hath buld me with an urchin, i'll go fetch Ralph our Horsekeeper; let him that got the calf keep the cow in a knave's name and he will, have you your book here?
No matter wench, I can do't well enough without book.
Nay and ye can do't well enough yourself, I care for neither of them both, but indeed I love to have a thing well done, for says my mother, a thing once well done, is twice done, and I am in her mind for that up and down.
Whose with my Lord the Duke? it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceal such treachery.
'tis not the Duchess sure, no it is amorous Ioue,
That seeing Zelmane passionate for love,
Descends to comfort her; Ioue if there be
A powerful Phoebus' God of poetry,
In dear remembrance of fair Daphne's rape,
To win my love, lend me some stranger shape,
Such as yourselves have worn, that when your same
Is sung by Poets, they may quote my name.
Sure 'tis my daughter.
Daughter? how her eye
Cut out new forms, new shapes of jealousy?
As sure as death 'tis she, for see they stand
Like amorous twins, in twisted hand in hand,
Breast against breast, and that no joy be missing,
To hear discourse, their lips keep time with kissing,
I'll not endure't, impatience grow strong,
And though a Prince, tell him he doth thee wrong.
Do, prithee do, this sweetens all the rest,
But here would be the elixir of the jest,
If whilst we keep each other at a bay,
A third should come, and bear the hare away.
Villainous poetry, unchristianlike poetry, I am cozened of my gold by poetry, robbed of my charge by poetry, made an apparent fool by poetry, villainous Oak, accursed Dorus, unfortunate Dametas: whose there my daughter and with Zelmane? a well-willer to Dorus, a favourite to poetry, and therefore enemy to Dametas, come hither Mopsa, a thy father's blessing come not near her: what Mopsa.
Yes, whos's there? Dorus.
Confusion a Dorus, I am thy miserable father, didst not see Hippolita?
No by my troth not. Did ye not see Dorus?
Pox of Dorus, I am undone Madam and thou telft me not of Hippolita.
Pox a Hippolita, I am a dumb woman and you can tell me news of Dorus.
I had rather see ten Dorusses hanged, then loose Hippolita.
I had rather see ten fathers damned, then lose my sweet Dorus.
I shall run mad and I find not Hippolita.
I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus.
What's here? I shall run mad for Hippolita.
And I shall run frantic and I find not Doras', I hold my life we have some Comedy in hand, we shall have a full Scene, for here comes more Actors.
As sure as I am a sinner to God Madam, that same's he.
What with a brace of wenches, i'faith old brock, have I ●●ne you in the manner, is this the fruits of your lying alone, is this your Court custom with a wannion? lend me thy knife, though I had neither house nor land to give 'em, I'll bestow a whores mark betwixt you, and yet I will not scold neither.
What a goodyer ail you mother, are you frampold, know you not your own daughter?
Mopsa? O insufferable wrong, make thine own natural child thy Bawd?
Here's an excellent pattern for wives to learn to scold by.
What Mistress Amazon? ha you such a cocking spirit, honest women cannot keep their husbands at home for you? 'tis not for nothing now I see, that the Duchess looks yellow on you, but I'll tear that painted whores face of yours, (by this light) and yet I will not scold neither.
Madam.
I'll mad you with a vengeance.
Touch not the Prince.
On your allegiance forbear, what means this outrage, cannot our private walks be privileged from your wild contentions?
How fares the Prince?
How cheers my good Zelmane?
Zelmane? No Gods my judge my liege ● am Manasses, miserable Manasses▪ your husband's Scribe-major Madam.
Manasses?
A fool.
My man.
And my dear h●●d●…a● sweet love, what makest th●● here?
M●…y work for the Hangman, and the Duke be not the more merciful.
There's some deceit in this: Dametas, where's Hippolita?
ay, I, there's some knavery in this: Mopsa, where's Hippolita?
Doubtless there some villainy in this: Mopsa, where's Hippolita?
There's no plain dealing in this, Manasses, where's Dorus?
Answer directly, where's Hippolita?
Alas Madam I know not, whilst I almost melted myself with digging of gold in Diana's Oak, I left her in my wife's charge.
And whilst I ran to Manasses, thinking to take my husband and his wife in the manner, I left Hippolita in my daughter's chamber.
And whilst ● came to Adonis' chapel, to be tossed in my marriage blankets with Dorus, I left my little dog Pearl picking daisies.
Who sent you to Diana's Oak to dig gold?
Who sent you to take your husband in Manasses house?
Dorus.
Who sent you to Adonis' Chapel?
Dorus.
And who turned you into this shape?
They that I fear have made Gulls of us all, Zelmane and Dorus.
We are all simply gulled, and see where the Son scarce half ready, skips from his Eastern bed, smiling at our gullery.
Come where's this lusty wit-master?
The Keeper of this Love-lotterie.
This gallant juventus of fourscore, that like my Lady of the Lake, displays against all comers.
May a couple of plaine-witted Princes have a sight of your prizes?
Where be these Ladies, ha? ha your wits had such a skir mishing, that the two Maids have lost their heads in the conflict?
Heads? I and bodies too my Lord, and all at one shot, and which is worse, our wits are so scattered with the terrible blow, that, to be plain, we are scarce our own men again.
Then you had some knocking.
So it appears by the story my Lord.
How say you my Lady, what Owl sings out of that Ivy-bush?
Was your wit Knighted in this last action?
I am not such a fool, I love my Lord, I am no Knight, I am Manasses, they made a plain fool.
The only wear, for the guarded fool is out of request: but faith my Liege, how did your opposites behave themselves, did they win the wenches fair at the point?
At the very push of invention, and went off clear untouched.
And could you draw no blood of their wits?
Not a drop.
Nor Dametas neither, nor Manasses?
Neither, to our disgrace be it spoken, the carriage of this stratagem deserves applause, and I hold it a credit to rest captive to such valiant conquerors.
Why so be, I like a man that will confess his error.
It merits commiseration Madam and my Liege, not to detract from our worth: your ear, we two are the parties you wot on.
Were you the man?
No he was the man, marry I was the woman in the Moon, that made you walk all this last night like the man in the mist, I could say somewhat to you Madam, as for Dametas and his man, let them stand like fools as they are.
Can it be possible?
No, no, we are Gulls, innocent sots, but lante tanta, the girls are ours we have won them away to Dargison.
Come we have won the conquest, and that's sufficient.
You are a Manasses 'tis not sufficient: aha not Hercules for Iole, Ioue for Danae, Apollo for Daphne, Pan for Sirne; nay the whole pack of their piperly godheads could a discharged a stratagem with more spirit of all merit; an ambling nag and a down a down we have borne her away to Dargison.
'Twas the most rarest, divinest, Metaphysicalst piece of invention, that— what say you my liege?
I give your deserts their full merit, you have gotten equality.
All the wenches gave you.
Alas that spirits under the Moon could have detained her, but know that her cherry red lip, a down, a down.
Trust me but you have deserved high commendation.
Your merit stood of the upper stair of admiration.
Why thou hast a pretty relish of wit now, that canst see the broad eye of my desert at a little hole of demonstration.
Your desert save me free, you have done a most (to use your own phrase) Metaphysical piece of service, but you had some help in't questionless.
I do not think but the Ladies had some handined.
A finger, I confess a finger by the hope of perseverance, a very little finger.
I thought as much by making of the jest.
I cannot detract from the Lady's worth, for I know them for excellent workwomen.
Workwomen fit to make Tailors men.
I by my faith do I, nay your best tailors are arrant butchers to them, you shall have a Lady make an end of a suit, a Court suit, especially when all the Tailors in a country know not how to set a stitch in't.
Some ordinary suit perhaps.
Your best Court suits that are, are finished by Ladies, I have known a suit myself lain a making and moring ●, ●, and five year together, and then a Lady hath dispatched it in a month with a wet finger, such a finger might the Ladies have in your plot.
Never wet a finger by this Sun.
Then she helped you with one dry jest or another, but and we may be so bold: faith whereare the Ladies?
Sure enough I warrant you, some fools now would have kept them here, and have been gulled on them again, and laughed at age, but to prevent all danger, we have shipped them home for Lacedaemon.
To Lacedaemon? your sun of wit shines but dimly in that me thinks, to whose charge have you trusted them?
To them we durst, nay you must think we are no fools,
Fools? nay deep wit, and policy forbid.
We had no sooner their surprisal, but we had disguise ready, a ship ready, a couple of lusty friends ready, the Lacedaemon Intelligencers.
Durst you trust such precious jewels in such rusty caskets?
Durst? our health, our lives, why they were my tenants; nay you must think we sifted them, we are no fools in that neither.
If in any thing your wits deserve the babble 'tis in that.
None but fools would have committed such inestimable peers to a couple of strangers.
And in a ship too.
And under sail too.
And unfurnished of friends too.
And without shipping to follow them too.
You were no fools in any thing but that, and in that not to flatter, you express the true shape of folly, and merely merit the name of fools.
What will you say now when these fellows surrender us our loves?
we'll discharge you and set their names down for Gulls in your steed.
You know the Proverb, when the sky sals we shall have Larks.
And when you can bring proof that we are consend of our Wenches we'll be the Woodcocks.
Why then we have once springed a couple of woodcocks.
Do you know these? who are the fools now?
Hippolita?
My Violetta?
What a strange change is here▪
Yes saith Gallant, you have very strange carding and you knew all, but I hope you'll offer up your cards, and yield the set lost.
Gulls?
And abused? I'll lose my life before I'll lose my honour.
Honour and life before I'll lose my love.
Nay Gentlemen, we bar all violence; the liberty of our challenge was to all alike equally free, and since these by fair play have won 'em, it stands with our honour to see them peaceably possessed of 'em, then surely take 'em, for though you wear the breeches, give us leave to stand a little.
Why father, is't not time that we were sped?
'tis a great charge to keep a Mayd●●●-head,
Lose it we must, and to prevent ill course,
Better to give't, then have it ta'en perforce,
If you be pleased let envy do her worst,
Spit out her poison, or contained and burst.
Welcome to all, to all a kind good-night,
They truly live, that live in scorn of spite.