BId all profane away;
None here may stay
To view our Mysteries,
But, who themselves have been,
Or will, in Time, be seen
The self-same Sacrifice.
For VNION, Mistress of these Rites,
Will be observed with Eyes,
As simple as her Nights.
Fly then, all profane, away,
Fly far off, as hath the Day;
Night her curtain doth display,
And this is Hymen's Holiday.
WHat more than usual Light
(Throughout the Place extended)
Makes JUNO'S Fane so bright!
Is there some greater Deity descended?
arraign, on earth, those Powers
So rich, as with their beams
Grace VNION more than ours;
And bound her Influence, in their happier streams?
'tis so: This same is he,
The King, and Priest of Peace!
And that his Empress, she,
That sits so crowned with her own increase!
O you, whose better Blisses,
Have proved the strict embrace
Of VNION, with chaste kisses,
And seen it flow so in your happy Race;
That know, how well it binds
The fighting Seeds of Things,
Wins Natures, Sexes, Minds,
And every discord in true Music brings:
Sit now propitious Aids,
To Rites, so duly prized;
And view two Noble Maids,
Of different Sex, to VNION sacrificed.
In honour of that blessed Estate,
Which all Good Minds should celebrate.
SAve, save the Virgins; Keep your hallowed Lights
Untouched: And with their flame defend our Rites.
The four untempered Humours are broke out:
And, with their wild Affections, go about
To ravish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Body,
Or little World of Man, from whence these came,
Look forth, and with thy bright and a numerous flame
Instruct their Darkness, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they have rebelled 'gainst thee.
Forbear your rude attempt; what Ignorance
Could yield you so profane, as to advance
One thought in Act, against these Mysteries?
Are union's a Orgies of so slender price?
She that makes Souls, with Bodies, mix in Love,
Contracts the World in one, and therein JOVE;
Is b Spring, and End of all Things yet, most strange!
herself nor suffers Spring, nor End, nor Change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humours and Affections would
Have dared so rash a venture. You will say
It was your Zeal, that gave your powers the sway;
And urge the masked, and disguised pretence
Of saving Blood, and succouring Innocence?
So want of Knowledge, still, begetteth jars,
When humorous Earthlings will control the Stars.
Inform yourselves, with safer Reverence,
To these mysterious Rites, whose mystic sense
REASON (which all things but itself) confounds)
Shall clear unto you, from th'authentic grounds.
THe Pair, which do each other side,
Though (yet) some space doth them divide,
This happy Night must both make one
Blessed Sacrifice, to VNION.
Nor is this Altar but a Sign
Of one more soft, and more divine
The a Genial Bed, where HYMEN keeps
The solemn Orgies, void of sleeps:
And wildest CUPID, waking, hovers
With adoration twixt the Lovers.
The Tead of white, and blooming Thorn,
In token of increase is borne:
As b also, with the ominous Light,
To fright all Malice from the Night.
Like are the c Fire, and Water set;
That, even as Moisture, mixed with Heat,
Helps every Natural Birth, to life;
So, for their Race, join Man, and Wife.
The d blushing Veil shows shamefastness
Th'ingenuous Virgin should profess
At meeting with the Man: Her Hair
That e flows so liberal, and so fair,
Is shed with grey, to intimate
She entereth to a matron's state.
For which those f Utensils are borne.
And, that she should not Labour scorn,
herself a g Snowy Fleece doth wear,
And these her h Rock and Spindle bear,
To show, that Nothing, which is good,
Gives check unto the highest blood.
The i Zone of wool about her waste,
Which, in contrary Circles cast,
Doth meet in one k strong knot, that binds,
Tells you, so should all Married Minds.
And lastly, these five Waxen Lights
Imply Perfection in the Rites;
For a Five the special Number is,
Whence hallowed VNION claims her bliss.
As being all the Sum, that grows
From the united strengths, of those
Which b Male, and Female Numbers we
Do style, and are First Two, and Three.
Which, joined thus, you cannot sever
In equal parts, but One will ever
Remain as common; so we see
The binding-force of Unity:
For which alone, the peaceful Gods
In Number, always, love the odds;
And even parts as much despise,
Since out of them all Discords rise.
ANd see, where JUNO, whose great Name
Is VNIO, in the Anagram,
Displays her glistering State, and Chair,
As she enlightened all the Air!
Hark how the charming Tunes do beat
In sacred Concord's bout her seat!
And lo! to grace what these intend,
Eight of her Noblest Powers descend,
Which are a enstiled her Faculties,
That govern nuptial Mysteries;
And wear those Masques before their faces,
Lest, dazzling Mortals with their graces
As they approach them, all Mankind
Should be, like CUPID, strooken blind.
These ORDER waits for, on the ground,
To keep, that you should not confound
Their measured steps, which only move
About th' harmonious sphere of LOVE.
THese, these are they,
Whom Humour and Affection must obey;
Who come to deck the genial Bower,
And bring, with them, the grateful Hour
That crowns such Meetings, and excites
The married Pair to fresh Delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oaths, & Vows,
Soft Whisperings, Embracements, all the joys,
And melting Toys,
That chaster LOVE allows.
CHO. Hast, haste, for HESPERUS his head down bows.
COnvey them, ORDER, to their places,
And rank them so, in several traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Unto the Music of the Hours;
And THESE, by joining with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the virtues of the Dames.
First a CURIS comes to deck the Bride's fair Tress.
Care of the ointments b VNXIA doth profess.
JUGA, her office to make One of twain:
GAMELIA sees that they should so remain.
Fair e ITERDUCA leads the Bride her way;
And DOMIDUCA home her steps doth stay:
CINXIA the Maid, quit of her Zone defends;
TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.
NOw, now begin to set
Your spirits in active heat;
And, since your Hands are met,
Instruct your nimble Feet,
In motions swift, and meet,
The happy ground to beat:
Whilst all this Roof doth ring,
And each discording String,
With every varied Voice,
In VNION doth rejoice.
Such was a the Golden Chain let down from Heaven;
And not those Links more even,
Than these: so sweetly tempered, so combined
By VNION, and refined.
Here no Contention, Envy, Grief, Deceit,
Fear, jealousy have weight;
But all is Peace, and Love, and Faith, and Bliss:
What Harmony like this?
The Gall, behind the Altar quite is thrown;
This Sacrifice hath none.
Now no Affections rage, nor Humours swell;
But all composed dwell.
O JUNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, JUNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENUS can do nought,
Save what with shame is bought:
No Father can himself a Parent show,
Nor any House with prosperous Issue grow.
O then! What Deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with JUNO to compare?
Think, yet, how Night doth waste,
How much of Time is past,
What more than winged hast
yourselves would take,
If you were but to taste
The joy, the Night doth cast
(O might it ever last)
On this bright Virgin, and her happy Make.
See, see! the bright a Idalian Star,
That lighteth Lovers to their War,
Complains, that you her influence loose;
While thus the Night-sports you abuse.
THe longing Bridegroom, b in the Porch,
Shows you again, the bated Torch;
And thrice hath JUNO c mixed her Air
With Fire, to summon your repair.
SEe, now she clean withdraws her Light;
And (as you should) gives place tonight:
That spreads her broad, and blackest wing
Upon the world, and comes to bring
A d thousand several-coloured Loves,
Some like Sparrows, some like Doves,
That hop about the nuptial-room,
And fluttering there (against you come)
Warm the chaste Bower, which e CYPRIA strews,
With many a Lily, many a Rose.
HAste therefore, haste, and call, Away:
The gentle Night is priest to pay
The usury of long Delights,
She owes to these protracted Rites.
O Know to end, as to begin:
A minute's loss, in Love, is sin.
These Humours will the Night out wear
In their own Pastimes here;
You do our Rites much wrong,
In seeking to Prolong
These outward Pleasures:
The Night hath other Treasures
Then these (though long concealed)
Ere day, to be revealed.
Then, know to end, as to begin;
A minute's loss, in Love, is sin.
HEre stay, and let your Sports be crowned:
The perfectest Figure is the Round.
Nor fell you in it by adventure,
When REASON was your Guide, and Centre.
This, this that beauteous a Ceston is
of Lovers many-coloured Bliss.
Come HYMEN, make an inner Ring,
And let the Sacrificers sing;
Cheer up the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch her Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what JUNO is to JOVE,
The same shall she be to her Love;
His Wife: which we do rather measure
A Name of Dignity, than Pleasure.
Up Youths, hold up your Lights in air,
And shake abroad c their flaming hair.
Now move united, and, in Gate,
As you (in pairs) do front the State,
With grateful Honours, thank his Grace
That hath so glorified the Place:
And as, in Circle, you depart
Linked hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those Bodies still remain
Whom he, (with so much sacred pain)
No less hath bound within his Realms
Than they are with the ocean's streams.
Long may his VNION find increase
As he, to ours, hath deigned his peace.
GLad Time is at his point arrived,
For which Loves hopes were so long-lived.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no Object stay,
Nor Banquets, (but sweet kisses)
The Turtles from their Blisses.
'tis CUPID calls to arm;
And this his last Alarm.
Shrink not, soft VIRGIN, you will love,
anon, what you so fear to prove.
This is no killing War,
To which you pressed are;
But fair and gentle strife
Which Lovers call their Life.
'tis CUPID cries to Arm;
And this his last Alarm.
Help Youths, and Virgins, help to sing
The Prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
And did so lately a rap
From forth the Mother's lap,
To place her by that side
Where she must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
See, HESPERUS is yet in view!
What Star can so deserve of you?
Whose light doth still adorn
Your Bride, that ere the Morn,
Shall far more perfect be,
And rise as bright as He;
When b (like to him) her Name
Is changed, but not her Flame.
Hast, tender Lady, and adventure;
The covetous House would have you enter,
That it might wealthy be,
And you, her c Mistress see:
Hast your own good to meet;
Aud lift your golden feete
Above the Threshold, high,
With prosperous Augury.
Now, Youths, let go your pretty arms;
The Place within chants other charms.
Whole showers of Roses flow;
And Violets seem to grow,
Strewed in the Chamber there,
As Venus' Mead it were.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
Good Matrons, that so well are known
To aged Husbands of your own,
Place you our Bride tonight;
And b snatch away the Light:
That c she not hide it dead
Beneath her Spouse's Bed;
Nor d he reserve the same
To help the funeral Flame.
So, now you may admit him in;
The Act he covets, is no Sin,
But chaste, and holy Love,
Which HYMEN doth approve:
Without whose hallowing Fires
All Aims are base Desires.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
Now, free from Vulgar Spite, or Noise,
May you enjoy your mutual joys;
Now, You no Fear controls,
But Lips may mingle Souls;
And soft Embraces bind,
To each, the others Mind:
Which may no Power untie,
Till One, or both must die.
And, look, before you yield to slumber,
That your Delights be drawn past number;
" joys, got with strife, increase.
Affect no sleepy peace;
But keep the Bride's fair eyes
Awake, with her own Cries,
Which are but maiden-fears:
And Kisses dry such tears.
Then, Coin them, twixt your Lips so sweet,
And let not Cockles closer meet;
Nor may your Murmuring Loves
Be drowned by a CYPRIS Doves:
Let Ivy not so bind
As when your Arms are twined:
That you may Both, ere Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And, JUNO, whose great Powers protect
The Marriage-Bed, with good effect
The Labour of this Night
Bless thou, for future Light;
And, Thou, thy happy charge,
Glad b GENIUS, enlarge:
That they may Both, ere Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And a VENUS, Thou, with timely seed
(Which may their after-Comforts breed)
Inform the gentle Womb;
Nor, let it prove a Tomb:
But, ere ten Moons be wasted,
The Birth, by CYNTHIA hasted.
So may they Both, ere Day,
Rise perfect every Way.
And, when the Babe to light is shown,
Let it be, like each Parent, known;
Much of the Father's Face,
More of the Mother's Grace:
And either grandsire's Spirit,
And Fame let it inherit.
That Men may bless th' Embraces,
That joined two such Races.
Cease Youths, and Virgins, you have done;
Shut fast the Door: And, as They soon
To their Perfection haste,
So may their ardours last.
So either's strength outlive
All loss that Age can give:
And, though full Years be told,
Their Forms grow slowly old.
WHo art thou, thus that imitatest my Grace,
In Steps, in Habit, and resembled Face?
Grave a Time, and Industry my Parents are;
My Name is TRUTH, who through these sounds of War
(Which figure the wise Minds discursive fight)
In Mists by Nature wrapped, salute the Light.
I am that TRUTH, thou some illusive sprite;
Whom to my likeness, the black Sorceress Night
Hath of these dry, and empty fumes created.
Best Herald of thine own Birth, well related:
Put me and mine to proof of words, and facts,
In any Question this fair Hour exacts.
I challenge thee, and fit this Time of Love,
With this Position, which TRUTH comes to prove;
That the most honoured state of Man and Wife,
Doth far exceed th'insociate Virgin-Life.
I take the adverse part; and she that best
Defends her side, be TRUTH by all confessed.
It is confirmed. With what an equal brow
To TRUTH, a opinion's confident! and how,
Like TRUTH, her Habit shows to sensual Eyes!
But whosoe'er thou be, in this disguise,
Clear TRUTH, anon, shall strip thee to the heart;
And show how mere Fantastical thou art.
Know then, the first Production of Things,
Required Two; from mere One nothing springs:
Without that knot, the Theme thou gloriest in,
(Th'unprofitable Virgin) had not been.
The Golden Tree of Marriage began
In Paradise, and bore the fruit of Man;
On whose sweet branches Angels sat, and sung,
And from whose firm root all Society sprung.
LOVE (whose strong Virtue wrapped heavens soul in Earth,
And made a Woman glory in his Birth
In Marriage, opens his inflamed Breast;
And, lest in him Nature should stifled rest,
His genial fire about the world he darts;
Which Lips with Lips combines, and Hearts with Hearts.
Marriage LOVES Object is; at whose bright eyes
He lights his Torches, and calls them his Skies.
For her, he wings his shoulders; and doth fly
To her white bosom, as his Sanctuary:
In which no lustful Finger can profane him,
Nor any Earth, with black Eclipses wane him.
She makes him smile in sorrows, and doth stand
Twixt him, and all wants, with her silver hand.
In her soft Locks, his tender Feet are tied;
And in his Fetters he takes worthy pride.
And as Geometricians have approved
That Lines, and Superficies are not moved
By their own forces, but do follow still.
Their bodies' motions; so the self-loved Will
Of Man, or Woman should not rule in them,
But each with other wear the Anademe.
Mirrors, though decked with Diamonds, are nought worth,
If the like Forms of Things they set not forth;
So Men, or Women are worth Nothing, neither,
If either's Eyes and Hearts present not either.
Untouched Virginity, Laugh out; to see
Freedom in Fetters placed, and urged 'gainst thee.
What Griefs lie groaning on the Nuptial Bed?
What dull Satiety? In what sheets of Lead
Tumble, and toss the restless Married Pair,
Each, oft, offended with the other's air?
From whence springs all-devouring Avarice,
But from the Cares, which out of Wedlock rise?
And, where there is in Life's best-tempered Fires
And End, set in itself to all desires,
A settled Quiet, Freedom never checked,
How far are Married Lives from this effect?
EURIPUS, that bears Ships, in all their pride,
'gainst roughest Winds, with violence of his Tide,
And ebbs, and flows, seven times in every day,
Toils not more turbulent, or fierce than they.
And then, what Rules Husbands prescribe their Wives!
In their Eyes Circles, they must bound their Lives.
The Moon, when farthest from the Sun she shines,
Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
But your poor Wives far off must never roam,
But waste their Beauties, near their Lords, at home:
And when their Lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to begged Monopolies) all their Pride.
When their Lords list to feed a serious Fit
They must be serious; when to show their Wit
In jests, and Laughter, they must laugh, and jest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their Wives Men give such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walk on Ropes:
No Tumblers bide more peril of their Necks
In all their Tricks; Then Wives in husband's Checks.
Where Virgins, in their sweet, and peaceful State
Have all things perfect; spin their own free Fate;
Depend on no proud Second; are their own
Centre, and Circle; Now, and always One.
To whose Example, we do still hear named
One God, one Nature, and but one World framed,
One Sun, one Moon, one Element of Fire,
So, of the Rest; One King, that doth inspire
Soul, to all Bodies, in this royal Sphere:
And where is Marriage more declared, then there?
Is there a Band more strict, then that doth tie
The Soul, and Body in such unity?
Subjects to Sovereigns? doth one Mind display
In th'one's Obedience, and the others Sway?
Believe it, Marriage suffers no compare,
When both Estates are valued, as they are.
The Virgin were a strange, and stubborn Thing,
Would longer stay a Virgin, than to bring
herself fit use, and profit in a Make.
How she doth err! and the whole Heaven mistake!
Look how a Flower, that close in Closes grows,
Hid from rude Cattle, bruised with no Ploughs,
Which th' Air doth stroke, Sun strengthen, Showers
It many Youths, & many Maids desire; (shoot higher,
The same, when cropped by cruel hand is withered,
No Youths at all, No Maidens have desired:
So a Virgin, while untouched she doth remain,
Is dear to hers; but when with bodies stain
Her chaster Flower is lost, she leaves to appear
Or sweet to Young Men, or to maidens dear.
That Conquest then may crown me in this War,
Virgins, O Virgins fly from HYMEN far.
Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield,
For as a lone Vine, in a naked Field,
Never extols her branches, never bears
Ripe Grapes, but with a headlong heaviness wears
Her tender body, and her highest sprout
Is quickly leveled with her fading root;
By whom no Husbandmen, no Youths will dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th' Elm, her Husband, many Husbandmen,
And many Youths inhabit by her, then:
So whilst a Virgin doth, untouched, abide
All unmanured, she grows old, with her pride;
But when to equal Wedlock, in fit Time,
Her Fortune, and Endeavour lets her climb
Dear to her Love, and Parents, she is held.
Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield.
These are but words; hast thou a Knight will try
(By stroke of Arms) the simple Verity?
To that high proof I would have dared thee.
I'll straight fetch Champions for the Brides and Me.
The like will I do for Virginity.
Now join; and if his varied Trial fail,
To make my Truth in Wedlock's praise prevail,
I will retire, and in more power appear;
To cease this strife, and make our Question clear.
Whereat OPINION insulting, followed her with this speech.
ay, Do: it were not safe thou shouldst abide:
This speaks thy Name, with shame to quit thy side.
PRinces, attend a tale of height, and wonder.
TRUTH is descended in a second Thunder,
And now will greet you, with judicial state,
To grace the Nuptial part in this debate;
And end with reconciled hands these wars.
Upon her head she wears a Crown of Stars,
Through which her orient Hair waves to her waist,
By which believing Mortals hold her fast,
And in those golden Chords are carried even
Till with her breath she blows them up to Heaven.
She wears a Robe enchased with Eagles Eyes,
To signify her sight in Mysteries;
Upon each shoulder sits a milk white Dove,
And at her feet do witty Serpents move:
Her spacious Arms do reach from East to West,
And you may see her Heart shine through her breast.
Her right hand holds a Sun with burning Rays,
Her left a curious bunch of golden keys,
With which Heaven Gates she locketh, and displays.
A Crystal Mirror hangeth at her breast,
By which men's Consciences are searched, and dressed:
On her Coach wheels Hypocrisy lies racked;
And squint-eyed Slander, with vainglory backed
Her bright Eyes burn to dust: in which shines Fate.
An Angel ushers her triumphant Gate,
Whilst with her finger's Fans of Stars she twists,
And with them beats back Error, clad in mists.
Eternal Unity behind her shines
That Fire, and Water, Earth, and Air combines.
Her voice is like a Trumpet loud, and shrill,
Which bids all sounds in Earth, and Heaven be still.
And see! descended from her Chariot now,
In this related Pomp she visits you.
Honour to all, that Honour Nuptials.
To whose fair Lot, in justice, now it falls,
That this my Counterfeit be here disclosed,
Who, for Virginity hath herself opposed.
Nor, though my Brightness do undo her Charms,
Let these her Knights think, that their equal Arms
Are wronged therein;" For Valour wins applause
That dares, but to maintain the weaker Cause.
And Princes, see, 'tis mere OPINION,
That in TRVTH'S forced rob, for TRUTH hath gone!
Her gaudy Colours, pieced, with many Folds,
Show what uncertainties she ever holds:
Vanish Adulterate TRUTH, and never dare
With proud Maids praise, to press where Nuptials are.
And Champions, since you see the Truth I held,
To Sacred HYMEN, reconciled, yield:
Nor, (so to yield,) think it the least Despite
" It is a Conquest to submit to Right.
This Royal judge of our Contention
Will prop, I know, what I have under gone;
To whose right Sacred Highness I resign
Low, at his feet, this Starry Crown of mine,
To show his Rule, and judgement is divine;
These Doves to him I consecrate withal,
To note his Innocence, without spot, or gall;
These Serpents, for his Wisdom; and these Rays,
To show his piercing Splendour; These bright Keys,
Designing Power to ope the ported Skies,
And speak their Glories to his subjects' Eyes.
Lastly, this Heart, with which all Hearts be true:
And TRUTH in him make Treason ever rue.