Now hath Flora robbed her bowers
To befriend this place with flowers;
Strow about, strow about,
The Sky rained never kindlier Showers.
Flowers with Bridals well agree,
Fresh as Brides, and Bridegrooms be,
Strow about, strow about,
And mix them with fit melody.
Earth hath no Princelier flowers
Than Roses white, and Roses red,
But they must still be mingled.
And as a Rose new plucked from Venus' thorn
So doth a Bride her Bride grooms bed adorn.
divers divers Flowers affect
For some private dear respect,
Strow about, strew about,
Let every one his own protect.
But he's none of Flora's friend
That will not the Rose commend.
strew about, strew about,
Let Princes Princely flowers defend.
Roses the Gardens pride,
Are flowers for love, and flowers for Kings,
In courts desired, and Weddings.
And as a Rose in Venus' bosom worn,
So doth a Bridegroom his Bride's bed adorn.
FLowers and good wishes Flora doth present,
Sweet flowers, the ceremonious ornament
Of maiden marriage, Beauty figuring,
And blooming youth, which though we careless fling
About this sacred place, let none profane
Think that these fruits from common hills are ta'en,
Or Vulgar valleys which do subject lie
To winter's wrath, and cold mortality.
But these are hallowed and immortal flowers
With Flora's hands gathered from Flora's bowers.
Such are her presents, endless, as her love,
And such for ever may this night's joy prove.
FOr ever endless may this night's joy prove,
So echoes Zephyrus the friend of love.
Whose aid Venus implores when she doth bring
Into the naked world the green leafed spring.
When of the suns warm beams the Nets we weave
That can the stubbornest heart with love deceive.
That Queen of beauty, and desire by me
Breathes gently forth this Bridal prophecy.
Faithful and fruitful shall these Bedmates prove,
Blessed in their fortunes, honoured in their love.
ALL grace this night, & Siluans so must you,
Offering your marriage song with changes new
WHO is the happier of the two,
A maid, or wife?
Which is more to be desired
Peace or strife?
What strife can be where two are one,
Or what delight to pine alone?
None such true friends, none so sweet life,
As that between the man and wife.
A maid is free, a wife is tied.
No maid but fain would be a Bride.
Why live so many single then.
'tis not I hope for want of men?
The bow and arrow both may fit,
And yet 'tis hard the mark to hit.
He levels fair that by his side
Lays at night his lovely Bride.
Sing Io: Hymen, Io: Io: Hymen.
VAnish dark vales, let night in glory shine
As she doth burn in rage, come leave our shrine
You black haired hours, and guide us with your lights,
Flora hath wakened wide our drowsy sprights
See where she triumphs, see her flowers are thrown,
And all about the seeds of malice sown?
Despiteful Flora is't not enough of grief
That Cynthia's robbed, but thou must grace the thief?
Or didst not hear night's sovereign Queen complain
Hymen had stolen a Nymph out of her train.
And matched her here plighted henceforth to be
loves friend, and stranger to Virginity
And mak'st thou sport for this?
be mild stern night
Flora doth honour Cinthia, and her right,
Virginity is a voluntary power,
Free from constraint, even like an untouched flower
Meet to be gathered when 'tis thoroughly blown.
The Nymph was Cinthias while she was her own,
But now another claims in her a right
By fate reserved thereto, and wise foresight.
CAn Cynthia one kind virgins loss bemoan?
How if perhaps she brings her ten for one?
Or can she miss one in so full a train?
Your Goddess doth of too much store complain.
If all her nymphs would ask advise of me
There should be fewer virgins than there be.
Nature ordained not Men to live alone,
Where there are two, a Woman should be one.
THou breathest sweet poison wanton Zephyrus
But Cynthia must not be deluded thus.
Her holy Forests are by thieves profaned,
Her Virgins frighted, and lo, where they stand
That late were Phoebus Knights, turned now to trees
By Cynthia's vengement for their injuries
In seeking to seduce her Nymphs with love:
Here they are sixth and never may remove
But by Diana's power that stuck them here.
Apollo's love to them doth yet appear,
In that his beams hath guilt them a they grow,
To make their misery yield the greater show.
But they shall tremble when sad Night doth speak,
And at her stormy words their boughs shall break.
Hail reverend angry Night, hail Queen of Flowers,
Mild spirited Zephyrus hail, Siluans and Hours.
Hesperus brings peace, cease then your needless jars
Here in this little firmament of stars.
Cynthia is now by Phoebus pacified,
And well content her Nymph is made a Bride.
Since the fair match was by that Phoebus graced
Which in this happy Western I'll is placed
As he in heaven, one lamp enlightening all
That under his benign aspect doth fall.
Deep Oracles he speaks, and he alone
For arts and wisdoms meet for Phoebus throne.
The Nymph is honoured, and Diana pleased:
Night be you then, and your black hours appeased.
And friendly listen what your Queen by me
Farther commands, let this my credence be,
View it, and know it for the highest gem,
That hung on her imperial Diadem.
I know, and honour it lovely Hesperus,
Speak then your message, both are welcome to
YOur Sovereign from the virtuous gem she sends us.
Bids you take power to retransform the friends
Of Phoebus, metamorphosed here to trees,
And give them straight the shapes which they did lose.
This is her pleasure.
HEsperus I obey,
Night must needs yield when Phoebus gets the day.
Honoured be Cynthia for this generous deed.
pity grows only from celestial seed.
IF all seem glad, why should we only lower?
Since t'express gladness we have now most power.
Frolic graced Captives, we present you here
This glass, wherein your liberties appear,
Cynthia is pacified, and now blithe Night
Begins to shake off melancholy quite.
WHo should grace mirth, & revels but the night,
Next love she should be goddess of delight.
'tIs now a time when (Zephyrus) all with dancing
Honour me, above day my state advancing.
I'll now be frolic, all is full of heart,
And e'en these trees for joy shall bear a part.
Zephyrus they shall dance.
Dance Goddess? how?
Seems that so full of strangeness to you now?
Did not the Thracian harp long since the same?
And (if we rip the old records of fame)
Did not Amphion's lyre the deaf stones call,
When they came dancing to the Theban wall?
Can music then joy? joy mountains moves
And why not trees? joys powerful when it loves.
Could the religious Oak speak Oracle
Like to the Gods? and the tree wounded tell
T'Aeneas his sad story? have trees therefore
The instruments of speech, and hearing more
than th'ave of pacing, and to whom but Night
Belong enchantments? who can more affright
The eye with magic wonders? Night alone
Is fit for miracles, and this shallbe one
Apt for this Nuptial dancing jollity.
Earth then be soft and passable to free
These fettered roots? joy trees the time draws near
When in your better forms you shall appear.
Dancing, and music must prepare the way,
there's little tedious time in such delay.
This spoken, the four Siluans played on their instruments the first strain of this song following: & at the repetition thereof the voices sell in with the instruments which were thus divided, a treble and a base were placed near his Majesty, and another treble and base near the grove, that the words of the song might be heard of all, because the trees of gold instantly at the first sound of their voices began to move, and dance according to the measure of the time which the musicians kept in singing, and the nature of the words which they delivered.
Move now with measured sound
You charmed grove of gold,
Trace forth the sacred ground
That shall your forms unfold.
Diana, and the starry night for your Apollo's sake
Endue your Siluan shapes with power this strange delight to make
Much joy must needs the place betide where trees for gladness move,
A fairer sight was near beheld, or more expressing love.
Yet nearer Phoebus throne
Meet on your winding ways,
Your bridal mirth make known
In your high-graced Hayes.
Let Hymen lead your sliding rounds, & guide them with his light,
While we do Jo Hymen sing in honour of this night
join three by three, for so the night by triple spell decrees
Now to release Apollo's knights from these enchanted trees.
BY virtue of this wand, and touch divine,
These Siluan shadows back to earth resign,
Your native forms resume, with habit fair,
While solemn music shall enchant the air
Presently the Siluans with their four instruments, and five voices, began to play, and sing together the song following at the beginning whereof that part of the stage whereon the first three trees stood began to yield, and the three foremost trees gently to sink, and this was effected, by an engine placed under the stage. When the trees had sunk a yard they cleft in three parts, and the Maskers appeared out of the tops of them, the trees were suddenly conveyed away, and the first three Maskers were raised again by the engine. They appeared then in a false habit, yet very fair, and in form not much unlike their principal, & true rob. It was made of green taffety cut into leaves, and laid upon cloth of silver, and their hats were suitable to the same.
NIght, and Diana charge,
And th'Earth obeys
Opening large
Her secret ways,
While Apollo's charmed men
Their forms receive again.
Give gracious Phoebus honour then,
And so fall down, and rest behind the train
Give gracious Phoebus honour then and so fall etc.
THus can celestials work in human fate,
Transform, & form as they do love or hate.
Like touch, and change receive: the Gods agree
The best of numbers is contained in three.
The song of transformation again.
Night and Diana, etc.
THe last, & third of nine, touch magic wand,
And give them back their forms at nights command
Again this song revive and sound it high,
Long live Apollo Britain's glorious eye.
PHoebus is pleased, and all rejoice to see
His servants, from their golden prison free,
But yet since Cinthia hath so friendly smiled,
And to you tree-born Knights, is reconciled,
First ere you any more work undertake,
About her tree solemn procession make,
Diana's tree, the tree of Chastity,
That placed alone on yonder hill you see.
These green leafed robes wherein disguised you made
Stealths to her nymphs through the thick forests shade
There to the goddess offer thankfully,
That she may not in vain appeased be.
The night shall guide you, and her hours attend you
That no ill eyes, or spirits shall offend you.
WIth spotless minds now mount we to the tree
Of single chastity.
The root is temperance grounded deep
Which the cold juiced earth doth steep:
Water it desires alone,
Other drink it thirsts for none:
Therewith the sober branches it doth feed,
Which though they fruitless be,
Yet comely leaves they breed,
To beautify the tree,
Cynthia protectress is, and for her sake,
We this grave procession make.
Chaste eyes and ears, pure hearts, and voices
Are graces wherein Phoebe most rejoices.
KNights of Apollo proud of your new birth,
Pursue your triumphs still with joy and mirth,
Your changed fortunes, and redeem estate
Hesperus to your Sovereign will relate,
'tis now high time he were far hence retired,
Th'old Bridal friend, that ushers Night desired
Through the dim evening shades, then taking flight
Gives place and honour to the nuptial Night.
I that wish't evening star must now make way
To Hymen's rights much wronged by my delay.
But on night's princely state you ought t'attend,
And t'honour your new reconciled friend.
HEsperus as you with concord came, e'en so
'tis meet that you with concord hence should go
Then join you that in voice, and art excel,
To give this star a musical farewell.
Of all the stars which is the kindest
To a loving Bride?
Hesperus when in the west
He doth the day from night divide.
What message can be more respected
Than that which tells wish't joys shallbe effected?
Do not Brides watch the evening star?
O they can discern it far:
Love bridegrooms revels?
But for fashion.
And why?
They hinder wished occasion.
Longing hearts and new delights,
Love short days, and long nights
HEsperus since you all stars excel
In Bridal kindness kindly farewell farewell.
COme Flora let us now withdraw our train
That th'eclipsed revels may shine forth again
HEre stay, Night leaden-eyed, and sprighted grows
And her late hours begin to hang their brows
Hymen long since the Bridal bed hath dressed,
And longs to bring the turtles to their nest.
Then with one quick dence sound up your delight,
And with one song we'll bid you all god-Night.
TEll me gentle hour of night
Wherein dost thou most delight?
Not in sleep,
Wherein then?
In the frolic view of men?
lovest thou music?
O 'tis sweet.
What's dancing?
e'en the mirth of feet
joy you in Fairies and idleness?
We are of that sore ourselves,
But Siluan say why do you love
Only to frequent the grove?
Life is fullest of content
Where delight is innocent.
Pleasure must vary not be long,
Come then let's close, and end our song.
YEt ere we vanish from this princely sight,
Let us bid Phoebus, & his states goodnight
Neither buskin now, nor bays
Challenge I, a Lady's praise
Shall content my proudest hope,
Their applause was all my scope
And to their shrines properly
Revels dedicated be:
Whose soft ears none ought to pierce
But with smooth and gentle verse,
Let the tragic Poem swell,
Raising raging fiends from hell,
And let Epic Dactyls range
Swelling seas and country's strange.
Little room small things contains
Easy praise quites easy pains.
Suffer them whose brows do sweat
To gain honour by the great.
It's enough if men me name
A Retailer of such fame.
Quid tu te numeris immisces? anne medentem
Metra cathedratum ludicra scripta decent
Musicus & medicus, celebris quoque Phoebe Poeta e
Et lepor aegrotos arte rogante juuat.
Crede mihi doctum qui carmen non sapit, idem
Non habet ingentum, nec genium medici.