THe Charms of silence through this Square be thrown,
That an un-usde Attention (like a jewel)
May hang at every ear, for we present
Matter above the vulgar Argument:
Yet drawn so lively, that the weakest eye,
(Through those thin veils we hang between your sight,
And this our piece) may reach the mystery:
What in it is most grave, will most delight.
But as in Landscape, Towns and Woods appear
Small a far off, yet to the Optic sense,
The mind shows them as great as those more near;
So, winged Time that long ago flew hence
You must fetch back, with all those golden years
He stole, and here imagine still he stands,
Thrusting his silver lock into your hands.
There hold it but two hours, It shall from Graves
Raze up the dead: upon this narrow floor
Swell up an Ocean, (with an Armed Fleet,)
And lay the Dragon at a doves softfeetes.
These Wonders sit and see, sending as guides
Your judgement, not your passions: passion slides,
When judgement goes upright: for though the Muse
(That's thus inspir'de) a Novel path does tread,
she's free from foolish boldness, or base dread.
Lo; scorn she scorns and envies rankling tooth,
For this is all she does, she wakens Truth.
THat we, in pomp●… peace, in god like splendour,
With adoration of all dazzled eyes,
Should breath thus long, and grow so full of days,
Be fruitful as the Vine, in sons and daughters,
(All Emperors, Kings, and Queens) that (like to Cedars
Uprising from the breath of Lybanus,
Or Olives nursed up by Ierusalem)
Heightened our glories, whilst we held up them:
That this vast Globe Terrestrial should be cantled,
And almost three parts ours, and that the ons,
Who suspiration draw out of this air,
With vniuersall Aues, shows, and oes,
Should us acknowledge to be head supreme
To this great body (for a world of years:)
Yet now, when we had made our Crown complete,
And closed it strongly with a triple arch,
And had enriched it with those precious jewels
Few Princes ever see (white hairs) even now
Our greatness hangs in balance, and the stamp
Of our true , .
By wh
Ask these holy Fathers:
Ask those our outcast sons: a throne usurped
Our chair is counted, all our titles stolen.
What blasphemy dare speak so?
All our robes,
Your vestments, (reverend, yet pontifical:)
This sword, these keys, (that open kingdoms hearts
To let in sweet obedience) All, but borrowed.
What soul above the earth—
Our royal signet,
With which, we, (in a mother's holy love)
Have signed so many pardons, is now counterfeit:
From our mouth flow rivers of blasphemy
And lies; our Babylonian Synagogues
Are counted Stews, where Fornications
And all uncleanness Sodomitical,
(Whose leprosy touched us never) are now daily acted:
Our Image, which (like Roman Caesars) stamped
In gold, through the whole earth did currant pass;
Is now blanched copper, or but guilded brass.
Can yonder roof, that's nailed so fast with
Cover a head so impious, and not crack? (stars,
That Sulphur boiling o'er celestial fires,
May drop in whizing flakes (with scalding vengeance)
On such a horrid sin!
No mortal bosom
Is so unsanctified.
Who is't bright Empress,
That feeds so ulcerous, and so rank a Spleen?
A woman.
Woman! who?
The Fairy Queen: (nights
Five Summers have scarce drawn their glimmering
Through the Moon's silver bow, since the crowned
Of that adored beast, on which we ride, (heads
Were struck and wounded, but so healed again,
The very scars were hid. But now, a mortal,
An unrecoverable blow is taken,
And it must bleed to death.
Heaven cannot suffer it.
Heaven suffers it, and sees it, and gives aim,
Whilst even our Empire's heart is cleft in sunder:
That strumpet, that enchantress, (who, in robes
White as is innocence, and with an eye
Able to tempt stern murder to her bed)
Calls herself Truth, has stolen fair Truth's attire,
Her crown, her sweet songs, counterfeits her voice,
And by prestigious tricks in sorcery,
Has razed a base impostor like Truth's father:
This subtle Courtesan sets up again,
Whom we but late banished, to live in caves,
In rocks and desert mountains.
Fear her not, she's but a shadow.
O 'tis a cunning Spider,
And in her nets so wraps the Fairy Queen,
That she sucks even her breast: Sh'as writ a book,
Which she calls holy Spells.
we'll break those spells.
The poles of heaven must first in sunder break,
For from the Fairy shores this Witch hath driven
All such as are like these (our Sooth-Saiers)
And called false Seers home, that of things past,
Sing wonders, and divine of things to come:
Through whose bewitching tongues run golden chains,
To which ten thousand ears so fast are bound,
As spirits are by spells; that all the Tones
Of harmony, that Babylon can sound,
Are charms to Adders, and no more regarded,
Than are by him that's deaf, the sick man's groans
She, they, Titania, and her Fairy Lords,
Yea even her vassal elves, in public scorn
Defame me, call me Whore of Babylon.
O unheard of profanation!
Give out I am common: that for lust, and hire
I prostitute this body: that to Kings
I quaff full bowls of strong enchanting wines,
To make them dote on me.
Let's hear no more.
And that all Potentates that tread on earth,
With our abominations should be drunk,
And be by us undone.
we'll hear no more.
You have thrust Furies whips into our hands.
Say but the word, and we'll turn home your wrongs,
In torn and bloody colours.
All her bowers,
Shall like burnt offerings purge away (in fire)
Her lands pollution.
Let's to arms.
Stay: hear me:
Her kingdom wears a girdle wrought of waves,
Set thick with precious stones, that are so charmed,
No rocks are of more force: her Fairies hearts,
Lie in enchanted towers (impregnable)
No engine scales them. Therefore go you three,
Draw all your faces sweetly, let your brows
Be sleekd, your cheeks in dimples, give out smiles,
Your voices string with silver, woo (like lovers)
Swear you have hills of pearl: show her the world,
And say she shall have all, so she will kneel
And do us reverence: but if she grow nice,
Dissemble, flatter, stoop to lick the dust
She goes upon, and (like to serpents) creep
Upon your bellies, in humility;
And beg she would but with us join a league,
To wed her land to ours: our blessing, go.
When mines are to be blown up, men dig low.
And so will we.
Prosper: till this sun set
The beams that from us shoot, seem counterfeit.
This physic cures not me.
Nor me.
Nor vs.
It is not strong of poison, to fetch up
That's baked within: my gall is overflown,
My blood grown rank and foul: An inflammation
Of rage, and madness so burns up my liver,
That even my heartstrings crack (as in a furnace)
And all my nerves into my eyeballs shrink,
To shoot those bullets, and my brains at once
Against her soul that has half damned us: falls
Fetched high, and near to heaven, light on no ground,
But in hell's bottom, take their first rebound.
Such are our falls: we once had mountaine-growth,
With Pines and Cedars.
Now with none of both.
I could be glad to lose the divine office
Of my creation, to be turned into
A dog, so I might lick up but her blood,
That thrusts us from our vineyards.
So could all.
Revenge were milk to vs.
Manna.
And it shall.
But how? we will not (as the head supreme
Over all nations, counseleth) lick the dust
The Fairy treads on, nor (like serpents) creep
Upon our bellies in humility:
This were (with Fencers) basely to give ground,
When the first bout may speed: or to sound parley,
Whilst they within, get swords to cut our throats:
No, we'll at one blow strike the heart through.
How?
By poniards.
No.
Poison.
No.
Treason.
Neither.
How (reverend Como) then?
Thus— let's consult— nay you shall hear.
You know that all the springs in Fairy land
Ran once to one head: from that head, to us:
The mountain and the valley paid us fruit;
The field her corn, the country felt no heat
But from our fires: Plenty still spread our boards,
And Charity took away. We stepped not forth
But with a godlike adoration
All knees bowed low unto us: why was this?
Why were our gardens Eden? why our bowers
Built like to those in Paradise? I shall tell you,
It was because the Law most mystical,
Was not made common: therefore was not vile;
It was because in the great Prophets Phanes
And hallowed Temples, we were Choristers:
It was because (wise Pilots) we from rocks,
And gulfs infernal, safely set on shore
men's souls at yonder haven: or (being shipwrecked)
Strong lines forth cast we, suffering none to sink
To that Abyss, which some hold bottomless.
But now our very graves
Cannot save dead men's bones from shame and bruzes.
The monumental marble Urns of bodies
(Laid to rest long ago) unreverently
Are turned to troughs of water now for jades:
Vast Charnel-houses, where our father's heads
Slept on the cold hard pillows of the earth,
Are emptied now, and changed to drinking rooms,
Or vaults for baser office.
What's therefore to be done?
This must be done:
This shall be done: They hunted us like wolves,
Out of their Fairy forests, whipped us away
(As vagabonds) mocked us, and said our fall
Could not be dangerous, because we bore
Our gods upon our backs: now must we whip them,
But wiselier.
How?
Thus: those that fill our rooms,
Hold Beacons in their eyes (blazing with fire
Of a hot-seeming zeal) to watch our entrance,
And to arm all against us: these we must quench:
They are counted wells of knowledge, poison these wells:
They are the kingdoms music, they the Organs,
Unto whose sound her Anthems now are sung,
Set them but out of tune, all's out of square,
Pull down the Church, and none can it repair,
But he that builds it: this is the faggot band
That binds all fast: undo't, undo the land—
Most certain.
You therefore (the best consort of the soul)
Shepherds (whose flocks are men, lambs, Angels,) you
That hold the roof of yond star-chamber up,
From dropping down to grind the world to dust,
You shall to Fairy land.
A joyful voyage.
Those that sing there the holy Hymns, as yet
Have not their voices clear, the stream of ceremony
Is scarcely settled, trouble it more: bait hooks
To take some, some to choke: cast out your net
At first, for all the fry: let us spread sails
To draw unto our shores the Fairy whales.
That Truth, whose standard-bearer Babylon,
And all we are, is not clean driven from thence,
Whither we send you: there sheelives, but lives
A widow; steps not forth, dares not be seen
During her month of mourning: here we write you
How, and with whom to find her: what she bids,
That do: your hire's above.
We know it well.
And when you see those Fairy fishermen
Row in your streams, when they grow cold in working,
And weary of their own waters, that the sails
(Which stiffly bear them up) flag and hang low,
And that (like reeds, playing with a pair of winds.)
They promise facile pliance, then, then shake
The trees by the root, then'le make the branches blow,
And drop their mellowed fruits, even at your feet,
Gather them they are our own, then is the hour,
To wean those sons of black Apostasi
From her. (their stepdame) and to make them take,
A blessing from our reverend mother's hands,
Be happy go.
We shall remember you,
In all our kneel.
Stay: ere you shift Air,
Sprinkle yourselves all ore with sacred drops,
Take Periapts, Pentacles, and potent Charms
To conjure down foul fiends, that will be rayzed
To vex you, tempt you, and betray your blood,
About your necks hang hallowed Annulets,
That may Conserve you from the plagues of Error
Which will strike at you.
We obey most holy fathers.
And hear you,
If climbing up to this haught enterprise
The foot slip, and (ith'fal) with death you meet—
O glorious ladder!
A Saints winding sheet,
Farewell: Mount all the engines of your wit
When darts are sent from all parts, some must hit.
There is a fellow to whom, because he dare
Not be a slave to greatness, nor is moulded
Of Court dough (flattering) but (should it thunder)
To his father. doing ill, (would speak ill) our Empress,
Hath given this name. (Plain Dealing): this plain dealing
Have I shipped hence, and is long since arrived
Upon the fairy strnod: from him I expect,
Intelligence of all Occurrences,
He for the names sake, shall perhaps be welcome,
Into that Harlot's Company (whom the fairies
Think honest, and swear deeply, she is Truth.
That Strumpet by enticement he'll bring over,
It came to me in letters (two days since.
That this plain dealing serves the fairy Queen,
And will no more be seen in Babylon.
How no more seen in Babylon, 'tis but one lost,
If Babylon subscribe to our wise-doome,
She shall lodge Double-Dealing in his room.
We thought the fates would have closed up our eyes,
That we should near have seen this day-star rise:
How many plots were laid to bar us hence,
(Even from our Cradle?) but our Innocence
Your wisdom (fairy Peers) and above all,
That Arm) that cannot let a white soul fall,
Hath held us up, and lifted us thus high,
Even when the Arrows did most thickly fly:
Of that bad woman, (Babylon's proud Queen,
Who yet (we hear) swells with Envenomed Spleen.
Whose poison, shall (like Arrows shot upright)
When forth it bursts, to her own downfall light.
Truth be my witness (whom we have employed,
To purge our Air that has with plagues destroyed
Great numbers, shutting them in darksome shades)
I seek no fall of hers, my Spirit wades,
In Clearer streams; her blood I would not shed,
to gain that triple wreath that binds her head,
though mine she would let forth, I know not why,
Only through rank lust after Sovereignty.
Enough it is for me, if with a hand,
(Unstained and un-ambitious) fairy Land
I Crown with Olive-branches: all those wounds,
Whose gory mouths but lately stained our Rounds,
Bleed yet in me: for when great a Elfiline
(Our grandsire) filled this throne, your bowers did shine
With fire-red steel, and not with Fairies eyes,
You heard no music then, but shrieks and cries,
Then armed Urchins, and stern household Elves,
Their fatal pointed swords turned on themselves.
But when the royal Elfiline sat crowned,
These civil woes in their own depth lay drowned.
He to immortal shades being gone,
(Fame's minion) great King b Oberon
Titaniaes' royal father, lively springs,
Whose Court was like a camp of none but Kings.
From this great conquering Monarchs glorious stem,
Three (in direct line) wore his Diadem:
A King first, than a pair of d Queens, of whom,
She that was held a downcast, by Fates doom,
Sits now above their hopes: her maiden hand,
Shall with a silken thread guide Fairy land.
And may she guide it,
Even till stooping time
Cut for her (down) long years that she may climb
(With ease) the highest hill old age goes o'er,
Or till her Fairy subjects (that adore
Her birthday as their being) shall complain,
They are weary of a peaceful, golden reign.
Which, that they never shall, your stately towers
Shall keep their ancient beauty: and your bowers
(Which late) like profaned Temples empty stood,
The tops defaced by fire, the sloores by blood,)
Shall be filled full of Choristers to sing
Sweet heavenly songs, like birds before the Spring:
The flowers we set, and the fruits by us sown,
Shall cheer as well the stranger as our own.
We may to strange shores once ourselves be driven,
For who can tell under what point of heaven
His grave shall open? neither shall our oaks,
Trophies of reverend Age, fall by our strokes,
Nor shall the brier, or hawthorn (growing under)
Fear them, but fly to them, to get from thunder,
And to be safe from foreign wildfire balls,
we'll build about our waters wooden walls.
On which we'll spend for you our latest lives.
Fairy's I thank you all, Stay who comes here?
Parthenophil, a Fairy Peer.
Parthenophil.
Bright Empress, Queen of maids
To us your Lords, amidst your Fairy shades:
Three Princes (so themselves they style) are come,
From whence, they'll us not learn, and do entreat
Fair, and a free access.
What is their business?
The splendour of your glories, which a far
Shines (as they say, and justly say) as brightly
As here at hand, hither them draws, protesting
All faith and service to you, and requesting
That they the tribute of their loves may pay,
At your most sacred feet.
Allow them entrance.
They in a Fairy mask, the argument
Of this their duty, gladly would present.
As best them please.
Your painted cheeks being off, your own discovers,
You are no Fairies.
No: but wounded lovers.
How! lovers! what! would you deflower my bed,
And strike off a poor maidenhead?
We know you not: what are you? and from whence?
The a land of whom the sun so enamoured is,
He lends them his complexion, gives me birth,
The Indian and his gold are both my slaves,
Upon my sword (as on the Axle tree)
A world of kingdoms move: and yet I write
Non sufficit. that lusty son of Ioue
That twelve times showed himself more than a man,
Reared up two pillars for me, on whose Capitals
I stand (Colossus-like) striding o'er seas,
And with my head knock at the roof of Heaven:
Hence come I, this I am, (O most divine)
All that I am is yours, be you but mine.
The country a at whose breast, hundreds of Kings
Have royally been fed, is nurse to me:
The god of grapes is mine, whose bounteous hand
In clusters deals his gifts to every land:
My Empire bears for greatness, policy,
State, skill in Arts and Arms, sole sovereignty
Of this Globe universal. All her Princes
Are warriors borne: whose battles to be told,
Would make the hearer's soldiers: 'tis a land
Of breath so sweet, and of aspect so fair,
That to behold her, and to conquer her,
(In amorous combats,) great king Oberon,
Your awful father, oft has thither come,
Like to a bridegroom, or a Reveller,
And gone again in goodly triumphs home.
From hence I spring, (fairest and most divine)
All that this is, is yours, be you but mine.
Be you but mine, and doubly will I treble
Their glories, and their greatness: like to thunder
My voice far off, shakes kingdoms; whilst mine own
Stands on Seven (b) hills, whose towers, and pinnacles,
And reverend Monuments, hold in them such worth,
And are so sacred, Emperors and Kings
(Like barefoot pilgrims) at her feet do fall,
Bowing to her triple crown imperial.
The language which she speaks, goes through the world,
To prove that all the world should stoop to her,
And (save yourself) they do; you think you leave
A rich inheritance, if to your sons,
Our fluent tongue you leave, (nor need they more)
Who speak and spend it well, cannot be poor:
On many nations necks, a foot to t,
If it be glorious, then may you be great.
We are all pleased, so please you be the bride,
Of three, we care not which two be denied.
For we are brethren, and those sacred breasts
From whence we draw our nourishment, would run
Nectar to you (sweet as the food of life:)
Our aged mother twenty times an hour,
Would breathe her wholesome kisses on your cheek,
And from her own cup you should drink that wine
Which none but Prince's taste, to make you look
With cheerful countenance.
You have a a son,
Rebellious, wild, ingrateful, poor, and yet
Apollo from's own head cuts golden locks,
To have them grow on his: his harp is his,
The darts he shoots are his: the winged messenger
That runs on all the errands of the gods,
Teaches him swiftness; he'll outstrip the winds:
This child of yours is (by adoption)
Our mothers now, her blessing he receives;
And though (as men did in the golden Age)
He live i'th' open fields, hiding his head
In dampish caves, and woods, (sometimes for fear,)
Yet do we succour him. This your lost sheep,
We home again will bring, to your own fold,
Humbly to graze upon your Fairy plains,
Provided, that you sow them with such seed,
On which your whole land wholesomely may feed.
We know you now: O what a deal of pains
Would you (as others of this wing have taken)
To be in Fairy land called sovereigns?
Thanks for it: rashly nothing must we do:
When kingdoms marry, heaven itself stands by
To give the bride: Princes in tying such bands,
Should use a thousand heads, ten thousand hands:
For that one Act gives like an enginous wheel
Motion to all, sets all the State a going,
And winds it up to height, or hurls it down,
The least blast turns the scale, where lies a crown:
we'll therefore take advice. If these think fit
We should be yours, you ours, we sign to it:
Your counsel Fairy Lords: Fideli speak.
Would you (my royal mistress) have those crystal
Fair, double-leaved doors, where light comes forth
To cheer the world, never to open more?
Would you have all your slumbers turned to dreams,
Frightful and broken? would you see your Lords
(In stead of sitting at your Council boards)
Locking their grave, white, reverend heads in steel?
If so, you cannot for all Fairy land
Find men to fit you better.
Florimell,
Breathes there in you Fidelies spirit?
No Lady.
No nor in any breast that's sound: true Counsellor,
Already you speak music: you are strung
With golden chords; Angels guide on your tongue.
These potent, politic, and twin-born States,
Would to their mitred fortunes tie our fates:
Our Fairy groves are green, our temples stand
Like goodly watchtowers, wafting passengers
From rocks, t'arriue them in the Holy land:
Peace (here) eats fruits, which her own hand hath sown,
Your lambs with lions play: about your throne,
The Palm, the Laurel, and the abundant Vine
Grow up, and with your roses do entwine.
But if these gripe your Sceptre once,
What then?
Vultures are not more ravenous than these men,
Confusion, tyranny, uproars will shake all,
Tigers, & wolves, and bears, will fill your seat,
In nothing (but in misery) you'll be great:
Those black and poisonous waters that bore down
In their rough torrent, Fairy towns and towers,
And drowned our fields in Mariana's days,
Will (in a merciless inundation)
Cover all again: red Seas will flow again:
The Devil will roar again: if these you love,
Be (as the Serpent,) wise then, though a Dove.
This he that speaks in music?
Are you all,
Of this opinion Lords?
All, all.
Let's hence.
When close plots fail, use open violence.
Stay: Princes are freeborn, & have free wills,
These are to us, as valleys are to hills,
We may, be counselled by them, not controlled:
Our words our Law.
Bright Sovereign.
You're too bold.
I knew the fort would yield.
Attend.
she's ours.
You would Combine a League, which these would break.
A League!
Holy.
Honourable.
Nay hear me speak,
You court me for my love, you I embrace
As maids do Suitors, with a smiling face
as you do me: receive our answer then:—
I cannot love you:— what! such hardy men
And fly for one repulse? I mean as yet;
As yet I'mnot at leisure: But I swear
Even by my birthday, by the crown I wear,
By those sweet waters, which into us power
Health, that no sickness taints, by that blessed flower
Upon whose roseal stalk our peace does grow,
I swear I will my love on you bestow,
When one day comes, which now to you I'll name.
The time! O blessed time!
Balm to our sorrow.
Name that most happy hour.
May be tomorrow:
Mark else and judge whether it may or no:
When Lambs of ours, are killed by wolves of yours,
Yet no blood sucked: when Heaven two Suns endures:
When Souls that rest in under-groundes,
Hear Anthems sung, and praise the sounds:
When drops of water are so spilled,
That they can wash out murders guilt:
When Surgeons long since dead and gone,
Can cure our wounds, being called upon:
When from yond towers I hear one cry,
You may kill Princes lawfully:
When a Court has no Parasite,
When truth speaks false, and falsehood right:
When Conscience goes in cloth of gold,
When Offices are given; not sold:
When merchants wives hate costly clothes,
When there's no lies in tradsmens' oaths:
When Farmers by dear years do leeze,
And Lawyers swear to take no fees:
(And that I hope will never, never be)
But then (and not till then) I swear,
Shall your bewitching Charms sleep in mine ear.
Away.
Derided to our faces!
Baffled!
Made fools!
This must not be.
It shall not be.
Revenge:
Fly to our Empress bosom, there suck treason,
Sedition, Herezies' confederacies,
The violation of all sacred leagues.
The combination of all leagues unjust,
The dispensation for sacramental oaths,
And when you're swollen with these, return again,
And let their poison rain down here in showers:
Whole herds of bulls loaden with hallowed curses,
With Interdictions, excommunications,
And with unbinding Subjects fealties,
And with large patents to kill Kings and Queen's
Drive roaring hither, that upon their horns
This Empire may be tossed.
She shall be torn,
Even joint from joint: to have her baited well,
(If we cannot) we will unkennel hell:
Will not you home with us?
No: here I'll lurk,
And in a dove-like shape raven upon Doves:
I'll suck allegiance from the common breast,
Poison the Courtier with ambitious drugs,
Throw bane into the cups where learning drinks,
I'll be a Saint, a Fury, Angel, Devil,
O'er Seas, on this side Seas; Devils foreigners,
With Devils within hell freedom, Devils in Vaults.
And with Church Devil, be it your soul's health,
To drink down Babylonian Stratagems.
And to forge three-forkt thunderbolts at home,
Whilst I melt Sulphur here: If the sweet bane
I lay be swallowed, oh! a Kingdom bursts,
But if the poisoned hook be spied, then levy
Eighty eight Legions, and take open arms,
The Guidon shall be mine, I'll bear the Standard.
'twi'll be a glorious war.
Farewell.
Be gone, than one.
Who cleans a realms head, needs more swords
These evil Spirits are vexed, & though they vanished
Like hideous dreams, yet have they left behind them,
Throbs, and heart-achings, in the general bosom,
As ominous bodings. Fairy Lack eyes.—
Here.
Fly Sirra through the Air and never rest
(On pain to be into an urchin turned)
Till thou hast fixed upon the highest gates,
Of our great'st Cities Thei's a warning piece. Away.
These to the Spirits that our waters keep,
Charge them that none rowst there, but those whose nets,
Are cast out of our Fairy gundolets. Away.
These to the keepers of those royal woods
Where Lions, Panthers, and the kingly herds
Feed in one company; that if wild Boars,
Mad Bulls, or raving Bears, break in for prey,
Hoping to make our groves their wilderness,
Ours may like soldiers bid them battle. Flie.
These to the Shepherds on our Fairy downs
To warn them not to sleep, but with sweet Lays
And jolly pipe drive into fat pastures
Their goodly flocks: Wolves are abroad say, Fly.
Place Providence, (because she has quick eye:
And is the best at kenning) in our Navy,
Courage shall wait on her.
No: she's most fit
To go with vs.
Let her in Counsel sit.
T is said: and lest they break into our walks
And kill our fairie-dear, or change themselves
Into the shape of Fawns, being indeed foxes,
Range all the forest danger to prevent,
Foresight, beats storms back, when most Imminent.
Away then.
Wise Pilots? firmest pillars? how it agrees,
When Princes heads sleep on their counsels knees:
Deep rooted is a state, and grows up high,
When Providence, Zeal, and Integrity
Husband it well: These fathers 'twill be said
(One day) make me a grandam of a maid.
Mean time my farewell to such gaudy lures
As here, were thrown up t'have me quite o'erthrown,
I charge you maids, entertain no desires,
So irreligious and unsanctified:
Oh, they ha' snakes sleeky tongues, but hearts more rugged
Than is the Russian Bear: our Fairy bowers
Would turn to Arabian deserts, if such flowers,
(Mortal as killing Hemlock) here should grow,
Which to prevent, I'll have you vow.
We vow
By the white balls in bright Titaniaes' eyes,
We their enchantments scorn.
It does suffice:
To bind it sure, Strew all your meads with charms,
Which if they do no good, shall do no harm.
Here comes your new sworn servant.
Now Sirrah, where have you been?
Where have I been? I have been in the bravest prison—
What prison? a brave prison? Can there be a brave prison?
All your fine men live and die there, it's the Knight's ward, and therefore mustneeds be brave: some call it an Ordinary, but I say 'tis a prison, for most of our gallants that are served every day with woodcocks there, lie there in a manner upon Execution: they dare not peep out of doors for fear of sergeants.
What are those sergeants?
Do not you know (mistress) what sergeants are? a number of your courtiers are dear in their acquaintance: why they are certain men-mid wives, that never bring people to bed, but when they are sore in labour, that no body else can deliver them.
Are there such places in our kingdom, as Ordinaries,
what is the true fashion of them, what's their order?
They are out of all true fashion: they keep no order.
Where about in Fairy land stand they?
In your great city: and here's the picture of your ordinary.
When Master Painter please we shall have it: come Sir.
Your gallants drink here right worshipfully, eat most impudently, dice most swearingly, swear most damnably, quarrel most desperately, and put up most cowardly. Suppose I were a young country gentleman, and that I were to come in (like an ass) among 'em, new cast into the bonds of satin.
What then?
Mary then do all the gyltrapiers turn their Tobacco faces in the room upon me, and they puff, they gape on a fresh man like so many stale Oysters at a full tide: then is there no salt to throw upon them, and to make them leave gaping, but this; to cast off his cloak, having good clothes underneath, single out some in the room worse accoutred than himself, with him to walk boldly up and down strutting, laugh aloud at any thing, talk aloud of nothing, so they make a noise, it is no matter.
You are grown sirrah an observer since you came out of Babylon.
Troth mistress, I left villains and knaves there, & find knaves & fools here: for your Ordinary is your Isle of Gulls, your ship of fools, your hospital of incurable madmen: it is the field where your captain and brave man is called to the lastreckoning, and is overthrown horse and foot: it is the only school to make an honest man a knave: for Intelligencers may hear enough there, to set twenty a begging oflands: it is the strangest Chessboard in the world.
Why?
Because in some games at Chess, knights are better than pawns, but here a good pawn is better than a knight.
Afford our shores such wonders?
Wonders? why this one little Cockpit, (for none come into it, but those that have spurs) is able to show all the follies of your kingdom, in a few Apes of the kingdom.
Have we not in our Land Physicians
To purge these red impostumes?
Troth yes mistress; but I am Plain dealing, and must speak truth, thou hast many Physicians, some of them sound men, but a number of them more sick at heart, than a whole parish full of Patients: let them cure themselves first, & then they may better know how to heal others: then have you other fellows that take upon them to be Surgeons, and by letting out the corruption of a State, and they let it out I'll be sworn; for some of them in places as big as this, and before a thousand people, rip up the bowels of vice in such a beastly manner, that (like women at an Execution, that can endure to see men quartered alive) the beholders learn more villainy than they knew before: others likewise there be of this consort last named, that are like Beadles bribed, they whip, but draw no blood, and of these I have made a Rhyme.
Let's hear it.
Those that do jerk these times, are butlike fleas;
They bite the skin, but leap from the disease.
I'll have you Sir (because you have an eye so sharply pointed) to look through and through that our great City, and like death, to spare the lives of none, whose conscience you find sickly and going.
If I give you the copy of the City's countenance, I'll not flatter the face, as painters do; but show all the wrinkles of it.
Do so, you shall no more to Babylon,
But live with us, and be our Officer.
Have I any kindred in your Court? is there any one of my name an officer? if there be, part us; because it will not be good, to have two of the Plain-dealing in one office, they'll be beggars if they do.
No Sirrah, we'll provide you shall not want
Whilst us you serve. Go learn where Truth doth lie.
Nay, nay, I have heard of her, she dwells (they say) at the sign of the Holy Lamb.
We built her up a lodging at our cost,
To have her labour in our Vineyards:
For till she came, no Vines could please our taste,
But of her fining Set your hand to hers,
Live with her in one house, fetch from our Court
Maintenance to serve you all: 'twill be to her
A comfort to have you stilby her sides,
She has such pretty and delightful songs,
That you will count your forestlabour light,
And time well spent only to hear her sing.
A way lose no more minutes.
Not a minute: I'll set more watches then a clockmaker.
What's yonder man that kneels?
'tis a Paridel
Our doctor?
The most wretched in your land.
the most in soul dejected; the most base,
And most unserviceable weed, unless
You by your heavenly Influence change his vileness
Into a virtual habit fit for use.
Oh: we remember it; you are condemned?
To Death.
Deservedly.
You had your hand
Not coloured with his blood.
No dearest Lady
Upon my vowed Loyalty.
The law, hath fastened on me only for attempt,
It was no actual nor commenced violence
That brought death with it, but intent of ill.
We would not save them, that delight to kill,
For so we wound ourselves: blood wrongly spilled
Who pardons, hath a share in half the guilt.
You struck, our laws not hard, yet what the edge
Of justice could take from you, mercy gives you
(Yourlife.) You have it signed, rize.
May yond Clouds
Muster themselves in Armies, to confound
Him that shall wish you dead, hurt, or uncrownd.
To run in debt thus basely for a life,
To spend which, had been glory! O most vile!
The good I reap from this superfluous grace,
Is but to make myself like Caesar's horse,
To kneel whilst he gets up: my back must bear
Till the chine crack, yet still a servile fear
Must lay more loads on me, and press me down.
When Princes give life, they so bind men to'em,
That trusting them with too much, they vndo'em.
Who then but I, from steps so low would rise?
Great fortunes (eanrd thus) are great Slaveries:
Snatched from the common hangman's hands for this?
To have my mind feel torture! now I see,
When good days come, (the Gods so seldom give them;)
That though we have them, yet we scarce believe them.
Heart how art thou confined? and bar of room,
Thart quick enough, yet livest within a tomb.
His name.
Campeius: Deeply learned.
We hear so:
But with it hear (from some whom we have weighed
For judgement and experience) that he carries:
A soul within him framed of a thousand wheels '
Yet not one steady.
It may be the rumour
That thus spreads over him, flows out of hate.
Believe us no: of his, and tother's fate,
The threads are too unlike, to have that woven.
To gain her crown I'll not kneel thus.
Besides
The harvest which he seeks is reapde already:
We have bestowed it.
Here then dies our suit.
Now shall you try with what impatience
That bay tree will endure a little fire,
My Lord, my Lord,
Such swelling spirits hid with humble looks,
Are kingdoms poisons, hung on golden hooks,
I hope he'll prove none such.
Such men oft prove.
Valleys that let in rivers to confound
The hills above them, though themselves lie drowned,
My Lord, I like not calm and cunning seas
That to have great ships taken or distressed,
Suffer base galleys to creep over their breast,
Let course hearts wear course skins: you know our wil.
Which (as a doom divine) I shall fulfil.
Thrown down, or raised?
All hopes (for this) are gone,
ome planet stands in opposition.
Umh: So.
Now Doctor Paridell.
An humble suit,
I am grown bold finding so free a giver,
Where beggars once take alms, they look for't ever.
You ha' been sworn our servant long.
Tenne yeares. (uing)
And we should wrong you; since you take vs gi-
Too let you go with life, that should want living,
What is it we can grant you.
I ha' been by two great Fairies in your land,
(Oppressed I dare not say) but so beaten down,
And sunk so low now with my last disgrace,
That all my happy thoughts lie in the dust,
Ashamed to look up yet: most humbly therefore
Beg I your gracious leave that I may vary,
This native Air for Forren.
Oh you would travel,
You may, you have our leave: Challenge our hand.
Storms are at Sea, when it is calm at land.
The Sea-God hath upon your maiden shores,
(On Dolphin's backs that pity men distressed)
In safety setta people that implores,
The Sovereign mercy flowing from your breast.
What people are they?
Neighbours: 'tis the nation,
With whom our Fairies interchange commerce,
And by negotiation grown so like us,
That half of them are Fairies: th'other half
Are hurtful Spirits, that with sulphurous breath
Blast their corn fields, deface their temples, cloth
their towns in mourning, poison hallowed founts,
And make their goodliest Cities stand (like tombs)
Full of dead bodies, or (like palaces,
From whence the Lords are gone) all desolate.
They have but 17. daughters young and fair,
Vowed to live vestals, and to know the touch
Of any forced or unreverend hand.
Yet Lust and Avarice (to get their dowers)
Lay barbarous siege against their chastity,
Threaten to ravish them, to make their bodies
The temples of pollution, or their beds,
Graves where their honours shall lie buried,
They pray to have their virgins wait on you,
That you would be their mother, and their nurse,
Their Guardian and their Governor; when Princes
Have their lives giuen'em, fine and golden threads
Are drawn and spun (for them) by the good fates,
That they may lift up others in low states.
Else let ourself decline; give them our presence:
In misery all nations should be kin,
And lend a brother's hand, usher them in.
Stood here my foes (distressed) thus would I grieve them,
Not how they ha' been, but how I might relieve them.
Your good deeds (matchless Fairy) like the Sun,
(Rising but only in this point of heaven,
Spread through the world, So that a Prince (made wretched,
By his unhappy father, that lies slain
By barbarous swords, and in his gory wounds,
Drowns all the hopes of his posterity)
Hither, is like an orphan come (from far)
To get relief and remedy 'gainst those,
That would defeat him of his portion.
Pity and we had talk before you came,
She hath not taken yet her hand from ours,
Nor shall she part, until those higher powers
Behold that Prince: good works are theirs, not ou'rs;
Go: bid him trust his misery in our hands,
Great trees I see do fall, when the shrub stands.
Stands my beard right? the gown I must look grave,
White hairs like silver clouds a privilege have,
Not to be searched, or be suspected foul:
Make away those 2. turn coats. Suit me next
Like to a Satin devil (bravely) fly
Your sails shape: be here immediately.
So: excellent: a subtle mask: all's fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
'mongst soldiers, I have played the soldier,
Been mutinous, railed at the State, cursed peace:
They walk with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Have under-shorde their eyelids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning ears,
Lie listening on flock bolsters, till rebellion
Beat up her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn half way, & all those throats
That are to bleed are marked: and all those doors,
Where civil Massacres, murders (died in grain)
Spoil, rifle, and sweet ravishments shall enter,
Have tokens stamped on them (to make 'em known)
More dreadful than the Bills that preach the plague▪
From them, with oiled hams (lapped in servile blue)
I stole, and filled out wine of Babylon,
To live things (made of clods) poor country sots,
And drunk they are: whole shires with it do reel,
Poisons run smooth, because men sweetness feel.
Now to my schoolmen, Learning's fort is strong,
But poorly manned, and cannot hold outlong
When golden bullets batter.— Yonder's one—
You're a poor scholar?
Yes.
What read you?
A book.
So learned, yet so young?
Ye may see Sir.
You feed some discontent?
Perhaps I ha' cause.
What troubles you?
You trouble me: pray leave me.
Put yourself, and your grief into my hands.
Say ye?
Put yourself & your grief into my hands.
Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?
You know me not.
Do you know yourself? your business?
Are you a scholar?
Iudge of that by these. (ool▪
Oh Sir, I have seen many heads under such
That scarce had brains to line it: if you're a scholar,
Me thinks you should know manners, by your leave
Pray leave your name behind you. Sir.
Name, Campeius.
Campeius! umh: Campeius? a lucky planet
strikes out this hour: Campeius Babylon,
His name hath in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queen hath set her mark: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischief in none sooner rent
A Church in two, then scholars discontent.
I must not lose this Martin's nest,— once more
You're happily met.
This burr still hang on me!
And you Sir.
Tell me pray, did you never tast-I'me bold-did you
Those clear & redolent fountains that do nourish, ne'er taste
In vive and fresh humidity those plants
That grow on tother side (our opposites)
Those that to us here, are th' Antipodes,
Clean against us in grounds-you feel me-say
ne'er drunk you of that nectar.
Never.
Never!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
What your disease is, I ha' been yourself,
This was Campeius once (thou not so learned)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well, but 'tis our country: and so,
Good to breed beggars: She starves Arts: farts fools,
She sets up drinking rooms, & pulls down schools.
So Sir.
No more but so Sir? this discourse
Not to be searched, or be suspected foul:
Make away those 2. turn coats. Suit me next
Like to a Satin devil (bravely) fly
Your sails shape: be here immediately.
So: excellent: a subtle mask: all's fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
'mongst soldiers, I have played the soldier,
Been mutinous, railed at the State, cursed peace:
They walk with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Have under-shorde their eyelids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning ears,
Lie listening on flock bolsters, till rebellion
Beat up her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn half way, & all those throats
That are to bleed are marked: and all those doors,
Where civil Massacres, murders (died in grain)
Spoil, rifle, and sweet ravishments shall enter,
Have tokens stamped on them (to make'em known)
More dreadful than the Bills that preach the plague:
From them, with oiled hams (lapped in servile blue)
I stole, and filled out wine of Babylon,
To live things (made of clods) poor country sots,
And drunk they are: whole shires with it do reel,
Poisons run smooth, because men sweetness feel.
Now to my schoolmen, Learning's fort is strong,
But poorly manned, and cannot hold out long
When golden bullets batter.— Yonder's one—
You're a poor scholar?
Yes.
What read you?
A book.
So learned, yet so young?
Ye may see Sir.
You feed some discontent?
Perhaps I ha' cause.
What troubles you?
You trouble me: pray leave me.
Put yourself, and your grief into my hands.
Say ye?
Put yourself & your grief into my hands.
Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?
You know me not.
Do you know yourself? your business▪
Are you a scholar?
judge of that by these. (●…ool▪
Oh Sir, I have seen many heads under such
That scarce had brains to line it: if you're a scholar,
Me thinks you should know manners, by your leave
Pray leave your name behind you. Sir.
Name, Campeius.
Campeius▪ umh: Campeius? a lucky planet
strikes out this hour: Campeius Babyl●…,
His name hath in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queen hath set her mark: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischief in▪ none sooner rent
A Church in two, then scholars discontent.
I must not lose this Martin's nest,— once more
You're happily met.
This burr still hang on m●…▪
And you Sir.
Tell me pray, did you never tast-I'me bold-did you
Those clear & redolent fountains that do nourish, ne'er taste
In vive and fresh humidity those p●…antss
That grow on tother side (our opposites).
Those that to us here, are th'Antipodes,
Clean against us in grounds-you feel me-say
ne'er drunk you of that 〈◊〉.
Never.
Never!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
What your disease is▪ I ●…a been yourself,
This was Campeius once (though not so learned)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well, but 'tis our country: and so,
Good to breed beggars▪ She starves Arts: ●…artss fools,
She sets up drinking rooms, & pulls down schools.
So Sir.
No more but lo Si●… this discover
Palates not you.
Yes.
Nothing hath passed me
I hope, against my country, or the State,
That any you can take hold of.
If they could,
'tis but mine ay, to your no.
You're to sour:
Unmellowed: you stand here in the shade,
Out of the warmth of those blessed ripening beams,—
Go to— I grieve that such a blossom— (razed,
Sir, I know you not this thing which you have
Affrights me: scholars of weak temper need
To fear (as they on Sunbankes lie to read)
Adders i'th' highest grass: these leaves but turned,
Like willow sticks hard rubbed may kindle fire,
Cities with sparks as small have oft been burned.
Do you take me for a hangman?
I would be loath,
For any harsh tune that my tongue may warble,
To have the instrument unstrung.
You shall not:
Welfare unto you.
And to you. A word Sir:
Bred in this country?
Yes.
I am no bird
To break mine own nest down: what flight soever
Your words make through this air (though it be troubled)
Mine ear Sir, is no reaching Fowling piece
What passes through it, kills: you may proceed,
Perhaps you would wound that, I wish should bleed.
You have th'advantage now,
I put the longest weapon into your hands,
It shall guard you:
You draw me by this line: let's private walk.
This paths vnbruzed: go on Sir.
Sir I love you.
The Dragons that keep learnings golden tree,
As you now have, I fought with, conquered them,
Got to the highest bough, eat of the fruit,
And gathered of the seaven-sold leaves of Art,
What I desired; and yet for all the moons
That I have seen wax old, and pine for anger,
I had outwatched them: and for all the candles
I wasted out on long, and frozen nights,
To thaw them into day; I filled my head
With books, butscarcecould fill my mouth with bread,
I had the Muse's smile, but moneys frown,
And never could get out of such a gown.
How did you change your starre 3
By changing Air:
The god of waves washed of my poverty,
I sought out a new sun beyond the seas,
Whose beams begat me gold.
O me dull ass!
I am nailed down by wilful beggary,
Yet feel not where it enters: like a horse
My hooves are pared to 'th quick) even till they bleed,
To make me run from hence, yet this Tortoise shell,
(My country) lies so heavy on my back,
Pressing my worth down, that I slowly creep
Through base and slimy ways.
Country!
She hangs
Her own brats at her back, to teach them beg,
And in her lap sets strangers.
Yet your country.
I was not borne to this, not schooled to this,
My parents spent not wealth on meto this,
I will not stay here long.
Do not.
Being hence,
I'll write in gall and poison 'gainst my nurse
This Fairy land, for not rewarding merit:
If ever I come back I'll be a Caltstrop
To prick my country's feet, that tread on me.
O she's unkind, hard hearted!
In disputation
I dare for latin, hebrew, and the greek,
Challenge an university; yet, (O evil hap!)
Three learned languages cannot set a nap.
Upon this threadbare gown: how is Art cursed?
She has the sweetest limbs, and goes the worst:
Like common Fiddlers, drawing down other's meat
With liquorish tunes, whilst they on scraps do eat.
Shake then these servile fetters off.
But how?
Play the mules part, now thou hast sucked a dam
Dry and unwholesome, kick her sides.
Her heart— her very heart—
Would it were dried to dust, to strew upon
Th'envenomed paper upon which I'll write.
Know you the Court of Babylon?
I have read,
How great it is, how glorious, and would venture
A soul to get but thither.
Get then thither; you venture none, but save a soul going thither:
The Queen of Babylon rides on a beast,
That carries up seven heads.
Rare.
Each head crowned.
O admirable!
She with her own hand
Will fill thee wine out of a golden bowl.
There's Angels to conduct thee. Get to sea,
Steal o'er, behold, here's one to waft thee hence,
Take leave of none, tell none, thouart made, farewell.
Thus to meet heaven, who would not wade through hell?
To slay off this hypocrisy, 'tis time,
Lest worn too long, the Fox's skin be known:
In our dissembling now we must be brave,
Make me a courtier come; Asses I see,
In nothing but in trappings, different be
From foot-cloth nags, on which gay fellows ride,
Save that such gallants gallop in more pride.
Away. Stow under hatches that light stuff:
'tis to be worn in Babylon.
At this grove,
And much about this hour, a slave well moulded,
In profound, learned villainy, gave oath
To meet me: Art thou come! Can thy black Art
This wonder bring to pass?
See, it is done.
Ti●…ss. picture right.
This virgin wax,
Bury I will in slimy putrid ground,
Where it may piece-meal rot: As this consumes,
So shall she pine, and (after languor) die.
These pins shall stick like daggers to her heart,
And eating through her breast, turnethere to gripings
Cramp-like Convulsions, shrinking up her nerves,
As into this they eat.
Thou art famed for even,
If these thy holy labours well succeed,
Statues of molten brass shall rear thy name,
The Babylonian Empress shall thee honour.
And (for this) each day shalt thou go in chains.
Where wilt thou bury it?
On this dunghill.
Good:
And bind it down with most effectual charms,
That whosoever with unhallowed hands,
Shall dare to take it hence, may rave and die.
Leave me.
Farewell and prosper: be blind you skies,
You look on things unlawful with sore eyes.
Who sets those tunes to mock us? Stay them.
Peace.
Peace there.
No more: your music must be dumb.
When those Celestial bodies that do move,
Within the sacred Spheres of princes' bosoms
Go out of order, 'tis as if you Regiment,
Wear all in uproar: heaven should then be vexed,
Me thinks such indignation should resemble,
Dreadful eclipses, that portend dire plagues
To nations, fall to Empires, death to Kings,
To cities devastation, to the world,
That universal hot calamity
Of the last horror. But our royal blood,
Beats in our veins like seas struggling for bounds,
Aetna, burns in us: bearded Comets shoot
Their vengeance through our eyes: our breath is lightning,
Thunder our voice; yet, as the idle Cannon,
Strikes at the Airs Invulnerable breast)
Our darts are philliped back in mockery,
Wanting the points to wound.
Too near the heart,
(Most royal Empress) these distempers fit,
So please you, we'll again assail her beauty
In varied shapes, and work on sutler Charms,
Again loves poisoned arrows we'll let she.
No: proud spirits once denying, still deny.
Then be yourself, (a woman) change those over tur●…s
You made to her of an unusual peace,
To an unusde defiance: give your revenge,
A full and swelling sail, as from your greatness
You took, in ●…yling to her: you have been
Too cold in punishment, too soft in chiding,
And like a mother (cause her years are green)
Have winked at Errors, hoping time, or council,
Or her own guilt (seeing how she goes awry,)
Would streigtenall.— you find the contrary.
What follows?
Sharp chastizment, leave the Mother
And be the steptdame; wanton her no more
On your Indulgent knee, sign no more pardons
To her Off-falling and her flying out,
But let it be a meritorious Act:
Make it a ladder for the soul to climb,
Lift from the hinges all the gates of heaven;
To make way for him that shall kill her.
Good.
Give him an office in you Starr-chamber,
Or else a Saints place and Canonize him;
So Sanctify the arm that takes her life,
That silly souls may go on pilgrimage,
Only to kiss the Instrument (that strikes)
As a most reverent relic.
Be it so.
In that one word she expires
Her fairy Lords
(That play the Pilots now, and steer her kingdom
In foulest weather) as white bearded corn
Bows his proud head before th'imperial winds,
Shall solely groveling (here) when that day comes.
And that it shall come fates themselves prepare.
True, but old Lions hardly fall into the snare.
Is not the good and politic Satyran
(Our leagued brother, and your vassal sworn)
Even now (this very minute) sucking close
Their fairest bosoms? if his train take well:
They have strange workings (downwards) into hell.
That Satiran is this hand: his brains a forge
Still working for us, he's the true set clock
By which we go, and of our hours doth keep
The numbered strokes, when welye bound in sleep.
Besides such voluntaries as will serve
Under your holy colours and forsake
The Fairy standard, all such fugitives
Whose hearts are Babylonized: all the Mu●…erss
All the damned Crew, that would for gold tear off
The devils beard: All scholars that do eat
The bread of sorrow, want, and discontent,
Wise Satryan takes up, presses, apparrels, (woves,
Their backs like Innocent Lambs, their minds like
Rubs o'er their tongues with poison, which they spot
Against their own anointed; their own Country,
Their very parent. And thus shippes'em hither.
To make 'em yours.
To use.
Only to employ them
As Bees whilst they have stings, & bring thighs laden
With honey, hive them, when they are drones, destroy them.
The earnest which he gives you (adored Empress,)
Are three fit engines for vs.
Are they wrought?
They are: and wait in Court your utmost pleasure,
Out of your Cup made we them drunk with wines,
To sound their hearts, which they with such devotion
Received down, that even whilst Bacchus, swom
From lip to lip, in midst of taking healths,
They took their own damnation, if their blood
(As those grapes) streamed not forth, to effect your good.
Let us behold these fireworks, that must run
Upon shortlines of life: yet will We use them,
Like instruments of music play on them,
A while for pleasure, and then hang them by,
Who Princes can upbraid, 'tis good they die.
For as in building sumptuous palaces,
We climb by base and slender scaffoldings,
Till we have razed the Frame: and that being done,
(To grace the work) we take the Scaffolds down,
So must we these: we know they love us not,
But Swallow-like when their own summers past,
Here seek for heat: or like flight Travalers',
(Swollen with vainglory, or with lust to see,)
They come to observe fashions and not me.
As Travalers' use them then, till they be gone,
Look Cheerfully; backs turned, no more thought upon.
What are they that fly hither (to our bosom)
But such as hang the wing, such as want nests;
Such as have no sound feathers; birds: so poor,
They scarce are worth the killing: with the Lark
(The morning's falconer) so they may mount high,
Care not how base and low their risings be?
What are they but lean hungry Crows that tire
Upon the mangled quarters of a Realm?
And on the housetops of Nobility
(If there they can but sit) like fatal Ravens,
Or Skrich-Owles croak their falls and hoarsely bode,
Nothing but scaffolds and unhallowed graves?
Fitter for us: yet sit they here like doves.
True: like corrupted Churchmen they are doves,
That have eat carrion: home we'll therefore send
These busie-working Spiders to the walls
Of their own country, when their venomous bags
(Which they shall stuff with scandales, libels, treasons)
Are full and upon bursting: let them there
weave in their politic looms nets to catch flies;
To us they are but Pothecary drugs,
Which we will take as Physical pills, not food:
Use them as lancets to let others blood,
That have foul bodies, care not whom you wound,
Nor what parts you cut off, to keep this sound.
Here come they.
Welcome: rise, and rise up high
In honours and our favour: you have thrust
Your arms into our coffers, have you not?
Yes sacred Empress.
And into our own,
Have rained down showers of gold.
You shall deserve it:
You see what Ocean can replenish you,
Be you but duteous tributary streams:
But is your temper right? are not the edges
Of your sharp spirits rebated? are you ours?
Do not your hearts sink down yet? will you on?
Stood deathith ' way.
Stood hell.
Nobly resolved:
But listen to us, and observe our counsel:
Back must we send you to the Fairy Land,
Danger goes with you; here's your-safetie: listen.
Choose winds to sail by; if the way ward seas
Grow stormy, hover, keep aloof: if fears,
Shipwrecks, and death lie tumbling on the waves,
And will not off, then on: be venturous,
Conquests hard got are sweet and glorious.
Being landed, if suspicion cast on you
Her narrow eyes, turn yourselves then to Moles,
Work under ground, and undermine your country,
though you cast earth up but a hand full high,
To make her stumble: if that bloodhound hunt you,
(That long-eared Inquisition) take the thickets,
Climb up to Hay-mowes, live like birds, and eat
The undeflowred corn: in hollow trees
Take such provision as the Ant can make:
Fly with the Bat under the eves of night,
And shift your nests: or like to Ancresses,
Close up yourselves in artificial walls:
Or if you walk abroad, be wrapped in clouds,
Have change of hairs, of cie-brows, halt with soldiers,
Be shaven and be old women, take all shapes
To escape taking: But if the air be clear,
Fly to the Court, and underneath the wings
Of the Eagle, Falcon, or some great bird hover,
Oaks and large Beech-trees many beasts do cover.
He that first sings a Dirge tun de to the death
Of that my only foe the Fairy Queen,
shallbe my love, and (clad in purple) ride
Upon that scarlet-coloured beast that bears
Seven Kingdoms on seven heads.
If all the Spells.
That wit, or eloquence, or arts can set:
If all the sleights that bookmen use in schools
Be powerful in such happiness, 'tis mine.
What physic can I dare only to grow
(But as I merit shall) up in your eye.
we'll erect ladders for you strong and high,
That you shall climb to starry dignity.
We take our leave dread Empress.
Fare you well:
Our benediction go along with you—
Our malediction and your soul's confusion
Like shivered towers fall on your hickelesse heads,
And wedge you into earth low as the deep
Where are the damned, if our world you fire,
Since desperately you'll ride and dare aspire.
But is this all? shall we thus bend our sinews
Only to empty quivers, and to shoot
Whole sheaves of forked arrows at the Sun,
Yet never hit him?
And the mark so fair!
Nay, which is more, suppose that all these torrents
Which from your sea of Greatness, you (for your part)
And all those straggling floods which we have driven
With full and stiff winds to the Fairy Strands,
Should all break in at once, and in a deluge
Of Innovation, rough rebellion, factions,
Of massacres, and pale destruction
Swallow the kingdom up, and that the blood
Even of Titania's heart should in deep crimson
die all these waters: what of this? what share
Is yours? what land shall you recover?
All.
All!
ay, all:
Between the Transuersaries that do run
Upon this cross staff, a dull eye may find
In what degree we are, and of what height
Yourself (our brightest Ariadne) is,
Being underneath that Tropic: as those jewels
Of night and day are by alternate course
Worn in heavens forehead,
So when Deaths Winter comes,
And shortens all those beams of Majesty,
Which in this oblique and Zodiacall Sphere
Move with Titania now, shall lose their heat,
Where must the next Sun rise but here? from whence
Shall Fairy land get warmth? merely from hence.
Let but the taper of her life burn out,
We have such torches ready in her land
To catch fire from each other, that the flames
Shall make the frighted people think earth burns,
And being dazzled with our Copes of Stars,
We shall their temples hauling with such ease,
As 'twere in solemn gay procession.
Some line sea cards, that know not the seas taste,
Nor scarce the colour: by your charms I gather
You have seen Fairy land— but in a Map:
Can tell how't stands: but if you give't a fall,
You must get bigger bones: for let me whisper
This to your ear; though you bait hooks with gold,
Ten thousand may be nibbling, when none bites,
And those you take for Angels, you'll find Sprites.
Say that Titania were now drawing short breath,
(As that's the Cone and Button that together
Clasps all our hopes) out of her ashes may
A second † Phoenix rise, of larger wing,
Of stronger talon, of more dreadful beak,
Who swooping through the air, may with his beating
So well command the winds, that all those trees
Where sit birds of our hatching (now fled thither)
Will tremble, & (through fear struck dead) to earth,
Throw those that sit and sing there, or in flocks
Drive them from thence, yea and perhaps his talon
May be so bonny and so large of gripe,
That it may shake all Babylon.
All Babylon!
Your pardon: but who'll swear this may not be?
How the prevention?
Thus; to fell down their Q. is but one stroke;
Our axe must cleave the kingdom, that's the Oak.
The manner.
easy: whilst our thunderbolts
Are anuiling abroad, call Satyran home,
He in his fathom meats vast Argoziet,
Huge Galleasses, and such wooden Castles,
As by enchantment of the waters move:
To his, marry yours and ours; and of them all
Create a brave Armado, such a Fleet,
That may break Neptune's back to carry it:
Such for variety, number, puissance,
As may fetch all the Fairy Land in turfs,
To make a green for you to walk upon
In Babylon.
Invincible! go on.
Now when the volley of those murdering shot
That are to play first on Titaniaes' breast,
And (yet) lean on their rests, go off and kill her,
So that the very Aluerado given,
Sounds the least hope of conquest; then, then show
Your warlike Pageants dancing on the waves,
Yours is the Land, the Nation are your slaves.
Counsel from Heaven!
None this shall overwhelm:
Brave voyage! Rig out ships, and fetch a Realm.
You arrive on a blessed shore. The freight you bring
Is good: it will be bought up of us all
With our dear bloods: be constant, do not warp
In this your zeal to Babylon.
Grave Palmio,
To you I have unladen even my soul,
The wings from home that brought me had sick feathers,
Some you have pulled off: my own country grass
Was to my feet sharp needle's (stuck upright)
I tread on downe-beds now.
But are your countrymen
(I mean those that in thought with us feast richly)
Fed with the course bread of affliction still?
Still father Palmio still, and to relieve them
I dare do what I told you.
Noble valour!
So that I might but read on yonder scrolls,
A warrant writ under the seal of Heaven,
To justify the Act.
You have my hand,
And shall have more. You're reconciled (Son?)
Yes.
Who did confess you?
Father Hannibal.
But did the Nuntio Campeggio
Present your letters, and your vowed service
At Babylon.
He did: I sued out warrant
For passage safely thither: and from grave Como
(One of the capital Columns of the state)
This I received.
He sends you here good welcome;
'Tis strong; why went you not?
I like it not:
There wants a convoy of some better words,
Which hourly I expect: upon a Sea
So dangerous, so full of rocks, so narrow,
(Albeit the venture holy and of honour)
I would not gladly sail, without direction
Of noble Pilots, home I would not come
Basely, but like a glorious voyager.
Yea, you do well; the Nuntio Raggazoni!
Not know him?
Certes no.
Come, you shall meet:
Monsignor, here's a Gentleman desires
To have your arms about him.—
Willingly.
He undertakes an action full of merit,
Sans promise or reward, to cure all those
Through Fairy land, that are diseased within,
And he will do't, by letting one vein blood.
Shoots he at highest?
Yes.
Draw home, and give
Your arrows compass, that until they fall
Full on the head, none see them: you do well:
My hands are yours: good speed.—
Campeggio?
Now shall you hear some news.
I do assure you,
The Mistress of us all, hath on this paper
Breathed you a blessing: your devotion
Is recommended highly, and to nourish
The flames new kindled in you, here's more fuel,
Licence to go and come, in verbo imperatrieis per omnes juris-dictiones Babilonicas absque impedimento.
Good: would it had come sooner.
Why?
'Tis general,
Exceeding absolute and peremptory.
It gives me my full sail: but by deep vows,
I am to travel lower, yet if season
Beat me not back, I will to Babylon,
What rubs soe'er I meet in letters still,
I'll kiss her sacred hand.
You change not bias.
Oh good sir, yonder is the goal I run for!
Lend me your speeches both.
Yonder comes one of your own country.
Oh I know him Sir.
Walk in this college class but some few minutes,
I'll send or bring to you a Gentleman,
Next neighbour to your country: an Albanois—
The man I told you of.
Thanks Sir.
Met happily, I looked for you.
Dear countryman the parley we late held
About the land that bred us, as how order
Was robbed of ceremony (the rich rob of order)
How Truth was freckled, spotted, nay made leprous:
How justice—
Come, no more.
Even now (as then)
You ward blows off from her, that at all weapons
Strikes at your head: but I repent we drew not
That dialogue out to length, it was so sweet. (man
At hours more opportune we shall: but country-
I heard of late the music of my soul,
And you the instrument are made that sounds it:
'tis given me, that yourself hath sealed to heaven
A bond of your devotion, to go forth
As champion of us all, in that good quarrel,
That hath cost many lives.
What need we use
Circumgyrations, and such wheelings? Sir,
Believe it, to recover our sick Nurse
I'd kill the noblest foster-child she keeps.
I know what bird you mean, & whom you hate,
But let him stand to fall: no sir, the Deer
Which we all hope you'll strike, is even the pride
And glory of the Forest: So, or not?
My vows are flown up, and it must be done,
So this may be but settled.
Do you stagger?
All winds are not yet laid.
Have you looked out
For skilful coasters, that know all the sounds,
The flats, and quick sands, and can safely land you
Out of all touch of danger?
I have met many,
And like a consort they hold several tunes—
But make they music?
Faith a little jarring:
Sometimes a string or so: yet reverend Palmio,
And Hannibal a Codreto keep the stream
In which I swim: the Nuntio Ragazzoni
Plies me with wholesome physic; so the Nuntio,
My honoured Friend Campeggio makes it clear,
That it is lawful.
Where at stick you then?
At a small rock, (a dispensation.)
You cannot want for hands to help you for
In such a noble work your friends are near; (ward:
Dear Countryman, my sword, my state, and honour,
Are for your use, go on; and let no heat
thaw your strong resolution, I shall see you,
Before you take to Sea.
You shall.
My duty.
This is the worthy Gentleman, to whom
I wish your love endeer'de: we have some conference.
Born Sir in Fairy Land?
No marry Sir-An Albanois,
Then for proximity
Of Countries, let us interchange acquaintance,
I wished for your embracements, for your name
Is crowned with titles of integrity,
judgement and Learning: let me upon their Bases
Erect a pillar, by which Babylon,
And all we may be strengthened.
I pray be apert and plain.
Then thus Sir; by the way of Argument
I would a question put, to taste your censure,
Because I do not soundly relish it.
Propone it Sir, I'll solve it as I can.
Suppose that in the field there were an Army,
Commixed of half your kinsfolk, friends, and lovers,
The other half sworn foes, (all countrymen;)
And that the leader of them were your father,
And that this leading father were so partial,
That to preserve that half which loves you not,
Ye would lose that which loves you: & that to take
This captains life away, might bring this good,
Of two sides to make one, and save much blood:
Would not you do it.
Umh: you're full of Ambage:
I answer as my spirits lead me, thus,
I would not do it.
Why Sir.
Because I hold, Quod non omninò Licet.
Come, Come, I know (without all commenting)
This text you understand: weigh the utility,
That goes with it: the health it gives to thousands;
The sap it spreads through branches which now wither:
The restoration—
Sir I see to'th bottom,
Of this deep well you dive in: I do arm you,
In this strong fight, just with the self same weapons
Which I would wear to guard me, and those are
My readings and belief settled by reading,
And this I find- Quod non sunt facienda mala, vt veniant bene
For good; (how great soever) must be done,
no ill how small soever.
'tis no evil.
To bar out so great ill, with so great good.
All good must not be done, but only that- Quod benè & legitimè fieri potest: For Sir I know, that Deus magis amat adverbia quam nomina. Quia in actionibus magis et Placent Benè & legitimè quàm bonum. Ita vt nullum bonum Liceat facere, nisi bene & legitime fieri potest. Quod in hoc Casu fieri non potest.
Yet (with your favour) several learned men,
Are clean from your opinion and do hold, Quòd licet.
Those learned men perhaps may hold it fit,
That to save many, they to one man's danger,
(Referring all to the depth inscrutable)
May allow of a particular; on no warrant
That they can show me written, but being stirred,
With a humane compassion to men's lives:
And less you revelation have divine,
That bids you do, do not; Thus you have mine.
What so hard at it.
We have done: the time,
Does pull me from your sweet society,
You will to Babylon.
I cannot tell;
Whether I do or no, you shall have notice,
How this great work goes forward; strengthen me,
With all your comforts, and commend my service
To the most glorious throne: if I get o'er,
There lands black vengeance on the Fairy shore.
If prayers can do it shall.
But how shall I know, thou art the right truth;
Because I am not painted.
Nay if thou hast no better colour than that, there's no truth in thee, for I'm sure your fairest wenches are free of the painters.
Besides I am not gorgeous in attire,
But simple, plain and homely; in mine eyes,
Doves sit, not Sparrows: on my modest cheeks,
No witching smiles do dwell: upon my tongue
No unchaste language lies: my Skins not spotted
With foul disease, as is that common harlot,
That base-born truth, that lives in Babylon.
Why? is she spotted?
All over, with strange uglines, all over,
Then she has got the pox, and lying at my host Gryncums', since I left her company: how soever it be thou and I will live honest together in one house, because my court mistress will have it so: I have been a travailer a great while, plain dealing hath leapt from country to country, till he had scarce a pair of soles to carry him.
Why? in what Countries have you been?
In more than I had mind to stay in; I have been amongst the Turks too, the Turks made as much of poor plain dealing, as those whom we call Christians.
What man is that great Turk? I never saw him:
Nor ever shalt: why the great Turk is a very little fellow; I have seen a scurvy little bad paltry Christian, has been taken for the greatest Turk there.
Where had you been, when now you met with me.
Looking up and down for thyself: and yet I lie too, now I remember, I was in the city: our mistress would needs have me go thither, to see fashions: I could make an excellent Tailor for Ladies and gentlemen, and fools, for I have seen more fashions there, than a picture drawer makes skuruy faces, the first two years of his trade: it's the maddest circle to conjure in, that ever razed spirit.
Tell me good kinsman, what in the city saw you?
What did I see? why I'll tell the cousin; I saw no more conscience in most of your rich men, then in Tavern faggots: nor no more soberness in poor men, then in Tavern spiggots: I see that citizens fine wives undo their husbands (by their pride) within a year after they are married; and within half a year after they be widows, knights undo them: they'll give a 100. pound to be dubbed ladies, and to ride in a coach, when they have scarce another hundred pound left to keep the horses. But cousin Truth, I met in one street a number of men in gowns, with papers in their hands, what are all those?
Oh! they are the sons of justice; they are those.
That beat the kingdom level, keep it smooth
And without rubs: they are the poor man's captain,
The rich man's soldier, and called Lawyers.
Lawyers? dost know any of them?
A few.
I wondered what they were, I asked one of them if they were going to football, yes said he, do you not see those country fellows, we are against them; and who do you think shall win, said I, o said he, the gowns, the gowns.
Follow me Truth; Plain dealing follow me.
He charges like a Constable; come, we are his watch: follow me? Is our Time mad?
O brave mad Time.
See there's the Cave, where that Hyena lurks,
That counterfeits thy voice, and calls forth men
To their destruction.
How full of the small pox she is, what ails she to stamp thus? is the whore mad? how now? Yea do you rise before dooms day; father Time, what conduit-pipes are these, that break out of the earth thus?
The conduit-heads of treason, which convey
Conspiracies, scandals, & civil discord,
Massacres, poisonings, wracks of faith and fealty
Through Fairies hearts, to turn them into elves:
See Truth, see son, the snake slips off his skin,
A scholar makes a ruffian.
Now must that ruffian cuff the scholar, if I were as he.
And see, that shape which erst showed reverend,
And wore, the outward badge of sanctity,
Is clothed in garments of hypocrisy.
See, see, father, he has a jack in a box: what's that?
A wild beast, a mad bull, a bull that roars,
To fright allegiance from true subjects bosoms;
That Bull must bellow, at the Flamens gate:
His gate, that tends the flocks of all those sheep,
That graze in the fatst pasture of the land,
Being all enclosed: that bull will on his back
Bear all.
Whither? whither?
To hell: 'tis said to heaven
That will but sit him, till with hoof or horn,
He gore the anointed Fairy.
Such Bulls have I seen sent out of Babylon, to run at people: I should once have rid upon one of them, but he that begged my office, broke his neck by the bargain, and saved me a labour: what's he with the sword, a master of the noble Science?
A noble villain: see, he pulls down heaven
With imprecations, if that blade he sheath not,
In our sweet mistress breast. (villain?
O rogue! what good clothes he wears, and yet is a
ay, do: clap hands upon't, that poisoned glove,
Shall strike thee dead to death, with the strong sent
Of thy discovered treason.
What's that horse-courser with the bridle?
A slave, that since he dares not touch her head,
Would work upon her hand:— laugh and conspire;
The higher villains climb, they fall the higher.
Stay father, now the Army comes forward: she takes down the flag, belike their play is done; what will she bear the colours? thou hast colour enough in thy face already, thou needst no more: did ye ever see a more lousy band? there's but two rapiers in the whole regiment: now they muster, now they double their files: mark how their hands juggle, and lay about; this is the main battle: O well flourished Ancient! the day is theirs; see, now they sound retreat: whither march they now?
To death; their falls, thus Time and Truth proclaim,
They shall like leaves-drop from the Tree of shame.
Let's follow them.
To the gallows? not I; what do we know, but this freckled face quean, may be a witch.
She is so; she's that damned sorceress,
That keeps the enchanted towers of Babylon.
This is the Truth, that did bewitch thee once.
Is this speckled toad she? She was then in mine eye,
The goodliest woman that ever wore fore part of Satin:
To see what these female creatures are, when they deal with 2. or 3. Nations; how quickly they were carbuncles & rich stones? now she is more ugly than a bawd.
She looked so then; fairness itself doth clothe her
In men's eyes, till they see me, and then they loathe her.
lose no more minutes, come, le's follow them.
With hue and cry, now I know her: this villainous drab is bawd, now I remember, to the Whore of Babylon; and we'll never leave her, till she be carted: her face is full of those red pimples with drinking Aquavite, the common drink of all bawds: come.
What comes this paper for?
Your hand.
The cause?
The Moon that from your beams did borrow light,
Hath from her silver bow shot pitchy clouds
T'ecclipse your brightness: heaven took your part,
And her surprised; A jury of bright stars,
Have her unworthy found to shine again:
Your Fairies therefore on their knees entreat,
She may be pulled out from the firmament,
Where she was placed to glitter.
Must we then,
Strike those whom we have loved? albeit the children,
Whom we have nourished at our princely breast,
Set daggers to it, we could be content
To chide, not beat them (might we use our will,)
Our hand was made to save, but not to kill.
You must not ('cause he's noble) spare his blood.
We should not, for he's noble that is good.
The fall of one, like multitudes on ye,
Makes all the rest, (of footing) be more nice:
But if by venturing on that glassy floor
Too far, he sinks, and yet rise with no more harm,
Ten thousand to like danger it doth arm:
All mercy in a Prince, makes vile the state,
All justice makes even cowards desperate.
In neither of these seas, spread we our sails,
But are the impartial beam between both scales;
Yet if we needs must bow, we would incline
To that where mercy lies, that scale's divine:
But so to save were our own breast to wound,
Nay (which is more) our peoples: for their good,
We must the Surgeon play, and let out blood.
Every Peers birth sticks a new star in heaven,
But falling by Luciferan insolence,
With him a Constellation drops from thence.
Give me his Axe— how soon the blow is given? writes
Witness: so little we in blood delight,
That doing this work, we wish we could not write.
Let's walk my Lords. Florimell?
Madame.
Stay:
Not one armed man amongst us? you might now
Be all old-beaten soldiers: truth I thank ye;
If I were now a jewel worth the stealing,
Two thieves might bind you all.
With much ado.
I marry I commend yond gentleman.
Pray Sir come near, look you he's well provided
For all rough wethers: Sir, you way be proud,
That you can give arms better than these Lords,
I thank you yet, that if a storm should fall,
We could make you our shelter. A good sword?
This would go through stitch; had I heart to kill
I'd wish no better weapon; but our days
Of quarrelling are passed; Shall we put up Sir,
We ha' put up wrongs ere now, but this is right,
Nay we are not falling yet,
It did us good
To see how your Majestic presence dawnted
The silly gentleman.
The silly gentleman!
He knew not how to stand, nor what to speak,
The silly gentleman? know you him Lords?
Where is he?
Gotten hence poor wretch with shame.
That wretch hath sworn to kill me with that
How? (sword,
The traitor.
Lock the Court gates.
Guard her person.
You guard it well. Alack! when lovers woo,
An extreme joy and fear, them so appall,
That over much love, shows no love at all.
Zeal sometimes-over-does her part-It's right—
When the frais done, Cowards cry where's the Flight. pensioners. Florimell
The wolves in his own snare: O damned slave!
I had like to ha' made his heart my poniards grave.
How got you to this knowledge?— blessed heaven!
It came unto me strangely: from a window,
Mine eyes took mark of him; that he would shoot
'twas told me, and I tried if he durst do't.
Is Ropus here, our Doctor?
Gracious Lady.
You have a lucky hand since you were ours,
It quickens our taste well; fill us of that
You last did minister: a draft, no more,
And give it fire, even Doctor how thou wilt.
I made a new extraction, you shall never
Relish the like.
Why, shall that be my last?
Oh my dear Mistress!
Go, go, I dare swore thou lov'st my very heart.
This scaly Serpent
Is thrown (as he deserves) upon the Sword
Of justice; and to make these tidings twins,
I bring this happy news, Campeius,
(A Snake that in my bosom once I warmed:)
The man for whom—.
Oh, we remember him.
This Owl, that did not love your sacred light,
Stole o'er the Seas by darkness, and was held
In Babylon a bird of noble flight:
They turned him to a Goshawk, feathered him
Armed him with talents, & then gave him bells,
And hither charged him fly, he did: and soared
O'er all your goodliest woods, and thickest groves,
Enticing birds that had the skill in song,
To learn harsh notes: and those that failed in voice,
He taught to peck the tender blossoms off,
To spoil the leafy trees, and with sharp bills
To mangle all the Golden ears of corn.
But now he's ta'en.
Good shepherds ought not care,
How many foxes fall into the Snare.
Your ciuill Doctor, Doctor Par
Casts Anchor on your shores again, being freighted
With a good venture, which he says, yourself
Must only have the sight of.
Bring him hither:
Lord Florimell, pray call Fideli to vs.
Sure 'tis too hot.
On rogue!
Set it to cool,
Hell and damnation, Devils,
What's that?
The damnedest treason! Dog: you whoreson dog;
O blessed maid: let not the toad come near her:
What's this? If't be his brewing, touch it not—
For 'tis a drench to kill the strongest Devil,
That's Drunk all day with brimstone: come suck, Weasel,
Suck your own teat, you— pray;
Thou art preserved.
From what? From whom?
Look to that Glister-pipe:
One crown does serve thy turn, but here's a thief,
That must have 50000. crowns to steal
Thy life: Here 'tis in black and white— thy life,
Sirrah thou Urinal, Tynoco, Gama,
Andrada, and Ibarra, names of Devils,
Or names to fetch up Devils: thou knowest these Scarecrows.
Oh me! O mercy, mercy! I confess.
Well said, thou shalt be hanged then.
Have we for this
Heaped favours on thee.
Heap halters on him: call the Guard: out polecat:
He smells, thy conscience stinks Doctor go purge
Thy soul, for 'tis diseased. Away with Ropus.
Away with him: foh.
Here my tale but out.
there's too muchout already.
Oh me accursed! and most miserable.
Goodness of virtue! is my blood so sweet,
That they would pay so dear for't
To suck Lambs,
What would not Wolves do, he that this paper writ,
Had never meaning we should finger it.
Our a mercy makes them cruel, hunt out these Leopards:
Their own spots will betray them: they build caves
Even in our parks: to them, him; and the rest,
Let death be sent, but sent in such a shape,
As may not be too frightful. Alack! what glory
Is it to buffet wretches bound in gives?
The debt is dearly paid that's paid with lives
Oh! leave us all.
More Doctors! if this do
As well as tother, best to hang him too.
Florimell! Stay,
But give us liberty.
This is the blessed day for which (through want
Of those bright rays that sparkle from your eyes)
My frozen soul hath languished Goddess complete,
If you, a wretch so mean, will bid to speak,
I shall unclasp a book whose very first line,
(Being not well pointed) is my doom to death:
But if your sacred judgement (on the Margin,)
Control all wresting comments, All your subjects
Will fold me in their bosoms.
Give your mind.
A Pilgrim have I been on foreign shores,
(Your gracious hand allowed it) in my wandering,
With Monsters I encountered of strange shape,
Some that sucked poison up, and spit it forth,
Upon your land: some, that shot forked stings,
At your most Godlike person: all were Giants,
Fighting against the heaven of your blessed reign:
With these (oh pardon me!) with these I held
A politic league, the lines of all their treasons,
(Drawn from one damned circle) met in me,
My heart became the Centre, and the point
Was this— I dare not tell it.
Speak?
To kill you.
How durst you (being our subject) wade so far?
Your ear of mercy. I became a sponge
To drink up all their mischief, and lay drowned
In their infected waters, (with much loathing,)
Only that I before you might wring out
This their corruption, and myself make clear.
And now (immortal maid) i'm not unlike
A casket wherein papers stuffed with danger,
Have close been locked, but those ta'en out, the chest
Serves to good use, so may my loyal breast:
For from their flinty hearts what sparks I got,
Were but to fire themselves.
I praise your plot,
You make us now your debtor, but a day
Will come, when we shall pay. My Lord, we want your Arme.
Umh! I fear—
Doctor, we'll have (Sir) other Dialogues.
O shallow fool, thou hast thyself undone,
she's hardened and thou melted at one sun.
Our eyes have lusted for you, and your presence
Comes as the light to day, showers to the spring,
Or health to sick men.
Thanks most reverend Fathers.
Our blood ran all to water, yea our souls
strove all (at once) t'expire, (when it was blown
Hither from Fairy land, that all the darts
Which ours here, and your arm delivered there,
Fell either short, or lighted upon ice)
Lest you had lost blood in the enterprise.
No, I wear stronger Armour: gamester-like
I saw the dogs brought forth; and set them on,
Till the Devil parted them; but plucked off none,
I kept aloof out of the reach of paws:
Better to fight with Lions then with laws.
What drums are these?
Music of heaven.
The dancers revel in steel.
These march to fill our Fleet.
From whence we'll match with proud victorious feet,
And walk on Fairies hearts, their beaten ways
With their own heads we'll pave, whilst ours with bays,
And oak (the conquering soldiers wreath) we crown:
These hooks, or none, must pull their Cities down,
Invasion is the fire: See, See, i'th' Air
Angels hang beckoning us to make more haste,
Vengeance deferred grows weak, and runs to waste.
What's this?—
Ere we take ship, we must to Court.
A vay.
In thunder: 'tis the soldiers sport.
It is the Imperial pleasure, decree, peremptory edict, and dreadful command (upon pain of a curse to be denounced upon him that is disobedient) from her who hath power given her to make the backs of stubborn Kings her footstools, and Emperors her vassals: the mother of Nations; the triple-crowned head of the world; the purple-rider of the glorious beast; the most high, most supreme, and most adored Empress of Babylon; that no Captain Generals of Armies, Generals of Squadrons, Admirals, Colonels, Captains, or any other Officers of her magnificent, incomparable, formidable, and invincible Armada, which is ordained to swallow up the kingdom of Fairy, shall presume to set one foot on shipboard, till her sacred hand hath blessed the enterprise by sealing them all on the forehead, and by bowing their knees before the Beast. Sound, go on.
Feels the base earth our weight? ist common Air
We suck in and respire? do servile clouds,
(Whose azure wings spread over graves and tombs)
Our glorious body circumvolue? dare night
Cast her black nets into days crystal streams,
To draw up darkness on our golden beams:
And us t'ecclipse, why is not Babylon
In a contorted chair made all of stars,
Wound up by wheels as high, nay 'bove the thrones
Supernal, which with Ioues own seat stand even,
That we might ride here as the Queen of heaven.
And with a spurn from our controlling foot,
That should like thunder shake th'aetherial floor,
Of life and heaven them both ot once bereave,
That thither up dare clime vithout our leave.
You do: you ride there now this is your Sphere,
Earth is all one with heaven when you are here.
Yet there's a hell on earth or if nothell,
Devils there are or worse than Devils, that roar only at you.
At us? what, dare they roar?
Your pardon, and i'll tell it.
Tell: We fear, no spots, the orb we shine in is so clear.
Thus then: the Fairy Adders hiss: they call you
The superstitious Harlot: purple whore:
The whore that rides on the rose-coloured beast:
The great whore, that on many waters sitteth,
Which they call many Nations: whilst their Kings,
Are slaves to sat your lust, and that their blood,
(When with them you have done) serves as a flood,
For you to drink or swim in.
O profane!
Go on: the searching small wounds is no pain.
These cowards thus when your back's turned (that strike)
Follow theirblowe and swear, that where you claim,
Supremacy monarchal over Kings,
'tis but your tyrannous pride, and not your due.
But what yourselves give, what have we from you?
You say we are your mother, and if so,
Must not sons kneel? they pay but what they owe.
They say the robes of purple which you wear,
Your scarlet veils, and mantles are not given you
As types of honour and regality,
But died so deep with blood upon them spilled,
And that (all o'er) you're with red murder gilt:
The drink even in that golden cup, they swear
Is wine sophisticated, that does run
Low on the lees of error, which in taste,
Is sweet and like the neat and wholesome juice
Of the true grape, but 'tis rank poison down.
Have we not all it tasted?
Nay, utter all.
Out of their lips you see flows nought but gall.
What can my breath do more, to blast your cheeks,
And leave them glowing as red gads of steel?
My tongue's already blistered sounding this,
Yet must I whisper to your sacred ear:
That on your brow (they say) is writ a name
In letters mystical, which they interpret
Confusion, by great Babylon they mean.
The City of Confusion.
View our forehead?
Where are we printed with such Characters?
Point out these marks: Which of you all can lay
A finger on that Mole that marks our face?
They say you can throw mists before our eyes,
To make us think you fair.
Damned blasphemies.
You shall with rods of iron scourge these treasons.
The Mace is in your hand, grind them to dust.
And let your blows be sound.
For they are just.
Let's hear with what loud throats our thunder speaks,
Repeat our vengeance o'er, which to beat Kings
Must now fly o'er the seas with linen wings.
Our Galeons, Galleasses, Zabraes, Galleys,
Ships, Pynaces, Pataches, huge Caruiles',
For number, rib and belly are so great,
That should they want a Sea near Fairy land
Of depth to bear them up, they in their wombs
Might swim with a sea thither: here are briefs
Of your imperial Armies.
Read them loud:
Thunder ne'er speaks, but the voice cracks a cloud.
In the first Squadron twelve great Galeons:
Float like twelve moving Castles: Zabraes two.
Habilimented gloriously for war,
With Soldiers, Seamen, shot, and ordinance:
This Squadron stout Medina does command:
Who of the main is Captain General.
The second Squadron brave Ricalde leads,
Being Admiral to fouretene Galleons.
Flores de Ualdes guides, the third, the fourth
Follows the silken streamers of the haughty
Pedro de Valdes that tried warrior.
Oquendo in the fift front cries a Charge.
Bretandona brings up the Levantines
With his sixt Squadron: Gomes de Medina
Waftes up the seventh like the God of war,
The eighth obeys Mendoza: and the ninth
Fierce Vgo de Montada: all these Squadrons,
For vessel, numbered are one hundred thirty,
The sight of Soldiers, Mariners, and Slaves
Twenty nine thousand, eight hundred thirty three.
Pieces of brass for battery these,
Six hundred thirty: add to these Galleons
Twenty Caruiles', and Saluees ten: which make
The whole Armada, eightscore lusty sail.
Add to all these your Generals of Armies,
Your Captains, Ensign bearers, (which in role,
Are eightscore and eleven) the Voluntaries,
With officers and servants, than the Regiments
That are in pay: to these, all men of orders,
All ministers of justice: and to these
Supplies of forces that must second us,
And last that host of stars which from the Moon
Will fall to guide us on: these totald up,
You shall a hundred thousand swords behold
Brandished at once, whose— stands
Men will seem borne with weapons in their hands.
Go: cut the fault some with your mooned keels,
And let our Galeons feel even childbirth pangs,
Till their great bellies be delivered
On the soft Fairy shores: captive their Queen,
That we may thus take oft her crown, whilst she
Kneels to these glorious wonders, or be trampled
To death for her contempt: burn, batter, kill,
Blow up, pull down, ruin all, let not white hairs,
Nor red cheeks blunt your wrath, snatch babes from breasts,
And when they cry for milk, let them suck blood,
Turn all their fields to lakes of gellyed gore,
That Seamen one day sailing by the land
May say, there Fairy kingdom once did stand.
They shall.
'T done already.
To be sure
You all are ours, bow and adore the beast;
On whom we ride.
We fall beneath his feet.
Be blessed, obedience is in sons most sweet,
O strange, to you he stoops as you before him,
Humility, he bows whilst you adore him:
To kindle lusty fires in all your blood,
A health to all, and as our cup goes round,
Draw near, we'll mark you for our chosen flock,
Who builds on hearts confirmed, builds on a rock:
The seal of heaven! who on their foreheads wear it,
We choose for counsel: on their hands who bear it,
We mark for Action: here, a health to all.
Brave health! to pledge it, see Kings prostrate fall.
On: All: On:
Sing war thy loud and loftiest notes.
We win; our ships meet none but fisher-boats.
What if I show you a foundation,
Firm as earths fixed Centre? a strong warrant,
To strike the head off, an In unction
That bids me do't: A dispensation
For what I do: A pardon signed, that gives
Indulgence plenaris, and full remission
(For any criminal breach of the highest Law)
After 'tis done: nay more, a voice as clear
As that of Angels, which proclaims the act,
Good, honourable, meritorious,
Lawful, and pious, what if I show you this?
Come, come, you cannot, then let riotous heirs
beg patents to kill fathers: grant but this
Murder may be a fair Monopoly,
And Princes stabbed by Acts of parliament:
Who is't dare that thing meritorious call,
Which fiends themselves count diabolical?
Your coldness makes me wonder: why should you
run up to'th neck, from drowning to save her,
That treads upon your head; your throat, to sink you?
Say you should wound me; should I (in revenge)
Murder myself? for what can be the close
But death, dishonour; yea, damnation
To an act so base, nay so impossible.
Impossible; the parting of the air,
Is not more easy: look upon the Court,
Through narrow sights, and she's the fairest mark,
And soonest hit of any: like the Turk
She walks not with a janisarie— Guard,
Nor (as the Russian with fowle-big-boand slaves,
Strutting on each side with the slicing Axe,
Like to a pair of hangmen: no, alas:
Her Courts of Guard are Ladies, & sometimes)
she's in the garden with as small a train,
As is the Sun in heaven: and our Access,
May then as easy be as that of Clients,
To Lawyers out of term— time.
Grant all this:
Nay, say the blow were given: how would you scape?
Oh sir, by water.—
I but.—
Nay, good cousin.—
You leap as short at safety, as at star: s
By water: why the gates will all be locked,
Waiters you must have-none.
Hear me.
Hear me,
You must not have a man, and if you kill
With powder, air betrays you.
Powder! no sir, my dag shall be my dagger:
Good sweet Cousin mark but how smooth
My paths are: look you sir.
I have thought upon a course.
Nay, nay, hear mine,
You are my mark, suppose you are my mark,
My level is thus low, but ere I rise,
My hand's got up thus high: the dear being struck,
The heard that stand about so frighted are,
I shall have leave to scape, as does a pirate,
Who having made a shot through one more strong,
All in that ship run to make good the breach,
Whilst th'other sails away. How like you this?
As I like paper harness.
Ha, well, pause then:
This bow shall stand unbent, and not an arrow
Be shot at her until we take our aim
In S. jagoes' park; a rare, rare Altar!
The fittest to sacrifice her blood upon:
It shall be there: in S. jagoes' park:
Ha coz! it shall be there: in the mean time,
We may keep followers (nine or ten a piece)
Without suspicion: numbers may work wonders;
The storm being sudden too: for were the guard
A hundred strong about her, look you sir,
All of us well appointed— Case of dags
To each man, see you? you shoot there, we here,
Unless some spirits put the bullets by,
there's no escape for her: say the dags fail,
Then to our swords.— Come, there's no mettle in you.
No mettle in me? would your wars were honest,
I quickly would find Armour: what's the goad
So sharp, that makes you wildly thus to run
Upon your certain ruin?
Goad? sharp poniards,
Why should I spare her blood?
She gave you yours.
To ha' ta'en it had been tyranny, her own lips
Confessed I struck her laws not hard: I ha' spent
My youth, and means in serving her: what reap I?
Wounds (discontents) what gives she me? good words
(Sweet meats that rot the eater:) why, last day
I did but beg of her the mastership
Of Santa Cataryna, 'twas denied me.
She keeps you to a better.
I tush, that's not all:
My bonds are yonder sealed; And she must fall.
Well coz, i'll hence.
When shall I see you?
Ha.
Soon: very soon: sooner than you expect,
Let me but breath, and what I mean to do,
I shall resolve you.
Fare you well,
adieu.—
News; thundering news sweet Lady: Envy, Ambition,
Theft sactilegious, and base treason, lay
Their heads and hands together, at one pull
To heave you from your throne: that mannish woman-divell,
That lustful bloody Queen of Babylon,
Hath (as we gather ripe intelligence)
Rigged an A●…d fleet, which even now beats the waves,
Boasting to make their wombs our City's graves.
Let it come on: our General leads above them,
Earthquakes may kingdoms move, but not remove them, Fideli.
He yonder, he that plays the fiend at sea,
The little Captain that's made all of fire,
Swears (Flemming-like) by twenty thousand Devils,
If our tongues walk thus, and our feet stand still,
So many huge ships near our coasts are come,
An Oyster-boate of ours will scarce find room.
He swears the winds have got the sails with child,
With such big bellies, all the linen's gone,
To find them linen and in Babylon,
That there's not one rag left,
Why swells this fleet?
Thus they give out, that you sent forth a Drake,
Which from their rivers beat their waterfowl,
Tore silver feathers from their fairest Swans,
And plucked the Haltions' wings that rove at sea,
And made their wilde-duckes under-water dive,
So long, that some never came up alive.
This Sea-pie Babylon, her bug Bear calls,
For when her bastards cry, let the nurse cry
But this, the Drake comes, they hush presently,
For him they'll cudgel us: will you ha' the troth?
That scarlet-whore is thirsty and no blood,
But yours, and ours (sweet maid) can do her good.
That drake shall out again: to counsel Lords.
Come, come, short counsel: better get long swords.
Good Lady dread not you, what ere befall.
we'll die first, yours is the last funeral: away, away, away.
Posts, posts, call messengers, posts with all speed.
How? fear? why should white bosoms.
Fear a Tyrant's Arm?
Tyrant's may kill us, but not do us harm.
Are we your prisoners that you guard us thus?
Stay, And you too, we are alone: when last
We entertained your speech (as we remember)
Close trains and dangerous you did discover
To fire which you were prayed.
I was.
And yielded.
Albeit it were against our life.
Most true:— my reasons.—
We forget them not: at that time
Here was but one, (true) but one counsellor,
Who stood aloof, heard nothing; and though abloud
Of courser veins than ours, would have been stirred
Into a sea tempestuous to boil up,
And drown the pilot that durst sail so far,
Yet of our princely grace (though 'twas not sit,
Nor stood with wisdom) did we silence it.
These heaped favours, notwithstanding (Doctor)
'tis in our ear: the hammers lie not still,
But that new clubs of iron are forging now,
To bruise our bones, and that yourself do know,
The very anvil where they work.
I.
Hear us, because 'tis thought some of those worser spirits,
And most malignant that at midnight rise
To blast our Fairy circles by the Moon,
Are your Familiars.
Madam.
Sir anon.
Thee therefore I conjure (if not by faith,
Oathed allegiance, nor thy conscience,
Perhaps this rankling ulcerateth them)
Yet by thy hopes of bliss, tell, and tell true,
Who is't must let us blood?
O unhappy man;
That thou shouldst breath thus long: mirror of women,
I open now my breast even to the heart,
My very soul pants on my lips: none, none,
I know of none.
Well; none: rise and take heed,
They are no common drops when Princes bleed.
What hour is this? does not my 'larum strike?
This watch goes false.
This watch goes true.
All's nought.— what hour is this?
Thy last hour, O heavens, further
The work you have begun: where art thou heart?
Oh we see't: Doctor wind up the wheel, 'tis down,
'tis down.
How now? what struck thee down? thy looks are wildes
Why was thine armed hand reared to his height?
What black work art thou doing?
Of damnation upon myself;
How?
Your words have split my heart in thousand shivers,
here, here that sticks which I fear will not out
Better to die than live suspected. Had not your bright eyes
Turned back upon me, I had long ere this
Lain at your feet a bloody sacrifice.
Stained Altars please not us: why dost thou weep?
Thou mak'st my good thoughts of thee now decline,
Who loves not his own blood, will ne'er spare mine,
Why dost thou weep?
When on your face I look,
Me thinks I see those Virtues drawn alive
Which did in Elfilyne the seventh survive,
(Your father's father, and your grandfather,)
And then that you should take me for a serpent
Gnawing the branches of that glorious tree,
The grief melts even my soul, O pardon me.
Contract thy spirits together, be composed;
Take a full man into thee, for behold
All these black clouds we clear: look up, 'tis day,
The sun shines on thee still: we'll read: away—
O matchless; i'm all poison, and yet she.
Tutnes all to goodness by wise tempering me.
If thou provest copper— well; this makes us strong
As towers of flint, All traitors are but waves,
That beat at rocks, their own blows dig their graves.
For not doing am I damned: how are my spirits
Halde, tortured, and grown wild? on leaves eternal
Vows have I writ so deep, so bound them up,
So texted them in characters capital,
I cannot raze them but I blot my name
Out of the book of sense: mine oath stands filled
On your court-roles, Then keep it, up to heaven
Thy ladder's but thus high: courage, to kill
Ten men I should not freeze thus: yet her murder
Cannot be named bloodshed, for her Fairies
Are all of faith, and fealty assoiled
The balm that her anointed is washed off,
Her crown is now not hers; upon the pain
Of a black curse, no more must I obey her,
I climb to heaven by this, climb then and slay her.
Atyrants' strange, but just end!
Run for sloepe, and died Princes that plunge
Their souls in rank and godless appetites
Must seek no rest but in the arms of Sprites.
Nothing to read? that (if my nerves should shrink
And make mine arm revolt) I might have colour
To usurp this walk of hers: what's this? see, see
An Angel thrusts this iron into my hand,
My warrant signed from Babylon to kill her,
Endorsed, the last will of Paridell.
Le concede sua Benedictione, plenaria indulgenza,
E remissione dittti li peccati—tutti li peccati—
All, all my sins are paid off, paying this,
'tis done, 'tis done, All you blessed powers I charm,
Now, now, knit all your sinews to this arm.
You haprooued yourself a loyal gentleman.
The hand of Angels guide us: she's not here,
The Queen's killed; treason: Wenches, raise the Court.
Walk several ways first.
Ways; she's murdered: treason.
Treason; asword. What traitor dare? who? where?
A guard the damned serpent, see, lurks here.
Sure here's some nest they breed in paw him fast,
This Wolf, this Yeade (mark, he swells red with poison,)
This learned knave is swum to murder thee.
I defy any man that speaks it.
Hah:—defie this , est ge,
Defy him, he shall spit into thy
Thy beard scald 〈◊〉,
And dost thou betray 〈◊〉 Sui●… thou so?
And will seal my speech with blood.
My no against his yea; My no his good.
Better, his yea go naked, and your no's
Very well elo off, , th
And here's his naked truth.
Again.
Oh me;— now nothing but your mercy me can save.
It must not: Princes that would safely live,
May grieue at traytor falles but not fome.
Let him be summoned to the bar of shame.
'tis welcome, a black life, ends in black fame,
Away with him.
Now to the business,
We have one foot.
ay, I, look to the head.
The hangman cures those members.
What is done?
This (sacred Lady:) we with either hand
Have raised an Army both by sea and land.
Your goodly ships bear the most royal freight,
That the world owes (true hearts) their wombs are full,
Of noble spirits, each man in his face
Shows a King's daunting look, the soldiers stand
So thickly on the decke, so braue sim'd,
(The Silken streamers waving o'er their heads)
That (seeing them) you would judge 'twere Pentecost,
And that the jolly youngsters of your towns,
Had flocked together in gay multitudes,
For May-games, and for summer merriments,
They looke so ely: in such de mome
So many Fairies never dwelled at once,
Never so many men were borne so soon,
The drum that gave the call, could not be heard
For justling armours: ere the call was done,
It was so ringed about with groves of pikes,
That when they broke on both sides to give way,
The beating of the drum was thunder's noise,
Whilst coats of steel clashed so on coats of steel,
Helmets on helmets that they struck out fire,
Which showed like lightning, or those flames that fly
From the huge Cyclops-hammer, when they sweat
To forge Ioues thunder: And in such a heat
With quickness rush they armed forth, captains swore,
Harness was sure the clothes they daily wore.
Men faster came to fight then to a feast.
Nay, women sued to us they might be priest.
Old grandams that on crutches bear up age,
Full nimbly buckled Armours on their sons,
And when 'twas on, she clapped him on his back,
And spoke thus, run my boy, fight till thouart dead,
Thy blood can never be more bravely shed.
How are the numbers you have levied?
What your sea-forces are, this brief doth speak.
We have raised double walls to fence your land.
The one the body of a standing Camp,
Whose tents by this are pitched in Beria,
On the shores point, to bar the foe from footing.
Over that Camp at Beria * we create
Your Florimell Lieutenant General;
The other is to guard your royal person.
Whose charge is yours: the sea Fideli, yours.
The standing camp of horsemen and of foot,
These numbers fill. Lances 253. Horsemen 769.
Footmen 22000. The moving Army, which attends on you,
Is thus made up: of horsemen & of foot, Lancers 481.
Light horsemen 1421. Footmen 34050.
We do not raise our hopes on points of spears,
A handful is an host, in a good fight,
Lambs may beat Lions in a war not right.
The General of all armies be our leader,
Be full of courage lords as you're in years.
For this be sure we'll not outlive our peers.
Weele al liue, but wil first haue them b'th cas.
Go on, your conduct be the prosperous hand,
Make you the sea good, we'll not lose the land.
Your Queen will to the field, It shall be said,
Once soldiers to their Captain had a Maid.
You sweat well in this harvest.
Nay, when we come to bind up the whore of Babylon's
Punks and Pynaces in sheaves, we'll sweat worse.
Have you bestowed the other hands?
I have.
Incorporate this to you then: 'tis the mandate
Of your Lieutenant General. You fight
In your great Fairy's quarrel, and Truths right,
Stand therefore to't.
I will have no wounds on my shoulders, I scorn to run,
Or to cry out of warlike kybes in the heel.
Go (thou most Godlike maid) & buckle on
The breastplates fetched from thine own Armoury,
Let every soldier wear one, on each leader
Bestow a guiding-staffe, and a strong shield
That may as faithful be to his good sword
As thou art to his heart: head all the spears
With gold of Angell-proofe. Sit like a dove
Upon the Horsmans' helm, and on his face
Fan with thy silver wings sweet victory,
Go, beat thy drum, that men may know thy march,
Spread thine own colours (Truth) so let them shine,
Soldiers may swear they'll follow none but thine.
I fly, swift as the winged wings.
Today is workaday with me for all I have my best clothes
On, what do you set me to?
Goe thou and sweepe th buses from the camp. (cleane,
Conscience has left no brooms big enough to do that
Then purge the tents of all infectious airs.
Yonder's one infection new broke out, if it be not stopped
From running, will choke us all.
Name it, i'll minister the remedy.
Time may do it, this 'tis: A Broker and his wife that dropped out of the Hangman's budget but last day; are now eating into the Camp, and are victuallers to it: their very Cans have hoops of gold lace now, that bangd Captains jerkins all o'er but yesterday: 15. Lief tenants have eaten up their buff jerkins with cheese and mustard: Nay this vilaine of fourscore i'th' hundred has set up three Armourers shops with harness caps, and pewter coats, that are lined clean out with Ale: the Rogue lies every night upon as many feathers which grew in soldiers hats, as will undooe four hundred Schoolmasters to hire them for their boys to go a feasting,
Breed such disorders 'mongst the soldiers?
They swarm like lice: nay his wife tickels it too, for three Muskateeres came but to drink Tobacco in her cabin, and she fired their flasks and tuch-boxes.
Go rid the Camp of these, and all like these.
If any soldier swear i'll cashier him too.
You will scarce leave two in the Army then.
What shall I do with those Pioneers yonder?
You know the ground, lead them to cast up trenches. Away.
They are by this time leading one another, for when I left them, I left them all casting, i'll now go see what it comes to.
I'll fly hence to the fleet of Babylon.
And from their tackle and their mainmast tons,
Time shall shoot vengeance through his bow of steel,
Wedge like to split their Navy to the keel.
I'll cut their Princes down as blades of grass,
As this glass, so the Babylonian power,
The higher shall run out to fill the lower.
The sulphurous Aetna belcheth on our ships,
Cut Cables, or the whole fleet drowns in fire
Holla.
Of Babylon.
What fire?
The devils: the sea's on fire 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
where's 〈◊〉
Close under hatches dares not show his head.
Daation on ch Ricalde?
Who?
Our Admiral the admiral of our Navy, wise Ricalde
Our stout and brave Ricalde keeps his bed.
All poxes fire him out; Pedro de Valdes
Having about him 50. Canons
Stretch wide to bark is boarded, taken.
Taken?
Without resistance: 〈◊〉 sunk,
Oquendo burned, Moncada drowned, or slain,
The ship of all our medicaments is lost.
Dogs eat our medicaments, such are our wounds.
We more shall Sextons need than Surgeons.
What course is best?
The best to get the day▪
Is to hoist sails up, and away.
Away, away, hoist sails up and away.
A world of men and wealth lost in one day.
Shoot, shoot, they answer, brave: more Linstocks: shoot:
This stratage dropt downe from in fi.
Board, board, hoist more sail up▪ they fly, shoot, Shoot.
We never held a royal Court till now:
(Warriors) would it not seem most glorious,
To have ambassadors to greet us thus?
Our chair of state, a drum: for sumptuous robes
Ruffling about vs, heads in glo
Of bright reflecting steel: for revellers
(Treading soft )
Trust me, I like the martial life so well,
I could change Cou ,
'tis a brave life: methinks it best becomes
A Prince to
My fellow soldier: I dare swear you'll fight,
To the last man, your Captain being in fight.
To the last lest man's little finger.
What flames through all your blood your breath inspires
For that we come not: no breast here wants fires.
'twas kindled in their cradles, strength, courage, zeal,
Meet in each bosom like a threefold flood,
We come with yours to venture our own blood.
For you and we are fellows; thus appears it,
The soldier keeps the crown on, the prince wears it.
Of all men you we hold the most most dear,
But for a soldier I had not been here.
Do not their guns offend you?
How? we are tried,
wh'im'e borne a soldier by the father's side.
The Cannon (thunders Zany) plays to us,
Soft musics tunes, and more melodious:
And me more rarely like, because all these,
That now can speak the language of stern war,
Could not speak swords, or guns, nay scarce could go,
Nay were not borne, but like to new sown grain
Lay hid i'th' mould, when we went to be crowned,
though now theyare tall corn fields, covering the ground.
Room, room, news, news, the youngest news that ever was brought forth amongst men at Arms: a woman (sweet mistress) is brought to bed of a man child i'th' Camp: a boy that looks as if he would shoot off already: the bed they have swaddled him in, is the piece of an old torn Ancient: his blankets are two soldiers Mandelions: his cradle is the hollow backe-peece of a rusty Armour: his head lies in a Murrain that's quilted to keep him warm, the first thing that ever he laid hold on, was a truncheon, on which a Captain leaned to look upon him, he'll be a warrior I warrant. A Can of beer is set to his mouth already, yet I doubt he'll prove but a victualer to the Camp: A notable fat double-chind bulchin.
A child borne in our Camp! go give him fame,
Let him be Beria called, by the Camps name.
Thats his name then: Beria, in steede of a Mid ▪ Captaine shall beare him to the Pont, and if there to followe it, they shal who would sweate thus to get for another child? fathers themselues are gu so sometimes, farewel .
With roses us you crown, yourself with palm,
Had we all wounds, your words are sovereign balm.
Are those clouds spersed that strove to dim our light?
And driven into the gloomy caves of night.
Our hands be heaved up for it.
Therers' good cause,
weare bowned to do so by the higher laws,
Those roaring Whales came with devouring wombs▪
To swallow vp your kingdomes: foolish he ▪
When half of them scarce knew where it did stand,
Under what Zenith, did they share your land.
At dice they played for fairies, at each cast▪
A Knight at least was lost: what do you set?
This Knight cries one (and names him) no, a Lord
Or none, 'tis done, he throws and sweeps the board,
His hat is fall of Lords upto the brim,
The sea threw next at all, won all and him,
Would you these Gamesters see now?
See now? where?
they'll scarce see us, the last sight cost so dear,
Bid you me do it, 'tis done, Time takes such pride,
To wait on you, he'll lackey by your-side.
Those days of their Arrival, battle, flight,
And ignominious shipwrecks (like lost Arrows,)
Are out of reach: of them the world receives
But what Times book shows turning back the leaves,
But if you'll see this Concubine of Kings,
In her majestic madness with her sons,
That hour is now but numbering out in sand,
These minutes are not yet run through Time's hand,
For you and for your 〈◊〉 sweet delight
,
I be a glori ,
Unseen you shall both see and hear these wonders
On the green Mount of Truth: let the Army move,
And meet you in the vale of Oberon,
Your captives are sent thither: quick as thought
You shall fly: 〈◊〉 upon my active wings,
Time at one instant sees all Courts of Kings.
Hence: sting me not: you're Scorpions to my breast,
Diseases to my blood: he dies that speaks.
You're mad.
You're mad.
o falls not heaven!
Be silent:
Be damned for your speech: as you're for Act,
You are all black and close conspirators
In our disgrace.
You lie▪
O horrible?
You Rave yet know not why,
Thou sayst all's lost.
Drowned, burnt, split upon rocks, cast over board,
Throats cut by kerns, whose hairs like else-loekes hang,
One of those shamrock-eaters at one break fast,
Slit fourscore weazand pipes of ours,
Of yours:
Oquendo burned, Piementelli Slain,
Pedro de Valdes ta'en,
Could dwarves beat Giants?
In one day fell 500: Galleons 15.
Drowned at the same time; or which was worser taken,
The same day made 1000. prisoners.
Yet not a cherry stone of theirs was sunk.