GRacious spectators do not here expect,
Visions of pleasure, amorous discourse:
Our subject is of blood and Tragedy,
Murder, foul Incest, and Hypocrisy.
Behold the Strumpet of proud Babylon,
Her Cup with fornication foaming full
Of God's high wrath and vengeance for that evil,
Which was imposed upon her by the Devil.
SEnt from the Crystal Palace of true Fame,
And bright star-chamber of eternal souls,
Severed from angels' fellowship awhile,
To dwell with mortal bodies here on earth:
I Francis Guicciardine a Florentine,
Am by the powerful and commanding Muse,
(Which beareth domination in our souls)
Sent down to let you see the Tragedy,
Of Roderigo Borgia lately Pope,
Called the sixth Alexander, with his son
Proud Caesar: to present unto your eyes,
Their faithless, fearless, and ambitious lives:
And first by what ungodly means and Art,
He did attain the Triple-Diadem,
This vision offered to your eyes declares.
Thus first with golden bribes he did corrupt
The purple conclave: then by devilish art
Sathan transfigured like a Pronotary
To him makes offer of the triple Crown
For certain years agreed betwixt them two.
The life of action shall express the rest.
Renowned Lodowik our warlike Cousin,
Auspiciously encountered on the skirts
Of Piedmont, we greet you joyfully.
Thrice and forever most renowned Charles,
A faithful tongue from an unfeigned heart
As a just herald full of truth and honour
On the behalf of forlorn Italie
Needing and craving at your Princely hands,
The patronage and true protection
Of such a Potent and victorious King
Humbly salutes your royal Majesty.
The ship of which sometime well guided state,
Is through tempestuous times malignity
By worthless Pilots, foolish Governors
Mutually factious, like to sink through Schism
Into the bottom of the black abysm
Through th'imposition of necessity.
Do not! oh do not then (most Christian Charles)
Do not forsake her holding up her hands
For succour to your royal Clemency:
Her sails are rent, masts spent and rudder brook
And under water such wide open leaks
As under water soon will make her sink.
Having been bilged upon so many shelves,
So torn, so rotten and so long unrigged,
And playing with the waves to and again
As one not governed with help of helm.
One than whom nature in his vows to God,
Hath tied to tender her forlone estate
With eyes foreseeing and compassionate,
Retenders her to your high Majesty,
A Christian Prince so wise so valiant:
Undoubted heir unto the Crown of Naples,
By lawful right of that great house of Anjou:
Of which your grace is well known lawful heir,
By th'issues of that Charles the first, that first
Of the blood royal of the Crown of France,
Obtained that Kingdom ages many passed.
These reasons wherewith Lodowik Sforza moved,
To move your Majesty with martial force
To pass these mountains to possess your own.
March then most Christian and renowned Prince,
Advance thy lily standard potent King:
And since all scandals are removed and cleared,
Strike up your cheerful drums and march along
In God's name; with good auspices of Saint Denys,
I know you doubt not mine integrity:
Can more gross error rest in policy.
Then first to raise a turbulent sharp storm,
And unadvisedly to leave defence
To doubtful chance and possibilities.
To broach strong poison is too dangerous,
And not be certain of the present virtue
Which is contained in his Antidote.
Wild fire permitted without limit burns,
Even to consume them that first kindled it:
I did advise you, I inducted you,
And Lodowick, which brought you on with honour,
Will bring you of with triumph and renown.
Embrace me Cousin Sforza: by the souls
Of my forefathers I rejoice as much
In thy dear friendship and wise industry,
As in the more part of my patrimony:
Courage together let us share all one,
In life, in death, in purchase or in none.
are fornmate for Daubigny,
how that the Coloneses,
(Although Alfonso did accord with them,)
Declared have themselves for France and us,
Without dissembling or hypocrisy.
Why this was it I did expect great Charles,
Our armies and our friends have been long sown,
The ground well ploughed, the blade is full come up,
And doubt not we shall have a joyful harvest.
Cousin Montpansier
March with your regiments to Pontremolt.
Expect us, or from us directions,
To meet our forces, when we come near Florence,
There shall you find the Swiss with their Artillery,
Newly by sea brought unto Spetia,
Come Cousin march we cheerfully together,
Fair is the way, fair fortune, and fair wether,
Nay such profane and monstrous Sodomy,
Such obscure Incest and Adultery,
Such odious Avarice and perfidy,
Such vinolence and brutish gluttony,
So barren of sincere integrity.
In whom there is no shame nor verity,
Faith nor religion, but mere cruelty?
Immoderate ambition, guileful treachery,
Such profanation and Apostasy,
And in all falsehood such dexterity.
As heavens detest, and men on earth disaster
Such impious sacrilege, such adulation:
Of all good men such detestation.
Such Magic skill, such devilish incantation.
apparent figures of damned reprobation.
As in all thoughts is thought abomination.
Time will outstrip us; for the morning star,
Portends the mounting of fair Phoebus car.
Hast we, for danger drawn on by delay,
Admits no time to tarry till clear day.
Fix on your Papers, these for Alexander
And his ambitious Caesar: set on yours.
Hale reverent Pasquill I doll of verity,
Accept these sacrifices which we bring.
These be sin offerings figuring foul vice.
Oh glorious guider of the golden Spheres,
And thou that from thy precious lyric strings
Makes Gods and men in heaven and earth to dance
With sacred touch of sweetest harmony:
Pity these times, by whose malignity,
We lose our grace, and thou thy dignity.
High Muse, which whilom virtues patronized,
In whose eternal rolls of memory
The famous acts of Princes were comprised
By force of everliving History:
What shall we do to call thee back again?
True Chronicler of all immortal glory,
When here with mortal men nought is devised,
But how all stories with foul vice to stain:
So that alas thy gracious Oratory,
Which with mere truth and virtue sympathized,
Is silent; and we Poets now with pain,
(Which in Castalian Fountains dipped our quills)
Are forced of men's impiety to plain;
And well thou wotest, wrought against our wills,
In rugged verse, vile matters to contain:
And herein lurks the worst of mortal ills,
That Rome (which should be virtues Paradise)
Bare of all good, is wilderness of vice.
How luculent and more conspicuous
Even than the sun, in clearest Majesty,
His vehement and more than hellish thirst
Soaring to perch upon the spire of honour
Displaces his bastard wings: and in that nest
Where princely Falcons, or Ioues kingly Birds,
Should hatch their young ones, plants his ravenous Harpies,
His graceless, impious, and disastrous sons,
Even in the sovereign Chair of domination.
But chiefly one, that devilish Cardinal,
Proud Caesar, farst, with fierce impiety:
His Oracle and instrument of shame
In all nefarious plots and practises,
Is now become as wicked as himself:
But haste we now, lest any should suspect us.
Much conference with Pasquill may detect us.
Dio viguarda signor illustrissimo: whether in such haste my noble Lord thus early?
signor Barbarossa in happy time well encountered, for I have some business this morning with my brother the Duke of Candie, wherein I would both use your counsel and countenance.
My good Lord Viselli, the countenance of your devoted poor friend, is of less value than his counsel, yet both of very small validity: such as they be, with his life and best fortunes he sincerely sacrificeth all to your service.
Pardon me dear sir no service more than reciprocal, and in due parity betwixt us, and since we be so near it, let us not pass Pasquill without an Ave: what scandalous hieroglyphics have we here?
A. S. P. M. avaritia, Superbia, Perfidiae, Malitiae, Alexander, Sextus, Pontifex, Maximus. Against my Lord the pope's holiness such blasphemous impudence, such intolerable bitterness! M. P. S. A. These are the same letters with the first beginning at the last, Magnum Petrum Sequitur Antichristus. Phy Diabolo, our blessed Alexander (being Saint Peeters successor) this devilish libeler calls Antichrist.
Pause there my Lord a little, somewhat here concerns my Lord the Cardinal Borgia.
Read it good Barbarossa.
Alexander Caesarem suum Galero et purpura donavit vt menstruoso spiritus sui veneno, universum simul conclave suffocaret.
Oh most intolerable abomination?
Alexander adopted his son Caesar into the fellowship of Cardinals, that he with the menstruous poison of his breath might choke the whole Conclave.
By the blessed altar of Saint Peter this villainy surpasseth patience.
My Lord here's a long libel.
Read it good Barbarossa: more mischief of my wife nay read it.
Quid mirum? Romae facta est Lucretia Thais,
unica Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus.
The same in effect ensueth.
Welcome good Post from Rome tell us some news,
Lucrece is turned Thayis of the stews:
In whom her father Alexander saw,
His only daughter, wife, and daughter in law,
Shall I read on my Lord? here is much more.
Nay read out all, it is but of a whore.
Francesco di Gonsaga was the first,
That married Lucrece Alexander's daughter,
And yet the Pope those banns of bridal burst,
And made of marriage sacrament a laughter,
His reason was because that fellow poor,
Lacked maintenance for such a noble whore.
Malignant aspect of ungracious stars,
Why have you pointed at my miseries?
Have patience good my Lord and here the rest,
Patienza per forza, but this wounds to th'quick.
Iohn Sforza now Lord Marquis of Pescare,
Was second husband to this jolly dame,
Of nature's faculties he being bare,
In like state with his predecessor came,
Because he, when he should have writ his mind,
Paper well might; but pen or ink none find.
Oh villainies of monstrous people,
Fashions and times deformed and unseasonable,
Yet my Lord a little have patience in your own cause
Malice perform thy worst least coming late,
I with anticipation cross that fate. Read it, to't man.
Gismond Viselli, nobly descended,
Is for his shameful match much discommended.
For never was the shameless Fulvia,
Nor Lais noted for so many wooers,
Nor that unchaste profuse Sempronia.
A common dealer with so many doers,
So proud, so faithless, and so void of shame,
As is new brothel bride Lucretia,
Take to thee Gismond both the scorn and shame,
And live long jealous of Lucretia.
With pushing horns keep out all comers in,
For now thy mortal miseries begin.
Mortal miseries? but we are all mortal,
Fortune I scorn thy malice, and thy meed,
Keep them up safe that I may show them to his holiness,
Is this the licence which our city Rome
Hath given to beastly Bards, and satirists,
ribaldy rhymesters, and malicious curs,
To leave no state of Church nor secular,
Free from their ordure, and pollution.
Good Barbarossa bear me Company:
Exile and Punishment for such base poets,
And stripes with wiry scourges were too little.
Which breathing here in Rome, and taking grace
From the fair Sunshine of this hemisphere,
Contaminate that air with their vile breath.
Obumbrating this light by which they live,
If these were truth: this times impiety,
May soon sink down under the deity.
With what expense of money plate and jewels
This Mitre is attained my Coffers witness:
But Astaroth my covenant with thee
Made for this soul more precious than all treasure,
Afflicts my conscience, O but Alexander
Thy conscience is no conscience; if a conscience,
It is a leprous and polluted conscience.
But what? a coward for thy conscience?
The devil is witness with me when I sealed it
And cauterised this conscience now scared up
To banish our faith, hope and charity;
Using the name of Christian as a stale
For Arcane plots and intricate designs
That all my misty machinations
And Counsels held with black Tartarian fiends
Were for the glorious sunshine of my sons;
That they might mount in equal parallel
With golden majesty like Saturn's son
To dart down fire and thunder on their foes.
That, that was it, which I so much desired
To see my sons through all the world admired,
In spite of grace, conscience, and Acheron
I will rejoice and triumph in my Charter.
Sedebis Romae Papa, summa in felicitate tui et
Filiorum vine; 11. et 7. dies 8. post moriere.
Proviso quod nunquam te signes tremende
Crucis signo.
Was a devil provideth in his covenant
I should not cross myself at any time;
I never was so ceremonious.
Well this rich Mitre thought it cost me dear
Shall make me live in pomp whilst I live here.
Holla Bernardo?
Call hither my two sons the Duke of Candy and the
Cardinal of Valence.
Happy those sons whom father's love so well
That for their sakes they dare adventure hell.
Come my dear sons the comfort of my life
Yours is this earthly glory which I hold.
Cannot the spacious bounds of Italy
Divided equally contain you both?
From France and Switzerland I will begin
With Naples and those Towns in Peadmont
And all the signories in Lombardy
From Porto di Volane to Savona
And Genes on th' otherside of Italy
Upon the Mediterranean towards Greece;
Allotted Candy for his patrimony.
And in Romania from Pontremoli
And Prato to fair Florence; and from thence
In Tuscany within the River Narre
And fruitful Arno those sweet Provinces
Even to Mont Alto, Naples, Policastro
And Petrasilia in Calabria
The furthest home of Italy for Caesar.
Gain double strength with your united loves
Love one another boys you shall be Kings:
Fortune hath been auspicious at my birth
And will continue gracious to mine end.
Castor and Pollux would not live in Heaven
unless they might be stellified together,
You for a little-turf of earth contend
When they together shine the welkin clears:
And gentle gales bear fourth the winged fails,
But when they shine a part they threaten storms
And hideous tempests to the Mariners
Castor would not be called but Pollux Castor
And Castor Castor's Pollux: so my Candy
Be Caesar's Candy, Caesar, Candy's Caesar,
With perfect love, dear boys love one another
So either shall be strengthened by his brother.
Ms blessed reuerend and renowned father,
The love by nature to my brother Candy,
embraceth me sometimes in plainer sort
To clear my conscience issuing from pure love,
It is mere love which moves these passions,
When I do counsel or advise your good.
I know dear brother when your counsel tends
Unto my good it issueth from pure love.
As when I tax your princely conscience
Like an unpitted penitentiary,
Brother with reverence of his Holiness
Your heart is too much spiced with honesty.
I and I fear me he will find it so,
Your brother Caesar tells you very true:
You must not be so ceremonious
Of oaths and honesty, Princes of this world
Are not pricked in the books of conscience,
You may not break your promise for a world:
Learn this one lesson look ye mark it well,
It is not always needful to keep promise,
For Princes (forced by mere necessity
To pass their faithful promises) again
Forced by the same necessity to break promise.
And for your more instructions learn these rules!
If any Cedar, in your forest spread,
And overpeer your branches with his top,
Provide a axe to cut him at the root,
Suborn informers or by snares entrap
That King of Flies within the spider's Web;
Or else ensnare him in the Lions toils.
What though the multitude applaud his fame:
Because the vulgar have wide open ears
Mutter amongst them and possess their hearts
That his designments wrought against the state
By which yea wound him with a public hate.
So let him perish, yet seem pitiful
Cherish the weakness of his stock and race
As if alone he merited disgrace.
Suffer your Court to mourn his funerals,
But burn a bonfire for him in your Chamber.
Caesar delivereth Oracles of truth.
'tis well said Caesar, yet attend a little,
And bind them like rich bracelets on thine arms
Or as a precious jewel at thine ear.
Suppose two factious Princes both thy friends
Ambitious both, and both competitors,
Advance in hostile arms against each other
join with the strongest to confound the weak
But let your wars foundation touch his Crown,
Your nearest Charity concerns yourself;
Else let him perish; yet seem charitable.
As if you were merely composed of virtue:
Believe me Candy things are as they seem,
Not what they be themselves; all is opinion:
And all this world is but opinion.
Look what large distance is twixt Heaven and Earth,
So many leagues twixt wealth and honesty:
And they that live puling upon the fruits
Of honest consciences; starve on the Common.
Caesar can tell thee this in ample sort.
And Caesar love him, love him heartily;
Though mildness do possess thy brother Candie,
It is a gentle vice, vicining virtue.
Under correction of your Holiness,
Those wars which virtue levies against vice,
Are only known to some particulars
Which have them written in their consciences.
Those are the same they seem and in such wars
Your son shall make remonstrance of his valour,
And so become true Champion of the Church.
It is the precious Ornament of Princes
To be strong hearted, proud, and valiant,
But well attempted with calidity,
Brother with reverence of his holiness
(Whose sacred words like blessed Oracles
Have pointed at your prudence) Caesar would
Have given the like advise: but (in conclusion)
Undoubtedly to work out thy confusion.
Upon my blessing follow Caesar's counsel;
It tendeth to thy glory.
Most blessed Lord,
Ambassadors from Ferdinand of Naples
Arrived here attend your holiness.
This is a welcome messenger for Godfrey,
To make a marriage with the Lady Saunce:
And Candy for so much as this requires
A joyful entertainment; take that honour
And bid him welcome with due compliments.
Show courteous, language laudable apport;
Let them be feasted in more sumptuous sort
Then ordinary messengers of state:
Observe his speeches, fathom his designs;
And for I know thy nature tractable,
And full of courtesy: show courtesy
And good entreaty to them: Gentle Candie
Now show thy self a politician;
I need not give thee large instructions;
For that I know thee wise, and honourable
Greet them from us: Caesar shall at a turn
Give correspondence to thy courtesy:
I as well sitteth with my state and honour
Within these ten days will admit them hearing:
meanwhile learn out by lore of policy
The substance of their motions, that we may
Be better armed to give them resolution.
Your holiness in this shall see my skill,
To do you service,
Caesar now to thee.
This task upon thy shoulders only leans;
I rest upon thee Caesar: were it not
That thou must second it, or first it rather
I durst not trust such things of consequence,
To feeble spirits: therefore from our stables
Six Persian Coursers armed and furnished
With rich Caparisons of gold and Pearl,
With six rich Complete Armours for their saddles,
And such a Cabinet of precious jewels
As we shall choose within tomorrow morning
Present from us in token of our love.
Let for no cost in sumptuous banqueting,
Believe me Caesar sometimes at a banquet,
More ground is got then at a bloody battle.
Worm out their humours, fathom their delights,
If they delight in that which Naples covets,
Fine, witty, lovesick, brave, and beautiful,
Eloquent, glancing, full of fantasies.
Such Sugar hearted Syrens, or such Comets,
As shine in our imperial state of Rome,
True picklocks in close wards of policy,
Present them with the Paragons of Rome:
And spare not for a Million in expense,
So long as here they keep their residence.
Caesar in such a case will prove true Caesar,
Wise, frank, and honourable.
I doubt it not:
And Caesar, (as thou dost embrace my love,
More than the world beside) accomplish this,
And we shall Caesar with high blessings bliss,
By this time is my fair Lucretia,
Befitted for a business of blood,
Nearly concerning her estate and mine.
Lucretia cast off all servile fear,
Revenge thyself upon thy jealous husband
Tt thine honor, wrong'd thy bed:
Fear not; with resolution act his death:
L ace in policies
thee Lucrece: now prove Caesar's Sister,
y sratagems as hee:
have found examples in all times.
If womanly thou melt the then call to mind,
wrathful fury,
indeous :
murder of her only son,
A Dauhters (all but one)
i one night, their husbands sleeping slew.
My cause as just as theirs, my heart as resolute,
My hands as ready. Gismond I come,
hailed on with fury to revenge these wrongs
And love imprisoned with thy jealousy,
I haue deised such a cuious sare,
As jealous Vulcan never yet devised,
To grasp his arms unable to resist,
Death's instruments enclosed in these hands.
You Dauhers of gumme Erebus,
Which spit out vengeance from your viperous heirs,
Infuse a threefold vigor in these arms;
Imarble av-d_c my strong indurate heart,
To consumate the pl o my reuenge.
Here comes the subject of my Tragedy.
What my Lucretia walking alone?
These solitary passions should bewray
Some discontentment, and those gracious eyes
Seem to be mooned with anger, not with love:
Tell me Lucretia, may thy Gismond know?
Demandest thou the cause miutious Gismond?
When like a recluse (shut up from the world)
I live close prisoner to thy jealousy?
The Esperian Dragons kept not with more watch,
The golden fruit than thou my fatal beauty:
Thou wouldst exclude me from the sight of Sun,
But that his beames break trough some cusies
Thou wouldst debar me from the common air,
But that against my will I suck it in,
breath it out in scalding sighs again:
Were I in Naxos where no noise is heard
But Nmes age ghts but ruthelesse rocks.
Or in the Libian deserts, or exchanged
This Hemisphe o Rome for Intodes,
Were not so glorious as to dwell in Rome,
Banished from sight and conference of friends.
thou my jealousy? may blame thy beauty,
And love imprisoned in those amorous looks:
fear the suns reflections on thy face,
lest he more wondering at thy precious eyes,
Than any nymphs which he most honoured,
Should bear thee to some other Paradise,
And rob me, silly man, of this world's joy.
I fear the winds least amorous Ioue in them,
(Envying such precious nature amongst men)
With extreme passion hence should hurry thee.
Oh love is full of fear all things I fear,
By which I might be frustrate of thy love.
scoff'st thou me Gismond with continual taunts?
Oh God of heavens, shall I both suffer shame
And scorn, with such despised captivity.
Here in the presence of the powers in Heaven,
I do not speak on scorn, but in mere love:
And further Lucrese, (of thy clemency,
For love, and beauty, both are rich in bounty)
Forgive me what is past, and I will swear,
Never to vex thee with more jealousy.
Thou wilt so swear thyself: Gismond come hither?
Sit down and answer me this question.
When I bestowed on thee this diamond
A Jewel once held precious as my life;
And with it cast away myself on thee
Didst thou not promise to maintain mine honour,
av-x_d in word nor deed to give suspect
O thy dislike and haste thou not since then
In presence of my nearest Noble friends
me like a Layis for my lightness?
his moy vp
So me restrained from speech and sight of them?
Wh thou didst bestow this Diamond
I had a precious lustre in mine eye:
And was possessed of virtue, when I vowed
To maintain that, which was impossible:
Bt that time this stone hath had a saw,
Brother, within the ring, his foil grown dim,
The virtue vanished and the lust lost.
I can no longer brook these base rebukes.
These taunting riddles and close libellings
Oh help I am strangled.
Peace wretched villain, then receive this quickly:
Or by the living powers of heaven i'll kill thee.
Take pen and ink: 'tis not to make thy will;
For if then wilt subscribe, I will not kill.
'tis but to clear those scandals of my shame,
With which thy jealousy did me defame.
So now that part is played, what follows now?
Thou ribald, Cuckold Rascal, libeler,
Pernicious Lecher void of all performance;
Perjurious Coxcomb, fool, now for those wrongs
Which no great spirit could well tolerate
Come I, with mortal vengeance on thy soul.
Take this for slandering of his Holiness
My blessed father and my brother Caesar
With incest: this take for my brother Candy:
And this for Noble Sphorza whom thou wrongest;
And since the time is short I will be short:
For locking up of me, calling me whore,
Setting espials tending at my tail;
Take this and this & this to make amends.
And put thee from thy pains;
Now will my father Alexander say
That I did take the best and safest way,
And Caesar will approve it with his heart,
That Lucrece hath performed a cunning part.
If others ask who Gismond killed or why
It was himself repenting jealousy.
Holla within there?
Why fellows?
Here my Lord.
What is my Lord Viselli stirring yet?
My Lord the Pope expects him and the ambassadors
Of Naples crave his company.
My Lord I have not seen him yet this morning.
Is not your Lady Lucrece stirring yet?
No my good Lord I think she be not yet come from her chamber, her custom is not to be seen so soon.
'tis well, 'tis well, let her take case in God's name,
But make haste call up my Lord thy master honest fellow.
With patience of your Lordship I will speak:
For three days space I did find in my Lord
Passionate motions, and strange melancholy
'T may be his solitude hath drawn him forth,
I will first look the garden and the galleries.
Do my good friend I will expect thee in this parlour here?
Fellow come back, come back, fellow come back:
Your Lord lies murdered here call up your Lady;
Call in your fellow servants. Deh Santa Croce.
grasped in his fatal hand
some violence, wrought on himself:
nature so much violate herself?
not wrought by bloody Borgia's race?
te hypchrisie,
Iuse me and ineruable
reveal it, oh reveal it in thy mercy.
Where y Lord? my dea Ld?
Fairy Lady.
Approach not near this ruthful spectacle;
Approach not near this spectacle of blood,
This ruthful spectacle of blood and death,
Lease sudden horror of these bleeding wounds
Wound thy distracted spirits to pale death.
What honour or what mortal spectacle.
Upon such sudden hath astonished me?
Oh my dear Lord: Viselli speak to me:
Oh most disastrous accident and hour;
Ay me most wretched and unfortunate,
My dearest Lord the treasure of my life,
The sweetest paradise of my best hopes,
Is murdered: out the murderers
Leave not unsearched a corner nor a Cranny:
Lock up the doors there lest that homicide
Escape us in this passion—
have patience Lady
Heavens will reveal the murder doubt it not.
Ah Noble Barbarossa much I fear
Now with these eyes I see the murderer,
Stained with the guilt of nature; oh my Lord
You little know that these work woman's hands
Twice rescued have the violence of his;
From killing of himself before this time:
Oh fie upon the devil, and melancholy;
Which leave me desolate a forlorn widow.
Madam these papers will bewray some matter.
Oh might I find another murderer.
These do contain some matter read them Lady.
My heart swollen up with sorrow, lends no light
Unto mine eyes, nor force unto my tongue
To see one letter, or to read one word,
I pray you read it good Lord Barbarossa.
I Gismond de Viselli through desperate grief conceived in jealousy (which I bore against my Lady Lucrecia) having found out by much trial, and examination her faithfulness and innocency, make this my protestation as the last piacular oblation to her for those wrongs that with mine own unfortunate hands I have ended my life, desiring her and all others to forgive me, and pray for me, subscribed with mine own hand, and sealed with my seal.
Oh Lord of heavens have pardon on his soul.
This is his hand and seal, speak now my Lord:
Did not I soon disclose the murderer?
Told I not that the murderer was present?
Ah never never shall I live to see.
Comfort you self dear Lady God will send succour
Your husband hath paid dearly for these wrongs.
Give me my Lord again, death shall not have him,
Come my dear Gismond▪ come again my joy:
Delay me not lest I prevent thy love
I cannot brook delay's, Lucrece shall follow.
Tempt not God's justice Lady, fall to prayer,
Help, in the take your Lord out of her sight.
Oh my dear friends that see my miseries,
I you beseech in dearest tenderness
Bring in the body of my dearest Lord;
That I before my death may (with these eyes)
Behold him honoured in his obsequies.
And I will bear these papers to his Holiness,
Whose sorrow will exceed for Gismond's death.
Thus foul suspicion, fear and jealousy
Of shame, dishonour, and his wives hot lust,
Hath seized upon Visell; whose revenge,
Was to restrain Lucrece from Company.
But swelling pride, and lust, both limitless,
Answered his loving fear and shame with death.
Attend the sequel. Now successively
(After such warlike preparations,
So many firm hopes found in Italy)
King Charles with fifteen hundred men at arms,
Three thousand Archers, with six thousand Swiss.
French men, and Gascons twice as many more,
With martial measures, over Piemont
Treads a long march after his drums and fife,
With Milan's force, and now his trumpets hard,
Unto the gates of Rome give fresh alarms,
Unto the Pope, who stirreth up in arms,
castilian take five hundred arquebus,
Two hundred Arbalests, and fortify,
Upon the tower of Saint Sebastian,
Affronting that port where proud Charles should enter,
Called Santa Maria di Popolo.
Our soldiers ready be with match in cock,
T'attend this service, and our scurriers,
Are now returned having descried King Charles,
His ensigns and his Cornets proudly manned,
With plumed regiments, and troops of horse,
Marching in glory to the gates of Rome.
Bravely bring on your companies bold hearts,
Gaspar de Fois are those two Basilisks,
Already mounted on their carriages?
They be.
We make you master of our Ordinance,
And on the Turret of Saint Adrian.
Plant six more Cannon, and four culverins,
four Lizards, and eight Sacres, with all speed,
Take Gunners with you to the Citadel,
Powder and shot, with Ladles for their charge,
See none be wanting; set them to their task.
Have a good care your Pioneers work hard,
To further your fortifications.
Pleaseth your Holiness to give me leave,
It fitteth well with our own purposes,
To give Charles entrance, and without restraint,
lest he by rigor should usurp that leave,
Which to resist were vain and dangerous.
Believe me Father we must temporize.
Besides you see how the Calabrian Duke,
Out of the Port of Saint Sabastian,
Not one hour past, hath issued and left Rome.
Now though you do suspect, conceal all doubts:
For you shall find this sure and commonly,
Dangers accompany suspicion,
We will embrace that course, but with your leave,
In Castle Angelo Capitulate:
Standing (as best befits us) on our guard.
'tis time your Holiness took to your guard,
For Potent Charles (like one that conquereth)
Armed at all pieces, in his plumed cask,
And with a Lance resting upon his thigh,
Already with his forces hath possessed
The suburbs, and is now come to the gates.
We are resolved: Gasper de fois take heed,
On pain of death no soldier be so bold
As to discharge one piece or arbalast,
Before th'alarm being given from them,
we with a culvering from Castle Angelo,
Proclaim hostility: troup on apace,
Take we what fortune peace or war affords,
The worst of resolution is with swords.
Thus far with much applause in joyful march,
With good success and hopeful augury,
We marched have within the walls of Rome,
Not little wondering that his Holiness,
Doth give such slender welcome to our troops.
Your majesty may well perceive how fear,
And jealous judgement of a wounded conscience,
Works hard in Alexander.
And how foxlike.
(Holding neutrality the surest guard)
He coops himself in Castle Angelo.
Pleaseth your majesty to give a summons,
Unto the Castle for some parlance,
Upon such articles as were set down,
Come we will touch him, summon forth a parley.
What office bear you marching on those walls,
We made no summons to confer with you.
Most Christian prince pleaseth your mightiness,
I am castilian of Saint Angelo, Under his Holiness.
To bid defiance to our forces?
Noah most gracious Lord.
But to salute you from his Holiness.
What is he sick?
Not very well disposed,
S. Pe. ad vin. Nor ever was, nor will be well disposed.
another summons for his Holiness,
Most Christian Charles, here I salute your grace,
Bidding you peaceably welcome to Rome,
If you bring peace along with you to Rome.
In filial Love I thank your Holiness,
We little thought it our most holy father,
That our allegiance to the Church of Rome,
Which we with all our predecessors tendered,
Should have enforced you to take sanctuary.
Son Charles know then we took not to this place,
In fear as to some refuge or asyle:
But for as much as news were brought in post,
That you with all your forces did approach.
Armed and in hostile manner to this City,
The Conclave thought it fit tendering the safety,
Of holy Church, and sacred privilege,
To know your meaning first, and then with pomp,
To make your welcome in Saint Peter's palace,
In the best fashion with due ceremonies.
Know then most holy father what we would,
Having in tedious marched from France thus far,
Past with our forces God still guiding us,
(As we be deeply bound by laws of nature.
And reason to work surely for our right)
We left no busy doubts, nor obstacles,
Which might prevent us in our just imprease,
Hence was it that we did Capitulate,
So strictly with the crafty Florentines,
Whom we well knew favoured Alphonso's part.
And this made Venice join in league with us.
Yet having notice that your Holiness.
Both with Alphonso (that usurps my Crown)
And his son Ferdinand drew deeper in
Upon considerations of more weight;
We thought it good to take France in our way.
And there to crave some certain Cautions
Of your indifferency to his just title
Had in the Crown of Naples: therefore first
We do require (if you these parties tender,
(As your late letters did import) yield up
In Caution of your good intent to France;
This Castle which you now retain against us.
Why Lodowick? the weathercock is turned,
The wind stands fair, but how long will that hold?
So may we put in hazard our whole Church
The dear estate of Christ's flock militant
And bring confusion unto Christendom.
So may you seize upon the church's rights,
If that we should refer all to your trust.
This is Saint Peter's bulwark; for my part
Here I will die ere I surrender it.
Now find I true which common bruit proclaimeth
Of your bad meanings and hypocrisy:
But I refer your conscience to that judge
Whom (if my conscience harbour any thought
To wrong the Church of God, in any thing)
I call in justice to revenge on me.
Renowned Charles, suppose we should surrender:
How may we be secured that you will
Restore it, after your imprease at Naples.
The faith and honour of a Christian King.
Your faith & honour? stay most Christian Charles
Men will not yield up Castles upon words
Unless their states, and lives grow desperate.
Why make we longer parley with this Pope
Whose falsehood is so much that neither oath,
Nor honesty can purchase place with him.
Who never yet in cause of consequence
Hath kept his promise.
Tell us, will ye grant?
What should we grant most Christian King of France
And tell me truly (were it your own case)
Whether you would (on such slight promises)
Accord to such uneven conditions?
We did not think our royal promises
Had been so slightly censured in your heart:
But since we find your infidelities
We must requite it with extremity,
Cousin Mountpanseir.
My Lord.
Forthwith cause ten brass pieces with their shot
And powder to be drawn out of Saint Marks;
Such as you find most fit for battery.
You will not hear us now, we speak so low:
Standing aloft you proudly scorn inferiors;
we'll send our minds, written in fiery notes.
Give doubtful answers, be not peremptory
lest through your heat, his rage exasperate.
Offer unto him on his Princely word,
The strength of Terracina for a pledge.
Victorious Charles, such is my trust and love
That neither fear of force nor violence
Could any ways induce me to suspect you.
Hence came it that the ports of Rome were opened
(At our behests) to give you guestning.
Accept us therefore with our promises,
Which we shall under hand and seal confirm
Not any way to Cross your action.
If you will yield up Castle Angelo
Resolve us presently without delays?
Because it is Saint Peeters Citadel
The conclave is in doubt to make surrender.
You will not yield then?
We cannot, nor we will not yield it up.
Why then a parley with our ordinance.
What come ye to make pillage of the Church,
Which held you dear as her chief Champion?
For bear your violence in the name of God:
Fearing the scourge, and thunder from above,
Our offers are both just and reasonable.
Pieces which are of more validity
We mean to tender to your Majesty.
What are those pieces you would tender us.
To render presently the Citadels
Of Terracina, Cinita Vecchia, and Spoleto.
And we receive them very thankfully.
S. P ad vin. Our voices of the conclave pass, that Charles
shallbe possessed of Castle Angelo.
And if your meaning with your words accord
We dare engage our souls for resurrender.
Your souls? foh foh they stink in sight of God & man,
Your souls? why they be sold to Lucifer,
Your consciences are of so large a last
That you would sell Saint Peter's Patrimony,
As Esau did his heritage for broth.
Thou most profane & impious Moabite;
So full of vices and abominable,
No Pope but Lucifer in Peter's Chair.
Renowned Charles pull down this Antichrist;
Advance some worthy father in his place.
Your fame shall live with all posterities
Who from a wicked bishop's tyranny
Enfranchised the Church of God misguided;
Even as (in this world's worthy memories)
The names of Pepin and King Charlemagne
Your predecessors, were eternised
For helping good Popes, Saints of Holy life,
Out of ungodly persecutions.
A Pope by nature full of fraud, and pride;
Ambitious, avaricious, shameless, devilish,
And that and which your experience testifies)
One that with mortal malice hates the French:
By whom this reconciliation made
Was more in fear and hard necessity
Then faithful inclination, or good will.
Iscraiot, reprobate apostata,
I charge thee to desist and make submission
With penance to the Mother Church of Rome
On pain of everlasting reprobation.
Blasphemous exorcist, here are no devils
Which thou canst conjure, with thy devilish spirit.
We charge thee render up that triple Crown
Which most ungodly man thou dost usurp.
Those robes pontifical which thou profanest,
Saint Peter's Chair wherein (like Antichrist)
Thou dost advance thyself thou man of sin.
Saint Peter doth make challenge to those keys,
Which (in those hands defiled with blood and bribes)
Thou like a profane deputy dost hold.
That sword (with which thou shouldst strike Antichrist)
Thou like proud Antichrist converted haste
Upon the members of Christ's chosen flock;
Saint Paul demands his sword, Peter his keys:
Forbear your blasphemies, what know ye not
Christ's Vicar general chosen on earth?
Have not I power to bind and lose men's sins,
And souls, on earth, in hell, and purgatory?
Come take Saint Peter's Chair proud heretics;
Here take this triple Crown, oh you would take it:
But he, that made it, did not for you make it.
Ascanio thou wouldst have these Golden keys;
Here take them with my vengeance on thy head,
And Pseudo Paulus would have Saint Paul's sword,
Ordained for his decollation.
Son Charles (since we capitulato with you)
methinks you should not suffer these t'affront us.
Forbear your idle velletations,
Angling and rubbing up the festered scars
O wrath inueterate, and mortall quarrels,
We come not here to foster factions,
All are in one accorded, all are friends.
But yet most Holy-Father, let me crave,
Two favours more, both very reasonable;
First that you pardon both these Cardinals,
And other Barons which partake with me.
Then that the brother of great Bajazet,
That fled from Rhodes to France, and last to Rome,
With the protection of Pope Innocent
Called Gemen Ottoman, may be delivered
Into my hands, when aftertime shall serve
For my best vantage in those holy wars,
Which we pretend against the Turks hereafter.
The sun shall never set upon my wrath;
That Oily Lamp of blessed Charity
Shall not extinguish in my zealous heart:
He that knows all, knows this I cannot falter
With any brother, all are faithful friends:
Be but submissive, mild, and penitent,
And all is past, as all had been well meant.
Now touching Gemen Ottoman, son Charles,
When you shall undertake those godly wars,
I will deliver him as willingly
As you demand: and with a cheerful heart,
Praising your godly zeal on Christ's behalf,
And praying for your good success in war.
I thank your Holiness.
These quarrels are as happily determined
As we could wish: call for an Actuary,
And let a Charter Bipartite be drawn
Betwixt you: to confirm this amity.
And now most blessed Father I beseech,
That I may show the duty which belongs
Unto this place, and see apostolic.
We will regreet your presence presently.
Son Charles, your welcome is as acceptable,
As ever was king's presence into Rome:
Tomorrow we will with the power of heaven,
Together celebrate a solemn Mass:
After the Senior, Bishop, Cardinal,
You must take place: and as our custom is,
Shall give us water when we celebrate:
This done, we will bestow some time in pleasures.
Here leave we Charles with pompous ceremonies,
Feasting within the Vatican at Rome:
From thence to Naples, where the people's hatred
Conceived against the former Kings, made way
For him, without resistance to the crown.
This done, he marcheth back again for France,
And Ferdinand doth repossess his state.
meanwhile King Charles sick of an Apoplexy,
Dies at Ambois: the Duke of Orleans,
Lewis the twelfth conjointly knitting force,
Doth march in arms with Ferdinand of Spain,
These regain Naples and divide that realm,
But this breeds mortal war betwixt them both,
The wily Pope dissembles at all hands,
These quell only concerns him and Caesar.
Brother Phillippo what availeth it,
When our state lost the Fauintines compounded,
That I should hold both life and liberty,
With all revenues of my proper state,
whenas my life within the Court of Rome,
Is much more loathsome to my soul than death,
And liberty more grief than servitude.
I rather choose within the river Tiber
To drown myself, or from Tarpeian hill,
My vexed body to precipitate,
Then to subject my body to the shame
Of such vild brutish and unkindly lust.
He that with fire and Brimstone did consume
Sodom and other Cities round about.
Deliver us from this soul-slaying sin.
To which our bodies are made prostitute,
Dear salutations from my Lord the Pope,
I recommend unto your excellence,
With semblable remembrance of his love,
To you my Lord Phillippo,
Good Barnardo.
My duty bound unto his Holiness,
Return in payment from his Captive servant.
Ingenious Prince, I bring a friendly message
Of tender kindness, which I must impart:
This Ruby from our Holy-fathers finger,
(In private token of his faithful love)
And therewithal, desireth of your love,
To have with him some private conference.
I was now going to our lady's mass,
In Saint Iohn Lateran's; where my ghostly father
Attendeth me for my confession.
But thank his Holiness on my behalf,
In all due reverence and humility.
Tell him I mean— so soon as I return,
To come according to my bounden duty.
My case is desperate, what shall I do?
Phillippo, was there ever any man
Hunted with such unsatisfied rage?
What hath he sent again to visit you?
To visit me, nay to dishonour me,
Behold this Ruby sent from his own finger,
Which as a Bawd inviteth me to shame.
Astor? what Astor? my delight my joy,
My star, my triumph, my sweet fantasy,
My more than son, my love, my Concubine,
Let me behold those bright Stars my joys treasure,
Those glorious well attempered tender cheeks;
That specious forehead like a lane of Lilies:
That seemly Nose loves chariot triumphant,
Breathing Panchaian Odours to my senses,
That gracious mouth, betwixt whose crimson pillow
Venus and Cupid sleeping kiss together.
That chin, the ball vowed to the Queen of beauty,
Now budding ready to bring forth love blossoms,
Astor Manfredi turn thee to my love,
Come hither Astor we must talk above.
Betrayed? a slave to sin? what shall I say?
Most Holy father.
Do not me forget:
I am thy brother, and thy dearest friend,
In riper years is pure and permanent,
Grounded on judgement, flowing from pure love:
Whereas the love lightning from young desire,
Fickle and feeble will not long hold fire,
It is so violent it will not last.
They're blessed whose lovers love when youth is past.
To call you friend were too familiar,
To call you brother sorts not with our years:
To call you Father doth import some fear,
Due to that age your Holiness doth bear.
Tell me not of mine age and Holiness,
Thy sight sufficeth me to make me young:
Neither upbraid me with my sanctimony,
Love is the purest essence from above,
And to thy soul I would affix my love.
Come hither then and rest with me tonight,
Give me fruition of those amorous pits,
Where blinded Cupid close in ambush sits:
Who with his Arrow (when thou laughed at Venus)
Shot through thy smiling cheeks, and did enchain us.
Thy Chamber with Ambrosial odours breatheth,
New loves and true loves unto them that entreateth,
And furious Mars made mild his falchion sheatheth
At thy delicious aspect: see thy Chamber:
The walls are made of Roses, roof of Lilies,
Be not ashamed to mount and venture it,
Here Cupid's Altar, and fair Venus' hill is.
Thy bed is made with spice and Calamus,
With Cinnamon and Spicnard, Arabic,
With Opobelsam and rich gums of Egypt,
Music Angelical of strings and voices.
With sundry birds in sugared symphony,
Where whistling wood-nymphs, and the pleasant choice is
Of antic action mixed with harmony,
Attend thy joyous entrance to this Chamber.
Is it possible that the Devil can be so sweet a dissembler?
Yes and play the pleasant part of a conceited Anire,
the shape of a bright Angel.
Now my sweet friend the joys of love doth mutter
Thy mind too bashful is, speak tongue loves utter,
Thy Coral gums cud loves pure quintessence,
And thou thyself fair boy loves purest essence.
Oh blessed heavens let Sathan tempt no longer,
His force is powerful yet thy strength much stronger,
He that with guileful baits gilded untruth,
So seeks to blast the blossom of my youth.
Delicious fruits divine Confections,
Of herbs, roots, flowers of sundry fashions.
Preservatives drawn from the rich elixir,
Of finest gold pure pearl and precious stones,
Provided for thy divine appetite,
Wines of more price (made by th'industrious art,
In sacred distillations) then that Nectar,
Which Hebe bore, when Ioue did most affect her.
Sathan false god of lies, and flattery;
How palpable is this gross villain?
What wilt thou come Manfredi to my Chamber,
And bless me with thy precious breath of Amber.
After our lady's Mass I will return.
Dear God what furies in his soul do burn?
After the Celebration of the Mass,
I come my Lord.
Come then, and let that pass,
Holla Barnardo?
All business for this night I will adjourn,
Give good attendance that at his return,
Astor may come to me for my sick heart,
Till Astor with his beauty full embrace,
Do bless my body wounded with his dart,
Can find no rest, love hath it in hot chase.
Wilt thou perform it faithfully?
What I? will I live to eat, to drink, to sleep?
Wilt thou perform it valiantly?
Will I eat to drink, will I drink to sleep, will I sleep to live?
Will thou be secret, and conceal my plot?
My name is Frescobaldi, as for my pedigree,
My mother was of consanguinity: with the Princess
Of Perugia: my father of the noble family of the Oddi,
Florentine both: I myself
Brought up a Page under Rayner King of Sicily,
Have served against the Turks and Sarazines,
Where at Vienna (with my single Pike,
Armed in a Maly brigandine of Naples,
And with an old-Fox which I kept in store,
A monument of Mars when I depart)
I did unhorse three Turkey janissaries.
Then (in the wars of Ferdinand the King)
This Hip was shot through with a Crocodile,
But that it were too tedious I could show you:
Under the King of Romans I was cut,
Just from this shoulder to the very pap:
And yet by fortunes of the war am here,
I thank God, and my Surgeon all fix, trillill,
I fought at Malta when the town was girt
With sergeant's heads, and bull-beggars of Turkey:
And by my plot (nimming below the rampire)
We gave th'hobgoblins leave to scale our walls,
And being mounted all upon that place:
I with my Lintstock gave fire to the train,
And sent them capering up to Capricornus.
Which when the wise Astronomers of Greece,
Prodigiously discovered from a far.
They thought those Turca's fiery meteors.
Which with their Pikes were pushing in the clouds,
The learned Bookmen writ strange Almanacs,
Of signs, and apparitions in the air:
And by these honours (if I prove a blab)
Then call me villain, varlet, coward, scab.
Then tell me Frescobaldi
Where I may send to thee when time shall serve.
Faith for the most part my mansion is in Civitavechiae nella strada di san lorenzo, near the conduct at a good old lady's house, la donna sempronia at sign of the glister pipe, where if you chance to fail of me. Within three houses more at sign of the frying-pan you may command me, at all hours in the forenoon.
Well gramercy Frescobaldi I will take the note of those houses in my tables.
But be sure and ready when opportunity calls upon you.
May it please your most reverend grace (without offence to your Lordship) to deliver me the party's name upon whom I should perform this Tragedy. For I may percase catch him in a gilder myself before you are aware; and moylie muffle up his mastership, with the garotta, or stiletto, perchance the poniard or pistol, such as I warrant you shall serve his turn.
Be it sufficient thou shalt know hereafter,
My business and affairs are very great:
One word more, and adieu.
Secret as midnight, sure as the sun, quick as the waters
Why? so said brave Frescobaldi like a man of some resolution farewell remember the watchword— do not fail.
My business and affairs are very great my gracious Lord, one word more with your grace my good Lord, and so I kiss your foot.
It was not ingratitude, neither forgetfulness in me Frescobaldi: Here take this and remember me.
I encounter your munificence with my love, and your love with my service, my love and service with your money.
Padrone mio multo honorato,
More for your love then your money,
And yet your grace well knows, clothes must be wrought, weapons must be bought; and Taverns must be sought, and all brave exploits must be done, as they should be done bravely.
But that I keep my secret to myself;
I would not use this slave for any gold:
Yet when I trust him he shall not deceive me.
Now skelder ye scoundrels, skelder you maggotmungers, you pompiós; you wood-worms, you magatapipicoes, I am for you, now Frescobaldi, call thy wits together, let me now see what o'clock it is: very near eight, and almost breakfast time at a eleven, this very night must I stand Perdue for this bloody service. I know my place and hour; I must confess and perchance be hanged, I have in the Burdellia's and in other such houses of natural recreation and agility, received three or four score broken pates in my time: and some bastinadoes for crossing courting spicy-spirited inamoratoes in their humours. Besides I was the first that from the Swiss quarter, in the reign of king Ferdinand brought up in his army the fashions of bousing and to using Greek and Spanish wines by the flagon, with that old stinkard Henrico Baglioni, sometime Alferoes to Capitanco Piccolomini & myself; I remember likewise at Terracinae I broke a glass (containing some quart of Robollia) upon the face of Capitanco Fransesco Boccansacchia a very sufficient soldier in that service, and to my knowledge a tall trencherman: howbeit from the teeth downward as base a mettled coward as ever was coined out of the sooty side of a copper kettle; so he was: well I will second my Lord in any slaughter for his wages, and if any man will give me better hiers (when I have served the cardinals turn) I will present my pistol upon his sacred person afterward for charity's sake: well, now to the drinking school, then to the fence school, and lastly to the vaulting school, to my Lady Sempronia.
This was an act of such strange consequence,
As never yet was heard, a man found dead
Within a private chamber of his house;
When all his servants stirred: not one of them
That could give evidence of what befell
But that he killed himself. it impossibile.
I was the first that found him in his blood;
Then warm from slaughter: such a ruthful sight
As yet I tremble to remember it.
It is impossible (after a search)
No stranger found within Visellis doers,
But that some servant of his family
Should have sure notice how the murder was.
It was his own hand sure.
I cannot think it.
The gentleman was honest, full of sport,
And well affected.
Pardon me my Lord,
My Lady Lucrece told it in great grief
She twice before had rescued his life.
Go too, go too.
Besides my Noble Lord.
Papers both writ, and sealed with his hand
Were found about him testifying this.
Good Barbarossa pray my sister Lucrece,
Here to encounter me with her good company:
Somewhat I would in private talk with her.
My Lord I will.
High God be merciful.
Thou that dost know the secrets of all hearts,
If Lucrece (as my father doth suspect)
Was privy to this murder of my life
I can learn all she knows.
But yet I will not either suspect, or urge her were it true
Being indeed a violation of brotherhood & common humanity
She maketh towards me— sister how fairs it with you?
As with a dead Corpse in a Sepulchre
Cold, lifeless, comfortless, oppressed with sorrow.
Nor since my joy did leave me desolate
Ever could I brook well this open air
But still lamenting and disconsolate
Kept up in Chamber, mourning for my Lord.
What order took you for his funeral?
He that alive was shrined in my breast,
Now dead lives yet entombed in my thoughts,
There is a model of it in my closet.
Perform it decently with diligence.
Brother methinks the air is cold and raw,
And as you please let us confer within.
Gladly dear sister with what haste you may,
And I desire you noble Barbarosa
To meet us at my Chamber after supper.
My brother Caesar hath appointed with me
Some business, and I crave your company.
Thanks my good Lord: but matters of much moment,
I have at that time with my Lord Caraffa;
And I must speak this night with my Lord Caesar.
Tell him I will attend by nine of clock.
I will my good Lord.
Farewell Barbarossa.
joy to you both.
My trembling liver throbs, my cold hearts heavy;
My mind disturbed and I know not why
But all as he will, heavens above for me.
This is the black night, this the fatal hand:
These are the bloody weapons which must be
Witness and actors of this Tragedy.
Now Frescobaldi play thy master's prize:
Here is a rich purse crammed with red crusadoes
Which doth inspire me with a martial spirit,
Now could I combat with the devil tonight.
First did I wash my liver, lungs, and heart.
In Cretan wines and head strong Maluesie
(Such as would make a coward fight with Mars)
Then lest I should with any weapons drawn
Be driven to danger of mine enemy;
I practised my martial feats of fence:
As for example if with arms unsheathed,
I were to kill this conduct here I come.
He makes a thrust, I with a swift passado,
Make quick avoidance, and with this stoccado
(Although he fence with all his finest force)
Barred of his body thrust him in the throat.
Grdrei ene, siguri honorenoli.
Suppose this conduct or my duelist,
Should falsify the foins upon me thus.
Here will I take him, turning down this hand.
Il punto verso indrizzato, thus.
Admit he force me with his ambroccado
Here I deceive then, with this passado
And come upon him in the speeding place.
what Mandragon or salvage Ascapart,
what Pantaconger or Pantagruell
Art thou that fightest with thy father's soul
Or with some subtle apparitions.
Which no man can behold with mortal eyes
Or art thou ravished with bedlamy
Fighting with figments and vain fantasies
chimeras or black spirits of the night.
Come not within 9. furlongs of this place.
My name is Rubosongal the grim ghost
Of Bembocamber king of Calicute.
And here for this night I keep sentinel
For Muscopateron great king of flies;
Great grandsire of ten thousand hecatombs.
I Conjure thee foul fiend of Acheron
By puissant Hoblecock and Bristletoe,
By Windicaper Monti-bogglebo.
Polipotmos and the dreadful names
of Mulli-sack and Hermocotterock.
By Petrovidemi, by the dogged spirits
Of Bacchus which Canary land inherits.
By purple Aligant the bloody giant.
And leaden headed hollock pure and pliant.
By Birrha Martia and by Sydrack sweet
Who did with mathew Glynne in combat meet.
And by this awful cross upon my blade
Of which black curs and hedgehogs are afraid.
And by this fox which stinks of Pagan blood,
Dost thou walk there for mischief or for good.
Brave man whose spirit is approved well,
(As most approved panders truly tell)
Under green hedges, under cobblers stalls,
In portal, porches, under battered walls,
Which day; by night keeps watchful sentinel
To guise the pleasures of fair Claribell
Profane arch patriarch of Pancridge steeple,
The bauldy beacon of ungodly people.
With other master which I might allege
To the Grand Captain of Collman-hedge,
Marching fould Amazonian trulls in troops
Whose lanterns are still lighted in their poops.
Some without kerchiefs, others with torn smocks;
Certain imboched with piles, and some with poxes.
Others with rotten shoes and stockings rent
With carrine in each ditch keep parliament.
In petticoats all patched and waistcoat torn,
And wandering with some rag bless every thorn.
Which with their Targets never make retire,
From any breach till they their foomen fire.
Rebating the stiff points of their keen blades
Till all their champions masculine prove lads.
To thee saith Frescobaldi case thy steel
lest thou the rigor of my fury feel.
And yet I love thee for thy martial grace,
Thine in all service: shake hands and embrace.
A pox upon thy coward fists foul knave,
And yet I love thee rogue: ask rogue and have.
Come and embrace: 'tis blithe when maltmen meet,
And drink till they have lost both head and feet.
And drivelling sleep on every stall and bench
With every man a knee in his hand and in his Can a pretty wench
But Frescobaldi my brave Bodigonero,
Varlet of velvet, my moccado villain,
Old heart of durance, my stripped canvas shoulders,
And my Perpetuana pander tell me;
Tell me what humours cataplasmatic,
Excited have thy Bacchic fantasies:
To draw that triumphant swerlidildido,
Upon some spirit of the Buttery,
This was no barmy spirit of the bottle,
It was a bloody spirit of the battle:
And if I lie, call me thy Wimble-cock.
A mouldy jest, well I will answer thee:
I conjure thee by Negra Lucia's name,
By Dol Pattenti, by the subtle shape,
Of Nanna Baliker, by the cunning flights
Of Vini Clerilicks with her fair sprights:
By Mega Court, with Marga Marichalus,
That in Turnuliball doth keep an Alehouse:
By Nan Rivehomo that hot stigmatist,
Now bedded with th'Italian Vitraillist,
Which in the fiery Phlegitonian flames,
Did work strange vitrial dildidoes for Dames,
Her spirits have no power to touch this strand.
Till they transported from Lambechia land,
By Charon ferry-man of Black Averne,
Fall Anchor at the stillyard Tavern,
And by Tartarean Pluto's Ebony bowl,
Why didst thou combat with thy Father's soul?
Learned Magician skilled in hidden Arts,
As well in prior as posterior parts,
I see thou kennest the secrets of all sorts,
Of sharp syrinxes and salacious sports:
Veneral Buboes, Tubers Ulcerous,
And Iames Defisticancker's venomous.
Doubtless Don Vigo then his vigour poured
Into thy brains, when he thy bottle scoured.
Noble Henrilico question no further,
My meditations are of blood and murder,
I feasted have too long, prithee be gone.
Henrico Baglioni (by this sword)
I am tomorrow to perform a duel,
And practising in this nights melancholy,
How to dispatch it with a brave stoccado.
Here I did make a proof, prithee good-night,
Trouble me now no more: early tomorrow,
I'll march unto the sign o'th' frying-pan,
And take thee timely with thy points untrust,
To drink a flagon of greek wine with thee.
Goodnight my noble Rillibilbibo,
Thou shalt be welcome in the darkest midnight.
Now to my watchword it is quite forgot, oh
Col nunolo la Pioggia: think upon it.
This is mine hour appointed this the place,
Here will I stand close till th'alarum call,
What is't o'clock boy now?
My gracious Lord,
By Sisto's horologe 'tis struck eleven.
A fit hour for our purpose noble brother,
But hath La Bella formiana notice,
Of our approach tonight.
Oh doubt it not, villain put out that torch,
Being disguised we will not be descried,
Depart you to my lodging presently,
Pain of thy life not one word that thou saw us.
'tis very dark, good brother go before,
You know the streets best.
Oh keep your way; you cannot lightly fall,
But if you do.
How then.
You shallbe supported.
My heart begins to throb, my soul misdoubts,
I fear some treachery A che me fido, guarda me Dio,
On in God's name.
Give me your hand brother, fie do not faint.
Caesar I can scarce go,
A sudden qualm hath seized upon my spirits.
Tut brother forward with alacrity,
My life for yours you'll be at ease anon,
'tis a foul business let us retire,
And seek some other season for our sports,
I am ashamed thou shouldst be general,
To lead those forces that fight for the Church,
And here show such faint hearted cowardice.
Are you disposed to quarrel in the streets,
Neither the time nor place serves instantly;
To call you to some audit for these words.
Abortive Coward borne before thy time,
I will not brook thy foolish insolence.
Col nuuolo la pioggia.
Dear God revenge my wrongs, receive my soul.
Let him receive thy soul when he thinks good,
I'll take an order for thy burial.
Help Frescobaldi let us heave him over,
That he may fall into the river Tiber,
Come to the bridge with him.
Be what he will the villain's ponderous,
Hath he some gold about him shall I take it?
Take it were there a million of ducats,
Thou hast done bravely Frescobaldi,
Stretch thee, stretch out thine arms fear that he
Fall not upon the arches.
I'll wash him doubt you not of a new fashion.
I think thou never hadst thy Christendom,
Follow for Company pernicious villain.
Hold hold, Coxwounds my Lord hold,
The devil go with you both for company.
Now Caesar Muster up thy wits together.
Summon thy senses and advance thyself,
Ware and Earth have interposed their bodies,
Betwixt the worlds bright eye and this black murder.
Sweet silent night (guarded with secret stars)
Keep silence, and conceal this Tragedy;
Saturn is lord ascendant of this hour,
Propitious patron of assassinates
murders, Parricides, and massacres:
Lord of my birth, auspicious to my life,
This is my first degree to domination.
Who can, or (if they could) who dare suspect,
How Caesar Borgia killed his brother Candie?
This is infallible, that many crimes
Lurk underneath the robes of Holiness:
And underneath my Purple tunicle
This fact concealed is: Ascanio Sforza
Shall strangely (by some wily policies)
Be brought into suspect for Candy's death.
Sister Lucretia thou must follow next:
My father's shame and mine, endeth in thee.
Now show thyself true Caesar; Caesar shall
Either live Caesar like, or not at all.
Death and blood only lengthen out our scene.
These be the visible and speaking shows,
That bring vice into detestation,
Unnatural murders▪ cursed poisonings,
Horrible exorcism, and Invocation,
In them examine the reward of sin.
What follows, view with gentle patience.
Fore-god 'tis Candie, 'tis Candy I know 'tis Candie,
Where is that traitorous homicide? where is he?
I cannot see him: he shall not scape me so▪
I must and will find him, though he were invisible,
Appear appear; not yet; ha and Candy murdered too,
Let me look forth.
Oh, oh, very good very good: well I perfectly perceive.
By this descension of Arctophilax,
What time of night it is, sorrow give place;
Revenge in blood and fiery sacrifice,
Commandeth: nature now prevents her current: yield,
Let us adore the second eye of heaven,
Bright Armatas increaseth she, is not combust.
O sacred season for nocturnal Ceremonies.
This joyous quarter is in Casmaran. ha.
What hour of night is't? why 'tis Salem, twelve a cloak,
What are our angels this quarter?
Gargatel Tariel Gaviel.
How goodly these augurize fair auspices of truth,
Now mounts bright Athaman in his golden ascension,
Direct in opposition with our hemispher,
And now there hour with them is Aetalon:
Bernardo bring hither thy white robes of sanctity,
Hast thou Coals ready burned bring in my Thurible,
And sense about this sanctified place,
For here Festativi must have her honour.
Candie my son is murdered, Candie my son,
Candie my son is murdered: I will raise
All the great devils to show the murderer,
Even as thou lov'dst my son haste and dispatch,
Hast and dispatch it as thou lovest my soul.
'tis not yet yawn by three quarters of an hour,
What are our Angels of this night? Michael, Dardael, Huratipel
In a triumphant car of burning gold,
Crowned with a circlet of black ebony,
And with a mace of jet King Varca rides.
Attended with his ministers of state, Andas and Cynaball.
Fit dismal times for our solemnities.
Put on my robes give me my Pentacle,
Cense well Barnardo: bring me some fire in an earthen vessel
Now must I labour like a collier's horse.
My precious best approved and trusty servant,
Hence in all haste betake thee to thy beads,
Whilst these dark works of horror are in hand,
Red Sandal is my fumigation.
I conjure thee by these aforesaid names,
That thou receive no phantasmatic illusions.
What would great Alexander have with us,
That from our fiery region millions of leagues,
Beneath the sulphurous bottom of Abyss,
Where Mammon tells his ever tried gold,
Thou call'st me from strong business of high state,
From sure subversions and mutations
Of mighty Monarchs, Emperors, and Kings,
From plotting bloody fields and massacres,
Triumphant treasons and assassinates.
What's thy demand?
I charge thee by the four recited names,
And by the dreadfull title of great Phaa.
By which all creatures are sure sealed up,
By which the prince of darkness and all powers,
In earth and hell do tremble and fall down,
Show me the shape of that condemned man,
Which murdered my son the duke of Candy.
Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,
Expect a messenger of trust stand fast,
Sent from the foggy lake of fearful Styx.
Am I commanded by that puissant monarch,
Which rides triumphing in a chariot,
On misty black clouds mixed with quenchless fire,
Through uncouth corners in dark paths of death,
To do what thou demandest.
Then by the dreadful names of Amioram,
Titepand Sadai show me that damned child of reprobation.
Which this night murdered the duke of Candie.
Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,
Hold, hold, hold, hold; per todos santos now no more,
Caesar hath killed a brother and a father.
What wouldest thou more shall I descend?
Show me the person by whose impious hand,
Gismond Viselli, was done to death?
Keep a firm station stir not for thy life.
Out, out, no more no more, my soul dissolves.
Say, say what wouldest thou more? descend,
Beldachiensis, Berolanensis, Helioren, descend, descend, jubeo, mando, impero. Devil descendeth with thunder. etc.
Out out alas Bernardo I am wounded,
With grisly wounds and deep incurable.
Comfort yourself in God's name blessed father.
so long as no wounds of the body bleed.
The cureless wounds I mean are of my body
Wounds both of my soul and body: but Bernardo
This is my comfort in calamity
Some shall pack after them for company
What's o'clock?
Very near six by Saint Peter's bell
Hast thee, then pass thee to my Pothecary, bid him provide those drugs I spoke for yesterday, and bear them in all haste to Dominico Giglio take you those letters with you which are here, bid him deliver them Lodowick Sforza's name her lustful Paramour; make haste and see that he dispatch it quickly, deliver him a purse from me for a token crammed with two hundred ducats, bid him be secret as he loves his life, hast and begone.
Astor shall follow, I must have his Lands
This thorn must be cut of being but tender
Then cut it soon whilst it is young and slender,
lest growing great it prick thee to the bone
My lust importunes it and he shall die,
Sons, Nephews, Daughters, Concubines, shall die.
My conscience is turned mercies enemy,
He that would rise to riches and renown
Must not regard though he pull millions down.
Where is his Holiness? where is my father?
Alas your Son is slain; your hapless Son,
My noble brother out alas, alas
Is murdered: in tender passion
Let curious search and inquisition
Be made through Rome to find the murderers:
I fear that Traitorous Iudas Cardinal
Ascanio Sforza with his complices:
I will not hold fraternity with him:
And here behold my meaning blessed father:
again these robes, take here this hat,
And in these arms which I have buckled on
I do forswear all offices of Church,
Until I be revenged for his death.
A foul red vengeance over hangs his head
Whose heart indurate or whose devilish brain,
Could execute conceive or meditate
So foul a murder of an Innocent.
Caraffa with Bentivoli give leave
Somewhat I would in private have with Caesar.
Caesar dissemble not for that were vain
Whence comest thou.
Directly from my Chamber.
Where didst thou here this news.
Fishers which found his body brought the news.
Then he was drowned Caesar was he not?
It seems he was.
What by some Fisher.
How should I know that.
Sure by some subtle Fisher that laid nets
For Candy's life and honour: but say truly,
Was it thy brother.
Are not you my father?
Ah that I never had been any father,
But speak again, man speak the truth and fear not:
Who slew thy brother Candie this last night,
Who trained him forth who walked along with him.
Am I the keeper of my brother's person.
Execrable Cain; perfidious homicide,
Apparent villain what canst thou design?
Which I would know that thou canst hide from me.
A plague upon your devils you deal with them,
That watch more narrowly to catch your soul
Than he which sought my brother Candy's death,
You know that Sathan is the lord of lies
A false accuser and dissembler,
Tell your false liars they be lying Devils.
Caesar no more, Caesar no more, thou know'st.
What know I?
That I know, dissemble not.
Suppose you know, suppose in wrath & fury
I killed my brother; can we mend it now?
He was not fashioned for these busy times:
He rests in peace, our peace rests in our swords.
Caesar thou dost unkindly vex my soul,
With rubbing up my secret miseries:
Incurred by seeking to lift up thy head.
Pull me not down good father with your conscience:
Your conscience, father of my conscience is.
My conscience is as like your conscience,
As it were printed with the self-same stamp.
I know my sins are burdenous, and bear them,
Your sins more heinous, yet your robes conceal them.
Out wicked and nefarious homicide.
Upbraid me not, for if that Lamp burn dim,
Which should give light to men in darkest night;
How can they choose but must in shadows err,
That follow the blind-glimmering thereof:
Doth this one petty fault appear so grievous?
Which if you well consider is no fault;
He was an honest man, and fit for heaven:
Whilst he lived here he breathed in misery;
And would have been enlarged: I set him free,
Now if I may compare your state with his,
Or your condition with my quality,
Have you not sold yourself unto the Devil,
To be promoted to the Papacy:
Have you not sold the livings of the Church?
Are not your coffers crammed with beastly bribes,
With foul extortion, and base Usury?
Have ye not (since your inauguration)
Poisoned and done to death six Cardinals;
In devilish avarice to get their goods?
Have you not (which is most abominable)
Committed incest with your only daughter;
And made me sin with her for company,
That both might reign in hell for company?
Did you not take of Georgio Bucciardo
One hundred thousand Ducats from the Turk,
To kill his brother Gemen Ottamon?
Have you not kept the Pearl of Italie,
Astor Manfredi that young virtuous Prince,
In beastly lust, and filthy Sodomy.
Blasting the blossom of his toward youth?
Have you not now given order for the death
Of my dear Sister, whom your passions caused
To kill her latter husband Di Viselli,
And robbed the noble Earl of his new spouse,
Only to cloak your vile impiety,
Caesar the Devil hath been thy Schoolmaster.
I pass your secret counsel with the devil,
Your Avarice, ambition, perfidy,
Your bloody plots, inhuman cruelty,
Why then upbraid ye me with Candy's death?
A bastard of our house, degenerate,
In whom no spark or spiracle of honour,
Appeared to raise the race of Borgia.
But had I been Lieutenant of your forces,
This arm had conquered all Romania,
France before this had trembled, Spain had stooped,
The Roman Emperor had fawned upon us.
King Charles had been restrained, Frederick expulsed,
And Naples had been made our heritage.
A triple joy succeeds a single grief,
I have engaged all to make Caesar great,
Caesar it suiteth with thy grace and glory,
To cloak my vices, I will pardon thine,
Let one of us excuse another's crimes,
And for this bloody fact so lately done.
As thou didst cunningly begin proceed,
To lay the guilt or imputation
On them whose death may do thee benefit:
And never was my soul better contented,
Then that our woes are with rich hopes prevented.
Now stands Romania subject to my sword.
Imola furli, Camerine, and Urbine
Shall have the first charge, if I there succeed,
Have forward farther with a better speed,
Caesar o nullo written in my guidon,
When with my troops victoriously I ride on.
Holla Bernardo, call in Caraffa with Bentivoly:
Ay now now now, my precious boy, my Caesar,
Prosecute as thou hast begun,
With Art, look sullen and demure,
Hold down thy head, like one swollen up with sorrow,
They come, they come, say that those arms were put on,
In revenge of Candy's death.
The sovereign medicine of things past cure,
Is for to bear with patience and forget,
Caesar hath vowed revenge for Candy's death,
And in regard of Caesar's piety,
I make him general in his brother's place.
And never shall I sheathe this sword in peace
Till it have wrought upon the murderer.
Happy success accompany my Lord,
And in your battles give you victory.
Is order taken for his funerals.
Bentivoli take you no thought for that,
That is the greatest care, which troubles me.
Come on my Lords, we will advise within,
For I must have your counsels in my grief.
Kind Lodowick hadst thou presented me,
With Persian clothes of gold or Tinsilry,
With rich Arabian Odours, precious stones,
Or what brave women hold in highest price,
Could not have been so gracious as this tincture,
Which I more value than my richest jewels,
Oh Motticilla.
Bring me some mixtures and my dressing boxes,
This night I purpose privately to sup
With my Lord Cardinal of Capua.
Bring me some blanching water in this bowl.
Here I perceive a little riveling
Above my forehead but I wimple it
Either with jewels or a lock of hair,
And yet it is as white as the pure snow:
O God when that sweet marquess Mantova,
Did in Ferrara feast my Lord and me,
What rich comparisons and similes,
He with ingenious fantasy devised,
Doting upon the whiteness of my brows?
As that betwixt them stood the chair of state,
Composed of ivory for the Paphian Queen:
Sitting in comfort after amorous conquest.
And kissed my forehead twenty thousand times.
Oft have I wished the colour of this hair
More bright, and not of such a Spanish die,
And yet the Duke of Bourbon on his knees,
As the divinest favour of this world,
Did beg one lock to make a Bracelet,
For which few hairs he garnished my head
With jewels worth six thousand crowns at least.
My beaming eyes yet full of Majesty,
Dart love, and give bright luster to the glass,
As when the sun beams touch a Diamond.
The Prince of Salerne solemnly did swear,
These eyes were quivers which such shafts did bear
That were so sharp, and had such fiery touch,
As Cupid's Arrows never had so much,
The Rosy Garden of these amorous cheeks,
My nose the gracious fort of conquering love,
Breathing attractive odours to those lovers
That languish and are vanquished with desire,
Gonzaga calleth it the silver perch,
Where Venus' turtles mutual pleasure search.
Sweet mouth the Ruby port to Paradise
Of my world's pleasure from whence issue forth,
Many false brags, bold sallies, sweet supplies,
A chin the matchless fabric of fair nature,
A neck two breasts upon whose cherry nipples.
So many sweet solutions Cupid sucked,
Give me some blanching water in this bowl,
Wash my face Motticilla with this cloth,
So 'tis well now will I try these colours.
Give me that oil of talc,
Take sarsenet Motticilla smooth my forehead.
I must delay this colour is it carnation right.
Oh the true tincture of a damask rose,
What is it excellent.
Most full of life.
And madame that's a precious lineament,
As ever I beheld to smooth the brows.
I will correct these arches with this mullet,
Pluck not to hard, believe me Motticilla,
You pluck to hard.
I feel a foul stink in my nostrils,
Some stink is vehement and hurts my brain,
My cheeks both burne and sting give me my glass.
Out out for shame I see the blood itself,
Dispersed and inflamed, give me some water.
My brains intoxicate my face is scalded.
Hence with the glass: cool cool my face, rank poison,
Is ministered to bring me to my death,
I feel the venom boiling in my veins.
Ah me dear Lady; what strange leprosy?
The more I wash the more spreads on your face.
Send to my father; call physicians in,
Oh Candie where art thou my comforter,
Dead and entombed; Lucrece must follow thee,
I burn I burn, oh where is my dear Lord.
My brains are seared up with some fatal fire.
Dear Lady cheer yourself, be not dismayed,
His Holiness in haste hath sent relief:
His own Physician to recomfort you.
For our dear lady's passion bring some water to cool my thirst.
Madam you may not drink,
Till you receive this one preservative.
A foul unsavoury loathsome stink chokes up
My vital senses and a boiling heat
sups up the lively spirit in my lungs.
This poison spreads and is incurable,
madam receive one precious antidote.
What have I caught you Sforza,
Who painted my fair face with these foul spots,
You see them in my foul deformed blots,
Deliver me from that murdered man,
He comes to stab my soul I wounded him,
Oh Gismond Gismond hide those bleeding wounds,
My soul bleeds drops of sorrow for thy sake;
Look not so wrathful I am penitent.
Love and remorse did harbour in thine heart,
What dost thou beckon to me I will come,
And follow thee through millions of woes.
Sweet Lady will you take a little rest,
It will refresh your spirits instantly.
No rest until I see my Lord again.
Dear Lady do you love your life, take rest,
From the pure burning coals of true contrition.
methinks I see the lively counterfeit,
Of caitiff Cressid in her misery,
engendered out of her disloyalty,
Ah Moticilla whom I trained up
In cunning sleights and snares of filthiness,
Forgive me for that sin; live and repent.
Oh God forgive me for my sins are great,
And if his goodness lend my life some space,
I will with penance call on him for grace,
And spend the remnant of my life in prayer.
I can no more, death summoneth my soul,
Open thy bosom father Abraham,
Merciful father let thy mercy pass
Extend thy mercy where no mercy was.
Merciful father for thy sons dear merit
Pardon my sinful soul receive my spirit.
Now is her soul at rest 'tis very strange,
As well the cause as manner of her death,
I have been studied in Hipocrates,
In books of Galen and old Avecine,
Observed the cures of divers learned doctors,
In France in Spain and higher Germany,
Yet never met with such an accent,
Bear in her body I will in all haste,
Bring woeful news unto saint Peeters Palace,
His Holiness will grievously lament.
Fellows in arms after our victories,
Had in the first front of our happy war,
With men of hardy resolution,
Now must we bend our forces against Furly,
Where that proud Amazonian Katharine,
Dareth defiance in the face of war,
And yet our hopes are sure, all passage clear,
And she before I lodge this restless head,
Shall bear the bondage of this victory.
These proud presuming spirits of vain women,
Whose bloodless wounds are only bloody words,
talk without reason, fight without resistance,
But on the face of grim devouring War,
With frowning forehead menacing his force,
They fall down on their backs as Venus did,
When Mars beheld her with a soldiers face,
Nay we must fight: I know the puissant spirit
Of warlike Kate the pride of Italie,
Sforza's brave sister and old Riario's widow,
Excellent valour, and deep policy
Must win it, if we purchase at her hands.
And yet we be beforehand with the Lady,
Having surprised her treasure and her sons,
As they were making their escape for Florence:
What shall we try renowned general?
And search her resolution.
Shall we? doubt you not,
Nay though the walls of Furly were of steel,
These pledges should make passage for our powers,
And what? shall we stoop for those twenty Ensigns,
Which this last night have entered their Ports,
Nay were they ten to one within those walls,
Caesar (that carries Fortune in his Standard)
Would make them give ground & subject themselves.
Speak then at once renowned general,
Shall we go soldier-like to work at first?
Shall we salute her with our Cannon?
What? no Barbarossa not without a parley,
Fore-God I love her, and admire her valour,
And till we find her words prove empty squibs,
We give her all the noble rights of war,
Summon a parley.
What have we Pallas come upon these walls,
To bring confusion of our companies:
Doth proud Penthesilea live again,
Which sometime raging in the Fields of blood,
Made passage with her angry sword through millions.
I tell thee Caesar son of Alexander
A book befits thee better than a blade:
Percase in scorn thou wilt reply the like,
A distaff fits me better than a pike.
Know Caesar had I now so many lives
As here are stones or hairs upon your beards,
I would forego them all before this honour,
Which my dear Lord Riario did leave me,
The pledge of my dear love his Children's patrimony.
Speak in a milder key renowned Kate.
I love you well and all brave Sforza's race
Yet you must yield there is no remedy,
It is the Churches right and I must have it.
methinks a pulpit were more fit for thee,
But didst thou ever read Saint Gregory:
That he which hunteth for authority,
Himself should govern direct and know well;
He did a deed of danger that advanced thee,
For proud ambition violates all right.
Be not so bitter Kate a friend entreats you,
But if entreaties will not, look upon me:
Here standeth Cesar, the sharp scourge of Furly
And were your fort fenced with as many men,
As it is girt with stones Caesar would have it.
Subdue them and make pillage of their goods
And in resistance seal it with their bloods.
What are your weapons sheathed in your throats?
Is every word a sword then shake hands Caesar:
Venture no further and we will be friends
But if your words have accents in keen swords,
And end in blood, than Caesar look on me:
I with defiance turn swords in your throats,
You shall not thrust that imputation
Upon our fex, for I will fight it out
So long as I can stand upon these walls.
You would repent it, if you knew the worst,
Consider Kate be well advised first.
Caesar at one word to discharge my conscience,
Were there a Cannon there to be discharged
Upon this fruitful womb the nurse of Children,
And I sure piece mell to be torn withal,
If I would not surrender up this fort
Your Cannon shot should plough these bowels up,
That vow to God and my dear husband made:
I never will infringe with perfidy:
I know thee bloody Caesar: the dishonour,
In yielding up thy reverend purple robes
Which should protect widows and Orphans rights,
Appeareth well in taking unjust arms,
To wrong the Widows and the Fatherless
Either fight Caesar or forsake the field,
Persuade thyself alive I will not yield.
Then I will show you what wars destiny,
Prognosticates, bring forth her ransom hither
If nature be not quite extinguished
These pledges shall enfranchize you from war
I brought them to this purpose; that in them,
You with your friends might live in liberty.
Never but with advantages dear Lord.
Monster of misery what think'st thou Cesar
That I will yield mine honour for their safety?
Be not deceived thou hast surprised my Children,
Riario's riches left in my tuition
And borne out of these bowels; but dear boys,
Courage yourselves I will defend your honours:
I tell thee Cesar these my boys are taught
To bear with patience fates inevitable
These carry Sforza's spirit and their fathers;
I dare gage life and ask them they will choose,
To lack their lives before they lose their honours.
Caesar in this hath offered like himself,
He proffereth to preserve your town untouched:
Your goods, your wives, your lives, your liberties:
But mark what fruits thy bitterness brings forth,
To make thine hard heart infamous for ever,
Before thy face these boys shall lose their lives
If thou surrender not without more parley.
Bloody Busyris I defy thy malice,
I spit defiance in thy coward's face.
Traitor to God and man hadst thou been Caesar,
Insisting on high terms of worth and honour
Thou wouldst consider that their blood is Noble,
Thou wouldst consider that they be but children,
Thou wouldst consider that thou art a warrior
And that such noble blood spilled with dishonour
And trammed in with insidious treachery,
By God nor man in heaven nor earth below
Can be forgotten or abolished.
Brave general you parley with a woman,
Whose heart is obstinate, whose hands are feeble,
Seemeth in vain and over tedious.
Speak at a word cannon is my next parley,
You will not yield your state to save their lives.
I will not Caesar.
Cut of both their heads.
Let us entreat our mother noble general,
For to deliver up the state of Furly
And will you save our lives then.
Good Captain do not kill us.
If she will yield the state your lives are safe.
Good mother for my father's sake that's dead,
And for mine uncle sake part of your bowels
And for our own sakes yield yourselves and save us.
Good sweet mother save us.
Poor boys, in heart unlike Riario's race,
Or Sforza's warlike lineage by the mother
Know what it is die with liberty,
And live with ignominious servitude.
If you your lives buy with the loss of states
It were of all extremities the vilest
But in extremity to die resolved
Preserving state and reputation:
Is said to die within the bed of honour,
This is an honour for Riario's children,
And for my part, it never shall be said,
That Katherine being strong upon her guard,
Having good forces able to defend,
In brutish feat should give away your states,
I rather will obtrude myself unarmed,
And meet the thickest ranks that enter breach,
To be tossed up upon their soldiers pikes,
Sooner I will set all the town on fire,
And with my soldiers sacrifice myself,
Rather than render up your heritage,
Oh bravely spoken warlike Amazon.
Mother we scorn death in respect of honour
Let him perform his worst, we fear him not,
Courage sweet brother, think upon my father,
I will die first, be not afraid of death.
Why then you are resolved to die?
I to die Caesar.
Bring hither both their heads.
God's blessing rest with you my dearest sons
And if I lose your states, my life shall follow,
Nothing but violence shall force it from us,
Ere long this quarrel twixt us will stand even:
Farewell dear boys, till we three meet in heaven.
Ah dear Mother, sweet mother, good Uncle Iulio save our lives.
Away with him.
Let me before I die, but kiss my mother.
What wouldst thou run again into my womb?
If thou wert here thou shouldst be Posthumus,
And ripped out of my sides with soldier's swords,
Before I would yield up thine heritage.
Come brother let us bravely die together.
I tell thee when that these have lost their heads,
I will make sack and pillage of your state,
Man, women, Orphans, all put to the sword,
This hath your obstinacy wrought in us,
Carry them hence, bring hither both their heads.
And then a charge upon this valiant Lady,
This Thamyris, this proud Semeramis,
Whose valour Barbarossa by these heavens,
Is very wonderful and glorious.
Had he more force, what would this tyrant do?
A chage a charge.
For God's sake charge, a charge let us to sight.
A spirit full of vengeance, wrath, and spite,
Assaut, assault, chrge noble hearts a charge.
Courageous Kate, you that would throw defiance
Into the face and throat of fate and Caesar,
Such are the fruits of pride and wilfulness.
Have I performed my word? are you surprised?
Is not your life and living in my power?
Now that my sons first by insidious means,
bereaved of their lives, and their states lost,
The date of my calamities is out,
Go forward with thy tyranny, strike Caesar,
And take away the Mother with her sons:
This done, recount what is thy victory.
A woman with two children vanquished,
A prize befitting the renown of Caesar.
Come hither Katherine wonder of thy sex,
The grace of all Italian womanhood:
Caesar shall never prove dishonourable,
Behold thy children living in my Tent.
Oh mother, mother, are you come, we be not dead.
Good mother, thank the Captain, we live yet,
They gave us spices, wines, and bade us welcome,
I pray you thank them.
Oh but your lands and honours are both lost,
Had not an honourable death been better:
Then thus to lose your states and livelihoods.
Heroic soldier, whose deceit is honour.
Thou that hast unexpected saved the lives
Of my two children, I submit them here
Thy captives, for their ransom what is fit.
I freely pardon these two boys their ransom,
Lady behold thy treasure in my Tent,
Had I not won this town, this hadst thou lost,
See Soldiers that her jewels be reserved
For her own service, now the quarrel ends.
But noble Caesar well entreat our people,
They be men valiant, civil, obedient,
If you their Magistrates entreat them well.
Take you the charge of Furly, Barbarossa,
Entreat the people well, do not restrain them,
We freely pardon all of them their ransoms,
So much as is in us, we pardon all,
Use them as Citizens of Rome in favour,
Other instructions you shall have hereafter:
Till then regard your charge and so farewell.
Lady, yourself, with your two little babes,
I will take order shallbe sent to Rome,
Be not dismayed, you shall be well entreated,
You shall want nothing fitting your estates,
March with us on our way for Capua.
Bring in that Opium, and bowl of Wine,
Here I must act a Tragicomedy,
Bernardo is it well confected and prepared?
According to my conference with Rotsi.
He sent it as your Holiness may see,
Safe sealed up
Fill me that bowl of wine,
'tis a drowsy medicine, do not taste it my Lord,
Thou hast been taster to me, many times,
Begin Bernardo.
My Lord I slept too much the last night and I dare not,
It holds good colour hold here Bernardo,
Give good attendance, bring them to their rest,
Then give me notice at my study door.
One set was passed before I parted from them,
And by this time they be well heated.
Sirrah be diligent and serviceable in this,
Even as thou lovest thy master.
Fear me not?
Were it not that my conscience hath been fired,
With flames of purgatory by this Pope,
I never could endure such villainy,
The best is he doth pardon all my sins.
This set was strangely lost I durst have wagered,
An hundred ducats after the first chase.
You think you play well, but believe me brother,
You cannot take pains not observe a ball,
With that dexterity which appertaineth.
Holla within there if I take no pains,
My waistcoat well can witness for I sweat.
Barber bring in some linen for my Lords
Bring me some wine for I am very thirsty
I listened for that string and he hath touched it.
willt please your Lordship sit on this low chair?
Rub my head first then comb it,
Fill me some wine Bernardo,
Good my Lord cool yourself a little,
Give me wine and let it be thy labour good Barnardo
To call for music.
Brother in this cup I commend the loves,
Of all true Faventines our trusty friends,
Hoping ere long to live again with them.
I thank you brother, if our father Pope.
Perform his promise we shall soon return.
This wine was good yet tasteth of the cask,
It hath a musty relish.
Let's here this music,
Holla within there.
My Lord.
I think it good after this little rubbing to repose my body
I am some what heavy.
I know the cause,
And what Bernardo.
Marry with much motion of your bodies my Lords,
You must not be so vehement in play.
I knew a noble French man at Anchona,
Twenty years since at tennis took his death.
With over heating of himself in play.
More music there.
My Lords are both asleep music depart.
And leave them to their ease; alas sweet boys,
Is it not pity that these noble branches,
So sweetly knit in one, should never wake?
I that am hard of heart sigh for their sake,
My Lord.
What news man?
Both fast asleep.
And both upon one bed?
'tis done.
And chamber voided?
All is performed my Lord.
My blessing rest upon thee my Benardo.
Depart now with those letters I delivered,
To be conveyed to Florence leave me here.
Slp both secure vpon your fatall bed,
Now that the God of silence Morpheus,
Hath with his signet of black horn sealed up,
Your languid eye lids loaden with pale death,
Sleep until you draw your latest breath,
Poor harmless boys' strangers to sin and evil,
Oh were my soul as innocent as yours!
This office is of highest consequence,
In friendship for I consider it,
I sent you from a million of sorrows,
Into the flowery fields of Paradise.
Their to go habit in the groves of myrtle,
To feed on Manna and to drink pure Nectar,
A cup of everlasting happiness.
Where such sweet music unconceivable,
Shall entertain your senses in sweet comfort,
As the delight thereof shall never die
Astor what Astor speak awake Phillippo,
Both fast asleep.
Now Roderick betake thee to thy task,
What? peace Astor begins to talk I will attend.
Fair gracious Angel of eternal light,
Which reachest out that hand of happiness.
Hailing my spirit to that triumphant throne,
Of endless comfort I adore thy grace.
Oh golden light of never setting Sun,
Hark brother Astor hark my soul is rapt,
Into the joys of heaven with harmony.
Do they not sleep? are they not yet asleep?
Be not their senses yet locked up in sleep.
Astor awake awake, awake Philippo.
All safe and sure, oh this was but a dream,
Their Genius hath foretold them of their end,
And joyfully they do shake hands with death.
Come out here now you Cleopatra's birds.
Fed fat and plump with proud Egyptian slime,
Of seven mouthed Nilus but now turned lean:
Take your repast upon these Princely paps.
Now Ptolemy's wife is highly magnified,
Ensigning these fair princely twins their death,
And you my lovely boys' competitors,
With Cleopatra share in death and fate.
Now Charon stays his boat upon the strand,
And with a rugged for head full of wrath
He thrusts a million from the shore of Styx,
To give you waftage to the Elysian fields,
I see their colours change and death sits heavy.
On their fair foreheads with his leaden mace.
My birds are glutted with this sacrifice.
What now proud worms? how tastes you princes blood.
The slaves be plump and round in to your nests,
Is there no token of the serpent's draft,
All clear and safe well now fair boys good-night.
Bernardo, Bernardo, the feat is done,
Use thy discretion as I did direct.
'tis done in deed alas they both be dead:
Now must I follow my directions,
Holla within there.
What news Bernardo?
Alas my Lord ill news,
But that his Holiness is fast asleep,
And this day stirred not from his bedchamber
I would have brought him to this woeful sight:
Prince Astor with Phillippo was at Tennis,
And being overheated at their game,
Drinking so suddenly upon that heat,
With much sweet Wine did surfeit instantly,
And here alas lie dead upon this bed.
Alas it is a ruthful spectacle,
Two princely boys of noble disposition,
Endued with honourable gifts of virtue.
Of gracious favour, wise, and liberal.
Phaenza's hope: Bernardo bear them in,
His Holiness will much bemoan their fate.
My Lord, my Lord, I do not like of this.
Peace man, no more do I, but bear with patience.
It is suspicious but we may not talk,
Come let us in, oh God!
Oh God what times are these.
After the bloody Duke Valentinoys
Had conquered Furly, with the warlike Lady,
By wily force he took in Capua,
Then through insidious sleights and treacheries,
He did surprise the state of Camerine,
Where he captived Iulio di Varana,
With his two sons all which he strangled,
With semblable tyranny proud Caesar,
On terms of trust meets with the Duke Gravina,
And Vitellozzo with the prince of Fermo:
Whom he betrayed at Sinigaglia,
Bereaving them both of their states and lives,
He conquereth Urbin; and with violence,
Performeth strange and hideous outrages.
By this time with his forces back to Rome,
Caesar is marching; what betided there,
Ends in the subject of this Tragedy.
Now that by cunning force and policy,
All the free states and cities of Romania
subjected are unto the Church of Rome.
And that our pikes and swords in blood and slaughter,
Are stained and sheathed quiet in our scabbards,
Our blood and wounds staunched and bound up in scarfs,
Let us for this could season of the year,
Rest us and cheer ourselves till the next spring.
And then march forward with alacrity.
Brave Barbarossa take these soldiers,
Unto some quarter where by sound of drum,
According to their muster give them pay,
Let them be satisfied and so discharged.
Fellows in arms faithful and valiant,
I thank you for your pains and honesties,
In token of our good heart to your service,
we give each common soldier more than pay,
Two ducats: and all other officers.
According to their place redoubled,
With many thanks for your exceeding valour,
Assuring you that in these wars with us,
Caesar shall make you Captains of your spoils,
And so doth he commend you to your ease.
A Caesar a Caesar God save Caesar.
Sirrah come hither you must wait on me.
My good Lord Cardinal and Bentivoli,
Much thanks and dear acceptance of your loves,
I lovingly return for your great pains.
His Holiness gave us in serious charge,
To give you greeting and withal prepares
A sumptuous feast for that solemnity.
To which he doth invite the Cardinals
With other Lords your favourers in Rome.
Humbly commend my duty to my father
Tell him this night I purpose to be with him,
Tell him I live in health and touching these,
I pray you certify his Holiness,
I will have special care: and so my Lords
For a small season I will take my leave.
We do congratulate your safe return.
Come hither Baglioni speak sincerely,
know'st thou Brandino Rotsi th'apothecary.
What I my gracious Lord? know I myself?
How should I know that sir?
May it please your highness he serves his Holiness.
He did indeed sometime and for his villainies,
Is worthily cast of; but tell me sirrah:
Thou dost remember how for breach of arms
When thou didst stab a certain lancepresado:
I pardoned thee thy life.
True my good Lord I very well remember,
He was a lousy villain, marry was he,
And if he lived yet such is my stomach,
That were he chopped in mammocks I could eat him:
But for that honour in a soldiers word
He spend my life to do your highness service.
Hast thou thy piece then ready.
Oh my good Lord lies fix, sound as a bell,
With all my warlike furniture beside
Good flask and touchbox, a Valentia blade
A slavish dagger, powder of Rheims and bullets
Here they been.
Sometime this afternoon within the park,
Next, to the Vatican, Ratsie willbe:
And as I know thee stout and resolute,
Bestow a bullet on him as he passeth;
Few words; if any man attach thee for it,
By my protection thou shalt be enlarged.
And if I do not my good Lord dam me for it
I have an old grudge at him coal black cur,
He shall have two steel bullets strongly charged
Nay but hear me my Lord?
I'll tell you what,
By this true fox of steel
I had as good a spaniel for the water,
As ever hunted duck: and this true villain
Because my dog did eat up a pannado
Within his house; what did that Spanish rogue?
What did he think you my Lord?
Marry very fair and instantly
Poisoned my Spaniel with Rosa-solis,
A pox on him mitcher, faith i'll pay him his old fivepence for't now.
Take this to buy thee clothes my trusty servant,
Nay 'tis gold be not afeard of it.
Afeard my Lord
Were it a tempest in a shower of gold
I would endure it and adore you for't.
Then Baglion fit thee, to thy furniture,
Watch in a corner close beyond some tree:
And when the deed is done repair to me:
Say that thy piece went off against thy will,
Keep a light match in cock, wear flask and touchbox:
And take a murrain with thee so farewell;
Thus must I dive deep in a villains nature,
And thus must save a villain from the gallows
To play my parts in others' purposes.
The man whom I to benefit would choose,
I must in matters of more moment use:
Or else I will not benefit a man,
And cut him of in sequel if I can.
hear me, but my good Lord mark my words well,
If old Henrilico shrink in this service
Cashier him, call him whipstock, let him perish,
For want of Spanish wines, and malvasy.
Then fail not my true servant finely, closely.
No more, but by this cross,
Why now this Noble Caesars like himself,
Hath fitted me with service: if the world,
Had sought out somewhat to content a man,
Nothing could better please old Ballion
Then to kill a rascal, coward, cur,
A Spanish squirt-up, a black poisoning toad.
I like this trading better than the wars
For there I serve for two ducats a month,
And not a duck egg richer when I march
And in continual hazard of my life
For which percase my piece kills twenty persons:
Now shall I march in purse with many ducats,
For one hours service but to kill one man,
Free from all danger of mine enemy,
I will about it and take up my stand.
Thus doth one hideous act succeed another,
Until the mouth of mischief be made up:
Now must I train my fellow to his death,
A deed of such and I did swear the same,
Not only for the secrecy thereof.
But to conceal a matter of more weight,
Of greater moment and high cruelty:
When any deed of murder must be done,
To serve his Holiness, call for Bernardo.
He must be principal or accessary
To serve all purposes; for gold or pardon,
The Pope gives both; and I can take them both:
Gold can make hard the softest conscience,
And mine is hardened by the practice of it.
Holla signior Bandino.
Who calls without there? what my good fellow Bernardo?
Very welcome: what news with you?
My Lord hath sent me for the things he spoke of.
Here they be very strong and sufficiently compounded
According to directions from his Holiness,
And special warrant under his privy signet
I tried them on three men condemned to death:
For rapine and vile murder: but the first
Within less than one quarter of an hour,
Puffed up, grew leprous and his heart strings broke;
Then did I give allay the second time,
The second prisoner died within three hours
I did the third time mitigate, a little,
And saw when it was ministered the third man,
Who did within eight hours swell, rage and die.
Well have you done your part, set down your bottles,
And read this letter from the Duke Valentinoys,
Well said brave Pincoginger, by mine honour
Before I do this service lie there piece.
For I must have a saying to those bottles,
True stingo stingo by mine honour. Oh that mine old friend and Boccadillio Frescobaldi Wear hear alive again to taste of this other bottle, Well I will venture upon it, that I may drink one health To Frescobaldi I will encounter with this stout Hectorean, Greek.
Were Meleager here that slew the boor.
Like a Boracchio armed all in sack,
Or stout Achilles in a pewter coat.
Or old Assaracus armed in a wicker jerkin,
Or Priamus armed with a leather jacket,
Lined and embossed with Alligant and Hollock
By force of arms and Mars his valiant hand,
I would encounter them whilst I could stand.
The slaves are busy reading their paphlagonian papers,
I must have a saying to you sir I must; though,
You be provided for his Holiness own mouth; I will be,
Bold to be the pope's taster by his leave.
Now trusty Troilus, base los manos.
Let him alone it is the Duke's pleasure,
That if he will taste he shall be suffered,
And therefore I was commanded to set them down,
In presence of such a fellow whom for his sauciness,
I have peppered.
Oh 'tis a perilous villain if you knew him so well as I, believe me he would pepper you for it if he understood so much, peace man he hath broken up the bottle let him drink.
Nay let him drink and burst, for believe me I was informed before of such a fellow; for whom I was commanded to lay bate; oh notable villain, how he sealeth death.
This is a Noble nipster i'faith, so so.
Back again to kennel slave.
He hath his full wages doubt not Bernardo, to serve him till he die, seem not to respect him in any case do I pray you.
Nay but do not you respect him, lest he doubt you suspect him.
Oh doubt you not, doubt you not, I will never look, let us turn our talk. Tell his Holiness 'tis well compounded and composed of all those drugs mentioned in your letter, give the Duke right humble thanks for his token, and with all reverence kiss his excellent hand.
And by this signet you are to deliver me the bottles.
Have a care of them and deliver them.
Farewell fellow Rotsi.
Adieu Bernardo.
Now do not I pity this Spanish villain because he consented to the poisoning of this soldier, but for that I am innocent.
What is the wild goose fallen? have at you Sir, might a poor soldier speak half a score words to your venomous worship and according to your accustomed surliness have no replyal: I believe you sir, your words are not offensive in any sort I must confess. Now thou infectious slave, thou compictious Rascal, thou confectionary villain: where is you sublimatum now sir? where is your Ratsbanatum now? now where are your poisoned pullets in stewed-broth? where be they? you never dreamt of a poisoned ballet, did you go too? now signior currigantino will I rummage in the worm eaten keel of your rotten hulk: passion of my soul what papers are these. Foh powder, powder foh, what's here I marry sir I like this well, are you so pursy sir, this may serve to stop a gap in my neighbour's hedge, what is this you show me with a shame to you, yea and master of the small ordinance to, this Basilisk hath been often mounted where there hath been hot and dangerous service in the I'll of Iapan, hold passion of me my guts, out upon thee thou hast poisoned me with thy stinking breath or with thy villainous powders out alas alas what fiery commotions I feel in my body griping fretting and fuming, a plague on your bottle ale with a vengeance, I am peppered there is no remedy in all these extreme agonies! must draw this villain further: and throw him into a ditch, Deh veleno dell Diabolo, farewell farewell my old Shurcordillio Frescobaldi: farewell Madam Sempronia, for in conscience I am guilty of mine own death oh the pangs of hell and purgatory; come you lousy Rascal I will bury thee with carrion in the next ditch.
Have you delivered to the bottleman,
The fatal wine.
I I gave charge to Bernardo,
Having them safely sealed with mine own signet,
That when feasting I do call for wine,
He shall break up the seals and fill that out,
For the two Cardinals Cornetto and Modina.
'tis well, now if our plot prove right,
Thou shalt be master of much wealth tonight,
Dying in estate all comes to my share,
Caraffa loves a salad passing well,
And I have fitted one to serve his turn,
Their gold will make thy soldiers fight in blood,
And wing thy victories with good success.
Let us no longer entertain the time,
By this the Cardinals expect our presence.
On with auspicious steps triumphant Caesar.
And entertain them in brave jollity.
Have special care you that have these in charge.
That these two sealed bottles be not stirred,
Until his Holiness call for that wine
Fear not I will attend it as my life.
Martial yourselves here sworn-men and their
Churchmen.
Here sit we swordmen to defend the Church.
My Lords give answer in sincerity,
Hath not my Caesar fought well for the Church?
That hath so soon subjected in her right.
Imola, Furly, Camerino, Capua,
Urbine, Faenza, Sinegaglia.
Brave Caesar I must boast of it in presence,
That I Christ's vicar of his Church on earth,
Have such a son which issued from my loins,
That being vicar of the church's wars.
Hath in revolution of one year,
Done more than all the generals have done,
In honour of our Church for forty years,
Your Holiness with all your Cardinals,
Your barons and indeed all Christendom
Are bound to give God thanks for such a Prince.
And him great honour for his fortitude.
Your excellence did in a blessed hour.
Surrender up your Holy robes and hat,
Betaking you to burganet and arms,
By which you might enlarge our liberties.
i'faith my Lord and see we have all of us good cause to rejoice, would I had been with your excellence at Capua, I would had one bout with them as old as I am.
You might my Lord have had your choice of Ladies,
Bfull pisners to be ent to Rom.
I marry my Lord some what might have been said to this gear in diebus illis, but transeant cum ceteris erroribus, would to GOD I wear as young as when I was a Scholar in Padua, faith then I could have swinged a sword and a buckler, and I did that then will being but a spring all of 24. years which be talked of in Padua these 40. years I warrant it faith my Lord were I so lusty now I would go with you to the waires this next spring that's flat, will you eat any salad my Lord, faith here are excellent herbs if you love them.
They be my Lord too cold for my stomach, wilt please you my Lord to drink a cup of old Greek wine with it, bring me some wine here.
Bring me some wine here I will drink a joy to Caesar and this Noble company.
Some wine for his Holiness own mouth, Bernardo.
yourself are master of this feast,
I drink a good success and victory,
To Caesar and great happiness to all.
Happy success and fortune to you all.
Hold Caesar; stay for we are poisoned,
My Lord it is all of.
Then art thou quite undone.
Some villainous conspiracy lies hid
Within this company, and this pernicious villain
Hath practised with them; go with thy soul to hell,
I feele the raging of i.
Away my Lord Modina come away,
This train was laid of purpose for our lives.
Our refuge and defence is from above,
Let Sathan work, he never shall prevail.
How doth my gracious Lord.
Oh very sick: bring me preservatives,
I think I have as good as any man.
My Lord Bentivogli take here my keys,
You know my study, search my Cabinet,
There shall you find a little Crystal phial,
Wrapped up in Sarsenet bring it hither straight,
I feel Vesonus raging in my guts.
Here Caesar taste some of this precious water,
Against all plague, poison, and pestilence
A present help: I bought it of a Iew,
Borne and brought up in Galilee.
My Lord it is too forcible and hot.
The flames of Mongibell consume my liver,
Bring me to some repose.
Comfort yourself my Lord.
Cesar take rest,
Send for Physicians, all my fear remains
That Caesar shall miscarry.
And all my grief that both.
Noble Bentivogli withdraw we both,
Unto my Chamber, I am very sick.
Belchar, Belchar, Belchar;
Varca, Varca, Varca,
Astaroth, Astaroth, Astaroth.
Let Orcus Erebus and Acheron,
And all those Ghosts which haunt the pitchy vaults
Of coal black hags in Cimmerian shades
Muster themselves in numbers numberless,
To dance about the Ghost of Alexander.
Our fiery region void of all religion,
And devilish order by necessity,
Compelled requires his present policy.
That fatal wine which for his Cardinals,
He destined I took out of the place:
And placed his own wine for those Cardinals.
The date of his damnation is at hand.
Be ready then for I the first will bear,
As swift as whirlwind his black soul to Styx.
And I with poisoned toads will stop his mouth,
Whose heart was never satisfied with lust.
And I with snakes and stinging Scorpions
Will scourge him for his pride and insolence.
And I with force of fiends will hall his limbs,
And pull them till he stretch an anchor length.
And for his avarice I will fill his paunch,
With store of molten gold and boiling lead.
Then let us for his sake a hornpipe tread.
You talk of penance and of penitence,
Compunction with contrition and remission
For all my sins; I pray you think of yours
You vex yourselves too much I cannot thank you,
Have patience sirs; oh 'tis a goodly exorcism
Quem penitet peccasse paene est innocens
Give leave, give leave, come hither when I call
Either mere fools or good physicians all.
Nay leave me good my lords, fain would I meditate,
Leave me I pray you.
We leave our prayers with your Holiness,
Call upon God, think of his endless bounty.
Pray for yourselves, trouble not me with prayers,
I pray you trouble not yourselves with praying.
solus. What is repentance? have I not forgotten?
Why repentance is a spiritual martyrdom,
Which mortifieth sins and heals the soul:
Having been wounded with the spirit's sword
This sword God's book: that book by me profaned
And by which book of God my soul is damned,
I damned undoubtedly.
Oh wretched Alexander, slave of sin
And of damnation; what is he that can
Deliver thy poor soul? oh none but he
That when thou didst renounce him cast of thee,
Repentance is in vain, mercy too late,
Oh why should miserable mortal man,
Whose languishing breath lives in his nostrils
Vex and torment himself with daily travel
To scrape up heaps of gold to gape for honours?
What were the conquests of great Alexander:
Of Cyrus, Cayus Caesar? what were it
To be possessed of this universe
And leave it all behind him in a moment?
Might some one man attain that happiness
Which our first Adam had in paradise,
Before he did prevaricate? why then
It were a work of lasting worthiness
To rip the bowels of our mother Ops
For treasure; and to conquer all the world,
Because eternity would promise it,
Out, out alas my pains, my guts, my liver
And yet I fear it not though in security
Once more I will with powerful exorcisms,
Invoke those Angels of eternal darkness
To show me now the manner of death.
What dost thou start foul child of reprobation
Vain are thy crosses, vain all exorcisms,
Those be no fruits of faith but mere hypocrisy:
Signa te signa temeré me tangis & angis
Roma tibi subito motibus ibit amor.
Rome Which once was thy gorgeous concubine
Hath now forsaken thee: now doth she find,
Thy falsehood which did her adulterate
What dost thou tremble slave of sin and hell?
I exorcize thee foul malignant spirit
In the names of, of, of—
Of what? foul mouth, polluted soul?
Corrupted flesh; God hath forsaken
Thy date expired it, thy power determined.
Dissolve dissolve, break, break, black soul dissolve,
And poison all this hem so here with sin.
Thy death and dissolution stand at door,
Resolve now to dissolve, thy soul is ours.
Proud Lucifer Traitor, to great Iehouah,
Father of lies my time is not expired
I will not do that violence to God,
Taking that which is his from him
To be bestowed on his great enemy.
Thou that hast thrown those graces in his face,
How canst thou think upon salvation?
Think that thouart damned. I will declare it plainly.
seven years are yet to come, I look for them.
Examine thy soul with this counterpart.
Behold it? is it not for eight years & 8 days?
Thou fool examine in arithmetic,
Numbers without distinction placed thus.
Annos with the figure 11. signifying eleven years, & the figure,
seven applied to Dies importing seven days.
How? how? how? how? how's that?
Deh quella malitia del Diabolo: Deh quello veleno del inferuno.
And for what stands this figure then?
Why for eighteen this figure stands for octavo referred unto die last before, signifying th'eight day after, so that Annos undicem without distinction signifying eleven years; and this figure seven added to days; and that octavo post, importing the eight day following, moriere, thou shalt die. I mean thy body with thy soul in respect of Heaven.
Thus many days hast thou continued Pope,
And this is thy last day designed by fate.
Thou canst not mock me with thy Sophistry,
M soule is more diuine and cannot perish.
Thy soul foul beast is like a Menstruous cloth,
polluted with unpardonable sins.
Know then malignant Angel of confusion,
My soul is a divine light first created
In likeness lively formed to the word,
Which word was God, that God the cause of causes,
My soul is substance of the living God,
Stamped with the seal of heaven, whose character
Is his eternal word, at which hell trembles.
And what of that? thou therein hast no part,
I do confess thy soul was first ordained
To good: but by free-will to sin thou slave,
Hast sold that soul from happiness to hell.
Mark yet what I can answer for this soul.
Mighty Iehouah most exuperant,
Two creatures made in feature like himself,
The world and man: world reasonable and immortal,
Man reasonable, but dissoluble and mortal,
And therefore man was called Microcosmus,
The little world, and second type of God,
Containing those high faculties and functions,
And elements which are within the world.
Man then that doth participate with all,
Through operation, conversation, and symbolisation,
With matter in the subject properly,
With th'elements in body quadrifary,
With growing plants in virtue vegetative
In sense with beasts; with heavens by th'influence
Of the superior spirits into th'inferior
In wisdom and capacity with Angels,
With Eloym in that great continent,
Is without doubt preserved by that God,
Finding all things contained in himself.
Answer me vain Philosopher to this,
Thou that hast planted man in this perfection,
Not looking on thy detestable soul,
Which first like a pure leaf of whitest Lily,
Clear from all blemish was bestowed by God,
And thou foul beast didst shamefully pollute it.
Is it not one of humane faculties,
To propose for yourselves the best you can,
Where other creatures carried with blind force,
Make themselves bondslaves to the present time.
The scope of man's creation was to glorify
The most all potent maker of all things,
The Alpha and Omega of all bounty.
But he that wilfully betrays this soul,
That precious jewel wherein God delights,
Dishonours God and doth deprive himself,
Of all salvation and beatitude.
Rest with this answer, that my soul is Gods
Whose habitacle is prepared in heaven.
First it doth know God being figured
According to that Image of himself,
And then the world whose lively shape it bears,
And to conclude the soul of man knows all,
Because with all things it doth symbolize,
For in this Man there is a mind intelligent,
A quickening word and a celestial spirit,
That like a lightning every way diffused,
All things which are made by the mighty power,
uniteth, moveth, and replenisheth.
These things should have been thought upon before,
The summum bonum which lives in the soul,
Is an eternal pleasure to behold,
And have fruition of the mighty power.
Which thou didst never see, nor canst enjoy.
Pause yet a little, let me meditate, Mercy, mercy, mercy; arise arise: up, up, up: fie, fie: no, no? stir stubborn, stony, stiff indurate heart not yet, up. why, what? wilt thou not foul traitor? to my soul? not yet?
Arise, arise, advance heart clogged with sin,
Oppressed with damnation: up advance yet.
Wilt thou not stir stiff heart? what am I damned?
Yet a little, yet a little, oh yet: not yet? alas.
High God of heavens and earth if thou bear love,
Unto the soul of sinful man show mercy,
Mercy good Lord, oh mercy, mercy, mercy.
Oh save my soul out of the lions paws,
My darling from the den of black damnation,
My soul, my dove, cover with silver wings,
Her down and plumage make of fine tried gold,
Help, help, help, above, stir, stir, stupidity.
He charms in David's words with Iudas spirit,
It will not, no it will not, yet alas, no, no, no? is that my sentence to damnation?
I am undone, undone.
He shall despair, vassal of sin and hell,
Provide thyself in black despair to dwell.
I tell thee I cannot be resolved,
To dwell in darkness break black soul dissolve,
And poison all this Hemisphere with sin,
And if I may not reach that happiness,
Since for my sons sake I myself enthralled,
Tell me shall Caesar die this death with me?
Caesar; his youth and strength of blood drives out
This fat all poison and shall live a while.
Oh show me then the manner of his death,
Attend it time grows short all fear is past.
What means that ghastly shadow which came first?
By that which represents Lucretia,
Leprous and poisoned is thy death declared,
By poison which now struggleth with thy spirits,
And by that other which sets out to thee,
The murder of thy son the Duke of Candy,
Prefigured is the death of thy son Caesar,
Thou for the poisoning of thy daughter poisoned:
He for the murdering of his brother murdered.
Thus God is only just.
The Devil cannot deny it.
Man only false.
Learn miserable wretched mortal men,
By this example of a sinful soul,
What are the fruits of pride and Avarice,
Of cruel Empire and impiety,
Of profanation and Apostasy,
Of brutish lust falsehood, and perfidy,
Of deep dissembling and hypocrisy,
Learn wicked worldlings, learn, learn, learn by me
To save your souls, though I condemned be.
Here comes a fatal message, I must hence.
My robes, my robes; he robs me of my robes,
Bring me my robes, or take away my life,
My robes, my life, my soul and all is gone.
From the pale horror of eternal fire,
Am I sent with the wagon of black Dis,
To guide thy spirit to the gates of death,
Therefore I summon thee to come with speed,
For orisons now stand thee not instead.
Horror and horror, fear ensueth fear,
Torment with torments is Encompassed:
Despair upon despair, damnation
Upon damnation, hell and conscience,
Murder lust avarice impiety,
profanation and apostasy,
Rage and distraction tyrannize: away,
Away proud Lucifer, away.
away, away.
Holla, holla, holla, come, come, come, what, when, where when, why, deaf, strike, dead, alive, oh alas, oh alas, always burning, always freezing, always living, tormented, never ending, never, never, never mending, out, out, out, out, why, why, whether whether, thither.
Thither, thither, thither.
What is he dead?
Dead, and in such a fashion,
As much affrights my spirits to remember,
Thunder and fearful lightning at his death,
Out cries of horror and extremity.
Cause all your bells to ring my lords of Rome,
Rome is redeemed from a wicked Pope.
God hath beheld us with his eyes of mercy,
His name be glorified, join all in prayer,
And give him praise that took away your shame.
Go your procession, sing your litanies,
A let your Churches through with multitudes,
Banquets and bonfires through the City make.
In sign our Church is freed from infamy,
even as his spirit was inflate with pride,
Behold his body puffed up with poison,
His corpse shall be conveyed to saint Peeters,
Open for all beholders, that they may
See the reward of sin, amend and pray.
Th'omnipotent great guider of all powers,
(Whose essence is pure grace, and heavenly love,
As he with glory crowns heroic actions,
Bearing a taste of his eternal virtue)
So semblably doth he with terror strike,
In heavy vengeance sins detestable:
As in this tragic mirror to your eyes,
Our scene did represent in Alexander,
Flagitious Caesar his ambitious son,
Reserved for more calamities to come,
After he was imprisoned by the Church,
Escaped into the kingdom of Navarre,
Unto King Iohn then brother to his wife:
Where in an ambush at Viano slain,
Just Nemesis repaid his treachery.
Heroic and benevolent spectators,
Your gracious ears, and curious observations,
judicious censures, and sweet clemency,
Have thus addressed our Tragic Theater,
T'exchange contentment, for benignity:
Humbly devoted to your good desires.
For some delight, cause of discourse for others,
For all example, and for none offence,
Your favours are a royal recompense.
Which when our lofty Muses shall perceive,
Then in more pompous and triumphant state,
Your eyes with glory shall the deed receive
Of mighty Monarchs, Kings, and change of fate.
By me those persons which our Scene presented,
Kiss all your hands, and wish you well contented.