ISyster of the thunderer, (for now that name alone remains to me) Ioue evermore as though devorste and gone,
And temples of the highest air as w●…we shunned have,
And beaten out of skies above the place to harlots gave.
I muite go dwell beneath on ground, for whores do hold the sky.
From hens the bear in part above of y●…ye p●…le full high,
A haughty star the greekysh ships by seas doth guide about.
From this way, whence at spring time warm the days is loased out,
Europ●…es bearer through the waves of Tyria shines full bright.
From this, their stormy fearful flock to ships, and seas affright,
The wandering daughters here and there of Atlas' upward sway.
With staring bush of hear from hens Orion gods doth fray:
And Perseus eke his glittering stars of golden gloss hath here.
From hens the twynns of Tyndar's stocks do shine, a sign full clear:
And at whose birth first stood the ground that erst went too and fro.
Nor only Bacchus now himself, or Bacchus' mother lo,
Have clymbde to gods: lest any part should from rebuke be free,
The skies the Gnossian strumpets crowns do bear in spite of me.
But I of ollde contempts complain: me, one dire, fierce, and shrewd
Thebana land, with wicked brood of Ioues base daughters strewed,
How oft hath it a stepdame made? though up to heaven should rise,
The conquering drab Alcmene now, and hold my place in skies,
And eke her son to promysde stars obtain the worthy way,
At birth of whom the staying world so long deferrde the day,
And Phoebus' slow from morning sea began to glister bright,
Commanded long in th'ocean waves to hide his drowned light:
Yet shall my hates not leave them so. a wrathful kindling rage's
His mind in madness shall stir up, and ire that may not swag●…
Shall evermore (all peace laid down) wage wars eternally.
What wars? what ever hideous thing the earth his enemy
Begets, or what soever sea, or air hath brought to sight
Both dreadful, dire, and pestplent, of cruel flercest might,
'tis tierde, and taemde: he passeth all, and name by ills doth raise,
And all my wrath he doth enjoy: and to his greater praise
He turns my hates: while tedious tails to much I him beehest,
He proves what father him begot. both the●…, where light epprect
Hath sea, and where it showed again, where ●…an day doth crayne,
And with his brand approaching near doth die those Aethiops twain,
His strength untamde is honoured: and god each where is he
Now called in world. and now more 〈◊〉 of monsters want to me,
And labour less to Hercles is t'accomplyshe all my will,
Then me to bid: at ease he doth mine imperies fulfil.
What cruel hests of tyrant now so fierce a young man may
Prevail to hurt? for lo he bears for weapons now away
What once he feared, and put to flight: he armed comes at side
With lion fierce, and Hydra both: nor land sufficeth wide,
But broke he hath the threshold lo of that infernal Ioue,
And spoils with him of conquered king be draws to gods above.
But that's but light, broke is the league of spirits that there do dwell.
I saw myself, I saw him lo (the night now gone of hell,
And Ditis taemde) throw out abroad before his father's sight
His brother's spoils. Why draws he not ●…ppreste and bound by might
Himself in chains that equal things to Ioue by lot doth hold?
And bear the rule of captive hell, and way to Styx unfold?
Up opened is from lowest ghosts the backward way to shy,
And sacred secrets of dire death in open sight do lie.
But he (the dreadful den of sprights break up) full fiercs and stout
Even ●…uer me doth triumph l●…, and with proud hand about
The ●…oule black dog by greekish towns he leads from hell away.
When seen was ugly Cerberus I saw the fading day,
And fearful soon: even melykewyse a trembling dread oppressed,
And looking on the filthy necks of conquered monstrous beast,
I feared much mine own behests. but light things I complain,
For heaven I may be frayed, lest he may get the highest rain,
That lowest won. the sceptres from his father will he take,
Nor he to stars (as Bacchus dy●…) his way will gently make:
The way with ruin will he seek, and be in empty skies
Will reign alone. with force displayed his haughty heart doth rise,
And he, that heaven itself, by force of his might gotten be,
It bearing learned: quite underneath the world his headsette he,
Nor once his shoulders bowed, the poise of such a mighty mass:
And midst of heaven on Hercles' neck alone lo settled was.
His neck unwryde the stars above and skies did only stay:
And me likewise oppressing him, to Gods he seeks the way.
Go Ire, go on, and beat him down that great things doth invent,
Match thou with him, and with thy hands now thou thyself him rend.
Such hates why dost thou meditate? Let all wild beasts now go:
And weary Euristeus now be free from geeving charges me.
The Titans daring once of Ioue to break the impery
Send out: let lose the den abroad of mount of Sicily.
The Doric land that with the turn●… of giant quakes afraid,
Let it bring forth the dreadful necke●… of mon●…er underlayde.
Let yet the haughty moon above some other beasts beeget.
But these he overcame. seek'st thou a matchet ' Alcides yet?
Thers none, except hymselfe: let hym agaynst hym selfe rebell.
Let present be from bottom deep upraysde of lowest hell
Th' Eumenides, let flaming locks of theirs the fires out fling,
And furious hands beestowe about the strokes of vipers sting.
Go now full proud, and scale the skies to seats of gods make way.
Now must thy battles wage●… be, full clear lo shines the day.
Despise man's works: thinkest the fierce wight that hell and souls allow
Thou haste escaped? nay here I will an other hell the show.
In deep mist hid I will call up from bottom low of hell
Beyond the ways of guilty ghosts rebatefull goddess fell.
where as the roaring dreadful den resounds with cries about,
From deepest bond of Ditis' reign beneath I will fet out,
what so is left. Let hateful hurt now come in anger wood,
And fierce imptetie em●…rewe himself with his own blood,
And error eke, and fury armed against itself to foght.
This mean, this mean, let wrath of mine now use to show my might.
Begin ye servants now of hell: the fervent burning tree
Of pine shake up: and set with snakes her dreadful flock to see
Let now Megaera bring to sight: and with her mournful hand
for burning rogue bring out of hell a huge and direful brand.
Do this, require you vengeance due, and pains of hell his spoil,
Strike through his breast: let fiercer flame within his bosom boil,
Than which in Aetna furnace beats so furiously to see.
That mad of mind and witless may Alcides driven be
With fury great through pierced quite, myself must first of all
Be mad. Wherefore doth Iuno yet not in to raging fall?
Me, met, ye Furies, sisters three thrown quite out of my wit
Cosse first, if any thing to do I do endeavour yet
For stepdame meet: let now my hates be turned an other way.
Let him (returned) his babes behold in safety, I you pray,
And strong of hand come home: I have now found the day at length,
In which may greatly me avail the hated Hercles' strength.
Both me, and eke himself let him subdue, and wish to die
Returned from hell. yea let it here be my commodity,
That he of jous begotten is: here present will I stand,
And that his shafts go straight from bow, I will direct his hand:
The mad man's weapons will I guide, Even Hercles fighting 〈◊〉
At length i'll aid. This guilt once done then leeful is that so
His father may admit to skies those guilty hands of his.
The fading stars now shine but seld in sight in stippy sky, night overcome with day,
Plucks in her fires, while sprung again is light that day star draws that clear son beams their way.
The y●…ye sign of haughty peal again, with seven stars marked that bears of Arcady,
Do call the light with overturned wain. with marble horse now drawn his way to hy
Doth Titan top of Detha overspread. the bushes bright that now with berries be
Of Thebes strewed, by day do blush full red. and to return doth Phoebus' sister flee.
Now labour hard begins, and every kind of cares it stirs, the shepherd doth unfold
His flocksunpend, do graze their food to find & nips that grass, with hoary frost full cold.
At will doth play in open meadow fair, that ealfe, whose brow did dam yet never tear
The empty kine their udders do repair. & light with course uncertain, here & there,
In grass full soft the wanton kid he flings. in top of bow doth sit with chanting song,
And to the son new rose to spread her wings bestirrs herself, her mournful nests among
The nightingale: & doth with birds about confuse resound, with murmur mixed rife
To witness day, his sails to winds set out the shipman doth commit in doubt of life,
While gale of wound that slack sails fills full straight he leaning over hollow rocks doth lie, 〈◊〉.
And either his beegiled hooks doth bait, or else beholds and feels the prey from high with poised hand.
The trembling fish he feels with line extent. this hope to them to whom of hurtless life,
Is quiet rest, and with his own content, and little, house, such hope in fields is rife.
The troublous hopes with rolling whirlwind great & dreadful fears, their ways in cities keep.
He proud repair to prince in regal seat, & hard court gates without the rest of sleep
Esteems, and endless happiness to hold doth gather goods, for treasure gaping more,
And is full poor amid his heaped gold. the people's favour him (astonished sore)
And commons more unconstant than the sea, with blast of vain ren●…un lifts up full proud.
He selling at the brawling bar his plea, full wicked, sets his ires & scollding loud
And words to sale a few hath known of all the careless rest, who mindful howdoth ●…tte
Swift age away, the time that never shall return again do hold. while fates permit.
At quiet live: the life full quickly glides with hastened course, & with the winged day
The wheel is turned of year that headlong ●…lides, the sisters hard perform their tasks always,
Nor may again untwist their threads ons spon yet mankind lo unsure what way to take
To meet the greedy destinies doth run, and willingly we seek the Stygian lake.
To much Alcides thou with stomach stout the sorry sprights of hell dooste haste to see. with course prefixed the fates are brought about to none once warned to come, may respite be
To none to pass their once appointed day. the tomb all people called by death doth hide
Let glory him by many lands away display, & same throughout all cities wide
Full babbling praise, & even with sky to stand advance, & stars: let him in chariot bright
Full haughty go: let me my native land in safe & secret house keep close from sight.
To restful men hoar age by course doth fall, and low in place, yet safe, & sure doth lie
The poor and base estate of cottage small: the prouder pomp of mind doth fall from high.
But sad here comes with loosed locks of hear lo Megara, with little company,
And slow by age draws Hercles' father near
QGuyder great of heaven, and of the world o judge full high,
Yet now at length appoint a mean●… of careful misery,
And end of our calamity. to me yet never day
Hath careless shined, the end of one affliction passed away
beginning of an other is: an other enemy
Is forthwith found, before that he his joyful family
Return unto, an other fight he taketh by behest:
Nor any respite given is to him nor quiet rest,
But while that he commanded is: straight him pursueth she
The hateful Iune. Was yet once from toil and labour free
His infant's age? the monsters lo he vanquysht hath and slain,
Before he knew what monsters meant. The scaled serpents twain
Their double necks drew on toward him, against the which to rise,
The infant crept to meet with them, the serpent's glittering eyes
Like fire, with quiet careless breast he looking fast upon,
With countenance clear, hard wrested kkots of them he caught anon:
And strangling then the swelling throats of them with tender hand,
To Hydraprelude made, the beast so swift of Maenale land,
That with much gold bore up full bright his beautified head,
Is caught in course. of Nemey wood likewise the greatest dread
The lion priest with Hercles' arms hath reared with dreadful cry.
What should I speak of stables dire of steeds of Bystonye?
Or king cast out himself for food his horses fierce to fill?
And brittled beast in thick tops wont of Crymanthus hill,
The boar of Maenalye, the woodds of Arcady to shake.
And bull that did no little dreads to hundred peoples make?
Among the flocks of Hesper land that hens far distant be,
The shepherd of Cartesian coast of triple shape to see
Is slain, and driven is the pray from farthest part of west,
Cithaeron quakte when by him past to sea the well known beast.
He being bid to make by coasts of summer son his way,
And parched lands which sore with heat doth boil the middle day,
The mountains broke on either side and rampters all undone,
Even unto swift and raging sea hath made a way to run.
Then entering in of plenteous wood the pleasant gardens gay,
The waking dragons golden spoils with him he brought away.
The Lerna monsters numerous ill what need to tell have I?
Hath he not him with fire at length subdued, and taught to die?
And which were wont with wings abroad to hide the day from sight,
Even from the clouds he sought and drove the Srymphale birds to flight.
Not him subdued who ever lies in bed unmatched at night
The widow queen of them that took to Thermodont their flight.
Nor hands that well durst enterprise his noble travails all
The filthy labour made to shrink of foul Augias' hall.
What veil all these? he wants the world which oft defended he.
And th'earth well knows the worker of his quietness to be
Away from earth: the prosperous guilt that beareth happy sway,
Is virtue called, and now the good to wicked do obey.
The right doth stand in might of arms, fear treadeth down the law.
Before my face with cruel hand even presently I saw
Revengers of their father's reign the sons with sword down cast,
And of the noble Cadmus eke himself the offspring last
Then slain: I saw his regal crown at once from him away
With head byreft. Who Thebes alas enough bewail now may?
The fertile land of gods, what lord now quakes it for to know?
Out of the fields of which sometime, and fruitful bosom low.
The youth upsprong with sword in hand prepared to battle stood:
And walls of which Amphion one of mighty Ioue his brood,
Hath built with sounding melody in drawing to the stones:
To town of whom the parent chief of Gods not only ones
Heaven being left hath come, this land that gods above always
Receyuds, & which hath made them gods, and (leeful beete to say)
Perhaps shall make, with loathsome yoke of bondage is pressed down.
O Cadmus stock, and citizens of old Amphion's town,
Whereto are ye now fallen? dread ye a cowardly exul thus,
His coasts to dwell in laching, and to ours injurious?
Who through the world pursues the gyllts and wrong by sea and land,
And cruel sceptres broken hath with just and rightful hand,
Now absent serves, and what he ea●…e in other doth sustains:
And now doth vannyshr Lycus hold of Hercles' Thebes the rain.
Yet shall he not: he shall come home, And him with vengeaunte quite,
And sudden rife to stars: he will Soon find the way to light,
Or make it else. return thou sat, repair to thine in haste:
And conqueror to conquered house yet come again at last.
Rise up my spouse, and darkness deep repellde of helly shade
Break up with hand, if no way may for thee kept back be made,
And passage be shut up, return with world uprent by might.
And what soever lieth possessed beneath in darkest night,
Send out with thee. as when the tops of haughty hills undone
A headlong passage making through for hasty flood to run
Thou sometime stoodst, when with great might of thine asunder broke
The Tempe woods wide open lay: and beaten with thy stroke
Of more renowns.
what wretches 〈◊〉 most chief wish of all,
They soon believe.
Nay what they fear to much lest it may fall,
They think it never may be shunned, nor rid by remedy.
Belief is ready still to dread the worser myse●…ye.
Deep drowned, & whelimde, & furthermore with all the world full low
Oppressed down, what ways hath he to light again to go?
What way I pray you had he then when through the burning cost,
Aud tumblyng after maner of the troubled sea vp toste
He went by sands: and fret that twice with ebb away doth slip,
And twice upflowe: and when alone with his forsaken ship,
Fast caught he stuck in shallow fords of shelfy●… Syrtes sand.
And (now his ship on ground) did pass through seas a foot to land?
Injurious fortune virtue most of men most stout and strong
doth seldom spare: no man alive Himself in safety long
i'll give the secret sacrifice: to thee with much faith lo
Long fire brands at Eleusis town full silent will I throw.
Then to my brethren shall I think to be restored again
Their souls, and eke himself alive and guiding of his rain
My father for to flourish yet. if any greater might
Deo keep thee shut, we follow thee: with thy return to sight
Defend us all, or else to hell draw down us all to thee.
Thou shalt us draw, no god shall raise us up that broken be.
O Faithful fellow of our blood, with chaste true faithfulness
The bridebed keeping, and the sons of haughty Hercules,
conceive in mind some better things, and take good heart to thee:
He will come home, as after all his labours woonteth he,
The mownt, now here, now there fell dow●… and rampire rent of stay,
The raging brook of Thessaly did run a new found way.
Thy parents so, thy sons, thy land repairing home to see,
Break out, and lowest bond of things out bringing thence with thee,
And what soever greedy age in all these long years race
Hath hid, show forth, & ghosts that have forgot their former case,
And people up before th●…e drive that fearful are of light.
Unworthy spoils for thee they are, if thou but bring to sight
What bidden is. great things, but far to much I speak for me,
unwitting of mine own estate. when shall I hap to see,
The day when thee, and thy right hand, I may embrace again,
And slow returns, nor yet of me once mindful, may complain?
To thee for this O guide of gods, untamed bulls shall bring
Their hundred necks: to thee O queen●… of fruits on earth that spring
To perils great and dangers may so often times out cast.
Whom chance doth often overslip, the same it finds at last.
But cruel lo, and grievous threats even bearing in his face,
And such as he of stomach is, doth come even such of pace,
Proud Lycus who the sceptres shakes in band of other king,
The plenteous places of the town of Thebes governing,
And every thing about the which with fertile soil doth go
Slope Phocis, and what ever doth Ismenus ouerflo●…,
What ever thing Cith●…ron seeth with haughty top and high,
And slender Isthmos isle, the which between two seas doth lie.
NOt I of native country bowers Possess the ancient right
Unworthy heir nor yet to me are noble men of might,
The grandfathers, nor stock renownd●… with titles hy●… of name,
But noble virtue: who so boasts of kindred whence he came,
Of others virtue makes his v●…wnte. but got with fearful hand
My sceptres are obtained: in sword doth all my safety stand.
What thee thou wottst against the will of citizens to get,
The bright drawn sword must it defend. in foreign counttey set
No stable kingdom is. But one my pomp and princely might
May ratify, once joined to me with regal torch full bright,
And chambers Megara: of stock of such nobility
Let upstarte state of mine take shape. I do not think that she
Refuse it will, or in the bed with me despise to lie.
But if with proud unbridled mynd●… thee stubborn do deny,
Then quite I purpose to destroy the house of Hercules.
The hate of men will then my pride, and people's speech oppress.
Chiese knack of kingdom is to bear Thy subjects hares each one.
Let's prove her then, chance given hath To us a place alone.
For she her head in fold of daple full sad and woefully
Enwrapped, the gods that are her guides for succour stands fast by,
And at the side of her doth lean A●…cides father true.
What thing doth this destroyer of our stock, again a new
Prepare? what proveth he?
O queen That name renowned high
And title tak'st of regal stock, full gentle and easily
A little while receive and bear my words with patient ear.
If always men eternal hates should one to th'other bear,
And rage beeg●…on, out of the heart should never fall away,
But th'happy still should armour hold th'unhappy still obey,
Then shall the battles nothing leave: with wide fields than the lands
Shall lie untyllde, with underlayde to housen fyrybrande
Then ashes deep shall over whelm the buried people all.
Expedient is to conqueror to wish that peace befall:
To conquered needful, partner of the kingdom come to me:
Lett's join our minds, take here this pledge of faith and truth to thee:
My right hand touch. Why whishtest thou with cruel face and mood?
Should I abide, that I the hand sprinkte with my father's blood,
Should touch and double death enbrewde of both my brethren? nay
first shall son rise extinguish quite, And west shall bring the day:
first faithful peace between the snows and fires there shall be tried,
And Scylla shall t'Ausonius first join his Sicilyan side,
And first, the fleeing flood that with swift turns of course deothe flow
Euripus, with Euboic wave shall stand full still and slow.
My father th'empire, brethren, house, Thou haste me clear bereft
My country to: what may be more? one thing to me is left,
Then brother, father, kingdom, house, that dearer is to me
The hate of thee: the which to me with people for to be
In common, woe I am: how great is mine alonely part?
Rule on full proud, bear up full high thy sprights and haughty heart:
Yet god the proud behind their backs doth follow them to wreak.
I know the The bane kingdoms. What should I the mothers speak,
Both suffering, and adventring gylts? what double mischief done?
And mixed name of spouse at once, of father and of son?
What brethren's double tents? or what as many rogues also?
The mother proud of Tantal's brood congealed in mourning lo,
And sorry stone yet flows with tears in Phrygian Sipylye.
Himself like wise erecting up his scaled head awry,
Even Cadmus' measuring throughout th'Illyrian lands in flight,
Behind him left of body drawn long slyniye marks in sight.
All these examples wait for thee: rule thou as likes thy will,
While thee our kingdoms wonted fates do call and oft hapte ill.
Go ●…o, these fierce and furious words thou woman mad refrain:
And imperies of princes learn of Hercles to sustain.
Though I the sceptres gotten by the force of war do bear
In conquring hand, and all do rule without the law his fear
Which arms subdue, a few words yet to thee now speak I shall
For this my cause: thy father did in bloody battle fall:
Thy brethren fell: the weapons keep n●… measurable stay.
For neither easily tempered be, nor yet repressed may
The drawn swords ire: the battles doth the blood delight out shed.
But he yet for his kingdom fought, we all together led
With wicked lust: yet th'end of war is now complained lo,
And not the cause. but no we let all remembrance thereof go:
When conqueror hath weapons left, the conquerds part should be
To leave his hates. No●… I that thou with lowly bended knee
Me reigning worship shouldst, require: Even this doth me delight,
That thou thy miseries dost bear with mind so s●…oute upright.
Thou for a king a sp●…use art meet, lets join our bedd●… anon.
A tremblng cold doth run throughout my bloodless limbs each one.
What heinous thing comes to mine ears? I feared not then at all,
When (all peace broke) the noise of war did by the city wall
●…sounde about, I bore all that unfearfully to see,
I fear the wedding chambers: now I captive seem to me.
Let heavy chains my body grieve, and ●…ke with hunger long
Let lingering death be slowly brought, yet shall no force full strong
My truth subdue: for even thine owne 〈◊〉 will I die.
Doth then thy husband drowned in hell give thee this stomach high?
Thehells allow he touched, that he
The height again might get.
The heavy poise oppresseth him
Of all the earth full great.
He with no burden shall be priest, that heaven itself ●…ustaynde.
Thou shalt be forced.
He wous not how to die, that is constrained.
Speak, what may rather I prepare then wedding new for th●…
More ●…oyall gift▪
Thine own death else, or else the death of me.
Then shalt mad woman die.
I shall then to my husband go.
More than my sceptres is to thee a servant loved so?
How many hath this servant ●…ayne of kings with handy stroke?
Why do●…he he yet a king then serus, and still ●…ustayne his yoke?
Take once away the hard behests, what's virtue then at la●…e?
Doo●…e thou it virtue count, to be to beasts, and monsters cast?
●…is virtues part, to tame the things, that all men quake to know.
Him great things bragging, darkness deep of 〈◊〉 press full low.
There never may from ground to stars an easy passage be.
Of whom be got, the housen then of gods through pierceth he?
O wretched wife of Hercles great, thy words a while now spare.
My part it is, the father of Alcides to declare,
And his true stock. yet after all of man so stout as this
So famous deeds, and after all Appeased with hand of his
What ever Titan risen up, doth see, or else at fall,
And after all these monsters taemde, and Phlegrey sprinkled all
With wicked blood, and after gods defended all on high,
Is not his father yet well known? Or Ioue do we belie?
Believe it yet by Iunoes hate.
why dost thou sclawnder Ioue?
No mortal kindred ever may be mixed with heaven above.
To many of the gods in skies is this a common trade.
But were they ever servants yet, before they gods were made?
Of Delos isle the shepherd los the flocks of Pherey fed.
But through all coasts he wandered not abroad as banished.
Whom straying mother first brought forth in wandering land to sight.
Yet Phoebus did no monsters fear, or beasts of cruel might.
First dragon with his blood embrued the shafts of Phoebus lo.
How grievous ills even yet full young he bore, do you not know?
From mother's womb the babe out thrown with lightening flame from high,
Even next his lightning father stood forthwith above in sky.
What? he himself that guides the stars, and shakes the clouds at will,
Did not that infant lurk in den of hollow caved hill?
The births so great full troublous price to have lo●… always aught:
And ever to be borne a God, with cost full great is bought.
Whom thou a miser seest, thou mayst Know him a man to be.
A miser him deny ye may, whom stout of heart ye see.
Call we him stout, from shoulders high of whom the lion thrown
A gift for maiden made, and eke his club from hand fell down,
And painted side with purple weed did shine that he did wear?
Or may we him call stout of heart, whose staring locks of hear
With ointment flowed? who hands renowned and known by praises high
To sound unmeet for any man of timber did apply,
With barbarous mitre cloasing in his forehead round about?
The tender Bacchus did not blush abroad to have laid out
His braided hears, nor yet with hand full soft the Thyrsus light
For to have shook, what time that he with pace unstoute in sight
His long trained barbarous garment drew with gold full fair to see.
Still virtue after many works is wont released to be.
Of this the house of Curitus destroyed doth witness bear,
And virgins flocks that brutyshly by him oppressed wear.
No Iuno did commawnde him this, Nor none Euristeus lo.
But these in deed his own works are.
Yet all ye do not know.
His work it is with weapons of his own hand vanquished
Both Eryx, and to Eryx joined Anteus Lybian deed:
And altars which with slaughter of the strangers flowing fast,
Busyris well deserved blood likewise have drunk at last.
His deed it is, that he that met the wownde, and sword is slain
Constrained to suffer death before those other Geryons twain.
Nor one alonely Geryon doth with one hand conquered lie.
Thou shalt among these he: which yet with none adultery
Have wedlock hurt.
What is to Ione to king is leeful thing:
To Ioue thou gaufts a wife, thou shalt now give one to a king.
And even of thee she shall it learn to be a thing not new,
Her husband even approving it the better man t'ensueensue.
But y●… she stubborn to be matched with me deny it still,
Then even by force a noble child Of her beget I will.
O Creon's ghosts, and all ye gods of th'house of Labdacus,
And wedding torches blazing bright, of wicked Oedipus,
To this my wedding give ye now our wonted destinies.
Now, now ye bloody daughters all of Egyptes king likewise,
Be here whose hands defyled are with so much blood out spilt:
One daughter lacks of Danaus, I will fill by the guilt.
Because that stubbornly thou doest refuse my wedding so,
And fearste a king, thou shalt know what the sceptres now may do.
embrace thine altars, yet no god shall ever take away
Thee from my hands: no not although with world upturned, may
Alcides' victor yet again to gods above return.
The wodos on he apes together cast, let all their temples burns
Even thrown upon their heads: his wife, and all his flock at last
With underlayed fire, let one wood pile consume and waste.
This only boon I father of Alcides ask of thee,
Which well may me beseem to crave, that I first slain may be.
Who all appoints with present death to have their punishment,
He tyrant wotts not how to be: more sundry grieves invent.
Restrain the wretched man from death, command that th'happy die.
I, while with beams prepared to burn the pile increaseth high,
Will him with vowing sacrifice that rules the seas entreat.
Oh chiefest power of god, and oh of heavenly things so great
The guide, and parent eke, with whose thrown thunderbolts do shake
All things human throughout the world, of king so cruel slake
The wicked hand: but why do I to gods in vain thus cry?
Where ever thou be hear me soon. why start so suddenly
The temples thus with moving sha●… Why roareth out the ground?
The noise of hell from bottom deep beneath hath made a sound:
We heard are, lo it is the sound of Hercules his pace.
O fortune hating men of stoutest breast, how ill rewards dost thou to good divide?
Euristeus reins at home in easy rest,
Alcinenaes son in every battle tried,
To munsters turns his hand that skies did stay: and cruel necks cuts of of hideous snake,
And apples brings from sisters mokt away, when e●…ce to sleep his watchful eyes betake,
Did dragon set rich fruit to oversee. he past 〈◊〉 Scythian bowers that stray abroad,
And those that in their countries strangers be and hardened top of frolen fret he croade,
And silent sea with banks full dumb about. the waters hard w●…t there their floods to flow.
And where before that ships full sails spread out is worn a path for Sarmates wild to go.
The sea doth stand to move in course again, now apt to bear the ship, now horsemen bold
The queen that there doth over widows rain, that girds her womb with girth of glittering gold,
Her noble spoil from body drawn hath she & shield, & bands of breast as white as snow,
acknowledging the conqueror with knee. with what hope drawn to hedleng hell allow,
S●… bold to pass the unreturned ways s●…st thou Proserpina's rain of Sicily?
With southern wind, or western there no se as arise with wave and swelling surges high.
Not there of Tyndar's stock that double brood two stars the fearful ships do aid & guide. with gulf full black doth stand that slothful flood and when pale death with gredyteeths so wide
Unnumbered nations hath set down to sprights with one boat man all over ferried be.
God grant thou mayst of hl subdue that tights
And unreveked webs of sisters three,
There king of many people reigneth he, who when thou didst with Nestor's Pylos fight,
Pesti●…erous hands applied to match {with} thee & weapon bare with triple mace of might:
And pricked with little wound he fled away, and lord of death himself did fear to die.
Break fate by force: & let the sight of day to sorry sprights of hell apparently, and porch unpassed show way to gods above. the cruel lords of sprights with pleasant song
And humble bown full well could Orpheꝰmove while he Eurydicen them craves among.
The art that drew woods, birds, & stones at w●… which made delay to floods of flitting flight
At sound whereof the savage beasts stood still with tunes unwont doth ghosts of hell delight
And clearer doth resound in darker place: & weep with tears did gods of cruel breast:
And they which faults with to severe a face do seek, & former guilt of ghosts out wrest:
The Thracian daughters wails Eurydicem. for her the judges weeping sit also.
We conquered are, chief king of death said them to gods (but under this condition) go,
Behind thy husbands back keep that thy way, look thou not back thy wife before to see,
Than the to sight of gods hath brought that day and gate of Spartan Taenare present be.
Love hates delay, nor could abide so long. his gift, he lost, while he desires the sight.
The place that could be thus subdued {with} song that place may soon be overcome by might.
QComfortable guide of light, and honour of the sky,
That compassing both hemispheres with flaming chariot his
Thy radiant head to joyful lands about the world dost bring,
Thou Phoebus pardon give to me, if any unlawful thing
Thine eyes have seen: (commanded) I have here to light out fet
The secrets of the world: and thou of heaven o guider great,
And parent eke, in flash out thrown of lightening hide thy sight.
And thou that governest the seas with second sceptres might,
To bottom sink of deepest waves: who so from high doth see,
And dreading yet with cowntnance new the earth defiled to be,
Let him from hens turn back his sight, and face to heaven uphold,
These monstrous sights to shoes: let twain this mischief great behold,
He who it brought, and she that bad. for painful toils to me,
And labours long, not all the earth thought wide enough may be
For Iunoes hate: things uncome to of all men I did see,
Unknown to son, and spaces wide that dark and shadesull be
Which worser pole gives direr Ioue to reign and rule therein.
And yet if third place pleased more for me to enter in,
I there could reign. the Chaos of eternal night of hell,
And worse than night, the doleful gods I have that there dood ●…ll,
And fates subdued, the death contemned I am returned to light.
What yet remains? I saw and showed the sprites of hell to sight:
appoint, if ought be more, dost thou my hands so long permit
Iuno to cease? what thing bid'st thou to be subdued yet?
But why do cruel sowldyars hold the holy temples wide?
And dread of armour sacred porch beset on every side?
Do either else my great desires delude and mock mine eyes?
Or hath the tamer of the world and Greeks renown likewise,
For sook the silent house, beset with cloud full sad to see?
Is this my soone? my membres lo for joy amazed be.
Oh son, the sure, and safeguard late of Thebes in misery,
See I thy body true in deed? or else deceived am I
Mo●…t with thy sprite? art thou the same●… these brawns of arms I know,
And shoulders, and thy noble hands From body high that grow.
Whence (father) haps this ugliness, And why in mourning clad
Is thus my wife? how haps it that with filth so fowl bestead
My children are? what misery doth thus my house oppress?
Thy father in la●…e is slain: the kingdom Lycus doth possess.
Thy sons, thy parent, and thy wife to death pursueth he.
Ungrateful land, doth no man come that will an aider be
Of Hercles' house? and this beheld so great and heinous wrong
Hath th' aided worlds? but why wear I the day in plaint so long?
Let th'enemy die: and this renown let strength obtain in haste,
And of Alcides enemies all let Lycus be the last.
I driven am to go to shed the blood of enemy out.
Watch Theseus, that no sudden strength beset us here about.
Me wars require. embracing yet defer O father dear,
And wife defer them: Lycus shall to hell this message bear
That I am now returned.
Shake of O queen out of thine eyes
This weeping face, and thou since that thy son is safe likewise
Thy dropping tears refrain: if yet I Hercles ever knew,
Then Lycus shall for Creon pay the pains to him full dew.
'tis light, he shall: he doth: and that's to light, he hath it done.
Now god that can them bring to pass, speed well our wishes soon,
And come to help our weary woes. O noble hearted mate
Of my stout son, of his renown declare us all the rate:
How long a way doth lead to place where sorry sprights do dwell,
And how the hard and heavy bonds the dog hath borne of hell.
The deeds thou dost constrain to tell, that even to mind secure
Are dreadful yet and horrible, scant yet the trust is sure
Of vital air, sore blunted is the sharpness of my sight,
And dulled eyes do scant sustain to see th'unwonted light.
Yet Theseus thoroughly overcome what ever fear remains
In bosom deep, nor do thou not of best fruit of thy pains
Beguiled thyself. What thing hath once to suffer been a care,
To have remembered it is sweet. those dreadful hap declare.
All right of world, and thee likewise I pray that bearst the rain
In kingdom wide, and thee, for whom All round about in deign
Thy mother throughout Aetna sowght, that secret things allow
And hid in ground, it freely may be lawful for to show.
The Spartan land a noble top of hill advanceth high,
Where Taenarus with woods full ●…hycks the sea doth overlye.
The house of hateful Ditis here his mouth doth ●…pen set,
And rocks of hill about doth gape, and with a den full great
A huge and gaping cleft of grownd●… with jaws full wide doth lie,
And way full broad to people all doth spread to pass thereby.
Not strait with darkness doth begin The way that blindeth the sight.
A little lingering brightness lo behind of late left light,
And dubtfull glittering yet of son afflicted falls allow,
And mocks the sight: such light is wont undoubtedly to show
The dawn of day, or twilight else at edge of evening tide.
From hens to hollow places void Are lost the spaces wide,
To which needs perish must all kind of men that once are thrown.
Nor it a labour is to go, the way itself leads down.
As oft the ships against their wills do the toss the swelling surge,
So down ward doth that headlong way, and greedy Chaos urge:
And back again to draw thy pat●…thee never do permit
The sprights who what they catch hold fast. allow within doth flit
In channel wide with silent ford the quiet lake of lethe,
And cares doth rid: and that theremay to scape again from death
No mean be made, with many turns and wyndyngs every way
Foldes in his flood. in such sort as with wave unsure doth play
Maeander wandering up and down, And yields himself unto,
And dowbtfull stands, if he toward bank, or back to spring may go.
The soul and filthy peole to see of slow Cocytus lies.
On th'one the gripe, on th'other side the mournful owlet cries,
And sad luck of th'unhappy Strix likewise resoundeth there.
Full uglyelye in shady bows black locks of lethsome hear,
Where Taxus tree doth over lean, which holdeth slothful sleep,
And hunger sad with famysht law that lies his place to keep,
And shame to late doth hide his face that knows what crimes it hath,
Both fear, and quaking, funeral, and fretting raging wrath,
And mourning dire doth follow on, and trembling pale disease,
And boisterous battles set with sword: and hid beyond all these
Doth slothful age his lingering pace help forth with staff in hand.
Of corn and wine in hell allow is any fertile land?
No joyful meads do there bring forth with face so green and fair,
Nor yet with gentle Zephyrus wags ripened corn in th'air.
Nor any tree hath there such bows as do bring apples out.
The barren compass of deep soil full filthy lies about,
And withered with eternal drought the loathsome land doth wa●…e
And bond full sad of things, and of the worllde the places last:
The air unmoved stands, and night sits there full dark to see
In slothful world, all things by dread●… full horrible there be.
And even far worse than death itself, is place where death doth bide.
What? ●…e that doth those places dark with regallsceptor gwyde,
In what seat set, doth he dispose and rule those people's light?
A place there is in turn obscure of Tartarus from sight,
Which mist full thick with fearful shade doth hold and overgo.
From hens a double parted stream from one wellspring doth flow:
The tone, much like a standing pool (by this the gods do swear)
The which the sacred Stygian lake with silent flood doth bear:
The other fierce with tumult great is drawn his course to go,
And Archeron with raging flood●… the stones drives to and fro
Unsaylable. with double ford is rounoe about beset
Against it Ditis' palace dire, and manspon house full great
In shadeful wood is covered: from wide den here the posts
And thresholds of the tyrant hang, this is the walk of ghosts:
This of his kingdom is the g●…te: a field about it goes,
Where sitting with a countenance proud●… abroad he doth dispose
New souls, a cruel majesty is in the god to know:
A frowning forehead, which yet of his brethren bears the show,
And so great stocks: there is in him of Ioue the very face,
But when he lightens: and great part of cruel kingdoms place,
Is he himself the lord thereof: the sight of who●…e doth fear,
What ever thing is feared.
Is fame in this point true, that there
Such rigours are, and guilty ghosts of men that there remain
Forgetful of their former fault, have their deserved pain?
Who is the rector there of right, and judge of equity?
Not only one extorter out of f●…utes in seat set high
The judgements late to trembling souls doth there by lot award:
In one appointed judgement place is Gnossian Minos hard,
And in an other Radamanth: This ●…ryme doth A●…ac bear.
What each man once hath done, he feels: and guilt to th'author there
Returns, and th'hurtful with their owns example punn●…ht be.
The bloody cruel captains I in prison shut did see,
And back of tyrant impotent even with his people's hand
All t●…rne and cut. what man of might with favour leads his land,
And of his own life lord reserves his hurtless hands to good,
And gently doth his empire guide without the thirst of blood,
And spares his soul, he having long led forth the lingering days
Of happy age, at length to heaven do●…the either find the ways,
Or joyful happy places else of fair Elysius' wood.
Thou then that here must be a iudg●… abstain from man his blood,
Who so thou be that raygnest king: our guilts are there acquytte
In greater wise.
doth any place prescript of limit ●…h ytte
The guilty ghosts, and as the fame reports, doth cruel pain
The wicked men make tame that in eternal bonds remain?
Ixion rollde on whirling wheel is ●…ost and turned high:
Upon the neck o●… Sisyphus the mighty stone doth lie.
Amid the lake with thirsty jaws ol●…de Tantalus' therein
Pursues the waves, the water stream●… doth wet and wash his ●…hyn,
And when to him now otte deceived it doth yet pr●…myse make,
Strait ●…ytts the ●…ood: the trute at mouth his famine doth forsake.
Eternal food to ●…leeyng ●…owle doth Tityus' heart give s●…yll:
And Danaus' daughters ●…oo in vain their water vessels fill.
The wicked Cadmus' daughters all go raging every wa●…e:
And there doth greedy ravening bird the Phi●…y tables fray.
Now of my son declare to me the noble worthy fight.
brings he his willing uncles gifts, or Pluto's spoils to sight?
A dire and dreadful stone there is the slothful fords fast buy,
Where sluggish fret with wave astoond full dull and flow doth lie:
This lake a dreadful fellow keeps both of attire and sight,
And quaking ghosts doth over bear An aged ugly wight:
His beard unkempt, his bosom fowl deformed in filthy wise
A knot binds in, full loathsome stand in head his hollows eyes:
He ferry man doth steer about his beat with his long ore.
He driving now his lyghtned ship of burden toward the shore,
Repairs to waves: and then his way Alcides doth require.
The flock of ghosts all giving place: Aloud cries Charon dire,
What way attemptest thou so bold? thy hastening pace here stay.
But natheless Alcmena's son abiding no delay,
Even with his own pole bette he doth full tame the shipman make,
And climes the ship: the bark that could full many people's take,
Did yield to one: he sat, the boat more heavy like to break
With shivering joints on eythersyde the lethey flood doth leak.
Then tremble all the monsters huge, the centaurs fierce of might,
And Lapythes, kindled with much wine to wars and bloody fight.
The lowest channels seeking out of Stygian pool a down,
His lerney labour sore affright his fertyle heads doth drown.
Of greedy Ditis after this doth then the house appear.
The fierce and cruel Stygian dog doth fray the spirits there,
The which with great and roaring sounds his heads upshaking three,
The kingdom keeps: his ugly head with filth full fowl to see
The serpent's lick: his hears be fowl with vipers 〈◊〉 among,
And at his crooked wrested tail doth hiss & dragon long:
Like ire to shape. when him he wy●… his pace that way to take,
His bristle hears he lysteth up with fierce up bended snake:
And sound sent out he soon perceives in his applied ear,
Who even the sprights is woon●…to sent. as soon as stood more near
The sonn●… of Ioue, the doubtful dog straight couched down in den,
And each of them did fear. behold with doleful barking then
The places dumb he makes a dread, the threatening serpent stout
Through all the fields about doth hiss: the bawling noise sent out
Of dreadful voice from triple mouth, even sprites that happy Bee
Doth make afraid. from left side then straight way undoth he
The cruel taws, and lions he●…d once slain in Cleon field
Against him sets, and cover doth himself with mighty shield.
And bearing in his conquer●…ng hands a sturdy club of oak,
Now ●…ere, now there he ●…olleth him about with often stre●…:
His stripes he doubles: he subdued his threats assuaged all,
And all his heads the weighed dog at once full low let fall,
And quite out of the ●…enne he fed. full greatly feared 〈◊〉
In regal throne) both, king and queen, and dadde him to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
And me likewise 〈◊〉 n for 〈◊〉 to Hercl●… 〈◊〉 ●…e.
The mon●… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 with ●…aude then 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 three,
In linked cha●… he 〈◊〉 〈◊〉: forgetting 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
The dog the watche●… keeper 〈◊〉 the kingdom dark, at leng●…
lay down his ears full so●… afraid: and suffering to be lend,
And eke acknowledging his lord, following with lowly head,
With tail that snakes thereon doth bear he both his sides doth smite.
But after that to Taenate mouth we came, and clearness bright
Had stroke his eyes of light unknown, good stomach yet again
He takes although onse overcome, and now the heavy chayn●…
He raging shakes: he had almost his leader plucked from place,
And headlong backward drawn to hell, and moved from his pace.
And even to my hands Hercles then his eyes did backward cast,
We both with double joined strength the dog out drawn at last
For anger wood, and battles yet attempting all in vain,
Brought up to world. as soon as he the clear air saw again,
And spaces pure of bright fair pole had once beheld with eye,
The night arose: his sight to ground he turned by and by,
Cast down his eyes, and hateful day forthwith he put to flight,
And backward turned away his look, And straight with all his might
To th'earth he falls: and underneath the shade of Hercles then
He hid his head. therewith there came a great resort of men
With clamour glad, that did the bay about their forhedds bring:
And of the noble Hercules' deserved praises sing.
EUrystheus born with swiftened birth in haste, did bid to bottom of the world to go:
This only lacked of labours all at last, to spoil the king of third estate also.
The dungeons dark to enter ventured he, where as that way to sprights far of doth bring
Full sad, & wood so black & feared to be: but full with flock full great him following.
As great a press as flock in cities streets, to see the plays of Theatre new wrought:
As great as at Eléus' thunder meets, when summer fift that sacred game hath brought:
As great as when comes hour of longer night, and willing quiet sleeps to be extent,
Holds equal Libra Phoebus' chariots light, a sort the secret Ceres do frequent,
And from their howsen left do haste to cum, the Attic priests the night to celebrate:
Such heap is chaste beneath by fields so dumb, with age full slow some taking forth their gate
Full sad, and fylld with life so long now led: some yet do run the race of better years,
The virgins yet unieind to spouses' bed, 〈◊〉 younglings eke on whom grow yet no hears
And infant lately taught his mother's name.
To these alone, (that the●… the les might fear)
Is granted night to ease with foreborne flame. the rest full sad by dark do wander there:
As is our mind, when one's away is fled the light, when each man sorry feels to be
Dep●… overwhelmed with all the earth his head. thick Chaos stands, & darkness fowl to see,
And colour ill of night▪ and slothful state of silent world, and d●…uers clouds about.
Let hoary age us thither bring full late. no man comes late to that, whence never out,
When once he is come, turn again he may. to hast the hard and heavy fate what veils?
This wandering beape in wide lands far away, shall go to ghosts: & all shall give their sails
To slow▪ Cocy●…s. all is to thee inclined, both what the fall, and rise of son doth see:
Spare us that cum, to the we death are signed: though thou be slow, ourselves yet 〈◊〉 we.
first hour, that gave the life, it lost again.
TO Thebes is come the joyful day, your altars touch ye humbyllye,
The fat fair sacrfices slay. maids ●…yxte with men in company
Let them in sole ●…ne flocks go roil: and now with y●…ake laid down let cease
The tillers of the fertile soil.
is with hand of Hercles' peace between the morn and Hesper's glade,
And where son holding middle seat, doth make the bodies cast no shade.
What ever ground is overweate with compass long of seas abowght,
Alcides labour ●…aemde full well. he over fords of Tartarus brought
Returned appeased being hell. there is remaining now no fear,
Nought lies beyond the hell to see.
O priest thy staring locks of hear●… wrap in with loved poplar tree.
WIth my revenging right hand slain now Lycus lo the ground with groveling face hath smit: then who soever fellow found
Of tyrant was, partaker of his pains did also lie.
Now to my father sacrifice and gods victor will I,
And altars that deserve it, with ●…ayne off●…yngs reverence.
Thee, thee O mate of all my toils I pray and my defence
O warful Pallas, in whose left hand thy clear shield Aegis shakes
Fierce ●…hretes, with head that each thing stone that looks upon it makes.
Let ●…amer of Lycurgus now, and of red sea be hear,
That point of spear with ivy green in hand doth covered bear:
And two gods power, both Phoebus, and his sister too I pray,
The sister meeter for her shafts, but he on th'harp to play:
And what soever brother else of mine doth dwell in sky,
Not of my stepdame brother. bring ye hither by and by
Your plenteous flocks, what ever have all th' Indians fruits brought out,
And what sweet odours th' Arabics do get in trees about,
To th'altars bring: lett●… vapour fa●…e and ●…ume smoke up full high,
Let round about the poplar tree my hears now bewtifye.
Let th'olive bow thee hide with braunch●… accustomed in our land
Thescu: for forthwith reverence the thunder, shall my hand.
O gods the builders of the town, and which of dragon fell,
The wild woods dens, and noble wa●… likewise of Dirces' well,
And Tyrian house inhabit eke of stranger wandering king.
Cast into fires the trankencense.
Son first thy hands flowing with bloody slaughter, and the death of enemy purify.
Would god the blood of hateful he●… Even unto gods on high
I might out shed, for liquor lo more acceptable none
Might th'altars stain: nor sacrifice more ample any one
Nor yet more plentiful may be To Ioue above down cast,
Then king unjust.
Desire that now thy father end at last
Thy labours all: let quietness At length yet given be,
And re●… to weighed folk.
I will the prayers make, for me
And Ioue full meet. in his due place Let stands the haughty sky,
And land, and air, and let the stars drive forth eternally
Their course unstaid: let restful peace keep nations quietly,
Let labour of the hurtless land all iron now occupy,
And sooprdes lie hid: let tempest none full violent and dire
Disturb the sea: let from the skies no flash of lightning fire
Fall down while Ioue full angry is: nor yet with winter snow
Increased flood the ground upturnde and fields quite overthrow.
Let poisons cease: and from henceforth let up from ground arise
No grievous herb with hurtful sap: nor fierce and fell likewise
Let tyrants reign: but if to sight some other mischief bring
The ground yet shall, let it make haste: and any monstrous thing
If it prepare, let it be mine. but what means this? mid day
The darkness have enclosed about, lo Phoebus goeth his ways
With face obscure without a cloud. who drives the day to flight,
And turns to east? from whence doth now his dusky h●…d the night
Unknown bring forth? whence fill the 〈◊〉 so many round about
Of daytime stars? lo here behold my labour first full stout
Not in the lowest part of heaven the lion shineth bright,
And fervently doth rage with ire, And bits prepares to fight.
Even now lo he some star will take▪ with mouth full wide to see
He threatening stands, and fires out blows and mane up rustleth he
Shaking with neck. the harvest sad o●… shape, what ever thing,
And what soever winter c●…llde in frozen time doth bring,
He with one rage will overpass, of spring time bull he will
Both seek, and break the necks at once.
What is this sudden ill?
Thy cruel cowntnance whether son Dost thou cast here and there?
And seest with troubled daselde sight false shape of heaven appear?
The land is taemde, the swelling seas their surges did assuage,
The kingdoms low of hell likewise have felt and known my rage,
Yet heaven is free, a labour meet for Hercules to prove.
To spaces high I will he borne of hawghtye skies about:
Let th'air be skaelde, my father doth me promise stars t'obtainobtain.
What if he it denied? all th'earth can Hercles not contain,
And gives at length to gods me calls of own accord behold
The whole assembly of the gods, and doth their gates unfold,
While one for bydds receyuste thou me, and openest thou the sky,
Or else the gate of stubborn heaven draw after me do I?
Do I yet doubt? I even the bonde●… from Saturn will undo,
And even against the kingdom proud of wicked father lo,
My grandsire lose. let Titans now prepare again their fight
With me their captain raging: stones with woods I will down smite,
And high hills tops with Centaurs full in right hand will I take.
With double mountain now I will a stair to gods up make.
Let Chiron under Ossa see his Pelion mowntayne great:
Olympus up to heaven above in third degree then set
Shall come itself, or else be cast.
Put far away from thee
The thowghts that ought not to be spoke: of mind unsownde to see,
But yet full great, the furyows rage assuage and lay away.
What meaneth this? the giants d●… pestiferous arms assay,
And Tityus from the sprights is fled, and bearing torn to see
And empty bosom, lo how near to heaven itself stood he?
Cithaeron falls, the mountain high Pallene shakes for fear,
And torn are Tempe. he the tops of Pindus' cawght hath here,
And Oethen he, some dreadful thing threatening doth rage about
Crinnys bringing flames: with stripes she sounds now shaken out,
And burned brands in funerals, lo yet more near and near
Throws in my face: fierce Tisiphone with head and ugly hear
With serpents set, now after dogg●… fet out with Hercles' hand,
That empty gate she hath shut up, with bolt of fiery brand.
But lee the stock of enmiows king doth hidden yet remain,
The wicked Lycus seed: but to your hateful father slain
Even now this right hand shall you send●… let now his arrows light
My bow out shoot: it seems the shafts to go with such a flight
Of Hercles.
Whether doth the rag●… and fury blind yet go?
His mighty bow he drew with horns together driven lo,
And quiver lost: great noise makes with byolence sent out
The shaft, and quite the weapon flew his middle neck torowghowt,
The wownd yet left
His other br●…ods I overthrow will quite,
And corners all. What stay I yet? to me a greater fight
Remains then all Mycenes lo, that rocky stones should all
Of Cyclops being overturnde with hand of mine, down fall.
Let shake both here: and there the house, with all stays overthrown,
Let break the posts: and quite let shrink the shaken pillar down:
Let all the palace fall at once. I here yet hidden see
The son of wicked father.
Lo his flattering hands to thee
applying to thy knees doth crave his life with piteous moan.
O wicked guilt, full sad, and eke abhorred to look upon,
His humble right hand caught he hath, and raging round about
Him r●…lled twice, or thrice hath cast. his head resoundeth out,
The sprinkled houses with the brain of him thrown out are wet.
But she poor wretch her little son in bosom hiding yet
Lo Megara, like one in rage doth from the corners flee.
although runagate in bosom of the thunder hid thou be,
This right hand shall from every where Thee seek, and bring to sight.
where goest thou wretch? what lurking dens, seek●…e thou to take, or flight?
No place of safeguard is if once be Hercles stirred with ire:
But do thou rather him embrace, and with thy meek desire
Assay t' assuage him.
Husband spare us I beseech thee now,
And know thy Megara, this son thy cowntenaunce doth show,
And bodies pitch: beholdest thou how his hands up lifteth he?
I hold my stepdame: follow on dew penawnce pay to me,
And bownden Ione from filthy bond●… deliver free away:
But I before the mother will this little monster slay.
Thou mad man whither goest thou? wilt thou thine own blood shed?
Th'infant with father's fiery face astonnyde all for dread,
Died even before the wownde: his fear●… hath took away his life.
And now likewise his heavy club is shaken toward his wife:
He broken hath the bones, her head from blocklike body gone
Is quite, nor any where it stays. dar'st thou this look upon
To long lived age? if mourning do thee grieve, thou hast then lo
The death prepared. Do thou thy breast upon his weapon's throw,
Or else this club with slaughter stained of monsters slain that be,
Now hither turn. thy parent false, unfit for name of thee
kid hens away, lest he should be to thy renown a let.
Which way the father toward thy death dost thou thyself cast yet?
Or whither goest thou mad man? flee, and lie thou closely hid,
And yet from hands of Hercules this only mischief rid.
'tis well, the house of shameful king is now quite overthrown.
To thee O spouse of greatest Ioue I have lo beaten down
This offered flock: I gladly have fulfyllde my wishes all
Full meet for thee, and Argos now give other offerings shall.
Thou hast not son yet all performed, fill up the sacrifice.
Loeth offering doth at th'altars stand, it waits thy hand likewise
With neck full prone: I give myself, I run, I follow lo.
Me sacrifice. what meaneth this? his eyes roll to and fro,
And heaviness doth dull his sight. see I of Hercules
The trembling hands? down falls his face to sleep and quietness,
And weighed neck with bowed head full fast doth downward shryuke,
With bended knee: now all at once he down to ground doth sink,
As in the woods wild ash cut down, or bulwark for to make
A haven in seas. Lyuste thou? or else to death doth thee betake
The self same rage, that hath sent all thy family to death?
It is but sleep, for to and fro doth go and come his breath.
Let time be had of quietness, that thus by sleep and rest
Great force of his disease subdued, may ease his grieved breast.
Remous his weapons servants, leau'st he mad get them again.
LEt th'air complain, & eke the parent great of haughty sky, & fertile lad throughout,
And wandering wave of ever moving fret.
And thou before them all, which lands about
And train of sea thy beams abroad dost throw with glittering face, & mak'st the night to flee,
O fervent Titan: both thy settings lo and rising, hath Alcides seen with thee: & known likewise he hath thy howsen twain. from so great ills release ye now his breast,
O gods release: to better turn again his righter mind. and thou O tamer best
O sleep of toils, the quietness of mind, of all the life of man the better part,
O of thy mother ast●…ey winged kind, of hard and pining death that brother art,
With truth mingling the false, of after state
The sure, but eke the worst foreteller yet:
O father of all things, of life the gate,
Of light the rest, of night and fellow fit, that comest to king, and servant equally,
And gently cherishest who weerye be,
All mankind lo that dreadful is to die, thou dost constrain long death to learn by thee. keep him fast bound with heavy sleep oppressed,
Let slumber deps his limbs untamed bind,
Nor sooner leave his unright raging breast,
Then former mind his course again may find.
Lo laid on ground with full fierce heart yet still
His cruel sleeps he turns: and not yet is
The plague subdued of so great raging ill:
And on great club the weighed head of his
He wont to lay, doth seek the staff to find
With empty hand, his arms out casting yet with moving vain: nor yet all rage of mind he hath laid down: but, as with south wind gre●…
The wave once vexed, yet after keepeth still his raging long, & though the wind now be
Assuaged, swells. shake of these mad & ill tossings of mind, return let pi●…tee,
And virtue to the man, else let be so his mind with moving mad tossed every way:
Let error blind, where it began hath, go. for nowght else now but only madness may
Thee guiltless make: in next estate it stands to hurtless hands, thy mischief not to know.
Now strooken let with Hercules his hands thy bosoms sound: thine arms the world allow were wont to bear, let grievous strips now smite with conquring hand: & loud complaining cries
Let th'air now here: let of dark pole & night the queen them hear, & who full fiercely lies
That bears his necks in mighty chains fast bound, low lurking Cerberus in dep●…st cave.
Let Chaos all with clamour sad resound, and of broad sea wide open wasting wave.
And th' air that felt thy weapons better yet,
But felt them though.
The breasts with so great ills as these beset, with little stroke they must not beaten be.
Let kingdoms three sound with one plaint & cry, and thou necks honowr, & defence to see,
His arrow strong long hanged up on high, & quivers light, the cruel stripes now smite on his fierce back, his shoulders strong & stout let oaken club now strike, & post of might with knots full hard his breasts load all about. let even his weapons so great woes complain.
Not you poor babes mates of your father's with cruel wound revenging kings again: (praise, not you your limbs in argos barriars plays,
Are taught to turn with weapon strong to smite, & strong of hand: yet even now daring lo the weapon of the Scythian quiver light
With steady hand to poise sent out from bow, and stags to pierce that save themselves by flight, and backs not yet full maned of cruel beast.
To Styg●…ā havens go ye of shade & night, go hurtless souls, whom mischief hath oppressed
Even in first porch of life but lately had,
And father's fury. go unhappy kind
O little children, by the way full sad
Of tourneye known.
Go, see the angry kings.
WHat place is this? what region●… or of the world what coast?
Where am I? under rise of sa●…ne, or bond else uttermost
Of th'icy bear? or else doth here of sea of Hesperye
The farthest ground appoint a bond●… for th'ocean sea to lie?
What air draw we●… to weighed wight what ground is underset?
Of truth we are returned from bell. whence in my house down bette
See I these bloody bodies? hath not yet my mind of cast
th'infernal shapes? but after yet return from hell at last
Yet wander doth that helly heap before mine eyes to see?
I am ashamed to grawnte, I quake, I know not what to me,
I can not tell what grievous ill my mind before doth know.
Where is my parent? where is she with goodly children's show
My noble hearty stomakt spouse? why doth my left side lack
The lions spoil? which way is gone the cover of my back?
And self same bed full soft for sleep of Hercules also?
Where are my shafts? where is my bow? Them from me living who
cold pluck away? who taken hath the spoils so great as thes?
And who was he that feared not even sleep of Hercules?
To see my conqueror me likes, it likes me him to know:
Rise victor up, what new son hath my father gotten now
Heaven being left? at birth of whom might ever stayed be
A longer night, than was in mine? what mischief do I see?
My children lo do lie on ground with bloody slaughter stain:
My wife is kyllde: what Lycus doth the kingdom yet obtain?
Who durst so heinous guilts as these At Thebes take in hand
When Hercles is returned? who so Ismenus waters land,
Who so Actaeon's fields, or who with double seas beset
The shaken Pelops kingdoms dost of Dardan dwell on yet,
Help me: of cruel slaughter show who may the author be.
Let rage my ire on all: my foe he is, who so to me
Shows not my foe. dost thou yet hid Alcides' victor lie?
Come forth, even whether thou revenge the cruel chariots his
Of bloody Thracian king, or if thou Geryons cattles quite,
Or lords of Libya, no delay there is with thee to fight.
Behold I naked stand, although even with why weapons lo
Thou me unarmed set upon. wherefore f●…eeth Theseus so
And eke my father from my sight? their faces why hide they?
Defer your weepings, and who did my wife and children slay
Thus all at ones, me tell. Wherefore O father doe thou whushte?
But tell thou Theseus, but Theseus with thy accustonide trust.
Each of them silent hides away their bashful cowntnawnces,
And privily they shed their tears. In so great ills as thes,
Of what ought we ashamed to be? doth ruler yet of might
Of Argos town, or hateful band Of sowldyars ap●…e to fight
Of Lycus dying, us oppress with such calamity?
By praise of all my noble acts I do desire of thee
O father, and of thy great name approved to me alway
The prosperous power, declare to me, who did my how should slay?
Whose pray lay I?
Let thus thyve ills in silence overpass.
That I should unrevenged be?
Revenge oft hurtful was.
Did ever man so grevows ills without revenge sustain?
Whos'euer greater feared.
Then these, O father yet again
May any greater thing, or else More grevows feared be?
How great a part is it thou worst, Of thy calamity?
Take mercy father, lo I lift to thee my humble hands.
What meaneth this? my hand fleeth back, some privy guilt here stands.
Whence comes this blood? or what doth mean flowing with death of chyllde
The shaft, enbrewde with slaughter onc●… of Lerney monster kyllde?
I see my weapons now, the hand I seek no more to wit.
Whose hand could bend this bow but mine? or what right arm but it
Could string the bow, that unto me Even scantly doth obey?
To you I turn: O father dear, is this my guilt I pray?
They healed their peace: it is mine own.
Thy grievous woe is there,
The crime thy stepdames: this myschawnce no fault of thine hath here.
From every part now father throw in wrath thy thunders might,
And of thy son forgetful now, with cruel hand requyght
At least thy nephews: let the world that bears the stars sound out,
And let both th'one and th'other p●…ale, fling down thy flames about:
And let the banks of Caspian sea my bownden body tear,
And greedy fowl. Wherefore do of Promethens lack hear
The rocks? with huge and haughty top let now prepared be,
Both feeding beasts and fowls, the side Of Cawcas torn to see,
And bare of woods, the isle that bridge Of Scythe that thereby stands
Simple gas joins, both here and there Let it my bounden hands
Stretch out abroad: and when with course returned accustomdlye
They shall together drive, and shall the rocks toss up to sky
With banks together being thrust, and eke the middle seaye,
Let me between the mountains lie unquiet restless stay.
But building up with wood thrown on a heaped pile on high,
My body thus with wicked blood besprynkt, why burn not I?
So, so it must be done: to hell I Hercles' will restore.
Not yet his heart astonyde lacks his raging tumult sore,
But wraths hath turned: and which of rag●… is property and ire
Against himself he rageth now.
The fury's places dire
And dung on deep of sprights in hell and place of tormentrrye
To guilty ghosts, and banishment if any yet do lie
Beyond Erebus, yet unknown to Cerberus and me,
There hide me ground: to farthest bond●… of Tartarus to see
To tarry there i'll go. O breast of mine to fierce and ●…wte:
Who you my children thus disperst●… through all my house about,
May worthily enough bewail? in all my evils yet
This countenance hard, can never weep. a sword now hither set,
My shafces reatche hither, hither reatche my mighty club also:
To thee my weapons break I will, to thee my son, a-two
i'll knap my bows, and eke my club this block of heavy weight,
Shall to thy sprites be burned lo: this self same quiver fraught
With Lerney shafts, to funeral of thine shall likewise go.
Let all my weapons penawnce pay, and you unhappy to
Even with my weapons burn I will, O stepdames hands of mine.
who ever yet to Ignorance hath given name of crime?
Full oftentimes did error great the place of guilt obtain.
Cys need to be a Hercles now, this heap of ill sustain.
Not ●…o hath shame yet given place with fury drowned quite:
But people's all I rather should drive from my wicked sight.
My weapons, weapons Theseus, I quickly crave to me
withdrawn to be restored again: if sound my mind now be,
Restore to me my weapons: if yet last my rage of mind,
Then father flee: for I the way to death myself shall find.
By sacred holly kindred's rights, by force and duty all
Of both my names, if either me thy bringer up thou call,
Or parent else, and (which of good men reverenced are)
By these boar heats, I thee beseech my desert age yet spare,
Aud werye yeares: of howse falne downe the one alonely staye,
One only light to me, with ills afflicted every way
Reserve thyself: yet never hath there happened once of thee
Fruit of thy toils: still either I the doubtful sea to see
Or monsters f●…arde: who ever yet bathe been a cruel king
In all the world, to ghosts allow, and altars both hurting,
Of meys feared: the father of thee absent still, to have
The frut●…, the touching, and the sight, of thee atlength I crave.
wherefore I longer should sustain my life yet in this light,
And linger here no cause there is: all good lost have I quite,
My mind, my weapons, my renown, my wife, my sons, my hands,
And fury to. no man may heal and lose from guilty bands
My mind defyellde: needs must with death, be healed so heinous ill.
wilt thou thy father slay?
Lest I should do it die I will.
Before thy rathers face?
I taught him mischief for to se.
Thy deeds marking rather that should of all remembered be,
Of this one only crime I do a pardon of thee crave.
Shall he give pardon to himself, that to none else it gave?
I being bidden praise deserved, this deed mine own doth prove,
Help father now, if either else thy piety thee move,
Or else my heavy fate, or else the honour and renown
Of stained strength: my weapons bring, let fortune be thrown down
With my right hand.
The prayers which thy father makes to thee
Are strong enough, but yet likewise with weeping lo of me
Be moved yet: arise thou up, and with thy wont might
Subdue thine yl●…: now such a mind unmeet to bear upright
No evil hap, receive again: lo now with manhood great
Thou must prevail, every Hercules forbyd with ire to fret.
alive, I hurt: but if I die, I take the guilt also.
I hast to rid the worllde of crime, even now before me so
A wicked monster, cruel, and untamed, fierce, and stout
Do the wander: now with thy right hand begin to go about
A great affair, yea more than all thy twice six labours long.
Yet stay'st thou wretch, that late against the children waste so strong,
And fearful mother? now except restored my weapons be,
Of Thracian Pindus either I will tear down every tree,
and Bacchus' holly woods, and tops of mount Cithaeron high
Burn with myself. and all at once with all their housen I
And with the Lords there of the roofs, with gods of Thebes all
The Theban temples even upon my body will let fall:
And will be hid in town upturnde: if to my shoulders might
The walls themselves all cast thereon shall fall a burden light,
And covered with seven gates I shall not be enough oppressed,
Then all the weight whereon the world in middle part doth rest,
And parts the Gods, upon my head i'll turn and overthrow.
My weapons give.
This word is meet for Hercles' father lo.
With this same arrow slain behold thy son is tumbled down,
This weapon cruel Iuno lo from hands of thine hath thrown,
This same will I now use. lo see how leaps with fear affright
My wretched heart, and how it doth my careful body smite.
The shaft is set there to, thou shalt a mischief lo do now
Both willing it, and wotting: tell, what thing commandest thou?
I nothing crave, my dolour lo in safety standeth now.
To keep my son alive to me that only do canst thou
o Theseus, yet I have not s●…apte, greatest fear that happen can.
Thou canst ●…e not a myler make, thou mayst a happy man.
So order every thing thou dost, as all thy cause in hand,
And fame thou mayst well know in strayg●… and doubtful case to stand:
Thou ●…iust, or diest: this slender soul that light is hence to flee,
we●…yed with age, and no less bet with grievous isle to see,
In mouth I holoe. so slowly to a father with such stay
Doth any man give life? I will no longer bide delay,
The deadly sword throughout my breast to strike I will apply,
Here, here the guilt of Hercules ever sound of mind shall lie.
Forbear O father now, forbear, withdraw thy hand again.
My manhood yield, thy father's will, and impery sustain.
To Hercles' labours now likewise, let this one labour go,
Let me yet live lift up from ground ●…hafflicted limbs with woe,
o Theseus of my parent: for from godly touch doth flee
My wicked hand.
I gladly do this hand embrace to me.
By this I being stayed will go, this moving to my breast
i'll slake my woes.
what place shall I seek roonaga●…e for rest?
Where shall I hide myself? or in what land myself engrave?
What Tanais, or what Nilus else, or with his persian wave
what Tigris violent of stream, or what fierce Rhenus' flood,
Or Tagus troublesome that flows with I bear treasures good
May my right hand now wash from guilt? although Mae●…tis collde
The waves of all the Northern sea on me shed out now wollde,
And all the water thereof should now pass by my two hands,
Yet will the mischief deep remain. Alas into what lands
wilt thou o wicked man resort? to East, or western cost?
Each where well known, all place I have of banishment quite lost
From me the world doth flee a back, the stars that spdeling ro●…n
Do backward drive their turned course, even Cerberus the soo●…
better countenance di●… b. hold. o faithful friend I say
o Theseus, seek some lurking place, farce hence, out of the way.
O thou awarder of men's guilts what ever judge thou be
That hurtful men dost love, repay a worthy thank to me:
And my deserts. I ●…hee beseech, to ghosts of hell again
Send me that ones escaped them: and subject to thy rain
Restore me yet to those thy bands. that place shall me well hide:
And yet even that place knows me well.
Our land for thee doth dyde.
There Mars, his hand acquit again and made from slaughter free
Restored to armour: lo that land (Alcides) calls for thee,
which wonts to quite the gods, and prove them Innocent to be.