HOw fares the King, my Lord?
speaks he cheerly?
even as a dying man, whose life
Like to quick lighting, which is
no sooner seen, but is extinct.
Is the Kings will confirmed?
ay, that's the point that we level at.
But oh, the confirmation of that will, 'tis all, 'tis all.
That will confirm my Daughter Queen.
Right, & my Son is married to your daughter.
My Lord, in an even plain way, I will
Derive the Crown unto your daughter's head.
What though the King hath left behind,
Two Sisters, lawful and immediate heirs,
To succeed him in his Throne Lies it not
In our powers to contradict it?
Have we not the King and counsel's hands unto it?
Tut, we stand high in man's opinion,
And the worlds broad eye.
Here comes Sir Thomas Wyatt.
Sir Thomas booted and spurred, whether away so fast?
It boots me not to stay,
When in this land rebellion bears such sway.
God's will, a Court! 'tis changed
Since Noble Henry's days.
You have set your hands unto a will.
'a will you well may call it:
So wils Northumberland:
So wils great Suffolk,
Against God's will, to wrong those Princely Maids.
Will you not subscribe your hand with other of the Lords?
Not with me, that in my hands,
Surprise the Sovereignty?
I'll damned my soul for no man, no for no man,
who at dooms day must answer for my sin:
Not you, nor you my Lords,
Who named Queen Iane in noble Henry's days,
Which of you all durst once displace his issue?
My Lords, my Lords, you whet your knives so sharp,
To carve your meat,
That they will cut your fingers.
The strength is weakness that you build upon,
The King is sick, God mend him, ay, God mend him:
But were his soul from his pale body free,
Adieu my Lords, the Court no court for me.
Farewell, I fear thee not.
The Fly is angry, but he wants a sting,
And all the Counsel: only this perverse
And peevish Lord, hath only denied his hand
To the investing of your princely Daughter.
he's idle, and wants power.
Our Ocean shall these petty brooks devour,
Here comes his highness Doctor.
How fares his Highness?
His body is past help.
We have left our practice to the Divines,
That they may cure his soul
Past physics help, why then past hope of life,
Here comes his highness Preacher:
Life reverent man.
Life, life, though death his body do dissever,
Our King lives with the King of heaven for ever.
Dead! send for Heralds, call me Pursuivants,
where's the King at arms? in every market town
Proclaim Queen Iane.
Best to take the opinion of the Counsel.
You are too timorous. We in ourselves
Are power sufficient: the King being dead.
This hand shall place the crown
On Queen Ianes head.
Trumpets and Drums, with your notes resound,
Her royal name, that must in state be crowned.
Our Cousen King is dead.
Alas, how small an Urn contains a King?
He that ruled all, even with his princely breath,
Is forced to stoop now to the stroke of death.
Heard you not the proclamation?
I hear of it, and I give credit to it
What great men fear to be,
Their fears grow greater.
Our Fathers grow ambitious
And would force us sail in mighty tempests,
And are not Lords of what they do possess.
Are not thy thoughts as great?
I have no thoughts so rank, so grown to head,
As are our Father's pride.
Troth I do enjoy a Kingdom having thee.
And so my pain be prosperous in that,
What care I though a Sheepcote be my Palace
Or fairest roof of honour.
See how thy blood keeps course with mine:
Thou must be a Queen, ay me! a Queen,
The flattering bells that shrilly sound
At the king's funeral with hollow hearts,
Will cowardly call thee Sovereign:
For indeed thou wouldst prove but an Usurper.
Who would wear fetters though they were all of gold?
Or to be sick, though his faint brows
For a wearing Nightcap, wore a Crown.
Thou must assume, a title that goes on many feet,
But 'tis an office, wherein the hearts of Scholars,
And of Soldiers will depend upon thy Hearse.
Were this rightly scanned,
we scarce should find a King in any Land.
Honour and happy reign
Attend the new Majesty of England.
To whom my Lord bends this your ave.
To your grace dread Sovereign,
You are by the Kings will, and the consent
Of all the Lords, chosen for our Queen.
O God! methinks you sing my death,
In parts of musics loudness,
'tis not my turn to rise.
The voice of the whole Landspeakes in my tongue
It is concluded your Majesty must ride,
From hence unto the Tower: there to stay
Until your Coronation.
O God!
Why sighs your Majesty?
My Lord and Father, I pray tell me,
Was your Father's Father ere a King?
Never, and it like your grace.
Would I might still continue of his line,
Not travel in the clouds.
It is often seen, the heated blood
That covets to be royal, leaves off ere it be noble,
My learned careful King, what must we go?
We must.
Then it must be so.
Set forward then.
The Tower will be a place of ample state,
Some lodgings in it, will like dead men's skulls,
Remember us of frailty.
We are led with pomp to prison,
O prophetic soul.
Lo we ascend into our chairs of State,
Like funeral Coffins, in some funeral
Pomp descending to their graves. But we must on.
How can we fare well, to keep our Court:
Where Prisoners keep their cave?
Thus like a Nun, not like a Princess borne,
Descended from the Royal Henry's loins:
Live I environed in a house of stone,
My Brother Edward lives in pomp and state,
I in a mansion here all ruinate.
Their rich attire, delicious banqueting:
Their several pleasures: all their pride and honour,
I have forsaken for a rich prayer Book.
The Golden Mines of wealthy India,
Is all as dross compared to thy sweetness.
Thou art the joy, and comfort of the poor,
The everlasting bliss in thee we find.
This little volume enclosed in this hand,
Is richer than the Empire of this land.
Pardon me Madam, that so boldly
I press into your Chamber. I salute your
Highness with the high style of Queen.
Queen! may it be?
Or jest you at my lowering misery.
Your Brother King is dead,
And you the catholic Queen must now succeed.
I see my God, at length hath heard my prayer.
You Sir Harry, for your glad tidings,
Shall be held in honour and due regard.
Health to the Lady Mary.
And why not Queen, Sir Thomas?
Ask that of Suffolk duke, & great Northumberland
Who in your steed hath Crowned another.
another Queen, Sir Thomas we alive,
The true immediate heirs of our dread Father?
Nothing more true than that:
Nothing more true than you are the true heir,
Come leave this Cloister and be seen abroad,
Your very sight will stir the people's heats,
and make them cheerly, for Queen Mary's cry.
One comfort I can tell you: the tenants of the Dukes
Northumberland and Suffolk denied their aid,
In these unlawful arms: to all the Counsel
I denied my hand, and for King Henry's Issue still will stand.
Your Counsel, good sir Thomas, is so pithy
That I am won so like it.
Come let us straight from hence,
From Framingham:
Cheer your spirits.
I'll to the Dukes at Cambridge, and discharge them all:
Prosper me God in these affairs,
I loved the Father well, I loved the Son,
And for the Daughter I through death will run.
where's Captain Bret?
Here my Lord.
Are all our numbers full?
They are my Lord.
See them arraigned, I will set forward straight.
Honourable friends, and native peers,
That have chosen me to be the leader of these martial
troops, to march against the sister
Of our late dead Sovereign.
Bear witness of my much unwillingness,
In furthering these attempts,
I rather joy to think upon our ancient victories
Against the French and Spaniard,
Whose high pride we levelled with the waves of british shore
Dying the haven of Brit: with guilty blood,
Till all the Harbour seemed a sanguine pool:
Or we desire these arms, we are now to war
'gainst the perfidious northern enemy,
Who trembling at our first shock voice and sight,
Like cowards turned their backs with shameful flight
But those rich spoils are past: we are now to go,
Being native friends, against a native foe.
In your hands we leave the Queen elected,
She hath seizure of the Tower,
If you'be confident, as you have sworn
yourselves true liege men to her highness
She no doubt, with royal favour will remunerate
The least of your deserts. Farewell
My tears into your bosoms fall,
With one embrace I do include you all.
My Lord most loved with what a mourning heart
I take your farewell, let the after signs
Of my employment witness. I protest.
Did not the sacred person of my Queen,
Whose weal I tender as my soul's chief bliss,
Urge my abode, I would not think it shame
To trail a pike where you were general.
But wishes are in vain, I am bound to stay,
And urgent business calls your grace away.
See, on my knees I humbly take my leave,
And steep my words with tears.
Kind Arundel, I bind thee to my love.
Once more farewell.
heavens give your grace success.
Commend us to the Queen and to your Son,
Within one week, I hope war will be done.
Come my Lords, shall us march.
ay, ay, for God's sake on.
'tis more than time my friends, that we were gone.
What ho Porter! open the gate.
I beseech your honour to pardon me,
The Counsel hath given strict command
Not any shall pass this way.
Why you idle fellow, am I not sent upon the queen's affairs, commanded by the Lords? and know you not that I am Treasurer? come open the Gate, you do you know not what.
Well my Lord, I do adventure on your word.
The Duke's displeasure: all the Counsel board
besides, may be my heavy enemies,
But go a God's name, I the worst will prove,
And if I die, I die for him I love.
I thank thee, and will warrant thee from death. Is my Horse ready?
It is my Lord
Then will I fly this fearful Counsel board,
My heart misgives me, I have done amiss,
Yet being a Counsellor one of the number
Nothing can prove amiss.
Now shall I know the worst.
Here comes my Lord of Arundel.
Porter, Did the Lord Treasurer pass this way?
But now my gracious Lord.
Ungracious Villain, follow,
Bring him back again,
If not, by fair means bring him back by force:
And hear you sirrah, as you go, will the Lord Maior and some Aldermen of his Brethren, and some especial citizens of note, to attend our further pleasures presently. The Treasurer fled: the Duke is but newly arrested, some purpose, on my life, to cross their plots: we'll set strong watches, see Gates and walls well manned: 'tis ten to one but princely innocence,
Is these strange turmoils wisest violence.
Though' your attempt, Lord Treasurer be such,
That hath no colour in these troublous times,
But an apparent purpose of revolt,
From the deceased Kings will, and our degree,
Yet, for you are a Counsellor of note,
One of our number, and of high degree,
Before we any way presume to judge,
We give you leave to speak in your behalf.
My Lord, the business of these troublous times,
Binding us all, still to respect the good of common weal:
Yet doth it not debar private regard of us & of our own
The general weal is treasured in your breast,
And all my ablest powers have been employed
To stir them there, yet have I borne a part,
Laying the commons troubles next my heart,
My oversight in parting without leave:
Was no contempt, but only for an hour.
To order home affairs, that none of mine,
In these nice times should unto faction climb.
Nay my good Lord, be plain with us, I pray,
Are you not grieved that we have given consent
To Lady Ianes election?
My Lords I am not,
Speak like a Gentleman, upon your word
Are you not discontent?
Troth to be plain, I am not pleased,
That two such princely Maids lineally descended,
From our royal King, and by his testimony,
Confirmed heir, if that their Brother dying issueless,
And one that never dreamt, it never desired
The rule of Sovereignty,
But with virgin's tears hath oft bewailed her misery,
Should politicly by us be named a Queen.
You have said nobly, sit and take your place.
My Lords, Sir Thomas Wyatt craves access unto your honours.
Let him come near.
Room for Sir Thomas Wyatt.
A divine spirit teach your honour's truth,
Open your eyes of judgement to behold
The true Legitimate, Mary your undoubted sovereign.
A rise sir Thomas, sit and take your place.
Now to our former business:
The obligation wherein we all stood bound
To the deceased late Kings will and our decree,
His cousen Iane, and the two absent Dukes
Cannot be concealed without great reproach
To us and to our Issue.
We have sworn in presence of the sacred host of heaven
Unto our late young Lord, to both the Dukes,
That no impeachment should divert our hearts
From the impeachment of the Lady Iane.
To this end we have ceased her in the tower,
By public proclamation made her Queen:
To this end we have armed the Duke, with power
Given them commission under our own hands
To pass against the Lady. You perform in hostile manner
And no doubt, the spleen of the undaunted spirit
Of Northumber's Earl, will not be called
With writings of repeal.
Advice in this, I hold it better far
To keep the course we run then seeking change,
Hazard our lives, our heirs and the Realms.
In action's roving from the bent of truth,
We have no precedent thus to persist
But the bare name of worldly policy.
If others have ground from justice, and the law,
As well divine as politic agreeing,
They are for no cause to be disinherited.
If you not seven years since to that effect,
Swore to the Father to maintain his seed,
What dispensation hath acquitted you
From your first sacred vows?
You'll say, the will extorted from a child.
O! let mine eyes in naming that sweet youth,
Observe their part,
pouring down tears, sent from my swelling heart.
God, mother, I term child? but i'll go on,
Say that the will were his, forced by no trick,
But for religions love his simple act,
Yet note how much you err.
You were sworn before to a man's will,
and not a will alone,
But strengthened by an act of Parliament.
Besides this sacred proof. The Princely Maids,
Had they no will nor act to prove their right?
Have birthrights no privilege, being a plea so strong,
as cannot be refeled, but by plain wrong?
Now were you touched. The Lady in tower,
alas she's innocent of my claim.
Trust me, she'd thinks it a most happy life,
To leave a queen's, and keep a Lady's name.
And for the Dukes, your warrants sent them forth,
Let the same warrant call them back again.
If they refuse to come, the Realm, not they
Must be regarded. Be strong and bold:
We are the people's factors. Save our Sons
From killing one another, be afraid,
To tempt both heaven and earth, so I have said.
Why then give order that she shall be Queen,
Send for the Maior, her errors we'll forget,
Hoping she will forgive.
Never make doubt, setting her ceremonious order by.
She is pure within, and mildly chaste without.
Give order to keep fast the Lady Iane,
Dissolve the the Counsel. Let us leave the Tower, and in the City hold our audience.
You have advised well honourable Lords,
So will the Citizens be wholly ours,
and if the Dukes be cross, we'll cross their powers.
Lance persado, quarter, quarter,
What shall we quarter Captain?
Why the Soldiers?
Why they are not hanged nor drawn yet?
Sir I mean quarter them, that the offended multitude, may pass in safety.
May we not take tools of the pies & the apple-women
Not in any sort the Duke's pleasure will pass free.
The Commons shall be used with all common courtesy
That goes in rank like beans and cheesecakes on their
heads in stead of Caps.
Sire, this is a famous University, and those scholars, those lofty buildings and goodly houses,
Founded by noble Patrons. But no more. Set
a strong watch. That be your chiefest care.
What's here soldiers?
Fear not, good speech, those rude arms I bear,
Is't not to fight, Sweet, gentle Peace away,
But to succour your lives, pass peaceably away.
Cry God save the Queen as you go, and God send you a good market.
God save the Queen, what Queen? there lies the sense
When we have none, it can be no offence.
What carry you there in your basket? Mat. Eggs forsooth.
Well, cry God save Queen Iane as you go, and
God send you a good Market.
Is the right Queen called Iane? alack for woe,
at the first she was not christened so.
Thus old and young still descant on her name,
Nor lend no ear, when we horstile proclaim.
I fear, I fear. Fear Bret, what shouldst thou fear?
Thou hast a breast composed of adamant.
Fall what ill betide, my anchor is cast,
and I in Harbour ride.
My Lord 'tis true, you sent unto the Counsel for fresh supplies, what succour, what supplies? Happy is he can draw his neck out of the collar, and make his peace with Marie.
How stands the Treasurer addicted to us?
I had forgot: when we wear at counsel,
He stole away, and went home to his house,
And by much entreaty was won to return,
In brief they all incline to Queen Mary
My Lord farewell, each hasty hour:
Will colder tidings cell.
Come they in thunder, we will meet with them?
In the loudest language that their ordinance speaks,
Ours shall answer theirs.
Call me a Herald, and in the market place Proclaim
Queen Jane. The streets are full,
The town is populous, the people gape for novelty.
Trumpets speak to them,
That they may answer with an echoing cry,
God save Queen Iane, God save her Majesty.
Ha? a bare report of Trumpets!
Are the slaves horse, or want they art to speak?
O me! This Town consists on famous Colleges,
Such as know both how, and what, and when to speak,
Well, yet we will proceed,
and smother what close envy hath decreed.
Ambrose my Son, what news?
O my thrice honoured Father,
Boy, speak the worst,
That which sounds deadly est, let me hear that first.
The Lords have all revolted from your faction
we in ourselves are strong.
In Baynard's Castle was a counsel held,
Whether the Maior and Sheriffs did resort,
And 'twas concluded to proclaim Queen Mary.
Then they revolt the allegiance from my Daughter, and give it to another:
True my thrice honoured Father,
Besides, my brother Guilford and his wife
Where she was proclaimed Queen, are now
close Prisoners, namely in the Tower.
God take them to his mercy, they had need,
Of grace and patience, for they both must bleed,
Poor Innocent souls, they both from guilt are free.
O my thrice honoured Father! might I advise
you, fly to your manner, there study for your safety.
Boy, thou sayst well,
And since the Lords have all revolted from me,
myself will now revolt against myself.
Call me a Herald to fill their empty ears,
Assist me Son, my good Lord Huntington,
Even in this market Town proclaim Queen Mary.
Mary by the grace of God, Queen of England,
France and Ireland, defendress of the Faith. Amen.
Amen, I bear a part,
I with my tongue, I do not with my heart,
Now they can cry, now they can bawl and yell,
Base minded slaves, sink may your souls to hell.
My honoured Lord, the Counsel greets you with these Letters.
Stay Master Roofe, ere you depart receive an answer and reward.
In the Sovereign name of Mary our Queen
You shall upon the sight hereof,
Surcease your arms, discharge your Soldiers,
And presently repair unto the Court,
Or else to be held as an Arch-Traitor.
'tis short & sharp, Master Roofe, we do obey your
warrant: but I pray tell me, how doth all our friends at
Court? is there not a great mortality amongst them?
Is there not a number of them dead of late since I came thence?
My gracious Lord not any.
O master Roofe, it cannot be, I will assure you
At my departure thence, I left living there at least
Five hundred friends, and now I have not one,
simply not one: friends! ha, ha, ha, Commission
Thou must be my friend.
And stand betwixt me and the stroke of death,
Were thy date out, my lives date were but short,
They are cold friends, that kills their friends in sport
Here comes your honoured friend the Earl of Arundel.
My honoured friend!
I am no friend to Traitors: in my most high &
Princely sovereign's name,
I do arrest your honour of high Treason.
A Traitor Arundel? have I not your hand in my
commission? let me peruse it: as I take't 'tis here,
and by your warrant have so strict proceeded.
Is the limits of my warrant broke answer me.
It may be that it hath pleased her Majesty
To pardon us, and for to punish you.
I know no other reason, this I must,
I am commounded, and the act is Just.
And I obey you: when we parted last
My Lord of Arundel, our farewell was
Better then our greeting now.
Then you cried God speed,
Now you come on me ere you say take heed:
Than you did owe me your best bloods: nay greened
You could not spend them in my service.
O then it was a double death to stay behind,
But I am overtook and you are kind,
I am, beshrew you else, but I submit,
My crime is great, and I must answer it.
You must with your three Sons, be guarded safe
Unto the Tower: with you, those Lords and Knights
That in this faction did associate you,
For so I am enjoined.
Then peacively, let us conduct you thither,
O my Children! my soul weeps endless tears for you.
O at the general Sessions, when all souls
Stand at the bar of justice,
And hold up their new immortalised hands,
O then lot the of their tragick endes
Be raced out of the bead-roll of my sins:
When ere the black book of my crime's unclasped.
Let not these scarlet Letters be found there:
Of all the rest, only that page be clear.
But come to my arraignment, then to death,
The Queen and you have long aimed at this head,
If to my Children, she sweet grace extend,
My soul hath peace, and I embrace my end.
Three days are past, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday too
Yet my protesting servant is not come.
Himself conducted me to this hard lodging,
A simple Cabin, for so great a Prince,
And then he swore, but oaths you see are vain,
That he would hourly come and visit me:
I that was wont, to surfeit in estate,
Am now through hunger almost desolate.
My Lord.
Ned Homes, speak hast thou brought me meat?
With much ado my Lord, meat, bread & wine,
While you refresh yourself, I will record
The cause of my long stay.
I prithee do, need bids me eat,
Need bids me hear thee too.
The night I left you in the hollow tree,
My house was searched.
Go on, go on.
And I no sooner entered but attached,
Threatened the Rack: and if I did not yield
Your gracious self into their graceless hands.
And thou hast done't, thou hast betrayed me.
Done it! o betray you? O Noah!
First would I see my loved wife and Children
Murdered, and tossed on spears, before I would
Deliver your grace unto their hands,
For they intend your death.
Go on, go on.
and offered a thousand Crowns to him that can
Bring news of your abode, 'twas offered in my hands.
Which I beseech may stop my Vital breath,
When I am feed with gold to work your death.
See yonder sits the Duke.
I kiss thee in requital of this love.
and in requital of so great a grace,
I kiss your hand that dares to kiss my face.
So Iudas kissed his Master: cease the Duke.
Ah me! Ned Homes we are undone,
Both thou and I betrayed.
My Lord, late Duke of Suffolk, in her highness name I do arrest you of high Treason.
I do obey, and only crave this kindness,
You would be good unto my Servant Homes,
Where in relieving me, hath but performed
The duty of a servant to his Lord.
You are deceived sir in your servant much,
He is the man that did betray you.
Here Master Homes, towards your thousand pounds,
Here is a hundred marks,
Come to the Exchequer, you shall have the rest.
Hast thou betrayed me? yet with such a tongue,
so smoothly oiled, slight of my dangers fear,
O break my heart, this grief's too great to bear.
Pardon me my Lord.
God pardon thee, and lay not to thy soul
This grievous sin: Farewell.
And when thou spendest this ill got gold
Remember how thy masters life was sold.
Thy Lord that gave thee Lordships, made thee great,
Yet thou betrayd'st him as he sat at meat.
On to my grave, 'tis time that I were dead,
When he that held my heart betrays my head.
O God, O God, that ever I was borne,
This deed hath made me (slave) to abject scorn.
O poor shrimp, how art thou fallen away for want of munching? O Colen cries out most tyrannically, the little gut hath no mercy, what's here victuals? O rare! O good! Feed chops, drink throat, good victuals makes good blood.
But stay, whose here? more Sheriffs more searchers?
O no, this is Homes that betrayed his honest Master,
How, with a Halter about his neck? I hope he doth
not mean to hang himself? i'll step aside.
This is the place, where I betrayed my Lord,
This is the place where oft I have relieved:
and villain I, betrayed him to the jaws of death,
But here before I further will proceed
Here will I bury this enticing gold,
Lie there damned fiend never serve humane more,
This is rare, now in this mood he would hang himself 'twere excellent.
Shall I ask mercy? no it is too late,
Heaven will not hear, and I am desperate.
So, so, a very good ending, would all false Servants
might drink of the same sauce.
Gold, you are first mine, you must help
To shift myself into some counterfeit suit
Of apparel, and then to London:
If my old Master be hanged, why so:
If not, why rustic and lustick:
Yet before I go, I do not care if I throw this Dog in
a Ditch: come away dissembler: this cannot choose but be
a hundred pound it ways so heavy.
By God's assistance, and the power of heaven,
after our Troubles we are safely set,
In our inheritance, for which we do subscribe
The praise and benefit to God, next thanks
To you my Lords. Now shall the sanctuary,
And the house of the most high be newly built.
The ancient honours due unto the Church,
Buried within the Ruin monasteries,
Shall lift their stately heads, and rise again
To astonish the destroyers wandering eyes.
Zeal shall be decked in gold,
Religion not like a virgin robbed of all her ponipe,
But briefly shining in her gems of state,
Like a fair bride be offered to the Lord.
To build large houses pull no churches down,
Rather in rich the Temple with our crown.
Better a poor Queen, than the Subjects poor.
May it please your grace to give release
Unto such ancient Bishops that have lost their
Honours in the church affairs.
We have given order to the Duke of Norfolk to release them.
Your sacred Highness will no doubt be mind
full of the late Oath you took at Framingam
O my Lord of Arundel, we remember that,
But shall a Subject force his Prince to swear
Contrary to her conscience and the Law?
we here release unto our faithful people,
one entire Subsidy,
Due unto the Crown in our dead Brother's days.
The Commonalty shall not be o'erburdened
In our reign, let them be libre all in Religion,
and we will spare their treasure to themselves:
Better a poor Prince than the Nation poor,
The subjects Treasure, in the sovereign's store.
What is your highness pleasure about the Rebels?
The Queenlike Rebels,
Mean you not Queen Iane?
Guilford and Iane, with great Northumberland, and haughty Suffolk's Duke.
The Duke of Suffolk is not yet apprehended,
Therefore my Lords,
Some of you most dear to us in love,
Be careful of that charge:
The rest we'll leave for try all of the other prisoners.
The Lady Iane most mighty Sovereign,
allied to you in blood: for she's the
Daughter of your Father's Sister.
Mary the Queen of France: Charles Brandon's
Wife your Niece, your next of blood, except your sister,
Deserves some pity, so doth youthful Guilford.
Such pity as the law allows to Traitors.
They were misled by their ambitious Fathers,
What Son to obey his Father proves a Traitor,
Must buy their disobedience with their death.
My Lord of Winchester, still thirsts for blood.
Wyatt no more, the law shall be their judge,
Mercy to mean offenders we'll ostend,
Not unto such that dares usurp our Crown.
Count Edmond the Ambassador from Spain,
attends your highness answer, brought those
Letters sent from the Emperor
In his sons behalf.
In the behalf of lovely Princely Philip,
Whose person we have shrined in our heart?
at the first sight of his delightful picture
That picture should have power to tingle
Love in Royal breasts: the Darts of love are words, pictures,
conceit, he'll prevail by any,
Your counsel Lords about this foreign business.
I say and it like your royal Majesty,
a royal treaty, and to be confirmed,
and I allow the match.
Allow it Lords, we have cause
To thank our God, that such a mighty Prince
as Philip is, Son to the Emperor,
Heir to wealthy Spain, and many spacious
Kingdoms, will vouchsafe—
Vouchsafe! my Lord of Winchester, pray what?
To grace our mighty Sovereign with his honourable Title.
To marry with our Queen: mean you not so?
I do, what then?
O God! is she a beggar, a forsaken Maid,
that she hath need of grace from foreign princes?
By God's dear mother, O God pardon swear I,
methinks she is a fair and lovely Prince,
Her only beauty (were she of mean birth)
Able to make the greatest Potentate,
I the great Emperor of the mighty Cham,
That hath more Nations under his Command,
Then spanish Philip's like to inherit towns,
To come and lay his sceptre at her feet,
And to entreat her to vouchsafe the grace
To take him and his Kingdom to her mercy.
Wyat you are too hot.
And you to proud vouchsafe? O base!
I hope she'll not vouchsafe to take the Emperor's
son to her dear mercy.
proceed my Lord of Winchester I pray.
Then still I say, we have cause to thank our God,
That such a mighty Prince will look so low,
As to respect this Island and our Queen.
Pardon me Madam, he respect your island more than your person? think of that.
Wyatt, you wrong the affection of the Prince,
For he desires no fortresses nor towns,
Nor to bear any office, rule or state,
Either by person or by Substitute,
Nor yet himself to be a Counsellor in our affairs.
What need he (Noble Lords) to ask the
fruit, when he demands the tree?
No Castle, fortresses, nor Towers of strength,
It boots not, when the chiefest Tower of all
The key that opens unto all the Land.
I mean our Gracious Sovereign must be his,
But he will bear no office in the land,
And yet will marry with the Queen of all.
Nor be of counsel in the realms affairs,
And yet the Queen enclosed in his arms:
I do not like this strange marriage
The Fox is subtle, and his head once in,
The slender body easily will follow.
I grant, he offers you in name of dower,
The yearly sum of threescore thousand Ducats.
Besides, the seventeen famous Provinces,
And that the heir succeeding from your loins,
Shall have the Sovereign rule of both the Realms.
What, shall this move your Highness to the match?
Spain is too far for England to inherit,
But England near enough for Spain to woe.
Has not the Kings of England (good Sir Thomas)
Espoused the Daughters of our Neighbour Kings?
I grant, your predecessors oft have sought
Their Queen from France,
And sometimes to from Spain.
But never could I hear that England yet
Has been so base, to seek a King from either:
'tis policy dear Queen, no love at all.
'tis love great Queen, no policy at all.
Which of you all, dares justify this match,
And not be touched in conscience with an oath?
Remember, O remember I beseech you,
King Henry's last will, and his act at Court,
I mean that royal Court of Parliament,
That does prohibit Spaniards from the Land,
That Will and Act, to which you all are sworn,
And do not dam your souls with perjury.
But that we know thee Wyatt to be true
Unto the Crown of England and to us,
Thy overboldness should be paid with death.
But cease, for fear your liberal tongue offend,
With one consent my Lords you like this match?
We do great Sovereign.
Call in Count Edmond Honourable Lords.
we have determined of your embassy,
and thus I plight, our love to Philip's heart,
Embark you straight, the wind blows wondrous fair:
Till he shall land in England, I am all care.
And ere he land in England, I will offer
My loyal breast for him to tread upon.
O who so forward Wyatt as thyself,
To raise this troublesome Queen in this her Throne?
Philip is a Spaniard, a proud Nation,
Whom naturally our Country men abhor.
Assist me gracious heavens, and you shall see
What hate I bear unto their Slavery.
I'll into Kent, there muster up my friends,
To save this Country, and this Realm defend.
God morrow to the Patron of my woe.
God morrow to my Lord, my lovely Dudley.
Why do you look so sad my dearest Lord?
Nay why doth Iane, thus with a heavy eye,
And a defected look, salute the day?
Sorrow doth ill become thy silver brow,
Sad grief lies dead, so long as thou lives fair,
In my Ianes joy, I do not care for care.
My looks (my love) is sorted with my heart,
The Sun himself, doth scantly show his face,
Out of this firm grate, you may perceive the Tower-Hill
Thronged with store of people,
As if they gaped for some strange Novelty.
Though sleep do seldom dwéll in men of care,
Yet I did this night sleep, and this night dreamt,
My Princely father great (Northumberland)
Was married to a stately Bride:
And then methought, just on his Bridal day,
A poisoned draft did take his life away.
Let not fond visions so appall my Love,
For dreams do oftentimes contrary prove.
The nights are tedious, and the days are sad,
And see you how the people stand in heaps,
Each man sad, looking on his aposed object,
As if a general passion possessed them?
Their eyes do seem, as dropping as the Moon,
As if prepared for a Tragedy.
For never swarms of people there do tread,
But to rob life, and to enrich the dead
And show they wept.
My Lord they did so, for I was there.
I pray resolve us good Master Lieutenant
Who was it yonder, that rendered up his life
To nature's death?
Pardon me my Lord, 'tis felony to acquaint you with death of any Prisoner, yet to resolve your grace, it was your Father, great Northumberland, that this day lost his head.
Peace rest his soul, his sins be buried in his grave,
And not remembered in his Epitaph: but who comes here?
My Father Prisoner!
O Iane! now nought but fear thy Title & thy state,
Thou now must leave for a small grave.
Had I been contented to a been great, I had stood,
But now my rising, is pulled down with blood.
Farewell, point me my house of prayers.
Is grief so short? 'twas wont to be full of words,
'tis true, but now deaths lesson, bids a could adieu.
Farewell, thus friends on desperate journeys part,
Breaking of words with tears, that swells the heart.
It is the pleasure of the Queen that you part lodgings.
Till your Arraignment, which must be tomorrow.
Good Master Lieutenant let us pray together.
Pardon me Madam I may not, they that owe you, sway me.
Entreat not Iane, though she our bodies part,
Our souls shall meet. Farewell my love.
My Dudley, my own heart.
Hold Drum, stand Gentlemen,
Give the word along: stand, stand:
Masters, friends, Soldiers, and therefore Gentlemen,
I know some of you wear warm purses
Lined with gold, to them I speak not,
But to such lean knaves that cannot put up
Crosses, thus I say, fight valiantly,
And by the mary God, you that have all
Your life time silver lacked,
Shall now get Crowns, marry they must be cracked.
No matter, we'll change them for white money.
But it must needs be so, dear Countrymen,
For Soldiers are the masters of wars mint,
Blows are the stamps, they set upon with bullets,
And broken pates are when the brains lies spilled:
These light crowns, that with blood are double guilt,
But that's not all, that your stout hearts shall earn,
Stick to this glorious quarrel, and your names
Shall stand in Chronicles ranked even with Kings
You free your Country from base spanish thrall,
From Ignominious slavery,
Who can digest a Spaniard, that's a true Englishman?
Would he might choke that digest him.
He that loves freedom and his Country,
Cry a Wyatt: he that will not, with my heart
Let him stand forth, shake hands,
And we'll depart.
A Wyatt, a Wyatt, a Wyatt.
Forbear, or with the breath thy Trumpet spends,
This shall let forth thy soul.
I am a Herald, and challenge safety
By the law of arms.
So shalt thou when thou art lawfully employed
What loud knaves that?
No knave Sir Thomas, I am a true man
to my Queen, to whom thou art a Traitor.
Knock him down.
Knock him down, fie no,
we'll handle him, he shall sound before he go.
He comes from Norfolk and those fawning Lords, in Mary's name, weighing out life to them that will with baseness bury it
Cease on him as a pernicious enemy.
Sir George be ruled,
Since we profess the Art of War,
Let's not be hissed at for our ignorance,
He shall pass and repass, juggle the best he can,
Lead him into the city. Norry set forth
Set forth thy brazen throat and call all Rochester
About thee: do thy office, fill their
Light heads with proclamations, do,
Catch Fools with Lime-twigs dipped with pardons.
But Sir George and good sir Harry Isley,
If this Gallant open his mouth too wide,
Powder the Varlet, pistol him, fire the Roof that's o'er his mouth
He craves the law of Arms, and he shall ha''t,
Teach him our law, to cut's throat if he prate.
If louder reach thy Proclamation,
The Lord have mercy upon thee.
Sir Thomas, I must do my office.
Come. we'll do ours too,
ay, ay, do, blow thyself hence
Whoreson proved Herald, because he can
give arms, he thinks to cut us off by the elbows.
masters and fellow Soldiers, say, will you leave old
Tom Wyatt?
No, no, no.
A March! 'tis Norfolk's Drum upon my life.
I pray see what Drum it is.
The word is given, arm, arm flies through the camp
As loud, though not so full of dread as thunder:
For no man's cheeks look pale, but every face,
Is lifted up above his foreman's head,
And every Soldier does on tiptoe stand,
shaking a drawn sword in his threatening hand.
At whom, at whose Drum?
At Norfolk, Norfolk's Drum:
With him comes Arundel, you may behold
The silken faces of their ensigns show,
Nothing but wrinkles straggling in the wind,
Norfolk rides formostly, his crest well known,
Proud, as if all our heads were now his own.
Soft, he shall pay more for them.
Sir Robert Rodston, bring our Muscateers,
To flank our Pikes, let all our archery,
Fall off in wings of shot a both sides of the van,
To gall the first Horse of the enemy
That shall come fiercely on:
Our cannoneers, bid them to charge, charge my l a ts.
Charge, charge.
Saint George for England, Wyatt for poor Kent,
Blood lost in country's quarrel, is nobly spent.
Base slave, hard hearted fugitue,
He that you sent with Norry, false sir George
Is fled to Norfolk.
Sir George Harper fled?
I near thought better of a counterfeit,
His name was Harper, was it not? let him go,
Hence all for his sake shall stand,
But for plain nine pence, throughout all the land.
They come, no man give ground in these hot cases,
Be Englishmen and beard them to their faces. Exeunt
Yonder the Traitor marcheth with a steel bow.
Bent on his Sovereign, and his kingdoms peace:
To wave him to us with a flag of truce,
And tender him soft mercy,
Were to call our right in question,
Therefore put in act, your resolute intendments,
If rebellion be suffered to take head,
She lives too long, treason doth swarm.
Therefore give signal to the fight,
'tis good, 'tis good, my Lord.
Where's Captain Bret?
Here my Lord.
To do honour to you and those five hundred
Londoners that march after your colours,
You shall charge the Traitor in the Vanguard
Whilst myself with noble Arundel
And stout Iarningam, second you in the main,
God and Saint George, this day fight on our side.
While thus we tame a desperate rebel's pride.
Countrymen and friends, And you the most valiant sword and BucklerMen of London, the Duke of Norfolk in honour has promoted you to the Vanguard, and why to the Vanguard? but because he knows you to be eager men, martial men, men of good stomachs, very hot shots, very actions for valour, such as scorns to shrink for a wetting, who will bear off any thing with head and shoulders.
Well forward, good commander for wards,
I am to lead you, & whether? to fight: and with whom? with Wyatt: and what is Wyatt? a most famous and arch-traitor, to nobody by this hand that I know.
Nay, speak out good Captain.
I say again, is worthy Norfolk gone?
I, , gon, .
I say again, that Wyatt for rising thus, In arms with the Kentishmen dangling thus at his tail, is worthy to be hanged like a jewel in the kingdoms ear, say I well my Lads?
Forwards, forwards.
And whosoever cuts off his head shall have for his labour—
What shall I have? I'll do't.
The pox, the plague, and all the diseases, the Spittle-houses and hospitals can throw upon lum.
not , flat.
And wherefore is Wyatt up?
Because he cannot keep his bed.
No, Wyatt is up to keep the Spaniards down, to keep King Philip out, whose coming in will give the Land such a Philip, 'twill make it reel again.
'a would it were come to that, we would, we would leave off Philips and fall to Hot-cockles.
Philip is a Spaniard, and what is a Spaniard?
A Spaniard is no Englishman that I know.
Right, a Spaniard is a Camocho, a Callimanco, nay which is worse, a Dondego, and what is a Dondego?
A Dondego is a kind of Spanish Stockfish, or poor Iohn.
No, a Dondego is a desperate Viliago, a very Castilian, God bless us.
There came but one Dundego into England, & he made all Paul's stink again, what shall a whole army of Dondegoes do my sweet Countrymen?
Marry they will make us all smell abominably, he comes not here that's flat.
A Spaniard is called so, because he's a Spaniard his yard is but a span.
That's the reason our Englishwomen love them not.
Right, for he carries not the English man's yard about him, if you deal with him look for hard measure: if you give an inch he'll take an ell: if he give an ell, he'll take an inch. Therefore my fine, spruce, dapper, finical, fellows, if you are now, as you have always been, counted politic Londoners, to fly to the stronger side, leave Arundel, leave Norfolk, and love Bret.
we'll fling our flat Caps at them.
Wear your own neats-leather shoes? Scorn Spanish Leather, cry a fig for the Spaniard: (said I) well bollies?
ay, ay, I.
Why then fiat, fiat, and every man die at his foot, that cries not a Wyatt, a Wyatt.
A Wyatt, Wyatt, a Wyatt.
Sweet music, Gallant fellow-londoner.
i'faith we are the Mad caps, we are the lickpennies.
You shall be all Lord Maiores at least,
Those eight brass pieces shall do service
now against their Masters Norfolk and Arundel,
They may thank their heels more than their hands
for saving of their lives,
When soldiers turn surveyors and measure Lands,
God help poor farmers.
soldiers and friends, let us all play nimble blood,
Hounds, and hunt them step by step,
We hear the Lawyers plead in Armour steed of
Gowns, if they fall out about the case they jar,
Than they may cuff each other from the Bar.
Soft, this is Ludg are, stand knock.
Who knocks?
A Wyatt, a true friend,
Open your gates, you louring Citizens,
I bring you freedom, from a foreign Prince,
The queen has heard your suit,
And 'tis her pleasure the City gates,
Stand open to receive us.
avaunt thou Traitor, thinks thou by forgery
To enter London with rebellious arms?
Know that these gates are bar against thy entrance
And it shall cost the lives of twenty thousand true
subjects to the Queen before a Traitor enters.
Shoot him through.
Stay, let's know him first.
Kill him, then let's know him afterwards.
Look on my face, and blushing, see with shame, thy treasons Charactered.
'tis the Lord Pembroke.
What have we to do with the Lord Pembroke, where's the queen's Lieutenant?
I am Lieutenant of the City now.
Are you Lord Maior?
The greatest Lord that breathes enters not beer, without express command from my dear Queen.
She commands hy us.
I do command thee in her highness name,
To leave the City gates, or by my honour,
A piece of ordinance shall be strait discharged,
To be thy deaths man, & shoot thee to thy grave.
Then here's no entrance.
No, none.
What should we do following Wyatt any longer.
O London, London, thou perfidious Town,
Why hast thou broke, thy promise to thy friend?
That for thy sake, and for thy general sake,
Hath thrust myself into the mouth of danger?
March back to Fleetstreet, if that Wyatt die,
London unjustly, buy thy treachery.
would I could steal away from Wyatt, it should be the first thing that I would do,
Where's all my Soldiers? what all gone,
And left my Drum and colours without guard?
O infelicity of careful men!
Yet will I sell my honoured blood as dear,
s euer did faithfull subiect to his Prince.
Pembroke revolts, and flies to Wyatt's side.
he's damned in hell that speaks it.
O my good Lord! 'tis spread,
That Pembroke and Count Arundel both are fled.
'sfoot who said so? what devil dares stir my patience? zwounds I was talking with a crew of vagabonds that lagged at Wiat's tail, and am I thus paid for my pains?
And there being missed, some villain finding you out of sight hath raised this slander on you, but come my Lord.
I'll not fight.
Nay sweet Earl.
Zounds fight, and hear my name dishonoured?
Wyatt is marched down Fleetstreet: after him.
Why do not you, and you, pursue him?
If I strike one blow may my hand fall off.
And if I do by this—
Come leave your swearing,
Did not country's care urge me to this quarrel?
For my part I would not strike a blow.
No more would I, i'll eat no wrongs,
Let's all die, and i'll die.
Stand on your Guard, for this way Wyatt is pursued a main.
Follow, follow.
Stand Traitor stand, or thou shalt near stand more.
Lords I yield, an easy conquest 'tis to win the field,
After als lost I am wounded, let me have a surgeon,
that I may go sound unto my grave.
'tis not the name of Traitor paules me,
Nor plucks my weapon from my hand.
Use me how you can, though you say Traitor,
I am a Gentleman.
Your dreadful shaking me, which I defy,
Is a poor loss of life, I wish to die,
Death frights my spirit, no more than can my bed,
Nor will I change one hair, losing this head.
Come guard him, guard him.
No matter where,
I hope for nothing, therefore nothing fear.
My Lord of Norfolk, will it please you sit
By you the noble Lord of Arundel,
Since it hath pleased her sacred Majesty,
To nominate us here Commissioners:
Let us without all partiality be open eared,
To what they can allege: where's the Lieutenant of the Tower?
my good .
Fetch forth the prisoners,
Place them severally in chairs of state.
clerk of the crown proceed as law requires.
Guilford Dudley, hold up thy hand at the bar.
And would to God, this hand heaved
Might haue ,
For , and weale.
Iane Grey, Lady Iane Grey,
Hold up thy hand at
A hand as from ,
At the white livery, worn by the Angels in their maker's sight.
You are here indicted by the names of Guilford Dudly, Lord Dudley; Iane Grey, Lady Iane Grey; of capital and high Treason, against our most sovereign Lady the queen's Majesty.
That is to say, that you Guilford Dudley, and Ladye Iane Gray, haue by all possible sought to procure vnto your selues, the Royal of the Crow of England, to the ting of our new Soueraigne Lady the Qu Maiestie, the true and lawfull lfull to that mous King Henrie the eight, and haue ly adorned your selues with the states Garland imperiall, and haue graunted , Commissions, and such like, for leuying of men and Souldiers to bee sent against the saide : what answere you to this In, ?
Our answer shall be several like our selves:
Yet Noble the ,
May we not make some apology unto the Court?
It is against the order of the Law, therefore directly plead unto the Inditement, and than you shall be heard.
the law?
,
For what ,
And you will follow it unto our deaths.
, you of these crimes or not
I'll answer first I am, and I am not,
But should we stand unto the last unguilty?
You have large conscience jurors to besmear
The fairest brow with style of treachery.
The barons of the Land shall be your jury.
An honourable and worthy Trial,
And God forbid, so many Noblemen
Should be made of .
You'll answer to the Inditement, will you not?
My Lord I will, I am.
What, are you guilty or no?
I say unguilty still, yet I am guilty,
Slander not thyself,
If there be any guilty it was I,
I was proclaimed Queen, I the crown should wear.
Because I was thy Husband I stand here.
Our wee our , our ,
And shall our fathers faults our lives divide?
It was my father that made thee distressed,
O but for mine, my Guilford had been
My Iane had as .
My Guilford free from this soul grieving care.
If we be guilty, 'tis no fault of ours,
And shall , for in
We sought no kingdom, we desired no Crown,
It was imposed upon us by constraint,
Like golden fruit hung on a barren Tree,
And will you such ?
Then make the silver Thames,
As black as Sickts, because it was constrained to bear the banks, whose battering ordinance should have been employed against the hinderers of our Royalty.
You talk of senseless things.
Dooe's Trees want sence, that by the power of musick? haue bene drawn to dance a pleasing measure, wcome then vnto liuing thinges, say wee vsurpe the English Royaltie, wast not by your
I tell you Lords, I have your hands to show,
Subscrib'd to the Commission of my father, cons?
By which, you did authorize him to wage arms,
If they were Rebellious against your sovereign
Who cried so loud as you, God save Queen Iane?
And come you now your Sovereign to arraign?
Come down, come down, here at a prisoner's bar
Better do so, then judge yourselves amiss:
For look what sentence, on our heads you lay,
Upon your own, may light another day.
The Queen hath pardoned them:
And we must die, for a less fault,
O partiality!
Patience my Guilford, it was ever known,
They that find least, the punishment have borne.
True, my fair Queen of sorrow truly speak.
Great men like great Flies,
Through laws Cobwebs break,
But the thin'st frame, the prison of the weak.
Now trust me Arundell,
It doth grieve me much, to sit
In judgement of these harmless—
I helped to attach the Father, but the son—
O through my blood, I feel compassion.
Run my Lords, we'll be humble suitors to the Queen
to save these innocent creatures from their deaths.
Let's break up Court,
If Norfolk long should stay,
In tears and passion, I should melt away.
Sit still, what will you take compassion upon such? they are heretics.
We are Christians,
Leave our conscience to ourselves:
We stand not here about Religious causes
But are accused of Capital Treason.
Then you confess the indictment.
even what you will,
Yet save my Iane, although my blood you spill.
If I must die, save Princely Guilford's life.
Who is not moved, to see this loving strife?
Pray pardon me, do what you will today,
And i'll approve it though it be my death.
Then hear the speedy sentence of your deaths,
You shall be carried to the place from whence you
came, from thence unto the place of Execution,
through London to be drawn on Hurdles,
Where thou Iane Grey shalt suffer death by fire.
Thou Guilford Dudley hanged and quartered,
So Lord have mercy upon you.
Why this is well, since we must die,
That we must die together.
Stay and here the mercy of the Queen,
Because you are of noble parentage,
Although the crime of your offence be great,
She is only pleased that you shall—
Will she pardon us?
Only I say that you shall lose your heads
Upon the Tower-Hill, so convey them hence lieutenant
strictly look into your charge.
Our dooms are known,
Our lives have played their part,
Farewell my Iane.
My Dudley, mine own heart.
fain would I take a ceremonious leave,
But that's to die a hundred thousand deaths:
I cannot speak for tears.
My Lord, come:
Great griefs speak louder
When the least are dumbed.
The sad aspect, this prison doth afford,
jumps with the measure that my heart doth keepe:
And this enclosure here, of nought but stone,
Yields far mòre comfort than the stony hearts
Of them that wronged their country, and their friend
Here is no perjured Counsellors to swear
A sacred oath, and then forswear the same,
No innovators here, doth harbour keep,
A steadfast silence, doth possess the place,
In this the Tower is noble being base.
Sir Thomas Wyatt.
That's my name indeed.
You should say Traitor.
Traitor and Wyatt's name,
Differ as farre as Winchester and ho.
I am a Pillar of the Mother Church.
And what am I?
One that subverts the state.
Insult not too much, o'er th' unfortunate,
I have no bishops Rochet to declare my innocency,
This is my cross, that causeless
I must suffer my heads loss.
When that hour comes, wherein my blood is spilled,
My cross will look as bright as yours twice guilt.
Here's for that purpose.
Is your grace so short?
Belike you come to make my death a sport.
We come to bring you to your execution,
You must be hanged and quartered instantly:
At the park Corner, it a gallous set,
Whether make haste to tender nature's debt.
Then here's the end of Wyatt's rising up,
Ito was ,
Right willingly I yeelde my selfe to th,
But sorry such, should have my place of birth.
Had London kept his word, Wyatt had stood,
But now King Philip enters through my blood.
Where's the lieutenant of the Tower?
Here my Lord.
Fetch forth your other Prisoners.
My Lord I will, here lies young Guilford, here the Lady Iane.
Conduct them forth.
Good morrow once more to my lovely Iane.
The last good morrow my sweet love to thee.
What were you reading?
On a prayer book.
Trust me so was I, we had need to pray,
For see, the Ministers of death draw near.
To a prepared mind death is a pleasure,
I long in soul, till I have spent my breath.
My Lord High Chancellor, you are welcome heather,
What come you to behold our execution?
And my Lord Arundel, thrice welcome,
You helped to attach our Father, come you now,
To see the black conclusion of our Tragedy?
We come to do our office.
So do we.
Our office is to die, yours to look on:
We are beholding unto such beholders,
The time was Lords, when you did flock amain,
To see her crowned, but now to kill my Iane,
The world like to a sickle, bends itself,
Men run their course of lives as in a maze,
Our office is to die, yours but to gaze.
Patience my Guilford.
Patience my lovely Iane:
Patience has blanched thy soul, as white as snow,
But who shall answer for thy death? this know,
An innocent to die, what is it less,
But to Angels ,
The guilty dying, do applaud the law,
But when the innocent creature stoops his neck
to an unjust doom; upon the judge they check.
Lives are like souls, required of their neglectors,
Than ours of you, that should be our protectors.
Rail not against the law.
No, God forbid, my Lord of Winchester,
It's made of law, and should I rail
'twere against you, if I forget not,
You rejoiced to see the fall of Cromwel,
joy you now at me?
Oft dying men are filled with prophecies,
But i'll not be a prophet of your ill.
Yet know my Lords, they that behold us now,
May to the axe of Justice one day bow,
And in that plot of ground where we must die,
Sprinkle their bloods,
Though I know no cause why.
Speak you to me Lord Guilford
Norfolk no, I speak to—
To whom?
Alas I do not know which of us two dies first.
The better part.
'tis I sweet love, that first must kiss the block.
I am a man, men better brook
shock of threatening death,
sexe are euerweake
The thoughts of death, a woman's heart will break.
But I am armed to die.
Likelier to live:
Death to the unwilling doth his presence give?
He dares not look the bold man in the face,
But on the fearful lays his killing Mace.
It is the pleasure of the Queen, that the
Lady Iane must first suffer death.
I thank her Highness,
That I shall first depart this hapless world,
and not Survive to see my dear love dead.
She dying first, I three times lose my head.
Forgive me Lady I pray your death.
Ha? hast thou the heart to kill a face so fair.
It is her headsman.
And demands a pardon,
Only of her, for taking off her head?
I gentle Guilford, and I pardon him.
But i'll not pardon him, thou art my wife.
And he shall ask me pardon for thy life,
Pardon me his Lord.
Rise, do not kneel.
Though thou submit'st, thou hast a lowering steel
Whose fatal declination brings our death:
Good man of earth, make haste to make us earth.
Pleaseth the Lady Iane, i'll help her off with her nightgown.
Thanks gentle friend,
But I have other waiting women to attend me.
Good Mistress Ellen lend me a helping hand,
To strip me of this worldly ornament
Off with these robes, O tear them from my side,
Such silken covers are the guilt of pride.
Instead of gowns, my coverture be
My worldly death or new celestial breath.
What is it off?
Madam almost.
Not yet, O God! how hardly can we
shake off this worlds Pomp,
That cleaves unto us like our Body's skin?
Yet thus O God shake of thy servants sin.
Here is a scarf to blind your
From all the world, but from my Guilford's sight:
Befor
Let me behold him with a constant look.
O do not kill me with that piteous eye:
'tis my last farewell, take it patiently,
My dearest Guilford let us
Nowe blinde mine ey,
Oh!
How fares my Lord
he's fallen into a trance.
,
Guilford if thou die in
will be the first in heauely bliss
Hear comes the Headsman, with the head of Iane:
Who spoke of Iane? who named my Lovely Iane?
Behold her head.
O I shall faint again!
Yet let me bear this fight unto my grave
My sweet Ianes head:
Look Norfolk, Arundel, Winchester
Do male factors, look:
Thus when they die a ruddy lip,
A clear reflecting eye,
Cheeks purer than the Maiden oreant pearl,
That sprinkles bashfulness through the clouds
Her innocence, has given her this look:
The like for me to show so well being dead,
How innocence, would Guilford lose his head.
My Lord, the time run on.
So does our death.
here's one has run so fast she's out of breath,
But the time goes on,
And my fair Ianes white soul, will be
In heaven before me
If I doe stay: stay getle wie,
Thy Guilford follows thee,
Though on the earth we part, by adverse fate,
Our souls shall knock together at heavens gate.
The sky is calm, our deaths have a fair day,
And we shall pass the smother on our way.
My Lords farewell, ay once farewell to all,
The Father's pride has caused the Children's fall.
Thus have we seen her highness will performed,
And now their heads and bodies shall be joined
and buried in one grave, as fits their loves.
Thus much i'll say in their behalfs now dead,
Their Father's pride their lives have severed.