BAck from th'umbrageous caves (still robbed of rest)
Must I return, where Phoebus guilds the fields,
A Ghost not worthy to be Pluto's Guest,
Since one to whom the world no burial yields?
O what a great disgrace is this to me,
Whose Trophies Fame in many a kingdom keeps.
That I (contemned) cannot transported be
A passenger for the Sulphurean deeps?
Dare churlish Charon (though not used to bow)
The raging torrent of my wrath gain-stand?
Must I succumb amidst hell's dungeons now,
Though all the world accustomed to command?
But it may be that this hath wrought me harm,
What bloodless Ghosts do stray on Stygian banks,
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Gave terror oft to many martial ranks?
Yet (for a prey exposed to ravenous beasts)
Can never have the honour of a Tomb;
But (though for such rude guests too precious feasts)
Were basely buried in a brutish womb.
Thus (as it seems) the horror of such deeds,
With like indignity attends my spirit;
What stormy breast this thirst of vengeance breeds,
To plague for that which valour did acquit?
Ah! might Alcmena's son (as son of Iove)
Once force the dreary forts of endless night,
To match stern Dis in the Tartarian grove,
And draw forth foaming Cerberus to light?
Then leading Theseus through the dungeons dark,
A second rape aimed for their ravished Queen,
Durst he (hell's terror) force the fatal Bark,
By squadrons pale (an envied victor) seen▪
And in my rage may I not toss this Round,
Till roaring Earthquakes all the world affright,
Heaven stained, hell cleared, earth torn, all to confound
Enlightening darkness, or else darkening light?
What, though I from terrestrial Regions swerve,
Whom in this state (it may be) some mistake?
May not the voice of Alexander serve
To make th'earth tremble, and the depths to shake?
Or, strait returned, shall I my fortune trust,
And th'Earth dispeople, slaughtering scattered hosts;
Then Pluto plague, all charged with blood and dust,
When men are killed to be a King of Ghosts?
O how I burst to think how some above,
Who for their glory did my steps attend,
My offsprings title proudly do disprove,
And to my Chair by violence ascend:
Ingratitude doth grieve a generous spirit,
Would God therefore that with a body stored,
I might return these Traitors to acquit,
My back with Arms, my hand charged with a sword:
As when I entered in a populous Town,
To war alone with thousands in my wrath,
Whilst (prising honour dearer than my Crown)
Each of my blows gave wounds, each wound gave death:
Then thundering vengeance on rebellious bands,
I would make them redeem my grace with groans,
Where now my Ghost (impaled with horror) stands,
Less graced than those whom I commanded once;
And yet the glory by those Captains had,
Whom first my Ensigns did acquaint with fame,
Doth make my soul (whilst hating them) more sad,
Then all the sufferings that the hells can claim.
O now I see what all my Minions blinds,
To grace my funerals that they take no pain!
My state (betraying me) distracts their minds,
Who have forgot all love, save love to reign;
But Ptolemy doth yet by time intent
To Alexandria to transport me once,
Not moved by love, no, for another end,
In hope my Fortune will attend my bones.
And must I then so great a trouble have
(To whom the Earth did all belong before)
For some few foots of Earth to be a grave,
Which mean men get, and great men get no more.
Though many thousand at my sign did bow,
Is this the end of all my Conquests then
To be thus barred that little circuit now,
A benefit even common unto men▪
But of those kingdoms which were thrall to me,
Lest that a little part my body bound,
Th'earth arched with heaven my fatal bed should be,
Still unconfined, and even when dead, yet crowned.
O blind ambition! great minds viperous brood,
The scourge of mankind, and the foe to rest,
Thou guilty art of many millions blood,
And whilst I reigned, didst reign within my breast;
This to my soul but small contentment brings,
That I some Cities reared, and others razed:
And made Kings captives; captives to be Kings,
Then whilst the wondering world did stand amazed.
All that doth now but torture after death,
Which raised my Fame on pillars more than rare;
O costly conquest of a little breath,
Whose flattering sounds both go and come with th'air!
Can I be he who thought it a disgrace
To be but weighed with other mortals even,
Who would be held of an immortal race,
The offspring of great Iove, the heir of heaven?
By many means I all men's minds did move,
For Altars (as a God) with offerings stored,
Till of his glory Iove did jealous prove:
All kings should reverenced be, but not adored.
Ah! whilst (transported with a prosperous state)
I toiled to raise my Throne above the Stars,
The thunderer strait (who still doth pride abate)
Did wound my fame with most infamous wars.
Made I not grave Calisthenes to smart,
Who did disdain a mortal to adore,
(What known unknowing) bent by foolish art,
Though but a man to be imagined more?
All feared the danger of my roaring wrath,
(Like Lions when asleep) which none durst wake;
My fury was the Messenger of death,
Which when inflamed, made flaming squadrons quake:
Ambition did so far my thoughts engage,
That I could not abide my Father's praise,
But (though my friend) killed Clitus in a rage,
Who Philips Fami durst in my presence raise.
Thus though that I mine Enemies did abate,
I made my greatest friends become my foes,
Who did my insolence (as barbarous hate)
And for the like afraid wailed others woes.
Those tyrannies which thousands chanced to see
As inhuman a multitude admired:
And my familiars strangers grown with me,
As from a Tyrant for distrust retired:
Yea, there were many too who did conspire
By base ambushments to have snared my life,
Of all my labours, lo, this was the hire!
Those must have store of toils who toil for st●●●e▪
And I remember that amidst my joys,
(Even whilst the chase of Armies was my sport)
There wanted not a number of annoys
To counter-poise my pleasures in some sort.
Of those on th'earth most happy that remain,
(As aged Experience constantly records)
The pleasures far exceeded are by pain:
Life greater grief than comfort still affords.
What grief, no, rather rage did feaze my soul.
Whilst big with hopes a battle bend to prove!
That sudden sickness did my course control,
Which (cold when kind) embracing floods did move.
From the Physician then (though deemed for ill)
I took his potion, gave him scandalous lines;
Then whilst he red did drink, yet eyed him still,
And by accusing looks sought guilty signs;
Not that suspicious fears could make me sad,
This was the ground whence did proceed my pain,
Lest death my victory prevented had:
For, I was sure still where I fought to gain,
But when that I extended had my state
From learned Athens to the barbarous I●des,
Still my tumultuous troops my pride did hate,
As monstrous mutinies unmasked their minds.
I (so my name more wonderful to make)
Of Hercules, and Bacchus past the bounds,
And (whilst that Memnon's Sunne-burnt bands did quake)
Did write my worth in many a Monarch's wounds.
Kings were my Subjects, and my servants Kings,
Yet my contentment further did require,
For, I imagined still more mighty things,
And to a greater greatness did aspire.
The spacious career of the speedy Sun,
(All quickly thralled) like lightning I o're-ran:
Yet wept, and wished more worlds t'have been won,
As this had wanted room to ease one man,
No wonder I was thought a God by some,
Since all my aims (though high as heaven) prevailed,
And what man (save myself) did still overcome?
Of all my fancies, never project failed.
This made me thought immortalized to be,
Which in all mind's amazement yet contracts:
I led blind Fortune, and she courted me,
As glad to grace the greatness of my acts.
Yet I have found it a more easy thing,
To conquer all whereon the Sun ere shined,
Then mine own self, and (of my passions King)
To calm the tumults of a stormy mind.
What comfort justly could my soul receive
Of all my Conquests past, if that even then
Whilst I triumphed (to wrath and wine a slave)
I scaped not scandal more than other men;
Ah! (seizing without right on every state)
I but myself too great a Monarch made,
Since all men gaped to get the golden bait
Which by my death seemed easy to be had;
Whilst from humanity too much divorced,
My deeds all hearts with fear, and horror filled,
I who by foes could never have been forced,
By friends did fall, yet not over-comed, but killed.
But now I see the troublous time draws near,
When they shall keep my obsequies with blood:
No wonder too, though such a warrior's beer,
At last doth swim amidst a scarlet flood:
For, as my life did breed huge broils o'er all,
My death must be the cause of monstrous cumbers,
And it doth best become a strong man's fall,
To be renowned by ruining of numbers.
The Snake-tressed Sisters now shall never need
Their fatal firebrands, loathsome Pluto's pests,
Nor inspirations strange whose rage doth breed
A thirst of murder in transported breasts.
Ambition's flames may from my ashes shine
To burn my Minions minds with high desires,
Each of their spirits that hath a spark of mine,
To ruin all the world, may furnish fires.
The Beauties of the Earth shall all look red,
Whilst my Lieutenants through that pride of theirs,
With Arms unkind huge streams of blood do shed,
By murdering of my heirs, to be my heirs.
Is this that Greatness which I did design,
By being eminent, to be o'erthrown,
To ruin first myself, than root out mine;
As conquering others, but to lose mine own?
O happy I, more happy far my race!
If pleased with that which was our ancient rent,
I managed had th' Aemaethian power in peace,
Which was made lawful by a long descent:
Then far sequestered from Bellona's rage,
I had the true delights of Nature tried,
And aged with honour, honoured in my age,
Had left my Son secure before I died;
And he inheriting a quiet state
(Which then because less great had been more sure)
Had (free from envy) not been harmed by hate,
Which of most States the ruin doth procure;
But since they will en-earth my earthly part.
Which now no badge of majesty retains,
To roaring Phlegeton I must departed
far from the lightsome bounds of th'airy plaines
And must I there who did the world surmount
(Arrested by the Monarch of the Ghosts)
To Rhadamanthus render an account
Of all the deeds done by my ravenous hosts▪
There whilst with Minos Aeacus sits down,
A rigorous judge in hell's most horrid Court,
With me who pass his Nephew in renown,
(Though of his race) he no way will comport.
O what pale Ghosts are here together brought,
Which were of bodies spoiled by my Decree!
And first Parmenio without whom I nought
But who did many great things without me:
At the tribunal of Tartarian powers,
He aggravates ingratitude too great,
And (whilst the raging Tyrant foaming lours)
All whom I wronged, for vengeance do entreat:
Yet guilty thoughts torment me most of all,
No spirit can be by plaguing furies pined,
(Though charged without with snakes, within with gall)
As by the stings of a remording mind.
If it be true that drowsy Lethe's streams
In dark oblivion drown all things at last,
There, let me bury far from Phoebus' beams,
The loathed remembrance of my labours past.
WHat strange adventures now
Distract distressed minds
With such most monstrous forms?
When silence doth allow
The peace that Nature finds,
And that tumultuous winds
Do not disturb with storms
An universal rest:
When Morpheus hath repressed
Th'impetuous waves of cares,
And with a soft sleep binds,
Those Tyrants of the breast,
Which would spread forth most dangerous snares
To sink affliction in despairs:
Huge horrors than arise
The Elements to mar,
With most disastrous signs:
Armed Squadrons in the skies,
With lances thrown from far,
Do make a monstrous war,
Whilst fury nought confines:
The Dragon's vomit fire,
And make the Stars retire
Cut of their Orbs for fear,
To satisfy their ire,
Which heavens high buildings not forbear,
But seem the Crystal Towers to tear;
Amidst the air, fierce blasts
Do boast with blustering sounds,
To crush this mighty frame,
Which (whilst the tempest lasts)
Doth rend the stately rounds,
To signify what wounds
To all her offsprings shame,
Shall burst th'earth's veins with blood,
And this all-circling flood,
(As it the heavens would drown)
Doth pass the bounding bounds,
And all the scaly brood,
Rear roaring Neptune's foamy Crown,
Whilst th'earth for fear seems to sink down,
Those whom it hide with horror!
Their ashy lodgings leave,
To re-enjoy the light,
Or else some Panic terror
Our judgement doth bereave,
Whilst first we misconceive,
And so prejudge the sight;
Or, in the body's stead,
The genius of the dead
Turns back from Styx again,
Which Dis will not receive,
Till it a time engendering dread,
Plague (whilst it doth on th'earth remain)
All else with fear, itself with pain.
These fearful signs fore-show
(All nations to appall)
What plagues are to succeed.
Since death hath laid him low,
Who first had made us thrall,
We heard that strait his fall
Our liberty would breed;
But this proves no relief:
For, many (O what grief!)
The place of one supply;
And we must suffer all;
Thus was our comfort brief:
O! rarely do usurpers dye,
But others will their fortune try.
WHat eye (not big with tears) can view this host,
Which hath in one (ah, as the end doth prove)
A King, a Captain, and a brother, lost,
Crowned, followed, tried, by right, for worth, in love?
I think amongst us all, there is not one,
Whom diverse favours do not justly bind
To please that Hero's Ghost (though from us gone)
With all the offerings of a thankful mind.
Ah, had the fates been subject to my will,
So great a loss should not have crossed our life;
But we had kept great Alexander still,
And he those kingdoms which procure this strife.
Yet heaven's decrees can never be recalled,
And thoughts of harm past help, breed double pain,
Though once to grief a space, by passions thralled,
The living must embrace the world again.
As one whose interest in that Prince was chief,
A sorrow singular my soul affects,
But I will not defraud the general grief,
To wail apart particular respects.
Though all the air still Ecchoes plaintive sounds
Of widowed hopes now wedded to despairs,
Yet time must cicatrise our inward wounds,
And to the public good draw private cares.
Let us give physic to the sickened state,
Which at this present in great danger stands,
Whilst grudging Subjests that our greatness hate,
By blood would venge their violated lands.
Those who by force are thralled, to be made free,
Precipitate themselves in dangers still,
And this of Nature seems a rule to be:
What Realm not scorns to serve a strangers will?
From forced obedience, nought but hate proceeds;
The more we have subdued, the more our foes:
A sovereign head this States huge body needs,
That might make us securely to repose:
And who more meet to have that great man's place,
Of those whose states he took who gained the hearts,
Then one descended from that Regal race,
Whose birth both worth and right to reign imparts?
If heavens every Roxane with a Son,
That longed-for birth a lawful Sovereign brings,
And ●ill that course of doubtful hopes be run,
Let some be named who manage may all things.
The Macedonians (swollen with wrath) would scorn,
That to their King a stranger should succeed:
Can men obey a Babe, a Babe not borne?
What fancies strange would this confusion breed?
This could not well become our grave foresight,
A doubtful birth so long t'●●tend in vain,
Which may abortive be, and brought to light,
(Through nature's error) made not apt to reign.
But if affection carry us so far,
That of that race we must be ruled by some,
Though neither trained by time in peace, nor war,
As those who must indeed by kind overcome:
Then have we Hercules the eldest son,
To our great Prince by fair Bar●ines borne,
Who fourteen years of age, hath now begun
His Princely birth by virtue to adorn.
To think of this, it makes my soul ashamed,
That we should serve a base Barbarians brood,
What▪ should we bear the yoke that have framed?
To buy disgrace, have we bestowed our blood?
Our ancestors whose glory we obscured,
Would get some vantage of their offspring thus:
That people's bondage they would have procured,
And have we warred to make them Lords o'er us?
Ah, bury this as a most odious thing,
Which may bring danger, and must breed our scorn.
Though (in effect) descended from our King,
They (come of Captives) are 〈◊〉 basely borne.
O! brave Leonides, I like thy strife,
Who with so few performed so glorious things,
And death preferred before th' infamous life,
Which bondage still from a Barbarian brings.
Those (loath to take a stranger for their Lord)
Did with their blood renown a foreign field,
And shall we honour them whom they abhorred,
And even (though victors) to the vanquished yield?
To what did tend that eminent attempt,
Which makes the Persians yet abase their brow?
But to our country's scorn (in a contempt)
To take by force that which we offer now.
Was this the scope of all our conquests then,
Of abject Captives to be made the prey?
No, let us still command like valorous men,
And rule our Empire by some other way.
May we not use this policy a space,
Till Time afford, or we a course devise?
Least dangerous discord do disturb our peace,
Still when we would of serious things advice;
With Majesty let us assembled be,
A sacred Senate with a chair of state,
That of the Sovereign power all signs may see,
Then whilst we compass that respected seat:
There, those who were in credit with the King,
Whose merits in men's minds have reverence bred,
Shall (weighed by judgement) balance every thing:
How kingdoms should be ruled, how armies led;
And what the greatest part hath once approved,
To that the rest will willingly incline;
By such a harmony the Army moved,
Will execute what ever we design.
This concord would prove happy for us all,
Which each man's state free from all danger renders:
And by this means our Macedon shall
In place of one, have many Alexanders.
Though silence (I confess) becomes me best,
Who, am a stranger, and the less believed,
Yet of your toils since I a partner rest,
I must unfold my mind, a mind much grieved:
And think you that a Babe repairs our loss?
How can good wits so grossly be beguiled?
This in all Countries hath been thought a cross:
Woe to that soil whose Sovereign is a child.
Nor would these great men (as is thought) agree,
They be too many bodies for one mind:
Ah (pardon Ptolemy) it cannot be,
This union would disjoin us all I find:
Thus would the Army from good order swerve,
If many might forgive, all would offend,
As thinking well though they did death deserve:
No man so bad, but some will him befriend.
And when so many Kings were in one Court,
One Court would then have many humours too,
Which fostering factions for each light report,
Would make them jar as neighbouring Princes do;
No, let this strange design be quite suppressed,
Whilst equal all, all would unequal be,
So that their minds (by jealousy possessed)
From pale suspicion never could be free.
But ah! what needs contention at this time,
To cloud a matter that was made so clear:
And do you now account it not a crime,
To damn his will, who once was held so dear?
When that great Monarch marched to match with death,
Whilst all his Captains were assembled there,
And did demand (whilst he disposed of breath)
Whom he himself adopted for his heir:
Then (that none might such doubtful questions breed)
As loving valour more than his own race:
He (that a brave man, brave men might succeed)
Said: let the worthiest have the worthiest place.
Nor did he speak this in a secret part,
With double words which might more doubt have moved,
As breathing thoughts in each ambitious heart,
To have his worth in Vulcan's furnace proved:
For▪ whilst ye hedged the fatal bed about,
(With an unpartial care distracted long)
Then he amongst you all did choose one out,
Who for so great a charge did seem most strong.
He to Perdiccas did present the Ring
That used to seal the secrets of the State,
By which it seemed that he designed him King,
And so would seize him of the regal seat.
Thus made this worthy man a worthy choice,
That further strife might not the state deform,
And all the world now justly may rejoice,
That who raised many, did prevent this storm.
For, if he had not thus declared his will,
Ye (Mars his Minions) should have lived at jars:
Whilst emulation amongst equals still,
Had made stern Trumpets thunder civil wars;
What huge disorders threatened to burst forth,
If that our Sovereign had no Prince designed,
Who oft hath been a witness of our worth,
And can weigh virtue in a virtuous mind?
I see consenting signs applaud my speech:
Rise, do, Perdiccas, that which they decree,
Whilst modesty doth Majesty impeach,
Though thou cravest not this Crown, this Crown craves thee.
I wonder not though thus Perdiccas shrink,
To take this place, still bragged with new alarms:
The Sun must make nights ugly bird to wink:
This Sceptre weighs, too much for so weak arms.
The Gods will never grant, nor men agree,
That such a one should tyrannize o'er us:
Though vulgar minds might yield his thralls to be,
His betters scorn to bow so basely thus.
He would have us Roxanes birth t'attend,
Which though it come to pass as some expect,
He can exchange, or cause be brought to end,
As bend to like all means, when one effect.
Thus would he temporize to our great scorn,
Till time might help to further his designs:
No Kings Perdiccas likes, but babes unborn;
He labours well in undiscovered Mynes.
I need not now insist to tell at large,
What brave men are amidst this martial band,
Who better do deserve so great a charge,
Both for their skill, and courage to command;
Yet are the best not worthy to succeed,
That man admired who never can be matched,
The thought of whom must make our minds to bleed,
Whose adversaries this advantage watched.
But, if that great man did consent so soon,
That our obedience should be thus abused,
Of all that ever yet he would have done,
I think this only aught to be refused.
That valorous band, whose worth the world oft proved,
Then, whilst their glory shined through silver shields:
By all that Monarch's deeds when no way moved,
(As conquered) would have left the conquered fields.
And when despising such a Prince's throne,
To whom his ancestors their Sceptre brought.
What reverence would they bear to such a one,
Who all this time was as their equal thought?
To those who o'er their equals raise their state,
Advancement envy breeds, and envy hate;
If such with all would rest familiar still,
This in contempt the Sovereign title brings:
And if they second not their Subjects will,
Men cannot bear with them, as with borne Kings.
Our lofty bands some lofty mind must tame,
Whose Princely birth doth procreate regard;
Whose Country may confound each slanderous claim,
As one with whom none else can be compared.
Lo, Alexander's brother, Philip's son,
Who always was a partner of our pain:
Can there be any else below the Sun,
O'er Macedonians who deserves to reign?
And I must wonder what so strange offence
Hath forfeited his title, maymed his right?
That any now with a disguised pretence
Dare wrong him thus, even in his people's sight.
None needs to wonder much, though we neglect
One whose election might procure our shame:
His mother's baseness, justice might object,
Whom bastardy secludes from such a claim.
But yet had Nature purged the spot she made,
We with his birth the better might comport,
If (like his Sire, fierce squadrons fit to lead)
His parts were such as might the State import;
He falsifies his race, of wit so weak,
That all his inward wants are soon perceived,
All of his judgement in derision speak,
By which great things can hardly be conceived:
And though his body might from pains be spared,
Whose constitution is not very strong;
But with infirmities so far impaired,
That it alive cannot continue long;
Yet since in State he never hath been schooled,
His ignorance would rack him still with fears:
Whilst he who ruled, still needing to be ruled,
Spoke but w●th others tongues, heard with their ears.
"A K ng inconstant, great conusion makes,
Wh●m ●ll mistrust, and most amidst a Camp:
Whilst (soft like wax) he each impression takes,
A little labour changing still the stamp;
Ah, should our lives depend upon his breath,
Who of himself cannot discern a crime:
But for each rash report damns men to death,
Then yields a fruitless pity out of time.
Thus whilst some always must his judgement sway,
Which still doth harbour in another's head,
Of Sycophants this Prince may be the prey,
Who where they list him (as quite blind) will lead.
And since but base, that they may be the best,
Such still will toil, that we may be o'erthrown:
And to the credulous King may means suggest,
To taint our fame, lest it obscure their own.
What grief were this to us, whilst such as those
Might make their vantage of th' all-pow'rfull breath?
And that our actions balanced by our foes,
Were guerdoned with disdain, or else with death?
Since private hopes your judgements do bewitch,
I'll leave this counsel where no good can please:
Come follow me all those who would be rich:
Few have regard (poor soldiers) to your ease.
That shall prove best which first I went about,
Though some would wrest my words from what I thought:
Lo, Meleager's spite doth now burst out,
Like flaming fires which burn themselves to nought.
Thus, naughty minds which never dream but ill,
Do construe all things to a crooked sense:
What I proposed, reposing on your will,
He would interpret for a great offence.
And (thus puffed up) this parting hence of his,
To many former faults hath added one:
By his seditious words incensed ere this,
The soldiers are to sack the treasure gone.
With one consent then let us all conclude,
That Alexander's race (when borne) must reign:
So shall we establish still that sacred blood,
Which raised our state, and may it best maintain.
And let us now (before we part) appoint
Who shall command till that the babe be borne:
And circumspectly ponder every point,
That success so our Council may adorn.
I hear a tumult raised amongst the Tents,
And Arideus is proclaimed King:
To which the multitude (soon changed) consents,
As bend for all whose course a change may bring,
The footmen are to indignation moved,
In this assembly that they want a seat,
Where our proceed they might have approved,
As knowing all that did concern the state.
They soon forget their Prince (expecting spoils)
That dare revolt from what we all advised:
Thus too much liberty breeds many broils,
And makes the giver still to be despised.
The want of discipline all things confounds.
Their deeds want order, and their pride all bounds.
And dare they then against that fortress rise,
Where Alexander's Ensigns are displayed?
Or violate the walls where as he lies?
May not his shadow make them all afraid?
What? how comes this? and dare they then presume,
To brag their Captains, and abuse their Arms?
Arms▪ arms, just wrath these Rebels must consume,
Our countenance will them curb, sound, sound th'alarms.
Lo, here a great and more than sudden change!
All men for mirth were like to have gone mad,
So that of late it would have been thought strange,
In all this City to have seen one sad.
Each wall resounded some melodious song,
To ravish curious ears with rare delight;
Strange Tapestries were stretched the streets along,
And stately objects made to charm the sight;
As if our King his conquests so would crown,
Of all the world a Parliament to hold,
He (placed with pomp in this imperial town)
Did of magnificence the height unfold.
Here glory (in her richest robes arrayed)
Should have shown all that Greatness could expect.
Yet were our hopes even at the height betrayed:
To death those Trophies fortune did erect.
A tragic end this triumph quite confounds,
All our applauses vanish in complaints,
Our Music marred by melancholy sounds,
Lo, by the Cypress pressed, the laurel faints.
To funeral shrieks, our shouts of joy we turn,
(With gorgeous garments, Grief cannot comport,)
We that so much rejoiced, far more must mourn,
Days spent with woe are long, with pleasure short.
This breeds most anguish, when that one compares
The present time with others that are past,
Whilst wont hopes are balanced with despairs,
Which all heroic minds with woe do waste.
Betwixt these two, what difference find we forth,
The rising Sun, and it that is declined?
Where is that Zodiac (lodging of all worth)
Whence valours beams (still lightning courage) shined?
Now desolation spreads itself o'er all:
A solitary silence, grief allows,
Ah, (as quite crush'd by that great Monarches fall)
How many malcontents cast down their brows?
A strange suspicion hath possessed the streets,
Whilst every man his neighbour's fall conspires,
Each one who unawares another meets,
(As fearing treason) with distrust retires.
Of rumours strange each ear is greedy grown,
Which (though but doubtful) move the mind to rue,
And (doting still on that which is their own)
What they conjecture, all affirm for true.
With eyes that flame for rage, our deeds heaven views,
And (moved for us) a high disdain doth bear;
Lo, all men's heads are heavy for ill news,
And though we know not what, yet still we fear:
For, since the widowed world doth want a head,
Each member now doth labour to be chief,
Which (whilst they diverse ways the body lead)
May give beginning to some endless grief;
Some (like the fool who thunder feigned like Iove)
Would make their fame like Alexander's sound,
And (all brought low) to be themselves above,
Would order all, or else would all confound;
Then some vain wits which only would seem wise,
(By flattering mirrors of their shape deceived)
Do every thing that is not theirs despise,
And perish would, ere them another saved.
A number too whom all things do content,
What each one thinks, are still resolved to do:
They make a choice, then do the choice repent,
And strait repent of that repentance too.
The public good is spoiled by private hope,
Whilst many thus high dignities do claim;
This discord gives to rash ambition scope:
For, all would fish within a troubled stream.
See how dissension hath dissolved so soon,
All kind of order, and confusion brought:
Our Council quite this variance hath undone,
Whilst one would have done all, all have done nought▪
Although Perdiccas (as it would have seemed)
Whilst for his master's race he only stood,
Sought (by that means more virtuous to be deemed)
His Prince's honour, and his Country's good;
Yet his companions having in contempt,
He did by subtle means himself advance:
And so to shadow his disguised attempt,
Aimed at the royal place as but by chance;
He toils that the unborn none should beguile,
As by the heavens for th' Orphans good reserved:
Yet wanting of a King nought but the style,
He would not want that when th' occasion served.
And Meleager partially disposed,
To hinder others, doth pretend a love
To bastard Philip, by effect disclosed,
Since he but seeks Perdiccas to disprove;
And if that foe, whom he doth fear, but fail,
He cares not much what Emperor they proclaim:
And his design with many may prevail:
A cloak of right, apparels any claim;
They whose descent some title doth disclose
(As by their birth made capable to reign:)
Must be preferred by reason unto those,
Who of all right without the bounds remain.
The furious footmen (insolently stout)
A title to maintain, did brave our band,
And (indignation thundering threatenings out)
Would with our blood have bathed this barbarous land.
O! what indignity would this have been,
Whilst those whom we subdued with such great toils,
Had in this sort their victors vanquished seen,
So of their spoilers purchasing the spoils▪
Thus darkening all that we had done before,
(Our swords first stained by ignominious wounds)
We, of our conquests could have kept no more,
But burials base (if those) in th' enemy's bounds.
O! what excellency consists in th' one,
(Though oft not marked till missed) clear at this hour:
Some with a word, or look, do more alone,
Then thousands joined with policy and power.
When squadrons armed with Ensigns full displayed,
As of their Prince all due regard quite lost,
His generous course would (obstinate) have stayed,
By them abandoned, when endangered most;
Then of disorder yielding bitter fruits,
They boldly marched with brags before his Tent,
And charged their Sovereign with unlawful suits,
To innovations violently bend;
Of duty then, they by no band detained,
First grudged, grew factious next, last rebels plain,
Like waters for a time (by Art restraied)
Their bounds once passed, which do all bounds disdain:
But from that pattern of accomplished worth,
Whom imitate none may, all must admire,
Through just disdain when fury spark'led forth,
These troops (astonished) trembling did retire;
His stately countenance calmed tumultuous sounds,
And lightened Majesty through clouds of wrath,
That (even as if his words had given them wounds)
They fell, afraid of him, though not of death:
Those lofty bands which were of late so proud,
That they disdained to wait their Emperor's will:
Then (by his look all at an instant bowed)
Did beg but leave that they might serve him still;
And yet what wonder though he gained all hearts;
Which to his presence happened to repair,
With that perfection of all virtuous parts,
As large in him, as in all others rare?
Lo, when we meet to treat, by peace or wars,
How all our conquests may be best secured,
The Soldiers do burst out in public jars,
Even by their Captains no respect procured.
And who can call that valorous Prince to mind,
That unto virtue any reverence bears,
But he must be constrained, or prove unkind,
To offer up a tribute of some tears?
His death doth make my soul faint sorrows prey,
Though many thought that I for it had longed;
For, if by any whom he should obey,
One can be wronged, than I indeed was wronged.
Though fame abroad by diverse tongues did bring,
To what huge danger you were once exposed;
It did not paint out each particular thing,
Which by yourself I long to hear disclosed.
When wise Calisthenes for no request,
With superstitious customs could comport,
But with frank words all flattery did detest,
He was abused, and in a barbarous sort:
So plaguing him (no doubt) the King did ill,
Yet to prosperity we must impute
Those fatal faults which follow fortune still,
As of great minds a kind of bastard fruit;
We should in Kings, as loath their state to touch,
Speak sparingly of vice, praise virtue much.
But I whose soul that wise man dearly loved,
Whilst his perfections spying thus injured,
(To tender passions by compassion moved)
Would his relief have willingly procured.
But when my credit failed, all hope quite past,
That I could purchase grace in any sort:
I desp'rate physic did afford at last,
That if his life was ill, it might be short.
The King ●nrag'd, that I had thus presumed
To limit his revenge by giving death,
That by a Lion I should be consumed,
Did throw my doom out of the depths of wrath;
But when with rolling eyes the Lion roared,
He, by my strength (as strengthless) was overthrown,
Which to the King whose did then remord,
My constancy and courage both made known,
So that incontinent I was set free,
By this rare proof esteemed amongst the strong,
And with a mind from inward rancour free,
As he his wrath, so I forgot the wrong:
For, whilst alone he through a Forest ranged;
A prey exposed, yet did no danger dream,
Some at that time had former wrongs revenged,
If but for mischief bent to gain a names;
Yet that which others did attempt in vain,
And (tyred by travel) of a surfeit died,
I did perform, and brought him back again,
As swiftly running as his horse could ride;
And of that deed my spirit rests well apaid:
For, since that time my Sovereign held me dear,
Which afterwards he to the world bewrayed,
Whilst by this means his favour did appear.
When unawares my brow he chanced to wound,
To stay my blood which strived to dye his Lance,
He with his Diadem my Temples crowned,
A happy sign though coming but by chance;
And O! who knows but once before I die,
Some good event may second the presage?
What hinders us but we should fortune try,
And for a Crown our travels strait engage?
Those bended minds which aim at Greatness still,
(Grown popular, of purpose to be praised:)
Do wind themselves every man's good will,
And would seem humble, that they may be raised.
What counterfeited friends seal trustless bands,
Whilst in the general cause that wit pretends,
Though never joining hearts, all join their hands▪
And work one way, yet work for diverse ends?
Yea, those whose minds move in the sphere of State,
Have purchased powers, as purposed for the fields,
With jealous minds their rivals to abate,
Whilst (equals all) none to another yields;
Yet with suspended thoughts they doubtful stand,
And their designs to venture do forbear,
Lest all the rest joined by a general band,
Do him o'erthrow, who first gives cause of fear;
But he may speed who for a Crown doth thirst,
And (free from fear) with courage doth advance:
Some to be second, doubting to be first,
Will make their course depend upon his chance;
And by a battle if that one prevail,
There will rich hopes at easy rates be sold,
Whilst those seek help, whose Fortune then doth fail,
As first by hope, last by despair made bold;
All this to me great cause of fear affords,
Lest that we two protract the time too long;
And wounded be before we draw our swords:
All at such times must do, or suffer wrong.
No chance of late hath brought me so to bow,
But I have thrown some thoughts at those high hopes:
Yet in my mind that man do most allow
Who doth with judgement mother are fancies scopes:
Those Provinces which are to us assigned,
As calm in mind, we manage must a space:
Till all attempt that which they have designed,
By interchanging damage and disgrace:
Then living but like those whose force is small,
From which the world no great thing can expect:
We shall profess a favour to them all,
As who nought else, save public peace affect;
Yet then, our thoughts shall not have leave to sleep,
But subtle plots must circumspectly frame,
Those whom we fear at variance still to keep,
So always strengthening us, and weakening them;
If wrongs provoke, or when occasion claims,
Like cunning wrestlers at th'olympic games,
Who exercise themselves to be more strong;
And when themselves have thus prepared the way,
Whilst that their pomp doth bear a lower sail.
(For at the last their force must much decay,
Since all must always lose, though one prevail)
Then prompt to tempt that which we now contrive,
(By ruining the remnant that remains)
We may possess the state for which they strive;
Thus they the toils, and we shall get the gains.
O Happy was that guiltless age,
When a● Astraea lived below:
And that Bellona's barbarous rage
Did not all order choir o'erthrow
Then whilst all did themselves content
With that thing which they did possess,
And gloried in a little rent,
As wanting means to make excess;
Those could no kind of want bemoan,
For, craving nought, they had all things:
And since none sought the regal Throne,
Whilst none were Subjects, all were Kings:
O! to true bliss their course was set,
Who got to live, not lived to get.
Then innocency naked lived,
And had no need, nor thought of Arms,
Whilst spiteful spirits no means contrived,
To plague the simple sort with harms;
Then snaring laws did not extend
The bounds of Reason as they do,
Strife oft begun where it should end,
One doubt but cleared to foster two:
By conscience than all order stood,
By which dark things were soon discerned,
Whilst all behoved there to be good,
Where as no evil was to be learned:
And how could any than prove naught,
Whilst by example virtue taught?
Then mortals minds all strong and pure,
Free from corruption lasted long,
(By innocency kept secure)
When none did know how to do wrong;
Then stinged with no suspicious thought,
Men mischief did from none expect:
For, what in them could not be wrought,
In others they would not suspect;
And though none did stern laws impart,
That might to virtue men compel,
Each one by habit in his heart,
Had graved a law of doing well:
And all did wickedness forbear
Of their freewill, and not for fear.
The first who spoiled the public rest,
And did disturb this quiet state,
Was Avarice, the greatest pest
Which doth of darkness fill the seat:
A Monster very hard to daunt,
Lean, as dried up with inward care,
(Though full of wealth) for fear of want,
Still at the borders of despair;
Scarce taking food for Nature's ease,
Nor for the cold sufficient clothing,
She whom her own could never please,
Thinks all have much, and she hath nothing:
This daughter of stern Pluto, still
Her father's dungeon strives to fill.
That Monster-tamer most renowned,
The great Alcides, Thebes glory,
Who (for twelve several labours crowned)
Was famous made by many a story,
As one who all his time had toiled
To purge the world of such like pests,
Who robbers robbed, and spoilers spoilt,
Still humbling haughty Tyrant's crests,
He by this Monster once o'erthrown,
Did pass in Spain o'er lands and floods,
And there took more than was his own,
What right had he to Gerion's goods▪
Thus Avarice the world deceives,
And makes the greatest Conquerors slaves.
Ah! when to plague the world with grief,
This poor-rich Monster once was borne:
Then weakness could find no relief,
And subtlety did conscience scorn:
Yet some who laboured to recall
That bliss which guilded the first age,
Did punishment prepare for all,
Who did their thoughts to vice engage;
And yet the more they laws did bring,
That to be good might men constrain,
The more they sought to do the thing
From which the laws did them restrain:
So that by custom altered quite,
The world in ill doth most delight.
NOw Fortune smiles upon my rising State,
And seems to promise more than I require;
Lo, by degrees my glory doth grow great,
And by their death who did my death conspire.
Proud Meleager who disdained to bow,
And my advancement always did mislike,
Hath with his blood sealed my assurance now,
To fright all those who would attempt the like.
Yet of his fall the form my mind appalls,
Even at Jove's Altar, and without regard;
We were too rash to violate those walls
Which the most impious could not but have spared.
Lascivious Ajax by Minerva's spite,
Erst for profaning such a sacred place,
On the Capharian Rocks did lose the light,
And all his Navy too for one's disgrace.
We should not irritate celestial powers;
And, all beginnings are considered most:
Such horror breeds this odious act of ours,
That we (I fear) opinions power have lost.
Let others seek to keep such points as those,
I am not scrupulous, for, I protest,
o'er all, and by all means I'll kill my foes,
And then thereafter argue of the rest.
They wrong the Gods who think their Church should be
A refuge free for Malefactors still:
For, with their justice this cannot agree:
Who guard ill doers, guilty are of ill.
Was he not stained with many a monstrous crime,
And Salamander-like amidst the fire
(Contentiously disposed) did spend his time,
And (never pleased) did still some change required?
One humorous head that doth in brawls delight,
May poison thousands with the gall of spite.
As still seditiously affecting strife,
He but abused the credit of his King:
And sent some of his slaves to take my life,
Such bitter envy did his stomach sting.
I saw, how that advanced before our band,
You first did check, then chase the them in the end:
And did with courage resolutely stand,
Our Sovereign's corpse (though dead) bent to defend,
He but a dastard is who basely yields,
And in no conflict: hath his Fortune tried,
We (if in time not venturing to the fields)
Like beasts (all sacrificed) had poorly died:
But when without we masters did remain,
(Lest Babylon had strait been barred from food):
I those proud squadrons quickly did constrain
Even as we pleased, a Treaty to conclude.
Graced whilst my foe (as in some kind compared)
A chief in charge, he many minds did sway,
But (found inferior) when a friend declared,
My credit did increase, and his decay.
Yet in this course all (who observe) do see,
That of the multitude the mind prevailed:
He whom they did elect our Prince must be,
And our design hath altogether failed:
But how comes this? that every Captain gets
A certain Realm committed to his charge,
And with an Army bravely forward sets,
Their bounds allowed to guard, or to enlarge?
I by my means have every great man crowned,
That from my greatness great things might proceed:
Yet by that means to make my power renowned,
The Alexandra an Tragedy.
The doing liked me better than the deed;
I this division chief did procure
To h●ve those great-men from the Court removed,
Where they might be employed, yet I secure,
Their favour purchased, or at least thus proved:
For, him who hath them to such honour brought,
They must be bound to hold in high account,
And their advancement for this end I sought,
That by their means I with more ease might mount.
O! but your fancies may be much deceived,
There is no bond can bind unthankful minds:
I fear the favour that they thus received,
Hath shown them ways to sail by other winds.
So long, of late, as they had need of you,
To seem your friends they (courting kindness) sought:
But since their greatness is well grounded now,
They will disdain what derogates in aught.
To those all great men friends most frankly prove,
Whom (for their pleasure) freely they affect,
And (loathing bands) cannot be forced to love,
As braved by worth, when merits urge respect.
Few mark from whence they rose, when once aloft,
None can endure that they should owe their state:
Deserts grow odious when upbraided oft,
And are depraved, not guerdoned, when too great.
Yea, in my judgement you have greatly erred,
Them to exalt, whose state you would surprise:
Their common custom is who are preferred,
That they may stand, not to let others rise.
To ruin lofty minds when least afraid,
Whilst careless carriage jealous censures sift,
By spies abroad to foes at Court betrayed,
Then by preferment what more subtle drift?
Their hearts with hate are parted all by pride;
One is already to confusion gone:
I long to learn how Leonatus died,
Not that I mind his funerals to bemoan.
That Prince magnanimous whom all admire,
(As was his custom) clemently proclaimed,
That banished Grecians might to Greece retire,
Save only such whom murder had defamed;
But who them banished, grieved for their return,
Did fear what just revenge might have designed,
As knowing well (whilst wrongs make wrath to burn)
How misery doth irritate a mind;
The indignation which they had conceived,
Did breed rebellion bursting out with rage,
The which our King (deep in his mind engraved)
By Athens spoils did purpose to assuage:
But since that death afforded them relief,
Grown bold to prosecute their proud attempt,
Th' Athenians, and th' Aetolians were the chief
Who brought Antipater first in contempt;
And by their power constrained to quite the field,
He (in a little Town enclosed) at last,
Was once reduced in danger near to yield,
And stain the glory of his actions past;
But yet by accident as oft it falls,
(It better is to happy be, then wise)
An unsuspected shaft thrown from the walls,
Their foes chief Captain happened to surprise;
Then did Antipater his courage rear,
Which had almost his staggering hopes betrayed:
Yet still in doubt, and not quite free from fear,
He Leonatus did entreat for aid;
And he who seemed his friendship to affect,
To further him desirous did appear;
But (if he had prevailed) some do suspect,
Antipater had bought his succours dear.
Yet by the end his purpose bend to show
(How ever in effect) he seemed a friend;
But when th' Athenians did his coming know,
They him to fight did all directly tend.
And though their thoughts in depths of doubts did fleet,
They when alone, to match him thought it best,
And whilst they marched th'adventurous troops to meet,
Did hardly welcome the unwelcome Guest:
When both the Armies were to battel1 brought,
And show with what bright flames their breasts were stored,
Brave Leonatus like a Lion fought,
So to prove worthy of his wont Lord:
But whilst he bravely did his charge acquit,
Yet lost himself, who others came to save,
And by their Captains fall discouraged quite,
His scattered troops great damage did receive;
When old Antipater was surely told
Of their mishap, who came for his relief,
He not one sign of sorrow did unfold:
A little gain doth mitigate much grief:
Well did he know that though his foes prevailed,
Yet this great fight enfeebled had their host,
And then he took to him which much availed
Those beaten bands who had their Captain lost;
Yet that in which he did most comfort find,
Was his delivery from a secret foe,
Who did with jealousy torment his mind,
Though outwardly not seeming to be so.
Thus, we who erst below one ensign warred,
Slept in one Tent, and all one Fortune proved,
And (with a friendship then, that never jarred)
Like Pylades, and mad Orestes loved,
Since that we want a Lord, and all are Lords;
We (lo) renounce all kind of kindness now,
And (secret rancour budding in discords)
Do others harms procure, at least allow.
Such is the sacred famine of a Crown,
That it to satisfy, before we fail,
What in our way doth stand, all must go down,
And bands of blood, or friendship not avail-
These glory-ravished souls that would be great,
No means omit, although they be unjust,
None bears with patience partners in the state;
What jealous lover can his Rivals trust?
Well, I perceive Antipater doth tend
With all his power to gain that sacred prey,
Whose means (of late enlarged) to reach his end:
Through every danger may enforce a way;
And Alexander sometimes spoke at large,
Then whilst Antipater with Agis strived,
That he (without the limits of his charge)
More like a King, than a Lieutenant lived.
Antigonus, and Ptolemy in Arms
Are joined in one, our ruin bend to breed;
I fear that friendship procreate our harms,
Unless their spite prevented be with speed.
I'll lodge you how (Eumenes) in my breast,
And let you see the ground of my intent:
Since that we both alike must toil, or rest,
As those whose courses must have one event.
Since at his death, I by our dying Lord,
Was in his place appointed to succeed,
And that my Fortune doth a means afford,
How I may compass that which he decreed.
To leave that place I cannot well agree,
As if I wanted courage to command,
I'll take that which the fates do force on me:
For, if without a Throne I cannot stand.
And those who would perform difficult things,
Must not regard what way, so they prevail:
Oft fraud, than force, greater furtherance brings,
The Fox must help, if that the Lion fail.
So old Antipater to have betrayed,
His daughter I in marriage did require,
That so the time might but have been delayed,
Till that I had accomplished my desire:
For, with the shadow of pretended love,
And hoped affinity which seemed designed,
I from his bounds some bands aimed to remove,
By raising me that he might have declined;
But who can snare a mind all eyed with fears▪
He quickly did mistrust the purposed wrong,
And from my Messengers strait barred his ears,
As did Ulysses from the Sirens song.
Yet this, (if rightly weighed) might much import,
If that you match yourself with such a Mate,
Whose beauty, pleasure, birth might bring support,
And both concur in one to bless your state,
If you to make your high attempts more sure,
By Hymen's means with some yourself ally,
Thus of some Prince you may the power procure,
On whom for help you boldly may rely.
What grief were this if you have hap to gain,
That fair Idea which your fancies frame,
If after you, none of your own remain
To keep your Conquests, and revive your name?
Kings live most safe who of their own have heirs,
Whos's sacred persons none dare seek to wound:
Since, though they die, yet there rest some of theirs,
Who are to venge their death, by Nature bound.
All shall be tried which may enlarge my might;
I mind to match myself with such a one,
Who (if she have my power to prove her right)
May be thought worthy of her Father's Throne.
I with Olympias have devised a thing,
Which may secure her state, and make mine strong,
And (if accomplished) prove a prosperous spring,
From whence may flow great acts ere it be long:
By Cleopatra may a means be catched,
Which to a glorious end our course may bring,
She whom at first her Father Philip matched
With Alexander of Epirus King,
Who having heard great Alexander's fame,
(In emulation of that Monarch's praise)
Went with his troops th'Etrurians bend to tame,
Which enterprise did but abridge his days:
In marriage with that widowed Queen combined,
(If that her Mother thus her course assist)
Whilst I perform that which I have in mind,
Who dare presume my purpose to resist?
For, whilst this friendship doth my name renown,
It may my thoughts from further fear seclude:
Since having thus a title to the Crown,
As one engrafted in the royal blood.
I fear that this your purpose to prevent,
A number now take arms all in one form,
As those whose fears conjecture your intent,
And by the lowering clouds foreknow a storm.
Already many do together run,
Who for our ruin wonderfully thirst.
Where do you think that we should then begin,
And exercise hostility at first?
Though we ourselves in strangers Thrones install,
And (having Asia to subjection brought)
Make Nibus, Indus, and Euphrates thrall,
Yet all those victories would serve for nought,
Whilst Macedon doth continue free,
(A fertile field to bring brave Armies forth)
Which (till first forced) can now not subject be,
And ere they love a King, must prove his worth,
Then unto those who seek a Prince in Arms,
His chiefest Realm the greatest vantage gives,
Where wars (held out) are always with his harms,
Since that his foe still at his charges lives;
And wars protracted with a people's loss,
Do from their Sovereign alienate their love;
They lose their hearts, whom Fortune once doth cross,
And foiled at home, can no where else remove:
Who Macedon hath, still the best,
Which of our state the stately Mistress is:
As which with courage conquered all the rest,
And but depends on Mars, as only his:
If you were Lord of that undaunted soil,
And by Olympias countenanced but a time,
Strait front Antipater all would recoil,
And, bent t'undo him, we would find a crime;
To you who are a Macedonian borne,
(If matched with Cleopatra, great in powers)
The Macedonians gladly would be sworn,
And (if commanding them) than all were yours.
Yet this opinion partly I disprove,
Which would not (as you think) our troubles end:
For, if we do from hence our force remove,
And to th' Aemathian bounds directly tend,
There must at first a doubtful war be proved,
With those brave bands whose valour is well known:
Of whom Craterus dearly is beloved;
Antipater is borne, and bred their own.
And though indeed (as kindly to those parts)
My friendship may affected be by some,
Yet those who start in time by many arts,
May undermyne their minds before we come.
Then whilst we trouble Macedony most,
And leave those Realms unarmed which now are ours,
Strait Ptolemy when strengthened is his host,
May (like a tempest) swallow Asia's powers.
I, for the time most willingly would take
The course which seems to make our state most sure:
A foe is dangerous, when behind ones back,
(Who whilst not looked for) may our harm procure▪
My purpose is, though yet to none made known,
That Egypt first shall burdened be with war:
For, if that Ptolemy were once o'erthrown,
Then that from Greece all hope of help would bar.
Hold still with you those of the sacred blood,
Whom to protect you always must pretend:
The countenance of the great, may do much good,
Whom still (though weak) all glory to attend.
LEt sorrow prove a tyrant to my soul,
Whose rage with reason now no measure keeps;
What of my tears the torrent can control,
Since flowing from afflictions deepest deeps?
How can my breast but burst whilst sobs rebound,
Since on●e the seat of joys now not the same?
May not huge horrors press me to the ground,
In thinking what I was, and what I am?
I was a great man's wife, a greater's mother,
Even she to whom the heavens their best did give;
Yet, I, even I, more plagued than any other,
In dungeons now of desolation live.
My son who was the glory of his time,
Stain of times past, and light of times to come,
(O frail mortality! O slipper ●yme!)
Though having all o're-comed, death did overcome.
And I (dejected wretch) whole dying eyes
(By Nature's custom bound) he should have closed,
Was not to shut his stars with th'yvory skies,
Which curtained once where Majesty reposed:
But ah! his falling in a foreign part
Hath (if aught can enlarge) enlarged my grief,
Or else on him I melted had my heart,
And spent myself to purchase his relief.
Yet though I was not present at his death,
He shall not be defrauded of my tears:
But for his funeral fires my flaming breath
Shall smoak, and to his Ghost a tribute bears.
Ah! to what corner rolls my watery sight,
Where it not finds some matter to bemoan?
O foolish eyes! why lose ye not your light,
Since your delight is lost, your object gone?
Once of all Queens I might the fortune scorn,
To whom just love that great man did engage,
Whose match in worth the world hath never borne,
Nor never shall enrich another age.
When those perfections do transport my mind,
Which admiration doth disclose too late;
I curse the fates that did his judgement bind,
To make me partner of so high a state.
And I repent that to his sight I passed
(Though highly graced) once on a festuall day,
A feast which many a time must make me fast,
And with flow woe that flying mirth defray;
Then if my fortune had not blinded me,
But ah! whose judgement had it not bereaved?
Whilst that great Monarch deigned to like of me,
Of my high flight I had the fall conceived.
Of Asia's Prince whose state did then decline,
He both the wife, and daughters had at will,
Whose beauties lustre might have darkened mine,
Yet free from snares restrained his fancies still.
And when my father chose out from the rest
Those Virgins all whom Fame affirmed for rare;
Though having viewed them all, he loved me best,
Then thought most fortunate, if not most fair;
And wh●n this match his Nobles all dismayed,
That he himself with captives had allied:
That act, he then (as love had dited) said
Took from the vanquished shame, from victor's pride;
Yet me (as Empress) all did entertain,
Though his inferior far in all respects,
Till I from him by death divorced remain,
Whom with his Son now all the world neglects.
Although this will but aggravate my woe,
From whom the fates all comfort now seclude,
Yet I do tender his remembrance so,
That of my Son to hear, it doth me good;
And (daughter) now to double my distress,
Make me at length acquainted with his death,
That sorrow may each part of me possess,
Sad news mine ears, tears eyes, and sighs my breath.
Though grief to me scarce liberty affords,
To press forth passions which oppress my mind,
Yet would affection wrestle out some words
To speak of him who all my thoughts confined;
When he had conquered all that could resist
(A Monarchy not equal with his mind)
Still in his haughty course he did insist,
And searched the Ocean other worlds to find:
But when from it his Navy was redeemed,
He stood in doubt where Trophies next to rear:
The world (though large) for him too little seemed.
His mind could more conceive, than Nature beare▪
Last (ah!) this Emperor purposed was in th'end,
At Babylon his glories hight to show,
Where all the world his coming did attends;
As Iove above, who only reigned below.
When he drew near that then thrice Monarch's seat,
The Astrologians by their skill foretold,
What danger huge was threatened to his state,
The which elsewhere might better be controlled:
But he who was not capable of fear,
And could not muse of misadventures then,
Would triumph there, and the world's Sceptre bear,
Backed with more Kings than other Kings with men.
There (as a God) transporting mortals sights,
(Which mirth with mourning I must still record)
He spent, or lost a time, in all delights,
Which Fortune could (when flattering most) afford,
Till Thessalus, for mischief but reserved,
Once to his house invited him to dine,
Where false Cassander at the Table served,
And as he used with water mixed his wine.
Alas, alas, and so it proved in th'end,
But who could fear a benefited friend?
There were all creatures valued for their worth,
As wholesome, dainty, sumptuous, stately, rare,
Which (forced by Phoebus) th'eastern Realms bring forth,
To live by Sea, by Land, or in the air.
Then when that Reason drunk with pleasure slept,
Which all the senses with abundance stored,
And whilst (save Music) nothing measure kept,
With Ceres, Bacchus only was adored.
Even when the King beginning was to drink,
(As strangely moved) he thund'red forth a groan:
And from the Table suddenly did shrink,
His wont vigour at an instant gone;
Whilst he was softly to a Chamber led,
That death a title to his body claimed,
The sorrowing Soldiers swarmed about his bed;
With looks once fierce, then for compassion framed:
But he whom victory had still arrayed,
With others past this battle bend to even,
Did look like one whom all the world obeyed,
And boasted shortly then to take the heaven:
Whilst (lightning comfort to afflicted bands)
He stretched them forth to kiss in several parts,
By Sword than Sceptre his more honoured hands,
On which, it seemed, they melted all their hearts.
Last, unto them those generous words he told:
Yet to my life my death doth bring no blot:
Thus, to dye young in years, in glory old,
Of all our Family is still the lot;
And since no worlds are resting to overcome,
Life serves for nought; I did an Empire found:
Lived, warred, and reigned (all done) for which I come:
Then go great Ghost (not grieved) below the ground.
No further Weighing what belonged to life,
He with a countenance constant even in death,
(As too victorious in that fatal strife)
The air perfuming, spent th'imperious breath.
But through the Camp when that it once was known,
That from the world that world of worth was gone,
What anguish was, it cannot well be shown,
I had my part, yet had not all alone.
O! let that day which makes my days all night,
Be registered amongst the dismal days,
Whose melancholy, and portentous light
With some disaster still the world dismays.
And Babylon, cursed be thy fatal towers,
Once seat of Monarches, Mistress of the earth,
But from henceforth (a slave to foreign powers)
Still burdened be thy bounds with blood and dearth▪
You need not use those execrations more,
Though Babylon of breath that Prince deprived,
Yet (as an Oracle had told before)
In Macedon was his death contrived;
Antipater had heard, how diverse times
The King against him had been moved to wrath,
And damned (as guilty of opprobrious crimes)
His son in law Lincestes unto death.
Then he was told, the King did strictly try
How his Lieutenants had their places used,
Still making all as traitors strait to dye,
Who had the same in any sort abused;
Thus, he who well did know his own misdeeds,
Had learned by others what he might expect,
As whose ambitious breast in pride exceeds,
And always did a Sovereignty affect:
But when Craterus was to have his place,
And he required the Army to attend,
He thought that thus Time would some means embrace,
To plague his pride with a deserved end;
Then to prevent that which I think was still
More feared by him, than purposed by the King,
With guilty thoughts oft exercised in ill,
He sought what might to death his Sovereign bring;
And this the traitor compassed at the last,
As I (alas!) have learned (although too late)
When to my son, his son Cassander past,
As to congratulate his prosperous state;
Then in his company he did retain
A poison powerful where it was employed,
Whose violence no metal could restrain,
But in a horses' hoof was still conveigh●d▪
He and his brother fit occasion watched,
And for their Prince a cup of poison made;
Thus he who never could by force be matched,
By treason, lo (O cruel fate!) lies dead.
And could, or durst those traitors be so bold,
The pillar of all worth to undermine?
But (Madam) ah, Antipater of old,
Against your greatness always did repine.
And (I remember) on a time he sent
A messenger of mind to make you bow,
Who to your Son a letter did present
Full of invectives to discredit you;
The King whilst reading what it did comprise,
Did smile with scorn, then to Hephestion say:
In writing of such things he is not wise,
Which strait one mother's tear will wipe away.
I oft informed my son (strange ways devised)
How that disloyal man strived to be great:
But as a woman's wit, mine was despised,
And construed still unto the sense of hate.
Yet of my Son (I thought) the deeds were such,
That all men them admired, none envy could;
And that none durst his sacred person touch,
Whom men adored, and Iove as his did hold.
How oft have I those bitter throws allowed,
By which I brought that demigod to light?
And well I might of such a birth be proud,
Which made me glorious in the people's sight;
Though diverse too (as I have some time known)
To draw his love from me did ways prepare,
Yet were their slights by duteous love o'erthrown,
And I respected with a reverend care.
His tender love to me was much extolled,
Then when he sought to establish a decree,
That with Immortals I might be enrolled,
And (as a Goddess) honours have to me.
Ah! how can I this tragic time survive,
Who lost a son so great, a son so kinder?
And all the means which make me now to live,
Is with revenge a hope to ease my mind.
His love to you it could not but abound,
(By nature, parents of their own are loved)
Since those to whom he by no band was bound,
Of his humanity the fruits have proved.
His clemency did make his state more sure,
Then all the terrors rising from his name,
Which whilst he lived, did public love procure,
And after death a never dying fame.
Old Sisigambis lifting up her heart,
(Of her own sons the death who bade survived)
To Alexander did that love impart,
Which was to Darius' due while as he lived;
But when these tidings wounded had her ears,
That heaven from th'earth had robbed that praise of men:
(Whilst all dissolved in floods of bitter tears)
She hated life, as never spoiled till then.
Her widowed nephew groaning at her feet,
Who of Hephestion did the death bewail,
In depths of woe she (drowned with tears) did fleet,
Till that o'erwhelmed, her strength began to fail;
Then barred from food, she grovelling did abide,
Till that life's course (than hastened fast) was run:
Thus she survived her son, yet with him died,
In whom she found the kindness of a son.
If but when hearing this his tragic end,
A stranger (once his Captive) died for grief,
Ah, shall his mother yet on hope depend,
As such a loss might look for some relief?
And yet I will, for it were a great disgrace
To me the mother of that matchless man,
(Like other women) to give fortune place,
And faintly yield as vulgar wretches can.
Though grief at first must mollify me once,
Or (as unnatural) I might be admired
Yet will I not still burst my breast with groans;
Then that, of me more courage is required,
I'll not degener from my generous kind,
(Faint-hearted Hindes brought never Lion forth)
Nor yet a Mother of an abject mind,
Had never borne a Monarch of such worth.
And O! who knows, but once the time may come,
That I to venge myself a means may have?
Whilst those vile traitors ruined are by some,
Who with their blood may bathe their Sovereign's grave.
Now on Perdiccas I repose my trust,
Who with Eumenes would our wrongs red resse;
Their valour (venturing in a cause so just)
By all appearance, promise doth no less.
Lo, now of late delivered of a son,
I to those Captains scarce dare make it known,
His kingdoms all to part who have begun,
And might (by killing him) make them their own.
Ah! (Madam) this doth move me most to pause,
Who of those great men the ambition fear,
Lest by pretending but a public cause,
They seek themselves the Diadem to bear▪
Thus, they of my young babe (fraud masking wrath)
Would but be Tutors first, and Traitors then,
far from obedience, duty, love or faith:
No things more dear than Diadems to men.
As those whose courage cannot be dis●a●●,
Let us now strive what way a force to find;
And whilst that pity doth procure for aid,
The people's passions tune unto our mind.
If that their love not vanished with his life,
Of Alexander (in a high degree)
I think the Son, the Mother, and the Wife,
By Macedonians still must reverenced be.
And this doth with disdain my soul consume,
That Arideus amongst other wrongs,
And proud Eurydice his wife presume
To take the honour which to us belongs.
O! they shall find my fortune not so changed,
But I am able yet to curb their pride:
What? what? Olympias must be revenged,
And (save herself) no Queen she can abide.
Lo, how all good decays,
And ills do now abound;
In this sky-compassed round,
There is no kind of trust:
For, mankind whilst it strays
In pleasure-paved ways,
With floods of vice is drowned;
And doth (far from refuge)
In endless shadows lodge,
Yet strives to rise no more:
No doubt (as most unjust)
The world once perish must,
And worse now to restore,
Than it was of before,
When at the last deluge,
Men by Deucalion once
Were made again of stones;
And well this wicked race
bewrays a stony kind,
Which bears a stubborn mind,
Still hardened ●nto sin.
Lo, now in every place
All virtuous motions cease,
And sacred faith we find,
far from the earth is fled,
Whose flight huge mischief bred,
And fills the world with wars,
Whilst impious breasts begin
To let base Treason in:
Which common concord mars,
Whilst all men live at jars,
And nets of fraud do spread,
The simple to surprise,
Too witty, but not wise,
Yet those who in deceit
Their confidence repose,
A thing more dear do lose
Then can by guile be gained;
Which when repent late,
May ruin once their state,
Whilst purer spirits disclose
With what their breasts are stored;
For, though they would remord,
They get not trust again;
But, having honour stained,
And covenants profaned,
Are held in high disdain,
And do in end remain,
Of all the world abhorred;
Not trusty when they should,
Not trusted when they would:
But ah! our Nobles now,
Lo, like Lysander still,
So that they get their will,
Regard not by what way,
And with a shameless brow,
Do of the end allow,
Even though the means were ill,
Which all the world may see,
Disgraceth their degree,
Who (changing every hour)
Do all base slights assay;
What can brave minds dismay,
Whose worth is like a Tower,
Against all fortune's power,
Still from all fraud whilst free?
These keep their course unknown,
Whom it would shame if shown:
Who not from worth digress,
To slights which fear imparts,
Do show heroic hearts,
The which would rather far
An open hate profess,
Then basely it suppress:
No glory comes from fearful Arts:
But those who do us lead,
As for dissembling made,
Even though that they intent
Amongst themselves to war,
Seem in no sort to jar,
But friendship do pretend,
Not like their Lord now dead,
Who trusting to his worth,
Still what he meant spoke forth;
The great men not for nought,
Do seek the people's love:
Their deeds that to approve,
They may their minds allure:
But Perdiccas is thought,
Too slowly to have sought
Their doubtful minds to move,
As one who still conceits
He may command the fates;
His pride so great is grown,
That none can it endure;
Yet stands his state unsure,
Since odious to his own:
He must be once o'erthrown,
Whose humour each man hates,
Pride doth her followers all,
Lead head-longs to a fall.
THough stormy discord, and tumultuous wars,
Do fire the minds of men with flames or rage,
That (having haughty thoughts, as heaven hath Stars)
Their indignation nothing can assuage:
Yet lo, amongst the Soldiers waving bowers,
The Herald's cries do calm the Trumpets sounds;
And peace dare interpose unarmed powers,
To limit for a time Bellona's bounds;
And whilst of fury they suspend th' effects)
The seeming-friended foes together treat,
And every one shows what his soul affects,
Of peace a shadow: th' essence must be great.
Thus men magnanimous amidst the field,
Dare of their enemies to the promise trust,
And (loathing what disloyalty doth yield)
Not violate their vows, nor prove unjust.
Though love be past, yet truth should still remain,
I virtuous parts even in my foes applaud;
A gallant mind doth greater glory gain,
To dye with honour, then to live by fraud;
And why (Eumenes) as mistrusting me,
Or standing on your reputation long,
Did you disdain to seek (as all men see)
A greater than yourself, and one more strong?
Though we come not to plead our birthright here,
Let him (tor warriors so should take their place)
In whom best signs of Nobleness appear,
Be graced, as first who doth adorn a race;
Most Noble he who still by virtue strives,
To leave his name in minds of men engraved,
And to his offspring greater glory gives,
Then from his ancestors he hath received.
Erst, we by birth in war not marshaled stood,
As at the Table, upon Ivory beds;
A Soldiers' worth consists not in his blood,
But in their blood which (as his foes) he sheds,
What ever others of my lineage try,
I am Eumenes, and will not accord;
That there can be a greater man than I,
While as I have a heart, a hand, a sword.
Lo, when prosperity too much prevails,
Above the judgement thus of vulgar minds,
As little Barges burdened with great Sails,
They move in state, all swollen with fortunes winds▪
And as adversity the spirit refines
From th'abject: dross of pride, and passions base,
That in affliction, virtue clearest shines,
And makes one all the ways of wit to trace:
So doth good success make the judgement dye,
Then whilst the fortunate their ease do take,
And lulled asleep in pleasures meadows lie,
As for the Slaughter fat, and ripe to shake;
Yet this the nature is of gallant men,
To rest (as in no state too much involved)
When prospering wary, and most humble then,
If crossed courageous, when embarked, resolved.
What though your first attempts renowned are,
By which you in two fields victorious stood,
And did o'erthrow two thunderbolts of war,
Who lost their lives amidst a crimson flood:
Yet is that course of victory controlled,
And you have tried what force your force exceeds,
Then, faded Laurels should not make you bold,
As still reposing on your by-past deeds:
For, by the same to indignation moved,
The Macedonians all abhor your name,
Who at that time so proud a Conqueror proved,
Their great men's slaughter having winged your fame.
No fortune past so puffs up my conceit,
That it contempt of further danger brings;
Nor am I now dejected so of late,
But I intent to do far greator things.
He (by prosperity made never proud)
Who knows the frailty of this earthly frame,
Can hardly by adversity be bowed:
The Sun (although eclipsed) remains the same.
Worth should by th'events not be thralled to wit,
On th' accidents as th'essence did depend:
The fault of fortune cannot blemish it,
On which oft times disasters may attend;
Though fortune (stumbling right) concur with worth,
Or yet, if crosses brag a gallant mind,
Both like themselves are always sparkling forth,
In every state some tokens of their kind.
Now at this time o'ermatched by numerous powers,
I kept my courage, though I lost the field:
And vaunt no more of this, for some few hours
May once to me the like advantage yield.
Nor is it long since that to fortune dear,
The world had never me but victor spied,
Though I protest by all th'Immortals here,
Pressed by necessity, not moved by pride.
Proud Neoptolemus that traitor still,
(Not worthy of a Macedonians name)
He to betray the host, and me to kill,
Had laboured long to his eternal shame.
But I of Craterus lament the fall,
Whom for his virtue I did dearly love,
And was constrained (I Iove to witness call)
For my defence that refuge last to prove.
How fortuned you your forces to dispose,
So well to scape that storm of threatened harms?
For, than you had to deal with mighty foes,
Who were in war grown hoary under arms.
When Neoptolemus did clearly spy,
That all his treason to the light was brought,
He, where our foes were camped, with haste did fly:
A foolish traitor who was false for nought.
There he informed, or misinformed my foes,
That (by good success grown secure of late)
I in my Tent did carelessly repose,
Though not by force, to be o're-comed by fate.
And to Antipater he further told,
That Macedonians, if they at that time,
Of Craterus the countenance did behold,
All willingly would yield themselves to him:
Now they had laboured earnestly before,
That I abandon would Perdiccas part,
And did protest that they would give me more
Than yet I had, or hoped for in my heart.
But love (born free) cannot be thrall d nor bought,
More than a shameful peace I like just strife;
To generous minds more dear than honour nought;
And ere I leave my faith, I'll lose my life:
Thus when despaired that I would prove their friend,
They sought in time to plague me as a foe,
Where love could not begin, that hate might end,
And came in haste to have surprised me so:
But Neoptolemus to cross by slight,
The Macedonians I for him did bend,
And Craterus concealing from their sight,
To match with him, caused troops of strangers tend.
This policy which none could justly blame,
I with myself in secret did conspire,
And had my shirt been privy to the same;
It should have been an offering to the fire.
When deaths first game (with danger played) was past,
I Neoptolemus did toil to find,
And he me too, which happened at the last;
Two will do much to meet, when of one mind.
Then whilst we met for whom both th'armies warred,
Whose fortune did depend upon our hands,
All was performed that force or fury dared,
Whilst both were bend t' abate the others bands.
And yet the heavens would not betray my trust,
Fowl treason never had a fairer end)
But smiled upon my cause (as which was just)
And did destruction to the traitor send:
For, forced by him, whose force he did despise,
(Though fight fiercely long) he lost his breath,
As one more strong than true, more stout than wise,
Whose greatest honour was his honest death.
But weakened with huge wounds, almost I dived
In seas of blood, even quite from knowledge strayed;
Yet by so great a victory revived,
My courage grew more than my strength decayed.
I (having finished thus this fatal strife)
Did come where Craterus his course had run,
Even in the confines placed 'twixt death and life,
The one near gone, the other not begun:
He with great valour had resisted long,
As all Briareus hands had moved his sword,
And did his Master's memory no wrong,
Whilst with his courage, not his fortune stored.
What life refused, to gain by death he thought:
For, life and death are but indifferent things,
And of themselves not to be shunned, nor sought,
But for the good or ill that either brings.
With endless glory bend to change his breath,
Of desp'rate valour all the power was proved,
And for great Captains no more glorious death,
Then to die fight with a mind unmoved.
When it appeared where victory did tend,
That army's courage with their Captain fell▪
And whilst I safely might be seen a friend,
I went where death his Spirits did expel;
And whilst I told how both to be betrayed,
By Neoptolemus were brought about,
My woe with tears I to the world bewrayed:
Mild pity and true kindness must burst out.
Ah, if the news of this that I express
Had come in time unto Perdiccas' ears,
He might have lived their pride now to repress,
Who by his fall were first divorced from fears.
The humour of that man was too well known,
Can he have parted other men from pride,
Whose soul was sold a slave unto his own,
And for the same (forced by his followers) died?
The proud must still be plagued by prouder ones,
There must be had sharp steel to smooth rough stones,
No vice then pride doth greater hate procure,
Which foes do scorn, and friends cannot endure.
Yet Majesty must not itself deject;
A lofty carriage doth procure respect.
A haughty gesture shows a tyrant's heart;
All love a courteous countenance, void of Art.
Yet manners too submiss as much condemned,
do make Kings scorned, and Captains be contemned.
A humble port, kind looks, words smooth and soft,
Are means by which great minds may mount aloft.
Those are indeed for such as raise their flight,
They may do more whose course is at the height:
Imperious forms an Empire must defend.
Thus hastened was Perdiccas to his end.
That worthy man had many fair designs,
But virtue still by envy is pursued,
Though (as a Candle in the night best shines)
It in a vicious age may best be viewed.
There was a man who scorned secure delights,
As still despising pain, attemptive, bold,
A brave observer of the ancient Rites,
Steel strictly grasping, prodigal of gold;
He loved to have the Soldiers of his band,
choosed at the Musters, not in markets bought,
And would not flatter where he might command;
More meet to have, then seek that which he sought;
But Soldiers now in this degenered age,
Are (fawned on by faint minds) bribed in such sort,
That all the reins enlarged unto their rage,
They with so strait a course cannot comport.
What was misfortune known unto them all,
Their malice as some great neglect did cite:
All things must help th' unhappy men to fall,
Thus forth they spewed the poison of their spite,
For, hating his frank form, and naked words,
By that occasion whetting their desires,
They in his body boldly sheathed their swords,
A deed which even barbarity admires.
Those traitorous troops may spot the purest bands,
If for a fact so vile they be excused:
This will set swords all our soldiers' hands,
Against us, and not for us, to be used.
I wish that Soldiers never could be brought
To prove so mutinous as they oft have been,
And that they durst not violate in aught,
Those who by them (as sacred) should be seen:
Nor like I Captains who (like blustering winds)
Would o'er their troops insult (as tyrants still),
Not weighing merits, nor respecting minds,
As carried headlong with a blinded will.
Pride by presumption bred (when at a height)
encountering with contempt both match in ire,
And 'twixt them bring base cruelty to light,
The loath-some offspring of a hated Sire.
Such of Perdiccas was the monstrous pride,
(The vice from which that vice more vile proceeds)
That it strange ways for his advancement tried,
And did burst forth in most prodigious deeds;
At first by Meleager's death when stained,
He showed what tyrants harboured in his heart,
To whom faith given, nor yet the Church he gained,
(Though sacred both) no safety could impart.
The Cappadocians (when all else was tried)
Choosed (rather than his insolence to bear)
By massacring themselves to scape from pride:
Pride, spite and horror, death breeds only fear.
Yet what against his foes he did perform,
From martial minds might plead for some excuse,
Since irritated thoughts which (wronged) do storm,
In minds offended, fury do infuse:
But yet why sought he in a servile sort,
To play the tyrant, braving his best friends,
Who with disdainful forms could not comport?
More than an enemy's yoke, a friends offends.
And when of late by Ptolemy constrained,
He brought his bands with disadvantage back,
How by the same his government was stained,
The world can witness by his Army's wrack:
But hate made judge, each error seems a crime,
Whilst present ills do aggravate things gone:
His Soldiers moved by fortune and the Time,
Did by his death venge all their wrongs in one.
As nought smells well to a distempered taste,
So to conceits pre-occupyed before;
Even good seems bad in them whom they detest:
Men must mislike where they can like no more.
To you who loathed Perdiccas and his state,
What ever came of him could not seem good:
And I not wonder though your soul did hate
One who had right and power, to take your blood:
For, fled from him to whom you once belonged,
His Trumpet still breathed terror in your ear:
Then all men hate those whom they once have wronged,
And by no means can love them whom they fear.
That which you speak of hate, in love I spy,
Love cannot find an imperfection forth,
But doth excuse, extenuate, or deny,
Faults (where it likes) with shadows of no worth:
I left Perdiccas, but did him no wrong,
Who first to take my life, all means did prove;
I told Antipater how he so long
Had been abused by a pretended love:
For, as I frankly love, whilst loved again,
If the ingrate, ingrately me acquit,
Strait kindling fury with a just disdain,
I by love past, proportion then my spite;
And yet (Eumenes) I commend thy mind,
Who to defend thy friend, hast proved so free,
And since in love so constantly inclined,
A friendship firm I would contract with thee;
Then where that now thy state hath been brought low,
(Since spoiled of him in whom thou didst repose)
Whilst aided by our power, thou great mayst grow,
And raise thy hopes of kingdoms to dispose.
I'll be your friend, whilst friend to right you rest:
For, without virtue, friendship is but vain,
Which cannot lodge in a polluted breast,
Whos's impious thoughts do sacred things profane.
While as the oath is kept, which once was sworn
To Alexander's self, and to his race,
Still shall this sword for your defence be borne,
But in my heart they hold the highest place;
And do not thus, as o'er one vanquished, vaunt,
Nor think me thralled, though once by chance o'erthrown,
The world must perish ere adventurers want,
Who toss all States to establish once their own.
Whilst bravely taking or yet giving place,
How ever fear (objecting danger) comes,
Misfortune, bondage, torment, death, disgrace,
And all things else, a mind resolved o'ercomes.
ANd must we buy our pomp at such a rate,
Who bear th'authority, or whom it bears?
O, O! how thorny are the ways of State,
With open dangers paved, and secret fears;
Each of our steps is waited with some snare,
Whilst from ourselves we all repose repel,
And (in frail Barks) pressed by tempestuous care,
Do seek a haven, whose heaven is but a hell.
Whilst Aeolus and Neptune joined in all,
With winds, and waves, beat th'earth, and brag the skies,
The tumbling Mountains do not rise and fall,
Though each of them another doth surprise:
As do th'aspiring powers which are with doubt
Tossed through the waving world on stormy Thrones,
And are (as in a Circle) hurled about,
Ascending, and descending, both at once.
Lo, some whose hopes would at their birth have seemed,
By Fortune's strictness, with contempt confined,
Have from the vulgar yoke themselves redeemed,
To do far more than such durst have designed;
And they who once might life to thousands give,
When some great period revolutions brings,
Brought down even low cannot have leave to live,
Made less than Subjects, who were more than Kings.
What once they scarce could dream, some thus procur,
Whose power though nought at first, last, Sceptres sways;
And some whose states seemed once to be secure,
Thrown from their Fortune's height lose glorious Bays:
My Father, lo, to gain that sovereign place,
Through many dangers boldly marched of late,
And, than the greatest, greater for a space,
Did manage all the Macedonian State:
But I his Son who (as some would suppose)
Might keep whith ease, that which he got with pain,
Can by no means my restless thoughts repose,
such raging Tyrants o'er my fancies reign.
And yet I think you have an easy part,
To whom his State your Father did resign,
For, it may make you smile, which made him smart:
Some press the grape, and others drink the wine.
I'll not believe that ever any ill
Was bred for me within my Father's breast,
Since children must suppose their Parents will
(Though seeming bad) still purposed for the best.
And yet my Father's Ghost must pardon me,
Though when from us he minded to remove;
I think the tenor of his last Decree,
Showed lack of judgement, or at least of love:
For, what base course had ever been begun
To make me seem not worthy of his place,
That he preferred a Stranger to his Son,
As bend to cloud the glory of his race?
Thus since in such a sort he did neglect,
The Son who should his name from death exempt,
(As disregarded for some great defect)
All other men may have me in contempt.
But ere his age attained the fatal date,
He saw my brows with laurel boughs arrayed,
And spied my skill in war, and wit in state,
Which grew as much as his had then decayed.
Nor can my courage so be brought to bow,
But Polypercon shall by proof find soon,
That in my Father's will, I Will allow,
Not what he did; but what he should have done;
And since by him high dignities were won,
I mind to prosecute what he began;
For (though I would) so great a Father's Son
Can not securely live a private man.
Lo, Polypercon by our power repelled
From Macedon hath retired dismayed,
And for the fear of us hath been compelled
To rest beholding for another's aid.
Let him not think that shadows (though of Kings)
Can match my power with these his borrowed bands:
A doubtful flight all framed with others wings
Will never bear him from Cassander's hands;
And though Olympias count'nanced once his cause,
As from Epirus come to ruin me:
Now of her own misfortune she must pause,
Since brought of late unto a low degree.
And yet Olympias once did prosper well,
When first she touched the Macedonian bounds,
Whilst Polypercon proudly did repel
all those who durst resist with words, or wounds.
Though Philip and Eurydice his Queen,
(To give them battle bend) in time arrived,
The Macedonians when they had her seen,
As their own Queen to do her honour strived.
And hapless Philip whilst constrained to yield,
There, for a Kings did take a captives state:
And with his mate (though flying from the field)
Was followed by their force, and by her fate.
Then ●id her husband and herself give place,
Whose brows of late a Diadem had borne:
But then thrown down in depths of black disgrace,
Were made of pride the prey, the butt of scorn.
Those were the means which did them first entrap,
But have you heard how after they were thrall,
To plague the world with horror, and mishap,
The proud Olympias tyrranized o'er all?
Some doubtful rumours did frequent each 〈◊〉
Such as rash Fame confusedly durst unfold:
But yet by favour hid, or else for fear,
The truth of all (it may be) was not told.
When thus the Tigress happened to surprise
Those wretched souls (as ravished in a dream)
Her heart at first seemed scarce to trust her eyes,
She surfeited her sight so with their shame;
But when she saw (by reason of her power)
That she might safely let her rage burst out:
She them about caused build a lightlesse Tower,
Pressed by whose walls, they scarce could turn about;
And in that dungeon (as entombed) they stood
With high disgrace t'appease more high disdains,
far from all comfort, whilst a little food
Their life prolonged, but to prolong their pains.
But for misfortune pity last doth plead,
As envy doth prosperity oppose;
The Macedonians (than indifferent made)
On murmured rumours doubtfully did gloze.
The people's grudge Olympias did perceive,
And of just fury fearing the effect,
She strait resolved life's remnant to bereave,
From weakened powers which did no less expect.
And when some Thracians basely bend for blood
(As she had charged) with mercenary spite,
Had murdered Philip, and his Queen imbrued
With these red streams that drowned her life's delight.
She sent to her whose soul in grief did sink,
(As messengers of death to brag her breast)
A sword, a cord, and an empoisoned drink,
A Tyrant's presents, yet a wretches best.
Those seen, the Queen unmoved this speech did make,
(As one who had embraced some great relief)
Fit gifts for her to give, for me to take,
Since she exceeds in hate, and I in grief.
And tell the Tyrant that I gladly dye,
That once the angry gods to venge my death,
May thunder forth that judgement, which I spy
With blood must choke that bloody woman's breath.
Last, looking on her Lord who there lay slain,
Once partner of his joy, then, of his woe,
Whilst that his Roses did her Lilies stain,
She kissed his wounds, as taking leave to go;
Lest Time her Resolution had betrayed,
Her snowy neck (not used with such a chain)
Her girdle grasped; then died no way dismayed;
And if she sighed, she sighed but for disdain.
This barbarous act my breast with grief dot● sting;
Can spite so much transport the meekest kind?
And yet on th'earth there's no more cruel thing
Than malice raging in a woman's mind?
But yet this sacrifice could not assuage
The boiling thoughts of her unbounded will:
For, entering thus she rioted in rage,
(As dogs that once get blood, would always kill)
Each light occasion kindling still her wrath,
The Sovereignty she shamefully abused;
And put my brother Nicanor to death,
Though for no crime condemned, no, not accused.
To some (when dead) an hate by her was borne,
Whose cruelty no flood of blood confined:
(Of Iolas the Tomb profanely torn)
She (robbing th'earth) with ashes stained the wind;
To be Cassander's friend was such a crime,
As none could scape who ever favoured me;
Thus huge disorders did abound a time:
Where laws not valued are, all things are free;
When having heard of this outrageous pride,
Which made my native soil contemned to be,
I those indignities could not abide,
Whose shame and danger did aim most at me.
So that at last (moved by my Country's care)
(As much as by particular respects)
I with great speed an Army did prepare
To punish, or prevent the like effects.
But when I was to Macedony come,
To fortify a Town she did design,
Which I enclosed, and quickly did overcome,
Whilst famine forced the Fortress to resign.
Then to necessity weak pride gave place,
Her lofty courage was constrained to bow:
So that she rests depending on our grace,
To be disposed, as it shall please us now.
This chance the world to wonder may invite;
Lo, there a Queen who had (though now distressed)
The rarest Fortune, and the greatest spirit
That ever any of her sex possessed.
The widowed Empress who first bragged the Indeses,
Or proud Thomiris though both praised have been,
Or th' Amazons all borne with martial minds,
Have never been more stout than was this Queen;
Her life's first progress did but prove too sweet,
Whom once the world with treasures strived to bless:
But now sad soul (foiled under Fortune's ●eet)
Her misery no creature can express.
Those were but Fortune's gifts which made her great,
Whilst treacherous shows by shallow wits were praised,
Her imperfections did but stain the State,
Where her not hers, but others merits raised:
When first that Dame with famous Philip matched,
Her cunning carriage was not free from blame:
But though she then with Argos eyes was watched,
(As was supposed) soon forfeited her Fame;
At least (shame-feared) he did her first disdain,
And of that sex the precious fame is such,
Their tender honour any breath may stain,
If tainted, foul, if but suspected, too much;
Yet this at last did his destruction breed,
For which her spiteful thoughts had laboured long:
She by Pausanias' privy to his deed,
Had spurred him to perform th'intended wrong;
And by such means long sought, that to her will,
Her husband's murder might enlarge the raynes,
Whilst backed by power she boldly did the ill,
Of which, too late, the troubled Realm complains.
Though loathed of all (long suffered for her Son)
She played the Tyrant safely as she pleased:
But by the course that I have now begun,
I hope those whom she plagued, shall be appeased.
Yet of Olympias (though cast down by you)
The fight her Son and Husband will revive,
And so may make the Macedonians now,
For her relief strange courses to contrive.
Of those whose greatness doth regard extort,
The miseries entender every mind,
And still th'affections of the vulgar sort,
Are (headlong led) too cruel, or too kind.
O! but I can precipitate her fall,
Even by the means which might support her most:
For, pity shall bar pity, whilst they all
Wail for their friends, who through her pride were lost.
As those to whom all other things are free,
Must have their life and reign both of one date,
So private men who pass their own degree,
Can hardly turn to take their former state.
Your Fortune thus is trusted to the fates;
None can retire who enters in such things:
All those who dare attempt against great States,
Must dye as Traitors, or else live as Kings;
And though you would but some disorders stay,
You deal with those who (borne not to be thrall)
As torrents bear away what stops their way,
And must of force (if not undone) do all.
Such (though set free) will storm when they are gone,
Who scorn to take the thing, that they should give;
All those must dye who dare but touch a Throne:
Who may endanger Kings, they must not live.
Since in this course I only once can err,
I shall be sure ere she herself withdraw.
And yet what surety can you have of her,
Can laws bind them who are above the law?
Who can a concord make betwixt the two,
Whereas the one must hate, the other fear?
O, but I mind to use the matter so
That both from hence shall further strife forbear.
What can her freedom, and your peace procure?
Death both can make her free, and me secure.
And would you do such ill to shed her blood?
Yea, ill to others, so it do me good.
The Macedonians will abhor this wrong.
And yet obey me if I be most strong.
But who shall have the Realm amidst those broils?
Who ever wins the field, doth owe the spoils.
So to possess the Realm you have no right.
But I have more, so long as I have might.
This State doth to itself an heir afford.
All kingdoms rights are pleaded by the Sword.
The people all will grudge against your state.
But d●re not stir, whilst fear exceeds their hate.
And in their hearts they will detest you too.
Think what they will, who have no power to do.
What though Olympias in a little space
May lose her power, together with her breath?
Yet there remains another of her race,
Who is by Nature bound to venge her death.
The raging streams of a tempestuous flood,
Which drowns the old, not yields the young relief?
What fool who of his foes victorious stood,
Would spoil an Army, and yet spare the chief:
No, since I must myself with murder stain,
I'll by the roots raze all the Royal race,
So that no power shall spring from thence again,
That may myself, or yet my plants displace.
The strength hath left great Alexander's arm,
Whose mothers fatal thread is now near spun;
And I have means to keep myself from harm,
Both of Roxane, and her tender Son.
But since this course may much our states advance,
By which a ground for great attempts is laid:
I m●●t entreat you now (what ever chance)
To lend us your applause, though not your aid.
I'll be your friend, yet wish you would refrain,
From doing this; but, ere you be undone,
Since by your guiltness I thus may gain,
I'll suffer that which I would not have done.
CAn I be she whom all the world admired,
As the most happy Queen that reigned below,
Whom all the Planets have to plague conspired,
Of fickle Fortune's course the power to show?
No, no, not I, for what could me control,
Or force me thus t'attend another's will,
Since I despise this prison of my soul,
Where it disdains t'abide in bondage still?
Ah! whilst vain pomp transported fancies fed,
The jealous gods my state to grudge did tempt,
My state which Envy once, and Reverence bred,
Though now it breed but pity, and contempt:
Olympias once high as Olympus stood,
The wife Philip, Alexander's Mother,
Who matched Alcides, and Achilles' blood,
To breed a man more worth than both together.
Am I the woman whose majestic state
Seemed once so happy to deceived conceits?
I, I am she, and never yet more great
Then at this present, even in spite of fates.
A double bondage long did burden me,
I to myself, myself to Fortune thrall:
But now captivity hath set me free,
Who could not rise till first I had a fall;
A spirit whilst it prosperity benumbs,
Scarce like the self can to the world appear:
But then when virtue every cross o'ercomes,
True Greatness shines most bright in Glories sphere.
Our treasure now (I see) consists no more
Without ourselves in th'eye-betraying shows,
But in the breasts inestimable store,
Which neither Time entombs, nor Power o'erthrows.
O never were my thoughts enlarged till now
To mark myself, and quintessence my mind:
For, long (a prey to pride) I know not how,
A mist of fancies made my judgement blind.
As those who dream sweet dreams, whilst waked at last,
Do find their error when their eyes find light:
Free from the slumbering of my Fortune past,
I now arise to judge of all things right.
That cloud of pomp, whose smoke me shadowed once,
Lo, now removed, unmasks my life too late:
And now I see, that Sceptres, Crowns, and Thrones,
Are burdenous badges of a dangerous state.
O happy woman, of true pleasure sure,
Who in the Country leadest a guiltless life!
From Fortune's reach retired, obscure, secure,
Though not a Queen, yet a contented wife.
Thy Mate more dear to thee then is the light,
(Though low in state) loves in a high degree,
And with his presence still to bless thy sight,
Doth scorn great Courts whilst he lives courting thee.
And as thou wound'st him not with hid disgrace,
He with no jealous thought doth rack thy breast:
Thus both lie down to rest, and rise in peace,
Then (if they strive) they strive who should love best;
What? though thou have not as the mighty ones,
Thy neck surcharged with chains (ah chains indeed!)
Nor ears weighed down with oriental stones,
Nor Robes, whose worth may admiration breed;
So want'st thou that which we have ever had,
Sad miscontentments, jealousy, and spite;
And though thy back be not with purple clad,
Thy thoughts are decked with Innocency's white.
As birds (whose cage of gold the sight deceives)
Do seem to sing, whilst they but wail their state:
So, with the mighty matched, (made glorious slaves)
We happy seem, whilst we but curse our fate.
That bliss whose show in us vain eyes doth please,
Makes thee indeed with pleasures spend thy breath,
Who liv'st while young in mirth, whilst aged in ease,
And knowst not what it is to dye till death;
Ah! since I lived, I always did but dye,
When seeming happy, then most wretched still;
Whilst dazzling with vain pomp each vulgar eye,
What strange mishaps did me with anguish fill?
The fates with fortune from my birth conspired
To make my life, a pattern of their might:
For both my parents from the world retired,
When I had scarcely looked upon the light:
The world may judge how I was justly grieved,
Whilst angry Philip sought for my disgrace,
(A thing which once I scarce could have believed)
And unto Cleopatra gave my place.
Then though I long (as desp'rate of relief)
For his offence afflicted had my mind,
Yet did his sudden death augment my grief:
He was my husband, though he was unkind;
And when my Sons rare deeds which fame doth sound,
The world with wonder, ravished me with joy,
Those (as himself) who would all his confound,
To compass me, did spite and power employ;
Yet stood my courage when my Fortune fell,
And still I toiled to persecute his foes,
That some might fall down who too much did swell,
Their blood in Marble registering my woes.
That which I purposed, long so prosp'red too,
That some of them did try (by torments strange)
All what a woman's just disdain could do,
Whilst spurred by jealousy, spite, and revenge:
But this Archtraitor, Ruler of the rest,
Who thirsts to drink the blood of all our Race,
Even then, with us when all succeeded best,
Did compass me with ruin and disgrace.
Such was the tenor of my Fortune past,
Whose least mishap had made another burst:
First, orphaned, widowed, and unchilded last,
A daughter, wife, and mother, all accursed.
Heaven's plague Cassander, let that base wretch try
That Iove his judgement but a while defers;
And let his wife bewail as well as I,
I murdered for my Son, and she by hers.
Even as th'incestuous Thebans monstrous brood,
So may thy Sons contend with mutual wounds,
And never let thy house be free from blood,
Till banished quite from this usurped bounds;
Thus, notwithstanding of my wont power,
To me (save wishes) nothing doth remain:
But though condemned to dye, yet at this hour
Should I begin to curse, and to complain?
No, no, that custom best becomes poor souls,
Whose resolution cannot climb more high;
But I whose courage that base course controls,
Must triumph still what ever State I try.
Death is the port where all may refuge find,
The end of labour, entry unto rest;
Death hath the bounds of misery confined,
Whose Sanctuary shrowds affliction best.
To suffer (oft) with a courageous heart,
It doth deserve more praise than deeds most known:
For, in our actions Fortune hath some part,
But in our sufferings, all things are our own:
Lo, now I loathe the world, and worldly things,
Of which I both have proved the best and worst:
The apprehended death great comfort brings,
And hath no cross, but that it should be forced.
O hear me now (dear Son) if that thy Ghost
May leave th'Elysian fields to look on me:
Of all things else this doth content me most,
That from this time I may remain with thee.
And blush not now to see thy Mother's end,
My death in glory with thy life shall strive:
It (as a captive) Fortune shall attend,
That (as thy fellow) followed thee alive;
AH, ah! though man the image of great Iove,
And, th'only creature that gives Reason place,
With reverence due unto the powers above,
His heavenly progeny should seek to prove,
By still resembling the Immortal kind;
Yet makes the world our better part so blind,
That we the clouds of vanity embrace,
And from our first excellency decline;
This doth distinguish that celestial grace,
Which should make souls to burn with Virtue's love,
Whose fancies vice luxuriously now feasts;
Vice is the Circe that enchants the mind,
And doth transform her followers all in Swine;
Whilst poisoned pleasures so corrupt our tastes,
That of halfgods, we make ourselves whole-beasts:
And yet of ruthless Pluto's raging host,
The unce which doth transport presumptuous hearts,
And makes men from the Gods to differ most,
Is cruelty, that to the sufferers cost,
And actors both, is oftentimes appeased:
The gods delight to give, and to forgive,
By pardoning, and not by plagueing pleased;
And why should men excogitate strange Arts,
To show their tyranny, as those who strive
To feed on mischief, though the Author smarts,
Oft for the deed of which himself did boast,
Whilst whence the blow first came, the grief doth turn?
For, that by which the mind at first was eased,
May it in th'end the greatest burden give;
Oft those whose cruelty makes many mourn,
Do by the fires which they first kindled burn;
Of other tyrants which oppress the mind,
With pleasure some delight it, in such sort
That first the honey▪ then the gall we find;
And others though from Honour's Court declined)
Som● comfort yield (but base) by hope of gain;
And, though some make us to be loathed of one,
We by their means another's love obtain;
But cruelty, with which none can comport,
Makes th'author's hated when the deed is done,
Oft even by those whom it did most support,
As that which altenates men from their kind;
And as humanity the mind enchants,
So barbarous souls which from the same refrain,
Moore fierce than lavage beasts, are loved of none:
Since with such beasts one with less danger haunts,
Then with the man whose mind all mercy wants;
Yet though the mind of man, as strong, and rude,
Be ravished oft with violent desire,
And must, if fired with rage, be quenched with blood,
How can this tender sex whose glory stood
In having hearts inclined to pity still
Itself delight in any barbarous deed?
For, Nature seems in this to use her skill,
In making women's minds (though weak) entire,
That weakness might, love, and devotion breed;
To which their thoughts (if pure) might best aspire,
As aptest for th'impression of all good,
But from the best to worst all things do wear;
Since cruelties from feeble minds proceed,
In breasts where courage fails, spite, shame and fear
Make envy, hate, and rigour rule to bear.
Our Queen Olympias, who was once so great,
And did such monstrous cruelties commit,
In plaguing Philip, and his Queen of late,
Lo, now brought low to taste the like estate.
Must take such entertainment as she gave,
And yet good reason that it should be so,
Such measure as we give, we must receive.
Whilst on a Throne she proudly erst did sit,
And with disdainful eyes looked on her foe,
As only vanquished by her power, and wit,
She did not weigh what doth proceed from fate:
O, O! th'Immortals which command above,
Of every state in hand the Rudder have,
And as they like, can make us stay or go;
The grief of others should us greatly move,
As those who sometime may like Fortune prove;
But as experience with rare proofs hath shown,
To look on others, we have Linx- his eyes,
Whilst we would have their imperfections known;
Yet (like blind Moles) can never mark our own.
Such clouds of self-regard do dim our sight;
Why should we be puffed up when foes do fall?
Since what to day doth on another light,
The same to morrow may our state surprise.
Those that on this inconstant constant Ball
Do live environed with th'all-circling skies,
Have many means whereby to be o'erthrown:
And why should dying worldlings swollen with wrath,
So tyrannize o'er an afflicted wight,
Since miseries are common unto all?
Let none be proud who draw a doubtful breath,
Good hap attends but few, unto their death.
LOg have I used that light which clears my mind,
On Nature's labours curiously to look,
And (of all creatures finding out the kind)
Have read strange wonders in the world's great book:
I mark her course by contraries maintained,
Whose harmony doth most subsist by strife,
And of all creatures in the same contained,
How various is the mystery of life?
But as all things are subject unto change,
Which partners are of th'elemental powers,
So (rolled about with revolutions strange)
The state of man rests constant scarce for hours.
Lo, what doth fame more frequently report,
Then sudden rise, and more sudden falls?
I think the world is but a Tennis-court,
Where Fortune doth play States, toss men for Balls.
And never any age showed more than this,
The wavering state of soul-ennobled wights,
Who soar too high to catch an airy bliss,
Whilst lowest falls attend the highest flights.
That matchless Monarch who was borne (it seemed)
To show how high mortality attains,
Hath not from death th'adored flesh redeemed;
But pain hath made an end of all his pains.
And those brave bands which furnished Fame with breath,
Whilst all the world their valorous deeds did spy,
Rest now (confounded since their Sovereign's death)
Like Polyphemus having lost his eye.
And they are like that teeth-engendered brood,
Which took their life out of a Monster dead,
Whilst each of them would drink the others blood,
Since that great Dragon's death who was their head.
So change all things which subject are to sight:
Disorder order breeds, and order, it:
Next light comes darkness, and next darkness light,
This never-changing change transcends our wit.
Thus health and sickness, poverty and state,
Dishonour, honour, life and death, with doubt,
Still interchanging (what a true deceit!)
All linked together, slide by turns about;
To worldly states the heavens a height appoint,
Where, when they once arrive, they must descend,
And all perfections have a fatal point,
At which Excellency itself must end.
But as all those who walk on th'earth, are crossed
With alterations, happening oft, and strange,
The greatest States with greatest storms are tossed,
And (sought of many) must make many a change.
Nor speak I this by speculation moved,
(As gathering credit out of ancient scrolls)
No, I have lived at Court, and oft have proved
Nothing below more vexed, then great men's Souls;
The Tyrant honours thralls, while as they moan,
Their plaints to vulgar ears loath to impart,
They all the weight of woes must bear alone,
Where others of their grief lend friends apart.
Their very rising o'er us to the height,
Which seems their best is worst, for, being Lords,
They never know the truth that comes to light,
When frank society speaks naked words.
Whilst sadness oft seems Majesty, Time tells
How dear they buy their pomp with loss of rest:
Some but three furies fain in all the hells;
There are three thousand in one great man's breast.
I think all Monarchies are like the Moon,
Which now eclipsed, now under cloud, now clear,
Grows by degrees, and is (when full) undone:
Yet Aeson-like renewed doth reappear:
For, lo they first, but small begin to shine,
And when they once their Spheric form obtain,
Do coldly languish, and (till changed) decline,
Yet (fall'n) in other realms do rise again.
Assyria once made many nations bow,
Than next, all power was in the Persians hand,
And Macedonians last (grown Monarches now)
Amongst themselves divided cannot stand.
A secret fate (alternatly) all things
Doth in this circle circularly lead:
Still generation from corruption springs,
That some may live, of force some must be dead;
Each Element another's strength devours;
Th'air to the fire succumbs, the fire to rain,
The waters strive to drown the Earth with showers,
Which it by vapours vomits out again;
Thus (w●th a Gordian knot together bound)
All things are made, un-made, and made again:
Whilst ruin found'st, perfection doth confound:
Free from some change no State can long remain;
But what in th'earth more dangerously stands
Than Sovereignty (though rated at such worth)
Which like the stormy Gods tumultuous bands,
Doth fly from th'East to West, from South to North?
A long experience now makes this not strange,
That mighty States whose reines one only leads,
Be oft distracted, and constrained to change,
As too great bodies for so little heads,
Since every commonwealth (where all men's wits
Do join in one to breed the public ease)
Hath many fevers and pestiferous fits,
Which physic oft, oft poison must appease:
For (ah) the multitude more rash than wise,
A Hydra-headed beast which humour blinds;
Doth passionately praise; or else despise,
As some preposterous fancies move their minds;
From vice and virtue oft like danger flows;
Whilst th'one breeds envy, and the other hate:
As jealousy, or emulation grows,
Those oft are crushed who do support a state.
Whilst some their betters, others equals scorn;
The popular authority decays,
And when it dies the Monarchy is borne,
Whose violence disorders fury stays;
The raines of state it with most ease doth sway,
Of power (as joined in one) the strongest kind:
Still whilst it (humbly high) doth bold a way
Twixt tyranny and too remiss a mind;
But though States ruled by one, may flourish long,
Whilst one can well command, and all obey,
Whilst guerdon goodness, vengeance follows wrong,
That (virtue cherished) vice is made decay:
Yet (if nought else) Time doth great States o'ercome:
And all are bounded by some fatal hour;
What mis-adventures many ways may come
To dissipate the most united power?
O! huge mishaps a Monarchy may mar,
When prosperous Times do (forced by fates) expire,
To further which oft strangers must make war,
And mutinous subjects sometime may conspire?
As jealous fear (when braved by danger) moves,
All princes would suppress aspirers still:
And than a subjects course most dangerous proves,
When either fear, or hope transports his will.
But though that first to rise, last to descend,
Great States are guided by a secret fate:
Yet, still the cause which doth forgo their end,
Springs from contempt, or is enforced by hate;
The first in kings the lack of courage breeds,
Encouraging Ambition to rebel;
The other doth attend tyrannic deeds,
That violence may violence deeds,
Yet never did so many Monarches fall
By foreign battles, nor by civil broils,
As by themselves who (seeming free) were thrall,
Whilst smooth-toogued Minions gloried of their spoils.
Those who have reigned by choice, by birth, or worth,
Or did encroach on Crowns by chance, or crime,
Oft suffer vices to burst freely forth,
Which virtue's colours guilded till that time.
Men clearly show what harbours in their breast,
Whilst (Envies object) free from any fear:
That which is eminent is marked best,
And highest fortunes hardest are to bear.
Low States to censure Critics do despise,
Whilst oft gross faults for virtue's fame esteems,
The stupid, patiented, and the fearful wise,
Will, constancy, and softness goodness seems.
But on the Stage of State when one must stand
A public Actor placed in all men's sight,
And (swaying power) with an imperious hand.
Doth hold the balance both of wrong and right,
Then, he for every action that is his
The censure of a thousand tongues must have,
Not only damned for doing things amiss,
But for not doing all that all men crave;
That Prince but undermines the Sovereign seat,
Who cares not who be weak so he be strong,
Moore studious for himself then for the state,
Or (if for it) that he may hold it long:
For, were Iove him for all men's good ordains,
He thinks both them, and theirs, made him to please,
As if a charge of weight, a place of pains▪
Were but a bed of rest, a Heaven of ease.
The world's great weight with Atlas' shoulders beat,
Is not so weighty all to weigh one down,
As that which on his head a king doth wear:
No burdens charge more heavy than a crown.
Th'aegean waves Time may more soon appease,
Then restless thoughts whose course for state prepares:
Can they have rest who toil for all men's ease?
The purple ever must be lined with cares.
Good kings are like the fire which (flaming bright)
Doth waste itself to serve another's turn:
And sovereignty is like fires glancing light,
Which (if but viewed) delights, if touched, doth burn;
I like for warmness to stand Vulcan by,
But not to burn amidst the Lemnian flame:
In Cedar's shadows men more safely lie,
Then on their tops, the roaring deities game:
All th'eye-attracting pomp and glorious shows,
Do merit scorn, though they amazement breed:
The world them pity more than Envy owes,
Who to seem happy wretched are indeed.
What alterations strange attend a Throne,
As if the sphere of fortune were a crown▪
The great still tossed like Sisyphus his stone,
When raised most high, rest ready to fall down.
Of this what greater proof can fame afford
Then mighty Philip's memorable fall,
Who daunted had the Grecians by the sword,
Though till that time by strangers not made thrall?
He, he, then whilst he solemnized with state,
His daughter's marriage, suddenly was lost:
It seemed when Heaven that Monarch's days would date,
That Hymen's torch gave light to Pluto's post.
When strong regards had graved within my heart,
The miseries that proper were to Court,
I thought them happy who (retired apart)
Can never know such things, but by report.
I might have lived with Alexander still,
To virtuous men, whose favours were not scarce:
Yet rather choosed (though having both at will)
To serve with Pallas, then command with Mars.
And whilst he toiled of others Lord to be,
I of myself did labour to be Lord;
Yet made as great a conquest too as he;
My pen shall be as famous as his Sword.
And had I willingly engaged my rest,
The way to trace which to vain glory tends,
I might have lived (respected with the best)
A special one of Alexander's friends.
Though I of him did never merit aught,
He entertained my friendship till his death,
And when he once our City's o'erthrow sought,
At my request did pacify his wrath.
Then once to me a mass of gold he sent,
And offered too a stately Asian Town,
Which I refused, more pleased with my poor rent,
Then he with all the treasures of a Crown:
I told, that such a sum but served to make
Him a corrupter, me corrupted thought,
And foul for him to give, for me to take,
Is used, shamed both, unused, did serve for nought;
But all those baits I never deigned to touch,
Lest I (who all my life had lived so free)
Might be possessed too much, possessing much,
If taking Riches, it had taken me.
No, I would rather learn to live with less,
Then for superfluous furniture to strive:
Who seeks out substance but to nurse excess,
To use it lives, not it that he may live.
My fortune doth afford sufficient means,
That may preserve all nature's powers in force;
And he who on a golden Sceptre leans,
Can not have more, but may well use it worse.
Then since abundance, but abuses brings,
Why seek men more than how to be well eased?
And (ah!) why toil they for so many things,
Since with a little nature can be pleased?
Lo! how the Heavens, whose love to man exceeds,
Have made his body strong, his mind divine,
And have made th'earth to furnish all his needs,
Lest curbing Cares might make his thoughts decline:
So that he hath a means to raise his flight
(If winged with virtue) and may (mounting high)
By time approach to the celestial light,
And deify himself before he die,
Yet doth he strait forgo that glorious way,
To toil for things which th'earth not forced affords,
The which his wants first framed were to defray,
By by himself are of his life made Lords.
O! how unworthy of the worth of man,
Are many labours which delight him most,
Since that corruption boldly first began
To make men nurse vile vice at virtue's cost.
And now what hath great Alexander gained
By endless travel, and excessive cares?
(Of whom (lo) now, they only say he reigned)
But death unto himself, worse to his heirs.
And for the guiltless blood which he hath spilled,
His conquests partners (lo) do now begin
To die even by the swords by which they killed,
And all his offspring expiates his sin.
Strange revolutions sway all worldly things:
The wheel of fortune still must slippery prove,
And chiefly then when charged it is with kings,
Whose states (as weighty) quickly make it move.
Yet Alexander I must say was blessed,
Who (still a victor) from distress estranged
The world's chief Monarch when his state was best,
Did did in time before his fortune changed:
And for his favour which I oft did try,
Whom earnestly he laboured to advance;
It grieves me that himself so soon did die,
And that his offspring hath so hard a chance.
His Successors have set all Greece on fire,
Of which I fear to perish by some spark;
For, Polypercon doth my death conspire,
And who can scape when made a great man's mark?
Yet for my Country's cause I'll give my blood,
Whilst safely praised all follow virtue can,
But (when by danger bragged) then, to do good,
O! that is worthy of a worthy man.
Nor do I tender so this puff of breath,
But I can yield that Nature it expel?
A mind that is resolved, triumphs o'er death,
He hath lived long enough who hath lived well.
NO doubt (great Heroes) whom the Heavens have loved,
(What ever countenance duty doth pretend)
Your minds are glad, since those (by me removed)
Who might have made you end, have made an end.
Loath not the means if pleased with the effect,
For though by this I have a realm obtained,
It yields you more, whose course none can suspect:
I only guilty am, ye all have gained.
Yet to pursue my life they first began,
For my defence this refuge last I proved:
What then himself can be more near to man?
When bragged by danger who would not be moved?
And if Olympias had not died in time
By offering up her blood to work my peace,
Then mine had been the harm, and hers the crime,
I but prevented her a little space;
And if her offspring had survived her death,
Whose rising could not but procure our fall,
Ye, now who nought but sovereignty do breath,
Had breathed obedience, or not breathed at all.
You from a dangerous yaoke have us relieved,
Which (I suspect) we should have tried too soon:
And why then should we labour to seem grieved
At that thing done, which we wish not undone?
No, no, since all for sovereignty do strive,
And have once tasted what it is to reign,
Each one of us would rather die, then live
To bear a subjects servile yoke again.
And though perchance with Alexander Son;
(If heir to him in worth, as of his state)
We might have most respected places won,
As special pillars of the Prince's seat.
Though greater than the rest, as of before,
It would have vexed us, less than one to fall:
The fall from first to second grieves one more,
Then from the second to the last of all;
Our envied glory had destruction brought,
And would have made us odious to remain:
It dangerous is for subjects to be thought
Such as desire, or yet deserve to reign.
When any Tempest threatened had his Throne,
He would have sought for surety at our cost:
When jealousy (minds worm) hath seized on one,
The greatest virtues are suspected most.
Yea, though we could to quite our state consent,
Us from suspicion nought but death could purge:
Still greatness must turmoil, or then torment,
If borne a burden, if laid down a scourge.
But when we have within our bosom weighed
The ruin of all Alexander's race,
Whom without blushing we might have obeyed,
By right succeeding in our Sovereign's place.
How can our souls but highly be ashamed,
If one below them far emboldened thus,
Doth seek by wrong that which by right they claimed,
And by their o'erthrow would insult o'er us?
Nor need I more as in suspense remain,
To mask my meaning with ambiguous words,
No, no, our words may as his deeds be plain,
Which fame (and that not whispring) now records:
Ye hear how that Antigonus of l●te,
(Whose thoughts (winged with good success) soar too high)
Doth strive above the rest to raise his State,
And by all means doth fortune frankly ply.
Since to his hands Eumenes was betrayed,
Lo quite transported by praepost'rous pride,
(As if in nought adebted to our aid)
To yield our due he cannot now abide.
Thus time let truth of all things doth proclaim:
Man is a crafty Creature, had to know,
Who can a face for every fortune frame:
No trust in mortals, no; nor faith below,
As our particulars do sometime move,
We, what we wish for most, seem to mislike,
And oft of others do the course disprove,
Whilst we want only means to do the like.
Then whilst Perdiccas did attempt before
To make the rest who were his equals thrall,
Who, than Antigonus detested more
The foolish pride of one that would have all?
But since Perdiccas and his faction fell,
Whom he (as Traitors of the State) pursued,
He, in his place succeeding to rebel,
Hath what he seemed to end, again renewed;
And yet I may times have mused of this,
How from the world he did Enmenes send.
How? but by Treason as his custom is,
False at the first, and cruel in the end.
I know, that after many doubtful fights,
He hath o'erthrown Eumenes at the last:
But by what Stratagems, or treacherous slights,
I would be glad to hear how all hath past.
Antigonus was at the first afraid,
To match Eumenes by plain force in fight,
And therefore all that fear affords assayed,
For valour frank, still using wary slight.
Amongst Eumenes' troops (their minds to prove)
He scattered letters with allurements stored,
By promised treasures, and protested love,
Some to corrupt who might betray their Lord;
But he (still wise) his Troops in time advised
To clear their virtue by their enemy's vice,
And gave them thankes, who would not be enticed
To sell their faith at such a bloody price;
Then said, that he himself those scrolls procured,
That when they spied such practices again,
They still might think them (by this means allured)
Their Captain's trial, not their Enemy's train.
Thus by the course which should have him entrapped,
His adversary did deluded stay:
Whilst both the from that present danger scaped,
And to prevent the like, prepared a way,
Then when he saw this policy had failed,
And that there had some doubtful afflicts past,
Antigonus who had at one prevailed
(As having had some vantage at the last)
Did with Eumenes strait procure to speak,
And (as t'one vanquished) offered him goodwill,
But he (whose mind could not be brought to break)
Would only talk as to his equal still:
For, when a band (between them made) did bear,
He to Antigonus should help impart,
That form reformed he first of all would swear,
With Alexander's offspring to take part.
Thus where they his submission did attend,
Imperiously conditions he imposed:
So that thereafter to procure his end,
The other by all means his mind disposed;
And shortly of his bands a vain debate,
For his confusion fit occasion brought;
Still as by concord small things do grow great,
By discord great things are reduced to nought;
Whileas Eumenes fortunately lived,
The Ag●raspides to him gave place,
Till that for state two of their Captains strived,
And his authority would not embrace.
Such as that spite of theirs to have him spoiled,
That though of valour he rare wonders proved,
And oft by force Antigonus had foiled,
Yet from their mind it could not be removed,
For (by their means allured) the other bands,
To get some baggage which they lost again,
Did take their Captain, with outrageous hands,
Their glory darkening by that odious stain:
And though Eumenes trusting to new hopes,
By flying laboured succour to have found,
He was prevented by his Traitorous Troops,
And (like to some base fugitive) was bound.
Scarce could his stormy stomach bend to break,
Deign to entreat those who had him betrayed,
Yet, having hardly purchased leave to speak,
He stretched them forth his fettered hands, and said:
Lo, what apparel now your General wears,
Since with your faith his liberty was lost;
Yet he those bands not given by th'enemy bears;
No, but by you in whom he trusted most:
And must he thus be led, who should you lead?
Is this the triumph which I should receive
For all my victories, thus to be made
Of Captain, Captive; of a Conqueror, slave?
How oft (my Soldiers) have ye all of late
To me by solemn oaths sworn to be true?
But it becomes none in a captives state
With lofty words his keepers to pursue;
Nor crave I further favour at this hour,
Then that ye bathe your weapons in my breast;
Let not my life be in mine enemy's power,
Lo all that your Commander doth request▪
I know Antigonus doth take no care
Who get my body, so he get my head;
And he regards not, neither when, nor where,
Nor in what sort I die, so I be dead.
But if through horror of so vile a deed
Your eyes look down, your hair erected stands,
Which in your minds this much remorse doth breed,
That as your hearts ye will not stain your hands;
Then as your Captain, since not force I may,
I (as your friend) entreat, that now in time
I may but have a Sword myself to stay,
You to excuse, whilst partner of your crime.
But when he saw that words could not assuage
Their barbarous thoughts which nothing could control,
Then having turned his Courage all in rage,
He thus flamed forth the fury of his soul:
O damned rascals who have lost all faith,
Whom neither duty, nor yet merit binds!
How oft was Alexander moved to wrath
By those your mutinous and malicious minds?
And, O! what could I at those hands attend,
Which yet were smocking with Perdiccas' blood?
Of those who by like Treason did intent
With old Antipater's to be imbrued.
Heaven thunder on you from th'aethereal Rounds,
And make you live (abominable band)
Base vagabonds, barred from your native bounds,
Then die detested in a harb'rous Land;
And as ye have the world with murder filled,
So may your blood by the same Swords be shed,
By which you have more of your Captains killed
Then of your foes, from whom (like beasts) ye fled.
But neither courteous, nor outrageous words
Can change his soldiers from their first intent;
Who forward led their Captain chained with cords,
(A scorned Captive) to his Rival's Tent,
Where to the end that he might quickly end,
He asked, what stayed Antigonus to go
By setting of him free to gain a friend,
Or by his death to rid him of a foe;
And soon Antigonus did hast his fall,
By this great magnanimity not moved;
And th' Agiraspides (dispersed o'er all)
As murderers, murder from the world removed.
Thus oft have Traitors been dispatched in time,
By those whom their upbraiding looks dismay:
That loathed remembrance of the Author's crime
The actors death can only wipe away.
Now claims Antigonus when fame doth feast,
Above his Sovereign's self in rank to sit;
For Alexander but subdued the East,
And he hath conquered them who conquered it.
No doubt, but he will do the best he can,
And hath within himself high things designed:
For whilst prosperity transports a man,
Nought seems difficult to a lofty mind.
Of those in whom he did suspect a spirit,
Whose courage served his courses to resist,
He hath himself by divers means made quite:
In others wreaks his safety doth consist;
Thus martial Python who no danger spared,
(Whom Alexander held in high account)
Did at the last receive a hard reward,
For helping him Eumenes to surmount.
His spirit to tempt, and power fit to perform
Made jealousy Antigonus torment;
And yet he feigned to love him for the form,
Till he his Court did love him to frequent,
Where whilst he did (mistrusting nought) abide,
He publicly in all the people's sight
(Though seeming justly) damned unjustly died:
No wrong more vile than wrong that looks like right.
Thus diverse Governors within short space,
Their Government, or then their life have lost,
And others are preferred unto their place,
Who did depend upon his favour most;
Oft likewise me he laboured to surprise,
By policy whom he would have o'erthrown:
But I, whom Python's danger had made wise,
Learned by his ruin to prevent mine own;
To save my life abandoned is my state,
And I have fled with danger as you see:
That you may know, how that man doth grow great,
Whose pride may plague you all, as well as me.
Then let us see what course we should intent,
Lest (out of time made wise) we rue too late.
I rather first pursue, than last defend.
A fire would still be quenched ere it grow great.
Then let us from Antigonus in haste
Demand our share of what he did attain;
Since in this war we did our Treasure waste,
We should be likewise partners of the gain:
But if against our suit his ears he bar,
And do with scornful words contemn our claim,
Then may our messenger denounce the war,
And we shall shortly prosecute the same.
A mutual band must made amongst us be,
To make one fortune common to us all,
And from henceforth we must all four agree
To stand together, or together fall.
And since the Princely buds for which we cared,
(How ever dead) are dead, what ere we do,
So to procure from men the more regard,
We with the state must take the title too.
And we must both be crowned, and known for kings,
The diadem of Greatness is the Tower:
All vulgar judgements lean on th'outward things,
And reverence State, where they obey but power.
IS there a Heaven? and are there Heavenly Powers
To whose decree terrestrial things are thrall?
Or would the Tyrant that begets the hours,
(Eternity not spared) extinguish all?
Lo, Nature travels now, as big with change,
Since mortals all humanity have lost,
And in th'old Chaos, or some mass more strange
To leave their essence all things earthly boast.
Can reasonable souls (from reason barred)
Even strive which most in cruelty exceeds?
What eye hath seen? or yet what ear hath heard
Such monstrous chances, and prodigious deeds?
Th'Arabian Robbers, nor the Scythians wild,
With savage beasts, which do (as barbarous) haunt
With such foul facts have not themselves defiled,
As those who of civility do vaunt.
Since Greeks (grown barbarous) basely are inclined,
All virtue vanished is, all good forgot.
O careless Heavens! wretched Earth! Cho. what loads thy mind?
A multitude of murders. Cho. what? Nun. what not?
We know that since our Sovereign lost his breath,
Th'earth hath been bathed with many a crimson flood;
Perdiccas did procure Meleager's death,
And his own Soldiers drowned his breath with blood,
Th'Athenians prey Leonatus did remain,
And (by Eumenes' subtlety dismayed)
Neoptolemus and Craterus were slain,
Then by his own Eumenes was betrayed.
Man with his skill against his knowledge strives,
Where death his way attends, that way he tends,
And t' Atropos the fatal razor gives,
To cut the thread on which his life depends.
When Asia's victor after all his wars,
Great Babylon to view had bend his mind;
Both I, and others, studious of the Stars,
Did show that there his ruin was designed;
And to his successors we oft have shown
The means by which their fate might be controlled,
Yet was our skill contemned, and they o'erthrown,
As we foretold, and as they now have told.
They have told much, and yet I must tell more,
Their news were evil, yet were they not the worst.
And have the Heaven reserved more plagues in store?
As if we yet were not enough accursed.
As th'earth in pride, the Heavens in plagues abounds;
Our highest hopes have perished but of late.
Then wound our ears by hearing others wounds,
That pity now may tread the steps of hate.
Our Queen Olympias (raging with revenge)
All Macedon did with murders fill,
Which from her part the people did estrange,
Whilst rigour only limited her will.
So that when fierce Cassander sought her wreak,
She did mistrust the Macedonians minds,
And for the time the nearest strength did take,
There, till the storm was past, to wait fair winds.
But soon Cassander did the Town enclose,
And as she held him out, did hold her in,
That (like a Captive guarded by her foes)
She knew not by what way a way to win;
And when lives scant provision did decay,
Then did bare walls but small refuge afford:
She Scylla scaped to be Charybdis prey,
Who fell on famine flying from the sword.
Strait like pale Ghosts, faint Soldiers did remain,
Whose bowels hunger like a Harpy tears,
And with courageous words, the Queen in vain
Did raise their spirit (the belly hath no ears)
All languishing did then begin to fade,
As if too weak to bear themselves about.
Legs failed the body, and the neck the head,
Then whilst the flesh fell in, bones bursted out;
And when that meats which common are were spent,
Then Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, all served for food,
Of which, no horror th'eaters did torment,
For what not poison was, all than seemed good:
Some mouths accustomed once with dainty meats,
Wished what they oft had loathed, vile crumbs, soul floods,
And Ladies which had lived in pompous states,
Fed, as brought up with wolves amidst the woods.
Yea, must by those whom they themselves had nursed,
Oft by the offsprings death the Parent lived:
And which was worst, whilst breasts were like to burst,
None could give comfort, all themselves were grieved.
Such was their state, no friend be wailed his friend,
No wife her husband, no, nor Sire his son;
For apprehending their approaching end,
All with compassion of themselves were won.
The dead men's smell empoisoned them who lived,
Whilst first made faint by a defrauded womb;
Heaps were of breath and but all both deprived,
That all the town in end was but a tomb.
Life is the subject of distress and grief,
That still affords us matter to be moan;
And we by death can only have relief:
To live, and to be wretched, are both but one.
Yet foolish worldlings tossed with endless care,
(Though at too dear a rate) would still buy breath,
And following feathers wavering through the air,
Love life (though wretched) more than a happy death.
When thus the world Olympias plagued did spy,
All sought Cassander though for several ends.
All as a pest them who are wretched do fly:
Eclipsed fortune threatens loss of friends.
And she considering that she could not long
Hold out the siege, since victuals were grown scant,
Did send (as weak) for peace unto the strong.
Thus time and travel all things once may daunt.
Then did Cassander know that need constrained
Her so to bow, as every way diseased:
And, though he her request not quite disdained,
Yet the appointment was such as he pleased:
For, all the favour that she could procure,
Was leave to live a private person still;
And yet of that she could not be made sure,
Which did depend upon the Victors will.
Then whilst Cassander sought his enemy's ends,
Huge numbers with him always did abide.
Yet might have many followers, and few friends:
Friends by the touchstone of distress are tried.
But though the Queen was rendered in this sort,
A promise given that life should be preserved,
The tyrant with her spirit could not comport,
But from his faith, for her confusion swerved:
The Macedonians were together brought,
There to consult what did concern their Queen:
Of whom when as a number deeply thought,
Both what she was, and what she once had been;
Even as Cassander had suborned them all,
Their parents came whom she had damned to death,
And did her rigour to remembrance call,
By which the multitude was moved to wrath.
Whilst from their breasts all pity quite was barred,
They did conclude, their Queen behoved to dye.
Durst Subjects damn their Sovereign? and not heard?
So still may clouds obscure the world's bright eye.
Yet did Cassander put (false every way)
A mask of pity on a cruel mind,
And offered her a ship to fly away,
As if to death against his will assigned;
Nor was this course for her delivery framed,
But only as by chance that she might drown:
So for her death that he might not be blamed,
But only Neptune who had drunk her down:
Yet she (a Princess of a mighty spirit,)
Whose lofty courage nothing could overcome,
Said, ere she scaped by such a shameful flight,
That she would hear the Macedonians doom.
But when Cassander's counsel was contemned,
Lest that the multitude had changed their mind,
When they remembered whom they had condemned,
And did the fullness of his purpose find,
To rid her soon from pain, and him from fear,
He sent some bands from pity most estranged:
Yet she ' against fortune did a banner bear,
And not her heart, no, not her countenance changed.
She constant still, though moaned, would never moon,
Whose stately gesture braved their bold attempt,
And did unite her virtues all in one,
To grace disgrace, and glorify contempt.
She on two Lady's shoulders leaned her arms,
And with a Majesty did march to death,
Like Alexander once amidst th' altarmes,
As if in triumph to abandon breath.
The height of virtue admiration brings,
At this great magnanimity amazed:
As at the image of their ancient Kings,
Or then some Goddess all the Soldiers gazed:
But (ah) some (forced by the tyrant) strived
To spoil (unnatural) Natures fairest frame,
And twixth th' Alabaster Balls, they drived
Th' unwilling swords that strait grew red for shame.
Then, she in worth who did all else excel,
Would neither word, nor tear, nor sigh forth send,
But spread her garments o'er her, whilst she fell,
As of her honour jealous to the end.
O strange barbarity, most monstrous deed!
Can men a woman, Subjects kill their Queen:
And could her fortune past no pity breed?
Who ever gave the wound, that not her seen.
The ugly Author of those odious evils,
(Of punishment afraid) must still be sad,
His breast a hell, his thoughts all turned to devils,
(Through horror of himself) must make him mad.
And yet the plague of these detested times,
Doth by more mischief aggravate our groans.
No end in sin, crimes are maintained by crimes,
Who fall in depths, must touch the bottom once:
The path of honour hath but narrow bounds,
On which who step, attentive must remain:
Since raised so high above the vulgar grounds,
That who thence fall can never rise again.
Thus now Cassander (since he cannot win
True reputation, but lives tainted still)
Embarked in mischief, sails the depths of sin,
So if not loved as good, yet feared as ill.
Though (by his means) his ruthless eyes have seen
Fates (as it were from fortune's bosom) take,
His King by poison, by the sword his Queen,
Even yet himself more guilty still to make,
He (prospering in impiety) grew proud,
And murdered both his Master's Son and Wife;
Thus he, who all the world by birthright owed,
Can have no part of it, no, not his life.
Yet could Roxana's death not ease his mind,
Nor her young son, too soon made Plato's gues●:
But to undo all Alexander's kind,
That to revenge the rest, there might none rest.
By treason he (as all his deeds are done)
Cau's Hercules his brother's steps to trace,
Who was great Alexander's bastard son,
And th' only remnant of that great man's race,
Lo, thus Cassander, enemy to all good,
Whose soul so much for Macedon longs:
Hath to the Sceptre swim'd through Seas of blood,
Yet, O weak right, since builded but on wrongs!
O, how ambition doth abuse the great!
Who with enough not pleased, still strive for more:
Lo, how our Sovereign seemed to raise his state,
Yet made it but to fall whilst starved with store.
And since his Trophies reared in several fields,
Both him and his have to confusion brought,
Then, what is all the good that greatness yields,
Which makes itself seem much to be made nought?
Thus, though the mountains make a mighty show,
They are but barren heaps borne up aloft,
Where Plains are pleasant still, though they lie low,
And are most fertile too, though trod on oft.
Greatness is like a cloud in thy'ayrie bounds,
Which some base vapours have congealed above:
It brawls with Vulcan, thundering forth huge sounds,
Yet melts and falls there whence it first did move.
Since that world's conqueror then whilst far from fear,
(By too much power pressed) so soon was dead:
Why do his Captains strive who now should bear
The Diadem that crushed so strong a head?
O! when my mind is ravished through the stars,
To search the secret secrets of the fates:
What treasons, murders, mutinies and wars,
Are threatening to o'erthrow usurped seats?
That false Cassander who betrayed his Lord,
And spoiled the princely race, in mischief chief,
(A traitor both of heaven and earth abhorred)
Shall live but with disgrace, and dye with grief.
His sons (in wickedness himself t'exceed)
Shall make the woman dye whom ade them live;
Then both (when drunk with blood) to death shall bleed,
And none of theirs their funerals shall survive:
When rash ambition should be cooled by age,
Lysimachus shall by Seleucus dye;
Nor shall Seleucus long enjoy the Stage,
But by like violence shall breathless lie;
And subtle Ptolemies degenered race,
(Long only famous for infamous things)
Shall end and to the pride of foes give place,
Whilst a lascivious Queen confusion brings;
Amigon●● shall be in battle killed,
His Son a captive perish with disgrace
And after that it Greece with blood hath filled,
In th' end, destruction doth attend that race;
The last in power (though of their line not bred)
A niggard, and a dastard, beaten down,
Shall (through a stranger's town, a Captive led)
Of Macedon bound the old renown.
WHat damned furies thus toss mortals minds,
With such a violent desire to reign?
That neither honour, friendship; duty, blood,
Nor yet no band so sacred is as binds
Ambitious thoughts which would a kingdom gain:
But all is buried in black Lethe's flood,
That may the course of Sovereignty restrain,
Which from the breast doth all respects repel,
And like a torrent cannot be gaine-stood:
Yea many would, a Sceptre to obtain,
In spite of all the world, and loves own wrath,
March through the lowest dungerons of the hells,
And from a Diadem would breathe with power,
Though all death's engines bragged them every hour,
Yet, though such restless minds attain in th'end
The height to which their haughty hearts aspired,
They never can embrace that dreamt bliss,
Which their deluded thoughts did apprehend;
Though by the multitude they be admired,
That still to power doth show itself submiss;
Yet by the soul still further is required,
Which should seal up th' accomplishment of joy;
Thus partial judgements blindly ●yme amiss,
At things which stand without our reach retired,
Which whilst not ours, as treasures we define,
But not the same whilst we the same enjoy;
Some things a far do like the Glow-worm shine,
Which looked too near, have of that light no sign.
No charge on th'earth more weighty to discharge,
Then that which of a kingdom doth dispose:
O! those who manage must the reynes of state,
Till their pale Ghost embark in Charon's Barge,
They never need t'attend a true repose:
How hard is it to please each wans conceit,
When gaining one, they must another lose?
Thus, hardly Kings themselves can evenly bear,
Whom if severe (as cruel) subjects hate;
Contempt dare to the mild itself oppose;
Who spare in time, as niggards are despised,
Men from too frank a mind, exactions fear,
Though in all shapes (as Proteus used) disguised,
Kings by some scandal always are surprised.
Yet one might well with every thing comport,
Which on opinion only doth depend,
If further danger followed not by deeds,
But every Monarch (Lo) in many a sort
Death (laid in ambush) always doth attend;
Of some by mutinous swords the life forth bleeds;
By unsuspected poison others end,
Which whilst they always labour to prevent,
A thousand deaths within their breasts life breeds;
Lo, this is all for which the great contend,
Who, (whilst their pride themselves and others spoils)
With their dominions do their cares augment:
And O vain man who toil'st to double toils,
Though still the victory the Victor foils:
Thus Alexander could not be appeased,
Whilst be to raise his state did ways prepare,
Which when made most, diminished most remained,
Where (with his father's bounds had he been pleased)
He might have left our Crown sure to his heir,
Who by his conquest nought but death hath gained;
Yet for no pains a number now doth spare,
To work for that by which his wreak was wrought,
Which (though from it they rage to be restrained)
Would (if possessed) their pleasures but impair;
Yet they by harm of others seek the thing
Which by their harm of others will be sought:
To him and his, each of them death would bring,
That it might once be said he was a King.
We may securely sitting on the shore,
Whilst great men do (as tossed on th' Ocean) grone,
Taught by their toils, esteem much of our rest:
For this doth thousands with affliction store,
Which of the world as most unhappy moan,
If they but chance to view some few more blessed,
Where if they would but mark, how many a one
More wretched than they in misery doth live,
It strait would calm the most unquiet breast;
The Cottage oft is happier than the Throne;
To think our own state good, and others ill:
It could not but a great contentment give:
There much consists in the conceit and will:
To us all things are as we think them still.