THough I (a Goddess) grace the azure round,
Whilst birds (all bright with eyes) my Coach do move,
And am with radiant stars, heaven's Empress crowned,
The thunderers sister, wife of mighty Iove,
And though I banquet in th'ethe rial bowers,
Where Ambrosia and Nectar serves for meat,
And at the meeting of th' Immortal powers,
And still advanced unto the highest seat:
Yet by those glorious shows of boundless bliss,
My burdened mind can no way be relieved:
Since immortality affords but this,
That I live ever to be ever grieved.
In vain, vain mortals seek for help at me,
With sacred odours on my Altars thrown:
What expectation can they have to see
One venge their wrongs, who cannot venge her own?
May Pallas then drown thousands if she please,
Who metamorphosed Diomedes mates?
And must my enemies always live at ease,
As me to spite appointed by the fates?
Of all the dying race which lives below,
With such indignities none could comport,
As wound my breast, whom Gods and men do know,
To be abused by Iove in many a sort.
Though known to me, from others if concealed,
His faults might breed me grief, but yet not shame;
Where, lo, now both through heaven and earth revealed,
Each slanderous Theatre doth his scorn proclaim.
If divine souls divinely lived aloft,
The world below would imitate them then,
But humanised by haunting mortals oft,
Where men should grow like Gods, Gods grow like men.
My painted Iris in her beauty's pride,
Smiles not on Phoebus with so many hues,
As Iove in diverse shapes himself can hide,
When he poor Maids (by Cupid spurred) pursues;
He Danae (a golden shower) deceived;
And did (a Swan) in Leda's bosom light;
Then (turned a Bull) Agenor's daughter reaved;
And Io made a Cow to mock my sight:
But O! I wish that with such wanton Dames,
He still to sport would as with me remain;
Not able then to touch celestial flames,
All (like the drunkard's mother) might be slain.
Then such a troop as Rhea's bosom stores,
Would not hold him and me at endless jars;
The heavens are pestered with my husband's whores,
Whose lights impure do taint the purest stars.
Though wrongs, when gross, are heavy to digest,
An Actor's greatness doth some grief remove,
Of whom to suffer wrong it shames one least:
If I were wronged ' I would be wronged by Iove;
But (ah) this long, tormented hath my breast,
A Man, a Boy, a shepherd, yea, and worse,
The Phrygian firebrand, the adulterous guest,
Who first wrought wrong by fraud, and then by force;
He, he was he, whose verdict moved me most,
Whilst partial fancies judged of beauties right;
Nor was it strange though one all judgement lost,
Who had three naked Goddesses in sight;
And yet I know, had not his wand'ring eyes
The Cyprian bribed by some lascivious smiles,
My pompous birds (in triumph) through the skies,
Had borne the gold which oft her Nymphs beguiles;
And am I she whose greatness is admired,
Whom Iove for wife, whom thousands court for love?
Whom haughty Ixion to embrace desired,
Yet with a cloud deluded did remove?
And what made me a matter to submit,
Where my authority might have availed?
Whilst though I promised wealth, and Pallas wit,
Yet with a young man, Venus most prevailed;
But how dared he of one the glory raise,
Where two contemned would needs the wrong repair?
It spite's our sex to hear another's praise,
Of which each one would be thought only fair.
To venge myself no kind of pain I spared,
And made his greatest gain his greatest loss:
As Venus gave him Helen for reward,
I gave him Helen for his greatest cross;
Nor did he long with joy her love enjoy,
Whose fatal flames his Country did confound,
Whilst Armies armed for her did Troy destroy,
And Neptune's labours leveled with the ground;
Whilst Simois seemed to be a burial field,
Whose streams as streets) were with dead bodies paved,
All Xanthus' Plain (as turned a Sea) did yield
A flood of blood, from Heroes wounds received;
Whilst braving thousands once, though much esteemed,
By dust and blood deformed, of Hector slain,
(Not like Patroclus by the sword redeemed)
The body basely was bought back again;
Then, by the same man's son who killed his son,
Old Priamus surprised, sighed forth his breath,
And even most harmed where he for help had run,
The Altar taking, taken was by death.
Though wrestling long to scape the heaven's decree,
(Blood quenching lust) last parted from the light,
He who loved Helen, and was loathed by me,
Did (as a Sacrifice) appease my spite.
Then, having lived (if wretches have a life)
Till in all hers ere dead, oft buried spied)
Though once known both, nor mother then, nor wife,
The fertile Hecuba (mad childless) died.
Thus, by those means it would have seemed to some
That scorned beauty had been well revenged:
But whilst they were o're-comed, they did overcome,
Since they their states for better states have changed.
I in one part that people did confound,
But did enlarge their power in every place:
All warlike Nations through the world renowned,
From Phrygian ruins strive to raise their race.
And yet two traitors who betray the rest
O! that the heaven on treason sometime smiles!
Though having worst deserved, did chance the best,
More I appy then at home in their exiles;
Did not Antenor (stealing through his foes)
near to th' Euganian Mountains build a Town,
Of which so●e nurslings once shall seek repose,
Amidst the waves, and in the depths sit down:
Their City (spousing Neptune) shall arise,
The rarest Commonwealth that ever was,
Whose peo; e, if as stout as rich and wise,
Might boast to bring miraculous things to pass.
Then false Aeneas, though but borne t' obey,
Did (of a fugitive) become a King:
And some of his near Tiber's streams that stay,
Would all the world to their obedience bring.
Their ravenous Eagles soaring o'er all lands,
By violence a mighty prey have won,
That bastard brood of Mars with martial bands,
Have conquered both the Mansions of the Sun;
Their course by mountains could not be controlled,
No; Neptune could not keep his bosom free:
The parching heat, nor yet the freezing cold,
Their Legions limits no way could decree;
Yet, of that City there can come no good,
Whose rising walls with more than barbarous rage,
The builder first bathed with his brother's blood,
Which their prodigious conquests did presage.
Oft hath that Town my soul with anguish fi●li'd,
Whose newborn state did triumph o'er my wrath,
Like my old foe who in his Cradle killed
The Serpents which I sent to give him death.
By Sabins, Albans, Tuscans, oft assailed,
Even in her infancy I tossed Rome's state,
Yet still Laomedon's false race prevailed,
And angry Iuno could do nought but hate.
Then when the gallant Gauls had vanquished Rome,
Who basely bought her liberty with gold,
A banished man Camillus chanced to come,
And her imbalanced state redeemed of old;
Great Hannibal our common cause pursued,
And made his bands within their bounds remain,
With Consuls and with Praetor's blood, imbrued,
At Thrasimene, and at Cannas slain;
In Romen minds, strange thoughts did doubt infuse,
But whilst they feared the taking of their Town,
He who could vanquish, victory not use,
Was by their brazen fate (when high) thrown down;
O what a torrent of Barbarian bands,
In inundations once their walls did boast,
Whilst Teutons huge, and Cymbers from their Lands,
Like Giants marched, a more than monstrous host?
But though from parts unknown to ruin Rome,
I led those troops which all the word admired,
Yet did fierce Marius me with them overcome,
And I in vain to venge old wrongs aspired;
By means more base I likewise sought her harms,
Whilst Ianus Church imported never peace,
I raised up abject Spartacus in Arms,
Who near eclipsed Rome's glory with disgrace.
Though I who all the world for help have sought.
From Europe, Africa, and from Asia thus,
Gauls, Carthaginians, and the Cymbers brought,
Yet did the damage still redound to us:
Of heaven and earth I all the powers have proved,
And for their wrack have each advantage watched,
But they by foreign force cannot be moved:
By Romans, Romans only may be matched.
And I at last have kindled civil war,
That from their thoughts (which now no reason bounds)
Not only laws, but Nature's laws doth bar;
The Son the Sire, the brother brother wounds;
Whilst th'Eagles are opposed to th'Eagles so,
O what contentment doth my mind attain!
No wound is wrong bestowed, each kills a foe,
What ever side doth lose, I always gain.
But this my soul exceedingly annoys,
That all at one time cannot be suppressed:
The war helps some, as others it destroys,
And those who hate me most, still prosper best.
Whilst with their blood their glory thousands spend,
Ah! once advancement aggravates my woe,
Who vaunts himself from Venus to descend,
As if he claimed by kind to be my foe.
I mean the man whose thoughts nought can appease,
Whilst, them too high a blind ambition bends,
Whom (as her minion) Fortune bend to please,
Her rarest treasures prodigally spends;
Not only hath he daunted by the Sword
The Gauls, the Germans, and th' Egyptians now,
But of all Lords pretends to be made Lord,
That who command the world to him may bow;
Thus dispossessing Princes of their Thrones,
Whilst his Affection nothing can assuage,
That the subjected world in bondage groans,
The prey of pride, the sacrifice to rage,
Men rail on Iove, and sigh for Saturn's time,
And to the present, Ages past prefer,
Than burden would the Gods with every crime,
And damn the heavens, where only th'earth doth err.
Though Iove (as stupid) still with Cupid sports,
And not the humour of proud Caesar spies?
Who may (if forcing thus the world's chief Forts)
Then Titans erst, more powerful, scale the skies.
Yet lest he thrall him too, who none free leaves,
We from the bounds above him must repel,
To brawl with Pluto in th'umbrageous Caves,
There since he will be first, made first in hell.
What? with that Tyrant I will strait be even,
And send his soul to the Tartarian grove▪
Though Iove will not be jealous of his heaven,
Yet Iuno must be jealous of her Iove;
And though none in the heavens would do him ill,
I'll raise up some in th'earth to haste his death:
Yea though both heaven and earth neglect my will,
H●ll 〈◊〉 me Ministers of wrath▪
I'll cro●● 〈◊〉 and the smoking lakes;
To borrow ●●enc●●●y brothers damned bands,
The furies armed with fire-barands, and with Snakes,
Shall plant their hell where Rome so stately stands;
Whilst Furies furious by my fury made,
Do spare the dead to have the living pined:
O! with what joy will I that Army lead?
Nought then revenge more calms a wronged mind;
I must make this a memorable age,
By this high vengeance which I have conceived:
But what though thousands dye t'appease my rage?
So Caesar perish, let no soul be saved.
WE should be loath to grieve the gods,
Who hold us in a balance still;
And as they will
May weigh us up, or down;
Those who by folly foster pride,
And do deride
The terror of the Thunderers rods,
In seas of sin their souls do drown,
And others them abhor as most unjust,
Who want Religion do deserve no trust:
How dare frail flesh presume to rise
(Whilst it deserves heaven's wrath to prove)
On th'earth to move,
Lest that it opening strait,
Give death and burial both at once?
How dare such one's
Look up unto the skies,
For fear to feel the Thunderers weight?
All th'Elements their Makers will attend,
As prompt to plague, as men are to offend.
All must be plagued who God displease,
Then whilst he Bacchus rites did scorn,
Was Pentheus torn;
The Delians high disdain
Made Niobe (though turned a stone)
With tears still moan,
And (Pallas to appease)
Arachne weaves loathed webs in vain:
Heaven hath prepared ere ever they begin,
A fall for pride, a punishment for sin.
Lo, Iuno yet doth still retain
That indignation once conceived,
For wrong received
From Paris as we find;
And for his cause (bend to disgrace
The Trojan race)
Doth hold a high disdain,
Long laid up in a lofty mind:
We should abstain from irritating those
Whose thoughts (if wronged) not till revenged repose.
Thus, thus for Paris fond desire,
Who of his pleasures had no part,
For them must smart:
Such be the fruits of lust;
Can heavenly breasts so long time lodge
A secret grudge?
Like Mortals thrall to ire,
Till justice sometime seems unjust?
Of all the furies which afflict the soul,
Lust and revenge are hardest to controull●
The Gods give them but rarely rest,
Who do against their will contend,
And plagues do spend,
That fortunate in nought,
Their spirits (quite parted from repose)
May still expose
The stormy troubled breast
A prey to each tyrannic thought:
All self-accusing souls no rest can find,
What greater torment than a trouble mind?
Let us adore th'immortal powers,
On whose decree, of all that ends,
The state depends,
That (far from barbarous broils)
We of our life this little space
May spend in peace
Free from afflictions showers;
Or at the least from guilty toils;
Let us of rest the treasure strive to gain,
Without the which nought can be had but pain.
NOw have my hopes attained the longed for heaven,
In spite of partial Envies poisonous blasts:
My Fortune with my courage hath proved even;
No Monument of miscontentment lasts.
Those who corrivaled me, by me overthrow,
Did by their falls give feathers to my flight:
I in some corner rather live unknown
Then shine in glory, and not shine most bright;
What common is to two, rests no more rare,
In all the world no Phoenix is save one,
That of my deeds none challenge might a share,
Would God that I had acted all alone:
And yet at last I need to mourn no more
For envy of the Macedonians praise,
Since I have equalled all that went before;
My deeds in number do exceed my days.
Some erst (whose deeds rest registered by Fame)
Did from their Conquests glorious titles bring,
But Greatness to be great, must have my name,
To be a Caesar is above a King.
Those warlike Nations, which did Nations spoil,
Are by thy Legions to our laws made thrall;
What can brave minds not do by time and toil?
True magnanimity triumphs o'er all.
Th'outrageous Gauls who in most monstrous swarms
Went wasting Asia, thundering down all things,
And (Macedony quaking at their Arms)
Did insolently make, and un-make Kings:
Those Gauls who having the world's conquerors foiled,
(As if the world might not have matched them then)
Would sacrilegiously have Delphos spoiled,
And warred against the Gods, contemning men;
Yea, those whose Ancestors our City burned,
(The only people whom the Romans feared)
By me (Rome's nursling) matched, and o'ermatched mourned:
So what they first eclipsed, again they cleared.
Then, as to Subjects having given degrees,
The Gauls no more presuming of their might,
I (wounding Neptune's bosom with winged trees)
Did with the world-divided Britain's fight;
The Germans from their birth enured to war,
Whose martial minds still haughty thoughts have bred,
Whilst neither men, nor walls, my course could bar,
(Masked with my banners) saw their Rhine run red;
The Eastern Realms when conquering now of late,
My coming, and o're-comming was but one;
With little pain ear'st Pompey was called great,
Who fought soft bands whose glorious days were gone:
But what though thousands set one's praises forth,
For fields which shadows, and not swords, obtained;
The rate (too easy) vilifies the worth:
Save by great pains, no glory can be gained:
From dangers past, my comfort now proceeds,
Since all who durst gainstand I did overcome:
And, in few words to comprehend my deeds,
Rome conquered all the world, and Caesar, Rome.
Lo those who strived your virtue to suppress,
(As whose great actions made them jealous still)
Whilst labouring but too much to make you less,
Have made you to grow great against your will:
Great Pompey's pomp is past, his glory gone,
And rigorous Cato by himself lies killed;
Then dastard Cicero more you● honours none,
Thus all your foes are with confusion filled.
The Senators who could not be assuaged,
Long to your prejudice their power abused,
Till at their great ingratitude enraged,
I swore our swords would grant what they refused▪
When having scaped, endangered, and despised,
Brave Curio and I did to your Camp resort,
In old bare gowns (like some base slaves) disguised,
All sighed to see us wronged in such a sort.
The highest in the heaven who knows all hearts,
Do know my thoughts as pure as are their Stars,
And that (constrained) I came from foreign parts
To seem uncivil in the civil wars.
I moved that war which all the world bemoanes,
Whilst urged by force to free myself from fears;
Still when my hand gave wounds, my heart gave groans;
No Romen blood was shed, but I shed tears:
But how could any elevated spirit,
Who had for honour hazarded his blood,
Yield willingly (by foes outrageous spite)
To be defrauded of th'expected good:
When as a multitude of battles won,
Had made Rome's Empires, and my glory great;
And that the Gauls (oft vanquished) had begun
To bear the yoke which they disdained of late.
Then glorious Pompey, my proud son-in-law,
And Cato (who still crossed what I designed)
From favouring me the people did withdraw,
And had a successor for spite assigned;
Not that he should succeed in dangerous broils,
But (even through envy) as they had ordained,
That he might triumph so of all my toils,
And rob the glory which I dearly gained;
With such indignity who could comport,
When prising honour dearer than the light?
No (whilst my soul rests sovereigning of this fort)
None shall have power to rob me of my right:
And yet by Iove who all the world commands,
To use such violence I did mislike:
And would have oft abandoned all my bands,
If that mine enemies would have done the like;
But yet the multitude, which floating still
(As waves with winds) are carried with conceits,
With nought but my disgrace would bond their will,
And I committed all unto the fates.
Yet when at Rubicon I stood perplexed,
And weighed the horror of my high attempt,
My stormy soul a thousand fancies vexed,
Which resolution buried in contempt.
Nought in a Captain more confounds his foes,
Then of a venturous course, the swift effects,
Since (so quite crushed) ere they their thoughts dispose,
All good advice a care confused neglects.
Though when you marched to Rome, your power was small,
The sudden news so thundered in each ear,
That (as if heaven had fall'n upon them all)
If bred amazement, and th'amazement fear.
Some secret destiny (as then was seen)
Doth guide men's actions, and their judgement bounds:
Those who by hosts could not have frighted been,
A shadow, or a rumour oft confounds:
All hasty dangers so surprise the mind,
That fear prevents the resolution's power,
Or else the fates make curious Reason blind,
When heavens determined have a fatal hour.
Great Pompey (lo) who was grown aged in arms,
And had triumphed o'er all the world's three parts,
Whilst (quite discouraged, by imagined harms)
Fled Rome, though without reach of th'enemies' darts.
As to a torrent all gave place to you,
And whom they called a rebel made their Lord;
Your successor Domitius (forced to bow)
Did trust your favour, more than fear your sword.
When in th' Iberian bounds you did arrive,
There, Adversaries (who did vainly vaunt)
Had all th'advantage that the ground could give,
Of victuals plenty, which with us were scant.
Yet the celerity that you had used,
Did so discourage their disordered band,
That (as Iove in their breasts had fear infused)
They had no strength against our strokes to stand.
And when Rome's General with brave legions stored,
Seemed to possess all that his soul required,
Whilst us to daunt, both famine and the sword,
The Sea, the Land, and all in one conspired;
Then, for your offices they did contend,
As those who of the victory were sure,
And (where they might th'affairs of state attend)
In Rome for lodgings fond did procure.
Yet memorable now that day remains,
When all the world was in two Armies ranged,
Whilst Mars went raging through th' Aemathian plains,
And to despairs high expectations changed;
When Pompey's party had the battle lost;
(As Lions do their prey) you did pursue
The scattered remnant of that ruined host,
On which new heads still (like a Hydra) grew
Though victory in Africa fatal seemed
To any Army that a Scipio led,
Yet, you showed there (for worth in war esteemed)
That Rome a better than a Scipio bred;
And all our Enemies were confounded thus,
Who us in number ever did surmount;
But Caesar and his fortune were with us,
Which we did more than many thousands count.
The sweetest comfort which my conquests gave,
Was that I so might do to many good:
For, every day some Romans life I save,
Who in the field to fight against me stood,
Thus, may my mind be judged by the event,
Who (even when by my greatest foes assailed)
To win the battle never was more bend,
Then prompt to pardon when I had prevailed.
Not covetous of blood, of spoils, nor harms,
I (even when victor) did insult o'er none,
But laid aside all hatred with my Arms,
A foe in fight, a friend when it was gone▪
Of clemency I like the praise, more than
Of force, which mortals with affliction loads;
Strength oft may prove the worst thing that's in men,
And pity is the best thing in the Gods.
Stern Cato (still affecting to be free)
Who either death or life (if given) disdained,
Thy death I envy, who didst envy me,
The glory that I (saving thee) had gained.
Yet I to Rents and dignities restore,
Even those who long my ruin had designed:
And O! it doth delight my mind far more,
By benefits, then by constraint to bind.
I would have all my foes brought to their ends,
I rather have my foes all made my friends.
Their blood whom I suspected should quench all strife.
So might one do who liked of nought but life.
Still life would be redeemed from dangers forth.
Not with a ransom then itself more worth.
Then life to man, what thing more dear succeeds?
The great contentment that true glory breeds.
Men by all means this blast of breath prolong▪
Men should strive to live well, not to live long.
And I would spend this momentary breath
To live by fame for ever after death:
For I aspire in spite of fates to live.
I fear that some too soon your death contrive.
Who dare but lodge such thoughts within their minds?
Those whom the shadow of your Greatness blinds.
The best are bound to me by gifts in store.
But to their Country they are bound far more.
Then loathe they me as th'Enemy of the state?
Who freedom love, you (as usurper) hate.
I by great battles have enlarged their bounds.
By that they think your power too muchy abounds.
From doing wrong, yet I refrain my will.
They fear your power, because it may do ill.
The present state still miscontentment brings
To factious minds affecting matters strange,
Which (burdens to themselves) do loath all things,
And so they change, regard not what they change.
In populous Towns where many do repair,
(Who at their meeting what they please do touch)
They further than their bounds extend their care:
The idle who do nothing, must think much.
Lo, Rome (though wasted all with raging wars)
Whilst private grudge pretended public good,
Equality (still rude) engendering jars,
Did prove too prodigal of Roman blood.
Though yet now at the last attaining rest,
Whilst all (obeying one) may banish tears:
It (if constrained) even scorns (as bad) the best,
This word necessity so wounds the ears.
The insolent with vile seditious words,
(Who trembled whilst they heard the Trumpets sound)
Stir now their tongues, as we did then our swords,
And what Mars spared, make Mercury confound.
The people thus in time of peace agree
To curb the great men still, even in that form,
As in calm days they do disbranch the Tree,
Which shrouded them of late against a storm.
But now I looked (brave deeds appeasing spite)
That bursted Envy should for anguish dye,
Dark shadows (as ashamed) do vanish quite,
When at his height bright Phoebus clears the sky.
And though their hatred deeply they disguise,
Yet can they not so hide inflamed desires,
But that their spite rests sparkling through their eyes,
And boasts to burst out strait in open fires.
Since first (great Caesar) I discerned thy worth,
On all thy actions I did still attend;
And what some whisper must speak freely forth:
Franke admonitions do become a friend.
The men who do suspect that you aspire
Of government the present form to change,
All in their souls your ruin do conspire,
And their affections far from you estrange.
Since chaste Lucretia (by proud Tarquin stained)
Washed with her blood the violated bed,
Whilst by his power Rome basely was constrained,
All to obey which his cursed brain had bred.
This government which some tyrannic call,
Doth sound so odious in the people's ears,
That they as Tyrant's vile, detest them all,
Whose greatness gives them any cause of fears▪
I not affect the title of a King
For love of glory, or desire of gain,
Nor for respect of any private thing,
But that the State may by my travels gain,
You know Sibylla's books which never fail;
In many minds have an opinion bred,
That o'er the Parthians Rome cannot prevail,
Till by a Prince her valorous Bands be led:
For, as confusion is the fruit (we find)
Of those affairs which diverse thoughts dispose,
So Sovereignty matched with a gallant mind,
Breeds reverence in ones own, fear to his foes.
And O! it grieves me, that these steps of ours
Have trod so oft on many a millions necks,
Whilst yet the Parthian vilipends our powers,
And all our victories (not vanquished) checks;
Ah! should a General of the Roman race
Be by Barbarians killed? and not revenged?
And should his Ensigns, signs of our disgrace,
Rest in the rank of conquered relics ranged?
No, no, (wretched Crassus) now thyself content,
I'll pacify thy Ghost with Parthians spoils,
My boiling fancies have been always bend
To match the matchless, daunt th'undaunted soils.
With victories quite cloyed, will you not then
Your safety once, more than new wars respect?
No, though I have surmounted other men,
My fancies yet do greater things affect:
In emulation of myself at last,
I even with envy look on my own deeds;
And (bend to make the new surpass things past)
Now to my mind stolen praise no pleasure breeds.
The world hath seen thee (great man) for Rome's good,
In danger oft of many a dangerous shelf,
Whilst for her glory thou engaged thy blood,
Of others careful, careless of thyself.
Though whilst in th'April of my blooming age,
I from the vulgar rate redeemed my name,
Some with my deeds did burden youths hot rage,
And an ambitious appetite of Fame,
Yet since the coldness of declining years,
Boasts to congeal the blood which boiled of late,
Whilst lo, my life the Sun of glory clears,
Who now of all the world am known most great;
I cannot covet that thing which I have,
I have all honour that can be required:
And now (as that which wants) would only crave
To taste the pleasures of a life retired:
But (save to serve the State) for nought I strive,
For, O! (neglecting th'echoes of renown)
I could content myself unknown to live
A private man, with a Plebeian gown:
Since (Anthony) thus for the state I care,
And all delights which Nature loves disdain,
Go, and in time the people's minds prepare,
That, as the rest, I may the title gain;
Yet indirectly at the first assay
To what their doubtful minds do most incline,
But as without my knowledge, that they may
All mark your mind, and yet not think of mine.
DId I survive th'impetuous Scilla's rage,
And in a torrent of destruction stood,
Whilst Tyrants did make Rome a tragic stage
Through a voluptuous appetite of blood?
Scaped I confusion in a time so bad,
Of liberty and honour once to taste,
That bondage now might make my soul more sad
By the remembrance of my fortunes past?
What though I once (when first by Fame made known)
From Catiline's strange treason did preserve
This Town (when free from foes) thralled by her own,
Since now the world from equity doth swerve?
A spark of that conspiracy I spy
As yet not quenched to have our state embroiled,
Which Rome to burne makes many flames to fly:
Thus one was spared, that we might all be spoiled.
O worthy Cato, in whose matchless mind
Three (rarely matched) things Natures did reveal,
Wit, Honesty, and Courage, which designed
A Citizen for Plato's commonweal:
Whilst courteous Pompey did things as a friend,
Thou as a wiseman spoke, and still foretold
To what all Caesar's deeds would turn in th'end,
If that his pride were not in time controlled.
And had we him (as wisely thou advised)
Given to the Germans whom he had injured,
We had not now been thus like slaves despised,
To see Rome's glory, and our own obscured:
But yet I may (disbending former cares)
A space comport with that proud Tyrant's power;
Age gives assurance by my hoarey hairs,
Ere he Rome's freedom, death will me devour.
But all whose youth and spirit might have attained
Those dignities which Caesar hath undone:
O! ye have lost as much as he hath gained,
Whose rising hopes must be retrenched so soon.
Though if novations at the first seem strange,
Yet oft experience approbation brings,
And if with upright thoughts we weigh this change,
From thence the safety of our City springs;
As doth a ship, when tossed by several winds,
More danger run whilst Pilots do contest,
So was our City vexed by differing minds,
Who did interpret laws as pleased them best;
Whilst for one sickness diverse drugs are used,
Whose powers (repugnant) in digestion jar,
Th'impatient patients perish, when abused,
So did we long whilst crossed by civil war;
But now great Caesar from tempestuous winds,
Rome's scattered ruins recollects of late:
A Pilot meet to calm tumultuous minds▪
A fit Physician for an aguish State.
The State from storms secure by drowning proves,
Now whilst despair doth doubtful fears appease;
He (with the life) the sickness quite removes:
Thus is the Physic worse than the Disease.
This Commonweal (as all the world did spy)
Was by proud spirits in civil wars involved,
Yet like black Clouds which would obscure the sky,
These tumid humours suddenly dissolved;
And no disgrace unto the state redounds,
But to th'Ambitious men that it abused,
Who (had their power like Caesar's wanted bounds)
Would (whilst they ruled) have greater rigour used.
All parts (we see) bred people of all kinds,
And as advanced some bad men did abide,
In power their equals, and of better minds,
Some always virtuous were to curb their pride,
But since that sacred liberty was lost,
The public power to private ends one turns:
And (as his lawless ways did always boast)
The Commonweal by violence o'erturns.
Though what you burden Caesar with were true,
Necessity hath purged his part from crime,
Who was (foes force to shun) forced to pursue,
And urged by danger to attempt in time.
To th'enemies' envy more obliged he rests,
Then to his wit which no such courses scanned:
For when quite barred from using of requests,
Th'occasion than invited to command.
His thoughts when calm, to storm fond foes did tempt:
True worth disdains to suffer open wrong:
A gallant courage kindled by contempt
Burns with revenge, whilst fury makes one strong.
O Decius, now a wrong account you cast,
The purpose, not th'event, declares the mind:
Tread back the steps of all his actions past,
And what he compassed had been long designed.
As by some spirit inspired, proud Scylla said,
That there in Caesar many Marian's were,
And Rome in ti●e was warned to be afraid
Of that evill-girded youth, with smooth-combed hair;
Then when (as still to quietness a foe)
The memory of Marius he renewed,
By re-erecting Tyrant's statues so,
His thoughts all bend to tyranny were viewed.
That people-pleaser might have been perceived,
By courteous compliments below his rank,
Who (lavishing forth gifts) the world deceived,
And to gain more than his, of his proved frank.
Though nought at all indulgent to his wife,
By prostrated pudicity disgraced;
Yet did he save th'adulterous Clodius' life,
To soothe the multitude, whose steps he traced.
These be the means by which Ambition mounts,
Without most humble, when within most high,
As if it fled from that things which it hunts,
Still wasting most, when it for most doth ply.
Then he (still tyranny bend to embrace)
Was thought conjoined with Catiline to be,
And, had wise Cato's counsel taken place,
Might with the rest have suffered death by me.
Yet having deeply dived in some men's souls,
With factious followers being pined oft,
He got the Consulship which nought controls,
And matching pride with power, did look aloft;
To flatter them who now must flatter him,
His power to make unlawful laws prevailed,
And those to cross who scorned he so should climb,
He furnished was with force, where reason failed:
But yet because he could not be assured
To rule alone according to his will,
To govern France, he craftily procured,
So to be strengthened with an Army still.
As Rome first warred at home, till being strong,
She thought her power might foreign Realms o're-co
So Caesar warred against strange Nations long,
Till that he thought his Might might conquer Rome.
Then having all that force or fate assigns,
Of discontentment he did cause pretend,
So to dissemble fore-conceived designs:
One soone may find a fault that would offend:
But when he first in a prodigious dream,
His mother seemed incestuously to use,
It might have shown to his eternal shame,
How of his birth the bounds he did abuse.
And yet I think (avoiding threatened harms)
He by constraint embarked in civil broils:
Did he not covenant to quite his Arms,
As not desirous of his Country's spoils?
Durst he with those who had his charge confined,
Stand to capitulate, as if their mare,
Where (as his Sovereign) to obey their mind,
It was his duty, and their due of late,
What? what? durst he whom (bound to keep the law)
The people in authority did put
The sword which they had given, against them draw;
When it was sharpened ●●●st their throat to cut?
That had not come which all o●● anguish breeds,
If he unforced when as his charge expired;
Till that the Senate censured had his deeds,
Had from his Province peaceably retired.
No, he hath but betrayed his native Town,
Those bands, by which she did him first prefer,
T'enlarge her borders, and his own renown
Those hath he used to tyrannize o'er her.
My passions (ah! transported as you see
With an excessive love to my dear soil)
Of my heart's store have made my tongue too free,
By flaming forth what in my breast doth boil.
That Caesar's part might justly be excused,
Lo, with the cause alleged, his course accords,
Of which that mildness which he since hath used,
A testimony to the world affords.
Though forced to fight, he always had great care
To save our Citizens as each man knows,
And willed his Captains Romans still to spare;
Barbarians bodies objects were for blows,
Of th'adversaries after bloody strife,
When oft he might have made some Captives smart,
Not only was he liberal of their life,
But pardoned them, even to take Pompey's part;
At that infortunate Pharsalian field,
When he securely might have used the sword,
He both did spare all th'enemies' that would yield,
And them to rents and dignities restored:
Then when th'Egyptians (so to get relief)
Brought to his sight pale Pompey's bloodless head,
He testified with tears his inward grief,
And graced his Statues after he was dead.
Those his proceed plainly may approve,
That he against his will did make this war;
And to his Country bears a tender love,
Who could comport to rein his rage so far.
Those favours feigned, by him bestowed, or due,
(As is ones custom whose high heart aspires,)
Were spent on many that who them did view
Might love his course, so kindling their desires:
But where he thus pleased some, he spoiled whole hosts,
And the Barbarians all to Rome not wrought
Such harm as he, who, of his goodness boasts,
Yet her best men hath to confusion brought;
That great man, whom erst fortune ne'er did fail,
Who still prevailed, though warring without right,
Now in a good cause, for the commonweal
With Caesar did infortunately fight.
Whilst fled from Lesbos with his wretched wife,
Three base-born Grooms (can fortune change so soon?)
Stood to consult upon great Pompey's life,
And did what thousands durst not once have done;
Then he whose knees had oft been kissed by Kings,
(Most highly happy, had he died in time)
By one of his own slaves, with abject things
His funerals had performed; what monstrous crime
Rome's greatest Captain to entomb alone?
The Roman who arrived with reason said:
The fatal glory was too great for one,
And to have part of that last honour stayed;
The tears bestowed by Caesar on his head,
Forth from a guilty mind, remorse had thrown:
Or else he wept to see his enemy dead
By any others hands then by his own.
That constant Cato, who even death did scorn,
And for a coward once had Caesar braved,
(Who lived as if to grace all mortals borne)
Would rather perish then by him be saved.
He justly whilst more just, himself more strong
Than Caesar thought, who for no justice cared:
And since discovering what he cloaked so long,
Said, that the other, and not he was snared.
Thus Caesar conquered all but Cato's mind,
Who to a tyrant would not owe his breath:
But in such sort his famous course confined,
Then Caesar's life, more glorious was his death:
Those great men thus brought to disastrous ends,
The author of their death make me despise,
Who to usurp all power while as he tends,
By treading good men down, doth strive to rise.
Now made most great by lessening all the great,
He proudly doth triumph in Rome, o'er Rome:
And we must seem to like the present state,
Whose doubtful breath depends upon his doom.
Yet had I not enlarged my griefs so long,
To you whom Caesar doth pretend to love;
Save that (I know) touched with the common wrong:
A just disdain all generous minds must move.
Had Caesar willingly resigned his Arms,
And rendered Rome her liberty at last,
When as from sores he feared no further harms,
But had repaired his just displeasures past,
More than for all that could be done for me,
He should have had and Altar in my best,
As worthy (for his virtuous deeds) to be
Feared by the bad, and honoured by the best:
But since (though conquering all the world by might)
He (to himself a slave) would make Rome thrall,
His benefits are loathsome in my sight,
And I am grieved that he deserves to fall;
My fancies move not in so low a sphere,
But I disdain that one Rome's Crown requires;
Yet it is best that with the time we bear,
And with our power proportion our desires.
Though first dissembling, so your mind to try,
I told what fame to Caesar's praise relates;
Yet was I pleased, that more were grieved than I:
All miscontented men are glad of Mates.
Since tyranny all liberty exiles,
We must our sleves (no more ourselves) disguise;
Then, learn to mask a mourning mind with smiles,
And seem to like that which we most despise.
Yet all our deeds not Caesar's humour please,
Who (since mistrusting once) esteems us still,
When dumb disdainful, flatterers when we praise,
If plain, presumptuous, and in all things ill:
Yea, we, whose freedom Caesar now restrains,
As his attenders all his steps must trace;
And know, yet not acknowledge his disdains,
But still pretend an interest in his grace:
Though all my thoughts detest him as a foe,
To honour him, a thousand means I move,
Yet but to save myself, and plague him so:
No hate more harms than it that looks like love.
His pride is by preposterous state grown such,
That by the better sort, he is abhorred;
The gods are jealous, and men envy much
To see a mortal man so much adored.
Well, Cicero let all means be entertained,
That may embark us in his bosom's deeps,
Till either willingly, or then constrained,
He justly quite what he unjustly keeps.
THis life of ours is like a Rose,
Which whilst rare beauties it array,
Doth then enjoy the least repose;
When Virginlike make blush (we see)
Of every hand it is the prey,
And by each wind is blown away;
Yea, though from violence scaped free,
(Thus time triumphs, and leads all thralls)
Yet doth it languish and decay:
O! whilst the courage hottest boiles,
And that our life seems best to be,
It is with dangers compassed still;
Whilst it each little change appals,
The body, force, without oft foils,
It th' own distemperature oft spoils,
And even, though none it chance to kill,
As nature fails, the body falls,
Of which save death, nought bounds the joyless;
What is this moving tower in whith we trust?
A little wind closed in a cloud of dust.
And yet some spirits though being penned
In this frail prisons narrow bounds,
(Whilst what might serve, doth not content,)
Do always bend their thoughts too high,
And aim at all the peopled grounds;
Then whilst their breasts Ambition wounds,
They feed as fearing strait to dye,
Yet build as if they still might live,
Whilst famished for fames empty sounds:
Of such no end the travel ends,
But a beginning gives, whereby
They may be vexed worse than before;
For, whilst they still new hopes contrive,
The hoped good more anguish sends,
Then the possessed contentment lends;
As beasts not taste, but do devour,
They swallow much, and for more strive,
Whilst still their hope some change attends:
And how can such but still themselves annoy,
Who can acquire, but know not how t'enjoy?
Since as a ship amidst the deeps,
Or as an Eagle through the air,
Of which no way th' impression keeps,
Most swift when seeming least to move:
This breath of which we take such care,
Doth toss the body every where,
That it may hence with haste remove:
Life slips and sleeps always away,
Then hence, and as it came, goes bare,
Whose steps behind no trace do leave;
Why should heaven-banished souls thus love
The cause, and bounds of their exile,
As restless strangers where they stray?
And with such pain why should they reave
That which they have no right to have,
Which with them in a little while,
As summer's beauties must decay,
And can give nought except the grave?
Though all things do to harm him what they can,
No greater enemy than himself to man;
Whilst oft environed with his foes,
Which threatened death on every side,
Great Caesar parted from repose,
(As Atlas holding up the Stars,)
Did of a world the weight abide;
But since a prey to foolish pride,
More than by all the former wars,
He now by it doth harmed remain,
And of his fortune doth diffide.
Made rich by many Nations wreak,
He (breaking through the liquid bars)
In Neptune's arms his Minion forced;
Yet still pursued new hopes in vain:
Would the ambitious looling back
Of their inferiors knowledge take,
They from huge cares might be divorced,
Whilst viewing few, more power attain,
And many more than they to lack:
The only plague from men that rest doth reave,
Is that they weigh their wants, not what they have.
Since thus the great themselves involve
In such a labyrinth of cares,
Whence none to escape can well resolve,
But by degrees are forward led,
Through waves of hopes, rocks of despairs
Let us avoid ambitions snares,
And far from storms by envy bred,
Still seek (though low) a quiet rest,
With minds where no proud thought repairs,
That in vain shadows doth delight;
Thus may our fancies still be fed
With that which Nature freely, gives;
Let us iniquity detest,
And hold but what we own of right;
Th' eyes treasure is th' all-circling light,
Not that vain pomp for which pride strives,
Whose glory (but a poisonous pest)
To plague the soul, delights the sight:
Ease comes with ease, where all by pain buy pain,
Rest we in peace, by war let others reign.
NOw (Brutus) now we need no more to doubt,
Nor with blind hopes our judgement to suspend,
That flatterers credit (lo) is quite worn out;
We must in time attempt, and not attend:
That race of victors which did Realms appall,
Ah (vanquished by their victories at last)
Are by their too much liberty made thrall,
Since all their strength but down themselves doth cast;
And we who by our birth aimed at great things,
Of the world's mistress mighty minions once,
Who might have laboured to give laws to Kings,
Laws from a King, must look for now with groans:
For, such of Caesar is the monstrous pride,
That though he domineers even at this hour,
And to his Clients kingdoms doth divide
With an unlimited tyrannic power;
Yet of Dictator he disdains the name,
And seeks a tyrant's title with the place,
Not for his honour, no, but for our shame,
As only bend brag of our disgrace.
I thought to see that man (as others are)
Walk re-apparrelled with a private gown,
As one who had unwillingly made war,
To stand himself, not to cast others down:
So Silla (though more inhuman than he)
Whilst having all to what his heart aspired,
The Sovereignty resigned, and set Rome free,
When expectations date was quite expired.
By Caesar's worth we must think that he too
Will render freedom to this captived state,
When first the world hath viewed what he might do,
His thoughts are generous, as his mind is great.
Though insolences oft from courage flow,
His dying fury sparkles but a space:
High thoughts which Mars inspires, nought can bring low,
Till one have used the purity of peace.
Those who by violence to all things tend,
Sc●r●● can themselves to quietness conform;
Their stately carriage, and frank words, offend,
Whilst peace cannot comport with wars rude form,
I hope that Caesar settling civil broils,
When worn by custom from intestine rage,
Will strive to mitigate his Country's toils,
And all those flames which burned his breast, assuage.
Thus, of his course you by your own conceived,
As if like thoughts of both did bound the will:
Ah, honest minds are with least pain deceived,
Those who themselves are good, dream not of ill.
To sound of some the still unsound device,
Their inclination must your judgement sway:
The square of virtue cannot measure vice,
Nor yet a line when strait, a crooked way.
So Caesar rising may usurp the State,
He cares not by what force, nor by what sleight:
O! one may soon deceive men, and grow great,
Who leaves religion, honesty and right.
When as the Senators (no more their own)
Came to that Tyrant whom ambition blinds,
And by high honours showed how they had shown
To gratify his greatness, grateful minds;
He (in a Chair imperiously placed,)
Not deigned to rise, nor bow in any sort,
As both of them had but their due embraced,
When he a haughty, they a humble port.
But if he thus, ere we be throughly thralled,
Dare so disdainfully such great men use,
When in a regal Throne by us installed,
Then will he break that which he now doth bruise.
Was he not first who ever yet began
To violate the sacred Tribunes place,
And punished them for punishing a man
Who had transgressed the laws in time of peace?
The laws which do of death all guilty hold,
Whose actions seem to tyranny inclined,
So earnest were our Ancestors of old,
To quench a tyrant's light before it shined:
And shall our Nephews (heirs of bondage) blame
Us dastard parents who their hopes deceived,
Who saw, who suffered, who survived such shame,
Not leaving dead, what we when borne received?
By Caesar's friends, to an assembly brought,
The Senators intent to call him King.
I'll not be there.
But what if we be sought.
To aid (as Praetors) such a public thing?
I will resist that violent decree;
None of Rome's Crown shall long securely boast:
For, ere that I live thralled, I'll first dye free,
What can be kept when liberty is lost?
O! with what joy I swallow up those words,
Words worthy of thy worth, and of thy name:
But (Brutus) do not fear, this cause affords
In danger many, but few mates in fame;
When Anthony proud Caesar's image crowned,
By silent sorrow all the people told
In what a depth of woes their thoughts were drowned,
That bondage-bragging Comet to behold.
What do those scrolls thrown in thy chair import:
Which, what thou art, to brave thy courage, brings?
Be those the fancies of the vulgar sort?
No, none but noble minds dream of great things;
Of other Praetor's people look for shows,
And distributions whose remembrance dies,
Whilst bloody Fencers fall with mutual blows,
And Africkes' monsters do amaze their eyes;
But from thy hands they liberty attend,
(By birthright due) the glory of thy race,
And bend for thee, their blood will frankly spend,
So thou succeed in thy great Parents place.
He (Rome redeeming) Tarquin did o'erthrow,
Though from his birth obeyed, and without strife;
A rising tyrant then bring boldly low,
To what extinguished was, who would give life.
I weigh thy words with an afflicted heart,
Which for compassion of my Country bleeds:
And would to God that I might only smart,
So that all others scaped what mischief breeds;
Then, never man himself from death did free,
With a more quiet and contented mind,
Then I would perish, if I both could be
To Caesar thankful, to my Country kind:
But though that great man's grace to me enlarged,
May challenge right in my affection's store,
Yet must the greatest debt be first discharged,
I own him much, but to my Country more.
This is my breast hath great dissension bred:
I Caesar love, but yet Rome's enemy hate,
And as Iove lives, I could be moved to shed
My blood for Caesar, Caesar's for the State.
I for my father's death loathed Pompey long,
Whilst just disdain did boil within my breast:
Yet when he warred to venge the common wrong,
I joined with him, because his cause was best.
A mind to reign if Caesar now reveal,
I will in time precipitate his end:
Thus (never armed but for the Commonweal)
I helped a foe, and now must hurt a friend.
Lest of his favour thou the poison prove,
From swallowing of such baits in time now spare,
No tyrant (trust me) can entirely love,
Nor none who for himself doth only care:
He by this course doth cunningly intent
(Thy virtue slacked) to undermine thy mind:
Thy well-known courage purposed to disbend,
Thus (though with silken bonds) he would thee bind;
This of each tyrant is the common tread,
To wreak all those in whom most worth he finds;
Or (whilst that terrors toss his jealous head)
By subtlety to snare the greatest minds:
As, for the Praetorship when we did strive,
Then both were held in hope, that so deceived,
Each th''others harms might study to contrive
Through emulation and disdain conceived.
Thus subtle Caesar by such sleights hath toiled
To sow dissension, that we both might pause
Of private wrongs, and (by such means embroiled)
Still courting him, neglect the common cause.
But nought must make us th' one t'another strange,
Who should in time the tyrant's course restrain:
Let other men lament, we must revenge,
I scorn to bear a sword, and to complain.
Though Caesar (now) I must conspire thy fall,
My heart to thee yet never harboured hate;
But (pardon me) who ever make it thrall,
From bondage Brutus must redeem the state.
Of this my course what ever others judge,
Here, I protest it is for good designed;
My thoughts are guilty of no private grudge,
For, reason and not fury moves my mind;
Nor doth ambition now inflame my breast,
With a prodigious appetite to reign,
That when I have made Caesar Pluto's guest,
I in his room a Monarch may remain:
No, if that glory did my fancy's charm,
To which (blindfolded) tyrants do aspire,
I needed not to do, nor suffer harm,
But with less pain might compass my desire:
For, if I would but temporize a space,
Till time or death diminish Caesar's might,
He thinks that I deserve to have his place,
And I could make my day succeed his night;
Yet do I not for glory seek so much
As to attain it by my Country's shame:
But, O! I would (my zeal to it is such)
That it may scape, incur a kind of blame.
Yea, so that I may free with honoured wounds
My soil that's dearer than my soul to me,
I could myself live banished from that bounds,
Which at so dear a rate I would set free.
What man doth breath of Mars his martial race,
But will with Brutus sacrifice his blood,
And (charged with Arms) ere tyranny take place,
Dare venture all things for his Country's good,
Can any judgement be deceived so far,
But it already clearly may behold,
How that this change Rome's greatness soon will mar,
And raze the Trophies which she reared of old.
Of old in Rome, all those who once had worn
The peace-importing gown, or warlike shield,
(Of dignities as capable all borne,)
Durst aim at aught that liberty could yield;
Those in affairs to deal, who would set forth;
Were not discouraged by their birth, though base;
And poverty could not hold back true worth,
From having honour both by war and peace:
Then emulation violently drived
All gallant minds to tempt great actions still;
In virtue's love, who friendly rivals lived,
Whilst in their bosoms Glory balm did still:
Fabricius first was from the Blow advanced,
The Rudder of the Commonweal to hold,
Yet by no means his private wealth enhanced,
As rich in virtue still, as poor in gold.
Rude Marius too, to match red Mars in fame,
Forth from the vulgar dross his race removed,
And lo, of Cicero the ridiculous name,
As famous as the Fabians now hath proved.
Each abject mind disdained to be obscure,
When still preferment followed lofty cares,
And that one might by dangers past, procure
Fame for himself, and honour to his heirs:
But since that state by Caesar is o'erturned,
Whilst all our lives upon one's lips depend,
Of breasts which once with love of glory burned,
The soaring thoughts this wholly doth disbend;
Advancement now doth not attend desert,
But flows from fancies of a flatt'red mind;
Which to base hirelings, honour doth impart,
Whilst envied worth no safe retreat can find.
All proud usurpers most addicted prove,
To them whom without cause they raise too high,
As thinking those who stand but by their love,
To entertain the same, all means must try.
Where they, whose virtue reaps a due reward,
Not building only on the giver's grace,
Do by deserts not gain so great regard,
Whilst they maintain, as they obtain their place.
And if a worthy man to work great things,
Winged with a tyrant's favour, raise his flight,
The highest course to him most harm still brings,
Who till he fall, cannot have leave to light.
Those who by force would have th'affection moved,
When willingly men hold such gallants dear,
Do rage that any should be freely loved,
Whose virtue makes their vice more vile appear.
The man who now to be preferred aspires,
Must by base flattery in a servile form,
So soothing Caesar, seal all his desires,
And in some shadow lurk to scape a storm.
A number now of that proud Rebels foes,
Who grieve to see the ground whence grows their grief,
Would in obscurity entomb their woes,
So waiting, and not working for relief.
But we whose lofty minds disdain to lower,
Like them who seek but their own safety thus;
When shall we use high indignations power,
Which (as brave Romans) worthy is of us?
Since no indignity you will endure,
I see our minds do sympathise in this;
Should we by suffering, seek to live secure,
Whose action must amend what is amiss?
No, no such abject thought must stain our breast,
Whose active thoughts reach further than discourse,
Whilst but like beasts, affecting food and rest,
Where men by reason should direct their course;
Like those of other parts, not raised by strife,
If Caesar had been born, or choosed our Prince,
Then those who durst attempt to take his life,
The world of treason justly might convince.
Let still the States which flourish for the time,
By subjects be inviolable thought,
And those (no doubt) commit a monstrous crime,
Who lawful Sovereignty profane in aught:
And we must think (though now thus brought to bow)
The Senate King; a subject Caesar is;
The Sovereignty whom violating now,
The world must damn, as having done amiss.
We will (dear Cassius) for our Country's sake,
(What ever follow) give, or suffer death,
And let us now advise what course to take,
Whilst nought but th'air can bear away our breath.
I think this matter needs not many words,
Since but one deed can bond the common shame;
In Caesar's body we must sheathe our swords,
And by his death our liberty reclaim;
But since his fortune did confound them all,
Who in the fields to match him did begin;
Whilst he by thousands made their bands to fall,
With hoary legions always used to win:
As Pompey's, Scipio's, and Petreius ghosts,
In lightlesse shades can by experience tell,
Who after fatal proofs of numerous hosts,
All famous (though infortunately, fell:)
And since (provided for the Parthian war)
His Army armed attends on his decree,
Where we (sequestered from such forces far)
Would (if suspected) soon prevented be:
With some few friends whom all things to assay,
A love to us, or to their Country binds,
We to his wreak must walk another way,
Whilst, ere our tongues, our hands do tell our minds:
Now when most high, and therefore hated most,
The gathered Senate seeks to make him King,
We must go give the blow before we boast,
And him to death, Rome out of bondage bring.
In all this course I only one thing blame,
That we should steal, what we may justly take,
By clothing honour with a cloak of shame,
Which may our cause (though good) more odious make.
O! I could wish with honourable wounds
To match Rome's enemy in the battle's dust:
No sweeter Music than the Trumpets sounds,
When right and valour keep a consort just:
Then, free if quick, else dead, no harm more feared,
I always so contentment might attain;
What tomb to men more glorious can be reared,
Then mountains made of foes whom they have slain?
But how are my transported thoughts grown such,
That they disdain a measure to admit?
Whilst (bent not what to do, but to do much)
On Glories Throne, Ambition strives to sit.
No, to the State me from myself I give,
Free from particulars, as who expose
Fame, life, and all for it, and whilst I live,
So Rome may gain, I care not what I lose.
I'll never rest till he for ever rest,
Who gives my Country such a cause of grief:
And that to do no form I will detest,
Nor for my fame endanger Rome's relief:
But (worthy Cassius) ere we further do,
Let our friends minds first well be understood,
Of which I hope to have assistance too,
Who will not venture for his Country's good?
Now whilst my soul rests ravished in a trance,
I think I see great Rome her courage raise,
Then beat the air with songs, th'earth with a dance,
And crown thy virtues with deserved praise.
MY dearest half, my comfort, my delight,
Of whom one smile may sweeten all my sow'rs:
Thou in my bosom used to pour thy spirit,
And where I was didst spare afflictions powers.
When broils domestic did disturb thy rest,
Then still (till finding) feigning some relief;
Thou with calm words disguised a stormy breast,
joys frankly sharing, and engrossing grief;
Still tendering me with a respective care,
What might offend, was by no means made known:
But (with loves colours all things painted fair)
What might have made me glad, was gladly shown.
How comest thou then thy courage thus to lose,
That thou canst look so sad, and in my sight?
Lend me (dear Love) a portion of thy woes;
A burden (when divided) doth grow light;
I see the Roses fading in thy face,
The Lilies languish, Violets take their place.
Thou hast (dear Lord) prevented my design,
Which was to ask of thee, what makes me pale;
If Phoebus had no light, could Phoebe shine?
No, with the cause of force th'effects must fail.
The mirror but gives back as it receives,
By just resemblance the objected form,
And what impression the ingraver leaves,
The wax retains, still to the stamp conform.
I am the mirror which reflects thy mind,
As forced from thoughts, or flowing from thine eyes;
I take the state in which thy state I find;
Such is my colour as thy countenance dies.
Then how can I rejoice, whilst thou art sad,
Whose breast of all thy crosses is the scroll?
I am still as thou art, if grieved, or glad,
Thy body's shadow, th'essence of thy soul:
On that great Planet which divides the years,
Of fields inferior as the fruit depends,
And as it vanish doth, or pleased appears,
In th'earth's cold bosom, life begins, or ends;
Sun of my soul, so I subsist by thee,
Whose shining virtue leads me as a thrall:
From care-bred clouds if that thy face be free,
I rise in joys, but if thou faint, I fall.
With all my course this countenance best accords,
Who as you know, yet never from my birth,
Light gestures used, nor did delight in words,
Whose pleasant strains were only tuned to mirth.
My melancholy Nature feeds on cares,
Whilst smothered sorrow by a habit smokes:
A thoughtful breast (when burdened with affairs)
Doth make a silent mouth, and speaking looks;
As for my paleness, it imports but good:
The bodies humbling doth exalt the mind,
Where fatness (come from food) but serves for food:
In fattest bodies, leanest spirits we find.
Ah! since I saw th'abhorred Thessalia's bounds,
All drenched with blood of Senators and Kings,
(As if my soul yet smarted in their wounds)
A secret sorrow oftentimes me stings:
But since thy Father (braving pain with blows)
In the most hideous form affronted death,
To him my mind a sad remembrance owes,
Which sorrow shall exact whilst I have breath;
Yet grieve I that I gave thee cause of grief,
Who thoughtst some new mishap did me dismay;
To such old sores one worst can give relief;
But Time in end may wear my woes away.
Why shouldst thou so from me thy thoughts conceal?
From thine own soul between whose breasts thou sleepest,
To whom (though shown) thou dost them not reveal,
But in thyself more inwardly them keep'st?
And thou canst hardly hide thyself from me,
Who soon in thee each alteration spy,
I can comment on all that comes from thee:
True love still looks with a suspicious eye:
Within our bosom rests not every thought,
Tuned by a sympathy of mutual love?
Thou marrest the Music if thou change in aught,
Which (when distempered) I do quickly prove.
Soul of my soul, unfold what is amiss,
Some great disaster all my thoughts divine,
Whose curiousness may be excused in this,
Since it concerns thy State, and therefore mine.
I wonder that thou dost thy frailty show!
By Nature women have been curious still,
And yet till now thou never craved to know
More than I pleased to speak of my free will.
Nought save the wife a man within the walls,
Nor ought save him without she should embrace:
And it not comely is, but th'one enthralls,
When any sex usurps another's place.
Dear, to their wont course thy cares enure,
I may have matters which import the State,
Whose opening up might my disgrace procure,
Whose weight for female thoughts would be too great.
I was not (Brutus) matched with thee, to be
A partner only of thy board, and bed:
Each servile whore in those might equal me,
Who but for pleasure, or for wealth did wed.
No, Portia spoused thee minding to remain
Thy Fortune's partner, whether good or ill:
By love's strict bonds whilst mutual duties chain,
Two breasts must hold one heart, two souls one will;
Those whom just Hymen voluntar'ly binds,
Betwixt them should communicate all things,
But chief that which most doth move the minds,
Whence either pleasure, or displeasure springs.
If thus thou seek thy sorrows to conceal
Through a disdain, or a mistrust of me,
Then to the world what way can I reveal,
How great a matter I would do for thee?
And though our sex too talkative be deemed,
As those whose tongues import our greatest powers,
For secrets still bad Treasurers esteemed,
Of others greedy, prodigal of ours;
Good education may reform defects,
And this may lead me to a virtuous life,
(Whilst such rare patterns generous worth respects)
I Cato's daughter am, and Brutus wife.
Yet would I not repose my trust in aught,
Still thinking that thy cross was great to bear,
Till I my courage to a trial brought,
Which suffering for thy cause can nothing fear:
For first to try how that I could comport
With stern afflictions sprit-enfeebling blows,
Ere I would seek to vex thee in this sort,
To whom my soul a duteous reverence owes.
Lo, here a wound which makes me not to smart,
No, I rejoice that thus my strength is known:
Since thy distress strikes deeper in my heart,
Thy grief (life's joy) makes me neglect mine own.
Thou must (dear love) that which thou soughtest receive,
Thy heart so high a sail in storms still bears,
That thy great courage doth deserve to have
Our enterprise entrusted to thine ears;
This magnanimity prevails so far,
That it my resolution must control,
And of my bosom doth the depths unbarre,
To lodge thee in the centre of my soul.
Thou seest in what estate the State now stands,
Of whose strong pillars Caesar spoiled the best,
Whilst by his own, preventing others hands,
Our famous Father fell amongst the rest.
That proud usurper fond doth presume
To re-erect detested Tarquin's throne,
Thus the world's Mistress all-commanding Rome,
Must entertain no Minion now but one.
All those brave minds who mark where he doth tend,
Swell with disdain, their Country's scorn to see;
And I am one of those who soon intent
(His death or mine procured) to be made free.
And without me, canst thou resolve so soon,
To try the danger of a doubtful strife?
As if despaired, and always but undone,
Of me grown weary, weary of thy life.
Yet since thou thus thy rash design hast shown,
Leave Portia's portion, venture not her part,
Endanger nought but that which is thine own,
Go where thou like st, I will hold still thy heart.
But lest by holding of thy best part back▪
The other perished, aggravate my groans:
Who would be so thought guilty of thy wrack,
Take all thy Treasure to the Seas at once.
Like Asia's Monarch's wife, who with short hairs,
(Sad signs of bondage) past still where he passed,
To wear away, or bear away thy cares,
I'll follow thee, and of thy fortune taste.
These hands which were with mine own blood imbrued,
To strike another, may more strength afford,
At lest when thou by th'enemies' art pursued,
I'll set myself betwixt thee and each Sword;
But if too great a privilege I claim,
Whose actions all should be disposed by thee,
Ah! pardon (Brutus) and but only blame
This stream of passions that transported me.
Thou ask'st what thou shouldst give, forgive dear Mate,
This venturous course of mine, which must have place,
Though it make Fortune Tyrant of our State,
Whose fickle footsteps Virtue grieves to trace.
And wonder not though thus to thee I prove,
Since private duties now all power have lost;
I weigh not glory, profit, pleasure, love,
Nor what respect may now import me most:
So to the land of which I hold my life,
I may perform that work which I intent,
Let me be called unkind unto my wife:
Yea, worst of all, ingrate unto my friend.
As an instinct by Nature makes us know,
There are degrees of duty to be past,
Of which the first unto the Gods we own,
The next t'our Country, to our friends the last.
From Rome of old proud Tyrants bend to drive,
Did th'author of my race with ardent zeal,
Make those to dye, whom he had made to live,
And spoiled himself to raise the Commonweal▪
To settle that which Caesar now o'erthrows,
(Though virtues nursery, stately whilst it stood)
He with the Tyrant interchanging blows,
On Glories Altar offered Fame his blood.
And did that man to cross the common foe,
Then damn his Sons to death? and with dry eyes,
And is his special heir degenered so,
In abject bondage that he basely lies?
No, his posterity his name not stains,
But even to tread his steps doth fast draw near;
Yet, of his spirit in us some spark remains,
Who more than life, our liberty hold dear.
Then prosecute thy course, for I protest,
Though with some grief, my soul the same approves;
This resolution doth become thy breast,
In honour's sphere where heavenly Virtue moves:
And do this enterprise no more defer,
What thee contents, to me contentment brings,
I to my life thy safety do prefer,
But hold thy honour dear above all things.
It would but let the world my weakness see,
If I sought my delights, not thy desires,
Though grief it give, and threaten death to me,
Go follow forth that which thy Fame requires.
Though Nature, sex, and education breed,
No power in me, with such a purpose even,
I must lend help to this intended deed,
If vows and prayers may penetrate the heaven:
But difficulties huge my fancy finds,
Nought, save the success, can defray my fear:
Ah! Fortune always frowns on worthy minds,
As hating all who trust in aught save her.
Yet I despair not but thou may'st prevail,
And by this course to ease my present groans,
I this advantage have which cannot fail:
I'll be a freeman's wife, or else be nonce:
For, if all prosper not as we pretend,
And that the Heavens Rome's bondage do decree,
Strait with thy liberty my life shall end,
Who have no comfort but what comes from t●●●▪
My Father hath me taught what way to dye,
By which if hindered from encountering death,
Some other means, I (though more strange) must try:
For, after Brutus none shall see me breathe.
Thou for my cause all others erst didst leave,
But now forsakest thyself to join with me,
o'er generous love no power weak passions have,
Against thy mind thou dost with mine agree.
I'll (since by thee approved) securely go,
And vilipend the dangers of this life:
Heavens make my enterprise to prosper so,
That I may once prove worthy such a wife:
But ah! of all thy words those grieve me most,
Which brag me with the dating of thy days;
What? though I in so good a cause were lost,
None flies the fate which established for him stays.
Do not defraud the world of thy rare worth,
But of thy Brutus the remembrance love;
From this fair prison strive not to break forth,
Till first the fates have forced thee to remove.
The heavens (I fear) have our confusion sworn,
Since this ill Age can with no good accord,
Thou and my Father (ah!) should have been borne,
When Virtue was advanced, and Vice abhorred.
Then, ere the light of Virtue was declined,
Your worth had reverenced been, not thrown away,
Where now ye both have but in darkness shined,
As Stars by night, that had been Suns by day.
My treasure, strive to pacify thy breast,
Lest sorrows but sinistrously presage
That which thou wouldst not wish, and hope the best,
Though Virtue now must act on Fortune's Stage.
THen liberty, of earthly things
What more delights a generous breast?
Which doth receive,
And can conceive
The matchless treasure that it brings;
It making men securely rest,
As all perceive,
Doth none deceive,
Whilst from the same true courage springs,
But feared for nought, doth what seems best:
Than men are men, when they are all their own,
Not, but by others badges when made known:
Yet should we not mispending hours,
A freedom seek, as oft it falls,
With an intent
But to content
These vain delights, and appetites of ours;
For, then but made far greater thralls,
We might repent
As not still penned
In stricter bounds by others powers,
Whilst fear licentious thoughts appalls:
Of all the Tyrants that the world affords,
Ones own affections are the fiercest Lords:
As Libertines those only live,
Who (from the bands of vice set free)
Vile thoughts cancel,
And would excel
In all that doth true glory give,
From which when as no Tyrants be
Them to repel,
And to compel
Their deeds against their thoughts to strive,
They blessed are in a high degree:
For, such of fame the scrouls can hardly fill,
Whose wit is bounded by another's will.
Our Ancestors of old such proved,
(Who Rome from Tarquin's yoke redeemed)
They first obtained,
And then maintained
Their liberty so dearly loved;
They from all things which odious seemed
(Though not constrained)
Themselves restrained,
And willingly all good approved,
Bend to be much, yet well esteemed;
And how could such but aim at some great end,
Whom liberty did lead, Glory attend?
They leading valorous legions forth,
(Though wanting Kings) triumphed o'er Kings,
And still aspired,
By Mars inspired,
To conquer all from South to North;
Then lending fame their eagle's wings,
They all acquired
That was required,
To make them rare for rarest things,
The world made witness of their worth:
Thus those great minds who domineered o'er all,
Did make themselves first free, than others thrall,
But we who hold nought but their name,
From that to which they in times gone
Did high ascend,
Must low descend,
And bound their glory with our shame,
Whilst on an object Tyrant's Throne,
We (base) attend,
And do intent
Us for our fortune still to frame,
Not it for us, and all for one:
As liberty a courage doth impart,
So bondage doth disbend, else break the heart,
Yet, O! who knows but Rome to grace
Another Brutus may arise?
Who may effect
What we affect,
And Tarquin's steps make Caesar trace;
Though seeming dangers to despise
He doth suspect
What we expect
Which from his breast hath banished peace,
Though fairly he his fears disguise:
Of Tyrants even the wrong, revenge affords,
All fear but theirs, and they fear all men's swords.
Dear Cousin, Cassius did acquaint mine ears
With a design which tossed my mind a space;
For, when strange news, a stranger's breath first bears,
One should not strait to rash reports give place.
I would not then discover what I thought,
Lest he to trap my tongue, a snare had framed,
Till first with thee I to confer was brought,
Whom he for Patron of his purpose named.
One should look well to whom his mind he leaves,
In dangerous times when tales by walls are told,
Men make themselves unnecessar'ly slaves,
Of those to whom their secrets they unfold.
As Cassius told thee, grieved for Rome's distress,
Which to our shame in bondage doth remain,
We strait intent what ever we profess,
With Caesar's blood to wash away this stain.
Though for this end a few sufficient are,
To whom their virtue courage doth impart,
Yet were we loath to wrong thy wrath so far,
As of such glory to give thee no part.
Since both this cause, yea, and thy name thee bind,
In this adventurous band to be comprised,
There needs no Rhetoric to raise thy mind,
To do the thing which thou shouldst have devised.
I thought no creature should my purpose know,
But he whose interest promised mutual cares:
Of those to whom one would his secret show,
No greater pledge of trust then to know theirs;
As when two meet whilst masked (though most dear friends)
With them (as strangers) no respect takes place,
But strait when friendship one of them pretends,
The other likewise doth un-cloud the face.
So as thou first, I'll now at last be bold:
My breast with the same birth long big hath gone,
But I to others durst it not unfold,
Nor yet attempt to compass it alone;
But since this course, at which I long did pause,
On such great pillars now so strongly stands,
Whose countenance may give credit to a cause,
It hath my heart, and it shall have my hands.
To our designs propitious signs are sent,
So that the Gods would give us courage thus:
For, all who ever heard of our intent,
Would willingly engage themselves with us:
Let other men discourse of virtuous rites,
Ours but by action only should be shown:
Bare speculation is but for such spirits
As want of power, or courage keeps unknown.
In those who virtue view, when crowned with deeds,
Through Glories glass, whose beauties long have shined,
To be embraced an high desire she breeds,
As loadstones iron, so ravishing the mind:
What though a number now in darkness lies,
Who are too weak for matters of such weight?
We who are eminent in all men's eyes,
Let us still hold the height of honour strait.
Erst (that our faction might be strengthened thus)
I laboured much to purchase all their powers,
Whom hate to Caesar, love to Rome, or us,
Might make embark in those great hopes of ours;
By sickness then imprisoned in his bed,
Whilst I Ligarius spied whom pains did prick,
When I had said with words that anguish bred:
In what a time Ligarius art thou sick?
He answered strait as I had Physic brought,
Or that he had imagined my design,
If worthy of thyself thou wouldst do aught,
Then Brutus I am whole, and wholly thine:
Since he by Caesar was accused of late
For taking Pompey's part, yet at this hour
He (though absolved) doth still the Tyrant hate,
Since once endangered by his lawless power:
Thus (of great spirits exasperating spites)
Heaven of our course the progress doth direct,
One inspiration all our souls incites,
Who have advis'dly sworn for one effect.
So I with Cicero did confer at length,
Who (I perceive) the present state detests,
And though old Age diminished hath his strength,
In him a will to free his Country rests.
That man whose love still to his country shined,
Would willingly the commonwealth restore:
Then he (I know) though he conceals his mind,
None Caesar more dislikes, nor likes us more:
Yet to his custody I'll not commit
The secrets of our enterprise so soon:
Men may themselves be oftentimes not fit
To do the things which they would wish were done.
He still was timorous, and, by age grown worse,
Might chance to lay our honour in the dust;
All Cowards must inconstant be of force,
With bold designs none fearful breasts should trust.
Then, some of ours would hold their hands still pure,
Who (ere they be suspected) for a space,
Amidst the tumult may remain secure,
And with the people mediate our peace:
But who then Tullius fit for that turn,
Whose eloquence is used to charm their ears?
His banishment they in black Gowns did mourn,
Whom all do honour for his worth and years.
Those studious wits which have through dangers gone,
Would still be out, ere that they enter in:
Who muse of many things, resolve of none,
And (thinking of the end) cannot begin.
The mind which looks no further than the eye,
And more to Nature trusts, then unto Art,
Such doubtful fortunes fittest is to try:
A furious actor for a desperate part.
We have enough, and of the best degree,
Whose hands unto their hearts, hearts t'us are true,
And if that we seek more, I fear we be
To hide, too many, if disclosed, too few;
Let us advise with an industrious care
(Now ere the Tyrant intercept our minds)
The time, the place, the manner, when, and where
We should en-trust our Treasure to the winds;
And since our states this doth in danger bring,
Let every point be circumspectly weighed,
A circumstance, or an indifferent thing,
Doth oft mar all, when not with care conveyed.
As for the time, none could be wished more fit,
Then is the present to perform our vow,
Since all the people must allow of it,
By recent anguish moved extremely now.
When represented in his triumph past,
Great Cato's mangled entrails made them weep,
And desperate Scipio whilst he leapt at last
To seek a Sanctuary amidst the deep.
Then all those great men whom in several parts,
Bend for Rome's freedom, Caesar did o'erthrow,
Did by their pictures pierce the people's hearts,
And made a piteous (though a pompous) show;
How could they but conceive a just disdain
To be upbraided in so strange a sort,
Whilst he who only by their loss did gain,
Of their calamity did make a sport?
But yet his purpose grieves them most of all,
Since that he strives to be proclaimed a King:
And not contents himself to make us thrall,
But would even all our heirs to bondage bring.
Thus whilst the people are with him displeased,
We best may do what to our part belongs:
For, after this they may be best appeased,
If, whilst their wrath doth last, we venge their wrongs;
And (since we nought intent but what is right,
Whilst from our Country we remove disgrace)
Let all be acted in the Senate's sight,
A common cause, and in a common place.
Let those whose guilty thoughts do damn their deeds,
In corners like Minerva's birds abide,
That which our Country good, us glory breeds,
May by the lights of heaven and earth be tried.
The Senators by our example moved,
Pleased with this action which imports them too,
To have the yoke of tyranny removed,
May at the least confirm that which we do;
So all the Senators were said of old,
King Romulus in pieces to have torn,
Who then to tyrannize was grown too bold,
And, ere turned God, humanity did scorn.
Yea, what though Caesar were immortal made,
As Romulus, whose deity him revives?
I rather as a God adore him dead,
Then as a King obey him whilst he lives.
That place indeed, most for our glory makes,
A Theatre worthy of so great an act,
Where in their sight from whom most power he takes,
We of the Tyrant vengeance may exact;
But I must recommend unto your mind,
A course (though strict) of which we must allow,
Lest it o'erthrow all that we have designed,
Since past recovery, if neglected now:
There is Antonius, Caesar's greatest friend,
A man whose Nature tyranny affects,
Whom all the Soldiers daily do attend,
As one who nought but to command respects;
I fear that he when we have Caesar slain,
The grieved faction furnish with a head:
So when we end, we must begin again
With one who lives worse than the other dead;
And in my judgement I would think it best,
When sacrificed the proud usurper lies,
That this seditious enemy of rest
Should fall with him, with whom he first did rise:
Thus, of our liberty we now may lay
A solid ground, which can be shaked by none:
Those of their purpose who a part delay,
Two labours have, who might have had but one.
I cannot (Cassius) condescend to kill
(Thus from the path of justice to decline)
One faultless yet, lest after he prove ill,
So to prevent his guiltiness by mine;
No, no, that neither honest were, nor just,
Which rigorous form would but the world affright;
Men by this mean, our meaning might mistrust,
And for a little wrong damn all that's right:
If we do only kill the common foe,
Our Country's zeal must then acquire due praise,
But if (like Tyrants) fiercely raging so,
We will be thought that which we raze to raise;
And where we but intent to aid the State,
Though by endangering what we hold most dear,
If slaying him (as armed by private hate)
We to the world all partial will appear,
Ah, ah! we must but too much murder see,
Who without doing ill cannot do good:
And, would the Gods, that Rome could be made free
Without the shedding of one drop of blood!
Then, there is hope that Anthony in end,
Whilst first our virtue doth direct the way,
Will (leagued with us) the liberty defend,
And (when brought back) will blush, as once astray.
Well Brutus, I protest against my will,
From this black cloud, what ever tempest fall,
That mercy but most cruelly doth kill,
Which thus saves one, who once may plague us all.
When Caesar with the Senators sits down,
In this your judgements generally accord,
That for affecting wrongfully the Crown,
He lawfully may perish by the Sword:
No greater harm can for our course be wrought,
Then by protracting the appointed time,
Lest that, which acted would be virtue thought,
Be (if prevented) construed as a crime;
Can one thing long in many minds be penned?
No, purposes would never be delayed,
Which judged by th'issues Fortune doth comment,
If prospering, reason, treason if betrayed.
There may amongst ourselves some man remain,
Whom (if afraid) his pardon to procure,
Or (if too greedy) for the hope of gain,
Time to disclose his consorts may allure.
Then for our recompense we ruin reap,
If ought our course thus made abortive mar,
For, if discovered once, we cannot scape:
As tyrant's ears hear much, their hands reach far.
The breast in which so deep a secret dwells,
Would not be long charged with so weighty cares:
For, I conjecture, as their countenance tells,
That many know our minds, though we not theirs:
Even but of late one, Casca came to see
Who curious was to have our purpose known,
And said to him, that which thou hadst from me,
To me by Brutus hath at length been shown.
Then Laena once came to us in like sort,
And wished that our design might prosper well;
But yet to haste did earnestly exhort,
Since others told what we refused to tell.
Whilst strangers rest familiar with our mind,
And ere we them, do all our purpose spy,
Make forward fast, or we will come behind:
Fame (winged with breath) doth violently fly.
Their words but burst from tales uncertain forth,
For, whilst considering of their bondage thus,
Of Caesar's tyranny and of our worth,
They think this should be done, and done by us.
Such conjurations to confirm of old,
Some drinking others bloods, swore on their swords,
And cursing those who did their course unfold,
Used imprecations, execrable words;
And yet, than this, though voluntar'ly vowed,
Free from all bonds, save that which virtue binds,
More constantly no course was ere allowed,
Till that the end must manifest our minds.
And since so many frankly keep their faith,
What first intended to accomplish bend,
No doubt in spite of sickle fortunes wrath,
A happy success shall our soul's content.
Might some few Thebans from the Spartans' pride,
By diverse tyrants' deaths redeem their Town?
And one Athenian who his virtue tried,
By thirty tyrants' ruin, get renown?
And to the Greeks' are we inferiors grown,
That where they have so many tyrants spoiled,
There cannot one be by us all o'erthrown,
Whose state yet staggering may be soon embroiled?
I am resolved, and with my thoughts decree,
What ever chance to come, or sweet, or sour,
I shall my soil from tyranny set free,
Or then myself free from the tyrant's power.
By Lepidus invited this last night,
Whilst Caesar went to sup, and I with him,
Of all death's shapes to talk, we took delight,
So at the table to beguile the time:
And whilst our judgements all about were tried,
Strait Caesar, (as transported) to the rest,
With a most sudden exclamation cried:
O! of all deaths, unlooked for death is best:
It from ourselves doth steal ourselves so fast,
That even the mind no fearful form can see,
Then is the pain ere apprehended past;
Sour things ere tasted, would first swallowed be.
The threatened destiny thus he divined:
(It would appear) divinely then inspired;
For, now I hope that he shall shortly find
That form of death which he himself desired.
Whilst of our band the fury flames most hot,
And that their will to end this work is such,
Lest Caesar's absence disappoint the plot,
Which would of some abate the courage much;
It (Decius) were exceedingly well done,
That to his lodging you addressed your way,
Him by all means to further forward soon,
Lest him some sudden chance may move to stay.
There, where the Senate minds this day to sit,
Stand all prepared, not fearing danger more,
And for the Sacrifice when all is fit,
I'll bring an offering hallowed of before.
LOng-lookt-for Time that should the glory yield,
Which I through Neptune's trustless reign have sought;
And through the dust of many a bloody field,
As by all dangers worthy to be bought.
Thy coming now those lowering shadows clears,
My hopes horizon which did long o'ercast;
This day defrays the toils of many years,
And brings the harvest of my labours past.
The Senators a Messenger have sent
Most earnestly entreating me to come
And hear myself discerned by their consent
To wear a Crown o'er all, excepting Rome;
Thus, they devise conditions at this hour
For him, of whom Mars hath made them the prey,
As Subjects limit could their Sovereign's power,
Who must have mind of nought but to obey;
But having pacified those present things,
I mind to lead my valorous legions forth
To th' oriental Realms (adoring Kings)
Who can afford all that is due to worth.
Then swim my thoughts in th' ocean of delight,
Whilst on the pillow of soft praise reposed;
Those eyes to gaze upon my glories light,
Which Envy opened, Admiration closed.
Ah, though your fancies great contentment find,
Whilst thus the world your virtue doth advance;
Yet a preposterous terror stings my mind,
And brags me with I know not what mischance;
My wavering hopes o're-ballanced are with fears,
Which to my soul sinistrous signs impart;
And om'nous rumours so assault mine eats,
That they almost make breaches in my heart.
What? do foiled Pompey's floating followers strive
To recollect their ruins from the dust?
Dare they who only by my tolerance live,
More to their strength, then to my favour trust?
Or dost thou fear his son's dejected state,
Who steals infamous flying through those floods,
Which his great father, Admiral of late,
Did plant with ships, till all their waves seemed woods;
Or makes his brother's death his hopes grow more,
Since (by them straited in a bloody strife)
I who in all the battels given before,
Did fight for victory, then, fought for life;
Or, whilst to march to Parthia I prepare,
Doth a suspicion thus afflict thy spirit:
By Crassus' fortune moved, who perished there,
The scorned prey of the Barbarians spite?
To those with Cassius who from thence retired,
Amongst my bands a place I will allow,
Whose foes shall find (bad fate at last expired,)
Though the same sheep, another shepherd now:
Do not imagine matters to bemoan,
For, whilst there stands a world, can Caesar fall?
Though thousand thousands were conjured in one,
I, and my fortune might confound them all.
No, none of those my mind doth miscontent,
Who undisguised still like themselves remain:
Vnlook't-for harms are hardest to prevent:
There is no guard against concealed disdain;
But, in whom further can your trust repose,
Whom danger now o'er all by all attends?
Where private men but only fear their foes,
Oft Kings have greatest cause to fear their friends,
For, since most trusted, fittest to betray,
Those unto whom ones favour force affords,
Most dangerous ambushes with ease may lay,
Whilst falsest hearts are hid with fairest words.
And some report (though privately) yet plain,
That Dolabella and Antonius now,
By your destruction do intent to gain
That which you keep by making all men bow.
No corpulent sanguinians make me fear,
Who with more pain their beards then th'enemies strike,
And do themselves like th'Epicurians bear
To Bacchus, Mars, and Venus borne alike;
Their hearts do always in their mouths remain,
As streams whose murmuring shows their course not deep,
Then still they love to sport, though gross, and plain,
And never dream of aught but when they sleep:
But those high spirits who hold their bodies down,
Whose visage lean their restless thoughts records:
Whilst they their cares depth in their bosoms drown,
I fear their silence more than th''others words.
Thus Cassius now and Brutus seem to hold
Some great thing in their mind, whose fire oft smokes;
What Brutus would, he vehemently would;
Think what they list, I like not their pale looks:
Yet with their worth this cannot well agree,
In whom bright virtue seems so much to shine:
Can those who have received their lives from me,
Prove so ingrate, that they do thirst for mine?
Dare Cassius (matched with me) new hopes conceive,
At th' Hellespont, who fortune durst not try,
And (like a dastard) did his Galleys leave,
In all (save courage) though more strong than I?
Shall I suspect that Brutus seeks my blood,
Whose safety still I tendered with such care,
Who when the heavens from mortals me seclude,
Is only worthy to be Caesar's heir?
The corners of the heart are hard to know;
Though of those two the world the best doth deem,
Yet do not trust too much to th' outward show,
For, men may differ much from what they seem.
None oft more fierce than those who look most mild,
Impiety sometime appears devout,
And (that the world the more may be beguiled)
Even vice can cloath itself with virtue's cote.
Though it would seem (all hatred now laid down)
They on your favour only should depend,
Yet no respect can counterpoise a Crown:
Ambition hath no bounds, nor 'Greed no end.
Moved by vindictive hate, or emulous pride,
Since some your person, some your place pursue;
All threatened dangers to prevent, provide,
And use for safety, what to State is due.
No armour is that can hold treason out.
To fright your foes with bands be backed about.
So dastard tyrants strive themselves to bear.
It better is to give, then to take fear.
No guard more strong than is the people's love.
But nought in th'earth doth more inconstant prove.
Guards (showing fear) to charge me men might tempt.
Guards would put them from hope, you from contempt.
My breast from terror hath been always clear.
When one lest fears, oft danger lurks most near.
I rather dye then fear: at last life goes.
Yet, death must grieve, when forced by vaunting foes.
I will not cross my present pleasures so,
By apprehending what may chance to come,
This world affords but too much cause for woe;
And sorrows still must harboured be by some.
By joys in time we must embrace relief,
That when they end, we in some measure may
By their remembrance mitigate the grief
Which still attends all those on th'earth that stay.
I think the Senate is assembled now,
And for my coming doth begin to gaze,
Let me condignly once adorn my brow,
And feast mine ears by drinking in due praise.
Stay, stay (dear Lord) retire thy steps again,
And spare a space to prorogate whole years;
Let not this ominous day begin thy reign,
WHich fatal and unfortunate appears.
An Astrologian through the world renowned,
Thy horoscopes just calculation lays,
And doth affirm (as he by signs hath found)
That Marches Ideses do brag to bond thy days;
Walk not abroad where harms may be received
(By great necessity since no way forced)
For, (though his judgement may be far deceived)
In things that touch thy life, suspect the worst.
Whilst I reformed the Calendar by fits,
Which did confound the order of the year;
I waded through the depths of all their wits,
Who of the stars the mysteries would clear.
Those pregnant spirits who walk betwixt the Poles,
And lodge at all the Zodiacs several signs,
Do read strange wonders wrapped in th'azure scrolls,
Of which our deeds are words, our lives are lines.
By speculation of superior powers,
Some Nature's secrets curious are to know,
As how celestial bodies rule o'er ours,
And what their influence doth work below.
Yea, they sometime may brave conjectures make
Of those whose parts they by their birth do prove,
Since naturally all inclination take
From Planets then predominant above;
And yet no certainty can so be had,
Some virtuously against their Stars have strived,
As Socrates, who grew (though borne but bad)
The most accomplished man that ever lived.
But of the hour ordained to close our lights,
No earth-cloged soul can to the knowledge come,
For, O! the destinies far from our sights,
In clouds of darkness have involved our doom!
And some but only guess at great men's falls,
By bearded Comets, and prodigious Stars,
Whose sight-distracting shape the world appalls,
As still denouncing terror, death, or wars.
The time uncertain is of certain death,
And that fantastic man far past his bounds:
With doubt and reverence they should manage breath,
Who will divine upon conjectured grounds.
But this all day hath preyed upon my heart,
And from the same of cares a tribute claimed;
Do not despise that which I must impart,
Though but a dream, and by a woman dreamed.
I thought (alas) the thought yet wounds my breast,
Then whilst we both (as those whom Morpheus weds)
Lay softly buried (with a pleasant rest)
I in thy bosom, thou within the beds:
Then from my soul strange terrors did withdraw
Th' expected peace by apprehended harms;
For, I imagined, no, no doubt I saw,
And did embrace thee bloody in mine arms.
Thus whilst my soul by sorrows was surcharged,
Of which huge weight it yet some burden bears,
I big with grief, two Elements enlarged,
Th' air with my sighs, the water with my tears.
That which I heard, with thy report accords,
Whilst thou all seemed dissolved in grief at once,
A heavy murmuring made with mangled words,
Was interrupted oft by tragic groans.
The memory, but not the judgement frames
Those raving fancies which disturb the brain,
Whilst night dissolves all day's designs in dreams,
The senses sleeping, souls would stir in vain.
From superstitious fears this care proceeds,
Which still would watch o'er that which thou dost love,
And in thy mind thus melancholy breeds,
Which doth those strange imaginations move.
Ah, in so light account leave off to hold.
Those fatal warnings, which our minds should lead
To search dark matters, till we may unfold
What dangers huge do hang above thy head.
With sacred Garlands he who things divines,
By th' entrails of the consecrated beast,
Doth in the offering see sinistrous signs,
And I entreat thee do not hence make haste.
When I in Spain against young Pompey went,
Thus, the diviner threatened me before,
Yet did I prosecute my first intent,
Which with new laurels did my brows decore.
And yet you hardly there (as I do hear)
From danger (far engaged) redeemed your life;
But tokens now more monstrous do appear,
And I suspect far worse than open strife.
Lest I too much seem wedded to my will,
(As others counsels scorning to allow)
With jealous eyes I'll search about me still,
And even mistrust myself to trust thee now;
Yet if I stay, the Senators deceived,
May my beginning strait begin to hate;
So might I perish, seeking to be saved:
By flying it, some fall upon their fate.
But here one comes who can resolve me much,
With whom I use to weigh affairs of weight;
Whence comest thou Decius, that thy haste is such?
Is aught occurred that craves our knowledge strait?
I come to tell you how the Senate stays,
Till that your presence bless their longing fight,
And to conclude what is proposed, delays,
Since your applause can only make it right:
They your contentment to procure intent,
And all their thoughts seem at one object bend,
Save that amongst themselves they do contend,
Who you to please, shall rarest ways invent.
Then that, no treasure to my soul more dear,
Which to enjoy from hence I long to part,
But yet I know not what arrests me here,
And makes my feet rebellious to my heart;
From thee (dear friend) I never do conceal
The weightiest secrets that concern me most;
And at this time I likewise must reveal,
How ●●avens by signs me with destruction boast:
To superstition though not erst inclined,
My wife by dreams doth now presage my fall,
It a soothsayer likewise hath divined:
The Sacrifice prodigious seems to all,
So that till this disastrous day be gone,
All company I purpose to disuse,
And to the Senators will send some one,
To paint my absence with a fair excuse.
Brut. Do not repose on superstitious signs,
You to suspect the people thus to bring,
Whilst Soveraigne-like you limit their designs,
Seem not a tyrant, seeking to be King:
How can we satisfy the world's conceit,
Whose tongue still in all ears your praise proclaims?
Or shall we bid them leave to deal in state,
Till that Calphurnia first have better dreams?
If that this day you private would remain,
The Senate to dissolve yourself must go,
And then incontinent come back again,
When you have shown to it some reverence so.
With thy advice (as powerful) I agree,
The Senators shall have no cause to grudge:
A little space, all part a space from me,
And I'll be shortly ready to dislodge.
WHence comes this huge and admirable change,
That in my breast hath uncouth thoughts infused,
Doth th'earth then erst yield terrors now more strange,
Or but my mind less courage than it used?
What spiteful fate against my state contends,
That I must now to fancied plagues give place,
By toes not moved, afraid amongst my friends,
By war secure, endangered but by peace?
When strongest troops to fight with me did come,
Then did my heart the highest hopes conceive,
I warred with many, many to overcome;
The greatest battels, greatest glory gave.
As th'enemies' numbers, still my courage grew;
Through depths of dangers oft times have I passed,
Yet never did those boundless labours rue,
To have none greater first, none equal last:
When bragging Gauls moved by their neighbours falls,
Had from the fields, no, from my fury fled;
And hide themselves with Arms, their Arms with walls,
Whilst I my troops before Alexia led;
Then, though there swarmed forth from the bounds about,
Huge hosts to compass me inflamed with wrath,
That the besiegers (all besieged about,)
Seemed drawn by danger in the nets of death.
No way I who could with the pride comport,
That those Barbarians by vain vaunts bewrayed,
Did re-assault th' assaulters in such sort,
That words by wounds, wounds were by death repaid.
Of those within the town (to ease their toils)
Till quite o're-comed, their coming was not known,
Who strait (upbraided by the barbarous spoils)
Did yield themselves, as if with them overthrow,
By liquid legions whilst with tumid boasts
The Trident-bearer strived my spoils to bear;
Though threatened thrice amidst his humid hosts,
Still courage scorned to think of abject fear.
I used those Pirates who had me deceived,
Still as my servants (thundering threatenings forth)
And gave them money more than they had craved,
Whose ignorance too meanly prized my worth:
Yet gathering ships, I stayed not long a shore,
But traced their steps, though they not paved the way,
And taking them (as I had vowed before)
By nought but death their ransom would defray;
Then when (without th'advice of others minds)
Through hoary waves I passed alone by night,
Whilst in a little Bark against great winds,
That even the Pilot lookit not for the light;
The waves themselves asunder seemed to tear,
That in their gravel I might choose a grave,
And cry stall arches did above me rear,
That I a Tomb fit for my state might have.
Whilst dangers seemed to merit Caesar's death,
As Neptune raised his head, I raised my heart;
And she wing what I was with constant breath,
To weak Amiclas courage did impart.
Was I not once amidst large Nilus' slote,
Whilst me to wound, a wood of darts did fly,
Yet swim'd so careless of my enemies shot,
That in my hand I held some papers dry?
With open dangers thus in every place,
I (whilst oft compassed both by Sea and Land,)
Did undismayed look horror in the face,
As borne for nought, but only to command.
But since a world of victories have filled
With Trophies Temples, theatres with my praise,
That bathed with balm which glories bays had stilled,
With friends in peace, I looked to spend my days;
The chambers music now affrights me more,
Then Trumpets sounds when marching in the field,
And Gowns (though signs of peace) worse than before
The pompous splendour of a flaming shield.
Those thoughts of late which had disdained to doubt,
Though I alone had marched amongst my foes,
Lo, whilst amongst my friends well backed about,
They, than the eyes more danger now disclose.
If any chance, to meet a number brings,
I insurrections fear from common wrath,
Yea, if two talk a part of private things,
Strait I suspect that they conspire my death;
●●en sudden rumours rise from vulgar smoke;
(whilst th'inward motions roll my restless eyes,)
I at ●●●ch corner for an ambush look,
A●●●start astonished, lest some tumult rise.
When light (first lightning) doth encourage toils,
I still despair to re-enjoy the night,
And when mine eyes th' umbragious darkness spoils,
I never look to grace them with the light;
For, when the light with shadows makes a change,
To flatter mortals with a dream of rest,
What ugly Gorgon's, what Chimeras strange
Do brag the little world within my breast?
The time which should appease impetuous cares,
Doth double mine, who view most when quite blind;
I apprehend huge horrors and despairs,
Whilst th' outward objects not distract my mind:
Now of my conquests what delight remains?
Where is the peace pursued by many a strife?
Have I but taken pain to purchase pains?
And sought by dangers for a dangerous life?
Is this the period of aspiring powers,
In promised calms to be most plagued by storms?
Lurk poisonous Serpents under fairest flowers,
And hellish furies under heavenly forms?
It will not grieve my ghost below to go,
If circumvented in the wars I end,
As bold Marcellus by Rome's greatest foe,
Who gave his ashes honour as a friend;
Or like t' Epaminondas in his death,
O! would the Gods I had amidst alarms,
When charged with recent spoils, been spoiled of breath,
Whilst I to Pluto might have marched in arms;
Yet, life to end, which nought but toils affords,
I'll pay to death the tribute that it owes;
Strait with my blood, let some come dye their swords,
Whose naked breast encounter shall their blows:
But ah! how have the furies seized my breast,
And poisoned thus my spirit with desp'rate rage?
By horrid Serpents whilst quite barred from rest,
No kind of comfort can my cares assuage;
No, Atropos, yet spare my thread a space,
That to the Stygian streams ere walking down,
I may of honour have the highest place,
And if I fall, yet fall beneath a Crown.
Whilst ears are bended to applauding shouts,
My thoughts divided are within my breast,
And my tossed soul doth float between two doubts,
Yet knows not on what ground to build her rest.
The Senators, they have this day designed,
To show the world how they esteem my worth;
Yet do portentous signs perturb my mind,
By which the heavens would point my danger forth:
The Gods from me with indignation gone,
In every thing charactered have my death:
And must both heaven and earth conspire in one,
To quench a little spark of smoking breath?
My safety would that I should stay within
Till this disastrous day give darkness place,
But daring honour would have me begin
To reap the glory of my painful race,
And I'll advance in spite of threatened broils,
For, though the fates accomplish what we dream,
When only death hath triumphed of my spoils,
I then (though breathless) still shall breathe with fame.
WHat fury thus doth fill the breast
With a prodigious rash desire,
Which banishing their souls from rest,
Doth make them live who high aspire,
(Whilst it within their bosom boyles)
As Salamanders in the fire;
Or like to Serpents changing spoils,
Their withered beauties to renew?
Like Vipers with unnatural toils,
Of such the thoughts themselves pursue,
Who for all lines their lives do square,
Whilst like Chameleons changing hue,
They only feed on empty air:
To pass ambition greatest matters brings,
And (save contentment) can attain all things.
This active passion doth disdain
To match with any vulgar mind,
As in base breasts where terrors reign,
Too great a guest to be confined;
It doth but lofty thoughts frequent,
Where it a spacious field may find,
Itself with honour to content,
Where reverenced fame doth loudest sound;
Those for great things by courage bend,
(far lifted from this lumpish round)
Would in the sphere of Glory move,
Whilst lofty thoughts which nought can bind,
All rivals live in virtue's love;
On abject preys as th' Eagles never light,
Ambition poisons but the greatest spirit,
And of this restless Vulture's brood,
(If not become too great a flame)
A little spark doth sometime good,
Which makes great minds (affecting fame)
To suffer still all kind of pain:
Their fortune at the bloody game,
Who hazard would for hope of gain,
Unless first burned by thirst of praise?
The learned to a higher strain,
Their wits by emulation raise,
As those who hold applauses dear;
And what great mind at which men gaze,
Itself can of ambition clear,
Which is when valued at the highest price,
A generous error, an heroic vice?
But when this frenzy flaming bright,
Doth so the souls of some surprise,
That they can taste of no delight,
But what from Sovereignty doth rise,
Then, huge affliction it affords;
Such must (themselves so to disguise)
Prove prodigal of courteous words,
Give much to some, and promise all,
Then humble seem to be made Lords,
Yea, being thus to many thrall,
Must words impart, if not support;
To those who crushed by fortune fall;
And grieve themselves to please each sort:
Are not those wretched, who o'er a dangerous snare,
Do hung by hopes, whilst balanced in the air;
Then when they have the Port attained,
Which was through Seas of dangers sought,
They (lo) at last but loss have gained,
And by great trouble, trouble bought:
Their minds are married still with fears,
to being forth many a jealous thought;
With searching eyes, and watching ears,
To learn that which it grieves to know,
The breast that such a burden bears,
What huge afflictions do o'erthrow?
Thus, each Prince is (as all perceive)
No more exalted than brought low,
Of many, Lord, of many, slave;
That idol greatness which th'earth doth adore,
Is gotten with great pain, and kept with more:
He who to this imagined good,
Did through his country's bowels tend,
Neglecting friendship, duty, blood,
And all on which trust can depend,
Or by which love could be conceived,
Doth find of what he did attend,
His expectations far deceived;
For, since suspecting secret snares,
His soul hath still of rest been reaved,
Whilst squadrens' of tumultuous cares,
Forth from his breast extort deep groans:
Thus Caesar now of life despairs,
Whose lot his hope exceeded once;
And who can long well keep an ill won State?
Those perish must by some whom all men hate.
ARe generous Romans so degenered now,
That they from honour have estranged their hands?
And, used with burdens, do not blush to bow,
Yea (even though broken) shake not off their bands;
This glorious work was worthy of your pain,
Which now ye may by others dangers have;
But what enchants you thus, that ye abstain
That which ye should have taken, to receive?
Where be those inundations of delight,
Which should burst out from thoughts overflowed with joy,
Whilst emulous Virtue may your minds incite,
That which we give you bravely to enjoy,
Or quite conformed unto your former state,
Do still your minds of servitude allow,
As broken by adversity of late,
Not capable of better fortune now?
Lo, we who by the Tyrant's favour stood,
And grieved but at the yoke which you outraged,
Have our advancement, riches, rest, and blood,
All liberally for liberty engaged.
Thou like thy great Progenitor in this,
Hast glory to thyself, t'us freedom brought;
Than liberty what greater treasure is?
Ought with it much, without it much seems nought:
But pardon us (heroic man) though we
To high perfection hardly can aspire,
Though every man cannot a Brutus bell▪
What none can imitate, all must admire.
At this strange course (with too much light made blind)
We our opinions must suspend a space,
When sudden chances do dismay the mind,
The judgement to the Passion first gives place.
What wonder now though this most barbarous deed
Have with amazement closed your judgement in,
Which O (I fear) shall great confusion breed?
When Caesar's toils did end, Rome's did begin:
The most suspicious minds had not believed,
That Romans reverenced for their worth by us,
Would have presumed to kill, or to have grieved
An hallowed body inhumanely thus;
Who would have once but dreamed of such despite?
What strange hostility! in time of peace
To kill, though not accused, against all right,
A sacred man, and in a sacred place?
If Caesar as a Citizen had lived,
And had by Law decided every strife,
Then I would grant those treason had contrived,
Who went without a Law to take his life;
But to pervert the Laws, subvert the State,
If all his travels did directly tend,
Then I must say, we did no wrong of late:
Why should not Tyrants make a Tragic end?
Since destinies did Caesar's soul enlarge,
What course can we for his recovery take?
Ah! th'unrelenting Charon's restless Barge
Stands to transport all o'er, but brings none back:
Of life's frail glass (when broken) with vain groans,
What earthly power the ruins can repair;
Or who can gather up, when scattered once,
Ones blood from th'earth, or yet his breath from th'air?
Let us of those who pass oblivions flood
Oblivious be, since hope of help is gone,
And spend our cares where cares may do most good,
Lest Rome wail many, where she wails but one.
Still concord for the Commonweal were best,
To reconcile divided thoughts again:
Than discord to great Towns, no greater pest,
Whose violence no reverence can restrain.
Yet oftentimes those wary wits have erred,
Who would buy wealth and ease at any cost:
Let honesty to profit be preferred,
And to vile peace war when it wounds us most;
But seeking peace, what surety can we find?
Can faithless men give faith, just fears to stay?
No sacred band Impiety can bind,
Which swears for trust, seeks trust but to betray;
What helped it Caesar, that we all had sworn
His body still from dangers to redeem?
Those who are once perjured, hold oaths in scorn?
All are most frank of what they least esteem.
None needs in States which are from Tyrant's free,
Loathed execrations to confirm his will,
Where willingly men would with good agree,
And without danger might despise all ill;
All odious oaths by those are only craved,
Whose suit from Reason doth a warrant want,
Whilst who deceive (afraid to be deceived)
Seek of men thralled, what none whilst free would grant.
When Caesar had prevailed in France and Spain,
His Fortune building on his Country's wrack,
(Of liberty a shadow to retain)
We gave him all that he was bend to take.
The Senate had reserved nought but a show,
Whose course to it by Caesar was imposed,
Who lifted up, by bringing others low,
Of Offices, and Provinces disposed:
Then that our faded hopes might never spring,
When bend to try the Parthians wooden shower,
He for five years disposed of every thing,
Even in his absence leaving us no power.
O how some aggravate our deed with hate!
Who durst his body wound, or with blood stain,
Though consecrated by constraint of late,
Yea, but reputed holy, yet profane,
And did forget how he (a wondrous case)
The Tribuneship did violate with scorn,
Which our forefathers (free) in time of peace
Advis'dly had inviolable sworn.
Did he not once appropriate (swollen with wrath)
The public treasure to his private use?
And to the Tribune boldly threatened death,
Who did resist, grieved at that great abuse.
Twixt Romans and a Tyrant what avails
A Covenant whilst Right rests trod on thus?
Who can build further when the ground once fails?
Can we save him who sought to ruin us?
So absolutely good no man remains,
Whose natural weakness may not him overcome;
Even Virtue's die from Vice may take some stains,
And worthy minds may of gross faults have some:
As in fine fruits, or weeds, fat earth abounds,
Even as the Labourers spend, or spare their pain,
The greatest spirits (disdaining vulgar bounds)
Of what they seek the highest height must gain;
They (that bright glory may be so enjoyed)
As only borne to be in action still,
Had rather be (than idle) ill employed:
Great spirits must do great good, or then great ill;
The world's chief treasure which bright Rays do arm,
Huge evil procured (though only framed for good)
Till that fond youth whom his own wish did harm,
Was killed by fire, and buried in a flood.
By rules of Reason whilst he rightly lived,
When lawfully elected by the State,
What glorious deeds by Caesar were achieved,
Which all the world as wonders must relate?
But when of right he buried all respects,
(As blind Ambition had bewitched his mind)
What harm ensued, by pitiful effects,
We at the first▪ he at the last did find;
Whilst like Narcissus with himself in love,
He with our bondage banqueted his sight,
And for a while (uncertain joys to prove)
With all our woes would sweeten his delight▪
How could brave men (with virtuous minds) as those
Who of their Country's weal are jealous still,
But stoutly to all storms their States expose,
The State's destroyer resolute to kill?
But since our freedom flows from Caesar's blood,
Let us embrace that which too long we lack:
Peace gives to justice power, it, to all good,
Where war breeds wrong, and wrong all kind of wrack.
This City hath experienced with great pain,
What guilty troubles rise from civil strife,
Which by her ruins registered remain,
Since first the Gracchis gave contention life.
When Scylla once, and Marius (mad through pride)
Did strive who should the most tyrannic prove,
What memorable miseries were tried,
From Romans minds no time can e'er remove?
Then last by Caesar, and his Son in law,
What thousands Ghosts to Pluto were dispatched?
Ah! that the world those hosts divided saw,
Which, joined in one, no world of worlds had matched.
Yet with this wit which we have dearly bought,
Let us abhor all that may breed such broils,
Lest when we have ourselves to ruin brought,
In end Barbarians bear away our spoils.
Rome to those great men hardly can afford
A recompense, according to their worth,
Who (by a Tyrant's overthrow) have restored
The light of liberty which was put forth;
Yet (by due praises with their merits even)
Let us acknowledge their illustrious minds;
And to their charge let Provinces be given:
Still virtue grows, when it preferment finds.
Those barbarous Realms by whose respective will,
Of Caesar's Conquests monuments are shown:
As if they held them highly honoured still,
Who warred with Caesar though they were o'erthrown,
Can this disgrace by their proud minds be borne,
Whilst we dishonour, whom they honour thus?
And shall we not (whilst as a Tyrant torn)
Give him a tomb, who gave the world to us?
Must his Decrees be all reduced again,
And those degraded whom he graced of late.
As worthy men unworthily did gain
Their rooms of reputation in the State?
As if a Tyrant we him damn so soon,
And for his murderers do rewards devise,
Than what he did, must likewise be undone,
For which I fear, a foul confusion rise.
Ah! (brave Antonius) sow not seeds of war,
And if thou always dost delight in arms,
The haughty Parthians yet undaunted are,
Which may give thee great praise, and us no harms.
Detest in time th'abominable broils,
For which no Conqueror to triumph hath comed,
Whilst this wretched Town (which still some party spoils)
Must loathe the Victor, and lament th'o'ercomed:
And shall we still contend against all good,
To make the yoke where we should bound abide?
Must still the Commons sacrifice their blood,
As only borne to serve the great men's pride?
Whilst I the depths of my affection sound,
And read but th'obligations which I own,
I find myself by oaths, and duty bound,
All Caesar's foes, or then myself t'o'erthrow.
But when I weigh what to the State belongs,
The which to plague no passion shall get place,
Then I with grief digesting private wrongs,
War with myself to give my Country peace.
Yet whilst my thoughts of this last purpose muse,
I altogether disassent from this,
That Caesar's fame, or body we abuse,
To deal with Tyrants as the custom is:
Lest guilty of ingratitude we seem,
(If guerdoning our benefactors thus)
Great Caesar's body from disgrace redeem,
And let his acts be ratified by us.
Then for the publike-weale which makes us pause,
Towards those that have him killed t'extend regard,
Let them be pardoned for their kinsman's cause:
Remission given for evil is a reward.
We stand not vexed like Malefactors here,
With a dejected and remorseful mind,
So in your presence supplicants t'appear,
As who themselves of death do guilty find;
But looking boldly with a lofty brow,
Through a delight of our design conceived,
We come to challenge gratefulness of you,
That have of us so great a good received.
But if you will suspend your thoughts a space,
Though not the givers, entertain the gift;
Do us reject, yet liberty embrace:
To have you free (lo) that was all our drift.
So Rome her ancient liberties enjoy,
Let Brutus and let Cassius banished live;
Thus banishment would breed us greater joy,
Than what at home a Tyrant's wealth could give.
Though some misconstrue may this course of ours,
By ignorance, or then by hate deceived;
The truth depends not on opinions powers,
But is itself, how ever misconceived.
Though to acknowledge us, not one would deign,
Our merit of itself is a reward,
Of doing good none should repent their pain,
Though they get no reward, nor yet regard.
I'll venture yet my fortune in the field,
With every one that Rome to bondage draws;
And as for me, how ever others yield,
I'll nought obey, but Reason, and the Laws.
What fools are those who further travel take,
For that which they even past recovery know?
Who can revive the dead, or bring time back?
That can no creature who doth live below.
Great Pompey (now) for whom the world still weeps,
Lies low, neglected on a barbarous shore;
Selfe-slaughtered Scipio floats amidst the deeps,
Whom, it may be, Sea-monsters do devour.
Of Libyan Wolves grave Cate feasts the wombs,
Whose death, of worth the world defrauded leaves;
Thus some that did deserve Mausolean tombs,
Have not a title graved upon their graves.
And yet may Caesar who procured their death,
By brave men slain be buried with his race;
All civil war quite banished with his breath,
Let him now dead, and us alive have peace.
We should desist our thoughts on things to set,
Which may harm some, and can give help to none,
Learn to forget that which we cannot get,
And let our cares be gone of all things gone.
Those who would strive all crosses to overcome,
To present times must still conform their course,
And making way for that which is to come,
Not meddle with things past, but by discourse.
Let none seek that which doth no good when found;
Since Caesar now is dead, how ever dead;
Let all our grief go with him to the ground,
For, sorrow best becomes a lightlesse shade;
It were the best, that joined in mutual love,
We physic for this wounded State prepare:
Neglecting those who from the world remove.
All men on earth for earthly things must care.
O how those great men friendship can pretend,
By soothing others thus with painted winds;
And seem to trust, where treason they attend,
Whilst love their mouth, and malice fills their minds;
Those but to them poor simple souls appear,
Whose countenance doth discover what they think,
Who make their words, as is their meaning, clear,
And from themselves can never seem to shrink.
Lo, how Antonius feigns to quench all jars,
And whom he hates with kindness doth embrace,
But as he furthered first the former wars,
Some fear he still will prove a foe to peace.
Now where Calphurnia stays our steps address,
Since by this sudden chance her loss was chief.
All visit should their neighbours in distress,
To give some comfort, or to share in grief.
WHen darkness last imprisoned had mine eyes,
Such monstrous visions did my heart affright,
That (quite dejected) it as stupid dies
Through terrors then contracted in the night;
A melancholy cloud so dims my breast,
That it my mind fit for misfortune makes,
A lodging well disposed for such a Guest,
Where nought of sorrow but th'impression lacks;
And I imagine every man I see
(My senses so corrupted are by fears)
A Herald to denounce mishaps to me,
Who should infuse confusion in my ears.
O! there he comes to violate my peace,
In whom the object of my thoughts I see;
Thy message is charactered in thy face,
And by thy looks directed is to me:
Thy troubled eyes rest rolling for relief,
As lately frighted by some ugly sight;
Thy breath doth pant as if grown big with grief,
And strait to bring some monstrous birth to light.
The man of whom the world in doubt remained,
If that his mind or fortune was more great,
Whose valour conquered, clemency retained
All Nations Subject to the Roman State;
Fraud harmed him more than force, friends more than foes;
Ah! must this sad discourse by me be made?
Stay, ere thou further go defray my woes,
How doth my love? where is my life? Nun. dead. Cal. dead?
Though apprehending horrors in her mind,
Now since she hath a certainty received,
She by experience greater grief doth find:
Till born, the passions cannot be conceived.
When as a high disaster force affords,
O how that Tyrant whom affliction bears,
Bars th'ears from comfort, and the mouth from words,
And when obdured scorns to dissolve in tears!
Ah! since the lights of that great light are set,
Why doth not darkness spread itself o'er all?
At lest what further comfort can I get,
Whose pleasures had no period but his fall?
O would the Gods I always might confine
Flames in my breast, and floods within my eyes
To entertain so great a grief as mine,
That thence there might fit furniture arise;
Yet I disdain (though by distress o'erthrown)
By such external means to seek relief:
The greatest sorrows are by silence shown,
Whilst all the Senses are shut up with grief:
But misery doth so tyrannic grow
That it of sighs and tears a tribute claims;
Ah! when the cup is full, it must o'erflow,
And fires which burn must offer up some flames;
Yet though what thou hast said my death shall be,
(Since sunk so deeply in a melted heart)
Of my lives death report each point to me,
For every circumstance that I may smart.
What fatal warnings did forego his end,
Which by his stay to frustrate some did try?
But he who scorned excuses to pretend,
Was by the destinies drawn forth to die.
Whilst by the way he chanced to meet with one,
Who had his deaths-day named, he to him said:
The Ideses of March be come; but yet not gone
The other answered, and still constant stayed:
Another brought a letter with great speed,
Which the conspiracy at length did touch,
And gave it Caesar in his hand to read,
Protesting that it did import him much.
Yet did he lay it up where still it rests,
As do the great whom blessed the world reputes,
Who (grieved to be importuned by requests)
Of simple supplicants neglect the suits:
Or he of it the reading did defer,
Still troubled by attendants at the gate,
Whilst some to show their credit would confer,
To flatter some, some something to entreat.
Not only did the Gods by diverse signs
Give Caesar warning of his threatened harms;
But did of foes disturb the rash designs,
And to their troubled thoughts gave strange alarms;
A Senator who by some words we find,
To the conspirators (though none of theirs)
Had shown himself familiar with their mind,
Then chanced to deal with Caesar in affairs.
That sight their souls did with confusion fill,
For, thinking that he told their purposed deeds,
They strait themselves, or Caesar thought to kill:
A guilty conscience no accuser needs;
But marking that he used (when taking leave)
A suitors gesture when affording thankes,
They of their course did greater hopes conceive,
And ranged them seven according to their ranks.
Then Caesar marched forth to the fatal place;
Near Pompey's Theatre where the Senate was,
Where (when he had remained a little space)
All the confederates flocked about. Calph. Alas.
First for the form, Metellus Cimber craved
To have his Brother from exile restored,
Yet with the rest a rude repulse received,
Whilst it they all too earnestly implored:
Bold Cimber who in strife with him did stand,
Did strive to cover with his Gown his head:
Then was the first blow given by Casca's hand,
Which on his neck a little wound but made.
And Caesar (starting whilst the stroke he spied)
By strength from further striking Casca stayed,
Whilst both the two burst out at once, and cried:
He Traitor Casca, and he, Brother aid;
Then all the rest against him did arise
Like desperate men, whose fury force affords,
That Caesar on no side could set his eyes,
But every look encountered with some Swords;
Yet, as a lion (when by nets surprised)
Stands struggling still so long as he hath strength,
So Caesar (as he had their power despised)
Did with great rage resist, till at the length
He thus cried out (when spying Brutus come)
And thou my Son! then grief did back rebound:
Nought but unkindness Caesar could o'ercome,
That, of all things, doth give the deepest wound.
Ah! when unkindness is, where love was thought,
A tender passion breaks the strongest heart:
For, of all those who give offence in aught,
Men, others hate, but for unkind men, smart.
Ah! taking then no more delight in light,
As who disdainfully the world disclaimed,
Or if from Brutus blow to hold his sight,
As of so great ingratitude ashamed,
He with his Gown when covered first o'er all,
As one who neither sought, nor wished relief,
Not wronging majesty, in state did fall,
No sigh consenting to betray his grief.
Yet (if by chance or force I cannot tell)
Even at the place, where Pompey's statue stood,
(As if to crave him pardon,) Caesar fell,
That in revenge it might exhaust his blood;
But when his corpses abandoned quite by breath,
Did fortunes frailties monument remain,
That all might have like interest in his death,
And by the same, look for like praise or pain:
Then Cassius, Brutus, and the rest began
With that great Emperor's blood to die their hands;
What beast in th'earth more cruel is then man,
When o'er his reason passion once commands?
Whilst brutish Brutus, and proud Cassius thus
Rome's greatest Captain under trust deceived,
Where was Antonius (since a friend to us)
That he not lost himself, or Caesar saved?
The whole conspirators remained in doubt,
Had he and Caesar joined, to be undone,
And so caused one to talk with him without,
Who feigned a conference till the fact was done.
Then knowing well in such tumultuous broils,
That the first danger always is the worst,
He fled in haste, disguised with borrowed spoils,
For rage and for disdain even like to burst.
The Senators which were assembled there,
When they beheld that great man brought to end,
What was their part? to what inclined their care?
I fear affliction could not find a friend.
Of those who in the Senate-house did sit
(So sad an object sorry to behold,
Or fearing what bold hands might more commit)
Each to his house a several way did hold;
This act with horror did confound their sight,
And unawares their judgement did surprise:
When any hasty harms un-lookt-for light,
The resolution hath not time to rise:
That man on whom the world did once rely,
By all long reverenced, and adored by some,
None to attend him had but two and I
To what an ebb may fortunes flowing come?
Why should men following on the smoke of pri●e,
Leave certain case to seek a dreamed delight,
Which when they have by many dangers tried,
They neither can with safety keep nor quite?
The people who by force subdued remain,
May pity those by whom oppressed they rest;
They but one Tyrant have, whereas there reign
A Thousand Tyrants in one Tyrant's breast;
What though great Caesar once commanded Kings,
Whose only name whole Nations did appall?
Yet now (let no man trust in worldly things)
A little earth holds him who held it all.
Ah! had he but believed my faithful cares,
His State to establish who have always strived,
Then (scaping this conspiracy of theirs)
He, honoured still, and I had happy lived.
Did I not spend of supplications store,
That he within his house, this day would waste,
As I by dreams advertised was before,
Which showed what was to come, and now is past;
Whilst the soothsayers sacrificed did find
A beast without a heart, their Altars stain,
By that presage my soul might have divined,
That I without my heart would soon remain;
But all those terrors could no terror give
To that great mind, whose thoughts too high still aimed;
He by his fortune confident did live,
As, if the heavens, for him had all things framed;
Yet though he ended have his fatal race,
To brag for this, let not his Murderers strive:
For, O! I hope to see within short space,
Him dead adored, and them abhorred alive.
Though now his name the multitude respects,
Since murdering one who him had hel● so dear,
Whilst inward thoughts each outward thing reflects,
Some monstrous shape to Brutus must appear.
Just Nemesis must plague proud Cassius soon,
And make him kill himself, from hopes estranged;
Once all the wrongs by foes to Caesar done,
May by themselves be on themselves revenged.
Some, Sovereign of the earth, would fortune prove,
As if, confusedly, God did men advance;
Nought comes to men below, but from above,
By providence, not by a staggering chance:
Though to the cause that last foregoes the end,
Some attribute the course of every thing,
That cause, on other causes doth depend,
Which chained 'twixt heaven and earth due ends forth bring;
Of those decrees the heavens for us appoint,
(Who ever them approves, or doth disprove)
No mortal man can disappoint a point,
But as they please here moves, or doth remove;
We, when once come the world's vain pomp to try,
(Led by the fates) to end our journey haste:
For, when first borne, we strait begin to dye,
Life's first day is a step unto the last.
And is there ought more swift than days, and years,
Which wear away this breath of ours so soon,
Whilst Lachesis to no request gives ears,
But spins the threads of life till they be done?
Yet foolish worldlings following that which flies,
As if they had assurance of their breath,
To frail preferment fond strive to rise,
Which (but a burden) weighs them down to death.
There's none of us but must remember still,
How that the Gods by many a wondrous sign,
Did show (it seemed) how that against their will,
The destinies would Caesar's days confine.
A monstrous star amidst the heaven hath been,
Still since they first against him did conspire;
The solitary birds at noon were seen,
And men to walk environed all with fire:
What wonder though the heavens at such a time,
Do brave the earth with apparitions strange,
Then whilst intending such a monstrous crime,
Unnatural men make Nature's course to change?
Though all such things seem wonderful to some,
They may by Reason comprehended be,
For, what, beyond what usual is, doth come,
The Ignorant with wondering eyes do see.
Those bastard Stars, not heritors of th'air,
Are first conceived below, then borne above,
And when foreknowing things, spirits take most care,
And by illusion, superstition move.
Yet this, no doubt, a great regard should breed,
When Nature hath brought forth a monstrous birth,
In secret Characters where men may read
The wrath of heaven, and wickedness of th'earth.
The naturalists, and th'Astrologians skill
May oft, encountering, manifest like care:
Since th'one looks back, the other forward still,
One may tell what, the other why things are.
Shall sorrow through the waves of woes to sail,
Have still your tears for Seas, your sighs for winds;
To misery what do base plaints avail?
A course more high becomes heroic minds.
None are overcome, save only those who yield,
From froward Fortune though some blows be borne,
Let Virtue serve Adversity for shield:
No greater grief to grief than th'enemies' scorn;
This makes your foes but laugh to see you weep,
At least these tears but for yourself bestow,
And not for that great spirit, whose spoils heavens keep;
For, he no doubt, rests deified ere now.
I only wail my life, and not his death;
Who now amongst th'immortals doth repose,
And shall so long as I have blood or breath,
To furnish forth the elements of woes.
I care not who rejoice, so I lament,
Who do to darkness dedicate my days,
And since the light of my delight is spent,
Shall have in horror all Apollo's rays.
(I will retire myself to wail alone,
As trusty Turtles mourning for their Mates)
And (my misfortune always bend to moon)
Will spurn at pleasures as empoisoned baits;
No second guest shall press great Caesar's bed,
Warmed by the flames to which he first gave life;
I think there may be greater honour had,
When Caesar's widow, than another's wife.
This had afforded comfort for my harms,
If I (ere chanced abandoned thus to be)
Had had a little Caesar in mine arms,
The living picture of his Sire to me.
Yet doth that Idol which my thoughts adore,
With me of late most strictly matched remain,
For, where my arms him sometimes held before,
Now in my heart I shall him still retain.
That (though I may no precious things impart)
Thy deity may by me be honoured oft,
Still offering up my thoughts upon my heart,
My sacred flame shall always mount aloft.
WHat fools are those who do repose their trust
On what this mass of misery affords?
And (bragging but of th'excrements of dust)
Of lifeless Treasures labour to be Lords:
Which like the Sirens songs, or Circe's charms,
With shadows of delight hide certain harms.
Ah! whilst they sport on pleasures yeie grounds,
Oft poisoned by Prosperity with Pride,
A sudden storm their floating joys confounds,
Whose course is ordered by the eyeless guide,
Who so inconstantly herself doth bear
Th'unhappy men may hope, the happy fear.
The fortunate who bathe in floods of joys,
To perish oft amidst their pleasure's chance,
And mirthless wretches wallowing in annoy▪
Oft by adversity themselves advance;
Whilst Fortune bent to mock vain worldlings cares,
Doth change despairs in hopes, hopes in despairs▪
That gallant Grecian whose great wit so soon,
Whom others could not number, did overcome,
Had he not been undone, had been undone,
And if not banished, had not had a home;
To him fear courage gave (what wondrous change!)
And many doubts are solution strange.
He who told one who then was Fortune's child,
As if with horror to congeal his blood:
That Caius Marius fairy from Rome exiled,
Wretched on the ruins of great Carthage stood;
Though long both plagued by grief, and by disgrace,
The Consulship regained, and died in peace.
And that great Pompey (all the world's delight)
Whom of his Theatre then th'applauses pleased,
Whilst praise-transported eyes endeared his sight,
Who by youth's toils should have his age then eased,
He by one blow of Fortune lost far more
Than many battles gained had before.
Such sudden changes so disturb the soul,
That still the judgement balanced is by doubt;
But, on a Round, what wonder though things roll?
And since within a Circle, turn about?
Whilst heaven on earth strange alterations brings,
To scorn our confidence in worldly things.
And chanced there ever accidents more strange,
Then in these stormy bounds where we remain?
One did a sheephook to a Sceptre change,
The nursling of a Wolf o'er men did reign;
A little Village grew a mighty Town,
Which whilst it had no King, held many a Crown.
Then by how many sundry sorts of men,
Hath this great State been ruled? though now by none,
Which first obeyed but one, than two, then ten,
Then by degrees returned to two, and one;
Of which three States, their ruin did abide,
Two by Two's lusts, and one by Two men's pride.
What revolutions huge have happened thus,
By secret fates all violently led,
Though seeming but by accident to us,
Yet in the depths of heavenly breasts first bred,
As arguments demonstrative to prove
That weakness dwells below, and power above.
Lo, prosperous Caesar charged for a space,
Both with strange Nations, and his country's spoils,
Even when he seemed by war to purchase peace,
And roses of sweet rest, from thorns of toils;
Then whilst his mind and fortune swelled most high,
Hath been constrained the last distress to try.
What warnings large were in a time so short,
Of that dark course which by his death now shines?
It, speechless wonders plainly did report,
It, men revealed by words, and gods by signs,
Yet by the chains of destinies whilst bound,
He saw the sword, but could not scape the wound.
What curtain o'er our knowledge error brings,
Now drawn, now opened, by the heavenly host,
Which makes us sometime sharp to see small things,
And yet quite blind when as we should see most,
That curious brains may rest amazed at it,
Whose ignorance makes them presume of wit;
Then let us live, since all things change below,
When raised most high, ●s those who once may fall,
And hold when by disasters brought more low,
The mind still free, what ever else be thrall:
Those (Lords of Fortune) sweeten every State,
(Who can command themselves, though not their fate.