I Thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany then Cornwell.
It did always seem so to us, but now in the division of the kingdoms, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for equalities are so weighed, that curiosity in neither, can make choice of either's moiety.
Is not this your son my Lord?
His breeding sir hath been at my charge, I have so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am brazed to it.
I cannot conceive you.
Sir, this young fellows mother Can, whereupon she grew round wombed, and had indeed Sir a son for her cradle, ere she had a husband for her bed, do you smell a fault?
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.
But I have sir a son by order of Law, some year elder than this, who yet is no dearer in my account, though this knave came something sawcely into the world before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair, there was good sport at his making & the whoreson must be acknowledged, do you know this noble gentleman Edmund?
No my Lord.
My Lord of Kent, remember him hereafter as my honourable friend ..
My services to your Lordship.
I must love you, and sue to know you better.
Sir I shall study deserving.
He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again, the King is coming.
Attend my Lords of France and Burgundy, Gloster.
I shall my Liege.
Mean time we will express our darker purposes,
The map there; know we have divided
In three, our kingdom; and 'tis our first intent,
To shake all cares and business of our state,
Confirming them on younger years,
The two great Princes France and Burgundy,
Great rivals in our youngest daughters love,
Long in our Court have made their amorous sojourn,
And here are to be answered, tell me my daughters,
Which of you shall we say doth love us most,
That we our largest bounty may extend,
Where merit doth most challenge it,
Goneril our eldest borne, speak first?
Sir I do love you more than words can wield the matter,
Dearer than eyesight, space or liberty,
Beyond what can be valued rich or rare,
No less than life; with grace, health, beauty, honour,
As much a child ere loved, or father friend,
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable,
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
What shall Cordelia do, love and be silent.
Of all these bounds, even from this sine to this,
With shady forests, and wide skirted meads,
We make thee Lady, to thine and Albans issue,
Be this perpetual, what says our second daughter?
Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwell, speak?
Sir I am made of the self same metal that my sister is,
And prise me at her worth in my true heart,
I find she names my very deed of love, only she came short,
That I profess myself an enemy to all other joys,
Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
And find I am alone felicitate, in your dear highness love.
Then poor Cord. & yet not so, since I am sure
My loves more richer than my tongue.
To thee and thine hereditary ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
No less in space, validity, and pleasure,
Then that confirmed on Goneril, but now our joy,
Although the last, not least in our dear love,
What can you say to win a third, more opulent
Than your sisters.
Nothing my Lord.
How, nothing can come of nothing, speak again.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave my heart into my mouth, I love your Majesty according to my bond, nor more nor less.
Go to, go to, mend your speech a little,
Lest it may mar your fortunes.
Good my Lord,
You have begot me, bred me, loved me,
I return those duties back as are right fit,
Obey you, love you, and most honour you,
Why have my sister's husbands if they say they love you all,
Happily when I shall wed, that Lord whose hand
Must take my plight, shall carry half my love with him,
Half my care and duty, sure I shall never
Marry like my sisters, to love my father all.
But goes this with thy heart?
I good my Lord.
So young and so untender.
So young my Lord and true.
Well let it be so, thy truth then be thy dower,
For by the sacred radiance of the Sun,
The mistress of Hecate, and the might,
By all the operation of the orbs,
From whom we do exist and cease to be
Heere I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this for ever, the barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation
Messes to gorge his appetite
Shall be as well neighboured, pitied and relieved
As thou my sometime daughter.
Good my Liege.
Peace Kent, come not between the Dragon & his wrath,
I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kind nursery, hence and avoid my sight?
So be my grave my peace as here I give,
Her father's heart from her, call France, who stirs?
Call Burgundy, Cornwell, and Albany,
With my two daughters dower digest this third,
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her▪
I do invest you jointly in my power,
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
That troup with Majesty, ourself by monthly course
With reservation of an hundred knights,
By you to be sustained, shall our abode
Make with you by due turns, only we still retain
The name and all the additions to a King,
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
Beloved sons be yours, which to confirm,
This Coronet part betwixt you.
Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honoured as my King,
Loved as my Father, as my master followed,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers.
The bow is bend & drawn make from the shaft,
Let it fall rather,
Though the fork invade the region of my heart,
Be Kent unmannerly when Lear is man,
What wilt thou do old man, thinkest thou that duty
Shall have dread to speak, when power to flattery bows,
To plainness honours bound when Majesty stoops to folly,
Reverse thy doom, and in thy best consideration
Check this hideous rashness, answer my life
My judgement, thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
Nor are those empty hearted whose low, sound
Reverbs no hollowness.
Kent on thy life no more.
My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it
Thy safety being the motive.
Out of my sight.
See better Lear and let me still remain,
The true blank of thine eye.
Now by Apollo,
Now by Apollo King thou swearest thy Gods in vain.
Vassal, recreant.
Do, kill thy Physician.
And the fee bestow upon the foul disease,
Revoke thy doom, or whilst I can vent clamour
From my throat, i'll tell thee thou dost evil.
Hear me, on thy allegiance hear me?
Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,
Which we durst never yet; and with strayed pride,
To come between our sentence and our power,
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward,
Four days we do allot thee for provision,
To shield thee from diseases of the world,
And on the fift to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom, if on the tenth day following,
Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death, away, by Iupiter
This shall not be revoked.
Why far thee well king, since thus thou wilt appear,
Friendship lives hence, and banishment is here,
The Gods to their protection take the maid,
That rightly thinks, and hast most justly said,
And your large speeches may your deeds approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love:
Thus Kent O Princes, bids you all adieu,
he'll shape his old course in a country new.
here's France and Burgundy my noble Lord.
My L. of Burgundy, we first address towards you,
Who with a King hath rivaled for our daughter,
What in the least will you require in present
Dower with her, or cease your quest of love?
Royal majesty, I crave no more than what
Your highness offered, nor will you tender less?
Right noble Burgundy, when she was dear to us
We did hold her so, but now her prize is fallen,
Sir there she stands, if ought within that little
Seeming substance, or all of it with our displeasure peec'st,
And nothing else may fitly like your grace,
she's there, and she is yours.
I know no answer.
Sir will you with those infirmities she owes,
Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Covered with our curse, and strangered with our oath,
Take her or leave her.
Pardon me royal sir, election makes not up
On such conditions.
Then leave her sir, for by the power that made me
I tell you all her wealth, for you great King,
I would not from your love make such a stray,
To match you where I hate, therefore beseech you,
To avert your liking a more worthier way,
Then on a wretch whom nature is ashamed
Almost to acknowledge hers.
This is most strange, that she, that even but now
Was your best object, the argument of your praise,
Balm of your age, most best, most dearest,
Should in this trice of time commit a thing,
So monstrous to dismantell so many folds of favour,
Sure her offence must be of such unnatural degree,
That monsters it, or you for vouched affections
Fallen into taint, which to believe of her
Must be a saith that reason without miracle
Can never plant in me.
I yet beseech your Majesty,
If for I want that glib and oily Art,
To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend
I'll do't before I speak, that you may know
It is no vicious blot, murder or foulness,
No unclean action or dishonoured step
That hath deprived me of your grace and favour,
But even for want of that, for which I am rich,
A still soliciting eye, and such a tongue,
As I am glad I have not, though not to have it,
Hath lost me in your liking.
Go to, go to, better thou hadst not been borne,
Than not to have pleased me better.
Is it no more but this, a tardiness in nature,
That often leaves the history unspoken that it intends to do,
My Lord of Burgundy, what say you to the Lady?
Love is not love when it is mingled with respects that stands
Aloof from the entire point will you have her?
She is herself and dower.
Royal Leir, give but that portion
Which yourself proposed, and here I take Cordelia
By the hand, Duchess of Burgundy,
Nothing, I have sworn.
I am sorry than you have so lost a father,
That you must lose a husband.
Peace be with Burgundy, since that respects
Of fortune are his love, I shall not be his wife.
Fairest Cordelia that art most rich being poor,
Most choice forsaken, and most loved despised,
Thee and thy virtues here I cease upon,
Be it lawful I take up what's cast away,
Gods, Gods! 'tis strange, that from their couldst neglect,
My love should kindle to inflamed respect,
Thy dowreles daughter King thrown to thy chance,
Is Queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:
Not all the Dukes in waterish Burgundy,
Shall buy this unprizd precious maid of me,
Bid them farewell Cordelia, though unkind
Thou losest here, a better where to find.
Thou hast her France, let her be thine,
For we have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again, therefore be gone,
Without our grace, our love, our benison? come noble Burgundy.
Bid farewell to your sisters?
The jewels of our father,
With washed eyes Cordelia leaves you, I know you what you are,
And like a sister am most loath to call your faults
As they are named, use well our Father,
To your professed bosoms I commit him,
But yet alas stood I within his grace,
I would prefer him to a better place:
So farewell to you both?
Prescribe not us our duties?
Let your study be to content your Lord,
Who hath received you at Fortune's alms,
You have obedience scanted,
And well are worth the worth that you have wanted.
Time shall unfold what pleated cunning hides,
Who covers faults, at last shame them derides:
Well may you prosper.
Come fair Cordelia?
Sister, it is not a little I have to say,
Of what most nearly appertains to us both,
I think our father will hence to night.
That's most certain, and with you, next month with us.
You see how full of changes his age is the observation we have made of it hath not been little; he always loved our sister most, and with what poor judgement he hath now cast her off, appears too gross.
'tis the infirmity of his age, yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.
The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash, then must we look to receive from his age not alone the imperfection of long engrafted condition, but therewithal unruly waywardness, that infirm and choleric years bring with them.
Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him, as this of Kent's banishment.
There is further complement of leave taking between France and him, pray let's hit together, if our Father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his, will but offend us,
We shall further think on't.
We must do something, and i'th' heat.
Thou Nature art my Goddess, to thy law my services are bound, wherefore should I stand in the plague of custom, and permit the curiosity of nations to deprive me, for that I am some twelve or 14. mooneshines lag of a brother, why bastard? wherefore base, when my dimensions are as well compact, my mind as generous, and my shape as true as honest madams issue, why brand they us with base, base bastardy? who in the lusty stealth of nature, take more composition and fierce quality, then doth within a stolen dull lied bed, go to the creating of a whole tribe of fops got tween a sleep and wake; well the legitimate Edgar, I must have your land, our Father's love is to the bastard Edmund, as to the legitimate, well my legitimate, if this letter speed, and my invention thrive, Edmund the base shall tooth'legitimate: I grow, I prosper, now Gods stand up for Bastards.
Kent banished thus, and France in choler parted, and the King gone to night, subscribed his power, confined to exhibition, all this done upon the gad; Edmund how now what news?
So please your Lordship, none.
Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
I know no news my Lord.
What paper were you reading?
Nothing my Lord,
No, what needs then that terribe dispatch of it into your pocket, the quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself, let's see, come if it be nothing I shall not need spectacles.
I beseech you Sir pardon me, it is a letter from my brother, that I have not all ore read, for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your liking.
Give me the letter sir.
I shall offend either to detain or give it, the contents as in part I understand them, are too blame.
Let's see, let's see?
I hope for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as an essay, or taste of my virtue.
This policy of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them, I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath power, but as it is suffered, come to me, that of this I may speak more, if our father would sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live the beloved of your brother Edgar.
Hum, conspiracy, slept till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue, my son Edgar, had he a hand to write this, a heart, and brain to breed it in, when came this to you, who brought it?
It was not brought me my Lord, there's the cunning of it, I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
You know the Caractar to be your brothers?
If the matter were good, my Lord I durst swear it were his but in respect, of that I would feign think it were not,
It is his?
It is his hand my Lord, but I hope his heart is not in the contents.
Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this business?
Never my Lord, but I have often heard him maintain it to be fit, that sons at perfect age, & fathers declining, his father should be as ward to the son, and the son manage the revenue.
O villain, villain, his very opinion in the letter, abhorred villain, unnatural detested brutish villain, worse than brutish, go sir seek him, I apprehend him, abominable villain where is he?
I do not well know my Lord, if it shall please you to suspend your indignation against my brother, till you can derive from him better testimony of this intent: you should run a certain course, where if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour, & shake in pieces the heart of his obedience, I dare pawn down my life for him, he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honour, and to no further pretence of danger.
Think you so?
If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an aurigular assurance have your satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very evening.
He cannot be such a monster.
Nor is not sure.
To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him, heaven and earth! Edmund seek him out, wind me into him, I pray you frame your business after your own wisdom, I would unstate myself to be in a due resolution.
I shall seek him sir presently, convey the business as I shall see means, and acquaint you withal.
These late eclipses in the Sun and Moon portend no good to us, though the wisdom of nature can reason thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects, love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide, in cities mutinies, in Country's discords, Palaces treason, the bond cracked between son and father; find out this villain Edmund, it shall lose thee nothing, do it carefully, and the noble and true hearted Kent banished, his offence honest, strange strange!
This is the excellent foppery of the world, that when we are sick in Fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we make guilty of our disasters, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, as if we were Villains by necessity, Fools by heavenly compulsion, Knaves, thieves, and Trecherers by spiritual predominance, Drunkards, Liars and Adulterers by an enforced obedience of planitary influence, and all that we are evil in, by a divine thrusting on, an admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish disposition to the charge of Stars: my Father compounded with my Mother under the Dragon's tail, and my nativity was under Vrsa maior, so that it follows, I am rough and lecherous, Fut, I should have been that I am, had the maidenlest star of the Firmament twinkled on my bastardy Edgar; and out he comes like the Catastrophe of the old Comedy, mine is villainous melancholy, with a sith like them of Bedlam; O these eclipses do portend these divisions.
How now brother Edmund, what serious contemplation are you in?
I am thinking brother of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these Eclipses.
Do you busy yourself about that?
I promise you the effects he writ of, succeed unhappily, as of unnaturalness between the child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against King and nobles, needles diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of Cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
How long have you been a sectary Astronomical?
Come, come, when saw you my father last?
Why, the night gone by.
Spoke you with him?
Two hours together.
Parted you in good terms? found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance?
None at all.
Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him, and at my entreaty, forbear his presence, till some little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in him, that with the mischief, of your parson it would scarce allay.
Some villain hath done me wrong.
That's my fear brother, I advise you to the best, go armed, I am no honest man if there be any good meaning towards you, I have told you what I have seen & heard, but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it, pray you away?
Shall I hear from you anon?
I do serve you in this business:
A credulous Father, and a brother noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms,
That he suspects none, on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy, I see the business,
Let me if not by birth, have lands by wit,
All with me's meet, that I can fashion fit.
Did my Father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
Yes Madam.
By day and night he wrongs me,
Every hour he flashes into one gross crime or other
That sets us all at odds, i'll not endure it,
His Knights grow riotous, and himself obrayds us,
On every trifell when he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him, say I am sick,
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well, the fault of it i'll answer.
he's coming Madam I hear him.
Put on what weary negligence you please, you and your fellow servants, i'd have it come in question, if he dislike it, let him to our sister, whose mind and mine I know in that are one, not to be overruld; idle old man that still would manage those authorities that he hath given away, now by my life old fools are babes again, & must be used with checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused, remember what I tell you.
Very well Madam.
And let his Knights have colder looks among you, what grows of it no matter, advise your fellows so. I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall, that I may speak, i'll write strait to my sister to hold my very course, go prepare for dinner.
If but as well I other accents borrow, that can my speech defuse, my good intent may carry through itself to that full issue for which I razed my likeness, now banished Kent, if thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned, thy master whom thou lovest shall find the full of labour.
Let me not stay a jot for dinner, go get it ready, how now, what art thou?
A man Sir.
What dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?
I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise, and says little, to fear judgement, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
What art thou?
A very honest hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.
If thou be as poor for a subject, as he is for a King, thou'rt poor enough, what wouldst thou?
Service.
Who wouldst thou serve?
You.
Dost thou know me fellow?
No sir, but you have that in your countenance, which I would feign call Master.
What's that?
Authority.
What services canst do?
I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly, that which ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of me, is diligence.
How old art thou?
Not so young to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for any thing, I have years on my back forty eight.
Fellow me, thou shalt serve me, if I like thee no worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet, dinner, ho dinner, where's my knave, my fool, go you and call my fool hither, you sirrah, where's my daughter?
So please you,
What says the fellow there, call the clat-pole back, where's my fool, ho I think the world's asleep, how now, where's that mongrel?
He says my Lord, your daughter is not well.
Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?
Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.
A would not?
My Lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my judgement, your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont, there's a great abatement, apeer's as well in the general dependents, as in the Duke himself also, and your daughter.
Ha, sayst thou so?
I beseech you pardon me my Lord, if I be mistaken, for my duty cannot be silent, when I think your highness wronged.
Thou but remember'st me of mine own conception, I have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity, then as a very pretence & purport of unkindness, I will look further into't, but where's this fool? I have not seen him this two days.
Since my young Ladies going into France sir, the fool hath much pined away.
No more of that, I have noted it, go you and tell my daughter, I would speak with her, go you call hither my fool, O you sir, you sir, come you hither, who am I sir?
My Lady's Father.
My Lady's father, my Lord's knave, you whoreson dog, you slave, you cur.
I am none of this my Lord, I beseech you pardon me.
Do you bandy looks with me you rascal?
I'll not be struck my Lord,
Nor tripped neither, you base football player.
I thank thee fellow, thou servest me, and i'll love thee.
Come sir i'll teach you differences, away, away, if you will measure your lubbers length again, tarry, but away, you have wisdom.
Now friendly knave I thank thee, their's earnest of thy service.
Let me hire him too, here's my coxcomb.
How now my pretty knave, how dost thou?
Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
Why Fool?
Why for taking on's part, that's out of favour, nay and thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly, there take my coxcomb; why this fellow hath banished two on's daughters, and done the third a blessing against his will, if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb, how now nuncle, would I had two coxcombs, and two daughters.
Why my boy?
If I gave them any living, id'e keep my coxcombs myself, there's mine, beg another of thy daughters.
Take heed sirrah, the whip.
Truth is a dog that must to kennel, he must be whipped out, when Lady oth'e brach may stand by the fire and stink.
A pestilent gull to me.
Sirrah i'll teach thee a speech.
Do.
Mark it uncle, have more than thou showest, speak less than thou knowest, lend less than thou owest, ride more than thou goest, learn more than thou trowest, set less than thou throwest, leave thy drink and thy whore, and keep in a door, and thou shalt have more, than two ten to a score.
This is nothing fool.
Then like the breath of an unfeed Lawyer, you gave me nothing for't, can you make no use of nothing uncle?
Why no boy, nothing can be made out of nothing.
Prithee tell him so much the rent of his land comes to, he will not believe a fool.
A bitter fool.
Dost know the difference my boy, between a bitter fool, and a swecte fool.
No lad, teach me.
That Lord that counselled thee to give away thy land,
Come place him here by me, do thou for him stand,
The sweet and bitter fool will presently appear,
The one in motley here, the other found out there.
Dost thou call me fool boy?
All thy other Titles thou hast given away, that thou wast borne with.
This is not altogether fool my Lord.
No faith, Lords and great men will not let me, if I had a monopoly out, they would have part an't, and loads too, they will not let me have all the fool to myself, they'll be snatching; give me an egg Nuncle, and i'll give thee two crowns.
What two crowns shall they be?
Why, after I have cut the egg in the middle and eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg; when thou clovest thy crown i'th' middle, and gavest away both parts, thou borest thy ass a''h back o'er the dirt, thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown, when thou gavest thy golden one away, if I speak like myself in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.
Fools had near less wit in a year,
For wise men are grown foppish,
They know not how their wits do wear,
Their manners are so apish.
When were you wont to be so full of songs sirrah?
I have used it nuncle, ever since thou mad'st thy daughters thy mother, for when thou gavest them the rod, and puttest down thine own breeches, than they for sudden joy did weep, and I for sorrow sung, that such a King should play bopeep, and go the fools among, prithee Nuncle keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie, I would feign learn lie.
And you lie, we'll have you whipped.
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are, they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou wilt have me whipped for lying, and sometime I am whipped for holding my peace, I had rather be any kind of thing then a fool, and yet I would not be thee Nuncle, thou hast pared thy wit a both sides, & left nothing in the middle, here comes one of the parings.
How now daughter, what makes that Frontlet on, Me thinks you are too much o'late i'th' frown.
Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frown, thou, thou art an O without a figure, I am better than thou art now, I am a fool, thou art nothing, yes forsooth I will hold my tongue, so your face bids me, though you say nothing.
Mum, mum, he that keeps neither crust nor crumb,
Weary of all, shall want some. That's a sheald peascod.
Not only sir this, your all-licenced fool, but other of your insolent retinue do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth in rank & (not to be endured riots,) Sir I had thought by making this well known unto you, to have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful by what yourself too late have spoke and done, that you protect this course, and put on by your allowance, which if you should, the fault would not scape censure, nor the redress, sleep, which in the tender of a wholesome weal, might in their working do you that offence, that else were shame, that then necessity must call discreet proceed.
For you trow nuncle, the hedge sparrow fed the Cuckoo so long, that it had it head bitten off be it young, so out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
Are you our daughter?
Come sir, I would you would make use of that good wisdom whereof I know you are fraught, and put away these dispositions, that of late transform you from what you rightly are.
May not an Ass know when the cart draws the horse, whoop jug I love thee.
Doth any here know me? why this is not Lear, doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? where are his eyes, either his notion, weakness, or his discern are lethargy, sleeping, or waking; ha! sure 'tis not so, who is it that can tell me who I am? Lears shadow I would learn that, for by the marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded I had daughters.
Which they, will make an obedient father.
Your name fair gentlewoman?
Come sir, this admiration is much of the savour of other your new pranks, I do beseech you understand my purposes aright, as you are old and reverend, should be wise, here do you keep a 100. Knights and Squires, men so disordered, so deboist and bold, that this our court infected with their manners, shows like a riotous Inn, epicurisme, and lust make more like a tavern or brothel, than a great palace, the shame itself doth speak for instant remedy, be thou desired by her, that else will take the thing she begs, a little to disquantitie your train, and the remainder that shall still depend, to be such men as may besort your age, that know themselves and you.
Darkness, and Devils! saddle my horses, call my train together, degenerate bastard, i'll not trouble thee, yet have I left a daughter.
You strike my people, and your disordered rabble, make servants of their betters.
We that too late repent's, O sir, are you come? is it your will that we prepare any horses, ingratitude! thou marble hearted fiend, more hideous when thou showest thee in a child, than the Sea-monster, detested kite, thou list my train, and men of choice and rarest parts, that all particulars of duty know, and in the most exact regard, support the worships of their name, O most small fault, how ugly didst thou in Cordelia show, that like an engine wrenched my frame of nature from the fixed place, drew from my heart all love and added to the gall, O Lear. Lear! beat at this gate that let thy folly in, and thy dear judgement out, go go, my people?
My Lord, I am guiltless as I am ignorant.
It may be so my Lord, hark Nature, hear dear Goddess, suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend to make this creature fruitful into her womb, convey sterility, dry up in her the organs of increase, and from her derogate body never spring a babe to honour her, if she must teem, create her child of spleen, that it may live and be a thourt disuetured torment to her, let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth, with accent tears, fret channels in her cheeks, turn all her mother's pains and benefits to laughter and contempt, that she may feel, that she may feel, how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is, to have a thankless child, go, go, my people?
Now Gods that we adore, whereof comes this!
Never afflict yourself to know the cause, but let his disposition have that scope that dotage gives it.
What, fifty of my followers at a clap, within a fortnight?
What is the matter sir?
I'll tell thee, life and death! I am ashamed that thou hast power to shake my manhood thus, that these hot tears that break from me perforce, should make the worst blasts and fogs upon the untender wound of a fatherscursse, peruse every sense about the old fond eyes, beweep this cause again, i'll pluck you out, & you cast with the waters that you make to temper clay, yea, be't come to this? yet have I left a daughter, whom I am sure is kind and comfortable, when she shall hear this of thee, with her nails she'll slay thy wolvish visage, thou shalt find that i'll resume the shape, which thou dost think I have cast off for ever, thou shalt I warrant thee.
Do you mark that my Lord?
I cannot be so partial Goneril to the great love I bear you,
Come sir no more, you, more knave than fool, after your master?
Nuncle Lear, Nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool with a fox when one has caught her, and such a daughter should sure to the slaughter, if my cap would buy a halter, so the fool follows after.
What Oswald, ho.
Here Madam.
What have you writ this letter to my sister;
Yes Madam.
Take you some company, and away to horse, inform her full of my particular fears, and thereto add such reasons of your own, as may compact it more, get you gone, and after your return now my Lord, this mildie gentleness and course of yours though I dislike not, yet under pardon you're much more alapt want of wisdom, then praise for harmful mildness.
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell, striving to better aught, we mar what's well.
Nay then.
Well, well, the event,
Go you before to Gloster with these letters, acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you know, then comes from her demand out of the letter, if your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there before you.
I will not sleep my Lord, till I have delivered your letter.
If a man's brains where in his heels, wert not in danger of kibes;
I boy.
Then I prithee be merry, thy wit shall near go slipshod.
Ha ha ha.
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly, for though she's as like this, as a crab is like an apple, yet I con, what I can tell.
Why what canst thou tell my boy?
she'll taste as like this, as a crab doth to a crab, thou canst not tell why one's nose stand in the middle of his face?
No.
Why, to keep his eyes on either side's nose, that what a man cannot smell out, a may spy into.
I did her wrong.
Canst tell how an Oyster makes his shell.
No.
Nor I neither, but I can tell why a snail has a house.
Why?
Why, to put his head in, not to give it away to his daughter, and leave his horns without a case.
I will forget my nature, so kind a father; be my horses ready;
Thy Asses are gone about them, the reason why the seven stars are no more than seven, is a pretty reason.
Because they are not eight.
Yes thou wouldst make a good fool.
To take't again perforce, Monster, ingratitude!
If thou wert my fool Nuncle, id'e have thee beaten for being old before thy time.
How's that;
Thou shouldst not have been old, before thou hadst been wise.
O let me not be mad sweet heaven! I would not be mad, keep me in temper, I would not be mad, are the horses ready;
Ready my Lord.
Come boy.
She that is maid now, and laughs at my departure, Shall not be a maid long, except things be cut shorter.
Save thee Curan.
And you Sir, I have been with your father, and given him notice, that the Duke of Cornwall and his Duchess will be here with him to night.
How comes that;
Nay, I know not, you have heard of the news abroad, I mean the whispered ones, for there are yet but eare-bussing arguments.
Not, I pray you what are they;
Have you heard of no likely wars towards, twixt the two Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?
Not a word.
You may then in time, far you well sir.
The Duke be here to night! the better best, this weaves itself perforce into my business, my father hath set guard to take my brother, and I have one thing of a queasy question, which must ask breefnes and fortune help; brother, a word, descend brother I say, my father watches, O fly this place, intelligence is given where you are hid, you have now the good advantage of the night, have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall ought, he's coming hither now in the night, i'th' haste, and Regan with him, have you nothing said upon his party against the Duke of Albany, advise your—
I am sure on't not a word.
I hear my father coming, pardon me in craving, I must draw my sword upon you, seem to defend yourself, now quit you well, yield, come before my father, light here, here, fly brother fly, torch's, torches, so farewell; some blood drawn on me would beget opinion of my more fierce endeavour, I have seen drunkards do more than this in sport, father, father, stop, stop, no, help;
Now Edmund where is the villain;
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out, warbling of wicked charms, conjuring the Moon to stands auspicious Mistress.
But where is he?
Look sir, I bleed.
Where is the villain Edmund?
Fled this way sir, when by no means he could—
Pursue him, go after by no means, what?
Persuade me to the murder of your Lordship, but that I told him the revengive Gods, 'gainst Parricides did all their thunders bend, spoke with how many fold and strong a bond the child was bound to the father, sir in a fine, seeing how loathly opposite I stood, to his unnatural purpose, with fell motion with his prepared sword he charges home my unprovided body, launched mine arm, but when he saw my best alarumd spirits, bold in the quarrels, rights, rousd to the encounter, or whether gasted by the noise I made, but suddenly he fled.
Let him fly far not in this land shall he remain uncaught and found, dispatch, the noble Duke my master, my worthy Arch and Patron, comes to night, by his authority I will proclaim it, that he which finds him shall deserve our thanks, bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake, he that conceals him, death.
When I dissuaded him from his intent, and found him pight to do it, with cursed speech I threatened to discover him, he replied, thou unpossessing Bastard, dost thou think, if I would stand against thee, could the reposure of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee make thy words faithed? no. what I should deny, as this I would, I, though thou didst produce my very character, id'e turn it all to thy suggestion, plot, and damned pretence, and thou must make a dullard of the world, if they not thought the profits of my death, were very pregnant and potential spurs to make thee seek it.
Strong and fastened villain, would he deny his letter, I never got him, hark the Duke's trumpets, I know not why he comes, all Ports i'll bar, the villain shall not scape, the Duke must grant me that, beside, his picture I will send far and near, that all the kingdom may have note of him, and of my land loyal and natural boy, i'll work the means to make thee capable.
How now my noble friend, since I came hither, which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short which can pursue the offender, how dost my Lord?
Madam my old heart is cracked, is cracked.
What, did my father's godson seek your life? he whom my father named your Edgar?
I Lady, Lady, shame would have it hid.
Was he not companion with the riotous knights, that tends upon my father?
I know not Madam, 'tis too bad, too bad.
Yes Madam, he was.
No marvel then though he were ill affected,
'tis they have put him on the old man's death,
To have these— and waste of this his revenues:
I have this present evening from my sister,
Been well informed of them, and with such cautions,
That if they come to sojourn at my house, i'll not be there.
Nor I, assure thee Regan;
I heard that you have shown your father a childlike office.
'twas my duty Sir.
He did betray his practice, and received
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
Is he pursued?
I my good Lord.
If he be taken, he shall never more be feared of doing harm, make your own purpose how in my strength you please, for you Edmund, whose virtue and obedience, doth this instant so much commend itself, you shall be ours, natures of such deep trust, we shall much need you, we first seize on.
I shall serve you truly, how ever else.
For him I thank your grace.
You know not why we came to visit you?
Thus out of season, threatening dark eyed night,
Ocasions noble Gloster of some prize,
Wherein we must have use of your advise,
Our Father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of desences, which I best thought it fit,
To answer from our hand, the several messengers
From hence attend dispatch▪ our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom, & bestow your needful council
To our business, which craves the instant use.
I serve you Madam, your Graces are right welcome.
Good even to thee friend, art of the house?
I.
Where may we set our horses?
Ith' mire.
Prithee if thou love me, tell me.
I love thee not.
Why then I care not for thee.
If I had thee in Lipsburie pinfold, I would make thee care for me.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
Fellow I know thee.
What dost thou know me for?
A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats, a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three shewted hundred pound, filthy worstedstocken knave, a lily lyuered action taking knave, a whoreson glassegazing superfinical rogue, one trunk inheriting slave, one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch, whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the least syllable of the addition.
What a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one, that's neither known of thee, nor knows thee.
What a brazen faced varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me, is it two days ago since I beat thee, and tripped up thy heels before the King? draw you rogue, for though it be night the Moon shines, i'll make a sop of the moonshine a you, draw you whoreson cullyonly barber-munger, draw?
Away, I have nothing to do with thee.
Draw you rascal, you bring letters against the King, and take Vanity the puppets part, against the royalty of her father, draw you rogue or i'll so carbonado your shanks, draw you rascal, come your ways.
Help, ho, murder, help.
Strike you slave, stand rogue, stand you neat slave, strike?
Help, ho, murder, help.
How now, what's the matter?
With you goodman boy, and you please come, i'll flesh you, come on young master.
Weapons, arms, what's the matter here?
Keep peace upon your lives, he dies that strikes again, what's the matter?
The messengers from our sister, and the King.
What's your difference, speak?
I am scarce in breath my Lord.
No marvel you have so bestirred your valour, you cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee, a Tailor made thee.
Thou art a strange fellow, a Tailor make a man.
I, a Tailor sir; a Stone-cutter, or a Painter could not have made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.
Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
This ancient ruffian sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his graybeard.
Thou whoreson Zedd, thou unnecessary letter, my Lord if you'll give me leave, I will tread this unboulted villain into mortar, and daub the walls of a iaques with him, spare my grey beard you wagtail.
Peace sir, you beastly Knave you have no reverence.
Yes sir, but anger has a privilege.
Why art thou angry?
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
That wears no honesty, such smiling rogues as these,
Like Rats oft bite those cords in twain,
Which are to entrench, to inloose smooth every passion
That in the natures of their Lords rebel,
Bring oil to stir, snow to their colder-moods,
Reneag affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing nought like days but following, a plague upon your epeliptick
Visage, smoyle you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose and I had you upon Sarum plain,
Id'e send you cackling home to Camulet.,
What art thou mad old fellow?
How fell you out, say that?
No contraries hold more, antipathy,
Then I and such a knave.
Why dost thou call him knave, what's his offence.
His countenance likes me not.
No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.
Sir 'tis my occupation to be plain,
I have seen better faces in my time
That stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.
This is a fellow who having been praised
For bluntness doth affect a saucy ruffians,
And constrains the garb quite from his nature,
He cannot flatter he, he must be plain,
He must speak truth, and they will take't so,
If not he's plain, these kind of knaves I know
Which in this plainness harbour more craft,
And more corrupter ends, than twenty silly ducking
Observants, that stretch their duties nisely.
Sir in good sooth, or in sincere verity,
Under the allowance of your grand aspect.
Whose influence like the wreath of radiant fire
In flitkering Phoebus' front.
What meanest thou by this?
To go out of my dialogue which you discommend so much, I know sir, I am no flatterer, he that beguiled you in a plain accent, was a plain knave, which for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure, to entreat me to't.
What's the offence you gave him?
I never gave him any, it pleased the King his master
Very late to strike at me upon his misconstruction,
When he conjunct and flattering his displeasure
Tripped me behind, being down, insulted, railed,
And put upon him such a deal of man, that,
That worthied him, got praises of the King,
For him attempting who was self subdued,
And in the flechuent of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.
None of these rogues & cowards but A'Iax is their fool.
Bring forth the stocks ho?
You stubborn miscreant knave, you reverent braggart,
we'll teach you.
I am too old to learn, call not your stocks for me,
I serve the King, on whose employments I was sent to you,
You should do small respect, show too bold malice
Against the Grace and person of my master,
Stopping his messenger.
Fetch forth the stocks? as I have life and honour,
There shall he sit till noon.
Till noon, till night my Lord, and all night too.
Why Madam, if I were your father's dog, you could not use me so.
Sir being his knave, I will.
This is a fellow of the self same nature,
Our sister speak of, come bring away the stocks?
Let me beseech your Grace not to do so,
His fault is much, and the good King his master
Will check him for't, your purpost low correction
Is such, as basest and temnest wretches for pilfrings
And most common trespasses are punished with,
The King must take it ill, that he's so slightly valued
In his messenger, should have him thus restrained.
I'll answer that.
My sister may receive it much more worse,
To have her Gentlemen abused, assaulted
For following her affairs, put in his legs,
Come my good Lord away?
I am sorry for thee friend, 'tis the Duke's pleasure,
Whose disposition all the world well knows
Will not be rubbed nor stopped, i'll entreat for thee.
Pray you do not sir, I have watched and travailed hard,
Sometime I shall sleep out, the rest i'll whistle,
A good man's fortune may grow out at heels,
Give you good morrow.
The Dukes to blame in this, 'twill be ill took.
Good King that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heavens benediction comest
To the warm Sun.
Approach thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Peruse this letter, nothing almost sees my wrack
But misery, I know 'tis from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been informed
Of my obscured course, and shall find time
From this enormous state, seeking to give
Losles their remedies, all weary and overwatch
Take vantage heavy eyes not to behold
This shameful lodging, Fortune goodnight,
Smile, once more turn thy wheel.
I hear myself proclaimed,
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escaped the hunt, no Port is free, no place
That guard, and most unusual vigilence
Dost not attend my taking while I may scape,
I will preserve myself, and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape,
That ever penury in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast, my face i'll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, else all my hair with knots,
And with presented nakedness outface,
The wind, and persecution of the sky,
The Country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices,
Strike in their numbed and mortified bare arms,
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary,
And with this horrible object from low service,
Poor pelting villages, sheep-coates, and mills,
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers
Enforce their charity, poor Turlygod, poor Tom,
That's something yet, Edgar I nothing am.
'tis strange that they should so departed from hence,
And not send back my messenger.
As I learned, the night before there was
No purpose of his remove.
Hail to thee noble master.
How, makest thou this shame thy pastime?
Ha ha, look he wears cruel garters,
Horses are tied by the heels, dogs and bears
Byth' neck, monkeys bit'h loins, and men
Byth' legs, when a man's over lusty at legs,
Then he wears wooden nether-stocks.
What's he, that hath so much thy place mistook to set thee here?
It is both he and she, your son & daughter.
No.
Yes.
No I say,
I say yea.
No no, they would not.
Yes they have.
By Iupiter I swear no, they durst not do't,
They would not, could not do't, 'tis worse than murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage,
Resolve me with all modest haste, which way
Thou mayst deserve, or they purpose this usage,
Coming from us.
My Lord, when at their home
I did commend your highness letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that showed
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking Post,
Stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
From Goneril his mistress, salutations,
Delivered letters spite of intermission,
Which presently they read, on whose contents
They summoned up their men, strait took horse,
Commanded me to follow, and attend the leisure
Of their answer, gave me cold looks,
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine,
Being the very fellow that of late
Displayed so saucily against your Highness,
Having more man than wit about me drew,
He raised the house with loud and coward cries,
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
This shame which here it suffers.
O how this mother swells up toward my heart,
Historica passio down thou climbing sorrow,
Thy element's below, where is this daughter?
With the Earl sir within,
Fellow me not, stay there?
Made you no more offence than what you speak of?
No, how chance the King comes with so small a train?
And thou hadst been set in the stocks for that question, thou ha'dst well deserved it.
Why fool?
we'll set thee to school to an Ant, to teach thee there's no labouring in the winter, all that follow their noses, are led by their eyes, but blind men, and there's not a nose among a 100. but can smell him that's stinking, let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following it, but the great one that goes up the hill, let him draw thee after, when a wise man gives thee better council, give me mine again, I would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
That Sir that serves for gain,
And follows but for form:
Will pack when it begin to rain,
And leave thee in the storm.
But I will tarry, the fool will stay,
And let the wise man fly:
The knave turns fool that runs away,
The fool no knave pardie.
Kent. Where learned you this fool?
Foole. Not in the stocks.
Deny to speak with me, theyare sick, theyare weary,
They traveled hard to night, meare justice,
I the Images of revolt and flying off,
Fetch me a better answer.
My dear Lord, you know the fiery quality of the Duke, now unremovable and fixed he is in his own Course.
Veng eance, death, plague, confusion, what fiery quality, why Gloster, Gloster, id'e speak with the Duke of Cornewali, and his wife.
I my good Lord.
The King would speak with Cornewal, the dear father
Would with his daughter speak, commands her service,
Fiery Duke, tell the hot Duke that Lear,
No but not yet may be he is not well,
Infirmity doth still neglect all office, where to our health
Is bound, we are not ourselves, when nature being oppressed
Command the mind to suffer with the body i'll forbear,
And am fallen out with my more hedier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit, for the sound man,
Death on my state, wherefore should he sit here?
This act persuades me, that this remotion of the Duke,
Is practise, only give me my servant forth,
Tell the Duke and's wife, I'll speak with them & her
Now presently, bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber door i'll beat the drum,
Till it cry sleep to death.
I would have all well betwixt you.
O my heart, my heart.
Cry to it Nuncle, as the Cokney did to the eels, when she put 'em i'th' pâst alive, she rapt 'em ath coxcombs with a stick, and cried down wantoness down, 'twas her brother, that in pure kindness to his horse buttered his hay.
Good morrow to you both.
Hail to your Grace.
I am glad to see your highness.
Regan I think you are, I know what reason
I have to think so, if thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb
Sepulchering an adulteress▪ yea are you free?
Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,
Thy sister is nought, oh Regan she hath tied,
Sharp toothed unkindness, like a vulture hear,
I can scarce speak to thee, thou't not believe,
Of how deprived a quality, O Regan.
I pray sir take patience, I have hope
You less know how to value her desert,
Then she to slack her duty.
My curses on her.
O Sir you are old,
Nature on you stands on the very verge of her con-fine,
You should be ruled and led by some discretion,
That discerns your state better than you yourself,
Therefore I pray that to our sister, you do make return,
Say you have wronged her Sir?
Ask her forgiveness,
Do you mark how this becomes the house,
Dear daughter, I confess that I am old,
Age is unnecessary, on my knees I beg,
That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed and food.
Good sir no more, these are unsightly tricks,
Return you to my sister.
No Regan,
She hath abated me of half my train,
Looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue
Most Serpentlike upon the very heart,
All the stored vengeances of heaven fall on her ingratful top,
Strike her young bones, you taking airs with lameness.
Fie fie sir.
You nimble lightnings dart your blinding flames,
Into her scornful eyes, infect her beauty,
You Fen sucked fogs, drawn by the powerful Sun,
To fall and blast her pride.
O the blessed Gods, so will you wish on me,
When the rash mood—
No Regan, thou shalt never have my curse,
The tender hested nature shall not give the o'er
To harshness, her eyes are fierce, but thine do comfort & not burn
'tis not in thee to grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in, thou better knowest,
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude,
Thy half of the kingdom, hast thou not forgot
Wherein I thee endowed.
Good sir to'th purpose.
Who put my man i'th' stocks?
What trumpets that?
I know't my sisters, this approves her letters,
That she would soon be here, is your Lady come?
This is a slave, whose easy borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her a follows,
Out varlet, from my sight.
What means your Grace?
Who struck my servant, Regan I have good hope
Thou didst not know an't.
Who comes here? O heavens!
If you do love old men, if you sweet sway allow
Obedience, if yourselves are old, make it your cause,
Send down and take my part,
Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?
O Regan wilt thou take her by the hand?
Why not by the hand sir, how have I offended?
all's not offence that indiscretion finds,
And dotage terms so.
O sides you are too tough,
Will you yet hold? how came my man i'th' stocks?
I set him there sir, but his own disorders
Deserved much less advancement,
You, did you?
I pray you father being weak seem so,
If till the expiration of your month,
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
Dismissing halfe your train, come then to me,
I am now from home, and out of that provision,
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
Return to her, and fifty men dismissed,
No rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
To wage against the enmity of the Air,
To be a Comrade with the Wolf and owl,
Necessity's sharp pinch, return with her,
Why the hot blood in France, that dowerles
took our youngest borne, I could as well be brought
To knee his throne, and Squire-like pension bag,
To keep base life afoot, return with her,
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumter
To this detested groom.
At your choice sir.
Now I prithee daughter do not make me mad,
I will not trouble thee my child, farewell,
we'll no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter,
Or rather a disease that lies within my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine, thou art a boil,
A plague sore, an embossed carbuncle in my
Corrupted blood, but I'll not chide thee,
Let shame come when it will, I do not callit,
I do not bid the thunder bearer shoot,
Nor tell tails of thee to high judging Ioue,
Mend when thou canst, be better at thy leisure,
I can be patiented, I can stay with Regan,
I and my hundred Knights.
Not altogether so sir, I look not for you yet,
Nor am provided for your fit welcome,
Give ear sir to my sister, for those
That mingle reason with your passion,
Must be content to think you are old, and so,
But she knows what she does.
Is this well spoken now?
I dare avouch it sir, what fifty followers,
Is it not well, what should you need of more,
Yea or so many, sith that both charge and danger
Speaks 'gainst so great a number, how in a house
Should many people under two commands
Hold amity, 'tis hard, almost impossible.
Why might not you my Lord receive attendance
From those that she calls servants, or from mine?
Why not my Lord? if than they chanced to slack you,
We could control them, if you will come to me,
For now I spy a danger, I entreat you,
To bring but five and twenty, to no more
Will I give place or notice.
I gave you all.
And in good time you gave it.
Made you my guardians, my depositaries,
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number, what, must I come to you
With five and twenty, Regan said you so?
And speak't again my Lord, no more with me.
Those wicked creatures yet do seem wel-fauored
When others are more wicked, not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise, I'll go with thee,
Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
And thou art twice her love.
He are me my Lord,
What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,
To follow in a house, where twice so many
Have a command to tend you.
What needs one?
O reason not the deed, our basest beggars,
Are in the poorest thing superfluous,
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Man's life as cheap as beasts, thou art a Lady,
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why nature needs not, what thou gorgeous wearest
Which scarcely keeps thee warm, but for true need,
You heavens give me that patience, patience I need,
You see me here (you Gods) a poor old fellow,
As full of grief as age, wretched in both,
If it be you that stirs these daughter's hearts
Against their Father, fool me not to much,
To bear it lamely, touch me with noble anger,
O let not women's weapons, water drops
Stain my man's cheeks, no you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on you both,
That all the world shall, I will do such things,
What they are yet I know not, but they shallbe
The terrors of the earth, you think i'll weep,
No i'll not weep, I have full cause of weeping,
But this heart shall break, in a 100. thousand flows
Or ere i'll weep, O fool I shall go mad.
Let us withdraw, 'twill be a storm.
This house is little the old man and his people,
Cannot be well bestowed.
'tis his own blame hath put himself from rest,
And must needs taste his folly.
For his particular, i'll receive him gladly,
But not one follower.
So am I pusposed, where is my Lord of Gloster?
Followed the old man forth, he is returned.
The King is in high rage, & will I know not whether.
'tis good to give him way, he leads himself.
My Lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
Alack the night comes on, and the bleak winds
Do sorely russel, for many miles about there's not a bush.
O sir, to wilful men
The injuries that they themselves procure,
Must be their schoolmasters, shut up your doors,
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him to, being apt,
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
Shut up your doors my Lord, 'tis a wild night,
My Reg counsails well, come out at'h storme.
What's here beside foul weather?
One minded like the weather most unquietly.
I know you, where's the King?
Contending with the fretful element,
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main
That things might change or cease, tears his white hair,
Which the impetuous blasts with eyles rage
Catch in their fury, and make nothing of,
Strives in his little world of man to outscorne,
The too and fro conflicting wind and rain,
This night wherein the cub-drawne Bear would couch,
The Lion, and the belly pinched Wolf
Keep their surre dry, unbonneted he runs,
And bids what will take all.
But who is with him?
None but the fool, who labours to out-iest
His heart struck injuries.
Sir I do know you,
And dare upon the warrant of my Art,
Commend a dear thing to you, there is division,
Although as yet the face of it be covered,
With mutual cunning, twixt Albany and Cornwall
But true it is, from France there comes a power
Into this scattered kingdom, who already wise in our negligence,
Have secret feet in some of our best Ports,
And are at point to show their open banner
Now to you, if on my credit you dare build so far,
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you, making just report
Ofhow unnatural and bemadding sorrow
The King hath cause to plain,
I am a Gentleman of blood and breeding,
And from some knowledge and assurance,
Offer this office to you.
I will talk farther with you.
No do not,
For confirmation that I much more
Than my out-wall, open this purse and take
What it contains, if you shall see Cordelia,
As fear not but you shall, show her this ring,
And she will tell you who your fellow is,
That yet you do not know, fie on this storm,
I will go seek the King.
Give mey our hand, have you no more to say?
Few words but to effect more than all yet:
That when we have found the King.
I'll this way, you that, he that first lights
On him, hollow the other.
Blow wind & crack your cheeks, rage, blow
You caterickes, & Hircanios' spout till you have drenched,
The steeples drowned the cocks, you sulphuroous and
Thought executing fires, vaunt-currers to
Oke-cleaving thunderboults, sing my white head,
And thou all shaking thunder, smite flat
The thick rotundity of the world, crack nature's
Mould, all Gennains spill at once that make
Ingrateful man.
O Nuncle, Court holly water in a dry house
Is better than this rain water out a door,
Good Nuncle in, and ask thy daughter's blessing,
here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.
Rumble thy belly full, spit fire, spout rain,
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters,
I task not you you elements with unkindness,
I never gave you kingdom, called you children,
You own me no subscription, why thenlet fall your horrible pleasure
Here I stand your slave, a poor infirm weak &
Despised old man, but yet I call you servile
Ministers, that have with 2. pernicious daughters joined
Your high engendered battle 'gainst a head so old & white
As this, O'tis foul.
He that has a house to put his head in, has a good headpiece, the Codpiece that will house before the head, has any the head and he shall louse, so beggars marry many, the man that makes his toe, what he his heart should make, shall have a corn cry woe, and turn his sleep to wake, for there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.
No I will be the pattern of all patience
I will say nothing.
Whose there?
Marry here's Grace, & a codpis, that's a wiseman and a fool.
Alas sir, sit you here?
Things that love night, love not such nights as these,
The wrathful Skies gallow, the very wanderer of the
Dark, and makes them keep their caves,
Since I was man, such sheets of fire,
Such bursts of horrid thunder, such groans of
Roaring wind, and rain, I ne'er remember
To have heard, man's nature cannot carry
The affliction, nor the force.
Let the great Gods that keep this dreadful
Powther o'er our heads, find out their enemies now,
Tremble thou wretch that hast within thee
Vndivulged crimes, unwhipt of justice,
Hid thee thou bloody hand, thou perjured, and
Thou simular man of virtue that art incestuous,
Caytife in pieces shake, that under covert
And convenient seeming, hast practised on man's life,
Close penned up guilts, rive your concealed centres,
And cry these dreadful summoners grace,
I am a man more sinned against their sinning.
Alack bare headed, gracious my Lord, hard by here is a hovel, some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest, repose you there, whilst I to this hard house, more hard than is the stone whereof 'tis raised, which even but now demanding after me, denied me to come in, return and force their scanted courtesy.
My wit begins to turn,
Come on my boy, how dost my boy, art cold?
I am cold myself, where is this straw my fellow,
The art of our necessities is strange that can,
Make vild things precious, come you hovel poor,
Fool and knave, I have one part of my heart
That sorrows yet for thee.
He that has a little tine wit, with hay ho the wind and the rain, must make content with his fortunes fit, for the rain, it raineth every day.
True my good boy, come bring us to this hovel?
Alack alack Edmund I like not this,
Unnatural dealing when I desired their leave
That I might pity him, they took me from me
The use of mine own house, charged me on pain
Of their displeasure, neither to speak of him,
Entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.
Most savage and unnatural.
Go toe say you nothing, there's a division betwixt the Dukes,
And a worse matter than that, I have received
A letter this night, 'tis dangerous to be spoken,
I have locked the letter in my closet, these injuries
The King now bears, will be revenged home
there's part of a power already landed,
We must incline to the King, I will seek him, and
Privily relieve him, go you and maintain talk
With the Duke, that my charity be not of him
Perceived, if he ask for me, I am ill, and gone
To bed, though I die for't, as no less is threatened me,
The King my old master must be relieved, there is
Some strange thing toward, Edmund pray you be careful.
This courtesy forbidden thee, shall the Duke instanly know
And of that letter to, this seems a fair deserving
And must draw me that which my father loses, no less
Than all, than younger rises when the old do fall.
Here is the place my Lord, good my Lord enter, the tyranny of the open nights too ruff for nature to endure.
Let me alone.
Good my Lord enter.
Wilt break my heart?
I had rather break mine own, good my Lord enter.
Thou thinkest 'tis much, that this tempestuous storm
Invades us to the skin, so 'tis to thee,
But where the greater malady is fixed
The lesser is scarce felt, thoud'st shun a Bear,
But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea,
thoud'st meet the bear i'th' mouth, when the mind's free
The bodies delicate, this tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats their filial ingratitude,
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to't, but I will punish sure,
No I will weep no more, in such a night as this!
O Regan, Goneril, your old kind father
Whose frank heart gave you all, O that way madness lies,
Let me shun that, no more of that.
Good my Lord enter.
Prithee go in thyself, seek thy one ease
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more, but i'll go in,
Poor naked wretches, where so ere you are
That bide the pelting of this pitiless night,
How shall your houselesse heads, and unfed sides,
Your looped and windowed raggedness defend you
From seasons such as these, O I have ta'en
Too little care of this, take physic pomp,
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou mayst shake the superflux to them,
And show the heavens more just.
Come not in here Nuncle, her's a spirit, help me, help me.
Give me thy hand, whose there.
A spirit, he says, his name's poor Tom.
What art thou that dost grumble there in the straw, come forth?
Away, the fowl fiend follows me, through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind, go to thy cold bed and warm thee.
Hast thou given all to thy two daughters, and art thou come to this?
Who gives any thing to poor Tom, whom the foul Fiend hath led, through fire, and through ford, and whirli-poole, o'er bog and quagmire, that has laid knives under his pillow, and halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his pottage, made him proud of heart, to ride on a bay trotting horse over four-inched bridges, to coarse his own shadow for a traitor, bless thy five wits, Toms a cold, bless thee from whirlwinds, starre-blusting, and taking, do poor Tom some charity, whom the soul fiend vexes, there could I have him now, and there, and and there again.
What, his daughters brought him to this pass, Couldst thou save nothing, didst thou give them all?
Nay he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated o'er men's faults, fall on thy daughters.
He hath no daughters sir.
Death traitor, nothing could have subdued nature
To such a lownes, but his unkind daughters,
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers,
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh,
judicious punishment 'twas this flesh
Begot those Pelicane daughters.
Pilicock sat on pelicocks hill, a lo lo lo.
This cold night will turn us all to fools & madmen.
Take heed a''h foul fiend, obey thy parents, keep thy words justly, swear not, commit not with man's sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on proud array, Toms a cold,
What hast thou been?
A Servingman, proud in heart and mind, that curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the lust of my mistress heart, and did the act of darkness with her, swore as many oaths as I spoke words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven, one that slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it, wine loved I deeply, dice dearly, and in woman out paromord the Turk, false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand, Hog in sloth, Fox in stealth, Wolf in greediness,, Dog in madness, Lion in prey, let not the creeking of shoes, nor the rustlings of silks betray thy poor heart to women keep thy foot out of brothel, thy hand out of placket, thy pen from lender's book, and defy the soul fiend, still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind, hay no on nigh, Dolphin my boy, my boy, caese let him troth by.
Why thou wert better in thy grave, then to answer with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies, is man no more, but this consider him well, thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume, her's three on's are so phisticated, thou art the thing itself, vnaccomodated man, is no more but such a poor bare forked Animal as thou art, off off you lend, come on
Prithee Nuncle be content, this is a naughty night to swim in, now a little fire in a wild field, were like an old lechers heart, a small spark, all the rest in body cold, look here comes a walking fire.
This is the foul fiend fliber degibek, he begins at curphew, and walks till the first cock, he gives the web, & the pin, squemes the eye, and makes the hare lip, mildews the white wheat, and hurts the poor creature of earth, swithald footed thrice the old, he met the night mare and her nine fold bid her, O light and her troth plight and arint thee, witch arint thee.
How fares your Grace?
What's he?
Whose there, what is't you seek?
What are you there? your names?
Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the tod pole, the wall-newt, and the water, that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cowdung for salads, swallows the old rat, and the ditch dog, drinks the green mantle of the standing pool, who is whipped from tithing to tithing, and stock-punisht and imprisoned, who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear.
But mice and rats, and such small Deer,
Hath been Tom's food for seven long year.
Beware my follower, peace snulbug, peace thou fiend.
What hath your Grace no better company?
The Prince of darkness is a Gentleman, modo he's called and ma hu—
Our flesh and blood is grown so vild my Lord, that it doth hate what gets it▪
Poor Toms a cold.
Go in with me, my duty cannot suffer to obey in all your daughters hard commands, though their injunction be to bar my doors, and let this tyrannous night take hold upon you, yet have I ventured to come seek you out, and bring you where both food and fire is ready.
First let me talk with this Philosopher,
What is the cause of thunder?
My good Lord take his offer, go into the house.
I'll talk a word with this most learned Theban, what is your study?
How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
Let me ask you one word in private.
Importune him to go my Lord, his wits begin to unsettle.
Canst thou blame him,
His daughters seek his death, O that good Kent,
He said it would be thus, poor banished man,
Thou sayest the King grows mad, i'll tell thee friend
I am almost mad myself, I had a son
Now outlawed from my blood, a sought my life
But lately, very late, I loved him friend
No father his son dearer, true to tell thee,
The grief hath crazed my wits,
What a nights this? I do be seech your Grace.
O cry you mercy noble Philosopher, your com-pany.
Tom's a cold.
In fellow there, in't hovel keep thee warm.
Come let's in all.
This way my Lord.
With him I will keep still, with my Philosopher.
Good my Lord soothe him, let him take the fellow.
Take him you on.
Sirrah come on, go along with us?
Come good Athenian.
No words, no words, hush.
Child Rowland, to the dark town come,
His word was still fie fo and fum,
I smell the blood of a British man.
I will have my revenge ere I depart the house.
How my Lord I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty, some thing fears me to think of.
I now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking merit, set a work by a reprovable badness in himself.
How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just? this is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent party to the advantages of France, O heavens that his treason were, or not I the detecter.
Go with me to the Dutches.
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.
True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloster, seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.
If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his suspicion more fully, I will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love.
Here is better than the open air, take it thankfully, I will piece out the comfort with what addition I can, I will not be long from you.
All the power of his wits have given way to impatience, the Gods deserve your kindness.
Fretereto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness, pray innocent beware the foul fiend.
Prithee Nuncle tell me, whether a mad man be a Gentleman or a Yeoman.
A King a King, to have a thousand with red burning spits come hiszing in upon them.
The foul fiend bites my back,
He's mad, that trusts in the tameness of a Wolf, a horses health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
It shall be done, I will arraign them strait,
Come sit thou here most learned justice
Thou sapient sir sit here, no you she Foxes—
Look where he stands and glars, wanst thou eyes, at tral madam come o'er the broom Bessy to me.
Her boat hath a leak, and she must not speak,
Why she dares not come, over to thee.
The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nigh-tingale,
Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two white herring,
Croak not black Angel, I have no food for thee.
How do you sir? stand you not so amazed, will you lie down and rest upon the cushing?
I'll see their trial first, bring in their evidence, thou rob man of justice take thy place, & thou his yoke-fellow of equity, bench by his side, you are o'th' commission, sit you too.
Let us deal justly sleepest or wakest thou jolly shepherd, Thy sheep be in the corn, and for one blast of thy minik in mouth, thy sheep shall take no harm, Pur the cat is grey.
Arraign her first 'tis Gonoril, I here take my oath before this honourable assembly kicked the poor king her father.
Come hither mistress is your name Goneril.
She cannot deny it.
Cry you mercy I took you for a join stool.
And here's another whose warped looks proclaim,
What store her heart is made an, stop her there,
Arms, arms, sword fire, corruption in the place,
False justicer why hast thou leather scape.
Bless thy five wits.
O pity sir, where is the patience now,
That you so oft have boasted to retain.
My tears begin to take his part so much,
they'll maire my counterfeiting.
The little dogs and all
Trey, Blanch, and Sweet heart, see they bark at me.
Tom will throw his head at them, avant you curs, Be thy mouth, or black, or white, tooth that poisons if it bite, Mastiff, grey hound, mongrel, grim-hound or spaniel, brach or him, bobtail tike, or trundletaile, Tom will make them weep & wail, For with throwing thus my head, dogs leap the hatch and all are fled, loudla doodla come march to wakes, and fairs, and market towns, poor Tom thy horn is dry.
Then let them anatomize Regan, see what breeds about her
heart is there any cause in nature that makes this hardness,
You sir, I entertain you for one of my hundred,
Only I do not like the fashion of your garments you'll say,
They are Persian attire, but let them be changed.
Now good my Lord lie here awhile.
Make no noise, make no noise, draw the curtains, so, so, so,
we'll go to supper i'th' morning, so, so, so,
Come hither friend, where is the King my master.
Here sir, but trouble him not his wits are gone.
Good friend I prithee take him in thy arms,
I have o'er heard a plot of death upon him,
There is a Litter ready lay him in't, & drive towards Dover friend,
Where thou shalt meet both welcome & protection, take up thy master,
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life with thine
And all that offer to defend him stand in assured loss,
Take up the King and follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.
Oppressed nature sleeps,
This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews,
Which if convenience will not allow stand in hard cure,
Come help to bear thy master, thou must not stay behind.
Come, come away.
When we our betters see bearing our woes: we scarcely think, our miseries, our foes.
Who alone suffers suffers, most i'th' mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind,
But then the mind much sufferance doth o'er scip,
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship:
How light and portable my pain seems now,
When that which makes me bend, makes the King bow.
He childed as I fathered, Tom away,
Mark the high noises and thyself bewray,
When false opinion whose wrong thoughts defile thee,
In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee,
What will hap more to night, safe scape the King,
Lurk, lurk.
Post speedily to my Lord your husband show him this letter
The army of France is landed, seek out the villain Gloster.
Hang him instantly.
Pluck out his eyes.
Leave him to my displeasure, Edmund keep you our sister company.
The revenge we are bound to take upon your traitorous father,
Are not fit for your beholding, advise the Duke where you are going
To a most festuant preparation we are bound to the like,
Our post shall be swift and intelligence betwixt us,
Farewell dear sister, farewell my Lord of Gloster,
How now where's the King?
My Lord of Gloster hath conveyed him hence,
Some five or six and thirty of his Knights hot questrits after him, met him at gate, who with some other of the Lords dependents are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast to have well armed friends.
Get horses for your mistress.
Farewell sweet Lord and sister.
Edmund farewell, go seek the traitor Gloster.
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us,
Though we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men may blame
But not control, whose there, the traitor?
Ingrateful Fox 'tis he.
Bind fast his corky arms.
What means your Graces, good my friends consider,
You are my gests, do me no foul play friends.
Bind him I say,
Hard hard, O filthy traitor!
Unmerciful Lady as you are, I am true.
To this chair bind him, villain thou shalt find—
By the kind Gods 'tis most ignobly done, to pluck me by the beard.
So white and such a Traitor.
Naughty Lady, these hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee, I am your host.
With robbers hands, my hospitable favours
You should not ruffell thus, what will you do.
Come sir, what letters had you late from France?
Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors late sooted in the kingdom?
To whose hands you have sent the lunatic King speak?
I have a letter gessingly set down
Which came from one, that's of a neutral heart,
And not from one opposed.
Cunning.
And false.
Where hast thou sent the King?
To Dover.
Wherefore to Dover? wast thou not charged at peril—
Wherefore to Dover? let him first answer that.
I am tied tot'h stake, and I must stand the course.
Wherefore to Dover sir?
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
In his aurynted flesh rash boorish fangs,
The Sea with such a storm of his loved head
In hell black night endured, would have laid up
And quenched the steeled fires, yet poor old heart,
He holpt the heavens to rage,
If wolves had at thy gate heard that dearne time
Thou shouldst have said, good Porter turn the key,
All cruels else subscribed but I shall see
The winged vengeance overtake such children.
Seeet shalt thou never, fellows hold the chair,
Upon those eyes of thine, I'll set my foot.
He that will think to live till he be old
Give me some help, O cruel, O ye Gods!
One side will mock another, other to.
If you see vengeance—
Hold your hand my Lord
I have served ever since I was a child
But better service have I never done you, them now to bid you hold.
How now you dog.
If you did wear a beard upon your chin id'e shake it on this quarrel, what do you mean?
My villain.
Why then come on, and take the chance of anger.
Give me thy sword, a peasant stand up thus.
Oh I am slain my Lord, yet have you one eye left to see some mischief on him, oh!
Lest it see more prevent it, out vild jelly
Where is thy lustre now?
All dark and comfortless, where's my son Edmund? Edmund unbridle all the sparks of nature, to quit this horrid act.
Out villain, thou call'st on him that hates thee, it was he that made the overture of thy treasons to us, who is too good to pity thee.
O my follies, than Edgar was abused,
Kind Gods forgive me that, and prosper him.
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell his way to Dover, how be't my Lord? how look you?.
I have received a hurt, follow me Lady,
Turn out that eyles villain, throw this slave upon
The dungell Regan, I bleed apace, untimely
Comes this hurt, give me your arm.
I'll never care what wickedness I do,
If this man come to good.
If she live long, & in the end meet the old course of death, women will all turn monsters.
Let's follow the old Earl, and get the bedlom
To lead him where he would, his roguish madness
Allows itself to any thing.
Go thou, i'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs to apply to his bleeding face, now heaven help him.
Yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
Then still contemned and flattered to be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of Fortune
Stands still in experience, lives not in fear,
The lamentable change is from the best,
The worst returns to laughter,
Who's here, my father poorlie, lead, world, world, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.
O my good Lord, I have been your tenant, & your father's tenant this fourscore—
Away, get thee away, good friend be gone,
Thy comforts can do me no good at all,
Thee they may hurt.
Alack sir, you cannot see your way.
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes,
I stumbled when I saw, full oft 'tis seen
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities, ah dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abused father's wrath,
Might I but live to see thee in my tuch,
Id'e say I had eyes again.
How now whos's there?
O Gods, who be't can say I am at the worst,
I am worse than ere I was.
'tis poor mad Tom.
And worse I may be yet, the worst is not.
As long as we can say, this is the worst.
Fellow where goest?
Is it a beggar man?
Mad man, and beggar to.
A has some reason, else he could not beg,
In the last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
Which made me think a man a worm, my son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him, I have heard more since,
As flies are toth' wanton boys, are we toth' Gods,
They bitus for their sport.
How should this be, bad is the trade that must play the fool to sorrow angering itself and others, bless thee master.
Is that the naked fellow?
I my Lord.
Then prithee get thee gone, if for my sake
Thou wilt o'ertake us here a mile or twain
Ith' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love
And bring some covering for this naked soul
Who I'll entreat to lead me.
Alack sir he is mad.
'tis the time's plague, when madmen lead the blind,
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure,
Above the rest, be gone.
I'll bring him the best apparel that I have Come on't what will.
Sirrah naked fellow.
Poor Toms a cold, I cannot dance it farther.
Come hither fellow.
Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
Know'st thou the way to Dover?
Both style and gate, horse-way, and footpath,
Poor Tom hath been scared out of his good wits,
Bless the good man from the foul fiend,
Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once,
Of lust, as Obidicut, Hobbididence Prince of dumbnes,
Mahu of stealing, Modo of murder, Stiber digebit of
Mobing, & Mobing who since possesses chambermaids
And waiting women, so, bless thee master
Here take this purse, thou whom the heavens plagues.
Have humbled to all strokes, that I am wretched, makes thee
The happier, heavens deal so still,
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man
That stands your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly,
So distribution should under excess,
And each man have enough, dost thou know Dover?
I master.
There is a cliff whose high & bending head
Looks firmly in the confined deep,
Bring me but to the very brim of it
And i'll repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me,
From that place I shall no leading need.
Give me thy arm poor Tom shall lead thee.
Welcome my Lord I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way, now where's your master?
Madam within, but never man so changed, I told him of the army that was landed, he smiled at it, I told him you werecoming, his answer was the worse, of Gloster's treachery, and of the loyal service of his son when I informed him, than he called me sot, and told me I had turned the wrong side out, what he should most desire seems pleasant to him, what like offensive.
Then shall you go no further,
It is the cowish cur of his spirit
That dares not undertake, he'll not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer, our wishes on the way
May prove effects, back Edgar to my brother,
Hasten his musters, and conduct his powers
I must change arms at home, and give the distaff
Into my husband's hands, this trusty servant
Shall pass between us, ere long you are like to hear
If you dare venture in your own behalf
A mistress' coward, wear this spare speech,
Decline your head: this kiss if it durst speak
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air,
Conceive and far you well.
Yours in the ranks of death.
My most dear Gloster, to thee woman's services are due
My foot usurps my body.
Madam here comes my Lord.
I have been worth the whistle.
O Gonoril, you are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face, I fear your disposition
That nature which contemns it origin
Cannot be bordered certain in itself,
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap, perforce must whither,
And come to deadly use.
No more, the text is foolish.
Wisdom and goodness, to the vild seem vild,
Filths savour but themselves, what have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you performed?
A father, and a gracious aged man
Whose reverence even the head-lugd bear would lick.
Most barbarous, most degenerate have you madded,
Can my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a Prince, by him so beniflicted,
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame the vild offences, it will come
Humanly must perforce pray on itself like monsters of the deep.
Milk livered man
That bearest a cheek for blocs, a head for wrongs,
Who hast not in thy brows an eye deserving thine honour,
From thy suffering, that not knowst fools, do those villains pity
Who are punished ere they have done their mischief,
where's thy drum? France spreads his banners in our noystles land,
With plumed helm, thy slayer begin threats
Whil's thou a moral fool sits still and cries
Alack why does he so?
See thyself devil, proper deformity seems not in the fiend, so horrid as in woman.
O vain fool!
Thou changed, and selfe-coverd thing for shame
Bemonster not thy feature, were't my fitness
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislecate and tear
Thy flesh and bones, how ere thou art a fiend,
A woman's shape doth shield thee.
Marry your manhood now—
What news.
O my good Lord the Duke of Cornwall's dead, slain by his servant, going to put out the other eye of Gloster.
Gloster's eyes?
A servant that he bred, thralled with remorse,
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
To his great master, who thereat enraged
Flew on him, and amongst them, field him dead,
But not without that harmful stroke, which since
Hath plucked him after.
This shows you are above your justices,
That these our neither crimes so speedily can venge.
But O poor Gloster lost he his other eye.
Both, both my Lord, this letter Madam craves a speedy answer,
'tis from your sister.
One way I like this well,
But being widow and my Gloster with her,
May all the building on my fancy pluck,
Upon my hateful life, another way the news is not so took,
I'll read and answer.
Where was his son when they did take his eyes.
Come with my Lady hither.
He is not here.
No my good Lord I met him back again.
Knows he the wickedness.
I my good Lord 'twas he informed against him,
And quit the house on purpose that there punishment
Might have the freer course.
Gloster I live to thank thee for the love thou showedst the King,
And to revenge thy eyes, come hither friend,
Tell me what more thou knowest.
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back, know you no reason.
Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his coming forth is thought of, which imports to the Kingdom, So much fear and danger that his personal return was most required and necessary.
Who hath he left behind him, General.
The Marshal of France monsieur la Far.
Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief.
I say she took them, read them in my presence,
And now and then an ample tear trilled down
Her delicate cheek, it seemed she was a queen over her passion,
Who most rebell-like, sought to be King o'er her.
O than it moved her.
Not to a rage, patience and sorrow stream,
Who should express her goodliest you have seen,
Sun shine and rain at once, her smiles and tears,
Were like a better way those happy smilets,
That played on her ripe lip seem not to know,
What guests were in her eyes which parted thence,
As pearls from diamonds dropped in brief,
Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,
If all could so become it.
Made she no verbal question.
Faith once or twice she heaved the name of father,
Pantingly forth as if it priest her heart,
Cried sisters, sisters, shame of Lady's sisters:
Kent, father, sisters, what i'th' storm i'th' night,
Let pity not be beleeft there she shook,
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamour moistened her, than away she started,
To deal with grief alone.
It is the stars, the stars above us govern our conditions,
Else one self mate and make could not beget,
Such different issues, you spoke not with her since.
No.
Was this before the King returned.
No, since.
Well sir, the poor distressed Lear's i'th' town,
Who some time in his better tune remembers,
What we are come about, and by no means will yield to see his daughter.
Why good sir?
A sovereign shame so elbows him his own unkindness
That stripped her from his benediction turned her,
To for rain casualties gave her dear rights,
To his dog-harted daughters, these things sting his mind,
So venomously that burning shame detains him from Cordelia.
Alack poor Gentleman.
Of Albanies and Cornewals powers you heard not.
'tis so they are a foot.
Well sir, i'll bring you to our master Lear,
And leave you to attend him some dear cause,
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile,
When I am known aright you shall not grieve,
Lending me this acquaintance, I pray you go along with me.
Alack 'tis he, why he was met even now,
As mad as the vent sea singing aloud,
Crowned with rank femiter and furrow weeds,
With hor-docks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo flowers,
Darnell and all the idle weeds that grow,
In our sustaining, corn, a century is sent forth,
Search every acre in the high grown field,
And bring him to our eye, what can man's wisdom
In the restoring his bereaved sense, he that can help him
Take all my outward worth.
There is means Madam.
Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lacks that to provoke in him,
Are many simples operative whose power,
Will close the eye of anguish.
All blessed secrets all you unpublisht virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears beaydant and remediat,
In the good man's distress, seek, seek, for him,
Lest his ungovernd rage dissolve the life.
That wants the means to lead it.
News Madam, the British powers are marching hitherward.
'tis known before, our preparation stands,
In expectation of them, o dear father
It is thy business that I go about, therefore great France
My mourning and important tears hath pitied,
No blown ambition doth our arms in sight
But love, dear love, and our aged father's right,
Soon may I hear and see him.
But are my brother's powers set forth?
I Madam.
Himself in person?
Madam with much ado, your sister is the better soldier.
Lord Edmund spoke not with your Lady at home.
No Madam.
What might import my sister's letters to him?
I know not Lady.
Faith he is posted hence on serious matter,
It was great ignorance, Gloster's eyes being out
To let him live, where he arrives he moves
All hearts against us, and now I think is gone
In pity of his misery to dispatch his nighted life,
Moreover to descry the strength a''h army.
I must needs after him with my letters
Our troup sets forth to morrow stay with us,
The ways are dangerous.
I may not Madam, my Lady charged my duty in this business.
Why should she write to Edmund? might not you
Transport her purposes by word, belike
Some thing, I know not what, i'll love thee much,
Let me unseal the letter.
Madam I'd e rather—
I know your Lady does not love her husband
I am sure of that, and at her late being here
She gave strange aliads, and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund, I know you are of her bosom.
I Madam.
I speak in understanding, for I know't,
Therefore I do advise you take this note,
My Lord is dead, Edmund and I have talked,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Then for your Ladies, you may gather more
If you do find him, pray you give him this,
And when your mistress hears thus much from you
I pray desire her call her wisdom to her, so farewell,
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
Would I could meet him Madam, I would show
What Lady I do follow.
Far thee well.
When shall we come toth' top of that same hill?
You do climb it upnow, look how we labour?
Me thinks the ground is even.
Horrible steep, hark do you hear the sea?
No truly.
Why then your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes anguish.
So may it be indeed,
Me thinks thy voice is altered, and thou speakest
With better phrase and matter than thou didst.
You're much deceived, in nothing am I changed
But in my garments.
Me thinks you're better spoken.
Come on sir, her's the place, stand still, how fearful
And dizi t is to cast one's eyes so low
The crows and choghes that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles, half way down
Hangs one that gathers sampire, dreadful trade,
Me thinks he seems no bigger than his head,
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice, and you tall anchoring bark
Diminished to her cock, her cock a bovi
Almost too small for sight, the murmuring surge
That on the unnumbered idle pebble chaffes
Cannot be heard, it's so high i'll look no more,
Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.
Set me where you stand?
Give me your hand, you are now within a foot
Of th'extreme verge, for all beneath the Moon
Would I not leap upright.
Let go my hand,
Here friend's another purse, in it a jewel,
Well worth a poor man's taking, Fairy's and Gods
Prosper it with thee, go thou farther off,
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Now far you well good sir.
With all my heart.
Why I do trifle thus with his despair is done to cure it.
O you mighty Gods,
This world I do renounce and in your sights
Shake patiently my great affliction off,
If I could bear it longer and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposles wils
My snursf and loathed part of nature should
Burn itself out, if Edgar live, O bless,
Now fellow far thee well.
Gone sir, farewell, and yet I know not how conceit my rob the treasury of life, when life itself yealds to the theft, had he been where he thought by this had thought been past, alive or dead, ho you sir, hear you sir, speak, thus might he pass indeed, yet he revives, what are you sir?
Away and let me die.
Hadst thou been aught but gosmore feathers air,
So many fathom down precipitating
Thou hadst shiverd like an egg, but thou dost breathe
Hast heavy substance, bleedst not, speakest, art sound,
Ten masts at each, make not the altitude,
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell,
Thy life's a miracle, speak yet again.
But have I fallen or no I
From the dread summons of this chalky borne,
Look up a height, the shrill gorged lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard, do but look up?
Alack I have no eyes
Is wretchedness deprived, that benefit
To end itself by death 'twas yet some comfort
When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
And frustrate his proud will.
Give me your arm?
Up, so, how feel you your legs, you stand.
Too well, too well.
This is above all strangeness
Upon the crown of the cliff what thing was that
Which parted from you.
A poor unfortunate bagger.
As I stood here below me thoughts his eyes
Were two full Moons, a had a thousand noses
Horns, welk't and waved like the enridged sea,
It was some fiend, therefore thou happy father
Think that the clearest Gods, who made their honours
Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.
I do remember now henceforth i'll bear
Affliction till it do cry out itself
Enough, enough and die that thing you speak of,
I took it for a man, often would it say
The fiend the fiend, he led me to that place
Bare free & patiented thoughts, but who comes here
The safer sense will near accommodate his master thus.
No they cannot touch me for coining, I am the king himself.
O thou side piercing sight.
Nature is above Art in that respect, there's your press money, that fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper, draw me a clothiers yard, look, look a mouse, peace, peace, this toasted cheese will do it there's my gauntlet, i'll prove it on a giant, bring up the browne-billes, O well flown bird in the air, hagh, give the word?
Sweet Margerum.
Pass.
I know that voice.
Ha Goneril, ha Regan, they flattered me like a dog, and told me I had white hairs in my beard, ere the black ones were there, to say I and no, to every thing I said, I and no toe, was no good divinity, when the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter, when the thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I found them, there I smelled them out, go toe, they are not men of their words, they told me I was every thing, 'tis a lie, I am not argue-proofe.
The trick of that voice I do well remember, be't not the King?
I ever inch a King when I do stare▪ see how the subject quakes, I pardon that man's life, what was thy cause, adultery? thou shalt not die for adultery, no the wren goes to't, and the small guilded fly do lecher in my sight, let copulation thrive, for Gloster's bastard son was kinder to his father then my daughters got tween the lawful sheets, to't luxury, pell-mell, for I lack soldiers, behold yond simpering dame whose face between her forks presageth snow, that minces virtue, and do shake the head hear of pleasure's name to fichew nor the soiled horse goes to't with a more riotous appetite, down from the waist they're centaurs, though women all above, but to the girdle do the gods inherit, beneath is all the fiends, there's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulphury pit, burning, scalding, stench, consummation, fie, fie, fie, pah, pah, Give me an ounce of Civet, good Apothocarie, to sweeten my imagination, there's money for thee.
O let me kiss that hand.
Here wipe it first, it smells of mortality.
O ruined piece of nature, this great world should so weare out to nought, do you know me?
I remember thy eyes well enough, dost thou squiny on me, no do thy worst blind Cupid, i'll not love, read thou that challenge, mark the penning oft.
Were all the letters suns I could not see one.
I would not take this from report, it is, and my heart breaks at it.
Read.
What! with the case of eyes
O ho, are you there with me, no eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse, your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light, yet you see how this world goes.
I see it feelingly.
What art mad, a man may see how the world goes with no eyes, look with thy ears, see how you justice rails upon you simple thief, hark in thy ear handy, dandy, which is the thief, which is the justice, thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar.
I sir.
And the creature run from the cur, there thou mightst behold the great image of authority, a dog, so bade in office, thou rascal beadle hold thy bloody hand, why dost thou lash that whore, strip thine own back, thy blood hotly lusts to use her in that kind for which thou whipst her, the usurer hangs the cosioner, through tottered rags, small vices do appear, robes & furred-gowns hides all, get thee glass eyes, and like a scurvy politician seem to see the things thou dost not, no now pull off my boots, harder, harder, so.
O matter and impertinency mixed reason in madness.
If thou wilt weep my fortune take my eyes, I know thee well enough thy name is Gloster, thou must be patiented, we came crying hither, thou knowest the first time that we smell the air, we wayland cry I will preach to thee mark me.
Alack alack the day.
When we are borne, we cry that we are come to this great stage of fools, this a good block. It were a delicate stratagem to shoot a troop of horse with fell, & when I have stole upon these son in laws, then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill.
O here he is, lay hands upon him sirs, your most dear
No rescue, what a prisoner, I am e'en the natural fool of Fortune, use me well you shall have ransom, let me have a churgion I am cut to the brains.
You shall have any thing.
No seconds, all myself, why this would make a man of salt to use his eyes for garden water-pots, I and laying Autums dust.
I will die bravely like a bridegroom, what? I will be jovial, come, come, I am a King my masters, know you that.
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
Then there's life in't, nay and you get it you shall get it with running.
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch, past speaking of in a king: thou hast one daughter who redeems nature from the general curse which twain hath brought her to.
Hail gentle sir.
Sir speed you, what's your will.
Do you hear aught of a battle toward.
Most sure and vulgar every one here's that
That can distinguish sense.
But by your favour how neers the other army.
near and on speed for't the main descries,
Standest on the hourly thoughts.
I thank you sir that's all.
Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
Her army is moved on.
I thank you sir.
You ever gentle gods take my breath from me,
Let not my worse spirit tempt me again,
To die before you please.
Well, pray you father.
Now good sir what are you.
A most poor man made lame by Fortune's blows,
Who by the Art of known and feeling sorrows
Am pregnant to good pity, give me your hand
I'll lead you to some biding.
Hartie thanks, the bornet and beniz of heaven to save thee.
A proclaimed prize, most happy, that eyles head of thine was framed flesh to raise my fortunes, thou most unhappy traitor, briefly thyself remember, the sword is out that must destroy thee.
Now let thy friendly hand put strength enough to't.
Wherhfore bold peasant durst thou support a published traitor, hence lest the infection of his fortune take like hold on thee, let go his arm?
Ihill not let go fir without cagion.
Let go slave, or thou diest.
Good Gentleman go your gate, let poor voke pass, and I'd have been swaggared out of my life, it would not have been so long by a fortnight, nay come not near the old man, keep out, chevore ye, or i'll try whether your coster or my battero be the harder, i'll be plain with you.
Out dunghill.
Ihill pick your teeth sir, come, no matter for your foins.
Slave thou hast slain me, villain take my purse,
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
And give the letters which thou findest about me
To Edmund Earl of Gloster, seek him out upon
The British party, o untimely death! death.
I know thee well, a serviceable villain,
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress, as badness would desire.
What is he dead?
Sat you down father, rest you let's see his pockets
These letters that he speaks of may be my friends,
he's dead, I am only sorrow he had no other deathsman
Let us see, leave gentle wax, and manners blame us not
To know our enemy's minds we'd rip their hearts,
Their papers is more lawful.
Let your reciprocal vows be remembered, you have many opportunities to cut him off, if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered, there is nothing done, If he return the conqueror, then am I the prisoner, and his bed my jail, from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your labour, your wife (so I would say) your affectionate servant and for you her own for Venture, Goneril.
O Indistinguisht space of woman's wit,
A plot upon her virtuous husband's life.
And the exchange my brother here in the sands,
Thee i'll rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murderous lechers, and in the mature time,
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death practised Duke, for him 'tis well,
That of thy death and business I can tell.
The King is mad, how stiff is my vild sense,
That I stand up and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows, better I were distract,
So should my thoughts be fenced from my griefs,
And woes by wrong imaginations lose
The knowledge of themselves.
Give me your hand far off me thinks I hear the beaten drum,
Come father i'll bestow you with a friend.
O thou good Kent how shall I live and work to match thy goodness,
My life will be too short and every measure fail me.
To be acknowledged madame is over paid,
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Nor more, nor clipped, but so.
Be better suited these weeds are memories of those
Worse hours, I prithee put them off.
Pardon me dear madame,
Yet to be known shortens my made intent,
My boon I make it that you know me not,
Till time and I think meet.
Then beet so, my good Lord how does the king.
Madam sleeps still.
O you kind Gods cure this great breach in his abused nature,
The untund and hurrying senses, O wind up
Of this child changed father.
So please your Majesty that we may wake the king,
He hath slept long.
Be governed by your knowledge and proceed,
Ith' sway of your own will is he arrayed,
I madam, in the heaviness of his sleep,
We put fresh garments on him,
Good madam be by, when we do awake him
I doubt not of his temperance.
Very well.
Please you draw near, louder the music there,
O my dear father restoration hang thy medicine on my lips,
And let this kiss repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made.
Kind and dear Princess,
Had you not been their father these white flakes,
Had challengd pity of them, was this a face
To be exposed against the warring winds,
To stand against the deep dread bolted thunder,
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick cross lightning to watch poor Perdu,
With this thin helm mine injurious dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire, and wast thou feign poor father,
To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
In short and musty straw, alack, alack,
'tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all, he wakes speak to him.
Madam do you, 'tis fittest.
How does my royal Lord, how fares your majesty.
You do me wrong to take me out ath grave,
Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.
Sir know me.
you're a spirit I know, where did you die.
Still, still, far wide.
he's scarce awake, let him alone a while.
Where have I been, where am I fair day light,
I am mightily abused, I should even die with pity,
To see another thus, I know not what to say,
I will not swear these are my hands, let's see,
I feel this pin prick, would I were assured of my condition.
O look upon me sir, and hold your hands in benediction o'er me, no sir you must not kneel.
Pray do not mock,
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, and to deal plainly
I fear I am not in my perfect mind,
Me thinks I should know you, and know this man;
Yet I am doubtful, for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is, and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments, nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night, do not laugh at me,
For as I am a man, I think this Lady
To be my child Cordelia.
And so I am.
Be your tears wet, yes faith, I pray weep not,
If you have poison for me I will drink it,
I know you do not love me, for your sisters
Have as I do remember, done me wrong,
You have some cause, they have not.
No cause, no cause.
Am I in France?
In your own kingdom sir.
Do not abuse me?
Be comforted good Madam, the great rage you see is cured in him, and yet it is danger to make him even o'er the time he has lost, desire him to go in, trouble him no more till further settling:
Wilt please your highness walk?
You must bear with me, pray now forget and forgive,
I am old and foolish.
Holds it true sir that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
Most certain sir.
Who is conductor of his people?
As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloster.
They say Edgar his banished son is with the Earl of Kent in Germany.
Report is changeable, 'tis time to look about,
The powers of the kingdom approach apace.
The arbitrement is like to be bloody, far you well sir.
My point and period will be thoroughly wrought,
Or well, or ill, as this days battles fought.
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by aught
To change the course, he's full of abdication
And self reproving, bring his constant pleasure.
Our sister's man is certainly miscarried,
'tis to be doubted Madam,
Now sweet Lord,
You know the goodness I intent upon you,
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?
I, honoured love.
But have you never found my brother's way,
To the forfended place?
That thought abuses you.
I am doubtful that you have been conjunct and bosomed with her, as far as we call hers.
No by mine honour Madam.
I never shall endure her, dear my Lord be not familiar with her.
Fear me not, she and the Duke her husband.
I had rather lose the battle, than that sister should loosen him and me.
Our very loving sister well bemet
For this I hear the King is come to his daughter
With others, whom the rigour of our state
Forced to cry out, where I could not be honest
I never yet was valiant, for this business
It touches us, as France invades our land
Not bolds the King, with others whom I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
Sir you speak nobly.
Why is this reasoned!
Combine together 'gainst the enemy,
For these domestic door particulars
Are not to question here.
Let us then determine with the ancient of war on our proceed.
I shall attend you presently at your tent.
Sister you'll go with us?
No.
'tis most convenient, pray you go with us.
O ho, I know the riddle, I will go.
If ere your Grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.
I'll overtake you, speak.
Before you fight the battle open this letter,
If you have victory let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it, wretched though I seem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is avouched there, if you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
Fortune love you,
Stay till I have read the letter.
I was forbid it, when time shall serve let but the Herald cry and i'll appear again.
Why far thee well, I will o'erlook the paper.
The enemies in view, draw up your powers
Hard is the quest of their great strength and forces
By diligent discovery, but your haste is now urged on you.
We will greet the time.
To both these sister have I sworn my love,
Each jealous of the other as the sting are of the Adder,
Which of them shall I take, both one or neither, neither can be enjoyed
If both remain alive, to take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril,
And hardly shall I carry out my side
Her husband being alive, now then we'll use
His countenadce for the battle, which being done
Let her that would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off, as for his mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia:
The battle done, and they within our power
Shall never see his pardon, for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
Here father, take the shadow of this bush
For your good host, pray that the right may thrive
If ever I return to you again i'll bring you comfort.
Grace go with you sir.
Away old man, give me thy hand, away,
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en,
Give me thy hand, come on.
No farther sir, a man may rot even here.
What in ill thoughts again men must endure,
Their going hence, even as their coming hither,
Ripeness is all come on.
Some officers take them away, good guard
Until their greater pleasures best be known
That are to censure them.
We are not the first who with best meaning have incurred
The worst, for thee oppressed King am I cast down,
Myself could else outfrowne false Fortune's frown,
Shall we not see these daughters, and these sisters?
No, no, come let's away to prison
We two alone will sing like birds i'th' cage,
When thou dost ask me blessing, i'll kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness, so we'll live
And pray, and sing and tell old tales and laugh
At guilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of Court news, and we'll talk with them to,
Who loses, and who wins, whose in, whose out,
And take upon's the mystery of things
As if we were God's spies, and we'll wear out
In a walled prison, packs and sects of great ones
That ebb and flow byth' Moon.
Take them away.
Upon such sacrifices my Cordelia,
The Gods themselves throw incense, have I caught thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
And fire us hence like Foxes, wipe thine eyes,
The good shall devour 'em, fleach and fell
Ere they shall make us weep? we'll see 'em starve first, come.
Come hither Captain, hark.
Take thou this note, go follow them to prison,
And step, I have advanct thee, if thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To noble fortunes, know thou this that men
Are as the time is, to be tender minded
Does not become a sword, thy great employment
Will not bear question, either say thou't do't,
Or thrive by other means.
I'll do't my Lord.
About it, and write happy when thou hast done,
Mark I say instantly, and carry it so
As I have set it down.
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats,
If it be man's work I'll do't.
Sir you have showed to day your valiant strain,
And Fortune led you well you have the captives
That were the opposites of this days strife,
We do require then of you, so to use them,
As we shall find their merits, and our safety
May equally determine.
Sir I thought it fit,
To save the old and miserable King to some retention,
Whose age has charms in it, whose title more
To pluck the coren bossom of his fide,
And turn our impressed lances in our eyes
Which do command them, with him I sent the queen
My reason, all the same and they are ready to morrow,
Or at further space, to appear where you shall hold
Your session at this time, me sweat and bleed,
The friend hath lost his friend and the best quarrels
In the heat are cursed, by those that feel their sharps,
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fit place.
Sir by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war, not as a brother.
That's as we list to grace him,
Me thinks our pleasure should have been demanded
E'er you had spoke so far, he led our powers,
Bore the commission of my place and person,
The which immediate may well stand up,
And call itself your brother.
Not so hot, in his own grace he doth exalt himself more then in your advancement.
In my right by me invested he com-peers the best.
That were the most, if he should husband you.
jesters do oft prove Prophets.
Hola, hola, that eye that told you so, looked but a squint.
Lady I am not well, else I should answer
From a full flowing stomach, General
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony,
Witness the world that I create thee here
My Lord and master.
Mean you to enjoy him then?
The let alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine Lord.
Half blooded fellow, yes.
Let the drum strike, and prove my title good.
Stay yet, hear reason, Edmund I arrest thee
On capital treason, and in thine attaint,
This gilded Serpent, for your claim fair sister
I bore it in the interest of my wife,
'tis she is subcontracted to this Lord
And I her husband contradict the banes,
If you will marry, make your love to me,
My Lady is bespoke, thou art armed Gloster,
If none appear to prove upon thy head,
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge, i'll prove it on thy heart
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaimed thee.
Sick, o sick.
If not, i'll ne'er trust poison.
there's my exchange, what in the world he is,
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies,
Call by thy trumpet, he that dares approach,
On him, on you, who not, I will maintain
My truth and honour firmly.
A Herald ho.
A Herald ho, a Herald.
Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers
All levied in my name, have in my name took their discharge.
This sickness grows upon me.
She is not well, convey her to my tent,
Come hither Herald, let the trumpet sound,
And read out this.
Sound trumpet?
If any man of quality or degree, in the host of the army, will maintain upon Edmund supposed Earl of Gloster, that he's a manifold traitor, let him appear at the third sound of the trumpet, he is bold in his defence.
Sound? Again?
Ask him his purposes why he appears
Upon this call o'th' trumpet.
What are you? your name and quality?
And why you answer this present summons.
O know my name is lost by treasons tooth.
Bare-gnawne and canker-bitte; yet are I moved
Where is the adversary I come to cope with all.
Which is that adversary?
What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloster,
Himself, what sayest thou to him?
Draw thy sword.
That if my speech offend a noble heart, thy arm
May do thee justice, here is mine.
Behold it is the privilege of my tongue,
My oath and my profession, I protest,
Maugure thy strength, youth, place and eminence,
Despite thy victor, sword and fire new fortuned,
Thy valour and thy heart thou art a traitor.
False to thy Gods thy brother and thy Father,
Conspicuate 'gainst this high illustrious prince,
And from th'extremest upward of thy head,
To the descent and dust beneath thy feet,
A most toadspotted traitor say thou no
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits,
As bend to prove upon thy heart whereto I speak thou liest,
In wisdom I sholud ask thy name,
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy being some say of breeding breaths,
By right of knighthood, I disdain and spurn
Hear do I toss those treasons to thy head.
With the hell hatedly, oreturnd thy heart,
Which for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way
Where they shall rest for ever, trumpets speak.
Save him, save him,
This is mere practice Gloster by the law of arms
Thou art not bound to answer an unknown opposite,
Thou art not vanquished, but cozened and beguiled,
Stop your mouth dame, or with this paper shall I stople it, thou worse than any thing, read thine own evil, nay no tearing Lady, I perceive you know't.
Say if I do, the laws are mine not thine, who shall arraine me for't.
Most monstrous knowst thou this paper?
Ask me not what I know.
Go after her, she's desperate, govern her.
What you have charged me with, that have I done
And more, much more, the time will bring it out.
'tis past, and so am I, but what art thou
That hast this fortune on me? if thou be'st noble
I do forgive thee.
Let's exchange charity,
I am no less in blood than thou art Edmund,
If more, the more thou hast wronged me.
My name is Edgar, and thy father's son,
The Gods are just, and of our pleasant virtues.
Make instruments to scourge us the dark and vicious
Place where thee he got, cost him his eyes.
Thou hast spoken truth, the wheel is come full circled I am here.
Me thought thy very gate did prophecy,
A royal nobleness I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart if I did ever hate thee or thy father.
Worthy Prince I know't.
Where have you hid yourself?
How have you known the miseries of your father?
By nursing them my Lord,
List a brief tale, and when 'tis told
O that my heart would burst the bloody proclamation
To escape that followed me so near,
O our lives sweetness, that with the pain of death,
Would hourly die, rather than die at once.
Taught me to shift into a madman's rags
To assume a semblance that very dogs disdained
And in this habit met I my father with his bleeding rings,
The precious stones new lost became his guide,
Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair,
Never (O Father) revealed myself unto him.
Until some half hour past, when I was armed,
Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
I asked his blessing, and from first to last,
Told him my pilgrimage, but his flawd heart,
Alack too weak, the conflict to support,
Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smillingly.
This speech of yours hath moved me,
And shall perchance do good, but speak you on,
You look as you had something more to say,
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolve, hearing of this,
This would have seemed a period to such
As love not sorrow, but another to amplify too much,
Would make much more, and top extremity
Whilst I was big in clamour, came there in a man,
Who having seen me in my worst estate,
Shunned my abhorred society, but then finding
Who 'twas that so endured with his strong arms
He fastened on my neck and bellowed out,
As he'd burst heaven, threw me on my father,
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him,
That ever ear received, which in recounting
His grief grew puissant and the strings of life,
Began to crack twice▪ then the trumpet's sounded.
And there I left him traunst.
But who was this.
Kent sir, the banished Kent, who in disguise,
Followed his enemy king and did him service
Improper for a slave.
Help, help,
What kind of help, what means that bloody knife?
It's hot it smokes, it came even from the heart of▪
Who man, speak?
Your Lady sir, your Lady, and her sister
By her is poisoned, she hath confessed it.
I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marie in an instant.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead,
This justice of the heavens that makes us tremble,
Touches us not with pity.
Here comes Kent sir.
O 'tis he, the time will not allow
The complement that very manners urges.
I am come to bid my King and master ay good night,
Is he not here?
Great thing of us forgot,
Speak Edmund, where's the king, and where's Cordelia
Seest thou this object Kent.
Alack why thus.
Yet Edmund was beloved,
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew herself.
Even so, cover their faces.
I pant for life, some good I mean to do,
Despite of my own nature, quickly send,
Be brief, in't toth' castle for my writ,
Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia,
Nay send in time.
Run, run, O run.
To who my Lord, who hath the office, send
Thy token of reprieve.
Well thought on, take my sword the Captain,
Give it the Captain?
Hast thee for thy life.
He hath Commission from thy wife and me,
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and to lay
The blame upon her own despair,
That she fordid herself.
The Gods defend her, bear him hence a while.
howl, howl, howl, howl, O you are men of stones,
Had I your tongues and eyes, I would use them so,
That heavens vault should crack, she's gone for ever,
I know when one is dead, and when one lives,
she's dead as earth, lend me a looking glass,
If that her breath will missed or stain the stone,
Why then she lives.
Is this the promised end.
Or image of that horror.
Fall and cease.
This feather stirs she lives, if it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.
A my good master.
Prithee away?
'tis noble Kent your friend.
A plague upon your murderous traitors all,
I might have saved her, now she's gone for ever,
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little, ha,
What be't thou sayest, her voice was ever soft,
Gentle and low, an excellent thing in women,
I killed the slave that was a hanging thee.
'tis true my Lords, he did.
Did I not fellow? I have seen the day,
With my good biting Falchion I would
Have made them skip, I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me, who are you?
Mine eyes are not oath best, i'll tell you strait.
If Fortune bragged of two she loved or hated,
One of them we behold.
Are not you Kent?
The same your servant Kent, where is your servant Caius,
he's a good fellow, I can tell that,
he'll strike and quickly too, he's dead and rotten.
No my good Lord, I am the very man.
I'll see that strait.
That from your life of difference and decay,
Have followed your sad steps.
You're welcome hither.
Nor no man else, als cheerless, dark and deadly,
Your eldest daughters have foredoom themselves.
And desperately are dead.
So think I to.
He knows not what he sees, and vain it is,
That we present us to him.
Very bootless.
Edmund is dead my Lord.
That's but a trifle here, you Lords and noble friends, Know our intent, what comfort to this decay may come, shall be applied: for us we will resign during the life of this old majesty, to him our absolute power, you to your rights with boot, and such addition as your honour have more then merited, all friends shall taste the wages of their virtue, and all foes the cup of their deservings, O see, see.
And my poor fool is hanged, no, no life, why should a dog, a horse, a rat of life and thou no breath at all, O thou wilt come no more, never, never, never, pray you undo this button, thank you sir, O, o, o, o.
He faints my Lord, my Lord.
Break heart, I prithee break.
Look up my Lord.
Vex not his ghost, O let him pass,
He hates him that would upon the wrack,
Of this tough world stretch him out longer.
O he is gone indeed.
The wonder is, he hath endured so long,
He but usurped his life.
Bear them from hence, our present business
Is to general woe, friends of my soul, you twain
Rule in this kingdom, and the gored state sustain.
I have a journey sir, shortly to go,
My master calls, and I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say,
The oldest have borne most, we that are young,
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.