IS your pawn good and sound sir?
I'll pawn my life for that sir;
Place yourself there then, I will seek to prefer it presently: my Master is very jealous of the pestilence; marry the pox sits at meat and meal with him.
Lent the fift day of September to mistress Onset upon her gown, taffety petticoat with three broad silver Laces, three pound fifteen shillings.
Lent to justice Cropshin upon both his Velvet jackets, five pound ten shillings.
Lent privately to my Lady Newcut, upon her gilt Casting-bottle, and her silver Lye-pot, fifty five shillings.
Sir.
Lent to Sir Oliver Needy upon his taffety cloak, Beaver hat, and perfumed leather-jerkin, 6. pound 5. shillings.
May it please your worship—
Lent to master Andrew Lucifer, upon his flame-coloured doublet, and blue taffeta-hose— top the candle sirrah, methinks the light burns blue when came that suit in.
Tas lain above the year now?
Fire and brimstone, cut it out into matches, the white linings will serve for tinder.
And with little help sir, they are almost black enough already?— Sir here's another come with a pawn;
Keep him aside awhile, and reach me hither the Bill of the last week;
Tere at hand sir?
Now sir what's your pawn?
The second part of a Gentlewoman's gown sir, the lower half I mean;
I apprehend you easily, the breeches of the gown!
Very proper, for she wears the doublet at home, a guest that lies in my house sir; she looks every hour: for her cousin out a''h country.
Oh her cousin lies here a may mistake in that? my friend of what parish is your pawn?
Parish why? Saint Clement's sir,- I'll come to you presently,
What parish is your pawn my friend. Saint Brides 5. Saint Dunstone's none; Saint Clement's 3. 3. at Clements, away with your pawn sir, your parish is infected, I will neither purchase the plague for six pence in the pound, and a groat Bill money, nor venture my small stock into contagious parishes: you have your answer fare-you-well, as fast as you can sir.
The pox arrest you sir at the suit of the Suburbs.
I welcome, welcome.
For I think plague scorns your company.
I rank with chief Gallants, I love to smell safely: lent in the vacation to master Proctor upon his Spiritual gown, 5. angels; and upon his Corporal doublet, 15. shillings. sum 3. pound 5. shillings.
Sir.
Now sir.
here's one come in with a trunk of apparel.
Whence comes it?
From Saint Martin's in the field.
Saint Martin's in the field,— Saint Mary Maudlin 2. Saint Martin's none, her's an Honest fellow, let him appear sir.
You may come near sir,
Oh welcome, welcome what's your pawn sir?
Faith a Gentlewoman's whole suit sir.
Whole suit? 'tis well.
A poor kind soul, troubled with a bad husband; one that puts her to her shifts here.
He puts her from her shifts methinks when she is feign to pawn her clothes?
Look you sir, a fair Satin gown; new taffeta petticoat.
Stay, this petticoat has been turned?
Often turned up and down & you will, but never turned sir.
Cry you mercy indeed:
A fine white Beaver, pearl-band; 3. falls, iha' known her have more in her days.
Alas and she be but a Gentlewoman of any count or charge, 3. faults are nothing, in these daies-Know that; tut the worlds changed, gentlewoman's faults stand upright now, no sin but has a Bolster, that it may lie at ease: Well what do you borrow of these sir?
twelve pound and you will sir.
How?
They were not hers for twenty.
Why so: our pawn is ever thrice the value of our money unless in plate and jewels, how should the months be restored and the use else? we must cast it for the twelvemonth, so many pounds, so many months, so many eighteen pences, than the use of these eighteen pences, than the want of the return of those pounds, all these must be laid together, which well considered, the valuation of the pawn had need to sound treble: Can six pound pleasure the Gentlewoman.
It may please her, but like a man of threescore in the Limbrest degree.
I have but one word more to say in't, twenty nobles is all and the utmost that I will hazard upon't.
she must be content with't, the less borrowed the better paid, come.
Arthur?
At hand sir.
Tell out twenty nobles, and take her name in a Bill?
I'm satisfied sir?
Welcome: good Saint Martin's in the field, welcome, welcome, I know no other name?
What so hard at your prayers?
A little sir, summing up my pawns here: what Master Primero? is it you sir Gallant; and how does all the pretty sweet Ladies, those plump, kind, delicate blisses; ha? whom I kiss in my very thoughts: how do they Gallant?
Why Gallant? if they should not do well in my house, where should it be done boy, have I not a glorious Situation?
Oh a Gallant Receipt, Violet air, curious garden, quaint walks, fantastical Arbours, three backdoors and a Coachgate, nay thou'rt admirably seated, little furniture will serve thee, thou'rt never without movables.
I praise my Stars; ah the goodly virginities that have been cut up in my house, and the goodly patrimonies that have lain like sops in the gravy, and when those sops were eaten, yet the meat was kept whole for another, and another, and another, for as in one pie twenty may dip their sippits, so upon one woman forty may consume their patrimonies.
Excellent, master Primero?
Well, i'll pray for women while I live, they're the profitablest fools, i'll say that for 'em, a man can keep about his house the prettiest kind fowl, so tame, so gentle e en to strangers, hands, So soon familiar, suffer to be touched, Of those they near saw twice: the Doves not like 'em.
Most certain, for that's honest; but I have a suit to you?
And so have I to you.
That happens well,
Grant mine and i'll grant yours?
A match.
Make me perfect in that trick that got you so much at Primero.
Oh for the thread tied at your partners leg: the twitch?
I that twitch and you callit so.
That secret twitch got me five hundred pound,
Ere 'twas first known and since I ha' sold it well
Five hundred pound laid down shall not yet buy,
The fee simple of my twitch I would be here with't,
'twas a blessed invention, I had been a beggar many a lousy year
But for my twitch. It was the prettiest twitch?
Many over-cheated gulls, have fatted
Me with the bottom of their patrimonies
e'en to the last Soap, gaped while I fed 'em;
who now live by that Art that first undid 'em.
But I must swear you to be secret, close,
As a maid, at Ten.
Had you sworn but two years higher I would here ha' believed you.
Nay I let twelve alone,
For after twelve has struck, maids look for one.
I look for one too and a maid I think.
What, to come hither?
Sure she follows me? a pretty fat eyed wench, with a Venus in her cheek, did but Raiment smile upon her, she were Nectar for great Dons, boy and that's my suit to thee.
And that's granted already: of what volume is this book, that I may fit a cover to't?
Faith neither in folio, nor in Decimo sexto, but in Octavo between both, a pretty middle sized trug.
Then I have fitted her already: in my eye i'faith: here came a pawn in e'en now will make shift to serve her as fit, look you sir Gallants, Satin, taffeta, Beaver, fall and all.
Is it new.
New? you see it bears her youth as freshly,—
A pretty suit of clothes i'faith;— but put case the party should come to redeem 'em of a sudden?
Puh then your wits sickly, have not I the policy think you to seem extreme busy and defer 'em till the morrow, against which time that pawn shall be secretly fetched home, and another carried out to supply the place.
I like thy craft well there.
A general course, oh Frippery is an unknown benefit sir Gallant!
And what must I give you for the hire now i'faith.
Of the who'll suit, for the month?
I for the month.
Go to, you shall give me but twelve pence a day, Master Primero your a friend, and I'll use you so, 'tis got up at your house in a afternoon i'faith, the hire of the who'll month: yea most think I can distinguish spirits and put a difference between you and others: you pay no more i'faith.
I can have offered you no less, myself.
Tut, a man most use a friend, as a friend may use him; your house has been a sweet house to me, both for pleasure and profit: i'll give you your due, omne tulit punctum, you have always kept fine punks in your house, that's for pleasure, qui miscuit utile dulci, and I have had sweet pawns from 'em, that's for profit now?
You flatter, you flatter sir Gallant? but whist, here she enters; I prithee question her? oh you're welcome.
Its this you new scholar Master Primero?
Marry its her sir.
I'll commend your judgement in a wench while I live, that face will get money i'faith, 'twill be a get penny I warrant you? got to? your fortune was choice pretty Bliss to fall into the regard of so kind a Gentleman.
I hope so sir.
See, what his care has provided already for you, you'll be simply set o' to the world: if you'll have that care now to deserve his pains oh that will be acceptable: and these be the Rudiments you most chiefly point at: to counterfeit cunningly, to wind in gentlemen with pourefull attraction, to keep his house in name and custom, to dissemble with your own brother, never to betray your followed imperfections, nor lay open the state of their bodies to strangers, to believe those that give you, to gull those that believe you, to laugh at all under Taffeta, and these be your rudiments.
there's e'en all i faith, we'll trouble you with no more, nay you shall live at ease enough: for nimming away jewels and favours from Gentlemen (which are your chief veils) hope that will come naturally enough to you, I need not instruct you, you'll have that with, I trussed to make the most of your pleasure.
I hope one's mother-wit will serve for that sir.
Oh properest of all wench: it most be a she wit that does those things,& life mother was quick enough at it in her days.
give me leave sister to examine you upon 2. or 3. particulars: and you make you ready be no ashamed, hers noon but friends— are you a maid.
Yes, in the last quarter sir.
Very proper, that e'en going o', a maid in the last quarter, that's a whore in the first;— let me see, new moon on Thursday, she'll be chande by that time too; are you willing to pleasure gentlemen?
We are all borne to pleasure our country forsooth.
Excellent, can you carry yourself cunningly, and seem often holy.
Oh fear not that sir, my friends were all puritanes.
I'll near try her further.
She's done well i'faith, I fear not now to turn her lose to any gentleman in Europe.
You need not sir of her own accord, I think she'll be lose enough without turning— Arthur.
Here sir.
Go make haste, shift her into that suit presently.
It shall be done.
Arthur do't neatly Arthur?
Feared not sir.
Fellow him wench.
With all my heart sir—.
But master
In what are we forgetful all this while?
In what?
The wooing business man.
Heart that's true.
The Gallants will prevent vs.
Are you certain.
I can avouch it there's a general meeting,
at the deceased knights house this afternoon
there's rivalship enough.
N doubt in that?
Would either thou or I might bear her from 'em.
My hopes are not yet faint.
Nor my.
Tut man?
nothing in women's hearts sooner win place,
than a brave o' side and a impudent face?
And for both those we'll fit it.
I if the devil be not in't, make halt:
I follow straight, vanish thou Fog, and Sink beneath our brightness,
Abashed at the splendour of such beams:
We scorn thee, base eclipser of our glories,
That wouldst have hid our shine from mortals' eyes,
Now Gallants, I am for you, I and perhaps before you?
You can appearce but glorious from yourselves,
And have your beams but drawn from your own light,
But mine from many, many make me bright.
Here's a diamond that sometimes gracest the finger of a countesse, here sits a Ruby that near lines blushing for the Party that pawned it: here a sapphire, O providence and fortune! my beginning was so poor, I would fain forget it, and I take the only course, for I scorn to think on't. Slave to a trencher: observer of a saltseller, privy to nothing, but a close-stool, or such unsavoury secret: but as I strive to forget the days of my serving, so I shall once remember the first step of my raising, for having hardly raked five mark together, I rejoiced so in that small stock, which most providently I ventured by water to Blackwall, among fishwives, and in small time, what by weekly return, and gainful restitution it rise to a great body, beside a dish of fish for a present, that stately preserved me a sevennight: nor ceased it there but drew on greater profit, for I was held religious by those that do profess like abstinence, and was full often secretly supplied, by charitable Catholics, Who censured me sincerely abstinate, when merely I for hunger nor for zeal, eat up the fish, & put their alms to use ha!, ha ha; but those times are run out, and for my sake, zealous dissemblance has since fared the worse;— let me see now, whose cloak shall I wear today to continue change,
Oh— Arthur.
Here sir.
Bring down sir Oliver Needies taffeta cloak. & Beaver hat, I am sure he is fast enough? & Andrew Lucifer's Rapier and dagger, in the knight's ward, with the embossed girdle and hangers, for he's in his third sweat by this time, sipping of the doctor's bottle, or picking the ninth part of a Rack of mutton dry roasted, with a leash of nightcaps on his head like the pope's triple crown, and as many pillows crushed to his back, with oh the needles, for he got the pox of a Semster, and it pricked so much more naturally,— quick Arthur quick, now,
To the deceased knight's daughter
Whom many Gallants sue to, I 'mongst many: for
Since impudence gains more respect than virtue,
And come them blood which few can now deny,
who'd your chief Gallants, then but such as I.
You do your Beauty's injury, sweet virgin,
To lose the time they must rejoice in youth:
There's no perfection in a woman placed
But wastes itself though it be never wasted,
Then judge your wrongs yourself.
Good Master Fitsgrave?
Through sorrow for the knight my father's death,
(Whose being was the perfections of my joy:
And crown of my desires,) I cannot yet,
But forcedly, on marriage fix my heart,
Yet heaven forbid I should deject your hopes
Conceive not of me so uncharitably,
I should bely my soul if I should say,
You are the man I never should affect:
I understand you thus far, you're a Gentleman
Whom your estate and virtues may command
To a far worthier breast, than this of mine,
O cease, I dare not hear such blasphemy,
What is without you worthy, I neglect,
In you is placed the worth that I respect:
Vouchsafe unequalled Virgin whereon I justly kept,
Accept this worthless favour from your servants arm, the hallowed beads,
The true and perfect number of my sighs.
Mine cannot equal yours, yet in exchange, accept and wear it for my sake.
even as my I'll rate it?
Heart? Fitsgrave in such bosom single-loves?
So close, and private with her?
Observe hem, he grows proud and bold?
Why was not this a general meeting?
By her own consent, Death how I could taste his blood?
See, the gentlemen, at my request do all present themselves?
Manifold blisses wait on her desire,
whose beauty and whose mind so many honour?
I take your wishes thankfully?— kind gentlemen!
all here assembled, over whose long suits,
I near insulted,
Not like that common sickness of our sex,
Grew proud in the abundance of my suitors,
Or number of the days they sued unto me.
Dutiful sorrow for my father's death,
Not wilful coyness hath my hours detained
So long in silence:
I'm left to mine own choice, so much the more
My care calls on me If I err through love,
'tis I must chide myself, I cannot shift
The fault unto my parents, they're at rest,
And I shall sooner err through love, than wealth.
Good.
Excellent.
That likes me well?
Hope still.
And my affections do pronounce you all.
Worthy their pure and most entire deserts,
Yet they can choose but one,
Nor do I dissuade any of his hopes,
(Because my heart is not yet thoroughly fixed,
On marriage, or the man,)
But crave the quiet respite of one month,
The month unto this night, against which time,
I do invite you all to that election,
Which on my unstained faith, and Virgin promise,
Shall light amongst no strangers, but yourselves:
May this content you?
Glad, and content.
'Tis a good time to leave,
Till then, commend us to your gentlest thoughts.
Enough.
Ough.
Hist, master Hist.
Boy? how now?
Look you sir.
Her Chain of Pearl.
I snecked it away finely.
Active boy, thy masters best revenue, his life & soul
Thou keep'st 'em both together? whip, away,
Fall back, fall belly, I must be maintained,
Hope is no purchase, nor care I if I miss her, why I rank
In this design with gallants, there's full cause
Policy invites me to it, 'tis not for love, or for her sake alone:
It keeps my state suspectless and unknown.
Their looks run through, & through me, & the stings
Of their Snake-hissing whispers pierced my hearing:
They're mad she graced me with one private minute,
Above their fortunes, I have observed 'em often,
Most spitefully aspected toward my happiness,
Beyond all others: but the cause I know not,
A quiet month the Virgin has enclosed
Unto herself: suitors stand without till then,
In which space cunningly I'll wind myself,
Into their Bosoms. I have bethought the shape,
Some credulous Scholar, easily infected
With fashion▪ time, and humour. unto such
Their deepest thoughts, will like to wanton fishes,
Play above water, and be all parts seen:
For since at their envy pines I'll see
Whether their lives from touch of blame sit free.
Mistress Newcut, welcome, here will be choice of Gallants for you anon.
Its all clear, may I venture? am I not seen of the wicked?
Strange absurdity, that you should come into my house and ask if you be not seen of the wicked, push, I take't unkindly i'faith, what think you of my house, 'tis no such common receptacle.
Forgive me sweet master Primero, I can be content to have my pleasure as much as another, but I most have a care of my credit, I would not be seen; any thing else; my husbands at Sea, and a woman shall have a ill report in this world let her carry herself never so secretly: you know't master Primero: and what choice of Gallants be they? will they be proper Gentlemen think you?
Nay sure they are as proper as they will be already.
I most have choice you know, I come for no gain, but for sheer pleasure and affection.
You see your old spy-hole yonder, take you stand, please your own eye, I'll work it so, the Gallants shall present themselves before you and in the most conspicuous fashion.
That's all I can desire— till better come? look you.
What mean you Lady?
A trifle sir, to bvy you silver Spurs: good sir accept it.
Silver Spurs, a pretty emblem, mark it, all her gifts are about riding still; the other day she sent me Boothose wrought in silk and gold, now silver spurs; well, go the ways, thou'rt as profitable a spirit as ere lighted into my house; come Ladies come, 'tis late, to Music, when?
You're best command us: sir, our pimp's grown proud.
To fools, and strangers these are Gentlewomen
of sort, and worship: Knights heirs, great in portions,
Boarded here for their Music,
And often time 'tas been so cunningly carried,
That I have had two stolen away at once,
And married at Savoy and proved honest shopkeepers;
And I may safely swear they practised Music:
Their natural at pricksong, a small mist
Will dazzle a fools eye, and that's the world,
So I can thump my hand upon the table,
With a Austere grace and cry 1 2 and 3,
Fret, stamp and curse, foh 'twill pass well for me?
How now sirrah?
They're coming in sir,& strangers in their company,
Tune apace Ladies, be ready for the Song sirrah?
Nay I beseech you gallants be more inward with this,
Gentleman his parts deserve it,
Whence come he sir?
Piping hot from the University, he smells of buttered loaves yet, a excellent scholar, but the arrantest Ass, for this our Solicitor, he's a rare fellow five and forty mile hence, believe that: his friends are of the old fashion, all in their graves, and now has he the leisure to fallow all fashions, ply the Brothels, Practice salutes and Cringes.
Oh!
Now dear acquaintance,
I'll bring you to see fashions.
What house its this sir?
Oh of great name here music its professed,
Here sometimes Ladies practise, and the meanest,
Daughters to men of worship,
Whom Gentlemen, such as ourselves may visit,
Court, clip and exercise our wits upon,
It its a professed courtesy.
A pretty recreation i'faith.
I seldom saw so few here, you shall have'em sometimes in every corner of the house, with their Viols betwixt their legs, and play the sweetest strokes 'twould e'en filch your soul almost out of your bosom.
Pax on't: we spoil ourselves for want of these things at University?
You have no such natural happiness, let's draw near,
Gentlemen you are all most respectively welcome:
We are bold and insatiate Suitors sir to the breath of your music, & the dear sight of those Ladies.
And what our poor skill can invite you to,
You are kindly welcome: you must pardon 'em Gentlemen,
Virgins and bashful, besides new beginners,
'tis not a whole month since they were first entered.
seven year in my knowledge.
They blush at their very lessons, they will not endure,
To hear of a Stop, a Prick, or a Semiquaver,
O out upon you:
La I tell you, you'll bear me witness Gentlemen,
If their complaints come to their parents ears,
Their words of Art, I teach 'em nought but Art.
Why 'tis most certain.
For all Scholars know, that Musica est Ars.
O beastly word?
Look to the Ladies, Gentlemen;
Kiss again?
Come another?
this a good Interim?
what have you done sir?
why? what have I done,
Saw you their stomachs queasy, and come with such gross meat!
Why is't not lattin sir,
Latin? Why then let the next to't be lattin too:
So enough?
Nay I can assure you thus far, I that never knew the language have heard so much that Ars, is lattin for Art, and it' may well be too, for there's more art in't now a days than ever was:
is't possible? I am sorry than I have followed it so far.
A Scholar call you him,
Music must not jar; the offence is satisfied, come to the Song, begin sir.
Not a whole month since you were entered Ladies?
None that shall see their cunning will believe it,
It is no affliction Gentlemen?
I care not much i'faith, if I write down to my father presently, to send up my sister in all haste, that I may place her here at this Music school.
Slid 'tis the fool my cousin, I would not for the value of three recreations he had seen me here?
How like you your new prize;
Pray give me leave, I have not yet sufficiently admired her
My wits must not stand idle, 'slife he's in a sick trance?
A cheat or two among these mistresses,
Would not be ill bestowed, I affect none,
But for my prey such are their affections,
I know it, how could drabs and cheaters live else,
Then since the world roll on dissimulation,
I'll be the first dissembler.
Prithee love, comfort, choice, my only wish in thee
I am confined, deny me any thing a slight chain of pearl,
Nay an't be but slight—
Being denied,
I prize it slight; but given me by my love,
Light shall not be so dear unto my eye;
Mine eye unto the body as the gift,
How have I power to deny this to you,
That command all my fortunes are thy servants,
And thou the Mistress both of them and me.
The truest that ere breathed.
To a Gentleman,
That thus so long and has so sincerely loved you,
As I myself, near was less pity shown.
Why I never was held cruel.
But to me.
Nor to you.
Go too, 'tas scared you much,
I'm sorry your conceit is so unkind,
To think me so.
When had I other argument,
I've often tendered you my love and service,
And that in no mean fashion:
Yet were you near that requiteful Mistress,
That graced me with one favour,
Slight, not so much as such a pretty ring, pax on't,
T'as almost broke my heart.
Has took it off, 'sfoot master Bouser,
Nay where a man loves most, there to be scanted.
My Ring, come, come.
What reckon I a Satin gown or two,
If she were wise.
Life my Ring sir, come.
Have you the face i'faith.
Give me my Ring.
Prithee hence, by this light you get none on't.
How?
I hold your favours of more pure esteem,
Than to part from 'em, faith I do,
howe'er you think of me.
Push, pray sir,
Hark you, go too, you have lost much by unkindness, go your ways.
'sfoot.
But yet there's no time past, you may redeem it.
Come, I cannot miss it i'faith; beside the Gentleman that bestowed it on me, swore to me it cost him twenty nobles.
Twenty nobles, pox of twenty nobles,
But you must cost me more, you pretty villain,
Ah you little rogue.
Come come, I know you're but in jest,
In jest no you shall see.
No way will get it.
As good give it him now, and hope for somewhat.
I ru loue made iest.
I did but try thy faith, how fast thou'dst hold it,
Now I see a woman may venture worthy favours to thy trust,
and have 'em truly kept, and I protest, had I drawn't from thee,
I should near ha' loved thee, I know that.
'sfoot I was near so wronged in my life,
Think you I am in jest with you, what with my love?
I could find lighter subjects you shall see,
And time will show, how much you injure me.
The Ring were't thrice worth I freely give,
For I know you will requite it.
Will I live.
Enough.
Why this was well come off now,
Where's my old Servingman? not yet returned,
Oh here he peeps: now sirrah?
May it please your worship— they're done artificially i'faith boy.
Both the great Beakers.
Both Lad.
just the same size.
I and the marks as just.
So fall off respectively now.
My Lord desires your worship of all love.
His Lordship must hold me excused till morning,
I'll not break company tonight,
Where sup we Gallants?
At mermaid.
Sup there who list, I have forsworn the house.
Serving. For the truth is this plot must take effect At Mitre.
Faith I'm indifferent.
So are we Gentlemen.
Name the place master Goldstone.
Why the Mitre in my mind,
For neat attendance, diligent boys and, push, excels it fair.
Agreed, the Mitre then: Boy, some goodness toward, the Boys whipped away.
The jewel, heart the jewel.
How now sir? what moved you?
Nothing sir, a spice of poetry, a kind a fury,
A disease runs among Scholars.
Mass it made you stamp.
Who, till make some stamp and stare, make a strange noise,
Curse swear, beat Tire-men, and kick players boys,
The effects are very fearful.
Bless me from't.
Oh you need not fear it sir— hell of this luck.
Hark, he's at it again.
Some pageant plot, or some device for the Tiltyard:
Disturb him not.
How can I gain her love, when I have lost her favour.
What money hast about thee?
Look you sir, I must be feign to pawn a fair Stone here, for ordinary expenses: a pox of my tenants, I give 'em twenty days after the quarter, and they cut out forty.
Why you might take the forfeiture of their leases then.
I know I might, but what's their course? the rogues comes me up all together, with Geese and Capons, and petitions in pigs shouts, which would move any man i'faith, were his stomach near so great, and to see how pitifully the pullen will look, it makes me after relent, and turn my anger into a quick fire to roast 'em— nay touched and spare it not.
'tis right, well, what does your worship borrow of this sir?
The Stone's twenty nobles.
Nay hardly.
As I am a right Gentleman.
It comes near it indeed: well here's five pound in gold upon't.
'twill serve, and the Ring safe and secret,
As a virgin's.
I wish no higher: what Gallants▪ are you constant,
Does the place hold?
The Mitre.
Sir, in regard of our continued boldness, & trouble, (which love to your Music hath made us guilty of) shall we entreat your worship's company, with these sweet Ladies, your professed Scholars, to take part of a poor Supper with myself and these Gentlemen at the Mitre.
Pray master Primere.
I beseech you sir let it be so.
Oh pardon me sweet Gentlemen, the world's apt to censure, I have the charge of them, they're left in trust, they're Virgins, and I dare not hazard their fames, the least touch mars 'em, and what would their right worshipful parents think, if the report should fly to them, that they were seen with Gentlemen in a Tavern.
All this may be prevented, what serves your coach for,
They may come coached and masked.
You put me to't sir,
Yet I must say again, I fear the Drawers,
And vintner's boys will be familiar with them,
And think 'em Mistresses.
There are those places where respect seems slighter,
More censure is belonging to the Mitre, you know that sir?
Gentlemen you prevail.
we'll all expect you there.
And we'll not fail.
The devil will near dissemble with them so, as you for them.
Come sir.
What else, let's go,
How cheer you sir?
Faith like the Moon, more bright,
decreased in body▪ but remade in light,
Here thou shalt share some of my brightness with me.
By my faith they are comfortable beams sir.
Come, where have you spent the time now from my sight,
I'm jealous of thy action.
Push I did but walk, a turn or two in the garden.
What made you there?
Nothing but cropped a flower.
Some woman's honour I believe.
Foh, is this a woman's honour.
Much about one?
When both are plucked their sweetness is soon gone.
prithee be true to me.
When did I fail.
Yet I am ever doubtful, that your sin.
I do account the world but as my spoil, to adorn thee,
My love is artificial to all others,
But purity to thee,— dost thou want gold?
Here take this chain of pearl, supply thyself,
Be thou but constant, firm and just to me,
Rich heirs shall want, ere want come near to thee.
Upon thy lip I seal sincerity.
Was this your vow to me?
Pox, what's a kiss to be quite rid of her, she's sued so long I was ashamed of her, 'twas but her cheek I kissed neither, to save her longing.
'tis not a kiss I weigh.
Had you weighed this,
T'had lacked above five ounces of a true one:
No kiss that ere weighed lighter.
'tis thy love that I suspect.
My love, why by this,— what shall I swear by?
Swear by this jewel, keep thy oath, keep that.
By this jewel then, no creature can be perfect in my love, but thy dear self.
I rest.
Ha, ha, ha, let's laugh at 'em sweet soul.
ay, they may laugh at me, I was a novice, and believed your oaths,
Why what do you think of me, make I no difference,
Turn seven years prostitution, and seven days,
Why you're but in the wain of a maid yet:
You wrong my health in thinking I love them,
Do not I know their populous imperfections.
Why they cannot live till Easter, let 'em show
The fairest side toth' world like hundreds more, whose clothes
E'en stand upright in silver, when their body,
Are ready to drop through 'em, such there be,
They may deceive the world, they near shall me.
Forgive my doubts, and for some satisfaction were this ring,
From which I vow de near, but to thee, to part.
With which thou ever bindest me to thy heart.
My pocket picked, this was no brothelhouse,
A music school; damnation has fine shapes,
I paid enough forth' song, I have lost a jewel
To me more precious than their souls to them,
That gave consent to filch it, i'll hunt hard:
Wast time and money, trace and wheel about,
But I will find these secret mischiefs out-how now, what's he:
Oh a servant to my love, being thus disguised,
I'll learn some news, now sir; you belong to me.
I Do sir, but I cannot stay to say, so, nay good sir detain me not I am going in all haste to inquire or lay wait for a chain of pearl nimmed out of her pocket the fift of November, a dismal day.
Ha a chain of pearl sayst thou.
A chain of pearl sir, which one Master Fitsgrave a gentleman and a suitor fastened upon her as a pledge of his love.
Ha?
Urge me no more I have no more to say,
Your friend Ieronimo Bedlam.
Thou'rt a mad fellow indeed, some comfort yet,
That's hers is missing too, I feel my soul at much more ease: both stolen.
When griefs have partners they are better borne.
Oh the parting of us twain,
Hath caused me mickle pain, and I shall near be married,
Until I see my muggle again.
Hist?
Ha.
The nimble gentleman, in the celestial stockings.
Has the best smock fortune, to be beloved of women?
Valle loo lo lille lo lilo, vallee loo lee lo lillo.
Vallee loo lo lillee lilo, Vallee loo le lo lil'o.
Ah sweet gentleman, he keeps it up stately.
Well held i'faith sir— mass and now I remember too, I think you near saw my little banqueting, box above, since I altered it.
Why have you altered that?
Oh divinely sir: the pictures are all new run over again.
Fie.
For what had the painter done think you, drew me, Venus naked, which is the grace of a man's Room you know, & when he had done, drew a number of Oaken-leaves before her, had not lawn been a hundred times softer, made a better show, and been more gentlewoman like?
More ladylike, a great dea'e.
Come, you shall see how 'tis altered now? I do not think but you'll like her.
Where be your liveries?
They attend without.
Go, call the Coach! Gentlemen, you have excelled in kindness as we in boldness.
So you think amiss sir?
Kind Ladies we commit you to sweet dreams,
ourselves unto the fortune of the dice, dice ho?
You rest firm mine.
E'en all my soul to thee.
You keep your vows.
Why do I breath, or see?
Is your love constant.
I to none but these now gone, ay, now I love nor them nor thee, 'slife, I should be cloyed, should I love one in three.
Oh here's master Bowser now.
Save you sweet Gentlemen.
Sweet master Bowser? welcome?
When come these dice.
Yet anon, anon sir.
Hast thou shown art in 'em.
You shall be judge sir, here be the Tavern Beakers, And here peep out the fine Alchemy knaves, looking like, well sir, most of our Gallants, that seem what they are not.
Peace villain, am not I in presence.
Why that puts me in mind of the jest sir.
Again, you quarter her.
Nay, compare 'em, and spare 'em not.
The bigness of the boar, just the same size, The marks, no difference: away, put money in thy pocket, and offer to draw in upon the least occasion.
I am no babe sir.
Hist.
What's the matter now?
Give me a pair of false Dice, ere you go.
Pax on't, you're so troublesome too, you cannot remember a thing before, if I stay a little longer, I shall be stayed anon.
Here be Dice for your worships.
Oh come, come.
The Vintner himself,
Ilo shift away these beakers by a slight.
Master Goldstone?
How now you conjuring rascal?
Bless your good worship, you're in humours methinks.
Humours: say that again.
I said no such word sir,— would I had my beakers out on's fingers.
What's thy name Vintner?
Iack and please your worship.
Turn Knight like thy companions, scoundrel, live upon usury, wear thy gilt spurs at thy girdle for fear of slubbering.
O no, I hope I shall have more grace than so sir:
Pray let me help your worship.
Cannot I push 'em together without your help?
O I beseech your worship, they're the two standards of my house.
Standards, there lie your Standards.
Good your worship; I am glad they are out of his fingers, my wife shall lock 'em up presently, they shall see no sun this twelvemonth's day for this trick.
Let me come to the sight of your Standards again.
Your worship shall pardon me, now you shall not see 'em in haste I warrant ye.
I do not desire't; ha, ha.
Why master Goldstone?
I am for you Gallants— Master Boxeer cry you mercy sir, why supped you from us?
Faith sir, I met with a couple of my fellow pupils at University, & so we renewed our acquaintance & supped together.
Fie, that's none of the newest fashion, I must tell you that master Bouser, you must never take acquaintance of any ath' University, when you are at London, nor any of London when you're at University you must be more forgetful i'faith, every place ministers his acquaintance abundantly.
He tells you true sir.
I warrant you here's a Gentleman will near commit such an absurdity.
Who I, no, 'tis well known, if I be disposed, I'll forget any man in a sevennight, and yet look him in the face: nay let him ride but ten mile from me, and come home again, it shall be at my choice whether I'll remember him or no, I have tried that.
This is strange sir.
'Tis as a man gives his mind too 't sir: and now you bring me in; I remember 'twas once my fortune to be cozened of all my clothes, and with my clothes my money; a poor Shepherd pitying me, took me in, and relieved me.
'Twas kindly done of him i'faith,
Nay you shall see now, 'twas his fortune likewise not long after, to come to me in much distress i'faith, and with weeping eyes, and do you think I remembered him.
You could not choose.
By my troth not I, I forgot him quite, and never remembered him to this hour.
And yet knew who he was.
As well as I know you i'faith—
'Tis a gift given to some above others.
To fools and knaves they never miss on't.
does any make such a wonder at this; why alas 'tis nothing to forget others; what say you to those that forget themselves?
Nay then to Dice: come set me Gallants, set.
ay, fall too 't Gentlemen. I shall here some news from some of you anon: I have thouart to know which loose and near look on; I'll be ready with all the worst money I can find about me, Arthur!
Here sir.
Stand ready.
Fear not me sir.
These are mine sir.
Here's a washed Angel, it shall away: Here's Mistress Rose-noble has lost her maidenhead, cracked in the Ring, shoe's good enough for gamesters, and to pass from man to man: for gold presents at Dice your harlot, in one hour won and lost thrice, every man has a fling at her.
Again pax of these dice
'tis ill to curse the dead sir.
Mew, where should I wish the pox, but among bones.
He tells you right sir.
I near have any luck at these odd hands,
None here to make us fix— why Master Frip.
I am very well here I thank you sir, I had rather be telling my money myself, then have others count it for me; 'tis the scurviest music in the world methinks, to hear my money jingle in other men's pockets, I never had any mind to't i'faith.
'slud play six or play four, I'll play no more.
'sfoot you see, there's none here to draw in.
Rather than you should be destitute gentlemen, i'll play my ten pound, if my masters worship will give me leave.
Come.
He shall, he shall.
Pray excuse me Gentlemen: 'sfoot how now goodman Rascal, what? because you served my Grandfather when he went Ambassador, & got some ten pound byth' hand, has that put such spirit in you, to offer to draw in among Gentlemen of worship, knave.
Pray sir, let's entreat so much for once.
'Tis a usual grace i'faith sir,
you've many gentlemen will play with their men.
I and with their Maids to i'faith.
Good sir give him leave.
Yes, come, and you be weary on't, I pray draw near sir.
Not so sir.
Come fool, fear nothing, I warrant toe, h'as given thee leave, stand here by me, come now, set round Gentlemen, set,
How the poor fellow shakes: throw lustily man.
At all gentlemen.
Well said i'faith.
they're all mine.
By my troth I am glad the fellow has such luck, it will encourage him well.
At my masters worship alone.
Now sit slave?
At my masters worship alone.
So, saucy rascal.
At my masters worship alone.
You're a rogue and will be ever be one?
By my troth Gentlemen at all again for once.
Take 'em to them boy, take 'em to thee, thou'rt worthy of 'em i'faith.
Gentlemen faith I am angry with you, go and suborn my knave again me here; to make him proud & peremptory.
Troth that's but your conceit sir, the fellows an honest fellow and knows his duty, I dare swear for him.
Heart, I am sick already.
Whether goes Master—
Play on, i'll take my turn sir?— boy?
Master.
Pist?— a supply, carry't closely my little fooker,— how much—
Three pound sir.
Good boy,— take out another lesson? how now gentlemen?
Devils in't did you ere see such a hand?
I set you these three angels.
My master may set high?— for all his stakes are drawn out of other men's pockets.
As I said gentlemen?
Dues Ace.
At all your right worshipful worships.
Death and vengeance!
Hell, darkness,
Hold sir.
Master Goldstone.
Hinder me not sweet gentlemen— you rascal— I banish thee the board.
I'faith but you shall not sir?
Touch a Die and thou darest, come you in with your lousy ten pound, you slave among gentlemen of worship, and win thirty at a hand.
Why will you kick again luck sir?
As long as the poor fellow ventures the loss of his own money, who can be offended at his fortunes.
I have a Master here? many a Gentleman would be glad to see his man come forward aha.
Pray be persuaded sir:
'Slife, here's none cuts my throat in play but he I have observed it, an unluckily slave 'tis.
methinks his luck's good enough sir.
Upon condition Gentlemen that I may ever bar him from the board hereafter I am content to wink at him.
Faith, use your own pleasure hereafter, has won our money now! come toth' table sir your master's friends with you.
Pray Gentlemen.
The fiends in't I think, I left a fair chain of pearl at my lodging too, like an ass and near remembered it; that would ha' been a good pawn now, speak what do you lend upon these Master Frip? I care not much if you take my Beaver hat too, for I perceive 'tis dark enough already, & it does but trouble me here.
Very well sir why now I can lend you 3. pound sir—
prithee do't quickly then?
There 'tis in six angels.
Very compendiously.
Here Arthur, run away with these presently, i'll enter 'em intoth' shop-book tomorrow. Item one gilt hatched rapier and dagger, with a fair embroidered girdle, and hangers, with which came also a Beaver hat, with a correspondent band.
Push, i'faith sir your to blame, you have snibbed the poor fellow too much, he can scarce speak, he cleaves his words with sobbing.
Haff haff, haff, haff at all Gentlemen.
Ah rogue, i'll make you know yourself.
At the fairest.
Out i'faith— two Aces.
I am glad of that, come pay me all these goodman cloak-bag:
Why are you the fairest sir?
You need not doubt of that sir— five. angels you Scoundrel.
Fie ath these Dice, not one hand tonight,— there they go Gentlemen at all i'faith.
Pay all with 2. treas and a quater.
All curses follow 'em, pay yourselves withal, i'll pawn myself to't, but i'll see a hand tonight, not once hold in? here Master Frip, lend me your hand, quick, quick, So.
What do you borrow of this doublet now?
near saw the world three days.
Go too, in regard your a continual customer, i'll use you well, and pleasure you with five angels upon't.
Let me not stand too long i'th' cold for them:
Had ever country gentleman such fortune?
All swooped away I'd, need repair toth' Brokers,
If you be in that mind sir there sits a Gentleman will furnish you upon any pawn, as well as the publickst broker of 'em all:
Say you so sir, there's comfort in that i'faith.
Item, upon his orange tawny satin doublet, five angels,
But by your leave sir? next comes the breeches,—.
Oh I have tongue fit for any thing—
Saving your tail sir? 'tis given me to understand that you are a Gentleman i'th' hundred, and deal in the premises aforesaid.
Master Bungler, Master Bungler, you're mightily mistook, I am content to do a gentleman a pleasure for once, so his pawn be neat and sufficient.
Why what say you to my Grandfathers seal ring here
I marry sir, this is somewhat like.
Nay view it well, an ancient arms, I can tell you.
What's this sir?
The great codpiece with nothing in't.
How?
The word about it, parturiunt montes.
What's that I pray sir?
You promise to mount us.
And belike he was not so good as his word.
So it should seem by the Story, for so our names came to be Bunglers.
A lamentable hearing that so great a house should shrink and fall to ruin.
Two quatres and yet lose it heart, boy?▪ i'faith? what is't?
Five pound sir.
By my troth this boy goes forward well, ye shall see him come to his preferment i'th' end!
Why how now, whose's that gentlemen, a bargeman?
I never have any luck Gallants, till my doublets off, I'm not half nimble enough, at this old finquanter drivelbeard:
Your worship must pay me all these sir?
There, and feast the devil with 'em.
Hell gnaw these dice.
What do you give over Gallants.
Is't not time.
I protest, I have but one angel left to guide me home to my lodging.
How much thinkst?
Some fourscore angels, sir.
Peace, we'll join powers anon, and see how strong we are in the whole number, mass, yond guilt Goblet stands so full in mine eye, the whoreson tempts me, it comes like cheese after a great feast, to digest the rest, he will hardly scape me i'faith I see that by him already; back for a parting blow now,--- boy?
Anon anon sir:
Fetch a pennyworth of soft wax to seal letters.
I will sir?
Nay had not I strange casting, thrice together, 2. quatres and a dews.
Why was not I as often haunted with two treas, and a quater:
there's wax for your worship— anon, anon, sir.
Screen me a little you whoreson old cross biter.
Why what's the business? fill chiton hob Goblet Goblet.
And what has master Bowser lost?
Faith not very deeply sir, enough for a scholar, some half a score royals.
'sfoot I have lost as many with spurs at their heels.
Come Gallants shall we stumble:
What's o'clock.
Here's none on't Dick, the Goblets carried down.
Nay 'tis upon the point of three, boy, Drawer, what's to be done sirs?
All's paid, and your worships are welcome, Only there's a Goblet missing Gentlemen, and cannot be found about house.
How a Goblet:
What manner a one.
A guilt Goblet sir, of an indifferent size.
'sfoot I saw such a one lately.
It cannot be found now sir.
Came there no strangers here?
No sir.
This a marvelous matter, that a Goblet should be gone, and none but we in the room, the loss is mere all, here as we are; keep the door Vintner.
No I beseech your worship.
By my troth Vintner we'll have a privy search for this; What? we are not all one woman's children.
I beseech ye Gentlemen, have not that conceit of me, that I suspect your worships.
Tut, you are an Ass; do you know every man's nature: There's a Broker i'th' company.
'slife you have not stole the Goblet, boy, have you?
Not I sir.
I was afraid,— 'tis a good cause i'faith, let each man search his fellow, we'll begin with you.
I shall save somebody a labour Gentlemen, for I'm half searched already.
I thought the Goblet had hung here i'faith— none here, nor here.
Seek about flower,— What was the Goblet worth vintner.
Three pound ten shillings sir no more.
Pox on't Gentlemen, 'tis but Angels a piece, it shall be a brace of mine, rather than I would have our reputations breathed upon by all comers, for you must think they'll talk on't in all companies; such a night, in such a company, such a Goblet, 'sfoot it may grow to a gangrene in our credits and be incurable.
Faith I am content.
So am I.
There's my Angel too.
So, and mine, I'll tell thee what, the missing of this goblet has dismayed the Gentlemen much.
I am sorry for that sir.
Yet they send thee this comfort by me, if they see thee but rest satisfied, and depart away contented, which will appear in thy countenance; not three times thrice the worth of the Goblet shall hang between them and thee, both in their continual custom, and all their acquaintances.
I thank their worships all--- I am satisfied.
Say it again: do you hear Gentlemen?
I thank your worships all I am satisfied.
Why la, was not this better than hazarding our reputations upon trifles, and in such public as a Tavern, such a questionable place.
True.
Faith it was well thought on. Nay keep your way Gentlemen: I have sworn master Bowcer, I will be last i'faith----- Rascal the goblet.
Where sir?
Peep yond sir under.
Here sir.
My husband is rode from home, make us delay, I know if your will be as free as your horse, you will see me yet ere dinner: From Kingston this eleventh of November---- Ha? these women are such creatures such importunate sweet souls: they'll scarce give a man leave to be ready, that's their only fault i'faith, if they be once set upon a thing, why there's no removing of 'em, till their pretty wills be fulfilled— O pity thy poor oppressed client here sweet Cupid, that has scarce six hours vacation in a month, his causes hang in so many Courts, yet never suffer my French adversary, nor his big swollen confederates to overthrow me,--- Who without mercy would my blood carouse, And lay me in prison in a doctor's house:
Thy clemency great Cupid: peace, who comes here?
Sir Gallant, well encountered.
I both salute, and take my leave together.
Why whether so fast sir.
Excuse me pray, I'm in a little haste,
My horse waits for me.
What some journey toward?
A light one i'faith sir.
I am sorry that my business so commands me,
I cannot ride with you; but I make no question,
You have company enough.
Alas not any— nor do I desire it,
Why 'tis but to Kingston yonder.
O cry you mercy sir,
Scape but one reach, there's little danger thither.
True a little of Come-parke.
You've named the place sir, that's all I fear i'faith,
Farewell sweet master Taylbee,
This fell out happily; I'll call this purchase mine, before I greet him,
e'en where his fear lies most, there will I meet him: Boy.
Sir.
Walk my horse behind yond thicket, give a word, if you descry.
I have all perfect sir.
So, he cannot now be long: What with my boy's dexterity at Ordinaries, and my Geldings celerity over hedge and ditch, but we make pretty shift to rub out, a Gallant, for I have learned these principles.
Stoop thou toth' world, 'twill on thy bosom tread,
It stoops to thee, if thou advance thy head:
The mind being far more excellent than fate,
'tis fit our mind then be above our state;
Why should I write my catremitics in my brow,
To make them loathe me, that respect me now,
If every man were in his courses known;
Legs that now honour him, might spurn him down.
To conclude, nothing seems as it is but honesty, & that makes it so little regarded amongst us.
Eela, ha, ho.
The Boy: he's hard at hand, I'll cross him suddenly: and here he comes; stand.
Ha!
Deliver your purse sir.
I feared none but this place i'faith, nay when my mind gives me a thing once.
Quick, quick sir, quick.
I must dispatch three robberies yet ere night.
I'm glad you have such good doings by my troth sir.
You'll fare never a whit the better for your flattery I warrant you sir.
I speak sincerely, 'tis pity such a proper-parted gentleman should want; nor shall you, as long as I have't about me, nay search and spare not: there's a purse in my left pocket as I take it, with fifteen pound in gold in't, and there's a fair chain of pearl in the other: nay I'll deal truly with you; it grieves me i'faith when I see such goodly men in distress, I'll rather want it myself than they should go without it.
And that shows a good nature sir.
Nay though I say it, I have been always accounted a man of a good nature, I might have hanged myself ere this time else; Pray use me like a gentleman, take all, but injury not my body.
You must pardon me sir, I must a little play the Usurer, and bind you, for mine own security.
Alas there's no conscience in that sir, shall I enter into bond, and pay money too.
Tut, I must not be betrayed.
hear me but what I say sir, I do protest I would not be he that should betray a man, to be Prince of the world.
Mass that's the devil, I thank you heartily, for he's called prince ath' world.
You take me still at worst.
Swear on this sword then, to set spurs to your horse, not to look back, to give no marks to any passenger.
Marks, why I think you have left me near a penny sir.
I mean no marks of any.
I understand you sir.
Swear then.
i'faith I do sir:
Away.
I'm gone sir, by my troth of a fierce thief he seems to be a very honest Gentleman.
Why this was well adventured, trim a Gallant:
Now with a courteous and long thusting eye,
Let me behold my purchase, & try the soundues of my bones with laughter, how? is not this the chain of pearl I gave to that perjured harlot, 'tis, 'sfoot 'tis, the very chain, oh damned mistress, ha; and this the purse, which not five days before I sent her filled with fair spur-royals— heart; the very gold?— 'slife is this no robbery, how many oaths flew toward heaven,
Which near came half way thither; but like fire drakes,
Mounted a little, gave a crack, and fell;
Feigned oaths bound up to sink more deep to hell.
What folded papers this? death— 'tis her hand.
Master Taylbee, you know with what affection I love you, You do:
I count the world but as my prey to maintain you, The more dissembling quean you I must tell you,
I have sent you an embroidered purse here with fifty fair spur-royals in't— A pox on you for your labour wench: And I desire you of all loves to keep that chain of pearl from Master Pursnets sight—
He cannot strumpet, I behold it now, unto thy secret torture:
So fare thee well, but be constant and want nothing.
As long as I ha''t i'faith? methinks it should have gone so,— well; what a horrible age do we live in, that a man cannot have a quean to himself let him but turn his back the best of her is chipped away like a Court loaf, that when a man comes himself, has nothing but bombast; & these are 2. simple chippings here, does my boy pick, & I steal, to enrich myself, to keep her, to maintain him: why this is right the sequence of the world,— A. L. maintains her, she maintains a Knight, he maintains a Whore, she maintains a captain. So in like manner, the pocket keeps my boy, he keeps me, I keep her, she keeps him, it runs like quicksilver, from one to another; 'sfoot I perceive I have been the chief upholder of this Gallant all this while; it appears true, we that pay dearest for our pasture are ever likely worse-used, 'sfoot he has a Nag can run for nothing, has his choice, nay and gets by the running of him;— oh fine world strange devils, and pretty damnable affections.
Lela ha, ho?
There boy, again, what news there?
Master, pist, master?
How now boy.
I have descried a prize.
Another lad?
The gull, the scholar?
Master Bowser:
ay, comes along this way:
Without company.
As sure, as he is your own.
Back to thy place boy,
I have the luck today, to rob in safety:
Two precious cowards, whist: I hear him— stand
You lie, I came forth to go.
Deliver your purse.
'tis better in my pocket.
How now, at disputations, signor fool.
I've so much logic to confute a knave, a thief, a rogue-
Hold, hold, sir, and you be a gentleman hold, let me rise.
Heart 'tis the courtesy of his scarf unmasked him to me,
Above the lip by chance, i'll counterfeit,
Light, because I am a scholar, you think belike that scholars have no metal in 'em, but you shall find,— I have not done with you cousin.
As you're a Gentleman:
As you're a rogue?
Keep on upon your way sir:
You bade me stand?
I have been once down for that:
And then deliver?
Deliver me from you sir— oh pax on't, has wounded me Eela, ha, ho my horse, my horse boy:
Have you your boy so ready: oh thou world,
How art thou muffled in deceitful fonnes:
There's such a mist of these, and still hath been,
The brightness of true Gentry is scarce seen:
This journey was most happily assigned,
I have found him dross both in his means and mind: what
papers this he dropped? i'll look on't as I go.
A gull call you him, let me always set upon wisemen, they'll be afraid of their lives, they have a feeling of their iniquities, and knows what 'tis to die with fighting, 'sfoot this gull lays on without fear, or wit, how deep's it sayst thou boy?
By my faith three inches sir.
La, this was long of you, you rogue:
Of me sir.
Forgive me dear boy, my wound ached, and I grew angry, there's hope of life boy, is there not?
Puh, my life for yours.
A comfortable boy in man's extremes! I was near so afraid in my life but the fool would have seen my face, he had me at such advantage, he might have commanded my scarf, I scaped well there 'thas choked me; my reputation had been past recovery, yet live I unsuspected, and still fit for Gallants choice societies— but here I vow, if ere I see this Bowser when he cannot see me, either in by-lane, privilege place, Court, Alley, or come behind him when he's standing, or take him when he reels from a Tavern late, pissing again a conduit, Wall, or Gate, when he's in such a plight and clear from me, i'll do that I am ashamed to speak till then.
Nay read forward, I have found 3. of your Gallants, like your bewitching shame merely sophistical, there's your bawdgallant, your pocket-Gallant, & your Whore-Gallant.
Master Taylbee.
That's he
I count the world but as my prey, to maintain you?
That's just the phrase and still of 'em all, to him: they meet altogether in one effect, and it may well hold too, for they all jump upon one cause, subands lechery.
What shapes can flattery take, let me entreat you,
Both in the virgins right, and our good hopes
Since your hours are so fortunate, to proceed.
Why he's base that fairs, until he crown his deed.
See that dissembling devil, that perjured strumpet.
Welcome my soul's best wish,— oh out alas, thy arm bound in a scarf, I shall sown instantly,
Heart and i'll fetch you again in the same tune,
O my unmatched love, if any spark of life remain,
Look up, my comfort, my delight, my—
O good, o good?
The organ of her voice is tuned again,
There's hope in women, when their speech returns:
See like the Moon after a black eclipse,
She by degrees recovers her pure light:
How cheers my love?
As one new waked out of a deadly trance,
The fit scarce quiet.
'twas terrible for the time, I'd much ado to fetch you.
Shrew your fingers,
How came my comfort wounded, speak?
Faith in a fray last night.
In a fray? will you lose your blood so vainly,
Many a poor creature lacks it, tell me how?
What was the quarrel?
Loath to tell you that.
Loath to tell me.
Yet 'twas my cause of coming.
Why then, must not I know it:
Since you urge it, you shall,
You're a strumpet.
O news abroad sir?
Say you so.
Why you knew that the first night you lay with me.
Nay not to me, only but to the world.
Speak within compass man.
Faith you know none, you sail without.
I have the better skill then.
At my first step into a Tavern-room, to spy that chain of pearl wound on a stranger's arm you begged of me.
How, you mistook it sure.
By heaven the very self same chain.
O cry you mercy, 'tis true, i'd forgot it, 'tis S. George's day tomorrow, I lent it to my cousin only to grace his arm before his mistress.
Notable cunning.
And is this all now i'faith.
Not, I durst go further.
Why, let me never possess your love, if you see not that again a Thursday morning, I take't unkindly i'faith you should fall out with me for such a trifle.
Better and better.
Come, a kiss and friends.
Away.
By this hand I'll spoil your atme and you will not.
More for this then the Devil.
Ye, at your book so hard.
Against my will, are you there signor Logic,
A pox of you sir.
Why how now, what has fate sent us here, in the name of Venus' goddess of Cypress.
A freebooter's pink sir, three or four inches deep.
No more, that's conscionable i'faith.
Troth I'm sorry for't, pray how came it sir?
Faith by a paltry fray, in Colman-streete.
Coome-park he would say.
No less than three at once sir, made a Triangle with their Swords and Daggers, and all opposing me.
And amongst those three, only one hurt you sir.
Ex for ex.
Troth and I'll tell you what luck I had too, since I parted from you last.
What I pray?
The day you offered to ride with me, I wish now I'd had your company, 'sfoot I was set upon in Coome-park by three too.
Bah.
Robbed by this light of as much gold and jewels, as I valued at forty pound,
Sure Saturn is in the fifth house.
I know not that, he may be in the sixth and he will for me, I am sure they were in my pocket wheresoever they were: but I'll near refuse a Gentleman's company again when 'tis offered me, I warrant you.
I must remember you, 'tis Miter-night Ladies.
Mass 'tis indeed, Friday today, I'd quite forgot, when a woman's busy, how the time runs away.
Oh you'ave betrayed us both.
I understand you not.
Y'ave let him see, the chain of Pearl I gave you.
Who him: will you believe me,
By this hand he never saw it.
Upon a stranger's arm he swore to me,
Mass that may be, for the truth is i'faith,
I was robbed on't at Coome-park.
'twas that betrayed it,
I would had staid him,
He was no stranger, he was a thief i'faith,
For thieves will be no strangers.
How shall I excuse it?
Nay I have you fast enough boy, you rogue.
Good sir, I beseech you sir, let me go.
A pickpocket, nay you shall to Newgate luck you: is this your Boy sir.
How now boy? a monster? thy arm lined fast in another's pocket, where learned you that manners; what company have you kept o'late, that you are so transformed into a rogue, that shape I know not, believe me sir I much wonder at the alteration of this boy, where he should get this nature: as good a child to see to, and as virtuous, he has his Creed by heart, reads me his chapter duly every night; he will not miss you one tittle in the nine commandments.
There's ten of 'em.
I fear he skips over one; thou shalt not steal.
Mass like enough.
Else grace and memory, would quite abash the boy. Thou graceless imp, ah thou prodigious child, begot at some aec ipse, degenerate rogue. Shame to thy friends, and to thy master eke: how far digressing from the noble mind of thy brave Ancestors that lie in Marble, with their coat armours over 'em.
Had he such friends?
The boy is well descended, though he be a rogue and has no feeling on't, yet for my sake, & for my reputations seek not the blood of the boy, his near allied to many men of worship now yet living, a fine old man to his father, it would kill his heart i'faith, heed away like a Crysom.
Alas good gentleman?
Ah shameless villain, complain'st thou? dost thou want?
No, no, no, no.
Art not well clad, thy hunger well resisted.
Yes, yes, yes, yes,
But thou shalt straight to Bridewell.
Sweet master.
Liue vpon bread and water, and chap choake.
I beseech your worship.
Come I'll be his surety for once:
You shall excuse me indeed sir?
He will mend, a may prove an honest man for all this, I know gallant Gentlemen now, that have done as much as this comes too in their youth.
Say you so sir?
And as for Bridewell, that will but make him worse, a will learn more knavery there in one week, then will furnish him and his heirs for a hundredth year.
Deliver the boy.
Nay I tell you true Sir, there's none goes in there a quean, but she comes out an arrant whore I warrant you.
The boy comes not there for a million.
No you had better forgive him by ten parts.
True, but a must not know it comes from me, down a your knees you rogue, and thank this gentleman has got your pardon.
O I thank your worship:
A pox on you for a rogue, you put me to my set speech once a quarter:
Nay gentlemen you quite forget your hour, lead master Bowser
Let me go you're a dissembler
How.
Did not you promise me a new gown?
Did I not? yes faith did I, and thou shalt have it, go sirrah run for a Tailor presently.
Let me see for the colour now; Orange tawny, Peach colour, what sayst to a Watchet Satin?
O 'tis the only colour I affect.
A very orient colour, an't please your worships, I made a gown on't for a Gentlewoman other day, and it does passing well upon her.
A Watchet Satin gown.
There your worship left sir.
Laid about Tailor.
Very good Sir.
With four fair Laces.
That will be costly sir.
How you rogue costly, out ath'house, you slip-shod, sham-legged, brown-thread, penny-skeand rascal.
Nay my sweet love.
Hang him rogue, he's but a Botcher neither, come I'll send thee a fellow worth a hundred of this, if the slave were clean enough.
Who knocks.
A Christian: pray is not this master Taylbee's lodging, I was directed hither.
Yes, this is my masters lodging.
Cry you mercy sir. Is he yet stirring.
he's awake, but not yet stirring, for he played away half his clothes last night
My mistress commends her secrets unto him, and presents him by me with a new Satin suit here.
Mass that comes happily.
And she hopes the fashion will content him.
there's no doubt to be had of that sir— your mistress name I pray? you're much preciously welcome.
I thank you uncommonly sir.
The suit shall be accepted I warrant you sir.
That's all my Mistress desires sir.
Fare you well sir.
Fare you well sir.
This will make my master leap out of the bed for joy, and dance Wigmois galliard in his shift about the chamber?
Came this suit from mistress Cleveland?
She sent it secretly sir.
A pretty requiteful squall, I like that woman, that can remember a good turn 3 months a'er the date, it shows both a good memory, and a very feeling spirit.
This came fortunately sir, after all your ill luck last night.
I'd beastly casting Jack.
Oh abominable sir, you had the scurviest hand— the old Servingman swooped up all;
I am glad the fortune lighted vpon the poore fellow by my troth, tmade his maister nad?
Did you mark that sir, I warrant he has the doggedst master of any poor fellow under the dog-sign, I'd rather serve your worship, I'll say that behind your back sir, for nothing, as indeed I have no standing wages at all, your worship knows.
Oh but your vails Jack your vails considered, when you run to and fro between me and mistresses.
I must confess my vails are able to keep an honest man go I where I lift.
go to then Jack.
But those vails stand with the state of your body sir as long as you hold up your head, if that droop once, farewell you, farewell I, farewell all, and droop it will, though all the caudles in Europe should put to their helping hands to't; 'tis e'en as uncertain as playing now vu now down, for if the Bill rise to above thirty, here's no place for players, so if your years rise to above forty, there's no room for old lechers.
and that's the reason all rooms are taken up for young Temp'ers?
you're in the right sir?
pize on't I pawned a good beaver hat to master Frip last night Jack,
I feel the want of it now,— hark whose's that knocks;
I maister Taylbee stirring?
What's your pleasure with him, he walks here i'th' hall.
Give your worship good morrow,
Welcome honest lad;
A letter from my mistress.
Whose th mistresse?
Mistress new block.
Mistress new-blocke my sincere love how does she?
Faith only ill the want of your sight.
alas dear sweet, I've had such business, I protest I near stood still since I saw her.
She has sent your worship a Beaver hat here, with a band best in fashion.
How shall I requite this dear soul?
'tit not a thing fit for me to tell you sir, for I have three years to serve yet: your worship knows how I warrant you;
I know the drift of her letter, and for the Beaver, say, I accept it highly.
O shee will be a proud woman of that sir.
And hark thee tell thy mistress as I'm a Gentleman, I'll dispatch her out of hand, the first thing I do a my credit, canst thou remember these words now?
Yes sirrah you are a Gentleman you'll dispatch her out of hand the first thing you do
Ia my credit.
Oh of your credit, I thought not of that fir.
Remember that good boy?
Fear it not now fir.
I dreamed to nigh Jack, I should have a secret supply out a'th' City
Your dream crawls out partly well sir,— what news there now?
I have an arrant no master Taylbee—
Yonder walks my master;
Mistress Tiffany commends her to your worship and h'as sent you your ten pound in gold back gain, and says she cannot furnish you of the same Lawn you desire, till after all hollantide—
Thank her she would let me understand so much? ha, ha,— this wench will live, why this was sent like a work woman now, the rest are borchers to her, faith I commend her cunning, she's a fool, that makes her servant fellow to her heart, it robs her of respect, dams up all duty, keeps her in awe e'en of the slave she keeps.
This takes a wise course I commend her more,
Sends back the gold, I never saw before:
Well women are my best friends i'faith,
Takes lands give me good legs:
Firm back white hand black eye, brown hair,
And ad but to these five a comely stature,
Let others live by art and I by nature.
Master Bowser master Bowser, ha, ha, ho, master Bowser.
Holla:
What not out of thy kennel, Master Bowser.
Master Goldstone, your an early Gallant sir?
A fair cloak yonder i'faith,— by my troth a bed Master Bowser, you remember your promise well o'er night.
Why what's o'clock sir?
Do you ask that now, why the chimes are spent at Saint Brides.
'tis a Gentleman's hour, saith Master Goldstone i'll be ready in a trice.
Away there's no trust to you:
Faith i'll come instantly?
Nay choose whether you will or no, by my troth your cloak shall go before you—
Nay Master Goldstone I ha' sworn— do you hear sir:
Away, away, faith I'm angry with you, pox, a bed now I'm ashamed of it.
Foot my cloak, my cloak Master Goldstone, 'slife what meant you by this sir you'll bring it back again, I hope, no not yet, by my troth I care very little for such kind of jesting, methinks this familiarity now extends a little too far, unless it be a new fashion come forth this morning, secretly yesterday 'twould have shown unmannerly, and saucily; I scarce know yet what to think on't, well there's no great profit in standing in my shirt, i'll on with my clothes, has bound me to follow the suit, my cloaks a stranger he was made but yesterday, & I do not love to trust him alone in company.
What may I conjecture of this Goldstone? he has not only pawned to me this cloak, but the very Diamond and sapphire, which I bestowed upon my new love at Master Primero's house; the cloaks new and comes fitly, to do me great grace at a wedding this morning, to which I was solemnly invited. I can continue change more than the proudest Gallant of 'em all; yet never bestow penny of myself, my pawns do so kindly furnish me: but the sight of these jewels is able to cloy me, did I not preserve my stomach the better for the wedding dinner, a gift could never have come in a more patient hour, nor to be better digested; is she proved false,— but I'll not fiet today nor chafe my blood.
Ha, yonder goes Bowser, the place is fit:— boy stand with my horse at Corner, I owe you for a Pink 3. inches deep sir?
On— o— oh;
Take that in part of payment; for Coome-park:
On— o— o?
How now, whose's this? 'sfoot one of our Gallants, knocked down like a Calf, is there such a plague of 'em here at London, they begun to knock 'em ath head already:
Oh Master Bowser, pray rend me your hand sir; I am slain:
Slain and alive? oh cruel execution?
What man so savage-spirited durst presume,
To strike down satin on two taffeties cut:
O lie his hand against a Beuer hat.
Some rogue that owes me money, and had no other means
To a wedding dinner: I must be d'est myself methinks.
How why this my cloak, life how came my cloak hither?
Is it yours sir,? Master Goldstone pawned it to me this morning fresh and failing▪ and borrowed five pound upon't.
How, pawned it? pray let me near out this story, come, and i'll lend you to the next barber-surgeons;— pawned my cloak?
How now Marmaduke what's the wager;
Nay my care is at end sir, now I am come to the sight of you? my mistress your cousin entreats you to take part of a dinner with her at home at her house, and bring what Gentleman you please to accompany you.
Thank my sweet coz, i'll munch with her say.
I'll tell her so.
Marmaduke—
Sir?
Will there be any stockfish thinkst thou?
How sir?
Tell my coz I've a great appetite to stockfish i'faith— Master Goldstone i'll entreat you to be the gentleman that shall accompany me.
Not? me sir?
You sir.
By my troth concluded, what state bears thy coz sirrah?
Oh a fine Merchant's wife,—
Or rather a merchant's fine wife—
Trust me and that's the properer phrase here at London, and 'tis as absurd too, to call him fine Merchant, for being at sea, a man knows not what pickle he is in.
Why true—
Yet my coz will be served in plate I can tell you, she has her silver jugs and her guilt Tankards.
Fie.
Nay you shall see a house dressed up i'faith, you must not think to tread ath ground when you come there.—
No, how there?
Why upon paths made of fig-frails, & white blankets cut out in steaks.
Away— I have thought of a device, where shall we meet an hour hence.
In Paul's.
Agreed.
The Broker-Gallant, and the Cheating-Gallant,
Now I have found 'em all, I so rejoice,
That the redeeming of my cloak I weigh not:
I have spied him.
Pax here's Boucer.
Master Goldstone, my cloak, come where's my cloak sir?
Oh you're a sure Gentleman; especially if a man stand in need of you, he may be slain in a morning to breakfast, ere you vouchsafe to peep out of your lodging.
How?
No less than four Gallants, as I'm a gentleman, drew all upon me at once, and opposed me so spitefully, that I not only lost your cloak i'th' fray.
Comes it in there?
But my tice Hangers, sirrah, I thinke thou hast seene e.
Neuer iah sir.
Those with the two Unicorns, all wrought in Pearl and gold pex on't it frets me ten times more than the loss of the platty cloak; prithee and thou lov'st me speak no more on 't, it brings the Unicorns into my mind, and thou wouldst not think how the conceit grieves me: I will not do thee that disgrace i'faith, to offer thee any satisfaction, for in my soul I think thou scorn'st it thou bearest that mind in my conscience▪ I have always said so of thee; fare thee well, when shall I see thee at my chamber, when?
Every day shortly.
I have fine toys to show thee.
You win my heart then:
The Devil scarce knew what a portion he gave his children, when he allowed 'em large impudence to live upon, & so turned 'em into th'world, surely he gave away the third part of the riches of his kingdom, revenues are but fools to't; the filed tongue and the undaunted forehead,
Are mighty patrimonies, wealthier than those
The city-sire, or the Court-father leaves,
In these behold it, riches oft like slaves
Revolt, they bear their foreheads to their graves,
What soonest grasps advancement, me & great suits
Trips down rich widows, gains repute and name,
Makes way where ere it comes, bewitches all
Thou impudence, the minion of our days
On whose pale cheeks favour and fortune plays!
Call you these your five Gallants, trust me they're rare fellows
They live on nothing; many cannot live on something,
Here they may take example;— Suspectless virgin!
How easy had thy Goodness been beguiled
Now only rests, that as to me they're known,
So to the world their base Arts may be shown.
Art sure thou sawst him receive't boy?
Forty pound in gold as I'm a gentleman borne,
Thy father gave the Ramshead boy?
No you're deceived my mother gave that sir.
what's thy mothers, is thy fathers;
I'm sorry it holds in the Ramshead, see here he walks, I was sure he came into Paul's, the gold had been yours master long ere this, but that he wears both his hands in his pockets:
How unfortunately is my purpose seated, what the devil should come in his mind to keep in his hands so long, the biting but of a paltry louse would do me great kindness now, I knew not how to requite it, will no rascal creature assist me, stay, what if I did impudently salute 'em out, good, boy be ready boy.
upon the least advantage sir?
You're most devoutly met in Paul's sir?
So are you, but I scarce remember you sir.
Oh I cry you mercy sir, I pray pardon me I fear I have tendered an offence sir, troth I took you at the first for one master Dumplin a Norfolk gentleman.
there's no harm done yet sir?
I hope he is there by this time, how now boy, hast it?
No by troth have I not, this labours lost, 'tis in the right pocket, and he kept that hand in sure enough.
unpractised Gallant, salute me but with one hand, like a counterfeit soldier, O times and manners? are we grown beasts, do we salute by halves, are not our limbs at leisure, where's comely nurture, the Italian kiss, or the French cringe, with the Polonian waste: are all forgot, than misery follows— Surely fate forbade it, had he employed but his right hand, I'd had it:— It must be an everlasting device I think, that procures both his hands out at once: do you walk sir.
No I stay a little for a Gentleman's coming too.
Farewell then sir, I have forty pound in gold about me, which I must presently send down into the country.
Fare you well sir: I wonder Master Goldstone spares my company so long, 'tis now about the navel of the day, upon the belly of noon.
See where he walks, be sure you let off at a twinkling now.
When did I miss you,— your worship has forgot, you promised Mistress Newcut your cousin, to dine with her this day.
Mass that was well remembered.
I am bold to salute you sir.
Sir.
Is Mistress Newcut your cousin sir.
Yes, she's a cousin of mine sir.
Then I am a cousin of yours, by the sister's side.
Let me salute you then, I shall be glad of your farther acquaintance.
I am a bidden guest here too.
Indeed sir?
Faith invited this morning.
Your good company, shall be kindly embraced sir.
I walk a turn or two here for a Gentleman, but I think he'll either overtake me, or be before me.
'tis very likely sir; there sirrah, go to dinner, & about two wait for me?
Nay let him come between two and three cozen, for we love to sit long at dinner i'th' City.
Come sweet cousin.
Nay cozen, keep your way cozen,
Good cousin I will not i'faith cozen.
Why how now sirrah, upon twelve of the clock, & not the cloth laid yet— must we needs keep Exchange time still.
I am about it forsooth.
You're about it forsooth; you're still about many things, but you near do one well, I am an Ass to keep thee inh' house now my husbands at sea, thou hast no audacity with thee, a foolish dreaming lad, fitter to be in the garret, then in any place else, no grace, nor manly behaviour; when didst thou ever come to me, but with thy head hanging down, oh decheerefull prentice, uncomfortable servant: pray heaven the Gull my cousin has so much wit left, as to bring master Taylbee along with him; my comfort, my delight, for that was the chiefest cause I did invite him, I bade him bring what Gentlemen he pleased to accompany him, as far as I durst go, why may he not then make choice of master Taylbee, had he my wit or feeling he would do't.
where's my sweet cousin here, does she lack any guess?
Ever such guess as you, you're welcome cozen.
I am rude Lady.
You're most welcome sir.
There will be a gallant here anon coz,
He promised faithfully.
Who is't master Taylbee?
Master Taylbee, no master Goldstone.
mayst Goldstone; I could think well of that Goldstone, wert not for one wild trick he has.
What's that Lady?
In jest, he will pawn his punc es for suppers.
That's a wild part in him i'faith, & he were my brother.
Pray gentlemen sit a while, your dinner shall come presently.
Ye mistress Newcut, at first give me a trip,
A close bite always asks a secret nip.
My cousin here is a very kind natured soul i'faith, in her humour.
Puh you know her not so well as I coz, I have observed her in all her humours you near saw her a little waspish I think.
I have i'faith.
Puh, then yea near saw pretty humour in your life, I can bring her into't when I list.
Would you could i'faith.
Would I could? by my troth and I were sure thou couldst keep thy countenance coz, what a pretty jest have I thought upon already to entertain time before dinner.
preach coz what is't, I love a jest a life i'faith.
Ah but I am jealous you will not keep your countenance i'faith.
Why yea shall see a pretty story of a humour.
Faith i'll try you for once, you know my cousin will wonder when she comes in to see the cloth laid and near a salt upon the board.
That's true i'faith.
Now will I stand a while out of sight with it, and give her humour play a little.
coz dost thou love me, and thou wilt ever do any thing for me, do't.
Marry I build upon you countenance.
Why dost thou think I'm an ass coz?
I would be loath to undertake it else, for if you should burst out presently, coz the jest would be spoiled.
Why do not I know that, away, stand close, so, so mum cozen? a merry companion i'faith, here will be good sport anon,— whist she comes?
I make you stray long for a bad dinner, here cozen, if Master Goldstone were come, the meats e'en ready.
Some great business detains him cousin, but he'll not be long now?
Why how now, cuds my life,—
Why?
Was ever mistress so plagued with a shetle-headed servant— why Marmaduke.
I come forsooth:
Able to shame me from generation to generation.
Did you call forsooth?
Come hither forsooth— did you lay this cloth?
Yes forsooth:
Do you use to lay a cloth without a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt.
How many salts would you have, I'm sure I set the best i'th' house upon the boor.
How? cozen:— sings— cozen, cozen, did call coz.
Did you see a salt upon the board when you came in.
Puh.
Come, come, I thought as much, beshrew your singers, where is't now?
Your cousin yonder.
Why the man's mad.
Cousin, hist cozen.
What say you.
Puh, I call not you, I call my cousin, come forth with th' salt cozen: ha, how, nobody: why was not he that came in e'en now your cousin?
My cousin: O my bell salt, O my great bell salt.
The tenor bell salt; oh here comes Master Goldstone now cozen, he may tell us some news on him. Did you not meet a fellow about door, with a great silver salt under his arm.
No sure, I met none such.
Pardon me sir, I forgot all this while to bid you welcome. I shall loathe this room for ever. Take hence the cloth you unlucky maple-faced rascal, come you shall dine in my chamber sir.
No better place lady.
No less than forty pound in fair gold at one lift, the next shall sown, and sown again till the devil fetch him ere I set hand to him, heart, nothing vexes me so much▪ but that I paid the Goldsmith for the change too not an hour before, had I let it alone in the chain of silver as it was at first, it might have given me some notice at his departure, 'sfoot I could fight with a windmill now, sure 'twas some unlucky villain, why should he come and salute me wrongfully too mistake me at noon day, now I think on't in cold blood? it could not be but an induction to some villainous purpose, well, I shall meet him—
This forty pound came fortunately to redeem my chain of pearl from mortgage, I would not care how often I swooned to have such a good caudle to comfort me, gold and pearl is very restorative.—
See yonder's the rogue I suspect for foul play, i'll walk muffled by him, offer some offence or cause of a quarrel, only to try his temper, if he be a coward, he's the likelier to be a rogue, an infallible note.
What a pox ail you sir, would I had been aware of you.
Sir, speak you to me?
Not I sir, pray keep on your way I have nothing to say to you.
You're a rascal.
You may, say your pleasure sir,— but I hope I go not like a rascal.
Are you▪ fain to fly to your clothes, because y' are Gallant, why there's no rascal, like your Gallant rascal believe that.
You have took me at such an hour, faith you may call me e'en what you please, nothing will move me.
No, i'll make somewhat move you? draw? I suspected you were a rogue, & you have pursed it up well with a coward?
Who my Patron.
Keep out you rascal.
The guest that did me the kindness in Paul's,
Hold as you are a gentleman, you'll give me breath sir.
Are you there with me, a vengeance stop you, you have found breath enough to run away from me I will never meet this slave hereafter in a morning but I will breathe myself upon him, since I can have no other satisfaction, he shall save me that forty pound in fence-school.
When things are cleanly carried, sign of judgement,
I was the welcom'st Gallant to her alive,
After the salt was stolen; then a good dinner,
A fine provoking meal which drew on apace,
The pleasure of a day-bed, and I had it:
This here one ring can witness, when I parted,
Who but seewte Master Goldstone, I left her in that trance.
What cannot wit so it be impudent
device and compass? I would fain know that fellow now,
That would suspect me but for what I am.
He lives not,; 'Tis all in the conveyance, what? Thou look'st not like a beggar, what mak'st thou on the ground, I have a hand to help thee up, a fair chain of pearl, surely a merchants wife gives lucky bandsell; they that find pearl may wear't at a cheap rate, mary my Lady dropped it from her arm for a device to toll me to her bed, I've seen as great a matter— who be these? I'll be to crafty for you, oh monsieur Primero, signor Frip, is it you gallants.
Sweet master Goldstone?
every bawd exceeds me in fortune: master Primero was robbed of a carcanet upon monday last▪ laid the goldsmiths and found it. I ha' laid goldsmith's jeweller, Burnisher Broker, and the devil and all I think, yet could never so much as here of that chain of pearl, he was a notable thief, he works close; peace, who be these, ha' me see, by this light there it 'tis back lest they see thee; a happy minute, Goldstone what an age do we breathe in, who, that saw him now would think he were maintained by purses: so, who, that meets me, would think I were maintained by wenches, as far as I can see 'tis all one case, and holds both in one Court, we are both maintained by the common road way? Keep thou thine own heart, thou liv'st unsuspected, I lose you again now.
But I pray you tell me,
met you no Gentlewomen by the way you came?
Not any what should they be?
Nay I do but ask,
Because a Gentlewoman's glove was found,
near to the place I met you?
Faith we saw none sir.
good officers, upon suspicion of felony.
Very good sir
What call you the thieves name you do suspect?
Master Iustinian Goldstone.
Remember, master justice Goldstone, a terrible world the whilst, my Masters.
Look you that's he; upon him officers.
I see him not yet, which is he sir.
Why that.
He a thief sir, who that Gentleman i'th' Satt in?
e'en he.
Farewell sir, you're a merry Gentleman.
As you will answer it officers, I'll bear you out, I'll be your warrant.
Nay and you say so, what's his name then.
Iustinian Goldstone.
Master Iustinian Goldstone, we apprehend you sir upon suspicion of felony.
Me.
You sir.
I charge you in the king's name gentlemen to assist us.
Master Taylbee?
The same man sir.
Life what's the news?
ha' you forgot Come-parke?
Come-parke? no, 'tis in Kingston way.
I believe you'll find it so.
I not deny it.
Bear witness has confessed.
What have I confessed, pair of coxcombs indubitable?
I was robbed finely of this chain of Pearl there,
And forty fair Spur-Royals.
Did I rob you?
There where I find my goods I may suspect sir.
I dreamed this would be his end.
See how I am wronged Gentlemen:
As I have a soul, I found this chain of pearl,
Not three yards from this place, just when I met you.
Ha, ha!
Yet the law's such, if he but swear 'tis you, you're gone.
Pox on't, that ere I saw't.
Can you but swear 'tis he, do but that, and you tickle him i'faith?
Nay and it come once to swearing let me alone:
Say and hold, he called my jewels counterfeit, and so cheated the poor wench of 'em:
Come bring him away, come?
'twill call my state in question!
I think what's got by theft doth never prosper, Now lost my chain of pearl— come master Goldstone, let's go this mine i'faith,
The chain of pearl?
By my trothit's mine;
By my troth much good do't you sir?
I'm glad in my soul fie— Gnaws,
Deliver your weapons,
How?
You're apprehended upon suspicion of felony?
Felony? what's that'
Was it you i'faith, sir all this while, that did me that kindness to ease both my pockets at Coom-park:
I sir? pray gentlemen draw near, let's talk among ourselves, stand a part Scoundrel;— must every gentleman be up braided in public that flies out now and then upon necessity, to be themes for peddlers and weavers? this should not be, 'twas never seen among the Romans; nor read we of it in the time of Brute▪ are we more Brutish now? did I list to blab, do not I know your course of lise master Taylbee to be as base as the basest, maintained by me, by him by all of us, and a second hand from mistresses, I've their letters here to show?
Why should you be so violent to strip naked
Another's Reputation, to the world knowing your own so leprous, Beside this chain of pearl and those spur-royals came to you falsely for she broke her faith, and made her soul a strumpet with her body, when she sent those; they were ever justly mine? Pray what moves you sir, why should you shake your head, you're clear, sure I should know you sir, pray are not you sometimes a pandar, & oftener a bawd sir, have I never Sinned in your banquetting boxes, your bowers and towers? you slave, that keeps fornication upon the tops of trees, the very Birds cannot in gender in quiet for you, why rogue, that goes in good clothes made out of wenches cast gowns.
Nothing goes so near my heart as that?
Do you shake your slaves noddle?
And here's a rascal looked a-sway too, (saving the pre, cease of master Goldstone;) a filthy-slimy-lousy-nittical broker, pricked up in pawns from the hatband to the shoestring a necessary hook to hang gentlemen's suits on't i'th' Air, lest they should grow musty with long lying? which his pawns seldom are guilty off, a fellow of several scents and Seeamea; French, Dutch, Italian, English, and therefore his louse must needs be mongrels. why Bill money?
I am sorry to here this among you, you'ave all deceived me, truly I took you for other Spirits, you must pardon me henceforward, I have a reputation to look to, I must be no more seen in your companies;
Nay, nay, nay, nay, master Goldstone, you must not scape so i'faith, one word before you go sir,
Pray dispatch then, I would not for half my revenues i'faith now, that any gallants should pass by in the mean time, and find me in your companies, nay as quick as you can sir.
You did not take away master Bowcer's cloak tother morning, pawned it to me and borrowed five pound upon't;
Ha?
'Twas not you neither that finely cheated my little Novice at master Primero's house, of a Diamond and sapphire, and swore they were counterfeit, both glass, mere glass as you were a right gentleman;
'slife, why were we strangers all this while? 'sfoot I perceive we are all natural Brothers? a pox on's all are we found i'faith?
A cheater?
A these, a lecher, a bawd and a Broker?
What mean they to be so merry, I'm afraid they laugh at us and make fools on's.
Push, leave it to me— how now: who would you speak withal?
Speak withal? have we waited all this while, for a suspected thief?
How? you're scarce awake yet I think, look well, does any appear like a thief in this company▪ away you slaves, you stand loitering, when you should look to the common wealth? you catch knaves apace now, do you not? they may walk by your nose, you rascals?
Sweet Master Goldstone.
You lacked spirit in your company, till I came among you▪ here be five on's, let's but glue together, why now the world shall not come between us.
If we be true among ourselves.
Why true; we cannot lack to be rich; for we cannot lack riches, nor can our wenches want, nor we want wenches.
Let me alone to furnish you with them.
And me.
There's one care past: and as for the knight's daughter,
Our chiefest business, and least thought upon.
That's true i'faith.
How shall we agree for her.
With as much ease as for the rest: tomorrow brings the night, let's all appear in the best shape we may; troth is, we have need on't, and when amongst us five she makes election, as one she shall choose.
True, she cannot choose.
That one so fortunate amongst us five,
Shall bear himself more portly, live regarded,
Keep house, and be a countenance to the rest.
Admiral.
For instance, put case yourself after some robbery done
Were pursued hardly; why there were your shelter,
You know your Sanctuary: nay say you were taken,
His letter to the justice will strike't dead,
'Tis policy to receive one for the head.
Let's hug thee Goldstone.
What have I begot?
What Sir?
I must plot for you all, it likes me rarely.
Prithee what is't sir?
'Twould strike Fitsgrave pale,
And make the other Suitors appear blanks.
For our united mysteries.
What if we fiu: presented our full shapes
In a Strange-gallant, and conceited mask?
In a mask, your thoughts and mine were twins.
So the device were subtle nothing like it.
Some Post must ▪
Poet? you'll take the direct line to have us staged? why what lacks Bowser, are you too well, too safe, an absolute scholar, easy to be wrought, no danger in the operation.
But have you so much interest.
What in Bowser? why my least word commends him:
Then no man fitter.
And there's Maister Frip too, sh vs of making sie ow.
Upon sufficient pawn I think I can sir▪
Pawn? I owe, here take my chain: pawns among brothers? we shall thrive? but we must still expect one rogue in five, and think us happy too.
Last man we spoke on, Master Bowser.
Little master Bowser, sweet master Bowser welcome i'faith?
Are your fathers dead▪ gentlemen, you're so merry.
By my troth a good jest, did not I commend his wit to you gentlemen, hark sirrah Rafe Bowser, could Bowser i'faith? there's a kind of portion in town, a girl of 15 hundred, whom we all powerfully affect, and determine to present our parts to her in a Mask.
In a Mask!
Right sir, now a little of thy brain for a device to present us firm, which we shall never be able to do ourselves thou know'st that; and with a kind of speech wherein thou mayst express what gallants are▪ bravely;
Puh, how can I express 'em otherwise but bravely: now for a Mercury and all were fitted.
Could not a boy supply it?
Why none better.
I have a boy shall put down all the Mercury's i'th' town,
'a will play a Mercury naturally, at his finger's end i'faith.
Why then we are suited; for torchbearers and shield-boys, these are always the writers properties; you're not troubled with them.
Come my little Bowser; do't finely now, to the life.
I warrant you gentlemen.
Hist; give me a little touch above the rest and you can possible, for I mean to present this chain of pearl to her.
Now I know that let me alone to fit you.
Come forth you wary private— why spring strumpet have we found your close. haunts, your private watch-towers, and your subtle means.
How then?
You can steal secretly hither, you mystical quean you, at twilight, twitterlights you have a privilege from your hat forsooth, to walk without a man, and no suspicion, But we poor gentlewomen that go in Tires Have no such liberty we cannot do thus▪ Custom grants that to you that's shame in us.
Have you done yet?
You broke the back of one husband already & now th' other's dead with grief at sea, with your secret expenses, close stealths cunning filches, and continued banquets in corners; then forsooth you must have your milk-baths to white you, your rose-leaves to sweeten you, your bean-flower bags, to sleek you, and make you soft, smooth, & delicate, for lascivious entertainment.
So, and you think all this while you dance like a these in a mist you're safe, nobody can find you; pray were not you a pillmonger's daughter at first, that run away with a new Courtier for the love of Gentlewomen's clothes, and bought the fashion at a dear rate, with the loss of your name & credit, why what are all of you, but rustical insides, and city flesh, the blood of yeomen, and the bum of gentlewomen—
What shall we suffer a changeable forepart to out-tongue us, take that.
Murder, murder—
How now? why Ladies, a retreat, come, you have shown your spirits sufficiently, you're all land captains, and so they shall find that come in your quarters, but have you the law free now to fight and scratch among yourselves and let your Gallants run away with us.
How?
Good.
Sweet master Bowser.
Another?
Why then I perceive you know nothing: why they are in the way of marriage:
A knight's daughter here in town makes her election among 'em this night.
This night?
This very night, and they all present themselves in a mask before her, know you not this?
O traitor Master Goldstone.
perjured Master Taylbee:
Without soul?
She will chase him.
You have more cause to join, and play the grounds of friendship 'mongst yourselves, then rashly run divisional could tell you a means to pleasure you:
Good master Bowser.
But that you're women and are hardly secret.
We vow it seriously?
You should be all there in presence▪
See all, hear all, and yet not they perceive you.
So that—
Sweet master Bowser,— I
I can stand you in stead,
For I frame the device,—
If ever—
Will you do't— hark you—
Content.
And i'll make one.
And I another,
we'll mar the match,
When that good news came of my husband's death,
Goldstone promised me marriage.
and Swear to me.
I'll bring his oaths in question.
So will
Agree among yourselves, for shame.
Are we resolved?
In this who would not feign,
Friends all for my part,
here's my lip for thine.
Round let it go,
All wrath thus quenched,
And I conclude it so.
How all events strike even with my wishes, Their own invention damns them,— now Gentlemen? stands your assistance firm?
Why 'tis our own case,
I'm sorry you should doubt.
we'll furnish you?
Are these our Gallants?
Are our Gallants these?
Here be five shields sir?
Finished already, that's well? I'll see thy master shortly.
I'm satisfied.
Prithee let's see master Fitsgrave,
I have blazed them,
What's this;
Fooh, you should be a gallant too, for you're no university Scholar?
Look this is Pursuit:, the device, a purse wide open, and the mouth downward. The wood, Alienis ecce crumenis.
What's that?
One that lives out of other men's pockets,
That's right?
here's Goldstone's three silver dice,
They run high, two sinks and a quater?
They're high men fit for his purposes— The word,
Nay he will cheat his own brother, nay his own father i'faith?
So much the word imports— Master Primero,
Pox what says he now?
The device, an unvalued pearl, hid in a cave. The word, Occulos vendit honores,
What's that.
One that sells maidenheads by wholesale;
Excellently proper?
Master Frip?
That pythagorical rascal, in a gentleman's suit today, in a knight's tomorrow:
The device for him; a Cuckoo sitting on a tree? The word, En avis ex auibus; one bird made of many; for you know as the Sparrow hatches the Cuckoo, so the Gentleman feathers the Broker?
Let me admire thee, master Fitsgrave?
They will scorn gentlemen: and to assist them the better, Pursnets boy that little precious pickpocket, has a compendious speech in lattin, and like a Mercury presents their their dispositions more liberally:
Never were poor gallants so abused?
Hang 'em, their counterfeits, no honest spirit will pity 'em▪
This is my Crown,
So good men smile I dread no rascals frown.
Away, bestow yourselves secretly, o'erhead, this is the place appointed for the rehearsal, to practise their behaviours.
We are vanished.
Master Bowcer,
well-said i'faith, off with your cloaks gallants, let's fall roundly to our business:
Is the boy perfect?
That's my credit sir, I warrant you?
If our little Mercury should be out, we should scarce be known what we are.
I have took a course for that, fear it not sir; look you first here be your Shields:
I Where be our Shields?
which is mine?
Which is mine master Bowcer? this?
I pray be contained a little gentlemen, they'll come all time enough to you, I warrant:
This Frip is grown so violent;
Yours to begin withal sir?
well-said master Bowcer, first the Device, a fair purse wide open, the mouth downward, the word Alienis ecce crumenis?
What's that prithee?
Your bounty powers itself forth to all men.
And so it does i'faith? that's all my fault, bountiful?
Master Goldstone here's yours sir, 3. silver Dice, the word, Fratremque Patremque?
And what's that?
Fortune of my side?
well-said little Bowcer i'faith?
What say you to me sir?
For the device A Candle in a corner; the word, Consumptio, Victus:
The meaning of that sir?
My light is yet in darkness, till I enjoy her, right sir?
Now mine sir?
The Device an unvalued pearl hid in a Cave.
Ah ha sirs?
The word, Occultes vendit honores;
Very-good I warrant,
A black man's a pearl in a fair ladies eye,
I said 'twas some such thing;
My turn must needs come now; am I fitted Master Bowcer?
Trust to me, your device here is a Cuckoo sitting on a tree,
The Welsh leaguer, good.
The word, En Anis ex Auibus.
I marry sir.
Why do you know what 'tis sir.
No by my troth not yet sir.
Oh, I keep one tune, I recant not.
I me like the Cuckoo in that indeed, where I love I hold.
Did I not promise you I would fit you.
They re all very well done i'faith, and very scholarlike, though I say't before thy face little Bowcer, but I would not have thee proud on't now: come if this be performed well.
Who the Boy, he has performed deeper matters then this.
I a pox on him, I think was in my pocket now, and truth were known.
I caught him once in mine.
Suppose the shields are presented, than you begin boy.
I representing Mercury, am a Pickpocket, and have his part at my finger's ends, Page I am to that great and secret thief, magno illo et Secreto Latroni.
There you make your honour sir.
At Latroni.
You have it sir.
Latroni, that's mine.
He confesses the thief's his.
Remember boy, you point Latroni to me.
To you Master, proceed.
These four are his companions, the one a notable cheater, that will cozen his own father.
Master Goldstone.
Let me alone master Boucer, I can take mine own turn.
Why.
Peace.
The second an notorious lecher maintained by harlots cuius virtus consumptio corpus.
That's I master Bowcer.
There you remember your honour sir.
Ille leno pretiosissimus, Virgineos ob lucrum vendens honores.
It sounds very well i'faith.
Postremus ille, quamuis apparatus splendidus, is no otherwise but a Broker, these feathers are not his own, sed anis ex Auibus; all which to be nothing but truth, will appear by the event.
i'faith here's all now Gentlemen.
Short and pithy.
A good boy i'faith and a pregnant.
I dare put trust in the Boy sir; forget not sirrah at any▪ hand to point that same Latroni to me.
I warrant you master.
Come Gentlemen the time beckons us away.
ay, furnish Gentlemen, furnish.
Hark one word master Boucer, what's the same Latroni, I have a good mind to that word i'faith.
Latroni? why Sheerse of the sheer.
i'faith? and I have shriven some shears in my days.
Now gentlemen are you satisfied and pleased?
never more amply.
Amongst us now falls that desired lot,
For we shall blast five rivals with one plot.
Grave gentlemen, in whose approved bosoms,
My deceased father did repose much faith
Your dearly welcome: pray sit, command music,
See nothing want to beautify this night,
That holds my election in her peaceful arms,
Feasts, Music, Hymns, those sweet celestial swarms.
May you be blessed in this election.
That content, may meet perfection.
Sound Lute. Bandora, Gittern,
Violent, Virginals and cithron!
Voices spring and lift aloud,
Her name that makes the Music proud:
this night perfection,
makes her election:
Follow, follow follow, follow round,
Look you to that, nay you to that, nay you to that:
Anon, you will be found, anon you will be found, anon you will be found.
Alienis ecce crumenis.
bows to her.
Fratremque, Patremque.
bows to her.
Consumptio victus.
bows to her.
Occultos vendit honores.
bows to her.
A Cuckoo: en anis ex auibus.
bows to her.
Are you all as the speech and shields display you?
we shall prove so.
The very chain of Pearl was filched from me.
Hold stop the boy there.
Will none lay hands on him.
How now.
Alas I'm but a broker, 'twas pawned to me in my shop.
Ha, Fitsgrave?
Peamont and the rest.
Where's Boucer?
Here.
we are all betrayed.
Betrayed▪ y' are new forth to betrayed, you have not so much worth: nay struggle not with the net, you are caught for this world.
Would we were out.
'Twas I framed your device: do you see 'twas I;
The whole assembly has took notice of it,
That you are a gallant cheater,
So much the pawning of my cloak contains▪
You a base thief, think of Coome-park and tell me that your a hired smockster, here's her letter. In which we are certified that you are a Bawd.
The broker has confessed it.
So has the boy.
That boy willbe hanged, he stole the chain at first and has thus long maintained his masters Gallantry.
All which we here present like captive slaves,
Waiting that doom which their presumption craves.
How easily may our suspectless sex,
With fair appearing shadows be deluded:
Dear sir, you have the work so well begun,
That took from you small glory would be won.
Since 'tis your pleasure to refer to me,
The doom of these; I have provided so:
They shall not altogether lose their cost;
See I have brought wives for 'em.
Heart, the strumpets— out,
Having assumed out of their impudence,
The shape of shield-boys.
To heapful confusion.
Rather confine us to strict chastity▪
A mere impossible task then to wed these:
Whom we loathe worse than the foulest disease.
O grant 'em their requests.
The doom is past,
So since your aim was marriage:
Either embrace it in these Courtesans,
Or have your base acts, and felonious lives
Proclaimed to the indignation of the law,
Which will provide a public punishment:
As for the boy, and that infectious Bawd,
We put forth those to whipping.
Whipping? you find not that in the statute to whip satin.
Away with him.
Since all our shifts are discovered, as far as I can see 'tis our best course to marry 'em: we'll make them get our livings.
He says true.
You see how we are threatened, by my troth wenches be ruled by me, let's many 'em and it be but to plague 'em; for when we have husbands we are under covert-baron, and may lie with whom we list; I have tried that in my other husband's days.
A match.
I'll be no more deferred▪ come, when do you join:
These forced marriages do never come to good.
How can they, when the come to such as you?
The often prove the ruin of great houses,
Nor Virgin do I in this seek to entice:
All glory to myself; these Gentlemen,
To whom I am bound to love for kind assistance,
Had great affinity in the plot with me.
To them I give my thanks: myself to thee,
Thrice worthy Fitsgrave.
I hasell my wishes.
And I presume there's none but those can frown,
Whose envies like the rushes we tread down.