SOund, sound aloud
The welcome of the orient Flood,
Into the West;
Fair, NIGER, k son to great OCEANUS,
Now honoured, thus,
With all his beauteous race:
Who, though but black in face,
Yet, are they bright,
And full of life, and light.
To prove that Beauty best,
Which not the colour, but the feature
Assures unto the creature.
BE silent, now the Ceremonies done.
And NIGER, say, how comes it, lovely Son,
That thou, the AETHIOPES River, so far East,
Art seen to fall into th' extremest West
Of me, the King of floods, OCEANUS,
And, in mine empire's heart, salute me, thus?
My ceaseless current, now amazed stands!
To see thy labour, through so many lands,
Mix thy fresh billow, with my brackish stream;
And, in thy sweetness, stretch thy diadem,
To these far distant, and unequalled skies
This squared Circle of celestial bodies:
Divine OCEANUS, 'tis not strange at all,
That (since the immortal souls of creatures mortal,
Mix with their bodies, yet reserve for ever
A power of separation) I should sever
My fresh streams, from thy brackish (like things fixed)
Though, with thy powerful saltness, thus far mixed.
" Virtue, though chained to earth, will still live free;
And Hell itself must yield to industry.
But, what's the end of thy Herculean labours,
Extended to these calm, and blessed shores?
TO do a kind, and careful Father's part,
In satisfying every pensive heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loved birth:
Who though they were the k first formed Dames of earth,
And in whose sparkling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sun did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best judge, and most formal Cause
Of all Dames beauties) in their firm hews, draws
Signs of his ferventest Love; and thereby shows
That, in their black, the perfectest beauty grows;
Since the fix't colour of their curled hair,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most fair)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearful tincture of abhorred Grey;
Since Death herself (her self being pale & blue)
Can never alter their most faithful hue;
All which are arguments, to prove, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great Beauty's war;
And more, how near Divinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
Poor brainsick men, styled Poets, here with you,
Have, with such envy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all climates, yea our purity;
As of one n PHAETON, that fired the world
And, that, before his heedless flames were hurled
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as fair,
As other Dames; now black, with black despair:
And in respect of their complexions changed,
Are each where, since, for o luckless creatures ranged.
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most jealous of their beauties) fear, and care
Possessed them whole; yea, and believing p them,
They wept such ceaseless tears, into my stream,
That it hath, thus far, overflowed his shore
To seek them patience: who have since, ere more
As the Sun riseth, q charged his burning throne
With volleys of revilings; cause he shone
On their scorched cheeks, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made Queens of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
(Though most in vain, against a settled thought
As women's are) till they confirmed at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; else they feigned:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gained,
As they sat, cooling their soft Limbs, one night,
Appeared a Face, all circumfused with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes r never dream)
Wherein they might decipher through the stream,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seek,
Whose termination (of the Greek)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their bloods, doth never s rise, or set,
But in his journey passeth by,
And leaves that climate of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who forms all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, have we three Princedoms past,
That speak out Tania, in their accents last;
Black Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place unto these longing Nymphs designed.
Instruct, and aid me, great OCEANUS,
What Land is this, that now appears to us?
This Land, that lifts into the temperate Air
His snowy cliff, is t Albion the fair;
So called of u Neptune's Son, who ruleth here:
For whose dear guard, myself, (four thousand year)
Since old Deucalion's days, have walked the round
About his Empire, proud, to see him crowned
Above my waves.
O see, our silver Star!
Whose pure, auspicious light greets us, thus far!
Great Aethiopia, Goddess of our shore,
Since, with particular worship we adore
Thy general brightness, let particular grace
Shine on my zealous Daughters: Show the place,
Which, long, their Longings urged their eyes to see.
Beautify them, which long have Deified thee.
NIGER, be glad: Resume thy native cheer.
Thy daughter's labours have their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright Face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mystic lines; (which skill Pythagoras
First taught to men, by a reverberate glass)
This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscribed, and shall extend
Wished satisfaction to their best desires.
Britannia, which the triple world admires,
This Isle hath now recovered for her name;
Where reign those Beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MUSES Sons have honoured,
And from bright HESPERUS to EOUS spread.
With that great name Britannia, this blessed Isle
Hath won her ancient dignity, and style,
A World, divided from the world: and tried
The abstract of it, in his general pride.
For were the World, with all his wealth, a Ring,
Britannia (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to enchase it,
Ruled by a sun, that to this height doth grace it:
Whose Beams shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanch an AETHIOPE, and revive a corpse.
His light sciential is, and (past mere nature)
Can salve the rude defects of every creature.
Call forth thy honoured Daughters, then;
And let them, 'fore the Britain men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their native graces.
Invite them, boldly, to the shore,
Their Beauties shallbe scorched no more:
This Sun is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.
Come away, come away,
We grow jealous of your stay:
If you do not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear
Syrens of the land, than they
To doubt the Syrens of the Sea.
DAughters of the subtle Flood,
Do not let Earth longer entertain you;
Let Earth longer entertain you.
Longer entertain you.
'Tis to them, enough of good,
That you give this little hope, to gain you
Give this little, hope to gain you.
Little hope, to gain you.
If they love,
You shall quickly see;
For when to flight you move,
They'll follow you, the more you flee
follow you, the more you flee.
The more you flee.
If not, impute it each to other's matter;
They are but Earth, & what you vowed was Water.
but earth & what you vowed was Water.
earth & what you vowed was Water.
And what you vowed was Water.
You vowed was Water.
I Nough, bright Nymphs, the night grows old,
And we are grieved, we can not hold
You longer light: But comfort take.
Your Father, only, to the Lake
Shall make return: yourselves with feasts,
Must here remain the Ocean's guests.
Nor shall this veil, the Sun hath cast
Above your blood, more Summers last.
For which, you shall observe these rites.
thirteen times thrice, on thirteen nights,
(So often as I fill my Sphere
With glorious light, throughout the year)
You shall (when all things else do sleep
Save your chaste thoughts) with reverence, steep
Your bodies in that purer brine,
And wholesome dew called rosemary:
Then with that soft, and gentler foam,
Of which the Ocean, yet, yields some,
Whereof bright Venus, Beauty's Queen,
Is said to have begotten been,
You shall your gentler limbs o'erlave,
And for your pains, perfection have.
So that, this night, the year gone round,
You do again salute this ground;
And, in the beams of yond bright Sun,
Your faces dry, and all is done.
NOw Dian, with her burning face,
Declines apace:
By which our Waters know
To ebb, that late did flow.
Back Seas, back Nymphs; but, with a forward grace,
Keep, still, your reverence to the place:
And shout with joy of favour, you have won,
in sight of Albion, Neptune's Son.