WHich, among these is Albion, Neptune's Son?
WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any ask, who Mars were, in the wars?
Or, which is Hesperus, among the stars?
Of the bright Planets, which is Sol? Or can
A doubt arise, 'mong creatures, which is man?
Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheer:
And are obeyed, more with love, than fear.
WHat Power art thou, that thus informest me?
DOst thou not know me? ay, to well, know thee
By thy a rude voice, that doth so hoarsely blow,
Thy hair, thy beard, thy wings, o'erhilled with snow,
Thy Serpent feet, to be that rough north-wind,
Boreas, that, to my reign, art still unkind.
I am the Prince of Months, called Ianuary;
Because by me b Ianus the year doth vary,
Shutting up wars, proclaiming peace, & feasts,
Freedom, & triumphs: making Kings his guests.
TO thee then, thus, & by thee, to that King,
That doth thee present honours, do I bring
Present remembrance of twelve Aethiop Dames:
Who, guided hither by the moons bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enjoined again, and (thence assigned a day
For their return) were in the waves to leave
Their blackness, and true beauty to receive.
WHich they received, but broke their day: & yet
Have not returned a look of grace for it,
Showing a course, and most unfit neglect.
Twice have I come, in pomp here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, have been fain
With c other rites my Feasts to entertain:
And, now the Third time, turned about the year
Since they were looked for; and, yet, are not here.
IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caused their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEUS, d the grey Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other four
Of their black kind, (whereof their Sire had store)
Faithful to that great wonder, so late done
Upon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seek Britannia forth,
And there, to hope like favour, as like worth.
Which Night envied, as done e in her despite,
And (mad to see an Aethiop washed white)
Thought to prevent in these; lest men should deem
Her colour, if thus changed, of small esteem.
And so, by malice, and her magic, tossed
The Nymphs at Sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Island, they by chance arrived,
That f floated in the main; where, yet, she' had gived sight.
Them so, in charms of darkness, as no might)
Should lose them thence, but their changed Sisters
Whereat the twelve (in piety moved, & kind)
straight, put themselves in act, the place to find;
Which was the night's sole trust they so will do,
That she, with labour, might confound them too.
For, ever since, with error hath she held
Them wandering in the Ocean, and so quelled
Their hopes beneath their toil, as (desperate now
Of any least success unto their vow;
Nor knowing to return to express the grace,
Wherewith they labour to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at Sea, did pray,
That for the love of my a ORYTHYIA,
(Whose very name did heat my frosty breast,
And make me shake my Snow-filled wings, & crest)
To bear this sad report I would be won,
And frame their just excuse: which here I have done.
WOuld thou hadst not begun, unlucky Wind,
That never yet blewest goodness to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st b horrors through the air, as sharp as death.
ALL horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
be all things here as calm as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, Vulturnus, brings you news
The I'll is found, & that the Nymphs now use
Their rest, & joy. The night's black charms are flown.
For, being made unto their Goddess known,
Bright Aethiopia, the Silver Moon,
As she was a Hecate, she broke them soon:
And now by virtue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty. b There, their Queen
Hath raised them a Throne, that still is seen
To turn unto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heaven, whirled
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loves, and chaste Desires,
Do light their beauties, with still moving fires.
And who to heavens consent can better move,
Than those that are so like it, Beauty and Love?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antic Greeks are come,
Poets, and Singers, Linus, Orpheus, all
That have excelled in c knowledge musical;
Where, set in Arbours made of myrtle, and gold,
They live, again, these Beauties to behold.
And thence, in flowery mazes walking forth
Sing hymns in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their Songs, two Fountains flow, one height
Of lasting Youth, the other chaste Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottoms spring,
And strike the Air to echo what they sing.
But, why do I describe what all must see?
By this time, near thy coast, they floating be;
For, so their virtuous Goddess, the chaste Moon,
Told them, the Fate of th' Island should, & soon
Would fix itself unto thy continent,
As being the place, by Destiny foremeant,
Where they should slow forth, dressed in her attires:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied upon
The other four, should make their Beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptune's Son,
And love the miracle, which thyself hast done.
WHen Love, at first, did move
From f out of Chaos, brightened
So was the world, and lightened,
As now! As now! As now!
Yield Night, then, to the light,
As Blackness hath to Beauty;
Which is but the same duty.
It was g for Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she reigns, h Loves lights admit no shade.
loves lights admit no shade.
Admit no shade.
RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receive these Nymphs, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Wherewith thou flowest betwixt the grounds
Of fruitful Kent, and Essex fair,
That lend thee garlands for thy hair;
Instruct their silver feet to tread,
Whilst we, again to sea, are fled.
SO Beauty on the waters stood,
(When Love had i severed earth, from flood!
So when he parted air, from fire,
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a Motion he them taught,
That elder than himself was thought.
Which thought was, yet, k the child of earth,
For Love is elder than his birth.
IF all these Cupids, now, were blind
As is a their wanton Brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battle they would make
If they their objects should mistake
And each one wound his Mother!
IT was no polity of Court,
Albe' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loves in, armed.
For say, the Dames should, with their eyes,
Upon the hearts, here, mean surprise;
Were not the men like harmed?
YEs, were the Loves or false, or straying;
Or Beauties not their beauty weighing:
But here, no such deceit is mixed,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fixed:
They do not war, with different darts,
But strike a music of like hearts.
HAd those, that dwell in error foul,
And hold b that women have no soul,
But seen these move; They would have, then
Said, Women were the souls of Men.
So they do move each heart, and eye
With the c World's soul, true Harmony.
YOur grace is great, as is your Beauty, Dames;
Enough my Feasts have proved your thankful flames.
Now use your Seat: that seat which was, before,
Thought straying, uncertain, floating to each shore,
And to whose having every Clime laid claim,
Each Land, and Nation urged as the aim
Of their ambition, Beauties perfect Throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
And his attractive beams, that lights these Skies:
Who (though with th'Ocean compassed) never wets
His hair therein, nor wears a beam that sets.
Long may his light adorn these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enjoy that happiness, e'en to envy,' as when
Beauty, at large, broke forth, and conquered men.
STill turn, and imitate the Heaven
In motion swift and even;
And as his Planets go,
Your brighter lights do so:
May Youth and Pleasure ever flow.
But let your State, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
So all that see your Beauty's sphere
May know the Elysian Fields are here.
Th'Elysian fields are here.
Elysian fields are here.