Enough, these loud sounds deafs my passions
How long shall love make me a slave to hope,
And mix my calm desires with tyranny?
O Phylocles 'tis heresy I hold,
Thought and affection cannot be controlled.
Yet may't be bend and suppled with extremes,
Sith few dare see the end of violence
What makes the skilful Leech to use the fire,
Or war her engines, or state's policy,
But to recover things most desperate?
Revolt is recreant when pursuit is brave,
Never to faint doth purchase what we crave
True my Phylocles, yet my recreant soul,
Slaved to her beauty, would renounce all war,
And yield her right to love, did not thy spirit
Mixed with my longing, fortify these arms.
But I am now resolved and this sad hour,
Shall give an end to my distemperature.
Summon a parley.
What says our tyrant suitor, our disease in love,
That makes our thoughts a slave unto his sword:
What says my Lord?
Madame attend me, this is my latest summons,
The many suns my sorrows have beheld,
And my sad nights of long, all through hope,
T'enjoy the joy of earth, (your own dear self)
Are grown so infinite in length and weight,
That like to wearied Atlas, I enforce
These wars as Hercules, to bear my load:
Briefly I must enjoy you, or else lose
The breath of life, which to prevent, behold,
My sword must be my Cupid, and with feathered steel,
Force pity from your breast, your city's walls,
Chidden with my Canons, have set open a path
And boldly bids me enter, all your men of war,
Feebled with famine, and a weary siege,
Take danger from mine actions, only yourself,
Strong in your will, oppose even destiny:
And like the giant's war offend the heavens,
Which to prevent, do but descend and give
Peace to my love-suit, and as o'ercome thereby,
I'll yield myself your prisoner, and be drawn,
A thrall in your triumphant victory.
If otherwise, behold these fatal swords,
Shall never be sheathed, till we be conquerors:
And not respecting innocence nor sex,
The cries of infants, nor the prayers of age,
All things shall perish, till within my arms
I fold yourself my thrall and conqueror.
Thou Mayest be master of my body's tomb
But for my soul and mind, they are as free
As their creation: and with Angels wings
Can soar beyond thy reach; trust me king of cypress
Those coals the Roman Portia did devour,
Are not burnt out, nor have th'Egyptian worms,
Yet lost their stings, steel holds his temper still,
And these are ransoms from captivity.
But art thou noble, hast thou one royal thought?
Approve me by your question.
Then briefly thus:
To shun the great effusion of their bloods,
Who feel no touch in mine affections,
Dare you to single combat, two to two,
Refer your right in love?
Who are your combatants? we love equality.
This is the first, the Epire duke, a man,
Sprung from the line, of famous Scanderbag:
The next Alphonso, sprung from noble blood:
Who laden with rich lusitanian prize,
Hath rod through Syracuse twice in pomp.
Their like to the motion.
They are like wrath,
Never unarmed to beat weak injury.
Nay more, we are the sons of destiny:
virtue's our guide, our aim is dignity.
'Sfoot king, shalt not forsake them: this I see,
Love, fight, and death, are ruled by destiny.
My spirit speaks thy motion.
Madame, although advantage might evade,
And give my love more hope, yet my bend will,
Bowed to your pleasure, doth embrace your law,
We do accept the combat, and ourself
Will with that Duke try fortunes, this my friend,
The more part of myself, me dearest Philocles,
One of an angel's temper, shall with that that Lord
Try best and worst the place, the time, the sword.
They are your rights, we claim as challengers.
And we would lose that vantage, but since fame
Makes virtue dulat, we embrace our rights:
The place before these walls, the hour next sun,
The pole-axe and the hand axe for the fight.
It is enough,
My hostage is my person and my love:
And mine my hope, my faith and royalty.
They are of poise sufficient, and one light
Shall at one instant, give us day and night.
she's gone my Philocles: and as she goes even so,
The sun forsakes the heavens to kiss the sea,
Day in her beauty leaves us, and methinks,
Her absence doth exile all happiness.
Tell me my Philocles, nay pray thee tell me true,
Even from that love
Which to us both should bend one sympathy:
Discharge an open breast, dost thou not think,
She is the mirror of her beauteous sex?
Unparalleled, and uncompanioned.
Envy will say she's rare, than truth must vow,
She is beyond compare, sith in her looks,
Each motion hath a speaking majesty,
She is herself, compared with herself:
For but herself, she hath no companion.
But when I think of beauty, wit and grace,
The elements of active delicacy,
Those all eye-pleasing harmonies of sight
Which do enchant men's fancies, and stir up
The life blood of dull earth, O then methinks,
Fair Mariana hath an equal place
And if not outshine, it shows more beautiful.
More than my Queen?
More in the gloss of beauty, less in worth,
Of wisdom and great thoughts, the one I find
was made for wonder, th'other for admire.
Thine equal praises makes my facnies rich:
And I am pleased with thy comparisons,
Things of like nature live in best consent,
Beauty with subjects, majesty with Kings,
Then let those two ideas lively move,
Spirit beyond all spirit, in our breasts,
That in the end of our great victory,
we may attain both love and majesty.
Although my first creation and my birth,
My thoughts and other tempers of my souls,
took all their noble beings from the sword,
And made me only for the use of wars:
Yet in this combat, something methinks appears,
Greater than greatest glory, and doth raise
My mind beyond herself,
'Sfoot methinks Caesar's Pharsalia,
Nor Scipio's Carthage, nor Emily's acts,
Were worthy chairs of triumph, they o'er men's
Poor mangled bodies, and fire-wasted climes,
Made their triumphant passage, but we two
Must conquer thoughts and love, more than the gods can do.
True, and therein
Consists the glorious garland of our praise,
But we neglect th'affairs of preparation. Florio be it your charge
To see th'erection of the squared lists,
Fit ground for either army, and what else,
Belongs unto such royal eminence.
How near will your majesties hand the lists extend
Unto the city's walls?
So as the dullest eye,
May see the heedfulst passage in the fight.
What square or circuit?
Threescore pace each way.
Your majesty shall have your will performed.
Do, and you do us grace; and now thou sun,
That art the eye of heaven, whose pure sight,
Shall be our guide, and Joves' great Chronicler,
Look from thy sphere,
No guilt of pride, of malice or of blood,
Puts on our armour, only pure naked love
Tutors our hopes, and doth our actions move.
Enough my Philocles, thine orisons are heard.
Come let's away.
Now fie upon't, who would be an orator's wife, and not a Gentlewoman if she could choose? a Lady is the most sweet lascivious life, conieyes and kisses, the tire, O the tire, made castle upon castle, jewel upon jewel, knot upon knot, crowns, garlands, gardens, and what not? the hood, the rabato, the french fall, the lose bodied gown, the pin in the hair, now clawing the pate, then picking the teeth, and every day change, when we poor souls must come and go for every man's pleasure, and what's a Lady more than another body? we have legs and hands, and rolling eyes, hanging lips, sleek brows, cherry cheeks, and other things as Ladies have, but the fashion carries it away.
Why how now Mistress Prat? i'the old disease still, will it never be better, cannot a woman find one kind man amongst twenty? O the days that I have seen, when the law of a woman's wit, could have put her husband's purse to execution.
O Mistress Collaquintida, mine is even the unnaturallest man to his wife.
Faith for the most part, all scholars are so: for they take so upon them to know all things, that indeed they know nothing: & beside, they are with study and ease, grown so unwieldy, that a woman shall near want a sore stomach that's troubled with them.
And yet they must have the government of all.
True, and great reason they have for it, but a wise man will put it in a woman's hand, what? She'll save what he spends.
You have a pretty ruff, how deep is it?
Nay this is but shallow, marry I have a ruff is a quarter deep, measured by the yard.
Indeed, by the yard?
By the standard I assure you: you have a pretty set too, how big is the steel you set with?
As big as a reasonable sufficient; pity of my life, I have forgot myself, if my husband should rise from his study, and miss me, we should have such a coil.
A coil, why what coil? if he were my husband and did but thwart me, I would ring him so many alarms, sound him so many brass trumpets, beat him so many drums to his confusion, and thunder him such a peal of great shot, that I would turn his brain in the pan, and make him mad with an eternal silence.
O Mistress Coloquintida, but my husband's anger is the worst favouredst without all conscience of any man's in all Sicily, he is even as peevish as a sick monkey, and as waspish as an ill pleased bride the second morning.
Let your wrath be reciprocal, and pay him at his own weapon: but to the purpose for which I came, the party you wot of, commends him to you in this diamond, he that met the party you know, and said the party's party was a party of a partly pretty understanding.
O the Lord, Alphonso.
The very same believe it, he loves you, and swears he so loves you, that if you do not credit him you are worse than an infidel.
Indeed Mistress Coloquintida, he hath the right garb for apparel, the true touch with the tongue in the kiss, and he dances well but falls heavily: but my husband woman, my husband, if we could put out his cats eyes, there were something to be said but they are ever peeping & prying that they are able to pierce through a millstone: beside: I may say to you, he is a little jealous too, and see where he comes, we shall have a coil now.
Begin you to pont first, for that's a woman's prevention.
What Lollia I say, where are you my house looks you, my men lack you, I seek you, and a whole quest of inquiry cannot find you, fie, fie, fie, fie, idleness is the whip of thrift, a good housewife should ever be occupied?
Indeed I have much joy to be occupied in any body's company.
Why, what's the matter?
Why Orators wives shortly will be known like images on water stairs, ever in one weather-beaten suit, as if none wore hoods but monks and Ladies, nor feathers but fore-horses and waiting gentlewomen, nor chains but prisoners and Lords officers, nor periwigs but players and hot brains, but the weakest must to the walls still.
Go to, you shall have what you will.
Nay nay, 'twas my hard fortune to be your wife, time was I might have done otherwise, but it matters not, you esteem me as you do yourself, and think all things costly enough that covers shame, and that a pair of silken foresleeves to a satin breastplate, is a garment good enough for a capitol: but is master Wrangle, master Tangle, or master Trobleare of that opinion? in faith sir no.
there's never a gallant in our state
That goes more rich in gaudy bravery:
And yet I hope for quality of speech,
Audacious words or quirks or quiddities,
You are not held their much inferior.
Fie, fie, I am ashamed to see your baseness.
Indeed master Prate she tells you truly; I wonder that you being a proper man and an Orator will not go brave, according to the custom of the country.
Go to neighbour, he that will rise to the top of a high ladder must go up, not leap up: but be patiented wench, and thou shalt shortly see me gallant it with the best, and for thyself my Lollia,
Not Lollia Paulina, nor those blazing stars,
Which makes the world the Apes of Italy:
Shall match thyself in sunbright splendency.
Nay, verily for myself I care not, 'tis you that are my pride, if you would go like yourself I were appeased.
Believe it wench so I will, but to the purpose for which I came, the end of this great war is now brought to a combat, two to two, the Duke of Epire and Alphonso for our Queen against the King and Prince Philocles: now wench if thou wilt go see the fight, I will send and provide thee of a good standing.
Indeed, for you have near a good one of your own.
What, precedent I say?
Anon, anon sir.
Why when I say, the villain's belly is like a bottomless pit, ever filling and yet empty, at your leisure sir.
I can make no more haste than my teeth will give me leave.
Well sir, get you without the town, to the place for the combat, and provide me for my wife some good standing, to see the conflict.
How master how, must I provide a good standing for you for my mistress? truly Master I think a mary bone pie, candied oranges, preserved dates, or marmalade of cantharides were much better harbingers, cock sparrows stewed, doves brains or swans pizzles are very provocative, roasted potatoes or boiled skirrets are your only lofty dishes, me thinks these should fit you better than I can do.
What's this, what's this I say? Provide me a standing for my wife upon a scaffold.
And truly Master, I think a private chamber were better.
I grant you, if there were a chamber convenient.
Willing minds will make shift in a simple hole, close windows, strong locks, hard bed and sure posts, are your only ornaments.
I think the knave be mad, sirrah you chop logic, blockhead, you that have your brain pan made of dry leather, & your wit ever wet-shod: pack about your business, or I'll pack your pen and inkhorn about your cares.
Well sir, I may go or so, but would my mistress take a standing of my preferment, I would so mount her, she should love strange things the better all her life after.
Why when sir.
And come sweet wife, nay neighbour let us have your company too.
Holla, what are you?
High marshal for the King, your Character.
I likewise for the Queen, where lies your equal ground?
Here underneath these walls, and there and there ground for the battles.
Place there the Queen's seat,
And there and there chairs for the combatants.
Place here the lists, fix every joint as strong
As 'twere a wall, for on this foot of earth
This day shall stand two famous monuments,
The one a throne of glory bright as gold,
Burnished with angel's lustre, and with stars,
Plucked from the crown of conquest, in which shall sit
Men made half Gods through famous victory:
The other a rich tomb of memorable fame,
Built by the curious thoughts of noble minds,
In which shall sleep these valiant souls in peace,
Whom fortune's hand shall only overthrow.
Heaven in thy palm, this day the balance hangs.
Which makes Kings Gods, or men more great than Kings.
So now let the heralds give the champion's sign
Of ready preparations.
What are you that appear, and what devoir
Draws you within these lists?
I am the Duke of Epire, and the mine,
Which doth attract my spirit to run this marshal course,
Is the fair guard of a distressed Queen,
Would wed to hate and in equality and brutish force,
Which to withstand I boldly enter thus,
And will defail, or else prove recreant.
And what are you or your intendiments?
I am Alphonso marshal of this realm,
Who of like tempered thoughts and like desires,
Have grounded this my sanctimonious zeal,
And will approve the Duke's assertions,
Or in this field lie slain and recreant.
Enter and prosper as your cause deserves.
What are you that appear, and what devoir
Draws you within these lists?
I am the King of cypress, who led on
By the divine instinct of heavenly love,
Come with my sword to beg that royal maid,
And to approve by gift of heaven and fate
She is a one to me appropriate:
Which to maintain I challenge entrance here,
Where I will live a King or recreant.
And what are you or your intendiments?
I am less than my thoughts, more than myself,
Yet nothing but the creature of my fate,
By name my nature only is obscured,
And yet the world baptized me Philocles.
My entrance here is proof of holy zeal,
And to maintain that no severe disdain,
False shape of chastity, nor woman's will,
Neglective petulance, or uncertain hope,
Fowl vizard coins, nor seducing fame
Should rob the royal temper of true love
From the desired aim of his desires,
Which my best blood shall witness, or this field
Entomb my body made a recreant.
Enter and pro sper as your cause deserves.
Princes, lay your hands on these swords points
Here you shall swear by hope, by heaven, by love;
And by the right you challenge in true fame,
That here you stand not armed with any guile,
Malignant hate, or usurpation
Of philtre charms, of nightspells characters,
Or other black infernal vantages,
But even with thoughts as pure
As your pure vallures, or the suns pure beams,
T'approve the right of pure affection;
And howsoe'er your fortunes rise or fall,
To break no faith in your conditions,
So help you Jove.
We swear.
How often doth my maiden thoughts correct
And chide my froward will, for this extreme
Pursuit of blood! Believe me, feign I would
Recall mine oaths vow, did not my shame
Hold fast my cruelty, by which is taught
Those gems are prized best, are dearest bought,
Sleep my loves softness then, waken my flame,
Which guards a vestal sanctity; Princes behold,
Upon those weapons sits my God of love,
And in their powers my loves severity.
If them you conquer, we are all your slaves,
If they triumph, we'll mourn upon your graves.
Now by my maiden modesty I wish
Good fortune to that Philocles, my mind
Presages virtue, in his eagletss eyes.
'Sfoot he looks like a sparrow hawk, or a wanton fire
A flash of lightning, or a glimpse of day,
His eye steals to my heart, and lets it see
More than it would, peace, blab no secrecy,
He must have blows.
Sound cornets, Princes respect your guards.
I crave the Queen's conditions, or this blow
Sends this afflicted soul to heaven or hell.
Speak madame, will you yield or shall he die?
Neither bold Prince, if thou but touch a hair,
The King's breath shall redeem it: madame your love
Is safe in angels guarding, let no fear
Shake hands with doubtfulness, you are as safe
As in a tower of Diamonds.
O 'tis but glass,
And cannot bear this axe's massiness.
Duke, thy brave words that second thy brave deeds,
Fills me with emulation, only we two
Stand equal victors; then if thou hast that tie
And bond of well knit valour, which unites
Virtue and same together, let us restore
Our captives unto freedom, and we two,
In single combat try out the mastery.
Where whoso falls each other, shall subscribe
To every clause in each condition.
Thou art the index of mine ample thought,
And I am pleased with thine election.
Speak madame, if ever I deserved grace,
Grace me with your consent.
'tis all my will.
Thy noble hand erect and perfect me.
What says his majesty?
My stars are writ in heaven, nor death nor fate
Are slaves to fear, to hope or human state.
I neither fear thy fortune nor my ruin;
But hold them all beyond all prophesy.
Thou hast my free consent, and on thy power
Lies my lives date or my death's hour.
Then rise and live with safety.
Alphonso, here my hand,
Thy fortune lends thy peace no infamy.
And now thou glorious issue of Joves' brain,
That burned the Telamonian ravisher,
Look from thy sphere, and if my heart contain
An impure thought of lust, send thy monsters forth
And make me more than earthly miserable.
Yield, recant or die.
Thine axe hath not the power to wound my thought,
And yields a word my tongue could never sound,
I say thou'rt worthy valiant, for my death,
Let the Queen speak it, 'tis an easy breath.
Not for the world's large circuit, hold gentle Prince,
Thus I do pay his ransom, low as the ground,
I tender mine unspotted virgin love,
To thy great wills commandment, let not my care
My woman tyranny, or too strict guard,
In bloody purchase take away those sweets
Till now have governed your amazed desires:
For trust me king, I will redeem my blame,
With as much love, as Philocles hath fame.
Thus comes a calm unto a sea-wrecked soul,
Ease to the pained, food unto the starved,
As you to me my best creation.
Trust me my Queen, my loves large chronicle
Thou never shalt over read, because each day
It shall beget new matter of amaze:
And live to do thee grace eternally,
Next whom my Philocles my bounteous friend,
Author of life, and sovereign of my love,
My heart shall be thy throne, thy breast the shrine,
Where I will sit to study gratefulness
To you and you my Lords, my best of thoughts,
Whose loves have showed a duteous carefulness,
To all free thanks and graces, this unity
Of love and kingdoms, is a glorious sight.
Mount up the royal Champion, music & cornets sound.
Let shouts and cries make heaven and earth rebound.
How like the suns great bastard o'er the world,
Rides this man mounted engine, this proud prince
And with his breath singes our continents
Sat fast proud Phaeton, for by heaven i'll kick
And plunge thee in the sea: if thou'lt needs ride,
Thou shouldst have made thy seat upon a slave,
And not upon mine honour's firmament.
Thou hast not heard the God of wisdoms tale,
Nor can thine youth curb greatness, till my hate,
Confound thy life with villain policy.
I am resolved since virtue hath disdained
To clothe me in her riches, henceforth to prove
A villain fatal, black and ominous:
Thy virtue is the ground of my dislike:
And my disgrace, the edge of envies sword,
Which like a razor shall unplumbe thy crest;
And rob thee of thy native excellence,
When great thoughts give their homage to disgrace
there's no respect of deeds, time, thoughts or place.
COme wife, me thought our party stood stiffly to it.
Indeed they were stiff whilst they stood, but when they were down, they were like men of a low world, a man might have wound their worst anger about his finger.
Go to sirrah, you must have your fools bolt in every body's quiver.
Indeed mistress, if my master should break his arrow with foul shooting or so, I would be glad if mine might supply the whole.
I find you kind sir.
True sir, according to my kind, and to pleasure my kind Mistress.
Go to sirrah, I will not have your kindness to intermeddle with her kind, she is meat for your master.
And your man sir, may lick your foul trencher.
I but not eat of his mutton.
Yet I may deep my bread in the wool, Mistress coloquintida.
Go to sirrah, you will be obscene, and then I shall knock you; but to the combat, me thought our side were the more proper men.
True, and therefore thoy had the worse fortune: but see here is the Lord Florio.
Master Orator, it is the King and Queen's majesties pleasure, that you presently repair unto the Court, touching the drawing out of certain Articles for the benefit of both the kingdoms.
My Lord, I will instantly attend their majesties.
Do, for they expect you seriously.
Wife you can have my service no longer. Sirrah, President, attend you upon your mistress home: and wife, I would have you to hold your journey directly homeward, and not to imitate princes in their progress, step not out of your way to visit a new gossip, to see a new garden-house, to smell the perfumes of Court jerkins, or to handle other tools than may fit for your modesty: I would not have you to step into the Suburbs, and acquaint yourself either with monsters or motions, but holding your way directly homeward, show yourself still to be a rare housewife.
I'faith, I'faith, your black outside will have a yellow lining.
Content thee wife, it is but my love that gives thee good counsel. But here comes one of my clients.
Sir, master Orator, I am bold to trouble you about my suit.
Si, Mr. country gentleman, I am now for present business of the kings.
You may the better remember me.
hay day, I shall mix your business with the kings.
No but you may let his majesty know my necessity.
Sir, sir, you must not confine me to your seasons, I tell you I will collect mine own leisures.
Master Orator, is it your pleasure I attend you about my dispatches?
Sir, it is my pleasure you dispatch yourself from mine encumbrance, I tell you I am for instant business of the Kings,
Sir, I have borne mine attendance long.
Bear it till your bones ache, I tell you I cannot bear it now, I am for new business.
Yet the old would be dispatched, it was first paid for.
If you be gentlemen do not make me mad.
Sir, our suits are of great weight.
If you be Christians do not make me an Atheist, I shall profane if you vex me thus.
What more vexation? my Lord, my Lord, save your breath for your broth, I am not now at leisure to attend you.
A word good Mr. Orator.
Not a word I beseech your Lordship, I am for the King's business, you must attend me at my chamber.
And every where else, we will not leave you.
Now methinks my master is like a horseleech, and these suitors so many sick of the gout, that come to have him suck their blood: O 'tis a mad world.
Go to sirrah, you will never leave your crabtree similes; but pity of me who have we hear?
O 'tis the Lord Alphonso.
Mistress God save: nay your lip I am a stranger; & how doth Mistress coloquintida, O you are an excellent seasoner of city stomachs.
Faith my Lord I have done my best to make somebody relish your sweet meats; but hark you my Lord, I have struck the stroke, I have done the deed, there wants nothing but time, place and her consent.
Call you that nothing?
A trifle, a trifle, upon her, upon her my Lord, she may seem a little rough at the first; but if you stand stiffly to her, she'll fall; a word with you Mr. President.
Mistress Prat, I am a soldier, and can better act my love then speak it, my suit you know by your neighbour, my love you shall prove by my merit, to both which my tokens have been petty witnesses and my body shall seal & deliver upon thee such a brave confirmation, that not all the Orators in Sicill shall be able to cancel the deed.
Truly my Lord, methinks you being witty should be honest.
Nay wench, if I were a fool, there's no question but I would be honest; But to the purpose, say wench, shall I enjoy, shall I possess?
To enjoy my love, is not to possess my body.
Tut wench, they be words of one signification, and cannot be separated.
Nay then I should wrong my husband.
'Sfoot, thou shouldest but do for him as he does for the whole world; why an Orator were a needle name, if it were not to defend wrong: then wench, do as he doth, writ by a precedent.
O my Lord, I have a husband,
A man whose waking jealousy survives,
And like a Lion, sleeps with open eyes;
That not a minute of mine hours are free
From the intelligence of his secret spies.
I am a very toward Danae
Thorough whose roof, suspicion will not let,
Gold showers have passage, nor can I deceive,
His Argus eyes, with any policy:
And yet I swear I love you.
Death of affection, if thou lov'st me, as thou sayest thou dost,
Thou canst invent some means for our delight.
The rather sith it ever hath been said,
That walls of brass withstand not willing minds:
And women when theyare prone make love admired:
For acquaint endeavours, come instruct thy wit:
And find some scale to our high height of bliss.
Then briefly thus my Lord.
To morrow doth the Senate sit to judge,
Causes both criminal and of the stave;
Where of necessity my husband's place,
Must be filled by himself, because his tongue,
Must gild his client's causes, Now if you please,
All that self hour, when he is turmoiled,
About those serious trifles, to vouchsafe
To visit me, his absence and my care
Shall give us liberty of more delight.
You know my meaning, and I am ashamed
My love should thus betray my modesty;
But make the use according to your fancy.
What hour assures his absence?
Eight is the latest time.
This kiss leave my faith with thee, farewell.
thoust given me double glory from thy breath,
Nothing shall lose me time but certain death.
Truly Mistress Collaquintida, you are an excellent piece of sweet gall.
Well sir, will you lead the way homeward?
To your bed chamber mistress, or your privy lodging.
Night clad in black mourns for the loss of day,
And hides the silver spangles of the air,
That not a spark is left to light the world,
Whilst quiet sleep the nourisher of life
Takes full possession on mortality.
All creatures take their rest in soft repose
Save malcontents, and we accursed lovers,
Whose thoughts perturbed, makes us passions slave:
And robs us of the juice of happiness.
Dear Mariana, shaped in an angel's mould,
Thou thrall'st my senses, and inflam'st my blood,
Love, power, by wisdom cannot be withstood.
But see the morning star breaks from the East,
To tell the world her great eye is awaked
To take his journey to the Western vales:
And now the court begins to rise with him.
There goes the physician, the waiting maid,
And a fine strait legged Gentleman usher,
The preface to a kirtle all puff past.
One that writes sonnets in his Lady's praise,
And hides her crimes with flattering poesy.
But peace amazement, see the day of life,
Nature's best work, the world's chief paragon.
Madame one word.
I; so now farewell.
You do mistake me.
That yourself can tell,
You asked me one word, which I gave, said I,
A word of least use in a virgin's breath,
Urge not my patience then with fond reply.
Dear Lady lend an ear unto my voice
Sith each were made for others happiness:
My tongue's not oiled with courtly flatter,
Nor can I paint my passions to the life;
But by that power which shaped this heavenly form,
I am your bondslave, forced by loves command,
Then let soft pity with such beauty dwell.
Madam I love you.
As I am a virgin so do i
But madam whom?
Myself, no Lady better.
But will you love me?
No by my chastity.
I hope you do but jest.
Nay i'll keep mine oath,
Men shall abandon pride and jealousy
Ere i'll be bound to their captivity,
They shall live continent, and leave to range,
But men like to the moon, each month must change.
Yet we must seek that nought their sight displeases,
And mix our wedlock sweets with loathed diseases:
When we consume ourselves and our best beauty,
All our reward is why, 'twas but our duty.
judge not so hard of all for some offenders;
For you are subject to the self same crimes,
Of men and women always have been had
Some good of each.
But for the most part bad:
Therefore i'll have none at all but die a perfect maid.
That humour like a flower soon will fade,
Once did mine own thoughts sing to that delight,
Till love and you reformed my barbarousness:
Therefore dear Lady, pity my wounded heart.
A Surgeon here for this love-wounded man.
How deep's your ulcerd orifice, I pray you tell?
Quite thorough my heart.
'tis strange and look so well;
Yet Ladies eyes have power to murder men,
And with one smile to make them whole again.
Achilles' lance to a hair, but do you love me prince?
Dearer than my soul.
Would I could love you.
Madam so you may.
As yet I cannot, therefore let me go.
O do not leave me, grant me but one request,
And here I vow by that divinest power,
The salt-seas glorious issue, whose bright sphere
Rules my sick heart, and knows my chaste intent,
That if you please t'impose on me that task
Which neither men nor monster can achieve,
Which even Angels have a dread to touch,
Deeds which outstretch all possibility,
'Sfoot more than can be thought, and i'll effect,
Or else i'll perish in th'accomplishment.
Let your request fit virgin modesty,
And you obey your vow, I am content
To give your thoughts contented happiness,
'tis but a kiss I ask, a minute's joy.
Now Cupid help thee, is thy grief for this,
Keep thy strong vow, & freely take a kiss.
I have obtained my heaven, and in this touch,
I feel the breath of all deliciousness:
Then freely give the sentence of my work,
Muster up all the engines of your wit,
Teach Juno rules beyond maliciousness,
What ear it be, i'll die but i'll perform it.
Thou shalt not kill thyself, nor fight with monsters,
Nor bring the great Turk's beard to show thy zeal:
Thy life thou shalt not hazard for my love,
Nor will I tie thee to an endless task,
But even with ease, and gentle wrangled knots,
Thou shalt untwind thy clew of miseries,
Let it have passage, madame give me my doom.
Then Philocles knit silence to my words,
And mark thy doom: for thus my stricter will
Loads grief upon thy vainer levity.
Hence for the space and compass of one year
Thou shalt abjure the liberty of speech,
Thou shalt not speak for fully twelve months' space,
For friend nor foe, for danger nor for death;
But live like air, with silent emptiness.
Break thou this vow, i'll hold thee for a villain:
And all the world shall know thy perjury.
Be heaven and earth a witness of my vow,
And mine eternal silence, I am dumb.
Why so, now shall I not be troubled with vain chat
Or idle prate of idle wantonness:
For love I cannot, therefore 'tis in vain,
Would all my suitors tongues I thus could rain,
Then should I live free from feigned sighs and groans,
With O take pity, 'tis your servant moans,
And such harsh stuff, that frets me to the heart:
And sonnets made of Cupid's burning dart.
Of Venus' lip, and Juno's majesty.
Then were I freed from fools and foolery.
In May the cuckoo sings, then she'll come hither,
Her voice and yours will rarely tune together.
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you:
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you,
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you.
The pox rot off your fingers for this blow,
It is coronation day, thorough all my skull,
There's such a fatal ringing in my brain,
Has won the felt, has laid five fingers on;
But 'twas a knavish part of him to play so.
Hear me you Gods for this my open wrong,
Make short his fingers as you have his tongue.
'tis not man's fortune, envy or neglect,
Which makes him miserable, but 'tis mean fate,
Even sole predestination, a firm gift,
Fixed to his birth, before the world was made,
For were it otherwise, then within our lives,
We should find some distractions, errors change.
And other toys of much uncertainty:
But my mishaps are fixed so to my blood,
They have no sire but my creation:
The Queen out of suspicion that my love,
First set an edge upon the King's desires,
And made him woo her with a victor's sword,
Casts me from favour, seizes all my lands,
And turns my naked fortunes to the cold.
The King made proud with purchase of his wish
Neglects my sufferance for him, and o'er looks,
The low-tide of my fortunes; lest my woes
Should speak my wrongs to his ingratitude;
The whilst those lords whose supple hams have bowed
To do me formal reverence, now despise
And slight me in their meanest compliments:
O 'tis a torment more than hell yet knows
To be an honest flatterer, or to live
A saint in Limbo, which that I may prevent,
I'll be nor best nor worst, but all indifferent.
But here comes a noble man, I must turn petitioner.
My Lord, may I not see the king?
You may not.
His majesty is now down priest with seriousness:
As for your suit it is with Prat the Orator.
I heard his highness give him a special charge
For your dispatch with favour.
O but he doth neglect,
And sleights me like his weak orations,
And by your lordship's leave, I do not think
His wisdom worthy of the conference.
Nay if you will correct the King's coin you are not for my conference, far you well.
Why, and far you well, 'sfoot this is more than strange,
That being grieved I may not say i'm pained.
But here comes another: Mine honourable Lord
May I not have some conference with the king?
You may not, business of greater weight
Imports both him and us: nay pray you cease;
As for your suit 'tis with the Orator.
Yet methinks 'ttwere meet
That you would rather trouble him then me.
It's strange.
It's strange indeed, to see you wrong your ease.
I am not now for idle conferences, adieu.
Why this is court grace to men in misery,
And thus these tail-less Lions with their roar,
Affright the simple heard: O I could now
Turn rebel 'gainst their pride.
But here comes the Duke:
My gracious Lord, vouchsafe to hear my griefs.
For Gods love cease your trouble, we are all
Troubled with griefs of stranger qualities.
Words are no heavy burden.
No, had I no other weight;
But we are all down priest with other poise:
As for your suit it is referred to Prat:
And he must give you fair dispatch with favour;
Which if he slight for envy or for bribe,
Repair to me, and I will not forget
To give you ease, and chide his negligence.
Mean space I pray you leave me, for we all
Are troubled now with greatest miracles.
Your grace doth do me comfort, and I will
Study with service to deserve your favours,
And so I take my leave.
Your own content●…ts follow you.
Now gentlemen what news within, can this dumb wonder speak?
Have you cut off those lets that tied his speech.
And made your fame to sound thorough Sicily?
All hopeful means that man or art can find,
Have we made trial of, but 'tis in vain:
For still my Lord, the cure's invincible.
Those Organs nature gave to move the tongue,
He fully doth possess as well as we;
Which makes us think his sudden apoplexy,
Is either will, vow, or a miracle.
I should think strangely, had we strange things on earth;
But wonders now are most familiar:
But here comes his majesty, now we shall see
If this dumb beast can speak before the king.
My best of friends, my dearest Philocles,
Thy griefs run in my spirit, make me sad,
And dulls my sense with thine affliction.
My soul with thine doth sympathise in woe,
And passion governs him that should rule all.
What say our Doctors is there no hope of help?
No hope my Lord, the cure is desperate.
Then I am king of grief, for in his words
Found I more music then in quires of Angels,
It was as silver as the chime of spheres.
The breath of Lutes, or Ioves' deliciousness:
Next to my Queen, he is my joy on earth:
Nor shall the world contain that happy good
Which with my tears I will not woo for him.
My Lord of Epire, let it be strait proclaimed
Thorough all the cities in our kingdoms verge,
That who so will avow to cure this prince,
And bring his work to wished effectualness
Shall have ten thousand crowns and our best love;
But if he fail in his great enterprise,
His daring is the loss of present life,
Since no man hitherto could do him good,
The next shall help him or else lose his blood.
Your majesty shall have your will performed.
Not all so soon dear brother, what if a woman now
Should turn Aesculapius and restore
This dumb Hippolytus? nay do not look strange,
I dare avow and undertake the cure.
You sister, are you in your wits?
Faith of the out side of them brother, yet a woman's tongue
Whose burden still is superfluity,
May lend a man an age's complement.
Madam I would not have you with the bark
Play yourself into day net, this great cure,
I fear is far beyond your physics help.
My Lord, you know not how Apollo loves me,
I have been thought as fair as Oenone was,
And dare be bold to claim this miracle.
Mariana attend, glory & ruin compass thee about
This hand shall raise thee to a golden throne,
And grace thee with all styles of dignity;
This cast thee down.
Lower than lives misfortune and o'erwhelm
Thy beauties with thy grave, perform be great,
Fail and be worse than worst calamity.
Stay gentle friend, my love doth bid thee stay,
Attempt not, and be safe from misery.
Sister you shall not grasp with mischief thus,
My blood doth challenge interest in your ill,
And I conjure you from this desperateness.
Brother content yourself, words but augment our strife,
I will perform or else my pawn's my life.
Proceed fair virgin.
Vouchsafe me privacy: now Venus be my speed,
Speak gentle Philocles, thine oaths bond I untie
And give thy vows a free enfranchisement,
Thy well kept league hath showed thy strength of truth,
And doth confirm me in my virtuousness:
Thy martyrdom and sufferance is too long,
And I restore it to new liberty.
Then speak my Philocles, speak gentle Prince
To her whose love respects and honours thee.
How now, what virtue from thy charms?
No hope is left, dear Philocles regard my miseries.
Untie that wilful let which holds in speech,
And make me happy through thy noble pity.
I see the face of mine ill shaped contempt,
Where like with like hath quit most injury:
Then speak my Lord, utter one angel breath
To give me joy, and save me from strange death.
What not a word, hath this small silence brought
An utter detestation to thy speech?
Wilt thou nor hear, nor speak, nor pity me,
The gentle Gods move thee to more remorse.
What, wilt not be?
Fond maid thou hast drawn affliction on thy head,
And thralled thyself to worst calamity:
Till morrow sun thy incantations use,
But then effectless, all hopes desperate,
Wert thou my bosom love thou diest the death,
Best ease for madness is the loss of breath.
O Philocles I am no courts disgrace,
No cities Prostitution, country's shame,
Nor one shall bring Troy's fire unto thy house,
Turn not away hard hearted Myrmidon,
See, on my knees I'll follow thee in court,
And make the world condemn thy cruelty:
Yet if my tears may mollify thy heart,
Receive them as the floods of strangest rides,
Turn not thy face from her that dotes on thee,
Love now hath made me subject to thy will,
And pale disdain hath ta'en revenge on me.
Behold my nerves I'll wear upon this earth,
And fill this roof with lamentations.
What dost thou smile, hath fury so much sway
As even to banish poor civility?
Then be thyself, and break thine itching spleen:
For I disdain thy ransoms victory,
Life thou art weary brought, welcome my death,
Sweet because wished for, good because my choice:
Yet when I am dead, this of me shall be said,
A cruel Prince murdered a loving maid.
And after ages to th'unborn shall tell,
Thy hate, my love, thy envy and my hell.
Nay do not speak I charge thee, go let nothing move thee,
Death is my glory, since thou wilt not love me.
Grief which controls the motions of our thoughts,
Rains in my blood and makes me passions slave,
My sister's misery torments my soul,
And breaks my gall when I but think of her:
She was bewitched with spells to her misfortune,
Or else borne hapless under a lowering star,
And 'tis her fate to be thus miserable:
O Philocles hadst thou no other scale
To mount thy heaven but by our miseries,
Must all the noble fame of our great house
Waste down her royal pillars to make steps
For thee to climb to glory? well I see
Thou plots our shames in thy great dignity.
Patience great Lord, me thinks these ill raised storms
Have not more violence than may be borne,
Come we will both go sue unto the King.
We there will kneel and pray eternally,
And never rise till he remit his doom:
It shall be so, I will unto the King,
To beg great favour for a small offence:
But if she die for this, than King take heed,
Thee and thy fortunes by this hand shall bleed.
Come my hearts, let's make all things ready for the execution, here's a maiden head must be cut off without a featherbed.
It's a sign she deals with sharp tools & a cruel heads man.
If I had been her judge, she should have been tossed to death in a blanket.
No, I would have had her smothered in a featherbed.
They say she would not plead at her trial.
No that's true, for she had a great desire to be priest.
And I have known some of her sex, have got that favour to be priest for speaking.
Then she was unwise to hold her tongue being a woman.
What is her crime that she must lose her head?
Because she lived honest, contrary to the statute.
There is a great number of my neighbours will never suffer for that fault.
No nor thou neither if the truth were known, for my part I shun that danger.
I think we are all out of danger of the law for that crime.
I know I am free, for I am a knave if I have not forgot what wench had my maiden head.
Make room there, his majesty is coming to the execution.
Come, now all things are ready: let's away.
Mercy is banished courts, the King like flint,
Hardens his royal temper 'gainst our plaints,
And makes our woes most unavoidable.
What inauspicious star reigned at her birth,
That heaven thus frowns upon her misery;
And my good Lord, now innocence must die.
As white as untroade snow, or culver down,
King's words are laws, and cannot be withstood;
Yet 'tis false greatness, which delights in blood.
Patience my Lord, I do not think this ill
Is yet so big as unrecoverable.
The king doth hold you in most choice respect,
And whom kings love, they study to oblige.
Then call your reason home, make not this civil ware,
To suffer makes woes lesser than they are.
How well the sound can salve the sick-man's grief!
But O how ill he can digest his pills!
O my good Lord, you shall not lose a sister,
That is the joy and comfort of your breath,
'tis not your blood shall issue from her wound,
But mine that runs in rivers from her tears:
And rounds my face in her calamity.
Well, let her perish, since her soul is clear,
And for her death, i'll make a massacre.
Your suits are bootless: for my vows have glued
And closed mine ears that they retain no sound
Of your entreaties, and even now the time
Doth run upon his latest minutes, and
Save but by speech, there's no recovery.
Have mercy good my Lord, O let my tears intrude
Betwixt your vows and her calamity.
In her you take from me my best of life,
My joy, my comfort and my playfellow.
Content you madame, for my vow is past,
And is like fate still unrevocable:
Ascend poor model of calamity.
As lightly burdened with the weight of crimes,
As spotesse infants, or poor harmless lambs,
Thus I ascend my heaven, this first step lower,
Mounts to this next, this, thus and thus hath brought
My bodies frame unto its highest throne;
Hear doth her office end, and hence my soul
With golden wings of thought shall mount the sky,
And reap a palace of pure sanctity.
Farewell my soveragine, madame within your thoughts
Make me a tomb, and love my memory.
Brother farewell, nay do not mourn my death,
It is not I that die to spot our house,
Or make you live in after obloquy.
Then weep no more, but take my last adieu,
My virtues not my faults preserve with you.
Lastly, to you that are my last of hope,
Nay do not hide your eyes, I love them still:
To part friends now is greatest charity.
O be thy days as fruitful in delights,
As Eden in choice flowers, thine honours such
As all the world may strive to imitate.
Be master of thy wishes: only this,
When the sad nurse to still the wrangling babe,
Shall sing the careful story of my death,
Give me a sigh, from thy heart's purest breath:
And so farewell.
Madame kneel here, forgive me for your death.
With all my heart, thou art but laws poor hand,
Thus to my death I bow, and yet arise,
Angels protect my spirits in the skies.
Hold, or thine own hand shall be thine own destruction.
Never did music sound with better voice.
Unbind the Lady.
The fear of death hath brought her to a swoon.
Endeavour her recovery.
Sister, dear sister call thy spirits back;
Sister, O sister, hearken to my woes,
Recover breath and live with happiness.
She stirs, give way to air that she may breathe.
Speak Mariana, thy woes are canceled:
You are not charitable unto my moans,
Thus to afflict me with a double punishment:
One death for one poor fault might well suffice,
They are most wretched who twice lives and dies.
Madam to save your life I kill my soul:
And speckle that which was immaculate.
Black perjury that open eyed disease,
Which is the plague sore of society,
Brands me with mischief, and protests I hold
Nothing within me but unworthiness:
And all these ills are your creation.
Which to wash off; lo here I yield myself
An humble sacrifice to love and thee:
All my best hopes, my fortunes and my love,
My faith, my service, and my loyalty,
Shall as thy slaves attend on thy commands,
And make me famous in my suffrages.
Receive her Philocles, for it pleaseth us.
But not me my thrice royal sovereign.
I'll rather wed a sooty blackamoor,
A leper, monster, Incubus or hag,
A wretch deformed in nature, loathed of men
Then her that hath bemonstered my pure soul,
Her scorn and pride had almost lost her life,
A maid so faulted, seldom proves ' good wife.
What is the reason you not love her now,
And were so passionate in love before?
Not that I love her less, but rather more,
Run I this backward course; only my vow,
Sith unperformed craves satisfaction;
Which thus I reconcile, when this fair maid,
Shall with as strong a love, as firm a zeal,
A Faith as constant, and a shame as strong,
Requited my care, and show as ample proof
In mine extremes, as I have in her death,
Then will I love, enjoy and honour her.
Till when, I will not think a loving thought;
Or give the easy temper of my mind
To lovesick passion, or deliciousness.
Only with those which do adore the sun,
I'll give her all respect and reverence,
I am well pleased, and with a doubtful foe,
You have good reason thus to capitulate,
Then hang your colours forth, extend your thought
Muster your strongest powers, of strictest wit,
And when your reasons best artilleries bend
Love not my love, if it be not excellent.
I have not seen a war breed better wit,
Or passion draw on more delightfulness:
Proceed in your contention, for we boast,
That love is best, which is approved most.
But now to revels, since our tragic scene
Is turned to comic mirthful constancy;
In stead of mourning we will dance and banquet
And fill our empty veins with all delights:
For oft we find that storms and sorrows prove
The best forerunners of a happy love.
He will, but he will not, loves but cannot like,
Will and affection in this Prince are like
Two buckets which do never both ascend:
Or those star twins which shine not in one sphere.
O Philoceles, I see thy soul grows fat,
And feeds upon the glories of my same;
But I'll forestall thine epileptic fits;
And by my plots breed thy destruction.
Revenge now rules as soveragine of my blood,
And others ruins shall advance my good.
Which once attained to, I will prove ambitious,
Great men like Gods, are near thought-vicious.
Now Philocles stand fast, King guard thy crown,
For by this brain, you both shall tumble down.
This is his chamber, let's enter, here's his clerk.
Fondling, said he, since I have hemmed thee here,
Within the circuit of this ivory pale.
I pray you sir help us to the speech of your master.
I'll be a park, and thou shalt be my deer:
He is very busy in his study.
Feed where thou wilt, in mountain or on dale.
Stay a while he will come out anon.
Graze on my lips, and when those mounts are dry,
Stray lower where the pleasant fountains lie.
Go thy way thou best book in the world.
I pray you sir, what book do you read?
A book that never an orator's clerk in this kingdom but is beholden unto; it is called maids philosophy, or Venus and Adonis: look you gentlemen, I have divers other pretty books.
You are very well stored sir, but I hope your master will not stay long.
No he will come presently.
Who have we here? another Client sure, crows flock to carcases; O 'tis the Lord Meshant.
Save you Gentlemen; sir is your master at any leisure?
Hear sit thee down where never serpent hisses,
And being set i'll smother thee with kisses.
His businesses yet are many, you must needs attend a while.
We must attend, 'em, even snails keep state
When with slow thrust their horns peep forth the gate.
We must attend, 'tis custom's fault not mine
To make men proud, on whom great favours shine,
It's somewhat 'gainst my nature to attend.
But when we must, we must be patiented,
A man may have admittance to the king
As soon as to these long robes, and as cheap.
Come gentlemen shall we walk?
Thus are the pavement stones before the doors
Of these great tongue guilt Orators, worn smooth
With clients dancing for them.
It's strange to see how the world waits upon them, therein they are the only men now.
O only; they of all men in request.
Your physician is the lawyer for your health:
And moderate unruly humours best.
Others are no body compared with him:
For all men neglect their health in regard of their profit.
True, and that's it makes these men grow so fat,
Swell with rich purchases.
Yea with golden fees,
And golden titles too, they can work miracles,
And like creators, even of empty nothing
Erect a world of goodly livings, fair demeans,
And gallant manors, heaped one on another.
They gain indeed excessively, & are not like us citizens
Exposed to hazard of the seas and traffic.
Why here's a fellow now, this Orator
Even Prat, you would little think it, his father was
An honest pruner of our country vines;
Yet he's shot to his foot-cloth.
O he is; he pruned him well and brought him up to learning.
Faith reasonable learning, a smattering in the Latin tongue,
A little rhetoric, with wrangling sophistry,
Were his preparatives unto his art.
After these preparatives (if you call them so)
The physic wrought well for a few years practise,
Brought him in wondrous credit, and preferments
Came tumbling in: O such a sudden rise,
Hath fortune for her minions, blame him not then,
Though he look high on't.
Nay for his pride, of weaker souls termed state,
It hurts none but himself.
Yet to my seeming it is very strange,
That from so base beginning, men can breathe
Such soaring fames.
Srange; it's not strange a whit,
Dunghills and marish bogs, dart store of vapours,
And viscous exhalations, against heaven,
Which borrowing lustre there (though basely bred)
Seem yet like glorious planets fairest stars:
To the weak eyes of wondering ignorance,
When wise men know they are but Meteors.
But here comes the Orator.
What precedent I say, come and attend me to the senate house.
I am ready sir, if you have Copia verborum, I have Copia rerum in a buckram bag here.
Your lordship's pleasure.
Master Orator, 'tis not unknown my suit
Nay your Lordship must be brief, I not attend
The shallow sleight of words, your suit, your suit.
The restoration of my lands and honours.
They are confiscate.
My lands confiscate, and my body free?
My Lord, my Lord, the Queen's more merciful.
Sir, you forget my place.
Sir you forget your faith,
'Twas known unto the Queen, the state and us,
Your malcontented spirit, your disease in duty:
Your diligent perturbance of the peace:
Your passages, occurrences and—
Sir.
Sir me no sirs.
Do not I know you were the chief of those
Which raised the wars in Sicill? and long since
Wrought in the kings loves bloody business.
Did not you hold fair quarter and commerce
With all the spies of cypress? fie I am ashamed,
Blind impudence should make you be so bold,
To bear your face before authority.
But hear me.
I will hear no reply, go home, repent, pray & die.
Come Gentlemen, what's your businesses?
Your confirmation to his highness grant, touching our trade with Spain, in which if it please you to assist us, we have a thousand crowns which shall attend you.
O I have you in my memory, the suit is great:
And I must squeeze forth more than a thousand crowns.
Well attend me to the senate, you shall have fair dispatches
I not attend the shallow sleight of words,
Go home repent, pray and die.
Excellent precepts for an orator's chamber.
Where speech must bathe a handful deep in gold,
Till the poor givers conduit being dry,
The wretch goes home, doth curse, repent and die.
It is thy counsel Orator, thy tale breath
Good only but to season infamy.
From this reproach, this incarressing humour
Hath taught my soul a new philosophy.
I will go home and there repent all good
Done to thy name or thy profession.
I will go home and there new frame myself
More thirstily pernicious to thy state,
Then war or unabated mutiny.
As for my prayers Orator, they are for thee;
Thou hast a pretty, lovely, witty wife:
O Mayst thou live, both to be known and know
Thyself the greatest cuckold in our land;
And yet not dare to amend or grieve at it.
Mayst thou embrace thy shame with thankful arms,
Hug thy disgrace, make thy black poison wine,
And cap and crouch to thy dishonour,
May thy remembrance live, upon my knees I pray,
All night in belmen's mouths, with Pasquil in the day.
Day be my speed, night shall not cloak my sin,
If I have nought to do, it's by the sun,
The light gives leave to all mine idleness.
Quick business and open eyes cease on mine orator,
Whilst I create him horny precedents.
But here's my bed broker. Now my great armful of good intelligence, where is my Mistress?
Fast locked in her bed with a close ward to devour thee my brave parakeet; but hushed no words, there is a calm before the tempest.
Tut, tell me of no storms, but direct me to her bed chamber, my noble firelock of a flesh pistol.
Fellow thy colours my brave worthy, mount up thy standard, so enter and prosper.
Thou hast a rich room, safe locks, sweet sheets, a choice armful, with o the rare, rare thought of imagination.
What's this, what's this, doth this Lord Alphonso turn the
Orator to an antelope? 'tis more than excellent,
And from the juice of this despite I suck
Delight more great than all my miseries,
Observe, dear eyes observe.
Nay go thy way for a camel or a chameleon, thou Mayst compare with all Europe, Africa and Asia, and one that will change tricks, though thou wert worthy to be schoolmaster either to Proteus or Aritine: what an excellent gift did God give unto man when he gave him woman, but how much more when that woman was made fair? but o the most of all when she had wit to use every member of her creation. Well I'll stand to it, their's nothing but beauty, use and old age that puts women of my rank out of request, and yet like old bucklers though few of your gallant cavileres will wear us, yet many of your stolen ruffians will employ us, and that's our comfort still.
Was ever heard a bawd more damnable?
A very mountebank of wench flesh, an empiric,
A dog-leech for the putrefied sores,
Of these just-cankerd great ones, O I could
Even mad myself with railing at their vices.
But hark one knocks, O for the orator,
Heavens I beseech thee, O for the orator.
How now, who knocks so rudely at the door?
'tis I I say, open the door, I am in haste.
'tis he, just heavens 'tis he, fore God the orator.
Soul of my bawdy office, how are we betrayed,
Anon, anon sir, what mistress Prate I say?
Arise for shame, your husbands at the door,
I come, I come, Lord God how dull you are
When danger's at your heels, rise quickly.
Open the door, or I will break it open.
I come, I come, I think he's mad with haste,
What John, what Thomas, Robert, where's these knaves,
What Julian, Mary, Sisly, near a maid within.
For Gods love stay, i'll find the key strait way.
O Mistress Coloquintida, what shall become of us?
Nay I am at my wit's end, and am made
Duller than any spurgald, tired jade.
'Sfoot if he enter, I will break his neck.
Not for a world dear love, step into my closet.
Did ever slave come thus unluckily?
Nay now's no time for passion, good Lord in.
Fie I have almost broke my heart with running.
How now dear husband, what hath moved this haste?
I think I was not blessed this morning when I rose: for through my forgetfulness I have left behind me in my study the breviates of all my causes, and now the senate is feign to dance attendance on my leisure, fie, fie, fie.
Nay if he smell nothing but papers, I care not for his dry foot hunting, nor shall I need to puff pepper in his nostrils, but see he comes again.
I think the devil have laid his horns in my way.
Yes, and if you had wit you might conjure him out of your wives closet.
Sancte benedicite, what have we here, hath the golden snake cast his skin upon my bed, go toe wife, I smell I smell, me thinks your plain rug should not agree with this rich counterpoint.
Husband, either I have fitted you now, or else I shall never fit you whilst I breath.
You oft have told me, that like those of your rank,
Who both adorn their credits and themselves,
Yea even their causes with their costly clothes,
Yourself in like sort would strive to imitate,
And now my neighbour here hath brought this suit,
Which if you please to buy, 'tis better cheap
Then ere 'twas made by full five thousand crowns.
sayst thou me so wench, a kiss for that i'faith,
Fore God it is a delicate fine suit, rich stuff, rare work, and of the newest fashion; nay if the senates business were never so hasty, I will stay to try it on, come, help good wenches help, so there, there there.
'Sfoot will the ox put on the Lions hide,
He will, he will, 'tis more than excellent,
So gild the tomb which holds but rottenness,
Laughter I fear will burst me, look how he struts,
O God that ever any man should look
Upon this mammet and not laugh at him,
Fit fit: excellent fit as though,
The body it was made for wore my mould,
Wife I will have it, we'll dispute no price.
Master Orator, the senate are set, and can dispatch no causes through your absence, therefore they earnestly entreat your presence.
I come, I come, good friend go say I come,
And wife see that you pay for this suit, what so ere it cost.
Not above making you cuckolded, that's the most.
What is he gone?
He is.
Why then come forth poor naked Lord.
What is he gone, may the devil and his horns both follow him.
He is gone: but yet he hath discovered your treason.
How?
Yes, and in revenge thereof hath vowed, that in this naked sort as you are, you shall do penance through the city for your sin of unchastity.
I pray thee leave thy woman's phrase, and speak like a man, plainly, plainly.
Then plainly thus, he is gone and hath taken away your apparel.
Upon what accident?
This, when your negligence had left your clothes upon my bed, he espied them, tasked me for the owner, I in excuse told him it was a suit brought by my gossip to be sold, he strait like a child proud of a new coat, presently puts it on, presently is sent for to the senate, and at this present hath left you that the world may behold your naked doings.
I would it were washed in the blood of a centaur, that when he puts it off, his skin might follow it, but how shall I get to my chamber?
Truly I know not, except you will wear a smock's upper-coate.
What a petticoat, you mad me with your mirth.
Then seriously thus, as he hath ta'en your clothes, you must take his, and let the world know you have had more than fiddlers far, for you have meat, money and clothe.
'Sfoot how shall I look in this devils suit, sure I shall grow sick to see my shape.
Well extremity must then be your physic, but come, you shall attire yourself in my chamber.
Are these the winding turns of female shames,
Lose woman's gambols, and the tricks of sin?
And are we borne to bear these suffrages?
O he that's tied unto a brothel bed,
Feels his worst hell on earth, and may presume
There is no sickness like his pestilence:
Well, what the issue of this jest will prove,
My wit but yet conceives and after time
Shall perfect it and give it liberty,
In such sort, that if it true fire strike,
A world of Apes shall study for the like.
My thoughts are troubled, joy forsakes me quite,
And all my meditations are revenge:
Ambition and fell murder join in me,
And aid each other to untwine a state,
And make whole millions prove unfortunate.
Now must I practise court art flattery,
And wisely temporize with blackest deeds:
I'll smile and stab now weep, then laugh, then frown,
And with sly tricks of state kill all suspicion.
devils must seem like Angels, saith ambition,
The blackest thoughts I'll study to excel,
Crowns and revenge have made men dive to hell.
My plot is currant and it cannot miss,
Whilst wisdom winds me on the clew of bliss.
The King shall kill the Queen, that acted right,
I soon will turn his brightest day to night.
he's simple, honest, and loves downy rest,
Then he must fall, 'tis policy in state
To hurl them down are blessed with happy fate.
Thus each shall scourge himself with his own rod,
Who is all policy, avows no God.
Who is within there ho?
Did your grace call?
I did, where is the King?
He is in his privy chamber playing at chess.
Go strait and tell him I must speak with him,
And say my business doth import great haste.
I go my Lord.
Be a blessed Mercury, now mount thee up my spirit,
And show thyself a politician,
Let slander rule thy tongue, envy thy heart,
And let destruction be thy period
Of what thou speak'st; for this my maxim is,
But rule no heaven, and but revenge no bliss.
Here comes the King, my Lord we must be private,
Remove your hear from our conference,
Now speak my Lord, speak freely as to heaven.
First with my knee I kiss this prostrate earth,
And humbly beg, that which my tongue shall speak,
So it proceed from love and vassalage,
May bear a pardon or forgetfulness.
You have it, arise, discharge an open breast.
O my dread Liege, my speech will make you sad,
(And Kings do seldom relish their distastes)
And from that sadness such a storm will rise
As will even drown up all credulity.
O that my loyal heart could cover sin,
Or that my tongue enured unto grief,
Might lose his spleen ere it distemper you,
But love and mine allegiance bid me speak.
Then speak, and do not rack me with delay.
Women, why were you made for man's affliction,
The first that ever made us taste of grief,
And last of whom in torments we complain,
You devils shaped like Angels, through whose deeds,
Our forked shames are made most visible,
No soul of sense would wrong bright majesty,
Nor stain their blood with such impurity.
Nay good Lord leave this allegoric speech,
And give me knowledge from a plainer phrase.
Then plainly thus, your bed is priest with lust.
I know you do not credit, nay what's more,
I know you hate me for my virtuousness,
Your Queen behaves her like a courtesan,
I know you hold me for a vild impostor,
O foolish zeal that makes me be so fond
To leave my faith unto black censuring,
O she hath sinned and done a double wrong
To you, to her and sacred chastity.
Duke thou art valiant, and with a valiant mind,
Slander is worse than theft or sacrilege,
Nay more than murder, or the height of treason,
A step beyond the utmost plagues in hell.
Then thou which in that nature wrong'st a Queen,
Deservest a scourge beyond their punishments,
Virtue should kill thee now.
Nay do, my breast is bare unto thy steel,
Kill me because I love thee and speak true,
Is this the merit of a Roman faith,
For this have I observed, pried in unto,
And searched each secret shift of vanity?
Nay pray you kill me, faith I'll patiented stand,
Live still a monster, hold shame in your hand.
Speak a word more, a King shallbe thy death.
Death is a slave to him that is resolved,
And my soul loathes this servile flattery:
Nor will I cover such intemperate sin,
But to the world make them and that transparent,
Unless yourself will seek to right yourself.
Thou hast awaked me, and thy piercing words
Have split my sense in sunder: yet what ground ha?
Remains whereon to ground suspicion? a cuckold, cuckold
Your absence is the bawd to her desires,
For their masks, dancings, gaming, banqueting,
Strange private meetings and all to●…fes in love.
As wanton speeches to stir Appetite,
And all enchantments that inflame desire.
When you return, than all is hushed and still,
And she demurely walks like virtues Ghost:
Before your face she's like a Puritan,
Behind your back a blushes courtesan.
O I have drunk in poison at mine ears,
which makes my blood boil with unquenched flames,
But speak who is it that dishonours me?
He that you prise a line before your life,
I know you will not credit faith you will not.
Nay if thou cease to speak, thou hat'st my life,
Tak'st thou delight to kill me, then forbear,
'Sfoot I am mortal man kill me, do do do.
Your best of friends, your dearest Philocles
Usurps your bed and makes you a cornute,
A creature uncreate in paradise.
And one that's only of a woman's making.
Is't possible? can I give faith to this?
Nay be but patiented, smooth your brow a little,
And you shall take them as they clip each other.
Even in their height of sin then dam them both,
And let them stink before they ask God pardon,
That your revenge may stretch unto their souls.
To be a cuckold doth exceed all grief.
To have a pleasant scoff at majesty.
To taste the fruit forbidden from my tree.
But he shall lose his paradise for that.
The slave will make base songs in my disgrace.
And wound your reputation in strange Lands.
This injury sads all my joys on earth.
Horns are not shunned by wisdom, wealth or birth
Watch their close meetings, & then give us notice,
Mean space my love shall in thy bosom rest,
My grief is like my birth great, great and high:
Give close intelligence, till then farewell,
Lust is the broadest path which leads to hell.
he's gone with black suspicion in his heart:
And made his soul a slave to jealousy,
My plots shall drive him to his own destruction;
And I gain both revenge and dignity.
He shall no sooner put his Queen to death,
But i'll proclaim her spotless innocence.
All men will hate him for so vile an act,
And mad with rage depose him from his crown.
Then I will be his death, his state doth give,
Kings once deposed, long after must not live;
For like a Phoenix rare in jealousy,,
He shall consume himself in scorching flames,
Whilst from his ashes I a Phoenix spring:
Many renounce their God to be a king,
And i'll be one to kill men with a frown.
None dare dispute the actions of a crown.
THe Queen is all for revels, her light heart,
Unladen from the heaviness of state,
Bestows itself upon delightfulness.
She follows her creation and her sex.
In my conceit it is as vile a thing,
To see the worthy model of a woman,
Who had not been at all; but to give life,
And stirring spleen to man's alacrity,
To sit o'erwhelmed with thought, with dark amuse
And the sad sullenness of a grieved dislike;
As to behold an old man in his furs,
Whose well spent youth, hath given his age full strength
To be his country's best physician,
To caper to his grave, and with vain gauds
Trick up his coffin, and upon his tomb,
To leave no knowledge but his levity.
'tis true indeed, and nature in herself,
Doth give us still distaste in contraries.
And in my thoughts it is as base to see a woman man
As see a man a long robed feminine.
Well, we forget ourselves my Lord, What is the music ready? I pray you command the guard to take their halberds in their hands, the ushers should have seen this room perfumed, in faith they are too negligent: here comes the Queen.
Loud music there, and let the God of Harmony
Ravish our senses with delightful airs,
Tuned to the music of the higher sphere,
And with that mortal sign rarely show,
The joys in Joves' high court, to feast the Gods,
Making that place abound in happiness.
Come noble Philocles I cease you first,
(Mariana there are choice of other Lords)
In gracing you, it is the king I grace.
Come honest Lord, 'tis you must stand to me,
The Queen in mine doth challenge interest,
And I must fly for shelter to my friends.
And i'll be glad to be your coverture.
O no my Lord, not till the weather change.
Well when you please, mean time you do me grace.
Nay my Lord, there's a Lady worth the handling.
Sound music then, fill earth with heavens pleasure,
My Queen is out of time, though she keep measure.
Be lucky villainy,
Hit now the mark that mine ambition aims at
Me thinks I see that lean Italian devil, jealousy, dance
In his eyes: possess him spirit of rage,
Mufflle his understanding with black thoughts,
Let passion govern reason, falsehood truth,
Oblivion hide his age, hate kill his youth.
Thou dancest on my heart lascivious Queen,
Even as upon these rushes, which thou treadest:
See how her motions wind about his eyes,
And doth present to him her passions,
Now doth her moistening palm glow in his hand
And courts him unto dalliance: she dies, 'tis just,
she's slave to murder that is slave to lust.
Thou curse of greatness, waking eyed suspicion,
Now help thy poor friends, murder and ambition.
This strain contained a preticke change.
Proceed unto the next.
Sin follows sin, and change on change doth wait,
Thy change doth change my love to cruel hate.
Madam methinks this change is better than the first.
I if the music would not alter it.
Methinks 'tis worse, come we will have another strain
I pleased, let us proceed.
Rivals in crowns and beds of kings must bleed,
Can that fair house contain so foul a guest.
As lust, or cloak inordinate and base desires,
Under so fair a coverture; O yes,
Women can blind our sense when we see best,
And set fair landscapes on inconstancy,
Making us blind with seeing the dance ends,
Your sins are blackest, breach of love and friends.
Now to the king, blow rage till it flame hate,
A politician thrives the best in state.
Come sweet Prince Philocles,
devise some new delights to shorten time,
This dullness hath no relish in my sense,
It hath no pith, and sloth in my conceit
Is but a type of pride in best constructions.
Madam i'll stand, that a fair woman must be proud or else a fool.
I would feign hear that I'faith.
Thy reason wench, I pray the come disburse.
A woman fair is like a full blown rose,
Which holds the fair no longer than it grows.
A woman fair is like the finest gold.
Which kept from use is good though near so old.
Nay good Lord leave a little,
She that is fair is wise, and aught to know it,
For to that end did nature first bestow it.
Now of this knowledge if we be not proud,
We wrong the author, and we are allowed
To rank with senseless beasts, sith careless we
For want of pride detract our dignity.
Now knowing it, we know truth in the same,
Not to be proud of truth asks follies name.
This lesson still is read in beauty's school,
She that is fair and humble is a fool:
For neither know she how to hold her good,
Or to keep safe the treasure of her blood.
a notable declamation.
Nay madame by your leave,
Pride gives a lustre to a woman's fair,
Things that are highest prized, are ever dear.
Why is the Diamond the sapphires king,
But for esteem and rareness? both which spring
From the stones pride, which is so chaste and hard,
Nothing can pierce it, itself is itself's guard,
Now what is pride? Self love, our own esteem,
A strength to make us of ourselves well deem:
From whence this maxim I collect 'mongst other,
Who hates herself can never love another.
And to conclude, man's appetite grows dull
To what it may have, empty hope is full,
To all our sex on earth, maid, widow, wife and bride,
They happy live, when they live with chaste pride.
My Queen will speak as much for lust as she for pride, if the toy take her.
Your ladyship sows dangerous seed abroad.
But I hope my lord all grounds are not fruitful.
Well wench, shalt be the proud woman's champion.
And i'll defend them against all men, as at single tongue.
I had rather fight with a giant, than you at that weapon.
My Lord go forth, return in your own shape, say I am coming.
I go my Lord.
I'll note their countenance when they hear of me.
King's often see that which they would not see.
Dancing hath made me weary, what sport is next?
What your highness will command.
she will command you sir to play with her.
Madam his majesty is returned to court.
Nay then away with revels and with sports,
Lie hushed, and still this vainer idleness,
It now hath lost his spleen, come Lords away.
My sun is risen, brings a brighter day.
Darkness is thy delight lascivious Queen,
And thou wouldst have thy sun penned up in cloud:
If I be he, O falseness did I for this,
In single opposition hand to hand,
Hazard my royal blood for thee to be
My greatest shame, the scandal of my blood,
Whilst rumour crowns me king of infamy?
But I will be revenged: watch gentle Lord,
When next I see them, they shall taste of death,
Such power hath baseness over great defame
That monarchs cannot cover their own shame.
My plot yet holds a true proportion,
And I do see, an even way to rule,
A crown like a bold champion bids me on,
And fame shall chronicle mine enterprise:
The Queen being dead, I must oppose myself,
Against her tyrant husband, that's my claim
And with strong courage, stand the shock of war:
If of myself I can withstand the King,
Then all the Land will flock unto mine aid, if not,
The king is Gods anointed, my head fits the block,
And that's the worst, yet future times will tell:
I sunk not slightly, for a crown I fell.
Come on my masters, you know the tenure of the King's command,
And what in this great business you must do,
Which is to keep him safe, and not vouchsafe
That any creature speak or visit him,
Till he be brought to the presence of the king,
You must not start for bounty nor for threats.
No though he say he is a noble man,
As it may be, he may prove mighty borne,
Yet what for that? you must perform your office
Or else expect to taste sharp punishment.
Tut, fear not my Lord, we that have had Cerberus office so many years under a gate, are not to learn now to play either devils or tyrants, let us but see him, and then take no care for his safety.
Nay he shall be put into safe keeping, for my wife shall take charge of him.
'tis well devised, see where he comes,
He may not see my presence, think upon't,
Your charge is trusty, and of mighty weight.
Farewell.
Fear not: come my ●…arts, compass him about, and cease on him all at once, like so many ravens on a dead horse.
Now an eternal sleep, an apoplexy, a swoon
Cease on their senses, who in this disguise
Shall view or note my vile deformity.
I was bewitched with spells to my misfortune:
Or else star crossed with some hags hellishness.
Sure I said my prayers, rised on my right side,
Washed hands and eyes, put on my girdle last;
Sure I met no splay-footed baker,
No hare did cross me, nor no bearded witch,
Nor other ominous sign, O then why
Should I be thus damned in the devils nets?
Pst possible? this habit which I wear
Should become any man? now of my soul,
I loathe to see myself, and willingly
I would even vomit at my countenance.
Stand sir, we arrest you.
Arrest me, why I injure no man but myself.
You are the more unkind, he that wrongs himself, will not stick to wrong the whole world also.
Nay strive not for we arrest you by virtue of the King's commission.
Well my masters be careful, you may mistake me.
Indeed it is no marvel you are so like other men.
Indeed at this time, I am hardly like one of Gods making.
Faith and I am sure you are no man of a good tailors making, you are but pieced work.
Well yet I may hap to prove a noble man.
A whoremaster or an unthrift, away with him, and let no man man catechize him upon pain of my displeasure.
Roll on the chariot wheels of my dear plots,
And bear mine ends to their desired ●●kes:
As yet there's not a rub of wit, a gulf of thought,
No rocky misconstruction, thorny amaze,
Or other let of any doubtfulness;
As yet thy way is even smooth and plain,
Like the green Ocean, in a silent calm.
Blessed credulity, thou great God of error,
That art the strong foundation of huge wrongs,
To thee give I my vows and sacrifice,
By thy great deity he doth believe
Falsehoods, that falsehoods self could not invent,
And from that misbelief doth draw a course
To overwhelm even virtue, truth and sanctity.
Let him go on blessed stars, 'tis meet he fall,
Whose blindfold judgement hath no guide at all.
But O these shadows have bewitched long,
To threat and not to do, doth malice wrong;
And see here comes the Queen.
My Lord the Duke, your presence and my wish,
jump in an even line together: come we must to cards,
I have some crowns I needs must lose to you.
I humbly beseech your highness pardon me,
I have important business of the Kings,
Which doth command mine instant diligence.
Brother, indeed you shall attend the Queen,
Another time will serve those state dispatches.
Sister content you, the affairs of state
Must give their best attendance on the times,
And great occurrents must not lose their minutes.
Now i'll stand to it, that to be a state's man or a lawyer, is to be of the most thankless occupation that ever was derived from human invention.
Why I pray thee wench?
Because they bestow all the laborious toil of the mind until they be forty, that they may live imprisoned in a study chamber till they be fourscore, only this world's Mammon, which is great name and riches, like a string between a galley slaves legs, is the only ease of their fetters.
A notable construction of a noble labour: but shall we not have your company my Lord?
My service Madam, but my presence the King hath employed, only if you please, I will send Prince Philocles to your majesty.
No creature better for his skill in play,
Is equal with our knowledge, good my Lord,
Send him to my privy chamber presently.
I will, and send affliction after him,
And see where he comes, My Lord your presence hath
Saved me much labour, and a little care,
I was in quest for your fair company:
The Queen my Lord entreats you earnestly
You will attend her in her privy chamber.
Unto what end?
Only to waste some time at cards with her,
The lazy hours stick heavy on her thoughts,
Which she would lose with some forgetfulness.
Faith, & play near relished worse within my thoughts,
I know not how, but loaden heaviness
Draws me to be in love with melancholy.
The fit for you with more light sports
To chase that blood consumer from your breast,
Who with a honey poison doth devour,
And kill the very life of livelihood.
'tis true, & therefore shall your counsel tutor me,
Where is her majesty?
Gone to her privy chamber where she doth expect you.
I will attend her presently.
Do, and I will attend thee to thy grave,
Poor shallow Lord, by much too virtuous.
Ho, whose within there?
Your grace's pleasure.
Go tell his majesty that I must speak with him.
I go.
Come my Lord take your place, here are cards, and here are my crowns.
And here are mine, at what game will your majesty play?
At mount saint.
A royal game, and worthy of the name,
And meetest even for saints to exercise:
Sure it was of a woman's first invention.
It is not Saint, but Cent, taken from hundreds.
True, for 'mongst millions hardly is found one saint
Indeed you may allow a double game,
But come list for the dealing, it is my chance to deal.
An action most, most proper to your sex.
How now my waking dragon, thou whose eyes
Do never fall or close through Lethean sleep,
What is there a Hercules that dare to touch,
Or enter the Hesperian Rosaries?
Speak softly gentle Lord behold, behold
The silly birds are tangled in your snare,
And have no way to scape your punishment:
See how her eyes do court him, and his looks pay to her
love a double interest: fie fie, they are toe blame.
What are you my Lord?
Your highness servant, but misfortunes slave.
Your game I mean.
Nothing in show, yet somewhat in account,
Madam I am blank.
You are a double game, and I am no less, there's an hundred, & all cards made but one knave.
Mark that, of my life she means your majesty.
True, I know she holds me as her varlet,
And that I am imperfect in her game,
But my revenge shall give me better place,
Beyond the hate of her foul impudence.
Nay good my Lord observe, they will confirm you better.
What's your game now?
Four Kings as I imagine.
Nay I have two, yet one doth me little good.
Indeed mine are 2 Queens, & one I'll throw away.
Doth your majesty mark that?
You are the King that she is weary of,
And my sister the Queen that he will castaway.
Can you decard Madam?
Hardly but I must do hurt.
But spare not any to confirm your game.
Would you have more plain proof of their foul treason?
They do not plot your highness death alone.
But others which they think depend on me.
Myself and those which do you services,
They are bloody minded, yet for myself,
Were it not for your safety, I could wish
You would remit and blot these errors out,
In hope that time would bring them to more virtue.
O than thou didst not love me, nor thy faith
took hold upon my scandals, fie I am mad,
Shamed and disgraced, all wit-stung, wisdomless.
Within there ho?
Did your majesty call?
Go instantly, (nay do not look sad or pale,
Neither dispute with me nor with thy thoughts:
But as thou lov'st thy life, effect my will)
Call all my guard, ascend the Queen's privy chamber,
And in my name arrest her and Prince Philocles of treason:
Make no delay but in thy diligence
Show how thou dost respect me, arrested once,
Convey them unto straightest prison: away.
For you my Lord, go instantly prepare,
And summon all the Princes of our land
Unto an instant Parliament, where we
Will have them both condemned immediately,
Without their answers plaints or piteousness.
Since women's tears do blunt revenges sword,
I will not see nor hear them speak one word.
Madam and Prince Philocles, in the King's name I arrest you both of high treason.
He lies that saith I ever knew the word.
I pray thee do not affright me gentle Lord,
Thy words do carry death even in their sound.
Madam I am most sorry 'tis my fortune,
But what I do is by the King's commission.
Whence is that warrant grounded, or what's our treason?
I am his instrument but not his counsellor.
Witness my tears that I am innocent.
Madam be patiented, that we do not know,
We have no cause to grieve at, as for envies toil,
Let her even break her own gall with desire,
Our innocence is our prevention.
Be cheerful Madam, 'tis but some villain's sound,
Made only to amaze, not to confound.
And what must we do my Lord?
To prison are the words of my commission.
Then lead the way; he hath of grief no sense,
Whose conscience doth not know of his offence.
HOw now mad sister, your dear love is condemned,
A sweet adulterer.
How, condemned before their trial?
No they were condemned by Act of Parliament.
I do not hold thee brother for a man,
For it is reasonless to mock calamity,
If he die innocent, thrice happy soul;
If guilty, weep, that man should so transgress:
Nature of reason thus much doth importune,
Man should partake in grief with man's misfortune.
For him, if ere mine eyes weep, may they drop out
And leave my body blinder than my sense:
Pity my foe the ruin of my house,
My valour's scandal, and mine honour's poison!
No let him fall, for blood must still quench lust,
Law hath condemned him, than his death is just.
Spit out that monster envy, it corrupts you,
And mildly hear me answer for my love,
What did he 'gainst you was not honourable,
Which you 'gainst him would not have gladly done?
Will you hate him for acting your own thoughts?
Can it be ill in him yet good in you?
Let reason weigh this difference than you'll find
His honour poizes down his infamy.
Canst thou love him that brought thee to thy death?
No like a God he made me with his breath.
Did he not win thy love and then reject thee?
His honour not his love doth now neglect me.
Fond maid thy foolish dotage doth mistake him.
Hell shall have mercy ere I will forsake him.
Farewell then sister, friend to my greatest foe,
Revenge strikes home, being ended with one blow.
Prevention thou best midwife to misfortune,
Unfold this ugly monster's treachery,
And let his birth be ominous struck dead,
Ere it have being in this open world:
Loves commands nature, brother pardon me,
Thine envy dies by my loves liberty.
Invention (heart of wit) possess my brain,
For treason is to treason her own bane.
And you bright heavens, now aid me in my plots,
That truth may shine through falsehoods leprous spots.
My life I'll hazard to redeem my love,
Firm constancy like rocks can never move.
Be bold then maiden heart in his defence
He saved thy life, thy life's his recompense.
My wit and hopes have furnished me with all
The helps of art, to bring forth treasons fall.
Now to the means: some say that gold hath power,
To enter without force a gateless tower;
And I'll try that, which if it take fast hold,
I'll never blame them more that dote on gold.
Ho, whose within there?
Who calls, what would you have? I thought you were a woman you were so hasty: O Madam is it you? I cry you mercy.
My grief speaks loud sir, and my swift desire
o'er rules my tongue, makes it keep time with thought,
I long to see a prisoner in this ill built house.
What prisoner Madam?
The worthy Prince, the famous Philocles.
Madam I dare not, without especial warrant.
I have my brother's strong commission, hold there is gold.
This golden calf is an excellent idol; and sew of my profession but serves it this dumb god gives tongue to all men, wit to all men, honour to any man, but honesty to no man; and therefore as for honesty I mean not to deal with so dear a commodity, but leave it to my better: Madam those stairs direct you to his lodging.
I thank you sir.
This is a worthy Lady to give thus much for the bare sight of a man in affliction, if he were at liberty it were nothing: but being as it is, it is most bountiful, but it may be it is for the past hours of former recreations, well let it be what it shall be, I am sure it was not that I should hold this disputation: but see here she comes again.
Madam my soul cannot consent to leave
Your life in this great hazard, nor can death
Carry such ugly shape as doth the thought
That you are left in this extremity:
Indeed I will not leave you.
Will you grow mad? what shall your nobler spirit
Which is the school of wisdom grow so fond,
As to revolt from all our happiness?
Our plots you know, and how to manage cares,
Whose true events have true proportions.
Then dear Lord rest resolved, the jailer over hears:
Live you with safety, most worthy maid farewell.
Farewell fair Prince; thanks M jailer and a kind commend.
As much unto your ladyship. So now I'll lock my doors.
Is our commission, as we gave in charge,
Delivered over to the corregidors?
It is, and with such strictness and advice,
For speedy execution of the same,
That by this time I know they are in the way
Unto their execution, for the hour
Of death doth run upon his latest minutes.
'tis well: for till their shameless lives have end,
There can no comfort creep into my thoughts,
Or ought save mifchief keep me company.
Why was I borne to this malignity
And lowness of base fortune: yet my place
Above the level of the vulgars' sight,
O it is but to let me know thus much,
That those which lie within the richest graves
Were at the best but fortunes glorious slaves.
But see, here comes my shame.
My dearest Lord.
Pass and respect me not lascivious woman,
Thy tears are of the spears of crocodiles,
See how I stop mine ears against thy plaints,
And glue mine understandings from thy charms,
Nay call on him thou hast offended most,
Mercy from me were worse than cruelty.
My dearest dread, my best best sovereign,
Whom I have near offended but with zeal
And constant love, loyal and honourable,
Vouchsafe me though a Queen a subjects right,
And let me know for what offence I perish.
For thine adulterate and monstrous lust,
Shameful and gross and most unsufferable.
Who doth accuse us?
Ourself, and our own soul that have beheld
Your vile and most lascivious passages.
O that my tongue would not betray my knowledge
Then would I amaze them all with mine assertions:
Madam, challenge the law.
My gracious Lord, since no desert in me,
Can merit your belief, nor that your eye,
Can rightly judge my pure complexion:
Yet as your handmaid, let me beg the right,
Due unto wretches from our country's laws.
The tenure of the law you do demand.
That in the case of slander, where the proof
Proceeds as much from envy as from truth,
We are allowed our champions to defend
Our innocence, with a well ordered sword.
I looked for this objection and allow it,
Nor am I unprovided for your best
And strongest hope in any victory; Lords attend in my Champion.
Will you my Lord approve the King's assertion.
Madame, although against the nature of my spirit,
And my first duty, bound to your allegiance,
Yet now compelled by duty and by truth,
I must of force become your opposite.
Thou art no true Italian, nor true gentleman,
Thus to confound the glory of thy judgement.
Hath not that arm which now is armed against me
That valour, spirit, judgement and that worth,
Which only makes you worthy, stood t'approve
More than myself will challenge to my virtues?
And are you now basely turned retrograde?
Well, I perceive there's nought in you but spleen,
And times observance, still to hold the best:
Still I demand the Law.
And you shall have it in the amplest manner. Sound cornets.
There is a combatant on the defendants part; your majesties pleasure.
Give him his oath according to the laws.
Are the fair ends of this your warlike posture,
To prove the innocence of these two condemned?
So help you Jove.
They are.
Then give the warlike signal to the fight.
Thou art my slave, either confess or die.
Didst thou speak true, I would not sound a word
To save the world from cinders; yet that thou Mayest
With more resolved fury murder me,
This I confess, 'twas I that only stirred,
Out of strong falsehoods hate and jealousy
The kings eternal wrath, and made him think
Untruths, that even untruth would not suggest:
And all my malice sprung from that Prince Philocles.
No 'twas from me that still am Philocles.
My Philocles, my Queen, O double pardon me,
My jealousy, his envy, and your virtues:
Are sprung from such impatient contraries,
I cannot reconcile them; yet O pardon me:
My faith in life shall make you recompense:
For thee rare Mariana; thou hast wrought
A work of noble constant magnitude.
As for this monster, this my tempting devil,
Whose forfeit life is witness to his shame:
I give his life and fortunes to the Queen,
She whom his malice would have brought to death,
Shall now be judge and jurer of his breath.
In which commission, (madame) let it be enrolled
He is my brother and my best of blood.
And only that is charter for his life:
Live envious Lord, more envious than thou'rt great,
Live to lament thy worst of wretchedness,
Live to repent, since this I certain know:
Thine own galled conscience will be thy worst woe.
Come bring him away, thrust him forward, though favour and a great purse were against him.
How now, what tumult have we there?
And it please your majesty we have brought you here a slip a piece of false coin: one that is neither stamped with true coin for his excuse, nor with good clothes for his redemption.
Alphonso, in the name of madness how comes this Metamorphosis? Nay stand forth, discourse, if thou dost lie, thou art mine enemy.
Nay more, if thou stick in any bog, and by a trick seek to wind out, I will discover you.
This conjuration (believe it my Lord) shall make me leap out of all fetters, and briefly thus I have long time loved the fair wife of the Orator; & having no opportunity but his absence at the senate, I took that season: he out of negligence, omitting his papers returned unseasonably, found me insufficiently, and forced me to take sanctuary strangely, which however I purchased, yet he found mine apparel, and mistaken in the tenure, reached it presently, put it on immediately: and now in the senate house is pleading in it seriously.
I cannot blame him, you having got so much within his inward garment.
Of all which my Lord, I being (in a strict conceit) a bawdy witness: and having both from the orator's scorns and delays received many indignities; though by this discovery to cry quittance with my proud enemy.
And you have amply done, yet this jest,
So perfect doth deserve more memory.
Florio, go bid the Orator attend us presently.
And now to you Drap and Velour, I did
Refer you long since to the Orator.
Yet I note your attention: come there is
Some too close fisted hardness in your hearts,
You gripe too hard, your bribes will not disburse,
Come tell me truly, as you look for heaven,
What must you pay for your dispatches?
A thousand crowns we offered willingly.
And will your suit avail with such disbursement?
It will, and we most richly satisfied.
Will you bestow the money on ourself,
We will see the business perfected.
With all our hearts, and be full joyed thereat, here are the crowns.
You shall have your dispatches.
See here comes the Orator, Prat come hither.
These Gentlemen whom long since I referred
To Your dispatches, are yet unsatisfied.
Alas my Lord the state,
I know implores you, yet there's many minutes
May give your best cares leisure; come there is
Some odd disburse, some bribe, some gratulance,
Which makes you lock up leisure, come tell true,
What bribe must they give, what is your unroost price
But five hundred crowns of my best conscience.
Tut it is nothing, hold here is the coin,
And let them have their pattens presently:
Or look to lose both place and sovereignty.
Legions of devils haunt their diligence.
Fie, I would not have a man of your high place,
Or for respect of wealth or base observance
In smallest things thus to neglect your credit.
Why look you my Lords, this Orator is not like others of his rank,
Who from their garish and fantastic humours,
Go thorough the streets, spotted in peacocks plumes.
Wearing all colours, laces, broideries,
Satins and silks, so antic garnished,
That when their gowns are off, you cannot find
In Italy a master shaped more nice.
But this fellow Prate, here's of another sort,
Clothed like himself, demure and soberly:
Nay you shall see him for a precedent.
Passion of mine eyesight, who have we here?
This is Alphonso, there's the Orator.
Heart of impatience, I am then a Cuckold,
A scorn, a by word and a laughing stock.
What is my wife turned whoreand must her depth
Be sounded by the plumes of foreigners?
Well, the revenge that I will take for this my shame,
Shall make all whores hereafter dread my name.
Not for thy life, not for my love I charge thee:
Thy wife is honest, chaste and virtuous:
Only this wanton Lord, with lust and come
Hath much attempted, but prevailed in nought,
For proof see here the crowns he would have given
T'have purchased her bed's honour but she would not,
Which I bestow on you for recompense.
Therefore as thou dost hope my grace to find,
So to thy wife, be loving, gentle kind.
Your majesty may mould me to your pleasure
I thank you and will quittance it.
Now Meshant, we restore to you your lands,
Your honours and near places, next ourself,
To all that feel distaste in any sore,
We give to cure them, all our grace and favour,
Thus storms bring gentle sunshine, and our hands,
May after shipwreck bring us to safe lands.