Rossa! Th'eternall wisdome doth not couet
Of man, his strength, or reason, but his loue.
And not in vaine: Since loue, of all the powres,
Is it which gouernes euery thought of ours.
I speake by Mustapha: For as a Father,
How often deem'd I those light-iudging praises
Of multitudes, whom my loue taught to flatter,
Truths oracles; and Mustapha's true stories?
So dearely Nature bidds our owne be lou'd:
So ill a Iudge is loue of things belou'd.
But is contempt the fruit of Parents care?
Doth kindnesse lessen Kings authority,
Teaching our Children pride, our Vassalls wit,
To subiect vs, that subiect are to it?
This frailty in my selfe I conquer must,
And stay the false vntimely hopes it workes,
Threatning the Fathers ruine in the Sonne:
Many with trust, with doubt few are vndone.
Sent for he is: Nor shall the painted shewes
Of fame, or kindnesse longer seele mine eyes?
For since he striues to vndermine my Crowne,
I will as firmely watch to keepe him downe.
Solyman my Lord! The knowledge who was Father
To Mustapha, made me (poore silly woman)
Thinke worth in blood had naturall succession:
But now, I see, Ambitions mixtures may
The gold of Natures elements allay.
His Fame vntimely borne: Strength strangely gather'd,
Honnor wonne with honoring, Greatnesse with humblenesse,
(A Monarchs heire in courses popular,)
Make me diuine some strange aspiring minde;
Yet doubtfull; for it might be Art, or Kinde.
But looke into him by his outward wayes:
Persia, our old imbrued enemy,
Treats of peace with the Sonne, without the Father:
A Course in all Estates to Princes nice;
But here much more; where he that Monarch is,
Must (like the Sunne) haue no light shine, but his.
The Offers; reall Crownes, or hopes of Kingdomes.
What suddaine knot hath bound vp our diuisions?
Made them that only fear'd our greater growing,
Offer such proiects for our greater growing?
" 'Tis true, that priuate thoughts may easily change:
But States, whose wayes are Time; Occasion, Seate,
" Hane other ends, then Chance, in all they treat.
Yet be it, all the world would vs obey;
In Monarchies: which surfet, more than pine;
The King should iudge: Strength knowes what strength can weld:
The best foundation, else may ouer-build.
No, no: vpon the pitch of high attemps
I see him stand, sporting with Wrong, and Feare:
For Law, and Duty, both are captiues there.
His hopes, the hopes of all; for all aspire:
His meanes, that proud, rebellious Discontent,
Which scornes both Gouernors, and Gouernment.
Solyman! Feare is broke loose within me.
What will, or may, mee-thinkes already happens;
His power thus great, will fixt, occasion ready,
Shaddowes of ruine to my heart deliuer.
Confused noyse within my eares doth thunder
Of multitudes, that with obeying threaten.
Solyman! while feare, to lose thee, wisheth death,
My feare againe, to leaue thee, wisheth breath.
Rossa! I scorne there should be cause of feares
In one mans rage; for hard then were our state,
That reynes of all the world desire to beare:
Yet thy disquiet shall increase my hate.
Thy wishes vaine to thee yet neuer were:
For loue, and Empire, both alike take pleasure,
Part of themselues vpon deserts to measure.
And, but that all my ioyes haue sorrowes image,
I could say; I take pride in thine affection:
For Power may be fear'd; Empire ador'd;
Rewards may make knees bow; and selfe-loue humble:
But loue is onely that which Princes couet;
And for they haue it least, they most doe loue it.
Care therefore for thy selfe; I hold thee deare;
And as for mee!
Though Fortune be of glasse, and apt to breake;
Kings life kept but in flesh, and easily pierc'd;
Kings Crownes no higher than priuate armes may reach;
Yet these all-daring spirits are rarely knowne,
That vpon Princes graues dare rayse a Throne.
Sir! few in number or Time presents children;
Where man ends, there ends discontentments empire;
Nouelty in flesh hath alwaies had a dwelling;
Then tell me Lord; what man would choose his roome,
That must expect in wickednesse a meane,
Or else be sure to feele a fatall doome?
Can that stay in the midst whose center's lowest?
Old age is Natures Pouerty, and scorne;
Desires riches liue in Princes children;
Their youths are Comets, within whose corruption
Men prophesie new hopes of better fortunes.
Ah Sir! Corrupt occasion still preferreth
The wisdome, that for selfe-aduantage erreth.
Wisdome is not vnto it selfe in debt,
That leaueth nothing, but a God, aboue it.
Will he returne from death vnto the liuing?
No Sir! But much may hap before his death;
Who thinking nothing worse, and nothing after,
Knowes thought of wrong is death, if Princes liue;
Where dead, all heires their owne good doe forgiue.
I sent, he comes; and come is in my power.
Before he comes, who knowes your fatall hower?
The wicked wrestle both with Might, and Slight:
" While Princes liue, each mans life guardeth theirs;
When they are dead, mens loues goe with their feare.
Slaine by the way lesse grudge, more safety were.
Wrong is not Princely; and much lesse is feare.
These glorious hazards tempt, and hasten fate;
They well become a Man, but not a State.
This feare in women shewes a kindnesse too;
And is for men to thanke, but not to doe.
Is Prouidence of no more vse to Power?
Than to preserue the Fame of Power entire,
Which often vndermined is by feare.
I doe suspect, yet is there nothing done;
I lose my Fame, if I so kill my Sonne.
Though I yet know not he hath done amisse,
I doubt; and heauy Princes doubting is.
Though I resolue I will not kill him there;
It mortall is if Kings see cause to feare.
When Mustapha returnes my iealous care
Will very hardly danger ouersee:
Order alone holds States in Vnity.
Fond Man! distract with diuers thoughts on foot,
That rack'st thy selfe, & Natures peace do'st breake;
Iudgenot the Gods aboue: it doth not boot,
Nor doe thou see that which thou dar'st not speake.
Power hath great scope; she walkes not in the wayes
Of priuate truth: Vertues of common men
Are not the same which shine in Kings aboue,
And doe make feare bring forth the workes of loue.
Admit that Mustapha not guilty bee;
Who by his Prince will rise, his Prince must please;
And they that please iudge with humility.
Yonder they are, whose charge must be discharged,
In Ross●'s face behold desire speaketh,
He keepes the lawes, that all lawes forme breaketh.
Is Mustapha in health, and coming?
My Lord! already come: For what can stay,
Where Lo●e, and Dutie both teach to obey?
In what strange ballance are mans humors peised?
Since each light change within vs, or without.
Turnes feare to hope, and hope againe to doubt.
If thus it worke in Man, much more in Thrones,
Whose tender heights feele all thinne aires that moue,
And worke that change below they vse aboue.
For on the Axis of our humors turne
Church-rites, and Lawes; Subiects desire, and wit;
Al● which, in all men come, and goe with it.
Rossa! a King ought therefore to suspect
Feares, fearefull counsells which incline to blood,
Wherein, but truths, no Influence is good.
Else will inferior practise euer cast
Such glasly shaddowes vpon all our errors,
As he that sees not ruine, shall see terrors.
Power therefore should affect the Peoples stampe,
" Whose good, or ill thoughts, euer proue to Kings,
Like aire, which either health, or sicknesse brings.
Now Rossa! by these straight lines, if we sound
The hollow depths of Rostens mysterie;
He will the canker of this State be found.
Long hath he wau'd betwixt my sonne, and me,
Making succession sacred, whilst he felt
Practise could not diuide the barke, and tree:
His end being not to finde, or cherish truth,
But rather vices, where his Art works ruth.
Long hath he weigh'd our humors with his ends,
To finde which nature was the fittest mould
For him, to bring to passe in, what he would.
And though his power be on my old age built,
Yet that, as slow to ruine, he dislikes:
Guilt seeking shields for euery blow it strikes.
Now in my Sonne though actiue powers he finde,
Yet what he cannot gouerne, giues offence;
From birth, or worth, still fearing competence.
He grounds this worke on iealousie of Kings,
" Where hopefull goodnesses oft in Successors
Seeme not strengths, as they bee, but strong oppressors.
And when this Art could not procure his fall,
Nor shape our humors like Procustes bed,
Where all that fit him not, are ruined:
Straight then he offers vp vnto my Sonne
My life, my Crowne, and all that I haue wonne.
Such slender props are Princes Fauorites,
" Who like good fortunes children, loue their mother;
And neuer can be true to any other.
In these nets shall he then catch him, and me,
And so this high, and soueraigne Scepter-power
Sinke into slaues by my infirmity?
No, No: when Princes, by defect of minde,
A pronesse feele, to sinke into their slaues;
Wherein they make their Creatures their graues:
By Nature haue they not a Phenix -fire,
From their owne ashes to reuiue againe,
And in their childrens honor, liue, and raigne●
Then Rossa! iudge: My loue hath made vs one;
And who can iudge these humorists, but we;
Since hope, and feare below lacke eyes to see?
Mustapha is through misprision hither come,
Brought to the practise of this crafty slaue,
Carelesse in which he make the others tombe:
His netts are layd; our thoughts for stales pitch'd downe,
To catch our selues in, and in vs, the Crowne.
But Natures lawes haue conquered Princes doubts;
And betweene King, and man, what was begonne,
Concludes betwixt a Father and a Sonne.
Behold! these sandy hearts haue no foundation;
Yet hence must I, with hazard, worke my will,
That haue to doe with thought, nor good, nor ill.
My Lord! your doubts from arguments did rise
Of wanton pride, ambitious seeking loue:
" And can remissions be in Nature wise,
While States vpon the steepe of danger moue?
No: thinke what pregnant grounds of his ambition
Resolu'd you first, his Greatnesse was your danger:
And shall a Father waue a Kings suspition?
Since Mischiefe, whilst her head shewes in a clowd,
In Pluto's Kingdome doth her body shrowd.
Suspition may enquire, but not conclude;
Both hope, and feare; doe with excesse delude.
Tell Beglerbie! how did he welcome thee?
In your accesse what found you; pompe, or pride?
Was he reseru'd; or else did he descend?
Appear'd I as his Soueraigne; or his friend?
His Court was great; and that which adds to you
Is that all Princes had their Agents there
Confessing, in the Sonne, the Fathers due:
And from them all the honnor done him such,
As if none thought the World for him too much.
Yet I no sooner to his presence came,
But he paid all their homages to me,
The rest look'd on, as when men wonders see.
What was his cheere? Did'st thou obserue his eyes,
When thou declared'st my will to haue him come?
First, at your name he bow'd in humble wise;
The rest appear'd to be a ioyfull doome.
Onely the Persian spake (it seemes) with care:
God make these fauors good; for they be rare.
This is the glasse which Father lookes not in;
The Workman hides, the instruments discouer:
See how it fitts a King to be a louer?
Sir! marke these words: whence should their wonder grow?
His scorne, and grudge, he worshipps, and obeyes:
In him, or for him, what strange works are these?
Tell me his manner. How, did he dispose
His followers, and affayres till his returne?
The newes of warre against our Persian foes,
I am sure, made not his vndertakers mourne.
The Persian Agent some distraction shew'd;
All else their eys to their Sunne rising turne.
What's the discourse of Court? and what the face?
His carriage is it Royally seuere,
Reseru'd, like vs, by attributes of place,
Or popular, as power in people were?
Shapes he his course to rule, or gaine a State?
Is our course chang'd, or doth he imitate?
He windes not spirits vp with Power, or Feare:
The antient forme he keepes, where it is good:
His proiects reformation euery where:
His care to haue diseases vnderstood:
Reuerend vnto your Throne; more to your deeds:
It is no imitation which exceeds.
What doth he in our Church, or law reproue?
What error in our discipline of warre?
With zeale he doth adore the Powers aboue;
With zeale inferior duties paid him are:
And, for his ends on publike centers moue,
His ends are seru'd with euery bodies loue.
His Court, like yours, the image of a Campe:
In yours, your Power; in his, Himselfe the Lampe.
He sees (men say) but only what he showes,
I meane examples both of Power, and Loue:
You see againe what from within you growes,
Such humble feare, as fearefull power moues.
His Campe, in rest and action both, content;
Assiduous order workes this frame in either:
Your discipline now loose, now ouerbent;
Forc'd to vse feare in both, contents in neither.
This freedome Sir! makes them you two compare,
Of whom, both he and they, but shadowes are.
What be his troopes? An armie, or a Traine?
Come they to dwell, or to goe backe againe?
His will was to depart immediately,
With no traine, but the Basha, Priest, and I.
Your honor only ministred debate;
Princes (some thought) stood fast by keeping state:
His Pompe gaue lustre to your Power, some said,
For Princes should be gloriously obeyed.
At this gappe entred Loue, and Intercession,
The Multitude all liberties approu'd,
The Wise to giue them way held it discretion,
Where it gaue honor to your selfe aboue.
Thus to the Coast number and order come,
Where Mustapha leaues all to bide your doome.
Within the Port, or where doth he attend?
What's the aspect betweene his owne, and ours?
Gaines he, or waines he by approching power?
His foot on land, straight to the Church he goes;
Applause, and wonder follow to that place,
Greater he, by your Influence, still growes,
Your Trophies vpon him the people place.
Vnto the State men prophecy progression,
And see your age, 'tis true, in your Succession.
Your Power, and Loue both, in his Pompe appeare;
For euen the Bassha's next you I did meet
Hastning to honor him, whom you hold deare.
What greater Triumph to a glorious Father,
Than such a Sonne for age to leane vnto,
Whence declination may more forces gather,
And impotence retaine ability to doe?
Goodnesse exiling iealousie of State,
From him whose dutie sets his power a rate.
Now by the way a paper vp I tooke,
Spread by the Mufti, as it should appeare,
Fore-telling with authority of booke,
What those times wrap'd in clouds, and these make cleare.
Wherein these Prophet-spirits did foreshow
The progresse of this Empire to the heighth;
Vnder what Princes humors it should grow,
Vnder whose weakenesse fall againe by weight:
Inferring this; that where declining spirits
To governe mighty Scepters God ordaines,
Order no Basis findes; Honor must fall:
Where man is nothing, Place cannot doe all.
Againe where worth, and wisdome soueraigne be,
And he that's King of Place, is King of Men,
Change, Chance, or Ruine cannot enter then.
And such a King must sit vpon this Throne;
Vnperfect times (they say) are fully runne,
And this perfection present in your Sonne.
Change hath prepar'd her moulds for Innouation.
I see inferior wheeles of practice moue,
Yet they preuaile not on the Powers aboue.
His worth rests constant, and yet works this motion,
They to him, for him, sacrifice at randome
All which they haue, and haue not, in deuotion.
He is the Glasse, in which their light affections
Come to behold what image they shall take:
If libertie they finde, then Anarchie they make.
On time, place, truth, these spirits neuer rest.
His worth, thus innocent, how can I feare?
Their thoughts, thus violent, can Power digest?
Then Gouernment! thy hand must cut betweene
My fearefull dangers, and his fearelesse praise.
In all States, Power, which oppresseth spir●●s,
Imprisons Nature, Empire disinherits.
This Throne grew not by delicate alliance,
Combining State with State, all States to Lawes,
Of idle Princes, and base subiects cause.
We grew by curious improuing all;
Our selues to people, people vnto vs;
Worth, through our selues, in them we planted thus.
And shall I helpe to make succession lesse,
Blasting the births of Nature and Example,
In narrow feares of selfe-vnworthinesse?
No, No: The art of Monarchie is more:
Princes must strength by such succession gather,
With future hopes all present smarts are eased;
Age hath a veyle, and Maiestie is pleased.
Who makes, can marre. Honor, reward, and feare,
Are reynes of Power: The ends inherent there.
Behold! I stand amaz'd: Sir! ease my heart.
A King lesse than a man! more than a God!
I know not where to stay, nor how to part.
God hath ordain'd that wickednesse shall die:
Sir! who is guiltie? Mustapha, or I?
He now is in the hands of Power, and Time.
His danger is to come, and ours is past;
Lets see into what moulds our owne are cast.
Who will endure the sentence he may giue,
Betweene you two? He must be King that liues.
Your graue prepared is among your owne:
Neighbours, Church, People, Souldiers, made the Stage,
Where Hope, and Youth shall ruine Feare, and Age.
Most wretched I, rais'd to be ouerthrowne.
If you will die, then am I lost in you;
And die you must, if you beleeue your owne.
If he shall liue; then am I prou'd vntrue,
Hated by him, whom you haue plac'd aboue,
Lost vnto you, and ruin'd by my loue.
" Ah Confidence! thou Glorie of the ill!
How safely do'st thou blinded Power assayle,
" That hauing all, yet knowes not what it will?
Rossa! you moue me; yet remoue I not.
Man comprehends a man, but not a King.
I feele my selfe ('tis true) and I feele you;
How to it selfe can Power then proue vntrue?
Succession on the present neuer winnes,
But by the death of body, or of spirit:
All heires by our mortality runne in.
Let not misprision wound me in thy loue:
Great inequality of worth you yeeld
To them, you thinke can on my ruines build.
LIke as mixt Humors, drawne vp from the ground,
Are vnto many formes, and functions bound;
Partly out of their natiue Propertie,
Partly the Climes, through which their iourneyes be;
Some into Meteors, that amaze below;
Others to Comets, which fore-threaten woe;
Some into Hailestones, that afflict the earth;
Others to Raine, which hastens euery birth;
Lightning, and Thunder onely made of those,
Which the cold Regions double heats inclose:
So is fraile Mankind, though in other fashion,
Rais'd, and let fall with his owne earthly passion;
Formed, transformed, and made instruments
In many shapes, to serue Powers many bents:
Feeding Superiours, euen as Vapors doe,
Which spending themselues, scourge their Parents too.
Some in mishaped Meteors, terrifying;
All constant spirits, vnder Tyrants lying;
Others like Windes, which AEolus makes blow,
To breathe themselues out, while they ouerthrow;
Some like sweet Dewes, that nourish where they touch;
Like Exhalations, some inflame too much;
Bondage, and ruine, only wrought by those,
That Kings with seruile Flattery inclose,
Hatching, in double heats of Power, and Will,
Thunder, and Lightning, to amaze, and kill.
Thus Tyrants deale with Peoples liberty,
The nether Region cannot long liue free.
Thus Tyrants deale with vs of higher place,
As drawne vp onely to disperse disgrace.
Ecchos of Power, that pleasingly resound
Those heauy Taxes, where with Princes wound.
Exhausters of fraile Mankind by our place,
To make them poore, and consequently base.
With Colonies we eat the Natiue downe,
And, to increase the Person, waine the Crowne.
With idle visions trafficking mens mindes
To humble moderation, in all kindes
Till vnder false stiles of Obedience,
We take from Mankinde all, but suffering sense,
Yet euen by these sailes, which for Scepters moue,
We forced are with modest breath to proue,
Which way these People-tides will passe with ease;
Crownes wounding deepely, when they striue to please.
Whence, as we dare not blow them vp to rage;
So againe, if we quit this People-stage,
Thrones know not where to act those fancie-playes,
Which catch the lookers on so many wayes.
For we, like Dewes, drawne to be clouds aboue,
Straight grow with that attracting Sunne in loue;
Which euer raiseth light things vp to fall,
In crafty Power Creation naturall.
Wrapt in which Crowne-mists, men cannot discerne
How dearely they her glittering tinctures earne,
Till, thorough glassie Time, these Cage-birds see,
That Honor is the badge of Tyrannie.
Lawes the next pillars be, with which we deale,
As Sophistries of euery Common-weale;
Or rather Nets, which people doe aske leaue,
That they, to catch their Freedomes in, may weaue,
And still adde more vnto the Sultans power,
By making their owne frames themselues deuoure.
These Lesbian rules, with shew of reall grounds,
Giuing Right, narrow; Will, transcendent bounds.
The Mufti, and their spirituall iurisdictions,
By course succeed these other guilt-inflictions:
Conscience annexing to our Crescent starre
All freedomes, that in Mans fraile Nature are;
By making doctrines large, strict milde, seuere;
As Power intends to stirre, vp hope, or feare:
Which heauenly shaddow, with earth-centers fixt,
Racke men, by truth, and vntruths, strangely mixt;
And proue to Thrones such a supporting cause,
As finely giues Law to all other Lawes.
Thus like the Wood that yeelds helues for the Axe,
Vpon it selfe to lay an heauy taxe:
We silly Bassha's helpe Power to confound,
With our owne strength exhausting our owne ground.
An Art of Tyrannie; which workes with men,
To make them beasts, and high-rais'd Thrones their denne,
Where they, that mischiefe others, may retire
Safe with their prey, as lifting Tyrants higher.
By which enthralling of our selues, with others,
Proue we not both Confusions heires, and mothers?
Farre vnlike Adam, putting Ciuil names
Vpon those errors, which the whole world blames.
For if Power rauine more than is her owne;
People, we say, are Chequers to a Throne.
Againe, if she to rise vp, will pull downe;
Creation, we say, still inheres the Crowne.
If good men chance to interrupt this way;
Too much in vertue oft there is, we say:
Since each inferior limbe must from the Head
Receiue his Standard and be ballanced.
If People grudge their freedome, thus made thrall;
Power is their body, they but shadowes all.
If God himselfe by Law, or Influence,
Seemes but to limit this Omnipotence;
Euen as in Christian Courts of Chancerie,
Though land, or Titles cannot setled be;
Yet where the Person dares to disobey,
Through him, his Title they imprison may:
So though with Tyrants God transcendent be,
Yet plague they his for too much pietie.
And, by distinctions from the Pulpits doome,
Leaue still for Crowne-impiety a roome.
This is our office vnder Tyrannie,
Where Power, and Passion only currant be.
But where the Better rules the Greater part,
And reason onely is the Princes Art;
There, as in Margents of great volum'd Bookes,
The little notes, whereon the Reader lookes,
Oft aide his ouerpressed memory,
Vnto the Authors sense where he would be:
So doe true Counsellors assist good Kings,
And helpe their Greatnesse on, with little things.
Honor, in chiefe, our Oath is to vphold,
That by no trafficke it be bought, or sold.
Else looke what brings that dainty Throne-worke downe;
Addes not, but still takes something from a Crowne.
Proffit, and her true Mine, Frugality,
Incident likewise to our Office be:
As husbanding the Scepters spreading right,
To stretch it selfe, yet not grow infinite;
Or with Prerogatiue to Tyrannize,
Whose workes proue oft more absolute, than wise.
Not mastering Lawes, which freedome interrupts;
Nor moulding Pulpits, which is to corrupt,
And helpe Change in; whose vanity still tends
To worke immortall things to mortall ends.
But our part is to keepe the Iustice free,
As equall peising liberality;
Which both contents the People that receiues,
And Princely giuer more enabled leaues.
Likewise with forraigne States we keepe respect
By diligence, which seldome findesneglect.
In Treaties still concluding mutuall good;
Since no one byas'd Contracteuer stood.
In Complements we striue to hold such measure,
That outward forme consume not inward treasure.
For betwixt Man, and Man; 'twixt King and Kings;
Our place should offer well-digested things.
Else as those Crudities, which doe remaine
Within the body, all Complexions staine:
So doth aduantage betweene State, and State,
Though finely got, yet proue vnfortunate:
And oft Disorder like in gouernment,
Leaue euen those that prosper, discontent.
But is our great Lords Character like these?
Are disproportion'd humors made to please?
Can Parricide, euen vnto Nature treason,
Draw any true line from, Mans Zenith, Reason?
Then how can Vice, in this confus'd estate,
Long scape the doome of neuer-sparing Fate?
For, as we see, when sicknesse deeply roots,
Meat, drinke, and drugges alike doe little boot;
Because all what should either nurse, or cure,
As master'd by diseases, grow impure:
So when Excesse (the maladie of Might)
Hath (Dropsy -like) drown'd all the stiles of right,
Then doth Obedience (else the food of Power)
Helpe on that dropsie Canker to deuoure.
In which craz'd times, woe worth foreseeing wit,
Which marre it selfe may, cannot helpe with it.
For as those Kings that conquer neighbour Nations,
First by the sword make Chaos of Creations;
Then, Spider -like a curious netting spinne,
Inuisible, to catch Inferiors in:
So when the Art of powerfull Tyrannie
Hath vndermin'd mans natiue libertie;
Then, like Lords absolute of words, and deeds,
They soone change weeds to herbs, and herbs to weeds.
Which ouer-winding while the People feare,
Can Tyrants hope of Sanctuarie there?
O●● when this feare hath tied Mens mindes together,
Proues this a storme, or constant Winter-weather?
Againe, when Selfenesse hath mens hearts estrang'd,
Is not one Soueraigne soone to many chang'd?
Lastly, where absolute seemes only wise,
Is not one, enuious there, in many eyes?
Disease thus growne, the Crisis, and the Doome,
Shew Princes must be ours, or we their Tombe.
For as the Ocean, which is euer deepe,
Vnder her smooth face, doth in secret keepe
The vast content of deaths deuouring wombe,
Where those desires which venture finde a tombe;
AEolus, with sweet breath, making all things faire,
Till he hath bound hope Prentise to his aire;
Then adding more breath to that breath they spend,
Makes tide with tide, and waue with waue contend?
Enforcing men, for taxe, to throw their goods
Into his mercilesse, entising floods;
Where swallowing some in sight of those he spares,
Euen they that prosper best must swarme with cares:
So doth vast Power, at first, spread out her slights
Of Grace, and Honor; smooth bewitching bayts;
And when mens Liues, their Goods, and Libertie,
Are left in trust once with her Tyrannie;
Then, Ocean -like, blowne vp with stormes of passion,
Which, but excesse, makes all seeme out of fashion,
It takes aduange to deuoure the Iust,
Because to Lawes, that limit Thrones, they trust
Ruines the Wise, whose eye discernes too much,
And thereby brings Powers errors to the touch;
Discards the Learned, for the difference
They make betweene the truth, and Princes sense;
Staines the Religious, as if they withstood
Powers will, the stampe of all that's currant good:
Yet saues it some, that they may witnesse beare,
Where Power raignes, there Worth must liue in feare.
Thus are we Soothers, as all shaddowes be,
Sworne to the bodies of Authority.
Thus doe Inferiors, catch'd with their owne ends,
Pay double vse for all the Scepter lends;
Not seeing, while Man striues to stand by Grace,
He offers Natures freedome vp to Place;
Whose true relation, betweene Men, and Might,
Assures vs, Thrones should not be infinite,
Lastly, thus doe we suffer God to wayne,
Vnder the Humors of a Sultans raigne.
And in the fatall ruine of his Sonne,
Cut off our owne liues, on a lesse threed spunne.
WHo, standing in the shade of humble vallies,
Lookes vp, and wonders at the state of hils;
When he with toyle of weary limbes ascends,
And feels his spirits melt with Phaebus glories,
Or sinewes starke with AEolus bitter breathing,
Or thunder-blasts, which comming from the skie,
Doe fall most heauy on the places high:
Then knowes (though farther seene, and farther seeing
From hills aboue, than from the humble vallies)
They multiply in woes, that adde in glories.
Who weary is of Natures quiet Plaines,
A meane estate, with poore, and chast desires;
Whose Vertue longs for knees, Blisse for opinion;
Who iudgeth pleasures Paradise in purple;
Let him see me: No Gouernor of Castile,
No petty Princes choice, whose weake dominions
Make weake, vnnoble Counsels to be currant:
But Bassha vnto Solyman; whose scepter,
Nay seruants, haue dominion ouer Princes:
Vnder whose feete, the foure forgotten Monarches,
The footstooles lie of his eternall glorie:
Euen I thus rais'd, this Solymans belou'd,
Thus caried vp by fortune to be tempted,
Must, for my Princes sake, destroy Succession,
Or suffer ruine to preserue Succession.
Oh happy Men! that know not, or else feare
This second slippery place of Honors steepe,
Which we with enuy get, and danger keepe.
Vnhappy state of ours! wherein we liue,
Where doubts giue lawes, which neuer can forgiue:
Where Rage of Kings not only ruines be,
But where their very loue workes miserie.
For Princes humors are not like the Glasse,
Which in it shewes what shapes without remaine,
And with the body goe, and come againe:
But like the Waxe, which first beares but his owne,
Till it the seale in easy mould receiue,
And by th'impression onely then is knowne.
In this soft weaknesse Rossa prints her art,
And seekes to tosse the Crowne from hand to hand;
Kings are not safe whom any vnderstand.
First, of her selfe, she durst send Rosten forth
To murther Mustapha, his dearest Sonne:
He found him only guarded with his worth,
Suspecting nothing, and yet nothing done.
Rosten is now return'd: For wicked feare
Did euen make him wickednesse forbeare.
A Beglerbie goes since to call him hither;
The Colour, warre against the Persian King;
The Truth, to suffer force of Tyrannie,
From his enforced Fathers Iealousie.
Who vtters this, is to his Prince a Traytor:
Who keepes this, Guilty is; his life is ruth,
And dying liues, euer denying truth.
Thus hath the Fancy-law of Power ordain'd,
That who betrayes it most, is most esteem'd:
Who saith it is betray'd, is Traytor deem'd.
I sworne am to my King, and to his Honor:
His Humors? No: which they, that follow most,
Wade in a Sea, wherein themselues are lost.
Yet Achmat stay! For who doth wrest Kings mindes,
Wrestles his faith vpon the stage of Chance;
Where vertue, to the world by fortune knowne,
Is oft misiudg'd, because shee's ouerthrowne.
Nay Achmat stay not! For who truth enuirons
With circumstances of Mans fayling wit,
By feare, by hope, by loue, by malice erreth;
Nature to natures banckrupts he engageth:
And while none dare shew Kings they goe amisse,
Euen base Obedience their Corruption is.
Then Feare! dwell with the ill; Truth is assur'd:
Opinion! be, and raigne with Fortunes Princes.
Policie! goe peece the faults of Mortall Kingdomes.
Death! threaten them that liue to die for euer,
I first am Natures subiect, then my Princes;
I will not serue to Innocencies ruine.
Whose Heauen is Earth, let them beleeue in Princes.
My God is not the God of subtill murther:
Solyman shall know the truth: I looke no further.
Behold! he comes like Maiestie confus'd;
Horror, Reuenge, Rage lighten in his eyes.
All Lawes giue place where Power is ioyn'd with these;
And he must goe beyond that will appease.
Mercie, and Loue! you Phrases popular,
Which vndermine, and limit Princes Thrones,
Goe, seeke the regions of Equality.
Greatnesse must keepe those Arts by which it grew,
And euer what it wills, or feares, make true.
My Lord! what moues these vndermining words,
Which shewing feare in you, stirre feare in vs?
Cruelty, and Dissolution enter thus.
Doth Kings restraint of wrath appeare like feare?
Shall our remissenesse suffer more than this?
Can horror onely, adoration beare?
Behold, the World layes Homage at my feet,
To them by sword, and fire I am knowne:
Must Kings that change this likenesse lose their owne?
Two States I beare; his Father, and his King;
These two, being Relatiues, haue mutuall bonds;
Neglect in either, all in question brings.
My Sonne climes vp with wings of seeming Merit;
His course, Applause; and mine, the scale of Order;
By Dissolution, he builds vp Content;
And I displease, by planting Gouernment.
My Age spends on the stocke of Honor wonne;
Flesh hath her buds, her flowers, her fruit, her fall;
Worke hath his time, and Rest is naturall:
His Youth hath hope for right; and Fame for end;
Time for a stage; for riuall Expectation;
Ascending by the ballance we descend.
Let Youth affect goodwill, praise, reputation,
Fashion it selfe to Times, or Times to it,
Grow strong, and rich in mans imagination:
But when her Fame reflects scorne vpon Kings,
Her glory vndermines, or else confounds
Of Place, Time, Nature, all the reuerend bounds.
These crooked shadowes no straight bodies haue;
Practise, Ambition, Pride, are here disguised.
And shall Loue be a chaine, tyed to my Crowne,
Either to helpe him vp, or pull me downe?
No, No: This Father -language fits not Kings,
" Whose publike, vniuersall prouidence
Of Things, not Persons, alwayes must haue sense.
With Iustice I these misty doubts will cleare.
And he that breakes diuine, and humane Law,
Shall no protection out of either draw.
Sir! where corrupted limbes Art doth diuide,
It hath no name of torment, but of cure:
Let many perish, so the State be sure.
Then Achmat! Bid the Eunuchs do their charge.
I wound my selfe in wounding of my Sonne;
A Kings estates hath of a Fathers wonne.
Aduantagious Ambition! hast thou learn't
That present Gouernment still giues offenses,
And long life in the best Kings discontenteth?
That discontentments hopes liue in succession?
Well! False desires (which in false Glasses shew
That Princes Thrones are like enchanted fires,
Mighty to see, and easie to passe ouer:)
By Mustapha's example, learne to know;
No priuate thoughts can sound Authoritie.
Achmat! I meane that Mustapha shall die.
My Lord! Good Fortune doth me witnesse beare,
That my hopes need not stand vpon Succession,
Where life is poore in all, but woe, and feare:
Then Sir! doubt not my faith, though I withstand
This fearefull Counsell, which you haue in hand.
Resolu'd I am. The forme alone I doubt.
Enuie, and Murmur I desire to shunne,
With which yet great Examples must be done.
The forme of proofe precedes the forme of death;
Kings honors, and their safeties liue in both:
Against these to giue counsell I am loth.
Thought is with God an Act: Kings cannot see
Th'intents of mischiefe, but with Iealousie.
In what protection then liues Innocence?
Below the danger of Omnipotence.
Are thoughts, and deeds confounded any where?
In Princes liues, that may not suffer feare.
Where Place vnequall equally is weigh'd,
There Power supreme is ballanc'd, not obey'd.
This is the way to make Accusers proud,
And feed vp starued Spite with guiltlesse blood.
A iust aduantage vnto Kings allow'd,
Whose safeties doe include a common good.
Sir! I confesse, where one man ruleth all,
There feare, and care are secret wayes of wit;
Where All may rise, and only One must fall,
There Pride aspires, and Power must master it:
For worlds repine at those, whom Birth, or Chance,
Aboue all men, and yet but Men, aduance.
I know when easie hopes doe nurse desire,
The Deadmen onely of the Wise are trusted:
And though crook'd Feare doe seldome rightly measure,
As thinking all things, but it selfe, dissembled:
Yet Solyman! let Feare awake Kings counsells.
But feare not Natures lawes, which seldome alter,
Nor rare examples of iniquity,
Which, but with age, of time deliuered be:
Feare false Stepmothers rage, Womans ambition,
Whereof each Age to other is a Glasse;
Feare them that feare not, for desire, shame;
Selling their faiths to bring their ends to passe.
Establish Rossa's children for your heires;
Let Mustapha's hopes fall; translate his right:
And when her proud Ambitions glutted be,
Straight Enuie dies; Feare will appeare no more:
Nature takes on the shape it had before.
Shall Error scape by Art? And shall a bare
Stepmothers name, in her that speaketh truth,
Disguise, and shadow Parricide from blame?
Intents are seeds, and actions they include.
Princes, whose Scepters must be fear'd of many,
Are neuer safe that liue in feare of any
Tyrants they are that punish out of feare,
States wiser than the truth decline, and weare.
Thou art but one. The rest, in whom I trust,
Discerne his fault, and vrge me to be iust.
Though Factions strength be great, her sleight is more;
Her plots, and instruments inlay'd with Art:
Lesse care hath Truth than hath the euill part.
Traytor! Must I doubt all to credit thee?
No lesse is Truth, where Kings deceiu'd will be.
The greater number holds the safest parts.
That one is but the least of Factions arts.
Thy counsell hazards all: Their course but one.
That painted hazard is but made the Gate,
For ruine of your Sonne to enter at.
Truth must the measure be to slaue, and King.
Shall Power then lose her oddes in any thing?
God, euen to himselfe, hath made a law.
He doth for Fame, what Kings doe but for awe.
What, but Desert, makes those that praise accuse?
The Vertue they admire, and cannot vse.
Dare ought, but Truth, assaile a Princes childe?
On Princes frailties Factions euer build.
Speake plaine, and free my soule from this disease,
That with the ruine of mine owne would please.
That which you will not feele, how can you see?
For in your loue these workes were all inweau'd;
With which most worthy men are most deceiu'd.
What King, or Man, loues feare, wrong, treacherie?
These be the things that now in question be.
Sir! where Kings doubt, Wisdome, and Lawes prouide,
Due triall, and restraint of libertie,
And vnto Caution their estate is tied:
But where Kings Rage becomes superlatiue,
There people doe forbeare, but not forgiue.
My Lord! then stay: Delayes are wisdome, where
Time may more easy wayes of safetye show.
Selfe-murther is an vgly worke of feare;
And little lesse is Childrens ouerthrow.
Mustapha is yours; more Sir! euen he
Is not, for whom you Mustapha or'ethrow.
Suspitious common to Successions be;
Honor, and Feare together euer goe.
Who must kill all they feare, feare all they see,
Nor Subiects, Sonnes, nor Neighbourhood can beare:
So infinite the limits be of Feare.
Well Achmat! Stay. I striue to rest my thoughts.
Words rather stirre, than quiet fixt impressions.
Kings hearts must iudge what Subiects hearts haue wrought,
Not your calme heart vnthreat'ned, and vpright.
Such Bees fetch home from the selfe same Flower,
Whence Spiders draw their deepe enuenom'd power.
No, No: Experience wounded is the Schoole,
Where man ●●arnes piercing wisdome out of smart;
Innocence includes the serpent, not the foole.
The wager's great of being, or not being.
These Crudities let me within digest;
My Power shall take vpon it all the rest.
They that from youth doe sucke at Fortunes brest,
And nurse their empty hearts with seeking higher,
" Like Dropsie-fedde, their thirst doth neuer rest;
For still, by getting, they beget desire:
" Till thoughts, like Wood, while they maintaine the Flame
O● high desires, grow Ashes in the same.
" But Vertue! Those that can behold thy beauties,
Those that sucke, from their youth, thy milke of Goodnesse,
" Their minds grow strong against the stormes of fortune,
And stand, like rockes, in Winter gusts vnshaken;
" Not with the blindnesse of desire mistaken.
O Vertue therfore! whose thrall I thinke fortune,
Thou who despisest not the sex of Women,
Helpe me out of these Riddles of my fortune,
Wherein (meethinks) you with your selfe doe pose me:
Let Fates goe on: sweet Vertue! doe not lose me.
My Mother, and my Husband haue conspired,
For Brothers good, the ruine of my Brother:
My Father by my Mother is inspired,
For one childe to seeke ruine of another.
I that to helpe by Nature am required,
While I doe helpe, must needs still hurt a Brother.
While I see who conspire, I seeme conspired
Against a Husband, Father, and a Mother,
Truth bids me runne, by Truth I am retired;
Shame leades me both the one way, and the other.
In what a Labyrinth is Honor cast,
Drawne diuerse wayes with Sex, with Time, with State?
In all which, Errors course is infinite,
By hope, by feare, by spite, by loue, and hate;
And but one only way vnto the right.
A thorny way: where Paine must be the guide;
Danger the light; Offence of Power the praise:
Such are the golden hopes of Iron dayes.
Yet Vertue, I am thine, for thy sake grieued
(Since basest thoughts, for their ill-plac'd desires,
In shame, in danger, death, and torment glory)
That I cannot with more paines write thy story.
Chance therfore! if thou scornest those that scorne thee;
Fame! if thou hatest those that force thy Trumpet
To sound aloud, and yet despise thy sounding;
Lawes! if you loue not those that be examples
Of Natures lawes, whence you are fall'n corrupted;
Conspire that I, against you all conspired,
Ioined with Tyrant Vertue, as you call her,
That I, by your reuenges may be named,
For Vertue, to be ruin'd, and defamed,
My mother oft, and diuersly I warned,
What Fortunes were vpon such courses builded:
That fortune still must be with ill maintained,
Which at the first with any ill is gained.
I Rosten warn'd, that mans selfe-louing thought
Still creepeth to the rude embracing might
Of Princes grace: a Lease of glories let,
Which shining burnes; breeds Serens when 'tis set.
And, by this creature of my mothers making,
This messenger, I Mustapha haue warn'd,
That Innocence is not enough to saue,
Where Good, and Greatnesse, Feare, and Enuie haue.
Till now, in reuerence I haue forborne
To aske, or to presume to ghesse, or know
My Fathers thoughts; where of he might thinke scorne:
For dreadfull is that Power that all may doe;
Yet they, that all men feare, are fearefull too.
Loe where he sits! Vertue! worke thou in me,
That what thou seekest may accomplisht be.
Ah Death! Is not thy selfe sufficient anguish,
But thou must borrow Feare, that threatning Glasse,
Which, while it goodnesse hides, and mischiefe showes,
Doth lighten Wit to honors ouerthrowes?
But husht: Meethinks away Camena steales:
Murther, belike, in me it selfe reueales.
Camena! Whither now? Why haste you from me?
Is it so strange a thing to be a Father?
Or is it I that am so strange a Father?
My Lord! Meethought, nay, sure I saw you busie:
Your Childe presumes, vncall'd, that comes vnto you.
Who may presume with Fathers, but their own,
Whom Natures law hath euer in protection,
And guilds in good beleefe of deare affection?
Nay, Reuerence, Sir! So Childrens worth doth hide,
As of the Fathers it is least espide.
I thinke its true: Who know their children least,
Haue greatest reason to esteeme them best.
How so my Lord? Since Loue in Knowledge liues,
Which vnto strangers therefore no man giues.
The life we gaue them soone they doe forget,
While they thinke our liues doe their fortunes let.
The tendernesse of life it is so great,
As any signe of death we hate too much
And vnto Parents Sonnes, perchance, are such.
Yet Nature meant her strongest vnity,
Twixt Sonnes, and Fathers; making Parents cause
Vnto the Sonnes, of their humanity;
And Children pledge of their eternitie.
Fathers should loue this Image in their Sonnes.
But streames backe to their springs doe neuer runne.
Pardon my Lord! Doubt is Successions foe:
Let not her mists poore Children ouerthrow.
Though streames from springs doe see me to runne away,
' Tis Nature leades them to their Mother Sea.
Doth Nature teach them, in Ambitions strife,
To seeke his death, by whom they haue their life?
Things easie, to desire impossible doe seeme:
Why should feare make impossible seeme easie?
Monsters yet be; and being are beleeued.
Incredible hath some inordinate progression:
Blood, Doctrine, Age, corrupting Libertie,
Doe all concurre, where men such monsters be.
Pardon me Sir! if Dutie doe seeme angry:
Affection must breathe out afflicted breath,
Where imputation hath such easie faith.
Mustapha is he that hath defil'd his nest;
The wrong the greater, for I Iou'd him best.
He hath deuised that all at once should die,
Rosten, and Rossa, Zanger, thou, and I.
Fall none but Angels suddainely to hell?
Are Kinde, and Order growne precipitate?
Did euer any other man, but he,
In instant lose the vse of doing well?
Sir! these be mists of Greatnesse. Looke againe:
For Kings, that, in their fearefull icie State,
Behold their children, as their winding sheet,
Doe easily doubt; and what they doubt, they hate.
Camena! Thy sweet Youth, that knowes no ill,
Cannot beleeue thine Elders, when they say,
That good beleefe is great Estates decay.
Let it suffice, that I, and Rossa too,
Are priuy what your Brother meanes to doe.
Sir! Pardon me: and nobly as a Father,
What I shall say, and say of holy Mother,
Know I shall say it, but to right a Brother.
My Mother is your Wife: Dutie in her
Is loue: She loues; which not well gouern'd, beares
The euill Angell of misgiuing Feares;
Whose many eyes, whilst but it selfe they see,
Still make the worst of possibility:
Out of this Feare she Mustapha accuseth:
Vnto this Feare, perchance, she ioynes the Loue,
Which doth in Mothers, for their Children moue.
Perchance, when Feare hath shew'd her yours must ●all,
In Loue she sees that hers must rise withall.
Sir! Feare a frailtie is, and may haue grace,
And ouer-care of you cannot be blamed;
Care of our owne in Nature hath a place;
Passions are oft mistaken, and misnamed;
Things simply good grow euill with misplacing.
Though lawes cut off, and doe not care to fashion,
Humanity of error hath compassion.
Yet God forbid, that either Feare, or Care,
Should ruine those that true, and faultlesse are,
Is it no fault, or fault I may forgiue,
For Sonne to seeke the Father should not liue?
Is it a fault, or fault for you to know,
My Mother doubts a thing that is not so?
These vgly workes of monstrous Parricide,
Marke from what hearts they rise, and where they bide.
Violent, despayr'd, where honor broken is;
Feare lord; Time Death; where Hope is Misery;
Doubt hauing stopt all honest wayes to blisse,
And Custome shut the windowes vp of shame,
That Craft may take vpon her Wisdomes name.
Compare now Mustapha with this despaire:
Sweet Youth, sure Hopes, Honor, a Fathers loue,
No infamie to moue, or banish feare,
Honor to stay, hazard to hasten fate:
Can horrors worke in such a Childes estate?
Besides, the Gods, whom Kings should imitate,
Haue plac'd you high to rule, not ouerthrow;
For vs, not for your selues, is your Estate:
Mercie must hand in hand with Power goe.
Your Scepter should not strike with armes of feare,
Which fathoms all mens imbecillitie,
And Mischiefe doth, left it should mischiefe beare.
As reason deales within with frailty,
Which kills not passions that rebellious are,
But adds, substracts, keepes downe ambitious spirits;
So must Power forme, not ruine instruments:
For flesh and blood, the meanes twixt heauen, and hell,
Vnto extremes extremely racked be;
Which Kings in Art of Gouernment should see.
Else they, which circle in themselues with death,
Poison the aire, wherein they draw their breath.
Pardon my Lord! Pittie becomes my Sex:
Grace with delay growes weake, and furie wise.
Remember Theseus wish, and Neptunes haste.
Kild Innocence, and left Succession waste.
If what were best for them that doe offend
Lawes did inquire, the answer must be, Grace.
If Mercie be so large, where's Iustice place?
Where Loue despaires, and where Gods promise ends.
For Mercie is the highest reach of wit,
A safety vnto them that saue with it:
Borne out of God, and vnto humane eyes,
Like God, not seene, till fleshly passion dies.
God may forgiue, whose being, and whose harmes
Are farre remou'd from reach of fleshly armes:
But if God Equalls, or Successors had;
Euen God, of safe reuenges would be glad.
While he is yet aliue, he may be slaine;
But from the dead no flesh comes backe againe.
While he remaines aliue, I liue in feare.
Though he were dead, that doubt still liuing were.
None hath the power to end what he begunne.
The same occasion followes euery Sonne.
Their Greatnesse, or their Worth is not so much.
And shall the best be slaine, for being such?
Thy Mother, or thy Brother are amisse:
I am betray'd; and one of them it is.
My Mother, if she errres, erres vertuously;
And let her erre, ere Mustapha should die.
Kings, for their safetie, must not blame mistrust;
Nor, for surmises, sacrifice the iust.
Well: deare Camena! keepe this secretly:
I will be well aduis'd before he die.
Come Achmat! to the Church: we will goe pray
God, to vnfold this probability,
Where Power, and Wit so much offend him may.
In this disease of spirits, the true Appeale
Is to that Iudge that euery spirit knowes;
For we by Error else may honor lose.
His lawes, the life, the Innocence, the State
Of Sonne, and Father now in ballance stand.
Kings that haue cause to feare, take leaue to hate;
Sonnes, that aspire, as easly lift their hands.
If I fall now, I giue that scope to face,
Our equall gage being onely Natures bands.
Helpe comes alike to each of vs too late,
If ought betweene vs, and aduantage stand.
Yet she, and you, a strife within me moue,
And rest I will with counsell from aboue.
IF among Christians, euen the best Diuines
Conclude, their Church (though thrall to humane might)
Yet to be such a faire mould, as refines
And guides Kings power, else indefinite,
That it no Tyrant, or Prophaner be;
Horrors too frequent in Authority:
May not our conquering true Church then assume,
By Grace, and Dutie, to linke God to Kings,
And Kings to Man? which what else could presume?
Since Might, and Number, rule all other things.
Then Crownes! what Honor to our Church is due,
That fashions it selfe thus, to fashion you?
Lawes we had none, but what our Priests inspir'd;
Our right was lesse; for we had nought to claime:
To propagate it selfe the Truth defir'd,
And to that end, at all mankinde did aime:
So that while Soules we only sought to saue,
They are with God, and we their Empires haue.
Olli, a Prophet from our Church diuided
In outward formes, not lines of inward life,
Like witty Schisme, we louingly decided,
With well-bent spirits in opinions strife.
Europe in chiefe our Prophets then withstood,
With her three-Mitred God of flesh, and blood.
Her lett'red Greece, that Lottarie of Arts,
Since Mars forsooke her subtle, neuer wise;
Proud of her new-made Gods in fleshly hearts,
As she of old was of her Heathen lies;
We vndertooke with vnity of minde,
And what their Wits dispute, our Swords did binde.
So that ere her grosse Sects could danger see,
Their Thrones, Schooles, Miters, Idols were resign'd
To vs, new Trophies of our Monarchie:
Thus are the Muses still by Mars refin'd:
And thus our Church, by pulling others downe,
I feare or'ebuilt it selfe, perchance the Crowne.
For, till of late, our Church and Prince were one,
No latitude left either to diuide:
The Word, and Sword endeuoured not alone,
But were, like mutuall Voice, and Eccho, tide
With one desire iointly to moue, speake, doe;
As if Fates Oracles, and Actors too.
Now while the Crowne, and Priest-hood ioyned thus
In equall Ends, though Dignities distinct,
As mans soule to his body linked is:
Crownes, by this tincture of Diuine instinct,
So aboue Nature rais'd the Lawes of Might,
As made all errors of the world our right.
Vices, I grant, our Martiall course then had;
For spoile, blood, lust, were therein left too free,
As raising strong Idea's in the Bad,
Braue instruments of Soueraignty.
Like Theeues, at home our Iustice was seuere;
In other Princes Realmes our freedomes were.
Great the Seraglia was, I must confesse,
Yet so, as kindle did, not quench our spirits:
Our pleasures neuer made our natures lesse;
Venus was ioyn'd with Mars, to stirre vp merits.
In right, or wrong our Course was not precise,
Nor is, in any State that multiplies.
Yet, to redeeme this Discipline of Vice,
We added to the glory of our State;
Wonne honor by them, to the preiudice
Of Strangers, conquering more than we did hate:
Our Emulation was with Crownes, not Men;
Thus did our Vices spread our Empire then.
Where since, though we still spoyle that Christian Sect,
Which, by diuision fatall to their kinde,
Friends, duties, enemies, and right neglect,
To keepe vp some Selfe-humor in the winde;
Yet all we thus winne, not by force, but sleight,
Poys'd with our Martiall Conquests, will lacke weight.
For Force, not Right, our Crescents beare in Chiefe;
Campes, and not Courts, are Mappes of our Estate,
Where Church, Law, Will, all Discipline in briefe,
Establisht are to make Worth fortunate:
We scorne those Arts of Peace, that Ciuile Tether,
Which, in one bond, tye Craft, and Force together.
Of Cell-bred Sciences we chew no cudde;
Our Food and Garments ouerloade vs not;
When one Act withers, straight another buddes;
Our Rest is doing; good successe our Lot;
Our Beasts are no more delicate than we:
This odds haue Turkes of Christianitie.
Yet by your traffike with this dreaming Nation,
Their Conquer'd Vice hath stain'dour Conquering State,
And brought thinne Cobwebs into reputation
Of tender Subtiltie; whose stepmother Fate
So inlayes Courage with ill shaddowing Feare,
As makes it much more hard to doe, than beare.
And as in Circles, who breakes any part,
That perfect forme doth vtterly confound:
Or as amongst the feigned lines of Art,
One onely Right is, all else Crooked found:
So from our Prophets Sawes when Sultans stray,
In humane Wit Power findes perplexed way.
Hence, though we make no Idols, yet we fashion
God, as if from Powers Throne he tooke his being;
Our Alchoran as warrant vnto passion;
Monarches in all lawes but their owne will seeing.
Hee whom God chooseth out of doubt doth well:
What they that choose their God do, who can tell?
Againe, when Great States learne Ciuility
Of petty Kingdomes, learne they not to fall?
Nay Monarchies, when they declining be,
Brooke they those Vertues which they rose withall?
Had Mustapha beene borne in Selims time,
What now is Fearefull, then had beene Sublime.
The Christian bondage is much more refin'd,
Though not in reall Things, in reall Names,
Lawes, Doctrine, Discipline, being all assign'd
To hold vpright that wittie Man-built frame;
Where euery limbe, though in themselues distinct,
Yet finely are vnto the Scepter linckt.
An Art by which Man seemes, but is not free;
Crownes keeping all their specious guiding reynes,
Fast in the hand of strong Authority;
So to relax, or winde vp Passions chaines,
As before humble people know their griefe,
Their states are vs'd to looke for no reliefe.
Yet if by parts we trauaile to compare,
What differences 'twixt these two Empires are:
We buildno Cittadells, our Strengths are Men,
And hold Retreit to be the Losers denne:
They, by their Forts, mowe their owne People downe;
A way perchance to keepe, not spread a Crowne.
Of bondage we leaue our Succession free;
Office, and Action, are our libertie.
They may inherit Land; we hope for Place:
They giue the Wealthy; we the Actiue grace.
We heare the fault, and so demand that Head,
Which hath in Martiall duties beene mislead:
Their processe is to answere, and appeare;
But vnder Lawes, which hold the Scepter deare.
Our Law is Martiall, suddaine, and seuere;
For Fact can rarely intricatenesse beare:
Their Lawes take life from Soueraigntie,
Thanklesse to which, Power will not let them be.
So that the Mussell -man sends home his head;
The Christian keeps his owne, till he be dead.
Our trade is Taxe, comprising Men, and Things:
And draw not they Mankindes wealth vnder Kings?
Soothing the Tyrant, till by his excesse,
Want makes the Maiestie of Thrones grow lesse,
By taxing Peoples Vice at such a rate,
As to fill vp a Siue, exhausts a State:
Lastly; so shuffling Trade, Law, Doctrine, Will,
As no soule shall finde peace in good, or ill;
Both being Trappes alike vs'd, to entice
The weake, and humble into preiudice.
Our Sultans rule their charge by Prophets Sawes,
And leaue the Mufti Iudge of all their Lawes:
The Christians take, and change Faith with their Kings,
Which vnder Miters oft the Scepter brings.
We make the Church our Sultans instrument:
They with their Kings will make their Church content.
They wrangle with themselues, and by dispute
In questions, thinke to make the one side mute:
If not, then sacrifice the weaker part;
As if, in Thrones, blood were Religions Art;
Forcing the will, which is to catch the winde,
As if mans Nature were more than his minde:
We in subduing Christians conquer both,
And to lose vse of either part are loth.
So that we suffer their fond zeale to pray,
That it may well our conquering armies pay.
And where we are, there Christians faine would be,
If lacke of Power were not their modestie.
Thus doe all Great States safely manage things,
Which danger seemes to Thrones of pettie Kings.
For though the Sicke haue sense of euery breath,
And shunne all what they feele, for feare of death:
Yet in strong States, those stormes they feele giue health,
And by their Purgings spoyle Infections stealth;
A play of Sunne-motes, from mans small World come,
Vpon the great World to worke heauy doome.
For proofe: Behold in Solyman that feare,
Which Torrid Zones of Tyrannie must beare.
For who hath lost mans Nature in his passion,
Can neuer see the World in better fashion:
But credit giues to limitlesse Suspition,
Which vnto all vice giueth one Condition,
Confusions Orbe; where men may hate their owne,
Nature, and Reason there being ouerthrowne.
Hence goe out Mandates of conspiracie
'Gainst Mustapha, who must not guiltlesse be
In such a Father, and a Monarchs eyes,
As will see nothing, but destruction, wise.
Hence Mustapha, from like dreames of the heart,
Sees his destruction wrought by Tyrants Art,
And yet yeelds things to names; his right to passion;
Which misplac'd duties helpe Power to disfashion.
Nay, hence Mankinde, by crafty power opprest,
Where it hath giuen part, still giues the rest;
And thinking Thrones in all their practise true,
Dare not of their owne Creatures aske their due:
But rather, like milde Earth with Weedes or'egrowne,
Yeelds to be plough'd, manur'd, and ouerthrowne.
Lastly, thus Scepters fall with their owne weight,
When climing Power, once risen to her height,
Descends to make distinction in her lust,
Which grants that absolute may be vniust;
And so subiects to censure what should raigne;
Steppes to bring Power to People backe againe.
Whence I conclude: Mankinde is both the Forme,
And Matter, wherewith Tyrannies transforme:
For Power can neither see, worke, or deuise,
Without the Peoples hands, hearts, wit, and eyes:
So that were Man not by himselfe opprest,
Kings would not, Tyrants could not make him beast.
O wearysome Obedience, Wax to Power!
Shall I in vaine be Mustapha's accuser?
Shall any Iustice equall him and me?
Is Loue so open-ear'd; my power so weake,
As ought against me to my Lord dare speake?
" Sands shall be numbred first and Motion fixt,
The Sea exchange her channell with the fire,
" Before my will, or reason stand in awe
Of God, or Nature, common Peoples law.
Rossa! whence growes this strange vnquiet motion?
Gouerne your thoughts. What want you to content you,
That haue the King of Kings at your deuotion?
Content? O poore estate of Womans Wit!
The latitude of Princes is Desire,
Which all, it hath enioy'd, still carries higher.
Say you the World is left to my deuotion?
Who question'd am both in my State, and Fame,
Must lose my Will, and cannot lose my Shame:
For Mustapha, long since condemn'd to die,
Now liues againe.
To boast of mariage then what ground haue I?
Conclude not now: For Thoughts that be offended.
Are seldome with their present visions mended.
Rage sees too much; Securitie too little;
Affections are, like glassy metall brittle.
Ah seruile Sex! must Yokes our honor be,
To make our owne loues our captiuity?
No Rossa, no: looke not in Languisht Wit,
For none can stand on Fortunes steepe with it.
" Thinke Innocencie harme; Vertue dishonor;
Wound Truth; and ouerweigh the scale of Right:
Sexes haue wayes apart; States haue their fashions:
The vertues of Authoritie are Passions.
Rossa! Take heede.
Your Honors, like Kings humors, brittle are,
Which broken once, repayr'd can hardly be;
And these once stain'd, what is Humanity?
Rossa! first iudge your Ends, and then your Meanes.
You seeke to vndermine a Princes State,
Deepe rooted in by Time, Power, Reuerence;
Establish'd on Succession fortunate
Of many Turks: from men that seruile be,
Vse hauing lost the vse of Libertie.
I vnderstand a Monarchs State too well,
To bid you purchase Peoples idle breath,
That haue no power of Honor, Life, or Death:
These wayes are wrong, vncertaine, fearefull too,
In absolutes, which all themselues will doe.
But turne your eyes vp to the will of one;
Know you must worke a Father from his Sonne.
This Parents dotage, as it weakenesse is,
So workes it with the vigor of disease,
Still vndermining with the things that please.
Vpon this Quick-sand what can be begunne?
Sonnes loue with selfe-loue must be ouerthrowne
By force of Natures law there's nothing wonne.
Strifes in the Fathers minde you must beget,
And him aboue his sweet affections beare,
To take impressions both of hope, and feare.
Those silly natures apt to louingnesse,
Which euer must in others power liue,
With Doubt become more fond, with Wrong more thral:
Feare here wants eyes, Hate hath no sting at all.
All these false Strengths of natiue Confidence,
With their Excesse, haue their Inconstancie:
The lawes of Kinde, with Tyrants, nothing be.
Besides, deare Rossa! Ills haue such alliance,
As in what subiect any one is growne,
The seeds of all, euen in that one, are sowne.
This masse of Passions who can deale withall?
Too nice, and subtile is Inconstancy.
Shall Wrong faire-written still in Patience be?
Must my desire so many Cautions haue,
And waite on those thoughts that haue worshipt me?
I cannot beare this Mediocrity.
Rossa! Take heed. Extreames are not the meanes,
To change Estates, either in good, or ill.
Therefore yeeld not; since that makes Nature lesse:
Nor yet vse Rage, which vainely driueth on
The minde to working without instruments:
Besides, it doth make partiall our intents,
Discredits Truth, condemnes indifferent things.
But take vpon you quiet Prouidence,
The Princes State, with his Authority;
Teach Power to doubt; for Doubt is her defence.
Degrees of Passions, as of Spirits there be;
Choose now for Vse, and not for Dignity.
Loue spreads the wit to play, but not to arme,
Hath many feet to walke an easie pace,
Slow to mistrust, and neuer apt to harme:
But feare of Credit is within the minde,
Strength'ned by Nature with the strength of all;
In Men, and Tyrants states both, naturall.
The Proiect of this feare must yet be made
The Princes safety, Honor of the State:
Such glorious Stiles may easily ouershade
The wayes of Spite; for Treason is in hate.
Flattery straight speakes aloud in Powers right,
Carrying things vnder names, Truth vnder might.
" Who dare distinguish in a Tyrannie,
Where fraud it selfe hath Powers authority?
" Who shall correct Errors, made for the King,
But Kings themselues; who Actors in their feares,
" Most honor those that most suspition bring.
Who there sees Right, or dare vse Honors name,
" Where both are sure of death, and doubtfull fame?
Then Rossa! plant you here; accuse the Sonne;
Although you faile his death, you need not doubt:
In Tyrants state neuer was man vndone
By miscomplaints. Besides, what comes about
In earth, but it hath lets, and findes delayes?
Yeeld not: but multiply malice in patience;
Honor is only forme, forme Tyrants wayes.
Accuse his Friendes, speake doubtfull, charge, and praise.
Put Truth to silence: People dare not see
The pride of Power in formall Tyrannie.
I know my time; the Bassha's how they bend;
Faction still wakes; and Competence hath spite;
'Tis fault enough that Achmat is his friend;
His lightnesse, and his power well vnderstood.
Things may so passe as Mustapha may die,
Ere Counsell, or Remorce put Furie by.
But if Extremitie chance to require
A more audacious Figure; then vse Rage:
It giue sometimes an Honor to desire;
It shewes a Plainenesse, credible to Age:
While it is rul'd, it may haue time, and place;
But if it rule, in prophesieth disgrace.
I feele my heart now rise; my spirits worke;
Confused thoughts all words haue ouergrowne,
When Mustapha is dead, what Starre hath motion,
But Achmat; in whom Solyman yet trusts?
They who their Ends, by Change, striue to aduance,
Must neuer doubt to goe the way of Chance.
Achmat is wise, and Solymans beloued:
Euen Tyrants couet to vphold their fame;
Not fearing euill Deeds, but euill Name.
When Childrens blood the Fathers forehead staines,
What priuiledge for Counsellors remaines?
What arguments against him?
Vse of killing;
Suspition, the fauorite of Tyrants;
Delight of Change; Fauors past; and feare of Greatnesse,
Sharp'ned by Achmats harsh, and open dealing,
Which mighty Tyrants liberty would draw
Into the narrow scope of humane Law.
Let Mustapha be dead.
how dead while Achmat raignes?
Downe is the Idoll, but the Workmanliues:
His fauor, vertue, reputation, course,
To vs are still that Mustapha, or worse.
Then downe he must, and shall. My chiefest End
Is, first to fix this World on my Succession;
Next so to alter, plant, remoue, create,
That I, not he, may fashion this Estate.
Rossa, and Rosten! while you stand debating
The ioyes, or sorrowes of your priuate Fortunes,
Some euill Angell doth traduce you both.
Achmat is call'd for: Wit, Art, Spite he hath;
And while for Sonnes with Fathers men intreat,
Affection makes each good apparance great.
Rosten! make haste: go hence, and carry with thee
My life, fame, malice, fortune, and desire:
For which, set all establish'd things on fire.
You vgly Ange●ls of th'infernall Kingdomes!
You who most brauely haue maintain'd your beings
In equall power, like Riuall, to the heauens!
Let me raigne, while I liue, in my desires;
Or dead, liue with you in eternall fires.
Ross●! Not words, but deeds please Hell, or Heauen:
I feare to tell; I tremble to conceale;
Fortune, vnto the death, is then displeas'd,
When remedies doe ruine the diseas'd.
Vse not these Parables of coward Feare:
Feare hurts lesse when it strikes, than when it threatens.
If Mustapha shall die, his death miscarries
Part of thy end, thy Fame, thy Friends, thy Ioy:
Who will, to hurt his foes, himselfe destroy?
My selfe? What is it else but my desire?
My Brother, Father, Mother, and my God,
Are but those steps which helpe me to aspire.
Mustapha had neuer truer friend than I,
That would not with him liue, but with him die.
Yet tell: What is the worst?
Camena must, with him, a Traytor be;
Or Mustapha, for her sake, must be free.
O cruell Fates! that doe in Loue plant Woe,
And in ●elights make our Disasters grow.
But speake: What hath she done?
Vndone thy doing.
Discouer'd vnto Mustapha his danger:
And from these relikes, I doe more than doubt,
Her confidence brings Solyman about.
Nay, blacke Auernus! so I doe adore thee,
As I lament my Wombe hath beene so barren,
To yeeld but one to offer vp before thee.
Who thinks the Daughters death can Mothers stay
From ends, whereon a Womans heart is fixt,
Weighs harmelesse Nature, without passion mixt.
Is Mother by the woman ouerthrowne?
Rage knowes no Kinne: Power is aboue the Law,
And must not curious be of base Respect,
Which onely they command that doe neglect.
Your Childs death angers him whom you must please.
My ends are great: Small things are wrought with ease.
This plants confusion in the Powers aboue.
My end is not to quiet, but to moue.
God plagues Iniustice in so great excesse.
The doing minds feele not that idlenesse.
What if this Worke proue not conspiracie,
But care, that with all duties may agree?
'Tis priuate Fortune that is built on Truth:
Iustice is but of great Estates the youth.
Yet by the Loue of Mothers to their Children,
By all the paines of trauaile, so well knowne,
Punish, but yet spare life; It is your owne.
I doe protest no Terrors, no Desires,
Glories of fame, nor Rumors iniuries,
Could, in a Mothers heart, haue quench'd the fire
Of louing kindnesse, to her children borne:
It conquer'd is with nothing, but with scorne.
I am resolu'd to moue the wheeles of Fate.
Her Triumph shall be paine; her Glorie shame:
Horror is of excesse a iust reward:
The giuers of example haue regard.
WHat meane these mortall children of mine owne,
Vngratefully, against me to complaine,
That all I build is by me ouerthrowne?
Vices put vnder to rise vp againe?
That on my wheeles both Good, and Ill doe moue;
The one beneath, while th'other is aboue?
Day, Night, Houres, Arts, All; God, or Men create,
The world doth charge me, that I restlesse change;
Suffer no being in a constant state:
Alas! Why are my revolutions strange
Vnto these Natures, made to fall, or clime,
With that sweet Genius, euer-mouing Time?
What Wearinesse; what lothsome Desolations
Would plague these life and death-begetting Creatures?
Nay what absurdity in my Creations
Were it, if Time-borne had Eternall features;
This nether Orbe, which is Corruptions Sphere,
Not being able long one shape to beare.
Could Pleasure liue? Could Worth haue reuerence?
Lawes, Arts, or Sects (meere probabilities)
Keepe vp their reputation in Mans sense,
If Noueltie did not renew his eyes;
Or Time take mildly from him what he knew,
Making both me, and mine, to each still new?
Daughter of Heauen am I; but God, none greater;
Pure like my Parents; life, and death of Action;
Author of ill successe to euery creature;
Whose pride against my Periods makes a faction:
With me who goe along, rise while they be;
Nothing of mine respects Eternitie.
Kings! why do you then blame me, whom I choose,
As my Annointed, from the Potters oare;
And to aduance you made the People lose,
While you to me acknowledged your power?
Be confident all Thrones subsist in me:
I am the measure of Felicitie.
Mahomet in vaine, one Trophee of my might,
Rais'd by my chang'd aspect to other Nations,
Striues to make his Succession infinite,
And robbe my wheeles of growth, state, declination.
But he, and all else, that would master Time,
In mortall Spheres, shall finde my power sublime.
I bring the Truth to light; detect he Ill;
My Natiu greatnesse scorneth bounded wayes;
Vntimely Power a few dayes ruine will;
Yea, Worth it selfe falls, till I list to raise.
The Earth is mine: of earthly things the care
I leaue to Men, that like them, earthly are.
Ripe I yet am not to destroy Succession;
The Vice of other Kingdomes giue him Time.
The Fates, without me, can make no progression;
By me alone, euen Truth doth fall, or clime:
The Instant pettie webs, without me spunne,
Vntimely ended be, as they begunne.
Not Kings, but I, can Nemesis send forth,
The iudgments of Reuenge, and Wrong, are mine:
My Stampes alone doe warrant reall Worth;
How doe vntimely Vertues else decline?
For Sonne, or Father, to destroy each other,
Are bastard deeds, where Time is not the mother.
Such is the worke this State hath vndertaken,
And keepes in Clouds; with purpose to aduance
False counsells; in their self e-craft iustly shaken,
As grounded on my slaue, and shaddow Chance.
Nay more; My childe Occasion is not free
To bring forth good, or euill, without me.
And shall I for reuealing this misdeed,
By tying Future to the Present ill,
Which keepes disorders wayes from happie speed;
Be guiltie made of Mans still-erring will?
Shall I, that in my selfe still golden am,
By their Grosse metall, beare an Iron name?
No; Let Man draw, by his owne cursed Square,
Such crooked lines, as his fraile thoughts affect:
And, like things that of nothing framed are,
Decline vnto that Centre of defect:
I will disclaime his downfall, and stand free,
As natiue riuall to Eternitie.
What meanes this New-borne childe of Planets motion?
This finite Elfe of Mans vaine acts, and errors?
Whose changing wheeles in all thoughts stirre commotion?
And in her owne face, onely, beares the Mirror.
A Mirror in which, since Time tooke her fall,
Mankinde sees Ill increase; no Good at all.
Because in your vast mouth you hold your Tayle,
As coupling Hges past with times to come;
Doe you presume your Trophees shall not fayle,
As both Creations Cradle, and her Tombe?
Or for beyond your selfe you cannot see,
By dayes, and houres; would you Eternall be?
Time is the weakest worke of my Creation,
And, if not still repayr'd, must straight decay:
The Mortall take not my true constellation,
And so are daz'led, by her nimble sway,
To thinke her course long; which if measur'd right,
Is but a Minute of my Infinite.
A Minute which doth her subsistence tye;
Subsistencies which, in not being, be:
Shall is to come; and was is passed by;
Time present cements this Duplicitie:
And if one must, of force, be like the other,
Of Nothing is not Nothing made the mother?
Why striues Time then to parallell with me?
What be her types of longest lasting glory?
Arts, Miters, Lawes, Moments, Supremacie,
Of Natures erring Alchymie the storie:
From Nothing sprang this point, and must, by course,
To that confusion turne againe, or worse.
For she, and all her mortall off-springs, build
Vpon the mouing Base of selfe-conceipt;
Which constant forme can neither take, nor yeeld;
But still change shapes, to multiply deceipt:
Like playing Atomi, in vaine contending,
Though they beginning had, to haue no ending.
I, that at once see Times distinct progression;
I, in whose bosome was, and Shall, still be;
I, that in Causes worke th'Effects Succession,
Giuing both Good, and Ill, their destinie;
Though I bind all, yet can receiue no bound;
But see the finite still it selfe confound.
Time! therfore know thy limits, and striue not
To make thy selfe, or thy works Infinite,
Whose Essence only is to write, and blot:
Thy Changes proue thou hast no stablish't right.
Gouerne thy mortall Sphere, deale not with mine:
Time but the seruant is of Power Diuine.
Blame thou this present State, that will blame thee;
Brick-wall your errors from one, to another;
Both faile alike vnto Eternitie,
Goodnesse of no mixt course can be the mother.
Both you, and yours doe couet states Eternall;
Whence, though pride end, your pains yet be Infernall.
Ruine this Masse; worke Change in all Estates,
Which, when they serue not me, are in your power:
Giue vnto their corruption doomes of Fate;
Let your vast wombe your Cadmus -men deuoure.
The Vice yeelds scope enough for you, and hell,
To compasse ill ends by not doing well.
Let Mustapha by your course be destroy'd,
Let your wheeles, made to winde vp, and vntwine,
Leaue nothing constantly to be enioy'd:
For your Scithe mortall must to harme incline,
Which, as this World, your maker, doth grow old,
Doomes her, for your toyes, to be bought, and sold.
Crosse your owne steps; hasten to make, and marre;
With your Vicissitudes please, displease your owne:
Your three light wheeles of sundry fashions are,
And each, by others motion, ouerthrowne.
Doe what you can: Mine shall subsist by Me:
I am the measure of Felicitie.
Achmat! Goe, charge the Bassha's to assemble:
God only is aboue me, and consulted.
Take freedome; not, as oft Kings seruants doe,
To binde Church, State, and all Power vnder you.
Visions are these, or bodies which appeared?
Rays'd from within, or from aboue descending?
Did vowes lift vp my soule, or bring downe these?
God's not pleas'd with vs, till our hearts finde ease.
What horror's this? Safetie, Right, and a Crowne,
Thrones must neglect that will adore Gods light.
His will, our good: Suppose it plucke vs downe;
Reuenge is his. Against the ill what right?
What meanes that Glasse borne on those glorious wings,
Whose piercing shaddowes on my selfe reflect
Staines, which my vowes against my children bring?
My wrongs, and doubts, seeme there despayres of Vice;
My Power a Turret; built against my Maker;
My danger, but disorders preiudice.
This Glasse, true Mirror of the Infinite,
Shewes all; yet can I nothing comprehend.
This Empire, nay the World, seemes shaddowes there;
Which mysteries dissolue me into feare.
I that without feele no Superior power,
And feele within but what I will conceiue,
Distract; know neither what to take, nor leaue.
I, that was free before, am now captiu'd;
This Sacrifice hath rais'd me from my Earth,
By that I should, from that I am depriu'd.
In my affections Man, in knowledge more,
Protected no where, farre more disunited;
Still King of Men, but of my Selfe no more.
In my Sonnes death, it shewes this Empires fall;
And in his life, my danger still included:
To die, or kill, alike vnnaturall.
My powers, and spirits, with prayer thus confused,
Nor iudge, nor rest, nor yeeld, nor raigne I can:
No God, no Diuell, no constant King, nor Man.
The Earth drawes one way, and the skie another.
If God worke thus, Kings must looke vpwards still,
And from these Powers they know not, choose a will.
Or else beleeue themselues, their strength, occasion;
Make wisdome conscience; and the world their skie:
So haue all Tyrants done; and so must I.
Solyman! If Rossa you will see aliue,
You must make haste: for her Despaire is such,
As she thinks all things but her Rage, too much.
Fortune! hast thou not moulds enough of Sorrow,
But thou must those of Loue, and Kindnesse borrow?
Tell me: Out of what ground growes Rossa's passion?
When hither I from Mustapha return'd,
And had made you accompt of my Commission;
Rossa, whose heart in care for your health burn'd,
Curiously after Mustapha inquiring,
A token spies, which I from hence did beare,
For Mustapha by sweet Camena wrought;
Yet gaue it not; for I beganne to feare,
And something in it more than kindnesse thought.
No sooner she espi'd this pretious gift,
But, as enrag'd, hands on her selfe she layes;
From me, as one that from her selfe would shift,
She runnes; nor till she found Camena stayes.
I follow, and finde both their voices high,
The one as doing, th'other suffring paine:
But whether your Camena liue, or die,
Or dead, if she by rage, or guilt be slaine;
If she made Rossa mad, or Rossa mad
To hurt things dearest to her selfe be glad,
I know not. But ô Solyman! make haste;
For Mans despaire is but occasion past.
What! Am I not mine owne? Who dare vsurpe
To take this Kingdome of my selfe from me?
Nature hath lied. She saith, Life vnto many
May be denied, but not death vnto any.
O Solyman! I haue at once transgress'd
The lawes of Nature, and thy lawes of State:
I wretched am, and you vnfortunate.
Declare what Storme is this? What Accident?
Thy self e-accusing doth excuse intent.
Sir, odious is the fact on euery side:
The remedie is more than you can beare;
And more must fall vpon you than you feare.
What threatning's this? what horror? what despite?
Kings thoughts to Iealousie are ouer-tender.
And any weaknesse many doth engender.
Rossa! what meanes this venome of thy breath?
Reuenge, and Iustice both require my death.
Then tell.
And lose the priuiledge of death.
Then tell, and die.
Nay tell, and liue a worthy death.
Rippenot my wounds, deare Lord! silence is fit:
My life hath shame, and death must couer it.
What should be secret vnto thoughts that loue?
All imperfections that offence do moue.
What guiltinesse cannot Goodwill forgiue?
These horrors which in stained soules doe liue.
Are thy faults to thy selfe, or vnto me?
To both alike. Remedilesse they be.
Yet shew me trust: it proues your heart is pure,
To me, and all crimes else Kings can endure.
Imagine all the depths of wickednesse:
My wombe as hell; my soule the world of sinne;
Confusion in my thoughts, feare mercilesse;
Without me Shame; Impenitence within.
These words are not of charge, but intercession,
As arguing not your Guilt, but your Oppression.
Yet least I faile, and error multiply,
Declare what's done? What moues this agonie?
Thy Child is slaine. These hands imbrued are,
Euen in her bowells, whom I nurs'd with care.
So strange a death includes some odious crime.
She did conspire. Silence deuoures the rest.
Horror I apprehend, Danger, Despaire:
All these lie hidden in this word, Conspire.
This Wretch conspir'd the ruine of this State.
Sir! aske no more: for Ills goe in a blood;
You heare already more than doth you good.
But tell: what made Camena thinke this thought?
Or by whom could she thinke to haue it wrought?
Mischiefe it selfe is cause of mischiefe done.
What should she feare; since with her is combin'd
Mustapha, this States Successor, and your Sonne?
Can this be true? Is humane Nature such,
As in the worst part none can thinke too much?
The ruines of my owne may shew my faith:
For I can see no comforts after you;
Yet to your Bassha's know I not what's true.
Discouer how these Treasons came to light.
Call Achmat first: for Truth is but a blast,
Till it his censures Oracle hath past.
What scornes be these? how am I thus possest?
Hath Achmat other Greatnesse than by me?
If greater by you than your selfe he be.
In Kings the secrets of Creation rest.
Sir! you created him: he all the rest.
I gaue that to his Worth, Faith, Industrie.
And so these gifts tyed to your children be.
What can his Age expect by innouation?
Ambition gets by doing, Estimation.
His power hath no true Basis, but my Grace.
Sir? Strength, like Number, multiplies by place.
Decrepit slaue, vile creature of mine;
Lies it in his base thoughts, and shaking hands,
To moue the props whereon my Empire stands?
The name of Power is yours; the being his;
By whom Creation, Hope; Reward, and Feare
Spread, and disposed still are, euery where.
Besides, there is no Age in mans desire,
Which still is actiue, yong, and cannot rest:
For Achmat knowes you will not what you can;
Since Crownes do change a State, but not the Man.
His Life, and Fortune stand vpon my breath.
Contempt deposeth Kings, as well as death.
But tell: How doth their Treacherie appeare?
Hath she confest? Or who doth them accuse?
This Guidon, with her owne hand wrought, and sent,
Beares perfect record what was their intent.
Expound: What is the meaning of this worke,
Vnder whose Art the arts of Mischiefe lurke?
These Clouds, they be the house of Iealousie,
Which fire, and water both, within them beare,
Where Good shewes lesse, Ills greater than they be.
Saturne here feeds on Children that be his.
His word;
A fatall winding sheet Succession is.
This pretious Hill, where daintynesse seemes wast,
By Natures art, that all Art will exceed,
In carelesse finesse shewes the sweet estate
Of Strength, and Prouidence together plac'd:
Two Intercessors reconciling hate,
And giuing feare euen of it selfe a taste.
Those Waues, which beate vpon the cliffes, doe show
The cruell stormes, which Enuie hath below.
The Border round about in Characts hath
The minde of all; which in effect is this:
'Tis hard to know; as hard, and harder too,
When men doe know, to bring their hearts to doe.
What said she, when you shewed her this worke?
Like them that are descried, and faine would lurke.
For while she would haue made her selfe seeme cleare,
She made her fault still more and more appeare.
How brook'd she that the wicked only feare?
Her death (I meane) with what heart did she beare?
She neither stubburne was, nor ouerthrowne;
And, but for Mustapha, made no request:
As if his harmes had only beene her owne.
Solyman! Take heed.
Malice, like Clockes woond vp to watch the Sunne,
Hasting a headlong course on many wheeles,
" Haue neuer done, vntill they be vndone.
I slew my Childe; my Childe would haue slaine thee:
All bloody Fates in my blood written be.
I sweare by Mahomet, my Sonne shall die.
Reuenge is Iustice, and no crueltie.
Beglerbie! attend. This glorious Phaëton here,
That would at once subuert this State, and Me,
Safe to the Eunuchs carried let him be.
These spirits of practise, that contend with fate,
Must, by their deaths, doe honor to a State.
Ah humorous Kings? how are you tossed, like waues,
With breaths, that from the earth beneath you moue;
" Obserued, and betray'd; knowne and vndone;
By being nothing, unto all things wonne.
" Frayle man! that mould'st misfortune in thy Wit,
By giuing thy made I doll leaue to fashion
" Thy ends to his. For marke; what comes of it?
Nature is lost, our being onely Chance,
" Where Grace alone, not Merit, must aduance.
The one my Image: Solymans the other:
He, with himselfe, is wrought to spoyle his owne:
I, with my selfe, am made the instrument,
That Courts should haue no great hearts innocent.
But stay: why wander I thus from my ends?
New counsells must be had when Planets fall:
Change hath her periods, and is naturall.
The Saint we worship is Authoritie,
Which liues in Kings, and cannot with them die.
True faith makes Martyrs vnto God alone:
Misfortune hath no such oddes in a Throne.
But see! This Foot-ball to the Starres is come,
Mustapha I meane, in Innocence secure,
Which, for it will not giue Fate, must endure.
Heli distract, fixt, and agast, I see,
And will goe nearer to obserue the rest,
That Wit may take occasion at the best.
For if they feele their State, and know their Strength,
How prone this Masse is for another head;
Did euer hazard finde Occasion dead?
Whether he get the Crowne, or lose his blood,
The one is ill to him; to me both good.
False Mahomet! Thy Lawes Monarchall are,
Vniust, ambitious; full of spoyle, and blood,
Hauing, not of the best, but greatest, Care.
Must life yeeld vp it selfe to be put out,
Before this frame of Nature be decaied?
Must blood the tribute be of Tyrants doubt?
O wretched Flesh! in which must be obeyed
Gods law, that wills Impossibilitie;
And Princes wills, the gulfes of Tyrannie.
We Priests, euen with the mysterie of words,
First binde our selues, and with our selues the rest
To seruitude, the sheath of Tyrants sword;
Each worst vnto himselfe, approuing best.
People! Beleeue in God: we are vntrue,
And spirituall forges vnder Tyrants might:
God only doth command what's good for you:
Where we doe preach your bodies to the Warre;
Your goods to Taxe; your Freedome vnto bands;
Duties, by which you own'd of others are;
And Feare, which to your harmes doth lend your hands.
Ah forlorne Wretch! with my hypocrisie,
I Mustapha haue ruin'd, and this State.
I am the Euills friend, Hells Mediator,
A Furie vnto man, a man to Furies.
Whence growes this sudden Rage thy gesture vtters?
These Agonies, and furious Blasphemings?
Man then doth shew his Reason is defaced,
When Rage thus shewes it selfe with Reason graced.
If thou haue felt the selfe-accusing Warre,
Where knowledge is the endlesse hell of thought,
The ruines of my Soule there figured are,
For where despaire the Conscience doth feare
My wounds bleed out that Horror which they beare.
Horror, and Pride, in Nature opposite;
The one makes Error great, the other small:
Where rooted habits haue no sense at all.
Heli! iudge not thy selfe with troubled minde,
But shew thy heart: when Passions steames breathforth,
Euen woes we wondred at are nothing worth.
I haue offended Nature, God, and Thee:
To each a sinne, to all impietie.
The faults of man are finite, like his merits:
His Mercies infinite that iudgeth spirits.
Tell me thy Errors, teach me to forgiue,
Which he that cannot doe, knowes not to liue.
Canst thou forgiue? Rather auoyd the cause
Which else makes Mercie more seuere than Lawes.
From man, to man duties are but respects,
The grounds where of are meere Humanitie:
Can Iustice other there than Mercie be?
Thought is an act. Who can forgiue remorse,
Where Nature, by her owne Law, suffers force?
What shall I doe? Tell Me. I doe not feare.
Preserue thy Father, with thy Selfe, and me:
Else guilty of each others death we be.
Tell how.
Thy Father purposeth thy death:
I did aduise: Thou offerest vp thy breath.
What haue I to my Father done amisse?
That wicked Rossa thy step mother is.
Wherein haue I of Rossa ill deserued.
In that the Empire is for thee reserued.
Is it a fault to be my Fathers sonne?
" Ah foule Ambition! which, like Water-flouds
Not channell-bound, do'st neighbors ouer-runne;
" And growest nothing when thy rage is done.
Must Rossa's heires out of my ashes rise?
Yet Zanger! I acquit thee of my bloud;
For, I beleeue, thy heart hath no impression
To ruine Mustapha for his Succession.
But tell what Colours they against me vse;
And how my Fathers loue they first did wound.
Of treason towards him they thee accuse:
Thy Fame, and Greatnesse, giues their malice ground.
Good World, where it is danger to be good.
Yet grudge I not power of my selfe to Power:
This basenesse onely in Mankinde I blame,
That Indignation shoul giue lawes to fame.
Shew me the Truth. To what rules am I bound?
No man commanded is by God to die,
As long as he may Persecution flie.
To flie hath scorne; it argues Guiltinesse,
Inherits Feare, weakely abandons Friends,
Giues Tyrants fame, takes Honor from distresse.
Death! doe thy worst. Thy greatest paines haue end.
Mischiefe is like the Cockatrices eyes;
Sees first, and kills; or is seene first; and dies.
Flie to thy strength, which makes misfortune vain●.
Rossa intends thy ruine: What is she?
Seeke in her bowels for thy Father lost:
Who can redeeme a King with viler cost?
O false, and wicked colours of Desire!
Eternall bondage, vnto him that seekes
To be possest of all things that he likes!
Shall I a Sonne, and Subiect seeme to dare,
For any Selfenesse, to set Realmes on fire,
Which golden titles to rebellions are?
Heli! euen you haue told me, Wealth was giuen
The wicked, to corrupt themselues, and others:
Greatnesse, and health, to make flesh proud, and cruell.
Where, in the good, Sicknesse mowes downe desire;
Death glorifies; Misfortune humbles.
Since therefore Life is but the throne of Woe,
Which sicknesse, paine, desire, and feare inherit,
Euer most worth to men of weakest spirit:
Shall we, to languish in this brittle Iayle,
Seeke, by ill deeds, to shunne ill destinie?
And so, for toyes, lose immortalitie?
Fatall Necessitie is neuer knowne
Vntillit strike: and till that blow become,
Who fals, is by false visions ouerthrowne.
Blasphemous loue! safe-conduct of the ill!
What power hath giuen mans wickednesse such skill?
Ah seruile Men! how are your thoughts bewitch'd
With hopes, and feares, the price of your subiection,
That neither sense, nor time can make you see,
The art of Power will leaue you nothing free?
Is it in vs to rule a Sultans will?
We made them first for good, and not for ill.
Our Gods they are, their God remaines aboue.
To thinke against annoynted Power is death.
To worship Tyrants is no worke of faith.
'Tis rage of Folly that contends with Fate.
Yet hazard something to preserue the State.
Sedition wounds what should preserued be.
To wound Powers humors, keepes their honors free.
Admit this true. What sacrifice preuailes?
Force the petition is that neuer fayles.
Where then is Natures place for innocence?
Prosperitie; that neuer makes offence.
Hath Destinie no wheeles but meere Occasion?
Could East vpon the West else make inuasion?
Confusion followes where Obedience leaues.
The Tyrant only that euent deceaues.
And are the wayes of Truth, and Honor such?
Weakenesse doth euer thinke it owes too much.
Hath Fame her glorious colours out of feare?
What is the world to him that is not there?
Tempt me no more. Goodwill is then a paine,
When her words beat the heart, and cannot enter.
I constant in my counsell doe remaine,
And more liues, for my owne life will not venture.
My fellowes! rest. Our Alcoran doth binde,
That I alone should first my Father finde.
Sir! by our Lords commandement, here I wayt,
To guide you to his presence:
Where, like a King, and Father, he intends
To honor, and acquaint you with his ends.
Heli! Farewell. All Fates are from aboue
Chain'd vnto humors that must rise, or fall.
Thinke what we will: Men doe but what they shall.
Are Men no more? Are Kings annoynted blood
Prophane to them, and sacred vnto vs?
Playes Power with lawes of God, and Nature thus?
Shall sorrow write this storie of oppression
Onely in idle teares, and not in blood?
Where is Mans zeale to God, his loue to men?
Shall that false Labyrinth of humane feare
Keepe Honor, and Reuenge still captiue there?
No: let the spirit of Wrong stirre vp affection,
By smart to make both men, and Tyrants know,
There is in each, of each, the overthrow.
Are hell, and heauen peopled out of vs?
Keepe we the Keyes of Conscience, and of Passion,
And can no iust reuenge in either fashion?
Was euer change vnwelcome vnto man?
Restlesse Mortalitie still hates the present:
No one Rule please the Vniuersall can.
This Empires constitution Martiall is,
Where hopes, and feares, must neuer be vnbent:
Anarchie is call'd for here by discontent.
To Mustapha I know the worlds affection;
To Solyman feare only drawes regard,
And men stirre easily where the reyne is hard.
Then l●t them stirre, and teare away this veyle
Of pride from Power; that our great Lord may see
Vnmiracled, his owne Humanity.
People! Looke vp aboue this Diuans name;
This rent of Error; snare of Libertie;
Where punishment is Tyrants taxe, and fame.
Abolish these false Oracles of might,
Courts subalterne, which bearing Tyrants seale,
Oppresse the People, and make vaine, Appeale.
Ruine these spetious maskes of Tyrannie,
These Crowne-payd Caddies of their makers fashion;
Which, Power-like, for Right distribute Passion.
Confound Degrees, the Artifice of Thrones
To beare downe Nature; while they raise vp Art
With gilded Titles, to deceiue the heart.
The Church absolues you: Truth approues your worke.
Craft, and oppression euery where God hates.
Besides, where Order is not, Change is free,
And giues all rights to Popularitie.
ANgels fell first from God, Man was the next that fell:
Both being made by him for Heau'n, haue for themselues made Hell.
Defection had, for ground, an essence which might fall,
Growne proud with glories of that God, like whom they would be all.
Hence each thing, but himselfe, these fall'n Powers comprehend,
Nor can beyond depriuings ill their knowledge extend.
But in that darckned Orbe, through mists which vice creates,
Ioylesse, enioy a wofull glimpse of their once happy States.
And Serpent-like, with curst eternitie of euill,
Actiue in mischiefe many wayes to adde more to the Diuell,
They take on euery shape of vice that may delight,
Striuing to make Creation lesse, Priuation infinite.
Whence Man from goodnes stray'd, and wisdomes innocence,
Yea subiect made to graue, and hell, by errors impotence,
Labors, with shaddowed light of imbecillitie,
To raise more towers of Babel vp, aboue the Truth to be.
Among which Phantasms mounts that roofe of Tyrants power,
The outward Church, whose nature is her Founders to deuoure.
And, through an hollow charme of life-forsaken words,
Entangle reall things, to raigne on all the earth affords:
By irreligious rites, helping Religions name
To blemifh truth, with gilded lies cast in Opinions frame.
Whence she that erst rais'd Kings, by pulling freedome downe,
Now seekes to free inferior Powers, and only binde the Crowne.
In which aspiring pride, where Wit encountreth Wit,
The power of the Thrones vnequall is, and turnes the scale with it:
Mastering those greedy swarmes of superstitious rites,
Which by the sinners feare, not faith, makes her scope infinite.
Hence growes it that our Priests, erst Oracles of State,
Against whose doome our Sultans durst trust nothing vnto fate,
At once were censur'd all, in one house to the fire,
As guiltie in their idle soules of Icarus desire.
So free, and easie is it to cast downe againe
The creatures pride, which his Creator couets to restraine:
Againe, so easie is it to bring States to death,
By vrging those Powers to oppose, whose vnion gaue them breath.
Thus from the liues of Priests kings first their doctrine staine,
And then let Sect, Schisme, Question in, to qualifie their raigne.
Nor can this swolne Excesse be well reform'd in either,
While both stand mixt of good, and ill, which ioyne not well together.
Kings seeking from the Church the rights of deitie;
The Church from Kings, not nursing helpe, but Gods supremacie.
A strife wherein they both find losse, in stead of gaine;
Since neither State can stand alone, much lesse diuided raigne.
The strife, and peace of which; like Ocean ebbs, and flouds;
Successiuely, doe here contract, and there disperse our goods.
And by this mutuall spleene amongst these Soueraigne parts
While each seeks gaine by others losse, the Vniuersall smarts.
For as soules, made to raigne, when they let downe their State
Into the bodies humors, straight those humors giue them fate:
So, when the Church, and Crowne (the soules of Empire) fall
Into Contempt, which humane Power cannot subsist withall,
They striue, turne, and descend, feele Errors destinie,
Which in a well-form'd Empire is, a Vagabond to be.
Thus, in Disorders chayne, while each linke wresteth other,
Incestuous Error, to her owne, is made both child, and mother.
So as their doing is vndoings still to breed,
And fatally entombe againe each other, in each deed.
Hence Humane Lawes appeal'd, as Moderators come,
Who, vnder shew of compremise, take on them Soueraigne doome;
Entring in at the first, like Wisdome, with applause,
And though propounded from our faults, yet by, consent, made Lawes;
Or rather scales, to weigh Opinion with the Truth,
Which, like Stepmothers, often bring the better side to ruth.
And as of actiue ill (from whence they tooke their root)
Guiltie, and so not strong to stand vpon a constant foot,
They waue, striue, and aspire, can beare no weight aboue,
But, as with Soueraigne Power it selfe, and nothing else in loue,
That riuall spleene, which Equalls still to Equalls beare,
Forgotten, or a-sleepe, as if desire had conquer'd feare,
They factiously a peace with their chiefe riuall make,
And let in Warres, which, like a Flood, all Sea-banks ouer-rake.
In which one act Lawes proue, though nature gaue them ground,
That they both mould, and practise tooke from Warre, which hath no bound.
Because, like Mars his seed, they feed vpon their owne;
And by the spoyle of Crownes, and Men, take glorie to be knowne.
In which deare enterchange betweene Church, Lawes, and Might,
While all their counsells are allayed, by oueracting, Right;
They leaue their supreme pitch to seruile Craft impawn'd,
Descending each to traffike there, where he ought to command.
Till fondly thus engag'd into a Ciuil Warre,
They casting off all publike ends, doe only make to marre.
Yet keepe a scope in shew to counterpoise each other,
And saue the health, and honor vp of Monarchy their mother.
" But as in Man, whose frame is chiefly foure Complexions,
Really ioyn'd, dispersed, mixt with opposite connexions,
" When any of these fourefold, or distract too farre,
Diseases raigne, which but Disorders natiue children are;
" From which contention stirr'd 'twixt Nature, and her Foes,
While humor weaken humor doth, to health the Bodie growes:
" So in these diuerse Powers, excesse of Opposition,
Oft, by begetting strange diseases, proues the States Physitian.
Mauors, that monster, borne of many-headed Passion,
While it seemes to destroy al moulds, to each mould giuing fashion.
" Yet as these Elements, thus opposite in kinde,
While, ballanc'd by superior ties, they liue, as if combinde
" To make their Discords base vnto that harmonie,
In whose sweet vnion mildely linkt all Powers concurre to be;
" When any breakes too much that poyse wherein they stood,
To make his own subsistence firme, with shew of common good;
" By oueracting, straight it breaks that well-built frame,
Wherin their being stood entire, although they lost their name:
" So in that Noble worke of publike Gouernment,
When Crownes, Church, Souldiers, or the Lawes, doe ouermuch dissent,
" That frame, wherein they liu'd, as fatally dissolu'd;
And each in gulfes of selfe-Conceipt, as fatally, inuolu'd.
Thus reeles our present State, and her foundation waues,
By making Trophees of times past, of present time the graues.
Lawes striue to curbe the Church, the Church wounds Lawes againe;
The Souldier would haue Church, Throne, Lawes kept low, that he might raigne.
And as before, while they ioyn'd to make Empire large,
All vnto greatnesse raysed were, by doing well their charge:
So now, by pulling quils each from the others wings,
They iointly all are cried downe, by letting fall their Kings.
A fate prepar'd to shake that Ottoman succession,
Which erst, remoued from mens eyes, wrought reuerend impression.
Where now, this Sultans line prophan'd when men shall see,
They soone will scorne Grace, Hope, and Feare; the Scepters mysterie.
Nor will they more by Faith, or Zeale, in warre be led
To sacrifice their liues to Power, for fame when they be dead.
Or, to shunne Mortall paines, prouoke the Infinite;
Wrong in Mans nature stirring sparks, that giue both heat, and light,
To gather in againe those strengths they gaue away;
And so plucke downe that Sampsons post, on which our Sultans stay.
NOurisht in Court, where no Thoughts peace is nourisht,
Vs'd to behold the Tragedies of ruine,
Brought vp with feares that follow Princes fortunes;
Yet am I like him that hath lost his knowledge,
Or neuer heard one storie of Misfortune.
My heart doth fall away: feare falls vpon me.
Tame Rumors, that haue beene mine old acquaintance
Are to me now (like Monsters) feare, or wonder.
My Loue beginnes to plague me with Suspitions.
My Mothers promises of my aduancement;
The name of Mustapha so often murmur'd,
With whose name euer I haue beene reioyced,
Now makes my heart misgiue, my spirits languish.
Man then is Augur of his owne misfortune,
When his ioy yeelds him arguments of anguish.
Tyrants! Why swell you thus against your Makers?
Is rays'd Equalitie so soone growne wilde?
Dare you depriue your People of Succession,
Which Thrones, and Scepters, on their freedomes build?
Haue feare, or loue, in Greatnesse no impression?
Since people, who did rayse you to the Crowne,
Are ladders standing still to let you downe.
Achmat! what strange Euents beget these Passions?
" Nature is ruin'd; Humanitie fall'n a sunder;
Our Alcoran prophan'd; Empire defac'd;
" Ruine is broken loose; Truth dead; Hope banisht.
My heart is full; my voyce, and spirits tremble.
Yet tell the worst.
By Counsell, or Comparison things lessen.
No Counsell, or Comparison can lessen
The losse of Mustapha, so vily murth'red.
How? dead? what Chance, or Malice hath preuented
Mankindes good fortune?
Fathers vnkindely doubts.
Tell, how?
when Solyman, by cunning spite
Of Rossa's witchcrafts, from his heart had banisht
Iustice of Kings, and Louingnesse of Fathers,
To wage, and lodge such campes of heady passions,
As that sects cunning practices could gather;
Enuie tooke hold of worth: doubt did misconster:
Renowne was made a lie, and yet a terror:
Nothing could calme his Rage, or moue Compassion:
Mustapha must die. To which end fetch'd he was,
Laden with hopes, and promises of Fauor.
So vile a thing is Craft in euery heart,
As it makes Power it selfe descend to Art.
While Mustapha, that neither hop'd, nor fear'd,
Seeing the stormes of Rage, and Danger comming,
Yet came; and came accompanied with power.
But neither Power, which warranted his safetie;
Nor Safetie, that makes Violence a Iustice;
Could hold him from Obedience to this Throne:
A Gulfe, which hath deuoured many a one.
Alas! Could neither Truth appease his furie?
Nor his vnlook'd Humilitie of comming?
Nor any secret witnessing remorses?
Can Nature, from her selfe, make such diuorces?
Tell on; that all the World may rue, and wonder.
There is a place enuironed with Trees,
Vpon whose shaddowed center there is pitched
A large, embrodered, sumptuous Pauillion;
The stately Throne of Tyrannie, and Murther.
Where Mightie men are slaine, before they know
That they to other than to Honor goe.
Mustapha no sooner to the Port did come,
But thither he is sent for, and conducted
By six slaue Eunuchs, either taught to colour
Mischiefe with reuerence, or forc'd, by Nature,
To reuerence true Vertue in misfortune.
While Mustapha, whose heart was now resolued,
Not fearing Death, which he might haue preuented;
Nor crauing Life, which he might well haue gotten,
If he would other duties haue forgotten;
Yet glad to speake his last thoughts to his Father,
Desir'd the Eunuchs to intreat it for him.
They did; wept; they and kneeled to his Father.
But bloodie Rage, that glories to be cruell;
And Iealousie, that feares she is not fearefull;
Made Solyman refuse to heare, or pittie.
He bids them haste their charge: and bloody-ey'd
Beholds his Sonne, whilest he obeying died.
How did that doing Heart endure to suffer? Tell on.
Quicken my Powers hardned, and dull to good,
Which, yet vnmou'd heare tell of brothers blood.
while these six Eunuchs to this charge appointed
(Whose hearts had neuer vs'd their hands to Pittie,
Whose hands, now onely, trembled to do Murther)
With Reuerence, and Feare, stood still, amazed;
Loth to cut off such Worth, afraid to saue it:
Mustapha with thoughts resolued, and vnited,
Bids them fulfill their charge, and looke no further.
Their hearts afraid to let their hands be doing,
The Cord, that hatefull instrument of Murther,
They lifting vp let fall, and falling lift it:
Each sought to helpe, and helping hindred other.
Till Mustapha, in haste to be an Angell,
With heauenly smiles, and quiet words, foreshowes
The ioy and peace of those soules where he goes.
His last words were; O Father! Now forgiue me;
Forgiue them too, that wrought my ouerthrow:
Let my Graue neuer minister offences.
For, since my Father coueteth my death,
Behold, with ioy, I offer him my breath.
The Eunuchs rore: Solyman his Rage is glutted:
His thoughts diuine of Vengeance for this Murther:
Rumor flies vp, and downe: the People murmur:
Sorrow giues Lawes before men know the truth;
Feare prophecieth aloud, and threatens ruth.
Remisse, and languisht are mens coward Spirits,
Where God forbids Reuenge, and Patience too:
Yet to the dead Nature or daineth rites,
Which idle Loue, I feele, hath power to doe.
I will goe hence, and shew to them that liue,
That God Almightie cannot all forgiue.
Helpe Achmat! helpe: Furies runnes ouer all.
Pittie my state, that with the Empire fall.
What sound is this of Ruine, and Confusion?
Terror afraid? Crueltie come for Pittie?
Seditious Rosten, running from Sedition?
And Malice forc'd to enemies for succour?
Achmat! The mysteries of Empire are dissolued.
Furie hath made the People know their forces.
Maiestie (as but a Myst,) they breed, and spread.
Nothing, but things impossible will please.
Mustapha must liue againe, or Rosten perish.
Oh wretchednesse! which I cannot deny;
I am asham'd to liue, and loth to die.
Tell on the dangers which concerne the State:
For thee! thou Rod ordain'd vnto the fire,
Thy other doomes let Acheron enquire.
When Mustapha was by the Eunuchs strangled,
Forthwith his Campe grew doubtfull of his absence:
The guard of Solyman himselfe did murmur.
People beganne to search their Princes Counsells:
Furie gaue Lawes: the Lawes of Dutie vanisht:
Kinde Feare of him they lou'd Selfe-feare had banisht.
The headlong spirits were the heads that guided:
He that most disobeyed, was most obeyed.
Furie so suddenly became vnited,
As while her forces nourished Confusion,
Confusion seem'd with Discipline delighted.
Towards Solyman they runne: and as the Waters,
" That meet with banks of Snow, make Snow grow Water:
So, euen those Guards, that stood to interrupt them,
Giue easie passage, and passe on amongst them.
Solyman, who saw this storme of Mischiefe comming,
Thinks absence his best argument vnto them:
Retires himselfe, and sends me to demand,
What they demanded, or what meant their comming?
I spake: they cried: For Mustapha, and Achmat.
Some bid away; some kill; some saue; some hearken.
Those that cried, Saue, were those that sought to kill me.
Who cried, Hearke, were those that first brake silence,
They held that bad me Goe. Humilitie was guiltie;
Words were reproch; Silence in me was scornfull;
They answer'd ere they ask'd; assur'd, and doubted.
I fled; their Furie followed to destroy me;
Fury made haste; Haste multiplied their Furie;
Each would doe all; none would giue place to other.
The hind most strake; and while the formost listed
Their armes to strike, each Weapon hindred other:
Their running let their strokes, strokes let their running.
Desire, mortall enemy to desire,
Made them, that sought my life, giue life vnto me.
Now Achmat! Though Blood-thirst deserue no Pittie;
Malice no loue; though iust Reuenge be Mercie;
Yet saue me. For, although my death be lawfull,
The Iudges, and the manner are vnlawfull.
If I die; what hath Solyman for warrant?
Mischiefe is still the Gouerness of Mischiefe.
If Solyman be slaine; where will they stay,
That Thorough God, and Maiestie make way?
Rosten! dar'st thou name Dutie, Lawes, or Mercie?
Owe not thy selfe to him thou would'st destroy;
Make good thy loue of Murther; die with Ioy.
If Solyman who hath beene thy best Fortune,
Safe thou wilt see, or safe his state preserue,
Make haste. The State did neuer ill deserue.
Occasion! when art thou more glorious,
Than euen now; when thou requir'st of me,
To fall with States in common destinie?
States trespasse not: Tyrants they be that swarue,
And bring vpon all Empires age, or death.
By making Truth but only Princes breath.
This Monarchie first rose by Industrie;
Honor held vp by vniuersall Fame,
Stirring mens mindes to strange Audacitie:
Great ends procur'd our Armies greater name:
To enemies no Iniurie had blame:
Worth was not proud: Authoritie was wise;
And did not on her owne then tyrannize.
Now own'd by humor of this dotard King
(Who, swolne with practise of long Gouernment,
Doth staine the Publike with ill managing)
Honor is layd a-sleepe: Fame is vnbent:
His Will, his End; and Powers right euery where:
Now, what can this, but dissolution, beare?
Whether our choyce, or Nature gaue vs Kings,
The end of either was the good of all:
Where many strengths make this Omnipotence,
The good of many there is naturall.
One drawes from all: Can that be fortunate?
All leaue this one: Can this be Iniurie?
And shall I helpe to stay the Peoples rage
From this Estate, thus ruined with Age?
No People, No. Question these Thrones of Tyrants;
Reuiue your old equalities of Nature;
Authority is more than that she maketh.
Lend not your strengths to keepe your owne strengths vnder.
Proceed in Furie: Furie hath Law, and Reason,
Where it doth plague the wickednesse of Treason.
For when whole Kingdomes surfet, and must fall,
Iustice diuides not there, but ruines all.
Besides of Duties 'twixt the earth, and skie,
He can obserue no one that cannot die.
But stay! Shall Man the Damme, and Graue of Crownes,
With Mutinie, pull sacred Scepters downe?
People of Wisdome voide, with Passion fill'd,
While they keepe names still presse to ruine things:
Freedome dissolues them; Order they refuse:
Worth, Freedome, Power, and Right while they destroy;
Worth, Freedome, Power, and Right they would enioy.
What soule then louing Nature, Dutie, Order,
Would hold a life of such a statelesse State,
As, made of Humors, must giue Honor fate?
No Achmat! Rather, with thy hazard, striue
To saue this high rais'd Soueraigntie,
Vnder whose wings there was Prosperitie.
I yeeld. But how?
Force is impossible; for that is theirs:
Counsell shewes, like their enemie, Delay:
Order turnes all desires into feares:
Their Art is violence: and Chance their end:
What, but Occasion, there can be my friend?
Behold where Rossa comes, in her lookes varying,
Like rage, that with it selfe, still feares miscarying.
Who euer thinkes by Vertue to aspire,
And Goodnesse dreames to be but Fortunes starre;
Or who by Mischiefes wit seekes his desire,
And thinkes, no Conscience, wayes to Honor are:
He, Mustapha! here seeing thee, and me;
Sees no Mans good, or ill rules Destinie.
Then ah! woe worth them that with God contend,
And would exchange the course of Fate by Wit,
Which God makes worke, to bring his works to end,
And with it selfe, euen oft, doth ruine it.
Ah Tyrant Fate! to them that doe amisse:
For nothing left me, but my Error, is.
What Glories this that with it selfe is sad?
Good lucke makes all hearts, but the guiltie, glad.
Zanger, for whom euen Mustapha was slaine,
And vnto whom Camena's blood was shed;
Zanger, for whom all Worlds on me complaine,
Hath done that which nor Law, nor Truth could doe:
(Horror, and doubt in my desires breed)
Murther'd himselfe, and ouerthrowne me too.
Tell why? And how he so vnthankfull died?
In euery Creatures heart there liues Desire,
Which men doe hallow as appearing good:
For Greatnesse they esteeme it to aspire,
Although it weakenesse be, well vnderstood.
This vnbound, raging, infinite Thought-fire
I tooke; nay it tooke me, and plac'd my heart
On hopes to alter Empire, and Succession.
Chance was my faith, and Order my despayre:
Sect, Innouation, Change of Princes right,
My studies were: I thought Hope had no end,
In her, that hath an Emperor to friend.
Whence like the Stormes (that then like stormes doe blow,
When all things, but themselues, they ouerthrow)
I ventur'd; first to make the Father feare,
Then hate, then kill, his most beloued Childe.
My Daughter did discouer him my way,
To Mustapha she opened mine intent:
For she had tried, but could not turne my heart.
Yet no hurt to me she in telling meant,
Though hurt she did me to disclose my Art.
I sought Reuenge: Reuenge it could not be;
For, I confesse, she neuer wronged me.
Remorse, that hath a Faction in each heart,
Womanish Shame, which is Compassions friend,
Conspir'd with Truth to haue restrayned me;
Yet kil'd I her whom I did dearely loue;
Furies of choyce, what arguments can moue?
I kill'd her: for I thought her death would proue
That Truth, not Hate, made Mustapha suspected:
The more it seem'd, against a Mothers loue,
The more it shew'd, I Solyman affected:
Thus, vnderneath seuere, and vpright dealing,
A mischieuous Stepmothers malice stealing,
It tooke effect: For few meane ill in vaine.
Which wicked Art although the Father knew,
Yet his Affection turn'd my ill to good:
Vice, but of hers, being only vnderstood.
Feare grew discreet, and would not speake in vaine;
Courage turn'd all the strengths of heart to beare;
Iustice it selfe durst murmur, not complaine:
So little care the Fates for vs below:
So little men feare God, they doe not know.
But ah! Woe worth each false preposterous way,
Which promiseth good lucke to euill deeds:
Since Mustapha, whose death I made my Glorie,
Hath left me no power now, but to be sorie.
For Zanger, when he saw his Brother dead,
Confusedly with diuerse shapes distract,
Hee silent stood, with Horrors compassed:
His Dutie mixt with woe; Kindenesse with rage;
Reuerence, Reuenge, both representing shame,
Equally against, and with a Mothers name.
But as these shaddowes vanisht from his minde,
The Globes of his enraged eyes he threw
On me, like Nature iustly made vnkinde:
And for this hatefull fault my Loue did make,
From Pittie, Woe, and Anger, thus he spake:
" Mother! Is this the way of Womans heart?
Haue you no Law, or God; but Will, to friend?
" Can neither Power, nor Goodnesse scape your Art?
Be these the Counsells by which you ascend?
" Is there no Hell? Or doe the Diuells loue fire?
If neither God, Heauen, Hell, or Diuell be;
" 'Tis plague enough that I am borne of thee.
Mother! O monstrous Name! shall it be said,
" That thou hast done this fact for Zangers sake?
Honor, and Life, shall they to one vpbrayd,
" That, from thy Mischiefe, they their Honor take?
O wretched Men! which vnder shame are layd,
" For faults which we, and which our Parents make.
Yet Rossa! to be thine, in this I glorie;
" That, being thine, giues power to make thee sorie.
He wounds his heart; and falling downe with death
On Mustapha, who there for his sake died;
These words he spake:
Ah base Ambition! mould of Crueltie,
" In thy vast narrow bosome euer breed
These hideous Counsells, light-abhorring deeds.
" Yet you pure soules that Mahomet adore!
Reade in these wounds my horror of his death,
" And to the Christians cary thou it, Breath.
He dies. Woes me. When in my heart I looke,
Horror I see: all there lost but despayre:
My Loue, and Ioy become Afflictions booke;
Eternity of Shame is printed there.
To thinke of God! Alas, that so I may:
Yet Power, and Goodnesse can but shew me Feare:
Mercie I cannot craue, that cannot trust:
Nor die I will; for death concludeth paines:
Nor languish in conceipt; for then I must
Abhorre my soule, in which all Mischiefes raigne.
I will beare with me, in this Bodies dust,
What curse soeuer to the earth remaines.
I will beare with me Enuie, Rage, Desire,
To set all Hearts, all Times, all Worlds on fire.
You weake Soules! whose true Loue hath made you base,
And fixt your Quiets vpon others will:
You humble Hearts! which vnto Power giue place,
For conscience bearing yokes of Tyrants skill:
You poore Religious! who in hope of grace,
Beare many sore temptations of the ill,
Reioyce: Vnkindnesse, Crueltie, Disgrace,
Vengeance, and Wrong beare hence with me I will.
Rather take heede: where can more Danger be,
Than where these Powers may be dispos'd by me?
VAst Superstition! Glorious stile of Weaknesse!
Sprung from the deepe disquiet of Mans passion,
To desolation, and despaire of Nature:
Thy Texts bring Princes Titles into question:
Thy Prophets set on worke the sword of Tyrants:
They manacle sweet Truth with their distinctions:
Let Vertue blood: teach Crueltie for Gods sake;
Fashioning one God; yet him of many fashions,
Like many-headed Error, in their Passions.
Mankinde! Trust not these Superstitious dreames,
Feares Idoles, Pleasures Relikes, Sorrowes Pleasures.
They make the willfull hearts their holy Temples:
The Rebells vnto Gouernment their Martyrs,
No: Thou childe of false miracles begotten!
False Miracles, which are but ignorance of Cause,
Lift vp the hopes of thy abiected Prophets:
Courage, and Worth abiure thy painted heauens.
Sicknesse, thy blessings are; Miserie, thy triall;
Nothing, thy way vnto eternall being;
Death, to saluation; and the Graue to Heauen.
So Blest be they, so Angel'd, so Eterniz'd
That tie their senses to thy senselesse glories,
And die, to cloy the after-age with stories.
Man should make much of Life, as Natures table,
Wherein she writes the Cypher of her glorie.
Forsake not Nature, nor misunderstand her:
Her mysteries are read without Faiths eye-sight:
She speaketh in our flesh; and from our Senses,
Deliuers downe her wisdomes to our Reason.
If any man would breake her lawes to kill,
Nature doth, for defence, allow offences.
She neither taught the Father to destroy:
Nor promis'd any man, by dying, ioy.
" OH wearisome Condition of Humanity!
Borne vnder one Law, to another bound:
" Vainely begot, and yet forbidden vanity,
Created sicke, commanded to be sound:
What meaneth Nature by these diuerse Lawes?
Passion and Reason, selfe-diuision cause:
Is it the marke, or Maiesty of Power
To make offences that it may forgiue?
Nature herselfe, doth her owne selfe defloure,
To hate those errors she her selfe doth giue.
For how should man thinke that, he may not doe
If Nature did not faile, and punish too?
Tyrant to others, to her selfe vniust,
Onely commands things difficult and hard.
Forbids vs all things, which it knowes is lust,
Makes easie paines, vnpossible reward.
If Nature did not take delight in blood,
She would haue made more easie waies to good.
We that are bound by vowes, and by Promotion,
With pompe of holy Sacrifice and rites,
To teach beleefe in good and still deuotion,
To preach of Heauens wonders, and delights:
Yet when each of vs, in his owne heart lookes,
He findes the God there, farre vnlike his Bookes.