CAll here my varlet, I'll unarm again,
Why should I war without the walls of Troy:
That find such cruel battle here within,
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field Troilus alas hath none.
Will this gear near be mended?
The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant,
But I am weaker than a woman's tear;
Tamer than sleep; fonder than ignorance,
Less valiant than the Virgin in the night,
And skilless as unpractised infancy:
Well, I have told you enough of this; for my part i'll not meddle nor make no farther; he that will have a cake out of the wheat must tarry the grinding.
Have I not tarried?
I the grinding; but you must tarry the bolting.
Have I not tarried?
I the bolting; but you must tarry the leavening.
Still have I tarried.
ay, to the leavening, but hears yet in the word hereafter, the kneading, the making of the cake, the heating the oven, and the baking, nay you must stay the cooling too, or yea may chance burn your lips.
Patience herself, what Goddess e'er she be,
Doth lesser blench at sufferance than I do:
At Priam's royal table do I sit
And when fair Cressida comes into my thoughts,
So traitor than she comes when she is thence.
Well she looked yesternight fairer than ever I saw her look, or any woman else.
I was about to tell thee when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh would rive in twain,
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me:
I have (as when the Sun doth light a scorn)
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile,
But sorrow that is couched in seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.
And her hair were not somewhat darker then Helen's, well go to, there were no more comparison between the women! but for my part she is my kinswoman, I would not as they term it praise her, but I would somebody had heard her talk yesterday as I did, I will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but—
Oh Pandarus I tell thee Pandarus,
When I do tell thee there my hopes lie drowned
Reply not in how many fathoms deep,
They lie indrench'd*, I tell thee I am mad:
In Cressida's love? thou answerst she is fair,
Pourest in the open ulcer of my heart:
Her eyes, her hair her cheek, her gate, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse: O that her hand
In whose comparison all whites are ink
Writing their own reproach; to whose soft seizure,
The cygnet's down is harsh, and spirit of sense:
Hard as the palm of ploughman; this thou tellest me,
As true thou tellst me, when I say I love her,
But saying thus in steed of oil and balm,
Thou layst in every gash that love hath given me
The knife that made it.
I speak no morethen truth.
Thou dost not speak so much.
Faith I'll not meddle in it, let her be as she is, if she be fair 'tis the better for her, and she be not, she has the mends in her own hands.
Good Pandarus. how now Pandarus
I have had my labour for my travel, ill thought on of her, and ill thought of you, gon between and between, but small thanks for my labour.
What are thou angry Pandarus? what with me?
Because she 's kin to me therefore she's not so fair as Hellen, and she were kin to me, she would be as fair a Friday as Helen, is on Sunday, but what I? I care not and she were a blackamoor, 'tis all one to me.
Say I she is not fair?
I do not care whether you do or no, she's a fool to stay behind her father let her to the Greekes, and so I'll tell her the next time I see her for my part I'll meddle nor make no more ith'matter.
Pandarus.
Not I
Sweet Pandraus.
Pray you speak no more to me I will leave all as I found it and there an end.
Peace you ungracious clamours, peace rude sounds,
Fools on both sides, Hellen must needs be fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus,
I cannot fight upon this argument:
It is too starved a subject for my sword,
But Pandarus: O gods! how do you plague me
I cannot come to Cressida but by Pander,
And he's as tetchy to be wood to woe,
As she is stubborn, chaste, against all suit.
Tell me Apollo for thy Daphne's love
What Cressida is, what Pander, and what we:
Her bed is India there she lies, a pearl,
Between our Ilium, and where she reides
Let it be called the wild and wandering stood:
Our ele the Marchant, and this sayling Pandar,
Our doubtful hope, our convoy and our bark.
How now prince Troilus, wherefore not afield,
Because not there; this woman's answer sorts,
For womanish it is to be from thence.
What news Aeneas from the field to day?
That Paris is returned home and hurt.
By whom Aeneas?
Troilus by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed 'tis but a scar to scorn,
Paris gored with Menelaus' horn.
Hark what good sport is out of town to day.
Better at home, if would I might were may:
But to the sport abroad are you bound thither?
In all swift haste.
Come go we then together.
Who were those went by?
Queen Hecuba, and Hellen.
And whether go they?
Up to the Eastern tower,
Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
To see the battle: Hector whose patience,
Is as a virtue fixed, to day was moved:
He chid Andromache and struck his armourer,
And like as there were husbandry in war
Before the Sun rose, he was harnessed light,
And to the field goes he; where every flower
Did as a Prophet weep what it foresaw,
In Hector's wrath.
What was his cause of anger.
The noise goes this, there is among the Greekes,
A Lord of Trojan blood, Nephew to Hector.
They call him. Ajax.
Good; and what of him,
They say he is a very man pierce and stands alone.
So do all men unless the are drunk, sick, or have no legs.
This man Lady, hath robbed many beasts of their particular additions, he is as valiant as the Lion, churlish as the Bear, slow as the Elephant: a man into whom nature hath so crowded humours, that his valour is crushed into folly, his folly sauced with discretion: there is no man hath a virtue, that he hath not a glimpse of, nor any man an attaint, but he carries some stain of it. He is melancholy without cause and merry against the hair, he hath the joints of every thing, but every thing so out of joint, that he is a gouty Briareus, many hands, & no use: or purblind Argus, all eyes, and no sight.
But how should this man that makes me smile, make Hector angry.
They say he yesterday coped Hector in the battle and stroke him down, the disdain and shame whereof hath ever since kept Hector fasting and waking.
Who comes here.
Madam your uncle Pandarus.
Hector a gallant man.
As may be in the world Lady.
What's that? what's that?
Good morrow uncle Pandarus.
Good morrow cozen Cressida: what do you talk of? good morrow Alexander: how do you cozend, when were you at Illum?
This morning uncle.
What were you talking of when I came? was Hector armed and gone ere yea came to Ilium, Helen was not up was she?
Hector was gone but Helen was not up?
E'en so, Hector was stirring early.
That were we talking of, and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he says here.
True he was so; I know the cause to, he'll lay about him to day I can tell them that, & there's Troilus will not come far behind him, let them take heed of Troilus; I can tell them that too.
What is he angry too?
Who Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two:
Oh Iupiter there's no comparison.
What not between Troilus and Hector? do you know a man if you see him?
ay, if I ever saw him before and knew him:
Well I say Troilus is Troilus:
Then you say as I say, for I am sure he is not Hector,
No not Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.
'tis just, to each of them he is himself.
Himself, alas poor Troilus I would he were.
So he is.
Condition I had gone barefoot to India.
He is not Hector.
Himself? no? he's not himself, would a were himself, well the Gods are above, time must friend or endwell Troilus well, I would my heart were in her body; no, Hector is not a better man than Troilus.
Excuse me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
Th'other's not come to't, you shall tell me another tale when th'other's come to't, Hector shall not have his will this year.
He shall not need it if he have his own.
Not his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beauty.
'twould not become him, his own's better.
You have no judgement niece; Helen herself swore th'other day that Troilus for a brown favour (for so 'tis I must confess) not brown neither.
No, but brown.
Faith to say truth, brown and not brown.
To say the truth, true and not true.
She praised his complexion above Paris.
Why Paris hath colour enough.
So he has.
Then Troylus should have too much, if she praised him above, his complexion is higher than his, he having colour enough, and the other higher, is too flaming a praise for a good complexion, I had as lief Helen's golden tongue had commended Troilus for a copper nose.
I swear to you I think Helen loves him better than Paris.
Then she's a merry greek indeed.
Nay I am sure she does, she came to him th'other day into the compassed window, and you know he has not past three or four hairs on his chin.
Indeed a Tapster's arithmetic may soon bring his particulars therein to a total.
Why he is very young, and yet will he within three pound lift as much as his brother Hector.
Is he so young a man, and so old a lifter.
But to prove to you that Helen loves him, she came and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin.
Iuno have mercy, how came it cloven?
Why, you know 'tis dimpled, I think his smiling becomes him better than any man in all Phrigia.
Oh he smiles valianty.
Does he not?
Oh yes, and 'twere a cloud in Autumn.
Why go to then, but to prove to you that Helen loves Troilus.
Troilus will stand to thee proof if you'll prove it so.
Troilus, why he esteems her no more than I esteem and addle egg:
If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle head you would eat chickens i'th' shell.
I cannot choose but laugh to think how she tickled his chin, indeed she has a marvelous white hand I must needs confess.
Without the rack.
And she takes upon her to spy a white hear on his chin.
Alas poor chin many a wart is richer.
But there was such laughing, Queen Hecuba laughed that her eyes ran over.
With millstones.
And Cassandra laughed.
But there was a more temperate fire under the pot of her eyes: did her eyes run over to?
And Hector laughed.
At what was all this laughing.
Marry at the white hear that Helen spied on Troilus chin.
And 't'had been a green hear I should have laughed too.
They laughed not so much at the hear as at his pretty answer.
What was his answer?
Quoth she here's but two and fifty heirs on your chin; and one of them is white.
This is her question.
That's true, make no question of that, two and fifty heirs quoth he, and one white, that white heir is my father, and all the rest are his sons. Iupiter quoth she, which of these heirs is Paris my husband? the forked one quoth he, plucked out and gave it him: but there was such laughing, and Hellen so blushed, and Paris so chafed, and all the rest so laughed that it past.
So let it now for it has been a great while going by.
Well cousin I told you a thing yesterday, think on't.
So I do.
I'll be sworn 'tis true, he will weep you an 'twere a man borne in April
And I'll spring up in his tears an 'twere a nettle against May.
Hark they are coming from the field, shall we stand up here and see them as they pass toward Ilium, good Niece do, sweet Niece Cresseida.
At your pleasure.
here, here, here's an excellent place, here we may see most bravely, ile tell you them all by their names, as they pass by, but mark Troilus above the rest.
Speak not so loud.
That's Aeneas, is not that a brave man, he's one of the flowers of Troy I can tell you, but mark Troilus, you shall see anon.
Who's that?
That's Antenor, he has a shrewd wit I can tell you, and he's man good enough, he's one o'th' soundest judgements in Troy whosoever, and a proper man of person, when comes Troilus, i'll show you Troilus anon, if he see me, you shall see him nod at me.
Will he give you the nod:
You shall see:
If he do the rich shall have more.
That's Hector, that, that, look you that, there's a fellow! go thy way Hector, there's a brave man Niece, O brave Hector, look how he looks, there's a countenance, ist not a brave man?
O a brave man.
Is a not? it does a man heart good, look you what hacks are on his helmet, look you yonder, do you see, look you there, there's no jesting, there's laying on, taket off, who will as they say, there be hacks.
Be those with swords.
Swords, anything he cares not, and the devil come to him, it's all one, by God's lid it does one's heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris, look ye yonder Niece, ist not a gallant man too, ist not, why this is brave now, who said he came hurt home to day. he's not hurt, why this will do Helen's heart good now ha? would I could see Troilus now, you shall see Troilus anon.
Whos's that?
That's Helenus, I marvel where Troilus is, that's Helenus, I think he went not forth to day, that's Helenus.
Can Helenus. fight uncle?
Helenus' no: yes he'll fight indifferent, well, I marvel where Troilus is; hark do you not here the people cry Troilus? Helenus is a priest;
What speaking fellow comes yonder?
Where? yonder? that's Deiphobus. 'tis Troilus! there's a man Niece, him? brave Troilus the Prince of chivalry.
Peace for shame peace.
Mark him, note him: O brave Troilus, look well upon him Niece, look you how his sword is bloodied, and his helm more hacked than Hector's, and how he looks, and how he goes? O admirable youth, he never saw three and twenty, go thy way Troilus, go thy way, had I a sister were a grace, or a daughter a Goddess, he should take his choice, O admirable man! Paris? Paris is dirt to him, and I warrant Helen to change would give an eye to boot.
Here comes more.
Asses, fools, dolts, chaff & bran, chaff & bran, porridge after meat, I could live and die in the eyes of Troilus, near look, near look, the Eagles are gone, crows and daws, crows and daws, I had rather be such a man as Troilus, than Agamemnon and all Greece.
There is amongst the Greekes Achilles a better man than Troilus.
Achilles, a dray-man, a porter, a very Camel.
Well well:
Well, well, why have you any discretion, have you any eyes, do you know what a man is? is not birth, beauty, good shape, discourse, manhood, learning, gentleness, virtue youth, liberality and such like, the spice & salt that season a man.
I a minced man, and then to be baked with no date in the pie, for then the man's date is out:
You are such a woman a man knows not at what ward you lie:
Upon my back to defend my belly, upon my wit to defend my wiles, upon my secrecy to defend mine honesty, my mask to defend my beauty, and you to defend all these: and at all these wards I lie, at a thousand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay I'll watch you for that; and that's one of the chiefest of them two: If I cannot ward what I would not have hit: I can watch you for telling how I took the blow unless it swell passed hiding and then its past watching:
You are such another:
Sir my Lord would instantly speak with you.
Where?
At your own house there he unarmes him:
Good boy tell him I come, I doubt he be hurt, fare ye well good Niece:
Adieu uncle:
I will be with you Niece by and by:
To bring uncle:
I a token from Troilus:
By the same token you are a Bawd,
Worde, vows, gifts, tears and loves full sacrifice:
He offers in another's enterprise,
But more in Troilus thousand fold I see,
Then in the glass of Panders praise may be:
Yet hold I off: women are angels wooing,
Things won are done, joys foul lies in the doing.
That she beloved, knows nought that knows not this,
Men price the thing vngaind more than it is,
That she was never yet that ever knew
Love got so sweet, as when desire did sue,
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach,
achievement is command; vngaind beseech,
Then though my hearts content firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
Princes: what grief hath set these jaundice o'er your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes,
In all designs begun on earth below,
Fails in the promised largeness, checks and disasters,
Grow in the veins of actions highest reared.
As knots by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infects the sound Pine, and diverts his grain,
Tortive and errant from his course of growth.
Nor Princes is it matter new to us,
That we come short of our suppose so far,
That after seven years siege, yet Troy walls stand,
Sith ever action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have record, trial did draw,
Bias and thwart: not answering the aim,
And that unbodied figure of the thought,
That gav't surmised shape: why then you Princes,
Do you with cheeks abashed behold our works,
And call them shames which are indeed nought else,
But the protractive trials of great Ioue,
To find persistive constancy in men.
The fineness of which metal is not found,
In fortune's love: for then the bold and coward,
The wise and fool, the Artist and unread,
The hard and soft seem all affined and kin,
But in the wind and tempest of her frown,
Distinction with a bread and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away,
And what hath mass or matter by itself,
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.
With due observance of the godlike seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance,
Lies the true proof of men: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble boat, dare sail,
Upon her ancient breast, making their way
With those of nobler bulk?
But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle That, and anon, behold
The strong ribbd bark through liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist elements,
Like Perseus' horse. Where's then the saucy boat,
Whose weak untimbered sides but even now
Corriuald greatness? either to harbour fled,
Or made a toast for Neptune: even so
Doth valours show, and valours worth divide
In storms of fortune; for in her ray and brightness
The herd hath more annoyance by the Bryze
Then by the Tiger, but when the splitting wind,
Makes flexible the knees of knotted Oaks,
And Flies fled under shade, why then the thing of courage,
As roused with rage, with rage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tuned in self same key,
Retires to chiding fortune.
Agamemnon,
Thou great Commander, nerves and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, soul and only sprite,
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Should be shut up: here what Ulysses speaks,
Besides th'applause and approbation,
The which most mighty (for thy place and sway
And thou most reverend) for the stretched out life,
I give to both your speeches; which were such
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece,
Should hold up high in brass, and such again
As venerable Nestor (hatched in silver)
Should with a bond of air strong as the Axel-tree,
(On which heaven rides) knit all the Greekish cares
To his experienced tongue, yet let it please both
Thou great and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.
Troy yet upon his bases had been down,
And the great Hector's sword had lacked a master
But for these instances.
The specialty of rule hath been neglected,
And look how many Grecian tents do stand,
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions,
When that the general is not like the hive,
To whom the foragers shall all repair,
What honey is expected? Degree being vizarded
Th'unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.
The heavens themselves, the planets and this centre
Observe degree, priority and place,
Insisture, course, proportion, season form,
Office and custom, in all line of order.
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol,
In noble eminence enthroned and sphered,
Amidst the other; whose medicinable eye,
Corrects the influence of evil Planets,
And posts like the Commandment of a King,
Sans check to good and bad. But when the Planets,
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What plagues, and what portents, what mutiny?
What raging of the sea, shaking of earth?
Commotion in the winds, frights, changes, horrors
divert and crack, rend and deracinate,
The unity and married calm of states
Quite from their fixure: O when degree is shaked,
Which is the ladder of all high designs,
The enterprise is sick. How could communities;
Degrees in schools, and brotherhoods in Cities,
Peaceful commerce from devidable shores,
The primogenitie and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels,
But by degree stand in authentic place:
Take but degree away, untune that string,
And hark what discord follows, each thing melts
In mere oppugnancie: the bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
And make a sop of all this solid globe:
Strength should be Lord of imbecility,
And the rude son should strike his father dead.
Force should be right or rather right and wrong,
(Between whose endless jar justice resides)
Should lose their names, and so should justice to?
Then every thing include itself in power,
Power into will, will into appetite,
And appetite an universal Wolf,
(So doubly seconded with will and power)
Must make perforce an universal prey,
And last eat up himself.
Great Agamemnon,
This chaos when degree is suffocate,
Follows the choking.
And this neglection of degree it is,
That by a pace goes backward with a purpose
It hath to climb. The general's disdained,
By him one step below, he by the next,
That next by him beneath, so every step,
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his superior, grows to an envious fever
Of pale and bloodless emulation,
And 'tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysses here discovered,
The fever whereof all our power is sick.
The nature of the sickness found Ulysses
What is the remedy?
The great Achilles whom opinion crowns,
The sinew and the forehand of our host,
Having his ear full of his airy fame,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his Tent
Lies mocking our designs: with him Patroclus
Upon a lazy bed the livelong day,
Breaks scurrell jests,
And with ridiculous and silly action,
Which (slanderer) he Imitation calls,
He pageants us. Sometime great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation he puts on,
And like a strutting Player, whose conceit
Lies in his ham-string, and doth think it rich
To here the wooden dialogue and sound,
Twixt his stretched footing and the scaffollage,
Such to be pitied and ore-rested seeming,
He acts thy greatness in. And when he speaks,
'tis like a chime a mending, with terms vnsquare,
Which from the tongue of roaring Typhoon dropped,
Would seem hyperboles, at this fusty stuff,
The large Achilles on his priest bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughs out aloud applause,
Cries excellent; 'tis Agamemnon right,
Now play me Nestor, him and stroke thy beard,
As he being dressed to some Oration,
That's done, as near as the extremest ends
Of parallels as like as Vulcan and his wife:
Yet god Achilles still cries excellent,
'tis Nestor right: now play him me Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night alarm,
And then forsooth the faint defects of age,
Must be the scene of mirth, to cough and spit,
And with a palsy fumbling on his gorget,
Shake in and out the rivet, and at this sport
Sir valour dies, cries O enough Patroclus,
Or give me ribs of steel, I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleen, and in this fashion,
All our abilities gifts, natures shapes,
severals and generals of grace exact,
achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is, or is not, serves
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twain,
Who as Ulysses says opinion crowns,
With an imperial voice: many are infect,
Ajax is grown self-willed, and bears his head
In such a rain, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles: keeps his Tent like him,
Makes factious feasts, rails on our state of war,
bold as an Oracle, and sets Thersites
A slave, whose gall coins slanders like a mint,
To match vs in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken our discredit, our exposure
How rank so ever rounded in with danger,
They tax our-pollicie; and call it cowardice;
Count wisdom as no member of the war,
Forstall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand, the still and mental parts,
That do contrive how many hands shall strike,
When fitness calls them on, and know by measure
Of their observant toil the enemy's weight,
Why this hath not a fingers dignity,
They call this bed-worke, mappry, Closet war,
So that the Ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swinge and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the engine,
Or those that with the finesse of their souls,
By reason guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles' horse
Makes many Thetis sons,
What trumpet? look Metellus.
From Troy.
What would you fore our tent
Is this great Agamemon's tent I pray you?
Even this.
May one that is a Herr'ald and a Prince,
Do a fair message to his Kingly eyes?
With surety stronger than Achilles' arme ,
Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice,
Call Agamemnon head and general.
Fair leave and large security, how may
A stranger to those most imperial looks,
Know them from eyes of other mortals?
How?
ay, I ask that I might waken reverence,
And bid the cheek by ready with a blush,
Modest as morning, when she coldly eyes the youthful Phoebus,
Which is that god, in Office guiding men,
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon.
This Trojan scorns us, or the men of Troy,
Are ceremonious Courtiers.
Courtiers as free as debonair, unarmed
As bending Angels, that's their fame in peace:
But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true sword, & great Jove's accord
Nothing so full of heart: but peace Aeneas,
Peace Trojan, lay thy finger on thy lips,
The worthiness of praise distaines his worth,
If that the praised himself bring the praise forth.
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blows, that praise sole pure transcends.
Sir you of Troy, call you yourself Aeneas?
I Greek, that is my name.
What's your affairs I pray you?
Sir pardon, 'tis for Agamemnon's cares.
He hears's nought privately that comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him,
I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,
To set his seat on that attentive bent,
And then to speak.
Speak frankly as the wind,
It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour;
That thou shalt know Trojan he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.
Trumpet blow aloud,
Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents,
And every Greek of mettle let him know,
What Troy means fairly, shall be spoke aloud,
We haue great herre in Troy,
A Prince called Hector, Priam is his father,
Who in his dull and long continued truce,
Is resty grown: He bade me take a Trumpet,
And to this purpose speak, Kings, Princes, Lords,
If there be one among the fairest of Greece,
That holds his honour higher than his case,
And feeds his praise, more than he fears his peril,
That knows his valour ,, and knows not his fear,
That loves his mistress more than in confession,
(With truant vows to her own lips he loves)
And dare avow her beauty, and her worth,
In other arms than hers: to him this challenge;
Hector in view of Trojans and of Greekes,
Shall make it good or do his best to do it:
He hath a Lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
Then ever Greek did couple in his arms,
And will to morrow with his Trumpet call;
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,
To rouze a Greci that is true in le;
If only come; Hector shall honour him:
If none, eele say in Troy wheir he ,
The Grecian dames are sunburnt, and not worth
The splinter of a Lance. Even so much.
This shall be told our lovers Lord Aeneas,
If none of them have soul in such a kind.
We left them all at home, we are soldiers,
And may that soldier a mere recreant prove,
That means not, hath not, or is not in love:
If then one is, or hath a means to be,
That one meets Hector: if none else I am he.
Tell him of Nestor, one that that was a man
When Hector's grandsire suckt suckt He is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian host,
A noble man that hath no spark of fire
To answer
I'll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver,
And in my vantbrace put, my withered brawns
And meeting him tell him that my Lady,
Was fairer than his grandam, and as chaste,
As may be in the world (his youth in flood)
I'll prove this troth with my three drops of blood,
Now heavens for-send such scarcity of men.
Amen. fair Lord Aeneas let me touch your hand,
To our pavilion shall I lead you sir;
Achilles shall have word of this intent,
So shall each Lord of Greece from tent to tent,
Yourself shall feast with us before you go,
And find the welcome of a noble so.
Nestor.
What says Ulysses?
I have a young conception in my brain,
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
What ist?
Blunt wedges rive hard knots, the seeded pride,
That hath to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles, must or now be cropped,
Or shedding breed a nursery of like evil,
To ouer-bulk us all.
Well and how?
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
How ever it is spread in general name
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
True the purpose is perspicuous as substance,
Whose grossness little characters sum up:
And in the publication make no strain,
But that Achilles wear his brain, as barren,
As banks of libia (though Apollo knows
'tis dry enough) will with great speed of judgement,
I with celerity find Hector's purpose, pointing on him.
And wake him to the answer think you?
Why 'tis most meet; who may you else oppose,
That can from Hector bring those honours off,
If not Achilles: though't be a sportful combat.
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells:
For here the Trojans taste our dear'st repute,
With their finest palate, and trust to me Vlissis
Our imputation shallbe oddly poised
In this wild action, for the success,
Although particular shall give a scantling
Of good or bad unto the general,
And in such indices (although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes) there is seen,
The baby figure of the giant mass,
Of things to come at large: It is supposed
He that meets Hector, issues from our choice,
And choice (being mutual act of all our souls)
Makes merit her election, and doth boil,
(As 'twere from forth us all) a man distilled
Out of our virtues, who miscarrying,
What heart receives from hence a conquering part,
To steel a strong opinion to themselves.
Give pardon to my speech? therefore 'tis meet,
Achilles meet not Hector, let us like Merchants
First show foul wares, and think perchance they'll sell;
If not; the lustre of the better shall exceed,
By showing the worse first: do not consent,
That ever Hector and Achilles meet,
For both our honour and our shame in this, are dogged with two strange followers.
I see them not with my old eyes what are they?
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector
Were he not proud, we all should share with him:
But he already is too insolent.
And it were better parch in afric Sun,
Then in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes
Should he scape Hector fair. If he were foiled,
Why then we do our main opinion crush
In taint of our best man. No, make a lottery
And by device let blockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight with Hector, among ourselves,
Give him allowance for the better man,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall,
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends,
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off
we'll dress him up in voices, if he fail
Yet go we under our opinion still,
That we have better men, but hit or miss,
Our projects life this shape of sense assumes
Ajax employed plucks down Achilles' plumes.
Now Ulysses I begin to relish thy advise,
And I will give a taste thereof forthwith,
To Agamemnon, go we to him strait
Two curs shall tame each other, pride alone
Must art the mastiffs on, as 'twere a bone.
Thersites.
Agamemnon, how if he had bites, full, all over, generally.
Thersites.
And those biles did run (say so), did not the general run then, were not that a botchy core.
Dog.
Then would come some matter from him, I see none now.
Thou bitchwolf's son canst thou not hear, feel then.
The plague of Greece upon thee thou mongrel beef witted Lord.
Speak then thou unsalted leaven, speak, I will beat thee into handsomeness.
I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness, but I think thy horse will sooner ken an oration without book, than thou learn prayer without book, thou canst strike canst thou? a red murrion ath thy jades tricks.
toadstool? learn me the proclamation.
Dost thou think I have no sense thou strikest me thus?
The proclamation.
Thou art proclaimed fool I think.
Do not Porpentin, do not, my finger's itch:
I would thou didst itch from head to foot, and I had the scratching of the, I would make thee the lothsomest scab in Greece, when thou art forth in the incursions thou strikest as slow as another.
I say the proclamation.
Thou gromblest and railest every hour on Achilles, and thou art as full of envy at his greatness, as Cerberus is at Proserpina's beauty, I that thou barkst at him.
Mistress Thersites.
Thou shouldst strike him. He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a sailor breaks a biscuit, you whoreson cur. Do? do?
Thou stool for a witch:
ay, Do? do? thou sodden witted Lord, thou hast no more brain than I have in mine elbows, an Asinico may tutor thee, you scurvy valiant ass, thou art here but to thrash Trojans, and thou art bought and sold among those of any wit, like a Barbarian slave. If thou use to beat me I will begin at thy heel, and tell what thou art by inches, thou thing of no bowels thou.
You dog:
You scuny Lord.
You cur.
Mars his Idiot, do rudeness, do Camel, do, do.
Why how now Ajax wherefore do ye thus,
How now Thersites what's the matter man.
You see him there? do you?
I what's the matter.
Nay look upon him.
So I do, what's the matter?
Nay but regard him well.
Well, why so I do.
But yet you look not well upon him, for whosoever you take him to be he is Ajax.
I know that fool.
I but that fool knows not himself.
Therefore I beat ate thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters, his evasions have ears thus long, I have bobbed his brain more than he has beat my bones. It will buy nine sparrows for a penny, and his pia matter is not worth the ninth part of a sparrow: this Lord (Achilles) Ajax, who wears his wit in his belly, and his guts in his head, I tell you what I say of him.
What.
I say this Ajax.
Nay good Ajax.
Has not so much wit.
Nay I must hold you.
As will stop the eye of Helen's needle, for whom he comes to fight.
Peace fool?
I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will not, he there, that he: look you there?
Oh thou damned cur I shall—
Will you set your wit to a fools.
No I warrant you, the fools will shame it.
Good words Thesites.
What's the quarrel.
I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenor of the proclamation, and he rails upon me.
I serve thee not?
Well, go to, go to.
I serve here voluntary.
Your last service was sufferance: 'twas not voluntary, no man is beaten voluntary, Ajax was here the voluntary, and you as under an Impress.
E'en so, a great deal of your wit to, lies in your sinews, or else there be liars, Hector shall have a great catch and knock at either of your brains, a were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel.
What with me to Thersites.
Ther s's Ulysses and old Nestor, whose wit was mouldy ere their grandsires had nails, yoke you like draft oxen, and make you plough up the wars.
What? what?
Yes good sooth to Achilles, to Ajax, to—
I shall cut out your tongue.
'tis no matter, I shall speak as much as thou afterwards.
No more words Thersites peace.
I will hold my peace when Achilles brooch bids me, shall I?
There's for you Patroclus.
I will see you hanged like Clatpoles, ere I come any more to your tents, I will keep where there is wit stirring, and leave the faction of fools.
A good riddance.
Marry this sir is proclaimed through all our host,
That Hector by the first hour of the Sun.
Will with a trumpet twixt our Tents and Troy,
To morrow morning call some Knight to arms,
That hath a stomach, and such a one that dare,
Maintain I know not what, ('tis rash) farewell—
Farewell, who shall answer him.
I know not, 'tis put to lottery, otherwise,
He knew his man.
O meaning you? I will go learn more of it.
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greekes:
Deliver Helen, (and all damage else,
As honour, loss of time, travel, expense,
Wounds, friends and what els dere that is conim'd
In hot digestion of this cormorant war)
shallbe struck off, Hector what say you to't?
Though no man lesser fears the Greekes than I
As far as toucheth my particular yet dread Priam
There is no Lady of more softer bowels,
More spongy to suck in the sense of fear:
More ready to cry out, who knows what follows
Then Hector is: the wound of peace is surely
Surely secure, but modest doubt is called,
The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches,
Too'th bottom of the worst let Helen go,
Since the first sword was drawn about this question
Every tith soul amongst many thousand dimes,
Hath beene as deere as Hllen. I meane of os,
If we have lost so many tenths of ours,
To guard a thing not ours, not worth to us,
(Had it our name) the value of one ten,
What merits in that reason which denies,
The yielding, of her up?
Fie, fie, my brother,
Way you the worth and honour of a King:
So great as our dread fathers in a scale
Of common ounces? will you with counters sum,
The past proportion of his infinite
And buckle in, a waste most fathomles,
With spans and inches so diminutive:
As fears and reasons: Fie for Godly shame?
No marvel though you bite so sharp of reasons,
You are so empty of them should not our father;
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reason,
Because your speech hath none that tell him so?
You are for dreams and slumbers brother Priest,
You fur your gloves with reason, here are your reasons
You know an enemy intends you harm:
You know a sword employed is perilous
And reason flies the object of all harm.
Who marvels then when Helenus beholds,
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heels,
And like chidden Merery from Ioe
Or like a star disorbd? nay if we talk of reason,
Sets shut our gates and sleep: manhood and honour,
Should have hare hearts, would they but fat their thoughts
With this crammed reason, reason and respect,
Make livers pale, and lustihood deject.
Brother, she is not worth, what she doth cost the keeping.
What's aught but as 'tis valued.
But value dwells not in particular will,
It holds his estimate and dignity,
As well wherein 'tis precious of itself
As in the prizer, 'tis mad Idolatry
To make the service greater than the God,
And the will dotes that is attributive;
To what infectiously itself affects,
Without some image of th'affected merit,
I take to day a wife, and my election:
Is led on in the conduct of my will,
My will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded pilots twixt the dangerous shore,
Of will and judgement: how may I avoid?
(Although my will distaste what it elected)
The wife I choose, there can be no evasion,
To blench from this and to stand firm by honour,
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant
When we have soiled them, nor the remainder viands,
We do not throw in unrespective siue,
Because we now are full, it was thught mete
Panis should do some vengeance on the Greekes.
Your breath with full consent bellied his sails,
The seas and winds (old wranglers) took a truce:
And did him service, he touched the ports desired,
And for an old aunt whom the Greekes held Captive,
He brought a Grecian Queen, whose youth and freshness,
wrinkles, Apollo's, and makes pale the morning.
Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our Aunt,
Is she worth keeping? why she is a pearl
Whose price hath launched above a thousand ships:
And turned crowned Kings to Merchants,
If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went,
As you must needs, for you all cried go, go,
If you'll confess he brought home worthy prize:
As you must needs, for you all, clapped your hands,
why do you now
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate,
And do a deed that never fortune did,
Beggar the estimation, which you prized
Richer than sea and land? O theft most base,
That we have stolen, what we do fear to keep,
But thieves unworthy of a thing thing so stolen:
That in their country did them that disgrace,
We fear to warrant in our native place.
Cry Trojans cry:
What noble? what shrik is this?
'tis our mad sister I do know her voice.
Cry Troyans.
It is Cassandra!
Cry Troyans cry, lend me me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears.
Peace sister peace.
Virgins and boys, mid-age, and wrinkled elders,
Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry,
Add to my clamours: let us pay betimes
A moiety of that mass of moan to come:
Cry Trojans cry, practise your eyes with tears,
Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand.
Our firebrand brother Paris burns us all,
Cry Troyans cry, a Helen and a woe.
Cry, cry, Troy burns, or else let Hellen go.
Now youthful Troylus, do not these high strains
Of divination in our Sister, work
Some touches of remorse? or is your blood
So madly hot, that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
Can qualify the same?
Why brother Hector,
We may not think the justness of each act
Such, and no other than event doth form it,
Nor once deject the courage of our minds,
Because Cassandra's mad, her brainsick raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel,
Which hath our several honours all engaged,
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touched than all Priam's sons:
And Ioue forbid there should be done amongst us,
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen,
To fight for and maintain.
Else might the world convince of levity,
As well my undertakings as your counsels,
But I attest the gods, your full consent,
Gave wings to my propension, and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project,
For what (alas) can these my single arms?
What propugnation is in one man's valour
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet I protest
Were I alone to pass the difficulties,
And had as ample power, as I have will,
Paris should near retract, what he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuit,
Paris you speak
Like one besotted on your sweet delights,
You have the honey still, but these the gall,
So to be valiant, is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not merely to myself,
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it,
But I would have the soil of her fair rape,
Wiped of in honourable keeping her,
What treason were it to the ransacked queen,
Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion? can it be,
That so degenerate a strain as this,
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party,
Without a heart to dare, or sword to draw,
When Helen is defended: nor none so noble,
Whose life were ill bestowed, or death unfamed,
Where Helen is the subject. Then I say,
Well may we fight for her, whom we know well,
The world's large spaces cannot parallel.
Paris and Troylus, you have both said well,
And on the cause and question now in hand,
Have glozd, but superficially, not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to here moral Philosophy;
The reasons you allege, do more conduce
To the hot passion of distempered blood,
Then to make up a free determination
Twixt right and wrong: for pleasure and revenge,
Have ears more deaf than Adders to the voice
Of any true decision, Nature craves
All dues be rendered to their owners, Now
What nearer debt in all humanity,
Then wife is to the husband? if this law
Of nature be corrupted through affection
And that great minds of partial indulgence,
To their benumbed wills resist the same,
There is a law in each well-orderd nation,
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refractory;
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's King,
As it is known she is, these moral laws
Of nature and of nations, speak aloud
To have her back returned: thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hector's opinion
Is this in way of truth: yet near the less,
My sprightly brethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still,
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependence,
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Why there you touched the life of our designer
Were it not glory that we more affected,
Then the performance of our heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood,
Spent more in her defence. But worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honour and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us,
For I presume brave Hector would not lose
So rich advantage of a promised glory,
As smiles upon the forehead of this action,
For the wide world's revenue.
I am yours,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus,
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
The dull and factious nobles of the Greekes,
Will shriek amazement to their drowsy spirits,
I was advertised, their great general slept,
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
This I presume will wake him.
How now Thersites? what lost in the Labyrinth of thy fury? shall the Elephant Ajax carry it thus? he beats me, and I rail at him: O worthy satisfaction, would it were otherwise: that I could beat him, whilst he railed at me: 'Sfoot, I le learn to conjure and raise Devils, but I'll see some issue of my spiteful execrations. Then there's Achilles, a rare engineer. If Troy be not taken till these two undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of themselves, O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus, forget that thou art Ioue the king of gods: and Mercury, lose all the Serpentine craft of thy Caduceus, if ye take not that little little less than little wit from them that they have: which short-armd Ignorance itself knows is so abundant scarce, it will not in circumvention deliver a fly from a spider, without drawing their massy Irons, and cutting the web. After this the vengeance on the whole camp, or rather the Neapolitan bone-ache: for that me thinks is the curse depending on those that war for a placket. I have said my prayers, and devil Envy say Amen. What ho my Lord Achilles?
Whose there? Thersites? good Thersites come in and rail.
If I could a remembered a guilt counterfeit, thou couldst not have slipped out of my contemplation: but it is no matter, thyself upon thyself. The common curse of mankind, Folly and Ignorance, be thine in great revenue: Heaven bless thee from a tutor, and discipline come not near thee. Let thy blood be thy direction till thy death: then if she that lays thee out says thou art not a fair course, I'll be sworn and sworn upon't, she never shrouded any but lazars. Amen. Where's Achilles?
What art thou devout? wast thou in prayer?
I the heavens hear me.
Amen.
Who's there?
Thersites my Lord.
Where? where? O where? art thou come why my cheese, my digestion, why hast thou not served thyself into my table, so many meals, come what's Agamemnon?
Thy commander Achilles, then tell me Patroclus, what's Achilles?
Thy Lord Thersites. Then tell me I pray thee, what's Thersites?
Thy knower, Patroclus: then tell me Patroclus, what art thou?
Thou must tell that knowest.
O tell, tell.
I'll decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is my Lord, I am Patroclus knower, and Patroclus is a fool.
Derive this? come?
Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles, Achilles is a fool to be commanded. Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool, and this Patroclus is a fool positive.
Why am I a fool?
Make that demand of the Prover, it suffices me thou art: look you, who comes here?
Come Patroclus, I'll speak with no body: come in with me Thersites.
Here is such patchery, such juggling, and such knavery: all the argument is a whore, and a Cuckold, a good quarrel to draw emulous factions, & bleed to death upon.
Where is Achilles?
Within his tent, but ill disposed my Lord.
Let it be known to him; that we are here,
He sat, our messengers and we lay by,
Our appertaining, visiting of him
Let him be told so, lest perchance he think,
We dare not move the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall say so to him.
We saw him at the opening of his tent,
He is not sick.
Yes Lion sick, sick of proud heart, you may call it melancholy if you will favour the man. But by my head 'tis pride: but why, why, let him show us a cause?
What moves Ajax thus to bay at him?
Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him,
Who Thersites?
Herald
Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his argument.
No you see he is his argument, that has his argument Achilles.
All the better, their fraction is more our wish then their faction, but it was a strong composure a fool could disunite.
The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily untie.
here comes Patroclus.
No Achilles with him.
The Elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy,
His legs are legs for necessity, not for flexure.
Achilles bids me say he is much sorry,
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Did move your greatness, and this noble state,
To call upon him. He hopes it is no other
But for your health, and your digestion sake,
An after dinners breath.
Hear you Patroclus:
We are too well acquainted with these answers,
But his evasion winged thus swift with scorn,
Cannot out-fly our apprehensions,
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him. Yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss,
Yea like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,
Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him,
We come to speak with him, and you shall not sin,
If you do say, we think him over-proud
And under-honest, in self assumption greater
Than in the note of judgement. And worthier than himself
here tend the savage strangeness he puts on
Disguise, the holy strength of their command,
And vnder-write in an observing kind,
His humorous predominance: yea watch
His course, and time, his ebbs and flows, and if
The passage, and whole stream of his commencement,
Road on his tide Go tell him this, and add,
That if he ouer-hold his price so much,
we'll ' none of him, But let him like an engine,
Not portable, lie under this report.
Bring action hither, this cannot go to war,
A stirring dwarf we do allowance give,
Before a sleeping giant. Tell him so.
I shall, and bring his answer presently.
In second voice we'll not be satisfied,
We come to speak with him: Ulysses entertain.
What is he more than another.
No more than what he thinks he is.
Is he so much: do you not think he thinks himself a better man than I am?
No question.
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is.
No noble Ajax, you are as strong, as valiant, as wise, no less noble, much more gentle, and altogether more tractable.
Why should a man be proud? how doth pride grow? I know not what pride is.
Your mind is the clearer, and your virtues the fairer, he that is proud eats up himself: Pride is his own glass, his own trumpet, his own chronicle, and what ever praises itself but in the deed, devours the deed in the praise.
I do hate a proud man, as I do hate the engendering of Toads.
And yet he loves himself, is't not strange?
Achilles will not to the field to morrow.
What's his excuse?
He doth rely on none.
But carries on the stream of his dispose,
Without observance, or respect of any,
In will peculiar, and in self admission.
Why will he not upon our fair request,
Vntent his person, and share th' air with us.
Things small as nothing, for requests sake only,
He makes important possessed he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself but with a pride,
That quarrels at self breath. Imagined worth,
Holds in his blood such swollen and hot discourse,
That twixt his mental and his active parts,
Kingdomed Achilles' in commotion rages,
And batters down himself. What should I say,
He is so plaguy proud, that the death tokens of it,
Cry no recovery.
Let Ajax go to him,
dear Lord, go you, and greet him in his tent,
'Tis said he holds you well, and will be led,
At your request a little from himself.
O Agamemnon let it not be so,
we'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes,
When they go from Achilles: shall the proud Lord
That basts his arrogance with his owne seame seame,
And never suffers matter of the world
Enter his thoughts, save such as doth revolve,
And ruminate himself: shall he be worshipped,
Of that we hold an idol more than he,
No :, this thrice worthy and right valiant Lord,
Shall not so stall his palm nobly acquird,
Nor by my will assubiugate his merit,
As amply liked as Achilles is by going to Achilles,
That were to enlard his fat already pride,
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns,
With entertaining great Hiperion,
This Lord go to him. Iupiter forbid,
And say in thunder Achilles go to him.
O this is well, he rubs the vain of him.
And how his silence drinks up his applause,
If I go to him: with my armed fist il push him ore the ae.
O no, you shall not go,
And he be proud with me, I'll phese his pride,
Let me go to him.
Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
A paltry insolent fellow.
How he describes himself.
Can he not be sociable.
The Raven chides blackness.
I'll tell his humorous blood.
He willbe the physician, that should be the patient.
And all men were of my mind.
Wit would be out of fashion.
A should not bear it so, a should eat swords first? shall pride carry it?
And 'twould you'd carry half.
A would have ten shares. I will knead him, I'll make him supple he's not yet through warm?
Force him with prayers pour in, pour, his ambition is dry.
My Lord you feed to much on this dislike,
Our noble general do not do so?
You must prepare to fight without Achilles.
Why 'tis this naming of him does him harm,
H re is a man but tis before his face, I wilbe silent.
Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous as Achilles is.
Know the whole world he is as valiant—
A hoarson dog that shall palter with us thus, would he were a Trojan?
What a vice were it in Ajax now:
If he were proud.
Or covetous of praise.
I or surly borne.
Or strange or self affected.
Thank the heavens Lord, thou art of sweet composure
Praise him that got thee, she that gave thee suck:
Famed be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature,
Thrice famed beyond all thy erudition:
But he that disciplined thine arms to fight,
Let Mars divide eternity in twain,
And give him half, and for thy vigour?
Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield,
To sinewy Ajax, I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which like a board: a pale, a shore confines
This spacious and dilated parts, here's Nestor,
Instructed by the antiquary times:
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise,
But pardon father Nestor were your days
As green as Ajax, and your brain so tempered,
You should not have the eminence of him,
But be as Ajax.
Shall I call you father?
I my good Son.
Be ruled by him Lord Ajax.
There is no tarrying here the Hart Achilles,
Keeps thicket, please it our great general,
To call together all his state of war,
Fresh Kings are come to Troy, To morrow
We must with all our main of power stand fast,
And here's a Lord come Knights from East to West
And call their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.
Go we to counsel, let Achilles sleep,
Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep.
Friend you, pray you a word, do you not follow the young Lord Paris.
I sir when he goes before me.
You depend upon him I mean.
Sir I do depend upon the Lord.
You depend upon a notable gentleman I must needs praise him.
The Lord be praised?
You know me? do you not?
Faith sir superficially.
Friend know me better, I am the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I shall know your honour better?
I do desire it.
You are in the state of grace?
Grace? not so friend, honour and Lordship are my titles, what music is this?
I do but partly know sir, it is music in parts.
Know you the musicians?
Wholly sir.
Who play they to?
To the hearers sir.
At whose pleasure friend?
At mine sir, and theirs that love music,
Command I mean:
Who shall I command sir?
Friend we understand not one another, I am to courtly and thou to cunning, at whose request do these men play?
That's to't indeed sir? marry sir, at the request of Paris my Lord, who is there in person, with him the mortal Venus, the heart blood of beauty, loves invisible soul:
Who my cousin Cressida,
No sir, Helen, could not you find out that by her attributes.
It should seem fellow thou hast not seen the Lady Cressida I come to speak with Paris, from the Prince Troilus. I will make a complemental assault upon, him for my business seethes.
Sodden business, their's a stewed phrase indeed.
Fair be to you my Lord, and to all this fair company, fair desires in all fair measure fairly guide them, especially to you fair Queen fair thoughts be your fair pillow.
Dear Lord you are full of fair words:
You speak your fair pleasure sweet Queen,
Fair Prince here is good broken music.
You have broke it cozen: and by my life you shall make it whole again, you shall piece it out with a piece of your performance.
he is full of harmony:
Truly Lady no:
O sir:
Rude in sooth, in good sooth very rude.
Well said my Lord, well, you say so in fits:
I have business to my Lord dear Queen? my Lord will you vouchsafe me a word.
Nay this shall not hedge us out, we'll hear you sing certainly:
Well sweet Queen you are pleasant with me, but, marry thus my Lord my dear Lord, and most esteemed friend your brother Troilus.
My Lord Pandarus honey sweet Lord,
Go too sweet Queen, go to?
Commends himself most affectionately to you.
You shall not bob us out of our melody,
If you do our melancholy upon your head.
Sweet Queen, sweet Queen, that's a sweet Queen
I faith—
And to make a sweet Lady sad is a sour offence.
Nay that shall not serve your turn, that shall it not in truth la? Nay I care not for such words, no, no. And my Lord he desires you that if the King can for him at super. You will make his excuse.
My Lord Pandarus.
What says my sweet queen, my very very sweet Queen?
What exploit's in hand, where sups he to night?
Nay but my Lord?
What says my sweet Queen? my cousin will fall out with you.
You must not know where he sups.
I'll lay my life with my disposer Cresseida.
No, no? no such matter you are wide, come your disposer is sick.
Well i'll makes excuse?
I good my Lord, why should you say Cresseida, no, your disposers sick.
I spy?
You spy? what do you spy? come, give me an instrument now sweet Queen:
Why this is kindly done?
My Niece is horribly in love with a thing you have sweet queen.
She shall have it my Lord, if it be not my Lord Paris.
He? no? she'll none of him, they two are twain.
Falling in after falling out may make them three.
Come, come, I'll hear no more of this, I'll sing you a song now.
ay, I, prithee, now by my troth sweet lad thou hast a fine forehead.
I you may, you may.
Let thy song be love: this love will undo us all. Oh Cupid, Cupid, Cupid.
Love? I that it shall i'faith.
I good now love, love, nothing but love.
Love, love, nothing but love, still love still more
For o loves bow. Shoots Buck and do.
The shafts confound not that it wounds
But ticles still the sore:
These lovers cry, oh ho they die,
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Doth turn oh ho, to ha ha he,
So dying love lives still,
O ho a while, but ha ha ha,
O ho groans out for ha ha ha— hay ho,
In love i'faith to the very tip of the nose.
He eats nothing but doves love, and that breeds hot blood, and hot blood begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love.
Is this the generation of love: hot blood hot thoughts and hot deeds, why they are vipers, is love a generation of vipers:
Sweet Lord whose afield to day?
Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus', Anthenor, and all the gallantry of Troy. I would fain have armed to day, but my Nell would not have it so.
How chance my brother Troilus went not?
He hangs the lip at something, you know all Lord Pandarus.
Not I honey-sweet Queen, I long to hear how they sped to day:
You'll remember your brother's excuse?
To a hair.
Farewell sweet Queen.
Commend me to your niece.
I will sweet Queen.
Their come from the field: let vs to Priam's Hall
To greet the warriors. Sweet Hellen I must woe you,
To help unarm our Hector: his stubborn buckles
With this your white enchanting fingers touched;
Shall more obey then to the edge of steel,
Or force of Greekish sinews: you shall do more
Than all the island Kings, disarm great Hector.
'twil make us proud to be his servant Paris ?!
Yea what he shall receive of us in duty,
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have.
Yea over shines ourself.
Sweet above thought I love her?
How now where's thy master, at my Cousin Cressida's?
No sir stays for you to conduct him thither.
O here he comestcomes: how now, how now?
Sirrah walk off.
Have you seen my Cousin?
No Pandarus, I stalk about her door
Like to a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
Staying for wastage. O be thou my Charon.
And give me swift transportance to these fields,
Where I may wallow in the lily bed's
proposed for the deserver. O gentle Pander,
From Cupids shoulder pluck his painted wings,
And fly with me to Cressid.
Walk here ith'Orchard, Ile bring her strait.
I am giddy; expectation whirls me round,
Th'imaginary relish is so sweet,
That it enchants my sense: what will it be
When that the watery palates taste indeed
loves thrice reputed Nectar? Death I fear me
Sounding destruction, or some joy to fine,
too subtle, potent, tuned to sharp in sweetness
For the capacity of my ruder powers;
I fear it much, and I do fear besides
That I shall lose distinction in my joys
As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
The enemy flying.
she's making her ready, she'll come strait, you must be witty now, she does so blush, and fetches her wind so short as if she were afraid with a spirit: I'll fetch her; it is the prettiest villain, she fetches her breath as short as a new tane sparrow.
Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom,
My heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse,
And all my powers do their bestowing loose
Like vassalage at unwares encountering the eye of majesty.
Come, come, what need you blush?
Shames a baby; here she is now, swear the oaths now to her that you have sworn to me: what are you gone again, you must be watcht ere ere you be made tame, must you? come your ways come your ways, and you draw backward we'll put you i' th' fills: why do you not speak to her. Come draw this curtain, and le's see your picture; alas the day? how loath you are to offend day light; and 'twere dark you'd close sooner: so so, rub on and kiss the mistress; how now a kiss in fee-farm: build there Carpenter, the air is sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The falcon, as the tercel: for all the ducks i' th' river: go too, go too.
You have bereft me of all words Lady.
Words pay no debts; give her deeds: but she'll bereave you ath' deeds too if she call your actiuity in question: what billing again: here's in witness whereof the parties interchangeably. Come in come in I'll go get a fire?
Will you walk in my Lord?
O Cressida how often have I wished me thus.
wished my Lord? the gods grant? O my Lord?
What should they grant? what makes this pretty abruption: what to curious dreg espies my sweet lady in the fountain of our love?
More dregs than water if my tears have eyes.
Fears make devils of Cherubins, they never see truly.
Blind fear that seeing reason leads, finds safer footing, then blind reason, stumbling without fear: to fear the worst out cures the worse.
O let my Lady apprechend no fear,
In all Cupids pageant there is presented no monster.
Nor nothing monstrous neither.
Nothing but our undertakings, when we vow to weep seas, live in fire, eat rocks, tame Tigers, thinking it harder for our mistress to devise imposition enough then for us to undergo any difficulty imposed.—
This the monstrosity in love Lady, that the will is infinite and the execution confined, that the desire is boundless, and the act a slave to limit.
They say all lovers swear more performance than they are able, and yet reserve an ability that they never perform: vowing more than the perfection of ten: and discharging less than the tenth part of one. They that have the voice of Lions, and the act of Hares are they not monsters?
Are there such: such are not we; Praise us as we are tasted, allow us as we prove: our head shall go bare till merit lover part no affection in reversion shall have a praise in present: we will not name desert before his birth, and being borne, his addition shall be humble: few words to fair faith. Troilus shall be such to Cressida, as what envy can say worst shall be a mock for his truth, and what truth can speak truest not truer than Troilus.
Will you walk in my Lord?
What blushing still, have you not done talking ye?
Well Uncle what folly I commit I dedicate to you.
I thank you for that, if my Lord get a boy of you, you'll give him me: be true to my Lord, if he flinch chide me for it.
You know now your hostages, your uncles word and my firm faith.
Nay I'll give my word for her too: our kindred though they be long ere they be wooed, they are constant being won, they are burrs I can tell you, they'll stick where they are thrown.
Boldness comes to me now and brings me heart: Prince Troilus I have loved you night and day, for many weary months.
Why was my Cressida then so hard to wyn?
Hard to seem won: but I was won my Lord
With the first glance; that ever pardon me
If I confess much you will play the tyrant,
I love you now, but till now not so much
But I might master it; in faith I lie,
My thoughts were like unbridled children groan
Too headstrong for their mother: see we fools,
Why have I blabbed: who shall be true to us
When we are so unsecret to ourselves.
But though I loved you well, I wooed you not,
And yet good faith I wished myself a man;
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent: see see your silence
Coming in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My very soul of council. Stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.
Pretty i'faith.
My Lord I do beseech you pardon me,
'twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss:
I am ashamed; O Heavens what have I done!
For this time will I take my leave my Lord.
Your leave sweet Cressida:
Leave: and you take leave till to morrow morning.
Pray you content you.
What offends you Lady?
sir mine own company.
You cannot shun yourself.
Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self recids with you:
But an unkind self, that itself will leave,
To be another's fool. I would be gone:
Where is my wit? I know not what I speak,
Well know they what they speak, that speak so wisely,
Perchance my Lord I show more craft than love,
And fell so roundly to a large confession.
To angle for your thoughts, but you are wise,
Or else you love not: for to be wise and love,
Exceeds man's might that dwells with gods above,
O that I thought it could be in a woman.
As if it can I will presume in you,
To feed for age her lamp and flames of love.
To keep her constancy in plight and youth.
outliving beauties outward, with a mind,
That doth renew swifter than blood decays,
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me,
That my integrity and truth to you,
Might be affronted with the match and weight,
O such a winnowed purity in loue,
How were I then uplifted! but alas,
I am as true as truth's simplicity,
And simpler than the infancy of truth.
In that i'll war with you,
O vertuous fight,
When right with right wars who sha'be most right,
True swains in love shall in the world to come
Approve their truth by Troilus, when their times,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare,
Wants simele's truth tired with iteration.
As true as steel, as plantage to the moon.
As sun to day: as uncle to her mate,
As Iron to Adamant: as Earth to th' Centre,
After all comparisons of truth.
(As truths authentic author to be cited)
As true as Troilus, shall crown up the verse,
And sanctify the numbers,
Prophet may you be,
If I be false or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old or hath forgot itself,
When water drops have worn the stones of Troy,
And blind oblivion swallowed Cities up.
And mighty states character-les are grated,
To dusty nothing, yet let memory,
From false to false among false maids in love,
Upbraid my falcehood, when th'haue said as false,
As air, as water, wind or sandy earth,
As Fox to Lamb; or Wolfeto Heifers Calf,
Pared to the Hind, or stepdame to her Son,
Yea let them say to stick the heart of falsehood,
As false as Cressida.
Go to a bargain made, scale it, seal it i'll be the witness here I hold your hand, here my Cousins, if ever you prove false one, to another since I have taken such pain to bring you together let all pitiful goers between be called to the world's end after my name, call them all Panders, let all constant men be Troiluses all false women Cressids, and all brokers between panders; say Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Whereupon I will show you a Chamber, which bed because it shall not speak of your pretty encounters press it to death; away.
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here,
Bed, chamber, Pander to provide this gear.
Now Princes for the service I have done,
Th'advantage of the time prompts me aloud,
To call for recompense: appear it to mind,
That through the sight I bear in things to love,
I have abandoned Troy, left my possession,
Incurred a traitors name, exposed myself,
From certain and possessed conveniences,
To doubtful fortunes sequestering from me all,
That time acquaintance, custom and condition,
Made tame, and most familiar to my nature:
And here to do you service am become,
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted.
I do beseech you as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit.
Out of those many registered in promise,
Which you say live to come in my behalfbehalfe:
What wouldst thou of us Trojan? make demands?
You haue a Troian prisoner cald Autor▪
Yesterday took, Troy holds him very dear.
Oft have you (often have you thanks therefore)
Desired my Cressida in right great exchange.
Whom roy hath still deni'd, but thi Authr,
I know is such a wrist in their affairs:
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage and they will almost,
Give us a Prince of blood a Son of Priam,
In change of him. Let him be sent great Princes,
And he shall buy my daughter: and her presence,
Shall quite strike of all service I have done,
In most accepted pain.
Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring us Cressida hither, Calcas shall have
What he requests of us: good Dieted
Furnish you fairly for this interchange,
Withal bring word If Hector will to morrow,
Be answered in his challenge. Ajax is ready.
This shall I undertake, and 'tis a burden
Which I am proud to bear.
Achilles stands its entrance of his tent,
Please it our general pass strangely by him:
As if he were forgot, and princes all,
Lay negligent and ? regard upon him,
I will come last, 'tis like hele question me.
Why such unpaulsive eyes are bend? why turned on him,
If so I have derision medicinable,
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink,
It may do good, pride hath no other glass,
To show itself but pride: for supple knees,
Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees,
we'll execute your purpose and put on,
A form of strangeness as we pas along,
So do each Lord, and either greet him not
Or else disdaynfully, which shall shake him more:
Then if not looked on. I will lead the way.
What comes the general to speak with me?
You know my mind I'll fight no more against Troy:
What says Achilles would he ought with us?
Would you my Lord ought with the general.
No.
Nothing my Lord:
The betes▪
Good day, good day:
How do you? how do you?
What does the cuckold scorn me ??
How now Patroclus?
Good morrow Ajax?
Ha:
Good morrow.
I and good next day too.
What mean these fellows know they not Achilles?
They pass by strangely: they were used to bend,
To send their smiles before them to Achilles:
To come as humbly as they used to creep, to holy altars:
What am I poor of late?
'tis certain, greatness once fallen out with fortune,
Must fall out with men too, what the declined is,
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall: for men like butterflies,
Show not their mealy wings but to the Summer,
And not a man for being simply man,
Hath any honour, but honour for those honours
That are without him, as place, riches, and favour,
Prizes of accident as oft as merit
Which when they fall as being slippery standers,
The love that leaned on them as slippery too,
Doth one pluck down another, and together, die in the fall,
But 'tis not so with me,
Fortune and I are friends, I do enjoy:
At ample point all that I did possess,
Save these men's looks, who do me thinks find out:
Some thing not worth in me such rich beholding,
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses
I'll interrupt his reading, how now Ulysses?
Now great Thetis Son.
What are you reading?
A strange fellow here,
Writes me that man, how dearly ever parted:
How much in having or without or in
Cannot, make boast to have that which he hath,
Nor feels not what he owes but by reflections:
As when his virtues aiming upon others,
Heat them and they retort that heat again.
To the first givers.
This is not strange Ulysses,
The beauty that is borne here in the face:
The bearer knows not, but commends itself,
To others' eyes, nor doth the eye itself
That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself
Not going from itself: but eye to eye opposed,
Sallutes each other, with each others form,
For speculation turns not to itself,
Till it hath travelled and is married there?
Where it may see itself: this is not strange at all.
I do not strain at the position,
It is familiar, but at the author's drift,
Who in his circumstance expressly proves,
That no man is the Lord of any thing:
Though in and of him there be much consisting,
Till he communicate his parts to others,
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught:
Till he behold them form in the applause.
Where theyare extended: who like an arch reverberate
The voice again or like a gate of steel:
Fronting the Sun, receives and renders back
His figure and his heat. I was much rap't in this,
And apprehended here immediately,
Th'unknown Ajax, heavens what a man is there?
A very horse, that has he knows not what
Nature what things there are.
Most object in regard, and dear in use,
What things again most dear in the esteem:
And poor in worth, now shall we see to morrow,
An act that very chance doth throw upon him
Ajax renowned? O heavens what some men do,
While some men leave to do.
How some men creep in skittish fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes,
How one man eats into another's pride,
While pride is fasting in his wantonness.
To see these Grecian Lords, why even already:
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder
As if his foot were one brave Hector's breast,
And great Troy shrieking.
I do believe it,
For they passed by me as misers do by beggars,
Neither gave to me good word nor look:
What are my deeds forgot?
Time hath (my Lord) a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion:
A great sized monster of ingratitudes,
Those scraps are good deeds passed,
Which are devoured as fast as they are made,
Forgot as soon as done, perseverance dear my Lord:
Keeps honour bright, to have done, is to hang,
Quite out of fashion like a rusty male,
In monumental mockery? take the instant way,
For honour travels in a strait so narrow:
Where on but goes a breast, keep then the path
For emulation hath a thousand Sons,
That one by one pursue, if you give way,
Or turn a side from the direct forth right:
Like to an entered tie they all rush by,
And leave you him, most, than what they do in present:
Though less than yours in pass, must o'er top yours.
For time is like a fashionable host,
That slightly shakes his parting guest by th'hand,
And with his arms outstretched as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer: the welcome ever smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing. Let not virtue seek,
Remuneration for the thing it was. For beauty, wit,
High birth, vigour of bone, desert in services,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all,
To envious and calumniating
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,
That all with one consent praise new-born gauds,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And go to dust, that is a little guilt,
More laud than guilt ore-dusted.
The present eye praises the present object.
Then marvel not thou great and complete man,
That all the Greekes begin to worship Ajax;
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye,
That what stirs not. The cry went once on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive,
And case thy reputation in thy tent.
Whose glorious deeds but in these fields of late,
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves,
And drove great Mars to faction.
Of this my privacy,
I have strong reasons.
But 'gainst your privacy,
The reasons are more potent and heroical:
'tis known Achilles that you are in love
With one of Priams daughters.
H? knowne.
Is that a wonder:
The prouidence th in ,
Knows almost every thing,
Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive depth,
Keeps place with thought and almost like the gods,
Do thoughts unveil in their dumb
There is a mystery (with whom relation
Durst never meddle) in the soul of state,
Which hath an operation more divine,
Then breath or pen can give expressure to:
All the commerce that you have had with Troy,
As perfectly is ours, as yours my Lord,
And better would it fit, Achilles' much,
To throw down Hector then Polixena.
But it must grieve young Pirhus now at home,
When fame shall in our islands sound her trump,
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing,
Great Hector's sister did Achilles win,
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him:
Farewell my Lord: I as your lover speak,
The fool slides over the Ice that you should break.
To this effect Achilles have I moved you,
A woman impudent and mannish grown,
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man
In time of action: I stand condemned for this
They think my little stomach to the war,
And your great love to me, restrains you thus,
Sweet rouse yourself, and the weak wanton Cupid,
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold,
And like dewdrop from the Lion's mane,
Be shook to air.
Shall Ajax fight with Hector.
I and perhaps receive much honour by him.
I see my reputation is at stake,
My fame is shrewdly gored.
O then beware.
Those wounds heal ill, that men do give themselves,
Omission to do what is necessary.
Seals a commission to a blank of danger,
And danger like an ague subtly taints
Even then when they sit idly in the sun.
Go call Thersites hither sweet Patroclus,
I'll send the fool to Ajax, and desire him
T' inuite the Trojan lords after the combat,
To see us here unarmed. I have a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
To talk with him, and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view. A labour saved.
A wonder.
What?
Ajax goes up and down the field ask for himself.
How so?
He must fight singly to morrow with Hector, and is so prophetically proud of an heroical cudgeling, that he raves in saying nothing.
How can that be?
Why a stalks up and down like a peacock, a stride and a stand: ruminates like an hostess, that hath no Arithmetic but her brain to set down her reckoning: bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should say there were wit in this head and 'twould out: and so there is. But it lies as coldly in him, as fire in a flint, which will not show without knocking, the man's undone for ever, for if Hector break not his neck i'th' combat, he'll break t't himself in vain glory. He knows not me. I said good morrow Ajax: And he replies thanks Agamemnon. What think you of this man that takes me for the General? he's grown a very land-fish languageless, a monster, a plague of opinion, a man may wear it on both sides like a leather jerkin.
Thou must be my Ambassador Thersites.
Who I: why he'll answer no body: he professes not answering, speaking is for beggars: he wears his tongue in's arms. I will put on his presence, let Patroclus make demands to me. You shall see the pageant of Ajax.
To him Patroclus, tell him I humbly desire the valiant Ajax, to invite the valorous Hector to come unarmed to my tent, and to procure safe-conduct for his person, of the magnanimous and most illustrious , six or seven times honoured Captain General of the army. Agamemnon, do this.
jove bless great Ajax.
Hum.
I come from the worthy Achilles.
Ha?
Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent.
Hum?
And to procure safe conduct from Agamemnon.
Agamme?
I my Lord.
Ha?
What say you to't.
God buy you with all my heart.
Your answer sir.
If to morrow be a fair day, by a seven of the clock it will go one way or other, howsoever he shall pay for me ere he has me.
Your answer sir.
Fare ye well with all my heart.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
No: but out of tune thus, What music will be in him, when Hector has knocked out his brains, I know not. But I am sure none, unless the fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make Catlings on.
Come, thou shalt bear a letter to him strait.
Let me hear another to his horse, for that's the more capable creature.
My mind is troubled like a fountain stirred,
And I myself see not the bottom of it.
Would the fountain of your mind were clear again, that I might water an Ass at it, I had rather be a sick in a sheep, than such a valiant ignorance.
See ho? who is that there?
It is the Lord Aeneas.
Is the Prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lie long
As your prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business,
Should rob my bed mate of my company.
That's my mind too? good morrow Lord Aeneas.
A valiant Greek Aeneas take his hand.
Witness the process of your speech: wherein
You told how Dyomed a whole week by days,
Did haunt you in the field.
Health to you valiant sir,
During all question of the gentle truce:
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance,
As heart can think or courage execute.
The one and other Diomedes embraces,
Our bloods are now in calm, and so long health:
lulled when contention, and occasion meet,
By Ioue I'll play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, pursuit, and policy.
And thou shalt hunt a Lion that will fly,
With his face backward, in human gentleness:
Welcome to Troy, now by Anchises' life,
Welcome indeed: by Venus hand I swear:
No man alive can love in such a sort,
The thing he means to kill, more excellently.
We simpathize. let Aen line
(If to my sword his fate be not the glory)
A thousand complete courses of the Sun,
But in mine emulous honour let him die:
With every joint a wound and that to morrow—
We know each other well?
We do and long to know each other worse.
This is the most despiteful gentle greeting,
The noblest hateful love that ere I heard of, what business
Lord so early?
I was sent for to the King? but why I know not.
His purpose meets you? 'twas to bring this Greek,
To Calcho's house, and there to render him:
For the enfreed Anthenor the fair Cressida,
Let's have your company, or if you please,
Hast there before us. I constantly believe,
(Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge)
My brother Troylus lodges there to night,
Rouse him and give him note of our approach,
With the whole quality wherefore:
I fear we shall be much unwelcome.
That I assure you: Troylus had had rather Troy were borne to Greece, then Cresseid borne from Troy.
There is no help.
The bitter disposition of the time will have it so:
On Lord, we'll follow you.
Good morrow all.
And tell me noble Dieted, faith tell me true,
Even in soul of sound good fellowship,
Who in your thoughts, deserves fair Helen best,
Myself, or Menelaus.
Both alike.
He merits well to have her that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soil,
With such a hell of pain, and world of charge.
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Not pallating the taste of her dishonour
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends,
He like a puling Cuckold would drink up,
The legs and dregs of a flat tamed piece:
You like a lecher out of whorish loins,
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors,
Both merits poised, each weighs nor less nor more,
But he as he, the heavier for a whore.
You are too bitter to your countrywoman.
she's bitter to her country, hear me Paris,
For every false drop in her bawdy veins,
A Grecians life hath sunke: for every scruple
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
A Trojan hath been slain. Since she could speak,
She hath not given so many good words breath,
As for her Greels and Trojans suffered death.
Fair Diomedes you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that they desire to buy,
But we in silence hold this virtue well,
we'll not commend, what we intend to sell. here lies our way.
Dear, trouble not yourself, the morn is cold.
Then sweet my Lord i'll call mine uncle down,
He shall unbolt the gates
Trouble him not.
To bed to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses,
As infants empty of all thought.
Good morrow then.
I prithee now to bed.
Are you a weary of me?
O Cresseid! but that the buie da,
Waked by the Lark hath rouzd the ribald Crows,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer,
I would not from thee.
Night hath been too brief.
Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays
As tediously as hell, But flies the grasps of love,
With wings more momentary swift then thought,
You will catch cold and curse me.
Prithee tarry, you men will never tarry,
O foolish Cresseid, I might have still held of,
And then you would have tarried, Hark there's one up.
What's all the doors open here?
It is your uncle.
A pestilence on him: now will he be mocking:
I shall have such a life.
How now, how now, how go maidenheads,
hear you maid, where's my cousin Cresseid?
Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle,
You bring me to do— and that you flout me to.
To do what, to do what? let her say what,
What have I brought you to do?
Come, come, beshrew your heart, you'll near be good, not suffer others.
Ha, ha: alas poor wretch: a poor chipochia, hast not slept to night? would he not (a naughty man) let it sleep, a bugbear take him.
Did not I tell you? would he were knocked i' th'
Who's that at door, good uncle go and see.
My Lord, come you again into my chamber,
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.
Ha, ha.
Come you are deceived, I think of no such thing,
How earnestly they knock, pray you come in.
I would not for half Troy have you seen here,
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beat down the door? How now, what's the matter?
Good morrow Lord, good morrow.
Who's there my Lord Aeneas: by my troth I knew you not: what news with you so early?
Is not Prince Troilus here?
Here, what should he do here?
Come he is here, my Lord, do not deny him,
It doth import him much to speak with me.
Is he here say you? its more than I know i'll be sworn For my own part I came in late: what should he do here?
Who, nay then! Come, come, you'll do him wrong ere you are ware, you'll be so true to him, to be false to him: Do not you know of him, but yet go fetch him hither, go.
How now, what's the matter?
My Lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand,
Parish your brother, and Deiphobus,
The Grecian Diomedes, and our Antenor
Delivered to him, and forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomedes hand
The Lady Cresseida.
Is it so concluded?
By Priam and the general state of Troy,
They are at hand, and ready to effect t.
How my achievments mock me.
I will go meet them: and my Lord Aeneas,
We met by chance, you did not find me here.
Good, good, my lord, the secrets of neighbour Pandar
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
Is't possible: no sooner got but lost, the devil take Antenor, the young Prince will go mad, a plague upon Antenor. I would they had brok's neck.
How now? what's's the matter? who was here?
Ah, ah!
Why sigh you so profoundly, where's my Lord? gone? tell me sweet Uncle, what's the matter.
Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above.
O the Gods, what's the matter?
Pray thee get thee in: would thou hadst near been born, I knew thou wouldst be his death. O poor Gentleman, a plague upon Anthenor.
Good uncle; I beseech you on my knees, what's the matter?
Thou must be gone wench, thou must be gone: thou art changed for Antenor. Thou must to thy father and be gone from Troylus, 'twill be his death, 'twill be his bane, he cannot bear it.
O you immortal Gods, I will not go.
Thou must.
I will not uncle. I have forgot my father,
I know no touch of consanguinity,
No kin, no love, no blood, no soul so near me
As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine,
Make Cressid's name the very crown of falsehood,
If ever she leave Troylus. Time, force and death,
Do to this body what extremes you can:
But the strong base, and building of my love,
Is as the very centre of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I'll go in and weep.
Do, do.
tear my bright hair, & scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart,
With sounding Troylus: I will not go from Troy.
It is great morning, and the hour prefixed,
For her delivery to this valiant Greek,
Comes fast upon: good my brother Troylus
Tell you the Lady what she is to do,
And hast her to the purpose.
Walk into her house,
I'll bring her to the Grecian presently:
And to his hand when I deliver her,
Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus
A priest there offering to it his own heart.
I know what 'tis to love,
And would, as I shall pity I could help:
Please you walk in my Lords?
Be moderate, be moderate.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full, perfect that I tasted;
And violenteth in a sense as strong
As that which causeth it, how can I moderate it?
If I could temporize with my affections,
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like alayment could I give my grief:
My love admits no qualifiing dross,
No more my grief in such a precious loss.
Here, here, here he comes, a sweet ducks.
Oh Troilus, Troilus.
What a pair of spectacles is here, let me embrace too, Oh heart, as the goodly saying is, Oh heart, heavy heart, why sighest thou without breaking: where he answers again, because thou canst not ease thy smart by friendship nor by speaking: there was never a truer rime. Let us cast away nothing, for we may live to have need of such a verse, We see it, we see it, how now lambs?
Cressida I love thee in so strained a purity,
That the blessed Gods as angry with my fancy:
More bright in zeal then the devotion, which
Cold lips blow to their dieties, take thee from me.
Have the God's envy?
ay, I, I, I, 'tis to plain a case.
And is it true that I must go from Troy?
A hateful truth.
What and from Troilus to?
From Troy, and Troilus.
Is't possible?
And suddenly, where injury of chance
Puts back, leave taking, iussles roughly by:
All time of pause: rudely beguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure: forcibly prevents
Our locked embrasures, strangles our dear vows,
even in the birth of our own labouring breath:
We two that with so many thousand sighs,
Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves:
With the rude brevity, and discharge of one,
Injurious time now with a robbers haste,
Cram's his rich theeu'ry up he knows not how.
As many farewells as be stars in heaven.
With distinct breath, and consigned kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a loose adieu:
And scants us with a single famished kiss,
Distasted with the salt of broken tears.
My Lord is the Lady ready?
Hark, you are called, some say the Genius
Cries so to him that instantly must die,
Bid them have patience she shall come anon.
Where are my tears rain to lay this wind, or my heart willbe blown up by my throat.
I must then to the Grecians.
No remedy?
A woeful Cressida 'mongst the merry Greekes,
When shall we see again.
Here me love? be thou but true of heart.
I true? how now? what wicked dame is this?
Nay we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us.
I speak not be thou true as fearing thee.
For I will throw my glove to death himself,
That there is no maculation in thy heart:
But be thou true say I to fashion in,
My sequent protestation; be thou true, and I will see thee.
Oh you shallbe exposed my Lord to dangers,
As infinite as imminent; but i'll be true,
And i'll grow friend with danger, were this sleeve.
And you this glove, when shall I see you?
I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels,
To give thee nightly visitation, but yet be true.
Oh Heavens be true again?
Here why I speak it loue,
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
And swelling over with arts and excercise:
How novelty may move, and parts with portion,
Alas a kind of Godly jealousy,
(Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin,)
Makes me a feared.
Oh heavens you love me not!
Die I a villain then,
In this I do not call your faith in question:
So mainly as my merit. I cannot sing
Nor heel the high lauolt, nor sweeten talk,
Nor play at subtle games, fair virtues all:
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant,
But I can tell that in each grace of these:
There lurks a still, and dumb-discoursive devil
That tempts most cunningly, but be not tempted.
Do you think I will?
No, but something may be done that we will not,
And sometimes wear devils to ourselves:
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Presuming on their changeful potency.
Nay good my Lord?
Come kiss, and let us part.
Brother Troilus?
Good brother come you hither?
And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.
My Lord will you be true?
Who I, alas it is my vice, my fault,
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I with great truth catch mere simplicity,
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do were mine bare:
Fear not my truth, the moral of my wit,
Is plain and true? there's all the reach of it,
Welcome sir Diomedes, here is the Lady,
Which for Antenor we deliver you.
At the port (Lord) I'll give her to thy hand,
And by the way possess thee what she is
Entreat her fair, and by my soul fair Greek,
If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword:
Name Cressid, and thy life shallbe as safe,
As Priam is in Illium?
Fair Lady Cressida,
So please you save the thanks this Prince expects:
The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair usage, and to Diomedes,
You shallbe mistress, and command him wholly.
Grecian thou dost not use me courteously,
To shame the seal of my petition to thee:
In praising her. I tell thee Lord of Greece,
She is as far high soaring o'er thy praises:
As thou unworthy to be called her servant,
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge:
For by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
I'll cut thy throat.
Oh be not moved Prince Troilus,
Let me be privileged by my place and message:
To be a speaker free? when I am hence,
I'll answer to my lust, and know you Lord
I'll nothing do on charge, to her own worth,
She shallbe prized: but that you say be't so,
I speak it in my spirit and honour no.
Come to the port I'll tell thee Diomedes,
This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head,
Lady give me your hand, and as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.
Hark Hector's trumpet?
How have we spent this morning?
The Prince must think me tardy and remiss,
That swore to ride before him to the field,
'tis Troilus fault, come, come, to field with him.
Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time. With starting courage,
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy
Thou dreadful Ajax that the appalled air,
May pierce the head of the great Combatant, and hale him hither.
Thou, trumpet, there's my purse,
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Blow villain, till thy sphered Bias cheek,
Out-swell the colic of puffed Aquilon,
Come stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood:
Thou blowest for Hector.
No trumpet answers.
'tis but early days.
Is not yond Diomedes with Calcas daughter.
'tis he, I ken the manner of his gate,
He rises on the too: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Is this the Lady Cressida?
Even she.
Most dearly welcome to the Greekes sweet Lady.
Our general doth salute you with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness but particular, 'twere better she were kissed in general.
And very courtly counsel. I'll begin: so much for Nestor.
I'll take that winter from your lips fair Lady,
Achilles bids you welcome.
I had good argument for kissing once.
But that's no argument for kissing now,
For thus popped Paris in his hardiment,
And parted thus, you and your argument.
Oh deadly gall and theme of all our scomes,
For which we loose our heads to guild his homes.
The first was ward kisse this mine,
Patrolus kisses you.
Oh this is trim.
Paris and I kiss evermore for him.
I'll have my kiss sir? Lady by your leave.
In kissing do you render or receive.
Both take and give.
I'll make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better than you give: therefore no kiss.
I'll give you boot, i'll give you three for one.
You are an odd man give even or give none.
An odd man Lady, every man is odd.
No Paris is not, for you know 'tis true,
That you are odd and he is even with you.
You fillip me a'th' head.
No i'll be sworne.
It were no match, your nail against his horn,
May I sweet Lady beg a kiss of you.
You may.
I do desire it.
Why beg then.
Why then for Venus' sake give me a kiss,
When Helen is a maid again and his—
I am your debtor, claim it when 'tis due.
Nevers my day, and then a kiss of you.
Lady a word, i'll bring you to your father.
A woman of quick sense.
Fie, fie upon her,
Ther's's language in her eye, her cheek her lip,
Nay her foot speaks, her wanton spirits look out
At every joint and motive of her body,
Oh these encounterers so glib of tongue,
That give a coasting welcome eroit comes,
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts,
To every ticklish reader, set them down,
For sluttish spoils of opportunity:
And daughters of the game.
The Trojans trumpet.
Yonder comes the troop.
Hail all the state of Greece: what shallbe done,
To him that victory commands, or do you purpose,
A victor shallbe known, will you the knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall they be divided,
By any voice or order of the field, Hector bade ask?
Which way would Hector have it?
He cares not, he'll obey conditions.
'tis done like Hector, but securely done,
A little proudly, and great deal misprising:
The knight opposed.
If not Achilles' sir, what is your name?
If not Achilles nothing:
Therefore Achilles, but what ere know this,
In the extremity of great and little:
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector
The one almost as infinite as all,
The other blank as nothing, way him well.
And that which looks like pride is courtesy,
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood,
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home,
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek:
This blended knight half Trojan, and half Greek.
A maiden battle then, Oh I perceive you.
Here is sir Diomedes? go gentle knight,
Stand by our Ajax. As you and Lord Aeneas'
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it, either to the uttermost,
Or else a breath, the combatants being kin,
Half stints their strife, before their strokes begin.
Ulysses: what Trojan is that some that looks so heavy?
The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,
Not yet mature, yet matchless firm of word,
Speaking deeds, and deedless in his tongue,
Not soon provoked nor being provoked soon calmed,
His heart and hand both open and both free.
For what he has he gives, what thinks he shows,
Yet gives he not till judgement guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impair thought with breath;
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous,
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects, but he in heat of action,
Is more vindicative than jealous love.
They call him Troilus, and on him erect,
A second hope as fairly built as Hector:
Thus says Aeneas one that knows the youth,
Even to his inches: and with private soul
Did in great Illium thus translate him to me.
They are in action.
Now Ajax hold thine own.
Hector thou sleepest awake thee.
His blows are well: disposed, there Ajax.
You must no more.
Princes enough so please you.
I am not warm yet, let us fight again.
As Hector pleases.
Why then will I no more,
Thou art great Lord my father's sister's Son,
A cousin german to great Priam's feed,
The obligation of our blood forbids,
A gory emulation twixt us twain:
Were thy commixtion Greek and Trojan so,
That thou couldst say this hand is Grecian all:
And this is Trojan, the sinews of this leg
All Greek, and this all Troy: my mother's blood,
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my fathers. By Loue multipotent
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member,
Wherein my sword had not impressure made.
But the just Gods gainsay,
That any day thou borrowd'st from thy mother,
My sacred Aunt, should by my mortal sword,
Be drained. Let me embrace thee Ajax:
By him that thunders thou hast lusty aims,
Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
Cozen all honour to thee.
I thank thee Hector,
Thou art to gentle, and too free a man,
I came to kill thee cozen, and bear hence,
A great addition earned in thy death.
Not Neptolymus so mirable,
On whose bright crest, fame with her loud'st (O yes)
Cries, this is he, could promise to himself,
A thought of added honour, torn from Hector.
There is expectance here from both the sides,
What further you will do.
we'll answer it,
The issue is embracement, Ajax farewell.
If I might in entreaties find success,
As seld I have the chance, I would desire,
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.
'tis Agamemnon's wish, and great Achilles
Doth long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.
Aeneas call my brother Troilus to me.
And signify this loving interview
To the expectors of our Trojan part,
Desire them home. Give me thy hand my Cozen.
I will go eat with thee, and see your Knights
Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.
The worthiest of them, tell me name by name:
But for Achilles my own searching eyes,
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Worthy all arms as welcome as to one,
That would be rid of such an enemy.
From heart of very heart, great Hector welcome.
I thank thee most imperious Agamemnon.
My well-famed Lord of Troy, no less to you.
Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting:
You brace of warlike brothers: welcome hither.
Who must we answer?
The noble Menelaus.
O you my Lord, by Mars his gauntlet thanks,
(Mock not thy affect, the untraded earth)
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' glove,
she's well, but bade me not commend her to you.
Name her not now sir, she's a deadly theme.
O pardon, I offend.
I have thou gallant Trojan seen thee oft,
Labouring for destiny, make cruel way,
Through ranks of Greekish youth, and I have seen thee
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,
Despising many forfeits and subduements,
When thou hast hung th'advanced sword ith'ayre,
Not letting it decline on the declined,
That I have said to some my standers by,
Lo Iupiter is yonder dealing life.
And I have seen thee pause, and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greekes have shrupd thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling. This have I seen,
But this thy countenance still locked in steel,
I never saw till now: I knew thy grandsire,
And once fought with him, he was a soldier good,
But by great Mars the Captain of us all,
Never like thee: O let an old man embrace thee,
And worthy warrior welcome to our tents.
'tis the old Nestor.
Let me embrace thee good old Chronide,
That hast so long walked hand in hand with time,
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
I would my arms could match thee in contention.
I would they could.
Ha? by this white beard I'd fight with thee to morrow.
Well, welcome, welcome, I have seen the time.
I wonder now how yonder City stands,
When we have here her base and pillar by us?
I know your favour lord Ulysses well,
Ah sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw selfe and Diomedes,
In Illium on your Greekish embassy.
Sir I foretold you then what would ensue,
My prophecy is but halfe his journey yet,
For yonder walls that pertly front your town,
You towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.
I must not believe you.
There they stand yet, and modestly I think,
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost,
A drop of Grecian blood: the end crowns all,
And that old common arbitrator Time, will one day end it.
So to him we leave it.
Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome:
After the General, I beseech you next
To feast with me, and see me at my tent.
I shall forestall thee lord Ulysses thou:
Now Hector I haue fed mine eyes on thee, (by ioint.
I have with exact view perused thee Hector, & quoted joint by joint.
Is this Achilles?
I am Achilles.
Stand fair I pray thee, let me look on thee,
Behold thy fill.
Nay I have done already.
Thou art too brief, I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb,
O like a book of sport thou'lt read me over:
But ther's more in me then thou vnderstan dst,
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye.
Tell me you heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him: whether there, or there, or there,
That I may give the local wound a name,
And make distinct the very breach, whereout
Hector's great spirit flew: answer me heavens.
It would discredit the blessed gods proud man,
To answer such a question: stand again,
Thinkst thou to catch my life so pleasantly,
As to prenominate in nice conjecture,
Where thou wilt hit me dead.
I tell thee yea.
Wert thou an Oracle to tell me so,
Ie not beleeue thee▪ Hence-forth gard thee well,
For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
But by the forge that stichied Mars his helm.
I'll kill thee every where, yea over and over.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag,
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But i'll endeavour deeds to match these words,
Or may I never—
Do not chafe thee cozen.
And you Achilles, let these threats alone,
Till accident or purpose bring you to't,
You may have every day enough of Hector,
If you have stomach, The general state I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.
I pray you let us see you in the field,
We have had pelting wars since you refused, the Grecians cause.
Dost thou entreat me Hector?
To morrow do I meet thee fell as death: to night all friends.
Thy hand upon that match.
First all you Peers of Greece, go to my tent,
There in the full convive we: afterwards
As Hector's leisure, and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him
To taste your bounties, let the trumpets blow,
That this great soldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Ulysses, tell me I beseech you,
In what place of the field doth Calcas keep.
At Menelaus' tent, most princely Troilus:
There Diomedes doth feast with him to night,
Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth,
But gives all gaze, and bend of amorous view,
On the fair Cresseid.
Shall I sweet Lord be bound to you so much,
After we part from Agamemnon's tent,
To bring me thither.
You shall command me sir.
But gentle tell me of what honour was
This Cressida in Troy? had she no lover there
That wails her absence?
O sir to such as boasting show their scars,
A mock is due; will you walk on my Lord,
She was beloved my Lord, she is, and doth,
But still sweet love is food for fortune's tooth.
I'll heat his blood with greekish wine to night,
Which with my scimitar i'll cool to morrow,
Patroclus let us feast him to the height
Here comes Thersites.
How now thou cur of envy.
Thou crusty batch of nature what's the news?
Why thou picture of what thou seemest, and Idol,
Of idiot worshippers, here's a letter for thee.
From whence fragment.
Why thou full dish of fool from Troy,
Who keeps the tent now.
The Surgeon's box or the pacients wound.
Well said adversity, and what needs this tricks,
Prithee be silent box I profit not by thy talk,
Thou art said to be Achilles' male varlet,
Male varlet you rogue what's that.
Why his masculine whore, now the rotten diseases of the south, the guts gripping ruptures: loads a gravel in the back, lethergies, could palsies, raw eyes, durtrottē livers, whissing lungs, bladders full of impostume, Sciaticas lime. kills i'th' palm, incurable bone-ache, and the riveled fee simple of the tetter, take and take again such preposterous discoveries.
Why thou damnable box of envy thou what means thou to curse thus.
do I curse thee.
Why no you ruinous but, you whoreson indistinguishable cur, no.
No why art thou then exasperate, thou idle immaterial skein of sleive silk, thou green sacenet clap for a sore eye, thou tossell of a prodigal's purse— thou ah how the poor world is pestered with such water flies, diminitives of nature.
Out gall.
Finch egg.
My sweet Patroclus I am thwarted quite,
From my great purpose into morrows battle,
Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba;
A token from her daughter my fair love
Both taxing me, and gauging me to keep:
An oath that I have sworn: I will not break it,
Fall Greekes, fail fame, honour or go or stay,
My mayor vow lies here; this i'll obey,
Come, come, Thersites help to trim my tent?
This night in banqueting must all be spent, away Patroclus.
With to much blood, and to little brain, these two may run mad, but if with to much brain and to little blood they do i'll be a curer of madmen, her's Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough, and one that loves quails, but he has not so much brain as ear-wax, and the goodly transformation of Iupiter there, his be the Bull, the primitive statue, and oblique memorial of cuck-olds, a thrifty shooing-horn in a chain at his bare leg, to what form but that he is, should wit larded with malice, and malice faced with wit, turn him to: to an Ass, were nothing he is both Ass and Ox to an Ox were nothing, her's both Ox and Ass, to be a day, a Moil, a Cat, a Fichooke, a Toad, a lizard, an Owl, a Puttock, or a Herring without a row. I would not care, but to be Menelaus I would conspire against destiny, ask me what I would be, if I were not Thersites, for I care not to be the Louse of a Lazar, so I were not Menelaus— heyday spirits and fires.
We go wrong we go wrong.
No, yonder 'tis there where we see the lights.
I trouble you.
No not a whit:
Here comes himself to guide you.
Welcome brave Hector, welcome Princes all.
So now fair Prince of Troy, I bid God night,
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks and good night to the Greekes general.
Good night my Lord.
Good night sweet Lord Menelaus.
Sweet draft, sweet quoth a, sweet sink, sweet sure.
Good night and welcome both to those that go or tarry.
Good night.
Old Nestor tarries, and you to Diomed.
Keep Hector company an hour or two.
I cannot Lord, I have important business,
The tide whereof is now, good night great Hector.
Give me your hand.
Follow his torch, he goes to Calcas tent, i'll keep you company.
Sweet sir you honour me?
And so good night.
Come, come, enter my tent.
That same Diomede a false hearted rogue, a most unjust knave, I will no more trust him when he leers, than I will a serpent when he hisses, he will spend his mouth and promise like brabbler the hound, but when he performs, Astronomers foretell it, is prodigious, there will come some change, the sun borrows of the Moon when Diomedes keeps his word, I will rather leave to see Hector than not to dog him, they say he keeps a Trojan drab, and uses the traitor Calcas tent, I'll after— nothing but lechery cherry all incontinent varlets.
What are you up here ho ?? speak?
Who calls?
Chalcas I think where's your daughter?
She comes to you.
Stand, where the torch may not discover us.
Cressida comes forth to him.
How now my charge.
Now my sweet guardian, hark a word with you.
Yea so familiar?
She will sing any man at first sight.
And any man may sing her, if he can take her Cliff, she's noted.
Will you remember?
Remember yes:
Nay but do then and let your mind be coupled with your words.
What shall she remember.
Lift?
Sweet honey Greek tempt me no more to folly.
Roguery.
Naythen.
I'll tell you what.
Foyes, foe, come tell a pin you are forsworn.
In faith I cannot, what would you have me do?
A juggling trick to be secretly open,
What did you swear you would bestow on me?
I prithee do not hold me to mine oath,
Bid me do any thing but that sweet Greek.
Good night.
Hold patience.
How now Trojan.
Diomed.
No, no, good night I'll be your fool no more,
Thy better must,
Hark a word in your ear.
O plague and madness!
You are moved Prince, let us depart I pray
Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself
To wrathful terms, this place is dangerous:
The time right deadly, I beseech you go.
Behold I pray you.
Now good my Lord go off.
You flow to great destruction, come my Lord.
I prithee stay.
You have not patience, come.
I pray you stay; by hell, and all hell's torment,
I will not speak a word.
And so good night,
Nay but you part in anger,
Doth that grieve thee, O withered truth.
How now my Lord?
By Ioue I will be patient.
Guardian? why Greek?
Foyes foe you palter.
In faith I do not, come hither once again.
You shake my Lord at something, will you go. you will break out.
She strokes his cheek.
Come, come.
Nay stay, by Ioue I will not speak a word,
Therein between my will and all offences
A guard of patience, stay a little while,
How the devil Luxury with his fat rump and potato finger, tickles together; fry lechery fry.
Will you then?
In faith I will lo, never trust me else.
Give me some token for the surety of it.
I'll fetch you one.
You have sworn patience:
Fear me not my Lord.
I will not be myself, not have cognition
Of what I feel, I am all patience:
Now the pledge, now, now, now.
here Diomedes keep this sleeve.
O beauty where is thy faith!
My Lord.
You look upon that sleeve behold it well,
He loved me (oh false wench) giv't me again:
Whose waist?
It is no matter now I have't again.
I will not meet with you to morrow night:
I prithee Diomedes visit me no more.
Now she sharpens, well said Whetstone.
I shall have it.
What this?
I that.
O all you gods; O pretty pretty pledge!
Thy master now lies thinking on his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it, as I kiss thee.
Nay do not snatch it from me.
He that takes that doth take my heart withal.
I had your heart before, this follows it.
I did swear patience.
You shall not have it Diomedes, faith you shall not,
I'll give you something else.
I will have this, whose was it?
It is no matter.
Come tell me whose it was?
'twas on's that loved me better than you will,
But now you have it take it.
Whose was it?
And by all Diana's waiting women yond
And by herself I will not tell you whose.
To morrow will I wear it on my Helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Wert thou the devil, and worest it on thy horn,
It should be challengd.
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past: and yet it is not.
I will not keep my word.
Why then farewell, thou never shalt mock Diomedes again.
You shall not got: one cannot speak a word but it strait starts you.
I do not like this fooling.
Nor I by Pluto; but that that likes not you, pleases me best.
What shall I come? the hour—
I come; O Ioue: do come, I shall be plagued.
Farewell till then.
Good night, I prithee come:
Troilus farewell, one eye yet looks on thee,
But with my heart the other eye doth see,
Ah poor our sex, this fault in us I find,
The error of our eye directs our mind,
What error leads must err: O then conclude,
Minds swayed by eyes are full of turpitude.
A proof of strength, she could not publish more,
Unless she said my mind is now turned whore.
All's done my Lord.
It is.
Why stay we there?
To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke:
But if I tell how these two did Court,
Shall I not lie in publishing a truth,
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
An esperance so obstinately strong,
That doth invert th attest of eyes and ears,
As if those organs were deceptions functions,
Created only to calumniate. Was Cresseid here?
I cannot conjure Trojan.
She was not sure.
Most sure she was.
Why my negation hath no taste of madness.
Nor mine my Lord: Cresseid was here but now.
Let it not be believed for womanhood.
Think we had mothers, do not give advantage
To stubborn Critics apt without a theme
For depravation, to square the general sex
By Cresseids rule, Rather think this not Cresseid.
What hath she done Prince that can spoil our mothers.
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
Will a swagger himself out on's own eyes.
This she, no this is Diomed's Cresseida,
If beauty have a soul this is not she:
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods delight:
If there berule in unity itself,
This was not she: O madness of discourse,
That cause sets up with and against itself,
By-found authority: where reason can revolt
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason,
Without revolt, This is and is not Cresseid,
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseparat,
Divides more wider than the sky and earth:
And yet the spacious breadth of this division,
Admits no orifice for a point as subtle,
As Ariachna's broken woof to enter,
Instance, O instance strong as Pluto's gates,
Cresseid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven,
Instance, O instance, strong as heaven itself,
The bonds of heaven are slipped, dissolved and loosed,
And with another knot find finger tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love.
The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy relics.
Of her ore-eaten faith, are glven to Diomedes,
May worthy Troilus be half attached
With that which here his passion doth express?
I Greek, and that shall be divulged well
In Characters as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus: never did young man fancy
With so eternal and so fixed a soul.
Hark Greek, as much I do Cressida love,
So much by weight, hate I her Diomedes:
That sleeve is mine, that he'll bear on his Helm:
Were it a Cask composed by Vulcan's skill
My sword should bite it: Not the dreadful spout
Which Shipmen do the hurricano call,
constringed in Mass by the almighty sun
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear, in his descent,
Then shall my prompted sword, falling on Diomed.
he'll tickle it for his concupy.
O Cressida, O false Cressida, false, false, false:
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
And they'll seem glorious,
O contain yourself;
Your passion draws ears hither.
I have been seeking you this hour my Lord:
Hector by this is arming him in Troy:
Ajax your guard stays to conduct you home.
Have with you Prince: my courteous Lord adieu,
Farewell revolted fair: and Diomedes
Stand fast, and wear a Castle on thy head.
I'll bring you to the gates.
Accept distracted thanks.
Would I could meet that rogue Diomedes I would croak like a Raven. I would bode, I would bode: Patroclus will give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore: the Parrot will not do more for an almond than he for a commodious drab: Lechery, lechery, still wars and lechery, nothing else holds fashion. A burning devil take them.
When was my Lord so much ungently tempered,
To stop his ears against admonishment:
Unarm unarm, and do not fight to day.
You train me to offend you, get you in,
By all the everlasting gods I'll go.
My dreams will sure prove ominous to the day.
No more I say.
Where is my brother Hector?
Here sister, armed and bloody in intent,
Consort with me in loud and dear petition,
Pursue we him on knees: for I have dreamt
Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.
O 'tis true.
Ho? bid my trumpet sound.
No notes of sally for the heavens sweet brother.
Begun I say, the gods have heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows,
They are polluted offerings more abhorred,
Then spotted livers in the sacrifice.
O be persuaded, do not count it holy,
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow,
But vows to every purpose must not hold:
Unarm sweet Hector.
Hold you still I say,
Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate:
Life every man holds dear but the dear man,
Holds honour far more precious dear than life,
How now young man, meanest thou to fight to day.
Cassandra call my father to persuade.
No faith young Troilus, doff thy harness youth,
I am to day i'th' vain of chivalry,
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee go, and doubt thou not brave boy,
I'll stand to day for thee and me and Troy.
Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you,
Which better fits a Lion then a man.
What vice is that? good Troilus chide me for it.
When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword.
You bid them rise and live.
O 'tis fair play.
fools play by heaven Hector.
How now? how now?
forth' love of all the gods
Let's leave the Hermit Pity with our Mother,
And when we have our armours buckled on,
The venomed vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, rain them from ruth.
Fie savage, fie.
Hector then 'tis wars.
Troilus I would not have you fight to day.
Who should withhold me?
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire,
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes ore-galled with recourse of tears,
Nor you my brother, with your true sword drawn,
Opposed to hinder me, should stop my way,
Lay hold upon him, Priam hold him fast,
He is thy crutch: now if thou lose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Come Hector, come, go back,
Thy wife hath dreamt, thy mother hath had visions,
Cassandra doth foresee, and I myself,
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt,
To tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come back.
Aeneas is afield,
And I do stand, engaged to many Greekes,
Even in the faith of valour to appear,
This morning to them.
I but thou shalt not go.
I must not break my faith,
You know me dutiful, therefore dear sir,
Let me not shame respect, but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me royal Priam.
O Priam yield not to him.
Do not dear father.
Andromache I am offended with you,
Upon the love you bear me get you in.
This foolish dreaming superstitious girl,
Makes all these bodements.
O farewell dear Hector.
Look how thou diest look how thy eye turns pale.
Look how thy wounds do bleed at many vents,
Hark how Troy roars, how Hecuba cries out,
How poor Andromache shrils her dolours forth,
Behold destruction, frenzy, and amazement,
Like witless antics one another meet,
And all cry Hector, Hector's dead, O Hector.
Away, away.
Farewell, yet soft: Hector I take my leave,
Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive?
You are amazed my liege, at her exclaim,
Go in and cheer the town,
we'll forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise, and tell you them at night.
Farewell, the gods with safety stand about thee.
They are at it hark proud Diomedes believe.
I come to lose my arm or win my sleeve.
Do you hear my Do You, do you
What now?
here's a letter come from yond poor girl.
Let me read,
A whoreson tisick, a whoreson rascally tisick, so troubles me, and the foolish fortune of this girl, and what one thing, what another, that I shall leave you one ath's days: and I have a rheum in mine eyes too, and such an ache in my bones, that unless a man were cursed I cannot tell what to think on't. What says she there?
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart,
Th'effect doth operate another way.
Go wind to wind, there turn and change together:
My love with words and errors still she feeds,
But edifies another with her deeds.
Now they are clapper-clawing one another: I'll go look on, that dissembling abhomihable varlet Diomedes, has got that same scurvy dooting foolish knaves sleeve of Troy there in his helm. I would fain see them meet, that that same young Trojan ass that loves the whore there, might send that Greekish whoremasterly villain with the sleeve, back to the dissembling luxurious drab of a sleeveless arrant. ath' other side, the policy of those crafty swearing rascals; that stale old Mouse-eaten dry cheese Nestor: and that same dogfox Ulysses, is not proved worth a Black-berry. They set me up in policy, that mongrill cur Ajax, against that dog of as bad a kind Achilles. And now is the cur Ajax, prouder than the cur Achilles, and will not arm to day. whereupon the Grecians began to proclaim barbarism, and policy grows into an ill opinion. Soft here comes sleeve & tother.
fly not, for shouldst thou take the over Styx, I would swim after,
Thou doost miseall ree,
I do not fly, but advantageous care,
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude, have at thee?
Hold thy whore Grecian: now for thy whore Trojan,
Now the sleeve, now the sleeve.
What art Greek, art thou for Hector's match.
Art thou of blood and honour.
No, no, I am a rascal, a scurvy railing knave, a very filthy rogue.
I do believe thee, live.
God a mercy, that thou wilt believe me, but a plague break thy neck— for frighting me: what's become of the wenching rogues? I think they have swallowed one another. I would laugh at that miracle— yet in a sort lechery eats itself, i'll seek them.
Go go, my servant take thou Troylus horse,
Present the fair steed to my Lady Cressida,
Fellow commend my service to her beauty:
Tell her I have chastised the amorous Trojan,
And am her knight by proof.
I go my Lord.
Renew, renew, the fierce Polidamas,
Hath beat down Menon: bastard Margarelon,
Hath Doreus prisoner.
And stands Colossus-wise waving his beam,
Upon the pashed corpses of the Kings:
Epistropus and Cedus, Polixines is slain,
Amphimacus and Thous deadly hurt,
Patroclus ta'en or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised, the dreadful Sagittary,
Appalls our numbers, hast we Diomedes,
To re-enforcement or we perish all.
Go bear Patroclus' body to Achilles,
And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame,
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
And there lacks work, anon he's there a foot
And there they fly or die, like scaling skulls,
Before the belching Whale, then is he yonder:
And there the strawy Greekes ripe for his edge
Fall down before him like a mower's swath,
Here, there and every where, he leaves and takes.
Dextty so ob aying appeute,
That what he will he does, and does so much:
That proof is called impossibility.
Oh courage, courage Princes, great Achilles,
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance,
Patroclus' wounds have roused his drowsy blood,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons
That noseless, handless, hacked and chipped come to him.
Crying on Hector, Ajax hath lost a friend,
And foams at mouth, and he is armed and at it.
Roaring for Troilus, who hath done to day,
Mad and fantastic execution:
Engaging and redeeming of himself
With such a careless force, and forceless care,
As if that lust in very spite of cunning, bade him win all.
Troilus, thou coward Troilus.
I there, there?
So, so we draw together.
Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller show thy face,
Know what it is to meet Achilles' angry
Hector where's Hector I will none but Hector.
Troilus thou coward Troilus show thy head.
Troilus I say where's Troilus?
What wouldst thou.
I would correct him.
Were I the general thou shouldst have my office,
Ere that correction? Troilus I say what Troilus.
Oh traitor Diomed, turn thy false face thou traitor,
And pay thy life thou owest me for my horse.
Ha art thou there?
I'll fight with him alone stand Diomed.
He is my prize, I will not look upon.
Come both you cogging Greekes have at you both.
Yea Troilus, O well fought my youngest brother.
Now do I see thee ha, have at thee Hector.
Pause if thou wilt.
I do disdain thy courtesy proud Trojan,
Be happy that my arms are out of use:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again:
Till when go seek thy fortune.
Fare thee well.
I would have been much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee, how now my brother.
Ajax hath ta'en Aeneas, shall it be,
No by the flame of yonder glorious heaven
He shall not carry him i'll be tane to to,
Or bring him off, fate hear me what I say:
I wreak not though I end my life to day.
Stand, stand thou Greek, thou art a goodly mark,
No? wilt thou not. I like thy armour well,
I'll frush it and unlock the rivets all:
But i'll be master of it, wilt thou not beast abide,
Why then fly on, i'll hunt thee for thy hide.
Come here about me you my Myrmidons,
Mark what I say, attend me where I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath,
And when I have the bloody Hector found:
Impale him with your weapons round about,
In fellest manner execute your armes
Follow me sirs and my proceedings eye,
It is decreed Hector the great must die.
The cuck-old and the cuck-old-maker are at it, now bull, now dog low, Paris low, now my double-henned hened spartan, low Paris, low the bull has the game, ware horns ho?
Turn slave and fight.
What art thou?
A Bastard son of Priam's.
I am a bastard too, I love bastards. I am bastard begot, bastard instructed, bastard in mind, bastard in valour, in every thing illegitimate, one bear will not bite another, and wherefore should one bastard? take heed, the quarrels most ominous to us, if the son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts judgement, farewell bastard.
The devil take thee coward.
Most putrefied core so fair without,
Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life;
Now is my days work done i'll take my breath:
Rest sword thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Look Hector how the Sun begins to set,
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels
Even with the vail and darkening of the Sun,
To close the day up, Hector's life is done.
I am unarmed forego this vantage Greek.
Strike fellows strike, this is the man I seek,
So Illium fall thou next, come Troy sink down,
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews and thy bone.
On Myrmidons, and cry you all amain,
Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain,
Hark a retire upon our Grecian prat.
The Trojans trumpet sound the like my Lord.
The dragon wing of night orespreds the earth,
And stickler-like the armies separates.
My half supped sword that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bait: thus goes to bed:
Come tie his body to my horse's tail,
Along the field I will the Trojan trail.
Hark, hark, what is this?
Peace drums.
Achilles, Achilles, Hector's slain Achilles.
The bruit is Hector's slain and by Achilles.
If it be so yet bragless let it be,
Great Hector was as good a man as he.
March patiently along: let one be sent,
To pray Achilles see us at our tent:
If in his death the Gods have us befriended.
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.
Stand ho? yet are we masters of the field,
Never go home, here starve we out the night,
Hector is slain.
Hector! the gods forbid.
he's dead and at the murderers horse's tail,
In beastly sort dragged through the shameful field:
Frown on you heavens, effect your rage with speed,
Sat gods upon you thrones, and smile at Troy.
I say at once, let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on.
My Lord you do discomfort all the host.
You understand me not that tell me so,
I do not speak of flight, of fear of death
But dare all imminence that gods and men
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so or Hecuba?
Let him that will a screech-owl aye be called,
Go into Troy and say their Hector's dead,
There is a word will Priam turn to stone,
Make wells and Niobe's of the maids and wives:
Could statues of the youth and in a word,
scar Troy out of itself, there is no more to say,
Stay yet you proud abominable tents:
Thus proudly pitched upon our Phrygian plains,
Let Titan rise as early as he dare;
I'll through, and through you, and thou great sized coward,
No space of earth shall sunder our two hates:
I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts,
Strike a free march, to Troy with comfort go
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.
But here you, here you.
Hence broker, lackey, ignomyny, shame,
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name.
A goodly medicine for my aching bones, Oh world, world— thus is the poor agent despised, Oh traitors and bawds, how earnestly are you set a work, and how ill requited, why should our endeavour be so loved and the performance so loathed, what verse for it? What instance for it?
Let me see,
Full merrily the humble Bee doth sing,
Till he hath lost his honey and his sting.
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey, and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted clothes,
As many as be here of Pandars, hall,
Your eyes half out weep out at Pandar' fall.
Or if you cannot weep yet give some groans,
Though not for me yet for my aching bones:
Brethren and sisters of the hold-ore trade,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made/
It should be now but that my fear is this,
Some gauled goose of Winchester would hiss.
Till than i'll sweat and seek about for eases,
And at that time bequeath you my diseases.