IN Troy there lies the Scene From Isles of Greece
The Prince's Orgillous, their high blood chafed
Have to the Port of Athens sent their ships
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel War: Sixty and nine that wore
Their Crownets, Regal, from th' Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia, and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, within whose strong emures
The ravished Helen, Menelaus' Queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps, and that's the Quarrel.
To Tenedos they come,
And the deepe-drawing Bark do there disgorge
Their warlike frautage: now on Dardan Plains
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave Pavilions. Priam's six-gated City,
Dardan and Timbria, Helias, Cheta, Troien,
And Antenonidus with massy Staples
And corresponsive and fulfilling Bolts
Stir up the Sons of Troy.
Now Expectation tickling skittish spirits,
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard. And hither am I come,
A Prologue armed, but not in confidence
Of Author's pen, or Actor's voice; but suited
In like conditions, as our Argument;
To tell you (fair Beholders) that our Play
Leaps over the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle: starting thence away,
To what may be digested in a Play:
Like, or find fault, do as your pleasures are,
Now good, or bad, 'tis but the chance of War.
CAll here my Varlet, I'll unarm again.
Why should I war without the walls of Troy
That find such cruel battle here within?
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field, Troilus alas hath none.
Will this gear ne'er be mended?
The Greeks are strong, & skilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness Valiant:
But I am weaker than a woman's tear;
Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance;
Less valiant than the Virgin in the night,
And skilless as unpractised Infancy.
Well, I have told you enough of this: For my part, I'll not meddle nor make no farther. He that will have a Cake out of the Wheat, must needs tarry the grinding.
Have I not tarried?
I the grinding; but you must tarry the bolting.
Have I not tarried?
I the bolting; but you must tarry the leau'ing.
Still have I tarried.
I, to the leavening: but here's yet in the word hereafter, the Kneading, the making of the Cake, the heating of the Oven, and the Baking; nay, you must stay the cooling too, or you may chance to burn your lips.
Patience herself, what Goddess ere she be,
Doth lesser blench at sufferance, than I do:
At Priam's Royal Table do I sit;
And when fair Cressida comes into my thoughts,
So (Traitor) than she comes, when she is thence.
Well:
She looked yesternight fairer, than ever I saw her look,
Or any woman else.
I was about to tell thee, when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain,
Lest Hector, or my Father should perceive me:
I have (as when the Sun doth light a-scorne)
Buried this sigh, in wrinkle of a smile:
But sorrow, that is couched in seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth, Fate turns to sudden sadness.
And her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's, well go too, there were no more comparison between the Women. But for my part she is my Kinswoman, I would not (as they term it) praise it, but I would somebody had heard her talk yesterday as I did: I will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but—
Oh Pandarus! I tell thee Pandarus;
When I do tell thee, there my hopes lie drowned:
Reply not in how many Fathoms deep
They lie endrenched. I tell thee, I am mad
In Cressida's love. Thou answerest she is Fair,
Powr'st in the open Ulcer of my heart,
Her Eyes, her Hair, her Cheek, her Gate, her Voice,
Handlest in thy discourse. O that her Hand
(In whose comparison, all whites are Ink)
Writing their own reproach; to whose soft seizure,
The Cignets down is harsh, and spirit of Sense
Hard as the palm of Ploughman. This thou tell'st me;
As true thou tell'st me, when I say I love her:
But saying thus, instead of Oil and Balm,
Thou lai'st in every gash that love hath given me,
The Knife that made it.
I speak no more than truth.
Thou dost not speak so much.
Faith, I'll not meddle in't: Let her be as she is, if she be fair, 'tis the better for her: and she be not, she has the mends in her own hands.
Good Pandarus: How now Pandarus?
I have had my Labour for my travel, ill thought on of her, and ill thought on of you: Gone between and between, but small thankes for my labour.
What art thou angry Pandarus? what with me?
Because she's Kin to me, therefore she's not so fair as Helen, and she were not kin to me, she would be as fair on Friday, as Helen is on Sunday. But what care I? I care not and she were a Black-a-Moore, 'tis all one to me.
Say I she is not fair?
I do not care whether you do or no. she's a Fool to stay behind her Father: Let her to the Greeks, and so I'll tell her the next time I see her: for my part, I'll meddle nor make no more i' th' matter.
Pandarus?
Not I
Sweet Pandarus.
Pray you speak no more to me, I will leave all as I found it, and there an end.
Peace you ungracious Clamours, peace rude sounds,
Fools on both sides, Helen must needs be fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus.
I cannot fight upon this Argument:
It is too starved a subject for my Sword,
But Pandarus: O Gods! How do you plague me?
I cannot come to Cressida but by Pander,
And he's as teachy to be wooed to woe,
As she is stubborn, chaste, against all suit.
Tell me Apollo for thy Daphne's Love
What Cressida is, what Pander, and what we:
Her bed is India, there she lies, a Pearl,
Between our Ilium, and where she resides
Let it be called the wild and wand'ring flood,
Ourself the Merchant, and this sailing Pander,
Our doubtful hope, our convoy and our Bark.
How now Prince Troilus?
Wherefore not a field?
Because not there; this woman's answer sorts.
For womanish it is to be from thence:
What news Aeneas from the field to day?
That Paris is returned home, and hurt.
By whom Aeneas?
Troilus by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed, 'tis but a scar to scorn,
Paris is gored with Menelaus' horn.
Hark what good sport is out of Town to day.
Better at home, if would I might were may:
But to the sport abroad, are you bound thither?
In all swift haste.
Come go we then together.
Who were those went by?
Queen Hecuba, and Hellen.
And whether go they?
up to the Eastern Tower,
Whose height commands as subject all the veil,
To see the battle: Hector whose patience,
Is as a Virtue fixed, to day was moved:
He chides Andromache and strooke his Armourer,
And like as there were husbandry in War
Before the Sun rose, he was harnessed light,
And to the field goes he; where every flower
Did as a Prophet weep what it foresaw,
In Hector's wrath.
What was his cause of anger?
The noise goes this;
There is among the Greeks,
A Lord of Trojan blood, Nephew to Hector,
They call him Aiax.
Good; and what of him?
They say he is a very man per se and stands alone.
So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no legs.
This man Lady, hath robbed many beasts of their particular additions, he is as valiant as the Lion, churlish as the Bear, slow as the Elephant: a man into whom nature hath so crowded humours, that his valour is crushed into folly, his folly sauced with discretion: there is no man hath a virtue, that he hath not a glimpse of, nor any man an attaint, but he carries some stain of it. He is melancholy without cause, and merry against the hair, he hath the joints of every thing, but every thing so out of joint, that he is a gouty Briareus, many hands and no use; or purblinded Argus, all eyes and no sight.
But how should this man that makes me smile, make Hector angry?
They say he yesterday coped Hector in the battle and stroke him down, the disdained & shame whereof, hath ever since kept Hector fasting and waking.
Who comes here?
Madam your Uncle Pandarus.
Hector's a gallant man.
As may be in the world Lady.
What's that? what's that?
Good morrow Uncle Pandarus.
Good morrow Cousin Cressida: what do you talk of? good morrow Alexander: how do you Cousin? when were you at Ilium?
This morning uncle.
What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector armed and gone ere yea came to Ilium? Helen was not up? was she?
Hector was gone but Helen was not up?
E'en so; Hector was stirring early.
That were we talking of, and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he says here.
True he was so; I know the cause too, he'll lay about him to day I can tell them that, and there's Troilus will not come far behind him, let them take heed of Troilus; I can tell them that too.
What is he angry too?
Who Troilus?
Troilus is the better man of the two.
Oh Iupiter; there's no comparison.
What not between Troilus and Hector? do you know a man if you see him?
I, if I ever saw him before and knew him.
Well I say Troilus is Troilus.
Then you say as I say,
For I am sure he is not Hector.
No not Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.
'Tis just, to each of them he is himself.
Himself? alas poor Troilus I would he were.
So he is.
Condition I had gone barefoot to India.
He is not Hector.
Himself? no? he's not himself, would a were himself: well, the Gods are above, time must friend or end: well Troilus well, I would my heart were in her body; no, Hector is not a better man than Troilus.
Excuse me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
The others not come too't, you shall tell me another tale when th' others come too't: Hector shall not have his will this year.
He shall not need it if he have his own.
Nor his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beauty.
'Twould not become him, his own's better.
You have no judgement Niece; Helen herself swore th' other day, that Troilus for a brown favour (for so 'tis I must confess) not brown neither.
No, but brown.
Faith to say truth, brown and not brown.
To say the truth, true and not true.
She praised his complexion above Paris.
Why Paris hath colour enough.
So, he has.
Then Troilus should have too much, if she prasied him above, his complexion is higher than his, he having colour enough, and the other higher, is too flaming a praise for a good complexion, I had as lief Helen's golden tongue had commended Troilus for a copper nose.
I swear to you,
I think Helen loves him better than Paris.
Then she's a merry Greek indeed.
Nay I am sure she does, she came to him th' other day into the compassed window, and you know he has not past three or four hairs on his chin.
Indeed a Tapster's Arithmetic may soon bring his particulars therein, to a total.
Why he is very young, and yet will he within three pound lift as much as his brother Hector.
Is he is so young a man, and so old a lifter?
But to prove to you that Helen loves him, she came and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin.
Iuno have mercy, how came it cloven?
Why, you know 'tis dimpled,
I think his smiling becomes him better than any man in all Phrigia.
Oh he smiles valiantly.
Dooes he not?
Oh yes, and 'twere a clowed in Autumn.
Why go to then, but to prove to you that Helen loves Troilus.
Troilus will stand to thee
Proof, if you'll prove it so.
Troilus? why he esteems her no more than I esteem an addle egg.
If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle head, you would eat chickens i' th' shell.
I cannot choose but laugh to think how she tickled his chin, indeed she has a maruel's white hand I must needs confess.
Without the rack.
And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin.
Alas poor chin? many a wart is richer.
But there was such laughing, Queen Hecuba laughed that her eyes ran over.
With Millstones.
And Cassandra laughed.
But there was more temperate fire under the pot of her eyes: did her eyes run over too?
And Hector laughed.
At what was all this laughing?
Marry at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus chin.
And t' had been a green hair, I should have laughed too.
They laughed not so much at the hair, as at his pretty answer.
What was his answer?
Quoth she, here's but two and fifty hairs on your chin; and one of them is white.
This is her question.
That's true, make no question of that, two and fifty hairs quoth he, and one white, that white hair is my Father, and all the rest are his Sons. Iupiter quoth she, which of these hairs is Paris my husband? The forked one quoth he, plucked out and give it him: but there was such laughing, and Helen so blushed, and Paris so chafed, and all the rest so laughed, that it past.
So let it now,
For is has been a great while going by.
Well Cousin,
I told you a thing yesterday, think on't.
So I does.
I'll be sworn 'tis true, he will weep you an'twere a man borne in April.
And I'll spring up in his tears, an'twere a nettle against May.
Hark they are coming from the field, shall we stand up here and see them, as they pass toward Ilium, good Niece do, sweet Niece Cressida.
At your pleasure.
here, here, here's an excellent place, here we may see most bravely, I'll tell you them all by their names, as they pass by, but mark Troilus above the rest.
Speak not so lowed.
That's Aeneas, is not that a brave man, he's one of the flowers of Troy I can you, but merke Troilus, you shall see anon.
Who's that?
That's Antenor, he has a shroud wit I can tell you, and he's a man good enough, he's one o' th' soundest judgement in Troy whosoever, and a proper man of person: when comes Troilus? I'll show you Troilus anon, if he see me, you shall see him him nod at me.
Will he give you the nod?
You shall see.
If he do, the rich shall have, more.
That's Hector, that, that, look you, that there's a fellow. Go thy way Hector, there's a brave man Niece, O brave Hector! Look how he looks? there's a countenance; is't not a brave man?
O brave man!
Is a not? It does a man's heart good, look you what hacks are on his Helmet, look you yonder, do you see? Look you there? There's no jesting, laying on, take't off, who ill as they say, there be hacks.
Be those with Swords?
Swords, any thing he cares not, and the devil come to him, it's all one, by God's lid it does one's heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris: look ye yonder Niece, is't not a gallant man to, is't not? Why this is brave now: who said he came hurt home to day? he's not hurt, why this will do Helen's heart good now, ha'? Would I could see Troilus now, you shall Troilus anon.
Whos's that?
That's Hellenus, I marvel where Troilus is, that's Helenus, I think he went not forth to day: that's Hellenus.
Can Hellenus fight Uncle?
Hellenus no: yes he'll fight indifferent, well, I marvel where Troilus is; hark, do you not hear the people cry Troilus? Hellenus is a Priest.
What sneaking fellow comes yonder?
Where? Yonder? That's Daphobus. 'Tis Troilus! there's a man Niece, him; Brave Troilus, the Prince of Chivalry.
Peace, for shame peace.
Mark him, not him: O brave Troilus: look well upon him Niece, look you how his Sword is bloodied, and his Helm more hacked than Hector's, and how he looks, and how he goes. O admirable youth! he ne'er saw three and twenty. Go thy way Troilus, go thy way, had I a sister were a Grace, or a daughter a Goddess, he should take his choice. O admirable man! Paris? Paris is dirt to him, and I warrant, Helen to change, would give money to boot.
here come more.
Asses, fools, dolts, chaff and bran, chaff and bran; porridge after meat. I could live and dye i' th' eyes of Troilus. ne'er look, ne'er look; the Eagles are gone, Crows and Daws, Crows and Daws: I had rather be such a man as Troilus, than Agamemnon, and all Greece.
There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better man than Troilus.
Achilles? a Dray-man, a Porter, a very Camel.
Well, well.
Well, well? Why have you any discretion? have you any eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not birth, beauty, goodshape, discourse, manhood, learning, gentleness, virtue, youth, liberality, and so forth: the Spice, and salt that seasons a man?
I, a minced man, and then to be baked with no Date in the pie, for then the man's dates out.
You are such another woman, one knows not at what ward you lie.
Upon my back, to defend my belly; upon my wit, to defend my wiles; upon my secrecy, to defend mine honesty; my Mask, to defend my beauty, and you to defend all these: and at all these wards I lie at, at a thousand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay I'll watch you for that, and that's one of the chiefest of them too: If I cannot ward what I would not have hit, I can watch you for telling how I took the blow, unless it swell passed hiding, and then it's past watching.
You are such another.
Sir, my Lord would instantly speak with you.
Where?
At your own house.
Good Boy tell him I come, I doubt he be hurt.
Far ye well good Niece.
Adieu Uncle.
I'll be with you Niece by and by.
To bring Uncle.
I, a token from Troilus.
By the same token, you are a Bawd.
Words, vows, gifts, tears, & love's full sacrifice,
He offers in another's enterprise:
But more in Troilus thousand fold I see,
Then in the glass of Pandar's praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women are Angels wooing,
Things won are done, joys soul lies in the doing:
That she beloved, knows nought, that knows not this;
Men prise the thing vngain'd, more than it is.
That she was never yet, that ever knew
Love got so sweet, as when desire did sue:
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach;
Achievement, is command; vngain'd, beseech.
That though my hearts Contents firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
Princes:
What grief hath set the jaundice on your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes
In all designs, begun on earth below
Fails in the promised largeness: checks and disasters
Grow in the veins of actions highest reared.
As knots by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infect the sound Pine, and diverts his Grain
Tortive and erant from his course of growth.
Nor Princess, is it matter new to us,
That we come short of our suppose so far,
That after seven years' siege, yet Troy walls stand,
Sith every action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have Record, Trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim:
And that unbodied figure of the thought
That gaueed surmised shape. Why then (you Princes)
Do you with cheeks abashed, behold our works,
And think them shame, which are (indeed) nought else
But the protractive trials of great Ioue,
To find persistive constancy in men?
The fineness of which metal is not found
In Fortune's love: for then, the Bold and Coward,
The Wise and Fool, the Artist and un-read,
The hard and soft, seem all affined, and kin.
But in the Wind and Tempest of her frown,
Distinction with a loud and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnowes the light away;
And what hath mass, or matter by itself,
Lies rich in Virtue, and unmingled.
With due Observance of thy godly seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words.
In the reproof of Chance,
Lies the true proof of men: The Sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble Boats dare sail
Upon her patiented breast, making their way
With those of Nobler bulk?
But let the Ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The strong ribbed Bark through liquid Mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist Elements
Like Perseus' Horse. Where's then the saucy Boat,
Whose weak vntimber'd sides but even now
Co-riualed Greatness? Either to harbour fled,
Or made a Toast for Neptune. Even so,
Doth valours show, and valours worth divide
In storms of Fortune.
For, in her ray and brightness,
The Herd hath more annoyance by the Breeze
Then by the Tiger: But, when the splitting wind
Makes flexible the knees of knotted Oaks,
And Flies fled under shade, why then
The thing of Courage,
As roused with rage, with rage doth sympathise,
And with an accent tuned in selfsame key,
Retires to chiding Fortune.
Agamemnon.
Thou great Commander, Nerve, and Bone of Greece,
Heart of our Numbers, soul, and only spirit,
In whom the tempers, and the minds of all
Should be shut up: Hear what Ulysses speaks,
Besides the applause and approbation
The which most mighty for thy place and sway,
And thou most reverend for thy stretcht-out life,
I give to both your speeches: which were such,
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold up high in Brass: and such again
As venerable Nestor (hatched in Silver)
Should with a bond of air, strong as the Axletree
In which the Heavens ride, knit all Greeks ears
To his experienced tongue: yet let it please both
(Thou Great, and Wise) to hear Ulysses speak.
Speak Prince of Ithaca, and be't of less expect:
That matter needless of importlesse burden
Divide thy lips; then we are confident
When rank Thersites opes his Mastic jaws,
We shall hear Music, Wit, and Oracle.
Troy yet upon his basis had been down,
And the great Hector's sword had lacked a Master
But for these instances.
The specialty of Rule hath been neglected;
And look how many Grecian Tents do stand
Hollow upon this Plain, so many hollow Factions.
When that the General is not like the Hive,
To whom the Foragers shall all repair,
What Honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
Th' unworthiest shows as fairly in the Mask.
The Heavens themselves, the Planets, and this Centre,
Observe degree, priority, and place,
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form,
Office, and custom, in all line of Order:
And therefore is the glorious Planet Sol
In noble eminence, enthroned and sphered
Amidst the other, whose medicinable eye
Corrects the ill Aspects of Planets evil,
And posts like the Commandment of a King,
Sans check, to good and bad. But when the Planets
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What Plagues, and what portents, what mutiny?
What raging of the Sea? shaking of Earth?
Commotion in the Winds? Frights, changes, horrors,
Divert, and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity, and married calm of States
Quite from their fixure? O, when Degree is shaked,
(Which is the Ladder to all high designs)
The enterprise is sick. How could Communities,
Degrees in Schools, and Brotherhoods in Cities,
Peaceful Commerce from dividable shores,
The primogenitive, and due of Birth,
Prerogative of Age, Crowns, Sceptres, Laurels
(But by Degree) stand in Authentic place?
Take but Degree away, un-tune that string,
And hark what Discord follows: each thing meets
In mere oppugnancie. The bounded Waters,
Should lift their bosoms higher than the Shores,
And make a sop of all this solid Globe:
Strength should be Lord of imbecility,
And the rude Son should strike his Father dead:
Force should be right, or rather, right and wrong,
(Between whose endless jar, justice resides)
Should lose her names, and so should justice too.
Then every thing includes itself in Power,
Power into Will, Will into Appetite,
And Appetite (an universal Wolf,
So doubly seconded with Will, and Power)
Must make perforce an universal prey,
And last, eat up himself.
Great Agamemnon:
This Chaos, when Degree is suffocate,
Follows the choking:
And this neglection of Degree, is it
That by a pace goes backward in a purpose
It hath to climb. The general's disdained
By him one step below; he, by the next,
That next, by him beneath: so every step
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his Superior, grows to an envious Fever
Of pale, and bloodless Emulation.
And 'tis this Fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness lives, not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysses here discovered
The Fever, whereof all our power is sick.
The Nature of the sickness found (Ulysses)
What is the remedy?
The great Achilles, whom Opinion crowns,
The sinew, and the forehand of our Host,
Having his ear full of his eyrie Fame,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his Tent
Lies mocking our designs. With him, Patroclus,
Upon a lazy Bed, the livelong day
Breaks scurrile jests,
And with ridiculous and awkward action,
(Which Slanderer, he imitation calls)
He Pageants us. Sometime great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation he puts on;
And like a strutting Player, whose conceit
Lies in his Ham-string, and doth think it rich
To hear the wooden Dialogue and sound
'Twixt his stretched footing, and the Scaffolage,
Such to be pitied, and ore-rested seeming
He acts thy Greatness in: and when he speaks,
'Tis like a Chime a mending. With terms vnsquared,
Which from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropped,
Would seems Hyperboles. At this fusty stuff,
The large Achilles (on his prest-bed lolling)
From his deep Chest, laughs out a loud applause,
Cries excellent, 'tis Agamemnon just.
Now play me Nestor; hum, and struck thy Beard
As he, being dressed to some Oration:
That's done, as near as the extremest ends
Of parallels; as like, as Vulcan and his wife,
Yet god Achilles still cries excellent,
'Tis Nestor right. Now play him (me) Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night-Alarme,
And then (forsooth) the faint defects of Age
Must be the Scene of mirth, to cough, and spit,
And with a palsy fumbling on his Gorget,
Shake in and out the Rivet: and at this sport
Sir Valour dies; cries, O enough Patroclus,
Or, give me ribs of Steel, I shall split all
In pleasure of my Spleen. And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Severals and generals of grace exact,
Achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is, or is not, serves
As stuff for these two, to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twain,
Who (as Ulysses says) Opinion crowns
With an Imperial voice, many are infect:
Aiax is grown self-willed, and bears his head
In such a reign, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles, and keeps his Tent like him;
Makes factious Feasts, rails on our state of War
Bold as an Oracle, and sets Thersites
A slave, whose Gall coins slanders like a Mint,
To match us in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken and discredit our exposure,
How rank soever rounded in with danger.
They tax our policy, and call it Cowardice,
Count Wisdom as no member of the War,
Forestall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand: The still and mental parts,
That do contrive how many hands shall strike
When fitness call them on, and know by measure
Of their observant toil, the Enemy's weight,
Why this hath not a singer's dignity:
They call this Bed-worke, Mapp'ry, Closset-Warre:
So that the Ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swing and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the Engine,
Or those that with the fineness of their souls,
By Reason guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles' horse
Makes many Thetis sons.
What Trumpet? Look Menelaus.
From Troy.
What would you 'fore our Tent?
Is this great Agamemnon's Tent, I pray you?
Even this.
May one that is a Herald, and a Prince,
Do a fair message to his Kingly ears?
With surety stronger than Achilles' arm,
'Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
Call Agamemnon Head and General.
Fair leave, and large security. How may
A stranger to those most Imperial looks,
Know them from eyes of other Mortals?
How?
I: I ask, that I might waken reverence,
And on the cheek be ready with a blush
Modest as morning, when she coldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus:
Which is that God in office guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
This Trojan scorns us, or the men of Troy
Are ceremonious Courtiers.
Courtiers as free, as debonnaire; unarmed,
As bending Angels: that's their Fame, in peace:
But when they would seem Soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords, & Jove's accord,
Nothing so full of heart. But peace Aeneas,
Peace Trojan, lay thy finger on thy lips,
The worthiness of praise distaines his worth:
If that he praised himself, bring the praise forth.
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath Fame blows, that praise sole pure transcends.
Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself Aeneas?
I Greeke, that is my name.
What's your affair I pray you?
Sir pardon, 'tis for Agamemnon's ears.
He hears nought privately
That comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him,
I bring a Trumpet to awake his ear,
To set his sense on the attentive bent,
And then to speak.
Speak frankly as the wind.
It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour;
That thou shalt know Trojan he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.
Trumpet blow loud,
Send thy Brass voice through all these lazy Tents,
And every Greek of mettle, let him know,
What Troy means fairly, shall be spoke aloud.
We have great Agamemnon here in Troy,
A Prince called Hector, Priam is his Father:
Who in this dull and long-continewed Truce
Is rusty grown. He bade me take a Trumpet,
And to this purpose speak: Kings, Princes, Lords,
If there be one amongst the fayr'st of Greece,
That holds his Honour higher than his ease,
That seeks his praise, more than he fears his peril,
That knows his Valour, and knows not his fear,
That loves his Mistress more than in confession,
(With truant vows to her own lips he loves)
And dare a vow her Beauty, and her Worth,
In other arms than hers: to him this Challenge.
Hector, in view of Trojans, and of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it.
He hath a Lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
Then ever Greek did compass in his arms,
And will to morrow with his Trumpet call,
Midway between your Tents, and walls of Troy,
To rouse a Grecian that is true in love.
If any come, Hector shall honour him:
If none, he'll say in Troy when he retires,
The Grecian Dames are sunburnt, and not worth
The splinter of a Lance: Even so much.
This shall be told our Lover's Lord Aeneas,
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
We left them all at home: But we are Soldiers,
And may that Soldier a mere recreant prove,
That means not, hath not, or is not in love:
If then one is, or hath, or means to be,
That one meets Hector; if none else, I'll be he.
Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
When Hector's Grandsire sucked: he is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian mould,
One Noble man, that hath one sparke of fire
To answer for his Love; tell him from me,
I'll hide my Silver beard in a Gold Beaver,
And in my Vantbrace put this withered brawn,
And meeting him, will tell him, that my Lady
Was fairer than his Grandam, and as chaste
As may be in the world: his youth in flood,
I'll pawn this truth with my three drops of blood.
Now heavens forbidden such scarcity of youth.
Amen.
Fair Lord Aeneas,
Let me touch your hand:
To our Pavilion shall I lead you first:
Achilles shall have word of this intent,
So shall each Lord of Greece from Tent to Tent:
Yourself shall Feast with us before you go,
And find the welcome of a Noble Foe.
Nestor.
What says Ulysses?
I have a young conception in my brain,
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
What is't?
This 'tis:
Blunt wedges rive hard knots: the seeded Pride
That hath to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles, must or now be cropped,
Or shedding breed a Nursery of like evil
To over-bulke us all.
Well, and how?
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
How ever it is spread in general name,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
The purpose is perspicuous even as substance,
Whose grossness little characters sum up,
And in the publication make no strain,
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
As banks of Lybia, though (Apollo knows)
'Tis dry enough, will with great speed of judgement,
I, with celerity, find Hector's purpose
Pointing on him.
And wake him to the answer, think you?
Yes, 'tis most meet; who may you else oppose
That can from Hector bring his Honour off,
If not Achilles; thought be a sportful Combat,
Yet in this trial, much opinion dwells.
For here the Trojans taste our dearest repute
With their finest palate: and trust to me Ulysses,
Our imputation shall be oddly poised
In this wild action. For the success
(Although particular) shall give a scantling
Of good or bad, unto the General:
And in such Indices, although small pricks
To their subsequent Volumes, there is seen
The baby figure of the Gyant-masse
Of things to come at large. It is supposed,
He that meets Hector, issues from our choice;
And choice being mutual act of all our souls,
Makes Merit her election, and doth boil
As 'twere, from forth us all: a man distilled
Out of our Virtues; who miscarrying,
What heart from hence receives the conquering part
To steel a strong opinion to themselves,
Which entertained, Limbs are in his instruments,
In no less working, then are Swords and Bows
Directive by the Limbs.
Give pardon to my speech:
Therefore 'tis meet, Achilles' meet not Hector:
Let us (like Merchants) show our foulest Wares,
And think perchance they'll sell: If not,
The lustre of the better yet to show,
Shall show the better. Do not consent,
That ever Hector and Achilles meet:
For both our Honour, and our Shame in this,
Are dogged with two strange Followers.
I see them not with my old eyes: what are they?
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
(Were he not proud) we all should wear with him:
But he already is too insolent,
And we were better parch in Afric Sun,
Then in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes
Should he scape Hector fair. If he were foiled,
Why then we did our main opinion crush
In taint of our best man. No, make a Lott'ry,
And by device let blockish Aiax draw
The sort to sight with Hector: Among ourselves,
Give him allowance as the worthier man,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
His Crest, that prouder than blue Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Aiax come safe off,
we'll dress him up in voices: if he fail,
Yet go we under our opinion still,
That we have better men. But hit or miss,
Our projects life this shape of sense assumes,
Aiax employed, plucks down Achilles' Plumes.
Now Ulysses, I begin to relish thy advice,
And I will give a taste of it forthwith
To Agamemnon, go we to him strait:
Two Curs shall tame each other, Pride alone
Must tar the Mastiffs on, as 'twere their bone.
Thersites?
Agamemnon, how if he had Biles (full) all over generally.
Thersites?
And those Byles did run, say so; did not the General run, were not that a botchy core?
Dog.
Then there would come some matter from him:
I see none now.
Thou Bitch-Wolfes-Sonne, canst thou not hear?
Feel then.
The plague of Greece upon thee thou Mongrel beefe-witted Lord.
Speak then you whinid'st leaven speak, I will beat thee into handsomeness.
I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness: but I think thy Horse will sooner con an Oration, then thou learn a prayer without book: Thou canst strike, canst thou? A red Murrain o' th' thy jades tricks.
Toads stool, learn me the Proclamation.
Dost thou think I have no sense thou strik'st me thus?
The Proclamation.
Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.
Do not Porpentine, do not; my finger's itch.
I would thou didst itch from head to foot, and I had the scratching of thee, I would make thee the lothsom'st scab in Greece.
I say the Proclamation.
Thou grumblest & railest every hour on Achilles, and thou art as full of envy at his greatness, as Cerberus is at Proserpina's beauty. I, that thou barkst at him.
Mistress Thersites.
Thou shouldst strike him.
Coblofe.
He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a Sailor breaks a biscuit.
You whoreson Cur.
Do, do.
Thou stool for a Witch.
I, do, do, thou sodden-witted Lord: thou hast no more brain than I have in mine elbows: An Asinico may tutor thee. Thou scurvy valiant Ass, thou art here but to thresh Troyans, and thou art bought and sold among those of any wit, like a Barbarian slave. If thou use to beat me, I will begin at thy heel and tell what thou art by inches, thou thing of no bowels thou.
You dog.
You scurvy Lord.
You Cur.
Mars his Idiot: do rudeness, do Camel, do, do.
Why how now Aiax? wherefore do you this?
How now Thersites? what's the matter man?
You see him there, do you?
I, what's the matter.
Nay look upon him.
So I do: what's the matter?
Nay but regard him well.
Well, why I do so.
But yet you look not well upon him: for who some ever you take him to be, he is Aiax.
I know that fool.
I, but that fool knows not himself.
Therefore I bear thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters: his evasions have ears thus long. I have bobbed his Brain more than he has beat my bones: I will buy nine Sparrows for a penny, and his Pia mater is not worth the ninth part of a Sparrow. This Lord (Achilles) Aiax who wears his wit in his belly, and his guts in his head, I'll tell you what I say of him.
What?
I say this Aiax—
Nay good Aiax.
Has not so much wit.
Nay, I must hold you.
As will stop the eye of Helen's Needle, for whom he comes to fight.
Peace fool.
I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will not: He there, that he, look you there.
O thou damned Cur, I shall—
Will you set your wit to a Fools.
No I warrant you, for a fools will shame it.
Good words Thersites.
What's the quarrel?
I bade thee vile Owl, go learn me the tenure of the Proclamation, and he rails upon me.
I serve thee not.
Well, go too, go too.
I serve here voluntary.
Your last service was sufferance, 'twas not voluntary, no man is beaten voluntary: Aiax was here the voluntary, and you as under an Impress.
E'neso, a great deal of your wit too lies in your sinews, or else there be Liars Hector shall have a great catch, if he knock out either of your brains, he were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel.
What with me to Thersites?
There's Ulysses, and old Nestor, whose Wit was mouldy ere their Grandsires had nails on their toes, yoke you like draft_oxes, and make you plough up the war.
What? what?
Yes good sooth, to Achilles, to Aiax, to—
I shall cut out your tongue.
'Tis no matter, I shall speak as much as thou afterwards.
No more words Thersites.
I will hold my peace when Achilles' Brooch bids me, shall I?
There's for you Patroclus.
I will see you hanged like Clotpoles ere I come any more to your Tents; I will keep where there is wit stirring, and leave the faction of fools.
A good riddance.
Marry this Sin is proclaimed through all our host,
That Hector by the sift hour of the Sun,
Will with a Trumpet, 'twixt our Tents and Troy
To morrow morning call some Knight to Arms,
That hath a stomach, and such a one that dare
Maintain I know not what: 'tis trash. Farewell.
Farewell? who shall answer him?
I know not, 'tis put to Lottry: otherwise
He knew his man.
O meaning you, I will go learn more of it.
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks,
Deliver Helen, and all damage else
(As honour, loss of time, travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of this comorant War)
Shall be struck off. Hector, what say you too't.
Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I,
As far as touches my particular: yet dread Priam,
There is no Lady of more softer bowels,
More spongy, to suck in the sense of Fear,
More ready to cry out, who knows what follows
Then Hector is: the wound of peace is surety,
Surety secure: but modest Doubt is called
The Beacon of the wise: the tent that searches
To ' th' bottom of the worst. Let Helen go,
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Every tithe soul 'mongst many thousand dimes,
Hath been as dear as Helen: I mean of ours:
If we have lost so many tenths of ours
To guard a thing not ours, nor worth to us
(Had it our name) the value of one ten;
What merit's in that reason which denies
The yielding of her up.
Fie, fie, my Brother;
Weigh you the worth and honour of a King
(So great as our dread Father) in a Scale
Of common Ounces? Will you with Counters sum
The past proportion of his infinite,
And buckle in a waste most fathomless,
With spans and inches so diminutive,
As fears and reasons? Fie for godly shame?
No marvel though you bite so sharp at reasons,
You are so empty of them, should not our Father
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
Because your speech hath none that tells him so.
You are for dreams & slumbers brother Priest
You fur your gloves with reason: here are your reasons
You know an enemy intends you harm,
You know, a sword employed is perilous,
And reason flies the object of all harm.
Who marvels then when Helenus beholds
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heels:
Or like a Star disorbed. Nay, if we talk of Reason,
And fly like chidden Mercury from Ioue,
Let's shut our gates and sleep: Manhood and Honour
Should have hard hearts, would they but fat their thoughts
With this crammed reason: reason and respect,
Makes Livers pale, and lustyhood deject.
Brother, she is not worth
What she doth cost the holding.
What's aught, but as 'tis valued?
But value dwells not in particular will,
It holds his estimate and dignity
As well, wherein 'tis precious of itself,
As in the prizer: 'Tis made Idolatry,
To make the service greater than the God,
And the will dotes that is inclineable
To what infectiously itself affects,
Without some image of th' affected merit.
I take to day a Wife, and my election
Is led on in the conduct of my Will;
My Will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded Pilots 'twixt the dangerous shores
Of Will, and judgement. How may I avoid
(Although my will distaste what it elected)
The Wife I chose, there can be no evasion
To blench from this, and to stand firm by honour.
We turn not back the Silks upon the Merchant
When we have spoiled them; nor the remainder Viands
We do not throw in unrespective same,
Because we now are full. It was thought meet
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks;
Your breath of full consent bellied his Sails,
The Seas and Winds (old Wranglers) took a Truce,
And did him service; he touched the Ports desired,
And for an old Aunt whom the Greeks held Captive,
He brought a Grecian Queen, whose youth & freshness
Wrinkles Apollo's, and makes stolen the morning.
Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our Aunt:
Is she worth keeping? Why she is a Pearl,
Whose price hath launched above a thousand Ships,
And turned Crowned Kings to Merchants.
If you'll avouch, 'twas wisdom Paris went,
(As you must needs, for you all cried, Go, go:)
If you'll confess, he brought home Noble prize,
(As you must needs) for you all clapped your hands,
And cried inestimable; why do you now
The issue of your proper Wisdom's rate,
And do a deed that Fortune never did?
Beggar the estimation which you prized,
Richer than Sea and Land? O Theft most base!
That we have stolen what we do fear to keep.
But thieves unworthy of a thing so stolen,
That in their Country did them that disgrace,
We fear to warrant in our Native place.
Cry Trojans, cry.
What noise? what shriek is this?
'Tis our mad sister, I do know her voice.
Cry Troyans.
It is Cassandra.
Cry Trojans cry; lend me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with Prophetic tears.
Peace sister, peace.
Virgins, and Boys; mid-age & wrinkled old,
Soft infancy, that nothing can but cry,
Add to my clamour: let us pay betimes
A moiety of that mass of moan to come.
Cry Trojans cry, practise your eyes with tears,
Troy must not be, nor goodly Illium stand,
Our firebrand Brother Paris burns us all.
Cry Trojans cry, a Helen and a woe;
Cry, cry, Troy burns, or else let Helen go.
Now youthful Troilus, do not these high strains
Of divination in our Sister, work
Some touches of remorse? Or is your blood
So madly hot, that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
Can qualify the same?
Why Brother Hector,
We may not think the justness of each act
Such, and no other than event doth form it,
Not once deject the courage of our minds;
Because Cassandra's mad, her brainsick raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel,
Which hath our several Honours all engaged
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touched, than all Priam's sons,
And love forbidden there should be done amongst us
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen,
To fight for, and maintain.
Else might the world convince of levity,
As well my undertake as your counsels:
But I attest the gods, your full consent
Gave wings to my propension, and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project.
For what (alas) can these my single arms?
What propugnation is in one man's valour
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet I protest,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties,
And had as ample power, as I have will,
Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuit.
Paris, you speak
Like one be-sotted on your sweet delights;
You have the Honey still, but these the Gall,
So to be valiant, is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not merely to myself,
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it:
But I would have the soil of her fair Rape
Wiped off in honourable keeping her.
What Treason were it to the ransacked Queen,
Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion? Can it be,
That so degenerate a strain as this,
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party,
Without a heart to dare, or sword to draw,
When Helen is defended: nor none so Noble,
Whose life were ill bestowed, or death vnfam'd,
Where Helen is the subject. Then (I say)
Well may we fight for her, whom we know well,
The world's large spaces cannot parallel.
Paris and Troilus, you have both said well:
And on the cause and question now in hand,
Have glozed, but superficially; not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to hear Moral Philosophy.
The Reasons you allege, do more conduce
To the hot passion of distempered blood,
Then to make up a free determination
'Twixt right and wrong: For pleasure, and revenge,
Have ears more deaf than Adders, to the voice
Of any true decision. Nature craves
All dues be rendered to their Owners: now
What nearer debt in all humanity,
Then Wife is to the Husband? If this law
Of Nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great minds of partial indulgence,
To their benumbed wills resist the same,
There is a Law in each well-ordred Nation,
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refracturie.
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's King
(As it is known she is) these Moral Laws
Of Nature, and of Nation, speak aloud
To have her back returned. Thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hector's opinion
Is this in way of truth: yet ne'er the less,
My sprightly brethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still;
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependence,
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Why? there you touched the life of our design:
Were it not glory that we more affected,
Then the performance of our heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood,
Spent more in her defence. But worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honour and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us.
For I presume brave Hector would not lose
So rich advantage of a promised glory,
As smiles upon the forehead of this action,
For the wide world's revenue.
I am yours,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus,
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks,
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits,
I was aduertized, their Great general slept,
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
This I presume will wake him.
How now Thersites? what lost in the Labyrinth of thy fury? shall the Elephant Aiax carry it thus? he beats me, and I rail at him: O worthy satisfaction, would it were otherwise: that I could beat him, whilst he railed at me: 'Sfoot, I'll learn to conjure and raise Devils, but I'll see some issue of my spiteful execrations. Then there's Achilles, a rare Engineer. If Troy be not taken till these two undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of themselves. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus, forget that thou art Ioue the King of gods: and Mercury, lose all the Serpentine craft of thy Caduceus, if thou take not that little little less than little wit from them that they have, which short-armed ignorance itself knows, is so abundant scarce, it will not in circumvention deliver a Fly from a Spider, without drawing the massy Irons and cutting the web: after this, the vengeance on the whole Camp, or rather the bone-ache, for that me thinks is the curse dependant on those that war for a placket. I have said my prayers and devil, envy, say Amen: What ho? my Lord Achilles?
Who's there? Thersites. Good Thersites come in and rail.
If I could have remembered a guilt counterfeit, thou wouldst not have slipped out of my contemplation, but it is no matter, thyself upon thyself. The common curse of mankind, folly and ignorance be thine in great revenue; heaven bless thee from a Tutor, and Discipline come not near thee. Let thy blood be thy direction till thy death, then if she that lays thee out says thou art a fair coarse, I'll be sworn and sworn upon't she never shrouded any but Lazars, Amen. where's Achilles?
What art thou devout? wast thou in a prayer?
I, the heavens hear me.
Who's there?
Thersites, my Lord.
Where, where, art thou come? why my cheese, my digestion, why hast thou not served thyself into my Table, so many meals? Come, what's Agamemnon?
Thy Commander Achilles, then tell me Patroclus, what's Achilles?
Thy Lord Thersites: then tell me I pray thee, what's thyself?
Thy knower Patroclus: then tell me Patroclus, what art thou?
Thou mayst tell that knowst.
O tell, tell.
I'll declin the whole question: Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is my Lord, I am Patroclus knower, and Patroclus is a fool.
You rascal.
Peace fool, I have not done.
He is a privileged man, proceed Thersites.
Agamemnon is a fool, Achilles is a fool, Thersites is a fool, and as aforesaid, Patroclus is a fool.
Derive this? come?
Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles, Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemon, Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool: and Patroclus is a fool positive.
Why am I a fool?
Make that demand to the Creator, it suffises me thou art. Look you, who comes here?
Patroclus, I'll speak with no body: come in with me Thersites.
Here is such patchery, such juggling, and such knavery: all the argument is a Cuckold and a Whore, a good quarrel to draw emulations, factions, and bleed to death upon: Now the dry Suppeago on the Subject, and War and Lechery confound all.
Where is Achilles?
Within his Tent, but ill disposed my Lord.
Let it be known to him that we are here:
He sent out Messengers, and we lay by
Our appertainments, visiting of him:
Let him be told of, so perchance he think
We dare not move the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall so say to him.
We saw him at the opening of his Tent,
He is not sick.
Yes, Lion sick, sick of proud heart; you may call it Melancholy if will favour the man, but by my head, it is pride; but why, why, let him show us the cause? A word my Lord.
What moves Aiax thus to bay at him?
Achilles hath inveigled his Fool from him.
Who, Thersites?
He.
Then will Aiax lack matter, if he have lost his Argument.
No, you see he is his argument that has his argument Achilles.
All the better, their fraction is more our wish then their faction; but it was a strong counsel that a Fool could disunite.
The amity that wisdom knits, not folly may easily untie.
Here comes Patroclus.
No Achilles with him?
The Elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy:
His leg are legs for necessity, not for slight.
Achilles bids me say he is much sorry:
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure,
Did move your greatness, and this noble State,
To call upon him; he hopes it is no other,
But for your health, and your digestion sake;
An after Dinners breath.
Hear you Patroclus:
We are too well acquainted with these answers:
But his evasion winged thus swift with scorn,
Cannot outfly our apprehensions.
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason,
Why we ascribe it to him, yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously of his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes, begin to lose their gloss;
Yea, and like fair Fruit in an unholdsome dish,
Are like to rot untasted: go and tell him,
We came to speak with him; and you shall not sin,
If you do say, we think him over proud,
And under honest; in selfe-assumption greater
Than in the note of judgement: & worthier than himself
Here tends the savage strangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strength of their command:
And under write in an observing kind
His humorous predominance, yea watch
His pettish lines, his ebbs, his flows, as if
The passage and whole carriage of this action
Road on his tide. Go tell him this, and add,
That if he overhold his price so much,
we'll none of him; but let him, like an Engine
Not portable, lie under this report.
Bring action hither, this cannot go to war:
A stirring Dwarf, we do allowance give,
Before a sleeping Giant: tell him so.
I shall, and bring his answer presently.
In second voice we'll not be satisfied,
We come to speak with him, Ulysses enter you.
What is he more than another?
No more than what he thinks he is.
Is he so much, do you not think, he thinks himself a better man than I am?
No question.
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is?
No, Noble Aiax, you are as strong, as valiant, as wise, no less noble, much more gentle, and altogether more tractable
Why should a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I know not what it is.
Your mind is the clearer Aiax, and your virtues the fairer; he that is proud, eats up himself; Pride is his own Glass, his own trumpet, his own Chronicle, and what ever praises itself but in the deed, devours the deed in the praise.
I do hate a proud man, as I hate the engendering of Toads.
Yet he loves himself: Is't not strange?
Achilles will not to the field to morrow.
What's his excuse?
He doth rely on none,
But carries on the stream of his dispose,
Without observance or respect of any,
In will peculiar, and in self admission.
Why, will he not upon our fair request,
Vntent his person, and share the air with us?
Things small as nothing, for requests sake only
He makes important; possessed he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself, but with a pride
That quarrels at selfe-breath. Imagined wrath
Holds in his blood such swollen and hot discourse,
That twixt his mental and his active parts,
Kingdomed Achilles in commotion rages,
And batters 'gainst itself; what should I say?
He is so plaguy proud, that the death tokens of it,
Cry no recovery.
Let Aiax go to him.
Dear Lord, go you and greet him in his Tent;
'Tis said he holds you well, and will be led
At your request a little from himself.
O Agamemnon, let it not be so.
we'll consecrate the steps that Aiax makes,
When they go from Achilles; shall the proud Lord,
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam,
And never suffers matter of the world,
Enter his thoughts: save such as do revolve
And ruminate himself. Shall he be worshipped,
Of that we hold an Idol, more than he?
No, this thrice worthy and right valiant Lord,
Must not so stall his Palm, nobly acquired,
Nor by my will assubingate his merit,
As amply titled as Achilles is: by going to Achilles,
That were to enlard his fat already, pride,
And add more Coals to Cancer, when he burns
With entertaining great Hyperion.
This L. go to him? Iupiter forbidden,
And say in thunder, Achilles' go to him.
O this is well, he rubs the vein of him.
And how his silence drinks up this applause.
If I go to him, with my armed fist, I'll pash him o'er the face.
O no, you shall not go.
And a be proud with me, i'll phese his pride: let me go to him.
Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
A paltry insolent fellow.
How he describes himself.
Can he not be sociable?
The Raven chides blackness.
I'll let his humours blood.
He will be the Physician that should be the patiented.
And all men were a my mind.
Wit would be out of fashion.
A should not bear it so, a should eat Swords first: shall pride carry it?
And 'twould, you'd carry half.
A would have ten shares.
I will kneaded him, I'll make him supple, he's not yet through warm.
Force him with praises, pour in, pour in: his ambition is dry.
My L. you feed too much on this dislike.
Our noble General, do not do so.
You must prepare to fight without Achilles.
Why, 'tis this naming of him doth him harm.
Here is a man, but 'tis before his face,
I will be silent.
Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
Know the whole world, he is as valiant.
A whoreson dog, that shall palter thus with us, would he were a Trojan.
What a vice were it in Aiax now—
If he were proud.
Or covetous of praise.
I, or surly borne.
Or strange, or self affected.
Thank the heavens L. thou art of sweet composure;
Praise him that got thee, she that gave thee suck:
Fame by thy Tutor, and thy parts of nature
Thrice famed beyond, beyond all erudition;
But he that disciplined thy arms to fight,
Let Mars divide Eternity in twain,
And give him half, and for thy vigour,
Bull-bearing Milo: his addition yield
To sinnowie Aiax: I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which like a bourn, a pale, a shore confines
Thy spacious and dilated parts; here's Nestor
Instructed by the Antiquary times:
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise.
But pardon Father Nestor, were your days
As green as Aiax, and your brain so tempered,
You should not have the eminence of him,
But be as Aiax.
Shall I call you Father?
I my good Son.
Be ruled by him Lord Aiax.
There is no tarrying here, the Hart Achilles
Keeps thicker: please it our General,
To call together all his state of war,
Fresh Kings are come to Troy; to morrow
We must with all our main of power stand fast:
And here's a Lord, come Knights from East to West,
And cull their flower, Aiax shall cope the best.
Go we to Counsel, let Achilles sleep;
Light Botes may sail swift, though greater bulks draw deep.
Friend, you, pray you a word: Do not you follow the young Lord Paris?
I sir, when he goes before me.
You depend upon him I mean?
Sir, I do depend upon the Lord.
You depend upon a noble Gentleman: I must needs praise him.
The Lord be praised.
You know me, do you not?
Faith sir, superficially.
Friend know me better, I am the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I shall know your honour better.
I do desire it.
You are in the state of Grace?
Grace, not so friend, honour and Lordship are my title: What Music is this?
I do but partly know sir: it is Music in parts.
Know you the Musicians.
Wholly sir.
Who play they to?
To the hearers sir.
At whose pleasure friend?
At mine sir, and theirs that love Music.
Command, I mean friend.
Who shall I command sir?
Friend, we understand not one another: I am too courtly, and thou art too cunning. At whose request do these men play?
That's too't indeed sir: marry sir, at the request of Paris my L. who's there in person; with him the mortal Venus, the heart blood of beauty, loves invisible soul.
Who? my Cousin Cressida.
No sir, Helen, could you not find out that by her attributes?
It should seem fellow, that thou hast not seen the Lady Cressida. I come to speak with Paris from the Prince Troilus: I will make a complemental assault upon him, for my business seethes.
Sodden business, there's a stewed phrase indeed.
Fair be to you my Lord, and to all this fair company: fair desires in all fair measure fairly guide them, especially to you fair Queen, fair thoughts be your fair pillow.
Dear L. you are full of fair words.
You speak your fair pleasure sweet Queen: fair Prince, here is good broken Music.
You have broke it cousin: and by my life you shall make it whole again, you shall piece it out with a piece of your performance. Nell, he is full of harmony.
Truly Lady no.
O sir.
Rude in sooth, in good sooth very rude.
Well said my Lord: well, you say so in fits.
I have business to my Lord, dear Queen: my Lord will you vouchsafe me a word.
Nay, this shall not hedge us out, we'll hear you sing certainly.
Well, sweet Queen you are pleasant with me, but, marry thus my Lord, my dear Lord, and most esteemed friend your brother Troilus.
My Lord Pandarus, honey sweet Lord.
Go too sweet Queen, go to.
Commends himself most affectionately to you.
You shall not bob us out of our melody:
If you do, our melancholy upon your head.
Sweet Queen, sweet Queen, that's a sweet Queen I faith—
And to make a sweet Lady sad, is a sour offence.
Nay, that shall not serve your turn, that shall it not in truth la. Nay, I care not for such words, no, no. And my Lord he desires you, that if the King call for him at Supper, you will make his excuse.
My Lord Pandarus?
What says my sweet Queen, my very, very sweet Queen?
What exploit's in hand, where sups he to night?
Nay but my Lord?
What says my sweete Queen? my cousin will fall out with you.
You must not know where he sups.
With my disposer Cressida.
No, no; no such matter, you are wide, come your disposer is sick.
Well, I'll make excuse.
I good my Lord: why should you say Cressida? no, your poor disposer's sick.
I spy.
You spy, what do you spy: come, give me an
Instrument now sweet Queen.
Why this is kindly done?
My Niece is horrible in love with a thing you have sweet Queen.
She shall have it my Lord, if it be not my Lord Paris.
He? no, she'll none of him, they two are twain.
Falling in after falling out, may make them three.
Come, come, I'll hear no more of this, I'll sing you a song now.
I, I, prithee now: by my troth sweet Lord thou hast a fine forehead.
I you may, you may.
Let thy song be love: this love will undo us al.
Oh Cupid, Cupid, Cupid.
Love? I that it shall i'faith.
I, good now love, love, no thing but love.
In good troth it begins so.
Love, love, nothing but love, still more:
For O love's Bow,
Shoots Buck and Do:
The Shaft confounds not that it wounds,
But tickles still the sore:
These Lover's cry, oh ho they die;
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Doth turn oh ho, to ha' ha' he:
So dying love lives still,
O ho a while, but ha' ha' ha',
O ho groans out for ha' ha' ha'— hay ho.
In love i'faith to the very tip of the nose.
He eats nothing but doves love, and that breeds hot blood, and hot blood begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love.
Is this the generation of love? Hot blood, hot thoughts, and hot deeds, why they are Vipers, is Love a generation of Vipers?
Sweet Lord whose a field to day?
Hector, Deiphoebus, Helenus, Antenor, and all the gallantry of Troy. I would fain have armed to day, but my Nell would not have it so.
How chance my brother Troilus went not?
He hangs the lip at something; you know all Lord Pandarus?
Not I honey sweet Queen: I long to hear how they sped to day:
You'll remember your brother's excuse?
To a hair.
Farewell sweet Queen.
Commend me to your Niece.
I will sweet Queen.
They're come from field: let us to Priam's Hall
To greet the Warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woe you,
To help unarm our Hector: his stubborn Buckles,
With these your white enchanting fingers touched,
Shall more obey then to the edge of Steel,
Or force of Greekish sinews: you shall do more
Than all the Island Kings, disarm great Hector.
'Twill make us proud to be his servant Paris:
Yea what he shall receive of us in duty,
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have:
Yea overshines ourself.
Sweet above thought I love thee.
How now, where's thy Master, at my Cousin Cressidas?
No sir, he stays for you to conduct him thither.
O here he comes: How now, how now?
Sirrah walk off.
Have you seen my Cousin?
No Pandarus: I stalk about her door
Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
Staying for waftage. O be thou my Charon,
And give me swift transportance to those fields,
Where I may wallow in the Lily bed's
Proposed for the deserver. O gentle Pandarus,
From Cupid's shoulder pluck his painted wings,
And fly with me to Cressida.
Walk here i'th' Orchard, I'll bring her strait.
I am giddy; expectation whirls me round,
Th' imaginary relish is so sweet,
That it enchants my sense: what will it be
When that the watery palates taste indeed
love's thrice reputed Nectar? Death I fear me
Sounding destruction, or some joy too fine,
Too subtle, potent, and too sharp in sweetness,
For the capacity of my ruder powers;
I fear it much, and I do fear besides,
That I shall lose distinction in my joys,
As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
The enemy flying.
she's making her ready, she'll come strait; you must be witty now, she does so blush, & fetches her wind so short, as if she were afraid with a spirit: I'll fetch her; it is the prettiest villain, she fetches her breath so short as a new ta'en Sparrow.
Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom:
My heart beats thicker than a feavorous pulse,
And all my powers do their bestowing lose,
Like vassalage at unawares encountering
The eye of Majesty.
Come, come, what need you blush?
Shames a baby; here she is now, swear the oaths now to her, that you have sworn to me. What are you gone again, you must be watched ere you be made tame, must you? come your ways, come your ways, and you draw backward we'll put you i' th' fils: why do you not speak to her? Come draw this curtain, & let's see your picture. Alas the day, how loath you are to offend day light? and 'twere dark you'd close sooner: So, so, rub on, and kiss the mistress; how now, a kiss in fee-farm? build there Carpenter, the air is sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The Falcon, as the Tercell, for all the Ducks i'th' River: go too, go too.
You have bereft me of all words Lady.
Words pay no debts; give her deeds: but she'll bereave you ' o'th' deeds too, if she call your activity in question: what billing again? here's in witness whereof the Parties interchangeably. Come in, come in, I'll go get a fire?
Will you walk in my Lord?
O Cressida, how often have I wished me thus?
Wished my Lord? the gods grant? O my Lord.
What should they grant? what makes this pretty abruption: what too curious dreg espies my sweet Lady in the fountain of our love?
More dregs than water, if my ears have eyes.
Fears make devils of Cherubins, they never see truly.
Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safe footing, then blind reason, stumbling without fear: to fear the worst, oft cures the worse.
Oh let my Lady apprehend no fear,
In all Cupids Pageant there is presented no monster.
Not nothing monstrous neither?
Nothing but our undertakings, when we vow to weep seas, live in fire, eat rocks, tame Tigers; thinking it harder for our Mistress to device imposition enough, then for us to undergo any difficulty imposed. This is the monstruositie in love Lady, that the will is infinite, and the execution confined; that the desire is boundless, and the act a slave to limit.
They say all Lovers swear more performance than they are able, and yet reserve an ability that they never perform: vowing more than the perfection of ten; and discharging less than the tenth part of one. They that have the voice of Lions, and the act of Hares: are they not Monsters?
Are there such? such are not we: Praise us as we are tasted, allow us as we prove: our head shall go bare till merit crown it: no perfection in reversion shall have a praise in present: we will not name desert before his birth, and being borne his addition shall be humble: few words to fair faith. Troilus shall be such to Cressida, as what envy can say worst, shall be a mock for his truth; and what truth can speak truest, not truer than Troilus.
Will you walk in my Lord?
What blushing still? have you not done talking yet?
Well Uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.
I thank you for that: if my Lord get a Boy of you, you'll give him me: be true to my Lord, if he flinch, chide me for it.
You know now your hostages: your Uncle's word and my firm faith.
Nay, I'll give my word for her too: our kindred though they be long ere they are wooed, they are constant being won: they are Burrs I can tell you, they'll stick where they are thrown.
Boldness comes to me now, and brings me heart: Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day, for many weary months.
Why was my Cressida then so hard to win?
Hard to seem won: but I was won my Lord
With the first glance; that ever pardon me,
If I confess much you will play the tyrant:
I love you now, but not till now so much
But I might master it; in faith I lie:
My thoughts were like unbridled children grow
Too headstrong for their mother: see we fools,
Why have I blabbed: who shall be true to us
When we are so unsecret to ourselves?
But though I loved you well, I wooed you not,
And yet good faith I wished myself a man;
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent: see, see, your silence
Coming in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My soul of counsel from me. Stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweet Music issues thence.
Pretty i'faith.
My Lord, I do beseech you pardon me,
'Twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss:
I am ashamed; O Heavens, what have I done!
For this time will I take my leave my Lord.
Your leave sweet Cressida?
Leave: and you take leave till to morrow morning.
Pray you content you.
What offends you Lady?
Sir, mine own company.
You cannot shun yourself.
Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self resides with you:
But an unkind self, that itself will leave,
To be another's fool. Where is my wit?
I would be gone: I speak I know not what.
Well know they what they speak, that speaks so wisely.
Perchance my Lord, I show more craft than love,
And fell so roundly to a large confession,
To Angle for your thoughts: but you are wise,
Or else you love not: for to be wise and love,
Exceeds man's might, that dwells with gods above.
O that I thought it could be in a woman:
As if it can, I will presume in you,
To feed for aye her lamp and flames of love.
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Out-living beauties outward, with a mind
That doth renew swifter than blood decays:
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me,
That my integrity and truth to you,
Might be affronted with the match and weight
Of such a winnowed puriritie in love:
How were I then up-lifted! but alas,
I am as true, as truth's simplicity,
And simpler than the infancy of truth.
In that I'll war with you.
O virtuous fight,
When right with right wars who shall be most right:
True swains in love, shall in the world to come
Approve their truths by Troilus, when their rhymes,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare;
Wants similes, truth tired with iteration,
As true as steel, as plantage to the Moon:
As Sun to day: as Turtle to her mate:
As Iron to Adamant: as Earth to th' Centre:
Yet after all comparisons of truth,
(As truths authentic author to be cited)
As true as Troilus, shall crown up the Verse,
And sanctify the numbers.
Prophet may you be:
If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old and hath forgot itself:
When water drops have worn the Stones of Troy;
And blind oblivion swallowed Cities up;
And mighty States characterlesse are grated
To dusty nothing; yet let memory,
From false to false, among false Maids in love,
Upbraid my falsehood, when they'aue said as false,
As Air, as Water, as Wind, as sandy earth;
As Fox to Lamb; as Wolf to Heifers Calf;
Pard to the Hind, or Stepdame to her Son;
Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
As false as Cressida.
Go too, a bargain made: seal it, seal it, I'll be the witness here I hold your hand: here my Cousins, fever you prove false one to another, since I have taken such pains to bring you together, let all pitiful goers between be called to the world's end after my name: call them all Panders; let all constant men be Troylusses, all false women Cressida's, and all brokers between, Panders: say, Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Whereupon I will show you a Chamber, which bed, because it shall not speak of your pretty encounters, press it to death: away.
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied Maidens here,
Bed, Chamber, and Pander, to provide this gear.
Now Princes for the service I have done you,
Th' advantage of the time prompts me aloud,
To call for recompense: appear it to your mind,
That through the sight I bear in things to love,
I have abandoned Troy, left my possession,
Incurred a Traitor's name, exposed myself,
From certain and possessed conveniences,
To doubtful fortunes, sequestering from me all
That time, acquaintance, custom and condition,
Made tame, and most familiar to my nature:
And here to do you service am become,
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted.
I do beseech you, as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit:
Out of those many registered in promise,
Which you say, live to come in my behalf.
What wouldst thou of us Trojan? make demand?
You have a Trojan prisoner, called Antenor,
Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear,
Oft have you (often have you, thanks therefore)
Desired my Cressida in right great exchange.
Whom Troy hath still denied: but this Antenor,
I know is such a wrist in their affairs;
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage: and they will almost,
Give us a Prince of blood, a Son of Priam,
In change of him. Let him be sent great Princes,
And he shall buy my Daughter: and her presence,
Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
In most accepted pain.
Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring us Cressida hither: Calcas shall have
What he requests of us: good Diomedes
Furnish you fairly for this interchange;
Withal bring word, if Hector will to morrow
Be answered in his challenge. Aiax is ready.
This shall I undertake, and 'tis a burden
Which I am proud to bear.
Achilles stands i' th' entrance of his Tent;
Please it our General to pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot: and Princes all,
Lay negligent and lose regard upon him;
I will come last, 'tis like he'll question me,
Why such unplausive eyes are bend? why turned on him?
If so, I have derision medicinable,
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink;
It may do good, pride hath no other glass
To show itself, but pride: for supple knees,
Feed arrogance, and are the proud man's fees.
we'll execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangeness as we pass along,
So do each Lord, and either greet him not,
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more,
Then if not looked on. I will lead the way.
What comes the General to speak with me?
You know my mind, I'll fight no more 'gainst Troy.
What says Achilles, would he ought with us?
Would you my Lord ought with the General?
No.
Nothing my Lord.
The better.
Good day, good day.
How do you? how do you?
What, does the Cuckold scorn me?
How now Patroclus?
Good morrow Aiax?
Ha.
Good morrow.
I, and good next day too.
What mean these fellows? know they not Achilles?
They pass by strangely: they were used to bend
To send their smiles before them to Achilles:
To come as humbly as they used to creep to holy Altars.
What am I poor of late?
'Tis certain, greatness once fall'n out with fortune,
Must fall out with men too: what the declined is,
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others,
As feel in his own fall: for men like butterflies,
Show not their mealy wings, but to the Summer:
And not a man for being simply man,
Hath any honour; but honoured for those honours
That are without him; as place, riches, and favour,
Prizes of accident, as oft as merit:
Which when they fall, as being slippery standers;
The love that leaned on them as slippery too,
Doth one pluck down another, and together
die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me;
Fortune and I are friends, I do enjoy
At ample point, all that I did possess,
Save these men's looks: who do me thinks find out
Something not worth in me such rich beholding,
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses,
I'll interrupt his reading: how now Ulysses?
Now great Thetis Son.
What are you reading?
A strange fellow here
Writes me, that man, how dearly ever parted,
How much in having, or without, or in,
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath;
Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection:
As when his virtues shining upon others,
Heat them, and they retort that heat again
To the first giver.
This is not strange Ulysses:
The beauty that is borne here in the face,
The bearer knows not, but commends itself,
Not going from itself: but eye to eye opposed
Salutes each other with each others form:
For speculation turns not to itself,
Till it hath travailed, and is married there
Where it may see itself: this is not strange at all.
I do not strain it at the position,
It is familiar; but at the Author's drift,
Who in his circumstance, expressly proves
That no may is the Lord of any thing,
(Though in and of him there is much consisting,)
Till he communicate his parts to others:
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught,
Till he behold them form in th' applause,
Where they are extended: who like an arch reuerb'rate
The voice again; or like a gate of steel,
Fronting the Sun, receives and renders back
His figure, and his heat. I was much rapt in this,
And apprehended here immediately:
The unknown Aiax;
Heavens what a man is there? a very Horse,
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things there are.
Most abject in regard, and dear in use.
What things again most dear in the esteem,
And poor in worth: now shall we see to morrow,
An act that very chance doth throw upon him?
Aiax renowned? O heavens, what some men do,
While some men leave to do!
How some men creep in skittish fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the Idiots in her eyes:
How one man eats into another's pride,
While pride is feasting in his wantonness
To see these Grecian Lords; why, even already,
They clap the lubber Aiax on the shoulder,
As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast,
And great Troy shrinking.
I do believe it:
For they passed by me, as my sers do by beggars,
Neither gave to me good word, nor look:
What are my deeds forgot?
Time hath (my Lord) a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion:
A great sized monster of ingratitudes:
Those scraps are good deeds passed,
Which are devoured as fast as they are made,
Forgot as soon as done: perseverance, dear my Lord,
Keeps honour bright, to have done, is to hang
Quite out of fashion, like a rusty male,
In monumental mockery: take the instant way,
For honour travels in a strait so narrow,
Where one but goes a breast, keep then the path:
For emulation hath a thousand Sons,
That one by one pursue; if you give way,
Or hedge aside from the direct forth right;
Like to an entered Tide, they all rush by,
And leave you hindmost:
Or like a gallant Horse fall'n in first rank,
Lie there for pavement to the abject, near
Ore-run and trampled on: than what they do in present,
Though less than yours in past, must overtop yours:
For time is like a fashionable Host,
That slightly shakes his parting Guest by th' hand;
And with his arms outstretched, as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer: the welcome ever smiles,
And farewells goes out sighing: O let not virtue seek
Remuneration for the thing it was: for beauty, wit,
High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
To envious and calumniating time:
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin:
That all with one consent praise new borne gauds,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And go to dust, that is a little guilt,
More laud than guilt over dusted.
The present eye praises the present object:
Then marvel not thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Aiax;
Since things in motion begin to catch the eye,
Then what not stirs: the cry went out on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive,
And case thy reputation in thy Tent;
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late,
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves,
And drove great Mars to faction.
Of this my privacy,
I have strong reasons.
But 'gainst your privacy
The reasons are more potent and heroical:
'Tis known Achilles, that you are in love
With one of Priam's daughters.
Ha'? known?
Is that a wonder?
The providence that's in a watchful State,
Knows almost every grain of Pluto's gold;
Finds bottom in th' uncomprehensive deeps;
Keeps place with thought; and almost like the gods,
Do thoughts unuaile in their dumb cradles:
There is a mystery (with whom relation
Durst never meddle) in the soul of State;
Which hath an operation more divine,
Then breath or pen can give expressure to:
All the commerce that you have had with Troy,
As perfectly is ours, as yours, my Lord.
And better would it fit Achilles' much,
To throw down Hector then Polixena.
But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home,
When fame shall in her Hand sound her trump;
And all the Greekish Girls shall tripping sing,
Great Hector's sister did Achilles win;
But our great Aiax bravely beat down him.
Farewell my Lord: I as your lover speak;
The fool slides over the Ice that you should break.
To this effect Achilles have I moved you;
A woman impudent and mannish grown,
Is not more loathed, than an effeminate man,
In time of action: I stand condemned for this;
They think my little stomach to the war,
And your great love to me, restrains you thus:
Sweet, rouse yourself; and the weak wanton Cupid
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold,
And like a dew drop from the Lion's mane,
Be shook to airy air.
Shall Aiax fight with Hector?
I, and perhaps receive much honour by him.
I see my reputation is at stake,
My fame is shrewdly gored.
O then beware:
Those wounds heal ill, that men do give themselves:
Omission to do what is necessary,
Seals a commission to a blank of danger,
And danger like an ague subtly taints
Even then when we sit idly in the sun.
Go call Thersites hither sweet Patroclus,
I'll send the fool to Aiax, and desire him
T' invite the Trojan Lords after the Combat
To see us here unarmed: I have a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace;
To talk with him, and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view. A labour saved.
A wonder.
What?
Aiax goes up and down the field, ask for himself.
How so?
He must fight singly to morrow with Hector, and is so prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling, that he raves in saying nothing.
How can that be?
Why he stalks up and down like a Peacock, a stride and a stand: ruminates like an hostess, that hath no Arithmetic but her brain to set down her reckoning: bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should say, there were wit in his head and 'twoo'd out; and so there is: but it lies as coldly in him, as fire in a flint, which will not show without knocking. The man's undone for ever; for if Hector break not his neck i' th' combat, he'll break't himself in vainglory. He knows not me: I said, good morrow Aiax; And he replies, thanks Agamemnon, What think you of this man, that takes me for the General? he's grown a very land-fish, languagelesse, a monster: a plague of opinion, a man may wear it on both sides like a leather jerkin.
Thou must be my Ambassador to him Thersites.
Who, I: why, he'll answer no body: he professes not answering; speaking is for beggars: he wears his tongue in's arms: I will put on his presence; let Patroclus make his demands to me, you shall see the Pageant of Aiax.
To him Patroclus; tell him, I humbly desire the valiant Aiax, to invite the most valorous Hector, to come unarmed to my Tent, and to procure safe conduct for his person, of the magnanimous and most illustrious, six or feaven times honoured Captain, General of the Grecian Army Agamemnon, etc. do this.
Ioue bless great Aiax.
Hum.
I come from the worthy Achilles.
Ha'?
Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his Tent.
Hum.
And to procure safe conduct from Agamemnon.
Agamemnon?
I my Lord.
Ha'?
What say you too't.
God buy you with all my heart.
Your answer sir.
If to morrow be a fair day, by eleven a clock it will go one way or other; howsoever, he shall pay for me ere he has me.
Your answer sir.
Far you well withal my heart.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
No, but he's out a tune thus: what music will be in him when Hector has knocked out his brains, I know not: but I am sure none, unless the Fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make catlings on.
Come, thou shalt bear a Letter to him strait.
Let me carry another to his Horse; for that's the more capable creature.
My mind is troubled like a Fountain stirred,
And I myself see not the bottom of it.
Would the Fountain of your mind were clear again, that I might water an Ass at it: I had rather be a Tick in a Sheep, than such a valiant ignorance.
See hoa, who is that there?
It is the Lord Aeneas.
Is the Prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lie long
As you Prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business,
Should rob my bed-mate of my company.
That's my mind too: good morrow Lord Aeneas.
A valiant Greek Aeneas, take his hand,
Witness the process of your speech within;
You told how Diomedes, in a whole week by days
Did haunt you in the Field.
Health to you valiant sir,
During all question of the gentle truce:
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance,
As heart can think, or courage execute.
The one and other Diomedes embraces,
Our bloods are now in calm; and so long health:
But when contention, and occasion meets,
By Ioue, I'll play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, pursuit and policy.
And thou shalt hunt a Lion that will fly
With his face backward, in humane gentleness:
Welcome to Troy; now by Anchises life,
Welcome indeed: by Venus' hand I swear,
No man alive can love in such a sort,
The thing he means to kill, more excellently,
We sympathize. Ioue let Aeneas live
(If to my sword his fate be not the glory)
A thousand complete courses of the Sun,
But in mine emulous honour let him dye:
With every joint a wound, and that to morrow.
We know each other well.
We do, and long to know each other worse.
This is the most, despightful'st gentle greeting;
The noblest hateful love, that ere I heard of.
What business Lord so early?
I was sent for to the King; but why, I know not.
His purpose meets you; it was to bring this Greek
To Calcha's house; and there to render him,
For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressida:
Let's have your company; or if you please,
Haste there before us. I constantly do think
(Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge)
My brother Troilus lodges there to night.
Rouse him, and give him note of our approach,
With the whole quality whereof, I fear
We shall be much unwelcome.
That I assure you:
Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece,
Then Cressida borne from Troy.
There is no help:
The bitter disposition of the time will have it so.
On Lord, we'll follow you.
Good morrow all.
And tell me noble Diomedes; faith tell me true,
Even in the soul of sound good fellowship,
Who in your thoughts merits fair Helen most?
Myself, or Menelaus?
Both alike.
He merits well to have her, that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soylure,
With such a hell of pain, and world of charge.
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Not pallating the taste of her dishonour,
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends:
He like a puling Cuckold, would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece:
You like a lecher, out of whorish loins.
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors:
Both merits poized, each weighs no less nor more,
But he as he, which heavier for a whore.
You are too bitter to your countrywoman.
she's bitter to her country: hear me Paris,
For every false drop in her bawdy veins,
A Grecians life hath sunk: for every scruple
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
A Trojan hath been slain. Since she could speak,
She hath not given so many good words breath,
As for her, Greeks and Troyans' suffered death.
Fair Diomedes, you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy:
But we in silence hold this virtue well;
we'll not commend, what we intent to sell.
Here lies our way.
Dear trouble not yourself: the morn is cold.
Then sweet my Lord, I'll call mine Uncle down;
He shall unbolt the Gates.
Trouble him not:
To bed, to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses,
As Infants empty of all thought.
Good morrow then.
I prithee now to bed.
Are you a weary of me?
O Cressida! but that the busy day
Waked by the Lark, hath roused the ribald Crows,
And dreaming night will hide our eyes no longer:
I would not from thee.
Night hath been too brief.
Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays,
As hidiously as hell; but flies the grasps of love,
With wings more momentary, swift then thought:
You will catch cold, and curse me.
Prithee tarry, you men will never tarry;
O foolish Cressida, I might have still held off,
And then you would have tarried. Hark, there's one up?
What's all the doors open here?
It is your Uncle.
A pestilence on him: now will he be mocking:
I shall have such a life.
How now, how now? how go maidenheads?
Hear you Maid: where's my cousin Cressida?
Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking Uncle:
You bring me to do— and then you flout me too.
To do what? to do what? let her say what:
What have I brought you to do?
Come, come, beshrew your heart: you'll ne'er be good, nor suffer others.
Ha', ha': alas poor wretch: a poor Chipochia, hast not slept to night? would he not (a naughty man) let it sleep: a bugbear take him.
Did not I tell you? would he were knocked i'th' head. Who's that at door? good Uncle go and see.
My Lord, come you again into my Chamber:
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.
Ha', ha'.
Come you are deceived, I think of no such thing.
How earnestly they knock: pray you come in.
I would not for half Troy have you seen here.
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beat down the door? How now, what's the matter?
Good morrow Lord, good morrow.
Who's there my Lord Aeneas? by my troth I knew you not: what news with you so early?
Is not Prince Troilus here?
Here? what should he do here?
Come he is here, my Lord, do not deny him:
It doth import him much to speak with me.
Is he here say you? 'tis more than I know, I'll be sworn: For my own part I came in late: what should he do here?
Who, nay then: Come, come, you'll do him wrong, ere ye are ware: you'll be so true to him, to be false to him: Do not you know of him, but yet go fetch him hither, go.
How now, what's the matter?
My Lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand,
Parish your brother, and Deiphoebus,
The Grecian Diomedes, and our Antenor
Delivered to us, and for him forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomedes' hand
The Lady Cressida.
Is it concluded so?
By Priam, and the general state of Troy,
They are at hand, and ready to effect it.
How my achievements mock me;
I will go meet them: and my Lord Aeneas,
We met by chance; you did not find me here.
Good, good, my Lord, the secrets of nature
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
Is't possible? no sooner got but lost: the devil take Antenor; the young Prince will go mad: a plague upon Antenor; I would they had brok's neck.
How now? what's the matter? who was here?
Ah, ha'!
Why sigh you so profoundly? where's my Lord? gone? tell me sweet Uncle, what's the matter?
Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above.
O the gods! what's the matter?
Prithee get thee in: would thou hadst ne'er been borne; I knew thou wouldst be his death. O poor Gentleman: a plague upon Antenor.
Good Uncle I beseech you, on my knees, I beseech you what's the matter?
Thou must be gone wench, thou must be gone; thou art changed for Antenor: thou must to thy Father, and be gone from Troilus: 'twill be his death: 'twill be his bane, he cannot bear it.
O you immortal gods! I will not go.
Thou must.
I will not Uncle: I have forgot my Father:
I know no touch of consanguinity:
No kin, no love, no blood, no soul, so near me,
As the sweet Troilus: O you gods divine!
Make Cressida's name the very crown of falsehood!
If ever she leave Troilus: time, orce and death,
Do to this body what extremity you can;
But the strong base and building of my love,
Is as the very Centre of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I will go in and weep.
Do, do.
Tear my bright heir, and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart
With sounding Troilus. I will not go from Troy.
It is great morning, and the hour prefixed
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek
Comes fast upon: good my brother Troilus,
Tell you the Lady what she is to do,
And hast her to the purpose.
Walk into her house:
I'll bring her to the Grecian presently;
And to his hand, when I deliver her,
Think it an Altar, and thy brother Troilus
A Priest, there offering to it his heart.
I know what 'tis to love,
And would, as I shall pity, I could help.
Please you walk in, my Lords.
Be moderate, be moderate.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full perfect that I taste,
And no less in a sense as strong
As that which causeth it. How can I moderate it?
If I could temporise with my affection,
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like alaiment could I give my grief:
My love admits no qualifying cross;
No more my grief, in such a precious loss.
Here, here, here, he comes, a sweet duck.
O Troilus, Troilus!
What a pair of spectacles is here? let me embrace too: oh hart, as the goodly saying is; O heart, heavy heart, why sighest thou without breaking? where he answers again; because thou canst not ease thy smart by friendship, nor by speaking: there was never a truer rhyme; let us cast away nothing, for we may live to have need of such a Verse: we see it, we see it: how now Lambs?
Cressida: I love thee in so strange a purity;
That the blessed gods, as angry with my fancy,
More bright in zeal, than the devotion which
Cold lips blow to their Deities: take thee from me.
Have the gods envy?
I, I, I, I, 'tis too plain a case.
And is it true, that I must go from Troy?
A hateful truth.
What, and from Troilus too?
From Troy, and Troilus.
Is't possible?
And suddenly, where injury of chance
Puts back leaue-taking, justles roughly by
All time of pause; rudely beguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure: forcibly prevents
Our locked embrasures; strangles our dear vows,
Even in the birth of our own labouring breath.
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves,
With the rude brevity and discharge of our
Injurious time; now with a robbers haste
Crams his rich thievery up, he knows not how.
As many farewells as be stars in heaven,
With distinct breath, and consigned kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a lose adieu;
And scants us with a single famished kiss,
Distasting with the salt of broken tears.
My Lord, is the Lady ready?
Hark, you are called: some say the genius so
Cries, come to him that instantly must dye.
Bid them have patience: she shall come anon.
Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or my heart will be blown up by the root.
I must then to the Grecians?
No remedy.
A woeful Cressida 'mong'st the merry Greeks.
When shall we see again?
Here me my love: be thou but true of heart.
I true? how now? what wicked deem is this?
Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us:
I speak not, be thou true, as fearing thee:
For I will throw my Glove to death himself,
That there's no maculation in thy heart:
But be thou true, say I, to fashion in
My sequent protestation: be thou true,
And I will see thee.
O you shall be exposed, my Lord to dangers
As infinite, as imminent: but I'll be true.
And I'll grow friend with danger;
Wear this Sleeve.
And you this Glove.
When shall I see you?
I will corrupt the Grecian Sentinels,
To give thee nightly visitation.
But yet be true.
O heavens: be true again?
Hear why I speak it; Love:
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
Their loving well composed, with gift of nature,
Flawing and swelling over with Arts and exercise:
How novelties may move, and parts with person.
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy;
Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin:
Makes me afraid.
O heavens, you love me not!
die I a villain then:
In this I do not call your faith in question
So mainly as my merit: I cannot sing,
Nor heel the high Lavolt; nor sweeten talk;
Nor play at subtle games; fair virtues all;
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant:
But I can tell that in each grace of these,
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursive devil,
That tempts most cunningly: but be not tempted.
Do you think I will:
No, but something may be done that we will not:
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves,
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Presuming on their changefull potency.
Nay, good my Lord?
Come kiss, and let us part.
Brother Troilus?
Good brother come you hither,
And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.
My Lord, will you be true?
Who I? alas it is my vice, my fault:
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I, with great truth, catch mere simplicity;
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare:
Fear not my truth; the moral of my wit
Is plain and true, there's all the reach of it.
Welcome sir Diomedes, here is the Lady
Which for Antenor, we deliver you.
At the port (Lord) I'll give her to thy hand,
And by the way possess thee what she is.
Entreat her fair; and by my soul, fair Greek,
If ere thou stand at mercy of my Sword,
Name Cressida, and thy life shall be as safe
As Priam is in Illium?
Fair Lady Cressida,
So please you save the thankes this Prince expects:
The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair visage, and to Diomedes
You shall be mistress, and command him wholly.
Grecian, thou dost not use me courteously,
To shame the seal of my petition towards,
I praising her. I tell thee Lord of Greece:
She is as far high soaring o'er thy praises,
As thou unworthy to be called her servant:
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge:
For by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
(Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard)
I'll cut thy throat.
Oh be not moved Prince Troilus;
Let me be privileged by my place and message,
To be a speaker free? when I am hence,
I'll answer to my lust: and know my Lord;
I'll nothing do on charge: to her own worth
She shall be prized: but that you say, be't so;
I'll speak it in my spirit and honour, no.
Come to the Port. I'll tell thee Diomedes,
This brave, shall oft make thee to hide thy head:
Lady, give me your hand, and as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.
Hark, Hector's Trumpet.
How have we spent this morning
The Prince must think me tardy and remiss,
That swore to ride before him in the field.
'Tis Troilus fault: come, come, to field with him.
Let us make ready strait.
Yea, with a Bridegroom's fresh alacrity
Let us address to tend on Hector's heels:
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
On his fair worth, and single Chivalry.
Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time. With starting courage,
Give with thy Trumpet a loud note to Troy
Thou dreadful Aiax, that the appalled air
May pierce the head of the great Combatant,
And hale him hither.
Thou, Trumpet, there's my purse;
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Blow villain, till thy sphered Bias cheek
Out-swell the colic of puffed Aquilon:
Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood:
Thou blowest for Hector.
No Trumpet answers.
'Tis but early days.
Is not young Diomedes with Calcas daughter?
'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gate,
He rises on the toe: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Is this the Lady Cressida?
Even she.
Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet Lady.
Our General doth salute you with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness but particular; 'twere better she were kissed in general.
And very courtly counsel: I'll begin. So much for Nestor.
I'll take that winter from your lips fair Lady Achilles bids you welcome.
I had good argument for kissing once.
But that's no argument for kissing now;
For thus popped Paris in his hardiment.
Oh deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns,
For which we lose our heads, to gild his horns.
The first was Menelaus kiss, this mine:
Patroclus kisses you.
Oh this is trim.
Paris and I kiss evermore for him.
I'll have my kiss sir: Lady by your leave.
In kissing do you render, or receive.
Both take and give.
I'll make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better than you give: therefore no kiss.
I'll give you boot, I'll give you three for one.
You are an odd man, give even, or give none.
An odd man Lady, every man is odd.
No, Paris is not; for you know 'tis true,
That you are odd, and he is even with you.
You fillip me o' th' head.
No, I'll be sworn.
It were no match, your nail against his horn:
May I sweet Lady beg a kiss of you?
You may.
I do desire it.
Why beg then?
Why then for Venus' sake, give me a kiss:
When Helen is a maid again, and his—
I am your debtor, claim it when 'tis due.
Neuer's my day, and then a kiss of you.
Lady a word, I'll bring you to your Father.
A woman of quick sense.
Fie, fie, upon her:
there's a language in her eye, her cheek, her lip;
Nay, her foot speaks, her wanton spirits look out
At every joint, and motive of her body:
Oh these encounterers so glib of tongue,
That give a coasting welcome eat it comes;
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts,
To every tickling reader: set them down,
For sluttish spoils of opportunity;
And daughters of the game.
The Troyans' Trumpet.
Yonder comes the troop.
Hail all you state of Greece: what shallbe done
To him that victory commands? or do you purpose,
A victor shall be known: will you the Knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall be divided
By any voice, or order of the field: Hector bade ask?
Which way would Hector have it?
He cares not, he'll obey conditions.
'Tis done like Hector, but securely done,
A little proudly, and great deal disprising
The Knight opposed.
If not Achilles' sir, what is your name?
If not Achilles, nothing.
Therefore Achilles: but what ere, know this.
In the extremity of great and little:
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector;
The one almost as infinite as all;
The other blank as nothing: weigh him well:
And that which looks like pride, is courtesy:
This Aiax is half made of Hector's blood;
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home:
Half heart, half hand, half Hector, comes to seek
This blended Knight, half Trojan, and half Greek.
A maiden battle then? O I perceive you.
Here is sir, Diomedes: go gentle Knight,
Stand by our Aiax: as you and Lord Aeneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it: either to the uttermost,
Or else a breach: the Combatants being kin,
Half stints their strife, before their strokes begin.
They are opposed already.
What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?
The youngest Son of Priam;
A true Knight; they call him Troilus;
Not yet mature, yet matchless, firm of word,
Speaking in deeds, and deedelesse in his tongue;
Not soon provoked, nor being provoked, soon calmed;
His heart and hand both open, and both free:
For what he has, he gives; what thinks, he shows;
Yet gives he not till judgement guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impair thought with breath:
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous;
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects; but he, in heat of action,
Is more vindecative than jealous love.
They call him Troilus; and on him erect,
A second hope, as fairly built as Hector.
Thus says Aeneas, one that knows the youth,
Even to his inches: and with private soul,
Did in great Illium thus translate him to me.
They are in action.
Now Aiax hold thine own.
Hector, thou sleepest, awake thee.
His blows are well disposed there Aiax.
You must no more.
Princes enough, so please you.
I am not warm yet, let us fight again.
As Hector pleases.
Why then will I no more:
Thou art great Lord, my Father's sisters Son;
A cousin german to great Priam's seed:
The obligation of our blood forbids
A gory emulation 'twixt us twain:
Were thy commixion, Greek and Trojan so,
That thou couldst say, this hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan: the sinews of this Leg,
All Greek, and this all Troy: my Mother's blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my fathers: by Ioue multipotent,
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
Of our rank feud: but the just gods gainsay,
That any drop thou borrwd'st from thy mother,
My sacred Aunt, should by my mortal Sword
Be drained. Let me embrace thee Aiax:
By him that thunders, thou hast lusty Arms;
Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
Cousin, all honour to thee.
I thank thee Hector:
Thou art too gentle, and too free a man:
I came to kill thee Cousin, and bear hence
A great addition, earned in thy death.
Not Neoptolymus so mirable,
On whose bright crest, fame with her loudest (O yes)
Cries, This is he; couldst promise to himself,
A thought of added honour, torn from Hector.
There is expectance here from both the sides,
What further you will do?
we'll answer it:
The issue is embracement: Aiax, farewell.
If I might in entreaties find success,
As seld I have the chance; I would desire
My famous Cousin to our Grecian Tents.
'Tis Agamemnon's wish, and great Achilles
Doth long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.
Aeneas, call my brother Troilus to me:
And signify this loving interview
To the expecters of our Trojan part:
Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my Cousin:
I will go eat with thee, and see your Knights.
Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.
The worthiest of them, tell me name by name:
But for Achilles, mine own searching eyes
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Worthy of Arms: as welcome as to one
That would be rid of such an enemy.
But that's no welcome: understand more clear
What's past, and what's to come, is strewed with husks
And formelesse ruin of oblivion:
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Strained purely from all hollow bias drawing:
Bids thee with most divine integrity.
From heart of very heart, great Hector welcome.
I thank thee most imperious Agamemnon.
My well-famed Lord of Troy, no less to you.
Let me confirm my Princely brother's greeting,
You brace of warlike Brothers, welcome hither.
Who must we answer?
The Noble Menelaus.
O, you my Lord, by Mars his gauntlet thanks,
Mock not, that I affect th' untraded Oath,
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' Glove
she's well, but bade me not commend her to you.
Name her not now sir, she's a deadly Theme.
O pardon, I offend.
I have (thou gallant Trojan) seen thee oft
Labouring for destiny, make cruel way
Through ranks of Greekish youth: and I have seen thee
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian Steed,
And seen thee scorning forfeits and subduements,
When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i' th' air,
Not letting it decline, on the declined:
That I have said unto my standers by,
Lo Iupiter is yonder, dealing life.
And I have seen thee pause, and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greeks have hemmed thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling. This have I seen,
But this thy countenance (still locked in steel)
I never saw till now. I knew thy Grandsire,
And once fought with him; he was a Soldier good,
But by great Mars, the Captain of us all,
Never like thee. Let an oldman embrace thee,
And (worthy Warrior) welcome to our Tents.
'Tis the old Nestor.
Let me embrace thee good old Chronicle,
That hast so long walked hand in hand with time:
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
I would my arms could match thee in contention
As they contend with thee in courtesy.
I would they could.
Ha'? by this white beard I'd fight with thee to morrow. Well, welcome, welcome: I have seen the time.
I wonder now, how yonder City stands,
When we have here her Base and pillar by us.
I know your favour Lord Ulysses well.
Ah sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw yourself, and Diomedes
In Illium, on your Greekish Embassy.
Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue,
My prophecy is but halfe his journey yet;
For yonder walls that pertly front your Town,
Yond Towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.
I must not believe you:
There they stand yet: and modestly I think,
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost
A drop of Grecian blood: the end crowns all,
And that old common Arbitrator, Time,
Will one day end it.
So to him we leave it.
Most gentle, and most valiant Hector, welcome;
After the General, I beseech you next
To Feast with me, and see me at my Tent.
I shall forestall thee Lord Ulysses, thou:
Now Hector I have fed mine eyes on thee,
I have with exact view perused thee Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.
Is this Achilles?
I am Achilles.
Stand fair I prithee, let me look on thee.
Behold thy fill.
Nay, I have done already.
Thou art to brief, I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee, limb by limb.
O like a Book of sport thou'lt read me over:
But there's more in me then thou understandest.
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye?
Tell me you Heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him? Whether there, or there, or there,
That I may give the local wound a name,
And make distinct the very breach, whereout
Hector's great spirit flew. Answer me heavens.
It would discredit the blessed Gods, proud man,
To answer such a question: Stand again;
Thinkest thou to catch my life so pleasantly,
As to prenominate in nice conjecture
Where thou wilt hit me dead?
I tell thee yea.
Wert thou the Oracle to tell me so,
I'd not believe thee: henceforth guard thee well,
For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
But by the forge that stythied Mars his helm,
I'll kill thee every where, yea, over and over.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag,
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But I'll endeavour deeds to match these words,
Or may I never—
Do not chafe thee Cousin:
And you Achilles, let these threats alone
Till accident, or purpose bring you too't.
You may every day enough of Hector.
If you have stomach. The general state I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.
I pray you let us see you in the field,
We have had pelting Wars since you refused
The Grecians cause.
Dost thou entreat me Hector?
To morrow do I meet thee fell as death,
To night, all Friends.
Thy hand upon that match.
First, all you Peers of Greece go to my Tent,
There in the full convive you: Afterwards,
As Hector's leisure, and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him.
Beat loud the Tabourins, let the Trumpets blow,
That this great Soldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Ulysses, tell me I beseech you,
In what place of the Field doth Calchas keep?
At Menelaus' Tent, most Princely Troilus,
There Diomedes doth feast with him to night,
Who neither looks on heaven, nor on earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
On the fair Cressida.
Shall I (sweet Lord) be bound to thee so much,
After we part from Agamemnon's Tent,
To bring me thither?
You shall command me sir:
As gentle tell me, of what Honour was
This Cressida in Troy, had she no Lover there
That wails her absence?
O sir, to such as boasting show their scars,
A mock is due: will you walk on my Lord?
She was beloved, she loved; she is, and doth;
But still sweet Love is food for Fortune's tooth.
I'll heat his blood with Greekish wine to night,
Which with my Cemitar I'll cool to morrow:
Patroclus, let us Feast him to the height.
here comes Thersites.
How now, thou core of Envy?
Thou crusty batch of Nature, what's the news?
Why thou picture of what thou seem'st, & I doll of Ideot-worshippers, here's a Letter for thee.
From whence, Fragment?
Why thou full dish of Fool, from Troy.
Who keeps the Tent now?
The Surgeon's box, or the Patient's wound.
Well said adversity, and what need these tricks?
Prithee be silent boy, I profit not by thy talk, thou art thought to be Achilles' male Varlet.
Male Varlet you Rogue? What's that?
Why his masculine Whore. Now the rotten diseases of the South, guts-griping Ruptures, Catarrhs, Loads a gravel i' th' back, Lethargies, cold Palsies, and the like, take and take again, such preposterous discoveries.
Why thou damnable box of envy thou, what meanest thou to curse thus?
Do I curse thee?
Why no, you ruinous But, you whoreson indistinguishable Cur.
No? why art thou then exasperate, thou idle, immaterial skiene of Sleyd silk; thou green Sarsenet flap for a sore eye, thou tassel of a Prodigals purse thou:
Ah how the poor world is pestered with such water-flies, diminutives of Nature.
Out gall.
Finch Egg.
My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpose in to morrow's battle:
here is a Letter from Queen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my fair Love,
Both taxing me, and gauging me to keep
An Oath that I have sworn. I will not break it,
Fall Greeks, fail Fame, Honour or go, or stay,
My mayor vow lies here; this I'll obey:
Come, come Thersites, help to trim my Tent,
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
Away Patroclus.
With too much blood, and too little Brain, these two may run mad: but if with too much brain, and too little blood, they do, I'll be a curer of madmen. here's Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough, and one that loves Quails, but he has not so much Brain as eare-wax; and the goodly transformation of Iupiter there his Brother, the Bull, the primative Statue, and obliqne memorial of Cuckolds, a thrifty shooing-horn in a chain, hanging at his Brother's leg, to what form but that he is, should wit larded with malice, and malice forced with wit, turn him too: to an Ass were nothing; he is both Ass and Ox; to an Ox were nothing, he is both Ox and Ass: to be a Dog, a Mule, a Cat, a Fitchow, a Toad, a Lizard, an Owl, a Puttock, or a Herring without a Roe, I would not care: but to be Menelaus, I would conspire against Destiny. Ask me not what I would be, if I were not Thersites: sot I care not to be the louse of a Lazar, so I were not Menelaus. Heyday, spirits and fires.
We go wrong, we go wrong.
No yonder'tis, there where we see the light.
I trouble you.
No, not a whit.
here comes himself to guide you?
Welcome brave Hector, welcome Princes all.
So now fair Prince of Troy, I bid goodnight,
Aiax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks, and goodnight to the Greeks general.
Good-night my Lord.
Good-night sweet Lord Menelaus.
Sweet draught: sweet quotha? sweet sink, sweet sure.
Good-night and welcome, both at once, to those that go, or tarry.
Good-night.
Old Nestor tarries, and you too Diomedes,
Keep Hector company an hour, or two.
I cannot Lord, I have important business,
The tide whereof is now, good-night great Hector.
Give me your hand.
Fellow his Torch, he goes to Chalcas Tent,
I'll keep you company.
Sweet sir, you honour me.
And so good night.
Come, come, enter my Tent.
That same Diomed's a falsehearted Rogue, a most unjust Knave; I will no more trust him when he leers, than I will a Serpent when he hisses: he will spend his mouth & promise, like Brabler the Hound; but when he performs, Astronomers foretell it, that it is prodigious, there will come some change; the Sun borrows of the Moon when Diomedes keeps his word. I will rather leave to see Hector, than not to dog him: they say, he keeps a Trojan Drab, and uses the Traitor Chalcas his Tent. I'll after— Nothing but Lechery? All incontinent Varlets.
What are you up here ho? speak?
Who calls?
Diomedes, Chalcas (I think) where's you Daughter?
She comes to you.
Stand where the Torch may not discover us.
Cressida comes forth to him.
How now my charge?
Now my sweet guardian: hark a word with you.
Yea, so familiar?
She will sing any man at first sight.
And any man may find her, if he can take her life: she's noted.
Will you remember?
Remember? yes.
Nay, but do then; and let your mind be coupled with your words.
What should she remember?
List?
Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly.
Roguery.
Nay then.
I'll tell you what.
Foyes, foe, come tell a pin, you are a forsworn.—
In faith I cannot: what would you have me do?
A juggling trick, to be secretly open.
What did you swear you would bestow on me?
I prithee do not hold me to mine oath,
Bid me do not any thing but that sweet Greek.
Good night.
Hold, patience.
How now Trojan?
Diomed.
No, no, good night: I'll be your fool no more.
Thy better must.
Hark one word in your ear.
O plague and madness!
You are moved Prince, let us departed I pray you,
Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous;
The time right deadly: I beseech you go.
Behold, I pray you.
Nay, good my Lord go off:
You flow to great distraction; come my Lord?
I pray thee stay?
You have not patience, come.
I pray you stay? by hell and hell torments,
I will not speak a word.
And so good night.
Nay, but you part in anger.
Doth that grieve thee? O withered truth!
Why, how now Lord?
By Ioue I will be patiented.
Guardian? why Greek?
Foyes, foe, adieu, you palter,
In faith I do not: come hither once again.
You shake my Lord at something; will you go? you will break out.
She strokes his cheek.
Come, come.
Nay stay, by Ioue I will not speak a word.
There is between my will, and all offences,
A guard of patience; stay a little while.
How the devil Luxury with his fat rump and potato finger, tickles these together: fry lechery, fry.
But will you then?
In faith I will lo; never trust me else.
Give me some token for the surety of it.
I'll fetch you one.
You have sworn patience.
Fear me not sweet Lord.
I will not be myself, nor have cognition
Of what I feel: I am all patience.
Now the pledge, now, now, now.
Here Diomedes, keep this Sleeve.
O beauty! where is thy Faith?
My Lord.
I will be patiented, outwardly I will.
You look upon that Sleeve? behold it well:
He loved me: O false wench: give't me again.
Whose was't?
It is no matter now I have't again.
I will not meet with you to morrow night:
I prithee Diomedes visit me no more.
Now she sharpens: well said Whetstone.
I shall have it.
What, this?
I that.
O all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge;
Thy Master now lies thinking in his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my Glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it;
As I kiss thee.
Nay, do not snatch it from me.
He that takes that, rakes my heart withal.
I had your heart before, this follows it.
I did swear patience.
You shall not have it Diomedes; faith you shall not:
I'll give you something else.
I will have this: whose was it?
It is no matter.
Come tell me whose it was?
'Twas one that loved me better than you will.
But now you have it, take it.
Whose was it?
By all Dianas waiting women yond:
And by herself, I will not tell you whose.
To morrow will I wear it on my Helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Wert thou the devil, and worest it on thy horn.
It should be challenged.
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past; and yet it is not:
I will not keep my word.
Why then farewell,
Thou never shalt mock Diomedes again.
You shall not go: one cannot speak a word,
But it straight starts you.
I do not like this fooling.
Nor I by Pluto: but that that likes not me, pleases me best.
What shall I come? the hour.
I, come: O Ioue! do, come: I shall be plagued.
Farewell till then.
Good night: I prithee come:
Troilus farewell; one eye yet looks on thee;
But with my heart, the other eye, doth see.
Ah poor our sex; this fault in us I find:
The error of our eye, directs our mind.
What error leads, must err: O then conclude,
Minds swayed by eyes, are full of turpitude.
A proof of strength she could not publish more;
Unless she say, my mind is now turned whore.
all's done my Lord.
It is.
Why stay we then?
To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke:
But if I tell how these two did coact;
Shall I not lie, in publishing a truth?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart:
An esperance so obstinately strong,
That doth invert that test of eyes and ears;
As if those organs had deceptious functions,
Created only to calumniate.
Was Cressida here?
I cannot conjure Trojan.
She was not sure.
Most sure she was.
Why my negation hath no taste of madness?
Nor mine my Lord: Cressida was here but now.
Let it not be believed for womanhood:
Think we had mothers; do not give advantage
To stubborn Critics, apt without a theme
For depravation, to square the general sex
By Cressida's rule. Rather think this not Cressida.
What hath she done Prince, that can soil our mothers?
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
Will he swagger himself out on's own eyes?
This she? no, this is Diomids Cressida:
If beauty have a soul, this is not she:
If souls guide vows; if vows are sanctimony;
If sanctimony be the god's delight:
If there be rule in unity itself,
This is not she: O madness of discourse
That cause sets up, with, and against thyself
By foul authority: where reason can revolt
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason,
Without revolt. This is, and is not Cressida:
Within my soul, there doth conduce a fight
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseparate,
Divides more wider than the sky and earth:
And yet the spacious breadth of this division,
Admits no Orifex for a point as subtle,
As Ariachnes broken woof to enter:
Instance, O instance! strong as Pluto's gates:
Cressida is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven;
Instance, O instance, strong as heaven itself:
The bonds of heaven are slipped, dissolved, and loosed,
And with another knot five finger tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love:
The fragments, scraps, the bits, and greasy relics,
Of her ore-eaten faith, are bound to Diomedes
May worthy Troilus be half attached
With that which here his passion doth express?
I Greeke: and that shall be divulged well
In Characters, as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus: never did young man fancy
With so eternal, and so fixed a soul.
Hark Greek: as much I do Cressida love;
So much by weight, hate I her Diomedes,
That Sleeve is mine, that he'll bear in his Helm:
Were it a Cask composed by Vulcan's skill,
My Sword should bite it: Not the dreadful spout,
Which Shipmen do the Hurricane call,
Constringed in mass by the almighty Fen,
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear
In his descent; then shall my prompted sword,
Falling on Diomed.
he'll tickle it for his concupie.
O Cressida! O false Cressida! false, false, false:
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
And they'll seem glorious.
O contain yourself:
Your passion draws ears hither.
I have been seeking you this hour my Lord:
Hector by this is arming him in Troy.
Aiax your Guard, stays to conduct you home.
Have with you Prince: my courteous Lord adieu:
Farewell revolted fair: and Diomedes,
Stand fast, and wear a Castle on thy head.
I'll bring you to the Gates.
Accept distracted thankes.
Would I could meet that rogue Diomedes, I would croak like a Raven: I would bode, I would bode: Patroclus will give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore: the Parrot will not do more for an Almond, than he for a commodious drab: Lechery, lechery, still wars and lechery, nothing else holds fashion. A burning devil take them.
When was my Lord so much ungently tempered,
To stop his ears against admonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight to day.
You train me to offend you: get you gone.
By the everlasting gods, I'll go.
My dreams will sure prove ominous to the day.
No more I say.
Where is my brother Hector?
Here sister, armed, and bloody in intent:
Consort with me in loud and dear petition:
Pursue we him on knees: for I have dreamt
Of bloody turbulence; and this whole night
Hath nothing been but shapes, and forms of slaughter.
O, 'tis true.
Ho? bid my Trumpet sound.
No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother.
Begun I say: the gods have heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows;
They are polluted offerings, more abhorred
Than spotted Livers in the sacrifice.
O be persuaded, do not count it holy,
To hurt by being just; it is as lawful:
For we would count give much to as violent thefts,
And rob in the behalf of charity.
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow;
But vows to every purpose must not hold:
Vnatme sweet Hector.
Hold you still I say;
Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate:
Life every man holds dear, but the dear man
Holds honour far more precious, dear, than life.
How now young man? meanest thou to fight to day?
Cassandra, call my father to persuade.
No faith young Troilus; doff thy harness youth:
I am to day i'th' vain of Chivalry:
Let grow thy Sinews till their knots be strong;
And tempt nor yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go; and doubt thou not brave boy,
I'll stand to day, for thee, and me, and Troy.
Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you;
Which better fits a Lion, than a man.
What vice is that? good Troilus chide me for it.
When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair Sword:
You bid them rise, and live.
O 'tis fair play.
Fool's play, by heaven Hector.
How now? how now?
For th' love of all the gods
Let's leave the Hermit Pity with our Mothers;
And when we have our Armours buckled on,
The venomed vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, reine them from ruth.
Fie savage, fie.
Hector, then 'tis wars.
Troilus, I would not have you fight to day.
Who should withhold me?
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire;
Not Priamus, and Hecuba on knees;
Their eyes ore-galled with recourse of tears;
Nor you my brother, with your true sword drawn
Opposed to hinder me, should stop my way:
But by my ruin.
Lay hold upon him Priam, hold him fast:
He is thy crutch; now if thou lose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Come Hector, come, go back:
Thy wife hath dreamt: thy mother hath had visions;
Cassandra doth foresee; and I myself,
Am like a Prophet suddenly enrapt, to tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come back.
Aeneas is a field,
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valour, to appear
This morning to them.
I, but thou shalt not go,
I must not break my faith:
You know me dutiful, therefore dear sir,
Let me not shame respect; but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me, Royal Priam.
O Priam, yield not to him.
Do not dear father.
Andromache I am offended with you:
Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl,
Makes all these bodements.
O farewell, dear Hector:
Look how thou diest; look how thy eye turns pale:
Look how thy wounds doth bleed at many vents:
Hark how Troy roars; how Hecuba cries out;
How poor Andromache shrils her dolour forth;
Behold distraction, frenzy, and amazement,
Like witless Antics one another meet,
And all cry Hector, Hector's dead: O Hector!
Away, away.
Farewell: yes, soft: Hector I take my leave;
Thou dost thyself, and all our Troy deceive.
You are amazed, my Liege, at her exclaim:
Go in and cheer the Town, we'll forth and fight:
Do deeds of praise, and tell you them at night.
Farewell: the gods with safety stand about thee.
They are at it, hark: proud Diomedes, believe
I come to lose my arm, or win my sleeve.
Do you hear my Lord? do you hear?
What now?
Here's a Letter come from yond poor girl.
Let me read.
A whoreson tissick, a whoreson rascally tissick, so troubles me; and the foolish fortune of this girl, and what one thing, what another, that I shall leave you one o' this days: and I have a rheum in mine eyes too; and such an ache in my bones; that unless a man were cursed, I cannot tell what to think on't. What says she there?
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart;
Th' effect doth operate another way.
Go wind to wind, there turn and change together:
My love with words and errors still she feeds;
But edifies another with her deeds.
Why, but hear you?
Hence brother lackey; ignomy and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name.
Now they are clapper-clawing one another, I'll go look on: that dissembling abominable varlet Diomedes, has got that same scurvy, doting, foolish young knave's Sleeve of Troy, there in his Helm: I would fain see them meet; that, that same young Trojan ass, that loves the whore there, might send that Greekish whore-maisterly villain, with the Sleeve, back to the dissembling luxurious drab, of a sleeveless errant. O' th' other side, the policy of those crafty swearing rascals; that stole old Mouse-eaten dry cheese, Nestor: and that same dog-foxe Ulysses is not proved worth a Black-berry. They set me up in policy, that mongrel cur Aiax, against that dog of as bad a kind, Achilles. And now is the cur Aiax prouder than the cur Achilles, and will not arm to day. Whereupon, the Grecians began to proclaim barbarism; and policy grows into an ill opinion.
Soft, here comes Sleeve, and th' other.
Fly not: for shouldst thou take the River Styx,
I would swim after.
Thou dost miscall retire:
I do not fly; but advantageous care
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude:
Have at thee?
Hold thy whore Grecian: now for thy whore Trojan: Now the Sleeve, now the Sleeve.
What art thou Greek? art thou for Hector's match?
Art thou of blood, and honour?
No, no: I am a rascal: a scurvy railing knave: a very filthy rogue.
I do believe thee, live.
God a mercy, that thou wilt believe me; but a plague break thy neck— for frighting me: what's become of the wenching rogues? I think they have swallowed one another. I would laugh at that miracle— yet in a sort, lechery ears itself: I'll seek them.
Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus Horse;
Present the fair Steed to my Lady Cressida:
Fellow, commend my service to her beauty;
Tell her, I have chastised the amorous Trojan.
And am her Knight by proof.
I go my Lord.
Renew, renew, the fierce Polidamus
Hath beat down Menon: bastard Margarelon
Hath Doreus prisoner.
And stands Calossus-wise waving his beam,
Upon the pashed courses of the Kings:
Epistropus and Cedus, Polixines is slain;
Amphimacus, and Thou deadly hurt;
Patroclus ta'en or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised; the dreadful Sagittary
Appauls' our numbers, haste we Diomedes
To re-enforcement, or we perish all.
Coe bear Patroclus body to Achilles,
And bid the snaile-paced Aiax arm for shame;
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his Horse,
And there lacks work: anon he's there a foot,
And there they fly or dye, like scaled skulls,
Before the belching Whale; then is he yonder,
And there the straying Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, like the mower's swath;
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes;
Dexterity so obeying appetite,
That what he will, he does, and does so much,
That proof is called impossibility.
Oh, courage, courage Princes: great Achilles
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance;
Patroclus wounds have roused his drowsy blood,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
That noseless, handless, hacked and chipped, come to him;
Crying on Hector. Aiax hath lost a friend,
And foams at mouth, and he is armed, and at it:
Roaring for Troilus; who hath done to day.
Mad and fantastic execution;
Engaging and redeeming of himself,
With such a careless force, and forceless care,
As if that luck in very spite of cunning, bade him win all.
Troilus, thou coward Troilus.
I, there, there.
So, so, we draw together.
Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face:
Know what it is to meet Achilles' angry.
Hector, where's Hector? I will none but Hector.
Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head.
Troilus, I say, where's Troilus?
What wouldst thou?
I would correct him.
Were I the General,
Thou shouldst have my office,
Ere that correction: Troilus I say, what Troilus?
Oh traitor Diomedes!
Turn thy false face thou traitor,
And pay thy life thou owest me for my horse.
Ha', art thou there?
I'll fight with him alone, stand Diomed.
He is my prize, I will not look upon.
Come both you cogging Greekes, have at you both.
Yea Troilus? O well fought my youngest Brother.
Now do I see thee; have at thee Hector.
Pause if thou wilt.
I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan;
Be happy that my arms are out of use:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again:
Till when, go seek thy fortune.
Far thee well:
I would have been much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee: how now my Brother?
Aiax hath ta'en Aeneas; shall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
He shall not carry him: I'll be ta'en too,
Or bring him off: Fate hear me what I say;
I wreak nor, though thou end my life to day.
Stand, stand, thou Greek,
Thou art a goodly mark:
No? wilt thou not? I like thy armour well,
I'll frush it, and unlock the rivets all,
But I'll be master of it: wilt thou not beast abide?
Why then fly on, I'll hunt thee for thy hide.
Come here about me you my Myrmidons:
Mark what I say; attend me where I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath;
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
Impale him with your weapons round about:
In fellest manner execute your arm.
Fellow me sirs, and my proceed eye;
It is decreed, Hector the great must dye.
The Cuckold and the Cuckold maker are at it: now bull, now dog, low; Paris low; now my double hened sparrow; low Paris, low; the bull has the game: aware horns ho?
Turn slave and fight.
What art thou?
A Bastard Son of Priam's.
I am a Bastard too, I love Bastards, I am a Bastard begot, Bastard instructed, Bastard in mind, Bastard in valour, in every thing illegitimate: one Bear will not bite another, and wherefore should one Bastard? take heed, the quarrel's most ominous to us: if the Son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts judgement: farewell Bastard.
The devil take thee coward.
Most putrified core so fair without:
Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life.
Now is my days work done; I'll take good breath:
Rest Sword, thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Look Hector how the Sun begins to set;
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels,
Even with the veil and darking of the Sun.
To close the day up, Hector's life is done.
I am unarmed, forgo this vantage Greek.
Strike fellows, strike, this is the man I seek.
So Illium fall thou: now Troy sink down;
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
On Myrmidons, cry you all a main,
Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain.
Hark, a retreat upon our Grecian part.
The Trojan Trumpets sounds the like my Lord.
The dragon wing of night ore-spreds the earth
And stickler-like the Armies separates
My half supped Sword, that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bed; thus goes to bed.
Come, tie his body to my horse's tail;
Along the field, I will the Trojan trail.
Hark, hark, what shout is that?
Peace Drums.
Achilles, Achilles, Hector's slain, Achilles.
The bruit is, Hector's slain, and by Achilles.
If it be so, yet braglesse let it be:
Great Hector was a man as good as he.
March patiently along; let one be sent
To pray Achilles see us at our Tent.
If in his death the gods have us befriended,
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.
Stand ho, yet are we masters of the field,
Never go home; here starve we out the night.
Hector is slain.
Hector? the gods forbidden.
he's dead: and at the murderer's Horses tail,
In beastly sort, dragged through the shameful Field:
Frown on you heavens, effect your rage with speed:
Sat gods upon your thrones, and smile at Troy.
I say at once, let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on.
My Lord, you do discomfort all the Host.
You understand me not, that tell me so:
I do not speak of flight, of fear, of death,
But dare all imminence that gods and men,
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so? or Hecuba?
Let him that will a screechoule aye be called,
Go in to Troy, and say there, Hector's dead:
There is a word will Priam turn to stone;
Make wells, and Niobes of the maids and wives;
Cool statues of the youth: and in a word,
Scare Troy out of itself. But march away,
Hector is dead: there is no more to say.
Stay yet: you vile abominable Tents,
Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains:
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
I'll through, and through you; & thou great sized coward:
No space of Earth shall sunder our two hates,
I'll haunt thee, like a wicked conscience still,
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzies thoughts.
Strike a free march to Troy, with comfort go:
Hope of revenge, shall hide our inward woe.
But hear you? hear you?
Hence broker, lackey, ignomy, and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name.
A goodly medicine for mine aching bones: oh world, world, world! thus is the poor agent despised: Oh traitors and bawds; how earnestly are you set a-work, and how ill requited? why should our endeavour be so desired, and the performance so loathed? What Verse for it? what instance for it? let me see.
Full merrily the humble Bee-doth sing,
Till he hath lost his honey, and his sting.
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey, and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted clothes;
As many as be here of Panders hall,
Your eyes half out, weep out at Pandar's fall:
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans;
Though not for me yet for your aching bones:
Brethren and sisters of the hold-dore trade,
Some two months hence, my will shall here be made:
It should be now, but that my fear is this:
Some galled Goose of Winchester would hisse:
Till then, I'll sweat, and seek about for eases;
And at that time be queath you my diseases.