TO sing a Song that old was sung,
From ashes, ancient Gower is come,
Assuming man's infirmities,
To glad your ear, and please your eyes:
It hath been sung at Feastivals,
On Ember eves, and Holidays:
And Lords and Ladies in their lives,
Have red it for restoratives:
The purchase is to make men glorious,
Et bonum quo Antiquius eo melius:
If you, borne in those latter times,
When Wits more ripe, accept my rhymes;
And that to hear an old man sing,
May to your Wishes pleasure bring:
I life would wish, and that I might
Waste it for you, like Taper light.
This Antioch, than Antiochus the great,
Built up this City, for his chiefest Seat;
The fairest in all Syria.
I tell you what mine Authors say:
This King unto him took a Peer,
Who died, and left a female heir,
So buxom, blithe, and full of face,
As heaven had lent her all his grace:
With whom the Father liking took,
And her to Incest did provoke:
Bad child, worse father, to entice his own
To evil, should be done by none:
But custom what they did begin,
Was with long use, accounted no sin;
The beauty of this sinful Dame,
Made many Princes thither frame,
To seek her as a bedfellow,
In marriage pleasures, playfellow:
Which to prevent, he made a Law,
To keep her still, and men in awe:
That who so asked her for his wife,
His Riddle told, not lost his life:
So for her many of wight did die,
As yond grim looks do testify.
What now ensues, to the judgement of your eye,
I give my cause, who best can justify.
Young Prince of Tyre, you have at large received
The danger of the task you undertake.
I have (Antiochus) and with a soul emboldened
With the glory of her praise, think death no hazard,
In this enterprise.
Music bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride,
For embracements even of Ioue himself;
At whose conception, till Lucina reigned,
Nature this dowry gave; to glad her presence,
The Seanate house of Planets all did sit,
To knit in her, their best perfections.
See where she comes, apparelled like the Spring,
Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the King,
Of every Virtue gives renown to men:
Her face the book of praises, where is read,
Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence,
Sorrow were ever racte, and tasty wrath
Could never be her mild companion.
You Gods that made me man, and sway in love;
That have inflame desire in my breast,
To taste the fruit of yond celestial tree,
(Or die in th'adventure) be my helps,
As I am son and servant to your will,
To compass such a bondlesse happiness.
Prince Pericles.
That would be son to great Antiochus.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,
With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touched:
For Death like Dragons here affright thee hard:
Her face like Heaven, enticeth thee to view
Her countless glory; which desert must gain:
And which without desert, because thine eye
Presumes to reach, all the whole heap must die:
Yon sometimes famous Princes, like thyself,
Drawn by report, adventurous by desire,
Tell thee with speechless tongues, and semblance pale,
That without covering, save yond field of Stars,
here they stand Martyrs slain in Cupid's Wars:
And with dead cheeks, advise thee to desist,
For going on death's net, whom none resist.
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught,
My frail mortality to know itself;
And by those fearful objects, to prepare
This body, like to them, to what I must:
For Death remembered should be like a mirror,
Who tells us, life's but breath, to trust it error:
I'll make my Will then, and as sick men do,
Who know the World, see Heaven, but feeling woe,
Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did;
So I bequeath a happy peace to you,
And all good men, as every Prince should do;
My riches to the earth, from whence they came;
But my unspotted fire of Love, to you:
Thus ready for the way of life or death,
I wait the sharpest blow (Antiochus)
Scorning advice; read the conclusion then:
Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed,
As these before thee, thou thyself shalt bleed.
Of all said yet, mayst thou prove prosperous,
Of all said yet, I wish thee happiness.
Like a bold Champion I assume the Lists,
Nor ask advise of any other thought,
But faithfulness and courage.
I am no Viper, yet I feed
On mother's flesh which did me breed:
I sought a Husband, in which labour,
I found that kindness in a Father;
he's Father, Son, and Husband mild;
I, Mother, Wife; and yet his Child:
How they may be, and yet in two,
As you will live resolve it you.
Sharp Physic is the last: But o you powers!
That gives heaven countless eyes to view men's acts.
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually,
If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?
Fair Glass of light, I loved you, and could still,
Were not this glorious Casket stored with ill:
But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt,
For he's no man on whom perfections wait,
That knowing sin within, will touch the gate.
You are a fair Viol, and your sense, the strings;
Who fingered to make man his lawful music,
Would draw Heaven down, and all the Gods to hearken:
But being played upon before your time,
Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime:
Good sooth, I care not for you.
Prince Pericl●s', touch not, upon thy life;
For that's an Article within our Law,
As dangerous as the rest: your time's expired,
Either expound now, or receive your sentence.
Great King,
Few love to hear the sins they love to act,
'Twould brayed yourself too near for me to tell it:
Who has a book of all that monarchs do,
he's more secure to keep it shut, then shown.
For Vice repeated, is like the wandering Wind,
Blows dust in others eyes to spread itself;
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear:
To stop the Air would hurt them, the blind Mole casts
Copt hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is thronged
By man's oppression, and the poor Worm doth die for't:
Kings are earth's Gods; in vice, their law's their will:
And if Ioue stray, who dares say, Ioue doth ill:
It is enough you know, and it is fit;
What being more known, grows worse, to smother it.
All love the Womb that their first being bred,
Then give my tongue like leave, to love my head.
Heaven, that I had thy head; he has found the meaning:
But I will gloze with him. Young Prince of Tyre,
Though by the tenor of your strict edict,
Your exposition misinterpreting,
We might proceed to counsel of your days;
Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree
As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise;
Forty days longer we do respite you,
If by which time, our secret be undone,
This mercy shows, we'll joy in such a Son:
And until then, your entertain shall be
As doth befit our honour and your worth.
How courtesy would seem to cover sin,
When what is done, is like an hypocrite,
The which is good in nothing but in sight.
If it be true that I interpret false,
Then were it certain you were not so bad,
As with foul Incest to abuse your soul:
Where now you both a Father and a Son,
By your untimely clasp with your Child,
(Which pleasures fits a husband, not a father)
And she an eater of her Mother's flesh,
By the defiling of her Parent's bed,
And both like Serpents are; who though they feed
On sweetest Flowers, yet they Poison breed.
Antioch farewell, for Wisdom sees those men,
Blush not in actions blacker than the night,
Will show no course to keep them from the light:
One sin (I know) another doth provoke;
murder's as near to Lust, as Flame to Smoke:
Poison and Treason are the hands of Sin,
I, and the targets to put off the shame,
Then lest my life be cropped, to keep you clear,
By flight, I'll shun the danger which I fear.
He hath found the meaning,
For which we mean to have his head:
He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin
In such a loathed manner:
And therefore instantly this Prince must die,
For by his fall, my honour must keep high.
Who attends us there?
Doth your highness call?
Thaliard, you are of our Chamber, Thaliard,
And our mind partakes her private actions,
To your secrecy; and for your faithfulness,
We will advance you, Thaliard:
Behold, here's Poison, and here's Gold:
We hate the Prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him;
It fits thee not to ask the reason why?
Because we bid it: say, is it done?
My Lord, 'tis done.
Enough. Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.
My Lord, Prince Pericles is fled.
As thou wilt live fly after, and like an arrow shot from a well experienced Archer hits the mark his eye doth level at: so thou never return unless thou say Prince Pericles is dead.
My Lord, if I can get him within my Pistols length, I'll make him sure enough, so farewell to your highness.
Thaliard adieu, till Pericles be dead,
My heart can lend no succour to my head.
Let none disturb us, why should this change of thoughts
The sad companion dull eyed melancholy,
By me so used a guest, as not an hour
In the days glorious walk or peaceful night,
The tomb where grief should sleep can breed me quiet,
Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun them,
And danger which I feared is at Antioch,
Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here,
Yet neither pleasures Art can joy my spirits,
Nor yet the others distance comfort me,
Than it is thus, the passions of the mind,
That have their first conception by mis-dread,
Have after nourishment and life, by care
And what was first but fear, what might be done,
Grows elder now, and cares it be not done.
And so with me the great Antiochus,
'Gainst whom I am too little to contend,
Since he's so great, can make his will his act,
Will think me speaking, though I swear to silence,
Nor boots it me to say, I honour,
If he suspect I may dishonour him.
And what may make him blush in being known,
he'll stop the course by which it might be known,
With hostile forces heel o'erspread the land,
And with the stint of war will look so huge,
Amazement shall drive courage from the state,
Our men be vanquished ere they do resist,
And subjects punished that near thought offence,
Which care of them, not pity of myself,
Who once no more but as the tops of trees,
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,
Makes both my body pine, and soul to languish,
And punish that before that he would punish.
joy and all comfort in your sacred breast.
And keep your mind till you return to us peaceful and comfortable.
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue,
They do abuse the King that flatter him,
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin,
The thing the which is flattered, but a spark,
To which that spark gives heat, and stronger
Glowing, whereas reproof obedient and in order,
Fits kings as they are men, for they may err,
When signor sooth here does proclaim peace,
He flatters you, makes war upon your life.
Prince paadon me, or strike me if you please,
I cannot be much lower than my knees.
All leave us else: but let your cares o'erlook,
What shipping, and what ladings in our haven,
And then return to us, Hellicans' thou hast
Moved us, what seest thou in our looks?
An angry brow, dread Lord.
If there be such a dart in Princes frowns,
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
How dares the plants look up to heaven,
From whence they have their nourishment?
Thou knowest I have power to take thy life from thee.
I have ground the Axe myself,
Do but you strike the blow.
Rise, prithee rise, sit down, thou art no flatterer,
I thank thee for't, and heave forbid
That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid.
Fit Counsellor, and servant for a Prince,
Who by thy wisdom makes a Prince thy servant,
What wouldst thou have me do?
To bear with patience such griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself.
Thou speak'st like a Physician Hellicanus,
That ministers a potion unto me:
That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself,
Attend me then, I went to Antioch,
Whereas thou know'st against the face of death,
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty,
From whence an issue I might propagate,
Are arms to Princes, and bring joys to subjects,
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder,
The rest hark in thine ear, as black as incest,
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father
Seemed not to strike, but smooth, but thou know'st this,
'tis time to fear when tyrants seems to kiss.
Which fear so grew in me I hither fled,
Under the covering of a careful night,
Who seemed my good protector, and being here,
Bethought what was past, what might succeed,
I knew him tyrannous, and tyrant's fear
Decrease not, but grow faster than the years,
And should he do't, as no doubt he doth,
That I should open to the listening air,
How many worthy Prince's bloods were shed,
To keep his bed of blackness vnlayde open,
To lop that doubt, he'll fill this land with arms,
And make pretence of wrong that I have done him,
When all for mine, if I may call offence,
Must feel wars blow, who spares not innocence,
Which love to all of which thyself art one,
Who now reprou'dst me fort.
Alas sir.
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,
Muse into my mind, with thousand doubts
How I might stop this tempest ere it came,
And finding little comfort to relieve them,
I thought it princely charity to grieve for them.
Well my Lord, since you have given me leave to speak,
Freely will I speak, Antiochus you fear,
And justly too, I think you fear the tyrant,
Who either by public war, or private treason,
Will take away your life: therefore my Lord, go travel for a while, till that his rage and anger be forgot, or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life: your rule direct to any, if to me, day serves not light more faithful than I'll be.
I do not doubt thy faith.
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
we'll mingle our bloods together in the earth,
From whence we had our being, and our birth.
Tyre I now look from thee then, and to Tharsus
Intent my travail, where I'll hear from thee,
And by whose Letters I'll dispose myself.
The care I had and have of subjects good,
On thee I lay, whose wisdoms strength can bear it,
I'll take thy word, for faith not ask thine oath,
Who shuns not to break one, will crack both.
But in our orbs will live so round, and safe,
That time of both this truth shall near convince,
Thou show'dst a subjects shine, I a true Prince.
So this is Tyre, and this the Court, here must I kill King Pericles, and if I do it not, I am sure to be hanged at home: 'tis dangerous.
Well, I perceive he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that being bid to ask what he would of the King, desired he might know none of his secrets.
Now do I see he had some reason for't: for if a king bid a man be a villain, he's bound by the indenture of his oath to be one.
hushed, here comes the Lords of Tyre.
You shall not need my fellow-Peers of Tyre, further to question me of your king's departure: his sealed Commission left in trust with me, does speak sufficiently he's gone to travail.
How? the King gone?
If further yet you will be satisfied, (why as it were unlicensed of your loves) he would depart? I'll give some light unto you, being at Antioch.
What from Antioch?
Royal Antiochus on what cause I know not, took some displeasure at him, at least he judged so: and doubting lest he had erred or sinned, to show his sorrow, he'd correct himself; so puts himself unto the Shipman's toil, with whom each minute threatens life or death.
Well, I perceive I shall not be hanged now, although I would, but since he's gone, the King's Seas must please: he scaped the Land to perish at the Sea, I'll present myself. Peace to the Lords of Tyre.
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
From him I come with message unto princely Pericles, but since my landing, I have understood your Lord has betake himself to unknown travails, now message must return from whence it came.
We have no reason to desire it, commended to our master not to us, yet ere you shall depart, this we desire as friends to Antioch we may feast in Tyre.
My Dyoniza shall we rest us here,
And by relating tales of others griefs,
See if 'twill teach us to forget our own?
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it,
For who digs hills because they do aspire?
Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher:
O my distressed Lord, even such our griefs are,
here they are but felt, and seen with mischiefs eyes,
But like to Groves, being topped, they higher rise.
O Dioniza.
Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it,
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?
Our tongues and sorrows to sound deep:
Our woes into the air, our exes to weep.
Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim
Them louder, that if heaven slumber, while
Their creatures want, they may awake
Their helpers, to comfort them.
I'll then discourse our woes felt several years,
And wanting breath to speak, help me with tears.
I'll do my best Syr.
This Tharsus o'er which I have the government,
A City on whom plenty held full hand:
For riches strew'de herself even in her streets,
Whose towers bore heads so high they kissed the clouds,
And strangers near beheld, but wondered at,
Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn'de,
Like one another's glass to trim them by,
Their tables were stored full to glad the sight,
And not so much to feed on as delight,
All poverty was scor'nde, and pride so great,
The name of help grew odious to repeat.
O 'tis too true.
But see what heaven can do by this our change,
These mouths who but of late, earth sea, and air,
Were all too little to content and please,
Although thy gave their creatures in abundance,
As houses are defil'de for want of use,
They are now starved for want of exercise,
Those palates who not yet too saviours younger,
Must have inventions to delight the taste,
Would now be glad of bread and beg for it,
Those mothers who to nouzell up their babes,
Thought nought too curious, are ready now
To eat those little darlings whom they loved,
So sharpe are hungers teeth, that man and we,
Draw lots who first shall die, to lengthen life.
here stands a Lord, and there a Lady weeping:
here many sink, yet those which see them fall,
Have scarce strength left to give them burial.
Is not this true?
Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.
O let those Cities that of plenty's cup,
And her prosperities so largely taste,
With their superfluous riots hear these tears,
The misery of Tharsus may be theirs.
Where's the Lord Governor?
Here, speak out thy sorrows, which thee bringst
n hast, for comfort is too farre for vs to expect.
We have descried upon our neighbouring shore, a portly sail of ships make hitherward.
I thought as much.
One sorrow never comes but brings an heir,
That may succcede as his inheritor:
And so in ours, some neighbouring nation,
Taking advantage of our misery,
That stuffedd the hollow vessels with their power,
To beat us down, the which are down already,
And make a conquest of unhappy me,
Whereas no glories got to overcome.
That's the least fear.
For by the semblance of their white flags displayde, they bring us peace, and come to us as favourers, not as foes.
Thou speak'st like hymns untuterd to repeat,
Who makes the fairest show, means most deceit.
But bring they what they will, and what they can,
What need we leave our grounds the lowest?
And we are half way there: Go tell their General we attend him here, to know for what he comes, and whence he comes, and what he craves?
I go my Lord.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist,
If wars, we are unable to resist.
Lord Governor, for so we hear you are,
Let not our Ships and number of our men,
Be like a beacon fier'de, t'amaze your eyes,
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,
And seen the desolation of your streets,
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,
But to relieve them of their heavy load,
And these our Ships you happily may think,
Are like the Trojan Horse, was stuffed within
With bloody veins expecting overthrow,
Are stored with Corn, to make your needy bread,
And give them life, whom hunger-starved half dead.
The Gods of Greece protect you,
And we'll pray for you.
Arise I pray you, rise; we do not look for reverence,
But for love, and harbourage for ourself, our ships, & men.
The which when any shall not gratify,
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,
Be it our Wives, our Children, or ourselves,
The Curse of heaven and men succeed their evils:
Till when the which (I hope) shall near be seen:
Your Grace is welcome to our Town and vs.
Which welcome we'll accept, feast here awhile,
Until our Stars that frown, lend us a smile.
here have you seen a mighty King,
His child I'wis to incest bring:
A better Prince, and benign Lord,
That Will prove awful both in deed and word:
Be quiet then as men should be,
Till he hath past necessity:
I'll show you those in troubles reign;
Losing a Mite, a Mountain gain:
The good in conversation,
To whom I give my benison:
Is still at Tharstill, where each man,
Thinks all is writ, he spoken can:
And to remember what he does,
Build his Statue to make him glorious:
But tidings to the contrary,
Are brought your eyes, what need speak I.
Good Helicon that stayed at home,
Not to eat Honey like a Drone,
From others labours; for though he strive
To killen bad, keep good alive:
And to fulfil his prince desire,
Saved one of all, that haps in Tyre:
How Thaliart came full bent with sin,
And had intent to murder him;
And that in Tharsis was not best,
Longer for him to make his rest:
He doing so, put forth to Seas;
Where when men been, there's seldom ease,
For now the Wind begins to blow,
Thunder above, and deeps below,
Makes such unquiet, that the Ship,
Should house him safe; is wracked and split,
And he (good Prince) having all lost,
By Waves, from coast to coast is tossed:
All perishen of man, of pelf,
Ne ought escapend but himself;
Till Fortune tired with doing bad,
Threw him a shore, to give him glad:
And here he comes: what shall be next,
Pardon old Gower, this long's the text.
Yet cease your ire you angry Stars of heaven,
Wind, Rain, and Thunder, remember earthly man
Is but a substance that must yield to you:
And I (as fits my nature) do obey you.
Alas, the Seas hath cast me on the Rocks,
Washed me from shore to shore, and left my breath
Nothing to think on, but ensuing death:
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers,
To have bereft a Prince of all his fortunes;
And having thrown him from your watery grave,
here to have death in peace, is all he'll crave.
What, to pelch?
Ha, come and bring away the Nets.
What Patch-breech, I say.
What say you Master?
Look how thou stirrest now:
Come away, or I'll fetchthee with a wanion.
faith Master, I am thinking of the poor men,
That were cast away before us even now.
Alas poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear,
What pitiful cries they made to us, to help them,
When (welladay) we could scarce help ourselves.
Nay Master, said not I as much,
When I saw the Porpas how he bounced and tumbled?
They say they're half fish, half flesh:
A plague on them, they near come but I look to be washed.
Master, I marvel how the Fishes live in the Sea?
Why, as Men do aland;
The great ones eat up the little ones:
I can compare our rich Misers to nothing so fitly,
As to a Whale; a plays and tumbles,
driving the poor Fry before him,
And at last, devour them all at a mouthful:
Such Whales have I heard on, a'th' land,
Who never leave gaping, till they swallowed
The whole Parish, Church, Steeple, Bells and all.
A pretty moral.
But Master, if I had been the Sexton,
I would have been that day in the belfry.
Why, Man?
Because he should have swallowed me too,
And when I had been in his belly,
I would have kept such a jangling of the Bells,
That he should never have left,
Till he cast Bells, Steeple, Church and Parish up again:
But if the good King Simonides were of my mind.
Simonides?
We would purge the land of these Drones,
That rob the Bee of her honey.
How from the fenny subject of the Sea,
These Fishers tell the infirmities of men,
And from their watery empire recollect,
All that may men approve, or men detect.
Peace be at your labour, honest Fishermen.
Honest good fellow what's that, if it be a day fits you
Search out of the Calendar, and no body look after it?
May see the Sea hath cast upon your coast:
What a drunken Knave was the Sea,
To cast thee in our way?
A man whom both the Waters and the Wind,
In that vast Tennis-court, hath made the Ball
For them to play upon, entreats you pity him:
He asks of you, that never used to beg.
No friend, cannot you beg?
here's them in our country of Greece,
Gets more with begging, than we can do with working.
Canst thou catch any Fishes then?
I never d it.
Nay then thou wilt starve sure: for here's nothing to be got nowadays, unless thou canst fish for't.
What I have been, I have forgot to know;
But what I am, want teaches me to think on:
A man thronged up with cold, my Veins are i'll,
And have no more of life than may suffice,
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help:
Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,
For that I am a man, pray you see me buried.
Die, ke-tha; now Gods forbided, and I have a Gown here, come put it on, keep thee warm: now afore me a handsome fellow: Come, thou shalt go home, and we'll have Flesh for all day, Fish for fasting-days and more; or Puddings and Flap-iackes, and thou shalt be welcome.
I thank you sir.
Hark you my friend: You said you could not beg?
I did but crave.
But crave?
Then I'll turn craver too, and so I shall scape whipping.
Why, are you Beggars whipped then?
Oh not all, my friend, not all: for if all your Beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office, then to be Beadle: But Master, I'll go draw up the Net.
How well this honest mirth becomes their labour?
Hark you sir; do you know where ye are?
Not well.
Why I'll tell you, this I called Pantapoles,
And our King, the good Simonides.
The good Simonides, do you call him?
I sir, and he deserves so to be called,
For his peaceable reign, and good government.
He is a happy King, since he gains from
His subjects the name of good, by his government.
How far is his Court distant from this shore?
Mary sir, halfe a days journey: And I'll tell you,
He hath a fair Daughter, and to morrow is her birthday,
And there are Princes and Knights come from all parts of the World to Just and Turney for her love.
Were my fortunes equal to my desires,
I could wish to make one there.
O sir, things must be as they may: and what a man can not get, he may lawfully deal for his wives soul.
Help Master help; here's a Fish hangs in the Net,
Like a poor man's right in the law: 'twill hardly come out.
Ha bots on't, 'tis come at last; & 'tis turned to a rusty Armour.
An Armour friends; I pray you let me see it?
Thanks Fortune, yet that after all crosses,
Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself:
And though it was mine own part of my heritage,
Which my dead Father did bequeath to me,
With this strict charge even as he left his life,
Keep it my Per●cl●s', it hath been a Shield
Twixt me and death, and pointed to this brays,
For that it saved me, keep it in like necessity:
The which the Gods protect thee, Fame may defend thee:
It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it,
Till the rough Seas, that spares not any man,
took it in rage, though calmed, have given 't again:
I thank thee for't, my shipwreck now's no ill,
Since I have here my Father gave in his Will.
What mean you sir?
To beg of you (kind friends) this Coat of worth,
For it was sometime Target to a King;
I know it by this mark: he loved me dearly,
And for his sake, I wish the having of it;
And that you'd guide me to your Sovereign's Court,
Where with it, I may appear a Gentleman:
And if that ever my low fortune's better,
I'll pay your bounties; till then, rest your debtor.
Why wilt thou tourney for the Lady?
I'll show the virtue I have borne in Arms.
Why do take it: and the Gods give thee good an't.
I but hark you my friend, 'twas we that made up this Garment through the rough seams of the Waters: there are certain Condolements, certain Veils: I hope sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from whence you had them.
believe't, I will:
By your furtherance I am clothed in Steel,
And spite of all the rupture of the Sea,
This jewel holds his building on my arm:
Unto thy value I will mount myself
Upon a Courser, whose delight steps,
Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread;
Only (my friend) I yet am unprovided of a pair of Bases.
we'll sure provide, thou shalt have
My best Gown to make thee a pair;
And I'll bring thee to the Court myself.
Then Honour be but a Goal to my Will,
This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill.
Are the Knights ready to begin the Triumph?
They are my Liege, and stay your coming,
To present themselves.
Return them, We are ready, & our daughter here,
In honour of whose Birth, these Triumphs are,
Sits here like Beauty's child, whom Nature got,
For men to see; and seeing wonder at.
It pleaseth you (my royal Father) to express
My Commendations great, whose merit's less.
It's fit it should be so, for Princes are
A model which Heaven makes like to itself:
As jewels lose their glory, if neglected,
So Princes their Renowns, if not respected:
'tis now your honour (Daughter) to entertain
The labour of each Knight, in his device.
Which to preserve mine honour, I'll perform.
Who is the first, that doth prefer himself?
A Knight of Sparta (my renowned father)
And the device he bears upon his Shield,
Is a black Ethyope reaching at the Sun:
The word: Luxtuvimihi.
He loves you well, that holds his life of you.
Who is the second, that presents himself?
A Prince of Macedon (my royal father)
And the device he bears upon his Shield,
Is an Armed Knight, that's conquered by a Lady:
The motto thus in Spanish. Pue Per dolecra kee per forsa.
Knight.
And with the third?
The third, of Antioch; and his device,
A wreath of Chivally: the word: Me Pompey provexit apex.
Knight.
What is the fourth.
A burning Torch that's turned upside down;
The word: Qui me alit me extinguit.
Which shows that Beauty hath his power & will,
Which can as well inflame, as it can kill.
Knight.
The fift, an Hand environed with Clouds,
Holding out Gold, that's by the Touchstone tried:
The motto thus: Sic spectanda fides.
Knight.
And what's the sixt, and last; the which,
The knight himself with such a graceful courtesy delivered?
He seems to be a Stranger: but his Present is
A withered Branch, that's only green at top,
The motto: In hac spe vivo.
A pretty moral from the dejected state wherein he is,
He hopes by you, his fortunes yet may flourish.
He had need mean better, than his outward show
Can any way speak in his just commend:
For by his rusty outside, he appears,
To have practised more the Whipstock, than the Lance.
He well may be a Stranger, for he comes
To an honoured triumph, strangely furnished.
And on set purpose let his Armour rust
Until this day, to scour it in the dust.
Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan
The outward habit, by the inward man.
But stay, the Knights are coming,
We will withdraw into the Gallery.
Knights, to say you're welcome, were superfluous.
I place upon the volume of your deeds,
As in a Title page, your worth in arms,
Were more than you expect, or more than's fit,
Since every worth in show commends itself:
Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a Feast.
You are Princes, and my guests.
But you my Knight and guest,
To whom this Wreath of victory I give,
And crown you King of this days happiness.
'tis more by Fortune (Lady) than my Merit.
Call it by what you will, the day is your,
And here (I hope) is none that envies it:
In framing an Artist, art hath thus decreed,
To make some good, but others to exceed,
And you are her laboured scholar: come Queen a th'feast,
For (Daughter) so you are; here take your place:
martial the rest, as they deserve their grace.
We are honoured much by good Symonides.
Your presence glads our days, honour we love,
For who hates honour, hates the Gods above.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Some other is more fit.
Contend not sir, for we are Gentlemen,
have neither in our hearts, nor outward eyes,
Envies the great, nor shall the low despise.
You are right courteous Knights.
Sit sir, sit.
By Ioue (I wonder) that is King of thoughts,
These Cates resist me, he not thought upon.
By Iuno (that is Queen of marriage)
All Viands that I eat do seem unsavoury,
Wishing him my meat: sure he's a gallant Gentleman.
he's but a country Gentleman: has done no more
Than other Knights have done, has broken a Staff,
Or so; so let it pass.
To me he seems like Diamond, to Glass.
You Kings to me, like to my father's picture,
Which tells in that glory once he was,
Had Princes sit like Stars about his throne,
And he the Sun for them to reverence;
None that beheld him, but like lesser lights,
Did vail their Crowns to his supremacy;
Where now his son like a Glow-worm in the night,
The which hath Fire in darkness, none in light:
Whereby I see that Time's the King of men,
he's both their Parent, and he is their Grave,
And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
What, are you merry, Knights?
Who can be other, in this royal presence.
here, with a Cup that's stirred unto the brim,
As do you love, fill to your Mistress lips,
We drink this health to you.
We thank your Grace.
Yet pause awhile, yond Knight doth sit too melancholy,
As if the entertainment in our Court,
Had not a show might countervail his worth:
Note it not you, Thaisa.
What is't to me, my father?
O attend my Daughter,
Princes in this, should live like Gods above,
Who freely give to every one that come to honour them:
And Princes not doing so, are like to Gnats,
Which make a sound, but killed, are wondered at:
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet,
here, say we drink this standing bowl of wine to him.
Alas my Father, it befits not me,
Unto a stranger Knight to be so bold,
He may my proffer take for an offence,
Since men take women's gifts for impudence.
How? do as I bid you, or you'll move me else.
Now by the Gods, he could not please me better.
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him
Of whence he is, his name, and Parentage?
The King my father (sir) has drunk to you.
I thank him.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.
And further, he desires to know of you,
Of whence you are, your name and parentage?
A Gentleman of Tyre, my name Pericles,
My education been in Arts and Arms:
Who looking for adventures in the world,
Was by the rough Seas reft of Ships and men,
and after shipwreck, driven upon this shore.
He thanks your Grace; names himself Pericles,
A Gentleman of Tyre: who only by misfortune of the seas,
Bereft of Ships and Men, cast on this shore.
Now by the Gods, I pity his misfortune,
And will awake him from his melancholy.
Come Gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,
And waste the time which looks for other revels;
Even in your Armours as you are addressed,
Will well become a soldiers dance:
I will not have excuse with saying this,
Loud Music is too harsh for ladies heads,
Since they love men in arms, as well as beds.
So, this was well asked, 'twas so well performed.
Come sir, here's a Lady that wants breathing too,
And I have heard, you Knights of Tyre,
Are excellent in making Ladies trip;
And that their Measures are as excellent.
In those that practise them, they are (my Lord)
Oh that's as much, as you would be denied
Of your fair courtesy: unclasp, unclasp.
Thanks Gentlemen to all, all have done well;
But you the best: Pages and lights, to conduct
These Knights unto their several Lodgings:
Yours sir, we have given order be next our own.
I am at your Grace's pleasure.
Princes, it is too late to talk of love.
And that's the mark I know, you level at:
Therefore each one betake him to his rest,
To morrow all for speeding do their best.
No Escanes, know this of me,
Antiochus' from incest lived not free:
For which the most high Gods not minding,
Longer to withhold the vengeance that
They had in store, due to this heinous
Capital offence, even in the height and pride
Of all his glory, when he was seated in
A Chariot of an inestimable value, and his daughter
With him; a fire from heaven came and shriveld
Up those bodies even to loathing, for they so stounke,
That all those eyes adored them, ere their fall,
Scorn now their hand should give them burial.
'Twas very strange.
And yet but justice; for though this King were great,
His greatness was no guard to bar heavens shaft,
But sin had his reward.
'tis very true.
See, not a man in private conference,
Or counsel, has respect with him but he.
It shall no longer grieve, without reproof.
And cursed be he that will not second it.
Follow me then: Lord Hellicane, a word.
With me? and welcome happy day, my Lords.
Know, that our griefs are risen to the top,
And now at length they overflow their banks.
Your griefs, for what?
Wrong not your Prince, you love.
Wrong not yourself then, noble Hellican,
But if the Prince do live, let us salute him,
Or know what ground's made happy by his breath:
If in the world he live, we'll seek him out:
If in his grave he rest, we'll find him there,
And be resolved he lives to govern us:
Or dead, give's cause to mourn his funeral,
And leave us to our free election.
Whose death in deed, the strongest in our censure,
And knowing this Kingdom is without a head,
Like goodly Buildings left without a Roof,
Soon fall to ruin: your noble self,
That best know how to rule, and how to reign,
We thus submit unto our Sovereign.
Live noble Hellicane.
Try honours cause; forbear your suffrages:
If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear,
(Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,
Where's hourly trouble, for a minutes ease)
A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you
To forbear the absence of your King;
If in which time expired, he not return,
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke:
But if I cannot win you to this love,
Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,
And in your search, spend your adventurous worth,
Whom if you find, and win unto return,
You shall like Diamonds fit about his Crown.
To wisdom, he's a fool, that will not yield:
And since Lord Hellicane enjoineth us,
We with our travels will endeavour.
Then you love us, we you, & we'll clasp hands:
When Peers thus knit, a Kingdom ever stands.
Good morrow to the good Sim●ui●eses.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know,
That for this twelvemonth, she'll not undertake
A married life: her reason to herself is only known,
Which from her, by no means can I get.
May we not get access to her (my Lord?)
faith, by no means, she hath so strictly
Tied her to her Chamber, that 'tis impossible:
One twelve Moons more she'll wear Diana's livery:
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vowed,
And on her Virgin honour, will not break it.
Loath to bid-farewell, we take our leaves.
So, they are well dispatched:
Now to my daughter's Letter; she tells me here,
she'll wed the stranger Knight;
Or never more to view nor day nor light.
'tis well Mistress, your choice agrees with mine:
I like that well: nay how absolute she's in't,
Not minding whether I dislike or no.
Well, I do commend her choice, and will no longer
Have it be delayed: Soft, here he comes,
I must dissemble it.
All fortune to the good Symonides.
To you as much: Sir, I am beholding to you
For your sweet Music this last night:
I do protest, my ears were never better fed
With such delightful pleasing harmony.
It is your Grace's pleasure to commend,
Not my desert.
Sir, you are Musics master.
The worst of all her scholars (my good Lord.)
Let me ask you one thing:
What do you think of my Daughter, sir?
A most virtuous Princess.
And she is fair too, is she not?
As a fair day in Summer: wondrous fair.
Sir, my Daughter thinks very well of you,
I so well, that you must be her Master,
And she will be your Scholar; therefore look to it.
I am unworthy for her Schoolmaster.
She thinks not so: peruse this writing else.
What's here, a letter that she loves the knight of Tyre?
'tis the King's subtlety to have my life:
Oh seek not to entrap me, gracious Lord,
A Stranger, and distressed Gentleman,
That never aimed so high, to love your Daughter,
But bent all offices to honour her.
Thou hast bewitched my daughter,
And thou art a villain.
By the Gods I have not; never did thought
Of mine levy offence; nor never did my actions
Yet commence a deed might gain her love,
Or your displeasure.
Traitor, thou liest.
Traitor?
ay, traitor.
Even in his throat, unless it be the King,
That calls me Traitor, I return the lie.
Now by the Gods, I do applaud his courage.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts.
That never relished of a base descent:
I came unto your Court for Honour's cause,
And not to be a Rebel to her state:
And he that otherwise accounts of me,
This Sword shall prove, he's Honour's enemy.
No? heere heere comes my Daughter, she can witness it.
Then as you are as virtuous, as fair,
Resolve your angry Father, if my tongue
Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe
To any syllable that made love to you?
Why sir, say if you had, who takes offence?
At that, would make me glad?
Yea Mistress, are you so peremptory?
I am glad on't with all my heart,
I'll tame you; I'll bring you in subjection.
Will you not, having my consent,
Bestow your love and your affections,
Upon a Stranger? who for aught I know,
May be (nor can I think the contrary)
As great in blood as I myself:
Therefore, hear you Mistress, either frame
Your will to mine: and you sir, hear you;
Either be ruled by me, or I'll make you,
Man and wife: nay come, your hands,
And lips must seal it too: and being joined,
I'll thus your hopes destroy, and for further grief:
God give you joy; what are you both pleased?
Yes, if you love me sir?
Even as my life, my blood that fosters it.
What are you both agreed?
Yes, if't please your Majesty.
It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed,
And then with what haste you can, get you to bed.
Now sleep yslacked hath the rout,
No din but snores about the house,
Made louder by the orefed breast,
Of this most pompous marriage Feast:
The Cat with eyen of burning coal,
Now coutches from the mouse's hole;
And Cricket sing at the Ovens mouth,
Are the blyther for their drought:
Hymen hath brought the Bride to bed,
Where by the loss of maidenhead,
A Babe is moulded: be attended,
And Time that is so briefly spent,
With your fine fancies quaintly each,
What's dumb in show, I'll plain with speech.
By many a dearne and painful perch
Of Perycles the careful search,
By the four opposing Crignes,
Which the world together joins,
Is made with all due diligence,
That horse and sail and high expense,
Can steed the quest at last from Tyre:
Fame answering the most strange inquire,
To'th Court of King Simonides,
Are Letters brought, the tenor these:
Anti●chus' and his daughter dead,
The men of Tyrus, on the head
Of Helycanus would set on
The Crown of Tyre, but he will none:
The mutiny, he there hastes t'oppress,
Says to'em, if King Pericles
Come not home in twice six Moons,
He obedient to their dooms,
Will take the Crown: the sum of this,
Brought hither to Pentapolis,
Yravished the regions round,
And every one with claps can sound,
Our heir apparent is a King:
Who dreamt? who thought of such a thing?
Brief he must hence depart to Tyre,
His Queen with child, makes her desire,
Which who shall cross along to go,
Omit we all their dole and woe:
Lichorida her Nurse she takes,
And so to Sea; their vessel shakes,
On Neptune's billow, halfe the flood,
Hath their Keel cut: but fortune moved,
Varies again, the grisled North
Disgorges such a tempest forth,
That as a Duck for life that dives,
So up and down the poor Ship drives:
The Lady shrieks, and wel-a-neare,
Does fall in travail with her fear:
And what ensues in this fell storm,
Shall for itself, itself perform:
I nill relate, action may
Conveniently the rest convey;
Which might not? what by me is told,
In your imagination hold:
This Stage, the Ship, upon whose Deck
The seas tossed Pericles appears to speak.
The God of this great Vast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven and hell, and thou that hast
Upon the Wind's command, bind them in Brass;
Having called them from the deep, o still
Thy deafening dreadful thunders, gently quench
Thy nimble sulphirous flashes: o How Lychorida!
How does my Queen? then storm venomously,
Wilt thou speat all thyself? the seaman's Whistle
Is as a whisper in the ears of death,
Unheard Lychorida? Lucina, oh!
Divinest patrionesse, and my wife gentle
To those that cry by night, convey thy deity
Aboard our dancing Boat make swift the pangs
Of my Queen's travails? now Lychorida.
here is a thing too young for such a place,
Who if it had conceit, would die, as I am like to do:
Take in your arms this piece of your dead Queen.
How? how Lychorida?
Patience (good sir) do not assist the storm,
here's all that is left living of your Queen;
A little Daughter: for the sake of it,
Be manly, and take comfort.
O you Gods!
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,
And snatch them straight away? we here below,
Recall not what we give, and therein may
Use honour with you.
Patience (good sir) even for this charge.
Now mild may be thy life,
For a more blusterous birth had never Babe:
Quiet and gentle thy conditions; for
Thou art the rudelyest welcome to this world,
That ever was Prince's Child: happy what follows,
Thou hast as chiding a nativity,
As Fire, Air, Water, Earth, and Heaven can make,
To herald thee from the womb:
Even at the first, thy loss is more than can
Thy portage quit, with all thou canst find here:
Now the good Gods throw their best eyes upon't.
What courage sir? God save you.
Courage enough, I do not fear the flaw,
It hath done to me the worst: yet for the love
Of this poor Infant, this fresh new sea-farer,
I would it would be quiet.
Slack the bolins there; thou wilt not wilt thou:
Blow and split thyself.
But Sea-room, and the brine and cloudy billow
Kiss the Moon, I care not.
Sir your Queen must over board, the sea works high,
The Wind is loud, and will not lie till the Ship
Be cleared of the dead.
That's your superstition.
Pardon us, sir; with us at Sea it hath been still observed.
And we are strong in eastern, therefore briefly yeeld'er,
As you think meet; for she must over board straight;
Most wretched Queen.
here she lies sir.
A terrible Childbed hast thou had (my dear,
No light, no fire, th'unfriendly elements,
Forgot thee utterly, nor have I time
To give thee hallowd to thy grave, but straight,
Must cast thee scarcely coffined, in oar,
Where for a monument upon thy bones,
The air remaining lamps, the belching Whale,
And humming Water must orewelme thy corpses,
Lying with simple shells: o Lychorida,
Bid Nestor bring me Spices, Ink, and Taper,
My Casket, and my lewels; and bid Nicander
Bring me the Satin Coffin: lay the Babe
Upon the Pillow; hie thee whiles I say
A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.
Sir, we have a Chest beneath the hatches,
Caulkt and bittumed ready.
I thank thee: Mariner say, what Coast is this?
We are near Tharsus.
Thither gentel Mariner,
Alter thy course for Tyre: When canst thou reach it?
By break of day, if the Wind cease.
O make for Tharsus,
There will I visit Clear, for the Babe
Cannot hold out to Tyrus; there isle leave it
At careful nursing: go thy ways good Mariner,
I'll bring the body presently.
Phylemon, hoe.
Doth my Lord call?
Get Fire and meat for these poor men,
't'as been a turbulent and stormy night.
I have been in many; but such a night as this,
Till now, I near endured.
Your Master will be dead ere you return,
There's nothing can be ministered to Nature,
That can recover him: give this to the Pothecary,
And tell me how it works.
Good morrow.
Good morrow to your Lordship,
Gentlemen, why do you stir so early?
Sir, our lodgings standing bleak upon the sea,
shook as the earth did quake:
The very principals did seem to rend and all to topple:
Pure surprise and fear, made me to quite the house.
That is the cause we trouble you so early,
'tis not our husbandry.
O you say well.
But I much marvel that your Lordship,
Having rich tire about you, should at these early hours,
Shake off the golden slumber of repose; 'tis most strange
Nature should be so conversant with Pain,
Being thereto not compelled.
I hold it ever Virtue and Cunning,
Were endowments greater, than nobleness & Riches;
Careless Heirs, may the two latter darken and expend;
But Immortality attends the former,
Making a man a god:
'tis known, I ever have studied Physic:
Through which secret Art, by turning o'er Authorities,
I have together with my practise, made familiar,
To me and to my aid, the blessed infusions that dwells
In Vegetives, in Metals, Stones: and can speak of the
Disturbances that Nature works, and of her cures;
which doth give me a more content in course of true delight
Then to be thirsty after tottering honour, or
Tie my pleasure up in silken Bags,
To please the Fool and Death.
Your honour has through Ephesus,
Poured forth your charity, and hundreds call themselves,
Your Creatures; who by you, have been restored;
And not your knowledge, your personal pain,
But even your Purse still open, hath built Lord Cerimon,
Such strong renown, as time shall never.
So, lift there.
What's that?
Sir, even now did the sea toss up upon our shore
This Chest; 'tis of some wrack.
Seted down, let's look upon't.
'tis like a Coffin, sir.
What ere it be, 'tis wondrous heavy;
Wrench it open straight:
If the Seas stomach be o'ercharged with Gold,
'tis a good constraint of Fortune it belches upon vs.
'tis so, my Lord.
How close 'tis caulkt & bottomed, did the sea cast it up?
I never saw so huge a billow sir, as toast it upon shore.
Wrench it open soft; it smells most sweetly in my sense.
A delicate Odour.
As ever hit my nostril: so, up with it.
Oh you most potent Gods! what's here, a Corpse?
Most strange.
Shrouded in Cloth of state, balmed and entreasured with full bags of Spices, a Passport to Apollo, perfect me in the Characters:
here I give to understand,
If ere this Coffin drives aland;
I King Pericles have lost
This Queen, worth all our mundaine cost:
Who finds her, give her burying,
She was the Daughter of a King:
Besiaes', this Treasure for a fee,
The Gods requited his charity.
If thou livest Pericles, thou hast a heart,
That ever cracks for woe, this chanced to night.
Most likely sir.
Nay certainly to night, for look how fresh she looks
They were too rough, that threw her in the sea.
Make a Fire within; fetch hither all my Boxes in my Closet,
Death may usurp on Nature many hours, and yet
The fire of life kindle again the oreprest spirits;
I heard of an Egyptian that had 9. hours lain dead,
Who was by good applyaunce recovered.
Well said, well said; the fire and clothes: the rough and
Woeful Music that we have, cause it to sound beseech you:
The Viol once more; how thou stirrest thou block?
The Music there: I pray you give her air:
Gentlemen, this Queen will live,
Nature awakes a warmth breath out of her;
She hath not been entranc'st above five hours:
See how she gins to blow into life's flower again.
The Heavens, through you, increase our wonder,
And sets up your fame for ever.
She is alive, behold her eyelids
Cases to those heavenly jewels which Pericles hath lost,
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold,
The Diamonds of a most praised water doth appear,
T make the world twise rich, liue, and make vs weepe.
To hear your fate, fair creature, rare as you seem to be.
O dear Diana, where am I? where's my Lord?
What world is this?
Is not this strange?
Most rare.
Hush (my gentle neighbours) lend me your hands,
To the next Chamber bear her: get linen:
Now this matter must be looked to for her relapse
Is mortal: come, come; and Esculapius guide vs.
Most honoured Cleon, I must needs be gone, my twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands in a litigious peace:
You and your Lady take from my heart all thankfulness,
The Gods make up the rest upon you.
Your shakes of fortune, though they haunt you mortally
Yet glance full wondringly on vs.
O your sweet Queen! that the strict fates had pleased, you had brought her hither to have blessed mine eyes with her.
We cannot but obey the powers above us;
Could I rage and roar as doth the sea she lies in,
Yet the end must be as 'tis: my gentle babe Marina,
Whom, for she was borne at sea, I have named so,
Here I charge your charity withal; leaving her
The infant of your care, beseeching you to give her
Princely training, that she may be manereed as she is borne.
Fear not (my Lord) but think your Grace,
That fed my Country with your Corn; for which,
The people's prayers still fall upon you, must in your child
Be thought on if neglection should therein make me vile,
The common body by you relieved,
Would force me to my duty: but if to that,
My nature need a spur, the Gods revenge it
Upon me and mine, to the end of generation.
I believe you, your honour and your goodness,
Teach me to't without your vows, till she be married,
Madam by bright Diana, whom we honour,
All unsistered shall this heir of mine remain,
Though I show will in't; so I take my leave:
Good Madam, make me blessed in your care
In bringing up my Child.
I have one myself, who shall not be more dear to my respect then yours, my Lord.
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
we'll bring your Grace e'en to the edge ath' shore, then give you up to the masked Neptune, and the gentlest winds of heaven.
I will embrace your offer, come dearest Madam, O no tears Lichorida, no tears, look to your little Mistress, on whose grace you may depend hereafter: come my Lord.
Madam, this Letter, and some certain jewels,
Lay with you in your Coffer, which are at your command:
Know you the Character?
It is my Lords, that I was shipped at sea I well remember, even on my learning time, but whether there delivered, by the holy gods I cannot rightly say: but since King Pericles my wedded Lord, I near shall see again, a vestal livery will I take me to, and never more have joy.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,
Diana's Temple is not distant far,
Where you may abide till your date expire,
Moreover if you please a Niece of mine,
Shall there attend you.
My recompense is thanks, that's all,
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,
Welcomed and settled to his own desire:
His woeful Queen we leave at Ephesus;
Unto Diana there's a Votarisse.
Now to Marina bend your mind,
Whom our fast growing seen must find
At Tharsus, and by Cleon trained
In musics letters, who hath gained
Of education all the grace,
Which makes high both the art and place
Of general wonder: but alack
monster envy oft the wrack
Of earned praise, Marina's life
Seek to take off by treasons knife,
And in this kind, our Cleon hath
One daughter and a full grown wench,
Even right for marriage sight: this Maid
height Philoten and it is said
For certain in our story, she
Would ever with Marina be.
Beet when they weaved the sleded silk,
With fingers long, small, white as milk,
Or when she would with sharp needle wound,
The Cambric which she made more sound
By hurting it or when toth' Lute
She sung, and made the night bed mute,
That still records with moan, or when
She would with rich and constant pen,
vail to her Mistress Dian still,
This Phyloten contends in skill
With absolute Marina: so
The Dove of Pap●os' might with the crow
Vie feathers white, Marina gets
All praises, which are paid as debts,
And not as given, this so darks
In Phyloten all graceful marks,
That Cleon's wife with Envy rare,
A present murderer does prepare
For good Marina, that her daughter
Might stand peerless by this slaughter.
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead,
Lichorida our nurse is dead,
And cursed Dioniza hath
The pregnant instrument of wrath.
priest for this blow, the unborn event,
I do commend to your content,
Only I carried winged Time,
Post one the lame feet of my rhyme,
Which never could I so convey,
unless your thoughts went on my way,
Dioniza does appear,
With Leonine a murderer.
Thy oath remember, thou hast sworn to do't, 'tis but a blow which never shall be known, thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon to yield thee so much profit: let not conscience which is but cold, in flaming, thy love bosom, inflame too nicely, nor let pity which even women have cast off, melt thee, but be a soldier to thy purpose.
I will do't, but yet she is a goodly creature.
The fitter than the Gods should have her.
Here she comes weeping for her only mistress death,
Thou art resolved.
I am resolved.
No: I will rob T●ll●ss of her weed to strow thy green with Flowers, the yellows, blewes, the purple Violets, and Marigolds, shall as a Carpet hang upon thy grave, while Summer days doth last: Ay me poor maid, borne in a tempest, when my mother died, this world to me is a lasting storm, whirring me from my friends.
How now Marina, why do you keep alone?
How chance my daughter is not with you?
Do not consume your blood with sorrowing,
Have you a nurse of me? Lord how your favours
Changed with this unprofitable woe:
Come give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it,
Walk with Leonine, the air is quick there,
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach,
Come Leonine take her by the arm, walk with her.
No I pray you, I'll not bereave you of your servant.
Come, come, I love the king your father, and yourself, with more than foreign heart, we every day expect him here, when he shall come and find our Paragon to all reports thus blasted,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage, blame both my Lord and me, that we have taken no care to your best courses, go I pray you, walk and be cheerful once again, reserve that excellent complexion, which did steal the eyes of young and old. Care not for me, I can go home alone.
Well, I will go, but yet I have no desire too it.
Come, come, I know 'tis good for you, walk halfe an hour Leonine, at the least, remember what I have said.
I warrant you Madam.
I'll leave you my sweet Lady, for a while, pray walk softly, do not heat your blood, what, I must have care of you.
My thanks sweet Madam, Is this wind Westerlie that blows?
south-west.
When I was borne the wind was North.
Wast so?
My father, as nurse says, did never fear, but cried good seamen to the Sailors, galling his kingly hands haling ropes, and clasping to the Mast, endured a sea that almost burst the deck.
When was this?
When I was borne, never was waves nor wind more violent, and from the ladder tackle, washes off a canvas clymer, ha ses one, wilt out? and with a dropping industry they skip from stern to stern, the boatswain whistles, and the master calls and trebles their confusion.
Come say your prayers.
What mean you?
If you require a little space for prayer, I grant it, pray, but be not tedious, for the Gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn to do my work with haste.
Why will you kill me?
To satisfy my Lady.
Why would she have me killed now? as I can remember by my troth, I never did her hurt in all my life, I never spoke bad word, nor did ill turn to any living creature: Believe me law, I never killed a Mouse, nor hurt a Fly: I trod upon a worm against my will, but I wept for't. How have I offended, wherein my death might yield her any profit, or my life imply her any danger?
My Commission is not to reason of the deed, but do't.
You will not do't for all the world I hope: you are well favoured, and your looks foreshow you have a gentle heart, I saw you lately when you caught hurt in parting two that fought: good sooth it showed well in you, do so now, your Lady seeks my life Come, you between, and save poor me the weaker.
I am sworn and will dispatch.
Hold villain.
A prize, a prize.
Half part mates, half part. Come le's have her aboard suddenly.
These rogueing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes, and they have seized Marina, let her go, there's no hope she will return, I'll swear she's dead, and thrown into the Sea, but i'll see further: perhaps they will but please themselves upon her, not carry her aboard, if she remain
Whom they have ravished, must by me be slain.
Bolt.
Sir.
Search the market narrowly, Mettelyne is full of gallants, we lost too much much money this mart by being too wenchlesse.
We were never so much out of Creatures, we have but poor three, and they can do no more than they can do, and they with continual action, are even as good as rotten.
Therefore le's have fresh ones what ere we pay for them, if there be not a conscience to be used in every trade, we shall never prosper.
Thou sayst true, 'tis not our bringing up of poor bastards, as I think. I have brought up some eleven.
I to eleven, and brought them down again, but shall I search the market?
What else man? the stuff we have, a strong wind will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sudden.
Thou sayest true, there's two unwholesome a conscience, the poor Transylvanian is dead that lay with the little baggage.
ay, she quickly poupt him, she made him roaste-meate for worms, but I'll go search the market.
Three or four thousand Checkins were as pretty a proportion to live quietly, and so give over.
Why to give over I pray you? Is it a shame to get when we are old?
Oh our credit comes not in like the commodity nor the commodity wages not with the danger: therefore if in our youths we could pick up some pretty estate, 't were not amiss to keep our door hatched, besides the sore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong with us for giving over.
Come other sorts offend as well as we.
As well as we, ay, and better too, we offend worse, neither is our profession any trade, It's no calling, but here comes Bolt.
Come your ways my masters, you say she's a virgin.
O Sir, we doubt it not.
Master, I have gone through for this piece you see, if you like her so, if not, I have lost my earnest.
Bolt has she any qualities?
She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent good clothes: there's no farther necessity of qualities can make her be refuzed.
What's her price Bolt?
I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.
Well, follow me my masters, you shall have your money presently, wife take her in, instruct her what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her entertainment.
Bolt, take you the marks of her, the colour of her hair, complexion, height, her age, with warrant of her virginity and cry. He that will give most shall have her first, such a maidenhead were no cheap thing, if men were as they have been: get this done as I command you.
Performance shall follow.
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow, he should have struck, not spoke, or that these Pirates, not enough barbarous, had not oreboord thrown me, for to seek my mother.
Why lament you pretty one?
That I am pretty.
Come, the Gods have done their part in you.
I accuse them not.
You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.
The more my fault, to scape his hands, where I was to die.
ay, and you shall live in pleasure.
No.
Yes indeed shall you, and taste Gentlemen of all fashions, you shall fare well, you shall have the difference of all complexions, what do you stop your ears?
Are you a xxxx?
What would you have me be, and I be not a woman?
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Marie whip the Gosseling, I think I shall have something to do with you, come you're a young foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have you.
The Gods defend me.
If it please the Gods to defend you by men, than men must comfort you, men must feed you, men stir you up: Bolts returned. Now sir, hast thou cried her through the Market?
I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs, I have drawn her picture with my voice.
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
Faith they listened to me, as they would have hearkened to their father's testament, there was a Spaniards mouth watered, and he went to bed to her very description.
We shall have him here to morrow with his best ruff on.
To night, to night, but Mistress do you know the French knight, that cowres eth'hams?
Who, Mounsieur Verollus?
ay, he, he offered to cut a caper at the proclamation, but he made a groan at it, and swore he would see her to morrow.
Well, well, as for him, he brought his disease hither, here he does but repair it, I know he will come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the Sun.
Well, if we had of every Nation a traveler, we should lodge them with this sign.
Pray you come hither a while, you have Fortunes coming upon you, mark me, you must seem to do that fearfully, which you commit willingly, despise profit, where you have most gain, to weep that you live as ye do, makes pity in your Lovers seldom, but that pity begets you a good opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.
I understand you not.
O take her home Mistress, take her home, these blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practice.
Thou sayest true i'faith, so they must, for your Bride goes to that with shame, which is her way to go with warrant.
Faith some do, and some do not, but Mistress if I have bargained for the joint.
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.
I may so.
Who should deny it?
Come young one, I like the manner of your garments well.
I by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.
Bolt, spend thou that in the town: report what a sojourner we have, you'll lose nothing by custom. When Nature framed this piece, she meant thee a good turn, therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou hast the harvest out of thine own report.
I warrant you Mistress, thunder shall not so awake the beds of eels, as my giving out her beauty stirs up the lewdly inclined, I'll bring home some to night.
Come your ways, follow me.
If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.
Diana aid my purpose.
What have we to do with Diana, pray you will you go with us?
Why ere you foolish, can it be undone?
O Dioniza, such a piece of slaughter,
The Sun and Moon near looked upon.
I think you'll turn a child again.
Were I chief Lord of all this spacious world, I'd give it to undo the deed. O Lady much less in blood then virtue, yet a Princes to equal any single Crown ath earth i'th' justice of compare, O villain, Leonine whom thou hast poisoned too, if thou hadst drunk to him tad been a kindness becoming well thy face, what canst thou say when noble Pericles shall demand his child?
That she is dead, Nurses are not the fates to foster it, not ever to preserve, she died at night, I'll say so, who can cross it unless you play the impious Innocent, and for an honest attribute, cry out she dyde by foul play.
O go too, well, well, of all the faults beneath the heavens, the Gods do like this worst.
Be one of those that thinks the petty wrens of Tharsus will fly hence, and open this to Pericles. I do shame to think of what a noble strain you are, and of how coward a spirit.
To such proceeding who ever but his approbation added, though not his prince consent, he did not flow from honourable courses.
Be it so then, yet none does know but you how she came dead, nor none can know Leonine being gone. She did disdain my child, and stood between her and her fortunes: none would look on her, but cast their gazes on Mariana's face, whilst ours was blurted at, and held a Malkin not worth the time of day. It pierced me thorough, and though you call my course unnatural, you not your child well loving, yet I find it greets me as an enterprise of kindness performed to your sole daughter.
heavens forgive it.
And as for P●r●leses, what should he say, we wept after her hearse, & yet we mourn, her monument is almost finished, & her epitaphs in glittering golden characters express a generrall praise to her, and care in us at whose expense 'tis done.
Thou art like the Harpy,
Which to betray, dost with thine angels face cease with thine eagle's talents.
Year like one that superstitiously,
Do swear too'th' Gods, that Winter kills
The Flies, but yet I know, you'll do as I advise.
Thus time we waste, & long leagues make short,
Sail seas in Cockles, have and wish but fort,
Making to take our imagination,
From bourn to bourn, region to region,
By you being pardoned we commit no crime,
To use one language, in each several clime,
Where our scenes seems to live,
I do beseech you
To learn of me who stand with gaps
To teach you.
The stages of our story Pericles
Is now again thwarting thy wayward seas,
Attended on by many a Lord and Knight,
To see his daughter all his lives delight.
Old Helicanus goes along behind,
Is left to govern it, you bear in mind.
Old Escenes, whom Hellicanus late
Advanced in time to great and high estate.
Well sailing ships, and bounteous winds
Have brought
This king to Tharsus, think this Pilate thought
So with his steerage, shall your thoughts groan
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone
Like moats and shadows, see them
Move a while,
Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile.
See how belief may suffer by foul show,
This borrowed passion stands for true old woe:
And Pericles in sorrow all devoured,
With sighs shot through, and biggest tears ore-showred.
Leaves Tharsus, and again imbarques, he swears
Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs:
He put on sackcloth, and to Sea he bears,
A Tempest which his mortal vessel tears.
And yet he rides it out, Now please you wit:
The Epitaph is for Marina writ, by wicked Dioniza.
The fairest, sweetest, and best lies here,
Who withered in her spring of year:
She was of Tyrus the King's daughter,
On whom foul death hath made this slaughter.
Marina was she called, and at her birth,
Thetis being proud, swallowed some part ath'earth:
Therefore the earth fearing to be ore-flowed,
Hath Thetis birth-child on the heavens bestowed.
Wherefore she does and swears she'll never stint,
Make raging Battery upon shores of flint.
No vizor does become black villainy,
So well as soft and tender flattery:
Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead,
And bear his courses to be ordered;
By Lady Fortune, while our steer must play,
His daughter's woe and heavy welladay.
In her unholy service: Patience then,
And think you now are all in Mittelin.
Did you ever hear the like?
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, she being once gone.
But to have divinity preached there, did you ever dream of such a thing?
No, no, come, I am for no more bawdy houses, shall's go hear the vestals sing?
I'll do any thing now that is virtuous, but I am out of the road of rutting for ever.
Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her she had near come here.
Fie, fie, upon her, she's able to freeze the god Priapus, and undo a whole generation, we must either get her ravished, or be rid of her, when she should do for Clients her fitment, and do me the kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks, her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her knees, that she would make a Puritan of the devil, if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
Faith I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish us of all our Cavalereea, and make our swearers priests.
Now the pox upon her green sickness for me.
Faith there's no way to be rid on't but by the way to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
Wer should haue both Lorde and Lowne, if the peeuish baggadge would but giue way to customers.
How now, how a dozen of virginities?
Now the Gods to bless your Honour.
I am glad to see your Honour in good health.
You may, so 'tis the better for you that your resorters stand upon sound legs, how now? wholesome iniquity have you, that a man may deal withal, and defy the Surgeon?
We have here one Sir, if she would, but there never came her like in Meteline.
If she'd do the deeds of darkness thou wouldst say.
Your Honour knows what 'tis to say well enough.
Well, call forth, call forth.
For flesh and blood Sir, white and red, you shall see a rose, and she were a rose indeed, if she had but.
What prithee?
O Sir, I can be modest.
That dignities the renown of a Bawd, no less than it gives a good report to a number to be chaste.
here comes that which grows to the stalk,
Never plucked yet I can assure you.
Is she not a fair creature?
Faith she would serve after a long voyage at Sea,
Well there's for you, leave vs.
I beseech your Honour give me leave a word,
And I'll have done presently.
I beseech you do.
First, I would have you note, this is an Honourable man.
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.
Next he's the Governor of this country, and a man whom I am bound too.
If he govern the country you are bound to him indeed, but how honourable he is in that, I know not.
Pray you without any more virginal fencing, will you use him kindly? he will line your apron with gold.
What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.
Ha you done?
My Lord she's not pac'ste yet, you must take some pains to work her to your manage, come we will leave his Honour, and her together, go thy ways.
Now pretty one, how long have you been at this trade?
What trade Sir?
Why, I cannot name but I shall offend.
I cannot be offended with my trade, please you to name it.
How long have you been of this profession?
Ere since I can remember.
Did you go to't so young, were you a gamester at five, or at seven?
earlier too Sir, if now I be one.
Why? the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a Creature of sale.
Do you know this house to be a place of such resort, and will come into't? I hear say you're of honourable parts, and are the Governor of this place.
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?
Who is my principal?
Why, your hearbe-woman, she that sets seeds and roots of shame and iniquity.
O you have heard something of my power, and so stand aloft for more serious wooing, but I protest to thee pretty one, my authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly upon thee, come bring me to some private place: Come, come.
If you were borne to honour, show it now, if put upon you, make the judgement good, that thought you worthy of it.
How's this? how's this? some more, be sage.
For me that am a maid, though most ungentle Fortune have placed me in this Sty, where since I came, diseases have been sold dearer than physic, that the gods would set me free from this unhallowed place, though they did change me to the meanest bird that flies i'th' purer air.
I did not think thou couldst have spoke so well, near dremped thou couldst, had I brought hither a corrupted mind, thy speech had altered it, hold, here's gold for thee, persever in that clear way thou goest and the gods strengthen thee.
The good Gods preserve you.
For me be you thoughten, that I came with no ill intent, for to me the very doors and windows savour vilely, fare thee well, thou art a piece of virtue, & I doubt not but thy training hath been noble, hold, here's more gold for thee, a curse upon him, die he like a thief that robs thee of thy goodness, if thou dost hear from me it shallbe for thy good.
I beseech your Honour one piece for me.
Avaunt thou damned doorkeeper, your house but for this virgin that doth prop it, would sink and overwhelm you. Away.
How's this? we must take another course with you? if your peevish chastity, which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope, shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like a spaniel, come your ways.
Whither would you have me?
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common hangman shall execute it, come your way, we'll have no more Gentlemen driven away, come your ways I say.
How now, whats the matter?
Worse and worse mistress, she has here spoken holy words to the Lord
O .
He makes our profession as it were to, stink afore the face of the gods
mary hang her up up for
The Nobleman would have dealt with her like a Noble man, and she sent him away as cold as a snowball, saying his prayers too.
Bolt take her away, use her at thy pleasure, crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
And if she were a thornyer piece of ground than she is, she shall be ploughed.
Hark, hark you Gods.
She conjures, away with her, would she had never come within my doors, Marry hang you: shes borne to undo us, will you not go the way of wemenkinde? Marry come up my dish of chastity with rosemary & bay.
Come mistress, come your way with me.
Whither wilt thou have me?
To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.
Prithee tell me one thing first.
Come now your one thing.
What canst thou wish thine enemy to be.
Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather my mistress.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art, since they do better thee in their command, thou hold'st a place for which the painedst fiend of hell would not in reputation change: Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every custrel that comes inquiring for his Tib. To the choleric fisting of every rogue, thy ear is liable, thy food is such as hath been belched on by infected lungs.
What would you have me do? go to the wars, would you? where a man may serve 7. years for the loss of a leg, & have not money enough in the end to buy him a wooden one?
Do any thing but this thou dost, empty old receptacles, or common-shores of filth, serve by indenture, to the common hangman, any of these ways are yet better than this: for what thou professest, a Baboon could he speak, would own a name too dear, that the gods would safely deliver me from this place: here, here's gold for thee, if that thy master would gain by me, proclaim that I can sing, weave, sow, & dance, with other virtues, which I'll keep from boast, and will undertake all these to teach. I doubt not but this populous City will yield many scholars.
But can you teach all this you speak off?
Prove that I cannot, take me home again, And prostitute me to the basest groom that doth frequent your house.
Well I will see what I can do for thee: if I can place thee I will.
But amongst honest woman.
Faith my acquaintance lies little amongst them. But since my master and mistress hath bought you, there's no going but by their consent: therefore I will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough. Come, I'll do for thee what I can, come your ways.
Marina thus the Brothel 'scape, and chances
Into an Honest-house our Story says:
She sings like one immortal, and she dances
As goddess-like to her admired lays.
Deep clerks she dumb's, and with her needle composes,
Natures own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry.
That even her art sisters the natural Roses
Her Inkle, Silk Twine, with the rubied Cherry,
That puples lacks she none of noble race,
Who power their bounty on her: and her gain
She gives the cursed Bawd, here we her place,
And to her Father turn our thoughts again,
Where we left him on the Sea, we there him left,
Where driven before the winds, he is arrived
here where his daughter dwells, and on this coast,
Suppose him now at Anchor: the city strived
God Neptune's annual feast to keep, from whence
our Tyrian Shippe espics,
His banners Sable, trimmed with rich expense,
And to him in his Barge with fervour hies,
In your supposing once more put your sight,
Of heavy Pericles, think this his Bark:
Where what is done in action, more if might
shallbe discovered, please you sit and hark.
Where is Lord Helicanus? he can resolve you, O here he is Sir, there is a barge put off from Metaline, and in it is Lysimachus the Governor, who craves to come aboard, what is your will?
That he have his, call up some Gentlemen.
Ho Gentlemen, my Lord calls.
Doth your Lordship call?
Gentlemen there is some of worth would come aboard, I pray greet him fairly.
Sir, this is the man that can in aught you would resolve you.
Hail reverent Sir, the Gods preserve you.
And you to outlive the age I am, and die as I would do.
You wish me well, being on shore, honouring of Neptune's triumphs, seeing this goodly vessel ride before us, I made to it, to know of whence you are.
First what is your place?
I am the Governor of this place you lie before.
Sir our vessel is of Tyre, in it the King, a man, who for this three months hath not spoken to any one, nor taken sustenance, but to prorogue his grief.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
'twould be too tedious to repeat, but the mayne grief springs from the loss of a beloved daughter & a wife.
May we not see him?
You may, but bootless. Is your sight, he will not speak to any, yet let me obtain my wish.
Behold him, this was a goodly person.
Till the disaster that one mortal wight drove him to this.
Sir King all hail, the Gods preserve you, hail royal sir.
It is in vain, he will not speak to you.
Sir we have a maid in Metiline, I durst wager would win some words of him.
'tis well bethought, she questionless with her sweet harmony, and other chosen attractions, would allure and make a battery through his defend parts, which now are midway stopped, she is all happy as the fairest of all, and her fellow maids, now upon the levy shelter that abutts against the Islands side.
Sure all effectless, yet nothing we'll omit that bears recoveries name. But since your kindness we have stretched thus far, let us beseech you, that for our gold we may provision have, wherein we are not destitute for want, but weary for the stalenesse.
O sir, a courtesy, which if we should deny, the most just God for every graff would send a Caterpillar, and so inflict our Province: yet once more let me entreat to know at large the cause of your king's sorrow.
Sit sir, I will recount it to you, but see I am prevented.
O here's the Lady that I sent for,
Welcome fair one, be't not a goodly present?
she's a gallant Lady.
she's such a one, that were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind, and noble stock, I do wish
No better choice, and think me rarely to wed,
Fair on all goodness that consists in beauty,
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient,
If that thy prosperous and artificial fate,
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,
Thy sacred Physic shall receive such pay,
As thy desires can wish.
Sir I will use my utmost skill in his recovery, provided that none but I and my companion maid be suffered to come near him.
Come, let us leave her, and the Gods make her prosperous.
Mark he your Music?
No nor looked on vs.
See she will speak to him.
Hail sir, my Lord lend ear.
Hum, ha.
I am a maid, my Lord, that near before invited eyes, but have been gazed on like a Comet: She speaks my Lord, that may be, hath endured a grief might equal yours, if both were justly weighed, though wayward fortune did malign my state, my derivation was from ancestors, who stood equivolent with mighty Kings, but time hath rooted out my parentage, and to the world, and awkward casualties, bound me in servitude, I will desist, but there is something glows upon my cheek, and whispers in mine ear, go not till he speak.
My fortunes, parentage, good parentage, to equal mine, was it not thus, what say you?
I said my Lord, if you did know my parentage, you would not do me violence.
I do think so, pray you turn your eyes upon me, your like something that, what Country women hear of these shows?
No, nor of any shows, yet I was mortally brought forth, and am no other than I appear.
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping: my dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one my daughter might have been: My Queen's square brows, her stature to an inch, as wandlike-straight, as silver voyst, her eyes as jewell-like, and cast as richly, in pace an other Iuno. Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them hungry, the more she gives them speech, Where do you live?
Where I am but a stranger from the deck, you may discern the place.
Where were you bred? and how achieved you these endowments which you make more rich to owe?
If I should tell my history, it would seem like lies disdained in the reporting.
Prithee speak, falseness cannot come from thee, for thou lookest modest as justice, & thou seemest a Pallas for the crowned truth to dwell in, I will believe thee & make senses credit thy relation, to points that seem impossible, for thou lookest like one I loved indeed: what were thy friends? didst thou not stay when I did push thee back, which was when I perceived thee that thou camest from good descending.
So indeed I did.
Report thy parentage, I think thou saidst thou hadst been tossed from wrong to injury, and that thou thoughts thy griefs might equal mine, if both were opened.
Some such thing I said, and said no more, but what my thoughts did warrant me was likely.
Tell thy story, if thine considered prove the thousand part of my enduraunce, thou art a man, and I have suffered like a girl, yet thou dost look like patience, gazing on King's graves, and smiling extremity out of act, what were thy friends? how lost thou thy name, my most kind Virgin? recount I do beseech thee, Come sit by me.
My name is Marina.
Oh I am mocked, and thou by some insenced God sent hither to make the world to laugh at me.
Patience good sir: or here I'll cease.
Nay I'll be patient: thou little know'st how thou dost startle me to call thyself Marina.
The name was given me by one that had some power, my father, and a King.
How, a King's daughter, and called Marina?
You said you would believe me, but not to be a troubler of your peace, I will end here.
But are you flesh and blood?
Have you a working pulse, and are no Fairy?
Motion well, speak on, where were you borne?
And wherefore called Marina?
Called Marina, for I was borne at sea.
At sea, what mother?
My mother was the daughter of a King, who died the minute I was borne, as my good Nurse Lichorida hath oft delivered weeping.
O stop there a little, this is the rarest dream
That ere dulled sleep did mock sad fools withal,
This cannot be my daughter, buried, well, where were you bred? I'll hear you more toth' bottom of your story, and never interrupt you.
You scorn, believe me 'twere best I did give over.
I will believe you by the syllable of what you shall deliver, yet give me leave, how came you in these parts? where were you bred?
The King my father did in Tharsus leave me,
Till ,
Did seek to murder me: and having wooed a villain,
To attempt it, who having drawn to do't,
A crew of pirates came and rescued me,
Brought me to Metaline,
But good sir whither will you have me? why do you weep? It may be you think me an imposture, no good faith: I am the daughter to King P●ricl●s', if good king P●ricles' be.
Hoe, Hellicanus?
Calls my Lord.
Thou art a grave and noble Counsellor,
Most wise in general, tell me if thou canst, what this maid is, or what is like to be, that thus hath made me weep.
I know not, but here's the Regent sir of Metaline, speaks nobly of her.
She never would tell her parentage,
Being demanded, that she would sit still and weep.
Oh Hellicanus, strike me honoured sir, give me a gash, put me to present pain, lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me, o'erbear the shores of my mortality, and drown me with their sweetness: Oh come hither, thou that begetst him that did thee beget,
Thou that wast borne at sea, buried at Tharsus,
And found at sea again, O Hellicanus,
Down on thy knees, thank the holy Gods as loud
As thunder threatens us, this is Marina.
What was thy mother's name? tell me, but that
for truth can never be confirmed enough,
Though doubts did ever sleep.
Frist sir, I pray what is your title?
I am Pericles of Tyre, but tell me now my
Drowned Queen's name, as in the rest you said,
Thou hast been Godlike perfect, the heir of kingdoms,
And an other like to Pericles thy father.
Is it no more to be your daughter, then to say, my mother's name was Thaisa, Thaisa was my mother, who did end the minute I began.
Now blessing on thee, rise thouart my child.
Give me fresh garments, mine own Hellicanus, she is not dead at Tharsus as she should have been by savage Cleon, she shall tell thee all, when thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge, she is thy very Princes, who is this?
Sir, 'tis the governor of Metaline, who hearing of your melancholy state, did come to see you.
I embrace you, give me my robes.
I am wild in my beholding, O heavens bless my girl,
But hark what Music tell, Helicanus my Marina.
Tell him o'er point by point, for yet he seems to dote.
How sure you are my daughter, but what music?
My Lord I hear none.
None, the Music of the Spheres, list my Marina.
It is not good to cross him, give him way.
Rarest sounds, do ye not hear?
Music my Lord? I hear.
Most heavenly Music.
It nips me unto listening, and thick slumber
Hangs upon mine eyes, let me rest.
A Pillow for his head, so leave him all.
Well my companion friends, if this but answer to my just belief, I'll well remember you.
My Temple stands in Ephesus,
High thee thither, and do upon mine Altar sacrifice, There when my maiden priests are met together before the people all, reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife, to mourn thy crosses with thy daughters, call, & give them repetition to the like, or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe: do't, and happy, by my silver bow, awake and tell thy dream.
Celestial Diana, Goddess Argentine,
I will obey thee Hellicanus.
Sir.
My purpose was for Tharsus, there to strike,
The inhospitable Cleon, but I am for other service first,
Toward Ephesus turn our blown sails,
eftsoons I'll tell thee why, shall we refresh us sir upon your shore, and give you gold for such provision as our intents will need.
Sir, with all my heart, and when you come a shore,
I have another sleight.
You shall prevail were it to woo my daughter, for it seems you have been noble towards her.
Sir, lend me your arm.
Come my Marina.
Now our sands are almost run,
More a little, and then dumb.
This my last boon give me,
For such kindness must relieve me:
That you aptly will suppose,
What pageantry, what feats, what shows,
What minstrelsy, and pretty din,
The Regent made in Metalin,
To greet the King, so he thrived,
That he is promised to be wived
To fair Marina, but in no wise,
Till he had done his sacrifice.
As Diana bade, whereto being bound,
The Interim pray, you all confound.
In feathered briefenes sails are filled,
And wishes fall out as they're wild,
At Ephesus the Temple see,
Our King and all his company.
That he can hither come so soon,
Is by your fancies thankful doom.
Hail Diana, to perform thy just command,
I here confess myself the King of Tyre,
Who frighted from my country did wed at Pentapolis, the fair Thaisa, at Sea in childbed died she, but brought forth a Maid child called Marina, whom O Goddess wears yet thy silver livery, she at Tharsus was nursed with Cleon, who at fourteen years he sought to murder, but her better stars brought her to Meteline, 'gainst whose shore riding, her Fortunes brought the maid aboard us, where by her own most clear remembrance, she made known herself my Daughter.
Voice and favour, you are, you are, O royal Pericles.
What means the mum? she dies, help Gentlemen.
Noble Sir, if you have told Diana's Altar true, this is your wife?
reverent appearer no, I threw her overboard with these very arms.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.
'tis most certain.
Look to the Lady, O she's but over-joyde, Early in blustering morn this Lady was thrown upon this shore.
I oped the coffin, found there rich jewels, recovered her, and plac'ste her here in Diana's temple.
May we see them?
Great Sir, they shallbe brought you to my house, whither I invite you, look Thaisa is recovered.
O let me look if he be none of mine, my sanctity will to my sense bend no licentious ear, but curb it spite of seeing: O my Lord are you not Pericles? like him you spoke, like him you are, did you not name a tempest, a birth, and death?
The voice of dead Thaisa.
That Thaisa am I, supposed dead and drowned.
I mortal Dian.
Now I know you better, when we with tears parted Pentapolis, the king my father gave you such a ring.
This, this, no more, you gods, your present kindness makes my past miseries sports, you shall do well that on the touching of her lips I may melt, and no more be seen, O come, be buried a second time within these arms.
My heart leaps to be gone into my mother's bosom.
Look who kneels here, flesh of thy flesh Thaisa, thy burden at the Sea, and called Marina, for she was yielded there.
Blessed, and mine own.
Hail Madam, and my Queen.
I know you not.
You have heard me say when I did fly from Tyre, I left behind an ancient substitute, can you remember what I called the man, I have named him oft.
'twas Hellicanus then.
Still confirmation, embrace him dear Thaisa, this is he, now do I long to hear how you were found? how possibly preserved? and who to thank (besides the gods) for this great miracle?
Lord Cerimon, my Lord, this man through whom the Gods have shown their power, that can from first to last resolve you.
reverent Sir, the gods can have no mortal officer more like a god than you, will you deliver how this dead Queen relives?
I will my Lord, beseech you first, go with me to my house, where shall be shown you all was found with her. How she came plac'ste here in the Temple, no needfulll thing omitted.
Pure Diana bless thee for thy vision, and will offer night oblations to thee Thaisa, this Prince, the fair betrothed of your daughter, shall marry her at Pentapolis, and now this ornament makes me look dismal, will I clip to form, and what this fourteen years no razor touched, to grace thy marridge-day, I'll beautify.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit. Sir, my father's dead.
heavens make a Star of him, yet there my Queen, we'll celebrate their Nuptials, and ourselves will in that kingdom spend our following days, our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.
Lord Cerimon we do our longing stay,
To hear the rest untolde, Sir leads the way.
In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard
Of monstrous lust, the due and just reward:
In Pericles his Queen and Daughter seen,
Although assayl'de with Fortune fierce and keen.
Virtue preferred from fell destructions blast,
Lead on by heaven, and crowned with joy at last.
In Helycanus may you well descry,
A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty:
In reverend Cerimon there well appears,
The worth that learned charity aye wears.
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when Fame
Had spread his cursed deed, the honoured name
Of Pericles, to rage the City turn,
That him and his they in his Palace burn:
The gods for murder seemed so content,
To punish, although not done, but meant.
So on your Patience evermore attending,
New joy wait on you, here our play has ending.