Strow, strew.
The muscadine stays for the bride at Church,
The Priest and Hymen's ceremonies tend
To make them man and wife.
By my maidenhead a joyful time, i'll pave their
Way with flowers.
While I perfume.
Some say this widow's rich.
I will not say as poor as Iob, but as bare as Ianuary, when the trees look like a girl, whose colour comes and goes as frost does in the milk.
'twas wont to be a rich widow and a poor knight, but now false, a knight rich and the widow poor.
however honour is most rich, no matter who is poor.
I would my fortune were no worse
Thine may be better.
So much if't be thy will, if ever knight were guled, be it in me, in me I pray.
What are the waits of London come?
Yes sir.
Play in their highest key then.
sound hautboys.
Make the God's dance, cause Jovial mirth
Music in heaven for this earths marriage
Is a triumphant concord to us all,
To me 'tis sealed by promise for his daughter,
Who in our blood shall sympathize, says I,
She shall be ours, bedded, although some
Menace a rivalship, yet the sure card
Gives the trick ours, and we shall win,
Since in my mother it doth first begin.
Good morrow sir.
A good one to thyself, to us 'tis seasoned,
A marriage sir?
I and a good one friend.
Because 'tis rich.
Good reach at stars, i'faith 'tis true.
In whom sit, if I may be bold.
A knight of More-clack to a London widow.
My burdened soul says I, a Knight of More-clack to the widow Humil, just, 'tis she,
By this the blessing of the holy rights,
Relishes in them, they are married, at least
Fair for it, I must witness to't, farewell.
How ignorance pleads nonage, in his eye
He knows me not, 'tis not the lions kind,
Whose nature challenges right property.
Of perfect being, if it were,
Humil would Humil know, that him begot,
To be what now he is married again,
And her first husband living, blame her not,
'tis my own project, thank my letters,
That falsified our deaths black funeral,
Into her mournful hearing, follow it,
Think on thy soul, divide that bitter band,
Knit by the closure of a mutual hand.
I rest ye sir.
At whose suit Wat?
At the bridegrooms, i'll not afoot further till I have eased my shoulders.
No nor I, we are asses right, we carry provender, but are not the better for't.
As how?
thou'lt not believe breads bread, till it be tasted, I say to thee, in this trunk is provender.
be an ass till thou prove it.
Here's money which will buy it.
O by a figure, I say to thee thou art an ass.
How?
By thy burden.
No otherwise, that's not so good.
Because thou hast ears.
Are all asses that have ears?
Are all trunks laden with money that are heavy?
indeed I confess in that I am an ass, but I think so.
By such a surmise thou makest it provender.
We are watermen, and think because we see a man coming, and that I am his first man, he'll be my first fare, when another gets him.
Come, you are bookish.
And thou blockish, say rights right, and no more.
See sirrah Mr. Touch, what an officer?
Yes, he's booking in, Mr. Touch, salve, sis salve.
Iubio tesalucre, ave.
He hears us not.
Let me see Capons, Turkeys, Small-birds, beeves,
Muttons, Partridge, Plover, Wood cocks.
Meaning us, good morning, and many sir.
And many Mr. Touch.
Are ye come water-squirts, are ye come?
And why sir, water-squirts?
Because you shoot water, and so do they, but ha' ye that will do't, my dainty element dashers.
Do't and stand to't Mr. Touch. if we might spend it sir.
Well said honest knaves, bear in, but say where's John i'th' hospital, and's nurse?
At hand sir.
'tis well, away, and Touch touch the tips of their tongues, with our seller suckets.
I'll touch the tips of their tongues, & their tongues tips, i'll baste their bellies and their lips till we have jerked the cat with our three whips.
Married? 'tis ended, and the next pull mine.
At a fair fleece, a golden one, the eldest daughter is my hope, what then rests in it, O you winged lapwings, farthest cry, when we come nearest to't. Quando pecus omnia sub umbra ruminat antiquos paulilum vocitamus amores.
'tis done too late to ask why so.
Tardy intrusion as a Cipher placed.
fills but up room, while substance in the other
Makes number precious, I am that round O,
Which with a sigh, as sad as is my soul,
Grieve all too late, what now befits my moan,
But black despair, and die in't do,
To make thyself known, but represents
Mellow fruit falling into danger, o I am that
Rotten ruined, and unrelished substance,
Which on my own upgrowing tree falls off,
By the Time's negligence, undone I am,
Would I had died indeed, and not in word.
These ill tuned words like discords sounded harsh
And yet were thought true music, well, well,
I'll take my stand, and as she passes by
Note if her glories dash not all my hopes
With base forgetfulness of what she was,
My picture can she not forget, may be,
Old love may yet live in this newborn Lady.
I am wonder strocken in myself,
O you all-seeing, pardon my attempt,
My second choice hath laid siege to my soul,
And my disloyalty hath in that witness
Slain the concurrences of after joy,
Even so he looked that had my maiden heart,
Even such was he, whose far estranged death
Gave me this licence of ill liberty,
To do, and undo, O forgive me then,
Weak in my sect, my fault to the best of men.
New wedded Lady, & our morning's bride,
What is't that troubles ye?
A loss but being small.
No matter for the loss.
You find a purchase, equals any cross.
Let it go then.
she knows me and this constant accident
Subscribes to't, how can she excuse,
This double deed, this false neglect of love?
O women how you dally in your trust,
How quickly you forget late living life,
And bury the remembrance in your smiles
All ye this morning for the dead to sigh,
And shed your tears in bosom of new choice
How have I sifted your loose difference,
For ever being precedent against all.
Glad am I at this opportunity,
Who landed me even in the jaws of fear
Swallowing my destine happiness
To utter ruin of herself and me
If the unconstant air whistle abroad,
That Humil lives, than Humils widow dies
In desperate scandal, racked and tormented,
In the remembrance of old wretchedness,
Which to prevent, plots cunningly contrived
Must buckler my repute so weakly wived.
Lost her glove?
So she makes known.
I'll find it to my everliving glory,
And the next triumph, wear it in my helm
Daring all gallants in defence to approve,
S. William Vergirs Lady owes this glove.
If my good fortune challenge such account,
To find it by my friend or industry,
I'll prick it on a pole, and with my lance,
curvet with nimble speed, in course of arms,
And as I snatch it by a curious pass,
Cry in loud echo, here is for her love,
Who on her wedding day did lose this glove.
The Bride, our new made mother lost her glove.
I sister, so she says.
I'll seek no further, for it is in vain.
Especially when quicker eyes than ours,
Arch in the brows of loves two votaries,
Lord how they'll brag to find it questionless,
'twill prove a ransom of a thousand kisses,
Amorous glances, modest courtesy,
O how these flatterers can insinuate,
And stretch an inch of length to an ell of wide
here's much in office for a little pay.
A glove God wot.
I sister, so they say, go to ye wanton you
He that shall marry thee, is matched i'faith,
To English rash, or to a Dutch snaphance,
You will strike fire with words—
Who I? now as I live sweet Moll.
If Filbon marry me, as by this light.
And wink.
'tis hard to juggle with the devil, we maids
So simper in each others quantity
As we know fashion ere it be devised
Forswear you one, and I'll forswear—
The other, just even so,
Shall I be plain with thee—
You'll answer, no
I. Tab. No I. Mary. I no.
I know you will not, therefore let him go;
I love my Filbon as men love good clothes,
Put them on every day.
And I love Towers as I love my sleep,
Embracing thus, folding most dearly.
Your lover nightly, as you wish him yearly.
In troth in such a sort:
As children play with stones, to make them sport.
You make me blush Tabitha.
At the thing ye wish,
Plague on the cat that loves nor milk nor fish.
We are all maiden's pictures, fain we would,
Yet we cry away away, when away we should.
Yet again.
Never yet.
Ever so when so our matters fit.
They are returned, a glove or no.
No, but the glove I sought not, I ha' found.
Where is't man?
You're the glove, which still I seek to wear
Make me happy, match it to a pair.
Be these for ever matches.
How can ye find the glove was never lost?
By seeking you that lost not what we find.
Indeed a willing loss, is loss of gain,
Where loving finders pity losers pain,
I will not say, enjoy so much the rather,
Because gift giver cries out on the father.
But if I durst, I would, till when.
unmatch our gloves, each take his own again.
It is enacted by the Bride's fair word,
Who finds her glove, is this days governor.
To manage all our pastimes in the house,
And thou art he, the only conqueror,
Of prize and honour, then enjoy it.
You give and I receive, is this my office?
Signed and delivered.
I take it on me, music triumphs come,
Since fortune cast her favours in my fist,
I'll be most prodigal.
Yet with modesty I am a Citizen.
unlooked for welcome, and unthinking come,
To receive honour in a state's man's room.
Yet to this presence I will still address,
Love, pains and duty in this business.
In this is fortune blind, whose deeds are dangers,
Giving her graces not to friends but strangers.
Prove on my fortunes howsoe'er they stand,
I hold my fairest fortune in my hand.
The like do I.
And all the fairest fortunes I would prove,
Is only this, to enjoy my dearest love.
The like I wish.
All happiness live in thy choice, in hers
All mischiefs, horror, les ourself participate in tender of our choice, freely delivered in the fight of heaven.
What news?
The wedding dinner breathes his last.
And we will visit it; on forward there.
So fair and fortunate to be thus false,
Wedded to two. O you all wondering eyes,
Gaze till your fire flame, your eyeballs drop
In moist imagination of this act,
Before the first be dead to wed a second. o
Why writ you dead in your last letters?
Sick was I, and no likelihood of life.
What then, was that a just excuse
To varnish over this base counterfeiting? no,
I'll make it known.
I care not, I will thus excuse it,
All opposite of injury was yours,
Putting to test our weakness by your letters,
Which carrying credit, woman in her will,
Guiltless is causer of this open ill.
Had I been thus advised, but all too late
Acquainted with your speed, I had prevented what now is past and done.
Why did you not? bawd to your own misdeed,
Three quarters guilty of this accident,
That might & would not stop the hazard,
Will ye now heap up miracle,
And make it worse in note, by adding to't
A bavins blaze, 'tis not so soon extinct,
Being fierce of flame, quenched must it be,
By watercourse of sounder policy.
I am from myself in this, what shall I do?
O I am mad, and mischief menace is unwitting of all purpose.
Why did I cast my glove,
Proclaimed the finder stickler of our sports,
But to a point prevailing practice?
I know not how.
Leave all to me, women that wade in sin,
Have their wits-charter to authorize it,
And they have antidotes that to digest,
Which better judgements lose themselves in, let me alone.
To lie with him the while.
'tis true to lie with him, but not in sheets,
To use the flourish of a woman's skill,
In winds and turnings, other lying,
My new made husband injures not the old,
As I am simply false, I will be found
Constant to death, knowing my business
Is to heal up the fractures of the time,
And to salve virtue in her taint of ill.
I build on this.
Some month.
While I possess the glory of my name;
Attendances according, marry our son
Unto his eldest daughter, that's the point
Of all: regain my jointure next,
'tis not amiss to satisfy your debts.
These two achieved, the third is bedding,
And if this brain beguile him not of that,
Say I am single: no, since blame sits nigh,
behooves give care to use true policy.
Our son.
Aside.
Mother the noble guest expects ye,
The present meeting does neglect itself
Where our fair bride is wanting,
Pray come in, you do them wrong.
I am not well, and this commanding air
Retains my health, I came to fetch it,
Wherefore enriched with what was ours before,
We yield fresh duty and attend them.
Will you be mindful of our marriage, mother?
Begin so happily in yours.
I shall endeavour in it, come.
Close and hushed, not a fly stirring,
While they feed hungerly, we, that loves detie
does proclaim pardon to presume, and speak,
challenge liberty, now by my maidenhead.
Swear not love.
Can you forbid my oath? Sir I will swear, & till I lack it, say, nought shall confine me, I had rather feast in fancy's pittance, then to seed gauged with attention, soothing every bit with curiosity: no, I can fill my belly in a minute, satisfy my stomach in a breath: Lovers digest their sighs, and chow their spleen, while other appetites fall hungry to't, and let them greedily graze on.
What's all this?
lovers talk any thing.
I understand ye not.
I would not that you should, for I speak Greek.
Regard her not, for she talks, Idly Filbon.
Be you advised then sister, I'm a fool.
Yet not so simple but I talk by rule,
I say, dine they that list, I will not, for my dish
Dressed to my hand is here, here let me feed,
'Tis the Maid's modicum, God send us speed.
In that I claim a part,
whoever feeds this dish hath Mary's heart.
So then said I well, ye wicked thing.
Mot as I am of Lovers union,
Contracted to a solitary life.
By thus retaining singleness of heart:
Changing all doubts that the world affords
But one, so to thy sweetest self,
Which only art idea of my thoughts:
I vow a reconciled amity,
Which violated, does command my life
To yield his interest to the shade of death,
May be, your father alienates our choice,
And shows as sunshine threatening rain,
To the all-hoping harvest present.
Which to make clear, the honourable word
And fatherly regard in present office
Have passed their speed in our attention.
I know your father will receive their onset
Soldier-like, joying the siege begun,
Which tho resisted, bids them gladly come.
Pause in that trust, give ear.
Sound proclamation,
It is enacted by the bride and bridegroom,
And by ourself chief in authority,
That all receive their pleasures
From the most high in this assembly
To the lowest, all pastimes are made free,
Dancing, carding, dicing reveling.
And other dues oft-times fit merriments,
Unto the bride and bridegrooms health.
The days short, and the night's
Stop there.
I will, to pleasure thee,
There take your places.
And in your sweetest key of music strokes
Sound pleasant melody, echo those sounds
Which true-love-hearts, in Concord's chiefest grounds
Have their blest being, use art in times,
Which may give welcome to our noblest guests.
We are betrayed, young Humil is at hand,
Dance, and excuse it so.
Sound music there.
Content, a dance, and in again.
Content, no dance, yet in again.
It is ungently done to snatch her so.
I snatch but that which promise says is mine,
Have I offended?
I.
Right what is wrong.
Here,
Or where you dare, go seek in Brainford, go.
Brainford?
Put up, or I shall be offending unto one,
Against the Bride's son, dare ye?
I repent not what is done, come you with me.
So slaves by violence do hurry hence,
The rights of—
Peace, we on you do impose command.
Yield duty in it: hall, a hall there.
Music sound, and to the bride do consecrate this round.
Squire of the day, cull out your gadding bucks.
Select your light-heeled does, open your Labits,
Turn them to the toils; we that are Venus' Huntsmen may partake the sports.
You're a gallant woodman sir.
My son for one.
And mine the other.
Good my daughters for them both,
A course or so, go too, lead on, the bucks that have employment for these does, are not these giddy gamesters, i'll be the Forester and look to't.
Hear you that?
A lightning before heat.
Your father's air is herald to his tongue.
A knows the coat, but thinks not who shall wear it.
there's two and two.
A couple more, too makes no show, our measure is for three.
Why then the bride.
And bridegroom.
O sir, pardon me.
My joints were oiled to pleasure, but now, not.
Then I with her.
You! O, your authority commands her.
Hark.
It gives his luster light.
My warrant wins, where his does lose the right.
My son in law grows bold.
Good again, here's much to do in love,
One simply stands, not challenging his own:
And reason, Mary, chance is yet unknown
No, nor in you sir, though my son,
Words past contrive, but after deeds cry done.
Brook'st thou this disgrace.
O sir, no remedy, what justice lives so free.
And to her own is friending,
I am mad to think on't boy, but—
How Goddess-like the elder of the two,
Stations the measure, it is a jovial sight,
Where beauty gilds the pavement with her light.
How sullen Saturn took her by the hand.
With frosty feeling, in whose joy touch,
She shrunk her hold, but with a jealous eye,
She glanced on me, fearful that standers by
Should be enriched with't: now she smiles me fair,
Guilding my torture with an after hope.
Thus moralized, I season on my right,
Her love thus challenged by inferior might.
After this dalliance here comes other sport.
Pray ye attend him gallants: How now Iohn?
Tardi venientis Iohn, you must be whipped.
Quaeso preceptor, non est tibi quid.
This silly sot, my Lord, so please you hear him,
Utters much hope of matter, but small gain.
An old wife nursed him, which we call blind Ales.
She dying, left him to the cities keeping.
Which in their Hospital they thus nursed up.
Amongst the bounties of their other deeds:
Many beside, now you shall hear his fellow
Ask him such questions as his simpleness
answers to any: sirrah let me hear ye.
Iohn, how many parts of speech be there?
Eight, the vocative, and ablative, caret nominativo o,
What say you to radish Jack?
That it does bite, Ha, ha, ha.
Where ha' you been Iacke?
At Paul's friend.
Who saw you there?
Mr. Deane Nowel, O he's a good man truly.
What did a give thee Iack?
A groat, look here else.
What wilt do with it?
carry't home to my Nurse.
I'll give thee a point Iack, what wilt do with it?
carry't home to my nurse.
I'll give thee a fools head Iack, what wilt do with it?
carry't home to my nurse,
Carry a fools head, what a fool are thou?
Should I go home without it? whose fool now?
Who toll the bell for Iohn?
I know not,
When dide a?
e'en now,
Hoo jack ho,
My Nurse's chicken. Ha, ha, ha.
A silly ignorant, is a ever so?
Never otherwise, a cleanly Idiot, what's put on him in his morning ries, is as you see it. This old woman is his Nurse.
So please your honour you are sent for to the Court,
The Court goes from Richmond to Whitehall.
We will attend her, kind sir William Vergir.
Our times bridegroom to yourself and you.
We wish as we have ever done, all love,
And for our present entertainment rest indebted to your bounty, if a court's amends have in it power of satisfaction, you command it, this acknowledged ever, your poor acquaintance but an honourable friend.
We will attend your coach.
Sir, be mindful of our servant Filbon.
What wants in him to weigh down love with gold,
Our savours shall supply.
'tis a light weight, their portions if they, poise no better, will to the world's belief, grow less not greater, but let them pass, I weigh them as they are. Come Nurse, follow us Iohn.
Wipe your nose, fie a sloven still, look ye be mannerly, hold up your chin, let me see ye make your holiday leg, so my chucking, that's a good lamb, do not cry for any thing, Iohn if ye do.
No Nurse, grace a God, Grace a Queen.
Shriek no more in my ear, I prithee peace, I grant I made such promise: but what then, shall I for that so set her on the rack, when her fair fortunes look a better way, with the small proffer of your giddy son, no: you shall pardon me.
You'll let me have my jointure yet.
Yes that, three hundred by the year t's thine,
But for your son to wed my eldest daughter.
Why, he doth merit her in my accord, and 'tis no wrong in you, to dip her blood in the self die that we are in.
I grant his merit, but her shining value made golden glittering, by my wantings looks to a higher promintoria, from which four, when your son gazes, it affrights him, yields him planet stroke.
He shall not have her then.
Believe it wife.
He shall.
Ha.
I will not bed with you till then.
What?
I ha' said it, and when posture of our word takes his base being, I will die the death, into our wedding sheets shall mischief come, before my body break your word with me, even on your wedding day.
Nay then up with the lists, again it shall not be.
I care not, think you I do, keep your word in that, when I break mine.
No more, be stranger to my bed, do do. Have
I of nothing made thee much and wilt thou—
Yes I will, have you of protestations, oaths, and vows made these loose fractures: lawful be it then for me to shun the make-peace bed, since strife sets such division betwixt man and wife, I am most firm in't.
Very well, 'tis not amiss.
The night draws on, 'tis time to part.
At your pleasures gentlemen.
Your gallant daughters will be next.
Or not at all, for I am past it now.
And we are prayed unto, our sons are gentlemen,
what resteth then, but we sail nearer to the point?
What point?
Of marriage past, betwixt us in our promises.
Indeed to one I promised her weight in gold, unto the other which I love as dear, her weight in silver, now gentlemen what goods have you to equal these large promises?
Why all we have.
But 'twill not serve,
The big avouchments of my promises
Controls you all, and all men's else, ye all,
Under degrees of Earls, Lords, or as Potent
To toll them on I echo these large sums.
Unvalued must your sums be to such choice,
Honour looks high above such petty price.
Look honour high as heaven,
Our earthly reach doth level in that eye,
And with the embellishment of richer worth
I'll by, and outbuy the imprisoned scope,
Of reaching blood, what will not value do
Where strong ability does reach his hand,
And they have beauty too, which joined to riches
Will proffer fair: though not so quaint
As courtly dames or earth's bright treading stars,
They are maids of More-clack, homely milk-bowl things,
Such as I love and fain would marry well.
It was a promise in you to be kind.
I'll forward with that promise, you love my eldest.—
With my soul.
And pity to divide that love, then hearken me,
when she's dead and lives again, she's yours, not till then,
Then never but in death.
You love my youngest daughter.
And will ever.
Pray ye do: but when you are from yourself a woman, she is yours in marriage.
Woman to woman joined 'twere wonderful, but in more maze of wonder I should be, what I do challenge to participate, and from myself live to divide in other.
Faith not till such a wonder.
Is't not enough to scandal thy true word?
But are we slighted thus with fantasies,
Impossibilities, dead and alive again,
Manhood infused in woman: 'tis not generous.
Come son upon my blessing
Take from thy eyes thy heart adoring shine,
Offer no more thy altar bearing thoughts
To one so giantlike, whose reach sits high,
Above the compass of a gentle eye.
you have your answers, gallants.
We like it not.
Nor will we so except it.
Forewarn come near my house,
Rapes, felonies, and what may else be thought on,
I will with heavy impositions
Surcharge ye with, if not with pistol shot,
I will defend myself and these I keep.
Live I to hear this?
Convey them from him, let us.
In disguise.
Or not at all.
That way or none.
Iames, when I put thee from my thought, let me be hoodwinked from all, fortune, thy partaking gentleness is such, as I do love thee, troth I do.
God continue this good league.
Wotest what news?
No.
The lovers are expulsed, and my fair hopes shine the clearer: what wilt say when I do marry this Knights eldest daughter?
That you are then possessed.
She is mine contracted in her father's word.
New broken sir.
Ha.
'tis true your mother challenged it: but he as angry as the raging morn, whose choler breathing shakes high battlements, puts her off with a pause of contrary, I know it sir, her jointure is subscribed too, which else to do, sooner should earth to heaven presume a progress, than the grant make firm what the antecedent challenges, your mother upon this abandons from his bed, vowing bold absence, he enraged, gives way to all malign and stubborn fashion of contempt, such a close today never had practice, such a wedding night, till this sad first never had purchase: you shall well agree them sir, to atone this jar, use means I pray you, 'twill become ye, well, when wrangling wrestles with such violent injury, 'tis the sons office.
'tis the devils office and not mine, to hell obedience, if he break his word.
You had a father loved ye better.
He loud me as a king in a play, his servant who were seeing him gives kind applause, but small utility: my father in my childhood loud and left me to the world's eye, in bold necessity, I thank him for it, since he died my mother hath her chance, mine wants the proof, stand by Time's minion and inconstancy, oh.
Have patience.
Yes, whereunto? sith all my hopes lie level
With despair, such milksops in whose breasts,
Lingers a lagging hope, to them is patience sufferable;
But to me, horror, and hell's black motions tickles
Me on to mischief, and I will—
So.
Now swims upon the main, such shipwreck-souls,
As the winds rage splits on the rocks of danger.
ay, my wife, and son all three, now heave, and
Fear of sinking, makes us timorous.
Should we be shelving on the shallow beach,
The seas rough gusts might scatter our intents,
So idle purchase might be gathered up,
from our so sudden shipwreck: No my state
Stands yet secure: though maimed yet is not foiled:
But salved by wise occasion may make good
This sudden overflow of tide and flood.
Where hadst this bread and butter?
The crow did give it me.
But take heed the kite take't not from thee.
I'll choke first.
Iohn shall's play at counter-hole i th' cloister?
I ha' near a counter.
I'll give thee one for a point.
Do, and i'll play hose go down, O sir, Willy is a good man truly, here's good custard and capon, and good bread and butter too.
Now Iohn, i'll cry first.
And i'll cry lag. I was in hobly's hole.
I ha' won this Iohn, now for another.
I'll hate again will I will ô.
What's the matter, making my sweet lamb cry?
Come Iohn we must to London, on with your clean muckender, and take leave of sir William and his Lady. God's me your point, where is it Iohn?
The crow has it, and did win it at counter hole.
I'll whip ye for it, take him up, lose your point lamb, fie, up with him sirrah.
Good Nurse now, no more truly o, o
Where's this suck-egg, where's Iack a boy:
Come ye movable matron, where's this tuggage,
away away.
I'll take leave of S. William and go away.
Now my Iohn juggler, your nose is like Lothbery conduit, that always runs waste.
What's his name Iohn?
Sternigogilus, ha, ha.
What?
A goggle eye, a wanton eye, a madcap, so a means.
Wat?
Hollo.
Trim boat. turn head, we're at hand mushroom,
We come boy, we come.
Come Iohn, our leave is taken.
Have o'er the sea to florida, and was not good King
Salomon, Tom Tyler.
O well sung Nightingale, a board a board there, ha rip there.
Boy, you understand me, though the liquour have rinsed me, remember your business boy.
Yes master.
'tis rare to be a tinker boy, work enough, wench enough, and drink enough, is't not boy?
I Master.
Boy where shall's have doings, I'll clout any woman's cauldrons, boy.
Master, tincke on 'tis time, for we ha' near a penny.
Pawn budget boy, I'll ring in boy, hay any work for a tinker, a ti, ti, tinker.
By my maidenhead 'tis he, the merry tinker of Twitnam boy, is't not?
Yes flower i'th' frying pan, he stops holes well, 'tis he,
Has his old songs still, has he not?
Yes, and new to boot.
And be not these tinker's knaves? upon their backs they bear a long pick, with a staff i'th' end,
He shall ha' work, I'll break way for him, and
Call out the gentlewoman to hear him sing.
Let them all say what they can dainty come thou to me.
We shall ha' work master.
Draw boy, homo armatus, boy, I'll pepper your pans,
Where's my dog boy?
your Dame has him, and will meet you at Putney.
Indeed what's a tinker with out's wench, staff and dog.
Is this the tinker you talk on?
I madame of Twitnam, I have seen him lick out burning fire brands with's tongue, drink two pence from the bottom of a full pottle of ale, fight with a Masty, & stroke his moustaches with his bloody bitten fist, and sing as merrily as the soberest chorister.
Come tinker, stop, mend.
I'll tickle your holes.
he's out of tune for singing now.
Out of tune and temper too, thus can dainty liquour do. Sing boy.
Relish master, relish, a note above etam master, Sol. fa, me, re.
A maiden sitting all alone,
Unto herself she made great moan,
Sorrow set upon her cheek,
And she looked green as any leek:
Her friends did ask her cause of care;
But she cried out in her despair.
O stone, stone ne ra, stone na ne ra, stone.
Cold comfort in a stone.
Doctors came her pulse to feel,
And Surgeons with their tools of steel,
To dig, to delve, to find her pain,
But all they did it was in vain,
Still on her back this maiden lies,
And with an open throat she cries.
O stone, stone na ne ra, stone ne na ne ra stone.
Better and better by my slipper.
Old wives they made answer thus,
Green sickness was most dangerous.
And oatmeal eating is a food,
That never yet did maiden good.
Tut, tut, tut, 'tis nothing so,
Still she cried out with pain and woe.
O stone, stone ne na ne ra, stone ne na ne ra, stone
Till she was delivered of a chopping boy, and all
was as I am, Omne been.
What a disfiguring diet, drunkenness,
Lays upon man, a beastly appetite.
Lingers the body where such gluttonous means,
Swelters in surfeit of desire and ease.
I am an enemy to myself, to think,
That man is slave so to continual drink.
Knight, feast, knight, a good cellar keeper knight.
I'll cusse thy daughter knight.
how's that?
shalls not buss knight, shall's not neb?
Thou art in the straits Moll, and the pirate's shot will sink thee, therefore yield.
I am thy Towers, being thus disguised,
am come to steal thee, then be sudden Moll.
Nay then i'faith.
Knight shall's drink at door like beggars? no, i'll in knight see thy seller, is thy seller in dept, knight dare he not show his face? your black jacks are my elder brothers, knight, shall's not shake hands with our brother's knight?
Follow him, look he steal nothing.
Tinkers steal nought but drink & maidenheads,
I'll watch him for one, if you allow loss of the other.
Where's Touch?
Sir.
Who wait you on?
On the world sir.
And what says the world to ye?
To me sir.
To you sir, what a message? letters, ha, daughter i'll be your secretary, nay hide not, juggle not with me, i'll once be secret to your thoughts, i'faith I will.
'tis a card of lace sir, which he bought me.
I bonelace sir.
Bonelace subscribed too like a letter, lace weaved of ten bones, be't so? even so.
O Touch.
O mistress now am I tried on my own touch,
I am true metal one way, but counterfeit another:
O life no life, but mess of public wrong,
Day turn tonight, for I ha' lived too long.
From Filbon.
Yes from Filbon, woe to the day, time, and hour.
Wherefore.
That I brought this news from your lover therefore.
Pull off your coat.
I need not sir, 'tis ready to fall off, yet if I do, 'tis the time of year, the fall of leaf sir, and serving men do drop their coats, there sir.
Begone, come no more near my house, if thou do thou art a felon, are you the carrier, are ye indeed, must love make you his mercury, must Filbon send by you? my own betray my own, to him, your a knave, they shuffle ye about, i'll deal the cards and cut ye from the deck, you understand me, go.
Gang is the word, and hang is the worst, we are even, I owe you no service, and you owe me no wages, short tale to make, the summers day is long, the winter nights be short, and brick-kiln beds does hide our heads, as spittle fields report.
Wife coop up our guinea hen, that wants this treading, you gossip, to your closer, Filbon shall, if we want will, yes yes what else.
Come daughter.
I deny Filbon to his face, bring me to him, I will justify that all his actions are like apricots, they dangle & love them.
You do.
Alas sir, mistress Marie is with the tinker gone, and at the back door horsed, I see the gelding, 'twas a dapple grey.
Hell and damnation.
Death and torture.
Christmas gambols, father, shoeing the wild mare.
Am I a jest to laugh at now, indeed, indeed.
O not so fast sir, I am for your race, and will out strip ye, if ye run no faster, speak what was this tinker?
tinker sir.
ay, thy master.
My master is a knight, who jove-like in the shape of such a thing, came to see Danae in this shower of gold.
Toures was it?
Etiam, ita, ego I sir.
Now fortune at the fairest, go with thee, thou hast been coming in this stratagem, and I do give thee joy with all my heart.
You do housewife.
Wishing a whirlwind in the like disguise.
Fetch me hence smoothly, I am lawful price.
Where's Iames?
At London.
I will thither too, since the devil drives I am the second, lock her up, safe be it your charge.
What for this counsellor, concealing rape and ruin of your child?
Whip him.
I shall never endure it.
Unless you do betray this trust, and tell us to what cabinet he hath conducted her.
To Putney, o to Putney sir, where they'll be married.
At my parsonage, God amen, no other hospital to shadow them but mine, am I the patron of so hard mischance, that my own of my own shall cozen me, i'll thither, son your company?
No, i'll to Richmond sir, prevent them there.
No sir, you shall with me, that's the next office, for yourself, delaying due, in other all things ready, you will then serve yourself, nor he nor you shall carve so to your appetites.
Your pleasure sir.
For my sake turned away.
Yes, my master turns a new leaf, and so must I sir, 'twas for your letters sake.
Is there no hope?
What do you call it when the ball sir hits the stool?
Why out.
even so am I, out, out of all hope ever to come in to crumb my portage at his table sir.
Welcome to mine, then honest Tutch, but speak thy mind, thinkest thou she will continue firm?
Firm sir, yes, unless you take her for a join stool. she'll continue firm, she seedes on ye, dreams on ye, hopes on ye, and relies on ye, telling her father what a friend you are, protesting and molesting to the hole house of your good parts, vowing to God and man if she have not you, she will have nothing: for any man's pleasure, she'll not line if not for yours.
I stand resolved.
She wishes that ye should, or she'll not trust to ye.
Son seest thou young Towers?
Not since our last repulse in love, since when I stand affected unto singleness of life.
Then art thou stable in my thoughts, but let me whisper to thee boy, young Towers in a Tanker's habit hath her stolen, to whom his hearty adorations were to this hour consecrate, she's gone, and her old doting father got to complain him at the court, how 'twill work I know not.
Like wax; she'll take any impression, sir she.
Like a tinker say ye?
Certainly even so.
'twas my own project father, he applauded it, knowing my fashion of that counterfeit, to be so sure, as no man could forego me.
But himself sir, 'tis a point of law, arraign him upon ipse facto.
And art thou stepped beyond me? where tonight thou slepst: soft be thy pillow: easy be thy rest, & may thy bed be.
Mortal down, thistle soft,
She laid herself under to keep him aloft,
And ever she said, come turn thee to me,
And was not this bonny lass Mary amber?
Mary indeed she hath resigned to me hard choice,
Near am I but as arrows afar off,
Seems to the shooter neighbour to the mark,
Till it prove otherwise, so I
Furthest from favour am, though seeming nigh.
Change your mark, shoot at a white, will say, come stick me in the clout sir, her white is black, 'tis crept into her eye, and wenches with black eyes the white's turned up are but as custards, though they seem stone cold, yet greedily attempted, burning hot, and such a wench is she sir.
I know she loves me.
Most affectionately burns in desire for ye; but key cold through her father, she stands to freeze while others are appointed to thaw the Ice, not you.
I must use policy.
The only man, I will assist you sir,
I thank thee, and I will prevail in't.
I think sir, if I see my house tonight, there will come warrants to make open way to their recovery, thinking they are with me, whom I protest I have, not seen, and unacquainted with her subtle stealth, am now as clear as is the babe new borne, I neither knew of it, nor where they are, I do beshrew their hearts, right I have in him for it.
sleep in my house then, so my word shall make your answer stronger, I have a son, I wish him so possessed, but not with violence, yet say he do climb high, and reach the top bough with a stricter course, I knowing not the manner nor the means, acquits me, and God give, them joy, my oath is clear, and that's my warrant.
Sir, I will trouble you to nigh, by this sad time his moan doth challenge comfort, and the council whose loves he hath so often visited, heartened on by the Earl of Tumults means, they will add present purpose as he begs it.
but if the Earl know of my sons discharge, signed by his careless answer, 'twould allay his hot endeavours with a cold responsal; but cease that, the time shall come——
'tis mine, the cause and all, pine let me in them, if the son of hope shine as a troubled meteor in the sky; 'tis our fate's fortune, and no matter cause no remedy.
True vauntings of resolve, 'tis late, and custom challenges no right in me, to be so hurtful to myself, the evenings air is raw and cold.
Filbon follow us, be you more temperate.
You see what hurry threatenings this misdeed
Wounds deep are dangerous, though they hardly bleed
Sir, I am lessoned,
As the boys at school?
Practice their knowledge by contrary rule.
O I am slain with wonder.
Hath this life left in it a little breath,
To blow out treason, reek ye clouds of shame,
putrefy all imagination, hold her at stern,
There let her sink, never to win again,
Homer's recovery, shall I say and think it?
O—
Have I not been in bed tonight, and so
Talk idly wanting sleep, or rose from rest,
As many troubled do, acting like life,
Awaking dead, for in that flattering fear,
Perchance her reputation may be saved.
No I am certain in my fear, 'tis true,
In yond black closet lies a wicked woman,
(I will not say my mother, that names lost)
In the twinned bracings of the slave her man.
In Iames his arms, and shall I suffer it?
O—
To blab, it were to herald out my shame,
In quartered scutcheon of black obloquy,
To murder one were most impartial;
Again to turn hills on this sin,
Would write me bawd, but to be nobly satisfied
Is a content licensed from equity.
The knight shall know it, I will write to him,
Startle his bold imagination with pale fear,
Rose his revengeful spirit on them both,
And make me hopeful of his love neglected,
Forgive me world, heavens justice puts me on,
And though a son, I'll punish both or none.
You that bind up in secrets of the night,
days benefits going to rest;
As peaceful birds, lodged in a sanctuary.
Smile at our courtier's care, whose industry,
Rules in the silent and all shadowing night,
Suits that are breathless in a troubled day.
Have their abiding in our cares at night.
Hard censured, and atoned by late advice,
Saluing the world's scares, as we would your care
Knew we the burden of it.
With us the morn is mated with the moon
And we are retrograde to what you do.
Esteeming conscience, benefit and good.
Challenged in service of our country:
Sir though our blood affirm us labour free,
It binds thee more to busy industry,
Wonder not at our late upsitting therefore.
Your humours toil in our extremities,
But we unthankful merit contrary,
Think it a want and weakness in our kind,
I post and labour in a toil myself,
Seeking my own: midnight to me is noon,
And all the hours of dull past night,
Sunshine eclipses, that do much molest me,
Pardon me that am so tedious.
Seeking your own.
My eldest daughter is conveyed from me,
Hurried away, as thieves by violence
Convey their booties from the true man's store.
Auditor, Towers son hath done this deed,
A rescue noble Lords.
Rescue and right, challenge the benefit.
A warrant for a general search,
Restraints for Cinck-ports, and all passages,
That thievish water doth despoil us of.
It shall be signed i'th' morning,
Draw the contents as you affect the means,
And let attendance urge the early act.
Good night.
God morrow is it not?
Betwixt them both.
The moral of my misery seeking too late,
That to recover which I lost too soon.
And yet in each you stand indifferent.
I must, till perfected by you,
Either late loss, or timely victory,
Recovering what I fear is past advantage.
Hope the best sir, things at worst,
Season in their decay, as children mend,
Bent in their eye to ruin, yet they pause
Resting in grace, does reobtain at will,
Opinion in rash judgement, dooming ill.
Good rest, for we go to't.
The peace of happiness be with ye,
I will retire me to my Inn, and wish.
Hours as short as momentary breath,
For till the morning, minutes hours be,
And hours years, such is revenged to me,
Might I enjoy it?
Sir.
My man, a midnight messenger, what is thy haste in leath steeped, speak is that all one? one all, that we call daughter, gone too, is she?
No sir.
Wherefore starest thou so wildly, say, wert thou asleep and wakened? com'st to us here without thy better part? and sent abroad, leaving thy wits at home.
Your son sir, in all haste sends you his tales, wishes your wit and judgement suddenly, read and regard sir.
Give the torch, if you will see my mother & your wife, fellowed in bed make haste, Iames your man writes on your pillow etc. my eyes are witnesses to their adultery.
What's the news?
Plague on these jauntings, once we shall be old, & then this trotting life will linger in our bones, all hours are our nights, we dally with our own destruction.
It cannot be, or if, or if, what if? if it be so I am undone, poisoned am I with fair promises, no marvel though you do forswear my bed, if yet again, if what make I here when treason is at home, away.
The bird that greets the dawning of the day,
Signs with his wings, the midnight's parture,
And the sleet dew moistening the cheeks
Of morrows welcome: gives earnest of the morn:
Yet all secure, adulterate lust does sleep,
And I the hatched young of this trodden hen,
Stands sentinel to her idolatry.
Blow you swelled winds and crack the battlements,
Rouse their incestuous luxury with fear
Of what's to come, yet that were my mishap,
No silent air fan on them bawdy breath.
That as they reek in their licentious love,
Devil may seal sure, and Morpheus so pleased,
May to their pastime add affliction
Delivered by the hand of him that's wronged,
And stands indebted to his destiny:
Yet are they as the hour, whose sandy minutes
Runs out at pleasure till the period comes,
Fast sleeping, and enjoy their quiet,
Rouse the black mischief from thy ebben cell,
Land in the bosoms of this twin in lust,
Him whose heaped-wrong calls vengeance to be just.
Lock fast that door and leave me. Give me your light, Son Humil?
Father.
Thou seest I am obedient at thy call. Exit servants.
I come as messengers that bring their bale,
Signed in their looks, be well advised,
Thou makest a challenge goes beyond all grace,
Should it be false.
It is my love to you that makes me step
Heart-deep in disobedience to my mother.
Wretch that I am to think her so,
It makes me desperate of priority,
Fore thinking my beginning to be base,
Conceived in such mistrust and frailty,
My front hath that impression still,
Adding a blush to my distemperature,
And I am crestfallen in sanguinity,
Pray ye believe me, would it were not so.
Enough watch & be secret, I will enter,
Sit as the night raven or the shrieking owl,
Over my portal, menacing ill chance
To all within: for death is to my blood
A blessing, while this fever kills,
Almost my intellect or better part,
Yet she's thy mother, and no son but hates
His own disgrace so highly merited,
And I believe thee.
Sir, truth is truth, my conscience and religion
Binds up in me, and since I do proclaim
Detraction from my blood, by her misdeed,
Give me leave to report a fly a fly,
If it offend the virtue of mine eye.
'tis true.
And yet methinks it should not be,
How hardly will this scandal take impression,
Where resolved christianity does dwell?
But I will try the gold, perhaps 'tis base,
Who knows the heart's affection by the face.
Scarlet is scarlet, and her sin blood red,
Will not be washed hence with a sea of water,
Is this my hand, or is the fire fire?
whose scorching heat dissolves relenting metal,
whenas it tries the substance; yes, and I
Make known my mother is an alien,
From my blood, so to fall off, and perish
Even in her pride of bliss, damned be the slave
That so attempts her spotless chastity
To ruin, I know that yet smooth look,
Plotted, contrived, and won her with device,
She never knew a double character till now,
But single singler she ever ruled,
Even modesty herself, Vesta resigned to her,
And virtue hand in hand at barleybreak,
Ran the swift course, none but a hound of hell,
Hunted this fawn of fortune to his kennel,
But my mother, forgetting her degree,
does captivate love, life and liberty,
By one deeds practise, wicked, nay far worse,
Fatal disgrace, honours created course.
Fool, fool, fool.
Ha.
Light bubble swell and break, wouldst thou believe all this, and give a gloss to slanders cruelty: ripening reproach itself with thy fond ear, o Humil, Humil.
Sir.
Thou art a villain, and hast cast up hills against heaven itself: when sons unto their mothers are so false, O where is grace? hoodwinked from honour, shamed to show her face.
Is it not so?
Trust thy own eyes, go, thou shalt see a sight
Will melt thy stubborn spleen in pity,
Sweetly she sleeps, whose innocent respect
Smiles in her dreams, the childlike govern,
Laughing loud in their simplicity,
While waking, mischief seeks that to undo,
Which true required, stands sentinel unto,
Go and return with shame.
With shame, devil of mischance what's this?
Did I not see their cutted guilt look big?
Was I in trance of my belief, ha, was I?
Can be no juggling in it: can there?
No thou art constant as the northern star,
And I as giddy as the untamed Leopard,
That sees no means but dire destruction,
Flinging his foam to poison in his way
Man's mischief, plotted to his overthrow:
He told me true, o that I live to think so,
Or they so wretched to deserve the thought,
Soundly they slept, whose slumbers killed me waking,
Yet to recover half slain reputation,
Done have I, what to purpose practiseth
If it prevail, our honour so reserved
Will kick at all malignant cruelty
That taints our name with ever living scorn,
Fortune be for me, I will that recover,
Which devil himself cries guilty too, my fame
The flight it wings, imps feathers of renown,
That left als lost, my birthright tumbles down,
Sir I am sorry.
How can they excuse such wanton looseness, know they I stand here to thunder vengeance on their luxury.
My mother's fast asleep, and I awake, am in a transive maze, unwitting how to make my peace with God herself and you.
why are they not together?
Not in bed.
Thou shouldst with Argos hundred eyes,
Search in the chinks and corners round about,
It cannot be but she is extant there, ha, is she not?
I am confounded in the search, please your justice be my torture, I have murdered innocence, sorrow is not the way, death is the least, I challenge cruelty and urge the exactest point of peril, slave that I am to live.
A son, a son, to do so to a mother.
Fare ye well, rather than be a witness of my wrong,
I will not see myself in't, go thou worse then,
I'll sacrifice to the devil, that tempted thee, all thy
Distempered thoughts, cry mercy to her sects.
To spotless innocence be free, say all thy treasons,
Build on slippery ice, and thou art frozen cruelty,
Sir, for your wrongs, if you remit black torture 'tis
My hell, and I appeal to stern rigor, O you sons,
Whose true obedience shines in majesty.
While mine more ugly than is vulcan's tithy.
Smells ranker than despised Hemlock
Curse and ban him, I am your subject to't
And every mother, whose snow innocence,
Feels soft and tender, as the down on palm,
Rate my rebellion with a blissless name,
And for my sake give misadventure aim.
Guide 'em to me, say I am such a son,
Through whom a mother is so soon undone,
Let me not see the while thou liv'st away,
Let thy repentance show itself in this,
Not to be seen where thou hast done amiss.
caitiff depart.
I will; this tongue that slandered,
Be her slander still.
It is too much already, was I bewitched,
That thus at hood-man blind I dallied
With her I honoured? o you times how have you
Nursed me, but no more, Humil hath branded on his
Mother's name, an Ethiop's blackness, and
A spotted stain, forgive me that and all.
What need I to afflict revenge on him
That on himself exasperates, farewell thou pride
Of sons, who to a father in supposition only and
by law, art all so loving, that thy mother dallying
With wantonness as girls with gauds, thou not respects
The womb that brought thee forth, but ill attempting
So, and so thou rumour'st, as the fault ripe in act,
Is blown to air, and though her son thou
Utterest what they were, thou shalt not lose by't
Now it fits, I challenge from the offence some right,
And add confine to this adultery
Wife, wife, rise and come forth.
Call ye sir?
Yes, take my closet key, let forth your lover,
Give me some ease by way of reason yet, and 'twill
Allay our discontent, O God so new to marriage, and
So stale, couldst thou so soon revolt, so soon, ha?
I must acknowledge all.
O No, some better looze,
This will but add to mischief torture
Use patience now be reconciled to fear,
Be dove-like humble, and leave that to me.
How can I, when the brand is on my brow,
But by exclaim, give ease to torture,
My brain is scared, and I am lifeless in't?
Kneel not.
A sentence, let us die.
No marvel though you vow this abstinence
When deputed by him, you shun my bed,
You do deserve your jointure well,
To admit a fellow in a true man's place,
I thank ye for it, yes.
Sir.
No, no words I know you can allege,
The devil has scripture for his damned ill,
And this does neighbour it, go and attire ye.
Be smilefull, and express no grief in scythes,
Rather be tickling sportful, topped in pleasure.
Then daunted any way, that me concerns.
To use the madman's guise, but I am past it,
Since what is done, no reference hath to wish,
I am for credit's sake, supportable, als well,
Content am I to be sensible, and feel my
Fortunes as I may, ranking myself with such,
As sometime lived in my repute most base,
Faith all is well believe it, I am satisfied:
I know you do repent, and that's my remedy,
Other amends I look not for, In, and attire ye,
But stay you with me.
I am obedient.
Go thou shame, never till now possessed,
And in a breath confounded, sir, you see your wrongs
Shine through the herne, as candles in the eve,
To light out others, think you this misdeed,
Merits salvation?
I must acknowledge contrary.
Wilt thou for all this spite, yet use me kindly in the next?
Command me sir.
Not for the second, this mistake me not,
Ratl. to bind thee from it, if here after,
Fashion of frailty summon us to fear
I must be plain, and therefore thus:
Look whensoever I hold up this finger,
Signing my lips with it, and cry begone,
Even then be speedy to depart the land.
If not, all power of mischief that I can, I will
and so resolve.
Sir, I am ready to the minute.
It may be, other reasons will restrain me
As causeless motives, nor seeing guiltiness.
In needy sequences perhaps our heart will in itself bake truce with this mischance, or if it do not, yet attend our spleen, it will be better for ye,
In humble duty.
Go, give copies of good countenance to our friends, think an is well, for so it is, I that am all in grief, am all in suffering, I forgive the reason, Fare ye well.
What I will do, is barred up in this closer,
The key that opens it, is my revenge.
Turned by a hand whose palm does itch with fire
Till all consume, a cuckold, cuckold William sir is
Its even so, would I were yet the last or least,
But not by thousands go too then, am I all alone, in this
Who is't that tongue calls man
That is assured of his wives conditions?
None, or if any, there the Phoenix lives
Unfellowed, be his fate renowned while mine
Is mockery, and a jestive stock, to all that knows me.
O you stars blaze fire, till this abuse be quenched
By my desire.
Hark ye Morris.
I Sir.
Where is Tailer? dudge me, will knog his pad,
What is chirken with cold button done, say you.
Excellent, this is Welsh indeed, O my honest Tutch.
Sauce box, roly-poly, am I not your master?
You are sir, pray ye pardon me.
You must have your left eye diameter wise,
Fixed on my right heel, and all the offices,
A servant owes in duty to his Master, perform
As naturally as if the forty shilling time
Were come, left I leave talking Welsh, and crack your pate in English.
I shall obey sir.
Fairest of beauties, love her seemly self,
For thy two eyes are Cupid's, which do shoot
From thy enamoured bow, shafts all of gold,
Headed with metal of immortal propose.
In thy fair bosom lives two hearts relenting,
Thine penetrable, through atoning pity,
Mine longing by desire to scale the fort
Of loves fair presence, make me happy,
Sign to my suit, but ye, for 'tis thy censure
Makes me thus bold, pronounce fair judgement,
Either of life or death, I that plead love,
Doubly devoted, challenge from thy deity
A maiden answer, let it come bright fire,
To try the substance of my loves resolve.
Sir, in sooth and verity believe me,
That I am fair 'tis credible, but to shoot
Arrows, whose heads have such immortal proof,
'tis most erroneous and false, 'sfoot your a Puritan,
A citizen I'm sure, her canvas curran bags,
Stuffed with sweet cinnamon and cloves,
Good sir you are deceived in me, I'm country plain
Without this nicety, and do you love me, yes?
Then crave an answer without ceremony,
Fetched from proud Ovid in his Arte amandi.
I do not like it I.
Bless you Latie.
Sir and you, tell me of Cupid's eyes,
shot from enamoured bows with hearts relenting, doubly devoted, and I know not what.
Bless you virgin.
No sir no, give me plain courtesy,
Drawing on loves white hand a glove of warmth,
Not chevril, stretching to such profanation,
You overthrow loves deity in this,
And putrefy his altars with bad breath.
I am a dairy housewife, no such wanton,
So easily flattered with far fetched replies.
Yet I esteem this worthless person free,
And though not fair, yet something fortunate.
Hark ye now Latie.
Sir cry you mercy.
Was a knight, mark you, of English in Wales, welsh blood, and 'tis no mock in en to marry in welsh blood, is it?
Sir all the smiles a modest maid, can in this kind make proffer of, are yours, in your fair welcome, blame me not, though his unkindness made me negligent in your kind entertain.
Neglect me so.
wives unto Citizens are tradesmen's daughters,
I am a blood of gentle composition,
My mind does equal it, I must be coached.
Banqueted everywhere, courted abroad,
At home flattered, for my private use,
I must have fancies, playfellows, as apes,
Monkeys, baboons, muffs, fans, receipts,
Costly abiliments of several suits,
Will ye give this? 'twill break you sir,
And crack your credits fair condition, no,
Citizens would, but cannot answer so.
Hark you, marry with her, and God dudge me, all is yours, was a knight have land, and a great deal of riches, will maintain you well, say you.
This gentleman or this, before a Citizen, you sir pardon me I will ha' none.
Then whom you will, call you this modesty to be so waspish? given to slight men off with incivility, give me leave to remember.
What you please, all the world except one or two, my eye motes that trouble but my sight. Filbon for me, man else but mere illusion and idolatry, vain worship, images of molten metal, which to dross dissolved, appear as nothing to my judgement, but his worth beyond compare, gentle and suffering as the silent air, that though it brook the buffets of base breath, yet in itself 'tis heavenly, free from earth.
Hark you, was knight in house called Sir William Perger.
Verger sir?
Morris was say true, give a ducat, look you tuck it, is mark, mark you that, and mark is 13 shillings four pence, good current money, and how do you? well, when was sir Robert Morgan, mik you latie, grace a God.
You sir.
Was I lie pray you?
Think you Master Auditor, knew nothing sir.
Upon my soul I think it.
I did wind him subtly as hounds the game,
New got on foot, for instance he lamented oft his sons proceedings, neglecting his own house, lest you in quest of her should search it, believe me sir I tell you what I know.
'tis likely, sons in these doting days
Will from their fathers alienate, differ still
From loves obedience, and in heart's affection,
join hand to hand, though beggary neighbour it,
And let them go.
Sir I am free then from your fear.
I good sir Henry I was wrong informed,
I am your patron in all love.
Long may ye line, so sir I find you gentle,
And a good benefactor to poor scholars,
We ha' few such, many we rather have,
That sell the Church rights, then maintain them,
And in my next stanza, I shall tickle them.
Speak conscience and no more.
Nay as for that sir pardon me,
I seldom exercise without that thought,
What my text leads me to, I will pronounce,
maugre the devil of judgement.
Soft.
Bless you gallant knight, a merchant sir,
Of London am I, my estate secure, and so it please you covet this fair maid in marriage, nothing else.
Know you him Sir Rafe?
Not well sir, but by guess, he is indifferent rich, has broke three times, made his head hole by means, & that say I, as this world shapes, is secure policy, what think you sir?
I do not think it so, though common practice finds it furthering shifts, do the devil resemble, & bankrupt baseness makes good credit tremble, like it not.
Please you Aunt, harg you now, knight was love this virgin, and God will, must make her wife, shall be her laty, go in Wales, great worship God willing.
O know this knight, he was created other day.
Sir Rober Morgan, o sir, such a one, whose reputation reacheth to the best, merits a good conjunction, were't my daughter, she should have him, o beware when majesty shines in a man's estate.
They long stand firm, spread wide regenerate
And though base borne, yet honour makes them swell,
Like clustered grapes, till mature sweetness brings,
Lussio us conclusion.
I have some mind to him, sir you receive
Kind welcome, let it store your thoughts with
Those sweet motions lovers wish to enjoy, she may,
perchance, all things concluded on, before ye.
Was aclad man, Morris fetch trunk of 'parel
was lie here a four week, will not out now.
Was welcome, plague on you, was love ye.
Sir, as for you, being city proud, my daughter's look sits on a courtier's brow, what sayst my girl?
O sir, a Courtier on my life, I love to sit up late,
Lie long i'th' morning, rot with sweet meats, and
To play at shuttlecock, methinks the games now
In my arms, in any hand a courtier's wife and
Why not? his black jet shows best about
Beauty's neck, and I am proud of such
A suitor, if I understand not his welsh, like
A good piece of ordinance, I shall lie fast upon the
Bulwark, and discharge my obedient English
Must be a Lady sir.
Yet welcome sir, let it not grieve you.
signor no, you're welcome to the wife I woo,
And mistress, might I be the man to strike the stroke.
You, or else none, sir Henry.
Troth she says true, but listen me for that, come Gallants enter with me, we will feast, there's little labour lost, where trial bids presumption scare the coast.
Right to a hair, 'tis mine, and I must do't
I see my fees, my rich advantage, sirrah boy,
Shall we have work, in faith and shall we?
Conclude, i'll busy him, Sir Rafe.
Son, you see to what a happy issue this disguise
Speaks fair, you know the plots, boldly proceed,
'tis ours in action, but your own the deed, I must
Shun all suspicion by my presence, look to't boy.
If thou failest now, for ever lose thy joy.
Ha, ha, master, I a Welshman, a Hangman.
A trick now on my maidenhead, I did mistrust it, Come leave the rest to me, this Priest shall marry us incontinent.
ay, if I were the Welshman.
Because your father gave him light thereto.
Therefore come sirrah, we'll shift clothes, meet us at Putney as my father shall mistrust ye.
I will, excusing your departure till anon,
do gentle love.
Heaven on our venture smiles, this to approve.
O it cannot choose.
Fathers are fortunate in this good news.
Go ye drones, ye do not love the hive,
There's honey in't, 'tis a sweet thing to win.
I must break the ice for ye, if I slip up to the chin, now you will pull me out, save me from drowning mistress.
Fear it not.
I would be loath betwixt Welsh and English, to be hanged, mistress, I cannot live on the bargain, come sir, I'll shift with them, and now I must shift with you.
I clothes, good Tutch.
And use me no worse being your man, than I used you, being mine.
O better, better.
O love, thou art a beggar, yet I am thy debtor.
Set down the heaviest load
That ever true affection underwent,
To you 'tis like the Anchor of your ship,
Heavy at first, but easily weighed seems light,
To me, that not supports her bodies weight,
'tis heart deep in the burden, & too ponderous
Sad, heavy is that load, whose leaden poise,
Is as a sullen sorrow, too, too pressing.
Sir, I would wish you to be brief.
Dig ho this golden beach, whose glittering sands
Shows with the sun as Diamonds set in gold,
Fitly entombs a jewel of much worth,
Whose living beauty stained all lapidary.
She was most gentle which was worth all riches.
And this night's tempest did a cruel deed,
To take from me a value of such price.
Sir, though our seas kill women with their frowns us their bugbear threats are womanish, and so we leave 'em.
Leaving yourself and all, sometime,
even so, no safer in our beds,
Or on the land, but under deaths black stroke,
And he that is the surest, sits in state,
Dyingly tended by the hand of Fate.
And yet methinks death should not
Take her from me, being scarce mine own.
But newly wed, never bedded yet.
So that the Ceremony burning bright,
Hymen yet hath his tapers flaming red.
And the bold boastings of that good man's breath.
That all religiously made one of two.
Hardly disgesled in the freezing cold,
Little I thought the priest's word being, ever,
Should find his period in so short a time.
Sir, but the gift was given ye on condition,
Till death depart, better or worse,
methinks this Catechizing little needs,
To human guiding, and to you the less
Knowing what openly you do confess.
Bear wi' me master, he that pines in grief,
Lives as you sailors do, thinking at sea,
Every storm ends, when flattery flouts ye,
So to our lovesick sorrow comes a calm,
By ease of fancies, when 'tis furthest,
And many times the weapon that doth wound,
Is salve, and Surgeon both, to make all sound.
Are ye ready sir?
All fitted, let me take my last farewell,
I am all jelly in my tears and sighs,
Wasted by waiting her untimely loss,
So long I did consume in drops of woe,
That contrary I laugh to think it so.
He that weeps much, having no tears to spend,
Smiles out the rest, but inwardly does rend,
O God that I venturing so hard a chance,
Should lose my dice, before my hand be out,
'tis even so, in all things man intends
The loss is ours, the winnings not our friends.
For charity be brief, should the wind
Turn his beak into the southern side
Our ship would leave us, dally not with grief,
Once and no more, let sorrow rule as chief.
Then thus, and this the last,
Moll, I take leave yet on thy hearsed self,
Dead selfe, and selfe slaine. Moll dcest
I am thy morning music, call thee up,
To wedded rights, I lead thee to the Church,
And there receive thee, dine with thee at noon,
Dance all the after day, bring thee at night
Into the wedding chamber, this is it.
And here I leave thee to thy virgin slumber,
Never attempted, as thy birth bestowed,
Madam beginning, take it in thy end,
So live thus die, only my married friend,
And nothing else, gone art thou to a power,
Which will with welcomes take thee, left I am
To the world's cross, thy father who enraged,
Will bitterly revenge thy death on me,
But I will prove his martyr, se-thee Moll,
Fool that I am to say so, here is all,
Gowns, tire, all abiliments of thine,
No rag shall rest remembrant in my view.
To stir the embers of thy dying fire,
I kiss thy key cold corpse, and with this key,
Lock thee for ever up, farewell, farewell,
My mouth the Church, my voice thy
Parting knell. All cares that live and hear
This bell to toll, christianlike bid peace unto
her soul.
Amen, be speedy mates, see ye not, look
The blueness of you cloud does threaten wind,
If it rise fair, we shall be lodged in France,
But not where pleaseth fates.
A board, aboard, hey.
Hollo, linger no time aboard, you hear
With me ho, will the rest stay? how a year?
O God that man should leave behind,
And live, the love of soul and mind.
Sir, welcome to Scilly,
Where I command my brother's friends have welcome,
But now my flattery gets you on this beach,
Where you prospectively see many countries,
Learn this of me, where danger shoots her string,
We in our neighbour nearness ought to fear:
But armed by our foresight, make bold resist
Against the brags of foreign enemies.
I have not seen a better glass to look in,
What country call you you, whose cliffs are as the clouds
smoke, and all shadowing mists?
Sir that is France, a fair beseeming friend,
On yonder continent stands Ireland,
On this side Britain, and on that side Garsie,
islands besides of much hostility,
Which are as sunshine, sometimes splendous,
Anon disposed to altering frailty.
We that all neighbour must so strength our being,
As fearless we may frolic yet not seeing.
I understand ye sir.
Now let my longing have content in you,
With the report of them you lately saw,
My brother Vergir and his children,
Is he a widower still at More-clack?
Married sir unto a London cast a way,
One whose decayed husband left to live,
(Though poorly) yet your brother's Lady.
It is his choice, and I subscribed to't,
But for his daughter's sir?
Alas, in them is he unhappy,
One is hailed from him by stolen practises,
The other lives as though she were not his,
A goodly gentle woman, but her own in heart,
She will be gone to, for her government
Stands upon will, as men stand on the beach,
Seeing the sea wherein they must be drowned,
Yet fearless venture on the ruthless main,
She will regardless of her father, marry,
And does as most, long for the misery,
Signed to them in their cradles.
Sorry am I.
Ha, what scrambled ends heap up confusedly?
New digged and ripped up is this plot of ground,
Some Shipwreck on my life, hid to deceive
The Queen and me of our advantages.
Likely sir,
And see our sudden coming scared from hence,
In the new ending, such as piled this heap,
Behind them have they left their implements
Which did the theft, what think ye sir if we
Redig the ground, should we depart & leave it?
At midnight would they fetch their borrowings.
I like your purpose, i'll make one.
What do you think it is sir?
nobody buried, it is sure some goods,
wracked on the sea, money or rich commodity.
Tobacco then.
'tis likely, for with us men smoke their lands through their nostrils, shall I tell ye sir, 'tis a commodity may well be spared.
Good luck a God's name, sir it is a trunk.
Lift sir.
'tis quick, it heaved as I heaved it.
I'faith I think so to, in heart of hope I will be all so bold, as to break way.
Ha.
If you be men and borne of that weak sex,
Which I myself profess, being woman,
Pity the living sorrow of a maid,
Buried for dead, but back again recalled,
By the divinity of heavenly power,
Amaze not, I am creature, flesh and blood,
Not as I see me, a pale and earthly Ghost,
The story when you hear it shall make plain,
The woeful chance of life so lately slain.
I had acquaintance with this voice, my cousin.
'tis she, sir, 'tis Mistress Mary Virger, I know her.
My name recalls my memory,
And I am such a creature, oh,
My uncle, where am I? return again,
Death thou art wanton in a lovers pain.
cousin I will not question the particulars,
The time calls on a present comfort,
And your life half spent,
Makes true necessity delay no longer,
Therefore come, as leisure we shall hear,
The dying story of your misery.
however, glad I am that such a chance,
Landed in Scilly not in neighbouring France.
If ever you used speed, be swift as lightning,
Shoot as the stars in their celestial spheres,
Go and return as Paris did from Greece,
With that immatchless Helen, tell the Priest
It must be done, he will believe your haste,
Because 'twas quickened with the former grant,
And promised by the knight himself.
Let me alone to make the way, follow you son.
And if I do not let me lose my prize.
Where's the knight?
Busy with one, who comes as conjured up from Cupid's quiver, strooken deep in love, he is a Pothecary.
I know him his mother was a.
Peace.
Him will I busily attend, go you dispatch while I detain the father, if this prove, 'tis comic pleasure in the school of love.
We must be quick and sudden, come.
Slip like your Eel.
If any man know any lawful cause why these two may not marry, now speak, or else for ever mum, I am gone i'faith.
Master, remember, you ha' my tongue.
yes, and thou mine, let me alone to counterfeit,
Think on your oath.
Sir, if I do not, let me die.
When I have poisoned her with this confection:
Be you cloudy killed with sorrow, 'tis a skin,
Will draw to purpose on the straightest glove,
But then your promised reward.
My daughter and my goods,
I have no other son but you, all is thine,
Question not the reason, why this is,
For I have many, and amongst them one
Sites all the rest, that known to thee,
Will rather hasten death, then pity it.
Go, I will bid my guests, for to this feast:
Shall she have noble poison, 'twill cause fear,
Use less suspicion, and my mortal hate,
Shall itself kennel in the pride of state.
give order for the banquet,
within there.
Sir, what is your will?
To murder thee,
She dies sir, if I live, I am a Pothecary.
And can knead the paste to purpose, she is gone
Had she a thousand lives laid up in one.
Wife, I must have thee paint,
And set a gloss upon this lovely front,
To move, and to attract all eyes look as the summer,
Which glads all hearts with his blood-creasing spring:
Use thy best graces, though most proudly
I will have it so, fit thee to all state,
Decked in thy choicest ornament, shine glow-worm,
In the noon of night, for at this supper.
I will have more than all our friends,
Music several, Masques and revelings.
In which thou shalt be mounted as the bride,
And I the jolly Bridegroom, will tend on thee,
As duty and the time commands me.
Whereof comes this cost?
Examine not, but lay your best end now to't
Council with this Pothecary which I sent for
To the business, pray ye use your art:
For I am bent to this consumption,
Where's our servant Iames?
Within sir, shall I call him?
No, I will wait on him, for 'tis my duty.
Such as would spend in feasts, are but the slaves,
To attend the pleasures of consuming knaves.
And I am one of those, he is the flower
That I must crop too in this fatal hour.
Pray ye appoint sir, she will fit you well,
My purse shall purvey what you shall determine,
What we will be wasteful sometime, & our own,
We uncontrolled may dispose of: 'tis our love,
Rather our destiny, hate joined to this brow,
A horn that draws on death, no matter how.
Sir, in my closet serve yourself with sugars, there are spices of the purest, use them in this cost, what else you want, please you command, they shall attend you.
I want virtue in a mother, are you one?
I am a mother to an absent son,
But not to virtue wanting, wrong me not.
Wrong not yourself.
I never will.
You have.
Humil, O my shame and not my son.
By thee a mother is made miserable.
By me black fin? no by thy own neglect, made perfect by my true intelligence, and however cunning masked and donned the vizard that so muffled me, I knew not who was in the bed.
Your eyes were witnesses.
And holy ones.
Found you the man you looked for?
No, 'twas a subtle strain, so hoodwinked truth,
I am a traitor if I did not see Iames your man fast in your arms.
Thou art a traitor then, if any Iames were there, he was no man of mine, he was thy father.
Marvel not, at leisure I will tell thee all,
His late return, the trick to place him here,
My stay, and his continuing in this house, which
Known, thou wilt no sin account, to keep our own.
O you prophetic Fairies, how dally you,
In concaves of our hearts, shamed at my error
I thought for ever to be from your sight,
But thinking, truth was blinded, I forethought
Some following business, thus I altered
Coming as one disguised to save her life,
damned for that fact.
My life?
You must be poisoned at this feast,
'tis I must do the deed, o mother,
How are you blessed in my return from travel,
I that to light bring your offence, so thought,
Must be the pardon at your judgement brought.
Ah me.
No more, much secrecy calls on us,
Acquaint me with my father, plead my guilt.
We shall with cunning so unfold this business,
That our hopes shall strengthen as they perish,
No idle practice, but a serious toil,
Must bring home conquest from this long wished spoil.
If I lock up this treason, let me perish,
No sir, my breast is yet an uncorrupt and holy house,
That harbours in it, nought but honesty, and to do
This wrong to my patron, per deum atque hominem fidem.
No matter if you tell it now, 'tis done, finis men
Say, concludes the ancient work, and this
Though newly done, cries so be it.
If keep secrets, can be but offence, and so 'tis now,
May be, I lose my place, but there's a friend which
Turning calls detraction, at his heels lives hope,
Whose cunning quickness every fault to favour.
Why true, and we shall as we may excuse it,
'twas a deed done in welch, you understood it not.
Let me alone to buckler thee sir Henry.
Can ye ward yourself?
This was a pass, 'twas fencer's play, and for the after veny, let me use my skill.
however girl, thou art my daughter now,
What thou shalt lose in father, from thy own,
Thou uncontrolled shalt find as much in his,
And I am he.
And I acknowledge both this in my Lord, my head, my husband, at whose bed I am obedient, at whose board I am obedient: all in all, I am the wife of Filbon, whose rough Welsh, hath got a constering English, parse it boy, Nouns, Pronouns, Verbs, Adverbs, and God give thee joy.
With vocative o, your father hears it.
And ablative caret, takes his daughter.
Then in pluraliter, ah has a son.
So singular and plural all is done.
If ever you were swift be nimble now, what hay married, tide this knot?
ay, and the earnest blow given, fear it not.
Sir, I have set my hand to't, sealed the deed,
Pray God it cancel not in me.
Then part, and every one be silent.
There is a feast appointed at the knights.
Our marriage dinner, is it?
A gallant one, much cost is threatened. And the good old knight unbuckles from his back, the liberal load of honour, does proclaim triumphs, and welcome unto all, calls for his wife, charges her care, commands his servant Iames to invite his guests, which in a roll stands quoted, there's a new come pothecary, and he bribes, even grace herself in this assembly, and does promise his furtherance in the business, on the sudden you are missed, daggers and devils the knight cries where's my daughter? one up ascends to search the chambers, another runs to seek for this lost daughter. I knowing more than much in this her absence, singled myself to warn you of his search, hither will he come, for he fears young Filbon, missing the suitors, calling for the merchant, I answered not (being absent) in this heat: the Welsh man, where is he? none can be found, cries out he knows not what, and all his word is now, a plot, a plot, a plot.
What will ye do?
Kiss and part, till fit occasion of our next salute, Filbon farewell, my husband think on me, I am thy treasure but thou bear'st the key.
I will home.
And I will see the rest, what will you sir do?
Nay I ha' done enough, I am undone in myself, Hei mihi quod nullos, I must do this deed, 'twas I pauca the rest, I'll home sir, I.
What rests for Welsh sir Robert Morgan, by God was cragge de pen, and the hangman calls to me, da hum a, da hum a?
I will be at this feast in some disguise.
I'll fit ye sir, 'tis here, I am touch right, hic & ubique, everywhere.
Now smiles the instant, & wraths wrinkles seem,
As smoothed curls upon a wanton stream,
My hopes grow big, and their delivery,
Is by our midwife time brought to true birth,
I will not be a pointing stock toth' world,
No, if this gossip rumor publish it,
It shall be christened with revenge and death,
Why when, are we grown sluggards now?
Tardy in bounty, shall we niggard it?
Be quick, carry those sweet meats in,
Bid them that in this business have to do,
That they attend this rich confectionary,
With no common care, the cost commands more love
And duty, sir we are fitting to occasion,
Would all your guests were come.
'tis the feasts duty to attend,
Thou art a willing mischief, hast thou fitted
our purpose to the proof?
Haue I, thinke you I am flacke?
Pushed on with hope of beauty and reward,
She dies had she a life more dear.
Then the last spring, sole comfort of the year.
But I will cover and prepare.
Do, do, my daughters thine, my goods, my all,
Blessed beginning to my sorrows fall.
Where's my Lady?
Here.
That one so heavenly fair should earthly be,
Slave to misfortune, base in luxury.
Sir for to please your eye, I am thus quaint,
Good faith I am ashamed in myself.
How and a woman.
Come blaze thy affections to immodesty,
And though thy virtues contradict the deed,
Be Venus' wanton, smile, with Helen's eye,
For I will have it so.
I was not so brought up: I shall endeavour, though my cheeks put on sensible die of other bashfulness.
Sir your honourable guests are come.
Nay then you wrong me most of all,
Show not these signs of fear, all's past,
And I am dead in old remembrance,
Troth I am, forget it, as I do, say on.
Coaches so fill the pavements of your door,
That scarce can passage give the footmen way,
'tis not amiss you go to meet them sir.
Why well said, spoke with courage, & I will,
jovial like a bridegroom, Lady you see,
They wait on us, and all attend on thee.
Worthless I am, but since it is your will,
I borrow light from sunshine of your beams,
Who glisters so, gives splendour nothing proud,
Darkened by fear, half hidden in a cloud.
Nay hand in hand in faith Iames pardon me,
That dally with the darling of your heart.
even so, but little thinking such a thing,
Small gain springs from that toil, where industry
Sweats in the brows of others victory.
Father be mindful, this presuming knight,
Plays with the flame, burns in the candlelight,
When we shall furnish to disfurnish him,
Of what he yet enjoys.
Humil, 'tis cunningly contrived,
and I attend it.
For charity be swift.
Place your plate, and pile your vitrial boles
Nest upon nest, These for wines and bear,
The other tend the call of altering diet,
Sirrah, quoth he, we shall fit I trow,
Not well, Iames be gone.
Sir, you shall pardon me, unless with her being not well.
Ha.
Think you I will; what leave my country, sir.
Upon a slight, a trifle, 'tis more dear to me.
Wast not thy promise?
Pughe.
Pughe.
madam, lean on me, I'll bring you to your chamber.
Prithee daughter, faith I'm passing ill,
Your honour and the rest must bear with us,
'tis nothing usual, a queasy fit.
The mother.
No, the husband.
Good faith I am not woman sick, though woman
But earnest ill, clogged at the very stomach with
A sudden calm, I fear me 'tis my death.
Nurse help to bring her to her closet, do.
Excellent fit, supported by tod.
Plague on't, shall I be left alone, master make haste? But 'tis my deed, I am author of this shift, he's where he would be now, I'm where I should be too, but not well backed, yes now I am.
Besecke ye pardon me.
I am wronged, and to this company,
I make it known by coming of thy daughter:
Is my son made her indored husband, shall I
Suffer it, call you this courtesy, 'tis simple craft?
Cloaked under thy denial, is this well to engraft with us unknown, and so to join younkers to heirs, he is my only all, and married unto thy daughter?
Ha, Married? Nurse, how is't within?
she's very ill sir, and I fear.
That your disguise is known, come juggle not, call you this Nurse? O thou dissembling boy.
Are you married?
Sir I must needs confess it, he's my husband, & the reason?
No matter for the reason, I ha' done, God boy ye, cony-catched by a trick, and so persuaded, good.
I am abused.
Yes questionless you are, I have all right.
You have no wrong sir, I to affirm your word,
When I was woman, and from man I should, and now,
I trust my shape does challenge but your promise.
I played but Iohn come kiss me now says she, I am Tutch your quondam servant sir, thrust out to thrust them in, a lawful marriage is no mockery sir, I counterfeited welch, to join this constering English.
What at a gaze sir William? cannot be recalled.
No, no, more mischief, nay come all together, welcome.
Thank ye sir.
My son returned, surrenders to your doom his life, for yours so lately lost, deputed in your daughter, for she is dead sir, buried in the isle of Scilly.
Not amiss, what's the next Pagan? all the craft of this is known.
Sir had I too hearts to melt this frozen fear, would thaw with passion, the drops distilled from our tormented brain, witnessed by these sailors that interred her, knows how I parted with her when she died.
Is mistress Mary dead?
She is.
Well, shall I have justice for her death?
Command it sir.
To prison with him them, for she is murdered, Sir cause you knew your rapine and your theft, tied to your runaway legs that clog, you were uncertain of her portion and our love, therefore to rid that fear, you rid me thus of her (to me) most dear, my own, my only eldest of my daughters, oh.
I'll be his bale.
Sir tell not me of bale, for my assurance pleads in his life, and he shall die.
You have no precedent for that.
Yes, remember Donningtons man, Grimes,
Who for an heir so stolen and married,
Was hanged, and the sergeant at arms
For assisting them, did lose his place,
If this were done, your theft will hardly scape.
I thought of that indeed.
Murder, murder, murder.
Ha, by whom?
By this fair counterfeit of husband, here's my witness, and the deputy in such a mischief.
Nay then.
My wife is made away, poisoned here, and you that should be just are witnesses.
We follow, speak, explain this mystery.
Your wife sir.
Yes, supposed for dead, as risen from my grave,
I came to More-clack, but a little late,
Even when the lying Priest did call her thine,
She knew it, and devised with her glove,
To repossess me of the house she challenged.
so honoured, I slept with my own, but thought the contrary, you know what happened, that son that so betrayed his parents thus disguised, fearing ensuing mischief, wrought by you to have poisoned his dear mother, 'twas your biding, therefore murder, but the will of heaven bade otherwise, and yet she lives, wife what say you?
That all is so.
And I affirm it true, my shape cast off does answer sir in few.
Pretty in faith, no marvel you forswore my bed,
When you had substance for a property,
Sir you must have your own, who can deny it?
And I must as the story runs be mum,
fold in myself by my own slights undone.
But what's this to my daughter, where is she?
Here sir.
Brother Vergir.
Brother George from Scilly, what's the news?
That your dear daughter dead and buried sir, by miracle was thus preserved, which at more leisure I shall manifest: pray ye forgive her fault, come there's some wanton blood left yet, says I, ye will I know, and wrongs past all remedy, the world must undergo.
My Towers, the dead does live, I am thy wife, Mary.
Or her ghost, a shadow or a substance.
Sister I will teach ye a medicine to make a shadow substance, lie with him tonight, as I will with my Filbon, & by the morning think but what is past, and you will reckon rightly you, he'll hold you three to one my medicine's true.
methinks I have a tickling in my blood crosses all anger, malediction hence, hence, thou ill tempered Fear, this comical event seasons the true applause; since welcome is the word, i'faith, I know not what to say, fain I would, & yet a lazy lagging apprehends with doubt, but well I know not what, in me, it lies to punish or to pardon I will be generally laughed at, once insooth I will. I am a widower, gallants, and you meet at marriages, and funerals, so think it pray ye, I abridge all complement, bar all opponents, & resolve to favour you, you, you, and challenge from your lou, persuasion to this purpose, since our fate makes us the world's fond Idiot, be it so youth, and your fortune was prodigious to it, and my best of spirit, binds up in this, all is but thankless merit.
Then Epilogue am I,
Imagine all the world were in your house,
And hearing this report with wondering brain,
I thus excuse it, Gentlemen you see how fortune
Favours in extremity, if any botched up ill, have
Show of good, and is not in thee sequel understood,
Yet bear with all, as this old Knight has done,
Losing a wife redoubled in a son, what you shall
Want in judgement, seeing this, think every
Act is subject to amiss, so said, so done, will
Bring to true delight, hands meeting thus,
To sign this blessed night.