Hail holy earth, whose cold arms do embrace
The truest man that ever fed his flocks:
By the fat plains of fruitful Thessaly,
Thus I salute thy grave, thus do I pay
My early vows and tribute of mine eyes,
To thy still loved ashes: thus I free
myself from all ensuing heats and fires
Of love, all sports, delights and games,
That Shepherds hold full dears thus put I off.
Now no more shall these smooth brows be girt,
With youthful colonels, and lead the dance,
No more the company of fresh fair Maids
And wanton shepherds be to me delightful.
Nor the shrill pleasing sound of merry pipes,
Under some shady dell when the cool wind
Plays on the leaves, all be far away:
Since thou art far away: by whose dear side,
How often have I sat crowned with fresh flowers
For Summer's queen, whilst every shepherds boy
Puts on his lustily green with gaudy hook,
And hanging scrip of finest cordovan:
But thou art gone, and these are gone with thee,
And all are dead but thy dear memory:
That shall outlive thee, and shall ever spring,
Whilst there are pipes, or jolly shepherds sing.
And here will I, in honour of thy love,
Dwell by thy grave, forgetting all those joys,
That former times made precious to mine eyes:
Only remembering what my youth did gain,
In the dark hidden virtuous use of herbs:
That I will I practise, and as freely give
All my endeavours, as I gained them free.
Of all green wounds I know the remedies,
In men or cattle, be they stung with snakes,
Or charmed with powerful words of wicked art,
Or be they lovesick, or through too much heat
Grown wild or lunatic, their eyes or ears
Thickened with misty film of dulling rheum,
These I can cure, such secret virtue lies
In herbs applied by a virgin's hand:
My meat shall be what these wild woods afford,
Berries, and Chestnuts, Plantains, on whose cheeks
The Sun sits smiling, and the lofty fruit
Pulled from the fair head of the strait grown pine:
On these I'll feed with free content and rest,
When night shall blind the world, by thy side blessed.
Through yond same bending plain,
That flings his arms down to the main,
And through these thick woods have I run,
whose bottom never kissed the Sun
Since the lusty spring began,
All to please my Master Pan,
Have I trotted without rest
To get him fruit, for at a feast,
He entertains this coming night,
His Paramour the Syrinx bright:
But behold a fairer sight
By that heavenly form of thine,
Brightest fair thou art divine:
Sprung from great immortal race
Of the Gods: for in thy face,
Shines more awful majesty,
Then dull weak mortality
Dare with misty eyes behold
And live, therefore on this mould,
Lowly do I bend my knee,
In worship of thy deity,
Deign it Goddess from my hand,
To receive whate'er this land,
From her fertile womb doth send
Of her choice fruits: and but lend,
Belief to that the Satire tells,
Fairer by the famous wells,
To this present day near grew,
Never better nor more true,
Here be grapes whose lusty blood,
Is the learned Poets good,
Sweeter yet did never crown,
The head of Bacchus, nuts more brown
Than the squirrels teeth that crack them,
Deign o fairest fair to take them,
For these black eyed Driope,
Hath often times commanded me,
With my clasped knee to climb,
See how well the lusty time,
Hath decked their rising cheeks in red,
Such as on your lips is spread,
Here be berries for a Queen,
Some be red, some be green:
These are of that luscious meat,
The great God Pan, himself doth eat:
All these, and what the woods can yield,
The hanging mountain or the field,
I freely offer, and ere long,
Will bring you more, more sweet and strong.
Till when humbly leave I take,
lest the great Pan do awake:
That sleeping lies in a deep glade,
unde a broad beech's shade:
I must go, I must run,
Swifter than the fiery Sun.
And all my fears go with thee.
What greatness or what private hidden power,
Is there in me to draw submission,
From this rude man, and beast? sure I am mortal,
The daughter of a Shepherd, he was mortal:
And she that bore me mortal: prick my hand
And it will bleed: a fever shakes me,
And the self-same wind that makes the young lambs shrink,
Makes me a cold, my fear says I am mortal:
Yet I have heard (my mother told it me)
And now I do believe it, if I keep
My virgin flower uncropped, pure, chaste, & fair,
No Goblin, wood-god, Fairy, Elf, or Fiend,
satire or other power that haunts these groves,
Shall hurt my body, or by vain illusion,
Draw me to wander after idle fires.
Or voices calling me in dead of night,
To make me follow, and so toll me on,
Through mires and standing pools:
Else why should this rough thing, who never knew
Manners, nor smooth humanity, whose heats
Are rougher than himself, and more misshapen,
Thus mildly kneel to me? sure there is a power
In that great name of virgin; that binds fast
All rude uncivil bloods, all appetites
That break their confines: then strong chastity,
Be thou my strongest guard, for here I'll dwell
In opposition against Fate and Hell.
Now we have done this holy festival,
In honour of our great God, and his rights
Performed, prepare yourselves for chaste
And uncorrupted fires: that as the priest,
With powerful hand shall sprinkle on your brows
His pure and holy water, ye may be
From all hot flames of lust, and loose thoughts free,
Kneel shepherds kneel, here comes the Priest of Pan.
shepherds thus I purge away,
Whatsoever this great day,
Or the past hours gave not good,
To corrupt your maiden blood:
From the high rebellious heat,
Of the grapes and strength of meat.
From the wanton quick desires,
They do kindle by their fires.
I do wash you with this water,
Be you pure and fair hereafter.
From your livers and your veins,
Thus I take away the stains.
All your thoughts be smooth and fair,
Be ye fresh and free as air.
Never more let lustful heat,
Through your purged conduits beat,
Or a plighted troth be broken,
Or a wanton verse be spoken:
In a Shepherdess's ear,
Go your ways you're all clear.
Sing his praises that doth keep,
our Flocks from harm,
Pan the Father of our sheep,
And arm in arm
Tread we softly in a round,
Whilst the hollow neighbouring ground,
Fills the music with her sound,
Pan, o great God, Pan to thee
Thus do we sing:
Thou that keepest us chaste and free,
As the young spring,
Ever be thy honour spoke,
From that place the morn is broke,
To that place Day doth unyoke.
Stay gentle Amoret thou fair browed maid,
Thy Shepherd prays thee stay, that holds thee de ere.
Equal with his souls good:
Speak, I give
Thee freedom Shepherd, & thy tongue be still
The same it ever was: as free from ill
As he whose conversation never knew
The court or city: be thou ever true.
When I fall off from my affection,
Or mingle my clean thoughts with foul desires,
First let our great God cease to keep my flocks,
That being left alone without a guard,
The wolf, or winter's rage, summers great heat,
And want of water, rots: or what to us
Of ill is yet unknown, fall speedily,
And in their general ruin let me go.
I pray thee gentle Shepherd wish not so,
I do believe thee: 'tis as hard for me
To think thee false, and harder than for thee
To hold me foul.
o you are fairer far,
Than the chaste blushing morn, or that fair star,
That guides the wandering seaman through the deeps
Straighter than the straightest pine upon the steep
Head of an aged mountain, and more white,
Than the new milk we strip before day light
From the full freighted bags of our fair flocks:
Your hair more beauteous than those hanging locks
Of young Apollo.
Shepherd be not lost,
Ye are sailed too far already from the coast
Of our discourse.
Did you not tell me once
I should not love alone, I should not lose
Those many passions, vows and holy oaths,
I have sent to heaven: did you not give your hand,
Even that fair hand in hostage? do not then
Give back again those sweets to other men.
You yourself vowed were mine,
Shepheard so far as maiden's modesty
May give assurance, I am once more thine,
Once more I give my hand, be ever free
From that great foe to faith, foul jealousy.
I take it as my best good, and desire
For stronger confirmation of our love,
To meet this happy night in that fair grove,
Where all true shepherds have rewarded been
For their long service: say sweet shall it hold?
Dear friend you must not blame me if I make
A doubt of what the silent night may do,
Coupled with this days heat to move your blood:
Maids must be fearful, sure you have not been
Washed white enough, for yet I see a stain
Stick in your liver, go and purge again.
O do not wrong my honest simple truth,
myself and my affections are as pure,
As those chaste flames that burn before the shrine,
Of the great Dian: only my intent
To draw you thither, was to plight our troths,
With interchange of mutual chaste embraces,
And ceremonious tying of our souls:
For to that holy wood is consecrate,
A virtuous Well, about whose flowery banks,
The nimble footed Fairies dance their rounds,
B the pale mooneshine, dipping often times
Their stolen children, so to make them free
From dying flesh, and dull mortality:
By this fair Fount hath many a Shepherd sworn,
And given away his freedom, many a troth
Been plight, which neither envy nor old time
Could ever break, with many a chaste kiss given,
In hope of coming happiness: by this
Fresh Fountain many a blushing maid
Hath crowned the head of her long loved shepherd,
With gaudy flowers, whilst he happy sung,
Lays of his love and dear captivity,
There grows all herbs fit to cool looser flames,
Our sensual parts provoke chiding our bloods,
And quenching by their power those hidden sparks,
That else would break out, and provoke our sense,
To open fires, so virtuous is that place:
Then gentle Shepherdess believe and grant,
In troth it sits not with that face to scant.
Your faithful Shepherd of those chaste desires,
He ever aimed at, and—
Thou hast prevailed, farewell, this coming night,
Shall crown thy chaste hopes with long wished delight.
Our great God Pan reward thee for that good,
Thou hast given thy poor shepherd fairest bud
Of maiden virtues: when I leave to be
The true admirer of thy chastity,
Let me deserve the hot polluted name,
Of a wild woodman, or affect some dame
Whose often prostitution hath begot,
More foul diseases, then ever yet the hot
Sun bred through his burnings, whilst the dog
Pursues the raging Lion, throwing fog
And deadly vapour from his angry breath.
Filling the lower world with plague and death.
Shepheard may I desire to be believed,
What I shall blushing tell?
Fair maid you may.
Then softly thus, I love thee Perigot,
And would be gladder to be loved again,
Than the cold earth is in his frozen arms
To clip the wanton spring: nay do not start,
Nor wonder that I woo thee! thou that art
The prime of our young grooms, even the top
Of all our lusty Shepherds: what dull eye
That never was acquainted with desire,
Hath scene thee wrestle, run, or cast the stone,
With nimble strength and fair delivery,
And hath not sparkled fire, and speedily
Sent secret heat to all the neighbouring veins?
whoever heard thee sing, that brought again,
That freedom back was lent unto thy voice?
Then do not blame me (shepherd) if I be
One to be numbered in this company,
Since none that ever saw thee yet, were free.
Fair Shepherdess much pity I can lend,
To your complaints: but sure I shall not love:
All that is mine, myself and my best hopes,
Are given already: do not love him then
That cannot love again: on other men
Bestow those heats more free, that may return
You fire for fire, and in one flame equal burn.
Shall I rewarded be so slenderly
For my affection, most unkind of men?
If I were old, or had agreed with Art,
To give another nature to my cheeks,
Or were I common mistress to the love
Of every swain, or could I with such ease
Call back my love, as many a wanton doth,
Thou mightst refuse me Shepherd, but to thee
I am only fixed and set, let it not be
A sport, thou gentle Shepherd, to abuse
The love of silly maid.
Fair soul, ye use
These words to little end: for know, I may
Better call back, that time was yesterday,
Or stay the coming night, then bring my love
Home to myself again, or recreant prove.
I will no longer hold you with delays,
This present night I have appointed been,
To meet that chaste fair (that enjoys my soul)
In yonder grove, there to make up our loves.
Be not deceived no longer, choose again,
These neighbouring plains have many a comely swain,
Fresher and freeer far than I ere was,
Bestow that love on them and let me pass,
Farewell, be happy in a better choice.
Cruel, thou hast struck me deader with thy voice
Then if the angry heavens with their quick flames,
Had shot me through: I must not leave to love,
I cannot, no I must enjoy thee boy,
Though the great dangers twixt my hopes and that
Be infinite: there is a Shepherd dwells
Down by the More, whose life hath ever shown
More sullen discontent than Saturn's brow,
When he sits frowning on the births of men:
One that doth wear himself away in loneness,
And never joys unless it be in breaking
The holy plighted troths of mutual souls:
One that lusts after every several beauty,
But never yet was known to love or like,
Were the face fairer or more full of truth,
Than Phoebe in her fullness, or the youth
Of smooth Lyeus, whose nigh starved flocks
Are always scabby, and infect all sheep
They feed withal, whose lambs are ever last,
And die before their weaning, and whose dog,
Looks like his Master, lean, and full of scurf,
Not caring for the pipe or whistle: this man may
(If he be well wrought) do a deed of wonder,
Forcing me passage to my long desires:
And here he comes, as fitly to my purpose
As my quick thoughts could wish for.
Fresh beauty, let me not be thought uncivil,
Thus to be partner of your loneness: 'twas
My love (that ever working passion) drew
Me to this place to seek some remedy
For my sick soul: be not unkind and fair,
For such, the mighty Cupid in his dumb
Hath sworn to be avenged on, then give room
To my consuming fires, that so I may
Enjoy my long desires, and so allay
Those flames, that else would burn my life away.
Shepherd, were I but sure thy heart were sound
As thy words seem to be, means might be found
To cure thee of thy long pains: for to me
That heavy youth consuming misery,
The love sick soul endures, never was pleasing,
I could be well content with the quick easing
Of thee & thy hot fires, might it procure
Thy faith, and farther service to be sure.
Name but that great work, danger, or what can
Be compassed by the wit or art of man,
And if I fail in my performance, may
I never more kneel to the rising day,
Then thus I try thee shepherd, this same night,
That now comes stealing on, a gentle pair
Have promised equal love, and do appoint
To make yond wood the place, where hands and hearts
Are to be tied for ever: break their meeting
And their strong faith, and I am ever thine.
Tell me their names, and if I do not move
(y my great power) the center of their loue
From his sixth being, let me never more,
Warm me, by those fair eyes I thus adore.
Come, as we go I'll tell thee what they are,
And give thee fit directions for thy work.
How have I wronged the times, or men, that thus,
After this holy feast I pass unknown,
And unsaluted? 'twas not wont to be
Thus frozen with the younger company
Of jolly shepherds: 'twas not then held good,
For lusty grooms to mix their quicker blood
With that dull humour: most unfit to be
The friend of man, cold and dull chastity:
Sure I am held not fair, or am too old,
Or else not free enough, or from my fold
Drive not a flock sufficient great, to gain
The greedy eyes of wealth alluring swain.
Yet if I may believe what others say,
My face has foil enough, nor can they lay
justly too strict a coyness to my charge.
My flocks are many, and the downs as large
They feed upon: then let it ever be
Their coldness, not my virgin modesty
Makes me complain.
Was ever man but I,
Thus truly taken with uncertainty?
Where shall that man be found that loves a mind
Made up in constancy, and dares not find
his love rewarded? here, let all men know,
A wretch that lives to love his mistress so.
Shepherd I pray thee stay, where haste thou been,
Or whether goest thou? here be woods as green
As any, air as fresh and sweet,
As where smooth Zephirus plays on the fleet
Face of the curled streams: with flowers as many
As the young spring gives, and as choice as any:
Here be all new delights, cool streams and wells,
Arbours are grown with woodbines, Caves, and dels,
Choose where thou wilt, whilst I sit by and sing,
Or gather rushes, to make many a ring
For thy long fingers, tell thee tales of love,
How the pale Phoebe hunting in a grove,
First saw the boy Endymion, from whose eyes,
She took eternal fire, that never dies,
How she conveyed him softly in a sleep,
His temples bound with poppy to the steep
Head of old Latmus, where she stoops each night,
Gilding the mountain with her brother's light
To kiss her sweetest.
Far from me are these
Hot flashes bred from wanton heat and ease,
I have forgot what love and loving meant,
Rhymes, Songs, and merry rounds, that oft are sent
To the soft ear of Maid, are strange to me:
Only I live t'admire a chastity,
That neither pleasing age, smooth tongue, or gold,
Could ever break upon, so sure the mould
Is, that her mind was cast in: 'tis to her
I only am reserved, she is my form, I stir
By, breath, and move: 'tis she and only she
Can make me happy or give misery.
Good Shepherd, may a stranger crave to know,
To whom this dear observance you do owe?
Ye may, and by her virtue learn to square
And level out your life: for to be fair
And nothing virtuous, only fits the eye
Of gaudy youth, and swelling vanity.
Then know, she's called the virgin of the grove,
She that hath long since buried her chaste love,
And now lives by his grave, for whose dear soul
She hath vowed herself into the holy role
Of strict virginity, 'tis her I so admire,
Not any looser blood or new desire.
Farewell poor swain, thou art not for my bend,
I must have quicker souls, whose words may tend,
To some free action: give me him dare love
At first encounter, and as soon dare prove.
Come Shepherds come,
Come away without delay,
Whilst the gentle time doth stay,
Green woods are dumb,
And will never tell to any,
Those dear kisses, and those many
Sweet embraces that are given,
Dainty pleasures that would even
Raise in coldest age a fire,
And give virgin blood desire.
Then if ever,
Now or never,
Come and have it,
Think not I,
Dare deny,
If you crave it.
Here comes another: better be my speed,
Thou God of blood, but certain if I read
Not false, this is that modest shepherd, he
That only dare salute, but near could be
Brought to kiss any, hold discourse, or sing,
Whisper, or boldly ask that wished thing
We all are borne for: one that makes loving faces,
And could be well content to covet graces,
Were they not got by boldness: in this thing
My hopes are frozen, and but fate doth bring
Him hither, I would sooner choose
A man made out of snow, and frecer use
An Eunuch to my ends: but since he is here,
Thus I attempt him: Thou of men most dear,
Welcome to her, that only for thy sake,
Hath been content to live: here boldly take
My hand in pledge, this hand, that never yet
Was given away to any: and but sit
Down on this rushy bank, whilst I go pull
Fresh blossoms from the bows, or quickly cull
The choicest delicates from yonder mead,
To make thee chains or chaplets, or to spread
Under our fainting bodies, when delight
Shall lock up all our senses how the sight
Of those smooth rising cheeks renew the story
Of young Adonis, when in pride and glory
He lay enfolded twixt the beating arms
Of willing Venus: methinks stronger charms,
Dwell in those speaking eyes: and on that brow
More sweetness than the painters can allow,
To their best pieces: not Narcissus he:
That wept himself away in memory
Of his own beauty, nor Silvanus' boy,
Nor the twice ravished maid, for whom old Troy,
Fell by the hand of Pyrrhus, may to thee,
Be otherwise compared then some dead tree
To a young fruitful Olive:
I can love, but I am loath to say so, lest I prove
Too soon unhappy.
Happy thou wouldst say,
My dearest Daphnis, blush not if the day
To thee and thy soft heats be enemy,
Then take the coming night, fair youth 'tis free
To all the world, shepherd I'll meet thee then
When darkness hath shut up the eyes of men,
In yonder grove: speak shall our meeting hold?
Indeed ye are too bashful, be more bold,
And tell me I.
I am content to say so,
And would be glad to meet, might I but pray so
Much from your fairness, that you would be true.
Shepheard thou hast thy wish,
Fresh maid adieu,
Yet one word more, since you have drawn me on
To come this night, fear not to meet alone,
That man that will not offer to be ill,
Though your bright self would ask it for his fill
Of this world's goodness: do not fear him then,
But keep your pointed time, let other men
Set up their bloods to sail, mine shall be ever,
Fair as the soul it carries, and unchaste never.
Yet am I poorer than I was before.
Is it not strange, among so many a score
Of lusty bloods, I should pick out these things
whose veins like a dull river far from springs,
Is still the same, slow, heavy, and unfit
For stream or motion, though the strong winds hit
With their continual power upon his sides?
O happy be your names that have been brides:
And tasted those rare sweets, for which I pine,
And far more heavy be thy grief and tine.
Thou lazy swain that mayst relieve my needs,
Than his upon whose liver always feeds
A hungry vulture.
Can such beauty be
Safe in his own guard, and not draw the eye
Of him that passeth on to greedy gaze,
Or covetous desire, whilst in a maze
The better part contemplates, giving rain
And wished freedom to the labouring vain?
Fairest and whitest, may I crave to know,
The cause of your retirement, why ye go
Thus all alone? methinks the downs are sweeter
And the young company of swains more meeter,
Than these forsaken and untrodden places.
Give not yourself to loneness, and those graces
Hide from the eyes of men, that were intended
To live amongst us swains.
Thou art befriended,
Shepherd in all my life, I have not seen,
A man in whom greater contents hath been,
Than thou thyself art: I could tell thee more,
Were there but any hope left to restore
My freedom lost: o lend me all thy red,
Thou shamefast morning, when from Tithon's bed
Thou risest ever maiden.
If for me,
Thou sweetest of all sweets, these flashes be,
Speak and be satisfied, o guide her tongue,
My better angel, force my name among
Her modest thoughts, that the first word may be,
Alexis when the sun shall kiss the sea,
Taking his rest by the white Thetis side,
Meet in the holy wood, where I'll abide
Thy coming Shepherd.
If I stay behind,
An everlasting dullness and the wind,
That as he passeth by shuts up the stream,
Of Reine or volga whilst the suns hot beam,
Beats back again, cease me, and let me turn
To coldness more than ice: oh how I burn
And rise in youth and fire! I dare not stay.
My name shall be your word.
Fly fly thou day,
My grief is great if both these boys should fail,
He that will use all winds must shift his sail.
shepherds all, and maidens fair,
Fold your flocks up, for the Air
gins to thicken, and the Sun
Already his great course hath run,
See the dew drops how they kiss
Every little flower that is:
Hanging on their velvet heads,
Like a rope of crystal beads.
See the heavy clouds loud falling
And bright Hesperus down calling,
The dead night from under ground,
At whose rising mists unsound,
damps, and vapours fly apace,
Hovering o'er the wanton face,
Of these pastures, where they come,
Striking dead both bud and bloom,
Therefore from such danger lock
Every one his loved flock,
And let your dogs lie loose without,
lest the Wolf come as a scout
From the mountain, and ere day
Bear a Lamb or Kid away:
Or the crafty thievish Fox,
Break upon your simple flocks,
To secure yourselves from these,
Be not too secure in ease,
Let one eye his watches keep,
Whilst the other eye doth sleep.
So you shall good Shepherds prove,
And for ever hold the love
Of our great God: sweetest slumbers
And soft silence fall in numbers
On your eyelids: so farewell,
Thus I end my evenings knell.
Now let me know what my best Art hath done,
Helped by the great power of the virtuous moon,
In her full light, o you sons of earth,
You only brood, unto whose happy birth
Virtue was given, holding more of nature
Than man her first borne & most perfect creature.
Let me adore you, you that only can,
Help or kill nature, drawing out that span
Of life and breath, even to the end of time,
You that these hands did crop, long before prime
Of day, give me your names, and next your hidden power.
This is the Clote bearing a yellow flower:
And this black Horehound, both are very good,
For sheep or shepherd, bitten by a wood
Dogs venomed tooth, these Ramun's branches are,
Which stuck in entries, or about the bar
That holds the door fast, kill all the enchantments, charms,
Were they Medea's verses that do harms
To men or cattle: these for frenzy be
A speedy and a sovereign remedy.
The bitter Wormwood, Sage, and Marigold,
Such sympathy with man's good they do hold:
This Tormentil whose virtue is to part
All deadly killing poison from the heart,
And here Narcissus' root, for swellings best:
Yellow Lecimacus, to give sweet rest
To the faint Shepherd, killing where it comes,
All busy gnats, and every fly that hums,
For leprosy, Darnell, and Sellondine,
With Calamint, whose virtue do refine
The blood of Man, making it free and fair,
As the first hour it breathed, or the best air.
Here other to, but your rebellious use,
Is not form, whose goodness is abuse,
Therefore foul standergrass, from me and mine
I banish thee, with lustful Turpentine,
You that entice the veins, and stir the heat
To civil mutiny, scaling the seat
Our reason moves in, and deluding it
With dreams and wanton fancies, till the fit
Of burning lust be quenched by appetite,
Robbing the soul of blessedness and light:
And thou light vermin to, thou must go after
Provoking easy souls to mirth and laughter,
No more shall I dip thee in water now,
And sprinkle every post, and every bow
With thy well pleasing juice, to make the grooms,
Swell with high mirth as with joy all the rooms.
This is the Cabin where the best of all
Her sex, that ever breathed, or ever shall
Give heat or happiness to the shepherds side,
Doth only to her worthy self abide.
Thou blessed star, I thank thee for thy light,
Thou by whose power the darkness of sad night
Is banished from the earth, in whose dull place
Thy chaster beams play on the heavy face
Of all the world: making the blue sea smile,
To see how cunningly thou dost beguile
Thy brother of his brightness, giving day
Again from Chaos whiter than that way
That leads to Ioues high Court, and chaster far
Than chastity itself: yond blessed star
That nightly shines, thou all the constancy
That in all women was, or ere shallbe:
From whose fair eyeballs flies that holy fire,
That ports style the mother of desire,
Infusing into every gentle breast,
A soul of greater price, and far more blessed
Than that quick power which gives a difference
Twixt man and creatures of a lower sense.
Shepheard how camest thou hither to this place?
No way is trodden, all the verdant grass
The spring shot up stands yet unbruised here
Of any foot, only the dappled deer:
Far from the feared sound of crooked horn
Dwells in this fastness.
Chaster than the morn,
I have not wandered, or by strong illusion
Into this virtuous place have made intrusion,
But hither am I come (believe me fair)
To seek you out, of whose great good the Air
Is full, and strongly labours, whilst the sound,
Breaks against heaven, and drives into a stround
The amazed Shepherd, that such virtue can
Be resident in lesser than a man.
If any art I have, or hidden skill,
May cure thee of disease or festered ill,
Whose grief or greenness to another's eye,
May seem unpossible of remedy,
I dare yet undertake it.
'tis no pain
I suffer through disease, no beating vain
Conveys infection dangerous to the heart,
No part impostumed to be cured by Art:
This body holds, and yet a feller grief
Than ever skilful hand did give relief
Dwells on my soul, and may be healed by you,
Fair beauteous virgin:
Then shepherd let me sue
To know thy grief that man yet never knew
The way to health, that durst not show his sore.
Then fairest know I love you,
swain no more.
Thou hast abused the strictness of this place,
And offered sacrilegious foul disgrace
To the sweet rest of these interred bones,
For fear of whose ascending fly at once,
Thou and thy idle passions, that the sight
Of death and speedy vengeance may not fright.
Thy very soul with horror.
Let me not
Thou all perfection merit such a blot,
For my true zealous faith.
Darest thou abide
To see this holy earth at once divide
And give her body up, for sure it will,
If thou pursuest with wanton flames to fill
This hallowed place: therefore repent and go,
Whilst I with prays appease his Ghost below,
That else would tell thee what it were to be,
A rival in that virtuous love, that he
Embraces yet.
'tis not the white or red
Inhabits in your cheek, that thus can wed
My mind to adoration: nor your eye,
Though it be full and fair, your forehead high,
And smooth as Pelops shoulder: not the smile
Lies watching in those dimples, to beguile
The easy soul, your hands and fingers long,
With veins enameled richly, nor your tongue,
Though it spoke sweeter than Arion's Harp,
Your hair woven into many a curious warp,
Able in endless error to unfold
The wandering soul, not the true perfect mould,
Of all your body, which as pure doth show,
In Maiden whiteness as the Alpsian snow,
All these, were but your constancy away,
Would please me less than a black stormy day
The wretched Seaman toiling through the deep.
But whilst this honoured strictness you dare keep,
Though all the plagues that ere begotten were,
In the great womb of air were settled here
In opposition, I would like the tree,
Shake off those drops of weakness, and be free
Even in the arm of danger.
Wouldst thou have
Me raise again fond man, from silent grave,
Those sparks that long ago were buried here,
With my dead friends cold ashes?
Dearest dear,
I dare not ask it, nor you must not grant,
Stand strongly to your vow, and do not faint:
Remember how he loved ye, and be still,
The same opinion speaks ye, let not will,
And that great god of wowen Appetite,
Set up your blood again, do not invite
Desire, and fancy for their long exile,
To seat them once more in a pleasing smile:
Be like a Rock made firmly up 'gainst all
The power of angry heaven, or the strong fall
Of Neptune's battery, if ye yield I die
To all affection: 'tis that loyalty
Ye tie unto this grave I so admire,
And yet there's something else I would desire,
If you would hear me, but withal deny,
O Pan, what an uncertain destiny
Hangs over all my hopes! I will retire,
For if I longer stay, this double fire,
Will lick my life up.
Do, and let time wear out,
What Art and Nature cannot bring about.
Farewell thou soul of virtue, and be blessed
For ever, whilst I wretched rest
Thus to myself, yet grant me leave to dwell
In kenning of this Arbour, yond same dell
o'er topped with mourning Cypress and sad Ewe,
Shall be my Cabin, where I'll early rue,
Before the Sun hath kissed this dew away,
The hard uncertain chance which Fate doth lay
Upon this head.
The Gods give quick release
And happy cure unto thy hard disease.
I do not love this wench that I should meet,
For never did my unconstant eye yet greet
That beauty, were it sweeter or more fair,
Than the new blossoms, when the morning air
Blows gently on them, or the breaking light,
When many maiden blushes to our sight
Shoots from his early face: were all these set
In some neat form before me, 'twould not get
The least love from me: some desire it might,
Or present burning: all to me in sight
Are equal, be they fair, or black, or brown,
Virgin, or careless wanton, I can crown
My appetite with any: sweat as oft,
And weep as any, melt my words as soft
Into a maiden's ears, and tell how long
My heart has been her servant, and how strong
My passions are: call her unkind and cruel,
Offer her all I have to gain the jewel
Maidens so highly praise: then loath and fly,
This do I hold a blessed destiny.
Hail Shepherd Pan bless both thy flock & thee,
For being mindful of thy word to me.
Welcome fair Shepherdess, thy loving swain
Gives thee the self same wishes back again:
Who till this present hour near knew that eye,
Could make me cross mine arms or daily die
With fresh consumings: boldly tell me then,
How shall we part their faithful loves, and when?
Shall I belly him to her, shall I swear
His faith is false, and he loves everywhere?
I'll say he mocked her the other day to you,
Which will by your confirming show as true,
For he is of so pure an honesty,
To think (because he will not none will lie.
Or else to him I'll slander Amoret,
And say, she but seemes chaste, Ile sweare she e
Me 'mongst the shady sycamores last night,
And loosely offered up her flame and sprite,
Into my bosom: made a wanton bed
Of leaves and many flowers, where she spread
Her willing body to be priest by me,
There have I carved her name on many a tree,
Together with mine own, to make this show
Moreful of seeming: Hobinal you know,
Son to the aged Shepherd of the Glen
Him I have sorted out of many men,
To say he found us at our private sport,
And roused us fore our time by his resorts
This to confirm, I have promised to the boy
Many a pretty knack, and many a toy,
As grins to catch him birds with bow, and bolt,
To shoot at nimble squirrels in the holts:
A pair of painted buskins and a lamb,
Soft as his own locks, or the down of Swan,
This I have done to win ye, which doth give
Me double pleasure, discord makes me live.
Loved swain I thank ye, these tricks might prevail
With other rustic shepherds, but will fail
Even once to stir, much more to overthrow,
His fixed love from judgement, who doth know,
Your nature, my end, and his chosen's merit,
Therefore some stronger way must force his spirit
Which I have found: give second, and my love
Is everlasting thine.
Try me and prove.
These happy pair of lovers meet straight way,
Soon as they fold their flocks up with the day
In the thick grove bordering upon yond hill,
In whose hard side Nature hath carved a well:
And but that matchless spring which Poets know,
Was near the like to this: by it doth grow
About the sides, all herbs which witches use,
All simples good for medicine or abuse,
All sweets that crown the happy nuptial day.
With all their colours, there the month of May
Is ever dwelling, all is young and green,
There's not a grass on which was ever seen,
The falling autumn or cold winter's hand
So full of heat and virtue is the land:
About this fountain: which doth slowly break
Below yond mountains foot, into a creak
That waters all the valley, giving fish
Of many sorts, to fill the shepherds dish.
This holy well, my grandam that is dead,
Right wise in charms, hath often to me said,
Hath power to change the form of any creature,
Being thrice dipped over the head, into what feature,
Or shape 'twould please the letter down to crave,
Who must pronounce this charm to, which she gave
Me on her death bed, told me what and how
I should apply unto the patient's brow,
That would be changed, casting them thrice asleep
Before I trusted them into this deep.
All this she showed me, and did charge me prove,
This secret of her Art, if crossed in love,
I'll this attempt, now Shepherd I have here
All her prescriptions and I will not fear
To be myself dipped: come, my temples bind
With these sad herbs, and when I sleep you find
As you do speak your charm, thrice down me let,
And bid the water raise me Amoret,
Which being done, leave me to my affair,
And ere the day shall quite itself out wear,
I will return unto my shepherds arm,
Dip me again, and then repeat this charm,
And pluck me up myself, whom freely take,
And the hot'st fire of thine affection slake.
And if I fit thee not, then fit not me,
I long the truth of this well's power to see.
Here will I stay, for this the covert is
Where I appointed Cloe, do not miss:
Thou bright eyed virgin, come, o come my fair,
Be not abused with fear, nor let cold care
Of honour slay thee from thy shepherds arm,
Who would as hard be won to offer harm
To thy chaste thoughts, as whiteness from the day,
Or yond great round to move another way.
My language shall be honest, full of truth,
My flame as smooth and spotless as my youth:
I will not entertain that wandering thought,
Whose easy currant may at length be brought
To a loose vastness.
Cloe!
'tis her voice
And I must answer, Cloe! o the choice
Of dear embraces, chaste and holy strains
Our hands shall give! I charge you all my veins
Through which the blood and spirit take their way,
Look up your disobedient heats, and stay
Those mutinous desires, that else would grow
To strong rebellion: do not wilder show
Than blushing modesty may entertain.
Cloe!
There sounds that blessed name again,
And I will meet it: let me not mistake,
This is some Shepherd, sure I am awake,
What may this riddle mean? I will retire,
To give myself more knowledge
Oh my fire,
How thou consumest me? Cloe answer me,
Alexis, strong Alexis, high, and free,
Calls upon Cloe: see mine arms are full
Of entertainment, ready for to pull
That golden fruit which too too long hath hung,
Tempting the greedy eye: thou stayest too long,
I am impatient of these mad delays,
I must not leave unsought those many ways
That lead into this centre, till I find
Quench for my burning lust, I come unkind.
Can my imagination work me so much ill,
That I may credit this for truth, and still
Believe mine eyes, or shall I firmly hold her
Her yet untainted, and these sights but bold
Illusion? sure such fancies oft have been
Sent to abuse true love, and yet are seen,
Daring to blind the virtuous though with error,
But be they far from me with their fond terror:
I am resolved my Cloe yet is true.
Cloe hark Cloe sure this voice is new,
Whose shrillness like the sounding of a bell,
Tells me it is a woman: Cloe, tell
Thy blessed name again
Oh what a grief is this to be so near
And not encounter?
Shepherd we are met,
Draw close into the covert, lest the wet
which falls like lazy mists upon the ground,
Soak through your startups.
Fairest, are you found
How have we wandered that the better part
Of this good night is perished? oh my heart!
How have I longed to meet ye? how to kiss
Those lily hands? how to receive the bliss
That charming tongue gives to the happy ear
Of him that drinks your language? but I fear
I am too much unmannered, far to rude,
And almost grown lascivious to intrude
These hot behaviours, where regard of fame,
Honour, and modesty, a virtuous name,
And such discourse, as one fair sister may
Without offence unto the brother say,
Should rather have been tendered, but believe
Here dwells a better temper, do not grieve,
Then ever kindest that my first salute,
Seasons so much of fancy, I am mute
Henceforth to all discourses, but shall be
Suiting to your sweet thoughts and modesty:
Indeed I will not ask a kiss of you,
No not to wring your fingers, nor to sue
To those blessed pair of fixed stars for smiles,
All a young lovers cunning, all his wiles:
And pretty wanton dyings shall to m
Be strangers, only to your Chastity
I am devoted ever.
Honest swain,
First let me thank you, then return again
As much of my love: no thou art too cold
Unhappy boy, not tempered to my mould,
Thy blood falls heavy downward, 'tis not fear
To offend in boldness wins, they never wear
deserved favours that deny to take
When they are offered freely: do I wake
To see a man of his youth, years and feature,
And such a one as we call goodly creature,
Thus backward? what a world of precious Art,
Were merely lost, to make him do his part?
But I will shake him off, that dares not hold,
Let men that hope to be beloved be bold,
Daphnis I do desire since we are met
So happily, our lives and fortunes set,
Upon one stake to give assurance now,
By interchange of hands and holy vow,
Never to break again: walk you that way,
Whilst I in zealous meditation stray
A little this way when we both have ended
These rights and duties by the woods befriended,
And secrecy of night, retire and find
An aged oak whose hollowness may bind
Us both within his body, thither go:
It stands within yond bottom
Be it so
And I will meet there never more with thee,
Thou idle shamefastness, Cloe!
'tis he.
That dare I hope be bolder.
Cloe.
now
Great Pan for Syrinx's sake bid speed our plow.
From thy forehead thus I take
These herbs, and charge thee not awake,
Till in yonder holy well,
Thrice with powerful magic spell,
Filled with many a baleful word,
Thou hast been dipped, thus with my cord
Of blasted hemp, by moonlight twined,
I do thy sleepy body bind,
I turn thy head into the East,
And thy feet into the West,
Thy left arm to the South put forth,
And thy right unto the North:
I take thy body from the ground,
In this deep and deadly sound:
And into this holy spring,
I let thee slide down by my string:
Take this maid thou holy pit
To thy bottom, nearer yet,
In thy water pure and sweet,
By thy leave I dip her feet:
Thus I let her lower yet,
That her ankles may be wet:
Yet down lower, let her knee
In thy waters washed be,
There stop: Fly away Every thing that loves the day,
Truth that hath but one face,
Thus I charm thee from this place.
Snakes that cast your coats for new,
Chameleons, that alter hue,
Hares that yearly sex's change,
Proteus altering oft and strange,
Hecate with shapes three,
Let this maiden changed be,
With this holy water wet, To the shape of Amoret:
Cinthia work thou with my charm,
Thus I draw thee free from harm,
Up out of this blessed lake,
Rise both like her and awake.
Speak shepherd, am I Amoret to sight?
Or hast thou missed in any magic right?
For want of which any defect in me,
May make our practises discovered be?
By yonder moon, but that I here do stand,
Whose breath hath thus reformed thee, and whose hand,
Let thee down dry, and plucked thee up thus wet,
I should myself take thee for Amoret,
Thou art in clothes, in feature, voice and hew
So like, that sense can not distinguish you.
Then this deceit which cannot crossed be,
At once shall lose her him, and gain thee me.
Hither she needs must come, by promise made,
And sure his nature never was so bad,
To bid a virgin meet him in the wood,
When night and fear are up, but understood,
'twas his part to come first: being come, I'll say
My constant love made me come first and stay,
Then will I lead him further to the grove,
But stay you here, and if his own true love
shall seek him here, set her in some wrong path,
Which say her lover lately trodden hath:
I'll not be far from hence, if need there be
Here is another charm, whose power will free
The dazzled sense read by the moon beams clear,
And in my one true shape make me appear.
Stand close, here's Perigot, whose constant heart,
Longs to behold her, in whose shape thou art.
This is the place (fair Amoret) the hour
Is yet scarce come, here every sylvan power
Delights to be, about yon sacred well,
Which they have blessed with many a powerful spell,
For never travailer in dead of night,
Nor strayed beasts have fallen in, but when fight,
Hath failed them, then their right way they have found,
By help of them, so holy is the ground,
But I will farther seek, lest Amoret
Should be first come and so stray long unmet.
My Amoret, Amoret! Perigot!
Per My love! Amarill. I come my love.
Now she hath got
Her own desires, and I shall gainer be
Of my long looked for hopes aswell as she;
How bright the moon shines here, as if she strove
To show her glory in this little grove
To some new loved Shepherd: yonder is
Another Amoret: where differs this
From that, but that she Perigot hath met,
I should have ta'en this for the counterfeit:
Herbs, woods, and springs, the power that in you lies,
If mortal men could know your properties.
methinks it is not night, I have no fear,
Walking this wood of Lion, or of Bear,
Whose names at other times, have made me quake,
When any shepherdess in her tale spoke,
Of some of them, that underneath a wood
Have torn true lovers that together stood.
methinks there are no goblins, and men's talk,
That in these woods the nimble Fairy's walk,
Are fables, such a strong heart I have got,
Because I come to meet with Perigot,
My Perigot, whose's that my Perigot?
Fair Maid.
Ay me thou art not Perigot.
But I can tell ye news of Perigot,
An hour together under yonder tree,
He sat with wreathed arms and called on thee,
And said, why Amoret stayest thou so long:
Then starting up down yonder path he flung,
lest thou hadst missed thy way: were it day light
He could not yet have borne him out of sight.
Thanks gentle Shepherd and beshrew my stay,
That made me fearful I had lost my way:
As fast as my weak legs, (that cannot be
Weary with seeking him) will carry me,
I'll follow, and for this thy care of me,
Pray Pan thy love may ever follow thee.
How bright she was? how lovely did she show?
Was it not pity to deceive her so?
She plucked her garments up and tripped away,
And with a virgin innocence did pray
For me, that perjured her: whilst she was here,
methought the beams of light that did appear,
Were shot from her: methought the moon gave none,
But what it had from her: she was alone
With me, if then her presence did so move,
Why did not I assay to win her love?
She would not sure have yielded unto me,
Women love only opportunity
And not the man, or if she had denied
Alone, I might have forced her to have tried
Who had been stronger: o vain fool, to let
Such blessed occasion pass, I'll follow yet,
My blood is up, I cannot now forbear.
I come sweet Amoret, soft who is here?
A pair of lovers, he shall yield her me,
Now lust is up, alike all women be.
Where shall we rest, but for the love of me,
Cloe I know ere this would weary be.
Alexis let us rest here, if the place
Be private, and out of the common trace
Of every shepherd: for I understood,
This night a number are about the wood,
Then let us choose some place where out of sight,
We freely may enjoy our stolen delight,
Then boldly here, where we shall near be found,
No shepherds way lies here, 'tis hallowed ground,
No maid seeks here her strayed Cow, or Sheep,
Fairies and Fawns, and Satires do it keep,
Then carelessly rest here, and clip and kiss,
And let no fear make us our pleasures miss.
Then lie by me, the sooner we begin,
The longer ere day descry our sin.
Forbear to touch my love, or by yond flame
The greatest power that shepherds dare to name,
Here where thou first under this holy tree,
Her to dishonour thou shalt buried be.
If Pan himself should come out of the lawns,
With all his troops of satires and of fauns,
And bid me leave I swear by her two eyes,
A greater oath than thine, I would not rise.
Then from the cold earth never thou shalt move,
But lose at one stroke both thy life and love.
Hold gentle Shepherd.
Fairest Shepherdess,
Come you with me, I do not love ye less
Than that fond man that would have kept you there
From me of more desert.
O yet forbear
To take her from me, give me leave to die
By her.
Now whilst theme one doth rule the sky,
And the stars, whose feeble light
Give a pale shadow to the night,
Are up, great Pan commanded me
To walk this grove about, whilst he
In a corner of the wood,
Where never mortal foot hath stood,
Keeps dancing, music and a feast,
To entertain a lovely guest:
Where he gives her many a rose
Sweeter than the breath that blows
The leaves: grapes, berries of the best,
I never saw so great a feast.
But to my charge: here must I stay,
To see what mortals lose their way,
And by a false fire seeming bright,
Train them in and leave them right:
Then must I watch if any be
Forcing of a chastity,
If I find it, then in haste,
Give my wreathed horn a blast,
And the fairies all will run,
Wildly dancing by the moon,
And will pinch him to the bone,
Till his lustful thoughts be gone.
O death!
Back again about this ground
Sure I hear a mortal sound,
I bind thee by this powerful spell,
By the waters of this well:
By the glimmering moon beams bright,
Speak again thou mortal wight.
Oh
Speak again thou mortal wight,
Here the foolish mortal lies,
Sleeping on the ground, arise,
The poor wight is almost dead,
On the Ground his wounds have bled,
And his Clothes fold with his blood,
To my Goddess in the wood,
Will I lead him, whose hands pure,
Will help this mortal wight to cure,
Since I beheld, you shaggy Man, my breast,
Doth pant, each bush methinks should hide a Beast,
Yet my desire, keeps still above my fear,
I would fain meet some Shepherd knew I where,
For from one cause of fear, I am most free,
It is Impossible to Ravish me,
I am so willing, here upon this ground,
I left my love all Bloody with his wound,
Yet till that fearful shape made me be gone,
Though he were hurt, I furnished was of one,
But now both lost Alexis speak or move,
If thou hast any life thou art yet my love,
he's dead, or else is with his little might,
Crept from the Bank for fear of that ill sprite,
Then where art thou that struck'st my love oh stray,
Bring me thyself in Change, and then I'll say,
Thou hast some justice, I will make thee trim,
With Flowers, and Garlands, that were meant for him,
I'll Clip thee round, with both mine arms as fast,
As I did mean, he should have been embraced.
But thou art fled what hope is left for me?
I'll run to Daphnis in the hollow tree.
Who I did mean to mock, though hope be small,
To make him bold, rather than none at all,
I'll try him, his heart, and my behaviour to
Perhaps may teach him, what he ought to do.
This was the place, 'twas but my feeble sight,
Mixed with the horror of my deed, an night,
That shaped these fears and made me run away,
And lose my Beauteous hardly gotten Pray,
Speak Gentle shepherdess I am alone,
And tender love, for love, but she is gone,
From me, that having struck her lover dead:
For filly fear left her alone and fled:
And see the wounded Body is Removed.
By her of whom it was so well beloved.
But all theise fancies must be quite for got,
I must lie close here comes young Perigot,
with subtle Amarillis in the shape,
Of Amoret pray love he may not scape.
Beloved Perigot, show me some place,
Where I may rest my Limbs, weak with the Chase
Of thee an hour before thou cam'st at least
Beshrew my Tardy steps, here shalt thou rest
Upon this holy bank no deadly snake,
Upon this Turf herself in folds doth make,
Here is no poison, for the Toads to feed.
Here boldly spread thy hands, no venomed weed,
Dares blister them, No sly my snail dare creep,
Over thy face when thou art fast asleep,
Here never durst the babbling cuckoo spit.
No slough of falling Star did ever hit.
Upon this Bank let this thy Cabin be.
This other set with violets for me.
Thou dost not loue me Perigot?
Fair maid
You only live to hear it often said;
You do not doubt,
Believe me, but I do.
What shall we now begin again to woe,
'tis the best way to make your lover last,
To play with him, when you have caught him fast,
By I an I swear, beloved Perigot,
And by you Moon, I think thou lovest me not.
By Pan I swear and if I falsely swear:
Let him not guard my flocks, let Foxes tear,
My earliest lambs, and wolves whilst I do steep
Fall one the rest a Rot among my sheep,
I love the better, than the careful Ewe,
The new yeaned lamb that is of her own hue,
I dote upon thee more than that young lamb.
Doth on the Bag, that feeds him from his dam.
Were there a sort of wolves got in my fold,
And one Ran after thee both young and old,
Should be devoured, and it should be my strife,
To save thee, whom I love above, my life,
how should I trust thee when I see thee choose
Another bed, and dost my side refuse,
'twas only that the chaste thoughts, might be shown,
Twixt thee and me, although we were alone,
Come Perigot will show his power that he
Can make his Amoret, though she weary be,
Rise nimbly from her Couch and come to his.
Here take thy Amoret embrace, and Kiss:
What means my love;
To do as lovers should.
That are to be enjoyed not to be wooed.
there's near a shepherd esse in all the plain,
Can kiss thee with more Art, there's none can feign.
More wanton tricks,
Forbear dear soul to try,
Whether my heart be pure, I'll rather die,
Then nourish one thought to dishonour thee,
Still thinkst thou such a thing as Chastity,
Is amongst women. Perigot there's none,
That with her love is in a wood alone,
And wood come home a Maid be not abused,
With thy fond first belief, let time be used,
Why dost thou rise,
My true heart, thou hast slain,
Faith Perigot, I'll pluck thee down again,
Let go thou Serpent that into my breast,
Hast with thy Cunning dived art, art not in jest;
Sweet love lie down,
Since this I live to see,
Some bitter North wind blast my flocks and me
You swore you loved yet will not do my will,
O be as thou wert, once, I'll love thee still,
I am, as still I was and all my kind,
Though other shows we have poor men to blind,
Then here I end all love, and lest my vain,
belief should ever draw me in again,
Before thy face that hast my youth mislead,
I end my life my blood be on thy head,
O hold thy hands thy Amoret doth cry,
Thou counsel'st well, first Amoret shall die,
That is the cause of my Eternal smart,
O hold.
This steel shall pierce thy lustful heart,
up and down everywhere,
I strew the herbs to purge the air.
Let your Odour drive hence,
All mists that dazzle sense,
Herbs and springs whose hidden mights
altars shapes, and mocks the sight.
Thus I charge ye to undo;
All before I brought ye to
Let her fly let her scape,
Give again her own shape:
For bear thou gentle swain thou dost mistake;
She whom thou followedst fled into the brake
And as I crossed thy way I met thy wrath;
The only fear of which near slain me hath,
Pardon fair Shepherdess my rage and night,
Were both upon me and beguiled my sight;
But far be it from me to spill the blood.
Of harmless maids that wander in the wood,
Many a weary step in yonder path
Poor hopeless Amoret twice trodden hath,
To seek her Perigot, yet cannot hear,
His voice, my Perigot, she loves thee dear:
That calls.
See yonder where she is how fair.
she shows, and yet her breath infects the Air.
My Perigot:
Here.
Happy.
Hapless first:
It lights, on thee, the next blow is the worst,
Stay Perigot, my love, thou art unjust:
Death is the best reward, that's due to lust;
Now shall their love be crossed, for being struck;
I'll throw her in the Fount least being took:
By some Night Traveller, whose honest care,
May help to cure her, shepherdess prepare,
yourself to die,
No mercy I do crave
Thou canst not give a worse blow than I have;
Tell him that gave me this, who loved him too
He struck my soul and not my body through:
Tell him when I am dead my soul shall be.
At peace if he but think he injured me.
In this Fount be thy Grave, thou wert not meant,
Sure for a woman, thou art so Innocent
She cannot scape for underneath the ground,
In a long hollow the clear spring is bound,
Till on you side where the morn's sun doth look,
The struggling water breaks out in a brook,
what powerful Charms my streams do bring
Back again unto their spring?
With such force that I their god,
Three times striking with my rod,
Could not keep them in their Ranks
My fishes shoot into the banks.
there's not one, that stays and feeds,
All have hid them in the weeds
Here's a Mortal almost dead,
fallen into my River head,
Hollowed so with many a spell,
That till now none ever fell,
'tis a Feamale young and clear,
Cast in by some Ravisher,
See upon her breast a wound,
On which there is no plaster bound,
Yet she's warm, her pulses beat,
'tis a sign of life and heat,
If thou be'st a virgin pure,
I can give a present cure,
Take a droop into thy wound
From my watery lock more round,
Then Orient Pearl, and far more pure,
Then unchaste flesh may endure,
See she pants and from her flesh,
The warm blood gusheth out afresh,
She is an unpolluted maid:
I must have this bleeding stayed,
From my banks, I pluck this flower.
With holy hand whose virtuous power,
Is at once to heal and draw
The blood returns I never saw,
A fairer Mortal, now doth break,
Her deadly slumber, virgin, speak,
Who hath restored my sense, given me new breath,
And brought me back out of the Arms of death,
I have healed thy wounds:
ay me,
Fear not him that succoured thee:
I am this Fountains God below,
My waters to a River grow,
And twixt two banks with Osiers set,
That only prosper in the wet,
Through the Meadows do they glide,
Wheeling still on every side,
Sometimes winding round about.
To find the Evenest channel out,
And if thou wilt go with me,
Leaving Mortal company.
In the Cool streams shall thou lie:
Free from harm as well as I,
I will give thee for thy food,
No fish that useth in the mud,
But Trout and Pike that love to swim,
Where the Gravel from the brim,
Though the pure streams may be seen,
Orient Pearl fit for a Queen,
Will I give thy love to win
And a shell to keep them in,
Not a fish in all my brook,
That shall disobey thy look,
But when thou wilt come sliding by,
And from thy white hand take a fly,
And to make thee understand:
How I can my waves command,
They shall Bubble whilst I sing,
Sweeter than the silver string.
Do not fear to put thy feet,
Naked in the River sweet,
Think not leech, or Newt, or Toad,
Will bite thy foot, when thou hast trod,
Not let the water rising high
As thou wadest in make thee cry:
And sob, but ever live with me.
And not a wave shall trouble thee.
Immortal power, there rul'st this holy flood,
I know myself, unworthy to be wooed,
By the a God, for ere this, but for thee:
I should have shown my weak Mortality,
Besides by holy Oath betwixt us twain,
I am betrothed unto a shepherd Swain,
Whose comely face; I know the Gods above:
May make me leave to see; but not to love,
may he prove to thee as true:
Fairest virgin now adieu,
I must make my waters fly,
lest they leave their Channels dry.
And beasts, that come unto the spring
Miss their mornings watering.
Which I would not, for of late.
All the Neighbour people sat.
One my banks and from the fold,
Tow white Lambs of three weeks Old,
Offered to my deity,
For which this year they shall be free
From raging floods that as they pass,
Leave their gravel in the grass,
Nor shall their Meads be over flown,
When their grass is newly moan,
For thy kindness to me shown,
Never from thy banks be blown,
Any Tree; with windy force.
Cross thy streams to stop thy Course,
May no Beast that comes to drink
With his horns cast down thy brink
May non that for thy fish do look,
Cut thy banks to dam thy Brook:
Barefoot may no Neighbour wade:
In thy cool streams? wife nor maid,
When the spawns one stones do lie,
To wash their Hemp and spoil the fry.
Thanks Virgin, I must down again.
Thy wound will put thee to no pain.
Wonder not, so soon 'tis gone;
A holy hand was laid upon.
And I unhappy borne to be.
Must follow him, that flies from me,
She is untrue unconstant, and unkind,
she's gone she's gone, blow high thou North west wind,
And raise the Sea to Mountains: let the Trees,
That dare oppose thy Raging fury lose
Their firm foundation: Creep into the earth,
And shake the world as at the monstrous birth,
Of some new prodigy, whilst I constant stand,
Holding this trusty boarspear in my hand,
And falling thus upon it.
Stay thy dead doing hand thou art to hot,
Against thyself believe me comely Swain,
If that thou diest, not all the showers of Rain.
The heavy Clouds send down can wash away:
The foul unmanly guilt, the world will lay,
Upon thee, yet thy love untainted stands:
Believe me she is constant, not the sands,
Can be so hardly numbered as she won:
I do not trifle, shepherd, by thee Moon,
And all those lesser lights our eyes do view
All that I could thee Perigot is true,
Then be a freeman, put away despair,
And will to die, smooth gently up that fair,
Dejected forehead: be as when those eyes,
Took the first heat,
Alas he doubly dies,
That would believe, but cannot, 'tis not well,
Ye keep me thus from dying here to dwell,
With many worse companions: but oh death,
I am not yet enamoured of his breath,
So much, but I dare leave it, 'tis not pain,
In forcing of a wound: nor after gain,
Of many days, can hold me from my will,
'tis not myself, but Amoret. bids kill
Stay, but a little little but on hour,
And if I do not show thee through the power?
Of herbs and words I have, as dark as Night?
myself, turned to thy Amoret, in sight?
Her very figure, and the rob she wears;
With tawny Buskins, and thee hook she bears
Of thine own Carving, where your names are set,
Wrought underneath with many a Curious fret
The Primrose Chaplet? tawdry-lace and Ring,
Thou gavest her for her singing with each thing,
Else that she wears about her let me feel;
The first tell stroke of that Revenging steel?
I am contented if there be a hope;
To give it Entertainment for the scope;
Of one poor hour; go you shall find me next?
Under you shady Beech? even thus perplexed;
And thus believing.
Bind before I go;
Thy soul by Pan unto me, not to do,
Harm or outrageous wrong upon thy life,
Till my Return.
By Pan and by the strife;
He had with Phoebus for the Mastery,
When Golden Midas, judged their minstrelsy;
I will not.
Softly gliding as I go;
With this Burden full of woe;
Through still silence of the night?
Guided by the glow-worms light.
Hither am I come at last;
Many a Thicket have I passed;
Not at twig that durst deny me;
Nor a bush that durst descry me.
To the little Bird that sleeps:
On the tender spray nor creeps,
That hardly worm with pointed Tail;
But if I be under sail;
Flying faster than the wind;
Leaving all the Clouds behind,
But doth hide her tender head,
In some hollow Tree or bed;
Of seeded nettles not a Hare
Can be started from his fare;
By my footing nor a wish;
Is more sudden, nor a fish?
Can be found; with greater ease,
Cut the vast unbounded seas;
Leaving neither print nor sound.
Then I when nimbly on the ground,
I measure many a league an hour;
But behold the happy bower,
That must ease me of my charge,
And by holy hand enlarge;
The soul of this sad man that yet,
Lies fast bound in deadly
Heaven and great Pan, sucker it,
Hail thou beauty of the Bower,
Whither then the Paramour:
Of my Master; let me crave,
Thy virtuous help to keep from Grave,
This poor Mortal that here lies,
Waiting when thee destinies.
Will undo his thread of life,
view the wound by cruel knife,
Trenched into him.
What art thou? call'st me from my holy Rights
And with the feared name of death a fright's
My tender Ears, speak me thy name and will,
I am the satyr that did fill,
Your lap with early fruit and will,
When I hap to gather more,
Bring ye better, and more store:
Yet I come not empty now,
See a blossom from the bow,
But be shrew his heart that pulled it,
And his perfect Sight that Culled it,
From the other springing blooms
For a sweeter youth the Gwomes
Cannot show me nor the downs:
Nor the many neighbouring Towns,
Low in yonder glade I found him,
Softly in mine Arms I bound him,
Hither have I brought him sleeping,
In a Trance, his wounds fresh weeping,
In remembrance such youth may
Spring and perish in a Day.
Satire: they wrong thee, that do term thee rude
Though thou be'st outward rough and tawny hued:
Thy manners are as gentle and as fair,
As his who brags himself, borne only heir,
To all Humanity: let me see thy wound:
This Herb will stay the Currant being bound,
Fast to the Orifice, and this restrain,
ulcers, and swellings, and such inward pain,
As the cold Air hath forced into the sore,
This to, draw out such putrefying gore,
As inward falls.
Heaven grant it may do good,
Fairly wipe away the blood,
Hold him gently till I fling,
Water of a virtuous spring:
On his Temples turn him twice:
To the Moon beams pinch him thrice:
That the labouring soul may draw.
From his great eclipse.
I saw.
His Eyelids moving.
Give him breath,
All the danger of cold death:
Now is vanished, with this plaster:
And this unction do I master:
All the festered ill that may:
Give him grief another day.
See he gathers up his sprite
And begins to hunt for light,
Now a gapes and breathes again:
How the blood runs to the vain:
That east was emply.
Oh my heart,
My dearest, dearest Cloe O the smart,
Runs, through my side: I feel some pointed thing,
Pass through my Bowels, sharper than the sting,
Of Scorpion.
Pan, preserve me, what are you,
Do not hurt me. I am true,
To my Cloe though she fly
And leave me to this Destiny,
There she stands, and will not lend,
Her smooth white hand to help her friend,
But I am much mistaken, for that face,
Bears more Austerity and modest grace,
More reproving and more awe.
Then these Eyes yet ever saw,
In my Cloe, oh my pain:
Eagerly Renews again:
Give me your help for his sake you love best:
Shepherd thou Canst not possible take rest.
Till thou hast laid a side all heats, desires,
Provoking thoughts, that stir up lusty fires.
Commerce with wanton Eyes: strong blood and will,
To execute these must be purged until,
The vain grow Whiter than Repent and pray:
Great Pan, to keep you from the like decay,
And I shall undertake your cure with ease.
Till when this virtuous Plasters will displease,
Your tender sides. give me your hand and rise.
help him a little Satire. for his Thighs.
Yet are feeble.
Sure I have lost much blood.
'tis no matter, 'twas not good,
Mortal you must leave your wooing,
Though there be alloy in doing,
Yet it brings much grief, behind it,
They best feel it, that do find it,
Come bring him in, I will attend his sore,
When you are well, take heed you lust no more,
shepherd see what comes of kissing
By my head 'twere better missing,
brightest if there, be remaining,
Any service, without feigning,
I will do it, were I set,
To catch the nimble wind or get,
Shadows gliding on the green,
Or to steal from the great Queen,
Of Fairies, all her Beauty,
I would do it so much duty,
Do I owe those precious Eyes,
I thank the honest Satire, if the Cries,
Of any other that be hurt, or ill,
Draw thee unto them, prithee do thy will?
To bring them hither,
I will and when the weather:
Serves to Angle in the brook,
I will bring a silver hook,
With a line of finest silk,
And a rod as white as milk,
To deserve the little fish,
So I take my leave and wish,
On this bower may ever dwell,
Spring, and summer.
Friend farewell.
This place is Ominous for here I lost,
My love and almost life, and since have crossed,
All these woods over, never a Nook or dell,
Where any little Bird, or beast doth dwell,
But I have sought it, never a bending brow,
Of any hill or Glade, the wind sings through,
Nor a green bank or shade where shepherd's use,
To sit and Riddle sweetly pipe or choose,
Their valentines but I have missed to find.
My love in, Perigot, Oh to unkind.
Why hast thou fled me? whether art thou gone,
How have I wronged thee? was my love alone,
To thee, worthy this scorned Recompense? 'tis well,
I am content to feel it; but I tell
Thee shepherd: and these lusty woods shall hear.
Forsaken Amoret is yet as clear,
Of any stranger fire, as Heaven is.
From foul Corruption, or the deep: Abyss,
From light, and happiness, and thou mayst know,
All this for truth and how that fatal blow,
Thou gavest me, never from desert of mine,
Fell on my life, but from suspect of thine,
Or fury more than Madness therefore, here.
Since I have lost my life, my love, my dear,
Upon this cursed place, and on this green,
That first divorced us, shortly shall be seen,
A sight of so great pity that each eye,
Shall daily spend his spring in memory.
Of my untimely fall.
I am not blind,
Nor is it through the working of my Mind.
That this shows Amoret, forsake me all,
That dwell upon the soul, but what men call
Wonder, or more than wonder Miracle,
For sure so strange as this the Oracle,
Never gave answer of, It passeth dreams,
Or madmen's fancy when the many streams,
Of new Imagination rise and fall:
'tis but an hour since these Ears heard her call,
For pity to young Perigot? whilst he,
Directed by his fury bloodily,
Launched up her breast, which bloodless fell and cold,
And if belief may Credit what was told,
After all this the Melancholy Swain,
Took her into his Arms being almost slain.
And to the bottom of the holy well,
slung her for ever with the waves to dwell,
'tis she, the very same, 'tis Amoret.
And living yet, the great powers will not let,
Their virtuous love be Crossed, maid wipe away,
Those heavy drops of sorrow, and allay,
The storm that yet goes high, which not depressed,
Breaks, heart, and life, and all before it rest:
Thy Perigot:
where: which is Perigot.
Sits there below lamenting much God wot:
Thee, and thy fortune, go and comfort him,
And thou shalt find him underneath a brim,
Of sailing pines that edge yond Mountain in,
I go, I run Heaven grant me. I may win:
His soul again.
Stay Amarillis stay,
Ye are to fleet, 'tis two hours yet to days
I have performed my promise let us sit;
And warme our bloodes together till the sitt;
Come lively on us;
Friend you are to keen;
The Morning, Riseth, and we shall be seen,
For bear a little;
I can stay no longer;
Hold shepherd hold, learn not to be a wronger;
Of your word, was not your promise laid,
To break their loves first:
I have done it Maid?
No they are yet unbroken, met again,
And are as hard to part yet as the stain?
Is from the finest lawn,
I say they are.
now at this present parted, and so far,
That they shall never meet,
Swain 'tis not so,
For do but to yond hanging Mountain go,
And there believe your eyes,
you do but hold:
Of with delays: and trifles, fare well cold,
And frozen bashfulness, unfit for men,
Thus I salute thee virgin,
And thus then,
I bid you follow, Catch me if ye can,
And If I stay behind I am no Man.
Night do not steal away: I woo thee yet?
To hold a hard hand o'er the Rusty bit,
That Guides thy Lazy team go back again,
Bootes thou that drivest thy frozen wane,
Round as a Ring and bring a second Night,
To hide my sorrows from the coming light,
Let not the Eyes of men stare on my face,
And read my falling give me some black place,
Where never sun beam, shot his wholesome light,
That I may sit, and power out my sad sprite,
Like running water never to be known:
After the forced fall and sound is gone,
This is the bottom: speak if thou be here,
My Perigot, thy Amoret, thy dear,
Calls on thy loved Name,
What thou dare,
Tread these forbidden paths, where death and care,
Dwell on the face of darkness,
'tis thy friend,
Thy Amoret come hither to give end,
To these consumings look up gentle Boy,
I have forgot those pains, and dear annoy,
I suffered for thy sake, and am content,
To be thy love again why hast thou rent,
Those curled locks, where I have often hung,
ribbons and damask Roses, and have flung,
Waters distilled to make thee fresh and gay,
Sweeter than Nosegays on a Bridal day,
Why dost thou cross thine Arms, and hang thy face,
Down to thy Bosom, letting fall apace,
From those too little Heavens upon the ground
Showers of more price, more Orient, & more round
Than those that hang upon the moons pale brow
Cease these complainings Shepherd I am now,
The same, I ever was, as kind and free,
And can forgive before you ask of me,
Indeed I can, and will.
So spoke my fair,
O you great working powers of Earth, and Air,
Water, and forming fire, why have you lent,
Your hidden virtues of so ill intent,
Even such a face, so fair so bright of hew,
Had Amoret, such, words so smooth and new,
Came flowing from her tongue, such was her eye,
And such the pointed sparkle that did fly
Forth like a bleeding shaft, all is the same,
The rob, and Buskins, painted, hook, and frame,
Of all her Body O me Amoret,
shepherd what means this Riddle who hath set,
So strange a difference, twixt myself and me,
That I am grown another, look and see.
The Ring thou gavest me, and about my wrist.
That Curious bracelet thou thyself didst twist.
From those fair Tresses, knowest thou Amoret.
Hath not some newer love forced thee forget,
Thy Ancient faith,
Still nearer to my love;
These be the very words she oft did prove,
Upon my temper, so she still would take,
wonder into her face, and silent make,
Sings with her head and hand as who would say
shepherd remember this another day:
Am I not Amoret. where was I lost,
Can there be Heaven, and time, and men most
Of these unconstant? faith where art thou fled?
Are all the vows and protestations dead:
The hands held up? the wishes and the heart?
Is there not one remaining not apart,
Of all these to be found why then I see:
Men never knew that virtue constancy
Men ever were most blessed, till Cross fate,
Brought love, and women forth unfortunate,
To all that ever tasted of their smiles,
Whose Actions are all double, full of wiles,
Like to the subtle Hare, that fore the Hounds,
Makes many turnings leaps and many rounds,
This way and that way, to deceive the scent,
Of her pursuers:
'tis but to prevent,
There speedy coming, on that seek her fall,
The hands of Cruel men more Bestial,
And of a nature more refusing good,
Then beasts themselves, or fishes of the flood,
Thou art all these, and more than nature meant,
When she created all, frowns, joys, content:
Extreme fire for an hour, and presently:
Colder than sleepy poison: or the sea,
Upon whose face sits a continual frost
Your Actions ever driven to the most,
Then down again as low that none can find,
The rise or falling of a woman's mind,
Can there be any Age, or days, or time,
Or tongues: of Men, guilty so great a crime:
As wronging simple Maid, O Perigot:
Thou that wast yesterday without a blot,
Thou that wast every good and every thing,
That men call blessed: thou that wast the spring.
From whence our looser grooms drew all their best:
Thou that wast always Just, and always blessed,
In faith and promise, thou that hadst the name,
Of virtuous given thee, and made good the same:
Even from thy Cradle: thou that wast that all,
That men delighted in, Oh what a fall,
Is this to have been so, and now to be,
The only best in wrong, and infamy,
And I to live to know this, and by me.
That loved thee dearer than, mine Eyes or that,
Which we esteem our honour virgin state,
Dearer than swallows love the early morn,
Or dogs of Chase the sound of merry Horn,
Dearer than thou canst love thy new love, if thou hast
Another and far dearer than the last,
Dearer than thou canst love thyself, though all,
The self love were wîthin thee, that did fall.
with that coy swain: hat now is made a flower
For whose dear sake, Echo weeps many a shower
And am I thus rewarded for my flame,
Loved worthily to get a wantons name,
Come thou forsaken willow wind my head,
And noise it to the world, my love is dead:
I am forsaken I am Cast away,
And left for every lazy Groom to say,
I was unconstant light, and sooner lost,
Than the quick Clouds we see or the Chill frost,
When the hot sun beats on it tell me yet,
Canst thou not lone again thy Amorett?
Thou art not worthy of that blessed name,
I must not know thee, fling thy wanton flame,
upon some lighter blood: that may be hot,
With words and feigned passions, Perigot,
Was ever yet unstained, and shall not now.
Stoop to the meltings of a borrowed brow:
Then hear me heaven: to whom I call for right.
And you fair twinkling stars that crown the night,
And hear me woods and and silence of this place,
And ye sad hours, that move a sullen pace,
Hear me ye shadows, that delight to dwell,
In horrid darkness, and ye powers of Hell,
Whilst I breathe out my last, I am that maid,
That yet untainted Amoret that played:
The careless Prodigal: and gave away:
My soul to this young man that now dares say:
I am a stranger, not the same, more wild,
And thus with much beleife, I was be guild,
I am that Maid, that have delayed deny,
Aud almost scornd the loues of all that tryded,
To win me but this swain, and yet confess,
I have been wooed by many with no less.
Soul of affection and have often had:
Rings Belts and Cracknels. sent me from the lad.
That feeds his flocks down westward, Lambs and Doves
By young Alexis, Daphnis sent me gloves,
All which I gave to thee not these nor they
That sent them, did I smile one, or ere lay.
up to my after memory but why,
Do I resolve to grieve and not to die
Happy had been the stroke thou gavest if home,
By this time had I found a quiet room.
Where every slave is free, and every breast,
That living bread, new care, now lies at rest,
And thither will poor Amoret,
Thou must,
Was ever any man, so loath to trust,
His Eyes as I, or was there ever yet,
Any so like, as this to Amoret,
For whose dear sake, I promise if there be
A living soul within thee thus to free,
Thy Body from it,
So this work hath end.
Farewell and live be constant to thy friend,
That loves thee next,
See the day begins to break,
And the light shuts like a streak,
Of subtle fire the wind blows cold,
Whilst the morning doth unfold,
Now the Birds begin to rouse,
And the squirrel from the boughs,
leaps to get him Nuts and fruit,
The early Lark erst was mute,
carols to the rising day,
Many a Note, and many lay,
Therefore here I end my watch,
lest the wandering Swain should catch,
Harm or lose him Amo self: ah me.
speak again whate'er thou be,
I am ready speak I say,
By the dawning of the day,
By the power of Night and Pan;
I enforce thee speak again,
O I am most unhappy.
Yet more blood,
Sure these wanton Swains are wood,
Can there be a hand, or heart,
Dare commit so vild a part,
As this Murder, by the Moon,
That hid herself when this was done,
Never was a sweeter face,
I will bear her to the place,
Where my Goddess keeps and crave,
Her to give her life, or grave,
Here whilst one patient takes his rest secure
I steal a broad to do another Cure,
Pardon thou buried body of my love,
That from thy side I dare so soon remove,
I will not prove unconstant nor will leave,
Thee for an hour alone, when I deceive,
My first made vow, the wildest of the wood,
Tear me, and o'er thy Grave let out my blood,
I go by wit to Cure a lovers pain,
Which no herb can, being done, I'll come again,
Poor shepherd in this shade for ever lie,
And seeing thy fair Clorin's, Cabin die,
O hapless love which being answered ends,
And as a little Infant cries and bends,
His tender Brows, when rolling of his eye,
He hath espied some thing that glisters nigh.
Which he would have, yet give it him, away,
He throws it straight, and cries a fresh to play
With some thing else such my affection set,
On that which I should loathe if I could get
See where he lies did ever man but he,
Love any woman for her Constancy,
To her dead lover which she needs must end,
Before she can allow him, for her friend,
And he himself, must needs the cause destroy,
For which he loves, before he can enjoy,
Poor shepherd, Heaven grant I at once may free,
Thee from thy pain, and keep my loyalty,
Shepherd look up,
Thy brightness doth amaze,
So Phoebus may at Noon bid mortals gaze,
Thy glorious constancy appears so bright,
I dare not meet the Beams with my weak sight
Why dost thou pine away thyself for me
Why dost thou keep such spotless constancy?
Thou holy Shepherd see what for thy sake,
Clorin, thy Clorin, now dare undertake, he starts up
Stay there, thou constant Clorin if there be,
Yet any part of woman left in thee,
To make thee light think yet before thou speak,
See what a holy vow, for thee I break,
I that already have my fame far spread,
For being constant to my lover dead
think yet dear Clorin of your love, how true,
If you had died, he would have been to you
Yet all I'll lose for thee.
Think but how blessed,
A constant woman is above the rest,
And offer up myself, here on this ground,
To be disposed by thee,
why dost thou wound,
His heart with Malice, against women more.
That hated all the Sex, but thee before,
How much more pleasant had it been to me,
To die than behold this change in thee,
Yet, yet return: let not the woman sway,
Insult not on her now, nor use delay
Who for thy sake hath ventured all her fame,
Thou hast not ventured but bought Certain shame,
Your Sexes Curse, foul falsehood, must and shall,
I see once in your lives light on you all;
I hate thee now: yet turn
Be just to me:
Shall I at once lose both my fame and thee,
Thou hadst no fame, that which thou didst like good
Was but thy Appetite that swayed thy blood,
For that time to the best, for as a blast,
That through a house comes, usually doth cast,
Things out of order: yet by chance may come,
And blow some one thing to his proper room,
So did thy Appetite, and not thy zeal.
Sway thee by chance to do some one thing well.
Yet turn.
Thou dost but try me if I would.
Forsake thy dear embraces for my old
Loves though he were alive, but do not fear,
I do contemn thee now: and dare come near.
And gaze upon thee, for methinks that grace:
Austerity, which sat upon that face,
Is gone, and thou like others false maid see,
This is the gain of foul Inconstance,
'tis done great: Pan, I give thee thanks for it,
What Art could not have healed, is cured by wit,
Will ye be constant yet, will ye remove,
Into the Cabin to your buried love,
Noah let me die, but by thy side remain,
there's none shall know that thou didst ever stain,
Thy worthy strictness, but shalt honoured be
And I will lie again under this tree,
And pine and die for thee with more delight,
Than I have sorrow now to know thee light,
Let me have thee, and I'll be where thou wilt.
Thou art of women's race and full of guilt,
Farewell all hope of that sex, whilst I thought,
There was one good, I feared to find one nought
But since there minds I all alike espy
Hence forth I'll choose as theirs, by mine eye,
Blessed be ye powers that gave such quick redress,
And for my labours sent so good success,
I rather choose though I a woman be,
He should speak ill of all,
then die for me.
shepherds, rise and shake of sleep.
See the blushing Morn doth peep,
Through the windows, whilst the Sun
To the Mountain tops is run,
Gilding all the vales below,
With his rising flames which grow,
Greater by his climbing still.
Up ye lazy grooms and fill,
bag and Bottle for the field,
Clasp your cloaks fast lest they yield,
To the bitter north-east wind,
Call the Maidens up and find.
Who lay longest, that she may,
Go without a friend all day.
Then reward your dogs and pray,
Pan to keep you from decay,
So unfold, and then away
What not a Shepherd stirring sure the grooms,
Have found their beds to easy, or the Rooms.
filled with such new delight, and heat that they,
Have both forgot their hungry sheep, and day,
Knock that they may remember what a shame,
Sloth and neclect, lays on a shepherds name.
It is to little purpose, not a swain,
This night hath known his lodging, here; or lain,
Within these coats: the woods or some near town,
that is a neighbour to the bordering down:
Hath drawn them thither, 'bout some lusty sport;
Or spiced wassail bowl, to which resort.
All the young men and maids of many a coat,
Whilst the Trim, Minstrel strikes his merry note.
God pardon sin, show me the way that leads,
To any of their haunts.
This to the Meads.
And that down to the woods,
Then this for me,
Come Shepherd let me crave your company.
Now your thoughts are almost pure:
And your wound begins to cure.
Strive to banish all that's vain,
Lest it should break out again.
Eternal thanks to thee, thou holy maid:
I find my former wandering thoughts, well stayed,
Through thy wise precepts, and my outward pain,
By thy choice herbs is almost gone again.
Thy sex's vice and virtue are revealed,
At once, for what one hurt another healed.
May thy grief more appease,
Relapses, are the worst disease:
Take heed how you in thought offend,
So mind and body both will mend.
Be'st thou the wildest creature of the Wood,
That bear'st me thus a way drowned in my blood.
And dying, know I cannot injured be
I am a maid, let that name fight for me:
Fairest Virgin do not fear,
Me that doth thy body bear,
Not to hurt, but held to be,
Men are ruder far than we.
See fair Goddess in the wood,
They have let out yet more blood:
Some savage man hath struck her breast
So soft and white, that no wild beast,
Durst a touched asleep or wake,
So sweet that Adder, newt, or Snake.
Would have lain from arm to arm,
On her bosom to be warm,
All a night and being hot,
Gone away and stung her not.
Quickly clap herbs to her breast,
A man sure is a kind of Beast,
With spotless hand, on spotless Breast,
I put these herbs to give thee rest.
Which till it heal thee there will bide
If both be pure, if not of slide.
See it falls of from the wound,
shepherdess thou art not sound,
Fall of lust.
Who would have thought it,
So fair a face:
Why that hath brought it.
For aught I know or think, these words my last:
Yet Pan, so help me as my thoughts are chaste.
And so may Pan bless this my cure,
As all my thoughts are just and pure,
Some uncleanness nigh doth lurk,
That will not let my medicines work.
Satire search if thou canst find it,
Here away methinks I wind it.
Stronger yet, Oh here they be,
Here here in a hollow tree.
Two fond mortals have I found,
Bring them out they are unsound.
By the fingers thus I wring ye,
To my Goddess thus I bring ye.
Strife is vain come gently in,
I scented them, they are full of sin,
Hold Satire, take this Glass,
Sprinkle over all the place,
Purge the Air from lustful breath,
To save this Shepherdess from death.
And stand you still, whilst I do dress
Her wound for fear the pain increase,
From this glass I throw a drop,
Of crystal water on the top.
Of every grass on flowers a pair:
Send a fume and keep the Air,
Pure and wholesome, sweet & blessed,
Till this virgin's wound be dressed,
Satire help to bring her in,
By Pan, I think she hath no sin.
She is so light, lie on these leaves,
Sleep that mortal sense deceives.
Crown thine eyes, and ease thy pain,
Mayst thou soon be well again,
Satire bring the Shepherd near,
Try him if his mind be clear,
Shepheard come,
My thoughts are pure,
The better trial to endure.
In this flame his finger thrust,
Which will burn him if he lust.
But if not away will turn,
As loath unspotted flesh to burn:
See it gives back let him go.
Farewell Mortal keep thee so.
Stay fair Nymph, fly not so fast,
we must try if yond be chaste:
Here's a hand that quakes for fear,
Sure she will not prove so clear:
Hold her finger to the flame:
That will yield her praise or shame.
To her doom she dares not stand,
But plucks away her tender hand:
And the Taper darting sends,
His hot beams at her finger's ends.
O thou art foul within, and haste;
A mind if nothing else unchaste.
Is not that Cloe? 'tis my love; 'tis she:
Cloe, fair Cloe.
My Alexis. Alexis: He.
Let me embrace thee.
Take her hence, lest her sight disturb his sense.
Take not her: take my life first.
See his wound again is burst,
Keep her near here in the wood.
Till I have stopped these streams of blood.
Soon again he ease shall find,
If I can but still his mind:
This curtain thus I do display,
To keep the piercing Air away.
Sure they are lost for ever, 'tis in vain,
To find them out, with trouble and much pain:
That have a Ripe desire, and forward will,
To fly the company of all, but ill:
What shall be counselled: Now shall we retire?
Or constant follow still, that first desire,
We had to find them?
Stay a little while:
For if the morning's mist do not beguile,
My sight with shadows: sure I see a swain
One of this jolly troops come back again.
Dost thou not blush young shepherd to be known,
Thus without care, leaving thy flocks alone:
And following what desire and present blood,
Shapes out before thy burning sense, for good,
Having forgot what tongue hereafter may
Tell to the world thy fall off, and say
Thou art regardless both of good and shame,
Spurning at virtue, and a virtuous name:
And like a glorious desperate man, that buys,
A poison of much price, by which he dies
Dost thou lay out for lust, whose only gain,
Is foul disease, with present age and pain:
And then a Grave: these be the fruits that grow,
In such hot veins that only beat to know,
Where they may take most ease & grow ambitious,
Through their own wanton fire, and pride delicious.
Right holy Sir I have not known this night,
What the smooth face of Mirth was: or the sight,
Of any looseness, music, joy and ease,
Have been to me, as bitter drugs to please
A Stomach lost with weakness, not a game
That I am skilled at throughly, nor a dame,
Went her tongue smother than the feet of Time,
Her bevy ever living like the Rhyme,
Our blessed Tityrus did sing of yore,
No, were she more enticing than the store
Of fruitful Summer, when the loaden tree,
Bids the faint traveler be bold and free
'twere but to me like Thunder 'gainst the bay,
Whose lightning may enclose, but never stay
Upon his charmed branches, such am I,
Against the catching flames of woman's eye.
Then wherefore hast thou wandered.
'twas a vow,
that drew me out last night, which I have now,
Strictly performed, and homewards go to give
fresh pasture to my sheep, that they may live.
'tis good to hear ye Shepherd if the heart,
In this well sounding Music bear his part;
Where have you left the rest,
I have not seen,
Since yesternight, we met upon this green,
To fold our flocks up, any of that train
Yet have I walked these woods round and have lain
All this long night under an aged tree.
Yet neither wandering Shepherd did I see,
Or Shepherdess, or drew into mine ear,
The sound of living thing unless it were,
The Nightingale, among the thick leaved spring
That fits alone, in sorrow and doth sing:
Whole nights away in mourning, or the Owl,
Or our great Enemy that still doth howl.
Against the moons cold beams.
Go and beware,
Of after falling.
Father 'tis my care.
Here comes another straggler, sure I see,
A shame in this young Shepherd Daphinis,
He,
Where hast left the rest, that should have been
Long before this, grazing upon the green:
Their yet imprisoned flocks,
Thou holy man.
Give me a little breathing till I can,
Be able to unfold what I have seen,
Such horror that the like hath never been,
Known to the ear of Shepherd: oh my heart,
Labours a double motion to impart,
So heavy tidings you all know the Bower,
Where the chaste Clorin, lives by whose great power,
Sick men and cattle have been often cured,
There lovely Amoret, that was assured,
To lusty Perigot: bleeds out her life:
Forced by some iron hand and fatal knife,
And by her young Alexis.
If there be
Ever a Neighbor-brook or hollow tree,
Receive my body, close me up from lust,
That follows at my heels, be ever just,
Thou God of shepherds: Pan for her dear sake,
That loves the rivers brinks, and still doth shake,
In cold remembrance of thy quick pursuit:
Let me be made a reed, and ever mute,
Nod to the waters fall, whilst every blast,
Sings through my slender leaves that I was chaste:
This is a night of wonder, Amarill,
Be Comforted, the holy gods are still,
Revengers of these wrongs.
Thou blessed man,
Honoured upon these plains and loved of Pan:
Hear me, and save from endless infamy,
My yet unblasted flower Virginity
By all the Garlands that have crowned that head,
By thy chaste office, and the marriage bed,
That still is blessed by thee: by all the rights
Due to our God: and by those virgin lights,
That burn before his Altar: let me not,
Fall from my former state to gain the blot
That never shall be purged.
I am not now,
That wanton Amarillis: here I vow,
To Heaven, and thee grave father, if I may,
Scape this unhappy Night, to know the day,
A virgin, never after to endure
The tongues, or company of men unpure.
I hear him, come, save me.
Retire a while,
Behind this bush, till we have known that vile
Abuser of young maidens.
Stay thy pace,
Most loved Amarillis: let the chase,
grow calm and milder, fly me not so fast,
I fear the pointed Brambles have unlaced
Thy golden Buskins, turn again and see:
Thy Shepherd follow, that is strong and free,
Able to give thee all content and case,
I am not bashful virgin, I can please:
At first encounter hug thee in mine arm,
And give thee many kisses, soft and warm,
As those the Sun prints on thy smiling cheek,
Of Plums or mellow peaches I am sleek,
And smooth as Neptune when stern Aeolus,
Locks up his surly winds and nimbly thus,
Can show my Active youth why dost thou fly.
Remember Amarillis it was I,
That killed Alexis for thy sake, and set,
An everlasting hate twixt Amoret,
And her beloved Perigot 'twas I,
That drowned her in the well, where she must lie,
Till time shall leave to be, then turn again:
Turn with thy open arms and clip the swain
That hath performed all this, turn turn I say:
I must not be deluded,
Monster stay,
Thou that art like a canker to the state,
Thou livest and breathest in, eating with debate,
Through every honest bosom, forcing still,
The veins of any men, may serve thy will.
Thou that hast offered with a sinful hand,
To seize upon this virgin that doth stand,
yet trembling here.
Good holiness declare,
What had the danger been if being bare,
I had embraced her, tell me by your Art:
What coming wonders wood that fight impart.
Lust, and branded soul,
Yet tell me more,
Hath not our Mother Nature for her store,
And great increase, said it is good and just,
And willed that every living creature must,
Beget his like.
Ye are better read than I,
I must confess in Blood and Lechery:
Now to the Bower and bring this beast along,
Where he may suffer Penance for his wrong,
Here will I wash it in the morning's dew,
Which she on every little grass doth strew,
In silver drops against the Suns appear:
'tis holy water and will make me clear.
My hand will not be cleansed, my wronged love,
If thy chaste spirit in the Air yet move,
Look mildly down on him that yet doth stand,
All full of guilt thy blood upon his hand,
And though I struck thee undeservedly,
Let my revenge on her that Injured thee.
Make less a fault which I intended not,
And let these dew drops wash away my spot,
It will not cleanse, O to what sacred flood,
Shall I resort to wash away this blood:
Amidst these Trees the holy Clorin. dwells,
In a low Cabin, of cut boughs and heals,
All wounds, to her I will myself a dress,
And my rash faults repentantly confess:
Perhaps she'll find a means by Art or prayer,
To make my hand with chaste blood stained, fair
That done not far hence underneath some tree,
I'll have a little Cabin built since she,
Whom I adore is dead, there will I give,
myself to strictness and like Clorin live.
Shepherd once more your blood is stayed,
Take example by this maid,
Who is healed ere you be pure,
so hard it is lewd lust to cure,
Take heed then how you turn your eyes
On these other lust fully,
And shepherdess take heed least you,
Move his willing eye thereto,
Let no wring, nor pinch, nor smile
Of yours, his weaker sense beguile,
Is your love yet true and chaste,
And for ever so to last.
I have forgot all vain desires,
All looser thoughts, ill tempered fires,
True love I find a pleasant fume,
Whose moderate heat can near consume.
And I a new fire feel in me,
Whose base end is not quenched to be.
join your hands with modest touch,
And for ever keep you such.
Yond is her cabin, thus far off i'll stand,
And call her forth, for my unhallowed hand,
I dare not bring so near yon sacred place,
Clorin come forth and do a timely grace,
To a poor swain,
What art thou that dost call?
Clorin is ready to do good to all.
Come near.
I dare not. Clorin. Satire, see
Who it is that calls on me.
there's a hand some swain doth stand,
Stretching out a bloody hand.
Come Clorin bring thy holy waters clear,
To wash my hand.
What wonders have been here
tonight stretch forth thy hand young swain,
Wash and rub it whilst I rain
Holy water.
Still you power,
But my hand will never scour.
Satire bring him to the bower
we will try the sovereign power
Of other waters.
Mortal
'tis the blood of maiden pure
That stains he so.
whatever thou be.
Be'st thou her sprite, or some divinity,
That in her shape thinks good to walk this grove,
Pardon poor Perigot
I am thy love.
Thy Amoret. for evermore thy love:
Stick once more on my naked breast, I'll prove
As constant still, O canst thou love me yet,
How soon could I my former griefs forget.
So over great with joy, that you live now
I am, that no desire of knowing how
doth seize me; hast thou still power to forgive,
Whilst thou hast power to love, or I to live,
More welcome now then hadst thou never gone
A stray from me.
And when thou lov'st alone
And not I, death or some lingering pain
That's worse, light on me.
Now your stain
Perhaps will cleanse, thee once again
See the blood that erst did stay,
With the water drops away:
All the powers again are pleased,
And with this new knot are appeased:
join your hands, and rise together,
Pan be blessed that brought you hither.
Go back again whate'er thou art: unless
Smooth maiden thoughts possess thee, do not press
This hallowed ground, go Satire take his hand,
And give him present trial.
Mortal stand.
Till by fire, I have made known
Whether thou be such a one,
That mayst freely tread this place,
Hold thy hand up, never was,
More untainted flesh then this,
Fairest he is fall of bliss.
Then boldly speak why dost thou seek this place,
First honoured virgin to behold thy face,
Where all good dwells, that is, next for to try
The truth of late report, was given to me:
Those shepherds that have met with foul mischance,
Through much neglect, and more ill governance,
Whether the wounds they have may yet endure
The open air, or stay a longer cure,
And lastly what the doom may be, shall light
Upon those guilty wretches, through whose spite
All this confusion full. For to this place,
Thou holy maiden have I brought the race,
Of these offenders, who have freely told,
Both why, and by what means, they gave this bold
Attempt upon their live.
Fume all the ground,
And sprinkle holy water, for unsound
And foul Infection gins to fill the Air
It gathers yet more strongly,
Of Censors filled with frankincense and myrrh.
Together with cold Camphire, quickly stir.
The gentle Satire, for the place begins
To sweat and labour, with the abhorred sins
Of those offenders, let them not come nigh,
For full of itching flame and leprosy,
Their very souls are, that the ground goes back,
And shrinks to feel the sullen weight of black
And so unheard of venom, high thee fast,
Thou holy man, and banish from the chaste,
These manlike monsters, let them never more
Be known upon thes downs, but long before,
The next suns rising, put them from the sight,
And memory of every honest wight.
Be quick in expedition, lest the sores
Of these weak patients, break into new gores
My dear dear Amoret, how happy are,
Those blessed paires, in whom a little lrr
Hath bred an everlasting love, to strong
For time or steel, or envy to do wrong,
How do you feel your hurts, a lass poor heart
How much I was abused, give me the smart
For it is justly mine.
I do believe.
It is enough dear friend, leave off to grieve,
And let us once more in despite of ill,
Give hands, and hearts again
with better will,
Than ere I went to find, in hottest day
Cool Christ all of the fountain, to allay
My eager thirst, may this band never break,
Hear us o heaven.
Be constant.
Else Pan wreak
With double vengeance, my disloyalty.
Let me not dare to know the company
Of men, or any more behold those eyes.
Thus shepherd with a kiss all envy dies.
Bright Maid, I have performed your will, the swain
In whom such heat, and black rebellion's reign
Hath undergone your sentence:
Only the maid I have reserved, whose face
shows much amendment, many a tear doth fall
In sorrow of her fault, great fair recall
Your heavy doom, in hope of better days
Which I dare promise: once again, upraise
her heavy Spirit, that near drowned lies
In self consuming care that never dies.
I am content to pardon: call her in,
The air grows cool again, and doth begin
To purge itself, how bright the day doth show
After this stormy cloud, go Satire go,
And with this taper boldly try her hand.
If she be pure and good, and firmly stand
to be so still: we have performed a work
worthy the gods themselves
Come forward Maiden, do not lurk
Nor hide your face with grief & shame,
Now or never get a name,
That may raise thee, and recure,
All thy life that was impure,
Hold your hand unto the flame,
If thou be'st a perfect dame:
Or hast truly vowed to mend,
This pale fire will be thy friend.
See the Taper hurts her not,
Go thy ways let never spot,
Henceforth cease upon thy blood.
Thank the Gods and still be good.
Young shepherdess now, ye are brought again
To virgin state, be so, and so remain
To thy last day, unless the faithful love
Of some good shepherd force thee to remove,
Then labour to be true to him, and live
As such a one, that ever strives to give
A blessed memory to after Time:
Be famous for your good, not for your crime.
Now holy man, I offer up again
These patients full of health, and free from pain
Keep them, from after ills, be ever near
Unto their actions: teach them how to clear,
The tedious way they pass though, from suspect
Keep them from wrong in others, or neglect
Of duty in themselves, correct the blood,
With thrifty bits and labour, let the flood,
Or the next neighbouring spring give remedy
To greedy thirst, and travail, not the tree
That hangs with wanton clusters, let not wine
Unless in sacrifice or rights divine,
Be ever known of shepherds, have a care,
Thou man of holy life, Now do not spare,
Their faults through much remissness, not forget,
To cherish him, whose many pains and sweat,
Hath given increase, and added to the downs.
Sort all your Shepherds from the lazy clowns:
That feed their heifers in the budded Brooms,
Teach the young maidens strictness that the grooms
May ever fear to tempt their blowing youth,
Banish all complement but single truth.
From every tongue, and every shepherds heart,
Let them use persuading, but no Art:
Thus holy Priest, I wish to thee and these,
All the best goods and comforts that may please,
And all those blessings Heaven did ever give,
we pray upon this Bower may ever live.
Kneel every Shepherd, whilst with powerful hand,
I bless you after labours, and the Land.
You feed your flocks upon Great Pan defend you.
From misfortune and amend you,
Keep you from those dangers still,
That are followed by your will:
Give ye means to know at length,
All your Riches all your strength.
Cannot keep your foot from falling,
To lewd lust, that still is calling,
At your cottage, till his power,
Bring again that golden hour:
Of peace and rest, to every soul.
May his care of you control,
All diseases, sores or pain,
That in after time may reign,
Either in your flocks or you,
Give ye all affections new.
New desires and tempers new,
That ye may be ever true.
Now rise and go, and as ye pass away,
Sing to the God of sheep, that happy lay:
That honest Dorus taught ye, Dorus he,
That was the soul and God of melody.
All ye Woods, and Trees, and Bowers,
All ye virtues, and ye powers:
That inhabit in the lakes,
In the pleasant springs or brakes.
Move your feet,
to our sound:
Whilst we greet,
all this ground.
With his honour and his name.
That defends our flocks from blame.
He is great, and he is just,
He is ever good and must:
Thus be honoured, Daffodils,
Roses, Pinks, and loved lilies.
Let us fling,
Whilst we sing,
Ever holy,
Ever holy.
Ever honoured, ever young,
Thus great Pan is ever sung.
Thou divinest, fairest, brightest,
Thou most powerful maid, and whitest.
Thou most virtuous, and most blessed,
Eyes of Stars and Golden Tressed,
Like Apollo, tell me sweetest,
What new service now is meetest.
For thee Satire shall I stray,
In the middle Air and stay,
Thy sailing Rack or nimbly take,
Hold by the Moon, and gently make.
Suit to the pale Queen of the night,
For a Beam to give thee light,
Shall I dive into the Sea,
And bring the coral making way,
Through the rising waves that fall,
In snowy fleeces, dearest shall,
I catch the wanton fawns, or flies,
Whose woven wings the Summer dies,
For many colours get thee fruit,
Or steal from Heaven old Orpheus' Lute
All these I venture for and more,
To do her service, all these Woods adore
No other Service Satire but thy watch,
About these Thicks least harmless people catch,
Mischief or sad mischance.
Holy virgin, I will dance,
Round about these woods as quick,
As the breaking light, and prick,
Down the lawns, and down the vales,
Faster than the Windmill sails.
So I take my leave and pray,
All the comforts of the day:
Such as Phoebus' heat doth send,
On the Earth may still be friend,
Thee and this Arbour.
And to thee,
All thy master's love be free.
The Pastoral of the faithful Shepherdess.