Nay, I will taste of other assays
And space our dame for holy days
So that for very need she must use her feat
With other of her house, and such as she can get,
Yet is she not much to blame
Though she increase her husbands name
Such children ●o bring as now ye see me
Tall men as I am unworthy though I be.
Thou speakest like a Lorell full large & full lewdly
And not like a child gotten of true matrimony
And yet though thy person induce no likelihood
That in thee should be any manhood
Yet beside that thou seemest of manhood frail
Because so abused is thy light apparel.
Apparel, good sir, what fault is that
Though grey be her cote why blame ye the wild cat
Why should ye him dame of nature frail
Though as wise as ye would were a Fox tail
Or a cote after the comen usage
Or have by nature a mad visage
These be no witness for justice to dyserne
Nor certain knowledge of nature to learn
And christ taught you sir how ye should judge men
Sayenge Nolite judicare secundum faciem.
And yet in nature better knowledge should be
Then is in apparel ye know perdie.
O yet in apparel is great abusion
If it be framed without discretion
For in apparel there may a great token be
Of frailness, of pride, and instabylytie,
If comen assize therein use no measure
For then is apparel a wanton foolish pleasure
And folly, best meed is of presumption
When nature or reason used resumption,
And therefore Chryst taught a great wise prose
saying Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos.
Yet with the same text I pray you wipe your nose
He said not Ex vestibus eorum cognoscetis eos.
Yet friends I pray you once again
To seat your travice that breeds disdain
And heartily both I do you pray
That both your friendships have I may.
Sir as for mine ye shall not miss
But this gentleman I think will go piss.
Nay sir Albyon I will not draw back
If that of me ye have lack,
So that I were in perfit surety
That this man here should manhood be.
Now Christ'S benedycyte
How Albion and justice hath forgot me
Because of me they had no exercise
Of long time by any enterprise
Wherefore sithen ye can not know me by experience
I wot not how ye should know me but by my credence
Therefore by my troth & by my honesty
Believe me, for manhood truly I am he.
Then by your oath I am content
To have your friendship with good assent
And justice I pray you to do the same.
Sir if manhood be his name
As he hath sworn I would be glad
That his friendship also I had.
Then justice I pray you both
Let me knit you both upon his oath.
Now friends I trust we be all three
And with this knot I pray you contented to be
Sir ye ought to be contented best of all
Where justice is treited with due equity
And where no favour nor meed should be
And when reason hath tried there every deal
That such an act were good for the comen weal
If therein any loss may be
To the disadvantage of Principaltie
Such an act loseth all his suit
With a little indoysing of reason astute
And if it touch the Lords spiritual
Or be disadvantage to the Lords temporal
Far well, go bet, this bill may keep
As well as through the parliament creep
And if that Merchants be moved with all
Or any multitude of the comen hall
This is not for us say they than
This bill is nought but for to wipe a pan
And this is all your new equity
And for all your message, yet thus will it be.
Alas if this may not reform be
I shall never be sure of prosperity.
Ye and what followeth hereof master Albion
To your person universal derision
Why to me derision.
For all other strange nations
They will rail on you with open proclamations
saying whosoever do as he dose
Is halfe a man and half a wild goose.
Why half a man and half a wild goose.
For with high reason they say ye can dispute
And try out perils with labourous suit
And eke the treasure for the comen vail
As far as wit or reason can assail
But when all is done and your statute made
Then forth ye go in a wise trade
To bring it all to good conclusion
And put it never in execution
Then speak they further in steed of a mock
They have made a statute like a woodkoeke
That hath but one eye and the other blind
And it will turn with every wind
And for because ye study but for the beginning
And never provide for a sure ending
beginning like a man ye take great assay
At last like a wild goose even but to fly away.
Well if this be true it is more pity
Yet let us endeavour both ye and I
To taste our message that it were done
To help here of some reformation.
Ye that to do I pray you both
And to you two I promise by oath
I shall me endeavour with the commonalty
Their hole allegiance to keep in unity.
Then God be your speed for I will forth my way
And I will after god guide us that best may.
And I will tarry no longer while
But as I see you over the style.
Now here beginneth a game iwis
For manhood they ween my name is
But trust me sirs if I should not lie
My name is called Injury
Which name to hide I thought it polysie
And turn it to manhood, and wot ye why?
It is a part of our new experience
When I against right make stiff defence
That justice in his seat may not be enstabled
Then am I Injury manhood called
O than of me craketh every man
How like a Lord this fellow steer can
The law to defend without a fall
For all their pleading in Westminster hall,
Or say what they will and babble there
Yet maintenance and I will keep the cheer
If it come once to the country
Then as I will so shall it be
A very cause sirs why I hide my name
Was, they should not suspect my fame
Because I would spy all their intent
To change their purpose after my judgement
And so will I do, for this is their pretence
By mean of justice to bring in experience
That peace should continue the people among
And so by that mean to banish me wrong
But trust me sirs I will none of that
But rather by their faces I will them scrat
And me to maintain in this opinion
I have an old mate called Dyvytion
That shallbe of my counsel in this case
Which I trust will not turn his face
Till Peace be driven clean from Albyon
And then let justice and me alone
For I trust or he and I have done
He shall go whistle in a mary bone
As for any rightful judgement
That after this shall follow his intent
And now sirs will I go my way
My fellow to seek, find him if I may.
Have in the ruske
Out of the busk
A lusty Captain,
A Boor with a tusk
A sturdy Luske
Any battle to detain
A stalyon stout
To bear it out
In every where,
And never to Lout
For a knaves clout
though my head it bear.
As stiff as a stake
Battle to make
As never afeard.
I can awake
These knaves and take
Them fast by the beard.
For Peace is bend
Nor 〈◊〉 intent
To live at ease,
Shall not prevent
Let of my judgement
To 〈◊〉 in disease.
Such can I have
To conjure a knave
Out of his skin,
Though justice rave
To hang or save
Fie on him whoreson.
Marry fie on him whoreson
What art thou mad again.
What 〈◊〉 old friend Injury
How were other hanged and 〈…〉
By god because I took delay▪
For lack of thee to be mine 〈…〉.
What whoreson wouldest thou have me
Be trussed up in stead of thee.
Ye by god, but even for a say
That I might learn of you to know the play.
To play whoreson, what menist thou by that
By god me thought even now ye were in a snare
Or else an hunting to catch an bare
But hark I say, do together and spell
Beware ever among of the frery clerks bell.
It is doubtful to me all that thou speakest
I pray thee spell it thyself & tell me what thou meanest
But wouldest thou needs so fain know it
I tell thee with Albion and justice I am knit
Therefore it were wisdom for thee
To beware what thou sayest before me
What whoreson then thou hast forsaken me.
Nay I had liefer ye were skinned all three
For I have turned the wrong side of my hood
And told them my name was manhood
And now by god in any wise
For both our eases I must have thine advise.
What hast thou now changed thine old copy
To justice and Albyon to be a comen hoby,
Or art thou a feared of thy old name
That in every place is had in fame
And is supported in such suffrentie
From the lowest unto the highest degree.
Nay by god I was not afeard
It was but for to claw their beard
Or rub it of all that they meant
That I might know all their intent
Whereof the matter is to long to tell
For the time that we did mell
But shortly to show thee for a conclusion
Their mind is to bring us both to confusion.
I pray thee by what mean.
Albyon hath sent justice to Pryncypaltie
To have assistance, and me to suffreyntie
Of the Lords temporal to have their aid
That justice in no wise should be delayed.
And this thou knowest well enough pardie
Thus they mean to destroy thee and me
And as for justice forth is gone
Speed as he can, but I tarried alone
And yet I would no messenger be
Till I had the advice of thee
Therefore how sayest thou now in this case
We shall not be idle to play at this base.
Tush as for this I care not a Pudding prick
For we two will go thorough thine and thick
Maygresse their heads every one
Though they be as hard as rock or stone
I pray thee tell me how
first I myself will enterprise
That peace shall have no exersyse
Between the commons and Pryncypalitie
Nor between lords spiritual & lords of the temporalty
Or thou go any further tell me by what mean
I have two spies of great exercise
The one is called double device
Him will I send I may tell thee
Unto the court to principality,
And him will I charge that with his provision
principality and the commons to set at division
The second spy is called old debate
A singular fellow with a bald pate
Him will I send to the lords spiritual
To cause them to wrangle with the lords temporal.
What shall they use in their device.
The one to principality shall surmise
That the commons hearts do arise
Against him, when that he doth ask
In time of need, our money for task,
His heart to move with such unkindness.
Then the same spy shall use like doubleness
And go to the commons and to them tell
That Principality with equtie doth rebel
More to his lucre in every deal
applying his affection then to the comen weal
And how that he of negligence
Doth not apply for their defence,
Neither by Sea nor by land
Neither by high ways, neither by strand
But thieves and raveners and murders eke
Daily true men they pursue and seek
And that his laws indifferently
Be not used, but maintenance and brybary
Is suffered alone without reformation
That the poor commons is in altercation
Of this matter and wot not what to say
Bringing them in opinion that they ought not to pay
To pryncypalytie their duty of very desert
Except like duty be ministered on his part.
I make god a vow this is a sovereign bait
To bring our purpose to a narrow straight
But what shall the other spy then do
A fellowship tell me that also.
Marry he shall inform the lords temporal
That the spiritual men would rule all
And say it were shame to them by the rood
That been descended from the noble blood
To suffer any other of such power to be
To have the governance about principality
sithen they inheritors are borne to be
Of the high counsel by blood and dignity
Which medicine I trow will not lyghlie start
Till it hath tickled them all by the heart
Then shall the same spy taste the other part
And turn to them the wrong side of the cart
And say that god of his high great grace
To them hath given good fortune and space
By learning sadness and gravity
And for their due reward in honour to be
And bear to them boldly in hand
That they ought by reason to rule this land
Because the power of temporalty
Hath no knowledge in cunning perdie
Neither in youth will labour the passage
Of pain for virtue to rule in age
So that if they rulers would be
They know not how, for in suffycientie
Thus will I divide by this proper train
That peace amongst them shall not rain.
Marry this is a cast of a new horse comb
To rub any on the navel that hath a tickle womb
This gear will work after my fantasy
To make of an old grudge a new frenzy
And this openeth the gate even for me
That both the one and the other degree
Shall wrestle with themself in such afflictions
That every one shall disdain at other jurisdictions
What wilt thou do them let me here thy cast
This gentle seed will I sow at the last
When Peace by thee is in perplexity
And wore not in what part quiet to be
Then justice must ever be in doubt
Which part at need shall bear him out
So that for my part he shall stand still
While I run at large and have all my will.
But to what conclusion wilt thou bring it then
Why knowest not thou, then hark me man
This justice is a fellow of a far cast
And driveth such drifts to rule all at the last
And Peace is his brother of one degree
Which hath a fair daughter that is called plenty
And Albion as long as rest him treats
He loveth fair flesh of all meats
And it is a comen saying that justice Peace & he
Will conclude a marriage with fair dame plenty
And then will Albyon that old soot
With rest and peace so on her do't
That than she by her and her friends
Shall sail in storms at all winds.
By god's bread thou sayest troth
But this to help we must not use sloth.
No, and therefore hark me to an end
Thou and I shall this matter defend
For thou shalt to Albyon a messenger be
And say thou were present when principality
With justice fell at great debate
When that his message he did delate
From Albion, & tell him that principality in no wise
His will with equity will grant to exercise
But that the law should be out after his liking
And every writ after his entyteling
And that his will who ever list to strife
Should be the best part for his prerogative
And then they both suddenly upon this
In great rages departed wis
Wherefore justice said I am in such confusion
That I am ashamed to turn again to Albyon
And when this message thou hast done soberly
Tell him thy name is Polysy.
What the devil meanest thou by that
Should I decemble from a wild cat
That ever before this have used patching
And now to play the wise man & leave scratching.
Why whoreson it is a point of high madness
For a time to dissemble sadness,
And though thou be all ready as mad as a heart
Yet will I make thee madder than thou art
Well say on then.
Marry then even thus I say
When that to Albion thou hast taken thy way
And done thy message as I thee bade
He will for a while be pensive and sad
And he will ask thine advise
Then must thou dissemble thyself wise.
I make god a vow that is unpossible
That I and wisdom should knit in one quyneble
Or in my brain to print such abusion
That wisdom and I should be in one conclusion
For when I was young my mother charged me
And said beware wit son though thou never thee.
I am not disposed to change much your live
But here me speak an end though you never thrive
Well say on then and tell me what counsel
I shall give Albion that may sound dwell
To both our profits that would I know.
Thou shalt teach him a wrong cross row
And tell him best it is after thine advise
With mirth and Prodigality him to exercise
And take of his own good while he may
Lest all at last be brybid away