GRacious Prince, and great Duke of Cornwall, I, the good Angel or Genius of Corinea, Queen to Brutus' noble Companion Corineus, the first of fair Britaynes Regions, and your own worthy Dukedom; in honour of this general rejoicing day, and to express the endeared affections of London's Lord Maior, his brethren the Aldermen, and all these worthy Citizens, Merchants that hold Commerce with me and the wide world, in our very best and richest commodities: do thus usher them the way, to applaud in this Triumph, and to let you know their willing readiness, by all means possible to love and honour you.
The shortness of time, hath been no mean bridle to their zealous forwardness, which (else) would have appeared in more flowing and abundant manner. Nevertheless, out of this little limitation, let me humbly entreat you to accept their boundless love, which is like to Jacob's Ladder, reaching from Earth to Heaven. Whereon, their hourly, holy and devout desires (like to so many blessed Angels) are continually ascending and descending: For their Royal Sovereign your Father, his Queen your peerless Mother, your sacred self, and the rest of their illustrious race. That unpolluted souls may be ever about ye, false hearts or foul hands never to come near ye; but the Host of Heaven, always to defend ye.
Royal PRINCE of Wales, in this figure of Musical Amphion upon his Dolphin, we personate the Character of Wales your Principality. Who having with my fair Sister Corinea thus far attended you, on behalf of London's Lord Major, his worthy brethren, and this goodly Fleet of well affected Citizens; we are all now forced to an unwilling departure.
See how our Streamers hang the head, as loath to leave you: Our Bardges lag and seem lumpish, as grieving to forego you: Our trumpets and other Musics appear tongueless, the word of farewell is so offensive to them. And except you put spirit into them all, with a gracious acceptance of this their love and loyalty: the bosom of fair Thames shrinks, and they fear swallowing.
But the Sun of trueborn Majesty shines in your bright eye, and your more serious affairs calling you hence, speaks both your love to them, and liking of their humble duty at their dismission.
Home again then fair Fleet, you have brought a Royal freight to landing, such a burden as hath made the River not meanly proud to bear. And since we must needs part, in our loudest voice of Drum, trumpets and ordinance, be this our last accent: Long live our Prince of Wales, the Royal Henry.