YOuth of the spring, mild Zephyrus blow fair,
And breathe the joyful air,
Which Tethys' wishes may attend this day,
Who comes herself to pay
The vows her heart presents,
To these fair compliments.
Breath out new flowers, which yet were never known
Unto the Spring, nor blown
Before this time, to beautify the earth,
And as this day gives birth
Unto new types of State,
So let it bliss create.
Bear Tethys' message to the Ocean King,
Say how she joys to bring
Delight unto his islands and his Seas,
And tell Meliades
The offspring of his bood,
How she applauds his good.
FRom that intelligence which moves the Sphere
Of circling waves (the mighty Tethys, Queen
Of Nymphs and rivers, who will strait appear,
And in a human Character be seen)
We have in charge to say, that even as Seas
And lands, are graced by men of worth and might,
So they return their favours; and in these
Exalting of the good seem to delight.
Which she, in glory, lately visiting
The sweet, and pleasant Shores of Cambria, found
By an unusual, and most forward Spring
Of comfort, wherewith all things did abound,
For joy of the investiture at hand
Of their new Prince, whose Rites, with acts renowned
Were here to be solemnized on this Strand:
And therefore straight resolves t'adorn the day
With her al-gracing presence, and the train,
Of some choice Nymphs she pleased to call away
From several Rivers which they entertain.
And first the lovely Nymph of stately Thames,
(The darling of the Ocean) summoned is:
Then those of Trent and Aruns graceful streams,
Then Darwent next with clear-waved worthiness.
The beauteous Nymph of Chrystall-streaming Lee
Gives next attendance: Then the Nymph of Air
With modest motion makes her sweet repair.
The Nymph of Severne follows in degree,
With ample streams of grace: and next to her
The cheerful Nymph of Rother doth appaere
With comely Medway, th'ornament of Kent,
And then four goodly Nymphs that beautify
Camber's fair shores, and all that Continent
The graces of clear Vske, Olwy, Dulesse, Wy●
All these within the goodly spacious Bay
Of manifold inharboring Milford meet,
The happy Port of Union, which gave way
To that great Heros HENRY, and his fleet,
To make the blessed conjunction that beg at
A greater, and more glorious far than that.
From hence she sends her dear loved Zephyrus;
To breath out her affection and her zeal
To you great Monarch of Oceanus,
And to present this Trident as the seal
And ensign of her love and of your right.
And therewithal she wills him, greet the Lord
And Prince of th' Isles (the hope and the delight,
Of all the Northern Nations) with this sword
Which she unto Astraea sacred found,
And not to be unsheathed but on just ground.
Herewith, says she, deliver him from me
This scarf, the zone of love and Amity,
Tingird the same; wherein he may survey,
Infigured all the spacious Empery
That he is borne unto another day.
Which, tell him, will be world enough to yield
All works of glory ever can be wrought.
Let him not pass the circle of that field,
But think Alcides' pillars are the knot
For there will be within the large extent
Of these my waves, and watery Government
More treasure, and more certain riches got
Then all the Indies to Iberus brought,
For Nereus will by industry unfold
A Chemic secret, and turn fish to gold.
This charge she gave, and looks ●ith such a cheer
As did her comfort and delight bewray,
Like clear Aurora when she doth appear
In brightest robes to make a glorious day.
WAs ever hour brought more delight
To mortal sight,
Then this, wherein fair Tethys daignes to show
Her, and her Nymphs a-row
In glory bright?
See how they bring their flowers,
From out their watery bowers,
To deck Apollo's Tree,
The tree of victory.
About whose verdant bows,
They Sacrifice their vows,
And wish an everlasting spring
Of glory, to the Oceans King.
IF joy had other figure
Then sounds, and words, and motion,
To intimate the measure,
And height of our devotion:
This day it had been showed
But what it can, it doth perform,
Since nature hath bestowed
No other letter,
To express it better,
Then in this form;
Our motions, sounds, and words,
Tuned to accords,
Must show the well-set parts,
Of our affections and our hearts,
ARe they shadows that we see?
And can shadows pleasure give?
Pleasure's only shadows be
Cast by bodies we conceive,
And are made the things we deem,
In those figures which they seem.
But these pleasures vanish fast,
Which by shadows are expressed
Pleasures are not, if they last,
In their passing, is their best.
Glory is most bright and gay
In a flash, and so away.
Feed apace then greedy eyes
On the wonder you behold.
Take it sudden as it flies
Though you take it not to hold:
When your eyes have done their part,
Thought must length it in the heart.
BEhold the Post of heaven, bright Mercury
Is sent to summon and recall again,
Imperial Tethys with her company,
Unto her watery Mansion in the main:
And shift those firmes, wherein her power did deign
T'invest herself and hers, and to restore
Them to themselves whose beauteous shapes they wore.
ANd now bright Star the Guidon of this state,
And you great Peers the ornaments of power
With all these glittering troops that have the fate,
To be spectators of this blessed hour.
Be pleased to sit a while, and you shall see
A transfirmation of far more delight
And apt drawn to nature, then can be
Described in an imaginary sight.
Fair branch of power, in whose sweet feature here
Mild Zephyrus a figure did present
Of youth and of the spring-time of the year
I summon you, and six of high descent
T attend on you (a● hopeful worthies borne
To shield the Honour and the clear Renown
Of Ladies) that you presently return
And bring back those, in whose fair shapes were shown
The late-seene Nymphs in figures of their own
Whom you shall find hard by within a grove
And Garden of the spring addressed to Ioue.
Pretulerim scriptor delirus inersque videri
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere & ringi.