THE Gods of Greece, whose deities I raised
Out of the earth, gave them divinity,
The attributes of Sacrifice and Prayer
Have given old Homer leave to view the world
And make his own presentment. I am he
That by my pen gave heaven to Iupiter,
Made Neptune's Trident calm, the curled waves,
Gave Aeolus Lordship o'er the warring winds;
Created black haired Pluto King of Ghosts,
And regent o'er the Kingdoms fixed below.
By me Mars wars, and fluent Mercury
Speaks from my tongue. I placed divine Apollo
Within the suns bright Chariot. I made Venus'
Goddess of Love, and to her winged son
Gave several arrows, tipped with Gold and lead.
What hath not Homer done, to make his name
Live to eternity? I was the man
That flourished in the worlds first infancy:
When it was young, and knew not how to speak,
I taught it speech, and understanding both
Even in the Cradle: Oh then suffer me,
You that are in the world's decrepit Age,
When it is near his universal grave,
To sing an old song; and in this Iron Age
Show you the state of the first golden world,
I was the muse's Patron, learning's spring,
And you shall once more hear blind Homer sing.
The old Uranus, son of the Air & Day
Is dead, and left behind him two brave sons,
Titan and Saturn.
Titan is the eldest,
And should succeed by the true right of birth.
But Saturn hath the hearts of all the people,
The kingdoms high applause, his mother's love,
The least of these are steps unto a crown.
But how will Titan bear him in these troubles,
Being by nature proud and insolent,
To see the younger seated in his throne,
And he to whom the true right appertains,
By birth, and law of Nations quite cast off?
That either power or steel must arbitrate:
Causes best friended have the best event.
Here Saturn comes.
Behold what nature scanted me in years,
And time, below my brother; your applause,
And general love, fully supplies me with:
And make me to his crown inheritable.
I choose it as my right by gift of heaven,
The people's suffrage, the dead king's bequest,
And your election, our fair mother Queen,
Against all these what can twelve moons of time,
Prevail with Titan to disherit us.
The Cretan people, with shrill acclamations
Pronounce thee sovereign o'er their lands and lives,
Let Titan storm, and threaten strange revenge,
We are resolved thy honour to maintain.
Titan, thy ruin shall attempt in vain
Our hearts adhere with Vesta's our late Queen,
According to our sovereign's late bequest,
To kneel to Saturn.
We accept your loves,
And we will strive by merit to exceed you.
In just requital of these favours done.
Arm Lords, I hear the voice
Of Titan storming at this strange election.
Descend proud upstart, tricked up in stolen weeds
Decked in usurped state, and borrowed honours,
Resign them to their owner, that's to me.
Titan keep off, I charge thee near me not,
Lest I thy bold presumption seal with blood.
A Crown's worth tugging for, & I will ha''t
Though in pursuit I dare my ominous Fate.
Down with the usurper.
Saturn here shall stand,
immovable; upheld by Vesta's hand.
Am I not eldest?
ay but youngest in brain.
Saturn the crown hath ceased, and he shall reign.
Am I a bastard, that my heritage
Is wrested from me by a younger birth?
Hath Vesta played th'adulteress with some stranger?
If I be eldest from Uranus loins,
Your maiden Issue, why am I debarred
The law of Nations? am I Vesta's son?
Why doth not Vesta then appear a mother?
Was younger Saturn bedded in your womb,
Nearer your heart than I, that he's affected
And I despised? If none of these, then grant me,
What justice wils, my interest in the Crown:
Or if you make me outcast, if my Mother
For get the love she owes, I shall abandon
The duty of a son. If Saturn prove
Unnatural, I'll be no more a brother,
But maugre all that have my right withstood,
Revenge my wrongs, & make my way through blood.
Titan we both acknowledge thee a brother,
And Vesta's son, which we'll express in love,
But since for many virtues growing in me
That have no life in you, the Queen, the Peers,
And all the people, with loud suffrages,
Have shrilled their Auees high above the clouds,
And styled me King, we should forget their loves
Not to maintain their strange election.
Advise you therefore, since this bold adventure
Is much above your strength, to arm yourself,
In search of future honours with our love,
For what can Titan do against a people?
Saturn adviseth well, list to his counsel.
If my own land prove thus unnatural,
I'll purchase foreign aid.
Rather compound.
Let Titan make demand of any thing
Saving our Crown, he shall enjoy it freely.
Titan, your brother offers royally,
Accept his love.
To lose a Crown includes
The loss of all things. What should I demand?
This grant him Saturn, since thy insinuation
Hath wrought him quite out of the Cretans hearts,
That Titan's warlike issue may succeed thee.
Lycaon well advised, he during life,
Shall reign in peace, no interruption,
Shall pass from Titan to disturb his reign,
So to our Giant race thou wilt assure
The crown as due by right inheritance.
To cut off all hostile effusion
Of human blood, which by our difference
Must needs be spilled upon the barren earth,
we'll swear to this accord.
Conditioned thus,
That to deprive all future enmity
In our succeeding Issue, thy male children
Thou in their Cradle strangle.
Kill my sons?
Or swear to this, or all our warlike race,
Dispersed in several Kingdoms I'll assemble,
To conquer thee, and from thy ambitious head,
Tear that usurped Crown.
Titan, thy friendship
we'll buy with our own blood, all our male children,
(If we hereafter shall have any borne)
Shall perish in their births, to this we swear,
As we are King and Saturn.
I the like,
As I am Titan, and Uranus' son:
This league confirmed, all my Allies I'll gather
Search foreign climes, in which I'll plant my kin,
Scorning a seat here where I am despised,
To live a subject to a younger birth.
Nor bow to that which is my own by due.
Saturn farewell, I'll leave thee to thy state,
Whilst I in foreign Kingdoms search my Fate.
Think on thy oath.
First stay with us and feast,
Titan this day shall be King Saturn's guest.
There is no dallying, you must come with all speed,
For Madam Sibilla is grown a great woman.
That is without question, for she is now a Queen.
Nay, she is greater than many Queens are: for though you may think she is with ancient folks: yet I can assure you she is with child, you may imagine, being now but morning she is new risen, yet 'tis thought that ere noon she will be brought a-bed. I never heard she was committed to prison: yet 'tis looked every hour when she shall be delivered, and therefore Nurse I was sent to you in all haste.
Is she so near her time?
Yes: and yet 'tis thought she will notwithstanding hold out, because she is groaning.
Your reason?
Because you know the proverb: A grunting horse, and a groaning wife never deceive their Master: say, will you make haste Nurse?
What's the best news abroad?
The best news abroad is, that the Queen is likely to keep at home: and is it not strange, that half an hours being abroad should make a woman have a months mind to keep in. But the worst news is, that if the King have a young Prince, he is tide to kill it by oath: but if his majesty went drunk to bed, and got a girl, she hath leave to live till she die, and die when she can live no longer.
That covenant was the most unnatural
That ever father made: one lovely boy
Hath felt the rigor of that strict decree,
And if this second likewise be a son,
There is no way but death.
I can tell you more news: the king hath sent to the Oracle to know whether my Lady be with child of a boy or a girl, and what their fortunes shall be: the Lord that went, is looked for every day to return with his answer: it is so Gossipped in the queen's chamber, I can tell you. O Nurse we have the bravest king, if thou knewest all.
Why I pray thee?
Let his virtues speak for himself: he hath taught his people to sow, to blow, to reap corn, and to scorn acorns with their heels, to bake and to brew: we that were wont to drink nothing but water, have the bravest liquour at Court as passeth. Besides, he hath devised a strange engine, called a Bow and Arrow, that a man may hold in hand, and kill a wild beast a great way off, and never come in danger of his clutches. I'll tell you a strange thing Nurse, last time the King went a hunting, he killed a bear, brought him home to be baked and eaten: A Gentlewoman of the Court, that said hungerly upon this pie, had such a rumbling and roaring in her guts, that her Entrails were all in a mutiny, and could not be appeased. No physic, would help her, what did the King but caused an excellent Mastiff to be knocked in the head, and dressed, gave it to the gentlewoman, of which when she had well eaten, the flesh of the Mastiff worried the bear in her belly, and ever since her guts have left wambling. But come, come, I was sent in haste, the Queen must needs speak with you.
You shall no more be lodged beneath the trees,
Nor chamber underneath the spreading Oaks:
Behold, I have devised you forms for tools,
To square out timber, and perform the Art
Of Architecture, yet unknown till now.
I'll draw you forms of Cities, Towns and Towers,
For use and strength, behold the models here.
Saturn's inventions are divine, not human,
A Godlike spirit hath inspired his reign.
See here a second Art of Husbandry,
To till the earth, to blow, to sow, to plant,
Devised by Saturn: here is gold refined
From Grosser metals, silver, brass, and tin,
With other minerals, extract from earth.
I likewise have found out to make your brooks,
Rivers and seas by practice Navigable.
Behold a form to make your Craers and Barks
To pass huge streams in safety, dangerless.
Saturn is a God.
The last, not least, this use of Archery,
The stringed, bow, and nimble-feathered-shaft:
By this you may command the flying fowl,
And reach her from on high: this serves for war,
To strike and wound thy foeman from afar.
What means this acclamation?
'tis thy people,
Divinest Saturn furnished with these uses,
(More than the Gods have lent them) by thy means.
Proclaim to thee a lasting deity.
And would have Saturn honoured as a God.
we'll study future profits for their use,
And in our fresh inventions prove divine.
But Gods are never touched with my suspires,
Passions and throbs: their Godlike Issue thrive,
Whilst I unmanlike must destroy my babes.
Oh my strict oath to Titan, which confounds
All my precedent honours: one sweet babe,
My youngest Ops hath felt the bloody knife,
And perished in his swathing: And my Queen
Swells with another Infant in her womb,
Ready to taste like rigor. Is that Lord
Returned from Delphos yet?
He is.
Admit him: now what doth the Oracle
Speak by the Delphian Priest.
Thus mighty Saturn.
After our Ceremonious Rites performed,
And Sacrifice ended with reverence,
A murmuring thunder hurried through the Temple.
When fell a pleasant shower, whose silver drops.
filled all the Altar with a roseate dew.
In this amazement, thus the Delphian God,
Spoke from the incensed Altar: Lord of Crete,
Thus say to Saturn: Sibyl his fair wife,
Is great with a young Prince of Noble hopes,
That shall his father's virtues much excel,
Cease on his Crown, and drive him down to Hell.
The Gods (if there be any 'bove ourself)
Envy our greatness, and of one that seeks
To bear himself 'bove man, makes me more wretched
Than the most slavish bruit. What shall my Sibyl
Bring me a son; that shall depose me then?
He shall not; I will cross the Deities,
I'll tomb th'usurper in his Infant blood,
I'll keep my oath; Prince Titan shall succeed,
Maugre the envious Gods, the brat shall bleed.
Way for the dowager Queen,
How fares our mother?
How is't with fair Sibilla, our dear Queen?
Your queen's delivered.
Of some female birth,
You Deities I beg: make me oh Heavens,
No more inhuman in the tragic slaughter
Of princely Infants, fill my decreed number
With Virgins, though in them I lose my name
And kingdom, either make her barren ever
Or else all generative power and appetite
Deprive me: lest my purple sin be styled
Many degrees 'bove murder. What's her birth?
she's the sad mother of a second son.
Be ever dumb, let everlasting silence
tongue-tie the world, all human voice henceforth,
Turn to confused, and undistinguished found,
Of barking Hounds, hoarse bears, & howling wolves,
To stop all rumour that may fill the world
With Saturn's tyrannies against his sons.
Ah, did but Saturn see you smiling babe,
he'd give it life, and break ten thousand oaths
Rather than suffer the sweet infant die,
His very look would beg a quick reprieve
Even of the tyrant Titan saw the uncle
With what a graceful look the Infant smiles,
he'd give it life, although he purchased it with loss of a great Kingdom.
Then spare the lad: I did offend too much
To kill the first, tell Sibyl he shall live,
I'll be no more so monstrous in my rigor,
Nor with the blood of Princes buy my Crown.
No more their Cradles shall be made their Tombs,
Nor their soft swaths become their winding sheets:
How can my subjects think I'll spare their lives,
That to my own can be so tyrannous?
Tell Sibyl he shall live.
Vesta will be that joyful messenger.
Stay, let me first reward the Oracle,
It told me Sibyl should produce a son,
That should his Father's virtues much excel,
Cease on my Crown, and drive me down to Hell.
Must I then give an Infant-traitor life,
To sting me to the heart? the brat shall bleed.
Sweet son.
Dear sovereign.
He that next replies,
Mother or friend, by Saturn's fury dies.
Away, fetch me his heart, brim me a bowl
With his warm blood. Tyrant, my vow I'll keep,
Life newly wakened, shall as newly sleep.
Worse than a bruit, for bruits preserve their own
Worse than the worst of things is Saturn grown.
Command the child to death.
Tyrant, I will.
tigers would save whom Saturn means to kill,
It is my son whom I command to death,
A Prince that may succeed me in my Throne,
And to posterity revive my name.
Call Vesta back, and bid her save the Babe.
I'll do't my Lord.
Yet stay: the lad to kill
I save my oath, and keep my kingdom still.
Post after her and charge them on their lives,
Send me the babe's blood in a cup of gold,
A present which I'll offer to the Gods.
Delay not, be't our mother, nay our wife,
Forfeits her own to save the infant's life.
I shall inform them so.
Is this a deity,
To be more wretched than the worst on earth,
To be deprived, that comfort of my issue,
Which even the basest of my land enjoy:
I'll henceforth for my rigor hate myself,
Pleasures despise, and joys abandon quite.
The purest blood that runs within my veins,
I'll dull with thick, and troubled melancholy,
I'll war with comfort, be at odds with solace,
And league with nothing but distemperature.
Henceforth my unkempt locks shall knot in curls,
Razor nor any edge shall kiss my cheek,
Until my chin appear a wilderness,
And make we wild in knowledge to the world.
Perpetual care shall cabin in my heart,
My tyranny I'll punish in myself,
And save the Gods that labour—
Saturn's disturbance to the world shall be,
That planet that infuseth melancholy.
Is not our mother Vesta yet returned,
That made herself th'unwilling messenger,
To bring the king news of his new-born son?
Madam, not yet.
Mother, of all that ever mothers were
Most wretched. kiss thy sweet babe ere he die,
That hath life only lent to suffer death.
Sweet Lad, I would thy father saw thee smile,
Thy beauty and thy pretty Infancy,
Would mollify his heart were't hewed from flint,
Or carved with Iron tools from the corsic rock,
Thou laughest to think thou must be killed in jest.
Oh if thou needs must die, I'll be thy murderess,
And kill thee with my kisses (pretty knave)
And canst thou laugh to see thy mother weep?
Or art thou in thy cheerful smiles so free
In scorn of thy rude father's tyranny?
Madam, the King hath slain his first borne son,
Whom had he seen alive, he'd not have given
For ten such Kingdoms as he now enjoys,
The death of such a fair and hopeful child,
Is full as much as Titan can demand.
He shall spare this sweet babe, I'll ransom thee
With my own life, the knife that pierceth thee,
Will wound thy mother's side, and I shall feel
The least sharp stroke from his offensive steel.
The mother Queen's returned.
How looks she Nurse?
Let her not speak, but yet a little longer
My hopes hold in suspense: oh me most wretched,
I read my Lords harsh answer in her eye,
Her very looks tell me the boy must die.
Say, must he? must he? kill me with that word,
Which will wound deeper than King Saturn's sword.
The boy must die.
Oh!
Look to the Queen, she faints.
Oh let's not lose the mother with her infant,
The loss of one's too much.
Oh where's my child?
I'll hide thee in my bed, my bosom, breast,
The murderer shall not find my little son,
Thou shalt not die, be not afraid my boy.
Go tell the King he's mine as well as his,
And I'll not kill my part: one he hath slain,
In which I had like interest: this I'll save,
And every second son keep from the grave.
forbear sir, for this place is privileged,
And only for free women.
Yet is the Kings command 'bove your decree,
And I must play th'intruder 'gainst my will.
The King upon your lives hath charged you,
To see that infant Lad immediately
Receive his death, he stays for his warm blood
To offer to the Gods. To think him slain,
Sad partner of your sorrows I remain.
Madam you hear the king doth threat our lives
Let's kill him then.
Is he inexorable?
Why should not I prove as severe a mother
As he a cruel father: since the King
Hath doomed him, I the Queen will do't myself,
Give me the fatal Engine of his wrath,
I'll play the horrid murderess for this once.
I'll kiss thee ere I kill thee: for my life,
The Lad so smiles, I cannot hold the knife.
Then give him me, I am his Grandmother,
And I will kill him gently: this sad office
Belongs to me, as to the next of kin.
For heavens sake when you kill him, hurt him not.
Come little knave, prepare your naked throat,
I have not heart to give thee many wounds,
My kindness is to take thy life at once. (Now.)
Alack my pretty Grandchild, smil'st thou still?
I have lust to kiss, but have no heart to kill.
You may be careless of the king's command,
But it concerns me, and I love my life
More than I do a suckling's, give him me,
I'll make him sure, a sharp weapon lend,
I'll quickly bring the youngster to his end.
Alack my pretty knave, 'twere more than sin,
With a sharp knife to touch thy tender skin.
On madam, he's so full of Angel grace
I cannot strike, he smiles so in my face.
I'll wink & strike, come once more reach him hither:
For die he must, so Saturn hath decreed,
'Las for a world I would not see him bleed.
Ne shall he do, but swear me secrecy,
The babe shall live, and we be dangerless,
O bless me with such happiness.
Attend me.
The king of Epire's daughters, two bright maids,
Owe me for many favours the like love,
These I dare trust, to them I'll send this babe
To be brought up, but not as Saturn's son.
Do but provide some trusty messenger,
My honour for his safety.
But by what means shall we delude the king,
A young Kid's heart, swimming in reeking blood
we'll send the King, and with such forged grief,
And counterfeit sorrow shadow it,
That this imposture never shall be found.
Oh twice my mother you bestow upon me,
A double life thus to preserve my boy.
Give me the child, I'll find a messenger,
Shall bear him safe to Melliseus' Court.
The blood and heart I'll presently provide,
T'appease the rage of Saturn.
First let's swear,
To keep this secret from King Saturn's ear.
We will, and if this plot pass undiscovered
By like device we will save all your sons.
About our tasks; you some choice friend to find,
I with my feigned tears the King to blind.
WHat cannot women's wits? they wonders can
When they intend to blind the eyes of man.
Oh lend me what old Homer wants, your eyes,
To see th'event of what these queen's device.
This passed so currant, that the third son borne,
Called Neptune, was by like device preserved,
And sent to Athens, where he lived unknown,
And had in time command upon the seas.
Pluto the youngest was sent to Tartary,
Where he in process a strange City built
And called it Hell, his subjects for their rapine,
Their spoils and theft, are Devils termed abroad.
Thus melancholy Saturn hath surviving
Three Noble sons in several confines placed
And yet himself thinks sonless: one fair daughter
Hight Iuno is his sole delight on earth.
Think kind spectators seventeen summers past,
Till these be grown to years, and Iupiter
Found in a cave by the great Epire King,
(where by his daughters he before was hid.)
Of him and of his fortunes we proceed,
My journey's long, and I my eyesight want.
Courteous spectators, left blind Homer stray,
Lend me your hands to guide me on your way.
After long war, and tedious differences,
Betwixt King Melliseus and ourself,
What crave the Epire Lords?
This King Lycaon,
Since truce and hostage hath ta'en up these broils,
And ended them in peaceful amity,
Since all the damage by the Epyrians done,
Is on our part abundantly made good:
We come Lycaon to demand the like
Of thee and of thy Kingdom, and for proof,
That all our malice is extinct and dead,
We bring thy hostage back, demanding ours.
Receive him Lords, a Banquet instantly,
You shall this day brave Epire feast with us,
And to your board your hostage shall be brought,
There to receive him freely, mean time sit,
And taste the royal welcomes of our Court.
Lycaon's just in keeping these conditions
So strictly with a reconciled foe.
But fair prince, tell me whence you are derived,
I never heard King Melliseus had
A Prince of your perfections?
This demand
Startles my blood, being borne I know not where,
Yet that I am of gentry at the least,
My Spirit prompts me, and my noble thoughts
Give me approved warrant, being an infant
Two beauteous Ladies found me in a cave,
Where from their voluntary charity,
Bees fed me with their honey, for that cause
The two bright Ladies called me Iupiter,
And to their Father Melliseus brought me,
My Foster-father, who hath trained my youth,
In feats of Arms, and military prowess,
And as an instance of his dearest love,
Hath honoured me with this late Embassy.
We are satisfied: Princes sit round and feast,
You are this day Lycaon's welcom'st guest.
This meat distastes me, doth Lycaon feast us
Like cannibals? feed us with human flesh?
Whence is this portent?
Feed Epyrians, eat,
Lycaon feasts you with no common meat.
But where's the Epire Lord we left as hostage?
Behold him here, he's at the table with you,
This is the Epire's head, and these his limbs,
Thinks Melliseus that Lycaon can
(Descended of the valiant Tytanoys)
Bury his hatred, and entomb his spleen
Without revenge? blood in these wars was shed,
And for that blood your hostage lost his head.
Bear wrong that list, & those can brook it best,
I was not borne to sufferance: thoughts mount high,
A King hath wronged me, and a King shall die.
Treason, treason.
Down with the tyrant, and that hateful crew,
And in their murderous breasts your blades imbrue.
Our guard.
Iupiter and the Epyriens beat off Lycaon and his followers.
Lycaon's fled, make good the palace gates,
And to th'amazed City bear these limbs,
So basely by the tyrant massacred.
Haply his subjects by our words prepared
May shake their bondage off, and make this war,
The happy means to rid a tyrant thence.
Bear in your left hands these dismembred limbs,
And in your right your swords, with which make way,
Courage brave Epire's, and a glorious day,
Lycaon's once more fled, we by the help
Of these his people, have confined him hence,
To whom belongs this Crown?
To Iupiter.
None shall protect our lives, but Iupiter.
A Iupiter, A Iupiter.
Nay we are far from such ambition, Lords,
Nor will we entertain such royalty.
Fair Prince, whom heaven hath sent by miracle,
To save us from the bloodiest tyrannies,
That ere were practised by a mortal prince,
We tender thee our fortunes: oh vouchsafe
To be our Lord, our Governor, and King,
Since all thy people jointly have agreed,
None of that tyrant's issue shall succeed.
A Iupiter, A Iupiter.
We not refuse the bounty of the Heavens
Expressed in these your voices; we accept
Your patronage, and 'gainst Lycaon's tyrannies
Henceforth protect you: but our conquest yet
Is all uncertain, second us dear subjects,
To assure our conquests: first we must provide
Our safety, ere attempt the helm to guide.
What mean these horrid & these shrill alarms
That fright the peaceful Court with hostile cries?
Fear and amazement hurry through each chamber;
Th'affrighted Lady's light the darkest rooms
With their bright beauties: whence (o whence ye Gods)
Are all you groans, cries, and inhuman sounds
Of blood and death: Lycaon, where is he?
Why in this dire and sad astonishment
Appears not he to comfort my sad fears,
And cheer me in this dull distemperature?
The Iron barred doors, & the suspected vaults,
The Barricadoed gates, and every room,
That boasted of his strength, is forced to obey
To our free entrance: nothing can withstand
Our opposite fury. Come, let's ransack further,
But stay, what strange dejected beauty's this
That on the sudden hath surprised my heart,
And made me sick with passion?
Hence away,
When we command, who dares presume to stay?
Bright Lady.
You affright me with your steel.
These weapons Lady come to grace your beauty
And these my arms shall be your sanctuary
From all offensive danger: cheer your sorrow,
Let your bright beauty shoot out of this cloud,
To search my heart, as it hath dazed my eyes.
Are you a Queen enthroned above the Elements,
Made of divine composure, or of earth,
Which I can scarce believe?
I am myself.
uncivil stranger, you are much to rude,
Into my private chamber to intrude:
Go call the King my father.
Are you their
Lycaon's daughter? (wonder without end,
That from a Fiend an Angel should descend.)
Oh Love, till now I never felt thy dart:
But now her painted eye hath pierced my heart.
Fair, can you love?
To be alone I can.
Women, fair Queen, are nothing without men:
You are but ciphers, empty rooms to fill,
And till men's figures come, uncounted still.
Shall I sweet Lady, add unto your grace,
And but for number-sake supply that place.
You're one too many, and of all the rest,
That bear men's figure, we can spare you best.
What are you sir?
We are Pelasge's King,
And these our subjects.
These did of late belong
To King Lycaon (Oh injurious wrong)
Oh suit your pity with your Angel-beauty,
And live Pelasge's Queen.
Give me a funeral garland to lament,
That best becomes my wretched discontent.
The sunshine of my smiles and jocund love,
Shall from your brows bright azure Elements,
Disperse all clouds: behold my crown is yours.
My sword, my conquest, I am of myself,
Nothing without your soft compassionate love?
For proof, ask what the heaven, earth, air, or sea
Can yield to men by power or orison,
And it is yours.
Sir, I shall prove your love.
Pray use me Lady.
You'll grant it me my Lord.
By all my honours, and by all the sweets
I hope for in your loves fruition,
Your will's your own.
You'll not revoke your word?
Be't to invest whom I did late degrade,
I'll do't for you, bright and divinest maid.
This only freedom to your captive give
That I a Nun and professed maid may live.
More cruel than the tyrant that begat thee,
Hadst thou asked love, gold, service, Empiry,
This sword had purchased for Calisto all.
Oh most unkind, in all this universe,
there's but one jewel that I value high,
And that (unkind) you will not let me buy:
To live a maid, what is't? 'tis to live nothing:
'Tis like a covetous man to hoard up treasure,
Barred from your own use, and from other's pleasure.
Oh think fair creature, that you had a mother,
One that bore you, that you might bear another:
Be you as she was, of an Infant glad,
Since you from her, have all things that she had.
Should all affect the strict life you desire,
The world itself should end when we expire:
Posterity is all, heavens number fill,
Which by your help may be increased still,
What is it when you lose your maidenhead,
But make your beauty live when you be dead
In your fair issue?
Tush, 'tis all in vain,
Dian I am now a servant of thy train.
Her order is mere heresy, her sect
A schism, 'mongst maids not worthy your respect.
Men were got to get; you born others to bear.
Wrong not the world so much: (nay sweet your ear)
This flower will wither, not being cropped in time,
Age is too late, then do not lose your prime.
Sport whilst you may, before your youth be passed.
Lose not this mould that may such fair ones cast,
Leave to the world your like for face and stature,
That the next age may praise your gifts of nature.
Calisto if you still grow thus precise,
In your strict vow, succeeding beauty dies.
I claim your oath, all love with men adieu,
Dianae's Cloister I will next pursue.
And there all beauty shall be kept in jail,
Which with my sword: ay with my life I'd bail:
What's that Diana?
She is the daughter of an ancient King,
That swayed the Attic sceptre, who being tempted
By many suitors, first began this vow:
And leaving Court betook her to the forests.
Her beauteous train are virgins of best rank,
Daughters of Kings, and Princes, all devoted
To abandon men, and choose virginity.
All these being first to her strict orders sworn,
Acknowledge her their Queen and Empress.
By all my hopes Calistoe's love to gain,
I'd wish myself one of Dianae's train.
Concerning your state business.
Well remembered.
Posts of these news shall be to Epire sent,
Of us, and of our new establishment.
Next for Calisto, (but of that no more.)
We must take firm possession of this state,
Our sword hath won, Lycaon lost so late.
Hail beauteous Dian, Queen of shades,
That dwells beneath these shadowy glades,
Mistress of all those beauteous maids,
That are by her allowed.
Virginity we all profess,
Abjure the worldly vain excess,
And will to Diam yield no less
Than we to her have vowed.
The Shepherds, satyrs, nymphs, and Fawns,
For thee will trip it o'er the lawns.
Come to the Forest let us go,
And trip it like the barren do,
The Fawns and satyrs still do so,
And freely thus they may do.
The Fairy's dance, and satyrs sing,
And on the grass tread many a ring,
And to their caves their venison bring,
And we will do as they do,
The Shepherds, etc.
Our food is honey from the Bees,
And mellow fruits that drop from trees,
In chase we climb the high degrees
Of every steepy mountain,
And when the weary day is past,
We at the evening hie us fast,
And after this our field repast,
We drink the pleasant fountain.
The Shepherds, etc.
These sports, our Fawns, our Satyrs and ourselves;
Make (fair Calisto) for your entertain:
Pan the great God of Shepherds, and the Nymphs
Of Meads and Fountains, that inhabit here,
All give you welcome, with their Rural sports,
Glad to behold a Princess of your birth
A happy Citizen of these Meads and Groves.
These Satyrs are our neighbours, and live here,
With whom we have confirmed a friendly league
And dwell in peace. Here is no City-craft.
Here's no Court-flattery simpleness and sooth
The harmless Chase, and strict Virginity
Is all our practice. You have read our orders,
And you have sworn to keep them,
Fair Calisto.
Speak, how esteem you them?
With reverence.
Great Queen, I am sequestered from the world,
Even in my soul hate man's society,
And all their lusts, suggestions, all Court-pleasures,
And City-curiosities are vain,
And with my finer temper ill agree,
That now have vowed sacred virginity.
We will not of your sorrows make recital
So lately suffered by the hand of chance:
We are from the world, & the blind Goddess Fortune
We dare to do her worst, as living here
Out of her reach: Us, she of force must spare,
They can lose nothing, that for nothing care.
Madam, devotion drew me to your service,
And I am now your handmaid.
where's Atlanta?
madam.
Is there no princess in our train,
As yet unmatched to be her Cabin-fellow,
And sleep by her?
Madam, we all are coupled
And twined in love, and hardly is there any
That will be won to change her bedfellow.
You must be single till the next arrive,
She that is next admitted of our train,
Must be her bed-companion, so 'tis lotted.
Come Fawns, and Nymphs, and satires, girt us round
Whilst we ascend our state, and here proclaim
A general hunting in Diana's name.
There I strid too wide. That step was too large for one that professeth the straight order: what a pitiful coil shall I have to counterfeit this woman, to lisp (forsooth) to simper and set my face like a sweet gentlewoman's made out of gingerbread? shall I venture or no? My face I fear not: for my beard being in the nonage durst never yet look a Barber in the face. And for my complexion, I have known as brown Lasses as myself have gone for currant. And for my stature, I am not yet of that Giant size, but I may pass for a bona Roba, a Ronnceual a Virago, or a good manly Lass. If they should put me to spin, or to sow, or any such Gentlewomanlike exercise, how should I excuse my bringing up? Tush, the hazard is nothing, compared with the value of the gain. Could I manage this business with Art, I should come to a hundred pretty sights in a year, as in the Summer when we come to flay our smocks, etc. I hope Diana doth not use to search her maids before she entertains them. But howsoever
Be my loss certain, and my profit none,
'tis for Calisto's love, and I will on.
we'll chase the Stag, and with our Beagles shrill,
The neighbouring Forests with loud echoes fill.
Is this a heaven terrestrial that contains
So many earthly Angels? (O amazement)
Diana with these beauties circled round,
Paled in with these bright pales, bears more state,
Than Gods have lent them by the power of fate.
I am destroyed,
Soft, what intruder's that?
Command her hither.
Hail divinest Queen,
I come to do thee service.
A manly Lass, a stout Virago,
Were all our train proportioned to thy size,
We need not fear men's subtle treacheries.
Thy birth and fortunes?
Madam, I derive
My birth from noble and high parentage:
Respect of your rare beauty, with my love
And zeal I still bear to a virgin's life,
Have drawn me to your service.
Welcome Lady. Her largeness pleaseth me, if she have courage proportioned with her limbs, she shall be Champion to all our wronged Ladies. You Atlanta, present her oath,
Madam you must be true
To bright Diana and her Virgin crew.
To bright Diana and her train I'll stand.
What can you do?
More than the best here can.
You shall vow chastity:
That's more than I can promise (well proceed
You never shall with hated man atone,
But lie with woman or else lie alone.
Make my oath strong, my protestation deep,
For this I vow by all the Gods to keep.
With Ladies you shall only sport and play,
And in their fellowship spend night and day.
I shall.
Consort with them at board and bed,
And swear no man shall have your maidenhead.
By all the powers both earthly and divine,
If ere I loos't, a woman shall have mine.
Now you're ours, you're welcome, kiss our hand,
You promise well, we like you, and will grace you.
And if with our election yours agree.
Calisto here your bedfellow shall be.
You Gods your will eternize me to your choice,
Madam I seal both with my soul and voice
Then hand each other and acquaint yourself
And now let us proceed in the pursuit,
Of our determined pastimes, dedicate
To the entertainment of these beauteous maids.
satires and fawns ring out your pleasing choir,
This done, our Bugles shall to heaven aspire.
Follow, pursue, the Stag hath took the Mountain,
Come let us climb the steep cliffs after him,
Let through the air your nimble javelins sing.
And our free spoils home with the evening bring.
Follow, follow, follow.
The nimble Ladies have outstripped us quite,
Unless we speed we shall not see him fall.
we are too slow in pursuit of our game;
Let's after tho; since they outstrip our eyes,
Run by their notes, that from their Bugles rise.
Hast gentle Lady, we shall lose our train,
And miss Dianai's pastime in the chase,
Hie then to stain our javelins guilded points
In blood of yond swift Stag, so hot pursued.
Will you keep pace with me?
I am tired already.
Nor have I yet been to these pastimes breathed,
Sweet shall we here repose ourselves a little?
And lose the honour to be first at fall?
Fear not, you shall come time enough to fall.
Either you must be so unkind to me,
As leave me to these deserts solitary,
Or stay till I have rest, for I am breathless
And cannot hold it out, behold a place
Remote, an Arbour seated naturally,
Trimmed by the hand of nature for a bower,
Screened by the shadowy leaves from the sun's eye.
Sweet will you sit, or on the verdure lie?
Rather than leave you, I will lose the sport
I'll find you pastime, fear not, Oh my Angel,
Whether wilt thou transport me, grant me measure.
Of joy, be free, I surfeit on this pleasure.
Come shall's lie down a little.
South I will.
I thirst in seas and cannot quaff my fill,
Behold before me a rich Table spread.
And yet poor I am forced to starve for bread:
We be alone, the Ladies far in chase,
And may I die an Eunuch by my vow,
If bright Calisto you escape me now.
Sweet bedfellow your hand, what have I felt,
Unless blanched snow, of substance not to melt?
You gripe too hard.
Good sooth I shall not rest
Until my head be pillowed on thy breast.
Lean on me then.
So shall I wrong mine eyes,
To leave your face to look upon the skies.
O how I love thee, come let's kiss and play.
How?
So a woman with a woman may.
I do not like this kissing.
Sweet sit still,
Lend me thy lips, that I may taste my fill.
You kiss too wanton.
Thy bosom lend
And by thy soft paps let my hand descend.
Nay fie what mean you?
prithee let me toy,
I would the Gods would shape thee to a boy,
Or me into a man.
A man, how then?
My sweet lie still, for we are far from men,
Lie down again. Your foot I oft have praised,
ay and your leg: (nay let your skirt be raised)
I'll measure for the wager of a fall,
Who hath the greatest great, or smallest small.
You are too wanton, and your hand too free.
You need not blush to let a woman see.
My bareness I have hid from sight of skies,
Therefore may bar it any ladies eyes.
methinks you should be fat, pray let me feel,
Oh God you tickle me.
Lend me your hand,
And freely taste me, note how I will stand,
I am not ticklish.
Lord how you woo,
We maids may wish much, but can nothing do.
I am weary of this toying.
Oh but I
In this Elysium could both live and die.
I can forbear no longer, though my rape
Be punished with my head, she shall not scape.
Say sweet I were a man.
Thus would I rise,
And fill the Dales and mountains with my cries.
A man! (Oh heaven) to gain Elysium's bliss,
I'd not be said that I a man should kiss.
Come, let's go wound the Stag.
Stay ere you go,
Here stands one ready that must strike a do.
And thou art she, I am Pelagius King,
That thus have singled thee, mine thou shalt be.
Gods, Angels, men, help all a maid to free.
Maugre them all thouart mine.
To do me right,
Help fingers, feet, nails, teeth, and all to fight.
Not they, nor all Dianae's Angel-train,
Were they in sight, this prize away should gain.
Young Iupiter doth force this beauteous maid,
And after would have made her his bright Queen.
But discontent she in the Forest stayed,
Loath of Diana's virgins to be seen.
Oft did she write, oft send, but all in vain,
She never will return to Court again.
Eight moons are filled & waned when she grows great
And young Ioues issue in her womb doth spring.
This day Diana doth her nymphs entreat,
Unto a solemn bathing, where they bring
deflowered Calisto, note how she would hide
That which time found, and great Diana spied.
Her crime thus found, she's banished from their crew,
And in a cave she childs a valiant son,
Called Archas, who doth noble deeds pursue,
And by Ioues gift Pelagia's seat hath won,
Which after by his worth, and glorious fame,
He hath trans-stiled Arcadia by his name.
But we return to Titan, who by spies
Hath learned, that Saturn hath kept sons alive.
He now assembles all his strange allies,
And for the crown of Crete intends to strive.
Of their success, and fortunes we proceed,
Where Titan's sons by youthful Ioue must bleed.
Now are we strong, our giant Issue grown,
Our sons in several kingdoms we have planted,
From whence they have derived us brave supplies,
From Sicily, and from th' Aegean sea,
That of our son Aegeon bears the name.
We have assembled infinites of men,
To avenge us on proud Saturn's perjury.
What I have said to Titan, I'll make good,
'tis rumoured Melliseus' Foster-child
He that expulsed me from Pelagia's Crown.
And in my high tribunal sits enthroned,
Is Saturn's son, and styled Iupiter,
(Besides my daughter by his lust deflowered)
On us the poor distressed Tytanoyes
He hath committed many outrages.
All which we'll punish on K. Saturn's head,
I that have made th' Aegean confines shake,
And with my powerful voice affrighted Heaven:
From whose enraged eyes the darkened skies
Have borrowed lustre, and Promethian fire,
Will fright from Crete the proud Saturnian troup,
And thousand hacked and mangled soldiers bring
To entomb the glories of the Cretan King.
That must be left to great Enceladus,
The pride and glory of the Titans host.
I that have curbed the billows with a frown,
And with a smile have made the Ocean calm,
Spurned down huge mountains with my armed foot,
And with my shoulders lift the valleys high,
Will in the wrinkles of my stormy brow,
Bury the glories of the Cretan King,
And on his slaughtered bulk brain all his sons.
And what shall I do then?
Do thou stand still,
Whilst I the foes of Titan pash and kill.
Am I not eldest from great Titan's loins,
The Saturnists hereditary scourge?
Leave all these deeds of horror to my hand,
I like a Trophy o'er their spoils will stand.
Why breath we then?
Come arm your sinewy limbs,
With rage and fury fright pale pity hence,
And drown him in the sweat your bodies still.
With hostile industry toss flaming brands
About your fleecy locks, to threat their Cities
With death and desolation, let your steel
Glistering against the sun, daze their bright eyes,
That with the dread of our astonishment
They may be sunk in Lethe, and their grave
May be the dark vault, called oblivious Cave,
Are our Ambassadors to Saturn gone,
To let him know whence this our war proceeds?
Your message hath by this startled th'usurper,
Set on them, waste their confines as we march,
And let them taste the rage of sword and fire,
Th' Alarm's given, and hath by this arrived
Even at the walls of Crete, the citadel
Where the Cathedral Saturn is enthroned.
Warlike Aegeon and Enceladus,
Noble Lycaon lend us your assistance
To forage as we march, plant desolation
Through all this fertile soil, be this your cry;
Revenge on Saturn for his perjury.
None speak, let no harsh voice presume to jar
In our distressed care, I am all sad,
All horror and affrightment, since the slaughter
And tragic murder of my first borne Ops,
Continued in the unnatural massacre
Of three young Princes: not a day hath left me
Without distaste, no night but double darkened
With terror and confused melancholy:
No hour but hath had care and discontent
Proportioned to his minutes not an instant:
Without remorse and anguish. Oh you crowns,
Why are you made, and metaled out of cares?
I am overgrown with sorrow, circumvaled
With multiplicity of distemperatures,
And Saturn is a King of nothing else,
But woes, vexations, sorrows, and laments.
To add to these the threatenings of red war,
As if the murder of my Princely babes
Were not enough to plague an usurpation,
But they must add the rage of sword and fire,
To affright my people: these are miseries,
Able to be comprised in no dimension.
My father shall not macerate himself,
I'll dare to interrupt his passions,
Although I buy it dearly with his hate.
My Lord you are a King of a great people,
Your power sufficient to repulse a foe
Greater than Titan. Though my brother's births
Be crowned in blood, yet am I still reserved
To be the hopeful comfort of your age.
My dearest Iuno, beautiful remainder
Of Saturn's royal issue, but for thee
I had ere this with these my fingers torn
A grave out of the rocks, to have entombed
The wretched carcase of a caitiff King:
And I will live, be't but to make thee Queen
Of all the triumphs and the spoils I win.
Speak, what's the project of their invasion?
That the King of Crete,
Hath not (according to his vows and oaths)
Slain his male issue.
Have I not their bloods
Already quaffed to angry Nemesis?
Have not these ruthless and remorseless eyes,
(unfather-like) beheld their panting hearts
Swimming in bowls of blood? Am I not sonless?
Nay childless too, save Iuno whom I love:
And dare they then? Come, our continued sorrow
Shall into scarlet indignation turn,
And my sons blood shall crown their guilty heads
With purple vengeance. Valiant Lords, set on,
And meet them to their last destruction.
March forward.
Stay, because we'll ground our wars
On justice: Fair Sibilla, on thy life,
I charge thee tell me, and dissemble not,
By all the hopes in Saturn thou hast stored,
Our nuptial pleasures, and affairs of love,
As thou esteemest our grace, or vengeance fear'st,
Resolve me truly. Hast thou sons alive?
These tears, and that dejection on thy knee,
Accompanied with dumbness, argue guilt.
Arise and speak.
Let Saturn know, I am a Woman then,
And more, I am a Mother: would you have me
A monster, to exceed in cruelty
The savagest of Savages? bears, Tigers, Wolves,
All feed their young: would Saturn have his Queen
More fierce than these? Think you Sibilla dare
Murder her young, whom cruel beasts would spare?
Let me be held a mother, not a murderess:
For Saturn, thou hast living three brave sons.
But where? rather than to reveal to thee,
That thou mayst send, their guiltless blood to spill,
Here cease my life, for them thou shalt not kill.
Amazement, war, the threatening Oracle,
All muster strange perplexions 'bout my brain,
And rob me of the true ability
Of my direct conceivements. Doubt, and war.
Titan's invasion, and my jealousy;
Make me unfit for answer.
Royal Saturn,
'Twas pity in the Queen so to preserve them.
Your strictness slew them, they are dead in you,
And in the pity of your Queen survive.
Divine assistance plunge me from these troubles,
Mortality here fails me, I am wrapped
In millions of confusions.
Arm, great Saturn,
Thy City's burne: a general massacre
Threatens thy people. The big Tytanoys
Blow up thy Land with their invasive steel.
A huge unnumbered army is at hand,
To set upon thy Camp.
All my disturbances
Convert to rage, and make my spleen as high
As is their topless fury, to encounter
With equal force and vengeance. Go Sibilla,
Convey my beauteous Iuno to the place
Of our best strength, whilst we contend in Arms
For this rich Cretan wreath: the battle done,
And they confined, we'll treat of these affairs.
Perhaps our love may with this breach dispense,
But first to Arms, to beat th'intruders hence.
Enter Titan, Lycaon, Enceladus, Egeon.
Saturn gives back, and begins to leave the field.
Pursue him then unto that place of strength,
Which the proud Cretans hold impregnable.
This gigantomachia be eternized
For our affright and terror: If they fly,
Toss rocks, and tops of Mountains after them
To stumble them, or else entomb them quick.
They have already got into the town,
And barricadoed 'gainst us their Iron gates.
What means then shall we find to startle them?
What, but to spurn down their offensive mures?
To shake in two their Adamantine gates,
Their marble columns by the ground fills tear,
And kick their ruined walls as high as heaven?
Pursue them to their gates, and 'bout their City
Plant a strong siege. Now Saturn all my sufferances
Shall on thy head fall heavy, we'll not spare
Old man or babe. The Titans all things dare.
The heavens have for our barbarous cruelty
Done in the murder of our first borne Ops,
poured on our head this vengeance. Where, oh where
Shall we find rescue?
Patience royal Saturn.
Bid Wolves be mild, and Tigers pitiful,
Command the Libyan lion's abstinence,
Teach me to mollify the Corsic rock,
Or make the Mount Chymera passable.
What Monarch wrapped in my confusions,
Can tell what patience means?
Oh royal Father!
Oh either teach me rescue from these troubles,
Or bid me everlastingly, ay ever
Sink in despair and horror,
Oh my Lord,
You have from your own loins issue reserved, that may redeem all these calamities.
Issue from us?
From Saturn and Sibylla.
That royal Prince King of Pelagia,
And famous Melliseus' foster-child,
Whom all the world styles by the noble name
Of Iupiter, he is King Saturn's son.
Thou hast Sibylla kept that son alive
That only can redeem me from this thraldom,
Oh how shall we acquaint young Iupiter,
With this his father's hard success in Arms.
My care did ever these events foresee.
And I have sent to your surviving son,
To come unto your rescue; Then great Saturn,
In your wives pity seem to applaud the heavens,
That make me their relentful minister,
In the repairing of your down cast-state.
If royal Iupiter be Saturn's son,
We shall be either rescued or revenged,
And now I shall not dread those Tytanois,
That threaten fire and steel.
Trust your Sibylla.
Thou art my anchor, and the only column
That supports Saturn's glory, Oh my Iupiter,
On thee the basis of my hopes I erect,
And in thy life King Saturn's fame survives.
Are messengers dispatched to signify
My son of our distress.
As far as Epire.
Where as we understand, Ioue now remains,
Then Titan, and the proud Enceladus,
Hyperion and Aegeon with the rest,
Of all the earth-bred race we weigh you not,
Threaten your worst, let all your eyes spark fire.
Your flaming nostrils like Auernus smoke,
Your tongues speak thunder, & your armed hands
Fling trisulc lightning: Be you Gods above,
Or come you with infernal hatred armed,
We dread you not: we have a son survives,
Shall calm your tempests: beauteous Iuno comfort,
And cheer Sibylla, if he undertake
Our rescue, we from danger are secure,
we in his valour all our lives assure.
Fair Prince, for less by your deserts and honour.
You cannot be: your fortunes and your birth
Are both unknown to me: my two fair daughters
As a swathed infant brought you to my Court,
But whence, or of what parents you proceed
I am merely ignorant.
Then am I nothing,
And till I know whence my descent hath been,
Or from what house derived, I am but air,
And no essential substance of a man.
Help, help, for heaven sake help, I am pursued,
And by my son, that seems to threat my life,
Stay that bold lad.
What's he? false Iupiter?
Calisto, or I much deceive myself.
Oh thou most false, most treacherous, and unkind,
Behold Calisto by her son pursued,
Indeed thy son: this little savage youth
Hath lived 'mongst Tigers, lions, Wolves, and Bears,
And since his birth partakes their cruelty.
Archas his name: since I Diana left,
And from her chaste train was divorced, this youth
I childed in a cave remote and silent.
His nurture was amongst the savages.
This day I by misfortune moved his spleen,
And he pursued me with revenge and fury,
And had I not forsook the shades and forests,
And fled for rescue to these walled Towns,
He had slain me in his fury: save me then,
Let not the son the mother sacrifice
Before the father's eye.
Archas my son, my young son Archas, Jupiter's first borne
Oh let me hug thee, and a thousand times
Embrace thee in mine arms. Lycaon's grandchild
Calisto's son; Oh will you beauteous Lady
Forsake the forests and yet live with us?
No thou false man, for thy perjurious lusts
I have abandoned humane subtleties:
There take thy son, and use him like a Prince,
Being son unto a Princess. Teach him Arts,
And honoured arms. For me: I have abjured
All peopled Cities, and betook myself
To solitary deserts. Ioue adieu.
Thou proving false, no mortal can be true
Since she will needs be gone, be pleased then,
Wearied with beasts, I long to live 'mongst men.
Yet stay Calisto, why wilt thou outrun
Thy Iupiter? she gone, welcome my son.
My dear son Archas, whom if fortune smile,
I will create Lord of a greater style.
Save you sir, is your name K. Melliseus
We are Melliseus, and the Epire King,
Then this letter is to you, but is there not one in your
Court, called (let me see) have you here never a gibbet-maker?
Sirrah, here's one called Iupiter.
ay Iupiter, that's he that I would speak with. Here's another letter to you, but ere you read it, pray let me ask you one question.
What's that?
Whether you, be a wise child or no?
Your reason?
Because I would know whether you know your own father, but if you do not, hoping you are in good health, as your father scarce was, at the making hereof, These are to certify you.
News of a father! never could such tidings
Have glutted me with gladness.
For mine own part, though I know not what belongs to the getting of children, yet I know how to father a child, & because I would be loath to have this Parish troubled with you, I bring you news where you were borne. I was the man that laid you at this man's door, & if you will not go home quietly, you shall be sent from Constable to Constable, till you come to the place where you were begot. read further & tell me more.
Is Iupiter then mighty Saturn's son?
Am I the son of Saturn, King of Crete?
My father baffled by the Tytanoys?
May all my toward hopes die in my birth,
Nor let me ever worthily inherit
The name of royalty, if by my valour
I prove me not descended royally,
I was the man that took pains with you, 'twas I that brought you in the hand-basket.
Should I have wished a father through the world,
It had been Saturn, or a royal mother,
It had been fair Sibylla, Queen of Crete.
Great Epire's King, peruse these tragic lines,
And in thy wonted bounty grant supplies
To free my noble father.
Iupiter, as I am Melliseus Epire's King,
Thou shalt have free assistance.
Come then, Arm,
Assemble all the powers that we can levy.
Archas, we make thee of Pelagia King,
As King Lycaon's grandchild, and the son
Of fair Calisto. Let that Clime henceforth
Be called Arcadia, and usurp thy name.
Go then and press th'Arcadians to the rescue
Of royal Saturn, this great King and I
Will lead th'Epyrians. Fail me not to meet,
To redeem Saturn, and to rescue Crete.
I have no mind to this buffeting: I'll walk after fair and softly, in hope that all the buffeting may be done before I come. Whether had I better go home by land, or by sea? If I go by land, and miscarry, than I go the way of all flesh. If I go by sea and miscarry, than I go the way of all fish: I am not yet resolved. But howsoever, I have done my message so cleanly, that they cannot say, the messenger is bereaved of any thing that belongs to his message.
Down treacherous Lord, and be our footpace now
To ascend our high tribunal. where's that Godhead
With which the people Aueeed thee to heaven?
'Tis sunk into the deep Abysm of hell.
Tear from his head the golden wreath of Crete.
Tread on his captive bulk, and with thy weight
Great Titan, sink him to the infernal shades,
So low, that with his trunk, his memory
May be extinct in Lethe.
More than tyrannous
To triumph o'er the weak, and to oppress
The low dejected. Let your cruelty
Be the sad period of my wretchedness:
Only preserve my lovely Iuno's life,
And give Sibilla freedom,
By these Gods.
We neither fear nor value, but contend
To equal in our actions: both shall die.
There shall no proud Saturnian live, to brave
The meanest of the high-born Tytanoys.
Raze from the earth their hateful memory,
And let the blood of Titan sway the earth.
Speak, are the ports and confines strongly armed
'Gainst all invasions?
Who dares damage us?
Let all the passages be open left,
Unguarded let our ports and havens lie.
All danger we despise, mischance or dread
We hold in base contempt.
Conquest is ours.
Maugre divine, or base terrestrial powers.
Arm royal Titan, Arm Enceladus,
A pale of brandished steel hath girt thy land.
From the earth's Caverns break infernal fires,
To make thy villages and hamlets burn.
Tempestuous ruin in the shape of war
Clouds all thy populous kingdom, At my heels
Confusion dogs me, and the voice of death
Still thunders in mine ears.
Is't possible? Bear Saturn first to prison
we'll after parley them.
Come Angels armed, or Devils clad in flames,
Our fury shall repel them. Come they girt
With power celestial, or infernal rage,
we'll stand their fierce opposure. Royal Titan,
Aegeon and Hyperion, don your arms,
Bravely advance your strong orbicular shields,
And in your right hands brandish your bright steel.
Drown your affrightments in th'amazed sounds
Of martial thunder (dispassioned deep)
we'll stand them, be they Gods; (if men,) expel
Their strengthless force, and stound them low as hell,
Whence are you that intrude upon our confines?
Or what portend you in these hostile sounds
Of clamorous war?
Titan's destruction,
With all the ruin of his giant race.
By what pretence or claim?
In right of Saturn:
Whom against law the Titans have deposed.
What art thou speak'st it?
I am Iupiter.
King Saturn's son, immediate heir to Crete.
There pause, that word disturbs all thy claim,
And proves that Titan seats him in his own.
If Saturn (as thou sayst) hath sons alive,
His oath is broken, and we are justly seized
Of Creta's Crown by his late forfeiture.
Thy tongue hath spoke thy own destruction,
Since whom K. Saturn spared, our swords must kill,
And he is come to offer up that life
Which hath so long been forfeit.
Tyrants no:
The heavens preserved me for a further use,
To plague your Offspring that afflict the earth,
And with your threatenings spurn against the Gods.
Now shalt thou pay me for Calisto's wrong,
Exiling me, and for dishonouring her.
Are you there Cannibal? Man-eating wolf?
Lycaon, thou art much beholding to me,
I womaned first Calisto, and made thee
A grandfather. Dost not thank me for't?
See here's the Boy, this is Archadia's King.
No more Pelagia now, since thy exile.
To thee that stillest thyself K. Saturn's son:
Know thou wast doomed before thy birth to die,
Thy claim disabled, and in saving thee
Thy father hath made forfeit of his Crown.
Know Titan I was borne free, as my father,
Nor had he power to take that life away
That the Gods freely gave me. Tyrants see,
Here is that life you by Indenture claim,
Seize it, and take it: but before I fall,
Death and destruction shall confound you all.
Destruction is our vassal, and attends
Upon the threatening of our stormy brows.
We trifle hours. Arm all your fronts with horror,
Your hearts with fury, and your hands with death.
Thunder meet thunder, tempests storms defy,
Saturn and all his issue this day die.
where's now the high and proud Enceladus,
To stop the fury of the Adverse foe,
Or stay the base flight of our dastard troops?
Titan is slain, Hyperion strews the earth,
And thousands by the hand of Iupiter
Are sent into black darkness. All that stand
Sink in the weight of his high jovial hand.
To shun whose rage, Aegeon thou must fly.
Crete with our hoped conquests all adieu.
We must propose new quests, since Saturn's son
Hath by his puissance all our camp o'errun.
None stir, be all your arms cramped & diseased
Your swords unuseful, may your steely glaives
Command your hands, and not your sinews them,
Till I by single valour have subdued
This murderer of my father.
Here he stands,
That must for death have honour at thy hands.
None interrupt us, singly we'll contend,
And twixt us two give these rude factions end.
Two royal armies then on both sides stand,
To view this strange and dreadful Monomachy.
Thy fall, Saturnian, adds to my renown:
For by thy death I gain the Cretan Crown.
Death is thy due, I find it in thy stars,
Whilst our high name gives period to these wars.
Never was Saturn deified till now,
Nor found that perfectness the Gods enjoy.
Heaven can assure no greater happiness
Than I attain in sight of Iupiter,
Oh my dear son, borne with my painful throws,
And with the hazard of my life preserved,
How well hast thou acquitted all my travels,
In this thy last and famous victory?
This tells me, that you royal King of Crete
My father is: and that renowned Queen
My mother: all which proves by circumstance,
That 'tis but duty, that by me's achieved.
Only you beauteous Lady stands apart,
I know not how to style.
'Tis Iuno, and thy sister.
Oh my stars!
You seek to make immortal, Iupiter.
Iuno is only happy in the fortunes,
Of her renowned brother.
Royal Saturn,
If ever I deserved well as a victor,
Or if my warlike deeds, yet bleeding new,
And perfect both in eyes and memory
May plead for me: Oh if I may obtain,
As one that merits, or entreat of you,
As one that owes; being titled now your son,
Let me espouse fair Iuno: and bright Lady
Let me exchange the name of sister with you
And style you by a nearer name of wife.
Oh be my spouse fair Iuno:
'Tis a name,
I prize 'bove sister, if these grace the same.
What is it I'll deny my Iupiter?
she is thy own. I'll royalize thy nuptials
With all the solemn triumphs Crete can yield.
Epire shall add to these solemnities,
And with a bounteous hand support these triumphs
So all Arcadia shall.
Then to our Palace
Pass on in state, let all rarieties
Shower down from heaven a largesse, that these bridals may exceed mortal pomp. March, March, and leave me
To contemplate these joys, and to devise,
How with best state this night to solemnize.
Saturn at length is happy by his son,
Whose matchless and unrivalled dignities
Are without peer on earth, Oh joy, joy? corsive
Worse than the throws of childbirth, or the tortures
Of black Cimmerian darkness. Saturn, now
Bethink thee of the Delphian Oracle:
He shall his father's virtue first excel,
Seize Crete, and after drive him down to hell.
The first is passed: my virtues are exceeded:
The last I will prevent, by force or treason.
I'll work his ruin ere he grow too high.
His stars have cast it, and the boy shall die.
More sons I have, more crowns I cannot win,
The Gods say he must die, and 'tis no sin.
O blind ambition and desire of rain,
What horrid mischief wilt not thou devise?
The appetite of rule, and thirst of reign
Besots the foolish, and corrupts the wise.
Behold a King suspicious of his son,
Pursues his innocent life, and without cause.
Oh blind ambition what hast thou not done
Against religion, zeal and nature's laws?
But men are borne their own fates to pursue,
Gods will be Gods, and Saturn finds it true.
Saturn against his son his force extended,
And would have slain him by his tyrannous hand,
Whilst Iupiter alone his life defended.
But when no prayers his fury could withstand,
He used his force, his father drove from Crete,
And as the Oracle before had told
Usurped the Crown, the Lords kneel at his feet,
And Saturn's fortunes are to exile sold.
But leaving him, of Danae that bright lass,
How amorous Ioue first wrought her to his power,
How she was closed in a fort of brass,
And how he scaled it in a golden shower,
Of these we next must speak, courteous and wise,
Help with your hands, for Homer wants his eyes.
Our unkind father double tyrannous,
To prosecute the virtues of his son,
Hath sought his own Fate, and by his ingratitude
Left to our head th'imperial wreath of Crete:
Which gladly we receive. Neptune from Athens,
And Pluto from the lower Tartarie
Both welcome to the Cretan Iupiter.
Those Stars that governed our nativity,
And stripped our fortunes from the hand of death,
Shall guard us and maintain us.
Noble Saturn,
Famous in all things, and degenerate only,
In that inhuman practise 'gainst his sons,
Is fled us, whom we came to visit freely,
And filial duties to express. Great Athens
The nurse and fostress of my infancy,
I have instructed in the seaman's craft.
And taught them truly how to sail by stars
Besides the unruly jennet I have tamed
And trained him to the saddle for my practice.
The horse to me is solely consecrate.
I from the bounds of lower Tartarie
Have travelled to the fertile plains of Crete.
Nor am I less in lustre of my fame,
Than Neptune, or renowned Iupiter.
Those barren Kingdoms I have riched with spoils,
And not a people traffics in those worlds,
For wealth or treasure, but we custom them,
And they enrich our coffers: our armed guards
Prey on their Camels, and their laden Mules,
And Pluto's through the world renowned & feared.
And since we have missed of Saturn lately fled,
It glads me yet, I freely may survey
The honours of my brother Iupiter.
And beauteous Iuno, Empress of all hearts
Whom Neptune thus embraceth.
So doth Pluto.
All divine honours crown the royal temples
Of my two famous brothers.
King Melliseus welcome them to Crete.
Archas do you the like.
Princes your hands.
You are my royal uncles.
Nay hand him Lords, he is your kinsman too.
Archas my son, of fair Calisto borne,
I hope fair Iuno it offends not you,
It was before your time.
she was a strumpet.
She shall be a Star.
And all the queens and beauteous maids on earth
That are renowned for high perfections,
We'll woe and win, we were borne to sway and rule.
Nor shall the name of wife be curb to us.
Or snaffle in our pleasures. Beauteous Io,
And fair Europa, have by out transhapes,
And guiles of love already been deflowered,
Nor lives she that is worthy our desires,
But we can charm with courtship. Royal brothers
what news of note is rumoured in those Realms,
Through which you made your travels?
Have you heard
Of great Acrisius, the brave Argos King,
And of his daughter Danae.
His renown,
And her fair beauty oft hath pierced our ears.
Nor can we be at peace, till we behold
That face fame hath so blazed on. What of her?
Of her enclosure in the Darreine Tower,
Girt with a triple Mure of shining brass.
Have you not heard?
But we desire it highly.
What marble wall, or Adamantine gate,
What Fort of steel, or Castle forged from brass,
Love cannot scale? or beauty not break through?
Discourse the novel Neptune.
Thus it was.
The Queen of Argos going great, the King
Sends (as the custom is) to th'Oracle,
To know what fortunes shall betide the babe.
Answer's returned by Phoebus and his Priests:
The Queen shall child a daughter beautiful,
Who when she grows to years, shall then bring forth
A valiant Princely boy, yet such a one
That shall the King his grandsire turn to stone.
Danae is borne, and as she grows to ripeness,
So grew her father's fear: and to prevent
His ominous fate pronounced by th'oracle,
He moulds this brazen Tower, impregnable
Both for the seat and guard: yet beautiful
As is the gorgeous palace of the Sun.
Ill doth Acrisius to contend and war
Against th'unchanging Fates, I'll scale that Towers:
Or rain down millions in a golden shower.
I long to be the father of that babe,
Begot on Danae, that shall prove so brave,
And turn the dotard to his marble grave.
'tis cast already: Fate be thou my guide,
Whilst for this amorous journey I provide.
But is the Lady there immured, and closed
From all society and sight of man?
So full of jealous fears is King Acrisius,
That, save himself, no man must near the Fort.
Only a guard of Beldames past their lusts,
Unsensible of love, or amorous pity,
Partly by bribes hired, partly curbed with threats,
Are guard unto this bright imprisoned dame.
Too pitiless, and too obdures the King,
To cloister beauty from the sight of man.
But this concerns not us.
That fort I'll scale,
Though in attempting it be death to fail.
Brothers and Princes, all our Courts rarities
Lie open to your royal'st entertainment
Yet pardon me, since urgence calls me hence
To an enforced absence. Nay Queen Iuno
You must be pleased, the cause imports us highly.
Feast with these Princes till our free return.
Attendance Lords, we must descend in gold.
Or you imprisoned beauty ne'er behold.
here's a coil to keep fire and tow asunder. I wonder the King should shut his daughter up so close: for any thing I see, she hath no mind to a man.
Content yourself, you speak according to your age and appetite. We that are full fed may praise fast. We that in our heat of youth have drunk our bellyfuls, may deride those that in the heat of their bloods are athirst. I measure her by what I was, not by what I am. Appetite to love never fails an old woman, till cracking of nuts leaves her. When Danae hath no more teeth in her head then you and I, I'll trust a man in her company, and scarce then: for if we examine ourselves, we have even at these years, qualms, and rheums, and devices comes over our stomachs, when we but look on a proper man.
That's no question, I know it by myself, and whilst I stand sentinel, I'll watch her for that I warrant her.
And have we not reason, considering the penalty?
If any stand sentinel in her quarters, we shall keep quarter here no longer. If the Princess miscarry we shall make gunpowder, and they say an old woman is better for that then saltpeter.
The 'larm bell rings,
It should be K. Acrisius by the sound of the clapper.
Then clap close to the gate and let him in.
Ladies well done: I like this providence
And careful watch o'er Danae: let me find you
Faithless, you die, be faithful and you live
Eternized in our love. Go call her hither,
Be that your charge: the rest keep watchful eye
On your portcullised entrance, which forbids
All men, save us, free passage to this place.
See! Danae is descended. Fair daughter
How do you brook this palace?
Like a prison:
What is it else? you give me golden fetters,
As if their value could my bondage lessen.
The architecture's sumptuous, and the building
Of cost invaluable, so rich a structure
For beauty, or for state, the world affords not.
Is not thy attendance princely, like a queen's?
Are not all these thy vassals to attend?
Are not thy chambers fair, and richly hung?
The walks within this barricadoed mure
Full of delight and pleasure for thy taste
And curious palate, all the chiefest cates
Are from the furthest verges of the earth
Fetch't to content thee. What distastes thee then?
That which alone is better than all these,
My liberty. Why am I cloistered thus,
And kept a prisoner from the sight of man?
What hath my innocence and infancy
Deserved to be immured in brazen walls?
Can you accuse my faith, or modesty?
Hath any loose demeanour in my carriage
Bred this distrust? hath my eye played the rioter?
Or hath my tongue been lavish? have my favours
unvirginlike to any been profuse,
That it should breed in you such jealousy,
Or bring me to this durance?
None of these.
I love my Danae. But when I record
The Oracle, it breeds such fear in me,
That makes this thy retainment.
The Oracle?
Wherein unto the least of all the Gods
Hath Danae been unthankful, or profane,
To bondage me that am a princess free,
And votaress to every deity?
I'll tell thee Lady. The unchanging mouth
Of Phoebus, hath this Oracle pronounced,
That Danae shall in time child such a son
That shall Acrisius change into a stone.
See your vain fears. What less could Phoebus say?
Or what hath Danae's fate deserved in this?
To turn you into stone; that's to prepare
Your monument, and marble sepulchre.
The meaning is, that I a son shall have,
That when you die shall bear you to your grave.
Are you not mortal? would you ever live?
Your father died, and to his Monument
You like a mourner did attend his hearse.
What you did to your father, let my son
Perform to you, prepare your sepulchre.
Or shall a stranger bear you to your tomb,
When from your own blood you may store a Prince
To do those sacred rights: or shall vain fears
Cloister my beauty, and consume my years?
Our fears are certain, and our doom as fixed
As the decrees of Gods. Thy durance here
Is with limit endless. Go attend her
Unto her chamber, there to live an Ankresse
And changeless virgin, to the period
Of her last hour. And you, to whom this charge
Solely belongs, banish all womanish pity:
Be deaf unto her prayers, blind to her tears,
Obdure to her relenting passions.
Should she (as heaven and th'Oracle forbid)
By your corrupting loose that precious Gem
We have such care to keep and lock safe up:
Your lives are doomed. Be faithful we desire,
And keep your bodies from the threatened fire.
Heaven be as chary of your highness life, As we of Dana's honour. Now if she be a right woman, she will have a mind only to lose that, which her father hath such care to keep. There is a thing that commonly sticks under a woman's stomach.
What do we talking of things? there must be no meddling with things in this place, come let us set our watch, and take our lodgings before the Princess chamber,
Sirrah, now I have sworn you to secrecy attend your (charge
Charge me to the mouth, and till you give fire I'll not of.
Thou know'st I have stuffed my pack with rich jewels, to purchase one jewel worth all these.
If your precious stones were set in that jewel it would be brave wearing.
If we get entrance, sooth me up in all things: & if I have recourse to the Princess, if at any time thou seest me whisper to her, find some trick or other to blind the Beldame's eyes.
She that hath the best eyes of them all, I have a trick to make her nose stand in her light.
No more K. Iupiter but goodman peddler, remember that
I have my memorandums about me. As I can bear a pack, so I can bear a brain, & now I talk of a pack, though I know not of the death of any of your friends, I am sorry for your heaviness.
Love and my hopes do make my load seem light,
This wealth I will unburden in the purchase
Of you rich beauty. Prithee ring the bell,
Nay do you take the rope in your hand for luck sake. The moral is, because you shall ring all-in.
I care not if I take thy counsel.
To the gate, to the gate, and know who 'tis ere you open.
I learned that in my youth, still to know who knocked before I would open.
Save you gentle Matrons: may a man be so bold as ask what he may call this rich and stately Tower?
Thou seem'st a stranger to ask such a question,
For where is not the tower of Darreine known?
It may be called the tower of Barren for aught I see, for here is none but are past children.
This is the rich and famous Darreine Tower,
Where King Acrisius hath enclosed his daughter,
The beauteous Danae, famous through the world
For all perfections.
Oh then 'tis here; I here I must unload.
Coming through Crete, the great King Iupiter
Entreated me to call here at this Tower,
And to deliver you some special jewels,
Of high prized worth, for he would have his bounty
Renowned through all the earth. Down with your pack,
For here must we unload.
jewels to us?
And from Iupiter?
Now gold prove thy true virtue. Thou canst all things and therefore this.
Comes he with presents, and shall he unpack at the gate? nay come into the Porters lodge good peddlers.
That Lady hath some manners, she hath been well brought up I warrant her.
And I can tell thee peddler, thou hast that courtesy that never any man yet found but the King Acrisius.
You shall be well paid for your courtesy,
Here's first for you, for you, for, for you, for you.
Rare!
Admirable!
The best that e'er I saw!
I'll run and show mine to my Lady.
Shut the gate for fear the King come, and if he ring clap the peddlers into some of you old rotten corners. And hath K. Iupiter been at all this cost? he's a courteous Prince, & bountiful. Keep you the peddler company, my Lady shall see mine too.
Mean you the Princess Danae? I have tokens from Iupiter to her too.
Run, run, you that have the best legs, and tell my Lady. But have you any more of the same?
Have we quoth he? We have things about us, we have not showed yet, and that every one must not see, would make those few teeth in your head to water, I would have you think, I have worn too as well as my Master.
Yonder's my Lady. Nay never be abashed peddler,
There's a face will become thy jewels, as well as any face in
Crete or Argos either. Now your token.
I have lost it. 'tis my heart, beauty of Angels,
Thou art o'er matched, earth may contend with heaven,
Nature thou hast to make one complete creature
Cheated even all mortality. This face
Hath robbed the morning of her blush, the lily
Of her blanched whiteness, and like theft committed
Upon my soul: she is all admiration.
But in her eyes I ne'er saw perfect lustre.
There is no treasure upon earth but yonder.
she is! (oh I shall lose myself)
Nay Sir, take heed you be not smelled out.
I am myself again.
Did he bestow these freely? Dana's guard
Are much indebted to King Iupiter.
If he have store we'll buy some for our use,
And wearing. They are wondrous beautiful,
Where's the man that brought them?
Here forsooth Lady, hold up your head and blush not, my Lady will not hurt thee, I warrant thee.
This jewel Madam did King Iupiter
Command me to leave here for Danae.
Are you so styled?
If sent to Danae,
'Tis due to me. And would the King of Crete,
Knew with what gratitude we take his gift.
madam he shall. Sirrah set ope your pack,
And what the Ladies like let them take freely.
Much have I heard of his renown in arms,
His generousness, his virtues, and his fullness
Of all that Nature can bequeath to man.
His bounty I now taste, and I could wish,
Your ear were his, that I might let him know
What interest he hath in me to command,
His ear is mine, let me command you then.
Behold I am the Cretan, Iupiter,
That rate your beauty above all these gems.
What cannot love, what dares not love attempt?
Despite Acrisius and his armed guards,
Hither my love hath brought me to receive
Or life or death from you, only from you.
We are amazed, and the large difference
Betwixt your name and habit, breeds in us
Fear and distrust. Yet if I censure freely
I needs must think that face and parsonage
Was ne'er derived from baseness. And the spirit
To venture and to dare to court a Queen
I cannot style less than to be a king's.
Say that we grant you to be Iupiter,
What thence infer you?
To love Iupiter.
So far as Iupiter loves Dana's honour,
So far will Danae love Iupiter.
We weight well upon my Lady.
Madam you have not seen a clear stone,
For colour or for quickness.
Beware your ruin, if you Beldames hear.
Sirrah show all your wares, and let those Ladies best please themselves.
Not all at these years. I spy his knavery. Now would he have me keep them busied, whilst he courts the Lady.
Doth my Lady want nothing?
As for example, here's a silver bodkin, this is to remove dandruff, and dig about the roots of your silver-haired fur. This is a tooth-picker, but you having no teeth, here is for you a coral to rub your gums. This is called a Mask.
Gramercy for this, this is good to hide my wrinkles, I never see of these afore.
Then you have one wrinkle more behind. You that are dim eyed put this pitiful spectacle upon your nose.
As I am son of Saturn, you have wrong
To be cooped up within a prison strong.
Your father like a miser cloisters you,
But to save cost: he's loath to pay your dower,
And therefore keeps you in this brazen Tower.
What are you better to be beautiful,
When no man's eye can come to censure it?
What are sweet cates untasted? gorgeous clothes
Unworn? or beauty not beheld? yond Beldames
With all the furrows in their wrinkled fronts
May claim with you like worth; eye and compare.
For eye to censure you none can, none dare.
All this is true.
Oh think you I would lie
(With any save Danae.) Let me buy
This jewel, your bright love, though rated higher
Than Gods can give, or men in prayers desire.
You covet that, which save the Prince of Crete
None dares.
That shows how much I love you (sweet)
I come this beauty, this rare face to save,
And to redeem it from this brazen grave.
Oh do not from man's eye this beauty screen,
These rare perfections, which no earthly Queen
Enjoys save you: 'twas made to be admired.
The Gods, the Fates, and all things have conspired
With Iupiter, this prison to invade,
And bring it forth to that for which 'twas made.
Love Iupiter, whose love with yours shall meet,
And having borne you hence, make at your feet
Kings lay their crowns, & mighty Emperors kneel:
Oh had you but a touch of what I feel,
You would both love and pity.
Both I do.
But all things hinder, yet were Danae free,
She could affect the Cretan.
Now by thee
(For what I most affect, by that I swear)
I from this prison will bright Danae bear,
And in thy chamber will this night fast seal
This covenant made.
Which Danae must repeal.
You shall not, by this kiss.
'tis good to have an eye.
Your nose hath not had these spectacles on yet.
Oh Iupiter.
Oh Danae.
I must hence:
For if I stay, I yield: I'll hence, no more.
Expect me for I come.
Yond is my door,
Dare not to enter there. I will to rest.
Attendance.
Come I will.
You had not best.
My Lady calls. we have trifled the night till bedtime. Some attend the Princess: others see the peddlers packed out of the gate.
Will you thrust us out to seek our lodging at Midnight. We have paid for our lodging, a man would think, we might have lain cheaper in any Inn in Argos?
This castle stands remote, no lodging near,
Spare us but any corner here below,
Be't but the Inner porch, or the least staircase,
And we'll begone as early as you please.
Consider all things, we have no reason to deny that. What need we fear? alas they are but Pedlars, and the greatest Prince that breathes would be advised ere he durst presume to court the princess Danae.
He court a princess? he looks not with the face. Well peddlers, for this night take a nap upon some bench or other, and in the morning be ready to take thy yard in thy hand to measure me some stuff, and so to be gone before day. Well, good-night, we must attend our princess.
Gold and reward, thou art mighty, and haste power
o'er aged, young, the foolish, and the wise,
The chaste, and wanton, foul, and beautiful:
Thou art a God on earth, and canst all things.
Not all things, by your leave. All the gold in Crete cannot get one of you old Crones with child. But shall we go sleep?
Sleep thou, for I must wake for Danae.
Hence cloud of baseness, thou hast done enough
To blear you Beldames. When I next appear
To you bright Goddess, I will shine in gold,
Decked in the high Imperial robes of Crete,
And on my head the wreath of Majesty:
For Ornament is a prevailing thing,
And you bright Queen I'll now court like a King.
Command our eunuchs with their pleasing'st tunes
To charm our eyes to rest. Leave us all, leave us.
The God of dreams hath with his downy fan
Swept o'er our eyelids, and sits heavy on them.
Hey-ho, Sleep may enter in at my mouth, if he be no bigger than a twopenny-loaf.
Then to your chambers, & let wakeless slumbers
Charm you in depth of silence and repose.
Good night to thee fair Danae.
Let music through this brazen fortress sound
Till all our hearts in depth of sleep be drowned.
Silence that now hath empire through the world
Express thy power and Princedom. Charming sleep
Death's younger brother, show thyself as still-lesse
As death himself. None seem this night to live,
Save Ioue and Danae. But that Goddess won
Give them new life breathed with the morning sun,
You is the door, that in forbidding me
She bade me enter. Women's tongues and hearts
Have different tunes: for where they most desire,
Their hearts cry on. when their tongues bid retire.
all's whist, I hear the snorting Beldames breath
Soundness of sleep, none wakes save Love and we
You bright imprisoned beauty to set free.
Oh thou more beauteous in thy nakedness
Then ornament can add to—
How sweetly doth she breathe? how well become
Imaginary deadness? But I'll wake her
Unto new life. This purchase I must win,
heavens gates stand ope, and Iupiter will in.
Danae?
Who's that?
'Tis I, K. Iupiter.
What mean you Prince? how dare you enter here?
Knowing if I but call, your life is doomed,
And all Crete's treasure cannot guard your person.
You tell me now how much I rate your beauty,
Which to attain, I cast my life behind me,
As loved much less than you.
I'll love you too,
Would you but leave me.
Repentance I'd not buy
At that high rate, ten thousand times to die.
You are mine own, so all the Fates have said.
And by their guidance come I to your bed.
The night, the time, the place, and all conspire
To make me happy in my long desire.
Acrisius eyes are charmed in golden sleep,
Those Beldames that were placed your bed to keep,
All drowned in Lethe (save your downy bed,
White sheets, and pillow where you rest your head)
None hears or sees; and what can they devise,
When they (heaven knows) have neither ears nor eyes.
Beshrew you sir, that for your amorous pleasure
Could thus sort all things, person, place and leisure.
Exclaim I could, and a loud uproar keep,
But that you say the Crones are all asleep:
And to what purpose should I raise such fear,
My voice being soft, they fast, and cannot hear?
They are deaf in rest, then gentle sweetly further,
If you should call, I thus your voice would murder,
And strangle with my kisses.
Kisses, tush.
I'll sink into my sheets, for I shall blush.
I'll dive into my bed.
And I behind?
No: were't the Ocean, such a gem to find,
I would dive after.
Good my Lord forbear
What do you mean? (oh heaven) is no man near,
If you will needs, for modesties chaste law,
Before you come to bed, the curtains draw,
But do not come, you shall not by this light,
If you but offer't, I shall cry out right.
Oh God, how hoarse am I, and cannot? fie
Danae thus naked and a man so nigh.
Pray leave me sir: he makes unready still,
Well I'll even wink, and then do what you will.
I would I were out of this tower of Brass, & from all these brazen faced Beldames: if we should fall asleep, and the King come and take us napping, where were we? My Lord stays long, & the night grows short, the thing you wot of hath cost him a simple sort of jewels. But if after all this cost, the thing you wot of would not do: If the peddler should show himself a piddler, he hath brought his hog's to a fair market. Fie upon it, what a snorting forward and backward these Beldames keep? But let them sleep on, some in the house I am sure are awake, and stirring too, or I miss my aim. Well, here must I sit and wait the good hour, till the gate be open, and suffer my eyes to do that, which I am sure my cloak never will, that is, to take nap.
Alas my Lord I never loved till now,
And will you leave me?
Beauteous Queen I must,
But thus conditioned; to return again,
With a strong army to redeem you hence,
In spite of Argos, and Acrisius,
That dooms you to this bondage.
Then farewell,
No sooner meet but part? Remember me:
For you great Prince I never shall forget!
I fear you have left too sure a token with me
Of your remembrance.
Danae, be't a son,
It shall be ours when we have Argos won.
But should you fail?
I sooner should forget
My name, my state, then fail to pay this debt,
The day-star 'gins t'appear, the Beldame's stir,
Ready t'unlock the gate, fair Queen adieu.
All men prove false, if Ioue be found untrue.
My man?
My Lord.
Some cloud to cover me, throw o'er my shoulders
Some shadow for this state, the Crones are up,
And wait t'unprison us, nay quickly fellow.
Here My Lord, cast your old cloak about you.
Where be these peddlers? nay quickly, for heaven sake: the gate is open, nay when? farewell my honest friends, and do our humble duties to the great King Iupiter.
King Iupiter shall know your gratitude, Farewell.
Nay, when I say farewell, farewell.
Farewell good Minivers.
Fair Danae doth his richest jewel wear.
That son of whom the Oracle foretold
Which cost both mother and the grandsire dear
Whose fortunes further leisure shall unfold:
Think Iupiter returned to Crete in haste,
To levy arms for Danae's free release,
(But hindered) till the time be fully passed,
For Saturn once more will disturb his peace.
The exiled Saturn by King Troos is aided,
Troos that gave Troy her name, and there reigned King,
Crete by the help of Ganimed's invaded,
Even at that time when Ioue should succours bring
To rescue Danae, and that warlike power,
Must now his native Territories guard,
Which should have brought her from the brazen tower,
(For to that end his forces were prepared)
We grow now towards our port and wished bay,
Gentles your love, and Homer cannot stray.
Whence are these warlike preparations,
Made by the King our brother.
'Tis given out,
To conquer Argos. But my sister Iuno
Suspects some amorous purpose in the King?
And blame her not, the fair Europa's rape,
Brought from Agenor, and the Cadmian rape,
Io the daughter of old Inachus,
Deflowered by him; the lovely Semele,
Fair Leda daughter to King Tyndarus
With many more, may breed a just suspect,
Nor hath he spared fair Ceres' Queen of Grain,
Who bore to him the bright Proserpina. (she
Such scapes may breed just fears, & what knows
But these are to surprise fair Danae.
Arm royal brothers, Creet's too small an I'll,
To comprehend our greatness, we must add
Argos and Greece to our Dominions.
And all the petty Kingdoms of the earth,
Shall pay their homage unto Saturn's son,
This day we'll take a muster of our forces,
And forward make for Argos.
All Arcadia
Assemble to this purpose.
Then set on.
The Eagle in our ensign we'll display,
Ioue and his fortunes guide us in our way.
Whether intends the King this warlike (march?
For Argos and Acrisius.
Rather guard,
Your native confines, see upon your Coast,
Saturn with thirty thousand Trojans landed
And in his aid King Troos and Ganymede.
In never worse time could the Tyrant come
Then now, to break my faith with Danae.
Oh beauteous love, I fear Acrisius' ire
Will with severest censure chastise thee,
And thou wilt deem me faithless and unkind
For promise-breach, (but what we must we must)
Come valiant Lords, we'll first our own defend
Ere against foreign climes our arm extend.
Degenerate boys, base bastards, not my sons,
Behold the death we threatened in your Cradles
We come to give you now. See here King Troos
In pity of deposed Saturn's wrongs,
Is come in person to chastise your pride,
And be the heavens relentless justicer.
Not against Saturn as a Father, we,
But as a murderer, lift our opposite hands.
Nature and heaven gives us this privilege,
To guard our lives 'gainst tyrants and invaders,
That claim we, as we're men, we would but live:
Then take not from us, what you cannot give.
Where hath not Saturn's fame abroad been spread
For many uses he hath given to man;
As Navigation, Tillage, Archery,
Weapons and gold? yet you for all these uses
Deprive him of his kingdom.
We but save
Our Innocent bodies from th'abortive grave,
We are his sons, let Saturn be content
To let us keep what Heaven and Nature lent.
Those filial duties you so much forget
We come to teach you. Royal Kings to arms,
Give Ganymede the onset of this battle,
That being a son knows how to lecture them,
And chastise their transgressions.
Ganymede,
It shall be so, power out your spleen and rage
On our proud Issue. Let the thirsty soil
Of barren Crete quaff their degenerate bloods,
And surfeit in their sins. All Saturn's hopes
And fortunes are engaged upon this day.
It is our last, and all, be't our endeavour
To win't for ay, or else to lose it ever.
Our Trojans are repulsed, where's Ganymede?
Amidst the throng of weapons, acting wonders.
Twice did I call aloud to have him fly,
And twice he swore he had vowed this day to die.
Let's make up to his rescue.
Tush, 'tis vain.
To seek to save him we shall lose ourselves.
The day is lost, and Ganymede lost too
Without divine assistance. high my Lord
Unto your ships, no safety lives a land,
Even to the Ocean's margin we are pursued,
Then save yourself by sea.
Crete thou hast won
My thirty thousand Soldiers, and my Son.
Come, let's to sea.
To sea must Saturn too,
To whom all good stars are still opposite.
My Crown I first bought with my infant's blood,
Not long enjoyed, till Titan wrested it;
Repurchased, and re-lost by Iupiter.
These horrid mischiefs that have crowned our brows,
Have bred in us such strange distemperature,
That we are grown dejected and forlorn.
Our blood is changed to Ink, our hairs to quills,
Our eyes half buried in our queachy plots.
Consumptions and cold agues have devoured
And eat up all our flesh, leaving behind
Nought save the Image of despair and death:
And Saturn shall to after ages be
That star, that shall infuse dull melancholy.
To Italy I'll fly, and there abide,
Till divine powers my place above provide.
Yield noble Trojan, there's not in the field
One of thy Nation lifts a hand save thee.
Why that's my honour, when alone I stand
'gainst thee and all the forces of thy land.
I love thy valour, and would woo thy friendship,
Go freely where thou wilt, and ransomless.
Why that's no gift: I am no prisoner,
And therefore owe no ransom, having breath,
Know I have vowed to yield to none save death.
I wish thee nobly Trojan, and since favour
Cannot attain thy love, I'll try conclusions,
And see if I can purchase it with blows.
Now speak'st thou like the noblest of my foes.
Stand all apart, and Princes girt us round.
I love him best, whose strokes can loudest sound.
I have thee, and will keep thee.
Not as prisoner.
A prisoner to my love, else thou art free,
My bosom friend, for so I honour thee.
I am conquered both by Arms and Courtesy.
The day is ours, Troos and K. Saturn's fled,
And Iupiter remains sole conqueror.
Peace with her golden wings hovers over Crete,
Frighting hence discord, and remorseless war:
Will Iupiter make up for Argos now?
Winter draws on, the sea's unnavigable,
To transport an Army. There attends without
A Lord of Argos.
Bring him to our presence.
How stands it with the beauteous Danae?
As one distressed by Fate, and miserable.
Of K. Acrisius, and his Fort of brass,
Danae's enclosure, and her Beldame guard,
Who but hath heard? yet through these brazen walls
Love hath broke in, and made the maid a mother
Of a fair son, which when Acrisius heard,
Her female guard unto the fire he dooms,
His daughter, and the infant prince her son,
He puts into a mastless boat to sea,
To prove the rigor of the stormy waves.
Acrisius, Argos, and the world shall know
Ioue hath been wronged in this: her further fortunes
Canst thou relate?
I can. As far as Naples
The friendly winds her mastless boat transports,
There succoured by a courteous Fisherman
she's first relieved, and after that presented
To King Pelonnus, who at this time reigns:
Who ravished with her beauty, crowns her Queen,
And decks her with th'imperial robes of state.
What we have scanted is supplied by fate.
Here then cease Arms, and now court amorous peace
With solemn triumphs, and dear Ganymede,
Be henceforth called The friend of Iupiter.
And if the Fates hereafter crown our brows
With divine honours, as we hope they shall,
we'll style thee by the name of Cupbearer,
To fill us heavenly Nectar, as fair Hebe
Shall do the like to Iuno our bright Queen.
Here end the pride of our mortality.
Opinion, that makes Gods, must style us higher.
The next you see us, we in state must shine,
Eternised with honours more divine.
Of Danae Perseus was that night be got,
Perseus that fought with the Gorgonian shield,
Whose fortunes to pursue Time suffers not.
For that, we have prepared an ampler field.
Likewise how Ioue with fair Alcmena lay:
Of Hercules, and of his famous deeds:
How Pluto did fair Proserpine betray:
Of these my Muse (now travelled) next proceeds.
Yet to keep promise, ere we further wade,
The ground of ancient Poems you shall see:
And how these (first borne mortal) Gods were made,
By virtue of divinest Poesy.
The Fates, to whom the Heathen yield all power,
Whose dooms are writ in marble, to endure,
Have summoned Saturn's three sons to their Tower,
To them the three Dominions to assure
Of Heaven, of Sea, of Hell. How these are scanned,
Let none decide but such as understand.
To Iupiter doth high Olimpus fall.
Who thunder and the trisulc lightning bears
Dreaded of all the rest in general:
He on a Princely Eagle mounts the Spheres,
Neptune is made the Lord of all the Seas,
His Mace a Trident, and his habit blue.
He can make Tempests, or the waves appease,
And unto him the Seamen are still true.
And for the winds, these brothers that still war,
Should not disturb his Empire, the three Fates
Bring them to Aeolus, chained as they are,
To be enclosed in caves with brazen gates.
Pluto's made Emperor of the Ghosts below.
Where with his black guard he in darkness reigns,
Commanding hell, where Styx and Lethe flow,
And murderers are hanged up in burning chains.
But leaving these: to your judicial spirits
I must appeal, and to your wonted grace,
To know from you, what eyeless Homer merits,
Whom you have power to banish from this place,
But if you send me hence unchecked with fear,
Once more I'll dare upon this Stage t'appear.