IF it seem strange unto yond (Honourable and worthy Lord) that in this manner I presume to saluce ye; the justice of the present cause, and the Suffrages due to such days of Triumph. shall instantly veiled you ample satisfaction. First for myself, I was sometime as you are now, Lieutenant or Governor of this famous City, albeit not in so mild a form or temper; in regard that those days of disturbance and rough combustion (after four several Conquests of the whole Land, and unsettled assurance in the very last) required a stearner strain of awful rule, than now these sweeter singing times are able to endure. Portgreves, Provostes, and Bailiffs, were London's first Magistrates, and (of Provosts) I the first, being named Leofstane, and a Gold Smith by my profession, as the powerful command that raised me from my Grave at Bermondsey, enstructes me that you are, and thought it fit, that the first honoured Brother of our ancient Fraternity, should attend this day of your solemn Inauguration, having a Brother Sheriff also of the same Society. For these my followers that attend me now, as in my time of authority they did: hostile still, to London's enemies or rude disturbers, but peaceful to all her friendly lovers. Then honourable Lord, and Brother Goldsmith, seeing Time privately tells me, that he hath further employment for me in this your day of Triumph, as best occasion shall give way thereto: here ends my first salutations to yourself, and these grave Senators your worthy brethren, who (in my time) were styled by the Name of Domesmen, Eldermen, or judges of the King's Courts, & were then assistant to me, in care, counsel, and fatherly providence, for this cities good, as these reverend men have been to others; and now will be the like to you. And so I leave ye to your further progression.
Leofstane, I charge thee stay.
What art thou, that dar'st bar me of my way?
He that surveys what ever deeds are done,
Abridges, or gives scope, as likes me best;
Recalling to the present sight of Sun
Actions, that (as forgot) have lain at rest,
And now, out of thy long since buried Chest
At Bermondsey, raised thee to see this day:
Leofstane; 'tis he, that dares compel thy stay.
See in how short a while a quiet Soul,
Hid from this world five hundred years and more,
May be forgetful of great Time's control,
By such gay sights as near I saw before.
Myself yer while could tell this worthy Lord,
Time had revived me, to attend this day:
Pardon me then, that I durst breathe a word
In contestation, where all ought obey.
needs must these gaudier days yield greater crime,
When long graned Ghosts dare thus contend with Time.
Enough, no more; Now honourable Lord,
For whose installment in this Dignity,
Thy loving brethren liberally afford,
Out of their loves their glad heart's sympathy,
And what may else thy triumph dignify:
As thus I turn my Glass to Times of old,
So tune thine ears to what must now be told.
In this triumphal Chariot thus attending,
Sit the supposed shapes of two great Kings,
That to this City gave no small befriending,
Advancing it from mean to mightier things,
From whence thy very instant honour springs:
For where before, stern, Martial-Regiment
Bore sole command, grew this grave government.
Richard the first, surnamed Lyon-heart,
For his undaunted courage and great mind,
When in God's cause he played a Champion's part,
In fair Iudea, where the pagan blind
In God's house would his mammetry have shrined
And full defaced Star-bright Jerusalem:
This royal Richard foiled his forces then.
But ere he undertook that holy war,
This City (his chief Chamber) did he grace
With Dignity, beyond the former far,
For Portgreves, Provosts, Bailiffs held best place,
Such, and no other (then) was London's case.
Till he bethought him of a Lord-maiors' name:
And so the Title of Lord Maior first came.
And shall I tell ye what that first Lord was?
A Goldsmith, of thine own profession,
Henrte Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane, of honourable race,
judicious, learned, and of such discretion,
That even by Richards own direction,
All his whole time, he held the State still on;
And so, until the fifteenth of King Iohn.
Which did exceed full four and twenty years,
That this grave Goldsmith held authority
Of the Lord Maior, as by Records appears,
Nineteen whole years this style of dignity
Came from the King: but then most graciously
Iohn gave the citizens free leave t'elect
Yearly their Maior, whom best they should respect.
Five years (each after other) till they chose
That grave Fitz-Alwine to his dying day,
When he was called hence to blessed repose.
Then justly may we be thus bold to say,
Four hundred years & three, the L. majors sway
Hath held in London, under their command,
Who still assigned that office to their hand.
How many goldsmiths have enjoyed the place,
Were needless to recount. Yet here sleeps one,
Whom in this raging and important case,
(He being Gold Smith too, and long since gone
Out of this world, old Nicholas Faringdon,
Four times Lord Maior) I may not well omit,
Because I think him for thy triumph fit.
These gates he built, this ward of him took name,
And three and fifty years he did survive
After his first being Maior What plenty came
To greet his days, with former times did strive,
And near the like as when he was alive:
Arise, arise I say, good Faringdon,
For in this triumph thou must needs make one.
AStonishment and frightful wonder,
Shakes and splits my soul in sunder.
Cannot graves contain their dead,
Where long they have lain buried,
But to Triumphs, sports, and shows
They must be raised? Alack, God knows
They count their quiet slumber hlest,
Free from disturbance, and unrest.
I know it well good man. Yet look about,
And recollect thy spirits free from fear,
Note what thou seest.
How? Whence? or where
May I suppose myself? Well I wot,
(If Faringdon mistake it not)
That ancient famous Cathedral,
Hight the Church of blessed Paul.
And that this Ward well witness can,
Once thereof I was Alderman,
And gave it mine own proper name.
I built these gates, the very same.
But when I note this goodly train,
(Yelad in Scarlet) it should say
(And sooth too) that these are they
Who watch for London night and day,
Grave Magistrates; of which fair band,
When second Edward swayed this land,
Four several times the chief was I,
And Lord of London's Mayoralty.
As by the bearing of that sword,
It seems that ye are London's Lord:
To whom becomes me lout full low,
Old duty yet (methinks) I know.
Turn now thy Glass to instant day,
And let old Faringdon thee pray:
Good Time, resolve him, what is he,
Graced with this day of Dignity?
A Brother of the goldsmiths Company,
Whose virtues, worth, and special love of all,
Hath raised unto this high authority.
Moreover note, how fit his lot doth fall,
That time should likewise at this instant call,
A Sheriff of the same Society:
To bear a part in this Solemnity.
See how the brethren of that worthy band,
Abound in love and liberality;
To grace this jovial day; On tiptoe stand
Their jocund Spirits: joying mutually,
In Maior and Sheriff of their Company.
How can thy Ghost then, but rejoice to see:
This honour of thine own Society?
joy and gladsome iovissance,
Doth old Faringdon entrance,
To hear the tale that Time hath told,
Since those reverend days of old,
Unto this great Solemnity,
For Brethren of my Company.
Glad and golden be your days,
Live in Prince and people's praise:
Honour London with your care,
Study still for her welfare:
And as goldsmiths both you are,
Such good and golden deeds prepare,
That may renown our Mystery,
To times of utmost memory.
My minute calls, and Ghosts must go.
Yet loathe I am to leave ye so.
For I could well spend out this day,
And do what service else I may;
Were Time but pleased that I might stay.
Time, that in this days honour raised us both,
Means not (I trust) so soon to sunder us:
To see that separation, I am loath,
Be then to both so kind and gracious;
That we may wait upon this worthy man:
And do him yet what service else we can.
You have your own desires. Go Faringdon,
There in that Chariot is thy place prepared:
here, I (as Coachman) mean to guide ye on,
So long as well our respite may be spared.
On then, away, for we have held ye long:
And done (I doubt) your worthy Guests great wrong.
Here, my Lord, my charge was limited, to describe this rich and beauteous Monument unto ye, with all relations thereto appertaining. But Time hath told me, that Guests of great State and Honour are come to feast with you, and the least delay now, may be both offensive and troublesome; therefore it is referred to more apt conveniency, when we (with much better leisure) may attend ye.
THis Orferie, so styled by the ancient Epithet of your Companies profession, or Gold-Smithery, doth speak itself unto your honour in this manner. here do the Miners and pioneers delve into the Earth's entrails, to gain the Oar, both of Gold and Silver; and having attained thereunto in plentiful measure, the ingenious finer purgeth him from his first Nature, and shapes him into to Ingots of variable form, according as his Art best guides and instructs him. From him, these precious Metals descend to divers other dexterious Artezans; as the Mint-Maister, his Coiners, and divers others, who make them to serve in public passage for general benefit, both in Coin, Plate, and jewels, as occasion best discovereth the just necessity. Being brought into these variant substances, to preserve those pure refined bodies from base adulterating, the Essay-Maister or absolute Trier of either's virtue, makes proof of them in his Furnaces, and of their true worth or value. So are they commended to Sovereign justice, attended by her gracious Daughters, Gold and Silver, who bountifully hurl abroad their Mother's treasures, after she hath (yet once again) tried them, by the Touch of undeceiveable perfection. The rest, that do sufficiently speak themselves in their distinguished places, as the jeweller, Lapidary, Pearle-Driller, Goldesmith, and such like, your eye of heedful observation may spare their further relating. Only I may not omit these two virtuous Ladies, Antiquity and Memory, who, present (in apt place) Grave judgement or Experience in the Goldesmiths ancient faculty, by the supposed shape of venerable Dunstane, a man, sometime very practic, & so well skilled in Gold-Smithery, as (notwithstanding his more Divine profession) being Bishop of Worcester, London, and lastly Archbishop of Canterbury, delighted therein to his utmost date of life.
So much for that; There Leofstane make a pause,
Till Time have certified this honoured Lord
Concerning these fair Emblems, And the cause
Of their combining in this kind accord.
The Argument doth instantly afford,
The ancient love and cordial amity
Between the Fishmongers & goldsmiths Company.
At Feasts and solemn meetings, on each side,
A fishmonger and Goldsmith, hand in hand
Have long time gone, and nothing could divide
The rare continuance of that loving band:
Which (doubtless) to the end of time will stand.
And therefore, these Imprese are thus borne:
The one's Fish, with the other's Unicorn.
Yet let no censure stray so far at large,
To think the reason of that unity
Makes Fishmongers support the Goldsmith's charge,
And their expenses shared equally:
No, t's the goldsmiths sole Society.
That in this Triumph bears the Purse for all:
As theirs the like, when like their lot doth fall.
Their loves (herein) may not be thought the less,
But rather virtual, and much stronger knit,
That each to other may the same express,
When honour (in each Science) makes men fit
On such a Seat of Dignity to fit.
Then Peter's Keys, with David's Cup of Gold:
May freely march together, uncontrolled.
Now, as custom wils it so,
On to Paul's Church must ye go,
To bless God for this bounteous day.
Till you return, here will we stay,
And usher then a gladsome guiding,
Home to the place of your abiding.
For such is your kind brethren's will:
And Time hath tied us thereuntill.
THus (honoured Lord) have we dutiously attended ye, till Time appointeth our departing, who hath tutourd Leofstanes' tongue how to take his leave, with some remarkable observations, not altogether unfitting your attention. First, the day of your Election, falling out in such strange manner as it did, exceeded the memory of Man to speak the like. And yet, notwithstanding, so great a Snow, Sleet, and rough wind; at the very instant of your choice, the Sun did as readily thrust forth his Golden beams, to guild the instant of your Inauguration, as hearts and hands did cheerfully applaud it with free and full confirmation. Next, three Names, all of equal syllables and sound, to happen in the immediate choice; is a matter deserving regard, and (from the Maioralties first beginning) never was the like. Pemberton, Swynnerton and Middleton, Names of three most worthy Gentlemen, but of much greater worth in sense and significancy, as your own (my Lord, for brevity) may yield an instance. Pemberton derives itself from the ancient British, Saxon, and eldest English, each Syllable suited with his apt meaning. Pem, implieth the head, chief or most eminent part of any thing; Bert, beareth the Character of bright shining and radiant splendour; and Tun, hath continued the long known Word for any Town or City, as most Shires in England (to this day) doth deliver the expression of their Towns; As London, sometime termed Ludstun, or Luds-Towne, may serve as an example. A bright head of this famous City, interpreting itself in the Name of Pemberton, and he being enstaulled in the government, to be her bright-shining Head under his Sovereign, Leofstanes' desire is;
Since Pemberton doth bear so bright a Name,
And that from gold & Goldsmiths grew his fame,
His deeds may prove to be like burnished Gold:
By no dim darkness any way controlled.
Well hast thou wished, therein Time joins with thee,
And tells this Lord, that such a goodly name,
Requires bright actions, from pollution free,
In word and deed to be alike, the same,
For then life standeth on her fairest frame.
And when the Head in splendour seems divine,
The people learn (by his clear light) to shine.
Contrariwise, obscure and misty deeds,
Do give a harsh and hateful precedent:
And of fair flowers begetteth stinking Weeds.
For ill example, harms the innocent;
And makes him (in bad life) as violent.
Be to this City then, so bright an Head,
That all may say, it near more flourished.
Consider likewise, Iames thy gracious King,
Sets Iames (his Subject) here his Deputy.
When Maiesste doth meaner persons bring
To represent himself in Sovereignty,
ist not an high and great authority?
Let it be said, for this high favour done:
King Iames hath found, a just Iames Pemberton.
Let me not now they brethren's love omit,
So worthily (this day) to thee declared,
If with like love thou kindly welcome it,
Their hope is to the highest pitch preferred,
For thus they wish, as Time himself hath heard:
That Pemberton, and Smiths, may both be,
An endless honour to their Company.
So wish I too, with all my heart,
And seeing now we needs must part,
From Faringdon one farewell take,
Who gives it for the goldsmiths sake.
You are Lieutenant to your King,
And 'tis a very worthy thing,
To mind God's blessing, and his grace,
That brought ye to so high a place.
Oh soil it not with any blame,
That, may impeach it, or your name.
For they have told ye well before,
That whereof I need speak no more:
You are a Goldsmith, Golden be
Your daily deeds of Charity.
Golden your hearing poor men's cases,
Free from partial bribes embraces.
And let no rich or mighty man
Injure the poor, if help you can.
The World well wots, your former care
Forbids ye now to pinch or spare,
But to be liberal, frank, and free,
And keep good Hospitality,
Such as beseems a Mayoralty,
Yet far from prodigality.
To be too lavish, is like crime
As being too frugal in this time.
I say no more, but God defend ye,
Many days of comfort send ye,
To whom (with all these) I commend ye.