WHence breaks this warlike thunder of loud drums,
(Clarions and Trumpets) whose shrill echo comes
Up to our Watery Court, and calls from thence
Us, and our Tritons? As if violence
Were to our Silver-footed Sister done
(Of Floods the Queen) bright Thamesis, who does run
Twice every day to our bosom, and there hides
Her wealth, whose Stream in liquid Crystal glides
Guarded with troops of Swans? what does beget
These Throngs? this Confluence? why do voices beat
The Air with acclamations of applause,
Good wishes, Love, and Praises? what is't draws
All Faces this way? This way Rumour flies,
Clapping her infinite wings, whose noise the Skies
From earth receive, with Musical rebounding,
And strike the Seas with repercussive sounding.
Oh! now I see the cause: vanish vain fears,
Isis' no danger feels: for her head wears
Crowns of Rich Triumphs, which This day puts on,
And in Thy Honour all these Rites are done.
Whose Name when Neptune heard, 'twas a strange Spell,
Thus farre-up into th' Land to make him swell
Beyond his Bownds, and with his Sea-troops wait
Thy wished arrival, to congratulate.
Go therefore on, go boldly: thou must sail
In rough Seas (now) of Rule: and every Gale
Will not perhaps befriend thee: But (how black
So ere the Skies look) dread not Thou a Wrack,
For when Integrity and Innocence sit
Steering the Helm, no Rock the Ship can split.
Nor care the Whales (never so great) their jaws
Should stretch to swallow thee: Every good man's cause
Is in all storms his Pilot: He that's sound
To himself (in Conscience) near can run-a-ground.
Which that thou mayst do, never look on't still:
For (Spite of foul gusts) calmer Winds shall fill
Thy Sails at last. And see! they home have brought
A Ship which Bacchus (God of Wines) hath fraught
With richest juice of Grapes, which thy Friends shall
Drink off in Healths to this Great Festival.
If any at Thy happiness repine,
They gnaw but their Own hearts, and touch not Thine.
Let Bats and Screech-owls murmur at bright Day,
Whiles Prayers of Goodmen Guid. Thee on the way.
Sound old Oceanus Trumpeters, and lead on.
Hail (worthy Praetor) stay, and do Me grace,
(Who still have called thee Patron) In this place
To take from me heaped welcomes, who combine
These people's hearts in one, to make them thine.
Bright virtues name thou know'st and heavenly birth,
And therefore (spying thee) down she leapt to earth
Whence vicious men had driven her: On her throne
The Liberal Arts wait: from whose breasts do run
The milk of Knowledge: on which, Sciences feed,
Trades and Professions: And by Them, the seed
Of Civil, Popular government, is sown;
Which springing up, lo! to what height 'tis grown
In Thee and * These is seen. And (to maintain
This Greatness) Twelve strong Pillars it sustain;
Upon whose Capitals, * Twelve Societies stand,
(Grave and well-ordered) bearing chief Command
Within this City, and (with Love) thus rear
Thy fame, in free election, for this year.
All armed, to knit their Nerves (in One) with Thine,
To guard this new Troy: And, (that She may shine
In Thee, as Thou in Her) no Misers key
Has bar the Gold up; Light flies from the Day
Not of more free gift, than from them their Cost:
For what's now spared, that only they count Lost.
As then their joynd-hands lift Thee to thy Seat.
(Changing thereby thy Name for one More * Great
And as this City, with her Loud, Full Voice,
(Drowning all spite that murmurs at the Choice,
If at least such there be) does Thee prefer,
So art thou bound to love, both Them and Her.
For Know, thou art not like a Pinnacle, placed
Only to stand aloft, and to be graced
With wondering eyes, or to have caps and knees
Heap worship on thee: for that Man does lose
Himself and his Renown, whose growth being high
In the weale-publicke (like the Cypress tree)
Is neither good to Build-with, nor bear Fruit;
Thou must be now, Stirring, and Resolute.
To be what thou art Sworn, (a waking Eye)
A far off (like a Beacon) to descry
What storms are coming, and (being come) must then
Shelter with spread arms, the poorest Citizen.
Set Plenty at thy Table, at thy Gate
Bounty, and Hospitality: he's most Ingrate
Into whose lap the Public-weal having poured
Her Golden showers, from Her his wealth should hoard.
Be like those Ancient Spirits, that (long agone)
Could think no Good deed sooner, than 'twas Don;
Others to pleasure. Hold it Thou more Glory,
Than to be pleased Thyself. And be not sorry
If Any strive (in best things) to exceed thee,
But glad, to help thy wronger's, if they need thee.
Nor fear the Stings of Envy, nor the Threats
Of her envenomed Arrows, which at the Seats
Of those Who Best Rule, evermore are shot,
But the Air blows off their feathers, and they hit not.
Come therefore on; nor dread her, nor her Sprites,
The poison she spits up, on her own Head lights.
On, on, away.
Adder's shoot, hiss speckled Snakes;
Sloth crawl up, see Oppression wakes;
(Baine to learning) Ignorance
Shake thy ass's ears, Disdain, advance
Thy head Luciferan: Riot split
Thy ribs with curses: Calumny spit
Thy rancke-rotten gall up: See, See, See,
That Witch, whose bottomless Sorcery
Makes fools run mad for her; that Hag
For whom your Dam pines, hangs out her flag
Our Den to ransack: Virtue, that whore;
See, see, how brave she's, I am poor.
On, on, the beams of Virtue, are so bright,
They dazzle Envy, on: the Hag's put to flight.
Snakes, from your virulent spawn engender
Dragons, that may piece-meal rend her,
Adders shoot your stings like quills
Of Porcupines, (Stiff) hot Aetnean hills
Vomit sulphur to confound her,
Fiends and Furies (that dwell under)
Lift hell gates from their hinges: come
You cloven-foote-broode of Barrathrum,
Stop, stay her, fright her, with your shrieks,
And put fresh blood in envies cheeks.
On, on, the beams of Virtue, are so bright,
They dazzle Envy: on the Hag's put to flight.
Shoot, Shoot, etc. All that are with Enuy.
WElcome to Fame's high Temple: here fix fast
Thy footing; for the ways which thou hast past
Will be forgot and worn out, and no Tract
Of steps observed, but what thou now shalt Act.
The book is shut of thy precedent deeds,
And Fame unclaspes another, where she reads
(Aloud) the Chronickle of a dangerous year,
For Each Eye will look through thee, and Each Ear
Waylay thy Words and Works. Thou'st yet but gone
About a Pyramids foot; the Tops not won,
That's glass; who slides there, falls, and once fallen down
Never more rises: No Art cures Renown
The wound being sent to th' Heart. 'tis kept from thence
By a strong Armour, virtues influence;
She guides thee, Follow her. In this Court of Fame
None else but Virtue can unroll thy Name.
Erect thou then a Serious Eye, And look
What Worthies fill up Fame's Voluminous book,
That now (thine own name read there) none may blot
Thy leaf with soul ink, nor thy Margin quoate
With any Act of Thine, which may disgrace
This cities choice, thyself, or this thy Place:
Or, that which may dishonour the high Merits
Of thy Renowned Society: Royal Spirits
Of Princes holding it a grace to wear
That Crimson Badge, which these about them bear,
Yea, Kings themselves 'mongst you have Fellows been,
Styled by the Name of a Free-citizen:
For instance, see, seven English Kings there placed,
Clothed in your Livery, The first Seat being graced
By second Richard: next him * Bullingbrooke:
Then, that Fift (thundering) Henry: who all France shook:
By him, his son (six Henry) By his side
Fourth Edward: who the Roses did divide:
Richard the third, next him, and then that King,
Who made both Roses in one Branch to spring:
A Spring of which Branch, (Highest now but One)
Is Henry Prince of Wales, followed by none:
Who of this Brotherhood, last and best steps forth,
Honouring your Hall: To Heighten more your worth.
I can a Register show of seventeen more,
(Princes and Dukes All:) entombed long before,
Yet kept alive by Fame; Earls thirty one,
And Barons sixty six that path have gone:
Of Visecounts only one, your Order took:
Turn over one leaf more in our vast book
And you may read the Names of Prelates there,
Of which one Archbishop your cloth did wear.
And Bishops twenty four: of Abbot's seve,
As many Priors, to make the number even:
Of forty Church men, I, one sub prior add,
You from all these, These from you honour had:
Women of high blood likewise laid aside
Their greater State so to be dignified:
Of which a Queen the first was, than a pair
of Duke's wives: And to leave the Roll more fair
Five Countesses and two Ladies are the last,
Whose Birth & Beauties have your Order graced.
But I too long spin out this third of Gold;
Here breaks it off. Fame hath them All enrolled
On a Large File (with Others,) And their Story
The world shall read, to Add unto thy Glory,
Which I am loath to darken: thousand eyes
Yet aching till they enjoy thee, win then that prize
Which Virtue holds up for thee, And (that done)
Fame shall the end crown, as she hath begun.
Set forward.
Honour, eldest Child of Fame,
Thou far older than thy Name,
Waken with my Song, and see
One of thine, here waiting thee.
Sleep not now
But thy brow
Chased with Olives, Oak and bay
And an age of happy days
Upward bring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Longing round about him stay
Eyes, to make another day,
Able with their virtuous Light
Utterly to banish Night.
All agree
This is he
Full of bounty, honour, store
And a world of goodness more
Yet to spring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Envy angry with the dead,
Far from this place hide thy head:
And Opinion, that near knew
What was either good or true
Fly, I say
For this day
Shall fair justice, Truth, and Right,
And such happy sons of Light
To us bring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Go on nobly, may thy Name,
Be as old, and good as Fame.
Ever be remembered here
Whilst a blessing, or a tear
Is in store
With the poor
So shall SWINERTON near die,
But his virtues upward fly
And still spring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus ceasing never,
He is living, living ever.
Fiend's and Furies that dwell under,
Lift Hell-gates from their hinges: Come
You cloven-footed-brood of Barathrum,
Stop, stony her, fright her with your shrieks,
And put fresh blood in Envies cheeks.
On, on, the beams of Virtue are so bright,
They dazzle Envy: On, the Hag's put to flight.
MY This-dayes-sworne-protector, welcome home,
If justice speak not now, be she ever dumb:
The world gives out she's blind; but men shall see,
Her Sight is clear, by influence drawn from Thee.
For One-yeare therefore, at these Gates she'll sit,
To guide thee In and Out: thou shalt commit
(If She stand by thee) not One touch of wrong:
And though I know thy wisdom built up strong,
Yet men (like great ships) being in storms, most near
To danger, when up all their sails they bear.
And since all Magistrates tread still on ice,
From mine own School I read thee this advice:
Do good for no man's sake (now) but thine own,
Take leave of Friends & foes, both must be known
But by one Face: the Rich and Poor must lie
In one even Scale: All Suitors, in thine Eye
Welcome alike; Even He that seems most base,
Look not upon his Clothes, but on his Case.
Let not Oppression wash his hands i'th' Tears
Of Widows, or of Orphans: Widows prayers
Can pluck down Thunder, & poor Orphans cries
Are Laurels held in fire; the violence flies
Up to Heaven-gates, and there the wrong does tell,
Whilst Innocence leaves behind it a sweet smell.
Thy Conscience must be like that Scarlet die;
One foul spot stains it All: and the quick Eye
Of this prying world, will make that spot thy scorn.
That Collar (which about thy Neck is worn)
Of Golden Esses, bids thee so to knit
Men hearts in Love, and make a Chain of it.
That Sword is seldom drawn, by which is meant,
It should strike seldom: never th'innocent.
'tis held before thee by another's Hand,
But the point upwards (heaven must that command)
Snatch it not then in Wrath; it must be given,
But to cut none, till warranted by Heaven.
The Head, the politic Body must advance
For which thou hast this Cap of Maintenance,
And since the most just Magistrate often errs,
Thou guarded art about with Officers,
Who knowing the oaths of Others that are gone,
Should teach thee what to do, what leave undone.
Night's Candles lighted are, and burn amain,
Cut therefore here off, Thy Officious Train
Which Love and Custom lend thee: All Delight
Crown both this Day and City: A good Night
To Thee, and these Grave Senators, to whom
My last Farewells, in these glad wishes come,
That thou & they (whose strength the City bears)
May be as old in Goodness as in Years.
Non displicuisse
Festinat (Praetor) Qui placuisse Tibi▪