STay, Stay.
Stay light foot Iris, for thou strivest in vain,
My wings are nimbler than thy feet.
Away,
Dissembling Mercury; my messages
Ask honest haste, not like those wanton ones
Your thundering father sends.
Stay foolish Maid,
Or I will take my rise upon a hill,
When I perceive thee seated in a cloud,
In all the painted glory that thou hast,
And never cease to clap my willing wings,
Till I catch hold of thy discoloured Bow,
And shiver it beyond the angry power
Of your cursed Mistress, to make up again.
Hermes forbear, Iuno will chide and strike;
Is great Ioue jealous that I am employed
On her love errands? she did never yet
Clasp weak mortality in her white arms,
As he hath often done: I only come
To celebrate the long wished Nuptials,
Here in Olympia, which are now performed
Betwixt two goodly Rivers, which have mixed
Their gentle rising waves, and are to grow
Into a thousand streams, great as themselves;
I need not name them, for the sound is loud
In heaven and earth, and I am sent from her
The Queen of Marriage, that was present here,
And smiled to see them join, and hath not chid
Since it was done: good Hermes let me go.
Nay you must stay, Ioues message is the same,
Whose eyes are lightning, and whose voice is thunder,
Whose breath is any wind, he will, who knows
How to be first on earth as well as heaven.
But what hath he to do with Nuptial rights?
Let him keep state upon his starry throne,
And fright poor mortals with his thunderbolts,
Leaving to us the mutual darts of eyes.
Alas, whenever offered he t'abridge
Your lady's power, but only now in these,
Whose match concerns his general government?
Hath not each god a part in these high joys?
And shall not he the King of gods presume
Without proud Juno's licence? let her know
That when enamoured Ioue first gave her power
To link soft hearts in Undissolved bonds,
He then foresaw, and to himself reserved
The honour of this Marriage: thou shalt stand
Still as a Rock, while I to bless this feast
Will summon up with my all charming rod,
The Nymphs of fountains, from whose watery locks
Hung with the dew of blessing and increase,
The greedy Rivers take their nourishment.
You Nymphs, who bathing in your loved springs,
Beheld these Rivers in their infancy,
And joyed to see them, when their circled heads
Refreshed the air, and spread the ground with flowers:
Rise from your Wells, and with your nimble feet
Perform that office to this happy pair;
Which in these plains, you to Alpheus did;
When passing hence through many seas unmixed,
He gained the favour of his Arethuse.
IS Hermes grown a lover, by what power
Unknown to us, calls he the Naiades?
Presumptuous Iris, I could make thee dance
Till thou forgot'st thy lady's messages,
And ran'st back crying to her, thou shalt know
My power is more, only my breath, and this
Shall move fixed stars, and force the firmament
To yield the Hyades, who govern showers,
And dewy clouds, in whose dispersed drops
Thou form'st the shape of thy deceitful Bow.
You maids, who yearly at appointed times,
Advance with kindly tears, the gentle floods,
Descend, and power your blessing on these streams,
Which rolling down from heaven aspiring hills,
And now united in the fruitful vales;
Bear all before them ravished with their joy,
And swell in glory till they know no bounds.
GReat wit and power hath Hermes to contrive
A lifeless dance, which of one sex consists.
Alas poor Iris, Venus hath in store
A secret Ambush of her winged boys,
Who lurking long within these pleasant groves;
First struck these Lovers with their equal darts,
Those Cupids shall come forth, and join with these,
To honour that which they themselves begun.
BEhold the Statues which wise Vulcan placed
Under the Altar of Olympian Ioue,
Shall dance for joy of these great Nuptials:
And gave to them an Artificial life,
See how they move, drawn by this heavenly joy,
Like the wild trees, which followed Orpheus' Harp.
ANd what will Juno's Iris do for her?
just match this show; or my Invention fails,
Had it been worthier, I would have invoked
The blazing Comets, Clouds and falling Stars,
And all my kindred Meteors of the Air
To have excelled it, but I now must strive
To imitate Confusion, therefore thou
Delightful Flora, if thou ever feltst
Increase of sweetness in those blooming plants,
On which the horns of my fair bow decline;
Send hither all the Rural company,
Which deck the May-games with their Country sports;
Iuno will have it so.
IRis we strive,
Like winds at liberty, who should do worst
Ere we return. If Iuno be the Queen
Of Marriage, let her give happy way
To what is done, in honour of the State
She governs.
Hermes, so it may be done
Merely in honour of the State, and these
That now have proved it, not to satisfy
The lust of Iupiter, in having thanks
More than his Iuno, if thy snaky rod
Have power to search the heavens, or found the sea,
Or call together all the ends of earth,
To bring in any thing that may do grace
To us, and these; do it, we shall be pleased.
Then know that from the mouth of Ioue himself,
Whose words have wings, and need not to be borne;
I took a message, and I bore it through
A thousand yielding clouds, and never staid
Till his high will was done: the Olympian games
Which long have slept, at these wished Nuptials,
He pleased to have renewed and all his Knights
Are gathered hither, who within their tents
Rest on this hill, upon whose rising head.
Behold Ioues Altar, and his blessed priest's
Moving about it: come you holy men,
And with your voices draw these youths along,
That till Ioues music call them to their games,
Their active sports may give a blessed content
To those, for whom they are again begun.
SHake off your heavy trance,
And leap into a dance,
Such as no mortals use to tread,
Fit only for Apollo
To play to, for the Moon to lead,
And all the Stars to follow.
ON blessed youths, for love doth pause
Laying aside his graver laws
For this device,
And at the wedding such a pair,
Each dance is taken for a prayer,
Each song a sacrifice.
The Knights dance their second Measure.
MOre pleasing were these sweet delights,
If Ladies moved as well as Knights;
Run every one of you and catch
A Nymph in honour of this match;
And whisper boldly in her ear,
Ioue will but laugh, if you forswear.
And this day's sins he doth resolve
That we his Priests should all absolve.
YE should stay longer if we durst,
Away, alas that he that first
Gave Time wild wings to fly away,
Hath now no power to make him stay.
But though these games must needs be played,
I would this Pair, when they are laid,
And not a creature nigh them,
Could catch his scythe, as he doth pass,
And cut his wings, and break his glass,
And keep him ever by them.
PEace and silence be the guide
To the Man, and to the Bride,
If there be a joy yet new
In marriage, let it fall on you,
That all the world may wonder.
If we should stay, we should do worse,
And turn our blessing to a curse,
By keeping you asunder.