THe chiefest point of king's felicity,
Some subjects do esteem Authority.
we are above, the Potentates of earth
Be unacquainted with high blood and birth.
We do transcend supremacy of Kings,
Account them (as they are) most mortal things.
Subject to putrefaction, to disease,
To folly; which no physic may appease.
Yet they do magnify themselves alone,
Their haughty stomachs do acknowledge none
Above; who may such dignity surmount:
Of power supreme as fables they account.
My Godhead may with privilege complaint
Of Sparta; whose proud factious Kings refrain
By wicked council, from due sacrifice
At my religious Altar: they suffice
To render duty in Olympics once,
And rob me of antique oblations:
Which we ascribe unto the base repute
They do conceive of our Divinity,
My Temple's honour and supremacy.
To Matrons (Bawds and Widows) they translate
To service of weak women dedicate
My whole predominance; they do exempt
Man's homage, and believe my power of change
Extends no further than the female sex.
This new-conceited error I'll refute,
I'll manifest how far compulsive change
Doth oversway proud man; I'll execute
The rigor of my vengeance: dreadful awe
Gods do obtain by a corrective law.
And thus will I restore that holiness,
Which they extinguish through bold sauciness:
Mortals contemn the maker's deity,
Until his wrath scourge their impiety.
Nature acquainted well with indigence,
Defining (in itself) our impotence,
Liable to corruption general,
Shows, nothing doth endure that's natural:
Stern death no pity takes on hallowed age,
Upon the sucking babe, whose harmless twine,
Tenderly hangs about the nurse's neck,
Never did old men's holy tears obtain,
Never did death from Innocents refrain.
The slave who smothers in obscurity
His hated life; who never did account
Of rising Sun, eclipse, and prodigies,
More than of customs and impertinence;
Never accounted seasons, months, and years,
Autumnal harvest, Springtide happiness,
Further than means to nourish misery,
Who never lent the busy world a smile,
But breathes out melancholy air, and groans.
This man (alike with Epicures and Kings,
Who often strive with a departing soul)
Expects upon the leisure of his fate,
So Kings and Cripples be incorporate;
Their ashes often mixed, when they repose
Two petty urns, their bodies oft enclose.
Death, how impartial be thy wounds? how free
From all exceptions? My beloved fire,
Lusty and full of Spirit five days since,
Here humbled lies, once royal prop of Greece.
Laments are idle, neither can recall
Your father's soul back from Elysium.
But grief informs the world he once did live
Worthy, and well respected, like a Prince,
Whom people pray for, and whose happy reign
True subjects crave to be perpetual.
But sorrow in excess (dread sovereign)
Begets a weak distraction of the brain.
Breeds a contempt of mundane diligence,
Neglects profession, violates the law
Of solace, and abhors congruity,
Gives careless reigns to sick security,
Turns nature to a living lethargy.
True Hypponax, and therefore temperance
Limits with reason our compulsive woe:
For men of pure discretion (you may find)
Bear all extremes with a most equal mind.
Repeat Perillus (the last sign of love)
A poem to express the Obsequy,
With tears concluding his Catastrophe.
Fear to offend his far divulged name,
Which (who may mention without righteous fame)
Being ever busied in effecting laws,
Commended still with popular applause,
Retaining orders of Antiquity,
Forbids me to repeat his Elegy:
Each clamorous echo and all forest-noise
Engendered by the Sylvan dryads,
Be henceforth silent; never may such tunes
Afford free mirth to poet's fantasy;
Who, may surcease to sing their sacred lays,
Viewing the unaccustomed change of time:
Till future ages do revive the loss
Of our dejected worthy in his son,
Whose true external image doth retain,
The living lustre of our wonted king,
May whose dear genius dwell thy gifts among,
And us provoke to leave his funeral song.
Enough; and in that final word, Enough,
Our lamentations fail: remove the hearse,
His body sleeps: who may the soul reverse?
(My Council) stay, assist me; and because
From the succession of new Kings, new laws
Take their original, I do intend
Enormities of custom to amend,
Matters (though in themselves erroneous)
Amended, may prove meritorious,
Had but impartial Fate five longer weeks,
Allotted to my safe progenitor.
He, by advise of your sage gravity,
Had finished (ere this) what you begun,
Which (through default) I must remember done.
The people of our continent, each sex
Both masculine and female, do adore
A Goddess, whose essential part is change,
(Proper to widows, virgins wild, and wives)
Antiquity doth call her CINTHIA;
The honour, sacrifice and Hecatombs,
Spent in the solemn, superficial awe
Of her accounted-sanctimonious law,
Are (without equal number) infinite.
We, knowing her supremacy extends
No further than weak women, will abridge
That annual expense, and will confine
Such customary devotion to the sect
Of Priesthoods feminine; their simple sex
Shall by injunction worship CINTHIA,
To whom indeed they be subordinate.
So, this decree of privilege exempts
Men from oblations: Let an Officer
Inform the people thus.
We all subscribe.
Your dutiful acceptance (noble friends)
Of this propounded policy, doth urge
My secret nature to disclose the love
Which was inflamed when juniority
Of years and judgement (my associates)
Gave me advice, which a more grounded age
Doth entertain, with equal permanence:
With self-same fervour and integrity
Of true entire affection, as before.
What Spartan Lady will oppose the King?
What Spartan Lady doth Maenander love?
Nay friends allow the marriage of your King,
A matter lawful first in general
And thence refute the scruple so precise,
Which bolsters up a life Monastical.
That scruple we as error do account.
Then I'll advertise in especial,
You sapient hearers of that beauteous dame,
Who, unredeemed Maenander, captivate
Doth hold in fetters, though a freeborn King,
The daughter of Hyarchus do I love.
My daughter? unexpected happiness!
Give me then leave, sweet ravishment, to see
Her glad espousal celebrated once,
By which, but some conjecture may arise,
To see the royal issue of her womb;
And I'll go lodge in my forefather's tomb.
Do all agree with this old o'erjoyed man?
True subjects will commend Menander's choice.
Nothing doth more prevent a PRINCE's fate,
Then wise directing Councillors of State.
Gross indignation! manifest repulse!
Am I neglected? O disdainful Prince!
May we observe thy peevish altitude,
Like a contemptive groom or Sycophant,
Without your glance and poor espial? judge,
O judge my quarrel some ingenious man,
Witness my righteous challenge of his pride;
Resolve me some indifferent arbiter,
How to digest this ignominious pill.
My love and duty both rejected thus?
My dignity esteemed so little worth?
My salutations frustrate? Some poor dolt,
Who pays a courtesy and supple cringe
For every dram of air he sucks in,
Cannot be used with less humanity.
we, bending, stooped before his Majesty,
He, with a crabbed countenance, clean aversed,
Goes on like some dull statue; never stoops,
Nor smiles, but with a frowning arrogance,
Just like a moulded picture, like the frame
Of a supported Image, doth move on,
As by some artificial new device,
Puppets are seen to make a solemn dance.
He now attended with a barbal size
Of sober Statesmen, doth reject my love,
As if I were not in full equipage
Of his own years: nay almost of degree,
Excepting his high place of Sovereign.
O pride of Princes! o how forcible
Be scornful frowns from an offended King?
This argues guilt, and makes me culpable,
Without a conscious crime; without pretence
Of any thing committed: In defence
I therefore well may plead pure ignorance.
What new suggestion should exasperate
The king's displeasure? doubtless, he of late,
And his big title, was more affable,
More gent and courteous: but the crown perhaps
Is heavy, and requires the cunning help
Of those grey dotards (who indeed possess
Our most deluded Monarch) to support
A thing so massy, and immense; proceed,
Soon may my wrathful curses overtake
The proudest vein of their advanced souls:
May the vast concave of Olympus crack
And give a signal to our God's decree
Of dissolution ready to approach,
Of earth and heaven their latest period,
When I repent my curse, or do abstain
From an effectual means, which may procure
Destruction, though delayed; yet deadly sure.
Am I not noble? bred of equal stem
With Sparta's chief and best Magnificoes?
My Ancestors (removed but nine degrees)
Knew never man below the blood of Kings
Worth emulation, as a rival fit
For them, admitting mighty Emperors,
None as above, but as competitors:
From those heroic monuments of Greece,
From those Hyrudo you can testify,
ourself derives a lineal descent:
And by the law of Herald's dignity,
A supported by antiquity)
I am enrolled amid the chiefest rank
Of Dukes, which govern this Peninsula:
Yet shall I traverse so obsequiously,
Within the glance of his huge altitude,
Like some dejected melancholy Ass,
Which feeds on thistles.
Death! you are abused,
Were I the man appointed to sustain,
So undeserved a signal of disgrace,
The proudest King in Europe should perceive,
I'd not digest an injury so base.
You being the subject of such high abuse,
You should with faction terrify the King,
Amaze the Court, and make your opposites
Tremble again like babes, who shaking stand,
Doubtful of mercy from the tutor's hand.
Were I the man whom dignity of place
Entitled to such vast prerogative
As you enjoy, no scandal, no disgrace,
Should touch my honour without full revenge:
The King himself should not escape my spleen,
(Upon so just a quarrel) I'd affront
His ample greatness: nay expostulate
On equal terms, why without open cause
He should reject my service with a frown,
I'd tax him of ungoverned appetite,
Self-humour, peevish ignorance of state,
And charge him to amend infirmities:
If like a tyrant he but durst reply,
Rating the licence of audacity,
Then would I menace torture; I would tear,
The big voluminous Title he doth wear
Pined on his back by parasites and knaves,
Who though they want, yet can bestow much grace,
Kings when they leave to be upright, are base.
Make me acknowledge this thy love sincere,
Bring thy magnanimous courage into act;
O be my agent, reconcile the doubts
Which do possess my intellectual sense.
The Statesmen are my sole Antigonists,
They do seduce and steal away the King.
Keep his heroic bounty for themselves;
They do detain his nature punctually,
Make him (deluded) parsimonious,
Erect who pleases their magnificence,
Who them displease, the king must frown upon:
They do entomb the silly wretch alive,
Make him as dead, to eminent designs,
Which they approve not; then revive his will,
To adventure such, as none approve but they.
In brief, they lead him like a lions whelp,
Tame, and yet fierce; if so the keeper please,
To worry with advantage: then beware,
Those who offended have the keepers will;
By which, the tame-taught Lions' governed still.
believe't my Lord, a homebred naturalist,
Whose resolution never was confirmed
By art, example, or experience;
Who never knew a faith historical,
(That low step to a warrant rational)
His anger would be ready for attempt;
Nay finish all with very good success,
Whilst you revolve a tedious advice,
Of which, too long delay doth spoil the prize.
But sir, the high opponents, who traduce
My honour, and good name, be numerous,
Men of no dunghill breeding (not advanced
By some especial madam of the Court,
For a concealment of her secrecy,
In case, where witness, bawdy hand, or seal,
To broken Titles be restorative)
But matchless in their eminence of birth,
Not sprung from petty page, or footboys race,
(Only removed, to fill up vacant place,
And rob judicial statesmen of deserts,
To whom by nation's law, all fame reverts)
No, my assailants be both rich and wise,
(Two qualities scarce analogical,
Yet my oppugnant enemies have both)
Rich, wise, and nobly borne; nay favourites,
Men of an equal judgement with myself,
Ingenious they be (though Flatterers)
Who with calumnious faction do deprave
My potent fortunes, making birth a slave.
My foes be great, therefore I am dismayed,
And to encounter great ones am afraid.
What huge Antaeus may of conquest brag,
Who overcomes a pygmy? or insults
Over a simple wretch condemned to chains?
May loves own Eagle stoop at stinking flies?
And suffer Owls to penetrate the skies?
Well did that mighty Indian dog deserve,
Whom neither Buck, mad Bull, nor threatening Boar,
Could from the kennel make to rise, before
A stout courageous Lion, king of strength,
Ireful enough, with vengeance in his jaws,
Prepared for single combat; boldly then
Like a resolved Champion forth he flew,
And the Majestic Lion fiercely slew.
Give me a man, whom neither multitude,
Nor means to work revenge, can terrify;
Who, though encompassed with corrival foes,
Immured with adverse competitors,
Left e'en amidst the circumventing jaws,
Of greedy hounds, and hunter's policy;
Can, like a whirlwind, in despite of those,
Who with unequal faction dare oppose,
Fly through the thickest, make their big-swollen maws,
Level with stinking lakes, and ditches deep,
Like a Colossus though they stood before.
Who may esteem it an inglorious act,
Rather who thinks the valour not divine,
Which through a banded troup of enemies,
Doth, like some bolt of thunder fly apace,
And force withstanding objects to give place?
Men of your size being urged with insolence.
Of peevish statists emulating pride,
(A humour most unnecessary ill)
Should, like the murdering Chain-shot, drive downhill
Castles and rocks, although impregnable,
Make mountains stoop before you, rend up Oaks,
Buffet large Atlas with incessant strokes,
(Though the supporter of Olympus' frame)
Till heaven and earth beg rescue for the same.
Yet shallow greatmen, they must wisemen seem,
For noble births do live by people's breath;
Nor may the privilege of birth redeem
Our estimation, subject still to death;
be therefore wise (wisdom who dares condemn?)
If not by nature, then by stratagem.
thouart young (Hirudo) resolute and wise,
A pliant apprehension soon will rise;
Remember now thy natural good parts,
Think if they serve to reconcile the doubt
Of my ensuing mischief; prithee think,
If thou darest venture boldly to remove
My foes from bounty of Menander's love:
Which, till the blinded King do abrogate,
Each fool may from my fortunes derogate.
Combine thy powers, and ingenious parts
To salve the wound of my disgrace, which smarts.
And be my creature; meditate withal
Our now-declining joys to reinstall:
And be my creature; satisfy the King
By some corrupted means, or anything:
And be my creature; may some new device,
Purchased by Magic Art, and hellish prize,
Wholly avert the puny king's belief
From our opponents tales, which do in chief
Poison my merits; o abolish those,
And be my creature, or indeed dear slave
I will be thine; do but employ some care
To best advantage of thy agent-skill;
Remember then, thou art my creature still.
Know then I love thee Duke, and must prefer
Thy fortunes, though I do confiscate all,
Whom Gods will not relieve, invention shall.
The King my brother? No, my brother clown,
Malicious coxcomb, peevish Spartan-fool;
Death brided? o my torments!
Madam know,
He is contract already.
To a whore?
The strumpet Favorina?
Hark just heaven!
She rails upon a virgin, whose pure soul
Might give example of true chastity
To her own spotted, leprous infamy.
Now old Hyarchus laughs.
Her father: yes:
A rotten Magistrate, who may thank warm clothes,
caudles and physic for each rising Sun,
Which he poor man is made partaker of,
His daughter must be married to the King:
So, ay, degraded must acknowledge one
Above us in our female properties,
Be boundless my exclaims, and terrible;
(Curses) assemble your offensive rage,
And help a woman's fury to disgorge
The poison of her stomach, in the face
Of a most spiteful brother, whose design
Is unto me a purge so laxative,
As my unable body will be spent
With bitter execrations; o I feel
The storm of vengeance wrestle in my blood,
Tempting my soul to be more great than good.
O may the horror of some fatal knife,
Finish the blessings of my brother's wife.
May she live loathed, or never may she live,
Till heavens unto my happiness shall give
A freedom, to insult and tyrannize,
Upon that impious whore, that Cockatrice.
O may new mischief tread upon the heels
Of terror, to affront the joy she feels.
Let some infernal Necromantic charm,
Change their expected happiness to harm.
Let many clouds salute their nuptial morn,
With ominous affrights in way of scorn.
The height of mischief makes my sorrow sound,
As Opobalsum doth a bleeding wound.
O the rude licence of a woman's rage,
Who her malignant discords can presage?
So, let her vanish, and her gall unmask,
Till we accomplish our appointed task.
My sorry conscience doth recoil (old men)
Worthy Malindo did enforce my vow
To prove delinquent, rather than oppose
My dreaded sovereign's life (an impious act,
Urged by the cunning of more impious age.)
O then submit, with penitential tears
Confess, your age offends the King through fears,
Our age offend the King? we urge this act?
Of murder: yes, you love Monopolies.
Subtle distraction!.
Silence.
Hipponax.
Hyarchus we disclaim your subtleties.
My father so rejected?
Queen forbear,
Malindo is our faithful favourite.
In thy protection let our kingdom live.
Welcome brave Duke; be ever mine, beloved;
Accounted in the chiefest scarlet rank
Of understanding judices; we thank
Your noble and magnanimous resolve,
Your charitable undertaking; be advanced
And ever in my bosom: you are loyal.
Deign mighty Monarch but experience,
Your love already hath in ample sort,
Given testimonial enough: be graced
And ever happy in our high account:
Another subject Officer I have,
Pheudippe called; on whom the grace's smile:
A man so absolute in my approof,
That Nature hath reserved small dignity
Which he enjoys not. Welcome friend approach,
Forsake the City, ever dwell in Court;
Nay nearer, in my bosom: we observe
Your manifest endeavour, diligence,
And all industrious faculties that lodge
Themselves in thee with a true correspondence,
we note your projects, and esteem them highly.
I servile groom put forth small industry,
Excepting what I owe in subjects duty.
My father, in the latest syllable
Of his weak utterance, did inculcate often,
Thy unrewarded loyalty: be big
In honour, and outshine the radiant gloss
Of bearded politicians: kneel before us.
And in uprising swell with a new name:
No more Pheudippe, but all-potent Duke
Of wide Illirium; (noble friend) arise,
We dive into the bottom of thy soul,
Which doth engender a sweet sympathy.
Live long and happy in a monarch's love:
Malindo, you provide some Theater,
Some regal show, wherewith we mutually
May solace and disport our heaviness.
Hyrudo live: May treason ever find
The biting tortures of a troubled mind.
You magistrates imagine it a curse,
And punishment beyond all punishment.
(If you attainted are with any guilt
Of so enorm designs) think it a curse
To suck up the salubrious air, and live,
Fame will infect you, though I pardon give:
So prosper we as we are innocent.
Good slave I thank thee, thou hast reconciled
The Kings distasteful and ambiguous frown,
I must enroll thee in the Catalogue
Of my professed favourites: contemn
The servile clog of stooping courtesy:
Enjoy whatever in the bounds of freedom.
Be idle, and securely frivolous,
Wanton or any thing that appertains
Unto a noble parsonage of worth.
Or if thou wishest a contented life,
Free from the cavils incident to worth,
be only idle, ever gazing out
Of public windows, and observe the pride
Of such a man, fair mounted on his cloth
And gelding dapple grey, accounting all
His footmen, till the coltish bayard stumble.
be whom thou pleasest, whom thou dost suppose
A blessed man is, absolutely rich.
All this demands a furtherance, my Lord.
Yes, and that furtherance will I bestow:
But the most noble have their enemies,
Their opposites, antagonists; nay some
Of ragged base repute do still survive,
Who (notwithstanding) dare malign the state
Of us, though splendour to the Commonweal.
These vomit forth each scandal, each contempt,
Malice and gall together: poison choke them;
I feel their aspic venom here involved,
They wound worse than a raging basilisk.
How bitter is the taste of contumely!
Some patience I entreat thee (heaven) bestow
Upon our scandalized name: Reproach,
That common adversary of us all,
Who are in a good way to purchase fame,
Doth dog us to our latest winding-sheet,
Even to the womb of our great grandmother,
That never satisfied womb of earth.
Blame not my zealous anger, I am hot,
And carried with true valour, to the pitch
Of an exclaim so requisite: o slaves,
And prodigies of nature, that will taint
Pure sanctity; nay, e'en the Gods above,
And their incomprehended holiness;
Their sacred essence, with like blasphemy;
If but enraged awhile, as they do mine.
Who? or what man is he that dares do thus?
'Sdeath I will not endure the sight of him.
How? speak that again, do you remember well?
'Sdeath I will not endure the sight of him.
No? why thou ungrateful man; must I advance,
Must I search out a lodging for thy soul,
And make room for thy friendship in our bosom?
Canst ever hope to be incorporate
With my own essence? the same man almost,
And not endure the presence, nay the sight
Of our malicious foe? recall your thought:
Each timorous fellow, that abhors the name
Of absolute revenge, could say no more:
What? run away from our contemned foe?
I'll not endure the presence; nay the sight
Of such a slave, yet never turn my heels:
No, I'd embowel the base rogue at first,
Contrive a quick dispatch: the villains heart
Would I expose upon a mountains top,
Or offer it upon my falchions's point,
Fresh bleeding to some wrathful Deity,
Of unappeased revenge, in sacrifice:
I'd mix my urine with his reeking blood,
And piss upon the carcase in despite,
Dissever joints and flesh, till all were done,
Then toast his marrow in the melting Sun:
I'd not endure the sight of him alive.
Courageous resolution! I commend
Such vehemence in valour: this doth urge
And animate my purpose to be quick,
Royal, and open-breasted to a man
Of such full undertaking every way.
Let us employ this youthful vehemence
Betimes: a quick blood calls for action.
Imagine this the pavement where my foe
Hath fixed (upon the quarrel) his firm foot;
For know that such a villain doth survive,
Whom I will scourge in thee my favourite,
Briefly you must disgrace and murder him
Whose name is hitherto concealed; but you
(After instruction for the stratagem)
Shall know the varlet, whom you must imagine
(Merely for apprehension) is yourself.
I like a ruffian (which remember well,
You must hereafter practise) though for instance
I will now undertake it, unawares
I fetch away your not misdoubting heels
From of the trampled earth, e'en thus: then swear
Some oath of high importance, that the air
Shall never be infected with a slave,
Who breathes out poisoned blasphemy on earth.
Swear then that neither shining light of day
No interchanged seasons shall afford
One minute more of blessing, that himself
Shall not enjoy one article of breath
Beside, to ask forgiveness of the world:
Swear that no planet, no supernal star,
No Hercules, no Gigantean arm
Shall rescue villains from appointed harm:
Then spit him through the centre of his heart,
Eu'n thus, Hirds.
But you jest I'm sure.
'Sdeath I am slain; forbear, ingratitude!
I perish without expectation: O.
May my suspected agents perish ever.
There sleep (unthought of) in a vaulted tomb:
Thus great men must be jealous of their fame,
Prevent all blemish in a noble name.
Now King and kingdom both are almost mine,
Lights be obscured when the greater shine.
The King reputes me loyal and submiss,
(Transparent colour to deceive a Prince)
(But hell bear record) I am bent to ruin,
To purchase kingdoms, or impeach my state,
Who never ventured, never knew his fate.
In Epire's rule now lives my noble friend,
Thither will we address our false complaint,
Pretending I am hated here at Court,
Threatened to death, not likely to escape,
Withal insinuate our appointed joy,
Which five days hence the King doth celebrate.
Inform I may, that then both Prince and Peers,
Will be assembled in the Theater:
And being so, how safely he may send
A managed Army to destroy them all.
(Dissembling still the means to rescue me
When I am safe advanced) but meaning most
To further my advancement: for which cause
I framed this little motive: Hoe within,
Fly to the confines of Epirotes rule,
Deliver unto Cassius my friend,
The Governor, this caution here enclosed,
Urge him upon allegiance ever due,
From one friend to another, to make haste.
Speak this, and speak no more, neither to any
Open the passage doors of utterance,
But to my friend, my dear, my best beloved,
Imagine me a block, a Niobe,
Conceive my mouth to be devoid of tongue,
Till with content I do accomplish all.
be secret as calm silence, or the night.
My care must follow to frame Theatres,
Warning the Megalenses, our Comedians
To act some pithy and applauded scene,
Wherewith to shadow my pretensive zeal.
But well-encountered (Poet) pray approach.
And let us parley of an Interlude.
Patron of Poets, much esteemed Duke,
Leaving the Muses, and my pleasant cares
Regarding yours more than my own affairs,
Poor Poet I'll attend your conference,
Command me ever, most ingenious Lord.
Command Perillus? no, entreat thee rather,
Each high-born Title must advance the worth
Of holy rapture: pray inform the Actors
Of some true Moral, of some Tragedy
Or else some subject more ridiculous,
Which may with new devised conceits stir up
The dull and solemn audience.
Believe
I'll stretch the scantness of my Mother-wit,
Rather than fail for to accomplish it.
The God of Kings protect thee: so adieu.
Attempts of great men speak in silver tones,
Thus gilded tombs o'ershadow dead men's bones.
A speedy foot-post here attends your honour.
His message?
Out of Greece, and more precisely
From Sparta.
Then admit the messenger.
Now friend, your business?
Open sir the Casket.
Somewhat's within contained, that will instruct you.
Arm if thou lov'st me noble CASSIUS,
And help thy brother with a royal rescue,
I am in prison, prithee make great haste,
Or I am dead: 'gainst Janus-festival,
Address thy courage to assault our King,
Both King and Statesmen kill, for fit occasion
Will be afforded, while they sleep: secure
Busied with joy, and jesting Cordials.
Arm if thou lov'st me noble Cassius?
Yes, arm I will, and in despite of spite
Rescue thy valour from the blackest night,
Which envy, or malignant wrath can yield,
To darken thy resplendent fortitude.
Carry the letter (friend) from whence you brought it,
Let nothing hinder quick delivery:
Nothing excels a wise dexterity.
You (Titio) shall act Mandragona,
But you (Eulalio) stout Bellephoron,
Each hath his part appointed, as in plays,
And this our active scene, so in the world
All have their parts allotted to begin
At seasons known after nativity,
But our evasion out of misery,
What cunning Sophist may denominate?
As for the Prologue in my sportive scene,
There needs no Actor it to amplify;
The festival approaches, let us give
Direction to your fellows:
Look Eulalio,
Unloose that Paper, or peruse the Title:
No superscription? rend the seal, and read.
Arm if thou lov'st me noble Cassius,
And help Malindo with a royal rescue,
I am in prison, prithee make great haste,
Or I am dead: at Ianus Festival. etc.
Words of amazement, and exceeding strange.
I smell a treason hypocritical.
A just construction; correspondent sure,
To this intent.
And therefore Titio,
You (much disguised) may safe annihilate
Both his, and our proceedings: Let's be wise,
I'll pen a part shall dash the enterprise.
Ioue, or what-else supernal Deity,
The Gods and Goddesses who govern Kings,
Who arbitrate the schism of month and years,
Whose sacred essence heaven and earth adore,
To whom the greatest potentates below,
Do sacrifice their Greekish Hecatombs,
These are accustomed to dispense with joy,
And in remembrance of their holy acts,
(As now) we often solemnize the day,
Recorded long from all antiquity,
And civil joy perhibit without fear;
Mirth may refresh not disannul my care.
Pheudippe (friend) sit here; all do agree,
That each man's place should answer dignity.
So, call for this appointed melody.
A quiet calm foretells tempestuous wind,
And fair-plumed swans sing sweetest when they die.
Gesture doth oft conceal a traitors mind,
And many golden dreams do prove a lie,
Sent and inspired by heavens high thundering Ioue,
I bid you arm, desist from jollity,
Those who pretend, show colourable, love,
whate'er avoids the test, is flattery
Gliding afar from out the Thracian soil,
I could espy Malindo's friend in arms,
Swiftly addressing his battalions,
Here to entrap and fully ruinate
You ancient Magistrates, thee matchless King.
Sovereign the fellow is lunatic,
Remove the mad man sirs; away with him.
Not mad Malindo, thou a traitor art,
Take witness from that paper, his own part,
Lalio, Lord General, give speedy battle.
Arm soldiers, arm, cry conquest and approach.
Make ready forces to repel the foe.
Arise from foggy Lerva some foul smoke.
Each living creature without mercy choke.
Be ever clouded Phoebus, may thy light,
Turn in a moment to aeternal night:
Return oblivion, or the antic age;
Forgotten Chaos, and the pilgrimage
Of undefiled man's first innocence,
That I all torment may escape on earth,
And be accounted guiltless (as at birth)
O for enchantments, for a potent charm,
A magic spell that may conjure the clouds,
To cover me with darkness at noonday!
For such a charm would I expose the wealth
Of Tagus, or the Ocean (were it mine)
Help, o assist me some infernal aid,
Now be propitious (Hell) I am betrayed.
Fortune, o strumpet! I'll advance the dark
And fearful habitation of the dead,
I'll worship witches, and extol the praise
Of Pluto, I'll prefer impiety,
Canonize all before thy Deity.
The blood of Nessus never did enforce
A Hercules to half such vehemence.
Was't you Malindo, that through mischiefs bait
Composed this ensign of a hollow heart?
Alas I loved thee well, why didst devise
Such fatal scenes, fashioned of blood and death?
The paper mourned when thou thy mind hadst writ,
Yes, mourned in black merely to think on it:
But you persist in deep obduracy.
I mourn myself, yet am devoid of pity,
Because thy error is ambitious pride.
The man whom fate hath from eternity,
From since the words beginning, hath enrolled
Amidst misfortunes mournful Catalogue,
Whose downfall frowning planets have conspired,
Who never was the bounded favourite
Of wayward rumor; whom adversity
Hath wholly seized, whom heavens appointed awe
Prepares as fatal object of disdain
To level her envenomed aim against.
O let him ever dwell in mother's womb,
Or let that infant's cradle be his tomb.
Conduct him Soldiers to the Carnifex,
Euphorbus, you attend the final gasp,
Then give to Cassius the decouped skull.
Ambition leads us to the fountains brink,
But then affords destruction 'stead of drink.
We read large conquest in our captains face,
Stand forth some sober nuntius, relate
The manner of this notable design,
Brontes, nor did Pyragmon ever shake
The anvil of that Ironmonger God
Vulcan, with blows so unsupportable,
In hammering the thunderbolts of Ioue,
As did the courage of our General
(By animating soldiers to attempt)
Shatter the weak array of Cassius.
He faint (for faintness ever doth attend
On such designs) being faint before the time
Of onset, he withdrew so speedily,
As, that retinue of his rebel-slaves,
Begged noble mercy of the Conqueror.
But we, like some fierce Giant given to spoil,
Enraged with a remembrance of their act,
Their too contemptuous uproar; did reply,
With anger unappeased in bloody phrase,
That no compassion should redeem their lives
From famine of our falchions: for indeed,
Rebellion must be scourged until it bleed.
Then flew the common Soldier with such speed,
To enterprise in rigor the new spoil,
As never did a hungry Wolf insult▪
With more unsatisfied revenge, than they.
Grim Slaughter in a Chariot of dead skulls,
Rode up and down triumphing, till dark night
Shook off the fetlock from her sleepy jades,
And gave way for retreat; each man before
Troad in contempt upon the scattered foe,
Until my fortune, rather than exploit,
Slew the once owner of this▪ unjoined skull,
Than every man gave back, with blood being full.
Magnanimous Amilcar, I account
Thy courage beyond apprehension; swell,
Swell my Phendippe with abundant joy,
Rejoice in thy courageous son, like me,
Who vaunt the rather, even because thy son
Doth so be have himself, thou being my friend,
Whom I esteem above all earthly good.
Stand forth Pheudippe, honour doth attend
To cast a gracious smile upon thee, friend;
And thee Amilcar, let us magnify.
Malindo sleeps (Amilcar) I advance
Thee through the ruin of his dignity,
Possess both place and goods.
Without desert
As hitherto; but I will endeavour.
We have a sister, where is she? Lucilla?
Let some attendant urge her company:
Bring hither likewise an appointed Priest,
(Be not amazed my sober Magistrates)
Pheudippe, you shall be espoused to her:
Her I'll bestow, and without prejudice
On thee alone, my noble Bedfellow.
Pardon (dear Liege) least worthy I of all
To be a monarch's kinsman, less, to be called
The brother of a Greekish King, yourself.
Do not refuse, for (noble friend) my love
Only admits thee as a friend and brother,
And for a witness that I make this league
Of love and friendship; let's embrace each other.
Ever obeisance to your Majesty.
My sister doth approach, let grooms make way
For beauty able to obscure the day.
Sister, behold thy husband; friend, thy wife,
Marriage doth breed, but sooner banish strife.
You (Priest) the Hymeneal rites may offer:
Acceptance is experienced by proffer.
Let Hymen triumph, and unite your souls.
Now live in peace, and brother ask a boon:
Ask what you list, for grant I will whatever,
Which henceforth may commemorate the time
Of an espousal so remarkable.
Your divine Majesty accumulates
Honour, above the trite capacity
Of all contemptuous age; that ancestors
(Before thy hallowed birthday) did approve:
(Great King) I have a kinsman, though obscure,
Yet wealthy, whom (because obscure) I beg
A small part of your high magnificence,
But to enroll amid the Catalogue
Of those you least remember: Kings be wise,
Their bounty will provoke a slave to rise.
To deify the worth of whom we love,
Advancement I'll impoverish, compel
Honour to hug thy kinsman, till a warmth
Quicken his humble blood without control.
Envy, (the scourge of Kings) be henceforth dumb,
Thus will I treason evermore entomb.
And thus exalt our love beyond all merit,
Birth may do much, love makes the low inherit.
A Midst my slumber, circumvolved with doubt,
In this thick midnight darkness, now all sense
Securely lies enchained; now potent dreams,
With unresisted awe, rule the dead lump
Of man's poor fabric; now all human flesh,
Kings, and the stern-browed Tyrants do submit
Their majesty to Sleeps Imperial feet.
Now, not long since I dreamed, and could with ease,
Utter the subject, how a misshapen hag,
His hair full horrid black, huge were his eyes,
Big, like a bowl encompassed with bone,
Thrice did the Imp appear, did vanish thrice,
Three massy Crowns, of worth inestimate,
(Had they enjoyed a worth substantial:)
Thrice did he show, and thrice again withdraw
The hallowed objects, than apace proclaim
Quod libet, licet, and away departs.
I then awaked, struck with extreme amazement,
And nimbly leaping from a secûre couch,
Came to expel this ominous affright.
Reading, or whatsoever can avail
The vigour of temptation, to withstand,
we should perhibit (though against our will.)
here's an aspiring Poet, whose proud touch,
May elevate some brain above the flight
Of nimble apprehension; I'll unclasp
Thy sacred volume, Lucan: I'll content
My roving fancy with full argument.
He writes of withered skulls, of mutiny,
Ominous apparitions of the dead,
Of Caesar, Pompey, and Imperial state,
Of combats foreign, of domestic broils,
Of dire invasion, of ambitious war,
(Whatever makes us noble) fortitude,
Of expert undertaking, of event:
O he's a fellow able to inflame
The frosty stomach of a starveling youth,
Who wholly feeds on rheumish winter-plums.
An Author of commanding Altitude,
And such a man give me; a man of worth,
Who makes the reader rub his paled brow,
Makes idle nature melt away in fume,
Gives breath and courage to out-puff the Cannon:
Such Authors you may feel at finger's end,
They gallop in your blood, provoke each vein,
To give them passage without violence,
Bella per aemathios plusquam civilia campos
Insque datum scelert canimus populumque potentem:
quenquam nunc ferre potest, Caesar-ve priorem
Pompeius-ve parem: quis justus induit arma
Scire nefas: magno se judice quisque tuetur.
Ah Pompei, Pompey, if thy hallowed acts,
Once more might flourish, I would emulate
Those bold encounters; o most happy men,
Whom Fate enrols to be victorious:
They conquer, spoil, subvert, and edify
Turn Dukes, nay Kings to common Parasites,
And make the proudest flatter to win life:
Yet Kings are mighty: yes and equal too;
(Though weak, although base cowards by the law
Of natural endowment) yet the name
Doth yield them equal; nay above the fame
Which often doth enrich a conqueror.
What may we hence collect? a principle,
A maxim of no vulgar consequence:
Subjects are base, and to acknowledge one
Superior, doth note servility:
O what a most perpetual slave is man,
If not the chiefest in predominance?
Let obscûre politicians be content
As chief in Parish; or some petty Town,
I'd make Dominions tremble with a frown:
Make every subject, high and low observe
The heavy danger of our discontent,
Or make a precious forfeit of each life.
Woe to that King where subjects be inflamed
With greater zeal of eminence than he:
There must invasion triumph, timeless death,
Rapes, murder, all iniquity of age:
By gulfs; by rocks, e'en by the laws of hell.
we swim who would obtain the gates of heaven.
O what a large divinity's involved
About the awful phrase of Emperor.
The name, the name of King, how it awakes
Our caitiff blood, quickens our faculty!
Ambition be my judge, if I were sick,
Wounded with pistols, out of hope to live,
Forsaken by all Art and physic law,
Lay speechless in my chamber, lost my sense
Of man or voice making no difference
Yet through the magic of this powerful sound,
You are a King, (if hallowed in my ear)
I should again recover, should recoil
Skip forty fathom from the couch, and sing,
Dance without shame, though naked, without noise
Trample amid the pavement, touch my roof,
Run giddy with glad passion, rub my veins,
Like one revived anew, esteem all base
Under blood-royal, be a rank mad man,
Till joy and rapture both were clean digested.
How readily man's temper is traduced?
How forcible temptation doth oppose
The supernatural act of doing well?
we are like windmills on ambitious mounts,
Open to every tempest, which will turn
Our sails without resistance: like the waves
worried from shores to rocks; from rocks to shelf;
Man is not man till he deny himself.
Yet on our state's imposed a slavish curse,
To see things good, though we connive at worse.
Ah husband, husband, what excessive care
Invaded me with violence? shot far
Into my shaking bosom, when I saw
Your sudden absence? heavy sleep alas
No sooner left mine eyelids, gave me leave
To ask, how does the comfort of my soul?
How does my silent love? my dear Pheudippe?
But with familiar lip, and flexile arm,
I seized upon the pillow 'stead of thee.
Think how intruding jealously began
To blur whatever I could wisdom call,
Within me, or without me; which alas,
All knows extremely dwarfish in out sex.
jealous the first night wife?
O then or never
An honest, loving wife is jealous ever.
jealous at home, lest husbands over-vex
A painful heart with meditation,
Of matters which concern his family.
jealous when husbands be enforced to travel;
Danger exceeds the objects they do meet,
Whether by sea, or in the public street.
I (peevish fool) perceiving you were gone,
Thus in my choler did expostulate:
Doth he for some dislike abhor my sheets?
Neglect what others love? the maiden sweets
Of mutual embracement? may men's taste
Lose their accustomed relish, and refuse
The mellow joys of ripe virginity?
Will he contemn the sportive dalliance
That married couples may engross with leave?
Will he this midnight show himself no man?
The first night of our meeting be disgraced?
Or will he by disaster end all strife?
Perish? and so prevent a formal tax
That may impeach his manhood? Thus, even thus
Poor foolish I did thus prevaricate;
Thus (for indeed we women struggle much
Until delivered of opinion) thus
Did loving zeal prejudicate amiss.
You are offended (love) I do suspect
See how his colour's changed, astonishment!
Prithee what pensive thoughts oppress thy soul?
I read the humour of a malcontent
Written between your eyebrows; recollect
The common sparks of scattered Majesty.
Speak gentle sir.
Women, women, women.
What of women?
Most women love to talk,
To scatter tales, and yet swear silence too,
To breed sedition, to deceive all those
Who in simplicity are confident,
Of honest meaning: o they do insult
With a tyrannic boldness over one
Who through bewitched opinion, doth impart
The substance of included secrecy.
O they will dare the soul of such a man,
Make him so subject to their base command,
As if they had his heartstrings in their hand.
Rail at our sex? why husband, though perhaps
Such women do survive, what will you hence
Conclude within their guilt, my innocence?
' Cry mercy wise,' good faith I did imagine
Their wicked conversation, general,
(All in good time be otherwise:) But wise,
The painters of our age be culpable
Of high abuse committed; they portrait.
Each mental vice in habit of a whore,
A Hag, a Witch, or Woman, at the least.
Virtue (although the others opposite)
Is painted with the like habiliment,
Therefore conclude, if tender womanhood
Take any full impression of deceit,
Virtue, or vice, of either strong belief.
Or colourable incredulity;
To change her mind will ask another age.
You may convert belief, you may revoke
Errors of wisemen, by a deep dispute,
But women settled, nothing will confute.
For painters do imply this consequent
By emblem; that our sex is permanent.
Are you so philosophical I'faith?
Well dost thou argue, for they sex and self.
She hath a ripe conceit, and I approve
Her subtle apprehension, out of love.
I relish her deep judgement; for indeed,
My railing laboured only to obtain
Of wits reply the due experience,
That in our wisdom of credulity.
We may impart a proud conspiracy.
women shoot fair sometimes, though seldom true
Like whetstones they give edge to tricks a anew.
Brave Catiline for this cause did account
Young Orestilla worthy to partake
Of his attempt (though far above the brain
Of woman to accomplish) he approved
The talkative Sempronia: Thus will I
Induce my wife through cunning circumstance,
To give directions for a raw conceit:
Though man is rather blessed, who may withhold
His closet counsel from a woman's ear;
Yet am I of such spongy clay compact,
As till I am disburdened of my care,
Nothing yields comfort: o I must unclasp
A volume, which may prejudice my life;
Happy's the man who dares believe his wife.
What magic may this motion ocular
Of lips, without all utterance portend?
For men to pause at a poor style of Dukes,
Most frequent Lords, and yet more common knights
Proclaims them base and trivial; if means
Of more advantage may be thought upon:
Thy father was a King Lucilla.
Just.
And shall the Chronicles of age report
Lucilla was no Queen? Were I a woman—
The Madam Favorina doth usurp
My due respect.
Shall Favorina live?
Shall she outshine the beauty whom I love?
Nature, nay Gods deny a double Moon,
They both are ominous; they do import
A prodigy of uproars and of death.
O man assist our weakness, we'll enforce
The potent succour of religious fate;
Conjure by solemn oath, deep secrecy
So crown the vigour of conspiracy.
Now spoke dame resolution: I adore
Such credible engagement; and embrace
Faction above all true felicity.
I can discover yet a childish vice
Within my nature, named cowardice:
I feel a fearful and familiar stamp
That shows I am a coward: I recoil
In thought of high achievements; I dissolve
With repetition of a sound so brave
As conquest, and impartial victory;
Yet would subdue Dominions; would enthrall
The vast Horizon of our universe:
But I abhor the sound of enemies;
Of proud resistance: Ambiguities
(With cowards) are begotten of each tale
Of each fantastic rumour; idle care:
A new suggestion will beget new fear.
If notwithstanding women will be stout
Women (the badge of clamorous affrights)
This would encourage slaves to victory,
And shall encourage me; my wife is valiant,
No creature living must (Lucilla) dare
When twice two Moons have made a change in Greece;
Dare to accost thy supereminence
Nor with like privilege (as now) affront
My then sublimed authority: be judge
Thou happy time, when that more haughty phrase
Long live, shall be pronounced, with {non-Roman} twice
we'll then disclaim acquaintance; live recluse;
Then if we are disposed to imitate
Some lively gesture of disdainful grace,
And peep into the public air awhile,
The thronging City will be crowded up
In a poor handful, to expatiate
With rolling eyes our unaccustomed face.
I am inflamed already: O ambition
Be but auspicious; mount my nimble breath
And win the God's good liking to command
Of earth and heaven a hopeful furtherance:
Swell heart, and with it swell my bravest blood,
Suggest new motives dear necessity,
Resolve now for a lucky plot betimes.
Nay first resolve of some associates:
Three to a banquet, four beget a brawl
Says our instructive adage; but i'faith
Five to a bloody banquet makes all square:
A banquet (wife) a banquet, shall enthrone
Our happy wishes and our hopeful joy:
The King shall die.
Yes, and the new Queen perish.
The Captain of his Guard will I corrupt
With forcible engagement, and fair shows:
(Chief architects in a design so rare,
Sole agents for the great men of our age)
Him if I do seduce; the Soldiers apt
For innovation will obey betimes:
My son Amilcar (by injunction bound)
Must then remove thy opposite, the Queen:
My faithfull steward, sage Mesie
He (by commandment) shall engross the corn
Which harvest hath afforded; and procure
The famishment of those who may resist
By insurrection our new seated bliss.
New barns I'll build, erect new granaries,
Which (open to their wants,) may well remove
Crippled allegiance, and procure much love.
The banquet shall obey my providence.
we who work jointly, may ingeminate
another's loss makes many fortunate.
Pheudippe false? and shall the king exclaim?
Wrest vengeance from the rage of Cinthia?
Distraction talked of in the lower Dis?
O I am ravished with extremity
Of hellish laughter, of loud harmony:
Balm to my torture, music to my soul!
How sweet this clamorous echo: all revenge;
Cracks in the jaws of repercussive air:
Awake thou damned troop of high-born youth
Angels of darkness my dear friends awake,
Howl forth some ditty, that vast hell may ring
With charms all potent; earth asleep to bring.
we who be barred from happiness by fate;
Who be confined within the fiery gulf,
The kingdom of perdition; who exempt
From full enjoying of supernal good,
we do but laugh when our colleagues are damned.
we triumph in their multitude, we dance
Our dismal rounds; our changes double over
Whilst purblind owls with night-ravens do consort,
And still together sing though Caesar's dance:
I a mere caitiff in the prime of youth.
Nourished an itching appetite to rule
The sudden rigor of which new disease
Crept in my dearest blood; until at length
As maggots do engender by the warmth
Of violent reflection; so attempt
Was all encouraged by desire, both which
Creating base ambition; bred my fall:
Thus do predominant affects consume
All hope; and turn the substance into fume:
Yet seeing our fate is unavoidable
What may we answer saving welcome fate?
For, happiness we exiles never knew,
Nor any joy doth holiness afford
To us the outcasts of Elizium,
But only this: to yawn aloud below
With lofty shouts; when foes may ranged be
Amongst our hellish troops for company:
Thus though my obscure shadow much compelled
Pays due allegiance to King Plato's Court
Yet by the fatal wisdom being informed
Of dire events, of Cinthia's revenge,
Revenge though future; yet in equity
Hereafter to be cast upon the Prince
Manander (he my downfall did approve
Doomed execution, him do I abhor)
Will triumph in his mad Catastrophe:
And do awake to haunt his company:
My shadowed spirit walks invisible
Can work itself into a Tennis-ball,
Shoot through the Centre, search into the Sea;
Slide through the Caverns, penetrate stonewalls:
Watch by the pillow of a sleeping man
Without all notice taken, without noise;
Hath liberty to play the Incubus;
Haunt whom I please with apparitions,
By privilege assumed from Pluto's forge:
Thus do I haunt Pheudippe; I suggest
Visions of air, of nocturnal fume,
forcible to buzz falsehood in his brain:
Falsehood in whom the King so dear accounts
Will breed a rigor in the Kings exclaims;
Till he impeach adored divinity,
His anger will expostulate the cause
Of change so sudden, of a breach, in love
So manifest; improper, than Distrust
Will answer changes derived from Cinthia
His passion will approve the pedigree
And after full-stuffed oaths crown blasphemy:
Then bloody jawed revenge will trot apace
Upon his winged curtal; to attach
Maenander of high-treason: O my Ghost
Shall quaff down, Lethe; tumble in the Wash
The rainbow coloured waves of Acheron:
ay, like some Sea-fish, frolic with fair shine,
Will toss about the billows of our flood;
Then through the flames (in lieu of triumph) scud;
Till then, implore some wrinkled witch, some hag,
Which may provoke Menander's patience:
To torment brave companions yield much ease
In sickness our associates help disease.
What shadow void of substance hither comes?
What incorporeal essence doth approach?
What vapours painted like myself with fume?
(Who steal existence from united fog)
What substance insubstantial? what Ghost
Walks in the clouded element of air?
Aread thou dumb associate of dark
And thievish midnights; now aread thy name.
Recital serves to tortuose, yet know
I am the ghost of slaughtered Cassio,
Slain for the zeal I nourished to a friend;
Unfaithful usage wrought my timeless end.
My true born Cassius? well encountered; see
The soul and image of thy zealous friend.
What echo bred of impudence, what air,
ejaculates the name without a blush?
Avaunt, o vanish (thou vild caitiff) run,
lest with a repetition of old tort,
I make thee vanish by the full report.
Stay thou abortive image, who assum'st
The title of a traitor, whom I loved,
Stay thou ignoble wretch, I will inform
How falsehood hath deluded innocence.
Tremble, o tremble (earth) when I repeat
The black disaster of my fatal end.
Tremble; for know, this ignominious man,
Whose wicked mischief did enthrall my days,
He was produced from out the loins of earth;
Yes (damned politician) thy proud aim
Thought by invasion to surprise thy prince,
Under pretext of high abuses done,
Of wrongful censure, of imprisonment.
Thus did your oiled speech insinuate,
Thus move a simple meaning friend, myself
To train forth Soldiers; o impiety!
Pretending rescue still to undertake
Rescue of thee, whose finger did not ache.
Seated in triumph, sole competitor,
With Princes of high courage, thou didst rule:
Envy, the common traitor to estate
Stood far enough from thee: imprisonment,
No way impeached thy lustre: yet as winds
Crowded within the recluse caverns, swell,
That dreadful earthquake is engendered thence,
So did thy turbulent faction overboil
The brim of due obedience; poor I
(Incited to rebellion by fair gloss,
Which colourable smoothness had put on)
Perished in battle, through thy peevish train,
Imprisonment proved false, and rescue vain.
I vanish where thy Ghost shall never see
My shadowed substance of impiety.
Run thou remorseless Image to the womb
Of hell, thy heavy mansion: let all sex
Believe that man to lethargy condemned,
Who takes a politician for his friend.
Gape greedy Lerna, thou most impious gulf,
Stretch thy unhallowed gums, belch poison forth;
Send some infectious plague into my blood,
Into my blood and bosom, send a curse
More biting than the breath of Scorpions:
Be boundless my swollen outrage; o blaspheme
That irreligious deity of chance;
My good estate's consumed with idle game:
Whatever this inconstant age terms Wealth,
Whatever I did call Peculiar,
My own poor substance, styled with proper name:
What with much travail, and extorting means,
I scraped (laborious to enrich my 'state)
All, in five hours, hath foolish game destroyed:
Large expectation doth impoverish
The wisest politician: we are cozened
With our opinionate luck; delusive hope:
Amongst all creatures (upon equal terms)
Man is most foolish, most improvident;
Confirmed in a belief, that happiness
Will make an everlasting harmony
When mischief lurks within our elbow-room.
I feel the sharp disease of beggary
Begin e'en with a threadbare impudence,
To seize upon our nothing-valued life.
All that is Courtier in me, who contemned
To' acknowledge one above me (but my maker)
To sue for friendship; cog for patronage,
Who was enfranchised by the Kings decree,
Had no revenues but a morning bribe,
(Which now of late are precious things, all men
Have so inclined themselves to subtlety,
As they conceive a courtier's gullery)
But I was well provided for, before
A foul disaster of such consequence,
As peevish gamester's luck oppressed my soul.
All that is Courtier in me, now compelled
Must vanish into smooth-tongued flattery.
With oiled gums, and with a supple arm,
I must salute my patron (though a fool)
Insinuate how many blessed years
He will enjoy, to bless my indigence:
Tell him how plump, how lusty, latter time
And my young mistress make him, though his face
More full of wrinkles than a practised witch
With pitiful hoof-shoulders do consort:
So, like a fawning Spaniel must I wag
At every costive windfall of a crumb;
Bid farewell to my Courtiership, and live,
Like an arch-fool, a Sycophant: fly hence
These childish terrors to my pained soul,
The chiefest Courtiers will my kinsmen be,
My fellows in profession, my colleagues,
Nay emulate my worth, if I excel,
In the most ample trade of glozing well.
O Gracchus! Gracchus! but a freeborn-life
Rather alludes unto felicity,
If our estate hath no dependent cause,
If we possess without another's claim,
Revenues (clear from tenancy at will)
Regardless of observance; do despise
Payment of homage to a foot-cloth-sir,
And may revile the best of Tradesman's coat,
If he insult (sans prejudicial fear
Of a compulsive debt, or Officers,
Who follow satisfaction:) for indeed
Revenues I account, although possessed,
Yet if infected with a name of Debt,
Nothing as mine which answers to the name;
Possessions be what others cannot claim.
If without scruple therefore we can boast,
In so complete a fashion as before
I did inculcate; then Rusticity,
To Gods and Monarchs may well answer free.
Thus doth improvidence of harebrain mates,
Buy little wisdom at excessive rates:
'Tis indeed better to be wise at last,
Then gallop headlong till our hopes be passed.
Though latter wisdom do import withal
An insufficience in points natural.
What melancholic caitiff yonder walks?
Gracchus (my Lord) the gallant Eunuch.
So,
What malcontented humour doth oppress
The image of unspotted honesty,
With him so frequent? I adore and love
The civil carriage that I do observe
In his Employment: if a Courtier hath
(Courtiers of common outside-silks) if they
Have dear acquaintance with dame Honesty
(Famished in exile to the frozen pole)
Gracchus I dare avow may parallel
The best of their acquaintance: (Gracchus) hoe?
My gracious Lord?
What peril imminent,
Doth so oppose thy noble splendour? which
(without mere base descension to colloque)
I must inform thee is refulgent.
o,
My good and gracious Lord; but poverty,
Is able to oppress maturity
Of diligence, of judgement, of designs,
Each liberal Art and Science doth submit
Their ends and occupations to obtain
The true terrestrial Saint, the sacred gloss,
Of all-effecting riches; every man
Will hazard his damnation to adore
A thing so blessed, so licentious:
The weak-brained gallant in extremity,
Will change Religion, will aequivocate
With mental reservation, rack the joints
Of his benumbed conscience, will provoke
A lethargy of sharp distinction: will out-puff
The Cardinal four winds, when they oppose
Each other all at once (and procreate
A whirlwind) these will he out-puff alone,
With some insufferable oath, which far exceeds
The three dimensions, dares proclaim himself
A perjured villain, to appropriate
Sixpence, upon trivial mistake.
Art-master's will transgress the rule of Art;
Nay our precisest schoolmen will forsake
The principles which they have authorized,
In cases that concern self-avarice,
And greedy lucre: knowledge is enforced
To follow by constraint, abuse of time,
Wit misemployed gapes at improper ends:
Strong men are impotent without rich friends.
What cloudy passion, wrapped in ample phrase
May such a railing vehemence portend?
What means thy sharp invective? what's involved?
He doth (my Lord) inveigh at poverty,
And shows how forceable a Saint Wealth is,
How potent the command of money is,
The dreadful awe of dame Pecunia.
And whilst I do revolve the misery
Which happens by constraint of beggary,
Than I remember what my plague must be.
Unshell thy riddle: most miraculous!
Your gaming fool is most ridiculous:
O Fortune, Fortune hath infringed the web
Which I with painful diligence did weave,
Whereto the pillar of my state was pinned:
Some little store I had (not looking higher)
A household smoke outwarms my neighbour's fire.
Have you lost all?
Some fifty hundred crowns.
O the uncertain lot of idle game!
I long have known thee.
And have known me honest.
Honest is now a metamorphized name:
He that can swear, blaspheme, be riotous,
Roar till the midnight echo, or begin'
Some unappeased fray, who dares commence
A drunken skirmish in a bawdy-house,
Fight for his hackney whore, and hazard all,
In honour of his damned associates:
Dares combat with a public officer,
Be (out of gun-shot) most irregular,
Drunk in good earnest, beat five Constables,
Cozen a flock of geese compendiously:
Yet after all put a smooth visage on,
Seem sober, be indulgent of his fame,
Though a most practised knave, remembering still,
To make the midnights all participate
Of such enormous acts: o he's the man
Reputed sociable in our age: ò he
Is reckoned for the honest gentleman:
Who plays the spendthrift, the voluptuous fool,
Exceeds the Turk in sensuality,
Is a true midnight Epicure, can hide
His lewd impostures from discovery,
He shall be most untouched with obloquy;
He (amongst youthful bloods) shall win the wreath
Purchase the name of Loyal honest friend;
But (as our adage says) observe his end.
But (Gracchus) I am rather confident
Than scrupulous of thy square honesty,
Gracchus, I love thee, therefore will bestow
An annual pension of six hundred pounds,
And must withal employ thee.
In a task
That may require my soul than I beseech thee;
May stretch sincerity with tenters: o
Impose an ample burden; o some task
That will survey the depth of love indeed:
Favour beyond man's merit, doth exact
A most unquenched servor; not his vow,
But sinews active, and a sweating brow.
My life lies prostrate to predominance,
Of your commanding voice: I will bestow
My reeking blood in recompense of love
Ready, without all first or second cause:
I wish some Doctor in extremity
Of unknown sickness, which may seize upon
Your most respective honour; would prescribe
The marrow of a man, medicinal;
You should not be indebted to the bones
Of a forsaken caitiff, new condemned,
Whose pocky pith might be infective: No,
My supple fingers should unloose a joint
From off this flexile carcase. I would bruise
A luculent and luscious marrowbone,
(The best I can style proper) to appease
The sharp divulsions of such new disease.
Gracchus, who gives not credence to a zeal
Of thy profession, we account him base:
Be chief among my chiefest followers,
They shall receive directions from thyself.
Withdraw, and punish those
Which my family roof is tainted with;
And which abusive ages do afford
A zeal sincere the Gods cannot reprove
And we erelong will manifest out loves
Let us inculcate now my father's charge,
Remember what with vehemence was urged,
Nay was enjoined you Mantofio
By our most watchful father.
I expect
Upon delivery of his closet keys.
Take them, and prosper; pray be vigilant;
Revolve I pray on how large consequence,
The bare event and sequel of our hopes
jointly consist; who jointly have embarked
The doubtful hazard of our dearest lives
Upon a small miscarriage: only five
Participate of our designs; myself,
But first my father, than my stepdame next
You (Steward) and the Captain of the Guard
Whose happy full consent is scarce obtained:
we severally have instructions learned
Of each particular function; have agreed
How each conspirator shall be employed.
Time calls for speedy action; the square plot
Doth now transcend a shapeless embryo
And will expect upon delivery:
You have engaged a wise dexterity,
And travail; to procure the famishment,
To purvey, to collect estival corn,
Which Harvest will enrich the Rustics with:
My task intends surprisal of the Queen:
Be careful, take the keys, expend the wealth
Which long hath been uphoard: traitors all
Like cunning Statuaries, must avoid
Blemish and eyesores; you conceive me sir:
Successive business needs no roweled spur:
Treason like some insculpture spacious
On a smooth touchstone will demand men wise
A diligent perusal, most precise;
With an elaborate artificer
Who may direct; for 'tis infallible
That errors in a beauteous frame (though small
And at another time though venial)
Yet if committed in a curious piece
Where blemish might (by sufferance) ensue
The total is condemned and carved a new:
Be white, or black; not (party-coloured) grey;
So follow your commission, post away.
Now my contentious brain revolve the tax
Imposed (upon thy blessing) to surprise,
And spoil the ruddy blossom of our age;
Fair Favovrina that Angel-like dame
A Equal for beauty, for unmatched fame;
With Saintlike Venus (by Appelles drawn)
This queen's espousals have I undertook
To disunite, by a most impious act
Of murder; but alas I am enthralled
With true libidinous fervour; am enforced
By lustful hot invasions to decline;
Which punctually tempt me to avoid
The colourable death of whom I love,
Our sweet Cycnaean Goddess; the fair Queen;
Whose body I'll enjoy with privilege,
(I will enjoy with hazard of my death)
Whilst every man imagine she is dead.
Gracchus the Eunuch did I entertain
Commodiously forecasting an exploit
Wherewith to muffle up the serpent-eyes
Of probable suspicion: Like the Fuller
Who cannot live by cloth must live by colour.
But see, observe the beautiful approach
Of my commanding object: bless me fate.
What makes Amilcar so obsequious?
Damsels depart.
Yes, rather, so, than maids.
Amilcar.
Madam.
Thy grave countenance
Trussed up in such a formal cognisance,
With front composed; so perpendicular
Directing steady aim at open gaze,
Your longing silence doth detect; as if
The business should concern my audience:
in faith, in-faith, you are disconsolate.
Yes, but my meaning is immaculate
Like the forgotten primitive attempts,
When all things were accounted innocence.
O might the wrathful arrogance of some
(Who by a peevish-tutored vehemence,
Conspire in habit of corrivalship
Against one pious beauty) be so far
From prejudicial meaning as myself
The age and Kingdom both might live secure:
Madam, I can disclose a prodigy
That appertains to you.
Deliver it.
Have you then female fortitude enough,
A most resolved courage, to conceive,
To apprehend a passion that will wound
Nay penetrate, the fabric of the soul?
Shoot through the centre of thy trembling blood?
Infuse five shaking palsies mutual
Before I finish the first period?
Give then a quick release; I am resolved:
Tormênt me not with idle circumstance,
Begin this tale of prodigy.
Hark heaven;
How careless she accounts of accident,
Grief, and this woman be familiar
I think, and well acquainted.
When begins
The prodigy you spoke of?
'Twill amaze
The organs of attention Madam: yet
Seeing you enforce and covet misery,
You shall no longer be withheld: then thus:
But I beseech thee Queen remember well
These admonitions that exemplify
The horror of my following discourse.
Imagine whilst you do ingurgitate
My poisoned sops the beauty of your sense
Of your ingenious parts (all donatives
Of Nature's bounty, and the Gods above)
Imagine they'll be changed with violence
With unresisted lunacy; so long,
Until each spirit leave her function:
Till with a surfeit you surcease to live
Neglecting mundane solace; be transformed
Into a lifeless image, all thy veins
And vital arteries being stopped with fear:
Thus much remember Queen I do premise.
Amplifications yet? begin, begin:
With all remember, you (right noble Queen)
Who may attend my tale, are but a woman.
And whether will your prolix Lordship amble?
To the world's end I think in preamble:
That (after all) you may anew begin.
No (my compendious Lady) here's an end:
Obstinate silence is the safest whip
To punish a perverse disciple with.
Are you enraged jolly sir i' faith?
O be appeased, leave ambiguities;
Finish thy tale (man.)
Worthy Madam no,
Your supple phrase shall not again recover
One vowel of narration.
O abrupt!
Yes (my blunt youth) if torment may unbind
Your costive silence, know, I will recover
The whole narration; if devulsive racks
Have not forsook the Kingdom; if the King
Will hearken to my spacious complaint;
Or yield with exoration of his Queen.
Your spacious? o then Arithmetic
Hath taught you to augment and multiply:
(Dear Madam) speak within the bounds of truth.
(Cheap Lord) thy impudence shall smart for this.
O bitter!
Thy dumb silence be enforced
To witness, nay reiterate the depth
Of your concealment.
O pernicious.
You shall rehearse, nay shall expound, this tale
Of prodigies.
Without your wide complaint
Without all torment to enforce the same
I will expound them straight; and therefore thus:
Ladies by birth of late are satisfied
With nature's gifts, nor seek they to resist
Impediments of age, or stinking breaths,
But well are guided by the heavens decree
Respecting beauty less than the command,
Of Gods above; be not these prodigies?
They honour husbands, hallow chastity
Reject all midnight offers, live within:
Abhor the name of lustful visitants,
Take little relish in a homebred fool;
And less delight in Physic, or the knaves
Who practise that purloining office well.
Be not these prodigies dear madam? speak;
When Ladies do bestow their idle time
In scrutination of divinity
Not seeking to beguile the abused Art
Of painting; or to wish five Jubilees
Might be allotted to their tumbling tricks
And coltish untamed pleasure; which they use
To practise without intermission: speak:
Be not these prodigies dear madam? speak
When Ladies, and light-women be estranged
From parakitoes, monkeys, island-curs
Coaches, and Coach-mares, masking novelties;
From waspish emulation, to exceed
Some elevated madam in her gown;
Some ivy-bush attire; to engross
The knowledge of a fucus, dentrifice,
unguentum, plaster (for in-faith sometimes
diverse scabbed sheep do perish for defect
Of these restoratives) o then resolve
When madams do estrange their faculty
From inquisition, from delight in these;
Will not the mouldered ashes that have slept
So many thousand years, again revive?
Will not the crazy joints of earth dissolve?
And rotten fathers be resuscitate?
The final extirpation of each dame
Both light and sober may this tale portend
Be not these prodigies dear madam? speak.
Wisdom doth urge me to entreat him fair
lest he indeed dissemble, or conceal
Business of high importance, that may touch
My most particular advantage: (sir
So-well-accomplished, meritorious count.)
I must importune your dexterity,
To recollect the now-forgotten tale
Of prodigies indeed; withal confess
My peevish error.
This doth mollify,
Nor may redemption of abuse, though late;
Although abruptly offered, derogate
From the large sequel; either thy belief
Or my unfeigned meaning (noble Queen)
But Madam you shall seriously admit
A most impugned caution, ere I speak;
And shall observe the same inviolate,
Without base mental reservation.
we will engage our female Majesty
Thy strictest of injunctions to prefer
Above all temporary baits, which may
Allure smooth falsehood to infringe the same:
Swear by this image of Palladium,
(Reckoned amongst our Sacramental oaths)
Neither by subtle tokens nor by voice
By second causes, by secure complaint,
Upon malicious, or well meaning terms,
To manifest, divulge, communicate,
Nor any way disclose the future plot
Whereof you shall anon participate
By process of relation.
I do swear
And will submit my life to thy advise.
With privilege, than Madam, I'll express
The wicked meaning of your enemies:
Lucilla my proud stepdame, doth abhor,
Sole repetition of thy harmless name:
She doth repose her chiefest confidence
In my audacious act, who am obliged
Upon surprise to kill thee.
Subtle whore?
So young, and yet so full of impudence?
So full of indignation, causeless wrath?
Envy how feeble are thy foaming jaws?
With undefined rancour they attempt,
But seldom are obnoxious to any,
Who have acquaintance with integrity;
For envy (upon spite) assails the hinge
Of our success: but wrong inflames revenge:
And therefore did high Ioues omnipotence,
Envy; unto the female sex impart:
Woman's a witch by Malice, man by Art.
How, how (Amilcar) may we recompense
The new disease of her indignity
Which would entice, and so corrupt thy youth
By fraudulent commotions.
I'll instruct
How opportunely, Madam, you may meet
With her abusive malice; and exempt
yourself from the suspicion of revenge.
And yet revenge will be conspicuous:
I thinke, and well acquainted.
When begins
The prodigie you spake of?
'Twill amaze
The organs of attention Madam: yet
Seeing you enforce and couer misery,
You shall no longer be with-held then thus:
But I beseech thee Queene remember well
These admonitions that exemplefy
The horror of my following discourse.
Imagine whilst you doe ingurgitate
My poyson'd soppes the beauty of your sence
Of your ingenious parts (all donatiues
Of Natures bounty, and the Gods aboue)
Imagine they'le be chang'd with violence
With vnresisted lunacy; so long,
Vntill each spirit leaue her function:
Till with a surfet you sur-sease to liue
Neglecting mudan: solace; be trans-form'd
Into a liuelesse image, all thy veines
And vitall arteries being stop'd with feare:
Thus much remember Queene I do prae-mise.
Amplifications yet? begin, begin:
With all remember, you (right noble Queene)
Who may attend my tale, are but a woman.
And whether will your prolix Lord-ship amble?
To the worlds end I thinke in preamble:
That (after all) you may anew begin.
No (my compendious Lady) heere's an end:
Obstinate silence is the safest whip
To punish a peruerse disciple with.
Are you enraged iolly sir i'saith?
O be appeasd, leaue ambiguities;
Finish thy tale (man.)
Worthy Madam no,
Your spple phrase shall not againe recouer
One voell of narration.
O abrupt!
Yes (my blunt youth) if torment may vnbind
Your silence, know, I will recouer
The whole narration; if duulsiue rackes
Haue not forsooke the Kingdome; if the King
Will hearken to my spatious complaint;
Or yeeld with exoration of his Queene.
Your spatious? ô then Arithmeticke
Hath taught you to augment and multiply:
(Deere Madam) speake within the bounds of truth.
(Cheape Lord) thy impudence shall smart for this.
Obitter!
Thy dumbe silence be inforc'd
To witnesse, nay reiterate the depth
Of your concealement.
O pernicious.
You shall rehearse, nay shall expound, this tale
Of prodigies.
Without your wide complaint
Without all torment to enforce the same
I will expound them straight; and therefore thus:
Ladies by birth of late are satisfied
With natures gifts, nor seeke they to resist
Impediments of age, or stinking breaths,
But well are guided by the heauens decree
Respecting beauty lesse then the command,
Of Gods aboue; be not these prodigies?
They honour husbands, hallow chastity
Reiect all midnight offers, liue within:
Abhorre the name of lustfull visitants,
Take little relish in a home-bred foole;
And lesse delight in Physicke, or the knaues
Who practise that purloyning office well.
Be not these prodigies deere Madame? speake▪
When Ladies do bestow their idle time
In scrutination of deuinity
Not seeking to beguile the abused Art
Of painting; or to wish fiue Iubiles
Might be allotted to their tumbling tricks
And coltish vntam'd pleasure; which they vse
To practise without intermission; speake:
Be not these prodigies deere Madame? speake
When Ladies, and light-women be estrang'd
From Para-kitos, Munkies, island-curres
Coaches, and Coach-mares, masking nouelties;
From waspish aemulation, to exceed
Some eleuated Madame in her gowne;
Some luy-bush attire; to engrosse
The knowledge of a fcus, dentifrice,
Vnguentum, plaister (for in-faith sometimes
Diuerse scab'd sheepe do perish for defect
Of these restoratiues) ô then resolue
When Madames do estrange their facultie
From inquisition, from delight in these;
Will not the mouldred ashes that haue slept
So many thousand yeares, againe reuiue?
Will not the crazy ioints of earth dissolue?
And rotten fathers be resuscitate?
The finall extirpation of each dame
Both light and sober may this tale portend
Be not these prodigies deere Madame? speake.
Wisedome doth vrge me to entreate him faire
Least hee indeed dissemble, or conceale
Businesse of high importance, that may touch
My most perticular aduantage: (sir
So-well-accomplish'd, meritorious Count)
I must importune your dexterity,
To re-collect the now-forgotten tale
Of prodigies indeed; withall confesse
My peeuish error.
This doth mollify,
Nor may redemption of abuse, though late;
Although abruptly offer'd, derogate
From the large sequele; either thy beleefe
Or my vnfeigned meaning (noble Queene)
But Madam you shall seriously admit
A most impugned caution, ere I speake;
And shall obserue the same inuiolate,
Without base mentall reseruation.
Wee will engage our female Maiesty
Thy strictest of iniunctions to prefer
Aboue all temporary baits, which may
Allure smooth falshood to infringe the same:
Sweare by this image of Paladium,
(Reckon'd amongst our Sacramentall oathes)
Neither by subtle tokens nor by voyce
By second causes, by secure complaint,
Vpon malitious, or well meaning termes,
To manifest, diuulge, communicate,
Nor any way disclose the future plot
Whereof you shall anon participate
By processe of relation.
I do sweare
And will submit my life to thy aduise.
With priuiledge, then Madam, Ile expresse
The wicked meaning of your enemies:
Lucilla my proud step-dame, doth abhorre,
Sole repetition of thy harmlesse name:
Shee doth repose her chiefest confidence
In my audacious act, who am oblig'd
Vpon surprise to kill thee.
Subtle whore
So yong, and yet so full of impudence?
So full of indignation, causelesse wrath?
Enuy how feeble are thy foming iawes?
With vndefined rancor they attempt,
But seldome are obnoxious to any,
Who haue acquaintance with integrity;
For enuy (vpon spight) assailes the henge
Of our successe: but wrong enflames reuenge:
And therefore did high Ioes omnipotence,
Eny; vnto the female sex impart:
Woman's a witch by Malice, man by Art.
How, how (Ailcar) may wee recompence
The new disease of her indignity
Which would entice, and so corrupt thy youth
By fraudulent commotions.
Ile instruct
How opportunely, Madam, you may meete
With her abusiue malice; and exempt
Your selfe from the suspicion of reuenge.
And yet reuenge will be conspicuous:
For all complaints and public remedy
The primitive injunction doth deny;
You therefore shall admit my new device,
When Summer makes each field, each meadow fair;
When pleasant springtide music is in tune,
You may retire into this thicker-grove
Loosely attended, with one maid, no more:
Whilst, like a common soldier in disguise
I suddenly rush forth, and do surprise
You not misdoubting, whom I will convey
Into my lodging near the City walls
After all inquisition cease: till then,
we may repast in some poor Country Town.
The manner I allow; speak for event.
(All men amazed with such a sudden chance)
I will suborn a simple idiot
(Being first obliged by bounty) to confess
That he through wicked instigation
Of my most infamous stepdame, did attempt,
Nay finish the supposed murder; then
That mere compunction did enforce the tale;
To mitigate, his wound of conscience.
So he may hazard life being innocent.
No, he may craftily insert a boon
Which will avoid the danger of his life.
He shall beseech his death may be deferred
Till my unlawful mother by the Law
Taste execution, or he will profess
Obstinate silence; so conceal the place
Of your pretended burial; the King
Nor any man alive may this deny;
But I'll instruct him when he doth espy
Occasion; this to manifest aloud
The Queen doth live, though I were tempted oft
By that malicious woman, now deprived
Of natural bad parts, by righteous death,
(Meaning my mother who shall then be dead)
To slay whom I preserved, this hopeful Queens.
The plot provokes me to esteem revenge
Above all earthly blessing; and embrace
The subtle virtue of a painted face.
Subtle indeed, for my pretence implies
Nothing but foggy mist to blind her eyes;
When fair temptation's weak; surprisal must
Give satisfaction to my flaming lust.
Most opportunely did you pre-acquaint
My place with a design so requisite.
Captain, you have well eased my anxious fear
But bounty shall remunerate thy care:
The title Viceroy (Captain) doth attend
To countervail thy meritorious act:
The famine doth already tyrannize.
What policy procures the famishment?
All insurrection do I disappoint,
Subdue resistance, mollify the fierce
And peevish overlooking multitude
By a substraction of their usual food
Which will discourage appetite to war:
But unexpected liberality,
And satisfaction of their empty maws
With rich abundance after penury,
It will enchain the base to loyalty.
A project most irreprehensible.
The chiefest onset doth belong to you:
Do you conceive a full advertisement
For each proceeding? punctually relate
How your conceit doth apprehend me sir.
To supper you'll invite the honest King—
Honest?
I; simple, indiscreet, blood-raw,
Of small experience to beguile, suspect,
Frown, laugh, kill, flatter with a tyrant's face;
A King too-open-breasted for this age;
And so the world doth honest men accounted
By way of high reproach.
Smooth Orator,
Ingeniously well worded is thy speech:
May not the sequel perish, now proceed.
To supper you'll invite this honest King;
He (not misdoubting homebred violence)
With a select strong military troop
I, and the Guard together, will invade
Murder (amidst the cups and Magistrates)
Him; who shall surfeit of each fatal wound;
Shall rather die than see Pheudippe crowned.
Captain, thy apprehension is acute
Thus bounty will oblige men resolute:
Withdraw, your several reward is future;
A pregnant Pupil thrives without his Tutor.
The popular invective doth exclaim
Upon Pheudippe; swear with open voice
He bred this famine.
Am I then betrayed?
Will my sage Steward turn delinquent? ha?
Can my Pheudippe prove disloyal? no,
Doth he intend subversion of my state?
we may consult of warlike discipline
Amidst our height of solace; (though secure)
Although at league with every Potentate
Who sits enthroned upon the spacious Orb.
So may we well advise your Majesty
To have a watchful overlooking spy
Upon your haughty Duke; (though innocent;
Though in himself obsequiously bent)
Learning advanced may prove judicious;
But (if mislead) extremely vicious.
Tell me my proper Genius may prove false,
My blood become a traitor to my life;
The issue of my loins degenerate;
Say; this right hand conspires against my head;
Tell me; the Gods whom I adore, neglect
Religion, do forbid all sacrifice;
And I believe you: but the villains lie,
Who dare imagine my Pheudippe false.
in faith I am afraid you do abuse
My honest friend's integrity, too much;
Pheudippe false? my bosom-counsellor?
The earth will shake at such a prodigy:
Some Phaeton shall mount the Chariot
Of our uprising Phoebus, and inflame
The world again; each widow shall conceive
Without man's aid five dragons at a birth,
All threatening this impossible event,
Ere I do entertain a syllable
Of your suggestion: though the Gods descend
Though they admonish my credulity
(In special) to beware of whom we speak
And call him traitor; o I should reply
Within the bounds (I fear) of blasphemy.
See how he walks perplexed with agony;
My anger shall improve his patience.
Pheudippe.
Doth my dread Sovereign call?
What doth my demi-self Pheudippe do?
Beshrew my melancholic dumps I do;
Which pretermit Menanders Majesty
Without obeisance; whilst I walk secure
In a blind corner thus extravagant.
His aromatic breath perfumes the air:
The spicy fields where gossamer doth grow
Have not one vapour half so redolent:
I must for fashion chide him fatherly.
Friend, friend, you are ambitious of rule,
Report exclaims upon your dignity;
All attribute the Time's calamity
Of dearth, to you the Author; who engross
Heaps of provision without real cause;
I must not wink at fraudulent abuse
Done to my Subjects; rather abuse me:
Thou mightst enjoy full many blessed years,
Live in an equal happiness with me,
Rather than thus neglect my sincere love,
And lose the hope of our munificence▪
Do not (I pray) deserve that infamy
With which our scandalising age condemns
Thy whole endeavours; o redeem the loss
Of Loyalty; a thing so precious.
Reject those machinations infinite
With which the people charge thee; I conceal
The horror of a rage so violent
As some censorious Critics have adjudged
To dwell within thy bosom: prithee think
Whether I do deserve thy impious hand
To thrust me from a lineal descent
Or (being down) deserve thy helping hand,
To rescue and uphold my primacy.
Some better Angel be auspicious
Unto my naked answer; (mighty King)
Your deep discretion may with ease collect;
(Though I were dumb and did through silence purge
This weighty accusation) that perforce
To public censure all authority
Is often subject: so irregular
Be sudden apprehensions; as upright
And politic proceedings are condemned;
The Prudent famed for ignominious
Mad Authors, of sick innovation;
(Though not resolved how this language means:)
I do in ample, and with open terms
Confess the crime supposed, not culpable,
Though burdened with ambition) I confess
A duteous love unto the Commonweal,
Hath bred my damage; Overdiligence
May summon active zeal to a defence,
Which doth appear in my ill-tuned event,
As you perceive, or call me insolent.
The famous Art of Mathematic Rules,
(Wherein my ignorance will never boast
A singularity of knowledge, or conceit)
Did by infallible demonstrations
Foresignify this famine: o resolve
Whether then by the law of Nations
I be accountable unto the Gods
For this pretended accusation;
Seeing to the safety of our Commonweal,
A providence conjectural hath urged,
My whole endeavour? If unto the Gods
I am excused; what impudence will dare
With falsehood to accuse my innocence?
For those designs which Gods allow, ne'er can
Be in themselves offensive unto man.
Know therefore (upon hopeful prescience)
I did engage a new dexterity,
To countervail the famishment foreknown,
I did engross provision, did expend
Twelvemonths revenue to accomplish corn:
Ill be my pains acquitted, worse my love;
Which, labours in the common cause may prove.
Thus imputations are too usual,
And bad constructions are authentical.
Some Kings, (to manifest predominance)
Accumulate on subjects, heavy wealth,
Honour above demerit, offices,
Popular Cities, and enfranchised Towns;
Nay whole dominions, Dukedoms they'll bestow,
And raise a simple Mushroom to the height
Of any monarch's due magnificence;
Till by excess of labour, sweat of brains,
He hath enriched his beggarly estate;
Then (like a full-ripe Orange; or indeed,
Like a deceitful sponge, whose empty pores
The owner doth replenish) he must look
To feel a sudden crush, a nip will squeeze
Him; who pretends he may be rich and please:
If then my Title (o judicious King)
My now desertless wealth, or eminence,
Which (by especial favour I enjoy,
Which freely were bestowed long since), if these
Shall be accounted error and offence,
Or be imputed to my sauciness,
I do submit, and will my crime confess;
If your unreprehended sapience
Think it a policy expedient,
I'll run to exile, die in banishment,
Live like a screech-owl in some secret cave,
Turn errant caitiff, and so die a slave:
If you suppose it be available
Or to diminish, or annihilate
To disannul, or to abbreviate
My large allowance; if you do account
The base degrading of a loyal peer
Will give advantage and security
To your successive regiment; (may which
Continue to the world's eternity:)
If thus you do imagine (dreaded Liege)
Lo, I will prostrate fall, and ask a boon,
Beg that the headman's Axe may overtake,
May with a bloody sentence, me salute,
With willing voice, and a more willing arm,
Would I the messenger of death regreet;
Till then, most lowly kiss your grace's feet:
Arise my faithful honourer, arise:
Good honest soul, thy language would enforce
The Cannibals to turn compassionate:
I will transmit thee into Scythia,
To Pontus, to the fierce untamed Getes,
Till with a fluent phrase, thou do compel
Their savage superstition to submit,
And me acknowledge, as their lawful King:
Thus thou like Orpheus couldst (I'm sure) enthrall
The rude Arabian, or the rugged Gaule,
And captivate their longing audience
With an eternity of eloquence.
Thus couldst thou re-enlarge my sovereign awe,
Thus multiply each province, thus augment
The bounds of our dominion, or deduce
Appointed troops of Colony; with voice:
But (my alone beloved) never think
I will exchange thy noble company
For temporal possession: though the Gods
Would all resign Olympus, and elect
Me as coheir indubitate to Ioue,
Upon Proviso to forsake this friend,
I rather would refuse divinity,
Live like a drudge in dark obscurity,
Then leave so loyal, so complete a friend:
And yet this man deserves a watchful eye;
Speak you censorious rank of Magistrates,
Doth he deserve suspicion? who replies?
Reports and rumour did deserve advise.
Who guided by report so far doth blame
Another, as to argue his ill-name,
Insisting much on some particular,
Detects himself, an Ass auricular.
This unexpected fume to pacify
Let your good grace vouchsafe to dignify
A Summer banquet, and I shall entreat
You the Patricians to accept my love.
Rather then bounty; whom I will invite
And feast with my beloved Liege tonight.
With temptive cups we'll wash away conceit,
And so renew each health in sober height.
May then my cauterised soul forsake
The rules of nature? sanctimonious law?
Religion' or distinct humanity?
The common spark of times morality?
Must lethargy now seize upon my soul?
Shall my infectious humour so control
judgement? so much prefer fantastic joy?
Give licence to disloyal treachery?
Atheism' Rebellion? black deformity?
O most ungoverned appetite of man!
we may foresee what few escape, e'er can.
Resolve me, Sophist, or Philosopher,
Some cunning moral disputant resolve,
I is the people do maintaine) Gods liue,
Gods, who revenge our close iniquity,
And search the recluse corners of each soul;
Why do the Gods forbear to punish me?
Who am as wicked as a man may be:
Why doth Olympus, or the Gods who dwell
Within that fabric suffer smoky hell,
Horror, impostume prodigies, and death,
Vengeance, delay; to stop a villains breath?
Can such a sublunary slave as I
outlive two minutes longer? Thus protract
A peaceable success, without heavens crack?
Can ominous portents be now asleep,
Whilst I am waking? do the Angels keep
No watch for Kings? then Iupiter awake,
And give the world some notice that you take
Especial care of Princes: o methinks
Morpheus the God of sleep, who daily winks,
Should leave his drunken catalogue of dreams,
And start with repetition of extremes,
Wherewith I am infected; seas should burn,
Bears, wolves, and lions peaceable should turn
Into their antic affability,
And argue men of much impiety.
Now should thy thunder (Jove) assail the the fort
Of my ambitious hope, by way of sport,
Blast me with lightning, brand me full of spots;
Who have entrenched a garrison of plots
Against my second maker, 'gainst my King.
So credulous, so element, so sincere,
So flexible, and gracious to me,
As I without him never had my name;
He hath endeared my dangerous attempt,
Is both indulgent of each true surmise,
And zealous of each tale that may arise,
Or to detect, or to oppugn my pride,
My most perfidious dealing; doth deride
All true suggestion of his Councillors,
Who would exasperate his amity,
Whilst I enchant his ears with flattery,
With mere dissimulation (Physic Art)
My gilded dagger stabs him to the heart.
Can my obstreperous passion echo forth
A sound so dismal irreligious,
Without some sudden earthquake ominous?
Without a clap of thunder to benumb
M trembling oynts, ad make my language dumb?
Then I'll infer the masty frame of earth,
Man universal; peasant, patriarch,
Grocers and great men, Kings and Copper-smiths,
Be governed by the Gods, no more than sheep,
Or I'll depose, the Gods be all asleep:
Scruple in actions doth augment the vice,
Which courage hath surnamed Cowardice.
Soon may a statesman savour of the Fool,
Who leaves his torrent for a standing-pool;
Who doth neglect his high pre-eminence
For safety of a quiet conscience.
All senior Sophists, and each puisne elf
Account him wise, who's wisest for himself.
Yet for conceited disputation's sake,
A long discourse of Honesty I'll make,
Of times corruption will I satirize,
And with each cunning nature temporize.
Thus doth a serpent, which will satisfy
His common thirst, and Summer heat allay,
After he is approached unto the bank
Of pleasant Nilus, without much delay,
Instinct doth teach him to disgorge the bag
Of poison, kept in his pernicious jaw,
Till he hath tasted the resulting wave;
Then readily licks up the viscous gall
Which he by nature did evacuate,
And so remains his body temperate,
His poison (though suspended) virulent.
So when we crafty fellows (for attempt)
By sudden motives do remember ways
Which men more honest, name Legitimate,
Or by converse, if we shall tempted be,
To show the best of our affections, we
Do like the thirsty snake, renounce our Saint,
(Accounted sin) which reassume we will;
So reassumption makes the Serpent still;
If my designs incur discovery,
I then admit, the King is merciful,
And he a milksop is, (we may resolve)
Can fear, if Kings be ready to absolve:
Noble attempts beget experience,
republics purchase mundane policy
Through observation; my success will bring
Plenty of knowledge: errors difficult
Daily engender rational discuss,
Which by events do sweep away the sink
Or muddy oppilation of our sense,
Original of knowledge is offence:
I therefore thus embarked for enterprise,
May win a double stake, learn wit, and rise.
This frolic evening, full of silent air,
Speaks a success to thy achievements, fair:
Both time an opportunity's, benign;
The Sun at his departure, seems to smile,
My banquet is prepared, which must beguile:
No apparitions, no refulgent star,
No threatening Comet can our act oppose,
No new transfigured meteor disclose
Our most heroic humour, and annoy
The glad conception of all future joy.
Nay, if a plot so well-contrived, so square,
So formal, so judicious, should prove
Ill-featured, and abortive, I'd forswear
All crafty dealing; never would I move,
Compassion with repentance; to obtain
Most absolute forgiveness, though the King
Do then release my criminal attempt,
I'd not endear his donative, except
With resolution to escape the law,
And wreak more ample vengeance on myself,
With my own proper hands, through violence.
If a design so mature, so concealed,
So rich in expectation, so obliged,
May now miscarry, and repugnant prove;
I'll sure prevent the headsman, hang myself
With expedition, hire a mountebank,
Some noted empiric, to anatomize
My politician corpses, dissect my skull,
Boil tongue and heart together in my blood,
Effuse them into broth made of my brains,
In which, my unctuous kidney-leaf dissolved
With my more luscious marrow, may compose
A poultice, which will speedily contrive
The downfall of erected favourites,
Inflame desire then— disannul the ends
Which that affection gapes for: I resolve
Thus to bequeath my members, to the sect
Of those, who narrow inquisition make
After each mystic virtue, physical;
If our attempts prove not effectual.
Then presuppose your project well do thrive,
What recompense may Lælio expect,
Chief captain of the guard; whose instant blow
Gives an advantage so peculiar?
That my officious Captain of his guard
The cunning wolf hath taught me to reward
Resolve the manner, be emphatical.
The famished wolf (whom hunger oft endues
With belly courage to be valiant)
If by adventure his extremity
Meets with a beast of more validity.
Though less tyrannic rapine then himself,
He (practised in such skill pernicious)
clay, to make his body ponderous;
by at to aequall natures strength,
Till he depress, and overcome at length.
By which instinct, his booty once obtained,
An easy vomit natural doth purge
His lumpish maw of that despised earth;
Which (after conquest) he thinks little worth:
e'en thus the Captain I'll remunerate,
And with contempt, I'll recapitulate
His humble service; so cashier the hope
Of due requital, with a good excuse,
We entertain those agents but for use.
Here comes my faithful steward; speak what news?
The Captain with his military troup,
I have appointed to their ambush; they
Expect upon my signal (gracious Duke)
The king's vaunt-couriers do each testify
His glad approach; give ear to Majesty.
The most of subjects welcome, to my Liege,
Accept our weak endeavour, I beseech;
Sit (gracious King) the Cates contain our love.
we do accept, and will deserve (my decree)
This thy extended free munificence:
This plentiful provision I may call,
(With licence of our Ethics) Liberal.
No (my most mindful & more sapient Prince)
I am your vassal, drudge, obsequious,
Not bountiful; for 'tis impossible
That a dependent caitiff who doth owe
His whole endeavour, and essential part,
His poor existence, spirits animal,
His function, his each power vegetal,
To a supreme efficient, should obtain
(After a free expense, to gratulate
His all-respective patron, God, or Saint)
One shred or title of Munificent,
Of Bountiful, or Liberal, because
Duty and love exact such obsequies
For lawful Kings, in stead of sacrifice.
What means thy mad irruption Laelio?
The ambush, the ambush; strike fellow, strike.
Strike this ignoble traitor, Cockatrice,
The subtle vermin base Pheudippe, strike,
Strike fellows, strike, as doth your General,
Who hath withstood temptation actual.
If dear temptation, if enticement smile,
Happy is he who can himself beguile.
Amazement be my death; dear captain hold:
Hold from the rescue of my royal King?
we were tempted to thy causeless death.
Permit thee the traitor to enjoy some breath.
My wounds are many, I degenerate,
Lived villain-like, and die a reprobate.
My husband, my dear husband is betrayed,
Another's death makes guilty men afraid.
Infamous change of dignity! dear friend,
Loyal repentance might again restore,
(Couldst thou revive) thy simple innocence.
Captain, you have abused our Majesty,
And thy audacious act will we revenge.
Revenge a traitors ignominious death?
Traitor? thou liest, admit his active blood,
His nimble brain, acute sincerity,
Conceived some sober means to ratify,
Or to confirm opinionate belief,
With trial of our unattempted love;
May this deserve a stab? what insolence
May term this loyal project an offence?
I'll over-vex with artificial fire,
Thee (slave) who didst Pheudippe's death conspire.
May treachery be then accounted zeal?
To his persuasive lines I do appeal.
Read them, they do contain Apostasy,
Foul matter of sedition: I avouch
The guard to witness, I implore the Gods
In their omnipotence, to testify
The zeal of my affection; to resolve
Whether this kingdom had not suffered woe,
Thy Majesty been trampled under foot,
Thy sinews cracked, thy bones unburied,
Sparta been battered with intestine war,
If through disloyal humour, through neglect
Of homage, we had hearkened to the false,
But honey-mouth of this rebellious man.
Insolent sir, suppose my friend were false,
(Which I can scarce imagine) or suppose
Confident faith made him erroneous:
Will you abridge the trial of our law?
Prevent my absolution? I appeal
Unto the blessed Theater of Saints,
Let holiness, or let humanity,
Your zeal, how much defective, testify:
For though the three dimensions did concur
In his offence, yet I had mercy left.
Pheudippe, simple man, thy false designs
ne'er knew a height in mischief so extreme,
A breadth, or depth in folly so profound,
So villainous, but our compassion knew
A means to mitigate thy error; See
My Concubine comes fraught with sober news;
Begin, resolve, and so exaggerate
Our heavy loss, we will intoxicate
Our soul with imbibition of more change:
Begin, depose an accident so strange,
As repetition of two syllables
May strike us with a sudden lethargy,
And so conclude a king's Catastrophe.
The queen—
There make thy period; we know
Mischief (like mighty waves) ne'er comes alone.
The queen's delivered of a hideous son
Some winged Dragon; is she so? or dead?
Privately walking in the forest-grove
A ruffian seized her, slew thy hopeful Queen,
Trussed up the carcase on a speedy nag,
Which by instruction (as my judgement gives)
Flew fast away, like Pegasus: poor I
(Never-enough contented with a chance
Of so secure amazement) stupid wretch,
I looking stood immoveable with fear,
Whilst he upon his palfrey cut the air;
Whilst every mountain echoed with laments,
The hollow rocks, and every bush repents
Their weak unable powers to resist
And stop the caitiffs passage: o desist
From a pursuit of such high consequence
Not a small minute longer; captain fly,
A bold career may stop loves destiny.
we'll fly with expedition; follow friends.
Discharge a bullet in my naked breast;
Be charitable some auspicious arm.
My daughter, o my daughter, she is dead.
Fair Favorina's dead, thy love, my Queen,
My dear Pheudippe's dead our joys be gone
Mirror of change! the plagues of Cinthia
Are manifest, revenge is palpable,
O that assembly (sir) who by command
Of your injunction did restrain the vow
Which masculines alike with females owe
To Cinthia, great Goddess of the air,
Was without question all-erroneous,
Your edict which pronounced her deity,
Sole-potent over feminine degrees,
Which did confine her awe celestial:
To that unable sex, seems trivial:
These accidents do cancel your design,
They disallow your obstinate decree,
They do advance forgotten Majesty:
O now reform delusion: terror speaks,
Cinthia is Goddess over human sex.
Cinthia's a female weathercock, a whore,
Doth she afflict our happiness? resolve
Speak (friends) deliver what you think.
Abstain
(Distressed King) from blasphemy; beware
judgements more strict may follow; these but scare.
O could I compass with a sudden leap,
The verge of big Olympus, or assault
With Swallow-wings, the orb of Cinthia!
O my revenge, my sweet revenge, more bold
Than bloody-jawed Busiris, than the Boar
Which slew dame Venus' joy, should wrathful vex
Her opposite excels divinity.
With rage would I blaspheme, though angry Ioue
Makes ready thunder to precipitate
My daring voice: I will ingeminate
With deep derision, her distasteful name,
Enforcing others to abuse the same.
Dost thou not hear me Cinthia? dissolve
The melancholy clouds which mask thy brow,
And let compunction mollify thee (witch)
Forth from thy cloudy palace (Luna) peep
And with incessant soft contrition, weep:
Reduce the antic deluge with thy tears,
Turn thy rejoicing into pale-faced fears.
Cinthia, remember my abuse, and blush,
Blush thou immodest harlot, be ashamed
To look upon the shadowed universe.
Catch me some whirlwind with a sweeping blast,
And carry me aloft, I'll vex the Moon
For she (ungracious Goddess) doth afflict
Us, and our dignity: she did suggest
Rebel-temptations to my beauteous friend,
Whose innocence I ever shall commend.
Manifest proof (Menander) doth detect
His viperous-reproachful perfidy,
Composed of pregnant infidelity:
To mischief his endeavour's daily bent,
I ever thought he was malevolent:
Of crimes detected (blame us if thou wilt)
Despairing apprehensions, argue guilt:
He did alike despair: which proceeds
From the confusion of abortive deeds:
I do enforce, that Cinthia hath done well,
She gives good warning to prevent a hell:
These weaker medicines do but search the wound,
lest rotten members perish; to confound
An ulcerous limb, is worse than scarify;
But rather than lose all: what remedy?
To Cinthia's, revenge o this apply:
Touching her name I'll prove a renegade,
My sudden scourge what soul can tolerate?
Error of man which overtops the sky,
And with quick waftage doth for vengeance fly;
calls down God's judgement (mischief to amend)
Nay, often doth enforce the Gods descend:
Horror, more ugly than the jaws of hell,
Horror, that apprehension doth excel,
Startles my Godhead to imagine how
I further may avenge the Spartans vow:
Shall we (great empress of Imperious night,
heaven's wonder, and wide Corinth's blessed Saint)
Thus be, o thus compelled, presumptuous King,
To spit our unappeased flames in thy face?
O the sharp edge of bitter blasphemy!
How deep incision doth attend on it?
Flesh cannot brook one trivial abuse,
And shall the Gods (being injured) take truce?
No; I'll inflict a terror to offence,
And will (without compassion) scourge thy sense:
For like some snowball tossed upon hot coals,
Thy wit shall vanish, and thy sense consume:
A madness must ensue, but mad alike,
Never was any; those that see shall shake
And tremble at our vengeance; but because
Thy unadvised rashness rails upon
Our monthly change, upbraid holiness,
With a false friend's miscarriage, I'll impose
A change unparalleled, which ne'er shall cease,
Till thy distracted body sleep in peace:
The most magnificent may learn of thee,
Kings from a dreadful vengeance are not free:
Kings may like petty-gods, insult below,
But of a dear-deep reckoning they must know:
Fame, freedom, fates, and all that may conspire
To make man happy, shall not make thee man:
For Fates do rescue neither life nor fame,
If God's high justice do enthrall the same:
Nor may the strict evasion of mishap,
Hurt who secured lie in virtues lap.
But if destruction be above decreed,
Means stop in justice, sew by means are freed.
Fall then the horror of blaspheming fears,
Not wiped away with penitential tears;
Till by his death my vengeance be appeased,
And wrathful famine absolutely pleased.
What you already with good cause condemn,
I must (though need not) urge thee to contemn
With all extremity of noble hate,
Vice which emboldens man to be ingrate.
To prove unthankful if occasion speaks,
The joyful head of freeborn bounty breaks:
Do but employ your bondslave (mighty Lord)
If Kings command not, how can slaves accord?
The blessings of my body, breath and soul,
Be so engaged, as their existence knows
Not one redeemer amongst all the Gods,
(Fabulous things to me) except yourself:
You have replenished my poor empty veins,
Have lent new spirits to despairing hope
Nay have bestowed a whole creations work
Upon mê off all-caitiff, who adore
Impression of your footsteps; that is all:
Expecting hourly on the happy time
When you shall dare command what I dare do:
When with advantage you will but pronounce
O Gracchus, give me of thy blood an ounce:
An ounce? take fifty pottles Id'e reply,
Open yourself a passage to my soul,
To take a lawful debt who dares control?
Nor do impute this love to lack of wit,
Or some disjointed weakness of the brain;
For if I argue as the thing demands,
Unless my life, what with your honour stands?
Let me profess, unto the Saints and you
I do desire employment, will be proud
Of death or life, being by yourself allowed.
Life we allow, but never wish thy death,
For we expect upon true diligence,
And must improve the nature of thy zeal;
Eunuchs, forbidden actions do conceal;
Thou art an Eunuch, listen to my shame,
Then give advise, and secrecy, though blame:
I love; no, rather lust and love the Queen,
Whom (all-supposing dead) by stratagem
And strong delusion of her silly sense,
I did surprise, being blinded with pretence;
Nor did she seem repugnant to such ruth
My Rhetoric was clad in robes of truth:
Affirming she might thus revenge the spleen,
Of proud Lucilla (who maligns her state)
Giving no colour of revengeful hate;
As to suborn a subtle wretch I vowed
Who with abundant knowledge being endowed
Most caitiff-like should counterfeit, no less,
(For penitent compunction) heaviness;
And so divulge he slew the Noble Queen,
Thereto induced by poor Lucilla's spleen:
Then should Lucilla live no longer day
But lose each vital benefit for aye:
Thus did the hope of vain revenge entice
Woman to prove more valiant than wise:
Whom I (as captive) do retain, till she
Shall manumit myself, (her bondslave) free.
Here in the Village doth your Goddess live?
Here; and thyself though sprung of human seed
As jailor to my Goddess I areed.
Faithfully wise we do account thy love;
And managing of this design will prove
Thy elegant enforcements, touching me,
Which (happily perchance) may set both free.
O now my blood and reason be at war
With apparition of this fatal star:
Fatal to me, because enchanted beams
Shoot from her eyelids into lovesick streams:
See where she comes with excellence enough
For fifty thousand of the female sex,
Beauties which bless the owner, neighbours vex.
Are you my Lords attendant?
(Madam) no,
But a poor bondslave, who can easily owe
The hazard of a soul in sacrifice
To his good honour's health, and pay the debt
Without compulsion, or a double threat.
madam he is the blessing of my fate
Borne to my fortunes, and my whole estate.
So: then resolve what news.
All fear is fled:
The worst of woman's fear, Lucilla's dead:
Most welcome tidings speak, I pray, and stuff
Your happy speech with circumstance enough.
Titan roused up from darkness by the day
Shrunk with amazement of the fatal morn,
(Remembering what a mischief should befall)
For cloudy nightcaps he again did call,
When my suborned vassal gave consent
To swim (for satisfaction of our sake)
Through deep damnation's gulf, so, through the lake
Of undigested horror, to accuse
My stepdame, young Lucilla, of your death:
He, a dissembling caitiff, deeply read
In irreligious acts; with doubtful face
More doubted voice, and miserable groan
Salutes the footstep of Menander's throne;
Then weeping, said, the Worm of Conscience
Strives in my blood; tortures my broken soul;
Haunted I am with terror whilst I live
Who to my life a period will give?
A final period: for I live too long
Let villains fortune be my fatal song,
With which the sorry King was somewhat moved,
And (after silence) did exact his name
Proceeding to the circumstantial cause;
My rude impostor did prevent the clause,
And seeming to afflict his pensive heart,
Back from the royal footsteps doth he start:
Help, o defend me from her hateful frowns,
See where Medusa-like she comes, (he cried)
Clad all in torchlight like the Queen of hell
Her scalp's encircled with a Crown of flames:
Much lean-jawed horror hangs about her eyes;
The gaping wound for greedy vengeance cries.
What madness now affrights thee, quoth our king?
Fair Favovrina's shadow he replies,
For through enticements of Lucilla's spleen
I slew the gallant Bride, and Sparta's Queen:
Lucilla, by consent, was doomed to death
And my Impostor also, whom I taught
For life's own safeguard to beseech the King,
That his uprighteous judgement of grim death
Might fail of execution, just so long
As the condemned Lucilla did survive
Thinking by this, than to discover all
And say he did preserve whom she conspired to kill.
The King, enraged with sorrow, did repel
This poor petition of my tortured slave:
Who then despairing to escape from death
Drew forth a dagger, gave one fatal stab
Into the Kings own bosom, with which wound
He like a lofty Turret, nodding low,
Clapped his victorious palms above his head,
And swear a mighty oath, MENANDER'S DEAD.
Menander dead? My King and Husband dead?
My slave torn piece-meal did enjoy his fate,
Lucilla burnt before the Palace gate.
Menander dead?
Yes, but Pheudippe's King.
Pheudippe King?
Yes; but MENANDER''s DEAD.
Oppressed with sorrow, I lament his death:
But am appeased by proud Lucilla's breath.
What is a woman's love? when to revenge
And empty out the poison of her gall
Against some Lady her malignant foe
She doth forget compassion, doth refuse
Friendship to neighbours, duty to her Spouse,
Respect of parents, piety to blood:
Nay, above these; abhor celestial good.
Now quickly (Madam) to disclose you live
Were dangerous, and prejudicial I doubt:
Therefore expect on opportunity,
lest you infringe the league of unity;
Till I advise, live (as you do) secure:
Safety's no less accepted of obscure
And Country Peasants, then of Courted Kings:
Place cannot change the nature of good things.
THe Mountain echoes they shall catch his name
And every nook reiterate the same;
For I will teach the night-raven to repeat
His pensive sound, the sleepy owl shall sing
And happy news of lost Pheudippe bring:
Awake dumb Ghost, Pheudippe, friend awake
And now repair thy old mansion-place;
Return Pheudippe but a while return
And truly answer to my just demand
I will resign a Kingdom to thy hand.
hark you mad furies of eternal night:
Boatman of Styx, by burning Phlegeton
Secluded Angels, and superior aid
I do conjure you to direct his soul
Back to the bosom of that slaughtered Hearse
Ah Charon, Charon, prithee Boatman bring
His errant shadow to the place of rest,
And Charon I will Canonize thy name
Give thee a Queen to sleep in thy cold arms,
To kindle moisture in thy rugged limbs
And make thy waftage easy with her hymns:
Bring but the soul of that ignoble man
To ask forgiveness, and I will forgive.
A foolish hope! (heaven knows) for he indeed
He hath a haughty stomach full of rage
Swollen-big with pride, begot of too much love,
And my familiar usage makes him think
(The more fault's mine) he should not now submit.
O sir the final stab of mischiefs end
Hath struck him dead; he cannot now amend.
No! 'tis a language difficult to learn
Though rules be frequent in our mother-tongue.
O that a lesson of one word; not two,
Should ask a life to learn, an age to do?
Yes; though Pheudippe's age had been deferred
Till a consumption of the Universe
In hope of his amendment, I believe
He would have purchased immortality
Through vice and vicious acts.
Damnation claps,
Gaping for custom at man's new relapse.
Right: Can the earth yield such a faithless man
As false Pheudippe?
O damnation laughs
And winged mischief claps her dusky plumes,
If proud ambition great men's hope consumes.
What a continual clapping is there then?
For daily hope consumes the greatest men:
I do appeal to dead Pheudippe's shame
Thou terror to my sense, a prodigy
Of all remembrance never to be matched
With any Ghost or man except thyself:
Who through abortive hope didst match thyself:
A man most worthy of all impious fame,
Who Dan Pheudippe cleped was by name.
Know (gallant sir) I did repose my life
Upon the friendship of that foolish man;
He kept my soul between his Tyrant's arms
Nay (let me add) the value of my Crown,
(For which some Kings would e'en exchange their soul)
He kept both Soul and Crown betwixt his arms,
Yet both lay open to excessive harms:
O if I had election to dispend
My favour upon such a Rogue as he
But once, once more; I'd lock my counsel up
And keep my bosom secrets to myself.
king's may indeed deprive their Senate-house
Of some pretence, and may (let others prate)
Conceal affairs belonging to the State.
If hell afforded such a menstruous rag
I'd reconcile the error of my sense;
But, now may reckon up some woeful verse
For solid passion Poets best rehearse.
A poet's rapture Kings have wished to feel
Which some despise because uncapable.
The Muses make my brain their banquet-house,
And thus with Lucan will we frame our song
Of dreaded horror, whose inhuman rage
Blew direful tempest through the Tharsal plain
Of laws neglected, and a stubborn age
Whose blood & black-deeds did their country stain
Of civil discord, and a hapless breach
In kingdoms covenant, which did sore impeach
The world's whole Confines, and their Public-weal
we sing, and sternly treat how every deal
Standards met Standards, Ensigns were alike,
Bows threatened Bows, and nimble spears the Pike.
(Romans) what madness may we term this strife?
Be your own blades let loose, against your life?
That Nations far remote should see and smile
At your wide gaping wounds, and Rome revile?
And must your hot encounters careless boil,
When Babylon should perish in the spoil
Of her victorious Trophies? when the Ghost
Of unrevenged Crassius here stood tossed
Above ground? then must warlike humours breathe
Which wanting triumph, want a worthy wreath.
O and alas! what Kingdoms, what renown
This blood might have obtained? some temptive Crown,
Where beauteous Titan sleeps, and heavy night
Exempts the joyful harbingers of light:
Else where the sweltering noonday scalds with heat,
Else where continual Winter takes her seat:
Where Scythic Pontus pierced with crazy cold
Lies bedrid on a cripple corner-mould,
Ceres might conquered been, Araxes yoked
Had not domestic war such broils provoked.
If (Rome) thy battles thou esteem such bliss
Subdue all Kings, then were it not amiss
To combat with thyself; meanwhile break of,
For multitude of foes may freely scoff.
Our King hath tasted juice of Helicon.
Tasted? no fool, the Muses do entrance
My dear imagination, I will swim
Through each sweet stream of ravished eloquence
Of Passion, Satire, Eclogue, Epigram
Of Sonnets, Imprecations, Epitaphs,
And by them all admonish Mighty Kings
To keep their bosom locked; for friendship stings.
Go fetch a Garland from the Muses- grove
For I will sit amongst the Shepherd Swains
Upon some pretty tust or pleasant hill
Hung (in my honour) with fresh hallowed bay,
And echo forth an Alphabet of lays:
My Queen, poor Queen, bereft of beauty's pride
Shall in our fancy sit and touch our side,
Grieve not, she was my daughter (gracious King)
Gracious, and King, be words not known to me;
I am no King, nor will be gracious
But an impartial Poet of this age
Who must inveigh at Kings and Kingly grace:
I must a multitude of woes rehearse
And stab my audience with Iambic verse:
Rail at the peevish humour of a slave
Whose rude examples be notorious.
Attend my whole narration (royal Dukes)
Remember how I did the Forest rule,
How I amongst the troop of Elephants,
Foxes, and Tigers, Apes, and Leopards,
Was, by appointment of my father's will
Left as an heir legitimate, to live
And re-establish my true parent's blood:
Remember and imagine I did rule
Like an audacious Lion of the lawns,
Who by misfortune have caught a prick
Which doth distemper his presuming paw
meets with a heartless Pilgrim, doth salute
His coward fancy with a peal of fears
Then doth submit (some ceremonies done)
His royal stoutness to the trembling man
Puts forth his pained member, shows the wound
Till the distracted traveler conceives
A remedy to succour that which grieves:
The Lion thus allured with seeming love
Protects the Pilgrim by his noble force
Doth not forsake him, fawns upon the wretch
Whose poor compulsive cowardice did urge
That tribute at allegiance (not his love)
lest life should answer what his will denied:
Thus did they live till the most faithless man
Grew so familiar he was not afeared
To shake the sleeping Lion by the beard:
Thus he pretended still to be above
So slew the Lion for his Kingly love.
And thus, o thus! did my Pheudippe deal:
For from the dust and dunghill did I raise
The needy fortunes of that naked man
Without all merit, save hypocrisy
Which was my thank for all his dignity:
The Gods and you bear witness (noble friends)
I took that fellow for the truest man
That woman e'er was blessed with; did believe
His birth and education both Divine,
Who was indeed a devil; for whose death
My brainless fury did blaspheme the Gods:
O if I had election to forsake
The substance of my soul's eternity,
If soul and body did together die
If death's corruption could corrupt the soul,
(So make it vanish, and avoid control,)
No speedy torment should escape, no death
Be unattempted, till my life and breath
Were as my soul is now, invisible:
O I would climb Acro-serannian rocks,
Run to the top of Aetna, or the Alps
And rush down headlong like a desperate slave;
Or like an Ajax, greedy of revenge,
I would encounter Wolves, and Unicorns,
Tempting the savage worthies to assail
My careless life, and so encounter me.
But sir, the soul of man is precious,
Made of immortal essence, cannot die.
So, I'm oppressed with immortality,
And though my rotten Carcase soon decay
Yet must my soul account for blasphemy:
For Blasphemy, which I in zealous love
To a false lewd impostor did augment
With sharp invectives e'en to vex the Gods.
Your love to that dissembler was extreme
And all extremes beget extremities.
To that dissembler, to that devil, say;
To that Magician, trueborn Imp of hell,
Speak thus; and let me thank your eloquence;
For had he been produced of earthly race
His charms and witchcraft could not so deceive
My narrow apprehension, o attend!
And I will make you weep before I end.
Pheudippe like a frozen viper was
Whom, I (delighted with a formal show)
By chance took up, and warmth and life bestowed
Upon this piteous creature; till at length
He crept and crawled into my bosom; I
Did suffer still, through plain simplicity,
The serpent to become familiar;
My table and my Trencher gave him food,
Still did I suffer, still he slept and fed
Upon my trembling bosom; he did kiss
And lick my tender veins, as I did his:
Still did I suffer, though my soundest friends
bade me beware of such a subtle Guest,
Giving fair cautions to embrace the best;
Still did I suffer, and did scourge advice,
With sharp rebukes, not valueing the price.
So long I suffered, he so long did sleep,
So long he licked me, and so long time crept,
So long I loved him, he so long time wept
With false affection, as he did confirm
My not misdoubting friendship, which was firm,
But after all my love, and all his tears,
After my patience, and his creeping smiles,
My long, long sufferance, and his thankful vows;
After all these o God, my bosom groans
To think, that after all such boundless good
He wished to suck upon my royal blood.
The subtle wretch, in mischief, did rejoice,
And was corrupted by the people's voice.
True, they corrupt, whom they still hope to please
The people's physic, doth inflame disease.
Foul vengeance choke the people, and their love,
They do deject whom they advance above:
The people's suffrage, to a rising youth
Is like their folly at a public Stage,
Striving to purchase a dumb audience
By multitude of clamour; they suppose
Peace is engendered by still crying peace,
As if confusion did by murmur cease:
So they imagine, by their open mouth,
To make a Giant, though but scarce a man:
They speak him virtuous, bountiful, and wise
Hoping polluted breath, might Canonize
Whom they (with dirty palms) do seem to raise,
And bind his Temples with their stinking bay:
No, they but make him dizzy, deaf, and mad,
Whom they desire to make a demi-god;
Their multitudes of clamour do beget
A most uncured swimming of the head;
For so the rules of ringing do agree,
Confusion ever spoils a harmony.
What Coxcomb now dares call Menander mad?
Do not (I pray) abuse me (noble boys)
Although I be a Poet; all men know
I never writ of Cupid's whirligig,
Of amorous conceits, nor dalliance,
And just so long as Poets will abstain
From foolish love and Cupid's deity.
The poet's Art is counted Piety.
But if the tenor of a lovesick Theme
Stuff rotten Volumes then the Author's mad,
Or Moonsick, some judicious bookmen, say,
Though others, amid' earnest, allow play.
(Alas good King) what sudden overthrow
Distracts poor weakness by a little woe?
Who talks of woe' did you sweet passenger?
Open thy case if it be parallel,
Let's live copartners in some ugly shade
Where none but melancholy night-ravens keep
There let's complain, but (breath being silent) weep.
Not far from hence, low in a humble Cave,
My little cottage stands devoid of care
Finely encompassed with a pleasant wave
Dressed up with Daisies, Cowslips, Hyacinths
And many thousand pretty, pretty things
Which Nature lends me while the blackbird sings:
four Goats I have which browse upon the twigs,
Two did relinquish mê, for I had six,
One seemed a Lamb which was indeed a Wolf,
Him did my dog discover, kill, and eat—
we do discover all thy weakness King
To help is hard, to weep an easy thing.
Dares then thy blistered tongue (audacious fool)
Forget all duty and disturb a Duke?
(Impudent Ass) I do degrade thy ears
And thee, from all employment; be an Ass
At large, and carry loaves, like Lucius
Deserve a Cudgel and a biting spur,
Be dull and sluggish in extremities
Till I bestow a Rose or any thing
To make thy sudden metamorphosis.
It's made already (King) and I will kiss
Your dainty plame, then laugh, and Poetize
Cast of my rob and act old Lucius,
Or Messala Corvino; dance I will,
And after sixty Summers will I dote
So, change my garment for a mimic's coat:
Captives repine at their compulsive thrall
Who then (sweet Mistress) may me Captive call?
Though conquered I confess
Yet void of heaviness:
Forbearance makes my freedom
At length to be more welcome.
When with compassion thou shalt pity
Me; or approve my harmless Ditty:
If ransom you require
Tell me thy chief desire;
What is it I would not give thee?
Make trial and believe me.
Ransom though you refuse
Or at the least excuse
Yet to the latest of a thousand lives
I will rejoice in love, triumph in gives.
Age is become a young inamorate.
Laugh, laugh, infernal furies leap for joy;
Make me a flaming Chariot, I will ride
Upon the wings of potent Lucifer,
And style, like lightning, through th'amazed Orb.
Thunder shall be my Page, and Aeolus
Lead up my Coach-horse to big Titan's Hall,
Where in that fair Assembly of the Gods,
Glistering with golden robes Pontifical:
I must a volume of large thanks recite,
And a petition to dame Luna write:
All, for thy sweet acquaintance Messala
Whom I adore, and much will dignify
Those who partake in ravished lunacy.
So, than we are companions (lusty lad.)
Till daring Ioue dissolve the Universe,
Till the last revolution of this Orb.
Till Citizens accounted civil knaves,
To cheating custom be no longer slaves.
Till sige authentics of unspotted lives
Leave bawdy Panderism to their willing wives.
Then, faith till Courtiers too, with satin sleeves
Renounce all begging and be arrant thieves.
Till tailors likewise made of shreds and shelves
every the debtor to undo themselves.
Till the most gallant Ladies of the Court
Esteem devotion there abused sport.
Then i'faith till Players, Poets, (Ape and Ass)
Spend all they get from Iune to Michaelmas.
So then for ever shall we live like friends,
Thou must forgive though Messala offends.
What can exceed these miracles of age,
Whose actions might again revive the stage?
A Common council must protect the State,
Till mad Menander have atoned his fate:
Till Cinthia her punishment release
And give Manander leave to rule in peace.
Whither, o whither, and to what extremes
Do the most waking Gods drive guilty men?
Who lives to know, obtains a blessed age,
But he a curse, who knowledge doth abuse;
Subtle temptation must not make men err
With judgement, though approval may confer
Kingdoms of wealth, which is impossible
(So gotten) to continue, if well paid.
O since I knew the folly to advise
And nourish up the rude infirmities
Of each voluptuous Epicure in state
Striving to take dependence from the smile
Of an imperious favourite, weak shame
Never till now oppressed me; and I swear
Did not the sword of justice now strike home
I would encounter shame with fortitude,
But a discarded woe (the common plague
Of servile age e'en dead with misery)
Hath after long forbearance seized on me:
Pheudippe's death was fatal to my life
Because neglected by his living wife.
Have I then caught thy unappeased soul?
Tell me, come tell me, wicked wretch declare,
Why hast thou broken holy friendships vow?
Speak (damned vermin) each true accent tell
For we'll unrip thy bosom spite of hell;
Speak thou contemptuous varlet, do not strive
And shake thy limbs with unexpressed fear,
For (trembling slave) my hand shall catch thy hair,
Hold thee perforce, with chains of adamant,
Till thy audacious shadow quaking seeth,
If hands be weary I can hold by teeth.
But o judicious—
Villain I abhor
The hateful sound of thy bewitching voice,
Keep in thy clamorous echo (conjuror)
And cease with Magic to enchant our sense
Or I will singe thy beard off with my breath:
O you damned fawning Rascal, canst thou shake
And tremble after all thy infamy?
Thou thankless, rotten-hearted-slave, thou snake
Did I deserve suppression? tell me (Fox)
You temporizing Courtier, that's enough,
He needs not call thee knave, nor Sycophant,
And irreligious Iew, that calls thee so,
For thou didst study these; thinking to prove
A learned Politician, that's a devil,
A most abortive monster, strangely made
With long huge horns a crafty fox's head
A lions posture and extended ears
With eighty souls and hearts, like little eggs;
But with a camel's back, and tigers legs;
Wanting a breastbone, like the savage Bear,
So climb he doth and curry up the rocks,
Mounting the tops of straight Pyramids
But when he tumbles, like a smitten Tower,
Declining softly to an ominous dearth,
First will his head salute the shaking earth.
The black remembrance of thy fatal end
Makes my assertion true, thee a false-friend:
O pacify great King.—
Your yawning voice
With a full concord of my furious palm
If you produce another syllable
You most notorious caitiff, you mad cur,
Thou politicians dog, did I advance
Thy ragged fortunes to degrade myself,
Make thee a partner of my kingdoms joy
Give thee my kingdoms pleasure, wealth, and wives,
When I (made foolish) to make thee as King
Took the bare title and a glorious heap
Of golden sorrow requisite for Kings,
Keeping the best (by privilege) for thee
Without a second rival? thus I did,
Nay, did I thus and yet thou prove unkind?
I call my faith in question to demand
Such needless truth, for thou didst prove unkind,
Contriving the subversion of my rule
Which gave a perfect essence to thy soul,
Submit, submit for shame, and say forgive:
Say but forgive and I am gracious.
I am not (sacred King) as you suppose
The tortured Ghost of that inglorious man
Pheudippe, sunk below the verge of hell.
But old Mantesio is my servile name,
Once did I serve whom you so much did love,
The murdered honour of that haughty Duke.
Thou Spirit of delusion, o affirm
This doubtful figment; once again deny
A soul of reason to thy Sovereign.
My flesh doth witness for me I do live.
Am I then mad Mantesio? agree
You are no Ghost and make the consequence.
But brother, who's mad now? not Messala.
Deride us then, and be ridiculous.
Tell me Mantesio, why didst talk of curse,
Discarded woe, and vexing misery?
Of all I tasted in extremity.
Lives there that soul upon the spacious globe,
Which doth uprightly think it can deserve
Extremity of sorrow, heaps of woe
As did Pheudippe? it's impossible:
No (good old man) though thy large multitude
Of capital offences do exceed,
The wandering stars, I may account thee clean,
Like a religious innocent, or babe,
As a bright Angel, to Pheudippe's shame.
Yet am I poor, and will partake in woe:
Canst be distracted? melancholic? mad?
Swear by the beauty of the burning Zone?
Look like a deadman's skull, most scurvily?
Laugh, weep, rail, swear, and hang thyself at once?
Rend off thy pleated hair, be lunatic?
Live naked in a tempting wilderness?
Call me Don. Ajax? live by roots and herbs?
Be a true malcontent? be ever sad?
Cloudy, like Christmas? be disconsolate?
And (above all) renounce society?
If thus thou canst observe a dogged change,
If gloomy sorrow (made excessive strange)
Stab thy distracted senses to the life,
we may dispatch all sense without a knife.
But who comes here?
A Poet (precious sir)
Thy name?
Perillus.
O advance thy tune,
Provoke thy sharp Melpomene to sing
The story of a beggar and the King.
Canst command Poems un-praemedite?
I have a little smack of poesy,
Can smell the amber-breath that rapture brings,
Upon receipt of which my consort sings.
But I have bedded the fair Muses nine,
Slept in the bosom of Melpomene,
Have rid upon the wings of Pegasus,
Drunk down a flood of sparkling Hyppocren,
Keep a perpetual moisture in my head,
Hating such dilatory sloth of men,
From whose weak brains the rotten papers shed,
Like leaves in autumn; I account him quick
Who is by nature so; with small intent
Such (as myself) may be proficient:
I could now turn conceited stage rite,
And represent I will, with feeling strains,
The Ghost of Crassus, or crack all my veins:
Suppose me then the Ghost of that old man,
That sorry man, my ribs transfixed with steel,
Or with a tempest of the Scythian darts,
My wounded carcase black with bloody gore,
Long sleeped in frosty stupor, to arise,
With squalid raiment from the waves of bell,
And unto Pompey apparitions tell:
Will you great Pompey, patron of my cause,
Who didst by solemn oath, vow full revenge?
Will you, the comfort of my funerals,
Tomb to my ashes, and my naked bones?
Will you, will Pompey prove delinquent? he,
Who hath in love to Crassus, threatened stabs,
Death and destruction till deep wounds increase,
Can he love Crassus foe, and seek for peace?
Bleed then my gaping and forgotten wounds
Bleed e'en afresh, or let my frozen blood,
Like a congealed syrup, now dissolve,
After such cloudy seasons of the year,
Such heavy sorrow, and such doubtful fear:
After so many dismal nights and days,
So many tempests of the Stygian Bark,
And prophesy, things fatal, true, but dark:
Calamity made famous by extremes
Erected in a marble monument,
Shall by her often meeting vex thy mind,
Else by opposed number make thee blind:
Horror and ruin (Pompey) shall affront
Thy shameless fortunes, thy foul negligence,
Cities at thy subversion shall rejoice
The skulls and trophies of thy captains loss
The victor shall upon his javelin toss;
Where swift Euphrates, sent such worthy names
To black oblivion, and the tumbling waves
Of big-swollen Tigris, cast my carcase dead
Upon the margin of that muddy shore,
And gave to earth what Neptune could not keep,
Having once cast my wounded limbs asleep:
There shall thy woe approach, and Pompey know
If quick avoidance be not difficult,
Thou then more easily mightst atone the strife
Which thy proud factious Nephew hath begun,
Raging amid the heart of Thessaly.
Think but a while upon the Roman orb,
Think of thy friends at home, think who they are,
And those few friends with watchful foes compare:
Think yet of Egypt, her seven-headed gulf,
join with Egyptian Ptolemy, and thrive,
His high tuition appertains to thee,
Tender his nonage, aim at Egypt's throne,
Whose King hath but the shadow of a name,
Because a childish infant, lacking fame,
And fear, (the substance of a Diadem)
Nor think the old allegiance to their kings,
Can so estrange the people's love to thee,
But know the state of kingdoms be most mild,
If, or, the King is new, or is a child:
Both do concur to crown thy happiness,
Set sail for Egypt, make thy covenant there,
Oppose the Parthi, and depopulate
The fields, where Crassus did enjoy his fate:
Say, from the cinders of a slaughtered man,
You took advice to turn Egyptian.
Most lively acted, and like Roseius,
He doth pronounce with volubility.
For a pure copious linguist he doth well,
But for ingenious action doth excel.
The King for a Comedian I'faith;
But I will strive to act above thee (King)
And out of brimstone rocks may virtue split,
I am a cold, and must go dig for wit.
Go dig for wit whilst I am jovial,
And laugh and leap among my flatterers,
Come dance Lavolios my familiar knaves,
Do you commend this mirth?
Most happily.
Mirth may expel distraction, if secure.
But o my friend, I am not as I seem,
Merry indeed, but only seeming so;
Unrip my bosom, and with lines of blood
Deeply engraved upon my trembling heart,
You may discern attractive Epitaphs,
The shameful curse of a contemptuous King,
A love-knot double broken; and by whom
Friendship rewarded with extreme abuse;
Falsehood, without a colour, and excuse.
What flinty flesh could now abstain from tears?
Do then thy stranger thoughts compassionate,
And weep at our inhuman destiny.
If thy relenting heart true passion feel,
Then let thy moistened love some drops distill;
Weep on (my friend) I cannot I control
The copious fountain; for a silent tear
Doth apprehend the quick; but never howl:
Forsake me now, and leave me desolate,
I would revolve the lessons of my state.
Up from earth's lodging, and those rotten skulls,
Buried in embers till the earth awake,
Wrapped in my funeral-ashes, safe reserved,
I do arise from rude antiquity,
To beg but pardon as a midnight's alms,
Feeling the horror of my fault immense,
Which doth exceed in nature all offence.
I come (Maenander.)
Who Menander calls?
What hidden Devil dares molest my muse?
Denounce thy judgement with a milder tune,
I come (Maenander.)
Death to my soul! what comes?
Who comes? or how dost come? invisible?
I come with meekness.
Why, or whence dost come?
Damnation overtake thee, what's thy name?
Shadow of Stygian horror! what's thy name?
(Intruder) know thy distance, keep aloof,
Come not within six yards, upon the price
And peril of an unavoided charm:
By which, and thousand other potent spells,
The magic Herbal, ointments, numbers odd,
By transmutations, midnights, Incubus,
Squint-eyed Ericthon, soul of Hecate,
I do conjure thee, tell, and not mistake,
How fares Pheudippe of the Stygian lake?
O I am he, a spirit of despair,
Compact (by loves decree) of cloudy air.
I am the wretch, who was in life, a span;
But in excess of crime, a crooked man.
Bless the good stars above, thou guilty thief
Which do enclose thee with a rob of clouds,
Spite of protection else, and coats of steel,
The tempest of my passion thou shouldst feel;
Thunder and lightning should not dare withstand
To take due vengeance from my fatal hand.
My tortures be above thy human guess,
The torment of my soul who may express?
My comforts now be multitudes of pain,
Viewing a number infinite of souls,
Which stuste the dampish pit with piercing howls,
Restless they tumble, hoping to get ease,
And, more they move, outrage doth more increase,
we rail at our conception, curse the sky,
And in the face of heaven spit blasphemy.
we all enjoy a most impatient curse,
Yet all suppose our own pain shall the worse;
Motion doth vex us, sitting still doth vex,
Torment, no age escapes, no sumptuous sex:
Did thy ambitious height incur all this?
My falsehood, flattery, and a courtier's life,
(The fountains to all sorrow) did infect
My soul with a disease incurable.
I do indeed forgive thee, therefore tell
Compassion to the Pursuivant of hell;
Say I forgive thee, and on that discharge,
Command the crabbed jailor to enlarge
Thy long and lowly thraldom; often say
I do forgive thee (false ungracious man)
O oftentimes repeat, the King forgives,
Often repeat, as an exemplar thing,
Thou hast obtained forgiveness of a King,
For a tall grant-error, an offence
Made monstrous big by circumstance; contempt
In a degree above comparison;
Yet I forgive those capital crimes done:
If thou attainted be with some offence,
Equal in nature to this high contempt,
Go then accursed, till I redeem thee, go
Accounted worthy of damnation's woe:
But, because officers do sting like bees,
Say I forgive thee, and will pay thy fees.
Few plaintiffs, or appellants do the like,
Though I without a judgement will release
Errors escaped from youth, so live in peace.
But I am past repentance (royal sir)
And so thy pardon is like bounty given
To beggars dead, or medicines ill-bestowed
On separated members, like vain life
Purchased by seals and writings after death,
And execution of a guilty thief;
There's no capacity for dead relief.
Kings, clad with numerous titles, cannot give
Promethean fire, to make a dead man live:
Pardon of Kings no benefit may deal,
Except it pass by a superior seal:
Surfeits and rupture, to be dumb, and blind,
Acknowledge Art; but surfeits of the mind
And rupture in affections forcing ill,
Know none above, but a free governed will:
Which if it prove remiss, man's powerful fate
Carries him headlong to my damned estate;
The ship-wrecked Pilot may discern a shelf,
But every fool un-cheated, cheats himself:
Advance thy pale desires, look fresh and big,
Think on revenge, clear thy contracted brow,
Be sensible of wrong, and (worthy) know
My false copartners live, who did conspire,
And frame the bellows of ambitious fire:
Amilcar lives (my some) Lucilla lives
(Thy subtle sister) old Mantesio lives:
All my adherents, all competitors
In mischief, most well-known conspirators;
Yet all survive in safety, traitors live:
Think on revenge, I do advise thee well;
Sleep not upon thy projects, if thou want
Opinion of a friend, hear me a supplicant:
Level invention with a speedy aime,
Till thou the cunning of such knaves reclaim.
My sister false? Amilcar such a knave?
Who indeed is, but is affection's slave?
And none but him, judgements encounter can,
Although aspersions touch the honest man.
Remember these my motives, morning peeps,
The day no dilatory time doth give,
To echo forth at large, thy Queen doth live.
Doth Favorina live? dear shadow stay,
My absence is enforced through rising day.
Split then in pieces thou pernicious toad,
My plagues diminish to augment thy load.
My Queen survive! joint-cause of all my woe!
Of all my anger, blasphemy and rage!
Is she reserved? doth Favorina live?
Whose absence made me rail at Cinthia?
O I have swallowed poison, which torments
All my distracted veins with agony,
A grief continuing without all release,
Consumption of my pain breeds pains increase.
Now for obnoxious compounds to possess
The soul with everlasting lethargy,
Ransom of thousand Kings would I exchange,
Or like a beast, humanity estrange.
O for enchanted Peppei, or the juice
Of drunken Hemlock, to lay souls asleep,
I'd like a Serpent on our belly creep,
Licking each humble shrub, and careless feed
Upon the stubble of each stinking weed.
shriek o the midnight-mandrakes voice aloud,
So may the horror of that piercing sound,
Turn soul and body both alike to ground:
pell-mell together my affections fight,
Each conquer each, some scud away by flight.
Coins and Lust, arch-enemies to love,
Combat apace within my youthful blood;
Fear to attempt my unexperienced wish,
Tells me with what a coy and constant face
The Queen will start in motives of my lust;
(For I no better Title can bestow
On our audacious meaning) lust abounds,
Free from all apprehension of that love
Which simple-meaning youths do still protest
And vow to virgin-chastity; but I,
Who am inflamed with ambiguity
Will not embark a faithless vow so far
As evaporate promise, which infects
Beyond fierce nature's lust, and stabs my fame:
Because rich Nature, although covetous,
Loath to confer a full satiety
Of goodness, upon me her suppliant,
Hath yet imposed one virtue above all,
In promise ever to disdain the breach,
Though strict observance do my weal impeach:
Yes, I prefer the violent attach
Of maidenhead, before false promises;
For (all can witness) rape's a thing in act,
So there's an end; We never do dissemble,
Nor do extinguish sparks of sanctity
With fraud, with unsupported perjury,
(joining rank falsehood to concupiscence)
Protesting marriage to enjoy a smack,
And so deceive the long desirous womb
Of hoped fruition: A hot ravisher
Gives what the womb would otherwise demand:
Yet will I not enrage my lust so far,
As violence to wrong the beauteous Queen,
If she (as women will) prove pliable,
Nor will engage on oath to assevere
What I disdain, yoked-marriage; for indeed,
Women be clogs which hang about the neck
Of man, so heavy till it sometimes break:
A well-couched theme of love shall therefore try
If without promise I may mount on high:
The bonds of marriage I abhor to choose,
And rather would upon such points refuse
The noble Queen (if to accomplish it
Were possible) then happily enjoy:
Seeing nature doth demand variety,
Admitting which, with full satiety,
Health is impeached, and many men made poor,
Who having honest wives will hug a whore.
Speak, is she made of wax (solicitor?)
Of millstones (my good Lord) for lime & chalk
Cannot express the full comparison:
Cold Images of Ice, and frozen snow,
Had been dissolved with my summer speech
Piercing unto the quick, but constant she,
Like to some eagle on a cedar's top,
Disdaining idle nets, will perch above,
In spite of Cupid, and his potent love.
I burn the rather, and by rape will quench
My lastful famine, were she loves own wench,
O do not offer headstrong violence;
Delay makes modest women more propense.
Death & damnation's plague to boot! how long
Must I abstain (you smooth-tongued flatterer)
Till doomsday? do not urge my flaming wrath,
lest you provoke a Lion to the spoil.
By Cupid's Sacraments of lust and love,
I will no more delay (thou lazy dog)
Dost trifle? speak forbearance, and delay?
I do begin to be suspicious
Of thy proceedings: tell us of delay?
No, as the Falcon doth a Pheasant seize,
I will both seize upon her (prating daw)
And truss her up in my Imperious claw.
(Sirrah) remember, I did give you meat,
Clothes, coin, and such good poor commodities,
When you were quite blown up with gamester's luck,
Rags and foul linen, scabs and scurvy louse,
The quick associates of all cheating dice,
Did honestly begin to set up house
In your old single suit, pray do not make
Me a disseisor of frank-tenements,
By tortuous dealing with your freeholders,
Who had a better Title then myself
If you do prove unthankful; so consider.
Am I upbraided? noble sir I thank
The bounteous alms you lent my bare estate,
And I as freely do disclaim desert,
As you did freely give them; yet in-faith
I was not lousy (Lord) consider well,
Though Lords be lousy too sometimes; if hell
Heaven, earth, and men, be not so gracious,
As to conceal infirmities of state.
Say I am lousy sir.
Can pox forbid?
But I must give him better language now:
No (my respected sir) I dare not tax
Especial favourites, of louse or pox,
'Mongst whom you are the chief, but milky skin
That hath fair outsides, may be foul within.
And I again do in despite aver,
' Avoidance of louse from our nativity.
Reclaim then that aspersion (Lord) and know
I was not lousy, but like midnight snow,
Pure, when thyself (now seeking to supplant)
Took'st me to rescue from the jaws of want:
I was not lousy (Lord) look big and burst,
I will maintain my credit, though accursed.
You were not lousy (knave) not ragged, no
Nor sick, I condescend; yet sirrah know
The plagues of Egypt all began to march
Full-mouth upon thee (like devouring dogs
Ready enough to rend a breathless Fox)
When I with noble pity being oppressed,
Flew forth like lightning to thy rescued life,
Which is indeed my proper donative.
Do not reply thou true insulting toad,
Squint-eyed caitiff, you pernicious rat,
You gelded rascal, you most lousy rogue:
Do not reply, mad mastiff, do not swell,
And think (because you can discover well
My tricks of youth) to stop the fervent rage
Of our untamed affections; future age
Must, and shall, witness my fierce violence,
If thou discover but one syllable;
Nay, if thou entertain a piece of thought,
Which by unmask me doth hope revenge:
Swear, swear (you thick-lipped rascal) kindly swear
Without compulsion, or base-minded fear,
To be like midnight, as a sepulchre,
Dumb as a Turkish executioner,
Nay, as a marble statue, void of signs
Touching the substance of my secrecy.
Swear (slave) and think my soul a fury mad,
Able to force wide rupture through the face
Of threatening Horror to endamage thee;
As to demand account of perjury.
Do not seem loath, expecting new delay;
For I can stab you (capon) to the quick,
Cut off your Eunuch-nose, then laugh and kick
Your lousy stinking neats-jowl to the dogs.
Without collusion I do strictly swear.
And think withal, I who have coin bestowed,
Clothes, and fair countenance, with store of meat,
Can also give sharp sauce, which will procure
Digestion to the stomach, else (proud sir)
You will disgorge the vomit in my face;
If kindness do recoil, let fear take place:
I am your footstool, tread upon my teeth,
And so charm silence if you do misdoubt.
No, but remember if you shall bewray
My dark designments, or use cheating play
In prosecution of my private cause,
(Hoping for payment from the Spartan laws)
Remember that thy life, and interest
Of being rich, both owe a special rent
With homage, and knight-service unto me,
Remember you do hold in Capite.
Cut then my servile tongue out of my head,
Slit my suspected organs, make me dumb,
Handless and sightless if you think me false,
For I must otherwise be false indeed:
Men that admonish to avoid some vice,
Must not inculcate motives more than thrice;
Pupils much tutored with Identity
Of reprehension, prove but spurgall jades;
Because they think the vicious estate
Of things habitual, do argue fate,
Which to resist, they think impiety,
Exclude me therefore from society
Of human habitants, or leave to vex,
Which is a torment to all human sex.
I leave addition, but consider well,
You are as deep engaged almost as I;
Which depth, of both engagements, reach to hell,
If any (but ourselves) the depth espy.
Sir, I have broke the Ice to Appetite,
And with a studied phrase did I begin,
Hoping to thaw the coldest frosty North
By representing multitude of fears.
And did she melt?
Yes melted into tears,
But was a stranger to my wanton tales:
She comes whom your hot love so close empales.
Wonder of women, pomp and pride of earth,
Whose woeful absence might make beauty's dearth,
Goddess of lovesick souls, thou glorious Nymph
Who mightst attract the Angels eyes to sin:
O thou beyond Hamilcar's county love,
(Because indeed a concubine for Ioue),
Rob not the treasure of my soul's delight,
Which lies imprisoned in aeternal night.
Did you for this (most lying impious man)
Pull me from refuge and protection safe?
Give me advice, in hope of due revenge,
To follow thee, forsake the Title Queen
Of Sparta, to become a Queen of Lust?
For this did you solicit (beastly Lord?)
And labour by this talking Eunuch-bawd,
To conquer chastity through faithless fraud?
For this did you obtest high oaths above
My poor conceit, to show dissembling love?
Let me again obtest the waking Gods,
Or (beyond them) your beauteous deity,
(Which to abuse, were vild impiety)
Thy glad fruition were a ransomed soul,
Or kingdoms conquest in my rich account
Of glorious beauty; giving more content
Than soul imagine, or great kingdoms may.
we call to witness thy imperious hate,
And do appeal to virtue of thy love,
(If hate and love may both together lodge)
Thy love surmounts my value, doth infuse
A sudden rapture to my longing soul,
Doth change dull nature, quicken up my brain,
Put a perfume into my sordid breath,
And is indeed restorative to death.
If you intend a true religious love,
Profess it sir, without offence to Ioue,
And so remember blessed nuptials;
For he enjoys his fate and funerals,
Who sometime was Maenander, and my spouse;
yourself did seal his death by constant vows.
Speak then, and let thy answer be direct,
Or I shall think, religion you neglect.
O she hath given his fury a full stab,
My sweet-mouthed Courtier swallows down a crab.
The Eel is in a sandbag, some good man
See how the mimic screws an Alphabet
Of hungry faces, how the maggot crawls
To feed upon the kernel.
Who replies?
Again, again (for loves sake) spur the jade:
Give him another pill, provoke the slave,
And make him spew his heart with madness; melt
His larded veins with striving to extend
A lousy answer; but the Idol speaks.
What makes Amilcar dumb with my request?
What makes thy trembling blood so pale and wan,
Most like the colour of a dying man?
The sad remembrance of my foolish vow,
Vexes meek apprehension; yielding forth
In stead of answer, ambiguities.
Look for a subtle rare-compacted lie.
Madam, the vow makes me monastical,
I have protested a true single life,
Which did engender a Dilemma, long,
But religious indeed.
Ridiculous,
Indeed you are a Goat libidinous.
I never will be yoked, by consequence
No drawing beast, no big laborious ox,
I must not marry madame.
Must you then
(Because not marry, to avoid the ox)
Live like a noted and egregious Ass?
Or like a Camel, fierce with flaming lust?
Would you seduce my weaker innocence?
Seek to entrap my credulous conceit?
You must not marry; would you then defile
The modest thoughts of virgin-chastity?
Would you take licence from a single life,
To make each maid a whore, not being a wife?
I blush to view such vild affinity,
Betwixt a Goatish beard, and bearded men.
But be familiar (Madam) and recall
I was a target once to thee condemned,
Both by Lucilla, and Pheudippe's doom;
Remember Madam, I did turn the edge
Of quick Lucilla's wrath upon herself,
Took thy confiscate beauty from the snare
Of imminent subversion, drew thee out
As from a gulf which gaping, ready stood
To swallow down thy honour, sing thy hurt,
So change thy golden dignity to dirt.
I did (remember Madam) banish hate,
For I did wrestle with uprising fate.
You did enfranchise my condemned life,
You did return Lucilla's point of spleen
Upon her wicked bosom; whence it came;
You (sir) did manage my neglected cause,
Took my confiscate beauty from the snare
Of imminent subversion; you did this;
You, you have been my target, you alone
Drew my forgotten safety from the teeth
Of tugging fingers; you alone did this;
And did you this to amplify abuse?
Did you reserve my innocence for this?
For this did you protect my ignorance?
You kept my carcase from a rampant Wolf,
To feed your tame, but hungry, lions whelp:
You did prevent a near captivity,
To make my thraldom be notorious;
You, from a guiltless danger, did redeem
My maiden thoughts, to make the danger, guilt;
Thou gav'st new being ('bout too fail before)
After which being, must I be thy whore?
i'faith you have done a deed of charity,
Took me by rescue, from death past the chin,
To rip my pregnant womb, and flay my skin.
But know (Amilcar) I am so resolved
Upon the spotless love of chastity,
As I with proper violence will rend
My womb in pieces, tear my tempting face
And go beyond a woman's fortitude,
Rather than (like a Strumpet) prostitute.
(Queen) I contemn your points of chastity,
Laugh at such idle tricks to colour sin:
You are a captive in my custody,
Consider well the law of time and place
Be at my proper nod; if naked lust
Bribe me to some injustice, do not blame
A smooth acceptance; for the frugal age
Wherein I live, doth bark aloud for fees
Which in themselves be bribes; if to the knees,
Or neck, some rascal knave be drenched in blood,
The scarlet can absolve a scarlet sin
And call deep slaughter a corrective deed.
Then blame the bribes which did injustice feed,
Blame not the man (I pray;) so blame our lust
Not met Amilcar, if enjoy we must.
Have you decreed some ravisher's attempt?
Will you determine to be violent?
A dead pale horror doth possess thy cheek
With repetition of the simple sound;
Thou violate a virgin's chastity?
Canst thou commit an odious rape, a sin
Of such high outrage; yet look pale and dead
Upon recital of the sin itself?
Nip me (good Gracchus) how? look pale and dead?
Fetch Aquafortis (Gracchus) stab my arm,
A shaking palsy doth oppress my heart;
How? pale, and dead?
(Wise woman) I adore
The quick invention, and if Gods agree
Will in despite of falsehood set her free.
O what damned terror to a wicked man
Be guilty thoughts, considering offence
(Fitly compared to prodigal expense:)
Nor may the valiantest sinful youth alive
With resolution so enwalled appear
But his high heart will be below his fear.
Can you commit lewd rape (Amilcar?) no:
Maids, and chaste women need no more defence
For hot invasion except innocence,
Earnest resistance, by but one true maid,
Will make the fiercest ravisher afraid:
For if a virgin violate you see
She did in part deny, in part agree:
firm resolution of a maiden's hand,
Tall Giant-lechers, cannot half withstand.
Take her (good Gracchus) to your custody
Be thou my bawd, and purge Phlebotomy.
Our ; the most valiant scule
which tall Champion, truly doth possess
My corpulent square limbs; then (subjects) call,
Call me brave Ajax that renowned Peer
equal to Agamemnon, we presume
By our Tragedians Art to Deify:
Laelio must Act Ulysses.
I agree.
Mantesio and Lucilla must like mutes
Expect upon my rage all counterfeit,
As did the savage throng that Ajax slew;
Robes shall not make a metamorphosis;
we may suppose you whom the scene requires
Some savage couple fit for Ajax wrath.
You may command us.
but brave Messala
Acts Agamemnon.
Brother I am glad
To thank your estimation of my parts
And I will strive to please you sir, though mad.
Bufo, Perillus, both be chieftains too,
Attentive to decide the argument
Of our contention, striving to deserve
The honour of Achilles after death.
we both be vassals to your celsitude.
Each take his part and study to rehearse
That none may stumble at an easy verse.
Manander is a Delphic Oracle.
Be silent, leave this big Hyperbole,
And show thy breeding modest.
Sir I am
A Gallant, thanks to Tailors, and good clothes,
Yet keep no crafty Page to pick a purse:
Nor do I often play the Sodomite,
Will, with a lively posture personate
The scene of Ajax, and enjoy our fate,
Enough, the solemn festival of joy
Which doth ensue, exacts your diligence,
To give some testimonial indeed
Of true deservings: think me bountiful
If any Action in my troop excel.
Fortune. I do contemn thee; sirs advance
And in despite of death, use vigilance.
MAdam, all chaste desires be laudable,
But if you tempt a mischief merciless,
Such certain truths be doubtful to avoid;
And I prefer the public safety still
(Which wants you as a chief and moving wheel)
Before my simple damage, though the curse,
Railings, and wrath of my contemptuous Lord
Fall last upon me, like so many shafts
Shot from heavens fabric by offended Ioue:
Come therefore death, destruction, stabs or steel,
Come outrage, madness, fierce amazing oaths,
Terror, and tortures come, what can betide,
You shall, unknown, by our advice escape
lest long expectance do incur the rape.
I much commend your zealous charity,
Yet I believe Amilcar cannot wrong
The harmless meaning of our innocence:
Suppose I do expect upon the rage
And lustful fury of that impious man,
Yet I presume the Gods will govern lust
And give such valour to a virtuous maid
As she may well encounter cannibals.
Why should Amilcar seem to conquer me?
Or why assault my noble chastity?
Secured hope, and heaven can witness too
I have no biting bosom-snake which gnaws
With greedy vulture-teeth and stinging jaws
Upon the precious comfort of my soul;
No second Inmate ready to control
Our quiet actions; no loud fearful sin
To stab me in the midst of honest mirth
And overlook the music of my mind,
To make me start and rob me of content
No, no (good Gracchus) I am innocent,
And therefore not excluded from the help
Of heavens tuition; know I dare affront
Amilcar in the fury of his flames,
Rail at the stubborn youth, and make him melt
e'en like a leaden statue, or indeed
Like some obdurate image carved of Ice,
Which through one blast of lightning do despair
And from tall statues vanish into air:
I feel within me such true noble signs
Of earnest courage, as no female thought
Can (except pure and pious) well compare:
I am not valiant, like a drunken whore,
Ramping by virtue of abused wine;
Not is my resolution desperate,
I am not fearless, to see fear abound
But innocence is resolution's ground.
Will you neglect my counsel to escape?
Will your deluded love to innocence
Not reckon means ordained for innocence?
Protection doth imply our vigilance,
Else virtue is reputed arrogance;
Honest and simple hearts alone deserve
That in extremity pure holiness
Should make means thrive, not without good means, bless.
(Madam) I swear they lack humanity
Who will teach men to tempt their destiny;
Believe it (Favorina) I should fear
The doubtful mercy of a hungry Bear:
They who desire to feel the lions paw
May live in compass of the lions Cave;
I know good means, neglected, make a slave.
(Gracchus) I once again commend your zeal
Thank, and admit your love, which labours well
To win the height of our capacity:
But (Gracchus) tell me now, suppose I stay,
Suppose Amilcar do continue still,
Like a wild Satire, most libidinous;
Admit he shall extend so far as rape
And by the ruin of our modest grace
Erect a shameful Priapus in place?
Tell me (good Gracchus) what rich victory
Can the fool boast of? what egregious act
Can he ascribe to conquest of our sex?
we are alas like walls unfortified,
Or like a Castle made of Marchpane walls
Easily subdued, without fierce ravishment.
Women were made to make rash men repent.
Shame to my fortunes, I did seek revenge
And sure the Gods will turn revenge on me;
Lucilla's death, the king's Catastrophe
Might have been both avoided, if revenge
And malice had not been so forceable
To banish pity from our spiteful breast,
The want of which procured a funeral chest
To keep the cinders of a sleeping pair;
Which loss, no time can prove, no age repair:
Lucilla's death had my malicious doom
As Epitaph to dead Manander's Tomb;
The plaintiffs lie which proved Lucilla's death
Did likewise rob Manander of his breath.
(Madam) you are deluded; I can give
A testimonial that both do live.
Maenander live? and doth Lucilla live?
Speak it again, proclaim the news aloud
Let heaven and earth be witness to thy tale:
Speak it again (good Gracchus) give the God's
Notice again of my certificate
Which makes me in a glorious estate:
Dance my dejected soul, sing merrily
Leap all my organs, I am innocent,
Gracchus will witness, I am innocent,
I did not kill Maenander, not accuse
My rival young Lucilla, no (good heaven)
Gracchus will witness I am innocent:
Lucilla lives, my best MENANDER lives,
Speak it again (good Gracchus.)
both do live.
Bear witness now; hark heaven, he said they live
Take special notice of his name and words
For he is prompt enough to justify
Our depositions, neither will he lie:
No, he's an honest, very honest man
Is called Gracchus so inscribe his name;
And set his certain testimonial
Upon record: Lucilla doth survive
And my Maenander he is yet alive:
So saith good Gracchus, so inscribe the same.
joy hath no passage through my ravished soul:
I did before put on a painted face
Forging false colour to my innocence
But now indeed am truly innocent:
Thou Gracchus be my judge, and heaven be judge
I am not now defiled with bloody thoughts
And fearful agues; thou be likewise judge
That false Amilcar is a menstruous rag,
A youth rank-rotten, before mellow-ripe:
fly-blown already as a carcase hot
Which hath no shelter from the dog-day Sun:
Beyond all virtues cunning to reclaim:
Goodness and reformation be to him
Monsters in nature; and detested more,
Then of a Hermit is the common-whore.
Vices, like Maggots, creep on him so thick,
As who destroys the one, he must not stick
To follow the subversion of them both:
Of lewd Amilcar and his lustful growth.
Who can escape the lime-twigs which are set
By loose affections to ensnare himself?
Man doth about him carry watchful foes
And must be careful to encounter those;
For all without him, though by troops they come
Cannot offend, who is in peace at home:
Amilcar (Madam) is now riding post
Upon exact employments; his return
Is doubtful, therefore to avoid delay,
The love and duty of my zeal obey.
A friend in whom I claim full interest
Doth give attendance to accompany
Your Grace, till I can truss a farthel up
And follow.
What's thy friend'
A Fencer.
I am engaged upon fidelity
And must preserve you from hostility,
e'en to the latest of a mortal life,
I will defend thee widow, maid, or wife.
My new redemption is a doubtful task,
You both do promise more than I will ask:
And though my squint-eyed fortune look askance
Yet heaven will succour my deliverance:
Which being once purchased, proud Hamilcar's lust
Shall vanish into salamander's dust.
Put on the wings of speed; fly fast away
I follow (Madam) before peeping day.
Success attend her, till I soon dispatch
And speedily escape Hamilcar's rage:
Saddle my horse, and fetch my Caskets, hoe,
Servants make ready I must ride to Athens.
All men desirous to prevent quick fate
Scorn (above all things) to procrastinate:
Watch there without, like busy sentinels
And on my Lords return, see some foretells.—
He is returned already; doth approach,
Saith you may travail in his new caroche.
Yes, to the devil; death! is he returned?
I am undone, I am undone; (good genius)
Help me; (good Angels) be auspicious,
Or I shall perish past recovery:
singe me some lightning, though invisible;
O burn my bleeding heart; consume, consume!
Fly from my nostrils an infectious fume!
Stop all my organs, o commiserate
The bad misfortune of a poor estate:
He comes, he comes—
(Gracchus' my dear) how dost?
What answer makes my Goddess? doth she melt?
Doth she recant and ask my pardon? speak.
No: I am troubled with a falling rheum.
Fetch forth Pigmalion's Image, I will dote,
And so become Cupid's Idolater:
Stay Gracchus, we will both accompany
Her sacred passage to the public air:
What shaking palsy doth detain thy steps?
Where is the Queen? speak (trembling coward) speak.
She overcame me with incessant tears;
To those I yielded, o forgive my fears.
Yielded? (base caitiff) be our hopes all dead?
My labour, lies, delusion, studied care,
All turned to smoke through yielding of a drudge?
All our engagements, my benevolence,
My projects, aims, and large gratuities,
All come to this? the centre of my thoughts,
My double tricks, and cunny-catching-slights,
All come to this? the rich felicity
Whereon my faith was grounded, come to this?
Come ghastly horror to consummate all,
Add ruin likewise to my witless fall.
O my loud curse! delusion was my bait
And I am now deluded; learning fails;
No new invented stratagem avails;
And virtue I am not acquainted with.
O you damned rogue, 'tis holiday at home,
You hope the Queen (sir) will advance you high,
And hope so still, but (very, very knave)
I will disjoint your elevated hopes;
And make you (sir) an Alcibiades:
The Queen departed?
Pity did prevail,
For she did weep, nor did of passion fail:
Her eyes (good Lady!) did with weeping smart,
Which made me give her licence to depart.
I am undone (you fragment) I'm undone,
I am detected, whither shall I run?
The harvest of my long laborious toil,
Now I have swom through death and swallowed fire.
Given doubtful fury a most brave repulse
Put back suspense, and all approaching fears
Almost concluded things impossible;
Made smooth my way, and tilted in the face
Of frowning mischief ready to take place;
Now, now is all subvert; I am lost
In a large Wood, a winding labyrinth:
I am excluded from all native power,
Am like the rubbish of a ruined Tower;
I am abused, I am to death betrayed,
By thee a doctor villain; not afraid
To swear me homage, and unlace my heart:
The blessings of your body, breath, and soul
Be so engaged, as their existence knows
Not one redeemer among all the Gods,
(Fabulous things to you) except myself;
Thus did you swear, and swore I gave thee life,
Nay did bestow a whole creations work
Upon thee offal-caitiff, who adored
Impression of my footsteps that was all
Expecting hourly on the happy time
When I should dare command what you durst do,
When with advantage, I would but pronounce
O Gracchus give me of thy blood an ounce:
Thus did you swear, you dog-day-villain, thus;
And yet your actions be malicious:
Teach me, some devil, to torment the rogue,
Else take the righteous rigor of his fault
In the depth of hels extremity;
Rescue, o rescue this offending wretch
(Some powers above) from my most fatal-wrath,
For to afflict thee as the crime deserves
Would lose a double part in Paradise:
Yet must I punish thee (thou Spider-gall)—
The toad and spider cannot choose but brawl.
I must (you creeping cur) and would refuse
Rather to be a God, than to forgive
A thing so capital; and thou escape;
But an arch-devil would I ever be
A fiend of horror beneath all degree,
Eat flames and brimstone to beget me fierce
That with astonished fury I might pierce
And split each sinew; fear thy plumpest vain,
So rack thy feeling with perpetual pain.
O feel compassion, for I do repent.
Repent? compassion? I would rather whip
My weakened carcase with a scorpion's tail;
Dwell in a nest of Adders, make them sting
Till patience could endure; then wash my wounds
With burning pitch and lamp-oil, bath in lead,
Or make a poultice of some swelling toad,
Rather than take one cruel thought from' load.
Your menace and commotion do torment
Above all suffering; o I will repent
six thousand times a day; devour my flesh,
Feed upon frogs, or quaff down aconite,
Kiss and embrace, a fearful Succubus,
If you but leave to terrify me thus.
No (thievish tumbler) leave thy cheating tricks
And swear allegiance to some puny Lord,
Make those believe that lack intelligence,
For I am lashed with true experience:
Though on thy bosom thou wouldst therefore crawl,
And, like a Serpent, live upon the dust:
Though by continual creeping thou didst wear
Thy breast and belly, (so become submiss
In a most new degree) didst lick paths clean
Where I should walk, and scrape away the filth:
Employ each servile sinew to my ends,
Yet you and I must never more be friends.
Fill flat upon thy face (thou parricide)
Fall down as ready (captive) to abide
Our indignation, which in childbirth lies,
Big with a thousand swelling lunacies:
Expecting all to be delivered out,
And by vexation of thy falling strength,
To be an orb in breadth, an age in length:
Fall (thou condemned schismatic) and charm
The killing rage of my advanced arm;
For I shall prove so desperately mad
And full of rigor, in my sharp revenge;
As to revolve the terror of my doom
Fancy doth tremble, but my rage makes room:
(Falie wretch) I must forget humanity,
And fall acquainted with some forest Wolf;
He, and such bloody Tutors shall instruct
The shameless Art of savage cruelty,
To kill thee, and become exorbitant;
I will anatomize thy limbs alive;
Will mince small gobbets of thy quaking flesh
And feed my Hawks, while life continues fresh
Within the bloody morsel; make the sluice
To quaver when they swallow down the juice:
The Turk shall teach me to extend some plague
Of most unsuffering nature: till the day,
And thy blaspheming breath do both decay.
But ô (quick sorrow seize me) what avails
This villains torture to my living woe?
For I (except I quickly be transformed
Into a Rat, a Hedgehog, Louse, or Toad,
Some base and obscure animal) must feel
Torments more tedious than tongues may express,
A Equal to which is doubtful heaviness:
Nay. our attempts and high abuses done
Be of such horrid shape, such ample strain;
As to absolve them would require a Saint
With special pardon from almighty Ioue:
Yes, though I should obtain that idle wish
Of transmigration; yet the shameful troop
Of sins which we are my scarlet livery
Would follow fast, and (as Actions dogs)
Tear me to pieces, not remembering, once,
That I was master of the family:
If, to become a new conformitant,
implied a venial act; each virtuous thought
Should be my fellow: 'tis the fault of all,
we do despair to stand, because we fall.
One maxim I retain by privilege;
Such secrets, they do seldom thrive, nor can,
Where we depend upon the breath of man:
O had my drudge, my Vassal been but true,
And faithful to the forecast of my hopes,
I had been brave confederate of Kings,
Nay, might have called some Kings my feodars.
(O devil) hadst thou been to my desires
A sudden knave and dutiful enough:
But for a time hadst thou continued so
Until some limitation did expire
With such observance as rank devils use
Upon the precious mortgage of a soul
I had been ready to depart with all;
With pleasures, titles, all things, to enrich
Thy budding fortunes; all did I reserve
Till death determined my approaching fate,
Only to thee, than all, was consecrate,
By due surrender; but (young prodigal)
Your hopes and life (poor slave) be pawned to me
Whom no sworn-devils Broker shall exceed
In scurvy usage, though my heartstrings bleed.
If no true mercy then may mitigate
Thy dull and stupid deafness. I do dare
The utmost of your frantic violence,
Cast all thy Adder-stings upon my heart;
Be thy conceited cramps more exquisite
Than is a terrible tormenting Bull;
Break forth (Hyaena) get some peevish dwarf
To hack me down at leisure; till I stand
Like a Colossus, like a Cedar tall
And yet immovable with smarting wounds:
Stab me now (tyrant) or inflict full pain
Upon each noble joint and glorious vein,
Virtue shall keep me with a sacred charm
Against the strength of a stipendious arm:
The challenge of my cause being heard at large
All (to thy damage) would my griefs discharge:
Mock babes and children (sir) with rods in piss,
I did approve no true defence like this,
That I have done uprightly; knit your brow,
Swell with a crabbed face conformable,
Let your offended garbage fry in steaks,
Truth will aver, and honest dealing speaks
That I have done uprightly; be ashamed
Of thy unjust revenge, and murder named.
Dare you then buzz (you beetle) and advance
Your voice to contradict superiors?
Proud slave come nearer; he may live 'mong rats,
Who will be daunted with a swarm of gnats,
Much less with one poor mushroom; petty sir
Pray leave to grumble, (you mad factious cur)
Torments shall mitigate and make you tame
Pains worse than death, shall make thee deadly lame.
Do I deserve such pains? no fiery youth
I have done most uprightly, will discharge
A good officious part, if you proceed,
I will unmask your shameful tricks indeed.
A squib, a squib, crack, flash, and spit apace,
Break (my ox-bladder) vanish into breath,
A screech-owl bids thee sing before thy death,
Squeak our rare bagpipe; flesh-fly buzz again,
Seem to insult with voice, (thou very sound)
Take thy last leave, bequeath short life to ground.
Hark how the monstrous whale doth roar aloud.
Presaging tempests (Pilot) in the straits.
No huge sea-wonder) I a swordfish am,
Who will by virtue most upright and plain,
Sting thee, and thrash thee, till thou roar with pain:
Proud man, remember what thou well deserv'st,
Think who hath tempted royal chastity;
Who like a cheating thief did steal the Queen,
With lying vows, and studied shameless oaths,
Did play the juggler; left the king's highway,
And went about to break enclosures: think
Who did excel in mischief, who did strive
To worship Devils, who did seek by Just,
And means new moulded, most inordinate,
To make a Heavenly Saint a Sodomite,
Compel pure thoughts to worship Priapus.
Think who protended to defile the Queen,
And did (above pretence) affirm the death
Of mad Maenander, the deluded King,
And vow Lucilla's death: observe young sir
The suitable description to the end;
And tell us if it be significant:
Or if the language be too blunt; observe;
Tell your opinion of the congruence,
And spew a whetstone up ere I proceed:
Think if I use (sir) an affected style,
Think also of the strange absurdities,
Think who's the subject of my railing theme,
And when thou dost consider heavily
It is thy wicked self whereof I speak
And all uprightly spoken; you'll perceive
You want much leisure (friend) to punish me
For mischiefs nearer hand do threaten thee:
Except thou dost despair and hang thyself.
Impudent devil, didst not hear the voice
Of threatening tortures; like so many toads,
Night-ravens, or screech owls which together sing
Thy death's decree, as a sad funeral dirge?
Repent, repent (slave) and consider well,
Who is now sailing to the gates of hell.
(Servants) come apprehend this Eunuch; hoe,
Reserve him till the rigor of my doom
Demands sharp execution; tie the wretch
With loading manacles, and crucify
This false condemned railer fifty times,
Till with excess of pain the Traitor dies.
I cannot now withstand hostility,
But follow death with such alacrity
As one resolved upon religious war,
Such deaths do purchase a triumphal car.
Unfold your Ensigns, beat your silent Drums,
Exchange (I say) their sable cognisance,
Adding a limitation to the fears
Of this great captains death: exhausted tears
May mitigate compunction, not despair
A loss unmatched well worthy of repair.
Weeping should show our zeal, not once repine
At Providence above, which is Divine.
But (Agamemnon) now the funeral rites
Be finished; new horror, new despites
Speak with a bloody accent: Ajax roars,
And like a tempest, or the giants race,
Which lay encamped against the Godlike face
Of great Olimpus, doth he bellow forth
Bombast exclaims, and calls upon desert;
Give me (saith he) that armour which is due,
And (as a trophy of eternal fame)
May stout Achilles, that most valiant man,
Survive in me: O thou unthankful Greece,
(Helmets and lances be my Orators)
Thou art indebted to my brave designs
Past restitution; let some Soldier speak,
And call thee bankrupt; for I am abused:
Will you admit a rival then saith he
In my magnanimous aims to conquer me?
Will you admit Ulysses?
They approach.
Shall every coward be competitor
With Princes of such potent fortitude,
Such high descent, such saintish pedigree
As Greece can tell I Ajax do enjoy?
For Ioue and all the Gods acknowledge me,
My arm hath whole share in the dust of Troy.
True (Ajax) true, take double share in dust,
But for Achilles now contend we must.
Contend with me? (thou creeping snail) with me?
Whom wrathful Hector on his Elephant,
Mounted like Neptune on the cursed waves,
Loath to encounter, did forsake the field;
Through his fair absence did the Trojans yield.
But (Ajax) wise men know self-arrogance
Is still instructed sir to amplify.
Fie (prating coxcomb) what a senseless fool
A stupid wretch, and suffering Ass am I
To interchange the air, and empty voice
With such a sheepshead, a poor Ithacan?
(Ajax) Your Giant brags lack policy,
Strength wanting wisdom, argues ecstasy.
Give us our lance and helmet, I consume
Till I have turned this coward into fume:
Fetch some offensive swords, and scimitars,
javelins and Curtle-axe, I will crush this Ape,
And as a trophy wear his captive skin;
(The doubtful terror of my certain spoil
Which may affright, and make our foes recoil.)
What high renown or fame is to be had
By fighting with a Soldier who is mad?
O my forgotten fury swell apace,
And spit forth lightning in the coward's face,
Who hath no title to his bold pretence,
But a most a poor untutored eloquence.
Ajax—
Be silent, Agamemnon speaks,
Hang taming fetters on your lofty frowns,
Compel thy wrath which is predominant,
Force wild affections (Ajax:) I profess.
Aiax you are too violent; leave rage,
And by appointment of my poor advice,
You (in this great assembly) shall recount
Your noble acts; which if they do amount
Beyond Ulysses' memorable deeds,
The armour of Achilles then succeeds
To thee alone, made happy through desert,
Else to Ulysses shall the arms revert.
Then let me challenge some prerogative
From this forgotten place: laugh Iupiter,
And blame the stupid brains of this rude throng,
Which with unthankful eyes can here behold
The ships, the sands, the tattered sails and shore,
(All rescued vassals of my venturous arm)
Yet make us dead, and vain Ulysses' warm;
Warm with the bounty which the frozen snake
Will but abuse (my Lords) and you mistake.
What man was he took danger by the jaws?
Gave an assault of battery to the ribs
Of rampant Horror? hewed a passage out
From spoil and ruin, to reap victory?
Wrestled, and rescued Navies from the fire?
And did (for safety) singe his beard with flames?
Gave to triumphant Hector the repulse?
Quenched a combustion equal in extremes
To burning Phaëton, and the torrid Zone?
What man was he? No talking verbalist;
But I, e'en Ajax, with but half a fist:
Where was my smooth-tongued adversary then?
What hope had weak Ulysses to supply
A captains part with Schoolboys eloquence?
No (poor Ulysses) if thou apprehendest
My unresisted victories aright;
If you conceive your disabilities,
Your inclinations natural, and raw,
Your lame, and halting courage in exploit;
Remembering sir with whom you do contend,
With me, with Ajax, whom no fears offend,
Then magnify yourself, and think it praise,
Above thy merits, to confess, by drum,
By harp and sackbut, that (though overcome)
Thou didst yet strive with Ajax, and renounce
Each other title, which may well denounce
Thee indiscreet, and thy assumption proud;
Help me (dear Wisdom) to refrain, for I
Shall be transported into agony
By virtue of a sight so ominous,
So full of brazen impudence and fear,
As that proud linguist, my competitor.
Advance, advance, your melancholy brow,
Bend your attentive politicians ear
To that which heaven and I will assecure,
You have been taught to dance, and turn the heel,
To run away betimes, and to forsake
Thy friend, nay soul, upon extremity.
Nestor, Tydides, both can well aver,
You lack the rules of doctrine militant;
All rescue is accounted heresy:
Which rule (if pity and compassion both
Were not my maxims friend) had cost your life.
I saw death's Sergeant ready to arrest
Thy pensive soul, when tumbling down to earth,
I threw my target on thy pallid hearse,
drove back thy foes, and did thy soul reverse.
Will you (sir) walk unto the place again?
Go feign some foes approach, put fear enough,
And wounds on, for a shift, shrink up again,
And like the Tortoise undercreep your shell;
So sir contend I pray, and stammer well:
Be wise (you mighty Captains) and collect
How Hector did the Trojan troops renew,
Amazing vanguards with-a multitude
Of heathen Gods giving a bloody cause
Of quick despair to my Antagonist;
Nay to the valiant and provincial Dukes:
This dreadful man, this Hector (tossing souls
Like Gnats and Ant-eggs down to Erebus)
I beat him groveling, laid his limbs asleep;
And like a mountain from the firmament,
Down fell great Hector from his Elephant:
Let then a wreath of Oak impale my head,
And let Ulysses share with Diomed.
Mars be my equal judge! what simple man
(Except in league with sottish ignorance)
Would (upon forfeit of his patrimony,
And stock of wisdom to debility)
Admit Ulysses my competitor
To strive in jest with Ajax? if desert
Shall in the upshot be predominant,
Look on our outsides, on our helmets look;
View each man's Beaver, Breastplate, Sword and Lance,
Look on our outsides hoe! consider well
And pause upon each target; give me leave,
To show the tokens of a soldiers claim,
And to uncase a coward's infamy.
Mark but the difference betwixt our shields:
Mine (a true target) hath sustained whole groves
Of artificial timber, topped with steel,
I stood like Mars among my Trojan foes,
When all forsook me but my faithful targe,
It still continued, and did nobly keep,
My limbs exposed to danger of the field;
A Crocodile I think may covert sleep
Within the large wounds of my open shield:
Cast (I beseech) now half a purblind look
Upon that thievish varlet; and his shield,
Observe how smooth and fair his nightcaps be,
His helmets (Lords) I mean, observe his shield,
His Beaver trimmed twice twenty times a day;
His gauntlets, gorgets, and his gilded Arms,
All of a sweet complexion, sanguine sap,
As to encounter some fine lady's lap:
Meaning to be a Champion of the smocks,
A gallant spruce young warrior indeed,
War shall press wives; for Soldiers do not bleed.
Account my phrase no ambiguity,
Ulysses' sloth my words will verify:
I laugh most freely to imagine how
Effeminate Ulysses will support
The massy fabric of Achilles arms,
If my deservings shall be robbed and lose
That which I honour, and affection woos.
(Ajax) enough; Ulysses now begin:
Desire (alas) being not effectual
To raise from Cinders dead mortality,
And make a living heir indubitate,
Heaven saith, he shall remain ambiguous,
Till you (great judges) do decide the strife,
And so restore Achilles unto life:
Which, because doubtful, I do challenge grace
Of you my patrons, and this public place.
The bragging fellow Ajax doth derive
A long forgotten age from Telamon,
Striving to fetch a foolish argument
Of his renowned acts, from high descent,
If which dead picture of king's pedigree,
Could but infuse a fortune competent,
And make that piercing wisdom of the soul
A thing entitled to inheritance,
I could produce a genealogy,
From sacred Ioue, and subtle Mercury;
But, may the best of all my stratagems,
Which to thy sole advantage (happy Greece)
I have invented; may they perish all
When I assume the virtue of my sire,
As agent for my hope, and chief desire.
Who tempted brave Achilles to the siege
When he (detained with fear of destiny)
Was e'en excluded in a female rob?
When he forgot to be pontifical,
And was a true virago? did refuse
Both weapons, and each little sound of war?
I had a feeling of my country's cause,
And drew Achilles to the Trojan wars;
That mighty Captain of the Mermedons
I drew to battle, made him disobey
His mother-goddess, to advance the state
Of weary toil, and trouble Pergamus:
I put his armour on; gave weapons too;
For what I gave (great Lords) I humbly woo.
Speak, did not I encounter Telephon?
Turn Thebes to ashes? conquer Tenedos?
Chryses, and Scylla, Syron, Hector, Troy,
All do acknowledge me; my valiant arm,
My notable advice; all attribute
The shameless ruin of subverted Troy
To me, as author sole, and absolute
Of such a safety to the commonweal;
Which, notwithstanding (fathers) I renounce,
And must acknowledge you the principals
Of an achievement so perspicuous:
And whatsoever the vain people's voice,
captains report, and painful soldiers love,
Doth by misguided error give to me,
I render back with all humility.
To urge my own directions, and advice
In Architecture of that happy horse,
That fatal fabric (being so fresh in thought)
Were to condemn you (mindful countrymen)
Of that which wisdom loathes, Ingratitude.
To reckon up Minerva's image, bought
With hazard of my breath, and precious limbs,
When wedging bars flew from the Iron gates,
And gave access unto that sacred spell,
Might argue a most false oblivion
In your quick wisdoms with strange impudence
In my most bold surmise. But (Mighties all)
May stupid Ajax his reproachful terms,
(Without each scruple to your judging ears)
Be twice retorted in his rotten teeth;
So he may swallow down such base Rebukes,
And make amends to me: for let him know,
My suffering shoulders could sustain the load
Not of Achilles' armour, but his lump
Of solid, brawny flesh, both legs and arms,
Nay the whole massy trunk trussed up in steel:
I (Ajax) ay, that carcase once bestrid,
Upon my shoulders took his heavy trunk
When death stood there, and in the midst of all
Carried Achilles to his funeral.
When after thousand sharp calamities
Of war, of winter, famine, pestilence,
Of parching dog-days, long and tedious,
Of tempest, thunder, much mortality,
After all these, and ten years doubtful siege,
When you forsook the Camp, did so recoil,
As almost scorning a recovery;
I charmed the topmast, haled you back to shore,
Converted all to conquest, which before
Did seem above my dull inventive brain,
Give me a meed for ten years toil and pain.
Succeed Ulysses, take thy rich desire.
Depth to my fortunes! shall Ulysses rob
My long deservings of so rich a claim?
I will increase the bargain, stay a while
Take my memento.
Sir, avoid his rage.
Dost fly from vengeance? whither can you fly?
Whither (thou shifting coward) to escape
The indignation of my doubtless wrath?
See how the lurking caitiff there doth hide
His Cuckoo-bill; what fury could abstain?
Angels protect us; help, we both are slain?
Defend it (fiction.)
Help it forward (faith)
And give some fee to justice: (gallants) know,
Mischief to high extremes this pair did woo,
With false Pheudippe did conspire we two.
Hark they confess what wonder did reveal,
Give your applause, and make a merry peal:
Call me not Ajax now, but Mercury,
Who could untie a Tragic riddle thus;
Worthy to be esteemed miraculous.
Cannot you (sir) espy the honest man
(That noble Eunuch, my deliverer)
Good Gracchus coming yet?
(Dear madam) no.
Indeed my fancy doth suggest new fear,
Seeming to tell me Gracchus is detained
By his Lords rage, who did (I doubt) return
Sooner than he expected; which despite
If I could well conjecture to be true,
With wings of lightning I'd again go back
And bring my Eunuch from captivity.
Take then some officers to apprehend
The lustful traitor.
Such delay is long,
And my dear Eunuch may be dead alas
With tortures and extremity of pain,
Ere such late rescue doth advantage give,
To qualify his torment; he, good man,
(Little affected with ensuing harm)
Bestowed upon me a deliverance,
Which is repaid (I fear), with bloody stripes:
Stay not my purpose; but give charity
A gentle freedom to deliver one
Who is my comfort; (friend) I will return:
And (let no living soul participate
Of what I say, except myself and air)
I will, through colour of a pious end,
Enjoy Amilcar, whom I did refuse:
For, to set free my Eunuch, will afford
A fine pretext, though I do prostitute;
Which I did e'en desire, expecting still
Upon each little sign of violence,
(The modest shadow of a secret whore)
So will I win what was half lost before.
Madam, you do protract the precious time,
Leave me, I will return.
The way's not far;
Walk on whilst I assemble Officers.
A needless caution, be content I pray
To take no care, save what I shall command;
Be not so dutiful above thy hire,
Bring me no water when I call for fire.
A riddle: so in safety's name walk on:
Yet seeing the woman will be obstinate,
I (to avoid suspicion) will go home,
Fetch neighbours, and encompass round the walls,
If Lords like outlaws live, the kingdom falls.
When, when (o Goddess) will thy anger leave
To punish nature, and afflict poor man,
Who was created to offensive sin?
The soldiers awe, and common people's rage,
Make civil customs be licentious;
Rapine, rude contracts, discord, enmity,
All take their essence from one ecstasy:
Maenander lives, the luckless cause of all;
His life alone procures the kingdoms fall:
The longer life, the loss more eminent:
Know (Lords) I am a witness ocular,
And may with privilege inform you both
Of a most new and fatal accident:
The King, Maenander, did produce a scene,
A scene of Ajax, that unhappy play
(Pretending sport) became a Tragedy
For blood, and breath's effluxion: five deep wounds
(wearing Menander's badge) at once deprived
The sister Royal, next allied, by law
Of birth, and native consanguinity,
From hope of all succession to the chair.
Lucilla dead?
With her Mantesio sleeps:
Each life was tributary to the rage
Of our mad King; but each accused itself
As privy, to that arch-conspiracy
So long forgotten; to Pheudippe's crime.
Concealed so long?
Who did discover it?
A question doubtful; but Maenander saith
An apparition did reveal the truth.
Shadows may walk indeed.
Impossible!
I am resolved against all argument;
I am incredulous; dead never walk.
Never the same, yet the similitude,
Who says again so, we'll aver the lie;
What be no things of nature, I account
Fables.
You are not Metaphysical.
No sir: I think the age is giddy; death!
Can we from ashes raise a second life?
The age is drunken sure.
A doting age.
The times are dizzy.
No man doth deny
A theme so irrepugnable and true:
reason's own self will be our advocate
In proving what you speak; for punies know
The world's lame revolution hath been long,
And all partake of mundane giddiness:
The turning round of earth hath touched our brain;
The longer age, the more absurd and vain.
Age must decline, life's comfort will decay.
Though all things perish; let religion stay.
I have a thousand plagues in readiness,
Strappadoes, and impalements, pitch, and oil,
A Rack of Bowstrings, a tormenting Bull.
Hogsheads with nails inverted; furies whips,
And artificial pricks of Adders bone,
Which to behold, in practice on my slave,
Your Ladyship is welcome; and approach
Most opportunely (Madam:) after all
When grief hath feared your eyesight up; you shall
Then be disburdened of that chastity
Which is a trouble to your conscience:
I (Madam) will remove the dear suspense
Of question; whither you may prostitute,
And so resolve you a whore absolute:
(Servants) come cast my drudge upon the wheel;
Stand upright (rascal) stand sir, do not reel,
Take your last leave of standings say adieu
To ease; and as you leave pain, look for new.
O save my Eunuch, and I will submit
My whole revenue, life, and chastity
To your disposal.
precedent of shame!
Shoot (hell) a bonfire of unbounded flame,
And may each heavenly star augment his light
To make this woman famous; may each night
Change foggy darkness to prodigious day,
And (by some sign) a subtle whore display
To be the miracle of monstrous age
Worthy of judgements quill, and nature's stage.
Are you the vestal? that religious Nun,
Who speak no syllable but Innocence,
Sacred devotion, Virgin chastity?
Rail at our fleshly sins, concupiscence,
Temptations actual, and yet embrace,
Nay, hug hell's bosom? creep into the vice
(Which you would seem so lively to abhor)
Gaping at small occasion? (Madam) know
Affection is my servant, Will my slave,
Passion my drudge, Temptation is my page
And I more easily can command them all,
Then may a Turk his tugging Galleyslave:
Know, I contemn that courteous venery
Which is afforded scotfree; such nice dames
Would seem to cover when they covet flames.
Of puddle-water no sick patient drinks;
A precious odour, cheaply valued, stinks.
And, that you may conceive how I esteem
Your beauty; thus will I deform—
O help.
Hark (neighbours) follow, force down locks & bars,
Attach the Traitor,
Am I then betrayed?
Take up the Queen.
My wound's not mortal; stay
Release that Eunuch.
Keep the Traitor safe.
Convey him as an Idiot, or Drudge;
My Wrong may be accuser, Clerk, and judge.
Tilt in my face (Euphorbus) and reclaim
The slight opinion of our Deity.
Tilt in our face (I say) and thence collect
If I be Hermes; make some steady thrust,
And call me Sacred, Matchless, Mercury:
Believe it (youth) I will disjoin thy neck
And shoulders, if thou dost again deny
That I am Hermes, Ioues Ambassador,
A winged, and impenetrable God:
Tilt therefore in my face, tilt speedily;
Be thou conjured by laws of sanctity.
The fiend (sir) doth oppress my feeble arm.
(Caitiff) provoke not my offensive rage
lest I deprive thee of all future age.
Then I must kill thee (King.)
I am a God;
Translated by the voice of Parliament
Which sits above this cloudy firmament:
I am a God Euphorbus; am no King;
The Tawny-moor, and Aethiop shall bring
Unto my Altars pleasant sacrifice,
Fresh Opobalsum; Fawns of paradise;
Roebucks and balm to please our Deity.
Stab us (thou Atheist) stab us, and believe
That I am perfect shadow, am a God;
Thrust thy unwilling Poniard through my ribs;
And thence perceive our full Divinity;
Avoid my wrath (I say) 'tis dangerous,
If you refuse, I am unmerciful.
Stand to thy fortune (God) my dagger comes:
Deep enough dig then: o my small wound smarts
My breath is stopped, my Godlike soul departs.
So: I now assume the intellectual rob
Of Reason; and relinquish Lunacy
Which idle scare brought me acquainted with:
And (as I hope) the understanding heads,
Which rule this commonwealths society;
Will construe this an act of Piety.
Where is the King? I carry news of joy—
Where is the King? dead Favorina lives.
Here lies the King who did enforce a death
Upon the peril of his author's life,
If he refused to execute his will.
Euphorbus then recovered?
Yes; for I
Did counterfeit a cozening lunacy.
Sparta behoves to acknowledge thee her friend.
The sentence of Amilcar let's attend.
Long live the Queen.
Draw the damned villain forth,
And let him swallow sulphur; flaming pitch,
Or else be roasted pitiless alive.
O give me oil of Mandrakes, poppy juice
Or poison of infected hellebore.
Flay him, and make a trophy of his skin.
Cut off his members; bind and broil the slave.
Let him be quartered.
To deceive all these
Were policy above the rules of Art:
I have concluded to prevent the shapes
Of torture; death by death alone escapes.
Save, save the Traitor, save him.
He is dead.
May then the Traitor sleep in tortures bed.
But may Menander's dying soul ascend;
Whom for the safety of this Commonwealth,
I did restore to happiness and health.
Amazement of our age! wonder of time!
Touched with a feeling of my country's good
I dipped my dagger in his royal blood,
By his own chief desire; so leave mad care,
Which my suspicion did assume through fear.
The Queen shall Crown thee.
So I leave the school
Of madness, to become mad fortune's fool.
Remove the Carcase of that slaughtered King.
we once obeyed him: after ecstasy
Let's therefore follow his dead obsequy.
(Nature) stand speechless, for above thy part
With man prevails both Lunacy and Art.
Horror, affrightments, death, and anger fly,
Fly to the bottom of hell's dark Abyss,
That heaven may smile upon the clouded earth
And all take notice we are pacified:
Grim death triumphant, whose empaled brow
Can terrify the factious Kings below,
(Who when we were incensed through blasphemy
Sent forth revenge to please our Deity)
Shall now enchain that mischief merciless,
And qualify revengeful greediness:
Discloud thy lustre (my new borrowed shine)
Scatter thy foggy damps which do debar
My bounteous lamp of universal light:
Let exhalations give my honour place,
All stars attendant look earth in the face.
God's cannot dwell in rage; though slimy man
If but ennobled by permissive law,
Dares prosecute his vengeance to the death
Till he extirp a whole posterity:
we though immortal, though above best brains
To comprehend; though sole efficients,
Though every thing in essence, though divine,
Though Gods; (in which one syllable, the sum
Of every thing's involved) though Gods we are,
Yet in compassion we do still accept
Those that profane our sacred holiness.
For; should the anger of Omnipotence
Punish mankind so often, or so long
As their insatiate folly doth deserve,
Ioue would be weary and the Gods above
Turn boiling wrath into abundant love.