STay; whether you human be or divine; here is no passage; see you not the earth furrowed? the region solitary? Cities and Courts fit tumultuous multitudes: this is a place of silence; here a kingdom I enjoy without people; myself commands, myself obeys; Host, Cook, and Guest myself; I reap without sowing, owe all to Nature, to none other beholding: my skin is my coat, my ornaments these boughs and flowers, this Bower my house, the earth my bed, herbs my food, water my drink; I want no sleep, nor health; I envy none, nor am envied, neither fear I, nor hope, nor joy, nor grieve: if this be happiness, I have it; which you all that depend on others service, or command, want: will you be happy? be private; turn Palaces to Hermitages, noys to silence, outward felicity, to inward content.
Whether travels thy tongue ill nurtur'dman? thy manners show madness, thy nakedness poverty, thy resolution folly; since none will undertake thy presumption; let me descend, that I may make thy ignorance know how much it hath injured sacred ears.
Naked I am, and so is truth; plain, and so is honesty; I fear no man's encounter, since my cause deserves neither excuse, nor blame.
Shall I now chide or pity thee? thou art as miserable in life, as foolish in thy opinion; answer me; dost thou think that all happiness consists in solitariness?
I do.
And are they unhappy that abide in society?
They are.
Dost thou esteem it a good thing to live?
The best of things.
Hadst thou not a Father and Mother?
Yes.
Did they not live in society?
They did.
And wert not thou one of their society, when they bred thee, instructing thee to go, and speak?
True.
Thy birth then and speech in spite of thy spleen make thee sociable, go, thou art but a vainglorious counterfeit, and wanting that which should make thee happy, contemnest the means; view but the heavens, is there not above us a Sun and Moon, giving and receiving light? are there not millions of Stars that participate their glorious beams? is there any Element simple? is there not a mixture of all things? and wouldst thou only be singular? action is the end of life, virtue the crown of action, society the subject of virtue, friendship the band of society, solitariness the breach. Thou art yet young, and fair enough, wert thou not barbarous; thy soul poor wretch is far out of tune, make it musical, come, follow me, and learn to live.
I am conquered by reason, and humbly ask pardon for my error, henceforth my heart shall honour greatness, and love society; lead now, and I will follow as good a fellow as the best.
More than most welcome, renowned and gracious Queen, since your presence vouchsafes to beautify these woods, whereof I am Keeper, be it your pleasure to accept such rude entertainment, as a rough Woodman can yield. This is to us a high holiday, and henceforth yearly shall be kept and celebrated with our Country sports, in honour of so Royal a guest; come friends and fellows now prepare your voices, and present your joys in a Siluan dance.
DAnce now and sing the joy, and love we owe:
Let cheerful voices and glad gestures show,
The Queen of grace is she whom we receive,
Honour and State are her guides,
Her presence they can never leave.
Then in a stately Sylvan form salute
Her ever flowing grace.
Fill all the Woods with Echoed welcomes,
And strew with flowers this place:
Let every bow and plant fresh blossoms yield,
And all the air refine.
Let pleasure strive to please our Goddess,
For she is all divine.
Yet once again, let us our measures move,
And with sweet notes record our joyful love.
An object more divine none ever had.
Beauty, and heau'n-borne worth,
Mixed in perfection never fade.
Then with a dance triumphant let us sing
Her high advanced praise,
And e'en to heaven our gladsome welcomes,
With wings of music raise;
Welcome, O welcome, ever-honoured Queen,
To this now-blessed place,
That grove, that bower, that house is happy
Which you vouchsafe to grace.
NO longer delay her,
'Twere sin now to stay her
From her ease with tedious sport;
Then welcome still crying,
And swiftly hence flying,
Let us to our homes resort.
Most magnificent and peerless Deity, lo I the surveyor of Lady Flora's works, welcome your grace with fragrant phrases into her Bowers, beseeching your greatness to bear with the late wooden entertainment of the Woodmen, for Woods are more full of weeds than wits, but gardens are weeded, and Gardeners witty, as may appear by me. I have flowers for all fancies, Time for truth, Rosemary for remembrance, Roses for love, heartsease for joy, and thousands more, which all harmoniously rejoice at your presence; but myself, with these my Paradisians here, will make you such music, as the wild Wooddists shall be ashamed to hear the report of it. Come sirs prune your pipes, and tune your strings, and agree together like birds of a feather.
WElcome to this flowery place,
Fair Goddess and sole Queen of grace:
All eyes triumph in your sight,
Which through all this empty space
Casts such glorious beams of light.
Paradise were meeter far
To entertain so bright a Star:
But why errs my folly so?
Paradise is where you are
Heaven above, and heaven below.
Could our powers and wishes meet,
How well would they your graces greet,
Yet accept of our desire,
Roses of all flowers most sweet
Spring out of the silly brier.
Wonder not (great Goddess) at the sweetness of our Garden-aire (though passing sweet it be) Flora hath perfumed it for you (Flora our mistress, and your servant) who invites you yet further into her Paradise; she invisibly will lead your grace the way, and we (as our duty is) visibly stay behind.
O joys exceeding?
From love, from power of your wished sight proceeding!
As a fair morn shines divinely,
Such is your view, appearing more divinely.
Your steps ascending,
Raise high your thoughts for your content contending;
All our hearts of this grace vaunting,
Now leap as they were moved by enchanting.
A Hall, a hall for men of moment; Rationals, and Irrationals; but yet not all of one breeding. For I an Academic am, refined by travel that have learned what to Courtship belongs, and so divine a presence as this; if we press passed good manners, laugh at our follies, for you cannot show us more favour, then to laugh at us. If we prove ridiculous in your sights, we are gracious; and therefore we beseech you to laugh at us. For mine own part (I thank my Stars for it) I have been laughed at in most parts of Christendom.
I can neither brag of my Travels, nor yet am ashamed of my profession; I make sweet walks for fair Ladies; Flowers I prepare to adorn them; close Arbours I build wherein their loves unseen may court them; and who can do Ladies better service, or more acceptable? when I was a Child and lay in my Cradle, (a very pretty Child) I remember well that Lady Venus appeared unto me, and setting a Silver Spade and Rake by my Pillow, bade me prove a Gardener; I told my Mother of it (as became the duty of a good Child) whereupon she provided strait for me two great Platters full of Pap; which having dutifully devoured, I grew to this portraiture you see, sprung sodainely out of my Cabin, and fell to my profession.
Verily by thy discourse thou hast Traveled much, and I am ashamed of myself that I come so far behind thee; as not once to have yet mentioned Venus or Cupid, or any other of the gods to have appeared to me. But I will henceforth boast truly, that I have now seen a Deity as far beyond theirs, as the beauty of light is beyond darkness, or this Feast whereof we have had our share, is beyond thy Salads.
Sure I am, it hath stirred up strange thoughts in me; never knew I the difference between Wine and Water before. Bacchus hath opened mine eyes, I now see bravery and admire it, beauty & adore it. I find my Arms naked, my discourse rude, but my heart soft as Wax, ready to melt with the least beam of a fair eye; which (till this time) was as untractable as Iron.
I much joy in thy conversion, thou hast long been a mad fellow, and now prouest a good fellow, let us all therefore join together sociably in a Song, to the honour of good fellowship.
A very Musical motion, and I agree to it.
Sing that sing can, for my part I will only while you sing, keep time with my gestures. A la more du France.
NIght as well as brightest day hath her delight,
Let us then with mirth and Music deck the night,
Never did glad day such store
Of joy to night boqueath.
Her Stars than adore,
Both in Heaven, and here beneath.
Love and beauty, mirth and Music yield true joys,
Though the Cynics in their folly count them toys.
Raise your spirits near so high,
They will be apt to fall:
None brave thoughts envy,
Who had ere brave thought at all.
joy is the sweet friend of life, the nurse of blood,
Patron of all health, and fountain of all good:
Never may joy hence depart,
But all your thoughts attend,
Nought can hurt the heart,
That retains so sweet a friend.
Silence sirs, here comes Silvanus' god of these Woods, whose presence is rare, and imports some novelty.
Let us give place, for this place is fitter for Deities then us.
THat health which harbours in the fresh aired groves,
Those pleasures which green hill and valley moves,
Silvanus the commander of them all,
Here offers to this State Imperial;
Which as a homager he visits now,
And to a greater power his power doth bow,
With all, thus much his duty signifies:
That there are certain Semideities,
Belonging to his Sylvan walks, who come
Led with the Music of a Sprightly drum,
To keep the night awake and honour you,
(Great Queen) to whom all Honours they hold due,
So rest you full of joy, and wished content,
Which though it be not given, 'tis fairly meant.
STay Goddess, stay a little space,
Our poor Country love to grace,
Since we dare not too long stay you,
Accept at our hands, we pray you,
These mean presents to express
Greater love, than we profess,
Or can utter now for woe
Of your parting hastened so.
Gifts these are, such as were wrought
By their hands, that them have brought,
Homebred things, which they presumed,
After I had them perfumed
With my flowery incantation,
To give you in presentation
At your parting, come feat Lasses
With fine curtsies, and smooth faces,
Offer up your simple toys
To the Mistress of our joys;
While we the sad time prolong
With a mournful parting song.
CAn you the Author of our joy
So soon depart?
Will you revive, and strait destroy,
New mirth to tears convert?
O that ever cause of gladness
Should so swiftly turn to sadness!
Now as we droop, so will these flowers
Barred of your sight.
Nothing avail them heavenly showers
Without your heavenly light.
When the glorious Sun forsakes us,
Winter quickly over-takes us.
Yet shall our prayers your ways attend,
When you are gone;
And we the tedious time will spend,
Remembering you alone.
Welcome here shall you hear ever,
But the word of parting never.