Again, again, fresh kindle Phoebus' sounds,
T'exhale Mania from her earthy den;
Alloy the fury that her sense confounds,
And call her gently forth, sound, sound, again.
What powerful noise is this importunes me,
T'abandon darkness which my humour fits?
Ioues hand in it I feel, and ever he
Must be obaied e'en of the franticst wits.
Mania?
Ha.
Brainsick, why startest thou so?
Approach yet nearer, and thou then shalt know
The will of Ioue, which he will breathe from me,
Who art thou? if my dazzled eyes can see,
Thou art the sweet Enchanter heavenly Orpheus.
The same Mania, and Ioue greets thee thus,
Though several power to thee, and charge he gave,
T'enclose in thy Dominions such as rave
Through bloods distemper, how dared thou attempt
T'imprison Entheus, whose rage is exempt
From vulgar censure? it is all divine
Full of celestial rapture, that can shine
Through darkest shadows, therefore Ioue by me
Commands thy power straight to set Entheus free.
How can I? frantics, with him many more
In one cave are locked up, open once the door,
All will fly out, and through the world disturb,
The peace of Ioue; for, what power then can curb
Their rainelesse fury?—
Let not fear in vain
Trouble thy crazed fancy, all again
Save Entheus to thy safeguard shall retire,
For Ioue into our music will inspire
The power of passion, that their thoughts shall bend
To any form or motion we intent:
Obey Ioues willing then, go, set Entheus free.
I willing go, so Ioue obeyed must be.
Let Music put on Protean▪ changes now,
Wild beasts it once tamed, now let frantics bow.
Through these soft and calm sounds Mania pass
With thy phantastics hence; here is no place
Longer for them or thee; Entheus alone
Must do Ioues bidding now, all else be gone.
Divinest Orpheus, o how all from thee
Proceed with wondrous sweetness, am I free?
Is my affliction vanished?
Too too long
Alas, good Entheus, hast thou brooked this wrong;
What? number thee with madmen? o mad age,
Senseless of thee, and thy celestial rage.
For thy excelling rapture, e'en through things
That seems most light, is borne with sacred wings:
Nor are these Musics, Shows, or Revels vain,
When thou adorn'st them with thy Phoebean brain;
theyare palate sick of much more vanity,
That cannot taste them in their dignity.
Ioue therefore lets thy prisoned sprite obtain
Her liberty and fiery scope again:
And here by me commands thee to create
Inventions rare, this night to celebrate,
Such as become a nuptial by his will
Begun and ended,—
Ioue I honour still,
And must obey, Orpheus I feel the fires
Are ready in my brain, which Ioue enspires,
Lo, through that vail, I see Prometheus stand
Before those glorious lights, which his false hand
Stole out of heaven, the dull earth to inflame
With the affects of Love, and honoured Fame,
I view them plain in pomp and majesty.
Such as being seen might hold rivality,
With the best triumphs; Orpheus give a call
With thy charmed music, and discover all.
Fly cheerful voices, through the air, and clear
These clouds, that you hid beauty may appear.
COme away; bring thy golden theft,
Bring bright Prometheus all thy lights,
Thy fires from Heaven bereft
Show now to human sights.
Come quickly come; thy stars to our stars strait present,
For pleasure being too much deferred, loseth her best content,
What fair dames wish, should swift as their own thoughts appear,
To loving & to longing hearts every hour seems a year.
See how fair; O how fair they shine,
What yields more pomp beneath the skies?
Their birth is yet divine,
And such their form implies.
Large grow their beams, their near approach afford then so
By nature sights that pleasing are, cannot too amply show,
O might these flames in human shapes descend this place,
How lovely would their presence be, how full of grace!
Patron of mankind, powerful and bounteous,
Rich in thy flames, reverend Prometheus,
In Hymen's place aid us to solemnize
These royal Nuptials, fill the lookers eyes
With admiration of thy fire and light,
And from thy hand let wonders flow to night.
Entheus and Orpheus names both dear to me,
In equal balance I your Third will be
In this night's honour, view these heaven borne Stars,
Who by my stealth are become Sublunars.
How well their native beauties fit this place,
Which with a choral dance they first shall grace,
Then shall their forms to human figures turn,
And these bright fires within their bosoms burn.
Orpheus apply thy music for it well
Helps to induce a Courtly miracle.
Sound best of Musics, raise yet higher our sprights,
While we admire Prometheus dancing lights.
Advance your Choral motions now
You musick-loving lights,
This night concludes the nuptial vow,
Make this the best of nights,
So bravely Crown it with your beams,
That it may live in fame,
As long as Rhenus or the Thames
Are known by either name.
Once move again, yet nearer move
Your forms at willing view,
Such fair effects of joy and love,
None can express but you,
Then revel midst your airy Bowers
Till all the clouds do sweat,
That pleasure may be poured in showers
On this triumphant Seat.
Long since hath lovely Flora thrown
Her Flowers and Garlands here,
Rich Ceres all her wealth hath shown,
Proud of her dainty cheer.
Changed then to human shape descend,
Glad in familiar weed.
That every eye may here commend
The kind delights you breed.
So, pause awhile, and come ye fiery spirits,
Break forth the earth-like sparks t'attend these Knights.
WAit spirits wait, while through the clouds we
And by descending gain a higher place. (pace,
SVpported now by Clouds descend,
Divine Prometheus, Hymen's friend,
Lead down the new transformed fires,
And fill their breasts with loves desires:
That they may revel with delight,
And celebrate this nuptial night,
So celebrate this nuptial night,
That all which see may stay.
They never viewed so fair a sight,
Even on the clearest day.
See, see Prometheus, four of these first dames
Which thou long since out of thy purchased flames,
Didst forge with heavenly fire, as they were then,
By Ioue transformed to Statues, so again,
They suddenly appear by his command
At thy arrival, Lo how fixed they stand,
So did Ioues wrath too long, but now at last,
It by degrees relents, and he hath placed
These Statues, that we might his aid implore,
First for the life of these, and then for more.
Entheus, Thy counsels are divine and just,
Let Orpheus deck thy Hymn, since pray we must.
Powerful Ioue, that of bright stars,
Now hast made men fit for wars;
Thy power in these Statues prove,
And make them women fit for love.
See Ioue is pleased, Statues have life & move,
Go new-born men, and entertain with love,
These new-born women, though your number yet
Exceeds theirs double, they are armed with wit,
To bear your best encounters, Court them fair:
When words and Music speak, let none despair.
Woo her, and win her, he that can,
Each woman hath two lovers,
So she must take and leave a man,
Till time more grace discovers;
This doth Ioue to show that want,
Makes beauty most respected;
If fair women were more scant,
They would be more affected.
Courtship and Music, suit with love,
They both are works of passion,
Happy is he whose words can move,
Yet sweet notes help persuasion.
Mix your words with Music then,
That they the more may enter;
Bold assaults are fit for men,
That on strange beauties venture.
Cease, cease your wooing strife, see Ioue intends,
To fill your number up, and make all friends,
Orpheus, and Eutheus, join your skills once more,
And with a Hymn the Deity implore.
Powerful Ioue, that hast given four,
Raise this number but once more,
That complete, their numerous feet
May aptly in just measures meet.
The number's now complete, thanks be to Ioue,
No man needs fear a Rival in his love;
For, all are sped, and now begins delight,
To fill with glory, this triumphant night.
Breathe you now, while Io Hymen
To the Bride we sing:
O how many joys, and honours,
From this match will spring?
Ever firm the league will prove,
Where only goodness causeth love.
Some for profit seek
What their fancies most disleeke,
These love for virtues sake alone:
Beauty and youth unite them both in one.
Live with thy Bridegroom happy, sacred Bride;
How blessed is he, that is for love envied.
Breathe again, while we with music
Fill the empty space:
O but do not in your dances,
Yourselves only grace.
Every one fetch out your Fere,
Whom chiefly you will honour here,
Sights most pleasure breed,
When their numbers most exceed:
Choose then, for choice to all is free,
Taken or left, none discontent must be.
Now in thy Revels frolicke-faire delight,
To heap joy on this ever honoured night.
CEase, cease you Revels, rest a space,
New pleasures press into this place,
Full of beauty and of grace.
Make clear the passage to Sibilla's sight,
Who with her Trophy comes, to crown this night,
And as herself with Music shall be led,
So shall she pull on with a golden thread.
A high vast obelisk, dedicate to fame,
Which immortality itself did frame.
Raise high your voices now, like Trumpets fill,
The room with sounds of Triumph, sweet and shrill.
COme triumphing, come with state,
Old Sibilla, reverend Dame,
Thou keep'st the secret key of fate,
Preventing swiftest fame.
This night breath only words of joy,
And speak them plain, now be not coy,
DEbetur alto iure, Principium iovi,
Votis det ipse vim meis, dict is fidem.
Vtrinque decoris splendet egregium jubar,
Medio triumphus mole stat dignus sua,
Coelumque summo Capite dilectum petit;
Quam pulchra pulchro sponsa respondet viro!
Quam plena numinis? Patrem vultu exprimit,
Parens futura masculae prolis, Parens
Regum, imperatorum: Additur Germaniae
Robur Britannicum. ecquid esse par potest?
Vtramque iunget una mens gentem, fides,
Deique Cultus unus, & simplex amor.
Idem erit utrique hostis, sodalis idem, idem
Votum periclitantium, atque eadem manus.
Favebit illis Pax, favebit bellica
Fortuna, semper aderit Adiutor Deus.
Sic, sic Sibilla; vocibus nec his deest
Pondus, nec hoc inane momumentum trahit.
Et aureum est, & quale nec flammas timet,
Nec fulgura, ipsi quip sacratur iovi.
The good old Sage is silenced, her free tongue
That made such melody, is now unstrung:
Then grace her Trophy with a dance triumphant,
Where Orpheus is none can fit music want.
DAnce, dance, and visit now the shadows of our joy,
All in height, and pleasing state, your changed forms employ.
And as the bird of Ioue salutes, with lofty wing, the morn;
So mount, so fly, these Trophies to adorn.
Grace them with all the sounds and motions of delight,
Since all the earth cannot express a lovelier sight,
View them with triumph, and in shades the truth adore,
No pomp or sacrifice can please Ioues greatness more.
Turn, turn, and honour now the life, these figures bear,
Lo, how heavenly natures far above all art appear,
Let their aspects revive in you, the fire that shined so late,
Still mount and still retain, your heavenly state.
Gods were with dance, and with music served of old,
Those happy days derived their glorious style from gold:
This pair by Hymen joined, grace you with measures then,
Since they are both divine, and you are more than men.
Let here Sibylla's Trophy stand,
Lead her now by either hand,
That she may approach yet nearer,
And the Bride and Bridegroom hear her
Bless them in her native tongue,
Wherein old prophecies she sung,
Which time to light hath brought:
She speaks that which Ioue hath taught.
Well may he inspire her now,
To make a joyful and true vow.
Sponsam sponse toro tene pudicam,
Sponsum sponsa tene toro pudicum.
Non haec unica nox datur beatis,
At vos perpetuò haec beabit una
Prole multiplici, parique amore.
Laeta, ac vera refert Sibylla, ab alto
Ipse jupiter annuit loquenti.
So be it ever, joy and peace,
And mutual love give you increase,
That your posterity may grow
In fame, as long as Seas do flow.
Live you long to see your joys,
In fair Nymphs and Princely Boys:
Breeding like the Garden flowers,
Which kind heaven draws with her warm showers.
Enough of blessing, though too much
Never can be said to such;
But night doth waste, and Hymen chides,
Kind to Bridegrooms and to Brides,
Then singing the last dance induce,
So let good night prevent excuse.
NO longer wrong the night,
Of her Hymenaean right,
A thousand Cupids call away,
Fearing the approaching day,
The Cocks already crow,
Dance then and go,