WElcome to the water, worthy Brother Draper. Imagine me to be the true resemblance of old S. Iohn Norman, sometime Lord Maior of this famous City, and the first that devised this water honour, making my Barge at mine own proper cost, and rowed with silver Oars to Westminster, when (as you now) I then went to take mine oath. In regard whereof, I was the first Maior, that was presented to the Barons, of the Exchequer. The imaginary shapes of the seven liberal Sciences, each one distinguished by their true character, are placed as my companions in my Barge: in memory of the love I ever bare to learning, and no mean bounties by me extended for the maintenance thereof. I joy, that invention would make use of my remembrance in this manner, to do any service to so desertful a Brother, and to the Company of Drapers which I dearly affected. On then my hearts, and as in those elder days you declared your love to old Iohn Norman: so express somewhat now to delight my honoured Brother, singing cheerfully, row thy Boat Norman.
WHy gaze ye so upon me! am I not a man flesh, blood, and bone, as you are? Or in these silken satin Towns, are poor plain meaning Shepherds wondered at, like Comets or blazing Stars▪ Or is it this goodly beast by me, that fills your eyes with admiration? If it be so, let me then resolve ye, that it is an article of duty which we Shepherds of Cotsall owe to the old Drapers of London, for keeping their flocks on the Cotsall hills, that when any worthy Brother of their Society comes to be L. Maior of this City, the very fairest Ram in all their flocks is sent unto them as a solemn offering, as being the Crest of their Companies Arms, and the chief maintainer of Wool for clothing. In which respect, my Father about some six and twenty years since, when S. Martin Calthrope (a Brother of the same Society) was Lord Maior, brought then the like goodly. Ram as his oblation; and I hearing, that his man S. Thomas Hayes, and another Martin, Master Martin Lumley (by the blessing of heaven and their own virtuous endeavours) were the next chosen Brethren of the same Band, the one to succeed in the self same dignity of the Mayoralty, and the other of the Shrivealty; have brought this as my hearts free offering, in honour of them that so dearly affect them, and in my duty to them both, with all my utmost service beside. For thus say we in Catswolde.
From the Ram
we have the Lamb
From both our finest
wools are shorn.
Wool had thus from
the Ram and Lamb,
Makes the best Cloth,
that can be worn.
Thank then the Draper
that began:
To make such Clothing,
meet for man.
For, if we have no Ram, we are sure to have no Lamb: no Lamb, no Wool: no wool, no Cloth: no Cloth, no Draper.
Heaven grant that we may never see these no's,
For we shall then feel twice as many woes:
But that of Ram, Lamb, Wool, Cloth, still we may have store:
So shall the Drapers then thrive more and more.
IN times of old Antiquity,
When men lived long and healthfully,
Detesting sloth and idleness,
Which breeds but surfeit and excess.
When yea and nay was greatest Oath,
And men's best wear, good woollen Cloth,
Yclept England's drapery,
More worth than gaudy bravery,
Of Silken twine, Silver and Gold,
near known in those blessed days of old:
Then lived that grave and worthy man,
That London's honour first began,
By title of the Mayoralty,
A high and famous dignity:
Henry Fitz-Alwine was his name,
Noble by birth, and of much fame.
Whose substance though his grave hath kept,
Four hundred years, where he hath slept:
Yet is his shadow raised in me,
To grace this days solemnity.
For he being first that held the sway
Of Maior in London, justly may
Challenge (by right) priority,
In honouring his own Company,
With all that sacred Poesy can
device, to grace so good a man,
As first with hearts, hands, and free voice,
Was thought meet in the people's choice
To rank in that rich roll of fame:
That honoured first the Draper's name.
And worthy Brother here survey
Those several kinds of London's sway
Till royal Richard first in me,
Altered the rule to Mayoralty.
Portgreves held first by strict command,
Next Provosts with a sterner hand,
Such from the Conquest was the case
Of London's awe, till milder grace
Made choice of Bailiffs, men thought fit
In the King's judgement Courts to sit,
And right all causes of contention:
By upright censure, or prevention.
Yet all this could not please the king,
In two men's rule grew varying,
By leaning to what part each listed,
So might by might was still resisted.
Wrongs unredressed, offences flowing,
Garboils & grudges each where growing.
Therefore as God had given him place,
Solely to rule, and judge each case,
So would he plant a deputy,
To figure his authority,
In the true form of Monarchy,
Than which, no better sovereignty.
Which office being imposed on me,
By such a gracious Majesty:
I held it four and twenty years,
(Yearly elected, as appears.)
Until my very dying day.
Since when (my Lord) I can well say,
The Science of old drapery,
(Our loving kind Society)
Hath yielded many a Magistrate,
In the self-same degree of State.
And Time reserveth in his store,
For the like honour, many more.
On then before, for we must tend,
Till this days triumph have full end.
Honourable Lord and Brother, it is imposed on old Iohn Norman, briefly to describe these two beautiful devices to ye. In the first, which manifesteth the Honour of drapery, your well judging eye may easily conceive, each person by their apt distinguishment. The Mother, Old drapery, with her Daughters and attendants placed about her, do deliver the Draper's true antiquity, and that which he and his only performed, is since become the benefit of divers trades or occupations. Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Fulling, Rowing, Shearing, Dressing, Dying, Tentering, and what else appertained to woollen cloth, was the ancient Draper's sole profession, and the chief honour of this famous Kingdom: flourishing thereby in so many happy blessings, and so fortified by Peace, Plenty, Bounty, Council and Discreet Zeal, that all other nations sat and admired thereat. You have a taste of this felicity in that other device, beautified with the chief Clothing Cities of this Land, for maintenance of ancient drapery, whereof London sitteth the highest advanced, as being his choice Chamber that first made a Draper the only Governor thereof. I am loath to hold ye long, and well I wot, more ample relation hath been made unto ye; and therefore to God and your good devotions I heartily commend ye.
THe longest days have end at last,
And pleasures pomp is but a blast,
You see my Lord that sullen night,
Sworn enemy to days delight,
(For all the pride these Tapers make,)
Whispers, that we must farewell take.
To doubt of your ensuing care,
Or to advise ye, to prepare
For envies storms, or soothing smiles,
That wait on such high place some while:
Longs not to me. For in your eye
Such true Characters I espy
Of virtue, zeal, and upright heed,
That you will prove the man indeed,
Meet such a charge to undergo:
Whereto heavens hand hath raised you so▪
And that you'll equal any yet
That in the self-same place hath set.
Such is the hope of all that love ye,
'mongst whom, I cannot choose but move ye
With their remembrance, that this day
Have done as much as men well may
In honouring this Solemnity,
The Draper's worthy Company.
Their love and bounty hath expressed,
How with their favours you are blessed:
For, as their kindness hath not scanted:
So hath no needful service wanted.
For this days honour and delight:
And so my worthy Lord good night.