CVFFE, where art thou?
Here at hand.
Where is this Cuff?
Almost at your Elbow.
OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou hadst been worn out of date by this time, or shrunk in the wetting at least.
What? do you think I am afraid of your great words? no, you shall know that there be men of fashion in place, as well as yourself.
Good Band, do not fret so.
A scurvy shagrag Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Puny, a Freshman, come up hither to learn fashions and seek to expel me?
Nay: if you be so broad with him, Band, we shall have a fray presently.
Sir, I'll pull down your Choler from you.
It was fit time for me to stay you up, for I am sure you were a falling Band.
Well, Band, for all you are so stiff, I'll make you limber enough before I have done with you.
No, Hodge Peake, it's more than you can do.
'sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let me catch you in another place, and I will make cutwork of you.
there's ne'er a Spanish Ruff of you all can do it.
'sfoot, if these two should go together by the cares and hurt one another, Ruff would be in a fine plight: would he not?
Well, Band, look to thyself, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee roundly.
Lace me? thou wouldest be laced thyself, Ruff, for this is the very truth, thou art a plain Knave.
If they talk of lacing, I were best look about myself.
Darest thou meet me in the field?
In the field? why? thou art but an effeminate fellow, Ruff; for all thou art so well set: but at what weapon?
Nay, I will give thee that advantage, bring thou what weapons thou wilt, I scorn to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle work.
'sfoot, thou shalt know, a Gentleman and a Soldier scorns thy proffer.
A Soldier?
Did you not hear of the great Bands went over of late?
Where did you serve? in the Low Countries?
It may be so; for I am sure he is a Holland Band.
Where I have served, it is no matter, but I am sure I have been pressed oft.
Truly, his Laundress will bear him witness thereof.
Press me no pressings, I'll make you know that Ruff is steeled to the back, if I had my stick here, you should feel it.
Nay bragger, it is not your great words can carry it away so; give Band but a hem, and he will be for you at any time, name the place, the time and hour of our meeting.
The place, the Paper mills, where I will tear thee into rags, before I have done with thee: the time, tomorrow in the afternoon about one: but do you hear? we will fight single, you shall not be double, Band.
Now I perceive, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.
But do you hear? once more do not say at our next meeting you forgot the time.
No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more careful of the time then he: for I am sure he hath always at the least a dozen Clocks about him.
Farewell then.
Then farewell.
Nay, you shall not part so, you will go into the fields, and know not what fighting means: a couple of white livered fellows, your Laundress will make you both as white as a clout it she list; If you lack beating, she'll beat you I'll warrant you, she'll so clap your sides together, that they shall be beaten out in once or twice handling; why? I have known her leave her mark behind her a whole week after, she'll quickly beat you Black and Blue, for I am sure she'll scarce wash white before she starch.
Well, remember the time and place, Ruff.
Well, remember your sclues and mistress Stichwell, one to whom you have been both beholding in your days.
Who? Mistress Stichwell, by this light I know her not.
No, nor you neither.
Nor I, I swear by all the Gum and Blew-starch in Christendom.
I thought so, why it's the sempster, one that both you had been undone had it not been for her, but what talk you of undoing? I say Mister is Stichwell the sempster was the very maker of you both, yet thus little do you regard her, but it is the common custom of you all, when you come to be so great as you are, you forget from what house you come.
'sfoot Ruff careth not a pin for her.
Nor Band a button.
Well Band and Ruff, you were best both of you to take heed of her, you know she set you both in the Stocks once before, and if she catch you again, it is a hundredth to one, if she hang you not both up, for she hath got strings already.
Meet me, if thou darest?
The place the Paper-mills, the hour tomorrow at one.
Since you will go, go; but hear me, if you go, look at me well; as little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuff you both out of the fields; if I do not, say, Cuff is no man of his hands.
Alas poor shrimp, thou art nothing in my hands.
If you go, you shall never say that Cuff came of a sleeveless errand, I'll bind your hands (I warrant you) for striking.
Say and hold.
Remember the Paper-mills.
And you be so choleric, I'll even pin you both in, as soon as I come home: can you not decide the quarrel between yourselves without a field? I had thought you had been a little more mild, Ruff. You were a horrible Puritan the other day, a very precise Ruff.
Hang him, base Rascal: would he not make any man mad, to see such a— I durst not scarce peep out before Collar came to Town, now to swagger thus.
Come, you shall be friends, Band.
Friends with him? such a base Rascal? he is a very threadbare fellow, I scorn, but my man collar should go as well as he every day in the week, and be friends with him.
Thy man collar? thy Master, thou wouldest have said, I am sure he is thy upholder.
Nay, surely he is his Master, at least his Maker: for Bands, make rags; Rags make Paper; Paper makes Pasteboard; and Pasteboard makes Collar; and I think that this is a stiff argument that he is his Master.
Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, I'll cut him in jags, let me but clasp him, and I'll make him for stirring.
But you shall not fight: have you not Friends & Neighbours enough to end this controversy, but you must go into the fields, and there cut the thread of your lives? we'll have none of that, come choose you an Umpire, Band, for it shall be so.
Since you will force me to it, if Ruff be content, I am willing.
Ruff, you shall be content.
If I shall then, I must, let him name him.
If I may choose, I'll have Master Handkerchief.
Nay, stay there, he is a most filthy Snivelling fellow, and he will wipe your Nose of all, if you put the case to him, but what say you to Shirt?
He is a shifting knave, and one, to whom Band, a little before hath been much beholding, they were joined a long time together in friendship.
Why, then go to Master Cap, the headman of the Town.
No, I deny that, he is a very bad justice, you may have him wrought on any side for money.
I'll tell you what, than we will go to my Lord Corpus himself.
He is not in Town.
He is, for I saw Sock, his chief Footman in Town.
here's ado with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeed I would you were both hanged about his neck for me, but I see, this strife will never be ended, till I be Arbitrator myself, you know, I am equally allied to you both: shall I be Moderator between you?
Content.
Well then, Ruff shall be most accounted of amongst the Clergy, for he is the grave Fellow (although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for him, he hath such a deal of setting, and they love standing very well.) As for you, Band, you shall be most made of amongst the young Gallants, although sometimes they shall use Ruff, for a fashion, but not otherwise; however, you need not regard the giddy headed multitude, let them do as they list, sometimes respecting one, sometimes the other: but when you come to the Counsellor, and men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknowledging Master Worths to be equal, they shall prefer neither, but use the kindness of you both, wearing both a Band and a Ruff; how say you, are you both content?
We are.
Then go before me to the next town, and I'll follow after with a Band of your friendship drawn, which I hope, these Gentlemen will seal with their hands.
Claw me, and I'll claw thee, the proverb goes, Let it be true in that our Muse here shoes, Cuff graceth hand, Cuffs debtors hands remain, Let hands clap me, and I'll Cuff them again.