NAy Rapier, come forth, come forth I say, I'll give thee a crown, though it be but a cracked one: what wilt not? art so hard to be drawn forth Rapier?
'Sfoot thou shalt know that Rapier dares enter: nay Backsword.
Whos's this behind me?
'tis Dagger sir; what will you never leave your quarreling?
Well Sword, Dagger hath defended you a good many times; but 'tis no matter, another time shall serve: shall I get you out Sword alone, that I may have you Single-sword.
Yes if you'll be single Rapier too.
Nay Sword, put the Case of Rapiers aside, that there were two of them, I hope you were able to buckle with them.
I'll tell you what, if I go into the Field with him, hang Sword up if I do not cut Rapiers points, and lash him when I have done: nay, you shall find Sword mettle to the very back: 'sfoot, my teeth be an edge at him.
If you offer but to thrust towards him Rapier, I'll strike you down.
Hang him, I defy him base Spaniard.
Defy me? sirrah Sword, Rapier spits i'thy face: darest meet me i'the fields, cravenly Capon?
Capon?
I Capon, so I say sir.
Why any man may see that thou art well carved Sword; and yet me thinks that Rapier should not speak of that, for it's an hundred to one if he be not gilded too.
Well Rapier, if thou goest into the fields with me, I'll make a Capon of you before I have done with you, you shall near come home uncut I'll warrant you.
Nay, you shall find Sword a notable Cutter.
He a Cutter? alas he near went into the fields yet, but he was sound hacked before he came out
Near talk you of hacking, for it's a hundred to one if you have not the Foyle-Rapier.
'Sfoot if you be so Short-Sword, Rapier near fears you: come a long.
Nay near go, for if you do, I'll send one after you, which shall scour you both. The Cutler can do it. I have seen him handle you both bravely.
The Cutler, Alas we are the best Friends he has, and if it were not for us, the Cutler might soon shut up his shop.
Alas Sword, you need not talk of his shutting up of Shop, and if it had not been for him, you had broken by this time Sword, Nay, near talk: For you know he can hold your nose to the Grindstone, when he list.
And as for you Rapier, you know he brought you up first, and if you had stayed with him still, it might have been better for you.
Better for me? Alas he knew not how to use me.
He used you too well indeed: for when you were with him he furnished you with Siler and every thing, but now you are worn out of all fashion. You are even like a Lapwing, you are no sooner Hatched Rapier, but you run abroad presently from him.
Yet I scorn to run away from him.
But it were more wisdom then to stand: For the Cutler is a man as well Armed as any man I know, and has as good skill in's weapons.
Ha Sword, is the wind in that Door? Faith now I see which way you stand bend Sword, you had rather sleep in a whole skin, then go into the Fields to try yourself.
Sir, Sword has been proved before now, and yet he'll prove himself again with you, if you dare follow him.
Do you hear Sword? If you go, look for Dagger at your backs presently; For I am a justice of Peace, and am sworn to keep and defend the Peace.
Sir, we will fight, and do you take it in Dudgeon Dagger if you please: if you once offer to hinder us, I'll so Pommel you Dagger, that you were never better Pummeld in your life; And howsoever, I hope there's Law against you as well as others, and Rapier can put up a Case against you.
Alas I care not if you were both Plaintiffs against me, you shall find Dagger your Defendant I'll warrant you: I, and if need be, I could put up an Action of Battery against you.
What talk you of Law? Sword scorns to have any other Law then Martial law, and that upon you Rapier.
Away Sword, the Time was indeed when thou wast a notable Swashbuckler, but now thou art grown old Sword.
I, you do well, to excuse his Cowardice.
Why Sir, 'tis well known that Sword has flourished in his days.
Flourished? i'faith Sir I, I have seen Sword hang with nothing but Scarves ere now.
With Scarves? with a Halter, if he had been well served, For he's a notable Thief.
A Thief?
I, a Thief. Did you near hear of Cutting-Dicke, this is the very same man.
Nay Rapier, near hit Sword i'th' teeth with that: for you know you were both Indicted for treason before now, and were in danger to be hanged, and drawn too, and had escaped well if you had not been quartered.
I hope knows how to keep his quarter's
You are a crafty Fox Sword: It were well if you knew how to keep your friendship too, for Gentlemen and Friends should not fall out.
Rapier a Gentleman?
A Gentleman? and has Arms.
But me thinks Sword by the very sounding of his Name should be the better Gentleman, and has the better Arms too: for if the truth were well known, Rapier hath but one arm.
Sword bear Arms? he's a base companion. Alas I have known you bear a Basket Sword.
If you look i'th' book of armory, I'll warrant you, you shall find Sword of more antiquity than you Rapier: He derives his Pedigree from Morglay, Bevis of South-hamptons sword; and that from S. George his sword, that killed the Dragon.
I, the dragon in Sussex, the other day: But I'll warrant you Rapiers of as good a blood as he for his heart.
Byth' mass, I think indeed, you are both well sanguind. Your both of one blood, only there's this difference, that sword comes of the elder brother, & you Rapier of the younger.
And oftentimes the younger brother proves the better Soldier.
Nay, Dagger will defend you both for good Soldiers.
Rapier a Soldier? When did you ere know Rapier fight a Battle?
Yes Rapier is a Soldier, and a Man as well Armed at all points as any one.
No, no, its Sword that's the notable Soldier; Why, there's none of all you Captains could do any thing in War without him.
I hope Rapier hath not been at Fencing-school all this while for nothing.
Alas there's none Master of Defence but Dagger: But yet if you speak of Soldiers, there's Bow, Bill, and Gun, worth twenty such as we are.
Indeed they say that Bow has been an old Soldier.
Yet he's not fit for a Soldier, any man may bend him as he list.
And as for Bowstring, I dare undertake to whip him myself.
Then let me alone to tickle Bows owns neck i'faith.
But what say you to Bill? he's a notable sturdy villain.
Bill, I'll pay him sound, if ere I reach him.
It's more than you can do, I'm afraid; For Bill's a Tallfellow on's hands, and will quickly be Wood: and then there's Gun, such another Bouncing-fellow too.
Gun, Alas he's Nobody: any little Boy will make him roar.
I have made him go off o'th' Fields, a good many times myself.
Well, is Gun Nobody? I'm sure he'll give some blows sometimes.
Its ' near but when Powder overcharges him, than indeed he'll be somewhat hot o'th' matter.
I think that Powder is a vile bragger, he doth nothing but crack.
Faith I know not what Soldier he is, but they say, he's an excellent politician.
He a Politician?
Why, he has an excellent wit?
Pish, It's nothing but a flash.
I'm sure I can remember since he was a Parlement-man.
He a Parlement-man: For what Shire?
Nay ber-lady, it was for the whole Country.
I wonder they should choose him: Why he does every thing on the sudden.
Oh he plots shrewdly. If they had not looked too it, He had undermined the whole parlement-house.
I but he's Nobody nowadays, he's blown up long ago.
Well, if either you, or any body else should meet with Powder, yet it's a hundred to one, if he meet not with his match.
Nay, you should let him alone Dagger, and you should see that Swords ' as notable a bragger as Powder. He thinks he shall near be matched too: but he shall, and overmatched too, by Rapier; I warrant him. Come Sword, after your long Parley, Dare you go into the Fields?
Dare I? You shall soon see that: Go, and I'll follow you.
Well said, desperate Dick. Sword, You may be ashamed to offer it. You know you are twohanded- Sword, and Rapier has but one hand (unless I help him) to do any good withal, and yet you'd have him go into the Fields with you. Come, there's neither of you shall go. Do not you know that Duels are put down?
You'll be bound toth' Peace ever hereafter, if you strike but one stroke. Therefore you had best let me decide your controversy for you.
Why, you are a backe-Friend to us both Dagger.
Nay, you know I'm equally allied to you both, and therefore shall prove an impartial judge: How say you, will you be ruled by me?
Nay let him choose, Rapiers at a good point, whether he will or no.
Why are are you so long Sword before you speak?
Are duels put down? Then I am forced to be Friends: Speak then.
Then in brief it shall be thus. Sword, you shall bear Chief force i'th' Camp, and be made General of the Field, to bear sway every where. As for you Rapier, since Duels are put down, you shall live quietly and peaceably here i'th' Court, and go every day in Velvet: You shall be Friends with every one, and be on every one's side, that if occasion serve, and Sword be absent, so that matters are driven to a push, Rapier shall be the only man to perform a Combat: And I myself will back you both, as occasion shall serve.
How say ye, are ye content?
We are.
Then go before to my House, to the Dagger in Cheap: and there we'll conclude all.
A longsword.
Our weapons drawn, and yet no hurt ye find,
Did Dagger then defend unto your mind?
He that defended others not long sense,
At last he dares not stand in's own defence;
But this he hopes, with you it will suffice,
To crave a pardon for a scholars Prize.