FOr as much as man is naturally prone.
To evil from his youth, as scripture doth recite,
It is necessary that he be speedily withdrawn,
from concupiscence of sin, his natural appetite,
And order to bring up youth, Ecclesiasticus doth writ▪
An untamed horse, will be hard saith he,
And a wanton child wilful will be.
give him no liberty in youth, nor his folly excuse,
Bow down his neck, and keep him in good awe,
Lest he be stubborn: no labour refuse,
To train him to wisdom, and teach him God's law▪
For youth is frail and easy to draw
(By grace (to goodness: (by nature tayll:
That nature hath engrafted, is hard to kill
Nevertheless in youth men may be best
Trained to virtue by godly mean
Vice may be so mortified and so suppressed
That it shall not break forth, yet the root will remain:
As in this Interlude by youth, you shall see plain:
From his lust by good counsel, brought to godly conversation
And shortly after to frail nature's inclination
The enemy of mankind, Satan through Hypocrisy
Feigned or chosen holiness of man's blind intent
Forsakyn God's word, that leadeth right way
Is brought to fellowship and ungracious company:
To abominable living, till he be holy bent
And so to desperation, if good counsel were not sent
From God, that in trouble doth no man forsake
That doth call, and trust in him for Christ's sake.
Finally, youth by gods special grace,
Doth earnestly repent his abominable living
By the doctrine of good counsel, and to his solace
God's mercy entereth to him reciting:
God's merciful promises, as they be in writing
He believeth and followeth to his great consolation
All these parts ye shall see briefly played in their fasshion
IN a herber green, a slope where as I lay
The birds sang sweet in the mids of the day
I dreamt fast of mirth and play
In youth is pleasure, in youth is pleasure.
Methought I walked still to and fro
And from her company I could not go
But when I waked it was not so,
In youth is pleasure, in youth is pleasure.
Therefore my heart is surely pight.
Of her alone to have a sight.
Which is my joy and hearts delight,
In youth is pleasure, in youth is pleasure.
What how are they not here?
I am disappointed by the blessed mass,
I had thought to have found them making good cheer
But now they are gone to some secrte place.
Vel seeing they are gone, I do not greatly pass.
Another time I will hold them as much,
seeing they broke promise, and keep not the tweche.
What shall I do now to pass a way the day
Is there any man here that will go to game.
At what so ever ye will play
To make one, I am ready to the same:
youth full of pleasure is my proper name
To be alone is not my appetite.
For of all things in th' world I love merry company
Who knoweth where is ere a minstrel,
By the mass I would fain go dance a fit
My compations are at it I know right well
They do not all this while in a corner sit:
Against another time they have taught my wit
I beshrew their hearts for serving me this.
I will go seek them, whether I it or miss.
Well I met father, well I met,
Did you hear any minstrels play?
As you came hitherward upon your way,
And if you did I pray you wish me theither
For I am going to seek them, & in faith I know not whether
Sir I will ask you a question by your favour
what would you with the minstrel do?
Nothing but have a dance or two,
To pass the time away in pleasure,
If that be the matter, I promise you sure
I am the more sorrier that it should so be,
For there is no such pasting, the time a pointed in the scripture
Nor yet thereunto it doth not agree,
I wish that ye would so use your liberty,
To walk as you are bound to do,
According to the vocation, which god hath called you to,
Why sir, are you angry because I have spoken so
By the mass it is alone for my apety
Show me your name I pray you heartily
And then I will my mind express
My name is called juventus doubtless
Say what you will I will give you the hearing.
For as much as god hath created you of nothing,
Unto his own likeness, by spiritual illumination,
It is unmeet that ye should lead your living
Contrary to his godly determination,
Saint Paul unto the Ephesians giveth good exhortation
Saying, walk circumspectly, redeeming the time
That is to spend it well, & not to wickedness incline
No, no, hardly none of mine,
If I would live so strait, you might count me a fool
Let them keep thousese rules, which are doctors divine
And have be brought up all their days in school.
Moses' in the law exhorteth his people,
As in the book of deuteronomy he doth plainly write,
That they should live obedient and thankful,
For infect these words he doth recite:
All ye this day stand before the lords sight,
Both princes, rulers, elders and parents,
Children wives, young & old, therefore obey his commandments
I am to young to understand his documents,
Wherefore did all they stand before his presence?
To enter with God peace and alliance,
promising that they would him honour, fear & serve
All kind of people were bound in those covenants,
That from his law they should never swerve,
For God useth no partiality.
What? am I bound as well as the clergy,
To learn and follow his precepts and law?
Ye surely, or else God will withdraw
His mercy from you, promised in his covenant,
For except you live under his obedience and awe,
How can you receive the benyfites of his testament?
For he submetteth himself to be a servant,
And his master's commandment will not fulfil nor regard
According as he hath done, is worthy his reward.
It is as true a saying as ever I heard,
Therefore your name I pray now tell,
For by my truth your communication I like wonders well
My name is called good counsel,
Good counsel,
Now in faith I cry you mercy,
I am sorry that I have you thus offended,
But I pray you bear with me patiently,
And my miss behaviour shallbe amended,
I know my time I have rudely spended,
following my own lust, being led by ignorance.
But now I hope of better knowledge through your acquaintance.
I pray God guide you with his gracious assistants
Unto the knowledge of his truth, your ignorance to undo
That you may be one of those numbered christians
Which followeth the lamb whether he doth go,
The lamb Iesus Christ, my meaning is so,
By sure faith & confidence, in his bitter death & passion,
The only price of our health and salvation.
Sir, I thank you for your hearty oration
And now I pray you show me your advisemet
How I may live in this my vocation,
According to Gods will and commandment.
first of all it is most expedient.
That you exercise yourself in continual prayer,
That it might please the Lord omnipotent,
To send unto you his holy spirit and comforter:
Which will lead you every day and hour
Unto the knowledge of his word and verity
Where in you may learn to live most christianly.
O Lord grant me of thy infinite mercy,
The true knowledge of the law and will,
And illumine my heart with spirit continually
That I way be apt thy holy precepts to fulfil:
Strengthen me, that I may persever stil.
Thy commandments to obey.
And then shall I never slip nor fall away,
Full true be these words, which Christ himself did say
He that seeketh shall surely find.
Be hold youth now rejoice we may
For I see knowledge of God, verity stand here behind
He is come now to satisfey your mind
In those things which you will desire,
Therefore together let us approach him near.
A good counsyl, new it doth appear.
That god never rejecteth the humbles petition,
Now the Lord bless you all with his heavenvly benediction,
And with his fiery love your hearts inflame
That of his merciful promises you may have the fruition
The subtlety, of the devil, utterly to defame:
now good christian audience, I will express mi name
The true knowledge of god's verity▪ thus mi name doth
Whom God hath appointed, to give the blind their sight.
All praise be given to that Lord of might,
which hath appointed you hither at this present hour
For I trust you will so instruct youth a right,
That he shall live according to God's pleasure
And I thank Iesus Christ my saviour,
That he is come to my company.
I thank you my friends most hartell
For your gentle salutation.
Sir, I will be so bold by your deliberation
To open my mind unto you now,
trusting that by your good exhortation,
I shall learn those things, which I never knew:
This one thing chief I would learn of you
How I may my life in thes my vocation lead.
According as God hath ordained and decreed,
The prophet David saith that the man is blessed,
Which doth exercise himself in the law of the Lord,
And doth not follow the way of the wicked,
As the first psalm doth plainly accord:
The four score & xiii psalms thereunto doth accord.
Blessed is the man whom thou teachest, o Lord saith he
To learn the law, precepts, word or verity
And Christ in the Gospel saith manifestly.
Blessed is he which heareth the word of god and keepeth it,
That is to believe his word, & live accordingly
Declaring the faith by the fruits of the spirit
Whose fruits are these, as s. Paul to the Gal. doth wright
Loue joy, peace, long suffering and faithfulness
meekness, goodness, temperance and gentleness
Be these words which unto you he doth express
He teacheth that you ought to have a steadfast faith
With out it is impossible doubtless,
To please god, as saint Paul saith:
Where faith is not, godly living decayeth
For whatsoever is not of faith, saith. s. Paul, is sin,
But where a perfit faith is, there is good working
It seemeth to me that this your meaning,
That when I observe gods commandments & the works of charity
They shall prevail unto me nothing,
Except I believe to be saved thereby.
No, no, you are deceived very blindly,
for faith in Christ's merits doth only iustyfy,
And make us righteous in god's sight
Why should I then in Good works delight?
Seing I shall not be saved by them
Becausy they are required of all christian men,
As the necessary fruits of true repentance.
But the reward of the heavenly inheritance
Is given us through faith, for Christ's deservings,
●s. s Paul declareth in the four chapter to the Romayns
therefore we ought not to work as hirelings:
Seing Christ hath purged us once from all our wicked living.
Let us no more wallow therein,
But persever like good branches, bearing fruit in him.
Now I know where about you have been.
My elders never taught me so before.
Though your elders were blind, doubt not you therefore
For saint Peter saith, vain is the conversations,
Which ye receive by your elders traditions,
I will gladly receive your godly admonitions,
But yet I pray you show me the cause,
that they being men of great discretions
Did not instruct me in gods laws,
According to his will and ordinance
Because they themselves were wrapped in ignorance
Being deceived by false preachers.
O Lord deliver me from wicked teachers,
That I be not deceived with their false doctrine.
to God's word you must only incline,
All other doctrine clean set a part.
Surely that I will from the bottom of my heart,
And I think the living God with hath given me the knowledge
To know his doctring from the false & pervarce
I being yet young and full tender of age:
And that he hath made me partaker of the heavenly in heritage
Of his one mercy and not of my deserving
For hell I have deserved by my sinful working.
I know right well my elders and parents.
Have of a long time deceived be,
With blind hypocrisy and superstitious intents,
Trusting in their own works, which is nothing but vanity
Their steps shall not be followed for me,
Therefore I pray you show me a brief conclusion,
How I ought to live in Christian religion,
The first beginning of wisdom, as saith the wise Solomon
Is to fear God with all they heart and power
And then thou must believe all his promise without any exception
And that he will perform them both constant & sure
And then be cause he is thy only saviour
Thou must love him with all thy soul and mind
And thy neighbour as thyself, because he hath so assigned,
To love my neighbour as myself, I can not be to kind
I pray you tell me, what mean you
My meaning is as Chryste saith in the vi chap. Math.
To do to him as you would be done to
I pray God give me grace so for to do
That unto his will I may be obedient.
Here you shall recceive Christ's testament
To comfort your conscience when need shall require
To learn the contents there of, see that you be diligent
The which all Christian men ought to desire
For it is the well, or fountain most clear
Out of the which doth spring sweet consolation
To all those that thirst after eternal salvation.
There in shall you find most wholesome preservation
Both in troubles, percicutions, sickness and adversity
And a sure defence in the time of temptation
Against whom the devil can not prevail with all his army:
And if you persever therein unfeignedly
It will set your heart at such quietness and rest
Which can not never be turned with storms nor tempest
With this thing you must neither flatter nor jest
But steadfastly believe it every day and hour
And let your conversation opinly protest
That of your heart it is the most precious treasure
And then your godly example shall other men procure
To learn and exercise the same also
I pray God strengthen you so for to do
Now for this godly knowledge, which you ha' ●●●rought me to
I beseech the living God reward you again
From your company I will never depart nor go
So long as in this life I do remain:
For in this book I see manifest and plain
That he that followeth his own lusts & imagination
Keepeth the ready path to everlast damnation.
And he that leadete a godly conversation
Shall be borught to such quietness, joy and peace
Which in comparison passeth all worldly gloriation
Which can not endure, but shortly cease
Both the time and hour I may now bless
That I met with you father good council
to bring me to the knowledge of his heavenly Gospel
This your profession I like veri well
So that you intend to live according
I pray God your living do not rebel
But ever agree unto your saying
That when ye shall make accounts or reckoning
Of this talon, which you have received
you may be one of those, with whom the Lord shallbe pleased
For this conversation of youth, the lords nam be prased
Let us now depart for a reason.
To give God the glori it is convenient and reason
if thou will departed, I will not tarry.
And I will never forsake your company
While I live in this world
Oh oh all to late
I trow this gear will come to nought
For I perceive my power doth abate
For all the policy that ever I have wrought,
Many and sundry ways I have sought,
To have the word of god deluded utterly,
Oh for sorrow yet it will not be.
I have done the best that I can,
And my ministers also in every place,
to rote it clean from the heart of man,
And yet for all that it flourisheth a pace:
I am sore in dread to show my face,
My authority and works are so greatly despised
My inventions, and all that ever I have devised
Oh oh, full well I know the cause,
that my estimation doth thus decay,
the old people would believe still in my laws,
But the younger sort lead them a contrary way
they will not believe they plainly say,
In old traditions and made by men,
But they will live as the scripture teacheth them.
Out I cry upon them, they do me open wrong,
to bring up their children thus in knowledge,
For if they will not follow my ways when they are young
it is hard turning them when they come to age:
I must needs find some means this matter to suage,
I mean to turn their hearts from the scripture quite,
that in carnal pleasures they may have more delight.
Well I will go taste to infect this youth
through the enticement of my son hypocrisy,
And work some proper feat to stoup his mouth
that he may lead his life carnally:
I had never more need my matters to apply,
Oh my child hypocrisy, where art thou?
I charge that of my blessing, appear before me now
Oh oh quoth he, keep again the sow,
I come as fast as I can, I warrant you,
Where is he that hath the sow to sell?
I will give him money if I like her well,
weather it be sow or hog, I do not greatly care
For by my occupation I am a bochare,
Oh my child, how dost thou far?
Sancti amen, who have we there?
By the mass I will buy none of thy ware,
thou art a chapman for the devil
What my son, canst thou not tell?
Who is here, and what I am,
I am thine own father Satan.
Be you so sir? I cry you mercy than,
you may say I am homely, & lack learning,
to liken my father's voice unto a sows groaning
But I pray you show me the cause, and why
that you called me hither so hastily,
A Hypocrisy, I am undone utterly
Utterly undone, nay stop there hardly,
For I myself do know the contrary,
By daily experience:
Do not I yet reign a broad,
And as long as I am in the world,
you have some treasure and substance.
I suppose I have been the flower
In setting forth thy laws and power,
Without any delay
By the mass if I had not been,
thou hadst not been worth a flaunders pin,
At this present day.
the time were to long now to declare
How many and great the number are,
Which have deceived be:
And brought clean from God's law,
Unto thy yoke and awe,
Through the enticement of me.
I have been bused▪ since the world began,
to graff thy laws in the heart of man,
Where they ought to be refused:
And I have so mingled gods commandments
with vain zeals, & blind intents
that they be greatly abused.
I set up great idolatry
With a kind of filthy Sodometry,
to give mankind a fall:
And I brought up such superstition
Under the name of holiness and religion,
that deceived all most all.
As holy Cardinals▪ holy Popes,
Holy vestiments, holy copes
Holy armytes and Friars
Holy priests. holy bishops
Holy monks, holy abbots
yea, and all abstinate liars.
Holy pardons, holy beads,
Holy saints, holy images,
With holy, holy blood,
Holy stocks, holy stones:
Holy cloughtes, hole bones:
yea, and holy holy wood.
Holy skins, holy bulls:
Holy rochetts, and cowls
Holy crutches and staves
Holy hoods, holy caps
Holy mitres, holy hats
a good holy, holy knaves.
Holy days, holy fastings:
Holy twitching, holy tastings,
Holy visions and sights:
Holy wax, holy lead:
Holy water, holy bread:
To drive a way spirits.
Holy fire, holy palm:
Holy oil, holy cream:
And holy ashes also:
Holy brooches, holy rings:
Holy kneeling▪ holy sensings:
And a hundred trim trams more.
Holy crosses, holy bells:
Holy relics, holy iovels:
Of mine own invention:
Holy candles, holy tapers:
Holy parchementes, holy papers:
Had not you a holy son?
All these things, which thou hast done
My honour and laws hath maintained,
But now, Oh alas, one thing is begun
By the which mi kingdom is greatly decayed
I shall lose all, I am sore afraid,
Except thy help I know right plain,
I shall never be able to recover it again.
God's word is so greatly sprung up in youth
That he little regardeth my laws or me,
He telleth his parents that is very truth,
That they of long time have deceived be,
He saith, according to Christ's verity,
All his doings he will order and frame,
mortifying the flesh with the lusts of the same.
A sir a, there beginneth the game,
What, is juventus become so tame?
To be a new gospeler.
As fast as I do make, he doth mar,
He that followed so long the steps of good counsel.
that knowledge and he together doth dwell,
For who is so busy in every place, as youth
To read and declare the manifest truth?
But ho Hypocrisy if thou could stop his mouth
Thou shouldest win mi heart for ever,
What would you have me to do in the matter?
Show me therein your advisement.
I would have the go incontinent,
And work some craft, feat or policy,
To set knowledge and him at controversy,
And his company thyself greatly use
That God's word he may clean a buse.
At your request I will not refuse
to do that thing which in me doth lie,
Doubt ye not, but I will excuse,
those things which ye doth plainly deny
And I will handle my matters so craftily
that ere he cometh to man's state:
God's word and his living shallbe clean at the bate
thou shalt have my blessing both early and late,
And be cause thou shalt all mi counsel keep
thou shalt call my name friendship.
By the mass it is a name full meet,
For my proper and amiable person,
Oh, far well far well my son,
Speed thy business, for I must be gone,
I warrant you, let me alone,
I will be with juventus anon,
And that ere he be ware.
And I wis if he walk not straight.
I will use such a sleight,
That shall trap him in a snare.
How shall I bring this gear to pass?
I can tell now by the mass,
Without any more advisement:
I will infect him with wicked company,
Whose conversation shallbe so fleshly,
yea, able to over come an innocent,
This wicked fellowship,
Shall him company keep,
For a while:
And then I will bring in,
Abominable living,
Him to beguile.
With words fair I will him tice,
Telling him of a gyrlenyse,
Which shall him somewhat move:
Abominable living, though she be,
yet he shall no other wayesse.
But she is for to love.
She shall him procure▪
To live in pleasure,
After his own phantesy▪
And my matter to frame,
I will call her name,
Unknowen honesty.
This will I convey,
My matter I say,
Some what handsomely,
That through wicked fellowship:
And false pretend frendshep,
youth shall live carnally.
Trudge hypocrisy trudge,
Thou art a good drudge,
To serve the devil:
If thou shouldest lie and lurk,
And not intend thy work,
Thy master should do full evil.
What master youth.
Well I met by my troth
and whether a way?
you are the last man,
Which I called on,
I swore by this day.
Me thought by your face
Ere you came in place,
It should be you:
Therefore I did a bide▪
For your coming, this is true.
For your gentleness, syr. most heartily I thank you
But yet you must hold me some what excused,
For to my simple knowledge I never knew
That you and I together were acquainted,
But nevertheless, if you do it renew,
Old acquaintance will some be remembered
Ah now I see well youth is feathered
And his crumbs he hath well gathered,
Since I spoke with him last
A poor man's tale can not now be herd
As in times past:
I cry you mercy, I was some what bold
Thinking that your mastership would,
Not have been so strange:
But now I perceive that promotion,
Causeth both man, manners and fashion
Greatly for to change▪
you are to blame this me to calenge
For I think I am not he which you take me for
yes, I have known you ever since you were boar
your age is yet under a score,
Which I can well remember:
I wiss, I wiss you and I.
Many a time have been full merry
When you were young and tender.
Then I pray let us reason no longer
But first show your nomination.
Of my name to make declaration
Without any dissimulation,
I am called frendshyip:
Although I be simple and rude of fashion
yet by lineage and generation,
I am neigh kin to your mastership.
What friendship▪
I am glad to see that you be merry,
By mi troth I had almost you forgot,
By long absence brought out of memory,
By the mass I love you so heartily,
That there is none so welcome to my company
I pray you tell me, whether are you going?
My intention is to go hear apreaching
A preaching quoth he, ha good little one
By chryst she will make you cry out of the winning
If you follow her instruction so early in the morning,
Full great I do abhor this your wicked saying,
For no doubt they increase much sin and vice,
Therefore I pray you show not your meaning,
For I delight not in such foolish fantesies
Surely, than you are the more unwise.
you may have a spyrt amongst them now and then
Why should not you as well as other men?
As for all those filth doings. I utterly detest them,
I will hear no more of your wicked communication.
if I may be so bold by your deliberation
What will you do at a preaching?
Learn some wholesome and godly teaching,
Of the true minister of Christ's gospel.
Tush, what he will say I know right well,
He will say that God is a good man,
He can make him no better, and say the best he can
I know that, but what then?
The more that God's word is preached and taught
The greater the occasion is to all christian men,
To forsake their 〈◊〉 livings, both wicked, vile & nought
And to repent their former evils, which they have wrought
Trusting by Christ'S death to be redeemed.
And he that this doth, shall never be deceived.
well said master doctor, well said.
By the mass we must have you, in to the pulpit,
I pray you be remembered, and cover your head
For in deed you have need to keep in your wit,
A Sirrah, who would have thought it
That youth had been such a well learned man:
Let me see your portous gentle sir Ihon.
No, it is not a boat for to look on,
you ought not to jest with God's testament.
What man, I pray you be content,
For I do nothing else but sai mi fantasy
But yet if you could do after mi advisement
In that matter you should not be so busy
Was not your father as well learned as ye?
And if he had said then as you have now done
I wiss, he had been like to make a burn
It were much better for me, then to return
From my faith in Christ, & the profession of his word.
whether is better, a halter or a cord
I can not tell, I swear by God's mother
But I thing you will have the one or the other
Will you lose all your friends Good will
To continue in that opinion still,
Was there not as well learned men before as now?
yea, and better to I may say to you
And they thought the younger sort of the people
By the elders to take an example
And if I did not love you as nature doth me bind
you should not know so much of my mind
Whether were I better to be ignorant and blind
And to be damned in hell for infidelity?
Or to learn godly knowledge, wherein I shall find
The right path way to eternal felicity?
Can you deny, but it is your duty
Unto your elders to be obedient
I grant I am bound to obey my parents
In all things honest and lawful.
Lawful quod ha, a fool fool
Will thou set men to school
when they be old
I may say to you secretly
The world was never meri
Since children where so bold.
Now every boy will be a teacher
The father a fool, and the child a preacher
This is preaty gear
The fool presumptuous of youth
will turn shortly to great ruth
I fear. I fear. I fear.
The sermon will be done ere I can come there,
I care not greatly whether I go or no,
And yet for my promise, by God I swear,
There is no remedy but I must needs go:
Of my companions there will be more
And I promised them by gods grace
To meet them there as the sermon was.
For onse breaking promise do not you pass,
Make some excuse the matter to cease
what have they to do?
And you and I were I wot wot where
we would be as merry as there
yea, and merrier to
I would gladly in your compane go
But if my companions should chance to see
They would report full evil by me:
And peradventure if I would it use.
My company they would clean refuse.
what, are those fellows so curious
That yourself you can not excuse?
I will teach you the matter to convey
Do what your own lust, and say as they say
And if you be reproved with your own affinity
Bid them pluck the beam out of there own eye
The old popish priests mock and despise
And the ignorant people that believe their lies
Call them papists, hypocrites, & joining of the plough.
Far out the matter, and then good enough.
Let your book at your girdle be tied,
Or else in your bosom that he may be spied,
And then it will be said both with youth and age
yonder fellow hath an excellent knowledge.
tush tush,
I could so bear the bush,
that all should be flusshe.
that ever I did.
Now by my troth you are merrily disposed
Let us go thither as you think best.
How say you, shall we go to breakfast
will you go to the pie feast.
Or by the mass if thou wilt be my gest
It shall cost the nothing,
I have a furny card in a place,
that will bare aturne besides the ace,
She puruyes now a pace,
For mi coming
And if thou wilt fybbere as well as I.
we shall have merry company,
And I warrant 〈◊〉 we have not a pie
we shall have a pudding.
By the mass that meat I love above all thing:
you may draw me a bout the town with a puddynge:
Then you shall see cunning.
A poor shift for a living.
Amongst poor men used is,
The kind heart of hers,
Hyth eased my purse,
Many a time ere this
I marvel greatly where friendship is,
He promised to meet me here ear this time
I beshrew his heart that this promise doth miss,
And then be ye sure it shall not be mine
yes fellowship that it shallbe thine
For I have tarried here this our or twain,
And this honest gentleman in mi company hath been
To abide your coming. this thing is plain
By the mass if you chide. I will be gone again
For in faith friendship, I may say to the
I love not to be there, where chyders be
No God it knoweth, you are as full of honesty
As a marry bone is full of honey
But sirrah, I pray you bid this gentleman welcome
For he is desirous in your company to come,
I tell you he is a man of the right making
And one that hath excellent learning
At his girdle he hath such a book
That the popish priests dare not in him look
This is a fellow for the nonce.
I love him the better by gods precious bones,
you are heartily welcome as I may say
I shall desire you of better acquaintance
That of your company be bold I may
you may be sure if in me it lie,
To do you pleasure, you should it find
For by the mass I love you, both with heart and mind.
To say the same to you, your gentleness doth me bind
And I thank you heartily for your kindness
Will you see this gentleman fines
your gentleness and your kindness,
I thank him and I thank you,
And I think, if the truth weary sought,
The one bad, and the other nought,
Never a good I make God a vow.
But yet fellowship tell me one thing.
Did you see little Bess this morning?
We should have our breakfast, yester night she said,
But she hath fore gotten it now, I am a afraid.
Her promise shallbe performed and paid,
For I spoke with her since the time I rose
And then she told me how the matter goeth:
We must be with her between eight and nine,
And then her master & mistress will be at the preaching
I purposed myself there to have been,
But this man provoked me to the contrary
And told me that we should have merry company.
Merry quod ha, we can not choose but be merry,
For there is such a girl, where as we go,
Which will make us be merry, whether we will or no
The ground is the better on the which she doth go
For she will make better cheer with a little which she can get
Then many one cane with a great banquet of meat,
To be in her company my heart is set,
Therefore I pray you let us be gone
She will come herself anon
For I told her before where we would stand.
And then she said she would beck us with her hand
Now by the mass I perceive that she is a gallaunde
What will she take pains to come for us hither?
yea I warrant you, therefore you must be familiar with her
When she cometh in place,
you must her embrace,
Somewhat hamsomlie.
lest she thinketh danger
Be cause you are a stranger,
To come in your company.
yea, by God's foot that I will be busy
And I may say to you I can play the knave secretly
Him, come a way quickly
The back door is opened I dare not tarry,
Come fellowship come on a way.
What unknown honesty a word
you shall not go yet by God I swear.
Here is none but your friends, you need not to fray.
Although this strange young gentle man be here,
I trust in me she will think no danger.
For I love well the company of fair women.
Who you, nay ye are such a holy man,
That to touch one ye dare not be bold,
I thing you would not kiss a young woman,
if own would give you twenty pound in gold,
yes by the mass that I would,
I could find in my heart to kiss you in your smock
My back is broad enough to bare a way that mock as mine
For one hath told me many a time,
That you have said iou would use no such vantens company
By dogs precious wounds that was some whoreson villain
I will never eat meat that shall doom good,
Tell I have cut his flesh by gods precious blood,
Tell me I pray you who it was.
And I will trime the knave by the blessed mass
Tush, as for that do not you pass
That which I told you was but for love
She did nothing else but prove,
Whether a little thing would you move
To be angry and fret
What and if one had said so,
Let such trifling matters go
And be good to men's flesh for all that.
To kiss her since she came I had clean forgot
you are welcome to my company
Sir I thank you most heartily,
By your kinds it doth a peer.
What a hurly burly is here,
Smicke smack and all this gear
you well to tycke take I fere.
if thou had time,
Well wanton well,
I wis I can tell
That such smock smell
will set your nose out of tune.
what man you need not to fume,
seeing he is come in to my company now
He is as well welcome as the best of you
And if it lie in me to do him pleasure.
He shall have it, you may be sure.
Then old acquaintance is clean out of favour.
Lo friendship, this geargoth with aflleight
He hath driven us twain out of conceit
Out of conceit, quoth ha' no no,
I dare welsay that she thinketh not so,
How say you unknown honesty?
Do not you love fellowship and me▪
ye by the mass I love you all three,
But yet in deed if I should say the troth
Amongst all other welcome master youth
Full greatly I do delight to kiss your pleasant mouth
I am not able your kinds to recompense,
I long to talk with you secretly, therefore let us go hence.
I agree to that, for I would not for twenty pence,
That it were known where I have been
what and it were known it where no daily sin
As for my part I do not greatly care,
So that they find not your proper butteckes bore
Now much fie upon you how badi you are,
I worse friendship it mouth have been spoken at twice
what think you for your saying the people will surmise
Who dare be so bold us to despise?
And if I may hear a knave speak one word,
I will run thorough his cheeks with my sword▪
This is an earnest fellow of god's word
See I pray you, how he is disposed to fight
Why, should I not and if my cause be right
What, and if a knave do me beguile?
Shall I stand crouching like an owl,
No, no, than you might count me a very cow,
I know what belongeth to god's law as well as you▪
your wit therein greatly I do allow,
For and if I were a man as you are,
I would not stick to give a blow,
To teach other knaves to beware,
I beshrew you twice and if you do spare,
But lay load on the flesh whatsoever befall
you have strength enough to do it with all,
Let us departed, and if that we shall,
Come on masters, we twain will go before.
Nay nay my friend stop there
it is not you that shall have her away,
She Shall go with me, and if she go to day.
She shall go with none of you I dare welsaye,
She will go with me before you both,
To forsake any of your company I would be very loath
Therefore I will follow you all three,
Now I beshrew his heart, that to that will not agree,
But yet because the time shall not seem very long,
Or eat we depart, let us have a merry song
Why should not youth fulfil his own mind,
As the course of nature doth him bind,
Is not every thing ordained to do his kind?
Report me to you, report me to you.
Do not the flowers spring fresh and gay,
Pleasant and sweet in the month Maye?
And when their time cometh they said away▪
Report me to you, report me to you.
Be not the trees in wyntter bare,
Like unto their kind, such they are,
And when they spring, their fruits declare
Report me to you, report me to you.
What should youth do, with the fruits of age
But live in pleasure in this passage,
For when age cometh hes lusts will suage
Report me to you, report me to you.
Why should not youth fulfil his own mind
As the course of nature doth him bind. etc.
O merciful Lord, who can cease to lament,
Or keep his heart from continual mourning,
To see how youth is fallen from thy word
And wholly inclined to abominable living,
He liveth nothing according to his profession
But alas his life is, to thy word abusion,
Except thy great mercy to his utter confusion.
O where is the godly conversation
Which should be among the professor of thy word
O where may a man find now one faithful
That is not infected with dissension or descorde?
Or amongst whom are all vices abhorred utterly
O where is the brotherly love between man & man
we may lament the time our vice be 'gan
O where is the peace & meekness, long suffering & temperance
which are the fruits of Gods holy spirit,
with whom is the flesh brought under obedience,
Or who readeth the scripture to the intent to follow it
who useth not now covetousness and deceit,
Who giveth unto the poor that which is dew?
I think in this world, few that live now.
O where is the godly example that parents should give.
Unto their young family, by godly & virtuous living?
Alas how wicked do they themselves live,
Without any fear of God, or his righteous threatening,
They have no respect unto the dreadful reckoning,
Which shallbe required of us, when the Lord shall come,
As a right full judge at the day of doom,
O what a joyful sight was it for to see,
When youth began God's word to embrace.
Then he promised godly knowledge and me,
That from our instruction he would never turn his face
But now he walketh, alas: in the ungodlyes chase,
Heaping sin up on sin, vice upon vice,
He that liveth most ungodly, is counted most wise,
Who is here playing at the dice?
I herd one speak of sins and cyce,
His words did me entice.
Hither to come:
A youth youth, whether dost thou run?
Greatly I do be wail thy misrable estate,
The tyrrible plagues, which in God's law are written,
Hang over thy head both early and late:
O fleshly capernite, stubborn and obstinate,
Thou hadst liefer forsake Christ thy saviour and king
Then thy fleshly swinish lusts, & abbomynable living.
what old whoreson, art thou a chiding?
I will play a spyrt, why should I not?
I set a mite by thy cheking
what hast thou to do, and if I lose my cote:
I will trill the bones while I have one groat,
And when there is no more ink in the pen,
I will make a shyfe as well as other men.
Then I perceive you have for gotten clean,
The promise that you made unto knowledge and me
you said such fleshly fruits should not be seen,
But to God's word your life should agree
Full true be the words of the prophet Osey
No verity nor knowledge of God is now in the land.
But abominable vices hath gotten the upper hand.
your mind therein I do well understand.
you go about my living to despise,
But you will not see the beams in your own eyes,
The devil hath you dysceived which is the auctor of lies
And trap you in his snar of wicked hypocrye,
Therefore all that ever you do devise
Is to maintain your fleshly liberty
I marvel why you do this report me,
Wherein do I my life abuse?
your whole conversation I may well accuse,
As in my conscience just occasion I find.
Therefore be not offended, although I exprese my mind
By the mass if thou tell not truth, I will not be behind
To touch you as well again.
For this thing most chiefly I do complaye:
Have ye not professed the knowledge of Christ'S gospel
And yet I think no more ungodliness doth reign,
In any wicked Heathen, Turk or infidel:
who can devise that sin or evil,
That you practise not from day to day
yea and count it nothing but a jest or a play,
Alas, what wantonness remaineth in your flesh?
How desirous are you, to accomplish your own will
what pleasure & delight have you in wickedness?
How diligent are you your lusts to fulfil?
S. Paul saith that you ought your fleshly lusts to kill
But unto his teaching, your life ye will not frame
Therefore in vain you bear a christians name.
Reed the .v. to the Galathians, & there you shall see
That the flesh rebelleth against the spirit
And that your own flesh is our most veter enemy,
If in your soul's health you do delight:
The time were to long now to recite,
What whoredom, uncleanness and filth communication
Is dispersed with youth, in every congregation
To speak of pride, envy, and abominable oaths
They are the common practices of youth,
To advance your flesh, you cut & iagge your clothes,
And yet ye are a great gospeler in the mouth:
What shall I say, for this plaspheming the truth
I will show you what saint, Paul doth declare
In his epistle to the Hebrues, and the ten Chapter.
For him saith he, which doth willingly sin or consent
After he hath received the knowledge of the verity
Remaineth no more sacrifice, but a fearful looking for judgement
And a trrible fire, which shall consume the adversary
And Christ saith that this blasphemy,
Shall never be pardoned nor forgiven,
In this world, nor in the world to come
Alas alas, what I have wrought and done?
Herein this place I will fall down desperate,
To ask for mercy, now I know it is to late
Alas alas, that ever, I was begat,
I would to God I had never been borne.
All faithful men that behold this wretched state
May very justly laugh me to scorn:
They may say my time I have evil spent and worn,
Thus in my first age, to work my own destruction,
In the eternal pains is my part and portion.
Why youth, art thou fallen into desperation?
What man pluck up thine heart, and rise,
Although thou see nothing now, but thy condemnation
yet it may please God again to open thy eyes:
Ah wretched creature, what dost thou surmise?
thinkest not that God's mercy doth exceed thy sin?
Remember his merciful promises & comfort thy self in high
O sir, this state is so miserable the which I lie in,
That my comfort and hope from me is separated,
I would to god I had never been.
woe worth the time that ever I was created.
A fair vessel unfaithful and faint hearted,
Dost thou think that god is so merciless,
That when the sinner doth repent, and is converted,
That he will not fulfil his merciful promises:
Alas sir, I am in such heaviness,
That his promises I can not remember
In thy wickedness continue no longer,
But trust in the Lord without any fear,
And his mersifull promises shall shortly appear
I would believe if I might them hear,
With all my heart, power and mind,
The living God hath him hither assigned:
Lo, where he cometh even here by,
Therefore mark his sayings diligently.
The Lord by his prophet Ezechiel sayeth in this wise plainly
As in the .xxxiii. chapter it doth appear.
Be converted O ye children, and turn unto me,
And I shall remedy the cause of your departure,
And also he saith in the xviii chapter,
I do not delight in a sinners death,
But that he should convert & live, thus the Lord saith,
Then must I give neither credit nor faith,
Unto saint Paul's saying, which this man did allege
yes, you must credit them, according unto knowledge,
For saint Paul speaketh of those which resist the truth by violence
And so end their lives without repentance,
thus saint Austin doth them define,
if unto the lords word you do your ears incline,
And observe those things, which he hath commanded
this sinful state, in the which you have lain.
shallbe forgotten, and never more remembered,
And Christ himself in the gospel hath promised,
that he which in him unfeignedly doth believe,
Although he were dead, yet shall he live.
these comfortable sayings doth me greatly move
to arise from this wretched place.
For me his mercy sake thou shalt obtain his grace
And not for thine own deserts▪ this must thou know
For my sake alone he shall receive solace,
For my sake alone, he will thee mercy show,
therefore to him as it is most due,
give most hearty thanks, with heart unfeigned
Whose name for ever more be praised.
The prodigal son as in Luke we read
which in vicious living his good doth waste,
As soon as his living he had remembered,
To confess his wretchedness he was not aghast,
wherefore his father, lovingly him embraced,
And as right joyful, the text saith plain
Because his son was returnen again.
O sinful flesh, thy pleasures are but vain,
Now I find it true, as the scripture doth say,
Brode & pleasant is the path, which leadeth unto pain,
But unto eternal life, full narrow is the way,
He that is not led by God's spirit, surely goeth astrayer
And all that ever he doth, shall be clean abhorred
Although he brag & boast never so much of God's word,
O subtle Satan, full deceitful is thy snare,
Who is able thy falsehood to disclose?
What is the man that thou dost favour or spare
And dost not tempt him eternal joys to lose?
Not on the world, surele I suppose,
Therfoore happy is the man, which doth truli wait,
Always to refuse thy decetful and crafty bait
When I had thought to live most christanly
And followed the steps of knowledge & good council,
Ere I was ware thou hadst deceived me
And brought me into the path▪ which leadeth unto hell:
And of an earnest professor of Christ's gospel
Thou madest me an hypocrite, blind and pervert,
And from virtue unto vice, thou hadst clean turned mi heart
first by hypocrisy thou diddest me move,
The mortification of the flesh, clean to forsake,
And wanton desire to embrace and love,
Alas to think of it, my heart doth quake,
Under the title of friendship to me he spoke,
And so to wicked fellowship did me bring,
Which broughe me clean to abominable living
Thus I say. Satan did me deceive,
And wrapped me in sin many afould,
The steps of good counsel, I did forsake and laeve,
And forgot the words, which before to me he told:
The fruits of a true Christian, in me waxed cold
I followed mine one lusts, the flesh I did not tame,
And had them in derision, which would not do the same.
yet it hath pleased God of his endless mercy
To give me respite my life to a mend.
From the bottom of my heart, I repent my iniquity.
I will walk in his laws unto my lives end:
From his holy ordinance I will never dicende.
But my whole delight shallbe to live therein,
Utterly abhorring all filthiness and sin.
All Christian people, which be here present,
May learn by me hypocrisy to know
With the which the devil, as with a poison most pestilent
Daily seeketh all men to over throw:
Credit not all things unto the out ward show,
But try them with God's word, that squire a rule most just
Which never deceived them that in him put their trust
Let not flattering friendship, nor yet wicked company
Parswade you in no wise, God's word to a buse
But see that you stand steadfastly unto the verity
And according to the rule thereof, your doings frame & use
Neither kindred nor fellowship shall you excuse
When you shall appear before the judgement seat
But your own secret conscience shall then give an audite
All you that be young, whom I do now represent,
Set your delight both day & night on Christ's testament
if pleasure you tickele, be not fikle, & suddenly slide,
But in Gods fear everywhere, see that you abide
In your tender age, seek for knowledge, & after wisdom run
in iour old age, teach your famili, to do, as you have dumb
your bodies subdue, unto virtue, delight not in vaniti
Say not I am young, I shall live long lest iour days shortened be
Do not incline, to spend the time▪ in wanton joys & nice
For idleness doth increase much wickedness and vice,
Do not delay the time, and say my end is not near
For with short warning, the lords coming shall suddenly apere
God give us grace, his word to embrace, & to live thereafter
That be the same, his holy name, may be prased ever.
Now let us make our supplications together
For the prosperous estate of our noble & virtuous queen,
That in her godly procedings she may still persever,
Which seeketh the glory of God above all other thing.
O Lord endue her heart with true understanding.
And give her a prosperous life, long over us to rain,
To govern & rule her people as a worthy servant.
Also, let us for all the nobility of this realm,
And namely for those, whom her grace authorized,
To maintain the public wealth over us & them,
That they may see his gracious acts published,
And they, being truly admonished,
By the complaint of them, which are wrongfulli oppressed
May less a reformation, and see it redressed.
Then shall this land enjoy great quietness & rest
And give unto God most hearty thanks therefore,
To whom be honour, praise and glory for evermore