IT is now a complete year,
Since in the borrowed shape I bear
Of old Fitz-Alwine, I was raised from rest.
On that days Triumph fully was expressed
The honour due by grave Antiquity,
Then given to London's drapery,
By Royal RICHARD, who in me,
First styled the name of Mayoralty:
Which I held four and twenty year,
As in good Records may appear.
In all this time my labouring soul,
Not quitted from the high control
Of divine Poesy; hath waited still
Upon her great commanding will;
By information, that another
Of mine own band, a Draper Brother,
Was to succeed in dignity;
Of London's famous Mayoralty,
This was a motive of such might,
That made me hover day and night,
To honour this solemnity,
With whatsoe'er remains in me.
Two Drapers to succeed each other?
I being their first advanced Brother▪
To both must my affection prove
Of cordial and sincerest love.
Then Sir, as I am taught to know ye,
So do these goodly Ensigns show ye
Draper and Stapler; so was I,
And both but one Society
In those grave times when woollen Cloth
Served best for King and subject both.
The Draper and the Stapler than
I tell ye were right worthy men,
And did more needy souls maintain,
Then I fear will be seen again.
But times must have their revolution,
And each their several execution.
But pass we them; And come to say
What Honours now do crown this day▪
The Golden Fleece being the crest
Of ancient Drapery; we digest
The story of the Golden Fleece,
Fetched by the Argonauts of Greece
From Cholcos in resemblance here,
Where Iason and those Greekes appear,
Which in that travail did partake,
Both for his love and honour's sake.
Medea's powerful charms prevailed,
And all those dreadful Monsters quailed,
That kept the Fleece in their protection,
Which then was won by her direction.
By way of Moral application,
Your Honour may make some relation
Unto yourself out of this story,
You are our Iason, London's glory,
Now going to fetch that fleece of Fame,
That ever must renown your name.
An Oath of Faith and Fealty
Unto his sacred Majesty,
That makes you his Great Deputy
Or Image of Authority.
No Monsters dare confront your way.
Imagine then, as well you may,
That all this fair and goodly Fleet,
Do in mere love (on purpose) meet,
Like to those Argonauts of Greece,
That then fetched home their Golden Fleece,
To tend the Argo where you ride,
Behind, before, on every side
With all applauding melody,
That best this day may dignify.
Neptune and gracious Thamesis,
To honour such a day as this,
Have sent out of their watery store
Their own Sea Chariot, which before
They near would part with. But as now,
Their sacred Deities allow
Our use thereof, which we employ,
To make more full this day of joy.
Eight Royal Virtues take the pain
Eight honoured Ensigns to sustain
Of eight Lord Majors, as you may see
Described by their Heraldry,
Drapers, and Staplers Brethren kind,
Leaving rare monuments behind
Of their affection to this City,
For the poors good whom they did pity.
Poultney, Cromer, Eyre, Wotton,
Sidney, Bullen, Capell, Champion.
Time checks me, that I may not tell
Their several deeds. Nor fits it well
In serious business to delay:
On then a God's name, le's away.
HOnourable Lord, Time hath nothing else to tell you, but the brief meaning of these several inventions. The water-devices have already sufficiently spoken themselves. This Ship, bearing your own name, and called the JOEL, trafficking England's Drapery with all other Countries, as by the goodly Ram or golden Fleece of England appeareth, where two Housewifely Virgins sit carding and spinning, is (after many happy voyages) returned to honour the day of her worthy Owner, being safely brought home by Neptune and Thamesis, who (mounted on a Lion and Sea-horse) vouchsafe their attendance on your triumph. And in stead of that Sea Chariot, which waited on the Argo in the morning, they bring another, graced with the same Royal Virtues, and Ensigns of Arms belonging to those honourable Drapers. On the top is placed a Sphere or Globe, intimating the world, created for the use of man, and such expense of time as is allotted him. It is supported by the four Elements, Water, Earth, Air, and Fire, as their figures and Emblems do aptly declare. It runneth on seven wheels, describing the seven ages of man; his Infancy, Childhood, Adolescency, or Stripling estate, Youth-hood, Manhood, Age, and Ages extremity, or decrepit condition: all of them subjected to the power of the seven Planets, as on each wheel they bear their Characters. It is drawn by two Lions and two Horses of the Sea, figuring what swift motion hasteneth on the minutes, hours, months and years of our frailty: and the whole frame or body guided by Time, as Coachman to the life of man. That other goodly Monument or Pageant, with the glorious Sun in continual motion over it, appertaining to the Draper's Armoury; presents ye London in the supreme place of eminence, and the twelve Companies (her twelve Daughters) all seated about her in their due degrees, only Drapery is nearest to her, as being the first and chiefest honoured Society before all other. As supports to London's flourishing happiness, and continuance of the same in true tranquillity: four goodly Mounts (as strong and defensive bulwarks) are raised about her, bearing Emblems of those four especial qualities, which make any Commonwealth truly happy. Learned Religion, Military Discipline, Navigation, and Homebred Husbandry.
For thus, my Lord, I truly understand,
No greater Cross can hap to any Land,
Then lack of Scholars, Soldiers, Sailors, Husbandmen,
Long may we have them all, Time says Amen.
NOw honoured Lord, since day is done,
And you to your own house are come,
With all delight that we can make ye:
Methinks should not yet forsake ye,
But that strict Time will have it so,
And parts us, whether we will or no,
All then my Lord that I shall say,
Is, that your Honour would well weigh
Your worthie-minded brethren's love,
Who have in firm affection strove;
How best they might renown this day:
In honouring you. And I dare say,
That never men did more desire
To stretch their love and bounty higher
Than they have done, and could afford
For such a worthy minded Lord,
Which they by me humbly commend
Still at your service: So I end.
SInce Graves may not their Dead contain,
Nor in their peaceful sleeps remain,
But Triumphs and great Shows must use them,
And we unable to refuse them:
It joys me that Earl Robert Hood,
Fetched from the Forest of merry Shirwood,
With these my Yeomen tight and tall,
Brave Huntsmen and good Archers all:
Must in this jovial day partake,
Prepared for your Honour's sake.
No sooner was I raised from rest,
And of my former state possessed
As while I lived: But being alone,
And of my Yeomen seeing not one:
I with my Bugle gave a call,
Made all the Woods to ring withal.
Immediately came little Iohn,
And Scathlock followed him anon,
With Much the honest Miller's Son.
And ere ought else could be done,
The frolic Friar came tripping in,
His heart upon a merry pin.
Master (quoth he) in yonder brake,
A Deer is hid for Marian's sake,
Bid Scathlock, Iohn, or honest Brand,
That hath the happy hitting hand,
Shoot right and have him. And see my Lord
The deed performed with the word.
For Robin and his Bowmen bold,
Religiously did ever hold,
Not emptie-handed to be seen,
Were't but at feasting on a Greene.
Much more then, when so high a day
Calls our attendance: All we may,
Is all too little, 'tis your grace,
To wink at weakness in this case.
So fearing to be overlong,
End all with our old hunting Song.
But good Master ere they sing,
Favour me to move one thing.
A boon, a boon, for Friar Tuck,
Who begs it with a lowly duck.
What is it Friar?
Since we are thus raised from our rest,
In honour of this famous feast,
And for his sake that may command,
(Next to my Master) heart and hand,
Of me and all these good Yeomen:
Ere we return to ground again,
Seeing jolly Christmas draws so near,
When as our service may appear,
Of much more merit then as now,
Which doth no larger scope allow,
Then that which is already done;
Your love, my Lord, so much hath won
Upon the Friar and his compeers,
As we could wish to live whole years,
To yield you pleasure and delight,
Be it by day, or be it by night.
For we have choice delights in store,
Command them, and I crave no more.
You hear (my Lord) the friars motion,
Out of mere love, and pure devotion.
You see beside that all my men,
(For any season, where or when,)
Second his suit. May it please you then,
Not to dislike his kind request,
Earl Robin frankly doth protest,
We will all strive to do our best,
When any occasion shall require,
The offer of our merry Friar,
For such a worthy minded Lord,
Robin Hood seals it with his word.
Thanks my dear Domine,
And to you noble Homine,
For to this Indenter,
Friar Tuck subscribes Libenter.
Now lest we offer wrong,
Fall to your Sing Song.
NOw wend we together, my merry men all,
Unto the Forest sidea:
And there to strike a Buck or a Doae,
Let our cunning all be tride-a.
Then go we merrily, merrily on,
To the Green-wood to take up our stand,
Where we will lie in wait for our Game,
With our bend Bows all in our hand.
What life is there like to Robin Hood?
It is so pleasant a thing a:
In merry Shirwood he spends his days,
As pleasantly as a King a.
No man may compare with Robin Hood,
With Robin Hood, Scathlock and Iohn:
Their like was never, nor never will be,
If in case that they were gone.
They will not away from merry Shirwood,
In any place else to dwell:
For there is neither City nor Town,
That likes them half so well.
Our lives are wholly given to hunt,
And haunt the merry Greene-wood:
Where our best service is daily spent,
For our Master Robin Hood.