BY virtue of this powerful wand,
Which in a minute can command
Graves, Vaults, and deeps yield up their dead,
How late or long time buried:
Thou Image of that worthy man,
That London's Knighthood first began,
In Office of the mayoralty,
(A high and graceful dignity,)
Though yet thou sleep'st in shade of death;
By me take power of life and breath.
London's Genius gives thee leave,
An airy substance to receive.
Speech like to Spirits raised from rest,
Triumphs and pleasures to digest
By power of sacred Poesy.
And seeing this days solemnity
Honours thine own Society
Of Fishmongers, a worthy band,
Famed both to City, and the Land,
By thy rare deed of loyalty,
Upon the King's proud enemy:
Sir William Walworth, do what may
Remain in thee, to crown this day▪
With general fullness of content:
For thereto all our hopes are bent.
HE that above two hundred years,
(Free from disturbance cares and fears,)
Hath silent slept, and raised this day,
To do what graceful help I may
Unto that band of worthy men,
That were, and are my Brethren;
And you grave Fathers of this State,
Which I myself did propagate
Twice, as L. Maior: Oh, yet to see,
This ancient famous dignity
Flourish so fairly: And (as then)
Blessed with as wise and worthy men;
Moves tears of joy, and bids me call
God's benison light on you all.
Your Character, Office and place,
Well wot I by that Sword & Mace,
With such a difference, as before
This day, once happened, and no more.
The Genius speaks you in mine ear,
A Mayden-man, a Bachelor.
You being the second, let me say,
This is a blessed marriage day
Of you to that great dignity
Of your dread Sovereign's Deputy,
No doubt, but your chaste thoughts and life,
Will be as chaste to such a Wife.
All happy blessings crown (I pray,)
London's and Lemans wedding day.
Observing that fair Livery,
You are of mine own Company.
How can I then, but joy to see
Such eminence and high degree:
Grace still our grave Society?
And see (my Lord) this Bower relates,
How many famous Magistrates,
From the Fishmonger's ancient name,
Successively to honour came
In London's Mayoralty. These fair Coats.
Their sever all Arms and titles notes.
Turk, Lovekin, Wroth, Pechie, Mordon,
These before me were every one:
Then I. Next, Exton, Ascham, Falconer.
Michael, Parneis, Reinwall, Foster,
Hulin, Hampton, Ostrich, Remington,
Kneisworth, Coppinger. These being gone
Succeeded Amcotes, Curtois, Allot,
And now Iohn Leman, who well I wot,
Welcome as any to this place,
With our kind brethren's love and grace.
aldermans we had many more
That never this high Office bore,
And therefore are not ranked here;
But only such as Lord Maiors were.
WAlworth, here stay: we may do wrong,
And hold this worthy man too long
From those great States, that at this feast
Are every one a welcome Guest.
Those Aldermen, that on the day,
(When the proud Rebel thou didst slay,)
Were Knighted with thee in the field:
Are raised by me their love to yield
With this fair Guard, and tend on thee,
In honouring this Solemnity.
Mount then thy Courser, that we may
(In the remainder of this day,)
Do more than time will now afford,
Set on then, Honourable Lord.
NOw worthy Lord, there is imposed on me,
A brief narration of each several show
Provided for this Triumph, as you see,
In order to describe them as they go.
The Fishing Buss instructs you first to know
The toilsome travel of poor Fishermen,
subjected to all weathers, where and when.
In stormy tempests they omit no pain,
To bless all lands with the Seas bounteous store:
Their labour doth return rich golden gain,
Whereof themselves taste least by Sea or shore,
But (like good souls) contented evermore
With any benefit their toil can bring;
The Fisher well is termed Contents true King.
This Emblem of the Dolphin, is the armory
Belonging to our brethren, and beside
Speaks somewhat of that creatures quality,
By nature Musical, as hath been tried:
Poesy and Music therefore thus do ride
Upon his back, in sweet Arion's shape,
Who, by a Dolphin, thus did death escape:
The King of Moores thus mounted, and his train,
Shows your affection to that Company,
Which league with you in love, and doth contain
The aptness of your correspondency
On either side, to hold inseparably.
His Indian treasure liberally is thrown:
To make his bounteous heart the better known.
This Leman Tree, your Honour may conceit
More, than I speak, because mysteriously
Some hidden secret thereon doth await
Known to yourself. It speaks ingeniously
The Character of your authority:
Figured in that fair Bird, fostering her brood:
Though with the dear expense of her own blood.
Continual cares, and many broken sleeps,
Heart-killing fears, which wait on Eminence
Hard at the heels, and (tortringly) still keeps
Within the soul imperious residence,
As whips t'afflict both hope and patience;
These in the Pelican are figured here:
And these you hardly will avoid this year.
But as the Senses sit about the Tree,
And show you how their virtues are supplied
Still with fresh vigour: So (no doubt) will be
Your busiest troubles sweetly qualified,
By those five helps that hold up dignity,
Discretion, Policy, and Providence,
Courage, Correction, these bar all offence.
Lastly, look on a figure of that day,
When by heavens help, and Walworth's happy hand,
That swarm of Rebels, who fought all to sway,
And have both King and Country at command:
Even in their height of pride, I made them stand,
And, in my sovereigns sight, there I struck dead
Their chiefest Captain and commanding head.
The rest of that base rout, dismayed thereby,
And all tumultuous troubles calmly ceased,
King Richard, to requite true loyalty,
His gracious favour presently expressed
In Royal manner, Knighting me and the rest
Of Aldermen, that were in field with me.
London till then had not that dignity.
As I, so these do represent the men
Knighted in field, on Corpus Christi day.
And as my Dagger slew the Rebel then,
So to renown the deed; And I dare say,
To honour London more (if more it may)
The redcrosse, in a Siluer-field before,
Had Walworth's Dagger added to it more.
And now my Lord, this goodly Monument
Or Chariot of Triumphal Victory
Some shape of that days honour doth present,
By heavens protection of True Majesty,
And beating down Treason and Mutiny.
Adorning all the Throne with those fair Graces:
That aught about a King to have best places.
Truth, Virtue, Honour, sober Temperance,
Fortitude, Zeal, Equity, Conscience,
justice, Authority, carefullVigilance,
Peace, Plenty, Law, Council, Obedience,
And Discipline, that whips all Errors hence,
These (as best Pillars) do support this State:
And every Kingdom else doth propagate.
A blessed Bachelor are you my Lord,
By being your sacred Sovereign's Deputy
In such a State, where all these do concord,
And truly do protect his Majesty
Figured in Richard's great Authority.
As Walworth then, so Leman now may say:
Never had Man a happier Wedding day.
PHoebus hath hid his golden head
In Thetis lap. And now are spread
The sable Curtains of the night,
Our evenings purpose to delight.
The twinkling Tapers of the Sky
Are turned to Torches; and apply
Their clearest radiance, to convey
Our Maiden Bridegroom on his way
Home to his own abiding place.
Our Triumphs pomp shortens apace,
That could afford more time to spend,
But gladly would no way offend.
You marriage Rites solemnized
Bequeathes you to the Bridal bed:
Where you and your chastewife must rest.
London (it seems) did like you best,
(Although you are a Bachelor,)
To be her Husband for a year;
Love her, delight her. she's a Bride,
near slept by such a Husband's side
But once before. She hath had many,
And you may prove as good as any
Have gone before you in this place.
'twill be your brethren's joy and grace,
That Fishmongers live still in fame,
And still renowned by your name.
Their hearty love by me they send ye,
And pray the hand of heaven defend ye
In all your actions. May your Fame,
Crown still their ancient worthy name
To all posterity. So, London's Lord
And Virgin Husband, in a word:
Old Walworth must to rest again,
Good-night to you, and all your train,