NEptune! since thou hast been at all this pains,
Not only with thy Tritons to supply me,
But art thyself come from thy utmost Manes,
To feast upon that joy that's now so nigh me,
To make our Loves the better understood,
Silence thy Watery Subject, this small Flood.
BY the timely Ebbs and Flows,
That make thee famous to all those
That must observe thy precious Tides
That issue from our wealthy sides:
Not a murmur, not a sound,
That may this Lady's Voice confound,
And Tritons, who by our commanding power
Attend upon the Glory of this Hour,
To do it service, and the City Grace,
Be silent, till we wave our silver Mace.
ANd you our honoured Sons, whose Loyalty,
Service, and zeal, shall be expressed of me,
Let not your loving over-greedy Noise,
Beguile you of the Sweetness of your joys.
My wish has took effect, for ne'er was known
A greater joy, and a more silent one.
TReasure of hope, and jewel of mankind,
Richer, no kingdoms peace did ever see;
Adorned in Titles, but much more in mind,
The loves of many thousands speak in me:
Who, from that blessing of our peaceful store
Thy Royal Father, hast received most free,
Honours that wooed thy Virtues long before,
And e'er thy Time were capable of thee:
Thou, whose most early goodness fixed in youth
Does promise comfort to the length of Time,
As we on earth measure heavens works by truth,
And things which Natural reason cannot climb:
So, when we look into the Virtuous Aim
Of thy Divine Addiction, we may deem
By Rules of Grace, and Principles of Fame,
What worth will be, now in so high esteem,
And so betimes pursued; which thought upon,
Never more cause this Land had to rejoice,
But chiefly I, the City, that has known
More of this good than any, and more choice:
What a Fair Glorious Peace for many years,
Has sung her sweet calms to the hearts of men?
Enriched our homes, extinguished foreign fears,
And at this hour begins her Hymns again:
Live long, and happy, Glory of our days,
And thy sweet Time marked with all fair presages,
Since heaven is pleased in thy blessed life to raise,
The Hope of these, and joy of after Ages.
Sound Tritons, lift our loves up with his Fame,
Proclaimed as far as Honour has a Name.
HOpe! now behold the Fullness of thy Good,
Which thy sick comforts have expected long,
And thou sweet Peace the Harmony of this flood,
Look up, and see the Glory of thy Song.
Fair and most Famous City, thou hast waked me,
From the sad slumber of disconsolate Fear,
Which at the Music of thy Voice forsaked me,
And now begin to see my Comforts clear,
Now has my Anchor her firm hold again,
And in my blessed and calm Security,
The expectations of all faithful men,
Have their full fruits being satisfied in me.
This is the place that I'll cast Anchor in,
This, Honour's Haven, the King's Royal Court,
here will I fasten all my joys again,
Where all deservers and deserts resort:
And may I never change this happy shore,
Till all be changed never to alter more.
WElcome, oh welcome Spring of joy & Peace,
Borne to be honoured, and to give increase
To those that wait upon thy Graces,
Behold the many thousand faces,
That make this amorous Flood,
Look like a moving Wood,
Usurping all her Crystal spaces.
'Mongst which The City's Love is first,
Whose expectations sacred thirst,
Nothing truly could allay,
But such a Prince, and such a day.
Welcome, oh welcome, all Fair joys attend thee,
Glory of life, to safety we commend thee.