Leap light hearts in every breast,
joy is now the fittest passion;
Double majesty hath blessed
All the place, with that high grace,
Exceedeth admiration!
Welcome, monarch of this Isle,
Europe's envy, and her mirror;
Great in each part of thy style:
England's wish, and Scotland's bliss,
Both France, and Ireland's terror.
Welcome, are you; and no less,
Your admired queen: the glory
Both of state, and comeliness.
Every line of her divine
Form, is a beauteous story.
High in fortune, as in blood,
So are both; and blood renowned
By oft falls, that make a flood
In your veins: yet, all these strains
Are in your virtues drowned.
House, be proud; For of earth's store
These two, only, are the wonder:
In them she's rich, and in no more.
Zeal is bound their praise to sound
As loud as fame, or thunder.
Note, but how the air, the spring
Concur in their devotions;
Pairs of Turtles sit, and sing
On each tree, o'erjoyed to see
In them like love, like motions.
Enter sir, this longing door,
Whose glad lord nought could have blessed
Equally; (I'm sure not more)
Then this sight: save of your right,
When you were first possessed.
That, indeed, transcended this.
Since which hour, wherein you gained it.
For this grace, both he and his,
Every day, have learned to pray,
And, now, they have obtained it.
Retire, you household-gods, and leave these excellent creatures to be entertained by a more eminent deity. Hail King, and Queen of the Islands, called truly fortunate, and by you made so; To tell you, who I am, and wear all these notable, and speaking ensigns about me, were to challenge you of most impossible ignorance, and accuse myself of as palpable glory: It is enough that you know me here, and come with the licence of my father JOVE, who is the bounty of heaven, to give you early welcome to the bower of my mother MAIA, no less the goodness of earth. And may it please you to walk, I will tell you no wonderful story. This place, whereon you are now advanced (by the mighty power of Poetry, and the help of a faith, that can remove mountains) is the Arcadian hill CYLLENE, the place, where myself was both begot, and borne; and of which I am frequently called CYLLENIUS: Under yond purslane tree stood sometime my cradle. Where, now, behold my mother MAIA, sitting in the pride of her plenty, gladding the air with her breath, and cheering the spring with her smiles. At her feet, the blushing AURORA, who, with her rosy hand, casteth her honey dews on those sweeter herbs, accompanied with that gentle wind, FAVONIUS, whose subtle spirit, in the breathing forth, FLORA makes into flowers, and sticks them in the grass, as if she contended to have the embroidery of the earth, richer than the cope of the sky. Here, for her month, the yearly delicate May keeps state; and from this Mount, takes pleasure to display these valleys, yond lesser hills, those statelier edifices, and towers, that seem enamoured so far off, and are reared on end, to behold her, as if their utmost object were her beauties. Hither the Dryads of the valley, and Nymphs of the great river come every morning, to taste of her favours; and depart away with laps filled with her bounties. But, see! upon your approach their pleasures are instantly remitted. The birds are hushed, ZEPHYRE is still, the morn forbears her office, FLORA is dumb, and herself amazed, to behold two such marvels, that do more adorn place, than she can time; Pardon, your Majesty, the fault, for it is that hath caused it; and till they can collect their spirits, think silence, and wonder the best adoration.
SEe, see, O see, who here is come a-Maying!
The master of the Ocean;
And his beauteous ORIAN:
Why left we off our playing?
To gaze, to gaze,
On them, that gods no less than men amaze.
Up Nightingale, and sing
jug, jug, jug, jug, etc.
Raise Lark thy note, and wing,
All birds their music bring,
Sweet Robin, linnet, Thrush,
Record, from every bush,
The welcome of the King;
And Queen:
Whose like were never seen,
For good, for fair.
Nor can be; though fresh May,
Should every day
Invite a several pair,
No, though she should invite a several pair.
If all the pleasures were distilled
Of every flower, in every field,
And all that HIBLA hives do yield
Were into one broad mazor filled;
If, thereto, added all the gums,
And spice, that from PANCHAIA comes,
The odour, that HYDASPES lends
Or PHoeNIX proves, before she ends;
If all the Air, my FLORA drew,
Or spirit, that ZEPHYRE ever blew;
Were put therein; and and all the dew
That ever rosy Morning knew;
Yet, all diffused upon this bower,
To make one sweet detaining hour,
Were much too little for the grace,
And honour, you vouchsafe the place.
But, if you please to come again,
We vow, we will not then, with vain,
And empty pass-times entertain,
Your so desired, though grieved pain.
For, we will have the wanton fawns,
That frisking skip, about the lawns,
The Paniskes, and the Sylvans rude,
satires, and all that multitude,
To dance their wilder rounds about,
And cleave the air, with many a shout,
As they would hunt poor Echo out
Of yonder valley, who doth flout
Their rustic noise. To visit whom
You shall behold whole bevies come
Of gaudy Nymphs, who tender calls
Well tuned (unto the many falls
Of sweet, and several sliding rills,
That stream from tops of those less hills)
Sound like so many silver quills
When ZEPHYRE them with music fills.
For these, FAVONIUS here shall blow
New flowers, which you shall see to grow,
Of which, each hand a part shall take,
And, for your heads, fresh garlands make.
Wherewith, whilst they your temples round,
An air of several birds shall sound
An Iö paean, that shall drown
The acclamations, at your crown.
All this, and more than I have gift of saying,
MAY vows, so you will oft come here a Masing.
And MERCURY, her son, shall venture the displeasure of his father, with the whole bench of Heaven, that day, but he will do his mother's intents all serviceable assistance. Till then, and ever, live high and happy, you, and your other you; both envied for your fortunes, loved for your graces, and admired for your virtues.
Again, great pair, I salute you; and with leave of all the gods: whose high pleasure it is, that MERCURY make this your holiday. May all the blessings both of earth, and heaven, concur to thank you: For till this days sun, I have faintly enjoyed a minute's rest to my creation. Now, I do, and acknowledge it you sole, and no less the divine benefit. If my desire to delight you, might not divert to your trouble, I would entreat your eyes to a new, and strange spectacle; a certain son of mine, whom the Arcadians call a god, howsoever the rest of the world receive him: It is the horned PAN, whom in the translated figure of a goat I begot on the fair Spartan PENELOPE; MAY, let both your ears, and looks forgive it: These are but the lightest escapes of our Deities. And, it is better in me, to prevent his rustic impudence, by my blushing acknowledgement, then, anon, by his rude, and not insolent claim, be enforced to confess him. Yonder he keeps, and with him the wood Nymphs, whose leader he is in rounds, and dances, to this sylvan music. The place, about which they skip, is the fount of laughter, or BACCHUS spring; whose statue is advanced on the top; and from whose pipes, at an observed hour of the day, there flows a lusty liquour, that hath the present virtue to expel sadness; and within certain minutes after it is tasted, force all the mirth of the spleen into the face. Of this is PAN the Guardian. Lo! the fountain begins to run, but the Nymphs at your sight are fled. PAN, and his satires wildly stand at gaze. I will approach, and question him: vouchsafe your ear, and forgive his behaviour, which (even to me, that am his parent) will no doubt be rude enough, though otherwise full of salt, which, except my presence did temper, might turn to be gall, and bitterness; but that shall charm him.
O, it is MERCURY! Hollow 'em, again,
What be all these, father? gods, or men?
All human. Only, these two are deities on earth, but such, as the greatest powers of heaven may resign to.
Why did our Nymphs run away? can you tell?
Here be sweet beauty's love MERCURY well?
I see by their looks. How say you? great master?
Will you please to here? Shall I be your taster?
PAN, you are too rude.
It is but a glass,
By my beard, and my horns, 'tis a health, and shall pass.
Were he a king, and his mistress a queen
This draft shall make him a petulant spleen.
But, trow, is he loose, or costive of laughter?
I'd know, to fill him his glass, thereafter,
Sure, either my skill, or my sight doth mock,
Or this lordings look should not care for the smock;
And yet he should love both a horse and a hound,
And not rest till he saw his game on the ground:
Well, look to him, Dame; beshrew me were I
'Mongst these bonny-bells, you should need a good eye.
Here mistress; all out. Since a god is your skinker:
By my hand, I believe you were borne a good drinker.
They are things of no spirit, their blood is asleep,
That, when it is offered 'em do not drink deep.
Come, who is next? Our liquor here cools.
Ladies, I'm sure, you all ha' not fools
At home to laugh at. A little of this,
ta'en down here in private, were not amiss.
Believe it, she drinks like a wench, that had store
Of lord for her laughter, will you have more?
What answer you, lordings? will you any, or none?
Laugh, and be fat, sir, your penance is known.
They that love mirth, let 'em heartily drink,
'Tis the only receipt, to make sorrow sink.
The young Nymph, that's troubled with an old man,
Let her laugh him away, as fast as he can.
Nay drink, and not pause, as who would say must you?
But laugh at the wench, that next doth trust you.
To you, sweet beauty; nay, 'pray you come hither:
ere you sit out, you'll laugh at a feather.
I'll never fear you, for being too witty,
You sip, so like a forsooth of the city,
Lords, for yourselves, your own cups crown,
The ladies, i'faith, else will laugh you down.
Go to, little blushet, for this, anon,
you'll steal forth a laugh in the shade of your fan.
This, and another thing, I can tell you,
Will breed a laughter, as low as your belly
Of such sullen pieces, JOVE send us not many,
They must be tickled, before they will any.
What have we done? They that want, let 'em call,
Gallants, of both sides, you see here is all.
PAN'S entertainment: Look for no more.
Only, good faces, I read you, make store
Of your amorous Knights, and Squires hereafter,
They are excellent sponges, to drink up your laughter.
Farewell, I must seek out my Nymphs, that you frighted;
Thank HERMES, my father, if aught have delighted.
I am sure, thy last rudeness cannot; for it makes me seriously ashamed. I will not labour his excuse, since I know you more ready to pardon, than he to trespass: but, for your singular patience, tender you all abundance of thanks; and, mixing with the Master of the place, in his wishes, make them my divinations: That your loves be ever flourishing as May, and your house as fruitful: That your acts exceed the best, and your years the longest of your predecessors: That no bad fortune touch you, nor good change you. But still, that you triumph, in this facility, over the ridiculous pride of other Princes; and for ever live safe in the love, rather, than the fear of your subjects.