LEt not your glories darken, to behold
The place, and me, her GENIUS here, so sad;
Who, by bold Rumor, have been lately told,
That I must change the loved Lord, I had.
And he, now, in the twilight of sere age,
Begin to seek a habitation new;
And all his fortunes, and himself engage
Unto a seat, his fathers never knew.
And I, uncertain what I must endure,
Since all the ends of destiny are obscure.
Despair not, GENIUS, thou shalt know thy fate.
WHat sight is this, so strange! and full of state!
The son of MAIA, making his descent
Unto the fates, and met with good Event.
Daughters of night, and secrecy, attend;
You, that draw out the chain of Destiny,
Upon whose threads, both lives and times depend,
And all the periods of mortality.
The will of JOVE is, that you straight do look
The change, and fate unto this house decreed,
And speaking from your Adamantine book,
Unto the GENIUS of the place it read;
That he may know, and knowing, bless his lot,
That such a grace, beyond his hopes, hath got.
When, underneath thy roof, is seen
The greatest King, and fairest Queen,
With Princes an unmatched pair,
One, hope of all the earth, their heir;
The other styled of Lorraine,
Their blood; and sprung from CHARLEMAINE:
When all these Glories jointly shine,
And fill thee with a heat divine,
And these reflected, do beget
And splendent Sun, shall never set,
But here shine fixed, to affright
All after-hopes of following night,
Then, GENIUS, is thy period come,
To change thy Lord: Thus, Fates do doom.
But is my Patron with this lot content,
So to forsake his father's monument?
Or, is it gain, or else necessity,
Or will to raise a house of better frame,
That makes him shut forth his posterity
Out of his patrimony, with his name?
Nor gain, nor need; much less a vain desire,
To frame new roofs, or build his dwelling higher;
He hath, with mortar, busied been too much,
That his affections should continue such.
Do men take joy in labours, not t'enjoy?
Or doth their business all their likings spend?
Have they more pleasure in a tedious way,
Than to repose them at their journeys end?
GENIUS, obey, and not expostulate;
It is your virtue: and such powers as you,
Should make religion of offending fate,
Whose dooms are just, and whose designs are true.
The person, for whose royal sake,
Thou must a change so happy make,
Is he, that governs with his smile,
This lesser world, this greatest Isle.
His lady's servant thou must be;
Whose second would great NATURE see,
Or FORTUNE, after all their pain,
They might despair to make again.
She is the grace of all, that are:
And as ELISA, now a star,