I Was jealous of the shadowing of my grace,
But that I know this is my time and place;
Where has not Industry a noble friend,
In this Assembly, even the best extend
Their grace and love to me, (joyed or amazed)
Who, of true Fame possessed but I have raised,
And after added Honours to his days,
For Industry is the lifeblood of praise,
To rise without me, is to steal to glory,
And who so abject to leave such a story,
It is as clear as Light, as bright as truth,
Fame waits their age, whom Industry their youth.
Behold this Ball of Gold, upon which stands
A golden Cupid wrought with curious hands,
The mighty power of Industry it shows,
That gets both wealth, and love, which overflows
With such a stream of Amity an a peace,
(Not only to itself adding increase)
But several nations where commerce abounds
Taste the harmonious peace, so sweetly sounds,
For instance, let your gracious eye be fixed,
Upon a joy, true, though so strangely mixed.
IT is my joy chiefly, (and I stand for thousands) to see the glory of this triumphant day, which in some measure requires the noble worthiness of the Honourable Society of Grocers, to whom and to my Lord Mayor I wish all good successes.
NOne of all these Nations, conceive more true joy at this triumphant day, than myself, to my Lord Mayor all fair and noble fortunes, and to the worthy Society of Grocers, all happy wishes, and I pray heaven, that all the year following may be as happy and successful, as this first entrance to your dignity.
WElcome to Fame's bright Castle, take thy place,
This seat's reserved to do thy virtues grace.
TRue, but not yet to be possessed, hear me,
justice must flow through him, before that be,
Great works of Grace must be required and done,
Before the honour of this Seat be won.
A whole years reverend care in righting wrongs,
And guarding Innocence from malicious tongues.
Must be employed in Virtues sacred right,
Before this place be filled; 'tis no mean fight,
That wins this Palm, truth, and a virtuous care,
Of the oppressed, those the Lodestones are,
That will 'gainst envies power draw him forth,
To take this merit in this seat of worth:
Where all the memorable worthies shine,
In works of brightness, able to refine,
All the beholders minds, and strike new fire,
To kindle an industrious desire,
To imitate their actions, and their Fame,
Which to this Castle adds that glorious Name.
Wherefore Reward, free as the Air or Light,
There must be Merit, or our work's not right.
IF there were any error 'twas my love,
And if it be a fault to be too free,
Reward commits but once such heresy.
How e'er, I know your worth will so extend,
Your fame will fill this seat at twelve months' end.
THere is no human glory or renown,
But have their evening & their sure sunset,
Which shows that we should upward seek our Crown
And make but use of time for our hopes bettering,
So to be truly mindful of our own,
Is to perform all parts of good in one;
The close of this triumphant day is come,
And Honour stays to bid you welcome home,
All I desire for my Grace and good,
Is but to be remembered in your blood,
With Honour to accomplish the fair time,
Which power hath put into your hands; A crime
As great as ever came into sins band,
I do entitle a too sparing hand,
Nothing deads' Honour more, then to behold
Plenty cooped up; and Bounty faint and cold;
Which ought to be the free life of the year,
For bounty 'twas ordained, to make that clear
Which is the light of goodness and of Fame,
And puts by Honour from the cloud of shame.
Great cost and love hath nobly been bestowed,
Upon thy triumph, (which this day hath showed:
Embrace 'em in thy heart, till times afford
Fuller expression; in one absolute word,
All the content that ever made man blessed,
This triumph done, make a triumphant breast.