Where are you Mate?
Here Sir, at hand,
To do what ere the Master shall command.
This goodly Canon, forged for this day
In Lemnos, where great Mulciber bears sway,
He and his Cyclops using all their skill,
To frame it in best form, and for good will
They bear unto that ancient Company,
For whom their Hammers walk continually,
Still to supply them from their plenteous Mine
With Steel and Iron: which as they refine
From the earth's Oar; So to all Lands they send,
And all Arts else do bounteously befriend.
Because, where Steel and Iron go to wrack:
Those Lands do feel a lamentable lack.
Now Mate, thou seest, this is a jovial day,
And every Trade triumphs as best it may,
(By yearly custom) gladly to express,
Their free affection, in full cheerfulness.
Be not we idle then, Seeing to our charge,
This Cannon is committed: But at large
Declare our diligence. Our Gunner's Art,
In this Triumphal day must bear a part.
Fall to thy pains.
Master, with all my heart.
And no men shall deliver (more than we)
How much we honour this days dignity.
First then, I'll Sponge her, as she ought to be,
Then Lad her, to Report her lustily.
Next Ram her. Now this Bullet passeth in,
Which Ramd again, louder Report shall win.
And shooting not Point blank, but out at length:
I'll mount her higher on her Carriage strength.
Now I have done Sir.
Then will I give Fire;
And may all speed no worse than we desire.
BLithe and bonny been ye awe,
And meckle blissing still be faw
Upon so fair and gudly meany,
As thilk like, near saw I any.
A British Bard, that long hath slept,
And in his Grave would still ha' kept:
But that the spirit of Poesy
(Which haudeth highest Sovereignty)
Hath raised me from my silent rest,
To make e'en in this jovial Feast.
Aw for your seek, most worthy man,
(Lowting as lowly as I can)
To creve your favour, that I may,
For your Society somewhat say,
Of thilk their buxom love to you,
Which they present but as your due.
As often they have done before,
To mickle of their brethren mere.
Among wha was your Feather one,
Which this high charge did undergone.
O, let me say it to your fece,
It is a sign of special greece,
●ee to supply your Feathers place:
In sick an encient femous City,
Under yer King, chief Deputy.
And let me tell ye ey thing mere,
Of Records have I read good steer;
Yet near could find the like before,
As now hath happed. Thilk dignity,
Of Meire and Shrieffes authority,
Whilk London yearly greants to three▪
eyen letter H begins them awe,
And in so soot concordance faugh:
That Heruey, Herne and Hemersley,
Maken ey pleasing Sympheny.
eyen Enegreme ilke neme mey bliss,
With Honour, heal and Happiness.
Honour to be sele Steffe and stay,
heal to uphaude all eirie weigh,
And Happiness sa to attend.
Yer year may have a happy end.
Thaese Shows and Emblems ta express,
Maine trouble ye with tediousness.
And ay, wha would na way offend,
Yer kenning of them do commend
Until thilk Book, whilk speeks them awe,
Mere large than to my lot does faugh.
Sa, Honour, heal and Happiness,
Give awe yer actions good success.
Thilk eye of day, whilk grec'de our spart,
Being clased up, mekes his resarte
Till under-dwellers. Seble-night,
Was gledly lengthen an't delight:
But standeth fearful of offending,
Because awe joys must have an ending.
Not, that we desire to lief ye,
But for you're own heme must receive ye.
And, thereto maken bavide intiusion,
Was clase up awe with rude confusion.
Whilk fare my Leard, my perting is,
Wisbing ye mickle years of bliss,
That justice, Zeal and Payetie,
Maine shine in ye with Meiesty,
That he wha puts ye in thilk trust,
Mey find yer rule sa true and just,
That after times may talk, and say
When Heruey, Herne and Hemersley
As Meire and Sheriffs did bear sway:
True Honour, Health and Heppinesse,
Thilk year did their endeavours bliss.
Yer brethren's love I must commend
To yer acceptance, sa I end.