Honour and joy double their B 〈…〉,
I, the days Love, the Cities greater all love.
Salute thee in the Sweetness 〈…〉
All▪ that behold me worthily, may see▪
How full mine eye stands of the joy 〈…〉
The more, because I may with Confidence say,
Desert and Love will be well matched too day:
And herein the great'st pity will appear,
This match can lust no longer than a year.
T let not that discourage thy good wayes,
men's Loves will last to crown thy end of days,
If those should fuile, which cannot easily die,
Thy good works wed thee to Eternity.
Let not the shortness then of Time dismay
The largeness of thy worth; gain every day,
So many years Thou 'gainst, that some have lost;
For they that think their Care is at great cost
If they do any good, in Time so small,
They make their Year but a poor Day in all.
For as a Learned Man, will comprehend
In Compass of his Hour, Doctrine so sound,
Which give another a whole year to mend,
He shall not equal, upon any ground:
So the judicious when he comes to bear
This powerful Office, struck with Divine fear,
Collects his spirits, redeems his hours with care,
Thinks of his Charge, and Oath, what Ties they are,
And with a Virtuous Resolution than
Works more good in one year, than some in Ten.
Nor is this spoken any to detract,
But all t'encourage to put Truth in Act.
methinks I see Oppression hang the head,
Falsehood and Injury with their guilt struck dead
At this Triumphant Hour, Ill Causes hide
Their Leprous Faces, daring not t'abide
The Brightness of this day; and in mine ear
Me thinks the Grace's Silver Chimes I hear.
Good wishes are at work now in each heart,
Throughout this sphere of Brotherhood play their part,
Chiefly thy Noble own Fraternity,
As near in heart, as they're in place to thee.
The Ensigns of whose love Bounty displays,
Yet esteems all their Cost short of thy praise:
There will appear elected Sons of War,
Which this fair City boasts of for their Care,
Strength and experience, set in Truth of heart;
All great and glorious Masters in that Art
Which gives to man his Dignity, Name and Seal,
Prepared to speak Love in a Noble Peal.
Knowing two Triumphs must on this day dwell,
For Magistrate, one, and one for Colonel,
Return Lord General, that's the Name of State
The Soldier gives Thee; Peace, the Magistrate.
On then, Great Hope, here that good care begins,
Which now earths Love and▪ Heavens hereafter wins.
GReat Lord, Example is the Crystal Glass,
By which wise Magistracy sets his face,
Fits all his Actions to their comeliest Dress,
For there he sent honour and seemliness;
'tis not like flauring glasses, those false Books
Made to set Age, back, in great Courliers Looks;
Like Clocks on reveling nights, that near go right,
Because the sports may yield more full delight,
But when they break off then they find it Late,
The Time and Truth appears, such is their State,
Whose death by flatteries is set back, awhile,
But meetes'em in the midst of then safe Smile.
Such horrors these forgetful things ●●end,
That only mind their ends, but not their End;
Leave them to their false Trust; List Thou to me,
Thy power is great, so let thy virtues be,
Thy care, thy watchfulness, which are but things
Remembered to thy praise, from thence it springs,
And not from fear of any want in Thee,
For in this Truth I may be comely, free,
Never was man advanced, yet waited on
With a more Noble Expectation;
That's a great Work to perfect: and as Those
That have in Art a Mastery, can oppose
All comers, and come off with Learned Fame,
Yet think not scorn still of a scholars name
(A Title which they had in ignorant youth:)
So he that deals in such a weight of Truth
As th' execution of a Magistrates place,
Though never so exact inform and Grace,
Both from his own Worth, and man's free Applause,
Yet may he called a Labourer in the cause,
And be thought good to be so, in true care,
The Labour being so glorious, just, and fair.
Behold then in a rough Example here
The Rude and thonny ways thy care must clear,
Such are the vices in a City sprung,
As are yon Thickets that grow close and strong:
Such is oppression, Cozenage, Bribes, false Hires,
As are yon catching and entangling briars:
Such is Gout-Iustice, that's, Delay in Right,
Demurs in Suits, that are as clear as Light.
Just such a Wilderness is a Commonwealth,
That is undressed, unpruned, wild in her health;
And the rude multitude, the Beasts a'th' wood,
That know no laws, but only Will and Blood:
And yet by fair Example, Musical Grace,
Harmonious government of the Man in place,
(Of fair Integrity, and wisdom framed)
They stand as mine do, ravished, charmed, and tamed.
Every wise Magistrate that governs thus,
May well be called a powerful Orpheus.
Behold yon Bird of state, the vigilant Cock,
The Morning's Herald, and the Ploughman's Clock,
At whose shrill Crow the very Lion trembles,
The sturdiest Prey-taker that here assembles;
How fitly d'os it match your Name, and power
Fixed in that Name now by this glorious Hour,
At your just Voice to shake the boldest offence
And sturdiest sin, that ere had residence
Insecure man, Yet with an equal Eye,
Matching grave justice with fair Clemency;
It being the property He chiefly shower,
To give Wing-warning, still before he Crows,
To Crow before he strike, by his clapped Wing,
To stir himself up first (which needful thing
Is every man's first duty) by his Crow
A gentle call, or warning, which should flow
From every Magistrate, before he extend
The Stroke of justice, he should reprehend,
And try the virtue of a powerful word,
If that prevail not, than the Spur, the Sword.
See, herein honours to his Majesty
Are not forgotten, when I turn, and see,
The sever all Countries, in those faces, plain,
Allowing Fealty to one Sovereign,
The Noble English, the fair Thriving Scot,
Plain hearted Welsh, the Frenchman bold and hot,
The civilly instructed Irish man,
And that kind Savage, the Virginian;
All lovingly assembled, ●●n by Fate;
This thy Days Honour to congratulate.
On then; and as your service fills this place,
So through the City do his Lordship Grace.
FRom that rough Wilderness, which did late present
The perplexed State, and cares of Government,
Which every painful Magistrate must meet;
Here the Reward stands for thee, a chief Seat
In Fame's fair Sanctuary, where some of old
Crowned with their Troubles now, are here enrolled
In Memories sacred sweetness, to all ages;
And so much the World's Voice of Thee presages.
And these that sit for many, with their graces
Fresh as the Buds of Roses, though they sleep,
In thy Society had once high places,
Which in their good Works they for ever keep;
Life called 'em in their Time, Honour's fair Stars,
Large Benefactors, and sweet Governors.
If here were not sufficient Grace for Merit,
Next Object, I presume, will raise thy Spirit.
Grave City Governor! so much honour do me,
Vouchsafe thy presence and thy patience to me,
And I'll Reward that Virtue with a Story,
That shall to thy Fraternity add Glory,
Then to thy Worth no mean part will arise,
That art ordained Chief for that glorious Prize.
'tis I, that keep all the Records of Fame,
Mother of Truths, Antiquity, my Name;
No Year, month, Day, or Hour, that brings in place
Good Works and Noble, for the City's Grace,
But I Record; that After Times may see
What Former, were, and how they ought to be,
Fruitful, and Thankful, in fair Actions flowing,
To meet heavens blessings, to which much is owing;
For instance, Let all Grateful Eyes be placest
Upon this Mount of Royalty, by Kings, graced,
Queens, Prince, Duke's, Nobles, more by numbering gained
Then can be in this narrow Sphere contained.
7. Kings, 5. Queens, only one Prince alone,
8. Dukes, 2. Earls, Plantagenets twenty one;
All these of this Fraternity made Free,
Brothers and Sisters of this Company;
And see with what propriety, the Fates
Have to this Noble Brotherhood knit such States;
For what Society, the whole City brings,
Can with such Ornaments Adorn their Kings,
Their only Robes of State, when they consent
To ride most glorious, to High Parliament;
And mark in this their Royal intent still,
For when it pleased the Goodness of their Will,
To put the richest Robes of their Loves on
To the whole City, the Most, ever came
To this Society, which Records here prove,
Adorning their adorners, with their Love;
Which was a Kingly Equity:
Be careful then, Great Lord, to bring forth Deeds,
To match that Honour, that from hence proceeds.
I Was the first, Grave Lord, that welcomed Thee
To this days Honour, and I spoke it free,
Just as in every heart I found it placest,
And 'tis my turn again now to speak last;
For love is circular (like the bright Sun,)
And takes delight to end where it begun,
Though indeed never ending, in true Will,
But rather may be said beginning still;
As all great works are of Celestial Birth,
Of which, Love is the Chief in Heaven and Earth.
To what Blessed state then are thy Fortunes come,
Since, That both brought thee forth, and brings thee home?
Now, as in common course which clears things best,
there's no free gift but looks for thanks at least;
A Love so bountiful, so free, so good
From the whole City, from thy Brotherhood,
(That Name I ought a while to dwell upon,)
Expect some fair Requital from the Man
They've all so largely Honoured. What's desired?
That which in Conscience ought to berequirde,
Oh thank 'em in thy justice, in thy Care,
Zeal to right wrongs, Works that are clear & fair,
And will become thy Soul (whence Virtue springs)
As those rich Ornaments thy Brother Kings.
And since we cannot separate Love and Care,
For where Care is, a Love must needs be there,
And Care where Love is; 'tis the Man and Wife,
Through every Estate that's fixed in Life;
You are by this the City's Bridegroom proved,
And She stands wedded to her best Beloved;
Then be, according to your Morning-Vowes,
A Careful Husband, to a Loving Spouse;
And Heaven give you great joy (both It and Thee;)
And to All Those that shall Match after Ye.