WEll over ta'en my Lord.
Noble friend welcome, and see who encounters us, honourable good Clerimon.
My good Lord Lion, most happily met worthy Traefilme,
Come gallants, what's the news,
the season affords us variety,
the novelists of our time runs on heaps,
to glut their itching ears with airy sounds,
trotting toth' burse; and in the Temple walk
with greater zeal to hear a novall lie,
than a pious anthem tho chanted by Cherubins.
True Sir:
and holds set counsels, to vent their brain sick opinions
with presagements what all states shall design.
That's as their intelligence serves.
And that shall serve as long as invention lasts,
there dreams they relate, as spoke from Oracles,
or if the gods should hold a synod, and make them their secretaries,
they will divine and prophesy too: but come and speak your
thoughts of the intended marriage with the Spanish Prince,
He is come you see, and bravely entertained.
He is so, but not married yet.
But like to be, and shall have in dowry with the Princess this Kingdom of Sicily.
Soft and fair, there is more will forbid the banns, then say amen to the marriage: though the King usurped the Kingdom, during the nonage of the Prince Phylaster, he must not think to bereave him of it quite; he is now come to years to claim the Crown.
And lose his head in' the asking.
A diadem worn by a headless King would be wondrous, Phylaster is too weak in power.
He hath many friends.
And few helpers.
The people love him.
I grant it, that the King knows too well,
And makes this Contract to make his faction strong:
What's a giddy-headed multitude,
That's not Disciplined nor trained up in Arms,
To be trusted unto? No, he that will
Bandy for a Monarchy, must provide
Brave martial troops with resolution armed,
To stand the shock of bloody doubtful war,
Not daunted though disastrous Fate doth frown,
And spit all spiteful fury in their face:
Defying horror in her ugliest form,
And grows more valiant, the more danger threats;
Or let lean famine her affliction send,
Whose pining plagues a second hell doth bring,
they'll hold their courage in her height of spleen,
Till valour win plenty to supply them,
What think ye, would yer feast-hunting Citizens
Endure this?
No sir, a fair march a mile out of town that their wives may bring them their dinners, is the hottest service that they are trained up to.
I could wish their experience answered their loves,
Then should the much too much wronged Phylaster,
Possess his right in spite of Don and the devil.
My heart is with your wishes.
And so is mine,
And so should all that loves their true born Prince,
Then let us join our Forces with our minds,
In what's our power to right this wronged Lord,
And watch advantage as best may fit the time
To stir the murmuring people up,
Who is already possessed with his wrongs,
And easily would in rebellion rise,
Which full well the King doth both know and fear,
But first our service we'll proffer to the Prince,
And set our projects as he accepts of us;
But hushed, the King is coming.
Fair Prince,
Since heaven's great guider furthers our intents,
And brought you with safety here to arrive
Within our Kingdom and Court of Sicily,
We bid you most welcome, Princely Pharamont,
And that our Kingly bounty shall confirm,
Even whilst the Heavens hold so propitious aspect
we'll crown your wished desires (with our own)
Lend me your hand sweet Prince, hereby enjoy
A full fruition of your best contents,
The interest I hold I do possess you with,
Only a father's care and prayers retain,
That heaven may heap on blessings, take her Prince,
A sweeter Mistress than the offered Language of any dame,
were she a Queen whose eye speaks common Loves;
and comfort to her servants: Last Noble son, for so I now must call you, what I have done thus public, is not to add a comfort in particular to you or me, but all, and to confirm the Nobles and the Gentry of our Kingdom by oath to your succession: which shall be within this month at most.
This will be hardly done.
It must be ill done, if it be done.
When it is at best, 'twill be but half done,
whilst so brave a gentleman is wronged and slung off.
I fear.
Who does not?
I fear not for myself, and yet I fear too:
well, we shall see, we shall see: no more.
Kissing your white hand Mistrisse I take leaue, to thanke your royall Father: and thus far to be my owne free trompet: vnderstand great King, and these your subiects, mine that must be, for so deseruing you haue spoke me Sir: and so deseruing I dare speake my selfe, to what a person of what Eminence, ripe expectation, of what faculties, manners and vertues you would wed your Kingdomes, and in me haue your wishes: oh this countrey, by more then all the gods, I hold it happy, happy in their deor memories, that haue bin Kings great and good; happy in yours that is, and from you as a Chronicle to keepe your noble name from rotting Age: do I open my selfe most happy: Gentlemen beleeue me in a word, a Princes word, there shalbe nothing to make vp a Kingdome mighty and flourishing, defenced feard equall to be commanded and obeyed but through the trauels of my life, ile finde it out, and tie it to this countrey. By all the gods; my Raigne shall bee as easie to the subiects, that euery man shall bee his Prince himselfe, and his owne Law; Yet I his Prince and Law. And deerest Lady, to your deerest selfe, deere in the choyce of him, whose name and lustre, must make you more and mightier: Let mee say you are the blessedst liuing: for sweete Princesse, you shall inioy a man of men, to bee your seruant, you shall make him yours, for whom great Queenes must d e.
Miracles!
This speech calls him Spaniard, being nothing
but a large Inventory of his own commendations.
I wonder what's his price?
for certainly he'll sell him, he has so be praised his shape:
But here comes one, more worthy those large praises, than the large speaker of them; Let me be swallowed quick, if I can find all the Anatomy of yond man's virtues unseen to sound enough, to promise for him, he shall be Constable by this Sun: he'll ne'er make King, unless it be of trifles in my poor judgement.
Right noble sir, as low as my obedience,
with a heart as loyal as my knee, I beg for favour.
Rise, you have it sir.
Mark but the King how pale he looks, he fears,
and this same whoreson conscience, ah how it jades us.
Speak your intents sir.
Shall I speak on freely, be still my royal Sovereign.
As a subject we give you freedom.
Now it heats.
Then thus I turn my language to you Prince, you foreign man ne'er start, nor put on wonder; you must endure me, and you shall: This earth you tread upon, a dowry as you hope with this sweet Princess, whose memory I bow to, was not left by my dead father, O I had a father: to your inheritance, and I up and living, having myself about me and my sword the souls of all my name and memories: these arms and some few friends besides the gods to part so calmly with it, and sit still and say I might have been, I tell thee Pharamont, when thou art King, look I be dead and rotten, and my name ashes, as I: for hear me Pharamont, this very ground thou goest on, this fat earth my father's friends made fertile with their faiths: before that day of shame shall gape and swallow thee and thy nation, like a hungry grave into his hidden bowels: Prince it shall, by the just gods it shall.
he's mad, beyond cure mad.
Here's a fellow has some fire in his veins,
the outlandish Prince looks like a tooth-drawer.
I Prince of popines, I will make it well appear
to you I am not mad.
You displease us, you are too bold.
No sir, I am too tame, too much a Turcle,
A thing borne without passion, a faint shadow:
That every drunken cloud sails over,
And make nothing.
I do not fancy this choler,
Sure he's somewhat tainted.
I do not think 'twill prove so.
Has given him a general purge already, for all the right he
has, and now he means to let him blood: be constant
gentle heavens, I'll run his hazard although
I run my name out of the Kingdom.
Peace, we are all one soul.
What you have seen in me to stir offence,
I cannot find, unless it be this Lady offered into my arms,
with the succession which I must keep: though is hath
pleased your sure to mutiny within you, without disputing,
your genealogies or taking knowledge whose branch you are,
the King will leave it to me,
and I dare make it mine: you have your answer.
If thou wert sole inheriter to him
That made the world his,
And couldst see no Sun shine upon any thing but thine,
Were Pharamont as truly valiant as I feel him cold,
And ringed amongst the choicest of his friends: such
As would blush to talk such serious follies,
Or back such belied commendations: and from his presence
Spit all those brags, you should hear further from me.
Sir, you wrong the Prince, I gave you not this freedom,
go to, be better tempered.
It must be sir, when I am noblier used.
ladies, this would have been a pattern of succession,
Had he never met this mischief: by my life this is
The worthiest: the true name of man this day within
My knowledge.
I cannot tell what you may call knowledge,
but i'm sure tother's the man set in my eye,
Oh 'tis a Prince of wax.
A dog it is.
Phylaster, tell me the injuries you aim at in your riddles.
If you had my eyes sir and sufferance,
My grief upon you, and my broken fortunes,
My wants great, and now nothing hopes and fears,
My wrongs would make ill riddles to be laughed at:
Dare you be still my King, and right me.
Give me your wrongs in private.
He dares not stand the shock.
I cannot blame him, there's danger in't.
Every man in this Age has a soul of Crystal, to read their actions, though men's faces are so far asunder, that they hold no intelligence: but view the stranger well, and you shall see a fever throw all his braveries, and feel him shack like a true truant, if he give not back his Crown again, upon the report of an elder gun: I am no augury.
Go to, be more yourself, as you respect our favour, you'll stir us else: sir I must have you know, that you are, and shallbe at our pleasure, what fashion we will put upon you, smooth yourself, over or by the gods
I am dead sir, you are my Fate, it was not I said I was wronged, I carry all about me, my weak stars lead me too: all my weak fortunes, who dare in all this presence speak, that is but man of flesh, and may be mortal, tell me, I do not most entirely love this Prince, and honour his full virtues.
he's possessed.
Yes, with my father's spirit is here O king,
a dangerous spirit, and now he tells me king,
I was a king's Heir, bids me be a king, and whispers
to me, these are all my subjects, 'tis strange he will
not let me sleep: but diues into my fancy, and there
gives me shapes that kneel and do me service,
cry me king, but i'll suppress him, heas a factious
spirit and will undo me: Noble sir your hand,
I am your servant.
Away I do not like this,
I'll make you tamer, or i'll dispossess you both of your life & spirit: for this time I pardon your wild speech, without so much as imprisonment.
I thank you sir, you dare not for the people.
Ladies what think you now of this brave fellow.
A pretty talking fellow hot at hand: but eye you stranger, is he not a fine complete Gentleman? O these strangers, I do affect them strangely, they do the rarest home things, and please the fullest, as I live I could love all their Nation over and over for his sake.
God's comfort, your poor head-piece 'tis a weak one, and has need of an nightcap.
See how his fancy labours, has he not spoke home and bravely, what a dangerous train did he give fire to, how he shook the King, made his soul melt within him, and his blood run into whay: it stood upon his brow like a cold winter dew.
Gentlemen, you have no suit to me, I am no minion, you stand methinks, like men that would be Courtiers, if you could well be flattered at a price not to undo your Children, you are all honest, go get you home again, and make your Country a virtuous Court, to which your great ones may, in their diseased age, retire live recluses.
How do your worth sir.
Well, very well, and so well, that if the King please,
I may live many years.
Sir, the King must please:
Whilst we know who you are, and what you are, your wrongs and virtues shrink not worthy sir: but call your father to you, in whose name we'll waken all the gods, and conjure up the rods of vengeance, the abused people, who like raging torrents shall swell high: and so begird the dens of these Male-dragons, that through the strongest safety they shall beg for mercy at your sword's point.
Friend no more, our ears may be corrupted, 'tis an Age we dare not trust our wills to, do you love me?
Do we love heaven and honour?
My Lord Lion you had a virtuous Gentlewoman
called you father, is she yet alive.
Most honoured sir she is, and for a penance but of an idle dream, has undertaken a tedious pilgrimage.
is't to me, or to any of these Gentlemen you come.
To you, brave Lord, the Princess would entreat your present company.
The Princess send for me, you are mistaken,
If you be called Phylaster, 'tis you.
Kiss her fair hand, and say I will attend her.
Do you know what you do?
Yes, go to see a woman.
But do you way the danger you are in?
Danger in a sweet face: By Iubiter I must not fear a woman.
But are you sure it was the Princess sent,
It may be some foul train to catch your life.
I dare not think it Gentlemen, she's noble, her eye may shoot me dead, or those true red and white fiend friends in her cheeks, may steal my soul out, there's all the danger in't: but be what may, her single name hath armed me.
Go on, and be as truly happy as thou art fearless:
Come Gentlemen, let's make our friends acquainted, lest the king prove false.
Comes he not.
madam?
Will Phylaster come?
Dear madam, you were wont to credit me at the first.
But didst thou tell me so.
I am forgetful, and my woman's strength is so over charged, with dangers like to grow about my marriage, that these under things dares not abide in such a troubled sea, how looked he when he told thee he would come?
Why we ll.
And not a little fearful.
Fear madam, sure he knows not what it is,
You all are of his faction, the whole Court is bold in praise of him, whilst I may live neglected, and do noble things, as fools in strife throw gold into the sea, drowned in the doing: but I know he fears.
madam, methinks his looks hid more of love then fear.
Of love, to whom: to you, did you deliver those plain words I sent, with such a woing gesture and quick looks that you have caught.
Madam I mean to you.
Of love to me: alas, thy ignorance lets thee not see the crosses of our births, nature that loves not to be questioned: why she did this, or that, but has his ends, and knows she does well: never gave the world to things so opposite, so bound to put as he and I am, if a bowl of blood drawn from this arm, would poison thee, a draught of his would cure thee: love to me.
madam, I think I hear him.
Bring him in: you gods that will not have your dens with. stood, whose holy wisdoms at this time it is to make the passions of a feeble maid, the way into your justice, I obey.
Here is my Lord Phylaster.
Oh it is well, withdraw yourself.
madam, your messenger.
made me believe you wished to speak with me.
'tis true Phylaster, but the words are such I have to say,
and does so ill become the mouth of woman,
that I wish them said, and yet am loath to speak them.
Have you known that I have aught detracted
from your worth: have I in person wronged you?
or have set my baser Instruments to throw disgrace
upon your virtues.
Never madame you.
Why then should you in such a public place,
Injury a Princess, and a scandal lay upon my fortunes,
found to be so great: calling a great part of my dowry in question.
madam, this truth which I shall speak, willbe foolish: but for your fair virtuous self, I could afford myself to have no right to any thing you wished.
Phylaster, know I must enjoy these Kingdoms.
madam both?
Both, or I do, by heaven I die Phylaster,
if I not calmly die enjoy them both,
I would do much to save that noble life,
yet would be loath to have posterity find in our stories,
that Phylaster gave his right unto a Sceptre and a Crown,
to save a lady's longing.
Nay then hear, I must and will have them, and more.
What more?
Or lose that little life the gods prepared,
to trouble this poor piece of earth with all.
madam, what more?
Turn then away thy face.
No.
Do.
I can endure it: turn away my face,
I never saw yet enemy that looked so dreadfully,
But that I thought myself as great a basilisk as he,
Or speak so horrible, but that I thought my tongue
Bore thunder underneath as much as his:
Nor beast that I could turn from, shall I then begin,
To fear sweet sounds, a woman's tongue, whom I do love,
Say you would have my life, why I will give it you,
For it is of me a thing so loathed, and unto you that beg,
Of so poor use, that I shall make no price,
If you intreat, I will unmovedly hear.
Yet for my sake a little bend thy looks.
I do.
Then know I must have them and thee.
And me!
Thy love, without which, all the land discovered yet, will serve me for no use, but to be buried in.
is't possible.
With it, it were too little to bestow on thee, now though thy breath strike me dead, which know it may, I have unripped my breast.
Madam, you are too full of noble thoughts,
to lay a train for this contemned life,
which you might have for asking, to suspect were base, where I deserve no ill: love you by all my hopes, I do above my life, but how this passion should proceed from you so violently, would amaze a man that would be jealous.
Another soul into my body shot,
Could not have filled me with more strength and spirit,
Than this thy breath, but spend not hasty time
In seeking how I came thus: 'tis the gods that make me so,
And sure our love will be the worthier, and the better
Blessed, in that the secret justice of the gods
Is mingled with it: let us leave, and kiss, lest some
Unwelcomed guest should fall betwixt us,
And we should part without it.
'twill be ill I should abide here long.
'tis true, and worse you should come often.
How shall we devise to hold intelligence?
That our true loves, on an new occasion may agree,
What path is best to tread.
I have a boy, sent by the gods, I hope to this intent, not yet seen in the Court, hunting the buck I found him sitting by a fountain side, of which he borrowed some, to quench his thirst, and paid the nymph as much again in tears: a Garland lay him by, made by himself, of many several flowers, bred in the veil, stuck in that mystic order that the rareness delighted me, but ever when he turned his tender eye upon 'em, he would weep as if he meant to make them grow again, seeing such pretty helpless innocence dwell in his face: I asked him all his story, he told me that his parents gentle died, leaving him to the mercy of the fields: which gave him roots, & of the crystal springs, which did not stop the course, and the Sun, which still he thanked, it yielded him his life: then took he up his garland, and did show what every flower, as country people hold, did signify, and how all ordered thus expressed his grief, and to my thoughts did read the prettiest lecture of his country art, that could be wished, so that methinks I could have studied it, I gladly entertained him, whom was glad to follow: and have got the trustiest, lovingest, and the gentlest boy that ever master kept, him will I send to wait on you and bear our hidden love.
'tis well, no more.
madam, the Prince is come to do his service.
What will you Phylaster do with yourself?
Why? that which all the gods have appointed out for me.
dear, hide thyself, bring in the Prince.
Hide me from Pharamont:
When thunder speaks, which is the voice of God,
Though I do reverence, yet I do not hide myself,
And shall a stranger Prince have leave to brag
Unto a foreign Nation, that he made Phylaster
hide himself.
He cannot know it.
Though it should sleep for ever to the world,
it is a simple sin to hide myself, which will for ever
on my conscience lie.
Then good Phylaster give him scope and way
in what he says: for he is apt to speak
what you are loath to hear.
I will.
My Princely Mistress, as true lovers ought,
I come to kiss these fair hands, & to show in outward ceremonies,
the dear love within my heart.
If I shall have an answer or no, directly I am gone.
To what? what would he have answer?
To his claim unto the Kingdom.
sirrah, I forbore you before the King.
Good sir do so still, I would not talk with you.
But now the time is fitter, do but offer to make mention of right to any kingdom, though it lie scarce habitable.
Good sir let me go.
And by the gods
Peace Pharamont, if then
Leave us Phylaster.
I have done.
You shall not need.
What now?
Know Pharamont I loathe to brawl with such a blast as thou, who are nothing but a valiant voice, but if thou shalt provoke me further, men shall say thou wert, and not lament it.
Do you sleight my greatness so much,
and in the chamber of the Princess?
It is a place to which I must confess, I owe a reverence, but wert the Church at the high Altar, there's no place so safe, where thou dar'st injury me, but I dare kill thee: and for your greatness, know I can grasp you and your greatness, thus, thus, into nothing: give not a word, not a word back, farewell.
'Tis an odd fellow madam, we must stop his mouth with some office when we are married.
You were best make him your Controller.
I think he would discharge it well.
madam, I hope our hearts are knit, but yet so slow, the ceremonies of state are, that 'twill be long before our hearts be so, then if you please being agreed in heart, let us not wait for dreaming form, but take a little stolen delights, and so prevent our joys to come.
If you dare speak your thoughts, I must withdraw in honour.
The constitution of my body will never hold out
till the wedding, I must seek else where.
And thou shalt find her honourable, boy full of regard
Unto thy tender youth, for thy own modesty,
And for my sake, apter to give, than thou wilt be to ask,
I or deserve.
Sir, you did take me up when I was nothing,
And I am only yet some thing, by being yours,
You trusted me unknown: and that which you were apt to construe: a simple innocence in me: perhaps might have been crafty: The cunning of a boy hardened in lies: and theft: yet ventured you to part my miseries and me: For which I never can expect to serve a Lady: that bears more honour in her breast than you.
But boy, it will prefer thee, thou art young,
And bear'st a childish overflowing love, to them that claps thy cheeks, and speak thee fair: but when judgement comes no rule those passions, thou wilt remember best those careful friends, that placed thee in the noblest way of life: she is a Princess I prefer thee to.
In that small time that I have seen the world,
I never knew a man hasty to part with a servant he thought trusty. I remember my father would prefer the boys he kept to greater men than he, but did it not till they were too saucy for himself.
Why gentle boy? I find no fault at all
In thy behaviour.
Sir, if I have made a fault of ignorance,
Instruct my youth, I shall be willing: if not apt to learn,
Age and experience will adorn my mind with larger
Knowledge, and if I have done a wilful fault
Think me not past all hope: for once
What master holds so strict a hand over his boy,
That he will part with him without one warning,
Let me be corrected, to break my stubbornness,
If it be so, rather than turn me off,
And I shall mend.
Thy love does plead so prettily to stay,
That trust me I could weep to part with thee:
Alas, I do not turn thee off: thou know'st it is my business
That does call thee hence, and when thou art with her,
Thou dwell with me, think so, and 'tis so, and when time is full
That thou hast well discharged this heavy trust,
Laid on so weak a one: I will again with joy,
Receive thee, as I live I will, nay, weep
Not, gentle boy, 'tis more than time thou didst attend the Princess.
I am gone, but since I am to part with you my Lord, and none knows whether I shall live to do more service for you, take this little prayer: Heaven bless your loves, your sighs, all your designs, may sick men if they have your wish, be well, and heavens hate those you curse, though I be one.
The love of boys unto their Lords is strange, I have read wonders of it: yet this boy for my sake, if a man may judge by looks and speech, would out do story. I must see a day to pay him for his loyalty.
Why should these Ladies stay so long, they must
Come this way, I know the Queen employs 'em not,
For the reverend mother sent me word,
They would all be for the garden: if they should all
Prove honest now, I were in a fair taking:
I was never so long without sport before in my life,
And in my conscience 'tis not my fault.
Oh for our country Ladies, here's one bolted,
I'll hound at her. madam.
Your grace.
Shall I not be a trouble?
Not to me sir.
Nay, nay, you're too quick by this sweet hand.
You'll be forsworn sir, 'tis an old glove, if you will talk at distance I am for you, but good Prince be not bawdy, nor do not brag, those two I only bar, and then I think I shall have sense enough to answer all the weighty Apothegms your royal blood shall manage.
Dear Lady, can you love?
Dear Prince, how dear? I ne'er cost you a Couch yet, nor put you to the dear repentance of a play and a banquet, here's no Scarlet sir, to make you blush, this is my own hair, and this face has been so far from being dear to any, that it ne'er cost a penny painting, and for the rest of my poor wardrobe such as you see, it leaves no hand behind it, to make the jealous silkman's wife curse our doing.
You much mistake me Lady.
Lord I do so, would you or I could help it.
You're very dangerous bitter, like a potion.
No sir, I do not mean to purge you, though I mean to purge a little time on you.
Do Ladies of this Country use to give no more respect to men of my full being.
Full being, I understand you not, unless your grace
Means growing to fatness: and than your only remedy
Upon my knowledge Prince, is in a morning,
A cup of neat white wine, brewed with Cardus,
Then fast till supper, about five you may eat, use exercise,
And keep a sparrow hawk, you can shoot in a tiler,
But of all, your grace must fly phlebotomy,
Fresh pork and Conger, and clarified whey:
They are dullers of the vital animals.
Lady you talk of nothing all this time.
'tis very true sir, I talk of you.
This is a crafty wench, I like her wit well,
'Twill be rare to stir up a leaden appetite,
she's dainty, and must be courted with a shower of gold,
madam look here, all these and more, then—
What ha' you there my Lord, gold? now as I live 'tis fair gold, you'd have silver for't, to play with the Pages, you could not have taken me in a worse time sir, but if you have present use my Lord, I'll send my man with silver, and keep your gold safe for you.
Lady, Lady.
She's coming sir behind,
Will ye take white money yet for all this.
If there be but two such in this Kingdom more, and near the Court, we may e'en hang up our harps, ten such camphor Constitutions as this would call the golden age again in question, and teach the old way for every ill fast husband, to get his own children, and what a mischief that would breed, let all consider.
here's another, if she be of the same last, the devil shall pluck her on: Many fair morning's Lady.
As many mornings, bring as many days,
fair, sweet, and hopeful to your grace.
She gives good words yet, sure this wench is free.
If your more serious business do not call you Lady,
Let me hold quarter with you, we'll talk an hour
On't quickly.
What would your grace talk of?
Of some such pretty subject as yourself,
I'll go no further than your eye, your lip, there's time enough
For one man for an Age.
Sir, they stand right, and my lips are yet even smooth,
Young enough, ripe enough, and red enough,
Or my glass wrongs me.
O they are two twend Cherries dyde in blush,
Which those fair suns above with their deep beams
Reflect upon, and ripen, sweetest beauty;
Bow down those branches, that the longing taste
Of the sweet looker on, may meet these blessings,
And taste and live.
O delicate sweet Prince, she that hath snow enough about her heart, to take the wanton spring of ten such lines, it may be a number without Probatum. Sir, you have by such neat Poetry gathered a kiss, that if I had but five lines of that number, such pretty begging blanks: I should commend your forehead, or your cheeks, and kiss you too.
Do it in prose;
you cannot miss it madam.
I shall, I shall.
By my life but you shall not,
I'll prompt you first,
Can you do it now?
methinks 'tis easy now you ha' doubt before me,
and yet I should stick at it.
Stick till tomorrow, i'll never part you sweetest,
but we lose time. Can you love me?
Loue you my Lord ye?
I'll teach you in a short sentence,
'cause I will not load your memory,
This is all: Love me and lie with me.
Was it lie with you, that you said, 'tis impossible.
Not to a willing mind, that will endeavour,
If I do not teach you to do it as easily in one night,
As you'll go to bed: I'll lose my royal blood for't.
Why Prince you have a Lady of your own,
that yet wants teaching.
I'll sooner teach a mare the old measures,
Then teach her any thing belonging to the function,
she's afraid to lie with herself,
If she have but my masculine imagination about her,
I know when we are married, I must ravish her.
By my honour that's a foul fault indeed,
But time and your good help will wear it out sir.
And for my other I see excepting your dear self,
dearest Lady I had rather be Sir Timen a schoolmaster,
and keep a dairy maid.
Has your grace seen the Court star Galatea.
Out upon her, she's as cold of her favour,
as an apoplex: she sailed by but now.
How do you hold her wit?
I hold her wit, the strength of all the guard
Cannot hold it, if they were tied to't:
She would blow 'em out of the kingdom: they talk of Iubiter,
he's but a squib-cracker to her, but speak sweet Lady,
Shall I be freely welcome?
Whether?
To your bed, if you mistrust my faith, you do me the most unnoblest wrong.
I dare not Prince.
Make your own conditions, my purse shall seal 'em,
and what you dare imagine you can want,
i'll furnish you withal, give worship to you thoughts
every morning about it, come I know you're bashful,
speak in my ear, will you be mine: keep this, and with
it me, soon I shall visit you.
My Lord, my chamber's most uncertain, but when 'tis night i'll find some means to slip into your lodging, till when
Till when, this and my heart go with thee.
Oh thou pernicious petticoat Prince, are these your virtues, well, if I do not jay a train to blow your sport up, I am no woman, and Lady Dowsabell, i'll fit you for it.
Where's the boy?
Within.
Gave you him gold to buy him clothes?
I did.
And has he done't?
Yes Madam.
'tis a pretty sad talking boy, is't not, asked you his name?
No madam.
O, you are welcome, what good news?
As good as any one can tell your grace,
that says, she has done that you would have wished.
Hast thou discovered?
I have strained a point of modesty for you.
I prithee how?
In listening after bawdry: I see, let a Lady live never so modestly, they shall be sure to find a lawful time, to hearken after bawdry, your Prince brave Pharamont was so hot on't.
With whom?
Why with the Lady I suspected, I can tell the time and place.
O when and where?
tonight, his lodging.
Run thyself into the presents: mingle there again with other Ladies, leave the rest to me, if destiny to whom we dare not say, why thou didst this, have not decreed it so, in lasting leaves: whose smallest characters was never altered, yet this match shall break: where's the boy.
Here madam.
Sir, your sad to change your service, is't not so?
madam, I have not changed, I wait on you to do him service.
Then trust in me, tell me thy name.
Bellario.
Thou canst sing and play.
If grief will give me leave madam, I can.
Alas, what kind of grief can thy years know,
Hadst thou a cross schoolmaster when thou went'st to school?
Thou art not capable of other grief,
Thy brows and cheeks are smooth as water be,
When no breath troubles them: believe me boy,
Care seeks wrinkled brows, and hollow eyes,
And builds itself caves to abide in them,
Come sir, tell me truly, doth your Lord love me?
I know not madam, what it is.
Canst thou know grief, and never yet knewst love,
Thou art deceived boy, does he speak of me,
As if he wished me well?
If it be love to forget all respect to his own friends, with thinking of your face: if it be love to sit cross armed, and think away the day, with mingling starts, and crying your name as loud as men in streets do fire: if it be love to weep himself away, when he but hears of any woman dead or killed, because it might have been your chance: if when he goes to rest, which will not be, 'twixt every prayer he says, to name you once as others drop beads, be to be in love, than madam I dare swear he loves ye.
O you're a cunning boy, and taught to your Lords credit,
But thou know'st a lie that bears this sound,
Is welcomer to me then any truth that says
He loves me not: lead the way boy, do you attend me too,
'tis thy Lord's business hasts me thus away.
Come Ladies, shall we talk a round, as men do walk a mile, women should talk an hour after supper, 'tis their exercise.
'tis late.
'tis all my eyes will do to lead me to my bed.
I fear their so heavy you'll scarce find the way to your own lodging with 'em tonight.
The Prince.
Not a-bed Ladies, you're good sitters up, what think you of a pleasing dream to last till morning?
I shall chose my Lord a pleasing wake before it.
'tis well you're courting of these Ladies,
is't not late Gentlemen?
Yes madame.
Wait you there.
she's jealous as I live, look my Lord,
the Princess a Hilus an Adonis,
His form is angel-like.
Why this is that, must when you are wed sit by
Your pillow, like young Apollo, with his hand
and voice, binding your thoughts in sleep, the Princess
does provide him for you, and for herself.
I find no music in these boys.
Nor I, they can do little, and that small they do,
they have not wit to hide it.
Serves he the Princess?
Yes.
'tis a sweet boy, how brave she keeps him.
Ladies all good rest, I mean to kill a buck,
tomorrow morning, ere you have done your dreams.
All happiness attend your grace,
Gentlemen good rest, shall we to bed?
Yes, all good night.
May your dreams be true to you,
What shall we do Gallants? 'tis late.
The king is up still, see he comes,
a guard along with him.
Look your intelligence be true.
upon my life it is, and I do hope your Highness will not tie me to a man, that in the heat of wooing, throws me off, and takes another.
What should this mean?
If it be true, that Lady had been better embraced cureless diseases: get you to your rest, you shallbe righted: Gentlemen draw near, we shall employ ye.
Is young Pharamont come to his lodging?
I saw him enter there.
Haste some of you, and cunningly discover,
if Megra be in her lodging.
Sir she parted hence but now with other Ladies.
If she be there, we shall not need to make a vain discovery of our suspicion, you gods I see, that who unrighteously holds wealth or state from others, shall be cursed in that which meaner men are blessed withal: Ages to come, shall know no male of him, left to inherit, and his name shallbe blotted from the earth, if he have any child, it shallbe crossly matched, the gods themselves shall sow wild strife betwixt her Lord and her: yet if it be your wills forgive the sin I have committed, let it not fall upon this undeserving child, if she has not broke your laws, but how could I look to be heard of gods, that must be just, praying upon the ground, I hold in wrong.
Sir I have asked, and her women swear she is within, but they I think are bawds, I told 'em I must speak with her, they laughed, and said their Lady lay speechless: I said my business was important, they said their Lady was about it: I grew hot, and cried, my business was a matter that concerned life and death, they answered so was sleeping, at which their Lady was: I urged again she had scarce time to be so, since last I saw her, they smiled again, and seemed to instruct me, that sleeping was nothing but lying down and winking, answers more direct, I could not get from them, in short sir, she's not there.
'tis then no time to dally, you a'the guard, wait at the backdoor of the PRINCE's lodging, and see that none pass thence upon your lives: Knock Gentlemen, knock loud, what has your pleasure taken off your hearing: I'll break your meditation, knock again, and louder, not yet, I do not think he sleeps, having such larums by him, once more, Pharamont.
What saucy groom knocks at this dead of night, where be our waiters, by my vexed soul he meets his death, that meets me for this boldness.
Prince, Prince, you wrong your thoughts, we are your friends, come down.
The king?
The same sir.
Come down sir, we have cause of present counsel with you,
If your grace please to use me, i'll attend you to your chamber.
No, 'tis too late Prince, i'll make bold with yours.
I have certain private reasons to myself sir,
Makes me unmannerly, and say you cannot:
Nay, press not forward, he must come through my life,
That comes here.
Sir be resolved, I must come, and will come enter.
I will not be dishonoured thus, he that enters, enters upon his death, sir 'tis a sign you make no stranger of me, to bring these runagates to my chamber, at these unseasoned hours.
Why, do you chafe yourself: you are not wronged,
Nor shallbe: only search your lodging,
For some cause to ourself, Enter I say.
I so no.
Let 'em enter Prince, let 'em enter, I am up,
I know their business, 'tis a poor breaking of a Lady's honour, they hunt so hotly after, let 'em enjoy it, you have your business Gentlemen, I lay here, O my Lord the King, this is not noble in you, To make public the weakness of a woman.
Come down.
I dare my Lord, your whooting and your clamours, your private whispers, and your broad fleerings, can no more vex my soul, than this base carriage: but I have vengeance still in store for some, shall in the most contempt you can have of me, be joy and nourishment.
Will you come down?
Yes, to laugh at your worst, but I shall wring you, if my skill fail me not.
Sir, I must chide you dearly for this looseness,
You have wronged a Lady, but no more,
Conduct him to his lodging, and to bed.
Get him another wench, and you bring him to bed indeed.
'tis strange a man cannot ride a Stage or two,
To breathe himself, without a warrant: if this gear hold,
That lodgings be searched thus, pray God we may lie
With our own wives in safety, that they be not
by some trick of state mistaken.
Now Lady of honour, where's your honour now?
No man can fit your palate but the Prince,
Thou most ill shrouded rottenness, thou piece
Made by a Painter and Apothecaries, thou troubled sea of lust,
Thou wilderness inhabited by wild thoughts,
Thou swollen cloud of infection, thou ripe mine of all diseases,
Thou all sin and hell, and last all devils, tell me,
Had you none to pull on with your courtesies,
But he that must be mine, and wrong my daughter:
By all the gods: all these, all the Pages, and all the Court
Shall hoot thee through the Court, fling rotten oranges:
Make ribald rhymes, and sear thy name with candles
Upon walls, do you laugh Lady Venus?
Faith sir you must pardon me, I cannot choose but laugh,
To see you merry, if you do this O King;
Nay, if you dare do it, by all those gods you swore by,
And as many more of my own, I will have fellows,
And such fellows in it, that shall make noble mirth:
The Princess your dear daughter shall stand by me,
Upon walls, and sung in ballads, or any thing, urge me no more,
I know her and her haunts, her fair leaps
And outlying, and will discover all, and will dishonour her,
I know the boy she keeps, a handsome boy, about eighteen,
Knows what she does with him, where, when;
Come sir, you put me to a woman's madness,
The glory of a fury, and if I do not do it to the height—
What boy is that she raves at?
Alas good minded Prince, you know not these things,
I am loath to reveal 'em: keep this fault
As you would keep your health from the hot air
Of the corrupted people, or by heaven,
I will not sink alone, what I have known,
Shall be as public as in Print, all tongues shall speak it,
As they do the language they're borne in, as free and commonly,
I'll set it like a prodigious star, for all to gaze at,
And so high and glowing, that other kingdoms far and foreign,
Shall read it there, travail with it, till they find no tongue,
To make it more, nor no more people,
And then behold the fall of your fair Princess.
Has she a boy?
So please your grace I have seen a boy wait on her, a fair boy.
Go get you to your quarters,
for this time, i'll study to forget you.
Do so, and i'll forget your—
here's a male spirit fit for Hercules.
if ever there be nine worthy of women, this wench shall ride aside and be their Captain.
Sure she has a Garrison of devils in her tongue,
She uttered such balls of wild fire, she has so nettled the King,
That all the Doctors in the Country will not cure him,
That boy was a strange found out antidote to cure her infections;
That boy, that Princess boy, that chaste, brave,
virtuous lady's boy, and a fair boy, a well-spoken boy,
All these considered can make nothing else,
But there I leave ye Gentlemen.
Nay, we'll go wander with you.
And doubtless 'tis true.
I and 'tis the gods
That raised this punishment to scourge the King
With his own issue, is it not a shame for all us,
That write noble in the Land for us, that should be freemen,
To behold a man that is the bravery of his age,
Phylaster: pressed down from his royal right,
By this regardless King, and only look and see the Sceptre
Ready to be cast into the hands of that lascivious Lady,
That lives in lust with a smooth boy,
Now to be married to you strange thing,
Who but that people please to let him be a Prince,
Is borne a slave, in that which should be his most noble part,
His mind.
That man that would not stir with you to aid Phylaster,
Let the gods forget that such a Creature
Walks upon the earth.
The gentry do await it, and the people
against their nature, are all for him, and like a field if standing corn,
moved with a stiff gale: their heads bow all one way,
The only cause that draweth Phylaster back,
From this attempt, is the fair Princess love,
Which he admires, and we can now comfort.
Perhaps he'll not believe.
Why Gentlemen, 'tis without question so.
I 'tis past speech she lives dishonestly,
But how shall we: if he be curious, work
on his belief.
We all are satisfied within ourselves.
Since it is true, and Lords to his own good,
I'll make this new report to be my knowledge,
I'll say I know it, i'll swear I saw it,
It will be best.
'twill move him.
Here he comes. Good morrow to your honour:
We have spent some time in seeking you.
My worthy friends, you that can keep your memories, to know your friend in miseries, and cannot frame on men disgrace for virtue, a good day attend you all, what service may I do worthy your acceptation.
My Lord, we come to urge that virtue which we know
lives in your breast: forth, rise, make a head,
the nobles and the people are all dull with this usurping king,
and not a man that ever heard the word,
knows such a thing as virtue, but will second your attempts,
How honourable is this love in you to me,
That have deserved more, know my friends,
You that were borne to shame your poor Phylaster,
With too much courtesy, I could afford to melt myself
To thanks, but my designs are not yet ripe sufficient,
That ere long I shall employ your loves,
But yet the time is short of what I would.
The time is fuller than you expect,
That which hereafter perhaps be reached by violence,
May now be caught, as for the King you know
The people long have hated him, but now
The Princess whom they loved.
Why, what of her?
Is loathed as much as he.
By what strange means?
she's known a whore.
Thou liest!
My Lord—
Thou liest, and thou shalt feel it, I had thought,
Thy mind had been of honour, than to rob a Lady
Of her good name, is an infectious sin, not to be pardoned,
Be it false as hell, 'twill never be redeemed,
If it be sown amongst the people, faithful to increase,
All evil they shall he are. Let me alone, that I
May cut out falsehood where it grows, set hills on hills,
Betwixt me and that man that utters this, and I will scale them all,
And from the utmost top fall on his neck,
like thunder from a cloud.
This is most strange, sure he does love her.
I do love fair truth, she is my mistress, & who injuries her, draws vengeance from me. Sirs, let go my arms.
Nay, good my Lord be patient.
Sir, remember this is your honoured friend, that comes to do his service, and will show you why he uttered this.
I ask your pardon sir,
My zeal to truth makes me unmannerly,
Should I have heard dishonour spoke of you, behind your backs, untruly, I had been as much distempered and enraged, as now.
But this my Lord, is truth.
Oh say not so,
Good sir forbear to say so, 'tis then truth that women all are false, urge it no more, 'tis impossible, why should you think the Princess light?
Why she was taken at it.
'tis false, by heaven 'tis false, it cannot be,
Can it, speak Gentlemen? Can women all be damned?
Why then it cannot be.
And she was taken with her boy.
What boy?
A Page, a boy that serves her.
Oh good gods, a little boy.
ay, know you him my Lord?
Hell and sin know him: Sir you are deceived,
I'll reason it a little milder with you,
If she were lustful, would she take a boy that knows not yet desires, she would have one should meet her thoughts, and know the sin she acts, which is the great delight of wickedness, you are abused, and so is she and I.
How, you my Lord?
Why all the worlds abused, in an unjust report.
O noble sir, your virtues cannot look
Into the subtle thoughts of women. In short my Lord,
I took them, I myself.
Now all the devils thou didst, fly from my rage,
Would thou hadst ta'en devils engendering plagues,
When thou didst take them: hide thee from mine eyes,
Would thou hadst taken daggers in thy breast,
When thou didst take them,
Or been struck dumb for ever, that this fault
might have slept in silence.
Have you known him so ill tempered?
Never before.
The winds that are let loose from the four corners
Of the earth, and spreads themself all over sea and land,
Meets not a fair on, what friend bears a sword,
To run me thorough?
Why my Lord, are you so moved at this?
When any fall from virtue I am distracted,
I have interest in't.
But good my Lord recall yourself,
and think what's best to be done,
I thank you, I will do't,
Please you to leave me I'll consider of it,
Tomorrow i'll find your lodgings, and give you answer.
All the gods direct you the readiest way.
I had forgot to ask 'em where he took her,
I'll follow him. Oh that I had a sea within my breast,
To quench the fire I feel, more circumstances
Would but flame this fire: it more afflicts me now,
To know by whom the deed is done, then simply,
That it is done, and he that tells me this, is honourable,
As far from lies, as she is far from truth,
O that like beasts we could not grieve ourselves
With that we see not, bulls and rams will fight,
To keep their females standing in their sight,
But take them from them, and you take at once
Their spleens away, and they will fall again
Unto their pastures, growing fresh and fat,
And taste the waters of the springs as sweet as 'twas before.
Finding no start in sleep, but miserable man,
See, see, you gods he walks still, and the face you let him wear
When he was innocent, is still the same, not blush.
Is this justice? do you mean to entrap mortality,
That you allow treason so smooth a brow:
I cannot now think he is guilty.
Health to you my Lord:
The Princess doth commend her love, her life,
and this unto you.
O Bellario, now I perceive she loves me,
She does show it in loving thee my boy,
She has made thee brave.
My Lord, she has attired me past wish,
Past my desert, more fit for her attendant,
But far unfit for me that do attend.
Thou art grown Courtly my boy.
O let all women that love black deeds, learn to dissemble here,
Here, with this paper, she does write to me
As if her heart were twines of Adamant
To all the world beside, but unto me a maiden snow,
That melted with my looks: tell me my boy,
How does the Princess use thee?
Scarce like her servant, but as if I were
Something allied to her, or had preserved her life
Three times by my fidelity: as mothers fond,
Do use their only sons, as I'd use one that's left unto my trust,
For whom my life should pay,
If he meet harm: so she does use me.
Why 'tis wondrous well,
But what kind language does she feed thee with?
Why she does tell me she will trust my youth with all her maiden store, and does call me her pretty servant, bids me weep no more for leaving you, she'll see my service rewarded, & such words of that soft strain, that I am nearer weeping when she ends, then ere she speaks.
This is much better still.
Are you not well my Lord?
Ill, no Bellario.
methinks your words fall out from your tongue, so unevenly, nor is there in your looks that quickness that I was wont to see.
Thou art deceived boy. And she stroke thy head.
Yes.
And she does clap thy cheeks.
She does my Lord.
And she does kiss thee boy, ha.
How my Lord?
She kisses thee.
Never my Lord, by heaven.
That's strange, I know she does.
No by my life.
Why then she does not love me,
Come she does, I bid her do't: I charged her by all charms of love between us, by the hope of peace we should enjoy, to yield thee all delight, naked as to her Lord. I took her oath thou shouldst enjoy her. Tell me gentle boy, is she not paradise: is not her breath sweet as Arabian winds when fruits are ripe, are not her breasts two liquid ivory balls? is she not all a lasting mine of joy?
Yes, now I see why my discurled thoughts were so perplexed. When first I went to her my heart held auguries: you are abused, some villain has abused you, I do see where you tend. Fall rocks upon his head, that put this to you, 'tis some subtle train to bring that noble friend of yours to nought.
Thou thinkst I will be angry with thee, come thou shalt know all my drift. I hate her more than I love happiness, and placed thee there to pry with sparrow's eyes, into her deeds, hast thou discovered, is she fall'n to lust, as I would wish her, speak some comfort to me.
My Lord you did mistake the boy you sent,
Had she the lust of sparrows and of goats,
Had she a sin that weighed from the world, beyond the name of lust,
I would not aid her base desires,
But what I come to know as servant to her,
I would not reveal, to make my life last ages.
Oh my heart!
This is a salve worse than the main deceit,
Tell me thy thoughts, for I will know the least
That dwells within thee, or will rip thy heart,
To know it, I will see thy thoughts as plain,
As I do now thy face.
Why so you do: she is for aught I know, by all the gods,
As chaste as ice: but were she foul as hell,
And I did know it thus, the breath of Kings,
The points of swords, tortures, nor bulls of brass,
Should wrack it from me.
Then 'tis no time to dally with thee, I will take thy life,
For I do hate thee, I could curse thee now.
If you do hate me, you could not curse me worse,
The gods have not a punishment in store,
To me, then is your hate.
Fie, fie, so young and so dissembling, tell me when & where,
Thou didst enjoy her, or let plagues fall upon me,
If I destroy thee not.
By heaven I never did, and when I lie to save my life,
May I live long and loathed, hew me asunder,
And whilst I can think, i'll love those pieces you have cut away
Better than those that grow, and kiss those limbs
Because you made 'em so.
Fear'st thou not death, can boys contemn that.
Oh! what boy is he could be content to live
To be a man, that sees the best of men thus passionate,
Thus without reason.
O thou dost not know what 'tis to die.
Yes, I do know my Lord 'tis less than to be borne,
A lasting sleep, a quiet resting from all jealousy,
A thing we all pursue: I know beside, it is but giving over again,
That must be lost.
But there are pains false boy,
For perjured, souls: think but those, and then thy heart will melt,
And than thou wilt utter all.
May they fall all upon me, whilst I live,
If I be perjured, or have ever thought of that you charge me with,
If I be false, send me to suffer in those punishments you speak of Kill me.
Oh! What should I do, why who can but believe him?
He does swear so earnestly, that if it were not true, the gods would not endure him. Rise Bellario, thy protestations are so deep, and thou dost look so truly when thou utterest them, that though I knew 'em false, as were my hopes, I cannot urge thee further, but thou wert too blame to envy me: for I must love thy honest looks, and take no revenge upon thy honest looks: a love from me to thee is firm, whate'er thou dost, it troubles me, that I have called thy blood out of thy cheeks, that did so well become thee: But good boy let me not see thee more, something is done, that will distract me, that will make me mad, if I behold thee, if thou tenderest me, let me not see thee.
I will fly as far,
As there is morning, ere I give distaste to that most honoured frame, but through these tears shed at my hapless parting, I can see a world of treason practised upon you, and her, and me, farewell for evermore, if you shall hear that sorrows struck me dead, and after find me loyal, let there be a tear shed from you, in my memory, and I shall rest at peace.
Blessing be with thee whate'er thou deservest.
O where shall I go bathe this body, nature too unkind,
That mad'st no medicine to a troubled mind.
I marvel my boy comes not back,
But that I know my love will question him over and over,
How I slept, make talk how I remember him,
When his dear name was last spoken,
And how spoke when I sighed song, and ten thousand such,
I should be angry at his stay.
What, in your meditations, who attends you?
None but my single self, I need no guard,
I do no wrong, nor fear none.
Tell me, have you not a boy?
Yes Sir.
What kind of boy?
A page, a waiting boy.
A handsome boy?
I think he be not ugly Sir, well
qualified, and dutiful, I know him,
I took him not for beauty.
He speaks, and sings, and plays?
Yes Sir.
About eighteen?
I never asked his age.
Is he full of service?
By your pardon, why do you ask?
Put him away.
Sir.
Put him away I say, has done you that good service,
Shames me to speak off.
Good sir, let me understand you?
If you fear me, show it in duty? put away that boy.
Let me have reason for it, and then your will is a command.
Do not you blush to ask it, cast him off:
OrI shall do that shame to you, ye are one shame with me,
And so near myself, that by the gods,
I'd dare not tell myself, what you myself,
Have done.
What I have done?
'tis a new language, that all love to learn:
The common people speak it well already,
They need no grammar: understand me well, there be foul
Whispers stirring, cast him off, and suddenly do it, farewell.
Where may a maid live securely free,
Keeping her honour fair, not with the living,
They feed upon opinions, errors, dreams, and make 'em truth,
They draw a nourishment out of defamings,
Grow upon disgraces, and when they see a virtue fortified,
Strongly above the battery of their tongues.
Oh how they mind to sink it, and defeated foul
Sick with poison, strike the mountains,
Where noble names be sleeping, till they sweat,
And the cold Marble melt.
Peace to your fairest thoughts, dearest mistress.
Oh my dearest servant,
I have a war within me.
He must be more than man that makes these crystals run into rivers, sweetest fair the cause, and as I am your slave, tied to your goodness, your creature made again from what I was, and newly spirited, I'll right your honour.
O my best love, that boy.
What boy?
The pretty boy you gave me,
What of him?
Must be no more mine.
Why?
They are jealous of him.
jealous, who?
The King.
Oh my misfortune,
Then 'tis no idle jealousy, let him go.
O cruel, are you hard hearted too?
Who shall now tell you how much I loved you?
Who shall swear it to you, and weep the tears I send?
Who shall now bring you letters, rings, bracelets,
Lose his health in service, make tedious nights,
In stories of your praise? Who shall now sing
Your crying Elegies, and strike a sad soul
Into senseless pictures, and make them warm?
Who shall take up his lute, and touch it,
Till he crown a silent sleep upon my eyelids,
Make me dream and cry:
O my dear, dear Phylaster.
O my heart, would he had broken thee,
That made thee know this Lady was not loyal.
Mistress forget the boy, I'll get you a far better.
Oh never, never, such a boy again, as my Bellario.
'tis but your fond affection.
With thee, my boy, fare well for ever,
All service in servants, farewell faith and all
Desires to do well, for thy sake, let all that
Shall succeed thee, for thy wrongs,
Sell and betray chaste love.
And all this passion for a boy.
He was your boy, and you put him unto me,
And the loss of such must have a mourning for.
O thou forgetful woman.
How, my Lord?
False Arethusa.
Hast thou a medicine to restore my wits,
When I have lost 'em, if not,
leave to talk, and do thus.
Do what sir, would you sleep?
For ever Arethusa, O ye gods, ye gods:
Give me a wealthy patience, have I stood naked
Above the shock of many fortunes? have I seen mischief,
Numberless, and mighty, grow like a sea upon me:
Have I taken danger as deep as death, into my bosom,
And laughed upon it, made it but a mirth,
And flowing it by, do I live now like him under this tyrant King,
That languishing here his sad bell, and sees his Mourners,
Do I bear all this bravely? and sink at length
Under a woman's falsehood, O that boy, that cursed boy,
None but a villain boy, to ease your lust.
Nay, than I am betrayed,
I feel the plot cast for my overthrow:
O I am wretched.
Now you may take that little right I have to this
Poor Kingdom, give it to your joy, for I have no joy in it:
Some far place, where never woman kind durst set her foot,
For bursting with her poison must I seek,
And live to curse you, and there dig a Cave,
And preach to beasts and birds, what women are;
How Heaven is in your eyes, but in your hearts more hell,
Than hell has: How your tongues, like scorpions,
Both heal and poison: How your thoughts woven,
With thousand changes in one subtle web, and worn by you:
How that foolish men that read the story of a woman's face,
And dies believing it is lost for ever: How all the good you have,
Is but a shadow, i'th' morning with you, and at night behind you,
Past and forgotten: How your vows are frost fast, for a night,
And with the next Sun gone; How you are,
Being taken altogether.
A mere confusion, and so dead a chaos,
That love cannot distinguish these sad texts,
Till my last hour I am bound to utter of you,
So farewell all my woe, all my delight.
Be merciful you gods, and strike me dead.
What way have I deserved this? make my breast transparent,
That the world jealous of me,
May see the foulest thought my heart holds:
Where shall women turn their eyes to find out constancy?
Save me, how black and vile methinks, that boy looks now!
Oh thou dissembler, that before thou spok'st,
Wert in thy cradle false, sent to make lies,
And to betray innocence, thy Lord and thou
mayst glory in the ashes of a maid, fooled by her passion:
But the conquest is nothing so great as wicked,
Fly away, let my command force thee to that,
Which shame would do without it, if thou understoodst.
The loathed office thou hast undertaken,
Why thou wouldst hide thee under heaps of hills,
Lest we should dig and find thee.
O what god angry with me, hath sent this strange disease
Into the noblest minds, madam this grief you add unto me,
Is no more than drops to seas, for which they are not seen to swell,
My Lord has struck his anger through my heart,
And let out all the hope of future joys,
Ye need not bid me fly, I came to part,
To take my latest leave,
Farewell for ever.
I durst not run away in honesty from such a Lady,
Like a boy that stole, or made some greater fault,
The power of gods assist you in your suffering:
Hasty time reveal the truth to your abused Lord, and mine,
That he may know your worth, whilst I go seek
Out some forgotten place to die.
Peace guide thee, thou hast overthrown me once,
But if I had another time to lose,
Thou, or another villain with thy looks,
Might take me out of it, and send me naked,
My hair dishevelled, through the fiery streets.
madam, the king would hunt,
And calls for you with earnestness.
I am in tune to hunt: Diana if thou canst
Rage with a maid, as with a man, let me discover thee
bathing, and turn me to a fearful hind,
That I may die pursued by cruel hounds,
And have my story written in my wounds.
What, are the hounds before, and all the Woodmen?
Our horses ready, and our bows bent?
All sir.
You are cloudy sir. Come we have forgotten your venial trespasses, let not that sit heavy upon your spirit,
Here's none dares utter it.
He looks like an old surfeited stallion after his leaping, Dull as a Dormouse: see how he sinks, the wench has shot him between wind and water, and I hope sprung a lake.
He needs no teaching, he strikes sure enough,
His greatest fault is, he hunts too much in the purlieus,
Would he would leave off poaching.
And for his horn, has left it at the lodge where he lay late: Oh he's a pernicious lime-hound, turn him upon the pursue of any Lady, and if he lose her, hang him up i'th' slip: when my fox byth' beauty grows proud, I'll borrow him.
Is your boy turned away?
You did command sir, and I obeyed you.
'tis well done, hark ye further.
is't possible this fellow should repent,
methinks that were not noble in him,
And yet he looks like a mortified member,
As if he had a sick man's salve in's mouth,
If a worse man had done this fault now,
Some physical justice or other, would presently
Without the help of an Almanac,
Have opened the obstructions of his liver,
And let him blood with a dog-whip.
See, see, how modestly yond Lady looks,
As if she came from churching with her neighbours,
Why what a devil can you see in her face,
But that she's honest.
Faith no great matter to speak of: a foolish twinkling with the eye, that spoils her coat, but he must be a cunning Herald that finds it.
See how they muster on another, O there's a rank regent, where the devil carries the colours, and his damned drum major. Now the flesh and the world come behind with the Carriage.
Sure this Lady has a good turn done against her will, before she was common talk, now none dares say Cantharides can stir her, her face looks like a warrant, willing and commanding all tongues, as they will answer it, to be tied up, and bolted, when this Lady means to let herself loose, as I live, she has got a goodly protection, and a gracious: and may use her body discreetly, for her health sake, once a week, except lent and dog-days. O if they were to be got for money, what a large sum would come out of the City, for these Licences.
To horse, to horse, we lose the morning Gentlemen.
What, have you lodged the deer below?
Yes, they are ready for the bow.
Who shoots?
The Princess.
No, she'll hunt.
she'll take a stand I say.
Who else?
Why the young strange Prince.
He shall shoot in a stone bow for me,
I never loved his beyondsea-ship, since he forsook the Say, for paying ten shillings: he was there at the fall of a deer, and would needs out of his Mightiness, give ten groats for the docets; marry his steward would have the villuet head into the bargain, to turf his hat withal, I think he should love venery: he and old Sir Tristram: for if ye be remembered, he forsook a Stag once, to strike a rascal milking in a meadow, and her he killed i'the eye. Who shoots else?
The Lady Galatea.
That's a good wench, an she would not chide us for tumbling of her women in the brakes, she's liberal, and by the gods, they say honest, and whether that be a fault or no, I have nothing to do, there's all.
No, one more, Megra.
That's a firker I'faith boy, there's a wench will ride her haunches as hard after a kennel of hounds as a hunting saddle, & when she comes home, get 'em clapped, and all is well again, I have known her lose herself three times in one afternoon, if the Woods had been answerable, and has been work enough for one man to find her, and has sweat for't: she rides well, and she pays well, hark else.
Oh that I had been nourished in the woods,
With milk of goats, and acorns, and not known
The right of Crowns, nor the dissembling trains
Of cruel love: but digged myself a Cave,
Where I, my fire, my Cattle and my bed,
Might have been shut together in one shed,
And then had taken me some mountain girl,
Beaten with winds, chaste as the rock whereon she dwelled,
That might have strewed my bed with leaves and reeds,
And with the skins of beasts our neighbours, and have borne
Out her big breasts, my large course issue:
This had been a life free from vexation.
Oh! wicked men, an innocent may walk safe amongst beasts,
Nothing assaults me here, I see my grieved Lord, sits as
His soul were searching out a way to leave his body.
Pardon me that broke thy last commandment, for I must speak:
You that are grieved can pity; hear my Lord.
Is there a creature yet so miserable that I can pity?
O my noble Lord, view my strange fortunes,
And bestow on me according to your bounty,
If my service can merit nothing, so much as may serve to keep
That little piece I hold of life, from cold and hunger.
Now by the gods this is unkindly done, to vex me
With thy sight, thou art fall'n again to thy dissembling trade,
How shouldst thou think to cozen me again,
Remains there yet a plague untried for me. even so
Thou slepst, and look'st, and spok'st, when I first took thee,
Curse on the time. If thy commanding tears can work
On any other, use thy art, I'll not betray it, which way
Wilt thou take, that I may shun thee, for thine eyes are
Poison to mine, and I am loath to grow in rage:
This way or that way?
Any will serve, but I will choose to have
That path in chase, that leads unto my grave.
This is the strangest sudden chance, you Woodman.
My Lord Leon—
Saw you a Lady come this way, on a sable horse, star-dyed with stars of white?
Was she not young and tall?
Yes, rode she to the wood, or to the plain?
Faith my Lord, we saw none.
Pox of your questions then: What, is she found?
Nor will be, I think.
Let him seek his daughter himself, she cannot stray
About a little necessary natural business:
But the whole Court must be in arms,
When she has done, we shall have peace.
There's already a thousand fatherless tales amongst us,
Some say, her horse run away with her; some, a wolf pursued her;
Others, 'twas a plot to kill her, and that armed men were seen
In the wood: but questionless, she rode away willingly.
Where is she?
Sir, I cannot tell.
how's that? answer me so again.
Sir, shall I lie?
Yes, lie, and dam, rather than tell me that:
I say again, where is she? mutter not,
Sir, speak you, where is she?
Sir, I do not know.
Speak that again so boldly, and by heaven it is thy last. You fellows, answer me, where is she? mark me all, I am your king, I wish to see my daughter, show her me, I do command you all, as you are subjects, to show her me: what, am I not your king, if I, why then, am I not to be obeyed?
Yes, if you command things possible, and honest.
Things possible, and honest, hear me then, thou traitor, that dar'st confine thy king, to possible and honest, things show her me, or let me perish, if I cover not all Sicily with blood.
Faith I cannot, unless you'll tell me where she is.
You have betrayed me, you have let me lose the jewel of my life, go bring her me, and set her here before me, 'tis the king will have it so, whose breath can still the winds, uncloud the Sun, charm down the swelling sea, and stop the Floods of heaven: speak, can it not?
No.
No, cannot the breath of a king do this?
No more smell sweet itself, if once the lungs be but corrupted.
Take you heed?
Take you heed, how you dare the powers
That must be just.
Alas! What are we kings, why do you gods
Place us above the rest, to be served, flattered, and adored,
Still we believe we hold within our hands your Thunder,
And when we come to try the power we think we have,
There's not a leaf shakes at our threatenings,
I have sinned, 'tis true, and here I stand to be punished,
Yet would not these be punished, let me choose my way,
And lay it on.
He articles with the gods, would somebody would draw bonds, for the performance of covenant betwixt them.
What, is she found?
No, we have ta'en her horse, he galloped empty by, there's some treason: you Galatea rode into the Wood with her, Why left you her?
She did command me.
Command, you should not.
'Twould ill become my fortunes, and my birth,
To disobey the daughter of my king.
O you're all cunning to obey us, for our hurts,
But I will have her.
If I have her not, by this sword, there shall be no more Sicily.
What, will he carry it to Spain in's pockets?
I will not leave one man alive,
But the king, a Cook, and a tailor.
Yes, you may do well to leave your Lady bedfellow here for a spinster.
I see the injuries I have done, must be revenged.
Sir, this is not the way to find her out.
Run all, disperse yourselves, the man that finds her, or if she be killed, the traitor, I'll make him great.
ay, some would give five thousand pounds to find her.
Come, let us seek.
Each man a several way, here I myself.
Come Gentlemen, we here.
Lady, you must go search too.
I had rather be the search myself.
Where am I now, feet find out the way, without the counsel of my troubled head, I'll follow you boldly about these woods, or mountains, through brambles, pits and floods; Heaven I hope will ease me, I am sick.
Yonder my Lady is, gods knows, I want nothing, because I do not wish to live, yet I will try her charity. O hear you, that have plenty from that flowing store, drop some on dry grounds, see the lively red is gone to guard her heart: I fear she faints, madam, look up: she breathes not; open once those rosy twines, and send unto my Lord your latest farewell: O she stirs; How is't madam? speak comfort.
'tis not gently done to put me in a miserable life, and hold me there, I prithee let me go, I shall do best without thee.
I am too blame to be so much in rage,
I'll tell her coolly, when and where I heard
This killing truth, I will be temperate in speaking,
And as just in hearing; O monstrous, tempt me not
You gods, good gods, tempt not a frail man, who's he that has a heart, but he must ease it with his tongue.
My Lord, help, help the Princess.
I am well, forbear.
Let me love lightnings, let me be embraced and kissed
By scorpions, or adore the eyes of basilisks,
Rather than trust the tongues of hell-bred women:
Some good god look down, and shrink these veins up,
Stick me here a stone, lasting to memory of this damned act.
Hear me you wicked ones, you have put hills of fire
Into my breast, not to be quenched with tears,
For which may guilt sit on your bosoms, at your meals and beds,
Despair await you, what, before my face,
Poison of Asps between your lips, diseases be your best issues,
Nature make a curse and throw it on you.
Dear Phylaster, leave to enrage, and hear me.
I have done,
Forgive my passion, not the calmed sea, when Aeolus
Locks up his windy brood, is less disturbed than I,
I'll make you know, dear Arethusa, take this sword,
And search how temperate a heart I have, than you,
And this your boy, may live and reign in Just, without control.
Wilt thou Bellario, I prithee kill me,
Thou art poor, and mayst nourish ambitious thoughts
When I am dead, thy way were freer, am I raging now?
If I were mad, I should desire to live: Sirs, feel my pulse,
Whether you have known a man in more
Equal tune to die.
Alas my Lord, your pulse keeps madmen's time,
So does your tongue.
You will not kill me then?
Kill you,
Not for the world.
I blame not thee Bellario, thou hast done but that
Which gods would have transformed themselves to do,
Be gone, leave me without reply, this is the last
Of all our meetings, kill me with this sword, be wise,
Or worse will follow, we are two, earth cannot bear at once, resolve to do or suffer.
If my fortunes be so good to let me sall upon thy hand,
I shall have peace with earth,
Yet tell me this, there will be no slanders, no jealousy, in the other world no ill here?
No.
Show me the way to joy.
Then guide my feeble hand, you that have power
To do it, for I must perform a piece of justice:
If your youth have any way offended heaven,
Let prayers short and effectual, reconcile you to't.
I am prepared,
I will see the king if he be in the Forest,
I have hunted him this two hours, if I should come home,
And not see him, my sisters would laugh at me,
I can see nothing but people, better horsed than myself,
That out ride me, I can hear nothing but shouting,
These kings had need of strong brains,
The whooping would put a man out of his wits:
There's a Courtier with his sword drawn, by this hand upon a woman, I think.
Are you at peace?
wounds her.
With heaven and earth.
Nay, they divide thy soul and body.
Hold dastard, strike a woman, thouart a craven, I warrant thee, thoud'st be loath to play half a dozen veneis at wasters with a man for a broken head.
Leave us good friend.
What ill bred man art thou, to intrude thyself upon our private sports, our recreations.
God judge me, I understand you not,
But I know the rogue has hurt ye.
Pursue thy own affairs, it will be ill to multiply blood upon my head, which thou wilt force me to.
I know not your Rethrack, but I can lay it on if you touch the woman.
Slave, take what thou deservest,
God's guard my Lord.
O, do you breath?
I hear the tread of people, I am hurt, the gods take part against me, would this boar have held me thus else: I must shift for life, though I do lose it, I would find a course,
To lose it rather by my will, than force.
I cannot follow the rogue,
I prithee wench come kiss me now.
What art thou.
Almost killed I am, for a foolish woman,
A knave has hurt her.
The Princess Gentlemen. Where's the wound madam,
Is it dangerous.
He has not hurt me.
By god she lies, has hurt her i'the breast, look else.
Oh secret spring of innocent blood.
'tis above wonder, who should dare this.
I felt it not.
Speak villain, who has hurt the Princess?
Is it the Princess?
I.
Then I have seen something yet.
But who has done it?
I told you a rogue, I ne'er saw him before, I.
madam, who did it?
Some dishonest wretch, alas I know him not,
And do forgive him.
He's hurt too, he cannot go far, I let my father's old fox fly about's ears.
How, will you have me kill him?
Not at all, 'tis some distracted fellow.
By this air, i'll leave never a piece bigger than a nut, and bring him all in my hat.
Nay, good sir, if you do take him, bring him quick to me, and I will study for a punishment great as his sin.
I will.
But swear.
By all my Love, I will: Woodman, conduct the Princess unto the king, and bear that wounded fellow to dressing: Come Gentlemen, we'll follow the chase close.
I pray you friend, let me see the king.
That you shall, and receive thanks.
If I get clear of this, I'll see no more gay fights,
Oh heavens! heavy death sits on my brow,
And I must sleep, bear me thou gentle bank,
For ever if thou wilt, you sweet on all,
Let me unworthy press you, I could wish,
I rather were a Corpse strewed o'er with you,
Then quick above you, dulness shuts my eyes, and I am giddy,
That I could take so sound asleep,
That I might never wake.
I have done ill, my conscience calls me false,
To strike at her that would not strike at me,
When I did fight, methought I heard her pray,
The gods to guard me, she may be abused,
And I a loathed villain if she be, she will conceal
Who hurt her, he has wounds, and cannot follow,
Neither knows he me. Who's this? Bellario sleeping,
If thou be'st guilty, there is no justice that thy sleep
Should be so sound, and mine whom thou hast wronged,
So broken.
Hark I am pursued, you gods I'll take
This offered means of my escape.
They have no mark to know me, but my blood,
If she be true, if false, let mischief
Light on all the world at once.
Sword print my wounds upon his sleeping body,
He has none I think are mortal,
Nor would I lay greater on thee.
O! death I hope is come, blessed be that hand, it wished me well again for pity.
I have caught myself,
The loss of blood hath stayed my flight here,
Here is he that struck thee, take thy full revenge,
Use me as I did mean thee, worse than death:
I'll teach thee to revenge. This luckless hand
Wounded the Princess, tell my followers, thou
Didst receive these hurts in staying me,
And I will second thee: get a reward.
Hide, hide my Lord, and save yourself.
How is this? wouldst thou I should be safe?
Else it were vain for me to live.
These wounds I have, has not bled much,
Reach me that noble hand, I'll help to cover you.
Art thou then true to me?
Or let me perish loathed: Come my Lord,
Creep in amongst these bushes, who does know
But that the gods may save your breath in't, Shromd,
Then I shall die for grief, if not for this,
That I have wounded thee: What wilt thou do?
Shift for myself: Well, peace, I hear 'em come.
Follow, follow, that way they went.
With my own wounds I'll bloody my own sword,
I need not counterfeit to fall, heaven knows,
I can stand no longer.
To this place I tracked him by his blood.
Yonder my Lord, creeps one away.
Stay sir, what are you?
A wretched creature, wounded in these woods by beasts,
Relieve me, if your names be men,
Or I shall perish.
This is he my Lord, upon my soul that hurt her,
It is the boy, that wicked boy, that served her.
O thou damned in thy creation, what cause couldst thou shape to strike the Princess?
Then I am betrayed,
Betrayed, no, apprehended.
I confess, urge it no more, that big with evil thoughts,
I set upon her, and did make my aim her death:
For charity let fall at once, the punishment you mean.
And do not load this weary flesh with torture,
I will know who hired thee to this deed.
My own revenge.
Revenge, for what?
It pleased her to receive me as her Page,
And when my fortunes ebbed, that men strid o'er them careless.
She did shower her welcome graces on me,
And did swell my fortunes: till they overflowed
Their banks, threatening the men that crossed them,
whenas swift as storms arise at sea, she turned
Her eyes to burning Sins upon me, and did dry the streams
She had bestowed, leaving me worse, and more contemned
Then other little brooks, Because I had been great,
In short, I knew I could not live:
And therefore did desire to die revenged.
If tortures can be found, long as thy natural life,
Resolve to feel the utmost vigour.
Help to lead him hence.
Turn back you ravishers of innocents,
Know you the price of what you bear away
So rudely.
Who's that?
My Lord Phylaster.
'tis not the treasure of all the Kings in one,
The wealth of Tagus, nor the rocks of pearl,
That pave the Court of Neptune, can weigh down
That virtue. It was I that hurt the Princess,
Place me some god, on a pyramid, higher than
Hills of earth: and lend a voice loud as you
Thunder to me, that from thence I may teach
The under-world, the worth that dwells in him.
How's this?
My Lord, some man weary of life that would be glad to die.
Leave this untimely courtesy Bellario.
Alas, he's mad, come, will you bear me hence?
By all the oaths that men ought most to keep,
And gods to punish most, when men do break.
He touched her nor, take heed Bellario,
How thou dost drown the virtues thou hast shown,
With perjury, by all the gods 'twas I,
You know she stood betwixt me and my right.
Thy own tongue be thy judge.
It was Phylaster.
is't not a brave boy?
Well, I fear me sir, we were deceived.
Have I no friend here?
Yes.
Then show it some good body, lend a hand to draw us nearer: Would you have tears shed for you, when you die? then lay me gently on his neck, that there I may weep floods, and breath forth my spirit. Not all the wealth of Pluto, nor the gold locked in the heart of earth, can buy away this armful from me; this had been a ransom to have redeemed the great Augustus Cesar, had he been taken; you hard-hearted men, more stony than these Mountains, can you see such a clear pure blood drop, and not cut your flesh to stop his life, to bind whose bitter wounds, Queens ought to tear their hairs, and with their tears bathe them: forgive me thou that art the wealth of poor Phylaster,
Is the villain ta'en?
Sir, here be two confess the deed, but suit it was Phylaster.
Question it no more, it was.
The fellow that did fight with him, will tell us that.
Ay me, I know him well.
Did not you know him?
Sir, if it were he, he was disguised.
I was so: Oh my stars, that I should live still.
Thou ambitious fool, thou that hast laid a train for thy own life, now I do mean to do, I'll leave to talk, bear them to prison.
Sir, they did plot together, to take hence this harmless life, should it pass unrevenged, I should to earth, weeping. Grant me then, by all the loves a father bears his child, their custodies, that I may appoint their tortures, and their deaths.
Death, soft your law will not reach that for this fault.
'tis granted, take 'em to you with a guard.
Come Princely Pharamont, this business past,
We shall with more security go on
With our intended match.
I pray that this action lose not Phylastor the hearts of the people.
Fear it not, their overwise heads
Will think it but a trick.
Has the king sent for him to death?
Yes, but the king must know, 'tis not in his power to war with heaven.
We linger time, the king sent for Phylastor, and the headsman, an hour ago.
Are all his wounds well?
All, they were but scratches, but the loss of blood made him faint.
We dally Gentlemen.
Away.
we'll shuffle hard before he perish.
Nay, faith Phylaster, grieve not, we are well.
Nay, good my Lord forbear, we are wondrous well.
Oh Arethusa and Bellario,
Leave to be kind, I shall be shut from heaven,
If you continue so, I am a man false to a pair
Of the truest ones that ever earth bore.
Can it bear us all? forgive me, and leave me;
But the King hath sent to call me to my death,
Oh show it me, and then forget me: and for thee my boy,
I shall deliver words, will mollify the hearts of beasts,
To spare thy innocence.
Alas, my Lord: My life is not a thing worthy
Your noble thoughts, 'tis not a life, 'tis but a piece
Of childhood thrown away: should I out live you,
I should out live virtue and honour:
And when that day come, if ever I shall close
These eyes but once; may I live spotted for my perjury,
And waste by time to nothing.
And I the woefull'st maid that ever lived,
Forced with my hands to bring my Lord to death,
Do by the honour of a Virgin swear.
To tell no hour behind it.
Make me not hated so.
Come from this prison, all joyful to our deaths.
People will tear me, when they find you true,
To such a wretch as I, I shall die loathed.
Enjoy your Kingdom peaceably, whilst I for ever sleep,
Forgotten with my faults. Every just maiden, every maid in love,
Will have a piece of me, if you be true.
My dearest, say not so.
A piece of you, he was not borne of woman, that can cut it, and look on.
Take me in tears betwixt you,
For my heart will break with shame and sorrow.
Why? 'tis well.
Lament no more.
Why? what would you have done?
If you had wronged me basely, and had found
My life no whit compared to yours for love,
Sirs, deal with me truly.
'Twas mistaken Sir.
Why, if it were?
Then sir we would have asked you pardon.
And have hope to enjoy it.
Enjoy it, I.
Would you indeed? be plain.
We would my Lord.
Forgive me then.
So, so.
'tis as it should be now.
Lead to my death.
Gentlemen, who saw the Prince?
So please you Sir, he's gone to see the City,
And the new Plot-form, with some Gentlemen
Attending on him.
Is the Princess ready to bring her prisoner out?
She waits your grace.
Tell her we stay.
King, you may be deceived yet, the head you aim at,
Cost more setting on, than to lose it so lightly:
If it must off like a wild overflow, that soopes before him,
A golden stock, and with it shakes down bridges,
Cracks the strong hearts of pines, whose cable roots
Held out a thousand storms, a thousand thunders,
And so made weightier, takes whole villages upon his back,
And in the heat of pride charges strong Towns,
Towers, Castles, Palaces, and leaves them desolate.
So shall thy head, thy noble head, bury the lives
Of thousands, that must bleed with thee like a sacrifice,
In thy red ruins.
How now, what mask is this?
Right royal Sir,
I shall sing you an epithalamion, but having lost my best airs with my fortunes, and wanting a celestial harp to strike this blessed onion; thus in glad story I give you all these two fair Cedar branches. The noblest of the mountains where they grew, straightest and tallest, under whose still shades, the worthier beasts have made their layers, and slept free from the fervour of the sirian star, and the fell thunderstroke, free from the Clouds, when they were big with humour, and deliver in thousand spouts, that issues to the earth: O there was none but silent quiet there, till never-pleased fortune shot up shrubs base under branches, to devour these branches, and for a while they did so, and did reign over the Mountain, and did choke up his beauty with brakes, rud, thorns and thistles, till the Sun scorched them to the root, and dried 'em there, and now a gentle gale has blown again, that made these branches meet and twine together, never to be unarmed: The god that sings his Number over marriage beds, has knit their noble hearts, and here they stand, your children, worthy king, and I have done.
How, how?
Sir, if you love it in plain truth, for now there is no masking in't, this gentleman the prisoner that you gave me, is become my keeper.
And through all the bitter threats, your jealousies, and his ill fate, have wrought him, thus nobly hath he struggled, and at length arrived here:
My dear husband.
Your dear husband. Call in the Captain of the Citadel, where you shall keep your wedding, I'll provide a mask shall make your Hymen turn his saffron into a sullen coat, and sing sad requiems to your departing souls, blood shall put out your torches, and instead of gaudy flowers about your wanton necks, an Axe shall hang, like a prodigious meteor, ready to crop your love's sweets. Hear you gods: From this time do I shake all title off of father to this woman, this base woman, and what there is of venge in a Lion chast amongst dogs, or robbed of his dear young, the same enforced more terrible, more mighty, look from me.
Sir, by that little life that I have left to swear by,
There's nothing can stir me from myself.
What I have done, I have done, without repentance,
For death to me can be no bugbear, as long as Pharamont,
Is not my headsman.
Sweet peace upon thy soul thou worthy maid,
When ere thou diest, for this time I'll excuse thee over by thy prologue.
Sir, let me speak next,
And let my dying words be better with you
Then my dull living actions: If you aim at the life
Of this sweet innocent, you are a tyrant and a savage monster,
That feeds upon the blood you gave a life to,
Your memory shall be as foul behind you as you are living:
All your better deeds shall be in water writ;
But this in marble. No Chronicle shall speak you,
Though your own, but for a shame of men:
No Monument, though high and big as Pelion,
shallbe able to cover this base murder, make it rich with brass,
Gold and shining jasper, like the Pyramids;
Lay on Epitaphs, such as make great men gods,
My little Marble, that only clothes my ashes, not my faults,
Shall far out shine it: and for after issues,
Think not so madly of the heavenly wisdoms,
That they will give you more, for your mad rage to cut off:
Unless it be some snake, or something like yourself,
That in his birth shall strangle you: Remember my father king,
There was a fault, but I forgive it, let that sin
Persuade you to love this Lady, if you have a soul.
Think, save her and be saved, for myself, I have so long
Expected this glad hour, so languished under you,
And daily withered, that by the gods, it is a joy to die,
I find a recreation in't.
Where's the King?
Here.
Get to your strength,
And rescue the Prince Pharamont from danger,
He's taken prisoner by the Citizens,
For the Lord Phylaster.
O brave fellows; Mutiny my fine dear countrymen, Mutiny. Now my brave valiant foremen, show your weapons In honour of your Mistresses.
Arm, arm, arm.
A thousand devils take these Citizens.
A thousand blessings on them.
Arm, O king, the City is in Mutiny.
Led by an old grey Ruffian, who comes on
In rescue of the Lord Phylaster.
Away to the Citadel, I'll see them safe,
And then cope with these burghers, let the guard
And all the Gentlemen give strong attendance.
The City up, this was above our wishes.
ay, and the marriage too, by all the gods, this noble Lady has deceived us all, a plague upon myself, a thousand plagues, for having such unworthy thoughts of her dear Honour: O, I could beat myself, or do you beat me, and I'll beat you, for we had all one thought.
No, no, 'twill but lose time.
You say true, are your swords sharp: Well my dear
Countrymen what you lacks, if you continue, and fall not
Back, upon the first broken skin, I'll see you Chronicled,
And Chronicled, and cut and Chronicled, and all to be praised,
And sung in sonnets, and bathed in brave new ballads,
That all tongues shall troll you in Secula seculorum,
My kind Countrymen.
What if a toy take 'em i'ch. les now, and they run all away, and cry, the devil take the hindmost.
Then the same devil take the foremost too, and sauce him for his breakfast, if they all prove cowards, my curses flush amongst 'em, and ill speeding: may they have injurious rain to keep the Gentlemen at home in rasine freeze, may the moth branch their velvets, and their silks only be worn before sore eyes, may their false lights undo 'em, and discover presses, holes, stains, and oldness in their stuffs, and make them shop-rid, may they keep whores, and horses, and break, and live mewed up with necks of beef and turnips; May they have many children, and none like the father, and know no language but that gibberish they prattle to their parcels, unless it be the goatish latin they write in their bonds, and may they write that false, and lose their debts.
Now the vengeance of all the gods confound them,
How they swarm together, what a hum they raise.
devils choke your wide throats, if a man had need
To use your valours, we must pay a brokage for't,
And then bring on, and you will fight like sheep:
'tis Phylaster, none but Phylaster must allay this heat,
They will not hear me speak, but fling dirt at me,
And call me tyrant. O run dear friend, and bring the Lord
Phylaster, speak him well, call him Prince,
Do him all the courtesies you can, commend me to him,
Oh! my wits, my wits.
O my brave Citizens, as I live I will not buy a pin
Out of your walls for this: nay, you shall cozen me,
And I'll thank you, and send you brawn and bacon,
Every long vocation; and foul shall come up fat
And in brave liking.
What they will do with that poor Prince, the gods know, I fear.
Why, they'll flay him, and make Church buckets on's skin, to quench rebellion, then clap a revit in's sconce, and hang him up for a sign.
O worthy Sir, forgive me: Do not make your miseries
And my faults meet together, to bring a greater danger,
Be yourself still sound amongst diseases, I have wronged you,
And though I find it last, and beaten to't,
Let me your goodness know, calm the people, and be
What you were born to, take your love, & with her my repentance,
All my wishes, and all my prayers, by the gods,
My heart speaks all this, and if the least fall from me,
Not performed, may I be struck with thunder.
Mighty Sir, I will not do your greatness so much wrong,
As not to make your word truth, free the Princess and the boy,
And let me stand the shock of this mad sea-breach,
Which I'll either turn, or perish with it.
Let your own word free her.
Then thus I take my leave, kissing your hand,
And hanging on your noble word, be Kingly,
And be not moved Sir, I shall bring you peace,
Or never bring myself back.
Now all the gods go with thee.
Come my brave Mermedons, fall on, let your caps swarm, & your nimble tongues forget your gibberish, of what you lack, and set your mouths ope children, till your palates fall frighted half a fathom past the cure of bay-salt & gross pepper; and then cry Phylaster, brave Phylaster. Let Phylaster be deep in request, my ding-adings, my pair of dear Indentures: King of clubs, then your cut-water-chamlets, and your painting: let not your hasty silks, dearly belovers of Custards & Cheesecakes, or your branch cloth of bodkins, or your tiffanies, your Robin-hood scarlet and Iohns, tie your affections in durance to your shops, my dainty duckers, up with your three piled spirits, that right valourous, and let your acute colours make the King to feel the measure of your mightiness; Phylaster, cry, myrose nobles, cry.
Phylaster, Phylaster.
How do you like this, my Lord prisoner?
These are mad boys I can tell you,
These be things that will not strike topsail to a Foist,
And let a Man of war, an argosy,
Stoop to carry coals.
Why, you damned slaves, do you know who I am?
Yes, my pretty Prince of puppets, we do know, and give you gentle warning, you talk no more such bugs words, lest that sodden Crown should be scratched with a musket; dear Prince pippin, I'll have you coddled, let him lose my spirits, and make a ring with your bills my hearts: Now let me see what this brave man dares do: note sir, have at you with this washing blow, here I lie, do you huff sweet Prince? I could hock your grace, and hang you cross legged, like a Hare at a poulter's stall; and do thus.
Gentlemen, honest Gentlemen—
A speaks treason Captain, shall's knock him down?
Hold, I say.
Good Captain let me have one mal at's mazzard, I feel my stomach strangely provoked to be at his Spanish pot-nowl, shall's kill him?
ay, kill him, kill him.
Again I say hold.
O how rank he looks, sweet Captain let's geld him, and send his dowsets for a dish to the bordello.
No, let's rather sell them to some woman Chemist, that extractions, she might draw an excellent provocative oil from useth them, that might be very useful.
You see, my scurvy Don, how precious you are in esteem amongst us, had you not been better kept at home, I think you had: must you needs come amongst us, to have your saffron hide tawed as we intend it: My Don, Phylaster must suffer death to satisfy your melancholy spleen, he must my Don, he must; but we your Physicians, hold it fit that you bleed for it: Come my robustics, my brave regiment of rattle makers, let's call a common cornuted counsel, and like grave Senators, bear up our branched crests, in sitting upon the several tortures we shall put him to, and with as little sense as may be, put your wills in execution.
Burn him, burn him.
Hang him, hang him.
No, rather let's carbinade his cods-head, and cut him to collops: shall I begin?
Stay your furies my loving Countrymen.
Phylaster is come, Phylaster, Phylaster.
My porcupines of spite, make room I say, that I may salute my brave Prince: and is Prince Phylaster at liberty?
I am, most loving countrymen.
Then give me thy Princely goll, which thus I kiss, to whom I crouch and bow; But see my royal spark, this headstrong swarm that follow me humming like a master be, have I led forth their Hives, and being on wing, and in our heady flight, have seized him shall suffer for thy wrongs.
ay, ay, let's kill him, kill him.
But hear me, Countrymen.
Hear the Prince, I say, hear Phylaster.
ay, ay, hear the Prince, hear the Prince.
My coming is to give you thanks, my dear Countrymen, whose powerful sway hath curbed the prosecuting fury of my foes.
We will curb 'em, we will curb 'em.
I find you will,
But if my interest in your loves be such,
As the world takes notice of, Let me crave
You would deliver Pharamont to my hand,
And from me accept this
Testimony of my love.
Which is but a pittance of those ample thanks,
Which shall redound with showered courtesies.
Take him to thee brave Prince, and we thy bounty thankfully accept, and will drink thy health, thy perpetual health my Prince, whilst memory lasts amongst us, we are thy Mermidons, my Achilles: we are those will follow thee, and in thy service will scour our rusty morions and our bill-bow-blades, most noble Phylaster, we will: Come my rowtists let's retire till occasion calls us to attend the noble Phylaster.
Phylaster, Phylaster, Phylaster.
Worthy sir, I owe you a life,
For but yourself there's nought could have prevailed.
'tis the least of service that I owe the King,
Who was careful to preserve ye.
I ever thought the boy was honest.
Well, 'tis a brave boy Gentlemen.
Yet you'd not believe this.
A plague on my forwardness, what a villain was I, to wrong 'em so; a mischief on my muddy brains, was I mad?
A little frantic in your rash attempt, but that was your love to Phylaster, sir.
A pox on such love, have you any hope my countenance will ere serve me to look on them?
O very well Sir.
Very ill Sir, uds death, I could beat out my brains, or hang myself in revenge.
There would be little gotten by it, e'en keep you as ye are.
An excellent boy, Gentlemen believe it, hark the King is coming,
No news of his return,
Will not this rabble multitude be appeased?
I fear their outrage, lest it should extend
With dangering of Pharamont's life.
See Sir, Phylaster is returned.
Royal Sir,
Receive into your bosom your desired peace,
Those discontented mutineers be appeased,
And this sovereign Prince in safety.
How happy am I in thee Phylaster?
Whose excellent virtues begets a world of love,
I am indebted to thee for a Kingdom.
I here surrender up all Sovereignty,
Reign peacefully with thy espoused Bride,
Assume my Son to take what is thy due.
How Sir, yer son, what am I then, your Daughter you gave to me.
But heaven hath made assignment unto him,
And brought your contract to annullity:
Sir, your entertainment hath been most fair,
Had not your hell-bred lust dried up the spring,
From whence flowed forth those favours that you found:
I am glad to see you safe, let this suffice,
yourself hath crossed yourself.
They are married sir.
How married? I hope your highness will not use me so, I came not to be disgraced, and return alone.
I cannot help it sir.
To return alone, you need not sir,
Here is one will bear you company,
You know this lady's proof, if you
Failed not in the say taging.
I hold your scoffs in vildest base contempt,
Or is there said or done, ought I repent,
But can retort even to your grinning teeths,
Your worst of spites, though Princess lofty steps
May not be tract, yet may they tread a wry,
That boy there—
If to me ye speak Lady,
I must tell you, you have lost yourself
In your too much forwardness, and hath forgot
Both modesty and truth, with what impudence
You have thrown most damnable aspersions
On that noble Princess and myself: witness the world;
Behold me sir.
I should know this face; my daughter.
The same sir.
How, our sometime Page, Bellario, turned woman?
madam, the cause induced me to transform myself,
Proceeded from a respective modest
Affection I bore to my my Lord,
The Prince Phylaster, to do him service,
As far from any lascivious thought,
As that Lady is far from goodness,
And if my true intents may be believed,
And from your Highness madam, pardon find,
You have the truth.
I do believe thee, Bellario I shall call thee still.
The faithfullest servant that ever gave attendance.
Now Lady lust, what say you toth' boy now;
Doe you hang the head, do ye, shame would fleale
Into your face, if ye had grace to entertain it,
Do ye slink away?
Give present order she be banished the Court,
And straightly confined till our further
Pleasure is known.
Here's such an age of transformation, that I do not know how to trust myself, I'll get me gone to: Sir, the disparagement you have done, must be called in question. I have power to right myself, and will.
We fear ye not sir.
Let a strong convoy guard him through the Kingdom,
With him, let's part with all our cares and fear,
And Crown with joy our happy love's success.
Which to make more full, Lady Galatea,
Let honoured Clerimont acceptance find
In your chaste thoughts.
'tis my suit too.
Such royal spokesmen must not be denied.
Nor shall not, madam.
Then thus I join your hands.
Our hearts were knit before.
But 'tis you Lady, must make all complete,
And gives a full period to content,
Let your love's cordial again revive,
The drooping spirits of noble Trasiline.
What says Lord Leon to it?
Marry my Lord I say, I know she once loved him.
At least made show she did,
But since 'tis my Lord Phylaster's desire,
I'll make a surrender of all the right
A father has in her; here take her sir,
With all my heart, and heaven give you joy.
Then let us in these nuptial feasts to hold,
Heaven hath decreed, and Fate stands uncontrolled.