NOw that Aurore with glittering streams,
The glading stars from sky doth chase,
Sir Phoebus pert, with spouting beams,
From dewy nest doth mount apace:
And with his cheerful looks doth yield,
Unto the world a gladsome day.
Go to, O wretch, with ample Field
Of heavy cares oppressed aye,
Thy grievous wonted plaints recount:
Do not alone with sighs and howls,
The Seaysh Aloyones surmount,
But also pass the Pandion fowls:
More irksome is thy state than theirs.
O Mother dear whose death by fits,
I nyll lament but still shed tears,
My ground of grief in thee it sits.
If that in shade of darksome den,
Perceiving sense at all remain,
Hear out at large, O mother then,
My great complaints, and grievous pain
O that immortal Clothos wrist,
Had torn in twain my vital thread:
Ere I unto my grief had wist
Thy wounds, and face of sanguine red.
O day which aye doth me annoy:
Since that time did I more desire,
The fearful darkness to enjoy,
Than Phoebus fresh with fair attire.
I have abode the bitter hest
Of stepdame dire, in mother's place,
I have abode her cruel breast,
Her stomach stout, and fighting face.
She, She, for spite unto my case,
A doleful, and a grave Eryn,
To bridegrooms chamber spousal space,
The Stygian flashing flames brought in.
And thee, (alas) most piteous Sire,
With traitorous trains hath she bereft
Of breathing soul with poisoned mire:
To whom ere while, the world all left
Unvanquished from the Ocean Seas
By martial feats did freely yield:
And didst subdue with wondrous ease,
The Britain brutes that fled the field:
Whom living at their proper sway:
No Roman power did erst invade.
Now lo (full well lament I may)
Thy Spouse deceit thy prows hath lade:
And now thy court and child of yore,
With homage serve a tyrants lore.
WHom so the glistering pomp of royal place,
With sudden sight ynumd doth quite disgrace,
Who so at courtly fleeting ebbing blaze,
Astonished sore, himself doth much amaze:
Lo see of late the great and mighty stock,
By lurking Fortunes sudden forced knock,
Of Claudius quite subvert and clean extinct:
Tofore, who held the world in his precinct:
The Britain Ocean coast that long was free,
He ruled at will, and made it to agree,
Their Roman Galleys great for to embrace.
Lo, he that Tanais people first did chase,
And Seas unknown to any Roman wight
With lusty shearing ships did overdight,
And safe amid the savage freaks did fight,
And ruffling surging seas hath nothing dread,
By cruel spouses gilt doth lie all dead.
Her son likewise more fiend than Tiger fierce,
Of natural mother makes a funeral hearse,
Whose brother drenched deep with poisoned cup.
Poor Britannic, his senseless soul gave up
Octavia sister and unhappy make,
Doth sore lament her case for Britans sake,
Ne can her ruthful piteous sorrow slake,
Though Nero's wrath do sore constrain her grace
She nil esteems the secret closet place:
But boiling still with equal peysd disdain.
With mutual hate 'gainst him doth burn again.
My true and trusty love that I do bear,
In vain I see doth strive to comfort her,
Revenging greedy grief doth straight reprieve,
T'appease her smart the counsel that I give,
Nor flame of worthy breast doth once relent
But heaps of grief, her courage do augment.
Alas, what grisly deeds for to ensue
My fear foreseeth: God grant it be not true.
O Staggering state, O peerless ill:
With ease Electra I repeat,
And call to mind thy mourning will.
With watered eyes like smarting sweat
Thou mightst lament thy father slain,
Still hoping that thy brother might,
That deadly deed revenge again.
Whom thou O tender loving wight
Didst safely shield from bloody foe,
And natural love did closely keep:
But Nero's dreaded visage lo,
Doth fear me that I dare not weep,
Nor wail my parents ruthfull case,
By cruel lot this slaughter caught:
Ne suffers me this genial face,
To dash with tears to dearly bought
With brother's blood: who only was
Mine only hope in all my grief,
And of so many mischiefs, as
My comfort great, and sole relief.
Now lo reserved for greater care,
And to abide more lingering pain,
Of noble famous lineage bore,
A drooping shade I do remain.
My ladies heavy voice methought
Within my listening ears can sound,
And snailish age in going soft,
Unto her thews in not ybound.
O Nurse our dolours witness sure
By coral cheeks distilling rain,
And heavy hearts complaint endure.
Alas, what day shall rid of pain,
With care your well-nigh wasted heart?
That sends this guiltless ghost to grave
This talk (good madame) set apart.
In rule my state their destinies have,
And not thy prayers, (O matron) just.
The down soft easy God shall give,
Your troubled mind a time I trust,
More sweet than ever you did live.
With fuel fair as one content,
And glossed face, but only please
Your man, and make, he will relent.
The Lion fierce I shall appeal,
And sooner tame the Tiger stout,
Then mankind tyrants brutish breast,
He spites the noble razed rout,
contemns high powers, disdains the least:
Ne can well use that princely weed,
Which venomous parent wrapped him in
By huge unspeakable grisly deed.
Although that wight unthankful, grin,
In Kingly throne that he doth reign,
Through cruel cursed mother's aid:
Although he pay with Death again
So great a gift, it shall be said
And after fates in long spent age,
That woman wight shall have alway,
This eloge yet and saying sage,
That he by her doth bear the sway,
Let not your ragious mind so walk,
But do compress your moody talk.
THough much I bear that boiling breast do beat
And tolerably take divorcements threat,
deaths only deadly dart, I see an end,
Of all my broil and pinching pain can send,
What pleasant light to me (O wretch) is left,
My natural Mother slain, and Sire be reft,
Of breathing life, by treason, and by gilt:
Of Brother eke deprived: with miseries spilled:
And wailing overcome: kept down with care,
envied of Make, which I dare not declare.
To maiden subject now, and now defied:
What pleasant light can me (O wretch) abide,
With fearful heart suspecting always aught:
Because I would no wicked deed were wrought:
Not that I fear deaths grisly girning face,
God grant I do not so revenge my case,
A better deed to die: for to behold
The tyrants visage grim, with brows uprolled
And with soft tender lips my foe to kiss,
And stand in awe of becks and nods of his,
Whose will to please my grief with cares yfired
Since brother's death by wicked wile conspire,
Could never once vouchsafe for to sustain,
Less grief to die, than thus to live in pain.
His Empire Nero rules and joys in blood:
The cause and ground of death that Tyrant wood.
How oft (alas) doth Fancy fondly fain.
When slumber sweet in pensive parts doth reign,
And sleep in eyes, all tired with tears doth rest,
I apprehend dear Britain's lively breast:
Ere while methinks his feeble shivering hands
He fenceth sure with deadly blazing brands,
And fiercely on his brother Nero's face,
With sturdy stinging strokes he flies apace.
Ere while thilk wretch recoileth back again,
And to my thews for aid retires amain:
Him foaming foe pursues with haste to have:
And while my brother I desire to save,
And in my clasped arms to shield him free,
His gory bloodied falchion keen I see.
The boisterous romping fiend to tug, & hale
Through out my shivering limbs, as ashes pale.
Forthwith a mighty trembling chattering quake
From weary limbs all supple sleep doth shake,
And makes me woeful wretch for to recount,
My wailing sobbing sorrows that surmount.
Hereto, put to that gorgeous stately house,
All glistering bright, with spoils of Claudius' house
His parent dear in bubbling boat did douse,
That wicked son, this fisking dame to please.
Whom yet escaping dangers great of Seas.
He fiercer freak than waves that scantly rest,
With bloody blade her bowels did unbreast.
What hope of health, can me, O wretch, abide,
That after them thilk way I should not ride?
My special foe, triumphant wise doth weight,
With naked nates to press by lovers sleight,
Our spousal, pure, and clean unspotted bed:
'gainst whom, she burns, with deadly food blood red.
And, for a meed of filthy strumpet's sport,
She causeth Make from spouse for to divort.
O ancient Sire, step forth from Limbo lake,
Thy daughters heavy troublous cares to slake:
Or your twi-gated hellish porch unfold,
That down through gaping ground I may be rolled.
O piteous wretch, in vain, (alas) in vain
Thou call'st upon thy father's senseless sprite:
In whom, God wot, there doth no care remain
Of mortal brood, that here doth take delight.
Shall he, think you, assuage your sorry cheer,
Or shape you forth some sleight, to appall your pain,
That could prefer, before his Briton dear,
Th'imperial throne, a strange begotten swain?
And with incestial love benumbed quite
His brother Germanick's daughter that could plight,
And join to him in solemn marriage rites,
With woeful, and unlucky lovers lights?
Here sprang the role of hurly-burly great,
Here beastly venomous slaughter 'gan to sweat,
Here wily treasons trains appeared first,
Here rules desire, and brutish bloody thirst.
Syllanus first Prince Claudius' son in law,
A bloody mangled offering fall we saw,
That in our grace's Hymenaeal bed,
Matched with you, he might not couch his head.
O monstrous slaughter, worthy endless blame:
In stead of gift unto that wanton dame,
A Carcase cold poor soul, and cureless corpse,
Sillane was given against his will perforce.
And falsely then attached of traitor's crime,
As one conspiring death in Claudius' time,
With loathsome streaks spewed out upon the wall,
He all bedashed your father's princely hall.
Eft stepped into servile Palace stroke,
To filthy vices lore, one easily broke.
Of Devilish wicked with this Princocks proud:
By stepdame's wile prince Claudius' Son avowed.
Whom deadly dam did bloody match ylight:
And thee, against thy will, for fear did plight.
Through which success this Dame of courage fine,
Durst venture, mighty Ioue to undermine.
Who can so many cursed kinds report
Of wicked hopes, and acts in any sort,
Or such a woman's glossed guiles can name,
That romps at rule, by all degrees of shame?
Then holy sacred zeal put out of grace,
Her staggering steps, directed forth apace,
And stern Erinys in with deadly steps,
To Claudius' Court, all desert left yleps.
And with her dreary drakes of Stygian fort,
Hath quite distained the sacred princely port.
And raging riven in twain both natures lore,
And right to wrongs misshapen form hath tore.
That haughty minded dame first gave her make,
A deadly poisoned cup, his thirst to slake.
Straight ways again through vice unkindly touch,
Her Nero caused with him in hell to couch.
And thee, unhappy Britt. in all that broil,
Till that of breath, and life he did despoil,
Thilk greedy bloody tyrant never stint:
Whose doleful death for aye we may lament.
Ere while, unto the world the star that shone,
And was the stay of princely court alone,
Now lo, light ashes easily puffed aforne,
And grisly ghost to grave with torch yborn.
Whom blessed Babe, thy stepdame did lament:
Nor from her gushing tears, did scarce relent,
whenas she gave each trim appointed part,
And goodly portrayed limbs with nature's art,
Of flaming stack to be devoured quite,
And saw the scorching fervent fire in sight
Thy naked joints to ravin up apace
And like the flittering God thy comely face.
Dispatch he me least with this hand he fall.
That power you, nature granted not at all.
But wondrous dolour, great and wrathful ire,
And miseries will it grant without desire.
Nay rather cause your angry moody make,
With supple cheer his fury for to slake.
What, that he will by guilt once slain before,
Alive again my brother me restore?
Nay, safe that you may live and issue bear:
Your father's ancient court for to repair.
That court doth wait another brood they say.
And poor Britt's death tugs me another way.
Yet let the cities love unto your grace,
Your troubled mind confirm but for a space.
Their minds so priest to pleasure me, I know
Great comfort brings: but do not slake my woe.
Of mighty power the people have been aye.
But PRINCE's force doth bear the greater sway.
He will respect his lawful wedded wife,
His minion brave can not so lead her life.
Of no man she esteemed.
But dear to make:
She can not truly yet of wifehood crake.
Ere long she shall a mother eke be made.
So far therein I dare most boldly wade.
His youthful heat at first in filthy love,
With lusty, crusty pangs doth boil above:
thilk courage quickly cold in lust apace
As vapour soon extinct in flame gives place.
But holy, loving, chaste unspotted spouse,
Her love endureth aye with sacred vows.
That wanton first that there durst couch her head,
And tumbling stained quite your spousal bed,
And being but your maid hath ruled long,
Her sovereign Lord, with beauty's grace bestung,
That pranked Paramour pert shall crouch with pain,
When she your grace shall see preferred again.
For Poppy subject is, and meek of sprite,
And now begins her ghostly tombs to dight:
Whereby she closely granting doth bewray,
Her secret hidden fear each other day.
That swift, unconstant, double winged lad
With clout, before his blinded eyes, yclad,
That fickle brained God, th'unhappy boy,
Shall leave her in the midst of all her joy:
Although for beauty bright the bell she bear,
And goodly glistering garments new she wear,
And now do vaunt herself in gorgeous gear,
She shall not long enjoy this gladsome cheer.
Be not dismayed, Madame, for such like pain,
The queen of gods was forced to sustain,
When to each pleasant shape the heavenly guide,
And sire of Gods yturned, from skies did glide.
The swans white wings, to see how they could fadge
He did on him, and cuckolds bullish badge,
That God shone bright in Golden rainy shower
To Danae's breast through top of fortred tower.
The twinkling stars the twins of Leda bright,
Whom Pollux, some, and Castor, call aright,
In large and ample space of starry scope,
With crystal glimmering faces shine wide ope.
And Semele's son, whom Bacchus we do call,
In heavenly birthright doth himself install.
And Hercules that puissant Champion stout,
His sturdy brawns, his Hebe winds about.
Nor once regards how Goddess Iuno fare:
Whose lowering stepdame now she is yframed,
That while on earth his prows he did declare,
Against that marriage, ay, was sore inflamed.
Yet lo her wise, and closely couched grief,
Debonair face, obeisance to her lief,
Caused him at length his mind for to remove,
Through mortal fears estrange from Juno's love.
And now that mighty heavenly Goddess great,
No more adread of mortal strumpet's feat,
Aloft alone in cloudy bower contents
The thundering Lord, which now to her relents.
Nor now with earthly ladies beauty bright
yfired, leaves his starry specked right.
Now madam sith on earth your power is pight
And have on earth Queen Juno's princely place,
And sister are, and wife to Nero's grace,
Your wondrous restless dolours great appease.
Nay, sooner shall the roaring frothy seas,
And mounting flashing flaws match the sky,
And smoking, stifling parching fire dry
With dankish pools agree and watery fen:
And grisly Pluto's filthy filtered den,
With starbright heaven shall sooner coupled be,
And shining light with gloomy shades agree,
And with the clear dry day the dewy night,
Than unto servile lore of husband wight,
That brutish wise in blood takes his delight,
My heavy woeful mind can I address,
While brother's death my heart doth still possess.
O that of heavenly powers the prince and sire,
That shogs and shakes the earth with thundering fire,
And with his wondrous, fearful, cursed cracks,
And strange misshapen monsters which he makes,
Our fearful musing minds doth sore amaze,
Would coin some cureless burning wildfire blaze,
To pelt and pash with thumping fire bright,
That devilish pate, that cruel cursed wight.
We saw from heaven, with beams forthshoting far
doubtless a dreadful hairy, blazing star:
That spouted out a mortal fiery flake,
Whose force a PRINCE's blood can only slake:
Even where that hayting carman slow Boot
With chilling cold all stark of frozen pole,
Doth guide aright Charles whirling running rote,
In stead of night that never away doth role.
Lo now the open air in every street,
With doggish tyrants breath, is poisoned, quite,
And dreadful stars some sudden death do threat.
To people ruled, by wicked Nero's sprite.
So stern a freak, or mankind tyrant stout,
Not Tellus with the Gods displeased brought out,
When mighty Ioue neglected she uphurled
Huge, ugly, monstrous Typhon to the world.
A sorer plague, a cleaner scouring scourge,
With bloody paws that cities bounds doth purge,
Is Nero dire, this cruel cursed wight.
That doth himself 'gainst God and man ydight:
And thrusts from sacred shrines their quiet port,
And goodly temples gay the sancted sort:
That cities dwellers puts from country's fort:
That hath bereft his brother of his life,
And launched his mother's sides with gory knife:
Yet doth this present lightsome day enjoy
And leads his life, that doth us sore annoy.
O Father of heaven, in vain why dost thou throw
Thy great unvanquished rattling thundering blow
Upon the whistling woods and ample seas,
With force of princely power thy wrath t'appease?
Ou such an hurtful and pernicious freak,
Thy due and just conceived ire to wreak.
Why stay thy mighty puissant brands so long,
Ere thou fling down thy rattling cracking throng?
O Lord, that Nero once might pay the price,
Of all his devilish deeds, and every vice,
Th'whole wide world's tyrant stern where he a stroke
Doth bear: which he overlades with burdenous yoke
Of princely sire yborn, but doth defame,
With beastly manners vile his princely name:
Unworth he is your spousal chamber place:
But yet your destiny's force, you must embrace,
And well, abide your fortune's crooked race:
Nor move unkindly Nero's gauly ire.
One day perchance, there will as I desire,
Some God revenge your lamentable case:
And once I trust a gladsome day shall be,
When you shall joy afresh in wonted place.
Ah. no, now, long this court (alas) we see
With heavy wrath of God's displeased ire
Hath overcharged been: which Venus dire
With Messalinas monstrous ramping lust,
She first hath brought adown into the dust.
Who madly married to prince Claudius' grace,
But little mindful then of that same case,
And not regarding much th'appointed pain,
With cursed cressets married once again.
To which unlucky incestual bridal bed,
That drosel dire that furious slut Erin,
With hanging hair about her hellish head,
And girt with snakes with deadly step went in.
And flaming brands from spousal chamber caught,
In both their bloods bathed, hath quenched clean:
And hath incensed prince Claudius' burning thought
In bloody thrattling stroke to pass all mean.
My mother first of wretches all the most,
With stripe of deadly sword gave up her ghost.
And now extinguished quite, left me forlorn,
With dolours pining pangs and mourning worn.
And after her in hellish team doth hail,
Unto the senseless souls of Pluto's jail
Her make, and Britannic her son that way:
And first this ruinous court did she betray.
Let be, Madame, with tears your face to dight:
Ne so renew your bitter wailing just:
Cease troubling now your parents piteous sprite,
That paid hath the price of raging lust.
God grant the talk we heard of late,
To rashly trusted everywhere,
And blown abroad through each estate,
No badge of truth that it may bear.
And that no fresh espoused dame,
Our Princes thews do enter in,
But that OCTAVIA keep the same,
And that the seed of GLADIV Skin,
May once bring forth some pledge of peace:
That to the world rest may redound,
And wrangling strife may easily cease,
And Rome retain her great renown.
The peerless Princess Iuno height,
Her brother's wedlock yoke retains:
Why is Augustus' sister bright,
Where like betrothed league remains,
From stately pomp of court reject,
What doth devoutness her avail?
To sainted sire who hath respect?
What doth her virgin's life prevail?
And CLAVDIV Snow in ground ylaid,
Even we to much unmindful be:
Whose worthy steme we have betrayed
through fear that made us to agree.
In breast our elders did embrace,
The perfect Roman puissance,
The true unstained worthy race,
And blood of Mars they did advance.
The proud and lofty stomached train
Of lusty haughty minded Kings,
They could not suffer to remain
Within this noble City's wings.
And justly they revenged thy death,
O Virgin chaste, VIRGINIA pure,
deprived by sire of vital breath,
That bondage thou mightst not endure:
And that his shameless brutish lust,
So good a meed might not enjoy:
Although by filthy force unjust
Thy chastity he would annoy.
Thee likewise whom thine own right hand,
With sword did pierce, LUCRETIA true,
Who tyrants rape could not withstand,
Did bloody broils and wars ensue.
And with her proud disdainful Make
Lord Tarquin imp of cursed seed,
Correction due doth TULLIA take
For her unkindly shameless deed,
Who on her Father's mangled corpse,
To mischief bent, and wicked bane,
The Carman she to drive did force,
His cruel bruising wombling wane.
And quite against all nature's law,
Even from her own dismembered sire,
The sacred rites she did withdraw,
Denaying wonted burial fire
This grief our woeful age doth feel,
Through monstrous act against all kind,
whenas in deadly crafty keel,
To TYRRHEN seas, and wrestling wind,
The proud presuming Prince did put,
His mother trapped in subtle sort.
The Mariners appointed cut,
The swelling Seas from pleasant port.
The clash resounds with stroke of oars,
The Ship out launched apace doth spin,
In surging froth aloof from shores,
And ample course of seas doth win.
Which gliding forth with loosened planks,
In pressed streams with poised weight,
The rifts do open closed cranks,
That hidden were with secret sleight:
And gulpeth up the leaking wave
The woeful roaring noise and cry,
With woman's shrieks themselves to save,
Do reach and beat the starry sky.
Then grisly present death doth dance
Before their eyes with pining Cheeks:
Whose deadly stroke and heavy chance
For to avoid, than each man seeks:
On rivened ribs some naked lie,
And cut the beating waves in twain:
And some their skilful swimming try,
To get unto the shore again.
The greatest part that sailed there,
By destinies dire to men prefixed,
In whirling swallows drowned were,
The brinks of Seas and ground betwixt.
Queen Agrippine her garments rends,
She tears her ruffled locks of hair
Abundant blubbering tears she spends,
Through deep distress of fainting fear.
Who when no hope of health she spies,
Inflame with wrath, which woes appeased,
O son, for so great gifts, she cries,
Hast thou with such reward me pleased?
This keel I have deserved sure,
That bore and brought thee first to light:
Who empire witless did procure,
And Caesar's title for thy right.
Show forth thy fearful spritish face,
O Claudius now from Limbo lake,
And of thy wife in wretched case,
Revenge and due correction take.
Thy death I causeless did conspire,
Which now I rue with woeful heart:
I dressed eke a funeral fire
Unto thy son by deadly smart.
Lo now as I deserved have,
untombed go to thy guiltless Ghost,
Enclosed in seas in stead of grave,
And wrestling waves of Roman coast.
The flashing flaws do flap her face,
And on her speaking mouth do beat,
Anon she sinks a certain space,
Depressed down with surges great:
Anon she fleets on weltering brim,
And pats them of with tender hands
Through fainting fear then taught to swim
Approaching death, and fates withstands
At length on troubled Seas displayed
She giving over working vain
And tired with streams is weary laid,
Not able toiling strength to strain
In close and secret silent breasts,
Of mates with her to sea that yode,
In whom no fear of death there rests
True faith unto their Queen abode.
Their ladies weather beaten limbs
To help, some freely venture dare,
Some in the cumbrous waters swims
And desperate danger do not spare.
With cheerful voice they comfort her,
Though drawling draggling limbs she drew,
To lift her up with help they stir,
And numbed corpses to strength renew.
What boots it thee the death to shun
Of roaring raging ravening waves.
From deadly sword of wicked son,
Alas poor wretch thee nothing saves?
Whose huge and heinous cursed rage,
Against all course of nature's lore,
Our after slow believing age,
Will scarce believe it done before,
The devilish man repined with grief
When he is mother saved saw,
From swallowing seas have safe relief,
And that she vital breath did draw,
He grudged with grief and in his heat,
He huger mischief heaps to this:
He doth not once delay his feat,
But headlong rashly carried is
Upon her death. A soldier sent,
Dispatcheth that he had in charge,
His Lady's breast his blade doth rent:
She yielding up her sold at large,
From wretched corpses for to entomb
Her slaughter man she then besought,
That bloody blade within her womb,
That first this woe to her had brought,
This, this accursed breast (quoth she)
Which this unkindly monster bore,
From pinching pain may not be free:
Dig, slash the same, no mischief spare.
When this with faltering tongue was said,
At last her sad and trembling ghost,
With latter sobbing sighs unstaid,
Through gored wounds leaves vital coast.
ON me with like consent why didst thou smile,
With glossed looks deluding me a while,
O fortune much of might and princely power?
To lift aloft to noble royal bower?
To th'end that I to honour's court extolled,
From stately seat might have the greater fall,
And round about in every place behold,
Such dreadful, threating dangers to us all,
I safer lay aloof from envies knocks,
Removed among the craggy corsic rocks:
Where as my mind there free at proper sway,
With leisure did repeat my studies aye.
A gladsome joy alone it was to view,
And earnestly to mark the heavens so blue:
And sacred Phoebus double wheeled wain:
And eke the worlds swift whirling motion main.
The Sun so even his second course to keep:
And Phoebe's gliding globe so swiftly sweep:
Whom wondrous starting stars encompass round.
And to behold that shines in every stound,
The glistering beauty bright of welkin wide:
Than which in all the world nothing beside.
Of all this huge and endless work the guide,
More wondrous nature framed that I espied,
For all the bumping bigness it doth bear;
Yet waxing old is like again to wear,
And to be changed to an unwieldy lump.
Now priest at hand this worlds last day doth jump,
With boisterous fall, and tumbling rush of sky.
To squeeze and make this cursed kind abye.
That springing once again, it may yield out
another strange renewed virtuous rout,
As once before it did, new sprung again,
What time Saturnus held his golden reign.
That blameless, chaste, unspotted Virgin clear
A goddess much of might cleped justice here,
With sacred sooth sent down from heavenly space,
At ease on earth did rule the mortal race.
That people plain knew not of warlike feats.
Nor trembling trumpets tunes that rends and beats
The soldiers ears: nor clashing armour bright,
That warring wights defend in field and fight.
Nor wonted was with walls to rampire round,
Their open cities set in any stound.
To each man passage free lay open then:
Nothing there private was to any man.
And then the ground itself and fertile soil,
Her fruitful bosom bared all void of toil,
Into such bounden barns a Matron good,
And peaceable unto so just a brood.
But then another second race arose,
Perceived not to be so meek as those.
A third more wise and witty sort up starts,
Of nature forged fit, t'invent new arts:
As yet unspotted quite with filthy vice.
Soon after though, they ranged with new device,
That boldly venture dare in scudding race,
Unwieldy beasts for to pursue apace.
And mighty weighing struggling fishes great,
With watery coats yclad with fisher's feat,
With net in window wise draw forth, and streeke
With craft of quill, the nibbling fishes cheek.
And silly birds beguiled with pining train:
And light foot dear for life that fling amain
entangling gins entrapped, that safely hold.
And sturdy scowling visage bulls controlled,
On fleshy fillet necks, make wear the yoke:
And earth ere that ungrub up that broke:
Which then turned up with Ploughman's shining share,
In sacred bosom deep, her fruits kept there.
But now this age much worse than all the rest,
Hath leapt into her mother's broken breast:
And rusty lumpish iron and massy Gold,
Hath digged out, that was quite hid with mould.
And fighting fists have armed without delay:
And drawing forth their bonds for rule to stay,
Have certain several jolly kingdoms made,
And cities new have raised now ruled with blade,
And fenceth either with their proper force
Strange stounds or them assaults the which is worse.
The Starry specked virgin flower of skies.
Which justice height, that guilty folk descries,
Now lightly esteemed of mortal people here,
Each earthly stound is fled, and comes not near
The savage mannered rout, and beastly rude,
With dabbed wrists in gory blood imbrued.
The great desire of grisly war is sprung:
And raping thirst of gold, it is not young.
Throughout the world a mighty monstrous vice,
Foul, filthy, monstrous lust hath got the price,
A pleasant tickling plague, whom longer space,
And error deep have fostered up apace.
The heaps of vice raked up in years long passed,
Abounding flow in these our days at last.
And this same troublous time, and cumbrous age,
Oppresseth all men sore, both young and sage.
Wherein those wicked ways that be do reign,
And cruel, romping woodness boils again.
Lust strong in filthy touch, doth bear a sway.
And Princes, riot, now doth catch away
With greedy paws, to bring it to decay.
Th' whole worlds uncredible wealth, without delay.
But lo, which staggering steps where Nero flings,
And visage grim, I fear what news he brings.
DIspatch with speed that we commanded have:
Go, send forthwith some one or other slave,
That Plautius cropped scalp and Silla's eke,
May bring before our face: go some man seek.
I nill protract your noble grace's hest:
But to their camps to go am ready priest.
'gainst lineage nought should rashly pointed be.
A light thing 'tis for to be just, I see
For him, whose heart is void of shrinking fear.
A sovereign salve for fear is for to bear
yourself debonair to your subjects all.
Our foes to slay, a chieftain's virtue call.
A worthier virtue 'tis in country's sire,
His people to defend with sword and fire.
It well beseems such aged wights, to teach,
Unbridled springolds young, and not to preach,
Both to a man and prince of riper years.
May, rather frolic youthful blood appears,
To have more need of counsel wise and grave
This age sufficient reason ought to have.
That heavenly powers your doings may allow.
A madness 'twere to Gods for me to bow,
When I myself can make such Gods to be:
As Claudius now ycounted is we see.
So much the more because so much you may.
Our power permits us all without denay.
Give slender trust to Fortune's flattering face:
She topsy-turvy turns her wheel apace.
A patch he is that knoweth not what he may.
A PRINCE's praise I counted have always,
To do that same which with his honour stood,
Not that which frantic fancy counteth good.
If that I were a meacock or a slouch,
Each stubborn, clubbish daw would make me couch.
And whom they hate, with force they overquell.
Then dint of sword the prince defendeth well.
But faith more sure defence doth seem to me.
Full meet it is that Caesar dreaded be.
More meet of subjects for to be beloved
From subjects minds, fear must not be removed
What so by force of arms you do wring out,
A grievous work it is to bring about.
Well hardly then our will let them obey.
Will nothing then, but that which well you may.
We will decree what we shall best suppose.
What people's voice doth jointly bind or lose.
Let that confirmed stand.
swords bloody dint,
Shall cause them else at me to take their hint.
God shield, and far that fact from you remove.
What then, why Senec do you that approve,
That we contemned, despised and set at nought,
With finger put in hole (full wisely wrought)
Our bodies blood to seek should them abide,
That they might us sometime destroy unspied?
Their native country bounds to banished be,
Nor Plautius' breast nor Sulla's eke we see
Hath broke or camd: whose cankered churlish ire,
Shapes bloody freaks to quench our bodies fire.
And chiefly when these traitorous absent clounes,
Such wondrous favour find in cities bounds,
Which those same exiles lingering hope doth feed:
Suspected foes with sword we will out weed.
And so Octavia shall that jolly dame,
Continue after them their bloody game.
And wend that way her noun white brother went,
Such high mistrusted things must needs be bent.
It is (O Prince) a worthy famous thing,
Amids redoubted Lords alone to ring:
And wisely work your country's praise to save:
And well yourself to captive folk behave:
From cruel brutish slaughter to abstain,
And void of mood to wreak your angry pain:
And to the world a quiet calm to give,
That all your age in peace their lives may live.
This is a PRINCE's praise without all crime:
This is the path to heaven whereby we climb.
So is Augustus prince and father called
Of country first in starbright throne installed.
Whom as a God in ministers we adorn,
Yet troublous fortune tossed him before,
A great while long on lands and ruffling seas,
Until his father's foes he could appease,
And throught wars diverse course could quell them quite.
To you did fortune yield her power, and might,
And reins of rule without all blood, and fight.
And to your beck both land, and seas hath bent.
Grim deadly envy daunted doth relent.
The Senate Lords gave place with free consent:
The battailous rout of knights with willing hearts
(That same decree from sager sires departs)
Unto the lay men's choice do well agree.
Your grace the spring of peace they count to be.
And chosen judge, and guide of mortal stock.
Your grace, your countries sacred sire, doth rock
And rule with princely gorgeous title bright,
The circled world in rundel wise ydight.
Which mighty mounting name to keep so great,
This noble city Rome doth you entreat:
And doth commend unto your royal grace
Her lively limbs in charge for your lives space.
The gift of Gods it is, as we discus,
That Rome with Senate sort doth honour us,
And that the fear of our displeasure great,
From cankered envious stomachs maketh sweat
Both humble talk and supplications meek.
And were not fear all these would be to seek.
Unwieldy, cumbrous cities, members ill,
That Prince and country both do seek to spill,
To leave alive (which swell, and puffed be,
Because of lineage great. and high degree)
What madness mere is it whenas we may,
Even with a word, such freaks dispatch away?
Sir Brutus stern, his brawns and arms did dight,
His sovereign liege to slain by force and might,
That erst had holpen him, and given him health,
And had endued him with princely wealth,
In brunt of raging war undaunted out,
That vanquished many people strong and stout,
Prince Caesar matched by great degrees of power
To love, in stately chair of starry bower,
By devilish citizens wicked wile was slain.
What store of bloody stifling streams on mould.
Did tatred Rome, of her own limbs, behold?
He by his noble virtues worthy praise,
Whom peoples, common bruit to heaven doth raise.
August among the Gods ysainted well,
How many noble breasts did he compel,
How many springolds young, and hoary heads,
Each where dispersed to lig in moulded heads?
How many men did he bereave of breath
Tofore proscript that were condemned to death?
When for the grisly fear of deadly dart
From propre home they were constrained to part
And fly Octauius force, and Lepidus might,
And not abide stern Mark Antonius' sight,
Which then the ample world at once did guide,
That into kingdoms three they did divide,
To dampish sadded sires, with heavy cheer,
Their children's grisly cropped pates appear,
Hung out before the senate's judgement seat,
For each man to behold in open street:
Ne durst they once lament their piteous case,
Nor inward seem to mourn to Claudius' face,
The market stead with blood from bodies spewed,
And loathsome mattrie streams, is all imbrued:
And quite throughout their faces foul arrayed,
The piteous gobs of blood drop down unstaid.
Nor here did this same slaughterous bloodshed stay.
Philip's Pharsalia ghastly fields each day,
The cromming ravening fowls, and cruel beasts
Long fed, with gobbets big of manly breasts,
Beside all this, the cost he scoured quite
Of Sicil sea and ships to ware ydight
With force of arms did win, and havoc made
Of proper subjects slain with his own blade.
The rundle round of lands with mighty main
Of noble Chieftains stroke reboils again.
Antonius overcome in Naval fight,
To Egypt posts in ships prepared to flight:
Not looking long to live nor hoping life.
Incestuous Egypt (through Antonius' wife)
That worthy Roman princes blood did suck:
And covered lie their ghosts with dirty muck.
Long wicked, waged civil war there stayed,
In Mark Antonius grave with him ylaid.
Augustus at the last of conquest great
His dulled swords that wounded souls did beat,
In peaceable sheaths reposed hath laid at rest:
And fear doth rule, and guide his kingdom best
By ready force of arms at all assays,
And Captains faith he shields himself always
Whom now his sons most worthy virtuous praise,
To heaven a consecrated God doth raise,
And causeth all, in Churches for to place
The sacred Picture of Prince Claudius' grace,
And us the starry reign of Gods shall bide
If first with dreadful sword about us wide
We wipe away what so our person stain:
And found our court with worthy stem again.
Your noble spouse, sprung forth of sainted peer
Of Claudius' stock, the starbright diamond clear,
That Goddess Iuno wise her brother's bed
Partaking, pressed down with buttocks red,
Your grace's princely court shall garnish gay,
With wondrous heavenly fair descended stay.
Incestuous married dames, from stock & stem,
Detract all hope, that we should have of them.
Nor us, could she once love that we could see,
Nor with our person once at all agree
In tender budding years, when love suppressed
With blushing hides the flames of burning breast,
Scant plain appears the love they bore indeed.
Thus we ourselves with hope in vain did feed:
Although undoubted signs, as body wried,
And frowning looks, which we have oft espied,
Her spiteful hating stomach did bewray
Which she doth bear, whom duty binds t'obey.
Which yet at last, big, boiling, grievous pain,
With death determined hath t' avenge again,
we have found out, for birth and beauty's grace.
A worthy make for such an Empress place:
To whom that lovely goddess Venus bright,
And mighty Ioue his spouse that Iuno height,
and goddess fierce in boisterous warlike arts,
Gives place for bodies seemly portrayed parts.
Faith, meekness, manners mild, & bashful shame
Of spouse, those aught an husband to reclaim.
The pearls of judging mind, alone remain,
Not subject once to any rulers reign.
The passing pride of beauties numbing grace
Each day appalls, and blemisheth apace.
What praises woman wights have in them closed?
All those in her alone hath God reposed,
And such a peerless peer, the guides of life,
The destinies would have borne to be our wife,
O noble prince such blind unlawful love,
(Do rashly credit nought) from you remove.
Whom Ioue can not repel that rules the clouds,
And piercing raging floods, therein him shrouds,
And rangeth through the reign of Pluto's pit,
And pulleth down in welkin high that sit
The mighty powers of heaven, the God of love?
And can I then his force from me remove?
Swift winged love, men's fancy fond, in vain
A mercy wanting God to be, doth fain:
And arms his hands with wounding weapons keen
And bows with burning brands, for lovers green:
Of Venus to be sprung they all accord,
and blindly forged of thunders limping Lord.
Bland love the minds great torment sore appears,
And buddeth first in frolic youthful years.
Who while we drink of Fortune's pleasant cup,
With lazy pampering riot, is nestled up:
Whom if to to stir up you leave at length
It fleeting, falls away with broken strength.
This is in all our life (as I suppose)
The greatest cause how pleasure first arose.
Which sith mankind by brooding bideth aye,
Through gladsome love the fierce wild beasts doth sway
It never can from manly breast depart.
This self same God I wish with all my heart
The wedlock lights to bear before our grace,
And fasten Poppy sure in our bed place.
The people's grief might never yield to it:
Nor virtue can the same at all permit.
Shall I alone to do, forbidden be
That every patch may do? that grieveth me
No trifling toys the people looks to have
Of him, that ought to rule with wisdom grave.
It pleaseth us with daunted power to try,
If people's rash conceived rage will fly.
Seek rather for to please and calm their mood.
Ill ruled is that reign where people wood,
Their subject Prince doth wield, as they think good
When nought that they require they can obtain,
They justly then aggrieved are again.
That gentle prayers cannot win with ease,
By force to wring it out, it doth us please.
An hard thing 'tis the people not to have
That of their Prince, which they do justly crave.
And horrible 'tis a Prince to be constrained.
Let not your subjects then so sore be reigned.
Why then the common brute abroad will be.
How that the people have subdued me.
That no man trusts that is of credit light.
Be it so, yet many it marks with deadly spite.
With country peers to meddle it is afraid,
To quip and frump, 'tis nothing less dismayed.
Your grace may easily couch that budding bruit
Let Sainted sire's deserts with pliant suit,
Your grace's mind remove: let spouses age,
And courteous bashful shame disrump your rage.
Leave off (I say) that we intend to grudge.
For now your talk our patience moveth much:
I pray you let it lawful be to do,
That Senec giveth not advise unto.
And we our people's wishes do defer,
While Poppy feel in wombling womb to star,
The pledge of faithful love to me and her.
Why do we not appoint the morrow next,
whenas our marriage pomp may be context?
THrough paunch of rivened earth, from Pluto's reign
With ghostly steps, I am returned again.
In writhled wrists, that blood do most desire,
For guiding wedlock vile with Stygian fire.
Let Poppy, which these cressets coupled sure,
Unto my son be joined in marriage pure:
Whom mother's grief, and hand revenging wracks,
Shall send with heave and hoe to funeral stacks
I always do remember well beneath
Where piteous, ghostly, crawling souls do breathe,
Th'unkindly slaughterous deed, which to our sprite
Yet unrevenged is grievous and of right:
And for the good I did a cruel prize,
That deadly framed ship in crafty wise:
And due reward that he gave me again,
For helping him to rule of Empyres reign:
And eke that night, whenas I did bewail,
Both loss of ship wherein we then did sail,
And mates unhappy death, and while I thought,
For this accursed deed to have beseeched
The Gods to trickling tears he gave scant time
But twice increased hath his devilish crime.
Quite slain with sword, thrust through my bodies bounds
And filthy laid through gory mattering wounds,
Delivered safe from seas, devouring sup,
In antic court my ghost I yielded up.
Nor yet his cankered, and unsatiate hate.
For all this blood doth Nero once abate.
That Tyrant dire doth rage at mother's name.
And seeketh ways my deeds for to defame.
Who threating death to them that do withstand,
My shapes he dingeth down in every land:
My princely titles large he scrapeth out
In every place, the whole wide world about,
Which my unlucky parents love did give,
too much unto my pain while I did live,
Unto a boy to guide, which now I rue.
My poisoned make, my Ghost doth oft pursue:
And in my face with burning brands doth fly.
He stays a space with earnest talk hard by,
And threateneth sore, and doth impute his death
And tomb he should have had to me beneath.
And now desires to have some factious wight,
That dare despoil my son of breathing sprite.
Let be you shall have one to work this crime,
I do require no long delayed time.
Revenging sprite Erin, a death doth coin,
Of life, that wicked tyrant to purloin.
Sore smarting leaden stripes and shameful flight,
And pining pangs with thirst and hunger dight:
That Tantalus spungelike thirsty mouth befured,
And Sisyphus' toil shall pass, and Tityus' bird,
And Ixion's painful wombling wheel about,
That teareth all his bodies parts throughout.
Although that Tyrant proud and scornful wight,
His court with marble stone do strongly dight,
And princelike garnish it with glistering gold:
Though troops of soldiers shielded sure, uphold
Their chieftains princely porch: and though yet still
The world drawn dry with tasks even to his will,
Great heaps of riches yield themselves to save,
Although his bloody help the Parthians crave,
And Kingdoms bring, and goods all that they have,
The time and day shall come, whenas he shall
Forlorn, and quite undone, and wanting all.
Unto his cursed deeds his life and more,
Unto his foes his bared throat restore.
Alas, unto what end is all my pain?
Or in what case do now my vows remain?
Whereto doth now thy rage and destinies spite?
Draw thee O Son, with brain benumbed quite?
That to such monstrous heaps of ills thy dame
(Whom thou with cursed mischief overcame)
Her wrath should yield? O that ere to the light
A sucking babe I brought thee forth in sight,
And fed thee fine with pap as princely borne,
The fierce, wild, savage beasts had rent and torn
My womb and bloody entrails all before.
Without all crime, and wanting reasons pride,
Mine own dear dandling child thou shouldst have died.
And fastened sure to me shouldst aye behold,
The quiet place, where Ghostly souls be rolled:
And see thy grandsires great of worthy fame,
And sire Domitius eke of princely name,
Whom now both shame and wailing doth abide,
That while they dure, from them shall never slide.
For which both thee, O cursed barn, they may,
And me, that thee have borne give thanks for aye.
But why cease I, with hell to hide my face,
Wife, stepdame, mother dire, in my life space?
DO not, alas, thus sore lament,
But rather yet your mourning stay,
Sith that the city whole is bent
To celebrate this joyful day:
lest your great love and favour both,
Which I do count to be most sure,
The more cause Nero me to loath,
And eke his bitter wrath procure:
And I fall out to be the ground
To you of many mischiefs vile,
This same is not the first deep wound,
That I have felt now this good while:
Far worse than this have I abode:
But of these troublous cares this day
Shall make an end I trust in God,
Although with Death he do me pay,
No man to see shall me constrain
His bended brows knit furrowise,
Nor step within the Chamber ragyne
Of maid dressed up in bridal guise
Augustus' sister I will be,
And not his wife as wont I was:
But only pains remove from me,
And fear of death I will not pass.
Yet canst thou piteous wretch once trust,
Thy cruel husbands father law,
Or these few things to have so lust
While mischiefs yet in mind are raw?
Now long reserved, until this day,
And these same marriage rites be passed,
Thou shalt poor wretch without delay,
A bloody offering die at last.
Why thus with tears disfigured sore
Thy wonted home dost thou behold?
Make haste to shun this deadly shore
And leave this slaughterous PRINCE's fold.
Lo see that day suspected long
And whispered Fame in all men's ears,
With glistering pomp of bridal throng,
To us poor wretches now appears.
And Claudius' brood Octauias grace,
From Nero's wedlock place expelled,
Departed is, whose spousal space,
Hath Poppy conqueror long time held.
The while, our piety couched lies
Kept down with heavy, cumbrous fear.
And slow revenging grief likewise:
Where doth the people's power appear,
That broke the force of Princes great,
That conquerous city laws hath framed,
That worthy men to honours seat
Preferred, that war and peace proclaimed,
That savage people strange did tame
That Kings and Princes caught in fight
Shut surely up in prison frame
To keep them close from all men's sight
Lo, which we cannot once abide,
To see where Poppies image trim,
Conjoined unto Nero's side
All glistering bright shines very brim.
Let force of Arms pull down that frame
And match with ground that ladies face
Too likely carved to his name,
And snatch her down from beddig place,
And let it forthwith fly with brands
With Darts and javelins fiercely flung,
From pithy brawns and sturdy hands
Unto the princes courtly throng.
FRom out of spousal bower dismayed with fear,
Whither go you? what secrets daughter dear
Unknown, makes you to look so drowsily?
Why spungelike looks your face with tears from eye
That fell? of truth the time desired long,
And wished for by prayers, and vows among
Hath shined bright. Caesar's wedlock are you:
Your golden grace, whereof he took the view.
Him prisoner caught, and did him surely bind,
So much the more, how much Senec his mind
Did seek to change, and wild from love to wield.
And Venus chief in love hath made him yield.
O in beauty passing all, what beds then down
More soft, have borne thy weight when thou with crown
Didst sit in mids of court the Senate all.
At thy great beauty aghast, thou didst appall.
Whilst thou the Gods with perfume sendest fine,
And sacred altars drenched with thankful wine,
Thy head attired with veil of yellow hue
By Caesar's side thou went'st as princess new:
When he aloft extolled above the rest,
With haughty courage merrily went to feast.
Like as king Peleus went sometimes to take
Queen Tethis, whom salt seas foam bred, his make.
Whose briding chambers, banquet wise ydrest,
The Gods vouchsafed to hallow with their hest,
Both they that rule in skies and eke in Seas.
But tell, O Lady, tell, if it you please,
What sudden chance doth shade your beauties light.
What means your colour change from red to white?
What moves those trickling tears, how stands your plight?
With dreams, and grisly sights, this last night, Nurse,
My mind was troubled sore, but frayed much worse.
For when sir Phoebe his weary course had rid,
While quiet resting night each thing shaded,
My senses weary fell in slumber deep,
While Nero me within his arms did clepe.
Resolving limbs, at length 'gan sleep discharge,
And long I rest not under quiets targe,
For lo, I saw a rout that brought me fear,
Come to my chamber with dishevelled hair:
The Matrons sage of Latin land did mourn,
And sounded shrieking sighs as though forlorn
They were, the dolefulst wights that live on ground.
And oft among the warlike trumpets sound,
I saw my husband's mother terribly stand,
With threatening look bewrayed with blood in hand
A light fire brand she bore which oft she shook,
And made me go with her through fearful look.
When down we came through opened earth she led
The way, I after went with bowing head,
And musing much thereat, mark what I say,
My bed, methought I saw, wherein I lay,
When first espoused I was to Rufe Chrispine:
And he methought, with first son of his line,
With many following them against me fast
Did come, and me to clepe did swift his haste,
And as he wonted was he kissed me oft,
Then rushed into my house with pace not soft
Amazed Nero sore, in Chrispine's breast
That hid his falchion keen: fear shaked of rest
From me: I trembling stood with quivering fear,
And breast dismayed to speak made me forbear.
Till now (O Nurse) I met with thee, whose trust,
And faith into these words have made me burst.
Alas, what threateneth me each grisly sprite?
What means of husband's blood that doleful sight?
The hidden sacred vain that moveth swift,
Which fantasy we call by secret drift,
When we do take our rest doth show again,
The things both good and bad that broil in brain:
You marvel that you saw your make, and bower,
His ghostly funeral stacks, at that same hour
Round clasped close in arms of husband new:
Hereto, the beaten breasts with hands moved you,
And maidens hair, on marriage day displayed:
Octauias friends with heavy hearts bewrayed,
Amids her brothers both and father's hall
Their heavy cheer for her unlucky fall.
That dreadful blazing flame of fire forborn
In Agrippina's hand your grace before.
Which you did follow streigth declares renown
To you, though envy strive to keep it down:
The seat you saw beneath doth promise you
Your state to stand full sure not changing new:
That Nero prince in Crispins throat did hide
His sword, it tells that he in peace shall bide,
Unknown to bloody ruthful war for aye.
Therefore (Madam) pluck up your heart I pray:
Receive both mirth and glee cast fear aside,
With joy, and ease you may in bower abide.
To temples high where mighty Gods do dwell,
I will repair, and offerings to them fell
In humble wise their heavy wrath t'appease,
And me of mighty sight, and dreams to ease.
My second wish shall be, that this fear all
Upon my foes as sudden chance may fall.
O Nurse pray thou for me some vows do make
Toth' Gods, that ghostly fear his flight my take.
IF stealth disclosed by blabbing fame,
And lusty, pleasant, thankful love,
Of JOVE be true: who form did frame
Of swan to come from skies above,
And did enjoy the sweet consent
Of Lady Leda's loves delight:
Who like a Bull his labour spent,
Through flowing floods to carry quite,
EUROPA slily stolen away:
He will no doubt leave reign of Sky
And POPPIES love disguised assay.
If he her sovereign beauty spy.
Which he might well prefer before
Fair Leda's sugared sweet delight:
And DANAE whom he won of yore,
Amazed with golden shower so bright:
Let SPARTE now for Helen's sake
Of beauty bragging fame upraise:
Admit the TROJAN herdman make
Of gained spoil triumphant praise:
Fair HELEN here is stained quite:
Whose beauty bred such boiling ire,
That earth was matched even in sight
With TROJAN towers consumed with fire.
But who is this that runs with fear oppressed?
Or else what news brings he in panting breast?
WHat sturdy champion stout doth joy with glee
Our chieftains royal bower safe to see,
Then to his court I counsel him to wend,
'gainst which the populus rout their force doth bend.
The rulers run amazed to fetch the guard,
And armed troops of men, their town to ward.
Nor woodness rashly caught through fear doth cease,
But more and more, their power doth increase.
What sudden rage doth beat their brawling brain?
The garrisons great with fury astoned again,
And stirred up for Queen Octauias sake
With monstrous mischief vile, their rage to slake,
They rumbling rush into the Palace far.
What dare they do, their counsellors who are?
Advance their Empress old, subvert the new:
And grant her, brothers beds as is her due.
Which Poppy now, with whole consent doth hold?
Yea that unbridled rage in breast uprolled,
Sets them agog, and makes them wondrous wood.
whatever image graven in marble stood,
If Poppies badge it bore, or if in sight,
It tended for to show her beauty bright,
Though it on heavenly altars brave did stand,
They break, or pull it down, with sword or hand.
Some parts with ropes sure tide, they trail them forth
Which spurned with dirty feet, as though nought worth
With filthy stinking mire, they it all bewray.
And with their deeds their talk doth jump agree,
Which mine amazed mind, thinks true to be
For fiery flames they threat for to prepare,
Wherewith to waste, the PRINCE's Palace fair,
Unless, unto their furious mood he give
His second wife, and with Octavia live,
But he by me shall know in what hard stay
The City stands: the rulers I'll obey.
A lack, what made you cruel wars, in vain
To move, sith prisoner love you can not gain
You can not him overcome, your fiery flame
He recketh not: his sire overcomes the same.
He darkened hath those thundering thumps that shake
Heaven, Earth, Hell, sea, all things that makes to quake.
Yea mighty Ioue, in heaven that wears chief crown
His flames from welkin high hath brought adown.
And you, not victors now, but vanquished,
Shall ransom pay, the price of heart's blood red.
Love, patient can not be, but hight in rage,
No easy thing it is, his wrath t'assuage,
Achilles worthy sight, that was so stout,
To twang the Harp he made in Lady's rout,
Prince Agamemnon stern that boy benumbed,
And rabble rude of Greeks with love brands burned.
King Priam's reign he topsy-turvy tossed,
Aud goodly Cities great he chiefly lost.
And now my mind sore frighted stands aghast,
What Cupid's furious force brings us at last.
AH, ah, our captains slow dispatching coil,
And our long suffering ire in such a broil,
That streams of blood yet do not quench their rage
Which they against our proper person wage
And that all Rome, with corpses strewed about,
Those cruel villains blood, doth not sweat out.
But deeds already done, with death to pay.
A small thing 'tis, a greater slaughterous day
The people's cursed crime, and eke that dame,
Whom I did aye suspect, deserves the same.
whom, to yield those peasants would me make:
At last she shall, with life our sorrow slake,
And with her Body's blood shall quench our ire.
Then, shall their houses fall by force of fire:
What burning both, and buildings fair decay,
What beggarly want, and wailing hunger may
Those villains shall be sure, to have each day.
Ah, Provender pricks that vile rebellious race
Ne can they once our favour well embrace,
Nor be content, with peace in quiet state,
But broiling raumpe about with troubled gate.
Hereon with boldness straight, hereon they fly,
With hare-brained rashness headlong by and by.
Well, they must tamed be with heavy stroke,
And down be kept with poise of weighty yoke:
That they, with like attempt, do not arise,
Nor once cast up their deadly peasants' eyes,
Against our loving spouses golden looks:
First punish them sure, than fear shall be their books,
To teach them, at their PRINCE's beck t'obey
But see at hand, whom faith, and virtue rare,
Lieutenant chief of camps, appointed there.
THe vulgar people's rash unruly rage
The slaughter of a few did soon assuage,
Which long with stood our valiant force in vain,
To tell your grace this news, I come again.
And is this then enough, dost thou so well.
O soldier mark what doth thy captain tell?
Hast thou with held thy hand from bloody ire?
Is this the due revenge that we require?
The captain guides of treason paid their hire,
By desperate death of bloody sword in fight.
The rout which sought with flaming fire to light,
Our royal Palace great, who would assign
Their Prince what he should do: and pull in fine
Our mate from us dissolving wedlock bands:
Whose hardy slanderous tongues, & wicked hands,
Her princely grace reproachfully withstands,
From due revenge, are they dismissed free?
Shall subjects pain, by grief assigned be?
It shall assign which time shall never wear.
Which neither wrath may end, nor yet your fear;
She shall appease our high displeased mind,
Who first, our wrath deserved due to find.
Declare whose death your mood doth most require
Let not my hand be stayed from your desire.
It seeks our sister's death, and traitorous head.
Those words through all my limbs, hath stiffness spread,
Oppressed with grisly fear.
Us to obey.
Stands thou in doubt:
On faith why do you lay
So great a fault?
Because thou sparedst our foe.
Deserves a woman to be termed so?
If treason she begin.
Is any man
So sure, that hit accuse of treason can:
The people's rage:
Those mad unwieldy wights
Who order could?
Who could stir up their spirits?
No creature as I think.
A woman could,
In whom a mind Dame nature hath upfould,
To mischief prone: she armed hath her heart,
To hurt by wiles: yet strength she set apart,
lest she undaunted force with her should bear:
But now her slender power with doubting fear,
Is quickly quailed, or else with punishment,
Which her condemned state to mischief bent
To late doth end: away with grave advise,
Us with entreating seek not to entice.
Dispatch that we command on shipboard horn,
Far off to shore aloof with dashing worn,
Command she be: that tunlike swelling breast
At length in storming stomach may take rest.
ALack the people's bitter love,
And dire good will to many one,
Which, when they hoisted sails above,
With pleasant blasts it made to groan,
And carried them from quiet shore,
That fainting, leaves them in the deep,
And tumbling, raging waters roar.
Cornelia piteous wretch did weep,
And sore bewail her sons estate:
The people's love did undo them,
And wondrous favour, bred them hate:
Great worthy peers of noble stem:
Of high renown for virtues praise:
In faith and eloquence did pass
Their stomachs stout their fame did raise:
i'th' laws each one most excellent was.
And Scipio, thee did Fortune yield
Unto like death, and cursed wrack,
Whom neither honour's pomp could shield,
Nor fenced house thy foes keep back.
More to repeat, although I could,
Pure present grief forbiddeth sore:
Ere while to whom the people would,
Her Father's antic Court restore,
And Brother's wedlock once again,
Now weeping, wringing hands poor wretch,
Unto her cruel, deadly pain,
The armed soldiers do her fetch.
How safe doth poverty lie content,
In thatched house safe shrouded there?
High raised towers with blasts are bent,
Which often times them over bear.
Where pull you me poor wretch? alas,
Into what banished exiles place,
Would Nero have me for to pass,
Or Fortune bids, with frowning face?
If now with fainting strength quite cooled,
And with my broils all wearied cease,
And longer life she grant me would,
If that she work for to increase,
My sorrows great with deadly dart,
Why is she then so much my foe,
In country that I may not part,
And leave my life before I go?
But now no help of health I feel,
Alas I see my Brother's boat:
This is the same, whose vaulted keel,
His Mother once did set a clote.
And now his piteous Sister I,
Excluded clean from spousal place,
Shall be so carried by and by:
No force hath virtue in this case.
No Gods there be my woes to wreck.
The griefly, dreadful drab Eryn,
Doth wield the world at nod and beck,
Who can lament my state, wherein
I am, alas, sufficiently?
How can Aedon duly plain,
My smarting streams at bears that I
Do shed? whose wings I would be fame,
If destinies would them grant, to wear.
Then would I leave my mourning mates,
As swiftly fled, as wings could bear,
Aud so auoyde these bloudy pates.
Then sitting sole in shirwood shirle,
And hanging sure, by dandling twig
With plaintive pipe I might out twarl
My heavy tuned note so big.
The mortal brood the destinies guide:
Themselves they nothing can assure,
That certainly doth steadfast bide:
Which our last day of life, procure,
(Where of we always should beware,)
Much dangerous chances for to try:
Unto your troubled mind with care,
Now many samples do applies,
Which your accursed court hath brought,
To holden you in all your broil:
For what hath more your troubles wrought,
What doth against you sorer toil,
Than fortune doth? the first of all,
Agrippa's child brought forth to life,
Whom we Tiberius' daughter call,
By law, and eke Prince Caesar's wife,
Of many sons a careful dame,
I cannot chose but now recount,
Whose worthy, glorious ample name,
Throughout the world doth much surmount.
So oft with belly bollen that bare
Desired fruits, and pieces pledge,
Ere long thou suffered'st exiles care,
Stripes, chains, and bolts of iron wedge,
And mourning much, which so did frame,
That death they caused thee to abide.
So Livia, Drusus lucky name
In male kind babes, did headlong slide,
Into a cruel monstrous deed,
And death sore piercing deadly dart.
Her mother's fates doth Iulia speed,
To follow straight with all her heart,
Who after longer wasted time
With bloody falchion keen, was slain,
Although for no just cause or crime.
Your mother eke that once did reign,
Who then esteemed of Claudius well,
Did wisely wield his court at will,
And fruitful was, as you can tell,
What could not her desire fulfil:
She sometime subject to her slave,
To death was put with soldiers blade.
What she, that easily hope might have,
Tooth skies, her reign to rise have made,
Prince Nero's lusty Parent great?
First tossed with shipman's boisterous force,
Then torn with sword in princes heat,
Did she not lie a senseless corpse,
Lo me the tyrant stern will send
To irksome shades and hellish spirits.
Why wretch do I the tyiue thus spend?
Draw me to death you to whose mights,
False Fortune hath bequeathed me.
I witness now the heavenly power.
What dost thou bedlam? leave to flee,
With prayer to Gods, who on thee lower.
I call to witness Tartar deep,
And sprites of Hell revenging freaks
Of heinous facts, in Dungeon steep,
And Sire whom death deserved wreaks.
I do not now repine to die,
Deck up your Ship, and hoist your Sail,
On frothing seas to winds on high:
Let him that guides the Helm not fail,
To seek the shore of Pharian Land.
O pippling puff of western wind,
Which sacrifice didst once with stand,
Of Iphigen to death assigned
And close in Cloud congealed clad,
Did carry her from smòking airs,
Which angry, cruel Virgin had:
This Prince also oppressed, with cares,
Save from this painful punishment,
To Diane's temple safely horn:
The barbarous Moores to rudeness bent,
Then princes Courts in Rome forlorn,
Have far more Civil courtesy:
For there doth strangers death appease
The angry Gods in heavens on high,
But Roman blood, our Rome must please.