HAh? let me clear mine Eyes, methinks I see
Comforts approach, as if They came to me;
I am not used to 'em; I ha' been long without,
How comes the Virtue of the Times about?
Has Ancient Custom yet a Friend? of Weight?
So many? rare I Goodness is waked o'late
Out of her long Sleep sure; that has lain still
Many a dear Day, charmed with Neglect and Will,
I thought I'd been forsaken, quite forsook,
For none these 7. years, has bestowed a Look
Upon my watery Habitation here;
I mean, of Power, that ought to see Me clear,
For yond fair City's health, which Sweetness bless
And Virtue in full Strength, ever possess;
Well fare thy Visitation, Noble Lord,
And this most Grave Assembly; that accord
In ways of Charity and Care with Thee;
joys visit You, as Your Loves visit Me:
The Water stands so full now in mine Eyes
I cannot choose but weep; but the Tears rise
From Gladness, not from Sorrow, for that's lost
Now I see you, Unkindness yet has cost
Many a dear Drop, since I beheld the Face
Of the last Magistrate, in Power and Place;
I ha' done good Service; 'tis no boasting part
In one forgot, to speak her own desert:
I grant my kind and loving Sisters both
Chadwell and Amwell, have expressed no Sloth
In their Pipe-Pilgrimage, but fairly proved
Most excellent Servants, housed, and well-beloved;
And have, when hard Necessity requires,
Given happy Quench to many merciless Fires;
Therefore am I neglected? An old Friend?
The Head? that to the Heart a'th' City send
My best and clearest Service, take Delight
To be at hand, make your Dames Pure and White;
Who for their civil Neatness, are proclaimed
Mirrors of women, through all Kingdoms famed;
Can I be so forgot? and daily hear
The noise of Water-bearers din your care?
Those are my Alms folks, trotting in a Ring,
And live upon the bounty of my Spring,
Yet like dull worms that have no sense at all,
Lick up the Dews, ne'er look from whence they fall,
The head's not minded, whence the goodness flows:
So with the world's condition right it goes;
Blessings are swallowed with a greedy love,
But Thanks fly slowly to yond place Above,
From whence the Everliving water's spring,
Which to your souls eternal comforts bring:
The Dews of Heaven fall on you, prosperous Fates
Like fruitful Rivers, flow into your States.