FRee Love, full welcome, bounty fair, & clear,
E'en as it flows from Heaven, inhabit here,
And with your Liberal Virtues bless the year,
Make this thy Palace thou smooth youth of Feasts,
Comus! and put joy into all the Guests,
That they may truly taste in fewest words,
Th' Abundant welcome yond Kind Lord affords,
Especially to You, above the rest,
Of all most worthy to be First and Best;
You challenge two Respects, in Brotherhood, one,
Which had desert enough came it alone,
Without a second Virtue, but to add
Unto Your Worthiness, Your Love was clad
With Honour, Cost, and Care, and how applied,
The late triumphant Day best testified,
Stands in no need of my applause and praise,
Your Worth can of itself, itself best raise;
So much for Noble Action in your Right,
Which I presume his goodness will require:
Now for Himself, (not far to wade or swim)
I borrow of your Honours to fit him,
Which both preserves me in my first bounds still,
And may agree best with his Love and Will:
Behold in this rare Symbol of Renown,
The Emblem of all justice, and the Crown
The fair reward for't, ever fresh and green;
Which imitates those joys Eye hath not seen;
These Arms, that for their nakedness resemble
E'en Truth itself, no covering, to dissemble,
Nor shift for Bribe, but open, plain, and bare,
Shows, Men of Power should keep their conscience
And were their Acts transparent, without veil (fair
Disguise or Vizard, and such never fail;
Observe this more, 'tis not one Arm alone
That bears this Laurel, but two joined in one,
Mercy and justice, the two Props of State,
They must be both fixed in the Magistrate;
If wanting either, subject to much harm,
For he that has but one, has but one Arm;
judge then the Imperfection; mark again,
They break both through a Cloud; which instructs Men
How they should place their Reverence and their Love,
Seeing all lawful power, comes from Above;
And as the Laurel (which is now your due)
Bring due to Honour, therefore most to you,
Fears no injurious Weather the Year brings,
But spite of Storms looks ever green and springs,
Apollo's Tree, which Lightnings never blast,
So (Honoured Lord) should burning Malice cast,
Her pitchy Fires at your Triumphant State;
You are Apollo's Tree, a (Magistrate,)
Which no foul Gust of Envy can offend,
Nor may it ever to your Lordships End,
Health and a Noble Courage bless your Days;
To this your worthy Brotherhood, fame and praise
WHy well said, thus should Christmas be
Lightsome, jocund, blithe and free,
Now it looks like bounty's Palace,
Where every Cup has his full ballast,
Drown Cares with juice that Grapes have bled,
And make Times cheek look fresh and red,
Let nothing now but Healths go round,
And no sooner off, but crowned
With sparkling Liquours, bounding up,
Quick in Pallet, as in Cup:
To be heavy, to be dull,
Is a fault so pitiful,
We bar it from the course of Reason,
Care must not peep abroad this Season,
Nor a sad look dare appear
Within ten Mile of Christmas cheer;
Sighs are banished ten leagues farther,
Either Cellar, Hall or Larder;
To be jovial then and blithe
Is truly to pay (Christmas) Tithe,
And where free Mirth is and impartial,
Christmas there h'as made me marshal.
Why how now? know you where you are? rude thing;
Bold and unmannered Licence, dare you bring
Your free Speech hither, before me begin?
Who let this Skittish thing of Lightness in?
Some call the Porter hither, yet stay, stay,
I've power in words to chase this toy away;
I wonder that the Music suffers thee
To come into their room?
Why Nicety?
Believe me honest Me (whate'er you be)
She's able to spoil all your Harmony,
Corrupt your airs with Lightness.
Oh fie, fie,
How ill you blaze my Coat, Severity?
Is this a place for you? can Lightness here
Under the Hazard of her Shame appear?
Why thou dull lumpish Thing, void of all fashion,
mirth's poison, Enemy to Recreation,
Thou Melancholy wretch, so filled with spite
Thou eatest thy heart, when others take delight,
I must be merry, 'tis my nature—
Fool.
Dull dogbolt.
Skit.
What? this a Scolding School,
How now? so high got? and so loud withal?
Whose doing was't placest you two there to brawl?
Pray mark the Assembly, look upon 'em well,
Think where you are, and let that rude thought quell
Your unbeseeming difference, 'tis not here
As at a Pit, here's Reverence, Worth, and Fear.
She says this place and season suits not me.
She says but right in that,
O Levity,
No, nor you neither,
You may be gone too,
You're Both Extremes, therefore no place for you,
Lightness becomes not, nor Severity,
It must me between both, and I am She,
Too Light, is bad, and too Severe as Vild,
But both well tempered, makes the mixture mild,
As I stand now between you, so it makes
A perfect Virtue up, when it partakes
Of each, and comes no nearer than I do,
And Virtue made, We have no need of you,
Vanish, be gone.
I give glace willingly
To You, but not to Her.
Nor I to Thee,
So, Thus things should have their becoming grace,
For Temperance fits the Reverence of this place:
Grave Senators, in goodness still increased!
Long may you Live to celebrate this Feast,
This blessed Season of true joy compiled
In which fair Heaven and Man were reconciled:
Music? thou modest Servant to this place,
Raise chaste Delight, to do this Season grace.
Eccho! Eccho! by thy loue once to Narcissus, I now coniure thee not to misse vs, But make thy Sound Vppon the Woods rebound And Mountains—Ecch: And mountaines, And to thy neighbouring Sisters cal,—Sisters cal, Log'd in Caue or hollow Wall And those resounding neere faire Fountaines Ecch: Neere faire Fountaines, Let e'm call to one another—To one another —one another— And one Sister rayse vp tother Ecch.—vp tother— Let it goe from me to you—From me to you —Mee▪ To you, From you to them, be iust and true —Iust and True Neuer cease your Voyces Flight, Till you raise vp chast Delight ——Vp chast Delight, Delight—Who calls me from my Caue Twas I—Twas I, Twas I; This is no Time in silence now to lye Delight—Who I? O I; This is a Season of all I oy compilde, In which faire Heauen and Man were reconcilde Ecch—Heauen and Man were reconcilde, Ecch-Reconcilde, Behold how many a worthy Guest Are met to celebrate this Feast. Delight—I see it plaine, O blame me then, I ne're will showe such Sloth agen; For whose delight am I now raisde? Oh for the Citties! Delight—How? for the Citties? Ecch—For the Citties: Del. To faile a Mistris so renown'd it were a thousand pitties, Ecch—Thousand pitties. Those are her Honor'd Sonnes you now behold, Del. Heauen blesse them all, with Graces manifold. Temp. So! Tis thankfully accepted, y'haue exprest, Your seruice well and fully to this Feast: Adorn'd and honor'd in each happy part, With those most reuerend Patrons to Desert: Ioy neuer faile your meetings, good successe All your Endeuours, and your Fortunes blesse, Gladnes of heart dwell euer in your Brests, And Peace of faire Workes bring you glorious Rests.