FLora, Flora! We call thee heere, We call thee heere, From forth thy fragrant Bower, Thou Queene of euery laughing Flower, Appeare! Appeare to vs, To vs appeare: Thou Banquet of the Yeare, Or if a Name may be more sweet, more deere. Harke, Summer harke, Marke, Autumne, marke, How coughing Winter mournes to see This smiling Houre, Would it were nipt for me, But soft I feele no such decay But I may liue to kisse faire May, And in the Morne and Euening howers, Leaue my cold sweats vpon the Flowers. Alasse poore Mumps, at thy weake power We laugh, —Oh—Oh—O— He's strucke cold At Floraes first appearing, Looke, in a Sound, Will drop to'th ground. Helpe, helpe, helpe, he wants your cheering. Oh I confesse Feild Emperesse, The Beauty of thy power amazes, I am content to ioyne With those three Friends of thine, And helpe to chant thy prayses; Now all the Seasons of the Yeare agree To giue, (Faire Flora) the prime place to Thee. Where's Hyacinth! the Boy Appollo loude, And turnde into a Flower? Here, Queene of sweetnes. Adonis! thou that for thy beauteous chastity, Wert turnde into the chastest of all Flowers, (The closse-infolded Rose) blowen into Blushes It is so mayden-modest, What's thy pleasure Faire Empresse of sweete Odours, Willing Seruants! I haue Employment for you both, and speedy, We waite with much Ioy to receiue the charge on't; Hast, to the two Assisting Magistrates, Those worthy Citty Consulls, Beare our sweete wishes to e'm, and speake Ioy From vs, to both their Feasts, And to that part of their Graue-worthy Guesse Which here we misse to day, though here be those Whom we ought more especially to Honor, Say though we cannot there our selfe appeare, Because we owe our greater seruice here, Yet that they shal not faile of all their due, We send the wishes of our Heart by you. Which shall be faithfully tendred, Tis presum'd; But to this faire Assembly present now I, and these yeelding Sweets all their heads bow In honour of this Feast, of the Day, chiefe, Made solemne by the workes of your Reliefe, Your Cares, your Charities, the holy Vse Of pious exercise; all which infuse Blessings into your Fortunes, you abound In temporall things, cause blessed fruits are found Vpon the Stocks you graft on, marke the Encrease; You plant poore Orphans in a ground of Peace, And carefully prouide, when fruit time comes, You gather Heauens Ioyes for't, in infinite Summer; This day you view'd the Garden of those Deeds, That blesse the Founders; and all those succeeds In Zeale and Imitation; you saw there, Vertues true Paradise, drest with your Care; (Your most religious Care) and those Blew Sets, They are the Cities Bancke of Violets That smels most sweet to Heauen; neuer cease then You worthy Praesidents for Times and Men, Till Charitie spring, (by your Examples giuen) As thick on Earth, as Rewards stand in Heauen; If there were sloth or faintnes tow'ard good works; (As blest be Heauen there is not) Time instructs, The Season of the Yeare, for as the Ground, The heauiest and dul'st Creature can be found, Yet now begins both in her Meades and Bowers To offer vp her Sacrifice, in Flowers, How much more ought that Earth with a Soule blest, Which is of euery of you here possest, To spring forth Workes of Piety and Loue, To gratifie those Dewes fall from Aboue; And as the humblest Flower that euer grew, Ha's not his Sent alone, but Vertue too, Good for Mans griefes; so tis not Mans full Fame To haue a Christian Sauour, or a Name, An empty voice of Charity and Reliefe, He must apply Ease to his Brothers griefe; 'Faith is the Sent and Odour of the Flower, 'But Work's the Vertue, that makes good the power; Tis like the Tincture of those Roabes you weare, In which cleare Vesture you to me appeare Like Borders of faire Roses; and worne hie Vpon the Cities forehead; that rich Dye As it is reuerend, honourable, graue, So it is pretious, wholesome; which doth craue A double Vertue at the Wearers hands, Iustice and Mercy; by which goodnesse stands: Thus Honour still claimes Vertue for his Due, And may both euer lay iust claime to you: What? the foure Seasons of the Yeare struck dumbe? I lookt for a kind Welcome, now Im'e come.
WElcome, O welcome, Queene of sweetnes welcome, in the noblest manner, With all thy Flowers, thy sweete breath't Maides of Honour; Flower guntle! I begin with Thee, Fayre Flower of Chrystall! that's for me, Apples of Loue! there sweetnesse dwels; Puh, giue me Canterbury Bels; Faire double-Gold cups, griefes expelling, Agnus Castus, all excelling, Venus Bath! the loueliest pride of Iune, Giue me that Flower, cald, Go to bed at noone, Blessed Thistle, fam'd for good, Shepheards Pouch, for stanching blood, Faire yallow Knight-wort, for a foule relapse, And Ladies▪ Mantle, good for Maydens Paps, Tuft Hyacinth! that crownes the Bower, Cald of some, the Virgins Flower; Take that for me, more good I feele In Ruffling Robin, and Larkes Heele. There is a Sweete, Vnnamed yet, The root is white, the Marke of pure Delight, Bearing his Flowers faire and hie, The colour like a purple Dye: What is the name tis blest withall? Liue-long! it so the Shepheards call; Liue-long? tis Vertues promis'd Due And may it Long remaine with You Honor'd Patrons, Vertuous Matrons, Whose Lifes and Acts this City graces, Daily striuing, And reuiuing Workes worthy your renowne and places. So ya're confirm'd; from your harmonious Closes May Sweetnesse drop, as Hony-Dew from Roses, A blessed Health possesse you, and a long, That in this latter Spring of your graue yeares, You may be greene in Vertues, and grow strong In works of Grace, which soules to Heauen endeers; your good Cares, here, Iustice, and well spent houres Crowne you hereafter with eternall Flowers.
THe goddess Flora, Empress of the Spring,
Choosing (this Feast) her Flowery Sojourning,
Under the Roof of the chief Magistrate,
Whose power lays just claim to the greatest state,
Hath sent me forth, not meanest in her Grace,
To breathe forth her sweet wishes to this place;
First to the Master of this bounteous Feast,
To speak her joy; next, to each worthy Guest;
And though she cannot now her Self appear,
Because she owes her greater Service there,
Yer her heart's Love to every one I bring,
To whom sh'as sent a Present of the Spring.