AM I so happy to be blessed again?
With These! the choice of many thousand
For Royal Trust selected, and a Care
That makes you Sacred; may the world compare men,
A Confidence with yours? from so complete
And excellent a Master? Or so great
And free a Love can any Nation show
In Subject to the Sovereign, then doth flow
From this most thankful City? Waves of Love
e'en overwhelm each other, as they move,
All striving to be first, they run in one
Toth' Ocean's Breast! (the king's Affection.)
And you of Honour! that do oft appear
In presence of a Majesty so clear,
So mighty in Heaven's blessings, be so kind
To grace with Words what He shall ever find,
And 'tis a glorious Truth, and well beseems
Places and Persons of your fair Esteems,
Not all the Kingdoms of the Earth, contain
A City freer to her Sovereign,
More faithful, and more careful; observe here
His highness' excellent Trial; Love and Fear
Make up a subject's duty, to his King,
As justice and sweet Mercy makes up Him;
So two fold Virtue twofold Duty, cheers,
He knew their lones, now came & touched their fears
To try their Temper, (O blessed Heaven) he found
It was the Fear he looked for, had it's ground
Upon Religion, Reverence, sweet Respect,
Love looked not Lovelier, nor divinelier decked,
Each reprehensive word He did impart
Flew, and cleaved fast to their obedient Heart,
'twas fire within their bosom, could not rest,
Till in some serious manner, they'd expressed
Their duteous Care, with all speed put in Act
Their sovereign's sacred pleasure, to coact
Where manners failed, and force, as with a Pill
From Humours rude, the Venom of the Ill;
“A king's own Admonition, against Crimes,
“Is Physic to the Body of the Times.
And herein did He Imitate the Highest,
(To whom it best becomes Him to be nighest)
To chasten, where he loves, it is the Seal
Of the Almighty's favour, He doth deal
So with his Chosen, do not languish then,
Thou Prince of Cities, cause the King of Men
Divinely did reprove thee, Know, 'tis Love,
Thou art his Chosen City, and wilt prove
(As thou hast ever been) faithful and free,
The Chamber of his sweet Security:
Then in a Health of loy your Hearts express,
Whilst I breathe welcome to those Noble Guess.
A Trust of Honour, and a Noble Care
Still to discharge that Trust, Keep your Fame's fair,
You have proceeded carefully; go on,
And a full Praise Crown your Progression.