WHat Creature is in health, either young or old,
But some mirth with modesty will be glad to use
As we in this Interlude shall now unfold,
Wherein all scurrility we utterly refuse,
Avoiding such mirth wherein is abuse:
Knowing nothing more commendable for a man's recreation
Than Mirth which is used in an honest fashion:
For Mirth prolongeth life, and causeth health.
Mirth recreates our spirits and voideth pensiveness,
Mirth increaseth amity, not hindering our wealth,
Mirth is to be used both of more and less,
Being mixed with virtue in decent comeliness.
As we trust no good nature can gainsay the same:
Which mirth we intend to use, avoiding all blame.
The wise poet's long time heretofore,
Under merry Comedies secrets did declare,
Wherein was contained very virtuous lore,
With mysteries and forewarnings very rare.
such to write neither Plautus nor Terence did spare,
Which among the learned at this day bears the bell:
These with such other therein did excel.
Our Comedy or Interlude which we intend to play.
Is named Roister Doyster in deed.
Which against the vain glorious doth inveigh,
Whose humour the roisting sort continually doth feed.
Thus by your patience we intend to proceed
In this our Interlude by God's leave and grace,
And here I take my leave for a certain space.
AS long liveth the merry man (they say)
As doth the sorry man, and longer by a day.
Yet the grasshopper for all his Summer piping,
starveth in Winter with hungry griping,
Therefore another said saw doth men advise,
That they be together both merry and wise.
This Lesson must I practise, or else ere long,
With me Mathew Merrygreek it will be wrong.
In deed men so call me, for by him that us bought,
whatever chance betide, I can take no thought,
Yet wisdom would that I did myself bethink
Where to be provided this day of meat and drink:
For know ye, that for all this merry note of mine,
He might appose me now that should ask where I dine.
My living lieth here and there, of God's grace,
Sometime with this good man, sometime in that place,
Sometime Lewis Loytrer biddeth me come near,
somewhiles Watkin Waster maketh us good cheer,
Sometime Davy Diceplayer when he hath well cast
Keepeth revel rout as long as it will last.
Sometime Tom Titivile maketh us a feast,
Sometime with sir Hugh Pie I am a bidden guest,
Sometime at Nichol Neuerthriues I get a sop,
Sometime I am feasted with Bryan Blinkinsop,
Sometime I hang on Hankin Hoddydody's sleeve,
But this day on Ralph Roister Doyster's by his leave.
For truly of all men he is my chief banker
Both for meat and money, and my chief shootanker.
For, sooth Roister Doister in that he doth say,
And require what ye will ye shall have no nay,
But now of Roister Doister somewhat to express,
That ye may esteem him after his worthiness,
In these twenty towns and seek them throughout,
Is not the like stock, whereon to graff a lout.
All the day long is he facing and craking
Of his great acts in fighting and fraymaking:
But when Roister Doister is put to his proof,
To keep the queens peace is more for his behoof.
If any woman smile or cast on him an eye,
Up is he to the hard ears in love by and by,
And in all the hot haste must she be his wife,
Else farewell his good days, and farewell his life,
Master Raufe Roister Doister is but dead and gone
Except she on him take some compassion,
Then chief of counsel, must be Mathew Merrygreek,
What if I for marriage to such an one seek?
Then must I soothe it, whatever it is:
For what he sayth or doth can not be amiss,
Hold up his yea and nay, be his noun white son,
Praise and rouse him well, and ye have his heart won,
For so well liketh he his own fond fashions
That he taketh pride of false commendations.
But such sport have I with him as I would not lose,
Though I should be bound to live with bread and cheese.
For exalt him, and have him as ye lust in deed:
Yea to hold his finger in a hole for a need.
I can with a word make him fain or loath,
I can with as much make him pleased or wroth,
I can when I will make him merry and glad,
I can when me lust make him sorry and sad,
I can set him in hope and eke in despair,
I can make him speak rough, and make him speak fair.
But I marvel I see him not all this same day,
I will seek him out: But lo he cometh this way,
I have yond espied him sadly coming,
And in love for twenty 〈◊〉, by his glomming.
COme death when thou wilt, I am weary of my life.
I told you ay, we should woo another wife.
Why did God make me such a goodly person?
He is in by the week, we shall have sport anon.
And where is my trusty friend Mathew Merrygreek?
I will make as I saw him not, he doth me seek.
I have him espied methinketh, yond is he,
Hough Mathew Merrygreek my friend, a word with thee.
I will not hear him, but make as I had haste,
Farewell all my good friends, the time away doth waste,
And the tide they say, tarrieth for no man.
Thou must with thy good counsel help me if thou can.
God keep thee worshipful Master Roister Doister,
And fare well the lusty Master Roister Doister.
I must needs speak with thee a word or twain.
Within a month or two I will be here again,
Negligence in great affairs ye know may mar all.
Attend upon me now, and well reward thee I shall.
I have take my leave, and the tide is well spent.
I die except thou help, I pray thee be content,
Do thy part well now, and ask what thou wilt,
For without thy aid my matter is all spilled.
Then to serve your turn I will some pains take,
And let all mine own affairs alone for your sake.
My whole hope and trust resteth only in thee,
Then can ye not do amiss whatever it be.
Gramercies Merrygreek, most bound to thee I am.
But up with that heart, and speak out like a ram,
Ye speak like a Capon that had the cough now:
be of good cheer, anon ye shall do well enough.
Upon thy comfort, I will all things well handle.
So lo, that is a breast to blow out a candle.
But what is this great matter I would fain know,
We shall find remedy therefore I trow.
Do ye lack money? ye know mine old offers,
Ye have always a key to my purse and coffers.
I thank thee: had ever man such a friend?
Ye give unto me: I must needs to you lend.
Nay I have money plenty all things to discharge.
That knew I right well when I made offer so large.
But it is no such matter.
What is it than?
Are ye in danger of debt to any man?
If ye be, take no thought nor be not afraid,
Let them hardly take thought how they shall be paid.
Tut I owe nought.
What then? fear ye imprisonment?
No
No I wist ye offend, not so to be shent.
But if he had, the tower could not you so hold,
But to break out at all times ye would be bold.
What is it? hath any man threatened you to beat?
What is he that durst have put me in that heat?
He that beateth me by his arms shall well find,
That I will not be far from him nor run behind.
That thing know all men ever since ye overthrew,
The fellow of the Lion which Hercules slew.
But what is it than?
Of love I make my moan.
Ah this foolish a love, wilt near let us alone?
But because ye were refused the last day,
Ye said ye would near more be entangled that way.
I would meddle no more, since I find all so unkind.
Yea, but I can not so put love out of my mind.
But is your love tell me first, in any wise,
In the way of Marriage, or of Merchandise?
If it may otherwise than lawful be found,
Ye get none of my help for an hundred pound.
No by my troth I would have her to my Wife.
Then are ye a good man, and God save your life,
And what or who is she, with whom ye are in love?
A woman whom I know not by what means to move.
Who is it?
A woman yond.
What is her name?
Her yonder.
Whom?
Mistress ah.
Fie fie for shame
Love ye, and know not whom? but her yond, a Woman,
We shall then get you a Wife, I can not tell when.
The fair Woman, that supped with us yesternight,
And I heard her name twice or thrice, and had it right.
Yea, ye may see ye near take me to good cheer with you,
If ye had, I could have told you her name now.
I was to blame in deed, but the next time perchance:
And she dwelleth in this house.
What Christian Custance.
Except I have her to my Wife, I shall run mad.
Nay unwise perhaps, but I warrant you for mad.
I am utterly dead unless I have my desire.
Where be the bellows that blew this sudden fire?
I hear she is worth a thousand pound and more.
Yea, but learn this one lesson of me afore,
An hundred pound of Marriage money doubtless,
Is ever thirty pound sterling, or somewhat less,
So that her thousand pound if she be thrifty,
Is much near about two hundred and fifty,
Howbeit wooers and Widows are never poor.
Is she a Widow? I love her better therefore.
But I hear she hath made promise to another.
He shall go without her, and he were my brother.
I have heard say, I am right well advised,
That she hath to Gavin Goodluck promised.
What is that Gavin Goodluck?
a Merchant man.
Shall he speed afore me? nay sir by sweet Saint Anne.
Ah sir, Backare quoth Mortimer to his sow,
I will have her mine own self I make God a vow.
For I tell thee, she is worth a thousand pound.
Yet a fitter wife for your maship might be found:
Such a goodly man as you, might get one with land,
Besides pounds of gold a thousand and a thousand,
And a thousand, and a thousand, and a thousand,
And so to the sum of twenty hundred thousand,
Your most goodly parsonage is worthy of no less.
I am sorry God made me so comely doubtless.
For that maketh me each where so highly favoured,
And all women on me so enamoured.
Enamoured quothed you? have ye spied out that?
Ah sir, marry now I see you know what is what.
Enamoured ka? marry sir say that again,
But I thought not ye had marked it so plain.
Yes, each where they gaze all upon me and stare.
Yea malkyu▪ I warrant you as much as they dare.
And ye will not believe what they say in the street,
When your maship passeth by all such as I meet,
That sometimes I can scarce find what answer to make.
Who is this (sayth one) sir Lancelot du lake?
Who is this, great Cuy of Warwick, sayth another?
No (say I) it is the thirteenth Hercules brother.
Who is this? noble Hector of Troy, sayth the third?
No, but of the same nest (say I) it is a bird.
Who is this? great Goliah, Sampson, or Colbrand?
No (say I) but it is a brute of the Alie land.
Who is this? great Alexander? or Charle le Magne?
No, it is the tenth Worthy, say I to them again:
I know not if I said well.
Yes for so I am.
Yea, for there were but nine worthies before ye came.
To some others, the third Cato I do you call.
And so as well as I can I answer them all.
Sir I pray you, what lord or great gentleman is this?
Master Ralph Roister Doister dame say I, iwis.
O Lord (sayth she then) what a goodly man it is,
Would Christ I had such a husband as he is.
O Lord (say some) that the sight of his face we lack:
It is enough for you (say I) to see his back.
His face is for ladies of high and noble parages▪
With whom he hardly scapeth great marriages.
With much more than this, and much otherwise.
I can thee thank that thou canst such answers devise:
But I perceive thou dost me thoroughly know.
I mark your manners for mine own learning I trow,
But such is your beauty, and such are your acts,
Such is your parsonage, and such are your facts,
That all women fair and foul, more and less,
They eye you, they lub you, they talk of you doubtless.
Your peasant look maketh them all merry,
Ye pass not by, but they laugh till they be weary,
Yea and money could I have the truth to tell,
Of many, to bring you that way where they dwell.
Merrygreek for this thy reporting well of me:
What should I else sir, it is my duty pardee.
I promise thou shalt not lack, while I have a groat.
Faith sir, and I near had more need of a new coat.
Thou shalt have one to morrow, and gold for to spend.
Then I trust to bring the day to a good end.
For as for mine own part having money enough,
I could live only with the remembrance of you.
But now to your Widow whom you love so hot.
By cock thou sayest truth, I had almost forgot.
What if Christian Custance will not have you what?
Have me? yes I warrant you, never doubt of that,
I know she loveth me, but she dare not speak.
In deed meet it were somebody should it break.
She looked on me twenty times yesternight,
And laughed so.
That she could not sit upright,
No faith could she not.
No even such a thing I cast.
But for wooing thou knowest women are shamefast.
But and she knew my mind, I know she would be glad,
And think it the best chance that ever she had.
Too her then like a man, and be bold forth to start,
Wowers never speed well, that have a false heart.
What may I best do?
Sir remain ye a while,
Ere long one or other of her house will appear.
Ye know my mind.
Yea now hardly let me alone.
In the mean time sir, if you please, I will home,
And call your musicians, for in this your case
It would set you forth, and all your wooing grace,
Ye may not lack your instruments to play and sing.
Thou knowest I can do that.
As well as any thing.
Shall I go call your folks, that ye may show a cast?
Yea run I beseech thee in all possible haste.
I go. Exeat.
Yea for I love singing out of measure,
It comforteth my spirits and doth me great pleasure.
But who cometh forth yond from my sweet heart Custance?
My matter blameth well, this is a lucky chance.
IF this distaff were spun Margerie Mumblecrust.
Where good stale ale is will drink no water I trust.
Dame Custance hath promised us good ale and white bread.
If she keep not promise, I will beshrew her head:
But it will be stark night before I shall have done.
I will stand here a while, and talk with them anon,
I hear them speak of Custance, which doth my heart good,
To hear her name spoken doth even comfort my blood.
Sit down to your work Tibet like a good girl.
Nurse meddle you with your spindle and your whirl,
No haste but good, Madge Mumblecrust, for whip and whir
The old proverb doth say, never made good fur.
Well, ye will sit down to your work anon, I trust.
Soft fire maketh sweet malt, good Madge Mumblecrust.
And sweet malt maketh jolly good ale for the nonce.
Which will slide down the lane without any bones.
Old brown bread crusts must have much good mumbling,
But good ale down your throat hath good easy tumbling.
The jolliest wench that ere I heard, little mouse,
May I not rejoice that she shall dwell in my house?
So sirrah, now this gear beginneth for to frame.
Thanks to God, though your work stand still, your tongue is not lame
And though your teeth be gone, both so sharp & so fine
Yet your tongue can run on patins as well as mine.
Ye were not for nought named Tib Talk apace.
Doth my talk grieve you? Alack, God save your grace.
I hold a groat ye will drink anon for this gear.
And I will not pray you the stripes for me to bear.
I hold a penny, ye will drink without a cup.
Wherein so ere ye drink, I wot ye drink all up.
By Cock and well sowed, my good Tibet Talk apace.
And e'en as well knit my noun Annot Alyface.
See what a sort she keepeth that must be my wife.
Shall not I when I have her, lead a merry life?
Welcome my good wench, and sit here by me just.
And how doth our old beldame here, Madge Mumblecrust?
Chide, and find faults, and threaten to complain.
To make us poor girls shent to her is small gain.
I did neither chide, nor complain, nor threaten.
It would grieve my heart to see one of them beaten.
I did nothing but did her work and hold her peace.
So would I, if you could your clattering cease:
But the devil can not make old trot hold her tongue.
Let all these matters pass, and we three sing a song,
So shall we pleasantly both the time beguile now,
And eke dispatch all our works ere we can tell how.
I shrew them that say nay, and that shall not be I.
And I am well content.
Sing on then by and by.
And I will not away, but listen to their song,
Yet Merrygreek and my folks tarry very long.
Pipe merry Annot. etc.
Trilla, Trilla, Trillarie.
Work Tibet, work Annot, work Margerie.
Sew Tibet, knit Annot, spin Margerie.
Let us see who shall win the victory.
This sleeve is not willing to be sewed I trow.
A small thing might make me all in the ground to throw.
Pipe merry Annot. etc.
Trilla. Trilla. Trillarie.
What Tibet, what Annot, what Margerie.
Ye sleep, but we do not, that shall we try.
Your fingers be numbed, our work will not lie.
If ye do so again, well I would advise you nay.
In good sooth one stop more, and I make holy day.
Pipe Merry Annot. etc.
Trilla. Trilla. Trillarie.
Now Tibbet, now Annot, now Margerie.
Now whippet apace for the mastery,
But it will not be, our mouth is so dry.
Ah, each finger is a thumb today methink,
I care not to let all alone, choose it swim or sink.
Pipe Merry Annot. etc.
Trilla. Trilla. Trillarie.
When Tibet, when Annot, when Margerie.
I will not, I can not, no more can I.
Then give we all over, and there let it lie.
There it lieth, the worst is but a curried coat,
Tut I am used thereto, I care not a groat.
Have we done singing since? then will I in again,
Here I found you, and here I leave both twain.
And I will not be long after: Tib Talk apace.
What is the matter?
Yond stood a man all this space
And hath heard all that ever we spoke together.
marry the more lout he for his coming hither.
And the less good he can to listen maidens talk.
I care not and I go bid him hence for to walk:
It were well done to know what he maketh here away.
Now might I speak to them, if I wist what to say.
Nay we will go both off, and see what he is.
One that hath heard all your talk and singing iwis.
The more to blame you, a good thrifty husband
Would elsewhere have had some better matters in hand.
I did it for no harm, but for good love I bear,
To your dame mistress Custance, I did your talk hear.
And Mistress nurse I will kiss you for acquaintance.
I come anon sir.
Faith I would our dame Custance
Saw this gear.
I must first wipe all clean, yea I must.
Ill chieve it doting fool, but it must be cust.
God yield you sir, chad not so much ichotte not when,
were since chwas bore chwine, of such a gay gentleman.
I will kiss you too maiden for the good will I bear you.
No forsooth, by your leave ye shall not kiss me.
Yes be not afeard, I do not disdain you a whit.
Why should I fear you? I have not so little wit,
Ye are but a man I know very well.
Why then?
Forsooth for I will not, I use not to kiss men.
I would fain kiss you too good maiden, if I might.
What should that need?
But to honour you by this light.
I use to kiss all them that I love to God I vow.
Yea sir? I pray you when did ye last kiss your cow.
Ye might be proud to kiss me, if ye were wise.
What promotion were therein?
Nurse is not so nice.
Well I have not been taught to kissing and licking.
Yet I thank you mistress Nurse, ye made no sticking.
I will not stick for a kosse with such a man as you.
They that lust: I will again to my sewing now.
Tidings hough, tidings, dame Custance greeteth you well.
Whom me?
You sir? no sir? I do no such tale tell.
But and she knew me here.
Tibet Talk apace,
Your mistress Custance and mine, must speak with your grace
With me?
Ye must come in to her out of all doubts.
And my work not half done? A mischief on all louts.
Ah good sweet nurse.
A good sweet gentleman.
what?
Nay I can not tell sir, but what thing would you?
Now doth sweet Custance, my heart of gold, tell me how?
She doth very well sir, and command me to you.
To me?
Yea to you sir.
To me? nurse tell me plain
To me?
Ye.
That word maketh me alive again.
She command me to one last day who ere it was.
That was e'en to me and none other by the Mass.
I can not tell you surely, but one it was.
It was I and none other: this cometh to good pass.
I promise thee nurse I favour her.
e'en so sir.
Bid her sue to me for marriage.
e'en so sir.
And surely for thy sake she shall speed.
e'en so sir.
I shall be contented to take her.
e'en so sir.
But at thy request and for thy sake.
e'en so sir.
And come hark in thine ear what to say.
e'en so sir.
COme on sirs apace, and quite yourselves like men,
Your pains shallbe rewarded.
But I wot not when.
Do your master worship as ye have done in time past.
Speak to them: of mine office he shall have a cast.
Harpax, look that thou do well too, and thy fellow.
I warrant, if he will mine example follow.
Curtsy whoresons, duck you and crouch at every word,
Yes whether our master speak earnest or board.
For this lieth upon his preferment in deed.
Oft is he a wooer, but never doth he speed.
But with whom is he now so sadly rounding yond?
With Nobs nicebecetur miserere fond.
God be at your wedding, be ye sped already?
I did not suppose that your love was so greedy,
I perceive now ye have chose of devotion,
And joy have ye lady of your promotion.
Tush fool, thou art deceived, this is not she.
Well mock much of her, and keep her well I 'vise ye.
I will take no charge of such a fair piece keeping.
What aileth this fellow? he driveth me to weeping.
What weep on the wedding day? be merry woman,
Though I say it, ye have chose a good gentleman.
Kocks nouns what meanest thou man, tut a whistle.
Ah sir, be good to her, she is but a gristle,
Ah sweet lamb and coney.
Tut thou art deceived.
Weep no more lady, ye shall be well received.
Up with some merry noise sirs, to bring home the bride.
gog's arms knave, art thou 〈◊〉 I tell thee thou art wide.
Then ye intend by night to have her 〈◊〉 brought.
I tell thee no.
How then?
'tis neither met ne thought.
What shall we then do with her?
Ah foolish harebrain,
This is not she.
No is? why then said again,
And what young girl is this with your maship so bold?
A girl?
Yea. I dare say, scarce yet three score year old.
This same is the fair widows nurse of whom ye wot.
Is she but a nurse of a house? hence home old trot,
Hence at once.
No no.
What an please your 〈◊〉
A nurse talk so homely with one of your worship?
I will have it so: it is my pleasure and will.
Then I am content. Nurse come again, tarry still.
What, she will help forward this my 〈◊〉 for her part.
Then is't mine own pigsney 〈◊〉, and blessing on my heart.
This is our best friend 〈◊〉.
Then 〈◊〉 her what to say
I am taught already.
Then go, make no delay.
Yet hark one word in thine ear.
Back sirs from his tail
Back villains, will ye be privy of my 〈◊〉?
Back sirs, so: I told you afore ye 〈◊〉 be shent.
She shall have the first day a whole peck of argent.
A peck? Nomine patris, have ye so much spare?
Yea and a cart load thereto, or else were it bare,
Besides other movables, household stuff and 〈◊〉.
Have ye lads too.
An hundred marks.
Yea a thousand
And have ye cattle too? and sheep too?
Yea a few.
He is ashamed the numbered of them to show.
e'en round about him, as many thousand sheep goes,
As he and thou and I too, have fingers and toes.
And how many years old be you?
forty at lest.
Yea and thrice forty to them.
Nay now thou dost jest.
I am not so old, thou misreckonest my years.
I know that: but my mind was on bullocks and steers.
And what shall I show her your mastership's name is?
Nay she shall make sure ere she know that iwis.
Yet let me somewhat know.
This is he understand,
That killed the blue Spider in Blanchpowder land.
Yea Iesus, William zee law, did he zo law?
Yea and the last Elephant that ever he saw,
As the beast passed by, he start out of a busk,
And e'en with pure strength of arms plucked out his great tusk.
Iesus, nomine patris, what a thing was that?
Yea but Merrygreek one thing thou hast forgot.
What?
Of tother Elephant.
Oh him that fled away.
Yea.
Yea he knew that his match was in place that day
Tut, he bet the king of Crickets on Christmas day,
That he crept in a hole, and not a word to say.
A sore man by 〈◊〉.
Why, he wrong a club
Once in a fray out of the hand of Belzebub.
And how when Mumfision?
Oh your coustreling
Bore the lantern a field so before the gosling.
Nay that is to long a matter now to be told:
Never ask his name Nurse, I warrant thee, be bold,
He conquered in one day from Rome, to Naples,
And won towns nurse as fast as thou canst make Apples.
O Lord, my heart quaketh for fear: he is to sore.
Thou makest her to much afeard, Merrygreek no more.
This tale would fear my sweet heart Custance right evil.
Nay let her take him Nurse, and fear not the devil.
But thus is our song dashed. Sirs ye may home again.
No shall they not. I charge you all here to remain:
The villain slaves a whole day ere they can be found.
Couch on your marybones whoresons, down to the ground.
Was it meet he should tarry so long in one place
Without harmony of Music, 〈◊〉 some 〈◊〉?
Who so hath such bees as your master in his head,
Had need to have his spirits with Music to be fed.
By your masterships licence.
What is that? a moat?
No it was a fools feather had light on your coat.
I was nigh no feathers since I came from my bed.
No sir, it was a hair that was fall from your head.
My men come when it please them.
By your leave..
What is that?
Your gown was foul spotted with the foot of a gnat.
Their master to offend they are nothing afeard.
What now?
A lousy hair from your mastership's beard.
And sir for Nurse's sake pardon this one offence.
We shall not after this show the like negligence.
I pardon you this once, and come sing near the worse.
How like you the goodness of this gentleman nurse?
God save his mastership that so can his men forgive,
And I will hear them sing ere I go, by his leave.
Mary and thou shalt wench, come we two will dance.
Nay I will by mine own self foot the song perchance.
Go to it sirs lustily.
Pipe up a merry note,
Let me hear it played, I will foot it for a groat.
Now nurse take this same letter here to thy mistress.
And as my trust is in thee ply my business.
It shallbe done.
Who made it?
I wrote it each whit
Then needs it no mending.
No, no.
No I know your wit.
I warrant it well.
It shall be delivered.
But if ye speed, shall I be considered?
Whough, dost thou doubt of that?
What shall I have?
An hundred times more than thou canst devise to crave.
Shall I have some new gear? for my old is all spent.
The worst kitchen wench shall go in Lady's raiment.
Yea?
And the worst drudge in the house shall go better
Than your mistress doth now.
The I trudge with your letter.
Now may I repose me: Custance is mine own.
Let us sing and play 〈◊〉 toward it may be known.
But are you sure, that your 〈◊〉 is well enough?
I wrote it myself.
Then sing we to dinner.
WHo took thee this letter Margerie Mumblecrust?
A lusty gay bachelor took it me of trust,
And if ye seek to him he will low your doing.
Yea, but where learned he that manner of 〈◊〉?
If to sue to him, you will any pains take,
He will have you to his wife (he sayth) for my sake.
Some wise gentleman belike. I am bespoken:
And I thought verily this had been some token
From my dear spouse Gavin Goodluck, whom when him please
God luckily send home to both our hearts ease.
A jolly man it is I wot well by report,
And would haue you to him for marriage ret:
Best open the writing, and see what it doth speak.
At this time nurse I will neither read ne break.
He promised to give you a whole peck of gold.
Perchance lack of a pyrite when it shall be all told.
I would take a gay rich husband, and I were you.
In good sooth Madge, ●en so would I, if I were thou.
But no more of this fond talk now, let us go in,
And see thou no more move me folly to begin.
Nor bring me no 〈◊〉 letters for no man's pleasure,
But thou know from whom.
I warrant ye shall be sure.
WHere is the house I go to, before or behind?
I know not where nor when nor how I shall it find.
If I had ten men's bodies and legs and strength,
This trotting that I have must needs lame 〈◊〉 at length.
And now that my master is new set on wooing,
I trust there shall none of us find lack of doing:
Two pair of shoes a day will now be too little
To serve me, I must trot to and fro so 〈◊〉.
Go bear me this token, carry me this letter,
Now this is the best way, now that way is better.
Up before day sirs, I charge you, an hour 〈...〉,
Trudge, do me this message, and bring word quick again,
If one miss but a minute, than his arms and wounds,
I would not have slacked for ten thousand pounds.
Nay see I beseech you, if my most trusty page,
Go not now about to hinder my marriage,
So fervent hot wooing, and so far from winning,
I trow never was any creature living,
With every woman is he in some loves pang,
Then up to our lute at midnight, twangled 〈◊〉 twang,
Then twang with our sonnets, and twang with our dumps,
And heigh-ho from our heart, as heavy as lead lumps:
Then to our recorder with toodleloodle p●●pe
As the owlet out of an ivy 〈◊〉 should hoop.
Anon to our gittern, thro●●ple 〈◊〉 thrumpledum thrum,
Thrumpledum, thrumpledum, thrumpledum, thrumpledum thrum.
Of Songs and Ballads also he is a maker,
And that can he as finely do as Jack Raker,
Yea and extempore will he ditties compose,
Foolish Marsias near made the like I suppose,
Yet must we sing them, as good stuff I undertake,
As for such a pen man is well fitting to make.
Ah for these long nights, heigh how, when will it be day?
I fear ere I come she will be wooed away.
Then when answer is made that it may not be,
O death why 〈◊〉 thou not? by and by (sayth he)
But then, from his heart to put away sorrow,
He is as far in with some new love next morrow.
But in the mean season▪ we trudge and we trot,
From dayspring to midnight, I sit not, nor rest not.
And now am I sent to dame Christian Custance:
But I fear it will end with a mock for pastance.
I bring her a ring, with a token in a clout,
And by all guess, this san●●● is her house out of doubt.
I know it now perfect▪ I am in my right way.
And lo yond the old nurse that was with us last day.
I Was near so shook up afore since I was borne,
That our mistress could not have chid I would have sworn:
And I pray God I die if I meant any harm,
But for my life tune this shall be to mea charm.
God you save and see nurse, and how is it with you?
marry a great deal the worse it is for such as thou.
For me? Why so?
Why were not thou one of them, say,
That song and played here with the gentleman last day?
Yes, and he would know if you have for him spoken.
And prays you to deliver this ring and token.
Now by the token that God tokened brother,
I will deliver no token one nor other.
I have once been so shent for your masters pleasure,
As I will not be again for all his treasure.
He will thank you woman.
I will none of his thank.
I ween I am a prophet, this gear will prove blank:
But what should I home again without answer go?
It were better go to Rome on my head than so.
I will tarry here this month, but some of the house
Shall take it of me, and then I care not a louse.
But yonder cometh forth a wench or a lad,
If he have not one Lombard's touch, my luck is bad.
I Am clean lost for lack of merry company,
We 〈◊〉 not half well within, our 〈◊〉 and I▪
They will command like mistresses, they will 〈◊〉.
If they be not served, Trupenie must be chid.
Let them be as merry now as ye can 〈◊〉,
With turning of a hand, our mirth lieth in the mire▪
I can not skill of such changeable mettle▪
There is nothing with them but in doke out ne.
Whether is it better that I speak to him turst,
Or he first to me, it is good to cast the wt.
If I begin first, he will smell all my purpose,
Otherwise I shall not need any ●●ing to disclose.
What boy have we yonder? I will see what he is.
He cometh to me▪ It is hereabout iwis.
Wouldest thou aught friend, that thou lookest so about?
Yea, but whether ye can help me or no, I don't.
I seek to one mistress Custance house here dwelling.
It is my mistress ye seek the by your telling.
Is there any of that name here but thee?
Not one in all the whole town that I know pardie.
A Widow she is I trow.
And what and she be?
But insured to an husband.
Yea, so think we.
And I dwell with her husband that 〈◊〉 to be.
In faith then must thou 〈◊〉 be welcome to me,
Let us for acquaintance shake 〈◊〉 is together,
And whate'er thou be, heartily welcome hither.
Well Trupenie never but flinging.
and frisking?
Well Tibet and Annot, 〈◊〉 swinging and whisking?
But ye roil abroad.
In the street every where.
Where are ye twain, in chambers when ye meet me there?
But come hither fools, I have one now by the hand,
Servant to him that must be our mistress husband,
Bid him welcome.
To me truly is he welcome.
Forsooth and as I may say, heartily welcome.
I thank you mistress maids.
I hope we shall better 〈◊〉
And when will our new master come.
Shortly 〈...〉
I would 〈◊〉 were tomorrow: for till he resort
Our mistress being a Widow hath small comfort,
And I heard our nurse speak of an husband today
Ready for our mistress, a rich man and a gay.
And we shall go in our french 〈◊〉 every day,
In our silk cassocks (I warrant you) 〈◊〉 and gay,
In our trick 〈...〉 of gold,
Brave in our suits of change seven double fold,
Then shall ye see Tibet 〈◊〉 tread the moss so trim,
Nay, why said I tread? ye shall see her glide and 〈◊〉▪
Not lumperdee-clumperdee like our spaniel Rig.
marry then 〈◊〉 come toast me a fig,
Who shall then know our Tib Talk apare trow ye?
And why not Annot Alyface as 〈◊〉 as she.
And what had Tom Trupenie, a 〈...〉 none?
Then our pretty new come man will look to be one.
We four I trust shall be a jolly merry knot.
Shall we sing a fit to welcome our friend, Annot?
Perchance he can not sing.
I am at all assays.
By cock and the better welcome to us always.
A thing very fit
For them that have wit,
And are fellows knit
Servants in one house to be,
Is fast fast for to sit,
And not oft to ●●itte,
Nor vary a whit,
But lovingly to agree.
No man complaining,
Nor other disdaining,
For loss or for gaining,
But fellows or friends to be.
No grudge remaining,
No work retraining,
Nor help refraining,
But lovingly to agree.
No man for despite,
By word or by write
His fellow to twit,
But further in honesty,
No good turns entwite,
Nor old fores recite,
But let all go quite,
And lovingly to agree.
After drudgery,
When they be weary,
Then to be merry,
To laugh and sing they be free
With chip and cherry
Heigh derie derie,
Trill on the berry,
And lovingly to agree.
will you now in with us unto our mistress go?
I have first for my master an errand or two.
But I have here from him a taken and a ring,
They shall have most thank of her that first doth it bring
marry that will I.
See and Tibet snatch not now.
And why may not I sir, get thanks as well as you?
Yet get ●e not all, we will go with you both.
And have part of your thanks be ye never so loath.
So my hands are rid of it: I care for no more.
I may now return home: so burst I not afore.
NAy come forth all three: and come hither pretty maid:
Will not so many forewarnings make you afraid?
Yes forsooth.
But 〈◊〉 be a runner up & down
Still be a bringer of tidings and tokens to town.
No forsooth mistress.
Is all your delight and joy
In whisking and ramping abroad like a Tomboy.
Forsooth these were there too, Annot and Trupenie.
Yea but ye alone took it, ye can not deny.
Yea that ye did.
But if I had not, ye twain would.
You great calf ye should have more wit, so ye should:
But why should any of you take such things in hand?
Because it came from him that must be your husband.
How do ye know that?
Forsooth the boy did say so.
What was his name?
We asked not.
No did?
He is not far gone of likelihood.
I will see.
If thou canst find him in the street bring him to me.
Yes.
Well ye naughty girls, if ever I perceive
That henceforth you do letters or tokens receive,
To bring unto me from any person or place,
Except ye first show me the party face to face,
Either thou or thou, full truly abye thou shalt.
Pardon this, and the next time powder me in salt.
I shall make all girls by you twain to beware.
If I ever offend again do not me spare.
But if ever I see that false boy any more
By your mistress-ship licence I tell you afore
I will rather have my coat twenty times swinged,
Than on the naughty wag not to be avenged.
Good wenches would not so ramp abroad idly,
But keep within doors, and ply their work earnestly,
If one would speak with me that is a man likely,
Ye shall have right good thank to bring me word quickly.
B otherwyse with messages to come in post
From henceforth I promise you, shall be to your cost.
Get you in to your work.
Yes forsooth.
Hence both twain.
And let me see you play me such a part again.
Mistress, I have run past the far end of the street,
Yet can I not yonder crafty boy see nor meet.
No?
Yet I looked as far beyond the people.
As one may see out of the top of Paul's steeple.
Hence in at doors, and let me no more be vexed.
Forgive me this one fault, and lay on for the next.
Now will I in too, for I think so God me mend,
This will prove some foolish matter in the end.
Now say this again: he hath somewhat to doing
Which followeth the trace of one that is wooing,
Specially that hath no more wit in his head,
Than my cousin Roister Doister with all is led.
I am sent in all haste to espy and to mark
How our letters and tokens are likely to work.
Master Roister Doister must have answer in haste
For he loveth not to spend much labour in waste.
Now as for Christian Custance by this light,
Though she had not her troth to Gavin Goodluck plight,
Yet rather than with such a loutish dolt to marie,
I dare say would live a poor life solitary,
But fain would I speak with Custance if I wist how
To laugh at the matter, yond cometh one forth now.
AH that I might but once in my life have a sight
Of him that made us all so ill shent by this light,
He should never escape if I had him by the ear,
But even from his head, I would it bite or tear.
Yea and if one of them were not enough,
I would bite them both off, I make God avow.
What is he, whom this little mouse doth so threaten?
I would teach him I trow, to make girls shent or beaten.
I will call her: Maid, with whom are ye so hasty?
Not with you sir, but with a little wagnastie,
A deceiver of folks, by subtle craft and guile.
I know where she is: Dobinet hath wrought some wile.
We brought a ring and token which he said was sent
From our dame's husband, but I wot well I was shent:
For it liked her as well to tell you no lies,
As water in hir shyppe, or salt cast in hir cies:
And yet whence it came neither we nor she can tell.
We shall have sport anon: I like this very well.
And dwell ye here with mistress Custance fair maid?
Yea marry do I sir: what would ye have said?
A little message unto her by word of mouth.
No messages by your leave, nor tokens forsooth.
Then help me to speak with her.
With a good will that.
Here she cometh forth. Now speak ye know best what.
None other life with you maid, but abroad to skip?
Forsooth here is one would speak with your mistress-ship.
Ah, have ye been learning of more messages now?
I would not hear his mind, but had him show it to you.
In at doors.
I am gone.
Dame Custance god ye save
Welcome friend Merrygreek: and what thing would ye have?
I am come to you a little matter to break.
But see it be honest, else better not to speak.
how feel ye yourself affected here of late?
I feel no manner change but after the old rate.
But whereby do ye mean?
Concerning marriage.
Doth not love lade you?
I feel no such carriage.
Do ye feel no pangs of dotage? answer me right.
I dote so, that I make but one sleep all the night.
But what need all these words?
Oh Iesus, will ye see
What dissembling creatures these same women be?
The gentleman ye wot of, whom ye do so love,
That ye would fain marry him, if ye durst it move,
Among other rich widows, which are of him glad,
Lest ye for losing of him perchance might run mad,
Is now contented that upon your suit making,
Ye be as one in election of taking.
What a tale is this? that I wot of? whom I love?
Yea and he is as loving a worm again as a dove.
e'en of very pity he is willing you to take,
Because ye shall not destroy yourself for his sake.
Mary God yelde his mashyp what euer he b,
It is gentmanly spoken.
Is it not trow ye?
If ye have the grace now to offer yourself, ye speed.
As much as though I did, this time it shall not need,
But what gentman is it, I pray you tell me plain,
That wooeth so finely?
Lo where ye be again,
As though ye knew him not.
Tush ye speak in jest.
Nay sure, the party is in good knacking earnest▪
And have you he will (he sayth) and have you he must.
I am promised during my life, that is just.
marry so thinketh he, unto him alone.
No creature hath my faith and troth but one,
That is Gavin Goodluck: and if it be not he,
He hath no title this way whatever he be,
Nor I know none to whom I have such word spoken.
Ye know him not 〈◊〉 by his letter and token.
In deed true it is, that a letter I have,
But I never read it yet as God me save.
Ye a woman? and your letter so long unread.
Ye may there by know what haste I have to wed.
But now who it is, for my hand I know by guess.
Ah well I say.
It is Roister Doister doubtless.
Will ye never leave this dissimulation?
Ye know him not.
But by imagination,
For no man there is but a very dolt and louted
That to woo a Widow would so go about.
He shall never have me his wife while he do live.
Then will he have you if he may, so mote I thrive,
And he biddeth you send him word by me,
That ye humbly beseech him, ye may his wife be,
And that there shall be no let in you nor mistrust,
But to be wedded on sunday next if he lust,
And biddeth you to look for him.
Doth he byd s?
When he cometh, ask him whether he did or no?
go say, that I bid him keep him warm at home
For if he come abroad, he shall cough me a mome.
My mind was vexed, I shrew his head sottish dolt.
He hath in his head.
As much brain as a burbolt.
Well dame Custance, if he hear you thus play choploge.
What will he?
Play the devil in the horologe.
I defy him lout.
Shall I tell him what ye say?
Yea and add whatsoever thou canst, I thee pray,
And I will avouch it whatsoever it be.
Then let me alone we will laugh well ye shall see,
It will not be long ere he will hither resort.
Let him come when him lust, I wish no better sport.
Fare ye well, I will in, and read my great letter.
I shall to my wooer make answer the better.
Now that the whole answer in my device doth rest,
I shall paint out our wooer in colours of the best.
And all that I say shall be on Constance's mouth,
She is author of all that I shall speak forsooth.
But yond cometh Roister Doister now in a trance.
Iuno send me this day good luck and good chance.
I can not but come see how Merrygreek doth speed.
I will not see him, but give him a jut in deed.
I cry your mastership mercy.
And whither now?
As fast as I could run sir in post against you.
But why speak ye so saintly, or why are ye so sad?
Thou knowest the proverb, because I can not be had.
Hast thou spoken with this woman?
Yea that I have.
And what will this gear be?
No so God me save.
Hast thou a flat answer?
Nay a sharp answer.
What
Ye shall not (she sayth) by her will marry her cat.
Ye are such a calf, such an ass, such a block,
Such a lilburne, such a hoball, such a lobcock,
And because ye should come to her at no season,
She despised your maship out of all reason.
beware what ye say (〈◊〉 I) of such a gentleman,
Nay I fear him not (〈...〉) do the best he can.
He vaunteth himself for a man of prowess great,
Where as a good gander I dare say may him beat.
And where he is louted and laughed to scorn,
For the veriest dolt that ever was borne,
And veriest lubber, sloven and beast,
Living in this world from the west to the east:
Yet of himself hath he such opinion,
That in all the world is not the like minion.
He thinketh each woman to be brought in dosage
With the only sight of his goodly parsonage:
Yet none that will have him: we do him lout and flock,
And make him among us, our common sporting stock,
And so would I now (ko she) save only because,
Better nay (ko I) I lust not meddle with daws.
Ye are happy (ko I) that ye are a woman,
This would cost you your life in case ye were a man.
Yea an hundred thousand pound should not save her life.
No but that ye woo her to have her to your wife,
But I could not stop her mouth.
Heigh how alas,
Be of good cheer man, and let the world pass.
What shall I do or say now that it will not be.
Ye shall have choice of a thousand as good as she,
And ye must pardon her, it is for lack of wit.
Yea, for were not I an husband for her fit?
Well what should I now do?
In faith I can not tell.
I will go home and die.
Then shall I bid toll the bell?
No.
God have mercy on your soul, ah good gentleman,
That ere ye should this die for an unkind woman,
Will ye drink our ere ye go.
No, no, I will none.
How feel your soul to God.
I am nigh gone.
And shall we hence straight?
Yea.
Master Roister Doister will straight go home and die.
Heigh how, alas, the pangs of death my heart do break.
Hold your peace for shame sir, a dead man may not speak.
Nequando: What mourners and what torches shall we have?
None.
Dirige. He will go darkling to his grave,
Neque lux, neque crux, neque mourners, neque clink,
He will steal to heaven, unknowing to God I think.
A porta inferi, who shall your goods possess?
Thou shalt be my sectour, and have all more and less.
Requiem aeternam. Now God reward your mastership.
And I will cry halfpenny dole for your worship.
Come forth sirs, hear the doleful news I shall you tell.
Our good master here will no longer with us dwell,
But in spite of Custance, which hath him wearied,
Let us see his maship solemnly buried.
And while some piece of his soul is yet him within,
Some part of his funerals let us here begin.
Audivi vocem, All men take heed by this one gentleman,
How you set your love upon an unkind woman.
For these women be all such mad peevish elves,
They will not be won except it please themselves.
But in faith Custance if ever ye come in hell,
Master Roister Doister shall serve you as well.
And will ye needs go from us thus in very deed?
Yea in good sadness?
Now Iesus Christ be your speed.
Good night Roger old knave, farewell Roger old knave,
Good night Roger old knave, knave knap. vt infra.
Pray for the late master Roister Doister's soul,
And come forth parish Clarke, let the passing bell toll.
Pray for your master sirs, and for him ring a peal.
He was your right good master while he was in heal.
Qui Lazarum.
Heigh how.
Dead men go not so fast
In Paradisum.
Hethow.
Soft, hear what I have cast
I will hear nothing, I am past.
Whough, wellaway.
Ye may tarry one hour, and hear what I shall say,
Ye were best sir for a while to revive again,
And quite them ere ye go.
Trowest thou so?
Ye plain.
How may I revive being now so far passed?
I will rub your temples, and fette you again at last.
It will not be possible.
Yes for twenty pound.
arms what dost thou?
Fet you again out of your swoon
By this cross ye were nigh gone in deed, I might feel
Your soul departing within an inch of your heel.
Now follow my counsel.
What is it?
If I were you,
Custance should eft seek to me, ere I would bow.
Well, as thou wilt have me, even so will I do.
Then shall ye revive again for an hour or two.
As thou wilt I am content for a little space.
Good hap is not hasty: yet in space cometh grace,
To speak with Custance yourself should be very well,
What good thereof may come, nor I, nor you can tell.
But now the matter standeth upon your marriage,
Ye must now take unto you a lusty courage.
Ye may not speak with a faint heart to Custance,
But with a lusty breast and countenance,
That she may know she hath to answer to a man.
Yes I can do that as well as any can.
Then because ye must Custance face to face woo,
Let us see how to behave yourself ye can do.
Ye must have a portly brag after your estate.
Tush, I can handle that after the best rate.
Well done, so lo, up man with your head and chin,
Up with that snout man: so lo, now ye begin,
So, that is somewhat like, but pranky coat, nay when,
That is a lusty brute, hands under your side man:
So lo, now is it even as it should be,
That is somewhat like, for a man of your degree.
Then must ye stately go, jetting up and down,
Tut, can ye no better shake the tail of your gown?
There lo, such a lusty brag it is ye must make.
To come behind, and make curtsy▪ thou must some pains take.
Else were I much to blame, I thank your mastership
The lord one day all to begrime you with worship,
Back sir sauce, let gentlefolks have elbow room,
Void sirs, see ye not master Roister Doister come?
Make place my masters.
Thou justlest now to nigh.
Back all rude louts.
Tush.
I cry your maship mercy
Hoighdagh. if fair fine mistress Custance saw you now,
Ralph Roister Doister were her own I warrant you.
Near an M by your girdle?
Your good mastership's
mastership, were her own mistress-ship mistress-ships,
Ye were take up for hawks, ye were gone, ye were gone,
But now one other thing more yet I think upon.
Show what it is.
A wooer be he never so poor
Must play and sing before his bestbeloved's door,
How much more than you?
Thou speakest well out of doubt.
And perchance that would make her the sooner come out.
Go call my 〈◊〉, bid them high apace.
I will be here with them ere ye can say trey ace.
This was well said of Merrygreek, I low his wit,
Before my sweet heart's door we will have a ●●t.
That if my love came forth, that I may with her talk,
I doubt not but this gear shall on my side walk.
But lo, how well Merrygreek is returned sense.
There hath grown no grass on my heel since I went hence,
Lo here have I brought that shall make you pastance.
Come sirs let us sing to win my dear love Custance.
Lo where she cometh, some countenance to her make
And ye shall hear me be plain with her for your sake.
WHat gauding and fooling is this afore my door?
May not folks be honest, pray you, though they be poor?
As that thing may be true, so rich folks may be fools,
Her talk is as ●●●e as she had learned in schools.
Look partly toward her, and draw a little near.
Get ye home idle folks.
Why may not we be here?
Nay and ye will haze, haze: otherwise I tell you plain,
And ye will not haze, then give us our gear again.
In deed I have of yours much gay things God save all.
Speak gently unto her, and let her take all.
Ye are to tender hearted: shall she make us daws?
Nay dame, I will be plain with you in my friend's cause.
Let all this pass sweet heart and accept my service.
I will not be served with a fool in no wise,
When I choose an husband I hope to take a man.
And where will ye find one which can do that he can?
Now this man toward you being so kind,
You not to make him an answer somewhat to his mind.
I sent him a full answer by you did I not?
And I reported it.
Nay I must speak it again.
No no, he told it all.
Was I not meetly plain?
Yes.
But I would not tell all, for faith if I had
With you dame Custance ere this hour it had been bad,
And not without cause▪ for this goodly parsonage,
Meant no less than to join with you in marriage.
Let him waste no more labour nor suit about me.
Ye know not where our preerment lieth I s,
He sending you such a token, ring and letter.
marry here it is, ye never saw a better.
Let us see your letter.
Hold, read it if ye can.
And see what letter it is to win a woman.
To mine own dear honey bird, sweet heart, and pigsny
Good Mistress Custance present these by and by,
Of this superscription de ye blame the style?
With the rest as good stuff as ye red a great while.
Sweet mistress where as I love you nothing at all,
Regarding your substance and richesse chief of all,
For your parsonage, beauty, demeanour and wit,
I commend me unto you never a whit.
Sorry to hear report of your good welfare.
For (as I hear say) such your conditions are,
That ye be worthy favour of no living man,
To be abhorred of every honest man.
To be taken for a woman inclined to vice.
Nothing at all to Virtue giving her due price.
Wherefore concerning marriage, ye are thought
Such a fine Paragon, as near honest man bought.
And now by these presents I do you advertise
That I am minded to marry you in no wise.
For your goods and substance, I could be content
To take you as ye are. If ye mind to be my wife,
Ye shall be assured for the time of my life,
I will keep ye right well, from good raiment and fare,
Ye shall not be kept but in sorrow and care.
Ye shall in no wise live at your own liberty,
Do and say what ye lust, ye shall never please me,
But when ye are merry, I will be all sad,
When ye are sorry, I will be very glad.
When ye seek your hearts ease, I will be unkind,
At no time, in me shall ye much gentleness find.
But all things contrary to your will and mind,
Shall be done: otherwise I will not be behind
To speak. And as for all them that would do you wrong
I will so help and maintain, ye shall not live long.
Nor any foolish dolt, shall cumber you but I.
ay, who ere say nay, will stick by you till I die.
Thus good mistress Custance, the lord you save and keep,
From me Roister Doister, whether I wake or sleep.
Who favoureth you no less, (ye may be bold)
Than this letter purporteth, which ye have unfold.
how by this letter of love? is it not fine?
By the arms of Caleps it is none of mine.
Fie you are foul to blame this is your own hand.
Might not a woman be proud of such an husband?
Ah that ye would in a letter show such despite.
Oh I would I had him here, the which did it indite.
Why ye made it yourself ye told me by this light.
Yea I meant I wrote it mine own self yesternight.
iwis sir, I would not have sent you such a mock.
Ye may so take it, but I meant it not so by cock.
Who can blame this woman to 〈◊〉 and fret and rage?
Tut, tut, yourself now have marred your own marriage.
Well, yet mistress Custance, if ye can this remit,
This gentleman other wise may your love requite.
No God be with you both, and ●●●ke no more to me.
wow, she is gone for ever, I shall her no more see.
What weep? fie for shame, and blubber? for manhood's sake,
Never let your foe so much pleasure of you take.
Rather play the man's part, and do love refrain.
It she despise you e'en despise ye her again.
By gosse and for thy sake I defy her in deed.
Yea and perchance that way ye shall much sooner speed,
For one mad property these women have in ●ey,
When ye will, they will not: Will not ye, then will they.
Ah foolish woman, ah most unlucky Custance,
Ah unfortunate woman, ah peevish Custance,
Art thou to thine harms so obstinately bent,
That thou canst not see where lieth thine high preferment?
Canst thou not lub dis man, which could lub dée so well?
Art thou so much thine own foe.
Thou dost the truth tell.
Well I lament.
So do I.
Wherefore.
For this thing
Because she is gone.
I mourn for another thing.
What is it Merrygreek, wherefore thou dost grief take?
That I am not a woman myself for your sake,
I would have you myself, and a straw for yond Gill,
And mock much of you though it were against my will.
I would not I warrant you, fall in such a rage,
As so to refuse such a goodly parsonage.
In faith I heartily thank thee Merrygreek.
And I were a woman.
Thou wouldest to me seek.
For though I say it, a goodly person ye be.
No, no.
Yes a goodly man as ere I did see.
No, I am a poor homely man as God made me.
By the faith that I owe to God sir, but ye be.
Would I might for your sake, spend a thousand pound land.
I dare say thou wouldest have me to thy husband.
Yea: And I were the fairest lady in the shire,
And knew you as I know you, and see you now here,
Well I say no more.
Gramercies with all my heart.
But since that can not be, will ye play a wise part?
How should I?
Refrain from Custance a while now.
And I warrant her soon right glad to seek to you,
Ye shall see her anon come on her knees creeping,
And pray you to be good to her salt tears weeping.
But what and she come not?
In faith then farewell the.
Or else if ye be wroth, ye may avenged be.
By cocks precious potstick, and e'en so I shall.
I will utterly destroy her, and house and all.
But I would be avenged in the mean space,
On that vile scribbler, that did my wooing disgrace.
Scribbler (ko you) in deed he is worthy no less.
I will call him to you, and ye bid me doubtless.
Yes, for although he had as many lives,
As a thousand widows, and a thousand wives,
As a thousand lions, and a thousand rats,
A thousand wolves, and a thousand cats,
A thousand bulls, and a thousand calves,
And a thousand legions divided in halves,
H shall neuer scae death on my swordes point,
Though I should be torn therefore joint by joint.
Nay, if ye will kill him, I will not fet him,
I will not in so much extremity set him,
He may yet amend sir, and be an honest man,
Therefore pardon him good soul, as much as ye can.
Well, for thy sake, this once with his life he shall pass,
But I will hew him all to pieces by the Mass.
Nay faith ye shall promise that he shall no harm have,
Else I will not fet him.
I shall so God me save.
But I may chide him a good.
Yea that do hardly.
Go then.
I return, and bring him to you by & by.
WHat is a gentleman but his word and his promise?
I must now save this villain's life in any wise,
And yet at him already my hands do tickle,
I shall uneath hold them, they will be so fickle.
But ●o and Merrygreek have not brought him since?
Nay I would I had of my purse paid forty pens.
So would I too: but it needed not that stound,
But the gentleman had rather spent five thousand pound,
For it disgraced him at least five times so much.
He disgraced himself, his loutishness is such.
how long they stand prating? Why comest thou not away?
Come now to himself, and hark what he will say.
I am not afraid in his presence to appear.
art thou come fellow?
How think you? am I not here?
What hindrance hast thou done me, and what villainy?
It hath come of thyself, if thou hast had any.
All the stock thou comest of later or rather,
From thy first father's grandfathers father's father,
Nor all that shall come of thee to the worlds end,
Though to three score generations they descend,
Can be able to make me a just recompense,
For this trespass of thine and this one offence.
Wherein?
Did not you make me a letter brother?
Pay the like hire▪ I will make you such another.
Nay see and these whoreson Phariseys and Scribes
Do not get their living by polling and bribes.
If it were not for shame. Scrivener. Nay hold thy hands still.
Why did ye not promise that ye would not him spill?
Let him not spare me.
Why wilt thou strike me again?
Ye shall have as good as ye bring of me that is plain.
I can not blame him sir, though your blows would 〈◊〉 grieve.
For he knoweth present death to ensue of all ye give.
Well, this man for once hath purchased thy pardon.
And what say ye to me? or else I will be gone.
I say the letter thou madest me was not good.
Then did ye wrong copy it of likelihood.
Yes, out of thy copy word for word I it wrote.
Then was it as ye prayed to have it I wot,
But in reading and pointing there was made some fault.
I wot not, but it made all my matter to halt.
how say you, is this mine original or no?
The self same that I wrote out of, so mote I go.
Look you on your own fist, and I will look on this,
And let this man be judge whether I read amiss.
To mine own dear coney bird, sweet heart, and pigsny,
Good mistress Custance, present these by and by.
How now? doth not this superscription agree?
read that is within, and there ye shall the fault see.
Sweet mistress, where as I love you, nothing at all
Regarding your richesse and substance: chief of all
For your parsonage, beauty, demeanour and 〈◊〉
I commend me unto you: Never a whit
Sorry to hear report of your good welfare.
For (as I hear say) such your conditions are,
That ye be worthy favour: Of no living man
To be abhorred: of every honest man
To be taken for a woman inclined to vice
Nothing at all: to virtue giving her due price.
Wherefore concerning marriage, ye are thought
Such a fine Paragon, as near honest man bought.
And now by these presents I do you advertise,
That I am minded to marry you: In no wise
For your goods and substance: I can be content
To take you as you are: if ye will be my wife,
Ye shall be assured for the time of my life,
I will keep you right well: from good raiment and fare,
Ye shall not be kept: but in sorrow and care
Ye shall in no wise live: at your own liberty,
Do and say what ye lust: ye shall never please me
But when ye are merry: I will be all sad
When ye are sorry: I will be very glad
When ye seek your hearts ease: I will be unkind
At no time: in me shall ye much gentleness find.
But all things contrary to your will and mind
Shall be done otherwise: I will not be behind
To speak: And as for all they that would do you wrong,
(I will so help and maintain ye) shall not live long.
Nor any foolish doit shall cumber you, but I,
ay, who ere say nay, will stick by you till I die.
Thus good mistress Custance, the lord you save and keep.
From me Roister Doister, whether I wake or sleep,
Who favoureth you no less, (ye may be bold)
Than this letter purporteth, which ye have unfold.
Now sir, what default can ye find in this letter?
Of truth in my mind there can not be a better.
Then was the fault in reading, and not in writing,
No nor I dare say in the form of inditing,
But who read this letter, that it sounded so nought?
I red it in deed.
Ye red it not as ye ought.
Why thou wretched villain was all this same fault in thee?
I knock your costard if ye offer to strike me.
Strikest thou in deed? and I offer but in jest?
Yea and rap you again except ye can sit in rest.
And I will no longer tarry hear me believe.
What wilt thou be angry, and I do thee forgive?
Fare thou well scribbler, I cry thee mercy in deed.
Fare ye well bibbler, and worthily may ye speed.
If it were another but thou, it were a knave.
Ye are another yourself sir, the lord us both save,
Albeit in this matter I must your pardon crave,
Alas would ye wish in me the wit that ye have?
But as for my fault I can quickly amend,
I will show Custance it was I that did offend.
By so doing her anger may be reformed.
But if by no entreaty she will be turned,
Then set light by her and be as testy as she,
And do your force upon her with extremity.
Come on therefore let us go home in sadness.
That if force shall need all may be in a readiness,
And as for this letter hardly let all go,
We will know where she refuse you for that or no.
IS there any man but I Sym Suresby alone,
That would have taken such an enterprise him upon,
In such an outrageous tempest as this was.
such a dangerous gulf of the sea to pass.
I think verily Neptune's mighty godship,
Was angry with some that was in our ship,
And but for the honesty which in me he found,
I think for the other's sake we had been drowned.
But fie on that servant which for his masters wealth
Will stick for to hazard both his life and his health.
My master Gavin Goodluck after me a day
Because of the weather, thought best his ship to stay,
And now that I have the rough surges so well passed,
God grant I may find all things safe here at last.
Then will I think all my travail well spent,
Now the first point wherefore my master hath me sent
Is to salute dame Christian Custance his wife,
Espoused: whom he tendereth no less than his life,
I must see how it is with her well or wrong,
And whether for him she doth not now think long:
Then to other friends I have a message or ●way,
And then so to return and meet him on the way.
Now will I go knock that I may dispatch with speed,
But lo forth cometh herself happily in deed.
I Come to see if any more stirring be here,
But what stranger is this, which death to me appear.
I will speak to her: Dame the lord you save and see.
What friend Sym Suresby? Forsooth right welcome ye be,
How doth mine own Gavin Goodluck▪ I pray the tell?
When he knoweth of your health he will be perfect well.
If he have perfect health, I am as I would be.
Such news will please him well, this is as it should be.
I think now long for him.
And he as long for you.
When will he be at home?
His heart is here ●en now
His body cometh after.
I would see that fain.
As fast as wind and sail can carry it a main.
But what two men are yond coming hitherward?
Now I shrew their best Christmas cheeks both togetherward.
WHat mean these lewd fellows thus to trouble me still?
Sym Suresby here perchance shall thereof deem some ill,
And shall suspect in me some point of naughtiness,
And they come hitherward.
What is their business?
I have nought to them, nor they to me in sadness.
Let us hearken them, somewhat there is I fear it.
I will speak out aloud best, that she may hear it.
Nay alas; ye may so fear her out of her wit.
By the cross of my sword, I will hurt her no whit.
Will ye do no harm in deed, shall I trust your word?
By Roister Doister's faith I will speak but in board.
Let us hearken them, somewhat there is I fears it.
I will speak out aloud, I care not who hear it:
Sirs, see that my harness, my tergat, and my shield,
Be made as bright now, as when I was last in field,
As white as I should to war again to morrow:
For sick shall I be, but I work some folk sorrow.
Therefore see that all shine as bright as saint George,
Or as doth a key newly come from the Smith's forge.
I would have my sword and harness to shine so bright,
That I might therewith dim mine enemies sight,
I would have it cast beams as fast I tell you plain,
As doth the glittering grass after a shower of rain.
And see that in case I should need to come to arming,
All things may be ready at a minute's warning,
For such chance may chance in an hour, do ye hear?
As perchance shall not chance again in seven year.
Now draw we near to her, and here what shall be said.
But I would not have you make her too much afraid.
Well found sweet wife (I trust) for all this your sour look.
Wife? why call ye me wife?
wife? this gear goeth acrook.
Nay mistress Custance, I warrant you, our letter
Is not as we red e'en now, but much better,
And where ye half stomached this gentleman afore,
For this same letter, ye will love him now therefore,
Nor it is not this letter though ye were a queen,
That should break marriage between you twain I ween.
I did not refuse him for the letter's sake.
Then ye are content me for your husband to take.
You for my husband to take? nothing less truly.
Yea say so, sweet spouse, afore strangers hardly.
And though I have here his letter of love with me,
Yet his ring and tokens he sent, keep safe with ye.
A mischief take his tokens, and him and thee too.
But what prate I with fools? have I nought else to do?
Come in with me Sym Suresby to take some repast.
I must ere I drink by your leave, go in all haste,
To a place or two, with earnest letters of his.
Then come drink here with me.
I thank you.
Do not miss
You shall have a token to your master with you.
No tokens this time gramercies, God be with you.
Surely this fellow misdéemeth some ill in me,
Which thing but God help, will go near to spill me.
Yea farewell fellow, and tell thy master Goodluck
That he cometh to late of this blossom to pluck.
Let him keep him there still, or at least wise make no haste,
As for his labour hither he shall spend in waste.
His betters be in place now.
As long as it will hold.
I will be even with thee thou beast, thou mayst be bold.
Will ye have us then?
I will never have thee.
Then will I have you?
No, the devil shall have thee.
I have gotten this hour more shame and harm by thee,
Than all thy life days thou canst do me honesty.
Why now may ye see what it cometh too in the end,
To make a deadly foe of your most loving friend:
And iwis this letter if ye would hear it now.
I will hear none of it.
In faith would ravish you.
He hath stained my name for ever this is clear.
I can make all as well in an hour.
As ten year.
How say ye, will ye have him?
No.
will ye take him?
I defy him.
At my word?.
A shame take him.
Waste no more wind, for it will never be.
This one fault with twain shall be mended, ye shall see.
gentle mistress Custance now, good mistress Custance,
Honey mistress Custance now, sweet mistress Custance,
Golden mistress Custance now, white mistress Custance,
Silken mistress Custance now, fair mistress Custance.
Faith rather than to marry with such a doltish lout,
I would match myself with a beggar out of doubt.
Then I can say no more, to speed we are not like,
Except ye rap out a rag of your Rhetoric.
Speak not of winning me: for it shall never be so.
Yes dame, I will have you whether ye will or no,
I command you to love me, wherefore should ye not?
Is not my love to you chafing and burning hot?
Too her, that is well said.
Shall I so break my brain
To dote upon you, and ye not love us again?
Well said yet.
Go to y• goose.
I say ●it Custance,
In case ye will not haze, well, better yes perchance.
avaunt lozel, pick thee hence.
Well sir, ye perceive,
For all your kind offer, she will not you receive.
Then a straw for her, and a straw for her again,
She shall not be my wife, would she never so fain,
No and though she would be at ten thousand pound cost.
Lo dame, ye may see what an husband ye have lost.
Yea, no force, a jewel much better lost than found.
Ah, ye will not believe how this doth my heart wound.
How should a marriage between you be toward,
If both parties draw back, and become so froward.
Nay dame, I will fire thee out of thy house,
And destroy thee and all thine, and that by and by.
Nay for the passion of God sir, do not so.
Yes, except she will say yea to that she said no.
And what, be there no officers trow we, in town
To check idle loiterers bragging up and down?
Where be they, by whom vagabonds should be repressed?
That poor silly Widows might live in peace and rest.
Shall I never rid thee out of my company?
I will call for help, what hough, come forth Trupenie.
Anon. What is your will mistress? did ye call me?
Yea, go run apace, and as fast as may be,
Pray Tristram Trusty, my most assured friend,
To be here by and by, that he may me defend.
That message so quickly shall be done by God's grace,
That at my return ye shall say, I went apace.
Then shall we see I trow, whether ere ye shall do me harm,
Yes in faith Kit, I shall thee and thine so charm,
That all women incarnate by thee may beware.
Nay, as for charming me, come hither if thou dare,
I shall clout thee till thou stink, both thee and thy train,
And coil thee mine own hands, and send thee home again.
Yea sayst thou me that dame? dost thou me threaten?
Go we, I will see whether I shall be beaten.
Nay for the pash of God, let me now treat peace,
For bloodshed will there be in case this strife increase.
Ah good dame Custance, take better way with you.
Let him do his worst.
Yield in time.
Come hence thou.
SO sirrah, if I should not with him take this way,
I should not be rid of him I think till dooms day,
I will call forth my folks, that without any mocks
If he come again we may give him raps and knocks.
Madge Mumblecrust, come forth, and Tibet Talk apace.
Yea and come forth too, mistress Annot Alyface.
I come.
I am here.
and I am here too at length.
Like warriors if need be, ye must show your strength
The man that this day hath thus beguiled you,
Is Ralph Roister Doister, whom ye know well enough,
The most lout and dastard that ever on ground trod.
I see all folk mock him when he goeth abroad.
What pretty maid? will ye talk when I speak?
No forsooth good mistress.
Will ye my tale break?
He threateneth to come hither with all his force to fight,
I charge you if he come, on him with all your might.
I with my distaff will reach him one rap.
And I with my new broom will sweep him one swap,
And then with our great club I will reach him one rap.
And I with our skimmer will fling him one flap.
Then Trupenie's firefork will him shrewdly fray,
And you with the spit may drive him quite away.
Go make all ready, that it may be e'en so.
For my part I shrew them that last about it go.
TRupenie did promise me to run a great pace,
My friend Tristram Trusty to fet into this place.
In deed he dwelleth hence a good start I confess:
But yet a quick messenger might twice since as I guess,
Have gone and come again. Ah yond I spy him now.
Ye are a slow goer sir, I make God avow.
My mistress Custance will in me put all the blame,
Your legs be longer than mine: come apace for shame.
I can thee thank Trupenie, thou hast done right weal.
Mistress since I went no grass hath grown on my hele,
But master Tristram Trusty here maketh no speed.
That he came at all I thank him in very deed,
For now have I need of the help of some wise man.
Then may I be gone again, for none such I m.
Ye may be by your going: for no Alderman
Can go I dare say, a sadder pace than ye can.
Trupenie get thee in, thou shalt among them know,
How to use thyself, like a proper man I trow.
I go.
Now Tristram Trusty I thank you right much.
For at my first sending to come ye never grudge.
Dame Custance God ye save, and while my life shall last,
For my friend Goodluck's sake ye shall not send in waste.
He shall give you thanks.
I will do much for his sake
But alack, I fear, great displeasure shall be take.
Wherefore?
For a foolish matter.
What is your cause
I am ill accumbered with a couple of daws.
Nay weep not woman: but tell me what your cause is
As concerning my friend is any thing amiss?
No not on my part: but here was Sym Suresby.
He was with me and told me so.
And he stood by
While Ralph Roister Doister with help of Merrygreek,
For promise of marriage did unto me seek.
And had ye made any promise before them twain.
No I had rather be torn in pieces and slain,
No man hath my faith and troth, but Gavin Goodluck,
And that before Suresby did I say, and there stuck,
But of certain letters there were such words spoken.
He told me that too.
And of a ring and token.
That Suresby I spied, did more than half suspect,
That I my faith to Gavin Goodluck did reject.
But there was no such matter dame Custance in deed?
If ever my head thought it, God send me ill speed.
Wherefore I beseech you, with me to be a witness,
That in all my life I never intended thing less,
And what a brainsick fool Ralph Roister Doister is,
yourself know well enough.
Ye say full true iwis.
Because to be his wife I ne grant nor apply,
Hither will he come he sweareth by and by,
To kill both me and mine, and beat down my house flat.
Therefore I pray your aid.
I warrant you that.
Have I so many years lived a sober life,
And showed myself honest, maid, widow, and wife,
And now to be abused in such a vile sort,
Ye see how poor Widows live all void of comfort.
I warrant him do you no harm nor wrong at all.
No, but Mathew Merrygreek doth me most appall,
That he would join himself with such a wretched lout.
He doth it for a jest I know him out of doubt,
And here cometh Merrygreek.
Then shall we here his mind.
CUstance and Trusty both, I do you here well find.
Ah Mathew Merrygreek, ye have used me well.
Now for altogether ye must your answer tell.
Will ye have this man, woman? or else will ye not?
Else will be come never bore so brim nor tossed so hot.
But why join ye with him.
For mirth?
or else in sadness
The more fond of you both hardly the matter guess.
Lo how say ye dame?
Why do ye think dame Custance
That in this wooing I have meant aught but pastance?
Much things ye spoke I wot, to maintain his dotage.
But well might ye judge I spoke it all in mockage,
For why? Is Roister Doister a fit husband for you?
I dare say ye never thought it.
No to God I vow.
And did not I know afore of the insurance
Between Gavin Goodluck, and Christian Custance?
And did not I for the nonce, by my conveyance,
Read his letter in a wrong sense for dalliance?
That if you could have take it up at the first bound,
We should thereat such a sport and pastime have found,
That all the whole town should have been the merrier.
Ill ache your heads both, I was never wearier,
Nor never more verte since the first day I was borne.
But very well I wist he here did all in scorn.
But I feared thereof to take dishonesty.
This should both have made sport, and showed your honesty
And Goodluck I dare swear, your wit therein would low.
Yea, being no worse than we know it to be now.
And nothing yet to late, for when I come to him,
Hither will he repair with a sheeps look full grim,
force and violence to drive you to yield.
If ye two bid me, we will with him pitch a field,
I and my maids together.
Let us see, be bold.
Ye shall see women's war.
That fight will I behold
If occasion serve, taking his part full brim,
I will strike at you, but the rap shall light on him.
When we first appear.
Then will I run away
As though I were afeard.
Do you that part well play
And I will sue for peace.
And I will set him on.
Then will he look as fierce as a Cotssold lion.
But when ghost thou for him?
That do I very now.
Ye shall find us here.
Well god have mercy on you.
There is no cause of fear, the least boy in the street:
Nay, the least girl I have, will make him take his feet.
But hark, methink they make preparation.
No force, it will be a good recreation.
I will stand within, and step forth speedily,
And so make as though I ran away dreadfully.
Now sirs, keep your ray, and see your hearts be stout,
But where be these caitiffs, methink they dare not rout,
How sayst thou Merrygreek? What doth Kit Custance say?
I am loath to tell you.
Tush speak man▪ yea or nay?
Forsooth sir, I have spoken for you all that I can.
But if ye win her, ye must e'en play the man,
e'en to fight it out, ye must a man's heart take.
Yes, they shall know, and thou knowest I have a stomach.
A stomach (quoth you) yea, as good as ere man had.
I trow they shall find and feel that I am a lad.
By this cross I have seen you eat your meat as well,
As any that ere I have seen of or heard tell,
A stomach quoth you? he that will that deny
I know was never at dinner in your company.
Nay, the stomach of a man it is that I mean.
Nay the stomach of an horse or a dog I ween.
Nay a man's stomach with a weapon mean I.
Ten men can scarce match you with a spoon in a pie.
Nay the stomach of a man to try in strife.
I never saw your stomach cloyed yet in my life.
Tush I mean in strife or fighting to try.
We shall see how ye will strike now being angry.
Have at thy pate then, and save thy head if thou may.
Nay then have at your pate again by this day,
Nay thou mayst not strike at me again in no wise.
I can not in fight make to you such warrantise:
But as for your foes here let them the bargain buy.
Nay as for they, shall every mother's child die.
And in this my fume a little thing might make me,
To beat down house and all, and else the devil take me.
If I were as ye be, by gog's dear mother,
I would not leave one stone upon another.
Though she would redeem it with twenty thousand pounds.
It shall be even so, by his lily wounds.
Be not at one with her upon any amends.
No though she make to me never so many friends.
Not if all the world for her would undertake,
No not God himself neither, shall not her peace make,
On therefore, march forward, soft, stay a while yet.
On.
Tarry.
Forth.
Back.
On.
Soft. Now forward set
What business have we here? out alas, alas.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Didst thou see that Merrygreek? how afraid she was?
Didst thou see how she fled apace out of my sight?
Ah good sweet Custance I pity her by this light.
That tender heart of yours will mar altogether,
Thus will ye be turned with wagging of a feather.
On sirs, keep your ray.
On forth, while this gear is hot
Soft, the Arms of Caleys, I have one thing forgot.
What lack we now?
Retire, or else we be all slain.
Back for the pash of God, back sirs, back again.
What is the great matter?
This hasty forth going
Had almost brought us all to utter undoing,
It made me forget a thing most necessary.
Well remembered of a captain by saint Mary.
It is a thing must be had.
Let us have it then.
But I wot not where nor how.
Then wot not I when.
But what is it?
Of a chief thing I am to seek.
Tut so will ye be, when ye have studied a week.
But tell me what it is?
I lack yet an head-piece.
The kitchen collocavit, the best hens to grece,
Run, fet it Dobinet, and come at once withal,
And bring with thee my potgun, hanging by the wall,
I have seen your head with it full many a time,
Covered as safe as it had been with a screen:
And I warrant it save your head from any stroke,
Except perchance to be amazed with the smoke:
I warrant your head therewith, except for the mist,
As safe as if it were fast locked up in a chest:
And lo here our Dobinet cometh with it now.
It will cover me to the shoulders well enough.
Let me see it on.
In faith it doth meetly well.
There can be no fitter thing. Now ye must us tell
What to do.
Now forth in ray sirs, and stop no more.
Now saint George to borrow, Drum dub a dub afore.
What mean you to do sir, commit manslaughter.
To kill forty such, is a matter of laughter.
And who is it sir, whom ye intend thus to spill?
Foolish Custance here forceth me against my will.
And is there no mean your extreme wrath to slake.
She shall some amends unto your good maship make.
I will none amends.
Is her offence so sore?
And he were a lout she could have done no more.
She hath called him fool, and dressed him like a fool.
Mocked him like a fool, used him like a fool.
Well yet the Sheriff, the justice, or Constable,
Her misdemeanour to punish might be able.
No sir, I mine own self will in this present cause,
Be Sheriff, and justice, and whole judge of the laws,
This matter to amend, all officers be I shall,
Constable, Bailiff, Sergeant.
And hangman and all.
Yet a noble courage, and the heart of a man
Should more honour win by bearing with a woman.
Therefore take the law, and let her answer thereto.
Merrygreek, the best way were even so to do.
What honour should it be with a woman to fight?
And what then, will ye thus forego and lese your right?
Nay, I will take the law on her withouten grace.
Or if your maship could pardon this one trespass.
I pray you forgive her.
Hoh?
Tush tush sir do not.
Be good master to her.
Hoh?
Tush I say do not.
And what shall your people here return straight home?
Yea, levy the camp sirs, and hence again each one,
But be still in readiness if I hap to call,
I can not tell what sudden chance may befall.
Do not off your harness sirs I you advise,
At the least for this fortnight in no manner wise,
Perchance in an hour when all ye think least,
Our masters appetite to fight will be best.
But soft, ere ye go, have once at Custance house.
Soft, what wilt thou do?
Once discharge my harquebus
And for my hearts ease, have once more with my p●tgoon.
Hold thy hands else is all our purpose clean foredone.
And it cost me my life.
I say thou shalt not.
By the mat but I will. Have once more with hail shot
I will have some pennyworth, I will not lose all.
WHat caitiffs are those that so shake my house wall?
Ah sirrah now Custance if ye had so much wit
I would see you ask pardon, and yourselves submit.
Have I still this ado with a couple of fools?
Here ye what she saith?
Maidens come forth with your tools
In a ray.
Dubba dub sirrah.
In a ray,
They come suddenly on us.
Dubbadub.
In a ray.
That ever I was borne, we are taken tardy.
Now sirs, quite ourselves like tall men and hardy.
On afore Trupenie, hold thine own Annot,
On toward them Tibet, for scape us they can not.
Come forth Madge Mumblecrust, 〈◊〉 stand fast together.
God send us a fair day.
See they march on hither.
But mistress.
What sayst y•?
Shall I go fet our goose?
What to do?
To yonder Captain I will turn her loose
And she gape and hiss at him, as she doth at me,
I durst jeopardy my hand she will make him flee.
On forward.
They come.
Stand.
Hold.
Keep.
There.
Strike.
Take heed.
Well said Trupenie.
Ah whoresons.
well done in deed
Hold thine own Harpax, down with them Dobinet.
Now Madge, there Annot: now stick them Tibet.
All my chief quarrel is to this same little knave,
That beguiled me last day, nothing shall him save.
Down with this little quean, that hath at me such spite,
Save you from her master, it is a very sprite.
I myself will mounsire grand captain undertake,
They win ground.
Save yourself sir, for God's sake.
Out, alas, I am slain, help.
Save yourself.
Alas.
Nay then, have at you mistress.
Thou hittest me, alas.
I will strike at Custance here.
Thou hittest me.
so I will
Nay mistress Custance.
Alas, thou hittest me still.
Hold.
Save yourself sir.
Help, out alas I am slain
Truce, hold your hands, truce for a pissing while or twain:
Now how say you Custance, for saving of your life,
Will ye yield and grant to be this gentman's wife?
Ye told me he loved me, call ye this love?
He loved a while even like a turtle dove.
Gay love God save it, so soon hot, so soon cold.
I am sorry for you: he could love you yet so he could.
Nay by cocks precious she shall be none of mine.
Why so?
Come away, by the mat she is mankine.
I durst adventure the loss of my right hand,
If she did not flee her other husband:
And see if she prepare not again to fight.
What then? saint George to borrow, our lady's knight.
slay else whom she will, by gog she shall not slay me.
How then?
Rather than to be slain, I will flee.
Too it again, my knightesses, down with them all.
Away, away, away, she will else kill us all.
Nay stick to it, like an hardy man and a tall.
Oh bones, thou bittest me. Away, or else die we shall.
Away for the pash of our sweet Lord Iesus Christ.
Away lout and lubber, or I shall be thy priest.
So this field is ours we have driven them all away.
Thanks to God mistress, ye have had a fair day.
Well now go ye in, and make yourself some good cheer.
We go.
Ah sir, what a field we have had here.
Friend Tristram, I pray you be a witness with me.
Dame Custance, I shall depose for your honesty,
And now fare ye well, except some thing else ye would.
Not now, but when I need to send I will be bold.
I thank you for these pains. And now I will get me in,
Now Roister Doister will no more wooing begin.
SYm Suresby my trusty man, now advise thee well,
And see that no false surmises thou me tell,
Was there such ado about Custance of a truth?
To report that I heard and saw, to me is ruth,
But both my duty and name and property,
Warneth me to you to show fidelity.
It may be well enough, and I wish it so to be,
She may herself discharge and try her honesty,
Yet their claim to her methought was very large,
For with letters rings and tokens, they did her charge.
Which when I heard and saw I would none to you bring.
No by saint Marie, I allow thee in that thing.
Ah sirrah, now I see truth in the proverb old,
All things that shineth is not by and by pure gold,
If any do live a woman of honesty▪
I would have sworn Christian Custance had been she.
Sir, though I to you be a servant true and just.
Yet do not ye therefore your faithful spouse mistrust.
But examine the matter, and if ye shall it find,
To be all well, be not ye for my words unkind.
I shall do that is right, and as I see cause why.
But here cometh Custance forth, we shall know by and by.
I Come forth to see and hearken for news good,
For about this hour is the time of likelihood,
That Gavin Goodluck by the sayings of Suresby,
Would be at home, and lo yond I see him I.
What Gavin Goodluck, the only hope of my life,
Welcome home, and kiss me your true espoused wife.
Nay soft dame Custance, I must first by your licence,
See whether all things be clear in your conscience,
I hear of your doings to me very strange.
What fear ye that my faith towards you should change?
I must needs mistrust ye be elsewhere entangled,
For I hear that certain men with you have wrangled
About the promise of marriage by you to them made.
Could any man's report your mind therein persuade?
Well, ye must therein declare yourself to stand clear,
Else I and you dame Custance may not join this year.
Then would I were dead, and fair laid in my grave,
Ah Suresby, is this the honesty that ye have?
To hurt me with your report, not knowing the thing.
If ye be honest my words can hurt you nothing.
But what I heard and saw, I might not but report.
Ah Lord, help poor widows, destitute of comfort.
Truly most dear spouse, nought was done but for pastance.
But such kind of sporting is homely dalliance.
If ye knew the truth, ye would take all in good part.
By your leave I am not half well skilled in that art.
It was none but Roister Doister that foolish mome.
Yea Custance, better (they say) a bad 'scuse than none.
Why Tristram Trusty sir, your true and faithful friend,
Was privy both to the beginning and the end.
Let him be the judge, and for me testify.
I will the more credit that he shall verify,
And because I will the truth know e'en as it is,
I will to him myself, and know all without miss.
Come on Sym Suresby, that before my friend thou may
Avouch the same words, which thou didst to me say.
O Lord, how necessary it is now of days,
That each body live uprightly all manner ways,
For let never so little a gap be open,
And be sure of this, the worst shall be spoken
How innocent stand I in this for deed or thought?
And yet see what mistrust towards me it hath wrought
But thou Lord knowest all folks thoughts & eke intents
And thou art the deliverer of all innocentes.
Thou didst help the adulteress that she might be amended,
Much more than help Lord, that never ill intended.
Thou didst help Susanna, wrongfully accused,
And no less dost thou see Lord, how I am now abused,
Thou didst help Hester, when she should have died,
Help also good Lord, that my truth may be tried.
Yet if Gavin Goodluck with Tristram Trusty speak.
I trust of ill report the force shall be but weak,
And lo yond they come sadly talking together,
I will abide, and not shrink for their coming hither.
ANd was it none other than ye to me report?
No, and here were ye wished to have seen the sport.
Would I had, rather than half of that in my purse.
And I do much rejoice the matter was no worse,
And like as to open it, I was to you faithful,
So of dame Custance honest truth I am joyful.
For God forfend that I should hurt her by false report.
Well, I will no longer hold her in discomfort.
Now come they hitherward, I trust all shall be well.
Sweet Custance neither heart can think nor tongue tell,
How much I joy in your constant fidelity,
Come now kiss me the pearl of perfect honesty.
God let me no longer to continue in life,
Than I shall towards you continue a true wife.
Well now to make you for this some part of amends,
I shall desire first you, and then such of our friends,
As shall to you seem best, to sup at home with me,
Where at your fought field we shall laugh and merry be.
And mistress I beseech you, take with me no grief,
I did a true man's part, not wishing your reproof.
Though hasty reports through surmises growing,
May of poor innocentes be utter overthrowing,
Yet because to thy master thou hast a true heart,
And I know mine own truth, I forgive thee for my part.
Go we all to my house, and of this gear no more.
Go prepare all things Sym Suresby, hence, run afore.
I go.
But who cometh yond, M. Merrygreek?
Roister Doister's champion, I shrew his best cheek.
Roister Doister self your wooer is with him too.
Surely some thing there is with us they have to do.
YOnd I see Gavin Goodluck, to whom lieth my message,
I will first salute him after his long voyage,
And then make all thing well concerning your behalf.
Yea for the passe of God.
Hence out of sight ye calf,
Till I have spoke with them, and then I will you ●et,
In God's name.
What master Gavin Goodluck well met
And from your long voyage I bid you right welcome home.
I thank you.
I come to you from an honest mome.
Who is that?
Roister Doister that doughty kite.
Fie, I can scarce abide ye should his name recite.
Ye must take him to favour, and pardon all past,
He heareth of your return, and is full ill aghast.
I am right well content he have with us some cheer.
Fie upon him beast, then will not I be there.
Why Custance do ye hate him more than ye love me?
But for your mind sir, where he were would I not be?
He would make us all laugh.
Ye near had better sport.
I pray you sweet Custance▪ let him to us resort.
To your will I assent.
Why, such a fool it is,
As no man for good pastime would forego or miss.
Fet him to go with us.
He will be a glad man.
We must to make us mirth, maintain him all we can.
And lo yond he cometh and Merrygreek with him.
At his first entrance ye shall see I will him trim.
But first let us hearken the gentleman's wise talk.
I pray you mark if ever ye saw crane so stalk.
MAy I then be bold?
I warrant you on my word,
They say they shall be sick, but ye be at their board.
They were not angry then.
Yes at first, & made strange
But when I said your anger to favour should change,
And therewith had commended you accordingly,
They were all in love with your maship by and by.
And cried you mercy that they had done you wrong.
For why, no man, woman, nor child can hate me long.
We fear (quoth they) he will be avenged one day,
Then for a penny give all our lives we may.
Said they so in deed.
Did they? yea, even with one voice
He will forgive all (quoth I) Oh how they did rejoice.
Ha, ha, ha.
Go fette him (say they) while he is in good mood,
For have his anger who lust, we will not by the Rood.
I pray God that it be all true, that thou hast me told,
And that she fight no more.
I warrant you, be bold.
Too them, and salute them.
Sirs, I greet you all well.
Your mastership is welcome.
Saving my quarrel.
For sure I will put you up into the exchequer.
Why so? better nay: Wherefore?
For an usurer.
I am no usurer good mistress by his arms.
When took he gain of money to any man's harms?
Yes, a foul usurer he is, ye shall see else.
Didst not thou promise she would pick no more quarrels?
He will lend no blows, but he have in recompense
fifteen for one, which is to much of conscience.
Ah dame, by the ancient law of arms, a man
Hath no honour to foil his hands on a woman.
And where other usurers take their gains yearly,
This man is angry but he have his by and by.
Sir, do not for her sake bear me your displeasure.
Well, he shall with you talk thereof more at leisure.
Upon your good usage, he will now shake your hand.
And much heartily welcome from a strange land.
Be not afeard Gavin to let him shake your fist.
Oh the most honest gentleman that ere I wist.
I beseech your maship to take pain to sup with us.
He shall not say you nay and I too, by Iesus.
Because ye shall be friends, and let all quarrels pass.
I will be as good friends with them as ere I was.
Then let me fet your quire that we may have a song.
Go.
I have heard no melody all this year long.
Come on sirs quickly.
Sing on sirs, for my friends sake.
Call ye these your friends?
Sing on, & no more words make.
The Lord preserve our most noble Queen of renown,
And her virtues reward with the heavenly crown.
The Lord strengthen her most excellent Majesty,
Long to reign over us in all prosperity.
That her godly proceedings the faith to defend,
He may stablish and maintain through to the end.
God grant her as she doth, the Gospel to protect,
Learning and virtue to advance, and vice to correct.
God grant her loving subjects both the mind and grace,
Her most godly proceedings worthily to embrace.
Her highness most worthy counsellors God prosper,
With honour and love of all men to minister.
God grant the nobility her to serve and love,
With all the whole commonty as doth them behoue.
WHo so to marry a minion Wife,
Hath had good chance and hap,
Must love her and cherish her all his life,
And dandle her in his lap.
If she will fare well, if she will go gay,
A good husband ever still,
whatever she lust to do, or to say,
Must let her have her own will.
About what affairs soever he go,
He must show her all his mind,
None of his counsel she may be kept free,
Else is he a man unkind.
I Must be married a Sunday
I must be married a Sunday,
whosoever shall come that way,
I must be married a Sunday.
Roister Doyster is my name,
Roister Doyster is my name,
A lusty brute I am the same,
I must be married a Sunday.
Christian Custance have I found,
Christian Custance have I found,
A Widow worth a thousand pound,
I must be married a sunday.
Custance is as sweet as honey,
Custance is as sweet as honey,
I her lamb and she my coney,
I must be married a Sunday.
When we shall make our wedding feast,
When we shall make our wedding feast,
There shall be cheer for man and beast,
I must be married a Sunday.
I must be married a Sunday. etc.