COme, now my head's in, I'll even venture the whole: I ha' seen the Lions ere now, and he that hath seen them may see the King.
I think he may; but have a care you go not too high (neighbour Notch) lest you chance to have a Tally made of your pate, and be clawed with a cudgel; there is as much danger going too near the King, as the Lions.
Wither? whither now gamesters? what is the business? the affaire? stop I beseech you.
This must be an Officer, or nothing, he is so pert and brief in his demands! a pretty man! and a pretty man is a little o''is side nothing; howsoever we must not be daunted now, I am sure I am a greater man than he out of the Court, and I have lost nothing of my Sire since I came to it.
Heyda! what's this? A hogshead of beer broke out of the King's buttery, ro some Dutch Hulk! whether are you bound? The wind is against you, you must back; do you know where you are?
Yes sir, if we be not mistaken, we are at the Court, and would be glad to speak with something of less authority, and more wit, that knows a little in the place.
Sir, I know as little as any man in the place; speak, what is your business? I am an Officer, Groom of the Revels, that is my place.
To fetch Bonge of Court a parcel of invisible bread, and beer for the Players (for they never see it) or to mistake six Torches from the Chandry, and give them one.
How sir?
Come, this is not the first time you have carried coals to your own house, I mean that should have warmed them.
Sir, I may do it by my place, and I must question you farther.
Be not so musty sir, our desire is only to know whether the King's Majesty, and the Court expect any disguise here to night.
Disguise! what mean you by that? do you think that his Majesty sits here to expect drunkards?
Not, if he did, I believe you would supply that place better than you do this: Disguise was the old English word for a Masque sir, before you were an implement belonging to the Revels.
There is no such word in the Office now I assure you sir, I have served here, man, and boy a Prenticeship or twain, and I should know. But, by what name so ever you call it, here will be a Masque, and shall be a Masque, when you and the rest of your Comrogues shall sit disguised in the stocks.
Sure by your language you were never meant for a Courtier, howsoever it hath been your ill fortune to be taken out of the nest young; you are some Constable's egg, some such Widgeon of Authority, you are so easily offended! Our coming was to show our love's sir, and to make a little merry with his Majesty to night, and we have brought a Masque with us, if his Majesty had not been better provided.
Who you? you a Masque? why you stink like so many bloat-herrings newly taken out of the chimney! In the name of Ignorance, whence came you? or what are you? you have been hanged in the smoke sufficiently, that is smelled out already.
Sir, we do come from among the Brewhouses in Saint Katherine's, that's true, there you have smoked us (the Dock comfort your nostrils,) and we may have lived in a mist there, and so missed our purpose; but for mine own part I have brought my properties with me to express what I am; the keys of my calling hung here at my girdle, and this the Register book of my function shows me no less than a Clerk at all points, and a Brewer's Clerk, and a Brewer's head Clarke.
A man of account sir! I cry you mercy.
I sir, I knew him a fine Merchant, a merchant of Hops, till all hoped into the water.
Not more of that, what I have been, I have been; what I am, I am: I Peter Notch, Clerk, hearing the Christmas invention was drawn dry at Court; and that neither the KING'S Poet, nor his Architect had wherewithal left to entertain so much as a Baboon of quality, nor scarce the Welsh Ambassador if he should come there: Out of my allegiance, to wit, drew in some other friends that have as it were presumed out of their own naturals, to fill up the vacuum with some pretty presentation, which we have addressed, and conveyed hither in a Lighter at the general charge, and landed at the back door of the Buttery, through my neighbour Slug's credit there.
A poor Lighter-man sir, one that hath had the honour sometimes to lay in the King's beer there; and I assure you I heard it in no worse place than the very Buttery, for a certain, there would be no Masque, and from such as could command a jack of beer, two, or three.
Dat is all true, exceeding true, de inventors be barren, lost, two, dre, vour mile, I know that from my selven; they have ting ting deir own, but dat they take urom de eared, or de zoea, or de heaven, or de hell, or de rest van de veir Clementen, de place a, dat be so common as de vench in de Bordello. Now me would bring in some dainty ting dat never was, nor never shall be in de rebus natura; dat has neder van de materia, nor de forma, nor de hoffen, nor de voote, but a mera devisa of de brain—
Heyda! what Hans Flutter kin is this? what Dutchman does build or frame Castles in the Air?
He is no Dutch man sir, he is a Britain borne, but hath learned to misuse his own tongue in travel, and now speaks all languages in ill English; a rare Artist he is sir, and a Projector of Masques. His Project in ours is, that we should all come from the three dancing Bears in Saint Katherine's (you may hap know it sir) hard by where the Priest fell in, which Alehouse is kept by a distressed Lady; whose name (for the honour of Knighthood) will not be known; yet she is come in person here Errand, to fill up the adventure with her two women that draw drink under her, Gentlewomen borne all three, I assure you.
And were three of those Gentlewomen that should have acted in that famous matter of England's joy in six hundred and three.
What talk you of England's joy, Gentlemen? you have another matter in hand I wis, England's sport and delight if you can manage it. The poor cattle yonder are passing away the time, with a cheat loaf, and a bombard of broken beer, how will ye dispose of them?
cattle! what cattle does she mean?
Not worse than the King's game I assure you; The Bears, Bears both of quality and fashion, right Bears, true Bears.
A devise only to express the place from whence we come (my Lady's house) for which we have borrowed three very Bears that (as her Ladyship aforesaid says) are well bred, and can dance to present the sign, and the Bearward to stand for the signe-poast.
That is pretty; but are you sure you have sufficient Bears for the purpose.
Very sufficient Bears as any are in the Ground, the Paris-garden, and can dance at first sight, and play their own tunes if need be. Iohn Vrson the Bearward, offers to play them with any Citie-dancers christened, for a ground measure.
Mary, for lofty tricks, or dancing on the Ropes he will not undertake, it is out of their element he says. Sir, all our request is since we are come, we may be admitted, if not for a Masque, for an Antickmask; and as we shall deserve therein, we desire to be returned with credit to the Buttery from whence we came, for reward, or to the Porter's Lodge with discredit, for our punishment.
To be whipped with your Bears? Well, I could be willing to venture a good word in behalf of the Game, if I were assured the aforesaid game would be cleanly, and not fright the Ladies.
For that sir, the Bearward hath put in security, by warranting my Lady and her Women to dance the whole changes with them in safety; and for their abusing the place you shall not need to fear, for he hath given them a kind of Diet-bread to bind them to their good behaviour.
Well, let them come; if you need one, I'll help you myself.
THough it may seem rude
For me to intrude,
With these my Bears by chance-a;
'Twere sport for a King,
If they could sing
As well as they can dance-a
Than to put you out
Of fear or doubt,
We came from St. Katharin-a;
These dancing three,
By the help of me,
Who am the Post of the signe-a
We cell good ware,
And we need not care
Though Court, and Country knew it:
Our Ale's o' the best,
And each good guest
Prays for their souls that brew it.
For any Alehouse,
We care not a louse,
Nor Tavern in all the Towne-a;
Nor the Vintry Cranes,
Nor St. Clements Danes,
Nor the Devil can put us downa,
Who has once there been,
Comes thither again,
The liquor is so mighty;
Beer strong and stolen,
And so is our Ale,
And it burns like Aquavita.
To a stranger there,
If any appear,
Where never before he has been;
We show th' iron Gate,
The wheel of St. Kate,
And the place where the Priest fell in.
The Wives of Wapping
They trudge to our tapping,
And still our Ale desire;
And there sit and drink,
Till the spew, and stink,
And often piss out our fire.
From morning to night,
And about to daylight,
They sit and never grudge it;
Till the Fishwives join
Their single coin,
And the Tinker pawns his budget.
If their brains be not well,
Or their bladders do swell,
To ease them of their burden;
My Lady will come
With a bowl and a broom,
And her Handmaid with a Iorden.
From Court we invite
Lord, Lady, and knight;
Squire, gentleman, yeoman and groom.
And all our stiff drinkers,
Smiths, Porters, and Tinkers,
And the beggars shall give ye room.
How like you? how like you?
Excellent! The Bears have done learnedly, and sweetly.
'tis noting, 'tis noting; vill you see something? Ick sall bring in the Turk●chen, met all zin Pashas, and zin dirty thousand Yanitsaries met all zin Whooren Cunuken, all met an auder, de Sofie van Persia, de Tartar Cham met de great King of Mogul, and make deir men, and deir horse, and deir Elephant en be seen fight in de air, and be all killen, and aliven, and no ting And all dis met de Ars van de Catropricks, by de reflesbie van de glassen.
O, he is an admirable Artist.
And a half sir.
But where will he place his glasses?
Fow, dat is all ean, as it be two, dree, veir, vife thousand Mile of: Ick sall multipliren de vizioun, met an ander secret dat Ick heb: Spreck, vat vil you haben?
Good sir put him too't, bid him do something that is impossible; he will undertake it I warrant you.
I do not like the Mogul, nor the great Turk, nor the Tartar, their names are somewhat to big for the Room; marry if he could show us some Country Players, strolling about in several Shires, without licence from the Office, that would please I know whom, or some Welsh Pilgrims.
Pilgrim? now you talk of de Pilgrim, it come in my head, Ick vill show you all de whole brave Pilgrim o'de World: de Pilgrim dat go now, now at de instant, two, dre thousand Mile to de great Mahomet, at de Mecha, or here, dear, every where, make de fine Labyrints, and show all de brave error in de vorld.
And shall we see it here?
Yau, here, here, here in does Room, 'tis very Room: vel vat is dat to you if Ick do de ting? vat an devil, vera boten devil?
Nay, good sir be not angry.
'Tis a disease that follows all excellent men, they cannot govern their passions; but let him alone, try him one 'bout.
I would try him, but what has all this to do with our Mask?
O Sir, all de better vor an Antick-maske, de more absurd it be, and urom de purpose, it be ever all de better. If it go from de nature of ting it is de more Art: for dear is Art, and dear is Nature, you shall see. Hochos-pochos, Paucos, Palabros.
IT is no dream, you all do wake, and see;
Behold, who comes! (b) far-shooting Phoebus he
That can both hurt and (c) heal; and with his (d) voice
Rear Towns, and make societies rejoice;
That taught the Muses all their harmony,
And men the tuneful Art of Augury.
Apollo stoops, and when a God descends,
May Mortals think he hath no vulgar ends.
LInus, and (g) Orpheus, (h) Branchus, (i) Idmon, all
My sacred Sons, rise at your Fathers call
From your immortal Graves; where sleep, not death,
Yet binds your powers.
Here.
Here.
What sacred breath
Doth reinspire us?
Who is this we feel?
What heat creeps through me, as when burning steel
Is dipped in water?
I, Phoemonoe,
Thy Father Phoebus 's fury filleth thee;
Confess my Godhead; once again I call,
Let whole Apollo enter in you all,
And follow me.
We fly, we do not tread,
The Gods do use to ravish whom they lead.
BEhold the love and care of all the Gods
Of the Ocean, and the happy Isles;
That whilst the World about him is at odds,
Sits Crowned Lord here of himself, and smiles.
To see the erring mazes of mankind;
Who seek for that, doth punish them to find.
PRince of thy Peace, see what it is to love
The Powers above!
Jove hath commanded me
To visit thee;
And in thine honour with my (l) Music rear
a College here,
Of tuneful Augurs, whose divining skill,
shall wait thee still,
And be the Heralds of his highest william.
The work is done,
And I have made their Precedent thy Son;
Great Mars too, on these nights,
hath added Salian rites.
Yond, yond afar,
They closed in their (o) Temple are,
And each one guided by a star.
Haste, haste, to meet them, and as they advance
'twixt every Dance;
Let us interpret their Prophetic trance.
WHich way, and whence the lightning flew,
Or how it burned, bright, and blue,
Design, and figure by your lights:
Than forth, and show the several flights
Your (p) Birds have made, or what the wing
Or voice in Augury doth bring.
Which hand the Crow cried on, how high
The Vulture, or the Erne did fly,
What wing the Swan made, and the Dove,
The Stork, and which did get above:
Show all the Birds of food or Prey,
But pass by the unlucky Jay,
The Night-Crow, Swallow, or the Kite
Let those have neither right, CHOR. Nor part,
In this night's art.
THe Signs are (q) lucky all, and (q) right
There hath not been a voice, or flight
Of ill Presage. Linus. The (r) bird that brings
Her Augury alone to Kings
The Dove, hath flown. Orpheus. And to thy peace
Fortunes and the Fates increase.
Minerva's Heronshaw and her Owl,
Do both proclaim, thou shalt control
The course of things. Idmon. As now they be
With tumult carried: Apollo. And live free
From hatred, faction, or the fear,
To blast the Olive thou dost wear.
Moore is behind, which these do long to show,
And what the Gods to so great virtue owe.
Still, still the (t) Auspice is so good,
We wish it were but understood;
It even puts Apollo
To all his strengths of art, to follow,
The flights, and to divine
What's meant by every Sign.
Thou canst not less be, than the charge
of every Deity.
That thus art left here to enlarge,
And shield their piety!
Thy neighbours at thy fortune long have gazed,
But at thy wisdom, all do stand amazed.
And wish to be,
O'ercome, or governed by thee!
Safety itself so sides thee, where thou goest,
And Fate still offers what thou covetest most!
Do not expect to hear of all
Your good at once, jest it forestall
A sweetness would be new:
Some things the Fates would have concealed
From us the Gods, jest being revealed
Our powers shall envy you.
It is enough your people learn
The reverence of your peace
As well as Strangers do discern
The Glories, by th'increase
And that the (x) princely Augur here, your Son
Do by his Father's lights his courses run.
Him shall you see triumphing over all
Both foes and vices: and your young and tall
Nephews, his Sons grow up in your embraces,
To give this Island Princes in long razes.
SEE heaven expecteth my return▪
The forked fire begins to burn,
Jove beckons to me come.
Though Phoebus be the god of Arts,
He must not take on him all parts:
But leave his Frather some.
My arts are only to obey. JOVE. (y) And mine to sway
Jove is that one, whom first, midst, last, you call
The power that governs, and conserveth all;
Earth, Sea, and Air, are subject to our check,
And Fate with heaven, moving at our beck.
Till Jove it ratify,
It is no Augury,
Though uttered by the mouth of Destiny.
Dear father, give the Sign, and seal it than.
It is the suit of Earth and Men.
What do their Mortals crave without our wrong?
That Jove will lend us this our Sovereign long;
Let our grandchildren, and not we,
His want or Absence ever see.
Your wish is blessed.
Jove knocks his Chin against his breast,
And firmes it with the rest.
Sing than his fame, through all the orbs; in even
Proportions, rising still, from Earth to Heaven:
And of the lasting of it leave to doubt,
The power of time shall never put that out.
This done, the whole Scene shut, and the Maskers danced their last Dance.