A sirrah nay soft, what? let me see,
God morrow to you sir, how do you fare?
Sante a men. I think it will be.
the next day in the morning, before I come there
Well forward I will, for to prepare,
Some weapons & armour, the caitiffs to quell,
I'll teach the hurchetes, again to rebel.
Rebel? ye sir, how say you there to?
What? you had not best their parts to take:
Hold the content fool, and do as I do,
Or else me chance, your pate for to ache.
Ye and that's more, for fear thou shalt quake,
Before Horestes, when in good sooth he,
Shall arrive in this land, revenged to be:
Well forward I will, things to purvey,
In good sooth for the wares, as I shall think good.
Far well good man dotterel, and mark what I say,
Or eyes it may chance you, to seek a new houd:
You would eat no more cakebread, I think then by the rood,
If that, that same poll from your shoulders were hent,
You would think you were ill, if so you were shent.
Ihill never nabore hodge, have a glad heart,
Till Aegisthus the King, hath for his desert:
Received due punishment, for this well I know,
Horrestes to Crete, with Idumeus did go.
When his father was slain, by his Mother most ill,
And therefore I think, that come heather he will:
And revenge the injury, of his mother most dire,
wasting our land with sword, and with vyare.
Iesu nabor, with vyar and sword? zaye you ze?
By gys nabor, Ihill zave one I tro:
For iche have small good, by gise for to lose,
And therefore iche care not, however it goose.
But Ihill not be slain, Ihill love nothing worse,
Ihill never be burned, for the money in my purse.
Iche have small ruddocks, and soldiers I know,
Will rob the rich churls, and let the poor knaves go.
A sir, now stay, and pause their a while,
Be not to hasty, but take all the day:
Be God I am weary, with coming this mile,
And having no money, my horse heyare to pay.
Who how, I rode on my feet, all the way,
Iesu what ground, since yesterday at none,
Have I gut thorough, with this pare of shoes.
Nabor hodge, be goge hatch none I bear,
That this little hourchet, the deviance doth bear.
Come let us go, and of him in good sooth?
We will conquer out, the very truth.
Hurchyt, gogs oundes gip with a wanion,
are you so lusty, in faith good man clound:
'ounds, heart, and nails, this is a franion,
I'll teach you to flout me, I hold you a pound.
O that it wear not, in faith for my gound?
It will I be knoc 'em, yet for all that.
Hold good master, you mare my new hat.
Ha, ha, he, mar his hat quoth he? there was all his thought
Tout tout, for the blow he set not a pin:
That garment is dyer, that with blow is bought,
Well sirs to in treat me, sith you begin?
I am contented, my blade, now shall in.
But tell me sirs tell me no wherefore of me,
The cause on this sort, your talking should be.
By gis and iche Ihill master, for all my great pain,
Of this matter to you to tell the very plain:
My neighbour hodge and I, in good sooth,
Mot hear in the wields, I tell you the truth:
Now as we were talking, mark what I zaye,
You came in straight, and of us crossed the way.
Which thing for certain, when I did espy,
This fancy vlouncht, in my head by and by:
And to hodge I said that, by gys I did veare,
That your maship, good master the deviance doth bear,
And be cause you wear little, and of stature but small:
Your person a hourchet, in faith I did call.
But by gis be contented, vor Ihill never more,
Ofvend you a gains, but cham zorey thearvore.
If they wear not twain, I cared not a point,
But two is to many, the proverb douth tell:
else be his oundes, I would iobard this joint,
And teach them against me, again to rebel?
O that I wear a bull, the knaves vor to quell,
Then would I triumph, passing all measure.
Gentle man gentle man, at your own pleasure:
In faith we be, and therefore we pray,
What they name, is to us vor to say.
My name would ye know, marry you shall,
Hark friend, first to the I will it declare:
Master patience master patience, many on doth me call?
But come heather nabor hodge, thou must have a share.
By gys unto the I will not spare,
The same for to show, whearfore my friend,
My name is patience if thou it perpend.
Past shame? Gods gée neighbour past shame?
By gods de neighbour thates a tryccom name.
Tell a mare a tall, and she'll girded out a fart
See bow thee as my words, douth mistake,
Would it not anger a saint at the heart:
To see what a scoff of my name, he doth make?
O oundes of me, as still as a stake.
He standeth, nought caring what of him may betyde,
Be his wounds, I would have a arm, or a side.
Sought let me see, it is best to be still,
Good sleeping in a hole skin, old folks do say,
Not withstanding I wis, ill have mine own will.
Nay I will be revenged, by his oundes and I may,
sirrah you good man Rustycus, mark what I say:
Hark in thine ear man, this did I see,
A hog of thine wearied to be.
Gods gée master patience, I pray you me tell,
What horsen churl's doge, my hog so did quell:
Iche swear by gise, and holy say belive,
bezwinge him, and ich be alive,
By gods de cham angry, and not well content,
Chould ha wear hear, chould make him repent.
Ich had rather given, vore strike of corn,
Then to had my hog on this wise forlorn:
But if I knew whose dog chould be,
Revenged well enough iche warrent thee.
Ha, ha, he, by god Rusticus, I may say in no game,
I know the person, whose dog so did flay:
Thy hog fie fie man, it was a very shame,
For thy neighbour hodge, to let it by this day.
Well I will go to him, and see if I may,
By any means procure him, to make the amends;
I'll do the best I can, to make you both friends.
Ihill be no friends, chad rather be hanged,
Till iche have that old karl, well and thriftily banged,
And 'twear not your masshyppe, did me with hold,
To swing the ourchet, iche chould be bold,
Ha, ha, he, nay, nay, spare not for me,
Go to it straight, if there to ye gre,
Hodge I hard say, thou illy, hast wrought,
For my hog unto death, with thy dog thou hast brought
Iche bid the thy vault, to me to amend,
Or Ihill swaddle thee, iche zweare in my bat end.
Swaddle me gods get? Ihill care not a point,
Iche have a good bat, thy bones to anoint:
Thou old carl I zaye, thy hog hurted me,
And therefore I will have, amends now of thee.
My rye and my oats, my beans and my pease,
They have eaten up quite, but small for my ease:
And therefore iche zaye, all thy hogs keep vast,
Or iche will them weary, as long as they last.
By gods get, I can never come in my ground,
But that zame zwyne, in my pease iche have found.
Tout tout Rusticus, these words be but wind
To him man, to him, and swaddle him well:
Ye never leave him, as long as thou can find
Him hot, but teeth him, a gain to rebel,
What nededest thou to care, though his words be so fell,
Tout tout tharte unwise, and follow my mind:
And I warrant thee in end, some ease thou shalt find.
Gods gée hourson hog, pay me for my zwine,
Or eyes learn to keep, that coxcomb of thine.
Gods de, do thy worst, I care not a point,
Ihill pay the none, Ihill crux a joint.
Nay stand I still some what, I will lend,
Take this for a reward, now a way I must wend.
O Gods get, cham zwinged zo zore,
Iche think chaul never live one hour more.
O gods ge I think, my bewnes will in zonder,
If ich get home by gis, ittes a wonder:
Farewell Rusticus, for by gis ich chaull,
When I meet the again, bezwinge the vorall.
Nay letes be friends, and Ihill in good part,
Of brown ale at my house, give the a whole whart:
What hodge shake hands, mon be merey and laugh,
By gods ge iche had not, the best end of the staff.
Ch'm content neighbour Rusticus, shall be e'en so,
Come to they house, I pray the let us go.
To call to mind the crabbed rage of mother's ill attempt
Provokes me now all pity quite, from me to be exempt.
Yet lo dame nature tells me that, I must with willing mind
For give the fault and to pity, some what to be inclined.
But lo beholdth advlltresdame, on hourdome morder vill
Hath heaped up not contented, her spousal bed to fill:
With foreign love but sought also, my fatal thread to share
As erst before my father's fill, in sunder she did pare.
O pattern love why do thou so, of pity me request,
Sith thou to me wast quite denied, my mother being priest:
When tender years this corpse of mine, did hold alas for woe
When friend my mother should have been than was she chief my foe
Oh gods therefore sith you be just, unto whose pour & will,
All thing in heaven, and earth also? obey and serve until.
Declare to me your gracious mind, shall I revenged be,
Of good King Agamemnon's death, ye gods declare to me
Or shall I let thee, adultresses dame, still wallow in her sin,
Oh gods of war, gide me a right, when I shall war begin.
war quoth he. I war in deed, and try it by the. sword,
God save you sir, the gods to ye: have sent this kind of word
That in the haste you armour take, your father's foes to slay
And I as guide with you shall go, to guide you on the way.
By me thy mind there wrathful doom, shallbe performed in deed
Therefore Horestes mark me well, & forward do proceed.
For to revenge thy father's death, for this they all have meant
Which thing for to demonstrat lo, to the they have sent me.
are you good sir, the messenger of gods as you do say
Will they in revenging this wrong, I make not long delay.
What need you doubt, I was in heaven, when all the gods did gre
That you of Agamemnon's death, for sooth revenged should be,
Tout tout, put of that childish love, couldst thou with a good will
Contented be? that one should so, they father seem to kill?
Why wail'st thou man, leave of I say, pluck courage unto thee.
This lamentation sone shall fade, if thou embracedest me.
What is thy name may I inquire? O sacred wight I pray
Declare to me & with this fear, do not my heart dismay.
Among the gods celestial, I Courage called am,
You to assist in very truth, from out the heavens I came
And not without god Marsis his leave, I durst hear show my face
which thou shalt feel if that their gift thou dost forth with embrace
And sith it is there gracious will, welcome thou art to me,
O holy wight for this there gift, I thank them heartily.
My thinks I feel all fear to flay, all sorrow grief & pain,
My thinks I feel courage provokes, my will for ward again
For to revenge my father's death, and infamy so great,
Oh how my heart doth boil in deed, with fiery perching heat.
Courage now welcome by the gods, I find thou art in deed,
A messenger of heavenly ghosts, come let us now proceed.
And take in hand to bring to pass, revenged for to be,
Of those which have my father slain, but soft now let me see
Idumeus that worthy King, doth come into this place,
What say you courage: shall I now? declare to him my case?
fall to it then and slack no time, for time once passed away,
Doth cause repentance, but to late to come old folks do say.
When stead is stolen, to late it is to shut the stable door,
Take time I say, while time doth give a leisure good therefore
whatever he be that sceptre bears or rules in state full high
Is soonest down through fortune's air, & brought to misery,
As of late years the worthy king Agamemnon by name,
whose pass throughout the world is blow, by golden trump of fame
His well won fame in martial stour, doth reach unto the sky
Yet lo through fortune's blind attempt, be lo in earth doth lie
He the had passed the fate of war, where chance was equal set,
Through fortune's spite is caught alack, win old Meros net
And he which sometime did delight, in clothed coat of mail,
Is now constrained in Charon's boat; over the brook to sail.
That flows upon the fatal banks, of Pluto's kingdom great
And that in shade of silent woods, and valleys green do beat.
Where souls of kings & other wights appointed are to be,
In quiet state there also is, this worthy real tree.
Of sooth I joy for to behold, Horestes active cheer,
The which in father sometime was, in son doth now appear,
But where is he that all this day, I never saw his face,
At hand O King thy servant is, which wisheth to thy grace
All hail with happy fate certain, with pleasures manifold,
But yet my liege a suit I have, if I might be so bold.
To crave the same my sovereign lord, whereby I might aspire
Unto the thing with very much, O king I do require.
What thing is that if we suppose, it lawful for to be,
On princes faith without delay, at shall be given thee.
Tout let him alone now, we may in good sooth,
I was not so lusty, my purpose to get:
But now of my honesty, I tell you of truth,
In revenging the wrong, his mind he hath set?
It is not Idumeus that hath pour to let.
Horestes fro seeking his mother to kill,
Tout let him alone, he'll have his own will.
Sith that your grace hath willed me, this my desire to show,
Oh gracious king this thing it is, I let your grace to know
That long I have request to view, my father's kingly place,
And eke for to revenge the wrong done to my father's grace,
Is mine intent wherefore o king, grant that without delay,
My heritage and honour eke, achieve again I may.
stay their a while Horestes mine, till council do decree?
The thing that shall unto your state, most honorable be.
My counciler how do you think, let us your council have,
How think you by this thing that which Horestes now doth crave
As I do think my sovereign lord, it should be nothing ill,
A Prince for to revenged be, on those which so did kill.
His fathers: grace but rather shall, it be a fear to those,
That to the like at any time, their cruel minds dispose:
And also as I think it shall, an honor be to ye,
To adjuvate and help him with, some men revenged to be.
This do I think most fittest for, your state and his also,
Do as you list seethe that your grace, my mind herein doth know.
Sith council thinks it fit in dead, revenged for to be,
That you Horestes in good sooth, for to revenge I 'gree.
And also to maintain your war, I grant you with good will,
A thousand men of stomach bold, your enemy to kill.
Take them forth with, & forward go, let slip no time ne tyd.
For chance to leisure to be bound, I tell you can not bid
Go therefore straight provide your men & like a manly knight
In place of stover put forth thyself, assay with all thy might.
To win the fame, for glory none, it chambering doth rest
Mark what I say to get thy men, I take it for they best.
Come on Horestes sith thou hast, obtained thy desire.
Tout tout man, seek to destroy, as doth the flaming fire?
Whose property thou know'st doth grow, as long as any thing
Is left where by the same may seem, some succour for to bring.
I thank your grace I shall sequest your gracious mind herein.
See see I pray you how he joys, that he must war begin.
My council now declare to me, how think you by this wight
Doth not he seem in sooth to be, in time a manley knight.
By all the gods I think in sooth, a man may easily know,
Whose son he was, so right he doth his father's steps follow
Undoubtedly my sovereign lord, he seemeth unto me,
Not to sequest his father's steps, in feats of chivalry:
But rather for to imitate, the flower of great 〈◊〉 land,
I mean Achilles that same knight, by whose one only hand
The Graecians have obtained at length the conquest of old Troy
For which they did whole x. years space, their labour great employ
sith he is gone for to purvey, such things as shall in deed,
Suffice to serve his turn in wares, whereof he shall have need
Let us depart and when he shall, return hither a gain,
To see the must or of his men, we will sure take the pain.
Far well adieu, that courtlike life,
To war we tend to gowe:
It is good sport to see the strife,
Of soldiers on a row.
How mereley they forward march,
These enemies to slay:
With heigh trim and tryxey to,
Their banners they display.
Now shall we have the Golden cheats,
When others want the same:
And soldiers have foul many feats,
Their enemies to tame.
With coucking hear, and bomynge their,
They break there foes' array:
And lusty jades amid the fields,
There ensigns do display.
The drum and flute play lustily,
The trumpet blows a main?
And venturous knights courageously,
Do march before there train:
With spear in rest so lively dressed,
In armour bright and gay:
With heigh trim and tryxey to,
There banners they display.
gogs oundes Haltersick, what makes thou hear,
What? Jack hempstringe welcome, draw near?
By his oundes I have sought the some news thee to tell,
Gods blood what news, is't the devil in hell?
In faith thou art meaty, but this is the matter,
dost thou hear haltersack? each man doth clatter:
Of wars, ye of wars, for Horestes will go,
His heritage to win, boy the truth is so.
Nay but Jack Hempstringe seize of this prate,
If thou cavil me boy, then beware thy pate.
What hold thy peace, as far as I see,
We be boys both therefore let us gree.
Boy nay be god, though I be but small,
Yet Jack hempstringe, a heart is worth all.
And have not I an heart, that to wars dare go,
Yes hempstringe I warrant thee, & that thou shouldest know
If dycke Haltersick's mind, thou move unto air,
Colles never bourn, till they be set one fire.
Ye but if they bourn, so that they same,
Yet water dycke haltersack, the bourning cane same.
But hack thee my master will venture a joint,
And me to wait on him, he all ready doth point.
But hear'st thou, thou knowest my master loves well,
Now and then to be snapping, at some dainty morsel.
But by gogs blood haltersack, if thou love me,
Take some pretty wench our launderer to be,
And be gogs blood, I am contented to bear,
Half of her charges, when that she comes there.
As fit for the war, Jack hempstringe thou art,
In faith as able, is to draw a cart:
He is like to be manned, that hath such a knight,
Under his banner, I swear for to fight.
When Horestes in fight, most busiest shallbe,
Then with they gynney, we must seek the.
gogs oundes, heart, and nails, you are a sea man,
Come of with a mischief, my gentle companion.
By your sleeve fire haltersick, I think that 'a be,
As good a soldier as ever was ye,
He hath learned his lesson, but of fouth I fear,
He hath quite forgotten, the way for to swear.
'ounds, heart, and nails, nalrey he's no
And he be not hanged, he will be stark mad.
Hang me no hanging, if ye be so quick,
Rub not to hard, lest hempstringe do kick.
Had better be still, and a sleep in his head,
If a kick me, me chance to break his head,
gogs blood good man haltersack, begin you to flout me
No not at all he doth but sout ye.
What hempstringe I say, are you angered at jest.
In faith goodman lobcock, your handsome dressed:
gogs blood so to flout me, thou art much to blame?
Why all that I do man, is but in game.
Take thou that for they jest, and flout me no more?
For that same on blow, than shalt have a score:
Draw thy sword villain, if thou be a man,
And then do the worst, that ever thou can.
Nay set sword a side, and at coffetes well trey,
Whether of us both, shall have the mastery.
gogs oundes thou art bigger, yet I care not a point,
If to be revenged, I jeopard a joint.
I have coiled the well, but I hold the a groat?
If thou meddle with me. I will swinge thy coat.
In deed I must say, I have caught the worst,
But I will be revenged, or eyes I shall burst.
If time did not call me, from hence to depart
I should anger the hempstring, euen at the ht?
Therefore farewell, till another day,
But hearst thou take this, to spend by the way.
gogs dundes is he gone, nay after I will,
And of the slave by his oundes, I will have my fill.
Oh gods be prosperous I pray, & eke preserve my band,
Show now that ye be gods in dead, stretch out your mighty hand
And give us hearts & wills also, where by we may prevail
And suffer not you gods I pray, our courages to fail.
But let our hearts adighted be, for aye as we pretend,
And of that one adultresses dame, oh gods now make an end.
My hands do thirst her blood to have, nought can my mind content
Till that on her I have performed, oh gods your just judgement
Nay stay my child from mother's blood with draw thy bloody hand
No nought at all oh nature can, my purpose now withstand,
Shall I for give my father's death, my heart can not agree
My father slain in such a sort, and unrevenged to be.
Consider first horestes mine, what pain for the she took,
And of my father's death again, o Nature do thou look.
I do confess a wicked fact, it was this is most plain,
Not with standing from mother's blood, thou must thy hands refrain
Canst thou a lack unhappy wight, consent revenged to be,
On her whose paps before this time, hath given foud to the
In whom I nature for mid thee, as best I thought it good,
Oh now requite her for her pain, withdraw thy hands from blood
Who offendeth the love of god, & eke man's love with willing heart
Must by the love have punishment, as duty due for his desert
For me therefore to punish hear as law of gods & man doth will
Is not a crime though that I do, as thou dost say my mother kill
The cruel beasts that range in fields whose jaws to blood are whet
Do not consent their mother's paunch, in cruel wise to eat
The tiger fierce doth not desire, the ruin of his kind,
And shall dame nature now in thee, such tyranny once find:
As not the cruel beasts vouchsafe, to do in any case,
Leave now I say Horestes mine, & to my words give place.
Lest that of men this fact of thine, may judged for to be:
Ne law in sooth, ne justices eke, but cruel tyranny.
Pythagoras doth think it lo, no tyranny to be,
When that justice is ministered, as law and gods decree.
If that the law doth her condemn, as worthy death to have,
Oh nature wouldst thou will that I, her life should seem to save?
To save her life whom law doth slay, is not justice to do,
Therefore I say I will not yield, they hests to come unto.
If nature cannot bridle thee, remember the decay,
Of those which heretofore in sooth, their parents sought to slay
oedippus fate, call thou to mind, that slew his father so,
And eke remember now what fame, of him a broad doth go.
what fame doth blow I force not I, ne yet what fame I have
For this is true that blood for blood, my father's death doth crave
And law of gods, & law of man, doth eke request the same.
Therefore oh nature seize to pray, I force not of my name.
For to lament this heavy fate, I cannot other do.
A lack a lack that once my child, should now consent unto:
His mother's death wherefore farewell, I can no longer stay.
Farewell dame Nature to my men. I straight will take my way
To see this monster let us go, for I suppose it time,
Where is Horestes why stays he: the truth to me define:
Oh sovereign lord methinks I hear, him for to be at hand
if'ft please your grace, he is in sight, even now with all his band.
Come on Horestes we have stayed, your monster for to see.
And now at hand my men and I, all ready armed be.
Lo mighty king this champions here, agree with me to wend
Oh gracious king that they shall so, wilt please you condescended
I do agree and now a while, give ear your king unto,
It doth behoof courageous knights, on this wise for to do.
That is to strive for to obtain, the victory and praise,
That lasts for aye, when death shall end, that find of these our days
Wherefore be bold, & fear no fate, the gods for you shall fight
For they be just and will not see, that you in case of right.
Shall be distressed wherefore attend, and do your busy pain,
The crabbed rage of enemy, by force for to restrain?
And as to me your trustiness, hath here to fore be known,
So now to this Horestes here, let eke the same be shown.
Be to his hests obedient, be stout to take in hand,
Such enterprise which he shall think, most for his state to stand
Which if you do the same is yours, the glory and renown,
That shall arise of this your facts, throughout the world shall sound
The which you may I pray the gods, your guides here in to be
And now farewell but not that well, that I have said to ye.
The gods preserve your grace for aye, & you defend from woe.
That we have done as you command, full well your grace shall know
Now hark Horestes sith thou must, of men the guider be,
And that the will of gods it is, thou must now part from me.
Take yet my last commandment, & bear it in thy mind,
Let now they men courageousness, in the their captain find
And as thou art courageous, so like wise let their be,
For safeguard of thy men a brain, well fraught with policy.
For over rash in doing aught, doth often damage bring,
Therefore take council first before, thou dost any thing.
For council as Plato doth tell, is sure a heavenly thing.
And Socrates a certainty doth say, council doth bring.
Of things in doubt for Lyuy says, no man shall him repent,
That hath before he worked aught, his time in council spent
And be thou liberal to thy men, and gentle be also,
For the way at thy will thou mayst, have them through fire to go
And he that shall at any time, deserve aught well of thee,
suffer him not for to depart, till well reward he be.
Thus have you hard horestes mine, remember well the same
In doing thus you shall purchase, to the immortal fame.
The which I hope you will assay, for to achieve in deed,
The gods the bliss when in the war, thou forward shalt proceed.
I thank your grace and now of you, my leave I here do take
Farewell my son Horestes I, thy parting ill shall take,
Yet ere thou go let me embrace, the once I thee do pray,
A lack alack that now from me, thou must needs part away
Yet while thou art in present place, receive of me this kiss,
Farewell good knight for now I shall, thy sweet embracings miss
The sacred gods preserve and save, thy state oh king I pray,
And send the health and after death, to rain with him for aye.
Come on my men, let us depart,
As please your grace with all our heart.
Ah, ah, how, grievous is his parting now, my council unto me
The Gods him bless & send him health, I pray them heartily.
Woe worth the time the day and our, now may Horestes wail
And Clytaemnestra may lament, that so she did assail.
His father dear for now on blood, Horestes mind is set,
And to revenge his father's death, sure nought their is can let.
In voiding of a mischief small, they have wrought their decay
For now nought else in Horestes, but sore revenge bears sway
For to causes my sovereign lord, revengement ought to be,
The on least others be infect, with that, that they shall see.
Their princes do, the other is, that those that now be ill.
May be revoked and may be taught, for to subdue their will,
Plato a wise philosopher, did think it for to be,
A princely fact whenas a King, shall punish seriously.
Such persons as did train their life, to follow that was nought
yt which their prīce at ani time, shal by mischaūce haue wroght
Protegeus an evil king, a carrion likeness to,
Which all the place about the same, to stink causeth to do.
Therefore O king if that her fault, should unrevenged be,
A thousand evils would ensue, their of your grace should see.
Her fault is great and punishment, it is worthy for to have,
For by that mean the good in sooth, from dangers may be safe
For lo the universal school, of all the world we know,
Is once the palace of a king, where vices chief do flow.
And as to waters from on head, and fountain oft do spring,
So vice and virtue oft do flo, from palace of a king.
Whereby the people seeing that, the king addicted to be,
To prosecute the like, they all do labour as we see.
Therefore the gods have willed thus, Horestes for to take,
His journey and a recompense, for fathers death to make.
Sith gods have willled the same to be, good luck the gods him send
Come on my council now from hence, we purpose for to wend
ANd was it not a worthy sight,
Of Venus' child king Priam's son:
To steal from Greece a Lady bright,
For whom the wares of Troy began.
nought fearing danger that might fall.
Lady lady.
From Greece to Troy, he went with all,
My dear Lady.
When Paris first arrived there,
Where as dame Venus' worship is:
And bluster fame abroad did bear,
His lively fame she did not miss.
To Helena for to repair,
Her for to tell:
Of praise and shape so trim and fair,
That did excel.
Her beauty caused Paris pain,
And bore chief sway with in his mind:
No thing was able to restrain,
His will some way fourth for to find.
Where by he might have his despair,
Lady lady:
So great in him was Cupid's fire,
My dear lady.
And eke as Paris did desire,
Fair Helena for to possess:
Her heart inflamed with like fear,
Of Paris love despair no less,
And found occasion him to meet,
In Cithaeron.
Where each of them the other did great,
The feast upon.
If that in Paris Cupid's shaft,
O Clytaemnestra took such place:
That time ne way he never left,
Till he had got her comely grace,
I think my chance not ill to be
Lady lady.
That ventured life to purchase ye,
My dear lady.
King Priam's. son loved not so sore,
The Grecian dame they brother's wife:
But she his person esteemed more,
Not for his sake saving her life.
Which caused her people to be slain,
With him to fly,
And he requite her love a gain,
Most faithfully.
And as he recompense again,
The fair queen Helen for the same:
So while I live I will take pain,
My will always to yours to frame.
Sith that you have vouchsafe to be,
Lady lady.
A Queen and lady unto me,
My dear lady.
And as she loved him best while life,
Did last so tend I you to do:
If that devoid of war and strife,
The Gods shall please to grant us to,
sith you vouchsafest me for to take,
O my good knight:
And me thy lady for to make,
My hearts delight.
As joyful as the warlike god is Venus to behold,
So is my heart replete with joy, much more a thousand fold
Oh Lady dear in that I do, possess my hearts delight,
What means this sound for very much, it doth my heart a flight
Fear nought at all Aegisthus mine, no hourt it doth pretend,
But lo methinks a messenger, to us hither doth wend.
The Gods preserve your equal state & send you of their bliss
Welcome good messenger what news, I pray the with thee is
Y'ft please your grace even now their is, arrived in this land
The mighty knight Horestes with, a mighty peasant band
Who purposeth for to invade, this Mycenae City strong,
And as he go he lay both tower, and castle all along.
It boots no man defence to make, for if he will not yield,
By soldiers rage he straight is slain, in midst of the field.
Ah sir is he come in deed, he is welcome by this day,
Aegisthus now in sooth with speed, from hence take you your way.
In to our realm and take up men, our title to defend,
Till your return this City I, to keep do sure intend.
For all his strength he shall not get, to entter once hear in,
The walls be strong and for his force, I sure set not a pin.
sith you be able to defend, this City as you say,
Farewell in sooth to get men, I now will take my way.
And soon again I will return, his pamper pride to tame,
Farewell Aegisthus and in sooth, I straight will do the same.
Yield the I say and that by and by,
Or with this sword, in faith thou shalt die.
Oh with a good will, I yield me to thee,
Good master soldier, have mercy on me.
My husband thou hast slain, in most cruel-wise,
Yet this my prayer, do now not despise.
Come on then in haste, my prisoner thou art,
Come follow me I say, we must needs depart.
A whoreson slave I will teach thee in say,
To handle a woman on, another way.
To put me in fear, without my desert
I will teach thee in say to play such a part.
Be contented good woman, and thou shalt be,
Never hear after molested for me.
Nay villain slave, amends thou shalt make,
In that thou before me as prisoner didst take.
Now I have caught thee, and my prisoner thou art,
By his oundes whoreson slave, this goose to they heart.
Nay save my life, for I will be,
Thy prisoner and lo I yield me to thee
Come wend thou with me, and they weapon thou shalt have,
Sith that thou vouchsafest, my life for to save.
STand back ye sleeping jacks at home,
And let me go.
You lie sir knave am I a mome,
Why say you so.
Tout tout, you dare not come in field,
For fear you should the ghost up yield.
With blows, he goose, the gun shot fly,
It fears, it sears, and their doth lie.
A hundred in a moment be,
Destroyed quite:
Sir sauce in faith if you should see,
The gonne shot light.
To quake for fear you would not stint,
whenas by force of gunshots dint:
The ranks in ray, are took away,
As pleaseth fortune oft to play.
But in this stour who bears the fame,
But only I:
Revenge, Revenge, will have the name,
Or he will die.
I spare no wight, I fear none ill,
But with this blade I will them kill
For when mine air, is set on fire,
I rap them, I snap them, that is my desire.
Farewell adieu to wares I must
In all the haste.
My cozen cut purse will I trust,
Your purse well taste,
But to it man, and fear for nought,
Me say to the it is well fraught.
With ruddocks red be at a beck,
Beware the arse, break not thy neck,
Come on my soldiers for at home, arrived their we be,
Where as we must have our desire, or else die manful.
The walls be high yet I intend, upon them first to go,
And as I hope you soldiers will, your captain eke follow
If I forsake to go before then flay you eke be hind,
And as I am so eke I trust, my soldiers for to find.
Come hither herald go proclaim this mine intent straightway
To yonder city say that I, am come to their decay.
Unless they yield I will destroy, both man woman & child,
And eke their towers that for the war, so strongly they do build
Byd them in hast to yeld to me, for nough I do a byde.
But for their answer or else fourth with for them & theirs provide
Your gracious mind straight shallbe done, come trumpet let us go
That I have done your message well, your grace full well shall know
high the apace and let me have, again an answer soon,
And then a none thou shalt well see, what quickly shallbe done.
How who is their that keeps the gate give ear my words unto
what wouldst thou have herald declare, what hast thou her to do
My master bides thee yield to him, this city out of hand,
Or else he will not leave on stone, on other for to stand.
And all things else within this town he will have at his will
As pleaseth him by any means, to save or else to spill,
What you will now, therefore declare, & answer to him send
This City here against him, and his I will defend,
Then in his name I do defy, both the and all with in,
By him and his tell him in sooth, we do not set a pin.
If it please your grace this word she sends, she will not yield to ye
But if you come unto your harm, she says that it shallbe.
Sith that my grace and eke good will, they on such sort despise,
For to destroy both man and child, I surely do devise,
Come on my men, bend now your force, this City for to win,
Save no man's life, that once should make, resistance there within,
And when you shall possess the town, & have all things at will,
Look out my mother but to her, do ye no kind of ill.
Let her not die, though that she would, desire the death to have
For other wise my father's death, revengement doth crave.
We shall your hests obey with speed, oh captain we desire,
That we were therefore to revenge, our hearts are set on fire.
Like men by God, I swear well said, Horestes let us go,
Now to thy men like manley heart, I pray thee for to show.
And as thou sayest be first the man, that shall the City win,
How, how, now for to fly, all ready they begin.
With lively hearts my trumpeters, exalt your tubal sound.
And now my soldiers in your hearts, let courage eke be found.
Come let us go the gods for us, shall make an easy way,
Spare none alive for I am bent, to seek their great decay.
A lack what heaps of mischiefs great, me silly wight torment.
Now is the time fall me upon, which I thought to prevent
Yet best I seek my life to save, perhaps he will me here,
A lack revengement he doth crave, for slaying his father dear.
If any spark of mother's blood, remained within thy breast,
Oh gracious child let now thine ears, unto my words be priest
Pardon I crave Horestes mine, save now my corpses from death
Let no man say that thou wast cause, I yielded up my breath,
I have offended I do confess, yet save my life I pray,
And to they mother this request, o knight do not denay.
For to repent this fact of thine, now that it is to late,
Can not be thought a recompense, for killing of thy mate.
Go have her hence therefore with speed, & see her surely kept,
And for the fact afore thou didst, thou surly shouldst have wept
Nay, far you well, in faith you have an answer, get you hence.
'ounds of me I would not be, in her coat for forty pence.
Nay nay, a way far well a dew, now now, it is to late.
When stead is stolen for you in sooth, to shut the stable gate.
She should have wept when first she went, the king about to slay,
It makes no matter she foul well, did breed her own decay
'ounds of me what mean you man, begin you now to faint
Iesu god how still he sits, I think he be a saint.
Ooooo, you care not for me, nay soon I have done I warrant ye
By all the gods my heart did fail, my mother for to see,
From high estate for to be brought, to so great misery.
That all most I had granted life, to her had not this be,
My father's death whose death in sooth, chief causer of was she.
even as you say but hark at hand, Aegisthus draweth nigh.
Who purposeth the chance of war, Horestes for to try.
And by the gods I purpose eke, my honour to defend,
Come on my men keep your array, for now we do pretend.
either to be the conquerer, or else to die in field,
life up your hearts and let us see, how ye your blow can yield.
Like manley men address yourselves, to get immortal fame,
If ye do fly lo what doth rest, behind but foul defame.
Strike up your drums let trumpets sound, your banners eke display,
And I myself as captain, to you will lead the way.
Thou traitor to my father dear, what makest thee here in field,
Repent the of thy wickedness, and to me straight do yield.
Thou princocks boy & bastard slave, thinks thou me to subdue?
It lieth not with in thy power, thou boy I tell the true.
But if I take thy corpses, it shallbe a food the birds to feed.
Strike up your drums & forward now, to wars let us proceed.
Oh villain traitor now the gods, ne mortal man shall save
Thy corpse from death for blood for blood my father's death doth crave
Oh tyrant first couldst thou vouchsafe, my father so to slay?
But now no force for thou hast wrought, at last thine one decay
A lack a lack yet spare my life, Horestes I the pray.
Thy life? nay traitor vile, that chief I do denay.
For as thou hast deserved, so I shall thy fact requite.
That once couldst seem to me & mine, for to work such despite
Therefore come forth and for thy fact, receive due punishment
Repent I say this former life, for this is my judgement.
That for my father's death, the which we find the chief to be,
The causer of thou shalt be hanged, where we thy death may see
And as thou for my father's death, due punishment receive,
So shall my mother in likewise, for that she gave the leave.
Him for to slay, and eke to it, with good will condescend,
Therefore come of and soon dispatch, that we had made an end.
Ah heavy fate & chance most ill, woe worth this hap of mine,
For give my fault you sacred gods, and to my words incline
Your gracious ear for causer first, I was this is most plain,
Of Agamemnon death, wherefore I must receive this pain.
Pardon I crave, vouchsafe ye gods, the same to grant it me,
Now soldier work thy will in haste, I pray the heartily.
Ah heavy fate would god I had, in turmoil great been slain
Sith nothing can Horestes hands, from shedding blood restrain
How chance you did not then lament his father when you slew?
But now when death doth you prevent, to late itis for to rue.
Yet hope I that he will me grant, my life that I should have.
even as much as thou vouchsafest, his father's life to save,
Therefore come of we must not stay, all day to weight on thee.
Lo mighty prince for whom ye sent, lo present here is she.
Have mercy son & quite remit, this fault of mine I pray,
Be merciful Horestes mine, and do not me denay.
Consider that in me thou haddest, they human shape composed
That thou shouldst slay thy mother son, let it not be disclosed,
Spare to pierce her heart with sword, call eke unto thy mind,
Oedipus' fate and as Nero, show not thyself unkind.
Like as a branch once set a fire, doth cause the tree to bourn
As Socrates supposeth so, a wicked wight doth turn.
Those that be good and cause them eke, his evil to sequest,
Wherefore the poet Juvenal, doth think it for the best:
That those that live licentiously, should bridled be with pain
And so others that elles would sin, thereby they might restrain
For thus he sayeth that Cities are, well governed in deed,
Where punishment for wicked ones, by law is so decreed.
And not decreed but exercised, in punishing of those,
Which law ne pain from wallowing still, in vice their mind dispose,
And as thou hast been chiefs cause, of yielding up they breathe,
So call to mind thou wast the cause, of Agamemnon's death.
For which as death is recompense, of death so eke with thee,
For killing of my father thou, now killed eke shalt be.
This thing to see accomplish, revenge with the shall go,
Now have her hence sith that you all, my judgement here do know
A lack a lack with draw thy hand, my son from shedding blood.
Thou art a foul thus for to prate, this doth Horestes good,
Come on a way thou dost no more, but him with words molest
A foul foul that thou wart dead, he takes it for the best?
If ever any pity was, of mother plant in thee,
Let it appear Horestes mine, and show it unto me.
What pity thou on father mine, didst curse bestow,
The same to the at this present, I purpose for to show.
Therefore Revenge have her a way, and as I judgement gave:
So see that she in order like, her punishment due have.
Let me alone, come on a way, that thou wert out of sight,
A pestilence on the crabbed quean, I think thou do delight,
Him to molest, come of in haste, and trouble me no more,
Come on come on, itis all in vain, and get you on afore,
Now sith we have the conquest got, of all our mortal foes,
Let us provide that occasion, we do not chance to lose.
Strike up your drums for enter now, we will the city gate
For now resistance none there is, to let us in thereat.
As each man bends himself, so I report his fame in deed,
If ill, then ill, through iarne trump, his fame doth straigh proceed:
If good, then good, through golden trump, I blo his lively fame:
through heavens, through earth, & surging seize I bear abroad the same
perhaps what wind me heather drives, within your minds you muse
From Crete I come to you my friends, I bring this kind of news
That Agamemnon's brother is arrived in this land,
And eke with him his lady fair, Queen Helen understand.
Whom for to see a great frequent, of people their arrive,
This news to show at this present, me heather now did drive.
A New master, a new,
No longer I may:
Abide by this day
Horestes now doth rue.
A new master a new,
And was it not ill?
His mother to kill?
I pray you how say you?
A new master a new,
Now itis to late?
To shut the gate?
Horestes gines to rue.
Deniꝙ non paruas animo dati gloria vires:
Et foecunda facit pectora laudis amor.
As Ovid sayeth I am in deed, the spur to each estate,
For by my troumpe I often cause the wicked man to hate,
Is filthy life, and eke I stour, the good more good to be:
So much the heart and will of man, is linked unto me.
A new master a new, nay I will go,
Tout, tout, Horestes is become a new man:
Now he sorroweth to bad that it is so,
Yet I will oresse him, by his oundes and I can.
Who Saintie amen. God morrow mistress Nan,
By his oundes I am glad to see the so trick,
Nay may I be so bold, at your lips to have a lick.
Iesus how coy, do you make the same,
You never knew me afore I dare say:
In faith, in faith, I was to blame,
That I made no curtsy to you by the way.
Who by’r lady Nan, thou art trim and gay,
Wounds of me, she hath wings also,
Who whother with a mischief, dost thou think for to go?
To heaven? or to hell? to purgatory? or Spain?
To Venys? to portugal? or to the isles Canarey?
Nay stay a while for a mile or twain.
I will go with thee, I swear by saint marey,
Wilt thou have a boat Nan, over seay thee to carey.
For if it chance for to rain, as the weathers not hard,
It may chance this trim gear of thine, to be marred,
Omnia si perdis, famam servare memento,
Qua semel amissa, postia nullus eris.
Above each thing keep well thy fame, whatever that thou lose
For fame once gone they memory, with fame a way it goose.
And it once lost thou shalt in sooth, accounted like to be,
A drop of rain that falleth in, the bosom of the see,
Me fame therefore as Ovid thinks, no man hath power to hold,
To those with whom I please to dwell, I am more rich than gold
What caused some for country's soil, themselves to peril cast
But that the knew that after death, the fame of theirs shall last.
Not on, but all, do me desire, both good and bad likewise,
As may appear if we perpend, of Nero's enterprise.
Which first did cause his master's death, & eke whereas he lay
In mother's wound to see in sooth, his mother did straight slay.
With this Horestes eke takes place, whose father being slain,
through mother's guile from mother's blood, his hands could not refrain
But like as he revenged the death, of father in his eyare,
So father's brother in like sort, Revenge hath set on fire.
For he is gone for to request, the aid of princes great,
So sore his heart is set on fire, throught raging rigorous heat.
What to determine all the kings, of Greece arrived be,
At Nestores town that Athens hight, their judgement to decree
'ounds heart and nails, nay now I am dressed,
Is the king Menelaus at Athenes arrived?
And I am be hind? to be packings the best,
lest the matter in sooth, to soon be contrived.
Auxilla humilia firma, consensus facit, this always provided
That consent maketh suckers most sure for to be,
Well I will be their straight, way you shall see.
As Publius doth well declare, we ought chiefest to see,
Unto ourselves that nought be done, after extremity.
Abalio expectes, alteri quod feceris.
For look what measure thou dost meat, the same again shallbe,
At other time at other's hand, repaid again to thee.
Therefore I wish each wight to do, to others as he would,
That they in like occasion, unto him offer would.
Well forth I must some news to here, for fame nowhere can stay
But what she hears throughout the world abroad she doth display
Make room and give place, stand back there afore,
For all my speaking, you press still the more.
give room I say quickly, and make no dalliance,
It is not now time, to make any tarriance:
The kings here do come, therefore give way,
Or else by the gods, I will make you I say.
Lo where my Lord King Nestor doth come,
And Horestes with him Agamemnon's son:
Menelaus a king likewise, of great fame,
Make room I say, before their with shame.
Now sith we be here King Menalaij
Unto us we pray you, your matter to say.
For these princes here, after they have perpended,
If aught be amiss, it shall be amended,
But sirrah provision, go in haste and fet,
Good king Idumeus, tell him we are set.
As your graces have willed, so tend I to do,
I will fetch him straight, and bring him you to.
If aught be amiss, the same soon shall be,
If I have committed amended of me:
But so Idumeus the good king of Crete,
Is come to this place, us for to meet.
The Gods preserve your graces all, & send you health for aye.
Well come sire king the same to ye, continually we pray.
Two things there is o kings, that moves me thus your aids to pray:
And these be it the which to you, I purpose for to say.
The one is this where with I find, myself aggrieved to be,
That on such sort my sisters slain, as all your graces see.
The other is that so her son, without all kind of right,
Should to his mother in such case, (I say) work such despite.
These two be they, wherefore I crave, your aids to join with me:
To the intent of such great ills, revenged I may be.
That thus he did be hold the state, of all my brother's land,
And see I pray you in what place, the same doth present stand.
His cruelty is such in sooth, as neither tower ne town,
That letted once his passage, but is brought unto the ground.
The fatherless he pitied not, where as he ever went,
ye agyd wight whose yeres before, their youthly poure had spent
The maid whose parents at the siege, defending of their right
Was slain, the same this tyrant hath oppressed through his might
The wido that through foreign wars, was left now comfortless,
He spared not, but them & theirs, he cruelly did distress.
Wherefore sith that he thus hath wrought, as far as I can see,
From Mycenae land we should provide, him exiled to be.
Sith that you have accused me, I must my answer make,
And here before these kings of Greece, this for my answer take
O uncle that I never went, revengement for to do,
On father's foes till by the gods, I was command there to.
Whose hests no man dare once refuse, but willingly obey
That I have slain her wilfully, untruly you do say.
I did but that I could not choose, itis hard for me to kick,
Sith gods command as on would say, in faith against the prick
In that you say, I spared none, your grace full well may see,
That little mercy they supposed, in sooth to show to me.
whenas they bade me do my worst, requesting them to yield,
It is no jest when soldiers join, to fight within a field.
Thus I suppose sufficiently, I answered have to end,
Your great complaint, the which you so, mightily did defend.
In deed as Hermes doth declare, no man can once eschew,
The judgement of god most just, that for his faults is due.
And as god is most merciful, so is he just like wise.
And will correct most severely those, that his hests dispysel
As you good King Idumeus, have said so likewise I,
Do think it true therefore as now, I do him here defy.
That one dare say that he hath wrought, the thing that is not right
Lo here my glove to him I give, in pledge with him to fight.
I promise here to prove there by, Horestes nought did do,
But that was just & that the gods, commanded him thereto,
That he is king of Mycenae land, whoever do deny.
I offer here my glove with him, therefore to live and die.
If none there be will under take, his tyghfull to with say.
Let us be friends unto him now, my Lords I do ye pray.
It was the part of such a knight, revenged for to be,
Should Horestes content himself, his father slain to see.
No, no, a righteous fact I think, the same to be in deed,
sith that it was accomplished so, as gods before decreed.
In deed I must confess that I, revenged should have be,
If that my father had been slain, with such great cruelty.
But yet I would for nature's sake, have spared my mother's life
O wretched man, o cruel beast, o mortal blade and knife.
Sease of sir king leave morning lo, nought can it you avail
Not with standing be ruled now, we pray by our counsel.
Consider first your one estate, consider what may be,
A joyful mean to end at length, this your calamity.
Horestes he is young of years, and you are somewhat old,
And sorrow may your grace to soon, within her net in fold,
Therefore itis best you do forget, so shall you be at ease,
And I am sure Horestes will, endeavour you to please,
So far as it for him may be, with honour lief to do,
He will not shrink but will consent, your graces bidding to
For assurance of your good will, Horestes here doth crave,
your daughter fair Hermione, in marriage for to have.
Thereby for to continue still, true love and amity,
That aught in sought betwixt to such, indifferent for to be.
As for my friendship he shall have, the gods his helper be
But for my daughter's marriage, I can not grant to be.
She is but young and much unfit, such holy rights to take,
Therefore sir kings at this present, no answer I can make.
She is a dame of comely grace, therefore king Menelaus,
Grant this to us this strife to end, o king we do the pray.
For each of them agreed be the other for to have,
Good sir grant this that at thy hands, so justly we do crave
O noble king what that it were, I could not you denay,
I must needs grant when nought I have, against you to reply
Horestes here before these kings, my son I thee do make,
And the o king while life doth last, for father I do take.
Right joyful is this thing to us, and happy for your state,
Therefore with speed let us go hence, the marriage to celebrate
And all the gods I pray preserve, & keep you both from woe,
Come on sir king, shall we from hence, unto our palace go.
As if shall please your grace in deed, so we consent to do,
And we likewise oh gracious Prince, do condescend there to.
I would I were dead, and laid in my grave,
'ounds of me, I am trimly promoted:
Ah, ah, oh, well now for my labour, these trinkets I have?
Whyse you not I pray you, how I am flouted.
A bag and a bottle, thus am I louted?
Each knave nowadays, would make me his man,
But Ihill master them, I be his oundes and I can.
A begging, a-begging, nay now I must go,
Horestes is married, god send him much care:
And I Revenge, am driven him fro.
And then itis no marvel, though I be thus bare.
But peace, who better than beggars doth fare.
For all they be beggars, and have no great port,
Who is merrier, than the poorest sort.
What shall I beg? nay thates to bad,
Is their near a man, that a servant doth lack:
Of mine honesty gentle woman, I would be glad?
You to serve but for clothes, to put on my back.
A way with these rages, from me the shall pack.
What think you scorn, me your servant to make,
'a neither will have me, if you me forsake.
perhaps you all marvel, of this sudden mutation,
How seen I was down, from so high a degree:
To satisfy your minds, I will use a persuasion.
This one thing you know, that on called amity,
Is unto me revenge most contrary.
And we twain to gather, could not abide,
Which caused me so soon, from high state to slide.
Horestes and his uncle, King Menelaus,
Is made such sure friends, without peradventure,
Through the policy, of old Idumeus?
That as, far as I can see, it is to hard to enter,
Ye and thates worse, when I sought to venture.
I was driven without comfort, away from their gate,
I was glad to be packing, for fear of my pate.
Yet before I went, my fancy to please,
The marriage celebrated, at the church I did see,
Willing I was, them all to disease:
But I durst not be so bold, for master Amity.
Sot by Menelaus, and bore him company,
On the other side Dewtey with Horestes bower sway.
So that I could not enter, by no kind of way?
Well sith from them both, I am banished so,
I will seek a new master, if I can him find:
Yet I am in good comfort, for this well I know,
That the most part of women, to me be full kind,
If they say ne'er a word, yet I know their mind.
If they have not all things, when they do desire,
They will be revenged, or else lie in the mire.
Nay I know their qualities, the less is my care,
As well as they do know, revenge's operation,
Ye fall to it good wives, and do them not spare.
Nay I'll help you forward, if you lack but persuasion.
What man a most is free, from invasion.
For as plainly Socrates declareth unto us,
Women for the most part, are borne malicious.
Perhaps you will say, many on that I lie,
And other some I am sure, also will take my part:
Not withstanding what I have said, they will verify,
ye and do it I wis, in spite of thy heart.
If therefore thou will live quietly, after their desert?
Reward then so shalt, thou bridle their affection,
And unto they will, shall have them in subjection.
In Athenes dwelled Socrates, the philosopher divine,
Who had a wife named Xanthippe, both devilish and ill:
Which twain being fallen out, upon a time,
Perhaps cause Xanthippe, could not have her will.
He went out of doors, sitting there still.
She crowned him with a pisspot, and their he
Was wet to the skin, most pitiful to see.
I pray god that such dames, be not in this place,
For then I might chance near a mistress to get,
Nay if ye anger them, they will lay you on the face,
Or else their nails in your cheeks, they will set,
Nay like a razor, foam of their nails are whet.
That not for to pare, but to cut to the bone,
I count him most happiest, that meddles with none.
Well far you well, for I must be packing,
Remember my words, and bear it in mind?
What suffer the mill, a while to be clacking,
If that you intend, any ease for to find.
Then will they be to you, both loving and kind.
Farewell cozen cutpurse, and be ruled by me,
Or else you may chance, to end on a tree.
sith that the gods have given us grace, this realm for to possess
Which flourisheth abundantly, with gold & great riches.
Let us now see how much the wilds, & mind of all this land,
Is unto us and of their state, likewise to understand.
I deem of them Horestes mine, that they contented be,
With humble heart for to submit, o king themselves to ye,
Wherefore my love inquire, their state this present time,
And of their hearts good will to us, o king let them divine.
As I do love the lady bright, so eke I think in deed,
That love for love as equally, shallbe reward of meed.
The gods never prolong my life, that day I shall a pear,
To break my faith to the now plight, my loving lord so dear.
Come on my Lords & commons eke, let me now understand,
Of all your minds for I desire, to know what case this land
Doth now consist vouchsafe the same, therefore to show to me,
And if that ought be now amiss, amended it shallbe.
Most regal Prince we now are void, of mortal wars vexation
And through your grace we are joined, in love with every nation.
So that your nobles may now live, in pleasant state certain,
Devoid of wars & civil strifes, while that your grace doth rain
The which you may I pray the god, with happy days and bliss
And after death to send you there, where joys shall never miss.
As sign of our obedience, lo Dewty doth the Crowned,
And Truth also which doth me bind, they subject to be found.
My nobles all I give you thanks, for this now showed to me
And as you have so eke will I, the like show unto ye.
My commons how goose it with you, your state now let me know,
Where as such on as you do rain, there needs must riches grow
We are o king eased of the yoke, which we have so desired.
The state of this our common wealth, need not to be inquired.
Peace, wealth, joy, and felicity, o king it is we have,
And what thing is their that which, subjects ought more to crave
sith all things is in so good state, my commons as you say
That it may so continue still, the sacred gods I pray.
And as to me your trustiness, shall any ways be found,
So still to maintain your estate, I surely shallbe bound.
And for your faithful hearts, the which you granted have to me
Both you my lords, and commons eke, I thank you heartily.
Therefore sith time will have an end, & now my mind you know
Let us give place to time, and to our palace let us go.
We both will weight upon your grace, if'ft please you to depart
Even when you please to weigh you on I shall with all my heart
A kingdom kept in Amity, and void of dissension,
Ne divided in himself, by any kind of way,
neither provoked by words, of reprehension,
Must needs long continue, as Truth doth say.
For descension and strife, is the path to decay.
And continuing therein, must of necessity,
Be quite ruinate, and brought unto misery.
Where I Dewtey am neglected, of any estate.
Their strife and dissension, my place do supply:
Cankered malice pride, and debate,
Therefore to rest, all means do try.
Then ruin comes after, of their state whereby,
They are utterly extinguished, leaving nought behind,
Whereof so much as their, name we may find.
He that leadeth his life, as his fancy doth like,
Though for a while, the same he may hide:
ye Truth, the daughter of Time, will it seek,
And so in a time, it will be descried.
Yet in such time as it can not, be denied?
But receive due punishment, as god shall see,
For the fault committed, most convenient to be.
As this story here hath, made open unto ye,
Which if it have been marked, much prophet may arise?
For as Truth sayth, nothings written be,
But for our learning, in any kind of wise.
By which we may learn, the ill to despise,
And the truth to imitate, thus Truth doth say:
The which for to do, I beseech God we may.
For your gentle patience, we give you thanks heartily,
And therefore our duty weighed, let us all pray,
For Elizabeth our Queen, whose gracious majesty:
May rain over us, in health for aye,
Like wise for her council, that each of them may.
Have the spirit of grace, their doings to direct,
In setting up virtue, and vice to correct.
For all the nobility, and spiritualty, let us pray,
For judges, and head officers, whatever they be:
According to our abundant duties, especially I say,
For my Lord Mayre, Lieutenant of this noble City.
And for all his brethren, with the commonality.
That each of them, doing their duties a right,
May after death possess heaven, to their hearts delight.