AS I remember Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will, but poor a thousand Crowns, and as thou saist, charged my brother on his blessing to breed me well: and there begins my sadness: My brother Iaques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part, he keeps me rustically at home, or (to speak more properly) stays me here at home unkept: for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that differs not from the stalling of an Ox? his horses are bred better, for besides that they are fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage, and to that end Riders dearly hired: but I (his brother) gain nothing under him but growth, for the which his Animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as I: besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me, his countenance seems to take from me: he lets me feed with his Hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my education. This is it Adam that grieves me, and the spirit of my Father, which I think is within me, begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy how to avoid it.
Yonder comes my Master, your brother.
Go apart Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.
Now Sir, what make you here?
Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.
What mar you then sir?
Marry sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poor unworthy brother of yours with idleness.
Marry sir be better employed, and be naught a while.
Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? what prodigal portion have I spent, that I should come to such penury?
Know you where you are sir?
O sir, very well: here in your Orchard.
Know you before whom sir?
I, better than him I am before knows me: I know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me: the courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that you are the first borne, but the same tradition takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us: I have as much of my father in me, as you, albeit I confess your coming before me is nearer to his reverence.
What Boy.
Come, come elder brother, you are too young in this.
Wilt thou lay hands on me villain?
I am no villain: I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys, he was my father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains: wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy throat, till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so, thou hast railed on thyself.
Sweet Masters be patiented, for your Father's remembrance, be at accord.
Let me go I say.
I will not till I please: you shall hear me: my father charged you in his will to give me good education: you have trained me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike qualities: the spirit of my father grows strong in me, and I will no longer endure it: therefore allow me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor allottery my father left me by testament, with that I will go buy my fortunes.
And what wilt thou do? beg when that is spent? Well sir, get you in. I will not long be troubled with you: you shall have some part of your will, I pray you leave me.
I will no further offend you, than becomes me for my good.
Get you with him, you old dog.
Is old dog my reward: most true, I have lost my teeth in your service: God be with my old master, he would not have spoke such a word. Ex. Orl. Ad.
Is it even so, begin you to grow upon me? I will physic your ranckenesse, and yet give no thousand crowns neither: holla Dennis.
Calls your worship?
Was not Charles the Duke's Wrestler here to speak with me?
So please you, he is here at the door, and importunes access to you.
Call him in: 'twill be a good way: and to morrow the wrestling is.
Good morrow to your worship.
Good monsieur Charles: what's the new news at the new Court?
There's no news at the Court Sir, but the old news: that is, the old Duke is banished by his younger brother the new Duke, and three or four loving Lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new Duke, therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
Can you tell if Rosalind the Duke's daughter be banished with her Father?
O no; for the Duke's daughter her Cousin so loves her, being ever from their Cradles bred together, that he would have followed her exile, or have died to stay behind her; she is at the Court, and no less beloved of her Uncle, than his own daughter, and never two Ladies loved as they do.
Where will the old Duke live?
They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England: they say many young Gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time carelessly as they did in the golden world.
What, you wrestle to morrow before the new Duke.
Marry do I sir: and I came to acquaint you with a matter: I am given sir secretly to understand, that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall: to morrow sir I wrestle for my credit, and he that escapes me without some broken limb, shall acquit him well: your brother is but young and tender, and for your love I would be loath to foil him, as I must for my own honour if he come in: therefore out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him from his intendment, or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own search, and altogether against my will.
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find I will most kindly require: I had myself notice of my Brother's purpose herein, and have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. I'll tell thee Charles, it is the stubbornest young fellow of France, full of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good parts, a secret & villainous contriver against me his natural brother: therefore use thy discretion, I had as liefe thou didst break his neck as his finger. And thou wert best look to't; for if thou dost him any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace himself on thee, he will practise against thee by poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device, and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other: for I assure thee, (and almost with tears I speak it) there is not one so young, and so villainous this day living. I speak but brotherly of him, but should I anathomize him to thee, as he is, I must blush, and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder.
I am hearty glad I came hither to you: if he come to morrow, I'll give him his payment: if ever he go alone again, I'll never wrestle for prise more: and so God keep your worship.
Farewell good Charles. Now will I stir this Gamester: I hope I shall see an end of him; for my soul (yet I know not why) hates nothing more than he: yet he's gentle, never schooled, and yet learned, full of noble device, of all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in the heart of the world, and especially of my own people, who best know him, that I am altogether misprised: but it shall not be so long, this wrestler shall clear all: nothing remains, but that I kindle the boy thither, which now I'll go about.
I pray thee Rosalind, sweet my Coz, be merry.
Dear Cellia; I show more mirth than I am mistress of, and would you yet were merrier: unless you could teach me to forget a banished father, you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.
Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that I love thee; if my Uncle thy banished father had banished thy Uncle the Duke my Father, so thou hadst been still with me, I could have taught my love to take thy father for mine; so wouldst thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously tempered, as mine is to thee.
Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to rejoice in yours.
You know my Father hath no child, but I, nor none is like to have; and truly when he dies, thou shalt be his heir; for what he hath taken away from thy father perforce, I will render thee again in affection: by mine honour I will, and when I break that oath, let me turn monster: therefore my sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.
From henceforth I will Coz, and device sports: let me see, what think you of falling in Love?
Marry I prithee do, to make sport withal: but love no man in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither; then with safety of a pure blush, thou mayst in honour come off again.
What shall be our sport then?
Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.
I would we could do so: for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.
'Tis true, for those that she makes fair, she scarce makes honest, & those that she makes honest, she makes very ill favouredly.
Nay now thou goest from Fortune's office to Natures: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of Nature.
No; when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by Fortune fall into the fire? though nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune, hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?
Indeed there is fortune too hard for nature, when fortune makes natures natural, the cutter off of nature's wit.
Peradventure this is not Fortunes work neither, but Natures, who perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, hath sent this Natural for our whetstone. for always the dulness of the fool, is the whetstone of the wits. How now Wit, whether wander you?
Mistress, you must come away to your father.
Were you made the messenger?
No by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you
Where learned you that oath fool?
Of a certain Knight, that swore by his Honour they were good Pancakes, and swore by his Honour the Mustard was naught: Now I'll stand to it, the Pancakes were naught, and the Mustard was good, and yet was not the Knight forsworn.
How prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?
I marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.
Stand you both forth now: struck your chins, and swear by your beards that I am a knave.
By our beards (if we had them) thou art.
By my knavery (if I had it) than I were: but if you swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn: no more was this knight swearing by his Honour, for he never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away, before ever he saw those Pancakes, or that Mustard.
Prithee, who is't that thou meansed?
One that old Frederick your Father loves.
My Father's love is enough to honour him enough; speak no more of him, you'll be whipped for taxation one of these days.
The more pity that fools may not speak wisely, what Wisemen do foolishly.
By my troth thou sayest true: For, since the little wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show; here comes Monsieur the Beu.
With his mouth full of news.
Which he will put on us, as Pigeons feed their young.
Then shall we be newes-cramed.
All the better: we shallbe the more Marketable. Boon-iour Monsieur le Beu, what's the news?
Fair Princess, you have lost much good sport.
Sport: of what colour?
What colour Madame? How shall I answer you?
As wit and fortune will.
Or as the destinies decrees.
Well said, that was laid on with a trowel.
Nay, if I keep not my rank.
Thou losest thy old smell.
You amaze me Ladies: I would have told you of good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
Yet tell us the manner of the Wrestling.
I will tell you the beginning: and if it please your Ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is yet to do, and here where you are, they are coming to perform it.
Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.
There comes an old man, and his three sons.
I could match this beginning with an old tale.
Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.
With bills on their necks: Be it known unto all men by these presents.
The eldest of the three, wrestled with Charles the Duke's Wrestler, which Charles in a moment threw him, and broke three of his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him: So he served the second, and so the third: yonder they lie, the poor old man their Father, making such pitiful dole over them, that all the beholders take his part with weeping.
Alas.
But what is the sport Monsieur, that the Ladies have lost?
Why this that I speak of.
Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport for Ladies.
Or I, I promise thee.
But is there any else longs to see this broken Music in his sides? Is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling Cousin?
You must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.
Yonder sure they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.
Come on, since the youth will not be entreated
His own peril on his forwardness.
Is yonder the man?
Even he, Madam.
Alas, he is too young: yet he looks successfully
How now daughter, and Cousin:
Are you crept hither to see the wrestling?
I my Liege, so please you give us leave.
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you there is such odds in the man: In pity of the challengers youth, I would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated. Speak to him Ladies, see if you can move him.
Call him hither good Monsiever Le Beu.
Do so: I'll not be by.
Monsieur the Challenger, the Princess calls for you.
I attend them with all respect and duty.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the Wrestler?
No fair Princess: he is the general challenger, I come but in as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.
Young Gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years: you have seen cruel proof of this man's strength, if you saw yourself with your eyes, or knew yourself with your judgement, the fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal enterprise. We pray you for your own sake to embrace your own safety, and give over this attempt.
Do young Sir, your reputation shall not therefore be misprised: we will make it our suit to the Duke, that the wrestling might not go forward.
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent Ladies any thing. But let your fair eyes, and gentle wishes go with me to my trial; wherein if I be foiled, there is but one shamed that was never gracious: if killed, but one dead that is willing to be so: I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none to lament me: the world no injury, for in it I have nothing: only in the world I fill up a place, which may be better supplied, when I have made it empty.
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.
And mine to eke out hers.
Far you well: pray heaven I be deceived in you.
Your hearts desires be with you.
Come, where is this young gallant, that is so desirous to lie with his mother earth?
Ready Sir, but his will hath in it a more modest working.
You shall try but one fall.
No, I warrant your Grace you shall not entreat him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.
You mean to mock me after: you should not have mocked me before: but come your ways.
Now Hercules, be thy speed young man.
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the leg.
Oh excellent young man.
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should down.
No more, no more.
Yes I beseech your Grace, I am not yet well breathed.
How dost thou Charles?
He cannot speak my Lord.
Bear him away:
What is thy name young man?
Orlando my Liege, the youngest son of Sir Roland de Boys.
I would thou hadst been son to some man else,
The world esteemed thy father honourable,
But I did find him still mine enemy:
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed,
Hadst thou descended from another house:
But far thee well, thou art a gallant youth,
I would thou hadst told me of another Father.
Were I my Father (Cousin) would I do this?
I am more proud to be Sir Rolands son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Fredricke.
My Father loved Sir Roland as his soul,
And all the world was of my Father's mind,
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
Ere he should thus have ventured.
Gentle Cousin,
Let us go thank him, and encourage him:
My Father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart: Sir, you have well deserved,
If you do keep your promises in love;
But justly as you have exceeded all promise,
Your Mistress shall be happy.
Gentleman,
Wear this for me: one out of suits with fortune
That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
Shall we go Cousin?
I: far you well fair Gentleman.
Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintine, a mere liveless block.
He calls us back: my pride fell with my fortunes,
I'll ask him what he would: Did you call Sir?
Sir, you have wrestled well, and overthrown
More than your enemies.
Will you go Cousin?
Have with you: far you well.
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando! thou art overthrown
Or Charles, or something weaker masters thee.
Good Sir, I do in friendship counsel you
Te leave this place; Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love;
Yet such is now the Duke's condition,
That he misconstrues all that you have done:
The Duke is humorous, what he is indeed
More suits you to conceive, than I to speak of.
I thank you Sir; and pray you tell me this,
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke,
That here was at the Wrestling?
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the taller is his daughter,
The other is daughter to the banished Duke,
And here detained by her usurping Uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of Sisters:
But I can tell you, that of late this Duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle Niece,
Grounded upon no other argument,
But that the people praise her for her virtues,
And pity her, for her good Father's sake;
And on my life his malice 'gainst the Lady
Will suddenly break forth: Sir, far you well,
Hereafter in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden to you: far you well.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant Duke, unto a tyrant Brother.
But heavenly Rosaline.
Why Cousin, why Rosaline: Cupid have mercy,
Not a word?
Not one to throw at a dog.
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs, throw some of them at me; come lame me with reasons.
Then there were two Cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with reasons, and the other mad without any.
But is all this for your Father?
No, some of it is for my child's Father: Oh how full of briers is this working day world.
They are but burrs, Cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery, if we walk not in the trodden paths our very petticoats will catch them.
I could shake them off my coat, these burrs are in my heart.
Him them away.
I would try if I could cry 'em, and have him.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
O they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.
O, a good wish upon you: you will try in time in despite of a fall: but turning these jests out of service, let us talk in good earnest: Is it possible on such a sudden, you should fall into so strong a liking with old Sir Roulands youngest son?
The Duke my Father loved his Father dear.
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his Son dear? By this kind of chase, I should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly; yet I hate not Orlando.
No faith, hate him not for my sake.
Why should I not? doth he not deserve well?
Let me love him for that, and do you love him
Because I do. Look, here comes the Duke.
With his eyes full of anger.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our Court.
Me uncle.
You Cousin,
Within these ten days if that thou be'st found
So near our public Court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.
I do beseech your Grace
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:
If with myself I hold intelligence,
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream, or be not frantic,
(As I do trust I am not) then dear Uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn,
Did I offend your highness.
Thus do all Traitors,
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself;
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a Traitor;
Tell me whereon the likelihoods depends?
Thou art thy Father's daughter, there's enough.
So was I when your highness took his Dukdome,
So was I when your highness banished him;
Treason is not inherited my Lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me, my Father was no Traitor,
Then good my Liege, mistake me not so much,
To think my poverty is treacherous.
Dear Sovereign hear me speak.
I Celia, we stayed her for your sake,
Else had she with her Father ranged along.
I did not then entreat to have her stay.
It was your pleasure, and your own remorse,
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her: if she be a Traitor,
Why so am I: we still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together,
And whatsoe'er we went, like Juno's Swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness;
Her very silence, and per patience,
Speak to the people, and they pity her:
Thou art a fool, she robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright, & seem more virtuous
When she is gone: then open not thy lips
Firm, and irrevocable is my doom,
Which I have passed upon her, she is banished.
Pronounce that sentence then on me my Liege,
I cannot live out of her company.
You are a fool: you Niece provide yourself,
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
And in the greatness of my word you die.
O my poor Rosaline, whether wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change Fathers? I will give thee mine:
I charge thee be not thou more grieved than I am.
I have more cause.
Thou hast not Cousin,
Prithee be cheerful; knowst thou not the Duke
Hath banished me his daughter?
That he hath not.
No, hath not? Rosaline lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one,
Shall we be sundered? shall we part sweet girl?
No, let my Father seek another heir:
Therefore devise with me how we may fly
Whether to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself, and leave me out:
For by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale;
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
Why, whether shall we go?
To seek my Uncle in the Forest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
(Maids as we are) to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face,
The like do you, so shall we pass along,
And never stir assailants.
Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man,
A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will,
we'll have a swashing and a marshal outside,
As many other mannish cowards have,
That do outface it with their semblances.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own Page,
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you by called?
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.
But Cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish Fool out of your Father's Court:
Would he not be a comfort to our travail?
he'll go along o'er the wide world with me,
Leave me alone to woe him; Let's away
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Device the fittest time, and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight: now go in we content
To liberty, and not to banishment.
Now my Co-mates, and brothers in exile:
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril then the envious Court?
here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons difference, as the I Icie phange
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile, and say
This is no flattery: these are counsellors
That feelingly persuade me what I am:
Sweet are the uses of adversity
Which like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head:
And this our life exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in every thing.
I would not change it, happy is your Grace
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a stile.
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dapled fools
Being native Burghers of this desert City,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round banches gored.
Indeed my Lord
The melancholy Iaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Then doth your brother that hath banished you:
To day my Lord of Amiens, and myself,
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antic root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood,
To the which place a poor sequestered Stag
That from the Hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
Did come to languish; and indeed my Lord
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase: and thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Iaques,
Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.
But what said Iaques?
Did he not moralise this spectacle?
O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream;
Poor Deer quoth he, thou makest a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too must: then being there alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friend;
'Tis right quoth he, thus misery doth part
The Flux of company: anon a careless Herd
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never staid to greet him: I quoth Iaques,
Sweep on you fat and greasy Citizens,
'Tis just the fashion; wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of Country, City, Court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse
To fright the Animals, and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling place.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?
We did my Lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing Deer.
Show me the place,
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.
I'll bring you to him straight.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be, some villains of my Court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any that did see her,
The Ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her a bed, and in the morning early,
They found the bed vntreasur'd of their Mistress.
My Lord, the roynish Clown, at whom so oft,
Your Grace was wont to laugh is also missing,
Hisperia the Princess Gentlewoman
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
Your daughter and her Cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the Wrestler
That did but lately foil the synowie Charles,
And she believes where ever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.
Send to his brother, fetch that gallant hither,
If he be absent, bring his Brother to me,
I'll make him find him: do this suddenly;
And let not search and inquisition quail,
To bring again these foolish runaways.
Who's there?
What my young Master, oh my gentle master,
Oh my sweet master, O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland; why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny priser of the humorous Duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not Master, to seem kind of men,
Their graces serve them but as enemies,
No more do yours: your virtues gentle Master
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you:
Oh what a world is this, when what is comely
Enuenoms him that bears it?
Why, what's the matter?
O unhappy youth,
Come not within these doors: within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives
Your brother, no, no brother, yet the son
(Yet not the son, I will not call him son)
Of him I was about to call his Father,
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means,
To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
And you within it: if he fail of that
He will have other means to cut you off;
I overheard him: and his practices:
This is no place, this house is but a butchery;
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
Why whether Adam wouldst thou have me go?
No matter whether, so you come not here.
What, wouldst thou have me go & beg my food,
Or with a base and boisterous Sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do:
Yet this I will not do, do how I can,
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood, and bloody brother.
But do not so: I have five hundred Crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your Father,
Which I did store to be my foster Nurse,
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown,
Take that, and he that doth the Ravens feed,
Yea providently cators for the Sparrow,
Be comfort to my age: here is the gold,
All this I give you, let me be your servant,
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot, and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashfull forehead woe,
The means of weakness and debility,
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty, but kindly; let me go with you,
I'll do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.
Oh good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed:
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat, but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up,
Even with the having, it is not so with thee:
But poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield,
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry,
But come thy ways, we'll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
we'll light upon some settled low content.
Master go on, and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty,
From seventy years, till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more
At seventeen years, many their fortunes seek
But at fourscore, it is too late a week,
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well, and not my Master's debtor.
O Iupiter, how merry are my spirits?
I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's apparel, and to cry like a woman: but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat; therefore courage, good Aliena.
I pray you bear with me, I cannot go no further.
For my part, I had rather bear with you, then bear you: yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your purse.
Well, this is the Forest of Arden.
I, now am I in Arden, the more fool I, when I was at home I was in a better place, but travelers must be content.
I, be so good Touchstone: Look you, who comes here, a young man and an old in solemn talk.
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
Oh Corin, that thou knewest how I do love her.
I partly guess: for I have loved ere now.
No Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow:
But if thy love were ever like to mine,
As sure I think did never man love so:
How many actions most ridiculous,
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
Oh thou didst then never love so heartily,
If thou remember'st not the slightest folly,
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy Mistress praise,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not broke from company,
Abruptly as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe.
Alas poor Shepherd searching of they would,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.
And I mine: I remember when I was in love, I broke my sword upon a stone, and bid him take that for coming a night to Iane Smile, and I remember the kissing of her batler, and the Cow's dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked; and I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took two cod, and giving her them again, said with weeping tears, wear these for my sake: we that are true Lovers, run into strange capers; but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love, mortal in folly.
Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of.
Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit, till
I break my shins against it.
Ioue, Ioue, this Shepherd's passion,
Is much upon my fashion.
And mine, but it grows something stolen with me.
I pray you, one of you question yond man,
If he for gold will give us any food,
I faint almost to death.
Holla; you Clown.
Peace fool, he's not thy kinsman.
Who calls?
Your betters Sir.
Else are they very wretched.
Peace I say; good even to your friend.
And to you gentle Sir, and to you all.
I prithee Shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves, and feed:
Here's a young maid with travail much oppressed,
And faints for succour.
Fair Sir, I pity her,
And wish for her sake more than for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
But I am shepherd to another man,
And do not shear the Fleeces that I graze:
My master is of churlish disposition,
And little wreaks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides his Coat, his Flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheep-coat now
By reason of his absence there is nothing
That you will feed on: but what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
That young Swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying any thing.
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the Cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
And we will mend thy wages:
I like this place, and willingly could
Waste my time in it.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold:
Go with me, if you like upon report,
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful Feeder be,
And buy it with your Gold right suddenly.
Under the green wood tree, who loves to lie with me,
And turn his merry Note, unto the sweet Birds throat:
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
here shall he see no enemy,
But Winter and rough Weather.
More, more, I prithee more.
It will make you melancholy Monsieur Iaques
I thank it: More, I prithee more,
I can suck melancholy out of a song,
As a Weazel sucks eggs: More, I prithee more.
My voice is ragged, I know I cannot please you.
I do not desire you to please me,
I do desire you to sing:
Come, more, another stanzo: Call you 'em stanzo's?
What you will Monsieur Iaques.
Nay, I care not for their names, they own me nothing. Will you sing?
More at your request, then to please myself.
Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank you: but that they call compliment is like th' encounter of two dog-Apes. And when a man thanks me heartily, me thinks I have given him a penny, and he renders me the beggarly thankes. Come sing; and you that will not hold your tongues.
Well, I'll end the song. Sirs, cover the while, the Duke will drink under this tree; he hath been all this day to look you.
And I have been all this day to avoid him:
He is too disputeable for my company:
I think of as many matters as he, but I give
Heaven thankes, and make no boast of them.
Come, warble, come.
Who doth ambition shun, and loves to live i' th' Sun:
Seeking the food he eats, and pleased with what he gets:
Come hither, come hither, come hither,
here shall he see. etc.
I'll give you a verse to this note,
That I made yesterday in despite of my Invention.
And I'll sing it.
Thus it goes.
If it do come to pass, that any man turn Ass:
Leaving his wealth and ease,
A stubborn will to please,
Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:
here shall he see, gross fools as he,
And if he will come to me.
What's that Ducdame?
'Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a circle. I'll go sleep if I can: if I cannot, I'll rail against all the first borne of Egypt.
And I'll go seek the Duke,
His banquet is prepared.
Dear Master, I can go no further:
O I die for food. here lie I down,
And measure out my grave. Farewell kind master.
Why how now Adam? No greater heart in thee:
Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a little.
If this uncouth Forest yield any thing savage,
I will either be food for it, or bring it for food to thee:
Thy conceit is nearer death, than thy powers.
For my sake be comfortable, hold death a while
At the arms end: I will here be with thee presently,
And if I bring thee not something to eat,
I will give thee leave to die: but if thou diest
Before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour.
Well said, thou look'st cheerly,
And I'll be with thee quickly: yet thou liest
In the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee
To some, shelter, and thou shalt not die
For lack of a dinner,
If there live any thing in this Desert.
Cheerly good Adam.
I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can no where find him, like a man.
My Lord, he is but even now gone hence,
here was he merry, hearing of a Song.
If he compact of jars, grow Musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the Spheres:
Go seek him, tell him I would speak with him.
He saves my labour by his own approach.
Why how now Monsieur, what a life is this
That your poor friends must woe your company,
What, you look merrily.
A Fool, a fool: I met a fool i' th' Forest,
A motley Fool (a miserable world:)
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down, and basked him in the Sun,
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
Good morrow fool (quoth I:) no Sir, quoth he,
Call me not fool, till heaven hath sent me fortune,
And then he drew a dial from his poke,
And looking on it, with lacke-lustre eye,
Says, very wisely, it is ten a clock:
Thus we may see (quoth he) how the world wags:
'Tis but an hour ago, since it was nine,
And after one hour more, 'twill be eleven,
And so from hour to hour, we ripe, and ripe,
And then from hour to hour, we rot, and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale. When I did hear
The motley Fool, thus moral on the time,
My Lungs began to crow like Chanticleer,
That Fools should be so deep contemplative:
And I did laugh, sans intermission
An hour by his dial. Oh noble fool,
A worthy fool: Motley's the only wear.
What fool is this?
O worthy Fool: One that hath been a Courtier
And says, if Ladies be but young, and fair,
They have the gift to know it: and in his braine,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage: He hath strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool,
I am ambitious for a motley coat.
Thou shalt have one.
It is my only suit,
Provided that you weed your better judgements
Of all opinion that grows rank in them,
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Wiithall, as large a Charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have:
And they that are most gauled with my folly,
They most must laugh: And why sir must they so?
The why is plain, as way to Parish Church:
He, that a Fool doth very wisely hit,
Doth very foolishly, although he smart
Seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The Wiseman's folly is anathomized
Even by the squandring glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley: Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.
Fie on thee. I can tell what thou wouldst do.
What, for a Counter, would I do, but good?
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:
For thou thyself hast been a Libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself,
And all th' embossed sores, and headed evils,
That thou with licence of free foot hast caught,
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
Why who cries out on pride,
That can therein tax any private party:
Doth it not flow as hugely as the Sea,
Till that the weary very means do ebb.
What woman in the City do I name,
When that I say the City woman bears
The cost of Princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in, and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she, such is her neighbour?
Or what is he of basest function,
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech,
There then, how then, what then, let me see wherein
My tongue hath wronged him: if it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself: if he be free,
why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies
Vnclaimed of any man. But who come here?
Forbear, and eat no more.
Why I have eat none yet.
Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.
Of what kind should this Cock come of?
Art thou thus boldened man by thy distress?
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?
You touched my vein at first, the thorny point
Of bare distress, hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred,
And know some nurture: But forbear, I say,
He dyes that touches any of this fruit,
Till I, and my affairs are answered.
And you will not be answered with reason,
I must dye.
What would you have?
Your gentleness shall force, more than your force
Move us to gentleness.
I almost die for food, and let me have it.
Sat down and feed, & welcome to our table
Speak you so gently? Pardon me I pray you,
I thought that all things had been savage here,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But what ere you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose, and neglect the creeping hours of time:
If ever you have looked on better days:
If ever been where bells have knolled to Church:
If ever sat at any good man's feast:
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear,
And know what 'tis to pity, and be pitied:
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope, I blush, and hide my Sword.
True is it, that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knowld to Church,
And sat at good men's feasts, and wiped our eyes
Of drops, that sacred pity hath engendered:
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command, what help we have
That to your wanting may be ministered.
Then but forbear your food a little while:
Whiles (like a do) I go to find my Fawn,
And give it food. There is an old poor man,
Who after me, hath many a weary step
Limpt in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age, and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
Go find him out.
And we will nothing waste till you return.
I thank ye, and be blessed for your good comfort.
Thou seest, we are not all alone unhappy:
This wide and universal Theatre
Presents more woeful Pageants than the Scene
Wherein we play in.
All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women, merely Players;
They have their Exits and their Entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His Acts being seven ages. At first the Infant,
Mewling, and puking in the Nurse's arms:
Then, the whining Schoolboy with his Satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the Lover,
Sighing like Furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his Mistress eyebrow. Then, a Soldier,
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the Pard,
jealous in honour, sudden, and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble Reputation
Even in the Canon's mouth: And then, the justice,
In fair round belly, with good Capon lined,
With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws, and modern instances,
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered Pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side,
His youthful hose well saved, a world too wide,
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble pipes,
And whistles in his sound. Last Scene of all,
That ends this strange eventfull history,
Is second childishness, and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.
Welcome: set down your venerable burden, and let him feed.
I thank you most for him.
So had you need,
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
Welcome, fall too: I will not trouble you,
As yet to question you about your fortunes:
Give us some Music, and good Cousin, sing.
Blow, blow, thou winter winde,
Thou art not so unkind, as man's ingratitude
Thy tooth is not so keen, because thou art not seen, although thy breath be rude.
Heigh ho, sing heigh ho, unto the green holly,
Most friendship, is feigning; most Loving, mere folly:
The heigh ho, the holly,
This Life is most jolly.
Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky that dost not bite so nigh as benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp, thy sting is not so sharp, as friend remembered not.
Heigh ho, sing, etc.
If that you were the good Sir Roland's son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness,
Most truly limned, and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither: I am the Duke
That loved your Father, the residue of your fortune,
Go to my Cave, and tell me, Good old man,
Thou art right welcome, as thy masters is:
Support him by the arm: give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present: but look to it,
Find out thy brother whatsoe'er he is,
Seek him with Candle: bring him dead, or living
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our Territory.
Thy Lands and all things that thou dost call thine,
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth,
Of what we think against thee.
Oh that your Highness knew my heart in this:
I never loved my brother in my life.
More villain thou. Well push him out of doors
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and Lands:
Do this expediently, and turn him going.
Hang there my verse, in witness of my love,
And thou thrice crowned Queen of night survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above
Thy Huntress name, that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind, these Trees shall be my Books,
And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
That every eye, which in this Forest looks,
Shall see thy virtue witnessed every where.
Run, run Orlando, carve on every Tree,
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.
And how like you this shepherd's life Mr Touchstone?
Truly Shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I like it very well: but in respect that it is private, it is a very vild life. Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well: but in respect it is not in the Court, it is tedious. As it is a spare life (look you) it fits my humour well: but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach. Hast any Philosophy in thee shepherd?
No more, but that I know the more one sickens, the worse at ease he is: and that he that wants money, means, and content, is without three good friends. That the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn: That pood pasture makes fat sheep: and that a great cause of the night, is lack of the Sun: That he that hath learned no wit by Nature, nor Art, may complain of good breeding, or comes of a very dull kindred.
Such a one is a natural Philosopher:
Was't ever in Court, Shepheard?
No truly.
Then thou art damned.
Nay, I hope.
Truly thou art damned, like an ill roasted Egg, all on one side.
For not being at Court? your reason.
Why, if thou never was't at Court, thou never saw'st good manners: if thou never saw'st good manners, than thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation: Thou art in a perilous state shepherd.
Not a whit Touchstone, those that are good manners at the Court, are as ridiculous in the Country, as the behaviour of the Country is most mockeable at the Court. You told me, you salute not at the Court, but you kiss your hands; that courtesy would be unclean if Courtiers were shepherds.
Instance, briefly: come, instance.
Why we are still handling our Ewes, and their
Fels you know are greasy.
Why do not your Courtier's hands sweat? and is not the grease of a Mutton, as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow: A better instance I say: Come.
Besides, our hands are hard.
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again: a more sounder instance, come.
And they are often tarred over, with the surgery of our sheep: and would you have us kiss Tar? The Courtier's hands are perfumed with Ciuet.
Most shallow man: Thou worms meat in respect of a good piece of flesh indeed: learn of the wise and perpend: Ciuet is of a base birth than Tar, the very uncleanly flux of a Cat. Mend the instance Shepheard.
You have too Courtly a wit for me, I'll rest.
Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee shallow man: God make incision in thee, thou art raw.
Sir, I am a true Labourer, I earn that I eat: get that I wear; own no man hate, envy no man's happiness: glad of other men's good content with my harm: and the greatest of my pride, is to see my Ewes graze, & my Lambs suck.
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the Ewes and the Rams together, and to offer to get your living, by the copulation of Cattle, to be bawd to a Bell-wether, and to betray a shee-Lambe of a twelvemonth to a crooked-pated old Cuckoldly Ram, out of all reasonable match. If thou be'st not damned for this, the devil himself will have no shepherds, I cannot see else how thou shouldst scape.
here comes young Mr Ganymede, my new mistress's Brother.
From the east to western Iude,
no jewel is like Rosalinde,
Her worth being mounted on the wind,
through all the world bears Rosalinde.
All the pictures fairest Lined,
are but black to Rosalinde:
Let no face be kept in mind,
but the fair of Rosalinde.
I'll rhyme you so, eight years together; dinners, and suppers, and sleeping hours excepted: it is the right Butter-womens' rank to Market.
Out Foole.
For a taste.
If a Hart do lack a Hind,
Let him seek out Rosalinde:
If the Cat will after kind,
so be sure will Rosalinde:
Wintered garments must be lined,
so must slender Rosalinde:
They that reap must sheaf and bind,
then to cart with Rosalinde.
Sweetest nut, bath sourest rind,
such a nut is Rosalinde.
He that sweetest rose will find,
must find Love's prick, & Rosalinde.
This is the very false gallop of Verses, why do you infect yourself with them?
Peace you dull folle, I found them on a tree.
Truly the tree yields bad fruit.
I'll graft it with you, and then I shall graft it with a Meddler: than it will be the earliest fruit i' th' country: for you'll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that's the right virtue of the Meddler.
You have said: but whether wisely or no, let the Forest judge.
Peace, here comes my sister reading, stand a side.
Why should this Desert be, for it is unpeopled? Noah:
Tonges Isle hang on every tree, that shall civil sayings shoe.
Some, how brief the Life of man runs his erring pilgrimage,
That the stretching of a span, buckles in his sum of age.
Some of violated vows, twixt the souls of friend, and friend:
But upon the fairest bows, or at every sentence end;
Will I Rosalinda write, teaching all that read, to know
The quintessence of every spirit, heaven would in little show.
Therefore heaven Nature charged, that one body should be filled
With all Graces wide enlarged, nature presently distilled
Helen's cheek, but not his heart,
Cleopatra's Majesty:
Attalanta's better part,
sad Lucrecia's Modesty.
Thus Rosalinde of many parts,
by Heavenly Synod was devised,
Of many faces, eyes, and hearts,
to have the touches dearest prized.
Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
and I to live and die her slave.
O most gentle Iupiter, what tedious homily of Love have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried, have patience good people.
How now back friends: Shepherd, go off a little: go with him sirrah.
Come Shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat, though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.
Didst thou hear these verses?
O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them more feet than the Verses would bear.
That's no matter: the feet might bear the verses.
I, but the feet were lame, and could not bear themselves without the verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse.
But didst thou hear without wondering, how thy name should be hanged and carved upon these trees?
I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder, before you came: for look here what I found on a Palm tree; I was never so berim d since Pythagoras' time that I was an Irish Rat, which I can hardly remember.
Trow you, who hath done this?
Is it a man?
And a chain that you once wore about his neck: change you colour?
I, prithee who?
O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but Mountains may be removed with Earthquakes, and so encounter.
Nay, but who is it?
Is it possible?
Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.
O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful wonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that out of all hooping.
Good my complexion, dost thou think though I am caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of delay more, is a South-sea of discovery. I prithee tell me, who is it quickly, and speak apace: I would thou couldst stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man out of thy mouth, as Wine comes out of a narrow-mouthed bottle: either too much at once, or none at all. I prithee take the Cork out of thy mouth, that I may drink thy tidings.
So you may put a man in your belly.
Is he of Gods making? What manner of man?
Is his head worth a hat? Or his chin worth a beard?
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Why God will send more, if the man will be thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.
It is young Orlando, that tripped up the Wrestlers heels, and your heart, both in an instant.
Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak sad brow, and true maid.
I' faith (Coz) 'tis he.
Orlando?
Orlando.
Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet & hose? What did he when thou saw'st him? What said he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes he here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou see him again? Answer me in one word.
You must borrow me Gargantuas mouth first: 'tis a Word too great for any mouth of this Age's size, to say I and no, to these particulars, is more than to answer in a Catechism.
But doth he know that I am in this Forest, and in man's apparel? Looks he as freshly, as he did the day he Wrestled?
It is as easy to count Atoms as to resolve the propositions of a Lover: but take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good observance. I found him under a tree like a dropped acorn.
It may well be called Jove's tree, when it drops forth fruit.
Give me audience, good Madam.
Proceed.
There lay he stretched along like a Wounded knight.
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.
Cry holla, to the tongue, I prithee: it curuettes unseasonably. He was furnished like a Hunter.
O ominous, he comes to kill my Hart.
I would sing my song without a burden, thou bring'st me out of tune.
Do you not know I am a woman, when I think,
I must speak: sweet, say on.
You bring me out. Soft, comes he not here?
'Tis he, slink by, and note him.
I thank you for your company, but good faith
I had as lief have been myself alone.
And so had I: but yet for fashion sake
I thank you too, for your society.
God buy you, let's meet as little as we can.
I do desire we may be better strangers.
I pray you mar no more trees with Writing Lovesongs in their barks.
I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them illfavouredly.
Rosalinde is your love's name?
Yes, Just.
I do not like her name.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.
What stature is she of?
Just as high as my heart.
You are full of pretty answers: have you not been acquainted with goldsmith's wives, & con them out of rings
Not so: but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied your questions.
You have a nimble wit; I think 'twas made of Attalanta's heels. Will you sit down with me, and we two, will rail against our Mistress the world, and all our misery.
I will chide no breather in the world but myself against whom I know most faults.
The worst fault you have, is to be in love.
'Tis a fault I will not change, for your best virtue: I am weary of you.
By my troth, I was seeking for a Fool, when I found you.
He is drowned in the brook, look but in, and you shall see him.
There I shall see mine own figure.
Which I take to be either a fool, or a Cipher.
I'll tarry no longer with you, farewell good signior Love..
I am glad of your departure: Adieu good Monsieur Melancholy.
I will speak to him like a saucy Lackey;. and under that habit play the knave with him, do you hear Forester.
Very well, what would you?
I pray you, what is't a clock?
You should ask me what time o' day: there's no clock in the Forest.
Then there is no true Lover in the Forest, else sighing every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time, as well as a clock.
And why not the swift foot of time? Had not that been as proper?
By no means sir; Time travels in diverse paces, with diverse persons: I'll tell you who Time ambles withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops withal, and who he stands still withal.
I prithee, who doth he troth withal?
Marry he trots hard with a young maid, between the contract of her marriage, and the day it is solemnised: if the interim be but a seven-night, Time's pace is so hard, that it seems the length of seven year.
Who ambles Time withal?
With a Priest that lacks Latin, and a rich man that hath not the Gout: for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study, and the other lives merrily, because he feels no pain: the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful Learning; the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury. These Time ambles withal.
Who doth he gallop withal?
With a thief to the gallows: for though he go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
Who stays it still withal?
With Lawyers in the vacation: for they sleep between Term and Term, and then they perceive not how time moves.
Where dwell you pretty youth?
With this Shepherdess my sister: here in the skirts of the Forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.
Are you native of this place?
As the Conie that you see dwell where she is kindled.
Your accent is something finer, than you could purchase in so removed a dwelling.
I have been told so of many: but indeed, an old religious Uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew Courtship too well: for there he fell in love. I have heard him read many Lectors against it, and I thank God, I am not a Woman to be touched with so many giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their whole sex withal.
Can you remember any of the principal evils, that he laid to the charge of women?
There were none principal, they were all like one another, as half pence are, every one fault seeming monstrous, till his fellow-fault came to match it.
I prithee recount some of them.
No: I will not cast away my physic, but on those that are sick. There is a man haunts the Forest, that abuses our young plants with carving Rosalinde on their barks; hangs Odes upon Hauthornes, and Elegies on brambles; all (forsooth) defying the name of Rosalinde. If I could meet that Fancie-monger, I would give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the Quotidian of Love upon him.
I am he that is so Loue-shaked, I pray you tell me your remedy.
There is none of my Uncle's marks upon you: he taught me how to know a man in love: in which cage of rushes, I am sure you act not prisoner.
What were his marks?
A lean cheek, which you have not: a blue eye and sunken, which you have not: an unquestionable spirit, which you have not: a beard neglected, which you have not: (but I pardon you for that, for simply your having in beard, is a younger brothers revennew) than your hose should be vngartered, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe untied, and every thing about you, demonstrating a careless desolation: but you are no such man; you are rather point device in your accoutrements, as loving yourself, then seeming the Lover of any other.
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I Love..
Me believe it? You may as soon make her that you Love believe it, which I warrant she is apt to do, then to confess she do's: that is one of the points, in the which women still give the lie to their consciences. But in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the Trees, wherein Rosalind is so admired?
I swear to thee youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.
But are you so much in love, as your rhymes speak?
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
Love is merely a madness, and I tell you, deserves as well a dark house, and a whip, as madmen do: and the reason why they are not so punished and cured, is that the Lunacy is so ordinary, that the whippers are in love too: yet I profess curing it by counsel.
Did you ever cure any so?
Yes one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me his Love, his Mistress: and I set him every day to woe me. At which time would I, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing, and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles; for every passion something, and for no passion truly any thing, as boys and women are for the most part, cattle of this colour: would now like him, now loathe him: then entertain him, then forswear him: now weep for him, then spit at him; that I drove my Suitor from his mad humour of love, to a living humour of madness, which was to forswear the full stream of the world, and to live in a nook merely Monastic: and thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon me to wash your Liver as clean as a sound sheep's heart, that there shall not be one spot of Love in't.
I would not be cured, youth.
I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind, and come every day to my Coat, and woe me.
Now by the faith of my love, I will; Tell me where it is.
Go with me to it, and I'll show it you: and by the way, you shall tell me, where in the Forest you live: Will you go?
With all my heart, good youth.
Nay, you must call me Rosalind: Come sister, will you go?
Come apace good Audrey, I will fetch up your
Goats, Audrey: and how Audrey am I the man yet?
Doth my simple feature content you?
Your features, Lord warrant us: what features?
I am here with thee, and thy Goats, as the most capricious Poet honest Ovid was among the Goths.
O knowledge ill inhabited, worse than love in a thatched house.
When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a man's good wit seconded with the forward child, understanding: it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room: truly, I would the Gods had made thee poetical.
I do not know what Poetical is: is it honest in deed and word: is it a true thing?
No truly: for the truest poetry is the most feigning, and Lovers are given to Poetry: and what they swear in Poetry, may be said as Lovers, they do feign.
Do you wish then that the Gods had made me Poetical?
I do truly: for thou swearest to me thou art honest: Now if thou wert a Poet, I might have some hope thou didst feign.
Would you not have me honest?
No truly, unless thou wert hard favoured: for honesty coupled to beauty, is to have Honey a sauce to Sugar.
A material fool.
Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the Gods make me honest.
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut, were to put good meat into an unclean dish.
I am not a slut, though I thank the Gods I am foul.
Well, praised be the Gods, for thy foulness; sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it, as it may be, I will marry thee: and to that end, I have been with Sir Oliver Mar-text, the Vicar of the next village, who hath promised to meet me in this place of the Forest, and to couple us.
I would fain see this meeting.
Well, the Gods give us joy.
Amen. A man may if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this attempt: for here we have no Temple but the wood, no assembly but horne-beasts. But what though? Courage. As horns are odious, they are necessary. It is said, many a man knows no end of his goods; right: Many a man has good Horns, and knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of his wife, 'tis none of his own getting; horns, even so poor men alone: No, no, the noblest Deer hath them as huge as the Rascal: Is the single man therefore blessed? No, as a walled Town is more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a married man, more honourable than the bare brow of a Bachelor: and by how much defence is better than no skill, by so much is a horn more precious then to want.
here comes Sir Oliver: Sir Oliver Mar-text you are well met. Will you dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your Chapel?
Is there none here to give the woman?
I will not take her on gift of any man.
Truly she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
Proceed, proceed: I'll give her.
Good even good Mr what ye call't: how do you Sir, you are very well met: goddild you for your last company, I am very glad to see you, even a toy in hand here Sir: Nay, pray be covered.
Will you be married, Motley?
As the Ox hath his bow sir, the horse his curb, and the Falcon her bells, so man hath his desires, and as Pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.
And will you (being a man of your breeding) be married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to church, and have a good Priest that can tell you what marriage is, this fellow will but join you together, as they join Wainscot, than one of you will prove a shrunk panel, and like green timber, warp, warp.
I am not in the mind, but I were better to be married of him then of another, for he is not like to marry me well: and not being well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter, to leave my wife.
Go thou with me,
And let me counsel thee.
Come sweet Audrey,
We must be married, or we must live in baudrey:
Farewell good Mr Oliver: Not O sweet Oliver, O brave Oliver leave me not behind thee: But wind away, be gone I say, I will not to wedding with thee.
'Tis no matter; ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling.
Never talk to me, I will weep.
Do I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider, that tears do not become a man.
But have I not cause to weep?
As good cause as one would desire,
Therefore weep.
His very hair
Is of the dissembling colour.
Something browner than Iudasses:
Marry his kisses are Iudasses own children.
I' faith his hair is of a good colour.
An excellent colour:
Your Chessenut was ever the only colour:
And his kissing is as full of sanctity,
As the touch of holy bread.
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a Nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously, the very ye of chastity is in them.
But why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not?
Nay certainly there is no truth in him.
Do you think so?
Yes, I think he is not a pick purse, nor a horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I do think him as concave as a covered goblet, or a Worm-eaten nut.
Not true in love?
Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.
You have heard him swear downright he was.
Was, is not is: besides, the oath of Lover is no stronger than the word of a Tapster, they are both the confirmer of false reckonings, he attends here in the forest on the Duke your father.
I met the Duke yesterday, and had much question with him: he asked me of what parentage I was; I told him of as good as he, so he laughed and let me go. But what talk we of Fathers, when there is such a man as Orlando?
O that's a brave man, he writes brave verses, speaks brave words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite travers athwart the heart of his lover, as a puisny Tilter, that spurs his horse but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble goose; but all's brave that youth mounts, and folly guides: who comes here?
Mistress and Master, you have oft enquired
After the Shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the Turph,
Praising the proud disdainful Shepherdess
That was his Mistress.
Well: and what of him?
If you will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true Love,
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you
If you will mark it.
O come, let us remove,
The sight of Lovers feedeth those in love:
Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
I'll prove a busy actor in their play.
Sweet Phebe do not scorn me, do not Phebe
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness; the common executioner
Whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes hard
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck,
But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
Then he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
I would not be thy executioner,
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee:
Thou tellest me there is murder in mine eye,
'Tis pretty sure, and very probable,
That eyes that are the frailst, and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomyes,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
Now counterfeit to swoon, why now fall down,
Or if thou canst not, oh for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers:
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee,
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it: Lean upon a rush
The Cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps: but now mine eyes
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
Nor I am sure there is no force in eyes
That can do hurt.
O dear Phebe,
If ever (as that ever may be near)
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That Love's keen arrows make.
But till that time
Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.
And why I pray you? who might be your mother
That you insult, exult, and all at once
Over the wretched? what though you have no beauty
As by my faith, I see no more in you
Then without Candle may go dark to bed:
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why what means this? why do you look on me?
I see no more in you then in the ordinary
Of Nature's sale-worke? 'ods my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too:
No faith proud Mistress, hope not after it,
'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream
That can entame my spirits to your worship:
You foolish Shepherd, wherefore do you follow her
Like foggy South, puffing with wind and rain,
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman. 'Tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favoured children:
'Tis not her glass, but you that flatters her,
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her:
But Mistress, know yourself down on your knees
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love;
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can, you are not for all markets:
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer,
Fowl is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
So take her to thee Shepherd, far you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together,
I had rather here you chide, than this man woo.
Heer fall'n in love with your foulness, & she'll
Fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast
As she answers thee with frowning looks, i'll sauce
Her with bitter words: why look you so upon me?
For no ill will I bear you.
I pray you do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine:
Besides, I like you not: if you will know my house,
'Tis at the tufft of Olives, here hard by:
Will you go Sister? Shepheard ply her hard:
Come Sister: Shepherdess, look on him better
And be not proud, though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.
Come, to our flock.
Dead Shepherd, now I sinned thy saw of might,
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?
Sweet Phebe.
Ha: what sayst thou Siluius?
Sweet Phebe pity me.
Why I am sorry for thee gentle Siluius.
Where ever sorrow is, relief would be:
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow, and my grief
Were both extermined.
Thou hast my love, is not that neighbourly?
I would have you.
Why that were covetousness:
Siluius; the time was, that I hated thee;
And yet it is not, that I bear thee love,
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me
I will endure; and I'll employ thee too:
But do not look for further recompense
Then thine own gladness, that thou art employed.
So holy, and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps: lose now and then
A scattered smile, and that I'll live upon.
Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me yere-while?
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the Cottage and the bounds
That the old Carlot once was Master of.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him,
'Tis but a peevish boy, yet he talks well,
But what care I for words? yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear:
It is a pretty youth, not very pretty,
But sure he's proud, and yet his pride becomes him;
he'll make a proper man: the best thing in him
Is his complexion: and faster than his tongue
Did make offence, his eye did heal it up:
He is not very tall, yet for his years he's tall:
His leg is but so so, and yet 'tis well:
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper, and more lusty red
Then that mixed in his cheek: 'twas just the difference
Betwixt the constant red, and mingled Damask.
There be some women Siluius, had they marked him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him: but for my part
I love him not, nor hate him not: and yet
Have more cause to hate him then to love him,
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black, and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me:
I marvel why I answered not again,
But that's all one: omittance is no quittance:
I'll write to him a very tanting Letter,
And thou shalt bear it, wilt thou Siluius?
Phebe, with all my heart.
I'll write it straight:
The matter's in my head, and in my heart,
I will be bitter with him, and passing short;
Go with me Siluius.
I prithee, pretty youth, let me better acquainted with thee.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.
I am so: I do love it better than laughing.
Those that are in extremity of either, are abominable fellows, and betray themselves to every modern censure, worse than drunkards.
Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.
Why then 'tis good to be a post.
I have neither the Scholars melancholy, which is emulation: nor the Musicians, which is fantastical; nor the Courtiers, which is proud: nor the Soldiers, which is ambitious: nor the Lawyers, which is politic: nor the Ladies, which is nice: nor the Lovers, which is all these: but it is a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels, in which by often rumination, wraps me in a most humorous sadness.
A traveler: by my faith you have great reason to be sad: I fear you have sold your own Lands, to see other men's; then to have seen much, and to have nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.
Yes, I have gained my experience.
And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have a fool to make me merry, than experience to make me sad, and to travail for it too.
Good day, and happiness, dear Rosalind.
Nay then God buy you, and you talk in blank verse.
Farewell Mounsieur Traveler: look you lisp, and wear strange suits; disable all the benefits of your own Country: be out of love with your nativity, and almost chide God for making you that countenance you are; or I will scarce think you have swum in a Gundello. Why how now Orlando, where have you been all this while? you a lover? and you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.
My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.
Break an hours promise in love? he that will divide a minute into a thousand parts, and break but a part of the thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid hath clapped him o'th' shoulder, but I'll warrant him heart hole.
Pardon me dear Rosalind.
Nay, and you be so tardy, come no more in my sight, I had as lief be wooed of a Snail.
Of a Snail?
I, of a Snail: for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his head; a better jointure I think than you make a woman: besides, he brings his destiny with him.
What's that?
Why horns: w r such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in his fortune, and prevents the slander of his wife.
Virtue is no horne-maker: and my Rosalind is virtuous.
And I am your Rosalind.
It pleases him to call you so: but he hath a Rosalind of a better leer than you.
Come, woo me, woo me: for now I am in a holiday humour, and like enough to consent: What would you say to me now, and I were your very, very Rosalind?
I would kiss before I spoke.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were gravelled, for lack of matter, you might take occasion to kiss: very good Orators when they are out, they will spit, and for lovers, lacking (God warn us) matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
How if the kiss be denied?
Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
Who could be out, being before his beloved Mistress?
Marry that should you if I were your Mistress, or I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.
What, of my suit?
Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit:
Am not I your Rosalind?
I take some joy to say you are, because I would be talking of her.
Well, in her person, I say I will not have you.
Then in mine own person, I die.
No faith, die by Attorney: the poor world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person (videlicet) in a love cause: Trotlous had his brains dashed out with a Grecian club, yet he did what he could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair year though Hero had turned Nun; if it had not been for a hot Midsomer-night, for (good youth) he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont, and being taken with the cramp, was drowned, and the foolish Chronoclers of that age, found it was Hero of Cestos. But these are all lies, men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not for love.
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind, for I protest her frown might kill me.
By this hand, it will not kill a fly: but come, now I will be your Rosalind in a more comming-on disposition: and ask me what you will, I will grant it.
Then love me Rosalind.
Yes faith will I, fridaies and saterdaies, and all.
And wilt thou have me?
I, and twenty such.
What sayest thou?
Are you not good?
I hope so.
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing: Come sister, you shall be the Priest, and marry us: give me your hand Orlando: What do you say sister?
Pray thee marry us.
I cannot say the words.
You must begin, will you Orlando.
Go too: will you Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?
I will.
I, but when?
Why now, as fast as she can marry us.
Then you must say, I take thee Rosalind for wife.
I take thee Rosalind for wife.
I might ask you for your Commission, But I do take thee Orlando for my husband: there's a girl goes before the Priest, and certainly a Woman's thought runs before her actions.
So do all thoughts, they are winged.
Now tell me how long you would have her, after you have possessed her?
For ever, and a day.
Say a day, without the ever: no, no Orlando, men are April when they woe, December when they wed: Maids are May when they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives: I will be more jealous of thee, than a Barbary cocke-pidgeon over his hen, more clamorous than a Parrot against rain, more new-fangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires, than a monkey: I will weep for nothing, like Diana in the Fountain, & I will do that when you are disposed to be merry: I will laugh like a Hyens, and that when thou art inclined to sleep.
But will my Rosalind do so?
By my life, she will do as I do.
O but she is wise.
Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the wiser, the waywarder: make the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out at the casement: shut that, and 'twill out at the keyhole: stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney.
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say, wit whether wilt?
Nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.
And what wit could wit have, to excuse that?
Marry to say, she came to seek you there: you shall never take her without her answer, unless you take her without her tongue: o that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool.
For these two hours Rosalinde, I will leave thee.
Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.
I must attend the Duke at dinner, by two a clock I will be with thee again.
I, go your ways, go your ways: I knew what you would prove, my friends told me as much, and I thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours won me: 'tis but one cast away: and so come death: two o'clocke is your hour.
I, sweet Rosalind.
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of your, promise, or come one minute behind your hour, I will think you the most pathetical breake-promise, and the most hollow lover, and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalinde, that may be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful: therefore beware my censure, and keep your promise.
With no less religion, then if thou wert indeed my Rosalind: so adieu.
Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and let time try: adieu.
You have simply misused our sex in your loue-prate: we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your head, and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest.
O coz, coz, coz: my pretty little coz, that thou didst know how many fathom deep I am in love: but it cannot be sounded: my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.
Or rather bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, in runs out.
No, that same wicked Bastard of Venus, that was begot of thought, conceived of spleen, and borne of madness, that blind rascally boy, that abuses every one's eyes, because his own are out, let him be judge, how deep I am in love: i'll tell thee Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight of Orlando: I'll go find a shadow, and sigh till he come.
And I'll sleep.
Which is he that killed the Dear?
Sir, it was I.
Let's present him to the Duke like a Roman Conqueror, and it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head, for a branch of victory; have you no song Forester for this purpose?
Yes Sir.
Sing it: 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.
What shall he have that killed the Dear?
His Leather skin, and bornes to wear:
Then sing him home, the rest shall bear this burden;
Take thou no scorn to wear the horn,
It was a crest ere thou wast borne,
Thy father's father wore it,
And thy father bore it,
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn,
Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
How say you now, is it not past two a clock?
And here much Orlando.
I warrant you, with pure love, & troubled brain,
He hath taken his bow and arrows, and is gone forth
To sleep: look who comes here.
My errand is to you, fair youth,
My gentle Phebe, did bid me give you this:
I know not the contents, but as I guess
By the stern brow, and waspish action
Which she did use, as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenure; pardon me,
I am but as a guiltless messenger.
Patience herself would startle at this letter,
And play the swaggerer, bear this, bear all:
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners,
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me
Were man as rare as Phoenix: gods my will,
Her love is not the Hare that I do hunt,
Why writes she so to me? well Shepherd, well,
This is a Letter of your own device.
No, I protest, I know not the contents,
Phebe did write it.
Come, come, you are a fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand, she has a leathern hand,
A freestone coloured hand: I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands:
She has a huswives hand, but that's no matter:
I say she never did invent this letter,
This is a man's invention, and his hand.
Sure it is hers.
Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel stile,
A stile for challengers: why, she defies me,
Like Turk to Christian: women's gentle brain
Can not drop forth such giant rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Then in their countenance: will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heard it yet:
Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.
She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.
Read. Art thou god, to Shepherd turned?
That a maiden's heart hath burned.
Can a woman rail thus?
Call you this railing?
Read. Why, thy godhead laid a part,
War'st thou with a woman's heart?
Did you ever hear such railing?
Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
That could do no vengeance to me.
Meaning me a beast.
If the scorn of your bright cine
Have power to raise such love in mine,
Alack, in me, what strange effect
Would they work in mild aspect?
Whiles you chid me, I did love,
How then might your prayers move?
He that brings this love to thee,
Little knows this Love in me:
And by him seal up thy mind,
Whether that thy youth and kind
Will the faithful offer take
Of me, and all that I can make,
Or else by him my love deny,
And then I'll study how to die.
Call you this chiding?
Alas poor Shepherd.
Do you pity him? No, he deserves no pity: wilt thou love such a woman? what to make thee an instrument, and play false strains upon thee? not to be endured. Well, go your way to her; (for I see Love hath made thee a tame snake) and say this to her; That if she love me, I charge her to love thee: if she will not, I will never have her, unless thou entreat for her: if you be a true lover hence, and not a word; for here comes more company.
Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, (if you know)
Where in the Purlieuses of this Forest, stands
A sheep-coat, fenced about with Olive-trees.
West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom
The rank of Oziers', by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand, brings you to the place:
But at this hour, the house doth keep itself,
There's none within.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description,
Such garments, and such years: the boy is fair,
Of female favour, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister: the woman low
And browner than her brother: are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind,
He sends this bloody napkin; are you he?
I am: what must we understand by this?
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkerchief was stained.
I pray you tell it.
When last the young Orlando parted from you,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the Forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo what befell: he threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present itself
Under an old Oak, whose bows were mossed with age
And high top, bald with dry antiquity:
A wretched ragged man, ore-gowne with hair
Lay sleeping on his back; about his neck
A green and guilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head, nimble in threats approached
The opening of his mouth: but suddenly
Seeing Orlando, it vnlinked itself,
And with indented glides, did slip away
Into a bush, under which bushes shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay cowching head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the sleeping man should stir; for 'tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing, that doth seem as dead:
This seen, Orlando did approach the man,
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
O I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.
And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.
But to Orlando: did he leave him there
Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?
Twice did he turn his back, and purposed so:
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And Nature stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness:
Who quickly fell before him, in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.
Are you his brother?
Was't you he rescued?
Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
'Twas I: but 'tis not I: I do not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweeetly tastes, being the thing I am.
But for the bloody napkin?
By and by:
When from the first to last betwixt us two,
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
As how I came into that Desert place.
I brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
Who gave me fresh array, and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother's love,
Who led me instantly unto his Cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cried in fainting upon Rosalinde.
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Died in this blood, unto the Shepherd youth,
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
Why how now Ganymede, sweet Ganymede.
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it; Cousin Ganymede.
Look, he recovers.
I would I were at home.
we'll lead you thither:
I pray you will you take him, by the arm.
Be of good cheer youth: you a man?
You lack a man's heart.
I do so, I confess it:
Ah, sirrah, a body would think this was well counterfeited, I pray you tell your brother how well I counterfeited: heigh-ho.
This was not counterfeit, there is too great testimony in your complexion, that it was a passion of earnest.
Counterfeit, I assure you.
Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to be a man.
So I do: but i'faith, I should have been a woman by right.
Come, you look paler and paler: pray you draw homewards: good sir, go with us.
That will I: for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
I shall device: something: but I pray you commend my counterfeiting to him: will you go?
We shall find a time Awdrie, patience gentle Awdrie.
Faith the Priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman's saying.
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Awdrie, a most vile Mar-text. But Awdrie, there is a youth here in the Forest lays claim to you.
I, I know who 'tis: he hath no interest in me in the world: here comes the man you mean.
It is meat and drink to me to see a Clown, by my troth, we that have good wits, have much to answer for: we shall be flouting: we cannot hold.
Good even Audrey.
God ye good even William.
And good even to you Sir.
Good even gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head: Nay prithee be eouered. How old are you Friend?
Five and twenty Sir.
A ripe age: Is thy name William?
William, sir.
A fair name. Was't borne i' th' Forest here?
I sir, I thank God.
Thank God: A good answer:
Art rich?
I'faith sir, so, so.
So, so, is good, very good, very excellent good:
and yet it is not, it is but so, so:
Art thou wise?
I sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou sayst well. I do now remember a saying: The Fool doth think he is wise, but the wiseman knows himself to be a Foole. The Heathen Philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a Grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth, meaning thereby, that Grapes were made to eat, and lips to open. You do love this maid?
I do sit.
Give me your hand: Art thou Learned?
No sir.
Then learn this of me, To have, is to have. For it is a figure in Rhetoric, that drink being poured out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one, doth empty the other. For all your Writers do consent, that ipse is he: now you are not ipse, for I am he.
Which he sir?
He sir, that must marry this woman: Therefore you Clown, abandon: which is in the vulgar, leave the society: which in the boorish, is company, of this female: which in the common, is woman: which together, is, abandon the society of this Female, or Clown thou perishest: or to thy better understanding, diest; or (to wit) I kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death, thy liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel: I will bandy with thee in faction, I will o'errun thee with policy: I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways, therefore tremble and departed.
Do good William.
God rest you merry sir.
Our Master and Mistress seeks you: come away, away.
Trip Audery, trip Audery, I attend, I attend.
Is't possible, that on so little acquaintance you should like her? that, but seeing, you should love her? And loving woe? and wooing, she should grant? And will you persever to enjoy her?
Neither call the giddiness of it in question; the poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor sudden consenting: but say with me, I love Aliena: say with her, that she loves me; consent with both, that we may enjoy each other: it shall be to your good: for my father's house, and all the revennew, that was old Sir Rowlands will I estate upon you, and here live and die a Shepherd.
You have my consent.
Let your Wedding be to morrow: thither will I
Invite the Duke, and all's contented followers:
Go you, and prepare Aliena; for look you,
here comes my Rosalinde.
God save you brother.
And you fair sister.
Oh my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.
It is my arm.
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a Lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a Lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to sound, when he showed me your handkerchief?
I, and greater wonders than that.
O, I know where you are: nay, 'tis true: there was never any thing so sudden, but the fight of two Rams, and Caesar's Thrasonical brag of I came, saw, and overcome. For your brother, and my sister, no sooner met, but they looked: no sooner looked, but they loved; no sooner loved, but they sighed: no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason: no sooner knew the reason, but they sought the remedy: and in these degrees, have they made a pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage; they are in the very wrath of love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part them.
They shall be married to morrow: and I will bid the Duke to the Nuptial. But O, how bitter a thing it is, to look into happiness through another man's eyes: by so much the more shall I to morrow be at the height of heart heaviness. by how much I shall think my brother happy, in having what he wishes for.
Why then to morrow, I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer by thinking.
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking. Know of me then (for now I speak to some purpose) that I know you are a Gentleman of good conceit: I speak not this, that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge: insomuch (I say) I know you arc: neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you, to do yourself good, and not to grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I can do strange things: I have since I was three year old conversed with a Magician, most profound in his Art, and yet not damnable. If you do love Rosalinde so near the hart, as your gesture cries it out: when your brother marries Aliena, shall you marry her. I know into what straits of Fortune she is driven, and it is not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her before your eyes to morrow, humane as she is, and without any danger.
Speakest thou in sober meanings?
By my life I do, which I tender dearly, though I say I am a Magician: Therefore put you in your best array, bid your friends: for if you will be married to morrow, you shall: and to Rosalind if you will.
Look, here comes a Lover of mine, and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
To show the letter that I writ to you.
I care not if I have: it is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
you are there followed by a faithful shepherd,
Look upon him, love him: he worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion, and all made oathes,
All adoration, duty, and obseruance,
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance:
And so am I for Phebe.
And so am I for Ganymede.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Why do you speak too. Why blame you me to love you.
To her, that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Pray you no more of this, 'tis like the howling of Irish Wolves against the Moon: I will help you if I can: I would love you if I could: To morrow meet me altogether: I will marry you, if ever I marry Woman, and I'll be married to morrow: I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you shall be married to morrow. I will content you, if what pleases you contents you, and you shall be married to morrow: As you love Rosalind meet, as you love Phebe meet, and as I love no woman, I'll meet: so far you well: I have left you commands.
I'll not fail, if I live.
Nor I.
Nor I.
To morrow is the joyful day Audrey, to morrow will we be married.
I do desire it with all my heart: and I hope it is no dishonest desire, to desire to be a woman of the world? here come two of the banished Duke's Pages.
Well met honest Gentleman.
By my troth well met: come, sit, sit, and a song.
We are for you, sit i' th' middle.
Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking, or spitting, or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice.
I faith, ye faith, and both in a tune like two gipsies on a horse.
It was a Lover, and his lass,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hay nonino,
That o'er the green corn field did pass,
In the spring time, the only pretty rang time.
When Birds do sing, hay ding a ding, ding.
Sweet Lovers love the spring,
And therefore take the present time.
With a hey, & a ho, and a hay nonino,
For love is crowned with the prime.
In spring time, etc.
Between the acres of the Rye,
With a hey, and a ho, & a hay nonino:
These pretty Country folks would lie.
In spring time, etc.
This Carol they began that hour,
With a hey and a ho, & a hay nonino:
How that a life was but a Flower,
In spring time, etc.
Truly young Gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untunable
you are deceived Sir, we kept time, we lost not our time.
By my troth yes: I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song. God buy you, and God mend your voices. Come Audrie.
Dost thou believe Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?
I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
You say, if I bring in your Rosalinde,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
And you say you will have her, when I bring her?
That would I, were I of all kingdoms King.
You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing.
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You'll give yourself to this most faithful Shepherd.
So is the bargain.
You say that you'll have Phebe if she will.
Though to have her and death, were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even:
Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter,
You yours Orlando, to receive his daughter:
Keep you your word Phebe, that you'll marry me,
Or else refusing me to wed this shepherd:
Keep your word Siluius, that you'll marry her
If she refuse me, and from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.
I do remember in this shepherd boy,
Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.
My Lord, the first time that I ever saw him,
Me thought he was a brother to your daughter:
But my good Lord, this Boy is Forrest borne,
And hath been tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies, by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great Magician.
Obscured in the circle of this Forest.
There is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the Ark. Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues, are called Fools.
Salutation and greeting to you all.
Good my Lord, bid him welcome: This is the Motley-minded Gentleman, that I have so often met in the Forest: he hath been a Courtier he swears.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation, I have trod a measure, I have flattered a Lady, I have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy, I have undone three Tailors, I have had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.
And how was that ta'en up?
I'faith we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.
How seventh cause? Good my Lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
God'ild you sir, I desire you of the like: I press in here sir, amongst the rest of the Country copulatives to swear, and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin sir, an ill-favoured thing sir, but mine own, a poor humour of mine sir, to take that that no man else will: rich honesty dwells like a miser sir, in a poor house, as your Pearl in your foul oyster.
By my faith, he is very swift, and sententious
According to the fool's bolt sir, and such dulcet diseases.
But for the seventh cause. How did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?
Upon a lie, seven times removed: (bear your body more seeming Audery) as thus sir: I did dislike the cut of a certain Courtier's beard: he sent me word, if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was: this is called the retort courteous. If I sent him word again, it was not well cut, he would send me word he cut it to please himself: this is called the quip modest. If again, it was not well cut, he disabled my judgement: this is called, the reply churlish. If again it was not well cut, he would answer I spoke not true: this is called the reproof valiant. If again, it was not well cut, he would say, I lie: this is called the countercheck quarrelsome: and so to lie circumstantial, and the lie direct.
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
I durst go no further than the lie circumstantial: nor he durst not give me the lie direct: and so we measured swords, and parted.
Can you nominate in order now, the degrees of the lie.
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book: as you have books for good manners: I will name you the degrees. The first, the Retort courteous: the second, the Quip-modest: the third, the reply Churlish: the fourth, the Reproof valiant: the fift, the Countercheck quarrelsome: the sixth, the Lie with circumstance: the seventh, the Lie direct: all these you may avoid, but the Lie direct: and you may avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven justices could not take up a Quarrel, but when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an If; as if you said so, than I said so: and they shook hands, and swore brothers. Your If, is the only peacemaker: much virtue in if.
Is not this a rare fellow my Lord? He's as good at any thing, and yet a fool.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.
Then is there mirth in heaven,
When earthly things made even atone together.
Good Duke receive thy daughter,
Hymen from Heaven brought her,
Yea brought her hither.
That thou mightst join his hand with his,
Whose heart within his bosom is.
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight & shape be true, why then my love adieu
I'll have no Father, if you be not he:
I'll have no Husband, if you be not he:
Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.
Peace hoa: I bar confusion,
'Tis I must make conclusion
Of these most strange events:
Here's eight that must take hands,
To join in Hymen's bands,
If truth holds true contents.
You and you, no cross shall part;
You and you, are hart in hart:
You, to his love must accord,
Or have a Woman to your Lord.
You and you, are sure together,
As the Winter to fowl Weather:
Whiles a Wedlock Hymn we sing,
Feed yourselves with questioning:
That reason, wonder may diminish
How thus we met, and these things finish.
Wedding is great Juno's crown,
O blessed bond of board and bed:
'Tis Hymen peoples every town,
High wedlock then be honoured:
Honour, high honour and renowns
To Hymen, God of every Town.
O my dear Niece, welcome thou art to me,
Even daughter welcome, in no less degree.
I will not eat my word, now thou art mine,
Thy faith, my fancy to thee doth combine.
Let me have audience for a word or two:
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here, and put him to the sword:
And to the skirts of this wild Wood he came;
Where, meeting with an old Religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise, and from the world:
His crown bequeathing to his banished Brother,
And all their Lands restored to him again
That were with him exiled. This to be true,
I do engage my life.
Welcome young man:
Thou offerest fairly to thy brother's wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent Dukedom.
First, in this Forest, let us do those ends
That here weet well begun, and well begot:
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days, and nights with us,
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Mean time, forget this newfallen dignity,
And fall into our Rustic Revelry:
Play Music, and you Brides and Bridegrooms all,
With measure heaped in joy, to ' th' Measures fall.
Sir, by your patience: if I heard you rightly,
The Duke hath put on a Religious life,
And thrown into neglect the pompous Court.
He hath.
To him will I: out of these convertites,
There is much matter to be heard, and learned:
you to your former Honour, I bequeath
your patience, and your virtue, well deserves it.
you to a love, that your true faith doth merit:
you to your land, and love, and great allies:
you to a long, and well-deserued bed:
And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victualled: So to your pleasures,
I am for other, then for dancing meazures.
Stay, Iaques, stay.
To see no pastime, I: what you would have,
I'll stay to know, at your abandoned cave.
Proceed, proceed: we'll begin these rights,
As we do trust, they'll end in true delights.—
It is not the fashion to see the Lady the Epilogue: but it is no more unhandsome, then to see the Lord the Prologue. If it be true, that good wine needs no bush, 'tis true, that a good play needs no Epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes: and good plays prove the better by the help of good Epilogues: What a case am I in then, that am neither a good Epilogue, nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play? I am not furnished like a Beggar, therefore to beg will not become me. My way is to conjure you, and I'll begin with the Women. I charge you (O women) for the love you bear to men, to like as much of this Play, as please you: And I charge you (O men) for the love you bear to women (as I perceive by your simpering, none of you hates them) that between you, and the women, the play may please. If I were a Woman, I would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me, complexions that liked me, and breaths that I defi'de not: And I am sure, as many as have good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths, will for my kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.