Diogenes' which used a barrel for his house,
Being fled from his father to the city of Athens,
Comforted himself much in beholding the mouse
which desired neither castle nor hold for her defence
Concerning sustentation, she made no difference,
But eat what soever to her did befall,
And touching her apparel, she had least care of all.
This poor mouse's property noted Diogenes,
Which oftentimes also, he would have in sight,
And though he ware disciple unto Antisthenes,
yet he learned of the mouse as much as he might
In the science of Sophy he had great delight,
But concerning his state, and outward condition
The most can declare, if you make inquisition.
On a time he chanced accumpanied to be
With Alexander, which stood between him & the son
What requirest thou to have Diogenes (quoth he?)
Is there any thing that by me may be done?
I pray thee stand aside, and make a little room
(quod Diogenes) that the sun upon me may shine,
Nought else require I of that that is thine.
He used to say, that as servants be obedient
To their bodily masters being in subjection,
Even so evil men that are not content,
Are subjects and slaves to their lusts and affection,
This lesson unto us may be a direction,
Which way our inclination to bridle and subdue,
Namely if we labour the same to eschew.
Thus see you how little this Philosopher esteemed
the abundant possessions of this mundaine treasure
Which yet notwithstanding at these days is deemed
to be the original and fountain of pleasure,
this causeth lust to reign without measure,
to the which men are subjects, Diogenes doth say,
yet both lost and treasure in time weareth away.
A Philosopher is he that wisdom doth love,
Which before Pythagoras, wise men ware named
Now Diogenes being wise, this doth approve
that some men of this age, aught as fools to be blamed
For where the one with treasure lack, his life framed
the other travail, care, and labour with greediness,
the same by all means, to enjoy and possess.
But as Lust with the lustre, converteth to dust
And leaveth of force, his pleasant prosperity,
So treasure in time, is turned to rust:
As S. Iames in his epistle showeth the verity
Hereof we purpose to speak without temerity,
Therefore our matter is named, the trial of Treasure,
Which time doth expel, with all mundaine pleasure.
Both merry and short we purpose to be,
And therefore require your pardon and patience,
We trust in our matter nothing you shall see,
That to the godly may give any offence,
Though the style be barbarous, not fined with eloquence
Yet our Author desireth your gentle acceptation,
And we the players likewise, with all humiliation.
HEy how care away let the world pass
For I am as lusty as ever I was,
In flowers I flourish as blosomes in May,
hay how care away: hay how care away.
What the Devil ailed me to sing thus,
I cry you mercy by my faith for entering,
Most like I have ridden on the flying Pegasus,
Or in Cock Lorrels barge I have been a ventringe,
Sing▪ why I would sing if it were to do again.
With Orpheus and Amphion I went to school,
What, lads must be lively attending on the train
Of lady Delectation, which is no small fool.
hay rouse▪ fill all the pots in the house,
Tush man, in good fellowship let us be merry,
Look up like a man or it is not worth a louse.
hay how troly low, hay dery dery,
Ha pleasant youth and lusty juventus,
In faith it is good to be merry this may,
For of man's living here, there is no point endentus.
Therefore a little mirth is worth much sorrow some say.
But remember ye not the wise man's sentence,
It is better in the house of mourning to be
Then in the house of laughter where folly hath residence,
For lightness with wisdom can not agree
Though many have pleasure in foolish fantasy.
Ensuing their inclination and lust,
Yet much better is the life of one that is just.
Sir, in this you seem against me to inveigh,
Nothing but reason I think I do say.
Marry you shall have a night cap for making the reason,
Friend have you not a piece of stockfish to sell,
I would you had a dish of buttered peason,
By my faith your communication likes me well,
But I beseech you tell me is not your name just:
Yes forsooth.
And my name thou shalt understand is lust,
And according thereto I am lusty in deed,
But I think thou haste drunk of Morpheus seed,
Thou goest like a Dromeldory dreaming & drowsy,
I hold twenty pound the knave is lousy.
Mine apparel is not like unto thine,
Disguised and jagged of sundry fashion,
How be it, it is not gold always that doth shine,
But corrupting Copper of small valuation
To horrible beside is thy operation,
Nothing more odious unto the just,
Then the beastly desires of inordinate lust.
It is a shameful thing as Cicero doth say
That a man his own acts should praise & commend,
Hypocrites accustom thee like day by day
Checking other men, when they do offend.
Yea but it is an hard thing saith the Philosopher,
For a foolish man to have his manners reprehended,
And even at this day it is come so far,
God grant for his mercy it may be amended.
For tell a man friendly now of his fault
Being blasphemy, pride, or vile fornication,
He willbe as presumptuous as Haman the halt
And repay with revenge or else defamation.
Thus few men a friendly monition will bear,
But stoutly persist and maintain their ill,
And in noble men's houses truly I do fear
There are to many have such froward will.
Wounds and hearts who can abide this,
Nay ye vile villain I will dress you therefore,
your lazy bones I pretend so to bliss,
That you shall have small lust to prate any more.
Behold the Image of incipient fools,
There are not a few even now of thy property,
Until you be put into poverties schools:
ye will not forsake this foolish insolency.
Nay soft, with thee I have not made an end.
The Just against lust must always contend,
Therefore I purpose to wrestle with thee,
Who shall have the victory, straightway we shall see.
When thou wilt by his flesh: I shall hold the wag
I know that lust useth not little to brag:
Thou shalt find me as mighty as Sampson the strong
yea the battle of lust endureth long.
Wounds and flesh, I was almost down on my back,
But yet I will wrestle till my bones crack.
The end of thy presumption now doth appear,
yet do what thou canst I will not lie here,
No by his wounds you old doting knave,
thinkest thou that lust will be made a slave,
I shall meet you in Smithfield or else other where,
By his flesh and blood, I will thee not forbear.
Not of my power I do thee expel
But by the might of his spirit that dwelleth in me,
Inordinate lust with the just may not dwell,
And therefore may not I accompany thee.
Well goodman just, it is no matter,
But in faith I pretend not with thee to flatter,
Though from thy company depart I must,
I shall live in as much wealthiness I trust.
Where moste wealth is and most dilectation,
There Lust is commonly of most estimation:
For where as wealth wanteth idleness doth slay
But where idleness is Lust parteth the slake.
Thus have you seen the conflict of the just,
Which all good men ought to use and frequent
For horrible are the fruits of inordinate lust,
Which in some case resemble Hybra the serpent,
Whose head being cut of an other riseth incontinent.
So one of lusts cogitations being cut away
There riseth up an other, yea many we may say:
It is requisite therefore that every degree
Against this his lust, both strive and contend,
And though at the first he seem sturdy to be,
The Lord will convince him for you in the end.
Your cause unto him therefore holy commend,
Labouring to avoid all inordinate lust,
And to practise in life, to live after the just.
I can remember since Noes ship
Was made and builded on Salisbury plain,
The same year the weathercock of Paul's caught the pip
So that Bow bell was like much woe to sustain,
I can remember I am so old.
Since Paradise gates were watched by night,
And when that Wlcanus was made a cuckold
Among the great Gods I appeared in sight.
Nay for all your smiling I tell you true,
No no▪ ye will not know me now,
The might on the earth I do subdue,
tush, if you will give me leave yle tell ye how,
How, in good faith I carenot greatly,
Although I declare my daily increase
But then these gentle women willbe angry,
therefore I think best to hold my peace:
Nay I beseech you let the matter stay,
For I would not for twenty pound come in their hands
For if there should chance to be but one dalila,
By the mass they would bind me in Samsons bands
But what mean I first with them to begin,
Seing that in all men I do remain,
Because that first I remained even within,
And after her Adam and so forth to Cain,
I perceive by your looks my name ye would know,
Why you are not ignorant of that I dare say,
It is I that do guide the bent of your bow,
And ruleth your actions also day by day,
Forsooth I am called Natural inclination
Which bred in old Adam's fostered bones,
So that I am proper to his generation
I will not away with casting of stones,
I make the stoutest to bow and bend:
Again when I lust I make men stand upright
From the lowest to the highest I do ascend,
Drawing them to things of natural might.
Where is the knave, that so did rave:
O that we could him find,
We would him make, for fear to quake
That lout of lobbish kind.
My name is lust, & let him trust
That I will have redress,
For thou and I, will make him fly,
Mine old friend Sturdines.
Where is now that valiant Hercules,
For all his brags he is now run away:
By the guts of Golya, it is best for his ease,
For he was most like for the pottage to pay.
cocks soul: what bragging knaves have we here,
Come ye to convince the mightiest conqueror,
It was I that before you now doth appear,
Which brought to confusion both Hector & Alexander:
Look on this leg ye prating slaves,
I remember since it was no greater than a tree,
At that time I had a couple of knaves
Much like unto you that weighted on me.
cocks precious soul, let us conquer the knave,
By his flesh and sides, a good courage I have,
Stand you therefore a little aside
And ye shall see me quickly abate the fools pride.
Nay I dare not I if thou lookest so big,
What should such a Boar fight with a pig.
Put up thy sword man we will agree,
So lo: do so much as bear that for me.
Nay by his heart, than I will you dress.
Be Good in thine office gentle friend Sturnines,
For though thou and I do seem to contend,
yet we are, and must be friends till the end.
Come give me thy hand I beshrew thy heart.
Nay you must take all things in good part,
Who standeth yonder captain Lust?
Yea marry.
No remedy then to him go I must,
you have forgot I dare say your old friend Inclination
But let us renew acquaintance again for cock's passion
Why man our acquaintance hath been of old,
I am yours at commandment therefore be bold,
For Lust can do nothing without Inclination,
Chief in matters concerning a pleasant vocation.
In deed Lust may be taken for a thing indifferent
Except Inclination be joined thereunto.
But when that I once have reaveled my intent,
As I will men to work so commonly they do,
Ye have hard of the combat between me & Just.
ye marry, I hard say that you lay in the dust.
What say ye.
Neither one word nor other ye may me trust.
Of mine honesty my company he utterly refused,
And in wrestling with me he gave me the foil,
saying: that I had myself and other abused.
Leading men in perplexity & marvelous toil.
By gog's wounds if we had found him here,
We should by his flesh have abated his cheer.
I perceive Sturdines thou art no fool,
Tell me of fellowship where wentest thou to school,
What to read or wright.
Nay to swear and fight.
For I think thou canst neither write, read, nor spell,
But in swearing and fight thou dost excel.
Thou knowest that I am joined with Lust,
And Sturdy by nature I am in like case,
What let the world wag, all can not be just,
Some must Natural inclination embrace.
All men just: no, I remember the sentence of Tully
That no man is just, that feareth death poverty or pain,
which I do fear all & that marvelously,
For fortune is variable I do perceive plain,
And notwithstanding that Flix possessed great gain,
yet when Paul preached of the judgement day,
He trembled for fear and bade him go away.
Doth such passions often trouble your mind?
Nay not often, but sometime I do them find,
But then to the intent to drive them away,
I either go to sleep, or else to some play.
By gog's precious heart, even so do I,
But sometime they cumber me pestilently.
Well master Lust, such dumps to eschew
My advise and request you must needs ensue,
That is to become disciple to doctor Epicurus,
And then you shall have mirth by measure & overplus
Tush, I know a couple companions in store
That ware marvelous meet for you evermore.
I wish you unto them.
Well then call them in.
Here they come each of them in a knaves skin.
With lust to live is our delight,
In high estate and dignity,
Seing that the Just put us to flight,
Let them alone in misery.
Nay, they be lusty lads I tell ye.
What Inclination, me thought I did smell thee,
give me thy hand or we further go.
Now welcome in faith, and Greedy gut also,
But sirs, are none of you both acquainted with Lust.
Yes that they have been both of them I trust,
welcome sirs in faith welcome unto me.
By my troth I am glad your mastership to see
In health and prosperity, as presently you be.
Bom faith so am I would all my heart,
This cow bellied knave doth come from the cart,
Ise teach you to speak I hold you a pound,
Curtsy Job curtsy, down to the ground.
Che can make curtsy well enough.
Lower old knave or Ile make ye to bow,
The great bellied lout me think can not bend,
yes so lo, he beginneth now to amend.
Well sirs, now I remember Aesop's advise
which he gave to the Samies against king Crassus,
Therefore it is good to be witty and wise,
And being in liberty to keep me still thus:
I can not abide a life that is dolorous,
And seeing that my name is properly Lust,
I hate the conversation also of the just.
Well master Lust, first join you to me Inclination
Next here with Sturdines you must you acquaint
Turn you about and embrace Elation,
And that wealth may increase without any restraint
join you with Greedy gut here in our presence,
That all these in you may have prosperous influence.
Out alas, what a sudden passion is this,
I am so taken that I can not stand,
The cramp, the cramp, hath touched me iwis,
I shall die without remedy now out of hand.
By my matins cheese, our master is sick.
Stand back Nycoll noddy with the pudding prick,
More brains in thy skin then wit in thy brain,
Such Greedy guts in faith would be slain,
This cramp doth signify nothing in effect
But how he is bowed by me Inclination,
None of all your counsels he will now reject,
And therefore fear not to make full declaration.
Then fear not the force of these that be just,
But labour yourself to advance and augment,
Be jocund and lively sith your name is lust,
And then you shall easily obtain your intent.
Esteem yourself always equal with the best,
And seek for promotion, power, and dignity:
It is good when men may live as they lust,
And unto the just bear hate and malignity.
O zur ye must be greedy to catch and to claw.
Well said Greedy gut, as wise as a daw,
Eat up at a mouthful, houses and lands.
There's a vengeable mouth to,
Never fear God nor the governors law,
But gripe gripe greedily all that cometh in your hands.
By the Mass but Hew Owlet is pestilens witty,
What guttishe greediness the whoreson can teach
That thou art not erected in faith it is pity,
As high as three trees, and a halter will reach.
Marry sirs, but your counsels hath set me on fire.
hay lusty lad, how fresh am I now,
Lead me Inclination to have my desire,
And then at thy request I will ever bend & bow.
He that bendeth to follow his own inclination,
Must needs live a wicked and vile conversation,
But go master Lust, I will lead you to a place
Where you shall have pleasure enough in short space.
yea, but shall not this company go thither.
yes marry we four will all go together,
But Sturdines shall tarry to face out the matter,
If just peradventure against you should clatter.
By the mass, and well said, but first let us sing,
I must tune my pipes first of all with drinking.
Tush what then, I pray thee help us bear a part.
yes I will sing the trouble with all my heart.
Luste shallbe led by inclination
To carnal cogitation,
Where lust is led wholly by me,
He must fall to Cupidite,
For carnal cares shall him assail,
And speedily they shall prevail.
I Sturdines will face it out,
In his cause, sturdy stiff and stout,
Then Greedy gut shall make him eat,
Both house & lands, like bread & meat.
Elation shall puff him high
For to aspire above the sky,
Then natural and lordly lust,
Shall with his power despise the just.
Our song is ended haste thou other in store,
I shall not have done this half hour and more,
yet I will now I remember, come in Lust
That I go before is but needful and just,
you shallbe now led by me Inclination
to reason and talk with Carnal cogitation.
Is there more vanity under neath the son,
Then to be inclined after this sort,
well Lust doth now as other have done,
yea, and do day by day, esteeming it a sport,
this Lust is the Image of all wicked men,
which in seeking the world, have all delectation,
they regard not God nor his commandments ten
But are wholly led by their own Inclination,
First to inculcate with Carnal cogitation,
And after to the desire of all worldly treasure,
which alone they esteem the fullness of pleasure
with Elation or Pride he is also assotiate,
which puffeth up his senses with presumption pestilent
then Greedy gut maketh them continually to grate
On the mock of this world which he thinketh permanent,
I sturdines to bear out all things, am bend:
thus see you how men that are led by their lust,
Dissent from the virtuous godly and just.
The advise of Aristippus have in your mind,
which willed men to seek such things as be permanent
And not such as are of a vanishing kind
For the one with the other is not equivalent,
Be circumspect therefore, forcing and Sapient,
For treasures here gotten are uncertain and vain,
But treasures of the mind do continually remain.
This is the mind of Musonus also I remember,
Like as presently you have advertised me,
For the which I can not but thankfully render,
Such commendations as is requisite to be,
And as your name is Sapience, thus much I see,
That on heavenly wisdom you do depend,
And not on as time doth bring to an end.
Truth in deed, & therefore your name being just,
With me and my documents must be assotiate,
Where contrary such as are led by their lust,
To incline evil are always appropriate,
They have not as you have, battle & combat,
Against the cogitations that inwardly spring,
But rather are obedient unto the same thing,
And this is the occasion that men are so ambitious,
And so foolish led by the lust of their brain,
Sometime to covet, sometime to be vicious,
Sometime the council of the wise to disdain,
Sometime to climb till they fall down again,
Sometime to usurp the possessions of other,
Sometime to disobey both father and mother.
Alas what availeth it riches to enjoy,
Though as much in comparison as Croesus the king,
What helpeth it to have Helen in Troy,
If the conscience of man continually sting,
Elation and Pride, no commodity doth bring,
But is often known the forerunner of shame,
And the blot of immortal memory and fame.
Now by my hallydome it is alone a,
Better sport in my life I never saw,
It is trim I tell you to dance with Iohn & Ione a:
We pass not a point for God nor his law,
But Lust is lusty and full of porridge,
Cogitation and he, in one Bed doth lie
When: here is master just with his cankered courage,
What an old doting, Sapience than I am dressed I,
So often already just hath me restrained,
That I dare not entice him any more,
For through Sapience he hath me clearly disdained
That my courage is spent, and I have no more.
Nay soft sir we must talk with you or ye go.
I can not tarry at this time the truth is so.
Nay, there is no remedy with you we must talk.
By the body of me, I hold best that I walk,
Or else learn to speak language another while,
And so I may happen the knaves to beguile.
Turn back or you go, we have somewhat to say.
Non point parla fransois, nun par ma foy.
To deceive us now himself he doth prepare.
Ick en can ghene english spreken vorwaer,
Body of me let me go, or else I shall piss,
Iwis master just, you have loved me or this,
Therefore now be ruled after my council,
And godly things for your commodity I shall you tell
Let him that is just not lightly ensue,
His vile inclination and carnal concupiscence,
But let him rather contend the same to subdue,
And chief those that have knowledge of Sapience,
Therefore to bridle this lust do your diligence,
His crafty provocations utterly to restrain,
That Just may live while life doth remain.
God man hoball speak you in earnest:
What dost thou say, shall the Just bridle me,
No, no, brother snaps, do the worst and thy best,
I will not be bridled of him nor of thee.
Seing Sapience consisteth in heavenly document,
And that heavenly document consisteth in sapience
To bridle this wretch I can not but consent,
Scythe I of his purpose have had oft intelligence.
Yet again bridle, it doth not prevail,
I will not be bridled of the best of you both,
See you this gear heres one will make you to quail,
Stand back, to kill you master just I would be loath
you have been so burned and fried of late,
That it were pity to hurt you any more,
Back I say, or my dagger shall about your pate,
By the mass but I will sir, Ile make your bones sore.
I will bridle thee beast for all thy bragging.
In faith good man just, Ile hold ye wagging,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a cursed colt to bridle,
Nay in faith, better yet I will make thee to struggle.
Never leave him but ensue the council of sapience.
Lo now I have brought him under obedience.
Not so obedient as thou thinkest me to have,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a coltishe knave,
We he, he, it is good for you to hold fast,
For I will kick and winch while thy life doth last▪
Thou shalt kick in deed but no victory win,
Neither to conquer the Just to ungodliness nor sin,
O yes, O yes, I will make a proclamation.
What shall that be?
If ye will give me leave than you shall see,
O yes, is there any man or woman that hath lost,
A gambolling gelding with a grey tail,
Let him come to the Crier and pay for his cost,
And he will tell him tidings without any fail.
To the intent that you may him sharply restrain,
Let him not enjoy so much of the rain.
cocks soul, now the snaffle cutteth my lip,
I would this suberly knave had the pip,
I shall leap no hedges while this bridle is on,
Out alas, I think it will fret me to the bone.
Thus should every man that willbe called just,
Bridle and subdue his beastly inclination,
That he in the end may obtain perfect trust,
The messenger of God to give sight to salvation.
That trust to obtain with him I have struggled,
Then let us depart and leave this beast bridled.
Marry the devil go with you and his dun dame,
Such horse masters will make a colt quickly tame,
I would he were hanged that this snaffell did make,
It maketh my chaps so shamefully to ache,
ye have no pity on me you I see by your laughing,
I care not greatly if I fall to gambolling,
We he, he, he, he, he, come aloft I say,
Beware the horse heel's I advise you, stand away,
The rain of my bridle is tied so short,
That I can not make you any more sport,
But though I be bridled now of the just,
I doubt not but I shallbe unbridled by Lust,
And let not Just think but I will rebel,
Although he bridle me ten times all well,
Though nature saith one doom with a croche,
It will not lie long but incontinent approach,
even so, though that I be bridled a while,
The Colt will at length the Curser beguile,
will run I as fast as I can,
zures did none of you see a man,
Cham zent in haste from my master Lust,
So that Inclination needs come to him must.
Where is he now I pray thee tell me.
Why what have we here Iesus benedicite,
I hold twenty pound it is Baalams' Ass,
Nay 'tis a Colt, I see his tail by the mass.
Am I a Colt, nay thou liest like a knave,
Somewhat for thy labour now shalt thou have.
Ho ball ho, lousy jade must ye kick.
Who ever saw such a desperate Dick,
Why Greedy gut, dost thou not know Inclination?
Body O me, who hath dressed thee of that fashion,
Thou art bridled for biting now in deed,
Syra, master Lust would have thee make speed.
I am bridled I, even as thou dost see,
Therefore desire him to come and help me,
But what is the matter that he for me sent.
Marry to gather with Greediness, now he is bend,
He hath had long talk with Carnal cogitation,
And is set on fire by the means of Elation,
So that he is so lusty he can not abide.
Therefore one or other for him must be spied.
Well Greedy gut, I pray thee go and make haste.
Tush fear not, chill spend no time in waste.
I had rather than .xl. pence that he ware come,
If I be bridled long I shallbe undone,
So sharp is this snaffell called restraint,
That it maketh me sweat I am so faint:
Hark, I hear the voice of my master Lust,
Now I shallbe unbridled shortly I trust.
Cock's precious wounds, here hath been villainy.
Ye, ye they have used me with to much villainy,
That old knave Sapience so counseled just,
But let me be unbridled good master Lust.
Lo now thou art unbridled, be of good cheer,
By lady I am glad I have gotten thus clear,
But hearken you master Lust, if I may do you pleasure
She is called Treasure.
O my heart is on fire till she come in place.
O master Lust, she hath an amiable face,
A tricker, a trimmer, in faith that she is,
The gods of wealth, prosperity and bliss.
But think you that this minion long endure shall.
For ever and ever man, she is immortal:
There be many other, but she exceedeth them all.
What be they, have you their names in store,
Yea hark in your ear. & many other more
Scythe that the apple of Paris before me is cast,
And that I may deliver the same where I will,
I would Prometheus were here to help me hold fast
That I might have a fore wit with me ever still,
Pallas I consider in science hath skill,
But Iuno and Venus, good will do I bear,
Therefore to give the Appull I know not where.
Be conciled by me and give it lady Treasure,
It shallbe for your commodity in the end without measure
For having the company of this minion lass,
you shall never want the society of Pallas,
Iuno, nor yet the armipotent Mars,
Can not resist your strength be they never so fierce
And as for Venus, you shall have at pleasure,
For she is bought and sold always with Treasure,
She of her power hath whole countries conquered
The most noble champions by her hath been murdered
Acon for her sake was stoned to death,
Tush, innumerable at this day spend their breath,
some hang or be hanged, they love her so well,
She is the great goddess, it is true that I tell.
Which way should I work of her to have a sight.
I Inclination will lead you thither right,
But we must have Greedy gut and also Elation.
They are at the house of carnal Cogitation.
Whether I would wish that we might depart.
I will lead you thither with all my heart.
So happy is the state of those,
That walk upright and just,
That thou Lord dost thy face disclose
By perfect hope and trust.
Their Inclination thou dost stay,
And sendest them Sapience,
That they should serve and eke obey,
Thy high magnificence.
Thou sendest contentation,
That we in thee may rest,
Therefore all adoration,
To thee pertaineth best.
God careth for his as the Prophet doth say,
And preserveth them under his merciful wings,
Namely the just that his will do obey,
Observing his holy commandment in all things,
Not for our sake, or for our deservings,
But for his own sake openly to declare,
That all men on earth ought to live in his fear.
How God hath blessed you all men may see,
For first at your entrance you conquered Lust,
Not by your power, but by might of the deity,
As all persons ought to do that be just,
Then through Sapience which God did you send,
You bridled that brutish beast Inclination,
And also ordered you with Contentation.
Those that are contented with their vocation,
Be thankful to God, this is a true consequent,
And those that be thankful in their conversation,
Can not but please the Lord God omnipotent,
But those that be sturdy, proud, and disobedient,
The Ruler of all Rulers will them confound,
And rote their remembrance of from the ground.
When Solon was asked of Croesus' the king,
What man was most happy in this vale terrestrial,
To the end he seemeth to attriqute that thing,
When men be asociate with treasures celestial,
Before the end can no man judge he doth say,
That any man is happy that here beareth breath,
But then by his end prettily judge we may,
Thus true happiness coesisteth saith he after death.
If this be a truth as undoubtedly it is,
What men are more foolish, wretched and miserable,
the in these treasures account their whole bliss
Being infect with amdition that sickness uncurable,
A wicked Adrastia, thou gods deceivable,
Thus to pluck from men the sense of their mind,
So that no contentation, therein they can find.
The treasure of this world we may well compare
To Circe's the witch, with her crafty cautilitie,
Where with many men's minds so poisoned are,
That quite they are carried into all fidelity,
They are conjured in deed, and bewitched so sore,
That treasure is their trust, joy and delight,
True trust is expelled they pass not therefore,
And against contentation, they continually fight.
But though wicked men follow their lust,
crying, on earth is our felicity and pleasure,
yet God doth so guide the hearts of the just,
That they respect chief the celestial treasure.
Alas should we not have that estimation,
Which God hath prepared for his dear elect,
Should not our minds rest in full contentation,
Having trust in this treasure, most high in respect:
S. Paul, when the Lord so high did erect,
Saith: it passeth the sense of our memory and mind,
Much less can our outward eyes the same find.
And as for treasures which men possess here
Through fickelnes of fortune, soon fadeth away,
The greatest of renown and most worthy peer,
Sometime falleth, in the end to misery and decay,
Record of Dionysius, a king of much fame,
Of the valiant Alexander, and Caesar the strong,
Record of Tarquinius, which Superbus had to name,
And of Heliogabolos that ministered with wrong,
If I should recite all, I should stand very long.
But these be sufficient plainly to approve,
How soon by uncertainty, this treasure doth remove.
It is true, therefore a mind well content,
Is great riches as the wise king Solomon doth say:
We have seen of late days this cancar pestilent
Corrupting our realm, to our great decay,
Ambition I mean, which chief did reign
Among those that should be examples to other,
We saw how their brethren they did disdain,
And burned with fire the child with the mother,
It is often seen that such monsters ambitious,
As spare not to spill the blood of the innocent,
Will not greatly stick to become seditious,
The determination of God thereby to prevent:
God grant every one of us earnestly to repent,
And not to set our minds on this fading treasure,
But rather wish and will, to do the lords pleasure.
O ye Emperors, Potentates, & Princes of renown,
Learn of Just with trust yourselves to associate,
That like as your vocation, by right doth ask the crown
And also due obedience, being the appointed magistrate,
So rule that at the last you may be resuscitate,
And reign with the almighty with perfect continuance,
Receiving double crowns for your godly governance
ye noble men, whom God hath furnished with fame,
Be mindful to walk in the ways of the just,
Add virtue evermore to your honourable name,
And be not overcome of concupiscence or lust,
flee from love of Treasure, catch hold of me Trust.
And then double felicity, at the last you shall possess,
And in all earthly doings, God shall give good success.
ye poor men & commons, walk well in your vocation
Banish lust and desire, which is not convenient,
Let trust work in you a full contentation,
Considering that it leadeth to treasures more excellent
For these are uncertain, but they are most permanent:
your necessity supply with virtue and trust,
And then shall you enjoy your crown among the just.
As I being properly nominate just,
Am here associate with contentation,
So have I my whole felicity in Trust,
Who ilumineth mine eyes to see my salvation.
Fear ye not, shortly you shall have consolation,
If I were once grown in you to perfection,
Even thus goeth it always with the children of election
I will depart now, will ye go with me trust.
yea I must always associate the just.
A psalm of thanksgiving first let us sing,
To the laud and praise of the immortal king.
Here if you will: sing the man is blessed
that feareth God. etc.
Lust (quoth he) now in faith he is lusty,
Lady Treasure and he hath made a match,
He thinketh that I wax marvelous trusty,
Because I teach him to claw and to catch,
And now a days amity doth therein consist,
He that can flatter shallbe well beloved,
But he that saith, thus and thus saith Christ,
Shall as an enemy be openly reproved.
Friendship, yea, friendship consists now in adulation,
Speak fair and please the lust of thy Lord,
I warrant thee be had in great estimation,
When those that tell truth, shallbe abhorred,
A unhappy lingua, whether wilt thou ren,
Take heed I advise thee, lest thou be shent,
If ye chance to tell any tales of these gentlewomen,
With flesh hooks and nails, you are like to be rend,
Nay for the passion of me, be not so moved,
And I will please you incontinent again,
Above all treasures you are worthy to be loved,
Because you do no men deride nor disdain,
You do not contempt the simple and poor,
you be not his minded, proud and presumptuous,
Neither wanton nor wily you be never more,
But gentle, loving, modesty, and virtuous,
Behold how a lie can please some folks diet,
O pacify their minds marvelous well,
All whyste I warrant ye, so they in quiet,
How to please you hereafter now I can tell,
Hark, I hear Lust and my lady Treasure.
They are given to solace singing and pleasure.
Ah Amorous Lady of beautiful face,
Thou art heartily welcome into this place,
My heart is inclined to thee lady Treasure,
My love is insatiate, it keepeth no measure.
It is I master Lust that will you advance,
Treasure, it is that things doth enhance
Upon me set your whole affection and lust,
And pass not a point for the ways of the just,
Treasure is a pleasure, bear that in mind,
Both trusty and true ye shall me always find.
As trusty as is a quick eel by the tail,
What Lady Treasure welcome without fail,
To be better acquainted with you once I trust,
But I dare not in the presence of my master Lust,
ye are welcome sir heartily, what be of good courage:
Drawer, let us have a pint of white wine & borage.
Wherefore I pray thee tell,
Marry me think you are not well.
Not well, who can a better life crave,
Then to possess such a lady as I have:
Is there any wealth not contained in treasure,
Ah lady, I love thee in faith out of measure,
It is out of measure in deed as you say,
And even so most men love her at this day:
Oh she is a minion of amorous hew,
Her peer in my days yet I never knew,
(Old quoth you) I am an old knave I tell ye,
Nay, never laugh at the matter, for doubtless I smell ye
She passeth Iuno, Ceres, and Pallas,
More beautiful than ever dame Venus was,
Othea in sapience she doth exceed,
And Diana in dignity, of whom we do read.
What should fair Helen once named be,
She excelleth all these master Lust believe me.
How say you, is not this an eloquent lad?
That you have such a servant, truly I am glad.
Ha, ha, now in deed I can you not blame,
For women of all degrees are glad of the same,
They that flatter and speak them fair,
Shallbe their sons, and peradventure their air.
You told me of a brother you had lady Treasure.
Yea sir that I have, his name is called Pleasure,
And seeing you enyoye me now at your will,
Right soon I am sure he will come you until▪
Truly of him I would feign have a sight,
For because that in pleasure. I have marvelous delight.
Then honesty and profit you may bid good night
What sayest thou?
I say he will shortly appear in sight,
I know by his singing, the same is he,
The misbegotten orpheus, I think that he be.
O happy eays, and pleasant plays,
Wherein I do delight a
I do pretend, till my lives end
To live still in such plight a.
Master pleasure I perceive you be of good cheer.
What Inclination old lad, art thou here.
Yea sir, and lady Treasure your sister also.
Body of me, then unto her I will go,
What sister, I am glad to meet with you here.
Welcome unto me mine own brother dear.
Master Lust, this is my brother of whom I told,
He is pleasant and lusty, as you may behold.
Gentleman (I pray you) is your name master Pleasure
yea sir, and I am brother to lady Treasure.
And are you concented to accompany me.
Where as she is resident I must needs be,
Treasure doth Pleasure commonly proceed,
But the one is with the other, they have both so decreed
Marry now you are well in deed master Lust,
This is better I trow then the life of the just,
They be compelled to possess contentation,
Having no treasure but trust of salvation,
But my lady your mistress, my mistress I would say,
She worketh you may see to keep you from decay.
O madame, in you is all my delight,
And in your brother Pleasure, both day and night,
The trial of treasure this is in deed,
I perceive that she is a true friend at need.
For I have proved her according as Thales doth say
And I perceive that her beauty can not decay.
Always with you I willbe resident,
So that your life shallbe most excellent.
yea sir and me Pleasure also you shall have,
So that none other thing there needeth to crave,
I will replenish your heart with delight,
And I willbe always with treasure in sight,
But if you desire to enjoy me at your will,
My sister you must have in reputation still,
And then as her treasure is certain and excellent,
My pleasure shallbe both perfect and permanent,
Credit not those sir that talk that and this,
saying, that in us two consisteth no bliss,
But let experience your mind ever move,
And see if all men us two do not love.
Love, yes they love you in deed without doubt,
Which shutteth some of them God's kingdom without:
They love you so well that their God they do hate,
As time hath declared to us even of late,
But he that on such things his study doth cast,
Shallbe sure to be deceived at the last.
What dost thou say,
Of treasure forsooth ye must ever hold fast,
For if you should chance to lose lady Treasure,
Then far well in post this gentleman Pleasure.
My love to them both can not be expressed,
And especially my Lady you I love best.
If ye love me as you do profess,
Be ye sure you shall want no kind of wealthiness.
And if you have wealthiness at your own will,
Then will I pleasure remain with you still.
You are both as constant as snow in the sun.
Which from snow to water through melting doth run
But worldly wise men can not conceive that.
To honte for such mice they learn of the cat.
My Lady is amorous and full of favour.
I may say to you she hath an ill-favoured savour.
What sayest thou?
I say she is loving and of gentle behaviour.
And so I will continue still be you sure.
And I in like case while your life doth endure,
Ah trust treasure, ah pleasant pleasure,
All wealth I possess now without measure,
And seeing that the same shall firmly remain,
To help me sing a song, will you take the pain.
Even with all my heart begin when ye will.
To it, and I will either help or stand still.
Am not I in blessed case
Treasure and pleasure to possess,
I would not wish no better place,
If I may still have wealthiness,
And to enjoy in perfect peace,
My lady lady.
My pleasant pleasure shall increase
My dear lady.
Helen may not compared be,
Nor Creseda that was so bright,
These can not stain the shine of thee
Nor yet Minerva of great might,
Thou passest Venus far away,
Lady lady,
Love thee I will both night and day
My dear lady.
My mouse my nobs and coney sweet
My hope and joy my whole delight,
Dame nature may fall at thy feet,
And may yield to thee her crown of right
I will thy body now embrace,
Lady, lady
And kiss thy sweet and pleasant face,
My dear lady.
I am God's minister called Visitation,
Which divers and many ways you may understand
Sometime I bring sickness, sometime perturbation,
Sometime trouble and misery throughout the land,
Sometime I signify gods wrath to be at hand,
Sometime a forerunner of destruction imminent,
But an exectuter of pain I am at this present,
Thou incipient fool that haste followed thy lust,
Disdaining the doctrine declared by Sapience,
In treasure and pleasure hath been thy trust,
Which thou thoughtest should remain ever in thy presence
Thou never remember'st Thales his sentence,
Who willeth men in all things to keep a measure,
Especially in love to incertainty of treasure,
Even now I am come from visiting the Just,
Because God beginneth first with his elect,
But he is so associate and comforted with trust,
That no kind of impatience his soul can infect,
Contentation in such sort his race doth direct,
That he is contented with God's operation,
Comfortably embracing me his visitation.
But now I am come to vex thee with pain,
Which makest treasure thy castle and rock,
Thou shalt know that both she and pleasure is vain,
And that the almighty thou canst not mock,
Anguish and grief into thee I do cast,
With pain in thy members continually,
Now thou hast pain thy pleasure can not last,
But I will expelle him incontinently.
O cocks heart, what a pestilence is this,
Depart from me I say, hence gods Visitation,
Help, help, lady treasure thou gods of bliss,
At thy hands let me have some consolation.
I will remain with you be out of doubt.
Will ye be packing you ill-favoured lout.
Presently in deed from him thou shalt not go,
And why? because God's will hath not determined so.
But in time thou treasure shalt be turned to rust,
And as for pleasure he shall now attend on the Just.
Gog's wounds these pangs increase ever more.
And my little finger is spitefully sore,
you will not believe how my heel doth ache,
Nay let me alone your part I will take,
Be of good comfort while I here remain.
For pleasure and he shallbe parted in twain,
It is not meet that he should be participate with lust
But rather with the virtuous godly and just.
Remain with me still master pleasure I say.
Nay there is no remedy I must away,
For where God doth send punition and pain,
I pleasure in no case can not remain.
I could in like case separate thy treasure.
But God doth admonish thee by losing thy pleasure.
Far well in the devils name old lousy lout,
That my master will die I stand in great doubt,
Ho, ho, ho, how is it with you master Lust,
By the flesh of Goliath, yet Treasure is my trust,
Though pleasure be gone, and I live in pain,
I doubt not but Treasure will fetch him again.
Yea, that I will fear not & with you remain.
The property of rich men undoubtedly he hath,
Which think with money to pacify God's wrath,
And health at their pleasure to buy and to sell,
How is it master Lust, are you any thing well.
Against this Visitation my heart doth rebel,
Gog's wounds, shall I still in these pangs remain.
Fear you not master Lust, I will help you again
Treasure in physic exceedeth Gallenus,
Tush there is no physician but we shall have with us.
To the ease of your body they will you bring,
And therefore I pray you despair in nothing,
Put your trust always in me lady treasure,
And I will restore you again unto pleasure,
For I am the Gods that therein hath power,
Which shall remain perfect unto the last hour.
Yea, yea, master Lust, be as merry as you may,
Let Treasure be your trust who so ever say nay.
The ancient Greeks have called me Chronos,
Which in our vulgar tongue signifieth time.
I am entered in presently for a certainly purpose,
Even to turn treasure to rust and to slime,
And Lust which hath long disdained the just,
Ensuing his filthy and vile inclination,
Shall immediately be turned to dust,
To the example of all the whole congregation,
For time bringeth both these matters to pass,
As experience hath taught in every age,
And you shall behold the same in this glass,
As a document both profitable and sage,
Both Lust and treasure come forth with speed
Into the shop of the most mighty God,
There shall you be beaten to powder in deed,
And for your abusion, feel his scourge and rod.
By saint Mary, than they have made a wise match,
I pretend therefore to leap over the hatch,
Nay let me depart, sirs stop me not I say,
For I must remain though both these decay.
Lust from the beginning frequented hath been
And shall I now turn to nothing for thee.
Treasure in all ages hath been beloved,
And shall she from the earth by thee be removed.
You know that all such things are subject to time
Therefore me to withstand is no reason nor rhyme,
For like as all things in time their beginning had,
So must all things in time vanish and fade.
Gog's wounds, let Treasure remain still with me,
Yea let me continue still in my dignity.
Nay, I must carry you into Vulcan's fire,
Where you shallbe tried unto the uttermost,
Seing Lust against Iust did daily conspire,
To dust he shall turn for all his great boast,
Both of you shall have one rigorous host,
Come therefore with speed time can not tarry,
To the end of your felicity I will you carry.
If there be no remedy then there is no shift,
He must needs go that is driven by the devils drift,
A cocks precious sides, what fortune is this,
Whether go I now, to misery or bliss.
We, he, he, he, he, ware the horse heel's I say,
I would the rain ware lose that I might run away.
Nay sith thou wilt not spare against me to rebel,
I will not spare by God's grace thee to bridle,
All men may see how vile Inclination,
Spareth not to put the Just to vexation,
Even so may all men learn of me again,
Thy beastly desires to bridle and restrain.
Marry sir I am bridled in deed as you say,
And shackled I think for running away,
This snafle is sharp indeed for the nonce,
And these shakkels do chafe my legs to the bones,
And yet will I provoke spurn and prick,
Rebel repugn lash out and kick,
We he, in the jades name are ye so fresh,
This gear I suppose will pluck down your flesh.
Nay soft, thou shalt have a little more pain,
For somewhat shorter now I will tie thy rain.
Most blessed and happy I say are the just,
Even because they restrain their own Inclination,
Thou therefore that hast made thy treasure of trust,
Behold, I have brought thee here consolation.
Now blessed be God of his mercy and grace,
With all my heart and soul I do you embrace.
Consolation is my name even as Trust hath said,
Which is joy or comfort in this life transitory,
He that possesseth me, is of nothing afraid,
But hath a most quiet and peaciable memory,
For I through trust doth show thee the glory,
That God hath prepared for them before hand,
Wherein at the last they shall perfectly stand.
Receive this crown of felicity now at this space,
Which shallbe made richer in the celestial place.
By'r lady, I would I had such a gay crown.
Now praised be God for this riches of renown
felicity in this world the just do enjoy,
Namely when the Devil can them not annoy,
The Lords work this is, who be praised for ever,
who grant us in his laws still to persever.
Amen, amen, God give us delight,
In his holy covenant both day and night.
Our matter is almost brought to an end,
Saving that Inclination in prison must be shut,
just carry him forth that useth to contend,
And see that surely enough he be put.
That shallbe done shortly by god's grace.
What soft I say, me think ye go a shameful pace,
Was there ever poor colt thus handled before,
Fie upon it, my legs be onreasonablye sore,
Well yet I will rebel, yea, and rebel again,
And though a thousand times, thou shouldest me restrain.
Behold here how Lust is converted to dust,
This is his Image, his wealth and prosperity,
And Treasure in like case is turned to rust,
Whereof this example showeth the verity.
The trial of Treasure this is no doubt,
Let all men take heed that trust in the same,
Considering what things I time bring about,
And quench out the ungodly their memory and fame.
Why, and is Lust and treasure converted to this.
yea forsooth.
What foolish man in them would put trust,
If this be the final end of their bliss,
Much better I commend the life of the just.
So it is no doubt, for they have consolation,
Possessing felicity even in this place,
I mean through Crust and hope of salvation,
Which setteth out unto us gods mercy and grace.
Let all men consider this good erudition,
And not to put confidence in Lust nor Treasure,
By these two examples receive admonition,
And also of the sudden vanishement of pleasure.
Remember that time turneth all things about.
Time is the touchstone the just for to try,
But where as lust & treasure in time is come to nought
Just possessing Trust, remaineth constantly,
So that as I Time hath revealed their infamy,
So have I showed the Consolation and gain,
That the just shall receive that justly do reign.
We will now no longer trouble this audience,
Sith some what tedious to you we have been,
Beseeching you to bear all things with patience,
And remember the examples that you have seen,
God grant them to flourish lively and green,
That some of us the better therefore may be.
Amen, Amen, I beseech the blessed trinity.