IF Music be the food of Love, play on,
Give me excess of it: that surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken, and so dye.
That strain again, it had a dying fall:
O, it came over my ear, like the sweet sound
That breathes upon a bank of Violets;
Stealing, and giving Odour. Enough, no more,
'Tis not so sweet now, as it was before.
O spirit of Love, how quick and fresh art thou,
That notwithstanding thy capacity,
receiveth as the Sea. Nought enters there,
Of what validity, and pitch so ere,
But falls into abatement, and low price
Even in a minute; so full of shapes is fancy,
That it alone, is high fantastical.
Will you go hunt my Lord?
What Curio?
The Hart.
Why so I do, the Noblest that I have:
O when mine eyes did see Olivia first,
Me thought she purged the air of pestilence;
That instant was I turned into a Hart,
And my desires like fell and cruel hounds,
Ere since pursue me. How now what news from her?
So please my Lord, I might not be admitted,
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
The Element itself, till seven years' heat,
Shall not behold her face at ample view:
But like a Cloystresse she will veiled walk,
And water once a day her Chamber round
With eye-offending brine: all this to season
A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh
And lasting, in her sad remembrance.
O she that hath a heart of that fine frame
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft
Hath killed the flock of all affections else
That live in her. When Liver, Brain, and Heart,
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied and filled
Her sweet perfections with oneself king:
Away before me, to sweet beds of Flowers,
Love-thoughts lie rich, when canopyed with bowers.
What Country (Friends) is this?
This is Illyria Lady.
And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elysium,
Perchance he is not drowned: What think you sailors?
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
O my poor brother, and so perchance may he be.
True Madam, and to comfort you with chance,
Assure yourself, after our ship did split,
When you, and those poor number saved with you,
Hung on our driving boat: I saw your brother
Most provident in peril, bind himself,
(Courage and hope both teaching him the practice)
To a strong Mast, that lived upon the sea:
Where like Orion on the Dolphines back,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves,
So long as I could see.
For saying so, there's Gold:
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority
The like of him. knowst thou this Country?
I Madam well, for I was bred and borne
Not three hours' travail from this very place:
Who governs here?
A noble Duke in nature, as in name.
What is his name?
Orsino.
Orsino: I have heard my father name him.
He was a Bachelor then.
And so is now, or was so very late:
For but a month ago I went from hence,
And then 'twas fresh in murmur (as you know
What great ones do, the less will prattle of,)
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
What's she?
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a Count
That dide some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also died: for whose dear love
(They say) she hath abjured the sight
And company of men.
O that I served that Lady,
And might not be delivered to the world
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow
What my estate is.
That were hard to compass,
Because she will admit no kind of suit,
No not the Dukes.
There is a fair behaviour in thee Captain,
And though that nature, with a beauteous wall
Doth oft close in pollution: yet of thee
I will believe thou hast a mind that suits
With this thy fair and outward character.
I prithee (and I'll pay thee bounteously)
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid,
For such disguise as haply shall become
The form of my intent. I'll serve this Duke,
Thou shalt present me as an Eunuch to him,
It may be worth thy pains: for I can sing,
And speak to him in many sorts of Music,
That will allow me very worth his service.
What else may hap, to time I will commit,
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
Be you his Eunuch, and your Mute I'll be,
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
I thank thee: Led me on.
What a plague means my Niece to take the death of her brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.
By my troth sir Toby, you must come in earlyer a nights: your Cousin, my Lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.
Why let her except, before excepted.
I, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order.
Confine? I'll confine myself no finer than I am: these clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too: and they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard my Lady talk of it yesterday: and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here, to be her wooer
Who, Sir Andrew Ague-cheeke?
I he.
He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.
What's that to th' purpose?
Why he has three thousand ducats a year.
I, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats: He's a very fool, and a prodigal.
Fie, that you'll say so: he plays o' th' Viol-de-gam-boys, and speaks three or four languages word for word without book, & hath all the good gifts of nature.
He hath indeed, almost natural: for besides that he's a fool, he's a great quarreler: and but that he hath the gift of a Coward, to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling, 'tis thought among the prudent, he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
By this hand they are scoundrels and substractor that say so of him. Who are they?
They that add moreour, he's drunk nightly in your company.
With drinking healths to my Niece: I'll drink to her as long as there is a passage in my throat, & drink in Illyria: he's a Coward and a Coistrel that will not drink to my Niece till his brains turn o' th' toe, like a parish top. What wench? Castiliano vulgo: for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.
Sir Toby Belch. How now sir Toby Belch?
Sweet sir Andrew.
Bless you fair Shrew.
And you too sir.
Accost Sir Andrew, accost.
What's that?
My Niece's Chambermaid.
Good Mistress accost, I desire better acquaintance
My name is Mary sir.
Good mistress Mary, accost.
You mistake knight: Accost, is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.
By my troth I would not undertake her in this company. Is that the meaning of Accost?
Far you well Gentlemen.
And thou let part so Sir Andrew, would thou mightst never draw sword again.
And you part so mistress, I would I might never draw sword again: Fair Lady, do you think you have fools in hand?
Sir, I have not you by ' th' hand.
Marry but you shall have, and here's my hand.
Now sir, thought is free: I pray you bring your hand to ' th' Buttery bar, and let it drink.
Wherefore (sweetheart?) What's your Metaphor?
It's dry sir.
Why I think so: I am not such an ass, but I can keep my hand dry. But what's your jest?
A dry jest Sir.
Are you full of them?
I Sir, I have them at my finger's ends: marry now I let go your hand, I am barren.
O knight, thou lackest a cup of Canary: when did I see thee so put down?
Never in your life I think, unless you see Canary put me down: me thinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian, or an ordinary man has: but I am a great eater of beef, and I believe that does harm to my wit.
No question.
And I thought that, I'd forswear it. I'll ride home to morrow sir Toby.
Pur-quoy my dear knight?
What is purquoy? Do, or not do? I would I had bestowed that time in the tongues, that I have in fencing dancing, and bear-baiting; O had I but followed the Arts.
Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
Why, would that have mended my hair?
Past question, for thou seest it will not cool my nature
But it becomes we well enough, dost not?
Excellent, it hangs like flax on a distaff: & I hope to see a huswife take thee between her legs, & spin it off.
Faith I'll home to morrow sir Toby, your niece will not be seen, or if she be it's four to one, she'll none of me: the Count himself here hard by, woos her,
she'll none o' th' Count, she'll not match above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit: I have heard her swear't. Tut there's life in't man.
I'll stay a month longer. I am a fellow o' th' strangest mind i' th' world: I delight in Masks and Revels sometimes altogether.
Art thou good at these kicke-chawses Knight?
As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters, & yet I will not compare with an old man.
What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
Faith, I can cut a caper.
And I can cut the Mutton too't.
And I think I have the backe-tricke, simply as strong as any man in Illyria.
Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these gifts a Curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like mistress Male picture? Why dost thou not go to Church in a Galliard, and come home in a Carranto? My very walk should be a jig: I would not so much as make water but in a Sinke-a-pace: What dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a Galliard.
I, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a damned coloured stock. Shall we sit about some Revels?
What shall we do else: were we not borne under Taurus?
Taurus? That sides and heart.
No sir, it is legs and thighs: let me see thee caper. Ha', higher: ha', ha', excellent.
If the Duke continue these favours towards you Cesario, you are like to be much advanced, he hath known you but three days, and already you are no stranger.
You either fear his humour, or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love. Is he inconstant sir, in his favours.
No believe me.
I thank you: here comes the Count
Who saw Cesario hoa?
On your attendance my Lord here.
Stand you awhile aloof. Cesario,
Thou know'st no less, but all: I have unclasped
To thee the book even of my secret soul.
Therefore good youth, address thy gate unto her,
Be not denied access, stand at her doors,
And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
Till thou have audience.
Sure my Noble Lord,
If she be so abandoned to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.
Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds,
Rather than make unprofited return,
Say I do speak with her (my Lord) what then?
O then, unfold the passion of my love,
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith;
It shall become thee well to act my woes:
She will attend it better in thy youth,
Then in a Nuntios of more grave aspect.
I think not so, my Lord.
Dear Lad, believe it;
For they shall yet belie thy happy years,
That say thou art a man: Diana's lip
Is not more smooth, and rubious: thy small pipe
Is as the maiden's organ, shrill, and sound,
And all is semblative a woman's part.
I know thy constellation is right apt
For this affair: some four or five attend him,
All if you will: for I myself am best
When least in company: prosper well in this,
And thou shalt live as freely as thy Lord,
To call his fortunes thine.
I'll do my best
To woe your Lady: yet a barrefull strife,
Who ere I woe, myself would be his wife.
Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter, in way of thy excuse: my Lady will hang thee for thy absence.
Let her hang me: he that is well hang'de in this world, needs to fear no colours.
Make that good.
He shall see none to fear.
A good lenten answer: I can tell thee where that saying was borne, of I fear no colours.
Where good mistress Mary?
In the wars, & that may you be bold to say in your foolery.
Well, God give them wisdom that have it: & those that are fools, let them use their talents.
Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent, or to be turned away: is not that as good as a hanging to you?
Many a good hanging, prevents a bad marriage: and for turning away, let summer bear it out.
You are resolute then?
Not so neither, but I am resolved on two points
That if one break, the other will hold: or if both break, your gaskins fall.
Apt in good faith, very apt: well go thy way, if sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece of Eve's flesh, as any in Illyria.
Peace you rogue, no more o' that: here comes my Lady: make your excuse wisely, you were best.
Wit, and't be thy will, put me into good fooling: those wits that think they have thee, do very oft prove fools: and I that am sure I Iacke thee, may pass for a wise man. For what says Quinapalus, Better a witty fool, than a foolish wit. God bless thee Lady.
Take the fool away.
Do you not hear fellows, take away the Lady.
Go too, ye are a dry fool: I'll no more of you: besides you grow dishonest.
Two faults Madonna, that drink & good counsel will amend: for give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry: bid the dishonest man mend himself, if he mend, he is no longer dishonest; if he cannot, let the Butcher mend him: any thing that's mended, is but patched: virtue that transgresses, is but patched with sin, and sin that amends, is but patched with virtue. If that this simple syllogism will serve, so: if it will not, what remedy? As there is no true Cuckold but calamity, so beauties a flower; The Lady bade take away the fool, therefore I say again, take her away.
Sir, I bade them take away you.
Misprision in the highest degree. Lady, Cucullus non facit monachum: thats as much to say, as I wear not motley in my brain: good Madonna, give me leave to prove you a fool.
Can you do it?
Dexteriously, good Madonna.
Make your proof.
I must catechise you for it Madonna, Good my Mouse of virtue answer me.
Well sir, for want of other idleness, I'll bide your proof.
Good Madonna, why mournest thou?
Good fool, for my brother's death.
I think his soul is in hell, Madonna.
I know his soul is in heaven, fool.
The more fool (Madonna) to mourn for your Brother's soul, being in heaven. Take away the Fool, Gentlemen.
What think you of this fool Maluolio, doth he not mend?
Yes, and shall do, till the pangs of death shake him: Infirmity that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
God send you sir, a speedy Infirmity, for the better increasing your folly: Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no Fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence that you are no Foole.
How say you to that Maluolio?
I marvel your Ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal: I saw him put down the other day, with an ordinary fool, that has no more brain than a stone. Look you now, he's out of his guard already: unless you laugh and minister occasion to him, he is gauged. I protest I take these Wisemen, that crow so at these set kind of fools, no better than the fool's Zanies.
O you are sicke of self-love Maluolio, and taste with a distempered appetite. To be generous, guiltless, and of free disposition, is to take those things for Bird-bolts, that you deem Cannon bullets: There is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail; nor no railing, in a known discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove.
Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools.
Madam, there is at the gate, a young Gentleman, much desires to speak with you.
From the Count Orsino, is it?
I know not (Madam) 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.
Who of my people hold him in delay?
Sir Toby Madam, your kinsman.
Fetch him off I pray you, he speaks nothing but madman: Fie on him. Go you Maluolio; If it be a suit from the Count, I am sick, or not at home. What you will, to dismiss it.
Now you see sir, how your fooling grows old, & people dislike it.
Thou hast spoke for us (Madonna) as if thy eldest son should be a fool: whose scull, Ioue cram with brains, for here he comes.
One of thy kin has a most weak Pia-mater.
By mine honour half drunk. What is he at the gate Cousin?
A Gentleman.
A Gentleman? What Gentleman?
'Tis a Gentleman here. A plague o' these pickle herring: How now Sot.
Good Sir Toby.
Cousin, Cousin, how have you come so early by this Lethargy?
Lechery, I defy Lechery: there's one at the gate.
I marry, what is he?
Let him be the devil and he will, I care not: give me faith say I. Well, it's all one.
What's a drunken man like, fool?
Like a drowned man, a fool, and a mad man:
One draught above heat, makes him a fool, the second mads him, and a third drowns him.
Go thou and seek the Crowner, and let him sit o' my Coz: for he's in the third degree of drink: he's drowned: go look after him.
He is but mad yet Madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.
Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you. I told him you were sick, he takes on him to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with you. I told him you were asleep, he seems to have a fore knowledge of that too, and therefore comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him Lady, he's fortified against any denial.
Tell him, he shall not speak with me.
ha's been told so: and he says he'll stand at your door like a Sheriff's post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he'll speak with you.
What kind o' man is he?
Why of mankind.
What manner of man?
Of very ill manner: he'll speak with you, will you, or no.
Of what personage, and years is he?
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy: as a squash is before 'tis a peascod, or a Coddling when 'tis almost an Apple: 'tis with him in standing water, between boy and man. He is very well-favoured, and he speaks very shrewishly: One would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.
Let him approach: Call in my Gentlewoman.
Gentlewoman, my Lady calls.
Give me my veil: come throw it o'er my face,
we'll once more hear Orsinos Embassy.
The honourable Lady of the house, which is she?
Speak to me, I shall answer for her: your will.
Most radiant, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty. I pray you tell me if this be the Lady of the house, for I never saw her. I would be loath to cast away my speech: for besides that it is excellently well penned, I have taken great pains to con it. Good Beauties, let me sustain no scorn; I am very comptible, even to the least sinister usage.
Whence came you sir?
I can say little more than I have studied, & that question's out of my part. Good gentle one, give me modest assurance, if you be the Lady of the house, that may proceed in my speech.
Are you a Comedian?
No my profound heart: and yet (by the very fangs of malice, I swear) I am not that I play. Are you the Lady of the house?
If I do not usurp myself, I am.
Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself: for what is yours to bestow, is, not yours to reserve. But this is from my Commission: I will on with my speech in your praise, and then show you the heart of my message.
Come to what is important in't: I forgive you the praise.
Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis Poetical.
It is the more like to be feigned, I pray you keep it in. I heard you were saucy at my gates, & allowed your approach rather to wonder at you, then to hear you. If you be not mad, be gone: if you have reason, be brief: 'tis not that time of Moon with me, to make one in so skipping a dialogue.
Will you hoist sail sir, here lies your way.
No good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer. Some mollification for your Giant, sweet Lady; tell me your mind, I am a messenger.
Sure you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the courtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.
It alone concerns your ear: I bring no overture of war, no taxation of homage; I hold the Olyffe in my hand: my words are as full of peace, as matter.
Yet you began rudely. What are you? What would you?
The rudeness that hath appeared in me, have I learned from my entertainment. What I am, and what I would, are as secret as maidenhead: to your ears, Divinity; to any others, profanation.
Give us the place alone,
We will hear this divinity. Now sir, what is your text?
Most sweet Lady.
A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it. Where lies your Text?
In Orsinoes' bosom.
In his bosom? In what chapter of his bosom?
To answer by the method in the first of his hart.
O, I have read it: it is heresy. Have you no more to say?
Good Madam, let me see your face.
Have you any Commission from your Lord, to negotiate with my face: you are now out of your Text: but we will draw the Curtain, and show you the picture. Look you sir, such a one I was this present: Is't not well done?
Excellently done, if God did all.
'Tis in grain sir, 'twill endure wind and weather.
'tis beauty truly blended, whose red and white,
Natures own sweet, and cunning hand laid on:
Lady, you are the cruelest she alive,
If you will lead these graces to the grave,
And leave the world no copy.
O sir, I will not be so hardhearted: I will give out diverse schedules of my beauty. It shallbe Inuentoried and every particle and utensile labeled to my will: As, Item two lips indifferent red, Item two grey eyes, with lids to them: Item, one neck, one chin, & so forth. Were you sent hither to praise me?
I see you what you are, you are too proud:
But if you were the devil, you are fair:
My Lord, and master loves you: O such love
Can be but recompensed, though you were crowned
The non-pareil of beauty.
How does he love me?
With adorations, fertile tears,
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Your Lord does know my mind, I cannot love him
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant,
And in dimension, and the shape of nature,
A gracious person; But yet I cannot love him:
He might have took his answer long ago.
If I did love you in my master's flame,
With such a suffering, such a deadly life:
In your denial, I would find no sense,
I would not understand it.
Why, what would you?
Make me a willow Cabin at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house,
Writ loyal Cantons of contemned love,
And sing them loud even in the dead of night:
Hollow your name to the reverberate hills,
And make the babbling Gossip of the air,
Cry out Olivia: O you should not rest
Between the elements of air, and earth,
But you should pity me.
You might do much:
What is your Parentage?
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I am a Gentleman.
Get you to your Lord:
I cannot love him: let him send no more,
Unless (perchance) you come to me again,
To tell me how he takes it: Far you well:
I thank you for your pains: spend this for me.
I am no feed post, Lady; keep your purse,
My Master, not myself, lacks recompense.
Love make his heart of flint, that you shall love,
And let your fervour like my masters be,
Placed in contempt: Farewell fair cruelty.
What is your Parentage?
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well;
I am a Gentleman. I'll be sworn thou art,
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit.
Do give thee fivefold blazon: not too fast: soft, soft,
Unless the Master were the man. How now?
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
Me thinks I feel this youths perfections
With an invisible, and subtle stealth
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.
What hoa, Maluolio.
here Madam, at your service.
Run after that same peevish Messenger
The Countess' man: he left this Ring behind him
Would I, or not: tell him, I'll none of it.
Desire him not to flatter with his Lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes, I am not for him:
If that the youth will come this way to morrow,
I'll give him reasons for't: hie thee Maluolio.
Madam, I will.
I do I know not what, and fear to find
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind:
Fate, show thy force, ourselves we do not owe,
What is decreed, must be: and be this so.
Will you stay no longer: nor will you not that I go with you.
By your patience, no: my stars shine darkly over me; the malignancy of my fate, might perhaps distemper yours; therefore I shall crave of you your leave, that I may bear my evils alone. It were a bad recompense for your love, to lay any of them on you.
Let me yet know of you, whither you are bound.
No sooth sir: my determinate voyage is mere extravagancie. But I perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty, that you will not extort from me, what I am willing to keep in: therefore it charges me in manners, the rather to express myself: you must know of me then Antonio, my name is Sebastian (which I called Rodorigo) my father was that Sebastian of Messalina, whom I know you have heard of. He left behind him, myself, and a sister, both borne in an hour: if the Heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended. But you sir, altered that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea, was my sister drowned.
Alas the day.
A Lady sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was yet of many accounted beautiful: but though I could not with such estimable wonder over-farre believe that, yet thus far I will boldly publish her, she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair: She is drowned already sir with salt water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more.
Pardon me sir, your bad entertainment.
O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.
If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.
If you will not undo what you have done, that is kill him, whom you have recovered, desire it not. Far ye well at once, my bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more, mine eyes will tell tales of me: I am bound to the Count Orsino's Court, farewell.
The gentleness of all the gods go with thee:
I have many enemies in Orsino's Court,
Else would I very shortly see thee there:
But come what may, I do adore thee so,
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Were not you even now, with the Countess Olivia?
Even now sir, on a moderate pace, I have since arrived but hither.
She returns this Ring to you (sir) you might have saved me my pains, to have taken it away yourself. She adds moreover, that you should put your Lord into a desperate assurance, she will none of him. And one thing more, that you be never so hardy: o come again in his affairs, unless it be to report your Lords taking of this: receive it so.
She took the Ring of me, I'll none of it.
Come sir, you peevishly threw it to her: and her will is, it should be so returned: If it be worth stooping for, there it lies, in your eye: if not, be it his that finds it.
I left no Ring with her: what means this Lady?
Fortune forbidden my outside have not charmed her:
She made good view of me, indeed so much,
That me thought her eyes had lost her tongue,
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
She loves me sure, the cunning of her passion
Invites me in this churlish messenger:
None of my Lord's Ring? Why he sent her none;
I am the man, if it be so, as 'tis,
Poor Lady, she were better love a dream:
Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness,
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
How easy is it, for the proper false
In women's waxed hearts to set their forms:
Alas, O frailty is the cause, not we,
For such as we are made, if such we be:
How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,
And I (poor monster) fond as much on him:
And she (mistaken) seems to dote on me:
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my master's love:
As I am woman (now alas the day)
What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breath?
O time, thou must untangle this, not I,
It is too hard a knot for me t'vnty.
Approach Sir Andrew: not to be a bed after midnight, is to be up betimes, and Deliculo surgere, thou knowst.
Nay by my troth I know not: but I know, to be up late, is to be up late.
A false conclusion: I hate it as an vnfill'd Can. To be up after midnight, and to go to bed then is early: so that to go to bed after midnight, is to go to bed betimes. Does not our lives consist of the four Elements?
Faith so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating and drinking.
Th' art a scholar; let us therefore eat and drink Marian I say, a stoop of wine.
here comes the fool i'faith.
How now my hearts: Did you never see the Picture of we three?
Welcome ass, now let's have a catch.
By my troth the fool has an excellent breast. I had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has. Insooth thou wast in very gracious fooling last night, when thou spok'st of Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the Equinoctial of Queubus: 'twas very good i'faith: I sent thee six pence for thy Lemon, hadst it?
I did impeticos thy gratility: for Maluolios nose is no Whipstock. My Lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.
Excellent: Why this is the best fooling, when all is done. Now a song.
Come on, there is six pence for you. Let's have a song.
There's a testrill of me too: if one knight give a
Would you have a lovesong, or a song of good life?
A love song, a love song.
I, I. I care not for good life.
O Mistress mine where are you roaming?
O stay and hear, your true loves coming,
That can sing both high and low.
Trip no further pretty sweeting.
journeys end in lover's meeting,
Every wise man's son doth know.
Excellent good, i'faith.
Good, good.
What is love, 'tis not hereafter,
Present mirth, hath present laughter:
What's to come, is still unsure.
In delay there lies no plenty,
Then come kiss me sweet and twenty:
Youths a stuff will not endure.
A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.
A contagious breath.
Very sweet, and contagious i'faith.
To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall we make the Welkin dance indeed? Shall we rouse the night-Owle in a Catch, that will draw three souls out of one Weaver? Shall we do that?
And you love me, let's do't: I am dog at a Catch.
Byrlady sir, and some dogs will catch well.
Most certain: Let our Catch be, Thou Knave.
Hold thy peace, thou Knave knight. I shall be constrained in't, to call thee knave, Knight.
'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call me knave. Begin fool: it begins, Hold thy peace.
I shall never begin if I hold my peace.
Good i'faith: Come begin.
What a caterwauling do you keep here? If my Lady have not called up her Steward Maluolio, and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.
My Lady's a Catayan, we are politicians, Maluolios a Peg-a-ramsie, and Three merry men be we. Am not I consanguinious? Am I not of her blood: tilly valley. Lady, There dwelled a man in Babylon, Lady, Lady.
Beshrew me, the knights in admirable fooling.
I, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do I too: he does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.
O the twelfe day of December.
For the love o' God peace.
My masters are you mad? Or what are you? Have you no wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like Tinkers at this time of night? Do ye make an Alehouse of my Lady's house, that ye squeak out your Coziers' Catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?
We did keep time sir in our Catches. Snecke up.
Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My Lady bade me tell you, that though she harbours you as her kinsman, she's nothing allied to your disorders. If you can separate yourself and your misdemeanours, you are welcome to the house: if not, and it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.
Farewell dear heart, since I must needs be gone.
Nay good Sir Toby.
His eyes do show his days are almost done.
Is't even so?
But I will never dye.
Sir Toby there you lie.
This is much credit to you.
Shall I bid him go.
What and if you do?
Shall I bid him go, and spare not?
O no, no, no, no, you dare not.
Out o' tune sir, ye lie: Art any more than a Steward? Dost thou think because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more Cakes and Ale?
Yes by S. Anne, and Ginger shall be hot ye th' mouth too.
Th' art i' th' right. Go sir, rub your Chain with crumbs. A stoup of Wine Maria.
Mistress Mary, if you prized my Lady's savour at any thing more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule; the shall know of it by this hand.
Go shake your ears.
'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's a hungry, to challenge him the field, and then to break promise with him, and make a fool of him.
Do't knight, I'll write thee a Challenge: or I'll deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
Sweet Sir Toby be patiented for to night: Since the youth of the Counts was to day with my Lady, she is much out of quiet. For Monsieur Maluolio, let me alone with him: If I do not gull him into an ayword, and make him a common recreation, do not think I have wit enough to lie strait in my bed: I know I can do it.
Possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.
Marry sir, sometimes he is a kind of Puritan.
O, if I thought that, I'd beat him like a dog.
What for being a Puritan, thy exquisite reason, dear knight.
I have no exquisite reason for't, but I have reason good enough.
The devil a Puritan that he is, or any thing constantly but a time-pleaser, an affectioned Ass, that cons State without book, and utters it by great swarths. The best persuaded of himself: so crammed (as he thinks) with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith, that all that look on him, love him: and on that vice in him, will my revenge find notable cause to work.
What wilt thou do?
I will drop in his way some obscure Epistles of love, wherein by the colour of his beard, the shape of his leg, the manner of his gate, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and complexion, he shall find himself most feelingly personated. I can write very like my Lady your Niece, on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands.
Excellent, I smell a device.
I have't in my nose too.
He shall think by the Letters that thou wilt drop that they come from my Niece, and that she's in love with him.
My purpose is indeed a horse of that colour.
And your horse now would make him an Ass.
Ass, I doubt not.
O 'twill be admirable.
Sport royal I warrant you: I know my Physic will work with him, I will plant you two, and let the Fool make a third, where he shall find the Letter: observe his construction of it: For this night to bed, and dream on the event: Farewell.
Good night Penthesilea.
Before me she's a good wench.
She's a beagle true bred, and one that adores me: what o' that?
I was adored once too.
Let's to bed knight: Thou hadst need send for more money.
If I cannot recover your Niece, I am a foul way out.
Send for money knight, if thou hast her not i' th' end, call me Cut.
If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.
Come, come, I'll go burn some Sack, 'tis too late to go to bed now: Come knight, come knight.
Give me some Music; Now good morrow friends.
Now good Cesario, but that piece of song,
That old and Antic song we heard last night;
Methought it did relieve my passion much,
More than light airs, and recollected terms
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.
Come, but one verse.
He is not here (so please your Lordship) that should sing it?
Who was it?
Feste the Iester my Lord, a fool that the Lady Oliuiaes Father took much delight in. He is about the house.
Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
Come hither Boy, if ever thou shalt love
In the sweet pangs of it, remember me:
For such as I am, all true Lovers are,
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else,
Save in the constant image of the creature
That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?
It gives a very echo to the seat
Where love is thron'd.
Thou dost speak masterly,
My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
Hath stayed upon some favour that it loves:
Hath it not boy?
A little, by your favour.
What kind of woman is't?
Of your complexion.
She is not worth thee then. What years i'faith?
About your years my Lord.
Too old by heaven: Let still the woman take
An elder than herself, so wears she to him;
So sways she level in her husband's heart:
For boy, however we do praise our seives,
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirme,
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,
Than women's are.
I think it well my Lord.
Then let thy Love be younger than thyself,
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent:
For women are as Roses, whose fair flower
Being once displayed, doth fall that very hour.
And so they are: alas, that they are so:
To die, even when they to perfection grow.
O fellow come, the song we had last night:
Mark it Cesario, it is old and plain;
The Spinsters and the Knitters in the Sun,
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
Do use to chant it: it is silly sooth,
And dallies with the innocence of love,
Like the old age.
Are you ready Sir?
I prithee sing.
Come away, come away death,
And in sad cypress let me be laid.
Fie away, fie away breath,
I am slain by a fair cruel maid:
My shroud of white, stuck all with Ewe, O prepare it.
My part of death no one so true did share it.
Not a flower, not a flower sweet
On my black coffin, let there be strewne:
Not a friend, not a friend greet
My poor corpses, where my bones shall be thrown:
A thousand thousand sighs to save, lay me o where
Sad true lover never find my grave, to weep there.
There's for thy pains.
No pains sir, I take pleasure in singing sir.
I'll pay thy pleasure then.
Truly sir, and pleasure will be paid one time, or another.
Give me now leave, to leave thee.
Now the melancholy God protect thee, and the Tailor make thy doublet of changeable Taffeta, for thy mind is a very Opal. I would have men of such constancy put to Sea, that their business might be every thing, and their intent every where, for that's it, that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
Let all the rest give place: Once more Cesario,
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty:
Tell her my love, more noble than the world
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands,
The parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her:
Tell her I hold as giddily as Fortune:
But 'tis that miracle, and Queen of gems
That nature pranks her in, attracts my soul.
But if she cannot love you sir.
It cannot be so answered.
Sooth but you must.
Say that some Lady, as perhaps there is,
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Olivia: you cannot love her:
You tell her so: Must she not then be answered?
There is no woman's sides
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion,
As love doth give my heart: no woman's heart
So big, to hold so much, they lack retention.
Alas, their love may be called appetite,
No motion of the Liver, but the palate,
That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt,
But mine is all as hungry as the Sea,
And can digest as much, make no compare
Between that love a woman can bear me,
And that I own Olivia.
I but I know.
What dost thou know?
Too well what love women to men may owe:
In faith they are as true of heart, as we.
My Father had a daughter loved a man
As it might be perhaps, were I a woman
I should your Lordship.
And what's her history?
A blank my Lord: she never told her love,
But let concealment like a worm i' th' bud
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
And with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like Patience on a Monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
Our shows are more than will: for still we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.
But died thy sister of her love my Boy?
I am all the daughters of my Father's house,
And all the brothers too: and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this Lady?
I that's the Theme,
To her in haste: give her this jewel: say,
My love can give no place, bide no denay.
Come thy ways Signior Fabian.
Nay I'll come: if I lose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with Melancholy.
Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly Rascally sheep-biter, come by some notable shame?
I would exult man: you know he brought me out o' favour with my Lady, about a Bearbaiting here.
To anger him we'll have the Bear again, and we will fool him black and blue, shall we not sir Andrew?
And we do not, it is pity of our lives.
here comes the little villain: How now my Mettle of India?
Get ye all three into the box tree: Maluolio's coming down this walk, he has been yonder i' the Sun practising behaviour to his own shadow this half hour: observe him for the love of Mockery: for I know this Letter will make a contemplative Idiot of him. Close in the name of jesting, lie thou there: for here comes the Trout, that must be caught with tickling.
'Tis but Fortune, all is fortune. Maria once told me she did affect me, and I have heard herself come thus near, that should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion. Besides she uses me with a more exalted respect, than any one else that follows her. What should I think on't?
here's an overweening rogue.
Oh peace: Contemplation makes a rare Turkey Cock of him, how he jets under his advanced plumes.
'Slight I could so beat the Rogue.
Peace I say.
To be Count Maluolio.
Ah Rogue.
Pistol him, pistol him.
Peace, peace.
There is example for't: The Lady of the Strachy, married the yeoman of the wardrobe.
Fie on him Iezabel.
O peace, now he's deeply in: look how imagination blows him.
Having been three months married to her, sitting in my state.
O for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye.
Calling my Officers about me, in my branched Velvet gown: having come from a day bed, where I have left Olivia sleeping.
Fire and Brimstone.
O peace, peace.
And then to have the humour of state: and after a demure travail of regard: telling them I know my place, as I would they should do theirs: to ask for my kinsman Toby.
Bolts and shackles.
Oh peace, peace, peace, now, now.
Seven of my people with an obedient start, make out for him: I frown the while, and perchance wind up my watch, or play with my some rich jewel: Toby approaches; curtsies there to me.
Shall this fellow live?
Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
I extend my hand to him thus: quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control.
And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips, then?
Saying, Cousin Toby, my Fortunes having cast me on your Niece, give me this prerogative of speech.
What, what?
You must amend your drunkenness.
Out scab.
Nay patience, or we break the sinews of our plot?
Besides you waste the treasure of your time, with a foolish knight.
That's me I warrant you.
One sir Andrew.
I knew 'twas I, for many do call me fool.
What employment have we here?
Now is the Woodcock near the gin.
Oh peace, and the spirit of humours intimate reading aloud to him.
By my life this is my Lady's hand: these be her very Cs, her V's, and her 't's, and thus makes she her great P's. It is in contempt of question her hand.
Her C's, her V's, and her 't's: why that?
To the unknown beloved, this, and my good Wishes: Her very Phrases: By your leave wax. Soft, and the impressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal: 'tis my Lady: To whom should this be?
This wins him, Liver and all.
Ioue knows I love, but who,
Lips do not move, no man must know.
No man must know. What follows?
The numbers altered: No man must know,
If this should be thee Maluolio?
Marry hang thee brock.
I may command where I adore, but silence like a Lucrece knife:
With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore, M.O.A.I. doth sway my life.
A fustian riddle.
Excellent Wench, say I.
M.O.A.I. doth sway my life. Nay but first let me see, let me see, let me see.
What dish a poison has she dressed him?
And with what wing the stallion checks at it?
I may command, where I adore: Why she may command me: I serve her, she is my Lady. Why this is evident to any formal capacity. There is no obstruction in this, and the end: What should that Alphabetical position portend, if I could make that resemble something in me? Softly, M.O.A.I.
O I, make up that, he is now at a cold sent.
Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as rank as a Fox.
M. Maluolio, M. why that begins my name.
Did not I say he would work it out, the Cur is excellent at faults.
M. But then there is no consonancy in the sequel that suffers under probation: A. should follow, but O. does.
And O shall end, I hope.
I, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry O.
And then I. comes behind.
I, and you had any eye behind you, you might see more detraction at your heels, than Fortunes before you.
M, O, A, I. This simulation is not as the former: and yet to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of these Letters are in my name. Soft, here follows prose: If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness: Some are become great, some atcheeves greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. Thy fates open their hands, let thy blood and spirit embrace them, and to enure thyself to what thou art like to be: cast thy humble slough, and appear fresh. Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants: Let thy tongue tang arguments of state; put thyself into the trick of singularity. She thus advises thee, that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, and wished to see thee ever cross gartered: I say remember, go too, thou art made if thou desir'st to be so: If not, let me see thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch Fortune's singers Farewell, She that would alter services with thee, that fortunate unhappy daylight and champain discovers not more: This is open, I will be proud, I will read pollticke Authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point device, the very man. I do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade me; for every reason excites to this, that my Lady loves me. She did commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being cross-gartered, and in this she manifests herself to my love, & with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her liking. I thank my stars, I am happy: I will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross Gartered, even with the swiftness of putting on. Ioue, and my stars be praised. here is yet a postscript. Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou entertainst my love, let it appear in thy smiling, thy smiles become thee well. Therefore in my presence still smile, deero my sweet, I prithee. Ioue I thank thee, I will smile, I will do every thing that thou wilt have me.
I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
I could marry this wench for this device.
So could I too.
And ask no other dowry with her, but such another jest.
Nor I neither.
here comes my noble gull catcher.
Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck.
Or o' mine either?
Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bondslave?
I'faith, or I either?
Why, thou hast put him in such a dream, that when the image of it leaves him, he must run mad.
Nay but say true, does it work upon him?
Like Aqua vite with a Midwife.
If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before my Lady: he will come to her in yellow stockings, and 'tis a colour she abhors, and cross gartered, a fashion she detests: and he will smile upon her, which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a melancholy, as she is, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt: if you will see it follow me.
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit.
I'll make one too.
Save thee Friend and thy Music: dost thou live by thy Tabor?
No sir, I live by the Church.
Art thou a Churchman?
No such matter sir, I do live by the Church: For, I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the Church
So thou mayst say the Kings lies by a beggar, if a beggar dwell near him: or the Church stands by thy Tabor, if thy Tabor stand by the Church.
You have said sir: To see this age: A sentence is but a chevril glove to a good wit, how quickly the wrong side may be turned outward.
Nay that's certain: they that dally nicely with words, may quickly make them wanton.
I would therefore my sister had had no name Sir.
Why man?
Why sir, her names a word, and to dally with that word, might make my sister wanton: But indeed, words are very Rascals, since bonds disgraced them.
Thy reason man?
Troth sir, I can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, I am loath to prove reason with them.
I warrant thou art a merry fellow, and carest for nothing.
Not so sir, I do care for something: but in my conscience sir, I do not care for you: if that be to care for nothing sir, I would it would make you invisible.
Art not thou the Lady Oliuia's fool?
No indeed sir, the Lady Olivia has no folly, she will keep no fool sir, till she be married, and fools are as like husbands, as Pilchers are to Herrings, the Husbands the bigger, I am indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.
I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.
Foolery sir, does walk about the Orb like the Sun, it shines every where. I would be sorry sir, but the Fool should be as oft with your Master, as with my Mistress: I think I saw your wisdom there.
Nay, and thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee. Hold there's expenses for thee.
Now Ioue in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard.
By my troth I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for one, though I would not have it grow on my chin. Is thy Lady within?
Would not a pair of these have bred sir?
Yes being kept together, and put to use.
I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia sir, to bring a Cressida to this Troilus.
I understand you sir, 'tis well begged.
The matter I hope is not great sir; begging, but a beggar: Cressida was a beggar. My Lady is within sir. I will construe to them whence you come, who you are, and what you would are out of my welkin, I might say Element, but the word is overworn.
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool,
And to do that well, craves a kind of wit:
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time:
And like the Haggard, check at every Feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practice,
As full of labour as a Wiseman's Art:
For folly that he wisely shows, is fit;
But wisemen's folly fall'n, quite taint their wit.
Save you Gentleman.
And you sir.
Dieu vou guard Monsieur.
Et vouz ousie vostre seruiture.
I hope sir, you are, and I am yours.
Will you encounter the house, my Niece is desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her.
I am bound to your Niece sir, I mean she is the list of my voyage.
Taste your legs sir, put them to motion.
My legs do better understand me sir, than I understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
I mean to go sir, to enter.
I will answer you with gate and entrance, but we are prevented.
Most excellent accomplished Lady, the heaven's rain Odours on you.
That youth's a rare Courtier, rain odours, well.
My matter hath no voice Lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.
Odours, pregnant, and vouchsafed: I'll get 'em all three already.
Let the Garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing. Give me your hand sir.
My duty Madam, and most humble seruices
What is your name?
Cesario is your servant's name, fair Princess.
My servant sir? 'Twas never merry world, Since lowly feigning was called compliment: ye are servant to the Count Orsino youth.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours: your servant's servant, is your servant Madam.
For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts,
Would they were blanks, rather than filled with me.
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
On his behalf.
O by your leave I pray you.
I bade you never speak again of him;
But would you undertake another suit
I had rather hear you, to solicit that,
Then Music from the spheres.
Dear Lady.
Give me leave, beseech you: I did send,
After the last enchantment you did hear,
A Ring in chase of you. So did I abuse
Myself, my servant, and I fear me you:
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you in a shameful cunning
Which you knew none of yours. What might you think?
Have you not set mine Honour at the stake,
And baited it with all th' unmuzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
Enough is shown, a Cypress, not a bosom,
Hides my heart: so let me hear you speak.
I pity you.
That's a degree to love.
No not a grize: for 'tis a vulgar proof
That very oft we pity enemies.
Why then me thinks 'tis time to smile again:
O world, how apt the poor are to be proud?
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the Lion, than the Wolf?
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time:
Be not afraid good youth, I will not have you,
And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest,
your wife is like to reap a proper man:
There lies your way, due West.
Then Westward ho:
Grace and good disposition attend your Ladyship:
you'll nothing Madam to my Lord, by me:
Stay: I prithee tell me what thou thinkest of me?
That you do think you are not what you are.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
I would you were, as I would have you be.
Would it be better Madam, than I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
O what a deal of scorn, looks beautiful?
In the contempt and anger of his lip,
A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon,
Then love that would seem hid: Love's night, is noon.
Cesario, by the Roses of the Spring,
By maid-hood, honour, truth, and every thing,
I love thee so, that maugre all thy pride,
Nor wit, nor reason, can my passion hide:
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woe, thou therefore hast no cause:
But rather reason thus, with reason fetter;
Love sought, is good: but given unsought, is better.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth,
I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth,
And that no woman has, nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu good Madam, never more,
Will I my Master's tears to you deplore.
Yet come again: for thou perhaps mayst move
That heart which now abhors, to like his love.
No faith, I'll not stay a jot longer:
Thy reason dear venom, give thy reason.
You must needes yield your reason, Sir Andrew?
Marry I saw your Niece do more favours to the Count's serving-man, than ever she bestowed upon me: I saw't i' th' Orchard.
Did she see the while, old boy, tell me that.
As plain as I see you now.
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
'Slight; will you make an Ass o'me.
I will prove it legitimate sir, upon the Oaths of judgement, and reason.
And they have been grand jury men, since before Noah was a Sailor.
She did show favour to the youth in your sight, only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to put fire in your Heart, and brimstone in your Liver: you should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests, firenew from the mint, you should have bangd the youth into dumbness: this was looked for at your hand, and this was balked: the double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now sailed into the North of my Lady's opinion, where you will hang like an ysickle on a Dutchmans' beard, unless you do redeem it, by some laudable attempt, either of valour or policy.
an't be any way, it must be with Valour, for policy I hate: I had as lief be a Brownist, as a Politician.
Why then build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valour. Challenge me the Count's youth to sight with him hurt him in eleven places, my Niece shall take note of it, and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world, can more prevail in man's commendation with woman, then report of valour.
There is no way but this sir Andrew.
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
o, write it in a martial hand, be curst and briefe: it is no matter how wittie, so it bee eloquent, and full of inuention: taunt hi with the license of Inke: if thou thou'st him some thrice, it shall not be amisse, and as many Lyes, as will lye in thy sheete of paper, although the sheete were bigge enough for the bedde of Ware in England, set 'em downe, go about it. Let there bee gaulle enough in thy inke, though thou write with a Gooe-pen, no matter: about it.
Where shall I find you?
we'll call thee at the Cubiculo: Go.
This is a dear Manakin to you Sir Toby.
I have been dear to him lad, some two thousand strong, or so.
We shall have a rare Letter from him; but you'll not delivered.
Never trust me then: and by all means stir on the youth to an answer. I think Oxen and waine-ropes cannot hale them together. For Andrew, if he were opened and you find so much blood in his Liver, as will clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the rest of th' anatomy.
And his opposite the youth bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.
Look where the youngest Wren of mine comes.
If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourselves into stitches, follow me; yond gull Maluolio is turned Heathen, a very Renegatho; for there is no christian that means to be saved by believing rightly, can ever believe such impossible passages of grossness. he's in yellow stockings.
And cross gartered?
Most villainously: like a Pedant that keeps a School i' th' Church: I have dogged him like his murderer. He does obey every point of the Letter that I dropped, to betray him: He does smile his face into more lines, then is in the new Map, with the augmentation of the Indies: you have not seen such a thing as 'tis: I can hardly forbear hurling things at him, I know my Lady will strike him: if she do, he'll smile, and take't for a great favour.
Come bring us, bring us where he is.
I would not by my will have troubled you,
But since you make your pleasure of your pains,
I will no further chide you.
I could not stay behind you: my desire
(More sharp than filled steel) did spur me forth,
And not all love to see you (though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage)
But jealousy, what might befall your rravell,
Being skilless in these parts: which to a stranger,
Vnguided, and unfriended, often prove
Rough, and unhospitable. My willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear
Set forth in your pursuit.
My kind Anthonio,
I can no other answer make, but thankes,
And thankes: and ever oft good turns,
Are shuffled off with such uncurrant pay:
But were my worth, as is my conscience firm,
You should find better dealing: what's to do?
Shall we go see the relics of this Town?
To morrow sir, best first go see your Lodging?
I am not weary, and 'tis long to night
I pray you let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorial, and the things of fame
That do renown this City.
Would you'd pardon me:
I do not without danger walk these streets.
Once in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys,
I did some service, of such note indeed,
That were I ta'en here, it would scarce be answered.
Belike you slew great number of his people.
Th' offence is not of such a bloody nature,
Albeit the quality of the time, and quarrel
Might well have given us bloody argument:
It might have since been answered in repaying
What we took from them, which for Traffics sake
Most of our City did. Only myself stood out,
For which if I be lapsed in this place
I shall pay dear.
Do not then walk too open.
It doth not fit me: hold sir, here's my purse,
In the South Suburbs at the Elephant
Is best to lodge: I will bespeak our diet,
Whiles you beguile the time, and feed your knowledge
With viewing of the Town, there shall you have me.
Why I your purse?
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy
You have desire to purchase: and your store
I think is not for idle Markets, sir.
I'll be your purse-bearer, and leave you
For an hour.
To th' Elephant.
I do remember.
I have sent after him, he says he'll come:
How shall I feast him? What bestow of him?
For youth is bought more oft, then begged, or borrowed.
I speak too loud: Where's Maluolio, he is sad, and civil,
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes,
Where is Maluolio?
He's coming Madame:
But in very strange manner. He is sure possessed Madam.
Why what's the matter, does he rave?
No Madam, he does nothing but smile: your Ladyship were best to have some guard about you, if he come, for sure the man is tainted in's wits.
Go call him hither.
I am as mad as he,
If sad and merry madness equal be.
How now Maluolio?
Sweet Lady, ho, ho.
Smil'st thou? I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
Sad Lady, I could be sad:
This does make some obstruction in the blood:
This crosse-gartering, but what of that?
If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true
Sonnet is: Please one, and please all.
Why how dost thou man?
What is the matter with thee?
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs: It did come to his hands, and Commands shall be executed. I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
Wilt thou go to bed Maluolio?
To bed? I sweet heart, and I'll come to thee.
God comfort thee: Why dost thou smile so, and kiss thy hand so oft?
How do you Maluolio?
At your request:
Yes Nightingales answer Daws.
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my Lady.
Be not afraid of greatness: 'twas well writ.
What meanest thou by that Maluolio?
Some are borne great.
Ha'?
Some atcheeve greatness.
What sayest thou?
And some have greatness thrust upon them.
Heaven restore thee.
Remember who commended thy yellow stockings.
Thy yellow stockings?
And wished to see thee cross gartered.
Cross gartered?
Go too, thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so.
Am I made?
If not, let me see thee a servant still.
Why this is very Midsummer madness.
Madame, the young Gentleman of the Count Orsino's is returned, I could hardly entreat him back: he attends your Ladyship's pleasure.
I'll come to him.
Good Maria, let this fellow be look'd too. Where's my Cousin Toby, let some of my people have a special care of him, I would not have him miscarry for the half of my Dowry.
Oh ho, do you come near me now: no worse man than sir Toby to look to me. This concurres directly with the Letter, she sends him on purpose, that I may appear stubborn to him: for she incites me to that in the Letter. Cast thy humble slough says she: be opposite with a Kinsman, surly with servants, let thy tongue langer with arguments of state, put thyself into the trick of singularity: and consequently sets down the manner how: as a sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of some Sir of note, and so forth. I have limed her, but it is Jove's doing, and Ioue make me thankful. And when she went away now, let this Fellow be looked too: Fellow? not Maluolio, nor after my degree, but Fellow. Why every thing adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstance: What can be said? Nothing that can be, can come between me, and the full prospect of my hopes. Well Ioue, not I, is the doer of this, and he is to be thanked.
Which way is he in the name of sanctity. If all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possessed him, yet I'll speak to him.
here he is, here he is: how is't with you sir?
How is't with you man?
Go off, I discard you: let me enjoy my private: go off.
Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him; did not I tell you? Sir Toby, my Lady prays you to have a care of him.
Ah ha', does she so?
Go too, go too: peace, peace, we must deal gently with him: Let me alone. How do you Maluolio? How is't with you? What man, defy the devil: consider, he's an enemy to mankind.
Do you know what you say?
La you, and you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart Pray God he be not bewitched.
Carry his water to th' wise woman.
Marry and it shall be done to morrow morning if I live. My Lady would not lose him for more than i'll say.
How now mistress?
Oh Lord.
Prithee hold thy peace, this is not the way: Do you not see you move him? Let me alone with him.
No way but gentleness, gently, gently: the Fiend is rough, and will not be roughly used.
Why how now my bawcock? how dost thou chuck?
Sir.
I biddy, come with me. What man, 'tis not for gravity to play at cherry pit with sathan Hang him foul collier.
Get him to say his prayers, good sir Toby get him to pray.
My prayers Minx.
No I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.
Go hang yourselves all: you are idle shallow things, I am not of your element, you shall know more hereafter.
Is't possible?
If this were played upon a stage now, I could condemn it as an improbable fiction.
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device man.
Nay pursue him now, lest the device take air, and taint.
Why we shall make him mad indeed.
The house will be the quieter.
Come, we'll have him in a dark room & bound. My Niece is already in the belief that he's mad: we may carry it thus for our pleasure, and his penance, till our very pastime tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy on him: at which time, we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of madmen: but see, but see.
More matter for a May morning.
here's the Challenge, read it: I warrant there's vinegar and pepper in't.
Is't so saucy?
I, is't? I warrant him: do but read.
Give me.
Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.
Good, and valiant.
Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't.
A good note, that keeps you from the blow of the Law
Thou com'st to the Lady Olivia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly: but thou liest in thy throat, that is not the matter I challenge thee for.
Very brief, and to exceeding good senseless.
I will waylay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me.
Good.
Thou kill'st me like a rogue and a villain.
Still you keep o' th' windy side of the Law: good.
Fartheewell, and God have mercy upon one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thyself. Thy friend as thou usest him, & thy sworn enemy, Andrew Ague-cheeke.
If this Letter move him not, his legs cannot:
I'll give't him.
You may have very sit occasion foted: he is now in some commerce with my Lady, and will by and by departed.
Go sir Andrew: scout me for him at the corner of the Orchard like a bumbaylie: so soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou drawest, swear horrible: for it comes to pass oft, that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood more approbation, than ever proof itself would have earned him. Away.
Nay let me alone for swearing.
Now will not I deliver his Letter: for the behaviour of the young Gentleman, gives him out to be of good capacity, and breeding: his employment between his Lord and my Niece, confirms no less. Therefore, this Letter being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a Clodde-pole. But sir, I will deliver his Challenge by word of mouth; set upon Ague-cheeke a notable report of valour, and drive the Gentleman (as I know his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. This will so fright them both, that they will kill one another by the look, like Cockatrices.
here he comes with your Niece, give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a Challenge.
I have said too much unto a hart of stone,
And laid mine honour too unchary on't:
There's something in me that reproves my fault:
But such a headstrong potent fault it is,
That it but mocks reproof.
With the same hauiour that your passion bears,
Goes on my Master's griefs.
here, wear this jewel for me, 'tis my picture:
Refuse it not, it hath no tongue, to vex you:
And I beseech you come again to morrow.
What shall you ask of me that I'll deny,
That honour (saved) may upon ask give.
Nothing but this, your true love for my master.
How with mine honour may I give him that,
Which I have given to you.
I will acquit you.
Well, come again to morrow: faretheewell,
A Fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
Gentleman, God save thee.
And you sir.
That defence thou hast, betake the too't: of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not: but thy intercepter full of despite, bloody as the Hunter, attends thee at the Orchard end: dismount thy tuck, be you're in thy preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skilful, and deadly.
You mistake sir I am sure, no man hath any quarrel to me: my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offence done to any man.
You'll find it otherwise I assure you: therefore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard: for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath, can furnish man withal.
I pray you sir what is he?
He is knight dubbed with vnhatch'd Rapier, and on carpet consideration, but he is a devil in private brawl, souls and bodies hath he divorced three, and his incensement at this moment is so implacable, that satisfaction can be none, but by pangs of death and sepulchre: Hob, nob, is his word: give't or take't.
I will return again into the house, and desire some conduct of the Lady. I am no fighter, I have heard of some kind of men, that put quarrels purposely on others, to taste their valour: belike this is a man of that quirk.
Sir, no: his indignation derives itself out of a very computent injury, therefore get you on, and give him his desire. Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with me, which with as much safety you might answer him: therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked: for meddle you must that's certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you do me this courteous office, as to know of the Knight what my offence to him is: it is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.
I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this Gentleman, till my return.
Pray you sir, do you know of this matter?
I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrement, but nothing of the circumstance more.
I beseech you what manner of man is he?
Nothing of that wonderful promise to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour. He is indeed sir, the most skilful, bloody, & fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of Illyria: will you walk towards him, I will make your peace with him, if I can.
I shall be much bound to you for't: I am one, that had rather go with sir Priest, than sir knight: I care not who knows so much of my mettle.
Why man he's a very devil, I have not seen such a virago: I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all: and he gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion that it is inevitable: and on the answer, he pays you as surely, as your feet hits the ground they step on. They say, he has been Fencer to the Sophy.
Pox on't, I'll not meddle with him.
I but he will not now be pacified,
Fabian can scarce hold him yonder.
Plague on't, and I thought he had been vallant, and so cunning in Fence, I'd have seen him damned ere I'd have challenged him. Let him let the matter slip, and I'll give him my horse, grey Capilet.
I'll make the motion: stand here, make a good show on't, this shall end without the perdition of souls, marry I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you.
I have his horse to take up the quarrel, I have persuaded him the youths a devil.
He is as horribly conceited of him: and pants, & looks pale, as if a Bear were at his heels.
There's no remedy sir, he will fight with you for's oath sake: marry he hath better bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of: therefore draw for the supportance of his vow, he protests he will not hurt you.
Pray God defend me: a little thing would make me tell them how much I lack of a man.
Give ground if you see him furious.
Come sir Andrew, there's no remedy, the Gentleman will for his honour's sake have one bout with you: he cannot by the Duello avoid it: but he has promised me, as he is a Gentleman and a Soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on, too't.
Pray God he keep his oath.
I do assure you 'tis against my will.
Put up your sword: if this young Gentleman
Have done offence, I take the fault on me:
If you offend him, I for him defy you.
You sir? Why, what are you?
One sir, that for his love dares yet do more
Than you have heard him brag to you he will.
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
O good sir Toby hold: here come the Officers.
I'll be with you anon.
Pray sir, put your sword up if you please.
Marry will I sir: and for that I promised you I'll be as good as my word. He will bear you easily, and reigns well.
This is the man, do thy Office.
Anthonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino
You do mistake me sir.
No sir, no jot: I know your favour well:
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head:
Take him away, he knows I know him well.
I must obey. This comes with seeking you:
But there's no remedy, I shall answer it:
What will you do: now my necessity
Makes me to ask you for my purse. It grieves me
Much more, for what I cannot do for you,
Than what befalls myself: you stand amazed,
But be of comfort.
Come sir away.
I must entreat of you some of that money.
What money sir?
For the fair kindness you have showed me here,
And part being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
I'll lend you something: my having is not much,
I'll make division of my present with you:
Hold, there's half my Coffer.
Will you deny me now,
Is't possible that my deserts to you
Can lack persuasion. Do not tempt my misery,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.
I know of none,
Nor know I you by voice, or any feature:
I hate ingratitude more in a man,
Then lying, vainness, babbling drunkenness,
Or any taint of vice, whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood.
Oh heavens themselves.
Come sir, I pray you go.
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here,
I snatched one half out of the jaws of death,
Relieved him with such sanctity of Ioue;
And to his image, which me thought did promise
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
What's that to us, the time goes by: Away.
But oh, how vild an idol proves this God:
Thou hast Sebastian done good feature, shame.
In Nature, there's no blemish but the mind:
None can be called deformed, but the unkind.
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunks, ore-flourished by the devil.
The man grows mad, away with him:
Come, come sir.
Lead me on.
Me thinks his words do from such passion fly
That he believes himself, so do not I:
Prove true imagination, oh prove true,
That I dear brother, be now ta'en for you.
Come hither Knight, come hither Fabian: we'll whisper over a couplet or two of most sage saws.
He named Sebastian: I my brother know
Yet living in my glass: even such, and so
In favour was my Brother, and he went
Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
For him I imitate: Oh if it prove,
Tempests are kind, and salt waves fresh in love.
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward then a Hare, his dishonesty appears, in leaving his friend here in necessity, and denying him: and for his cowardship ask Fabian.
A Coward, a most devout Coward, religious in it.
'Slid I'll after him again, and beat him.
Do, cuff him sound, but never draw thy sword
And I do not.
Come, let's see the event.
I dare lay any money, 'twill be nothing yet.
Will you make me believe, that I am not sent for you?
Go too, go too, thou art a foolish fellow,
Let me be clear of thee.
Well held our i'faith: No, I do not know you, nor I am not sent to you by my Lady, to bid you come speak with her: nor your name is not Master Cesario, nor this is not my nose neither: Nothing that is so, is so.
I prithee vent thy folly somewhere else, thou knowst not me.
Vent my folly: He has heard that word of some great man, and now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly: I am afraid this great lubber the World will prove a Cockney: I prithee now ungird thy strangeness, and tell me what I shall vent to my Lady? Shall I vent to her that thou art coming?
I prithee foolish greek depart from me, there's money for thee, if you tarry longer, I shall give worse payment.
By my troth thou hast an open hand: these Wisemen that give fools money, get themselves a good report, after fourteen years' purchase.
Now sir, have I met you again: there's for you.
Why there's for thee, and there, and there,
Are all the people mad?
Hold sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.
This will I tell my Lady strait, I would not be in some of your coats for two pence.
Come on sir, hold.
Nay let him alone, I'll go another way to work with him: I'll have an action of Battery against him, if there be any law in Illyria: though I struck him first, yet it's no matter for that.
Let go thy hand.
Come sir, I will not let you go. Come my young soldier put up your iron: you are well fleshed: Come on.
I will be free from thee. What wouldst thou now?
If thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.
What, what? Nay then I must have an Ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.
Hold Toby, on thy life I charge thee hold.
Madam.
Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the Mountains, and the barbarous Caves,
Where manners ne'er were preached: out of my sight.
Be not offended, dear Cesario:
Rudesbey be gone. I prithee gentle friend,
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion sway
In this uncivil, and unjust extent
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
This Ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby
Mayst smile at this: Thou shalt not choose but go:
Do not deny, beshrew his soul for me,
He started one poor heart of mine, in thee.
What relish is in this? How runs the stream?
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream:
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe sleep,
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep.
Nay come I prithee, would thoud'st be ruled by me
Madam, I will.
O say so, and so be.
Nay, I prithee put on this gown, & this beard, make him believe thou art sir Topas the Curate, do it quickly. I'll call sir Toby the whilst.
Well, I'll put it on, and I will dissemble myself in't, and I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown. I am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to be thought a good Student: but to be said an honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly, as to say, a careful man, & a great scholar. The Competitors enter.
Ioue bless thee M. Parson.
Bonos dies sir Toby: for as the old hermit of Prage that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a Niece of King Gorbodacke, that that is, is: so I being M. Parson, am M. Parson; for what is that, but that? and is, but is?
To him sir Topas.
What hoa, I say, Peace in this prison.
The knave counterfeits well: a good knave.
Who calls there?
Sir Topas the Curate, who comes to visit Maluolio the Lunatic.
Sir Topas, sir Topas, good sir Topas go to my Lady.
Out hyperbolical fiend, how vexest thou this man? Talkest thou nothing but of Ladies?
Well said M. Parson.
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged, good sir Topas do not think I am mad: they have laid me here in hideous darkness.
Fie, thou dishonest sathan: I call thee by the most modest terms, for I am one of those gentle ones, that will use the devil himself with courtesy: sayest thou that house is dark?
As hell sir Topas.
Why it hath bay Windows transparent as baricadoes, and the clear stores toward the South north, are as lustrous as Ebony: and yet complainest thou of obstruction?
I am not mad sir Topas, I say to you this house is dark.
Madman thou errest: I say there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzeled than the Egyptians in their fog.
I say this house is as dark as Ignorance, though Ignorance were as dark as hell; and I say there was never man thus abused, I am no more mad than you are, make the trial of it in any constant question.
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning Wildfowl?
That the soul of our grandam, might happily inhabit a bird.
What thinkest thou of his opinion?
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
Far thee well: remain thou still in darkness, thou shalt hold th' opinion of Pythagoras, ere I will allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a Woodcock, lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Far thee well.
Sir Topas, sir Topas.
My most exquisite sir Topas.
Nay I am for all waters.
Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown, he sees thee not.
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findest him: I would we were well rid of this knavery. If he may be conveniently delivered, I would he were, for I am now so far in offence with my Niece, that I cannot pursue with any safety this sport the vppeshot. Come by and by to my Chamber.
hay Robin, jolly Robin, tell me how thy Lady does.
Foole.
My Lady is unkind, perdie.
Foole.
Alas why is she so?
Fool, I say.
She loves another. Who calls, ha'?
Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a Candle, and pen, ink, and paper: as I am a Gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee for't.
M. Maluolio?
I good Foole.
Alas sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
Fool, there was never man so notoriously abused: I am as well in my wits (fool) as thou art.
But as well: than you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits then a fool.
They have here propertied me: keep me in darkness, send Ministers to me, Asses, and do all they can to face me out of my wits.
Advise you what you say: the Minister is here. Maluolio, Maluolio, thy wits the heavens restore: endeavour thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble babble.
Sir Topas.
Maintain no words with him good fellow.
Who I sir, not I sir. God buy you good sir Topas: Marry Amen. I will sir, I will.
Fool, fool, fool I say.
Alas sir be patiented. What say you sir, I am shent for speaking to you.
Good fool, help me to some light, and some paper, I tell thee I am as well in my wits, as any man in Illyria.
Welladay, that you were sir.
By this hand I am: good fool, some ink, paper, and light: and convey what I will set down to my Lady: it shall advantage thee more, than ever the bearing of Letter did.
I will help you too't. But tell me true, are you not mad indeed, or do you but counterfeit.
Believe me I am not, I tell thee true.
Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains
I will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.
Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree:
I prithee be gone.
I am gone sir, and anon sir,
I'll be with you again:
In a trice, like to the old vice,
your need to sustain.
Who with dagger of lath, in his rage and his wrath,
cries ah ha', to the devil:
Like a mad lad, pair thy nails dad,
Adieu good man devil.
This is the air, that is the glorious Sun,
This pearl she gave me, I do feel't, and see't,
And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Anthonio then,
I could not find him at the Elephant,
Yet there he was, and there I found this credit,
That he did range the town to seek me out,
His council now might do me golden service,
For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Yet doth this accident and flood of Fortune,
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes,
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust, but that I am mad,
Or else the Ladies mad; yet if 'twere so,
She could not sway her house, command her followers,
Take, and give back affairs, and their dispatch,
With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing
As I perceive she does: there's something in't
That is deceivable. But here the Lady comes.
Blame not this haste of mine: if you mean well
Now go with me, and with this holy man
Into the Chantry by: there before him,
And underneath that consecrated roof,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith,
That my most jealous, and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it,
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth, what do you say?
I'll follow this good man, and go with you,
And having sworn truth, ever will be true.
Then lead the way good father, & heavens so shine,
That they may fairly note this act of mine.
Now as thou lov'st me, let me see his Letter.
Good M. Fabian, grant me another request.
Any thing.
Do not desire to see this Letter.
This is to give a dog, and in recompense desire my dog again.
Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
I sir, we are some of her trappings.
I know thee well: how dost thou my good Fellow?
Truly sir, the better for my foes, and the worse for my friends.
Just the contrary: the better for thy friends.
No sir, the worse.
How can that be?
Marry sir, they praise me, and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me plainly, I am an Ass: so that by my foe's sir, I profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends I am abused: so that conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why then the worse for my friends, and the better for my foes.
Why this is excellent.
By my troth sir, no: though it please you to be one of my friends.
Thou shalt not be the worse for me, there's gold.
But that it would be double dealing sir, I would you could make it another.
O you give me ill counsel.
Put your grace in your pocket sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.
Well, I will be so much a sinner to be a double dealer: there's another.
Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play, and the old saying is, the third pays for all: the triplex sir, is a good tripping measure, or the bells of S. Bennet sir, may put you in mind, one, two, three.
You can fool no more money out of me at this throw: if you will let your Lady know I am here to speak with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.
Marry sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come again. I go sir, but I would not have you to think, that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness: but as you say sir, let your bounty take a nap, I will awake it anon.
Here comes the man sir, that did rescue me.
That face of his I do remember well,
yet when I saw it last, it was besmeared
As black as Vulcan, in the smoke of war:
A bawbling Vessel was he Captain of,
For shallow draught and bulk unprizable,
With which such scathfull grapple did he make,
With the most noble bottom of our Fleet,
That very envy, and the tongue of loss
Cried fame and honour on him: What's the matter?
Orsino, this is that Anthonio
That took the Phoenix, and her fraught from Candy,
And this is he that did the Tiger board,
When your young Nephew Titus lost his leg;
here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
In private brabble did we apprehend him.
He did me kindness sir, drew on my side,
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me,
I know not what 'twas, but distraction.
Notable Pirate, thou salt-water Thief,
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,
Whom thou in terms so bloody, and so dear
Hast made thine enemies?
Orsino: Noble sir,
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me:
Anthonio never yet was Thief, or Pirate,
Though I confess, on base and ground enough
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
That most ingrateful boy there by your side,
From the rude seas enraged and foamy mouth
Did I redeem: a wrack past hope he was:
His life I gave him, and did thereto add
My love without retention, or restraint,
All his in dedication. For his sake,
Did I expose myself (pure for his love)
Into the danger of this adverse Town,
Drew to defend him, when he was beset:
Where being apprehended, his false cunning
(Not meaning to partake with me in danger)
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
And grew a twenty years removed thing
While one would wink: denied me mine own purse,
Which I had recommended to his use,
Not halfe an hour before.
How can this be?
When came he to this Town?
To day my Lord: and for three months before,
No interim, not a minute's vacancy,
Both day and night did we keep company.
here comes the Countess, now heaven walks on earth:
But for thee fellow, fellow thy words are madness,
Three months this youth hath tended upon me,
But more of that anon. Take him aside.
What would my Lord, but that he may not have,
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
Madam:
Gracious Olivia.
What do you say Cesario? Good my Lord.
My Lord would speak, my duty hushes me.
If it be aught to the old tune my Lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
As howling after Music.
Still so cruel?
Still so constant Lord.
What to perverseness? you uncivil Lady
To whose ingrate, and unauspicious Altars
My soul the faithfullest offerings have breathed out
That ere devotion tendered. What shall I do?
Even what it please my Lord, that shall become him
Why should I not, (had I the heart to do it)
Like to th' Egyptian thief, at point of death
Kill what I love: (a savage jealousy,
That sometime savours nobly) but hear me this:
Since you to non-regardance cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That screws me from my true place in your favour:
Live you the Marble-breasted Tyrant still.
But this your Minion, whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
Where he sits crowned in his master's spite.
Come boy with me, my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
I'll sacrifice the Lamb that I do love,
To spite a Raven's heart within a Dove.
And I most jocund, apt, and willingly,
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would dye.
Where goes Cesario?
After him I love,
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
More by all moor, then ere I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesss above
Punish my life, for tainting of my love.
Ay me detested, how am I beguiled?
Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?
Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?
Call forth the holy Father.
Come, away.
Whether my Lord? Cesario, Husband, stay.
Husband?
I Husband. Can he that deny?
Her husband, sirrah?
No my Lord, not I
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear,
That makes thee strangle thy propriety:
Fear not Cesario, take thy fortunes up,
Be that thou knowst thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fearest.
O welcome Father:
Father, I charge thee by thy reverence
here to unfold, though lately we intended
To keep in darkness, what occasion now
Reveals before 'tis ripe: what thou dost know
Hath newly passed, between this youth, and me.
A Contract of eternal bond of love,
Confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands,
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Strengthened by enterchangement of your rings,
And all the Ceremony of this compact
Sealed in my function, by my testimony:
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
I have travailed but two hours.
O thou dissembling Cub: what wilt thou be
When time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow:
Farewell, and take her, but direct thy feet,
Where thou, and I (henceforth) may never meet.
My Lord, I do protest.
O do not swear,
Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
For the love of God a Surgeon, send one presently to sir Toby.
What's the matter?
H'as broke my head across, and has given Sir Toby a bloody Coxcomb too: for the love of God your help, I had rather than forty pound I were at home.
Who has done this sir Andrew?
The Count's Gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for a Coward, but he's the very devil incarnate.
My Gentleman Cesario?
Odd's lifelings here he is: you broke my head for nothing, and that that I did, I was set on to do't by sir Toby.
Why do you speak to me, I never hurt you:
you drew your sword upon me without cause,
But I bespoke you fair, and hurt you not.
If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me: I think you set nothing by a bloody Coxcomb. here comes sir Toby halting, you shall hear more: but if he had not been in drink, he would have tickled you other gates than he did.
How now Gentleman? how is't with you?
That's all one, has hurt me, and there's th' end on't:
Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?
O he's drunk sir Toby an hour agone: his eyes were set at eight i' th' morning.
Then he's a Rogue, and a passy measures panyn: I hate a drunken rogue.
Away with him? Who hath made this havoc with them?
I'll help you sir Toby, because we'll be dressed together.
Will you help an Ass-head, and a coxcomb, & a knave: a thin faced knave, a gull?
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked too.
I am sorry Madam I have hurt your kinsman:
But had it been the brother of my blood,
I must have done no less with wit and safety.
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
I do perceive it hath offended you:
Pardon me (sweet one) even for the vows
We made each other, but so late ago.
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
A natural Perspective, that is, and is not.
Anthonio: O my dear Anthonio,
How have the hours racked, and tortured me,
Since I have lost thee?
Sebastian are you?
Fearest thou that Anthonio?
How have you made division of yourself,
An apple cleft in two, is not more twin
Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Most wonderful.
Do I stand there? I never had a brother:
Nor can there be that Deity in my nature
Of here, and every where. I had a sister,
Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured:
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What Countryman? What name? What Parentage?
Of Messalina: Sebastian was my Father,
Such a Sebastian was my brother too:
So went he suited to his watery tomb:
If spirits can assume both form and suit,
You come to fright us.
A spirit I am indeed,
But am in that dimension grossly clad,
Which from the womb I did participate.
Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
And say, thrice welcome drowned Viola.
My father had a mole upon his brow.
And so had mine.
And died that day when Viola from her birth
Had numbered thirteen years.
O that record is lively in my soul,
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.
If nothing lets to make us happy both,
But this my masculine usurped attire:
Do not embrace me, till each circumstance,
Of place, time, fortune, do co-here and jump
That I am Viola, which to confirm,
I'll bring you to a Captain in this Town,
Where lie my maiden weeds: by whose gentle help,
I was preserved to serve this Noble Count:
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this Lady, and this Lord.
So comes it Lady, you have been mistook:
But Nature to her bias drew in that.
You would have been contracted to a Maid,
Nor are you therein (by my life) deceived,
You are betrothed both to a maid and man.
Be not amazed, right noble is his blood:
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
I shall have share in this most happy wrack,
Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times,
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
And all those sayings, will I over swear,
And all those swear keep as true in soul,
As doth that Orbed Continent, the fire,
That severs day from night.
Give me thy hand,
And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.
The Captain that did bring me first on shore
Hath my maid's garments: he upon some Action
Is now in durance, at Maluolio's suit,
A Gentleman, and follower of my Ladies.
He shall enlarge him: fetch Maluolio hither,
And yet alas, now I remember me,
They say poor Gentleman, he's much distracted.
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my remembrance, clearly banished his.
How does he sirrah?
Truly Madam, he holds Belzebub at the staff's end as well as a man in his case may do: has here writ a letter to you, I should have given't you to day morning. But as a madmans' Epistles are no Gospels, so it skills not much when they are delivered.
Open't, and read it.
Look then to be well edified, when the Fool delivers the Madman. By the Lord Madam.
How now, art thou mad?
No Madam, I do but read madness: and your Ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must allow Vox.
Prithee read i' thy right wits.
So I do Madonna: but to read his right wits, is to read thus: therefore, perpend my Princess, and give ear.
Read it you, sirrah.
Reads. By the Lord Madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it: Though you have put me into darkness, and given your drunken Cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as your Ladyship. I have your own letter, that induced me to the semblance I put on; with the which I doubt not, but to do myself much right, or you much shame: think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little unthought of, and speak out of my injury.
Did he write this?
I Madame.
This savours not much of distraction.
See him delivered Fabian, bring him hither:
My Lord, so please you, these things further thought on,
To think me as well a sister, as a wife,
One day shall crown th' alliance on't, so please you,
here at my house, and at my proper cost.
Madam, I am most apt t' embrace your offer:
Your Master quits you; and for your service done him,
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you called me Master, for so long:
here is my hand, you shall from this time be
your Master's Mistress.
A sister, you are she.
Is this the Madman?
I my Lord, this same: How now Maluolio?
Madam, you have done me wrong,
Notorious wrong.
Have I Maluolio? No.
Lady you have, pray you peruse that Letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand,
Writ from it if you can, in hand, or phrase,
Or say, 'tis not your seal, not your invention:
You can say none of this. Well, grant it then,
And tell me in the modesty of honour,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour,
Bade me come smiling, and cross-gartered to you,
To put on yellow stockings, and to frown
Upon sir Toby, and the lighter people:
And acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the Priest,
And made the most notorious gecke and gull,
That ere invention played on? Tell me why?
Alas Maluolio, this is not my writing,
Though I confess much like the Character:
But out of question, 'tis Maria's hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then cam'st in smiling,
And in such forms, which here were presupposed
Upon thee in the Letter: prithee be content,
This practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee:
But when we know the grounds, and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the Plaintiff and the judge
Of thine own cause.
Good Madam hear me speak,
And let no quarrel, nor no brawl to come,
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wondered at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess myself, and Toby
Set this device against Maluolio here,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
We had conceived against him. Maria writ
The Letter, at sir Tobyes' great importance,
In recompense whereof, he hath married her:
How with a sportful malice it was followed,
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,
If that the injuries be justly weighed,
That have on both sides past.
Alas poor Fool, how have they baffled thee?
Why some are borne great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrown upon them. I was one sir, in this Interlude, one sir Topas sir, but that's all one: By the Lord Fool, I am not mad: but do you remember, Madam, why laugh you at such a barren rascal, and you smile not he's gagged: and thus the whirlegigge of time, brings in his revenges.
I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you?
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Pursue him, and entreat him to a peace:
He hath not told us of the Captain yet,
When that is known, and golden time convents
A solemn Combination shall be made
Of our dear souls. Mean time sweet sister,
We will not part from hence. Cesaerio come
(For so you shall be while you are a man:)
But when in other habits you are seen,
Orsino's Mistress, and his fancy's Queen.
When that I was and a little tine boy, with hay, ho, the wind and the rain:
A foolish thing was but a toy, for the rain it raineth every day.
But when I came to man's estate, with hay ho, etc.
'Gainst Knaves and thieves men shut their gate, for the rain, etc.
But when I came alas to wine, with hay ho, etc.
By swaggering could I never thrive, for the rain, etc.
But when I came unto my beds, with hay ho, etc.
With tospottes still had drunken heads, for the rain, etc.
A great while ago the world begun, hay ho, etc.
But that's all one, our Play is done, and we'll strive to please you every day.