IF you shall chance (Camillo) to visit Bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my services are now on-foot, you shall see (as I have said) great difference betwixt our Bohemia, and your Sicilia.
I think, this coming Summer, the King of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the Visitation, which he justly owes him.
Wherein our Entertainment shall shame us: we will be justified in our Loves: for indeed—
Beseech you—
Verily I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge: we cannot with such magnificence— in so rare— I know not what to say— We will give you sleepy Drinks, that your Senses (un-intelligent of our insufficience) may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse us.
You pay a great deal to dear, for what's given freely.
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me, and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia: They were trained together in their Child-hoods; and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection, which cannot choose but branch now. Since their more mature Dignities, and Royal Necessities, made separation of their Society, their Encounters (though not Personal) hath been Royally attornyed with interchange of Gifts, Letters, loving Embassies, that they have seemed to be together, though absent: shook hands, as over a Vast; and embraced as it were from the ends of opposed Winds. The Heavens continue their Loves.
I think there is not in the World, either Malice or Matter, to alter it. You have an unspeakable comfort of your young Prince Mamillius: it is a Gentleman of the greatest Promise, that ever came into my Note.
I very well agree with you, in the hopes of him: it is a gallant Child; one, that (indeed) Physics the Subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on Crutches ere he was borne, desire yet their life, to see him a Man.
Would they else be content to die?
Yes; if there were no other excuse, why they should desire to live.
If the King had no Son, they would desire to live on Crutches till he had one.
Nine Changes of the Watry-Starre hath been
The Shepherd's Note, since we have left our Throne
Without a Burden: Time as long again
Would be filled up (my Brother) with our Thanks,
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: And therefore, like a cipher
(Yet standing in rich place) I multiply
With one we thank you, many thousands more,
That go before it.
Stay your Thanks a while,
And pay them when you part.
Sir, that's to morrow:
I am questioned by my fears, of what may chance,
Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
No sneaping Winds at home, to make us say,
This is put forth too truly: besides, I have stayed
To tire your Royalty.
We are tougher (Brother)
Than you can put us to't.
No longer stay.
One Seue'night longer.
Very sooth, to morrow.
we'll part the time betweene's then: and in that I'll no gainsaying.
Press me not (' beseech you) so:
There is no Tongue that moves; none, none i' th' World
So soon as yours, could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
'Twere needful I denied it. My Affairs
Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder,
Were (in your Love) a Whip to me; my stay,
To you a Charge, and Trouble: to save both,
Farewell (our Brother.)
Tongue-tied our Queen? speak you.
I had thought (Sir) to have held my peace, until
You had drawn Oaths from him, not to stay: you (Sir)
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
All in Bohemia's well: this satisfaction,
The by-gone-day proclaimed, say this to him,
He's beat from his best ward.
Well said, Hermione.
To tell, he longs to see his Son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
we'll thwack him hence with Distaffs.
Yet of your Royal presence, I'll adventure
The borrow of a Week. When at Bohemia
You take my Lord, I'll give him my Commission,
To let him there a Month, behind the Gest
Prefixed for's parting: yet (good-deed) Leontes,
I love thee not a jar o' th' Clock, behind
What Lady she her Lord. You'll stay?
No, Madame.
Nay, but you will?
I may not verily.
Verily?
You put me off with limber Vows: but I,
Though you would seek t' unsphere the Stars with Oaths,
Should yet say, Sir, no going: Verily
You shall not go; a Ladies Verily ' is
As potent as a Lords. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a Prisoner,
Not like a Guest: so you shall pay your Fees
When you depart, and save your Thanks. How say you?
My Prisoner? or my Guest? by your dread Verily,
One of them you shall be.
Your Guest then, Madame:
To be your Prisoner, should import offending;
Which is for me, less easy to commit,
Than you to punish.
Not your Gaoler then,
But your kind Hostess. Come, I'll question you
Of my Lords Tricks, and yours, when you were Boys:
You were pretty Lordings then?
We were (fair Queen)
Two Lads, that thought there was no more behind,
But such a day to morrow, as to day,
And to be Boy eternal.
Was not my Lord
The verver Wag o' th' two?
We were as twyned Lambs, that did frisk i' th' Sun,
And bleat the one at th' other: what we changed,
Was Innocence, for Innocence: we knew not
The Doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamed
That any did: Had we pursued that life,
And our weak Spirits ne'er been higher reared
With stronger blood, we should have answered Heaven
Boldly, not guilty; the Imposition cleared,
Hereditary ours.
By this we gather
You have tripped since.
O my most sacred Lady,
Temptations have since then been borne to's: for
In those vnfledg'd days, was my Wife a Girl;
Your precious self had then not crossed the eyes
Of my young Play fellow.
Grace to boot:
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your Queen and I are Devils: yet go on,
Th' offences we have made you do, we'll answer,
If you first sinned with us: and that with us
You did continue fault; and that you slipped not
With any, but with us.
Is he won yet?
he'll stay (my Lord.)
At my request he would not:
Hermione (my dearest) thou never spoak'st
To better purpose.
Never?
Never, but once.
What? have I twice said well? when was't before?
I prithee tell me: crams with praise, and makes
As fat as tame things: One good deed, dying tongueless,
Slaughters a thousand, waiting upon that.
Our praises are our Wages. You may ride's
With one soft Kiss a thousand Furlongs, ere
With Spur we heat an Acre. But to th' Goal:
My last good deed, was to entreat his stay.
What was my first? it has an elder Sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her Name were Grace.
But once before I spoke to th' purpose? when?
Nay, let me have't: I long.
Why, that was when
Three crabbed Months had soured themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white Hand:
A clap thyself, my Love; then didst thou utter,
I am yours for ever.
'Tis Grace indeed.
Why lo-you now; I have spoke to th' purpose twice:
The one, for ever earned a Royal Husband;
Th' other, for some while a Friend.
Too hot, too hot:
To mingle friendship far, is mingling bloods.
I have Tremor Cordis on me: my heart dances,
But not for joy; not joy. This Entertainment
May a free face put on: derive a Liberty
From Heartiness, from Bounty, fertile Bosom,
And well become the Agent: it may; I grant:
But to be paddling Palms, and pinching Fingers,
As now they are, and making practised Smiles
As in a looking-glass; and then to sigh, as 'twere
The Mort o' th' Deer: oh, that is entertainment
My Bosom likes not, nor my Brows. Mamillius,
Art thou my Boy?
I, my good Lord.
I' faith:
Why that's my Bawcock: what? hast smutched thy Nose?
They say it is a Copy out of mine. Come Captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, Captain:
And yet the Steere, the Heycfer, and the Calf,
Are all called Neat. Still Virginalling
Upon his Palm? How now (you wanton Calf)
Art thou my Calf?
Yes, if you will (my Lord.)
Thou want'st a rough pash, & the shoots that I have
To be full, like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as Eggs; Women say so,
(That will say any thing.) But were they false
As o're-dyed Blacks, as Wind, as Waters; false
As Dice are to be wished, by one that fixes
No borne 'twixt his and mine; yet were it true,
To say this Boy were like me. Come (Sir Page)
Look on me with your Welkin eye: sweet Villain,
Most dearest, my Collop: Can thy Dam, may't be
Affection? thy Intention stabs the Centre.
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicat'st with Dreams (how can this be?)
With what's unreall: thou coactive art,
And fellowest nothing. Then 'tis very credent,
Thou may'st co-ioyne with something, and thou dost,
(And that beyond Commission) and I find it,
(And that to the infection of my Brains,
And hardening of my Brows.)
What means Sicilia?
He something seems unsettled.
How? my Lord?
What cheer? how is't with you, best Brother?
You look as if you held a Brow of much distraction:
Are you moved (my Lord?)
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes Nature will betray its folly?
It's tenderness? and make itself a Pastime
To harder bosoms? Looking on the Lynes
Of my Boy's face, me thoughts I did requoyle
Twenty three years, and saw myself vn-breeched,
In my green Velvet Coat; my Dagger muzzl'd,
Lest it should bite its Master, and so prove
(As Ornaments oft does) too dangerous:
How like (me thought) I then was to this Kernel,
This Squash, this Gentleman. Mine honest Friend,
Will you take Eggs for Money?
No (my Lord) I'll fight.
You will: why happy man be's dole. My Brother
Are you so fond of your young Prince, as we
Do seem to be of ours?
If at home (Sir)
He's all my Exercise, my Mirth, my Matter;
Now my sworn Friend, and then mine Enemy;
My Parasite my Soldier: Statesman; all:
He makes a Iulyes day, short as December,
And with his varying child-nesse, cures in me
Thoughts, that would thick my blood.
So stands this Squire
Officed with me: We two will walk (my Lord)
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou lov'st us, show in our Brother's welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily, be cheap:
Next to thyself, and my young Rover, he's
Apparent to my heart.
If you would seek us,
We are yours i' th' Garden: shall's attend you there?
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,
Be you beneath the Sky: I am angling now,
(Though you perceive me not how I give Lyne)
Go too, go too.
How she holds up the Neb? the Bill to him?
And arms her with the boldness of a Wife
To her allowing Husband. Gone already,
Ynch-thick knee-deep; o'er head and ears a forked one.
Go play (Boy) play: thy Mother plays, and I
Play too; but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hisse me to my Grave: Contempt and Clamour
Will be my Knell. Go play (Boy) play, there have been
(Or I am much deceived) Cuckolds ere now,
And many a man there is (even at this present,
Now, while I speak this) holds his Wife by th' Arm,
That little thinks she has been sluyced in's absence,
And his Pond fished by his next Neighbour (by
Sir Smile, his Neighbour:) nay, there's comfort in't,
Whiles other men have Gates, and those Gates opened
(As mine) against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted Wives, the tenth of Mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for't, there's none:
It is a bawdy Planet, that will strike
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful: think it:
From East, West, North, and South, be it concluded,
No Barricodo for a Belly. Know't,
It will let in and out the Enemy,
With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
Have the Disease, and feeleed not. How now Boy?
I am like you say.
Why, that's some comfort.
What? Camillo there?
I, my good Lord.
Go play (Mamillius) thou'rt an honest man:
Camillo, this great Sir will yet stay longer.
You had much ado to make his Anchor hold,
When you cast out, it still came home.
Didst note it?
He would not stay at your Petitions, made
His Business more material.
Didst perceive it?
They're here with me already; whispering, rounding:
Sicilia is a soforth: 'tis far gone,
When I shall gust it last. How camed (Camillo)
That he did stay?
At the good Queen's entreaty.
At the Queens be't: Good should be pertinent,
But so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding Pate but thine?
For thy Conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common Blocks. Not noted, is't,
But of the finer Natures? by some Severalls
Of Head-piece extraordinary? Lower Messes
Perchance are to this Business purblind? say.
Business, my Lord? I think most understand Bohemia stays here longer.
Ha'?
Stays here longer.
I, but why?
To satisfy your Highness, and the Entreaties
Of our most gracious Mistress.
Satisfy?
Th' entreaties of your Mistress? Satisfy?
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee (Camillo)
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My Chamber-Councels, wherein (Priestlike) thou
Hast cleansed my Bosom: I, from thee departed
Thy Penitent reformed: but we have been
Deceived in thy Integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.
Be it forbidden (my Lord.)
To bide upon't: thou art not honest: or
If thou inclinest that way, thou art a Coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From Course required: or else thou must be counted
A Servant, grafted in my serious Trust,
And therein negligent: or else a Fool,
That seest a Game played home, the rich Stake drawn,
And tak'st it all for jest.
My gracious Lord,
I may be negligent, foolish, and fearful,
In every one of these, no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the World,
Sometime puts forth in your affairs (my Lord.)
If ever I were wilfull-negligent,
It was my folly: if industriously
I played the Fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end: if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Whereof the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest: these (my Lord)
Are such allowed Infirmities, that honesty
Is never free of. But beseech your Grace
Be plainer with me, let me know my Trespass
By its own visage; if I then deny it,
'Tis none of mine.
Ha' not you seen Camillo?
(But that's past doubt: you have, or your eye-glasse
Is thicker than a Cuckold's Horn) or heard?
(For to a Vision so apparent, Rumour
Cannot be mute) or thought? (for Cogitation
Resides not in that man, that does not think)
My Wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor Eyes, nor Ears, nor Thought, then say
My Wife's a Holy-Horse, deserves a Name
As rank as any Flax-Wench, that puts to
Before her trothplight: say't, and iustifyed.
I would not be a stander-by, to hear
My Sovereign Mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken:' shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate, were sin
As deep as that, though true.
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning Cheek to Cheek? is meating Noses?
Kissing with inside Lip? stopping the Career
Of Laughter, with a sigh? (a Note infallible
Of breaking Honesty) horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing Clocks more swift?
Hours, Minutes? Noon, Midnight? and all Eyes
Blind with the Pin and Web, but theirs; theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? Is this nothing?
Why then the World, and all that's in't, is nothing,
The covering Sky is nothing, Bohemia nothing,
My Wife is nothing, nor Nothing have these Nothings,
If this be nothing.
Good my Lord, be cured
Of this diseased Opinion, and betimes,
For 'tis most dangerous.
Say it be, 'tis true.
No, no, my Lord.
It is: you lie, you lie:
I say thou liest Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross Lout, a mindless Slave,
Or else a hover Temporizer, that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my Wife's Liver
Infected (as her life) she would not live
The running of one Glass.
Who does infect her?
Why he that wears her like her Medulla, hanging
About his neck (Bohemia) who, if I
Had Servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine Honour, as their Profits.
(Their own particular Thrifts) they would do that
Which should undo more doing: I, and thou
His Cupbearer, whom I from meaner form
Have Benched, and reared to Worship, who may'st see
Plainly, as Heaven sees Earth, and Earth sees Heaven,
How I am galled, mightst be-spice a Cup,
To give mine Enemy a lasting Wink:
Which Draught to me, were cordial.
Sir (my Lord)
I could do this, and that with no rash Potion,
But with a lingering Dram, that should not work
Maliciously, like Poison: But I cannot
Believe this Crack to be in my dread Mistress
(So soveraignely being Honourable.)
I have loved thee.
Make that thy question, and go rot:
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation?
Sully the purity and whiteness of my Sheets
(Which to preserve, is Sleep; which being spotted,
Is goads, Thorns Nettles, Tails of Wasps)
Give scandal to the blood o' th' Prince, my Son,
(Who I do think is mine, and Ioue as mine)
Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?
Can man so blench?
I must believe you (Sir)
I do, and will fetch off Bohemia for't:
Provided, that when he's removed, your Highness
Will take again your Queen, as yours at first,
Even for your Son's sake, and thereby for sealing
The Injury of Tongues, in Courts and Kingdoms
Known, and allied to yours.
Thou dost advise me,
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
I'll give no blemish to her Honour, none.
My Lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As Friendship wears at Feasts, keep with Bohemia,
And with your Queen: I am his Cupbearer,
If from me he have wholesome Beveridge,
Account me not your Servant.
This is all:
Do't, and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do't not, thou splitt'st thine own.
I'll do't, my Lord.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
O miserable Lady. But for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes, and my ground to do't,
Is the obedience to a Master; one,
Who in Rebellion with himself, will have
All that are his, so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows: If I could find example
Of thousand's that had struck anointed Kings,
And flourished after, I'd not do't: But since
Nor Brass, nor Stone, nor Parchment bears not one,
Let Villainy itself forswear't. I must
Forsake the Court: to do't, or no, is certain
To me a breakeneck. Happy Star reign now,
Here comes Bohemia.
This is strange: methinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day Camillo.
Hail most Royal Sir.
What is the News i' th' Court?
None rare (my Lord.)
The King hath on him such a countenance,
As he had lost some Province, and a Region
Loved, as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customary compliment, when he
Wafting his eyes to th' contrary, and falling
A Lip of much contempt, speeds from me, and
So leaves me, to consider what is breeding,
That changes thus his Manners.
I dare not know (my Lord.)
How, dare not? do not? do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me, 'tis thereabouts:
For to yourself, what you do know, you must,
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a Mirror,
Which shows me mine changed too: for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
Myself thus altered with't.
There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the Disease, and it is caught
Of you, that yet are well.
How caught of me?
Make me not sighted like the Basilisque.
I have looked on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but killed none so: Camillo,
As you are certainly a Gentleman, thereto
Clerke-like experienced, which no less adorns
Our Gentry, than our Parents Noble Names,
In whose success we are gentle: I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behoove my knowledge,
Thereof to be informed, imprisoned not
In ignorant concealment.
I may not answer.
A Sickness caught of me, and yet I well?
I must be answered. Dost thou hear Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man,
Which Honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this Suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidencie thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near,
Which way to be prevented, if to be:
If not, how best to bear it.
Sir, I will tell you,
Since I am charged in Honour, and by him
That I think Honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly followed, as
I mean to utter it; or both yourself, and me,
Cry lost, and so good night.
On, good Camillo.
I am appointed him to murder you.
By whom, Camillo?
By the King.
For what?
He thinks, nay with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen't, or been an Instrument
To vice you to't, that you have touched his Queen
Forbiddenly.
Oh then, my best blood turn
To an infected Jelly, and my Name
Be yoked with his, that did betray the Best:
Turn then my freshest Reputation to
A savour, that may strike the dullest Nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunned,
Nay hated too, worse than the great'st Infection
That ere was heard, or read.
Swear his thought over
By each particular Star in Heaven, and
By all their Influences; you may as well
Forbidden the Sea for to obey the Moon,
As (or by Oath) remove, or (Counsel) shake
The Fabric of his Folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his Faith, and will continue
The standing of his Body.
How should this grow?
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to
Avoid what's grown, then question how 'tis borne.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this Trunk, which you
Shall bear along impawnd, away to Night,
Your Followers I will whisper to the Business,
And will by twoes, and three, at several Posterns,
Clear them o' th' City: For myself, I'll put
My fortunes to your service (which are here
By this discovery lost.) Be not uncertain,
For by the honour of my Parents, I
Have uttered Truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer,
Than one condemned by the Kings own mouth:
Thereon his Execution sworn.
I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in's face. Give me thy hand,
Be Pilot to me, and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My Ships are ready, and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious Creature: as she's rare,
Must it be great; and, as his Person's mighty,
Must it be violent: and, as he does conceive,
He is dishonoured by a man, which ever
Professed to him: why his Revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear ore-shades me:
Good Expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious Queen, part of his Theme; but nothing
Of his ill-ta'ne suspicion. Come Camillo,
I will respect thee as a Father, if
Thou bearest my life off, hence: Let us avoid.
It is in mine authority to command
The Keys of all the Posterns: Please your Highness
To take the urgent hour. Come Sir, away.
Take the Boy to you: he so troubles me,
'Tis past enduring.
Come (my gracious Lord)
Shall I be your playfellow?
No, I'll none of you.
Why (my sweet Lord?)
You'll kiss me hard, and speak to me, as if
I were a Baby still. I love you better.
And why so (my Lord?)
Not for because
Your Brows are blacker (yet black-browes they say
Become some Women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a Cemicircle,
Or a halfmoon, made with a Pen.)
Who taught ' this?
I learned it out of women's faces: pray now,
What colour are your eyebrows?
Blew (my Lord.)
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a Lady's Nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
Hark ye,
The Queen (your Mother) rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new Prince
One of these days, and then you'd wanton with us,
If we would have you.
She is spread of late
Into a goodly Bulk (good time encounter her.)
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come Sir, now
I am for you again: Pray you sit by us,
And tell's a Tale.
Merry, or sad, shalt be?
As merry as you will.
A sad Tale's best for Winter:
I have one of Sprights, and Goblins.
Let's have that (good Sir.)
Come-on, sit down, come-on, and do your best,
To fright me with your Sprights: you're powerful at it.
There was a man.
Nay, come sit down: then on.
Dwelled by a Churchyard: I will tell it softly,
Yond Crickets shall not hear it.
Come on then, and give't me in mine care.
Was he met there? his Train? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of Pines I met them, never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their Ships.
How blessed am I
In my just Censure? in my true Opinion?
Alack, for lesser knowledge, how accursed,
In being so blessed? There may be in the Cup
A Spider steeped, and one may drink; depart,
And yet partake no venom: (for his knowledge
Is not infected) but if one present
Th' abhorred Ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides
With violent Hefts: I have drunk, and seen the Spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his Pander:
There is a Plot against my Life, my Crown;
All's true that is mistrusted: that false Villain,
Whom I employed, was pre-employed by him:
He has discovered my Design, and I
Remain a pinched Thing; yea, a very Trick
For them to play at will: how came the Posterns
So easily open?
By his great authority,
Which often hath no less prevailed, then so,
On your command.
I know't too well.
Give me the Boy, I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.
What is this? Sport?
Bear the Boy hence, he shall not come about her,
Away with him, and let her sport herself
With that she's big-with, for 'tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.
But I'd say he had not;
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
How e'er you leave to th' Nay-ward.
You (my Lords)
Look on her, mark her well: be but about
To say she is a goodly Lady, and
The justice of your hearts will thereto add
'Tis pity she's not honest: Honourable;
Praise her but for this her without-dore-Forme,
(Which on my faith deserves high speech) and strait
The Shrug, the Hum, or Ha', (these Petty-brands
That Calumny doth use; Oh, I am out,
That Mercy does, for Calumny will fear
Virtue itself) these Shrugs, these Hum's, and Has,
When you have said she's goodly, come between,
Ere you can say she's honest: But be't known
(From him that has most cause to grieve it should be)
she's an adulteress.
Should a Villain say so,
(The most replenished Villain in the World)
He were as much more Villain: you (my Lord)
Do but mistake.
You have mistook (my Lady)
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou Thing,
(Which I'll not call a Creature of thy place,
Lest Barbarism (making me the precedent)
Should a like Language use to all degrees,
And mannerly distinguishment leave out,
Betwixt the Prince and Beggar:) I have said
she's an adulteress, I have said with whom:
More; she's a Traitor, and Camillo is
A Federarie with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know herself,
But with her most vild Principal: that she's
A Bedswaruer, even as bad as those
That Vulgars' give boldest Titles; I, and privy
To this their late escape.
No (by my life)
Privy to none of this: how will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have published me? Gentle my Lord.
You scarce can right me throughly, then, to say
You did mistake.
No: if I mistake
In those Foundations which I build upon,
The Centre is not big enough to bear
A Schoolboys Top. Away with her, to Prison:
He who shall speak for her, is a far-off guilty,
But that he speaks.
There's some ill Planet reigns:
I must be patiented, till the Heavens look
With an aspect more favourable. Good my Lords,
I am not prone to weeping (as our Sex
Commonly are) the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
That honourable Grief lodged here, which burns
Worse than Tears drown: beseech you all (my Lords)
With thoughts so qualified, as your Charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The Kings will be performed.
Shall I be heard?
Who is't that goes with me? beseech your Highness
My Women may be with me, for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep (good Fools)
There is no cause: When you shall know your Mistress
Has deserved Prison, then abound in Tears,
As I come out; this Action I now go on,
Is for my better grace. Adieu (my Lord)
I never wished to see you sorry, now
I trust I shall: my Women come, you have leave.
Go, do our bidding: hence.
Beseech your Highness call the Queen again.
Be certain what you do (Sir) lest your justice
Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your Queen, your Son.
For her (my Lord)
I dare my life lay down, and will do't (Sir)
Please you t' accept it, that the Queen is spotless
I' th' eyes of Heaven, and to you (I mean
In this, which you accuse her.)
If it prove
she's otherwise, I'll keep my Stables where
I lodge my Wife, I'll go in couples with her:
Then when I feel, and see her, no farther trust her:
For every inch of Woman in the World,
I, every dram of Woman's flesh is false,
If she be.
Hold your peaces.
Good my Lord.
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
You are abused, and by some butter on,
That will be damned for't: would I knew the Villain,
I would Land-damne him: be she honor-flawed,
I have three daughters: the eldest is eleven;
The second, and the third, nine: and some five:
If this prove true, they'll pay for't. By mine Honour
I'll gelled 'em all: fourteen they shall not see
To bring false generations: they are coheirs,
And I had rather glib myself, than they
Should not produce fair issue.
Cease, no more:
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a deadman's nose: but I do see't, and feel't,
As you feel doing thus: and see withal
The Instruments that feel.
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty,
There's not a grain of it, the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy-earth.
What? lacke I credit?
I had rather you did lack than I (my Lord)
Upon this ground: and more it would content me
To have her Honour true, than your suspicion
Be blamed for't how you might.
Why what need we
Commune with you of this? but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your Counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this: which, if you, or stupefied,
Or seeming so, in skill, cannot, or will not
Relish a truth, like us: inform yourselves,
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ordering on't,
Is all properly ours.
And I wish (my Liege)
You had only in your silent judgement tried it,
Without more overture.
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou were't borne a fool: Camillo's flight
Added to their Familiarity
(Which was as gross, as ever touched conjecture,
That lacked sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to ' th' deed) doth push-on this proceeding.
Yet, for a greater confirmation
(For in an Act of this importance, 'twere
Most piteous to be wild) I have dispatched in post,
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's Temple,
Cleomines and Dion, whom you know
Of stuff'dsufficiency: Now, from the Oracle
They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had
Shall stop, or spur me. Have I done well?
Well done (my Lord.)
Though I am satisfied, and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the Oracle
Give rest to th' minds of others; such as he
Whose ignorant credulity, will not
Come up to th' truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person, she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two, fled hence,
Be left her to perform. Come follow us,
We are to speak in public: for this business
Will raise us all.
To laughter, as I take it,
If the good truth, were known.
The Keeper of the prison, call to him:
Let him have knowledge who I am. Good Lady,
No Court in Europe is too good for thee,
What dost thou then in prison? Now good Sir,
You know me, do you not?
For a worthy Lady,
And one, who much I honour.
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the Queen.
I may not (Madam)
To the contrary I have express commandment.
Here's ado, to lock up honesty & honour from
Th' access of gentle visitors. Is't lawful pray you
To see her Women? Any of them? Emilia?
So please you (Madam)
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.
I pray now call her:
Withdraw yourselves.
And Madam,
I must be present at your Conference.
Well: be't so: prithee.
here's such ado, to make no stain, a stain,
As passes colouring. Dear Gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious Lady?
As well as one so great, and so forlorn
May hold together: On her frights, and griefs
(Which never tender Lady hath borne greater)
She is, something before her time, delivered.
A boy?
A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty, and like to live: the Queen receives
Much comfort in't: Says, my poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you,
I dare be sworn:
These dangerous, unsafe Lunes i' th' King, beshrew them:
He must be told on't, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best. I'll take't upon me,
If I prove hony-mouthed, let my tongue blister.
And never to my red-looked Anger be
The Trumpet any more: pray you (Emilia)
Commend my best obedience to the Queen,
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
I'll show't the King, and undertake to be
Her Advocate to th' loudest. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o' th' Child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades, when speaking fails.
Most worthy Madam,
your honour, and your goodness is so evident,
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no Lady living
So meet for this great errand; please your Ladyship
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Acquaint the Queen of your most noble offer,
Who, but to day hammered of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour
Lest she should be denied.
Tell her (Emilia)
I'll use that tongue I have: If wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom, lead not be doubted
I shall do good.
Now be you blessed for it.
I'll to the Queen: please you come something nearer.
Madam, if't please the Queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur, to pass it,
Having no warrant.
You need not fear it (sir)
This Child was prisoner to the womb, and is
By Law and process of great Nature, thence
Freed, and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the King, nor guilty of
(If any be) the trespass of the Queen.
I do believe it.
Do not you fear: upon mine honour, I
Will stand betwixt you, and danger.
Nor night, nor day, no rest: It is but weakness
To bear the matter thus: mere weakness, if
The cause were not in being: part o' th' cause,
She, th' adulteress: for the harlot-King
Is quite beyond mine Arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain: plot-proofe: but she,
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again. Whose there?
My Lord.
How does the boy?
He took good rest to night: 'tis hoped
His sickness is discharged.
To see his Nobleness,
Conceyving the dishonour of his Mother.
He strait declined, drooped, took it deeply,
Fastened, and fixed the shame on't in himself:
Threw-off his Spirit, his Appetite, his Sleep,
And downright languished. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares: Fie, fie, no thought of him,
The very thought of my Revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his Alliance; Let him be,
Until a time may serve. For present vengeance
Take it on her: Camillo, and Polixenes
Laugh at me: make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh, if I could reach them, nor
Shall she, within my power.
You must not enter.
Nay rather (good my Lords) be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more (alas)
Then the Queen's life? A gracious innocent soul,
More free, than he is jealous.
That's enough.
Madam; he hath not slept to night, commanded
None should come at him.
Not so hot (good Sir)
I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you
That creep like shadows by him, and do sigh
At each his needless heave: such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking. I
Do come with words, as medicinal, as true;
(Honest, as either;) to purge him of that humour,
That presses him from sleep.
Who noise there, ho?
No noise (my Lord) but needful conference,
About some Gossips for your Highness.
How?
Away with that audacious Lady. Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me,
I knew she would.
I told her so (my Lord)
On your displeasures peril, and on mine,
She should not visit you.
What? canst not rule her?
From all dishonesty he can: in this
(Unless he take the course that you have done)
Commit me, for committing honour, trust it,
He shall not rule me:
La-you now, you hear,
When she will take the rain, I let her run,
But she'll not stumble.
Good my Liege, I come:
And I beseech you hear me, who professes
Myself your loyal Servant, your Physician,
Your most obedient Counsellor: yet that dares
Less appear so, in comforting your Evils,
Then such as most seem yours. I say, I come
From your good Queen.
Good Queen?
Good Queen (my Lord) good Queen,
I say good Queen,
And would by combat, make her good so, were I
A man, the worst about you.
Force her hence.
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord, I'll off,
But first, I'll do my errand. The good Queen
(For she is good) hath brought you forth a daughter,
here 'tis: Commends it to your blessing.
Out:
A mankind Witch? Hence with her, out o'dore:
A most intelligencing bawd.
Not so:
I am as ignorant in that, as you,
In so entit'ling me: and no less honest
Than you are mad: which is enough, I'll warrant
(As this world goes) to pass for honest:
Traitors;
Will you not push her out? Give her the Bastard,
Thou dotard, thou art woman-tyred: unroosted
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the Bastard,
Take't up, I say: give't to thy Crone.
For ever
Vnvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Tak'st up the Princess, by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon't.
He dreads his Wife.
So I would you did: then 'twere past all doubt
you'd call your children, yours.
A nest of Traitors.
I am none, by this good light.
Nor I: nor any
But one that's here: and that's himself: for he,
The sacred Honour of himself, his Queens,
His hopeful Sons, his Babes, betrays to Slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the Swords; and will not
(For as the case now stands, it is a Curse
He cannot be compelled too't) once remove
The Root of his Opinion, which is rotten,
As ever Oak, or Stone was sound.
A Callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her Husband,
And now baits me: This Brat is none of mine,
It is the Issue of Polixenes,
Hence with it, and together with the Dam,
Commit them to the fire.
It is yours:
And might we lay th' old Proverb to your charge,
So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold (my Lords)
Although the Print be little, the whole Matter
And Copy of the Father: (Eye, Nose, Lip,
The trick of's Frown, his Forehead, nay, the Valley,
The pretty dimples of his Chin, and Cheek; his Smiles:
The very Mould, and frame of Hand, Nail, Finger.)
And thou good Goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the Mind too, 'mongst all Colours
No Yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her Children, not her Husbands.
A gross Hag:
And Lozel, thou art worthy to be hanged,
That wilt not stay her Tongue.
Hang all the Husbands
That cannot do that Feat, you'll leave yourself
Hardly one Subject.
Once more take her hence.
A most unworthy, and unnatural Lord
Can do no more.
I'll ha' thee burnt.
I care not:
It is an Heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you Tyrant:
But this most cruel usage of your Queen
(Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weake-hindged Fancy) something savours
Of Tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the World.
On your Allegiance,
Out of the Chamber with her. Were I a Tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one, Away with her.
I pray you do not push me, I'll be gone.
Look to your Babe (my Lord) 'tis yours: Ioue send her
A better guiding Spirit. What needs these hands?
You that are thus so tender o'er his Follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so: Farewell, we are gone.
Thou (Traitor) hast set on thy Wife to this.
My Child? away with't? even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence,
And see it instantly consumed with fire.
Even thou, and none but thou. Take it up strait:
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
(And by good testimony) or I'll seize thy life,
With what thou else call'st thine: if thou refuse,
And wilt encounter with my Wrath, say so;
The Bastard-braynes with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire,
For thou sett'st on thy Wife.
I did not, Sir:
These Lords, my Noble Fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in't.
We can: my Royal Liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.
You're liars all.
Beseech your Highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech '
So to esteem of us: and on our knees we beg,
(As recompense of our dear services
Past, and to come) that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Led on to some foul Issue. We all kneel.
I am a Feather for each Wind that blows:
Shall I live on, to see this Bastard kneel,
And call me Father? better burn it now,
Then curse it then. But be it: let it live.
It shall not neither. You Sir, come you hither:
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your Midwife there,
To save this Bastard's life; for 'tis a Bastard,
So sure as this Beard's grey. What will you adventure,
To save this Brats life?
Any thing (my Lord)
That my ability may undergo,
And Nobleness impose: at least thus much;
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left,
To save the Innocent: any thing possible.
It shall be possible: Swear by this Sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.
I will (my Lord.)
Mark, and perform it: seest thou? for the fail
Of any point in't, shall not only be
Death to thyself, but to thy lewd-tongued Wife,
(Whom for this time we pardon) We enjoin thee,
As thou art Liegeman to us, that thou carry
This female Bastard hence, and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place, quite out
Of our Dominions; and that there thou leave it
(Without more mercy) to it own protection,
And favour of the Climate: as by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy Souls peril, and thy Bodies torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place,
Where Chance may nurse, or end it: take it up.
I swear to do this: though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on (poor Babe)
Some powerful Spirit instruct the Kites and Ravens
To be thy Nurses. Wolves and Bears, they say,
(Casting their savageness aside) have done
Like offices of Pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require; and Blessing
Against this Cruelty, fight on thy side
(Poor Thing, condemned to loss.)
No: I'll not rear
Another's Issue.
Please ' your Highness, Posts
From those you sent to th' Oracle, are come
An hour since: Cleomines and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to th' Court.
So please you (Sir) their speed
Hath been beyond account.
Twenty three days
They have been absent: 'tis good speed: foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear: Prepare you Lords,
Summon a Session, that we may arraign
Our most disloyal Lady: for as she hath
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open Trial. While she lives,
My heart will be a burden to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.
The Clymat's delicate, the Air most sweet,
Fertile the Isle, the Temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the Celestial Habits,
(methinks I so should term them) and the reverence
Of the grave Wearers. O, the Sacrifice,
How ceremonious, solemn, and un-earthly
It was i' th' Offering?
But of all, the burst
And the ear-deaf'ning Voice o' th' Oracle,
Kin to Jove's Thunder, so surprised my Sense,
That I was nothing.
It th' event o' th' journey
Prove as successful to the Queen (O be't so)
As it hath been to us, rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on't.
Great Apollo
Turn all to th' best: these Proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.
The violent carriage of it
Will clear, or end the Business, when the Oracle
(Thus by Apollo's great Divine sealed up)
Shall the Contents discover: something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh Horses,
And gracious be the issue.
This Sessions (to our great grief we pronounce)
Even bushes 'gainst our heart. The party tried,
The Daughter of a King, our Wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be cleared
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the Gild, or the Purgation:
Produce the Prisoner.
It is his highness' pleasure, that the Queen
Appear in person, here in Court.
Read the Indictment.
Hermione, Queen to the worthy Leontes, King of Sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned of High Treason, in committing Adultery with Polixenes King of Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo to take away the Life of our Sovereign Lord the King, thy Royal Husband: the pretence whereof being by circumstances partly laid open, thou (Hermione) contrary to the Faith and Allegiance of a true Subject, didst counsel and aid them, for their better safety, to fly away by Night.
Since what I am to say, must be but that
Which contradicts my Accusation, and
The testimony on my part, no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say, Not guilty: mine Integrity
Being counted Falsehood, shall (as I express it)
Be so received. But thus, if Powers Divine
Behold our humane Actions (as they do)
I doubt not then, but Innocence shall make
False Accusation blush, and Tyranny
Tremble at Patience. You (my Lord) best know
(Whom least will seem to do so) my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than History can pattern, though devised,
And played, to take Spectators. For behold me,
A Fellow of the Royal Bed, which own
A Moiety of the Throne: a great King's Daughter,
The Mother to a hopeful Prince, here standing
To prate and talk for Life, and Honour, fore
Who please to come, and hear. For Life, I prise it
As I weigh Grief (which I would spare:) For Honour,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own Conscience (Sir) before Polixenes
Came to your Court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so: Since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrant, I
Have strained t' appear thus; if one jot beyond
The bound of Honour, or in act, or will
That way inclining, hardened be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my nearest of Kin
Cry fie upon my Grave.
I ne'er heard yet,
That any of these bolder Vices wanted
Less Impudence to gainsay what they did,
Then to perform it first.
That's true enough,
Though 'tis a saying (Sir) not due to me.
You will not own it.
More than Mistress of,
Which comes to me in name of Fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes
(With whom I am accused) I do confess
I loved him, as in Honour he required:
With such a kind of Love, as might become
A Lady like me; with a Love, even such,
So, and no other, as yourself commanded:
Which, not to have done, I think had been in me
Both Disobedience, and Ingratitude
To you, and toward your Friend, whose Love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an Infant, freely,
That it was yours. Now for Conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes, though it be dished
For me to try how: All I know of it,
Is, that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your Court, the Gods themselves
(Wotting no more than I) are ignorant.
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have vnderta'ne to do in's absence.
Sir,
You speak a Language that I understand not:
My Life stands in the level of your Dreams,
Which I'll lay down.
Your Actions are my Dreams.
You had a Bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dreamed it: As you were passed all shame,
(Those of your Fact are so) so past all truth;
Which to deny, concerns more than avails: for as
Thy Brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No Father owning it (which is indeed
More criminal in thee, than it) so thou
Shalt feel out justice; in whose easiest passage,
Look for no less than death.
Sir, spare your Threats:
The Bug which you would fright me with, I seek:
To me can Life be no commodity;
The crown and comfort of my Life (your favour)
I do give lost, for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second joy,
And first Fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barred, like one infectious. My third comfort
(Stared most unluckily) is from my breast
(The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth)
Haled out to murder. Myself on every Post
Proclaimed a Strumpet: With immodest hatred
The Childbed privilege denied, which longs
To Women of all fashion. Lastly, horrid
Here, to this place, i' th' open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now (my Liege)
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed:
But yet hear this: mistake me not: no Life,
(I prise it not a straw) but for mine Honour,
Which I would free: if I shall be condemned
Upon surmizes (all proofs sleeping else,
But what your jealousies awake) I tell you
'Tis Rigour, and not Law Your Honours all,
I do refer me to the Oracle:
Apollo be my judge.
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth
(And in Apollo's Name) his Oracle.
The Emperor of Russia was my Father.
Oh that he were alive, and here beholding
His Daughter's Trial: that he did but see
The flatness of my misery; yet with eyes
Of Pity, not Revenge.
You here shall swear upon this Sword of justice,
That you (Cleomines and Dion) have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
This seal'd-vp Oracle, by the Hand delivered
Of great Apollo's Priest; and that since then,
You have not dared to break the holy Seal,
Nor read the Secrets in't.
All this we swear.
Break up the Seals, and read.
Hermione is chaste, Polixenes blameless, Camillo a true Subject, Leontes a jealous Tyrant, his innocent Babe truly begotten, and the King shall live without an Heir, if that which is lost, be not found.
Now blessed be the great Apollo.
Praised.
Hast thou read truth?
I (my Lord) even so as it is here set down.
There is no truth at all i' th' Oracle:
The Sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
My Lord the King: the King?
What is the business?
O Sir, I shall be hated to report it.
The Prince your Son, with mere conceit, and fear
Of the Queen's speed, is gone.
How? gone?
Is dead.
Apollo's angry, and the Heavens themselves
Do strike at my Injustice. How now there?
This news is mortal to the Queen: Look down
And see what Death is doing.
Take her hence:
Her heart is but o'ercharged: she will recover.
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
Beseech you tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life. Apollo pardon
My great profaneness 'gainst thine Oracle.
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woe my Queen, recall the good Camillo
(Whom I proclaim a man of Truth, of Mercy:)
For being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts, and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister, to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command: though I with Death, and with
Reward, did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing it, and being done: he (most humane,
And filled with Honour) to my Kingly Guest
Unclasped my practice, quit his fortunes here
(Which you knew great) and to the hazard
Of all Incertainties, himself commended,
No richer than his Honour: How he glisters
Through my Rust? and how his Piety
Does my deeds make the blacker?
Woe the while:
O cut my Lace, lest my heart (cracking it)
Break too.
What fit is this? good Lady?
What studied torments (Tyrant) hast for me?
What Wheels? Racks? Fires? What slaying? boiling?
In Leads, or Oils? What old, or newer Torture
Must I receive? whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst. Thy Tyranny
(Together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for Boys, too green and idle
For Girls of Nine) O think what they have done,
And then run mad indeed: stark-mad: for all
Thy bygone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betrayed'st Polixenes, 'twas nothing,
(That did but show thee, of a Fool, inconstant,
And damnable ingrateful:) Nor was't much,
Thou wouldst have poisoned good Camillo's Honour,
To have him kill a King: poor Trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to Crows, thy Baby-daughter,
To be or none, or little; though a Devil
Would have shed water out of fire, ere don't:
Nor is't directly laid to thee the death
Of the young Prince, whose honourable thoughts
(Thoughts high for one so tender) cloven the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish Sire
Blemished his gracious Dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last: O Lords,
When I have said, cry woe: the Queen, the Oueene,
The sweetest, dearest creature's dead: & vengeance for't
Not dropped down yet.
The higher powers forbidden.
I say she's dead: I'll swear't. If word, nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture, or lustre in her lip, her eye
Heat outwardly, or breath within, I'll serve you
As I would do the Gods. But, O thou Tyrant,
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir: therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees,
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren Mountain, and still Winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the Gods
To look that way thou were't.
Go on, go on:
Thou canst not speak too much, I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bittrest.
Say no more;
How ere the business goes, you have made fault
I ' th' boldness of your speech.
I am sorry for't;
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent: Alas, I have showed too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touched
To th' Noble heart. What's gone, and what's past help
Should be past grief: Do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punished, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now (good my Liege)
Sir, Royal Sir forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your Queen (Lo, fool again)
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your Children:
I'll not remember you of my own Lord,
(Who is lost too:) take your patience to you,
And I'll say nothing.
Thou didst speak but well,
When most the truth: which I receive much better,
Then to be pitied of thee. Prithee bring me
To the dead bodies of my Queen, and Son,
One grave shall be for both: Upon them shall
The causes of their death appear (unto
Our shame perpetual) once a day, I'll visit
The Chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation. So long as Nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come, and lead me
To these sorrows.
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touched upon
The Deserts of Bohemia.
I (my Lord) and fear
We have Landed in ill time: the skies look grimly,
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience
The heavens with that we have in hand, are angry,
And frown upon's.
Their sacred will's be done: go get aboard,
Look to thy bark, I'll not be long before
I call upon thee.
Make your best haste, and go not
Toofarre i' th' Land: 'tis like to be loud weather,
Besides this place is famous for the Creatures
Of prey, that keep upon't.
Go thou away,
I'll follow instantly.
I am glad at heart
To be so rid o' th' business.
Come, poor babe;
I have heard (but not believed) the Spirits o' th' dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy Mother
Appeared to me last night: for ne'er was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another,
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow
So filled, and so becoming: in pure white Robes
Like very sanctity she did approach
My Cabin where I lay: thrice bowed before me,
And (gasping to begin some speech) her eyes
Became two spouts; the fury spent, anon
Did this break from her. Good Antigonus,
Since Fate (against thy better disposition)
Hath made thy person for the Thower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep, and leave it crying: and for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita
I prithee call't: For this ungentle business
Put on thee, by my Lord, thou ne'er shalt see
Thy Wife Paulina more: and so, with shrieks
She melted into Air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect myself, and thought
This was so, and no slumber: Dreams, are toys,
Yet for this once, yea superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione hath suffered death, and that
Apollo would (this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes) it should here be laid
(Either for life, or death) upon the earth
Of its right Father. Blossom, speed thee well,
There lie, and there thy character: there these,
Which may if Fortune please, both breed thee (pretty)
And still rest thine. The storm begins, poor wretch,
That for thy mother's fault, art thus exposed
To loss, and what may follow. Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds: and most accursed am I
To be by oath enjoined to this. Farewell,
The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have
A lullaby too rough: I never saw
The heavens so dim, by day. A savage clamour?
Well may I get aboard: This is the Chase,
I am gone for ever.
I would there were no age between ten and three and twenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest: for there is nothing (in the between) but getting wenches with child, wronging the Auncientry, stealing, fight, hark you now: would any but these boylde-braines of nineteen, and two and twenty hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my best Sheep, which I fear the Wolf will sooner find than the Master; if any where I have them, 'tis by the seaside, brouzing of ivy. Good-luck (and't be thy will) what have we here? Mercy on's, a Barn? A very pretty barn; A boy, or a Child I wonder? (A pretty one, a very pretty one) sure some Escape; Though I am not bookish, yet I can read Waiting-Gentlewoman in the escape: this has been some staire-worke, some Trunke-worke, some behinde-doore work: they were warmer that got this, than the poor Thing is here. I'll take it up for pity, yet I'll tarry till my son come: he hallowed but even now. Whoa-ho-hoa.
Hilloa, loa.
What? art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk on, when thou art dead and rotten, come hither: what ail'st thou, man?
I have seen two such sights, by Sea & by Land: but I am not to say it is a Sea, for it is now the sky, betwixt the Firmament and it, you cannot thrust a bodkins point.
Why boy, how is it?
I would you did but see how it chases, how it rages, how it takes up the shore, but that's not to the point: Oh, the most piteous cry of the poor souls, sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em: Now the Ship boaring the Moon with her main Mast, and anon swallowed with yeast and froth, as you'd thrust a Cork into a hogshead. And then for the landservice, to see how the Bear tore out his shoulder-bone, how he cried to me for help, and said his name was Antigonus, a Nobleman: But to make an end of the Ship, to see how the Sea flapdragoned it: but first, how the poor souls roared, and the sea mocked them: and how the poor Gentleman roared, and the Bear mocked him, both roaring louder than the sea, or weather.
Name of mercy, when was this boy?
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor the Bear half dined on the Gentleman: he's at it now.
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man.
I would you had been by the ship side, to have helped her; there your charity would have lacked footing.
Heavy matters, heavy matters: but look thee here boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things dying, I with things new borne Here's a sight for thee: Look thee, a bearing-cloath for a Squire's child: look thee here, take up, take up (Boy:) open't: so, let's see, it was told me I should be rich by the Fairies. This is some Changeling: open't: what's within, boy?
You're a mad old man: If the sins of your youth are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold, all Gold.
This is Fairy Gold boy, and 'twill prove so: up with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way. We are lucky (boy) and to be so still requires nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: Come (good boy) the next way home.
Go you the next way with your Findings, I'll go see if the Bear be gone from the Gentleman, and how much he hath eaten: they are never cursed but when they are hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll bury it.
That's a good deed: if thou mayest discern by that which is left of him, what he is, fetch me to th' sight of him.
Marry will I: and you shall help to put him i' th' ground.
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't
I that please some, try all: both joy and terror
Of good, and bad: that makes, and unfolds error,
Now take upon me (in the name of Time)
To use my wings: Impute it not a crime
To me, or my swift passage, that I slide
over sixteen years, and leave the growth untride
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To o'erthrow Law, and in one self-born hour
To plant, and o'erwhelm Custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancientest Order was,
Or what is now received. I witness to
The times that brought them in, so shall I do
To th' freshest things now reigning, and make stolen
The glistering of this present, as my Tale
Now seems to it: your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass, and give my Scene such growing
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving
Th' effects of his fond jealousies, so grieving
That he shuts up himself. Imagine me
(Gentle Spectators) that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son o' th' Kings, which Florizell
I now name to you: and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering. What of her ensues
I list not prophesy: but let Time's news
Be known when 'tis brought forth. A shepherd's daughter
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is th' argument of Time: of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse, ere now:
If never, yet that Time himself doth say,
He wishes earnestly, you never may.
I pray thee (good Camillo) be no more importunate: 'tis a sickness denying thee any thing: a death to grant this.
It is fifteen years since I saw my Country: though I have (for the most part) been ayred abroad, I desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent King (my Master) hath sent for me, to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay, or I oreweene to think so) which is another spur to my departure.
As thou lov'st me (Camillo) wipe not out the rest of thy services, by leaving me now: the need I have of thee, thine own goodness hath made: better not to have had thee, then thus to want thee, thou having made me Businesses, (which none (without thee) can sufficiently manage) must either stay to execute them thyself, or take away with thee the very services thou hast done: which if I have not enough considered (as too much I cannot) to be more thankful to thee, shall be my study, and my profit therein, the heaping friendships. Of that fatal Country Sicilia, prithee speak no more, whose very naming, punnishes me with the remembrance of that penitent (as thou call'st him) and reconciled King my brother, whose loss of his most precious Queen & Children, are even now to be afresh lamented. Say to me, when saw'st thou the Prince Florizel my son? King's are no less unhappy, their issue, not being gracious, than they are in losing them, when they have approved their Virtues.
Sir, it is three days since I saw the Prince: what his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I have (missingly) noted, he is of late much retired from Court, and is less frequent to his Princely exercises then formerly he hath appeared.
I have considered so much (Camillo) and with some care, so far, that I have eyes under my service, which look upon his removednesse: from whom I have this Intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd: a man (they say) that from very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
I have heard (sir) of such a man, who hath a daughter of most rare note: the report of her is extended more, then can be thought to begin from such a cottage
That's likewise part of my Intelligence: but (I fear) the Angle that plucks our son thither. Thou shalt accompany us to the place, where we will (not appearing what we are) have some question with the shepherd; from whose simplicity, I think it not uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither. Prithee be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
I willingly obey your command.
My best Camillo, we must disguise ourselves.
When Daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh the Doxy over the dale.
Why then comes in the sweet o' the year,
For the red blood reigns in the winters pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With boy the sweet birds, O how they sing:
Doth set my pugging tooth an edge,
For a quart of Ale is a dish for a King.
The Lark that tirra Lyra chants,
With heigh, the Thrush and the jay:
Are Summer songs for me and my Aunts
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizel, and in my time wore three pile, but now I am out of service.
But shall I go mourn for that (my dear)
the pale Moon shines by night:
And when I wander here, and there
I then do most go right.
If Tinkers may have leave to live,
and bear the Sow-skin Bowget,
Then my account I well may give,
and in the Stocks auouch-it.
My Traffic is sheets: when the Kite builds, look to lesser Linnen. My Father named me Autolicus, who being (as I am) lyttered under Mercury, was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles: With die and drab, I purchased this Caparison, and my Revennew is the silly Cheat. Gallows, and Knock, are too powerful on the Highway. Beating and hanging are terrors to me: For the life to come, I sleep out the thought of it. A prize, a prize.
Let me see, every Leaven-weather toddes, every tod yields pound and odd shilling: fifteen hundred shorn, what comes the wool too?
If the springe hold, the Cocke's mine.
I cannot do't without Compters. Let me see, what am I to buy for our Sheepe-shearing-Feast? Three pound of Sugar, five pound of Currence, Rice: What will this sister of mine do with Rice? But my father hath made her Mistress of the Feast, and she lays it on. She hath mademe four and twenty Nosegays for the shearers (three-man song-men, all, and very good ones) but they are most of them Means and Bases; but one Puritan amongst them, and he sings Psalms to horne-pipes. I must have Saffron to colour the Warden Pies, Mace: Dates, none: that's out of my note: Nutmegs, seven; a Race or two of Ginger, but that I may beg: Four pound of Prewyns, and as many of Raisins o' th' Sun.
Oh, that ever I was borne.
I' th' name of me.
Oh help me, help me: pluck but off these rags: and then, death, death.
Alack poor soul, thou hast need of more rags to lay on thee, rather than have these off.
Oh sir, the loathsomeness of them offend me, more than the stripes I have received, which are mighty ones and millions.
Alas poor man, a million of beating may come to a great matter.
I am robbed sir, and beaten: my money, and apparel ta'en from me, and these derestable things put upon me.
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
A footman (sweet sir) a footman.
Indeed, he should be a footman, by the garments he has left with thee: If this be a horseman's Coat, it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand, I'll help thee. Come, lend me thy hand.
Oh good sir, tenderly, oh.
Alas poor soul.
Oh good sir, softly, good sir: I fear (sir) my shoulderblade is out.
How now? Canst stand?
Softly, dear sir: good sir, softly: you ha' done me a charitable office.
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
No, good sweet sir: no, I beseech you sir: I have a Kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, unto whom I was going: I shall there have money, or any thing I want: Offer me no money I pray you, that kills my heart.
What manner of Fellow was he that robbed you?
A fellow (sir) that I have known to go about with Troll-my-dames: I knew him once a servant of the Prince: I cannot tell good sir, for which of his Virtues it was, but he was certainly Whipped out of the Court.
His vices you would say: there's no virtue whipped out of the Court: they cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no more but abide.
Vices I would say (Sir.) I know this man well, he hath been since an Ape-bearer, than a Processe-seruer (a Bailiff) than he compassed a Motion of the Prodigal son, and married a Tinker's wife, within a Mile where my Land and Living lies; and (having flown over many knavish professions) he settled only in Rogue: some call him Autolicus.
Out upon him: Prig, for my life Prig: he haunts Wakes, Fairs, and Bear-baitings.
Very true sir: he sir he: that's the Rogue that put me into this apparel.
Not a more cowardly Rogue in all Bohemia; If you had but looked big, and spit at him, he'd have run.
I must confess to you (sir) I am no fighter: I am false of heart that way, & that he knew I warrant him.
How do you now?
Sweet sir, much better than I was: I can stand, and walk: I will even take my leave of you, & pace softly towards my Kinsman's.
Shall I bring thee on the way?
No, good faced sir, no sweet sir.
Then fartheewell, I must go buy Spices for our sheepshearing.
Prosper you sweet sir. Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your Spice: I'll be with you at your sheepshearing too: If I make not this Cheat bring out another, and the sheerers prove sheep, let me be unrold, and my name put in the book of Virtue.
Iog-on, Iog-on, the footpath way,
And merrily hent the Stile:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tires in a Mile-a.
These your unusual weeds, to each part of you
Does give a life: no Shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in April's front. This your sheepshearing,
Is as a meeting of the petty Gods,
And you the Queen on't.
Sir: my gracious Lord,
To chide at your extremes, it not becomes me:
(Oh pardon, that I name them:) your high self
The gracious mark o' th' Land, you have obscured
With a Swains wearing: and me (poor lowly Maid)
Most Goddese-like pranked up: But that our Feasts
In every Mess, have folly; and the Feeders
Digest with a Custom, I should blush
To see you so attired: sworn I think,
To show myself a glass.
I bless the time,
When my good Falcon, made her flight across
Thy Father's ground
Now Ioue afford you cause:
To me the difference forges dread (your Greatness
Hath not been used to fear:) even now I tremble
To think your Father, by some accident
Should pass this way, as you did: Oh the Pates,
How would he look, to see his work, so noble,
Vildly bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I (in these my borrowed Flaunts) behold
The sternness of his presence?
Apprehend
Nothing but jollity: the Gods themselves
(Humbling their Deities to love) have taken
The shapes of Beasts upon them. Iupiter,
Became a Bull, and bellowed: the green Neptune
A Ram, and bleated: and the Fire-roab'd-God
Golden Apollo, a poor humble Swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations,
Were never for a piece of beauty, rarer,
Not in a way so chaste: since my desires
Run not before mine honour: nor my Lusts
Burn hotter than my Faith.
O but Sir,
Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis
Opposed (as it must be) by th' power of the King:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose,
Or I my life.
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee darken not
The Mirth o' th' Feast: Or I'll be thine (my Fair)
Or not my Fathers. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry (Gentle)
Strangle such thoughts as these, with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial, which
We two have sworn shall come.
O Lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious.
See, your Guests approach,
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And let's be red with mirth.
Fie (daughter) when my old wife lived: upon
This day, she was both Pantler, Butler, Cook,
Both Dame and Servant: Welcomed all: served all,
Would sing her song, and dance her turn: now here
At upper end o' th' Table; now, i' th' middle:
On his shoulder, and his: her face o' fire
With labour, and the thing she took to quench it
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one: and not
The Hostess of the meeting: Pray you bid
These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is
A way to make us better Friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes, and present yourself
That which you are, Mistress o' th' Feast. Come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheepshearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.
Sir, welcome:
It is my Father's will, I should take on me
The Hostesseship o' th' day: you're welcome sir.
Give me those Flowers there (Dorcas.) Reverend Sirs,
For you, there's Rosemary, and Rue, these keep
Seeming, and savour all the Winter long:
Grace, and Remembrance be to you both,
And welcome to our Shearing.
Shepherdess,
(A fair one are you:) well you fit our ages
With flowers of Winter.
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers o' th' season
Are our Carnations, and streaked Gilly-vors,
(Which some call Nature's bastards) of that kind
Our rustic Gardens barren, and I care not
To get slips of them.
Wherefore (gentle Maiden)
Do you neglect them.
For I have heard it said,
There is an Art, which in their pidenesse shares
With great creating-Nature.
Say there be:
Yet Nature is made better by no mean,
But Nature makes that Mean: so over that Art,
(Which you say adds to Nature) is an Art
That Nature makes: you see (sweet Maid) we marry
A gentler Sien, to the wildest Stock,
And make conceive a bark of base kind
By bud of Nobler race. This is an Art
Which does mend Nature: change it rather, but
The Art itself, is Nature.
So it is.
Then make you Garden rich in Gilly'vors,
And do not call them bastards.
I'll not put
The Dible in earth, to set one slip of them:
No more than were I painted, I would wish
This youth should say 'twere well: and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you:
Hot Lavender, Mints, Savoury, Mariorum,
The Marigold, that goes to bed with Sun,
And with him rises, weeping: These are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. YE are very welcome.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.
Out alas:
You'd be so lean, that blasts of Ianuary
Would blow you through and through. Now my fair'st Friend,
I would I had some Flowers o' th' Spring, that might
Become your time of day: and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your Virgin-branches yet
Your Maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
For the Flowers now, that (frighted) thou lettest fall
From Dysses Wagon: Daffodils,
That come before the Swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty: Violets (dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes,
Or Cytherea's breath) pale Primroses,
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his strength (a Malady
Most incident to Maids:) bold Oxlips, and
The Crown Imperial: Lilies of all kinds,
(The Flowre-de-Luce being one.) O, these I lack,
To make you Garlands of) and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er, and over.
What? like a Coarse?
No, like a bank, for Love to lie, and play on:
Not like a Coarse: or if: not to be buried,
But quick, and in mine arms. Come, take your flours,
Me thinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitson-Pastorals: Sure this Robe of mine
Does change my disposition:
What you do,
Still betters what is done. When you speak (Sweet)
I'd have you do it ever: When you sing,
I'd have you buy, and sell so: so give Alms,
Pray so: and for the ordering your Affairs,
To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
A wave o' th' Sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that: move still, still so:
And own no other Function. Each your doing,
(So singular, in each particular)
Crowns what you are doing, in the present deeds,
That all your Acts, are Queens.
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth
And the true blood which peeps fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out an unstained Sphepherd
With wisdom, I might fear (my Doricles)
You wooed me the false way.
I think you have
As little skill to fear, as I have purpose
To put you to't. But come, our dance I pray,
Your hand (my Perdita:) so Turtles pair
That never mean to part.
I'll swear for 'em.
This is the prettiest Low-born Lass, that ever
Ran on the greene-sord: Nothing she does, or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too Noble for this place.
He tells her something
That makes her blood look on't: Good sooth she is
The Queen of Curds and Cream.
Come on: strike up.
Mopsa must be your Mistress: marry Garlic to mend her kissing with.
Now in good time.
Not a word, a word, we stand upon our manners,
Come, strike up.
Pray good Shepherd, what fair Swain is this,
Which dances with your daughter?
They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
To have a worthy Feeding; but I have it
Upon his own report, and I believe it:
He looks like sooth: he says he loves my daughter,
I think so too; for never gazed the Moon
Upon the water, as he'll stand and read
As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and to be plain,
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.
She dances fearly.
So she does any thing, though I report it
That should be silent: If young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.
O Master: if you did but hear the Pedlar at the door, you would never dance again after a Tabor and Pipe: no, the Bagpipe could not move you: he singes several Tunes, faster than you'll tell money: he utters them as he had eaten ballads, and all men's ears grew to his Tunes.
He could never come better: he shall come in: I love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down: or a very pleasant thing indeed, and sung lamentably.
He hath songs for man, or woman, of all sizes: No Milliner can so fit his customers with Gloves: he has the prettiest Lovesongs for Maids, so without bawdry (which is strange,) with such delicate burdens of Dildoes and Fade: jump-her, and thump-her; and where some stretch-mouthed Rascal, would (as it were) mean mischief, and break a fowl gap into the Matter, he makes the maid to answer, Whoop, do me no harm good man: put's him off, slights him, with Whoop, do me no harm good man.
This is a brave fellow.
Beleeee me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow, has he any unbraided Wares?
He hath Ribbons of all the colours i' th' Rainbow; Points, more than all the Lawyers in Bohemia, can learnedly handle, though they come to him by th' gross: Inckles, Caddysses, Cambrics, Lawns: why he sings 'em over, as they were Gods, or Goddesses: you would think a Smock were a shee-Angell, he so chants to the sleeve-hand, and the work about the square on't:
Prithee bring him in, and let him approach singing.
Forewarn him, that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes.
You have of these Pedlars, that have more in them, than you'd think (Sister.)
I, good brother, or go about to think.
Lawn as white as driven Snow,
Cypress black as ere was Crow,
Gloves as sweet as Damask Roses,
Masks for faces, and for noses:
Bugle-bracelet, Necke-lace Amber,
Perfume for a Lady's Chamber:
Golden Quoises, and Stomachers
For my Lads, to give their deres:
Pins, and poaking-stickes of steel.
What Maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come: come buy, come buy,
Buy Lads, or else your Lasses cry: Come buy.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take no money of me, but being enthralled as I am, it will also be the bondage of certain Ribbons and Gloves.
I was promised them against the Feast, but they come not too late now.
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
He hath paid you all he promised you:' May be he has paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
Is there no manners left among maids? Will they wear their plackets, where they should bear their faces? Is there not milking-time? When you are going to bed? Or kill-hole? To whistle of these secrets, but you must be tittle-tatling before all our guests? 'Tis well they are whispering: clamour your tongues, and not a word more.
I have done; Come you promised me a tawdry-lace, and a pair of sweet Gloves.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way, and lost all my money.
And indeed Sir, there are Cozeners abroad, therefore it behooves men to be wary.
Fear not thou man, thou shalt lose nothing here
I hope so sir, for I have about me many parcels of charge.
What hast here? Ballads?
Pray now buy some: I love a ballet in print, a life, for than we are sure they are true.
Here's one, to a very doleful tune, how a Usurer's wife was brought to bed of twenty money bags at a burden, and how she longed to eat Adders heads, and Toads carbonadoed.
Is it true, think you?
Very true, and but a month old.
Bless me from marrying a Usurer.
Here's the Midwives name to't: one Mist. Tale-Porter, and five or six honest Wives, that were present. Why should I carry lies abroad?
Pray you now buy it.
Come-on, lay it by: and let's first see more Ballads: we'll buy the other things anon.
Here's another ballad of a Fish, that appeared upon the coast, on wensday the fourscore of April, forty thousand fathom above water, & sung this ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was thought she was a Woman, and was turned into a cold fish, for she would not exchange flesh with one that loved her: The Ballad is very pitiful, and as true.
Is it true too, think you.
Five justices hands at it, and witnesses more than my pack will hold.
Lay it by too; another.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Let's have some merry ones.
Why this is a passing merry one, and goes to the tune of two maids wooing a man: there's scarce a Maid westward but she sings it: 'tis in request, I can tell you.
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou shalt hear, 'tis in three parts.
We had the tune on't, a month ago.
I can bear my part, you must know 'tis my occupation: Have at it with you.
Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know.
Whether?
O Whether?
Whether?
It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.
Me too: Le me go thither:
Or thou goest to th' Grange, or Mill,
If to either thou dost ill,
Neither.
What neither?
Neither:
Thou hast sworn my Love to be,
Thou hast sworn it more to me.
Then whether goest? Say whether?
we'll have this song out anon by ourselves: My Father, and the Gent. are in sad talk, & we'll not trouble them: Come bring away thy pack after me, Wenches I'll buy for you both: Pedlar let's have the first choice; follow me girls.
And you shall pay well for 'em.
Will you buy any Tape, or Lace for your rpe?
My dainty Duck, my deere-a?
Any Silk, any Thread, any Toys for your head
Of the newsed, and finsed, finsed wearea.
Come to the Pedlar, Money's a meddler,
That doth utter all men's ware.
Master, there is three Carters, three Shepherds, three Neatherds, three Swineherds that have made themselves all men of hair, they call themselves Saltiers, and they have a Dance, which the Wenches say is a gallimaufry of Gambols, because they are not in't: but they themselves are o' th' mind (if it be not too rough for some, that know little but bowling) it will please plentifully.
Away: we'll none on't; here has been too much homely foolery already. I know (Sir) we weary you.
You weary those that refresh us: pray let's see these foure-threes of Herdsmen.
One three of them, by their own report (Sir,) hath danced before the King: and not the worst of the three, but jumps twelve foot and a half by th' squire.
Leave your prating, since these good men are pleased, let them come in: but quickly now.
Why, they stay at door Sir.
O Father, you'll know more of that hereafter:
Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them,
He's simple, and tells much. How now (fair shepherd)
Your heart is full of something, that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young,
And handed love, as you do; I was wont
To load my Shee with knacks: I would have ransacked
The Pedlar's silken Treasury, and have poured it
To her acceptance: you have let him go,
And nothing matted with him. If your Lass
Interpretation should abuse, and call this
Your lack of love, or bounty, you were straited
For a reply at least, if you make a care
Of happy holding her.
Old Sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me, are packed and locked
up in my heart, which I have given already,
But not delivered. O hear me breathe my life
Before this ancient Sir, whom (it should seem)
Hath sometime loved: I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as Doves down, and as white as it,
Or Ethyopians tooth, or the saned snow, that's bolted
By th' Northern blasts, twice over.
What follows this?
How prettily th' young Swain seems to wash
The hand, was fair before? I have put you out,
But to your protestation: Let me hear
What you profess.
Do, and be witness too't.
And this my neighbour too?
And he, and more
Than he, and men: the earth, the heavens, and all;
That were I crowned the most Imperial Monarch
Thereof most worthy: were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's, I would not prise them
Without her Love; for her, employ them all,
Commend them, and condemn them to her service,
Or to their own perdition.
Fairly offered.
This shows a sound affection.
But my daughter,
Say you the like to him.
I cannot speak
So well, (nothing so well) no, nor mean better
By th' patterne of mine own thoughts, I cut out
The purity of his.
Take hands, a bargain;
And friends unknown, you shall bear witness to't:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her Portion, equal his.
O, that must be
I' th' Virtue of your daughter: One being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet,
Enough then for your wonder: but come-on,
Contract us fore these Witnesses.
Come, your hand:
And daughter, yours.
Soft Swain awhile, beseech you,
Have you a Father?
I have: but what of him?
Knows he of this?
He neither does, nor shall.
Methinks a Father,
Is at the Nuptial of his son, a guest
That best becomes the Table: Pray you once more
Is not your Father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? Is he not stupid
With Age, and altering Rheums? Can he speak? hear?
Know man, from man? Dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bedrid? And again, does nothing
But what he did, being childish?
No good Sir:
He has his health, and ampler strength indeed
Then most have of his age.
By my white beard,
You offer him (if this be so) a wrong
Something unfilliall: Reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The Father (all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity) should hold some counsel
In such a business.
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons (my grave Sir)
Which 'tis not sit you know, I not acquaint
My Father of this business.
Let him know't.
He shall not.
Prithee let him.
No, he must not.
Let him (my son) he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.
Come, come, he must not:
Mark our Contract.
Mark your divorce (young sir)
Whom son I dare not call: Thou art too base
To be acknowledge. Thou a Sceptres heir,
That thus affects a sheephook? Thou, old Traitor,
I am sorry, that by hanging thee, I can
but shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent Witchcraft, whom of force must know
The royal Fool thou coap'st with.
Oh my heart.
I'll have thy beauty scratched with briers & made
More homely than thy state. For thee (fond boy)
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh,
That thou no more shalt never see this knack (as never
I mean thou shalt) we'll bar thee from succession,
Not hold thee of our blood, no not our Kin,
far then Deucalion off: (mark thou my words)
Fellow us to the Court. Thou Churl, for this time
(Though full of our displeasure) yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you Enchantment,
Worthy enough a Herdsman: yea him too,
That makes himself (but for our Honour therein)
Unworthy thee. If ever henceforth, thou
These rural Latches, to his entrance open,
Or hope his body more, with thy embraces,
I will device a death, as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to't.
Even here undone:
I was not much afeared: for once, or twice
I was about to speak, and tell him plainly,
The selfsame Sun, that shines upon his Court,
Hides not his visage from our Cottage, but
Looks on alike. Wilt please you (Sir) be gone?
I told you what would come of this: Beseech you
Of your own state take care: This dream of mine
Being now awake, I'll Queen it no inch farther,
But milk my Ewes, and weep.
Why how now Father,
Speak ere thou diest.
I cannot speak, nor think,
Nor dare to know, that which I know: O Sir,
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet: yea,
To dye upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones; but now
Some Hangman must put on my shroud, and lay me
Where no Priest shovels-in dust. Oh cursed wretch,
That knewest this was the Prince, and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him. Undone, undone:
If I might dye within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not affear'd: delayed,
But nothing altered: What I was, I am:
More straining on, for plucking back; not following
My leash unwillingly.
Gracious my Lord,
You know my Father's temper: at this time
He will allow no speech: (which I do guess
You do not purpose to him:) and as hardly
Will he endure your sight, as yet I fear;
Then till the fury of his Highness settle
Come not before him.
I not purpose it:
I think Camillo.
Even he, my Lord.
How often have I told you 'twould be thus?
How often said my dignity would last
But till 'twere known?
It cannot fail, but by
The violation of my faith, and then
Let Nature crush the sides o' th' earth together,
And mar the feeds within. Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me (Father) I
Am heir to my affection.
Be advised.
I am: and by my fancy, if my Reason
Will thereto be obedient: I have reason:
If not, my senses better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.
This is desperate (sir.)
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow:
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be there at gleaned: for all the Sun sees, or
The close earth wombs, or the profound seas, hides
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved: Therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my Father's honoured friend,
When he shall miss me, as (in faith I mean not
To see him any more) cast your good counsels
Upon his passion: Let myself, and Fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know,
And so deliver, I am put to Sea
With her, who here I cannot hold on shore:
And most opportune to her need, I have
A Vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.
O my Lord,
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.
Hark Perdita,
I'll hear you by and by.
he's irremoveable,
Resolved for flight: Now were I happy if
His going, I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia,
And that unhappy King, my Master, whom
I so much thirst to see.
Now good Camillo,
I am so fraught with curious business, that
I leave out ceremony.
Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, i' th' love
That I have borne your Father?
Very nobly
Have you deserved: It is my Father's Music
To speak your deeds: not little of his care
To have them recompensed, as thought on.
Well (my Lord)
If you may please to think I love the King,
And through him, what's nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self; embrace but my direction,
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration. On mine honour,
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your Highness, where you may
Enjoy your Mistress; from the whom, I see
There's no disjunction to be made, but by
(As heavens forefend) your ruin: Marry her,
And with my best endeavours, in your absence,
Your discontenting Father, strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.
How Camillo
May this (almost a miracle) be done?
That I may call thee something more than man,
And after that trust to thee.
Have you thought on
A place whereto you'll go?
Not any yet:
But as th' unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
Of every wind that blows.
Then lift to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight; make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself, and your fair Princess,
(For so I see she must be) 'fore Leontes;
She shall be habited, as it becomes
The partner of your Bed. methinks I see
Leontes opening his free Arms, and weeping
His Welcomes forth: asks thee there Son forgiveness,
As 'twere i' th' Father's person: kisses the hands
Of your fresh Princess; over and over divides him,
'Twixt his unkindness, and his Kindness: th' one
He chides to Hell, and bids the other grow
Faster than Thought, or Time.
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my Visitation, shall I
Hold up before him?
Sent by the King your Father
To greet him, and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you (as from your Father) shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down,
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say: that he shall not perceive,
But that you have your Father's Bosom there,
And speak his very Heart.
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.
A Course more promising,
Then a wild dedication of yourselves
To vnpath'd Waters, vndream'd Shores; most certain,
To Miseries enough: no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one, to take another.
Nothing so certain, as your Anchors, who
Do their best office, if they can but stay you,
Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know,
Prosperitie's the very bond of Love,
Whose fresh complexion, and whose heart together,
Affliction altars.
One of these is true:
I think Affliction may subdue the Cheek,
But not take-in the Mind.
Yea? say you so?
There shall not, at your Father's House, these seven years
Be borne another such.
My good Camillo,
She's as forward, of her Breeding, as
She is i' th' rear ' our Birth.
I cannot say, 'tis pity
She lacks Instructions, for she seems a Mistress
To most that teach.
Your pardon Sir, for this,
I'll blush you Thanks.
My prettiest Perdita.
But O, the Thorns we stand upon: (Camillo)
Preserver of my Father, now of me,
The Medicine of our House: how shall we do?
We are not furnished like Bohemia's Son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
My Lord,
Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care,
To have you royally appointed, as if
The Scene you play, were mine. For instance Sir,
That you may know you shall not want: one word.
Ha', ha', what a Fool Honesty is? and Trust (his sworn brother) a very simple Gentleman. I have sold all my trumpery: not a counterfeit Stone, not a Ribbon, Glass, Pomander, Browch, Table-book, Ballad, Knife, Tape, Glove, Shooe-tye, Bracelet, Horne-Ring, to keep my Pack from fasting: they throng who should buy first, as if my Trinkets had been hallowed, and brought a benediction to the buyer: by which means, I saw whose Purse was best in Picture; and what I saw, to my good use, I remembered. My Clown (who wants but something to be a reasonable man) grew so in love with the Wenches Song, that he would not stir his Petty-toes, till he had both Tune and Words, which so drew the rest of the Herd to me, that all their other Senses stuck in Ears: you might have pinched a Placket, it was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a Codpiece of a Purse: I would have filled Keys of that hung in Chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my Sirs Song, and admiring the Nothing of it. So that in this time of Lethargy, I pickd and cut most of their Festival Purses: And had not the old-man come in with a Whoo-bub against his Daughter, and the King's Son, and scared my Chowghes from the Chaff, I had not left a Purse alive in the whole Army.
Nay, but my Letters by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes?
Shall satisfy your Father.
Happy be you:
All that you speak, shows fair.
Who have we here?
we'll make an Instrument of this: omit
Nothing may give us aid.
If they have overheard me now: why hangging.
How now (good Fellow)
Why shak'st thou so? Fear not (man)
Here's no harm intended to thee.
I am a poor Fellow, Sir.
Why, be so still: here's no body will steal that from thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty, we must make an exchange; therefore dis-case thee instantly (thou must think there's a necessity in't) and change Garments with this Gentleman: Though the pennyworth (on his side) be the worst, yet hold thee, there's some boot.
I am a poor Fellow, Sir: (I know ye well enough.)
Nay prithee dispatch: the Gentleman is half fled already.
Are you in earnest, Sir? (I smell the trick on't.)
Dispatch, I prithee.
Indeed I have had Earnest, but I cannot with conscience take it.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate Mistress (let my prophecy
Come home to ye:) you must retire yourself
Into some Covert; take your sweet-hearts Hat
And pluck it o'er your Brows, muffle your face,
Dis-mantle you, and (as you can) disliken
The truth of your own seeming, that you may
(For I do fear eyes over) to Shipboard
Get undescried.
I see the Play so lies,
That I must bear a part.
No remedy:
Have you done there?
Should I now meet my Father,
He would not call me Son.
Nay, you shall have no Hat:
Come Lady, come: Farewell (my friend.)
Adieu, Sir.
O Perdita: what have we twain forgot?
Pray you a word.
What I do next, shall be to tell the King
Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
Wherein, my hope is, I shall so prevail
To force him after: in whose company
I shall review Sicilia; for whose sight,
I have a Woman's Longing.
Fortune speed us:
Thus we set on (Camillo) to th' Seaside.
The swifter speed, the better.
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a Cutpurse; a good Nose is requisite also, to smell out work for th' other Senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive. What an exchange had this been, without boot? What a boot is here, with this exchange? Sure the Gods do this year connive at us, and we may do any thing extempore. The Prince himself is about a piece of Iniquity (stealing away from his Father, with his Clog at his heels:) if I thought it were a piece of honesty to acquaint the King withal, I would not do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my Profession.
Aside, aside, here is more matter for a hot brain: Every Lanes end, every Shop, Church, Session, Hanging, yields a careful man work.
See, see: what a man you are now? there is no other way, but to tell the King she's a Changeling, and none of your flesh and blood.
Nay, but hear me.
Nay; but hear me.
Go too then.
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the King, and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show those things you found about her (those secret things, all but what she has with her:) This being done, let the Law go whistle: I warrant you.
I will tell the King all, every word, yea, and his Son's pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his Father, nor to me, to go about to make me the King's Brother in Law.
Indeed Brother in Law was the farthest off you could have been to him, and then your Blood had been the dearer, by I know how much an ounce.
Very wisely (Puppies.)
Well: let us to the King: there is that in this Farthell, will make him scratch his Beard.
I know not what impediment this Complaint may be to the flight of my Master.
Pray hearty he be at ' Palace.
Though I am not naturally honest, I am so sometimes by chance: Let me pocket up my Pedlar's excrement. How now (Rustiques) whither are you bound?
To th' Palace (and it like your Worship.)
Your Affairs there? what? with whom? the Condition of that Farthell? the place of your dwelling? your names? your ages? of what having? breeding, and any thing that is fitting to be known, discover?
We are but plain fellows, Sir.
A Lie; you are rough, and hairy: Let me have no lying; it becomes none but Tradesmen, and they often give us (Soldiers) the Lie, but we pay them for it with stamped Coin, not stabbing Steel, therefore they do not give us the Lye.
Your Worship had like to have given us one, if you had not taken yourself with the manner.
Are you a Courtier, and't like you Sir?
Whether it like me, or no, I am a Courtier. Seest thou not the air of the Court, in these enfoldings? Hath not my gate in it, the measure of the Court? Receives not thy Nose Court-Odour from me? Reflect I not on thy Baseness, Court-Contempt? Thinkest thou, for that I insinuate, at toaze from thee thy Business, I am therefore no Courtier? I am Courtier Cap-a-pe; and one that will either push-on, or pluck-back, thy Business there: whereupon I command thee to open thy Affair.
My Business, Sir, is to the King.
What Advocate hast thou to him?
I know not (and't like you.)
advocate's the Court-word for a Pheazant: say you have none.
None, Sir: I have no Pheazant Cock, nor Hen.
How blessed are we, that are not simple men?
Yet Nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.
This cannot be but a great Courtier.
His Garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.
He seems to be the more Noble, in being fantastical: A great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking on's Teeth.
The Farthell there? What's i' th' Farthell? Wherefore that Box?
Sir, there lies such Secrets in this Farthell and Box, which none must know but the King, and which he shall know within this hour, if I may come to th' speech of him.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Why Sir?
The King is not at the Palace, he is gone aboard a new Ship, to purge Melancholy, and air himself: for if thou be'st capable of things serious, thou must know the King is full of grief.
So 'tis said (Sir:) about his Son, that should have married a Shepherd's Daughter.
If that Shepherd be not in handfast, let him fly; the Curses he shall have, the Tortures he shall feel, will break the back of Man, the heart of Monster.
Think you so, Sir?
Not he alone shall suffer what Wit can make heavy, and Vengeance bitter; but those that are jermaine to him (though removed fifty times) shall all come under the Hangman: which, though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. An old Sheepe-whistiing Rogue, a Ram-tender, to offer to have his Daughter come into grace? Some say he shall be stoned: but that death is too soft for him (say I:) Draw our Throne into a Sheep-Coat? all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
Has the old-man ere a Son Sir (do you hear) and't like you, Sir?
He has a Son: who shall be flayed alive, than ' anointed over with Honey, set on the head of a Wasp's Nest, then stand till he be three quarters and a dram dead: then recovered again with Aquavite, or some other hot Infusion: then, raw as he is (and in the hottest day Prognostication proclaims) shall he be set against a Brickwall, (the Sun looking with a southward eye upon him; where he is to behold him, with Flies blown to death.) But what talk we of these Traitorly-Rascals, whose miseries are to be smiled at, their offences being so capital? Tell me (for you seem to be honest plain men) what you have to the King: being something gently considered, I'll bring you where he is aboard, tender your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man, besides the King, to effect your Suits, here is man shall do it.
He seems to be of great authority: close with him, give him Gold; and though Authority be a stubborn Beare, yet he is oft led by the Nose with Gold: show the inside of your Purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado. Remember ston'd, and stayed alive.
an't please you (Sir) to undertake the Business for us, here is that Gold I have: I'll make it as much more, and leave this young man in pawn, till I bring it you.
After I hate done what I promised?
I Sir.
Well, give me the moiety: Are you a party in this Business?
In some sort, Sir: but though my case be a pitiful one, I hope I shall not be flayd out of it.
Oh, that's the case of the Shepherd's Son: hang him, he'll be made an example.
Comfort good comfort. We must to the King, and shew our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your Daughter. nor my Sister. we are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as this old man does when the Business is pursued, and remain (as he says) your pawn till it be brought you.
I will trust you. Walk before toward the Seaside, go on the right hand, I will but look upon the Hedge, and follow you.
We are blessed, in this man: as I may say, even blessed.
Let's before, as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not suffer me: she drops booty in my mouth. I am courted now with a double occasion: (Gold, and a means to do the Prince my Master good; which, who knows how that may turne back to my advancement?) I will bring these too Moales, these blind-ones, aboard him. if he think it fit to shore them again, and that the Complaint they have to the King, concerns him nothing, let him call me Rogue, for being so far officious, for I am proof against that side, and what shame else belongs to't: To him will I present them, there may be matter in it.
Sir, you have done enough, and have performed
A Saintlike Sorrow: No fault could you make,
Which you have not redeemed; indeed paid down
More penitence, than done trespass: At the last
Do as the Heavens have done; forget your evil,
With them, forgive yourself.
Whilst I remember
Her, and her Virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did myself: which was so much,
That Heirelesse it hath made my Kingdom, and
Destroyed the sweetest Companion, that ere man
Bred his hopes out of true.
Too true (my Lord:)
If one by one, you wedded all the World,
Or from the All that are, took something good,
To make a perfect Woman; she you killed,
Would be vnparallell'd.
I think so. Killed?
She I killed? I did so: but thou strik'st me
Sorely, to say I did: it is as bitter
Upon thy Tongue, as in my Thought. Now, good now,
Say so but seldom.
Not at all, good Lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things, that would
Have done the time more benefit, and graced
Your kindness better.
You are one of those
Would have him wed again.
If you would not so,
You pity not the State, nor the Remembrance
Of his most Sovereign Name: Consider little,
What Dangers, by his Highness fail of Issue,
May drop upon his Kingdom, and devour
Incertain lookers on. What were more holy,
Then to rejoice the former Queen is well?
What holier, then for Royalties repair,
For present comfort, and for future good,
To bless the Bed of Majesty again
With a sweet Fellow to't?
There is none worthy,
(Respecting her that's gone:) besides the Gods
Will have fulfilled their secret purposes:
For has not the Divine Apollo said?
Is't not the tenor of his Oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an Heir,
Till his lost Child be found? Which, that it shall,
I all as monstrous to our humane reason,
As my Antigonus to break his Grave,
And come again to me: who, on my life,
Did perish with the Infant. 'Tis your council,
My Lord should to the Heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills. Care not for Issue,
The Crown will find an Heir. Great Alexander
Left his to th' Worthiest: so his Successor
Was like to be the best.
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione
I know in honour: O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy council: then, even now,
I might have looked upon my Queen's full eyes,
Have taken Treasure from her Lips.
And left them
More rich, for what they yielded.
Thou speakest truth:
No more such Wives, therefore no Wife: one worse,
And better used, would make her Sainted Spirit
Again possess her Corpse, and on this Stage
(Where we Offenders now appear) Soule-vext,
And begin, why to me?
Had she such power,
She had just such cause.
She had, and would incense me
To murder her I married.
I should so:
Were I the Ghost that walked, I'd bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
You chose her: then I'd shrieke, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me, and the words that followed,
Should be, Remember mine.
Stars, Stars,
And all eyes else, dead coals: fear thou no Wife;
I'll have no Wife, Paulina.
Will you swear
Never to marry, but by my free leave?
Never (Paulina) so be blessed my Spirit.
Then good my Lords, bear witness to his Oath.
You tempt him overmuch.
Unless another,
As like Hermione, as is her Picture,
Affront his eye.
Good Madame, I have done.
Yet if my Lord will marry: if you will, Sir;
No remedy but you will: Give me the Office
To choose you a Queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former, but she shall be such
As (walked your first Queen's Ghost) it should take joy
To see her in your arms.
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry, till thou bidst us.
That
Shall be when your first Queen's again in breath:
Never till then.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his Princess (she
The fairest I have yet beheld) desires access
To your high presence.
What with him? he comes not
Like to his Father's Greatness: his approach
(So out of circumstance, and sudden) tells us,
'Tis not a Visitation framed, but forced
By need, and accident. What Train?
But few,
And those but mean.
His Princess (say you) with him?
I: the most peerless piece of Earth, I think,
That ere the Sun shone bright on.
Oh Hermione,
As every present Time doth boast itself
Above a better, gone; so must thy Grave
Give way to what's seen now. Sir, you yourself
Have said, and writ so; but your writing now
Is colder than that Theme: she had not been,
Nor was not to be equalled, thus your Verse
Flowed with her Beauty once; 'tis shrewdly ebbed,
To say you have seen a better.
Pardon, Madame:
The one, I have almost forgot (your pardon:)
The other, when she has obtained your Eye,
Will have your Tongue too. This is a Creature,
Would she begin a Sect, might quench the zeal
Of all Professors else; make Proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.
How? not women?
Women will love her, that she is a Woman
More worth than any Man: Men, that she is
The rarest of all Women.
Go Cleomines,
Yourself (assisted with your honoured Friends)
Bring them to our embracement. Still 'tis strange,
He thus should steal upon us.
Had our Prince
(jewel of Children) seen this hour, he had paired
Well with this Lord; there was not full a month
Between their births.
Prithee no more; cease: thou knowst
He dies to me again, when talk'd-of: sure
When I shall see this Gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that, which may
Vnfurnish me of Reason. They are come.
Your Mother was most true to Wedlock, Prince,
For she did print your Royal Father off,
Conceiving you. Were I but twenty one,
Your Father's Image is so hit in you,
(His very air) that I should call you Brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us performed before. Most dearly welcome,
And your fair Princess (Goddess) oh: alas,
I lost a couple, that 'twixt Heaven and Earth
Might thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
You (gracious Couple) do: and then I lost
(All mine own Folly) the Society,
Amity too of your brave Father, whom
(Though bearing Misery) I desire my life
Once more to look on him.
By his command
Have I here touched Sicilia, and from him
Give you all greetings, that a King (at friend)
Can send his Brother: and but Infirmity
(Which waits upon worn times) hath something seized
His wished Ability, he had himself
The Lands and Waters, 'twixt your Throne and his,
Measured, to look upon you; whom he loves
(He bade me say so) more than all the Sceptres,
And those that bear them, living.
Oh my Brother,
(Good Gentleman) the wrongs I have done thee, stir
Afresh within me: and these thy offices
(So rarely kind) are as Interpreters
Of my behindhand slackness. Welcome hither,
As is the Spring to th' Earth. And hath he too
Exposed this Paragon to th' fearful usage
(At least ungentle) of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man, not worth her pains; much less,
Th' adventure of her person?
Good my Lord,
She came from Libya.
Where the Warlike Smalus,
That Noble honoured Lord, is feared, and loved?
Most Royal Sir,
From thence: from him, whose Daughter
His Tears proclaimed his parting with her: thence
(A prosperous Southwind friendly) we have crossed,
To execute the Charge my Father gave me,
For visiting your Highness: My best Train
I have from your Sicilian Shores dismissed;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya (Sir)
But my arrival, and my Wives, in safety
Here, where we are.
The blessed Gods
Purge all Infection from our Air, whilst you
Do Climate here: you have a holy Father,
A graceful Gentleman, against whose person
(So sacred as it is) I have done sin,
For which, the Heavens (taking angry note)
Have left me Issueless: and your Father's blessed
(As he from Heaven merits it) with you,
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a Son and Daughter now have looked on,
Such goodly things as you?
Most Noble Sir,
That which I shall report, will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you (great Sir)
Bohemia greets you from himself, by me:
Desires you to attach his Son, who has
(His Dignity, and Duty both cast off)
Fled from his Father, from his Hopes, and with
A Shepherd's Daughter.
Where's Bohemia? speak:
Here, in your City: I now came from him.
I speak amazedly, and it becomes
My marvel, and my Message. To your Court
Whiles he was hastening (in the Chase, it seems,
Of this fair Couple) meets he on the way
The Father of this seeming Lady, and
Her Brother, having both their Country quitted,
With this young Prince.
Camillo has betrayed me;
Whose honour, and whose honesty till now,
Endured all Wethers.
Lay't so to his charge:
He's with the King your Father.
Who? Camillo?
Camillo (Sir:) I spoke with him: who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the Earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With diverse deaths, in death.
Oh my poor Father:
The Heaven sets Spies upon us, will not have
Our Contract celebrated.
You are married?
We are not (Sir) nor are we like to be:
The Stars (I see) will kiss the Valleys first:
The odds for high and lows alike.
My Lord,
Is this the Daughter of a King?
She is,
When once she is my Wife.
That once (I see) by your good Father's speed,
Will come-on very slowly. I am sorry
(Most sorry) you have broken from his liking,
Where you were tied in duty: and as sorry,
Your Choice is not so rich in Worth, as Beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an Enemy,
Should chase us, with my Father; pour no jot
Hath she to change our Loves. Beseech you (Sir)
Remember, since you owed no more to Time
Then I do now: with thought of such Affections,
Stop forth mine Advocate: at your request,
My Father will grant precious things, as Trifles.
Would he do so. I'd beg your precious Mistress,
Which he counts but a Trifle.
Sir (my Liege)
Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month
'Fore your Queen died, she was more worth such gazes,
Than what you look on now.
I thought of her,
Even in these Looks I made. But your Petition
Is yet unanswered: I will to your Father:
Your Honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
I am friend to them, and you: Upon which Errand
I now go toward him: therefore follow me,
And mark what way I make: Come good my Lord.
Beseech you (Sir) were you present at this Relation?
I was by at the opening of the Farthell, heard the old Shepherd deliver the manner how he found it: Whereupon (after a little amazedness) we were all commanded out of the Chamber: only this (me thought) I heard the Shepherd say, he found the Child.
I would most gladly know the issue of it.
I make a broken delivery of the Business; but the changes I perceived in the King, and Camillo, were very Notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with staring on one another, to tear the Cases of their Eyes. There was speech in their dumbness, Language in their very gesture: they looked as they had heard of a World ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable passion of Wonder appeared in them: but the wisest beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say, if th' importance were joy, or Sorrow; but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be.
Here comes a Gentleman, that happily knows more: The News, Rogero.
Nothing but Bonfires: the Oracle is fulfilled: the King's Daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour, that Ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.
Here comes the Lady Paulina's Steward, he can deliver you more. How goes it now (Sir.) This News (which is called true) is so like an old Tale, that the verity of it is in strong suspicion: Has the King found his Heir?
Most true, if ever Truth were pregnant by Circumstance: That which you hear, you'll swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. The Mantle of Queen Hermiones: her jewel about the Neck of it: the Letters of Antigonus found with it, which they know to be his Character: the Majesty of the Creature, in resemblance of the Mother: the Affection of Nobleness, which Nature shows above her Breeding, and many other Evidences, proclaim her, with all certainty, to be the King's Daughter. Did you see the meeting of the two Kings?
No.
Then have you lost a Sight which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in such manner, that it seemed Sorrow wept to take leave of them: for their joy waded in tears. There was casting up of Eyes, holding up of Hands, with Countenance of such distraction, that they were to be known by Garment, not by favour. Our King being ready to leap out of himself, for joy of his found Daughter; as if that joy were now become a Loss, cries, Oh, thy Mother, thy Mother: then asks Bohemia forgiveness, then embraces his Son-in-law: then again worryes he his Daughter, with clipping her. Now he thanks the old Shepherd (which stands by, like a Weather-bitten Conduit, of many King's Reigns.) I never heard of such another Encounter; which lame Report to follow it, and vndo's description to do it.
What, 'pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried hence the Child?
Like an old Tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though Credit be asleep, and not an ear open; he was torn to pieces with a Bear: This avouches the Shepherd's Son; who has not only his Innocence (which seems much) to justify him, but a Handkerchief and Rings of his, that Paulina knows.
What became of his Bark, and his Followers?
Wracked the same instant of their Master's death, and in the view of the Shepherd: so that all the Instruments which aided to expose the Child, were even then loft, when it was found. But oh the Noble Combat, that 'twixt joy and Sorrow was fought in Paulina. She had one Eye declined for the loss of her Husband, another elevated, that the Oracle was fulfilled: She lifted the Princess from the Earth, and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin her to her heart, that she might no more be in danger of losing.
The Dignity of this Act was worth the audience of Kings and Princes, for by such was it acted.
One of the prettyest touches of all, and that which angled for mine Eyes (caught the Water, though not the Fish) was, when at the Relation of the Queen's death (with the manner how she came to't bravely confessed, and lamented by the King) how attentiveness wounded his Daughter, till (from one sign of dolour to another) she did (with an Alas) I would fain say, bleed Tears; for I am sure, my heart wept blood. Who was most Marble, there changed colour: some swownded, all sorrowed: if all the World could have seen't, the Woe had been universal.
Are they returned to the Court?
No: The Princess hearing of her Mother's Statue (which is in the keeping of Paulina) a Piece many years in doing, and now newly performed, by that rare Italian Master, Iulio Romaeno, who (had he himself Eternity, and could put Breath into his Work) would beguile Nature of her Custom, so perfectly he is her Ape: He so near to Hermione, hath done Hermione, that they say one would speak to her, and stand in hope of answer. Thither (with all greediness of affection) are they gone, and there they intent to Sup.
I thought she had some great matter there in hand, for she hath privately, twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of Hermione, visited that removed House. Shall we thither, and with our company piece the Rejoicing?
Who would be thence, that has the benefit of Access? every wink of an Eye, some new Grace will be borne: our Absence makes us unthrifty to our Knowledge. Let's along.
Now (had I not the dash of my former life in me) would Preferment drop on my head. I brought the old man and his Son aboard the Prince; told him, I heard them talk of a Farthell, and I know not what: but he at that time overfond of the Shepherd's Daughter (so he then took her to be) who began to be much Sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of Weather continuing, this Mystery remained undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me: for had I been the finder-out of this Secret, it would not have relished among my other discredits.
Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their Fortune.
Come Boy, I am passed more Children: but thy Sons and Daughters will be all Gentlemen borne.
You are well met (Sir.) you denied to fight with me this other day, because I was no Gentleman borne. See you these Clothes? say you see them not, and think me still no Gentleman borne: You were best say these Robes are not Gentlemen borne. Give me the Lie: do: and try whether I am not now a Gentleman borne.
I know you are now (Sir) a Gentleman borne.
I, and have been so any time these four hours.
And so have I, Boy.
So you have: but I was a Gentleman borne before my Father: for the King's Son took me by the hand, and called me Brother: and then the two Kings called my Father Brother: and then the Prince (my Brother) and the Princess (my Sister) called my Father, Father; and so we wept: and there was the first Gentlemanlike tears that ever we shed.
We may live (Son) to shed many more.
I: or else 'twere hard luck, being in so preposterous estate as we are.
I humbly beseech you (Sir) to pardon me all the faults I have committed to your Worship, and to give me your good report to the Prince my Master.
Prithee Son do: for we must be gentle, now we are Gentlemen.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
I, and it like your good Worship.
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the Prince, thou art as honest a true Fellow as any is in Bohemia.
You may say it, but not swear it.
Not swear it, now I am a Gentleman? Let Boors and Francklins say it, I'll swear it.
How if it be false (Son?)
If it be ne'er so false, a true Gentleman may swear it, in the behalf of his Friend: And I'll swear to the Prince, thou art a tall Fellow of thy hands, and that thou wilt not be drunk: but I know thou art no tall Fellow of thy hands, and that thou wilt be drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst be a tall Fellow of thy hands.
I will prove so (Sir) to my power.
I, by any means prove a tall Fellow: if I do not wonder, how thou darest venture to be drunk, not being a tall Fellow, trust me not. Hark, the Kings and the Princes (our Kindred) are going to see the Queen's Picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy good Masters.
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee?
What (Sovereign Sir)
I did not well, I meant well: all my Services
You have paid home. But that you have vouchsafed
(With your Crowned Brother, and these your contracted
Heirs of your Kingdoms) my poor House to visit;
It is a surplus of your Grace, which never
My life may last to answer.
O Paulina,
We honour you with trouble: but we came
To see the Statue of our Queen. Your Gallery
Have we passed through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my Daughter came to look upon,
The Statue of her Mother.
As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness I do well believe
Excels what ever yet you looked upon,
Or hand of Man hath done: therefore I keep it
Lovely, apart. But here it is: prepare
To see the Life as lively mocked, as ever
Still Sleep mocked Death: behold, and say 'tis well.
I like your silence, it the more shewes-off
Your wonder: but yet speak, first you (my Liege)
Comes it not something near?
Her natural Posture.
Chide me (dear Stone) that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she,
In thy not chiding: for she was as tender
As Infancy, and Grace. But yet (Paulina)
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems.
Oh, not by much.
So much the more our Carver's excellence.
Which lets goe-by some sixteen years, and makes her
As she lived now.
As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort, as it is
Now piercing to my Soul. Oh, thus she stood,
Even with such Life of Majesty (warm Life,
As now it coldly stands) when first I wooed her.
I am ashamed: Does not the Stone rebuke me,
For being more Stone than it? Oh Royal Piece:
There's Magic in thy Majesty, which has
My Evils conjured to remembrance; and
From thy admiring Daughter took the Spirits,
Standing like Stone with thee.
And give me leave,
And do not say 'tis Superstition, that
I kneel, and then implore her Blessing. Lady,
Dear Queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours, to kiss.
O, patience:
The Statue is but newly fixed; the Colour's
Not dry.
My Lord, your Sorrow was too sore lay'd-on,
Which sixteen Winters cannot blow away,
So many Summer's dry: scarce any joy
Did ever so long live; no Sorrow,
But killed itself much sooner.
Dear my Brother,
Let him, that was the cause of this, have power
To take-off so much grief from you, as he
Will piece up in himself.
Indeed my Lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor Image
Would thus have wrought you (for the Stone is mine)
I'd not have showed it.
Do not draw the Curtain.
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your Fancy
May think anon, it moves.
Let be, let be:
Would I were dead, but that me thinks already.
(What was he that did make it?) See (my Lord)
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
Did verily bear blood?
Masterly done:
The very Life seems warm upon her Lip.
The fixure of her Eye has motion in't,
As we are mocked with Art.
I'll draw the Curtain:
My Lord's almost so far transported, that
he'll think anon it lives.
Oh sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together:
No settled Senses of the World can match
The pleasure of that madness. Leted alone.
I am sorry (Sir) I have thus far stirred you: but
I could afflict you farther.
Do Paulina:
For this Affliction has a taste as sweet
As any Cordial comfort. Still me thinks
There is an air comes from her. What fine Chizzell
Can ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her.
Good my Lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her Lip, is wet:
You'll mar it, if you kiss it; stain your own
With Oily Painting: shall I draw the Curtain.
No: not these twenty years.
So long could I
Standby, a looker-on.
Either forbear,
Quit presently the Chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement: if you can behold it,
I'll make the Statue move indeed; descend,
And take you by the hand: but than you'll think
(Which I protest against) I am assisted
By wicked Powers.
What you can make her do,
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear: for 'tis as easy
To make her speak, as move.
It is required
You do awake your Faith: then, all stand still:
On: those that think it is unlawful Business
I am about, let them departed.
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.
Music; awake her: Strike:
'Tis time: descend: be Stone no more: approach:
Strike all that look upon with marvel: Come:
I'll fill your Grave up: stir: nay, come away:
Bequeath to Death your numbness: (for from him,
Dear Life redeems you) you perceive she stirs:
Start not: her Actions shall be holy, as
You hear my Spell is lawful: do not shun her,
Until you see her dye again; for than
You kill her double: Nay, present your Hand:
When she was young, you wooed her: now, in age,
Is she become the Suitor?
Oh, she's warm:
If this be Magic, let it be an Art
Lawful as Eating.
She embraces him.
She hangs about his neck,
If she pertain to life, let her speak too.
I, and make it manifest where she has lived,
Or how stolen from the dead?
That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old Tale: but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while:
Please you to interpose (fair Madam) kneel,
And pray your Mother's blessing: turn good Lady,
Our Perdita is found.
You Gods look down,
And from your sacred Viols pour your graces
Upon my daughter's head: Tell me (mine own)
Where hast thou been preserved? Where lived? How found
Thy Father's Court? For thou shalt hear that I
Knowing by Paulina, that the Oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
Myself, to see the issue.
There's ttme enough for that,
Left they desire (upon this push) to trouble
Your joys, with like Relation. Go together
You precious winners all: your exultation
Partake to every one: I (an old Turtle)
Will wing me to some withered bough, and there
My Mate (that's never to be found again)
Lament, till I am lost.
O peace Paulina:
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a Wife. This is a Match,
And made betweene's by Vows. Thou hast found mine,
But how, is to be questioned: for I saw her
(As I thought) dead: and have (in vain) said many
A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek fair
(For him, I partly know his mind) to find thee
An honourable husband. Come Camillo,
And take her by the hand: whose worth, and honesty
Is richly noted: and here justified
By Us, a pair of Kings. Let's from this place.
What? look upon my Brother: both your pardons,
That ere I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion: This your Son-in-law,
And Son unto the King, whom heavens directing
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
Each one demand, and answer to his part
Performed in this wide gap of Time, since first
We were dissevered: Hastily lead away.