I Come no more to make you laugh, Things now,
That bear a Weighty, and a Serious Brow,
Sad, high, and working, full of State and Woe:
Such Noble Scenes, as draw the Eye to flow
We now present. Those that can Pity, here
May (if they think it well) let fall a Tear,
The Subject will deserve it. Such as give
Their Money out of hope they may believe,
May here find Truth too. Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and so agree,
The Play may pass: If they be still, and willing,
I'll undertake may see away their shilling
Richly in two short hours. Only they
That come to hear a Merry, Bawdy Play,
A noise of Targets: Or to see a Fellow
In a long Motley Coat, guarded with Yellow,
Will be deceived. For gentle Hearers, know
To rank our chosen Truth with such a show
As Fool, and Fight is, beside forfeiting
Our own Brains, and the Opinion that we bring
To make that only true, we now intent,
Will leave us never an understanding Friend.
Therefore, for Goodness sake, and as you are known
The First and Happiest Hearers of the Town,
Be sad, as we would make ye. Thinke you see
The very Persons of our Noble Story,
As they were Living: Think you see them Great,
And followed with the general throng, and sweat
Of thousand Friends: Then, in a moment, see
How soon this Mightiness, meets Misery:
And if you can be merry then, I'll say,
A Man may weep upon his Wedding day.
GOod morrow, and well met. How have ye done
Since last we saw in France?
I thank your Grace:
Healthful, and ever since a fresh Admirer
Of what I saw there.
An untimely Ague
Stayed me a Prisoner in my Chamber, when
Those Suns of Glory, those two Lights of Men
Met in the vale of Andren.
'Twixt Guynes and Arde,
I was then present, saw them salute on Horseback,
Beheld them when they lighted, how they clung
In their Embracement, as they grew together,
Which had they,
What four Throned ones could have weighed
Such a compounded one?
All the whole time
I was my Chambers Prisoner.
Then you lost
The view of earthly glory: Men might say
Till this time Pomp was single, but now married
To one above itself. Each following day
Became the next day's master, till the last
Made former Wonders, it's. To day the French,
All Clinquant all in Gold, like Heathen Gods
Shone down the English; and to morrow, they
Made Britain, India: Every man that stood,
Showed like a Mine. Their Dwarfish Pages were
As Cherubins, all gilt: the Madams too,
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
The Pride upon them, that their very labour
Was to them, as a Painting. Now this Mask
Was cried incompareable; and th' ensuing night
Made it a Fool, and Beggar. The two Kings
Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst
As presence did present them: Him in eye,
Still him in praise, and being present both,
'Twas said they saw but one, and no Discerner
Durst wag his Tongue in censure, when these Suns
(For so they phrase 'em) by their Heralds challenged
The Noble Spirits to Arms, they did perform
Beyond thoughts Compass, that former fabulous Story
Being now seen, possible enough, got credit
That Bevis was believed.
Oh you go far.
As I belong to worship, and affect
In Honour, Honesty, the tract of every thing,
Would by a good Discourser lose some life,
Which Actions self, was tongue too.
All was Royal,
To the disposing of it nought rebelled,
Order gave each thing view. The Office did
Distinctly his full Function: who did guide,
I mean who set the Body, and the Limbs
Of this great Sport together?
As you guess:
One certes, that promises no Element
In such a business.
I pray you who, my Lord?
All this was ordered by the good Discretion
Of the right Reverend Cardinal of York.
The devil speed him: No man's Pie is freed
From his Ambitious finger. What had he
To do in these fierce Vanities? I wonder,
That such a Keech can with his very bulk
Take up the Rays o' th' beneficial Sun,
And keep it from the Earth.
Surely Sir,
There's in him stuff, that put's him to these ends:
For being not propped by Auncestry, whose grace
Chalks Successors their way; nor called upon
For high feats done to ' th' Crown; neither Allied
To eminent Assistants; but Spider-like
Out of his Selfe-drawing Web. O gives us note,
The force of his own merit makes his way
A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys
A place next to the King.
I cannot tell
What Heaven hath given him: let some Graver eye
Pierce into that, but I can see his Pride
Peep through each part of him: whence has he that,
If not from Hell? The Devil is a Niggard,
Or has given all before, and he begins
A new Hell in himself.
Why the Devil,
Upon this French going out, took he upon him
(Without the privity o' th' King) t'appoint
Who should attend on him? He makes up the File
Of all the Gentry; for the most part such
To whom as great a Charge, as little Honour
He meant to lay upon: and his own Letter
The Honourable Board of Council, out
Must fetch him in, he Papers.
I do know
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
By this, so sickened their Estates, that never
They shall abound as formerly.
O many
Have broke their backs with laying Manors on 'em
For this great journey. What did this vanity
But minister communication of
A most poor issue.
Greevingly I think,
The Peace between the French and us, not values
The Cost that did conclude it.
Every man,
After the hideous storm that followed, was
A thing Inspired, and not consulting, broke
Into a general Prophecy; That this Tempest
Dashing the Garment of this Peace, aboaded
The sudden breach on't.
Which is budded out,
For France hath flawed the League, and hath attached
Our Merchant's goods at Bordeaux.
Is it therefore?
Th' Ambassador is silenced?
Marry is't.
A proper Title of a Peace, and purchased
At a superfluous rate.
Why all this Business
Our Reverend Cardinal carried.
Like it your Grace,
The State takes notice of the private difference
Betwixt you, and the Cardinal. I advise you
(And take it from a heart, that wishes towards you
Honour, and plenteous safety) that you read
The Cardinal's Malice, and his Potency
Together; To consider further, that
What his high Hatred would effect, wants not
A Minister in his Power. You know his Nature,
That he's Revengeful; and I know, his Sword
Hath a sharp edge: It's long, and't may be said
It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend,
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel,
You'll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that Rock
That I advice your shunning.
The Duke of Buckingham's Surveyor? Ha'?
Where's his Examination?
here so please you.
Is he in person, ready?
I, please your Grace.
Well, we shall then know more, & Buckingham
Shall lessen this big look.
This Butcher's Cur is venom'd-mouthed, and I
Have not the power to muzzle him, therefore best
Not wake him in his slumber. A Beggar's book,
Out-worths a Nobles blood.
What are you chaffed?
Ask God for Temperance, that's th' appliance only
Which your disease requires.
I read in's looks
Matter against me, and his eye reviled
Me as his abject object, at this instant
He boreas me with some trick; He's gone to ' th' King:
I'll follow, and outstare him.
Stay my Lord,
And let your Reason with your Choler question
What 'tis you go about: to climb steep hills
Requires flow pace at first. Anger is like
A full hot Horse, who being allowed his way
Selfe-mettle tires him: Not a man in England
Can advise me like you: Be to yourself,
As you would to your Friend.
I'll to the King,
And from a mouth of Honour, quite cry down
This Ipswich fellows insolence; or proclaim,
There's difference in no persons.
Be advised;
Heat not a Furnace for your foe so hot
That it do singe yourself. We may outrun
By violent swiftness that which we run at;
And lose by overrunning: know you not,
The fire that mounts the liquor till't run over,
In seeming to augment it, wastes it: be advised;
I say again there is no English Soul
More stronger to direct you then yourself;
If with the sap of reason you would quench,
Or but allay the fire of passion.
Sir,
I am thankful to you, and I'll go along
By your prescription: but this top-proud fellow,
Whom from the flow of gall I name not, but
From sincere motions, by Intelligence,
And proofs as clear as Founts in Iuly, when
We see each grain of gravel; I do know
To be corrupt and treasonous.
Say not treasonous.
To th' King I'll say't, & make my vouch as strong
As shore of Rock: attend. This holy Fox,
Or Wolf, or both (for he is equal ravenous
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief,
As able to performed) his mind, and place
Infecting one another, yea reciprocally,
Only to show his pomp, as well in France,
As here at home, suggests the King our Master
To this last costly Treaty: Th' interview,
That swallowed so much treasure, and like a glass
Did break i'th' wrenching.
Faith, and so it did.
Pray give me favour Sir: This cunning Cardinal
The Articles o' th' Combination drew
As himself pleased; and they were ratified
As he cried thus let be, to as much end,
As give a Crutch to th' dead. But our Count-Cardinall
Has done this, and 'tis well: for worthy Wolsey
(Who cannot err) he did it. Now this follows,
(Which as I take it, is a kind of Puppy
To th' old dam Treason) Charles the Emperor,
Under pretence to see the Queen his Aunt,
(For 'twas indeed his colour, but he came
To whisper Wolsey) here makes visitation,
His fears were that the Interview betwixt
England and France, might through their amity
Breed him some prejudice; for from this League,
Peeped harms that menaced him. Privily
Deals with our Cardinal, and as I troa
Which I do well; for I am sure the Emperor
Paid ere he promised, whereby his Suit was granted
Ere it was asked. But when the way was made
And paved with gold: the Emperor thus desired,
Tha he would please to alter the Kings course,
And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know
(As soon he shall by me) that thus the Cardinal
Does buy and sell his Honour as he pleases,
And for his own advantage.
I am sorry
To hear this of him; and could wish he were
Something mistaken in't.
No, not a syllable:
I do pronounce him in that very shape
He shall appear in proof.
Your Office Sergeant: execute it.
Sir,
My Lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
Of Hertford, Stafford and Northampton, I
Arrest thee of High Treason, in the name
Of our most Sovereign King.
Lo you my Lord,
The net has fall'n upon me, I shall perish
Under device, and practise:
I am sorry,
To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on
The business present. 'tis his Highness' pleasure
You shall to th' Tower.
It will help me nothing
To plead mine Innocence; for that die is on me
Which makes my whitest part, black. The will of Heaven
Be done in this and all things: I obey.
O my Lord Aburgany: Far you well.
Nay, he must bear you company. The King
Is pleased you shall to th' Tower, till you know
How he determines further.
As the Duke said,
The will of Heaven be done, and the King's pleasure
By me obeyed.
Here is a warrant from
The King, t'attach Lord Montacute, and the Bodies
Of the Duke's Confessor, Iohn de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, his counselor.
So, so;
These are the limbs o' th' Plot: no more I hope.
A Monk o' th' Chartreux.
O Michael Hopkins?
He.
My Surveyor is false: The ore-great Cardinal
Hath showed him gold; my life is spanned already:
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Whose Figure even this instant Cloud puts on,
By Darkening my clear Sun. My Lords farewell.
My life itself, and the best heart of it,
Thanks you for this great care: I stood i' th' level
Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thankes
To you that choked it. Let be called before us
That Gentleman of Buckingham's, in person,
I'll hear him his confessions justify,
And point by point the Treasons of his Master,
He shall again relate.
Nay, we must longer kneel; I am a Suitor.
Arise, and take place by us; halfe your Suit
Never name to us; you have half our power:
The other moiety ere you ask is given,
Repeat your will, and take it.
Thank your Majesty
That you would love yourself, and in that love
Not unconsidered leave your Honour, nor
The dignity of your Office; is the point
Of my Petition.
Lady mine proceed.
I am solicited not by a few,
And those of true condition; That your Subjects
Are in great grievance: There have been Commissions
Sent down among 'em, which hath flawed the heart
Of all their Loyalties; wherein, although
My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
Most bitterly on you, as butter on
Of these exactions: yet the King, our Master
Whose Honour Heaven shield from soil; even he escapes not
Language unmannerly; yea, such which breaks
The sides of loyalty, and almost appears
In loud Rebellion.
Not almost appears,
It doth appear; for, upon these Taxations,
The Clothiers all not able to maintain
The many to them longing, have put off
The Spinsters, Carders, Fuller's, Weavers, who
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring th' event too th' teeth, are all in uproar,
And danger serves among them.
Taxation?
Wherein? and what Taxation? My Lord Cardinal,
You that are blamed for it alike with us,
Know you of this Taxation?
Please you Sir,
I know but of a single part in aught
Pertains to th' State: and front but in that File
Where others tell steps with me.
No, my Lord?
You know no more than others? But you frame
Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
To those which would not know them, and yet must
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions
(Whereof my Sovereign would have note) they are
Most pestilent to th' hearing, and to bear 'em,
The Back is Sacrifice to th' load; They say
They are devised by you, er else you suffer
Too hard an exclamation.
Still Exaction:
The nature of it, in what kind let's know,
Is this Exaction?
I am much too venturous
In tempting of your patience; but am boldened
Under your promised pardon. The Subject's grief
Comes through Commissions, which compels from each
The sixth part of his Substance, to be levied
Without delay; and the pretence for this
Is named, your wars in France: this makes bold mouths,
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
Allegiance in them; their curses now
Live where their prayers did: and it's come to pass,
This tractable obedience is a Slave
To each incensed Will: I would your Highness
Would give it quick consideration; for
There is no primer baseness.
By my life,
This is against our pleasure.
And for me,
I have no further gone in this, then by
A single voice, and that not passed me, but
By learned approbation of the judges: If I am
Traduced by ignorant Tongues, which neither know
My faculties nor person, yet will be
The Chronicles of my doing: Let me say,
'Tis but the fate of Place, and the rough Brake
That Virtue must go through: we must not stint
Our necessary actions, in the fear
To cope malicious Censurers, which ever,
As ravenous Fishes do a Vessel follow
That is new trimmed; but benefit no further
Then vainly longing. What we oft do best,
By sick Interpreters (once weak ones) is
Not ours, or not allowed; what worst, as oft
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
For our best Act: if we shall stand still,
In fear our motion will be mocked, or carped at,
We should take root here, where we sit;
Or sit State-Statues only.
Things done well,
And with a care, exempt themselves from fear:
Things done without example, in their issue
Are to be feared. Have you a Precedent
Of this Commission? I believe, not any.
We must not rend our Subjects from our Laws,
And stick them in our Will. sixth part of each?
A trembling Contribution; why we take
From every Tree, lop, bark, and part o' th' Timber:
And though we leave it with a root thus hacked,
The Air will drink the Sap. To every County
Where this is questioned, send our Letters, with
Free pardon to each man that has denied
The force of this Commission: pray look too't;
I put it to your care.
A word with you.
Let there be Letters writ to every Shire,
Of the King's grace and pardon: the grieved Commons
Hardly conceive of me. Let it be noised,
That through our Intercession, this Revokement
And pardon come: I shall anon advise you
Further in the proceeding.
I am sorry, that the Duke of Buckingham
Is run in your displeasure.
It grieves many:
The Gentleman is Learned, and a most rare Speaker,
To Nature none more bound; his training such,
That he may furnish and instruct great Teachers,
And never seek for aid out of himself: yet see,
When these so Noble benefits shall prove
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Who was enrolled 'mongst wonders; and when we
Almost with ravished listening, could not find
His hour of speech, a minute: He, (my Lady)
Hath into monstrous habits put the Graces
That once were his, and is become as black,
As if besmeared in hell. Sat by Us, you shall hear
(This was his Gentleman in trust) of him
Things to strike Honour sad. Bid him recount
The forerecited practices, whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
Stand forth, & with bold spirit relate what you
Most like a careful Subject have collected
Out of the Duke of Buckingham.
Speak freely.
First, it was usual with him; every day
It would infect his Speech: That if the King
Should without issue dye; he'll carry it so
To make the Sceptre his. These very words
I've heard him utter to his Son in Law,
Lord Aburgany, to whom by o'th' he menaced
Revenge upon the Cardinal.
Please your Highness' note
This dangerous conception in this point,
Not friended by his wish to your High person;
His will is most malignant, and it stretches
Beyond you to your friends.
My learned Lord Cardinal,
Deliver all with Charity.
Speak on;
How grounded he his Title to the Crown
Upon our fail; to this point hast thou heard him,
At any time speak aught?
He was brought to this,
By a vain Prophecy of Nicholas Henton.
What was that Henton?
Sir, a Chartreux Fryer,
His Confessor, who fed him every minute
With words of Sovereignty.
How knowst thou this?
Not long before your Highness sped to France,
The Duke being at the Rose, within the Parish
Saint Laurence Poultney, did of me demand
What was the speech among the Londoners,
Concerning the French journey. I replied,
Men fear the French would prove perfidious
To the King's danger: presently, the Duke
Said, 'twas the fear indeed, and that he doubted
'Twould prove the verity of certain words
Spoke by a holy Monk, that oft, says he,
Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
Iohn de la Car, my Chaplain, a choice hour
To hear from him a matter of some moment:
Whom after under the Commissions Seal,
He solemnly had sworn, that what he spoke
My Chaplain to no Creature living, but
To me, should utter, with demure Confidence,
This pausingly ensu'de; neither the King, nor's Heirs
(Tell you the Duke) shall prosper, bid him strive
To the love o' th' Commonalty, the Duke
Shall govern England.
If I know you well,
You were the Duke's Surveyor, and lost your Office
On the complaint o' th' Tenants; take good heed
You charge not in your spleen a Noble person,
And spoil your nobler Soul; I say, take heed;
Yes, hearty beseech you.
Let him on: Go forward.
On my Soul, I'll speak but truth.
I told my Lord the Duke, by th' Devil's illusions
The Monk might be deceived, and that 'twas dangerous
For this to ruminate on this so far, until
It forged him some design, which being believed
It was much like to do: He answered, Tush,
It can do me no damage; adding further,
That had the King in his last Sickness failed,
The Cardinals and Sir Thomas Lovels heads
Should have gone off.
Ha'? What, so rank? Ah, ha',
There's mischief in this man; canst thou say further?
I can my Liege.
Proceed.
Being at Greenwich.
After your Highness had reproved the Duke
About Sir William Bulmer.
I remember of such a time, being my sworn servant,
The Duke retained him his. But on: what hence?
If (quoth he) I for this had been committed,
As to the Tower, I thought; I would have played
The Part my Father meant to act upon
Th' Usurper Richard, who being at Salisbury,
Made suit to come in's presence; which if granted,
(As he made semblance of his duty) would
Have put his knife into him.
A Giant Traitor.
Now Madam, may his Highness live in freedom,
And this man out of Prison.
God mend all.
there's something more would out of thee; what sayst?
After the Duke his Father, with the knife
He stretched him, and with one hand on his dagger,
Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes,
He did discharge a horrible Oath, whose tenor
Was, were he evil used, he would outgo
His Father, by as much as a performance
Does an irresolute purpose.
There's his period,
To sheathe his knife in us: he is attached,
Call him to present trial: if he may
Find mercy in the Law, 'tis his; if none,
Let him not seeked of us; By day and night
he's Traitor to th' height.
Is't possible the spells of France should juggle
Men into such strange mysteries?
New customs,
Though they be never so ridiculous,
(Nay let 'em be unmanly) yet are followed.
As far as I see, all the good our English
Have got by the late Voyage, is but merely
A fit or two o' th' face, (but they are shrewd ones)
For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
Their very noses had been counselors
To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep State so.
They have all new legs,
And lame ones; one would take it,
That never see 'em place before, the Spaven
A Spring-halt rained among 'em.
Death my Lord,
Their clothes are after such a Pagan cut too't,
That sure th' have worn out Christendom: how now?
What news, Sir Thomas Lovel?
Faith my Lord,
I hear of none but the new Proclamation,
That's clapped upon the Court Gate.
What is't for?
The reformation of our travelled Gallants,
That fill the Court with quarrels, talk, and Tailors.
I'm glad 'tis there;
Now I would pray our Monsieurs
To think an English Courtier may be wise,
And never see the Louure.
They must either
(For so run the Conditions) leave those remnants
Of Fool and Feather, that they got in France,
With all their honourable points of ignorance
Pertaining thereunto; as Fights and Fireworks,
Abusing better men than they can be
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
The faith they have in Tennis and tall Stockings,
Short blistered Breeches, and those types of Travel;
And understand again like honest men,
Or pack to their old Playfellows; there, I take it,
They may Cum Praulegio, we away
The lag end of their lewdness, and be laughed at.
'tis time to give 'em Physic, their diseases
Are grown so catching.
What a loss our Ladies
Will have of these trim vanities?
I marry,
There will be woe indeed Lords, the sly whoresons
Have got a speeding trick to lay down Ladies.
A French Song, and a Fiddle, has no Fellow.
The Devil fiddle 'em,
I am glad they are going,
For sure there's no converting of 'em: now
An honest Country Lord as I am, beaten
A long time out of play, may bring his plain song,
And have an hour of hearing, and by't Lady
Held currant Music too.
Well said Lord Sands,
Your Colt's tooth is not cast yet?
No my Lord,
Nor shall not while I have a stump.
Sir Thomas,
Whither were you a going?
To the Cardinals;
Your Lordship is a guest too.
O, 'tis true;
This night he makes a Supper, and a great one,
To many Lords and Ladies; there will be
The Beauty of this Kingdom I'll assure you.
That Churchman
Bears a bounteous mind indeed,
A hand as fruitful as the Land that feeds us,
His dews fall every where.
No doubt he's Noble;
He had a black mouth that said other of him.
He may my Lord,
Has wherewithal in him;
Sparing would show a worse sin, then ill Doctrine,
Men of his way, should be most liberal,
They are set here for examples.
True, they are so;
But few now give so great ones:
My Barge stays;
Your Lordship shall along: Come, good Sir Thomas,
We shall be late else, which I would not be,
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guilford
This night to be Comptrollers.
I am your Lordships.
Ladies,
A general welcome from his Grace
Salutes ye all; This Night he dedicates
To fair content, and you: None here he hopes
In all this Noble Bevy, has brought with her
One care abroad: he would have all as merry:
As first, good Company, good wine, good welcome,
Can make good people.
O my Lord, ye are tardy;
The very thought of this fair Company,
Clapped wings to me.
You are young Sir Harry Guildford.
Sir Thomas Lovel, had the Cardinal
But halfe my Lay-thoughts in him, some of these
Should find a running Banquet, ere they rested,
I think would better please 'em: by my life,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.
O that your Lordship were but now Confessor,
To one or two of these.
I would I were,
They should find easy penance.
Faith how easy?
As easy as a down bed would afford it.
Sweet Ladies will it please you sit; Sir Harry
Place you that side, I'll take the charge of this:
His Grace is entering. Nay, you must not freeze,
Two women placed together, makes cold weather:
My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking:
Pray sit between these Ladies.
By my faith,
And thank your Lordship: by your leave sweet Ladies,
If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me:
I had it from my Father.
Was he mad Sir?
O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too;
But he would bite none, just as I do now,
He would Kiss you Twenty with a breath.
Well said my Lord:
So now ye are fairly seated: Gntlemen,
The penance lies on you; if these fair Ladies
Pass away frowning.
For my little Cure,
Let me alone.
YE are welcome my fair Guests; that noble Lady
Or Gentleman that is not freely merry
Is not my Friend. This to confirm my welcome,
And to you all good health.
Your Grace is Noble,
Let me have such a Bowl may hold my thankes.
And save me so much talking.
My Lord Sands,
I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours:
Ladies you are not merry; Gentlemen,
Whose fault is this?
The red wine first must rise
In their fair cheeks my Lord, than we shall have 'em,
Talk us to silence.
You are a merry Gamester
My Lord Sands.
Yes, if I make my play:
here's to your Ladyship, and pledge it Madam:
For 'tis to such a thing.
You cannot show me.
I told your Grace, they would talk anon.
What's that?
Look out there, some of ye.
What warlike voice,
And to what end is this? Nay, Ladies, fear not;
By all the laws of War ye are privileged.
How now, what is't?
A noble troop of Strangers,
For so they seem; th' have left their Barge and landed,
And hither make, as great Ambassadors
From foreign Princes.
Good Lord Chamberlain,
Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue
And pray receive 'em Nobly, and conduct 'em
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
You have now a broken Banquet, but we'll mend it.
A good digestion to you all; and once more
I shower a welcome on ye: welcome all.
A noble Company: what are their pleasures?
Because they speak no English, thus they prayed
To tell your Grace: That having heard by fame
Of this so Noble and so fair assembly,
This night to meet here they could do no less,
(Out of the great respect they bear to beauty)
But leave their Flocks, and under your fair Conduct
Crave leave to view these Ladies, and entreat
An hour of Revels with 'em.
Say, Lord Chamberlain,
They have done my poor house grace:
For which I pay 'em a thousand thankes,
And pray 'em take their pleasures.
The fairest hand I ever touched: O Beauty,
Till now I never knew thee.
My Lord.
Your Grace.
Pray tell 'em thus much from me:
There should be one amongst 'em by his person
More worthy this place then myself, to whom
(If I but knew him) with my love and duty
I would surrender it.
I will my Lord.
What say they?
Such a one, they all confess
There is indeed, which they would have your Grace
Find out, and he will take it.
Let me see then,
By all your good leaves Gentlemen; here I'll make
My royal choice.
Ye have found him Cardinal,
You hold a fair Assembly; you do well Lord:
You are a Churchman, or I'll tell you Cardinal,
I should judge now unhappily.
I am glad
Your Grace is grown so pleasant.
My Lord Chamberlain,
Prithee come hither, what fair lady's that?
An't please your Grace,
Sir Thomas Boulogne's Daughter, the Viscount Rochfort,
One of her Highness' women.
By Heaven she is a dainty one. Sweet heart,
I were unmannerly to take you out,
And not to kiss you. A health Gentlemen,
Let it go round.
Sir Thomas Lovel, is the Banquet ready
I' th' Privy Chamber?
Yes, my Lord.
Your Grace
I fear, with dancing is a little heated.
I fear too much.
There's fresher air my Lord,
In the next Chamber.
Led in your Ladies every one: Sweet Partner,
I must not yet forsake you: Let's be merry,
Good my Lord Cardinal: I have halfe a dozen healths,
To drink to these fair Ladies, and a measure
To lead 'em once again, and then let's dream
Who's best in favour. Let the Music knock it.
Whether away so fast?
O, God save ye:
Even to the Hall, to hear what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
I'll save you
That labour Sir. All's now done but the Ceremony
Of bringing back the Prisoner.
Were you there?
Yes indeed was I.
Pray speak what has happened.
You may guess quickly what.
Is he found guilty?
Yes truly is he,
And condemned upon't.
I am sorry for't.
So are a number more.
But pray how past it?
I'll tell you in a little. The great Duke
Came to the Bar; where, to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged
Many sharp reasons to defeat the Law.
The King's Attorney on the contrary,
Urged on the Examinations, proofs, confessions
Of diverse witnesses, which the Duke desired
To him brought vina voce to his face;
At which appeared against him, his Surueyor
Sir Gilbert Peck his Chancellor, and Iohn Car,
Confessor to him, with that Devil Monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.
That was he
That fed him with his Prophecies.
The same,
All these accused him strongly, which he fain
Would have fling from him; but indeed he could not;
And so his Peers upon this evidence,
Have found him guilty of high Treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly for life: But all
Was either pitied in him, or forgotten.
After all this, how did he bear himself?
When he was brought again to th' Bar, to hear
His Knell rung out, his judgement, he was stirred
With such an Agony, he sweat extremely,
And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty:
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly,
In all the rest showed a most Noble patience,
I do not think he fears death.
Sure he does not,
He never was so womanish, the cause
He may a little grieve at.
Certainly,
The Cardinal is the end of this.
'tis likely,
By all conjectures: First Kildares Attendure;
Then Deputy of Ireland, who removed
Earl Surrey, was sent thither, and in haste too,
Lest he should help his Father.
That trick of State
Was a deep envious one,
At his return,
No doubt he will requite it; this is noted
(And generally) who ever the King favours,
The Cardinal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from Court too.
All the Commons
Hate him perniciously, and o' my Conscience
Wish him ten faddom deep: This Duke as much
They love and dote on: call him bounteous Buckingham,
The Mirror of all courtesy.
Stay there Sir,
And see the noble ruined man you speak of.
Let's stand close and behold him.
All good people,
You that thus far have come to pity me;
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
I have this day received a Traitor's judgement,
And by that name must dye; yet Heaven bear witness,
And if I have a Conscience, let it sink me,
Even as the Axe falls, if I be not faithful.
The Law I bear no malice for my death,
T' has done upon the premises, but justice:
But those that sought it, I could wish more Christians:
(Be what they will) I hearty forgiue'em;
Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief;
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men;
For then, my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
For further life in this world I ne'er hope,
Nor will I sue, although the King have mercies
More than I dare make faults.
You few that loved me,
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
His Noble Friends and Fellows; whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying:
Go with me like good Angels to my end,
And as the long divorce of Steel falls on me,
Make of your Prayers one sweet Sacrifice,
And lift my Soul to Heaven.
Led on a God's name.
I do beseech your Grace, for charity
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Sir Thomas Lovel, I as free forgive you
As I would be forgiven: I forgive all.
There cannot be those numberless offences
'Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with:
No black Envy shall make my Grave.
Commend me to his Grace:
And if he speak of Buckingham; pray tell him,
You met him half in Heaven: my vows and prayers
Yet are the Kings; and till my Soul forsake,
Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live
Longer than I have time to tell his years;
Ever beloved and loving, may his Rule be;
And when old Time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he, fill up one Monument.
To th' water side I must conduct your Grace;
Then give my Charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
Who undertakes you to your end.
Prepare there,
The Duke is coming: See the Barge be ready;
And fit it with such furniture as suits
The Greatness of his Person.
Nay, Sir Nicholas,
Let it alone; my State now will but mock me.
When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable,
And Duke of Buckingham: now, poor Edward Bohun;
Yet I am richer than my base Accusers,
That never knew what Truth meant: I now seal it;
And with that blood will make'em one day groan for't.
My noble Father Henry of Buckingham,
Who first raised head against Usurping Richard,
Flying for succour to his Servant Banister,
Being distressed; was by that wretch betrayed,
And without Trial, fell; God's peace be with him.
Henry the seventh succeeding, truly pitying
My Father's loss; like a most Royal Prince
Restored me to my Honours: and out of ruins
Made my Name once more Noble. Now his Son,
Henry the Eight, Life, Honour, Name and all
That made me happy; at one stroke has taken
For ever from the World. I had my Trial,
And must needs say a Noble one; which makes me
A little happier than my wretched Father:
Yet thus far we are one in Fortunes; both
Fell by our Servants, by those Men we loved most:
A most unnatural and faithless Service.
Heaven has an end in all: yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your loves and Counsels,
Be sure you be not lose; for those you make friends,
And give your hearts to; when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from ye, never found again
But where they mean to sink ye: all good people
Pray for me, I must now forsake ye; the last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me:
Farewell; and when you would say something that is sad,
Speak how I fell.
I have done; and God forgive me.
O, this is full of pity; Sir, it calls
I fear, too many curses on their heads
That were the Authors.
If the Duke be guiltless,
'Tis full of woe: yet I can give you inkling
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater than this.
Good Angels keep it from us:
What may it be? you do not doubt my faith Sir?
This Secret is so weighty, 'twill require
A strong faith to conceal it.
Let me have it:
I do not talk much.
I am confident;
You shall Sir: Did you not of late days hear
A buzzing of a Separation
Between the King and Katherine?
Yes, but it held not;
For when the King once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the Lord Mayor strait
To stop the rumour; and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.
But that slander Sir,
Is found a truth now: for it grows again
Fresher than e'er it was; and held for certain
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal,
Or some about him near, have out of malice
To the good Queen, possessed him with a scruple
That will undo her: To confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately,
As all think for this business.
'tis the Cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor,
For not bestowing on him at his ask,
The Archbishopricke of Toledo, this is purposed.
I think
You have hit the mark; but is't not cruel,
That she should feel the smart of this: the Cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.
'Tis woeful.
We are too open here to argue this:
Let's think in private more.
MY Lord, the Horses your Lordship sent for, with all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. They were young and handsome, and of the best breed in the North. When they were ready to set out for London, a man of my Lord Cardinals, by Commission, and main power took 'em from me, with this reason: his master would be served before a Subject, if not before the King, which stopped our mouths Sir.
I fear he will indeed; well, let him have them; he will have all I think.
Well met my Lord Chamberlain.
Good day to both your Graces.
How is the King employed?
I left him private,
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
What's the cause?
It seems the Marriage with his Brother's Wife
Has crept too near his Conscience.
No, his Conscience
Has crept too near another Lady.
'tis so;
This is the Cardinals doing: The King-Cardinall,
That blind Priest, like the eldest Son of Fortune,
Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.
Pray God he do,
he'll never know himself else.
How holily he works in all his business,
And with what zeal? For now he has cracked the League
Between us & the Emperor (the Queen's great Nephew)
He diues into the King's Soul, and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wring of the Conscience,
Fears, and despairs, and all these for his Marriage.
And out of all these, to restore the King,
He counsel a Divorce, a loss of her
That like a jewel, has hung twenty years
About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
Of her that loves him with that excellence,
That Angels love good men with: Even of her,
That when the greatest stroke of Fortune falls
Will bless the King: and is not this course pious?
Heaven keep me from such council: 'tis most true
These news are every where, every tongue speaks 'em,
And every true heart weeps for't. All that dare
Look into these affairs, see this main end,
The French Kings Sister. Heaven will one day open
The King's eyes, that so long have slept upon
This bold bad man.
And free us from his slavery.
We had need pray,
And hearty, for our deliverance;
Or this imperious man will work us all
From Princes into Pages: all men's honours
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashioned
Into what pitch he please.
For me, my Lords,
I love him not, nor fear him, there's my Creed:
As I am made without him, so I'll stand,
If the King please: his Curses and his blessings
Touch me alike: th' are breath I not believe in.
I knew him, and I know him: so I leave him
To him that made him proud; the Pope.
Let's in;
And with some other business, put the King
From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon him:
My Lord, you'll bear us company?
Excuse me,
The King has sent me otherwhere: Besides
You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him:
Health to your Lordships.
Thanks my good Lord Chamberlain.
How sad he looks; sure he is much afflicted.
Who's there? Ha'?
Pray God he be not angry.
Who's there I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
Into my private Meditations?
Who am I? Ha'?
A gracious King, that pardons all offences
Malice ne'er meant: Our breach of Duty this way,
Is business of Estate; in which, we come
To know your Royal pleasure.
Ye are too bold:
Go too; I'll make ye know your times of business:
Is this an hour for temporal affairs? Ha'?
Who's there? my good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my wounded Conscience;
Thou art a cure fit for a King; you're welcome
Most learned Reverend Sir, into our Kingdom,
Use us, and it: My good Lord, have great care,
I be not found a Talker.
Sir, you cannot;
I would your Grace would give us but an hour
Of private conference.
We are busy; go.
This Priest has no pride in him?
Not to speak of:
I would not be so sick though for his place:
But this cannot continue.
If it do, I'll venture one; have at him.
I another.
Your Grace has given a Precedent of wisdom
Above all Princes, in committing freely
Your scruple to the voyce of Christendom:
Who can be angry now? What Envy reach you?
The Spaniard tide by blood and favour to her,
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
The Trial, just and Noble. All the Clerks,
(I mean the learned ones in Christian Kingdoms)
Have their free voices. Rome (the Nurse of judgement)
Invited by your Noble self, hath sent
One general Tongue unto us. This good man,
This just and learned Priest, Cardinal Campeius,
Whom once more, I present unto your Highness.
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
And thank the holy Conclave for their loves,
They have sent me such a Man, I would have wished for.
Your Grace must needs deserve all stranger's loves,
You are so Noble: To your Highness' hand
I tender my Commission; by whose virtue,
The Court of Rome commanding. You my Lord
Cardinal of York, are joined with me their Servant,
In the unpartial judging of this Business.
Two equal men: The Queen shall be acquainted
Forth with for what you come. Where's Gardiner?
I know your Majesty, has always loved her
So dear in heart, not to deny her that
A Woman of less Place might ask by Law;
Scholars allowed freely to argue for her.
I, and the best she shall have; and my favour
To him that does best, God forbidden else: Cardinal,
Prithee call Gardener to me, my new Secretary.
I find him a fit fellow.
Give me your hand: much joy & favour to you;
You are the Kings now.
But to be commanded
For ever by your Grace, whose hand has raised me.
Come hither Gardiner.
My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace
In this man's place before him?
Yes, he was.
Was he not held a learned man?
Yes surely.
Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then,
Even of yourself Lord Cardinal.
How? of me?
They will not stick to say, you envied him;
And fearing he would rise (he was so virtuous)
Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him,
That he ran mad, and died.
Heaven's peace be with him:
That's Christian care enough: for living Murmurers,
There's places of rebuke. He was a Fool;
For he would needs be virtuous. That good Fellow,
If I command him follows my appointment,
I will have none so near else. Learn this Brother,
We live not to be gripped by meaner persons.
Deliver this with modesty to th' Queen.
The most convenient place, that I can think of
For such receipt of Learning, is Blackfriars:
There ye shall meet about this weighty business.
My Wolsey, see it furnished, O my Lord,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
So sweet a Bedfellow? But Conscience, Conscience;
O 'tis a tender place, and I must leave her.
Not for that neither; here's the pang that pinches.
His Highness, having lived so long with her, and she
So good a Lady, that no Tongue could ever
Pronounce dishonour of her; by my life,
She never knew harme-doing: Oh, now after
So many courses of the Sun enthroaned,
Still growing in a Majesty and pomp, the which
To leave, a thousand fold more bitter, then
'Tis sweet at first t' acquire. After this Process.
To give her the avaunt, it is a pity
Would move a Monster.
Hearts of most hard temper
Melt and lament for her.
Oh Gods will, much better
She ne'er had known pomp; though't be temporal,
Yet if that quarrel. Fortune, do divorce
It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance, panging
As soul and bodies severing.
Alas poor Lady,
she's a stranger now again.
So much the more
Must pity drop upon her; verily
I swear, 'tis better to be lowly borne,
And range with humble livers in Content,
Then to be perked up in a glistering grief,
And wear a golden sorrow.
Our content
Is our best having.
By my troth, and Maidenhead,
I would not be a Queen.
Beshrew me, I would,
And venture Maidenhead for't, and so would you
For all this spice of your Hypocrisy:
You that have so fair parts of Woman on you,
Have (too) a Woman's heart, which ever yet
Affected Eminence, Wealth, Sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, are Blessings; and which gifts
(Saving your mincing) the capacity
Of your soft Chiverell Conscience, would receive,
If you might please to stretch it.
Nay, good troth.
Yes troth, & troth; you would not be a Queen?
No, not for all the riches under Heaven.
'tis strange; a three pence bowed would hire me
Old as I am, to Queen it: but I pray you,
What think you of a Duchess? Have you limbs
To bear that load of Title?
No in truth.
Then you are weakly made; pluck off a little,
I would not be a young Count in your way,
For more than blushing comes to: If your back
Cannot vouchsafe this burden, 'tis too weak
Ever to get a Boy.
How you do talk;
I swear again, I would not be a Queen,
For all the world:
In faith, for little England
You'd venture an emballing: I myself
Would for Carnaruanshire, although there longed
No more to th' Crown but that: Lo, who comes here?
Good morrow Ladies; what were't worth to know
The secret of your conference?
My good Lord,
Not your demand; it values not your ask:
Our Mistress Sorrows we were pitying.
It was a gentle business, and becoming
The action of good women, there is hope
All will be well.
Now I pray God, Amen.
You bear a gentle mind, & heavenly blessings
Fellow such Creatures. That you may, fair Lady
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high notes
Ta'en of your many virtues; the King's Majesty
Commends his good opinion of you, to you; and
Does purpose honour to you no less flowing,
Then marchioness of Pembroke; to which Title,
A Thousand pound a year, Annual support,
Out of his Grace, he adds.
I do not know
What kind of my obedience, I should tender;
More than my All, is Nothing: Nor my Prayers
Are not words duly hallowed; nor my Wishes
More worth, then empty vanities: yet Prayers & Wishes
Are all I can return.' Beseech your Lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thankes, and my obedience,
As from a blushing Handmaid, to his Highness;
Whose health and Royalty I pray for.
Lady;
I shall not fail t' approve the fair conceit
The King hath of you. I have perused her well,
Beauty and Honour in her are so mingled,
That they have caught the King: and who knows yet
But from this Lady, may proceed a gem,
To lighten all this I'll. I'll to the King,
And say I spoke with you.
My honoured Lord.
Why this it is: See, see,
I have been begging sixteen years in Court
(Am yet a Courtier beggarly) nor could
Come pat betwixt too early, and too late
For any suit of pounds: and you, (oh fate)
A very fresh Fish here; fie, fie, fie upon
This compelled fortune: have your mouth filled up,
Before you open it.
This is strange to me.
How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no:
There was a Lady once ('tis an old Story)
That would not be a Queen, that would she not
For all the mud in Egypt; have you heard it?
Come you are pleasant.
With your Theme, I could
O're-mount the Lark: The marchioness of Pembroke?
A thousand pounds a year, for pure respect?
No other obligation? by my Life,
That promises more thousands: Honours train
Is longer than his fore-skirt; by this time
I know your back will bear a Duchess. Say,
Are you not stronger than you were?
Good Lady,
Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
And leave me out on't. Would I had no being
If this salute my blood a iot; it faints me
To think what follows.
The Queen is comfortless, and wee forgetful
In our long absence: pray do not deliver,
What here ye have heard to her.
What do you think me—
Whilst our Commission from Rome is read;
Let silence be commanded.
What's the need?
It hath already publicly been read,
And on all sides th' Authority allowed,
You may then spare that time.
Be't so, proceed.
Say, Henry K. of England, come into the Court.
Henry King of England, etc.
here.
Say, Katherine Queen of England,
Come into the Court.
Katherine Queen of England, etc.
Sir, I desire you do me Right and justice,
And to bestow your pity on me; for
I am a most poor Woman, and a Stranger,
Borne out of your Dominions: having here
No judge indifferent, nor no more assurance
Of equal Friendship and Proceeding. Alas Sir:
In what have I offended you? What cause
Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure,
That thus you should proceed to put me off,
And take your good Grace from me? Heaven witness,
I have been to you, a true and humble Wife,
At all times to your will conformable:
Ever in fear to kindle your Dislike,
Yea, subject to your Countenance: Glad, or sorry,
As I saw it inclined? When was the hour
I ever contradicted your Desire?
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your Friends
Have I not strove to love, although I knew
He were mine Enemy? What Friend of mine,
That had to him derived your Anger, did I
Continue in my Liking? Nay, gave notice
He was from thence discharged? Sir, call to mind,
That I have been your Wife, in this Obedience,
Upward of twenty years, and have been blessed
With many Children by you. If in the course
And process of this time, you can report,
And prove it too, against mine Honour, aught;
My bond to Wedlock, or my Love and Duty
Against your Sacred Person; in God's name
Turn me away: and let the fowl'st Contempt
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
To the sharpest kind of justice. Please you, Sir,
The King your Father, was reputed for
A Prince most Prudent; of an excellent
And unmatched Wit, and judgement. Ferdinand
My Father, King of Spain, was reckoned one
The wisest Prince, that there had reigned, by many
A year before. It is not to be questioned,
That they had gathered a wise Council to them
Of every Realm, that did debate this Business,
Who deemed our Marriage lawful. Wherefore I humbly
Beseech you Sir, to spare me, till I may
Be by my Friends in Spain, advised; whose Counsel
I will implore. If not, i' th' name of God
Your pleasure be fulfilled.
You have here Lady.
(And of your choice) these Reverend Fathers, men
Of singular Integrity, and Learning;
Yea, the elect o' th' Land, who are assembled
To plead your Cause. It shall be therefore bootless,
That longer you desire the Court, as well
For your own quiet, as to rectify
What is unsettled in the King.
His Grace
Hath spoken well, and justly: Therefore Madam,
It's fit this Royal Session do proceed,
And that (without delay) their Arguments
Be now produced, and heard.
Lord Cardinal, to you I speak.
Your pleasure, Madam.
Sir, I am about to weep; but thinking that
We are a Queen (or long have dreamed so) certain
The daughter of a King, my drops of tears,
I'll turn to sparks of fire.
Be patiented yet.
I will, when you are humble; Nay before,
Or God will punish me. I do believe
(Induced by potent Circumstances) that
You are mine Enemy, and make my Challenge,
You shall not be my judge. For it is you
Have blown this Coal, betwixt my Lord, and me;
(Which Gods dew quench) therefore, I say again,
I utterly abhor; yea, from my Soul
Refuse you for my judge, whom yet once more
I hold my most malicious Foe, and think not
At all a Friend to truth.
I do profess
You speak not like yourself: who ever yet
Have stood to Charity, and displayed th' effects
Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom,
Ore-topping woman's power. Madam, you do me wrong
I have no Spleen against you, nor injustice
For you, or any: how far I have proceeded,
Or how far further (Shall) is warranted
By a Commission from the Consistory,
Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me,
That I have blown this Coal: I do deny it,
The King is present: If it be known to him,
That I gainsay my Deed, how may he wound,
And worthily my Falsehood, yea, as much
As you have done my Truth. If he know
That I am free of your Report, he knows
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
It lies to cure me, and the Cure is to
Remove these Thoughts from you. The which before
His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech
You (gracious Madam) to unthink your speaking,
And to say so no more.
My Lord, my Lord,
I am a simple woman, much too weak
T' oppose your cunning. YE are meek, & humble-mouthed
You sign your Place, and Calling, in full seeming,
With Meekness and Humility: but your Heart
Is crammed with Arrogancy, Spleen, and Pride.
You have by Fortune, and his highness' favours,
Gone slightly o'er low steps, and now are mounted
Where Powers are your Retainers, and your words
(Domestickes to you) serve your will, as't please
Yourself pronounce their Office. I must tell you,
You tender more your persons Honour, than
Your high profession Spiritual. That again
I do refuse you for my judge, and here
Before you all, Appeal unto the Pope,
To bring my whole Cause 'fore his Holiness,
And to be judged by him.
The Queen is obstinate,
Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and
Disdainful to be tried by't; 'tis not well.
she's going away.
Call her again.
Katherine. Q of England, come into the Court.
Ʋsh. Madam, you are cald backe.
What need you note it? pray you keep your way,
When you are called return. Now the Lord help,
They vex me past my patience, pray you pass on;
I will not tarry: no, nor ever more
Upon this business my appearance make,
In any of their Courts.
Go thy ways Kate,
That man i' th' world, who shall report he has
A better Wife, let him in naught be trusted,
For speaking false in that; thou art alone
(If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness Saintlike, Wifelike Government,
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
Sovereign and Piousels, could speak thee out)
The Queen of earthly Queens: she's Noble borne;
And like her true Nobility, she has
Carried herself towards me.
Most gracious Sir,
In humblest manner I require your Highness,
That it shall please you to declare in hearing
Of all these ears (for where I am robbed and bound,
There must I be unloosed, although not there
At once, and fully satisfied) whether ever I
Did broach this business to your Highness, or
Laid any scruple in your way which might
Induce you to the question on't: or ever
Have to you, but with thankes to God for such
A Royal Lady, spoke one, the least word that might
Be to the prejudice of her present State,
Or touch of her good Person?
My Lord Cardinal,
I do excuse you; yea, upon mine Honour,
I free you from't: You are not to be taught
That you have many enemies, that know not
Why they are so; but like to Village Curs,
Bark when their fellows do. By some of these
The Queen is put in anger; ye are excused:
But will you be more iustifi'de? You ever
Have wished the sleeping of this business, never desired
It to be stirred; but oft have hindered, oft
The passages made toward it; on my Honour,
I speak my good Lord Cardinal, to this point;
And thus far clear him.
Now, what moved me too't,
I will be bold with time and your attention:
Then mark th' inducement. Thus it came; give heed too't:
My Conscience first received a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick, on certain Speeches uttered
By th' Bishop of Bayon, than French Ambassador,
Who had been hither sent on the debating
And Marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans, and
Our Daughter Mary: I' th' Progress of this business,
Ere a determinate resolution, he
(I mean the Bishop) did require a respite,
Wherein he might the King his Lord advertise,
Whether our Daughter were legitimate,
Respecting this our Marriage with the Dowager,
Sometimes our Brother's Wife. This respite shook
The bosom of my Conscience, entered me;
Yea, with a spitting power, and made to tremble
The region of my Breast, which forced such way,
That many mazed consider, did throng
And pressed in with this Caution. First, me thought
I stood not in the smile of Heaven, who had
Commanded Nature, that my Lady's womb
If it conceived a malechild by me, should
Do no more Offices of life too't; then
The Grave does to th' dead: For her Male Issue,
Or died where they were made, or shortly after
This world had aired them. Hence I took a thought,
This was a judgement on me, that my Kingdom
(Well worthy the best Heir o' th' World) should not
Be gladded in't by me. Then follows, that
I weighed the danger which my Realms stood in
By this my Issues fail, and that gave to me
Many a groaning throw: thus hulling in
The wild Sea of my Conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy, whereupon we are
Now present here together: that's to say,
I meant to rectify my Conscience, which
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,
By all the Reverend Fathers of the Land,
And Doctors learned. First I began in private,
With you my Lord of Lincoln; you remember
How under my oppression I did reek
When I first moved you.
Very well my Liege.
I have spoke long, be pleased yourself to say
How far you satisfied me.
So please your Highness,
The question did at first so stagger me,
Bearing a State of mighty moment in't,
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The daringest Counsel which I had to doubt,
And did entreat your Highness to this course,
Which you are running here.
I than moved you,
My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
To make this present Summons vnsolicited.
I left no Reverend Person in this Court;
But by particular consent proceeded
Under your hands and Seals; therefore go on,
For no dislike i' th' world against the person
Of the good Queen; but the sharp thorny points
Of my alleged reasons, drives this forward:
Prove but our Marriage lawful, by my Life
And Kingly Dignity, we are contented
To wear our mortal State to come, with her,
(Katherine our Queen) before the primest Creature
That's Parragoned o' th' World
So please your Highness,
The Queen being absent, 'tis a needful fitness,
That we adjourn this Court till further day;
Mean while, must be an earnest motion
Made to the Queen to call back her Appeal
She intends unto his Holiness.
I may perceive
These Cardinal's trifle with me: I abhor
This dilatory sloth, and tricks of Rome.
My learned and well-beloved Servant Cranmer,
Prithee return, with thy approach: I know,
My comfort comes along: break up the Court;
I say, set on.
Take thy Lute wench,
My Soul grows sad with troubles,
Sing, and disperse 'em if thou canst: leave working:
Orpheus' with his Lute made Trees,
And the Mountain tops that frieze,
Bow themselves when he did sing.
To his Music, Plants and Flowers
Ever sprung; as Sun and Showers,
There had made a lasting Spring.
Every thing that heard him play,
Even the Billows of the Sea,
Hung their heads, & then lay by.
In sweet Music is such Art,
Killing care, & grief of heart,
Fall asleep, or hearing dye.
How now?
an't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
Wait in the presence.
Would they speak with me?
They wiled me say so Madam.
Pray their Graces
To come near: what can be their business
With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour?
I do not like their coming; now I think on't,
They should be good men, their affairs as righteous:
But all Hoods, make not Monks.
Peace to your Highness.
Your Graces find me here part of a Housewife,
(I would be all) against the worst may happen:
What are your pleasures with me, reverent Lords?
May it please you Noble Madam, to withdraw
Into your private Chamber; we shall give you
The full cause of our coming.
Speak it here.
There's nothing I have done yet o' my Conscience
Deserves a Corner: would all other Women
Can speak this with as free a Soul as I do.
My Lords, I care not (so much I am happy
Above a number) if my actions
Were tried by every tongue, every eye saw 'em,
Envy and base opinion set against 'em,
I know my life so even. If your business
Seek me out, and that way I am Wife in;
Out with it boldly: Truth loves open dealing.
Tanta est erga te mentis integritas Regina serenissima.
O good my Lord, no Latin;
I am not such a Truant since my coming,
As not to know the Language I have lived in:
A strange Tongue makes my cause more strange, suspicious:
Pray speak in English; here are some will thank you,
If you speak truth, for their poor Mistress sake;
Believe me she has had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,
The willingest sin I ever yet committed,
May be absolved in English.
Noble Lady,
I am sorry my integrity shoul breed,
(And service to his Majesty and you)
So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant;
We come not by the way of Accusation,
To taint that honour every good Tongue blesses;
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow;
You have too much good Lady: But to know
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
Between the King and you, and to deliver
(Like free and honest men) our just opinions,
And comforts to our cause.
Most honoured Madam,
My Lord of York, out of his Noble nature,
Zeal and obedience he still bore your Grace,
Forgetting (like a good man) your late Censure
Both of his truth and him (which was too far)
Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
His Service, and his Counsel.
To betray me.
My Lords, I thank you both for your good wills,
Ye speak like honest men, (pray God ye prove so)
But how to make ye suddenly an Answer
In such a point of weight, so near mine Honour,
(More near my Life I fear) with my weak wit;
And to such men of gravity and learning;
In truth I know not. I was set at work,
Among my Maids, full little (God knows) looking
Either for such men, or such business;
For her sake that I have been, for I feel
The last fit of my Greatness; good your Graces
Let me have time and Council for my Cause:
Alas, I am a Woman friendless, hopeless.
Madam,
You wrong the King's love with these fears,
Your hopes and friends are infinite.
In England,
But little for my profit can you think Lords,
That any English man dare give me Council?
Or be a known friend 'gainst his Highness' pleasure,
(Though he be grown so desperate to be honest)
And live a Subject? Nay forsooth, my Friends,
They that must weigh out my affllictions,
They that my trust must grow to, live not here,
They are (as all my other comforts) far hence
In mine own Country Lords.
I would your Grace
Would leave your griefs, and take my Counsel.
How Sir?
Put your main cause into the King's protection,
he's loving and most gracious. 'Twill be much,
Both for your Honour better, and your Cause:
For if the trial of the Law o'er take ye,
You'll part away disgraced.
He tells you rightly.
Ye tell me what ye wish for both, my ruin:
Is this your Christian Council? Out upon ye.
Heaven is above all yet; there sits a judge.
That no King can corrupt.
Your rage mistakes us.
The more shame for ye; holy men I thought ye,
Upon my Soul two reverend Cardinal Virtues:
But Cardinal Sins, and hollow hearts I fear ye:
Mend 'em for shame my Lords: Is this your comfort?
The Cordial that ye bring a wretched Lady?
A woman lost among ye, laughed at, scorned?
I will not wish ye half my miseries,
I have more Charity. But say I warned ye;
Take heed, for heaven's sake take heed, least at once
The burden of my sorrows, fall upon ye.
Madam, this is a mere distraction,
You turn the good we offer, into envy.
Ye turn me into nothing. Woe upon ye,
And all such false Professors. Would you have me
(If you have any justice, any Pity,
If ye be any thing but Churchman's habits)
Put my sick cause into his hands, that hates me?
Alas, has banished me his Bed already,
His Love, too long ago. I am old my Lords,
And all the Fellowship I hold now with him
Is only my Obedience. What can happen
To me, above this wretchedness? All your Studies
Make me a Curse, like this.
Your fears are worse.
Have I lived thus long (let me speak myself,
Since Virtue finds no friends) a Wife, a true one?
A Woman (I dare say without Vainglory)
Never yet branded with Suspicion?
Have I, with all my full Affections
Still met the King? Loved him next Heaven? Obeyed him?
Been (out of fondness) superstitious to him?
Almost forgot my prayers to content him?
And am I thus rewarded? 'Tis not well Lords.
Bring me a constant woman to her Husband,
One that ne'er dreamed a joy, beyond his pleasure;
And to that Woman (when she has done most)
Yet will I add an Honour; a great Patience.
Madam, you wander from the good
We aim at.
My Lord,
I dare not make myself so guilty,
To give up willingly that Noble Title
Your Master wed me to: nothing but death
Shall e'er divorce my Dignities.
Pray hear me.
Would I had never trod this English Earth,
Or felt the Flatteries that grow upon it:
Ye have Angels Faces; but Heaven knows your hearts.
What will become of me now, wretched Lady?
I am the most unhappy Woman living.
Alas (poor Wenches) where are now your Fortunes?
Shipwrecked upon a Kingdom, where no Pity,
No Friends, no Hope, no Kindred weep for me?
Almost no Grave allowed me? Like the Lily
That once was Mistress of the Field, and flourished,
I'll hang my head, and perish.
If your Grace
Can but be brought to know, our Ends are honest,
you'd feel more comfort. Why should we (good Lady)
Upon what cause wrong you? Alas, our Places,
The way of our Profession is against it;
We are to Cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.
For Goodness sake, consider what you do,
How you may hurt yourself: I, utterly
Grow from the King's Acquaintance, by this Carriage.
The hearts of Princes kiss Obedience,
So much they love it. But to stubborn Spirits,
They swell and grow, as terrible as storms.
I know you have a Gentle, Noble temper,
A Soul as even as a Calm; Pray think us,
Those we profess, Peacemakers, Friends, and Servants.
Madam, you'll find it so:
You wrong your Virtues
With these weak women's fears. A Noble Spirit
As yours was, put into you, ever casts
Such doubts as false Coin from it. The King loves you,
Beware you lose it not: For us (if you please
To trust us in your business) we are ready
To use our utmost Studies, in your service.
Do what ye will, my Lords:
And pray forgive me;
If I have used myself unmannerly,
You know I am a Woman, lacking wit
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
Pray do my service to his Majesty,
He has my heart yet, and shall have my Prayers
While I shall have my life. Come reverend Fathers,
Bestow your Counsels on me. She now begs
That little thought when she set footing here,
She should have bought her Dignities so dear.
If you will now unite in your Complaints,
And force them with a Constancy, the Cardinal
Cannot stand under them. If you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promise,
But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces,
With these you bear already.
I am joyful
To meet the least occasion, that may give me
Remembrance of my Father-in-Law, the Duke,
To be revenged on him.
Which of the Peers
Have vncontemn'd gone by him, or at least
Strangely neglected? When did he regard
The stamp of Nobleness in any person
Out of himself?
My Lords, you speak your pleasures:
What he deserves of you and me, I know:
What we can do to him (though now the time
Gives way to us) I much fear. If you cannot
Bar his access to ' th' King, never attempt
Any thing on him: for he hath a Witchcraft
Over the King in's Tongue.
O fear him not,
His spell in that is out: the King hath found
Matter against him, that for ever mars
The Honey of his Language. No, he's settled
(Not to come off) in his displeasure.
Sir,
I should be glad to hear such News as this
Once every hour.
Believe it, this is true.
In the Divorce, his contrary proceed
Are all unfolded: wherein he appears,
As I would wish mine Enemy.
How came
His practices to light?
Most strangely.
O how? how?
The Cardinal's Letters to the Pope miscarried,
And came to th' eye o' th' King, wherein was read
How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
To stay the judgement o' th' Divorce; for if
It did take place, I do (quoth he) perceive
My King is tangled in affection, to
A Creature of the Queens, Lady Anne Bullen.
Has the King this?
Believe it.
Will this work?
The King in this perceives him, how he coasts
And hedges his own way. But in this point,
All his tricks founder, and he brings his Physic
After his Patient's death; the King already
Hath married the fair Lady.
Would he had.
May you be happy in your wish my Lord,
For I profess you have it.
Now all my joy
Trace the Conjunction.
My Amen too't.
All men's.
There's order given for her Coronation:
Marry this is yet but young, and may be left
To some ears unrecounted. But my Lords
She is a gallant Creature, and complete
In mind and feature. I persuade me, from her
Will fall some blessing to this Land, which shall
In it be memorised.
But will the King
Digest this Letter of the Cardinals?
The Lord forbidden.
Marry Amen.
No, no:
There be more Wasps that buzz about his Nose,
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius,
Is stolen away to Rome, hath ' ta'en no leave,
Has left the cause o' th' King unhandled, and
Is posted as the Agent of our Cardinal,
To second all his plot. I do assure you,
The King cried Ha', at this.
Now God incense him,
And let him cry Ha', louder.
But my Lord
When returns Cranmer?
He is returned in his Opinions, which
Have satisfied the King for his Divorce,
Together with all famous Colleges
Almost in Christendom: shortly (I believe)
His second Marriage shall be publishd, and
Her Coronation. Katherine no more
Shall be called Queen, but Princess Dowager,
And Widow to Prince Arthur.
This same Cranmers
A worthy Fellow, and hath ta'en much pain
In the King's business.
He has, and we shall see him
For it an Archbishop.
So I hear.
'Tis so.
The Cardinal.
Observe, observe, he's moody.
The Packet Cromwell,
Gav't you the King?
To his own hand, in's Bedchamber.
Looked he o' th' inside of the Paper?
Presently
He did unseal them, and the first he viewed,
He did it with a Serious mind: a heed
Was in his countenance. You he bade
Attend him here this Morning.
Is he ready to come abroad?
I think by this he is.
Leave me a while.
It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,
The French Kings Sister; He shall marry her.
Anne Bullen? No: I'll no Anne Bullens for him,
There's more in't then fair Visage. Bullen?
No, we'll no Bullens: Speedily I wish
To hear from Rome. The marchioness of Penbroke?
He's discontented.
Maybe he hears the King
Does whet his Anger to him.
Sharp enough,
Lord for thy justice.
The late Queen's Gentlewoman?
A Knight's Daughter
To be her Mistress Mistress? The Queens, Queen?
This Candle burns not clear, 'tis I must snuff it,
Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
And well deserving? yet I know her for
A spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to
Our cause, that she should lie i' th' bosom of
Our hard ruled King. Again, there is sprung up
An Heretic, an Arch-one; Cranmer, one
Hath crawled into the favour of the King,
And is his Oracle.
He is vexed at something.
I would 'twere something that would fret the string,
The Master-cord on's heart.
The King, the King.
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
To his own portion? And what expense by ' th' hour
Seems to flow from him? How, i' th' name of Thrift
Does he rake this together? Now my Lords,
Saw you the Cardinal?
My Lord, we have
Stood here observing him. Some strange Commotion
Is in his brain: He bites his lip, and starts,
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his Temple: strait
Springs out into fast gate, then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon, he casts
His eye against the Moon: in most strange Postures
We have seen him set himself.
It may well be,
There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning,
Papers of State he sent me, to peruse
As I required: and wots you what I found
There (on my Conscience put unwittingly)
Forsooth an Inventory, thus importing
The several parcels of his Plate his Treasure,
Rich Stuffs and Ornaments of Household, which
I find at such proud Rate, that it outspeaks
Possession of a Subject.
It's Heaven's will,
Some Spirit put this paper in the Packet,
To bless your eye withal.
If we did think
His Contemplation wore above the earth,
And fixed on Spiritual object, he should still
Dwell in his Muse, but I am afraid
His Think are below the Moon, not worth
His serious considering.
Heaven forgive me,
Ever God bless your Highness.
Good my Lord,
You are full of Heavenly stuff, and bear the Inventory
Of your best Graces, in your mind; the which
You were now running o'er: you have scarce time
To steal from Spiritual leisure, a brief span
To keep your earthly Audit, sure in that
I deem you an ill Husband, and am galled
To have you therein my Companion.
Sir,
For Holy Offices I have a time; a time
To think upon the part of business, which
I bear i' th' State: and Nature does require
Her times of preservation, which perforce
I her frail son, amongst my Brethren mortal,
Must give my tendance to.
You have said well.
And ever may your Highness' yoke together,
(As I will lend you cause) my doing well,
With my well saying.
'Tis well said again,
And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well,
And yet words are no deeds. My Father loved you,
He said he did, and with his deed did Crown
His word upon you. Since I had my Office,
I have kept you next my Heart, have not alone
Employed you where high Profits might come home,
But pared my present Have, to bestow
My Bounties upon you.
What should this mean?
The Lord increase this business.
Have I not made you
The prime man of the State? I pray you tell me.
If what I now pronounce, you have found true:
And if you may confess it, say withal
If you are bound to us, or no. What say you?
My Sovereign, I confess your Royal graces
Showered on me daily, have been more than could
My studied purposes requite, which went
Beyond all man's endeavours. My endeavours,
Have ever come too short of my Desires,
Yet filled with my Abilities: Mine own ends
Have been mine so, that evermore they pointed
To ' th' good of your most Sacred Person, and
The profit of the State. For your great Graces
Heaped upon me (poor Undeserver) I
Can nothing render but Allegiant thankes,
My prayers to heaven for you; my Loyalty
Which ever has, and ever shall be growing,
Till death (that Winter) kill it.
Fairly answered:
A Loyal, and obedient Subject is
Therein illustrated, the Honour of it
Does pay the Act of it, as i' th' contrary
The foulness is the punishment. I presume,
That as my hand has opened Bounty to you,
My heart dropped Love, my power rained Honour, more
On you, than any: So your Hand, and Heart,
Your Brain, and every Function of your power,
Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
As 'twere in Love's particular, be more
To me your Friend, than any.
I do profess,
That for your Highness' good, I ever laboured
More than mine own: that am, have, and will be
(Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
And throw it from their Soul, though perils did
Abound, as thick as thought could make 'em, and
Appear in forms more horrid) yet my Duty,
As doth a Rock against the chiding Flood,
Should the approach of this wild River break,
And stand unshaken yours.
'Tis Nobly spoken:
Take notice Lords, he has a Loyal breast,
For you have seen him open't. Read o'er this,
And after this, and then to Breakfast with
What appetite you have.
What should this mean?
What sudden Anger's this? How have I reaped it?
He parted Frowning from me, as if Ruin
leapt from his Eyes. So looks the chafed Lion
Upon the daring Huntsman that has galled him:
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper:
I fear the Story of his Anger. 'Tis so:
This paper has undone me: 'Tis th' Account
Of all that world of Wealth I have drawn together
For mine own ends, (Indeed to gain the Popedom,
And fee my Friends in Rome.) O Negligence!
Fit for a Fool to fall by: What cross Devil
Made me put this main Secret in the Packet
I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
No new device to beat this from his Brains?
I know 'twill stir him strongly; yet I know
A way, if it take right, in spite of Fortune
Will bring me off again. What's this? To th' Pope?
The Letter (as I live) with all the Business
I writ too's Holiness. Nay then, farewell:
I have touched the highest point of all my Greatness,
And from that full Meridian of my Glory,
I haste now to my Setting. I shall fall
Like a bright exhalation in the Evening,
And no man see me more.
Hear the King's pleasure Cardinal,
Who commands you
To render up the Great Seal presently
Into our hands, and to Confine yourself
To Asher-house, my Lord of Winchesters,
Till you hear further from his Highness.
Stay:
Where's your Commission? Lords, words cannot carry
Authority so weighty.
Who dare cross 'em,
Bearing the Kings will from his mouth expressly?
Till I find more than will, or words to do it,
(I mean your malice) know, Officious Lords,
I dare, and must deny it. Now I feel
Of what course Mettle ye are moulded, Envy,
How eagerly ye follow my Disgraces
As if it fed ye, and how sleek and wanton
Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin?
Fellow your envious courses, men of Malice;
You have Christian warrant for 'em, and no doubt
In time will find their fit Rewards. That Seal
You ask with such a Violence, the King
(Mine, and your Master) with his own hand, gave me:
Bade me enjoy it, with the Place, and Honours
During my life; and to confirm his Goodness,
Tied it by Letters Patents. Now, who'll take it?
The King that gave it.
It must be himself then.
Thou art a proud Traitor, Priest.
Proud Lord, thou liest:
Within these forty hours, Surrey durst better
Have burnt that Tongue, than said so.
Thy Ambition
(Thou Scarlet sin) robbed this bewailing Land
Of Noble Buckingham, my Father-in-Law,
The heads of all thy Brother-Cardinals,
(With thee, and all thy best parts bound together)
Weighed not a hair of his. Plague of your policy,
You sent me Deputy for Ireland,
far from his succour; from the King, from all
That might have mercy on the fault, thou gav'st him:
Whilst your great Goodness, out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an Axe.
This, and all else
This talking Lord can lay upon my credit,
I answer, is most false. The Duke by Law
Found his deserts. How innocent I was
From any private malice in his end,
His Noble jury, and foul Cause can witness.
If I loved many words, Lord, I should tell you,
You have as little Honesty, as Honour,
That in the way of Loyalty, and Truth,
Toward the King, my ever Royal Master,
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrie can be,
And all that love his follies.
By my Soul,
Your long Coat (Priest) protects you,
Thou shouldst feel
My Sword i' th' life blood of thee else. My Lords,
Can ye endure to hear this Arrogance?
And from this Fellow? If we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by a piece of Scarlet,
Farewell Nobility: let his Grace go forward,
And dare us with his Cap, like Larks.
All Goodness
Is poison to thy Stomach.
Yes, that goodness
Of gleaning all the Lands wealth into one,
Into your own hands (Cardinal) by Extortion:
The goodness of your intercepted Packets
You writ to ' th' Pope, against the King: your goodness
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly Noble,
As you respect the common good, the State
Of our despised Nobility, our Issues,
(Whom if he live, will scarce be Gentlemen)
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the Articles
Collected from his life. I'll startle you
Worse than the Sacring Bell, when the brown Wench
Lay kissing in your Arms, Lord Cardinal.
How much me thinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in Charity against it.
Those Articles, my Lord, are in the King's hand:
But thus much, they are foul ones.
So much fairer
And spotless, shall mine Innocence arise,
When the King knows my Truth.
This cannot save you:
I thank my Memory, I yet remember
Some of these Articles, and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush, and cry guilty Cardinal,
You'll show a little Honesty.
Speak on Sir,
I dare your worst Objections: If I blush,
It is to see a Nobleman want manners.
I had rather want those, than my head;
Have at you.
First, that without the King's assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a Legate, by which power
You maimed the jurisdiction of all Bishops.
Then, That in all you writ to Rome, or else
To Foreign Princes, Ego & Rex meus
Was still inscribed: in which you brought the King
To be your Servant.
Then, that without the knowledge
Either of King or Council, when you went
Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
To carry into Flanders, the Great Seal.
Item, You sent a large Commission
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude
Without the Kings will, or the State's allowance,
A League between his Highness, and Ferrara.
That out of mere Ambition, you have caused
Your holy-Hat to be stamped on the King's Coin.
Then, That you have sent innumerable substance,
(By what means got, I leave to your own conscience)
To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways
You have for Dignities, to the mere undooing
Of all the Kingdom. Many more there are,
Which since they are of you, and odious,
I will not taint my mouth with.
O my Lord,
Press not a falling man too far: 'tis Virtue:
His faults lye open to the Lawes, let em
(Not you) correct him. My heart weeps to see him
So little, of his great Self.
I forgive him.
Lord Cardinal, the King's further pleasure is,
Because all those things you have done of late
By your power Legative within this Kingdom,
Fall into ' th' compass of a Praemunire;
That therefore such a Writ be sued against you,
To forfeit all your Goods, Lands, Tenements,
Castles, and whatsoever, and to be
Out of the King's protection. This is my Charge.
And so we'll leave you to your Meditations
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
About the giving back the Great Seal to us,
The King shall know it, and (no doubt) shall thank you.
So far you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.
So farewell, to the little good you bear me.
Farewell? A long farewell to all my Greatness.
This is the state of Man; to day he puts forth
The tender Leaves of hopes, to morrow Blossoms,
And bears his blushing Honours thick upon him:
The third day, comes a Frost; a kill Frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His Greatness is a ripening, nips his root,
And then he falls as I do. I have ventured
Like little wanton Boys that swim on bladders:
This many Summers in a Sea of Glory,
But far beyond my depth: my high-blowne Pride
At length broke under me, and now has left me
Weary, and old with Service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
Vain pomp, and glory of this World, I hate ye.
I feel my heart new opened. Oh how wretched
Is that poor man, that hangs on Prince's favours?
There is betwixt that smile we would aspire too,
That sweet Aspect of Princes, and their ruin,
More pangs, and fears than wars, or women have;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.
Why how now Cromwell?
I have no power to speak Sir.
What, amazed
At my misfortunes? Can thy Spirit wonder
A great man should decline. Nay, and you weep
I am fall'n indeed.
How does your Grace.
Why well:
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell,
I know myself now, and I feel within me,
A peace above all earthly Dignities,
A still, and quiet Conscience. The King has cured me,
I humbly thank his Grace: and from these shoulders
These ruined Pillars, out of pity, taken
A load, would sink a Navy, (too much Honor.)
O 'tis a burden Cromwell, 'tis a burden
Too heavy for a man, that hopes for Heaven.
I am glad your Grace,
Has made that right use of it.
I hope I have:
I am able now (me thinks)
(Out of a Fortitude of Soul, I feel)
To endure more Miseries, and greater far
Than my Weake-hearted Enemies, dare offer.
What News abroad?
The heaviest, and the worst,
Is your displeasure with the King.
God bless him.
The next is, that Sir Thomas Moor is chosen Lord Chancellor, in your place.
That's somewhat sudden.
But he's a Learned man. May he continue
Long in his Highness' favour, and do justice
For Truths-sake, and his Conscience; that his bones,
When he has run his course, and sleeps in Blessings,
May have a Tomb of Orphant's tears wept on him.
What more?
That Cranmer is returned with welcome;
Installed Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
That's News indeed.
Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open, as his Queen,
Going to Chapel: and the voice is now
Only about her Coronation.
There was the weight that pulled me down.
O Cromwell,
The King has gone beyond me: All my Glories
In that one woman, I have lost for ever.
No Sun, shall ever usher forth mine Honours,
Or gild again the Noble Troops that weighted
Upon my smiles. Go get thee from me Cromwell,
I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now
To be thy Lord, and Master. Seek the King
(That Sun, I pray may never set) I have told him,
What, and how true thou art; he will advance thee:
Some little memory of me, will stir him
(I know his Noble Nature) not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell
Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.
O my Lord,
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
So good, so Noble, and so true a Master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of Iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his Lord.
The King shall have my service; but my prayers
For ever, and for ever shall be yours.
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my Miseries: But thou hast forced me
(Out of thy honest truth) to play the Woman.
Let's dry our eyes: And thus far hear me Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold Marble, where no mention
Of me, more must be heard of: Say I taught thee;
Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of Glory,
And sounded all the Depths, and Shoales of Honour,
Found thee a way (out of his wrack) to rise in:
A sure, and safe one, though thy Master missed it.
Mark but my Fall, and that that Ruined me:
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away Ambition,
By that sin fell the Angels: how can man then
(The Image of his Maker) hope to win by it?
Love thyself last, cherish those hearts that hate thee;
Corruption wins not more than Honesty.
Still in thy right hand, carry gentle Peace
To silence envious Tongues. Be just, and fear not;
Let all the ends thou aim'st at, be thy Countries,
Thy Gods, and Truths. Then if thou fallest (O Cromwell)
Thou fallest a blessed Martyr.
Serve the King: And prithee lead me in:
There take an Inventory of all I have,
To the last penny, 'tis the Kings. My Robe,
And my Integrity to Heaven, is all,
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell,
Had I but served my God, with half the Zeal
I served my King: he would not in mine Age
Have left me naked to mine Enemies.
Good Sir, have patience.
So I have. Farewell
The Hopes of Court, my Hopes in Heaven do dwell.
YE are well met once again.
So are you.
You come to take your stand here, and behold
The Lady Anne, pass from her Coronation.
'Tis all my business. At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckingham came from his Trial.
'Tis very true. But that time offered sorrow,
This general joy.
'Tis well: The Citizens
I am sure have shown at full their Royal minds,
As let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward
In Celebration of this day with Shows,
Pageants, and Sights of Honor.
Never greater,
Not i'll assure you better taken Sir.
May I be bold to ask what that contains,
That Paper in your hand.
Yes, 'tis the List
Of those that claim their Offices this day,
By custom of the Coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be high Steward; Next the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be Earl Marshal: you may read the rest.
I thank you Sir: Had I not known those customs,
I should have been beholding to your Paper:
But I beseech you, what's become of Katherine
The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned, and Reverend Fathers of his Order,
Held a late Court at Dunstable; six miles off
From Ampthill, where the Princess lay, to which
She was often cited by them, but appeared not:
And to be short, for not Appearance, and
The King's late Scruple, by the main assent
Of all these Learned men, she was divorced,
And the late Marriage made of none effect:
Since which, she was removed to Kymmalton,
Where she remains now sick.
Alas good Lady.
The Trumpets sound: Stand close,
The Queen is coming.
A lively Flourish of Trumpets.
Then, two judges.
Lord Chancellor, with Purse and Mace before him.
Quirristers singing.
Mayor of London, bearing the Mace. Then Garter, in his Coat of Arms, and on his head he wore a Gilt Copper Crown.
marquis Dorset, bearing a Sceptre of Gold, on his head, a Demy coronal of Gold. With him, the Earl of Surrey, bearing the Rod of Silver with the Dove, Crowned with an Earl's Coronet. Collars of Esses.
Duke of Suffolk, in his Robe of Estate, his Coronet on his head, bearing a long white Wand, as High Steward. With him, the Duke of Norfolk, with the Rod of Marshalship, a Coronet on his head. Collars of Esses.
A Canopy, borne by four of the Cinque-Ports, under it the Queen in her Robe, in her hair, richly adorned with Pearl, Crowned. On each side her, the Bishops of London, and Winchester.
The Old Duchess of Norfolk, in a coronal of Gold, wrought with Flowers bearing the Queen's Train.
Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain Circlets of Gold, without Flowers.
A Royal Train believe me: These I know:
Who's that that bears the Sceptre?
marquis Dorset,
And that the Earl of Surrey, with the Rod.
A bold brave Gentleman. That should be
The Duke of Suffolk.
'Tis the same: high Steward.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
Yes.
Heaven bless thee,
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever looked on.
Sir, as I have a Soul, she is an Angel;
Our King has all the Indies in his Arms,
And more, and richer, when he strains that Lady,
I cannot blame his Conscience.
They that bear
The Cloth of Honour over her, are four Barons
Of the Cinque Ports.
Those men are happy,
And so are all, are near her.
I take it, she that carries up the Train,
Is that old Noble Lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
It is, and all the rest are Countesses.
Their Coronets say so. These are Stars indeed,
And sometimes falling ones.
No more of that.
God save you Sir. Where have you been broiling?
Among the crowed i' th' Abbey, where a finger
Can not be wedged in more: I am stifled
With the mere rankness of their joy.
You saw the Ceremony?
That I did.
How was it?
Well worth the seeing.
Good Sir, speak it to us?
As well as I am able. The rich stream
Of Lords, and Ladies, having brought the Queen
To a prepared place in the Quire, fell off
A distance from her; while her Grace sat down
To rest a while, some half an hour, or so,
In a rich Chair of State, opposing freely
The Beauty of her Person to the People.
Believe me Sir, she is the goodliest Woman
That ever lay by man: which when the people
Had the full view of, such a noise arose,
As the shrouds make at Sea, in a stiff Tempest,
As loud, and to as many Tunes. Hats, Cloaks,
(Doublets, I think) flew up, and had their Faces
Been lose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
I never saw before. Great bellied women,
That had not half a week to go, like Rams
In the old time of War, would shake the press
And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living
Can say this is my wife there, all were woven
So strangely in one piece.
But what followed?
At length, her Grace rose, and with modest paces
Came to the Altar, where she kneeled, and Saintlike
Cast her fair eyes to Heaven, and prayed devoutly.
Then rose again, and bowed her to the people:
When by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
She had all the Royal make of a Queen;
As holy Oil, Edward Confessors Crown,
The Rod, and Bird of Peace, and all such Emblems
Laid Nobly on her: which performed, the Choir
With all the choicest Music of the Kingdom,
Together sung Te Deum. So she parted,
And with the same full State paced back again
To Yorke-Place, where the Feast is held.
Sir,
You must no more call it Yorke-place that's past:
For since the Cardinal fell, that Titles lost,
'Tis now the Kings, and called White-Hall.
I know it:
But 'tis so lately altered, that the old name
Is fresh about me.
What two Reverend Bishops
Were those that went on each side of the Queen?
Stokesly and Gardiner, the one of Winchester,
Newly preferred from the King's Secretary:
The other London.
He of Winchester
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishops,
The virtuous Cranmer.
All the Land knows that:
How ever, yet there is no great breach, when it comes
Cranmer will find a Friend will not shrink from him.
Who may that be, I pray you.
Thomas Cromwell,
A man in much esteem with th' King, and truly
A worthy Friend. The King has made him
Master o' th' jewel House,
And one already of the Privy Council.
He will deserve more.
Yes without all doubt.
Come Gentlemen, ye shall go my way
Which is to ' th' Court, and there ye shall be my Guests:
Something I can command. As I walk thither,
I'll tell ye more.
You may command us Sir.
How does your Grace?
O Griffith, sick to death:
My Legs like loaden Branches bow to ' th' Earth,
Willing to leave their burden: Reach a Chair,
So now (me thinks) I feel a little ease.
Didst thou not tell me Griffith, as thou leadest me,
That the great Child of Honour, Cardinal Wolsey
Was dead?
Yes Madam: but I thank your Grace
Out of the pain you suffered, gave no ear too't.
Prithee good Griffith, tell me how he died.
If well, he stepped before me happily
For my example.
Well, the voice goes Madam,
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at Yorke, and brought him forward
As a man sorely tainted, to his Answer,
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
He could not sit his Mule.
Alas poor man.
At last, with easy Rhodes, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the Abbey; where the reverend Abbot
With all his Covent, honourably received him;
To whom he gave these words. O Father Abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of State,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye:
Give him a little earth for Charity.
So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness
Pursued him still, and three nights after this,
About the hour of eight, which he himself
Foretold should be his last, full of Repentance,
Continual Meditations, Tears, and Sorrows,
He gave his Honours to the world again,
His blessed part to Heaven, and slept in peace.
So may he rest,
His Faults lie gently on him:
Yet thus far Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And yet with Charity. He was a man
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
Himself with Princes. One that by suggestion
Tied all the Kingdom. Simony, was fair play,
His own Opinion was his Law. I' th' presence
He would say untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words, and meaning. He was never
(But where he meant to Ruin) pitiful.
His Promises, were as he then was, Mighty:
But his performance, as he is now, Nothing:
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The Clergy ill example.
Noble Madam:
men's evil manners, live in Brass, their Virtues
We writ in Water. May it please your Highness
To hear me speak his good now?
Yes good Griffith,
I were malicious else.
This Cardinal,
Though from an humble Stock, undoubtedly
Was fashioned to much Honor. From his Cradle
He was a Scholar, and a ripe, and good one:
Exceeding wise, fair spoken, and persuading:
Lofty, and sour to them that loved him not:
But, to those men that sought him, sweet as Summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
(Which was a sin) yet in bestowing, Madam,
He was most Princely: Ever witness for him
Those twins of Learning, that he raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford: one of which, fell with him,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it.
The other (though unfinished) yet so Famous,
So excellent in Art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his Virtue.
His Overthrow, heaped Happiness upon him:
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the Blessedness of being little.
And to add greater Honours to his Age
Then man could give him; he died, fearing God.
After my death, I wish no other Herald,
No other speaker of my living Actions,
To keep mine Honour, from Corruption,
But such an honest Chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated Living, thou hast made me
With thy Religious Truth, and Modesty,
(Now in his Ashes) Honour: Peace be with him.
Patience, be near me still, and set me lower.
I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,
Cause the Musicians play me that sad note
I named my Knell; whilst I sit meditating
On that Celestial Harmony I go too.
She is asleep: Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.
Spirits of peace, where are ye? Are ye all gone?
And leave me here in wretchedness, behind ye?
Madam, we are here.
It is not you I call for,
Saw ye none enter since I slept?
None Madam.
No? Saw you not even now a blessed Troop
Invite me to a Banquet, whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the Sun?
They promised me eternal Happiness,
And brought me Garlands (Griffith) which I feel
I am not worthy yet to wear: I shall assuredly.
I am most joyful Madam, such good dreams
Possess your Fancy.
Bid the Music leave,
They are harsh and heavy to me.
Do you note
How much her Grace is altered on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? How pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes?
She is going Wench. Pray, pray.
Heaven comfort her.
an't like your Grace—
You are a saucy Fellow,
Deserve we no more Reverence?
You are too blame,
Knowing she will not lose her wont Greatness
To use so rude behaviour. Go too, kneel.
I humbly do entreat your Highness' pardon,
My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying
A Gentleman sent from the King, to see you.
Admit him entrance Griffith. But this Fellow
Let me ne'er see again.
If my sight fail not,
You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
My Royal Nephew, and your name Capucius.
Madam the same. Your Servant.
O my Lord,
The Times and Titles now are altered strangely
With me, since first you knew me.
But I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?
Noble Lady,
First mine own service to your Grace, the next
The King's request, that I would visit you,
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
Sends you his Princely Commendations,
And hearty entreats you take good comfort.
O my good Lord, that comfort comes too late,
'Tis like a Pardon after Execution;
That gentle Physic given in time, had cured me:
But now I am passed all Comforts here, but Prayers.
How does his Highness?
Madam, in good health.
So may he ever do, and ever flourish,
When I shall dwell with Worms, and my poor name
Banished the Kingdom. Patience, is that Letter
I caused you write, yet sent away?
No Madam.
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my Lord the King.
Most willing Madam.
In which I have commended to his goodness
The Model of our chaste loves: his young daughter,
The dews of Heaven fall thick in Blessings on her,
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding.
She is young, and of a Noble modest Nature,
I hope she will deserve well; and a little
To love her for her Mother's sake, that loved him,
Heaven knows how dearly.
My next poor Petition,
Is, that his Noble Grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have followed both my Fortunes, faithfully,
Of which there is not one, I dare avow
(And now I should not lie) but will deserve
For Virtue, and true Beauty of the Soul,
For honesty, and decent Carriage
A right good Husband (let him be a Noble)
And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.
The last is for my men, they are the poorest,
(But poverty could never draw 'em from me)
That they may have their wages, duly paid 'em,
And something over to remember me by.
If Heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole Contents, and good my Lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor people's Friend, and urge the King
To do me this last right.
By Heaven I will,
Or let me lose the fashion of a man.
I thank you honest Lord. Remember me
In all humility unto his Highness:
Say his long trouble now is passing
Out of this world. Tell him in death I blessed him
(For so I will) mine eyes grow dim. Farewell
My Lord. Griffith farewell. Nay Patience,
You must not leave me yet. I must to bed,
Call in more women. When I am dead, good Wench,
Let me be used with Honour; strew me over
With Maiden Flowers, that all the world may know
I was a chaste Wife, to my Grave: Embalm me,
Then lay me forth (although vnqueened) yet like
A Queen, and Daughter to a King enterre me.
I can no more.
It's one a clock Boy, is't not.
It hath strooke.
These should be hours for necessities,
Not for delights: Times to repair our Nature
With comforting repose, and not for us
To waste these times. Good hour of night Sir Thomas:
Whether so late?
Came you from the King, my Lord?
I did Sir Thomas, and left him at Primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.
I must to him too
Before he go to bed. I'll take my leave.
Not yet Sir Thomas Lovel: what's the matter?
It seems you are in haste: and if there be
No great offence belongs too't, give your Friend
Some touch of your late business: Affairs that walk
(As they say Spirits do) at midnight, have
In them a wilder Nature, than the business
That seeks dispatch by day.
My Lord, I love you;
And durst commend a secret to your ear
Much weightier than this work. The Queens in Labour
They say in great Extremity, and feared
she'll with the Labour, end.
The fruit she goes with
I pray for hearty, that it may find
Good time, and live: but for the Stock Sir Thomas,
I wish it grubbed up now.
Me thinks I could
Cry the Amen, and yet my Conscience says
she's a good Creature, and sweet-Ladie does
Deserve our better wishes.
But Sir, Sir,
Hear me Sir Thomas, ye are a Gentleman
Of mine own way. I know you Wise, Religious,
And let me tell you, it will ne'er be well,
'Twill not Sir Thomas Lovel, take't of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she
Sleep in their Graves.
Now Sir, you speak of two
The most remarked i' th' Kingdom: as for Cromwell,
Beside that of the jewell-house, is made Master
O' th' Rolls, and the King's Secretary. Further Sir,
Stands in the gap and Trade of more Preferments,
With which the Lime will load him. Th' Archbishop
Is the King's hand, and tongue, and who dare speak
One syllable against him?
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
There are that Date, and I myself have ventured
To speak my mind of him: and indeed this day,
Sir (I may tell it you) I think I have
Incensed the Lords o' th' Council, that he is
(For so I know he is, they know he is)
A most Arch-heretic, a Pestilence
That does infect the Land: with which, they moved
Have broken with the King, who hath so far
Given care to our Complaint, of his great Grace,
And Princely Care, foreseeing those fell Mischiefs,
Our Reasons laid before him, hath commanded
To morrow Morning to the Council Board
He be convented. He's a rank weed Sir Thomas,
And we must root him out. From your Affairs
I hinder you too long: Good night, Sir Thomas.
Many good nights, my Lord, I rest your servant.
Charles, I will play no more to night,
My minds not on't, you are too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win of you before.
But little Charles,
Nor shall not when my Fancies on my play.
Now Lovel, from the Queen what is the News.
I could not personally deliver to her
What you commanded me, but by her woman,
I sent your Message, who returned her thankes
In the great'st humbleness, and desired your highness'
Most heartily to pr ▪
What sayst thou? Ha'??
To pray for her? What is she crying out?
So said her woman, and that her sufferance made
Almost each pang, a death.
Alas good Lady.
God safely quit her of her Burden, and
With gentle Travail, to the gladding of
Your Highness with an Heir.
'Tis midnight Charles,
Prithee to bed, and in thy prayers remember
Th' estate of my poor Queen. Leave me alone,
For I must think of that, which company
Would not be friendly too.
I wish your Highness
A quiet night, and my good Mistress will
Remember in my Prayers.
Charles good night.
Well Sir, what follows?
Sir, I have brought my Lord the Archbishop,
As you commanded me.
Ha'? Canterbury?
I my good Lord.
'Tis true: where is he Denny?
He attends your Highness' pleasure.
Bring him to Vs.
This is about that, which the Bishop spoke,
I am happily come hither.
Avoid the Gallery.
Ha'? I have said. Be gone.
What?
I am fearful: Wherefore frowns he thus?
'Tis his Aspect of Terror. All's not well.
How now my Lord?
You do desire to know wherefore
I sent for you.
It is my duty
T' attend your Highness' pleasure.
Pray you arise
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury:
Come, you and I must walk a turn together:
I have News to tell you.
Come, come, give me your hand.
Ah my good Lord, I grieve at what I speak,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows.
I have, and most unwillingly of late
Herd many grievous. I do say my Lord
Grievous complaints of you; which being considered,
Have moved Us, and our Council, that you shall
This Morning come before us, where I know
You cannot with such freedom purge yourself,
But that till further Trial, in those Charges
Which will require your Answer, you must take
Your patience to you, and be well contented
To make your house our Tower: you, a Brother of us
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
Would come against you.
I humbly thank your Highness,
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
Most throughly to be winnowed, where my Chaff
And Corn shall fly asunder. For I know
There's none stands under more calumnious tongues,
Then I myself, poor man.
Stand up, good Canterbury,
Thy Truth, and thy Integrity is rooted
In us thy Friend. Give me thy hand, stand up,
Prithee let's walk. Now by my Holidame,
What manner of man are you? My Lord, I looked
You would have given me your Petition, that
I should have ta'en some pains, to bring together
Yourself, and your Accusers, and to have heard you
Without endurance further.
Most dread Liege,
The good I stand on, is my Truth and Honesty:
If they shall fail, I with mine Enemies
Will triumph o'er my person, which I weigh not,
Being of those Virtues vacant. I fear nothing
What can be said against me.
Know you not
How your state stands i' th' world, with the whole world?
Your Enemies are many, and not small; their practices
Must bear the same proportion, and not ever
The justice and the Truth o' th' question carries
The dew o' th' Verdict with it; at what case
Might corrupt minds procure, Knaves as corrupt
To swear against you: Such things have been done.
You are Potently opposed, and with a Malice
Of as great Size. Ween you of better luck,
I mean in perjured Witness, than your Master,
Whose Minister you are, whiles here he lived
Upon this naughty Earth? Go too, go too,
You take a Precepit for no leap of danger,
And woe your own destruction.
God, and your Majesty
Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me.
Be of good cheer,
They shall no more prevail, than we give way too:
Keep comfort to you, and this Morning see
You do appear before them. If they shall chance
In charging you with matters, to commit you:
The best persuasions to the contrary
Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
Th' occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties
Will render you no remedy, this Ring
Deliver them, and your Appeal to us
There make before them. Look, the goodman weeps:
He's honest on mine Honor. God's blessed Mother,
I swear he is truehearted, and a soul
None better in my Kingdom. Get you gone,
And do as I have bid you.
He has strangled his Language in his tears.
Come back: what mean you?
I'll not come back, the tidings that I bring
Will make my boldness, manners. Now good Angels
Fly o'er thy Royal head, and shade thy person
Under their blessed wings.
Now by thy looks
I guess thy Message. Is the Queen delivered?
Say I, and of a boy.
I, I my Liege,
And of a lovely Boy: the God of heaven
Both now, and ever bless her: 'Tis a Girl
Promises Boys hereafter. Sir, your Queen
Desires your Visitation, and to be
Acquainted with this stranger; 'tis as like you,
As Cherry, is to Cherry.
Lovel.
Sir.
Give her an hundred Marks.
I'll to the Queen.
An hundred Marks? By this light, I'll ha' more.
An ordinary Groom is for such payment.
I will have more, or scold it out of him.
Said I for this, the Girl was like to him? I'll
Have more, or else vnsayed: and now, while 'tis hot,
I'll put it to the issue.
I hope I am not too late, and yet the Gentleman
That was sent to me from the Council, prayed me
To make great haste. All fast? What means this? Hoa?
Who waits there? Sure you know me?
Yes, my Lord:
But yet I cannot help you.
Why?
Your Grace must weight till you be called for.
So.
This is a Peer of Malice: I am glad
I came this way so happily. The King
Shall understand it presently.
'Tis Butts.
The King's Physician, as he passed along
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me:
Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace: for certain
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me,
(God turn their hearts, I never sought their malice)
To quench mine Honour; they would shame to make me
Wait else at door: a fellow Councillor
'Mong Boys, Grooms, and Lackeys.
But their pleasures
Must be fulfilled, and I attend with patience.
I'll show your Grace the strangest fight.
What's that Butts?
I think your Highness saw this many a day.
Body a me: where is it?
There my Lord:
The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury,
Who holds his State at door 'mongst Pursuivants,
Pages, and Footboys.
Ha'? 'Tis he indeed.
Is this the Honour they do one another?
'Tis well there's one above 'em yet; I had thought
They had parted so much honesty among 'em,
At least good manners; as not thus to suffer
A man of his Place, and so near our favour
To dance attendance on their Lordship's pleasures,
And at the door too, like a Post with Packets:
By holy Mary (Butts) there's knavery;
Let 'em alone, and draw the Curtain close:
We shall hear more anon.
Speak to the business, M. Secretary;
Why are we met in Council?
Please your Honours,
The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.
Has he had knowledge of it?
Yes.
Who waits there?
Without my Noble Lords?
Yes.
My Lord Archbishop:
And has done halfe an hour to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
Your Grace may enter now.
My good Lord Archbishop, I'm very sorry
To sit here at this present, and behold
That Chair stand empty: But we all are men
In our own natures frail, and capable
Of our flesh, few are Angels; out of which frailty
And want of wisdom, you that best should teach us,
Have misdemeaned yourself, and not a little:
Toward the King first, than his Laws, in filling
The whole Realm, by your teaching & your Chaplains
(For so we are informed) with new opinions,
diverse and dangerous; which are Heresies;
And not reformed, may prove pernicious.
Which Reformation must be sudden too
My Noble Lords; for those that tame wild Horses,
Place 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle;
But stop their mouths with stubborn Bits & spur 'em,
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer
Out of our easiness and childish pity
To one man's Honour, this contagious sickness;
Farewell all Physic: and what follows then?
Commotions, uproars, with a general Taint
Of the whole State; as of late days our neighbours,
The upper Germany can dearly witness:
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
My good Lords; Hitherto, in all the Progress
Both of my Life and Office, I have laboured,
And with no little study, that my teaching
And the strong course of my Authority,
Might-goe one way, and safely; and the end
Was ever to do well: nor is there living,
(I speak it with a single heart, my Lords)
A man that more detests, more stirs against,
Both in his private Conscience, and his place,
Desacers of a public peace than I do:
Pray Heaven the King may never find a heart
With less Allegiance in it. Men that make
Envy, and crooked malice, nourishment;
Dare bite the best. I do beseech your Lordships,
That in this case of justice, my Accusers,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face,
And freely urge against me.
Nay, my Lord,
That cannot be; you are a Counsellor,
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
My Lord, because we have business of more moment,
We will be short with you. 'Tis his Highness' pleasure
And our consent, for better trial of you,
From hence you be committed to the Tower,
Where being but a private man again,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,
More than (I fear) you are provided for.
Ah my good Lord of Winchester: I thank you,
You are always my good Friend, if your will pass,
I shall both find your Lordship, judge and juror,
You are so merciful. I see your end,
'Tis my undoing. Love and meekness, Lord
Become a Churchman, better than Ambition:
Win straying Souls with modesty again,
Cast none away: That I shall clear myself,
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
I make as little doubt as you do conscience,
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
But reverence to your calling, makes me modest.
My Lord, my Lord, you are a Sectary,
That's the plain truth; your painted gloss discovers
To men that understand you, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, ye are a little,
By your good favour, too sharp; Men so Noble,
How ever faultly, yet should find respect
For what they have been: 'tis a cruelty,
To load a falling man.
Good M. Secretary,
I cry your Honour mercy; you may worst
Of all this Table say so.
Why my Lord?
Do not I know you for a Favourer
Of this new Sect? ye are not sound.
Not sound?
Not sound I say.
Would you were half so honest:
men's prayers than would seek you, not their fears.
I shall remember this bold Language.
Do.
Remember your bold life too.
This is too much;
Forbear for shame my Lords.
I have done.
And I.
Then thus for you my Lord, it stands agreed
I take it, by all voices: That forthwith,
You be conveyed to th' Tower a Prisoner;
There to remain till the King's further pleasure
Be known unto us: are you all agreed Lords.
And by that verte no man dare accuse you.
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
We are.
Is there no other way of mercy,
But I must needs to th' Tower my Lords?
What other,
Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome:
Let some o' th' Guard be ready there.
For me?
Must I go like a Traitor thither?
Receive him,
And see him safe i' th' Tower.
Stay good my Lords,
I have a little yet to say. Look there my Lords,
By virtue of that Ring, I take my cause
Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it
To a most Noble judge, the King my Master.
This is the King's Ring.
'Tis no counterfeit.
'Ts the right Ring, by Heaven: I told ye all,
When we first put this dangerous stone a rolling,
'Twould fall upon ourselves.
Do you think my Lords
The King will suffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vexed?
'tis now too certain;
How much more is his Life in value with him?
Would I were fairly out on't.
My mind gave me,
In seeking tales and Informations
Against this man, whose honesty the Devil
And his Disciples only envy at,
Ye blew the fire that burns ye: now have at ye.
Dread Sovereign,
How much are we bound to Heaven,
In daily thankes; that gave us such a Prince;
Not only good and wise, but most religious:
One that in all obedience, makes the Church
The chief aim of his Honour, and to strengthen
That holy duty out of dear respect,
His Royal self in judgement comes to hear
The cause betwixt her, and this great offender.
You were ever good at sudden Commendations,
Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
They are too thin, and base to hide offences,
To me you cannot reach. You play the Spaniel,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me:
But whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for; I'm sure
Thou hast a cruel Nature and a bloody.
Good man sit down: Now let me see the proudest
He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee.
By all that's holy, he had better starve,
Then but once think his place becomes thee not.
May it please your Grace;—
No Sir, it does not please me,
I had thought, I had had men of some understanding,
And wisdom of my Council; but I find none:
Was it discretion Lords, to let this man,
This good man (few of you deserve that Title)
This honest man, wait like a lousy Footboy
At Chamber door? and one, as great as you are?
Why, what a shame was this? Did my Commission
Bid ye so far forget yourselves? I gave ye
Power, as he was a Counsellor to try him,
Not as a Groom: There's some of ye, I see,
More out of Malice than Integrity,
Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean,
Which ye shall never have while I live.
Thus far
My most dread Sovereign, may it like your Grace,
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed
Concerning his Imprisonment, was rather
(If there be faith in men) meant for his Trial,
And fair purgation to the world than malice,
I'm sure in me.
Well, well my Lords respect him,
Take him, and use him well; he's worthy of it.
I will say thus much for him, if a Prince
May be beholding to a Subject; I
Am for his love and service, so to him.
Make memo more ado, but all embrace him;
Be friends for shame my Lords: My Lord of Canterbury
I have a Suit which you must not deny me.
That is, a fair young Maid that yet wants Baptism,
You must be Godfather, and answer for her.
The greatest Monarch now alive may glory
In such an honour: how may I deserve it,
That am a poor and humble Subject to you?
Come, come my Lord, you'd spare your spoons; You shall have two noble Partners with you: the old Duchess of Norfolk, and Lady marquis Dorset? will these please you?
Once more my Lord of Winchester, I charge you
Embrace, and love this man.
With a true heart,
And Brother; love I do it.
And let Heaven
Witness how dear, I hold this Confirmation.
Good Man, those joyful tears show thy true hearts,
The common voice I see is verified
Of thee, which says thus: Do my Lord of Canterbury
A shrewd turn, and he's your friend for ever:
Come Lords, we trifle time away: I long
To have this young one made a Christian.
As I have made ye one Lords, one remain:
So I grow stronger, you more Honour gain.
You'll leave your noise anon ye Rascals: do you take the Court for Parish Garden: ye rude Slaves, leave your gaping:
Good M. Porter I belong to th' Larder.
Belong to th' Gallows, and be hanged ye Rogue: Is this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen Crabtree staves, and strong ones; these are but switches to 'em: I'll scratch your heads; you must be seeing Christen? Do you look for Ale, and Cakes here, you rude Rascals?
Pray Sir be patiented; 'tis as much impossible,
Unless we sweep 'em from the door with Cannons,
To scatter 'em, as 'tis to make 'em sleep
On May-day Morning, which will never be:
We may as well push against Paul's as stir 'em.
How got they in, and be hanged?
Alas I know not, how gets the Tide in?
As much as one sound Cudgel of four foot,
(You see the poor remainder) could distribute,
I made no spare Sir.
You did nothing Sir.
I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colebrand,
To mow 'em down before me: but if I spared any
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
He or she, Cuckold or Cuckold-maker:
Let me ne'er hope to see a Chine again,
And that I would not for a Cow, God save her.
Do you hear M. Porter?
I shall be with you presently, good M. Puppy,
Keep the door close Sirrah.
What would you have me do?
What should you do,
But knock 'em down by th' dozen? Is this More fields to muster in? Or have we some strange Indian with the great Tool, come to Court, the women so besiege us? Bless me, what a fry of Fornication is at door? On my Christian Conscience this one Christening will beget a thousand, here will be Father, Godfather, and all together.
The Spoons will be the bigger Sir: There is a fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a Brazier by his face, for o' my conscience twenty of the Dog-days now reign in's Nose; all that stand about him are under the Line, they need no other penance: that Fire-Drake did I hit three times on the head, and three times was his Nose discharged against me; he stands there like a Morter-piece to blow us. There was a Haberdasher's Wife of small wit, near him, that railed upon me, till her pincked porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a combustion in the State. I missed the Meteor once, and hit that Woman, who cried out Clubs, when I might see from far, some forty Truncheoners draw to her succour, which were the hope o' th' Strand where she was quartered; they fell on, I made good my place; at length they came to th' broom staff to me, I defied 'em still, when suddenly a File of Boys behind 'em, lose shot, delivered such a shower of Pebbles, that I was fain to draw mine Honour in, and let 'em win the Work, the Devil was amongst 'em I think surely.
These are the youths that thunder at a Playhouse, and fight for bitten Apples, that no Audience but the tribulation of Tower Hill, or the Limbs of Limehouse, their dear Brothers are able to endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days; besides the running Banquet of two Beadles, that is to come.
Mercy o' me: what a Multitude are here?
They grow still too; from all Parts they are coming,
As if we kept a Fair here? Where are these Porters?
These lazy knaves? YE have made a fine hand fellows?
There's a trim rabble let in: are all these
Your faithful friends o' th' Suburbs? We shall have
Great store of room no doubt, left for the Ladies,
When they pass back from the Christening?
an't please your Honour,
We are but men; and what so many may do,
Not being torn a pieces, we have done:
An Army cannot rule 'em.
As I live,
If the King blame me for't; I'll lay ye all
By th' heels, and suddenly: and on your heads
Clap round Fines for neglect: ye are lazy knaves,
And here ye lie baiting of Bombards, when
Ye should do Service. Hark the Trumpets sound,
The are come already from the Christening,
Go break among the press, and find away out
To let the Troop pass fairly; or I'll find
A Marshallsey, shall hold ye play these two Months.
Make way there, for the Princess.
You great fellow,
Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache.
You i' th' Chamblet, get up o' th' rail,
I'll peck you o'er the pales esse.
Heaven
From thy endless goodness, send prosperous life,
Long and ever happy, to the high and Mighty
Princess of England Elizabeth.
And to your Royal Grace, & the good Queen,
My Noble Partners, and myself thus pray
All comfort, joy in this most gracious Lady,
Heaven ever laid up to make Parents happy,
May hourly fall upon ye.
Thank you good Lord Archbishop:
What is her Name?
Elizabeth.
Stand up Lord,
With this Kiss, take my Blessing: God protect thee,
Into whose hand, I give thy Life.
Amen.
My Noble Gossips, ye have been too Prodigal;
I thank ye hearty: So shall this Lady,
When she has so much English.
Let me speak Sir,
For Heaven now bids me; and the words I utter,
Let none think Flattery; for they'll find 'em Truth.
This Royal Infant, Heaven still move about her;
Though in her Cradle; yet now promises
Upon this Land a thousand thousand Blessings,
Which Time shall bring to ripeness: She shall be,
(But few now living can behold that goodness)
A Pattern to all Princes living with her,
And all that shall succeed: Saba was never
More covetous of Wisdom, and fair Virtue
Then this pure Soul shall be. All Princely Graces
That mould up such a mighty Piece as this is,
With all the Virtues that attend the good,
Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall Nurse her,
Holy and Heavenly thoughts still Counsel her:
She shall be loved and feared. Her own shall bless her;
Her Foes shake like a Field of beaten Corn,
And hang their heads with sorrow:
Good grows with her.
In her days, Every Man shall eat in safety,
Under his own Vine what he plants; and sing
The merry Songs of Peace to all his Neighbours.
God shall be truly known, and those about her,
From her shall read the perfect way of Honour,
And by those claim their greatness; not by Blood.
Nor shall this peace sleep with her: But as when
The Bird of Wonder dies, the Maiden Phoenix,
Her Ashes new create another Heir,
As great in admiration as herself.
So shall she leave her Blessedness to One,
(When Heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness)
Who, from the sacred Ashes of her Honour
Shall Starlike rise, as great in fame as she was,
And so stand fixed. Peace, Plenty, Love, Truth, Terror,
That were the Servants to this chosen Infant,
Shall then be his, and like a Vine grow to him;
Where ever the bright Sun of Heaven shall shine,
His Honour, and the greatness of his Name,
Shall be, and make new Nations. He shall flourish,
And like a Mountain Cedar, reach his branches,
To all the Plains about him: Our children's Children
Shall see this, and bless Heaven.
Thou speakest wonders.
She shall be to the happiness of England,
An aged Princess; many days shall see her,
And yet no day without a deed to Crown it.
Would I had known no more: But she must dye,
She must, the Saints must have her; yet a Virgin,
A most unspotted Lily shall she pass
To th' ground, and all the World shall mourn her.
O Lord Archbishop
Thou hast made me now a man, never before
This happy Child, did I get any thing.
This Oracle of comfort, has so pleased me,
That when I am in Heaven, I shall desire
To see what this Child does, and praise my Maker.
I thank ye all. To you my good Lord Mayor,
And you good Brethren, I am much beholding:
I have received much Honour by your presence,
And ye shall find me thankful. Led the way Lords,
Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye,
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
Has business at his house; for all shall stay:
This Little-One shall make it Holiday.
'tIs ten to one, this Play can never please
All that are here: Some come to take their case,
And sleep an Act or two; but those we fear
W' have frighted with our Tumpets: so 'tis clear,
They'll say 'tis naught. Others to hear the City
Abused extremely, and to cry that's witty,
Which we have not done neither; that I fear
All the expected good w' are like to hear.
For this Play at this time, is only in
The merciful construction of good women,
For such a one we showed 'em: If they smile,
And say 'twill do; I know within a while,
All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap,
If they hold, when their Ladies bid 'em clap.