YOu do not meet a man but Frowns.
Our bloods no more obey the Heavens
Then our Courtiers:
Still seem, as does the Kings.
But what's the matter?
His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom (whom
He purposed to his wife's sole Son, a Widow
That late be married) hath referred herself
Unto a poor, but worthy Gentleman. She's wedded,
Her Husband banished: she imprisoned, all
Is outward sorrow, though I think the King
Be touched at very heart.
None but the King?
He that hath lost her too: so is the Queen,
That most desired the Match. But not a Courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the King's looks, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.
And why so?
He that hath missed the Princess, is a thing
Too bad, for bad report: and he that hath her,
(I mean, that married her, alack good man,
And therefore banished) is a Creature, such,
As to seek through the Regions of the Earth
For one, his like; there would be something failing
In him, that should compare. I do not think,
So fair an Outward, and such stuff Within
Endowes a man, but he.
You speak him far.
I do extend him (Sir) within himself,
Crush him together, rather than unfold
His measure duly.
What's his name, and Birth?
I cannot delve him to the root: His Father
Was called Sicillius, who did join his Honour
Against the Romans, with Cassibulan,
But had his Titles by Tenantius, whom
He served with Glory, and admired Success:
So gained the Sur-addition, Leonatus.
And had (besides this Gentleman in question)
Two other Sons, who in the Wars o' th' time
Died with their Swords in hand. For which, their Father
Then old, and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit Being; and his gentle Lady
Bigge of this Gentleman (our Theme) deceased
As he was borne. The King he takes the Babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him, and makes him of his Bedchamber,
Puts to him all the Learnings that his time
Can make him the receiver of, which he took
As we do air, fast as 'twas ministered,
And in's Spring, became a Harvest: Lived in Court
(Which rare it is to do) most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest: to th' more Mature,
A glass that feated them: and to the graver,
A Child that guided Dotards. To his Mistress,
(For whom he now is banished) her own price
Proclaims how she esteemed him; and his Virtue
By her election may be truly read, what kind of man he is.
I honour him, even out of your report.
But pray you tell me, is she sole child to ' th' King?
His only child:
He had two Sons (if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it) the eldest of them, at three years old
I' th' swathing clothes, the other from their Nursery
Were stolen, and to this hour, no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.
How long is this ago?
Some twenty years.
That a King's Children should be so conveyed,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow
That could not trace them.
howsoe'er, 'tis strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laughed at:
Yet is it true Sir.
I do well believe you.
We must forbear. here comes the Gentleman,
The Queen, and Princess.
No, be assured you shall not find me (Daughter)
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Euill-eyed unto you. You're my Prisoner, but
Your Gaoler shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint. For you Posthumus,
So soon as I can win th' offended King,
I will be known your Advocate: marry yet
The fire of Rage is in him, and 'twere good
You leaned unto his Sentence, with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.
Please your Highness,
I will from hence to day.
You know the peril:
I'll fetch a turn about the Garden, pitying
The pangs of barred Affections, though the King
Hath charged you should not speak together.
O dissembling Courtesy! How fine this Tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds? My dearest Husband,
I something fear my Father's wrath, but nothing
(Always reserved my holy duty) what
His rage can do on me. You must be gone,
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes: not comforted to live,
But that there is this jewel in the world,
That I may see again.
My Queen, my Mistress:
O Lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyall'st husband, that did ere plight troth.
My residence in Rome, at one Filorio's,
Who, to my Father was a Friend, to me
Known but by Letter; thither writ (my Queen)
And with mine eyes, I'll drink the words you send,
Though Ink be made of Gall.
Be brief, I pray you:
If the King come, I shall incur, I know not
How much of his displeasure: yet I'll move him
To walk this way: I never do him wrong,
But he does buy my Injuries, to be Friends:
Pays dear for my offences.
Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to departed, would grow: Adieu.
Nay, stay a little:
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here (Love)
This Diamond was my Mothers; take it (Heart)
But keep it till you woe another Wife,
When Imogen is dead.
How, how? Another?
You gentle Gods, give me but this I have,
And sear up my embracements from a next,
With bonds of death. Remain, remain thou here,
While sense can keep it on: And sweetest, fairest,
As I (my poor self) did exchange for you
To your so infinite loss; so in our trifles
I still win of you. For my sake wear this,
It is a Manacle of Love, I'll place it
Upon this fairest Prisoner.
O the Gods!
When shall we see again?
Alack, the King.
Thou basest thing, avoid hence, from my sight:
If after this command thou fraught the Court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest. Away,
Thou'rt poison to my blood.
The Gods protect you,
And bless the good Remainders of the Court:
I am gone.
There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp than this is.
O disloyal thing,
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heapest
A years age on mee
I beseech you Sir,
Harm not yourself with your vexation,
I am senseless of your Wrath; a Touch more rare
Subdues all pangs, all fears.
Past Grace? Obedience?
Past hope, and in despair, that way past Grace.
That mightst have had
The sole Son of my Queen.
O blessed, that I might not: I chose an Eagle,
And did avoid a Puttock.
Thou took'st a Beggar, wouldst have made my
Throne, a Seat for baseness.
No, I rather added a lustre to it.
O thou vild one!
Sir,
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
You bred him as my Playfellow, and he is
A man, worth any woman: Ouer-buyes me
Almost the sum he pays.
What? art thou mad?
Almost Sir: Heaven restore me: would I were
A Neat-heards Daughter, and my Leonatus
Our Neighbour-Shepheards Son.
Thou foolish thing;
They were again together: you have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up.
Beseech your patience: Peace
Dear Lady daughter, peace. Sweet Sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves, and make yourself some comfort
Out of your best advice.
Nay let her languish
A drop of blood a day, and being aged
die of this Folly.
Fie, you must give way:
here is your Servant. How now Sir? What news?
My Lord your Son, drew on my Master.
Ha?
No harm I trust is done?
There might have been,
But that my Master rather played, then fought,
And had no help of Anger: they were parted
By Gentlemen, at hand.
I am very glad on't.
Your Son's my Father's friend, he takes his part
To draw upon an Exile. O brave Sir,
I would they were in Africa both together,
Myself by with a Needle, that I might prick
The goer back. Why came you from your Master?
On his command: he would not suffer me
To bring him to the Haven: left these Notes
Of what commands I should be subject too,
When't pleased you to employ me.
This hath been
Your faithful Servant: I dare lay mine Honour
He will remain so.
I humbly thank your Highness.
Pray walk awhile.
About some half hour hence,
Pray you speak with me;
You shall (at least) go see my Lord aboard.
For this time leave me.
Sir, I would advise you to shift a Shirt; the Violence of Action hath made you reek as a Sacrifice: where air comes out, air comes in: There's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.
If my Shirt were bloody, then to shift it.
Have I hurt him?
No faith: not so much as his patience.
Hurt him: His body's a passable Carcase if he be not hurt. It is a thoroughfare for Steel if it be not hurt.
His Steel was in debt, it went o' th' Backside the Town.
The Villain would not stand me.
No, but he fled forward still, toward your face.
Stand you? you have Land enough of your own:
But he added to your having, gave you some ground.
As many Inches, as you have Oceans (Puppies.)
I would they had not come between us.
So would I, till you had measured how long a Fool you were upon the ground.
And that she should love this Fellow, and refuse me.
If it be a sin to make a true election, she is damned.
Sir, as I told you always: her Beauty & her Brain go not together. she's a good sign, but I have seen small reflection of her wit.
She shines not upon Fools, lest the reflection
Should hurt her.
Come, I'll to my Chamber: would there had been some hurt done.
I wish not so, unless it had been the fall of an Ass, which is no great hurt.
You'll go with us?
I'll attend your Lordship.
Nay come, let's go together.
Well my Lord.
I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' th' Haven,
And questioned'st every Sail: if he should write,
And I not have it, 'twere a Paper lost
As offered mercy is: What was the last
That he spoke to thee?
It was his Queen, his Queen.
Then waved his Handkerchief?
And kissed it, Madam.
Senseless Linen, happier therein than I
And that was all?
No Madam: for so long
As he could make me with his eye, or ear,
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The Deck, with Glove, or Hat, or Handkerchief,
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of's mind
Can best express how slow his Soul sailed on,
How swift his Ship.
Thou shouldst have made him
As little as a Crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.
Madam, so I did.
I would have broke mine eyestrings;
Cracked them, but to look upon him, till the diminution
Of space, had pointed him sharp as my Needle:
Nay, followed him, till he had melted from
The smallness of a Gnat, to air: and then
Have turned mine eye, and wept. But good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him.
Be assured Madam,
With his next vantage.
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say: Ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours,
Such thoughts, and such: Or I could make him swear,
The she's of Italy should not betray
Mine Interest, and his Honour: or have charged him
At the sixth hour of Morn, at Noon, at Midnight,
T' encounter me with Orisons, for than
I am in Heaven for him: Or ere I could,
Give him that parting kiss, which I had set
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my Father,
And like the Tyrannous breathing of the North,
Shakes all our buds from growing.
The Queen (Madam)
Desires your Highness' Company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatched,
I will attend the Queen.
Madam, I shall.
Believe it Sir, I have seen him in Britain; he was then of a Crescent note, expected to prove so worthy, as since he hath been allowed the name of. But I could then have looked on him, without the help of Admiration, though the Catalogue of his endowments had been rabled by his side, and I to peruse him by Items.
You speak of him when he was less furnished, then now he is, with that which makes him both without, and within.
I have seen him in France: we had very many there, could behold the Sun, with as firm eyes as he.
This matter of marrying his King's Daughter, wherein he must be weighed rather by her value, than his own, words him (I doubt not) a great deal from the matter.
And then his banishment.
I, and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable divorce under her colours, are wonderfully to extend him, be it but to fortify her judgement, which else an easy battery might lay flat, for taking a Beggar without less quality. But how comes it, he is to sojourn with you? How creeps acquaintance?
His Father and I were Soldiers together, to whom I have been often bound for no less than my life.
here comes the Britain. Let him be so entertained amongst you, as suits with Gentleman of your knowing, to a Stranger of his quality. I beseech you all be better known to this Gentleman, whom I commend to you, as a Noble Friend of mine. How Worthy he is, I will leave to appear hereafter, rather than story him in his own hearing.
Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
Since when, I have been debtor to you for courtesies, which I will be ever to pay, and yet pay still.
Sir, you o're-rate my poor kindness, I was glad I did atone my Countryman and you: it had been pity you should have been put together, with so mortal a purpose, as then each bore, upon importance of so slight and trivial a nature.
By your pardon Sir, I was then a young traveler, rather shunned to go even with what I heard, then in my every action to be guided by others experiences: but upon my mended judgement (if I offend to say it is mended) my Quarrel was not altogether slight.
Faith yes, to be put to the arbiterment of Swords, and by such two, that would by all likelihood have confounded one the other, or have fall'n both.
Can we with manners, ask what was the difference?
Safely, I think, 'twas a contention in public, which may (without contradiction) suffer the report. It was much like an argument that fell out last night, where each of us fell in praise of our Country-Mistresses. This Gentleman, at that time vouching (and upon warrant of bloody affirmation) his to be more Fair, Virtuous, Wise, Chaste, Constant, Qualified, and less attemptible than any, the rarest of our Ladies in France.
That Lady is not now living; or this Gentleman's opinion by this, worn out.
She holds her Virtue still, and I my mind.
You must not so far prefer her, 'fore ours of Italy.
Being so far provoked as I was in France: I would abate her nothing, though I profess myself her Adorer, not her Friend.
As fair, and as good: a kind of hand in hand comparison, had been something too fair, and too good for any Lady in Brittany; if she went before others. I have seen as that Diamond of yours out-lusters many I have beheld, I could not believe she excelled many: but I have not seen the most precious Diamond that is, nor you the Lady.
I praised her, as I rated her: so do I my Stone.
What do you esteem it at?
More than the world enjoys.
Either your vnparagoned Mistress is dead, or she's out-prized by a trifle.
You are mistaken: the one may be sold or given, or if there were wealth enough for the purchases, or merit for the gift. The other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the Gods.
Which the Gods have given you?
Which by their Graces I will keep.
You may wear her in title yours: but you know strange Fowl light upon neighbouring Ponds. Your Ring may be stolen too, so your brace of unprizeable Estimations, the one is but frail, and the other Casual;. A cunning Thief, or a (that way) accomplished Courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
Your Italy, contains none so accomplished a Courtier to convince the Honour of my Mistress: if in the holding or loss of that, you term her frail, I do nothing doubt you have store of thieves, notwithstanding I fear not my Ring.
Let us leave here, Gentlemen?
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy Signior I thank him, makes no stranger of me, we are familiar at first.
With five times so much conversation, I should get ground of your fair Mistress; make her go back, even to the yielding, had I admittance, and opportunity to friend.
No, no.
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my Estate, to your Ring, which in my opinion o're-values it something: but I make my wager rather against your Confidence, than her Reputation. And to bar your offence herein to, I durst attempt it against any Lady in the world.
You are a great deal abused in too bold a persuasion, and I doubt not you sustain what ye are worthy of, by your Attempt.
What's that?
A Repulse though your Attempt (as you call it) deserve more; a punishment too.
Gentlemen enough of this, it came in too suddenly, let it dye as it was borne, and I pray you be better acquainted.
Would I had put my Estate, and my Neighbours on th' approbation of what I have spoke,
What Lady would you choose to assail?
Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe. I will lay you ten thousands Ducats to your Ring, that commend me to the Court where your Lady is, with no more advantage than the opportunity of a second conference, and I will bring from thence, that Honour of hers, which you imagine so reserved.
I will wage against your Gold, Gold to it: My Ring I hold dear as my finger, 'tis part of it.
You are a Friend, and there in the wiser: if you buy Ladies flesh at a Million a Dram, you cannot preseure it from tainting; but I see you have some Religion in you, that you fear.
This is but a custom in your tongue: you bear a graver purpose I hope.
I am the Master of my speeches, and would under-go what's spoken, I swear.
Will you? I shall but lend my Diamond till your return: let there be Covenants drawne between's. My Mistress exceeds in goodness, the hugeness of your unworthy thinking. I dare you to this match: here's my Ring.
I will have it no lay.
By the Gods it is one: if I bring you no sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest bodily part of your Mistress: my ten thousand Ducats are yours, so is your Diamond too: if I come off, and leave her in such honour as you have trust in; She your jewel, this your jewel, and my Gold are yours: provided. I have your commendation, for my more free entertainment.
I embrace these Conditions, let us have Articles betwixt us: only thus far you shall answer, if you make your voyage upon her, and give me directly to understand, you have prevailed, I am no further your Enemy, she is not worth our debate. If she remain vnseduced, you not making it appear otherwise: for your ill opinion, and th' assault you have made to her chastity, you shall answer me with your Sword.
Your hand, a Covenant: we will have these things set down be lawful Counsel, and strait away for Britain, lest the Bargain should catch cold, and starve: I will fetch my Gold, and have our two Wagers recorded.
Agreed.
Will this hold, think you.
Signior Iachimo will not from it.
Pray let us follow 'em.
Whiles yet the dewes on ground,
Gather those Flowers,
Make haste. Who has the note of them?
I Madam.
Dispatch.
Now Master Doctor, have you brought those drugs?
Pleaseth your Highness, I: here they are, Madam:
But I beseech your Grace, without offence
(My Conscience bids me ask) wherefore you have
Commanded of me these most poisonous Compounds,
Which are the moovers of a languishing death:
But though slow, deadly.
I wonder, Doctor,
Thou ask'st me such a Question: Have I not been
Thy Pupil long? Hast thou not learned me how
To make Perfumes? Distil? Preserve? Yea so,
That our great King himself doth woe me oft
For my Confections? Having thus far proceeded,
(Unless thou thinkest me devilish) is't not meet
That I did amplify my judgement in
Other Conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy Compounds, on such Creatures as
We count not worth the hanging (but none humane)
To try the vigour of them, and apply
Allayments to their Act, and by them gather
Their several virtues, and effects.
Your Highness
Shall from this practice, but make hard your heart:
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome, and infectious.
O content thee.
here comes a flattering Rascal, upon him
Will I first work: he's for his Master,
And enemy to my Son. How now Pisanio?
Doctor, your service for this time is ended,
Take your own way.
I do suspect you, Madam,
But you shall do no harm.
Hark thee, a word.
I do not like her. She doth think she has
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice, with
A drug of such damned Nature. Those she has,
Will stupefy and dull the Sense awhile,
Which first (perchance) she'll prove on Cats and Dogs,
Then afterward up higher: but there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking up the Spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fooled
With a most false effect: and I, the truer,
So to be false with her.
No further service, Doctor,
Until I send for thee.
I humbly take my leave.
Weeps she still (sayst thou?)
Dost thou think in time
She will not quench, and let instructions enter
Where Folly now possesses? Do thou work:
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my Son,
I'll tell thee on the instant, thou art then
As great as is thy Master: Greater, for
His Fortunes all lie speechless, and his name
Is at last gasp. Return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is: To shift his being,
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes, comes to decay
A day's work in him. What shalt thou expect
To be depender on a thing that leans?
Who cannot be new built, nor has no Friends
So much, as but to prop him? Thou tak'st up
Thou knowst not what: But take it for thy labour,
It is a thing I made, which hath the King
Five times redeemed from death. I do not know
What is more Cordial. Nay, I prithee take it,
It is an earnest of a farther good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy Mistress how
The case stands with her: do't, as from thyself;
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou hast thy Mistress still, to boot, my Son,
Who shall take notice of thee. I'll move the King
To any shape of thy Preferment, such
As thou'lt desire: and then myself, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women.
Think on my words. A sly, and constant knave,
Not to be shaked: the Agent for his Master,
And the Remembrancer of her, to hold
The handfast to her Lord. I have given him that,
Which if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of Leidgers for her Sweet: and which, she after
Except she bend her humour, shall be assured
To taste of too.
So, so: Well done, well done:
The Violets, Cowslippes, and the Primroses
Bear to my Closet: Far thee well, Pisanio.
Think on my words.
And shall do:
But when to my good Lord, I prove untrue,
I'll choke myself: there's all Isle do for you.
A Father cruel, and a Stepdame false,
A Foolish Suitor to a Wedded-Lady,
That hath her Husband banished: O, that Husband,
My supreme Crown of grief, and those repeated
Vexations of it. Had I been Theefe-stolne,
As my two Brothers, happy: but most miserable
Is the desires that's glorious. Blessed be those
How mean so ere, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie.
Madam, a Noble Gentleman of Rome,
Comes from my Lord with Letters.
Change you, Madam:
The Worthy Leonatus is in safety,
And greets your Highness dearly.
Thanks good Sir,
You're kindly welcome.
All of her, that is out of door, most rich:
If she be furnished with a mind so rare
She is alone th' Arabian-Bird; and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my Friend:
Arm me Audacity from head to foot,
Orlike the Parthian I shall flying fight,
Rather directly fly.
He is one of the Noblest note, to whose kindnesses I am most infinitely tied. Reflect vpon him accordingly, as you value your trust. Leonatus.
So far I read aloud.
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warmed by ' th' rest, and take it thankfully.
You are as welcome (worthy Sir) as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.
Thanks fairest Lady:
What are men mad? Hath Nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted Arch, and the rich Crop
Of Sea and Land, which can distinguish 'twixt
The fiery Orbs above, and the twinned Stones
Upon the numbered Beach, and can we not
Partition make with Spectales so precious
Twixt fair, and foul?
What makes your admiration?
It cannot be i' th' eye: for Apes, and Monkeys
'Twixt two such She's, would chatter this way, and
Contemn with mows the other. Nor i' th' judgement:
For Idiots in this case of favour, would
Be wisely definite: Nor i' th' Appetite.
Sluttery to such near Excellence, opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allured to feed.
What is the matter trow?
The Cloyed will:
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that Tub
Both filled and running: Ravening first the Lamb,
Longs after for the Garbage.
What, dear Sir,
Thus raps you? Are you well?
Thanks Madam well: Beseech you Sir,
Desire my Man's abode, where I did leave him:
He's strange and peevish.
I was going Sir,
To give him welcome.
Continues well my Lord?
His health beseech you?
Well, Madam.
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Exceeding pleasant: none a stranger there,
So merry, and so gamesome: he is called
The Britain Reveller.
When he was here
He did incline to sadness, and oft times
Not knowing why.
I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his Companion, one
An eminent Monsieur, that it seems much loves
A Gallian-Girle at home. He furnaces
The thick sighs from him; whiles the jolly Britain,
(Your Lord I mean) laughs from's free lungs: cries oh,
Can my sides hold, to think that man who knows
By History, Report, or his own proof
What woman is, yea what she cannot choose
But must be: will's free hours languish:
For assured bondage?
Will my Lord say so?
I Madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter,
It is a Recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman:
But heaven's know some men are much too blame.
Not he I hope.
Not he:
But yet heaven's bounty towards him, might
Be used more thankfully. In himself 'tis much;
In you which I account his beyond all Talents.
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.
What do you pity Sir?
Two Creatures heartyly.
Am I one Sir?
You look on me: what wrack discern you in me
Deserves your pity?
Lamentable: what
To hide me from the radiant Sun, and solace
I' th' Dungeon by a Snuff.
I pray you Sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?
That others do,
(I was about to say) enjoy your— but
It is an office of the Gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on't.
You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me; pray you
Since doubting things go ill, often hurts more
Than to be sure they do. For Certainties
Either are past remedies; or timely knowing,
The remedy then borne. Discover to me
What both you spur and stop.
Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon: this hand, whose touch,
(Whose every touch) would force the Feelers soul
To ' th' oath of loyalty. This obiect, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Firing it only here, should I (damned then)
Slawer with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol: join gripes, with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood (falsehood as
With labour:) then by peeping in an eye
Base and illustrious as the smoky light
That's fed with stinking Tallow: it were fit
That all the plagues of Hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.
My Lord, I fear
Has forgot Britain.
And himself, not I
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The Beggary of his change: but 'tis your Graces
That from my mutest Conscience, to my tongue,
Charms this report out.
Let me hear no more.
O dearest Soul: your Cause doth strike my hart
With pity, that doth make me sick. A Lady
So fair, and fastened to an Empery
Would make the great'st King double, to be partnered
With Tomboys hired, with that self exhibition
Which your own Coffers yield: with diseased ventures
That play with all Infirmities for Gold,
Which rottenness can lend Nature. Such boiled stuff
As well might poison Poison. Be revenged,
Or she that bore you, was no Queen, and you
Recoil from your great Stock.
Revenged:
How should I be revenged? If this be true,
(As I have such a Heart, that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse) if it be true,
How should I be revenged?
Should he make me
Live like Diana's Priest, betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable Ramps
In your despite, upon your purse: revenge it.
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
More Noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your Affection,
Still close, as sure.
What hoa, Pisanio?
Let me my service tender on your lips.
Away, I do condemn mine ears, that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert Honourable
Thou wouldst have told this tale for Virtue, not
For such an end thou seekest, as base, as strange:
Thou wrong'st a Gentleman, who is as far
From thy report, as thou from Honour: and
Solicits here a Lady, that disdains
Thee, and the Devil alike. What hoa, Pisanio?
The King my Father shall be made acquainted
Of thy Assault: if he shall think it fit,
A saucy Stranger in his Court, to Mart
As in a Romish Stew, and to expound
His beastly mind to us; he hath a Court
He little cares for, and a Daughter, who
He not respects at all. What hoa, Pisanio?
O happy Leonatus I may say,
The credit that thy Lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long,
A Lady to the worthiest Sir, that ever
Country called his; and you his Mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit. Give me your pardon,
I have spoke this to know if your Affiance
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your Lord,
That which he is, new o'er: And he is one
The truest mannered: such a holy Witch,
That he enchants Societies into him:
Half all men hearts are his.
You make amends.
He sits 'mongst men, like a defended God;
He hath a kind of Honour sets him off,
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry
(Most mighty Princess) that I have adventured
To try your taking of a false report, which hath
Honoured with confirmation your great judgement,
In the election of a Sir, so rare,
Which you know, cannot err. The love I bear him,
Made me to fan you thus, but the Gods made you
(Unlike all others) chaffelesse. Pray your pardon.
All's well Sir:
Take my power i' th' Court for yours.
My humble thankes: I had almost forgot
T' entreat your Grace, but in a small request,
And yet of moment too, for it concerns:
Your Lord, myself, and other Noble Friends
Are partners in the business.
Pray what is't?
Some dozen Romans of us, and your Lord
(The best Feather of our wing) have mingled sums
To buy a Present for the Emperor:
Which I (the Factor for the rest) have done
In France: 'tis Plate of rare device, and jewels
Of rich, and exquisite form, their values great,
And I am something curious, being strange
To have them in safe stowage: May it please you
To take them in protection.
Willingly:
And pawn mine Honour for their safety, since
My Lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my Bedchamber.
They are in a Trunk
Attended by my men: I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night:
I must aboard to morrow.
O no, no.
Yes I beseech: or I shall short my word
By length'ning my return. From Gallia,
I crossed the Seas on purpose, and on promise
To see your Grace.
I thank you for your pains:
But not away to morrow.
O I must Madam.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your Lord with writing, do't to night,
I have outstood my time, which is material
To ' th' tender of our Present.
I will write:
Send your Trunk to me, it shall safe be kept,
And truly yielded you: you're very welcome.
Was there ever man had such jucke? when I kissed the jack upon an vp-cast, to be hit away? I had a hundred pound on't: and then a whorson Iacke-an-Apes, must take me up for swearing, as if I borrowed mine oaths of him, and might not spend them at my pleasure.
What got he by that? you have broke his pate with your Bowl.
If his wit had been like him that broke it: it would have run all out.
When a Gentleman is disposed to swear: it is not for any standers by to curtail his oaths. Ha'?
No my Lord; nor crop the ears of them.
Whoreson dog: I gave him satisfaction? would he had been one of my Rank.
To have smelled like a Foole.
I am not vexed more at any thing in th' earth: a pox on't. I had rather not be so Noble as I am: they dare not fight with me, because of the Queen my Mother: every jacke-slave hath his belly full of Fight, and I must go up and down like a Cock, that no body can match.
You are Cock and Capon too, and you crow
Cock, with your comb on.
Sayest thou?
It is not fit you Lordship should undertake every
Companion, that you give offence too.
No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit offence to my inferiors.
I, it is fit for your Lordship only.
Why so I say.
Did you here of a Stranger that's come to Court night?
A Stranger, and I not know on't?
He's a strange Fellow himself, and knows it not.
There's an Italian come, and 'tis thought one of Leonatus Friends.
Leonatus? A banished Rascal; and he's another, whatsoever he be. Who told you of this Stranger?
One of your Lordship's Pages.
Is it fit I went to look upon him? Is there no derogation in't?
You cannot derogate my Lord.
Not easily I think.
You are a Fool granted, therefore your Issues being foolish do not derogate.
Come, I'll go see this Italian: what I have lost to day at Bowls, I'll win to night of him. Come: go.
I'll attend your Lordship.
That such a crafty Devil as is his Mother
Should yield the world this Ass: A woman, that
Bears all down with her Brain, and this her Son,
Cannot take two from twenty for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas poor Princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur'st,
Betwixt a Father by thy Stepdame governed,
A Mother hourly coining plots: A Wooer,
More hateful than the foul expusion is
Of thy dear Husband. Then that horrid Act
Of the divorce, heeled make the Heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear Honour. Keep vnshaked
That Temple thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand
T' enjoy thy banished Lord: and this great Land.
Who's there? My woman: Helen?
Please you Madam.
What houe is it?
Almost midnight, Madam.
I have read three hours then:
Mine eyes are weak,
Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed.
Take not away the Taper, leave it burning:
And if thou canst awake by four o' th' clock,
I prithee call me: Sleep hath seized me wholly.
To your protection I commend me, Gods,
From fairies, and the Tempter's of the night,
Guard me beseech ye.
The Crickets sing, and man's ore-labored sense
Repairs itself by rest: Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the Rushes, ere he wakened
The Chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
How bravely thou becomest thy Bed; fresh Lily,
And whiter than the Sheets: that I might touch,
But kiss, one kiss. Rubies vnparagoned,
How dearly they do't: 'Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the Chamber thus: the Flame o' th' Taper
Bows toward her, and would vnder-peepe her lids.
To see th' enclosed Lights, now Canopied
Under these windows, White and Azure laced
With Blue of Heavens own tinct. But my design?
To note the Chamber, I will write all down,
Such, and such pictures: There the window, such
Th' adronement of her Bed; the Arras, Figures,
Why such, and such: and the Contents o' th' Story.
Ah, but some natural notes about her Body,
Above ten thousand meaner Movables
Would testify, t' enrich mine Inventory.
O sleep, thou Ape of death, lie dull upon her,
And be her Sense but as a Monument,
Thus in a Chapel lying. Come off, come off;
As slippery as the Gordian-knot was hard.
'Tis mine, and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the Conscience does within:
To ' th' madding of her Lord. On her left breast
Amole Cinque-spotted: Like the Crimson drops
I' th' bottom of a Cowslippe. here's a Voucher,
Stronger than ever Law could make; this Secret
Will force him think I have picked the lock, and taken
The treasure of her Honour. No more: to what end?
Why should I write this down, that's rivete,
Screwed to my memory. She hath been reading late,
The Tale of Tereus, here the leaffe's turned down
Where Philomele gave up. I have enough,
To ' th' Trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you Dragons of the night, that dawning
May bear the Raven's eye: I lodge in fear,
Though this a heavenly Angel: hell is here.
One, two, three: time, time.
Your Lordship is the most patiented man in loss, the most coldest that ever turned up Ace.
It would make any man cold to lose.
But not every man patiented after the noble temper of your Lordship; You are most hot, and furious when you win.
Winning will put any man into courage: if I could get this foolish Imogen, I should have Gold enough: it's almost morning, is't not?
Day, my Lord.
I would this Music would come: I am advised to give her Music a mornings, they say it will penetrate.
Come on, tune: If you can penetrate her with your fingering, so: we'll try with tongue too: if none will do, let her remain: but I'll never give o'er. First, a very excellent good conceited thing; after a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words to it, and then let her consider.
Hark, hark, the Lark at Heaven's gate sings, and Phoebus 'gins arise,
His Steeds to water at those Springs on chaliced Flowers that lies:
And winking Mary-buds begin to open their Golden eyes
With every thing that pretty is, my Lady sweet arise:
Arise, arise.
So, get you gone: if this penetrate, I will consider your Music the better: if it do not, it is a voice in her ears which Horse-haires, and Calues-guts, nor the voice of unpaved Eunuch to boot, can never amed.
here comes the King.
I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason I was up so early: he cannot choose but take this Service I have done, fatherly. Good morrow to your Majesty, and to my gracious Mother.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter
Will she not forth?
I have assailed her with Musics, but she vouchsafes no notice.
The Exile of her Minion is too new,
She hath not yet forgot him, some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance on't,
And then she's yours.
You are most bound to ' th' King,
Who let's go by no vantages, that may
Prefer you to his daughter: Frame yourself
To orderly felicity, and be friended
With aptness of the season: make denials
Increase your Services: so seem, as if
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her: that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.
Senseless? Not so.
So like you (Sir) Ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.
A worthy Fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now;
But that's no fault of his: we must receive him
According to the Honour of his Sender,
And towards himself, his goodness fore-spent on us
We must extend our notice: Our dear Son,
When you have given good morning to your Mistress,
Attend the Queen, and us, we shall have need
T' employ you towards this Roman.
Come our Queen.
If she be up, I'll speak with her: if not
Let her lie still, and dream: by your leave hoa,
I know her women are about her: what
If I do line one of their hands, 'tis Gold
Which buys admittance (oft it doth) yea, and makes
Diana's Rangers false themselves, yield up
Their Deer to ' th' stand o' th' Stealer: and 'tis Gold
Which makes the Trueman killed, and saves the Thief:
Nay, sometime hangs both Thief, and Trueman: what
Can it not do, and undo? I will make
One of her women Lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case myself.
By your leave.
Who's there that knocks?
A Gentleman.
No more.
Yes, and a Gentlewoman's Son.
That's more
Than some whose Tailors are as dear as yours,
Can justly boast of: what's your Lordship's pleasure?
Your Lady's person, is she ready?
I, to keep her Chamber.
There is Gold for you,
Sell me your good report.
How my good name? or to report of you
What I shall think is good. The Princess.
Good morrow fairest, Sister your sweet hand.
Good morrow Sir, you lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble: the thankes I give,
Is telling you that I am poor of thankes,
And scarce can spare them.
Still I swear I love you.
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me:
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.
This is no answer.
But that you shall not say, I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you spare me, i'faith
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing
Should learn (being taught) forbearance.
To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin,
I will not.
Fools are not mad Folks.
Do you call me Fool?
As I am mad I do:
If you'll be patiented, I'll no more be mad,
That cures us both. I am much sorry (Sir)
You put me to forget a Lady's manners
By being so verbal: and learn now, for all,
That I which know my heart, do here pronounce
By th' very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of Charity
To accuse myself, I hate you: which I had rather
You felt, then make't my boast.
You sin against
Obedience, which you own your Father, for
The Contract you pretend with that base Wretch,
One, bred of Alms, and fostered with cold dishes,
With scraps o' th' Court: It is no Contract, none;
And though it be allowed in meaner parties
(Yet who then he more mean) to knit their souls
(On whom there is no more dependency
But Brats and Beggary) in selfe-figured knot,
Yet you are curbed from that enlargement, by
The consequence o' th' Crown, and must not foil
The precious note of it; with a base Slave,
A Hilding for a Livery, a Squire's Cloth,
A Pantler; not so eminent.
Profane Fellow:
Wert thou the Son of Iupiter, and no more,
But what thou art besides: thou were't too base,
To be his Groom: thou were't dignified enough
Even to the point of Envy. If 'twere made
Comparative for your Virtues, to be styled
The under Hangman of his Kingdom; and hated
For being preferred so well.
The South-Fog rot him.
He never can meet more mischance, then come
To be but named of thee. His meanest Garment
That ever hath but clipped his body; is dearer
In my respect, than all the Heirs above thee,
Were they all made such men: How now Pisanio?
His Garments? Now the devil.
To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently.
His Garment?
I am sprighted with a Fool,
Frighted, and angered worse: Go bid my woman
Search for a jewel, that too casually
Hath left mine Arm: it was thy Masters. Shrew me
If I would lose it for a Revenue,
Of any Kings in Europe. I do think,
I saw't this morning: Confident I am.
Last night 'twas on mine Arm; I kissed it,
I hope it be not gone, to tell my Lord
That I kiss aught but he.
'Twill not be lost.
I hope so: go and search.
You have abused me:
His meanest Garment?
I, I said so Sir,
If you will make't an Action, call witness to't.
I will inform your Father.
Your Mother too:
She's my good Lady; and will concieve, I hope
But the worst of me. So I leave your Sir,
To ' th' worst of discontent.
I'll bereuenged:
His meanest Garment? Well.
Fear it not Sir: I would I were so sure
To win the King, as I am bold, her Honour
Will remain here's.
What means do you make to him?
Not any: but abide the change of Time,
Quake in the present winter's state, and wish
That warmer days would come: In these feared hope
I barely gratify your love; they failing
I must die much your debtor.
Your very goodness, and your company,
Ore-payes all I can do. By this your King,
Hath heard of Great Augustus: Caius Lucius,
Will does Commission throughly. And I think
he'll grant the Tribute: send th' Arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans', whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.
I do believe
(Statist though I am none, nor like to be)
That this will prove a War; and you shall hear
The Legion now in Gallia, sooner landed
In our not-fearing-Britaine, then have tidings
Of any penny Tribute paid. Our Countrymen
Are men more ordered, then when Iulius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found their courage
Worthy his frowning at. Their discipline,
(Now wingled with their courages) will make known
To their Approvers, they are People, such
That mend upon the world.
See Iachimo.
The swiftest Hearts, have posted you by land;
And Winds of all the Corners kissed your Sails,
To make your vessel nimble.
Welcome Sir.
I hope the briefness of your answer, made
The speediness of your return.
Your Lady,
Is one of the fairest that I have looked upon
And therewithal the best, or let her beauty
Look through a Casement to allure false hearts,
And be false with them.
here are Letters for you.
Their tenure good I trust.
'Tis very like.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain Court,
When you were there?
He was expected then,
But not approached.
All is well yet,
Sparkles this Stone as it was wont, or is't not
Too dull for your good wearing?
If I have lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in Gold,
I'll make a journey twice as far, t'enjoy
A second night of such sweet shortness, which
Was mine in Britain, for the Ring is won.
The Stones too hard to come by.
Not a whit,
Your Lady being so easy.
Make note Sir
Your loss, your Sport: I hope you know that we
Must not continue Friends.
Good Sir, we must
If you keep Covenant: had I not brought
The knowledge of your Mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess myself the winner of her Honour,
Together with your Ring; and not the wronger
Of her, or you having proceeded but
By both your wills.
If you can make't apparent
That you have tasted her in Bed; my hand,
And Ring is yours. If not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure Honour; gains, or loses,
Your Sword, or mine, or Masterless leave both
To who shall find them.
Sir, my Circumstances
Being so near the Truth, as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe; whose strength
I will confirm with oath, which I doubt not
You'll give me leave to spare, when you shall find
You need it not.
Proceed.
First, her Bedchamber
(Where I confess I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching) it was hanged
With Tapestry of Silk, and Silver, the Story
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Sidnus swelled above the Banks, or for
The press of Boats, or Pride. A piece of Work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In Workmanship, and Value, which I wondered
Can be so rarely, and exactly wrought
Since the true life on't was—
This is true:
And this you might have heard of here, by me,
Or by some other.
More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.
So they must,
Or do your Honour injury.
The Chimney
Is South the Chamber, and Chimney-piece
Chaste Diana, bathing: never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves; the Cutter
Was as another Nature dumb, outwent her,
Motion, and Breath left out.
This is a thing
Which you might from Relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.
The Roof o' th' Chamber,
With golden Cherubins is fretted. Her Andirons
(I had forgot them) were two winking Cupids
Of Silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their Brands.
This is her Honour:
Let it be granted you have seen all this (and praise
Be given to your remembrance) the description
Of what is in her Chamber, nothing saves
The wager you have laid.
Then if you can
Be pale, I beg but leave to air this jewel: See,
And now 'tis up again: it must be married
To that your Diamond, I'll keep them.
Ioue—
Once more let me behold it: Is it that
Which I left with her?
Sir (I thank her) that
She stripped it from her Arm: I see her yet:
Her pretty Action, did out-sell her gift,
And yet enriched it too: she gave it me,
And said, she prized it once.
May be, she plucked it off
To send it me.
She writes so to you? doth she?
O no, no, no, 'tis true. here, take this too,
It is a Basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on't: Let there be no Honour,
Where there is Beauty: Truth, where semblance: Love,
Where there's another man. The Vows of Women,
Of no more bondage be, to where they are made,
Then they are to their Virtues, which is nothing:
O, above measure false.
Have patience Sir,
And take your Ring again, 'tis not yet won:
It may be probable she lost it: or
Who knows if one her women, being corrupted
Hath stolen it from her.
Very true,
And so I hope he came by't: back my Ring,
Render to me some corporal sign about her
More evident than this: for this was stolen.
By Iupiter, I had it from her Arme.
Hark you, he swears: by Iupiter he swears.
'Tis true, nay keep the Ring; 'tis true: I am sure
She would not lose it: her Attendants are
All sworn, and honourable: they induced to steal it?
And by a Stranger? No, he hath enjoyed her,
The Cognisance of her incontinency
Is this: she hath bought the name of Whore, thus dearly
There, take thy hire, and all the Fiends of Hell
Divide themselves between you.
Sir, be patiented:
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of.
Never talk on't:
She hath been colted by him.
If you seek
For further satisfying, under her Breast
(Worthy her pressing) lies a Mole, right proud
Of that most delicate Lodging. By my life
I kissed it, and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?
I, and it doth confirm
Another stain, as big as Hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.
Will you hear more?
Spare your Arithmetic,
Never count the Turns: Once, and a Million.
I'll be sworn.
No swearing:
If you will swear you have not doneed, you lie,
And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny
Thou'st made me Cuckold.
I'll deny nothing.
O that I had her here, to tear her Limb-meale:
I will go there and do't, i' th' Court, before
Her Father. I'll do something.
Quite besides
The government of Patience. You have won:
Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.
With all my heart.
Is there no way for Men to be, but Women
Must be halfe-workers? We are all Bastards,
And that most venerable man, which I
Did call my Father, was, I know not where
When I was stamped. Some Coyner with his Tools
Made me a counterfeit: yet my Mother seemed
The Diana of that time: so doth my Wife
The Non-pareill of this. Oh Vengeance, Vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrained,
And prayed me oft forbearance: did it with
A pudencie so Rosy, the sweet view on't
Might well have warmed old Saturn;
That I thought her
As Chaste, as vn-sunned Snow. Oh, all the Devils!
This yellow Iachimo in an hour, was't not?
Or less; at first? Perchance he spoke not, but
Like a full Acorned Boar, a jarmen on,
cried oh, and mounted; found no opposition
But what he looked for, should oppose, and she
Should from encounter guard. Can I find out
The Woman's part in me, for there's no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the Woman's part: be it Lying, note it,
The woman's: Flattering, hers; Deceiving, hers:
Lust, and rank thoughts, hers, hers: Revenges hers:
Ambitions, Covet, change of Prides, Disdain,
Nice-longing, Slanders, Mutability;
All Faults that name, nay, that Hell knows,
Why hers, in part, or all: but rather all For even to Vice
They are not constant, but are changing still;
One Vice, but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that. I'll write against them,
Detest them, curse them: yet 'tis greater Skill
In a true Hate, to pray they have their will:
The very Devils cannot plague them better.
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Iulius Caesar (whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes, and will to Ears and Tongues
Be Theme, and hearing ever) was in this Britain,
And Conquered it, Cassibulan thine Uncle
(Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
Than in his Feats deserving it) for him,
And his Succession, granted Rome a Tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds; which (by thee) lately
Is left vntendered.
And to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.
There be many Caesars,
Ere such another Iulius: Britaine's a world
By itself, and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own Noses.
That opportunity
Which then they had to take from's, to resume
We have again. Remember Sir, my Liege,
The Kings your Ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your Isle, which stands
As Neptune's Park, ribbed, and paled in
With Oaks unskaleable, and roaring Waters,
With Sands that will not bear your Enemy's Boats,
But suck them up to ' th' Topmast. A kind of Conquest
Caesar made here, but made not here his brag
Of Came, and Saw, and Overcame: with shame
(The first that ever touched him) he was carried
From off our Coast, twice beaten: and his Shipping
(Poor ignorant Baubles) on our terrible Seas
Like Egge-shels moved upon their Surges, cracked
As easily 'gainst our Rocks. For joy whereof,
The famed Cassibulan, who was once at point
(Oh giglot Fortune) to master Caesar's Sword,
Made Luds-Towne with reioycing-Fires bright,
And Britain's strut with Courage.
Come, there's no more Tribute to be paid: our Kingdom is stronger than it was at that time: and (as I said) there is no more such Caesars, other of them may have crooked Noses, but to owe such strait Arms, none.
Son, let your Mother end.
We have yet many among us, can gripe as hard as Cassibulan, I do not say I am one: but I have a hand. Why Tribute? Why should we pay Tribute? If Caesar can hide the Sun from us with a Blanket, or put the Moon in his pocket, we will pay him Tribute for light: else Sir, no more Tribute, pray you now.
You must know,
Till the injurious Romans, did extort
This Tribute from us, we were free. Caesar's Ambition,
Which swelled so much, that it did almost stretch
The sides o' th' World, against all colour here,
Did put the yoke upon's; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be, we do. Say then to Caesar,
Our Ancestor was that Mulmutius, which
Ordained our Laws, whose use the Sword of Caesar
Hath too much mangled; whose repair, and franchise,
Shall (by the power we hold) be our good deed,
Tho Rome be therefore angry. Mulmutius made our laws
Who was the first of Britain, which did put
His brows within a golden Crown, and called
Himself a King.
I am sorry Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar
(Caesar, that hath more Kings his Servants, than
Thyself Domestic Officers) thine Enemy:
receive it from me then. War, and Confusion
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee: Look
For fury, not to be resisted. Thus defied,
I thank thee for myself.
Thou art welcome Caius,
Thy Caesar Knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him; of him, I gathered Honour,
Which he, to seek of me again, perforce,
Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect,
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians, for
Their Liberties are now in Arms: a Precedent
Which not to read, would show the Britain's cold:
So Caesar shall not find them.
Let proof speak.
His Majesty bids you welcome. Make pastime with us, a day, or two, or longer: if you seek us afterwards in other terms, you shall find us in our Salt-water-Girdle: if you beat us out of it, it is yours: if you fall in the adventure, our Crows shall far the better for you: and there's an end.
So sir.
I know your Master's pleasure, and he mine:
All the Remain, is welcome.
How? of Adultery? Wherefore writ you not
What Monsters her accuse? Leonatus:
Oh Master, what a strange infection
Is fall'n into thy ear? What false Italian,
(As poisonous tongued, as handed) hath prevailed
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.
She's punished for her Truth; and undergoes
More Goddesse-like, then Wifelike; such Assaults
As would take in some Virtue. Oh my Master,
Thy mind to her, is now as low, as were
Thy Fortunes. How? That I should murder her,
Upon the Love, and Truth, and Vows; which I
Have made to thy command? I her? Her blood?
If it be so, to go do odd service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
That I should seem to lack humanity,
So much as this Fact comes to? Do't: The Letter.
That I have sent her, by her own command,
Shall give thee opportunity. Oh damned paper,
Black as the Ink that's on thee: senseless bauble,
Art thou a Foedarie for this Act; and look'st
So Virginlike without? Lo her she comes.
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
How now Pisanio?
Madam, here is a Letter from my Lord.
Who, thy Lord? That is my Lord Leonatus?
Oh, learned indeed were that Astronomer
That knew the Stars, as I his Characters,
Heeled lay the Future open. You good Gods,
Let what is here contained, relish of Love,
Of my Lord's health, of his content: yet not
That we two are asunder, let that grieve him;
Some griefs are medcinable, that is one of them,
For it doth physic Love, of his content,
All but in that. Good Wax, thy leave: blessed be
You Bees that make these Locks of counsel. Lovers,
And men in dangerous Bonds pray not alike,
Though Forfeytours you cast in prison, yet
You clasp young Cupid's Tables: good News Gods.
IVstice, and your Fathers wrath (should he take me in his Dominion) could not be so cruell to me, as you: (oh the deerest of Creatures) would euen renew me with your eyes. Take notic I am in Cambria at Milford-Hauen: what your owne Loue, will out of this aduise you, follow. So he wishes you all happinesse, that remaines loyall to his Vow, and your encreasing in Loue. Leonatus-Posthumus.
Oh for a Horse with wings: Hearest thou Pisanio?
He is at Milford-haven: Read, and tell me
How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then true Pisanio,
Who longest like me, to see thy Lord; who longest
(Oh let me bate) but not like me: yet longest
But in a fainter kind. Oh not like me:
For mine's beyond, beyond: say, and speak thick
(Love's Counsellor should fill the bores of hearing,
To ' th' smothering of the Sense) how far it is
To this same blessed Milford. And by ' th' way
Tell me how Wales: was made so happy, as
T'inherit such a Haven. But first of all,
How we may steal from hence: nd for the gap
That we shall make in Time, from our hence-going,
And our return, to excuse: but first, how get hence.
Why should excuse be borne or ere begot?
we'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
How many store of Miles may we well rid
Twixt hour, and hour?
One score 'twixt Sun, and Sun,
Madam's enough for you: and too much too.
Why, one that road to's Execution Man,
Can never go so slow: I have heard of Riding wagers,
Where Horses have been nimbler than the Sands
That run i' th' Clocks behalf. But this is Foolrie,
Go, bid my Woman feign a Sickness, say
She'll home to her Father; and provide me presently
A Riding Suit: No costlier than would fit
A Franklins' Huswife.
Madam, you're best consider.
I see before me (Man) nor here, not here;
Nor what ensues but have a Fog in them
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee,
Do as I bid thee: There's no more to say:
Accessible is none but Milford way.
A goodly day, not to keep house with such,
Whose roof's as low as ours: Sleep Boys, this gate
Instructs you how t'adore the Heavens; and bows you
To a morning's holy office. The Gates of Monarches
Are Arched so high, that Giants may jet through
And keep their impious Turbonds on, without
Good morrow to the Sun. Hail thou fair Heaven,
We house i' th' Rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.
Hail Heaven.
Hail Heaven.
Now for our Mountain sport, up to yond hill
Your legs are young: I'll tread these Flats. Consider,
When you above perceive me like a Crow,
That it is Place, which lessen's, and sets off,
And you may then revolve what Tales, I have told you,
Of Courts, of Princes; of the Tricks in War.
This Service, is not Service; so being done,
But being so allowed. To apprehend thus,
Draws us a profit from all things we see:
And often to our comfort, shall we find
The sharded-Beetle, in a safer hold
Than is the full-winged Eagle. Oh this life,
Is Nobler, then attending for a check:
Richer, then doing nothing for a Babe:
Prouder, then rustling in unpayd-for Silk:
Such gain the Cap of him, that makes him fine,
Yet keeps his Book vncros'd: no life to ours.
Out of your proof you speak: we poor vnfledg'd
Have never winged from view o' th' nest; nor knows not
What air's from home. Haply this life is best,
(If quiet life be best) sweeter to you
That have a sharper known. Well corresponding
With your stiff Age; but unto us, it is
A Cell of Ignorance: travailing a bed,
A Prison, or a Debtor, that not dares
To stride a limit.
What should we speak of
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The Rain and wind beat dark December? How
In this our pinching Cave, shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing:
We are beastly; subtle as the Fox for prey,
Like warlike as the Wolf, for what we eat:
Our Valour is to chase what flies: Our Cage
We make a Quite, as doth the prisoned Bird,
And sing our Bondage freely.
How you speak.
Did you but know the City's Usuries,
And felt them knowingly: the Art o' th' Court,
As hard to leave, as keep: whose top to climb
Is certain falling: or so slippery, that
The fear's as bad as falling. The toil o' th' War,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
I' th' name of Fame and Honour, which dies i' th' search,
And hath as oft a slanderous Epitaph,
As Record of fair Act. Nay, many times
Doth ill deserve, by doing well: what's worse
Must curtsy at the Censure. Oh Boys, this Story
The World may read in me: My body's marked
With Roman Swords; and my report, was once
First, with the best of Note. Cymbeline loved me,
And when a Soldier was the Theme, my name
Was not far off: then was I as a Tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night,
A Storm, or Robbery (call it what you will)
shook down my mellow hangings: nay my Leaves,
And left me bare to weather.
Uncertain favour.
My fault being nothing (as I have told you oft)
But that two Villains, whose false Oaths prevailed
Before my perfect Honour, swore to Cymbeline,
I was Confederate with the Romans: so
Followed my Banishment, and this twenty years,
This Rock, and these Demesnes, have been my World,
Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
More pious debts to Heaven, then in all
The fore-end of my time. But, up to ' th' Mountains,
This is not Hunter's Language; he that strikes
The Venison first, shall be the Lord o' th' Feast,
To him the other two shall minister,
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater State:
I'll meet you in the Valleys.
How hard it is to hide the sparks of Nature?
These Boys know little they are Sons to ' th' King,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine,
And though trained up thus meanly
I' th' Cave, whereon the Bow their thoughts do hit,
The Roofs of Palaces, and Nature prompts them
In simple and low things, to Prince it, much
Beyond the trick of others. This Paladour,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The King his Father called Guiderius. Ioue,
When on my three-foot stool I sit, and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my Story: say thus mine Enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on's neck, even than
The Princely blood flows in his Cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young Nerves, and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger Brother Cadwall,
Once Aruiragus, in as like a figure
Strikes life into my speech, and shows much more
His own conceiving. Hark, the Game is roused,
Oh Cymbeline, Heaven and my Conscience knows
Thou didd'st unjustly banish me: whereon
At three, and two years old, I stole these Babes,
Thinking to bar thee of Succession, as
Thou refts me of my Lands. Euriphile,
Thou was't their Nurse, they took thee for their mother,
And every day do honour to her grave:
Myself Belarius, that am Mergan called
They take for Natural Father. The Game is up.
Thou told'st me when we came from horse, the place
Was near at hand: ne'er longed my Mother so
To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio, Man:
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
From th' inward of thee? One, but painted thus
Would be interpreted a thing perplexed
Beyond selfe-explication. Put thyself
Into a hauiour of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my staider Senses. What's the matter?
Why tenderest thou that Paper to me, with
A look untender? If't be Summer News
Smile too't before: if Winterly, thou needest
But keep that countenance still. My Husband's hand?
That Drug-damned Italy, hath out-craftied him,
And he's at some hard point. Speak man, thy Tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.
Please you read,
And you shall find me (wretched man) a thing
The most disdained of Fortune.
THy Mistress (Pisanio) hath played the Strumpet in my Bed: the Testimonies whereof, lies bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak Surmises, but from proof as strong as my grief, and as certain as I expect my Revenge. That part, thou (Pisanio) must act for me, if thy Faith be not tainted with the breach of hers; let thine own hands take away her life: I shall give thee opportunity at Milford Haven. She hath my Letter for the purpose; where, if thou fear to strike, and to make me certain it is done, thou art the Pander to her dishonour, and equally to me disloyal.
What shall I need to draw my Sword, the Paper
Hath cut her throat already? No, 'tis Slander,
Whose edge is sharper than the Sword, whose tongue
Out-venomes all the Worms of Nile, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds, and doth belie
All corners of the World. Kings, Queens, and States,
Maids, Matrons, nay the Secrets of the Grave
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, Madam?
False to his Bed? What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge Nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him,
And cry myself awake? That's false to's bed? Is it?
Alas good Lady.
I false? Thy Conscience witness: Iachimo,
Thou didd'st accuse him of Incontinency,
Thou then look'dst like a Villain: now, me thinks
Thy favours good enough. Some jay of Italy
(Whose mother was her painting) hath betrayed him:
Poor I am stolen, a Garment out of fashion,
And for I am richer than to hang by th' walls,
I must be ripped: To pieces with me: Oh!
men's Vows are women's Traitors. All good seeming
By thy revolt (of Husband) shall be thought
Put on for Villainy; not borne where't grows,
But worn a Bait for Ladies.
Good Madam, hear me.
True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas,
Were in his time thought false: and Sinon's weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear: took pity
From most true wretchedness. So thou, Posthumus
Wilt lay the Leaven on all proper men;
Goodly, and gallant, shall be false and perjured
From thy great fail: Come Fellow, be thou honest,
Do thou thy Master's bidding. When thou seest him,
A little witness my obedience. Look
I draw the Sword myself, take it, and hit
The innocent Mansion of my Love (my Heart:)
Fear not, 'tis empty of all things, but Grief:
Thy Master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it. Do his bidding, strike,
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause;
But now thou seem'st a Coward.
Hence vile Instrument,
Thou shalt not damn my hand.
Why, I must dye:
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No Servant of thy Masters. Against Selfe-slaughter,
There is a prohibition so Divine,
That cravens my weak hand: Come, here's my heart:
Something's afoot: Soft, soft, we'll no defence,
Obedient as the Scabbard. What is here,
The Scriptures of the Loyal Leonatus,
All turned to Heresy? Away, away
Corrupters of my Faith, you shall no more
Be Stomachers to my heart: thus may poor Fools
Believe false Teachers: Though those that are betrayed
Do feel the Treason sharply, yet the Traitor
S in worse case of woe. And thou Posthumus,
That didd'st set up my disobedience 'gainst the King
My Father, and makes me put into contempt the suits
Of Princely Fellows, shalt hereafter find
It is no act of common passage, but
A strain of Rareness: and I grieve myself,
To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her,
That now thou tyreft on, how thy memory
Will then be panged by me. Prithee dispatch,
The Lamb entreats the Butcher. where's thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy Master's bidding
When I desire it too.
Oh gracious Lady:
Since I received command to do this business,
I have not slept one wink.
Do't, and to bed then.
I'll wake mine eyeballs first.
Wherefore then
Didd'st undertake it? Why hast thou abused
So many Miles, with a pretence? This place?
Mine Action? and thine own? Our Horse's labour?
The Time inviting thee? The perturbed Court
For my being absent? whereunto I never
Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far
To be un-bent? when thou hast 'tane thy stand,
Th' elected Deer before thee?
But to win time
To lose so bad employment, in the which
I have considered of a course: good Lady
Hear me with patience.
Talk thy tongue weary, speak:
I have heard I am a Strumpet, and mine ear
Therein false strooke, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent, to bottom that. But speak.
Then Madam,
I thought you would not back again.
Most like,
Bringing me here to kill me.
Not so neither:
But if I were as wise, as honest, than
My purpose would prove well: it cannot be,
But that my Master is abused. Some Villain,
I, and singular in his Art, hath done you both
This cursed injury.
Some Roman Courtesan?
No, on my life:
I'll give but notice you are dead, and send him
Some bloody sign of it. For 'tis commanded
I should do so: you shall be missed at Court,
And that will well confirm it.
Why good Fellow,
What shall I do the while? Where bide? How live?
Or in my life, what comfort, when I am
Dead to my Husband?
If you'll backe to ' th' Court.
No Court, no Father, nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing:
That Clotten, whose Love-suite hath been to me
As fearful as a Siege.
If not at Court,
Than not in Britain must you bide.
Where then?
Hath Britain all the Sun that shines? Day? Night?
Are they not but in Britain? I' th' world's Volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in't:
In a great Pool, a Swannes-nest, prithee think
There's livers out of Britain.
I am most glad
You think of other place: Th' Ambassador,
Lucius the Roman comes to Milford-haven
To morrow. Now, if you could wear a mind
Dark, as your Fortune is, and but disguise
That which t'appear itself, must not yet be,
But by selfe-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty, and full of view: yea, happily, near
The residence of Posthumus; so nigh (at least)
That though his Actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear,
As truly as he moves.
Oh for such means,
Though peril to my modesty, not death on't
I would adventure.
Well then, here's the point:
You must forget to be a Woman: change
Command, into obedience. Fear, and Niceness
(The Handmaids of all Women, or more truly
Woman it pretty self) into a waggish courage,
Ready in gybes, quicke-answered, saucy, and
As quarrelous as the Weasel: Nay, you must
Forget that rarest Treasure of your Cheek,
Exposing it (but oh the harder heart,
Alack no remedy) to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan: and forget
Your laboursome and dainty Trimmes, wherein
You made great Iuno angry.
Nay be brief?
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already.
First, make yourself but like one,
Forthinking this. I have already fit
('Tis in my Cloak-bag) Doublet, Hat, Hose, all
That answer to them: Would you in their serving,
(And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season) 'fore Noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service: tell him
Wherein you're happy; which will make him know,
If that his head have ear in Music, doubtless
With joy he will embrace you: for he's Honourable,
And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad:
You have me rich, and I will never fail
Beginning, nor supplement.
Thou art all the comfort
The Gods will diet me with. Prithee away,
There's more to be considered: but we'll even
All that good time will give us. This attempt,
I am Soldier too, and will abide it with
A Prince's Courage. Away, I prithee.
Well Madam, we must take a short farewell,
Lest being missed, I be suspected of
Your carriage from the Court. My Noble Mistress,
here is a box, I had it from the Queen,
What's in't is precious: If you are sick at Sea,
Or Stomacke-qualmed at Land, a Dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your Manhood: may the Gods
Direct you to the best.
Amen: I thank thee.
Thus far, and so far well.
Thanks, Royal Sir:
My Emperor hath wrote, I must from hence,
And am right sorry, that I must report ye
My Master's Enemy.
Our Subjects (Sir)
Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself
To show less Sovereignty than they, must needs
Appear un-kinglike.
So Sir: I desire of you
A Conduct over Land, to Milford-haven.
Madam, all joy befall your Grace, and you.
My Lords, you are appointed for that Office:
The due of Honour, in no point omit:
So farewell Noble Lucius.
Your hand, my Lord.
Receive it friendly: but from this time forth
I wear it as your Enemy.
Sir, the Event
Is yet to name the winner. Far you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my Lords
Till he have crossed the Seuern. Happiness.
He goes hence frowning: but it honours us
That we have given him cause.
'Tis all the better,
Your valiant Britain's have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the Emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our Chariots, and our Horsemen be in readiness:
The Powers that he already hath in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.
'Tis not sleepy business,
But must be looked too speedily, and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But my gentle Queen,
Where is our Daughter? She hath not appeared
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tendered
The duty of the day. She look us like
A thing more made of malice, then of duty,
We have noted it. Call her before us, for
We have been too slight in sufferance.
Royal Sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life been: the Cure whereof, my Lord.
'Tis time must do. Beseech your Majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her. she's a Lady
So tender of rebukes, that words are stroke;,
And strokes death to her.
Where is she Sir? How
Can her contempt be answered?
Please you Sir,
Her Chambers are all locked, and there's no answer
That will be given to ' th' loud of noise, we make.
My Lord, when last I went to visit her,
She prayed me to excuse her keeping close,
Whereto constrained by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaide to you
Which daily she was bound to proffer: this
She wished me to make known: but our great Court
Made me too blame in memory.
Her doors locked?
Not seen of late? Grant Heavens, that which I
Fear, prove false.
Son, I say, follow the King.
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old Servant
I have not seen these two days.
Go, look after:
Pisanio, thou that standest so for Posthumus,
He hath a Drugge of mine: I pray, his absence
Proceed by swallowing that. For he believes
It is a thing most precious. But for her,
Where is she gone? Haply despair hath seized her:
Or winged with fervour of her love, she's flown
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is,
To death, or to dishonour, and my end
Can make good use of either. She being down,
I have the placing of the British Crown.
How now, my Son?
'Tis certain she is fled:
Go in and cheer the King, he rages, none
Dare come about him.
All the better: may
This night forestall him of the coming day.
I love, and hate her: for she's Fair and Royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than Lady, Ladies', Woman, from every one
The best she hath, and she of all compounded
Out-selles them all. I love her therefore, but
Disdaining me, and throwing Favours on
The low Posthumus, slanders so her judgement,
That what's else rare, is choked: and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For, when Fools shall—
Who is here? What, are you packing sirrah?
Come hither: Ah you precious Pander, Villain,
Where is thy Lady? In a word, or else
Thou art straightway with the Fiends.
Oh, good my Lord.
Where is thy Lady? Or, by Iupiter,
I will not ask again. Close Villain,
I'll have this Secret from thy heart, or rip
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many weights of baseness, cannot
A dram of worth be drawn.
Alas, my Lord,
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
He is in Rome.
Where is she Sir? Come nearer:
No farther halting: satisfy me home,
What is become of her?
Oh, my allworthy Lord.
Allworthy Villain,
Discover where thy Mistress is, at once,
At the next word: no more of worthy Lord:
Speak, or thy silence on the instant, is
Thy condemnation, and thy death.
Then Sir:
This Paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.
Let's see't: I will pursue her
Even to Augustus' Throne.
Or this, or perish.
She's far enough, and what he learns by this,
May prove his travel, not her danger.
Humh.
I'll write to my Lord she's dead: Oh Imogen,
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again.
Sirrah, is this Letter true?
Sir, as I think.
It is Posthumus hand, I know't. Sirrah, if thou wouldst not be a Villain, but do me true service: undergo those Employments wherein I should have cause to use thee with a serious industry, that is, what villainy soe'er I bid thee do to perform it, directly and truly, I would think thee an honest man: thou shouldst neither want my means for thy relief, nor my voice for thy preferment.
Well, my good Lord.
Wilt thou serve me? For since patiently and constantly thou hast stuck to the bare Fortune of that Beggar Posthumus, thou canst not in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower of mine. Wilt thou serve me?
Sir, I will.
Give me thy hand, here's my purse. Hast any of thy late Master's Garments in thy possession?
I have (my Lord) at my Lodging, the same Suit he wore, when he took leave of my Lady & Mistress.
The first service thou dost me, fetch that Suit hither, let it be thy first service, go.
I shall my Lord.
Meet thee at Milford-haven: (I forgot to ask him one thing, I'll remembered anon:) even there, thou villain Posthumus will I kill thee. I would these Garments were come. She said upon a time (the bitterness of it, I now belch from my heart) that she held the very Garment of Posthumus, in more respect, than my Noble and natural person; together with the adornment of my Qualities. With that Suit upon my back will I ravish her: first kill him, and in her eyes; there shall she see my valour, which will then be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground, my speech of insulment ended on his dead body, and when my Lust hath dined (which as I say, to vex her, I will execute in the clothes that she so praised:) to the Court I'll knock her back, foot her home again. She hath despised me rejoicingl, and I'll be merry in my Revenge.
Be those the Garments?
I, my Noble Lord.
How long is't since she went to Milford-haven?
She can scarce be there yet.
Bring this Apparel to my Chamber, that is the second thing that I have commanded thee. The third is, that thou wilt be a voluntary Mute to my design. Be but duteous, and true preferment shall render itself to thee. My Revenge is now at Milford, would I had wings to follow it. Come, and be true.
Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee,
Were to prove false, which I will never be
To him that is most true. To Milford go,
And find not her, whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow
You Heavenly blessings on her: This Fool's speed
Be crossed with slowness; Labour be his meede.
I see a man's life is a tedious one,
I have tired myself: and for two nights together
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick,
But that my resolution helps me: Milford,
When from the Mountain top, Pisanio showed thee,
Thou was't within a ken. Oh Ioue, I think
Foundations fly the wretched: such I mean,
Where they should be relieved. Two Beggars told me,
I could not miss my way. Will poor Folks lie
That have Afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
A punishment, or Trial? Yes; no wonder,
When Rich-ones scarce tell true. To lapse in Fullness
Is sorer, then to lie for Need: and Falshood
Is worse in Kings, than Beggars. My dear Lord,
Thou art one o' th' false Ones: Now I think on thee,
My hunger's go; but even before, I was
At point to sink, for Food. But what is this?
here is a path too't: 'tis some savage hold:
I were best not call; I dare not call: yet Famine
Ere clean it overthrow Nature, makes it valiant.
Plenty, and Peace breeds Cowards: Hardness ever
Of Hardiness is Mother. Hoa? who's here?
If any thing that's civil, speak: if savage,
Take, or lend. Hoa? No answer? Then I'll enter.
Best draw my Sword; and if mine Enemy
But fear the Sword like me, he'll scarcely look on't.
Such a Foe, good Heavens.
You Polidore have proved best Woodman, and
Are Master of the Feast: Cadwall, and I
Will play the Cook, and Servant, 'tis our match:
The sweat of industry would dry, and dye
But for the end it works too. Come, our stomachs
Will make what's homely, savoury: Weariness
Can snore upon the Flint, when resty Sloth
Finds the Downe-pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Poor house, that keep'st thyself.
I am throughly weary.
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.
There is cold meat i' th' Cave, we'll brouz on that
Whilst what we have killed, be Cooked.
Stay, come not in:
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
here were a Fairy.
What's the matter, Sir?
By Iupiter an Angel: or if not
An earthly Paragon. Behold Divinenesse
No elder than a Boy.
Good masters harm me not:
Before I entered here, I called, and thought
To have begged, or bought, what I have took: good troth
I have stolen nought, nor would not, though I had found
Gold strewed i' th' Floor. here's money for my Meat,
I would have left it on the Board, so soon
As I had made my Meal; and parted
With Prayers for the Provider.
Money? Youth.
All Gold and Silver rather turn to dirt,
As 'tis no better reckoned, but of those
Who worship dirty Gods.
I see you're angry:
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died, had I not made it.
Whether bound?
To Milford-haven.
What's your name?
Fidele Sir: I have a Kinsman, who
Is bound for Italy; he embarked at Milford,
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fall'n in this offence.
Prithee (fair youth)
Think us no Churls: nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encountered,
'Tis almost night, you shall have better cheer
E'er you depart; and thankes to stay, and eat it.
Boys, bid him welcome.
Were you a woman, youth,
I should woe hard, but be your Groom in honesty:
I bid for you, as I do buy.
I'll make't my Comfort
He is a man, I'll love him as my Brother:
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
(After long absence) such is yours. Most welcome:
Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst Friends.
'Mongst Friends?
If Brothers: would it had been so, that they
Had been my Father's Sons, than had my prize
Been less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee Posthumus.
He wrings at some distress.
Would I could freeed.
Or I, what ere it be,
What pain it cost, what danger: Gods!
Hark Boys.
Great men
That had a Court no bigger than this Cave,
That did attend themselves, and had the virtue
Which their own Conscience sealed them: laying by
That nothing-guift of differing Multitudes
Can not out-peere these twain. Pardon me Gods,
I'd change my sex to be Companion with them,
Since Leonatus false.
It shall be so:
Boys we'll go dress our Hunt. Fair youth come in;
Discourse is heavy, fasting: when we have supped
we'll mannerly demand thee of thy Story,
So far as thou wilt speak it.
Pray draw near.
The Night to ' th' Owl,
And Morn to th' Lark less welcome.
Thanks Sir.
I pray draw near.
This is the tenor of the Emperor's Writ;
That since the common men are now in Action
'Gainst the Pannonians, and Dalmatians,
And that the Legions now in Gallia, are
Full weak to undertake our Wars against
The falne-off Britain's, that we do incite
The Gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius Pro-Consull: and to you the Tribunes
For this immediate Levy, he commands
His absolute Commission. Long live Caesar.
Is Lucius General of the Forces?
I.
Remaining now in Gallia?
With those Legions
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be suppliant: the words of your Commission
Will tie you to the numbers, and the time
Of their dispatch.
We will discharge our duty.
I am near to ' th' place where they should meet, if Pisanio have mapped it truly. How fit his Garments serve me? Why should his Mistress who was made by him that made the Tailor, not be fit too? The rather (saving reverence of the Word) for 'tis said a Woman's fitness comes by fits: therein I must play the Workman, I dare speak it to myself, for it is not Vainglory for a man, and his Glass, to confer in his own Chamber; I mean, the Lines of my body are as well drawn as his; no less young, more strong, not beneath him in Fortunes, beyond him in the advantage of the time, above him in Birth, alike conversant in general services, and more remarkable in single oppositions; yet this imperseverant Thing loves him in my despite. What Mortality is? Posthumus, thy head (which now is growing upon thy shoulders) shall within this hour be off, thy Mistress enforced, thy Garments cut to pieces before thy face: and all this done, spurn her home to her Father, who may (happily) be a little angry for my so rough usage: but my Mother having power of his testiness, shall turn all into my commendations. My Horse is tied up safe, out Sword, and to a sore purpose: Fortune put them into my hand: This is the very description of their meeting place and the Fellow dares not deceive me.
You are not well: Remain here in the Cave,
we'll come to you after Hunting.
Brother, stay here:
Are we not Brothers?
So man and man should be,
But Clay and Clay, differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick,
Go you to Hunting, I'll abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well:
But not so Citizen a wanton, as
To seem to dye, ere sick: So please you, leave me,
Stick to your journal course: the breach of Custom,
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me. Society, is no comfort
To one not sociable: I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it: pray you trust me here,
I'll rob none but myself, and let me dye
Stealing so poorly.
I love thee: I have spoke it,
How much the quantity, the weight as much,
As I do love my Father.
What? How? how?
If it be sin to say so (Sir) I yoke me
In my good Brother's fault: I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say,
love's reason's, without reason. The Beer at door,
And a demand who is't shall dye, I'd say
My Father, not this youth.
Oh noble strain!
O worthiness of Nature, breed of Greatness!
Cowards father Cowards, & Base things Sire Base;
Nature hath Meal, and Bran; Contempt, and Grace.
I'm not their Father, yet who this should be,
Doth miracle itself, loved before me.
'Tis the ninth hour o' th' Morn.
Brother, farewell.
I wish ye sport.
You health.— So please you Sir.
These are kind Creatures.
Gods, what lies I have heard:
Our Courtiers say, all's savage, but at Court;
Experience, oh thou disproou'st Report.
Th' imperious Seas breeds Monsters; for the Dish,
Poor Tributary Rivers, as sweet Fish:
I am sick still, heartsick; Pisanio,
I'll now taste of thy Drugge.
I could not stir him:
He said he was gentle, but unfortunate;
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.
Thus did he answer me: yet said hereafter,
I might know more.
To ' th' Field, to ' th' Field:
we'll leave you for this time, go in, and rest.
we'll not be long away.
Pray be not sick,
For you must be our Huswife.
Well, or ill.
I am bound to you.
And shalt be ever.
This youth, how ere distressed, appears he hath had
Good Ancestors.
How Angel-like he sings?
But his neat Cookery?
He cut our Roots in Characters,
And sawc'st our Broths, as Iuno had been sick,
And he her Dieter.
Nobly he yokes
A smiling, with a sigh; as if the sigh
Was that it was, for not being such a Smile:
The Smile, mocking the Sigh, that it would fly
From so divine a Temple, to commix
With winds, that Saylors rail at.
I do note,
That grief and patience rooted in them both,
Mingle their spurs together.
Grow patiented,
And let the stinking-Elder (Grief) untwine
His perishing root, with the increasing Vine.
It is great morning. Come away: Who's there?
I cannot find those Runagates, that Villain
Hath mocked me. I am faint.
Those Runagates?
Means he not us? I partly know him, 'tis
Cloten, the Son o' th' Queen. I fear some Ambush:
I saw him not these many years, and yet
I know 'tis he: We are held as Outlaws: Hence.
He is but one: you, and my Brother search
What Companies are near: pray you away,
Let me alone with him.
Soft, what are you
That fly me thus? Some villaine-Mountainers?
I have heard of such. What Slave art thou?
A thing.
More slavish did I ne'er, then answering
A Slave without a knock.
Thou art a Robber,
A Lawbreaker, a Villain: yield thee Thief.
To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? A heart, as big:
Thy words I grant are bigger: for I wear not
My Dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art:
Why I should yield to thee?
Thou Villain base,
knowst me not by my clothes?
No, nor thy Tailor, Rascal:
Who is thy Grandfather? He made those clothes,
Which (as it seems) make thee.
Thou precious Varlet,
My Tailor made them not.
Hence then, and thank
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some Fool,
I am loath to beat thee.
Thou injurious Thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.
What's thy name?
Cloten, thou Villain.
Cloten, thou double Villain be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it, were it Toad, or Adder, Spider,
'Twould move me sooner.
To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere Confusion, thou shalt know
I am Son to ' th' Queen.
I am sorry for it: not seeming
So worthy as thy Birth.
Art not afeard?
Those that I reverence, those I fear: the Wise:
At Fools I laugh: not fear them.
die the death:
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
I'll follow those that even now fled hence:
And on the Gates of Luds-Towne set your heads:
Yield Rustic Mountaineer.
No company's abroad?
None in the world: you did mistake him sure.
I cannot tell: Long is it since I saw him,
But Time hath nothing blurred those lines of Favour
Which then he wore: the snatches in his voice,
And burst of speaking were as his: I am absolute
'Twas very Cloten.
In this place we left them;
I wish my Brother make good time with him,
You say he is so fell.
Being scarce made up,
I mean to man; he had not apprehension
Of roaring terrors: For defect of judgement
Is oft the cause of Fear.
But see thy Brother.
This Cloten was a Fool, an empty purse,
There was no money in't: Not Hercules
Can have knocked out his Brains, for he had none:
Yet I not doing this, the Fool had borne
My head, as I do his.
What hast thou done?
I am perfect what: cut off one Clotens head,
Son to the Queen (after his own report)
Who called me Traitor, Mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand heeled take us in,
Displace our heads, where (thanks the Gods) they grow
And set them on Luds-Towne.
We are all undone.
Why, worthy Father, what have we to lose,
But that he swore to take, our Lives? the Law
Protects not us, then why should we be tender,
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us?
Play judge, and Executioner, all himself?
For we do fear the Law. What company
Discover you abroad?
No single soul
Can we set eye on: but in all safe reason
He must have some Attendants. Though his Honour
Was nothing but mutation, I, and that
From one bad thing to worse: Not Frenzy,
Not absolute madness could so far have raved
To bring him here alone: although perhaps
It may be heard at Court, that such as we
Cave here, hunt here, are Outlaws, and in time
May make some stronger head, the which he hearing,
(As it is like him) might break out, and swear
Heeled fetch us in, yet is't not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking,
Or they so suffering: then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this Body hath a tail
More perilous than the head.
Let Ordinance
Come as the Gods foresay it: howsoe'er,
My Brother hath done well.
I had no mind
To hunt this day: The Boy Fideles sickness
Did make my way long forth.
With his own Sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en
His head from him: I'll throw it into the Creek
Behind our Rock, and let it to the Sea,
And tell the Fishes, he's the Queen's Son, Cloten,
That's all I reak.
I fear 'twill be revenged:
Would (Polidore) thou hadst not done it: though valour
Becomes thee well enough.
Would I had done it:
So the Revenge alone pursued me: Polidore
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou hast robbed me of this deed: I would Revenges
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through
And put us to our answer.
Well, 'tis done:
we'll hunt no more to day, nor seek for danger
Where there's no profit. I prithee to our Rock,
You and Fidele play the Cooks: I'll stay
Till hasty Polidore return, and bring him
To dinner presently.
Poor sick Fidele.
I'll willingly to him, to gain his colour,
I'd let a parish of such Cloten's blood,
And praise myself for charity.
Oh thou Goddess,
Thou divine Nature; thou thyself thou blazonest
In these two Princely Boys: they are as gentle
As Zephyr's blowing below the Violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet, as rough
(Their Royal blood enchafed) as the rud'st wind,
That by the top doth take the Mountain Pine,
And make him stoop to th' Vale. 'Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To Royalty unlearned, Honour untaught,
Civility not seen from other: valour
That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
As if it had been sewed: yet still it's strange
What Cloten's being here to us portends,
Or what his death will bring us.
Where's my Brother?
I have sent Clotens Clot-pole down the stream,
In Embassy to his Mother; his body's hostage
For his return.
My ingenuous Instrument,
(Hark Polidore) it sounds: but what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark.
Is he at home?
He went hence even now.
What does he mean?
Since death of my dearest Mother
It did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn Accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing, and lamenting Toys,
Is jollity for Apes, and grief for Boys.
Is Cadwall mad?
Look, here he comes,
And brings the dire occasion in his Arms,
Of what we blame him for.
The Bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipped from sixteen years of Age, to sixty:
To have turned my leaping time into a Crutch,
Then have seen this.
Oh sweetest, fairest Lily:
My Brother wears thee not the one half so well,
As when thou grew'st thyself.
Oh Melancholy,
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? Find
The Ooze, to show what Coast thy sluggish care
Mightst easilest harbour in. Thou blessed thing,
Ioue knows what man thou mightst have made: but I,
Thou dyed'st a most rare Boy, of Melancholy.
How found you him?
Stark, as you see:
Thus smiling, as some Fly had tickled slumber,
Not as deaths dart being laughed at: his right Cheek
Reposing on a Cushion.
Where?
O' th' floor:
His arms thus leagued, I thought he slept, and put
My clouted Brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answered my steps too loud.
Why, he but sleeps:
If he be gone, he'll make his Grave, a Bed:
With female Fairies will his Tomb be haunted,
And Worms will not come to thee.
With fairest Flowers
Whilst Summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele,
I'll sweeten thy sad grave: thou shalt not lack
The Flower that's like thy face. Pale-Primrose, nor
The azured Harebell, like thy Veins: no, nor
The leaf of Eglantine, whom not to slander,
Out-sweetned not thy breath: the Raddocke would
With Charitable bill (Oh bill sore shaming
Those rich-left-heyres, that let their Father's lie
Without a Monument) bring thee all this,
Yea, and furred Moss besides. When Flowers are none
To winter-ground thy Coarse—
Prithee have done,
And do not play in Wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let us bury him,
And not protract with admiration, what
Is now due debt. To ' th' grave.
Say, where shall's lay him?
By good Euriphile, our Mother.
Be't so:
And let us (Polidore) though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to ' th' ground
As once to our Mother: use like note, and words,
Save that Euriphile, must be Fidele.
Cadwall,
I cannot sing: I'll weep, and word it with thee;
For Notes of sorrow, out of tune, are worse
Than Priests, and Phanes that lie.
we'll speak it then.
Great griefs I see medicine the less: For Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a Queen's Son, Boys,
And though he came our Enemy remember
He was paid for that: though mean, and mighty rotting
Together have one dust, yet Reverence
(That Angel of the world) doth make distinction
Of place between high, and low. Our Foe was Princely,
And though you took his life, as being our Foe,
Yet bury him, as a Prince.
Pray you fetch him hither,
Thersites body is as good as Aiax,
When neither are alive.
If you'll go fetch him,
we'll say our Song the whilst: Brother begin.
Nay Cadwall, we must lay his head to ' th' East,
My Father hath a reason for it.
'Tis true.
Come on then, and remove him.
So, begin.
Fear no more the heat o' th' Sun,
Nor the furious Winter's rages,
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages.
Golden Lads, and Girls all must,
As Chimneysweepers come to dust.
Fear no more the frown o' th' Great,
Thou art passed the Tyrant's stroke,
Care no more to cloth and eat,
To thee the Reed is as the Oak:
The Sceptre, Learning, Physic must,
All follow this and come to dust.
Fear no more the Lightning flash.
Nor th' all-dreaded Thunder-stone.
Fear not Slander, Censure rash.
Thou hast finished joy and moan.
All Lovers young, all Lovers must,
Consign to thee and come to dust.
No Exorcisor harm thee,
Nor no witchcraft charm thee.
Ghost unlaid forbear thee.
Nothing ill come near thee.
Quiet consummation have,
And renowned be thy grave.
We have done our obsequies:
Come lay him down.
here's a few Flowers, but 'bout midnight more:
The herbs that have on them cold dew o' th' night
Are strew firest for Graves: upon their Faces.
You were as Flowers, now withered: even so
These Herbelets shall, which we upon you strew.
Come on, away, apart upon our knees:
The ground that gave them first, has them again:
Their pleasures here are past, so are their pain.
Yes Sir, to Milford-haven, which is the way?
I thank you: by yond bush? pray how far thither?
'Ods pittikins: can it be six mile yet?
I have gone all night: I'faith, I'll lie down, and sleep.
But soft; no Bedfellow? Oh Gods, and Goddesses!
These Flowers are like the pleasures of the World;
This bloody man the care on't. I hope I dream:
For so I thought I was a Cave-keeper,
And Cook to honest Creatures. But 'tis not so:
'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the Brain makes of Fumes. Our very eyes,
Are sometimes like our judgements, blind. Good faith
I tremble still with fear: but if there be
Yet left in Heaven, as small a drop of pity
As a Wrens eye; feared Gods, a part of it.
The dream's here still: even when I wake it is
Without me, as within me: not imagined, felt.
A headless man? The Garments of Posthumus?
I know the shape of is Leg: this is his Hand:
His Foot Mercurial: his martial Thigh
The brawns of Hercules: but his jovial face—
Murder in heaven? How? 'tis gone. Pisanio,
All Curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
All mine to boot, be darted on thee: thou
Conspired with that Irregulous devil Cloten,
Hath here cut off my Lord. To write, and read,
Be henceforth treacherous. Damned Pisanio,
Hath with his forged Letters (damned Pisanio)
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Struck the main top! Oh Posthumus, alas,
Where is thy head? where's that? Ay me! where's that?
Pisanio might have killed thee at the heart,
And left this head on. How should this be, Pisanio?
'Tis he, and Cloten: Malice, and Lucre in them
Have laid this Woe here. Oh 'tis pregnant, pregnant!
The Drugge he gave me, which he said was precious
And Cordial to me, have I not found it
murderous to ' th' Senses? That confirms it home:
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten: Oh!
Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us. Oh, my Lord! my Lord!
To them, the Legions garrisoned in Gallia
After your will, have crossed the Sea, attending
You here at Milford-haven, with your Ships:
They are here in readiness.
But what from Rome?
The Senate hath stirred up the Confiners,
And Gentlemen of Italy, most willing Spirits,
That promise Noble Service: and they come
Under the Conduct of bold Iachimo,
Sienna's Brother.
When expect you them?
With the next benefit o' th' wind.
This forwardness
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
Be mustered: bid the Captains look too't. Now Sir,
What have you dreamed of late of this wars purpose.
Last night, the very Gods showed me a vision
(I fast, and prayed for their Intelligence) thus:
I saw Jove's Bird, the Roman Eagle winged
From the spongy South, to this part of the West,
There vanished in the Sunbeams, which portends
(Unless my sins abuse my Divination)
Success to th' Roman host.
Dream often so,
And never false. Soft hoa, what trunk is here?
Without his top? The ruin speaks, that sometime
It was a worthy building. How? a Page?
Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather:
For Nature doth abhor to make his bed
With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.
Let's see the Boy's face.
he's alive my Lord.
he'll then instruct us of this body: Young one,
Inform us of thy Fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded: who is this
Thou makest thy bloody Pillow? Or who was he
That (otherwise then noble Nature did)
Hath altered that good Picture? What's thy interest
In this sad wrack? How cameed? Who is't?
What art thou?
I am nothing; or if not,
Nothing to be were better: This was my Master,
A very valiant Britain, and a good,
That here by Mountaineers lies slain: Alas,
There is no more such Masters: I may wander
From East to Occident, cry out for Service,
Try many, all good: serve truly: never
Find such another Master.
Lack, good youth:
Thou movest no less with thy complaining, than
Thy Master in bleeding: say his name, good Friend.
Richard du Champ: If I do lie, and do
No harm by it, though the Gods hear, I hope
They'll pardon it. Say you Sir?
Thy name?
Fidele Sir.
Thou dost approve thyself the very same:
Thy Name well sits thy Faith; thy Faith, thy Name:
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well mastered, but be sure
No less beloved. The Roman Emperors Letters
Sent by a Consul to me, should not sooner
Then thine own worth prefer thee: Go with me.
I'll follow Sir. But first, and it please the Gods,
I'll hide my Master from the Flies, as deep
As these poor Pickaxes can dig: and when
With wild wood-leaves & weeds, I ha' strewed his grave
And on it said a Century of prayers
(Such as I can) twice o'er, I'll weep, and sigh,
And leaving so his service, follow you,
So please you entertain me.
I good youth,
And rather Father thee, than Master thee: My Friends,
The Boy hath taught us manly duties: Let us
Find out the prettiest Dazied-Plot we can,
And make him with our Pikes and Partisans
A Grave: Come, Athie him: Boy he's preferred
By thee, to us, and he shall be interred
As Soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes,
Some Falls are means the happier to arise.
Again: and bring me word how 'tis with her,
A Favour with the absence of her Son;
A madness, of which her life's in danger: Heavens,
How deeply you at once do touch me. Imogen,
The great part of my comfort, gone: My Queen
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
When fearful Wars point at me: Her Son gone,
So needful for this present? It strikes me, past
The hope of comfort. But for thee, Fellow,
Who needs must know of her departure, and
Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee
By a sharp Torture.
Sir, my life is yours,
I humbly set it at your will: But for my Mistress,
I nothing know where she remains: why gone,
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your Highness,
Hold me your loyal Servant.
Good my Liege,
The day that she was missing, he was here;
I dare be bound he's true, and shall perform
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
And will no doubt be found.
The time is troublesome:
we'll slip you for a season, but our jealousy
Does yet depend.
So please your Majesty,
The Roman Legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your Coast, with a supply
Of Roman Gentlemen, by the Senate sent.
Now for the Counsel of my Son and Queen,
I am amazed with matter.
Good my Liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of. Come more, for more you're ready:
The want is, but to put those Powers in motion,
That long to move.
I thank you: let's withdraw
And meet the Time, as it seeks us. We fear not
What can from Italy annoy us, but
We grieve at chances here. Away.
I heard no Letter from my Master, since
I wrote him Imogen was slain. 'Tis strange:
Nor hear I from my Mistress, who did promise
To yield me often tidings. Neither know I
What is betide to Cloten, but remain
Perplexed in all. The Heavens still must work:
Wherein I am false, I am honest: not true, to be true.
These present wars shall find I love my Country,
Even to the note o' th' King, or I'll fall in them:
All other doubts, by time let them be cleared,
Fortune brings in some Boats, that are not steered.
The noise is round about us.
Let us from it.
What pleasure Sir, we find in life, to lock it
From Action, and Adventure.
Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us? This way the Romans'
Must, or for Britain's slay us or receive us
For barbarous and unnatural Revolts
During their use, and slay us after.
Sons,
Wee'l higher to the Mountaines, there secure v▪
To the King's party there's no going: newness
Of Clotens death (we being not known, not mustered
Among the Bands) may drive us to a render
Where we have lived; and so extort from's that
Which we have done, whose answer would be death
Drawn on with Torture.
This is (Sir) a doubt
In such a time, nothing becoming you,
Nor satisfying us.
It is not likely,
That when they hear their Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quartered Fires; have both their eyes
And ears so cloyed importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.
Oh, I am known
Of many in the Army: Many years
(Though Cloten then but young) you see, not wore him
From my remembrance. And besides, the King
Hath not deserved my Service, nor your Loves,
Who find in my Exile, the want of Breeding;
The certainty of this heard life, aye hopeless
To have the courtesy your Cradle promised,
But to be still hot Summer's Tanlings, and
The shrinking Slaves of Winter.
Then be so,
Better to cease to be. Pray Sir, to ' th' Army:
I, and my Brother are not known; yourself
So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
Cannot be questioned.
By this Sun that shines
I'll thither: What thing is't, that I never
Did see man dye, scarce ever looked on blood,
But that of Coward Hares, hot Goats, and Venison?
Never bestrid a Horse save one, that had
A Rider like myself, who ne'er wore Rowel,
Nor Iron on his heel? I am ashamed
To look upon the holy Sun, to have
The benefit of his blessed Beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.
By heavens I'll go,
If you will bless me Sir, and give me leave,
I'll take the better care: but if you will not,
The hazard therefore due fall on me, by
The hands of Romans'.
So say I, Amen.
No reason I (since of your lives you set
So slight a valewation) should reserve
My cracked one to more care. Have with you Boys:
If in your Country wars you chance to dye,
That is my Bed too (Lads) and there I'll lie.
Led, lead; the time seems long, their blood thinks scorn
Till it fly out, and show them Princes borne.
Yea bloody cloth. I'll keep thee: for I am wished
Thou shouldst be coloured thus. You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder Wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little? Oh Pisanio,
Every good Servant does not all Commands:
No Bond, but to do just ones. Gods, if you
Should have ' ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never
Had lived to put on this: so had you saved
The noble Imogen, to repent, and strooke
Me (wretch) more worth your Vengeance. But alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love
To have them fall no more: you some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers thrift.
But Imogen is your own, do your best wills,
And make me blessed to obey. I am brought hither
Among th' Italian Gentry, and to fight
Against my Lady's Kingdom: 'Tis enough
That (Britain) I have killed thy Mistress: Peace,
I'll give no wound to thee: therefore good Heavens,
Hear patiently my purpose. I'll disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds, and suit myself
As does a Britain Peasant: so I'll fight
Against the part I come with: so I'll dye
For thee (O Imogen) even for whom my life
Is every breath, a death: and thus, unknown,
Pitied, nor hated, to the face of peril
Myself I'll dedicate. Let me make men know
More valour in me, than my habits show.
Gods, put the strength o' th' Leonatis in me:
To shame the guise o' th' world, I will begin,
The fashion less without, and more within.
The heaviness and guilt within my bosom,
Takes off my manhood: I have belied a Lady,
The Princess of this Country; and the air on't
Revengingly enfeebles me, or could this Carl,
A very drudge of Natures, have subdued me
In my profession? Knighthoods, and Honours borne
As I wear mine) are titles but of scorn.
If that thy Gentry (Britain) go before
This Lout, as he exceeds our Lords, the odds
Is, that we scarce are men, and you are Gods.
Stand, stand, we have th' advantage of the ground,
The Lane is guarded: Nothing routs us, but
The villainy of our fears.
Stand, stand, and fight.
Away boy from the Troops, and save thyself:
For friends kill friends, and the disorders such
As war were hood-winked.
'Tis their fresh supplies.
It is a day turned strangely: or betimes
Let's reinforce, or fly.
Cam'st thou from where they made the stand?
I did,
Though you it seems come from the Fliers?
I did.
No blame be to you Sir, for all was lost,
But that the Heavens fought: the King himself
Of his wings destitute, the Army broken,
And but the backs of Britain's seen; all flying
Through a straight Lane, the Enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the Tongue with slaught'ring: having work
More plentiful, than Tools to do't: strooke down
Some mortally, some slightly touched, some falling
Merely through fear, that the straight pass was damned
With deadmen, hurt behind, and Cowards living
To dye with lengthened shame.
Where was this Lane?
Close by the battle, ditched, & walled with turph,
Which gave advantage to an ancient Soldier
(An honest one I warrant) who deserved
So long a breeding, as his white beard came to,
In doing this for's Country. Athwart the Lane,
He, with two striplings (Lads more like to run
The Country base, then to commit such slaughter,
With faces fit for Masks, or rather fairer
Than those for preservation cased, or shame)
Made good the passage, cried to those that fled.
Our Britain's hearts die flying, not our men,
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards; stand,
Or we are Romans, and will give you that
Like beasts, which you shun beastly, and may save
But to look back in frown: Stand, stand. These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many:
For three performers are the File, when all
The rest do nothing. With this word stand, stand,
Accommodated by the Place; more Charming
With their own Nobleness, which could have turned
A Distaff, to a Lance, guilded pale looks;
Part shame, part spirit renewed, that some turned coward
But by example (Oh a sin in War,
Damned in the first beginners) 'gan to look
The way that they did, and to grin like Lions
Upon the Pikes o' th' Hunters. Then began
A stop i' th' Chaser; a Retire: Anon
A Rout, confusion thick: forthwith they fly
Chickens, the way which they stopped Eagles: Slaves
The strides the Victors made: and now our Cowards
Like Fragments in hard Voyages became
The life o' th' need: having found the back door open
Of the unguarded hearts: heavens, how they wound,
Some slain before some dying; some their Friends
O'erborne i' th' former wave, ten chased by one,
Are now each one the slaughterman of twenty:
Those that would dye, or ere resist, are grown
The mortal bugs o' th' Field.
This was strange chance:
A narrow Lane, an old man, and two Boys.
Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear,
Then to work any. Will you Rhyme upon it,
And vent it for a Mock'rie? here is one:
Two Boys, an Oldman (twice a Boy) a Lane,
Preserved the Britain's, was the Romans bane.
Nay, be not angry Sir.
Lack, to what end?
Who dares not stand his Foe, I'll be his Friend:
For if he'll do, as he is made to do,
I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too.
You have put me into Rhyme.
Farewell, you're angry.
Still going? This is a Lord: Oh Noble misery
To be i' th' Field, and ask what news of me:
To day, how many would have given their Honours
To have saved their Carcases? took heel to do't,
And yet died too. I, in mine own woe charmed
Can not find death, where I did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where he strooke. Being an ugly Monster,
'Tis strange he hides him in fresh Cups, soft Beds,
Sweet words; or hath more ministers than we
That draw his knives i' th' War. Well I will find him:
For being now a Favourer to the Britain,
No more a Britain, I have resumed again
The part I came in. Fight I will no more,
But yield me to the veriest Hind, that shall
Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is
here made by ' th' Roman; great the Answer be
Britain's must take. For me; my ransom's death,
On either side I come to spend my breath;
Which neither here I'll keep, nor bear again,
But end it by some means for Imogen.
Great Iupiter be praised, Lucius is taken,
'Tis thought the old man, and his sons, were Angels.
There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,
That gave th' Affront with them.
So 'tis reported:
But none of 'em can be found. Stand, who's there?
A Roman,
Who had not now been drooping here, if Seconds
Had answered him.
Lay hands on him: a Dog,
A leg of Rome shall not return to tell
What Crows have pecked them here: he brags his service
As if he were of note: bring him to ' th' King.
You shall not now be stolen,
You have locks upon you:
So graze, as you find Pasture.
I, or a stomach.
Most welcome bondage; for thou art a way
(I think) to liberty: yet am I better
Than one that's sick o' th' Gout, since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuity, then be cured
By ' th' sure Physician, Death; who is the key
T'vnbarre these Locks. My Conscience, thou art fettered
More than my shanks, & wrists: you good Gods give me
The penitent Instrument to pick that Bolt,
Then free for ever. Is't enough I am sorry?
So Children temporal Fathers do appease;
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent,
I cannot do it better than in Gyves,
Desired, more than constrained, to satisfy
If of my Freedom 'tis the main part, take
No stricter render of me, than my All.
I know you are more clement than vild men,
Who of their broken Debtors take a third,
A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
On their abatement; that's not my desire.
For Imogens dear life, take mine, and though
'Tis not so dear, yet 'tis a life; you coined it,
Between man, and man, they weigh not every stamp:
Though light, take Pieces for the figures sake,
(You rather) mine being yours: and so great Powers,
If you will take this Audit, take this life,
And cancel these cold Bonds. Oh Imogen,
I'll speak to thee in silence.
No more thou Thunder-Master show thy spite on Mortal Flies:
With Mars fall out with Iuno chide, that thy Adulteries Rates, and Revenges.
Hath my poor Boy done ought but well, whose face I never saw:
I died whilst in the Womb he stayed, attending Natures Law.
Whose Father then (as men report, thou Orphans Father art)
Thou shouldst have been, and sheelded him, from this earth-vexing smart.
Lucina lent not me her aid, but took me in my Throws,
That from me was Posthumus ripped, came crying 'mong'st his Foes.
A thing of pity.
Great Nature like his Ancestry, moulded the stuff so fair:
That head served the praise o' th' World, as great Sicilius heir.
When once he was mature for man, in Britain where was he
That could stand up his parallel?
Or fruitful object be?
In eye of Imogen, that best could deem his dignity.
With Marriage wherefore was he mocked to be exiled, and thrown
From Leonatis Seat, and cast from her, his dearest one:
Sweet Imogen?
Why did you suffer Iachimo, slight thing of Italy,
To taint his Nobler hart & brain, with needless jealousy,
And to become the geeke and scorn o' th' others villainy?
For this, from stiller Seats we came, our Parents, and us twain,
That striking in our Country's cause, fell bravely, and were slain,
Our Fealty, & Tenantius right, with Honour to maintain.
Like hardiment Posthumus hath to Cymbeline performed:
Then Iupiter, thou King of Gods, why hast thou thus adiourned
The Graces for his Merits due, being all to dolours turned?
Thy Crystal window open; look, look out, no longer exercise
Upon a valiant Race, thy harsh, and potent injuries:
Since (Iupiter) our Son is good, take off his miseries.
Peep through thy Marble Mansion, help, or we poor Ghosts will cry
To ' th' shining Synod of the rest, against thy Deity.
Help (Iupiter) or we appeal, and from thy justice fly.
No more you petty Spirits of Region low
Offend our hearing: hush. How dare you Ghosts
Accuse the Thunderer, whose Bolt (you know)
Sky-planted, batters all rebelling Coasts.
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
Upon your never-withering banks of Flowers.
Be not with mortal accidents oppressed,
No care of yours it is, you know 'tis ours.
Whom best I love, I cross; to make my gift
The more delayed, delighted. Be content,
Your low-laide Son, our Godhead will uplift:
His Comforts thrive, his Trials well are spent:
Our jovial Star reigned at his Birth, and in
Our Temple was he married: Rise, and fade,
He shall be Lord of Lady Imogen,
And happier much by his Affliction made.
This Tablet lay upon his Breast, wherein
Our pleasure, his full Fortune, doth confine,
And so away: no farther with your din
Express Impatience, lest you stir up mine:
Mount Eagle, to my Palace Crystalline.
He came in Thunder, his Celestial breath
Was sulphurous to smell: the holy Eagle
Stooped, as to foot us: his Ascension is
More sweet than our blessed Fields: his Royal Bird
Prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his Beak,
As when his God is pleased.
Thanks Iupiter.
The Marble Pavement clozes, he is entered
His radiant Roof: Away, and to be blessed
Let us with care perform his great behest.
Sleep, thou hast been a Grandsire, and begot
A Father to me: and thou hest created
A Mother, and two Brothers. But (oh scorn)
Gone, they went hence so soon as they were borne:
And so I am awake. Poor Wretches, that depend
On Greatness, Favour; Dream as I have done,
Wake, and find nothing. But (alas) I swerve:
Many Dream not to find, neither deserve,
And yet are steeped in Favours; so am I
That have this Golden chance, and know not why:
What Fairies haunt this ground? A Book? Oh rare one,
Be not, as is our fangled world, a Garment
Nobler than that it covers. Let thy effects
So follow, to be most unlike our Courtiers,
As good, as promise.
WHen as a Lion's whelp, shall to himself unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of tender Air: And when from a stately Cedar shall be lopped branches, which being dead many years, shall after revive, be jointed to the old Stock, and freshly grow, then shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate, and flourish in Peace and Plenty.
'Tis still a Dream: or else such stuff as Madmen
Tongue, and brain not: either both, or nothing,
Or senseless speaking, or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The Action of my life is like it, which I'll keep
If but for sympathy.
Come Sir, are you ready for death?
Ouer-roasted rather: ready long ago.
Hanging is the word, Sir, if you be ready for that, you are well Cooked.
So if I prove a good repast to the Spectators, the dish pays the shot.
A heavy reckoning for you Sir: But the comfort is you shall be called to no more payments, fear no more Tavern Bills, which are often the sadness of parting, as the procuring of mirth: you come in faint for want of meat, depart reeling with too much drink: sorry that you have paid too much, and sorry that you are paid too much: Purse and Brain, both empty: the Brain the heavier, for being too light; the Purse too light, being drawn of heaviness. Oh, of this contradiction you shall now be quit: Oh the charity of a penny Cord, it sums up thousands in a trice: you have no true Debtor, and Creditor but it: of what's past, is, and to come, the discharge: your neck (Sis) is Pen, Book, and Counters; so the Acquittance follows.
I am merrier to dye, than thou art to live.
Indeed Sir, he that sleeps, feels not the Toothache: but a man that were to sleep your sleep, and a Hangman to help him to bed, I think he would change places with his Officer: for, look you Sir, you know not which way you shall go.
Yes indeed do I, fellow.
Your death has eyes in's head then: I have not seen him so pictured: you must either be directed by some that take upon them to know, or to take upon yourself that which I am sure you do not know: or jump the after-enquiry on your own peril: and how you shall speed in your journey's end, I think you'll never return to tell one.
I tell thee, Fellow, there are none want eyes, to direct them the way I am going, but such as wink, and will not use them.
What an infinite mock is this, that a man should have the best use of eyes, to see the way of blindness: I am sure hangings the way of winking.
Knock off his Manacles, bring your Prisoner to the King.
Thou bring'st good news, I am called to be made free.
I'll be hanged then.
Thou shalt be then freer than a Gaoler; no bolt, for the dead.
Unless a man would marry a Gallows, & beget young Gibbets, I never saw one so prone: yet on my Conscience, there are verier Knaves desire to live, for all he be a Roman; and there be some of them too that dye against their wills; so should I, if I were one. I would we were all of one mind, and one mind good: O there were desolation of Gaolers and Galowses: I speak against my present profit, but my wish hath a preferment in't.
Stand by my side you, whom the Gods have made
Preservers of my Throne: woe is my heart,
That the poor Soldier that so richly fought,
Whose rags, shamed gilded Arms, whose naked breast
Steptf before Targes of proof, cannot be found:
He shall be happy that can find him, if
Our Grace can make him so.
I never saw
Such Noble fury in so poor a Thing;
Such precious deeds, in one that promised nought
But beggary, and poor looks.
No tidings of him?
He hath been searched among the dead, & living;
But no trace of him.
To my grief, I am
The heir of his Reward, which I will add
To you (the Liver, Heart, and Brain of Britain)
By whom (I grant) she lives. 'Tis now the time
To ask of whence you are. Report it.
Sir,
In Cambria are we borne, and Gentlemen:
Further to boast, were neither true, nor modest,
Unless I add, we are honest.
Bow your knees:
Arise my Knights o' th' Battle, I create you
Companions to our person, and will fit you
With Dignities becoming your estates.
There's business in these faces: why so sadly
Greet you our Victory? you look like Romans',
And not o' th' Court of Britain.
Hail great King,
To sour your happiness, I must report
The Queen is dead.
Who worse than a Physician
Would this report become? But I consider,
By Medicine life may be prolonged, yet death
Will seize the Doctor too. How ended she?
With horror, madly dying, like her life,
Which (being cruel to the world) concluded
Most cruel to herself. What she confessed,
I will report, so please you. These her Women
Can trip me, if I err, who with wet cheeks
Were present when she finished.
Prithee say.
First, she confessed she never loved you: only
Affected Greatness got by you: not you:
Married your Royalty, was wife to your place:
Abhorred your person.
She alone knew this:
And but she spoke it dying, I would not
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
With such integrity, she did confess
Was as a Scorpion to her sight, whose life
(But that her flight prevented it) she had
Ta'en off by poison.
O most delicate Fiend!
Who is't can read a Woman? Is there more?
More Sir, and worse. She did confess she had
For you a mortal Mineral, which being took,
Should by the minute feed on life, and lingering,
By inches waste you. In which time, she purposed
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
O'ercome you with her show; and in time
(When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
Her Son into th' adoption of the Crown:
But failing of her end by his strange absence,
Grew shameless desperate, opened (in despite
Of Heaven and Men) her purposes: repent
The evils she hatched, were not effected: so
Despairing, died.
Herd you all this, her Women?
We did, so please your Highness.
Mine eyes
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful:
Mine ears that hear her flattery, nor my heart,
That thought her like her seeming. It had been vicious
To have mistrusted her: yet (Oh my Daughter)
That it was folly in me, thou mayst say,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all.
Thou com'st not Caius now for Tribute, that
The Britain's have razed out, though with the loss
Of many a bold one: whose Kinsmen have made suit
That their good souls may be appeased, with slaughter
Of you their Captives, which ourself have granted,
So think of your estate.
Consider Sir, the chance of War, the day
Was yours by accident: had it gone with us,
We should not when the blood was cool, have threatened
Our Prisoners with the Sword. But since the Gods
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
May be called ransom, let it come: Sufficeth,
A Roman, with a Romans heart can suffer:
Augustus lives to think on't: and so much
For my peculiar care. This one thing only
I will entreat, my Boy (a Britain borne)
Let him be ransomed: Never Master had
A Page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
So tender over his occasions, true,
So feat, so Nurse-like: let his virtue join
With my request, which I'll make bold your Highness
Cannot deny: he hath done no Britain harm,
Though he have served a Roman. Save him (Sir)
And spare no blood beside.
I have surely seen him:
His favour is familiar to me: Boy,
Thou hast looked thyself into my grace,
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore,
To say, live boy: ne'er thank thy Master, live;
And ask of Cymbeline what Boon thou wilt,
Fitting my bounty, and thy state, I'll give it:
Yea, though thou do demand a Prisoner
The Noblest ta'en.
I humbly thank your Highness.
I do not bid thee beg my life, good Lad,
And yet I know thou wilt.
No, no, alack,
There's other work in hand: I see a thing
Bitter to me, as death: your life, good Master,
Must shuffle for itself.
The Boy disdains me,
He leaves me, scorns me: briefly die their joys,
That place them on the truth of Girls, and Boys.
Why stands he so perplexed?
What wouldst thou Boy?
I love thee more, and more: think more and more
What's best to ask. knowst him thou look'st on? speak
Wilt have him live? Is he thy Kin? thy Friend?
He is a Roman, no more kin to me,
Than I to your Highness, who being born your vassal
Am something nearer.
Wherefore ey'st him so?
I'll tell you (Sir) in private, if you please
To give me hearing.
I, with all my heart,
And lend my best attention. What's thy name?
Fidele Sir.
Thou'rt my good youth: my Page
I'll be thy Master: walk with me: speak freely.
Is not this Boy revived from death?
One Sand another
Not more resembles that sweet Rosy Lad:
Who died, and was Fidele: what think you?
The same dead thing alive.
Peace, peace, see further: he eyes us not, forbear
Creatures may be alike: were it he, I am sure
He would have spoke to us.
But we see him dead.
Be silent: let's see further.
It is my Mistress:
Since she is living, let the time run on,
To good, or bad.
Come, stand thou by our side,
Make thy demand aloud. Sir, step you forth,
Give answer to this Boy, and do it freely,
Or by our Greatness, and the grace of it
(Which is our Honour) bitter torture shall
Winnow the truth from falsehood. One speak to him.
My boon is, that this Gentleman may render
Of whom he had this Ring.
What's that to him?
That Diamond upon your Finger, say
How came it yours?
Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken, that
Which to be spoke, would torture thee.
How? me?
I am glad to be constrained to utter that
Which torments me to conceal. By Villainy
I got this Ring; 'twas Leonatus jewel,
Whom thou didst banish: and which more may grieve thee,
As it doth me: a Nobler Sir, ne'er lived
'Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou hear more my Lord?
All that belongs to this.
That Paragon, thy daughter,
For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spirits
Quail to remember. Give me leave, I faint.
My Daughter? what of her? Renew thy strength
I had rather thou shouldst live, while Nature will,
Then die ere I hear more: strive man, and speak.
Upon a time, unhappy was the clock
That strooke the hour: it was in Rome, accursed
The Mansion where: 'twas at a Feast, oh would
Our Viands had been poisoned (or at least
Those which I heaved to head:) the good Posthumus,
(What should I say? he was too good to be
Where ill men were, and was the best of all
Amongst the rarest of good ones) sitting sadly,
Hearing us praise our Loves of Italy
For Beauty, that made barren the swelled boast
Of him that best could speak: for Feature, laming
The Shrine of Venus, or straight-pight Minerva,
Postures, beyond brief Nature. For Condition,
A shop of all the qualities, that man
Loves woman for, besides that hook of Wiving,
Fairness, which strikes the eye.
I stand on fire. Come to the matter.
All too soon I shall,
Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly. This Posthumus,
Most like a Noble Lord, in love, and one
That had a Royal Lover, took his hint,
And (not dispraising whom we praised, therein
He was as calm as virtue) he began
His Mistress picture, which, by his tongue, being made,
And then a mind put in't, either our brags
Were craked of Kitchin-Trulles, or his description
Proved us unspeaking sots.
Nay, nay, to ' th' purpose.
Your daughter's Chastity, (there it begins)
He spoke of her, as Diana had hot dreams,
And she alone, were cold: Whereat, I wretch
Made scruple of his praise, and wagered with him
Pieces of Gold, 'gainst this, which then he wore
Upon his honoured finger) to attain
In suit the place of's bed, and win this Ring
By hers, and mine Adultery: he (true Knight)
No lesser of her Honour confident
Then I did truly find her, stakes this Ring,
And would so, had it been a Carbuncle
Of Phoebus' Wheel; and might so safely, had it
Been all the worth of's Car. Away to Britain
Post I in this design: Well may you (Sir)
Remember me at Court, where I was taught
Of your chaste Daughter, the wide difference
'Twixt Amorous, and Villainous. Being thus quenched
Of hope, not longing; mine Italian brain,
'Gan in your duller Britain operare
Most vildly: for my vantage excellent.
And to be brief, my practice so prevailed
That I returned with simular proof enough,
To make the Noble Leonatus mad,
By wounding his belief in her Renown,
With Tokens thus, and thus: averring notes
Of Chamber-hanging, Pictures, this her Bracelet
(Oh cunning how I got) nay some marks
Of secret on her person, that he could not
But think her bond of Chastity quite cracked,
I having ' ta'en the forfeit. Whereupon,
methinks I see him now.
I so thou dost,
Italian Fiend. Ay me, most credulous Fool,
Egregious murderer, Thief, any thing
That's due to all the Villains past, in being
To come. Oh give me Cord, or knife, or poison,
Some upright justicer. Thou King, send out
For Torturors ingenious: it is I
That all th' abhorred things o' th' earth amend
By being worse than they. I am Posthumus,
That killed thy Daughter: Villain-like, I lie,
That caused a lesser villain than myself,
A sacrilegious Thief to do't. The Temple
Of Virtue was she; yea, and she herself.
Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set
The dogs o' th' street to bay me: every villain
Be called Posthumus Leonatus, and
Be villainy less then 'twas. Oh Imogen!
My Queen, my life, my wife: oh Imogen,
Imogen, Imogen.
Peace my Lord, hear, hear.
Shall's have a play of this?
Thou scornful Page, there lie thy part.
Oh Gentlemen, help,
Mine ' and your Mistress: Oh my Lord Posthumus,
You ne'er killed Imogen till now: help, help,
Mine honoured Lady.
Does the world go round?
How comes these staggers on me?
Wake my Mistress.
If this be so, the Gods do mean to strike me
To death, with mortal joy.
How fares my Mistress?
Oh get thee from my sight,
Thou gav'st me poison: dangerous Fellow hence,
Breath not where Princes are.
The tune of Imogen.
Lady, the Gods throw stones of sulphur on me, if
That box I gave you, was not thought by me
A precious thing, I had it from the Queen.
New matter still.
It poisoned me.
Oh Gods!
I left out one thing which the Queen confessed,
Which must approve thee honest. If Pasanio
Have (said she) given his Mistress that Confection
Which I gave him for Cordial, she is served,
As I would serve a Rat.
What's this, Cornelius?
The Queen (Sir) very oft importuned me
To temper poisons for her, still pretending
The satisfaction of her knowledge, only
In killing Creatures vild, as Cats and Dogs
Of no esteem. I dreading, that her purpose
Was of more danger, did compound for her
A certain stuff, which being ta'en, would cease
The present power of life, but in short time,
All Offices of Nature, should again
Do their due Functions. Have you ta'en of it?
Most like I did, for I was dead.
My Boys, there was our error.
This is sure Fidele.
Why did you throw your wedded Lady fro you?
Think that you are upon a Rock, and now
Throw me again.
Hang there like fruit, my soul,
Till the Tree dye.
How now, my Flesh? my Child?
What, makest thou me a dullard in this Act?
Wilt thou not speak to me?
Your blessing, Sir.
Though you did love this youth, I blame ye not,
You had a motive for't.
My tears that fall
Prove holy-water on thee; Imogen,
Thy Mother's dead.
I am sorry for't, my Lord.
Oh, she was naught; and long of her it was
That we meet here so strangely: but her Son
Is gone, we know not how, nor where.
My Lord,
Now fear is from me, I'll speak troth. Lord Cloten
Upon my Ladies missing, came to me
With his Sword drawn, foamed at the mouth, and swore
If I discovered not which way she was gone,
It was my instant death. By accident,
I had a feigned Letter of my Masters
Then in my pocket, which directed him
To seek her on the Mountains near to Milford,
Where in a frenzy, in my Master's Garments
(Which he enforced from me) away he posts
With unchaste purpose, and with oath to violate
My Lady's honour, what became of him,
I further know not.
Let me end the Story: I slew him there.
Marry, the Gods forefend.
I would not thy good deeds, should from my lips
Pluck a hard sentence: Prithee valiant youth
Deny't again.
I have spoke it, and I did it.
He was a Prince.
A most incivill one. The wrongs he did me
Were nothing Princelike; for he did provoke me
With Language that would make me spurn the Sea,
If it could so roar to me. I cut off's head,
And am right glad he is not standing here
To tell this tale of mine.
I am sorrow for thee:
By thine own tongue thou art condemned, and must
Endure our Law: Thou'rt dead.
That headless man I thought had been my Lord
Bind the Offender,
And take him from our presence.
Stay, Sir King.
This man is better than the man he slew,
As well descended as thyself, and hath
More of thee merited, than a Band of Clotens
Had ever scar for. Let his Arms alone,
They were not borne for bondage.
Why old Soldier:
Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for
By tasting of our wrath? How of descent
As good as we?
In that he spoke too far.
And thou shalt dye for't.
We will dye all three,
But I will prove that two one's are as good
As I have given out him. My Sons, I must
For mine own part, unfold a dangerous speech,
Though haply well for you.
Your danger's ours.
And our good his.
Have at it then, by leave
Thou hadst (great King) a Subject, who
Was called Belarius.
What of him? He is a banished Traitor.
He it is, that hath
Assumed this age: indeed a banished man,
I know not how, a Traitor.
Take him hence,
The whole world shall not save him.
Not too hot;
First pay me for the Nursing of thy Sons,
And let it be confiscate all, so soon
As I have received it.
Nursing of my Sons?
I am too blunt, and saucy: here's my knee:
Ere I arise, I will prefer my Sons,
Then spare not the old Father. Mighty Sir,
These two young Gentlemen that call me Father,
And think they are my Sons, are none of mine,
They are the issue of your Loins, my Liege,
And blood of your begetting.
How? my Issue.
So sure as you, your Fathers: I (old Morgan)
Am that Belarius, whom you sometime banished:
Your pleasure was my near offence, my punishment
Itself, and all my Treason that I suffered,
Was all the harm I did. These gentle Princes
(For such, and so they are) these twenty years
Have I trained up; those Arts they have, as I
Can put into them. My breeding was (Sir)
As your Highness knows: Their Nurse Euriphile
(Whom for the Theft I wedded) stole these Children
Upon my Banishment: I moved her too't,
Having received the punishment before
For that which I did then. Beaten for Loyalty,
Excited me to Treason. Their dear loss,
The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shaped
Unto my end of stealing them. But gracious Sir,
here are your Sons again, and I must lose
Two of the sweetest Companions in the World.
The benediction of these covering Heavens
Fall on their heads licks dew, for they are worthy
To in-lay Heaven with Stars.
Thou weep'st, and speakest:
The Service that you three have done, is more
Unlike, than this thou tell'st. I lost my Children,
If these be they, I know not how to wish
A pair of worthier Sons.
Be pleased awhile;
This Gentleman, whom I call Polidore,
Most worthy Prince, as yours, is true Guiderius:
This Gentleman, my Cadwall, Aruiragus.
Your younger Princely Son, he Sir, was leapt
In a most curious Mantle, wrought by th' hand
Of his Queen Mother, which for more probation
I can with ease produce.
Guiderius had
Upon his neck a Mole, a sanguine Star,
It was a mark of wonder.
This is he,
Who hath upon him still that natural stamp:
It was wise Nature's end, in the donation
To be his evidence now.
Oh, what am I
A Mother to the birth of three? Near Mother
Rejoiced deliverance more: Blessed, pray you be,
That after this strange starting from your Orbs,
You may reign in them now: Oh Imogen,
Thou hast lost by this a Kingdom.
No, my Lord:
I have got two Worlds by't. Oh my gentle Brothers,
Have we thus met? Oh never say hereafter
But I am truest speaker. You called me Brother
When I was but your Sister: I you Brothers,
When we were so indeed.
Did you ere meet?
I my good Lord.
And at first meeting loved,
Continued so, until we thought he died.
By the Queen's Dram she swallowed.
O rare instinct!
When shall I hear all through? This fierce abridgement,
Hath to it Circumstantial branches, which
Distinction should be rich in. Where? how lived you?
And when came you to serve our Roman Captive?
How parted with your Brother? How first met them?
Why fled you from the Court? And whether these?
And your three motives to the Battle? with
I know not how much more should be demanded,
And all the other by-dependances
From chance to chance? But nor the Time, nor Place
Will serve our long Interrogatories. See,
Posthumus Anchors upon Imogen;
And she (like harmless Lightning) throws her eye
On him: her Brothers, Me: her Master hitting
Each object with a joy: the Counterchange
Is severally in all. Let's quit this ground,
And smoke the Temple with our Sacrifices.
Thou art my Brother, so we'll hold thee ever.
You are my Father too, and did relieve me:
To see this gracious season.
All o'erjoyed
Save these in bonds, let them be joyful too,
For they shall taste our Comfort.
My good Master, I will yet do you service.
Happy be you.
The forlorn Soldier, that no Nobly fought
He would have well becomed this place, and graced
The thank of a King.
I am Sir
The Soldier that did company these three
In poor beseeming: 'twas a fitment for
The purpose I then followed. That I was he,
Speak Iachimo, I had you down, and might
Have made you finish.
I am down again:
But now my heavy Conscience sinks my knee,
As than your force did. Take that life, beseech you
Which I so often own: but your Ring first,
And here the Bracelet of the truest Princess
That ever swore her Faith.
Kneel not to me:
The power that I have on you, is to spare you:
The malice towards you, to forgive you. Live
And deal with others better.
Nobly doomed:
we'll learn our Freeness of a Son-in-law:
Pardon's the word to all.
You holp us Sir,
As you did mean indeed to be our Brother,
Joyed are we, that you are.
Your Servant Princes. Good my Lord of Rome
Call forth your Soothsayer: As I slept, me thought
Great Iupiter upon his Eagle backed
Appeared to me, with other sprightly shows
Of mine own Kindred. When I waked, I found
This Label on my bosom; whose containing
Is so from sense in hardness, that I can
Make no Collection of it. Let him show
His skill in the construction.
Philarmonus.
here, my good Lord.
Read, and declare the meaning.
WHen as a Lion's whelp, shall to himself unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of tender Air: And when from a stately Cedar shall be lopped branches, which being dead many years, shall after revive, be jointed to the old Stock, and freshly grow, then shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate, and flourish in Peace and Plenty.
Thou Leonatus art the Lion's Whelp,
The fit and apt Construction of thy name
Being Leonatus, doth import so much:
The piece of tender Air, thy virtuous Daughter,
Which we call Mollis Aer, and Mollis Aer
We term it Mulier; which Mulier I divine
Is this most constant Wife, who even now
Answering the Letter of the Oracle,
Unknown to you unsought, were clipped about
With this most tender Air.
This hath some seeming.
The lofty Cedar, Royal Cymbeline
Personates thee: And thy lopped Branches, point
Thy two Sons forth: who by Belarius stolen
For many years thought dead, are now revived
To the Majestic Cedar joined; whose Issue
Promises Britain, Peace and Plenty.
Well,
My Peace we will begin: And Caius Lucius,
Although the Victor, we submit to Caesar,
And to the Roman Empire; promising
To pay our wont Tribute, from the which
We were dissuaded by our wicked Queen,
Whom heavens in justice both on her, and hers,
Have laid most heavy hand.
The fingers of the Powers above, do tune
The harmony of this Peace: the Vision
Which I made known to Lucius ere the stroke
Of yet this scarse-cold-Battaile, at this instant
Is full accomplished. For the Roman Eagle
From South to West, on wing soaring aloft
Lessened herself, and in the Beams o' th' Sun
So vanished; which foreshowed our Princely Eagle
Th' Imperial Caesar, should again unite
His Favour, with the Radiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in the West.
Laud we the Gods,
And let our crooked Smokes climb to their Nostrils
From our blessed Altars. Publish we this Peace
To all our Subjects. Set we forward: Let
A Roman, and a British Ensign wave
Friendly together: so through Luds-Towne march,
And in the Temple of great Iupiter
Our Peace we'll ratify: Seal it with Feasts.
Set on there: Never was a War did cease
(Ere bloody hands were washed) with such a Peace.