WHat brave Sea Music bids us Welcome, hark!
Sure this is Venice, and the day Saint Mark,
In which the Duke and Senates, their course hold▪
To wed our Empire with a Ring of Gold.
No Thetis you're mistaken, we are led
W infinite delight from the Lands had:
In ken of goodly shipping and you bridge,
Venice had near the like survey that ridge,
Of stately buildings which the river Hem,
And grace the silver stream, as the stream them:
That beauteous seat is London so much famed,
Where any Navigable Sea is named;
And in that bottom Eminent Merchants placed,
As rich, and venturous as ever graced,
Venice or Europe these two Rivers hear,
Our followers may tell you where we are;
This Thamesis, that Midway who are sent,
To you most worthy Praetor to present,
Acknowledgement of duty near shall err,
From Stanes unto the Ancient Rochester;
And now to grace their Triumph in respect,
These pay us tribute, we are pleased to select
Seven worthy Navigators out by name,
Seated beneath this Globe; whose ample fame
In the remotest part a' the earth is found,
And some of them have circled the Globe round:
These you observe are living in your eye,
And so they ought, for worthy men near die:
Drake, Hawkins, Furbisher, Gilbert, brave Knights,
That brought home gold, and honour from sea fights,
Candish, Carlisle, and Davis', and to these,
So many worthies I could add at Seas,
Of this bold Nation, it would envy strike,
I th' rest ath' World, who cannot show the like;
'tis action values honour as the flint,
Look black and feels like ice, yet from within't,
Their are struck sparks which to the darkest nights,
Yield quick and piercing food for several lights.
You have quickened well my memory, and now
Of this your grateful Triumph I allow,
Honour looks clear and spreads her beams at large,
From the grave Senate seated in that Barge,
Rich Lading swell your bottoms, a blessed Gale,
Follow your ventures that they never fail;
And may you live successively to wear,
The joy of this day, each man his whole year.
HIstory, Truth, and Virtue seek by name,
To celebrate the Merchant-Taylors fame;
That Henry de Royal, this we call
Worthy Iohn Yeacksley purchased first their Hall;
And thus from low beginnings their oftsprings
Societies claim Brotherhoods of Kings.
I Troynovant placed eminent in the eye
Of these admire at my felicity:
Five Cities, Antwerp and the spacious Paris,
Rome, Venice, and the Turks Metropilis:
Beneath these, five learned Poets worthy men,
Who do eternize brave acts by their pen;
Chaucer, Gower, Lidgate, Moor and for our time
Sr. Philip Sidney, glory of our clime,
These beyond death a fame to Monarches give,
And these make Cities and Societies live.
TO Honour by our Wrighting Worthy men,
Flows as a duty from a judging pen,
And when we are employed in such sweet praise,
Bees swarm and leave their honey on our bays:
Evermore Musically Verses run,
When the loathed vain of flattery they shun.
Survey most Noble Praetor what succeeds,
Virtue low bred aspiring to high deeds.
MY birth was mean, yet my deservings grew
To eminence, and in France a high pitch flew,
From a poor common Soldier I attained,
The style of Captain, and then Knighthood gained;
Scrud the Black Prince in France in all his wars;
Then went t'the Holy-land, thence brought my scars.
And wearied body which no danger feared.
To Florence where it nobly lies Inteerd,
There Sir Iohn Hawkewoods memory doth live,
And to the Merchant-Taylors fame doth give.
VIew whence the Merchanttaylors' honour springs
From this most Royal Conventicle of Kings:
Eight that Successively wore England's Crown
Held it a special honour, and renown:
(The Society was so worthy, and so good)
T'vnite themselves into their Brotherhood.
Thus Time, and Industry attain the prize,
As Seas from Brooks, as brooks from Hillocks rise,
Let all good men this sentence oft repeat,
By unity the smallest things grow great.
By unity the smallest things grow great.
TO express what happiness the Country yields,
The Poet's feigned Heaven in th'elysian fields;
We figure here a Garden, fresh and new,
In which the chiefest of our blessings grew:
This worthy Patriot here, Sr. Thomas White,
Whilst he was living had a dream one night,
He had built a College and given living to't,
Where two Elme-bodies sprang up from on root;
And as he dreamed, most certain 'tis he found,
The Elm near Oxford, and upon that Ground,
Built Saint Iohns College, Truth can testify
His merit, whilst his Faith and Charity
Was the true compass, measured every part,
And took the latitude of his Christian heart;
Faith kept the centre, Charity walked this round,
Until a true circumference was found;
And may the Impression of this figure strike,
Each worthy Senator to do the like.
OF all the Triumphs which your eye has viewed
This the fair Monument of Gratitude;
This chiefly should your eye, and ear Employ
That was of all your Brotherhood the joy,
Worthy Prince Henry fame's best precedent,
Called to a higher Court of Parliament,
In his full strength of Youth and height of blood,
And which Crowned all, when he was truly good:
On Virtue, and on Worth he still was throwing
Most bounteous showers, where ere he found them growing,
He never did disguise his ways by Art
But shooted his intents unto his hart,
And loved to do good, more for goodness sake,
Then any retribution man could make.
Such was this Prince, such are the noble hearts;
who when they die, yet die not in all parts:
But from the Integrity of a Brave mind,
Leave a most Clear and Eminent Fame behind.
Thus hath this jewel not quite lost his Ray,
Only cased up 'gainst a more glorious day.
And be't remembered that our Company
Have not forgot him who ought ne'er to die:
Yet, wherefore should our sorrow give him dead,
When a new Phnaeix springs up in his stead:
That as he seconds him in every grace,
May second him in Brotherhood, and place.
Good rest my Lord, Integrity that keeps
The safest Watch and breeds the soundest sleeps.
Make the last day of this your holding seat,
joyful as this, or rather more complete.