WHat of the Game, called Chess-play can be made
To make a Stage-Play, shall this day be played.
First, you shall see the men in order set,
States, and their Pawns, when both the sides are met:
The Houses well distinguished: In the Game
Some men entrapped, and taken to their shame,
Rewarded by their Play: And in the Close
You shall see checkmate given to virtue's Foes.
But the fairest jewel, that our hopes can deck,
Is, so to play our Game, t'avoid your Check.
HA? where? what Angle of the world is this;
That I can neither see the politic face,
Nor with my refined nostrils taste the footsteps,
Of any of my Disciples, sons and heirs
As well of my designs, as institutions,
I thought they'd spread over the World by this time,
Covered the earth's face, and made dark the land,
Like the Egyptian Grasshoppers,
Here's too much light appears, shot from the eyes
Of Truth and Goodness, never yet deflowered:
Sure they were never here, then is their Monarchy
Unperfect yet: A just reward I see
For their ingratitude so long to me,
Their father and founder;
'Tis not five years since I was saluted by'em,
Where slept my honour all the time before?
Could they be so forgetful to canonize
Their prosperous Institutor, when they had saluted
They found no room in all their calendar
To place my name, that should have removed Princes,
Pulled the most eminent Prelates by the roots up,
For my dear coming, to make way for me,
Let's every petty martyr, and Saint Homile,
Roch, Main, and Petronel, itch, and Ague curers,
Your Abbess Alde-gund, and Cuney-gund;
The Widow Marcell, Person Policary,
Sislie and Vrslie, all take place of me;
And but for the Bissextile, or Leap-year;
And that's but one in three, I fall by chance,
Into the nine and twentieth day of February:
There were no room else for me; see their love,
Their conscience too, trust me a lame Soldier
In-to-Leape-yeare: My wrath's up, and methinks
I could with the first syllable of my name,
Blow up their Colleges: up Error, awake
Father of supererogation rise:
It is Ignatius calls thee, Loyola.
What have you done? oh I could sleep in ignorance
Immortality, the slumber is so pleasing.
I saw the bravest setting for a game now,
That ever my eye fixed on.
Game: what Game?
The noblest Game of all, A Game at Chess,
Betwixt our side, and the White House, the men set
In their just order, ready to go to it.
Were any of my sons placed for the Game?
Yes: and a daughter too, a secular daughter
That plays the Black queen's pawn, he the Black Bishops.
If ever power cold show a mastery in thee,
Let it appear in this,
'Tis but a Dream,
A vision you must think.
I care not what,
So I behold the Children of my cunning,
And see what rank they keep,
You have your wish:
Behold there's the full number of the Game,
Kings and their Pawns, Queens, Bishops, Knights and Dukes.
Dukes they're called Rooks by some.
Corruptively:
Le roch, the word custody de La Rock,
The keeper of the forts in whom both Kings
Repose much confidence, and for their trust's sake,
Courage and worth do well deserve those titles.
Thy answer's high, see my son and daughter.
Those are two pawns the black Queen, & black Bishops.
Pawns argue but poor spirits, and light performents:
Nor worthy of the name of my Disciples:
If I had stood so nigh I would have cut
That bishop's throat, but I'd have had his place;
And told the Queen a love tale in her ear,
Would have made her best pulse dance, there's elixir
Of brain, and spirit amongst 'em.
Why? would you have 'em play against themselves.
That's quite against the Game (Ignatius.)
Pish, I would rule myself, not observe rule.
Why you you'd play a game all by yourself.
I would do any thing to rule alone,
'tis rare to have the world ruled in by one.
See'em anon, and view 'em in their play,
Observe as in a dance they glide away.
Oh with what longing will this breast be tossed,
Until I see this great Game won and lost.
I Never see that face, but my pity rises,
When I behold so clear a Masterpiece
Of heaven's art, wrought out of dust and ashes,
In that not ours, but the Daughter of Heresy:
My soul bleeds at mine eyes.
Where should truth speak
If not in such a sorrow? they're tears plainly:
Beshrew me if she weep not heartily?
What is my peace to her to take such pains in't?
If I wander to loss, and with broad eyes
Yet miss the path she ran blindfold in.
(Through often exercise) why should my oversight,
Though in the game that ere Christian lost,
Raise the least spring of pity in her eye,
'tis doubtless a great charity, and no virtue,
Could win me surer.
Blessed things prevail with't,
If ever goodness made a gracious promise,
It is in yonder look, what little pains
Would build a Fort for virtue to all memory
In that sweet creature, were the groundwork firmer.
It has been all my glory to be firm,
In what I have professed.
That is the enemy
That steals your strength away, and fights against you,
Disarms your soul, even in that heat of battle:
Your firmness that way, makes you more infirm,
For the right Christian conflict; there I spied
A zealous primitive sparkle, but now slew,
From your devoted eyes:
Able to blow up all the Heresies
That ever sat in Council with your spirit;
And here comes he whose Sanctimonious breath,
Can make that spark a flame: list to him (virgin)
At whose first entrance Princes will prostrate:
Women are weaker Vessels.
By my penitence
A comely presentation, and the habit
To admiration reverend.
But the heart, the heart Lady
So meek, that as you see good Charity pictured still
With young ones in her arms, so will he cherish
All his young tractable sweet obedient daughters
e'en in his arms, in his own bosom,
I am myself a secular Jesuitess,
As many Ladies are of worth and greatness,
A second sort are Iesuits in voto,
Giving their vow into the father general:
That's the Black Bishop of our house, whose pawn
This Gentleman now stands, now to receive
The College habit at his holy pleasure.
But how are these in voto employed (Lady)
Till they receive the habit.
They're not idle,
He finds 'em all true labourers in the work
Of universal Monarchy, which he
And his Disciples principally aim at.
Those are maintained in many Courts and Palaces,
And are induced by noble Personages,
Into great princes' services, and prove
Some counsellors of State, some Secretaries:
All serving in notes of intelligence:
(As Parish Clerks,) their mortuary bills,
To the father General, so are designs
Often times prevented, and important secrets
Of state discovered, yet no author found,
But those suspected oft that are most sound:
This mystery is too deep, yet for your entrance,
And I offend to set your zeal so back,
Checked by Obedience, with desire to hasten
Your progress to perfection, I commit you
To the great workers hands, to whose grave worth
I fit my reverence, as to you my wishes.
Dost find her supple?
There's a little passage made.
Let me contemplate,
With wholly wonder season my access;
And by degrees approach the Sanctuary
Of unmatched beauty, set in grace and goodness
Amongst the daughters of men I have not found
A more Catholical aspect, that eye
does promise single life and meek Obedience.
Upon those lips the sweet fresh buds of youth,
The holy dew of prayer lies like pearl,
Dropped from opening eyelids of the morn,
Upon that bashful Rose, how beauteously
A gentle fast not rigorously imposed,
Would look upon that cheek, and how delightful
The courteous Physic of a tender penance,
Whose utmost cruelty should not exceed
The first fear of a bride to beat down frailty,
Would work to sound health your long festered judgement,
And make your merit well (through erring ignorance
Appears but spotted righteousness to me,
Far clearer than the innocence of Infants.
To the good work I bow and will become,
Obedience humblest daughter, sithence I find
The assistance of a sacred strength to aid me:
The labour is as easy to serve virtue
The right way since, 'tis she I ever served
In my desire, though I transgressed in judgement.
It's easily absolved amongst the rest,
You shall not find the virtue, that you serve now
A sharp and cruel mistress, her ear's open
To all your supplications; you may boldly
And safely let in the most secret sin
Into her knowledge, which like vanisht man
Never returns into the World again:
Fate looks not up more trulier,
To the guilty,
That may appear some benefit.
Who so innocent
That never stands in need on't in some kind?
If every thought were blabbed that's so confessed,
The very air we breath would be emblessed:
Now to the work indeed, which is to catch
Her inclination, that's the special use
We make of all our practice in all Kingdoms
For my disclosing their most secret frailties,
Things which once ours, they must not hide from us
That's the first article in the Creed we teach 'em,
Finding to what point their blood most inclines,
Know best to apt them, then to our designs:
Daughter the sooner you disperse your Errors,
The sooner you make haste to your discovery,
You must part with'em, to be nice or modest
Towards this good action, is to imitate
The bashfulness of one conceals an vlter,
For the uncomely parts that tumour vexes,
till't be past cure. Resolve you thus fair (Lady)
The privat'st thought that runs to hide itself,
In the most secret corner of your heart, now
Must be of my acquaintance, so familiarly
Never she friend of yours might counsel nearer.
I stand not much in fear of any account
Guilty of that black crime (most noble holiness,)
I must confess as in a sacred Temple,
Thronged with an auditory, some come rather
To feed on humane object, than to taste
Of angel's food.
So in the Congregation of quick thoughts
Which are more infinite, than such assemblies,
I cannot for truths safely speak for all:
Some have been wanderers, some sinful, some sound:
But those found ever poor entertainment.
They'd encouragement to come again,
The single life which strongly I profess now:
Heaven pardon me, I was about to part from.
Then you have passed through love?
But left no stain
In all my passage (Sir) no print of wrong;
For the most chaste maid that may trace my footsteps.
How came you off so clear?
I was discharged
By an inhuman accident, which modesty
Forbids me to put any language too.
How you forget yourself? all actions
Clad in their proper language, though most sordid
My ear is bound by duty to let in,
And lock up everlastingly: Shall I help you;
He was not found to answer his creation?
A vestal Virgin in a slip of prayer,
Could not deliver man's loss modestlier:
'twas the White bishop's pawn.
The same (blessed Sir)
An heretic well pickled.
By base treachery,
And violence prepared by the Competitor:
The black Knights pawn whom I shall ever hate for't.
'twas of revenge the most unmanli'st way
That ever rival took, a villain
That for your sake i'll never absolve him off.
I wish not so heavy.
He must feel it,
I never yet gave absolution
To any crime of that unmatring nature:
It seems you refuse him for defect,
That other women have in the ends of marriage:
Pardon my boldness, if I sift your goodness
To the last grain.
I reverence your pains (Sir)
And must confess, custom to enjoy
What other women challenge and possess,
More ruled me then desire: for my desires
Dwell all in Ignorance, and I'll never wish
To know that fond way, may redeem them thence.
I never was so taken, beset doubly
Now with her judgement what a strength it puts forth,
I bring work nearer to you, when you have seen
A masterpiece of man, composed by Heaven
For a great PRINCE's favour, kingdom's love:
So exact Envy could not find a place
To stick a blot on person, or on fame:
Have you not found ambition swell your wishes then?
And desire stir your blood.
By virtue never:
I have only in the dignity of the creature,
Admired the works glory.
She's impregnable,
A second siege must not fall off so tamely:
She's one of those must be informed to know
A daughter's duty which some take untaught;
Her modesty brings her behind hand much,
My old means I must fly too, yes 'tis it,
Please you peruse this small tract of Obedience,
'Twill help you forward well.
(Sir) that is a virtue:
I have ever thought on with especial reverence.
You will conceive by that,
My power your duty.
What makes yond troubler of all Christian water,
So near yonder blessed spring? but I know
Her goodness is the rock from whence it issues.
unmovable as fate, 'twould more afflict me
Then all my sufferings for her, which so long
As she holds constant to the house she come off,
The whiteness of the cause, the side, the quality
Are sacrifices to her worth and virtue,
And though confined in my religious joys,
I marry her and possess her.
Behold Lady,
The two inhuman enemies, the black Knights p.,
And the white Bishops, the gelder and the gelded.
There's my grief, my hate.
What? in the Iesuites fingers? by this hand,
I'll give my part now for a parrot's feather,
She never returns virtuous, 'tis impossible:
I'll undertake, more wagers will be laid
Upon a usurer's return from hell,
Then upon hers from him now: have I been guilty
Of such base malice, that my very conscience
Shakes at the memory of it, and when I look
To gather fruit find nothing but the savin tree:
Too frequent in nuns' Orchards, and there planted
By all conjecture to destroy fruit rather,
I willbe resolved now most noble Virgin.
Ignoble villain, dare that unhallowed tongue
Lay hold upon a sound so gracious,
What's nobleness to thee, or virgin Chastity?
They're not of thy acquaintance, talk of violence,
That shames creation, deeds would make night blush
That's company for thee, hast thou the impudence
To court me with the Leprosy upon thee,
Able to infect the walls of a great building.
Son of offence forbear, go set your devil
Before your eyes, a penitential vesture,
Would better become ye, some shirt of hair.
And you a three pound smock, steed of an Abbey,
An Epicene Cassible, this holy fellow
Robs safst and close, I feel a sting that's worse too:
White pawn, hast so much Charity to accept
A reconcilement, make thy own conditions,
For I begin to be extremely burdened.
No truth, no peace, of that black house, Protest
Is to be trusted, but for hope of acquittance,
And warned by difference, I may entrap him soonest,
I admit conference.
It is a nobleness
That makes confusion cleave to all my merits.
That treatise will instruct you fully.
So, so,
The business of the Universal Monarchy
Goes forward well now, the College pot
That should be always boiling with the fuel,
Of all intelligencers possible,
Through the Christian Kingdom is this fellow
Our prime incendiary? one of those
That promised the white Kingdom seven years since
To our black-house, put a new daughter to him,
The great work-slaves, he minds nor Monarchy
Nor heresy (diviner principalities) I brag less,
But have done more than all the conclave on'em
Take their assistant fathers in all parts:
ay, or their father general in to boot:
And what I have done, I have done factiously
With pleasant subtlety, and bewitching courtship,
Abuse all my believers with delight,
They took comfort to be cozened by me,
To many a soul I have let in mortal poison,
Whose cheeks have cracked with laughter to receive it,
I could so roll my pills in sugared syllables,
And strew such kindly mirth o'er all my mischief,
They took their bane in way of recreation,
A pleasure steals corruption into youth,
he spies me now, I must uphold his reverence,
Especially in public (though I know)
Priapus guardian of the cherry Gardens:
Bacchus and Venus chit is not more vicious.
Blessings accumulation keep with you (sir.)
honour's dissimulation be your due (sir.)
How deep in duty in observance plunge?
His charge must needs be reverend.
I am Confessor
To this Black Knight too, you see devotion's fruitful,
Sh'as many sons and daughters.
I do this the more,
To maze our adversaries to behold,
The reverence we give these great ones,
And to beget a sound opinion
Of holiness in them, and zeal in us;
As also to invite the like obedience
In other pupils, by our meek example:
So, is your trifle gone?
Trifle call you her, it's a good game (sir)
Sure she's the second pawn of the White house,
And to the opening of the game I hold her.
I you hold well: for that I know your play
Of old, if there were more queen's pawns you'd ply
The game a great deal harder (now sir we're in private)
But what for the main work, the great existence?
The hope Monarchal?
It goes on in this.
In this? I cannot see't.
So you may deny
A dial's motion, 'cause you cannot see
The hand move, or a wind that rends the Cedars.
Where stops the current of the intelligence;
Your father general Bishop of the black-house,
Complains for want of work.
Here's from all parts
Sufficient to to employ him, I received
A packet from the assistant fathers lately,
Look you there's Anglica, this Gallica.
I marry (sir) there's some quick flesh in this.
Germanica.
Think they'n sealed this with butter.
Italica this
They put their pens the hebrew way methinks,
Hispanica there.
Hispanica, blind word this,
The Jesuit hath writ this with juice of lemons sure
It must be held close to the fire of Purgatory
Ere't can be read.
You will not leave your jesting (Knight)
Though it wound your own fame.
Curanda pecunia.
Take heed (Sir) we're entrapped.
He's made our own (man half in Voto yours,
His heart's in the black house, leave him to me,
Most of all friends indeed preciously special,
You see my outside, but not my heart,
Great difference in the colour, there's some intelligence,
And as more ripeness, so your knowledge still
Shall prove the richer, there shall nothing happen
(believe't) to extenuate your cause.
Or to oppress her fr, ends, but I will strive
To cross it with my counsel, purse and power
Keep all supplies both in means and men,
That may raise against you, we must part,
I dare not longer of this theme discuss,
The ear of State is quick and jealous.
Excellent estimation, thou art valued
Above the fleece of gold, that came short home,
Poor Jesuit, ridden soul, how art thou fooled
Out of thy faith, from thy allegiance drawn,
Which way soe'er thou takest, thou'rt the lost Pawn.
AND here again it is the daughter's duty
To obey her fessors command in all things
Without exception, or expostulations;
'tis the most general rule that ere I heard of:
Yet when I think how boundless virtue is,
Goodness and grace lies gently reconciled,
And then it appears well to have the power
Of the dispenser are's uncircumscribed
She's hard upon't, 'twas the most modest key
That I could use to open my intents,
What little, or no pains goes to some people:
Hah? a seald note, whence this,
To the black Bishops pawn these, how to me
Strange, who subscribes it? the black King what would he.
Sir after my desire has took a Tulip
For its own inflammation, that yet scorches me,
I shall have cooler time to think of yours,
She's past the general rule of the large extent
Of our prescription for obedience;
And yet with what alacrity of soul,
Her eye moves on the Letter.
Holy Sir,
Too long, I have missed you, oh your absence starves me,
Hasten for Time's redemption (worthy Sir)
Lay your commands as thick and fast upon me
As you can speak 'em, how I thirst to hear 'em:
Set me to work upon this spacious virtue,
Which the poor span of life's, tomorrow for
Boundless obedience, the humblest, yet mightiest of all
Duties, well set her down a universal goodness.
By holiness of garment, her safe innocence
Has frighted the full meaning from itself,
She's far off from understanding now
The language of my intent, then at first meeting
For virtue's sake, good sir,
Command something,
Make trial of my duty in some small service,
And as you find the faith of my obedience there,
Then trust it with a greater.
You speak sweetly,
I do command you first then.
With what joy I do prepare my duty.
To meet me,
And seal a kiss of love upon my lips,
Hah.
At first disobedient in so little too.
How shall I trust you with a greater then?
Which was your own request?
Pray send not back
My Innocence to wound me, be more courteous,
I must confess much like a ignorant plaintiff
Who presuming on the fair path of his meaning
Goes rashly on, till on a sudden brought
Into the wilderness of Law, by words
Dropped unadvisedly, hurts his good cause,
And gives the Adversary advantage by it.
Apply it you can best (sir) if my obedience
And your command can find no better way,
Fond men command, and wantons best obey.
If I can at that distance send you a blessing,
Is it not nearer to you in my arms:
It flies abroad from these libs dealt in parcels,
And I to honour thee above all daughters.
Invite thee home to the house, where thou mayst surfeit
On that, which others miserably pine for:
A favour which the daughters of great Potentates,
Would look of envy's colour but to hear.
Good men may err sometimes, you're mistaken,
Sure if this be virtue's path, 'tis a most strange one,
I never came this way before.
That's your ignorance,
And therefore shall that edict still conduct you,
That knows no way but one, nor ever seeks it,
'tis strange if virtue should be put to one,
If there be twenty ways to some poor Village.
Your fear is wondrous faulty, cast it from you,
'twill gather else in time a disobedience,
Too stubborn for my pardon.
Have I locked myself
At unawares into sin's servitude
With more desire of goodness? is this the tie
Of all strict order, and the holiest
Of all societies, the three vowed people
For Poverty, Obedience, Chastity:
The last they most forget, when a virgin's rain
I see the great work of Obedience,
Is better than half finished.
What a stranger,
Are you to duty grown, what distance keep you,
Must I bid you come forwards to a happiness
yourself should sue for? 'twas never so with me
I dare not let this stubborness be known,
'Twould bring such fierce hate on you, yet presume not
To make that courteous care a privilege
For wilful disobedience, it turns then
Into the blackness of a curse upon you,
Come, come, be nearer.
nearer?
Was that in scorn?
I would not have it proved so for the hopes
Of the great Monarchy, if it were like it,
Let it not dare to fly abroad again,
A stronger I will cope with't.
Bless me, threatens me,
And quite dismays the good strength that should
Help me. I never was so doubtful of my safety.
'Twas but my jealousy, forgive me (sweetness)
Yours is the house of meekness, and no venom lives
Under that roof, be nearer; why so fearful?
nearer the Altar the more safe and sacred.
But nearer the offerors oft more wicked.
A plain and most insufferable contempt,
My glory I have lost upon this woman,
In freely offering that she should have kneeled
A year in vain for: my respect is darkened,
Give me my reverence again thou hast robbed me off
In thy repulse, thou shalt not carry it hence.
(Sir.)
Thou'rt too great a winner to depart;
And I too deep a looser to give way to't.
Oh Heaven!
Lay me down reputation,
Before thou stir'st thy nice Virginity
Is recompense too little for my love.
'Tis well if I accept of that for both,
Thy loss is but thine own, there's art to help thee,
And fools to pass thee to; in my discovery
The whole society suffers and in that,
The hope of absolute Monarchy eclipsed,
Assurance thou canst make me none for thy secrecy,
But by thy honour's loss, that act must awe thee.
Oh my distressed condition.
Dost weep?
If thou hadst any pity, this necessity
Would wring it from thee, I must else destroy thee:
We must not trust the policy of Europe,
Upon a woman's tongue.
Then take my life (Sir)
And leave my honour for to guide me to Heaven.
Take heed I take not both which I have vowed
Since, if longer thou resist.
Help, oh help.
Art thou so cruel for an honour's babble:
To undo a whole fraternity, and disperse
The secrets of most nations locked in us?
For Heaven and virtue's sake
Must force confound noise?
Hah, what's that? silence (if fair worth be in thee)
I'll venture my escape on all dangers now,
Who comes to take me, let me see that pawns face,
Or his proud tympanous Mas-well with state wind,
Which being once pricked in the Convocation house,
The corrupt air puffs out, and he falls shrivelled.
I will discover the Arch-hypocrite,
To all the kindreds of the earth.
Confusion in that voice,
Rings the alarum of my undoing,
How, which way scaped she from me?
Are you mad?
Can lust infatuate a man so hopeful?
No patience in your blood: the dogstar reigns sure,
Time, and fire temper would have wrought her
Pliant: I spied a Pawn of the white House walk near us,
And made that noise of purpose to give warrant
For mine own turn: which ends in all I work for.
Methinks I stand over a powder vault,
And the match now a kindling: what's to be done?
'Tis his own case, he will defend you mainly,
And happily here he comes with the black Knight too.
Oh you made noble work for the white house
This act will fill the adversary's mouth,
And blow the Lutherans' cheeks, tilt crack again.
This will advance the state Monarchal business
In all parts well, and help the agents forward,
Which I have seven years laboured to accomplish.
One minute sets back by some codpiece college still.
I dwell not (sir) alone in this default,
The black house yields me partners.
All more cautelous.
Qui caute, cast, that's my Motto still,
I've travailed with that word over most Kingdoms,
And lain safe with most nations on a leaking bottom
I have been as often tossed on Venus' seas
As trimmer, and fresher barks, when sounder vessels
Have lain at anchor, that is kept the door.
She has no witness then?
Gross witness, when went one of his society?
To mischief with a witness?
I have done't then,
Away upon the wings of speed, take post horse,
Cast thirty leagues of earth behind thee suddenly,
Leave letters antedated at our house,
Ten days at least from this.
Bishop I taste thee,
Good strong Episcopal counsel, take a bottle on't,
'twill serve thee all thy journey.
But good (sir) how,
For my getting for the unspied?
There's Check again.
No, I'll help that.
Well said my bouncing Jesuitess.
There lies a secret vault.
Away, make haste then.
Run for my Cabinet of intelligences,
For fear they search the house, good Bishop burn'em,
I cannot stand to pick 'em now.
Begone the dangers all in you.
Let me see Queens pawn,
How formerly has packed up his intelligences,
H'as laid them all in truckle beds (methinks)
And like Court harbingers has writ the names
In Chalk upon their Chambers: Anglica,
Oh this is the English house, what news there trow?
Hah by this hand most of these are bawdy epistles,
Time they were burnt indeed, whole bundles of 'em:
Here's from his daughter Blanch & daughter Bridget:
From the safe sanctuary in the White-Friers:
Those from two tender sisters of compassion,
In the bowels of Bloomsbury:
These three from the Nunnery in Drury lane:
A fire, a fire, (go Jesuitess) a fire:
What have you there?
A note (sir) of State policy,
And an exceeding safe one.
Pray let's see it (Sir)
To sell away all the powder in the Kingdom,
To prevent blowing up, that's safe, i'll able it:
Here's a factious observation now,
That suits my humour better, he writes here
Some wives in England will commit adultery,
And then send to Room for a bull for their husbands.
Have they those shifts?
Oh no familiarity breathing
Sweeter, here wench take those papers,
Schorch 'em soundly, burn 'em to French russet,
And put 'em, in again.
Why, what's your mystery?
Oh (sir) 'twill mock the adversary strangely,
If ere the house be searched, 'twas done in Venice
Upon the jesuitical expulse there,
Where the inquisitors came all spectacled
To pick out syllables out of the dung of treason,
(As children pick their cherry-stones) yet found none;
But what they made themselves with ends of letters.
Do as I bid you Pawn.
Faith not in all,
I love roguery too well to let it fall:
How now, what news with you?
The sting of conscience
Afflicts me so for that inhuman violence,
On the White bishops Pawn, it takes away
My joy, my rest.
This 'tis to make an Eunuch,
You made a sport on't then.
Cease aggravation,
I come to be absolved for't, where is my Confessor,
Why dost thou point to the ground?
'Cause he went that way:
Come, come, help me in with this Cabinet,
I'll tell thee a strange Story.
If't be sad, 'tis welcome.
'tis not much troubled with mirth, sir. Ex.
Pawn.
I attend at your great holiness' service.
For great, I grant you, but greatly holy,
There the sold alters fat Cathedral bodies,
Have very often lean, little souls,
Much like the Lady in the lobster's head,
A great deal of shell and garbage of all colours,
But for the pure part, that should take wings and mount
That's at last gasp, as if a man should gape,
And from a huge bulk let forth a butterfly,
Like those big-bellied mountains, which the Poet
Delivers, that are brought to bed with man's flesh,
Are my book Printed pawn, my last invictives against
Against the black-house?
Ready for publication:
For I saw perfect books this morning (sir.)
Fetch me a few, which I will instantly
Distribute amongst the White-house.
With all speed (sir.)
'tis a most Lordly life to rail at ease,
See, eat, and drink upon the fat of one Kingdom;
And rail upon another with the juice on't:
I have writ this book out of the strength and marrow
Of six and thirty dishes at a meal:
But most on't out of cullishe of Cock sparrows,
'twill stick and glue the faster to the adversary,
'twill slit the root of their most Calvish cause,
And yet I eat but little butcher's meat
In the conception:
Of all things I commend the White-house best,
For plenty and variety of victuals:
When I was one of the black-house professed,
My flesh fell half a Cubit, time to revolt,
When my own ribs revolted; but to say truth,
I have no preferment yet, that's suitable
To the greatness of my person and my parts:
I grant I live at ease, for I am made
The Master of the beds, the long acre of beds:
But there's no marigold, that shuts and opens,
Flower gentlee Venus' borth, apples of love,
Pinks, Hyanths, honeysuckles, Daffi-down-dillies,
There was a time I'd much more drab than beds,
Now I've more beds, than drabs:
Yet there's no eminent trader deals in wholesale;
But she and I have clap a barging up,
Let in at water-gate, for which I have racked
My tenants purse-strings, that then've twanged again:
Yonder black Knight, the Fistula of Europe,
Whose disease once I undertook to cure,
With a high Holborn halter, when he last
Vouchsafed to peep into my privileged lodgings
He saw good store of plate, and rich hangings:
He knew I brought none to the White-house with me,
I have not lost the use of my profession,
Since I turned White-house bishop:
Look, more books yet?
Yonder greasy gormundizing Prelate
Does work our house more mischief by his scripts,
His fat and fulsome Volumes,
Than the whole body of the adverse party.
Oh 'twere a Masterpiece of serpent subtlety
To fetch him a this side again.
And then dam him
Into the bag for ever, or expose him
Against the adverse party, which now he feeds on;
And that would double damn him, my revenge
Has prompted me already, i'll confound him
A both sides for the physic he provided,
And the base Chirurgeon he invented for me,
I'll tell you what a most uncatholical jest
He put upon me once when my pain tortured me,
He told me he had found a present cure for me,
Which I grew proud on, and observed him seriously,
What think you 'twas, being execution day,
He showed the Hangman to me out at window.
The common Hangman.
I'll make him the baloom ball,
Of the Churches.
And both the sides shall toss him, he looks like one,
A thing swelled up with mingled drink and wine,
And will bound well from one side to another.
Come, you shall write our second bishops dead
Which has yet no employment in the Game
Perhaps nor ever shall, it may be won
Without his motion, it rest in ours:
He shall be flattered with Seed vacant,
Make him believe he comes into his place,
And that will fetch him with a vengeance to us,
For I know powder is not more ambitious,
When the match meet it, than his mind for mounting
As Covetous and Lecherous.
No more, now (Sir) both the sides fill.
This has been looked for long.
The stronger sting it shoots into the blood
Of the black adversary, I'm ashamed now,
I was theirs ever, what a Lump was I?
When I was led in ignorance and blindness?
I must confess I've all my life time played
The Fool, till now.
And now he plays two parts, the fool and knave.
there's my recantation in the last leaf.
Were't like a Ciceronian in pure Latain.
Pure honesty, the better latain serves then,
Out of those pestilent pamphlets those are they
That wound our cause to the heart.
Here, more anger yet.
But we come well provided for this storm
Is this my Pawn? she that should
Guard our Person,
Or some pale figure of dejection,
Her shape usurping, sorrow and affrightment,
Has prevailed strangely with her.
King of Integrity,
Queen of the same, and all the house professors
Of noble Candour, uncorrupted justice,
And truth of heart, through my alone discovery
(My like and honour wondrously preserved)
I bring into your knowledge with my sufferings,
Fearful affrightments, and heart-killing terrors,
The great incendiary of all Christendom,
The absolute abuser of true sanctity,
Fairer peace, and holy order can be found
In any part of th'universal Globe:
Who making meek devotion keep the door,
(His lips being full of holy zeal at first)
Would have committed a foul rape upon me.
Hah?
A rape? that's foul indeed, the very sound
To our ear fouler than the offence itself
To some Kings of the earth.
Sir, to proceed,
Gladly I offered life to preserve honour,
Which would not be accepted without both:
The chief of his ill aim to be at mine honour,
Till heaven was pleased by some unlooked for accident,
To give me courage to redeem myself.
When we find desperate sins
In ill men's company,
We place a charitable sorrow there;
But custom and their leprous inclination,
Quits us of wonder: for our expectation
Is answered in their lives, but to find sin
Under a robe of Sanctity, is able
To draw all number to that monster only,
And leave created monsters unadmired,
The pride of him that took first fall for pride,
Is to be Angel shaped, and imitate
The form from whence he fell; but this offendor,
Far, baser than sins master, fixed by vow
To holy order which is angel's method,
It grieves me that my knowledge must be tainted,
With his infested name,
Oh rather with thy finger point him out.
The place that he should fill is void my L.
His guilt has scared him the black bishop's pawn.
Hah, mine, my pawn? the glory of his order,
The prime and precedent zealot on the earth?
Impudent pawn, for thy sake at this minute
Modesty suffers, all that's virtuous blushes,
And truth's self like the sun vexed with a mist,
Looks red with anger.
Be not thou drunk with rage too
Sober sincerity nor you a cup,
Spoke with Hypocrisy.
You name their Bishop,
But your own Christmas bowl you morning draught
Next your Episcopal heart all the twelve days,
Which smack you cannot leave all the year after.
A shrewd retort
Has made our Bishop smell of burning too,
Would I stood farther off, were't no impeachment
To my honour or the game, would they would play faster
White Knight, there's acknowledged from our house
A reverence to you and respect
To that Lord Duke stands next you, with the favour
Of the white King, and th'aforenamed respected,
I combat with this cause, if with all speed
Wast not one syllable, unfortunate pawn,
Of what I speak, thou dost not plead destruction
A plea which will but faintly take thee off neither,
From this Leviathan scandal, that lies rolling
Upon the Crystal waters of devotion,
Or what may quit the more (though enough nothing)
Fall down, and foam, and by then pang discover,
The vexing spirit of falsehood strongly within thee,
Make thyself ready for perdition,
there's no remove in all the Game to scape it,
This pawn or this, the Bishop, or myself
Will take thee in the end, play how you can.
Spite of sins glorious ostentation;
And all blood-threats, that thunder cracks of pride,
Ushering a storm malice house of impudence,
Trust and equivocation, my true cause
Shall keep the path it treads in.
I play thus then:
Now in the hearing of this high assembly,
Bring forth the time of this attempts conception.
It seems black Knight you are afraid to touch it
Well its eruption, will she have it so then?
Or your white Bishop for her, the more unclean;
Vile and impious that you urge the strain to,
The greater will her shames heap now i'th' end,
And the wrongs meek man's glory, the time (pawn)
Yesterday's cursed evening.
Oh the treasure of my revenge I cannot spend on thee,
Ruin enough to spare for all thy kindred too,
For honour's sake call in more slanderers,
I have such plentiful confusion,
I know not how to waste it, i'll be nobler yet,
And put her to her own house: King of meekness
Take the cause to thee, for our hands are too heavy,
Our proofs will fall upon her like a Tower,
And grind her bones to powder.
What new engine,
Has the devil raised in him now.
Is it he,
And that the time stands firm, now to your scandal,
Pray do not shift your slander.
Shift your treachery,
They've worn one suit too long.
That holy man,
So wrongfully accused by this lost pawn:
H'as not been seen these ten days in these parts.
How.
Nay at this instant thirty leagues from hence.
fathomless falsehood, will it scape unblasted.
Can you make this appear?
Light is not clearer,
By his own letters (most impartial Monarch.)
How wrongfully may sacred virtue suffer, sir.
Bishop we have a treasure of that false heart.
Step forth and reach those proofs.
Amazement covers me,
Can I be forsaken of a cause
So strong in truth and equity, will virtue
Send me no aid in this hard time of friendship.
There's an infallible staff and a red hat
Reserved for you.
Oh, sir, indeed.
A staff
That will not easily break, you may trust to't,
And such a one had your correction need of,
There's a state fig for you now,
Behold all,
How they were in one:
I always held a charity so good
To holiness professed I ever believed rather,
The accuser false you the professor vicious.
A charity like all your virtues else,
Gracious and glorious.
Where sets the offence,
Let the faults punishment be derived from thence:
We leave her to your censure.
Most just Majesty.
Calamity of virtue, my Queen leaves me too:
Am I cast off as the Olive casts her flower?
Poor friendless innocence art thou left a prey,
To the devourer?
Nor thou art not lost,
Let 'em put on their bloodiest resolutions,
If the fair policy I aim at prospers:
Thy counsel (noble Duke.)
For that work chiefly.
A man for speed now.
Let it be my honour, sir,
Make me that flight that owes my life's service.
Was not this brought about for our honours:
Pish, the Galician brain can work out wonders.
Let's use her, as upon like discovery
A maid was used at Venice, every one
Be ready with a penance being majesty
Vessel of foolish scandal, take thy fright
Had been in that Cabinet of niceness,
Half the virginities the earth locked up,
And all swept at one cast, by the dexterity
Of a jesuitical Gamester t'had not valued
The least part of that general worth thou hast tainted.
First I enjoin thee to a three days fast for't.
You're to penurious, sir, ill make it four.
I to a twelve hours' kneeling at one time.
And in a room filled all with Aretine's pictures,
(More than the twelve labours of Luxury)
Thou shalt not so much as the chaste pummel see
Of Lucrece dagger peeping: nay I'll punish thee
For a discoverer, i'll torment thy modesty.
After that four days last, into the inquisition house.
Strengthened with bread and water for worse penance.
Why well said Duke of our house, nobly aggravated.
Virtue to show her influence more strong,
Fits me with patience mightier than my wrong.
I Know my pen draws blood of the black house,
there's never a book I writ but their cause bleeds,
It has lost many an ounce of reputation,
Since I came to this side, I deep in,
And leave the Orifex gushing were I come:
But where's my advancement all this while I have got,
I'd have some round preferment, corpulent dignity
That bears some breath and compass in the gulf on't,
I am persuaded that this flesh would fit
The biggest chair Ecclesiastical,
If it were put to trial, to be made Master of an Hospital,
Is but a kind of disease-bred honour:
Or dream of the poor alms Knights that wear badges
there's but two lazy beggarly preferments,
In the white Kingdom, and I've got 'em both,
My merit does begin to be crop-sick
For want of other Titles.
Oh here walks his fulsome holiness:
Now for the Masterpiece
To undo him everlasting, that's put home,
And make him hang in most seriously,
That jested with an halter upon,
The black Knight? I must look to play then.
I bring fair greetings to your reverend virtues,
From Cardinal Paulus your most princely kinsman.
Our princely kinsman saith thou? we accept m:
Pray keep your side and distance, I am chary
Of my Episcopal person:
I know the Knights walk in this Game too well,
He may slip over me, and where am I then?
There where thou shalt be
Shortly if art fail not,
(Hah, all my Body's blood mounts to my face,
To look upon this letter.)
The pill works with him,
Think on't seriously it is not yet too late then,
Through the submiss acknowledgement
Of your disobedienced
To be brotherly received into the loving
Bosom of the Conclave.
This was the chair of ease I ever aimed at,
I'll make a bonfire of my books immediately
All, that are left against that side i'll sacrifice:
Pack up my plate and goods, and steal away
By night at Water-gate: It is but penning
another recantation, and in venting
Two or three bitter books against the white house,
And then I'm at other side again,
As firm as ere I was, as fat, and flourishing:
Black Knight, expect a wonder ere't be long,
Thou shalt see me one of the black-house.
Your holiness is merry with the messenger,
Too happy to be true, you speak what should be.
If natural compunction touched you truly:
Oh you've drawn-blood, live blood, blood of honour
From your most dear primitive mother's heart:
Your sharp invectives have been points of spears
In her sweet tender sides, the unkind wounds
Which the son gives, a son of reverence specially,
They rankle ten times more, you the adversaries:
I tell you, sir, your reverend revolt
Did give the fearfullest blow to adoration
Our cause ere felt, it shook the very statues,
The veins and ashes of the Sainted sleepers.
Forbear, or I shall melt i'the place I stand,
And let forth a fat Bishop in sad syrup:
Suffice I am yours, when they least dream on't,
Ambitious fooder, power and riches draws me,
When I smell honour that's the lock of hay,
That lead me through the world's field every way. Ex.
B. Kt. Here's a sweet pang to propagate belief on,
Like the foundation of a Chapel laid
Upon a quagmire, I may number him now
Amongst my inferior policies, and not shame 'em;
But let me a little solace my designs
With the remembrance of some brave ones past,
To cherish the futurity of project,
Whose motion must be restless till that great work,
Called the possession of the world be ours:
Was it not procured a gallant fleet,
From the white Kingdom to secure our coasts,
'gainst th'infidel Pirates, under pretext
Of more necessity's expedition,
Who made the jails fly open (without miracle)
And let the Locusts out, those dangerous flies.
Whose property's to burn corn without touching
The Heretic Granaries, feel it to this minute;
And now they've got amongst the country Corpse,
They stick so fast to the converted ears,
The loudest tempest that authority rouses,
Will hardly shake 'em off, they have their dens
In lady's coaches, their safe groves and fens:
Nay they were followed and found out by th' sent
Palm oil will make a Pursuivant relent:
Whose policy was it to put a silenced muzzle,
On all the barking tongue-men of the time:
Made pictures that were enough before,
Poor sufferers in that politic restraint?
My light spleen skips, and shakes my ribs to think on't
Whilst our drift walked uncensured, but in thought
A whistle or a whisper, would be questioned,
In the most fortunate Angle in the World,
The Court has held the City by thy horns,
Whilst I have milked her: I have got good soups too
From Countries for their liberties,
From some for their most vainly hoped for preferments.
High offices, in th'air, I should no live
But for this Mellacrim, this mirth Manna,
My pawn? how now, the news.
Expect none very pleasing
That comes (sir) of my bringing, I'm so sad.
Thy conscience is so tender hoofed a late,
Every nail pricks it.
This may prick yours too,
If there be any quick flesh in a yard on't.
Mine, mischief must find a deep nail and a driver.
Beyond the strength of any Matchauile:
The politic Kingdoms fatten to reach mine,
Prithee compunction needle prick a little,
Unbind this sore wound.
Sir, your plots discovered.
Which of the twenty thousand, nine hundreth
Threescore and five, canst tell?
Bless us, so many?
How does poor Country men have but one plot
To keep a Cow on, yet in law for that,
You can note'em all sure by their names (Sir)
Yes were the number trebled: thou hast seen
A Globe stand on the table in my Closet.
A thing (sir) drawn with Countries and hard words.
True, with lines drawn
Some Tropical, some oblique.
I scarce can read, I was brought up in blindness.
just such a thing (if ere my scull be opened)
Will my brains look like.
Like a Globe of Countries.
I and some Master politician,
That has sharp state eyes will go near to pick out
The plots and every climate where they fastened,
And will puzzle 'em too.
I'm of your mind for that (sir.
they'll find 'em too full upon so ne countries,
Theed need use spectacles; but I turn to you now,
What plot is that discovered?
Your last bruit sir,
Begot twixt the black Bishop and yourself,
Your antedated letters 'bout the Jesuit.
Discovered, how?
The white knight's policy has out stripped yours it seems:
joined with th'assistant council of this Duke:
The white bishop's pawn undertook the journey,
Who as they say, discharged it like a flight,
I made him for the business fit and light.
'Tis but a bawdy pawn out of the way a little,
there's enough of them in all parts.
You have heard all then.
The wonders passed with me, but some
Shall down for't.
Set free that virtuous pawn from all her wrongs,
Let her be brought with honour to, the face,
Of her malicious Adversary.
Good.
Noble chaste Knight, a title of that Candour,
The greatest Prince on earth without impeachment
May have the dignity of his worth comprised in,
This fair delivering act virtue will register,
In that white book of the defence of Virgins,
Where the clear fame all preserving Knights,
Are to eternal memory consecrated;
And we embrace as partner of that honour,
This worthy Duke, the counsel of the act,
Whom we shall ever place in our respect.
Most blessed of Kings, throned in all royal graces,
Every good deed sends back its own rewards,
Into the bosom of the enterpriser;
But you to express yourself as well to be
King of munificency, as integrity
Adds glory to the gift.
Thy deserts claim it,
Zeal and fidelity appear, thou beauty
Of truth and innocence, best ornament
Of patience, thou that mad'st thy sufferings glorious
I'll take no knowledge on't what makes she here?
How dare you pawn unpennanced with a cheek
Fresh as her falsehood yet, where castigation
Has left no pale print of her visiting anguish,
Appear in this assembly, let me alone,
Sin must be bold, that's all the grace 'tis bound too.
What's this?
I'm wonder struck.
Assist me goodness,
I shall to prison again.
At least I've mazed 'em,
Scattered by admiration of her innocence,
(As the fired ships put in, severed the Fleet
In eighty eight) I'll on with't, impudence
Is mischief's patrimony, is his justice
injured reverence no sharplier righted,
I ever held that Majesty impartial,
That like unequal, Heaven looks on the manners,
Not on the shapes they shroud in.
This black Knight
Will never take any answer, 'tis a victory
To make him understand, he does amiss,
When he knows in his own clear understanding,
That he does nothing else, show him the testimony
Confirmed by good men, how that foul attempter,
Got but this morning to the place from whence
He dated his forged lines six days past,
Why may not the corruption sleep in this,
By some connivance, as you have walked in ours,
By too rash confidence.
I'll undertake
That Knight shall teach the devil how to lie.
If sin were half so wise as impudent,
She'd ne'er seek father for an advocate.
Now to act treachery with an angel's tongue,
Since all ours come out, i'll bring him in strongly again,
Where is his injured chastity? this goodness
Whose worth no transitory prize can equal,
This rock of constant, and invincible virtue
That made sin's tempest weary of his fury.
What is my pawn distracted?
I think rather
there's some notable masterprize of roguery,
This drum strikes up for.
Let me fall down with reverence
Before this blessed Altar.
This is madness.
Mark the end, I stand for roguery still,
I will not change my side,
I shall be taxed I know
I care not what the black house thinks of me.
What say you now?
I will not be unlaid yet.
however censure flies, I honour sanctity,
That is my object I intend no other,
I saw this glorious and most valiant virtue,
Fight the most noble combat with the devil.
If both the Bishops had been there for seconds
T'had been a complete Devil.
Then thou hast heard the violence intended?
'tis a truth, I joy to justify I was an agent
On virtue's part, and raised that confused noise,
That started his attempt and gave her liberty.
Oh 'tis a righteous story she has told (Sir)
My life and fame stands mutually engaged,
Both to the truth and goodness of this pawn.
Does it appear to you, yet clear as the Sun.
Lass I believed it long before 'twas done.
Degenerate
Base,
Perfidious.
Traitorous pawn
What are you all besides yourselves?
But I remember that pawn.
May a fearful barrenness,
Blast both my hopes and pleasures, if I brought not
Her ruin in my pity, a new trap
For her more sure confusion.
Have I not won now,
Did not I say 'twas craft, and machination?
I smell conspiracy all the way I went,
Although the mess were covered I'm so used to't.
That queen would I fain finger.
You are too hasty (sir)
If she were took the game would be ours quickly,
My aims at that white Knight, t'entrap him first.
The Duke will follow too.
Would that Bishop were in my Diocese,
I'd soon change his whiteness.
(Sir) I could whip you up a pawn immediately,
I know where my game stands.
Do't suddenly,
Advantage least must not be lost in this play.
Pawn, thou art ours.
he's taken by default,
By wilful negligence, guard the sacred persons,
Look well to the white Bishop, for that pawn
Gave guard to the queen, and him in the third place.
See what sure piece you lock your confidence in,
I made this pawn here by corruption ours,
As soon as honour by creation yours,
The whiteness upon him is but the leprosy
Of pure dissimulation: view him now,
His heart and his intents are of our colour.
Most dangerous Hypocrite
One made against us.
This truth of his complexion.
Has my goodness,
Clemency, love, and favour gracious raised thee
From a condition next to popular labour,
Took thee from all the dubitable hazards
Of Fortune? her most unsecure adventures?
And grafted thee into a branch of honour,
And dost thou fall from the top bough by the rottenness
Of thy alone corruption, like a fruit
That's over-ripened by the beams of favour,
Let thy own weight reward thee, I have forgot thee,
Integrity of life is so dear to me,
Where I find falsehood, or a crying trespass,
Be it in any whom our grace shines most on,
I'd tear 'em from my heart.
Spoke like heaven's substitute.
You have him, we can spare him, and his shame
Will make the rest look better to their Game.
The more cunning we must use then.
we shall match you,
Play how you can) perhaps, and make you too.
Is there so much amazement spent on him
That's but half black, there might be hope of that man
But how will this house wonder, if I stand forth
And show a whole one, instantly discover
One that's all black, where there's no hope at all.
I'll say, thy heart then justifies thy books,
I long for thy discovery.
look no farther then,
Bear witness all the house I am the man,
And turn myself into the black house freely,
I am of this side now.
Monster near matched him.
This is your noble work Knight.
Now I'll halter him.
Next news you hear, expect my books against you,
Printed at Douai, Brussels, or Spalato.
See his goods seized on.
Lass, they were all conveyed
Last night by water-gate, to a tailor's house:
A friend of Black house.
A prepared Hypocrite.
Premeditated turncoat.
Yes, rail on,
I'll reach you in my writings when I'm gone.
Flatter him a while with honours till we put him
Upon some dangerous service, and then burn him.
This came unlooked for.
How we rejoice to see you.
Now i'll discover all the white house to you.
Indeed that will both reconcile and praise you.
I rest upon you knight for my advancement.
Oh for the staff, the strong staff that will hold
And the red hat fit for the guilty measure,
Into the empty bag, know the first way,
Pawns that are lost, are ever out of play.
How's this?
No replication you know me,
No doubt ere long you'll have more company.
The bagge is big enough t'wil hold va
I sue to thee, prithee be one of us
Let my love win thee, thou hast done truth this day,
And yesterday my honour noble service.
The best Pawn of our house, could transcend it not.
My pity stands with zeal especially,
When I foresaw your marriage, than I amounted.
How? marriage?
That contaminating Art,
Would have spoilt all our fortunes a rape God bless us.
Thou talk'st of marriage.
Yes, yes, you do marry,
I saw the man.
The man.
An absolute handsome Gentleman, a complete one,
You'd say so when you see him, heir to the three red hats,
Besides his general hopes in the black house.
Sure thou art mistaken, for this man
I have promised single life to all my affections.
Promise you what you will, or I, or all's one,
There's fate rules us, and over rules us all methinks.
How came you to see or know this mystery.
A Magical glass I bought of an Egyptian,
Whose stone retains that speculative virtue,
Presented the man to me, your name brings him
As often as I use it, and methinks
I never have enough person and postures:
Are all so pleasing.
This is wondrous strange,
The faculties of soul are still the same,
I cannot feel one motion tend that way.
We do not always seek, the faith we live by,
Nor ever see our growth, yet both work▪ upward.
It was well applied, but may I see him too.
Surely you may without all doubt or fear,
Observing the right use as I was taught it,
Not looking back, nor questioning the spectre.
That's no hard observation, trust it
With me, is't possible, I long to see this man.
Pray follow me then,
And I'll case you instantly.
I would so fain take one of these white pawns now.
I'd make him do all under drudgery,
Feed him with ashes, milk, crumbed with goat's cheese;
And all the white meats can be devised for him,
So make him my white jennet when I prance it,
After the black knight's litter.
You'd look then,
Just like the Devil striding over a night mare.
Made of a miller's daughter.
A pox on you, were you so nigh, I'm taken
Like a Blackbird in the great snow, this white
Pawn grinning over me.
And now because I will not foul my clothes
Ever hereafter? for white quickly soils you know.
I prithee get thee gone,
Than I shall smut thee.
I'll put that to venture, now I have
Snapped thee, thou shalt do all the dirty drudgery,
That slavery was ever put too.
I shall cozen you,
You may chance come and find your work undone,
For I'm too proud to labour, i'll starve first,
I tell you that before hand.
I will fit you then with a black
Whip, that shall not be behind hand.
Pish, I have been used to whipping,
I have whipped myself three miles out of Town
In a morning, I can fast a fortnight, and
Make all your meat stink, and lie upon your hands.
To prevent that, your food shall be
Black berries, and upon gaudy days a pickled
Spider cut out like Anchovies: I'm not to
Learn a month's ordinary, come fir, will you firk.
Soft, soft you, you have no such
Bargain on't, if you look well about you.
I'm snapped too, a black
Pawn in the breech of me:
we three look like a bird spit, a white Chick
Between two russet Woodcocks.
I'm glad of this.
But you shall have small cause, for i'll firk you.
And i'll firk you again.
And I'll firk you again.
Mas here will be old firking, I shall
Have the worst on't, for I can firk nobody,
we draw together now for all the world.
Like three flies with one straw through their buttocks.
This is the room he did appear to me in,
And look you, this the Magical glass, that showed him.
I find no motion yet, what should I
Think on't? a sudden fear invades me,
A faint trembling under this omen
As oft felt the panting of a Turtle,
Under a stroking hand.
That bodes good luck still,
Sign you shall change state speedily: for that trembling
Is always the first symptom of a bride,
For any vain fears that may accompany
His apparition, by my truth to friendship
I quite you of the least, never was object
More gracefully presented, the very air
Conspires to do him honour, and treats
Sweet vocal sin as if a bridegroom enters:
Which argues the blessed harmony of your loves.
And will the using of my name produce him.
Nay of yours only, else the wonder halted,
To clear you of that doubt: i'll put the difference
In practice, the first thing I do, and make
His invocation in the name of others.
That will satisfy me much.
It shall be done.
Thou with gentle form and face,
filled lately this Egypted Glass,
By th'imperious powerful name,
And the universal fame,
Of the mighty black House Queen
I conjure thee to be seen.
What see you nothing yet?
Not any part: Pray try another.
You shall have your will:
I double my command and power,
And at the instant of this hour:
Invoke thee in the white queen's name,
With stay for time, and shape the same.
What see you yet?
There's nothing shows at all.
My truth reflects the clearer.
Then now fix and bless your fair eye,
With your own for ever.
Thou well composed by fate's hand drawn,
To enjoy the white Queens Pawn,
Of whom thou shalt (by virtue meet)
Many graceful issues get:
By the beauty of her fame,
By the whiteness of her name,
By her fair and fruitful love,
By her truth that mates the Dove,
By the meekness of her mind,
By the softness of her kind,
By the lustre of her grace,
By all these thou'rt summoned to this place.
Hark how the air enchanted with your praises,
And his approach this words to sweet notes raises.
Oh let him stay a while, a little longer.
That's a good hearing.
If he be mine, why should he part so soon?
Why, this is but the shadow of yours:
How do you?
Oh, I did in to give consent to see it,
What certainty is in our bloods our states?
What we still write is blotted out by fates:
Our wills are like a cause that is law-tossed,
What one Court orders, is by another-crost.
I find no fit place for this passion here,
'tis merely an intruder, he is a Gentleman,
Most wishfully composed, honour grows on him,
And wealth piled up for him, has youth enough too,
And yet in the sobriety of his Countenance,
Grave as a tetrarch, which is gracious
i'th' eye of modest pleasure, where's the emptiness,
What can you more request.
I do not know
What answer yet to make, it doth require,
A meeting twixt my fear and my desire.
she's caught, and which is strong, by her most wronger.
THE Iesuit in his gallant habit,
'tis he my Confessor, he might have passed me
seven years together, had I not by chance
Advanced mine eye upon that lettered Hat bond:
The jesuitical symbol to be worn,
By the brave collegians with consent,
'tis a strange habit for a holy Father,
A precedent of poverty especially:
But we the sons and daughters of Obedience,
Dare not once think awry, but must confess ourselves
As humble to the father of that feather,
Long spear and poniard, as to the Abbey and Altar,
And happy we are so highly graced t'attain to't,
Holy and reverend.
How has found me out?
Oh (sir) put on the sparlingst trim of glory,
Perfection will shine for most, and I know you
By the Catholical mark you wear about you,
The mark above your forehead.
Are you grown
So ambitious in your observance: well, your business,
I have my Game to follow.
I have a worm
Follows me, so that I can follow no game,
The most faint hearted pawn, if he could see
His play, might snap me up at pleasure:
I desire (sir) to be absolved, my conscience
Being at ease, I could then with more courage
Play my Game.
'Twas a base fact.
'Twas to a Schismatic pawn (sir.)
What's that to the ability of revenge
Suffices I have neither will nor power
To give you absolution for that violence,
Make your petition to the penance Chamber,
If the Tax Register relieve you in't,
By the black bishop's clemency you ha'wrought out,
A single piece of favour with your money,
It's all your refuge now.
This sting shoots deeper.
Yonder's my Game, which like a politic Chessner,
I must not seem to see.
Oh my heart.
That 'tis.
The very same that the Magical
Presented lately unto me.
Aud how like
A most regardless stranger he walks by,
Merely ignorant of that sat, you are not indeed
The principal'st part of him, what strange mysteries
Inscrutable love works by.
The time you see,
Is not yet come.
But 'tis in our power now
To bring time nearer, knowledge is a mastery,
And make it observe us, and not we it
I would force nothing
From its proper virtue,
Let time have his full course. I'd rather die
The modest death of undiscovered love,
You have heavens left and lowest servant suffer,
Or in his motion receive check for me:
How is my soul's growth altared that single life,
The fittest garment that peace ere made for't
Is grown too straight, too stubborn on the sudden.
He comes this way again.
Oh here's a Traitor
Leapt from my heart into my cheek all ready.
That will betray all to his powerful eye,
If it but glance upon me.
By my verity
Look, he's passed by again, down in neglect
Without the prosperous hint of so much happiness
To look upon his forehead, how close fate
Seals up the eye of humane understanding,
Till like the sun's flower, time and love encloses it,
'Tis pity he should dwell in ignorance longer.
What will you do?
Yes, die a bashful death, do
And let the remedy pass by unused skill,
You're chained enough all ready, look into't,
Absolute (Sir) with your most noble pardon,
For this my rude intrusion I am bold
To bring the knowledge of a secret nearer,
By many days (sir) then would it arrive,
In its own proper revelation with you,
Pray turn and fix, do you know yond noble goodness,
'tis the first minute my eye blessed me with her,
And clearly shows how much my knowledge wanted,
Not knowing her till now.
She's to be liked then,
Pray view advisedly, there's strong reason,
That I'm so bold to urge it, you must guess
The work concerns you nearer than you think for.
Her glory and the wonder of this secret,
Puts a reciprocal amazement on me.
And 'tis not without worth,
You two must be better acquainted.
Is their cause affinity,
Or any covetous help creation joys in,
To bring that work forward.
Yes, yes, I can show you,
The nearest way to that perfection,
Of a most virtuous one, that joy ere found,
Pray mark her once again you follow me,
And I will show you her, must be your wife (sir.)
The mystery exceeds, or else creation,
Has set that admirable piece before us,
To choose out chaste delight by.
Please you follow (Sir.)
What heart have you to put in on one object,
And cannot get me off? 'tis pain to part from't.
If there prove no check in the magic-glass.
But by proportion come as fair, and full
Into his eyes as his into mine lately,
You I'm confirmed he is mine for ever.
The very self same that my mirror blessed me, with
From head to foot, the beauty and the habit,
Kept you this place? still did not you remove Lady.
Not a foot (sir.)
Is't possible,
I would have sworn I'd seen the substance yonder,
'T was to that lustre, to that life presented.
even so was yours to me (sir.)
Pawn, saw you mine.
Perfectly clear, no
Sooner my name used, but yours appeared.
just so did yours at mine now.
Why stand you idle, will you let time
Cousen you, (protracting time) of those
Delicious benefits, that faith marked to you,
You modest pair of blushing,
Gamesters, and you (Sir) the bashful
I cannot flatter a foul fault in any,
Can you be more than man and wife assign,
And by a power the most irrevocable,
Others that be adventurers in delight,
May meet with crosses, shame or separation
You know the mind of fate, you must be coupled.
she speaks but truth in this,
I see no reason then,
That we should miss the relish of this night;
But we are both shamefaced.
How this night (Sir)
Did not I know you must be mine, and therein
Your privilege runs strong, for that loose motion
You never should be, is it not by fortune
To match with a pure mind, then am I miserable,
The Doves and all chaste loving, winged creatures
Have their pairs fit, their desires justly
Mated is woman, more infortunate, virgin?
The (may of woman) fate has ordained (Sir)
We should be man and wife, has not given
Warrant for aim act of knowledge till
We are so.
Tender eyed modesty, how it grieves at this,
I'm as far off for all this, strange imposture,
As at first interview, where lies our game now?
You know I cannot marry by my order.
I know you cannot (sir) yet you
May venture on a contract.
Hah!
Sure you may (sir,)
Without all question so far, without danger
Or any stain to your vow, and that make take her:
Nay do't with speed, she'll think you
Mean the better too.
Be not so lavish of that blessed spring,
You've wasted that upon a cold occasion now,
Would wash a sinful soul white by our love joys,
That motion shall ne'er light upon my tongue more,
Till we're contracted, than I hope your mine.
In all just duty ever.
Then do you question it?
Pish, then you're man and wife,
All but Church Ceremonies:
Pray let's see it done first,
She shall do reason then:
Now i'll enjoy the sport, and cousen you both,
My blood's game is the wages I have
Worked for.
Pawn, I have spoke to the Fat bishop for thee,
I'll get thy absolution from his own mouth:
Reach me my Chair of ease, my Chair of cozenage
seven thousand pounds in women, reach me that
I love a life to sit upon a bank
Of Heretic gold: Oh soft and gentle (sirrah)
there's a foul flaw i'th' bottom of my bum (pawn)
I ne'er shall make sound soldier, but sound treacher
With any he in Europe, how now? quality
Thou hast the paltrest fool that ere I met with,
It cannot bear one suckling villain:
Mine can digest a monster without credit,
A fin as weighty as an Elephant,
And never wamble for't.
ay, you have been used to't (sir)
That's a great help, the swallow of my conscience
Has but a narrow passage, you must think yet
It lies i'th' penitent pipe, and will not down,
If I had got seven thousand pounds by Offices
And gulled down you, the boar would have been bigger.
Nay, an thou provest factious, I shall hug thee,
Can a poore-pocht-soft rear iniquity
So rude upon thy conscience, I'm ashamed of thee,
Hadst thou betrayed the witness to the black,
beggared a Kingdom by dissimulation,
Unjointed the fair frame of peace, and traffic
Poisoned allegiance, set faith back and wrought
Women's soft souls even up to the masculine malice,
To pursue truth to death if the cause roused 'em,
That stairs and parets as first taught to curse thee:
All these and ten times troubled has this brain
been parent too, they are my offsprings all.
A goodly brood.
Yet I can jest as lightly,
Laugh and tell strange stories to Court Madames,
(Daughters of my seducements) with alacrity,
As high and heartily, as youth's time of innocence
That never knew a sin, to shape a sorrow by;
I feel no tempest, not a leaf wind stirring,
To shake a fault, my conscience is be calmed rather,
I'm sure there's a Whirlwind huffs in mine.
Sirrah, I ha' sold the Groom ath stool six times,
And received money of six several Ladies:
Ambitious to take place of baronets' wives▪
To three old money Matrons I have promised,
The mother ship o'th' maids, I've taught our friends
To convey white house gold, to our black kingdom
In cold backed pasties, so cousen Searchers:
For venting halbowed oil, beads, needles, pardons,
Pictures, veronices, heads in private presses,
That's done one i'th' habit of a Pedlar:
Letters conveyed in rolls, tobacco-roles:
When a restraint comes, by my politic counsel;
Some of our Iesuites turn Gentlemen Ushers:
Some falconers, some park-keeper, & some huntsmen:
One took the shape of an old lady's Cook once,
And dispatched two chares in a sunday morning,
The Altar and the Dresser: pray what use
Put I my summer recreation too?
But more t'inform my knowledge in the state
And strength of the white Kingdom? no fortifications,
Haven, Creek, landing place, 'bout the white Coast,
But I got draught, and plot-form, learned the depth
Of all the Channels, knowledge of all sands,
Shelves, Rocks and Rivers for invasion:
A Catalogue of all the Navy Royal:
The burden of each ship, the brass murderers:
The number of the men, to what cape bound:
Again for the discovery of the Inlands:
Never a Shire but the State better known
To me, then to her best Inhabitants:
What power of men and horse, gentries, revenues,
Who well affected to your side, how ill,
Who neither will nor ill, all the neutrality.
Thirty eight souls have been seduced (Pawn)
Since the joales vomited with the Pill I gave 'em.
Sure you put oil of toad into physic (sir)
I'm now about a masterpiece of play,
To entrap the Wh. Knight, and with false allurements,
Entice him to our black House, more will follow,
Whilst our Fat Bishop sets upon the Queen
Then will our game lie sweetly.
he's come now (sir.)
here's Taxa Penitentiaris Knight,
The book of general pardons, of all prizes:
I have been searching for his sin this half hour,
And cannot light upon it.
That is strange let me see it.
Wretched as I am, has my rage done that
There is no precedent of pardon for?
For wilful murder 13. pounds, 4. shillings
and sixpence, that's reasonable cheap, for killing,
killing, killing, killing, killing, killing.
Why here's nothing but killing of this side.
Turn over the sheet, you shall find adultery
And other trivial sins.
Adultery, oh I'm met now; for Adultery
A couple of shillings, and for Fornication five pence,
Mass these are the good pennyworths,
I cannot see how a man can mend himself, for lying
With Mother, Sister, or Daughter, I marry (sir)
Thirty three pounds, three shillings and three pence,
The sin's gradation right paid all in three too.
You have read the story of that monster (sir)
That got his daughter, sister & wife, of his own mother
Simon nine pounds.
They may thank me for that, 'twas nineteen,
Before I came, I have mitigated many of the sums.
Sodomy six pence, you should have
Put that sum ever on the back side of your book
Bishop.
there's few on's very forward (sir)
What's here? a old precedents of encouragement.
I those are ancient notes.
Given as a gratitude for the killing of an Heretical
Prince, with a poisoned knife ducats 5 thousand.
True (sir) that was paid.
Promised to Doctor Lopus for poisoning the Maiden Queen of the Whit Kingdom, ducats twenty thousand, which said sum was afterwards given as a meritorious alms to the Nunnery at Lisbon, having at this present, ten thousand pounds more at use in the town-house of Antwerp.
What's all this to my conscience (worthy Holiness)
I sue for pardon, I have brought money with me.
You must depart, you see there is no precedent,
Of any price or pardon for that fact.
Most miserable, are fouler sins remitted?
Killing, nay wilful murder.
True, there is instance:
Were you to kill him I'd pardon you:
there's precedent for that, and price set down,
But none for Gelding.
I have picked out understanding now for ever,
Out of the carbulistic bloody riddle,
I'll make away all my estate and kill him,
And by that act obtain full absolution.
Why Bishop, Knight, where's your removes?
Your troops? stand you now idle in the heart of game?
My life for yours black sovereign the game is ours,
I have wrought underhand for the Whit Knight,
And this brave Duke, and find them very cunning
And for their sanctimonious Queen's surprisal,
In that State-puzell, and distracted hurry,
Trust my Arch subtlety with.
Oh Eagle pride,
Never was Game more hopeful of our side.
If Bishop Bullbeef, be not snapped at next bout,
As the Game stands, I'll never trust art more.
True noble Duke, fair virtues most endeared one,
Let us prevent their rank insinuation,
With truth of cause, and cunning meet their plots:
With confident goodness, that shall strike them grauling.
(Sir) all the gins, traps, and alluring snares,
The Devil has been at work since eighty eight,
Are laid for the great hope of this Game only.
The more noble will truth's triumphs be,
When they have wound about our constant courages,
The glittering serpent, that e'er falsehood fashioned;
And glorying most, in his resplendent poisons,
Just Heaven can find a bolt to bruise his head.
Look would see destruction lie a sunning?
In yonder smile sits blood, and treachery basking, Ent.
In that perfidious model of face falsehood:
Hell is drawn grinning.
What a pain it is
For Truth to feign a little?
Oh fair Knight,
The rising glory of the House of Candour,
Have I so many protestations lost?
Lost, lost, quite lost, am I not worth your confidence?
I that have void the faculties of Soul,
Life, spirit, and brain, to your sweet Game of youth,
(Your noble fruitful Game) can you mistrust
Any foul play in me? that have been ever
The most submiss observers of your virtues,
And no way taunted with ambition.
(Save only to be thought your first admirer,
How often have I changed (for your delight)
The Royal Presentation of my place?
Into a mimic jester, and become
(For your sake, and the expulsion of sad thoughts)
Of a great state since, a light son of pastime,
Made three score year a Tomboy, a mere wanton,
I'll tell you what I told a (Savoy) dame once:
New Wed, high, plump, and lusting for an issue,
Within the year I promised her a child,
If she would stride over (Saint Rumbant's) breeches,
A relic kept at Methlin, the next morning
One of my followers old hose was conveyed
Into her chamber, where she tried the feat,
By that, and a Court friend, after grew great.
Why who could be without thee)
I will change,
To please you, to any shape, and my aim
Has been to win your love, in all this game.
Thou hast it nobly, and I long to see,
the black-house pleasure, state and dignity.
Of honour you'll so surfeit and delight,
You'll ne'er desire again to see the Whit.
My love, my hope, my dearest, oh he's gone,
Entrapped, ensnared, surprised amongst the black on's,
I never felt extremity like this,
Thick darkness dwells upon this hour, Integrity
Like one of heaven's bright Luminaries now,
By errors dullest element interpose,
Suffers a black eclipse, I never was
More sick of love then now I am of horror:
I shallbe taken, the games lost, I'm set upon:
Oh 'tis the turncoat Bishop, having watched
Th'advantage of his play, comes now to seize on me:
Oh! I'm hard be set, distressed most miserable.
'tis in vain to stir, remove which way you can:
I take you now, this is the time we have hoped for,
Queen you must down.
No rescue, no deliverer.
The black king's blood burns for thy prostitution,
And nothing but the spring of thy chaste virtue
Can cool his inflammation: instantly
He dies upon a pleurisy of Luxury,
If he deflower thee not.
Oh straight of misery.
And is your holiness his divine procurer?
The devils in't, I'm taken by a Ringdove:
Where stood this Bishop all this while, that I saw him not?
Oh you were so ambitious you looked over me,
You aimed at no less person, than the Queen
(The glory of the Game) if she were won,
The way were open to the master-check,
Which (look you) he and his, lives to give you:
Honour and virtue guide him in his station.
Oh, my safe sanctuary.
Let Heavens blessings
Be no longer mine, than I am thy sure one:
The dove's house is not safer in the Rock,
Than thou in my firm bosom.
I am blessed in't.
Is it that lump of rank ingratitude,
Swelled with the poison of Hypocrisy:
Could he be so malicious, h'as partaken
Of the sweet fertile blessings of our Kingdom, Bishop
Thou hast done our White House gracious service,
And worthy the fair reverence of thy place:
For (thee black Holiness) that works out thy death,
As the blind mole the properest son of earth,
Who in casting his ambitious hills up,
Is often taken and destroyed in the midst
Of his advanced work: 'twere well with thee,
If like that verminous labourer, which thou imitatest
In bills of pride and malice, when death puts thee up,
The silent grave might prove the bag for ever:
No deeper pit than that for thy vain hope
Of the white Knight, and his most firm assistant,
Two princely pieces, which I know thy thoughts
Give lost for ever now, my strong assurance
Of their fixed virtues, could you let in seas
Of populous untruths against that Fort,
'Twould burst the proudest billows.
My fear's passed then.
Fear? you were never guilty of an injury
To goodness, but in that.
It stayed not with me (sir.)
It was too much, if it usurped a thought,
Place a strong guard there.
Confidence is set (sir.)
Take that prize hence (you reverend of men)
Put covetousness into the bag again.
The Bag had need be sound, or it goes to wrack,
Sin and my weight will make a strong one crack.
HOld, hold,
Is the black bishop's pawn, the Jesuit
Planted for his consecration?
Ecce triumphanti, Me fixum Caesaris Arte.
Art there (my holy boy) sirrah, Bishop
Tumbrle is snapped i'th' Bag by this time.
Heretici pereant sic.
All Latin: Sure the Oration hath infected him:
Away, away make haste: they are coming.
Si quid mortalibus, in vnquam oculis hilarem
Et gratum aperuit diem: Si quid permantibus
Amicorum Animis gaudium attulit perperitùr
Laetitiam (Eques candidissime pralucentissime,
Falscom profecto tuum a Dome Candoris ad Domum
Nigritudinis Accessum promisse peperisse, at tulisse fatemur:
Omnes aduentus Tui Conflagrantissimi, omni qua
Possumus laetitia, Gaudio, Congratulatione, Acclamations
Animis observantissimis, Affectibus divotissimis, obsequijs
Uenerabundis Te Sospitim congratulamur?
(Sir) in this short congratulatory speech,
You may conceive how the whole House affects you.
The Colleges and Sanctimonious seed plots.
'Tis clear and so acknowledged royal (Sir.)
What Honours, Pleasures, Rarities, Delights
Your noble thought can think.
Your fair eye fix on
That's comprehended in the spacious circuit
Of our black Kingdom, they are your servants all.
How amply you endear us?
They are favours that equally enrich the Royal Giver.
As the receiver in the free donation.
Hark,
To enlarge your welcome: from all parts
Is heard sweet-sounding airs, abstruse things
Open of voluntary freeness: And yond Altar,
The seat of adoration, seems t'adore,
The virtues you bring with you.
there's a taste of the old vessel still.
The erroneous relish.
Wonder work some strange delight
(This place was never yet without)
To welcome thee the fair White House Knight,
And to bring our hopes about,
May from the Altar Flames aspire,
Those Tapers set themselves on fire.
May senseless things our joys approve,
And those brazen Statues move:
Quickened by some Power above,
Or what more strange to show our Love.
A happy Omen waits upon this hour,
All move portentuously the Right-hand way.
Come let's set free all most choice delights,
That ever adorned Days or quickened Nights.
I see 'twas but a trial of my duty now,
Has a more modest mind, and in that virtue
Most worthily hath Fate provided for me,
Hah! 'tis the bad-man in the Reverend habit,
Dares he be seen again? Traitor to Holiness,
Oh marble fronted Impudence, and knows,
How ill'has used? I'm ashamed he blushes not,
Are you yet stored with any woman's pity?
Are you the Mistress of so much Devotion?
Kindness, and Charity? as to bestow
An Alms of Love on your poor sufferer yet
For your sake only?
(Sir) for the reverend respect you ought
To give to Sanctity (though none to me)
In being her servant vowed, and wear her livery,
(If I might counsel) you should never speak,
The language of unchastity in that habit:
You will not think how ill it does with you,
The world's a stage on which all parts are played,
You'd think it most absurd to see a Devil
Presented there not in a devil's shape,
Or wanting one, to send him out in yours,
You'd rail at that for an absurdity,
No College ere committed, for decorum's sake then
For pities cause, for sacred virtue's honour,
If you'll persist still in your devilish part,
Present him as you should, and let one
That carries up the goodness of the play,
Come in that habit: and I'll speak with him,
Then will the parts be fitted, and the spectators
Know which is which, they must have cunning judgements,
To find it else, for such a one as you
Is able to deceive a mighty Auditory.
Nay those you have seduced (if there be any
In the assembly) if they see what manner
You play the Game with me, they cannot love you.
Is there so little hope of you to smile (sir)
Yes at your fears, at th'ignorance of your power
The little use you make of time (youth's fortune)
Knowing you have a Husband for lust's shelter,
You dare not yet make bold with a friend's comfort:
This is the plague of weakness.
So hot burning?
The syllables of sin, fly from his lips,
As if the letter came new cast from Hell.
Well setting aside the dish you love so much,
(Which hath been heartily tasted by your betters)
I come to marry you to the gentleman
That last enjoyed you, I hope that pleaseth you.
there's no immodest relish in that office.
Strange of all men he should light on him,
To tie that holy knot that sought to undo me,
Were you requested to perform that business (sir)
I name you a sure token.
As for that (sir)
Now you're most welcome, and my fair hopes of you
You'd never break the sacred knot you tyde once,
With any lewd solicitings hereafter.
But all the crafts in getting of it knit,
You are all one fire to make your cozening market,
I am the merrier and the man, do you know me?
Do you know me nice Iniquity? strict luxury?
And holy whoredom, I would clap on marriage
With all hot speed to solder up the Game?
So what a strong Fate hath provided for thee,
You were a maid, swear still you're no worse now:
I left you as I found you, have I startled you?
I'm quit with you now for my discovery,
Your outcries, and your Cunning, farewell brookage.
Nay stay, and hear me but give thanks a
Little (if your care can endure a work so gracious,
Than you may take your pleasure.
I have done that.
That power that hath preserved me from this devil.
How?
This that may challenge the chief chair in Hell,
And sit above his Master.
Bring in merit.
That sufferest him through blind lust to be led,
Last night to the action of some common bed.
Not over common neither.
Hah! what voice was that?
Of virgins be thou ever honoured.
Now you may go, you hear I have given thanks (sir)
Here is a strange Game indeed, did not I lie with you.
No.
What a devil art thou?
I will not answer you (sir)
After thanksgiving.
You made promise to me
After the contract.
Yes.
Mischief confound thee,
I speak not to thee: and you were prepared for't,
And set your joys more heigh.
Then you could reach (sir)
This is some bawdy P. i'll slit the throat on't.
What me your bedfellow,
To one that works so kindly without rape.
My bedfellow.
Do you plant your scorn against me?
Why, when I was Probationer at Brussels.
That Engine was not known; then Adoration
Filled the place, and wonder was in fashion.
Is't turned to the wild seed of contempt so soon?
Can 5 years' stamp a bawd? pray look upon me (sir)
I'm youth enough to take it, 'tis no longer,
Since you were chief agent for the transportation
Of ladies' Daughters, if you be remembered,
Some of their portions I could name, you pursed 'em too
They were soon dispossessed of worldly cares,
That came into your fingers.
Shall I hear her?
Holy derision yes, till thy ears swell
With thy own venom, thy profane life's vomit:
Whose Niece was she you poisoned with child twice,
And gave her out possessed with a foul Spirit
When 'twas indeed your Bastard?
I am taken
In mine own toils.
Yes, and 'tis just you should be.
And thou lewd Pawn, the shame of Womanhood.
I'm lost of all hands.
I cannot feel
The weight of my affection: now he's taken,
It hath not the burden of a Grasshopper.
Thou whore of order, cockatrice in Voto.
Yonder's the Whit bishop's pawn, I'll play at's heart now
Oh bloody villain, wouldst thou heap a murder,
On thy first foul offences? O merciless bloodhound
'Tis time that thou wert taken.
Death prevented.
For thy sake, and that partner in thy shame,
I'll never know man further than by Name.
You have enriched my knowledge royal (sir)
And my content together.
Steed of riot,
We set you only welcome, surfeit is
A thing that's seldom heard of in these parts.
I hear of the more virtue when I miss on't.
We do not use to bury in our bellies,
Two hundred thousand ducats, and then boast on't:
Or exercise the old Roman painful idleness,
With care of fetching fishes far from home,
The golden headed Coracine out of Egypt:
The Salpa from Ebusis, or the Pelamis,
Which some call summer whiting from Calcedon:
Salmons from Aquitaine, Helops from Rhodes:
Cockles from Chios, franked and salted up,
With Far and Sapa flower, and cockled wine,
We cram no birds nor Epicurian like,
Enclose some creeks o'th' sea, as Sergius Crata did,
He, that invented the first stews for Oysters,
And other sea fish? who besides the pleasure of his
Own throat, got large revenues by the invention,
Whose fat example the nobility followed;
Nor do we imitate that Arch gourmandizer,
With twenty two courses at a Dinner;
And betwixt every course, he and guess
Washed, and used women, then sat down and strengthened:
Lust swimming in their dishes, which no sooner
Was tasted, but was ready to be vented.
Most impious Epicures.
We commend rather
Of two extremes the parsimony of Pertinax,
Who had half lettuces set up to serve again,
Or his successor Iulian, that would make
Three meals of a lean Hare, and after sup
With a green fig, and wipe his beard (as we can)
The old bewailers of excess in those days
Complained there were more coin bid for a
Cook then for a war-horse; but now Cooks are
Purchased after the rate of Triumphant, and some
Dishes after the rate of Cooks, which must needs
Make some of th'white house gourmandizers, especially
Your wealthy plump plebeians, like the Hogs
Which Scaliger cities, that could not move for fat,
So insensible of either prick or goad,
That mouse made goles to needle in their buttocks
And they ne'er felt 'em: There was once a ruler
Cyrene's Governor choked with his own paunch,
Which death, fat Sanctius King of Castille, fearing
Through his infinite mass of belly, rather chose
To be killed suddenly, by a pernicious herb
Taken to make him lean, which old Cordeba
King of Morocco counselled his fear too,
Than he would hazard to be stung to death,
As that huge Cormorant that was choked before him.
Well you are as sound a spokesman for parsimony,
And clear abstinence, and scarce one meal a day
As ever spoke with tongue.
Censure him mild (sir) 'twas but to find discourse.
he'll talk of any thing.
I shall be half afraid to feed hereafter.
Or I beshrew my heart: for I fear fatness,
The fog of fatness as I fear a Dragon:
The comeliness I wish for, that's as glorious.
Your course is wondrous strict: I should transgress (sir)
Were I to change my side (as you have wrought me.)
How you misprise? 'tis not meant to you-ward:
You that are wound up to the height of feeding,
By clime and custom are dispensed withal,
You may eat, Cabrito, Calf, and Ton's:
Eat, and eat every day, twice if you please.
Nay, the franked hen, fatted with Milk and Corn,
A riot which the Inhabitants of Delos
Were first inventors of: or the crammed Cockle.
Well for the food I'm happily resolved in;
But for the diet of my disposition,
There comes a trouble you will hardly find
Food to please that.
It must be a strange nature,
We cannot find a dish for't, having Policy
(The Master Cook of Christendom) to dress it.
Pray name your nature's diet.
The first mess, is hot Ambition.
That's but served in puff-paste:
Alas, the meanest of our Cardinals Cooks
Can dress that dinner: Your Ambition (sir)
Can fetch no further compass than the World?
That's certain (Sir.)
we are about that already,
And in the large feast of our vast Ambition,
We count but the white Kingdom (whence you came from)
The Garden for our Cook, to pick his Salads:
The food's lean France larded with Germany;
Before which comes the the Grave, chaste Signiory
Of Venice, served in (Capon-like) in White-broth:
From our chief Oven Italy the bake-meats:
Savoy the Salt: Genena the chipped Mancher.
Below the Salt, the Netherlands are placed;
A common dish at lower end a'th' table,
For meaner pride to fall too. For our second course,
A spit of Portugals served in for Plovers:
Indians and Moores for blackbirds: all this while
Holland stands ready melted to make sauce,
On all occasions, when the Voider comes;
And with such cheer our full hopes we suffice,
Zealand says grace, for fashion when we rise.
Her's meat enough in conscience for ambition
If there be any want there is Switzerland,
Polonia, and such pickled things will serve
To furnish out the table.
You say well (sir)
But here's the misery, when I ha' stopped the mouth
Of one vice, there's another stands gaping for food.
I'm as covetous as a barren womb,
The grave, or what's more ravenous?
we're for you (sir)
Call you that heinousness, that is good husbandry?
Why when we make money of our faith, our prayers,
We make make the very death bed buy her comforts,
Most dearly pay for all her pious Counsels,
Leave rich revenues for a few weak orisons:
Or else they pass unreconciled without 'em,
Did you but view the vaults within our monasteries,
You'd swear then Pluto (whom the fiction calls)
The Lord of riches, were entombed there.
Is it possible.
You cannot walk for Tons.
But how shall I bestow the vice I bring, sir,
You quite forget me, I shall be shut out,
By your strict key of life.
Is yours so vild (Sir)
Some that are pleased to make a wanton on't,
Call it infirmity of blood, flesh frailty;
But certain there's a worse name in your book for't.
The trifle of all vices, the mere innocent,
The very novice of this house of clay, verily
If I but hug thee hard, I show the worst on't,
'tis all the fruit we have here after supper:
Nay, at the ruins of a Nunnery once,
Six thousand Infants heads found in a fishpond.
How?
ay, how? how came they thither think you?
Huldrick Bishop of Ausberg in's Epistle
To Nicholas the first, can tell you how,
(May be he was at cleansing of the pond)
I can but smile to think, how it would puzzle
All mother maids that ever liver in those parts,
To know their own child's head; but is this all?
Are you ours yet?
One more, and I am silenced:
But this that comes now will divide up questionless
'tis ten times, ten times, worse than the forerunners.
Is it so vild, there is no name ordained for't?
Toads have their titles, and creation gave
Serpents, and Adders those names to be known by.
This of all others bears the hiddenest poison,
The smoothest venom, I am an Arch-dissembler.
How.
'tis my nature's brain turn from me (sir,)
The time is yet to come, that ere I spoke
What my heart meant.
And call you that a vice:
Avoid all profanation, I beseech you;
The only prime-state virtue upon earth,
The policy of Empires, oh take heed (Sir)
For fear it take displeasure and forsake you,
'tis a jewel of that precious value,
Whose worth's not known, but to the skilful Lapidary
The instrument that picks ope princes' hearts,
And locks up our from them, with the same motion:
You never came so near our souls till now.
Now you're a brother to us.
What we have done, has been dissemblance ever.
There you lie then:
And the Games ours, we give the check mate
By discovery, King the noblest mate of all.
I'm lost, I'm taken.
Ambitious, covetous luxurious falsehood.
Dissembler, that includes all.
All hopes confounded.
Miserable condition.
Oh let my arms be blessed,
With this dear treasure,
truth's glorious Masterpiece, see Queen of sweetness
He's in my bosom safe, and this fair Structure
Of comely honour, his true blessed assistant.
May their Integrities ever possess
That powerful Sanctuary.
As 'twas a Game (Sir)
Won with much hazard, so with much more triumph,
I gave him check mate by discovery (sir.)
Obscurity is now the fittest favour
Falsehood can sue for: it well snites Perdition,
'tis their best course that so hath lost their fame,
To put their heads into the bag for shame;
And there behold the bags mouth (like hell) opens
To take her due; and the lost sons appear,
Greedily gaping for increase of fellowship
In infamy, the last desire of wretches
Advancing their perdition, branded foreheads
Like Envies issue, or a bed of Snakes.
'tis too apparent the Game's lost, King taken.
The white House has given us the bag (I thank 'em.)
They'd need have given you a whole bag
By yourself,
'sfoot this black bishop has so over laid me,
So squelched and squeezed me, I have no verjuice
Let in me, you shall find all my goodness if you
Look for't in the bottom of the Bag.
Thou malapert Pawn,
The Bishop must have room, he will have room,
And room to lie at pleasure.
All the Bag I think
Is room too little for your Spalletto paunch.
Down viper of our Order, I abhor thee,
thou'lt show thy whorish front.
Yes, monster Holiness.
Contention in the bag? is hell divided.
You'd need have some of Majesty and Power,
To keep good rule amongst you, make room Bishop.
I am not easily moved, when I'm once set,
I scorn to stir for any King on earth.
Here comes the Queen, what say you then to her?
Indeed a Queen may make a Bishop stir.
Room for the greatest Machiavill Politician,
That ere the Devil hatched of a nuns-egg.
He'll pick a hole in the bag, and get out shortly:
I'm sure to be the last man that creeps out;
And that's the misery of greatness ever.
Room for a sunburned, Tanzy faced beloved,
An Olive coloured Ganymede; and that's all
That's worth the bagging.
Crowd in all you can,
The Bishop will be still uppermost man
Maugre King, Queen, or Politician.
So let the Bag close now (the fittest womb
For Treachery, Pride and falsehood, whilst we winner like)
Destroying through heaven's power, what would destroy;
Welcome our white Knight with loud peals of joy.
MY Mistress (the Whit Queen) hath sent me forth,
And bade me bow thus low, to all of Worth,
That are true Friends of the White House and Cause,
Which She hopes most of this assembly draws:
For any else, by Envies mark devoted,
To those night-glow-worms in the Bag denoted;
Where ere they sit, stand, or in private lurk,
They'll be soon known by their depraving work:
But She's assured, what they'll commit to bayne,
Her white Friends hands will build up fair again.