WHo would believe that in this human form,
And under these mean Shepherd's weeds,
A god head? nor yet of the lower rank,
But the most mighty 'mong the gods; whose power were hid
Makes oft the bloody Sword of angry Mars
Fall from his hand; stern Neptune hurl away
His powerful trident; and great Ioue lay by
His thunderbolt: and thus attyr'de, I hope
My mother Venus shall have much ado
To find her Cupid. For the troth to tell,
Sh'has made me play the runaway with her:
Because (forsooth) she will sole mistress be,
And to her pleasure bind my shafts and me;
And (vain ambitious woman as she is)
Would tie me to live still 'mongst Crowns, & Sceptres,
And to high Courts confine my power and me;
And to my under-followers grants to live
Here in these woods; and to advance their powers,
o'er silly Shepherds breasts; but I that am
No child, (though childish be my gate and looks)
Will for this once, do as shall please me best:
For not to her, but me allotted were
The ever awful brand, and golden bow:
Therefore I purpose to conceal myself,
And run from her entreats; (for other power
Then to entreat, she shall not have o'er me:)
I hear she haunts these groves, and promiseth
Unto the Nymphs and Shepherds, which of them
Will bring me to her, kisses for their pains,
And more than kisses too; and cannot I
To them shall hide me from her, liberal be
Of kisses, and more too as well as she?
The Nymphs I know will like my kisses best,
When I shall woe them that am god of love:
Therefore my mother doth but looze her pain,
Here's none will bring her home her son again.
But to be surer, that she may not know
Or find me out by the vsd'e marks I bear,
I'ue laid my quiver, bow, and wings from me;
Yet come I not hither unarmed; this rod
I carry is my brand transformed thus,
And breathes out unseen flame at every poor;
And this dart (though it have no golden head)
Of heu'nly temper is; and where it lytes
Enforceth love; and even this day shall make
A deep and cureless wound in the hard breast
Of the most cruel Nymph, that ever yet
Hath been a follower of Diana's train;
Nor will I pity Silvia more, (for so
Th'obdurate stony-brested Nymph is called)
Then erst I did the gentle-hearted Swain
Aminta, many winters since, when he
(Poor wretch) then young, followed her younger steps
From wood to wood in every game and sport:
And for more sure effecting my intent,
I'll pause a while till some remorse and pity
Of the poor Shephedrs sufferings, have a little
Thawde the hard ice congealed about her breast
With maiden peevishness; and when I find
She grows more pliant, will I launch her breast:
And this to do with better ease and art,
Amongst the feasting troops of the crowned Shepherds
That hither come to sport o'hollydayes,
I'll put myself; and here, even in this place
I'll give the speeding blow unseen, unknown.
To day these Woods shall hear another voice
Of love then ere before, and more refin'de;
My god head here shall in itself appear
Present no longer in my Ministers:
I'll breathe soft thoughts into their courser breasts,
And make their tongues in smoothest numbers move;
For whatsoe'er I am, still am I Love;
No less in Shepherds then in greatest Peers;
And inequality in people, I
Can temper as I please, such is my power.
The Rural sound of homely Shepherds reed
I can make equal with the learned'st lyre,
And if my mother (which disdains forsooth
To see me here) be ignorant of this,
she's blind, not I
Whom the blind world reputes blind wrongfully.
Is't possible (Silvia) thou canst resolve
To spend the fair hours of thy flowering youth
With such contempt of Venus, and her Son;
And hast no more desire to be a mother,
And leave a part of thee (when thou art dead)
Living behind thee? Change (young fondling) change
Thy mind; and do not lead a life so strange.
Daphne, let others pleasure take in love,
(If in such thraledome any pleasure be;)
The life I lead contents me well enough;
To chase the flying Deer over the lawn
With Hound, or well-aym'de Flight, and while I find
shafts in my quiver, and beasts for my prey,
I'll want no sport to pass the time away.
Fine sports no doubt, and sure a goodly life
For silly minds that never tasted other,
And for that cause alone it pleases thee:
●o duller ages heretofore could think
scornes and water the best meat and drink,
Before the use of corn and wine was found,
but now theyare only eat and drunk by beasts:
And hadst thou but once proved the thousand part
Of the dear joys those happy lovers feel,
That truly love, and are beloved again,
Thou wouldst with sighs repent thy time misspent,
And only call a lover's life Content.
And say, O my past springtyde, how in vain
Spent I thy widowy nights? how many days
In fruitless loneness, which I now be wail?
Why knew I not loves sweets have this condition
To bring new joys with every repetition?
Change, change thy mind (young silly one) and know
Too late repentance is a double woe.
When I repent the thoughts I carry now,
Or say such words as these thou feigning framest
To sport thyself withal; the Floulds shall run
Back to their Springs, the Wolf shall fearing fly
The silly Lamb, and the young Leurett shall
Pursue the speedy Grayhound o'er the plain,
The Bear shall in the toiling Ocean breed,
And finny Dolphin on the mountains feed.
I so, just such another peevish thing
Like thee was I, when I was of thy years;
So looked, so pac'de, so golden trest ', so ruddy
My 'ticing lip, so in my rising cheek
The damask rose was blown; and I remember
Just such as thine is now, my mind was then,
And even such silly pastimes as thine be
I likewise vsd'e; as with limned twiggs to catch
Unwares the feathered singers in the wood,
Track the Deeres footing, till I had entrapped them
And such like; when a gentle lover wood me,
With such a peevish grace hang down the head
And blush for scorn I would, as oft thou dost;
And that unseemly form me thought became me,
Nay even disliked what others lik'de in me,
So much I counted it a fault, and shame
To be desired or loved of any one;
But what cannot time bring to pass? and what
Cannot a true and faithful lover do
With importunity, desert and love?
And I confess plainly the troth to thee
So was I vanquished; nor with other arms
Then humble sufferance, sighs, and pity craving:
But then I soon found in one short nights shade,
What the broad light of many hundred days
Can never teach me; then I could recall
Myself, shake off my blind simplicity,
And sighing say, here Cynthia take thy bow,
Quiver, and horn, for I renounce thy life.
And I hope yet to see another day
Thy wild thoughts bridled too, and thy hard breast
Yield, and grow softer at Aminta's plaints.
Is he not young and fresh, and lovely too?
Does he not love thee dearly ', and thee alone?
For though beloved of many Nymphs, he never
For others love, or thy hate, leaves to love thee.
Nor canst thou think him to mean borne for thee;
For (be thou daughter of Cidippe fair,
Whose sire was god of this our noble flood)
Yet is Aminta old Silvanus' heir,
Of the high seed of Pan the Shepherd's god.
The sleeke-browd ' Amarillis (if ere yet
In any fountains glass thou saw'st thyself)
Is not a whit less lovely than thou art;
Yet all her sweet allurements he rejects,
And madly dotes on thy despiteful loathe.
Well, but suppose now, (and the heavens forbidden
It come to more than supposition)
That he falling from thee, his mind remove,
And cleave to her, that so deserves his love;
What will become of thee then? with what eye
Wilt thou behold him in an others arms
Happily twyn'de, and thyself laughed to scorn?
Be it to ' Aminta and his loves, as best
Shall like himself; I'm at a point for one;
And so he be not mine, be ' he whose he list.
But mine he cannot be against my will,
Nor yet though he were mine, would I be his.
Fie, whence grows this thy hate?
Why from his love.
Too soft a sire to breed so rough a Son;
But who ere saw Tigers of mild Lambs bred,
Or the black Rau'ne hatched of a silver Dove?
Thou dost but mock me Silvia, dost thou not?
I hate his love, that doth my honour hate;
And loved him, whilst he sought what I could grant.
'tis thou offendest thyself; he doth but crane
The same for thee, that he desires to have.
I prithee Daphne either speak no more,
Or somewhat else that I may answer to.
See fondling see
How ill this peevishness of youth becomes thee;
Tell me but this yet, if some other loved thee,
Is this the welcome thou wouldst give his love?
Such and worse welcome they deserve, that are
These theenes of silly maids virginities,
Whice you call lovers, and I enemies.
Is the ram then to th'ewe an enemy,
The bull to th' bayfer, is the turtle too,
An enemy to ' his mate that loves him so?
And is the Spring the season of debate,
That (sweetly smiling) leads to coupling bands
The beast, the fish, the fowl, women and men?
And see'st thou not that e'ury thing that is,
Breathes now a sovereign air of love, and sweetness,
Pleasure, and health? behold that Turtle there
With what a wooing murmur he sighs love
To his beloved; hark of yond Nitingall
That hops from bough to bough,
Singing I love I love; nay more than these,
The speckled Serpent lays his venom by,
And greedy runs to ' embrace his loved one;
The Tiger loves, and the proud Lion too;
Thou only savage more than savage beasts
Barrest against love thy more-then-yron breast.
But what speak I of Lions, Tigers, Snakes,
That sensible are? why all these trees do love;
See with what amorous and redoubled twinings
The loving Vine her husband fair entangles;
The Beech tree loves the Beech, the Pine the Pine,
The Elm the Elm loves, and the Willows too
A mutual languish for each other feel.
That Oak that seems so rough and so impenetrable,
Doth no less feel the force of amorous flame;
And hadst thou but the spirit and sense of love,
His hidden language thou wouldst understand.
Wilt thou be less and worse than trees and plants,
In being thus an enemy to Love?
Fie silli'one fie; these idle thoughts remove.
When I hear trees sigh (as belike they do)
I'll be content to be a lover too.
Well, mock my words, laugh my advice to scorn,
(Deaf to Love's sound, and simple as thou art)
But go thy ways; be sure the time will come
When thou shalt fly from the now-loved fount
Where thou beholdest and so admyr'st thyself;
Fearing to view thyself so wrinkled fowl
●s age will make thee; but I note not this
o thee aboue the rest, for though age be
euill, 'tis so to all as well as thee.
Heard'st thou what Elpine spoke this other day,
The reverend Elpine to the fair Licoris,
Licoris whose eyes wrought upon him that
Which his songs should have wrought upon her heart,
●f Love could learn but to give each his due)
He told it (Batto ' and Thirsis being by,
●hose two learned lovers) in Aurora's den,
●●er whose door is writ— hence ye profane,
●ye ye far hence, which words he writ (said he)
that in that high pitch sang of loves and arms,
●nd when he died bequeathed his pipe to him;
●here was (he said) low in th'infernal lake
A dungeon dark, aye filled with noisome fumes
breath'd from the furnaces of Acaron,
●nd there all cruel and ingrateful women
●●ue in eternal horror, and are fed
With only their own bootless plaints and cries.
●ooke to't betimes, or I am sore afraid
there must a room be taken up for you,
quite this cruelty to others vsd'e.
●nd 'twere but justice, that those fumes should draw
sea of sorrow from those eyes of thine,
●hat pity could ne'er make to shed a tear:
Well, run on thine own course, and mark the end.
But what did then Licoris (prithee tell me)
What reply did she make to Elpine's words?
How curious th' art in other folks' affairs,
And careless quite in what concerns thyself?
Why, with her eyes Licoris answered him.
How could she answer only with her eyes?
Yes; her fair eyes wrapped in a sunny smile,
Told Elpine this; Her heart and we are thine;
More cannot she give, nor must thou desire.
This were alone enough to satis sie
And serve for full reward to a chaste lover,
That held her eyes as true as they were fair,
And put entire and hearty trust in them.
But wherefore does not he then trust her eyes?
I'll tell thee; knowst thou not what Thirsis wri●
When hurried so with love, and love's disdain
He wont to wander all about the woods,
In such a sort, as pity moved, and langhter
'Mongst the young Swains and Nymphs that gaz'de o● him?
Yet writ he nought that laughter did deserve,
Though many things he did, deserved no less.
He writ it on the barks of sundry trees,
And as the trees, so grew his verse. 'Twas this—
Deluding eyes, false mirhors of the heart,
Full well I find how well ye can deceive:
But what avails, if love enforce my will
To'imbrace your harms, and dote upon you still?
Well thus we wast the time in idle chat,
And I had half forgot, that 'tis to day
We did appoint to meet in th'Oaken grove,
To hunt an hour; I prithee if thou wilt,
Stay for me till I have in yond fresh fount
●ayd off the sweat and dust that yesterday
●soyld me with, in chase of a swift do,
That at the length I overtook, and kill'de.
I'll stay for thee, and perhaps wash me too,
But first I'll home a while, and come again,
●or the day's younger than it seems to be.
Go then, and stay there for me till I come;
●nd in the mean time, think on my advice,
that more imports thee, than the chase, or fount;
●nd if thou dost not think so, thou must know
Thou little knowst; and ought'st thy judgement bow
To their direction that know more than thou.
AT my laments I'ue heard the rocks, the waters
For pity answer; and at my complaint
●he leau'de boughs murmur, as they grieved for me;
●●t never saw, nor ever hope to see
Pity in the fair and cruel (shall I say
Woman or) tiger? for a woman she
Denies to be, in thus denying me
The pity this my miserable state
Draws from things senseless, and inanimate.
Lambs on the grass, the Wolf feeds on the Lambe●
Love (cruelest of things) with tears is fed.
And though he ever feeds, is never full.
Alas alas, love hath been with my tears
Long since full fed, and now thirsts only for
My blood; and long it shall not be, ere he
And the fair Cruel drink it with their eyes.
Ay me, what sayest thou ' Aminta? Fie no more
Of this strange dotage; be of comfort man
And seek some other; others thou mayest find
As true, as this is cruel, and unkind.
Alas how weary'a work were it for me
Other to seek, that cannot find myself;
And having lost myself, what can I gain
With busie'st search that shall requite the pain?
Despair not yet, unhappy though thou be,
She may in time relent, and pity thee:
Time makes the Tiger and the Lion tame.
O but so long to hope and be delayed,
Is worse than death to one in misery.
Perhaps thy sufferance shall not long endure;
For maids so ' inconstant are of disposition,
That as they're soon at odds, they're as soon won;
Uncertain as the leaf Howne with each wind,
And flexible as is the bladed grass.
But gentle Shepherd, let me crave to know
More throughly thy love's hard condition;
For though I'ue often heard thee say thou lov'st,
Thou never told'st me yet, who 'twas thou lov'st;
And well it fits the nearness of our lives,
And friendship, that such counsels should be none
Between us two, but free to both, as one.
Thirsis, I am content to open to thee
What the woods, hills, and floods are privy to,
But no man knows: so near alas I find
Th'approaching period of this loathed breath,
That reason 'tis I leave some one behind,
That may relate th'occasion of my death,
And leave it written on some Beech-tree bark,
near where my bloodless carcase shall be laid;
That as the cruel Fair shall pass along,
She may at pleasure spurn with her proud foot
The unhappy bones,
And smiling say; lo here, lo where he lies;
The triumph and the trophy of mine eyes;
And (to increase her fame,) rejoice to see
In my sad end her beauty's victory
Known to the Nymphs, and Shepherds far and near,
Whom the report may thither guide: perhaps
(Ab hopes too high) she may bestow a sigh,
And though too late, with some compassion rue
The loss of him dead, whom she living slew,
And wish he lived again. But I digress.
On with thy story, for I long to hear't;
Perhaps to better end than thou supposest.
Being but a Lad, so young as yet scarce able
To reach the fruit from the low-hanging boughs
Of new grown trees; Inward I grew to be
With a young maid, fullest of love and sweetness,
That ere displayed pure gold tress to the wind;
Thou knowst her mother hight Cidippe; no?
Montano the rich Goteheard is her father:
Silvia, fair Silvia 'tis I mean, the glory
Of all these woods, and flame of every heart;
'Tis she, 'tis she I speak of; long alas
Lived I soneare her, and then loved of her,
As like two turtles each in other joy'de;
Near our abodes, and nearer were our bearts;
Well did our years agree, better our thoughts;
Together wove we nets t'intrapp the fish
In floods and sedgy fleets; together set
Pitfalls for birds; together the pyeed Buck
And flying do over the plains we chased;
And in the quarry ', as in the pleasure shar'de:
But as I made the beasts my prey, I found
My heart was lost, and made a prey to other.
By little ' and little in my breast began
To spring, I know not from what hidden root
(Like th'her be that of itself is seen to grow)
A strange desire, and love still to be near
And hourly drink from the fair Sylvia's eyes
A sweetness past all thought, but it had still
(Me thought) a bitter farewell; oft I sighed,
Yet knew no cause I had to sigh; and so
Became betimes a lover, ere I knew
What love meant; but alas I knew too soon;
And in what sort, mark, and I'll tell thee
Onn.
All in the shade of a broad Beech-tree sitting,
Silvia, Phillis, and myself together;
A Bee, that all about the flowery meed
Had honey gathered; flow to Phillis cheek;
The rosy cheek mistaking for a rose,
And there (belike) his little needle left:
Phillis cries out, impatient of the pain
Of her sharp sting; but th' everlovely Silvia
Bade her be patiented; Phillis (said she) peace,
And with a word or two I'll heal thy hurt,
And take the sting, and soon the grief away;
This secret erst the grave Aretia taught me,
And her I gave (in recompense) the horn
Of Ivory tipped with gold I want to were;
This said, the libs of her fair sweetest mouth
Upon th' offended cheek she laid; and strait,
(O strange effect) whether with the sound it were
Of her soft murmured verse of Magic power,
Or rather (as I rather do believe)
The virtue of her mouth,
That what it toucheth, cures, Phillis was cured;
And with the pain soon was the swelling gone.
I, that till then ne'er dreamt of more delight,
Then on the shine of her bright eyes to gaze,
And joy to hear her speak, (music more sweet,
Then makes the murmur of a slow pac'de brook,
When 'tis with thousand little pebbles crossed;
Or the wind prattling 'mongst the wanton leaves)
'Gan then, even then to feel a new desire
Possess me, of touching those dear lips with mine;
And grown more subtle than I was before,
(So love perhaps th'imagination whets,)
I found this new deceit, whereby to ' aspire
With greater ease to th'end of my desire;
I feigned myself stung on the neither lip,
In like sort with a Bee as Phillis was;
And in such manner 'gan to moan myself,
As th'help my tongue craved not, my looks implored;
The harmless Silvia, pitying stratt my case,
Offered her ready cure to my feigned hurt;
But th' unfeigned wound I bleed of, deeper made,
And far more deadly, when those coral twins
On mine she laid. Nor do the giddy Bees
Gather from any flower honey so sweet,
As I did from those freshest roses gather;
Though bashful shame, and fear had taught to bar,
Hot kisses from desire to press too far,
T'imbathe themselves; and did their heat withhold
And kill, or made them slower and less bold.
But while down to my heart that sweetness glided,
Mixed with a secret poison, such delight
I inly felt, that feigning still the grief
Of the sting had not left me yet; so dealt,
That she the charm repeated sundry times:
Since when till now, still more and more I find,
For all her charm, she'has left the sting behind.
Whose pain ere since hath so increased upon me,
As my love-labouring breast could hold no longer,
But that upon a time, when diverse Nymphs
And Shepherds of us in a ring were sitting,
Whilst the play was, each one should softly whisper
Some word in th'ear of her that next him sat;
Silvia (quoth I soft in her ear) for thee
I pine, and dye, unless thou pity me.
No sooner heard she this, but down she hangs
The fair look, whence I might perceive to break
A sudden and unwonted ruddiness,
That seemed to breat he forth anger mixed with shame;
Nor would she ' in other language answer me,
Then such a troubled silence, as appeared
Threatening and deadly; nor since then would ever
Willingly see, or hear me: Thrice the Sun
His yearly course hath run, thrice the green fields
Hath the naked Sythman barbed; and three times hath
The Winter robbed the trees of their green locks;
That I have tried all means I could, t'appease her,
And nought remains, but that I die to please her;
And gladly would I dye, were I but sure
'Twould either please, or but draw pity from her;
Each were a blessing to me, though no doubt
Her pity were of both the greater meed,
And worthier recompense for all my love,
And for my death; yet I were loath to wish
Aught, that too rudely might those eyes molest,
Or do the least offence to that dear breast.
Did she but hear thus much from thee, believest thou
It would not make her love, or pity thee?
I neither know, nor can I hope so much:
She flies my speech, as th' Adder doth the charm,
Well be of comfort; my mind gives me yet,
we'll find a mean that she shall hear thee speak
'Twill come to nought; to beg such grace were vain,
For me to speak, where speech no grace will gain.
For shame despair not thus.
Alas just cause
Bids me despair; my cruel destiny
Was read by the grave Mopso long agone,
Mopso that knows the hid language of birds,
And understands the force of herbs and founts.
What Mopo's this thou speakest on? is't not he
That carries honey in his supple tongue,
And friendly smiles for all he looks upon,
But in his heart deceit, and hidden bears
Under his coat a razor? shame befall him;
The vild unlucky dooms he lewdly sells
To silly fools with that grave look, and grace,
Are far from truth; take't of my word, and trial.
I'll rather hope (and sure my hope will thrive)
That from this fellows idle auguryes
Much happier fate will to thy love arise.
If aught by proof thou knowst of him, good swain
Hide it not from me?
I'll tell thee willingly.
When first my hap led me to know these woods,
I knew this fellow, and esteemed him
As thou dost: So it fortuned once, I had
Desire and business to go see that great
Wonder of Cities, at whose ancient feet
The broad-famed river runs; and him I made
Acquainted with my purpose: he replies,
And thus began to preach; My son beware
Now thou art going to that seat of fame,
Where those deceitful crafty Citizens,
And evil minded Courtiers live, and wont
To scoff at us, and hold in such a scorn
Our plain distrnstlesse homely carriage;
Be well advised (my son) and press not there
Where the fresh coloured robes with gold are wrought,
Gay plumes, and dayly-varied dress shine;
But above all, beware accursed Fate,
Or thy youth's jollity conduct thee not
Unto that magazine of restless chat,
But fly that cursed and enchanted place.
What place is that (quoth I?) 'tis there (said he)
Where dwell th'enchantresses that have the power
And art to make men, and their minds transparent;
And what so Diamonds seem, and finest gold,
But glass and copper are; those silver chests
That seem full of rich treasure, are no more
Than kennels full of filth, and cousin men;
The walls are built too with that wondrous art,
That they will speak, and answer them that speak;
Nor in half words, and such imperfect sounds,
As wont the Eccos that here haunt our grounds,
But every word whole, and entire repeating:
Nay more than this, the tables, chairs, and stools,
Hang, and all that to each room belongs,
Have tongue and voice, and never silent are;
False lies there, formed into the shape of babes,
Are hopping all about; and be he dumb
That enters there, finds strait a tongue to prate
And lie with; but there is yet worse than this,
May happen thee; thou mayst perhaps be turned
Into a beast, a tree, a flood, a flame,
Into a flood of tears, a fire of sighs.
All this he told me; and I forward went
To see the City with this false belief;
And (as good hap would have it,) chanced to pass
Along the place where stands that blessed dwelling,
Whence I might hear breath out such melody,
By Swans, and Nymphs, and heavenly Sirens made,
With voice so shrill, so sweet and full of pleasure,
That all amazed, I stayed to gaze, and listen:
Before the door there stood (me seemed) as guard
Of the fair shows within, a man in show
And of proportion stout, and knightly hue;
Such as (for what he seemed me) made me doubt
Whether for Arms he were, or counsel fit:
With a benign, and mild, though grave aspect,
He highly-faire bespoke, and led me in;
He great in place, me poor and homely man:
But then, what did I see? what did I hear?
Celestial goddesses, and lovely Nymphs,
New lights, new Orpheusses; and others too
Vnuayled unclouded, as the virgin-morne,
When silver dews her golden rays adorn.
There Phoebus shone, enlightening all about,
With all his sister Muses; among whom
Satt Elpine; at which sight, all in a trice
I felt myself grow greater than myself,
Full of new power, full of new deity?
And sang of wars, and Knightly deeds in Arms,
Scorning the rural Songs I want to make;
And though I after did (for others pleasure)
Turn to these woods again, yet I retained
Part of that Spirit; nor yet sounds my pipe
So lowly as before, but shriller far.
And through the woods rings with a trumpets voice.
Afterward Mopso heard me '; and with so vild,
And sour a countenance greeted me, that I
Became strait hoarse, and was a long time mute;
When all the Shepherds said, sure I had been
Scared with the Wolf; but Mopso was the Wolf.
This I have told thee, that thou mayst believe
How little this man's words deserve belief;
And out of doubt, thoust the more cause to hope,
For that this fellow bids thee not to hope.
I'm glad to hear this troth of him; but now
I leave my life, and my life's care to you.
Fear not 'tis all my care to cure thy pain:
Within this bower see thou be here again.
O Happy Age of Gould; happy ' hours;
Not for with milk the rivers ran,
And honey dropped from every tree;
Nor that the Earth bore fruits, and flowers,
Without the toil or care of Man,
And Serpents were from poison free;
Nor for th' Air (ever calm to see)
Had quite exiled the lowering Night;
Whilst clad in an eternal Spring
(Now fiery hot, or else freezing)
The cheeks of heaven smil'de with clear light;
Nor that the wand'ring Pine of yore
Brought neither wars, nor wares from foreign shore;
But therefore only happy Days,
Because that vain and idle name,
That cozening I doll of unrest,
(Whom the mad vulgar first did raze,
And called it Honour, whence it came
To tyrannize o'er every breast,)
Was then suffered to molest
Poor lovers' hearts with new debate;
More happy they, by these his hard
And cruel laws, were not debarred
Their innate freedom; happy state;
The golden laws of Nature, they
Found in their breasts; and then they did obey.
Amidd the silver streams and flowers,
The winged Genii then would dance,
Without their bow, without their brand;
The Nymphs sat by their Paramours,
Whispering love-sports, and dalliance,
And joining lips, and hand to hand;
The fairest Virgin in the land.
Nor scorn'de, nor glor'yed to display
Her cheeks fresh roses to the eye,
Or open her fair breasts to the day,
(Which now adays so vailed lie,)
But men and maidens spent free hours
In running Rivers, Lakes, or shady Bowers.
Thou Honour, thou didst first devise
To mask the face of Pleasure thus;
Bar water to the thirst of Love,
And lewdly didst instruct fair eyes
They should be nice, and scrupulous,
And from the gazing world remove
Their beauties; thy hands new nets wove
T'entrap the wild curls, fair dispred
To th'open air; thou mad'st the sweet
Delights of Love seem thus unmeet;
And (teaching how to look, speak, tread,)
By thy ill laws this ill haste left,
That what was first Loves gift, is now our theft.
Nor ought thy mighty working brings,
But more annoys, and woe to us;
But thou (of Nature and of Love
The Lord, and scourge of mighty Kings,)
Why dost thou shroud thy greatness thus
In our poor cells? hence, and remove
Thy power; and it display above.
Disturbing great ones in their sleep;
And let us meaner men alone
T'inioye again, (when thou art gone)
And laws of our Forefathers keep.
Live we in love, for our life's hours
Hast on to death, that all at length devours.
Live we while we may; the wain
Of Heaven can set, and rise again;
But we (when once we looze this light)
Must yield us to a never ending Night.
SMall is the Bee; but yet with his small sting
Does greater mischief, than a greater thing.
But what of all things can be less than Love,
That through so narrow passages can pierce,
And in so narrow room lie hid? sometime
Under the shadow of an eyelids fault,
Now in the small curl of a shining tress,
Now in the little pits which form sweet smiles
In an inamo'ring check; yet makes so deep,
So deadly and immedicable wounds.
Ay me my breast is all one bleeding wound;
A thousand armed darts alas are lodged
By that fell tyrant Love in Siluia's eyes;
Cruel Love, cruel Silvia, savadger
Then the wild deserts; O how well thy name
Suits with thy nature (Sylvan as thou art)
The woods under their green roofs hide the Snake,
The Bear, the Lion; and thou in thy breast
hidest disdain, hate, and impiety,
More baleful than the Lion, Bear, or Snake;
For they will someway be reclaim'de; thou neither
With prayers or gifts; Alas when I present thee
Fresh flowers, thou frowardly refusest them;
Perhaps because thoust in thy lovely face,
Fairer than those; Alas when I present thee
Fair Apples, thou dost scornfully reject them;
Perhaps because thy bosom bears a pair
Fairer than those; Ay me when I present thee
Sweet honey, thou disdainfully deniest it,
Perhaps because thy lips breathe sweeter honey
Than the Bee makes; but if my poverty
Can give thee nought that thou hast not more fair,
And lovely in thyself, myself I give thee;
But thou unjust scornest, and abhorr'st the gift.
Yet I'm not so fowl, to be so dispiz'de,
If well I marked myself, when th'other day
I viewed my shadow in the watery main,
When the wind blew not, and the sea lay still.
The manly tincture of my sanguine brow,
These muscled arms, and shoulders large enough;
This hairy breast of mine, and hoary thighs
Proclaim my able force, and manly hood;
Make trial of me if thou doubtest of it.
What wilt thou do with these same tenderlings,
On whose bare cheek the young down scarcely springs?
With what an art they place their hair in order?
Women in show, and women in their strength.
Tell me, who wilt thou have to follow thee
O'er the bald hills, and through the leafy woods,
And fight for thee with Bear, and armed Boar?
No no, my shape's not it thou hat'st me for,
But 'tis my poverty thou dost abhor.
Ah that poor Cottages will follow still
Great Towns example in what ere is ill;
This may be truly called the Golden age,
For gold alone prevails, gold only rain.
O thou (who ere thou wert) that first didst teach
To sell love thus, accursed be thy dust.
And thy cold buried bones; nor ever may
Shepherd or Nymph say to them, rest in peace;
But be they washed with raines, and tossed with winds,
And may the passers by, and all the rout
Of beasts with fowl feet spurn them all about.
Base mercenary love, thou hast deflowered
Love's nobleness; and turned his happy joys
Into such bitterness, and sharp annoys.
Love to be slave to gold? O miracle
More odious, and abominable far
Then the large earth produces, or the Mayne.
But why alas, why do I vex myself
Thus all in vain? no, let each creature use
Those arms that Nature for his aid hath given him,
The Hart his speed, the Lion his strong paw,
The foaming Boar his tusk; the woman's arms
And power lie in her beauty ', and graceful shape;
I, since my strength is the best help I have,
And am by nature fit for deeds of force,
Will for reward of all my love misspent,
Force this proud cruel to my own content.
And by so much as I can understand,
(As yond Goteherd that hath observed her ways
Hath lately told me) she doth oft repair
To'a water-fount to wash herself; the place
He made me know, and there I mean to lie
Close in a thickett near, t'attend her coming,
And as occasion fits, I'll make her mine,
What can she do then, what avail alas
Can her hands give her, or her legs to fly
(Poor wretch) from me so forcible, and swift?
Let her a good year weep, and sigh, and rail,
And put on all the power her beauty hath;
If once I catch her by the snary curls,
We will not part in haste, till I have bathed
(For my revenge) my arms in her warm blood.
THirsis (as I have told thee) well I know
How well, Aminta Silvia loves; heaven knows
How many friendly offices I have,
And will do for him; and so much the rather
For that thou dost entreat in his behalf;
But I would sooner take in hand to tame
A Bear, or Tiger then a fond young wench;
The silly thing (simple as fair) sees not
How sharp and burning be her beauty's rays,
But smiles or cries; yet wounds where ere she go,
And fond knows not if she hurt or no.
Tush there's no wench so simple but she knows
Soon as she leaves the cradle, how to seem
Spruce, and delightful; and what arms to use
To hurt, or kill outright, and what to heal
A wounded heart, and give it life withal.
What Master is't that shows 'em all these arts?
He that instructs the birds to sing and fly;
The Fish to swim, the Ram to butt, the Bull
To use his horn, the Peacock to display
His many-ey'ed-plumes beauty to the day.
How name you this same teacher?
H'has a name.
Go trifler.
Why I prithee art not thou
Fit enough to teach twenty girls their lessons?
I'll warrant thee, I; and yet to speak the troth
They need no teacher; Nature teacheth them
Although the nurse and mother have a part.
Come y''re unhappy; but in earnest now
I'm not resolved Silvia so simple is
As by her words she seems; for th'other day
One deed of hers put me in doubt of her:
I found her in those broad fields near the town,
Where amongst drowned grounds, lies a little Isle,
And round about, a water clear, and calm;
There o'er she hung her head; and seemed (me thought)
Full proud to see herself, and took advice
O'th'water, in what order best to lay
Her locks, and them about her brow display,
And over them her veil, and over that
The flowers she carried in her lap; now here
She hung a Lily, there she stuck a Rose;
Then laid them to her neck, and to her cheek,
As to try whethers hue the other past;
At last, (as joyful of the victory)
She smiling seemed to say, the day is mine;
Nor do I wear you for my ornament,
But for your own disgrace (counterfeit flowers)
To show how much my beauty passeth yours.
But while she thus stood decking of herself,
She turned her eye by chance, and soon had found
That I had noted her, and blushed a main,
Down fell her flowers; I laughed to see her blush;
And she blushed more, perceiving that I laughed;
But, (for of one side of her face, the hair
Was hung abroad, and th'other not,) she turns
To th'water once on twice, to mend the fault,
And gazed as 'twere by stealth, (fearful belike
That I too nearly eyed her,) where she saw
Her hair (though orderless, yet) hanging so,
As graced her well; I saw, and saw her not.
All this I will believe: guest I not well?
Thou didst: but yet I will be bold to say
That I have seldom seen a Shepherdess
Or Nymph what ever of her years discreeter;
Nor was I such when I was of her years:
The world grows old, and of a troth I think
It grows as ill as old.
True; heretofore
Those of the City were not wont so much
To haunt these woods as now adays they do,
Nor meaner people in the village bred,
To come so much among the citizens;
Their bloods are now more mingled, and their customs.
But leave we this discourse; and tell me now
Couldst thou not find a time Aminta might
Either alone, or in thy presence come
To speak to Silvia?
I cannot tell;
Silvia is nice and strange beyond all measure.
And he nicely respect full beyond measure.
He's i'the wrong then, fie on such a lover;
Nice (quoth you?) counsel him to leave that vice,
If he will learn to love; he must be bold,
And urge with speeding importunity;
Let him a little filch; if that be vain,
Then ravish: tush knowst thou what women are?
They fly; but every step wish to be ta'en;
What they deny, they wish were snatched from them;
They fight, but still wish to be overcome.
I tell thee this Thirsis, but in thine ear:
Blab not what I say to thee ', I cannot speak
Inrime (thou knowst) but if I could, I'd say
Somewhat more worth than rhyme to bear away.
Fear not, I will not speak
Ought from thy lips what ere they open to me.
But gentle Daphne, for the dear day's sake
Of thy past youth, help me to help Aminte
Poor wretch that dies.
Ah what a propper style
Of conjuration (fool) hast thou devised
To move me with; bringing my youth to mind,
The pleasure I have lost, and pain I find.
But what wouldst have me do?
thou'rt not to seek of wit, nor yet of power,
Do but dispose thy will, I'll ask no more.
Well then, I'll tell thee: we are going now
Silvia and I together all alone
Unto Diana's fount, to wash ourselves;
There where the planetree with his safer shade
Ore-spreds the cool stream, and is wont t'invite
The weary huntresses to rest, and cool them:
There she'll uncase her so-beloved limbs.
And what of that?
What of that? silly thou'rt
Or else thou wouldst not ask me what of that.
Suppose I hit thy meaning, who knows yet
If he will dare to meet her there or no?
No? Why then truly let him stay till she
Come to woee him; and when will that be trow ye?
Do she or not, he does deserve she did.
But now let's leave this theme; and talk a word
Or two of thee; say Thirsis, wilt not thou
Resolve at last to be a lover too?
thou'rt not yet old; few more than thirty years
Have ouer-slipt thee, and I well remember
Thy infancy; wilt thou live joyless still?
For only he lovers is the happy life.
The joys of Venus he enjoys as well,
That shunning lovers painful miseries,
Tastes of the sweet, and lets the sour alone.
O but that sweet grows dull, and gluts betime,
That is not seas'ned with a little sour.
Better 'tis to be glutted (of the two)
Then pine before one feeds, and after two.
But if the food be pleasing, and possessed,
'Tis good before; and in the tasting best.
No man can so possess what he desires,
As just t'enjoy it then when's hunger craves it.
Who hopes to find, that never means to seek?
'Tis dangerous to seek that which once found,
Pleases a little, but not found, torments
Much more; no, no, I'll go no more a wooing;
Cupid shall triumph over me no more;
I know a little what those sufferings be,
Let others prove them if they list for me.
Belike thoust not enjoyed loves pleasure yet:
Nor do I wish to buy the plague so dear.
You may perhaps be forced against your will;
Who keeps himself far off, cannot be forced.
Who can be far from love?
Who fears & flies.
But what avails to fly from him hath wings?
Love but new borne, hath wings but short & small,
And hardly strong enough to fly with all.
Being young, we know him not; but after, long;
And when we feel him once, he's grown too strong.
Not if we never felt him grow before.
Well; ye shall have't; we'll see how well you will
Bridle your eye and heart; but I protest
Since thou canst play both Hound and Hare so well,
If ere I hear thee call and cry for help,
I will not move a foot, nor yet a finger,
Nor stir an eye, nor speak a word for thee.
Wouldst have the heart (cruel) to see me dye?
If thou wouldst have me love, why love thou me,
And let's now make a loving bargain on't.
Away you mock me now; well well, perhaps
You do not merit such a love as mine.
I'ue seen many a lad as fine as you
Deceived with a fair seeming painted face.
I do not jest nor mock thee; this is but
A colour now to bar me loving thee,
As 'tis the custom of you all to do:
But if you will not love me, I'm content,
To live still as I do.
I, live so still,
Happier than twenty others; live in ease;
Perhaps unwares ease may engender love.
O Daphne, a God this ease hath bred me; he
That hath appeared a second god to me
By whom so many herds and flocks are fed
From th'one to th'other Sea, upon the fair
And fruitful Plains, and on the craggy backs
Of the steep Apenines: he said to me,
When as he made me his; Thirsis (quoth he)
Let others chase the Wolf, and Thief, and keep
A watchful eye over my walled sheep;
Let others care be to reward, or punish
My Ministers; let others feed and tend
My flocks, and keep the account of milk & wool;
And take, and pay: take thou thine ease, and sing,
Wherefore 'tis reason good, I let go by
All loser strains, and vainer carrolings;
And sing his Ancestors, and their high praise,
Who is to me Ioue, and Apollo both;
Since in his looks and deeds he both resembles
Issue of Saturn and of heaven. Poor Muse
To mean for such a task; and yet how e'er
Horse voiced, or clear she sings, he not contemns her.
I sing not him, too high for my low rhymes,
Whom silent adoration only can
Worthily honour; but still shall his altars
Be sprinkled with my flowers, and ne'er without
My humble Incense fuming all about.
Which simple (yet devout) religion in me
When it shall leave my heart, the Hearts shall feed
●n th'air on air; and so the floods shall change
their bed, and course; that Sun shall Persia greet,
●nd the large Tigris beat the French- Alps feet.
O thou fliest high; prithee descend a little,
And to our purpose.
Then here lies the point;
That as thou go'st with her unto the fount,
Thou use thy best cunning to make her coming,
And hear Aminta speak; mean time my care
Shall be to make Aminta meet you there.
I fear my task will be the hardest of both.
Onn then o' God's name.
Yes, I go; but Thirsis,
We were discoursing of an other matter.
If mine eye fail me not, yond same should be
Aminta, that comes hitherward; 'tis he.
NOw shall I see what Thirsi' has done for me;
And if he have done nothing, ere my woes
Melt me'into nothing, I'll go kill myself
Before the proud face of that cruel maid,
That so delights to see my hearts deep wound
Made by her murdering eyes, as sure it can
Please her no less, to see her sad command
Fulfilled on my own breast with my own hand.
News, news Aminta, happy news I bring thee;
Clear then thy brow, and cast thy griefs away.
What is't thou sayest Thirsis, what bringst thou me,
Life, or death? new joy, or new misery?
I bring thee life and joy, if thou but dare
To go and meet them; but I tell thee true
Thou must not faint but play the man Aminta.
Why against whom should I advance my force?
Suppose the Nymph thou lov'st were in a wood
That (wal'de about with mountains of sharp briers)
Were full of Tigers, and of greedy Lions,
Wouldst thou go thither?
Yes, more cheerfully,
Then village-lasse to the dance o'holly days.
Were she engaged 'mongst troops of armed thieves,
Wouldst thou go thither?
Yes more greedily,
Then runs the thirsty Hart to the cool streeme.
O but a harder task asks greater labour.
Why I would pass through the devouring torrents,
When the dissolu'de snows down the mountain's rain:
And headlong run t'ingulph them in the main:
Or through the fire; or indeed down to hell;
If any place a hell may termed be,
That shall contain so heavenly a thing as she.
But prithee tell me all.
Here then.
Say on.
Silvia ' at a Fount, starnaked, and all alone
Attends thy coming; darest thou now go thither?
Silvia? and all alone? and stays for me?
Yes all alone, unless haply there be
Daphne ', who thou knowst is all in all for thee. (ah do not
Naked?
I, naked, but.
But what?
Mangle me thus.
Why but she does not know
That you should meet her there; though (as I say)
she'll there attend you, do but haste away.
Bitter conclusion; that infects, and poisons
What ever sweet thy former speeches promised,
Why with such art
Dost thou delude me, cruel as thou art?
Is't not enough
Thinkest thou for me thus full of grief to be,
But thou must come to mock my misery?
Be ruled by me Aminta, and be happy;
What should I do?
Why not let slip that good
That fortune (much thy friend) presents thee with.
The beau'ns forbidden that ever I should do
Aught to displease her; nor yet ever did I
The thing that justly merited her frown;
Vulesse it were my loving her so much;
Which yet if'twere a fault, was none of mine;
It was her beauties; and by beau'n I vow
I mean not to begin to'offend her now.
Why but yet tell me, if'twere in thy power
To leave to love her, wouldst thou do't to please her?
No sure; love will not let me say, or think
That ere I should desist from loving her,
Though'twere in my own power.
Why an't be so,
In her despite whether she will or no,
you'd love her,
No, no, not in spite of her,
But I would love her.
Yet against her will?
Why yes, against her will.
And wherefore then
Dare you not take of her against her will,
That which (althoughed irks thee at first to do)
In th'end will quite thy pains and please her too.
Thirsis, let love that speaks within my breast
Make answer for me; thou, (through thy long use
Of reas'ning much of love) too subtle art
For me; love ties my tongue, who tied my heart.
Why then thou wilt not go?
Yes, yes, I'll go;
But not where you would have me:
Whether then?
To death; if this be all y'haue done for me.
Is this that I have done then nothing worth?
And dost thou think Daphne would counsel thee
To go, unless she saw a little more
Into thy Sylvia's heart, than thou and I?
Suppose she has revealed her mind to her;
Think you she would abide that any else
Should know't? or know she knew it ere the more?
So that to covet an express consent
On her part, think you not it were to seek
What in all reason must offend her most?
Where's this your care then, and desire to please her?
Perhaps she would that your delight should be
Your own theft, not her gift; what skilled I pray.
Whether you have it this, or th'other way?
What certainty ' have I that her mind is such?
See still how sillily you seek to have
That certainty which must of force displease her;
And which 'boue all things else you should not crave:
But who assures you to the contrary
But that she may mean so as well as not?
Now if she did, and that you would not go;
(Since both the doubts and dangers equal be)
Is not a valiant than a base death better?
thou'rt mute; thou'rt overthrown;
Confess it then;
Nor doubt but this thy overehrow will be
Th'occasion of a greater victory.
Go'we.
Stay.
Why stay?
knowst not how swiftly the time runs away?
Prithee let's think first what, and how to do.
we'll think of all things as we go; but he
That thinks too much, does little, commonly.
O Love, of whom, and where is taught
This thy so doubtful Art, and long
Of loving, that instructs the tongue
At ease to utter every thought.
That the wild fant' sie doth devise?
Whilst with thy wings above the heaven it flies.
The learned Athens taught it not;
Nor was it to Liceus known;
Apollo, god of Helicon
For all his knowledge knew it not.
Faint and cold is what he speaks,
Nor from his voice such a fire breaks
As doth thy greatness (Love) befitt:
Nor can his wit,
Or thoughts unto the height arise
Of thy profounder mysteries:
Thou readst thine own lesson best
(Great Love) and onely'art by thyself expressed.
Thou of thy grace and bounty daynest
T'instruct th' unlearnedest, and plainest
Men of thousands, how to see
And read those wondrous things that be
Writ with thine own hand in an others eyes.
Thou teachest those thou lovest best,
A purer language than the rest,
And with smooth ease to breathe their fantasies.
Nay often times, such is thy rare
And most mysterious eloquence,
That in a confusd'e broken sense
And half words that imperfect are,
The heart is best revealed and seen;
And such perhaps move more by far
Then many words that better polished been.
Yea even Loves silence oft doth more express
Than words could do, the mind's unhappiness.
(Love) let others if they please
Turn over the works of Socrates,
And those great volumes of the wise;
While I but read what's writ in two fair eyes.
Perhaps the pen that higher climes,
Will but halt after the rhymes,
That in the rough and uncooth tree
With my rude artless hand engraven be.
O Savage cruelty '; O th'ungrateful mind
Of a most most ungrateful Maid; O Sex
Full of ingratitude: and thou lewd Nature,
Nigligent mistress, and maker of things,
Wherefore, ah wherefore mad'st thou womankind
So fair, and sweet, and mild only without;
And didst forget to make their insides good?
Poor youth, I fear ' has made away himself
E'er this; alas I cannot find him out:
Three hours from place to place, & where I left him
Have I been seeking him; but cannot find
Or him, or any print of his strayed foot:
Sure sure he's dead.
I will go ask yond Swains I see, if they
Can tell me any tidings of him. Friends
Did you not see Aminta, or haply hear
News of him lately?
Thou dost seem to me
Full of distraction, what is't troubles thee?
How cam'st thou so'out of breath, and to sweat so?
What ail'st thou? say what is't thou fearest or wantest;
I fear Amintas harms; tell me I pray
Saw ye him not?
Not since he went with you
A while agone, but what d'ye fear in him.
Alas I fear
Lest he have slain himself with his own hand.
Slain with his own hand? how so? what might cause
Such vengeance on himself?
Why love, and hate.
Two powerful enemies:
What cannot they do, when they meet together?
But speak yet clearer.
His too much love, and her too much disdain
Whom he loved so.
Ah tell thy story out;
This is a way of passage, and ere long
Perhaps some one will bring us news of him,
Or himself come.
I'll tell it willingly;
For 'tis not just that such ingratitude
Should rest without the due deserved blame.
Aminta heard (and I had told it him,
And was his conduct too, the gods forgive me)
That Silvia was with Daphne gone to'a Fount
To wash themselves; thither then (not without
A thousand doubts and fears in him) we went;
And twenty times we turned again, (his heart
Being all against it,) but that I was fain
Almost against his will to force him onn;
But drawing near unto the Fount, we heard
A sad lamenting voice; and all at once
Daphne we spied wring her hands, and strait
Seeing us coming, ah run, run (she cries)
Siluia's deflowered. Th'enamoured Aminta
No sooner heard it, but swift as a Pard
He fling away; and I made after him:
Nor far we went, when lo before our eyes
We saw the young maid naked as at her birth,
Fast fettered by the fair hair to a tree;
About whose branches in a thousand knots
The curls were linked, and entertwin'de, the girdle
That wont to deck, and guard her maiden loins,
Served as an actor in her ravishment;
Binding her arms about the trees hard trunk,
The tree itself became a helper too,
For by her feet a branch or two grew out,
Which (easy bending) both her tender legs
Had fastened to the tree; and face to face
A beastly satire stood; who but even then
Had newly made an end of binding her,
All the defence she could (poor soul) she made;
But sure'twould have but little steeded her,
Had not we come. Aminta with his dart
Slew like a Lion
Upon the satire; and I gathered stones;
Whereat he fled; and gave Aminta leisure
To feast his greedy eyes with her fair limbs,
Which trembling seemed as tender, white, & soft,
As unpressed curds new from the whey divided.
Full was her face of anger, grief, and spite;
He gently accosting her with modest looks,
Spoke thus; O lovely Silvia pardon me;
Fardon my hands for daring to approach
So near these beauteous limbs of thine; alas
It is necessity enforceth them,
Necessity t'unloose these bands of thine;
And let it (I beseech thee) not displease thee,
That Fate has raised them to this happiness.
Words that would mollify a heart of flint;
But what reply made she?
Why none at all.
But with a look full of disdain, hung down
The head, and hid her fair lap all she could;
He stood unbrayding her entangled ' tresses,
And sighing said (the while,) O how unworthy
Is this rude trunk of so fair knots as these?
See what advantage have Love's votaries,
That (like this tree) have with so precious bands
Their hearts entwined: Cruel plant, couldst thousese
This hair thus injured, that thus honours thee?
Then with his hands her hands he fair vnloozed,
In such a sort, as that he seemed afraid
To touch them, yet desired to touch them still:
Then stooped he down t'untye her feet; when she
Finding her late bound hands at liberty,
Said with a scornful, and disdaining look;
Shepherd, I am Diana's; touch me not;
Leave me, I shall unbind my feet myself.
Ah that the soft best of a maid should harbour
Such pride; O Courtesy full ill repaid.
strait he with reverence withdrew himself,
Not lifting once his eyes to look on her;
Barring himself of his delight; that she
Might lay no blame on his immodesty.
I that was hid near hand, and saw all this,
And heard it all, was even exclaiming on her,
But that I curbed myself; see the strange creature;
After she was with much ado got lose,
Away she hurried straight, swift as a Do,
Without so much as ' Thank ye, or farewell;
And yet knew well, she had no cause to fear;
So modest and respectful was Aminta.
Why fled she then?
Perhaps she thought it showed
Better; and argued more her modesty.
Her foul ingratitude: but what did then,
What said the poor Aminta?
I cannot tell.
For (angry) after her I ran amain
To have o'erta'en, and stayed her; but in vain;
For soon I lost her; and again returning
Unto the Fountain where I left Aminta,
I found him not; and my heart much misgives me
Of some self ill befallen him; for I know
He was resolved (before this happened him)
To end his life and miseries together.
It is the common use and art of Lovers
To threaten their own deaths; but rarely shall
We see th'effect in any of them all.
Pray heaven he be not of those rare ones then.
Tush fear him not.
Well I'll down to the Cave
Of the sage Elpine; thither he perhaps
Will be retyr'de, if he be yet alive;
For there he went full oft to'allay and ease
The rage of his bitter calamities,
With the sweet sound of Elpines' Reeds; that win
And draw with their alluring voice, to hear them,
The hard stones from the craggy mountain tops;
Make floods and waterfounts run with pure milk;
And oft the rough barked trees against their kinds
Distil sweet honey from their bitter rinds.
Pitiless (Daphne) was that Pity of thine,
When thou held'st back the dart; because my death
Will but more painful be, the more delay'de:
And now, why dost thou stay me trifling thus,
And hold me ' in vain with these thy long discourses?
If thou be'st fearful of my death, thou fearest
My happiness.
Leave leave Aminta
This thy unjust despair: I know her well;
And 'twas her bashfulness, not cruelty,
That made her run away so fast from thee.
Ah that my only friend must be Despair,
Seeing that only Hope hath bred my ruin:
And yet it would be breeding in my breast
Again, and bid me live; when, what can be
A greater ill to so great misery,
Then still to live, but to be still unhappy?
Why live yet, live with thy unhappiness;
And bear it for thy greater happiness
When the time comes; think what thou lately saw'st
In the fair naked one, and let that serve thee
For a reward sufficient for thy hope,
And make thee in love with life.
'Twas not enough
For love, and fortune, that I was before,
So wretched, as I scarcely could be more;
But that I must be showed (t'augment my ill)
Part of my bliss, yet go without it still.
Must I be then the Raven, and sinister
Relater of so bitter news? O wretched,
Wretched Montano; ah what wilt thou do,
When thou shalt hear the sad, and kill story
Of thy own only Silvia? poor old man,
Most hapless father of a hapless child;
Ah now no father.
I do hear a sad
Lamenting voice.
I hear the name of Silvia,
That strikes mine ear, and my heart through at once;
But who is't names her?
'Tis I think the Nymph
Nerina, she whom Diana loves so well,
That has so lively eyes, and lovely hands,
And so becoming a behaviour.
Yet he shall know it; and go gather up
Th'unhappy relics, (if yet any be;)
Ah Silvia Silvia, O accursed fate.
Ay me, what means this Nymph? what says she?
Daphne?
Nerina? what's the matter that thou namest
Silvia so oft, and sighest at every word?
There's cause enough Daphne; ah too too much.
Ay me I feel, I feel my breast so full
Of ice, my breath half stopped; lives she, or no?
Tell us all, tell the worst Nerina.
O heaven,
Must I be then th'unhappy ' historian?
And yet it's fit I tell my sad tale out.
Silu'ia starnaked (whereof ye know perhaps
The cause) came to our house, where being clad,
She afterward desired me I would go
A hunting with her, as it was before
Appointed, to the Grove of Okes, (for so
The place ye know is called;) I did agree;
And onn we went, and found there many Nymphs
Gathered together; not far off, behold
Rushes a huge Wolf forth, whose yawning jaws
Foamed with a bloody froth; Silvia then near him
Let fly a shaft at him; and in his head
The arrow light; he took the wood again,
And she at heels pursued him with a Dart
Into the wood.—
Ah sorrowful beginning,
I fear, I fear a sad conclusion.
I with an other Dart followed their footing;
But setting out too late, was cast far off;
And having gained the wood, I lost the sight
Of them; yet kept their tract, and ran so far,
Till I was got into the desertest
And thickest of the wood; at length I found
(And took up) Sylvia's Dart upon the ground;
And not far off a white veil, which (ere while)
I did myself bind up her hair withal;
And whilst I looked about me ', Ispi'de seven Wolves
Licking blood off the ground, that scattered lay
About a few bare bones; and 'twas my hap
To scape unseen, while they so earnestly
Minded their prey.
I full of fear turned back, and came my way.
And this is all that I can say of Silvia;
And here's the veil.
thoust said, thoust said enough;
O blood, O veil, O Silvia,' dead dead—
Poor youth he dies; he's dead; ay me he's dead
With grief.
He breath's yet, he's but in a trance;
Tarry he comes again t'himselfe.
O grief,
Why dost, why dost thou thus torment me?
And wilt not end me? thou'rt unjust. Perhaps
Thou leav'st the work to my own hand: I am,
I am content it shall be my own care;
Since thou wilt not, or canst not do't; Ay me,
Ay me if nothing want to make this clear,
And nothing want to make my miseries
Now brimful; why do ' I linger? why do I stay?
O Daphne Daphne, was it to this end,
This bitter, bitter end thou didst reserve me?
My death had then been sweet, and pleasing to me,
When thou and heaven held back my Dart, and saved me;
Heaven that was loath (belike) I should prevent
With death, the woes it has prepared for me;
But nowed has done the very worst it can,
I hope both heaven, and you may suffer me
To dye in peace.
Stay yet, stay wretch, and learn
The truth yet better.
Ah the truth is such,
Iue stayed too long, alas I'ue heard too much.
Ay me, wretch that I am, why did I speak?
Gentle Nymph, let me crave that veil of thee,
The poor remainder of her; they it may
Accompany me for these few sad hours
Of way, and life yet left me; and increase
That martyrdom, that were no martyrdom
Were it not much more then enough to kill me.
Shall I denieed, or shall I give it him?
The cause he asks it for, bids me retain it.
Cruel Nymph, to deny me ' a grace so small
In my extremity; and even I see
How in each trifle fortune crosseth me.
I yield, I yield; long may it bide with thee:
Long live ye; my way to my death must be.
Aminta stay, Aminta ', a word Aminta,
Hark, stay; alas how swift he flies away.
He runs so fast, 'twill be in vain for us
To follow him; 'twere best I onward went
Upon my way; and yet perhaps 'twere better
I stayed, and held my peace, than myself be
Author of poor Montano's misery.
DEath, there is no need of thee:
Love alone, and Constancy
Are enough (without thy Dart)
To tire upon an honest heart.
Yet so hard is not the way
To Love's fame, as many say;
For Loan no price but love regards;
And with itself, itself rewards.
And oft in seeking it, is found
Glory that lives, when we are under ground.
NOw may the wind upon his wings bear hence
All ill may happen thee; together with
Th'accursed news so lately spread of thee.
Thou art alive (the gods be thanked forted)
And even but now I did believe thee dead;
So had Nerina painted to the life
Thy late hap; but I would she had been dumb,
Or some that heard her deaf.
Indeed I scaped
So narrowly, as I believe she might
Full well suppose me dead.
Suppose she might
Yet not have told it with such certainty.
But tell me prithee how thou didst escape
The danger so.
Why I in following
A Wolf into the wood, had thickt with him
So far, till I at length had lost his tract;
And as I stood thinking to turn again
Back as I went, I spied him, and I knew him
By ' a shaft that stuck in's head near to his ear,
Which I not long before had shot at him:
He was accompanied with many more,
About the body of some beast new slain;
But what beast 'twas I knew not; the same Wolf
I think knew me so well, that on he made
Towards me with his head besmeared with blood.
I boldly stood, and bend a Dart at him,
And when I thought his distance fit for me,
I threw, but (whether it was fortunes fault
Or mine) I missed him, as thou knowst I use
Not oft to do; he fiercer than before
Rushes upon me; and was come so near,
That I, (my shafts now spent) found it too late
To trust my bow, and took me to my heels:
Away Tranne; he followed me as fast.
See now my hap; a veil that I had tied
My hair withal, was half undone, and flew
At the wind's pleasure loosely, that at length
'Thad wound itself about a bough; I felt
That somewhat stayed me; but the fear I had,
Redoubled so my strength, that though the bough
Did all it could to hold me, I broke lose;
And as I left my veil behind, I left
Part of my hair withal; and so had fear
Lent my feet wings, that I outwent the Wolf,
And came safe from the wood; when turning home
I met thee thus amazed, and am no less
Amazed myself to see thee so.
Ay me
Thou liv'st, 'tis well, would all were well beside.
What ail'st thou? prithee art thou sorry then
That I'm alive?
No; that thou liv'st I'm glad;
But for an others death I must be sad.
How's this? for whose death?
Why Aminta's death.
Aminta dead? alas how may that be?
Nay how I cannot tell; nor yet am sure
Of the deed done; but I believe it firmly.
What's this thou tell'st me? alas what might be
Th'occasion of Aminta's death?
Thy death.
Make me conceive thee.
Even the heavy news
Of thy death, which he heard, and credited,
Hath brought him to his end, someway or other.
Fie, thou'rt deceived; and this thy thought will be
As vain as was the news thou heardst of me;
For surely no man will dye willingly.
O Silu'ia Silvia, thou dost not feel
Nor know what ' love's flame can do, in a breast
That is a breast of flesh, and not of flint
As thine is; for didst thou but know't, I know
Thou wouldst have loved him that loved thee more
Than both his eyes; more than his breath and life;
I do believe it, nay I'ue seen, and know it.
I saw, I saw him when thou fledst from him
(Unkind and cruel as thou wert) when he,
Even then when thou shouldst rather have embraced
Then scorned him so, against his breast had bend
His Dart, with full intent to kill himself:
Nor any whit repent of the deed,
When (stayed by me from farther wounding him)
The sharp steel had his garment and his skin
Died in his blood, and had pierced through that heart
That loyal heart of his, that thou before
Hadst wounded worse, had not I held his hand,
And saved him all I could: but O alas
That slight wound served but as a trial only
And small proof of his desp'rate constancy;
And but to teach the fatal steel, to do
The black deed it was preappointed to.
Ay me what's this thou tell'st me?
But at last
When the news came that thou wert dead, I saw him
Sound at the hearing on't, and dye away;
And came no sooner to himself again,
But furiously he flings away amain;
And sure I fear, alas, too sure 'twill prove
Has killed himself;
Such was his too much grief, and too much love.
But hold'st thou this for certain?
'tis too true.
Ay me why didst thou not strait follow him?
And stay him? ah let's seek, let's find him out;
Since from my death, his death's desire is bred,
He must live still because I am not dead.
Alas I followed him, but he had soon
So far outrun me, as I now despair
That we shall find him having lost his footing.
We must alas we must inquire him out
Some way or other speedily, lest he
Through our slowness his own murderer be.
Belike then (Cruel) th'art but grieved he should
Take from thee th'honour of this goodly deed?
And wouldst thyself be the brave murderess?
Must no hand else but thine, an Actor be
In th' execution of this Tragedy?
Well, set thy heart at rest; for howso're
He dies, thou art his only murderer.
Ah thou dost wound me; and thy every word
Adds to the agony'e of my bleeding breast,
Struck through with fear of him; and with the bitter
Remembrance of the savage cruelty
In me, which I called honesty ', and so 'twas,
But too severeit was, and rigorous;
I find it now, alas I now repent it.
What's this? what do I hear?
Why thou art pitiful then, and thy heart
Seems to have feeling of another's harms;
What do I see?
Why thou dost weep too; I'm amazed at this?
Whence are these tears? Is't love that causes them?
'Tis pity, 'tis compassion causes them.
Compassion is the messenger of love,
As is the lightning of the thunder clap.
'Tis often times the property of love
When he would creep unseen into young hearts
Which austere Chastity hath long time shut
And barred against him, to assume the habit
And semblance of his handmaid Pity ', and so
Deceives them ere they be aware, and gets
Into their breasts unknown and vndiscry'de.
These are love-teares (Silvia) they flow so fast;
Dost thou not love indeed? ha'? not a word?
Yes, 'tis too true, but alas 'tis too late.
Behold the strange ways of Love's chastisement;
Wretched Aminta, thou that (like the Bee,
Which hurting dies, and in an others wound
Leaves his own life,) hast with thy death, at last
Pierced that hard heart, which living felt thee not.
But if, O erring Spirit, (as I fear
Thou art, and severed from thy empty corpse)
Thou wanderest here about; behold her plaints;
Living thou lov'dst her, see she loves thee dead.
And if thy cruel fate would have it so,
That thy love could not be repaid till now,
And that her love was only to be purchased
By thee at this dear price; let it suffice thee
(Where more thou canst not have) that thou hast bought it
As dearly now, as she could rate it thee;
Even with thy death.
Dear bargain for the buyer;
And all unprofitable, and infamous
Unto the cruel seller.
O that I
Can with my love redeem his life again,
Or with my life his life, if he live not.
O pity, O discretion, too late bred;
Little avail they to revive the dead.
I Am so full of woe, so full of borror
As all I hear and whatsoe'er I look on
Me thinks afflicts, disquiets, and affrights me.
What strange news brings this man, that seems to me
So troubled in his looks, and in his speech?
I bring the sad news of Aminta's death.
Ay me what says he?
Aminta noblest Shepherd of these woods;
That was so comely and so gracious;
So dear unto the Nymphs, and to the Muses;
And dead but even a lad.
Ah of what death?
Tell us, ah tell all; that we may in one
Lament with thee his mischief, and our own.
Ay me my heart fails me '; I dare not approach
Th'unwelcome news which I of force must hear.
Vild breast of mine, ohdurate heart of mine,
What fear'fl thou now? go hard'ly, press upon
The murdering knives that are in yond man's tongue;
And there display thy fierceness? friend, I come
To bear my part of all the woe thou bringest;
Perhaps it does concern me more by much
Than thou'rt aware of; It belongs to me;
grudge me not on't then.
Nymph I do believe thee;
For even upon his death, I heard the wretch
Call still upon thy name to his last breath.
Now, now begins, the heavy history.
I was upon the mids of yond high hill,
Where I had spread abroad some nets of mine
To dry them, when not far off from me, came
Aminta by, with a sad cloudy look,
And altered much from what he wont to be
Both in his face and fashion; which I spying
Ran after him; and staying him, quoth he
Ergastus thou must do a courtesy
For me of much importance and avail;
'Tis to go with me but a little hence,
For witness of a deed I have to do;
But first I'll have thee bind thy faith to me
By a strict oath to stand aloof from me
And not approach to let or hinder that
That I shall do: I (that could ne'er have dreamt
Of such a furious madness in him) yielded
To's will; and made desperate invocations
Calling to witness Pan, and Priapus:
Pales, Pomona ', and nightly Hecate,
Which done, he led me higher up the hill:
Where, clambering through wild rocky passages,
(By ways ne'er found, and never trod before)
We gained the top, that over-hung a valley,
'Twixt which and us was a steep precipice,
And there we stayed; I casting down mine eye,
Began for fear to tremble, and shrunk back.
After a little pause, he smil'de me thought,
And seemed more cheerful than he was before;
And that made me misdoubt him less than ever:
After that; (quoth he to me) see thou tell
The Nymphs and Shepherds what thou shalt behold;
Then looking down, Ah that I had (said he)
So ready at my will, the throat and teeth
Of those same greedy Wolves, as these rocks be;
I would not dye of other death, than she
Who was my life; nor have my carcase torn
But by those teeth that tore those delicate
And beauteous limbs of hers; but since that heaven
Denies so great a blessing to me, I
Must be content some other way to dye;
And though a worse way, yet a speedier.
Silvia I follow thee, Silvia I come
To bear thee comapny,
If thou disdain me not; O I should dye
Much more contentedly; were I but sure
My following thee would not disquiet thee,
And that thy hate had ending with thy life:
Silvia I follow thee, I come. Which said,
Down from the place he headlong threw himself,
And I turned ye to see't.
Wretched Aminta.
Ay me, ay me.
Why didst not hinder him?
Perhaps the oath thou took'st barred thee to do't?
Not so; for setting all such oaths at nought,
(Vain doubtless in such cases) when I saw
Wither his fond and heady madness tended,
I reached at him; and (as ill hap would have it)
Laid hold but of this thin scarf, wherewithal
He girt himself; which (all too weak to bear
His body's weight, that rested all upon't)
Remained broke in my hand.
And what became
Of the unhappy carcase?
I know not;
For I was so dead strucken at the sight,
As my heart would not suffer me, to look
And see him dashed to pieces.
O strange fate.
Ay me, were I not made of stone indeed,
This news would kill me. Ah if the false death
Of me that cared no more for him, was cause
Enough to end his life;
Much more cause is there that the certain death
Of him that loved me so, should be enough
To end my life; and it shall end my life;
And if grief cannot do't, the sharp steel shall;
Or else this girdle here, which justly stays
As loath to follow his sweet Master's ruins,
Till it have done on me the due revenge
Of his sad death, and my ingratitude.
Unhappy girdle (relic of a more
Unhappy Master) ah do not disdain
T'abide a while with one so odious;
For thou shalt stay but to be th'instrument
Of his revenge, and of my punishment.
I might have been, alas I should have been
Yoke-fellow with Aminta here on earth;
But since that cannot be, by thy help now
I'll find him out among th'infernal shades,
And there go bear him better company.
Content thee (thou sad soul) 'tis Fortune's fault,
And not by thy mean, that this ill is wrought.
Shepherds why plain ye? if ye moan my woes,
I do deserve no pity; that have been
Myself so pitiless; if ye wail the death
Of the poor Innocent, ab t is too small;
Grief is too poor to pay his deed withal.
And Daphne thou I prithee dry thy tears;
If for my sake thou weep'st; for my sake cease.
And for his sake that was a thousand times
More worth than I; and go along and help me
To find th'unhappy bones; and bury them;
'Tis that alone that keeps me still alive,
And that I do not even now kill myself.
It is the least and last duty is left
For me to do him, for the love he bore me;
And though this vile hand of mine, might perhaps
Blemish the pi'ety of so just a deed;
Yet he I know will like the deed the better,
For being done by it; for I am sure
He loves me still; his death assures it me.
I am content to'assist thee'in seeking him,
But talk (for heaven's sake) of this death no more.
Alas wee'ue had too much of that before.
Till now I'ue lived only unto myself,
And my own wayward humour: for the rest,
I vow it all to'Aminta; and if to him
I may not, I'll live yet to his cold carcase,
Till I have done it the last obsequies:
So long I may; longer I will not live.
But Shepherd set me in the way (I pray)
Unto the valley at the high hills foot.
There of'at hand 'tis, and not far from hence.
I'll go along and guide thee, for I well Remembered.
Farewell Shepherds, Nymphs farewell;
Farewell woods, fields, and flocks; farewell, farewell.
This maiden speaks me thinks in such a strain,
As if she went ne'er to return again.
Love; thou reioyn'st what Death unbinds?
(Thou friend of Peace but she of Blood;)
Yet thou her Triumphs over raignest;
And in uniting gentle minds,
Makest Earth so heavenly an abode,
As thou to dwell among us daynest:
Thou smoothest the rugged hearts of men;
And inward rancours drivest away
(Great prince of happy peace;) and when
Mild breasts are troubled, dost allay
Their woes; and by thy working strange,
Framst of things mortal, an eternal change.
Doubtless the laws where with Love governeth
His Empire evermore, are neither hard
To follow, nor unjust; and those his works
Which many men do condemn wrongfully,
Are full of providence, and mystery,
Lo with what art,
And by how many unknown ways, he leads
His votaries unto their happiness;
And placeth them among the highest joys
And pleasures of his amorous Paradise,
When oftentimes they feel themselves sunk down
even to the very bottom of all ills.
Behold Aminta with his headlong fall,
Aspires unto the top of all delight;
O happy ' Aminta; and so much the more
Happy now, as unfortunate before.
This thy example makes me hope no less,
That once at last my lovelesse fair (that covers
Under those friendly smiles, such cruelty)
Will with true pity heal the wounds, that she
Hath with her feigned pity made in me.
Yond is the reverend Elpine; and me thinks
Speaks of Aminta ' as if he were alive,
Calling him happy, blessed, and fortunate,
Ah hard condition of unhappy lovers;
He belike counts him fortunate, that dies
For love, and is beloved (when he is dead)
Of her he loved so well; and this he calls
The paradise of love; O with how light
And poor rewards the winged Love-god contents
His servants. Art thou (Elpine) then indeed
In such a pitiful estate, as that
Thou canst term fortunate, the miserable
Death of the poor Aminta? and wouldst thou
So far thy life to love's subjection bow,
And undergo the like fate?
Friends be merry
What of his death perhaps ye have heard, is false.
That were a welcome news.
Did he not throw himself down headlong then
From yond high Mountain's top?
'tis true he did.
But 'twas a fortunate and happy fall;
That looked so like death, and is proved to him
Not life alone, but a most joyful life;
For now he lies lulled in the tenter lap.
Of his beloved one that seems much more
Fond of him now, than she was coy before;
Drying each tear he lets fall, with a sigh,
Or with the like, friendly requiting it.
But I am going to find out Montane
Her Father, and conduct him where they be;
For there wants nothing else but his consent,
To both their boundless joys accomplishment.
Their age, their blood and birth, their mutual loves,
And all agree; and the good old Montano
Will he glad doubtless of posterity,
And to ' arm his grey hairs with so sweet a guard,
So that his will no doubt shall second theirs.
But thou (good Elpine) tell what god, what fate
In that so dangerous, and deadly fall
Prescrued Aminta.
I am well content;
Hear then, hear that which with these eyes I saw;
I was before my Caues mouth, which ye know
Lies at the hills foot, on the valleys brim;
There Thirsi' and I were reasoning together
Of the fair she that in the self same net
Had first ensnared him, and me afterward;
When I preferring my loved servitude
Before his free state; all at once we heard
A shriek; and saw a man fall frbm above,
Upon a bushy knowle; for on the side
Of the steep hill, there grows (all of a heap,
And as 'twere wove tog there,) a round mass
Of brambles, thorns, and certain weeds among;
There first he light before he lower fell;
And though he made way through them with his weight,
And fell down to the ground before our feet;
Yet so that stop abated the falls force,
As 'twas not mortal; though so dangerous
As that he lay a while devoid of sense,
And as a dead man without show of motion.
We with amazement, and compassion were
Dumbe-strucken at the sudden spectacle:
And knowing him, and knowing soon (with all)
He was not dead, nor perhas like to die,
Appeased his woe, and eased him all we could;
Then Thirsis made me throughly ' acquainted with
Th'whole passage of his loves. but while we sought
To bring him to himself again, and sent
To fetch Alphesibeo (t'whom Apollo
Taught th'art of Physic, when he gave his Harp
And Lute to me) came Daphne, and Silvia,
Who (as I heard) had been to seek him out
Whom they supposed dead. But when Silvia
Had found and knew him, and beheld his cheeks
And lips so bloodless, and discoloured,
As the wan Violet's hue their paleness past;
And saw him languish, as if then he had
Been drawing his last breath; she gave her sorrows
A liberal passage through her earnest cries;
And beating her fair breast, falls down upon him,
Laying her face on his, and on his lips
Her lips.
And did not bashful shame restrain
Her more, who is so strict and so severe?
Bashfulness oft bars weak loves of their long,
But is too weak a curb for a strong love.
But then, as if her eyes had been two fountains,
She drowned his cold face with her pouring tears;
Whose water was of so great force, and virtue,
That he revived; and opening his dim eyes,
He sighs forth a hollow ' Ay me, from the bottom
Of his sad breast; she caught the heavy sound
Of that same bitter breath; and mingled it
With her sweet breath; and so restored, and healed him.
Then; who can say? who can imagine what
Both of them thought, and at that instant felt?
Each now assured of others life? and he
Assured of her love, and to find himself
Entangled in so loved, and loving arms?
He that loves firmly may imagine it,
Yet hardly too; but no tongue sure can tell it.
Is then Aminta safe belike, and well,
And so clear from all danger of his death?
He's safe, and well; save that he has a little
Battered his flesh, and somewhat scratched his face;
But 'twill be nothing; and he ways it not.
Thrice happy he, t'have given so great and high
A sign, and earnest of his Constancy;
And now enjoys the fruit of his firm love;
To which his sad induring, and pains past,
Prove pleasing and sweet sauces at the last.
But peace be wi'yeyee '; I must go seek about
Till I have found the good Montano out.
I Know not whether the much sour
This (now blest) Lover (serving, burning,
Now despairing, and still mourning)
Hath felt; may in one happy ' hour
Be thoroughly repaid again
With pleasure equal to his pain.
But if the good more pleasing be,
And come more welcome, after we
Have felt the ill; I do not crave
(O Love) this happiness to have.
Let others be so blest by thee,
And grant the Nymph I love, may be
Won with a little less ado;
Less prayers, less service when I woo;
And let the sauce to our loves, be
Not so much pain, and misery:
But sweet disdains, repulses sweet;
Fall off a little, and strait meet.
That after a short frown or twain,
New peace, or truce may knit our hearts again.
Down from the third heaven, I (that am
His queen, goddess, & mother) come
To seek my son, (the runaway
Cupid.) I lost him yesterday.
As he lay playing in my lap
(Whether of purpose, or by hap
I cannot say,) but his gold shaft
Fell with the point on my left side,
And pricked me '; and when my hurt he spied,
(As erst h'has served me ') he flew away, and laughed.
But though sometime I angry seem,
A tender care I have of him;
And now (my anger laid aside)
Have been to seek him far and wide;
As well my heavens each part about
As Mars his orb, and throughout
All th'other wheels that move, and stand;
The shining heaven has not a Sphere,
But I have been to seek him there,
Yet cannot find this little vagabond.
Wherefore now amongst you (meek
Mortals) I am come to seek
My child, who of entim s I know,
Takes delight to live with you;
But I more than half despair
To find him 'mongst you (Ladies fair)
For though oftentimes he flies
About your face, and by your eyes,
And would fain enter your breast,
And in your bosoms make his nest;
Yet they're so bard against him with disdain,
That there I fear he does but knock in vain.
But amongst you Men more kind
I may hope my son to find;
Your milder breasts will not disdain
This fugitive to entertain;
Therefore to you my suit must be;
Tell me ' (I pray) then, where is he?
He that can but give me tiding
Where the Wag has his abiding;
Shall for his rewarding, sipp
A pair of kisses from my lip,
Soon as he will wish to take them,
Full as sweet as I can make them:
But he that shall the kindness do me
To bring my little wandrer to me,
Shall expect a greater meed
Wherewith to recompense his friendly deed;
And such as all the wealth I have
Cannot exceed; no though I gave
All Love's Kingdom; and I take
To witness the black Stygian lake,
That I will truly pay my vow.
Tell me therefore, tell me now
Where's my Son? who grants my suit?
But no man answers; all are mute.
Perhaps ye have not seen the Elf,
Or he hath so disguiz'de himself
Ye know him not; perhaps h'has left
His brand, and from his shoulders reft
His painted wings; and thrown them by,
With th'rest of his Artillery.
But I'll give y'other marks of him, whereby
Ye shall discern, and find him easily.
This Love (thus masked) although he be
Old both in years, and subtlety;
Seems but a boy in shape, and face,
And (like a boy in gate, and pace)
Is never constant to one place.
Such sports and pastimes useth he,
As common unto children be;
But all his sports he tempers so,
they're dangerous, and full of woe
To those he plays withal; displeased
He will be soon, and soon appeased;
And in his face at once appears
An interchange of smiles and tears.
His hair is gold, & curled, & grows
(As Fortune often painted shows)
Hanging long before; but short
And thin on his heads hinderpart.
His face cleare-coloured, & delightful,
Like to fire is quick and sprightful;
And doth easily express
His minds audacious wantonness.
His inflamed eyes are full of guile,
Which still he sugars with a smile.
Under the brow unhappily
He uses oft to throw his eye,
That rowles unsteedy here and there,
And ne'er is firmly fixed any where.
His tongue is sweet; and when he speaks
A pleasing air from his lips breaks,
In many ' a pieced imperfect word,
Which yet a winning sound afford.
His voice is shrill, and clear, and small,
Which uttering, still he smiles withal;
And those his fleering smiles doth baiyt
With hidden treason, and deceit,
Which (like the Snake) surke in the bed
Of those flowers undiscovered.
And first with these he doth begin
To'vnlocke your breasts, and enter in.
When having seemed all courtesy,
All meekness, and humility,
And that (as a poor pligrim) ye
Have harbered him in charity,
Than 'ginnes he by degrees, t'express
Himself, and wrong your easiness,
Grows proud and wondrous insolent.
And never rests, is ne'er content
Until he be (Ingrateful Elf).
Possessed of your heats keys himself;
And strait turns all those out of door
That there inhabited before;
And placeth others in their room,
A troop of newer guests; to whom
He makes your reason thrall; and finds
New Laws wherewith to rule your minds;
And thus becomes of a mild guest,
A cruel Tyrant o'er the breast;
And so his new placed Powers assist him
He kills or conquers all that ere resist him,
Now by these marks (both of his face,
His hauiour, qualities, and grace)
Which I have given ye ', I hope ye may
Know this disguized runaway.
Tell me ' I pray then, where is he?
But not a man will answer me.
ye'll conceal him from me then?
Ah foolish unadvised men,
Ye cannot Love so closely hide,
But that at length he will be spied;
And in your words & looks appear,
By tokens evident and clear;
And then such hap will you betide,
As unto him that seeks to hide
A Snake in's bosom, till his cries
And blood discover where he lies.
But since I cannot find him here,
(Ere I return up to my Sphere,)
I'll seek for him on Earth some other where.