Hail worthy Praetor, (Hail Grave Senators)
The Queen of Waves (leaving Grey Neptune's Bowers)
waits here (Fair Lord) to serve you. Fame's Report,
(so far as old Oceanus' Crystal Court)
what Triumphs Ceremony forth would Call
To Swell the joys of This Grand Festival,
Enticed me with my Mermaids and a Train
Of sea-nymphs hither. Here (this day) shall Reign
Pleasures in State Majestic: And to lend
A brighter Splendour to them, do Attend
Three of my Noblest Children, Humber, Trent,
And Severn (Glorious made by Punishment.)
The Silver-footed Thames (my eldest son)
To Grace your Triumphs, by your Barge shall run.
Your Fortunes (led by a white-handed Fate
Up to this High Fame) I Congratulate:
Glad am I to behold you Thus Set Round
With Glories, Thus with Acclamations Crowned,
So Circled, and Hemmed in, on Every side
With Echoing Music, Fishes even take pride
To Swim along, and listen, Go, and Take
The Dignity stays for you, whilst I make
Smooth way Before you, on This Glassy Floor,
Ushering your glad Arrival to the Shore.
To honour's Temple now you have not far,
High, and Come back more Great than yet you Are, On,
BEhold, the four Elements wait upon you to do you Honour: Water hath provided Floating Triumphs to Dance in the Air: In the Air are a Thousand Echoes with Music in their Mouths, to Entice you to hear them: On the Shore shall ten thousand pair of hands give you Plaudits in the City: The Element of Fire, Thunders aloud your welcomes. Throngs of Subjects here, are glad to see the Graces enthroned on your Forehead: All the Delicacies of Love, playing on your Eyelids, The Roses of England, and the Lilies of France, Kissing one Another on your cheeks. Be you healthful as the Spring; Glorious as Summer: Fruitful as the Vine: Safety run along your Chariot by Day; Golden Slumbers dress up your Chamber at Night.
Live long,
Live happy,
Live beloved;
Goodness Guard you,
Virtues Crown you,
Angels Guide you.
TEn thousand welcomes Greet you on the shore,
(My long expected Praetor,) O before
You look on Others, fix your eyes on Me,
On Me, your second Mother, (London.) she
Whom all Great Britain's Cities, style their Queen,
For still I am, and have her Darling been.
The Christian World, in Me, reads Times best stories,
And Reading, falls blind at my dazling Glories,
But now the Snow of age, covers my head:
As therefore you, by Me have up been bred,
You (Sir) must Nurse me now: with a quick eye
View then my Tree of Honour, branching high
For hundreds of past years, with 12. large Stems,
twelve Noble Companies, which like 12. Gems
So shine, they add new Sun beams to the Day:
Guard all these 12. maine-Boughes; but you must lay:
A soft hand, on the Topping-branch, for there
(Thrive the Root well) yourself grows all this year:
The lesser twigs which lowly run along
My tall Tree, Border, you must shield from wrong,
There the poor be, (the sweating Trade's man) flies
From Flower to Flower, and home with Honey bees.
With me Minerva; and Bellona come,
For Arts and Arms, must at your Board have room,
Your Gates will spread, the Rich to entertain,
But whilst the Mighty ones within remain,
And feast: Remember at the same Gate stands
The Poor, with crying Papers in their hands,
To watch when justice up the Glass shall turn,
Let those sands run, the Poor can never mourn.
Place in your eyes two Beacons, to descry
Dangers far off, which strike ere home they fly;
Kiss Peace; let Order ever steer the Helm,
Left-handed Rule, a State does overwhelm.
You are your sovereign's Gardener for one year,
The Plot of Ground, you're trusted with, lies here,
(A City,) and your care must all be spent,
To prune and and dress the Tree of Government.
Lop off Disorders, Factions, Mutiny,
And Murmurations against those sit high,
May your years last day, end as this begins,
Sphered in the loves of Noble Citizens.
FAme's turn is now to Speak; for who but Fame
Can with her thousand Tongues abroad Proclaim,
Your this day's Progress (rising like the Sun,)
Which through the yearly Zodiac on must run.
Fame hath brought hither from great Mosco's Court,
(The seven-mouthed Volga, spreading the report,)
Two Russian Princes, who to feast their eyes,
With the rich Wonders of these rarities,
Ride in this glorious Chariot; How amazed
They look, to see streets thronged, and windows glazed
With beauties, from whose eyes such beams are sent,
Here moves a second starry Firmament.
Much, on them, startling admiration wins,
To see these Brave, Grave, Noble Citizens,
So streamed in multitudes, yet flowing in State,
For all their Orders are Proportionate.
Russia, now envies London, seeing (here) spent
Her richest Furs, in graceful ornament,
More Brave and more Abounding, than her own:
A golden Pen he earns, that can make known
The use of Furs, so Great, so General,
All men, may these, their Winter Armours call.
Th'invention of warm Furs the Sun did fret,
For Russians lapped in these, slighted his heat,
Which seen, his fiery Steeds he drove from thence,
And so the Muff has dwelled in cold ere since.
What royalties, add Furs to Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, in the distinguishings,
Of all their several Robes? The Furs worn here,
Above th'old Roman State make Ours appear:
The reverend judge, and all that climb the trees
Of sacred Arts, ascend to their Degrees,
And by the colours changed of Furs are known:
What Dignity, each Corporation
Puts on by Furs, witness these infinite eyes,
Thank then the bringers of these Rarities.
I wish (Grave Praetor) that as Hand in Hand,
Plenty and Bounty bring you safe to Land,
So, Health may be chief Carver at that Board,
To which you hasten. Be as Good a Lord
I'th' eyes of Heaven, as this day you are Great
In Fame's applause: High to your Honoured Seat.
SHall the proud wife of Neptune, or shrill Fame,
Or Troynovant herself, Ring out your Name:
And I be Dumb, or sparing, to Sound high,
The Glories of This Day? No, They shall Fly
Like Soaring Eagles, to That Curled main
whose Head my Rocky Bridle, In does Reyne:
The Great Britannia, Bred you in her Womb,
Hear then a Mother's Counsel; You are Come
Aboard a Goodly Ship, where all your State,
Fame, Honour and Renown (Embarked) must wait
The voyage of twelve Moons. High Admiral
You are to All That Fleet, which Thus you Call
To sail in This vast Ocean. Nor must you
Walk Heartless on the Hatches, I here's a New
State-Navigation, to be studied Now,
With an High reared, Undaunted, Fixed Brow.
Be sure to have Brave Ordnance, and charged well;
In this your Ship, Trust None, For Officers Sell
Their Captains Trust; let None but your own Eyes,
Rule Chart and Compass, There your Safety lies.
Your Own Hands steer the Helm, But strongly Steer,
And spite of storms, be stout when you stand There.
Emblem of Mercy! Your Keen sword does sleep,
But why a Sword, if not to Kul, and Keep
Vices (like Slaves) in Awe? Fullness of Wine
Is a Foul Dropsy, That and Lust Entwine:
Pride a swollen Timpany, Sloth, the beggar's Gout,
(In tradesmen's Hands and Feet, It runs about,)
No Cure for this! Oaths thick as Smallshot fly
From Children, No Defence to Put this by!
You May, you Must. I Counsel not, but Read
A Lesson of my love; By which Love led
I'll on, and Bring you to your Honoured Chair,
Whilst Aves (Round about you) Dance i'th' Air.
heaven's bright Orientall Gates I oped this Morn,
And Hither wheeled my Chariot to adorn
These splendours with my Beams: ne'er did the Sun
In his Celestial Circle faster run
Than Now, to see these Sights: O how I joy
To view a Kingdom, and a New-built Troy
So flourishing so full, so fair, so dear
To th' Gods. they leave Ioue's Court to revel here.
All o'er the World, I travel in one Day,
Yet oft am forced to leave my beaten way,
Frighted with Uproars, Battles, Massacres,
Famines, and all that Hellish brood of wars:
I meet no Peace but here. O blessed Land!
That seest fires kindling round, and yet canst stand
Unburnt for all their flames; O Nation blessed!
When all thy neighbour's shriek, none wound thy breast.
To Crown these joys, with me are come along,
The four Lords of the year, who by a strong
Knit Charm, bring in this goodly Russian prize,
As earnest of a more rich Merchandise:
Half of our Race, Time, and my Hours have run,
Nor shall they give o'er till the Goal be won.
THe Sun is mantled in thick Clouds of Black,
And by his hidden Beams, threatens the wrack
Of all these Glories: Every pleasure dies
When Raven-winged Night, from her Cave flies;
None but these Artificial Stars keep fire
To Light you Home, these burn with a desire
To lengthen your brave Triumphs; but their heat
Must cool, and die at length, though ne'er so Great.
Peace therefore guide you on: Rest, charm your eyes,
And Honours wait to cheer you when you Rise.