THus Mounted, hither comes the King of waves,
Whose voice Charms roughest Billows into slaves,
Whose Foot, treads down their necks with as much Ease
As in my shelly Coach, I rein up These.
Loud Echoes called me from my glittering Throne
To see the Noble Thamesis;— A Son
To this my Queen and Me (〈◊〉) whose Ear
ne'er jeweld up such Music as sounds Here.
For, our unfaddomd World, Roars out with None
But Horrid Sea-fights, Navies Overthrown,
Islands halfe-drownd in Blood, Pirates pell mell,
Turk's slavish tugging Oars, The Dunkirks Hell,
The Dutchmans' Thunder, And the Spaniards Lightning,
To whom, the Sulphur's Breath gives Heat & Heightening,
O! These are the Dire Tunes my Consort sings,
But here! old Thame out shines the Beams of Kings.
This City Adds New Glories to Ioues Court.
And to All you, who to this Hall resort,
This 〈◊〉 via (as a Path) is given,
Being P●l●d with Pearl, as that with Stars in heaven
I could (to ●w●ll my train) Becon the Rhine.
(But the wild Boar ha' tusked up his vine.)
I could Swift Volga Call, whose curled head lies
On seven 〈◊〉 pillows, (But, in merchandizes
The Russian, him employs)- I could to these
Call Ganges, Nilus, long haired Euphrates,
Tagus whose golden Hands clasp Lisbon walls,
Him could I call too, But what need these calls?
Were they all here, they would weep out there eyes,
Mad that new Troy's high towers on tiptoe rise
To hit Heaven's Roof: Mad, to see Thames this day
(For all his age) in wanton windings Play,
Before his, new Grave Praetor, and before
These senators, Best fathers of the poor.
That Grand Canale, where (stately) once a year
A Fleet of bridal Gondoletts appear,
To marry with a golden Ring, (That's Hurled,
Into the sea) That minion of the world
Venice to Neptune,- A poor Lantscip is,
To these full Bravereiss of Thamesis.
Go therefore up to Caeasars' Court,- And claim
What honours there are left to Campe-bels name
As by disent, whilst we tow up a tide
Which shall run sweeting up by you barges side:
That done, Time shall Oceanus Name Enrol,
For guarding You to London's Capitol.
Brave Jron! Brave Hammer! from your sound,
The Art of Music has her Ground,
On the Anuile, Thou keep'st Time,
Thy Knick-a-knock is a smith's Best Chime,
Yet Thwick a-Thwack,
Thwick, Thwac-a-Thwac-Thwac,
Make our Brawny sinews Crack,
Then Pit a-pat-pat, pit-a-pat-pat,
Till thickest bars be beaten flat.
We shoe the Horses of the Sun,
Harness the Dragons of the Moon,
Forge Cupid's Quiver, Bow, and Arrows,
And our Dame's Coach, that's drawn with Sparrows.
Till thwick-a-thwack, etc.
Ioues Roaring Cannons, and his Rammers,
We beat out with our Lemnian Hammers,
Mars his Gauntlet, Helm and Spear,
And Gorgon Shield are all made here.
Till thwick-a-thwack, etc.
The Grate which (shut) the Day out-barres,
Those golden studs which nail the stars,
The Globes-case, and the Axletree,
Who can Hammer these but We.
Till thwick-a-thwack, etc.
A Warmng-pan to heat Earth's bed,
Lying i'th' frozen Zone half-dead,
Hobnails to serve the Man i'th' Moon,
And Sparrow-bils to clout Pan's shoon.
Whose work but ours? Till thwic-a-thwack, &c,
Venus Kettles, Pots and Pens,
We make, or else she Brawls and Bannes,
tongues, Shovels, Andirons have their places,
Else she scratches all our faces.
Till thick a-thwack, etc.
Stop your Hammers: what ails Ioue?
We are making arrows for my slip-string son,
Here,— reach him those two dozen; I must now
A golden handle make for my wife's fann:
Work my sine Smugges.
First hear; you shall not play,
The Fates would scold should you keep Holiday.
What then?
Command thy Brawny fisted slaves to sweat
At th' Anuile, and to dust their Hammers beat,
To stuff with Thunderbolts Ioues Armoryes,
For Vices (mountainlike) in black heaps rise,
My sinews crack to fallen them:— Idiot pride
Stalks upon stilts,— Ambition, by her side,
Climbing to catch Stars, breaks her neck it'h fall,
The Gallant Roars,— Roarers drink oaths and gall,
The Beggar curses,— Avarice eats gold
Yet ne'er is filled,— Learning's awrangling scold,
War has a Fatal hand,— Peace, whorish Eyes,
Shall not Iove, beat down such Impieties?
Is't not high time, Is't not true justice then
(Vulcan) for thee, and thy tough Hammer-men
To heat thy Anuile,— and blow fires to flames
To burnethese Broods, who kill even with their Names?
Yes Ioue, 'tis more than Time.
And what helps this, but Iron! O then, how high
Shall this Great Troy, Text up the Memory
Of you her Noble Praetor, and tall Those
(Your worthy Brotherhood) through whose Care goes
That rare, rich prize of Iron, to the whole Land,
Iron! far more worth than Tagus' golden Sand.
Iron! best of Metals! Pride of Minerals!
Hart of the Earth! Hand of the World, which falls
Heavy when it strikes home:— By Irons strong Charms
Riots lie bound:— War stops her rough Alarms
Iron; Earthquakes strikes in Foes:— Knits friends in love,
Iron's that maine Hinge, on which the World doth move:
No Kingdom's Globe can turn, Even, Smooth and Round,
But that his Axletree in Iron is found:
For, Armies wanting Iron, are puffs of wind,
And, but for Iron, who thrones of peace would mind?
Were there no gold nor silver in the land:
Yet Navigation (which on Jron does stand)
Can fetch it in— Gold's Darling to the Sun,
But Iron, his hardy Boy, by whom is done
More than the T'other dare: The Merchant's Gates
By Iron, bar out thievish assassinates:
Iron is the Shopkeepers both Lock and Kay,
What are your Cours of Guard, when Iron's away?
How would the Cornepricke up her golden Ears:
But that Iron Plough shares, all the labour bears
In Earth's strange Midwiffry? Brave Jron! what praise
Deserves it? More 'tis beat, more it obeys;
The more it suffers: More it smooths offence:
In Drudgery, it shines with Patience.
This Fellowship, was then with judging Eyes
United to the twelve great Companies:
It being far more Worthy, than to Fill
A File inferior;— You's the sun's gilded Hill:
On toot: Ioue guards you on: Cyclopes a Ring
Make with your Hammers, to whose Music Sing.
WElcome (great Praetor) Now hear Titan speak,
Whose beams to Crown this Day, through Clouds thus Break
My coach of beaten gold is set aside,
My Horses to Ambrosial mangers tied,
Why is this done? why leave I mine own Sphere?
But here to circled You, for a whole Year:
Embrace then Titan's Counsel:— Now so Guide
The Chariot of your sway in a Just Pace,
That All (to come hereafter) may with Pride,
Say, None like you did Noblier quit the Place▪
Lower than Now you are in Fame, Never fall,
Note me (the Sun) who in my Noon Career,
Renders a shadow, short or None at all,
And so, since Honour's Zodiac is your sphere,
A shrub to you must be the tallest Pine,
On poor and rich you Equally must shine.
This if you Do, my Arms shall ever spread
About those Rooms you Feast in:— From her head
Flora, her garlands pluck (being Queen of Flowers)
To dress your Parlours up like summer's Bowers:
Ceres, lay golden sheaffes on your full board,
With fruit you from Pomona shall be sloard,
Whilst Ver and Estas (Spring and Summer) Drive
From this your Tempe, Winter, till he Dive
I'th' frozen Zone, and Titan's Radiant shield
Guard Campe-bels Beuch ampe, London's fairest field.
APollo never stuck in Admiration till now: My Delphos is removen hither; my Oracles are spoken here: Here the Sages utter their wisdom, Here the Sibyls their divine verses.
I see Senators this day in Scarlet riding to the Capitol, and to morrow the same men riding up and down the field in Armours Gowned Citizens, and Warlike Gowne-men. The Gun here gives place, and the own takes the upper hand. The Gown and the Gun march in one File together.
Happy King that has such people, happy Land in such a King! Happy Praetor so graced with Honours! Happy Senators so obeyed by Citizens. And happy Citizens that can command such Triumphs.
Good in your full glories: whilst Apollo, and these Mistresses of the Learned Sciences, waft you to that Honourable shore; whither Time bids you hasten to arrive.
AFter the glorious troubles of this day,
Night bids you welcome home,— Night who does lay
All pomp, all Triumphs, by,- state, now desends,
Here or Officious Train their service ends,
And yet not all, for see: the golden Sun,
Albeiu he had his days work fully done,
Sits up above his hour, and does his best
To keep the stars from lighting you to rest,
Him will I take along to lay his head
In Tethys' lape, Peace therefore Guard your beds:
In your year's Zediacke may you fairly move,
Shined on by Angels, blest with goodness love.