THe Duke is moved.
The news displeased him much.
And yet I see no reason, why he should
Engage so great affection to th'▪ Daughter
Of Milan, he ne'er saw her.
Fame doth paint
Great beauties, and her picture (by which Princes
Court one another) may beget a flame
In him to raise this passion.
Trust a pencil,
I like not that State▪ wooing, see his Brother
Has left him, pray my Lord how is it with
His highness?
Somewhat calmer, love I think
Will kill neither of us, although I be
No Stoic, yet I thank my stars I have
A power o'er my affection, if he'll not
Tame his, let it melt him into Sonnets
He will prove the more loving Prince to you,
Get in again; and make wise speeches to him,
There is Aristotle's Ghost still with him,
My philosophical governor that was,
He wants but you two, and a pair of Spectacles,
To see what folly 'tis, to love a woman
With that wicked resolution to marry her,
Though he be my elder Brother, and a Duke,
I ha' more wit, when there's a dearth of women
I may turn fool, and place one of their sex
nearer my heart, farewell, commend me to
My Brother, and the council-table.
Still the same wild Prince, there needs no character
Where he is, to 〈◊〉 him.
He said truth,
I doubt there is no room for one, whom he
Should place in's heart, and honour.
His own Lady
All pity her misfortune, both were too
Unripe for Hymen, 'twas the old Duke's act,
And in such marriages, hearts seldom meet
When they grow older.
Wherefore would the Duke
Marry his young son first?
The walk of Princes,
To make provision betimes for them:
They can bequeath small legacy, knowing th'heir
Carries both state and fortune for himself,
His fates before him, here comes Grimundo!
The Duke is recollected, where's the Prince?
Gone.
I would he were returned once to himself.
He has to soon forgot your precepts.
Your example might still be a Lecture,
I did not deceive the old Duke's trust
While I had power to manage him,
he's now past my tuition, but to th'Duke—
Is it not strange my Lord, that the Young Lady
Of Milan, should be forced to marry now, with
Her uncle?
They're unequal,
'Tis unlawful.
'Tis a trifle, reasons of State they urge
Against us, least their Dnkedome by this match,
e subiect vnto Sauoy, for the scrupl
O Religion, they are in hope, that
A Dispensation may be procured
To quit exceptions, and by this means,
They shall preserve their Principality,
I'th' name and blood, so reports Fabrichio
Whom the Duke employed for Treaty, how now?
The Duke calls for you my Lords.
We attend,
Ha'? he is coming forth.
His looks are cheerful.
Fabrichio?
My Lord,
We will to Tennis.
What your Grace please.
Grimundo?
Because you take no pleasure in such pastimes,
Your contemplation may busy itself, with that book.
Book my Lord, it is—
Leonora's picture a fair table-book.
You may without offence to your yonng Wife▪
Look on a Picture.
I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 it, let 〈◊〉 see't't to more,
Milan and we are parted, our breast wears
Again his natural Temper, allow me pray
The excuse of common frailty, to be moved
At strangeness of this news.
Your highness said,
You would to Tennis.
And'tis time enough,
We have the day before us: some Prince Grimundo
In such a cause as this would have been angry,
Angry indeed, thrown of cold language, and
Called it a high, and loud affront, whose stirring
Imagination would have wakened Death,
And by a miserable war, have taught
Repentance, to a pair of flourishing States,
Such things there have been?
But your Grace is wise—
Nay do not flatter now, I do not Court
Your praise so much, I speak but what our stories
Mention, if they abuse not soft posterity:
I was not come to tell you, what my thoughts,
With a strong murmur prompt me too.
We hope—
Ye fear, and do not know me yet, my actions
Shall clear your jealousy, I'm reconciled
At home, and while I cherished a peace here,
Abroad I must continue it, there are
More Ladiesi'the world?
Most true my Lord.
And as attractive, great, and glorious women
Are there not, ha'?
Plenty my Lord i'the world.
Ith' world, within the confines of our dukedom
In Savoy, are there not?
In Savoy too.
Many choice beauties, but your birth my Lord▪
Was but an honour purchased by another,
It might have been thy chance.
My Father was
No Duke.
'Twas not thy fault, nor is't my virtue,
That I was borne when the fresh sun was rising,
So came with greater shadow into life,
Then thou, or he.
But royal Sir be pleased—
No more, we are not ignorant, you may
Take away this distinction, and allege
In your grave wisdoms, spacious arguments,
For our alliance with some foreign Prince,
But we have weighed their promising circumstance,
And find it only a device, that may
Serve time, and some dark ends, a mere state-trick,
To disguise hatred, and is empty of
Those benefits, it seems to bring along:
Give me a Lady borne in my obedience,
Whose disposition, will not engage
A search into the nature of her Climate,
Or make a serutinie into the stars:
Whose language is mine own, and will not need
A smooth Interpreter, whose virtue is
Above all titles, though her birth or fortune,
B a Degree beneath vs, such a Wife
Were worth a thousand far fetched Brides, that have
More state, and less devotion.
If your highness—
Come you shall know our purpose, in the last
We obeyed your directions, not without
Our free and firm allowance of the Lady
Whom we'll forget, it will become your duties,
Fellow us now, we have not been unthrifty
In our affections, and that Milan may
Know Savoy can neglect a Milanese,
And that we need not borrow a delight,
Hear we are fixed to marry,
We are subjects,
And shall solicit heaven, you may find one
Worthy your great acceptance.
We are confident,
And to put off the cloud we walk in, know
We are resolved to place all love and Honour
Upon Cleona
Nor is't a new affection, we but cherish
Some seeds, which heretofore, her virtue had
Scattered upon our heart.
We cannot be
Ambitious of a Lady, in your own
Dominion, to whom we shall more willingly
Prostrate our duties.
She's a Lady of
A flowing sweetness, and the living virtue
Of many noble Ancestors.
In whom
Their fortunes meet, as their prophetic souls
Had taught them thrifty providence, for this
Great honour, you intent her.
We are pleased,
And thank your general vote,
You then shall strait prepare our visit, bear our
Princely respects, and say we shall take pleasure
To be her Guest to day, nay lose no time,
We shall the sooner quit the memory
Of Leonora's Image.
The Prince your Brother Sir?
Withdraw, but be not at too much distance,
Lodowick Y'are welcome.
I shall know that by my success, I want
A thousand crowns, a thousand crowns.
For what use?
Why will these foolish questions ne'er be left,
Is't not sufficient I would borrow 'em,
But you must still capitulate with me?
I would put 'em to that use they were ordained for,
You might as well have asked me, when I meant
To pay you again.
That to some other men,
Might ha' been necessary.
And you won't
Do that, I have another easy suit to you.
What is't?
A thing of nothing, I would entreat you
To part with this same transitory honour,
This trifle called a dukedom, and retire,
Like a good Christian Brother, into some
Religious house, it would be a great ease to you,
And comfort to your friends, especially
To me, that would not trouble you, with the noise
Of money thus, and I could help it.
'tis a kind, and honest motion, out of Charity,
Mere Charity, so I must needs accept it—
I'll only marry, and get a Boy, or two,
To govern this poor trifle for I'm bound
In duty, to provide for my Succession.
What do you make of me, cannot I serve?
You, that propound a benefit for my soul,
Woe not neglect your own I know, weele both
Turn friars together?
And be low sie?
Any thing.
I shall not have a thousand crowns?
Thou shalt.
Then be a Duke still, come let's love, and be
Fine Princes, and thou hadst but two or three
Of my conditions, by this hand I would not
Care and thou were immortal, so I might
Live with thee, and enjoy this world's felicity.
thou'st put me in tune, how shall's be very merry
Now in the instant?
Merry?
Yes.
Merry indeed?
Yes.
Fellow me,
I'll bring you to a Lady?
To a Whore?
That is a little the courser name.
And can you play the Pander for me?
A toy, a toy.
What can a man do less for any Brother,
Th'ordinary compliment now a days, with great ones,
We prostitute our Sisters with less scruple
Then eating flesh on vigils, 'tis out of fashion
To trust a servant with our private sins,
The greater tie of blood, the greater faith,
And therefore Parents have been held of late,
The safest wheels, on which the children's lust,
Hath hurried into act, with supple greatness,
Nature doth wear a virtuous charm, and will
Do more in soft compassion to the sin,
Then gold or swelling promises.
O Lodowick!
These things do carry Horror, he is lost
I fear, no I ha' thought a something else,
You shall with me to a Lady?
With all my heart.
Unto my Mistress.
Your Mistress, who's that?
The fair Cleona.
She is honest.
Yes, were she otherwise, she were not worthy my visit,
Not to lose circumstance I love her.
How?
Honestly.
You do not mean to marry her?
It sha'not be my fault if she refuse,
To be a Duchess.
A'my Conscience,
You are in earnest.
As I hope to thrive in my desires, come
You shall bear me company, and witness
How I woo her.
I commend
Your nimble resolution, than a Wife
Must be had somewhere, would you'd mine, to ceole
Your appetite, take your own course, I can
But pray for you; the thousand crowns—
Upon Condition, you'll not refuse, to
Accompany.
Your caroche quickly— stay—
Now I think better on't, my Wife lives with her,
They are Companions, I had forgot that?
she'll take it kindly.
It were enough to put her
Into conceit, I come in love to her,
My Constitution will not bear it,
What?
Not see her?
Yet a thousand crowns— God buy
Condemn me to my wife.
Ye hear Gentlemen?
With grief my Lord, and wonder at your sufferance.
He is our Brother, we are confident
Though he be wild he loves us, 'twill become
Us t'pray and leave him to a miracle
But to our own affair.
Love and thy golden arrow, we shall try,
How you'll decide our second Destiny.
A kiss, and then 'tis scaled, this she should know
Better than the impression, which I made,
With the rude signet, 'tis the same she left
Upon my lip▪ when I departed from her,
And I have kept it warm still, with my breath,
That in my prayers hath mentioned her.
My Lord?
Dulcino welcome. thou art soon returned,
How dost thou like the city?
'tis a heap of handsome building.
And how the people?
My conversation hath not age enough
To speak of them, more than they promise well,
In their aspect, but I have argument
Enough in you my Lord, to fortify
Opinion, they are kind, and hospitable
To strangers.
Thy indulgence to my wound,
Which owes a cure unto thy pretty Surgery,
Hath made thee, too much Prisoner to my Chamber▪
But we shall walk abroad.
It was my duty?
Since you received it in my cause, and could
My blood have wrought it sooner, it had been
Your balmy fountain▪
Noble youth, I thank thee.
How now, didst speak with him?
I had the happiness my Lord to meet him
Waiting upon the Duke abroad, he bade me,
Make haste with the remembrance of his service,
he'll bring his own joys with him, instantly,
To welcome your return.
Didst thou request
His secrecy?
I did, he promised silence.
So, I'll expect him, thou art sad Dulcino,
I prophesy thou shalt have cause, to bless
The minute, that first brought us to acquaintance.
Do not suspect my Lord, I am so wicked,
Not to do that already, you have saved
My life, and therefore have deserved that duty.
Name it no more, I mean another way.
It is not in your power, to make me richer,
With any benefit, shall succeed it, though
I should live ever with you.
I require,
Not so much gratitude.
There is no way
Left for my hope, to do you any service,
Near my preserving, but by adding one
New favour, to a suit, which I would name,
To me, I prithee speak, It must be something
I can deny thee.
'tis an humble suit,
You licence my departure.
Whither?
Any whether.
Do you call this a way to do me service?
It is the readiest I can study Sir.
To tarry were but to increase my debt,
And waste your favours, in my absence, I
May publish, how much virtue, I have found
In Savoy, and make good unto your fame,
What I do owe you here, this shall suruiue you,
For I will speak the story with that truth,
And strength of passion, it shall do you honour,
And dwell upon your name sweeter than myth,
When we are both dead?
Thou hast art, to move
In all things, but in this, change thy desire,
And I'll deny thee nothing, do not urge
Thy unkind departure, thou hast met perhaps,
With some that have deceived thee with a promise,
Won with thy pretty looks and presence, but
Trust not a great man, most of them dissemble,
Pride, and Court cunning hath betrayed their faith,
To a secure Idolatry, their soul,
Is lighter than a compliment, take heed,
They'll flatter thy to young ambition,
Feed thee with names, and then like subtle chemists
Having extracted, drawn thy Spirit up,
Laugh, they have made thee miserable.
Let
No jealousy my Lord, render me so
Unhappy, that preferment, or the flatteries
Of any great man, hath seduced my will
To leave you, by my life, and your own honour,
No man hath tempted me, not have I changed
A syllable with any.
Any man?
Still I suspect thy safety?
And thou mayst thus deceive me, it may be,
Some wanton Lady hath beheld thy face,
And from her eyes, shot Cupid's into thine,
To abuse that fight, or wrought upon thy frailty,
With their smooth language to undo thyself,
Trust not the innocence of thy soul too far,
For though their bosoms carry whiteness, think,
It is not snow, they dwell in a hot climate,
The Court, where men are but deceitful shadows,
The women, walking flames; what if this Lady
Bestow a wealthy carcanet upon thee,
Another give thee Wardrobes, a third promise
A chain of Diamonds, to deck thy youth,
'tis but to buy thy virtue from thee, and when
Thy outside thrives, upon their treacherous bounty
Th'out starve at heart, and lust will leave thy body,
Many unpitied ruins, th' ovart young—
There is no fear my Lord, that I shall take
Such wicked courses, and I hope you see not,
Any propension in my youth, to sin
For Pride, or wantonness.
Indeed, I do not,
But being my boy so young, and beautiful,
Thou art apt to be sedueed.
Believe me Sir,
I will not serve the greatest Prince on earth,
When I leave you.
Thou shalt not serve me, I
Will make thee my companion.
No reward,
Though just, should buy the freedom I was borne with
Much less base ends, in I but meet again
That good man, who in reverence to his habit,
The thieves let go before your happy valour
Came to my rescue.
He that was your Conduct?
From Milan, for so— if I remember
You named a Father, what could he advantage?
Your fortune, were he present, more, then with
Religious council?
I did trust him Sir,
As being the sasest treasurer, with that,
Would make me welcome in Savoy, and
I know he will be faithful, when we meet,
For his sake, let me beg you would discharge,
A worthless servant, that inquest of him—
No more to cut of all unwelcome motives,
I charge thee by thy love, thy Gratitude,
Thy life preserved, which but to stay thee here,
I would not name again, urge no consent
From me, to thy departure, I have now
use of thy faith, thou wilt not run away
I have employment for thee, such a one
As shall not only pay my services,
But leave me in arrearage to thy love,
Receive this letter.
Let me embrace thee, with a spreading arm,
I have dispensed with my attendance, on
The Duke, to bid you welcome Sir, from death,
Fame so, had couz'ned our belief, but thus,
She has made you the more precious.
Then I prospered,
If I may call it so, for I procured
That rumour to be spread, excuse a minute,
He tell thee all my counsels, I need not,
Wast any instructions on thee, Dulcino,
For the conueyance of this Paper, let me
Commend it to thy care, 'tis to my Mistress,
Conceal my lodgings, and do this for him
Will study noble recompense,
You command me.
What pretty youth is that? sure I have seen
That face before,
Never, I brought him first
To Savoy, having brought him from the
Bandetti, in my passage, o'er the Confines,
Is't not a sweet fam'd thing? there are some Ladies,
Might change their beauties with him.
And gain by it.
nay, to his shape he has as fine a soul,
Which 〈◊〉 that perfection.
You ha' not
Been long acquainted with him.
I have skill
my Character,
full excellent excellent sweetness.
You express him
Passionately.
his virtue will deserve
More praise, he suffers Sir for love, in that
He is a Gentleman, for never could
Narrow, and earthly minds, be capable
Of love's impression, or the injury—
He willingly forsook his friends, and Country,
Because unkindly for unworthy ends,
They would have forced him marry against his heart.
He told me so himself, and it were sin,
Not to believe him, but omitting these,
How fares the best of Ladies my Cleona?
Your Cleona?
Mine, she is in affection,
She is not married.
No?
She is in health?
Yes.
There is something in thy looks, I cannot
Read by thy own gloss, and make me know,
That doubtful text, to whom hath she given up,
The hope of my felicity, her heart,
Since my too fatal absence?
Unto none,
Within the circle of my knowledge,
Then
I am renewed again, may thy tongue never
Know sorrows 〈◊〉.
Will you presently
Visit her?
I have sent a letter, to
Certify, I am still her living servant.
No matter, we'll be there, before the boy,
There is necessity, if you knew all,
Come let's away.
Again thou dost afflict
My soul with jealousy, if she have still
The 〈◊〉 possession of her heart—
But you are
Dead Sir, remember that.
I shall be living,
And soon enough present myself her fresh,
And active Lower.
If the Duke be not
Before you▪
How?
The Duke, 'tis so resolved,
Your rival, if you still affect Cleona,
Within this hour, he means his first solicit
And personal siege, lose not yourself with wonder,
If you neglect this opportunity,
She having firm opinion of your death,
It will not be a miracle, if the Title
Of Duchess be a strong temptation,
To a weak woman.
I must thank your love,
And counsel, but for this time, disengage
Your further stay with me, the Duke may miss you,
preserve his favour, and forget me in
Your conference, I would be still concealed,
Let me consider on my fate, again
I thank you, and dismiss you,
Quiet thoughts,
Dwell in your breast, in all things I obey you,
You know you have my heart.
She's but a woman.
Yet how shall I be able to accuse her,
With any justice, when she thinks me dead,
The Duke, I must do something, I am full
Of discord, and my thoughts are fight in me,
From our own army must arise our fear,
When love itself is turned a Mutineere.
So, so, yet more perfume, y'are sweet servingmen, make every corner of the house smoke, bestir yourselves, every man know his province, and be officious to plie my Lady, according to his talon, have you furnished out the banquet?
Most Methodically?
'tis well, here should have been a fresh suit of Arras, but no matter, these 〈◊〉 the age well, let'em hang.
And there were a mask to entertain his highness?
Hang masks, let every conceit show his own face, my Lady would not disguise her entertainment, and now I talk of disguising, where's the Butler?
Here Sir.
Where Sir? 'tis my Lady's pleasure, that you be drunk to day, you will deal her wine abroad, the more liberally among the Dukes servants, you two are tall fellows, make good the credit of the Buttery, and when you are drunk, I will send others to releefe you, go to your stations, if his Grace come hither a suitor to my Lady, as we have some cause to suspect, and after marry her, I may be a great man, and ride upon a reverend Mov●…e by Patent, there is no end of my preferment, I did once teach my Lady to dance, she must then help me to rise; for indeed, it is just▪ that only those, who get their living by their legs, should ride upon a Foot-cloth.
Here's a young Gentleman: desires to speak with my Lady.
More young Gentlemen? tell him I am busy.
With my Lady—
Busy with my Lady Sir?
Would speak with my Lady Sir?
I ha' not done with my Lady myself yet, he shall stay, 'tis for my Lady's sute, no time to interrupt my Lady, but now, I'll know his business, and taste it for my Lady, if I like it, she shall hear more, but bid him come to me, me thinks I talk, like a peremptory state's man already, I shall quickly learn to forget myself, when I am in great office, I will oppress the subject, flatter the Prince, take bribes a both sides, do right to neither, serve heaven as far as my profit will give me leave, and tremble, only at the Summons of a Parliament.
Hum? a Page, a very Page, one that would wriggle and prefer himself to be a Wag, 'tis so, have you any Letter of commendations?
I have a Letter Sir.
Let me see the complexion of the face, has it a handsome Title Page, is it Stilo 〈◊〉.
I have command Sir, to deliver it,
To none, but to my Lady.
A forward youth, I like him, he is not modest, I will assist his preferment, to engage him to my faction, a special Court policy, see my Lady.
Yet ay Belinda—
I beseech you Madam
Allow excuse to my abrupt departure,
There is a business of much consequence,
And which you will not mourn to see effected,
Besides the duty that I own my Lord,
Compels me to it Madam.
Well, but that
We are acquainted with your virtue, this
Would move suspicion you were not in
Charity with the Duke.
You are pleasant Madam,
You are severe, to bind yourself too strictly,
From Court and entertainments, sure your Lord
Should chide you for it.
If it please you stay
Your ladyship and i'll converse together,
My unkind fate hath indisposed me,
To these state ceremonies too.
You will oblige me by your pardon?
Use your pleasure.
Nay you shall give me leave a little further.
Here I am vselesse.
May it please you Madam,
This pretty Gentleman, has a suit to you,
And I in his behalf, he will be serviceable,
And active in his place, a friend of mine.
Your Steward Madam, is too full of zeal,
To do me a preferment, but I have
No other ambition, then to commend
This paper to your white hands,
Never doubt,
'tis done, be bold and call me fellow.
Be
You circumspect I pray, that all things have
Their perfect shape and order, to receive
The Duke, you know our pleasure, not to spare
Or cost, or study, to delight his highness.
I hope I have not been your steward so long,
But I know how to put your ladyship
To cost enough without study.
Shall I credit
So great a bliss? the date is fresh, Foscari
Whom I thought dead? Give him five hundred Crowns
We will divide 'em.
Stay.
You need not bid,
I use to make 'em stay, and long enough,
Ere they receive such bounties.
Treasure is
Too cheap a payment for so rich a message.
This is the right Court largess.
I must call thee,
My better Genius, have you known this youth?
If your ladyship like him, I have known him long
If otherwise, I ne'er saw him in my life.
The day breaks glorious to my darkened thoughts,
He lives, he lives yet, cease ye amorous fears,
More to perplex me, prithee speak sweet youth,
How fares my Lord? Upon my Virgin heart,
I'll buied a flaming Altar, to offer up
A thank▪ full Sacrifice for his return,
To life▪ and me, speak and increase my comforts,
Is he in perfect health?
Not perfect Madam, until you bless him with
The knowledge of your constancy.
O get thee wings and fly then,
Tell him my love doth burn like vestal fire,
Which with his memory, richer than all spices,
Dispersed odours round about my soul,
And did refresh it when 'twas dull, and sad,
With thinking of his absence.
This is strange,
My Lady is in love with him.
Yet stay
Thou goest too soon away, where is he speak?
He gave me no Commission for that Lady▪
He will soon save that question, by his presence.
Time h'as no feathers, he walks now on crutches,
Relate his gesture when he gave thee this,
What other words, did mirth smile on his brow,
I would not for the wealth of this great world,
He should suspect my faith, what said he prithee,
He said, what a warm lover, when desire
Makes eloquent could speak, he said you were
Both star and pilot.
Not to fast, my joys
Will be too mighty for me.
I have found it,
That boy comes from the Duke, that letter love,
'Twill be a match, and please your ladyship—
Forbear your Ceremonies, what needs all this
Preparation, if the Duke vouchsafe
His person for my guest, duty will teach me,
To entertain him without half this trouble,
I'll have noryot for his highness.
Hum?
How's this.
Be less officious, you forget—
Sweet youth, go forward with thy story.
Hum?
This is a Faurie, and the devil sent him
To make my Lady mad, 'ttwere well to try
Whether he be flesh and blood, ha', I'll pinch him first.
How now?
My care shall see nothing be wanting, for
Your honour, and the Dukes.
Your place I see,
Is better than your manners, go too, be
Less troublesome, his highness brings intents
Of grace, not burden to us, know your duty.
So, I were best keep myself warm with my own office, while I may, the Tide is turned I see within two Minutes, here was nothing but look to the Gallery, perfume the Chambers, what Musicke for the Duke, a Banquet for the Duke, now, be less officious, we'll have noryot for his highness, 'tis this urchin h'as undone all our preferment.
The sun's loved flower, that shuts his yellow curtain,
When he declineth, opens it again
At his fair rising, with my parting Lord,
I closed all my delights, till his approach,
It shall not spread itself.
Madam the Duke?
Already.
He is entered.
Do not leave me,
I shall remember more.
Excellent Cleona,
The humble duty of a subject to your highness.
Rise high in out thoughts, and thus
Confirm we are welcome, to these eyes, our heart,
Shall pay a lower duty, than obedience
Hath taught your knee.
Your Grace much honours me,
Till this white hour, these walls were never proud,
T'enclose a guest, the genius of our house,
Is by so great a presence waked, and glories,
Te entertain you.
Every accent falls
Like a fresh jewel, to increase her value,
We can but thank Cleena.
Royal Sir—
Let me revoke that hasty syllable,
But thank thee, yes, we can do more, and will,
We have a heart to do't, our much grieved sister
I know you do not wear this sadness, for
Our presence.
If I've any skill in mine own eyes,
Since they beheld you, they have looked
More cheerfully, than they are wont.
And yet I see a tear is ready to break prison,
It is of joy to see you sit in health,
I hope the Prince is well?
He will be so
when he leaves to be unkind
To thee, but let's forget him,
Fame has not
Injured him, in the Character of his person,
And his shape promiseth a richer soul,
I feel a new, and fiery spirit dance,
Upon my amorous heartstrings.
We are come
My fair Cleona.
With your highness' pardon,
That name was never so attended, it
Becomes your bounty, but not me to wear
That Title.
What?
Of, fair my Lord?
I said you were my fair Cleona—
Sir?
I did apply,
I hopeed does not offend to call you so,
Y'are yet my subject.
When I leave that name, may heaven—
Be pleased to change it for a better▪
It cannot.
Do not sin, 'tis in our power
With your consent, to work that wonder Lady.
I want my understanding.
I'll explain,
Do not believe it youth, by all the faith
Of Virgins▪ I'll not change my service, to
Thy Master for his dukedom.
Y'are too noble.
What boy is that? Ha' Giotto?
Madam, the Duke observes us.
I ha' seen him,
It is no common face.
My Lord we know not,
Where is Grimundo?
Not yet come my Lord.
Send for him straight, and bid him bring the picture
We gave into his keeping, yet, forbear,
It is in vain.
My Lord, Cleona waits
Your farther Courtship.
Whither am I carried?
I hope dread Sir, my house affords no object,
To interrupt your quiet.
None but heavenly,
this roof be capable of ill,
only presence Lady would convert it.
rtuous magic in your eye,
For where soe'er it calls a beam, it does
Create a goodness, y'ave a handsome boy.
The Duke is troubled?
He's a pretty youth.
I hope he won't take me from my Lady,
I'll say I am her servant.
Something binds
My speech, my heart is narrow of a sudden,
Giotto take some opportunity
To inquire that youth condition▪ name, and Country,
And give us private knowledge, to cut off
Circumstance Lady, I am not your fresh,
And unacquainted lover, that doth waist
The tedious moons with preparation
To his amorous suit, I have been Cleona,
A long admirer of your virtues, and
Do want the comfort or so sweet a Partner,
In our young state.
You mock your humble handmaid.
A stranger sayest?
He brought some welcome Letter
To my Lady.
Not know his name nor whence?
No my good Lord.
So so, I like this well,
My Lady does apply her to the Duke,
There is some hope again, things may succeed
This Lords discoursing with me, is an Omen
To my familiarity with greatness.
Grimundo not come yet? I am not well.
Good heaven defend, Angels protect your highness.
Your holy prayers cannot but do me good.
Continue that devotion, charity
Will teach you a consent, to my departure,
I am unhappy.
Make not me so Lady,
By the least trouble of yourself, I am
Acquainted with these passions, let me breathe
A hart upon thy lip farewell again
Your pardon.
'Tis a very strange distemper,
And sudden, noble Lady we must wait
Upon the Duke.
My bud is niptagen,
Would all the Banquet were in his belly for't.
Let not my eyes betray me.
I'm sick too,
Let not your ladyship repent your cost,
I'll have a care the Sweet meats be not lost.
Acquaint him with these passages of the Duke.
Tell him I long to see him, and at last
To crown the story, say my heart shall know
No other love but his.
I fly with this
Good news.
Madam here is Prince Lodowick,
Newly discoached.
Attend him?
Most officiously.
Stay it can do no harm.
E'en what you please.
If he inquire for his Lady, answer
She is not very well, and keeps her Chamber.
I'll say she's dead if you please, 'tis my duty
I'll never speak truth while I live, that shall
Offend your ladyship.
You may hear all,
And when you please appear.
Sick? where's her Doctor,
I'll be acquainted with him, noble Lady.
Your Grace is here most welcome,
I am bold?
I'm happy that my duty to the Prince
Brought me to kiss your hand.
Beside the honour done to me, your person
Will add much comfort to Astella, your
Weak Lady,
She is sick, mend let her mend, she'll spend her time worse, yet she knows my mind, and might do me the courtesy to die once, i'd take it more kindly, then to be at charge with a physician.
You would not poison her?
I think I must be driven to't, what shall a man do with a woman that won't be ruled, I ha' given cause enough to break any reasonable woman's heart in Savoy, and yet you see how I am troubled with her, but leave her to the Destinies, where is my Brother all this while? I came to meet him, what is't a match already? when shall we dance, and triumph in the tiltyard, for honour of the high and mighty nuptials: where is he?
My Lord he is gone.
How?
Distempered.
Not with wine?
Departed sick.
She jeers him, by this lip I'll love thee, and thou wots abuse him, I knew he would but shame himself, and therefore durst not come with him, for mine own credit, I warrant, he came fierce upon thee with some parcel of Poetry, which he had conned by hart out of Tasso Guarini, or some other of the same melting Tribe, and thought to have brought thy Maiden town to his obedience, at the first noise of his furious artillery.
My Lord, you understand me not, your Brother
Is not in health, some unkind pain within him
Compelled him to forsake us,
Is it true?
That he is sick, my brother's sick Piero.
I am very well here.
So am not I, pray Sir appear more civil
Or I shall leave you.
True?
'tis too true my Lord.
No, no, truth is a virtuous thing, and we cannot have too much on't, d'ye hear, if I may counsel you be wise, and stay for me, you may be my wife within this month, and the Duchess too.
Your Wife my Lord, why you are married,
What Shall become of her?
Is she not sick?
But are you sure she'll die?
What a ridiculous question, do you make, if death won't take a fair course with her, are there not reasons enough in state think you, to behead her, or if that seem cruel, because I do not affect blood, but for very good ends, I can be divorced from her, and leave her rich in the Title of Lady Dowager.
Upon what offence can you pretend a divorce?
Because she is not fruitful, is not that a sin.
Would your Lordship have her fruitful, and you
ne'er lie with her.
Have not I known a Lady, whose husband is an Eunuch, upon Record, mother to three or four children and no free conscience but commends her.
But these things woe▪ not be easily perfect, unless
You were Duke to enforce 'em.
Is not my brother in the way? Sick already, and perhaps as fit for heaven, as an other, I know he cannot loue long▪ he's so well given, they never thrive, and then d'●… think ill keep such a Religious Court, in this corner lodge a covey of Capochins, who shall zealously pray for me without stockings, in that a nest of Carthusians, things which in fit turn to Otters, appear flesh, but really are fish, for that they feed on: no▪ no▪ give me a Court of flourishing pleasure where delight in all her shapes, and studied varieties, every minute courts the soul, to actuate her chief felicity.
Do you never think of Hell?
Faith I do, but it always makes me melancholy, and therefore as seldom as I can, my contemplation shall point thither, I am now in the spring of my life, winter will come on fast enough, when I am old, I will be as methodical an hypocrite, as any pair of lawn sleeves in Savoy.
I dare not hear him longer, Madam release me.
How now, whence come you, were you sick?
At heart my Lord, to think of your unkindness.
At heart? ile nere beleeue, without inspection, am I vnkind, goe to, there's not a friend in the whole world can wih you better, would you were Canonis'd a Saint, 'tis more then I wish my selfe yet, I doe not trouble thee much on earth, and thou wert in Heauen, I would not pray to thee, for feare of diturbing thy Serapicall deution.
What sin have I committed Sir, deserves
This distance?
In Christian charity salute her.
I would not have your ladyship too ventrous,
The air is some what cold, and may endanger
A weak body.
There's an other duty, my Lord required from husband▪
My Madam would to rut, hath your honour, no pretty dapper Monkey, each morning to give you a heat in a dance, is not your Doctor gamesome.
If the suspicion that I am unchaste—
unchaste? by this hand I do not know one honest woman in the dukedom.
How my Lord, what do you think of me?
I know not whether you be a woman or no, yet.
Fie my Lord.
What would you have me do, I have not seen her this six months.
Oh rather my Lord conclude my sufferings,
T thus with tortures lengthen out my death,
O kill me, and I beseech you I will kisse
The instrument, which guided by your hand,
Shall give my grief a period, and pronounce
With my last breath, your free for givenesse.
No kill yourself, more good will come on, how now? nay then weare like to have a precious time on't.
The Duke my Lord inquired for you.
I met
His highness in return, and he employed me
To bring back knowledge of his better health,
Which he says, shall enable him, but to
Expresse how much he honours fair Cleona.
I am his studious servant, and rejoice
In this good news: your Brother is recovered.
TWO, I knew he would do well enough, now Sir?
I have some business, with you my Lord,
Were you at opportunity.
Some moral exhortations, they are fruitless, I shall never eat garlic with Diogenes in a Tub, and specular the stars without a shirt, prithee enjoy thy Religion, and live at last most philosophy call lousy.
My design is of an other nature.
May I obtain so great a favour Sir,
You'd be my Gu●…t in absence of the Duke,
I'm but ambitious, to remember
His health in greek-wine.
So this Lady will be temperate, and use me but like a stranger, without pressing me to inconveniences of kissing her, and other superstitious Courtship of a Husband.
I will engage she'll not offend you▪
And yet it goes against my conscience to tarry so long in honest company, but my 〈◊〉 is I do not use it, come away Piero, you have had a fine time on't.
My Lord.
I follow Madam, yet have comfort,
Though reason and example 〈◊〉 our fears,
Heaven will not let you lose so many tears.
Did she receive my Letter with such joy?
I want expression my Lord, to give you
The circumstance, with a flowing love,
Or rather with what glad devotion
She entertained it, at your very name,
For so I guest, to which her covetous sight
Made the first haste, one might have seen her heart
Dance in her eyes, and as the wonder strove
To make her pale, warm love did fortify
Her cheeks, with guilty blushes, she did read
And kiss the paper often, mingled questions,
Some half propounded, as her soul had been
Too narrow, to receive what you had writ,
She quite forgot.
This was before the Duke
Came thither?
Yes my Lord.
And didst thou not
Observe her at his presence slack that fervour,
her former passion had begot of me?
Was she not costly to him boy?
So far
As her great birth, and breeding, might direct
A Lady to behave herself to him,
That was her Prince.
She kissed him, did she not?
She kissed.
He did salute her?
Yes my Lord.
And didst not see a flame hang on her lip,
A spirit busy to betray her love,
And in a sigh convey it to him? Oh,
Thou canst not read a woman, did he not
Woe her to be his Duchess?
Yes my Lord.
Thou shouldst ha' watched her cheek then, there a blush
Had cene a guilt indeed, a feeble answer,
With half a smile, had been an argument
ee had beene lost, and the temptation
Above her strength, which had I known, I could
Ha' slept, and never been disturbed, although
I had met her in a dream.
My Lord, you weare
A causeless trouble to yourself.
Oh jealousy.
I am ashamed—
If ever woman loved
With faith, Cleona honours you above
Mankind, 'twere sin but to suspect so chaste,
So furnished with all virtue, your Cleona,
It were indeed, I am too blame Dulcino,
Yet when thou comest to beso ripe, for so
Much misery, as to love, thou wilt excuse me,
My Lord if I might not offend with my
Opinion, it were safest that you lose
No time, your presence would confirm a joy
To either, and prevent the Duke, whose strong
Solicits, may in time. endanger much
The quiet of your thoughts.
Why can there be
suspition she will vary, do not choke
The confidence thou hadst, unsettle not,
The faith I have in thee, she can prove false.
Mistake me not, I do not doubt her truth,
But she's a woman, and if you delay
To interpose yourself, his greatness may
In time, without injustice to your love,
Win upon her affection, you shall do
A great impiety to 〈◊〉 her now.
With so much proof, and loyalte of honour.
On never, never, and I will 〈◊〉
her low▪ beyond example, thus Dulci
The 〈◊〉 return.
My Lord I had much rather
Wait on you to her.
jush, thou understandest not
What I have purposed, thou shalt presently
Go back, and tell Cleona, I am dead.
How dead?
I boy, that I am dead, may mark
The issue.
But my Lord, she hath your Letter
To check that.
Thou shalt frame something, to take
That off, some fine invention may be made,
To say 'twas forged, wee'll study that anon,
In the assurance of my death, which must
Be so delivered, as she shall believe thee,
She may affect the Duke.
How Sir, the Duke?
I, I, the Duke, for that's the plot,
I must advance.
And will you thus reward
So great a love to you.
Best, best of all,
Shall I be so ungrateful to a Lady,
Of such rare merit, when a Prince desires
To make her great, by my unworthy interest
Destroy her blessings, hinder such a fortune
From fair Cleona, let her love the Duke,
In this I will express the height, and glory
Of my best service.
Are you sir in earnest?
I love her, and can never see her more,
Posterity shall learn new piety
In love from me, it will become me look on,
Cleona a far off, and only mention
Her name, as I do Angels in my Prayer,
Thus she deserves I should converse with her▪
Thus I most nobly love her.
Doth she languish
Expecting you, and shall I carry death
To comfort her? good heaven forbidden this Sir.
Heaven d●… 〈◊〉 me to it, she shall reign
Glorious in power, while I let fall my beads
That she might prosper, be not thou an enemy
To her and me, I see thovart unwilling
To this employment, if thoust any wish
To see me happy, to preserve my life,
And honour, which was never more engaged,
If I shall think thou art not very wicked,
A false, dissembling boy, deny me not
This office, use what circumstance thou wilt,
To thrive in this report, and thy sad breath,
Shall give a failed, save a real death.
I'm lost i'th' springing of my hope, shall I
Obey him to destroy myself? I must,
I dare not be myself, no need have they▪
Of other force, that make themselves away.
I smell a match again, the Duke will fetch her about, here was another Ambassadour at Dinner, and his highness is again expected, in confidence of my place that shall be, I will continue my state posture, use my toothpick with discretion, and cough distinctly, what can hinder my rising? I am no scholar, that exception is taken away, for most of our states men, do hold it a saucy thing, for any of their servants, to be ●…ser than themselves, observe the inventory of a great noble man's house, mark the number of the learned, I'll begin with them. imprimis, chaplains and school▪ masters one, two pages, 3. Gentlemen, 4. Footmen, 6. Horses, 8 serving creatures, and 10. couple of Dogs. a very Noble family.
Worthy Sir—
My Lady shall be at leisure for you presently—
It may be you would speak with me first?
I only entreat my Lady may have knowledge that
I wait here.
I will enrich my Lady's understanding, I'll say nothing else but that you are here shall I? that's enough if you have another Letter.
What then?
I would wish you deliver it to her own hand, but under your favour, the contents of the last Chapter, had like to undone us all, and Cupid had not been more merciful.
Fear nothing, the news I bring, will make you merry.
I'd laugh at that, howsoever you are hearty welcome and ever shall be, you do hear no harm of the Duke?
No harm?
You shall hear more shortly, I say no more, but heaven bless my Lady and his highness together, for my part though I speak a proud word— I'll tell my lady that you attend her.
I prithee do, and hasten the discharge
Of my sad embassy, which when I have done,
And that it prospers in mine own misfortune,
I'll teach my breath to pray.
A glorious fate
courts your acceptance, and I hope your 〈◊〉
Will teach you how to meet it, y'ave received
His highness bosom, now I'll take my leave,
Will you not see the Prince again?
I saw his highness walking with Grimundo▪
Toward the Garden, and the Duke expects me▪—
Think of a Duchess Madam.
I'm not worthy,
And needs must sink, under the weight of such
A title, my humblest service to his Grace,
I am his beadswoman.
Madam, here's the Youth.
Art thou returned already? why were you
So rude to make him wait.
Since I arriv'd,
'tis but a pair of minutes.
They are worth
As many days.
He shall be with your ladyship,
Next time, before he come, when I but spy him
A mile off, I'll acquaint you, in my duty
To yourself, and my honour unto him.
Withdraw.
Here is no couch, I do not like
My Lady's familiarity with a boy,
Me thinks a man were fit, and more able
To give her a refreshing, but this Lobby
Shall be my next remove.
You will repent
This welcome Madam.
What harsh sound is that?
Thy looks upon a sudden are become
Dismall, thy brow dull as Saturnes i.
Thy lips are hung with black, as if thy tongue
Were to pronounce some funeral.
It is,
But let your virtue place a guard about
Your eare, it is too weak a sense to trust
With a sad tale, that may disperse too soon.
The kill Syllables, and some one, or other
Find out your heart.
The Mandrake hath no voice
Like this, the raven, and the night birds sing
More soft, nothing in Nature, to which fear
Hath made us superstitious, but speaks gently
Compared with thee, discharge thy fatal burden,
I am prepared, or stay, but answer me,
I will and save thee breath, and quickly know
The total of my sorrow, is Foscari
Dead since I saw thee last? Or hath some wound,
Or other dire misfortune sealed him for
The grave, that though he yet live, I may bid
My heart despair to see him?
None of these,
Since last I saw you Madam.
None of these?
Then I despise all sorrow boy, there is
Not left another mischief in my fate,
Call home thy beauty, why dost look so pale?
See I am armed, and can with valiant blood,
Hear thee discourse of my terror row,
Me thinks I can in the assurance of
His safety, hear of battles, Tempest, Death,
With all the horrid shapes that poet's fancy,
Tell me the tale of Troy, or Rome on fire,
Rich in the trophies of the conquered world,
I will not shed so many tears, to save
The temples, as my joy doth sacrifice,
To hear my Lord is well.
Turn them to grief,
Again, and here let me kneel, the accuser
Of him, that hath deserved more punishment,
Then your wronged piety will inflict.
Dost kneel,
And call thyself accuser?
Yes.
Of whom?
Thy Lord, take heed, for if I be a judge
I shall condemn thee ere thou speak.
You may,
But I accuse myself, and of an injury
To you.
To me?
Too great to be forgiven.
My love to him thou servest, hath found a pardon
Already for it, be it an offence
Against my life.
For his sake, you must punish,
Dear Madam, I have sinned against his Ghost,
In my deceiving you.
His Ghost?
And if.
His soul hath not forgotten how he loved you,
I must expect him to affright my dreams.
And prove my waking evil, the truth is,
My Lord is dead.
How dead? when? where? did I
Not hear thee say, since I received his Letter,
He was alive?
No Madam.
Be not impious.
I said that neither death, nor any black
Misfortune had befallen him, since I gave
The Letter to you.
Grant this truth, I am
Secured again.
Alas he was dead before,
I'm sure you could not choose but hear as much,
It was my wickedness arrived, to mock
Your credulous heart, with a devised Letter,
I know you are in wonder, what should move me,
To this imposture, sure it was no malice,
For you ne'er injured me, and that doth make
My crime the more deformed, all my aim was,
Being a stranger here, and wanting means
After my Lord's death, by this cunning, to
Procure some bounty from you, to sustain
My life, until by some good fortune, I
Might get another Master, for I knew
There was no hope to benefit myself,
By saying he was dead, good heaven forgive me
And keep my eyes from weeping.
Thou hast undone me,
Like a most cruel boy.
Madam, I hope
I shall repair the ruins of your eye,
When I declare the cause, that leads me to
This strange confession, I have observed
The Duke does love you, love you in that way,
You can deserve him, and though I have sinned,
I am not stubborn in my fault, to suffer you,
In the belief of my deceitful story,
To wrong your fortune, by neglect of him,
Can bring your merit such addition,
Of state and title.
Dost thou mock again?
Heaven knows, I have no thought of such impiety,
If you will not believe, that for your sake
I have betrayed myself, yet be so charitable,
To think it something of my duty, to
The Duke, whose ends, while they are just, and noble,
All loyal subjects, aught to serve, for him.
Whom I am bound to honour, and I love him,
Else may I never know one dayof comfort,
I durst not without guilt of treason, to
His chaste desires, deceive you any longer,
Collect yourself dear Madam, in the grave,
There dwells no music, in the Dukes embrace
You meet a perfect happiness.
Begun,
And never see me more, who ever knew
Falsehood so ripe at thy years?
Is not yet
My poor heart broke? hath nature given it
So strong a temper, that no wound will kill me?
What charm was in my gratitude to make me
Undo so many comforts with one breath,
Or was it for some sin I had to satisfy?
I have not only widowed Cleona,
But made myself a misery beneath,
An orphan, I ne'er came to have a friend,
I ha' destroyed my hope, that little hope,
I had to be so happy.
Is't e'en so?
My friend, what make you here? who sent for you? Begun dye hear, begun I say the word too, there is a Porters lodge else, where you may have due chastisement, you'll begun.
I'm sorry,
I have offended Sir.
So am not I,
Let me see, somebody is dead, if I knew who, no matter 'tis one that my Lady loved, and I am glad to hear it, for mine ownsake, now Venus' speed the Duke's plough and turn me lose to a privy counsellor.
Signior Jacomo, where's your Lady?
She is within my good Lord, wilt please you walk this way?
Prithee make haste, the Duke is coming.
I small him hither to,
So so, I will take this opportunity, to present myself to his highness, that he may take particular notice, of my bulk and personage, he may chance speak to me, I have common places to answer any ordinary question, and for other, he shall find by my impudence, I come not short of a perfect Courtier. Here he comes, I will dissemble some contemplation, and with my hat on, give him cause to observe me the better.
What fellows that?
A servant of Cleona's.
Signior?
Your highness' humble creature, you have blessed my lips, and I will wear them threadbare, with my prayers, for your grace's immortal prosperity.
Soranzo is returned,
How fares Cleona?
My Lord not well, I found her full of sadness, which is increased, she cannot as becomes her duty, observe your highness.
One word with your Grace in private, she is as well, as either you, or i
Sayest thou so?
There came indeed before you certain news, that a noble Gentleman, I know not who, and therefore he shall be nameless, but some dear friend of hers, is dead, and that's all, and that has put her into a melancholy mood, with your gracious pardon, if I were worthy to be one of your counsellors—
What then?
I would advise you, as others do, to take your own course, your Grace knows best, what is to be done.
So Sir; Didst thou not see that pretty boy I told thee of?
No my good Lord.
We are resolved to comfort her, set forward.
You had simple grace?
A touch or so, abeame with which his highness,
Doth use to keep desert warm, good my Lord,
It is not come to that yet.
Go to the next religious house, and pray,
Some Holy Father come and speak with me,
But hasten thy return, I dare not look on
Myself, lest I forget to do her honour,
And my heart prove a partial advocate,
I must not entertain with the same thought,
Cleona and my love, lest my own passion
Betray the resolution, I ha' made,
To make my service famous to all ages,
A legend that may startle wanton blood,
And strike a chillness through the active veins
Of noblest lovers, when they hear, or read,
That to advance a Mistress, I have given her▪
From mine own heart, if any shall be so
Impious at my memory, to say
I could not do this act, and love her too,
Some power divine, that knew how much I loved her,
Some angel that hath care to right the dead,
Punish that crime for me, and yet me thinks,
In such a cause my own enraged Spirit,
In pity of my ashes, so profaned,
Should nimbly lift my sweeting marble up,
And leap into my dust, which new enlivened
Should walk to him, that questioned my honour,
And be its own revenger, he is come.
Welcome good Father,
I sent to entreat your help, but first, pray tell me,
I have no perfect memory, what Saint
Gives title to your Order?
We do wear
The Scapular of Saint Bennet Sir.
Your Charity
Make you still worthy of that reverend habit,
I have a great devotion, to be made
A Brother of your sacred institution,
What persons of great birth hath it received?
To fashion my reply to your demand,
Is not to boast, though I proclaim the honours
Of our profession; four Emperors,
Forty six Kings, and one and fifty Queens,
Have changed their royal Ermines for our sables,
These cowls have clothed the heads of fourteen hundred,
And six King's sons, of Dukes, great Marquises,
And Earls, two thousand and above four hundred
Have turned their Princely Coronets, into
An humble coronet of hair of hair▪ left by
The razor thus.
No, it is not.
There is a sun ten times more glorious,
Then that which riseth in the East, attracts me
To feed upon his sweet beams, and become
A Bird of paradise, a religious man
To rise from earth, and no more to turn back,
But for a burial.
Think what 'tis you do,
It is no thing to play the wanton with,
In the strong bended passion of an humour,
For a friends death, a King's frown, or perhaps
Loss of a Mistress.
O still bless the guide
What ever, that shall lead this happy way.
My Lord, the truth is like your coat of arms,
Richest when plainest, I do fear the world
Hath tired you, and you seek a cell to rest in,
As birds that wing it o'er the Sea, seek ships,
Till they get breath, and then they sly away.
Do not mistake a piety, I am prepared
And can endure your strict mortifications,
Good Father then prefer my humble suit,
To your superior for the habit, and
Let me not long expect you, say I am,
Noble, but humblest in my thoughts.
I go,
Mean time examine well this new desire,
Whether't be a wild flash, or a heavenly fire.
Now my good boy.
Sir, your command is done,
And she believes?
That I am dead Dulcino?
That you are dead, and as she now scorned life▪
Death lends her cheeks his paleness, and her eyes
Tell down their drops of silver to the earth,
Wishing her tears might rain upon your grave▪
To make the gentle earth produce some flower,
Should bear your names and memories.
But thou seest,
I live Dulcino.
Sir I should be blessed,
If I did see you sought the means to live,
And to live happily, O noble Sir,
Let me untread my steps, unsay my words,
And tell your love, you live.
No my sweet Boy,
She thinks not much amiss, I am a man
But of an hour or two, my will is made,
And now I go, never more cheerfully,
To give eternal farewell to my friends.
For heaven's sake Sir, what's this you mean to do?
There is a fear sits cold upon my heart,
And tells me—
Let it not misinform thee Boy,
I'll use no violence to myself, I am
Resolved a course, wherein I will not doubt,
But thou wilt bear me company? We'll enter
Into Religion.
Into Religion?
O 'tis a heavenly life, go with me boy,
we'll imitate the singing Angels there,
Learn how to keep a choir in heaven, and scorn
Earth's transitory glory, wilt Dulcino?
Alas my Lord, I am too young.
Too young
To serve heaven? Never, never, O take heed.
Of such excuse.
Alas, what shall I do?
And yet I'm weary of the world, but how
Can I do this? I am not yet discovered,
Sir, I shall still attend you.
thou'rt my comfort,
I have propounded it already, to
A Benedictine, by whose means we may
Obtain the habit, stay thou and expect him,
I must be absent for a little time,
To finish something, will conduce, to my
Eternal quiet, if th'haft any scruple,
He will direct thee, having both made even
With earth, we'll travail hand, in hand to heaven.
Fortune hath lent me a prospective glass,
By which I have a look beyond all joys,
To a new world of misery, what's my best
Let it be so, for I am hopeless now,
And it were well, if when those weeds I have,
That I might go disguised to my grave.
This is strange.
You know I have given you many precepts of honesty?
And you know how I have followed 'em.
To mine own heart, I have made tedious discourses of heaven to ye, and the moral virtues, numbered up the duties of a good Prince, urged examples of virtues, for your imitation.
To much purpose.
Seemed to sweat with agony and vexation, for your obstinate courses, reproved you, nay sometimes made complaints of you, to the Duke.
And I ha' cursed you for it, I remember.
Alas my Lord, I durst do no otherwise, was not the Duke your Father an honest man, and your Brother now foolishly takes after him, whose credulities, when I had already cozened, I was bound to appear stoical, to preserve the opinion they had conceived of me.
Possible.
It speaks discretion and abilities, in statesmen, to apply themselves to their Prince's disposition, vary a thousand shapes, if he be honest, we put on a form of gravity, if he be vicious, we are Parasites, indeed in a politic Common wealth, if you observe well, there is nothing but the appearance, and likeness of things that carrieth opinion, your great men will appear odd, and fantastical, and fools are often taken for wise Officers, your most active gallants, seem to carry their own hair, and your handsomest Ladies their own faces, you cannot know a Secretary from a scholar in black, nor a Gentleman usher in Scarlet, from a captain, your judge that is all composed of Mercy, hath still the face of a philosopher, and to some is more terrible and crabbed, than the Law itself. All things are but representation, and my Lord, howsoever I have appeared to you, I am at heart one of your own Sect, an Epicure, be but so subtle to seem honest, as I do, and we will laugh at the foolish world in our cells, declaim against intemperate livers, and hug our own licentiousness, while we surfeit our souls in the dark with Nectar and Ambrosia.
Can this be earnest, you did talk of Hell and bugbears.
I confess, and were you in public, I would urge many other empty names to fright you, put on my holiday countenance, and talk nothing but divinity, and golden sentences, look like a superlicious Elder, with a starched face, and a tuneable nose, whilst he is edifying his neighbour's woman.
You were a Christian, how came you to be converted.
I think I had a name given me, and that's all I retain, I could never endure really, their severe discipline, marry for my preferment, and other politic ends, I have, and can still dispense, with fasting, prayer, and a thousand fond austerities, though I do penance for 'em in private.
Let me ask you one question, were you never drunk?
A thousand times in my study, that's one of my recreations.
How chance I could never see't in you, you know I would ha' been drunk for company.
But I durst not trust so young a sinner, for I always held it a maxim, to do wickedness with circumspection.
Wickedness?
I speak in the phrase of the foolish world, that holds voluptuousness a crime, which you and I, and every wise man knows, to be the only happiness of life, and the inheritance, we are borne to.
But stay, how comes it to pass, that accounting me so young a sinner, you now adventure to discover yourself?
To you?
To me.
Good my Lord conceive me, you were a young sinner, and in your Nonage, does that infer that you have made no growth, that y'are a child still, do think that I ha' not wit to distinguish a Principiant in vice, from a Graduate, shall I be afraid to lay open my secretest impieties to you, that are almost as perfect as myself in Epicurisme, I beseech you, do not think, I ha' so little manners to undervalue you.
Very well, proceed.
And yet my Lord, with your princely licence, you may learn too, and indeed the first virtue that I would commend to your practice should be that, by which I have attained to this height, and opinion, and that's hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy?
Yes, a delicate white devil, do but fashion yourself to seem holy, and study to be worse in private, worse, you'll find yourself more active in your sensuality, and it will be an other titillation, to think what an ass you make a'the believing world, that will be ready to dote, nay superstitiously adore you, for abusing them.
This is pretty wholesome doctrine, and hark you, ha' you no wenches now and then?
Wenches? would the Duke your Brother had so many for his own sake, or you either.
Hast i'faith?
Faith? why judge by yourself, how dye think a man should subsist, wenching? why 'tis the top-branch, the heart, the very soul of pleasure, i'll not give a chip to be an Emperor, and I may not curvet as often as my constitution requires, lechery is the Monarch of Delight, whose Throne is in the blood, to which all other sins do homage, and bow like serviceable vassals, petty subjects in the Dominion of flesh— Wenches Why I have as many— yet now I think better on't, I'll keep that to myself, store makes a good proverb.
Nay nay, be free and open to me, you have my oath not to betray.
Well, I'll not be nice to you, you little imagine (though I be married,) that I am the greatest whoremaster o' dukedom.
Not the greatest?
Have a strong faith and save my proofs, I? the usurer do not hoard up his gold, nor the country oppressor his corn more against a dear year, but Caute si non cast, my nun at home knows nothing, like a Mole in the earth, I work deeps, but invisible; I have my private Houses, my Granaries, my magazine's bully, as many Concubines, as would collected, furnish the Great Turk's Seraglio.
How do you conceal 'em, I should ne'er keep half so many▪ but't would be known.
You are then a novice in the Art of Venus, and will tell Tales out a'the school, like your weak Gallants o'the first chin, that will brag what Ladies they have brought to their obedience, that think it a mighty honour, to discourse how many forts they have beleaguered, how many they have taken by battery, how many by composition, and how many by Stratagem; that will proclaim, how this Madam kisses, how like ivy the t'other bona Roba embraced 'em, and with what activity, a third plays her amorous prize, a fine commendation for such whelps is't not?
A fault, a fault, who can deny it? But what are those you practice with? A touch, come, what Commodities?
Not Sale-ware, Mercenary stuff, that ye may have i'th' Suburbs, and now maintain traffic with ambassador's servants, nor with Laundresses, like your Students in Law, who teach her to argue the case so long, till she find a Statute for it, nor with mistress silkworm in the city, that longs for cream and cakes, and loves to Cuckold her Husband in fresh air, nor with your waiting Gentlewoman, that is in love with poetry, and will not part with her honour, under a copy of fine verses, or an Anagram, nor with your course Lady herself, that keeps a Stallion and cousin's the old Knight, and his two pair of Spectacles, in the shape of a servingman, but with your rich, fair, high▪ fed, glorious and springing catamountains, Ladies of blood, whose eyes will make a soldier melt, and he were composed of marble, whose every smile, hath a magnetic force to draw up souls, whose voice will charm a satire, and turn a man's prayers into ambition, make a Hermit run to Hell for a touch on her, and there hug his own damnation.
I have heard you, and now I think fit to discover myself to you, you are a rascal.
Sir, I think I am one.
Let not your wisdom think, I can be so easily guide.
How Sir?
How think you have talked very methodically, and cunningly all this while, and that I am as they say, a credulous coxcomb, and cannot perceive, that by your politic jeers upon my pleasures, you labour to discredit, not only my recreations, but myself to my own face, D'ye hear? the time may come you will not dare these things, and yet you shall see, I will not now so much as seem angry, preserve your humour, 'twill appear fresh o'ch. my learned Gymnosophist, very well, excellent well.
Why does not your Lordship believe me then?
dost thou think throughout the year, I will lose one minute of my pastime, for this your toothless satire▪ your mock▪ balled, go get some pretty tune, 'twill do you a great deal of credit, the next Lent to be presented by folly in an Anti maske mask, i'll to a wench presently.
I came to carry you to one.
How? thou?
Do not deceive yourself, come you shall believe and thank me, will that serve turn, shall I be thought worthy to be trusted then, if I do the office of a Bawd for you, and play the Pander with dexterity, will that convince you?
Yes, yes, than I will believe thee.
then go with me, and I will demonstrate.
Whither?
I will carry you to a Lady be not afraid she is honest, a handsome piece of flesh, a Lady that will bond ye, and rebound, a Lady that will ravish you.
Me?
with delight and admiration, one in whom doth flourish all the excellency of women, honesty only excepted, such a charming brow speaking eye, springing cheek, tempting lip, swelling bosom.
wil you lead me to such a creature?
Yes.
And shall I enjoy her in dalliance?
Yes, and think yourself 〈◊〉, then to be Lord of both the Indies, here's my hand cut it off if I do not this feat for you, when you please, and when you are satisfied with her, I'll help you to forty more, but we are interrupted.
There he is with Grimundo.
His late governor, he is giving him good counsel.
Pray heaven he have the grace to follow it.
Consider Sir, but what will be the end▪
Of all these wicked courses.
Precious villain.
We must be circumspect.
No more, I have a cronet new sprung,
Where shall I mere thee?
I'll expect you in the park— be very secret
My Lord I can but grieve for you.
How have we all been coyn'd?
What is my brother here?
This hour my Lord▪ he is now upon te●…rne.
I'll see him, and then prepare me for this lady.
I feel a boiling in my veins already,
This is the like of greatness, and of Court
They're fools that will be frighted from their sport.
Do't and thou lov'st me?
What d'ye mean my Lord?
Nay wee must have such a deal of circumstance▪
I say do it.
What, that?
That? Is that such a piece of matter, does it appear so horrid in your imagination, that you should look as if you were frighted now?
My Lord it is—
A thing your lust will prompt you to, but that
You affect Ceremony, and love to be entreated.
With your Lady?
Yet again, must I voice it like the town-crier, and ram it into your head with noise, you have not been observed so dull, in a business of this supple Nature.
But think on't again, I pray you think a little better, I ha' no great ambition to ha' my throat cut.
By whom?
By you, you cannot choose but kill me for't, when I have done, name any other Lady, or halfe a score on 'em, as far as flesh will go, I ha' but a body, and that shall venture upon a disease to do you service, but your Lady.
Have I not told thee my end?
I Sir, but I am very loath to begin with her, I know she will not let me do the feat, I had as good never attempt it.
Is your mountainous promise come to this? Remember, if I do not turn honest—
My Lord do but con cider— well I will do what I can, and there be no remedy— but
No butting.
Nay for butting, your Lordship is like to do that better, when I have done with your Lady, upon one condition, I'll resolve.
What's that?
I must be a little plain w'ee my Lord, that you wonot ask me blessing, I am like to be one of your Godfathers.
How?
The new name that I shall add to your other titles will stick in your head and I fear corrupt your brains too many wise men have run mad upon't in the city.
Never fear it, for if thou canst but corrupt her.
I'll show a divorce presently.
And bring me in for a witness.
She's here fear nothing, I'll be thy protection, it were not amiss to cast away some kindness upon her, nay I was coming to take my leave.
I know you never meant it▪
Thus my best intents are rewarded still, the more sin upon your conscience, y'have a hard heart, but heaven for give us all, Astella farewell, Piero expect my return here— pray entertain this Gentleman courteously in my absence, you know not how kindly I may take it.
I would you would enjoin me any testimony,
So I might be in hope to win your love.
'tis in the will of women to do much, do not despair, the proudest heart is but flesh, think a that.
Of what?
Of flesh, and so I leave you.
Wilt please you Madam, walk into your chamber▪
I have something to impart, will require more privacie.
If it be grief, 'tis welcome.
My soul I have examined, and yet find
No reason for my foolish passion
Our hot Italian doth affect these boys,
For sin, I've no such flame, and yet me thought
He did appear most lovely, nay in's absence
I cherish his Idea, but I must
Exclude him, while he hath but soft impression,
Being removed already in his person,
I lose him with less trouble.
Please your highness,
A stranger but some Gentleman of quality,
Intending to leave Savoy, humbly prays
To kiss you hand.
A gentleman, admit him.
You are a gracious prince, and this high favour
Dfernes my person, and my Sword, when you
Vouchsafe so much addition to this honour,
To call them to your service.
You are noble.
It is not compliment my Lord alone
Made me thus bold, I have a private message,
Please you command their distance,
wait without.
Have you forgot this face?
Foscaries shadow?
The substance Sir, and once more at your feet,
Return'd to lise. Rise, meet our armes▪ why i
This Cloud?
Your pardon royal Sir, it will
Concern your highness to permit me walk
In some Eclipse.
How?
Be but pleased to grant
A little freedom to my speech, I shall
Demonstrate the necessity of this
Action, I said I had a messuage,
I come Sir from Cleona.
From Cleona?
From her indeed, and in her name, I must
Propound a question, to which she prays,
You would be just and noble in your answer,
Without disputing your Commission,
Upon mine Honour—
Prince's cannot stain it, dee you love her?
Do I love her? Strange?
Nay she would have you pause, and think welle're
You give her resolution, for she bade me tell you
She has been much afflicted since you left her,
About your love.
About my love? I prithee
Be more particular.
I shall, so soon
As you were gone, being alone, and full
Of melancholy thoughts.
I left her so.
Willing to ease her head upon her couch,
Through silence, and some friendship of the dark,
She fell asleep, and in a short dream thought,
Some Spirit told her softly in her ear,
You did but mock her with a smooth pretence
O Loue.
Ha'?
More, that you are fallen from honour,
Have taken impious flames into your bosom,
That y'are a Bird of prey▪ and while she hath
No household Lar, to wait upon her three should
You would flie in, and 〈◊〉 upon her honour.
I hope she has no faith in dreams▪
And yet
Divinity hath oftentimes descended
Upon our slumbers, and the blessed troops
Have in the calm, and quiet of the soul,
Conversed with us, taught men and women happy
Ways to prevent a tyrant's rage, and lust.
But this was some most false malicious Spirit,
That would insinuate with her white soul,
There's danger if she cherish the infusion.
She cannot tell, she hath some fears my Lord,
Great men have left examples of their vice,
And yet no jealousy of you, but what
A miracle doth urge, if this be one;
If you but once more say you love Cleona,
And speak it unto me, and to the Angels,
Which in her prayers, she hath invoked to hear you,
She will be confident, and tell her dream,
She cannot be illuded.
Though I need not
Give an account to any, but to heaven
And her fair self, Foscari, thou shalt tell her
With what alacrity I display my heart,
I love her with chaste and noble fire, my intents are
Fair as her brow, tell her I dare proclaim it,
In my devotions, at that minute, when
I know a million of adoring Spirits
Hover about the Altar, I do love her—
Enough, enough, my Lord be pleased to hear,
What I have now to say, you have expressed
A brave and virtuous soul, but I must not
Carry this message to her, therefore take
Your own words back again— I love Cleona
With chaste, and noble sire, my intents are
Fair as her brow, I dare proclaim it Sir,
In my devotions, at that minute, when
I know a Million of adoring Spirits,
Hover about the Altar.
Do ye mock me?
Pardon a truth my Lord, I have appareled
My own sense with your language.
Do you come
To affront us, you had better ha' been sleeping
In your cold urn, and fame late gave you out,
And mingled with the tude forgotten ashes,
Then live to move our anger.
Spare your frowns.
This earth weighs not my Spirit down, a fear
Would die the paleness of my father's dust,
Into a blush, Sir many are alive,
Will swear, I did not tremble at a Canon,
When it strooke thunder in mine ear, and wrapped
My head in her blue mists, it is not breath
Can fright a noble truth, nor is there magic
I'th' person of a King that plays the Tyrant,
But a good Sword can easily vncharme i,
You threaten us.
Heaven avert so black a thought,
Though in my honour's cause I can be flame,
My blood is frost to treason make me not
Belly my heart, for I do love Cleona?
And my bold heart tells me, above all height,
You can affect her with, no birth or state
Can challenge a prerogative in love;
Nay be nor partial, and you shall ascribe
To mine love's victory, for though I admit,
You value her above your dukedom, health,
That you would sacrifice your blood, to avert
Any mishap should threaten that dear head,
All this is but above yourself, but I
Love her above herself, and while you can
But give your life, and all you have, to do
Cleona service, I can give away
Herself, Cleona's self, in my love to her,
I see you are at loss, I'll reconcile
All, she is yours, this minute ends my claim,
Live, and enjoy her happily, may you
Be famous in that beauteous Empire, she
Blessed in so great a Lord.
I must not be
O'ercome in honour, nor would do so great
A wrong, to enjoy the blessing, I knew not
You were engaged.
Ere you proceed, I must
Beseech you hear me out, I am but fresh,
Returned from travail, in my absence, she
Herd I was slaine, at my return, upon
The hearing of these honours you intent her,
And which I now believe from your own lip,
I found a means, and have wrought her already,
Into a firm belief that I am dead,
(For I have but pretended I came from her)
If for my sake you leave her now, I can
Make good her faith and die, it sha'not be said,
I lived▪ and 〈◊〉 Cleona's fortune.
Stay miracle of honour, and of love.
If you proceed, as it concerns your happiness,
I can secure all fear of me, I am
Resolved a course wherein I will be dead
To her, yet live to pray for her, and you,
Although I never see you more, will you
royal Lord?
did ever lover plead
against himself before?
I love her still,
And in that study her advancement Sir,
In you. I cannot give her.
Well, I will still love her, and solicit.
And not open
That I am living.
Not a Syllable.
I am confident, let me but kiss your hand.
again, may blessings dwell with you for ever.
He was always noble, but this passion
Has outgone history, it makes for me,
Hail to my courteous fate, Foscari thankes,
Like the aged Phenix, thy old love expires,
And from such Death, springs life to my desires.
The Father is not come yet, nor my Lord
yet when they do, I have no way
T lpe my selfe, nor haue I power to goe
From hence, sure this is the Religious man.
Ha' 'tis the same.
Father Valentio?
Dear Leonora.
Sir the same.
Oh let
My tears express my joys, what miracle
Gave you this liberty?
I was rescued,
By th'happy valour of a Gentleman,
To whom in gratitude, I pay this service,
He bade me here expect a holy man,
And is it you?
The circumstance confirms it.
Are you the goodman whom my Lord expects▪
'tis so me refreshing in the midst of sorrow,
To meet again.
And heaven hath heard my prayer.
But I am miserable still unless
Your counsel do relieve me.
Why my charge?
This noble Gentleman, to whom I own
My preservation, who appointed you
To meet him here, having resolved to enter,
Into Religion, hath been very urgent,
For me to do so too, and overcome
With many importunities, I gave
Consent, not knowing what was best to do,
Some cure or I am lost, you know I cannot
Mix with religious men.
Did you consent?
I did, and he is now upon the point
Of his return.
Y'are in a strait▪ I must
Confess, no matter, hold your purpose, and
Leave all to me, he is returned.
Good Father.
Now I am ready, have you disposed him
For such a life.
He is constant to attend you,
I have prepared him, and made way to the Abbot,
For your reception,
I am blessed, Dulcimo,
Nay no distinction now, me thinks we move
Upon the wings of Cherubins already,
'tis but a step to heaven, come my sweet boy
We climb by a short ladder to our joy▪
This my Lord is her garden, into which you see
My key hath given us private access,
'tis full of curiosity,
You see that grove.
I do.
There is her house of pleasure, let your eye entertain
Some delight here, while I give her happy
Knowledge you are entered▪
Do so, an honest knave I see that, how happy
Shall I be in his conversation, I sha'not need
To keep any in fee to procure, and he be
So well furnished, in ever I come to be Duke, I will
Erect a magnificent college, endow it
With revenue to maintain wenches, and
With great pensions invite the fairer Ladies
From all parts of Christendom, into my Seraglio,
Then, will I have this fellow gelded, and make him
My chief Eunuch ranger, or ouerseer of all,
My precious tame fowl
How now? What's this so me fury asleep, I'll take another path, another? Into what wilderness has this fire-drake brought me? I dare not cry out for fear of waking 'em, would Grimundo were come back.
Rise you drowsy satyrs rise,
What strong charm doth bind your eyes?
See who comes into your grove,
To embrace the Queen of love,
Leap for joy, and frisk about,
Find your pretty Dryads out,
Hand in hand compose a ring,
Dance and circled you new King,
Him, Silvanus must obey,
Hence and cry a holy day.
Some mask, a device, to entertain me, ha'? And yet I see not how they should prepare so much ceremony, unless they had expected me, a curse upon their ill faces, they shook me at first, how now?
Have ye no tongues? yes I will venture myself in your company, and you were my destinies, would there were no worse in Hell, must I walk like a bride too, fortune set on afore then, and thou dost not guide into a handsome place, would thy eyes were out, and so thou Mayst be taken for the blind goddess indeed, forward to Venus' Temple.
vanished like fairies? Ha' what music this? the motion of the spheres, or am I in Elysium.
Here is 〈◊〉 ha'? What glorious creatures this commits a rape upon my senses on every side, but when I look on her, all other admirations are forgot, and leslen in her glory.
My Lord y'are welcome, nay our lip is not too precious, for your salute, most welcome,
I have kept my, word Sir,
Thou hast obliged my soul,
Be high and frolic, she loves to see one
domineere, when y'are throughly acquainted, you'll
Give me thankes.
Let us be private with as much speed as may be.
Away with those gipsies, so so.
I forgot to ask her name-Lady I am come.
Wilt please you use that chair▪
You are not ignorant
O the intents my bloud hath brought with me▪
Grimundo, I hope, hath told my coming Lady▪
And you l'me confident, will justify his promise
O some pastime.
He's a servant,
Whose bosom I dare trust, the son of night,
And yet more secret than his mother, he
Hath power to engage me, and I shall
take pride in my obedience, first be pleased
T tast, what in my duty I prepar'd
F●… your first 〈◊〉, these but serve
To 〈◊〉 appetite.
I like this well,
I 〈◊〉 use much courtship, where's this music?
Doth it 〈◊〉 your ear?
'●is ravishing
whence doth it breath?
If you command, we'll change
A thousand airs▪ till you find one is sweet,
And high enough, to rock your wanton soul
into 〈◊〉 slumbers.
Spare them all,
I hear '●…m in thy accents.
Calliopes famed son, upon whose lute
Myriads of lovers Ghosts do wait, and hang
Upon the golden strings to have their own
griefs softened with his noble touch, shall come
again from hell, with fresh, and happier strains,
Tomove your fancy.
That were very strange,
She is poetical, more then half a Fury,
But we prate all this while, and lose the time
W should imploy more pretiously, I need
No more prouocatiue, my veins are rich
And swell with expectation, shall we to
This vaulting business?
I shall hope my Lord
You will be silent in mine honour, when
You have enjoyed me, and not boast my name,
To your disgrace, not mine.
Your name, why Lady?
By my desires I know it not, I hope
You have received a better Character,
Then to suspect my blabbing, I'll not trust
My Ghostly Father with my sins, much less
Your name.
O let me fly into your arms,
These words command my freedom, I shall love you
Above myself, and to confirm how much,
I dare repose upon your faith, I'll not
Be nice to tell you who I am.
Pray do.
I am a Princess.
How?
Believe me Sir.
I'm glad a that, but of what Country Lady?
And my dominions are more spreading than
Your Brothers.
H? thats excellent, if the villaine
do prosper with my wife, I'll marry her.
I was not borne to perch upon a dukedom▪
Or some such spot of earth, which the dull eyes
Examine by a multiplying glass,
And wonder at, the Roman Eagles never
Did spread their wings upon so many shores,
The silver moon of Ottoman looks pale
Upon my greater Empire, Kings of Spain,
That now may boast their ground, doth stretch as wide
As day▪ are but poor Landlords of a Cell,
Compared to mine inheritance, the truth is▪
I am the devil.
How a devil?
Yes.
Be not affrighted Sir, you see I bring
No horror to distract you, if this presence,
Delight you not I'll weary a thousand shapes
To please my Lord.
Shapes quotha,
Do not tremble,
A devil? I see her cloven foot, I ha'not,
The heart to pray, Grimundo has undone me,
I did command my spirits, to put on
Satyrs, and Nymphes to entertain you first
Whiles others in the air, maintained a choir
For your delight, why do you keep such distance,
with one that loves you? recollect yourself,
You came for pleasure, what doth fright my love,
See I am covetous to return delight,
And satisfy your lustful genius,
Come let's withdraw, and on the bed prepared
Beget a race of smooth and wanton devils—
Hold, come not near me, ha'? now I compare,
The circumstances, they induce me to
A sad belief, and I had breath enough,
I would ask a question.
Any thing, and be
Resolved.
How came Grimnndo, and your devilship,
Acquainted▪
He hath been my agent long,
And hath deserved for his hypocrisy,
And private sins, no common place in Hell,
H●…es now my favourite, and we enjoy,
Each other daily, but he never did,
By any service more endear my love,
Then by this bringing you to my acquaintance,
Which I desired of him long since▪ with many,
And fierce solicit, but he urged his fear,
You were not ripe enough in sin, for his,
Discovery.
I feel myself dissolve▪
In sweat,
My Lord I must acknowledge▪ I
Have ever had you in my first regard,
Of any mortal sinner, for you have
The same propension with me, though with
Less malice▪ spirits of the lower world
Have several offices assigned, some are
To advance pride, some avarice, some wrath,
I am for lust, a gay, voluptuous devil,
Come let's embrace, for that I love my Lord,
Do, and command a regiment of hell,
They all are at your service.
O my foul!
Be●…ide my Lord, it is another motive
To honour you, and by my chains which now
I have left behind, it makes me grow enamoured,
Your wife, that says her prayers at home, and weeps
Away her sight, Of let me hug you for it,
Despise her vows still, spurn her tears again
Into her eyes thou shalt be prince in hell
And have a crown of flames▪ brighter than that,
Which Ariadue wears of fixed staires,
Come shall we dally now?
My bones within
Are dust already, and I wear my flesh
Like a lose, upper garment,
Y'are afraid▪
Be not so pale at liver, for I see
Your blood turn Coward, how would you be frighted
To look upon me clothed with all my horror,
That shudder at me now? call up your spirit.
There are too many spirits here already,
Would thou wert conjured, what shall I do?
What other then to bathe your soul in pleasure
And never heard of ravish, we two,
Will progress through the air in Uenus charet▪
And when her silver doves grow faint, and tire,
Cupid and Mercury shall lend us wings,
And we will visit new worlds, when we are,
Weary of this, we both will back the winds.
And hunt the phoenix through the Arabian deserts
her we will spoil of all her shining plumes.
To make a blazing Coronet for thy temples,
Which from the Earth beheld, shall draw up wonder
And puzzle learned Astronomy, to distinguish it
From some new Constellation, the Sea
Shall yield us pastime, when envoleped
With Clouds, blacker than night, we range about
And when with storms we overthrow whole navies,
We'll laugh to hear the mariners exclaim
In many thousand shipwrecks, what do I
Urge these particulars? let us be one soul,
Air, Earth and Hell, is yours.
I have a suit,
But dare not speak.
Take courage, and from me
be confident to obtain.
I am not well,
The name of Diuill came to quick upon me,
I was not well prepared for such a sound,
It turned my blood to ice, and I had not
recovered so much warmth yet, to desire
The sport I came for, would you please but to
Dismisse me for a time, I would return,
When I have heat and strength enough, for such
A sprightful action.
I do find your cunning,
You pretend this excuse, but to gain time,
In hope you may repent.
And please your Grace,
Not i
You will acquaint some Priest, or other,
A tribe of all the world, I most abhor,
And they will foole you with their Ghostly council,
Pe Perplexe you with some fond divinity,
To make you lose the Glories I have promised.
I could never abide such mell melancholly people.
In this I must betray, we spirits have
No perfect knowledge of men's thoughts, I see
Your bloods enfeebled, and although my love
Be infinite, and every minute I
Shall languish in your absence, yet your health
I must preserve, 'tis that that feeds my hopes,
Hereafter I shall perfectly enjoy thee,
You will be faithful, and return.
Suspect not,
One kiss shall seal consent,
Her breath smells of brimstone.
When next we meet, like to the Gemini
we'll twine our limbs in one another, till
We appear one creature in our active play,
For this time I dismiss you— do not pray,
A spirit shall attend you.
Do not pray, when did I last? I know not, farewell horror.
He wants a wench, that goes to the devil for her.
Touch me not villain, piety defend me
Art thou a man, or have I all this while
Conversed with some ill angel in the shape
Of my Lord's friend,
What needeth all this stir
I urge your benefit.
To undo my name
N●…v soul for ever with one act.
One act,
There be those Ladies that have acted it
A hundred times, yet think themselves as good
christians as other women, and do carry
As much opinion too for virtue.
Heaven.
What harm can there be in't, can you neglect
Revenge so just, so easy and delightful?
thy breath doth scatter an infection.
Scatter a toy, be wise, and lose no time
You know not when-such opportunity,
May tempt you to't again, for my own part
I can but do you pleasure in't, your blood
Should need no other argument.
I'll sooner
Empty my veins, not to redeem thy soul,
Should sin betray mine honour to one lose
Embrace, hence traitor I do feel corruption
I'th' air already, it will kill me if
I stay, hereafter I'll not wonder how
My Lord became so wicked.
You will lead me
To some more private room, I'll follow Madam.
More private room, said he? I smell a business I thought this Gamester had been gone, is it e'en so, have at your burrow Madam, he's a shrewd Ferret I can tell you, and just in the nick here comes the Warrener.
This devil does not follow me, nor any of her Cubs I hope, I'm glad I came off so well, I never was so hot to engender with the nightmare, could Grimundo find no other creature for my coupling but a Succubus, me thinks I smell the Fiend still.
He talks on her already.
I am very jealous.
Not without a cause my Lord.
Ha'? there she is again.
No my Lord, she is new gone into the withdrawing Chamber.
Ha'? who? who is gone?
A Gentlewoman that you were late in company with.
The devil? Look well about you then, a Spirit,
Of her constitution will set the house on fire
Instantly and make a yonghell on't when
Came she? I shall be everlastingly haunted
With goblin, are sure thou sawest her?
Saw her, yes and him too.
Grimundo?
No not Grimundo, but I saw an other Gentleman
That has been held a notable spirit,
Familiar with her.
Spirit and familiar.
Piero my Lord
Piero?
I wonot say what I think, but I think somewhat,
And I know what I say, if she be a devil▪ as she
Can be little less, if she be as bad as I imagine
Some body's head will ache for't, for mine own
Part, I did but see and hear, that's all, and
Yet I ha' not told you half.
Let me collect sure this fellow by th'circumstance
Means Astella, thou talkest all this while of my Lady
Dost not?
Yes my Lord, she is all the Ladies in the house,
For my Lady and mistress was sent for
To the Abbey.
I had forgotten myself this is new horror,
Is my Lady and Piero so familiar sayst and
In private?
What I have said, I have said, and what they have
Done, they have done, by this time.
Done? and I'll be active too.
Show what feats of activity you please but
I believe he hath vaulted into your saddle
Already— so so now I am alone which is as
The learned say, Solus cumsola I will entertain
Some honourable thoughts of my preferment,
Hum the gamester is returned what melancholy, than
He has done't I lay my head to a fool's cap on't
I was always so myself after my capering▪
Did you not meet the Prince sir.
No, where is he?
He was here but now, and inquired how his Lady did, and I told him you could tell the state of her body better than I, for I thought you were gone in before him.
I did but see her.
That's not the right on't, it runs for I did but kiss her, for I did but kiss her.
It was enough for me to kiss her hand.
And feel her pulse.
How Sir?
As a noble Gentleman should Sir?
I am suspected, I must turn this fool's discourse,
Another way, the present theme is dangerous;
What I hear say 〈◊〉, your Lady is like to rise?
My Lady does rise as early as other Ladies do that go to bed late.
And there will be notable preferment for you?
'tis very likely my Lady understands herself▪
There is a whisper abroad▪
'tis a good hearing.
What if she be married in this absence?
Very likely, I say nothing but I think I know my Lady's secrets for the triumph, as pageants, or running at tilt, you may hear more shortly, there may be reasons of state to have things carried privately, they will break out in bells and bonfires hereafter; what their Graces have intended for me, I conceal.
He is wound up already.
You are a Gentleman I shall take particular notice of.
I hope a man may get a place for himself or his friend for ready money.
'ttwere pity of my life else, you shall command the first that falls, but you must swear you came in without chaffering or buying, imagine it a plump Parsonage, or other Church living, the oath will go down the more easily. Divines make no scruple.
But what if after all this imagination of a marriage, fortune should forbid the banes.
How? Fortune's a slut, and because she is a whore herself, would have no Lady marry and live honest.
Piero, where's Piero?
Ha', my Lord, I ha' done't.
Ha'? what.
I have pleased thy Excellence, and you had made more haste, you might ha' come to the falla'th dear, delicate Venison.
thoust not enjoyed her?
They talk of Jupiter and a golden shower,
Give me a Mercury with wit and tongue
He shall charm more Ladies on their backs,
Then the whole bundle of Gods pshaw.
Shoot not so much compass, be brief and answer me, hast thou enjoyed her?
I have, shall I swear?
No, thou wilt be damned sufficiently without an oath, in the mean time, I do purpose to reward your nimble diligence, draw?
What dye mean.
And you be so sharp set, I do e mean to withdraw.
I do mean to cut your throat, or perish●…'th attempt you see your destiny, my birth and spirit won't let me kill thee in the dark, draw and be circumspect.
Did not you engage me to it, have I done any thing but by your directions? my Lord.
'tis all one, my mind is altered, I will see what complexion your heart bears, do not neglect my fury, but guard yourself discreetly, if I hit upon the right vein I may cure your diseasea'th blood.
Hold, and there be no remedy, I will die better than I ha' lived, you shall see Sir that I dare fight with you, and if I tall by your Sword, my base consent to act your will deserves it.
Ha'?
I find your policy, and by this storm,
You'd prove my resolution, how boldly I
Dare stand to't when this great
Dishonour comes to question prepare
To be displeased— she is a miracle
Of chastity impenetrable like.
A marble she returned my sinful arrows
And they have wounded me, forgive me Lady.
I prithee tell me true, now thou shalt swear
Hast thou not done't.
Not by my hope of heaven
Which I had almost forfeited, had not she
Relieved me with her virtue, in this truth
I dare resign my breath.
I dare believe thee
What did I see in her to doubt her firmness.
Here they are Madam, you do not mean to
Run upon their naked weapons.
Piero thou shalt wonder.
What means my Lord?
You shall know that a non
My Lady go with me.
Wither you please
You shall not need to force me sir, you may
Led me with gossamer, or the least thread
The industrious spider weaves.
Whimsies caribit so's.
What fury thus transports him at some distance
I'll follow him, he may intent some violence
She is too good to suffer I shall grow
In love with my conversion.
Grow in love with a coxcomb his last words
Stick on my stomach still fortune forbidden the banes
Quotha, slid if fortune should forbid the banes
And my Lady be not converted into a Duchess
Where are allmy offices?
Hum where are they quoth I, I do not know
But of all tunes I shall hate fortune my foe.
Know you not who they are my Lord this day
Receive the habit.
I can meet with no intelligence.
They are persons of some quality.
The Duke does mean to grace their ceremony.
He was invited by the Abbot to their clothing.
Which must be in private too hear in his lodgings.
Well, we shall not long expect'em his grace enters.
It helped much that he never saw my wife.
Dost think 'twill take.
Thera's some hope my Lord already
And heaven may prosper it.
We cannot endear thee to thy merit.
How the Duke embraces him.
Cleona you are welcome 'tis a blessed
Occasion that makes us meet so happily.
It pleased my Lord Abbot to invite me hither.
I appeared too upon his friendly summons
we'll thank him for this presence,
The Abbot enters.
Speak your desire.
We kneel to be received into the number,
O those religious men that dedicate
Themselves to heaven, i'th' habit of St. Bennet,
And humbly pray, that you would rectify
And teach our weak deuotion, the way
To imitate his life, by giving us
The precepts of your order,
Let me tell you,
You must take heed, the ground of your resolve
Be perfect, yet look back into the spring
Of your desires, religious men should be
Tapers, first lighted by a holy beam,
Meteors may shine like stars, but are not constant.
We covet not the blaze, which a corrupt,
And slimy matter may advance, our thoughts
Are slamed with Charity.
Yet ere you embark
Think on your hard adventure, there is more
To be examined, beside your end,
And the reward of such an undertaking,
You look on heaven a far off, like a Land▪ skip,
Whether wild thoughts, like yours imperfect eye,
Without examination of those ways,
Obliqne, and narrow are transported, but
I'th' walk, and try all of the difficulties
That interpose, you tyre like inconsiderate,
And weary Pilgrims.
We desire to know
The rules of our obedience,
They will startle
Your resolutions, can your will, not used
To any Law beside itself, permit
The knowledge of severe, and positive limits?
Submit to be controlled, employed sometime,
In servile offices, against the greatness
Of your high birth, and sufferance of nature?
Can you, forgetting all youthful desires,
And memory of the world's betraying pleasures,
Check wanton heat, and consecrate your blood
To Chastity, and holy solitude?
I woe not be religious Giotto?
Nor I, upon these terms I pity 'em.
Can you quit all the glories of your state,
Resign your titles, and large wealth to live
Poor and neglected, change high food and surfeits,
For a continual fasting, your down beds
For hard and humble lodging, your guilt roofs,
And galleries for a melancholy Cell
The pattern of a grave, where, stead of music
To charm you into slumbers, to be waked
With the sad chiming of the sacring bell;
Your robes, whose curiosity hath tired
Invention, and the silkworm to adorn you,
Your blaze of jewels, that your pride hath worn
To burn out envies eyes, must be no more
Your ornament, but course, and rugged clothing
Harrow your soft skins, these and many more
Unkind austerities will much offend
Your tender constitutions, yet consider.
He does insist much on their flate and honour
May we not know'em yet;
One of them sir
Doth owe this character.
It is Foscary
I find his noble purpose, he is perfect
I honour thee young man, she must not see
This paper.
This doth speak the other Sir.
'tis at large— ha'— Grimundo I prithee read,
I dare not credit my own eyes Leonora
So it begins, Leonora.
Leonora daughter to the late Gonzaga Duke
Of Milan, fearing she should be compelled to marry
Her uncle, in the habit of a Page and the conduct
Of Father Valentio, came to Savoy, to try the
Love and honour of his Excellence, who once
Solicited by his ambassador—
No more, I am ecstasied
If so much blessing may be met at once
I'll do my heart that justice to proclaim
Thou hadst a deep impression, as a boy
I loved thee too, for it could be no other,
But with a divine flame, fair Leonora
Like to a perfect Magnes, though inelosed
Within an ivory box, through the white wall
Shot forth embracing virtue, now, oh now
Our Destinies are kind.
This is a mystery, Dulcino?
No my Lord, I am discovered,
You see Leonora now, a Milan Lady,
If I may hope your pardon—
Love; and honour
Thou dost enrich my heart, Cleona read
And entertain the happiness, to which
Thy fare predestined thee, whilst I obey
Mine here.
How, my Lord Foscary?
If he beliving, I must die before
This separation be confirmed, my joy
Doth overcome my wonder, can you leave
The world while I am in't?
Decr' Leonora!
Then willingly I dispense with my intention
And if the Duke have found another Mistress,
It shall be my devotion to pray here,
And my religion to honour thee.
Many blessings crown
This unlon.
Your pardon gracious Princess
I did impose too much.
I studied
To be your grateful servant, as yourself
Unto the fair Cleona we are all happy.
They're here; by your leave brother, my Lord Abbot?
Witness enough.
Why thus kneels Lodowick?
To make confession brother, and beg heavens
And every good man's pardon, for the wrong
I 〈◊〉 ' done this excellent Lady, whom my soul
New marries, and may heaven— ha' do not hold
A justice back, Grimunde is a traitor
Take heed on him and say your prayers, he is
The Deulls grand solliciter for souls,
He hath not such another cunning engine
I'th' world, to ruin virtue.
I my Lord?
You are no hypocrite, he does every night
Lie with a Succubus, he brought me to one
Let him deny it, but heaven had pity on me.
Ha'? there she is, do you not see her? Devil!
I do defy thee, my Lord stand by me,
I will be honest, spite of him and thee,
And lie with mine own wife.
Sure the Prince is mad,
Oh rise most noble Lady, well deserning
A statue to record thy virtue.
Ha'?
This is Grimundo's wife,
'Tis so my Lord.
No Deuills but the servant of your virtue,
That shall rejoice, if we have thrived in your
Conuersion.
I hope it.
Have I been mocked into honesty? are not you a fury?
And you a slye and subtle Epicure?
I do abhor the thought of being so,
Pardon my seeming Sir.
Oh go not back,
Prevent thus seasonably your real torment.
I am fully wakened, be this kiss the pledge
Of my new heart.
True love stream in your bosoms
Lady forgive me too.
Most willingly.
Our joy is perfect, Lodowick 〈◊〉
A 〈◊〉 in this Lady, Leonora,
The object of our first love, take the story
As we 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Abbot we must thank
You 〈◊〉 contriving this, and you good Father,
Embassedors shall be dispatched to Milan,
where and how their absent Princess
Leonora 〈◊〉 disposed herself, mean while,
Poets shall stretch inuention, to express
Triumphs for thee, and Savoyes' happiness.