Joy, joy to mortals, the rejoicing fires
Of gladness, smile in your dilated hearts!
Whilst Love presents a world of chaste desires,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Love is the right affection of the mind,
The noble appetite of what is best:
Desire of union with the thing designed,
But in fruition of it cannot rest.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want,
Plenty the beauty, which it wanteth, draws;
Want yields itself: affording what is scant.
So, both affections are the union's cause.
But, rest not here. For Love hath larger scopes,
New joys, new pleasures, of as fresh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but those he can perpetuate.
To you that are by excellence a Queen!
The top of beauty! but, of such an air,
As, only by the mind's eye, may be seen
Your interwoven lines of good, and fair!
Vouchsafe to grace Loves triumph here, tonight,
Through all the streets of your Callipolis;
Which by the splendour of your rays made bright
The seat, and region of all beauty is.
Love, in perfection, longeth to appear
But prays, of favour, he be not called on,
Till all the suburbs, and the skirts be clear
Of perturbations, and th'infection gone.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your nostrils! or some sweeter sound
Of melting music, that shall not consume
Within the ear, but run the mazes round.
Mean time, we make lustration of the place,
And with our solemn fires, and waters prove
T'have frighted, hence, the weak diseased race
Of those were tortured on the wheel of love.
1 The glorious,2 whining,3 the aduenturous foole,
Fantastic, ⁵ bribing, and the jealous ass
1 The sordid, ² scornful, ³ and the angry mule4
4 The melancholique,5 dull, and envious masse,
With all the rest, that in the sensual school
Of lust, for their degree of brute may pass.
All which are vapoured hence.
No loves, but slaves to sense:
Mere cattle, and not men.
Sound, sound, and treble all our joys again,
Who had the power, and virtue to remove
Such monsters from the labyrinth of love.
Here, stay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beauty is!
Here, perfect Lovers, you must pay
First-fruits; and on these altars lay
(The lady's breasts) your ample vows,
Such, as Love brings, and Beauty best allows!
For Love, without his object, soon is gone:
Love must have answering love, to look upon.
To you, best judge then, of perfection!
The Queen, of what is wonder, in the place!
Pure object, of Heroic Love, alone!
The centre of proportion—!
Sweetness.
Grace.?
Deign to receive all lines of love in one.
And by reflecting of them fill this space.
Till it a circle of those glories prove,
Fit to be sought in Beauty, found by Love.
Where Love is mutual, still
All things in order move,
The circle of the will
Is the true sphere of Love.
Advance, you gentler Cupids, then advance,
And show your just perfections in your dance.
The Cupids dance their dance.
And the Masquers their entry.
So love, emergent out of Chaos brought the world to light!
And gently moving on the waters, wrought all form to fight!
love's appetite
Did beauty first excite:
And left imprinted in the air,
Those signatures of good, and fair,
Which since have flowed, flowed forth upon the sense,
To wonder first, and then to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!
And Neptune too
Shows what his waves can do:
To call the Muses all to play,
And sing the birth of Venus' day,
Which from the Sea flowed, forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and next to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!
Hast daughter Venus haste, and come away:
All powers, that govern marriage, pray That you will lend your light
Unto the constellation of this night.
Hymen.
And Iuno.
And the Genius call,
Your father Iupiter,
And all
That bless, or honour holy nuptial.
Here, here I present am
Both in my girdle, and my flame:
Wherein are woven all the powers
The Graces gave me, or the Hours
(My nurses once) with all the arts
Of gaining, and of holding hearts:
And these with I descend.
But, to your influences, first commend
The vow, I go to take
On earth, for perfect love and beauty's sake!
Beauty and Love, whose story is mysterial,
In yonder palm-tree, and the Crown imperial,
Do from the Rose, and Lily so delicious,
Promise a shade, shall ever be propitious
To both the Kingdoms. But to Britain's Genius
The snaky rod, and serpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, than these, who so united be
By Love, as with it Earth and Heaven delighted be.
And who this King, and Queen would well historify,
Need only speak their names: Those them will glorify.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES, with his MARY, named are
And all the rest of Loves, or Princes famed are.