Now forasmuch as in these latter days,
Throughout the whole world in every land
Vice doth increase, and Virtue decays
Iniquity having the upper hand.
We therefore intend, good gentle Audience,
A pretty short Interlude, to play at this present
desiring your leave and quiet scisence
To show the same, as is meet and expedient.
The sum whereof, matter and argument,
In two or three verses, briefly to declare,
Since that it is for an honest intent,
I will somewhat bestow my care.
In the City of London, there was a rich man
Who loving his son most tenderly,
Moved him earnestly now and than,
That he would give his mind to study.
saying that by knowledge, science, and learning
Is at the last gotten a pleasant life:
But throng he the want, and lack of this thing
Is purchased ponertie, sorrow, and strife.
His Son notwithstanding, this gentle monition
As one that was clean devoid of grace,
Did turn to a mock, and open derision
Most wickedly with an bushame fast face.
In so much that contrary to his father's will
Unto a young woman he did consent,
Whereby of lust he might have his fill,
And married the same in contynents.
Not long after that, the child began
To feel his wifes great frowardness,
And called himself unhappy man,
Oppressed with pains and heaviness.
Who before that time, did live blessedly,
Whilst he was under his father's wing
But now being wedded, mourning and misery
Did him torment without ending,
But now it is time for me to be going,
And hence to depart for a certain space,
For I do hear the Rich man coming
With the wanton boy into this place.
LAther I beseech you father, show me the way
What thing I were best to take in hand,
Whereby this short life so spend I may
That all grief and trouble, I might withstand.
What is the meaning (my child) I the pray
This question to be mand of me?
For that thing to so, I am glad alway
Which should not be grievous to the.
Marye but therefore, of you counsel I take,
seeing now my childhood, I am clean past,
That unto me ye plainly do make,
What to a youngman is best for to taste.
I see nothing truly my Son so meet
And to prove so profitable for the
As unto the School to move thy feet,
With studious Lads, there for to be.
What the Scholeen aye father, nay,
Go to the School is not the best way,
Say what thou list, for I can not invent
A way more commodious in my judgement.
It is well known how that ye have loved
Me heretofore at all times most tenderly
But now (me think) ye have plainly showed
Certain tokens of hatred
For if I should go to my Book after your advise
Which have spent my childhood so pleasantly,
I may then seem driven out of Paradyse
To take pain and woe, grief and misery.
All things I had rather sustain and abide
The business of the School once cast aside,
Therefore though ye cry till ye reave asunder
I will not meddle with such a matter.
Why can not I thee thus much persuade
For that in my mind is the best trade.
When all is said and all is done,
Concerning all things both more and less
Yet like to the School none under the Son
Bringeth to children so much heaviness.
What though it be painful, what thought it be griefs,
For so be all things at the first learning,
Yet marvelous pleasure it bringeth unto us
As a reward for such pains taking.
Wherefore come of and be of good cheer
And go to thy Book without any fear
For a man without knowledge (as I have read)
May well be compared to one that is dead.
Not more of the School, no more of the Book
That woeful work is not for my purpose
For upon those Books I may not look,
If so I did, my labour I should loose.
Why than to me thy fancy express
That the School matters to the are counted weariness
Even as to a great man, wealth and rich
Service and bondage is a hard thing
So to a Boy both dainty and nice
Learning and study is greatly displeasing.
What my Child, displeasing I pray thee?
That maketh a man live so happily.
Yea by my truth, such kind of wisdom
Is to my heart I tell you, very loathsome.
What trial thereof hast thou taken
That the Scole of thee is so ill bespoken?
What trial thereof would ye fain know?
Nothing more easy than this to show:
At other boy's hands, I have it learned,
And that of those truly most of all other
Which for a certain time have remained
In the house and prison of a schoolmaster
I dare well say that there is no misery
But rather joy, pastime, and pleasure
Always with Scholars haping company,
No life to this, I the wall assure.
It is not true Father which you do say,
The contrary thereof is proved alway,
For as the Brutus goeth by many a one,
Their tender bodies both night and day
Are whipped and scourged, and beat like a stone
That from top to toe, the say is away.
Is there not (say they) for them in this case,
Given other while for pardon some place?
None truly none, but that alas, alas
Diseases among them do grow apace.
For out of their back and side doth flow,
Of very goore blood marvelous abundance,
And yet for all that is not suffered to go,
Till death be almost seen in their countenance.
Should I be content then thither to run,
Where the blood from my breech thus should spuane,
So long as my wits shall be mine own,
The schoolhouse for me shall stand alone.
But I am sure that this kind of fashion
Is not showed to children of honest condition.
Of troth with these Masters is no difference
For alike towards all, is their wrath and violence.
Son in this point, thou art quite deceived
And without doubt falsely persuaded
For it is not to be judged that any schoolmaster,
Is of so great fierceness and cruelty
And of young Infants so sore a tormenter
That the breath should be about to leave the body.
Father this thing I could not have believed
But of late days I did behold
In honest man's son hereby buried
Which through many stripes was dead and cold.
peradventure the Child of some disease did labour
Which was the cause of his Sepulture.
With no disease surely, was he disquieted,
As unto me it was then reported.
If that with no such thing he were infected
What was the cause that he departed.
Men say, that of this man, his bloody master
Who like a Lion most commonly frowned,
Being hanged up by the heels together▪
Was belly and buttock grievously whipped.
And last of all (which to speak I trembled)
That his head to the wall he had often crushed.
Thus to think Son, thou art beguiled verily,
And I would wish the to suppose the contrary.
And not for such tales my counsel to forsake
Which only do covet thee learned to make.
If Demesthenes and Tully were present truly
They could not print it within my head happily.
Yet by thy father's will and intercession,
Thou shalt be content that thing to pardon.
Command what ye list, that only excepted,
And I will by ready your mind to fulfil,
But where as I should to the School have resorted
My hand to the Palmer submitting still.
I will not obey ye therein to be plain,
Though with a thousand strokes I be slain.
woe is me my Son, woe is me,
This heavy and doleful day to see.
I grant in deed, I am your Son,
But you my Father shall not be,
If that ye mill cast me into that prison,
Where torn in pieces ye might me see.
Where I might see the torn and rend?
O Lord I could not such a deed invent.
Nay by the Mass, I hold ye, a groat
Those cruel tyrants cut not my throat:
Better it were myself did fleye,
Then they with the Rod my flesh should fleye.
Well I would we did this talk omit,
For it is loathsome to me every whit.
What trade then (I pray thee) shall I devise
Whereof thy living at length may arise?
Wilt thou follow Warfare, and a Soldier be pointed,
And so among Trojans and Romans be numbered,
See ye not masters my Father's advise
Haur ye the like at any time hard?
To will me thereto he is not wise
If my years and strength he did regard,
You speak worse and worse, what soever ye say
This manner of life is not a good way.
For no kind of office can me please,
Which is subject to wounds and strokes always.
Somewhat to do, it is meet and conveniet,
wilt thou then give thy diligent endenoure
To let thy youth unhonestly be spent
And do as poor knaves, which jares do scour?
For I do not see that any good Art
Or else any honest Science, or occupation
Thou wilt be content to have a part
After thy father's mind and exhortation.
Ha', ha', ha', a labour in very deed,
God sand him that life which stands in need.
There be many fathers that children have
And yet not make the worst of them a ●aue,
Might not you of yourself be well a shamed
Which would have your son thither constrained?
I would not have the driven to that succour,
Yet for because the Scriptures declare,
That he should not ear, which will not labour
Some work to do it must be thy ear.
Father, it is but a folly with you to strive
But yet notwithstanding I hope to thrive
That this thine intent may take good success
I pray God heartily of his goodness.
Well, well, shall I in few words rehearse,
What thing doth most my Conscience pierce?
Therewith I am Son very well contented.
Yea but I think that ye will not be pleased.
In deed peradventure it may so chance.
Nay but I pray ye without any perchance,
Shall not my request turn to your grevannce.
If it be just and lawful, which thou dost require,
Both just and lawful have ye no fear.
Now therefore ask, what is thy petition?
Lo this it is without further Dilation,
For so much as all youngmen for this my Beauty,
As the Moon, the stars, I do far excel,
Therefore out of made, with all speed posy●ly,
To have a wife (me think) would do well,
For now I am longe, lively, and iustie,
And welcome besides to all men's company.
Good Lord, good Lord, what do I here?
Is this your beginning to perform my desire.
It is my child, what meaneth thy doting?
Why dost thou covet thy own un doing?
I know not in the world how to do the thing
That to his stomach, may be delighting.
Why fooly she I deot, thou goest about a wife
Which is a burden and yoke all thy life.
Admit she shall as a burden with me remain,
Yet ●oyll I take one, if your good will I attain.
Son it shall not be thus by my counsel.
I trust ye will not me otherwise compel.
If thou were as wise, as I have judged thee
Thou wouldest in this case be ruled by me.
To follow the contrary I can not be turned
My hat thereon is styflly fixed.
What I say, about thine own destruction?
Not, not, but about mine own salvation:
For if I be helped, If were by the Mass,
It is only Marriage that brings it to pass.
It is not the School, it is not the Book,
It is not Science or Occupation,
It is not to be a harbour or Cook
Wherein is now set my consolation.
And since it is thus, be father content
For to marye a wife, I am full bent.
Well if thou wilt not my Son, be ruled
But needs will follow thine own foolysshenes,
Take heed hereafter if thou be troubled
At me thou never seek redress.
For I am certain thou canst not abide
Any pain at all, grief, or vexation.
Thy childhood with me so easily did slide
Full of all pastime and delectation.
And if thou wouldest follow the Book and learning,
And with thyself also, take a wise way:
Then thou mayst get a gentleman's lining
And with many other bear a great sway.
Besides this I would in time to come
After my power, and small havylytie,
Help the and further thee, as my wisdom,
Should me most counsel for thy commodity.
And such a wife I would prepare for the
As should be virtuous, wise and honest,
And give the with her after my degree,
Whereby thou mightest always live in test.
I cannot, I tell ye again, so much of my life
Consume at my Book without a wife.
I perceive therefore. I have done to well
And showed over much favour to thee,
That now against me thou dost rebel
And for thine own furtherance wilt not agreed.
Wherefore of my goods thou gettest not a penny
Nor any succour else at my hands
For such a child is most unworthy
To have any part of his father's lands.
I do not estéme father your goods or lands
Or any part of all your treasure,
For I judge it enough to be out of bands
And from this day forward to take my pleasure.
Well, if it shall chance the thy folly to repent
As thou art like within short space,
Think none but thyself worthy to be shent,
Letting my council to take no place.
As touching that matter, I will no man blame
Now farewell father, most heartily for the same.
Farewell my Son, depart in God's name.
Rome I say room, let me be gone
My father if he list, shall tarry alone.
Now at the last I do myself consider
How great grief it is and heaviness,
To every man, that is a Father.
To suffer his child to follow wantonness,
If I might live a hundred years longer
And should have sons and daughters many
Yet for this Boy's sake, I will not suffer,
One of them all at home with me to tarry,
They should not be kept thus under my wing
And have all that which they desire,
For why it is but their only undoing
And after the Proverb, we put oil to the fire.
Wherefore we Parents must have a regard,
Our Children in time for to subdue
Or else we shall have them ever untoward,
Yea, spiteful, disdainful, naught, and untrue.
And let us them chruste alway to the School
Whereby at their Books they may be kept under:
And so we shall shortly their courage cool,
And bring them to honesty, virtue and Nurture.
But alas now a days (the more is the pity)
Science and learning is so little regarded,
That none of us all doth muse or study
To see our children well taught and instructed.
We deck them, we trim them with gorgeous array
We pampre and fede them, and keep them so gay
That in the end of all this, they be out foes.
We base them, kiss them, we look round about
We marvel and wonder to see them so leave
We ever anon do invent and seek out,
To make them go tricksy, gallant, and clean.
Which is nothing else, but the very provoking
To all unthriftiness, vice, and Iniquity,
It pucteth them up, it is an alluting
Their fathers and mothers at length to defy.
Which thing mine own Son doth plainly declare
Whom I always entirely have loved,
He was so my joy, he was so my care
That now of the same I am despised.
And now he is hence from me departed,
He hath no delight with me to devil,
He is not merry until he be married,
He hath of knavetye took such a smell.
But yet seeing that he is my Son,
He doth me constrain bitterly to weep,
I am not (me think) well, till I be gone
For this place I can no longer keep.
NAke haste Blaunche Blab it out, & come a way
For we have enough to do all this whole day,
Why Blaunche blab it out, wilt thou not come
And knowest what business there is to be done?
If thou may be set with the pot at thy nose
Thou carest not how other matters goes,
Come a way I did thee, and tarry no longer
To trust to thy help, I am much the better.
What a Murryn I say, what a noise dost thou make
I think that thou be not well in the wyrtes
I never hard man on this sort to take
With such angry words, and hasty fits.
Why dost thou remember, what is to be bought
For the great Bridal against to morrow?
The market must be in every place sought
For all kind of meats, God guye the sorrow.
What bamning? what cursing? Longtong is with the
I made as much speed, as I could possibly,
I wis thou mightest have tarried for me
Until in all points I had been ready,
I have for thee looked full often heretofore,
And yet for all that said never the more.
Well for this ones, I am with thee content
So that hereafter thou make more haste,
Or else I tell thee, thou wilt it repent,
To loiter so long, till the Market be past.
For there must be bought Byefe, Veal, and Mution,
And that even such as is good and fat
With Pig, Geese, conies and Capon,
How sayest thou Blanch blab it out unto that?
I can not tell Lontonge, what I should say
Of such good cheer I am so glad:
That if I would not eat all that day
My belly to fill, I were very made.
There must be also Fesaunte and Swanne
There must be Heronse●er, Particle and Quayle,
And therefore I must do, what I can,
That of none of all these the Gentleman fail.
I dare say he looks for many things more,
To be prepared against to worn,
Wherefore I say, hence let us go,
My feet do stand upon a thorn.
Nay good Long tongue, I pray the ones again
To here yet of my mind, a word or twain.
Come of them dispatch, and speak it quickly
For what thynge it is, thou causest me ty.
Of whence is this Gentleman, that to morrow is matried
Where doth his father and his mother devil?
Above forty miles be hath travailed
As yester night his Servant did tell.
In very deed, he comes a great way,
With my Master he may not long abide,
It hath cost him so much on costly array,
That Money out of his purse apace doth slide.
They say that his friends be rich and wealth
And in the City of London have their dwelling,
But yet of them all he hath no penny,
To spends and bestow here at his weddynge.
And if it be true that his Servant did say
He hath utterly lost his friends good will
Because he would not their counsel whey,
And in his yvone Country tarry still.
As for this woman, which he shall marye
At Sainet Alban's always, hath spent her life
I think she be a shrew, I tell thee plainly,
And full of debate, malice and strife.
Though I never saw this woman before
Which hither with him this Gentleman bo●ught,
Yet nevertheless I have tokens in store,
To judge of a woman that is froward and naught.
The tip of her nose, is as sharp as mine
Her tongue and her tune is very shrill
I warrant her, she comes of an vng●acius kin,
And loneth to much her pleasure and will,
What though she be now so neat and so nice,
And speaketh as gentle as ever I heard:
Yet youngmen which be both witty and wise,
Such looks, and such words, should not regard.
Blanch blab it out, thou sayest very true
I think thou beginnest at length to preach
This thing to me is strange and new,
To hear such a fool youngmen to teach.
A fool mine own Longtong, why call'st thou me fool
Though now in the kitchen I waste the day,
Yet in times paste I went to School,
And of my latin primer I took assay,
masters this woman did take such assay,
And then in those days so applied her book,
That one word thereof, she carried not away,
But then of a Scholar was made a Cook.
I dare say she knoweth not, how her Primer began,
Which of her master she learned then.
I trow it began with Domine labia aperies.
What did it begin with butterde peeas?
I tell the again, with Domine labia aperies,
If now to hear, it be thine ease.
How, how, with my Madaine lay in the peeas?
I think thou art mad with Domine labia aperies.
Yea marry, I judged it went such ways,
It began with Dorothy lay up the keys.
Nay then God night, I perceive by this gear,
That none is so deaf, as who will not hear,
I spoke as plainly, as I could devise,
Yet me understand, thou canst in no wise.
Why yet once again, and I will better listen
And look upon thee, how thy lips do open.
Well mark then, and hearken ones for all:
Or else he are it again thou never shall,
My Book I say, began with Domine labia aperies.
Fie, fie, how slow am I of understanding▪
Was it all this while, Domine labia aperies?
Belike I have lost my sense of hearing,
With broiling and burning in the kitchen adyes.
I promise the thou seemest to have done little better
For that I wot in my life I never saw,
One like to thyself, in so easy a matter.
Unless he were deaf, thus play the Daw.
Come on, come on, we have almost forgotten
Such plenty of victuals as we should buy
It were alms by my troth, thou were well beaten
Because so long thou hast made me tarry.
Tusshe tush, we shall come in very good season,
If so be thou goest as fast as I,
Take up thy basket and quickly have done
We will be both there by and by.
I for my part will never leave running
until that I come to the Sign of the Whiting.
WHere is my sweating, whom I do seek
He promised me to have met me here
Till I speak with him, I think it a week
For he is my joy, he is my cheer.
There is no night, there is no day
But that my thoughts be all of him
I have no delight if he be away,
Such toys in my head do everswym.
But behold at the last, where he doth come
For whom my heart desired long,
Now shall I know all a● some,
or else I would say, I had great wrong
My darling, my Conye, my Bird so bright of blee,
Sweet heart I say, all hail to thee
How do our Loves, be they fast a sleep
Or the old lynelynes, do to they still keep?
Do ye ask and my Love be fast a sleep?
O if a woman may utter her mind,
My love had almost made me to weep
Because that even now I did not you find
I thought it surely a whole hundred year,
Till in this place I saw you here.
Alack, alack, I am sorry for this,
I had such business I might not come
But ye may perceive what my wit is,
How small regard I have and wisdom.
Whereas ye ask me concerning my love
I well assure you, it doth daily augment:
Nothing can make me start or move
You only to love is mine intent.
And as for my love doth never relent,
For of you I do dream, of you I do think:
To dinner and supper, I never went,
But of Beer and Wine to you I did drink.
Now of such thynhes therefore to make an end
Which pitiful lovees do cruelly torment,
To Marriage in God's name, let us descend
As unto this hour we have been bent.
Your will to accomplish I am as ready,
As any woman, believe me truly.
This Ring than I gyne you as a token sure,
Whereby our love shall always endure.
With a pure pretence your pledge I take gladly
For a Sign of our love, faith and fidelity.
Now I am safe, now I am glad,
Now I do live, now I do ra●g●●●
Me thought till now I was to sad,
Wherefore sadness fly hence again.
I way with those words which my father brought out
A way with his saigenes and exhortation
He could not make me his fool or his lout,
And put me vesydes this delectation.
Did he judge that I would go to the School,
And might my time spend after this sort▪
I am not his Calse, nor yet his fool,
This Virgin I kiss, is my comfort.
Well than I pray you let us be married
For me think from it we have long tarried.
Agreed my Sweating, it shalve then done,
Since that thy good will I have gotten and won.
There would this day be very good there
That every one his vealy may fill.
And three or four Minstrels would be here
That none in the house sit idle or still.
Take ye no thought for abundance of meat
That should be spent at our Bridal,
For there shallbe enough for all men to eat
And Minstrels besides thereto shall not sail.
The Cooks I dare say, a good while a gone
With such kind of flesh as I did them tell
Are from the market both come home
Or else my own Conye they do not well.
I knew before that I come to this place
We should be married together this day
Which caused me then forth with in this case
To send for victuals or I came away.
Where fore then (I pray ye) shall we go to our Inn,
And look that every thing be made ready,
Or else all is not worth a Brass pin,
Such haste is required in matry money.
I think six a clock it is, not much passed
But yet to the priest we will make haste
That according to custom we may be both coupled
And with a strong knot for ever bound fast.
Yet ere I depart, some song I will sing,
To the intent to derlare my joy without fear
And in the mean fyme you may my sweating,
Rest yourself in this little chair.
Spite of his spite, which that in vain.
Doth seek to force my fantasy,
I am professed for loss or gain,
To be thine own assucedlye:
Wherefore let my father spite and spurn,
My fantasy wyil never turn.
Although my father of busy wit,
Doth babble still. I care not tho,
I have no fear, nor yet will flit,
As doth the water to and fro,
Wherefore let my father spite and spurur,
My fantasy will never turn.
For I am set and will not swerve,
Whom spiteful speech removeth naught
And since that I thy grace deserve,
I count it is not dearly bought,
Wherefore let my father spite and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
Who is afrayde●●let you him fly,
For I shall well abide the brunt:
Mangre to his lips that listeth to lie
Of busy brains as is the wont.
Wherefore let my father spite and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
Who listeth thereat to laughe or louvre
I am not be that ought doth retch
There is no pain that hath the power,
Out of my orest your love to fetch,
Wherefore let my father spite and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
for whereas he moved me to the School,
And only to follow my Book and learnening:
He could never make me such a fool,
With all his soft words, and fair speaking.
Wherefore let my father spite and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
This Minion here, this myneing Trull,
Both please me wore a thousand fold:
Then all the earth that is so full.
f precious stones, Soluer and Golde.
Wherefore let my father spire and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
What soever I did, it was for her sak
It was for her love, and only pleasure,
I count it no labour, such labour to take,
In getting to me so high a treasure.
Wherefore let my father spite and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
This day I intended for to be merry,
Although my hard Father be far hence.
I know no cause for to be bevye,
For all this cost and great expense.
Wherefore let my father spite and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
How like ye this song, my own sweet Rose,
Is it well made for our purpose?
I never hard in all my life a better,
Moore pleasmante, more meet for the matter,
Now let us go then, the morning is nigh gone
We can not any longer here remain:
Farewell good Masters everyechone,
Till from the Church we come again.
Sirs, by my truth it is a world to see,
The exceeding negligence of every one.
Even from the highest to the lowest degree,
Both goodness and conscience is clean gone.
There is a youge gentleman in this town,
Who this same day now must be married:
Yet though I would bestow a Crown,
That knave the Clerk can not be spied.
For he is safe if that in the Alehouse,
He may sit typling of Nut brown Ale:
That often be comes forth as drunk as Mouse,
With a nose of his own not greatly pale,
And this is not once, but every day,
Almost of my faith, through out the whole year,
That he these tricks doth use to play,
Without all shame, dreable and fear.
He knoweh himself that yester night,
The said young gentleman came to me,
And then desired, that he might
This morning beiymes married be.
But now I doubt it will be high noon,
Ere that this busynes be quite ended:
Unless the knaves she fool come very soon,
That this same thing may be dispatched,
And therefore since that this naughty pache,
Hath at this present me thus served.
He is like hence forward my good will to lack
or else b●wyss I might be judged.
I am taught hereafter, how such a one to trust,
In day matter concerning the Church,
For if I should, I perceive that I must,
Of mine own honesty lose very much.
And yet for all this, from week to week,
For his stipend and wages he never crieth,
And for the same continually doth seek,
As from time to time plainly appeareth,
But whither his wages he hath deserved,
Unto you all I do me report,
Since that his duty he hath not fulfilled,
Nor to the Church will scant resort.
That many a time and often, I am fain
To play the Priest, Clarke, and all
Though thus to do, it is great pain,
And mire ward but very small,
Wherefore (God willing) I will such order take,
Before thou I be many days elder,
That he shallbe glad this town to forsake
And learn evermore to please his better.
And in such wise all they shall be used,
Which in this pacysshe intend to be Clerks,
Great pity it were, the Church should be disordered
Because that such Swylbowles do not their works.
And to say truth, in many a place,
And other great towns beside this same,
The Priests and Parishioners be in the like case,
Which to the Church wardens may be a shame.
Haw should the Priest his office fulfil,
accordingly as in deed he aught?
When that the Clerk will have a self will
And always in Service time must be sought?
Notwithstanding at this present there is no remedy
But to take time, as it doth fall,
Wherefore I will go hence and make me ready
For it helpeth not to chafe or brawl.
LOmmynae this day forth of my Chambre,
Even as for water to wash I did call,
By chance I espied a certain stranger,
Standing beneath within my Hall.
Who in very deed came from the Inholder
Whereas for a time my Son did lie,
And said that his master had sent me a letter
And bade him to bring it with all speed possibly.
Wherein he did writ that as this day
That vnthr●fre my Son to a certain Maid,
Should then be wedded, without further delay,
And bathe borrowed more than will be paid.
And since that he hard, he was my Son,
By a Gentleman or two, this other day:
He thought that it should be very well done,
To let me have knowledge thereof by the way.
And willed me if that I would any thing
Of him to be done of me in this matter:
That then he his Servant such word should bring
As at his coming he might do hereafter.
I bade him thank his Master most hattelye
And sent him, by him a piece of Venison:
For that he vouchsafed to write so gently,
Touching the marrying and state of my Son,
But notwithstanding I sent him no Money,
To pay such debts as my Son did own,
Because he had me forsaken utterly,
And me for his good Father would not know,
And said that with him I would not make,
From that day forward, buring my life
But as he had brewed, that so be should bake,
Since of hys own choosing, he got him a wife.
Thus what his Servant from the departed
Into my Chambre I went again,
And there a great while I pitterly weeped,
This news to me was so great pain:
And thus with these words I began to moon,
Lamenting and mourning myself all alone.
O wadnes, O doting of those young folk
O my ●●es without wit, advise, and discretion,
With whom their parents can bear no stroke
In these first Matrimonial conjunction
They know not what misery grief and unquietness
Will hereafter ensue, of their extreme foolysshenes,
Of all such labours, they be clean ignorant,
Which in the nourishing and keeping of Children
their great charges, it is convenient
Either of them henceforth to sustain:
Concerning expenses bestowed in a house
They perceive as little as doth the Mouse.
On the one side, the wife will brawl and scold,
On the other side the Infant will cry in the Cradle:
Anon when the Child wareth somewhat old,
For meat and drink, he begins to babbell.
Hereupon cometh it, that at markets and fairs
A Husband is forced to buy many wares.
Yet for all this hath my foolish Son
As wise a woodcock, without any wit,
Despising his Father's mind and opinion,
Married a wife for him most unfyete,
Supposing that mirth to be eveciasting,
Which then at the first was greatly pleasing.
How they two will live, I can not tell,
Whereto they may trust, they have nothing
My mind gyueth me, that they will come devil,
At length by their father for want of livings,
But my Son doubtless, for any thing that I know▪
Shall reap in such wise as he did sow,
True he shall find, that Hippon●rtes did write
Who said with a wife are two days of pleasure
The first is the joy of the Marriage day and night
The second to be at the wife's Sepulture:
And this by experience he shall prove true,
That of his Bridal great evyiles do ensue.
And (as I suppose,) it will prove in his life,
When he shall wish that to him it may chance,
Which unto Eupolis and also his wife,
The night they were wedded, fell for a vengeance
Who with the heavy thine of the Gedde were slain,
As the Poet Ovid in these two Verses makes plain,
Si tibi coniugii nox prima, novissima vite,
Eupolis, hoc periit, & nova nupta modo.
ovidius writing against one Ibis his enemy
That the first night of his Marriage did wish
The last of his life might be certainly.
For so (quoth he) did Eupolis and his wife perish.
Yet to my Soon I pray God to send
Because thereunto me Nature doth bind:
Though he hath offended, a better end,
Then Eupolis and his wife did find.
And now I shall long ever anon,
Till some of those quarters come riding hither,
Unto the which my Son is gone,
To know how they do live together.
But I am fasting, and it is almost noon
And more than time that I had dined:
Wherefore from hence I will go soon,
I think by this time, my meat is burned.
O My sweet wife, my pretty Conye.
O my Husband, as pleasant as Honey.
O Lord wath pleasures and great commodity,
Are heaped together in matrimony?
How vehement, how strong a thing love is?
How many smyrkes, and dulsome kisses?
What smiling: what laughing?
What sport, pastime, and playing?
What tickling: what toying,
What dalyenge, what ioyenge?
The man with the wife is wholly delighted
And with many causes to laughter enforced.
When they two drink, they drink together
They never eat, but one with another.
Sometimes to their Garden forth they walk
And into the fields sometimes they go,
With merry tricks, and gestures they talk
As they do move their feet to and fro.
Sometimes they ride into the Country
Passing the time with mirth and sport,
And when with their friends, they have been merry▪
Home to their own house they do resort.
Sometimes abroad they go, to see plays,
And other trim sights, for to be hold:
When often they meet in the high ways
Much of their acquaintance they knew of old.
Sometimes to the Church, they do repair
To here the Sermon that shallbe made:
Though it to remember, they have small care,
For why? they be now, but few of that trade.
Sometimes at home, at cards they play
Sometimes at this game sometimes at that
They need not with sadness to pass the day
Nor yet to sit still, or stand in one plat.
And as for us wives, occasions do moan,
Sometimes with our gossips to make good cheer
Or else we did not, as did us behove,
For certain days and weeks in the years.
I think that a man might spend a whole day
Declaring the joys, and endless bliss:
Which married persons receive alway,
If they love faithfully, as meet it is.
wives can not choose, but love earnestly
If that their Husbands do all things well
Or eyes my sweet heart, we shall espy,
That in quietness they can not devil.
If they do not, it may be a shame
For I love you heartily I you assure:
Or else I were truly greatly to blame
You are so loving, so kind, and demure.
I trust that with neither hand or foot,
You shall see any occasion by me:
But that I love you even from the heart root
And during my life so intend to be,
Who then merry Marriage can discommend
And will not with Aristotle in his Ethics agreed▪
But will say, that misery is the end
When otherwise I find it to be:
A politic man will marye a wife
As the Philosopher makes declaration,
Not only to have children by his life,
But also for living, help, & sustentation.
Who will not with Herocles playntly confess,
That Mankind to Society is wholly adioynyng ?
And in this Society nevertheless:
Of worthy Wedlock took the beginning.
Without the which, no City can stand
Nor Household be perfect in any land.
Pythagoras, Socrates, and Crates also
Which truly were men of very small Substance
As I hard my father tell long ago,
Did take them wife's with a safe conscience:
And dwelled together, supposing that they
Were unto Philosophy, nother stop nor stay.
yea what can be more according to kind
Then a man to a woman himself to bind?
Away with those therefore that Marriage despyst
And of dangers thereof invent many lies.
But what is he that cometh yonder,
Do ye not think it is our man?
Somewhat there is that he hasteth hither,
For he makes asmuch speed as he can.
Master there is a Stranger at home
He would very fain with you talk:
For until that to him you do come
Forth of the doors he will not walk.
Come on then my wife, if it be so,
Let us depart hence for a season:
For I am not well till I do know
Of that man's coming the very reason.
Let them go both, and do what they will
And with communication fill their belly:
For I by Saint George will tarry here still,
In all my life I was never so weary.
I have this day filled so many Pots
With all manner wine, Ale, and Beer:
That I wished their bellies full of bots
Long of whom was made such cheer.
What kinds of meat, both flesh and fish
Have I poor knave to the table carried?
From time to time dish after dish,
My legs from going never ceased.
What running had I for Apples and Nuts?
What calling for Biskettes, Cumfettes and Caroweys?
A vengeance said I, light on their guts
That makes me to turn so many ways.
What crying was there for Cards and Dice?
What coysting, what ruffling made they within?
I counted them all not greatly wife.
For my head did almost ache with din.
What babbling, what jangling was in the house?
What quaffing, what bibbing with many a Cup?
That some lay along as drunk as a Mouse
Not able so much as their heads to hold up.
What dancing, what leaping, what iumping about
From bench to bench, and stool to stool?
That I wondered their brains did not fall out
When they so outrageously played the fool.
What juggling was there upon the boards?
What thrusting of knives through many a nose
What bearing of Forms? what holding of swords?
And putting of Botkyns through leg and hose?
Yet for all that they called for drink,
And said that they could not play for dry
That many at me did nod and wink
Because I should bring it by and by,
How so ever they sported the pot did still walk
If that were away, than all was lost:
For ever anon the jug was their talk,
They paste not who bore such charge and cost.
Therefore let him look his Purse be right good,
That it may discharge all that is spent,
Or else it will make his hair grow through his hood
There was such havoc made at this present,
But I am afeard my master be angry
That I did abide thus long behind:
Yet for his anger I pass not greatly,
His words they be but only wind,
Now that I have rested so long in this place
Home ward again. I will buy me apace.
WHere is my Husband, was he not here?
I marvel much whither he is gone
Than I perceive I am much the near,
But lo●, where he cometh hither alone.
Wots ye what Husband, from day to day,
With dainty dishes, our bodies have been filled:
What meat tomorrow next shall we assay?
Whereby we may then be both refresihed.
Do ye now provide and give a regarve
For Victuals hereafter to be prepared?
But that I know Husband, it lieth us in hand
Of things to come to have a consideration
I would not one's will you to understand
About such business my careful provision:
It is needful therefore to work we make haste
That to get both our livings we may know the cast.
To trouble me now, and make me vexed,
This mischievous mean hast thou invented.
What trouble for thee? what kind of vexation?
Have I to disquiet thee, caused at this present?
My only mind is, thou make expedition
To seek for our profit as is convenient.
Wherefore to thee I say once again,
Because to take pains thou art so loath,
By Christ it were best, with might and main
To fall to some work, I swear a great oath.
Yet for a time, if it may thee please
Let me be quit, and take mine ease.
Will't thou have us then through hunger he starved:
I would not we should for hungers be killed.
Then I say then, this gear go about,
And look that thou labour diligently:
Or else thou shalt shortly prove without doubt,
Thy sluggysshnes will not please me greatly.
beginnest thou even now to be painful & grievous
And to thy Husband, a woman so troublous?
What words have we here thou misbegotten,
Is there not already enough to the spoken?
O mirth, O joy, O pastime and pleasure,
How little a space, do you endure?
I see my commandment can take no place,
Thou shalt abye therefore, I swear by the Mass.
Alas good wife, good wife, alas, alas,
Strike not so hard, I pray thee heartily,
Whatsoever thou wilt have brought to pass
It shallbe done with all speed possibly.
Say these faggots man upon thy shoulder
And carry this wood from street to street:
To cell the same, that we both together,
Our living may get, as is most meet.
Hence Idiot hence, without more delay
What meanest thou thus, to stagger and stay?
O Lord what how miserable men be those
Which to their wives as wretches be wedded
And have them continually their mort all foes
Serving them thus, as Slaves that he hired.
Now by experience true I do find,
Which oftentimes unto me heretofore
My father did say, declaring his mind
That in matrimony was pain evermore,
What shall I do most pitiful Creature?
just cause I have alas to lament:
That frantic woman my death will procure
If so he this day without gain be spent
For unless for my wood some Money be taken
Like a dog, with a Cudgel I shallbe beaten.
Ho thou good fellow which standest so nigh
Of these heavy bundelles ease my sore back:
And somewhat therefore give me by and by
Or else I die, for Silver I do lack.
Now that I have some Money received
For this my burden home I will go:
And jest that my wife be discontented,
What I have take, I will her show.
Wyfe I am come, I went a long way
And here is the profit, and gains of this day.
Why thou lout, thou fool, thou whoreson folte,
Is this thy wood money, thou peevish Dolt?
Thou shalt smart for this gear, I make God a vow
Thou knowest no more to cell wood, then doth the sow
By God's precious I will not unwisely suffes
To do as I have done, any longer.
Why dost thou rise against me Villain?
Take heed I scrache not out thy eyes twain.
Scratch and thou dare, for I have a knife,
Perchance I will rid the of thy life.
Slay me with thy knife, thou shitten Dastard?
Dost thou think to find me such a Dissarde?
By Cox bones I will make thy skin to rattle,
And the brains in thy Soull more deeply to sattell.
Good wife be content, forgive my this fault
I will never again do that which is nought.
Go to foolish Calf, go to, and upryse,
And put up thy knife, I the advise.
I will do your commandments whatsoever.
Hence away then, and fill this with water.
O merciful God, in what lamentable state
Is he, of whom the wife is the master?
Would God I had been predestinate,
On my Marriage day, to have died with a Fever.
O wretched creature, what may I do?
My grievous wife shall I return unto?
Lo wife behold without further delay
The water ye sent for, here I do bring.
What I said what meaneth this weeping?
What aileth the to make all this crying?
I weep not forsooth, not cry not as yet.
Not, nor thou wilt not, if thou haste any weigh,
It is not thy weeping, that can aught avail,
And therefore this matter no longer be wail.
Come of I say, and run to the river
And wash these clothes in the water.
Wife I will thither high me fast.
Yet I advise thee, thou Cullion make haste.
O how unhappy and eke unfortunate
Is the most part of married men's condition?
I would to death I had been agate
When my Mother in be aring me made lamentation.
What shall I do whither shall I turn,
Most careful man now under the Sky?
In the flaming fire, I had rather burn,
Then with extreme pain, live so heavily,
There is no wyfte, to my wife I must go
Whom that I did wed, I am full●●o.
Where are ye wife, your clothes are washed clean
Is white as a lily without spot or vein.
Thou thief, thou caitiff, why is not this place,
washed as fair as all the rest,
Thou shalt for this gear now smoke apace
By gys I swear, thou brutysshe Beast.
Alas, alas, I am almost quite dead,
My wife so pytyfully hath broken my head.
Well I perceive, the rhyme will away
And into the Country to go I have promised
Look therefore thou go not from hence to days
Till home again I am returned.
Take heed I say, this House thee retain,
And stir not for any thing out of my door:
Until that I come hither again,
As thou wilt be rewarded therefore.
The slyinge and fiend go with my wife
And in her journey ill may she speed:
I pray God almighty to shorten her life
The earth at no time doth bear such a weed.
Although that I be a Gentleman borne
And come by my Ancestors of a good blood,
Yet am I like to wear a Coat torn
And hither and thither go catye wood.
But rather than I this life will abide
To morrow morning I do intend,
Home to my Father again to ride,
If some man to me his Horse will lend.
She is to her gossips gone to make merry,
And there she will be for three or four days:
She cares not though I do now miscarye
And suffer such pain and sorrow always.
She leaveth to me neither Bread nor drink
But such as I judged no body would eat:
I might by the wails lie dead and stink
For any great wholesomeness in my meat.
She walketh a broad, and taketh her pleasure
Herself to cherysshe is all her care:
She passeth not what griefs I endure,
Or how I can live with naughty fare:
And since it is so, without further delay
To my father to morrow I will away.
HO, ho, ho, what a fellow am I?
Geue row me I saye both more and lesse:
My strength and power hence to the Sky
No eacthly tongue can well express.
O what inventious, crafts and wiles,
Is there contained within this head?
I know that he is within few miles
Which of the same is thoroughly sped.
O, it was all my study day and night
cunningly to bring this matter to pass:
In all the earth, there is no wight
But I can make to cry alas.
This man and wife, that not long ago
Fallen in this place together by the ears:
It was only I that this strife did sow
And have been about it certain years.
For after that I had taken a small:
Of their good will and fervent love,
My thought I should not tarry in hell
But unto debate them shortly move,
O it was I that made him to despise
All wisdom, goodness, virtue and learning
That be afterward could in no wise
One's in his heart fancy teaching.
O it was I, that made him refuse
The wholesome menytion of his Father dear
And caused him still of a wife to muse
As though she should be his joy and there.
O it was I, that made him go hence,
And suppose that his father was very unkind,
It was I, that did oryve him to such expense,
And made him as bore, as an ape is behind.
And now that I have this business ended
And joined him and his wise together:
I think that I have my part well played,
None of you all would do it better.
Ho, ho, ho, this well favoured heads of mine
What thing soever it hath in hand:
Is never troubled with Ale or Wine,
Neither by Sea, nor yet by land.
I tell you I am a marvelous body,
As any is at this day living:
My head doth devise each thing so trimly,
That all men may wonder of the ending,
O I have such fetches, such toys in this head
Such crafty devices and subtle train:
That whom so ever of you I do wed,
ye are like at my hands to take small gain.
There is no gentleman, knight, or Lord:
There is no Duke, Earl, or king:
But if I list, I can with one word,
Shortly send unto their lodging.
Some I disquiet with Coveitousnes,
Some with wrath, pride and lechery,
And some I do thrust into such distress
That he feeleth only pain and misery.
Some I allure to have their delight
Always in Glotonye, Envy and murdre:
And those things to pracise with all their might
Either by land, or else by water.
Ho, ho, ho, there is none to be compared,
To me I tell you, in any point:
With a great sort myself I have tried,
That boldly ventured many a joint.
And when for a long time we had wrestled
And showed our strength on either side,
Yet often times a fall they received,
When through my policy their feefe did slide.
Wherefore (my dear children) I warn ye all,
Take heed, take heed of my temptation:
For commonly at the last ye have the fall
And also brought to Desperation.
O it is a sorye for many to strive
And think of me to get the upper hand:
For unless that God make them to thrive
They can not against me stick or stand.
And though that God on hye have his dominion
And ruleth the world every where:
Yet by your leave, I have a portion,
Of this same earth that standeth here.
The kingdom of God is above in Heaven
And mine is I tell you beneath in Hell:
But yet a greater place if he had dealt even
He should have given me and mine to devil,
For to my Palace of every Nation
Of what degree or birth so ever they be.
Come running in with such festination,
That other whiles they amazed me,
O all the Iewes, and all the Turks,
Yea and a great part of Christian doom
When they have done my will, and my works
In the end they fly hither all and some.
There is no miunte of the day
There is no minute of the night:
But that in my Palace there is alway
Crowding together a marvelous sight,
They come on thicker, than swarms of Bees,
And make such a noise and crying out:
That many a one lieth on his knees,
With thousands kept under, and closed about
Not so much as my parlours, halls, and every chamber
By Porches, my galeryes, and my court:
My entries, my kitchen, and my Larder,
But with all manner people be filled throughout.
What shall I say more, I can not tell,
But of this (my children) I am certain,
There comes more in one hour unto Hell,
Then unto Heaven, in a month or twain.
And yet for all this, my Nature is such
That I am not pleased with this company,
But out of my kingdom I must walk much
That one or other I may take tardy,
Ho, ho, ho, I am never once afraid
With these my Claws you for to touch,
For I will not leave till you be paid,
Such treasure, as is within my Pouche.
The world is my Son, and I am his Father
And also the flesh, is a daughter of mine
It is I alone, that taught them to gather,
Both Gold and Silver that is so fine.
Wherefore I suppose that they love me well
And my Commandments gladly obey,
That at the last then unto Hell,
They may come all the ready way.
But now (I know) since I came hither
There is such a multitude at my gate,
That I must again repair down thither
After mine old manner and rate.
How glad am I, that my journey is ended,
Which I was about this whole dare?
My Horse to stand still I never suffered,
Because I would come to the end of my way,
But yet I am sorry that I can not find,
My loving Father at home at his place:
That unto him I may break my mind,
And let him know my miserable case.
I have been wild, I have been wanton,
I have ever followed my fancy and will:
I have been to my Father a froward Son
And from day to day continued still.
I have always proudly disdained those
That in my madness gave me good counsel
I counted them most my mortal foes,
And stoutly against them did rebel.
The thing that was good, I greatly hated
As one which lacked both wit and reason,
The thing that was evil I ever loved
Which now I see is my confusion.
I could not abide of the School to hear
Masters and teachers my heart abhorred,
We thought the Book was not fit gear,
For my tender fingers to have handled,
I counted it a pleasure to be daintily fed
And to be clothed to costly artaye:
I would most commonly slug in my bed,
Until it were very far forth day.
And to be short, anon after this,
There came such fancies in my brain:
That to have a wife whom I might kiss
I reckoned to be the greatest gain.
But yet alas I was quite deceived
The thing itself doth easily appear:
I would alas I had been buryeb,
When to my Father, I gave not ear.
That which I had, I have clean spent,
And kept so much riot with the same:
That now I am fain, a Coat that is rend
At as to wear for very shame.
I have not a cross left in my purse,
To help myself now in my need:
That well I am worthy of God's curse,
And of my Father to have small meed.
But except m●●e eyes do we beguile,
That man is my Father, whom I do see:
And now that he comes, without craft or wile,
To him I will hende on either knee.
Ah Father, Father, my Father most dear,
Ah mine own child, with the what there?
All such sayings as in my mind,
At the first time ye studied to sattell,
Most true alas, I do them find,
As though they were written in the Gospel.
Those words my Son, I have almost forgotten,
Stand up therefore, and kneel no longer:
And what it was I spoke so often,
At two or there words, recite to thy Father.
If that ye be Father well remembered
As the same I believe ye can not forget:
You said that so soon as I were married,
Much pain and trouble thereby I should get.
Haste thou by proof soon, this thing tried?
Yea, alas to much I have experyenced:
My wife, I did wed, all full of frenzy,
My silly poor shoulders, hath now so bruised,
That like to a cripple, I moon me weakly,
Being full often with the staff thwacked:
She spareth no more my flesh and bone,
Than if my body were made of Stone,
Her will, her mind, and her Commandment,
From that day hither, I have fulfilled:
Which if I did not, I was bitterly shent,
And with many strokes grievously punished:
That would God the hour when I was married,
In the midst of the Church I might have fynked.
I think there is no man under the Son
That here on the earth beareth life:
Which would do such drudgery, as I have done,
At the unkind words of such a wife,
For how I was used, and in what wise
A day to declare will not suffice.
If this be not true, as I have spoken
To my good neighbours I me report,
Who either whiles when I was smitten
My wife to be gentle, did then exhort:
For glad I was to abide all labour
Whereby the less might be my dolour.
Wherefore good Father I you humbly desire
To have pity of me and some compassion?
Or else I am like to lie fast in the mire,
Without any succour or consolation:
For at this hour I have not a penny,
Myself to help in this great misery.
For so much as by my advise and counsel
In no manner wise thou wouldest be ruled:
Therefore to the I can not do well,
But let the still suffer, as thou haste deserved
For that thou hast suffered, is yet nothing
To that tribulation which is behind coming.
Alas Father, what shall I do?
My wits of themselves can not devise,
What thing I were best to go unto,
Whereof an honest living may arise:
Wherefore gentle Father in this distress,
Somewhat assuage mine heaviness.
What should I do I can not tell,
For now that thou hast taken a wife
With me thy father thou mayst not devil,
But always with her spend thy life.
Thou mayst not again thy wife forsake,
Which during life to the thou didst take.
Alas I am not able thus to endure
Though thereunto I were never so willing:
For my wife is of such a crooked nature
As no woman else, is this day living,
And if the very truth I shall confess
She is to me an evil that is endless.
If that thou thinkest thyself alone
Only to lead this irksome life.
Thou mayest learn what grief, sorrow and moan,
Socrates had with Xantippa his wife.
Her Husband full oft she taunted and checked
And as the Book saith unhonestly mocked.
I can not tell, what was Socrates wife
But mine I do know alas to well,
She is one that is evermore full of strife
And of all Scolders beareth the Bell.
When she speaketh best, then brawleth her tongue
When she is still she fighteth apace:
She is an old Witch though she be young,
No mirth with her, no joy or solace.
I can not my Son thy state redress,
Me thy Father thou didst refuse:
Wherfore now helpe thy owne fooly shenes,
And of thy wife no longer muse.
My wife went forth no to the Country
With certain gossips to make good cheer,
And bade me at home still to be,
That at her return, she might find me there:
And if that she do take me from home,
My bones alas she will make to crackell:
And me her Husband as a stark mome,
With knocking and mocking she will handle.
And therefore if I may not here remain,
Yet loving Father, give me your reward,
That I may with speed ride have again,
That to my wife's words, have some regard.
If that at the first thou wouldest have been ordered.
And done as thy Father counseled thee:
So wretched a life had never chanced
Whereof at this present thou complainest to me.
But yet come on, to my house we will be going
And there thou shalt see, what I will give:
A little to help thy needy living:
Since that in such penury thou dost live,
And that once done, thou must hence again
For I am not he, that will the retain.
THis Interlude here good gentle audience,
Which presently before you we have played:
Was set forth with such care and diligence,
As by us truly might well be showed.
Short it is I deny not, and full of brevity
But if ye mark thereof the matter,
Then choose ye can not, but see plainly
How pain and pleasure be knit together.
By this little play, the Father is taught,
After what manner his Child to use:
Lest that through cockering at length he be brought
His Father's Commandment to refuse,
Here ye may learn a witty lesson,
Betimes to correct his Son being tender:
And not let him be lost and undone,
With wantonness of mischief the Mother,
For as long as the twig is gentle and plyent
(Every man knoweth this by experience:)
With small force and strength it may be bend
Putting thereto but little diligence.
But after that it waxeth somewhat digger
And to east his branches largely beginneth,
It is scant the might of all thy power,
That one kowghe thereof▪ easily bendeth,
This twig to a child may well be applied
Which in his childhood, and age of Infancy:
With small correction may be amended,
Emoracing the School with heart and body.
Who afterward with over much liberty,
And ranging abrobe with the Bridle of will.
despiseth all virtue, searnyuge and honesties,
And also his Father's mind to fulfil.
Whereby at the length it so falleth out
That this the young stripling after that day:
Runs into confusion without any doubt
And like for evermore quite to decay.
Wherefore take heed all ye that be parents
And follow a part after my counsel,
Instruct your Children and make them students
That unto all goodness they do not rebel
Remember what writeth Solomon the wise,
Oui parcit Virgae, odith filium.
Therefore for asmuch as ye can devise
Spare not the Rod, but follow wisdom.
Further ye young men and Children also
listen to me and hearken a while,
What in few words for you I will show,
Without any flatterye, fraud, or guile.
This Richemans' Son whom we did set forth,
Here evidently before your eyes:
Was (as it chanced) nothing worth,
Given to all naughtiness, vice, and lies.
The cause whereof was this for a truth
His time full idly he did spend,
And would not study in his youth,
Which might have brought him to a good end.
His father's commandment he would not obey,
But wantouly followed his fantasy:
For nothing that he could do or say,
Would bring this Child to honesty.
And at the last (as here ye might see:)
Upon a wife he fired his mind,
Thinking the same to be felicity,
When in deed misery came bebind.
For by this wife be carefully lived,
Who under his Father did want nothing:
And in such sort was hereby tormented
That ever a none, he went lamenting.
His Father did will him lightness to leave
And only to give himself unto study:
But yet unto virtue he would dot cleave,
Which is commodious for soul and body.
You heard that by Sentences ancient and old
He stirred his Son as he best thought:
But he as an unthryfe stowte and bold,
His bolsome counsel did set at naught.
And since that he despised his Father
God unto him did suddenly then send:
Such poverty with a wife, and grief together
That shame and sorrow was his end.
Wherefore to conclude, I warn you all
By your loving parents, always be ruled:
Or else be well assured of such a fall?
As unto this youngman worthily channced.
Worship God daily which is the chief thing
And his holy laws do not offend:
Look that ye truly serve the king,
And all your faults be glad to amend.
Moreover, be true of hand and tongue,
And learn to do all things that be honest,
For no time so fit, as when ye be young,
Because that age only is the aptest.
I have no more, to speak at this season,
F ye good wyll these thynges I dyd saye.
Because I do see that virtue is geason,
With most men and children, at this day.
And last of all, to make an end,
O God to the we most humbly pray:
That to Queen Elizabeth thou do send
Thy lively path, and perfect way,
Grant her in health to reign.
With us many years most prosperoustye:
And after this life for to attain,
The eternal bliss, joy, and felicity.
Our bishops, pastors, and ministers also
The true understanding of thy word,
Both night and day, now mercifully show,
That their life and preaching may godly accord,
The Lords of the Counsel, and the Nobility,
Most heavenly Father, we thee desire:
With grace, wisdom, and godly policy,
Their hearts and minds, always inspire.
And that we thy people duly considering
The power of our Queen and great authority,
May please thee and serve her without feigning,
living in peace, rest, and tranquilytie.
WHy doth the world study vainglory to aff●yne
The prosperity whereof is short and transitory
Whose mighty power, doth fall down again,
Like earthen ports, that breaketh suddenly.
Believe rather words that be written in Ice
Then the wretched world with his subtylytie:
deceitful in Gi●ces, men only to entice,
destitute of measure credence and fidelity.
give credit more to men of true judgements
Then to the worldly renown and joys:
Replenys shed with dreams and vain intentes,
Aboun dynge in wicked and noughtye toyes.
Where is now Solomon in wisdom so excellence
Where is now Samyson, in battle so strong?
Where is now Absolons in beauty resplendent?
Where is now good Iousthas hid so long?
Where is now Cesar in victory triumphing?
Where is now Tines, in dishes so dainty?
Where is now Tully in Gloquence exceeding?
Where is now Article, learned so deeply?
What Emperoves, kings, and Dukes in times past?
What Earies and Lords, and Captains of war?
What Popes and bishops, all at the last,
In the twy●●kynge of an eye are fled so far?
How short a Feast is this worldly ioyenge?
Even as it shadewe 〈◊〉 passeth away,
Depry●●ge a 〈◊〉 of byttes everlasting
Leading to dashed 〈◊〉 not to day.
O meat of worms, O heap of dust,
O like to dew climb not to high:
To live to morrow, thou canst not trust,
Therefore now betime help the needy
The fles shely Beauty, whereat thou dost wondre,
In holy Scripture is likened to Hay:
And as a Leaf in a stormy weather,
So is man's life blown clean a way,
call nothing thine that may be lost,
The world doth give and take again:
But set thy mind on the holy Ghost,
Despise the world that is so vain.