HEnce Clouds of melancholy
I'll be no longer subject to your schisms,
But thou dear soul, whose nerves and arteries
n dead resoundings summon vp reuenge,
And thou shalt hate, be but appeased sweet hearse
The dead remembrance of my living father
And with a heart as air, swift as thought
I'll excuse justly in such a cause
Where truth leadeth, what coward would not fight
Ill acts move some, but mine's's a cause is right
See the powers of heaven in apparitions
And fight full aspects as incensed
That I thus tardy am to do an act
which justice and a father's death excites,
Like threatening meteors antedates destruction.
Again I come, I come, I come,
be silent thou effigies of fair virtue
That like a goodly syen wear't plucked up
By murderous, winds, infectious blasts and gusts
I will not leave thee, until like thyself,
I've made thy enemies, than hand in hand
we'll walk to paradise— again more blessed
I'll to yond promont's top, and their survey,
What shipwrecked passengers the belgic sea
Casts from her foamy entrails by mischance.
Roar sea and winds, and with celestial fires,
Quicken high projects, with your highest desires.
Yet this is somewhat like, but brambles, you are to busy, were I at Luningberg, and you catched me thus, I should go near to ask you at whose suit, but now I am out of scent, And fear no sergeants, for I think these woods and waters are common wealths that need no such subjects nay they keep not a Constable at sea, but a man's overwhelmed without order.— Well, dry land I love thee, though thou swarm with millions of devourers, yet hast thou no such swallow as the sea.
Thou liest, there lives upon the earth more beasts
With wide devouring throats, then can be found
Of ravenous fishes in the Ocean:
The huge Leviathan is but a shrimp
Compared with our Balena on the land
I am of your mind; but the Whale has a wide mouth
To swallow fleeting waters, and poor fish,
But we have Epicures and Cormorants,
Whom neither sea, nor land can hardly serve
They feed them fat, while arms and honour starve,
Desert looks pale as death, like those bare bones.
Ha— amazed.
Seest thou them trembling, slave here were Arms?
That served the troth less state of Luningberg.
So do I sir serve the Duke's son of the state,
Ha, ha, I laugh to see how dastard fear
Hastens the death doomed wretch to his distress,
Say didst thou serve the duke of Luningberg.
His son Otho sir, I'm a poor follower of his
And my master is airing of himself at your Cell,
Is he that scaped the wrack young Luningberg?
ay sir, the same sir, you are in the right sir.
Revenge I kiss thee, vengeance y'are at liberty,
Wouldst thou having lost a father as I have,
Whose very name dissolves my eyes to tears
Could duty and thy love so different prove,
Not to avenge his death whose better part
Was thine, thou his, when he fell part of thee
Fell with him each drop, being partly thine own
And wouldst not be revenged;
Yes on the murderer,
On him, or any man that is affied
Has but one ounce of blood, of which he's part
He was my father, my heart still bleeds
Nor can my wounds be stopped, till an incision,
I've made to bury my dead father in:
Therefore without protraction, sighing, or excuses
Swear to be true, to aid assist me, not to stir
Or contradict me in any enterprise
I shall now undertake, or hereafter.
I swear.
Were I persuaded that thou couldst shed tears,
As doth the Egyptian serpents near the Nile;
If thou wouldst kiss and kill, embrace and stab,
Than thou shouldst live, for my invictive brain
Hath cast a glorious project of revenge
Even as thou kneel'st, wilt thou turn villain speak.
Oh sir when was I otherwise, from my creation nothing else, I was made of no other stuff, villainy is my only patrimony: though I be an irreligious slave, yet I bear a religious name, though I want courage, yet in talk, I'll put them all down, though I have nothing in me that is good:
Yet I'll—
Forbear thy Lord is coming i'll go in
And royally provide for such a Prince,
Say thou hast met the kindest host alive,
One that adores him, with no less zeal
Than rich men gold, or true religious heaven
Dissemble cunningly, and thou shalt prove
the minion of my thoughts, friend to my love.
Well sir ne'er fear me this is an excellent fellow
A true villain fitter for me then better company,
This is Hans Hoffman's son.
that stole down his father's Anatomy from the gallows at Leningberg, 'tis the same upon the dead scull there's the iron Crown that burned his brains out, what will come of this, I neither know nor care: but here comes my lord. How cheers my most noble, my most honourable, my most gracious; yea my most grieved prince.
A fearful storm
And full of horror.
Trust me Lorrique besides the inly grief
That swallows my content when I perceive
How greedily the fierce unpitying sea, and waves,
Devoured our friends another trouble grieves my vexed eyes
With ghastly apperitions, strange aspects
Which either I do certainly behold
Or else my soul divining some sad fate
Fills my imaginary powers with shapes
Hideous and horrid.
My lord let your heart have no commerce with that
Mart of idle imaginations, rouse up your nobleness
To apprehend comfort, kindness ease and what otherwise
Entertained so solitary a place as this, can the
Ancient subject of the state of Leningberg collect
'tis I take it the son to that vice-admiral that
Turned a terrible pirate.
Let us turn back into the sea again
Yielding our bodies to the ruthless sound
That hath divided us and our late friends
Rather than see choice Hoffman.
Courage brave Otho, he'll use thee kindly.
Here he comes, sweet host here is the Duke's heir of
Leningberg do homage and after entertain him and me his
Follower with the most conspicuous pleasures
That lies in thy poor ability.
Before I speak to my most sacred Lord
I join my soft lips to the solid earth
And with an honoured benison I bless
The hour, the place, the time of your arrive
For now my savage life, lead amongst beasts
shallbe turned civil by your gracious help
I see thy true heart's love drop down in tears
And this embrace shows I am free from fears
My disturbed blood runs smoothly through my veins
And I am bold to call thee friend, bold to entreat
Food for by wrack I have lost ship, friends and meat.
You that attend my Lord enter the cave
Bring forth the homely Cakes these hands prepared
While I entreat his excellence sit down
Villain bring nothing but a burning Crown.
What's that thou bidst him bring, a burning Crown
Still you suspect my harmless innocence
What though your father with the power state
And your just uncle duke of Brusia
After my father had in thirty fights
Filled all their treasures with foemen's spoils
And paid poor soldiers from his treasury
What though for this his merits he was named
A prescript out law for a little debt
Compelled to fly into the Belgic sound
And live a pirate.
Prithee speak no more
Thou raisest new doubts in my troubled heart
By repetition of thy father's wrongs
Then he was wronged you grant but not by you,
You virtuous gentleman
Sat like a just judge of the under-shades,
And with an unchanged Rhadamantine look,
Beheld the flesh mangled with many scars
Pared from the bones of my offended father
And when he was a bare anatomy,
You saw him chained unto the common gallows,
Hoffman.
Nay hear me patiently kind Lord
My innocent youth as guilty of his sin,
Was in a dungeon hidden from the sun,
And there I was condemned to endless night
Except I passed my vow never to steal
My father's fleshless bones from that base tree
I know nor who it was, I guess your mother,
She kneeled and wept for me, (but you did not)
Beseeching from that vow I might be freed
Then did I swear if Nations foreign power
Compelled me to take down those naked bones
I never would release them from those chains
Never entomb them, but immediately
Remove them from that gallows to a tree
I kept mine oath: look Luningberg; 'tis done
Behold a father hanged up by his son
Oh horrible aspect murderer stand off
I know thou meanst me wrong
My Lord behold these precious twines of light
Burnt out by day eclipsed whenas the sun
For shame obscured himself this deed was done
Where none but screech owls sung, thou receptacle
thou organ of the soul;
Rest, go rest, and you most lovely Couplets
Legs and arms reside, for ever here
This is my last farewell, what do you weep?
Oh Lorrique I am betrayed, slave touch me not
Not touch thee? yes, and thus trip down thy pride.
You placed my father in a Chair of state:
This earth shall be your throne, villain come forth
And as thou mean'st to save thy forfeit life,
Fix on thy Master's head my burning Crown,
While in these Cords, I in eternal bands
Bind fast his base and coward trembling hands.
Lorrique, art thou turned villain to my life.
I'll turn any thing sir rather than nothing, I was taken life promised to betray you, and I love life so well, that I would not lose it for a Kingdom, for a king's Crown, an Empire.
On with the Crown.
Oh torture above measure.
My father felt this pain, when thou hadst pleasure.
Thy father died for piracy.
Oh peace, had he been judge himself, he would have showed
He had been clearer than the Crystal morn!
But wretches sentenced never find defence,
however guiltless be their innocence,
No more did he, no more shalt thou, no ruth
Pitied his winter age, none helps thy youth.
Oh Lorrique torture, I feel an Aetna burn
Within my brains, and all my body else
Is like a hill of Ice, all these Belgic seas
That now, surround us cannot quench this flame
Death like a tyrant seizeth me unawares,
My sinews shrink like leaves parched with the sun
My blood dissolves, nerves and tendons fail
Each part's disjointed, and my breath expires
Mount soul to heaven, my body burns in fire.
he's gone.
Go let him come Lorrique
This but the prologue to th'ensuing play.
The first step to revenge, this scene is done
Father I offer thee thy murderer's son.
Princes of Saxony and Austria,
Though your own words of sufficient weight
To justify the honourable love borne by Lodowick to bright Lucybell,
Yet since your parents live and as I hear
There is between them some dissension,
Blame us not for detaining you thus long
Till we had notice how the business stood
Your royal entertain great Ferdinand,
Exceeding expectation in our stay,
Bind us to thanks, and if my brother please
To hold his challenge for a Tournament
In praise of Lucibella's excellence,
No doubt our father and the Austrian duke
Will be in person at so royal sport.
We trust they will.
I do assure your grace
The Austrian and the duke of Saxony
By true report of pilgrims at my cell
From either of their courts set hitherward
Some six days since.
Thanks Rodorick for this news
They are more welcome than the sad discourse
Of Leningberg our nephews timeless wreck
Which addeth sorrow to the mourning griefs
Abound in us for our Duchess death.
I truly Princes, my father has had but hard luck since your coming to his court, for aught I know you are bred of ill weather, come before you are sent for, yet if my most gracious father say you are welcome, I his more gracious son take you by the hands, though I can tell you my mother's death comes somewhat near my heart, but I am a prince, and princes have power more than common people to subdue their passions.
We know your worthiness is experienced in all true wisdom.
True, I am no fool, I have been at Wittenberg, where wit grows.
Peace thou unshapen honour, my state's shame,
My ages corrosive, and my black sin's curse,
Oh hadst thou never been, I had been then,
A happy childless man, now among men,
I am the most unhappy, one that knows
No end of mine, and of my people's woes.
I tell you Princess, and most gracious maid;
I do not wear these sable ornaments
For Isabella's death, though she were dear,
Nor are my eyelids overflown with tears,
For Otho of Luningberg, wracked in the sound,
Though he were all my hope: but here's my care,
A witless fool must needs be Prussia's heir.
Well, and you were not my father,— s'nailes, and I would not draw rather than put up the fool, would I might never win this lady at tilt and tournament: as Knights, I defy you both, for her; even you Lodowick, that loves her, and your brother that loves you: look to me, Stilt, and I have practised these two days: s'nailes god forgive me to swear, she shall not be carried away so.
We are glad to hear your grace so resolute.
As I am a Prince, and a Duke's heir, though I say it myself, I am as full of resolution as the proudest of you all
I thank Prince Lodowick he has bound my youth
To be the conquerors prize, and if my stars
Allot me to be yours, I will be proud,
For howsoe'er you seem not fashioned
Like me, and cunning Courtiers; I protest,
By some small love I bear thee in mine eye,
Your worthy beauty, wealth and dignity.
Heart you would not unhorse Hercules for her father, i'll practise again at Danzig, you say in the Duke's mead; i'll meet thee Mathias: there's my glove For a gauntlet, though my father count me a fool, you shall find me none.
Would I might never find thee any thing,
For thou indeed art nothing in esteem,
My sad soul sinks with sorrow at thy sight,
Health to the right gracious, generous, virtuous, and valorous Ferdinand Duke of Prussia.
hermit dost thou not know this young man's face?
is't not Lorrique, that met us at thy cell
With letters from our brother Luningberg?
It is that gentleman.
I am no less.
thou saidst thou wast my nephews play fellow,
Appointed to await his virtuous person,
How is it then thou wert so ill advised
To take the land away, and forsake thy Lord?
Whom I have never seen, nor never may,
Though in his life my hope and comfort lay.
Be it known right gracious: Lorrique had never so little grace, as to leave his loved lord for weather or water, for torture or fire, for death or for life, since I first came to move in a pilgrim's proportion; much disguised, being so proper a man: but only for those six words; that I was sent wholly to give notice of his coming.
But thou hast left him now sunk in the sea.
I left the ship sunk, and his highness saved, for when all hope had left Master and pilot, sailer and swabber, I caused my Lord to leap into the cock, and for fear she should be sunk with too much company; I capered out and cut the cable: rouse, quoth the ship against the rocks, roomer cry I in the cock, my Lord wept for the company: I laughed to comfort him; last by the power of heaven, goodness of stars, kindness of winds, mercy of the waves, our cock and we were cast ashore under Reeshopscurre, we clambered up, but having scaped drowning, were in danger of killing.
What there betided you?
Marry my Lord a young villain, son of a damned pirate, a maid ravisher.
Be brief, what was he?
Clois Hoffman.
Oh my heart! did the false rebel hurt his sovereign's son?
Noah my Lord, the prince so hought and host him, that he had no other help but to his heels, and then I, my good Lord, being roe-footed, outstripped him in running, tripped him by strength, and in fine, finely cut's throat.
Where is the villain's body?
Marry even heaved over the scar, and sent a swimming toward Burtholme, his old habitation; if it be not intercepted by some Scale, Shark, Sturgeon, or such like.
Where is our nephew?
He intends to stay at the same hermitage, where I saluted your excellence, with news of my lords excellencies intent, to visit you; for that his apparel is somewhat sea-sick, and he wants shift.
A chariot, and rich robes attend Lorrique.
And his reward, be thirteen hundred dollars,
For he hath driven dolour from our heart.
Princes, and Princess, in your kindest love,
Attend our person to the hermitage,
where we shall meet the heir of two great States,
Rich Luningberg, and warlike Prussia's,
Otho living, we'll disinherit our fond son:
And bless all Danzig, by our son elect,
hermit you have at home, a guest of ours,
Your little cell, is a great princes court;
Had you been there to entertain young Otho,
He would have took your welcome thankfully,
Where now he mourns, for want of company.
I will go on before my gracious Lord.
Nay I am jealous of my approaching joy,
And fearful, any eye but mine, should gain
The pleasure of my glad divining soul;
Forward come all, in my delight take part,
He that's now glad, adds joy to gladness heart.
If there live ere a surgeon that dare say
He could do better: i'll play Mercury,
And like fond Marsias flay the Quacksalver
There were a sort of filthy Mountebanks,
Expert in nothing but in idle words,
Made a day's work, with their incision knives
On my oppressed poor father: silly man,
Thrusting there dastard fingers in his flesh,
That durst not while he lived, behold his face;
I have fitted my anatomy
In a fair chain to; father this youth scorned
When he was set in an ascending throne,
To have you stand by him; would he could see,
How the case altars, you shall hang by him,
And hang afore him to, for all his pride,
Come image of bare death, join side, to side,
With my long injured father's naked bones;
He was the prologue to a Tragedy,
That if my destinies deny me not,
Shall pass those of Thyestes, Tereus,
Iocasta, or Duke Jason's jealous wife;
So shut our stage up, there is one act done
Ended in Otho's death; 'twas somewhat single;
I'll fill the other fuller, if Lorrique,
That I have late sworn to be murder's slave,
Swears he will protest me to be Otho's,
Whom Prussia his uncle unknown loves;
If I be taken for him well: Oh then!
Sweet vengeance make me happiest of all men:
Prussia, I come as comets against change:
As apparitions before mortal ends;
If thou accept me for thy nephew, so;
Uncle, i'll uncle thee of thy proud life.
Father farewell, i'll to the hermitage,
Where if I be received for Luningberg,
I will have thy dry bones, sanguined all o'er
With thy foe's blood, Rhamnusia help thy priest,
My wrong thou know'st, my willingness thou seest.
Come Stilt, bestir your stumps; you know I must be a tilter.
I my lord, I know you should be one, but I hope you are not so mad.
what dost thou count it madness to run atilt.
I my Lord, for you that cannot sit a hobby, you'll hardly manage your tilt-horse.
Why? they say Stilt, that stone Mares are gentler, see if thou canst get me one of them.
Not afore next grass; I could help you now to a stone mule, a stone ass.
Well, i'll try one course with thee at the half pike, and then go, come draw thy pike.
That's not your fit word; you must say, advance your pike, and you must be here sir, and here, you'll never learn for all my teaching.
I have answered you Stilt, that Princes have no need to be taught, and I have e'en determined with myself, not to run at tilt, lest I hazard my horse and harness: therefore i'll to the court, and only see my new cousin, that they said was drowned: and then retire to my Castle at Helsen, and there write a new poem, that I have taken pains in, almost these ten years: It is in praise of picktooths.
That will be excellent my Lord, the barbers will buy those poems abominably.
Nay sirrah, i'll get a patent from the Duke, my father, for the Cum Privilegio for that poem, Ad imprimendum solum; besides thou shalt have a privilege, that no man shall sell tooth picks without thy seal: my father says I am a fool, but I think I bestow my time to look out for setting a new nap upon his threadbare Common wealth: Who's that knocks? who dares disturb our honourable meditation? hark Stilt, dost thou see no noise?
No, but I hear a noise.
A hall then; my father and my new cousen: stand aside, that I may set my countenance, my beard brush and mirror, Stilt, that set my countenance right to the mirror of Knighthood, for your mirror of magistrates is somewhat to sober. how lik'st me?
Oh excellent! here's your casting bottle.
Sprinkle, good Stilt, sprinkle, for my late practice hath brought me into strange favour: ha mother of me, thou hadst almost blinded the eyes of excellence; but omnia bene, let them approach now, and I appear not like a Prince, let my father cashier me, as some say he will.
Cashier you? no, do but manage your body, and have here, and here your congees, and then quid sequitur, Stilt knows, and all the court shall see.
Ferdinand by the divine grace, prince of Heidelberg lord of Pomer, and Duke of Prussia, for sundry reasons him moving, the quiet state of his people especially: which as a witless and insufficient prince, disinherits Ierom Heidelberg his known son, and adopteth Otho of Iuningberg his sister's son, as heir, immediately to succeed after his death in all his provinces. God save Duke Ferdinand, and Otho his heir.
Amen, Heaven witness, how my heart is pleased,
With the conceit of Prussia's after-peace,
By this election.
Why? but hear you father.
Away, disturb us not, let's in and feast,
For all our country in our choice is blessed.
Why, but Stilt, what's now to be done Stilt?
Nay that's more than I know: this matter will trouble us more than all your poem of picktooths, s'nailes: you were better be unknighted then unprinced, I have lost all my hope of preferment, if this hold.
No more Stilt, I have it here; 'tis in my head, and out it shall not come, till red revenge in robes of fire, and madding mischief run and rave: they say I am a fool Stilt, but follow me; i'll seek out my notes of Machiavel, they say he's an odd politician.
i'faith he's so odd, that he hath driven even honesty from all men's hearts.
Well, sword come forth, and courage enter in,
Breast break with grief; yet hold to be revenged:
Follow me Stilt; widows unborn shall weep,
And beardless boys with armour on their backs
Shall bear us out, Stilt we will tread on stilts,
Through the purple pavement of the court,
Which shall be, let me see, what shall it be?
No court, but even cave of misery.
there's an excellent speech Stilt, follow me, pursue me, will acquire,
And either die, or compass my desire.
Oh brave master, not a Lord: O, Stilt will stalk, and make the earth a stage,
But he will have thee lord in spite of rage.
Sir since you are content, you here shall find,
A sparing supper, but a bounteous mind:
Bad lodging, but a heart as free, and generous,
As that which is fed with generous blood,
Your hermitage is furnished for a prince.
Last night this roof covered the sacred heads
Of five most noble, fair, and gracious Princes,
Duke Ferdinand himself, and Otho his nephew,
The sons of Saxon, and the Austrian Princess.
Oh god! that girl, which fled my Court and love,
Making love colour for her heedless flight,
Pardon great prince: are you the Austrian duke?
hermit I am, Saxons proud wanton sons
Were entertained like Priam's Firebrand
At Sparta: all our State gladly' appeared
Like cheerful Lacedaemon's, to receive
Those Daemons that with magic of their tongues,
Bewitched my Lucibell's my Helen's ears.
Who traveleth so late? who knocks so hard?
Turn to the east end of the Chapel, pray;
We are ready to attend you.
Which is the way to Danzig?
There is no way to Danzig you can find
Without a guide thus late, come near I pray,
look to our horses, by your leave master hermit,
We are soon bidden, and will prove bold guests:
God save you sir.
That should be Saxons tongue.
Indeed I am the Duke of Saxony.
Then art thou father to lascivious sons,
That have made Austrea childless.
O subtle duke, thy craft appears in framing thy excuse,
Thou dost accuse my young son's innocence:
I sent them to get knowledge, learn the tongues,
Nor to be metamorphized with the view
Of flattering beauty, peradventure painted.
No; I defy thee John of Saxony;
My Lucibell for beauty needs no art,
Nor do I think the virtues of her mind
Ever inclined to this ignoble course
But by the charms and forcings of thy sons.
Oh would thou durst maintain thy words proud Duke.
I hope great Princes, neither of you dare
Commit a deed so sacrilegious: This holy cell
Is dedicated to the son of peace;
The foot of war never profaned this floor,
Nor doth wrath here with his consuming voice
Affright these buildings; charity with prayer,
Humility with abstinence combined,
Are here the guardians of a grieved mind.
Father we obey thy holy voice;
Duke Iohn of Saxony, receive my faith;
Till our ears hear the true course thy sons
Have taken with my fond and misled child.
I proclaim truce, Why dost thou sullen stand?
If thou mean peace, give me thy Princely hand.
Thus do I plight thee troth, and promise peace,
Nay, but thy eyes agree not with thy heart;
In vows of combination, there's a grace
That shows the intention in the outward face,
Look cheerfully, or I expect no league.
First give me leave to view a while the person,
Of this Helmet, Austria note him well,
Is he not like your brother Rodorick?
he's like him, but I heard he lost his life
Long since in Persia, by the Sophy's wars.
I heard so much my Lords, but that report
Was purely feigned, spread by my erring tongue,
As double as my heart, when I was young,
I am that Rodorick that aspired your throne;
That vile false brother who with rebel breath,
Drawn sword, and treacherous heart threatened your death.
My brother I nay, then i'faith old Iohn lay by
Thy sorrowing thoughts, turn to thy wonted vein,
And be mad Iohn of Saxony again.
Mad Rodorick, art alive? my mother's son
Her joy and her last birth; oh she conjured me
To use thee thus, and yet I banished thee:
Body of me; I was unkind I know,
But thou deserv'st it then; but let it go:
Say thou wilt leave this life thus truly idle,
And live a Statesman, thou shalt share in reign,
Commanding all but me thy sovereign.
I thank your Highness; I will think on it:
But for my sins this sufferance is more fit.
Tut, title, tattle, tell not me of sin.
Now Austria once again thy Princely hand:
I'll look thee in the face, and smile, and swear,
If any of my sons have wronged thy child,
I'll help thee in revenging it myself;
But if as I believe they mean, but honour,
As it appeareth by these jousts proclaimed.
Then thou shalt be content to name him thine,
And thy fair daughter i'll account as mine.
Agreed.
Ah Austria! 'twas a world when you and I
Ran these Careers; but now we are stiff and dry.
I am glad you are so pleasant my good Lord.
'twas my old mood, but I was soon turned sad:
With over grieving for this long lost lad;
And now the Boy is grown, as old as I,
His very face as full of gravity.
Please your Graces enter,
I know the servants that attend one me
By the appointment of Duke Ferdinand
By this have covered.
Why then let's in: brother I trust, and brother
Hold you this hand, Rodorick hold thou the other,
By heaven my heart with happiness is crowned,
In that my long lost brother now is found:
so run on fate, my destinies are good,
Revenge hath made me great by shedding blood:
I am supposed the heir of Luningberg,
By which I am of Prussia Prince elect.
Good: who is wronged by this? Only a fool:
And 'tis not fit that idiots should bear rule.
My Lord I have as you enjoined, enticed Saxons elder son to talk with you: and here he comes with his most excellent, amorous, and admirable Lady.
hast thou the hermit's weeds for my disguise?
All ready, fit, fit' in the next chamber, your beard is point-vice, not a hair amiss.
Faithful Lorrique in thy unfaithfulness:
I kiss thy cheek, and give thee in that kiss
The moiety of all my earthly bliss.
Good: I am halfe a Monarch: half a fiend
Blood I begun in and in blood must end
yet this Clois is an honest villain, has conscience in his killing of men: he kills none but his father's enemies, and there issue, 'tis admirable, 'tis excellent, 'tis well 'tis meritorious, where? in heaven? no, hell.
Now friend, where is prince Otho?
Sad, sir, and grieved.
Why? prithee why?
Alas I know not why.
The hermit Rodorigo talked with him
Somewhat of you, and somewhat of the Duke,
About surprising you and murdering Lodowick:
Or such a thing, nay sure 'twas such a thing.
Surprising me and murdering Lodowick.
By whom? by what complot?
Sure by the Duke, the Duke's an odd old lad:
I know, this night there's set a double guard,
And there's some trick in that: but patience:
Here comes the hermit: holy reverent man!
Somewhat important, wings his aged feet
With speedy nimbleness: heaven grant that all be well.
Princes in pity of your youth, your love,
Your virtues, and what not, that may move ruth,
I offer you the tender of your lives,
Which yet you may preserve: but if you stay,
Death and destruction waiteth your delay.
Who hath conspired our deaths? speak reverent man.
The Duke of Prussia, doting on this face;
Worthy indeed of wonder, being so fair,
This night hath plotted, first to murder you;
The guard are set that you may not escape,
Within, without, and round about the court;
Only one way, thorough Prince Otho his lodging
Is left; here is the key, and for more proof
Of my great zeal and care, on with these robes.
Within are Grecian habits for your heads;
Nay if you love life do not stand amazed,
But take the path toward my hermitage,
Yet I advise you, that you go not in;
There may be plots to, for aught I know;
But turn down by the river, there's a way
Leads to a little Chapel; in that porch
Stay, till I visit you with better news;
I will but call my brother, and then go.
That were a going never to return:
I'll send him after you, be well assured.
Oh god! the Duke of Prussia grown thus false,
such shows of friendship, and so little faith.
Come Lucibella let's embrace this mean,
Duke Ferdinand shall with a sorrowing heart,
Repent this base dishonourable plot:
Father, our fortunes if they sort aright,
shall with continual thankfulness require
This virtuous and this charitable care:
Farewell: we'll wait thee in the Chapel porch
Bring Prince Mathias our kind brother thither,
And thou shalt add good works to charity:
Once more farewell Lorrique; there's for thee,
Commend me to thy Lord, tell him this wrong
Of his false uncle, shall mere full revenge:
But do to him our duties. Come chaste, fair,
We must not now by tilt and tournament
Maintain thy honour: for thy champion Knight,
Is forced by treason to unwilling flight.
so run to mischief: Oh my dear Lorrique
When I have summed up my account of death,
And robbed those fathers of their lives and joy,
That robbed me of my joy, my father's life,
Thus thy hand clasped in mine, we'll walk and meditate,
And boast in the revenges I have wrought;
That done; i'll seat thee by my throne of state,
And make thee rival in those governments,
That by thy secrecy thou list'st me to;
Shalt be a Duke at least.
I thank your Grace, but pray resolve me,
what you now intend,
To these three Princes Lodowick, and Mathias,
And the thrice beauteous Princess Lucibell.
Death certain: call in Mathias, if my plot prove good, I'll make one brother shed the other's blood.
I am nimble as your thought, device, i'll execute what you command.
A precious villain: a good villain too:
Well if he be no worse; that is do worse,
And honey me in my death-stinging thoughts,
I will prefer him: he shall be preferred
To hanging peradventure; why not? 'tis well
His sufferance here may save his soul from hell.
He comes; what news my faithful servant? where's the Prince.
he's talking with the lady Lucibell,
And when I said your Highness sent for him,
He 'gan with courtly salutations,
To take his leave and to attend your grace.
Well god-a-mercy friend, thou got'st me grace:
But more of that at leisure: take this gown;
My cloak, a chair; I must turn melancholy.
Second whate'er I say, approve my words,
That we may move Mathias to mad rage.
God save your excellence: what sad, dull, heavy?
Or are you now in meditation
Which part to take tomorrow at the Tilt?
The mead is ringed with tents of stranger Knights,
Whose rich devices, and caparisons
Exceed the Persian monarch's, when he met
Destruction and pale death sent from the sword
Of Philip's son, and his stout Macedons
cheerly Prince Otho there's such a warlike sight
That would stir up a leaden heart to fight.
For what?
For honour and fair Luicbell.
Oh Prince Mathias! it is ill combined
When honour is with fickle beauty joined.
Where is your most Princely brother?
I cannot tell I left him with his loved Lucibell.
But she has got another love,
Dishonoured all this rich assembly,
Left the memorial of such infamy,
As cannot die while men have memory.
How? pray you how? what hath the princess done?
she with a Grecian is but new fled hence,
Belike some other love of hers before:
Our tilt and tournament is spoilt and crossed.
The fair we should defend, her faith hath lost.
Fled with a Grecian? saw you them go Prince Otho?
ay, ay, I saw them go.
And would not stay them?
My true servant knows,
How at the sight of such inconstancy
My gentle heart was smit with inward grief
And I sunk down with sorrow.
'sdeath; what path? which way? that I may track her harlot-steps,
Fled now: gone now: i'll go seek Lodowick
Nay then you add an irreligious work,
To there lascivious act; follow yourself,
I and my man will bear your company
Lorrique, as I think, thou namedst a chapel,
A hermit, some such thing: I have lost the form.
I heard her say, she could not travel far,
He told her, they would rest the dead of night,
near to a chapel, by a hermitage.
Where is that chapel? where's that hermitage?
If you love honour Princely Luningberg,
let's to that chapel: if you know the way,
That I may kill our shame, ere it see day.
I'll guide you to the chapel, aid your arm,
In your revenge, against that Grecian,
But for the Lady spare her, she is fair.
I will do what I can; oh hell of life!
Who, but a fool would strive to win a wife?
shall we call Lodowick?
Noah, 'twould smite his soul in sunder, split his heart,
If he should hear of such adulterate wrong,
Cover the fault or punish as you please:
Yet I would save her fain, for she deserves
pity for beauty.
Nothing, no for nothing.
she is as harlots, fair, like guilded tombs
Goodly without; within all rottenness:
she's like a painted fire upon a hill,
set to allure the frost-nipped passengers,
And starve them after hope: she is indeed
As all such strumpets are, Angel in show,
Devil in heart: Come, come if you love me go.
Follow Lorrique; we are in the right way.
To hell I fear: tush let all fear go by,
who'll shun a bad way with good company.
Are you not faint divinest Lucibell?
Noah, the clear moon strews silver in our path,
And with her moist eyes weeps a gentle dew
Upon thee the spotted pavement of the earth,
Which softens every flower whereon I tread
Besides; all travel in your company
Seems but a walk made in some goodly bower,
Where loves fair mother strips her paramour.
This is the Chapel, and behold a bank,
Covered with sleeping flowers, that miss the Sun:
Shall we repose us till Mathias come?
The hermit will soon bring him, let's sit down.
Nature, or art hath taught these boughs to spread,
In manner of an arbour o'er the bank.
No, they bow down as veils to shadow you:
And the fresh flowers beguiled by the light
Of your celestial eyes, open there leaves,
And when they entertain the lord of day
You bring them comfort like the Sun in May.
Come, come, you men will flatter beyond mean:
Will you sit down? and talk of the late wrong
Intended by the Duke of Prussia?
Fairest forget it, leave till we are clear freed hence,
I will defy him, and cause all the knights
Assembled for our purposed tournament,
To turn there keen swords 'gainst his caitiff head.
Prithee no more, I feel thy blood turn hot,
And wrath inflames thy spirit, let it cease;
Forgive this fault, convert this war to peace.
O breath sweet touch with what a heavenly charm
Do your soft fingers my war-thoughts disarm,
Prussia had reason to attempt my life
Enchanted by the magic of these looks,
That cast a luster on the blushing stars.
Pardon chaste Queen of beauty, make me proud
To rest my toiled head on your tender knee,
My chin with sleep is to my bosom bowed;
Fair if you please a little rest with me.
No, i'll be sentinel; i'll watch for fear
Of venomous worms, or wolves, or wolvish thieves:
My hand shall fan your eyes, like the filmed wing
Of drowsy morpheus; and my voice shall sing
In a low compass for a Lucibell.
Sleep sweet, perhaps i'll sleep for company.
I thank you; I am drowsy, sing I pray;
Or sleep: do what you please, I am heavy, I;
God night to all our care: oh! I am blessed
By this soft pillow where my head doth rest.
By my troth I am sleepy too: I cannot sing,
My heart is troubled with some heavy thing.
Rest one these violets, whilst I prepare,
In thy soft slumber to receive a share:
Blush not chaste Moon to see a virgin lie
So near a Prince, 'tis no immodesty:
For when the thoughts are pure, no time, no place,
Hath power to work fair chastity's disgrace;
Lodowick I clasp thee thus, so arm clip arm,
So sorrow fold them that wish true love harm.
Art sure thou'st found them?
Look, are these they?
Adulterer: strumpet.
Oh!
Oh!
unhuman deed to kill both.
Both have abused our glory, both shall bleed,
how now! what have ye done? my Lodowick bleeds
Some savage beast hath fixed his ruthless fang
In my soft body: Lodowick, I faint,
Dear wake; my Lodowick: alas what means
Your breast to be thus wet? is't blood or sweat?
Who troubles me?
Brother.
Who is that? Mathias.
ay, accursed I,
where's the good hermit? thank him for his love,
Yet tell him; Ferdinand of Prussia
Hath a long arm; some murderer of his
hath killed us sleeping.
Killed thee? oh no! I trust the careful destinies deny
So hard a fate: 'tis I alone am killed.
Come Lodowick, and close up my night-veiled eyes
That never may again behold the day.
What means Mathias?
Hold me not Prince Otho.
I will revenge myself upon myself:
For Parricide for damned parricide:
I have killed my brother sleeping in the arms
Of the divinest form that e'er held breath.
I have killed love's Queen defaced with my foul hand,
The goodliest frame that ever nature built
And driven the graces from the mansion
Wherein they have continued from their birth;
She now being dead, she'll dwell no more on earth.
What moved you to it brother?
jealous rage, suspicion by Prince Otho,
That Lucibell had fled with a base Greek,
Oh me accursed! I am borne to shame.
But I am wretcheder, that from the love
Devoted to the house of Saxony,
Have thus begot this monster cruelty:
I lay within an arbour, whence I saw
The princess, and yourself in this disguise
Departing secretly my uncle's court:
I judged you for a Greek as you appeared.
Told Prince Mathias of your secret flight;
And he led on by fury followed you
Where thus deceased by night and your attire,
Hath robbed your heart of life, his own of joy.
Forgive me brother, pardon fairest maid,
And ere the icy hand of ashy death
Fold your fair bodies in this sable veil;
Discover why you put on this disguise.
To scape the lustful Duke of Prussia,
Who purposed this night to murder me,
And ravish her whom death hath made his prey
My Lucibell, whose lights are masked with clouds
That never will be cleared.
My uncle, fie, who buzzed into your head
This damned lie?
it's no lie.
Noah lie: 'tis true, 'tis true,
The reverent hermit Rodorick told it us.
The hermit is a villain damned in hell
Before the world's creation, if he say't
My Princely uncle purposed such a thought.
Look to the Princess, there's life in her:
Cheer up your heart Prince Lodowick, courage man.
Your being of comfort may recover her,
While I bring forth the hermit and disprove
This false assertion: Rodorick is a slave
A vile and irreligious hypocrite,
No hermit, but a devil if he dare
Affirm such falsehood of Duke Ferdinand.
Rodorick is not as you report him sir,
Nor did he e'er belie Duke Ferdinand.
No did? why then did you maliciously
Advise Prince Lodowick and fair Lucibell
To fly the Prussian court this dismal night.
Who I? I spoke not with them,
Yes ye did.
Where was it that he spoke with you? tell us where?
At Danzig in the Duke of Prussia's court.
Who heard him besides you?
The Princess Lucibell.
As heaven shall help my fleeting soul, I did.
why speaks my dukedoms hope in hollow sounds?
Look up fair child here's Saxony and I
Thy father, Lucibella look on me;
I am not angry that thou fled'st away
But come to grace thy nuptials; prithee speak.
Father I thank you: Lodowick reach me thy hand
How cold thou art; death now assails our hearts,
Having triumphed over the outward parts;
Farewell a while, we die but part, to meet
Where joys are certain, pleasures endless, sweet.
Father, this latest boon of you I crave,
Let him, and me, lie in one bed, and grave.
Oh me! oh miserable wretched me.
Hover a little longer blessed soul, glide not away too fast: mine now forsakes his earthly mansion and on hopes gilt wings will gladly mount with thine, where Angels sing celestial ditties to the King of Kings. brother adieu, your rashness I forgive, pardon me father, pardon; Austria your daughter is become a bride for death: the dismal even before her wedding day. hermit God pardon thee: thy double tongue hath caused this error: but in peace farewell. He that lifts us to Heaven keep thee from Hell.
Oh strange conjecture! what should move this Prince
To charge me with such horrid cruelty?
I'll tell thee hypocrite.
Stay Mathias stay,
It is thy uncle Rodorigo, and beside,
My honour and Duke Austria's shall be gagged,
He never parted from our company in his own hermitage
Since day declined, and glimmering twilight ushered in the night.
Not from his hermitage?
Noah not he.
is't possible?
By Heaven he did not.
Then there is villainy, practice, and villainy
Mathias hath been wronged and drawn to kill
His natural brother, with him to destroy
The rarest piece of nature's workmanship,
No doubt by practice and base villainy
The hermit not at court? strange! wondrous!
Oh for my son, and Austria's worthy child.
Thou weep'st in scorn, and very tear of thine
covers a smile: Saxony, I defy
All truce, all league of love, guard thee proud Duke;
Thy sons have made me childless; I'll have thee
Consort in death with my wronged girl and me.
Help Prince Mathias: hermit, oh the Heavens!
The Austrian Duke sinks down upon the earth.
Proud Iohn of Saxony: hast thou no wound?
Not any Austria; neither touched I thee.
Somebody touched me home: vain world farewell
Dying I fall on my dead Lucibell.
Sir what are you that take on you to part?
It's by your weapon that the Duke is fall'n.
If I thought so, i'd fall upon the point,
But I am innocent of such an ill:
Kill my good kinsman, Duke of Austria;
Then were Prince Otho of Luningberg set down
In sad despairs black book to rave and die;
But I am free from such impiety.
Are you Prince Otho of Luningberg?
He is, and heir apparent to Duke Ferdinand
May be the Moon deceives me, and my grief
As well in the distinguishing of sounds,
As sight: I have heard of young Luningberg,
And seen him to at Hoffman's overthrow,
He looked not like you, neither spoke like you.
Father, 'tis he: Lorrique his man attends him,
That fellow which is all composed of mirth
Of mirth? of death: why should I think of mirth
After so foul a murder? come lend hands
To give this Princely body funeral rites,
That I may sacrifice this hand and heart
For my peace-offerings on their sepulchers.
Nay, boy, thou shall not leave old Saxony
Childless for all this sorrow: Prince, and if Otho
Help in my son with noble Austria,
Lodowick shallbe my burden: brother yours
The lovely but the luckless Lucibell.
So tread a heavy measure; now let's go
To inter the dead, our hearts being dead with woe.
there's life in Lucibell, for I feel
A breath, more odoriferous than balm
thirl through the coral portals of her lips,
Apparent signs of life, her pulses beat;
Oh if I could but yet recover her,
'twould satisfy the State of Austria,
That else would be disturbed for want of heirs
Heaven be propitious, guide my artless hand,
To preserve fainting life in this clear form.
Grant this thou soul of all Divinity,
And I will strive whatever mortal may
To serve thee on my knees both night and day.
Tarry Prince Otho and see their bodies balmed,
I pray you think me not in passion dull;
I must withdraw, and weep, my heart is full.
Oh reverent man, thou bear'st the richest fruit;
That ever fell in the unripened spring,
Go lay her soft, she had ill fate to fall;
But rich or fair or strong, death swallows all,
Hola! Lorrique, leave our horse; draw near.
Help me to sing a hymn unto the fates
Composed of laughing interjections.
Why my good Lord? what accidents
Have chanced, that tickle so your spleen?
Oh my dear self: thou trusty treasurer of my revenge;
Kneel down, and at my bidding kiss the earth;
And on her cold ear whisper this strict charge:
That she provide the best of her perfumes,
The fat of Lambs rap't from the bleating Ewes,
The sweetest smelling wood she can devise;
For I must offer up a sacrifice,
To blessed occasion that hath seconded
With opportune means my desire of wreak;
Now I have kissed the earth, let me partake
In your great joy, that seems to exceed.
Are Lodowick, and the Princess murdered?
'tis done, go, hie thee to Prince Ferdinand;
Tell him how misadventure and mistrust
Hath killed Prince Lodowick and bright Lucibell:
By Prince Mathias hand: add to that chance,
Another unexpected accident:
Say that the Dukes of Austria and Saxony,
Being by the hermit Rodorick entertained,
And hearing outcries in the dead of night,
Came and beheld the tragic spectacle,
Which sight did so enrage the Austrian Duke,
That he, assailed the Saxon, but fell slain,
On his pale daughter, now deflowered by death.
Is Austria then slain by Saxony?
Come, come, he's dead, either by him or me,
No matter, he's gone: there's more to go.
Run with the news; away.
Father, set you the army in qeraye, while I invocate:
The General Foulkes: Fibs, foreman, and
Friends all, Officers ail, help to marshal; Prince
Ierom my Lord shall remunerate that, is shall be
Full of thanksgiving, while nature is able to
Nourish, or sustain; Father you have order to stay the rest, be sententious, and full of circumstance I advise you; and remember this, that more than mortality fights on our side; For we have treason and iniquity to maintain our quarrel.
Hah! what sayst my son? treason and iniquity?
Reason, and equity I meant Father; there's little controversity in the words: but like a Captain courageous, I pray go forward, remember the place you are, in no more, but this; the days of old, no more, but that; and the glory Father; Knighthood at least, to the utter defacing of you and your posterity, No more but so.
Well, go thy ways: thou art able to put fire into a Flint stone; thou hast as rheumatic a tongue to persuade as any is between Pole and Pomer; but thou art even kit after kind, I am thy father, and was infamous for my exprobations, to discourage a dissembly of tall soldiers afore thou wert borne, and I have made them stand to it tooth and nail; how say you, most valiant and reprobate Country men: have ye not heard I have been a stinger, a tickler, a wormer.
Yet; noble, ancient Captain Stilt, ye have removed men's hearts I have heard that of my father (God rest his soul,) when ye were but one of the common all soldiers that served old Sarloys in Norway.
I then was, and Sarloys was; a gentleman would not have given his head for the washing; but he is cut of, as all valiant cavaleroes shall; and they be no more negligent of themselves; But to the purpose: we are dissembled together, and fall'n into battle bewray in the behalf Prince Ierom a virtuous Prince, a wise Prince, and a most respectless Prince; my son Timothy's master, and the unlawful heir of this land. Now sir the old Duke has put out a declamation, and says our rising is no other than a resurrection, for the Prince inspires not against his father; but the Duke inspires against his son, using him most naturally, charitably, and abominably, to put him from intercession of the crown; wherefore as ye be true men, and obstinate subjects to the State uncover your heads, and cast up your caps and cry a Ierom, a Ierom,
Om, A Ierom, a Ierom, a Ierom.
Most noble Countrymen I cannot but condole in joy, and smile in tears to see you assembled in my right, but this is the lamentation that I poor Prince must make, who for my father's proclamation am like for to lose my head; except you stand to me, for they are coming on with bows, bills, and guns, against us: but if you be valiant, and stand to me lustily, all th' earth' shall roar but we'll have victory.
Upon those traitors valiant gentlemen:
Let not that beast the multitude confront,
With garlic-breath and their confused cries
The Majesty of me their awful Duke,
Strike their Typhoean body down to fire
That dare 'gainst us, their sovereign conspire.
Come, come, you shall have your hands full, and you
Come where we have to do, stand to it Stilt.
stand to't? here's the father and the son will stand, though all the rest fly away.
I warrant you Prince, when the battle comes to joining, my son and I will be invisible, and they overcome us, i'll give you leave to say I have no pith in me; upon 'em true Prince upon 'em.
I thought 'twou'd come to that;
I thought we should bring
The false Prince on his knees.
What means my Dukedoms hope to turn thus base? arise, and smite thy foes.
I see them not my most honoured uncle; pity I beseech
These silly people, that offend as babes,
Not understanding, how they do offend:
And suffer me chief agent in this wrong,
To plead their pardons with a peaceful tongue.
We scorn pardons, Peace and pity; we'll
have a Prince of our own choosing, Prince Ierom.
ay, ay, Prince Jerome or nobody; be not obstacle old Duke, let not your own flesh and blood be inherited of your Dukedom, and a stranger displaced in his retority: for and you do, we will take no comparison of you and your army, but fall upon you like temperance and lightning.
Upon your peril; gentlemen assail.
If any bosom meet the brunt of war,
Mine shall be first opposed; these honest men
That rise in arms for my young cousin's right
Shall be Protected whilst Prince Charles can stand.
Why see now what a thing Majesty is;
Stilt and the rest of my good people; my cousin)
Charles looking but in the face of our excellence
Cannot choose but take our part.
Nay but trust him not my Lord; take heed of him,
Aware your enemies at any hand.
Why should you make this intercession
For these base abjects, whose presumptuous hearts
Have drawn their rebel bodies 'gainst their head:
Entreat not for them, they are all but dead.
Forbear a little worthy Countrymen.
Nay we deny that, wear none of your Countrymen; you are an arrant arrant Alien.
True son sincere peregrination, and one that was not borne within our Duke's damnation, and therefore not to be remitted to any substantial degree of office amongst us: that's the fine, that's the confusion of all.
But hear me.
ay, I, pray hear him; nay I charge you all upon pain of death that you hear my cousin.
he Well we will are him: come on, speak, what will ye say?
O I beseech you save your lives and goods,
For the Duke's squadrons armed with wrath and death,
Watch but the signal when to cease on you,
That can no more with stand their approved strengths
Then sparrows can contend with towering hawks:
Or 'gainst the Eagles eyrie:
This act of yours by gathering to a head,
Is treason capital, and without grace
Your lives are forfeit to extremest law.
Mas he says true son; but what's the remedy?
None at all father, now we are in, we must go through stitch.
Yes, there is remedy: cast your weapons down,
And arm yourselves with mercy of your Prince
Who like a gracious shepherd ready stands
To take his lost sheep home in gentle hands.
As for your Prince, I will for him entreat
That he may be restored again in love,
And unto offices of dignity, as either Taster,
Sewer, Cupbearer, the place himself thinks
Fittest for his state, and for my part when
That unhappy time of Princely Ferdinand's
Sad death shall, come:—
Which moment:—
But should I as I say behold that hour,
Although I am elected for your Prince,
Yet would I not remove this gentleman,
Bat rather serve him as his councillor.
Give me your hand of that Cousin; well said, now get a pardon for me, and my merry men all; and then let me be my father's Taster, being the office belonging to his eldest son; I Being the same, and than you shall see me behave myself, not as a rebel, or reprobate, but as a most reasonable Prince, and sufficient subject.
Well since my Lord has said the word, bring that of spoke he to pass and ye shall have my word too, and old Stilt my fathers, being a man of good reproach I tell you, and condemnation in his country.
I that I am my Lord, I have lived in name and shame these threescore, and seven winters, all my neighbours can bear me testament, and accord.
Well, rest ye quiet; Sovereign on my knees
I beg your Highness grant to there request:
Suppose them silly, simple, and your own;
To shed their blood were just, yet rigorous,
The praise of Kings is to prove gracious.
True soul of honour, substance of myself,
Thy merit wins thee mercy, go in peace,
Lay by your unjust arms, live by your sweat,
And in content the bread of quiet eat.
God save Duke Ferdinand.
Pray Father, forgive me, and my man,
And my man's father by our single selves;
For we have been the capital offenders.
I truly my Lord, we raised the resurrection,
I pardon all; give thee my taster's place:
Honour this Prince that hath thus won you grace.
Y-S. God save Duke Ferdinand, and Prince Otho.
I and me too.
And Prince Ierom too; well son, i'll leave thee a Courtier still, and get me home to my own desolation, where i'll labour to compel away excessity: and so fareyee well.
This business over: worthy nephew Charles,
Let us go visit the sad Saxon Duke,
The mourning hermit,
That through affection wrought his brother's fall.
I'll wait your Highness to that house of woe,
Where sad mischance sits in a purple chair,
And underneath her beetle cloudy brows
smiles at unlocked for mischiefs; oh there
Doth grief unpainted, in true shape appear.
Shrill trumpets sound a flourish
For the cries of war are drowned.
Nay but cozen cozen, is't not necessary I wait
Upon mine own father? and stilt upon me?
It's most expedient, be obsequious.
no doubt his excellence will like that well.
Dieu vou guard monsieur.
Welcome my friend, hast any suit to me?
Away monsieur, if you be the grand Prince
Legitimate of Prussia, I have for tender
To your Excellence de service of one poor
Gentle home of Champagne.
I am not he you look for gentlemen,
My cousin is the true and lawful Prince.
ay sir I am the legitimate, and am able to entertain
A gentleman though I say't and he be of any quality,
Lorrique, now or never play thy part:
This Act is even our Tragedies best heart.
Let me alone for plots, and villainy,
Only commend me to this fool the Prince.
I tell thee, I am the Prince, my cousin knows it,
That's my cousin, this is stilt my man.
A vostree seruice monsieur most Genereux.
no doubt he is some cunning gentleman
Your Grace may do a deed befitting you
To entertain this stranger.
It shall be done cozen; i'll talk with him a little
And follow you, go commend me to my father
Tell him I am coming, and Stilt, and this stranger, be mindful cousin, as you will answer to my Princely indignation.
Well sir, I will be careful, never doubt;
Now scarlet Mistress from thick sable clouds
Thrust forth thy bloodstained hands, applaud my plot,
That giddy wonderers may amazed stand
While death smites down suspectless Ferdinand.
Sweet Prince I scarce understand this fellow well, but I like his conceit in not trusting Prince otho; you must give him the remove that's flat.
I be, gar, he be chose again you, he give you good word so be dat, but he will have one fisgig or dia by gar for company on in principality be no possible.
Well, I apprehend thee, I have a certain Princely feeling in myself that he loves me not.
Hold ye there my Lord, I am but a poor fellow and have but a simple living left me; yet my brother were he a very natural brother of mine own, should he be 'dopted, I would 'dopt him, and herit him, i'll fit him.
ay but how Stilt, but how?
By gar my Lord, I will tell you fine knacks, for make him kick up his heels, and cry we, or be gar I be hang, and so shall I be to, and for de grand love I bear you, for de Lady Isabella's sake your most tres-excellent Lady mother,
Didst, thou know her French doctor? didst thou?
I as beggars do the Ladies that are their Almsgivers.
By gar you lie, like jacknape, I love de Lady.
With a boon coeur, and for her sake here take dis same, and dis same, put dis in de cup, where de competitor Prince otho shall drink; by gar it will poison him bravely.
That were excellent my Lord, and it could be done, and no body know on't.
ay, but he always drinks in my Father's cup.
I so let be, let de Duke drink a de same.
What poison my father? Noah, I like not that so well.
You shall drink too, and I too and when we be sick, as we shall have as shall have a petit rumble in de belly; dan take a dis same, and give your fadra dis: but your cousin none of it, and bygar no body shall be dead, and kicka, and cry oh, but Otho.
That's excellent, master;
This is the poison then, and this is the medicine?
I dat be true.
Well Physician, attend in my chamber here, till Stilt and I return; and if I pepper him not, say I am not worthy to be called a Duke, but a drawlatch.
Farewell awe, and iebbit a vow; and we speed by thy practice we'll crush a cup of thine own country wine.
Go speed to spoil yourselves.
Doctor lie there, Lorrique, like thyself appear
So now i'll post unto the Hermitage, and smile
While silly fools act treason act through my guile.
See Princely uncle black dormitory,
Where Austria and Prince Lodowick are laid
On the cold bed of earth, where they must sleep
Till earth and air, and sea consume by fire.
Their rest be peace, their rising glorious;
Sad mourners, give your partners leave to kneel,
And make their offertory on this tomb,
That does contain the honourablest earth
That ever went upright in Germany,
Welcome Duke Ferdinand, come, come, keel, kneel,
Thus should each friend another's sorrow feel.
Is Lucibella in this monument?
Noah, she's recovered from death's violence;
But through her wounds and grief distract of sense.
Heaven help her, here she comes;
Kneel still, I pray.
Oh me accurst I why live I this black day?
Oh a sword, I pray you kill me not,
For I am going to the river's side.
To fetch white lilies, and blue daffodils
To stick in Lodowick's bosom, where it bled,
And in mine own; my true love is not dead,
Noah y'are deceived in him, my father is:
Reason he should, he made me run away;
And Lodowick too, and you Mathias too;
Alack for woe, yet what a the remedy?
We must run all away: yet all must die.
'Tis so, I wrought it in a sampler,
'Twas heart in hand, and true love's knots and words,
All true stitch by my troth: the posy thus:
No flight dear love but death, shall sever us;
Nor that did not neither; he lies here does he not?
Yes lovely madam, pray be patient.
Iso I am, but pray tell me true,
Could you be patient, or you, or you, or you,
To lose a father and a husband too:
Ye could, I cannot; open, door here hoe!
Tell Lodowick, Lucibell would speak with him;
I have news from heaven for him, he must not die,
I have robbed Prometheus of his moving fire:
Open the door, I must come in, and will,
I'll beat myself to air, but I'll come in.
Alas her tender hands smiting the stone
Beweep their mistress rage in tears of blood.
Fair Lady be of comfort, 'tis in vain
To invocate the dead to life again.
I gentle Daughter be content, I pray,
Their fate is come, and ours is not, far off.
Here is a hand over my fate hath power
And I now sink under the stroke of death,
But that a purer spirit fills my breast
And guides me from the footsteps of despair,
A heavenly motion full of charity,
yourself to kill you self were such a sin
As most divines hold deadly.
ay but a knave may kill one by a trick,
Or lay a plot, or so, or cog, or prate,
Make strife, make a man's father hang him,
Or his brother, how think you goodly Prince,
God give you joy of your adoption;
May nor tricks be used?
Alas poor Lady.
I that's true, I am poor, and yet have things,
And gold ring, and amidst the leaves green
Lord how d'ee, well I thank god, why that's well,
And you my Lord, and you too; never a one weep,
Must I shed all the tears? well he is gone,
And he dwells here ye said, ho i'll dwell with him,
Death, dastard, Devil, robber of my life
Thou base adulterer, that partest man and wife
Come I defy thy darts.
O sweet for bear.
For pities sake a while her rage restrain
Last she do violence upon herself.
O never fear me, there is somewhat cries
Within me Noah: tells me there's knaves abroad
Bids me be quiet, lay me down and sleep
Good night good gentlefolks, brother your hand,
And yours good father, you are my father now,
Do but stand here, I'll run a little course
At base, or barleybreak, or some such toy,
To catch the fellow, and come back again,
Nay look thee now, let go, or by my troth
I'll tell my Lodowick how ye use his love:
So now good-bye, now goodnight indeed:
Lie further Lodowick, take not all the room,
Be not a churl, thy Lucibell doth come.
Follow her brother, follow son Mathias,
Be careful guardians of the troubled maid;
While I confer with Princely Ferdinand
About an embassy to Aüstria,
With true reports of there disastrous haps.
Well, I will be her guardian and her guide,
By me her senses have been weakened,
But i'll contend with charitable pain,
To serve her, till they be restored again.
A virtuous, noble resolution.
Worthy Prince Rodorigo, when tempestuous woe
Abates her violent storm, I shall have time
To chide you for unkindness, that have lived
In solitary life with us so long.
Believe me Saxon Prince you did us wrong:
Would I might never live in no worse state;
For contemplation is the path to heaven.
My new conversing in the world is proved
Luckless and full of sorrow; fare-ye-well
My heavens, alone, all company seems hell.
My nephew call for wine my soul is dry
I am sad at sight of so much misery.
Is the Duke's taster there?
I am at hand with my office.
Fill for the Duke good cousin, taste it first.
I have no mind to it Stilt, for all my antidote.
I warrant you Master let Prince Otho drink next,
Here cozen, will you begin to my father?
I thank you kindly, i'll not be so bold,
It is your office; fill unto my Lord.
Well god be with it, it's gone down, and now i'll send the medicine after; Father pray drink to my cousin for he is so mannerly that he'll not drink before you.
Pray ye do my Lord, for Prince Otho is best worthy of all this company to drink of that cup, which and he do, I hope he shall ne'er drink more.
Good for tune after all this sorrow Saxony.
O worthy Ferdinand, fortune and I are parted, she has played the minion with me, turned all her favours in to frowns, and in scorn robbed me of all my hopes, and in one hour o'er turned me from the top of her proud wheel.
Build not on fortune, she's a fickle dame
And those that trust unto her sphere are fools.
Fill for his Excellence.
Here cozen for your Excellence, pray drink you to the Duke of Saxony.
Not I kind cozen, I list not to drink.
God's Lady, I think Stilt, we are all undone, for I feel a jumbling worse and worse.
O give the Duke some of the medicine
What medicine talk'st thou of? what ails my son?
O lord, father, and ye mean to be a life's man take some of this.
Why? this is deadly poison unprepared.
True, but it was prepared for you and me by an excellent fellow, a french Doctor?
ay, he is one that had great care of you.
Villain what was he? drink not Saxony
I doubt I am by treason poisoned.
Heaven keep that fortune from my dread Lord.
Treason ye Princes, treason to the lives
Of Ferdinand the Duke of Prussia
My Princely master! Otho of Luningberg
Who should intend us treason?
This fond Prince.
Never to you Father, but to my cousin Charles; indeed I meant to poison him, but I have peppered myself.
I never gave thee cause.
That's nothing to the purpose, but my Lord took occasion by the council of a French Doctor.
Physitians for the Duke, y vncie faints.
Surgeons for the Prince, my master falls.
Call no Physicians, for I feel't too late,
The subtle poison mingled with my blood
' Numbs all the passages, and nimble death
Fleets on his purple currents to my heart.
Father, I am dying too, oh now I depart,
Be good to Stilt my man, he was accessary
to all this.
I truly: was I sir therefore I hope you'll be good to me, I helped to mingle the poison as the French Doctor, and my master charged me.
What's that French Doctor?
What's become of him?
we left him in the court in my master's chamber.
ay sir woe worth him, farewell Stilt, farewell fathers
I ask you pardon with repentant eyes;
Fall stars, O Stilt, for thus thy master dies.
Take hence that maytor for the fool his man.
I pray provide for me sit;
Let him be tortured, then upon a wheel
broke like a traitor and a murderer.
O lord sir. I meant you no hurt, but to Prince Charles
Away, disturb us not with idle talk.
Provide quoth a● and you call this providing, pray let me, provide for myself, alas my poor father, he'll creep upon crutches into his grave when, he hears his proper'st Stilt is cut off by the stumps.
Hence with that fellow.
Pray, not so hasty, you would scarce be so forward, and you were going as I am, to the gallows.
How cheers my royal uncle?
Like a ship that having long contended with
The waves, is at last with one proud billow
Smit into the ruthless swallow of the sea.
For thee alas I perceive this plot was laid;
But heaven had greater mercy-on shy youth,
And one my people, that shall find true rest
Being with a Prince so wise and virtuous blessed.
Farewell most noble Iohn of Saxony,
Bear thy unmatched grief with a mind bent
Against the force of all temptations;
By my example Princely brother, see,
How vain our lives and all our glories be.
God for thy mercy! treason upon treason,
How now young Otho what art thou poisoned too?
Would God I were, but my sad stars reserve
This simple building for extremer ruin:
Oh that French doctor.
I that worst of hell.
no torment shall content us in his death.
Nay soft and fair, let him be taken first;
How now sad brother, are you come to see
This Tragic end of worthy Ferdinand?
I heard of it too soon, and come too late.
Well brother leave the Duke, and wait on me;
Mathias, and the heart-grieved Lucibell
Shall go with us to Wittenberg, and shun
That fatal land filled with destruction.
But Lucibella like a chased hind
flies through the thickets, and neglects the briers,
After her runs your Princely son Mathias,
As much disturbed, though not so much distract,
Vowing to follow her, and if he can,
Defend her from despairing actions.
And we will follow them, Prince Otho adieu
Care goes with us, yet we leave grief with you,
Inter your uncle, punish traitors crimes,
Look to your persons these are dangerous times,
Lords take this body, bear it to the court,
And all the way sound a sad heavy march,
Which you may truly keep, than people tread
A mournful march indeed,
Go on afore, i'll stay a while, and weep
My tributary tears paid on the ground
Where my true joy your Prince my uncle fell:
I'll follow to drive from you all distress
And comfort you, though I be comfortless.
Art not thou plumped with laughter my Lorrique,
All this excellent, but worthy Lord,
There is an accident this instant chanced
Able to overthrow in one poor hour
as well your hopes as these assurances.
What's that Lorrique? what can fortune do
That may divert my strain of policy.
You know all Prussia take you for the son
Of beauteous Martha,
I they suppose me to be Otho her son,
And son to that false Duke whom I will kill
Or curse my stars
His star is sunk already, death and he
Have vowed an endless league of amity.
Had I Briareus hands, I'd strive with heaven
For executing wrath before the hour,
But wishes are in vain, he's gone.
Our son is somewhat slack as we conceive
By this delaying, while our heart is feared,
And our eyes dimmed with expectation
As are the lights of such as on the beach
With many a longing, yet a little proof
Stand waiting the return of those they love.
His Excellence no doubt hath great affairs
But his familiar friend Lorrique is come.
kneel not Lorrique, I prithee glad my heart
With thy tongues true report of my son Otho
Whom since his Princely Father is deceased
I am come from oppressed with grief
In person to salute him for our Duke.
Your mother like affection, and high care,
His Highness doth return with duteous thanks
Desiring pardon of your excellence,
In that he did not first salute your grace:
But dismal accidents and bloody deeds,
Poysonings treasons, so disturb this state
Chiefly this gentle mind since the late death
Of your right princely brother Ferdinand
That like the careful Captain of a band
He is compelled to be the last in field;
Yet he protests by me, and I for him:
That no soft rest shall enter his grieved eyes
Till he behold your presence, more desired
Than the large Empire of the wide earth;
Only he prays that you would take your rest
For in your soft content his heart is blessed.
Spread me a Carpet on the humble earth:
My hand shall be the pillow to my head.
This step my bolster, and this place my bed.
Your Highness will take harm.
Nay, never fear.
A heart with sorrow filled sleeps anywhere,
Will our son come tonight?
Madam he will.
See our train lodged, and then Lorrique attend
For captain of the guard; that wait on us,
Go all away, nobody stay with me
Except our son, come if we chance to call,
Trouble us not, god night unto you all.
Quo fugiat mortale genm? nil denique tutum est,
Crudelis nam morsomnia falce secat?
Nil durum, nil non mortis penetrabile telis,
Omnia vi demit, mors vio lneta sua.
'tis true, the wise, the fool, the rich, the poor
The fair, and the deformed fall; their life turns
Air: the King and Captain are in this alike
None hath free hold of life, but they are still
When death heaven's steward comes, tenants at will.
I lay me down, and rest in thee my trust,
If I wake never more, till all flesh rise
I sleep a happy sleep, sin in me dies.
Art sure she is asleep!
I cannot tell, be not too hasty.
She stirs not, she is fast.
Sleep sweet fair Duchess, for thou sleep'st thy last:
Endymion's love, muffle in clouds thy face,
And all ye yellow tapers of the heaven
veil your clear brightness in Cimmerian mist;
Let not one light my black deed beautify;
For with one stroke virtue and honour dies.
And yet we must not kill her in this kind:
Weapons draw blood, blood shed will plainly prove
The worthy Dutchess, worthless of this death
Was murdered, and the guard are witnesses,
None entered but ourselves.
Then strangle her, here is a towel fit.
Good: kneel and help, compass her neck about,
Alas poor Lady thou sleep'st here secure
And never dreamest of what thou shalt endure.
Nay, good my Lord dispatch.
What ruthless hind
Shall I wrong nature that did ne'er compose
One of her sex so perfect? prithee stay,
Suppose we kill her thus about her neck,
Circles of purple blood will change the hue
Of this white porphyry and the red lines
Mixed with a deadly black, will tell the world
She died by violence, then 'twill be inquired
And we held ever hateful for the act.
Then place beneath her nostrils this small box
Containing such a powder that hath power,
Being set on fire to suffocate each sense
Without the sight of wound, or show of wrong.
That's excellent, fetch fire, or do not, stay:
The candle shall suffice, yet that burns dim;
And drops his waxen tears as if it mourned
To be an agent in a deed so dark.
Will you confound yourself by dotage speak,
'swounds i'll confound her, and she linger thus.
Thou were't as good, and better,— note my words:
Run unto the top of dreadful scar,
And thence fall headlong on the under rocks,
Or set, thy breast against a cannon fired,
When iron death flies thence on flaming wings,
Or with thy shoulders, Atlas like attempt,
To bear the ruins of a falling tower,
Or swim the Ocean; or run quick to hell;
(as dead assure thyself no better place)
Than once look frowning on this angel's face
Confound her? black confusion be my grave
Whisper one such word more, thou diest base slave.
I have done, i'll honour her if you command.
She stirs, and when she wakes observe me well,
Sooth up whate'er, I say, touching Prince Otho.
Prince Otho, is our son come? who's there Lorrique?
What shall I answer her?
whose's that thou talk'st with?
The most indebted servant to your Grace
Of any creature underneath the Moon.
I prithee friend be brief, what is thy name?
I know thee not, what business hast thou here?
Art thou a messenger come from our son?
If so acquaint us with the news thou bring'st.
I saw your highness' son, Lorrique here knows, the last of any living.
Living? heaven help,
I trust my son h'as no commerce with death.
Your son no doubt is well, in blessed state.
My heart is smitten through thy answer,
Lorrique, where is thy gracious Lord?
In heaven I hope.
True madam, he did perish in the wrack
When he came first by sea from Lubeck haven.
What false impostor then hath mocked my care?
Abused my Princely brother Ferdinand?
Gotten his Dukedom in my dead son's name?
I grant him an impostor, therein false
But when your Highness hears the circumstance,
I know your wisdom and meek piety
Will judge him well deserving in your eyes.
What can be said now I have lost my son?
Or how can this base two-tongued hypocrite
Excuse concealing of his master's death.
Unhappy Martha, in thy age undone,
Robbed of a husband, cheated of a son.
Hear me with patience for that pities sake
You showed my captive body, by the tears
You shed, when my poor father dragged to death
Endured all violence at their hands:
By all the mercies poured on him and me
That like cool rain somewhat allayed the heat
Of our sad torment, and red sufferings;
hear me but speak a little to repay
With gratitude the favours I received.
Art thou the luckless son of that sad man
Lord of Burtholme some time admiral?
I was his only son, whom you set free,
Therefore submissively I kneel and crave,
You would with patience hear your servant speak;
Be brief, my swollen heart is at point to break.
I stood upon the top of the high scar,
Where I beheld the splitted ship let in
Devouring ruin in the shape of waves,
Some got on Rafts, but were as soon cast off
As they were seated; many strid the mast,
But the Sea's working was so violent,
That nothing could preserve them from their fury,
They did and were entombed in the deep.
Except some two the surges washed ashore
Prince Charles being one, who on Lorrique's back
Hung with clasped hands, that never could unfold,
Why not as well as he Lorrique doth live,
Or how was he found clasped upon his back
Except he had had life to fold his hands.
Madam, your Highness errs in that conceit,
For men that die by drowning, in their death,
Hold surely what they clasp, while they have breath.
Well he held me, and sunk me too.
I'll witness, when I had recovered him
The PRINCE's head being split against a Rock
Past all recover, Lorrique in desperate rage,
Sought sundry means to spoil his new-gained; life,
exclaiming for his master: cursing heaven,
For being unjust to you, though not to him,
For robbing you of comfort in your son
Oh gracious Lady said this grieved man
Could I but work a means to called me her grief.
Some reasonable course to keep black care
From her white bosom; I were happy then;
But knowing this, her heart will sink with woe
And I, am ranked with miserablest men,
I gods my witness, these were my laments,
Till Hoffman being as willing, as myself;
Did for his love to you, that pitied him.
Take on him to be called by your son's name,
Which now he must refuse except your Grace
Attempt his service in Prince Otho's place,
If this that you protest be true, your care
Was like a long reprieve, the date worn out;
The execution of my woe is come,
And I must suffer it with patience:
Where have you laid the body of my son?
Within the chapel of an hermitage,
Some half a mile hence.
I'll build me there a Cell,
Made like a tomb, till death, therein i'll dwell:
Yet for thy wrongs young man attend my words
Since neither Ferdinand, nor Saxony,
Have any heirs, to sway their several states;
I'll work what lies in me to make thee Duke,
And since thou art accepted for my son,
Attempting it only to do me good
I here adopt thee: mine christen thee Otho,
Mine eyes are now the font, the water tears,
That do baptize thee in thy borrowed name.
I thank your Highness, and of just heaven crave
The ground I wrong you in, may turn my grave.
Lights to our chamber, now our fears are past,
What we long doubted, is proved true at last.
Attend us son.
we'll wait upon your Grace.
Son, this is somewhat, this will bear the eyes
Of the rude vulgar, but this serves not me;
Dukedoms I will have them my sword shall win,
If any interposer cross my will,
But new made mother, there's another fire
Burns in this liver lust, and hot desire,
which you must quench; must? I and shall; I know
Women will like however they say no;
And since my heart is knit unto her eyes
If she, being sanctimonious, hate my suit,
In love this course i'll take, if she deny;
Force her: true, so: si non blanditijs, vi.
Have you not found her yet?
Not I,
Nor I.
Then I believe borne by her fits of rage
She has done violence to her bright fame,
And fall'n upon the bosom of the Balt.
What reason leads ye to believe it, son?
I did perceive her some half hour since
Clambering upon the steepness of the rock,
But whether up or down I could not guess
By reason of the distance.
Stand aside, she comes, let her not scape us now.
What has she got apparel? I and rich,
Poor soul, she in her idle lunacy
Hath took it from some house where 'twill be missed.
let's circle her about, least spying us
she run away with wonted nimbleness,
Fairest well met.
Well overtaken sir.
What have ye here?
And you too heartily.
I am sure you know.
Why that's well, I like that, that you are well and you, and you: god buy.
Nay, nay you must not go, we'll hold you now.
Why that's well, done, Pray come, see my house
I have a fine house now, and goodly knacks
And gay apparel; look ye here, this is brave;
And two lean porters starved for lack of meat,
Pray let go mine arms, look here they be.
Oh horrid sight!
Nay, never start I pray; is it not like I keep
A princely house, when I have such fat porters at my gate;
What should this mean? why in this wood
So thick, so solitary, and remote
From common road of men, should these hang thus?
Brother your Hermitage is not far hence,
When knew you any execution here?
I never knew any, and these bones are green,
This less anatomy hath not hung long
The bigger, by the moss and dryness seems
Of more continuance.
What's on there heads?
why golden Crowns, my porters shall be Kings,
And hide there barebones with these gay weeds.
I do remember the Admiral
that kept the Island of Burtholme
Was by the Duke of Prussia adjudged
To have his head feared with a burning crown,
And after made a bare Anatomy,
Which by his son was from the gallows stolen;
ay, that same son of his, but where lives he
No doubt, he doth possess some cave hard by.
Come, go with me, i'll show you where he dwells,
Or somebody; I know not who it is;
Here, look, look here, here is a way goes down,
Down, down a down, heigh down, down.
I sung that song, while Lodowick slept with me.
This is some Cave, let's boldly enter in,
And learn the mystery of that sad sight,
Come Lady, guide us in, yond know the way.
True, that's the way, you cannot miss the path;
The way to death and black destruction
Is the wide way; nobody is now at home,
Or tarry, peradventure here comes some will tell you more.
Stand close, this is Lorrique, I do not know the
Lady comes with him.
I ha' seen that countenance.
Stand close, I pray, my heart divines,
Some strange and horrid act will be revealed.
Nay that's most true, a fellow with a red cap told me so
And bade me keep these clothes, and give them
To a fair Lady in a mourning gown;
Let go my arms; I will not run away
I thank you now, now you shall see me stay,
By my troth I will, by my maidenhead I will.
Lorrique return into the beaten path,
I asked thee for a solitary plot,
And thou hast brought me to the dismal'st grove
That ever eye beheld, no wood-nymphs here
Seek with their agile steps to outstrip the Roe,
Nor doth the sun suck from the queachy plot
The rankness and the venom of the Earth
It seems frequentless for the use of men:
Some basilisks, or poisonous serpent's den!
It is indeed an undelight full walk;
But if I do not err in my belief,
I think the ground, the trees, the rocks, the springs,
Have since my Princely Master Charles his wrack
Appeared more dismal, than they did before,
I memory of his vntimelesse fall.
For hereabouts, hereabouts the place,
Where his fair body lay deformed by death
Here Hoffman's son, and I embalmed him
After we had concluded to deceive
Your sacred person, and Duke Ferdinand
By causing Hoffman to assume his name.
This is very strange.
Nay tarry, you shall hear all the knavery anon.
And where's the Chapel that you laid him in?
it's an old Chapel, near the Hermitage:
But was the hermit at his burial?
Noah, Hoffman and I only digged the grave
Played Priest and clerk, to keep his burial close?
Most admirable!
Nay, pray you peace.
Alas! poor son, the soul of my delights;
Thou in thy end wert robbed of Funeral rites,
None sung thy requiem, no friend closed thine eyes,
Nor laid the hallowed earth upon thy lips,
Thou wert not houseled, neither did the bells ring
Blessed peals, nor toll thy funeral knell,
Thou wontst to death, as those that sink to hell;
Where is the apparel that I bade him wear
Against the force of witches and their spells.
We buried it with him it was his shroud,
The desert woods no fitter means allowed.
I think he lies.
Now by my troth, that gentleman smells knave.
Swear one thing to me, ere we leave this place;
Whether young Hoffman did the most he might to save my son.
By heaven it seems he did, but all was vain
The flinty rocks had cut his tender scull,
And the rough water washed away his brain.
Liar, liar, lick dish.
How now what woman's this? what men are these?
A poor maiden mistress, has a suit to you,
And 'tis a good suit, very good apparel.
lo, here I come a-wooing my ding, ding,
Lo, here we come a suing, my darling,
Lo, here I come a praying, to bidea,
How do you Lady, well I thank God, will you buy a bargain I pray, it's fine apparel.
Run my life's blood, comfort my troubled heart,
That trembles at the sight of this attire:
Lorrique, look on them, knowest thou not these clothes?
Nor the distracted bringer? prithee speak.
Ay me, accurst and damned; I know them both;
The bringer is the Austrian Lucibella
ay, you say true, I am the very same,
The apparel was my Lords, your Princely son's.
This is not sea-wet, if my son were drowned
Then why thus dry is his apparel found?
O me accurst, o miserable me?
Fall heaven, and hide my shame, gape earth, rise sea,
Swallow, o'erwhelm me, wherefore should I live,
The most perfidious wretch that ever breathed,
And base consenter to my dear Lords death.
Nay, look you here, do you see these poor starved ghosts; can you tell whose they be?
Alas! what are they? what are you that seem
In civil habits to hide ruthless hearts;
Lorrique, what are they? what wilt thou attempt?
Help Gentlemen, if ye be Gentlemen,
And stay this fellow from despairing ill.
I was ordained unto perdition, stay me not;
For when ye know the mischiefs I have done,
(at least, consented to, through coward fear)
You would not stop me, if I skipped in quick
To that black, bottomless and ruthless, gulf,
Where everlasting sorrows like linked chains
Fetter the wretched in eternal night.
what hast thou done?
Knavery I warrant you, tell truth and shame the
Devil my boy, do, and thou shalt have a fine thing by and by.
I take your Highness for that reverend Duchess
Late wife unto the Duke of Prussia.
I am the wretched childless widow sir.
princess hear me, and I will briefly tell
How you came childless, you brotherless,
You husbandless, and fatherless, all, all,
I'll tell you, having ended, act my fall.
Well, forward;
Be it so, I have deserved a greater cruelty,
To be kept living when I long to die.
I charge thee setting by all circumstance,
Thou utter what thou knowest: my heart is steel,
Nor can it suffer more than it doth feel.
Then thus, Prince Charles and I escaped the wrack,
Came safe ashore to this accursed plot,
Where we met Hoffman, who upon yond tree
Preserved his father's bare anatomy,
The biggest of them two were those strong bones
That acted mighty deeds.
Hoffman the son full of revenge and hate,
'Gainst every hand that wrought his father's hurt,
Yet guilded over his envy with fair shows,
And entertained us with as friendly terms
As falsehood could invent; and 'tis well known:
Bitter deceit useth the sweetest speech.
At length he took advantage, bound my Lord,
And in a chain tied him to yonder rock,
While with a burning Crown he feared in twain
The purple Veins, strong sinews, arteries, nerves,
And every cartilege about the head,
In which sad torment the mild Prince fell dead.
Did Hoffman this? and thou concealest the deed?
Pardon my fear, Dread Madam.
well, go on, I am confident to hear all cruelty,
And am resolved to act some, if no hand
Will else attempt the murderers and, but mine.
Be patient; you will find associates:
For there are many murderers more behind.
what did he with the body of my son?
Buried the flesh, the bones are they that hang
Close by his fathers.
Let them hang a while
Hope of revenge in wrath doth make me smile.
Pray let him tell the rest.
This acted, Hoffman forced me to conceal
The murder of my Lord, and threatened more
Than death by many torments, till I swore
To call him Otho, and say he was your son:
I swore and kept my oath.
O Heaven.
O Devil.
Nay, I pray you peace.
Then sent he me for you, and you he sent,
Or as I best remember, lead you on
Unto the Chapel porch, where he himself
Appointed them to stay, and there you know
What happened in your wrath.
To me asleep,
And to my harmless Lodowick in my arms.
On on, that deed is writ among the acts of guilt:
A brother's sword a brother's life blood spilled.
Proceed, what's next? killed he not Austria?
He did.
O villain did he kill my Father?
And make my brother kill my husband too?
Go forward.
After all those hated murders
He taught the foolish prince in the disguise
Of a French Doctor to prepare a poison,
Which was the death of Princely Ferdinand:
Next plot he purposed your grace's death,
And had opposed my strength of my tears,
You had been murdered as you lay asleep.
Let's hear no more, seek out the hated wretch,
And with due torture let his life be forced
From his despised body.
Do I pray.
All the Land will help,
And each man be a justice in this act.
Well, I that never knew revenges power,
Have entertained her newly in my breast:
Determine what's to do.
even what you will; would I were with my Lodowick asleep
In the Elysian fields, where no fears dwell;
For earth appears as vile to me as hell.
Let me be Prologue to your scene of wrath,
And as the Roman Catiline resolved
His doubtful followers by exhausting blood
From the live body, so draw mine, cast mine
Upon the troubled and offended earth;
Offer blood fit for an infernal sacrifice,
Wine is not poured but on celestial offerings:
Therefore I advise you
As you hope to thrive in your revenge, smite me.
That have been pander to this injury.
Thou meritest death indeed.
Stay judge him not, let me a little plead in his excuse,
And this one sentence serves; a man compelled
To evil acts, cannot be justly held
A wilful malefactor; the law still
Looks upon the deed, ne'er on the will:
Besides although I grant the matter small
And very safe to raise a multitude,
That by their power might cease the murderer,
Yet two especial reasons cross that course:
First: many having notice of our plot,
One babbling tongue may utter out intent,
And Hoffman being warned is surely armed
Having the fort and treasure in his power,
And be his cause more than notorious ill,
He may with gold maintain it at his will
Scape us, for no doubt he's full of sleights:
Besides, Revenge should have proportion,
By sly deceit he acted every wrong,
And by deceit I would have him entrapped;
Then the revenge were fit, just, and square,
And 'twould more vex him that is all composed
Of craft and subtlety to be outstripped
In his own fashion, than a hundred deaths.
Therefore by my advice pardon Lorrique
Upon condition, that he lay some plot
To intercept the other.
We are agreed.
Your mercy doth all bounds of hope exceed,
And if you will repose that trust in me,
By all the protestations truth can make,
Before the Sun have run his midday's course,
I will tomorrow! yield him to your hands.
Show us the means.
The means is in the Duchess policy.
If she can smooth the murder but a while.
I'll turn deceit to overthrow his fraud.
Then with fair words his flatteries entertain,
And when he doth importune you for love,
Desire him first to show you the first place,
Where he beheld Prince Charles after the wrack
Say you have earnestly entreated me,
But I have led you in a labyrinth
Of no effect; he full of heat and lust,
Glad of occasion will no doubt alone
Conduct you to this fatal horrid cave,
Thy king by force, or fair means, to attain
His false hearts longing, and your honours stain;
But being in the height of his base pride,
The Duke, the hermit, Lodowick and myself,
Will change his pleasures into wretched
And redeemeless misery.
The plot is good, Madam, are you agreed?
To any thing however desperate.
ay but by your leave, Lady, and Lords all, what if
This knave that has been, play the knave still,
And tell tales out of school; how then?
I know not what to swear by; but no soul
Longs for the sight of endless happiness,
With more desire, than mine thirsts for his death:
By all the gods that shall give ill men life,
I am resolved chief agent in his end.
We credit thee, join hands, and ring him round,
Kneel, on his head lay our right hands, and swear
Vengeance against Hoffman.
Vengeance, vengeance, fall
On him, or sudden death upon us all.
Come, part, we to the cave,
You to the Court:
justice dig murders grave.
Nay, I'll come, my wits are mine again
Now faith grows firm to punish faithless men.
Not to be found? hell which way is she gone?
Her Highness charged us to call you her son,
The mystery we know not, but we know,
You are not Princely Otho of Luningberg.
no matter what I am; tell me the way she went
With that Lorrique; speak, or by heaven
Hell shall receive you all.
Be not in raged she comes,
And with her comes trusty Lorrique.
Madam, I feared you, and my heart was sick,
With doubt some over-desperate accident
Had drawn you to the melancholy paths,
That lie within the verge of this rough scar.
Your doubt was but an embryo; I indeed
Desired Lorrique to bring me to the place
Where you beheld the shipwreck of my son;
And he hath led me up and down the wood,
But never brought me to the fatal beach,
It were not fit you should see the sad place,
That still seems dismal since the PRINCE's death.
Dead? is our sovereign Lord the Prince dead?
Inquire no more of that, I will anon
Resolve you of his fate, this time for bear,
Esteem this gentleman your Lord and Prince.
we hold him so, sith you command us so.
Will you go forward, Madam?
Willingly, so you will promise me to walk tomorrow
And see the Earth that gently did receive
My sons wracked body from the churlish foam.
I'll wait upon your Grace, set forward there,
Tricks, and devices! longings! well 'tis good:
I'll swim to my desires, through seas of blood.
Fox you'll be taken, hunter you are fall'n
Into the pit you digged; I laughed to see
How I outstrip the Prince of villainy.
Hoffman for me told such a smoothing tale,
That had not this strange accident befallen
In finding of the cave; I had been held
More dear than ever, in the Duchess eyes:
But now she'll hold me hard, whate'er she say,
Yet is her word past that she'll pardon me,
And I have wealth hoard up which i'll bear
To some strange place: rich men live anywhere.
What? are you gadding sir? what moves your flight?
Coin not excuses in your crouching come,
What cause have you to fly and seek strange hoards
For your wealth gotten by my liberal gift?
And my desert, my Lord.
Well be it your desert;
But what's the cause you'll fly this country?
As I live, my Lord, I have no such intent;
But with your leave, I was debating things,
As if it should chance thus, and thus, why then
'Twere better be far off, but otherwise
My love and life, low at your service lie.
You are a villain damned as low as hell;
An hypocrite, a fawning hypocrite:
I know thy heart, come Spaniel up, arise,
And think not with your antics and your lies
To go beyond me, you have played the slave,
Betrayed me to the duchess, told her all,
Disappointing all my hopes with your base tongue,
o'erturned the height of my intendments,
For which i'll hurl thee from my mountain wrack,
Into the lowest Cavern of pale death.
Alas my Lord for bear, let me be heard.
Thou hast betrayed me, therefore never talk.
By heaven—
O hell! why shouldst thou think on heaven.
Stay, and believe me, think you I am mad,
So great a foe to my own happy chance,
When things are sorted to so good an end,
That all is hid, and we held in regard:
After such horrid, and perfidious acts,
Now to betray myself; be reasonable,
And think how shallow such an act would seem
In me, chief agent in so many ills.
Thou hast a tongue as glib and smooth to lies,
As full of false inventions, and base fraud,
As prone to circumvent believing souls,
As ever heretic or traitor used,
Whose speeches are as honey, their acts gall,
Their words raise up, but their hands ruin all.
By virtue's glorious soul.
Blasphemer peace, swear not by that thou hat'st;
Virtue, and thou have no more sympathy,
Than day with night, Heaven with Hell.
Thou knowest, I know thy villainies excel
Why then by villainy, by blood, by sleights,
By all the horrors tortures can present,
By Hell, and by revenge's purple hand
The Duchess had no conference with me,
But only a desire to see the place
That first received her son, whom she believes
The unrelenting waves and flinty rocks,
Had severed from sweet life after the wrack.
May I believe thee?
Have I failed you yet?
Measure my former acts, and you shall find
My foule allied to yours, wholly estranged
From all I ever loved.
no more, have done.
thou'st won me to continue thee my friend;
But I can tell thee somewhat troubles me,
Some dreadful misadventure my soul doubts,
And I conceive it with no common thought,
But a most potent apprehension;
For it confounds imaginary sense,
Sometimes inflames my blood, another while
' Numbs all the Currents that should comfort life,
And I remain as 'twere a senseless stone.
Come, come, I know the cause, you are in love,
And to be so, is to be any thing.
Do you not love the Duchess?
Yes, I do.
Why there's the matter, then, be ruled by me,
Tomorrow morning she desires to see
The shore, that first received her sea-wrecked son,
And to be unaccompanied she loves;
Except some one or two, you and I:
Now when you have her near your dismal I cave,
Force her, I dot man, make no scruple do't,
Else you shall never win her to your bed:
Do a man's part, please her before she go,
Or if you see, that she turns violent,
Shut her perpetual prisoner in that den;
Make her a Philomel, prove Tereus:
Do't, never fear it.
Why she will be missed.
By whom? by fools. gross, dull, thick sighted fools,
whom every mist can blind, I'll sway them all,
With exclamation that the grieved Duchess
when she beheld the sea that drowned her son,
Stood for a while like weeping Niobe,
As if she had been stone: and when we strived
With mild persuasions to make less her woe
She madder than the wife of Athamas
Leapt suddenly into the troubled sea,
Whose surges greedy of so rich a prey,
Swallowed her up, while we in vain exclaimed
'Gainst Heaven and hell, 'gainst fortune and her fate,
Oh my good villain! how I hug thy plots,
This shall be done, she's mine: run swift slow hours,
Make a short night hasten on day apace,
Rough arms wax soft soft beauty to embrace.
Why so, now your fear will quickly end,
Thou wilt not talk of this?
Will I be hanged?
ne'er take me for a blab, you'll find me none.
I have a neither secret, but—
Come what is't? come, this breast is yours,
My heart's your treasury.
Thou must be secret, 'tis a thing of weight concerns thee near.
Were it as near as life, come, pray speak.
Hark in thine ear, I would not have the air
Be privy to this purpose, wilt thou swear?
What? to be secret? if the least jot I tell
Let all my hopes sink suddenly to hell.
Thou hast thy wish, down villain, keep this close.
Unthankful murderer, is this my meed?
Oh slave, thou'st killed thy heart in wounding mine,
This is my day, tomorrow shall be thine.
Go fool; now thou art dead, I need not fear.
Yet as thou wert my servant just and true,
I'll hide thee in the ditch: give dogs there due,
He that will prove a mercenary slave
To murder, seldom finds so good a grave,
he's gone, I can now spare him, Lorrique farewell;
Commend me to our friends thou meet'st in hell:
Next plot for Mathias and old Saxony,
There ends shall finish our black tragedy.
How little care had we to let her 'scape,
Especially on this so needful time,
When we are vowed to wait upon revenge.
no doubt our uncle's care will keep her safe,
Nor is she in her fits so violent
As she was wont, look where my
Uncle comes, sustaining with one hand
A dying man, and one the other side,
Fair Lucibell supports the fainting body.
Look you here, you marvelled why I went,
Why this man drew me unto him, can you help
Him now. Hoffman has hought him too.
Brother who is't you bring thus ash pale;
is't not Lorrique;
I am, and 'tis in vain to strive for longer hope.
I cannot, only be provident; I greatly fear
The murderous traitor out of mere suspect
Will plot some stratagem against the life
Of the chaste Duchess, help her what you can,
Against the violence of that wicked man.
Hast thou not told him, what we do intend?
Noah, as heaven help me in my wretched end,
Be confident of that, now I must fall
Never again to rise, you know his wrongs:
Be careful Princes to revenge them all.
Well, farewell fellow, thou art now paid home
For all thy councelling in knavery,
Good Lord! what very fools are very knaves!
There cunning bodies often want due graves.
Son, daughter, brother, follow my advice,
Let us no longer keep this hateful plot,
lest we be circumvented.
True, 'tis to put on open arms.
'tis now too late, we are beset
With soldiers, we must fight, and since it must be;
Let's to't valiantly.
Princes prepare not to resist your foes,
we are as firm as life unto your blood.
The Duchess Martha greets old Saxony,
Prince Mathias, Rodorick, and fair Lucibell:
To me she hath discovered the damned plots
Of that perfidious Hoffman, and hath sent
These armed soldiers, to attend on you.
We thank her Highness, but we think in vain
Both you and we attend; Lorrique lies slain
By Hoffman's sly suspicion; best be joined
To apprehend him publicly.
There is no need, our Duchess hath apparelled
Her speech in a green livery,
She salutes him fair, but her heart
Like his actions, is attired
In red, and blue, and sable ornaments.
But' tell us where they are?
At hand she comes, with him alone her plot is,
She comes in happy time for all your good.
Cease words, use deeds
Revenge draws nigh.
Come set his body like a scarecrow,
This bush shrowded you, this you,
Stand close true soldiers, for revenge.
I: do, do, do, I pray you heartily do, stand close.
I wonder much why you ask me for Lorrique,
What is Lorrique to you, or what to me?
I tell you he is damned, inquire no more,
His name is hatefuller than death.
Heaven! what alterations these!
Can I believe you love me as you swore,
When you are so inconstant to your friend?
He is no friend of mine whom you affect,
Pardon me Madam, such a fury reigns
Over my boiling blood, that I envy
Any one on whom you cast an amorous eye.
What grown so loving? marry heaven defend,
we shall deceive you if you dote on us,
Fot I haue sworne to lead a widdowes life,
And never more to be termed married wife.
ay, but you must.
Must? use not force, I pray.
Yield to my love, and then with meekest words
And the most humble actions, i'll entreat
Your sacred beauty; deny me? i'll turn fire,
More wild than wrath, come then agree,
If not to marry, yet in unseen sports
To quench these Lawless heats that burn in me.
What my adopted son become my lover?
And make a want on minion of his mother?
Now fie upon you fie y'are too obscene
If like your words, your thoughts appear unclean.
By heaven I do not jest, go to, believe me,
'Tis well you laugh; smile on, I like this:
Say, will you yield?
At the first? fie Noah.
That were an abject course, but let us walk
Into some covert, there are pretty caves,
Lucky to lovers' suits, for Virgil sings;
That Dido being driven by a sharp storm
Into a Lybian cave, was there enticed
By silver-tongued Aeneas to affect;
And should you serve me so, I were undone,
Disgraced in Germany by every Boor,
Who in their rhymes would jest at Martha's name
Calling her minion to her cozen son.
Fairer than Dido, or loves amorous Queen;
I know a cave, where in the bright day's eyes
Looked never but askance through a small creek,
Or little cranny of the fretted scar;
There I have sometimes lived, there are fit seats,
To sit and chat, and coll, and kiss, and steal
love's hidden pleasures, come, are you disposed
To venture entrance? if you be, assay,
'Tis death to quick desire, use no delay.
Virtue and modesty bids me say no,
Yet trust me Hoffman thou'rt so sweet a man,
And so beloved of me, that I must go.
I am crowned the King of pleasure.
Hateful slave, thou goest to meet destruction in the cave.
'Sdeath who stands here?
What's that? Lorrique's pale ghost?
I am amazed: nay slave stand of:
Thy weapons sure, the prize is ours.
Come forth dear friends, murder is in our powers
Yield thee, base son of shame.
How now what's here? am I betrayed?
By dotage, by the falsehood of a face?
Oh wretched fool fall'n by a woman's hand
From high revenge's sphere, the bliss of souls.
Cut out the murderer's tongue.
What do you mean?
Whom have I murdered; wherefore bind ye me;
They are justices to punish thy bare bones,
Look with thy bloodshed eyes on these bare bones,
And tell me that which dead Lorrique confessed
Who is't thou villained that least? who was't?
Why Otho thy sons, and that's my fathers by him.
O merciless and cruel murderer
To leave me childless.
And me husbandless.
Me brotherless. oh smooth tongued hypocrite
How thou didst draw me to my brother's death.
Talk no more to him, he seeks dignity,
Reason he should receive his desperate hire,
And wear his crown made flaming hot with fire:
Bring forth the burning crown there.
Do old dog, thou helpest to worry my dead Father
And must thou kill me too? 'tis well, 'tis fit,
I that had sworn unto my father's soul
To be revenged on Austria, Saxony,
Prussia, Luningberg, and all there heirs:
Had prospered in the downfall of some five;
Had only three to offer to the fiends,
And then must fall in love; oh wretched eyes
That have betrayed my heart; be you accursed;
And as the melting drops run from my brows,
So fall they on the strings that guide your heart
Whereby their oily heat may crack them first,
I so, boil on thou foolish idle brain,
For giving entertainment to love's thoughts.
A man resolved in blood, bound by a vow
For no less vengeance, than his father's death,
Yet become amorous of his foe's wife!
Oh sin against all conceit! worthy this shame
And all the tortures that the world can name.
Call upon heaven, base wretch, think on thy soul.
In charity and prayer
To no purpose without charity.
We pardon thee, and pray for thy soul's health.
So do not I for yours, nor pardon you;
You killed my father, my most warlike father,
Thus as you deal by me, you did by him;
But I deserve it that have slacked revenge
Through fickle beauty, and a woman's fraud;
But Hell the hope of all despairing men,
That wring the poor, and eat the people up,
As greedy beasts the harvest of their spring:
That Hell, where cowards have their seats prepared,
And barbarous asses, such as have robbed trojans of
Reward, and punish true desert with scorned death.