LEt the world feel thee, and those Demigods,
Proud with the name of Kings, debase themselves
To honour thee, this Crown commands as much
Wherewith I do invest thy happy brow,
Happy indeed if that succeeding times
Shall set up virtue, so to lessen crimes.
Thus from the ashes of dead Solyman
Is raised another Phoenix great Corcutus;
Live equally adored, when Princes bend
To better courses, all their subjects mend.
Crowns make not Kings, nor can that glittering show
Perfect thine honour, take another sign
Of thy Imperial dignity, 'tis thine.
That adds a Godlike grace unto thy brow,
This binds due honour, that prostrates every knee
Before thy throne, then live, and may that arm
Secure thy subjects from all foreign harm.
What seasoned knowledge, learning's prudent Queen
Hath blessed thee with, must now initiate thee
In the paths of war, all studied Arts
Are but degrees unto some wished end▪
And steps of hope whereby we do ascend
Unto the top; and level of our thoughts.
But Kings than prove most happy when they are
Watchful in peace, and provident in war.
Those are their utmost ends, which that they may
O'ertake, Art, and the sword, make fairest way.
The Muses nursed thee up, and thou didst draw
The pleasant juice of learning from their breasts,
In thy first nonage; here than we bestow
The second help, to which good Princes owe
Much of their welfare; swords are the first ground
Of peace, and war; they both defend and wound.
Thus are we vowed to thee, let thy dread fame
Thunder amazement through the spacious world,
That when thou lifts thine arm, thy foes may say
Not Ioue, but great Corcutus rules the day.
Which that applause hath crowned, and with it
Will ever spite of traitors joying sit
As now we do; nor shall my watchful care
Be wanting to you, whilst this subtle air
Feeds mine industrious spirits, I shall fill
The good with joy, by cutting of the ill
Corrupted rags of men; Ioue let me stand
An object in thine eye, when thy swift hand
Fails in the stroke of justice, virtue return
From thy sad exile, I will purge the walls
From spotted vice, and make this City free
To entertain so fair a Queen as she.
Then (Bassanes) I embrace what you have thrown
Upon me, and these signs of honour thus
We rebestow; their power still stays with us.
Could this vast body of the Commonwealth
Stand fast without a soul? each man should see
I am not greedy of this dignity:
This burdenous weight which some must undergo,
The gods are busied with diviner things,
And put Earth's care into the hands of Kings.
And is Bajazet arrived?
So fame reports
Yet how he doth digest Corcutus Reign,
That every Bird sings not; but sure with pain.
A Turkish Bajazet, and suffer wrong,
May for a time conceal his grief, not long.
Eagles soar high, and scorn that shorter Plumes
Should reach the clouds, which their proud wings can touch,
Corcutus must not reign, to keep his father's right
Due to his father, nor will he if he might,
he's learned, therefore just, Arts not allow
To were a Crown due to another's brow.
Dar'st thou oppose his greatnesse? is not Gr
Already wracked enough? have thy proud Towers
Reared up their lofty spires? which steeped in blood,
Threw a reflex of red back to the clouds,
And blushed at their own ruins, are thy crude wounds
Already stopped, and is that day forgot,
In which the Turkish Mavors Ottoman,
Wielded a sword of death within thy Walls?
Charon grew weary with hurrying souls to hell,
When threescore thousand Greekes in one day fell.
We know their force, and sad experience says,
Move not again, Greece welters still in blood
And every crackling thunder of the heavens
Speaks the shrill echo of the Turkish drums,
Then are we drawn by you, so let it be,
About these great affairs as you decree.
This phrase becomes the Greekes, submissive states
Must bend, 〈◊〉 Conqueror must rule the fates.
And such are you, our vanquished hearts must bend,
But bad beginnings have a fatal end▪
Me thinks I see great Bajazet in arms▪
Spreading his fearful Ensigns in the air,
Like some prodigious Comet, we may fear
Speedy revenge vulesse some quick advice
Work a prevention of his future hate,
'tis he must sway the Sceptre, or we shall hear
A dreadful defiance rattled in our ear,
he's strong in friends, and power, we must descend,
To our just duty, or our latest end.
Renowned Viceroy, thy persuading thoughts
Have predeuined most truly these effects,
And we applaud thy Counsel, let us three
join our best strength, that these ensuing jars
May be composed without the stroke of Wars:
Coroute is wise, and mild, and being so,
He hates the rumour of a public foe.
Nobly resolved (Greece sings) if the event,
Prove but so happy, as honest the intent.
But stand aside, Bajazet is come.
Am I not Emperor? he that breathes a no,
Damns in that negative syllable his soul,
Durst any god gainsay it, he should feel
The strength of fiercest Giants in mine arms,
Mine angers at the highest, and I could shake
The firm foundation of the earthly Globe:
Could I but grasp the Poles in these two hands,
I'd pluck the world asunder; drop thou bright Sun,
From thy transparent Sphere, thy course is done,
Great Bajazet is wronged not shall thine eye
Be witness to my hateful misery.
Madness and anger makes my tongue betray,
The Chaos of my thoughts: under this breast,
An heap of indigested cares are pressed.
What is it that I doubt? through every joint
Dances a trembling agve, this dull blood,
That courses through my veins divines no good.
Ha, shouts of joy, at dead men's obsequies?
I'm in a maze of woes, what thou wilt throw
On me, Ioue, let it come, i'll stand thy blow.
Live happy Bajazet.
Happy in my fear,
That word sounds sweet in my distracted ear.
Happy in what?
In thy friends,
That grieve to see thy wrongs.
My wrongs,
There sticks the string my thoughts did harp upon;
But who hath wronged me in this high content?
The fates do sometime frown, yet bless th'event,
And sequel of our woes, it cannot be,
I should be thwarted in my jollity.
But if I can unfold it— for the more,
I know them not the greater is my sore.
In that read all thy woes, take there a brief,
Contract of all thine ills, sad lines of grief.
How's this? my youngest son advanced to my seat.
Corcutus Imperator, sure I dream:
These are but mpty apparitions
Feigned by the god of sleep to vex my soul,
Were they not so— ere this black night
Had thrown her sable mantle o'er the heavens
To hide me from my shame; but is it so?
I do but flatter up myself, they are true
And real griefs, my Passion says they are,
Isaac, Achmetes, are they not?
Too true
Great Bajazet:
Corcutus Imperator,
Would I had seen thy name writ in the book
Of dark damnation, rather than these lines.
Cracked not mine eyestrings when I viewed this text?
See how each letter spreads abroad in pomp,
As if they scorned my tears, how I could dwell
On these two words, Corcutus Imperator.
Hither repair, the watchful paper worms
That scan old records over to a line:
Here in two words imprinted shall you see,
The model of a doleful history;
Virtue dishonoured, breach of filial love,
Right shouldered out by wrong, nor can you fain,
A crime, which these two words do not contain,
But now I rail, not grieve. O nimble air,
Let my plaints vanish as they spoken are,
Off with this womanish mildness, I will find
A shorter trick than this to ease my mind,
Pluto beware, I come to reign in hell,
Fates bid me rule, and birthright to excel.
Stay Bajazet, that arm can break a path
Unto thy earthly Monarch, ere thou come
To bless the banks of sweet Elysium,
With thy wished presence: Mahomet forefend
That thou shouldst seal a Kingdom to thy son,
By this untimely death, Corcutus reigns,
But at thy better pleasure; when he shall hear
Thou art arrived, then he'll 'twixt joy and grief,
Start from his throne, and nimbly run to meet,
Thy pomp, and throw his Sceptre at thy feet:
If he but slack that duty here are by,
Achmetes strong and bold, Isaac and I.
Devoted to your service, yet the world stands
On wavering doubts, ready to clap their hands.
My desires are crowned,
And from the gate of Limbo, where I sat,
I feel my spirits knock against the heavens.
Achmetes? In that name I hear an ease
Of all my griefs pronounced, he shall suffice
To banish usurpation from my throne,
Did furies guard it round, he's able well
To reach my Kingdoms from the gripes of hell.
My sword, and life, both which are vowed to thee,
Are still at thy command: walk but along,
Corcutus shall resign, thou have no wrong.
Death, and the furies plunge the obsequious slaves,
Would he have joined with us? we would have kept
Corcutus high, and honoured, where he sits
In spite of a whole host of Baiazet's.
Me thinks your power might have been greater far
Over Achmetes, one addict to you
By no less bond of duty, than the son
Is to the father:
Mustapha I'll tell you
Had not my daughter been espoused to him,
I had named his death, and by some plot
Worked him a quick destruction long e'er this;
Now let us temporize with Bajazet;
Yet keep thy nature ever, and be true
To thine own profit; Fortune may advance
Some other Prince, worth both thy love and mine.
we'll stay her leisure,
See more Harpies gathered to catch a Crown,
O 'tis a charming bait.
Me thinks these City walls smile on our entrance,
As if they knew great Baiazet's three sons,
Were come to grace their beauty.
But We should frown
On them which harbour such black treasons, Well,
Were I great Bajazet, I'd ring a noise
Of spiteful horror, that should make the ground
Tremble beneath their weight at such a sound:
A younger son enthroned an Emperor.
Brother contain yourself, come le's away,
To see the end that waits on this sad day.
What Mahomet?
And Trizham? here's a sight
Of one man's issue, Noble Bajazet,
Brothers we have jumped together?
All save one,
And he's a great deal better so alone.
Corcutus 'tis you mean, who though he reign,
Above us now, yet must fall back again,
Into our rank, 'tis Bajazet must rise,
And he descend, such a report there flies.
Did he not frown, and storm?
It moved him much,
And wrought strange passions in him, when he read
Your name, and found your name so entitled.
Cling to my temples thou blessed ornament,
Be ever unremoved, though all the gods
Chide me in thunder for this insolence,
Am I in heaven? in state placed on the sphere
Of eminence, but barely to appear,
With faint, and borrowed lustre, then descend,
Ranked with the vulgar heads, first let me feel,
The Tition vulture, or Ixion's wheel;
And the worst torture hell itself can bring,
To scourge my soul, o let me dye a King;
But stay, I must bethink me at what rate,
I purchase these fair trappings: ha? the curse
Of him that got me: start my daunted spirits,
Shall I usurp a throne, and sit above my father,
Whilst the gaping pit of hell,
With wide stretched jaws, yawns for my fall,
O I am struck with horror, and the slaves of stix,
Already sting my wounded soul.
Will you fair Prince reject all future hopes
Of just succession, and afflict your Sire,
By your unjust detainment of his Crown.
I am distracted, and me thinks I burn,
Under these robes of state, a boiling heat,
Runs from them through my veins, Ioues hardy son,
When he bewrapt himself in Nessus' shirt,
Felt not more bitter agonies, than I,
Clothed in the trappings of my Majesty.
I am resolved; Bassas, go meet our father,
Allure him home with this: I am begun
To be no King, but a repentant son.
Pallas I ask thy pardon, I have strayed
A graceless truant from thy happy schools,
Whither I'll now return; there's not a rank,
Place, or degree, can sort us out true bliss
Without thy Temple, there my dwellin●g is:
Amongst the Sacred monuments of wit,
Which Classic authors carefully have writ
For our instruction, I will waste my time;
So to wash out the spots of this sad crime.
Court honours, and you shadows of true joy
That shine like stars, till but a greater light
Drown your weak lustre, I adjure your sight,
Even from my meditations, and my thoughts
I banish your enticing vanities,
And closely kept within my study walls,
As from a cave of rest, henceforth I'll see,
And smile, but never taste your misery.
I but as yet am floating on the waves,
Of stormy danger, nor am sure to scape
The violent blast of angry Bajazet.
Blow fair my hopes and when I touch the shore,
I'll venture forth on this rough surge no more.
See where he comes, oh how my guilty blood
Starts to my face, and proves my cause not good.
Our duty to our father,
Ours to the Emperor.
Why kneels great Bajazet? I am thy son
Thy slave: and if thy wrath but frown, undone.
Why kneels great Bajazet, heavens hide thy face,
From these preposterous doings.
What, not ashamed
To circled in thy brow with that bright Crown,
Yet blush to see me kneel? though filial rites,
And moral precepts say the son must bend
Before the Father, yet your high degree
And power bids you rise, commands my knee.
Those ornaments be thine, Here Bajazet
I Crown thee Monarch of the spacious West,
Asia, and Africa: if ought be mine,
Greater than these I here proclaim it thine.
Live Bajazet our mighty Prince,
Live, rule, and flourish.
Is this your zeal? is it? did every voice
Breath out a willing suffrage? I am crowned,
My joys are fully perfect, and I feel
My lightened spirits caper in my breast.
Rise thou starbright mirror of thine age,
By thee our iron days prove full as good,
As when old Saturn thundered in the clouds.
Be an example to succeeding times,
How sons should use their Parents: and I vow
(When I shall fail) this honour to thy brow.
Attend us Bassaes, I'll lead on to joy,
Never was Father blessed with such a Boy.
Freed from a Princely burden, I possess
A Kingly liberty, and am no less
Princely; observance wait on him, on me
Thoughts undisturbed, I shall then happy be.
Scarce had I set my foot within these walls
In expectation of a solemn hearse,
Due to the wand'ring Ghost of Mahomet;
But loud alarms of abundant joy
Ring in mine ears, and every servile groom
Congratulates the Coronation
Of Bajazet: hark how they roar it out.
A cold disturbance like a gelid ●●ost
Settles my blood within me, and I hate
His cheerful triumphs, more than mine own Fate.
'Tis true indeed, I proved not the first fruits,
An elder offspring of my Fathers breed,
Yet was it so that Bajazet and I
Both tumbled in one womb, perhaps the Queen
Of women's labours doted at our birth,
And sent him first abroad, or else I slept,
And he before me stole into the world,
Must I then lose my glory, and be hurled
A slave beneath his feet? no, I must be
An Emperor as full as great as he.
Divorced my Daughter? fond and insolent man,
I'll crush thee into nothing, if I can
Endure the noise of my disgrace I know
How to return it; I am a flame of fire,
A chafing heat distempers all my blood.
Achmetes thou must cool it, when thy limbs
Are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
And thy stained blood enchanted from thy veins,
Then shall I be appeased, mean while I live
Thy mortal foe: But stay, let me contain
Mine anger undiscovered. Friend how is't?
Know you not Isaac?
What?
The flight of Zemes
Hence to Armenia.
O Zemes?
Yes e walkt
About the City disguised, and unseen
Till his escape.
'tis strange and full of fear.
We meet him frequent in the vulgar mouth.
Zemes is valiant, and Armenia strong,
Here's Bajazet, he must beware the wrong.
What is it thou murmur'st, Bajazet and wronged?
Something it is thou knowest concerning us:
Take thee fair leave, and speak it.
Yes I know
Matter of weight, such as concern thy life.
Such as concern my life? Speak out thy tale,
We are so fleshed in joy, bad news proves strange,
And touch my sense too harshly.
But you must hear.
Your brother Zemes, when swift winged Fame
Told him your father Mahomet was dead,
Flew quickly hither first to celebrate
His funeral pomp, then to assume his State,
His Crown, and Sceptre: which he rightly knew,
Unto your hand, and head, both to be due.
But when applausive joys, and peals of mirth,
Sounded loud Mosique in his troubled ears,
Of you enthroned; then he began too late
To brawl at heaven, and wrangle with his Fate.
So he went hence and cried; revenge be mine:
Quake thou great City of proud Constantine
At my fierce anger, when I next return,
With clouds of misty powder, I shall choke
Thy breath, and dull thy beauty with its smoke.
This posted he hence to Armenia's King,
There to implore his aid, which he will bring
To front thy power: nor doth he yet despair,
To dispossess, and fright thee from thy chair.
First from my body shall he fright my soul,
And push me into dust. Isaac make haste
To muster up our forces, strike up our Drums,
Let them proclaim destruction through the world.
Clear up your dusty armour, let it cast
Such an amazing lustre on the Foe,
As if Bellona danced on every crest.
The bright sun of my glory is eclipsed,
Till Zemes be extinct: he must not shine
To dull my beams, since the whole heaven is mine.
Call forth Achmetes, his unconquered arm,
Shall keep us safe from this intended harm.
My Liege, you have forgot Archmetes oath,
In which he vowed never to draw his sword
In your defence.
I had forgot it,
But now I remember, such was the vain
Heat of my youth, but I recall again
What ever I protested, tell him so.
Rash words must be dispensed with.
Then I'll go.
My Father once in ordering of a Camp,
Preferred me to be Captain of a wing,
So when the Battles joined, and life and death
Where struggling who should win power of our breath,
Our Armies proved the stronger; only my guide
Failed, and a base repulse fell on my side;
At which my Father stormed, and in my place
Seated Achmetes, for which black disgrace,
I vowed a swift revenge, even by his shame
That wore mine honour, to redeem my fame▪
Which when Achmetes heard, he deeply swore,
Never with wit and strength to guide me more.
But now he must, see where he comes, and armed.
What strange device is plotting in his brain?
Honoured Achmetes.
Royal Emperor.
Thine arm must then uphold my Royalty.
Why lies thy valour, prostrate at our feet,
When like fierce lightnings it should run and meet
My harms like a rock unmoved? oppose.
The course, and headlong torrent of my foes.
I am a man of peace, mistake me not.
I made a vow, nor can it be forgot,
Till you revoke your oath.
Which here I do,
Great Mahomet be witness, that I mean
Sincerely what I speak, Achmetes now
we're friends, and thus I nullify my vow;
Heavens on this concord lend a gracious smile.
Achmetes I have placed thee in my bosom,
Gave thee an honoured title in my love;
And of as lasting constancy, as is
The sun which looks so cheerfully on this.
Go fit the janissaries to the wars,
Kindle new fire of valour in their breasts,
Thou art their Genius, even the breath they draw,
Raise then thy plumes, and keep thy foes in awe.
Stood there a Pluto at thy city walls,
And with a band of furies had besieged
Thy people, I would conjure them away,
And send them back to hell: so thou shalt stand
As fast as in the skies, under mine hand.
I am Crowned in thee, nor can I fall,
Whilst such a valour breathes within our wall,
Zemes depose me? he must be more strong,
Then Mars, that can do Bajazet that wrong.
We hate thy brother, therefore lend thee aid,
'Tis not our duty to expostulate
Thy right unto the Crown, on to your wars,
Thrive in your projects, I shall joy to see
A quarrel fought 'twixt Bajazet and me.
I'll second thy encounters, and we two
Like the two Roman thunderbolts of war,
Will with the flashes of our fiery swords
Keep their composed ranks, that they shall stand
Aghast, to see two Scipioes in one band,
Thanks great Armenian King, and when I am
Wheeled to that height, which now my brother holds,
I shall require these benefits, and vow
That kindness, which I can but promise now.
Come let's away, our armies are well set,
Ready to march, now tremble Bajazet.
Caigubus, public dangers call me forth,
And I must leave thee now unto thyself
My son, thou seest unto what height of fame
We are ascended, yet the sun shines clear,
And not one dusky cloud of discontent
Dims the unspotted brightness of our joys,
Not Bajazet is more beloved than I:
Such strict observance is there showed to me,
By all that know my worth, and hear me named,
As if I grasped Ioues thunder in my hands:
By all my hopes, I fear some tragic scene
Will trouble our calm fortune▪ Son beware,
The top of honour is a narrow plot
Of ground, whither we have already got,
'Tis brittle, and uncertain, if thou tread
One careless step aside, thou fallest down dead,
The shoot from thence is deep, and underneath,
Ruin gapes wide, thy body to receive.
Stand firm Caigubus: though thou startest not away
Yet blasts of envy often force aside
The weariest footsteppe: these where e'er they shall,
Blow strong▪ will make them stagger if not fall.
I shall forget to sleep, to breath, to live,
Sooner than these thy precepts, they are fixed,
And printed in my thoughts.
Enough, no more,
That Isaac Bassa trust him not too much:
I have divorced his daughter from my bed,
For her adulterate looseness, hence, he hides
A mass of fretting ranchor in his breast,
Which he hath varnished yet, and gilded o'er
With coloured shows of love, but he is false,
And subtle as a Serpent, that will wind
Into thy breast, stinging thee ere thou find
Or once suspect his hatred; I must away,
Hasty alarms call me hence, thus, and farewell,
Envy grows greater, as our states excel:
Father, adieu.
Alaready marched so near, Zemes make haste
To death, as if he longed our wrath to taste.
Trizham, and Mahomet, it concerns you now,
To fly hence nimbly to your Provinces,
Zemes is come too near us to escape,
He cannot fly the ground whereon he treads,
But through your countries, hast then, if the wars
Crack not his thread of life, his flight will be
When you may intercept it; if we presume
Only on bold Achmetes, and ourselves,
In beds of down supinely, sleep at home,
Zemes may scape the tempest of our wrath.
Then we hope best, when each event we see,
Thwarted with their preventing policy.
Doubt not our haste and truth, he shall as soon
Break through the fiery fabric of the skies,
As through my Provinces:
Through hell as soon as mine.
Go, I have done my part; Mars and my fate
Give fair success to my designed plot,
And Zemes is entrapped, already dead:
That hand secures me that strikes off his head.
The battle will prove great and dangerous,
But were their number double more than ours,
The justice of our cause bids us go on,
And like a cheerful drum strikes panting fear
From every breast. Father, lead you the vanguard,
The rearward be your charge, the right wing yours,
Myself will guide the left, this day shall crown
Your valour in full pride, Zemes must down.
Time hath outstripped our haste, our foes do stand,
Waving their golden plumes, as if the gods,
Were come to meet great Zemes in the field,
Their armies planted, and a distilling cloud,
Hovers above their heads, as if it wept,
At their approaching fate. Armenia's King
Lead you the vanguard, under your command
The rearward shall march on, the Phalanx
Be your care brave Captains, as we're informed,
Achmetes rules the left wing of our foe,
I'll rule the right wing of ours, so when I meet,
Him in his pride I'll prostrate at his feet.
Our men are ordered, Zemes lead the way,
The skies look dusky black on this sad day.
Great Queen of chance; but do I call on this
Unconstant Stepdame? be thou propitious Mars,
Rough god of war: steel up this weary arm,
And put a ten fold vigour in my bones;
What shall Achmetes fall, and in his loss,
Great Bajazet, be wronged? it cannot be
Death comes to wound thee Zemes, I am he.
Zemes?
Achmetes? Opportunelie met,
Here staggers all the fortune of the field,
This hour must bless me, and a single fight
Purchase thee honour, and to me my right:
Honour to thee, to die by Zemes' hand,
My right to me, an Empire to command.
Brave Prince, I more lament thy case then can thyself
That runnest with such madness on the edge
Of desperate ruin, thou art but young and weak,
Manhood's soft blossoms are not fully spread
Upon thy downy chin; but riper years
Have settled the compacture of my joints,
And they are strongly knit: 'twill vex my soul
In the clear morn of thine uprising hopes,
To wrap thee in a fatal cloud of death.
Submit thee to thy brother, thou shalt find
Me thy true friend, him merciful and kind.
Submit? had I a right to loves high Throne,
And stood in opposition of his power,
Should all the gods advise me to submit,
I would reject their counsel: much more thine.
Guard thee Achmetes, I thy stroke abide,
I cannot gore thy Prince but through thy side.
The day be thine, and Zemes stand thy Fate;
Strike home, I'd lost the day, and life I hate.
Have at thee then.
Not stir? now by my sword
Thou shalt have fairer play before thy death:
Take back thy sword, in that I recommit
My forfeit to thy charge, thy life with it.
Oh! hold thy conquering hand, and give my soul
A quiet passage to her rest; my blood
Begins to waste, and a benuming cold,
Freezes my vital spirits: Achmetes go,
Tell Bajazet that thou hast slain his foe.
Farewell, brave son of Mars, thy fame shall stay
With us, although thy soul flit hence away.
I have not lied, Achmetes thou hast slain,
My hopes, and therefore me, my wounds are shallow,
But my state desperate, Ha? what shall I do?
Armenia's King is 〈◊〉 acke to his home,
Cold entertainment will attend me there;
The field is empty, every man retired,
Only a few dead carcasses, and I,
Then whither shall I bend my steps? to Rome!
To Rome then let it be: Bishop I come,
thouart a religious thing, and I will trust,
My life to one so innocently just.
Indeed we may be thought upon in time,
When there be Countries more than there be men,
We may get some preferment: sit at home
And prove good boys, and please our father well.
My thoughts are two unbridled, Bajazet,
I neither can, nor will endure thy curb,
My compressed valour like a strangled fire.
Breaks out in violent flames, and I must rule.
Trizham and Mahomet are slipped in haste
Each to their several Province, we must stay,
That are their Elders for another day;
This Court will prove our scaffold where we stand
Placed in the eye of angry Bajazet:
Who thwarts him in his fury is but dead,
And in that passions heat, off goes his head.
I must not line thus.
I could be content,
He fears not death, whose thoughts are innocent.
I thank you brother, than belike some crimes
Lie heavy on my conscience, and I fear,
Unless I shift my station, 'twill be known;
You think well of me kind Mahometes.
As well as of a brother I can think.
If by a rash applying to yourself,
My words have been distasteful, blame not me.
Can I apply them then unto myself?
Am I so loose in manners? by heaven and earth,
Thou shalt repent this deeply.
Stop that oath,
Brothers agree, or walk hence but along
Into my garden, where each springing herb
Smiles on my fair content, there you shall see,
How flowers of one stock, so twisted are,
One in the others twinings, that they show,
One stands by th'other's help, both jointly grow;
These shall suffice your quarrels to remove,
And dumb examples teach a lively love.
Come let us go.
Strait I will follow you.
Away fond wretches, o that every breast
Were of so dull a temper as you two.
But who comes here?
Brother Corcutus whither are you bent▪
What from the Court so soon?
My father bids,
I go to undertake the charge, his love
Hath thrown upon me; That's rich Ionia.
You go to rule there?
Yes:
Heaven's speed you well.
Dear Selimus adieu.
Brother farewel.
Revenge and you, three furious twins of night,
Ascend up to our theatre of ill,
Plunge my black soul twice in your Stygian flood,
That by its virtue it may be congealed,
And hardened against remorse: Pluto every
My breast, with a diviner policy,
Then every trifling brain can reach unto;
I'll fill the world with Treasons, and my wit
Shall put new tracts to death: Charon shall see,
His waftage still in use by company,
Sent thither by my care, o 'twill do well,
To blast the earth with want, and furnish hell,
Tush, Virtue makes men fools, Isaac be wise,
Shake off the tender fetters of remorse,
And hug that chance, that opens thee the way
To ruinate Achmetes: did he stand
On terms of conscience, neighbourhood or love,
When he cashiered my daughter from his house,
And to the world's broad eye, opened her crime?
No: he was swift and bitter in his hate,
And so will I, he is but now returned
In Triumph from the field, as full of pride
As I of envy, hence I'll ground my hate.
When fierce Bellona smiled on Bajazet,
Amidst the fiery tumults of the War,
She offered Zemes to Achmetes hand,
They fought, Achmetes conquered at his foot,
Fell the proud rebel, wounded, but not slain,
There might Achmetes with a blow of death
Cut off our fears, continued in his breath:
This shall incense the angry Emperor,
And crush Achmetes in his fairest hopes.
True politicians work by others hands,
So I will by the Prince, my plot stands firm:
See where he comes, now sly Mercurius, whet
My tongue, to kindle hate in Bajazet,
Isaac how thrived Achmetes in his Wars,
Fame is of late grown dumb of his renown,
Surely unwelcome news clogs her swift wings,
Else had she now been freqvent in our Court;
And we had fully known the chance of all.
We had, yet could not the event,
Lie so concealed, but Isaac found it out,
Which when I first discovered, strait it wrought
Tempests of passions in me, joy and grief
Reigned at one instant in the self same breast.
As how?
As thus. I joyed that Zemes fell,
Was sorry he escaped.
Fell and yet escaped?
Beneath Achmetes feet the traitor fell.
And yet escaped, good Ioue how may this be.
Thus it might be, and was so: when sad death
Was glutted with the ruin of each side,
When slaughtering Mars had stained the field with blood,
And cast a purple colour o'er the earth,
At length some milder providence desired,
An end of those hot tumults that were seen,
To last in Zemes' breath; so that their fire
Would be extinct, when Zemes should expire
Then from the middle skirmish forth were brought
He and Achmetes, being met they fought,
Zemes was vanquished by a violent blow,
Which struck him trembling lower than his knees▪
Now whither flattering, or present gifts
Redeemed him from his fate I cannot show
Something they plotted, what, none yet can know.
Canst thou advise me Isaac how to sound
The depth of all his mischief.
Thus you may,
He being come from Zemes overthrow,
And yet lukewarm in blood, and full of joy,
You may in way of honour and free mind,
Call him this night to banquet, then being set,
When the hot spirits of caroused healths,
Have spoiled his wit of smooth and painted tales,
And wine unlocked the passage for the truth,
Bid him relate the manner of his war,
The chances and events; then when he comes
To Zemes, if he err about his flight,
His ends are bad, his bosom black as night.
Thou art my good Angel, Isaac I applaud
Thy faithful plot, Achmetes were thy soul
As dark as hell, and thy enclosed thoughts,
As subtle as a winding Labyrinth,
By such a guide as can remove each doubt,
And by a quill of thread ●'de track them out.
But Isaac, if we trap him in this wiles,
How shall we kill the traitor? We have a trick,
Already strange to catch him in the nick.
Easily thus: our laws allow a custom,
Not used of late, yet firm still in effect,
And thus it is; when there doth breath a man,
Direfully hated of the Emperor,
And he in strict severity of right
Cannot proceed against him, than he may
O'erwhelm him in a robe of mourning black,
Which we have called deaths mantle, that thing done,
The man thus used, is forfeited to fate,
And a devoted sacrifice to him
Whom he had er'st offended, neither can
Strength or entreaty, wrest him from his death,
Both which are treason, and inexpiable.
Thus than you may proceed, when banquets done,
And all their comic merriment run on
To the last scene, and every man expects
A solemn gift, due to Achmetes worth,
Call for a robe therewith to deck your friend,
And perfect all his glory, let that be
This robe of fate, in which ready at hand,
You may entomb the traitor, and bewrappe
His pampered body in a veil of death,
So let him dye, dream not on the event,
Vice is rewarded in its punishment.
I will be fierce and sudden, Isaac invite
Achmetes to a feast: he dies this night.
I shall: would not a private warning serve
But open penance must correct my child,
And a severe divorcement quite degrade
Her other honoured Matrimonial rights?
Were he as strong, as steele-like jointed Mars,
As much applauded through our popular streets,
As erst Dictator Fabius was in Rome,
Or great Augustus, yet the slave should feel
The wrath of an inflamed father light
Heavy upon his soul, and that e'er the next sun
Appear, Achmetes all thy glory's done.
I feared your safety and devoutly prayed
The sword of justice, which your hand did sway,
Might be of conquering force.
Thy prayers were heard
And I am here as safe as I went forth,
Untouched by the rough hands of desperate war,
Nor did I once spy danger in the field,
But when I fronted Zemes, than there met
Two streams of valour, sith on us was set
The chance of the whole combat, others stood
Expecting which of us should lose his blood:
But heaven was just, and to compose the strife,
This sword at one sad blow took thence his life.
The heavens were just indeed, but who comes here▪
Isaac, Mesithes, and Baiazet's three sons,
They come to gratulate my late success,
I see their errand folded in their smiles,
How cheerfully they look upon my joys,
All happiness attend Achmetes.
Thanks Noble friends, how fares the Emperor.
Well by your guard, and he hath sent us now,
All to invite your presence to a feast,
We must be frolic, and this following night,
Shall Crown your joy with revels and delight,
Or else deprive thy soul of that good light.
We must be frolic Captains, think not then
On my loud drums, and staring trumpeters,
Such whose strong lungs roar out a bellowing voice,
Would make a man dance Antic in the fire,
we'll have a choicer music, and my feet,
Shall tread a neater march, than such harsh strains
Can teach them, with more pleasure, and less pains.
Since it hath pleased the Emperor to grace
Our slender merits thus: we shall be there,
To taste his bounty.
we'll lead on before.
I'll follow you.
Ne'er to return more,
I am happy above envy, and my state,
Not to be thwarted with 〈◊〉 fate,
I could disburden all my jealous thoughts,
And shake that currish vice suspicion, off
From my sincere affection, I have wronged
Sure I have wronged thee Isaac thy chaste love,
Cloaks not intended mischief, black deceit
Cannot lie hid under so pure a white,
But it would cast a coloured shadow out,
Through such a slender veil, thy generous thoughts,
Nourish no base detraction; thy free love
Thy professed actions, say 'twere no just fate
That good men's deeds should die by ill men's hate.
Pray heaven they do not.
fear not, I am guessed
To Bajazet, expected at the feast,
The day's far spent, is not Achmetes come?
Not yet great Emperor.
Viceroy of Greece, say now there were a man
Whom my mind honoured, and I should command,
To clothe his body in a suit of gold,
Studded with gems, worth all the Indian snore,
durst any tongue gainsay it:
Surely no.
What if I hated him, and should command
To wrap him in a sable coloured black,
And sentence him to death?
Then he must die.
My thoughts are troubled.
What should these questions mean,
Abrupt demands, one to confound the other?
My liege, your guests are come.
Blessed be the hour in which I see Achmetes safe returned
Bring in our banquet soldiers: boys kneel round,
A ring of braver lads ne'er blessed the ground,
Supply us here with nectar, give it me,
Achmetes, noble warrior, here's to thee,
A health to thy blessed fortunes, it shall run
A complete circle ere the course be done.
My duty bids me pledge it. I return
Good health to Isaac, and in this I've drowned
All concealed enmities.
Ioue split me with his thunder, if my breast
Harbour one bad thought, when this draught is past.
And so I greet thy son? health to Caigubus.
Mahomates the turn lights next on you.
I'll pledget freely, Viceroy her's to you.
Achomates, to you I must commend
The welfare of Achmetes in this cup.
To you Mesithes, thus I prove my love.
Young Prince I do commit this health to you.
I am the last▪ be prodigallin wine,
Fill up my bowl with Nectar, let it rise
Above the goblet's side, and may it like
A swelling Ocean flow above the banks,
I will exhaust it greedily, 'tis my due.
we'll drink with Bacchus and his roaring crew.
Already done, so quickly run about,
One health to me, faith sith you are set to't,
here's a carouse to all,
we'll pledge it round.
'Tis the last draught to some, or I shall fail,
In mine intendments▪ let a foe escape?
When he was trampled down beneath his feet,
There must be treason in it; how my blood
boils in my breast, with anger, not the wine
Could work such strong effect; my soul is vexed,
A chafing heat distempers all my blood,
Achmetes thou must cool it when thy limbs
Are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
And thy stained blood vnchanneled from thy veins,
Then shall I be secure, a quiet rest
Shall rock my soul asleep, 'tis thy last hour,
Must set a period to my restless fears.
What are you merry friends? drink on your course,
Then all arise: and now to consummate
Our happy meeting, and shut up our joys,
Discourse Achmetes of your finished wars;
After an age of woes it proves at last
A sweet content to tell of dangers past.
Let's know your whole events.
Great Emperor
Scarce had the rosy daystar through the East,
Displayed her silver colours through the heaven,
But all the watchful soldiers ready armed,
Dimmed her pale cheeks, with their transparent steel,
And added lustre to the dull sight morn,
So stood we in full pride till the bright Sun
Climbing the glass pavement of the skies,
Roused the slow spirits of the backward foe,
And urged them to the field; at length stepped forth
Zemes, in all the trappings of his state:
And like a well-taught Hector, ranged his troops,
Into their several orders, all prepared
Titan being fearful stepped behind a cloud,
Lest when he saw our limbs bathed all in blood,
And purple streams gushed from our wounded breasts,
Like water from their springs; he in a fear
Should be eclipsed, or startle from his sphere,
The air was thick and dim, our armies joined,
The skirmishes grew hot, and angry Mars
Enthroned upon the battlements of heaven,
Left either side to tug with their own strength,
Till their oppressing multitude bore down,
The justice of our cause, and our whole side,
Not daring to withstand, scorning to fly,
Stood trembling on the utmost brink of hope,
Then the propitious Gods singled me out
Zemes, the life and spirit of our foes:
We met and fought, such was my happy fate,
That at the first encounter Zemes fell,
And I disarmed him, when in proud contempt,
He spit defiance in the face of death,
Opened his breast, and dared me to the stroke,
Whereby I might have sent him hence to hell,
But I in admiration of his worth,
Armed his right hand once more and bad him fight,
Chance did direct my sword upon his head,
He fell before me, and cried, Achmetes hold▪
I'm wounded to the death, and Captain go
Tell Bajazet that thou hast slain his foe.
I left the dying Prince, our wars were done
And ceased with him, by whom they were begun.
The plot has took.
Treason by Mahomet.
I left the dying Prince.
Pursue the project.
Worthy Achmetes,
Well we may give, but not reward by gifts,
And thank, but not requite thee, I would hate
That liberality which would abate
The worth of the receiver▪ thy true fame,
Outstrips the length of titles, and a name
Of weighty honour, is a slender price,
To grace thy merits with, as for a voice,
To crown thee after death, thou art the choice,
Of everliving glory, on thy crest,
Is her abode, and when the latest rest
Of nature, hath betrayed thee to thy grave,
Then shall she print in characters of gold
How brave a man thou wast, how great, how bold;
Though we be dumb, yet shall the world uplift,
Thy name, and thou shalt live without our gift.
Yet thy blessed fates, have not created thee
So clearly Godlike, but some other chance,
May cross thy greatness, and thy high renown
The envy of some God may shoulder down,
Then thus we'll make thee happy, future events
Ne'er shall oppress thy worth nor envious chance
Blot thy ensuing fame, Achmetes know,
Death an immortal gift, we 〈…〉
Treason, treason. O my Father treason,
Help janissaries.
Stop the furious youth.
Bring in an Headsman. Traitor, Zemes' dead?
He lives to see this hand untwine thy thread.
What means this outrage?
Cruel homicide.
Vngratefull
Tyrant.
Meet hilts in's guts.
First let his own hands take that Mantle off.
Help! Treason! I am slain.
Help? why? From whom?
Is not thy Guard about thee.
Hemmed in with death? My friends beset me round
Not to preserve my life, but murder me.
Blush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
That they may see their crimes, and be ashamed
Of this unheard offence: Valiant janissaries,
Sheath up these weapons of rebellion,
Print not that ugly sin upon your brow,
Let my tree pardon woe you to submit.
Keep your allegiance firm.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
One word more damns thee.
How prettily he began to talk
Of sin and pardon. Bajazet behold
Here stands a man mild, honoured, gracious,
Valiant, and faithful; gentle in command,
At home beloved, and feared amongst our foes,
Yet hath thy hand of cruelty assayed
The hated murder of so de re a friend:
Blush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
That he may see his crimes, and be ashamed
Of this new bloodiness. Wicked Bajazet
These admonitions fit the teacher well.
But hear me speak.
First set Achmetes free, then speak thy fill.
What shall I be compelled?
And quickly too.
We cannot brook to see him stand thus clothed.
Your anger will have way. Achmetes go.
There take him. They have saved thee from this woe.
Pernicious villains, they have crossed my plot,
'Twas intercepted e'en in the last deed:
What should Achmetes mean thus to engross
The best affections of my janissaries?
Will he defrand me of my Crown and life?
My life I weigh not: but to lose my Crown
Were to be sentenced to a hell of woes.
I am full stuffed with choler. Slavish Peasants
Held I a sword of power in mine hand,
I would disjoint them piecemeal; can I not?
Am I not Emperor? men call me so:
A reverend title, empty attributes,
And a long page of words follow my name,
But no substantial true prerogative.
Good health to Bajazet.
Indeed that's nothing, since your counsel failed.
Use your best patience it may be regained.
Affection in your stubborn multitude
Is a prone torrent not to be withstood.
Were you as sacred as their household gods,
Yet when you thwart the current of their will,
They'll break the bands of duty, and profane
That holiness to which they bound their thoughts.
Mine eyes are witness with what lively joy
They bore him through the streets upon their necks,
Offering the use of their best strength.
No more.
I am already gone. Why did not then
His proud ambitious tongue bid them go fetch
My Crown, and with quick speed disrobe a wretch?
'Twas in his power: we are distracted Isaac▪
Lend us thy wholesome counsel to prevent
My ruin, and their dangerous intent.
Mine is a blunt advice, and deep in blood
To cut off those base Peasants that withstood
The force of your decree.
To cut them off?
Me thinks I see myself yet circled in
With their revengeful swords, ha? cut them off?
Could I but curse the Traitors from the earth,
Or were my doom pronounced but of effect,
I'd rattle such new torments in their ears,
Should stagger their high courage; but my fears
Strangle my furies, and my envious fate
Forceth my tongue to flatter, where I hate.
Here lies the safest course, to rid these griefs
Give out, you'll go to war, so to enlarge your territories,
And to this end fetch home,
Those warlike Soldiers placed in Garrison.
Let them remain without the walls; at last,
When things shall fit your purpose, lead them all
By night into the City, and in one stroke
Strike off so many thousand perjured heads,
As shall amaze posterity to hear,
How many lives redeemed thee from thy fear.
The weight of all mine honour leans on thee,
That or some nearer course shall quell the pride
Of strong Achmetes, and confound his side.
If your intents be virtuous, and desire
Of eminent place quite banished from your thoughts,
My house shall be your Castle: that I deny
My men and Arms to aid you in your broils,
Think it kind usage: should my Holinesle
Feed your ambition, and make strong your hand
Against your brother 'twere too light a brand
Of flaming hot dissension, and to set
The world in a combustion: all would then
Quarrel by my example: No sweet Prince
Rome's holy Bishop must not so transgress.
If you will dwell within my sacred roof
Settle irregular Passions, and begin
A quiet life, repentance wipes out sin.
My waxen wings are melted, I will soar
Against the sun, through such thick clouds no more.
The middle Region shall contain my flight,
Your counsel sways my wishes, my late deeds
Were full of sin: now let my brother know
Zemes reputes; (and that's the greatest woe.)
To man's aspiring thoughts, how sweet is hope
Which makes them (like Chameleons) live on air
And hug their slender plots: till cool despair
Doth so benumb his thoughts, that he falls dead
From his sublime height, and his lofty head
Which leveled at the skies, doth drop below
His humble feet, this hath experience taught
In that man's headlong ruin, whose proud thoughts
Aimed at the Turkish Diadem; but now cross Fates
Have forced his stubborn Fates to bow.
What speaks your entrance?
Health to Rome's Bishop.
And Peace from Bajazet, who commends his love
With this his Letter, and expects from you
A gracious answer. He reads the Letter.
Let Zemes die by an untimely death,
Else for our love you shall provoke our hate.
he's not our brother, but our hated foe:
And in his death you shall prevent our woe.
Return our service back: tell Bajazet
What he hath given in charge; shall by my hand
Be carefully dispatched.
Good peace attend you.
Imperious Turk,
Am I not Gods Vize-gerent here on earth,
And dar'st thou send thy letters of command?
Or speak to me in threatening menaces?
It grates my patience to obey this monster,
Yet must I murder Zemes, what do I know
Whether my father's soul did transmigrate
Into his breast or no? be dumb remorse,
The Turk is great and powerful, if I win
His love by this, 'twill prove a happy sin.
Am I so poor in worth? still kept so low?
Was I begot only to live and dye,
To fill a place, move idly to and fro
Like other naturals? unmanly life,
The world shall take more notice of my fame,
Else will I with the venomed sting of war,
Deface the beauty, of the universe.
Posteritie shall know, once there did breathe
A Selimus, a mortal deity,
A man at whose blessed birth the planets smiled,
And spent their influence to create a boy,
As brave as Greece e'er hatched, or Rome, or Troy.
here's Isaac Bassa, he's already mine,
He courts my father, but intends for me,
And furthers all my counsels; Noble friend▪
How stand our hopes?
Great Sir, most happily,
The Bassa's murmur at Achmetes wrong:
Seize on their wavering love, their breasts are open,
To him that first will enter there's free scope;
Drop down thy frank affection in their hands,
To bribe is lawful, and 'tis strongly proved
By good examples, Otho ne'er was loved,
Till he had bought the soldiers, that once done,
Galba grew out of fashion; so must we
Addict them to us by a gainful fee:
Give freely, and speak fairly I'll be gone▪
Stay, here, the Bassaes will be here anon.
I shall observe thy precepts, Mesithes welcome,
How fare you in these days of discontent?
My duty bids me ask, and wish you well;
I have been long a barren debtor to you,
At length I may prove thankful: wear my love,
'Tis yours without refusal, a sleight gift,
Yet your looks tells me, 'twill help out my drift.
This courtesy exceeds my weak deserts
Sweet Prince but when occasion calls me forth,
To help you, I'm devoted to your worth.
Your kind acceptance of that recompense,
Binds me more strictly to you.
Sir, farewell,
So one hath took, see where another comes:
All health to Mustapha.
Thanks gracious Prince,
Your gentle pardon for my boldness Sir.
Command my pardon, and commend my love
To thy bright daughter: tell her I admire
Her virtuous perfection; let that chain
Make me remembered often in her mind.
When my weak strength, or wealth shall stretch so far,
As to continue—
No Cynic compliment, good Mustapha.
Then I return you thanks
Health follow you,
And honour me; here is a third at hand.
Continuance to your health Sir.
Thanks gentle Prince▪
Please you to use my service?
Yes, thus far
Spend me that purse of gold.
What means your Highness?
But to deserve your kindness, and avoid
The hated censure of ingratitude,
This is your liberal virtue not my deeds,
But you shall find me thankful.
So I hope;
Three steps are trod already to a Throne,
And I am rich in friends, these prfferd gifts
Conjure observance from their servile breasts:
Oh powerful gold, whose influence doth win
Men with desire for to engender sin.
Isaac Bassa?
Even the man you wished;
What did the golden 〈◊〉 work good effect?
And make the Bassas stoop unto your mind?
Words are but empty shadows, but if deeds
Answer their words, we cannot doubt their faith,
They stoop beneath my feet, I seem to be
As true as Ioue, but sly as Mercury,
Here comes Mesithes muttering back again,
But step aside and we shall know his mind.
But he is cruel, bloody, and his pride
Unsufferable great—
Ha?
Proud Bajazet,
Thou hast usurped a title, thy descent
Could never reach unto, thou wrong'st the world
Since thou detainest the Crown, which heavens decree
Due to a better brow, thou art defamed
With Tyranny and wrong, but Selimus
Is void of blemishes as truth of lies;
Bad stocks must be cut down, the good must rise.
He daunted me at first, but now I find
The golds bright lustre made his judgement blind,
Mustapha comes.
Fortune hath wheeled me up above the stars,
Under a Monarch I'll not sell my hopes:
Bold Selimus I'll second thy designs,
And thou shalt Queen my daughter, that being done
With mine own splendour I'll eclipse the Sun.
ist so? a while I'll feed thy airy hopes
Than dash thee into nothing.
here's a third.
A purse of gold? I can untie the knot,
The close aengima says, I would be King.
Brave Selimus I like thy mounting thoughts,
Work out thy projects, thou canst never need
Or ask my help, but thou art sure to speed.
What we resolved, stands firm, but the event
Be scanned when leisure serves, we'll now prevent
My brother's hopes, and by a sudden fate
Unto their lives and days give equal date,
To compass a blessed end: now we begin
Ioue hath offended if it be a sin
To throw a father down: Saturn did dwell
Once in the heavens, Ioue threw him down to hell.
But stay. Achmetes, and our father's friends?
Achmetes I have injured thy deserts,
Suborned accusers, wronged my credulous ears,
And my rash censure undervalued much
Thy noble spirits, when it first condemned
Then of intended treason, rinse thy soul
In the dull river of oblivion,
We halt beneath the burden of thy hate,
Think my moved anger made me hot and wild▪
I cannot sleep till we be reconciled.
The gods neglect my welfare here on earth,
And when I shall put off this mortal load,
Let me be outlawed from the Court of heaven,
If in this bosom there lie hid one thought
That doth not honour Bajazet.
We know—
Thy virtues make us happy: valiant Sir,
Thy feet once more must tread a warlike march▪
Under our fearful banner, thou shalt place
Even to the walls of Rome, there dwells our foe,
Where our half Moon reared in the middle camp,
Like a distempered Meteor in the air,
Shall strike amazement in the cloistered monks
And shake the prelate's Mitre from his head,
Till he yield Zemes up alive or dead.
When we have moved thee from thy januzaries,
Thou shalt not travel far.
A subtle trick
And well pretended, I admire thy wit.
Let me march hence, and Bajazet shall know,
How little I befriend my Prince's foe,
I'll cast a ring of soldiers round 〈◊〉
The walls of Rome, if Zemes scape thence out,
Cut of my breath: he that's deep in blame,
Must hazard boldly to regain his fame.
What means our father, noble Bajazet,
To work untimely horrors through the world,
Desolate ruin, public discontent
Have printed deep impressions in our path,
Danger and fear scare emptied from our town,
The shaken members of our common wealth,
Yet staggers with their wounds, when discord shall
Make but a second breach, they faint and fall.
Short peace hath charmed your subjects all asleep,
And thrown a quiet slumber o'er their eyes,
Whilst with a sweet restorative she heals
Their Martyred joints, and wipeth out their scars
Writ on their bosoms by the hand of wars,
Zemes is safely cloistered up at Rome,
The prelate dares not aid him, all the gods
Smile on the entrance of triumphant peace,
War lies fast bound, nor can she work our pains
Unless we lose the fury from her chains.
Our sons instruct us? must your pregnant wits,
Cross my command? Bassaes prepare for war,
And since your grave discourse argues a will,
To stay at home▪ you shall; we'll lay you up,
Where no loud echoing drums shall break your sleep,
Even in the bowels of your mother earth
I will entomb you: Put them both to death.
What means great Bajazet?
To murder you, unless you strangle them.
But hear us speak.
Stop up the damned passage of their throat,
Or you are all but ghosts. what; stare you friends?
Isaac and Selimus, a garter;
Twist me that fatal string about his neck,
And either pull and an end,
Mesithes come
join force with me, by 〈◊〉 y' best make haste,
Or thou art shorter lived than is that bratte.
Tug strongly at it.
So; let the bastard drop,
We have out-liud our tutors: dunghill slaves,
Durst they breathe out their Stoic sentences
In opposition of our strict command?
So: things run well along, and now I find
Ioue hears my prayers, and the gods grow kind.
Did not I send these to their provinces
To hinder Zemes' flight? and did not they
Dejected bastards give him open way?
Mine anger hath been just.
None doth deny't;
You may proceed in your edict for wars,
And make Achmetes general of the camp.
It is enough: Achmetes go to hell,
The devils have rung out thy passing bell,
And look for thine arrival.
Shend me slaves.
They fly before my breath like mists of air,
And are of less resistance, I'll pursue.
Oh! I am slain, Tyrant thy violent hand,
Hath done me pleasure, though against thy will,
Had I as many lives as drops of blood,
I'd not outlive this hour: fly hence vain soul,
Climb yonder sacred mount, strive upwards, there,
There where a guard of stars shall hem thee round,
Build thee a safe tribunal— I am gone—
Oh tragic cruelty— behold— the end
Of two right Noble sons— one faithful friend
Have all forsaken me? and am I left
A prey unto myself; did all their breath
Pass through his organs? and in his sad death,
Have I abruptly cracked the vital thread
Of all my Bassas?
Ha? where am I now?
In some Gehenna, or some hollow vault,
Where dead men's ghosts sigh out their heavy groans:
Resolve me Mahomet, and rid me hence,
Or I will spoil the fabric of thy tomb,
And beat away the title of a God.
Dost thou not move? a trunk? a stock? to die,
Is to put on your nature, so will I.
Hold, hold, and live.
How come these bodies dead?
Father, it was yourself.
Let me revoke
My wand'ring sense, Oh what a stream of blood
Hath purged me of my black suspicion,
Two sons, one valiant Captain hence are wrought
By mine own hand, to cure one jealous thought,
As 'tis, they are the happier, I outlive,
Them whom I wished to fall: only to grave,
Bear forth their bodies; Bassas carry them out,
We were cursed in this,
And shall entomb with them much of our bliss,
Indeed we had resolved to spend this day
In things of more solemnity, less woe.
Now our more wished council shall begin
And bitter deeds weigh up the scales of sin.
Amasia is a province rich and strong,
Mahomates it is thine, keep it as long
As I have power to give it go, provide
For thy conveyance, at the next fair tide.
Farewell dear father.
Worthy son adieu.
The love my dead sons wanted, falls to you,
As an hereditary good.
Then we
May veil our heads in black, no mourners be.
Mahomates, thy worth
Deserves some trophies of our love,
Which to let slip unmentioned, were to add
To this black day, a fourth offence as bad;
Govern Man●sia, now the people stand
Disfurnished of an head, let thy command,
Be great amongst them, so; make speedy haste.
Honour ayes for thee.
Now the storms are past.
Father adieu;
Mahomates, farewell.
Now to my lot, I thought 'twould ne'er a fell,
Now Selimus, we know thy hopes are great,
And thine ambition gapes with open jaws,
To swallow a whole Dukedom: but young Sir,
We dare not trust the reins of government
Into the hands of Phaeton. Desire,
Rashly fulfilled, may set the world on fire;
Green youth, and raw experience are not fit,
To shoulder up a Kingdom's heavy weight,
Mix wit with stayed discretion, and spend
Wild years in study, than we do intend
To settle more preferment on thy head
Then thou canst hope for.
Wilt thou envious dotard
Strangle my greatness in a miching hole?
The world's my study Bajazet, my name,
Shall fill each angle of this round-built frame.
I know he grumbled at it; but 'tis good
To calm the rebel heat of youthful blood
With sharp rebukes.
Health to the Emperor.
What will your message?
Duty first from Rome,
Commended by the Bishop to your service,
With a firm promise to dispatch your will
What ever it employed, and would but stay
Till times swift circle should bring forth a day
Secure for the performance.
'Tis enough.
Thanks for your care. This was to murder Zemes.
War with the Bishop? 'thad been pretty sport,
I knew my powerful word was strong enough
To make him do my pleasure: simple Priest,
Only I used it as a trick, to send
Achmetes from the City and his friends;
But Fate to smiled upon me, that I found
A shorter means his life and hopes to wound
With my sententious sons, that when my foes
Fled through their Province, finely let him go;
Which being wholly finished, strait to please
My friends, I played raging Hercules;
Then to shut up the Scene, neatly put on
A passionate humour, and the worst was done.
But who comes here?
I like not this. Mahomates beloved
So dearly of the Commonalty: ha?
he's wise, fair-spoken, gently qualified,
Powerful of tongue; why he's the better son,
Not to supplant his Father. I mislike
The prodigal affection thrown on him
By all my subject. I belied my hopes
When I presumed this day had freely rid
Me of my worst vexation: I was borne
To be a jade to Fate, and Fortunes scoff,
My cares grow double-great by cutting off.
If ever man loved sorrow wished to grieve
Father I do for thee. Could I deprive
My senses of each object, but thy death,
Then should I joy to sigh away my breath:
Be Godhead to my grief, then shall these eyes
With tributary tears bedeck thy shrine:
And thus I do invoke thee: nimble Ghost
What ever Orb of Heaven, what ever coast
Affords thee present mansion, quickly thence
Flit hither, and present unto my sense
Thyself a feeling substance, let me see,
Acknowledge and admire thy Majesty.
Put off that airy thinness which denies
Me to behold thee with these duller eyes,
Then shall they sending down a powerful flood,
Rinse thy cold members from each drop of blood,
And so return thee back, that thou may'st soar
Up to the skies, much purer than before.
Had the just course of nature wrought thee hence,
I would have made the gods know their offence,
And back restore thy soul: but thou art dead,
And 'twas a fiercer hand that clipped thy thread.
Fiercer, and bolder, which did ever thrive
By mischief, and once coffinde thee alive
Up in death's mantle, but then would not use
Such open violence, nor durst abuse
One of such sacred worth, till fury struck
His reason dead, and made his treacherous hand
Creepingly stab thee, both unseen and foul,
As if he would have stolen away thy soul.
But oh!
But of indeed!
Why what?
As bad
A stroke attends thee as thy Father had▪
Princess suspicion is a flame of fire,
Exhaled first from our manners, and by desire
Of rule is nourished, fed, and roars about
Till the whole matter dye, and then goes out.
Unfold a Scene of murders: Fates work on,
we'll make a path to Heaven, and being gone
Down from the lofty towers of the skies
Throw thunder at the Tyrant; will he press
The earth with weight of slaughtered carcases?
Let him grow up in mischief, still shall her womb
Gaping, reserve for him an empty tomb.
We do but tread his path; and Bassa since
It stands upon thee, now to cure thy Prince
Of his distempered lunacy, go fetch
The instrument of death, whilst I a wretch
Expect thy sad return.
I go; and could
It stand with mine allegiance, sure I should
Employ my service to a better end,
Then to disrobe the Court of such a friend.
He that is judged, down from a steepy hill
To drop unto his death, and trembling still
Expects one thence to push him, such a slave
Doth not deserve to live, nor's worth a grave.
Then Lachisi●, thou that divid'st the thread
Of breath, since this day's Sun must see me dead,
Thus I'll prevent thy pain, thus I'll outrun
My Fate; and in this stroke thy work is done.
Eternal mover, thou that whirl'st about
The skies in circular motion hear me out
What I command, see that without control
Thou make Heaven clear, to entertain my soul,
And let the nimble spirits of the air
Print me a passage hence up to thy chair,
There will I sit, and from the Azure sky,
Laugh at obsequious base mortality.
Vanish my soul, enjoy, embrace thy Fate
We are prevented; see the fates command
False deeds, must dye though by the Actor's hand.
Return to Bajazet, and bear that corpses.
So now I am alone, nor need I fear
To breathe my thoughts out to the silent air;
My conscience will not hear me, that being deaf
I may joy freely: first thy hated breath
Achmetes vanished, next Caigubus fell,
Thus we climb Thrones, whilst they drop down to hell.
The glorious eye of the all-seeing sun,
Shall not behold (when all our plots are done)
A greater Prince than Selimus; 'tis he
Must share with Ioue an equal Majesty.
But for myself his Engineer I'll stand
Above mortality, and with a hand
Of power, dash all beneath me into dust,
If they but cross the current of my lust.
What I but speak, 'tis Oracle and Law,
Thus I will rule and keep the world in awe.
Noble assistant.
Happy Selimus.
'Tis thou must make me so, for should I stay
Waiting my Father's pleasure, I might stand
Gazing with envy at my Brother's pride,
Myself lying prostrate, even beneath their feet.
Towns, Cities, Countries, and what ere so ever
Can give high thoughts content, are freely theirs,
I only like a spend thrift of my years
Idle my time away, as if some god
Had razed my name out of the roll of Kings,
Which if he have, than Isaac be thy hand
As great as his, to print it in again
Though Bajazet say nay.
No more: I will;
An Empire be our hopes; that to obtain
we'll watch, plot, fight, sweat, and be cold again.
Cannot my words add solace to your thoughts?
Oh! you are gulfed too deep in a desire
Of sovereign pomp, and your high thoughts aspire.
All the unshadowed plaineness of my life
Doth but contract thick wrinkles of mislike
In your Majestic brow, and you distaste
Moral receipts, which I have ministered
To cool Ambition's Fever.
Pardon Sir,
Your Holiness mistakes my malady,
Another sickness grates my tender breast,
And I am ill at heart: alas, I stand
An abject now as well in Nature's eye,
As erst I did in Fortunes: is my health
Fled with mine honour? and the common rest
Of man, grown stranger to me in my grief?
Some unknown cause hath bred through all my blood
A colder operation, than the juice
Of Hemlock can produce: O wretched man:
Look down propitious Godheads on my woes:
Phoebus infuse into me the sweet breath
Of cheerful health, or else infectious death.
If there an Angel be whom I have crossed
In my tormented boldness? and these griefs
Are expiatory punishments of sin?
Now, now repentance strike quite through my heart,
Enough of pains, enough of bitter smart
Have tied me to't. I have already been
Bolted from joy, content can enter in,
Not at the open passage of my heart,
I neither hear, nor see, nor feel, nor touch
With pleasure; my vexation is so much.
My grave can only quit me of annoy;
That prevents mischief, which can bring no joy.
Now I could curse what mine own hand hath done,
And wish that he would vomit out the draught
Of direful poison, which infects his blood.
Ambitious fire? why 'tis as clean extinct,
As if his heart were set beneath his feet,
Grief hath boiled out the humours of vain pride,
And he was mere contrition.
What's the news?
Zemes as now he left you, pale and wan,
Dragging his weak legs after him, did fall
Dead on the stony pavement of the Hall,
Not by unhappy chance, but as he walked,
Folding his arms up in a pensive knot,
And railing at his Fate, as if he staged
The wounded Priam, or some falling King,
So he, oft lifting up his closing eye,
Sunk faintly down, groaned out, I die, I die.
It grieves my soul: let Bajazet know this
Could our own shortened life, but lengthen his
By often sighs I would transfuse my breath
Into his breast, and call him back from death.
Let not my absence steal away my love,
Or local distance weaken the respect
Which you have ever borne me: I must fly
To shake the yoke of bondage from my neck:
My Father's eyes shall not scan out my life
In every action; then when I am gone,
Our love like precious metal shall not crack
In the protraction, but be gently framed
Into a subtler thinness, which shall reach
From either part, not crazed by any breach.
Return with ruin painted in thy brow,
Pale death triumphant in thy horrid crest,
Danger limned out upon thy threatening sword,
The Turkish thraldom portrayed on thy shield,
we'll meet thee in thy horror, and unfold
Our arms as wide as heaven to take thee in.
We trust you: if there lie unspoken love
Hid in your bosoms? we must bury it
In silent Farewells.
Noble Prince adieu,
Since thy frank deeds have printed in our hearts
So true a pattern of thee, we will feed
Our contemplation with thy memory.
When thou art really departed, thus
A better part of thee shall stay with us.
So the swift wings of flight shall mount me up
Above these walls into the open air,
And I will tower above thee Bajazet.
Farewell soft Court; I have been kept too long
Within thy narrow walls, and am new borne
To golden liberty; now stretch out you heavens,
Spread forth the dewy mantle of the clouds
Thou powerful Sun of Saturn, and remove
The terminating Poles of the fixed earth
To entertain me in my second birth.
Not yet rid from our wars? Fair Prince take heed,
Treason's a Race that must be run with speed:
Aelus beckons, and the flattering winds
join all to help our project: quickly hence:
All's full of danger. Did your Father know
he'd stop your flight, and breath at one deaths blow.
Friend I am gone: thou hoary God of Seas,
Smooth the rough bosom of thy wrinkled tide,
That my winged Boat may gently on it glide.
How the obsequious duty of the world
Hangs shivering on the skirts of Majesty,
And mells out all her footsteps: I could yet
Never steal leisure reform my thoughts,
Since my pale brow was first hooped in with gold
Till this blessed hour: and now great Bajazet
Empty thy breast of her imprisoned joys,
Which like the smothering winds, could with a blast
Rip up a passage. I am crowned in bliss,
Placed on the rocks of strong security,
Without the reach of Fate. Envy shall gnash
And pine at my full pleasures; the soft feet
Of labouring Ambition, shall quite tyre
Ere touch the starry-height on which I stand.
Achmotes and his son with my two boys
Are fall'n, to clear the sunshine of my joys,
Achomates I fear not, Selimus
lives caged within the compass of mine eye,
All that I doubt is of Mahomates,
That blazing star once darkened, I will throw
The lustre of my pomp from me, as clear
As if three Suns were orbed all in one Sphere.
What news brings Isaac?
Unwelcome news.
Be quick in the delivery.
Then thus.
Young Selimus is fled.
Fled?
Fled this night to the Tartarian King.
Would he had sunk
To the Tartarian deep. Isaac, thouart false,
And every hair dependant from thy head
Is a twined serpent. Isaac I say thouart false,
I read it in thy brow.
By heaven I am not.
Come; answer my demands, first, at what time
Let he the Court?
I know not.
Know he is fled,
And know not when he fled, how can this be?
After our strict enquiry, 'twas our chance
To light on one that saw him take a ship,
At the next haven.
On one; bring forth that one,
I'll sound the depth of these villainies.
What's here?
A barrel reared an end upon two feet?
Sirrah, you guts and garbage— did you see
Selimus leave the Court?
So please it your—
Please it? thou monster, are you now so pleasing.
My Liege hold in your fury: spend not one drop
Of your fierce anger, on so base a worm,
Keep it entire and whole, within your breast,
That with its vigour it may crush the bulk
Of him whose treasons move it.
So it shall,
Neptune reine back thy swelling Ocean,
Invert the current of thy guilty streams
Which further treacherous plots, mild Aeolus,
(That when a peevish goddess did entreat,
Scatteredst a Trojan Navy through the seas)
Now Bajazet a Turkish Emperor
Bids thee send forth thy jarring prisoners,
Into the seas deep bowels, let them raise
Tempests shall dash against the firmament
Of the vast heavens, and in their stormy rage,
Either confound or force the vessel back,
In which the traitor sails; now, now begin
Or I shall think thee conscious of this sin.
What would this monk?
Only your blessed alms.
I'm in a liberal vain—
Traitor I'm slain,
I feel the bullet run quite through my sides,
Great Mahomet hath kept you safe from harm,
It never touched you.
Oh— I am slain,
Open the gates of sweet Elysium,
Take in my wounded soul: Bring forth that Monk,
I'll make him my soul's harbinger, he shall
Forerun my coming and provide a place
Amongst the gloomy banks of Acheron,
Then shall he dwell with me in those black shades
And it shall be my bliss to torture him.
he's gone already, I have sent him hence.
Fly then my soul, and nimbly follow him,
He must not scape my vengeance: Charon stay,
One waftage will serve both, I come, away.
Let not conceit thus steal away your life.
Me thinks I feel no blood ebb from my heart,
My spirits faint but slowly.
Hear me Sir,
You are not wounded.
Ha? not wounded.
Untouched as yet;
His quaking hand deceived him of his aim,
And he quite missed your body, here behold
The bullet yet unstained with blood.
Now I believe thee: oh the baleful fate
Of Princes, and each eminent estate!
How every precious jewel in a Crown,
Charms mad ambition, and makes envy dote
On the bewitching Beauty of its shine;
Indeed proud Majesty is ushered in
By superstitious awful reverence,
But cursed mischiefs follow; and those are
Treasons in peace, black stratagems in war.
But where's the dwarf? Isaac go send him in▪
Bid bold Mesithes, and sage Mustapha
Quickly attend us; go.
I shall.
This hour,
Hath hatched a richer project in my brain,
Whose wished event, shall strangle envies breath,
And strike ambition dead in every breast.
Sirrah, draw hence the body to the ditch,
Whither the filth of the whole City runs,
There overwhelmed in blood; go, quickly do't;
What dost thou grin thou visage of an ape?
I'll rather hang myself then endure this.
Nay, come; be patient and I'll use thee well,
Why— 'twas a Sceptre struck thee, and 'twill work
Diviner operation in thy blood
Then thou canst dream of.
I'd rather be struck cross the teeth with a pudding
Then cross the back with a sceptre.
A man would guess so, that overviews the dimensions
But to thy business.
Bassaes stand ye round,
Stay: who comes here? sure I should know that sature,
Observe him nearly.
'tis no Courtier.
Mahomates 'tis time to look about,
Selimus fled? Achomates adored?
My name scarce heard of through the popular reets?
Had that unhappy arm of that damned Monk,
Not staggered from the Mark at which he aimed,
Who ever sent him hither, I had leapt
Into the empty throne, and cropped the fruit
Budding from treasons root; but I'll return
Back to my Province, this unknown disguise,
Shall search my Father's closest policies.
Mahomates disguised.
By heaven 'twas he
He pries into my counsels: let it be.
we'll forward in our business, which being done,
we'll cool the hot ambition of each son,
As mine already is, quick moving time
Hath cast a snowy whiteness on my hairs,
And frosty age hath quelled the heat of youth,
Mine intellectual eyes, which ever yet
Gazed on the world's rich gilded vanities,
Are now turned inward, and behold within,
Dismal confusion of unpardoned sin▪
E'er since I first was settled on this Throne,
My cares have clogged the swiftness of the hours,
And wrought a tedious irksomeness of life,
Murders have masked the forehead of the Sun
With purple-coloured clouds, and he hath blushed
At the bloodsucking cruelty of state.
there's not one little angle of this Court,
Whose guilty walls have not concealed a knot
Of traitors, squaring out some hideous plot,
Against my safety; now at last I spy
The dangers of perplexed Majesty.
And were it not for a religious fear
Of after-harmes, which wretchedly might tear
And spoil the body of this Monarchy,
Here at this instant would I strike the sail,
And proud top-gallant of mine eminence,
Hurl up my sceptre, disenthrone myself,
And let the green heads scramble for the Crown.
Age hath taught me a staider providence
Than my rash youth could reach to; I intent
To place this glittering babble, on the head
Of some successor, e'er I yet am dead,
So give it out; thereby I le try the love
And favour of the people: whom they seem
Most to affect I'll raise to that esteem,
How do you like the counsel?
As we could like
A voice of health sent from the careful gods.
This news will lay the fury of your sons,
And breed low duty in them all in hope
Of the reward proposed.
Awake preventions eyes, we must not sleep
If we would see proud Bajazet displaced,
And Selimus elated to his height.
Name him the people favours;— heeaffects
Achomates: and knows the multitude
Wrapped with his heavenly wisdom, cry for him,
We must be quick and wary, here are keys
Left, and laid up by Selymus, that store
Shall visit empty purses, and enchant
The needy sort of men, that the one's wealth,
Shall weigh up 'tothers wisdom in the scale
Of their light judgement; lend your best endeavours
we'll cross thee Bajazet, and thy hopes shall dye
By thine own ill-contrived policy.
Leave us; We would be private with our friend,
'Tis thou must do't sweet Asmehemides,
Mahomates and thou are two near friends;
He will suspect in others close deceit,
Thee, for thy generous virtues he will stand
With obvious embracements to receive
Into his bosom; whither when thou art
Wound in, be sure to strike him through the heart.
I am offended, 'tis just piety
To sacrifice his body at the shrine
Of my displeasure, do it, I am thine.
Were he as dear to me, as the half part
Of mine own body, as the breath I draw;
I'd do this charge: we mortals must obey
When Gods command, and Emperors are they.
So willing to be damned? had I adjoined
Some virtuous office, surely he would then
Have said, that good deeds are not deeds of men.
But let them go; Mahometes must dye,
And for my other boy fierce Selymus
The boisterous hand of war must snatch him hence,
My other son Corcutus liuesimmured
Within Minerua's cloister, thus I clear,
A path through which Achomates shall run
Up to my throne when all their hopes are done.
The promise was direct and absolute,
To bless my temples with a sacred Crown,
With protestations of a quick dispatch,
Ere his own right were canceled by fate,
So to cut off all rivals in my joys.
What intercedent chance hath made his care
So slack in the performance? by heaven I fear,
Delays willprove delusions of my hopes
And that homebred Mercurian Selimus,
Will split the expectation of my bliss,
Forefend it Mahomet, or I shall be
A sad revenger of indignity.
How now? what speaks this bold intrusion?
Health to Achomates from Bajazet.
From 〈◊〉? unfold thy welcome news,
How fares our Noble Father?
In full health;
And will you thus by me: to muster up
Your surest forces, and with moderate haste,
Repair unto the Court, where you shall find
Employments worthy of a valorous mind.
To muster arms? canst thou surmise the cause?
With confidence I dare not; but 'tis said,
Against that haughty Noble Selimus.
Who of the Tartar King implored aid,
To an uncertain end: himself gives out
To fight with Hungary, and stretch the bounds
Of the old Turkish regiment▪ But same
With panting voice, bids Bajazet beware,
And whispers in his ear, he is the foe,
Proud Selimus intends to overthrow.
Enough, regret our Father with our love
Tell him we shall not sleep to his command;
Fly nimbly back▪ dares the audacious boy,
Trouble the world with his tempestuous arms?
I'll chastise him with iron whips of war,
If either strength or stratagems shall serve,
To spoil the gaudy plumes of his high crest,
I'll use the strongest violence of both;
I am swollen big with hate, and I could break
Untimely passage with a wholesome stab
To vent the monster strangled in my womb.
Father I come, he that detains a Crown
Bequeathed to me, must thunderstrike me down.
Buzzing reports have piered my sluddy walls,
And clogged my meditations airy wings,
By which I mount above the moving spheres
And search the hidden closerts of the heaven,
I cannot live retired, but I must hear
Mine own wrongs sounded in my troubled ear:
What? will my father falsify that oath;
In which he vowed successions right to me,
When I resigned my honours up to him,
He deeply swore; when the uprising Sun
Of his bright-shining royalty had run
It's complete course through the whole heaven of state,
And fainting dropped into the Western lapse;
My brightness next should throw its golden beams,
Upon the world's wide face, and over-peere
The dusky clouds of hidden privacy,
And shall Achomates succeed? Shall he
Shine in the spangled robes of Majesty?
Then Bajazet is false, let it be so
I am secured from a huge mass of woe.
Yet I'll toth'Court, that when Achomates
Shall spy me, and remember but my due
'Twill stain his lustre with a blushing hue,
My cares are grown to great to be comprised,
Within the narrow compass of my breast,
Viceroy of Greece, I'll pour into thy heart
Part of my secrets; which being entered in,
Lock them as close up, as thou wouldst a sin
Committed, yet not known: I must impart
Things worth thy faithful silence.
Worthy Sir,
By the enclosure of my soul I swear—
I'll not hear out oath, in brief 'tis thus
The Bassas are all false and love not us;
Nor doth my 〈…〉 prompt 〈◊〉 thus,
I read it in their gestures, 〈◊〉,
Actions, and counsels, my suspicious eye
Hath found a great breach in their loyalty.
Surely this cannot be.
By heaven 'tis true,
Each man that guards mine honour is my foe,
I'll shake these splendent robes of Majesty
From my o'erburdened shoulders, and to ease
Myself, bequeath them to 〈◊〉.
Achomates?
Even he, unless the voice
Of the whole City interdict my choice.
here comes the 〈◊〉,
Sure I see bad news
Portrayed on the Index of their fronts.
Bad news? We have outlived good days too long,
We can expect no other, come unclasp
Volumes of mischiefs, and make deaf my ears
With an infused multitude of cares.
Young Selimus hath crossed Danubius' flood,
And seized upon the Provinces of Thrace,
And with a Navy ploughed the Euxine Sea.
Peace bellowing night-ravens, with how cheerful noise
Their puffing lungs croak out the baleful note,
Are these the wars against Hungary? you powers
Of heaven, brush off your cloddy patience,
If you but wink at these notorious crimes,
I'll say you dare not check our stubborn times.
Well as yet, I'll make use of his pretence
Viceroy of Greece, bear you this Embassy
To that suspected Traitor Selimus,
Tell him the wars against th' Hungarian foe,
Are full of dangers and approved harms,
Never attempted by our Ancestors,
Without repulse or damage bid him dismiss
His rough Tartarian youth, then if he stand
Unmoved and stiff, feign vengeance is at hand.
Make thy best speed.
I shall, 'twill be well done
To reconcile a Father and a Son.
Though he tumultuous uproars could deserve
The favour of his Prince: h'as trod awry,
And missed the path that leads to Majesty.
These bright Imperious ornaments shall grace
No rebel-monster nor base runaway.
My resolution's firm, it shall not be;
Bassanes, this day an Herald shall proclaim
In the world's ear, my great successor's name.
Are you content?
We are.
Call forth an Herald.
As our allegiance binds us we'll obey.
But what we grant, the Soldiers will gainsay.
Thou shalt not thrive in this: I dare be bold
My golden hooks have ta'en a faster hold.
Herald,
Be my loud Echo, ratify my deed,
And say Achomates shall next succeed.
Bajazet the second by the appointment of our great Prophet Mahomet, the only Monarch of the World, a mighty God on earth, an invincible Caesar, King of all Kings, from the East unto the West, Governor of Greece, Sultan of Babylon, Sovereign of Persia and Armenia, triumphant Tutor of 〈◊〉, Lord possessor of the Sepulchre of the Crucified God, subverter and sworn enemy of the Christians, and of all that call upon Christ; proclaimeth Achomates his second son next and immediate successor.
None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.
By heaven they are corrupted: none but I?
'Tis no love borne to me that moves this cry.
Great Baiazet the cause why they deny
This just proposal, riseth from an use
And customary licence long observed;
To wit, when their crowned Emperor is dead,
The interposed vacation is a time
Of lawless freedom: then they dare to spoil
The jewish Merchants of their traffic wares,
And prey upon all strangers: so that should
Your Honour be conferred upon your son
Whilst you yourself yet breath, than should they lose
The long expected gains; therefore refuse
What you proposed.
If that be all the cause,
we'll give them such a Kingly donative,
As doubly shall buy out those ill-got spoils
Five hundred thousand Ducats, if they please
With my free choice to crown Achomates,
Proclaimed to be their due.
Bajazet the second by appointment of our great Prophet
Mahomet, etc. proclaimeth that he'll attribute 500.
Thousand ducats if you yield allegiance
To Achomates his successor.
None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.
Achomates I sent for, how he'll digest
These gross illusions, I may justly fear:
By this I had discouraged Selimus,
And killed his hopes; by this I had cut off
The growth of hate, and choked discords seed.
Bear this to Selimus with thy best care.
And this.
And this: fly, let thy winged speed
Return a sudden answer, ely we bleed.
Go on brave Prince; Led on thy marshaled troops,
Degrade the Turkish Monarch, let him faint
At the deep wounds, which thy revengeful hand
Shall print upon the bosom of his land.
Go on; Me thinkes I see Victoria sit
Triumphant on thy steely Burganet.
Farewell; now I will meet thee Bajazet
With a career as free as if Heaven's Ioue
Had bid me go: bespeak the stoutest gods
To take thy part; tell them that thou must meet
A Selymus, who when the wars are done,
Will scale the Forts and Castles of the Sun,
Break up the brazen gates of Acheron,
And bury Nature with the world together.
Captains lead on; Now shall the sword and fire
By public ruins crown my just desire.
Sleep Hungary, I'll not break off thy rest
With the unwelcome Music of my Drums;
I'll turn the edge of my revengeful sword
Upon the bosom of my native soil;
There dwells the motive of my Tragic wars,
Whose ruthless sad Catastrophe shall wound
Posterity in us: Infants shall mourn
Over their Fathers ' tombs as yet unborn.
But who comes here? I'll meet him.
Noble Viceroy.
Peace and health to Selimus.
Health, but not peace, whilst yonder light can see
Mortals, whom Turkish force could ne'er subdue.
Yet what if Baiazet our honoured Lord
Bid you roll up those flaxen signs of war,
And sheathe the sword drawn forth against his foe?
When duty says obey, what shall say no.
My courage and a proud contempt of all
Corrival Nations, could send back a no,
Able to fright a Parliament of gods.
It could so: but if Bajazet gainsay
My plumy valour flags, my thoughts gave way.
Then thus he will you to discard your force,
And send the black Tartarians to their home,
Withal averring the Hungarian foe
(Against whose power, you have summoned Arms)
Is full of strength and power, ne'er opposed
Without the bitter downfall of our side.
Nor would the world's great Monarch 〈◊〉
Impair his fame so much, as to be said,
He tamed a Foe by Tartars borrowed aid.
Ha: I am vilely nonplussed. Courteous Viceroy
Return our duty back to Bajazet,
Even in the humblest terms wit can invent,
Tell him 〈◊〉 hath a son of that high spirit,
As doth detest a cowardly retreat.
Were all the dead Heroes of our foes
All that are now, and all that are to come
Met in one age, I'd face them drum to drum.
Bid our dear Father be secure of me
And my proceedings: then true valour shines
Most bright, when busied in the great'st designs.
Is not this answer fair?
Most true: and yet
'Twill prove distasteful.
No, it cannot be:
If there be too much valour in this breast,
Blame him that placed it there, even Baiazet.
My virtues and my blood, are both derived
From his first influence, and I must either hate
Disgraceful calumns, or degenerate.
All this I'll tell your Father, yet he'll rest
As much unsatisfied as at the first,
He will expect the headstrong pride of youth
Should strike low sail to his grave providence.
And so it shall: sage Viceroy I obey,
And reverence his counsel more, then fear
An host of armed foes: tell him I'll come
To his Court gates with neither man nor drum.
I'll tell it him with joy, which when he hears,
he'll be disburdened of a thousand fears.
Remember my just duty: 'tis no matter,
I will retain that till I come myself.
I am not outreached yet by all these tricks,
My hopes are farther strong, I'll to the Court
With a close march, in no submissive sort,
And steal upon them: Instantly I go
To meet my Father, but a subtle foe.
Good health to Selimus.
Good health: From whom?
Isaack, Mesithes, Mustapha salute you.
Those good Trinm viri what is't they, speak?
(To feed on hopes is but a slender diet)
'Tis short, but full of weight: to feed on hope
Is but a slender diet. Let it be.
I'll mend my table though no feast with me.
(Fair opportunity is bald behind)
'Tis true indeed Mesithes. Never fear
I'll twist my fingers in her golden hair.
What speaks the third? This writes more at large,
And comments on the prefixed principals.
(Your Father did proclaim who should succeed
Public denials nullified his deed,
Your haste will be convenient; things concur
To bless your hopes, Fate bids you not demur)
I am thine,
And come to finish up our great design.
Unquiet anguishments and jealous fear
Fly from any thoughts, like night before the Sun:
I'm lifted to the highest Sphere of joy,
My top enveloped in the azure cloud,
And starry rich habiliments: my feet
Set rampant on the face of Nature's pride,
The rarest work weaved by her handmaid Art
clothes my soft pleasures, I'm as great as Ioue.
Only I rule below, he reigns above.
Oh! the unspoken beauty of a Crown,
Whose empty speculation mounts my soul
Up to an heavenly Paradise of thoughts.
Father, I come that thou may'st crown my head,
Whilst apprehensive reason stands amazed,
Amidst the blissful shades of sweet conceit.
Then I'll call back my wand'ring intellect
From dreams, and those imaginary joys,
I'll teach my soul to twine about a Crown
To sweat in raptures, to fill up a Throne
With the big-swelling looks of Majesty,
I'leamble through a pleasure's Labyrinth,
And wander in the path of happiness,
As the true object of that faculty.
Great Bajazet I come. Thou must descend
From Honour's high Throne, and put off thy right
To build me up an heaven of choice delight.
The Emperor begins to smell deceit.
I know by his ill looks and sparkling eye
That he affects us not.
I doubt as much.
Young Selimus has wronged our loyalty
In his so slack proceedings; we were rash
And indiscreetly-forward in consent,
When we joined on to raise his government.
Peace, 'tis too late to chide at what is done,
We have so deeply waded in the streams
Of those procellous plots, nor can revoke
Repentant footsteps, or securely creep
Back to the Throne of safety, 'tis now good
To venture on, and swim quite through the flood.
Here comes the emperor.
Attend us Bassaes.
Art sure he's dead?
Mahomates is dead.
There's nothing moving of him but his soul,
And that robbed of his body by this hand.
Enough. That soul revives to see him dead
That wronged the body; Oh! my bloody heart,
Must in his frenzy act an horrid part.
Follow thy Prince to hell.
To death! Oh devilish ingratitude:
I'm slain. I die.
And justly: would each foe
And Traitor to my state were thwarted so.
Bassas convey this hated body hence,
The sight of that damned villain moves offence:
Now pause a while my soul, and reckon up
What obstacles are yet to be removed
Achomates must stay the people's leisure.
Corcutus dally with Minor●aes Nymphs.
The last and worst, proud Selimus shall dye.
Thus I'll compose a firm security.
Arrived already noble Cherseogles?
You're careful in our cause: but speak the news
From our pert Soldier. What means Selimus?
To tract the path backward from whence he came,
To strip himself of martial ornaments,
And to fill up the duty of a Son,
Come visit you in low submission.
These are too fairly promised, to be meant,
Ambition hath already chained his soul
Too surely in the captive bonds of pride,
Then that he now should clothe his stately hopes
In the plain sordid weeds of penitence,
He doth but varnish o'er some treacherous plot
In this smooth answer: come, wee'le lead along
To our Imperial seat of 〈◊〉,
That strongly fortified, we need not fear
The weak attempts an homebred foe can dare.
Ha! we are sweetly plunged, if cold despair
Benumb his youthful courage, and he faint,
Would I were fairly rid of all these cares,
Dejected Cowards: are you not ashamed
Thus to give up the goal of dignity
To heartless fear? Here comes the Messenger.
What news from Selimus?
Even nothing certain:
Ambiguously he promised to be here
As soon as I.
ist even so?
We are quite dashed— undone.
Lift up your downcast spirits— who comes here?
Who? Selimus?
Where? sweet Isaac do not tell him,
That we were sending forth faith's latest breath.
Enough, I will not— happy Selimus.
Long live great Selymus.
We thank you friends:
Your care hath fostered up our infant hopes
Beyond the pitch of expectation.
We hear that Bajazet is going now
From hence to Constantinople; my men
Lie closely ambushed in the middle way,
Close by a ruinous city, there expect
A sudden onset, but till then farewell.
When we meet next, our ensigns waved on high,
Shall shine like Meteors blazing in the sky.
Fortune's best care go with thee.
Brave boy i'faith.
I shall adore him whilst I breathe for this.
Again in heart?
Let's follow Bajazet, come lads away,
The sun of all his glory sets this day.
Come on the honoured youth of Tartary,
My brothers and joint sharers of my woe,
Draw forth the weapons of inflamed revenge,
Against this horrid monster's Tyranny;
I seem like Rome's great Caesar, when oppressed
With Pompey's grating malice he led forth
His noble Frenchmen through the snowy Alps,
I have my Curio Isaac in the Court,
And Cherseogles like grim Cato's ghost,
Soothes the rough humour of fierce Bajazet,
These men's examples, were we faint and loath
Would set sharp spurs unto ourslow paced wrath,
And whet our dull-eged anger▪ but I see
In your smooth brow perfect alacrity;
We stand to thwart the passage of a fiend,
Through whose wide yawning throat hath coasted down.
The blood of Princes, in continual streams,
Has fed and pampered up his appetite
With the abhorred destruction of his own,
And glutted on the blood of innocents.
Stood we like marble statues in his way,
And had no use of policy and wit,
Our Ireful Prophet Mahomet would send
Sense, life, and valour through our stony joints,
That we might ruinate this ghastly boar,
Made by some hellish fury to confound
The order of this wondered Universe.
I'll grapple with the monster, he's at hand,
If you stand firm▪ the Common Wealth may be,
A slave to Bajazet, but I'll live free.
No Drum nor Trumpet hath disturbed the air,
Within the reach of mine attention.
And I admire it, '●were a miracle
If that ambitious boy intent no harm.
What noise is that?
Help Bajazet, the vanguard's almost slain,
The Tartars lay in ambush.
What? so near?
Set up our standard, I'll give battle here,
Hang out defiance, scorn, and proud contempt,
Write in the blood-red colours of your plumes,
Summon our Army
From these skirmishes,
Speak out the traitor's doom in thine alarms.
Thought he to daunt our courage?
Valiant soldiers;
When I behold the manner of this war
Then treason copes with awful Majesty,
A graceless son, with his own aged Sire,
Me thinks to bid you fight, were full as vain
As to bid heavy clouds fall down in rain:
But when I view the Chaos of the field,
And wild confusion striking valour dead,
I called you, not (as Captains do to boys)
To read a lecture of encouragement,
But that your ancient virtue may be shown
In this my last defence: I wish to dye
Revenged, that death sorts best with Majesty,
Selimus?
Bajazet?
Ioue lend me but a minute's patience.
Unnatural son.
Vencharitable Father.
Father? My sword shall hew that title off.
And cut in twain kindreds continued line,
By which thou canst derive thy blood from mine.
Abortive monster— thou first breath of sin,
We had but slender shadows of offence,
Till thou creptst forth to the offended light,
The very mass, and stock of villainy.
Crimes in all others, are but thy influence.
Nature has planted viperous cruelty,
In thy dark breast, the scandal of her works
Her error, and extract perfection
Of vices; the first wellhead of bad things
From whence the world of ills draw their weak springs,
Then hear me speaketoo: you have been to me
No Father, but a sour Pedantic wretch,
One that with frosty precepts, strived to kill
The flaming heat of my ambitious youth,
As vainly as to strangle fire with straw:
You sit so daily hover on your Throne,
As if you'd hatch new Monarchies to feed
The hungry gulf of your unbridled pride,
Y'ave surfettted on titles, y'ave engrossed
Honour, you are the moth of eminence,
And liberal fortunes answered your desires;
You had deflowered th'infinity of Crowns,
With your adulterate ambition,
Y'are Sovereignty's horseleech, and have spilled
The blood of State, to have your own veins filled.
Hold, hold thy venomed tongue, if there be hid
More of this kind unuttered, I le rip up
Thy full fraught bosom, and to save mine ear
Mine eyes shall overview what I'll not hear.
Dar'st thou fight Traitor?
Dare I be ealed a King?
Dare I unsheathe my sword, or gather might?
If I dare aught of these, I dare to fight.
Guard thee, I'd not omit the sweet desire
And pleasure of revenge, were heaven my hire.
The slave has scaped the power of my wrath,
Midst the disseured troops of scattered foes
I lost him in a smoky cloud of dust,
So thick as if the tender Queen of love,
Had wrapped her brat Aeneas from my sight.
joy to my Liege, of his last victory.
The bold Tartarians flew like fearful Hearts
Before the hunters rage.
So let them fly;
Heaven rain down vengeance on their cursed heads;
It is our honour that the frighted slaves
Owe their life's dearest safeties to their heels.
How now, whence come you?
From yonder hayricke Sir.
Didst thou see Selimus when he fled the field?
No indeed, I was two far crept in.
O you are brave attendants.
Let's forward in our journey; these affairs
Achomates must know, his golden wish,
The people have delayed, perhaps he'll frown,
And trample filial duty under feet
As this hath done: but let them storm their fill
virtue's not shipwrecked in a sea of ill.
An honoured Legate? an Ambassador?
As if that title like Medeas charm
Could stay the untamed spirit of my wrath,
Had he been sent a messenger from heaven,
And spoke in thunder to the slavish world;
If he had roared one voice, one syllable
Cross to my humour, I'd a searched the depth
Of his unhallowed bosom, and turn out
His heart, the profane seat of saucy pride.
Slain an Ambassador? no less: 'tis done,
And '●was a noble slaughter, I conceive
A joy ineffable to see my sword
Bathed in a blood so rare, so precious,
As an Ambassador s; must we be told
Of times delays, and opportunities?
That the basesoldier hath gainsaid our bliss?
Thought Bajazet, his son so cold, so dull,
So innocently blockish, as to hear
An Embassy most harsh and grossly bade
The people to deny me? we contemn
With strange defiance Bajazet, and them.
Mischief on mischief, all our hopes are dead,
Slain in the hapless fall of Selimus.
I think the devils fought for Bajazet
And all the infernal hags; how could he else
With a confused army, and half slain,
Break the well-ordered ranks of a strong foe?
And unexpected to— now Isaac! what
Sadly repenting for thy last misdeeds.
Plots and conspiracies against thy Prince?
Faith we must hang together—
Good Mesithes
'Tis nothing so: they say 〈◊〉
Disdaining to be mocked out of his hopes,
And most desired possession of the Crown,
Has in contempt of Bajazet and all,
Slain the Ambassador, and vows revenge
On every guilty agent in his wrong.
I looked for that; and therefore first shrank back,
When Bajazet made choice of one to send
On such a thankless errand as that was.
Grant the report be true: what's that to us?
Fame in mine ear ne'er blabbed a sweeter tale,
This shall redeem our low dejected hopes,
To their full height. no more; be it my charge,
To chase out the event— what's this comes here?
Upon my life, the body of the slain
Ambassador.
'Tis so.
We greet you friends,
And your sad spectacle.
'tis sad enough
To banish peace and patience, from each breast
That owes true loyalty to Bajazet.
And so it shall; lay down the injured corpse.
Achomates has wronged his Father's love,
To grossly, in the murder even of him
That bore his sacred person, and should stand
Inviolably honoured by the law
Of men and nations,
But here comes Bajazet.
A tragic spectacle? whose trunk is this?
The body of your slain Ambassador.
Slain? by what cursed violence? what slave
Durst touch the man that represented me?
Achomates.
Achomotes?
The same
Highly displeased with the unexpected news
Of a denial from the people's mouth,
His reason slipped in fury, and contempt
Hath thus abused your gracious Majesty.
Withal, he threatened to maintain this sin
With force of arms, and so resolved to win
Your Crown, without such tarriance—
Oh! no more,
I am unfortunate in all my blood.
Hath he thus guerdoned my fair promises,
My daily sweat and care, to further him,
And fix him in the paradise of joy?
Nations cry out for vengeance of this fact,
I'll scourge this black impiety to hell.
Muster our forces to the utmost man,
Once more I'll bury this my aged corpse
In steely armour, and my coloured crest
Like a bright star shall sparkle out revenge
Before the rebels faint amazed eyes.
Lose not a minute, Bassas hence, be gone
Muster our men, stay not; that from the tide
Of our fierce wrath, no drop may ebb away
By causeless linger.
Whom speak you General?
Whom but myself? whom doth the cause concern
More nearly then myself?
My honoured Liege,
Bear your best care about you; 'tis a time
Of double danger, but remove the one,
The other strait called forward, Selymus
Great in the favour of Tartaria's King,
Is manned afresh with soldiers; his assault
Threatens as much as fierce 〈◊〉,
And must be borne off with your ablest forces,
Then if you leave the City to subdue,
One of these two, expect ere you return
T'other possessed, and seated on your throne.
Distraction rends my soul: what shall I do?
Force out one nail with other of these two,
Choose him you most affect, and best dare trust,
Allure him fairly home, wink at his crimes,
And then create him your high General,
To lead against his brother, since yourself
Cannot at once oppress two foes so stout
Try if one heat can drive another out.
Isaac we like thy counsel: but of these
Which can we pardon? either so deboyst,
So guilty of rebellion, so 〈◊〉
From pious loyalty, that my soul even both
With bitter hatred equally may loathe.
First weigh their faults, the one a brainsick youth,
Endeavoured to supplant your Majesty,
The other in defiance, and contempt,
Of God and man profaned the holy rights
Of an Ambassador.
For which dire fact,
Should it slip up unpunished, the name,
The fearful name of 〈◊〉 would prove
The subject of each libel, and the scoff
Of petty Princes.
Enough, we have decreed
Achomates shall quake beneath the stroke
Of our fierce anger. Isaac speed away
To Selimus, he shall confront the slave
The best of two so bad, go—
'Tis hard when we beg succour of a foe:
Beg? stay again— first will I drop before
The sword of proud Achomates— go— tell him,
Upon his low submission we will deign
To make him Champion to his sovereign.
My dear Corcutus welcome.
Royal Father.
Arise thou only solace of mine age,
It was a night of harmless innocence,
Of peace and rest, in which kind nature laid
Thee in thy mother's womb: Right virtuous boy,
How hast thou lived untainted with the breath
Of that infectious vice Rebellion,
Right noble Father, 'tis a faithful rule
In moral rites, that who desires a good,
And most suspects his right to it, is bold
And turbulent, and eager in pursuit,
Whereas the man to whom this good is due,
Rests happily contented; till time fit
Crown him in the possession of his wish.
Well moralised: I understand thee Boy,
My grant shall melt thy prayers in full joy.
Once more (in hope to gain, and fear to lose
A Crown and Kingdom) we have marched thus near
The seat of a dread Emperor, to try
The chance of war, or resolutely die.
Fear no cross blow, for with this hand I move
The wheel of Fate: and each success shall run
Even with our pleasures, till our hopes are spun
Up to their full perfection, this day's light
That looks so cheerfully, shall see as bright
As it, my crown and glory.
What stranger's this? my blessed Genius haunts me.
Isaac I take thee in with open love.
What speaks they Presence?
Good news to Selymus.
From whom?
From Bajazet.
'Tis strange if good.
And full as good as strange March quickly hence.
I'll tell you as we walk; if constant Chance
Smile on our project e'er this Sun go down,
We may salute you with a glorious Crown.
I follow even to death. Grand Mars to thee
I'll build an Altar if thou prosper me.
Revenge my black impiety; each brow
Seems with a scornful laughter to deride
Those empty Menaces of 〈◊〉.
And Bajazet is not our Father now,
Sith he hath wronged the duty of a Son,
But a scorned Enemy whose prostrate soul
Shall make a step by which I will ascend
Up to the heavenly throne of heavenly state,
If you but lend your help and free consent.
Lead us along the misty banks of hell
Through Seas of danger, and the house of death,
We are resolved to follow, and by one
To second each step of Achomates.
This resolution is as great as just,
Continue it brave spirits: he's a slave
That having sinned, dares not defend his sin,
The world shall know I dare: For though our cause
Be wrong, yet we'll make good the breach of laws.
Would I had slept with Trizham, and that hand
That strangled Mahomet, had stopped my breath,
Rather than live to see myself thus wronged.
Despair not sweet Corcutus, what I promised
I'll keep most true, and here again I vow
When I am dead, this honour to thy brow.
I have called home that rebel Selimus,
Only to tame a Traitor: And that done,
We have no other heir, no other son
Beside Corcutus, to whose free command
We do bequeath the duty of this land.
Is Isaac not returned?
My Liege he is.
And Selymus with him.
Let them approach.
Let your high spirit shrink below itself
In a dissembled show of penitence.
Tush I can bow, as if my joints were old,
And tumble at his feet.
Practise your skill.
Less show, and more good meaning Selimus.
Arise: these crouching feats, give slender proofs
Of inward loyalty.
Right noble Father,
Mine expedition to avenge your cause
Upon the head of proud Achomates,
Be my just trial.
Hast then: May thy arm
By breathless treason raise up a full joy,
And turn that monster back unto the earth
From whence it leapt, a most prodigious birth.
We fly to the performance; who both dare
And will correct his boldness: now we tread
The path to honour, and me thinks I hear
The people's Viva, a Echo in mine ear.
New insolence: The Bassas slipped away,
How the obsequious villains
As if he were their Godhead.
I suspect
Some plotted mischief, else they durst not leave
Your person thus unguarded.
Plot and hang.
We weigh not all their treasons at a straw,
One must not rule too long, 'tis subject's law.
Long live Selymus, Vivat Selimus,
Magnificent Emperor of the Turks.
Hell and the furies vex their damned souls.
What people? Ha? what Nation is't we live in?
Is't our State and Monarchy? good gods
Two Emperors at once. Live Selimus?
Can slavish vassals thus supplant their Prince?
What's this enshrines my head? a type for fools
To fleare at a divided ornament:
Fail not my sense and courage, let me live
To find myself again. Viceroy of Greece,
Didst thou not see a Bajazet withdraw
And vanish hence? tell thou most faithful man,
What is become of that forgetful name?
Or who hath stole it from me? Selimus!
Oh that damned villain with his treacherous plot,
Hath robbed me of that glory. Death a sense
If t'have a soul of Adamant or Steel,
Else had that hated noise reft it in twain:
What are thou? or whence comest thou?
From a Prince.
Yet I believe thee.
From thine enemy.
Yet I believe thee.
From the Emperor.
And I believe thee still; yet slave thou liest,
These parts must know no Emperor but me,
unless base usurpation hath stept-up
Unto my chair of honour. Right, 'tis so:
'Tis so indeed. Well then, what will your Emperor?
That by my hand you yield him up his crown!
Traitor his crown? so: now I am resolved.
I have forgone myself, else had this hand
Tore out thy spotted heart, and that one word
Of yielding had been cause enough to spoil
Thee and thy generation. Heartless slave,
Why sneakest thou from our presence? stay, behold
Here I commend this gorgeous ornament,
These trappings to thy Emperor, as full
Bestead with curses as my heart with woes,
That it may clog his ears, and vex his head
With daily terrors. Hence thy Prince is sped.
Viceroy of Greece, to thee our last farewell,
Thou worthiest truest best deserving man,
That ever made us happy: if thy faith
Respect me, not my fortune, Do this charge,
Fly to Achomates, and rather aid
Him then this faithless Bastard Selimus,
The scandal of our race, the mark for heaven
To shoot revenge. But all in vain,
I strive to word away my inward pain.
Nor this nor that I'll favour, may I 〈◊〉
Baiazet shall live to see both bleed.
Mask up thy brightness Phoebus, lovely night,
Hurl thy thick mantle over all the heavens,
Let this black day for ever be forgot
In the eternal registers of time:
Which of you sacred powers are not ashamed
To see a Prince so sinfully abused
By his own issue and unrevenged.
But stand we, who comes here? a face of brass.
Else would it blush: now thou Saturnine Ioue,
Thou God of great men, thunder that the world
Drenched all in sin, may shake and fear the noise
That horrid scourge of villainies.
Father?
Slave
Avaunt: ● feele a strong Antipathy
Twixt thee and me, thy sight makes my dead heart
Distil fresh drops of blood, and work new smart.
What furious Baiazet, and raging hot?
I hug the amorous pleasure that I feel
Creep through my joints: observe our Father,
Else by some wilful murder he'll prevent
My purposed project, I'd not lose the guilt
Of his destruction for a crown: heaven knows
I love him better than to let him dig
Himself a grave, whilst I may take the pains.
Now mount my soul, and let my soaring plumes
Brush the smooth surface of the Azure sky.
With this I charm obeysance from the world:
Thou golden counterfeit of all the heavens:
See how the shining stars in careless ranks
Grace the composure; and the beauteous Moon
Holds her irregular motion at the height
Of the four poles; this is a complete heaven,
And thus I wear it: but me thinks 'tis fixed
But weakly on my brow, whilst there yet breath
Any whose envy once reflect on it,
And those are three: the angry Bajazet,
Puling Corcutus, proud Achomates:
One of these three is cared for, that's Corcutus
Who ere the blushing morn salutes the Sun,
Shall be dispatched by two most hideous slaves,
Whom I have bred a purpose to the fact:
The other rival, wise Achomates,
I'll bear aside by force of men and arms,
Which ready Mustered, but attend the stroke,
Then attend our Fathers.
Here's one deals for him,
Shall send him quick to hell. It is decreed.
He that makes lesser greatness soon shall bleed,
Hamon draw near, most welcome my dear Hamon,
What guess of your patient Bajazet?
Is he all healthful?
No my gracious Prince.
Neither his body nor his mind is free
From miserable anguish.
A sad case.
Hamon I love him, and would rid him from't.
Were I so skilled in naturals as you.
All that my art can work to cure his grief
Shall be applied.
Unapprehending fool:
I must speak broader. Hamon is he ill
In mind and body both?
Exceeding ill.
Then should I think him happier in his death,
Then in so hateful life and so weak breath.
And that's the readier way to cure his ill.
(H'as found me now) but Hamon can thy Art
Reach to the cure?
With easy diligence.
Then let it.
I'm yours.
Walk, and thy pains,
Shall be rewarded highly, with the like
As thou bestowest on Bajazet: the Court
Makes it a fashion now first to bring the event
About, and then hang up the instrument.
Thus Cherseogles hast thou wound thyself,
Out of thyself to act some fearful plot,
By which the Authors of this public woe,
Shall skip into their graves, it is confirmed
A deed of lawful valour to defeat
Those of their lives, that robbed the world of peace.
On this side the false hearted Selimus
With his confederate Bassas lie encamped
Just opposite the proud Achomates;
The Sun now sunk into the Western lap,
Bids either part, unlace their warlike helms
Until to morrow light where both intent
The hazard of a battle: but you powers
That with propitious cares, tender the world
And us frail mortals, help me to present
A general enemy by the fall of some;
Assist my spirits in a deed of blood,
Cruel, yet honest and austerely good.
Who? Selimus? as I expected.
What?
A soldier thus licentious in his walks,
A stranger? Ha? What art thou?
A sworn friend, a servant to thy greatness.
Then return
Back into thy ranks and orders, no edict
From me hath ratified this liberty,
To scout at random from the standing camp.
'Tis true my honoured Lord, nor have I dared
For some poor trivial prey thus to remove
Myself, but for a cause of greater weight
The ruin of our enemies.
How's that?
The ruin of our enemies?
No less;
The quick fall of great Achomat●
Can work it.
Soldier as thou hop'st to live,
Mock not my thoughts with false and painted tales,
Of a supposed stratagem.
I swear—
What wilt thou swear?
By all the heavenly powers
I speak the truth, and if I fail in aught,
Grind mine accursed body into dust.
Enough, unfold the meaning and the way
By which this happy project must be wrought.
'Tis thus; at the twelfth hour of this black night.
Achomates I have induced to walk
Forth to this valley weaponed, but unmanned,
In expectation of your presence there,
Where being met, he'll urge a single fight,
'twixt you and him: after a stroke or two,
I have engaged myself closely to start
From ambush, and against you take his part.
Then thou art a traitor?
Worse than a devil, should my heart
Have made that promise with my tongue;
But heaven bear witness that my inward thoughts
Labour his welfare only, whom you powers
Have proved most worthy, therefore only yours.
Meet but this foe, whom I have flattered thus,
To his destruction: and great Selimus
Shall see my strength employed to offend
Achomates, and stand thy faithful friend.
Oh were thou faithful—
If I shrink in aught
That I profess, death shall strike me to the grave.
So thrive all falsehood, and each perjured slave.
thoust won our credit, bear a noble mind
About thee, then to find me forward trust
This night when sleep triumphant hath subdued
Her wakeful subjects, and the midnight clock
Sounded full twelve, in this appointed place,
Expect my presence, and till then adieu
Our next shall be a tragic interview.
The first is cared for— here a second comes,
Assist me thou quick jssue of Ioues brain,
And this one night shall make their labours vain.
It shall be so, my fears are too to great,
To join all in one onset: a strong band
Shall with a circle 'em the traitor round,
And intercept the passage of their flight;
How now? from whence comest thou? what at thou?
A Liegman to Achomates.
To me?
Yet noble Prince, and one whose life is vowed
To further your desert, and therefore yours.
We thank you, and pray you leave us.
I can unfold an easy stratagem,
Would crown the hopes of great Achomates.
What means the fellow?
To secure your state
By Selimus his fall.
What is't thou breathest?
Speak it again, for many careful thoughts
Possess my soul, that every blessed voice,
Steals in the passage 'twixt my ear and haste,
By Selimus his fall, to secure my state?
I can:
Delude me not, and I will rain
Such an unmeasured plenty in thy lap,
Heap such continual honours on thy head
That thou shouldst snrinke, and stagger with the weight.
judge of the means; this night I have induced
Young Selimus to walk forth in this grove,
At the twelfe hour, in hope to meet you here▪
Where having urged a combat, and both met
In eager conflict I have pawned my vow.
To rush from yonder thicket, and with him
join against you.
Villain.
And devils had,
My heart made promise with my tongue,
But heaven bear witness that my soul affects
None but Achomates, try but my faith,
And meet this foe, whom I have baited thus,
With golden hopes, and you will find my deed
In your defence all promise shall succeed.
I'm resolved soldier, when day is past▪
And the full fancies of mortality
Busie in dreams and playing visions,
At the sad melancholy hour of twelve,
I'll meet thee in this plain.
And you shall find
Me here before you.
Be so; Who denies
To strike in time, can seldom hope to rise,
These two will meet, and I must take both parts.
Now for a trick to send them both to hell,
In the full growth of expectation;
Heavens know they have deserved it than 'twould be
An happy murder: and behold the men
Whom I have decreed should do it, once again
I must betake me to my former note;
Health to the friends of our great Emperor,
The three strong pillars that uphold true worth.
Sir, your intrusion is unseasonable.
And your salute, impardonably bold.
Perhaps the news I bring, may frame excuse
For both these faults.
Speak out thy mind in brief.
Then thus: to night here present on this plain,
You may encounter two fierce enemies,
Achomates, and Cherseogles, both at the full stroke of twelve.
How (Mesithes) we're blessed.
This night at twelve of the clock?
Upon my life—
What shall we do?
But meet me on this plain
At the appointed hour, and I will place
You three aside, from whence you shall oppress
Your foes at unawares.
Is it a match?
'Tis done at twelve a clock.
See thou prove faithful.
If I shrink in aught
That I profess, death strike me to the grave.
So thrive all falsehood and each perjured slave.
How easily base minds are drawue to strike
Their foes at least advantage— beauteous morn,
Pale witness to a thousand deeds of sin
Veil up thy light, that darkness may help on
These black stratagems, and unhallowed hands
Strike in mistaken bodies, even soul
Themselves adore, and cheerfully defend,
But time grows fast upon me, hit all right
Two Princes, and three Bassas die this night.
Heaven whither run these projects? is the thought
Of man so senseless, void of wit, yet fraught
With threatening ambition? to what end
Doth this distempered madness headlong bend?
Bless me my Genius from these hated toils
Of murdering warfare, and these sweeting broils,
Of watchful policy; Phoebus let it be
That I may know no other god but thee.
Learned experience says, ambiguous fates
Vex eminent fortunes, and he only stands
Without the beams of envy, whom the hands
Of some propitious power, hath ranked below
Those short delights that troubled thoughts do know;
A Crown's a golden mark, which being hit,
Falls not alone, but off the head with it:
Honours are smoky, nothing, then let the Queen
Of learning, great Minerva, and the nine
chaste sisters, that adorn the Grecian hill,
Devote me to themselves, but let me still
Within Apollo's sacred Temple sit,
And spend my body to increase my wit;
Reign Selimus, for I shall ne'er thee hate,
Thy supreme power, nor envy thy state,
Corcutus stands divorced from a life,
Engaged to vain ambition factious state,
And empty power of Kings; he's great in fame
Not who seeks after, but neglects the same.
Since thou hast grieved me Phoebus, free my wit,
That I my ease my grief by speaking it;
If thou deniest fond god, 'twill be in vain,
Sorrow can sing, though thou not tune the strain.
Then thou sweet Muse from whence there flows,
words able to express our ill,
Teach me to warble out my woes,
and with a sigh each accent fill:
Infuse my breast with doleful strains,
Whose heavy note may speak my pains,
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night deprive my woes with sleep.
The pleasing murmurers of the air,
that gently fan each moving thing,
I being heard, strait do repair,
and bear a burden whilst I sing,
An heavy burden doleful song,
The father's grief the subjects wrong,
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
The grieved Flora hangs the head
Of every youthful plant and tree
And flowery pleasures are stark dead,
at my lamenting melody,
Then all you Muses help my strain
To reach the depth of bitter pain.
Oh let me sigh, and sighing weep
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
Me thinks I hear the singing spheres,
tune their melodious strains to mine,
The dewy clouds dissolve in tears,
as if they grieved to see me pine;
Thus each thing joins to help my moan,
Thus seldom come true sighs alone;
Then let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguile my woes with sleep.
He sleeps: Then enter two murderers
Who slaying him, bear him away.
A dark and heavy night, as if the gods
Winked at our projects, and had clad the heavens
In a propitious black, to bless my plot;
Revenge, to thee I dedicate this work,
And I will pamper thy wild appetite
With blood and murder, thy dull slow paced feet
Shall caper to behold our fearful scenes
Drenched in a scarlet Ocean,
'tis full twelve—
I hear a quiet foot pace, and it beats
Directly towards. 'Tis Selimus,
joy of expectation.
Thou Queen of shades;
Bright Cynthia, and you starry lamps of heaven,
What sphere hath told you? oh y'are envious all,
And therefore hate to grace the time, in which
I ruinated my latest foe; this is the sand
On which I am to wrestle for a Crown,
And I am entered full of greedy lust,
To meet my adverse champion; here's my god,
Whom I adore with greater confidence
Than all those beauties, Sun, or Moon, or Stars
That with malicious absence have disrobed,
This gracious hour of its due respect.
Oh thou the silent darkness of the night,
Arm me with desperate courage and contempt,
Of gods— loved men, now I applaud the guile,
Of our brave roarers which select this time,
To drink and swagger, and spurn at all the powers
Of either world, blessed mortals, had that mother
Strangled her other infant, white faced day,
And brought forth only night, my limbs are stiff,
And I must bathe them in my brother's blood,
I'll steep this grass in a red purple gore,
Scatter the carcase piecemeal, and that done
I'll rear a lasting monument, I'll sign
A trophy, which inscribed, shall speak my deeds
To after ages, that's my chief intent,
he's coldly praised that's written innocent;
who's there? my soldier?
Soldier and slave, great Prince at your command,
I will jnoble thee place thee my second self
In all my power for thy rare faith.
Where's our Achomates?
I heard one softly track full hitherwards,
And think 'tis he; 'tis needful that I meet him,
And give some proof that I continue his,
Else jealous of my faith, he will return,
And we be both deluded; when y'are met,
Parley before you fight, till I prepare
Myself to run upon him unawares,
Mean while I'll go to meet him.
Go, make haste,
But if this base rascal should deceive
My trust? a trifle— my nerves are plumped up
And filled with vigour, strong enough to fright,
A million of such big backed, drowsie slaves;
I hear them both approach.
See where he stands, I shall not be flow
To second your encounter being met,
Parley before ye fight, till I prepare
Myself, to run upon him unaware,
Mean while I'll withdraw— now for my Bassas,
A time of dismal blackness, and my soul
Is dull and heavy, as if envious night,
Strived to subdue my fatal watch fullness.
But I have rushed upon my foe: whose there?
Answer thy Prince first I say, what art thou?
He that vsurp's the title of a villain.
But he that wears it is a Saint, and such am I
thouart a treacherous slave.
Achomates thou liest, this night shall prove
I shrink not to unmake what I have done.
Oh heavens so impudently bad?
Good brother we know your virtues, one that
Gain country, gods, and men,
Slew an Ambassador which here we must revenge.
Hark in thine ear,
I'll whisper forth thy mice 〈◊〉, lest the heavens
Should tear and snatch them hence from my reuenge,
In greediness of wrath— they whisper.
See where they stand.
Achomates and Selimus?
Both:
They are two, we four, le's run upon them,
'Tis very dark, be certain in your aim,
And all strike home.
A match.
Isaack, and I will take the nearest.
And we the other.
Strike home, and sure, and here's at them.
I have the Crown, and I will, Oh, oh, oh.
Oh, òò, O villain I am slain.
It is not Cherseogles we have slain.
Not Cherseogles villain, whom then? speak.
Achomates and Selimus.
Ha.
None other.
Hast thou betrayed us so?
Be silent, hear me.
There lie the Captains of both Armies dead,
Breathless, and so stupid to neglect
The use of opportunities.
What use?
Are you not rich, wealthy in powerful gold,
Go whilst the Soldiers lie thus destitute
Of any Leader, frankly bribe both parts
Buy their unsettled love at any rate,
And creep into their bosom, then in this
Dead want and dearth of Princes, they will
Cleave to Isaac, and at length salute
Me Emperor?
You apprehend it right.
What blessed angel art thou?
'Tis no time for uncle compliment.
Thy counsel's good.
I would not let slip this sweet occasion,
For all the precious plenty of the world.
Come let's away.
First make some quick dispatch with these now rivals.
True, they'll not endure my Sovereignty.
Hast no sudden wits how to remove them both?
No wile but strength; are not we two?
They are no more; we must encounter them, 'tis man to man:
The match no whit unequal.
I am thine:
I hate to have copartners in my state:
There shall not breathe a man whose envious eye
Dares look a squint on my dread Majesty.
They that bring news first, are still most welcome.
Experience speaks it true.
Let us haste, now Selimus we come to gratulate
Stay—
Stand.
How?
What means this?
Fate to your lives.
Sweet doings.
'Tis no less, Sir witness this,
Traitor I'm slain.
Cross fortune, wicked chance:
But I must make the best of it. Is he dead?
Villain he is, and thy bad turn is next:
What devil did incite thee, to incite
Isaac against friends? Injurious slave.
Urge him to no confession, till the rack
Force from his closest thought unwilling truth,
He shall be doomed for this notorious fact
Unto continual pains,
Hunger, oppression, want and slavery.
That struck me full.— Have at thee:
Hold thou art victor. I have met the price
Of treason death, and as I hoped to raise
By blood, I fall, so have I missed my scope;
Delusion is the end of lawless hope.
Mesithes stay one moment, art thou gone,
I am not far behind, I feel the blood
By slow degrees ebb, from my fainting breast,
I am heart struck, and wounded even to death,
A Scene of slaughterthis.— O just heavens
Still I plighted faith to each of these,
I wished that if I failed in one, I vowed
Death would thus strike me, I have gained my wish,
Than you imperial Fates that intercept
The brittle courses of frail mortality,
Continue this firm justice, and enact
A constant law, that all false meaning hearts
That think of oaths as of a puff of wind,
May as I do, thus sink into the grave
My dying wish: so thrive each perjured knave.
The night overblown, and five a clock,
I wonder at their absence; what are these
Our Generals murdered, our dear Selimus,
With his three Bassas, and Achomates,
Whose bloody hand is guilty of this fact?
A trembling shakes me, 'twas some power
That frowned at our proceedings.
Bajazet is new born to his Sovereignty.
Let's take their bodies, bear them hence in pomp
Unto their greatness, and advise the foe
Of their slain General stern Achomates,
Sound peaceful rumours; we must resubmit
To Bajazet, so heaven hath thought it fit.
Set down the Book and Candle, go and provide
The Potion to prevent my Fever-fit,
Till when I meane to study: goe make ha.
Fortune I thank thee, thou'rt a gracious Whore.
Thy happy anger hath immured a Prince
Within the walls of base security.
Farewell thou swelling sea of Government,
On whose bright crystal bosom along
The graveled vessel of proud Majesty.
Ambition empty all thy bag of breath,
Send forth thy blast among the quiet waves,
And work huge tempests to confound the Art
Of the usurping Pilate Selymu●s.
Treason and envy like to bickering winds,
Shake the unsettled abrick of his State,
That from my study windows I may laugh,
To see his broken fortune swallowed up
In the quick sands of danger, and the sail
Puffed with the calm breath of flattering Chance,
By furious whirlwinds rended into rags,
And piecemeal scattered through the Ocean:
But peace my chiding spirit; Come thou man
Of rare instinct, blessed Author of a book
Worthy the studies of a reading God,
Thou dost present before my wearied eyes,
Tiberius sweeting in his policies,
Dull Claudius gauged by dull flattery,
Nero unboweling Nobility,
Galba undone by servants hardly good,
Otho o'erwhelmed in love, and drenched in blood,
Vittelli●s sleeping in the chair of State,
Vespasian called to government by Fate,
Still as thy Muse doth travel o'er their age,
A Prince's care is writ in every Page.
Thus I unfold the volume of thy wit,
The chiefest solace of my moving wit,
Caedes eo fuit nobilior, quia filius
Patrem interfecit. Tacit. Hist. lib. 20.
Avaunt thou damned wizard, did thy god
Apollo teach thee to divine my fall?
What hath thy cursed Genius tract my steps
Through the Meanders of dark Privacy,
And will he dwell with me in these close shades
To vex my banished soul, banished from joy,
Removed from the world's eye? I am accursed,
And hated by the Synod of the gods,
A knot of envious deceits, the day will be
When they shall smart for this indignity.
Triumph my Plaintiffs, Nemesis your Queen
Is Pierced quite through with your continual groans.
See, see, the prostrate body of a King,
Clad in the weeds of pining discontent,
Lieth open to your wrath, and doleful hate:
But I conjure you not to touch his skin,
Nor hurt his sacred person, those three Fates
(Those frightfull sisters) told me they decree
For Bajazet another destiny:
But vex his soul with your deluding blows,
And let him dream of direful anguishments,
Each in the proper order of his Fate,
Vent the compressed confusion of his hate.
Awake, awake thou tortured Emperor,
Look with the eye of fury on the heavens,
Threaten a downfall to this mortal stage,
And let it crack with thee, thy life is run
To the last Scene, thy Tragic part is done.
You meager devils, and infernal hags,
Where are you? Ha? what vanished? am I found?
Did I not feel them tear and rack my flesh,
And foreamble it amongst them? heaven and earth
I am deluded, what thin airy shapes
Durst fright my soul, I'll hunt about the world,
Search the remotest angles of the earth,
Till l've found out the climate hold sthese fiends,
Or build a bridge by Geometric skill,
Whom lineal extension shall reach forth
To the declining borders of the sky,
On which I'll lead mortality along,
And break a passage through those brazen walls,
From whence Ioue triumphs o'er this lower world:
Then having got beyond the utmost sphere,
Besiege the concave of this universe:
And hungerstarve the gods till they confess
What furies did my sleeping soul oppress.
Ha? did it lighten? or what nimble flame
Has crept into my blood? me thinks it steals
Through my distempered joints, as if it feared
To urge Medeas to i●n●atience.
Hamon, accursed Hamon stand my soul
Above the power of these inuenomed drugs:
Am I in hell alive? the Stygian flames
Could not produce an heat so violent
As burns within my body: Oh I feel
My heart drop into cinders, I am dust;
Ioue for thine own sake Ioue, confine my soul
Within these walls of earth: for in the sky
When I am there, none shall be Ioue but I.
Still, still I boil, and the continued flames
Are aggravated: He is done, subdued
(By the base Art of a damned Empiric)
Whose empty name sent terror through the world:
Is not the heaven bespangled all with stars,
And blazing Meteors, whose bright glimmering flames
Like ceremonial Tapers should adorn
My solemn Hearse? what doth the golden Sun
Ride with its wont motion? are the waves
Bridled within their narrow Continent
No deluge? not an earthquake? Shall a Prince,
An Emperor, a Batazet decease
And make no breach in nature? fright the world
With no prodigious birth? Are you asleep
You thundering beggars that so awe the world?
I'll hasten to revenge this strong neglect
Of my deceasing spirits, mount my soul,
Brush off this cloddy heavy element:
So Ioue I come excorporate, divine,
Immortal as thyself, I must contest
With thee proud god, with thee to arm my mind,
Only my soul ascends earth stays behind.
Is Selymus deceased?
He is my Lord.
Who Solymus? what Fate durst be so bold:
Oh, I could act an holy frenzy now
Selimus deceased? What did not Atlas tremble
At such a burden? Can he support the Orb
That holds up Selimus? is not yet the Pole
Cracked with his weight? do not the heaven's preparr
His funeral Exequys? Ioue I invoke thee now,
Command the heavens that the prone Chandler shops
Command that idle Phoebus, that he exhale
Matter from earth to make thy funerall Tapers:
Or I'll make Torches of the universe
In stead of Comets; flaming Countries, Cities
Shall be thy ceremonial Tapers:
Or if not this; I'll ransack Christendom,
King's Daughters I'll embowel for a Sacrifice,
Their fat with vestal fire will I refine,
And offer virgins ware unto thy shrine.
Start back bright Phoebus, let thy fiery Steeds
Keep Holiday for Selimus. tell thy host
Proud Neptune now expects another's deluge,
That all the earth may weep for Selimus.
What do you smile you Heavens? are ye conscious,
And guilty of this execrable treason?
What dare the fields to laugh when I do mourn?
I'll dye your motley coloured weeds in scarlet,
And clothe the world in black destruction.
Nemesis, I'll nail thee to my greedy sword,
Destruction shall serve under me a Prenticeship.
Courage brave Sel●xie, with thy Princely boat
Through Styx even all mortality shall float;
I'll levy Soldiers through the Universe,
With which thou shalt begirt Elysium;
Thus barren Nature shall repent thy fall,
Grieving that she did not the event forestall;
Death I will hate thee: the world shall wear
Thy sable livery embroidered with fear:
Thy Trophies every where the world shall gaze on:
Thy Arms in sable and in gules I blazon.
My Lord this Crown entreats you leave off these
Ground-creeping meditations, and to think
Of Majesty, wherefore we invest your brow
With this rich robe of glory, and do vow
To it our due allegiance: thus you shall
Mount up aloft above your Father's fall.
Thus our dear Father, those bright robes of state,
For which so lately thou hast sweat in blood,
Thou wearest upon my shoulders in thy stead:
Thus are we crowned, and thus our labours be,
Made gainful unto thine, though not to thee.
Live then, and reign most mighty Emperor,
Whilst that our care and watchful providence,
Shall fence thy safety, and keep Sentinel
Over thy sacred person, were black treasons,
Hatched in the Centre of the darkest earth,
The massy element should be prospective
For all our piercing eyes; should Pluto send
His black Apparator to summon thee
To appear before him, by that Mahomet
We would confront him boldly, and excuse
Thy absence unto Pluto, by our presence;
Death we'll disarm thee, if thou dar'starrest
Thy fury on our Solyman, or we'll bale his person
With our imprisonment.
By our death thou shalt live; our City walls
May with warlike ruin be battered,
But our allegiance, that European Bull,
Shall never push from us, with his golden horns;
Nor shall his guilded showers quench our loves:
No golden Engineer shall undermine
The Castles of our faith, nor blow them up
With blasts of hoped preferment, were thy walls▪
But paper, were they made of brittle glass,
Our faiths should make them marble, and as firm
As Admant: not walls, but subjects love,
Do to a Prince the strongest Castle prove.
Behold great Prince allegiance mixed with love
Locked in our breasts: thou art the living key
To shut, and to unlock them at thy pleasure:
No golden picklock shall e'er serve itself
Into these faithful locks, whose only springs
Can be no other than our own heart strings,
Our greedy swords which erst imbrued in blood,
Did seem to blush at their own Master's acts,
And upbraid us with our bloody facts
Though peace hath now condemned to pleasing rust,
Yet at thy beck we'll sheathe them in the breast
Of daring Christians, thus in war we'll fight
For thee, whilst thou dost strive for victory:
Here to describe such Princely virtues, which
Should more adorn thy Crown then Orient pearls,
Were but to show a glass, and to commend
Thyself unto thyself. Be gracious,
Magnificent, courageous, or mild,
Or more compendiously, be more thyself,
Reign then, and Mahomet grant that thou may'st pass
Nestor in years, as much as now thou dost
In wisdom and in valour; Herald proclaim
To the world his title, and let swift-winged Fame
Second thy trumpet.
Long live Soliman, etc.
We thank you friendly Actors of our bliss,
Our patience hath at length tired out the gods;
Our Empire hath been racked enough with treasons,
And black seditions, as if no Christians
Were left to conquer, we yield our Turkish blades
Against ourselves, imbowelling the State
With bloody discord, by our strength we fall
A scorn to Christians, with our hands we shed
That blood which might have conquered Christendom;
Thus while we hate ourselves we love our enemies,
And heal them with our sores, whilst we lie weltering
n bloudy peace: the dy of the publique safety
Hath been already cast by th'hand of war,
Treasons have made a blot, which may provoke
The enemy to enter, and bear our men
To dark Avernus, Envy might have blushed,
Though always pale at all our projects: now
This bloody deluge is quite past, return
Sweet Peace with th'olive branch, enough of wars,
'Tis thou must pour oil into our scars.
Fly hence Hereditary hate, discords dead,
Let not succeeding omnities and hatred live.
Let none presume to cover private sores
With public ruins, nor let black discord
Make an Anatomy of our too lean
Empire, let it w●● sat again; when peace
Hath knit her knots, then shall the wanton sounds
Of Bells give place to thundering bombards,
And blood wash out the smoothing oil of Peace,
Every Soldier I'll ordain a Priest
To ring a fatal knell to Christians,
And every minute unto earth's wide womb,
Shall sacrifice a Chrisitians' Hecatomb:
Then shall we make a league with Aeolus,
The winds shall strive to further our proceedings,
Then will we load the Seas, and fetter Neptune
With chains that hold our Anchors; he shall quake
Lest he to Pan resign his watery Empire,
And three forked-mace unto my awful Sceptre;
The Whales and Dolphins shall amazed stand,
That they shall yield their place to Bears and lions,
Sylla shall howl for fear when she shall see
The Sea become a Forest, and herself
Mountanie, then let Siren's quake
For fear of Satyrs, then let the Christians think,
Not that our Navy, but the Country itself
Is come to move them from the growing earth;
Comets, fiery swords shall be my Heralds,
Threatening to th'world sudden combustion:
Let our arms be steely bows, our arrows
Thunderbolts, and in stead of warlike drums,
Thunder shall proclaim black destruction;
Vulcan I'll tax thee, exercise thy Forge,
Prepare to me for all the world a scourge,
The Fates to me their powers shall resign,
Which with this hand will rend the strongest twine
Of humane breath, first for the I'll of Rhodes
Destruction there shall keep his mournful Stage:
Th'inhabitants shall act a bloody Tragedy,
And personate themselves; Then for Nayos I'll
Death there shall keep her Court, than I will make
Vienna all a Shambles; yea gaping Famine
Ever devouring, always wanting food,
Shall gnaw their bowels, and shall lean them nothing
Besides themselves to feed on; their dead corpses
Shall be entombed in their neighbour's bellies.
There every one shall be a living Sepulchre,
An unhallowed Churchyard; famine shall feed itself,
Then shall they envy beasts, and wish to be
Our jades, our Mules, Matrons shall strive to bring
Into the hateful light abortive Brats;
The Infants shall return, and the lean womb
Shall be unto the Babes a sudden tomb.
Then shall they hoard carcases, and strive
Only to be rich in Funerals; I'd rejoice
To see them stand like Screech-owls, gaping when
Their Parents should expire, and bequeath
To hell their wretched souls, to them their death.
Long live great Soliman our noble Emperor.
All this, and more than this I'll do, when peace
Hath glutted our new greedy appetites,
When it hath filled the veins of the Empire full
With vigour, then lest too much blood should cause
Armies of vices, not of men to kill us,
And strength breed weakness in our too great Empire,
Then, then, and only than we shall think good,
With war to let the body politic blood,
Mean time we'll think on our Father's Funeral:
Oh, I could be an holy Epicure,
In tears, and pleasing sighs, Oh I could now
Refresh myself with sorrow, I could emblame
Thy corpses with holy groans from putrefaction:
Oh, I could powder up thy thirsty corpses
With brinish tears, and wipe them off with kisses,
And that I might more freely speak my grief,
These eyes should be still silent Orators,
Till blindness shut them up were I a woman:
But I am Solyman, Emperor, the Turk,
Blood shall be my tears, I'll think thee slain
Amongst the Christians, and translate my grief
To fury, every member of my body
Shall execute the office of a weeping son.
Thus in my tears an Argus will I be,
My head, heart, hands, and all shall weep for or thee.
Oh that the cruel Fates were half so mild
As to drive streams of tears from forth the springs,
Great sorrows have no leisure to complain,
Lest ills vent forth, great griefs within remain:
See Selimus, sometimes a fore-string instrument
Feeding his Soldiers with sweet Harmony,
Doth now tune nought to us but Lacrymy,
Could not Aesculapius be found to tune
His disagreeing elements treasons cracked
The string which else an headache would untune.
Every disease is a ragged fort
To wear these strings asunder, treason did lend
Death, which both age, and sickness did intend;
What then remains, but that his Funeral rites
With our Grandfather, Uncles be solemnised,
That so black discord may be with them buried:
But noble Selimus what Tomb shall I prepare
For thy memorial? shall a heavy stone
Press thy innocent ashes? Shall I confine
Thy wand'ring ghost in some high marble prison?
Or shall I hither fetch the flying I Tomb
Of proud Mausolus the rich Carian King?
No; Religion shall cloak no such injury,
No hired Rhetoric shall adorn thy coarse,
No prattling stone shall trumpet forth thy praise,
The world's thy tomb, thy Epitaph I'll carve
In Funerals, destruction is the book
In which we'll write thy annals, blood's the Ink,
Our sword the Pen; A Tragedy I intent,
Which with a Plangity, no Plaudity shall end.