BEhold great Magistrate, on either hand
Sands, Shelves, and Syrteses, and upon them stand
Two dangerous rocks, your safety to engage,
Boasting of nought save shipwreck spoil and strage.
This Sylla, that Charybdis, (dangerous both)
Placed in the way you row to take your oath.
Yet though a thousand monsters yawn and gape
To ingurdge and swallow you, there's way to scape;
Ulysses by his wisdom found it, steer
You by his Compass, and the way lies clear,
Will you know how? look upward then; and sail
By the sign Libra, that Celestial scale,
In which (some write) the Sun at his creation
First shone; and is to these times a relation
Of Divine Justice: It in justice shined,
Do you so (Lord) and be like it divind.
Keep the even Channel, and be neither swayde,
To the right hand nor left, and so evade
Malicious envy (never out of action,)
Smooth visadgd flattery, and black mouthed detraction,
Sedition, whisper, murmuring, private hate,
All ambushing, the godlike Magistrate.
About these rocks and quick sands Siren's haunt,
One sings connivance, th'other would enchant
With partial sentence; and a third ascribes,
In pleasing tunes, aright to gifts and bribes;
Sweetening the ear, and every other sense,
That place, and office, may with these dispense.
But though their tones be sweet, and shrill their notes,
They come from foul breasts, and inpostumed throats,
Sea monsters they be styled, but much (nay more,
'Tis to be doubted,) they frequent the shore.
Yet like Ulysses, do but stop your ear
To their enchantments, with an heart sincere;
They failing to endanger your estate,
Will from the rocks themselves precipitate.
Proceed then in your blessed Inauguration,
And celebrate this Annual Ovation;
Whilst you nor this way, nor to that way lean,
But shun th' extremes, to keep the golden mean.
This glorious City, Europa's chiefest minion,
Most happy in so great a King's dominion:
Into whose charge this day doth you invest,
Shall her in you, and you in her make blessed.
IF Time (some say) have here been oft in view,
Yet not the same, old Time is each day new,
Who doth the future locked up hours enlarge,
To welcome you to this great City's charge.
Time, who hath brought you hither (grave and great)
To inaugure you, in your Praetorium seat:
Thus much with grief doth of himself profess
Nothing's more precious, and esteemed less.
Yet you have made great use of me, to aspire
This eminence, by desert, when in full choir
Avees and Acclamations, with loud voice,
Meet you on all sides, and with Time rejoice.
This Hill, that Nymph appareled like the Spring,
These Graces that attend her, (every thing)
As fruitful trees, green plants, flowers of choice smell,
All Emblems af a City governed well;
Which must be now your charge. The Labels here
Mixed with the leaves will show what fruit they bear:
The fear of God, a Magistrate discreet,
justice, and Equity: when with these meet,
Obedience unto Rulers, Unity,
Plain and just dealing, Zeal, and Industry:
In such blessed symptoms where these shall agree,
Cities, shall like perpetual Summers be.
You are now General, do but bravely lead,
And (doubtless) all will march, as you shall tread:
You are the Captain, do but bravely stand
To oppose vice, see, all this goodly band
Now in their City Liveries will apply
Themselves to follow, where your Colours fly.
You are the chief, defend my daughter Truth,
And then both Health and Poverty, Age and Youth,
Will follow this your Standard, to oppose
Error, Sedition, Hate, (the common foes.)
But pardon Time (grave Lord) who speaks to thee;
As well what thou now art, as aught to be.
See you this withered branch, by Time o'er grown
A City's Symbol, ruined, and trod down.
A Tree that bore bad fruit; Dissimulation,
Pride, Malice, Envy, Atheism, Supplantation,
Ill Government, Prophannes, Fraud, Oppression,
Neglect of virtue, Freedom to transgression,
Obedience, here with power did disagree,
All which fair London be still far from thee.
You noble Cities of this generous Isle,
May these my two each Ladies ever smile.
(Justice, and mercy) on you. You we know
Are come to grace this our triumphant show.
And of your courtesy, the hand to kiss
Of London, this fair lands Metropolis.
Why sister Cities sit you thus amazed?
If to behold above you, windows glazed
With Diomonds'sted of glass? Stars hither sent,
This day to deck our lower Firmament?
Is it to see my numerous Children round
Encompass me? So that no place is found.
In all my large streets empty? My issue spread
In number more than stones whereon they tread.
To see my Temples, Houses, even all places.
With people covered, as If, Tiled with faces?
Will you know whence proceeds this fair increase,
This joy? the fruits of a continued peace,
The way to thrive; to prosper in each calling,
The weak, and shrinking states, to keep from falling,
Behold; my motto shall all this display,
Read and observe it well: Serve and obey.
Obedience though it humbly doth begin,
It soon augments unto a Magazine
Of plenty, in all Citties'tis the ground,
And doth like harmony in music sound:
Nations and Common weals, by it alone
Flourish: It incorporates, many into one,
And makes unanimous peace content and joy,
Which pride, doth still Insidiate to destrsy.
And you grave Lord, on whom right honour calls,
Both borne and bredi'th circuit of my walls,
By virtue and example, have made plain,
How others may like eminence attain.
Persist in this blessed concord, may we long,
That Cities to this City may still throng,
To view my annual triumphs, and so grace,
Those honoured Praetors that supply this place.
A Soldier, by valour and martial Discipline
A Churchman by Learning and degrees in schools
A Statesman by Travel and Language &c.
A Lord Maior by Commerce and Traffic both
The Palace of Honour is thus governed
I Katherine, long since Sainted for true piety,
The Lady patroness of this Society,
A queen, a Virgin, and a Martyr: All
My Atributes: Invite you to this Hall
Called Honours palace: nor is this my Wheel,
Blind Fortune's Emblem, she that makes to reel;
Kingdoms and Common weals, all turning round,
Some to advance, and others to Confound:
Mine is the Wheel of Faith, (all ways in motion)
Steadfast in Hope, and Constant in Devotion.
It Imitates the Spheres swift agitation,
Orbicularly, still moving to Salvation:
That's to the Primus motor: from whom Flows,
All Goodness, Virtue: There; true Honour grows,
Which: If you will attain 't must be your care.
(Crime Magistrate.) Instated as you are.
To keep thou Curoular action, in your charge,
To Curb the opressor, the oppressed to enlarge;
To be the Widow's Husband, th' Orphant's Father,
The blindman's oye, the lune man's foot: so gather
(A treasure beyond value, by your place;
More than Earth's Honour,) true Celestial grace,
Aim first at that: what other Honours be,
Honour Herself can best Instruct thats she.
The way to me though not debarred,
Yet it is dificult and hard.
If Kings Arrive to my profection
'tis by Succession, or Election
When Fortitude doth Action grace,
The Soldier then with me takes place
When Stooddy, Knowledge and degree
Makes Scholars Eminent here with me;
They are listed with the Honoured: and
The Travilar, when many a land
He hath ' pierced for language, and much knows
A great respected slatesman grows.
So you and such as you (Grave Lord)
Who wear this Scarlet, use that Sword
Collar, and Cap of Maintenance.
These are no things, that come by chance
Or got by sleeping but averse
From these I am pained: by care, Commerce,
The hazarding of Goods, and men
To Pirates Rocks, shelves, Tempest, when?
You through a Wilderness of Seas,
Dangers of wrack, Surprise, Disease
Make new descoveryes, for a lasting story
Of this our Kingdom's fame and Nations glory
Thus is that Collar, and your Scarlet worn,
And for such cause, the Sword before you Borne.
They are the emblems of your Power, and here
Though curbed within the Limmet of one year,
Yet manage as they ought by your Endeavour
Shall make your name (as new) Honoured for ever
Unto which Palace of peace, rest and bliss,
Supply of all things, where nought wanting is
Would these that shall succeed you know the way?
'tis plain, God, the King Serve and Obey.
Night grows, Inviting you to rest, prepare
To rise to morrrw to a whole Years care,
Envy still waits on Honour, then provide
Ulysses Wisdom may be still your guide
To steer you through all dangers: Husband Time
That this day brings you to a place sublime,
By the Supporture of his daughter Truth
This Ancient City in her pristine Youth,
Your sword may re-establish: and so bring
Her still to flourish; like that lasting Spring
That London in whose Circuit you were bred
And borne therein, to be the Chief and Head
Drawn by these two beasts in an Equal line
May in your Mercy and your justice shine,
So Honour who this day did you Invite
Unto Her palace bids you thus Good Night,
No following day but add to your Renown
And this your Charge with numerous Blessings crown.