LEt go this wicked hand; oh daughter leave me,
Leave me while thou art virtuous, before
Th' infection of my crimes do blast thy goodness
Or draw some plague upon thee; this dire head
Abhorred by heaven and earth, living in Thebes
Brought forth a pestilence, which help of art
Could never cure, until, by heaven's decree,
Most hateful I was banished from the City.
Oh Daughter leave me.
Never, never Sir.
While you are here, Cythaeron's craggy mount
Is my abode, and far preferred before
Labdacus' stately palace, or the towers
Of wealthy Thebes, for which my brothers strive,
What there I loved, I am possessed of here,
My Father's presence; do not banish me
Thither again; that place is banishment,
While you are here; what but impiety,
And brother's hatred shall I there behold?
Thou art too good, Antigone, thy birth
Would make me Ioue my crimes, but that all sense
Of virtue, as of light, is dead in me.
If thou wilt guide me, guide me to that high
And fatal cliff, from whence unhappy Ino
Pursued, leapt down into the seas, and met
The danger which she fled, there let me lie
Concealed for ever from the eye of heaven
Ah could I kill my memory as well,
That no succeeding ages might relate
The name and story of sad Oedipus!
Be not unjust unto yourself to think
You have deserved death; the gods call that
Mishap and error, which your cruel self
Against yourself call crime; love would not hold
His vengeful thunder, if he judged it so.
The age were good, were men as penitent
For true and real faults, as you for that,
Which ignorance hath wrought, and was the crime
Of fate itself, not yours: you could not think
That Theban Laius and Iocasta were
Your hapless parents; and too great a fear
Of being guilty, made you what you feared.
Remembering what the oracle foretold,
You left a kingdom's glory, and forsook
Good Polybus and loving Merope,
Your then supposed parents, and betook
yourself unto a willing banishment.
What more than this could you have done? to keep
Your goodness, you forsook a crown, which others
Strive to attain by all impiety.
Yet cruel fate pursued you still, and made
Your virtuous mind the way to your offence;
As if the Gods themselves had punished you
For striving to be innocent, when they
Had fore-decree'd decreed your guilt, take comfort Sir,
No man offends, but where the will consents.
How well canst thou, Antigone, that bear'st,
A magazine of virtuous thoughts within thee,
Speak words of comfort, but accursed I
Am most uncapable, there's nought in me,
But horror, grief, despair and misery.
Show me some way of death, or let me go.
I cannot leave you Sir, nor show your death,
But where I mean to bear you company.
I never should have had a virtuous child
But to afflict me more; nature will work
A miracle to make my sufferings greater.
The Sun shall bring black night, the Evening star
Usher the day, and seas shall meet the sky
To make addition to my misery!
good Sir, go take some rest; do not destroy
That life, on which another life depends.
There's none but thou, has a commanding power
o'er Oedipus, if thou command me leap
Into Sicilian Aetna's scalding throat,
I'll gladly do't; if thou wilt have it so
I will, like Titius, with my liver feed
A tiring vulture; more, I will take rest;
Nay, most of all, I'll live at thy request.
I see some signs of rest upon him now. Exeunt.
How well this sad and solitary place
Suits with my thoughts? these unfrequented woods,
Where nature void of artificial robes
Presents her naked and ungarnished face.
In such abodes as these dwelled piety,
White innocence, and spotless chastity
In that first golden age when Saturn reigned.
And still methinks within these woods he reigns,
Though banished quite from all the world beside,
Here lives the soul of virtue; here abides
The fair Antigone, whose matchless goodness
Upbraids, and expiates this ages crimes,
And quite o'erweighs th'impiety of Thebes,
This place the Gods, disdaining other sights,
Behold with wonder, when Antigone
With pious hands directs her blinded sire
The woeful Oedipus; hither the Graces,
The chaster Nymphs, and harmless dryads
Leaving their bowers of pleasure, all resort
To wait on her, and bear her company.
My father is asleep; you powers above
Send sweet refreshment to his wearyed soul.
Oh pity him, and punish not too far
That crime which fate and you yourselves have made.
He has already been himself a judge
Too cruel to himself, to expiate
His fatal errors, left a crown and sceptre,
Fled men's society, and day itself,
Torn out his innocent unhappy eyes.
Now since he wants the comfort of your light
Grant him a quiet undisturbed night.
Young Aemon here?
Pardon me royal virgin,
Think it not rudeness in me thus to press
Upon your privacies; but call it service,
Or zeal to wait upon you, and behold
What I do most admire.
Sir, 'tis no fault
That I can apprehend; or if it be,
'tis such a fault as punishes itself.
This is the house of sorrow; nought is here
That can invite or recompense your coming.
To visit you, so you be pleased to grace
That visit with a welcome, is a blessing
No place has power to lessen, it would make
hell's saddest cave a fair Elysium.
You come from Court, and speak as that has taught you.
This place knows no such language.
Aemon never
Was taxed of flattery, nor will your worth
Admit it; gentle Lady, be but pleased
To think my heart speaks in my tongue to you.
Oh give me leave but to confess my flame,
Which never can be hid; a better fire
More chaste, more true, and full of constancy,
(I dare maintain it) warms no breast on earth.
No earthly power but sweet Antigone
Can sentence me to bliss or endless woe.
Oh save that creature that depends on you.
Make me immortal by a fair return
Of grace from you and favour.
(That title, though I hated you, your worth
Would challenge from my truth) I love you better
Than so to work your ruin; Love and wedlock
Have still been fatal in our family.
The baleful owls and croaking ravens sing
Our Hymenaean songs, and furies light
Their brands for torches to our bridal beds.
No, wondrous maid, you bear a heaven about you,
A heaven of virtue, that is proof against
The furies rage, and fortunes utmost spite:
You are above them all. Oh take me to you,
And by conjunction of your goodness, make
Me higher than the power of fate can reach.
These are no times for Hymen, when the frown
Of all the gods lies heavy on our house.
Oh move that suit no more; but yet as far
As my chaste sorrow can admit of love,
Let this suffice you, I do love your soul.
And if this storm should clear, and I have power
To marry ever, Aemon is the man
Of all the world I choose.
Oh heavenly voice!
This promise from divine Antigone,
More than fruition of the proudest beauty
That ere mortality could boast, revives me,
And makes me ever happy; all the hours,
That from my country's cause, and from the war
I can be spared, I'll keep as holy ones
To pay devotion here, here I'll relate
whatever fortune throws on doubting Thebes.
But one chaste kiss and so farewell.
You have it.
Ye powers of love, be all auspicious now.
Hymen redeem the wrongs that thou hast done
Our house already; had I never seen
Young Aemon's face, ne'er known his matchless worth,
No other man or mind had ere had power
To warm Antigone's cold breast with love.
Prosper that flame that you yourselves did move.
'tis so, Ianthus, Aemon is in love
With fair Antigone; no other passion
Could make so fresh a youth and spirit as his
To seek such sad retreats; from that dark grove,
Which clothes Cythaeren's rough and craggy top,
Where far from sight and company of men
The woeful Oedipus laments alone
His hapless; e errors fault, unseen by any
But good Antigone his pious daughter,
How oft of late brave Aemon has been met!
What but her love had power to draw him thither?
she is an object worthy of Aemon's love.
The mirror of her sex, a lasting pattern
Of piety to all succeeding times.
As much true wortha nd manly virtue lives
In noble Aemons breast, he's the true brother
Of brave Menaeceus, whose devoted head
Saved Thebes from ruin.
True, if Thebes be safe,
As never fairer were her hopes then now;
Th'Argolian forces are disheartened quite,
And of their seven proud leaders, which of late
Beset the gates of Thebes, but two are left
Only Adrastus, and our banished prince.
If we, I say, be safe, we owe that safety
To Creon's sons, to brave Menaeceus' death,
And Aemon's living valour; one by death
Gave life to thousands; tother noble life
Deserved an easier way to fame then death.
But I have heard news from the enemy's camp,
All's quiet there, and 'tis supposed they mean
To fight no more, but secretly dislodge,
And fly away by night.
'tis like enough,
And would the King be ruled by my advice
He should not follow them, there has been spilled
Already blood enough in that unjust,
Unnatural cause. Those brave Argolians,
Whose virtues we, although their enemies,
Must needs acknowledge, and lament their deaths,
Besides those dearer funerals, which Thebes
Has mourned already for, to justify
The broken faith of King Eteocles.
But who's that makes to us so speedily,
Thy looks speak news, what are they man? be brief.
The King was walking round the city walls,
When straight a parley sounded from the foe,
And Polynices our exiled Prince
Himself appeared, who from below complained
So many noble funerals had paid
The forfeit of his brother's perjury;
Defied him then, and challenged him alone
To end the difference in a single combat.
Oh horrid monstrous challenge?
Has the King
Accepted it?
Yes, with a seeming joy,
And did complain alone that he himself
Was not the challenger.
Unnatural!
Though many that were by, persuaded him
He need not answer it at all; his strength
Was great enough to keep the crown without it.
But piety however should forbid it.
It did not move his breast; thou shalt (quoth he)
Immediately at head of all our troops
Find us prepared to answer, and to take
Mistake away, we'll wear our royal crown▪
It grieves us only 'twas thy motion first.
And one of us, when this black fight is done,
Shall without rival keep the Theban crown.
Come Dircus, let's away, and or prevent,
Or see the issue of this dire intent.
Can Thebes yet find no peace, nor see
A period of her misery?
What booted brave Menoeteus' death,
Who gave up his devoted breath
To save his Country? what the falls
Of all those worthies, whom the walls
Of our sad Thebes late trembled at?
Bold Capaneus, whose strange fate
No human strength, but from above
The thunderbolts of armed Ioue
Could work; the stout Hippomedon,
And Meleager's beauteous son;
Apollo's sacred Prophet too.
Quick to Avernus forced to go
Amphiaraus, to prevent
The fates, by his so strange descent
Frighting the Ghosts that dwell below.
Nor could the fatal sisters know,
Before they saw him 'mongst the dead;
That they should cut his vital thread.
These, and a thousand worthies more
Are fled down to the shades below,
And yet the wicked part of war
Doth still remain; the Princes are
Both yet alive, and yet do hate.
What end can be composed by fate?
Their hate is impious, but to try
The cause, were more impiety.
Our fears do still increase, the skies
Are filled with nought but prodigies
Which woes and ruins do display.
I long to hear what fate today
The field affords; relate to us
How black soe'er and ominous.
Then hear a story that might make
Amazed nature's self to shake
The Princes both are slain (alas).
What guilty hands could act such tragedies?
Nay there's the sorrow of it, and a grief
Worse than their death's are, in a single combat
They slew each other.
Oh black family?
But yet relate the manner of their death.
When this great war of one divided womb,
Two brothers met, both armies stood at gaze,
Amazed both; the grieved gods of war,
Withdrew their presence from so black a fight.
Bellona broke her lance, the blue-eyed maid
Fled from the field ashamed, and Mars drove back
His Thracian chariot; in whose stead the furies
Marshaled the field, and all th' Ogygian ghosts
In a black ring beset the combatants
Blasting the day with damps of Acheron.
No Trumpets sounded, nor shrill cornets pierced
The wounded air; for these the nights sad King
Thrice thundered from Avernus; thrice the Earth
with mournful groans gave signal to the fight.
Old men complained that they had lived too long.
To see that horrid sight; the women shrieked,
And weeping mothers from the walls forbade
Their children to behold it, but the Princes
With such a furious hatred both encounter
As if the souls of all their slaughtered friends,
And both the armies, whom their cause engaged,
Had lived in them, till fate so cruelly
Balanced their strength, that both were slain, yet both
were guilty conquerors.
But did they die
Together then.
Eteocles fell first;
o'er whom, before death closed up his eyes,
Bloodless and feeble Polynices stood,
And from his head taking th'imperial crown
Impaled himself therewith; at last (quoth he)
Thou art mine own. oh do not close his eyes
Pale death, till he have seen me wear the Crown.
But I must leave it too; Oh short short reign.
If there be justice in the other world,
Before great Minos' urn, it Minos' urn
Be not a fable, will I summon thee,
Nor shall this combat end our enmity.
Then on his brother falling down he died.
Oh horrid fight! bright Phoebus hide thy head,
Wrap up the day in foggy clouds, and make
An endless night, to hide this tragedy
From human eyes; a blacker deed than this
Thy light did ne'er discover, here let all
The prodigies that threatened us, have end.
The Argives all with winged speed are fled,
And Thebes once more has peace; but that, I fear
Long cannot last.
What storm can threaten now?
Creon no sooner was saluted King
(For so he was since both those Princes fell)
But he commanded (Oh fond tyranny)
No man on pain of death should dare to bury
One body of the Argives, they (alas)
Remain exposed in the open field
To feed the fowls, or perish in the air.
Nor must the Argives only want the rites
Of funeral; but Theban Polynices
Because with them he fought against his country,
Remains exposed as the Argives are
In th' open air, who ere shall bury him,
His own dead carcase shall supply the place.
Thebes will, I fear, incur the enmity
Of nations by this act, and we shall wish
(If Creon so begin his froward reign)
Th' unhappy house of Oedipus again.
WHere shall we vent our griefs? what power on earth
Can lend our woes redress?
Accursed Thebes,
Is't not enough thy guilty soil hath drunk
So many princes bloods, but after death
Unto their Ghosts thou still shouldst prove a foe,
And bar what nature, and all laws bestow?
Whither is goodness fled from humane breasts?
tigers themselves, if tigers could perform
These rites of funerals, would now correct
The malice of mankind.
What shall we do
T'appease the ghosts of our unburied Lords?
Go sue to Thebes, perchance the sighs, and tears
Of weeping queen's may move the tyrant's heart:
No, royal Ladies, banish from your breasts
That flattering hope; no tears, nor prayers can move,
The ruthless tyrant's mind; an impious oath
Hath bound his cruelty; his watchmen tell
The carcases, and guard the place, to keep
Sad friends from thence: no creatures have access
To that dire field, but beasts, and birds of prey.
His hate is constant, sooner hope t'appease
Busiris altars, or the fiends themselves,
Then savage Creon; venture not to Thebes.
What other course is left us?
To perform
To their dear names such empty funerals
As fortune will allow; or if that that
Will not suffice, go speedily to Athens;
Thither all conquering Theseus is returned,
Triumphant now from th' Amazonian war,
Whose mighty arm all savage tyrant's dread,
Whose high Heroic thoughts were ne'er averse
From suppliants, and for encouragement
To all that come, in midst of Athens stands
A gracious altar, where white mercy dwells,
The poor man's goddess, shaded with a grove
Of suppliant Olives, and chaste Laurel trees.
None are denied to enter, but the rich,
And fortunate; poor wretches, night and day,
Find free access, and there have leave to pay
Their cheap devotion; no slain bullock's blood,
No Frankincense, nor rich Arabian fumes
Do feed that altar▪ sighs, and floods of tears
Are all that goddess craves; no gold adorns
Her humble roofs, as those proud temples raised
By happy Monarchs, and great conquerors,
Instead of trophies, and triumphal robes,
Torn hair, and widows mourning garments hang
About the temple, thither from all coasts
Unhappy souls repair, sad folk subdued
In war, or banished from their native soils,
Or those, whom hapless error has made guilty.
There they implore, and there obtain their peace.
Go you to Athens, sister, and entreat
Great Theseus' aid, whilst I, whose fatal quarrel
Was cause of all this dire and mournful war,
Will try what mercy can be found in Thebes.
Do not expose your life to such an hazard.
What mischief can an humble suppliant fear?
Besides my suit to Creon will in Thebes
Be seconded by Polynices' friends.
Go you with speed to Athens, if I fail,
That your petitions timely may prevail.
And all the gods prosper your pious suit.
May Thebes prove gentle when Argia enters.
Now I am free to act what I design.
Shall I expect the doubtful grant of Creon,
Or Theseus lingering aid, whilst thou, dear Lord,
Art food for vultures? whilst thy funeral
Decreases daily, and thy wandering Ghost
Perchance complaining to th'infernal gods
Callest me unkind, and cruel? I will lose
No longer time, no danger shall withstand
That act, which love, and my chaste fires command.
Move me no more in that, can Aemon find
No match 'mongst all the noble Theban Maids,
Nor foreign princess, but Antigone?
To mix the fortune of our house with that
Incestuous, dire, and fatal family?
Move me no more I say.
but good, my Lord,
Weigh not alone her hapless parentage,
(Though that were royal, and allied to you
In near degrees) but her admired virtue,
In which the general voice of people speaks her
As much excelling, as the worst of all
Her wretched race were infamous for vice.
What real virtue ever could proceed
From such an impious stock? or being borne,
Could ever prosper?
Do not tax so far
The justice of the gods, that they should punish
In good Antigone her kindred's crimes:
They have already with dire punishments
Paid for their proper guilt; and her rare virtues
By the same law may challenge, as a due,
The greatest blessings that the gods can grant.
No act of hers can recompense the guilt
Her birth alone has brought into the world,
And now we'll purge the city, Aephytus,
Go find out Oedipus, and in our name
Confine him to Cithaeron; speak it death,
If ere he show within the walls of Thebes
His ominous head.
That banishment, my liege,
Is come too late, he is confined already
Unto his latest home, grief for his sons
Has broke at last his great and stubborn heart.
The queen Iocasta hearing that sad news
Beating her breast, tearing her hoary hair,
And uttering sad complaints against the gods,
And fates severe decrees, at last espied
That fatal sword by which old Laius died
On which she fell, and ended her sad life.
We have no tears for her, although our sister;
Let all the plagues, that Thebes so long has felt,
Take end with them. None but Antigone
Is now remaining of that family.
Go thou, Ianthus, in our name command her
To keep her house in Thebes, nor stir from thence,
Until our farther pleasure shall be known.
Be good to her, my Lord, for Aemons sake.
whate'er mishap befall Antigone
he'll deeply share in, for I fear his love
Is too too constant ere to be removed.
Rather than lose him, grant his lawful suit.
I'll rather grant him death then marriage there.
Remember he's our son, our only son,
And virtuous too, of whom the Kingdom boasts.
Blast not their hopes in him, the fate of love
Is irresistible.
Let Aemon know
we'll be his fate. No more Eurydice.
Antigone was lately met alone
Without the city. None of all her servants
Were privy to her going, nor yet know
Whither their Lady went.
Ha! I suspect
What she intends to do. If I guess right
She goes upon her ruin. Aephytus,
Double the watch, and with a careful eye
o'er look the knaves; this night shall be thy charge.
Perform it well, and thou shalt find reward
Beyond thy wishes; let no negligence,
No gifts, no favour, nor respect to any,
How near soe'er to us, make thee or them
Slack in your charges, as your lives shall answer
Our strictest justice.
Do not fear me Sir.
I'll be at hand myself to make all sure.
Post to the West, bright Phoebus, and thou night,
That robbest mortality of light, to lend them
A greater blessing, rest and sweet repose,
Spread thy black mantle over yond mourning fields,
Which those dead Grecians strew, where too too long
My wronged brother Polynices lies
Barred by unnatural, and injurious Thebes,
Dead from a tomb, as living from a Crown.
This wrong must I redress, assist me virtue,
And all ye gods, that favour piety.
I have at last escaped the curious eyes
Of all that watched my actions, and expect
Nought but the safe concealment of the night:
Were but these rites performed, not Creon's spite,
Nor racks, nor tortures should my soul affright.
What could th' Argolian ghosts, though once our foes,
Deserve so much from us, as thus to lose
The rites of funeral, which all mankind
justly expect from greatest foes to find?
Why should the land that gave them death, deny
Them sepulture? pursuing enmity
Farther than that? why with so black a stain
Dost thou pollute the entrance of thy reign
Unhappy Creon, thwarting nature's law,
Upon thyself and fatal Thebes to draw
The hate and curse of nations, who will make
The quarrel theirs; Pluto himself will take
Revenge for this great loss, that must befall
His Monarchy, whilst these Argolians all
Unburied lie, wandering a hundred year
Exiled from him for want of sepulchre.
Thine anger boots not, Creon; 'tis all one
Whether the fire or putrefaction
Dissolve them; all to nature's bosom go,
And to themselves their ends the bodies owe.
If now the Argives bodies be not burned,
They shall when earth and seas to flames are turned.
Earth will, inspite of thee, receive again
whatever she brought forth; and they obtain
heaven's coverture, that have no graves at all.
Thou that deniest these people funeral,
Why dost thou fly those slaughter-smelling fields?
Breathe, if thou canst, the air this sad place yields.
Those vanquished carcases alone possess
The ground, and bar the conquerors access.
When that annoyance shall be vanished quite,
The wandering ghosts will still remain, and fright
The baleful place; ploughmen shall fear to toil
In furrows of this ill-manured soil.
This ghostly land of ours perchance shall be
ta'en for Avernus by posterity,
And claimed by Pluto as his monarchy,
Where thousand wandering souls together fly.
Clear Dirce shall be made the poet's theme,
Instead of muddy Styx, whose fatal stream
The ghosts so strive to be transported over
By churlish Charon to Elysium's shore:
And rather than so great an host should seem
Exiled from thence, it will be thought by them
Another Acheron shall here be made,
And they possess their own Elysian shade.
What shall we do to cure this fatal stain
Upon our nation?
Nothing but complain.
MY fears have brought me early to this place.
The night is young; No watches yet are set.
How sad and deep a silence does possess
These mourning fields! but why should that seem strange!
Why shake I thus? Why do my coward thoughts
Tell me 'tis ominous? is it not night?
And who dares tread on this forbidden ground?
The Ravens, Wolves, and vultures here have filled
Their hungry maws, and now are gone to rest.
What noise should I expect, unless the Ghosts
Of these dead Greeks with querulous cries should fill
The air of night? what horror thus invades me?
Is it because the screech owl cried about me
Passing the gates of Thebes? because tonight
I have so often stumbled on dead men?
Tut; these are toys for children, let not fear,
That ever was a stranger to this breast,
Reign in it now. But 'tis Antigone,
Whom cruel virtue will command tonight
Into a world of danger, is the cause
Of all my fear. Oh fair Antigone,
Why art thou good? so excellently good,
To make me more than wretched? you bright stars,
That do alternately with Phoebus rule
And measure time, if virtue be a kin
To heaven and you, if your fair influence
Govern this lower world, let not the night,
Which is your time of reign, give privilege
To murders, witchcrafts, and infernal arts,
Whilst virtue suffers, and white innocence
Is made a prey. I'll watch the fields tonight;
But not be seen, till time require mine aid.
Secretly shrouded in yond Cypress grove
I'll watch what fortunes do attend my love.
Madam, the place is near; the noisome air,
Which those unburied carcases exhale,
Grows stronger still, and from that feeble shine,
Which to the night half-clouded Cynthia lends,
How large a shade the lofty Theban walls
Spread o'er this field of death! those twinkling lights,
Which we from hence discern, burn in the tower
Of Creon's cruel watch.
Oh Thebes, a name
Once dear to me, but now a word of horror,
And endless sorrow! yet give leave t' enterre
My husband's hearse, and I will love thee still,
And leave my heart for evermore to dwell
On thy dear ground, behold with what attendance,
What state the great Adrastus' daughter comes
To claim her right at Thebes; how poor a claim
The wronged wife of Polynices makes.
'tis not thy wealth, nor Cadmus stately throne,
Nor crown, nor sceptre that Argia claims.
I crave but mourning free, but death and dust,
And such abhorred dust, as thou disdainest
To harbour lovingly, bestow but what
Thou hat'st on me, and take the greatest thanks
A queen can give; and thou beloved ghost
Of my dead Lord, if through these fields thou wander,
And love the rites that I perform tonight,
Direct me where thy wronged body lies.
Madam this way, nearer the city walls
My Lord was slain, & there perchance he lies.
Prince Aemon is abroad, and woe is me
Gone with too great a confidence I fear
Upon my plot, which is defeated quite.
The watch is doubled, and more strictly kept
Then heretofore, no possibility
To lay them all asleep, what he intended
To work upon it, is quite frustrate now.
Oh could I meet him but to let him know
What has befallen. I'll range these fields to find him.
Was this the sight was promised me at Thebes?
Are these the triumphs of my dearest Lord?
Thus to thy native country dost thou bid
Argia welcome? thus dost thou requite.
The entertainment, that kind Argos gave
To thee a stranger? why preparest thou not
The Theban palace to receive thy queen?
But why complain I vainly? thou alas
Art held a stranger to thy native Thebes,
Nay more, a foe, to whom the cruel ground
Denies that common bounty, which in death
The meanest creatures challenge at her hand.
But woe is me, 'twas I that caused thy fall,
'twas I that moved my father to this war,
And all those Grecian Princes; happy else
Mightst thou have lived at Argos still with me,
And ne'er set foot on this accursed ground.
Did I for this entreat those valiant Greeks
To war with Thebes, to see my dearest Lord
Thus all deformed with gore, trod down in dust,
And covered over with filth?
See, Madam, see
The mortal wound yet gaping on his breast.
Was this a brother's hand? but in that name
I find thy guilt as much; I'll rather think
Thou ne'er hadst any kindred, never brother,
Nor other name of blood, which nature meant
A name of love. For where are all their tears?
Where is their sorrow now? if not in Thebes
Where hast thou kindred? none laments but I;
To me alone is Polynices dead.
Where is thy mother, and thy sisters now?
Where is that good Antigone, so famed
For piety, whom thou so oft wouldst praise,
And tell such pleasing stories of her virtue?
About this place he lies, dear Ghost forgive
Thy sister's slackness, and with favour now
Accept these loving, though late rites I do.
A Grecian Lady? (so her habit speaks her)
Some pious sorrow brings her to this place:
Lady the gods assist your piety.
Are you a woeful widowed Lady too,
That come to break dire Creon's savage law?
But yet you seem a Theban; all their bodies
Have rites of funeral performed already.
Or does your too too charitable grief?
Extend to some unhappy Grecian soul?
I know not how to answer you; the man
Whose hearse I seek, was once a Thebes, prince;
But since his native soil did prove to him
So cruel, and unnatural, I dare
Not call him Theban. Gentle Argos proved
A kinder home to him, and freely gave
What Thebes, though due, denied, a princely state
With royal nuptials; now among the souls
Of those unburied Grecians wanders he,
And still perhaps desires to be esteemed
One of their company, hating for ever
(Ah woe is me) the memory of Thebes.
His name was Polynices, my unhappy,
Though dearest brother.
Oh my heart? are you
That good Antigone, whom I so long
Have wished to see?
I am that woeful maid.
Then see your brother my dear husband's hearse
Your grief is mine.
Pardon me royal sister,
Are you Argia great Adrastus' daughter?
Let me adore the best of woman kind.
Has your most faithful unexampled love
Brought you so far, and on so cruel hazards
To my dead brother? was it not enough
That first so great a princess as yourself
Advanced a banished man, and freely gave
That love to him, which happiest princes sought?
But that his dire misfortunes evermore
Should make your virtue wretched?
Dearest sister,
Whose knowledge I am proud, though thus, to meet,
By this true knot of everlasting love
Our sorrow ties tonight, I here protest,
No grief, no loss that banishment could bring
Did move so much sad Polynices' heart,
As parting from thy dearest company.
No name to him was half so dear in Thebes,
No name so often as Antigone
Would his sad tongue to me alone repeat.
And witness all ye sacred deities,
Though Polynices from his native Thebes
Were banished long, yet from a sister's heart
The love of thee could never be exiled,
Nor Thebes without thy presence pleasing to me.
How oft have I upon Cithaeron's mount
Appeased my father's anger toward thee?
And dost thou thus visit thy sister here?
Oh my wronged brother?
Oh my dearest Lord!
When first at Argos I beheld thy face,
It was deformed with blood, and wounded then,
Yet then I loved it; fortune to my love
Showed thee at first a pitied spectacle
As now at last, dearest Antigone;
My brother Tydeus met him then at Argos,
Both strangers there, before affinity
Had made them brothers, in a mutual rage
They fought; but all the blood that then was drawn
Seemed but a sacrament, that did confirm
Their after rare and unexampled love.
Ay me, how different was it from the love
Which here a natural brother showed to him!
Argos, how far dost thou disgrace our Thebes
In nature and in honour!
Royal Ladies,
The night grows old, and danger threatens us.
Be speedy now: these obsequies performed,
You may with more security enjoy
Each others mutual love, and then discourse
Of Thebes, and Argos; danger, and the time
Will not permit it now; not far from hence
Are many fragments left of funeral fire,
Where Thebans have been burned; those let us use,
And then retire from this unhappy place.
Where didst thou see those lights? 1. About the place
Where Polynices' body lies.
If any
Have there performed forbidden obsequies,
They cannot far escape; pursue with speed;
Spare none; you know your oath, and penalty.
The watch is up, and with a winged speed
Pursues those lights, which my presaging soul
Tells me attend on fair Antigone.
Should what I fear prove true, they must not seize her,
If all persuasions, promise of reward,
Nor gold prevail not, the dear cause will lend
This arm a strength above mortality.
The watch is diligent; they do not know
That I am in the field.
No sure, my Lord.
For your disguise is perfect, and no notice
Was given from me at all.
What things are these?
Witches, my Lord, that come to exercise
On these dead bodies that bestrew the field
Their damned arts; here in the depth of night
With incantations, and abused herbs
They turn the dead's pale faces to inquire
And hear the horrid oracles of death.
Th' infernal gods over mastered by their power,
Or else persuaded by some piety
Which pleases them, deny these witches nothing
Which they request, the souls of those dead men
Are forced t' obey their charmings, and return
Back to their ancient prisons, to reveal
To these dire hags the secrecies of fate
And things to come.
I'll follow them Ianthus,
And know what fortunes shall attend my reign.
Ah good my Lord use not so bad away,
You have at hand, a nobler means to know
The truth of all; the old Tiresias
Taught from the wisdom of the gods above,
Who by a magic more divine and pure
Surveys the course and influence of the stars,
And in that glorious book reads the event
Of future things, rather repair to him,
Let him prepare a sacrifice, and ask
The pleasure of the gods.
Tut tut Ianthus,
astrology's uncertain, and the gods
In mystic riddles wrap their answers up.
But he that dares with confidence to go
inquire of deaths black oracles below
In plainest terms the certain truth shall know.
We come too late, nor can this field
To us a speaking prophet yield.
The carcases, whose cold dead tongues
From whole, and yet unperished lungs,
Twixt hell and us should hold commerce,
And be the black interpreters
Of Stygian counsels to relate
The hid decrees of death and fate;
Those carcases I say are grown
Corrupt, and rotten every one,
Their marrow's lost, their moisture's gone,
Their Organs parched by the sun,
That there the Ghost drawn up from hell's
Dark entrance, nought, but broken yells,
And dismal hizzings can afford,
Not one intelligible word.
But from this field of slaughter I
Have gathered up a treasury,
As dead men's limbs wet in the rain,
Cold gelled tongues and parched brain,
The slime that on black knuckles lies,
Shrunk sinews, and congealed eyes,
Bit from their fingers nails over grown,
And from young chins pulled springing down.
Flesh bit by Wolves I took away,
And robbed the vulture of her prey.
Where Thebans funeral piles had made,
I did the mourning fire invade,
And there black rags with ashes filled,
And coals on which their fat distilled,
I gathered up, and took from thence
Half-burnt bones, and Frankincense,
And snatched the fatal kindling brand
From out the weeping parents hand.
Once more let's trot the fields about
To find a fresher carcase out.
And speak a charm that may affright
All pious love from hence tonight,
Lest we by funeral rites do lose
What Creon's cruelty bestows.
By Creon's trembling watch I bore
This new slain carcase, but before
I brought him thence, I gripped him round.
The fillets of his lungs are sound.
His vitals all are strong and whole
To entertain the wretched soul,
Whom forced furies must affright
Back from hell to us tonight.
You wise interpreters of fate, that look
With just contempt down on that small allowance
Of knowledge, which weak human breasts possess.
Whose subtle eyes can penetrate the depth
Of dark Avernus' secrets, and from thence
Enforce an answer from th' obeying finds.
Let me from your deep skill be guided now
To know th' assurance of my future state:
It is a King that craves your aid, a King
Whose power has given your art this furtherance,
By my command these carcases have lain
Unburied here for you to practise on.
If Creon then deserve it at your hands,
Resolve me of my fate.
You have your wish.
This carcase shall relate it; do not fear
To hear him speak: what herbs have you prepared?
I here have gathered, all in one,
The poisonous jelly of the moon,
Mixed with sulphur of the night,
leopard's bane, and Aconite,
Dew gathered, ere the morn arose,
From nightshade, henbane, Cypress boughs.
'Mongst living creatures I have sought,
And from each baneful brood have brought
whate'er could aid to our work give,
Skins stripped from horned snakes alive,
The Lynxes bowels, blood of frogs,
The screech-owls eggs, the foam of Dogs,
The wings of bats, with dragon's eyes,
The Crows black head, the stone that lies
In Eagles nests, and pebbles round,
That when the Ocean ebbs are found:
Enough; but I to add to these so known
And vulgar helps of our great art, have gone,
And found such simples, whose concealed aid
No witch ere used, or trembling god obeyed.
Thessalia's valleys, Colchos famed shore,
Nor Libyan squalid sands with Gorgon's gore
Bedewed and sprinkled, ne'er produced juice
That could so much enthrall the deities.
When first I plucked them in yond gloomy vale
The furies shriek, and Hecate grew pale,
As loath to have (in that abhorred ground)
The power of simples, and their weakness found.
Then let us now employ their powerful help.
What place do we design for our black work?
There is within Cithaeron's hollow side
A dark, and squalid cave, where day ne'er peeped,
Nor ever light, but light by magic made
Shot through that dismal air; pale mouldy filth
Bred there by dreary night o'erspreads the place.
The mouth of Taenarus, that baleful bound
Twixt heaven and hell, appears not half so black.
To this sad cave th' accustomed fiends ascend,
And think themselves still in their proper place.
But Ghosts, that newly past Avernus' lake,
Shun the ascent, and though by us invoked,
Tremble to enter to that place unknown,
And find a hell more horrid than their own.
Then thither let us bear this carcase hence.
No, no, we scorn the helps of that dark place;
Nor is it honour to our art to find,
But make a darkness fit to serve our ends.
We that can force a Magic light to glide
Through closest vaults, can force in spite of day
A mist of night to rise, which all the rays
Of burning Phoebus shall want power to scatter.
Oh would it were not night, but that the sun
Rode in his height of strength; how proudly then
Might we perform our rites, and make it known,
We use not nature's darkness but our own.
Let's go no further then; this place shall serve.
3. Apply your ointments to the body, whilst I
Prepare, and speak a charm shall quickly call
Th' affrighted soul back to his mansion.
My joints begin to tremble, and I fear
As much the means of knowledge, as th' event
Of what I came to know.
How full of black
And baleful horror is this art of theirs?
Would I were well from hence; let me hereafter.
Rather remain in endless ignorance
Then purchase knowledge by such means as these.
Sad King of night, whose baleful Monarchy
The still repaired ruins of mankind
Through every age increase; that griev'st alone
To see the heavenly gods for ever free
From death's assaults, and thy subjection.
Old formless Chaos, thou that wouldst deface
Nature's whole beauty, quite disjoined her fabric,
And swallow up in dark confusion
Ten thousand worlds; thou squalid ferryman
Of still Avernus; thou three-headed porter;
You snake-haired sisters, punishers of guilt,
As you would gain our aid, or fear our threats,
Whip back again into this upper world
That new-fled soul, which did of late inhabit
This pale and ghastly seat, but if in vain
On you I call, thou wretched wandering Ghost,
Not yet transported o'er the burning stream,
But doomed to exile for an hundred years,
If true rewards can tempt thee, once again
Enter thy ancient prison, and in lieu
Of that shore penance, I will make thee free
(Releasing all thy tedious banishment)
Of fair Elysium; with such powerful rites
I'll give thee burial, as no Magic spells,
Nor incantations shall for ever call
Thee back, nor trouble thine eternal rest.
Relate to Creon King of Thebes the fate
That shall attend his reign.
The carcase stirs.
The face retains pale death; yet seems to live.
Thy death is near; yet ere thou die
A great and strange calamity
Shall seize thy house, and thou in woe
Shalt think the fatal sister's slow
In giving death, desiring then
Thy reigns short date had shorter been;
Yet thou at last in death shalt have
(Though thou denied'st it us) a grave.
Shame on your damned arts; it does not lie
Within the power of fate to work this mischief.
Believe it not, my Lord; let's quit the place,
And from the wise Tiresias seek advice,
Dircus, she's gone, and I am worse than dead,
Oh would the villain's arms had had the power
To have dispatched me quickly.
Good my Lord,
Take fairer hopes, and live; cast not away
The kingdom's joy; what cruelty can touch
So sweet a virtue as Antigone?
Retire with me into yond little house;
I'll there bind up your wounds; you bleed too fast,
And needs must faint before you reach the walls.
The wounds I took are scratches.
Honest Dircus,
What care can ere my body have without
The presence of my soul?
Delay not Sir.
Their goodness will protect them: what other Lady
Was that with her?
It seems it was Argia
Dead Polynices wife, Adrastus' daughter,
Or else some grace or goddess in that shape
Came to consort with good Antigone.
Wandering about the fields to find out you,
I met with witches, impious hags, that came
As I suppose, for execrable ends
There to abuse the bodies of the dead.
Oh partial fates, oh too injurious night,
Can these escape, when piety must suffer?
A faintness seizes me, I prithee Dircus
Let me have speedy news.
You shall my Lord.
When I have dressed you, I'll to court, and thence
Bring you a true and swift intelligence.
By what new ways of grief shall we
Our widowed losses signify?
What strange expression can become
A woe so strangely burdensome?
No howls, no shrieks, no voice of woe,
Not such as widowed turtles show,
Nor such as Philomel, when she
High seated on a poplar tree,
Sends sweet sad notes through th' air of night,
Wailing the husbandman's despite,
That reaved her of her dearest nest.
Our loss cannot be so expressed.
No, nor by actions, such as are
The rending of dishevelled hair,
Or beating of our breasts; these all
No more than death and funeral
Can show; but in our husbands we
Receive a greater injury
Than death had done; the common rite
Of funeral barred in despite.
Cease widows longer in that strain
To wail, or 'gainst the fates complain
For funeral rites; but understand
Great Theseus, whose victorious hand
In conquests never yet has failed,
Is he, with whom we have prevailed
For aid; and think what action
He undertakes, already done.
He will revenge on Creon's head
The wrongs that we have suffered.
Our dear Lords Ghosts shall righted be.
Then join your voices all with me,
And in triumphant songs let us
Renown the noble Theseus.
Theseus is he, whose warlike hand
Defends mankind in every land
No less by tyrants feared and known
Then was the fair Alcmena's son.
'twas he, whose just revenging steel
Subdued, and made dire Schinis feel
The self-same torture in his death
By which he took from other's breath,
When trees together bowed were,
And parted thence again, did tear
Poor wretches, but by Theseus he
Was forced to taste that Tragedy.
Procrustes that inhuman thief
(Monster of nature past belief)
That made all passengers, whom he
Surprised within the woods, to be
By an unheard of cruel sport
Stretched longer out, or else cut short,
To fit their stature to his bed,
By Theseus' hand was conquered,
And doomed then himself to die
By the same kind of cruelty.
'Twas he alone that did set free
Athens from that sad slavery
Which Minos fury, for the loss
Of his beloved Androgeos,
Had brought them to; when with clew
He scaped the Labyrinth, and slew
Fierce Minotaurus, that had been
The monstrous issue of the Queen
Pasiphae, Whom unnatural
Prodigious lust had made to fall
Before a Bull; the monster held
Both shapes, and her foul guilt revealed.
Against a far worse monster now
The noble Theseus' arms to go,
inhuman Creon, that denies
To worthiest souls due obsequies,
And, what those monsters would not do,
Does after death his hate pursue.
Oh let that still victorious sword
Be now as prosperous, and afford
To wicked Creon the just meed
That is deserved for such a deed.
But 'tis against all holy laws
To doubt success in such a cause.
PRince Polynices' body is interred
By these two Ladies, whom I apprehend
Just as the deed was done; nor did themselves
Deny the fact.
One I suspected still,
And I am glad I have her, what's the other?
The woeful widow of that wronged Prince
Who stayed behind my countrymen, to do
Those rites, which love, and piety required
To my dead Lord; if that be judged a crime
'tis such a crime as I profess, and boast.
Are you Adrastus' daughter then?
The same.
You are our prisoner now, take her, Ianthus,
Into your custody: this falls out fitly,
The ransom of this Princess will come well
To fill our now-exhausted treasury.
But thou a Theban borne, bound to obey
Our crown and laws, what fury moved thy breast
(Disloyal maid) to scorn our edict so?
No other fury than the love of virtue,
And reverence of the gods, moved me to this.
Which were't to do again, not all the power
Of hell, and tyrants should affright me from it.
Has guilt emboldened thee? is this th' excuse
Thou mak'st to me?
Creon, Let impious acts
Seek for excuses; I nor can, nor will
So wrong the cause of heaven and piety,
As once to plead a fond excuse for that,
Which is my merit, for that act I say
Which by direction from the gods themselves
I have performed.
Is disobedience merit?
Or do the gods command subjects to break
The laws of Princes?
Yes, their wicked laws,
Which thwart the will of heaven, the rule of nature,
And those pure principles, which human breasts
Did at their first original derive
From that Celestial essence: Such a law
Was this which I have broke, in giving rites
Of funeral to Polynices' hearse,
My dearest brother, this disobedience
Thy servants (durst they speak) would justify;
But foreign nations, and all future times
In spite of tyrant's threatenings shall commend
What I have done, and though I die for this
Unjustly now, yet the infernal judges,
Whose sentence no mortality can scape,
But must to all eternity sustain,
Shall from their just unpartial urns bestow
Endless rewards beyond my sufferings far.
To those infernal judges shalt thou go,
And thank my charitable doom, that sends
Thy soul to such great happiness, if thou
Esteem it happiness, and do not fear
What thou wouldst seem to wish.
No, tyrant, no;
Death cannot prove a punishment to me,
Whose life was nought but sorrow; freed from this
Unhappy world, in tother I shall come
Most wished, and welcome to my father's sight,
And that dear brother, for whose sake I die.
Thou shalt be banished from the light of day,
Nor then shalt thou immediately have power
To see that other world thou so desir'st.
Ianthus, till our farther pleasure's known
Guard safe Argia's person; Aephytus;
See present execution done upon
Antigone; without the city walls
There is a new digged tomb, where never yet
Lay any funeral; in that enclose
Antigone alive, and bar it fast
As thou intend'st to live, there let her pray
To those infernal gods she so adores,
To keep her there, or take her quickly thence.
Oh black accursed doom; oh my sad fate,
That must report this news to noble Aemon,
And with that breath destroy the best of men.
Furies have left their dark abodes, to dwell
In human shapes on earth; there could not else
Live such a monster, one so opposite
To heaven and goodness, as cursed Creon is.
Ah dearest, dearest sister, did the fates
Differre so long our wished acquaintance here
To make us meet so wretchedly at last?
Weep not dear sister; your calamity
Adds to my sufferings more: why were not all
The miseries of Cadmus woeful house
Confined within ourselves, and bounded here
In fatal Thebes? why spread they so, to make
The best of soul's partaker? happy else,
And safe for ever had your virtue lived
Admired in wealthy Argos, had you ne'er
near known the sad affinity of Thebes.
Why did the tyrant thus divide our sufferings?
The tomb, where thou art closed, had been to me
More pleasing than a palace.
Heaven forefend;
May the just gods hereafter recompense
Argia's virtue with a happier love
Than Polynices was, and happier friends
Than Thebes can give, do not lament for me,
Not fear the torments of my lingering death.
I am provided of a remedy
That shall delude the cruelty of Creon.
Farewell my dearest Aemon, whose loved presence
More than the sight of day afflicts my soul
To lose so soon, farewell where ere thou art,
Till in the other world we meet again.
No news of comfort, or discomfort yet?
Forgive me faithful Dircus, if my soul
My lovesick soul unjustly do accuse
Thy diligent care, and think thee slack; my heart
Till thy return is stretched upon the wrack,
A rack of torturing thoughts, more painful far
Than tyranny could wish, or foes invent
To punish foes, dost thou delay, because
The news thou bring'st is ill? if my fair love
Be dead, or doomed to death, why dost thou keep
My soul from her Celestial company?
If all be well— but oh presumptuous soul
check that too happy thought again; I know
My father's nature is unmovable
In all resolves, and this bound by an oath
So deep, so solemn, and inviolable
As ere't be broke will break this heart of mine.
See here he comes, speak man, what news? Ay me,
Thy very looks have blasted me before
Thy tongue can be their sad interpreter.
No news but black could force a soldier's tears.
Antigone is dead.
Not dead, my Lord,
But lives among the dead.
How man? Expound
This enigmatic sorrow.
In a tomb,
Where never more she shall behold the day
Nor Phoebus splendour, by the king's command,
Is fair Antigone enclosed alive—
To famish there and die.
Enough, enough.
Shut up alive to starve, oh horrid doom!
As if that death alone, though ne'er so gentle,
Had not been punishment enough for her
For such a cause as that; but yet this sentence
Gives respite to her death, and leaves a way
To our prevention; I must spend no time
In thinking now; all action is required.
Thus it must be; be speedy faithful friend,
Run to my mother, and with all the vows,
And vehement protestations that thou canst
From me assure her, if Antigone
Be not released in time, it shall not lie
In all the power of earth to save my life.
Her love I fear not, though my father now
Have cast his frown upon me, to this place
Return again with all thy speed, whilst I
device some other means if that should fail.
Fear not my care, my Lord, but let me crave
(By your own worth I beg it, and that favour
Which you were ever pleased to reflect
On my poor services) till I return,
Attempt no other course, I will be speedy,
And if persuasions of the queen do fail;
we'll find a way to save the princess life,
But 'tis a desperate way, and must be used
The last of all.
Oh comfortable Dircus,
Do but assure me that, and I shall owe
More than my life, and all my fortunes to thee
Upon mine honour, I'll not stir from hence
Till thou return, nor stay thee now t'enquire
More of the plot.
I will outfly the wind.
Closed up alive within a tomb to starve!
Oh horrid cruelty, I would I could
Forget whose crime it were, that my free hate
Might not be checked by duty to a father.
Should I approve his action, 'twere a sin
So great 'gainst virtue, as no time could pardon;
Should I condemn it, I must then abhor
Th' offendor, and that piety forbids.
Oh why should piety, and virtue strive?
That piety, which I so much admired
In fair Antigone, myself transgress
In loving her cross to my father's will.
Yet in obeying him I must approve
Her piety, or else condemn mine own.
What thoughts will reign in this divided breast.
Till Dircus do return? but courage heart,
More strong is he, that can his doubts defer
Than he that known calamities does bear.
Oh smooth thy frown at last, great queen of heaven,
Let not unhappy Thebes for ever feel
The dire effects of thy too mindful wrath:
What could the wretched Semele's offence,
Or poor Alcmena's error more deserve,
Than they themselves have suffered from thy hand?
Or if succeeding branches needs must bleed
For parents' faults, before a goddess wrath
Can be appeased, could not Actaeon's wounds
Athamas madness, Ino's woeful death,
Nor pitied Oedipus his fall suffice?
Could not the actions of great Hercules,
Nor Bacchus glorious deeds, which all mankind
For ever shall renown, weigh down the crimes
Of their unhappy mothers, and such crimes,
As only Ioues resistless power could force?
A fiercer war by far now threatens Thebes
Then that which old Adrastus with the aid
Of all his rash confederates could make.
The mighty Theseus, whose all-conquering hand
No Kingdom yet with safety could withstand,
Armed with a cause, in which the prayers and wish
Of nations join, is marching towards us.
In vain, alas, did we expect an end
Of this dire war, when both the princes died,
When th' Argives fled, must out own victory
Become our grief? and draw upon us now
A greater ruin than our foil had done?
It must, it must, since Creon's cruelty,
Most unexpected, barbarous cruelty
Will have it so, oh friend, I could believe,
Were not the noble Aemon Creon's son,
And heir apparent to our Diadem,
We had been happier far t' have been subdued
Then brought by victory to such obedience.
True friend; there's all out trust, the gods in nought
But that brave PRINCE's life, have left us hope
Of any future favour to redress
The miseries, which we so long have felt.
But for this imminent, nay present danger
What were we best to do?
Advise the King
Rather to change his purpose, then expose
His weakened Kingdom to great Theseus' fury.
Though he should prove never so obstinate:
Better that any one for good advice
Should suffer from his fury, than the land
In general should smart.
You counsel well,
But who should be the man?
There's none so fit
As old Tiresias, that most holy man,
Taught from the gods above, whose words by all
Our Theban Princes have been long esteemed
As oracles, him Creon will obey.
Then thither let us, and with him advise
How to redress our present miseries.
THat was my fear before, I thought my son
Too far in love to bear, with patience,
His Lady's death, and therefore did entreat
The King with tears, and sighs, that would have moved
A rock of flint, but he more hard than rocks,
Deafer than Northern winds, with rage repulsed
My oft repeated suite, and now, ay e,
What most I feared is proved, my son will die;
For he has vowed never to pardon her.
Must I return the Prince this killing news?
No gentle Dircus, stay a little while,
'twill not be long before the King return,
I'll move him once again.
Your highness' pardon,
Not for the world would I delay the time—
Upon uncertainties; I fear I have
Already stayed too long. My quick return
Is th' only means to keep the prince alive.
Please it your highness then when I am gone
To move the King, and fear not, gracious madam,
The PRINCE's life a while howe'er.
Farewell,
True faithful Dircus, all the gods assist
Thy good intents, and bless thy loyalty.
What, weeping still?
Would I could weep myself
Like Niobe to marble, and become
A woeful tomb to Aemon, whom my womb
With fates disastrous brought into the world,
My virtuous Aemon,
Why, is Aemon dead?
Why do you ask, that mean to murder him?
How? murder him?
Yes in Antigone
His most inseparable love.
Must then
Th'audacious giglot, live unpunished,
To brave a King?
Were kings ordained to kill
Virtues true servants, and control her laws?
Where is the king?
he's here. What mischief now
Com'st thou to utter, never from thy tongue
Flowed any good to me.
A guilty man
Was never pleased with truth, but hear me,
I come to thee sent from the wrathful gods
To let thee know thy guilt, and punishment.
Great plagues from heaven, if Tiresias
Truly divine, are threatened 'gainst thy house.
When I for thee unthankful man prepared
A sacrifice within, the opened beast
No signs but sad and fatal did afford.
None but th' infernal gods deigned to appear.
The blood was black, the burning entrails gave
No flame at all, but darkly did consume,
Mouldering away to ashes, and with black
Unsavoury smoke clouded the fearful air.
Unto our augury no birds at all
But sad, and baleful birds of night appeared.
Nor to our orisons would th'invoked gods
Vouchsafe an answer, but in signs alone
Declared their wrath. The cause of these their threats
Against thy house is for thy cruelty
To good Antigone, and if she die
These plagues will surely fall.
Can we avoid them.
By sparing her?
The gods above relent
At humane penitence, and hear their prayers,
Nor like the fiends are they inexorable.
No longer,
shalt thou now deny me
Since heaven is joined with my petition.
You are not constant in persisting thus,
But obstinate.
Now I renew my suit.
In which we bend our knees, release, O king,
For Thebes, for Aemons sake, that virtuous maid,
And to prevent a fierce and cruel war,
Vouchsafe to grant our suit, and give us leave
To bury those dead Grecians in the field.
No more of them; that last must not be granted,
For our command is passed too far already,
And must be justified, not changed now.
But for the life of that Antigone,
Although it cannot suit well with our justice
To pardon her rebellious stubbornness,
Yet she is thine Eurydice, to thee
Do we refer her wholly; take this ring,
And absolute power to dispose of her,
Either to pardon, or to punishment.
The gods reward thee for't; I'll go myself
And bring her out with speed from that sad place;
Heaven grant that grief have not already killed her.
To arms, my Lord, if any arms so soon
Can rescue Thebes from quick destruction.
The mighty Theseus threatens you at hand.
Why let him come: Should I esteem the name
Of Theseus such a bugbear it should fright
Me from my constant resolution?
Have our late conquests, have the overthrows
Of Argos and Mycenae taught the world
Nothing of us? look on you purple fields
With slaughter died, and learn what Thebes can do,
Where Capanaeus, and stout Tydeus
Parthenopaeus and Hippomedon
Lie weltering in their gores, and should we then
So tremble at the threats of Theseus?
No power must daunt me; 'tis not Kingly now
Upon constraint to change my rough decree.
Though I relented now, though my soft breast
Were moved with piety, yet thought of honour
Would conquer that, as now it conquers fear,
The fear of Theseus' hand; nor have I left
A place for wisdom now; it comes too late;
I must prevent or meet my instant fate.
Yonder's the tomb, my Lord, which though it seem
Too hard, and solid for our strength to force,
I know a place will open presently.
Then let us break this wealthy Cabinet,
And take from thence a jewel, which the ransom
Of all the Kings on earth would be a price
too poor to purchase: Knew'st thou, happy cave,
Or knew the world what true unvalued wealth
Thy bare unpolished bosom did contain,
Thou wouldst despise the richest temples reared
On Marble Columns, and high-roofed with gold;
To thee would men with adoration come
As to a place more sacred than the cave
That nourished Cretan Ioue, than Bacchus Nisa,
Or the Oetaean Mount, from whence in flames
The great Alcides mounted to the sky.
But I forget myself, I first must know
Whether I live or no; for in that cave,
Not here does. Aemon breath. Antigone.
Who calls Antigone? is it my Aemon?
Dircus I live; heardst thou that heavenly voice
Which has inspired a happier life into me
Than my creation did. let's lose no time
In this sweet business.
I'll ope the tomb
Immediately, my Lord.
Sad Thebes adieu,
I'll find some happier country to convey
My envied treasure to. Possessed of her
I shall be richer than the Theban crown
Can make me; speak how fares my fairest love;
Shall we be gone?
I would, my dearest Aemon,
Begone with thee rather then live; but fate
Too cruel, fate prevents it.
How? what fate
Can let our journey, if thy love consent?
I love thee, Aemon, better than my life,
And never truly wished to live till now,
But now I cannot live.
Oh do not mock
My joys, Antigone, or if thou dost not,
Tell me what sad disaster can befall.
That sad disaster is befallen already;
Fearing the pains that such a lingering death
Might bring upon me, I have ta'en already
A gentle poison down, which long before
'Gainst some such dire occasion I prepared,
I feel it work; my vital spirits fail.
My dearest love farewell. Live long and happy;
Let fate hereafter recompense to thee
whate'er her cruelty 'gainst me has wrought.
No fate can make me happy, I am lost
Beyond her cure.
What end of tragedies
Can woeful Thebes for ever hope to see
After this sorrow. Oh I more than fear
The PRINCE's fury;
Her white soul is fled.
What unsubstantial bubbles are the best
Of humane joys? how from the top of all
My hopes and comforts in one fatal minute
Has envious fortune thrown me down again
Into the depth of misery, and woe.
Oh fortune how extreme thou art in all
Thy favours and thy frowns!
Most noble prince,
Collect that strength of man, which all the world
Expects from you, and arm yourself to bear
With fitting patience this calamity.
The passive fortitude is great and noble
As is the active.
Strike that string no more,
Do not in vain torment a desperate man
With thy dull counsel: 'tis as possible
Thou shouldst persuade a dead man to arise
After his soul is fled, as me to live.
Now she is dead, I do conjure thee Dircus
By all the love thou bear'st me, by that faith
Which I have ever found and prized in thee,
To leave me here.
My Lord, I will obey;
And thus I take my leave.
Too cruel Dircus.
Was I not miserable enough before,
But thou must load my sufferings with thy death?
What cause hadst thou to die? thou hast not lost
A love, why should my loss extend so far
As to the ruin of so brave a friend?
Thy death has injured fair Antigone,
And made a strange Division in my grief.
For all the sorrow which this breast could hold,
Was due to her before. I must encroach
Upon her right in spending tears for thee.
My breast's too narrow for so great a grief,
And must be quickly opened. Thou pure soul
Of my Antigone, which still surviv'st,
Though this fair palace be demolished quite
By deaths ungentle hand, thou heavenly substance,
True object of a chaste, and spotless love,
Thy Aemon comes; and from these bonds of nature
Flies forth to meet thee in the other world,
To wed thee there; to finish there the rites
Of long-crossed love, and taste eternal sweets.
Oh horrid spectacle! see Aephytus,
The Prince, Antigone, and Dircus dead.
All dead?
Ay me.
Look to the Queen, she swoons
Alas, 'tis more than so; cold death has seized her
I fear, beyond recovery, Let's in,
And certify the King, who now may see.
The dire effects of his rash cruelty.
Our war's already ended, and the death
Of savage Creon, whose dire soul is fled
To pacify the Argives wandering ghosts,
Hath satisfied our justice, here we sheathe
Our sword again, and free your town from fears.
And now enterre with fitting obsequies
The Carcases of all your slaughtered foes.
Let cruel Creon too, though he at all
Deserve it not, have rites of funeral.
Those pious rites will we perform with joy,
And thanks to mighty Theseus, may the Gods.
Assist thee ever; and great Hercules
Beholding thy brave actions from the sky
Rejoice, and not disdain at all to be
Esteemed thy equal by posterity.
Send back Argia to her father's court
With fair attendance; and 'tis left to you
To place the Theban sceptre where 'tis due.
Thebes humbly bows to mighty Theseus,
And lays her crown and sceptre at his feet.
No; still let Thebes be governed by her own;
'twas not our wars intention to enthrall
Your land, but free it from a tyrant's yoke;
And to preserve the conquered, not destroy them.
We drew the sword of justice, not of conquest,
Ambitiously to spread our Kingdoms bounds,
But to avenge the laws of nature broke;
This act being done, Theseus is peace again.
soldiers' march on to Athens. Thebes adieu.
Now let mankind enjoy a happy peace;
Oh let no monsters breed on earth, to glut
Themselves with human slaughter, let no thieves
Infest the woods; no tyrants stain the cities
With blood of innocents? but if such monsters
Must needs be bred to plague the wretched earth,
'Gainst nature, and her holy laws to strive,
Let them appear while Theseus is alive.