Come forth, come forth, the gentle Spring,
And carry the glad news, I bring,
To Earth, our common mother:
It is decreed, by all the Gods
The Heaven, of Earth shall have no odds,
But one shall love another:
Their glories they shall mutual make,
Earth look on Heaven, for Heaven's sake;
Their honour's shall be even:
All emulation cease, and jars;
Jove will have Earth to have her stars
And lights, no less than Heaven.
It is already done, in flowers
As fresh, and new as are the hours,
By warmth of yonder Sun.
But will be multiplied on us,
If from the breath of ZEPHYRUS
Like favour we have won.
Give all to him: His is the dew,
The heat, the humour,
All the true.
Beloved of the Spring!
The Sun, the Wind, the Verdure!
All,
That wisest Nature cause can call
Of quick'ning any thing.
Fair Maid, but are you come to devil,
And tarry with us here?
Fresh Fountains, I am come to tell
A tale in yond soft ear,
Whereof the murmur will do well:
If you your parts will bear.
Our purl wait upon the Spring.
Go up with me, than: help to sing
The story to the King.
Cupid hath ta'en offence of late
At all the Gods, that of the State,
And in their Council, he was so deserted,
Not to be called into their Guild
But slightly passed by, as a child.
Wherein he thinks his honour was perverted.
And though his Mother seek to season,
And rectify his rage with reason,
By showing he lives yet under her command,
Rebellious he, doth disobey,
And she hath forced his arms away.
To make him feel the Justice of her hand.
Whereat the Boy, in fury fell,
With all his speed, is gone to hell,
There to excite, and stir up Jealousy,
To make a party 'gainst the Gods,
And set Heaven, Earth, and Hell at odds.
And raise a chaos of calamity.
Hold my stirrup, my one Lacqucy; and look to my Curtal, the other: walk him well, Sirrah, while I expatiate myself here in the report of my office! o the Furies! how I am joyed with the title of it! Postilion of Hell! yet no Mercury. But a mere Cacodaemon, sent hither with a packet of news! news! never was Hell so furnished of the commodity of news! Love hath been lately there, and so entertained by Pluto, and Proserpina, and all the Grandees of the place, as, it is there perpetual Holiday: and a cessation of torment granted, and proclaimed for ever! Half-famished Tantalus is fallen to his fruit, with that appetite, as it threatens to undo the whole company of Costermongers, and has a River afore him, running excellent Wine; Ixion is loosed from his wheel, and turned Dancer, does nothing but cut capreols, fetch friskals, and leads Lavaltoes, with the Lamiaes! Sisyphus has left rolling the stone, and is grown a Mr. bowler; challenges all the prime gamesters, Parsons in hell, and gives them odds: upon Tityus his breast, that (for six of the nine acres) is counted the subtlest bowling-ground in all Tartary. All the Furies are at a game called nine-pins, or keilles, made of old Usurer's bones, and their souls looking on with delight, and betting on the game. Never was there such freedom of sport. Danaus' Daughters have broke their bottomless tubs, and made bonfires of them. All is turned triumph there. Had Hell gates been kept with half that strictness, as the entry here has been to night, Pluto would have had but a cold Court, and Proserpina a thin presence, though both have a vast territory. We had such a stir to get in, I, and my Curtal, and my two Lackeys all ventured through the eye of a Spanish needle, we had never come in else, and that was by the favour of one of the guard who was a womans-taylor, and held open the passage. Cupid by commission hath carried Jealousy from Hell, Disdain, Fear, and Dissimulation, with other Goblins, to trouble the Gods. And I am sent after post, to raise Tempest, Windes, Lightnings, Thunder, Rain, and Snow, for some new exploit they have against the Earth, and the Goddess Chloris, Queen of the flowers, and Mistress of the Spring. For joy of which I will return to myself, mount my Bidet, in a dance; and corvet upon my Curtal.
Run out, all the Floods, in joy with your silver feet;
And hast to meet, the enamoured Spring;
For whom the warbling Fountains sing:
The story of the flowers; preserved by the Hours;
At Juno's soft command, and Iris showers;
Sent to quench jealousy, and all those powers
Of Love's rebellious war:
Whilst Chloris sits a shining star
To crown, and grace our jolly song, made long,
To the notes, that we bring, to glad the Spring.
Tell a truth, gay Spring, let us know
What feet they were, that so
Impressed the Earth, and made such various flowers to grow!
She that led, a Queen was at lest,
Or a Goddess, 'bove the rest:
And all their graces, in herself expressed!
O, 'twere a fame, to know her name!
Whether she were the root;
Or they did take th'impression from her foot.
Now Juno, and the Air shall know
The truth of what is done below,
From our discoloured bow. Iris, what news?
The air is clear, your bow can tell,
Chloris renowned, Spite fled to Hell;
The business all is well. And Cupid sues
For pardon. Does he?
He sheds tears
Moore than your Birds have eyes.
The Gods have ears.
Offences, made against the Deities,
Are soon forgot-
If who offends, be wise.
Rise golden Fame, and give thy name a birth
From great and generous actions, done on Earth.
The life of Fame is action.
Understood
That action must be virtuous, great, and good!
Virtue itself by Fame is often protected,
And dies despised—
Where the Fame's neglected.
Who hath not heard of Chloris, and her Bower
Fair Iris act, employed by Juno's power
To guard the Spring, and prospero every flower,
Whom Jealousy and Hell thought to devour?
Great actions, often obscured by time, may lie,
Or envy—
But they last to memory.
We that sustain thee, Learned Poesy,
And I, her sister, severe History.
With Architecture, who will raise thee high,
And Sculpture, that can keep thee from to dye.
All help lift thee to eternity.
And Juno, through the air, doth make thy way,
By her serenest Messenger of Day.
Thus Fame, ascends, by all degrees, to Heaven:
And leaves a light, here, brighter than the seven.
Let all applaud the sight.
Air first, that gave the bright
Reflections, Day or night!
With these supports of Fame,
That keep alive her name!
The beauties of the Spring.
Founts, Rivers, every thing:
From the height of all,
To the Waters fall-
Resound, and sing
The honour of his Chloris, to the King.
Chloris, the Queen of Flowers;
The sweetness of all Showers;
The ornament of Bowers;
The top of Paramours!