Behold! I come not from above,
To hide, or hunt out wanton Love,
Or do what Man can do:
But to spread all my nimble wings,
And like a God, do Godlike things
Grateful, and Gracious too.
Observe! But see ye be not nice,
Prepare to give, and take advice,
As wise-Men ought to do:
Lest when your subtle wits have done,
Your Notes, like Motes, thought in the Sun
Prove far beneath us too.
Admire! but censure not their Powers,
That sink not with Times sandy hours,
As mortal Creatures do.
And since the Shaft that is addressed,
At Heaven may hurt the shooter's breast,
Be pleased and please us too.
Happy, thrice happy is that hour
Wherein a God descends,
Either in person, or in power
And Man's poor state befriends.
olympian JOVE to the bright ALBA sends
No vulgar God to bear his dear Commends.
And with pure eyes, and a paternal hand,
This Universe having surveyed, and spanned,
In Council with himself, he hath decreed,
From fair ALBIPOLIS shall soon proceed
A Triumph: Mighty, as the Man designed
To wear those bays; Heroic, as his mind;
Just, as his actions; Glorious, as his Reign.
And like his Virtues, Infinite in Train.
Th' Immortal Swans, contending for his Name,
Shall bear it singing, to the House of Fame.
And though at distance yet High JOVE is pleased
Your laboring eyes shall with his sight be eased,
This from a God, unto a Goddess sent,
A God Relates, that could use Compliment:
But when such States, negotiate by such means
We speak in Acts, and scorn words trifling Scenes.
Ye Powers Divine make room, prepare a Seat
On the Northside, for ALBANACT the Great,
Earth is not fruitless: nor your numbers full,
there's One to come will make some Stars look dull.
What mak's me so vnnimbly ryse, That did descend so fleete? There is no vp-hill in the skyes; Clouds stay not feathered feete. Thy wings are sing'd: and thou canst fly But slowly now, swift MERCVRY. Some Lady heere, is sure too blame That from Loves starry skyes, Hath shot some Beame, or sent some flame, Like Lghtning, from her Eyes. Taxe not the Starrs, with what the Sunne, Too neere aproch't (insens't) hath done. I'le rowle me in Auroras Dew, Or lye in Tethis bed; Or from coole Iris begge a few, Pure Opale shewrs new shed. Nor Dew, nor shewers, nor sea can slake Thy quenchlesse heate, but Lethes lake.
Though I have earned it with the sweat of my brows in Ianuary, yet I am glad I saw it, for there never was such a sight seen.
What sight Publius?
The Triumph.
Whose Triumph?
The Triumph of ALBANACTUS.
Didst thou see it?
See it, yes, and feel it too. Every one there (I can assure you) went not upon his own feet.
No, I think, some rid.
They did so, for some rid me. Some trod on my toes. Some cried, some kept it in; for my part, I confessed all, for fear I should have been pressed to death.
Though thy body was pinched, thine eyes were feasted.
Were not yours so too?
Yes.
Where stood you?
I stood not,
You had the better friend's sir, I pray where sat you?
In my study.
Is not your study backward? with a shop-light in it, where one can see nothing but the sky?
I confess it, what of that?
Why then you saw no Triumph.
But I did, and a true one, thine was but a show.
If what I saw was but a show, what you saw was but a shadow, or at the most a Vision. For it seems your body kept home, though your spirit walked.
It did so. And traveled to better purpose than most men do, that go, and see, and say, but know nothing.
To confute that Heresy of yours, I have gone, and seen, and know, but I will say nothing.
That's impossible; The meat thou hast lately fed upon, is so windy, out it must, thou wilt burst else.
Faith sir, I am very full indeed.
Purge then, and tell thy Doctor all.
ALBANACTUS CAESAR from his sumptuous Palace, through the high-streets of ALBIPOLIS rid Triumphing, on a Chariot, made—
Of wood, perhaps guilt, perhaps gold. But I will save you all those charges, if you will go on to the Persons, and let the Pageants alone.
Sir I saw him not as he was borne, naked, but since you affect such brevity, I saw the King and a great deal more, and so I turned my back, and went away.
Nay good Publius, now thou art too brief.
When you begin to tell your dreams, I'll not jog you, till you wake of yourself.
Nay prithee be not angry.
I am not angry, but a little short-winded upon occasion. Yet to give you some satisfaction because you have done me wrong. Before CAESAR Marched Captive Kings, with their hands bound. And Ladies, with their Arms across, furious wild Beasts, great Giants, and little dwarfs with Lictors, and Pictors, and a number of Priests that were as you would have them, In their shirts. These with certain Princes that were behind him: made up a Triumph too great to come out of any mortal man's mouth.
That's most certain.
I mean in words. But as you hunt me you would hunt a Hare off her legs.
I confess thou hast made more haste, then good speed: But for a supplement to thy lame Story, Know, I have seen this brave ALBANACIUS CAESAR, seen him with the eyes of understanding, viewed all his Actions; looked into his Mind: which I find armed with so many moral virtues that he daily Conquers a world of Vices, which are wild Beasts indeed.
For example Ambition, is a Lion; Cruelty, a Bear; Avarice, a Wolf. Yet He subdues them all. To be short, no Vice is so small, to scape him: Nor so great, but he overcomes it: And in that fashion he triumphs over all the Kings, and Queens that went before him. All his Passions, are his true Subjects: And Knowledge, judgement, Merit, Bounty and the like, are fit Comma dear, for such a General, These Triumph with him, And these are the Princes you saw about him. And this Publius, is more than you can find in the street.
I grant it, But yet grant me one Request dear
Platonicus?
What's that?
Go but with me to the Amphitheatre.
To Gaze.
Yes.
Why beforehand I know there will be Gladiators, Saltators, and sights to please the People. Wert not thou better stay here, and see CAESAR present himself to this fair Goddess, seeking sweet rest, after all his labours.
I should sleep at such a sight.
Then after a Play, thou art all for a prize.
All together, and so (I hope) are you
At this time, I am. For I will go with thee, if it be but to teach thee to Read in thy own Book. Outsides, have Insides, Shells, have Kernels in them. And under every Fable, nay (almost) under every thing, lies a Moral.
What art thou doing Publius.
Lifting up the stone I stumbled at.
To what end?
To see what lies under it.
What should lie under a stone, but a Worm, or a
Hoglouse.
If there lie not a Moral under it, then have you taught me false Doctrine.
Such thanks have they that teach such Scholars. Come away Fool, they begin to throng to the Theater.
Sit not secure, nor think in ease
Still undispleased, yourselves to please:
Diana, Chaste Diana stoop,
And help to wound this war like troop.
Wants Love a Bow, or shaft of mine?
This suit will make my Crescent shine.
Love is grown wise, and means to bring
To his smart Bow, a double string.
Behold our Mark? took thou not pride
In such a Glory to divide?
I do, I do, since I am sure,
When we two join, our flames are pure.
As pure, and Clear, as Alba's skin,
As her fair Fame, or thoughts within:
Pure as myself; nay pure like Thee,
Now Love is that which Love should be.
Bow bearing Gods, shoot, shoot, and hit,
And make our CAESAR greater yet:
Yet leave him with us, Let him shine
Still here; And make him all Divine
Ye Worthies of this I'll,
That led by your brave Chief,
In an Heroic style,
Have over done Belief:
Subdued by Alba's eyes
Come down, Loves Sacrifice!
It is no shame to yield,
Where 'tis in vein to strive:
The Gods would quit the field,
Should they these wars revive
Or Conquered, by her Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice.
Straight Cedar, that hast stood,
The shock of many a wind:
The top of this Tall wood,
By a high hand designed
Subdued by Alba's Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice!
Great ALBA though each Grandee here,
At this High Court of thine,
Like a true Liege Man doth appear,
And offers at thy Shrine:
It is no Conquest for thine Eyes,
When petty Princes fall,
That are some single Beauty's prize,
Or a lone virtue's Thrall:
Here comes the trophy of thy praise,
The Monarch of these Isles,
The Mirror of thy Cheerful Rays,
And Glory of thy Smiles:
The Virtues and the Graces all,
Must meet in one, when such Stars full.
Blessed Pair whose prayers like Incense rise,
Opening, and pulling down the Skies
Take your Reward! just as ye met,
So hand in hand live many a Day,
And may your Virtuous minds beget
Issue that never shall decay,
And so be fruitful every way.
May Plenty Proteus like appear,
Varying your Pleasures every year:
we five come freely to impart,
Such favours as we can afford:
One gives his ᵃ Hand, the next his ᵇ Heart,
The third her c Robe, the fourth her ᵈ Sword,
The fifth full many a ᵉ Suppliant Word.
And to fulfil your future Bliss,
Sweet Peace salutes you with a Kiss.
Frighted by Day; And in the Night diseased,
I fled to Heaven, and left the World displeased.
Find Men that strive more for a Province there,
Then looking upward to possess a Sphere.
Yet vanquished and Victorious, both at last,
Their weary Limbs, on my soft Bed would cast.
lions, and Lambs together lie,
When lovely Peace stands smiling by
Temples and Towns by thy staid hand,
First learn to Rise, And then to Stand.
'Tis not the Laurel Tree that brings,
Anointing Oil for sacred Kings:
Those Princes see the happiest Days,
Whose Olive Branches stand for bays.
Arms are laid by: Early and late,
The traveler goes safe to Bed:
Men eat and Drink in Massy Plate,
And are with Dainties daily fed.
Why should this I'll above the rest,
Be made (great Gods) the halcyon's nest?
Imperious Peace herself Descends
Then here our search, and wonder ends,
we'll steal away
Earth's Rulers, stay!
Doth soft Peace call?
Yes: and will straight employ ye All.
How, and wherein?
Give ear, your Charge doth now begin.
Neptune to Sea, And let no Sail,
Meet Albion's Fleet, But make it veil.
Bellona Arm, That Foes may see,
Their Lilies kept by lions be.
Their fruitful fields (Cebele) make
Pay Centuple for all they take.
And let Both Indies (Pluto) meet,
And lay their wealth at Alba's feet.
When Peace commands such pleasing things,
From Love and Time we'll steal their wings.
Loaden with Wealth and Honour may,
These God's return to crown this Day,
And MARY-CHARLES whose minds within,
And Bodies make but Hymen's Twin,
Long live they so, And Breast, to Breast,
May Angels sing them to their Rest.