AGathon he whose counsel wise, to princes weal extended:
by good advice unto a Prince iij. things he hath commended
First, is that he hath government and ruleth over men:
Secondly, to rule with laws, eke justice (saith he) then.
Thirdly, that he must well conceive, he may not always reign:
Lo, thus the rule unto a Prince, Agathon squared plain.
Tully the wise whose sapience, in volumes great doth tell:
Who in wisdom, in that time did many men excel.
A Prince (saith he) is of himself, a plain and speaking law:
The law, a School master divine, this by his rule I draw.
The sage and witty Seneca, his words thereto did frame:
The honest exercise of Kings, men will ensue the same.
But contrary wise if that a King, abuse his kingly seat:
His ignomy and bitter shame, in fine shallbe more great.
In Percia there reigned a king, who Cirus height by name:
Who did deserve as I do read, the lasting blast of Fame.
But he, when sisters three had wrought, to shear his vital thread:
As heir due to take the crown, Cambices did proceed.
He in his youth was trained up, by trace of virtues lore:
Yet (being king) did clean forget, his perfect race before.
Then cleaving more unto his will such vice did imitate:
As one of Icarus his kind, for warning then did hate.
Thinking that none could him dismay, ne none his fact? could see
Yet at the last a fall he took, like Icarus to be.
Else as the fish which often had take, the pleasant bait from hook:
In safe did spring & pierce the streams when fisher fast did look.
To hoist up from the watery waves, unto the dried land:
Then scaept, at last by subtle bait, come to the fisher's hand.
Even so this king Cambices here, when he had wrought his will:
Taking delight the Innocent, his guiltless blood to spill.
Then mighty Ioue would not permit, to procé offence:
But what measure the king did meat, the same did Ioue commence.
To bring to end with shame his race, two years he did not reign:
His cruelty we will dilate, and make the matter plain.
Craving that this may suffice now, your patience to win:
I take my way, behold I see, the players coming in.
MY Counsel grave & sapient with lords of legal train:
Attentive ears towards bend & mark what shallbe said.
So you likewise my valiant knight whose manly acts doth fly
By brute of fame the sounding trump doth pierce the azure sky.
My sapient words I say perpend and so your skill delate:
You know that Mors vanquished hath Cirus that king of state
And I by due inheritance possess that Princely crown:
Ruling by sword of mighty force in place of great renown.
You know and often have heard tell my father's worthy facts.
A manly Marsis heart he bore appearing by his acts.
And what? shall I to ground let fall my father's golden praise?
Not, not, I mean for to attempt, this fame more large to raise,
In that that I his son succeed his kingly seat as due:
Extend your council unto me in that I ask of you.
I am the king of Persia, a large and fertile soil:
The Egyptians against us repunge, as varlets slave and vile.
Therefore I mean with Marsis heart, with wars them to frequent
Them to subdue as captives mine this is my heart's intent.
So shall I win honours delight, and praise of me shall go:
My Council speak, and Lordings eke, is it not best do so?
O pusant king, your blisful woordis, deserves abundant praise
That you in this do go about, your fathers same to raise.
O blisful day that king so young, such profit should conceive:
His father's praise & his to win, from those that would deceive.
Sure my true and sovereign king, I fall before you priest:
Answer to give as duty mine, in that your grace request.
If that your heart addicted be, the Egyptians to convince:
Through Marsis and the conquest won, than deed of happy prince
Shall pierce the skies unto the throne of the supernal seat:
And merit there a just reward, of Iupiter the great.
But then your grace must not turn back, from this pretenced will
For to proceed in virtuous life, employ endeavour still.
Extinguish vice, and in that cup, to drink have no delight.
To martial feats and kingly sport, fix all your whole delight.
My Council grave a thousand thanks, with heart I do you tender
That you my case so prosperous, entirely do tender.
I will not swerve from those your steps, whereto you would me traun
But now my Lord & valiant knight, with woordis give answer plain
Are you content with me to go, the Marsis games to try?
Yea peerless Prince to aid your grace, myself will live and die.
And I for my ability, for fear will not turn back:
But as the ship against the rocks, sustain and bide the wrack.
O willing hearts, a thousand thanks I tender unto you:
Strike up your drums with courage great, we will march forth even now.
Permit (O king) few words to here, my duty serves no less:
Therefore give leave to council thine, his mind for to express.
Speak on my Council what it be, you shall have savour mine
Then will I speak unto your grace, as duty doth me bind.
Your grace doth mean for to attempt of war the manly art:
Your grace therein may bap receive with others for your part.
The dent of death in those affairs, all persons are alike:
The heart courageous often times, his detriment doth seek.
It's best therefore for to permit, a Ruler of your land:
To sit and judge with equity, when things of right are scanned.
My grace doth yield to this your talk, to be thus now it shall:
My Knight therefore prepare yourself, Sisamnes for to call.
A judge he is of prudent skill, even he shall bear the sway:
In absence mine, when from the land I do depart my way.
Your Knight before your grace even here, himself hath ready priest:
With willing heart for to fulfil as your grace made request.
Pleaseth your grace I judge of him to be a man right fit:
For he is learned in the Law having the gift of wit.
In your grace's presinct, I do not view for it a meeter man:
His learning is of good effect. bring proof thereof I can.
I do not know what is his life, his conscience hid from me:
I doubt not but the fear of God, before his eyes to be.
Report declares, he is a man that to himself is nigh:
One that favoureth much the world, and to much sets thereby.
But this I say of certainty, if he your grace succeed:
In your absence but for a while, he will be warned indeed:
No injustice for to frequent, no partial Judge to prove:
But rule all things with equity, to win your grace's love.
Of that he shall a warning have, my hests for to obey:
Great punishment for his offence against him will I lay.
Behold I see him now agresse and enter into place:
O puissant Prince & mighty king, the gods preserve your grace.
Your grace's message came to me, your will purporting forth:
With grateful mind I it received, according to mine oath.
Erecting then myself with speed, before your grace's eyes:
The tenor of your Princely will, from you for to agnize.
Sisamnes, this the whole effect, the which for you I sent:
Our mind it is to elevate, you to great preferment▪
My grace and gracious council eke hath chose you for this cause:
In judgement you do office bear, which have the skill in laws,
We think that you accordingly, by justice rule will deal:
that for offence none shall have cause (of wrong) you to appeal.
Abundant thanks unto your grace for this benignity:
To you his council in like case, with Lords of clemency.
What so your grace to me permits, if I therein offend:
Such execrable then commence, and use it to this end.
That all other (by that my deed) example so may take:
To admonish them to flee the same, by fear it may them make.
Then according to your words, if you therein offend:
I assure you even from my breast, correction shall extend,
From Persra I mean to go into the Egypt land:
Them to convince by force of arms, and win the upper hand.
While I therefore absent shallbe, I do you full permit:
As governor in this my right, in that estate to sit.
For to detect and eke correct, those that abuse my grace:
This is the total of my will, give answer in this case.
Unworthy much (O prince) am I, and for this gift unfit:
But sith that it hath pleased your grace, that I in it must sit.
I do avouch unto my death, according to my skill:
With equity for to observe, your grace's mind and wil.
And naught from it to swerve indeed, but sincerely to stay:
Else let me taste the penalty, as I before did say.
Well then of this authority, I give you you full possession:
And I will it fulfil also, as I have made profession.
By council, then let us depart, a final stay to make:
To Egit land now forth with speed, my voyage I will take.
Strike up your drums us to rejoice, to hear the warlike sound
Stay you here Sisamnes judge, and look well to your bound.
Even now the King hath me extolled, and set me up aloft.
Now may I were the broidered guard and lie in down bed soft.
Now may I purchase house and land, and have all at my will:
Now may I build a princely place, my mind for to fulfil.
Now may I abrogate the Law, as I shall think it good:
If any one me now offend, I may demand his blood.
According to the Proverb old, my mouth I will up make:
Now it doth lie all in my hand, to leave or else to take.
To deal with justice to my bound, and so to live in hope:
But oftentimes the birds be gone, while one for nest doth grope.
Do well or il, I dare avouch, some evil on me will speak:
Not truly yet I do not mean, the kings precept to break,
To place I mean for to return my duty to fulfil.
Stand away, stand away for the passion of God,
Harnessed I am prepared to the field:
I would have been content at home to have bod,
But I am sent forth with my spear and shield.
I am appointed to fight against a Snail,
And Wilkin Wren the ancient shall bear:
I doubt not but against him to prevail,
To be a man my deeds shall declare.
If I overcome him, than a Butter fly takes his part,
His weapon must be a blue speckled Hen:
But you shall see me over throw him with a fart,
So without conquest he shall go home again.
If I overcame him, I must fight with a fly,
And a black pudding the flies weapon must be:
At the first blow on the ground he shall lie,
I will be sure to thrust him through the mouth to the knee.
To conquest these fellows the man I will play,
Ha', ha', ha', now ye will make me to smile:
To see if I can all men beguile.
Ha', my name, my name would you so fain know?
Yea iwis shall ye, and that with all speed:
I have forgot it therefore I cannot show,
A, A, now I have it, I have it in deed.
My name is Ambidexter I signify one,
That with both hands finely can play:
Now with king Cambices and by and by gone,
Thus do I run this and that way,
For while I mean with a Soldier to be,
Then give I a leap to Sisamnes the judge:
I dare avouch, ye shall his destruction see,
To all kind of estates I mean for to trudge.
Ambidexter, nay he is a fellow if ye knew all:
Gog's flesh and his wounds these wars rejoice my heart:
By his wounds I hope to do well for my part.
By God's heart the world shall go evil if I do not shifted:
At some old Carls bouget I mean for to lift.
By his Flesh, nose, Eyes and Ears,
I will venture voided of all cares.
He is not a Soldier that doth fear any doubt:
If that he would bring his purpose about.
Fear that fear list, it shall not be I:
By God's wounds I will make some neck stand awry.
If I loose my share, I swear by God's heart:
Then let an other take up my part.
Yet I hope to come the richest Soldier away:
If a man ask ye, ye may hap to say nay.
If a man ask ye, ye may hap to say nay.
Let all men get what they can, not to lose I hope:
Where soever I go in each corner I will grope.
What & ye run into the Corner of some pretty maid?
To grope there good fellow I will not be a afraid.
Gog's wounds what art thou that with us dost mell?
Thou seemest to be a Soldier the truth to tell,
Thou seemest to be harnessed. I cannot tell how:
I think he came lately from riding some Cow.
Such a deformed slave did I never see:
Ruf dost thou know him? I pray thee tell me.
Not by my troth fellow Huf I never see him before.
As for me I care not if I never see him more.
Come let us run his Arse against the post:
A ye: slaves, I will be with you at the ofts.
A ye knaves, I will teach ye how ye shall me deride,
Out of my sight I can ye not abide.
Now goodman pouchmouth I am a slave with you:
Now have at ye a fresh again even now.
Mine Arse against the post you will run:
But I will make ye from that saying to turn.
I beseech ye heartily to be content:
I insure you by mine honesty no hurt we meant.
Beside that again we do not know what ye are:
You know that Soldiers their stoutness will declare,
Therefore if we have any thing offended:
Pardon our rudeness and it shallbe amended.
Yea Gods pity, begin ye to entreat me?
Have at ye once again by the mass I will beaten ye.
Gog's heart let us kill him, suffer no longer:
Thou slave we will see if thou be the stronger.
Strike of his head at one blow:
we be Soldiers, Gog's heart let him know.
O the passion of God, I have done by mine honesty:
I will take your part héerafter verily.
Then content let us agreed:
Shake hands with me, I shake hands with thee.
You are full of courtesy, that is the best:
And you take great pain, ye are a mannerly gest.
Why masters do you not know me? the truth to me tell:
Not trust us, not very well.
Why I am Ambidexter who many soldiers do love
Gog's heart to have thy company needs we must prove.
We must play with both hands with our hosts & host
Play with both hands and score on the post.
Now and then with our Captain for many a delay?
We will not stick with both hands to play.
The honester man ye, ye may me trust.
Enter Meretrix with a staff on her shoulder.
What? is there no lads here that hath a lust:
To have a passing Trul to help at their need?
Gog's heart she is come indeed.
What mistress Meretrix by his wounds welcome to me:
What will ye give me I pray you let me see?
By his heart she looks for gifts by and by.
What master Ruf, I cry you mercy.
The last time I was with you I got a broken head.
And lay in the street all night for want of a bed.
Gog's wounds kiss me my Trul so white:
In thee I swear is all my delight.
If thou shouldest have had a broken bed for my sake:
I would have made his head to ache.
What master Ambidexter, who looked for you?
Mistress Meretrix I thought not to see you here now.
There is no remedy at meeting I must have a kiss:
What man? I will not stick for that by gisse.
So now gramercy, I pray thee be gone:
Nay soft my friend I mean to have one.
Nay soft I swear, and if ye were my brother:
Before I let go I will have an other.
Gog's heart the whore would not kiss me yet:
If I be a whore. thou art a knave than it is quit.
But hearst thou Meretrix, with who this night wilt the lyee
With him that giveth the most money.
Gog's heart, I have no money in purse, ne yet in clout:
Then get thee hence and pack like a Lout.
Adieu like a Whore.
Farewell like a knave.
Gog's Nails, Mistress Meretrix now he is gone:
A match ye shall make strait with me:
I will give thee sixpences to lie one night with thee.
Gog's heart slave dost thou think I am a six penny Iug::
Not wis ye Iack I look a little more smug.
I will give her xviij. pnce to serve me first:
Gramercy Snuff, thou art not the worst.
By God's heart she were better be hanged, to forsake me and take this
Were she so? that shall we see.
By God's heart my Dagger into her I will thrust.
A ye boy, ye would do it and ye durst.
Peace my masters ye shall not fight:
He that draws first I will him smite.
Gog's wounds Master Snuff are ye so lusty?
Gog's sides master Ruf are ye so crusty?
You may happen to see:
Do what thou darest to me.
Gog's sides knaves, seeing to fight ye be so rough
Defend yourselves for I will give ye both enough.
I will teach ye how ye shall fall out for me:
Yea thou slave Snuff, no more blows wilt thou bide?
To take thy heels a time hast thou spied?
Thou Villain seeing Snuff is gone away:
A little better I mean thee to pay.
Alas good mistress Meretrix no more:
My legs, sides, and arms with beating be sore.
Thou a Soldier and lose thy weapon?
Go hence Sir boy. say a woman hath thee beaten.
Good Mistress Meretrix my weapon let me have:
Take pity on me mine honesty to save.
If it be known this repulle I sustain:
It will redound to my ignomy and shame.
If thou will be my man and wait upon me:
This Sword and Buckler I will give thee.
I will do all at your commandment:
As servant to you I will be obedient
Then let me see how before me ye can go:
When I speak to you ye shall do so.
Of with your cap at place and at board:
Forsooth mistress Meretrix at every word.
Tut, tut, in the Camp such Soldiers there be:
One good woman would beaten a way two or three.
Well I am sure Customers tarry at home:
Mannerly before and let us be gone.
O the passion of God, be they here still or no?
I durst not abide to see her heat them so.
I may say to you I was in such a flight:
Body of me I see the hear of my head stand upright.
When I saw her so hard upon them lay on:
O the passion of God thought I, she will be with me anon
I made no more a do but avoided the thrust:
And to my legs began for to trust.
And fell a laughing to myself when I was once gone:
It is wisdom (quoth I) by the mass to save one.
Then into this place I intended to trudge:
Thinking to meet Sisamnes the judge.
Behold where he cometh I will him meet:
And like a gentleman I mean him to greet
Since that the King's graces majesty in office did me set:
What abundance of wealth to me might I get.
Now & then sun vantage I achieve, much more yet may I take:
But that I fear unto the king, that some, complaint will make
Iesu master Sisamnes you are unwise.
Why so? I pray ye let me agnize.
What master Ambidexter, is it you?
Now welcome to me I make God avow.
Iesu master Sisamnes with me you are well acquainted:
By me rulers may be trimly painted.
You are unwise if ye take not time while ye may:
If ye will not now when ye would ye shall have nay.
What is he that of you dare make exclamation:
Of your wrong dealing to make explication?
Can you not play with both hands and turn with the wind?
Believe me your words draw deep in my mind.
In colour wise unto this day to bribes I have inclined:
Moore the same for to frequent of truth I am now minded.
Behold even now unto me Suitors do proceed.
I beseech you here good master judge, a poor man's cause to téder
Condemn me not in wrongful wise, that never was offender.
You know right well my right it is, I have not for to give:
You take away from me my due, that should my corpse relieve.
The Commons of you do complain, from them you devocate:
with anguish great & grievous words, their hearts do penetrate.
The right you sell unto the wrong, your private gain to win:
You violate the simple man, and count it for no sin:
Hold thy tongue thou prattling knave, and give to me reward
Else in this wise I tell thee truth, thy tale will not be heard.
Ambidexter, let us go hence, and let the knave alone.
Farewell Small habilitises for help now get ye none.
Bribes hath corrupt him, good Laws to pollute:
A naughty man that will not obey the Kings constitute.
with heavy heart I will return till Ged redress my pain.
From among the grisly ghosts I come, from tyrants testy train.
Unseemly shame of sooth I am procured to make plain,
The odious facts & shameless dée us that Cambyses king doth use.
All piety and virtuous life, he doth it clean refuse.
Lechery and drunkenness, he doth it much frequent:
The Tigers kind to imitate, he hath given full consent.
He naught esteems his council grave, ne virtuous bringing up
But daily still receives the drink, of damned vices cup.
He can bide no instruction, he takes so great delight:
In working of iniquity, for to frequent his spite.
As Fame doth sound the royal trump of worthy men and frim:
So shame doth blow w strained blast, the trump of shame on him.
My judge since my departure hence, have you used judgement right?
If faithful steward I ye find, the same I will requited.
Not doubt your grace shall not once hear, that I have done a mis.
I much rejoice to hear, so good news as this.
Alas, alas, how are the Commons oppressed,
By that vile judge Sisamnes by name?
I do not know how it should be redressed.
To amend his life no whit he doth frame.
We are undone and thrown out of door,
His damnable dealing doth us so torment:
At his hand we can find no relief nor succour,
God grant him grace for to repent.
What doleful cries be these my lord, that sound do in mine ear?
Intelligence if you can giut, unto your king declare.
To me it seemeth my Commons all, they do lament & cry:
Out of Sisamnes judge most chief, even now standing us by.
Even so (O king) it seemed to me, as you rehearsal made:
I doubt the judge culpable be, in some respect or trade.
Redoubted king have no mistrust, no whit your mind dismay:
There is not one that can me charge or aught against me lay
Commons complaint I represent, with thrall of doleful state:
By urgent cause erected forth, my grief for to dilate.
Unto the king I will prepare, my misery to tell
To have relief of this my grief, and fettered feet so fel.
Redoubted Prince & mighty King, myself I prostrate here
Vouchsafe (O King) with me to bear, for this that I appear.
With humble suit I pardon crave, of 〈◊〉 most royal grace
To give me leave my mind to break, before you in this place
Commons complaint keep nothing back, foar not thy tale to tell
What ere he be within this land, that hath not used thee well.
As Prince's mouth shall sentence give, he shall receive the same
unfold the secrets of thy breast, for I extinguish blame.
God preserve your royal grace, and sand you blissful days:
That all your deeds might still accord, to give the God the praise.
My complaint is (O mighty king) against that judge you by:
Whose careless deeds, gain to receive, hath made the commons cry
He, by taking bribes and gifts, the poor he doth oppress:
Taking rebeef from Infants young, widows and fatherless.
Vntrustful traitor & corrupt judge, how likest thou this complaint
Forewarning I to thee did give, of this to make restraint.
And hast thou done this devilish dée, mine ire for to augment?
I sentence give, thou Iudas judge, thou shalt thy deed repent.
O pusant Prince it is not so, his complaint I deny:
If it be not so (most mighty King) in place then let me die
Behold that I have brought wine, both Proof & I rial true
To stand even here and sentence give, what by him did ensue.
I Proof do him in this appeal, he did the Commons wrong:
Unjustly he will them hath dealt, his greedy was so strong.
His heart did covet in to get, be cared not which way:
The poor did lose their due and right, because they want to pay
Unto him for bribes indeed, this was his wunted use:
whereas you grace good laws did make, he did the same abuse.
I Trial héerto verify, what Proof doth now unfold:
To stand against him in his wrong, as now I dare be bold.
How likest the this, thou caitiff vile, canst thou the same deny?
O noble king forgive my fact, I yield to thy mercy.
Complaints and Proof, redress will I, all this your misery:
Depart with speed from whence you came, & strait command by me
The Execution man to come, before my grace with haste.
For to fulfil this your request, no time we mean to waste.
My Lord, before my grace go call, Otian this judges Son:
And he shall hear and also see: what his father hath done.
The Father he shall suffer death, the Son his room succeed
And if that he no better prove, so likewise shall he speed.
As your grace hath commandment given, I mean for to fulfil:
Accursed Judge couldst thou consent, to do this cursed il?
According unto thy dentaund, thou shalt for this thy gilt:
Receive thy death before mine eyes, thy blood it shallbe spilled.
Behold (O King) Sisamnes Son, before you doth appear.
Otian this is my mind, therefore to me come near.
Thy father here for judgement wrong procured hath his death:
And thou his son shalt him succeed, when he hath lost his breath
And if that thou dost once offend, as thou seest thy father have:
In likewise thou shalt suffer death, no mercy shall thee save.
O mighty King, vouchsafe your grace, my father to remit:
Forgive his fault, his pardon I do ask of your as yet.
Alas although my father hath your Princely heart offended:
Amendss for miss he will now make▪ & faults shallbe amended.
In stead of his requested life, pleaseth your grace take mine:
This offer I as tender Child, so duty doth me bind.
Do not entreat my grace no more, for he shall die the death,
Where is the Execution man, him to bercave of breath.
At hand and if it like your grace, my duty to dispatch:
In hope that I when deed is done, a good reward shall catch.
Dispatch w sword this judges life, extinguish fear and cares:
So done, draw thou his cursed skin, straight over both his ears.
I will see the office done, and that before mine eyes.
To do the thing my king commands, I give the enterprise.
Otian my son the king to death (by law hath me condemned
And you in room and office mine, his graces will hath placed.
Use justice therefore in this case, and yield unto no wrong:
Jest thou do purchase the like death, or ever it be long.
O father dear, these words to hear, that you must die by force
Bedews my cheeks w stilled tears, the King hath no remorse.
the gréeudus gréefꝭ & strained sighs, my heart doth break in twain
And I deplore most woeful child, that I should see you slain.
O false and fickle frowning Danie, that turneth as the wind:
Is this the joy in father's age, thou me assignest to find?
O dole full day, unhappy hour, that loving child should see:
His Father dear before his face, thus put to death should be.
Yet Father give me blessing thine, and let me once embrace:
Thy comely corpse in folded arms, & kiss thy ancient face.
O child thou makes mine eyes to run, as rivers do by stream:
My leave I take of thee my Son beware of this my beam.
Dispatch even now thou man of death, no longer seem to stay:
Come M. Sisamnes, came on your way, my office I must pay.
Forgive therefore my deed.
I do forgive it thee my friend, dispatch therefore with speed.
smite him in the neck with a sword to signify his death
Behold (O king) how he doth bleed, being of life bereft:
In this wise, he shall not yet be left.
Pull his skin over his ears, to make his death more vile:
A wretch he was, a cruel thief my commons to beguile.
What child is he of nature's mould, could bide the same to see
His Father flayed in this wise? O how it grieveth me.
Otian, thou seest thy father dead, and thou art in his room:
if thou be'st proud as be hath been, even thereto shalt thou come.
O King, to me this is a glass, with grief in it I view:
Example that unto your grace, I do not prove untrue.
Otian, convey your Father hence, to Tomb where be shall lie
And if it please your Lordship, if shallbe done by and by.
Good Execution man for need, help me with him away:
I will fulfil, as you to me did say.
My Lord now that my grace hath seen, that finished is this deed,
To question mine give tentive ear, & answer make w speed.
Have not I done a gracious deed, to redress my commons woe?
Yea truly if it please your grace, ye have indeed done so.
But now (O King) in friendly wise, I council you in this:
Certain vices for to leave, that in you placed is.
The vice of drunkenness (O king) which doth you sore infect:
With other great abuses, which I wish you to detect.
Peace my Lord, what needeth this? of this I will not hear,
To Palace now I will return, and there to make good cheer.
God Bacchus he bestows his giftis, we have good store of wine:
And also that the Ladies be, both passing brave and fine.
But stay, I see a Lord now come, and eke a valiant knight:
What news my Lord? to see you here my heart it doth delight
Nonewes (O king) but of duty come, to wait upon your grace:
I thank you my Lord & loving knight, I pray ye with me trace
My Lords and Knight I pray ye tell, I will not be offended:
Am I worthy of any crime once to be reprehended?
The Persians much praise your grace, but one thing discommend:
In that to Wine subject you be, wherein you do offend.
Sigh that the might of wine's effect, doth often subdue your brain
My council is to please their hearts, from it you would refrain.
Not, not, my Lord, it is not so, for this of Prince they tell:
For virtuous proof and Princely facts, Cirus he doth excel.
By that his grace by conquest great, the Egyptians did convince
Of him report abroad doth pass, to be a worthy Prince.
In person of Croesus I answer make, we may not his grace compare
in whole respect for to be like, Cirus the king's father.
In so much your grace hath yet no child, as Cirus left behind
Even you I mean, Cambyses king, in whom I favour find.
Croesus' said well in saying so, but Praxaspes tell me why:
That to my mouth in such a sort, thou should avouch a lie.
Of drunkenness me thus to charge, but thou with speed shalt see
Whether that I a sober King, or else a drunkard be.
I know thou haste a blissful babe, wherein thou dost delight:
Me to revenge of these thy words, I will go wreak this spite.
When I the most have tasted wine, my Bow it shallbe bend
At heart of him even then to shoot, is now my whole intent.
And if that I his heart can hit, the King no drunkard is:
It heart of his I do not kill, I yield to thee in this.
Therefore Praxaspes fetch to me, thy yungest son with speed:
There is no way I tell thee plain, but I will do this deed.
Redoubted Prince spare my sweet Child, he is mine only joy:
I trust your grace to Infant's heart, no such thing will employ.
If that his mother hear of this, she is so nigh her flight:
In clay her corpse will soon be shrined, to pass from world's delight
Not more ado, go fetch me him, it shallbe as I say:
And if that I do speak the word, how dare ye once say nay?
I will go fetch him to your grace, but so I trust it shall not be:
For fear of my displeasure great, go fetch him unto me.
Is he gone? now by the Gods I will do as I say:
My Lord therefore fill me some wine, I heartily you pray.
For I must drink to make my brain somewhat intoxicate:
When that the wine is in my head, o trimly I can prate.
Here is the cup with filled wine, thereof to take repast:
Give it me to drink it of, and see no wine be waste.
Once again in large this Cup, for I must taste it still:
By the Gods I think of pleasant wine, I cannot take my fill.
Now drink is in give me my bow, and arrows from sir Knight
At heart of Child I mean to shoot, hoping to cleave it right.
Behold (O King) where he doth come, his infant young in hand
O mighty King your grace behest, with sorrow I have scanned.
And brought my Child fro mother's knee, before you to appear:
And she thereof no whit doth know that he in place is here.
Set him up my mark to be, I will shoot at his heart:
I beseech your grace not so to do, set this pretence a part.
Farewell my dear and loving babe, come kiss thy father dear:
A grievous sight to me it is, to see thee slain even here.
Is this the gain now from the King for giving council good:
Before my face with such despite, to spill my sons heart blood?
O heavy day to me this is, and mother in like case.
O Father, Father, wipe your face.
I see the tears run from your eye:
My mother is at home sowing of a band:
Alas dear father, why do you cry?
Before me as mark now let him stand, I will shoot at him my mind to fulfil
Alas, alas, Father will you me kill?
Good master king do not shoot at me, my mother loves me best of all
I have dispatched him, down he doth fall,
As right as a line his heart I have hit:
Nay thou shalt see Praxaspes, stranger news yet.
My Knight with speed his heart cut out, and give it unto me.
It shallbe done (O mighty king) with all celereity.
My Lord Praxaspes, this had not been, but your tongue must be walking
To the King of correction, you must needs be talking.
No correction (my Lord) but council for the best:
Here is the heart, according to your grace's behest.
Behold Praxaspes thy Sons own heart, O how well the same was hit
After this wine to do this deed, I thought it very fit.
Esteem thou mayst right well thereby, no drunkard is the king:
That in the midst of all his cups, could do this valiant thing.
My Lord and knight on me attend, to Palace we will go:
And leave him here to take his son, when we are gone him fro.
With all our hearts we give consent, to wait upon your grace:
A woeful man (O Lord) am I, to see him in this case.
My days I déem desires their end, this deed will help me hence:
To have the blossoms of my field, destroyed by violence.
Alas, Alas I do hear tell, the King hath killed my Son:
If it be so, woe worth the deed, that ever it was done.
It is even so, my Lord I see, how by him he doth weep
What meant I that from hands of him, this child I did not keep?
Alas husband and Lord, what did you mean,
to fetch this Child away?
O Lady wife I little thought for to háue seen this day.
O blissful babe, O joy of womb, heart's comfort and delight:
For Council given unto the King, is this thy just requite?
O heavy day and doleful time, these mourning tunes to make
With blubbered eyes into mine arms, from earth I will thee take.
And wrap thee in mine apron white, but o my heavy heart:
The spiteful pangs that it sustains, would make it in two to part.
The death of this my Son to see, O heavy mother now?
That from thy sweet and sugared joy, to sorrow so shouldst bow,
What grief in womb did I retain, before I did thee see?
Yet at the last when smart was gone, what joy wert thou to me
How tender was I of thy food, for to preserve thy state?
How stilled I thy tender heart, at times early and late?
With velvet Papꝭ I gave thee suck with issue from my breast:
And danced thee, upon my knee, to bring thee unto rest.
Is this the joy of thee I reap (O king) of Tiger's brood?
O tigers whelp hadst thou the heart, to see this child's heart blood?
Nature enforceth me alas, in this wise to deplore:
To wring my hands O weal away, that I should see this hour.
Thy mother yet will kiss thy lips, silk soft and pleasant white:
With wring hands, lamenting for to see thee in this plight.
My Lording deer let us go home, our mourning to augment:
My Lady dear with heavy heart, to it I do consent.
Between us both the child to bear unto our lordly place, Exeunt
In deed as ye say I have been absent a long space.
But is not my cousin Cutpurse, w you in the mean time?
To it, to it Cousin and do your office fine.
How like you Sisamnes for using of me?
He played with both hands, but he sped il favouredly.
The King himself was godly up trained:
He professed virtue, but I think it was feigned.
He plays with both hands good deeds and ill:
But it was no good deed, Praxaspes son for to kill.
As he for the good deed, on the judge was commended:
For all his deeds else he is reprehended.
The most evil disposed person, that ever was:
All the state of his life he would not let pass.
Some good deeds he will do, though they be but few:
The like things this tyrant Cambices doth show.
No goodness from him, to none is exhibited:
But still malediction, abroad is distributed.
And yet ye shall see in the rest of his race:
What infamy he will work against his own grace.
Whist, no more words here comes the king's brother.
The King's brother by birth am I, issued from Cirus loins:
A grief to me it is to hear, of this the kings repines.
I like not well of those his deeds, that he doth still frequent:
I wish to God that other ways, his mind he could content.
Yung I am and next to him, no more of us there be:
I would be glad a quiet Realm in this his reign to see.
My Lord your good awilling heart, the Gods will recompense:
In that your made so pensive is, for those his great offence.
My Lord, his grace shall have a time to pair and to amend:
Happy is he that can escape, and not his grace offend.
If that wicked vice he could refrain, from wasting wine forbear
A moderate life he would frequent, amending this his square.
My Lord, and if your honour it shall please:
I can inform you what is best for your ease.
Let him alone of his deeds do not talk:
Then by his side: ye may quietly walk.
After his death you shallbe King:
Then may you reform each kind of thing.
In the mean time live quietly, do not with him deal:
So shall it redound much to your weal.
Thou sayst true my friend, that is the best:
I know not whether he love me, or do me detest.
Lean from his company, all that you may:
I faithful Attendance will your honour obey.
If against your honour he take any ire:
His grace is as like, to kindle his fire.
To your honours destruction, as otherwise:
Therefore my Lord take good advise.
And I Diligence, your case will so tender:
That to his grace your honour shallbe none offender.
I thank you both entire friends, with my honour still remain:
Behold where the King doth come with his train.
O Lording dear and brother mine, I joy your state to see:
Surmising much what is the cause, you absent thus from me.
Pleaseth your grace no absence I, but ready to fulfil:
At all assays my Prince and king, in that your grace me wil.
What I can do in true defence, to you my Prince aright:
In readiness I always am, to offer forth my might.
And I the like to you again do here avouch the same:
For this your good agreement here, now praised be God's name.
But hear ye noble Prince, hark in you ear.
It is best to do as I did declare.
My Lord and brother Smirdis now, this is my mind and will:
That you to Court of mine return, and there to tarry still.
Till my return within short space, your honour for to greet:
At your behest so will I do, till time again we meet.
My leave I take from you (O King) even now I do depart.
Farewell Lord and Brother mine, farewell with all my heart.
My Lord, my brother Smirdis is, of youth and manly might:
And in his sweet and pleasant face, my heart doth take delight.
Yea noble Prince if that your grace, before his honour die:
He will succeed a virtuous King, and rule with equity.
As you have said my Lord, he is chief heir next my grace:
And if I die to morrow next he shall succeed my place.
And if it please your grace (O king) I herd him say:
For your death unto the God, day and night he did pray.
He would live so virtuously, and get him such a praise:
That Fame by trump his due deserts, his honour should up raise.
He said your grace deserved had, the cursing of all men:
That ye should never after him, get any praise again.
Did he speak thus of my grace, in such dispightful wise?
Or else dost thou presume to fill my princely ears with lies?
I cannot think it in my heart, that he would report so,
How sayst thou? speak the truth, was it sore no?
I think so if it please your grace, but I cannot tell:
Thou playst with both hands, now I perceive well:
But for to put all doubts aside, and to make him lose his hope:
He shall die by dent of Sword, or else by choking Rope.
Shall he succeed when I am gone, to have more praise than I?
Were he Father as brother mine, I swear that he shall die.
To palace mine I will therefore, his death for to pursue.
Are ye gone? straight way I will follow you.
How like ye now my masters? doth not this géer cotton?
The proverb old is verified, soon ripe and soon rotten.
He will not be quiet, till his Brother be killed:
His delight is wholly to have his blood spilled.
Marry Sir I told him a notable lie:
If it were to do again man, I durst do it I
Mary when I had done, to it I durst not stand:
Thereby you may perceive I use to play with each hand.
But how now Cousin Cutpurse with whom play you?
Take heed for his hand is groping even now.
Cousin take heed, if ye do secretly grope:
If ye be taken Cousin, ye must look through a rope.
I am wandering alone here and there to walk,
The Court is so unquiet, in it I take no joy:
Solitary to myself now I may talk,
If I could rule I witted what to say.
My coequal partner Murder, come away.
From me, long thou mayst not stay.
Yes from thee I may stay, but not thou from me:
Therefore I have a prerogative above thee.
But in this case we must together abide:
Come, come, Lord Smirdis I have spied.
Lay hands on him with all festination:
That on him we may work our indignation.
How now my friends? what have you to do with me?
King Cambyses hath sent us unto thee.
Commanding us straightly, with out mercy or favour:
Upon thee to bestow our behaviour.
With Cruelty to murder you, and make you away.
Yet pardon me I heartily you pray:
Consider the King is a tyrant tirannious:
And all his doings be damnable and parnitious.
Favour me therefore, I did him never offend:
No favour at all, your life is at an end.
Even now I strike his body to wound:
Behold now his blood springs out on the ground,
Now he is dead, let us present him to the King:
Lay to your hand, away him to bring.
O the passion of God, yunder is a heavy Court:
Some wéeps, some wails, and some make great sport.
Lord Smirdis, by Cruelty and Murder is slain:
But Iesus for want of him, how some do complain.
If I should have had a thousand pound, I could not forbear weeping
Now Iesus have his blessed soul in keeping.
Ah, good Lord, to think on him, how it doth me grieve:
I can not forbear weeping, ye may me believe.
O my heart, how my pulses do beaten:
With sorrowful lamentations, I am in such a heat.
Ah my heart, how for him it doth sorrow:
Nay I have done in faith now, and God give you good morrow.
Ha', ha', weep nay laugh, with both hands to play:
The king througe his cruelty, hath made him away,
But hath not he wrought, a most wicked deed:
Because king after him he should not proceed.
His own natural brother and having no more:
To procure his death by violence sore.
In spite because his brother should never be King:
His heart being wicked consented to this thing.
Now he hath no more Brothers nor kindred alive:
If the King use this géer still, he cannot long thrive.
God's hat Neighbour come away, its time to market to go
God's Vast Neighbour zay ye so?
The Clock hath stricken vive ich think by lakin:
Bum Vay urom sleep cham not very well waken.
But Neighbour Hoh, Neighbour Hob, what have ye to zel?
Bum troth Neighbour Job to you I I'll tell.
Chave two Goslings, and a Chine of good Pork:
There is no vatter between this and York.
Chave a pot of Strawberries and a calves head:
A zennight zince to morrow it hath been dead.
Chave a score of Eggs, and of Butter a pound:
Yesterday a nest of goodly young Rabits I bound.
Chave forty things more, of more and of less:
My brain is not very good them to express.
But God's Hat Neighbour, wotst what?
Not not well Neighbour. what's that?
Bum vay Neighbour, master king is a zhrode lad
Zo God help me and holidame, I think the vool he mad.
Zome zay he deal cruelly his Brother he did kill:
And also a goodly young lads heart blood, he did spill,
Vorbod of God neighbour, has he played zuch a volish deed?
Goodman Hob and goodman Job, God be your speed.
As you two towards market do walk:
Of the King's cruelty I did hear you talk.
I insure you, he is a King most vile and parnitious:
His doings and life are odious and vicious.
It were a good deed zome body would break his head:
Bum vay Neighbour Lob. I chousd he were dead.
So would I Job and Hob with all my heart:
Now with both hands, will ye see me play my part?
A ye Whoreson traitorly Knaves:
Hob and Job out upon you slaves.
And thou call'st me knave thou art an other:
My name is Job and Hob my next Neighbour.
Hob and Job, a ye country Patches:
A ye fools ye have made wrong matches.
You have spoken treason against the king's grace:
For it I will accuse ye before his face.
Then for the same ye shallbe martyred:
At the lest ye shall be hanged, drawn and quartered:
O gentleman ye shall have two Pear pies and tell not of me.
By God a vat Goose I'll give thee.
I think no hurt by my Vathers soul I zweare:
Chave lived well all my life time my naybors among:
And now chould be loath to come to zuch wrong.
To be hanged and quartered the grief would be great:
A foul evil on thee Hob, who bid thee on it treat?
Vor it was thou that first did him name.
Thou liest like a varlet, and thou zaist the same,
It was zuch a voolish Lob. thou:
Speak many words and by cod's nails I vow:
Upon thy pate my staff I will lay.
By the Mass I will 'cause them to make a fray.
Yea Job thou sayest true, all came through him.
Bum vay thou Hob. a little would make me ye trim.
Give thee a zawp on thy nose till thy heart ache:
If thou darest do it, else man cry creak.
I trust before thou hurt me:
With my staff I'll make a Lob. thee.
O the body of me husband Hob, what mean you to fight:
For the passion of God, no more blows smite.
Neighbours and friends so long, and now to fall out:
What? in your age to seem so stout?
If I had not parted ye, one had killed another:
I had not cared I swear by God's mother.
Shake hands again at the request of me:
As ye have been friends, so friends still be.
Bum troth cham content, and zaist word neighbour Job:
I am content agreed neighbour Hob.
So, get you to market, no longer stay.
And with yonder knave let me make a fray.
Content wife Marian, I'll do as thou dost say:
But buss me ich pray thee at going away.
Thou whoreson knave & prick-eared boy, why didst thou let them fight?
If one had killed another here, couldst thou their deaths requited?
It bears a sign by this thy deed, a cowardly knave thou art:
Else wouldst thou draw the weapon thine, like a man them to part
What Marian may be good, are you come prattling?
You may hap get a box on the ear, with your talking.
If they had killed one another, I had not cared a pease:
A villain, myself on thee I must ease.
Give me a box on the ear? that will I try:
Who shallbe Master thou shalt see by and by.
O not more, no more I beseech you heartily:
Even now I yield, and give you the mastery.
A thou knave, dost thou throw me down and run thy way?
If he were here again, o how I would him pay.
I will after him, and if I can him meet:
With these my nails, his face I will greet.
Come forth my son, unto my words attentive ears resign
What I pretend see you frequent, to force this game of mine.
The King a kinswoman hath, adorned with beauty store:
And I wish that Diana's gifts, they twain shall keep no more.
But use my silver sugared game, their joys for to augment:
When I do speak to wound his heart, Cupid my son conset.
And shoot at him the shaft of love, that bears the head of Gold:
To wound his heart in loovers' wise, his grief for to unfold.
Though kin she be unto his grace, that nature me expel:
Against the course thereof he may, in my game please me well.
Wherefore my son do not forget, forthwith pursue the deed:
Mother I mean for to obey, as you have whole decreed.
But you must tell me mother deer, when I shall arrow draw:
Else your request to be attained, will not be worth a straw.
I am blind and cannot see, but still do shoot by guess:
The Poets well in places store, of my might do express.
Cupid my son when time shall serve, the thou shalt do this deed,
Then warning I to thee will give, but see thou shoot, with speed.
Lady dear to King a kin, forthwith let us proceed:
To trace abroad the beauty fields, as erst we had decreed.
The blowing buds whose savoury scents our sense will much
The sweet smell of musk white rose, to please the appetite.
The chirpig birds whose pleasant tunes, therein shall hear record delight
That our great joy we shall it find, in field to walk a broad.
On Lute and Cittern there to play a heavenly harmony:
Our ears shall hear, heart to content, our sports to beauty.
Unto your words most comely Lord, myself submit do I:
To trace with you in field so green, I mean not to deny.
And I your waiting maid at hand, with diligence will be:
For to fulfil with heart and hand, when you shall command me.
Come on my Lord and knight abroad, our mirth let us employ
Since he is dead this heart of mine, in corpse I feel it joy.
Should brother mine have reigned King, when I had yielded breath
A thousand brothers I rather had, to put them all to death.
But o, behold where I do see, a Lord and Lady fair:
For beauty she most worthy is, to sit in Prince's chair.
Shoot forth my son now is the time, the thou must wound his heart
Content you Mother I will do my part.
Of truth my Lord in eye of mine, all Ladies she doth excel:
Can none report what dame she is, and to my grace it tell?
Redoubted Prince pleaseth your grace, to you she is a kin:
Cousin Iarmin nigh of birth, by mother's side come in.
And that her waiting maiden is attending her upon:
He is a Lord of Prince's Court, and will be there anon.
They sport themselves in pleasant field, to former used use:
My Lord & knight of truth I speak, my heart it cannot choose.
But with my Lady I must speak and so express my mind:
My Lord and Ladies walking there, if you will favour find.
Present yourselves unto my grace, & by my side come stand:
We will fulfil most mighty king, as your grace doth command.
Lady dear intelligence, my grace hath got of late:
You issued out of mother's stock, and kin unto my state.
According to rule of birth you are, Cousin iarmin mine:
Yet do I wish that farther of, this kindred I could find.
For Cupid he that eyeless boy, my heart hath so inflamed:
With beauty you me to content, the like cannot be named.
For since I entered in this place and on you fixed mine eyes:
Most burning fits about my heart in ample wise did rise.
The heat of them such force doth yield, my corpse they scorch alas:
And burns the same with wasting heat, as Titan doth the grass
And sith this heat is kindled so, and fresh in heart of me:
There is no way but of the same, the quencher you must be.
My meaning is that beauty yours, my heart with love doth wound:
To give me love, mind to content my heart hath you out found.
And you are she must be my wife, else shall I end my days:
Consent to this and be my Queen, to were the crown with praise.
If it please your grace (O mighty king) you shall not this request
It is a thing that nature's course, doth utterly detest.
And high it would the God displease, of all that is the worst:
To grant your grace to marry so, it is not I that durst.
Yet humble thanks I tender now unto you mighty King:
That you vouchsafe to great estate, so gladly would me bring.
Were it not it were offence, I would it not deny:
But such great honour to achieve, my heart I would apply.
Therefore (O king) with humble heart, in this I pardon crave:
Mine answer is in this request: your mind ye may not have.
May I not? nay then I will by all the Gods I vow:
And I will marry thee as wife, this is mine answer now:
Who dare say nay what I pretend, who dare the same withstand?
Shall loose his head and have report, as traitor through my land.
There is no nay I will you have, and you my Queen shallbe:
Then mighty King I crave your grace, to hear the words of me
Your council take of Lordings wit, the laws aright peruse:
If I with safe may grant this deed, I will it not refuse.
Not, not, what I have said to you. I mean to have it so:
For counsel theirs I mean not I, in this respect to go.
But to my Palace let us go, the marriage to prepare:
For to avoid my will in this, I can it not forbear.
O God forgive me if I do amiss:
The king by compulsion, enforceth me this.
Unto the Gods for your estate, I will not cease to pray:
That you may be a happy Queen. and see most joyful day.
Come on my Lords with gladsome hearts, let us rejoice with glee:
Your Music show to joy this deed, at the request of me.
For to obey your grace's words our honours do agree.
O the Passion of me, marry as ye say, yonder is a royal court
There is triumphing and sport upon sport.
Such loyal Lords, with such Lordly exercise:
Frequenting such pastime as they can devise.
Running at tilt, justing, with running at the King:
Masking and mumming, with each kind of thing,
Such dancing, such singing, with musical harmony:
Believe me I was loath to absent their company.
But will you believe? Iesu what hast they made till they were married?
Not for a Million of pounds one day longer they would have tarried
O there was a banquet royal and superexelent:
Thousands, and thousands at that banquet was spent.
I muse of nothing but how they can be married so soon:
I care not if I be married before to morrow at noon.
If marriage be a thing that so may be had:
How say you maid? to marry me will ye be glad?
Out of doubt I believe it is some excellent treasure:
Else to the same belongs abundant pleasure.
Yet with mine ears I have heard some say:
That ever I was married, now cursed be the day.
Those be they, that with curse wives be matched:
That husband for hankes meat, of them is up snatched.
Head broke with a bedstaf, face all to be scratched.
Knave slave and villain, a coild cote now and than:
When the wife hath given it, she will say alas good man.
Such were better unmarried my masters I trow:
Then all their life after to be matched with a shrew.
With speed I am sent all things to prepare:
My message to do as the king did declare.
His grace doth mean a banquet to make:
Meaning in this place repast for to take.
Well the cloth shallbe laid and all things in readiness:
To court to return when done is my business.
A proper man and also a fit.
For the King's estate to prepare a banquet.
What Ambidexter? thou art not unknown:
A wischéef on all good faces, so that I curse not mine own.
Now in the knaves name shake hands with me.
Well said goodman pouchmouth your reverence I see.
I will teach ye, if your manners no better be.
A ye slave, the king doth me a gentleman allow:
Therefore I look, that to me ye shall how.
Good Master Ambidexter, pardon my behaviour:
For this your deeds, ye are a knave for your labour.
Why ye stolen counterly villain, nothing but Knave?
I am sorry your mastership offended I have.
Shake hands that between us agreement may be:
I was over shot with myself, I do see.
Let me have your help, this furniture to provide:
The King from this place will not long abide.
Content, it is the thing that I would wish:
I myself will go fetch on Dish.
Cleanly master Ambidexter, for fair on the ground they lie:
I will have them up again by and by.
To see all in readiness I will put you in trust:
There is no nay to the Court needs I must.
Have ye no doubt but all shallbe well:
Marry Sir as you say, this gear doth excel.
All things is in a readiness, when they come hither:
The king's grace and the Queen both together.
I beseech ye my masters tell me is it not best:
That I be so bold to bid a gest?
He is as honest a man as ever spurred Cow:
My Cousin cutpurse I mean, I beseech ye judge you:
Believe me Cousin if to be the King's gest, ye could be taken:
I trust that offer would not be forsaken.
But Cousin because to that office ye are not like to come:
Frequent your exersises, a horn on your Thumb.
A quick eye, a sharp knife, at hand a receiver:
But then take heed Cousin ye be a cleanly convayour.
Content yourself Cousin, for this banquet you are unfit:
When such as I at the same am not worthy to sit.
My Queen and Lords to take repast, let us attempt the same
Here is the place delay no time, but to our purpose frame.
With willing hearts your whole behest, we mind for to obey:
And we the rest of Prince's train, will do as you do say.
Me think mine ears doth wish the sound, of musics harmony:
Here for to play before my grace, in place I would them spy:
They be at hand Sir with stick and fiddle:
They can play a new dance called hay diddle diddle.
By Queen parpend what I pronounce I will not violate:
But one thing which my heart makes glad. I mind to explicate
You know in Court by trained is, a Lion very young:
Of on litter two whelps beside, as yet not very strong.
I did request one whelp to see, and this young Lion fight:
But Lion did the whelp convince, by strength of force a might.
His brother whelp perceiving that the Lion was to good:
And he by force was like to see, the other whelp his blood.
With force to Lion he did run, his brother for to help:
A wonder great it was to see that friendship in a whelp.
So then the the whelps between them both the Lion did convince
Which thing to see before mine eyes, did glad that heart of Prince.
These words to hear makes stilling tears, issue from Crystal eyes
What dost thou mean my spouse to weep, for loss of any prize
Not, not (O King) but as you see, friendship in brother's whelp:
When one was like to have repulse, the other yielded help.
And was this favour showed in dogs to shame of royal king:
Alack I wish these ears of mine, had not once heard this thing
Even so should you (O mighty King) to brother been a stay:
And not without offence to you, in such wise him to slay.
In all assays it was your part, his cause to have defended:
And who so ever had him misused, to have them reprehended.
But faithful love was more in Dog, than it was in your grace:
O cursed caitiff vicious vile, I hate thee in this place.
This banquet it is an end, take all these things away:
Before my face thou shalt repent, the words that thou dost say
O wretch most vile, didst thou the cause of brother mine so tender:
The loss of him should grieve thy heart, he being none offender
It did me good his death to have, so will it to have thine:
What friendship he had at my hands, the same even that shalt find
I give consent and make a vow, that thou shalt die the death:
By Cruels sword & Murder fell, even thou shalt die the breath.
Ambidexter, see with speed, to Cruelty ye go:
'Cause him hither to approach, Murder with him also.
I ready am for to fulfil, if that it be your graces wil.
Then naught oblight my message given, absent thyself away:
Then in this place, I will no longer stay:
If that I durst, I would mourn your case:
But alas, I dare not for fear of his grace.
Thou cursed jil, by all the Gods, I take an oath and sweet:
that flesh of thine these hands of mine, in pieces small could tere.
But thou shalt die by dent of sword, there is no friend ne f ee:
Shall find remorse at Prince's hand, to save the life of thee.
O mightle King & husband mine, vouchsafe to here me speak:
And licence give to spouse of thine, her patiented mind to break.
For tender love unto your grace, my words I did so frame:
For pure love doth heart of king, me violate and blame.
And to your grace is this offence, that I should purchase death:
Then cursed time that I was Queen, to shorten this my breath.
your grace doth know by marriage true, I am your wife & spouse
And one to save another's health (at troth plight) made our vows
Therefore O king let loving Queen, at thy hand find remorse
Let pity be a mean to quench, that cruel raging force.
And pardon plight from prince's mouth, yield grace unto your queen:
That amity with faithful zeal, may ever be us between.
A caitiff vile to pity thee, my heart it is not bend:
Ne yet to pardon your offence, it is not mine intent.
Our mighty prince with humbe suit of your grace this I crave:
That this request it may take place, your favour for to have.
Let mercy yet abundantly the life of Queen preserve:
Sigh she in most obedient wise, your graces will doth serve.
As yet your grace but while with her, hath had cohabitation:
And sure this is no desert why, to yield her indignation.
Therefore (O King) her life prolong, to joy her days in bliss:
Your grace shall win immortal fame, in granting unto this.
She is a Queen whose goodly hue, excels the royal Rose:
For beauty bright dame nature she, a large gift did dipose.
For comeliness who may compare? of all she bears the bet:
This should give cause to move your grace, to love her very well.
Her silver breast in those your arms, to sing the songs of love:
Fine qualities most excellent to be in her you prove.
A precious pearl of prize to Prince, a jewel passing all:
Therefore (O king to beg remorse on both my knees I fall.
To grant her grace to have her life, with heart I do desire:
You villains twain, with raging force, ye set my heart on fire.
If I consent that she shall die, how dare ye crave her life?
You two to ask this at my hand, doth much enlarge my strife.
Were it not for shame you two should die, that for her life do sue
But favour mine from you is gone, my Lords Itel you true.
I sent for Cruelty of late, if he would come away:
I would commit her to his hands, his cruel part to play.
Even now I see where he doth come, it doth my heart delight:
Come Murder, come, let us go forth with might.
Once again the King's commandment we must fulfil
I am contented to do it with a good wil.
Murder and Cruelty, for both of you I sent:
With all festination, your offices to frequent.
Lay hold on the Queen, take her to your power:
And make her away with in this hour.
Spare for no fear I do you full permit:
So I from this place, do mean for to flit.
With courageous hearts (O King) we will obey:
Then come my Lords let us depart away.
With heavy hearts we will do all, your grace doth say,
Come Lady and Queen now are you in our haudling:
In faith with you we will use no dandling.
With all expedition, I Murder will take place:
Though thou be a Queen, ye be under my grace.
With patience I will you both obey:
Not more words but go with us away.
Yet before I die some Psalm to God let me sing:
We be content to permit you that thing.
Farewell you Ladies of the Court, with all your masking hue:
I do forsake these broidered guards, and all the fashions new.
The Court and all the courtly train, wherein I had delight:
I banished am from happy sport and all by spiteful spite.
Yet with a joyful heart to God a Psalm I mean to sing:
Forgiving all & the king, of each kind of thing.
A, A, A. A, I cannot choose but weep for the Queen:
Nothing but mourning now at the Court there is seen.
O, o, my heart, my heart, O my bum will break:
Very grief so torments me that scarce I can speak.
Who could but weep for the loss of such a Lady?
That can not I do, I swear by mine honesty.
But Lord so the Ladies mourn crying a lack:
Nothing is worn now but only black.
I believe all cloth in walling street, to make gowns would not serve
If I make a lie, the Devil let ye starve.
All Ladies mourn both young and old:
There is not one that weareth a points worth of Gold
There is a sort for fear, for the King do pray:
That would have him dead, by the mass I dare say.
What a King was he that hath used such tyranny?
He was a kin to Bishop Bonner, I think verily,
For both their delights was to shed blood:
But never intended to do any good.
Cambyses put a judge to death, that was a good deed:
But to kill the young Child was worse to proceed.
To murder his Brother, and then his own wife:
So help me God and holidom, it is pity of his life
Hear ye? I will lay twenty thousand pound:
That the king himself doth die by some wound.
He hath shed so much blood that his will be shed:
If it come so to pass infaith then he is sped.
Out alas what shall I do? my life is finished.
Wounded I am by sudden chance, my blood is m●nished.
Gog's heart what means might I make, my life to preserve?
Is there naught to be my help: nor is their naught to serve?
Out upon the Court, and Lords that there remain:
To help my grief in this my case, will none of them take pain?
Who but I in such a wise his death's wound could have got:
As I on horse back up did leap, my sword from scabbard shot.
And ran me thus into the side, as you right well may see:
A marvels chance unfortunate, that in this wise should be.
I feel myself a dying now, of life bereft am I:
And death hath caught me with his dart, for want of blood I spy.
Thus gasping here on ground I lie, for nothing I do care:
A just rewad for my misdeeds, my death doth plain declare.
How now noble King? pluck up your heart:
What will you die, and from us depart?
Speak to me, and you be alive:
He cannot speak, but behold how with death he doth strive.
Alas good King, alas he is gone,
The Devil take me, if for him I make any moan.
I did prognosticate of his end by the Masss:
Like as I did say so is it come to pass.
I will be gone, if I should be found here:
That I should kill him it would appear.
For fear with his death they do me charge:
Farewell my masters I will go take barge.
I mean to be packing now is the tide:
Farewell my masters I will no longer abide.
Behold my Lords it is even so, as he to us did tell:
His grace is dead upon the ground, by dent of sword most fel.
As he in saddle would have leapt, his sword from sheath did go:
Coring him up into the side, his life was ended so.
His blood so fast did issue out, that naught could him prolong:
Yet before he yielded up the ghost, his heart was very strong.
A just reward for his misdeeds, the God above hath wrought:
For certainly the life he led, was to be counted naught.
Yet a princely burial he shall have, according his estate:
And more of him here at this time, we have not to dilate.
My Lord let us take him up, to carry him away.
Content we are with one accord, to do as you do say.
RIght gentle Andience, here have you perused,
The tragical History of this wicked king:
According to our duty we have not refused,
But to our best intent expressed every thing.
We trust none is offended for this our doing,
Our Author craves likewise if he have squared amiss:
By gentle admonition to know where the fault is.
His good will shall not be neglected to amend the same,
Praying all to bear therefore with his simyte deed:
Until the time serve a ●●tter he may frame,
Thus yielding you 〈◊〉 to end we decreed.
That you so gently 〈◊〉 ●●●red us to proceed,
In such patient 〈◊〉 as to hear and see:
We can but thank ye therefore, we can do no more
As duty binds us for our noble Queen let us pray,
And for her honorable Councel the trueth yt they may b
To practise justice and defend her grace each day,
To maintain God's word they may not refuse.
To correct all those, that would her grace & grace's laws abuse,
Beseeching God over us, she may reign long:
To be guided by truth and defended from wrong.