Was I a Lion! that am now afraid!
I fear no danger; nor I fear no Death;
But to be Retransformed, into a Beast:
Which while I was, although I must confess,
I was the Bravest: What could she do less,
That saw me Subject, to no base desire:
Yet was there in me, a Promethean fire,
That made me covet to be man again,
Governed by Reason, and not ruled by Sense.
Therefore I shun this place of Residence,
And fly to Virtue: in whose awful sight,
She dares not come, but in a Mask, and crouch,
As low as I did, for my liberty.
Her Bower is pleasant, and her Palace Rich;
Her Fare Delicious; and her Language fine;
But shall the Soul, the Minion of the Gods,
Stoop to her Vassals? Or stand by and starve,
While they sit swelling, in her Chair of State?
'tis not her Rod, her Philters, nor her Herbs,
(Though strong in Magic) that can bound men's minds;
And make them Prisoners, where there is no wall.
It is consent that makes a perfect Slave:
And Sloth that binds us to Lusts easy Trades,
Wherein we serve out our youth's Prenticeship,
Thinking at last, Love should enfranchize us,
Whom we have never, either served or known:
He finds no help, that uses not his own.
Dissembling Traitor, now I see the cause,
Of all thy fawning, was but to be free:
'twas not for nothing, thou hadst teeth and claws,
For thou hast made a cruel prey of me.
Ingratitude is apt, to slink away,
And shun that bounty which it cannot pay.
And he is gone (ay me) is stolen from hence,
And this poor Casket of my breast, hath left
Without a Heart: that should for recompense,
Have locked in two: O most inhuman theft!
Send not your sighs, after a fickle mind,
That Sails the faster for such Gales of wind.
Then take my keys! and show me all my wealth.
Lead me abroad! Let me my subjects view!
Bring me some Physic! though that bring no health!
And feign me pleasures, since I find none true.
Ye willing servants! And ye Souls confined
To several shapes, by powerful Herbs and Art,
Appear, transformed each in your several kind,
And strive to temper the distempered Heart,
Of sullen Circe, stung with Cupid's dart.
Not as myself, but as the brightest Star,
That shines in Heaven, come to Reign this day.
And these the Beams and Influences are
Of Constellations, whose Planetic sway,
Though some foresee, all must alike obey.
Such a Conjunction, of auspicious lights,
Meet but in Honour, of some Regal rights.
Ladies! lend us your ears.
And let no lover's sigh be heard!
Or Suit, (though just) be now preferred
A consort of the Spheres,
Admits no whisper, nor no sound,
But what is descant, to their ground:
Nor can we hold ye long,
For there are Stars to rise,
That far above, our song
Are Music to all eyes.
If any Beauty here,
In her own glass appear
Or lover's eye, most clear?
Looking but up, she may with small ado
Perceive that flatters, and her servant too.
When Divine Beauty, will vouchsafe to stoop,
And move to Earth: 'tis fit the Heavenly Spheres,
Should be her Music: And the Starry Troop,
Shine round about her, like the Crown she wears.
No mortal Breast,
Can entertain:
So great a Guest,
And such a Train.
I cannot blame ye if ye gaze,
And give small ear to what I say:
For such a presence will amaze,
And send the Senses all one way.
The Music that ye hear, is dull,
But that ye see, is sweet indeed:
In every Part exact, and full,
From whence there doth an Air proceed,
On which th' Intelligences feed,
Where fair and good, inseparably conjoined,
Create a Cupid, that is never blind.
How rich is earth? and poor the skies?
Deprived of heavenly Beauty's eyes?
Whose Image men adore.
Heroic Virtue, is that kind
Of Beauty, that attracts the mind,
And men should most implore.
Ianus was happy that could see,
Two ways at once: And happier he
That round about him kept
Watches, that never slept.
But we most happy, that behold,
Two that have turned this Age to Gold,
Making old Satur's Reign,
In theirs, come back again.
And since more, th'object, then the sight,
Makes every seer Blessed;
How are we ravished with delight,
That see the best.
It is but justice, to torment a heart,
That tortured thousands: And my gentle reign,
So wronged with acting of a tyrant's part,
I must Restrain,
My power abused; And right my injured Train.
Thou claimest her Subjects: And I claim the Soil,
As Sovereign Lord: The Hecatombs she brings,
Though great Oblations, yet deduced from Spoil,
Are sordid Things:
And sent of Earth: Virtue pure Incense brings.
The Gods, more freedom did allow,
when Ioue turned Io to a Cow.
Are mortal Creatures, grown so proud
To tax the Sky, for every Cloud:
man-maid, be gone!
Though I could turn thee, to a Stone
I'll beg thy peace:
Dear Daughter cease!
Cease Dreadful Ioue! Finding thy Drift,
My Bounty, shall prevent thy Gift:
This Matchless Pair,
I make, my Heir:
All I possess, I here, Resign,
Thou hast thy And I have Mine.
she gives but what she can not keep.
Then was the wound I gave her deep.
'twas I whose power none can withstand,
That opened both her heart, and hand.
How would they mourn, to lose ye quite!
That are so loath, to say, Goodnight.
Yet we may plead, in our Excuse,
Should you, these Loans of Love forsake
The Gods themselves, such Sums would take
And pay us, use.