THe DEVIL is an Ass. That is, to day,
The name of what you are met for, a new Play.
Yet, Grandees, would you were not come to grace
Our matter, with allowing us no place.
Though you presume SATAN a subtle thing,
And may have heard he's worn in a thumb-ring;
Do not on these presumptions, force us act,
In compass of a cheese-trencher. This tract
Will ne'er admit our vice, because of yours.
Anon, who, worse than you, the fault endures
That yourselves make? when you will thrust and spurn,
And knock us o'the elbows, and bid, turn;
As if, when we had spoke, we must be gone,
Or, till we speak, must all run in, to one,
Like the young adders, at the old ones mouth?
Would we could stand due North; or had no South,
If that offend: or were Muscovy glass,
That you might look our Scenes through as they pass.
We know not how to affect you. If you'll come
To see new Plays, pray you afford us room,
And show this, but the same face you have done
Your dear delight, the Devil of Edmonton.
Or, if, for want of room it must miscarry,
'Twill be but justice, that your censure tarry,
Till you give some. And when six times you ha' seen't,
If this Play do not like, the Devil is in't.
HOh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, etc.
To earth? and, why to earth, thou fooolish Spirit?
What wouldst thou do on earth?
For that, great Chief!
As time shall work. I do but ask my month.
Which every petty puny Devil has;
Within that term, the Court of Hell will hear
Some thing, may gain a longer grant, perhaps.
For what? the laming a poor Cow, or two?
Entering a Sow, to make her cast her farrow?
Or crossing of a Mercat-womans' Mare,
Twixt this, and Totnam? these were want to be
Your main achievements, Pug, You have some plot, now,
Upon a tonning of Ale, to stolen the yeast,
Or keep the churn so, that the buttter come not;
Spite o'the housewives cord, or her hot spit?
Or some good Rib, about Kentish Town,
Or Hogsden, you would hung now, for a witch,
Because she will not let you play round Robin:
And you'll go sour the Citizen's Cream 'gainst Sunday?
That she may be accused for't, and condemned,
By a Middlesex jury, to the satisfaction
Of their offended friends, the Londoners wives
Whose teeth were set on edge with it? Foolish fiend,
Stay ● ' your place, know your own strengths, and put not
Beyond the sphere of your activity.
You are too dull a Devil to be trusted
Forth in those parts, Pug, upon any affair
That may concern our name, on earth. It is not
Every one's work. The state of Hell must care
Whom it employs, in point of reputation,
Hear about London. You would make, I think
An Agent, to be sent, for Lancashire,
Proper enough; or some parts of Northumberland,
So ye had good instructions, Pug.
O Chief!
You do not know, dear Chief, what there is in me.
Prove me but for a fortnight, for a week,
And lend me but a Vice, to carry with me,
To practise therewith any playfellow,
And, you will see, there will come more upon't,
Than you'll imagine, precious Chief.
What Vice?
What kind wouldst th'haue it of?
Why, any Frand;
Or Covetousness; or Lady Vanity;
Or old Iniquity: I'll call him hither.
What is he, calls upon me, and would seem to lack a Vice?
E'er his words be half spoken, I am with him in a trice;
Here, there, and every where, as the Cat is with the mice:
True vetus Iniquitas. Lackest thou Cards, friend, or Dices?
I will teach thee cheat, Child, to cog, lie, and swagger,
And ever and anon, to be drawing forth thy dagger:
To swear by Gogs-nownes, like a lusty Iwentus,
In a cloak to thy heel, and a hat like a penthouse.
Thy breeches of three fingers, and thy doublet all belly,
With a Wench that shall feed thee, with cock-stones and jelly.
Is it not excellent, Chief? how nimble he is!
Child of hell, this is nothing! I will fetch thee a leap
From the top of Paul's-steeple, to the Standard in Cheap:
And lead thee a dance, through the streets without fail,
Like a needle of Spain, with a thread at my tail.
We will survey the Suburbs, and make forth our sallies,
Down Petticoat-lane, and up the Smock-alleys,
To Shoreditch, Whitechapel, and so to Saint Katherine's.
To drink with the Dutch there, and take forth their patterns:
From thence, we will put in at Customhouse key there,
And see, how the Factors, and Prentices play there,
False with their Masters; and geld many a full pack,
To spend it in pies, at the Dagger, and the Woolsacke.
Brave, brave, Iniquity! will not this do, Chief?
Nay, boy, I will bring thee to the Bawds, and the Roisters,
At Belins-gate, feasting with claret-wine, and oysters,
From thence shoot the Bridge, child, to the Cranes i'the Vintry,
And see, there the gimlets, how they make their entry▪
Or, if thou hadst rather, to the Strand down to fall,
'Gainst the Lawyers come dabbled from Westminster-hall
And mark how they cling, with their clients together,
Like ivy to Oak; so Velvet to Leather:
Ha', boy, I would show thee.
Rare, rare!
Peace, dotard,
And thou more ignorant thing, that so admirest.
Art thou the spirit thou seem'st? so poor? to choose
This, for a Vice, t'advance the cause of Hell,
Now? as Vice stands this present year? Remember,
What number it is. Six hundred and sixteen.
Had it but been five hundred, though some sixty
Above; that's fifty years ago, and six,
(When every great man had his Vice stand by him,
In his long coat, shaking his wooden dagger)
I could consent, that, than this your grave choice
Might have done that, with his Lord Chief, the which
Most of his chamber can do now. But Pug,
As the times are, who is it, will receive you?
What company will you go to? or whom mix with?
Where canst thou carry him? except to Taverns?
To mount up ona joint-stool, with a jewes-trumpe,
To put down Cokeley, and that must be to Citizens?
He ne'er will be admitted, there, where Vennor comes.
He may perchance, in tail of a Sheriff's dinner,
Skip with a rhyme o'the Table, from New-nothing,
And take his Almain-leap into a custard,
Shall make my Lad Majoress, and her sisters,
Laugh all their hoods over their shoulders. But,
This is not that will do, they are other things
That are received now upon earth, for Vices;
Stranger, and newer: and changed every hour.
They ride 'em like their horses of their legs,
And here they come to Hell, whole legions of 'em,
Every week tired. We, still strive to breed,
And rear 'em up new ones; but they do not stand,
When they come there: they turn 'em on our hands.
And it is feared they have a stud.their own
Will put down ours. Both our breed, and trade
Will suddenly decay, if we prevent not.
Unless it be a Vice of quality,
Or fashion, now, they take none from us. Carmen
Are got into the yellow starch, and Chimney-sweepers
To their tobacco, and strong-waters, Hum,
Meath, and Obarni. We must therefore aim
At extraordinary subtle ones, now,
When we do sand to keep us up in credit.
Not old Iniquities. Get you e'en back, Sir,
To making of your rope of sand again.
You are not for the manners, nor the times:
They have their Vices, there, most like to Virtues;
You cannot know 'em, apart, by any difference:
They wear the same clothes, eat the same meat,
Sleep i' the selfsame beds, ride i' those coaches.
Or very like, four horses in a coach,
As the best men and women. Tissue gowns,
Garters and roses, fourscore pound a pair,
Embroidered stockings, cutwork smocks, and shirts,
Moore certain marks of lechery, now, and pride,
Than ere they were of true nobility!
But Pug, since you do burn with such desire
To do the Commonwealth of Hell some service;
I am content, assuming of a body,
You go to earth, and visit men, a day.
But you must take a body ready made, Pug,
I can created you none: nor shall you form
Yourself an airy one, but become subject
To all impression of the flesh, you take,
So far as human frailty. So, this morning,
There is a handsome Cutpurse hanged at Tyburn,
Whose spirit departed, you may enter his body:
For clothes employ your credit, with the Hangman,
Or let our tribe of Brokers furnish you.
And, look, how far your subtlety can work
Thorough those organs, with that body, spy
Amongst mankind, (you cannot there want vices,
And therefore the less need to carry 'em wi'you)
But as you make your soon at night's relation,
And we shall found, it merits from the State,
You shall have both trust from us, and employment.
Most gracious Chief!
Only, thus more I bind you,
To serve the first man that you meet; and him
I'll show you, now: Observe him. Yon is he,
You shall see, first, after your clothing. Fellow him:
But once engaged, there you must stay and fix;
Not shift, until the midnight's cock do crow.
Any conditions to be gone.
Away, than.
I, they do, now, name Bretnor, as before,
They talked of Gresham, and of Doctor Foreman,
Franklin, and Fiske, and Savoury (he was in too)
But there's not one of these, that ever could
Yet show a man the Devil, in true sort.
They have their crystals, I do know, and rings,
And virgin parchment, and their dead-men's sculls
Their ravens wings, their lights, and pentacles,
With characters; I ha' seen all these. But—
Would I might see the Devil. I would give
A hundred o' these pictures, to see him
Once out of picture. May I prove a cuckold,
(And that's the one main mortal thing I fear)
If I begin not, now, to think, the Painters
Have only made him. 'Slight, he would be seen,
One time or other else. He would not let
An ancient gentleman, of a good house,
As most are now in England, the Fitz-dottrels,
Run wild, and call upon him thus in vain,
As I ha' done this twelve mone'th. If he be not,
At all, why, are there Conjurers? If they be not,
Why, are there laws against 'hem? The best artists
Of Cambridge, Oxford, Middlesex, and London,
Essex, and Kent, I have had in pay to raise him,
These fifty weeks, and yet h'appears not. 'S death,
I shall suspect, they, can make circles only
Shortly, and know but his hard names. They do say,
HE will meet a man (of himself) that has a mind to him.
If he would so, I have a mind and a half for him:
He should not be long absent. Pray thee, come
I long for thee. An I were with child by him,
And my wife, too; I could not more. Come, yet,
Good Beelzeebub. Were he a kind devil,
And had humanity in him, he would come, but
To save one's longing. I should use him well,
I swear, and with respect (would he would try me)
Not, as the Conjurers do, when they ha' raised him.
Get him in bonds, and sand him post, on errands.
A thousand miles, it is preposterous, that:
And I believe, is the true cause becomes not.
And he has reason. Who would be engaged,
That might live freely, as he may do? I swear,
They are wrong all. The burnt child dreads the fire.
They do not know to entertain the Devil.
I would so welcome him, observe his diet,
Get him his chamber hung with arras, two of 'em,
I' my own house; lend him my wives wrought pillows:
And as I am an honest man, I think,
If he had a mind to her, too; I should grant him,
To make our friendship perfect. So I would nor
To every man. If he but hear me, now?
And should come to me in a brave young shape,
And take me at my word? ha'! Who is this?
SIR, your good pardon, that I thus presume
Upon your privacy. I am borne a Gentleman,
A younger brother; but, in some disgrace,
Now, with my friends: and want some little means,
To keep me upright, while things be reconciled.
Please you, to let my service be of use to you, Sir.
Service? 'fore hell, my heart was at my mouth,
Till I had viewed his shoes well: for, those roses
Were big enough to hid a cloven foot.
Not, friend, my number's full. I have one servant,
Who is my all, indeed; and, from the broom
Unto the brush: for, just so far, I trust him.
He is my Wardrobe man, my Cater, Cook,
Butler, and Steward; looks unto my horse:
And helps to watch my wife. HE has all the places,
That I can think on, from the garret downward,
Even to the manger, and the currycomb.
Sir, I shall put your worship to no charge,
Moore than my meat, and that but very little,
I'll serve you for your love.
Ha'? without wages?
I'll hearken o' that ear, were I at leisure.
But now, I'm busy.' Pray the, friend forbear me,
And ' thou hadst been a Devil, I should say
Somewhat more to thee. Thou dost hinder, now,
My meditations.
Sir, I am a Devil.
How!
A true Devil, Sr.
Nay, now, you lie:
Under your favour, friend, for, I'll not quarrel.
I looked o' your feet, afore, you cannot cousin me,
Your shoo's not cloven, Sir, you are whole hoofed.
Sir, that's a popular error, deceives many:
But I am that, I tell you.
What's your name?
My name is Devil, Sr.
Sayst thou true.
Indeed, Sr.
'Slid! there's some omen i' this! what countryman?
Of Derbyshire, Sr. about the Peake.
That Hole
Belonged to your Ancestors?
Yes, Devil's arse, Sr.
I'll entertain him for the name sake. Ha'?
And turn away my t'other man? and save
Four pound a year by that? there's luck, and thrift too!
The very Devil may come, hereafter, as well.
Friend, I receive you: but (withal) I acquaint you,
Aforehand, if ye offend me, I must beaten you.
It is a kind of exercise, I use.
And cannot be without.
Yes, if I do not
Offend, you can, sure.
Faith, Devil, very hardly:
I'll call you by your surname, 'cause I love it.
YOnder he walks, Sir, I'll go lift him for you.
To him, good Engine, raise him up by degrees,
Gently, and hold him there too, you can do it.
Show yourself now, a Mathematical broker.
I'll warrant you for half a piece.
'Tis done, Sr.
Is't possible there should be such a man?
You shall be your own witness, I'll not labour
To tempt you passed your faith.
And is his wife
So very handsome, say you?
I ha' not seen her,
Since I came home from travel: and they say,
She is not altered. Than, before I went,
I saw her once; but so, as she hath stuck
Still i' my view, no object hath removed her.
'Tis a fair guest, Friend, beauty: and once lodged
Deep in the eyes, she hardly leaves the Inn.
How does he keep her?
Very brave. However,
Himself be sordid, he is sensual that way.
In every dressing, he does study her.
And furnish forth himself so from the Brokers?
Yes, that's a hired suit, he now has one,
To see the Devil is an Ass, to day, in▪
(This Engine gets three or four pound a week by him)
He dares not miss a new Play, or a Feast,
What rate soever clothes be at; and thinks
Himself still new, in other men's old.
But stay,
Does he love meat so?
Faith he does not hate it.
But that's not it. His belly and his palate
Would be compounded with for reason Mary,
A wit he has, of that strange credit with him,
'Gainst all mankind; as it doth make him do
Just what it list: it ravishes him forth,
Wither it please, to any assembly or place,
And would conclude him ruined, should he scape
One public meeting, out of the belief
He has of his own great, and Catholic strengths,
In arguing, and discourse. It takes, I see:
HE has got the cloak upon him.
A fair garment,
By my faith, Ingine!
It was never made, Sir,
For three score pound, I assure you: IT will yield thirty.
The plush, Sir, cost three pound, ten shillings a yard!
And than the lace, and velvet.
I shall, Ingine,
Be looked at, pretitly, in it! Art thou sure
The Play is played to day?
o here's the bill, Sr.
I', had forgot to gi't you.
Ha'? the Devil!
I will not loose you, Sirrah! But, Ingine, think you,
The Gallant is so furious in his folly?
So mad upon the matter, that he'll part
With's cloak vpo' these terms?
Trust not your Engine,
Break me to pieces else, as you would do
A rotten Crane, or an old rusty Iacke,
That has not one true wheel in him. Do but talk with him.
I shall do that, to satisfy you, Ingine,
And myself too. With your leave, Gentlemen.
Which of you is it, is so mere Idolater
To my wife's beauty, and so very prodigal
Unto my patience, that, for the short parley?
Of one swift hours quarter, with my wife,
He will departed with (let me see) this cloak here
The price of folly? Sir, are you the man?
I am that venturer, Sir.
Good time! your name
Is Wittipol?
The same, Sr.
And 'tis told me,
Ye have travelled lately?
That I have, Sr.
Truly,
Your travels may have altered your complexion;
But sure, your wit stood still.
It may well be, Sir.
All heads ha' not like growth.
The good man's gravity,
That left you land, your father, never taught you
These pleasant matches?
Not, nor can his mirth,
With whom I make 'em, put me of.
You are
Resolved than?
Yes, Sr.
Beauty is the Saint,
You'll sacrifice yourself, into the shirt too?
So I may still cloth, and keep warm your wisdom?
You lad me Sr!
I know what you will bear, Sr.
Well, to the point. 'Tis only, Sir, you say,
To speak unto my wife?
Only, to speak to her.
And in my presence?
In your very presence.
And in my hearing?
In your hearing: so,
You interrupt us not.
For the short space
You do demand, the fourth part of an hour,
I think I shall, with some convenient study,
And this good help to boot, bring myself to't.
I ask no more.
Please you, walk toward my house,
Speak what you list; that time is yours: My right
I have departed with. But, not beyond,
A minute, or a second, look for. Length,
And drawing out, ma'aduance much, to these matches.
And I except all kissing. Kisses are
Silent petitions still with willing Lovers.
Lovers? How falls that o'your fancy?
Sir.
I do know somewhat, I forbidden all lipwork.
I am not eager at forbidden dainties.
Who covets unfit things, denies himself.
You say well, Sir, 'Twas prettily said, that same,
He does, indeed. I'll have no touches, therefore,
Nor take by the arms, nor tender circles
Cast 'bout the waist, but all be done at distance.
Love is brought up with those soft miniard handle;
His pulse lies in his palm: and I defend
All melting joints, and fingers, (that's my bargain)
I do defend 'em; any thing like action.
But talk, Sir, what you william. Use all the Tropes
And Schemes, that Prince Quintilian can afford you:
And much good do your Rhetoric's heart. You are welcome, Sir.
Ingine, God b' w' you.
Sir, I must condition
To have this Gentleman by, a witness.
Well,
I am content, so he be silent.
Yes, Sir.
Come Devil, I'll make you room, straight. But I'll show you
First, to your Mistress, who's not common one,
You must conceive, that brings this gain to see her.
I hope thou'st brought me good luck.
I shall do't. Sir.
Engine, you hope o'your half piece? 'Tis there, Sir.
Be gone. Friend Manly, who's within here? fixed?
I am directly in a fit of wonder
what'll be the issue of this conference!
For that, ne'er vex yourself, till the event.
How like ye him?
I would feign see more of him.
What think you of this?
I am past degrees of thinking.
Old Africk, and the new America,
With all their fruit of Monsters cannot show
So just a prodigy.
Can you have believed,
Without your sight, a mind so sordid inward,
Should be so specious, and laid forth abroad,
To all the show, that ever shop, or ware was?
I believe any thing now, though I confess
His Vices are the most extremities
I ever knew in nature. But, why loves he
The Devil so?
O Sr! for hidden treasure,
He hopes to find: and has proposed himself
So infinite a Mass, as to recover,
He cares not what he parts with, of the present,
To his men of Art, who are the race, may coin him.
Promise' gold mountains, and the covetous
Are still most prodigal.
But ha' you faith,
That he will hold his bargain?
O dear, Sir!
He will not of on't. Fear him not. I know him.
One baseness still accompanies another.
See! he is here already, and his wife too.
A wondrous handsome creature, as I live!
COme wife, this is the Gentleman. Nay, blush not.
Why, what do you mean Sir? ha you your reason?
Wife,
I do not know, that I have lent it forth
To any one; at lest, without a pawn, wife:
Or that I'have eat or drunk the thing, of late,
That should corrupt it. Wherhfore gentle wife,
Obey, it is thy virtue: hold no acts
Of disputation.
Are you not enough
The talk, of feasts, and meetingy, but you'll still
Make argument for fresh?
Why, careful wedlock,
If I have have a longing to have one tale more
Go of me, what is that to thee, dear heart?
Why shouldst thou envy my delight? or cross it?
By being solicitous, when it not concerns thee?
Yes, I have share in this The scorn will fall
As bittterly on me, where both are laughed at.
Laughed at, sweet bird? is that the scruple? Come, come,
Thou art a Niaise. Which of your great houses,
(I will not mean at home, here, but abroad)
Your families in France, wife, sand not forth
Something, within the seven year, may be laughed at?
I do not say seven months, nor seven weeks,
Nor seven days, nor hours: but seven year wife.
I give 'em time. Once, within seven year,
I think they may do something may be laughed at.
In France, I keep me there, still. Wherhfore, wife,
Let them that list, laugh still, rather than weep
For me; Hear is a cloak cost fifty pound, wife,
Which I can cell for thirty, when I ha' seen
All London in't, and London has seen me.
To day, I go to the Black friar's Playhouse,
Sat it he view, salute all my acquaintance,
Rise up between the Acts, let fall my cloak,
Publish a handsome man, and a rich suit
(As that's a special end, why we go thither,
All that pretend, to stand for it o'the Stage)
The Ladies ask who's that? (For, they do come
To see us, Love, as we do to see them)
Now, I shall loose all this, for the false fear
Of being laughed at? Yes, wiss. Let 'em laugh, wife,
Let me have such another cloak to morrow.
And let 'em laugh again, wife, and again,
And than grow fat with laughing, and than fatter,
All my young Gallants, let 'em bring their friends too:
Shall I forbidden 'hem? Not, let heaven forbidden 'em:
Or wit, if't have any charge on 'hem. Come, thy ear, wife,
Is all, I'll borrow of thee. Set your watch, Sir,
Thou, only art to hear, not speak a word, Dove,
To aught he says. That I do give you in precept,
Not less than council, on your wifehood, wife,
Not though he flatter you, or make court, or Love,
(As you must look for these) or say, he rail;
What ere his arts be, wife, I will have thee
Delude 'em with a trick, thy obstinate silence;
I know advantages; and I love to hit
These pragmatic young men, at their own weapons.
Is your watch ready? Here my sail bears, for you:
Tack toward him, sweet Pinnace, where's your watch?
I'll set it, Sir, with yours.
I must obey.
Her modesty seems to suffer with her beauty,
And so, as if his folly were away,
It were worth pity.
Now, th' are right, begin, Sir.
But first, let me repeat the contract, briefly,
I am, Sir, to enjoy this cloak, I stand in,
Freely, and as your gift; upon condition
You may as freely, speak here to my spouse,
Your quarter of an hour always keeping
The measured distance of your yard, or more,
From my said Spouse: and in my sight and hearing.
This is your covenant?
Yes, but you'll allow
For this time spent, now?
Set 'em so much back.
I think, I shall not need it.
Well, begin, Sir,
There is your bound, Sir. Not beyond that rush.
If you interrupt me, Sir, I shall discloak you.
The time I have purchased, Lady, is but short;
And, therefore, if I employ it thriftily,
I hope I stand the nearer to my pardon.
I am not here, to tell you, you are fair,
Or lovely, or how well you dress you, Lady,
I'll save myself that eloquence of your glass,
Which can speak these things better to you than I.
And 'tis a knowledge, wherein fools may be
As wise as a Court Parliament. Nor come I,
With any prejudice, or doubt, that you
Should, to the notice of your own worth, need
Lest revelation. she's a simple woman,
Knows not her good: (who ever knows her ill)
And at all characts. That you are the wife,
To so much blasted flesh, as scarce hath soul,
In stead of salt, to keep it sweet; I think,
Will ask no witnesses, to prove. The cold
Sheets that you lie in, with the watching candle,
That sees, how dull to any thaw of beauty,
Pieces, and quarters, half, and whole nights, sometimes,
The Devil-given Elfin Squire, your husband,
Doth leave you, quitting here his proper circle,
For a much-worse i' the walks of Lincoln's Inn,
Under the Elms, t' expect the fiend in vain, there
Will confess for you.
I did look for this gear.
And what a daughter of darkness, he does make you,
Locked up from all society, or object;
Your eye not let to look upon a face,
Under a Conjurers (or some mould for one,
Hollow, and lean like his) but, by great means,
As I now make; your own too sensible sufferings,
Without the extraordinary aids,
Of spells, or spirits, may assure you, Lady.
For my part, I protest 'gainst all such practice,
I work by no false arts, medicines, or charms
To be said forward and backward.
Not, I except:
Sir I shall ease you.
Mum.
Nor have I ends, Lady,
Upon you, more than this: to tell you how Love
Beauties good Angel, he that waits upon her
At all occasions, and no less than Fortune,
Helps th' adventurous, in me makes that proffer,
Which never fair one was so fond, to loose;
Who could but reach a hand forth to her freedom;
On the first sight, I loved you: since which time,
Though I have travelled, I have been in travel
Moore for this second blessing of your eyes
Which now I have purchased, than for all aims else.
Think of it, Lady, be your mind as active,
As is your beauty: view your object well.
Examine both my fashion, and my years
Things, that are like, are soon familiar:
And Nature joys, still in equality.
Let not the sign o' the husband fright you, Lady.
But ere your spring be gone, enjoy it. Flowers,
Though fair, are often but of one morning. Think,
All beauty doth not last until the autumn.
You grow old, while I tell you this. And such,
As cannot use the present, are not wise.
If Love and Fortune will take care of us,
Why ● should our will be wanting? This is all.
What do you answer, Lady?
Now, the sport comes.
Let him still wait, waite, waite: while the watch goes,
And the time runs. Wife!
How! not any word?
Nay, than, I taste a trick in't. Worthy Lady,
I cannot be so false to mine own thoughts
Of your presumed goodness, to conceive
This, as your rudeness, which I see's imposed.
Yet, since your cautelous jailor, here stands by you,
And ye are denied the liberty o' the house,
Let me take warrant, Lady, from your silence,
(Which ever is interpreted consent)
To make your answer for you: which shall be
To as good purpose, as I can imagine,
And what I think you'd speak.
Not, no, no, no.
I shall resume, Sr.
Sir, what do you mean?
One interruption more, Sir, and you go
Into your hose and doublet, nothing saves you.
And therefore hearken. This is for your wife.
You must play fair, Sr.
Stand for me, good friend.
Troth, Sir, 'tis more than true, that you have uttered
Of my unequal, and so sordid match here,
With all the circumstances of my bondage.
I have a husband, and a two-legged one,
But such a moonling, as no wit of man
Or roses can redeem from being an Ass.
HE is grown too much, the story of men's mouths
To scape his lading: should I make't my study,
And lay all ways, yea, call mankind to help,
To take his burden of, why, this one act
Of his, to let his wife out to be courted,
And, at a price, proclaims his asinine nature
So loud, as I am weary of my title to him.
But Sir, you seem a Gentleman of virtue,
Not less than blood; and one that every way
Looks as he were of too good quality,
To entrap a credulous woman, or betray her:
Since you have paid thus dear, Sir, for a visit,
And made such venture, on your wit, and charge
Merely to see me, or at most to speak to me,
I were too stupid; or (what's worse) ingrate
Not to return your venture. Think, but how,
I may with safety do it; I shall trust
My love and honour to you, and presume;
You'll ever husband's both, against this husband;
Who, if we chance to change his liberal ears,
To other ensigns, and with labour make
A new beast of him, as he shall deserve,
Cannot complain, he is unkindly dealt with.
This day he is to go to a new play, Sir.
From whence no fear, no, nor authority,
Scarcely the King's command, Sir, will restrain him,
Now you have fitted him with a Stage-garment,
For the mere names sake, were there nothings else,
And many more such journeys, he will make.
Which, if they now, or, any time hereafter,
Offer us opportunity, you hear, Sir,
who'll be as glad, and forward to embrace,
Meet, and enjoy it cheerfully as you.
I humbly thank you, Lady.
Keep your ground Sir.
Will you be lightened?
Mum.
And but I am,
By the sad contract, thus to take my leave of you
At this so envious distance, I had taught
Our lips ere this, to seal the happy mixture
Made of our souls. But we must both, now, yield
To the necessity. Do not think yet, Lady,
But I can kiss, and touch, and laugh, and whisper,
And do those crowning courtships too, for which
Day, and the public have allowed no name
But, now, my bargain binds me. IT were rude injury,
T' importune more, or urge a noble nature,
To what of its own bounty it is prove to:
Else, I should speak— But, Lady, I love so well,
As I will hope, you'll do so to. I have done, Sir.
Well, than, I ha' won?
Sir, And I may win, too.
O yes! no doubt on't. I'll take careful order,
That she shall hung forth ensigns at the window,
To tell you when I am absent. Or I'll keep
Three or four footmen, ready still of purpose,
To run and fetch you at her long, Sir.
I'll go bespeak me strait a guilt caroche,
For her and you to take the air in: yes,
Into Hyde-park, and thence into Blackfriars,
Visit the painters, where you may see pictures,
And note the properest limbs, and how to make 'hem.
Or what do you say unto a middling Gossip?
To bring you ay together, at her lodging?
Under pretext of teaching o' my wife
Some rare receipt of drawing almond milk? ha'?
It shall be a part of my care. Good Sir, God b' w' you.
I ha' kept the contract, and the cloak is mine own.
Why, much good do't you Sr; it may fall out,
That you ha' bought it dear, though I ha' not sold it.
A pretty riddle! Far you well, good Sir.
Wife, your face this way, look on me: and think
Ye have had a wicked dream, wife, and forget it.
This is the strangest motion I ere saw.
Now, wife, sits this fair cloak the worse upon me,
For my great sufferings, or your little patience? ha'?
They laugh, you think?
Why Sr. and you might see it.
What thought, they have of you, may be soon collected
By the young Genlemans' speech.
Young Gentleman?
Death! you are in love with him, are you? could he not
Be named the Gentleman, without the young?
Up to your Cabbin again.
My cage, ye were best
To call it?
Yes, sing there. You'd feign be making
Blank Manger with him at your mothers! I know you.
Go get you up. How now! what say you, Devil?
Here is one Engine, Sir, desires to speak with you.
I thought he brought some news, of a broker! Well,
Let him come in, good Devil: fetch him else.
O, my fine Engine! what's th' affair? more cheats?
No Sir, the Wit, the Brain, the great Projector,
I told you of, is newly come to town.
Where, Engine?
I ha' brought him (HE is without)
E'er he pulled of his boots, Sir, but so followed,
For businesses:
But what is a Projector?
I would conceive.
Why, one Sir, that projects
Ways to enrich men, or to make 'em great,
By suits, by marriages, by undertakings:
According as he sees they humour it.
Can he not conjure at all?
I think he can, Sir.
(To tell you true) but, you do know, of late,
The State hath ta'en such note of 'em, and compelled 'em,
To enter such great bonds, they dare not practice.
'Tis true, and I lie fallow for it, the while!
O, Sir! you'll grow the richer for the rest.
I hope I shall: but Engine, you do talk
Somewhat too much, o' my courses. My Cloak-customer
Can tell me strange particulars.
By my means?
How should he have 'em else?
You do not know, Sr,
What he has: and by what arts! A moneied man, Sir,
And is as great with your Almanack-Men, as you are!
That Gallant?
You make the other wait too long, here:
And he is extreme punctual.
Is he a gallant?
Sir, you shall see: He ' is in his riding suit,
As he comes now from Court. But here him speak:
Minister matter to him, and than tell me.
SIr, money's a whore, a bawd, a drudge;
Fit to run out on errands: Let her go.
Via pecunia! when she's run and gone,
And fled and dead; than will I fetch her, again,
With Aquavitae, out of an old Hogshead!
While there are leeses of wine, or dregss of beer,
I'll never want her! Coin her out of cobwebs,
Dust, but I'll have her! Raise wool upon eggshells,
Sir, and make grass grow out o' marro-bones.
To make her come. (Commend me to your Mistress,
Say, let the thousand pound but be had ready,
And it is done) I would but see the creature
(Of flesh, and blood) the man, the prince, indeed,
That could employ so many millions
As I would help him to.
How, talks he? millions?
(I'll give you an account of this to morrow.)
Yes, I will talk no less, and do it too;
If they were Myriad: and without the Devil,
By direct means, it shall be good in law.
Sir.
Tell Mr. Woodcock, I'll not fail to meet him
Upon th' Exchange at night. Pray him to have
The writings there, and we'll dispatch it: Sir,
You are a Gentleman of a good presence,
A handsome man (I have considered you)
As a fit stock to grafted honours upon:
I have a Project to make you a Duke, now.
That you must be one, within so many months,
As I set down, out of true reason of state,
You sha' not avoid it. But you must hearken, than.
Hearken? why Sr, do you doubt his ears? Alas!
You do not know Master Fitz-dottrel.
He does not know me indeed. I thank you, Ingine,
Fot rectifying him.
Good! Why, Ingine, than
I'll tell it you. (I see you ha' credit, here,
And, that you can keep counsel, I'll not question.)
He shall but be an undertaker with me,
In a most feasible business. It shall cost him
Nothing.
Good, Sr.
Except he please, but's countenance;
(That I will have) t' appear in it, to great men,
For which I'll make him one. He shall not draw
A string of's purse. I'll drive his patent for him.
We'll take in Citizens, Commoners, and Aldermen,
To bear the charge, and blow 'em of again,
Like so many dead flies, when 'tis carried.
The thing is for recovery of drowned Land,
Whereof the Crown's to have a moiety,
If it be owner; Else, the Crown and Owners
To share that moiety: and the recoverers
T' enjoy the t'other moiety, for their charge.
Throughout England?
Yes, which will arise
To eyghteene millions, seven the first year:
I have computed all, and made my survey
Unto an acre, I'll begin at the Pan,
Not, at the skirts: as some ha' done, and lost,
All that they wrought, their timberwork, their trench,
Their banks all borne away, or else filled up
By the next winter. Tut, they never went
The way: I'll have it all.
A Gallant tract
Of land it is!
IT will yield a pound an acre.
We must let cheap, ever, at first. But Sir,
This looks too large for you, I see. Come hither,
We'll have a less. Here's a plain fellow, you see him,
Has his black bag of papers, there, in Buckram,
Wi' not be sold for th' Earldom of Pancridge: Draw,
Give me out one, by chance. Project; four dogs skins?
Twelve thousand pound! the very worst, at first.
Pray you let's see it Sir.
'Tis a toy, a trifle!
Trifle! 12. thousand pound for dogs-skins?
Yes,
But, by my way of dressing, you must know, Sir,
And med'cining the leather, to a height
Of improved ware, like your Borachio
Of Spain, Sir. I can fetch nine thousand for it—
Of the King's glover?
Yes, how heard you that?
Sir, I do know you can.
Within this hour:
And reserve half my secret. Pluck another;
See if thou hast a happier hand: I thought so.
The very next worse to it ● Bottle-ale.
Yet, this is two and twenty thousand! Pray thee
Pull out another, two or three.
Good, stay, friend,
By bottle-ale, two and twenty thousand pound?
Yes, Sir, it's cast to penny-hal' penny-farthing,
O' the backside, there you may see it, read,
I will not bate a Harrington o' the sum.
I'll win it i' my water, and my malt,
My furnaces, and hanging o' my coppers,
The tonning, and the subtlety o' my yeast;
And, than the earth of my bottles, which I dig,
Turn up, and steep, and work, and neal, myself,
To a degree of Porc'lane. You will wonder,
At my proportions, what I will put up
In seven years! for so long time, I ask
For my invention. I will save in cork,
In my mere stoppling, 'boue three thousand pound,
Within that term: by googing of 'em out
Just to the size of my bottles, and not slicing.
There's infinite loss i' that. What hast thou there?
O' making wine of raisins: this is in hand, now,
Is not that strange, Sr, to make wine of raisins?
Yes, and as true a wine, as th' wines of France,
Or Spain, or Italy, Look of what grape
My raisin is, that wine I'll tender perfect,
As of the muscatel grape, I'll tender muscatel;
Of the Canary, his; the Claret, his;
So of all kinds: and bate you of the prices,
Of wine, throughout the kingdom, half in half.
But, how, Sr, if you raise the other commodity,
Raisins?
Why, than I'll make it out of blackberries:
And it shall do the same. 'Tis but more art,
And the charge less. Take out another.
Not, good Sir.
Save you the trouble, I'll not look, nor hear
Of any, but your first, there; the Drowned land:
If it will do, as you say.
Sir, there's not place,
To give you demonstration of these things.
They are a little to subtle. But, I could show you
Such a necessity in't, as you must be
But what you please: against the received heresy,
That England bears no Dukes. Keep you the land, Sr,
The greatness of th' estate shall throw it upon you.
If you like better turning it to money,
What may not you, Sr, purchase with that wealth?
Say, you should part with two o' your millions,
To be the thing you would, who would not do ' t?
As I protest, I will, out of my divident,
Lay, for some pretty principality,
In Italy, from the Church: Now, you perhaps,
Fancy the smoke of England, rather? But—
Ha' you no private room, Sir, to draw to,
T' enlarge ourselves more upon.
O yes, Devil!
These, Sir, are businesses, ask to be carried
With caution, and in cloud.
I apprehended,
They do so, Sr. Devil, which way is your Mistress?
Above, Sr. in her chamber.
O that's well.
Than, this way, good, Sir.
I shall follow you; Trains,
Give me the bag, and go you presently,
Commend my service to my Lady Tail-bush.
Tell her I am come from Court this morning; say,
I have got our business moved, and well: Entreat her,
That she give you the four-score Angels, and see 'em
Disposed of to my Council, Sir Paul Eytherside.
Sometime, to day, I'll wait upon her Ladyship,
With the relation.
Sir, of what dispatch,
He is! Do you mark?
Ingine, when did you see
My cousin Euerill? keeps he still your quarter?
I' the Bermudas?
Yes, Sir, he was writing
This morning, very hard.
Be not you known to him,
That I am come to Town: I have effected
A business for him, but I would have it take him,
Before he thinks for it.
Is it past?
Not yet.
'Tis well o' the way.
O Sir! your worship takes
Infinite pains.
I love Friends, to be active:
A sluggish nature puts of man, and kind.
And such a blessing follows it.
I thank
My fate. Pray you let's be private, Sir?
In, here.
Where none may interrupt us.
You hear, Devil,
Lock the streete-doores fast, and let no one in
(Except they be this Gentleman's followers)
To trouble me. Do you mark? Ye have heard and seen
Something, to day; and, by it, you may gather
Your Mistress is a fruit, that's worth the stealing
And therefore worth the watching. Be you sure, now,
Ye have all your eyes about you; and let in
No lace-woman; nor bawd, that brings French-masques,
And cutworks. See you? Nor old crones, with wafers,
To convey letters. Nor no youths, disguised
Like country-wives, with cream, and marrow-puddings.
Much knavery may be vented in a pudding,
Much bawdy intelligence: They ' are shrewd cyphers.
Nor turn the key to any neighbours need;
Be't but to kindle fire, or beg a little,
Put it out, rather: all out, to an ash,
That they may see no smoke. Or water, spill it:
Knock o' the empty tubs, that by the sound,
They may be forbidden entry. Say, we are robbed,
If any come to borrow a spoon, or so.
I wi' not have good fortune, or gods blessing
Let in, while I am busy.
I'll take care, Sir:
They sha' not trouble you, if they would.
Well, do so.
I have no singular service of this, now?
Nor no superlative Master? I shall wish
To be in hell again, at leisure? Bring,
A Vice from thence? That had been such a subtlety,
As to bring broad-cloths hither: or transport
Fresh oranges into Spain. I find it, now;
My Chief was i' the right. Can any fiend
Boast of a better Vice, than here by nature,
And art, th' are owners of? Hell ne'er own me,
But I am taken! the fine tract of it
Pulls me along! To hear men such professors
Grown in our subtlest Sciences! My first Act, now,
Shall be, to make this Master of mine cuckold:
The primitive work of darkness, I will practise!
I will deserve so well of my fair Mistress,
By my discoveries, first; my counsels after;
And keeping counsel, after that: as who,
So ever, is one, I'll be another, sure,
I'll ha' my share. Most delicate damned flesh!
Slice will be! O! that I could stay time, now,
Midnight will come too fast upon me, I fear,
To cut my pleasure—
Look at the backdoor,
One knocks, see who it is.
Dainty she-devil!
I cannot get this venture of the cloak,
Out of my fancy; nor the Gentleman's way,
He took, which though 'twere strange, yet 'twas handsome,
And had a grace withal, beyond the newness.
Sure he will think me that dull stupid creature,
He said, and may conclude it; if I find not
Some thought to thank th' attemp. He did presume,
By all the carriage of it, on my brain,
For answer; and will swear 'tis very barren,
If it can yield him no return Who is it?
Mistress, it is, but first, let me assure
The excellence, of Mistresses, I am,
Although my Master's man, my Mistress slave,
The servant of her secrets, and sweet turns,
And know, what fitly will conduce to either.
What's this? I pray you come to yourself and think
What your part is: to make an answer. Tell,
Who is it at the door?
The Gentleman, Mrs,
Who was at the cloak-charge to speak with you,
This morning, who expects only to take
Some small commandments from you, what you please,
Worthy your form, he says, and gentlest manners.
O! you'll anon prove his hired man, I fear,
What has he given you, for this message? Sir,
Bid him put of his hopes of straw, and leave
To spread his nets, in view, thus. Though they take
Master Fitz-dottrel, I am no such foul,
Nor fair one, tell him, will be had with stalking.
And wish him to forbear his acting to me,
At the Gentleman's chamber-window in Lincolns-inn there,
That opens to my gallery: else, I swear
T' acquaint my husband with his folly, and leave him
To the just rage of his offended jealousy.
Or if your Master's sense be not so quick
To right me, tell him, I shall find a friend
That will repair me. Say, I will be quiet.
In mine own house? Pray you, in those words give it him.
This is some fool turned!
If he be the Master,
Now, of that state and wit, which I allow him;
Sure, he will understand me: I durst not
Be more direct. For this officious fellow,
My husband's new groom, is a spy upon me,
I find already. Yet, if he but tell him
This in my words, he cannot but conceive
Himself both apprehended, and requited.
I would not have him think he met a statue:
Or spoke to one, not there, though I were silent.
How now? ha you told him?
Yes.
And what says he?
Says he? That which myself would say to you, if I durst.
That you are proud, sweet Mistress? and withal,
A little ignorant, to entertain
The good that's proffered; and (by your beauty's leave)
Not all so wise, as some true politic wife
Would be: who having matched with such a Nupson
(I speak it with my Master's peace) whose face
Hath left t' accuse him, now, for it doth confess him,
What you can make him; will yet (out of scruple,
And a spiced conscience) defraud the poor Gentleman,
At lest delay him in the thing he longs for,
And makes it his whole study, how to compass,
Only a title. Can but he writ Cuckold,
He had his ends. For, look you—
This can be
None but my husbands wit.
My precious Mrs.
It creaks his Engine: The groom never durst
Be, else, so saucy—
If it were not clearly,
His worshipful ambition; and the top of it;
The very forked top too: why should he
Keep you, thus mured up in a backroom, Mistress,
Allow you ne'er a casement to the street,
Fear of engendering by the eyes, with gallants,
Forbidden you paper, pen and ink, like Ratsbane.
Search your half pint of muscatel, jest a letter
Be sunk i' the pot: and hold your newlaid egg
Against the fire, jest any charm be writ there?
Will you make benefit of truth, dear Mistress,
If I do tell it you: I do't not often?
I am set over you, employed, indeed,
To watch your steps, your looks, your very breathe,
And to report them to him. Now, if you
Will be a true, right, delicate sweet Mistress,
Why, we will make a Cokes of this Wise Master,
We will, my Mistress, an absolute fine Cokes,
And mock, to air, all the deep diligences
Of such a solemn, and effectual Ass,
An Ass to so good purpose, as we'll use him.
I will contrive it so, that you shall go
To Plays, to Masques, to Meetings, and to Feasts.
For, why is all this Rigging, and fine Tackle, Mistress,
If you neat handsome vessels, of good sail,
Put not forth ever, and anon, with your nets
Abroad into the world. It is your fishing.
There, you shall choose your friends, your servants, Lady,
Your squires of honour; I'll convey your letters,
Fetch answers, do you all the offices,
That can belong to your blood, and beauty. And,
For the variety, at my times, although
I am not in due symmetry, the man
Of that proportion; or in rule
Of physic, of the just complexion;
Or of that truth of Picardill, in clothes,
To boast a sovereignty o'er Ladies: yet
I know, to do my turns, sweet Mistress. Come, kiss—
How now!
Dear delicate Mist. I am your slave,
Your little worm, that loves you: your fine Monkey;
Your Dog, your Iacke, your Pug, that longs to be
Styled, o'your pleasures.
Hear you all this? Sir, Pray you,
Come from your standing, do, a little, spare
Yourself, Sir, from your watch, t'applaud your Squire,
That so well follows your instructions!
HOw now, sweet heart? what's the matter?
Good!
You are a stranger to the plot! you set not
Your saucy Devil, here, to tempt your wife,
With all the insolent uncivil language,
Or action, he could vent?
Did you so, Devil?
Not you? you were not planted i' your hole to hear him,
Vpo' the stairs? or here, behind the hang?
I do not know your qualities? he durst do it,
And you not give directions?
You shall see, wife,
Whether he durst, or no: and what it was,
I did direct.
Sweet Mistress, are you mad?
You most mere Rogue! you open manifest Villain!
You Fiend apparent you! you declared Hellhound!
Good Sr.
Good Knave good Rascal, and good Traitor.
Now, I do find you parcel- Devil, indeed.
Vpo' the point of trust? I' your first charge?
The very day o' your probation?
To tempt your Mistress? You do see, good wedlock,
How I directed him.
Why, where Sr, were you?
Nay, there is one blow more, for exercise:
I told you, I should do it.
Would you had done, Sir.
O wife, the rarest man! yet there's another
To put you in mind o' the last. such a brave man, wife!
Within, he has his projects, and does vent 'em,
The gallantest! where you tentiginous? ha'?
Would you be acting of the Incubus?
Did her silks rustling move you?
Gentle Sir.
Out of my sight. If thy name were not Devil,
Thou shouldst not stay a minute with me. In,
Go, yet stay: yet go too. I am resolved,
What I will do: and you shall know't aforehand.
Soon as the Gentleman is gone, do you hear?
I'll help your lisping. Wife, such a man, wife!
He has such plots! He will make me a Duke!
Not less, by heaven! six Mares, to your coach, wife!
That's your proportion! And your coachman bald!
Because he shall be bore, enough. Do not you laugh,
We are looking for a place, and all, i' the map
What to be of. Have faith, be not an Infidel.
You know, I am not easy to be gulled.
I swear, when I have my millions, else, I'll make
Another Duchess; if you ha' not faith.
You'll ha' too much, I fear, in these false spirits,
Spirits? O, no such thing! wife! wit, mere wit!
This man defies the Devil, and all his works!
He dost by Engine, and devices, he!
He has his winged ploughs, that go with sails,
Will plough you forty acres, at once! and mills,
Will spout you water, ten miles of! All Crowland
Is ours, wife; and the fens, from us, in Norfolk,
To the utmost bound of Lincolnshire! we have viewed it,
And measured it within all; by the scale!
The richest tract of land, Love, i' the kingdom!
There will be made seventeen, or eighteen millions;
Or more, as't may be handled! wherefore, think,
Sweet heart, if th' hast a fancy to one place,
Moore than another, to be Duchess of;
Now, name it: I will have't, what ere it cost,
(If it will be had for money) either here,
Or' n France, or Italy.
You ha' strange fantasies!
WHere are you, Sir?
I see thou hast no talon
This way, wife. Up to thy gallery; do, Chuck,
Leave us to talk of it, who understand it.
I think we ha' found a place to fit you, now, Sir.
Gloucester.
O, no, I'll none!
Why, Sr?
'tis fatal.
That you say right in. Spenser, I think, the younger,
Had his last honour thence. But, he was but Earl.
I know not that, Sir. But Thomas of Woodstock,
I'm sure, was Duke, and he was made away,
At Calais; as Duke Humphrey was at Bury:
And Richard the third, you know what end he came too.
By m'faith you are cunning i' the Chronicle, Sir.
Not, I confess I have't from the Playbooks,
And think theyare more authentic.
That's sure, Sir.
What say you (to this than)
Not, a noble house.
Pretends to that. I will do no man wrong.
Than take one proposition more, and hear it
As past exception.
What's that?
To be
Duke of those lands, you shall recover: take
Your title, thence, Sir, Duke of the Drowned-land,
Or Drowned-land.
Ha'? that last has a good sound!
I like it well. The Duke of Drowned-land?
Yes;
It goes like Groenland, Sir, if you mark it.
I,
And drawing thus your honour from the work,
You make the reputation of that, greater;
And stayed the longer i' your name.
'Tis true.
Drowned-land will live in Drowned-land!
Yes, when you
Ha' no foot left; as that must be, Sir, one day.
And, though it tarry in your heirs, some forty,
Fifty descents, the longer liver, at last, yet,
Must thrust 'em out on't: if no quirk in law,
Or odd Vice o' their own not do ' it first.
We see those changes, daily: the fair lands,
That were the Clients, are the Lawyers, now:
And those rich Manors, there, of good man Tailors,
Had once more wood upon 'em, than the yard,
By which th' were measured out for the last purchase.
Nature hath these vicissitudes. She makes
No man a state of perpetuety, Sir.
Ye are i' the right. Let's in than, and conclude.
I my sight, again? I'll talk with you, anon.
Sure he will geld me, if I stay: or worse,
Pluck out my tongue, one o' the two. This Fool,
There is no trusting of him: and to quit him,
Were a contempt against my Chief, past pardon.
It was a shrewd disheartening this, at first!
Who would ha' thought a woman so well harnessed,
Or rather well-caparisoned, indeed,
That wears such petticoats, and lace to her smocks,
Broad seeming laces (as I see 'em hung there)
And garters which are lost, if she can show 'em,
Can ha' done this? Hell! why is she so brave?
It cannot be to please Duke Dotterel, sure,
Nor the dull pictures, in her gallery,
Nor her own dear reflection, in her glass;
Yet that may be: I have known many of 'em,
Begin their pleasure, but none end it, there:
(That I consider, as I go a long with it)
They may, for want of better company,
Or that they think the better, spend an hour;
Two, three, or four, discoursing with their shadow:
But sure they have a farther speculation.
No woman dressed with so much care, and study,
Doth dress herself in vain. I'll vex this problem,
A little more, before I leave it, sure.
THis was a fortune, happy above thought,
That this should prove thy chamber; which I feared
Would be my greatest trouble! this must be
The very window, and that the room.
It is.
I now remember, I have often seen there
A woman, but I never marked her much.
Where was your soul, friend?
Faith, but now, and than,
Awake unto those objects.
You pretend so.
Let me not live, if I am not in love
Moore with her wit, for this direction, now,
Than with her form, though I ha' praised that prettily,
Since I saw her, and you, to day. Read those.
They'll go unto the air you love so well.
Try 'em unto the note, may be the music
Will call her sooner; light, she's here! Sing quickly.
Either he understood him not: or else,
The fellow was not faithful in delivery,
Of what I bad. And, I am justly paid,
That might have made my profit of his service,
But, by mistaking, have drawn on his envy,
And done the worse defeat upon myself.
How! Music? than he may be there: and is sure.
O! Is it so? Is there the interview?
Have I drawn to you, at last, my cunning Lady?
The Devil is an Ass! fooled of! and beaten!
Nay, made an instrument! and could not sent it!
Well, since ye have shown the malice of a woman,
Not less than her true wit, and learning, Mistress,
I'll try, if little Pug have the malignity
To recompense it, and so save his danger.
'Tis not the pain, but the discredit of it,
The Devil should not keep a body entire.
Away, fall back, she comes.
I'll leave you, Sir,
The Master of my chamber. I have business.
Mrs!
You make me paint, Sr.
The are fair colours,
Lady, and natural! I did receive
Some commands from you, lately, gentle Lady,
But so perplexed, and wrapped in the delivery,
As I may fear t' have misinterpreted:
But must make suit still, to be near your grace.
Who is there with you, Sr?
None, but myself.
It falls out, Lady, to be a dear friends lodging.
Wherein there's some conspiracy of fortune
With your poor servants blessed affections.
Who was it sung?
He, Lady, but he's gone,
Upon my entreaty of him, seeing you
Approach the window. Neither need you doubt him,
If he were here. He is too much a gentleman.
Sir, if you judge me by this simple action,
And by the outward habit, and complexion
Of easiness, it hath, to your design;
You may with justice, say, I am a woman:
And a strange woman. But when you shall please,
To bring but that concurrence of my fortune,
To memory, which to day yourself did urge:
It may beget some favour like excuse,
Though none like reason.
Not, my tuneful Mistress?
Than, surely, Love hath none; nor Beauty any;
Nor Nature violenced, in both these:
With all whose gentle tongues you speak, at once.
I thought I had enough removed, already,
That scruple from your breast, and left ye all reason;
When, through my morning's perspective I showed you
A man so above excuse, as he is the cause,
Why any thing is to be done upon him:
And nothing called an injury, misplaced.
I rather, now had hope, to show you how Love
By his accesses, grows more natural:
And, what was done, this morning, with such force
Was but devised to serve the present, than.
That since Love hath the honour to approach
These sister-swelling breasts; and touch this soft,
And rosy hand; he hath the skill to draw
Their Nectar forth, with kissing; and could make
Moore wanton salts, from this brave promontory,
Down to this valley, than the nimble Roe;
Can play the hopping Sparrow, 'bout these nets;
And sporting Squirrel in these crisped groves;
Bury himself in every Silkworms kell,
Is here vnrauelled; run into the snare,
Which every hair is, cast into a curl,
To catch a Cupid flying: Bath himself
In milk, and roses, here, and dry him, there;
Warm his cold hands, to play with this smooth, round,
And well turned chin, as with the Billiard ball;
Roll on these lips, the banks of love, and there
At once both plant, and gather kisses. Lady,
Shall I, with what I have made to day here, call
All sense to wonder, and all faith to sign
The mysteries revealed in your form?
And will Love pardon me the blasphemy
I uttered, when I said, a glass could speak
This beauty, or that fools had power to judge it?
Do but look, on her eyes! They do light—
All that love's world compriseth!
Do but look on her hair! it is bright,
As love's star, when it riseth!
Do but mark, her forehead's smother,
Than words that soothe her!
And from her arched brows, such a grace
Sheds itself through the face;
As alone, there triumphs to the life,
All the gain, all the good, of the elements strife!
Have you seen but a bright Lily grow,
Before rude hands have touched it?
Have you marked but the fall of the Snow,
Before the soil hath smuched it?
Have you felt the wool o' the Beaver?
Or Swans down, ever?
Or, have smelled o' the bud o' the Briar?
Or the Nard i' the fire?
Or, have tasted the bag o' the Bee?
O, so white! O, so soft! O, so sweet is she!
IS she so, Sir? and, I will keep her so.
If I know how, or can: that wit of man
Will do't, I'll go no farther. At this window
She shall no more be buzzed at. Take your leave on't.
If you be sweet meats, wedlock, or sweet flesh,
All's one: I do not love this hum about you.
A fly-blown wife is not so proper, In:
For you, Sr, look to hear from me.
So, I do, Sir.
Not, but in other terms. There's no man offers
This to my wife, but pays for't.
That have I, Sir.
Nay, than, I tell you, you are.
What am I, Sir?
Why, that I'll think on, when I ha' cut your throat.
Go, you are an Ass.
I am resolved on't, Sir.
I think you are.
To call you to a reckoning.
Away, you broker's block, you property.
'Slight, if you strike me, I'll strike your Mistress,
O! I could shoot mine eyes at him, for that, now;
Or leave my teeth in him, were they cuckolds bane,
Enough to kill him. What prodigious,
Blind, and most wicked change of fortune's this?
I ha' no air of patience: all my veins
Swell, and my sinews start at iniquity of it.
I shall break, break.
This for the malice of it,
And my revenge may pass! But, now, my conscience
Tells me, I have profited the cause of Hell
But little, in the breaking-off their loves.
Which, if some other act of mine repair not,
I shall hear ill of in my account.
O, Bird!
Can you do this? 'gainst me? and at this time, now?
When I was so employed, wholly for you,
Drowned i' my care (more, than the land, I swear,
I have hope to win) to make you peerless? studying,
For footmen for you, fine paced ushers, pages,
To serve you o' the knee; with what Knights wife,
To bear your train, and sit with your four women
In council, and receive intelligences,
From foreign parts, to dress you at all pieces!
YE have (o' most) turned my good affection, to you;
Soured my sweet thoughts; all my pure purposes:
I could now find (i' my very heart) to make
Another, Lady Duchess; and depose you.
Well, go your ways in. Devil, you have redeemed all.
I do forgive you. And I'll do you good.
WHy ha' you these excursions? where ha' you been, Sir?
Where I ha' been vexed a little, with a toy!
O Sir! no toys must trouble your grave head,
Now it is growing to be great. You must
Be above all those things.
Nay, nay, so I william.
Now you are toward the Lord, you must put of
The man, Sir.
He says true.
You must do nothing
As you ha' done it heretofore; not know,
Or salute any man.
That was your bedfellow,
The other month.
The other month? the week.
Thou dost not know the privileges, Ingine,
Fellow that Title; nor how swift: To day,
When he has put on his Lord's face once, than—
Sir, for these things I shall do well enough,
There is no fear of me. But than, my wife is
Such an untoward thing! she'll never learn
How to comport with it! I am out of all
Conceit, on her behalf.
Best have her taught, Sir.
Where? Are there any Schools for Ladies? Is there
An Academy for women? I do know,
For men, there was: I learned in it, myself,
To make my legs, and do my postures.
Sir.
Do you remember the conceit you had—
O' the Spanish gown, at home?
Ha! I do thank thee,
With all my heart, dear Ingine. Sir, there is
A certain Lady, here about the Town,
An English widow, who hath lately travelled,
But she's called the Spaniard; cause she came
Latest from thence: and keeps the Spanish habit.
Such a rare woman! all our women here,
That are of spirit, and fashion flock, unto her,
As to their Precedent; their Law; their Canon;
Moore than they ever did, to Oracle-Foreman.
Such rare receipts she has, Sir, for the face;
Such oils; such tinctures; such pomatums;
Such perfumes; medicines; quintessences, etc.
And such a Mistress of behaviour;
She knows, from the Duke's daughter, to the Doxy,
What is their due just: and no more!
O Sir!
You please me i' this, more than mine own greatness.
Where is she? Let us have her.
By your patience,
We must use means; cast how to be acquainted—
Good, Sr, about it.
We must think how, first.
O!
I do not love to tarry for a thing,
When I have a mind to it. You do not know me.
If you do offer it.
Your wife must sand
Some pretty token to her, with a compliment,
And pray to be received in her good graces,
All the great Ladies do't,
She shall, she shall,
What were it best to be?
Some little toy,
I would not have it any great matter, Sir:
A Diamant ring, of forty or fifty pound,
Would do it handsomely: and be a gift
Fit for your wife to sand, and her to take.
I'll go, and tell my wife on't, straight.
Why this
Is well! The clothes we have now: But, where's this Lady?
If we could get a witty boy, now, Engine;
That were an excellent crack. I could instruct him,
To the true height. For any thing takes this dotterel.
Why, Sir your best will be one o' the players!
Not, there's no trusting them. They'll talk on't,
And tell their Poets.
What if they do? the jest
will brook the Stage. But, there be some of 'em
Are very honest Lads. There's Dick Robinson
A very pretty fellow, and comes often
To a Gentleman's chamber, a friends of mine. We had
The merriest supper of it there, one night,
The Gentleman's Landlady invited him
To'a Gossip's feast, Now, he Sir brought Dick Robinson,
Dressed like a Lawyer's wife, amongst 'em all;
(I lent him cloathes) but, to see him behave it;
And lay the law; and carve; and drink unto 'em;
And than talk bawdy: and sand frolicks! oh!
It would have burst your buttons, or not left you
A seam.
They say he's an ingenious youth!
O Sir! and dresses himself, the best! beyond
Forty o' your very Ladies! did you ne'er see him?
Not, I do seldom see those toys. But think you,
That we may have him?
Sir, the young Gentleman
I tell you of, can command him. Shall I attempt it?
Yes, do it.
'Slight, I cannot get my wife
To part with a ring, on any terms: and yet,
The sullen Monkey has two.
It were 'gainst reason,
That you should urge it; Sir, sand to a Goldsmith,
Let not her loose by it.
How does she loose by ' t?
Is it not for her?
Make it your own bounty,
It will ha' the better success; what is a matter
Of fifty pound to you, Sr.
I have but a hundred
Pieces, to show here; that I would not break—
You shall ha' credit, Sir. I'll sand a ticket
Unto my Goldsmith. Heer, my man comes too,
To carry it fitly. How now, Trains? What birds?
Your Cousin Euerill met me, and has beaten me,
Because I would not tell him where you were:
I think he has dogged me to the house too.
Well—
You shall go out at the backdoor, than, Trains.
You must get Guilt-head hither, by some means:
'Tis impossible!
Tell him, we have venison,
I'll gi' him a piece, and sand his wife a Pheasant.
A Forrest moves not, till that forty pound,
Ye had of him, last, be paid. He keeps more stir,
For that same petty sum, than for your bond
Of six; and Statute of eight hundred!
Tell him
we'll hedge in that. Cry up Fitz-dottrell to him,
Double his price: Make him a man of metal.
That will not need, his bond is currant enough.
ALl this is to make you a Gentleman:
I'll have you learn, Son. Wherhfore have I placed you
With Sr. Paul Either-side, but to have so much Law
To keep your own? Besides, he is a justice,
Here i' the Town; and dwelling, Son, with him,
You shall learn that in a year, shall be worth twenty
Of having stayed you at Oxford, or at Cambridge,
Or sending you to the Inns of Court, or France.
I am called for now in haste, by Master Mere-craft
To trust Master Fitz-dottrel, a good man:
I have inquired him, eighteen hundred a year,
(His name is currant) for a diamant ring
Of forty, shall not be worth thirty (that's gained)
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
O, but good father, you trust too much!
Boy, boy,
We live, by finding fools out, to be trusted.
Our shop-books are our pastures, our corn-grounds,
We lay 'em open, for them to come into:
And when we have 'em there, we drive 'em up
Int' one of our two Pounds, the Compters, straight,
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
We Citizens never trust, but we do cousin:
For, if our debtors pay, we cousin them;
And if they do not, than we cousin ourselves.
But that's a hazard every one must run,
That hopes to make his Son a Gentleman!
I do not wish to be one, truly, Father.
In a descent, or two, we come to be
Just ' i their state, fit to be cozened, like 'hem.
And I had rather ha' tarried i' your trade:
For, since the Gentry scorn the City so much,
Me thinks we should in time, holding together,
And matching in our own tribes, as they say,
Have got an Act of Common Council, for it,
That we might cousin them out of rerum natura.
I, if we had an Act first to forbidden
The marrying of our wealth heirs unto 'em:
And daughters, with such lavish portions.
That confounds all.
And makes a Mongrel breed, Father.
And when they have your money, than they laugh at you:
Or kick you down the stairs. I cannot abide 'hem.
I would feign have 'em cozened, but not trusted.
O, is he come! I knew he would not fail me.
Welcome, good Guilt-head, I must ha' you do
A noble Gentleman, a courtesy, here:
In a mere toy (some pretty Ring, or jewel)
Of fifty, or threescore pound (Make it a hundred,
And hedge in the last forty, that I own you,
And your own price for the Ring) He's a good man, Sr,
And you may hap' see him a great one! He,
Is likely to bestow hundreds, and thousands,
Wi' you; if you can humour him. A great prince
He will be shortly. What do you say?
In truth, Sir
I cannot. IT has been a long vacation with us,
Of what, I pray thee? of wit? or honesty?
Those are your Citizens long vacations.
Good Father do not trust 'em,
Nay, Thom. Guilt-head.
He will not buy a courtesy and beg it:
he'll rather pay, than pray. If you do for him,
You must do cheerfully. His credit, Sir,
Is not yet prostitute! Who's this? thy son?
A pretty youth, what's his name?
Plutarch, Sir.
Plutarch! How came that about?
That year Sr,
That I begot him, I bought Plutarch's lives,
And fallen s ' in love with the book, as I called my son
By ' his name; In hope he should be like him:
And writ the lives of our great men!
I' the City?
And you do breed him, there?
His mind, Sir, lies
Much to that way.
Why, than, he is i' the right way.
But, now, I had rather get him a good wife,
And plant him i' the country; there to use
The blessing I shall leave him:
Out upon 't!
And loose the laudable means, thou hast at home, here,
T' advance, and make him a young Alderman?
Buy him a Captain's place, for shame; and let him
Into the world, early, and with his plume,
And Scarves, march through Cheapside, or along Cornhill,
And by the virtue ' of those, draw down a wife
There from a windo', worth ten thousand pound!
Get him the posture book, and 's leaden men,
To set upon a table, 'gainst his Mistress
Chance to come by, that he may draw her in,
And show her Finsbury battles.
I have placed him
With justice Eytherside, to get so much law—
As thou hast conscience. Come, come, thou dost wrong
Pretty Plutarch, who had not his name,
For nothing: but was borne to train the youth
Of London, in the military truth—
That way his Genius lies. My Cousin Euerill!
O, are you here, Sir? 'pray you let us whisper.
Father, dear Father, trust him if you love me.
Why, I do mean it, boy; but, what I do,
Must not come easily from me: We must deal
With Courtiers, boy, as Courtiers deal with us.
If I have a Business there, with any of them,
Why, I must wait, I'm sure on it, Son: and though
My Lord dispatch me, yet his worshipful man—
Will keep me for his sport, a month, or two,
To show me with my fellow Citizens.
I must make his train long, and full, one quarter;
And help the spectacle of his greatness. There,
Nothing is done at once, but injuries, boy:
And they come headlong! all their good turns move not,
Or very slowly
Yet sweet father, trust him.
Well, I will think.
Come, you must do it, Sir.
I'm undone else, and your Lady Tail-bush
Has sent for me to dinner, and my cloaths
Are all at pawn. I had sent out this morning,
Before I heard you were come to town, some twenty
Of my epistles, and no one return—
Why, I ha' told you o' this. This comes of wearing
Scarlet, gold lace, and cutworks! your fine gartering!
With your blown roses, Cousin! and your eating
Pheasant, and Godwit, here in London! haunting
The Globes, and Mermaids! wedging in with Lords,
Still at the table! and affecting lechery,
In velvet! where could you ha' contented yourself
With cheese, salt-butter, and a pickled herring,
I' the Low-countrieses; there worn cloth, and fustian!
Been satisfied with a leap o' your Host's daughter,
In garrison, a wench of a stoter! or,
Your Sutler's wife, i' the leaguer, of two blanks!
You never, than, had run upon this flat,
To writ your letters missive, and sand out
Your privy seals, that thus have frighted of
All your acquaintance; that they shun you at distance,
Worse, than you do the Bailies!
Pox upon you.
I come not to you for counsel, I lack money.
You do not think, what you own me already?
I?
They own you, that mean to pay you. I'll besworne,
I never meant it. Come, you will project,
I shall undo your practice, for this month else:
You know me.
I, ye are a right sweet nature!
Well, that's all one!
You'll leave this Empire, one day?
You will not ever have this tribute paid,
Your sceptre o' the sword?
Tie up your wit,
Do, and provoke me not—
Will you, Sir, help,
To what I shall provoke another for you?
I cannot tell; try me: I think I am not
So utterly, of an o'er un-to-be-melted,
But I can do myself good, on occasions.
Strike in than, for your part. Mr. Fitz-dottrel
If I transgress in point of manners, afford me
Your best construction; I must beg my freedom
From your affairs, this day.
How, Sr.
It is
In succour of this Gentleman's occasions,
My kinsman—
You'll not do me that affront, Sr.
I am sorry you should so interpret it,
But, Sir, it stands upon his being invested
In a new office, he has stood for, long:
Master of the Dependences! A place
Or my projection too, Sir, and hath met
Much opposition; but the State, now, see's
That great necessity of it, as after all
Their writing, and their speaking, against Duels,
They have erected it. His book is drawn—
For, since, there will be differences, daily,
'Twixt Gentlemen; and that the roaring manner
Is grown offensive; that those few, we call
The civil men o' the sword, abhor the vapours;
They shall refer now, hither, for their process;
And such as trespass 'gainst the rule of Court,
Are to be fined—
In troth, a pretty place!
A kind of arbitrary Court 'twill be, Sir.
I shall have matter for it, I believe,
E'er it be long: I had a distaste.
But now, Sir,
My learned council, they must have a feeling,
They'll part, Sir, with no books, without the hand-gout
Be oiled, and I must furnish. If it be money,
To me straight. I am Mine, Mint and Exchequer,
To supply all. What is't? a hundred pound?
Not, th' Harpey, now, stands on a hundred pieces.
Why, he must have 'em, if he william. To morrow, Sir,
Will equally serve your occasions,—
And therefore, let me obtain, that you will yield
To timing a poor Gentleman's distresses,
In terms of hazard.—
By no means!
I must
Get him this money, and william.—
Sir, I protest,
I'd rather stand engaged for it myself:
Than you should leave me.
O good Sr. do you think
So coursely of our manners, that we would,
For any need of ours, be pressed to take it:
Though you be pleased to offer it.
Why, by heaven,
I mean it!
I can never believe less.
But we, Sir, must preserve our dignity,
As you do publish yours. By your fair leave, Sir.
As I am a Gentleman, if you do offer
To leave me now, or if you do refuse me,
I will not think you love me.
Sir, I honour you.
And with just reason, for these noble notes,
Of the nobility, you pretend too! But, Sir—
I would know, why? a motive (he a stranger)
You should do this?
You'll mar all with your fineness)
Why, that's all one, if 'twere, Sir, but my fancy.
But I have a Business, that perhaps I'd have
Brought to his office.
O, Sir! I have done, than;
If he can be made profitable, to you.
Yes, and it shall be one of my ambitions
To have it the first Business? May I not?
So you do mean to make't, a perfect Business.
Nay, I'll do that, assure you: show me once.
Sr, it concerns, the first be a perfect Business,
For his own honour!
I, and th' reputation
Too, of my place.
Why, why do I take this course, else?
I am not altogether, an Ass, good Gentlemen,
Wherhfore should I consult you? do you think?
To make a song on't? How's your manner? tell us.
Do, satisfy him: give him the whole course.
First, by request, or otherwise, you offer
Your Business to the Court: wherein you crave:
The judgement of the Master and the Assistants.
Well, that's done, now, what do you upon it?
We straight Sr, have recourse to the springhead;
Visit the ground; and, so disclose the nature:
If it will carry, or no. If we do find,
By our proportions it is like to prove
A sullen, and black Business That it be
Incorrigible; and out of, treaty; than,
We file it, a Dependence!
So 'tis filled.
What follows? I do love the order of these things.
We than advise the party, if he be
A man of means, and have, that forthwith,
He settle his estate: if not, at lest
That he pretend it. For, by that, the world
Takes notice, that it now is a Dependence.
And this we call, Sir, Publication.
Very sufficient! After Publication, now?
Than we grant out our Process, which is divers;
Either by Cartel, Sir, or oretenus,
Wherein the Challenger, and Challengee
Or (with your Spaniard) your Provocador,
And Provocado, have their several courses—
I have enough on't! for an hundred pieces?
Yes, for two hundred, underwrite me, do.
Your man will take my bond?
That he will, sure,
But, these same Citizens, they are such sharks!
There's an old debt of forty, I give my word
For one is run away, to the Bermudas,
And he will hook in that, or he wi' not do.
Why, let him. That and the ring, and a hundred pieces,
Will all but make two hundred?
Not, no more, Sir.
What ready Arithmetic you have? do you hear?
A pretty morning's work for you, this? Do it,
You shall ha' twenty pound on't.
Twenty pieces?
Good Father, do't)
You will hook still? well,
Show us your ring. You could not ha' done this, now
With gentleness, at first, we might ha' thanked you?
But groan, and ha' you courtesies come from you
Like a hard stool, and stink? A man may draw
Your teeth out easier, than your money? Come,
Were little Guilt-head here, no better a nature,
I should ne'er love him, that could pull his lips of, now!
Was not thy mother a Gentlewoman?
Yes, Sir.
And went to the Court at Christmas, and St. Georges-tide?
And lent the Lords-men, chains?
Of gold, and pearl, Sr.
I knew, thou must take, after some body!
Thou couldst not be else. This was no shop-look!
I'll ha' thee Captain Guilt-head, and march up,
And take in Pimlico,, and kill the bush,
At every tavern! Thou shalt have a wife,
If smocks will mount, boy. How now? you ha' there now
Some Bristo-stone, or Cornish counterfeit
You'd put upon us.
Not, Sir, I assure you:
Look on his lustre! he will speak himself!
I'll give you leave to put him i' the Mill,
HE is no great, large stone, but a true Paragon,
HE has all his corners, view him well.
HE is yellow.
Vpo' my faith, Sr, o' the right blackwater,
And very deep! HE is set without a foil, too.
Here's one o' the yellow-water, I'll cell cheap.
And what do you value this, at? thirty pound?
Not, Sir, he cost me forty, ere he was set.
Turn, you mean? I know your Equivocks:
You ' are grown the better Fathers of 'em o' late.
Well, where't must go, it will be judged, and, therefore,
Look you't be right. You shall have fifty pound for't.
Not a denier more! And, because you would
Have things dispatched, Sir, I'll go presently,
Inquire out this Lady. If you think good, Sir.
Having an hundred pieces ready, you may
Part with those, now, to serve my kinsman's turns,
That he may wait upon you, anon, the freer;
And take 'em when you ha' sealed, a gain, of Guilt-head.
I care not if I do!
And dispatch all,
Together.
There, th' are just: a hundred pieces!
I ha' told 'em over, twice a day, these two months.
Well, go, and seal than, Sr, make your return
As speedy as you can.
Come give me.
Soft, Sir,
Marry, and fair too, than. I'll no delaying, Sir.
But, you will hear?
Yes, when I have my divident.
There's forty pieces for you.
What is this for?
Your half. You know, that Guilt-head must ha' twenty.
And what's your ring there? shall I ha' none o' that?
O, that's to be given to a Lady!
Is't so?
By that good light, it is.
Come, give me
Ten pieces more, than.
Why?
For Guilt-head? Sir,
Do ' you think, I'll ' low him any such share:
You must.
Must I? Do you your musts, Sir, I'll do mine,
You wi'not part with the whole, Sir? Will you? Go too.
Give me ten pieces!
By what law, do you this?
E'en Lion-law, Sir, I must roar else.
Good!
Ye have heard, how th' Ass made his divisions, wisely?
And, I am he: I thank you.
Much good do you, Sr.
I shall be rid o' this tyranny, one day?
Not,
While you do eat; and lie, about the town, here;
And cousin i' your bullions; and I stand
Your name of credit, and compound your business;
Adjourn your beat every term; and make
New parties for your projects. I have, now,
A pretty task, of it, to hold you in
Wi' your Lady Tail-bush: but the toy will be,
How we shall both come of?
Leave you your doubting.
And do your portion, what's assigned you: I
Never failed yet.
With reference to your aids?
You'll still be unthankful. Where shall I meet you, anon?
You ha' some feat to do alone, now, I see;
You wish me gone, well, I will find you out,
And bring you after to the audit.
'Slight!
There's Engines share too, I had forgot! This reign
Is too-too-unsuportable! I must
Quit myself of this vassalage! Ingine! welcome.
HOw goes the cry?
Excellent well!
Wil't do?
Where's Robinson?
Here is the Gentleman, Sir.
Will undertake t' himself. I have acquainted him,
Why did you so?
Why, Robinson would ha' told him,
You know. And he's a pleasant wit! will hurt
Nothing you purpose. Than, he ' is of opinion,
That Robinson might want audacity,
She being such a gallant. Now, he has been,
In Spain, and knows the fashions there; and can
Discourse; and being but mirth (he says) leave much,
To his care:
But he is too tall!
For that,
He has the bravest device! (you'll love him for't)
To say, he wears Cioppinos: and they do so
In Spain. And Robinson's as tall, as he.
Is he so?
Every jot.
Nay, I had rather
To trust a Gentleman with it, o' the two.
Pray you go to him, than, Sir, and salute him.
Sir, my friend Ingine has acquainted you
With a strange business, here.
A merry one, Sir.
The Duke of Drowned-land, and his Duchess?
Yes, Sir.
Now, that the Conjurers ha' laid him by,
I ha' made bold, to borrow him a while;
With purpose, yet, to put him out I hope
To his best use?
Yes, Sir.
For that small part,
That I am trusted with, put of your care:
I would not loose to do it, for the mirth,
Will follow of it; and well, I have a fancy.
Sir, that will make it well.
You will report it so.
Where must I have my dressing?
At my house, Sir.
You shall have caution, Sir, for what he yields,
To six pence.
You shall pardon me. I will share, Sir,
I' your sports, only: nothing i' your purchase.
But you must furnish me with compliments,
To th' manner of Spain; my coach, my guarda duennas;
engine's your Pro'uedor. But, Sir, I must
(Now I have entered trust wi' you, thus far)
Secure still i' your quality, acquaint you
With somewhat, beyond this. The place, designed
To be the Scene, for this our merry matter,
Because it must have countenance of women,
To draw discourse, and offer it, is here by,
At the Lady Tail-bush's.
I know her, Sir,
And her Gentleman hutsher.
Mr Ambler?
Yes, Sir.
Sir, It shall be no shame to me, to confess
To you, that we poor Gentlemen, that want acres,
Must for our needs, turn fools up, and plough Ladies
Sometimes, to try what glebe they are: and this
Is no unfruitful piece. She, and I now,
Are on a project, for the fact, and venting
Of a new kind of fucus (paint, for Ladies)
To serve the kingdom: wherein she herself
Hath travelled, specially, by way of service
Unto her sex, and hopes to get the Monopoly,
As the reward, of her invention.
What is her end, in this?
Merely ambition,
Sir, to grow great, and court it with the secret:
Though she pretend some other. For, she's dealing,
Already, upon caution for the shares,
And Mr. Ambler, is he named Examiner
For the ingredients; and the Register
Of what is vented; and shall keep the Office.
Now, if she break with you, of this (as I
Must make the leading thread to your acquaintance,
That, how experience gotten i' your being
Abroad, will help our business) think of some
Pretty additions, but to keep her floating:
It may be, she will offer you a part,
Any strange names of—
Sr, I have my ' instructions.
Is it not high time to be making ready?
Yes, Sir,
The fool's in sight, Dotterel.
Away, than.
Returned so soon?
Yes, here's the ring: I ha' sealed.
But there's not so much gold in all the row, he says—
Till it come fro' the Mint. 'Tis ta'en up for the gamesters.
There's a shop-shift! plague on 'hem.
He does swear it.
He'll swear, and forswear too, it is his trade,
You should not have left him.
'Slid, I can go back,
And beaten him, yet.
Not, now let him alone.
I was so earnest, after the main Business,
To have this ring, gone.
True, and 'tis time.
I have learned, Sir, sin ' you went, her Ladyship eats
With the Lady Tail-bush, here, hard by.
I'the lane here?
Yes, if you had a servant, now of presence,
Well clothed, and of an aery voluble tongue,
Neither too big, or little for his mouth,
That could deliver your wife's compliment;
To sand along withal.
I have one Sir,
A very handsome, gentleman-like-fellow,
That I do mean to make my Duchess Usher—
I entertained him, but this morning, too:
I'll call him to you. The worst of him, is his name!
She'll take no note of that, but of his message.
Devil! How like you him, Sir. Pace, go a little.
Let's see you move.
He'll serve, Sr, give it him:
And let him go along with me, I'll help
To present him, and it.
Look, you do sirrah,
Discharge this well, as you expect your place.
Do ' you hear, go on, come of with all your honours.
I would feign see him, do it.
Trust him, with it;
Remember kissing of your hand, and answering
With the French-time, in flexure of your body.
I could now so instruct him— and for his words—
I'll put them in his mouth.
O, but I have 'em
O' the very Academies.
Sir, you'll have use for 'em,
Anon, yourself, I warrant you: after dinner,
When you are called.
'Slight, that'll be just playtime.
It cannot be, I must not loose the play!
Sir, but you must, if she appoint to sit.
And, she's precedent.
'Slid, it is the Devil!
And, 'twere his Dam too, you must now apply
Yourself, Sir, to this, wholly; or loose all.
If I could but see a piece—
Sr. Never think on't.
Come but to one act, and I did not care—
But to be seen to rise, and go away,
To vex the Players, and to punish their Poet—
Keep him in awe!
But say, that he be one,
Wi' not be awed! but laugh at you. How than?
Than he shall pay for ' his dinner himself.
Perhaps,
He would do that twice, rather than thank you.
Come, get the Devil out of your head, my Lord,
(I'll call you so in private still) and take
Your Lordship i' your mind. You were, sweet Lord,
In talk to bring a Business to the Office.
Yes.
Why should not you, Sr, carry it o' yourself,
Before the Office be up? and show the world,
You had no need of any man's direction;
In point, Sir, of sufficiency. I speak
Against a kinsman, but as one that tenders
Your graces good.
I thank you; to proceed—
To Publications: ha' your Deed drawn presently.
And leave a blank to put in your Feoffees
One, two, or more, as you see cause—
I thank you
Hearty, I do thank you. Not a word more,
I pray you, as you love me. Let me alone.
That I could not think o' this, as well, as he?
O, I could beaten my infinite blockhead—!
Come, we must this way.
How far is't.
Hard by here
Over the way. Now, to achieve this ring,
From this same fellow, that is to assure it;
Before he give it. Though my Spanish Lady,
Be a young Gentleman of means, and scorn
To share, as he doth say, I do not know
How such a toy may tempt his Ladyship:
And therefore, I think best, it be assured.
Sir, be the Lady's brave, we go unto?
O, yes.
And shall I see 'em, and speak to 'hem?
What else? ha you your false-beard about you? Trains.
Yes,
And is this one of your double Cloaks?
The best of 'hem.
Be ready than. Sweet Pitfall!
COme, I must buss—
Away.
I'll set thee up again.
Never fear that: canst thou get ne'er a bird?
Not Thrushes hungry? Stay, till cold weather come,
I'll help thee to an Onsell, or, a Fieldfare.
Who's within, with Madam?
I'll tell you strait.
Please you stay here, a while Sir, I'll go in.
I do so long to have a little venery,
While I am in this body! I would taste
Of every sin, a little, if it might be
After the manner of man! Sweetheart!
What would you, Sr?
Nothing but fall in, to you, be your Blackbird,
My pretty pit (as the Gentleman said) your Throstle:
Lie tame, and taken with you; here ' is gold!
To buy you so much new stuffs, from the shop,
As I may take the old up—
You must sand, Sir.
The Gentleman the ring.
There ' 'tis. Nay look,
Will you be foolish, Pit,
This is strange rudeness.
Dear Pit.
I'll call, I swear.
Where are you, Sr?
Is your ring ready? Go with me.
I sent it you.
Me? When? by whom?
A fellow here, even now,
Came for it i' your name.
I sent none, sure.
My meaning ever was, you should deliver it,
Yourself: So was your Master's charge, you know.
What fellow was it, do you know him?
Here,
But now, he had it.
Saw you any? Trains?
Not I
The Gentleman saw him.
Inquire.
I was so earnest upon her, I marked not!
My devilish Chief has put me here in flesh,
To shame me! This dull body I am in,
I perceive nothing with! I offer at nothing,
That will succeed!
Sir, she saw none, she says.
Satan himself, has ta'en a shape t' abuse me.
It could not be else!
This is above strange!
That you should be so reckless. what'll you do, Sir?
How will you answer this, when you are questioned?
Run from my flesh, if I could; put of mankind!
This's such a scorn! and will be a new exercise,
For my Archduke! Woe to the several cudgels,
Must suffer, on this back! Can you no succours? Sir?
Alas! the use of it is so present.
I ask,
Sir, credit for another, but till to morrow?
There is not so much time, Sir. But how ever,
The Lady is a noble Lady, and will
(To save a Gentleman from check) be entreated
To say, she has received it.
Do you think so?
Will she be won?
No doubt, to such an office,
It will be a Lady's bravery, and her pride.
And not be known on't after, unto him?
That were a treachery! Upon my word,
Be confident. Return unto your master,
My Lady Precedent sits this afternoon,
Has ta'en the ring, commends her services
Unto your Lady-duchess. You may say
She's a civil Lady, and does give her
All her respects, already: Bade you, tell her
She lives, but to receive her wished commandments,
And have the honour here to kiss her hands:
For which she'll stay this hour yet. Hasten you
Your Prince, away.
And Sir, you will take care
Th' excuse be perfect?
You confess your fears.
Too much.
The shame is more, I'll quit you of either.
A Pox vpo' referring to Commissioners,
I had rather hear that it were passed the seals:
Your Courtiers move so Snail-like i' your Business.
Would I had not begun wi' you.
We must move,
Madam, in order, by degrees: not jump.
Why, there was Sr. Iohn Money-man could jump
A Business quickly.
True, he had great friends,
But, because some, sweet Madam, can leap ditches,
We must not all shun to go over bridges.
The harder parts, I make account are done:
Now, 'tis referred. You are infinitely bound
Unto the Ladies, they ha' so cried it up!
Do they like it than?
They ha' sent the Spanish-Lady,
To gratulate with you—
I must sand 'em thanks
And some remembrances.
That you must, and visit 'hem.
Where's Ambler?
Lost, to day, we cannot hear of him.
Not Madam?
Not in good faith. They say he lay not
At home, to night. And here has fallen a Business
Between your Cousin, and Master Manly, has
Unquieted us all.
So I hear, Madam.
Pray you how was it?
Troth, it but appears
Ill o' your Kinsman's part. You may have heard,
That Manly is a suitor to me, I doubt not:
I guessed it, Madam.
And it seems, he trusted
Your Cousin to let fall some fair reports
Of him unto me.
Which he did!
So far
From it, as he came in, and took him railing
Against him.
How! And what said Manly to him?
Enough, I do assure you: and with that scorn
Of him, and the injury, as I do wonder
How Euerill bore it! But that guilt undoes
Many men's valours
Here comes Manly.
Madame,
I'll take my leave—
You sha' not go, i' faith.
I'll ha' you stay, and see this Spanish miracle,
Of our English Lady.
Let me pray your Ladyship,
Lay your commands on me, some other time.
Now, I protest: and I will have all pieced,
And friends again.
It will be but ill soldered!
You are too much affected with it.
I cannot
Madam, but think on't for th' injustice.
Sir,
His kinsman here is sorry.
Not I, Madam,
I am no kin to him, we but call Cousins,
And if we were, Sir, I have no relation
Unto his crimes.
You are not urged with 'hem.
I can accuse, Sir, none but mine own judgement,
For though it were his crime, so to betray me:
I'm sure, 'twas more mine own, at all to trust him.
But he, therein, did use but his old manners,
And savour strongly what he was before.
Come, he will change!
Faith, I must never think it.
Nor were it reason in me to expect
That for my sake, he should put of a nature
He sucked in with his milk. It may be Madam,
Deceiving trust, is all he has to trust to:
If so, I shall be loathe, that any hope
Of mine, should bate him of his means.
Ye are sharp, Sir.
This act may make him honest!
If he were
To be made honest, by an act of Parliament,
I should not altar, i' my faith of him.
Eytherside!
Welcome, dear Either-side! how hast thou done, good wench?
Thou hast been a stranger! I ha' not seen thee, this week.
EVer your servant, Madam.
Where hast ' how been?
I did so long to see thee.
Visiting, and so tired!
I protest, Madam, 'tis a monstrous trouble!
And so it is. I swear I must to morrow,
Begin my visits (would they were over) at Court.
It tortures me, to think on 'hem.
I do hear
You ha' cause, Madam, your suit goes on.
Who told thee?
One, that can tell: Mr. Eytherside.
O, thy husband!
Yes faith, there's life in't, now: It is referred.
If we once see it under the seals, wench, than,
Have with 'em for the great Caroche, six horses,
And the two Coachmen, with my Ambler, bore,
And my three women: we will live, i' faith,
The examples o' the town, and govern it.
I'll lead the fashion still.
You do that, now,
Sweet Madam.
O, but than, I'll every day
Bring up some new device. Thou and I, Either-side,
Will first be in it, I will give it thee;
And they shall follow us. Thou shalt, I swear,
Wear every month a new gown, out of it.
Thank you good Madam.
Pray thee call me Tail-bush
As I thee, Either-side; I not love this, Madam.
Than I protest to you, Tail-bush, I am glad
Your Business so succeeds.
Thank thee, good Eytherside.
But Master Either-side tells me, that he likes
Your other Business better.
Which?
O' the Toothpicks.
I never heard on't.
Ask Mr. Mere-craft.
Madame? he's one, in a word, I'll trust his malice,
With any man's credit, I would have abused!
Sir, if you think you do please me, in this,
You are deceived!
Not, but because my Lady,
named him my kinsman; I would satisfy you,
What I think of him: and pray you, upon it
To judge me!
So I do: that ill men's friendship,
Is as unfaithful, as themselves.
Do you hear?
Ha' you a Business about Toothpicks?
Yes, Madam.
Did I ne'er tell't you? I meant to have offered it
Your Ladyship, on the perfecting the patent.
How is't!
For serving the whole state with Toothpicks;
Somewhat an intricate Business to discourse) but—
I show, how much the Subject is abused,
First, in that one commodity? than what diseases,
And putrefactions in the gums are bred,
By those are made ' of ' adulterate, and false wood?
My plot, for reformation of these, follows.
To have all Toothpicks, brought unto an office,
There sealed; and such as counterfeit 'em, mulcted.
And last, for venting 'em to have a book
Printed, to teach their use, which every child
Shall have throughout the kingdom, that can read,
And learn to pick his teeth by. Which beginning
Barely to practice, with some other rules,
Of never sleeping with the mouth open, chawing
Some grains of mastic, will preserve the breath
Pure, and so free from taym— ha' what is't? sayst thou?
Good faith, it sounds a very pretty Business!
So Mr. Either-side says, Madam.
The Lady is come.
Is she? Good, wait upon her in. My Ambler
Was never so ill absent. Either-side,
How do I look to day? Am I not dressed,
Sprunt?
Yes, verily, Madam.
Pox o' Madam,
Will you not leave that?
Yes, good Tail-bush.
So?
Sounds not that better? What vile Fucus is this,
Thou hast got on?
'Tis Pearl.
Pearl? Oyster-shells:
As I breath, Either-side, I know't. Here comes
(They say) a wonder, sirrah, has been in Spain!
Will teach us all! she's sent to me, from Court.
To gratulate with me! Pray thee, let's observe her,
What faults she has, that we may laugh at 'em,
When she is gone,
That we will hearty, Tail-bush.
O, me! the very Infanta of the Giants!
Here is a noble Lady, Madam, come,
From your great friends, at Court, to see your Ladyship:
And have the honour of your acquaintance.
Sir.
She does us honour.
Pray you, say to her Ladyship,
It is the manner of Spain, to embrace only,
Never to kiss. She will excuse the custom!
Your use of it is law. Please you, sweet, Madam,
To take a seat.
Yes, Madam. I have had
The favour, through a world of fair report
To know your virtues, Madam; and in that
Name, have desired the happiness of presenting
My service to your Ladyship!
Your love, Madam,
I must not own it else.
Both are due, Madam,
To your great undertakings.
Great? In troth, Madam,
They are my friends, that think 'em any thing:
If I can do my sex (by 'em) any service,
I have my ends, Madam.
And they are noble ones,
That make a multitude beholden, Madam:
The common wealth of Ladies, must acknowledge from you.
Except some envious, Madam.
Ye are right in that, Madam,
Of which race, I encountered some but lately.
who (it seems) have studied reasons to discredit
Your business.
How, sweet Madam.
Nay, the parties
Wi' not be worth your pause— Most ruinous things, Madam,
That have put of all hope of being recovered
To a degree of handsomeness.
But their reasons, Madam?
I would feign hear.
Some Madam, I remember.
They say, that painting quite destroys the face—
O, that's an old one, Madam.
There are new ones, too.
Corrupts the breath; hath left so little sweetness
In kissing, as 'tis now used, but for fashion:
And shortly will be taken for a punishment.
Decays the foreteeth, that should guard the tongue;
And suffers that run riot everlasting!
And (which is worse) some Ladies when they meet
Cannot be merry, and laugh, but they do spit
In one another's faces!
I should know
This voice, and face too:
Than they say, 'tis dangerous
To all the fall'n, yet well disposed Madams,
That are industrious, and desire to earn
Their living with their sweat! For any distemper
Of heat, and motion, may displace the colours;
And if the paint once run about their faces,
Twenty to one, they will appear so ill-favoured,
Their servants run away, too, and leave the pleasure
Imperfect, and the reckoning als' vnpayed.
Pox, these are Poets reasons.
Some old Lady
That keeps a Poet, has devised these scandales.
Faith we must have the Poets banished, Madam,
As Master Either-side says.
Master Fitz dotterel?
And his wife: where? Madame, the Duke of Drowned-land,
That will be shortly.
Is this my Lord?
The same.
YOur servant. Madame!
How now? Friend? offended,
That I have found your haunt here?
Not, but wondering
At your strange fashioned venture, hither.
It is
To show you what they are, you so pursue.
I think't will prove a medicine against marriage;
To know their manners.
Stay, and profit than.
The Lady, Madam, whose Prince has brought her, here,
To be instructed.
Please you sit with us, Lady.
That's Lady-President.
A goodly woman!
I cannot see the ring, though.
Sir, she has it.
But, Madam, these are very feeble reasons!
So I urged Madam, that the new complexion,
Now to come forth, in name o' your ladyship's fucus,
Had no ingredient—
But I durst eat, I assure you.
So do they, in Spain.
Sweet Madam be so liberal,
To give us some o' your Spanish Fucuses!
They are infinite Madam.
So I hear, they have
Water of Gourds, of Radish, the white Beans,
Flowers of Glass, of Thistles, Rose-marine.
Raw Honey, Mustardseed, and Bread dough-baked,
The crumbs o' bread, Goats-milk, and whites of Eggs,
Campher, and Lilly-roots, the fat of Swans,
Marrow of Veal, white Pigeons, and pine- kernels,
The seeds of Nettles, pierce line, and hare's gall.
Lemons, thin-skind—
How, her Ladyship has studied
All excellent things!
But ordinary, Madam.
Not, the true rarities, are th' Aluagada,
And Argentata of Queen Isabel!
I, what are their ingredients, gentle Madam?
Your Alum Scagliola, or Pol-dipedra;
And Zuccarino; Turpentine of Abezzo.
Wash'd in nine waters: Soda di levante,
Or your Ferne ashes; Benjamin di gotta;
Grasso di serpe; Porcelletto marino;
Oils of Lentisco; Zucche Mugia; make
The admirable Varnish for the face,
Gives the right lustre; but two drops tubed on
With a piece of scarlet, makes a Lady of sixty
Look at sixteen. But, above all, the water
Of the white Hen, of the Lady Estifanias!
O, I, that same, good Madam, I have heard of:
How is it done?
Madame, you take your Hen,
Plume it, and skin it, cleanse it o' the inwards:
Than chop it, bones and all: add to four ounces
Of Carrnuacins, Pipitas, Soap of Cyprus,
Make the decoction, strain it. Than distil it,
And keep it in your galley-pot well, gliddered:
Three drops preserves from wrinkles, warts, spots, moles,
Blemish, or Sun-burnings, and keeps the skin
In decimo sexto, ever bright, and smooth,
As any looking-glass; and indeed, is called
The Virgin's milk for the face, Oglio real;
A Ceruse, neither cold or heat, will hurt;
And mixed with oil of myrrh, and the read Gillyflower
Called Cataputia; and flowers of Rovistico;
Makes the best muta, or dye of the whole world.
Dear Madam, will you let us be familiar?
Your Ladyship's servant.
How do you like her.
Admirable!
But, yet, I cannot see the ring.
Sir.
I must
Deliver it, or mar all. This fool's so jealous.
Madam— Sir, wear this ring, and pray you take knowledge,
'Twas sent you by his wife. And give her thanks,
Do not you dwindle, Sir, bear up.
I thank you, Sir,
But for the manner of Spain! Sweet, Madam, let us
Be bold, now we are in: Are all the Ladies,
There, i' the fashion?
None but Grandees, Madam,
O' the clasped train, which may be worn at length, too,
Or thus, upon my arm.
And do they wear
Chopines all?
If they be dressed in punto, Madam.
Gild as those are? madame?
Of Goldsmith's work, madam;
And set with diamonds: and their Spanish pumps
Of perfumed leather.
I should think it hard
To go in 'em, madam.
At the first, it is, madam.
Do you never fall in 'hem?
Never.
I swear, I should
Six times an hour.
But you have men at hand, still,
To help you, if you fall?
Only one, madam,
The Guardo-duennas, such a little old man,
As this.
Alas! he can do nothing! this!
I'll tell you, madam, I saw i'the Court of Spain once,
A Lady fall i'the King's sight, along.
And there she lay, flat spread, as an Umbrella,
Her hoop here cracked; no man durst reach a hand
To help her, till the Guarda-duenn'as came,
Who is the person onel' allowed to touch
A Lady there: and he but by this finger.
Ha' they no servants, madam, there? nor friends?
An Escudero, or so madam, that waits
Upon 'em in another Coach, at distance,
And when they walk, or dance, holds by a handkerchief,
Never presumes to touch 'hem.
This's scurvy!
And a forced gravity! I do not like it.
I like our own much better.
'Tis more French,
And Courtly ours.
And tastes more liberty.
We may have our dozen of visiters, at once,
Make love t' us.
And before our husbands?
Husband?
As I am honest, Tail-bush I do think
If no body should love me, but my poor husband,
I should e'en hung myself.
Fortune forbidden, wench:
So fair a neck should have so foul a necklace,
'Tis true, as I am handsome!
I received, Lady,
A token from you, which I would not be
Rude to refuse, being your first remembrance.
O, I am satisfied now!
Do you see it, Sir.)
But since you come, to know me, nearer, Lady,
I'll beg the honour, you will wear it for me,
It must be so.
Sure I have heard this tongue.
What do you mean, Sr?
Would you ha'me mercenary?
We'll recompense it anon, in somewhat else,
I do not love to be gulled, though in a toy.
Wife, do you hear? ye are come into the School, wife,
Where you may learn, I do perceive it, any thing!
How to be fine, or fair, or great, or proud,
Or what you will, indeed, wife; here 'tis taught.
And I am glad on't, that you may not say,
Another day, when honours come upon you,
You wanted means. I ha' done my parts: been,
To day, at fifty pound charge, first, for a ring,
To get you entered. Than left my new Play,
To wait upon you, here, to see't confirmed.
That I may say, both to mine own eyes, and ears,
Senses, you are my witness, sha' hath enjoyed
All helps that could be had, for love, or money—
To make a fool of her.
Wife, that's your malice,
The wickedness o' you nature to interpret
Your husband's kindesse thus. But I'll not leave;
Still to do good, for your depraved affections:
Intent it. bend this stubborn will; be great.
Good Madam, whom do they use in messages?
They commonly use their slaves, Madam.
And does your Ladyship.
Think that so good, Madam?
no, indeed, Madam; I,
Therein prefer the fashion of England far,
Of your young delicate Page, or discreet Usher,
And I go with your Ladyship, in opinion,
Directly for your Gentleman-usher,
There's not a finer Officer goes on ground.
If he be made and broken to his place, once.
Nay, so I presuppose him.
And they are fit
Managers too, Sir, but I would have 'em called
Our Escuderoes.
Good.
Say, I should sand
To your Ladyship, who (I presume) has gathered
All the dear secrets, to know how to make
Pastilloes of the Duchess of Braganza,
Coquettes, Almoiauana's, Mantecadas,
Alcoreas, Mustaccioli; or say it were
The Peladore of Isabel, or balls
Against the itch, or aqua nanfa, or oil
Of jessamine for gloves, of the marquis Muja;
Or for the head, and hair: why, these are offices
Fit for a gentleman, not a slave. They only
Might ask for your piveti, Spanish-coal,
To burn, and sweeten a room: but the Arcana
Of Lady's Cabinets—
Should be elsewhere trusted.
Ye are much about the truth. Sweet honoured Ladies,
Let me fall in wi'you. I'ha' ' my female wit,
As well as my male. And I do know what suits
A Lady of spirit, or a woman of fashion!
And you would have your wife such.
Yes, Madam, aery,
Light; not to plain dishonesty, I mean:
But, somewhat o''is side.
I take you, Sir.
HE has reason Ladies. I'll not give this rush
For any Lady, that cannot be honest
Within a thread.
Yes, Madam, and yet venture
As far for th'other, in her Fame—
As can be;
Coach it to Pimlico; dance the Saraband;
Hear, and talk bawdy; laugh as loud, as a alarm;
Squeak, spring, do any thing.
In young company, Madame.
Or afore gallants. If they be brave, or Lords,
A woman is engaged.
I say so, Ladies',
It is civility to deny us nothing.
You talk of a University! why, Hell is
A Grammar-schoole to this!
But than,
She must not loose a look on stuffs, or cloth, Madam.
Nor no course fellow.
She must be guided, Madam
By the clothes he wears, and company he is in;
Whom to salute, how far—
I ha' told her this.
And how that bawdry too, vpo' the point,
Is (in itself) as civil a discourse—
As any other affair of flesh, what ever.
But she will ne'er be capable, she is not
So much as coming, Madam; I know not how
She loses all her opportunities
With hoping to be forced. I have entertained
A gentleman, a younger brother, here,
Whom I would feign breed up, her Escudero,
Against some expectations that I have,
And she'll not countenance him.
What's his name?
Devil, o' Darbishire.
Bless us from him!
Devil?
Call him Devile, sweet Madam.
What you please, Ladies.
De-uile's a prettier name!
And sounds, me thinks,
As it came in with the Conqueror—
Over smocks!
What things they are? That nature should be at leisure
Ever to make 'hem! my wooing is at an end.
What can he do?
Let's hear him.
Can he manage?
Please you to try him, Ladies'. Stand forth, Devil.
Was all this but the preface to my torment?
Come, let their Ladyships see your honours.
O,
He makes a wicked leg.
As ever I saw!
Fit for a Devil.
Good Madam, call him Devile.
Devile, what property is there most required
I' your conceit, now, in the Escudero?
Why do you not speak?
A settled discreet pace, Madam.
I think, a barren head, Sir, Mountainlike,
To be exposed to the cruelty of weathers—
I, for his Valley is beneath the waste, Madam,
And to be fruitful there, it is sufficient.
Dullness upon you! Can not you hit this?
Good Sir—
He than had had no barren head.
You daw him too much, in troth, Sir.
I must walk
With the French stick, like an old verger for you,
O, Chief, call me to Hell again, and free me.
Do you murmur now?
Not I, Sr.
What do you take
Mr. Devile, the height of your employment,
In the true perfect Escudero?
When?
What do you answer?
To be able, Madam,
First to inquire, than report the working,
Of any Lady's physic, in sweet phrase,
Yes, that's an act of elegance, and importance.
But what above?
O, that I had a goad for him.
To found out a good Corn-cutter.
Out on him!
Most barbarous!
Why did you do this, now?
Of purpose to discredit me? you damned Devil.
Sure, if I be not yet, I shall be. All
My days in Hell, were holidays to this!
'Tis labour lost, Madam?
HE is a dull fellow
Of no capacity!
Of no discourse!
O, if my Ambler had been here!
I, Madam;
You talk of a man, where is there such another?
Mr. Devile, put case, one of my Ladies, here,
Had a fine brach: and would employ you forth
To treat 'bout a convenient match for her.
What would you observe?
The colour, and the size, Madam.
And nothing else?
The Moon, you calf, the Moon!
I, and the Sign.
Yes, and receipts for proneness.
Than when the Puppies came, what would you do?
Get their nativities cast!
This's well. What more?
Consult the Almanac-man which would be least?
Which cleanliest?
And which silentest? This's well, madam!
And while she were with puppy?
Walk her out,
And air her every morning!
Very good!
And be industrious to kill her fleas?
Yes!
He will make a pretty proficient.
Who,
Coming from Hell, could look for such Catechising?
The Devil is an Ass. I do acknowledge it.
The top of woman! All her sex in abstract!
I love her, to each syllable, falls from her.
Good madam give me leave to go aside with him!
And try him a little!
Do, and I'll withdraw, Madam,
With this fair Lady: read to her, the while.
Come, Sr.
Dear Chief, relieve me, or I perish.
Lady, we'll follow. You are not jealous Sir?
O, madame! you shall see. Stay wife, behold,
I give her up here, absolutely, to you,
She is your own. Do with her what you will!
Melt, cast, and form her as you shall think good!
Set any stamp on! I'll receive her from you
As a new thing, by your own standard!
Well, Sir!
But what ha' you done i' your Dependence, since?
O, it goes on, I met your Cousin, the Master—
You did not acquaint him, Sr?
Faith, but I did, Sr.
And upon better thought, not without reason!
He being chief Officer, might ha' ta'en it ill, else,
As a Contempt against his Place, and that
In time Sir, ha' drawn on another Dependence.
Not, I did find him in good terms, and ready
To do me any service.
So he said, to you?
But Sr, you do not know him.
Why, I presumed
Because this business of my wives, required me,
I could not ha' done better: And he told
Me, that he would go presently to your Council,
A Knight, here, i' the Lane—
Yes, justice Either-side.
And get the Feoffment drawn, with a letter of Attorney,
For livery and seizin!
That I knows the course.
But Sir, you mean not to make him Feoffee?
Nay, that I'll pause on!
How now little Pitfall.
Your Cousin Master Euerill, would come in—
But he would know if Master Manly were here.
Not, tell him, if he were, I ha' made his peace!
he's one, Sir, has no State, and a man knows not,
How such a trust may tempt him.
I conceive you.
Sr. this same deed is done here.
Pretty Plutarch?
Art thou come with it? and has Sir Paul viewed it?
His hand is to the draught.
Will you step in, Sr.
And read it?
Yes.
I pray you a word wi' you.
Sir Paul Either-side willed me give you caution,
Whom you did make Feoffee: for 'tis the trust
O' your whole State: and though my Cousin here
Be a worthy Gentleman, yet his valour has
At the tall board been questioned; and we hold
Any man so impeached, of doubtful honesty!
I will not justify this; but give it you
To make your profit of it: if you utter it,
I can forswear it!
I believe you, and thank you, Sir.
BE not afraid, sweet Lady: ye are trusted
To love, not violence here; I am no ravisher,
But one, whom you, by your fair trust again,
May of a servant make a most true friend.
And such a one I need, but not this way:
Sir, I confess me to you, the mere manner
Of your attempting me, this morning took me,
And I did hold m'inuention, and my manners,
Were both engaged, to give it a requital;
But not unto your ends: my hope was than,
(Though interrrupted, ere it could be uttered)
That whom I found the Master of such language,
That brain and spirit, for such an enterprise,
Can not, but if those succours were demanded
To a right use, employ them virtuously!
And make that profit of his noble parts,
Which they would yield. Sr, you have now the ground,
To exercise them in: I am a woman;
That cannot speak more wretchedness of myself,
Than you can read; matched to a mass of folly;
That every day makes haste to his own ruin;
The wealth portion, that I brought him, spent;
And (through my friends neglect) no jointure made me.
My fortunes standing in this precipice,
'Tis Counsel that I want, and honest aides:
And in this name, I need you, for a friend!
Never in any other; for his ill,
Must not make me, Sr, worse.
O friend! forsake not
The brave occasion, virtue offers you,
To keep you innocent: I have feared for both;
And watched you, to prevent the ill I feared.
But, since the weaker side hath so assured me,
Let not the stronger fall by his own vice,
Or be the less a friend, cause virtue needs him.
Virtue shall never ask my succours twice;
Most friend, most man; your Counsels are commands:
Lady, I can love goodness in you, more
Than I did Beauty; and do here entitle
Your virtue, to the power, upon a life
You shall engage in any fruitful service,
Even to forfeit.
Madame: Do you hear, Sir,
We have another leg-strained, for this Dotterel.
He ' has a quarrel to carry, and has caused
A deed of Feoffment, of his whole estate
To be drawn yonder; he hast within: And you,
Only, he means to make Feoffee. he's fall'n
So desperately enamoured on you, and talks
Most like a madman: you did never hear
A Frantic, so in love with his own favour!
Now, you do know, 'tis of no validity
In your name, as you stand; Therefore advise him
To put in me. (h's come here:) You shall share Sir.
Madame, I have a suit to you; and aforehand,
I do bespeak you; you must not deny me,
I will be granted.
Sir, I must know it, though.
No Lady; you must not know it: yet, you must too.
For the trust of it, and the fame indeed,
Which else were lost me. I would use your name,
But in a Feoffment: make my whole estate
Over unto you: a trifle, a thing of nothing,
Some eighteen hundred.
Alas! I understand not
Those things Sir. I am a woman, and most loathe,
To embark myself—
You will not slight me, Madam?
Nor you'll not quarrel me?
Not, sweet Madam, I have
Already a dependence; for which cause
I do this: let me put you in, dear Madam,
I may be fairly killed.
You have your friends, Sir,
About you here, for choice.
She tells you right, Sir.
Death, if she do, what do I care for that?
Say, I would have her tell me wrong.
Why, Sir,
If for the trust, you'll let me have the honour
To name you one.
Nay, you do me the honour, Madam:
Who is't?
This Gentleman:
O, no, sweet Madam,
I● ' is friend to him, with whom I ha' the dependence.
Who might he be?
One Wittipol: do you know him?
Alas Sir, he, a toy: This Gentleman
A friend to him? no more than I am Sir!
But will your Ladyship undertake that, Madam?
Yes, and what else, for him, you will engage me.
What is his name?
His name is Eustace Manly.
Whence does he writ himself?
of Middlesex,
Esquire.
Say nothing, Madam. Clerk, come hither
Writ Eustace Manly, Squire o' Middlesex.
What ha' you done, Sir?
named a gentleman,
That I'll be answerable for, to you, Sir.
Had I named you, it might ha' been suspected:
This way, 'tis safe.
Come Gentlemen, your hands,
For witness.
What is this?
You ha' made Election
Of a most worthy Gentleman!
Would one of worth
Had spoke it: whence it comes, it is
Rather a shame to me, than a praise.
Sir, I will give you any Satisfaction.
Be silent than:" falsehood commends not truth.
You do deliver this, Sir, as your deed.
To th' use of Mr. Manly?
Yes: and Sir—
When did you see young Wittipol? I am ready,
For process now; Sir, this is Publication.
He shall hear from me, he would needs be courting
My wife, Sir.
Yes: So witnesseth his Cloak there.
Nay good Sir,— Madam, you did undertake—
What?
That he was not Wittipol's friend.
I hear
Sr. no confession of it.
O she knows not;
Now I remember, Madam! This young Wittipol,
Would had debauched my wife, and made me Cuckold,
Through a casement; he did fly her home
To mine own window: but I think I soued him,
And ravished her away, out of his pounces.
Tha ' sworn to ha' him by the ears: I fear
The toy, wi' not do me right.
Not? that were pity!
What right do you ask, Sir? Here he is will do't you?
Ha'? Wittipol?
I Sir, no more Lady now,
Nor Spaniard!
Not indeed, 'tis Wittipol.
Am I the thing I feared?
A Cuckold? No Sir,
But you were late in possibility,
I'll tell you so much.
But your wife's too virtuous!
we'll see her Sir, at home, and leave you here,
To be made Duke o' Shoreditch with a project.
thieves, ravishers.
Cry but another note, Sir,
I'll mar the tune, o' your pipe!
Give me my deed, than.
Neither: that shall be kept for your wife's good,
Who will know, better how to use it.
Ha'
To feast you with my land?
Sir, be you quiet,
Or I shall gag you, ere I go, consult
Your Master of dependences; how to make this
A second business, you have time Sir.
Oh!
What will the ghost of my wife Grandfather,
My learned Father, with my worshipful Mother,
Think of me now, that left me in this world
In state to be their Heir? that am become
A Cuckold, and an Ass, and my wife's Ward;
Likely to lose my land; ha' my throat cut:
All, by her practice!
Sir, we are all abused!
And be so still! Who hinders you, I pray you,
Let me alone, I would enjoy myself,
And be the Duke o' Drowned-land, you ha' made me.
Sir, we must play an aftergame o' this
But I am not in case to be a Gamester:
I tell you once again—
You must be ruled
And take some counsel.
Sir, I do hate counsel,
As I do hate my wife, my wicked wife!
But we may think how to recover all:
If you will act.
I will not think; nor act;
Nor yet recover; do not talk to me?
I'll run out o' my wits, rather than hear;
I will be what I am, Fabian Fitz-Dottrel,
Though all the world say nay to't.
Let's follow him.
But has my Lady missed me?
Beyond telling!
Here has been that infinity of strangers!
And than she would ha' had you, to ha' sampled you
With one within, that they are now a teaching;
And does pretend to your rank.
Good fellow Pitfall,
Tell Mr. Mere-craft, I entreat a word with him.
This most unlucky accident will go near
To be the loss o' my place; I am in doubt!
With me? what say you Mr Ambler?
Sir,
I would beseech your worship stand between
Me, and my Lady's displeasure, for my absence.
O, is that all? I warrant you.
I would tell you Sir
But how it happened.
Brief, good Master Ambler,
Put yourself to your rack: for I have task
Of more importance.
Sir you'll laugh at me!
But (so is Truth) a very friend of mine,
Finding by conference with me, that I lived
Too chaste for my complexion (and indeed
Too honest for my place, Sir) did advise me
If I did love myself (as that I do,
I must confess)
Spare your Parenthesis.
To give my body a little evacuation—
Well, and you went to a whore?
Not, Sr. I durst not
(For fear it might arrive at some body's ear,
It should not) trust myself to a common house;
But got the Gentlewoman to go with me,
And carry her bedding to a Conduit-head,
Hard by the place toward Tyburn, which they call
My L. Major's Banqueting-house. Now Sir, This morning
Was Execution; and I never dreamt on't,
Till I heard the noise o' the people, and the horses;
And neither I, nor the poor Gentlewoman
Durst stir, till all was done and passed: so that
I' the Interim, we fell a sleep again.
Nay, if you fall, from your gallop, I am gone Sr.
But, when I waked, to put on my cloathes, a suit,
I made new for the action, it was gone,
And all my money, with my purse, my seals,
My hard-wax, and my table-books, my studies,
And a fine new device, I had to carry
My pen, and ink, my civet, and my toothpicks,
All under one. But, that which grieved me, was
The Gentlewoman's shoes (with a pair of roses,
And garters, I had given her for the business)
So as that made us stay, till it was dark.
For I was feign to lend her mine, and walk
In a rug, by her, barefoot, to Saint Giles'.
A kind of Irish penance! Is this all, Sir?
To satisfy my Lady.
I will promise' you, Sr.
I ha' told the true Disaster.
I cannot stay wi' you
Sir, to condole; but gratulate your return.
An honest gentleman, but he's never at leisure
To be himself: He has such tides of business.
O, Call me home again, dear Chief, and put me
To yoking foxes, milking of He-goats,
Pounding of water in a mortar, laving
The sea dry with a nutshell, gathering all
The leaves are fall'n this Autumn, drawing farts
Out of dead bodies, making ropes of sand,
Catching the winds together in a net,
Mustering of aunts, and numbering atoms; all
That hell, and you thought exquisite torments, rather
Than stay me here, a thought more: I would sooner
Keep fleas within a circle, and be accountant
A thousand year, which of 'em and how far
Out leapt the other, than endure a minute
Such as I have within. There is no hell
To a Lady of fashion. All your tortures there
Are pastimes to it. IT would be a refreshing
For me, to be i' the fire again, from hence.
This is my suit, and those the shoes and roses!
Th' have such impertinent vexations,
A general Council o' devils could not hit—
Ha! This is he, I took a sleep with his Wench,
And borrowed his cloathes. What might I do to balk him?
Do you hear, Sr?
Answ. him but not to th' purpose
What is your name, I pray you Sir.
Is't so late Sir?
I ask not o' the time, but of your name, Sir,
I thank you, Sir. Yes it does hold Sir, certain.
Hold, Sir? What holds? I must both hold, and talk to you
About these clothes.
A very pretty lace!
But the Tailor cozened me.
Not, I am cozened
By you! robbed.
Why, when you please Sir, I am
For three penny Gleek, your man
Pox o' your gleek,
And three pence. Give me an answer.
Sir,
My master is the best at it.
Your master!
Who is your Master.
Let it be friday night.
What should be than?
Your best songs Thom o' Bedlam
I think, you are he. Does he mock me trow, from purpose?
Or do not I speak to him, what I mean?
Good Sir your name.
Only a couple o' Cock's Sir,
If we can get a Widgeon, 'tis in season.
He hopes to make on o' these Sceptics o' me
(I think I name 'em right) and does not fly me.
I wonder at that! 'tis a strange confidence!
I'll prove another way, to draw his answer.
It is the easiest thing Sir, to be done.
As plain, as sizzling: roll but wi' your eyes,
And foam at th' mouth. A little castle-soap
Will do it, to rub your lips: And than a nutshell,
With toe, and touchwood in it to spit fire,
Did you never read, Sir, little Darrel's tricks,
With the boy o' Burton, and the 7, in Lancashire,
Summer at Nottingham? All these do teach it.
And we'll give out, Sir, that your wife has bewitched you:
And practised with those two, as Sorcerers.
And give you potions, by which means you were
Not Compos mentis, when you made your feoffment.
There's no recovery o' your state, but this:
This, Sir, will sting.
And move in a Court of equity.
For, it is more than manifest, that this was
A plot o' your wives, to get your land.
I think it.
Sir it appears.
Nay, and my cousin has known
These gallants in these shapes.
T' have done strange things, Sir.
One as the Lady, the other as the Squire.
How, a man's honesty may be fooled! I thought him
A very Lady.
So did I: renounce me else.
But this way, Sir, you'll be revenged at height.
Upon 'em all.
Yes faith, and since your Wife
Has run the way of woman thus, even give her—
Lost by this hand, to me; dead to all joys
Of her dear Dotterel, I shall never pity her:
That could, pity herself.
Princely resolved Sir,
And like yourself still, in Potentiâ.
Guilt-head what news?
O Sir, my hundred pieces:
Let me ha' them yet.
Yes Sir, officers
Arrest him.
Me?
I arrest you.
Keep the peace,
I charge you gentlemen.
Arrest me? Why?
For better security, Sir. My son Plutarch
Assures me, ye are not worth a groat.
Pardon me, Father,
I said his worship had no foot of Land left:
And that I'll justify, for I writ the deed.
Ha' you these tricks i' the city?
Yes, and more.
Arrest this gallant too, here, at my suit.
I, and at mine. He owes me for his lodging
Two year and a quarter.
Why M. Guilt-head, Landlord,
Thou art not mad, though th' art Constable
Puffed up with th' pride of the place? Do you hear, Sirs.
Have I deserved this from you two? for all
My pains at Court, to get you each a patent
For what?
Vpo' my project o' the forks,
Forks? what be they?
The laudable use of forks,
Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
To th' sparing o' Napkins. That, that should have made
Your bellows go at the forge, as his at the furnace.
I ha' procured it, ha' the Signet for it,
Dealt with the Linen-drapers, on my private,
By cause, I feared, they were the likeliest ever
To stir against, to cross it: for 'twill be
A mighty saver of Linen through the kingdom
(As that is one o' my grounds, and to spare washing)
Now, on you two, had I laid all the profits.
Guilt-head to have the making of all those
Of gold and silver, for the better personages;
And you, of those of Steel for the common sort.
And both by Patent, I had brought you your seals in.
But now you have prevented me, and I thank you.
Sir, I will bail you, at mine own apperill.
Nay choose.
Do you so too, good Father.
I like the fashion o' the project, well,
The forks! It may be a lucky one! and is not
Intricate, as one would say, but fit for
Plain heads, as ours, to deal in. Do you hear
Officers, we discharge you.
Why this shows
A little good nature in you, I confess,
But do not tempt your friends thus. Little Guilt-head,
Advise your sire, great Guilt-head from these courses:
And, here, to trouble a great man in reversion,
For a matter o' fifty on a false Alarm,
Away, it shows not well. Let him get the pieces
And bring 'hem. you'll hear more else.
Father.
O Master Sledge, are you here? I ha' been to seek you.
You are the Constable, they say. Here's one
That I do charge with Felony, for the suit
He wears, Sir.
Who? M. Fitz-Dottrels man?
Beware what you do, M. Ambler.
Sir, these clothes
I'll swear, are mine: and the shoes the gentlewomen
I told you of: and ha' him afore a justice,
I william.
My master, Sir, will pass his word for me.
O, can you speak to purpose now?
Not I,
If you be such a one Sir, I will leave you
To your God fathers in Law. Let twelve men work.
Do you hear Sir, pray, in private.
well, what say you?
Brief, for I have no time to lose
Truth is, Sir,
I am the very Devil, and had leave
To take this body, I am in, to serve you.
Which was a Cutpurses, and hanged this Morning.
And it is likewise true, I stole this suit
To clothe me with. But Sir let me not go
To prison for it. I have hitherto
Lost time, done nothing; shown, indeed, no part
O' my Devil's nature. Now, I will so help
Your malice, 'gainst these parties: so advance
The business, that you have in hand of witchcraft,
An your possession, as myself were in you.
Teach you such tricks, to make your belly swell,
And your eyes turn, to foam, to stare, to gnash
Your teeth together, and to beat yourself,
Laugh loud, and feign six voices—
Out you Rogue!
You most infernal counterfeit wretch! Avaunt!
Do you think to gull me with your Aesop's Fables?
Here take him to you, I ha' no part in him.
Sir.
Away, I do disclaim, I will not hear you.
What said he to you, Sir?
Like a lying rascal
Told me he was the Devil.
How! a good rest!
And that he would teach me, such fine devil's tricks
For our new resolution.
O' pox on him,
'Twas excellent wisely done, Sir, not to trust him.
Why, if he were the Devil, we sha' not need him,
If you'll be ruled. Go throw yourself on a bed, Sir,
And feign you ill. we'll not be seen wi' you,
Till after, that you have a fit: and all
Confirmed within. Keep you with the two Ladies
And persuade them. I'll to justice Either-side,
And possess him with all. Trains shall seek out Engine,
And they two fill the town with't, every cable
Is to be veered. We must employ out all
Our emissaries now; Sir, I will sand you
Bladders and bellows. Sir, be confident,
'Tis no hard thing t' out do the Devil in:
A Boy o' thirteen year old made him an Ass
But t' toher day.
Well, I'll begin to practice,
And scape the imputation of being Cuckold,
By mine own act.
ye are right.
Come, you ha' put
Yourself to a simple coil here, and your friends,
By dealing with new Agents, in new plots.
Not more o' that, sweet cousin.
What had you
To do with this same Wittipol, for a Lady?
Question not that: 'tis done.
You had some strain
'Boue E- la?
I had indeed.
And, now, you crack for it.
Do not upbraid me.
Come, you must be told on't;
You are so covetous, still, to embrace
Moore than you can, that you lose all.
'Tis right.
What would you more, than Guilty? Now, your succours.
HEre you are lodged, Sir, you must sand your garnish,
If you'll be private.
There it is, Sir, leave me.
To Newgate, brought? How is the name of Devil
Discredited in me! What a lost fiend
Shall I be, on return? My Chief will roar
In triumph, now, that I have been on earth,
A day, and done no noted thing, but brought
That body back here, was hanged out this morning.
Well! would it once were midnight, that I knew
My utmost. I think Time be drunk, and sleeps;
He is so still, and moves not! I do glory
Now i' my torment. Neither can I expect it,
I have it with my fact.
Child of hell, be thou merry:
Put a look on, as round, boy, and read as a cherry.
Cast care at thy posterns; and firk i' thy fetters,
They are ornaments, Baby, have graced thy betters:
Look upon me, and harken. Our Chief doth salute thee,
And lest the coldyron should chance to confute thee,
HE hath sent thee, grant-parole by me to stay longer
A month here on earth, against cold Child, or hunger
How? longer here a month?
Yes, boy, till the Session,
That so thou mayest have a triumphal egression.
In a cart, to be hanged.
Not, Child, in a Car,
The chariot of Triumph, which most of them are.
And in the mean time, to be greasy, and bouzy,
And nasty, and filthy, and ragged and lousy,
With damn me, renounce me, and all the fine phrases;
That bring, unto Tyburn, the plentiful gazes.
He is a Devil! and may be our Chief!
The great Superior Devil! for his malice?
Archdevil! I acknowledge him. He knew
What I would suffer, when he tied me up thus
In a rogues body: and he has (I thank him)
His tyrannous pleasure on me, to confine me
To the unlucky carcase of a Cutpurse,
Wherein I could do nothing.
Impudent fiend,
Stop thy lewd mouth. Dost thou not shame and tremble
To lay thine own dull damned defects upon
An innocent case, there? Why thou heavy slave!
The spirit, that did possess that flesh before
Put more true life, in a finger, and a thumb,
Than thou in the whole Mass. Yet thou rebell'st
And murmurest? What one proffer hast thou made,
Wicked enough, this day, that might be called
Worthy thine own, much less the name that sent thee?
First, thou didst help thyself into a beating
Promptly, and with it endangered'st too thy tongue:
A Devil, and could not keep a body entire
One day! That, for our credit. And to vindicate it,
Hinderdest (for aught thou knowst) a deed of darkness:
Which was an act of that egregious folly,
As no one, toward the Devil, could ha' thought on,
This for your acting! but for suffering! why
Thou hast been cheated on, with a false beard,
And a turned cloak. Faith, would your predecessor
The Cutpurse, think you, ha' been so? Out upon thee,
The hurt th' hast done, to let men know their strength,
And that the are able to outdo a devil
Put in a body, will for ever be
A scar upon our Name! whom hast thou dealt with,
Woman or man, this day, but have outgone thee
Some way, and most have proved the better fiends?
Yet, you would be employed? Yes, hell shall make you
Provincial o' the Cheaters or Bawd-ledger,
For this side o' the town! No doubt you'll tender
A rare account of things. Bane o' your itch,
And scratching for employment. I'll ha' brimstone
To all lay it sure, and fire to singe your nails of,
But, that I would not such a damned dishonour
Stick on our state, as that the devil were hanged;
And could not save a body, that he took
From Tyburn, but it must come thither again:
You should even ride. But, up away with him—
Mount, darling of darkness, my shoulders are broad:
He that caries the fiend, is sure of his load.
The Devil was want to carry away the evil;
But, now, the Evil out-carries the Devil.
O me!
1. What's this? 2. A ●ece of justice Hall
Is broken down. 3. Fough! what esteem of brimstone
Is here? 4. The prisoner's dead, came in but now!
Ha'? where? 4. Look here.
'Slid, I should know his countenance!
It is Gill-Cut-purse, was hanged out, this morning!
'Tis he! 2. The Devil, sure, has a hand in this!
3. What shall we do?
Carry the news of it
Unto the Sheriffs. 1. And to the justices.
4. This strange! 3. And savours of the Devil, strongly!
2. I ha' the sulphur of Hell-coal i' my nose.
1. Fough.
Carry him in. 1. Away. 2. How rank it is!
THis was the notablest Conspiracy,
That ere I heard of.
Sir, They had given him potions,
That did enamour him on the counterfeit Lady—
Just to the time o' delivery o' the deed—
And than the witchcraft 'gan t' appear, for straight
He fell into his fit.
Of rage at first, Sir,
Which since has so increased.
Good Sr. Poule, see him,
And punish the impostors.
Therefore I come, Madame.
Let Mr Eitherside alone, Madam.
Do you hear?
Call in the Constable, I will have him by:
HE is the King's Officer! and some Citizens,
Of credit! I'll discharge my conscience clearly.
Yes, Sir, and sand for his wife.
And the two Sorcerers,
By any means!
I thought one a true Lady,
I should be sworn. So did you, Eytherside?
Yes, by that light, would I might ne'er stir else, Tailbush.
And the other a civil Gentleman.
But, Madam,
You know what I told your Ladyship.
I now see it:
I was providing of a banquet for 'hem.
After I had done instructing o' the fellow
Devile, the Gentleman's man
Who's found a thief, Madam.
And to have robbed your Usher, Master Ambler,
This morning.
How?
I'll tell you more, anon.
Gi' me some garlic, garlic, garlic, garlic.
Hark the poor Gentleman, how he is tormented!
My wife is a whore, I'll kiss her no more: and why?
Mayest not thou be a Cuckold, as well as I?
Ha', ha', ha', ha', ha', ha', ha', ha', etc.
That is the Devil speaks, and laughs in him.
Do you think so, Sr.
I discharge my conscience.
And is not the Devil good company? Yes, wis.
How he changes, Sir, his voice!
And a Cuckold is
Where ere he put his head, with a a Wanion,
If his horns be forth, the Devil's companion!
Look, look, look, else.
How he foams!
And swells!
O, me! what's that there, riseth in his belly!
A strange thing! hold it down:
We cannot, Madam.
'Tis too apparent this!
Wittipol, Wittipol.
How now, what play ha' we here.
What fine, new matters?
The Coxcomb, and the Coverlet.
O strange impudence!
That these should come to face their sin!
And outface
justice, they are the parties, Sir.
Say nothing.
Did you mark, Sir, upon their coming in,
How he called Wittipol.
And never saw 'hem.
I warrant you did I, let 'em play a while.
Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
Lass poor Gentleman!
How he is tortured!
Fie, Master Fitz-dottrel!
What do you mean to counterfeit thus?
O, o,
She comes with a needle, and thrusts it in,
She pulls out that, and she puts in a pin,
And now, and now, I do not know how, nor where,
But she pricks me here, and she pricks me there: ôh, ôh:
Woman forbear.
What, Sr?
A practice foul
For one so fair:
Hath this, than, credit with you?
Do you believe in't?
Gentlemen, I'll discharge
My conscience. 'Tis a clear conspiracy!
A dark, and devilish practice! I detest it!
The justice sure will prove the merrier man!
This is most strange, Sir!
Come not to confront
Authority with impudence: I tell you,
I do detest it. Here comes the King's Constable,
And with him a right worshipful Commoner;
My good friend, Master Guilt-head! I am glad
I can before such witnesses, profess
My conscience, and my detestation of it.
Horrible! most unnatural! Abominable!
You do not tumble enough.
Wallow, gnash:
O, how he is vexed!
'Tis too manifest.
Give him more soap to foam with, now lie still.
And act a little.
What does he now, Sr.
Show
The taking of Tobacco, with which the Devil
Is so delighted.
Hum!
And calls for Hum.
You takers of strong Waters, and Tobacco,
Mark this.
Yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, etc.
That's Starch! the Devil's Idol of that colour.
He ratifies it, with clapping of his hands.
The proofs are pregnant.
How the Devil can act!
He is the Master of Players! Master Guilt-head,
And Poets, too! you heard him talk in rhyme!
I had forgot to observe it to you, ere while!
See, he spits fire.
O no, he plays at Figgum,
The Devil is the Author of wicked Figgum—
Why speak you not unto him?
If I had
All innocence of man to be endangered,
And he could save, or ruin it: I'd not breathe
A syllable in request, to such a fool,
He makes himelfe.
O they whisper, whisper, whisper.
We shall have more, of Devils a score,
To come to dinner, in me the sinner.
Alas, poor Gentleman!
Put 'em asunder.
Keep 'em one from the other.
Are you frantic, Sir,
Or what grave dotage moves you, to take part
With so much villainy? we are not afraid
Either of law, or trial; let us be
Examined what our ends were, what the means?
To work by; and possibility of those means.
Do not conclude against us, ere you hear us.
I will not hear you, yet I will conclude
Out of the circumstances.
Will you so, Sir?
Yes, they are palpable:
Not as your folly:
I will discharge my conscience, and do all
To the Meridian of justice:
You do well, Sir.
Provide me to eat, three or four dishes o' good meat,
I'll feast them, and their trains, a justice head and brains
Shall be the first.
The Devil loves not justice,
There you may see.
A spare-rib o' my wife,
And a whore's purtenance! a Guilt-head whole.
Be not you troubled, Sir, the Devil speaks it.
Yes, wis, Knight, shit, Poule, jowl, owl, foul, troll, bowl.
Cram, another of the devil's games!
Speak, Sir, some Greek, if you can. Is not the justice
A solemn gamester?
Peace.
,
,
.
He curses
In Greek, I think.
Your Spanish, that I taught you.
Quebrémos elojo de burlas,
How? your rest—
Let's break his neck in jest, the Devil says,
Di grátia, Signior miose haúcte denári fataméne part.
What, would the Devil borrow money?
Ouy,
Ouy Monsieur, ùn pàuure Diable! Diablet in!
It is the devil, by his several languages.
Where's Sr. Poule Eitherside?
Here, what's the matter?
O! such an accident fall'n out at Newgate, Sir:
A great piece of the prison is rend down!
The Devil has been there, Sir, in the body—
Of the young Cutpurse, was hanged out this morning,
But, in new clothes, Sir, every one of us know him.
These things were found in his pocket.
Those are mine, Sr.
I think he was committed on your charge, Sir.
For a new felony
Yes.
he's gone, Sir, now,
And left us the dead body. But withal, Sir,
Such an infernal stink, and steam behind,
You cannot see St. Pulchar's Steeple, yet.
They smelled as far as Ware, as the wind lies,
By this time, sure.
Is this upon your credit, friend?
Sir, you may see, and satisfy yourself.
Nay, than, 'tis time to leave of counterfeiting.
Sir I am not bewitched, nor have a Devil:
Not more than you. I do defy him, I,
And did abuse you. These two Gentlemen
Put me upon it. (I have faith against him)
They taught me all my tricks. I will tell truth,
And shame the Fiend. See, here, Sir, are my bellows,
And my false belly, and my Mouse, and all
That should ha' come forth?
Sir, are not you ashamed
Now of your solemn, serious vanity?
I will make honourable amendss to truth.
And so will I. But these are Coozeners, still;
And ha' my land, as plotters, with my wife:
Who, though she be not a witch, is worse, a whore.
Sir, you belie her. She is chaste, and virtuous,
And we are honest. I do know no glory
A man should hope, by venting his own follies,
But you'll still be an Ass, in spite of providence.
Please you go in, Sir, and hear truths, than judge 'em:
And make amendss for your late rashness; when,
You shall but hear the pains and care was taken,
To save this fool from ruin (his Grace of Drowned-land)
My land is drowned indeed—
Peace.
And how much
His modest and too worthy wife hath suffered
By misconstruction, from him, you will blush,
First, for your own belief, more for his actions!
His land is his: and never, by my friend,
Or by myself, meant to another use,
But for her succours, who hath equal right.
If any other had worse counsels in it,
(I know I speak to those can apprehended me)
Let 'em repent 'em, and be not detected.
It is not manly to take joy, or pride
In human errors (we do all ill things,
They do 'em worst that love 'em, and devil there,
Till the plague comes) The few that have the seeds
Of goodness left, will sooner make their way
To a true life, by shame, than punishment.
THus, the Proiecter, here, is overthrown.
But I have now a Project of mine own,
If it may pass: that no man would invite
The Poet from us, to sup forth to night,
If the play please. If it displeasant be,
We do presume, that no man will: nor we.