WEre not our present subject mixt with sear,
'Twould much affright us to see all you here.
One would suffice us, or no Auditor.
Each to himself an ample Theatre,
Let rude Plebejans think so, but we know
All judgements here from the same Spring do flow.
All here have but one censure, all one breast.
All sons of the same Mother; but the rest
We preoccupate their Censure, and Foretell,
What after may be said not to be well,
As in most decent Garments you may see.
Some gracious Ornaments inweaved be:
Which serve for little use, but on some day
Destined to please himself, the wearer may
Without a blush put on, when his best friends
Intent to visit him, so our hope intends
The sacred Muse's Progeny to greet,
Which under our Roof, now the third time meet,
We will not open the book to you, and show
A story word by word, as it doth go,
But give invention leave to undertake,
Of its own strains, some benefit to make:
For though a Tragic Pen may be confined,
Within a studies private Walls, the mind
Must be unbounded, and with inventions steel,
Strike fire from alient Flints—
So free we are from setting any price,
On these our studied Vanities, that advice
Almost disdained the whispers of those tongues
Which private first, though vented public wrongs:
To the Patient Patient oft. We'll here begin
To be alitle peremptory, oh that sin
Of wilful indiscretion, 'tis no bays
To make us Garlands of our own mouths praise,
Which who affect, may they so Laurel lacke,
That slanders Thunder may behind their back,
Blast them with Calumny, for we vow dear
Pay for their pains, that give attention here.
And since it's suffered with kind indulgence
We hope that Kingly Parent's our defence,
Who would not have his dandling love be known,
But unto those had off spring of their own,
And for we are assured that here be
No brains so cursed with black sterility.
But of some nature they can freely call,
Births more mature, and Celestial,
Their studies issue, they like kindest Mothers,
With tender hands will swath the limbes of others.
BE dumb those now harsh notes, our softer ears
Shall never be acquainted with such sounds,
Peace (our grand) Captai, se h ,
That would have once confronted Mars himself,
(Acknowledged for a better Deity)
Puts off ambitious burdens, and doth hate
Through bloody Rivers to make passages,
Whereby his Soul might float to Acheron,
Wrinckle your brows no more (stern fates) for we
Scorn to be made the servile Ministers
To cut those threads, at which yourselves have trembled,
ming us the fiercer Destiny.
Yet must great Amurath thank those sacred powers,
They have enriched our souls with such a price,
As had those Heroes whose revengeful Arms,
Served Mars a ten years' Prenticeship at Troy,
dreamed succeeding times should be possessed,
With such an unparalleled unprized beauty as my Saint:
They would not have prevented so their bliss,
But been most humble Suitors to the Gods,
To have protracted their then fond spent life,
But to behold this object. Which outshines
Their Helena, as much as doth the eye
O all the World, dazle the lesser fires.
Iove I'll outbrave thee! melt thyself in Lust
Embrace at once all star-made Concubines,
I'll not envy thee, know I have to spare
Beauty enough, to make another Venus;
And for fond Gods, that have no reward in store
To make me happier, here I'll place my Heaven.
And for thy sake, this shall my Motto be,
I conquered Greece, one Grecian conquered me.
But (gracious Lord) those streams (we see) soon ebb,
Which with outrageous swelling flow to fast,
Forbid (Lucina) this soon kindled fire,
Should ere burn out itself 'tis a true Theme,
That ne'er lasts long, that seemeth most extreme.
Can this rich price of nature, precious gem
Give entertainment to suspecting guests?
Come, come, these arms are curious chains of love,
With which thou linkest my heart eternally,
Thy cheeks the royal Paper interlined,
With Nature's Rhetoric, and love persuasion,
Stands there attracting still my gazing eye:
This than I'll read, and here I now will feign,
That these all Antique fables of the Gods,
Are writ in flowing numbers; first thy lip,
Was fair Europa's which they say made Iove,
Turn a wild Heifer: next, this sparkling eye
Was the Aemonian Io's; then, this hand
Leda's, fair Mother to those Stare made Twins,
Thus, thus, I'll Comment on this golden Book:
Nature nor Art, have taught how to feign:
Fairest, 'twas you first brought me to this vain:
In loving Combats now I valiant prove,
Let others war, great Amurath shall love.
Brave resolution, O the fond thoughts of man,
Awake Enuo! I'll find stratagems:
There shall be Physic, to purge this disease,
Light sores are gently used, but such a part,
Must be cut off, lest it infect the hart.
Schahin, Our Tutor, we command this night
Be solemnized with all delightful sports,
Thy learned invention best can think upon.
Prepare a Mask, which lively represents,
How once the Gods did love: that shall not teach
Us by examples, but we'll smile to think:
How poor and weak their idle feigning was
To our affection. Schahin, be free in wit;
And sudden: now come my Kingdom's Pride:
Hymen would wed himself to such a Bride.
Nature, and all those universed powers,
Which showed such Admirable Godlike skill,
Inframing this true model of ourselves,
This Man, this thing called man, why do you thus,
Make him a spectacle of such laughter for you,
When in each man we see a Monarchy?
For, as in states, all fortunes still attend:
So with a Kingdom, with a complete state
Well governed, and well managed in himself,
Both each man bears, when that best part of man,
(Reason) doth swayand rule each Passion.
Affections are good Servants: but if will
Make them once Master, they'll prove Tyrants still.
No more King now: poor Subject AMURATH,
Whom I have seen break through a Troop of Men,
Like lightning from a Cloud: and done those Acts,
Which 'ene the Furies would have trembled a:
Treading down Armies, as if by them he meant
Of dead men's backs to build up stairs to Heaven:
And now lieth lurking in a woman's arms
Drencht in the Lethe of Ignoble lust,
its me for the wanton Enginere
keep his so loose thoughts in smoothing tune.
Woman enticing woman: golden hook
To catch our thoughts: and when we once are caught▪
into the public view of shame:
And there we lie bathed in incestuous pleasure
od to laugh and scorne at once.
Bone to my senses! I could either wish
birth were like those Creatures, which we say
from Putrid and corrupted matter;
Then that we should acknowledge our dear being
With grass and flowers: for what else is our state?
V to the top but then the waight shll fall
Upon their head that caused it. Work (my brain)
Tush, blood, not water must wash off this stain.
Shine here (my beauty) and expel the night
More than a thousand stars that grace the Heavens:
Me thinks, I see the Gods inventing shapes
In which they mean to court thee. Iove he frowns
And is far more jealous, more suspicious
Of thee, than all the painted Trulls, whose eyes
Bedeck the all ennameld Firmament.
Beauty (my Lord) 'tis the worst part of woman.
A weak poor thing, assaulted every hour
By creeping minutes of defacing time:
A superficies which each breath of care.
Blasts off: and every humorous streame of grief,
Which flows from forth these Fountains of our eyes,
Washeth away, as rain doth Winter's snow.
But those blessed guiders of all Nuptial rites,
Have wrought a better cement to make fast,
The hearts of Lovers; the true name of Wife
Guilds o'er our thrones, with a more constant shape,
Than can be subject or to time, or care:
And in our selves; yea in our own true breasts,
We have obedience, duty, careful Love;
And last and best of all, we may have Children,
Children are Hymen's pledges, these shall be
Perpetual chains, to link my Lord and me.
Art thou a Woman? Goddesse, we adore,
And Idolise; what we but loved before;
What Devils have men beene, whose furious brains
Have oft abused that Deity called Woman:
Dipping their Raven's quill in Stygian Ink,
To blast such heavenly paper as your faces.
Were all the enticing lusts, damned policies,
Prodigious fascinations, unsearched thoughts,
Dissembled tears, broke vows, loathed appetites,
Luxurious and unsatiate desires.
Were all these of Women equally weighed,
That virtue in thy breast, 'twill out-ballance all
And recompense the ruin of all thy Sex.
So please your Majesty, L. Shahin's ready
For entrance with his Masque.
Tell him we're wholly bent for expectation.
Sat, sit (my Queen) Musicke exceed your Spheres,
Think I am Iove, and Godlike please our ears.
Gaze you mortals, gaze you still,
On the Gods now look your fill.
Iove and Iuno are descending,
Yet her lealousies not ending,
Mars, stern Mars, he will not fight,
But with Venus when 'tis Night.
Daphne crowns Apollo's head,
Whom she would embrace in Bed,
Neptune swells his frothy cheek,
Cause Diana is not meek.
Gaze you mortals, etc.
Come now my (Sister and Wife) we'll begin
To court afresh! Nay, lour not (Heaven's Queen)
Heere on this greene we'll a Lavato dane,
What if our hairs grow silver, yet our strength,
Is young, and vigorous! Say (fellow Gods)
(Since we are full of Nectar, and our cares,
Lie drenched in our Nepenthe) take your Queenes, and be all
jovial, Mars for our Daughter Venus!
Apollo join with Pallas! Brother of Floods
Embrace Diana! God's sometimes merry be:
But in the night, when mortals may not see.
How now (wanton?) Can I no where go,
For recreation but you follow me?
Is this your Recreation? Fie! My Lord
Will you be wanton still? For here you came
For some new Harlot, some new Queen for you.
Juno, Wife.
Your Sister, (thunderer,) and not your Wife!
Banished from Heaven I am; and your Bed,
Resign them both to Strumpets, Concubines,
And now you come to see a fresh new lass
In which Pole now or in what part of heaven,
Shall she be stellified?
Shall still sinister thoughts wrong our intent,
Well (Iuno) well, you'll ever be a woman,
A very, very woman! But since she scolds,
Let's hence (ye Gods) lest her infectious breath
Blast the succeeding day: and mortals curse
Her hellbred jealousy: Calumnious woman
Come scold in heaven! For if Gods lived on Earth
Suspitious tongues would blame most innocent mirth.
Well! love looked pale! I touched him to the quick!
'Tis some new Minion he came down to see!
Hark (jealousy) know Juno is a woman!
Am I not mad yet? Mistress Bride, adieu:
Jove shall not steal a kiss? My curse is past,
When thou sleepest first a Bride, mayst sleep thy last.
Fair Bride I sang thy Epithalamy,
And left Elisium for thy Nuptials:
Iuno here thundered 'gainst the Thunderer,
Knowing how thy beauty dazzles hers,
She durst not let heaven's King once glance a look,
But threatened with her hellbred incantations,
To metamorphize thine unparaleld
And most celestial shape into worse forms;
And more prodigious than ever poisoned charms.
Wrought on the fabled Concubines of love:
But know great Queen, my Mother Venus vows
Her everlasting guard to save such beauty,
Lest if thou perish, Nature herself
Loose her only pattern of serenity,
But I must hast, Love which the Gods protect,
Can never be indangered by neglect.
Scahin, thine Art is excellent; but say,
Do Gods fall out for love amongst themselves?
My Lord, these are but fables: yet to make
The show more pertinent, and to grace your Queen,
Conceipt took leave to put the frown on Iuno.
My Lords and friends, we shall be ever thankful
And rest a Debtor to your courtesy.
Not so fair Queen, but durst I now entreat
The Kings detaining from the sweets of Bed,
There yet remains one thought upon conceit,
Which you would doubly grace me to behold.
Our worthy Tutor shall obtain a Night,
A night ofus, in any case we can!
But then let me inform your Majesty,
That 'tis a warrior's show, which once you loved,
But now are free from.
'Tis best of all, with greediness we'll see it,
O how the soul doth gratulate itself
When safely it beholds the dangerous state
Of others, and itself securely free!
Glad are we still to stand upon the shore,
And see a far off others tossed in the Sea,
Or in a Gallery at a Fencer's stage,
We laugh when mutually each one takes wounds;
Sat still (Eumorphe) Scahin, thy show in haste;
'Tis best delight, to think on troubles past.
Stay you most worthy shades! brave Hector stay!
And proud Achilles, know your massy Tombs,
Which have so long o'erwhelmed your valiant bones
Yawns wide to let the imprisoned corpses forth.
I must afresh imbalm your sacred Trunks,
And sweet your memory with most happy oil,
Of just report, the Gods awaked me Fame
From out the oblivious Sepulcher of sleep,
To drop that Ink into old Homer's pen,
Wherewith he curiously hath lined your names,
Enfolding them in Everlasting Cedar,
And made them live to all posterity.
Virtue to valour hath his gift assigned.
Great men may dye, yet deeds still rest in mind.
Most fortunate young man, whose worth is crowned
With everlasting Trophies of renown,
How hath he set thee on the wings of Fame
Which sore i'th' middle region of high glory
Proposed to all, a never dying story.
May it please the (Son of Iupiter) to accept
A Present, which our fight enriched us with?
Is it a Band of stubborn Souldiers Captain?
O no (my Liege) of exquisite formed Ladies,
Darius his wife, the wonder of her Sex,
Besides a Troop of such shaped Ganimedes,
That love not equals.
Philoxenus▪ We thank thee! Yet hark!
There is a secret we would know of thee,
And you must tell Us: on your faith you must.
My Leige—
Nay, no Court oil (by your leave) no flattery,
We are but man, this very trunk of ours,
Is but a Vessel filled with humane blood
And we trust not that Parasite like pen,
I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
All the destroying vices of frail man,
I may be subject to, but what base looseness,
Or supple Luxury, didst thou ere obscure
So to benumb our sense, that thou shouldst think
We could be pleased with such effaeminate Presents,
Know sir our eyes shall have that abstinence
That will not look on them, on boys, of women,
Hence then, and present some coward with them,
Give me a spectacle would please the Gods,
And make them bend their Ivory brows to the Earth,
A man, a Soldier, strong with his wounds,
Amongst fate and ruin, upright and unshaped,
His mind being all his guard, his wall, and armour,
And if he fall, still noble wrath remains,
In his amazed Trunk: not all the darts
Stuck in his sides, making him all one wound,
Affright his courage, but wrath lending weapons,
Himself doth seem a new and horrid War,
Nor are those Milksops which beguile the time,
With stealing minutes from their Lady's lips
Such as the Gods do love; foras the Wind
Loseth its force, if it be not opposed
With woods of strong and stubborn planted tree,
So virtue, if it walk in trodden paths
That breaks up honour's gap, and makes the way
Through paths of death, that flame burns strong
Which is resisted: valour shines in wrong:
Of Alexander's Soldiers be this sed,
War was as peace, when he the army led.
Brave Macedon, how truly hast thou weighed,
The reason of man's birth, who is equal borne,
For all the world, as well as for himself.
The world's a field too narrow for thy worth!
And although Nature, hath her enacted bounds
For Sea and Earth, nay for the Heavens themselves,
Nor Sea nor Earth, shall coop thy valour up:
Valour of Nature ever this attains
That it breaks forth, far, and beyond her chains,
And this I'll trumpet out. the whole world's Ball
In which thou art so great, to thee is small;
When men want worlds to show their virtue in,
That is the crime o'th' gods, and not their sins:
'Tis a decree of a true Souldiers mind,
To think nought done, when aught is left behind,
On (valiant youth) for, know I will appoint;
A Grecian Prince who so shall steep his quill
To paint out thy name in Wels of eloquence,
That this thy scorn of Lust shall be
Proposed to all King's example to posterity,
Know mortals that the men the Gods most love
In hard and dangerous Arts, they always prove,
When men live brave at first, then fall to crimes,
Their bad I Chronicle to future times:
For, who begins good Arts, and not proceeds
He but goeth backward in all noble deeds.
Death consecrates those men whose awful end,
Though most men fear, yet all men must commend.
Schahin, the Macedons beholding to thee,
And history shall pay you thanks for this,
Which we rest Debtors for.
Great Prince, such kindness of acceptance pays:
For things which are but for a King's delight,
In seeing them, he amply doth requite.
Eumorphe, Love, Queen, Wife, let's haste to Bed!
And may we wish this night eternal time,
Schahin, good night: good night (kind Gentlemen!)
Thus when we are dead shall we revive o'th' stage:
One hour can present a King's whole age.
Observed you not the King's looks? Grew they not pale?
O yes (Lord Schahin) you must be his Parent?
And snatch him out'h the Gulf he's falling in,
That feigned speech of Alexander's wrought
Like to most purging Physic, nights then black
When 'tis compared with day: Boldness is clear,
When 'tis presented before bastard fear.
I'll tell thee (Eurenoses) thou art a Soldier:
And I am both a Soldier, and a Scholar,
And for these two Professions, am both most glorious:
And most meritorious, Pallas is for both:
O what Tisiphone, what snaked scourge
Can make a Scholar, that should never sleep,
But 'twixt the Pillows of Parnassus Hils,
And dip his lips in springs of Helicon,
Make him by snoring on a wanton breast,
And suck the adulterate and spiced breath
Of a lewd feigned woman?
And for a Soldier (Schahin,) let me speak!
We that do know the use of swords, and fire,
We that do know, halters can throttle us,
Shall we ere venture on a Woman's cruelty?
We that endure no Lords, shall we endure:
A woman to overcome us? Most true Demophoon!
I reverence thy memory, no puling phrase
Could so euchaine thee to thy Thracian Dame,
But thou wouldst rather perish than she save thee.
I'll not declaim long on that common Theame,
But they have lust lieth in their finger's ends,
And whilst their sweet-hearts breath sticks in their sheets,
They will admit another. Lucrece in the day
To be a Thais, if the night will not gainsay.
Why (Eurenoses) why should we endure
A new Queen now? this Kingdom wants not heirs?
We know (should we have more) 'twere dangerous,
But hark! The Queens for Bed, enticing sleep
With charms of Music: well, even such a Night,
May yet prove dismal ere the following Light!
Scahin, let's in:
The first degree to purge such ills as these,
Is to instruct the patient his disease:
That you have done.
Yea, and will yet once more
Adventure a new stratagem, just when the King
H'as rid his Chamber, and with covetous haste
Thinks for to clip Elysium, and drink deep
Of his long wished delight, I having skill
And uncontrolled access, will in disguise
Seem his deceased Father's apparition:
And by all ties of children to their Parents,
Bid him forsake that vile bewitching woman.
An easy Medicine doth and sure will work,
To rub shrewd wounds, make them but fester more,
Fowl Medicines we worse brook, than a foul sore.
Madam make haste hast! The King will be impatient
If he be from you long. O Happiness.
Why Menthe, than thou deemest us happy now
Thus to command a world of services,
To have a King my subject; and attended
With these harmonious sounds t'affect our ears?
Yes (truly Madam) 'tis a happiness.
'Tis, were't Eternal: but I fear a power
A woman's power, doth but make sport with us;
Why, were we not once Menthe, a Captive (Wretch?)
Yes Lady! now your happiness the more:
Riches please best, when there went want before.
That power which raised us from so base, so high,
Can throw us down again as suddenly:
Me thinks my life is but a Player's Scene,
In the last Act my part was then to play,
A Captive creature, and a Queen to day.
Your Morals (Madam) are too serious;
Me thinks these Ornaments should elevate
Your dumpish spirits. Think this Bed a place
In which no Icy slipping chance hath power;
A Kings safe Bed is like a guarded Tower.
No (Menthe) no, 'tis not the Bed of state,
Nor the free smile of a well pleased King:
'Tis not the embracing Arms of Emperors,
N all the Gemmes that so inwreath the browes
Can so allure Fortune unto their gaze,
As she should still be constant; O she's blind,
Nor doth she know herself where she is kind;
Close, those are Kings, and Queens whose breast's secure
Like brazen walls, Lust's entrance not endure!
Where impotent ambition not intrudes,
Nor the unstable talk of multitudes;
Fortune serues such, they happiness command
More than all Lybia's gold, all Tagus sand;
As Heaven hath given us no more conspicuous thing
Than form or beauty: so like a forward spring.
Nothing more short.
Madam, divine not of a change; Belief
Is too too prone, in entertaining grief!
Our Lord attends to enter in,
And surely sleep envieth his delight,
For he sits heavy on my drowsy lids,
Draw all our Curtains; sleep beguiles our ears.
(Madam) good night; time helps suspicious fears!
Drop golden showers, gentle sleep,
And all the Angels of the Night,
Which do us in protection keep,
Make this Queen dream of delight
Morpheus be kind a little, and be
Deaths now true Image, for 'twill prove
To this poor Queen, that then thou art he;
Her grave is made i'th' Bed of love:
Thus with sweet sweets can Heaven mix gall,
And marriage turn to Funeral.
Turk, Amurath, slave nay something base,
King! For all airy titles which the Gods
Have blasted man withal, to make them swell
With puffed up honour, and ambitious wind,
This name of King holds greatest antipathy
With manly government, for if we weigh,
'Tis subjects, and not Kings bear all the sway.
Each whispered mur mur from their idle breath,
Condemns a King to Infamy, to death;
Were there a Metempsucocosis of souls,
And nature should a free Election grant
What things they afterwards would reinform
The vain and haughtiest minds the Sun ere saw,
Would choose its Cottage in some Shepherd's flesh,
Nay, be confined within some Dog or Cat,
Than Antique like prank in a King's gay-clotheses,
Were I no King, and had no Majesty,
I had more than all Kings, blessed liberty;
And without rumour might enjoy my choice,
Not fearing Censure of each popular voice;
Poor men may love, and none their wills correct:
But all turn Satyrs of a Kings affect!
O my base greatness! What disastrous star,
Professed itself a Midwife at my birth,
To shape me into such prodigious States,
But hence regard of tongues! Were we a Saint,
Some envious tongue would dare our names to taint:
And he from slander is at securest rest,
Not that hath none, but that regards it least.
Open you envious Curtains here's a sight,
That might commend the act of Love so chaste;
Were now the chariot-guider of the Sun
Weary on's task, and would entreat a day
Of Heaven to rest in, here's a radiant Look,
That might be fixed i'th' midst o'th' Axletree;
And in despite of dark conspiring Clouds,
She would outshine Sun, Moon, and all the Stars,
O, I could court thee now (my sweet) a fresh,
Mixing a kiss with every period:
Telling the Lilies how they are but won,
Earth in the vernant spring is dull, and dark,
Compared with this aspect! the Eastern air,
Famed with the wings of Mercury and Iove,
Infectious, but compared with this perfume!
Hence then th'ambition of that furious * youth,
Who knew not what a crime his rashness was!
I might o'ercome more Kingdoms; have more dominion
Enthrone myself an Emperor! o'th' world,
I might! I might! Amurath thou mightst!
The Christians now will scoff at Mahomet;
Perchance they sent this wretch thus to enchant me!
O my perplexed thoughts! tush I'll to bed
Should the commanding Thunder of the Gods
Prohibit me, or strike me in the act!
Talk on (vain rumour) fame I dare thy worst!
Call me a Lusty, Lazy, wanton, Coward!
Should I win all the world, my breath once fled,
My bad would still survive, all good be dead.
Eumorphe, sweet, I come! you sacred powers,
Who have bestowed some happiness on man,
To help to pass away this sinful life,
Grant me a youthful vigour yet a while,
Full veins, free strength, complete and manly fence
To know, and taste a beauty most immense!
Amurath, Amurath?
Devil, Devil? What?
Dar'st thou appear before an Angel (Fiend?)
O Amurath, why doth intemperate Lust
Raging within thy furious youthful veins,
Burst through thy father's Tomb? Disturb his soul?
Know, all the torments that the fabulous age
Dreamt, did afflict deceased impious Ghosts,
Hartbiting-hunger, and soul-searching thirst,
The ne'er consumed, yet ever eaten prey
That the devouring Vulture feeds upon,
Are not such tortures as our offsprings crimes!
They, they sit heavy on us, and no date
Makes our compassionate affection cease.
O thou hereditary Ulcer, hark
By the name of Father, and by all those cares,
Which brought me to my grave, to make thee great:
Thou that hast nothing of me but my crown:
My enterprise surpassed the boundless Sea,
Cutting the churlish Waves of Hellespont,
When the flood stood which wind for to obey!
Euxinum groaned beneath my burdenous Ships;
I was the first of all the Turkish Kings
That Europe knew, and the fond Christians plague
What coward blood ran flowing in my veins,
When thou wert first begot: who marrest all
Thy Father's acts, by thy untamed desires,
Wherefore with Stygian curses I will lad thee
First, may she prove a Strumpet to thy Bed
Be her lips poison, and let her loose embrace,
Be venomous as Scorpions! If she conceived,
A Generation from thee, let it be
As ominous as thou hast been to me!
Rebellious to thy Precepts, printing cares,
Upon thy aged brows, O may they prove,
As Fairies for to lash thee in thy rest!
But Amurath, if thou canst quench this flame,
If thou wilt cut this Gordian thread, and rend hence,
That putrid Wen which cleaves unto thy flesh,
Be all thine actions prosperous! Mahomet,
Shall be auspicious unto each design;
Fortune to show thee favour shall be proud,
Farewell! if that men do speak last, before
They die, take root, then dead men's should take more.
What art thou vanished? Know (thou careful spirit)
Thou shalt no sooner pierce the wand'ring Clouds
With unperceived flight, than my resolve
Shall expiate my former Vanity!
Look on thy son thou (airy intellect)
And see him sacrifice to thy command!
Now Titan turn thy breathing curses back!
Start hence bright day, a sable Cloud invade
This Universal Globe, break every prop,
And every hinge that doth sustain the Heavens:
For strait must dye a woman, I have named
A crime, that may accuse all Nature guilty.
The Sex wisely considered, deserves a death;
For think this (Amurath) this woman may,
Prostrate her delicate and Ivory limbs,
To some base Page, or Scul, or shrunk up Dwarf:
Or let some Groom lie feeding on her lips,
She may devise some misshapen trick,
To satiate her goatish Amurath,
And from her bended knees at Meditation,
Be taken by some slave toth' deep of Hell!
thouart a brave Creature, were thou not a woman:
Come! thou shalt see my well-kept vow,
And know my hate, which saw me dote but now:
Schahin! Eurenoses! Captains ho!
Our Tutor, Eurenoses, Captains, welcome!
Gallants, I call you to a spectacle:
My breast too narrow to hoard up any joy:
Nay, gaze here (Gentlemen!) give Nature thanks,
For framing such an excellent sense as (Sight)
Whereby such objects are enjoyed as this!
Which of you now imprison not your thought
In envious and silent policy.
My Lord to whatsoever you shall propose,
My sentence shall be free.
And mine. Chase-Il. And mine.
Which of you then dare challenge to himself,
Such a pathetic a Prerogative,
So stoically severed from affection,
That had he such a Creature as lieth here,
One, at whom Nature herself stood amazed:
One, whom those lofty ecstasies of Poets,
Should they decay, here't must not barely dump
Their dull inventions with similitudes,
Taken from Sun, Moon, Violets, Roses,
And, when their raptures at a period stand;
A silent admiration must supply
Only name her, and she is all described.
Hyperbole of women, Colour itself
Is not more pure, and incontaminate!
Sleep dotes on her: and grasps her eyelids close;
The sky itself hath only so much blue
As the azure in her veins, bends by reflex.
Here's breath that would those vapours purify,
Which from Avernus chokes the flying Birds!
Here's heat would tempt the numbed Atkenian,
Though all his blood with age were conjealed ice!
Now, which of you all is so temperate;
That, did he find this jewel in his Bed
(Unless an Eunuch) could refrain to grapple,
And dally with her? Come! Speak freely all.
Truly (my Lord) I came of mortal Parents
And much confess me subject to desires;
Freely enjoy your Love!
That were she mine, I surely would do no less.
What saith Eurenoses?
My Lord, I say;
That they may rail at light, that ne'er saw day;
But, had I such a Creature by my side
Were the world twice enlarged, and all that world
O'ercome by me, all volumes writ,
Made clean and filled up by Rhetoric strains:
Of my great deeds, Historians should spend
Their Ink and Paper in my sole Chronicle,
A thousand such alluring idle charms,
Could not conjure me from betwixt her arms.
Your sentence Chase Ill Beg?
What need your Grace depend upon our breath?
I vow (my Lord,) if all those scrupulous things
Which burden us with precepts so praecise,
Those Parents which when they are married once
And past their strength of years, think their sons straight,
Should be as old in every thing as they,
I say my Lord, did my head wear a Crown
That Queen should be the chiefest gem t'adorn it,
Spite of all hate, that's an unhappy state
When Kings must fear to love, least subjects hate.
Well spoke three Milksops, Schahin! Your Sword!
Now, now be valour in this manly arm
To cut off troops of thoughts that would invade me!
Think you my mind is waxy to be wrought,
By any fashion, Orchanes thy strength,
Here do I wish as did that Emperor,
That all the heads of that enticing Sex,
Were upon hers, thus then should one full stroke
Mow them all off.
There, kiss now (Captains) do! and clap her cheek;
This is the face that did so captive me:
These were the looks that so bewitched mine eyes:
Here be the lips, that I but for to touch,
Gave over Fortune, Victory, Fame, and all;
These were two lying mirrors where I looked
And thought I saw a world of happiness.
Now Tutor, shall our swords be exercised,
In ripping up the breasts of Christians.
Say Generals! Whether is first?
For Thracia!
On then for Thracia, for he surely shall
That conquers first himself, soon conquer all.
Thou sacred guider of the arched Heavens,
Who canst collect the scattering stars, and fix
The Erratic Planet in the constant Pole,
O why shouldst thou take such solicitous care
To keep the air, and Elements in course?
That Winter should unclothe our Mother Earth,
And wrap her in a winding sheet of snow;
That then the spring duly revives her still,
Vnlinds her sinews, fills her clinged up veins,
With living dew, and makes her young again;
Next that, the Nemean terror breathes her flames,
To parch her flaxy hairs with furious heat;
Which to allay too, thou op'st the Cataracts,
And watereth the world's Gardens with blessed drops;
Canst thou▪ which canst sustain the ponderous world,
And keep'st in true poise, securely sleep,
Letting a Tyrant (which with a Philip, thus;
Thou mightest sink to Earth) to baffle thee?
A warrior in thy Fields, I long have been
To see if in thy sacred providence,
Thou meanest to arm me with thy thunderbolt,
Yet, yet, it strikes not now, he Gyant-wise,
He dares thee again; pardon our earnest zeal
What ever's decreed for man by thy behost,
He must perform: and in obedience rest.
Thou, like Spectators when they do behold
An hardy youth encountering with a Bear,
Or something terrible; then they give a shout,
So dost thou even applaud thyself to see,
Religion striving with Calamity.
Which while it often bears, and still rests true,
It's fence against all that after shall ensue.
Turk, i'll oppose thee still! Heaven has decreed:
That this weak hand, shall make that tyrant bleed.
A man religious, firm, and strongly good
Cannot o'th' sudden be, nor understood.
Rise (Soul!) enjoy the prize of thy brave worth!
Schahin! the Present that thou so professed,
Should from the City of Orestias,
Make proud our eyes! then tell me. hast thou slain
A thousand superstitious Christian souls;
Make them stoop to us; O, I would bathe my hands
In their warm blood to make them supple. (Schahin;)
That they may wield more Spears! our hands are dull,
Our fury's patient! now will I be a Turk,
And to our Prophet's altars do I vow,
That to his yoke I will all necks subdue,
Or in their throats my bloody sword imbrue.
Then King, to add fresh oil unto thy hate,
And make it raise itself a greater flame,
See here these Christians heads; thus still shall fall
Before thy fatal hand, these impious slaves;
So long as number's wanting to the sand,
So long as day shall come with Sun, and night
Be spangled with the twilight dawning stars,
Whilst floods shall fall into the Ocean
Shall Christians tremble at Turk's thundering strokes.
Soam I Amurath the great King of Turks,
O how it glads me thus to pash their brains,
To rend their locks, to tear these Infidels!
Who thundered when these heads were smitten off?
Stars I could reach you with my lofty hand,
'Tis well enough, enough, (great Amurath)
For now I sit in Orcanes' great throne,
And sacrifice due rites to Mahomet;
Yet why enough? I'll on and dung the Earth,
With Christians rotten trunks, that from that soil,
May spring more Cadmean Monsters to o'ercome them.
Captains, what Conntries next shall we make flow,
With Channels of their blood?
To Servia (my Lord) there are troops of arms,
Gathered to resist Mahometans.
At Bulgaria, there they set on fire,
The Countries as they pass, 'twere good we haste.
Why they do well! we like of their desire
To make the flame in which themselves must fry!
Ruin, destruction, famine, and the sword,
Shall all invade them, Sun stay thou thy flight,
And see the snakes in their own River drenched,
Whilst with their blood our furious thirst is quenched!
Whether (Bulgaria) whether must we fly?
The Butcherous Turk's at hand. Blessed Sanctity!
If thou didst ere guard goodness, wall our towers?
Bring strength into our Nerves! For in thy cause
Our Breasts upon their Rapiers we will run;
We'll with just hope confront the tyrant's rage,
Meet him in the face, fury will find us arms:
There is a power can guard us from all harms.
Let's be sudden: for we'll not find scope,
To see our haps. Who most doth fear, may hope.
Governor, Captains, hast unto your arms:
The dangers imminent, and the Turk's at hand
(Cobelitz) must we still wade thus deep
In blood and terror.
Yes (Servia) we must, we should, we ought,
Ease and success keeps baseness company,
Shall we not blush to see the register
Of those great Romans, and Heroic Greekes,
Which did those acts (at which our hearts are struck
Beneath all credence) only to win fame:
And shall not we for that Eternal name?
To live without all credence even to win fame,
Is not to know life's chief, and better parts:
To us of future hopes; calamity
Must help to purchase immortality.
Well spoke (true Christian) they who still live high,
And snoare in praised applause ne'er know to bear,
A contumely, or check a fate,
Wisely to steer a Ship, or guide an Army,
Undaunted hardiness is requisite;
(O) then le's to our weapons! make him yield,
They which deny all right, oft give't i'th' Field.
Why (Gentlemen) we want no foes to fight,
Nor need we turn our weapons on ourselves!
You lazy rogue, what! come in my Cabinet?
Conspiring slave you murmured 'gins th'allowance,
And wouldst persuade upon a larger pay,
To betray all Garrisons, and turn Turk.
Thou half Can-carousing rascal, I'll tear thee,
And those treacherous veins of thine, will you see.
Will you see your Corporal wronged?
Well, since I fight for victuals for company,
Use now your swords and Bucklers.
Treason the next man that speaks or strikes a blow!
Then shall our Laundresses fight for us.
Why, Amazons! Baudicans, come help to scratch!
O Cobelitz, what way shall we appease them?
Out thy Corporal (huswife) hath the itch,
You now will have foul washing, Drab i'll tear your mouth;
An inch or two yet wider.
What, soldiers think you each distasteful word,
Given▪ 'mongst yourselves so strong an obloquy
That revenge spurs you to each others death?
And will not seek to wash those blasphemies,
In Seas of their foul blood, which they belched out.
By our approaching foes, against the Essence
Of the Eternal.
Leave, leave, these factions; cease these Mutinies!
Hark their Drums take advantage of these stirs!
Let us oppose our strength against our foe!
And in our Camp let not one soldier be,
Who will not find and strike his Enemies.
Now (blessed guider and great strength of arms)
If in thy secret and hid decree,
Thou hast not yet appointed the full time,
Wherein thou meanest to tame this tiger,
Who dare murmur against thine hidden will?
Be we slain now, there's victory in store,
Which when thou pleasest thou'lt give, & not before.
Give us still strength of patience, not to wish,
A funeral honour unto all the world,
When we are perishing we'll still believe,
Those dangers worth our death we undergo.
Whilst who is ours, is all alike thy foe;
Should fortune lose this day when we are slain,
Thou canst give hands, and strength, and men again;
On thee we trust then, and on thee bear,
Scorning for Heaven's sake to shed a tear.
Bassa! we thank thy valour and discretion,
In finding fit occasion to invade
The mutinons Christians! these Captives here
Shall be good presents to our worthy Master.
General now trust me these young slaves,
To be full of Valour, they have metal in them.
Yes; and to his Highness shall perform
A service which I long have thought upon,
And which his Turkish Majesty requires;
They'll fit to be a near attendant guard,
On all occasions to the Emperor;
Therefore they shall be called Janizaries,
By me first instituted, for our Prince's safeties sake.
Their vigour and strong hearts becomes such service,
For to o'ercome them made our soldiers sweat,
Much Turkish blood: the Servians kept the Fight,
With stubborn hard resistance, The Bulgarians
Left the right wing; there set I forward first,
And like a torrent rolled destruction on,
Raising huge storms of blood, as doth the Whale,
Puff up the Waves against a mighty Ship;
Me thinkes I see the Rivers of their gore:
Their Leaders trampled on by Turkish Horse,
The body of their army quite dispersed;
Themselves all floating in Vermilion pools,
With their own weapons hasting to their death.
And such a slaughter did we make of them,
As Nature scarce can ere repair again.
One hasting to others death, pulling to ground,
Him that held up, so they each other drowned.
Still are they confident upon a power,
They know not what, who (as they think) can snatch
Their praecise souls from out the jaws of death.
Yes, such a superstition doth possess them,
For when they looked for nothing but their fate,
And danger stood in sweat upon their brows?
They yet scorned Mahomet, and profaned his rites,
And nought but horror made them to believe him;
So many men were fight on his side:
As might have changed my seat, and part i'th' world,
(Though Nature stood against) to a new place:
Or carry Sestos whereby Abydos stands,
Or pull down Atlas with so many hands.
How like our Captains the last Victory?
(If any can prophesy of future things)
Me thought I did dream of this blessed hap,
How Fortune did involve them in their ruin,
And slight from danger, brought them into danger,
Each one astonished with a sudden fear,
Knew not the danger that was then most near.
To add more triumph, I present my Liege,
With these young Rebels, which you may bring up,
In all the precepts of our Mahomet:
And for great Emperor, your person wants,
A thing which much o'erclouds your light of state,
Attendant janissaries to a Prince:
These may be so trained up, as to supply
The duty fit for such a Majesty:
Bassa we thank thy strength: Schahin your counsel,
And to that end, let them have safe protection.
But we must treat now of a marriage (Lords)
The Germane Ogly, he who Sceptor sways
The Phrygian confines in strong Asia,
By Embassy entreats that he may join
His Daughter Hatam to our Bajazet!
Ambassador here to our Council speak,
Your Master's Message.
Please then your Maj. and these reverend heads
To be informed my Master's will by me,
In Wedlock; if your Prince may be combined
To the fair Princess his sole Daughter:
He freely gives the Phrygian territories,
And Bythinia to you for your Dowry;
Catal, Simon, Egregios, Sansale,
Abbettingon, the Ottomans estate,
Which Ottomans, because he not endures,
The Noble Zelzucciom family protests,
To join with you in quelling their ambition.
May't please your Majesty to like mine advice
It's good to have alliance with such friends;
Kings that combine themselves are like to shafts,
The ancient Sage proposed unto his son!
Which whilst together they were close compact:
Arms, knees, and his whole strength, could never break;
Take one by one, they with a touch were tract,
So Kings may be o'ercome that stand alone;
But two such Princes, knit thus hand in hand,
Should Nations totter, they would firmly stand.
Yes Schahin we'll approve what thou sayest;
Then from us carry the great Asians Monarch,
This his kindest greeting:
Tell him the gates of Prusa shall stand open,
And the glad air shall Echo notes of joy,
To entertain her who shall bless our Land,
With hopeful issue; greedy thoughts expect
Her soon arrival; and so (Embassador)
Inform thy Priucesse, when she shall appear,
A lasting Star shall shine within our Sphere!
O Servia, our Cities are turned flames;
Each stays to hast his own and others death:
And as though Heaven conspired destructiou too,
That reigns down scalding Sulphur on our heads,
Here one that lies thick gasping for his breath,
Is choked with blood that runs from's fellows wounds,
Whilst others for the dead are making Graves,
Themselves are made the corpses that do fill them!
Nobles, and base, together perish all:
And a drawn sword sticks fast in every rib;
Our stones are died Vermilion with our blood!
Old creatures that are creeping to the grave,
Are thrust on faster!
Infants but in the threshold of their lives,
And thus kicked off, O most disastrous times,
To love our deaths, and make our life our crimes.
See, see, the ruins of our goodly Walls,
Our City's smoke hinders the sight of heaven:
The conqueror yet amazed measures out our Towns,
With eyes of terror, and doth scarce believe
He hath o'ercome us; yet among these fires,
Our dead men are denied their funeral flames:
Aud those infectious Carkases doe performe,
A second murder on the rest that live!
And all the hope of safety that we have,
Is now to fix our flattering lips at's feet:
Mercy (perhaps) may wearied slaughter meet.
Will you do so? speak for I am determined—
No (worthy General) Heaven avert
And arm you with the proof of better thoughts!
What though a Tyrant strives to terrify
All Christendom, and would not be beloved?
Let not your fears give impious rage such scope!
As for to bring Religion to profaneness:
Fortune and Heaven will scorn to try a man,
That hurls his weapons hence and runs away!
How is he worthy of heaven's victory;
That, when it frowns, dares not look up and see?
Me thinks we three are now environed round,
With hosts of Angels, and our powerful Mars.
Is putting bows of steel into our hands:
He doth suggest our wrath, and bids us, on!
O what an army 'tis to have a cause
Holy and just; there, there's our strength indeed.
Tu ment Labantes,
Dirige nos, dubios: Certo Robore firmâ.
If we must dye, the narrow way to bliss,
Shall be made wide for us, the gate wide open,
And the spread Palace entertains with joy.
Mean time, let's look like men upon our grief.
Out frown fate, Despot, Bulgaria, come!
Turk! once more at thee (Tyrant) mortals must,
Command Heaven's favour in a cause so just.
Sends our proud father in Law this greeting to us?
Was our sword sheathed so soon to hear this answer?
My Lord, he bade me tell you that 'twas you
Have made him leave off this great Prophets Wars,
When he was hewing down the Christians;
Therefore submission should not now appease him,
More, though your Wife, his Daughter, should herself,
Upon her penitent knees be suppliant!
No sooner shall the Tyrian splendent Sol,
Open Heavens Casements, and enlarge the day,
But his horse hooves shall beat your treacherous Earth;
And that you may be warned of his approach,
Murder and flames shall be his Prodromo's!
Confederate Princes and my kind allies,
Shall his proud nostrils breathe those threats on us?
Moreover, my Lord will or win, or raze,
Iconium and Larenda.
Iconium and Larenda? I? No more?
Had best look first, how safe his Prusa stands!
Lords, I am moved, and will forget my Queen
Was ere the issue of his hated blood!
My spleen is tossed within; mine entrailes pant,
As, when the Sea is raised with Southern gusts,
The wind allayed, yet still the Waves will tremble,
Princes, now bind yourselves with such strong chains,
Your faith and breaths can make; swear to me all,
To be as firm to me against Amurath,
As is the skin and flesh unto the Nerves;
We all swear we will.
Then all here kiss my Sword,
Which shall be steeped within the headman's throat:
We'll make him know those will not fly in War,
Which may in policy in treat a peace!
Hast thy course (time) and soon reduce the year!
Ensigns may Ensigns meet, Carmania's King,
Great Aladin, scorns to avoid a Turk:
Princes, and Neighbours, muster up your strength,
That we may meet him on his full Career!
And let it be Carmania's pride to say,
To overcome him we asked no second day.
Thne O Hymen, thine: O she,
Whose Beauties verse Calliope,
Sing to Marriage rites an Io,
Io to Hymen.
To thee Apollo is my suit,
Lend me a while thy silver Lute,
O what a woe it is to bring,
A Bride to Bed and never sing.
Io to Hymen.
When she's old, still seems she young,
When she's week, to her be strong!
Be Cyprus, both, and Paphos here,
Love, sing with merry cheer.
Io to Hymen.
You Gods of Marriage: sacred Protectoresse
Of lawful propagations, and blessed Love
Be most propitious to these grafted stems!
Drop dewing showers of generation on them!
Think (Son) this day too prodigal of blessing
As, that had Juno tasked thee (like Alcides)
To grapple with Stymphallides, or cleanse
Angelas' stables: or like the Trojan Boy,
Sat like a Shepheard on Dardadias' Hills,
Such a reward as this fair Queen repairs,
O thou hoped future offspring spare thy Parent!
Hurt not this tender womb, these Ivory worlds,
When you are borne; O be within your limbs,
The Grandsire Amurath, and father's strength!
Line their faces (Nature) with their Mother's die!
And let the Destinies mark the ensuring night
In their Eternal Books, with notes most white.
Grant it great Mahomet!
Most awfull father and my honored Pinee,
Although it be enacted by the Heavens,
That in these bonds of marriage such curse
Attends on Princes above private men,
That nor affection, nor home-nourished Love
But state and policy must elect their Wives.
Which must be fetched from Countries far remote!
Yet the protecting Powers have such a care,
Both of their offsprings and their Kingdom's state,
That to what they ordain, they work in us
A sudden willingness to make us obey;
For, in this breast, I do already feel
That there's a kindling a Diviner heat:
Which disobedience never shall extinguish.
And, if there be any felicity
From these united Loves to be derived
From the weak sex into the husband's soul,
Then may my Lord make his affection sure,
To be repaid with unattainted Love,
In which a pretty people ye shall live,
Wi soft and yeilding curtesie in all
He shall command, my willing arms shall still,
Be open t'enfold within a Wives embrace,
If any comfort else there be in store,
(Which modesty keeps silent to itself)
Cause only husbands and the night must know't,
My Loyalty shall ever all perform,
And (though my) Lord should frown, I'll be the lame,
Green wood will burn with a continued flame:
Princess our ardour is already fired,
Yet with no violent temerity;
Such as might fear its short and soon decaying;
Thy virtue seems so to exceed thy Sex,
And wisdom so far to outpace thy years,
That, surely (Ptincesse) soon maturity,
Argues in them, hidden Divinity.
Expected (Hymen) here hath bound our hands,
And hearts, with everlasting ligaments:
Fortunate both we are, and have one bliss
The want of which for ever doth infect,
With anxious cares the sweets of marriage Beds:
Our Parent's benediction and consent,
They are the truest Hymens, and should be
To children the best marriage Deity.
Thus then attended with such sacred charms
Our last day of content shall never come;
Till we must part by th'unresisted doom,
With a pleased error we will age beguile,
All stars on us, an equal yoke must smile.
Now (Lords) who'll dance
A Turkish measure? Ladies our nerves are shrunk;
And you now fix the sign of age on me,
You who have blood still flowing in your veins,
Be nimble as an Hart: Caper to the Sphaeres!
O you are light, that wrnt the weight of years!
And health to our Bride and her father!
O (Nobles) would this wine were Christians blood,
But that it would Frenetic humours breed,
And so infect our brains with Superstition!
Auspicious fortunes to great Amurath!
To open more springs unto this full tide of joy,
Know (potent Emperor) I from Europe bring
Six daughters of six several Kings,
Whose Cities we have equalled to the ground;
And of their Palaces did torches make,
To light their souls through the black Cave of death (Acheron)
Describe (good Captain) how the dogs were wearied.
So weary were they to endure to endure our swords,
That by impetuous mutiny themselves,
Turned on each other; slew their Masters;
children's own hands, tore out their father's throats.
And each one strove who should be slaughtered first;
Here did a brother pash out a Brother's brains,
Some in stinking Quagmires, and deep Lakes
(Which they had made t'avoid their excrements)
Ran quick, and in the lake lay buried.
(Goon Executioner of our most just wrath!)
Nor did it leave till death itself was weary:
Murder grew faint, and each succeeding day,
showed us the slaughter of the day before.
Amongst carcases and funerals we stood,
Denying those that lived such Ceremonies
As in their Temples to the Indian Gods,
With prayers and vows they daily offered:
Nor destiny, nor cruelty ere left,
Till they had nothing to work upon;
For, of so many souls that breathed
These six are all remained: which as a Pledge
Of my best service to your Majesty.
I here am bold to yield an offer.
Nor shall this present be unrecompensed;
For thy true service, on thee I'll bestow
All the rich gifts, which all these Asian Lords
Brought to adore these happy Nuptials,
On you fair Bride great Princess and our Daughter
Do we bestow these Virgins (daughters to Kings)
For your attendence.
We are too much bound unto our Princely Father!
No (Daughter) no! we hope thou art the spring,
From whence shall flow to all the world a King.
(Captaines and Lords, to morrow we must meet,
To think of our rebelliious son in Law)
Be this time all for comfort and delight,
Short wedding days make it seem long to night.
Here set we down our miserable load,
O Cobelitz with whom is't that we fight?
With Lydian Lions, and Hyrcanian Bears;
Which grind us daily in their ravenous teeth?
The Tyrant (as it were destructions Engineer)
Help Nature to destroy the world's frame quickly,
Alas my Lord that needs not, every day
Is a sufficient helper to decay:
Great workman, who art sparing in thy strength
To bring things to perfection, and to o'erturn
All thy best works, thou usest sudden force,
When man's an Embrio! and first conceived
How long 'tis ere he see his native light?
Then borne, with expectation for his growth!
Tenderly nourished, carefully brought up,
Grown to perfection, what a little thing,
Serves to call on his sudden ruining?
Come Cobelitz,▪ 'mongst those demolished stones
We'll sit as Hecuba, at those Troyan Walls:
Our tears shall be false glasses to our eyes:
Through these we'll look, and think we yet may see
Our stately Pinnacles, and strong founded holds;
That which one hour can dilapidate,
One age can scarce repair.
No sir, for nothing's hard
To Nature, when she means t'consume
A thousand Oaks (which time hath fixed i'th' earth,
As Monuments of lasting memory)
Are in a moment turned to ashes all;
Things that rise slowly, take a sudden fall.
What course now Cobelitz, must we still be yoke▪
To misery, and murder? We scarce have room,
Upon our bodies to receive more wounds,
And must we still oppose ourselves to more?
Yes! We are ready still; a solid mind
Must not be shaked with every blast of Wind!
Pollux, nor Hercules, had none other art,
To get them Mansions in the spangled Heavens
Then a true firm resolve; th' Adriatic Sea,
Shall from his currents with tempestuous blasts,
Be sooner heard, than virtue from its aim,
Let us but think (when we so many see,
Enjoying greater quiet than ourselves.)
How many have endured more misery;
Ilium, Ilium, what a fate hadst thou?
How fruitful wert thou in matter for thy foe?
Thus we'll delude our grief, make ourself glad,
To think of miseries that others had.
I (Captain) ay! they that furnished thee
With sentences of comfort, never saw,
Their Cities burnt, their Countries desolate!
'Tis easy for Physicians for to tell
Advice to others, when themselves are well!
Tush, tush (my Lord) there's on our side we know,
One that can both, and will our weak hands guide,
One that will strike and thunder; Giant then,
Look for a dart! we must not appoint when;
Mean while help for to convey this burden hence
Turk, though thy tyranny deny us graves,
Corruption will give them spite of thee!
Nor do our corpse, such Tombs and Caverns need:
For our own flesh, still our own graves to breed:
And, when the Earth receiveth not, when they die;
Heaven's Vault overwhelmeth them, so their tombe's i'th' sky.
Besieged on every side? Iconium taken?
Entrenched within my foes myself must lie
Wrapped in my City's ruin! Turks come on!
Nay but my Lord, mean you to meet your death?
Let's hast our flight, and trust more to our feet
Then words, or hands—
Why, so much of our blood
Is already spilt, as should the glittering Sun
Exhale it upward, 'twould obnubulate
It's lustre, else to fiery Meteors turn.
Some council (Lords) he that's amidst the Sea,
When every curled wave doth threat his death
Yet trusts upon the oars of his own arms,
And sometime the salt foam doth pity him,
A Wolf, or Lion, that hath filled his gorge
With bloody prey, at last will lie to sleep,
And the unnatural'st creatures not forget
Their love to those whom they do know their own!
My wife's his Daughter; sice we canot stand
His fury longer, she shall suage his wrath.
The boisterous Ocean when no winds oppose,
Growth's Calme revenge is lost, when't hath no foes.
Why then (my Lord) array yourself in weeds,
Of a Petitioner: take the Queen along,
And your two children; they may move his eyes;
For, desperate sores ask desperate remedies.
Go (Lords) go: fetch some strait. O Heavens!
O fortune they that lean on thy cracked wheel,
And trust a Kingdom's power, and domineer
In a walled Palace, let them look on me,
And thee (Carmania) greater instances
The world affords not to demonstrate
The frail estate of proudest Potentates,
Of sturdiest Monarchies: high Pinnacles
Are still invaded with the prouder winds;
They must endure the threats of every blast;
The tops of Caucasus and Pindus shake,
With every crack of thunder; humble Vaults
Are ne'er touched with a bolt, ambiguous wings
Hath all the state, that hovers over Kings.
ay, I, this vesture fits my misery!
This badge of poverty must now prevail,
Where all my Kingdom's power & strength doth fail,
Why should not a prophetic soul attend
On great men's persons, and forewarn their ills?
Raging Boötes doth not so turmoil
The Lybian ford, as Fortune doth great hearts.
Bellona and Erynnis scourge us on;
Should wars and treasons cease, why our own weight
Would send us to the Earth; as spreading arms
Make the huge trees in tempest for to split.
For as the slaughterman to pasture goes,
And drags that Ox home first, whose Bulk is greatest,
The lean he still le's feed: disease takes hold
On bodies that are pampered with best fare;
So doth all ruin choose the fairest marks:
At which it bends, and strikes it full of shafts,
Ambition made me now that eminent but:
And I that fell by mine own strength, must rise
By professed weakness; Buckets full sink down:
Whilst empty ones danceith ' air, and cannot drown.
Come (Lords) he out of's way can never range,
Who is at furthest! worst ne'er finds ill change.
Our hate must not part thus, I'll tell thee (Prince)
That thou hast kindled violent Aetna in our breast,
And such a flame is quenched with nought but blood:
His blood whose hasty and rebellious blast,
Gave life unto the fire; should Heaven threat us;
Knows we dare not menace it; are we not Amurath?
(Whose awful name is even trembled at)
So often dared by Pigmy Christians;
Which we will crush to air; what haughty thought
Buzzed thy praesumptuous ears with such vain blasts,
To puff thee into such impetuous acts?
Or what, durst prompt thee with a thought so frail,
As made thee covetous of so brave a death?
As this known hand should cause it? know that throat
Shall feel it strangled with some slave brought up
To nought but an Hangman: thy last breath,
Torn from thee by a hand that's worse than death
Why then, I'll (like the Roman Pompey) hide
My dying sight, scorning Imperious looks
Should grace so base a stroke with sad aspect;
Thus will I muffle up and choke my groans,
Lest a grieved tear should quite put out the name,
Of lasting courage in Carmania's fame.
What? still stiff necked? Is this the truce you beg?
sprinkled before thy face those Rebell Brats,
Shall have their brains, and their dissected limbes,
Hurled for a prey to Kites; for (Lords) 'tis fit
No spark of such a Mountain threatening fire,
Be left as unextinct, lest it devour,
And prove more hot unto the Turkish Empery,
Then the Promithean blaze did trouble Iove!
First sacrifice those Brats—
(Dear father) let thy fury rush on me!
Within these entrailes sheathe thine unsatiate sword,
And let this ominous, and too fruitful womb,
Be torn in sunder? For from thence those Babes,
took all their crimes; error made them guilty,
'Twas Nature's fault, not theirs; O if affection
Can work then; now show a true Father's Love,
If not, appease those murdering thoughts with me:
For as Iocasta pleaded with her sons
For their dear Father, so to a Father I
For my dear Babes and husband; husband, father,
Which shall I first embrace? Victorious father,
Be blunt those now sharp thoughtsllay down those threats,
unclasp that impious Helmet! fix to earth
That monumental Sphere look on thy child
With pardoning looks, not with a Warrior's eye:
Else shall my breast cover my husband's breast,
And serve as Buckler to receive thy wounds,
Why dost thou doubt? Fearest thou thy Daughter's faith?
I fear, for after Daughter's perjury
All Laws of Natures shall distasteful be;
Nor will I trust thy children or thyself.
No Father 'tis I, fear you him, he you,
I both, but for you both, for both you war;
So that 'tis best with him that's overcome.
O let me kiss (kind father) first the Earth
On which you tread, then kiss mine husband's cheek.
Great King embrace these Babes! you are the stock
On which these Grafts were planted—
True, and when sprouts do rob the tree of sap,
They must be pruned,
Dear Father, leave such harsh similitudes!
By my deceased Mother, (to whose womb
I was a ten months' burden:) By yourself,
(To whom I was a pleasing Inant one)
Pity my husband, and these tender Infants!
Yes to have them collect a manly strength,
And their first lesson that their Dad shall teach them
Shall be to read my misery.
Stern Conqueror: but that thy daughter shows,
There once dwelt good in that obdurate breast,
I would not spend a tear to soften thee!
Thou seest my Countries turned into a Grave:
My City's scar the Sun with fiereer flames,
Which turn them into ashes! all myself
So slicked and carved, that my amazed blood
Knows not through which wound first to take its way;
If not on me, have mercy on my Babes!—
Which, with thy mercy thou mayst turn to Love.
No sir, we must root out malicious seed:
Nothing sprouts faster, than an envious weed!
We see a little Bullock, amongst an heard
(Whose horns are yet scarce crept from out his front)
Grows on a sudden tall, and in the Fields,
Frolicks so much, he makes his Father yield.
A little twig left budding on an Elme
(Ungratefully) bars his mother sight from Heaven!
I love not future Aladins.
Threat all a Conqueror can, canst threat but death,
And I can die, but if thou wouldst have mercy!—
O see you feet we're proved with this hands kiss!
The higher those great powers have raised you,
Press that which lies below with gentler weight:
To pardon miseries is Fortune's height:
Alas, these Infants, these weak sinewed hands
Can be no terror to these Hector's arms!
Beg (Infants) beg, and teach these tender joints
To ask for mercy; learn your lisping tongues
To give due accent to each syllable:
Nothing that Fortune urgeth too, is base;
Put from your thoughts all memory of descent:
Forget the Princely titles of your fathers:
If your own misery you can feel,
Learn thus of me to weep, of me to kneel!
Do (boys) and imitate your Parents tears,
Which I (like Priam) shed, when he beheld,
Hector thrice dragged about the Trojan Walls.
He that burst open the gates of Erebus,
And roused the yelling Monster from his Den,
Was conquered with a tear! great Monarch learn,
To know how dear a King doth weeping earn.
Good Grandsire see, see how my father cries!
Good mother take my napkin for your eyes!
(Good father) hear, hear how thy daughter prays:
Thou that knowst how to use stern Warrior's arms,
Learn how to use mild Warriors pity too!
Alas? can ere these ungrowne strengths repair
Their Father's battered Cities? Or can these
These o'erthrown Turrets? (Jconium) what small hopes
Hast thou to lean upon? If these be all?
Not half so mild hath our misfortune been
That any can ere fear us: Be pleased—
Rise (my dear child) as Marble against rain,
So I at these obedient showers, melt!
Thus I do raise thy husband: thus thy Babes:
Freely admitting you to former state.
But Aladim, wake not our wrath again!
Patience grows fury that is ofter stirred;
When Conquerors wax calm, and cease to hate,
The conquered should not dare to reiterate.
Be thou our son and friend.
By all the rites of Mahomet I vow it!
Then for to seal unto our love,
Yourself shall lead a wing in Servia,
In our immediate Warres, we are to meet
The Christians in Cassano's Plains with speed:
Great Amurath ne'er had time to breath himself:
So much, as to have warring with new foes;
No day securely to his Sceptre shone,
But one War's end, still brought another on.
Let now victorious wreathes engird our brows,
Let Angels 'stead of Soldiers wield our arms,
Against him, who that our Citties might be his
Strives to depopulate, and make them none!
But look, look in the air (me thinks) I see
An host of Soldiers brandishing their swords;
Each corner of the Heaven shoots thunderbolts,
To nail these impious forces to the Earth.
Soldiers stand to 't! though fortune bandy at's
Let's stand her shocks, like sturdy Rockesith ' Sea.
On which the angry foaming Billows beat,
With frivolous rush: and break themselves, not them;
Stand like the undainted countenance o'th' sky,
Or, like the Sun, which when the foolish King,
Thought to obscure with a Cloud of Darts,
Out looked them all, our lives are all enchanted,
And more invulnerate than Thetis son.
We shall have hands snd weapons, if the stone,
Of fortune glide from under our weak feet,
And we must fall: yet, let all Christians say,
'Tis she, and not the cause, that wins the day.
We must believe Heaven hath a greater care
Of them, whom fortune doth so oft out dare!
Gentlemen, brothers, friends Soldiers, Christians,
We have no reason to command of Heaven
A thing denied to all mortality.
Nor should we be so impudently proud,
As in this weak condition to repute
Ourselves above the stroke of Lady Chance,
A caution must divine it ever fixed,
That whilst her checks, equally fall out,
Community should ease their bitterness.
I could afresh now shed those Princely tears
To think such sudden rain should attend
Heroic spirits glittering in bright arms!
But if the Grecian (when he heard the dreams
Disputed subtly by Philosophers,
To prove innumerable extant worlds)
Was strike with pensiveness, and wept to think
He had not yet obtained one for himself;
What terror can affright a Christians thoughts
Who knows there is a world, at liberty
To breath in, when this glass of life is broke?
Our foes with circling fury are entrenched;
Pelions of earth and darkness shall o'erlade them,
Whilst we shall mount, and these our spirits light,
Shall be yet ponderous to depress them lower.
Nay, my Enthusiastic soul divines,
That some weak hand shall from the blazing Zone
Snatch Lightning, which shall strike the snarling Cur
With horror and amazement to the Earth!
Which Hell cannot oppose! Turk, Tyrannize!
Stand, yet at length to fall my sacrifice.
Super-Olympicke vigour will (no doubt)
Squeeze all thy supercilious rancour out!
Who set the world on fire? How now (ye Heavens)
Grow you so proud that you must needs put on curled locks;
And clothe yourselves in Periwigs of fire?
Mahomet (say not but I invoke thee now!)
Command the puny-Christians demigod
Put out those flashing sparks, those Ignes fatui,
Or i'll unseate him, or with my Looks so shake
The staggering props of his weak seated Throne,
That he shall find he shall have more to do
To quell one Amurath, than the whole Giant brood
Of those same sons of Earth than ten Lycaon's!
Do the poor snakes so love their misery
That they would see it by these threatening lights?
Dare ye blaze still? I'll toss up Buckets full
Of Christians blood to quench you: by those hairs
Drag you beneath the Centre: there put out
All your praesaging flames in Phlegeton!
Can you outbrave me with your piddling Lights?
Yawn earth with Casements as wide as hell itself!
Burn Heaven as ardent as the Lemnian flames!
Wake (pale Tisiphone) spend all thy snakes!
Be Aeacus, and Minos as severe
As if the jail delivery of us all
Were the next Sessions! I'll pull Radamant
By his flaming furs from out his Iron Chair.
Horror dismal cries, and yells
Of these thy Grandsires thee foretells,
Furies sent of thee to learn
Crimes, which they could ne'er discern.
Furies sent, etc.
O Amurathl thy Father's come,
To warn thee of a sudden doom,
Which in Cassano's fields attends
To bring thee to thy Hellish friends.
Which in Cassanoes, etc.
Megaera and Enyo both do stand,
Trembling, lest when thou art damned
Chief of Furies thou shouldst be,
And they their snakes resign to thee.
Chief of Furies, etc.
Terror we a while will leave thee,
Till Cocytus' Lake receive thee.
Cerberus will quake for fear
Where he a new Turk's fate shall hear.
Cerberus' will, etc.
Now who the Devil sent my Grandsires hither?
Had Pluto no task else to set them too?
He should have bound them to Ixion's wheel,
Or bid them roll the stone of Sisyphus:
Beshrew me, but their singing did not please me!
Have they not been so drunk with Lethe yet
As to forget me? Then can portend no ill
For, should the fates be twining my last thread;
Yet none durst come from Hell to tell me so!
Shall I be scared with a Nightwalking Ghost;
Or what my working fancy shall present?
Why, I can look more terrible, than Night,
And command darkness in the unwilling day:
Make Hecate start: and draw back her head,
To wrap it in a swarthy veil of Clouds.
Drop sheets of Sulphur, you prodigious skies!
Cyclops, run all thy Bullets into Ae,
Then vomit them at once! should Christians
Couch to the bottomless abyss of Styxe,
Or hide themselves under Avernus' shade,
This mine arm should fetch them out! Day must perform
What I intent, wrath rains a bloody storm:
And now begins rise the Sun, which yet not knows
The misery it shall see on Amurath's Foes,
Lords, Leaders, Captains:
Your Highness up so soon?
He small rest takes,
That dreams on nought but bloody broils and death.
Your Grace seems much distempered: Beds of sweat
Bedew your brows with never wont paleness.
Why; see you not? The heavens are turned Court Ladies,
And put on other Hair besides their own:
Canst guess (learned Schahin) what these flames portend?
My Lord, such things as these we men must
And wonder at, and yet not search the reason,
Perchance unwholesome fogs exhaled by th'sun
Are set a blazing by his too near heat:
But 'tis not lawful that a mortal eye:
Should dare to penetrate Heaven's secrecy.
Doth it not bode a Conquest?
Yes, against the Christians:
For, unto them it bends sinister looks,
And frowns upon their army more than ours.
So, so! come on, ere ' Phosphorus appear
Let's to't, and so prevent that sluggard Sol!
If we want light, we'll from our Winnards:
Strike fire enough to scorch the Universe;
Mine armour there!
Now (Mahomet) I implore
Thy promised aid for this auspicious day!
Toss me aloft, and make me ride on Clouds!
If my horse fail me, those fire breathing jades,
(Which the boy Phaethon knew not how to guide)
Will I pluck out from out the flaming team,
And hurl myself against those condense Spheres,
On which i'll sit, and stay their turning Orbs;
The whole vertigious Circle shall stand still,
But to behold me:
So help on here, now like Alcides do I girt myself,
With well knit sinews, able to stagger Earth,
And threaten Nature with a second Chaos:
If one impetuous broil remain to come
In future ages, set on foot this hour!
How well this weight of steel befits my strength?
Me thinks the Gods stand quivering, and do fear
(When I am armed) another Phiegrae's near!
Chiron shall see his Pindus at my feet!
And, i'll climb to Heaven, and pull it down,
And kick the weighty burden of the world,
From off the Babies shoulders that supports it!
For I am safer Buckled against my foe.
Then sturdy Iason who by the enchanted charms
Medea gave, encountered Unicorns,
Quelled Lions, struggeld with fiery belching Bulls:
Obtained a glorious prize, a Fleece, a Fleece
Dipped deep in tincture of the Christians blood.
Shall be my spoil, nay should they hide their heads
In their God's bosom, here's a sword shall reach them!
Come they shall know no place is free from wrath,
When boiling blood is stirred in Amurath.
Here (mighty Prince) take view of Victory,
And see the field too narrow for thy spoils!
Erynnus hides her head as if afraid,
To see a slaughter. She durst never hope for,
Earth hath the Carcases, and denies them Graves,
And lets them be and rot, and fat her womb,
Scorning to be unto slaves a Tomb.
Where are become those ominous Comets now?
What? are those pissing Candles quite extinct?
Leave their disastrous snuffs no stench behind them?
'Tis something yet, that their God seeth their slaughter.
Lending sulphurious Meteors to behold
The blessed destruction of these Parasites.
I knew the Elements would first untie
The Nerves of the Universe, then let me dye!
See (King) here's one worm yet that dare confess
He breathes and lives, which once this hand crushed down.
Ha, ha, by Mahomet and we are weary now:
Some Mercy shall lay Victory asleep.
It will a Laureate prove to this great strife,
Amongst all these murdered to give one his life,
So we'll descend.
From what a dismal grave am I awaked,
Entombed within a Golgotha of men;
Have all these Souls prevented me in bliss,
And left me in a dream of happiness?
But soft! me thoughts he said he would descend!
Then, Heavens one minutes breath, that's all I ask,
And then I shall perform my life's true task.
Poor slave, wouldst live?
Yes Turk to see thee dye!
howl, howl, (grim Tartar) yell (thou gristly Wolfe)
Force the blood from out thy gaping Wound!
Dij tibi non mortem, quae cunctis pena paratur,
Sed sensum post fata, tua dent (impie) morti.
My spirit makes me not to feel thy weapon!
Hold you (cracked Organs) of my shottered life,
I am not touched yet! can I not mock my death,
And think 'tis but a dream tells me I am hurt?
Dar'st thou then leave me (blood?) Canst be so bold
As to forsake these veins to flow on Earth?
And must, I like th'unhappy Roman, die
By a slaves hand?
Tyrant, 'tis known
He's Lord of others lives that scorns his own!
I that could scarce ere sleep, can I ere die?
And will none fear my life when I am dead
Tortures and torments for the murderer!
Ha, ha, ha!
I thank the (great omnipotent) that I
Shall ere laugh out the lag end of my life!
Villain, thy laugh wounds worse than did thy Dagger!
Are you Lethargic (Lords) in cruelty?
Nay, hear me (Turk) now will I prompt their rage
Lock me in the Bull of Phalaris,
Cut off these eyelids, bid me then outgaze
The parching Sunbeams; flay this tender skin,
Set nests of Hornets on my rawest flesh,
Let the Siconian Clouds drop brimstone on me,
Pour boiling Lemnos on my greenest wounds,
Put on my shoulder Nessus poisoned shirt,
Bind all these bloody faces to my face
Rock me Procrastes like—
Hell, oh! I cannot brook your smallest touch,
Ha, ha, each groan is Balsam to my wounds:
I am perfect well!
Rascal dar'st deride us?
Yea? and while your witty furies shall invent
For me, some never heard of punishment;
I see a guard of Saints ready to take me hence.
Take then fro flight, my new rewarded soul,
And seat thee on the winged Seraphims,
Hast to the Empyreum, where thy welcome
Shall be an Hallelujah, anthemed forth
By the Chorus of the Angel-hierarchy.
Pierce with (swift plumes) the concave paths o'th' Moon
Where the black air enlightened is with stars.
Stay not to wonder (there) of wand'ring Signs
At the inhorned Gemini, or Amphious Harp,
At Arctos, or Boötes, or the Bear,
(Which are to please wizard Astrologers)
Soar higher with the pitch and then look down
To laugh at the hard trifles of the world!
Perchance some oft have known a better life,
Never did none ere leave it more willingly.
Fear your deaths (Gods) for I have lost my life,
And what I most (complain) my tyranny!
Soul to detain thee from thy wished rest
Were but an envious part! arise, farewell:
To stay thee to accuse or fate or man
Would show I were unwilling yet to leave thee
But dear companion hence: cut through the air:
Let not the grossness of my Earth o'er-lime
Thy speedy wings, fly without weight of crime.
O now have I and Fortune tried it out.
With all her best of favours was I crowned
And suffered her worst threats, when most she frowned.
Stay (Soulel) a King, a Turk, commands thee stay!
Sure I am but an actor, and must strive
To personate the Tragic ends of Kings.
And so (to win applause unto the Scene)
With feigned passion thus must grasp at death!
O but I see pale Nemesis at hand:
Art thou dull fate, and dost not overspread
Gimmerion wings of death throughout the world;
What? Not one Earthquake? One blazing Comet
T'accompany my soul t'his Funeral?
s not this houre the generall period
To ne'er returning time? Last breath command
A new Deucalion's deluge, that with me
The world may swim to his Eternal Grave,
Crack hinge that holds this globe, and welcome death,
Wilt thou not stay Soul? Friend not stay with Kings?
Sink then, and sink beneath the Thracian Mount.
Sink beneath Athos, be the Brackish Waves
Of Acheron thy Tomb, i'll want a Grave;
So all parts fear, which first my Corpse shall have;
For in my Grave, i'll be the Christians foe.
Here like a Massy Pyramid i'll fall,
I'll strive to sink all the whole fabric with me,
Quake Pluto, for 'tis I that come
A Turk, a Tyrant, and a Conqueror,
And with this groan, like thunder will I cleave,
The timorous earth, whilst thus my last I breath.
O easy powers, to give's all at first,
But in their loss they make us most accursed.
The Taper of your Father's life is spent
We must have light still and adore a Sun
That next is rising, therefore mighty Prince,
Upon your shoulders must the load
Of Empire rest.
Why (Lords) we have a Brother
Who, as in the same blood he tocke a share,
So let him bear his part in Government:
My Lord! within the selfsame Hemisphere
It's most prodigious when two Suns appear!
One body by one soul must be informed.
Kingdom's like (marriage beds) must not endure
Any corrival! Rome was ne'er secure
Whilst she contain'da Pompey, and a Caesar.
Like as one Prophet we acknowledge now
So of one King in state we must allow.
You know the Turkish Laws, Prince be not nice
To purchase Kingdoms, whatsoever the price.
He must be lopped, send for him he must dye.
O happy Bajazet that he was borne
To be a King when thou was Counsellor.
Call in our Brother cup,
Why (Lords!) is Amurath so light a weight?
Is this the Trunk o'th' Turkish Emperor?
Oh what a heap of thoughts are come to naught
What a light weight is he unto six men
Who durst stand under Ossa, and sustain it:
My Lord, these Meditations fit not you:
You are to take the honour he hath left,
And think you of his rising, not his fall!
Let your decree be sudden, here's your Brother.
Brother, I could have wished we might have met
At times of better greeting! Our father hath
Bequeathed to the Grave these ashes, to us his State.
Nor have we leisure (yet) to mourn for him
Brother, you know our state hath made a Law,
That, he that sits in a Majestic Chair,
Must not endure the next succeeding heir.
Yes, we do:
And (Brother) do you think 'tis crime enough
To dye, because I am son to an Emperor?
My Lord, we know their breathes in him that ay
Of true affection, that he doth much desire
You should be equal in his Kingdom with him:
But still when two great evils are proposed:
The less is to be chosen.
My Lord, your life's but one:
Kings are the threads whereto there are inweaved
Millions of lives, and he that must rule all
Must still be one that is select from all.
Although we speak, yet think them not our words,
But what the Land speaks in us! King's are free:
And must be impatient of equality.
And is't even so?
How have these Dogs fawned on me licked my feet
When Amurath yet lived? Felt all my thoughts,
And soothed them to the sight of Empire,
And now the first would set their politic hands
To strangle up that breath, a blast of which
Their nostrils have sucked up like perfumed air
Well brother well by all men this is spoke,
That heart that cannot bow, may yet be broke.
Brother you must not now stand to upbraid;
They which do fear the vulgars' murmuring tongue,
Must also fear th'authority of a King;
For rulers must esteem it happiness
That with their government they can hate suppress:
They with too faint a hand the Sceptres sway,
Who regard love, or what the people say:
To Kindred we must quite put off respect,
When 'tis so near it may our Crown affect.
Then name of Brother do I thus shake off,
For 'tis in vain, their mercy to implore
When impious Scatists have decreed before.
Yet King although thou take my life away
See how I'll die in better state than thou!
Who like (my Father) after his greatest glory
May fall by some base hand: The Minister
To take my breath, shall be to thyself, a King.
Yet give me leave a while▪ to Prophesy,
You that so Puppetlike delude your hopes,
And Miser-draw the ancestry from Kings,
Thinking, that fates dare not approach your blood
Till they do seize you, than you leave this Earth
Not as you went, but by compulsion dragged;
Still begging for a morrow from your Grave,
And with such shifts you do deceive yourselves:
As if you could deceive mortality,
No (Brother King) nor all the Glow-worm state,
Which makes thee be a Horseleech for thy blood,
Not all the Parasites Minions thou maintains,
Nor the restorative Dishes that are found out.
Nor all thy shifts and tricks can cheat mortality,
Or keep thee from a▪ death that's worse than mine.
Should all this fail, age would profess itself
A slow, but a sure Executioner.
O 'tis a hard thing well to temperate
Decaying happiness in great estate
But this example by me may you gain:
That at my death I not of Heaven complain
pull then, and with my fall pull on thyself
Mountains of burdenous honour which shall curse thee
Death leads the willing by the hand
But spurs them headlong on, that dares command.
Take up this Trunk; and let us first appoint
O Fathers and our Brothers Funerals,
The senseless body of that caitiff slave,
Hurl to a Ditch, Posterity shall hear
Our less ill Chronicled, but time shall hear
These minutes rather, then repeat their woe.
Now Primacy, on thee i'll medio,
Which who enjoy thee, are in blessed estate.
Whose age in secure silence fleets away,
Without disturbance to his funeral day;
Nor ponderous nor unquiet honours can
Vex him but dies a primate ancient man,
What greater powers threaten inferior men
A greater power threatens him again:
And like to wasted Tapers Kings must spend
Their lives to light up others: So all end.