FIe, cease to wonder,
Though you hear Orpheus with his ivory Lute,
Move Trees and Rocks,
Charm Bulls, Bears, and men more savage to be mute,
Weak foolish singer, here is one,
Would have transformed thyself, to stone.
Man.
SEt Phoebus, set, a fairer sun doth rise,
From the bright Radiance of my Mrs. eyes then ever thou begat'st
I dare not look, each hair a golden line,
Each word a hook,
The more I strive, the more still I am took.
Wom.
Fair servant, come, the day these eyes do lend
To warm thy blood, thou dost so vainly spend.
Come strangled breath.
Man.
What note so sweet as this,
That calls the spirits to a further bliss?
Wom.
Yet this outsavours wine, and this Perfume
Man.
Let's die, I languish, I consume,
COurtier, if thou needs wilt wive,
From this lesson learn to thrive.
If thou match a Lady, that passes thee in birth and state,
Let her curious garments be
Twice above thine own degree;
This will draw great eyes upon her,
Get her servants and thee honour.
Poor Citizen, if thou wilt be
A happy husband, learn of me;
To set thy wife first in thy shop,
A fair wife, a kind wife, a sweet wife, sets a poor man up.
What though thy shelves be ne'er so bare:
A woman still is currant ware:
Each man will cheapen, foe, and friend,
But whilst thou art at other end,
whate'er thou seest, or what dost hear,
Fool, 'haue no eye to, nor an ear;
And after supper for her sake,
When thou hast fed, snort, though thou wake:
What though the Gallants call thee mome?
Yet with thy lantern light her home:
Then look into the town and tell,
If no such Tradesmen there do dwell.
SIR, I may move the Court to serve your will,
But therein shall both wrong you and myself.
Why think you so sir?
'Cause I am familiar
With what will be their answer: they will say,
'tis against law, and argue me of Ignorance
For offering them the motion.
You know not, Sir
How in this cause they may dispense with Law,
And therefore frame not you their answer for them,
But do your parts.
I love the cause so well,
As I could run, the hazard of a check for't.
From whom?
Some of the bench, that watch to give it,
More than to do the office that they sit for:
But give me (sir) my fee.
Now you are Noble.
I shall deserve this better yet, in giving
My Lord some counsel, (if he please to hear it)
Then I shall do with pleading.
What may it be, sir?
That it would please his Lordship, as the Presidents,
And counselors of Court come by, to stand
Here, and but show yourself, and to some one
Or two, make his request: there is a minute
When a man's presence speaks in his own cause,
More than the tongues of twenty advocates.
I have urged that.
Their Lordships here are coming,
I must go get me a place, you'll find me in Court,
And at your service.
Now put on your Spirits.
The ease that you prepare yourself, my Lord,
In giving up the place you hold in Court,
Will prove (I fear) a trouble in the State,
And that no slight one.
Pray you sir, no more.
Now sir, lose not this offered means: their looks
Fixed on you, with a pitying earnestness,
Invite you to demand their furtherance
To your good purpose.— This such a dullness
So foolish and untimely as—
You know him.
I do, and much lament the sudden fall
Of his brave house, It is young Charloyes.
Son to the Marshal, from whom he inherits
His fame and virtues only.
Ha, heigh name you.
His father died in prison two days since.
Yes, to the shame of this ungrateful State!
That such a Master in the art of war,
So noble, and so highly meriting,
From this forgetful Country, should, for want
Of means to satisfy his creditors,
The sums he took up for the general good,
Meet with an end so infamous.
Dare you ever hope for like opportunity?
My good Lord!
My wish bring comfort to you.
The time calls us.
Good morrow Colonel.
This obstinate spleen,
You think becomes your sorrow, and sorts well
With your black suits: but grant me wit, or judgement,
And by the freedom of an honest man,
And a true friend to boot, I swear 'tis shameful.
And therefore flatter not yourself with hope,
Your sable habit, with the hat and cloak,
No though the ribbons help, have power to work'em
To what you would: for those that had no eyes,
To see the great acts of your father, will not,
From any fashion sorrow can put on,
be taught to know their duties.
If they will not,
They are too old to learn, and I too young
To give them counsel, since if they partake
The understanding, and the hearts of men,
They will prevent my words and tears: if not,
What can persuasion, though made eloquent
With grief, work upon such as have changed natures
With the most savage beast? Blessed, blessed be ever
The memory of that happy age, when justice
Had no guards to keep off wronged innocence,
From flying to her succours, and in that
Assurance of redress: where now (Roment)
The damned, with more ease may ascend from Hell,
Than we arrive at her. One Cerberus there
Forbids the passage, in our Courts a thousand,
As loud, and fertile headed, and the Client
That wants the sops, to fill their ravenous throats,
Must hope for no access: why should I then
Attempt impossibilities: you friend, being
Too well acquainted with my dearth of means
To make my entrance that way?
Would I were not.
But Sir, you have a cause, a cause so just,
Of such necessity, not to be deferred,
As would compel a maid, whose foot was never
Set o'er her father's threshold, nor within
The house where she was borne, ever spoke word,
Which was not ushered with pure virgin blushes,
To drown the tempest of a pleaders tongue,
And force corruption to give back the hire
It took against her: let examples move you.
You see great men in birth, esteem and fortune,
Rather than lose a scruple of their right,
Fawn basely upon such, whose gowns put off,
They would disdain for Servants.
And to these can I become a suitor?
Without loss,
Would you consider, that to gain their favours,
chastest dames put off their modesties,
Soldiers forget their honours, usurers
Make sacrifice of Gold, poets of wit,
And men religious, part with fame, and goodness?
Be therefore won to use the means, that may
Advance your pious ends.
You shall o'ercome.
And you receive the glory, pray you now practise.
'Tis well.
Not look on me!
You must have patience— Offer't again.
And be again contemned?
I know what's to be done.
And that your Lordship
Will please to do your knowledge, we offer, first
Our thankful hearts here, as a bounteous earnest
To what we will add
One word more of this
I am your enemy. Am I a man
Your bribes can work on? ha?
Friends, you mistake
The way to win my Lord, he must not hear this,
But I, as one in favour, in his sight,
May hearken to you for my profit. Sir,
I pray hear 'em.
'tis well.
Observe him now.
Your cause being good, and your proceedings so,
Without corruption; I am your friend,
Speak your desires.
Oh, they are charitable,
The Marshal stood engaged unto us three,
Two hundred thousand crowns, which by his death
We are defeated of. For which great loss
We aim at nothing but his rotten flesh,
Nor is that cruelty.
I have a son,
That talks of nothing but of Guns and Armours,
And swears he'll be a soldier, 'tis an humour
I would divert him from, and I am told
That if I minister to him in his drink
Powder, made of this bankrupt Marshals bones,
Provided that the carcase rot above ground,
'T will cure his foolish frenzy.
You show in it
A father's care. I have a son myself,
A fashionable Gentleman and a peaceful:
And but I am assured he's not so given,
He should take of it too. Sir, what are you?
A Gentleman.
So are many that rake dunghills.
If you have any suit, move it in Court.
I take no papers in corners.
Yes as the matter may be carried, and hereby
To manage the conveyance— Follow him.
You are rude. I say, he shall not pass.
You say so.
O what assurance?
For the well cutting of his Lordship's corns,
Picking his toes, or any office else
Nearer to baseness!
Look upon me better,
Are these the ensigns of so course a fellow?
Be well advised.
Out, rogue, do not I know,
These glorious weeds spring from the sordid dunghill
Of thy officious baseness? wert thou worthy
Of any thing from me, but my contempt,
I would do more than this, more, you Court-spider.
But that this man is lawless; he should find that I am valiant.
If your ears are fast,
'tis nothing. What's a blow or two? as much—
These chastisements, as useful are as frequent
To such as would grow rich.
Are they so Rascals? I will befriend you then.
Bear witness, Sirs.
Truth, I have borne my part already, friends.
In the Court you shall have more.
I know you for
The worst of spirits, that strive to rob the tombs
Of what is their inheritance, from the dead.
For usurers, bred by a riotous peace:
That hold the Charter of your wealth & freedom,
By being Knaves and Cuckolds that ne'er prayed,
But when you fear the rich heirs will grow wise,
To keep their Lands out of your parchment toils;
And then, the Devil your father's called upon,
To invent some ways of Luxury ne'er thought on.
Be gone, and quickly, or I'll leave no room
Upon your forehead for your horns to sprout on,
Without a murmur, or I will undo you;
For I will beat you honest.
Thrift forbid.
We will bear this, rather than hazard that.
I am somewhat eased in this yet.
(Only friend)
To what vain purpose do I make my sorrow,
Wait on the triumph of their cruelty?
Or teach their pride from my humility,
To think it has o'ercome? They are determined
What they will do: and it may well become me,
To rob them of the glory they expect
From my submiss entreaties.
Think not so, Sir,
The difficulties that you encounter with,
Will crown the undertaking— Heaven! you weep:
And I could do so too, but that I know,
There's more expected from the son and friend
Of him, whose fatal loss now shakes our natures.
Then sighs, or tears, (in which a village nurse
Or cunning strumpet, when her knave is hanged,
May overcome us.) We are men (young Lord)
Let us not do like women. To the Court,
And there speak like your birth: wake sleeping justice,
Or dare the Axe. This is a way will sort
With what you are. I call you not to that
I will shrink from myself, I will deserve
Your thanks, or suffer with you— O how bravely
That sudden fire of anger shows in you!
ship's seated. May this meeting proue
vs, and to the generall good of Burgundy.
Speake to the point.
is,
With honour to dispute the place and power
Or premier precedent, which this reverent man
Grave Rochfort, (whom for honour's sake I name)
Is purposed to resign a place, my Lords,
In which he hath with such integrity,
Performed the first and best parts of a judge,
That as his life transcends all fair examples
Of such as were before him in Dijon,
So it remains to those that shall succeed him,
A precedent they may imitate, but not equal.
I may not sit to hear this.
Let the love
And thankfulness we are bound to pay to goodness,
In this o'ercome your modesty.
My thanks
For this great favour shall prevent your trouble.
The honourable trust that was imposed
Upon my weakness, since you witness for me,
It was not ill discharged, I will not mention,
Nor now, if age had not deprived me of
The little strength I had to govern well,
The Province that I under took, forsake it.
That we could lend you of our years.
Or strength.
O as you are, perswade you to continue
The noble exercise of your knowing judgement.
That may not be, nor can your Lordship's goodness,
Since your employments have conferred upon me
Sufficient wealth, deny the use of it,
And though old age, when one foot's in the grave.
In many, when all humours else are spent
Feeds no affection in them, but desire
To add height to the mountain of their riches:
In me it is not so, I rest content
With the honours, and estate I now possess,
And that I may have liberty to use,
What Heaven still blessing my poor industry,
Hath made me Master of: I pray the Court
To ease me of my burden, that I may
Employ the small remainder of my life,
In living well, and learning how to die so,
See sir, our Advocate.
The Court entreats,
Your Lordship will be pleased to name the man,
Which you would have your successor, and in me,
All promise to confirm it.
I embrace it,
As an assurance of their favour to me,
And name my Lord Novall.
The Court allows it.
But there are suitors wait here, and their causes
May be of more necessity to be heard,
And therefore wish that mine may be deferred,
And theirs have hearing.
If your Lordship please
To take the place, we will proceed.
The cause
We come to offer to your Lordship's censure,
Is in itself so noble, that it needs not
Or Rhetoric in me that plead, or favour
From your grave Lordships, to determine of it.
Since to the praise of your impartial justice
(Which guilty, nay condemned men, dare not scandal)
t will erect a trophy of your mercy
With married to that justice.
Speak to the cause.
I will, my Lord: to say, the late dead Marshal
The father of this young Lord here, my Client,
Hath done his Country great and faithful service,
Might task me of impertinence to repeat,
What your grave Lordships cannot but remember,
He in his life, become indebted to
These thrifty men, I will not wrong their credits,
By giving them the attributes they now merit,
And failing by the fortune of the wars,
Of means to free himself, from his engagements,
He was arrested, and for want of bail
Imprisoned at their suit, and not long after
With loss of liberty ended his life.
And though it be a Maxim in our Laws,
All suits die with the person, these men's malice
In death find matter for their hate to work on,
Denying him the decent Rites of burial,
Which the sworn enemies of the Christian faith
Grant freely to their slaves: may it therefore please
Your Lordships, so to fashion your decree,
That what their cruelty doth forbid, your pity
May give allowance to.
How long have you Sir practised in Court?
Some twenty years, my Lord.
By your gross ignorance it should appear,
Not twenty days.
I hope I have given no cause in this, my Lord—
How dare you move the Court,
To the dispensing with an Act confirmed
By Parliament, to the terror of all bankrupts?
Go home, and with more care peruse the Statutes:
Or the next motion savouring of this boldness,
May force you to leap (against your will)
Over the place you plead at.
I foresaw this.
Why does your Lordship think, the moving of
A cause more honest than this Court had ever
The honour to determine, can deserve
A check like this?
Strange boldness!
'tis fit freedom:
Or do you conclude, an advocate cannot hold
His credit with the judge, unless he study
His face more than the cause for which he pleads?
Forbear.
Or cannot you, that have the power
To qualify the rigour of the Laws
When you are pleased, take a little from
The strictness of your sour decrees, enacted
In favour of the greedy creditors
Against the o'erthrown debtor?
Sirrah, you that prate
Thus saucily, what are you?
Why I'll tell you,
Thou purple-coloured man, I am one to whom
Thou owest the means thou hast of sitting there
A corrupt Elder.
Forbear.
The nose thou wear'st, is my gift, and those eyes,
That meet no object so base as their Master,
Had been, long since torn from that guilty head,
And thou thyself slave to some needy Swiss,
Had I not worn a sword, and used it better
Than in thy prayers thou ere didst thy tongue.
Shall such an Insolence pass unpunished?
Hear me.
Yet I, that in my service done my Country,
Disdain to be put in the scale with thee,
Confess myself unworthy to be valued
With the least part, nay hair of the dead Marshal,
Of whose so many glorious undertakings,
Make choice of any one, and that the meanest
Performed against the subtle Fox of France,
The politic Lewis, or the more desperate Swiss,
And 'twill outweigh all the good purpose,
Though put in act, that ever gown-man practised.
Away with him to prison.
that curses,
Urged justly, and breathed forth so, ever fell
On those that did deserve them; let not mine
Be spent in vain now, that thou from this instant
Mayest in thy fear that they will fall upon thee,
Be sensible of the plagues they shall bring with them.
And for denying of a little earth,
To cover what remains of our great soldier:
May all your wives prove whores, your factors thieves,
And while you live, your riotous heirs undo you.
And thou, the patron of their cruelty,
Of all thy Lordships live not to be owner
Of so much dung as will conceal a Dog,
Or what is worse, thyself in. And thy years,
To th'end thou mayst be wretched, I wish many,
And as thou hast denied the dead a grave,
May misery in thy life make thee desire one,
Which men and all the Elements keep from thee:
I have begun well, imitate, exceed.
Good counsel were it, a praise worthy deed.
Remember what we are.
Thus low my duty
answers your Lordship's counsel. I will use
In the few words (with which I am to trouble
Your Lordship's ears) the temper that you wish me,
Not that I fear to speak my thoughts as loud,
And with a liberty beyond Romont:
But that I know, for me that am made up
Of all that's wretched, so to haste my end,
Would seem to most, rather a willingness
To quit the burden of a hopeless life,
Then scorn of death, or duty to the dead.
I therefore bring the tribute of my praise
To your severity, and commend the justice,
That will not for the many services
That any man hath done the Common wealth,
Wink at his least of ills: what though my father
Writ man before he was so, and confirmed it,
By numbering that day, no part of his life,
In which he did not service to his Country;
Was he to be free therefore from the Laws,
And ceremonious form in your decrees?
Or else because he did as much as man
In those three memorable overthrows
A Granson, Morat, Nancy, where his Master,
The warlike Charloyes (with whose misfortunes
I bear his name) lost treasure, men and life,
To be excused, from payment of those sums
Which (his own patrimony spent) his zeal,
To serve his Country, forced him to take up?
The president were ill.
And yet, my Lord, this much
I know you'll grant; After those great defeatures,
Which in their dreadful ruins buried quick,
Courage and hope, in all men but himself,
He forced the proud foe, in his height of conquest,
To yield unto an honourable peace.
And in it saved an hundred thousand lives,
To end his own, that was sure proof against
The scalding Summer's heat, and Winter's frost,
Ill airs, the Cannon, and the enemy's sword,
In a most loathsome prison.
'twas his fault to be so prodigal.
He had from the state sufficient entertainment for the Army.
sufficient? My Lord, you sit at home,
And though your fees are boundless at the bar:
Are thrifty in the charges of the war,
But your wills be obeyed. To these I turn,
To these soft-hearted men, that wisely know
They are only good men, that pay what they owe
And so they are.
'Tis the City Doctrine,
We stand bound to maintain it.
Be constant in it,
And since you are as merciless in your natures,
As base, and mercenary in your means
By which you get your wealth, I will not urge
The Court to take away one scruple from
The right of their laws, or one good thought
In you to mend your disposition with.
I know there is no music to your ears
So pleasing as the groans of men in prison,
And that the tears of widows, and the cries
Of famished Orphans, are the feasts that take you.
That to be in your danger, with more care
Should be avoided, then infectious air,
The loathed embraces of diseased women,
A flatterer's poison, or the loss of honour.
Yet rather than my father's reverent dust
Shall want a place in that fair monument,
In which our noble Ancestors lie entombed,
Before the Court I offer up myself
A prisoner for it; load me with those irons
That have worn out his life, in my best strength
e run to th' incounter of cold hunger,
And choose my dwelling where no Sun dares enter,
So he may be released.
What mean you sir?
Only your fee against hers so much said
Already in this cause, and said so well,
That should I only offer to speak in it,
I should not be heard, or laughed at for it.
'Tis the first money advocate ere gave back,
Though he said nothing.
Be advised, young Lord,
And well considerate, you throw away
Your liberty, and joys of life together:
Your bounty is employed upon a subject
That is not sensible of it, with which, wise man
Never abused his goodness; the great virtues
Of your dead father vindicate themselves,
From these men's malice, and break ope the prison,
Though it contain his body.
Let him alone,
If he love Lords, a God's name let him wear 'em,
Provided these consent.
I hope they are not
So ignorant in any way of profit,
As to neglect a possibility
To get their own, by seeking it from that
Which can return them nothing, but ill fame,
And curses for their barbarous cruelties.
What think you of the offer?
Very well.
Accept it by all means: let's shut him up,
He is well-shaped and has a villainous tongue,
And should he study that way of revenge,
As I dare almost swear he loves a wench,
We have no wives, nor never shall get daughters
That will hold out against him.
What's your answer?
Speak you for all.
Why, let our executions
That lie upon the father, be returned
Upon the son, and we release the body.
The Court must grant you that.
I thank your Lordships,
They have in it confirmed on me such glory,
As no time can take from me: I am ready,
Come lead me where you please: captivity
That comes with honour, is true liberty.
Strange rashness.
A brave resolution rather,
Worthy a better fortune, but however
It is not now to be disputed, therefore
To my own cause. Already I have found
Your Lordship's bountiful in your favours to me,
And that should teach my modesty to end here
And press your loves no further.
There is nothing
The Court can grant, but with assurance you
May ask it, and obtain it.
You encourage a bold Petitioner, and 'tis not fit
Your favours should be lost. Besides, t'as been
A custom many years, at the surrendering
The place I now give up, to grant the precedent
One boon, that parted with it. And to confirm
Your grace towards me, against all such as may
Detract my actions, and life hereafter,
I now prefer it to you.
Speak it freely.
I then desire the liberty of Romont,
And that my Lord Novall whose private wrong
Was equal to the injury that was done
To the dignity of the Court, will pardon it,
And now sign his enlargement.
Pray you demand
The moiety of my estate, or any thing
Within my power, but this.
Am I denied then— my first and last request
It must not be.
I have a voice to give in it.
And I.
And if persuasion will not work him to it,
We will make known our power.
You are too violent,
You shall have my consent— But would you had
Made trial of my love in any thing
But this, you should have found then— But it skills not.
You have what you desire.
I thank your Lordships.
The court is up, make way.
I follow you— Baumont.
My Lord.
You are a scholar, Baumont,
And can search deeper into th' intents of men,
Than those that are less knowing— How appeared
The piety and brave behaviour of
Young Charloyes to you?
It is my wonder,
Since I want language to express it fully;
And sure the Colonel—
Fie! he was faulty— what present money have I?
There is no want
Of any sum a private man has use for.
'Tis well:
I am strangely taken with this Charlaloys;
Methinks, from his example, the whole age
Should learn to be good, and continue so.
Virtue works strangely with us: and his goodness
Rising above his fortune, seems to me
Princelike, to will, not ask a courtesy.
'tIs strange.
methinks so,
In a man, but young,
Yet old in judgement, theoric, and practic,
In all humanity (and to increase the wonder)
Religious, yet a Soldier, that he should
Yield his free living youth a captive, for
The freedom of his aged father's Corpses,
And rather choose to want life's necessaries,
Liberty, hope of fortune, than it should
In death be kept from Christian ceremony.
Come, 'Tis a golden precedent in a Son,
To let strong nature have the better hand,
(In such a case) of all affected reason.
What years sits on this Charalois?
Twenty eight, for since the clock did strike him 17 old
Under his father's wing, this Son hath fought,
Served and commanded, and so aptly both,
That sometimes he appeared his father's father,
And never less than's son; the old man's virtues
So recent in him, as the world may swear,
Nought but a fair tree, could such fair fruit bear.
But wherefore lets he such a barbarous law,
And men more barbarous to execute it,
Prevail on his soft disposition,
That he had rather die alive for debt
Of the old man in prison, than he should
Rob him of Sepulture, considering
These moneys borrowed bought the lender's peace,
And all their means they enjoy, nor was diffused
In any impious or licentious path?
True: for my part, were it my father's trunk,
The tyrannous Rameheads, with their horns should gore it,
Or, cast it to their curs (than they) less currish,
Ere prey on me so, with their Lion-law,
Being in my free will (as in his) to shun it.
Alas! he knows himself (in poverty) lost:
For in this partial avaricious age
What price bears Honour? Virtue? Long ago
It was but praised, and freezed, but nowadays
'Tis colder far, and has, nor love, nor praise,
Very praise now freezeth too: for nature
Did make the heathen, far more Christian then,
Then knowledge us (less heathenish) Christian.
This morning is the funeral.
Certainly!
And from this prison 'twas the son's request
That his dear father might interment have.
See, the young son interred a lively grave.
They come, observe their order.
How like a silent stream shaded with night,
And gliding softly with our windy sighs;
Moves the whole frame of this solemnity!
Tears, sighs and blacks, filling the fimily,
Whilst I the only murmur in this grove
Of death, thus hollowly break forth Vouchsafe
To stay a while, rest, rest in peace, dear earth,
Thou that brought'st rest to their unthankful lives
Whose cruelty denied thee rest in death:
Here stands thy poor Executor thy son,
That makes his life prisoner, to bale thy death;
Who gladlier puts on this captivity,
Than Virgins long in love, their wedding weeds:
Of all that ever thou hast done good to,
These only have good memories, for they
Remember best, forget not gratitude.
I thank you for this last and friendly love.
And though this Country, like a viperous mother,
Not only hath eat up ungratefully
All means of thee her son, but last thyself,
Leaving thy heir so bare and indigent,
He cannot raise thee a poor Monument,
Such as a flatterer, or a usurer hath.
Thy worth, in every honest breast builder one,
Making their friendly hearts thy funeral stone.
Sir.
Peace, O peace, this scene is wholly mine.
What weep ye, soldiers? Blanch not, Romont weeps.
Ha. let me see, my miracle is eased,
The jailer and the creditors do weep;
Even they that make us weep, do weep themselves.
Be these thy Body's balm: these and thy virtue
Keep thy fame ever odoriferous,
Whilst the great, proud, rich, undeserving man,
Alive stinks in his vices, and being vanished,
The golden calf that was an Idol decked
With Marble pillars jet, and Porphyrie,
Shall quickly both in bone and name consume,
Though wrapped in lead, spice, cerecloth and perfume
Sir.
What! Away for shame: you profane rogues
Must not be mingled with these holy relics:
This is a Sacrifice, our shower shall crown
His sepulchre with Olive, Myrrh and bays
The plants of peace, of sorrow, victory,
Your tears would spring but weeds.
Would they not so?
we'll keep them to stop bottles then:
No; keep 'em for your own sins, you Rogues,
Till you repent: you'll die else and be damned.
Damned, ha! ha, ha.
Laugh ye?
Yes faith. Sir, we'd be very glad
To please you either way.
Y'are ne'er content,
Crying not laughing.
Both with a birth she rogues.
Our wives, Sir, taught us.
Look, look you slaves, your thankless cruelty
And savage manners, of unkind Dijon,
Exhaust these floods, and not his father's death.
Slid, Sir, what would ye, yeare so choleric?
Most soldiers are so i'faith, let him alone:
They have little else to live on, we have not had
A penny of him, have we?
'Slight, would you have our hearts?
We have nothing but his body here in durance
For all our money.
On.
One moment more,
But to bestow a few poor legacies,
All I have left in my dead father's rights,
And I have done. Captain, wear thou these spurs
That yet ne'er made his horse run from a foe.
Lieutenant, thou, this Scarf, and may it tie
Thy valour, and thy honesty together:
For so it did in him. Ensign, this cuirass
Your general's necklace once. You gentle Bearers,
Divide this purse of gold, this other, strew
Among the poor: 'tis all I have. Romont,
(Wear thou this medal of himself) that like
A hearty Oak, grew'st close to this tall Pine,
Even in the wildest wilderness of war,
Whereon foes broke their swords, and tired themselves;
Wounded and hacked ye were, but never felled.
For me, my portion provide in Heaven:
My root is earthed, and I a desolate branch
Left scattered in the high way of the world,
Trod under foot, that might have been a Column,
Mainly supporting our demolished house,
This would I wear as my inheritance.
And what hope can arise to me from it,
When I and it are both here prisoners?
Only may this, if ever we be free,
Keep, or redeem me from all infamy.
No farther, look to 'em at your own peril.
No, as they please: their Master's a good man.
I would they were the Bermudas.
You must no further.
The prison limits you, and the Creditors
Exact the strictness.
Out you wolvish mongrels!
Whose brains should be knocked out, like dogs in Iuly,
Lest your infection poison a whole town.
They grudge our sorrow: your ill wills perforce
Turns now to Charity: they would not have us
Walk too far mourning, vsurers relief
Grieves, if the Debtors have too much of grief.
I prithee tell me, Florimell, why do women marry?
Why truly Madam, I think, to lie with their husbands.
You are a fool; She lies, Madam, women marry husbands,
To lie with other men.
Faith, e'en such a woman wilt thou make. By this light, Madam, this wagtail will spoil you, if you take delight in her licence.
'tis true, Florimell: and thou wilt make me too good for a young Lady. What an electuary found my father out for his daughter, when he compounded you two my women? for thou, Florimell, art e'en a grain too heavy, simply for a waiting Gentlewoman.
And thou Bellapert, a grain too light.
Well, go thy ways goodly wisdom, whom nobody regards. I wonder, whether be elder thou or thy hood you think, because you serve my Lady's mother, are 32 years old which is a peep cut, you know.
Well said, whirligig.
You are deceived: I want a peg i'th' middle. Out of these Prerogatives! you think to be mother of the maids here, & mortify 'em with proverbs: go, go, govern the sweet meats, and weigh the Sugar, that the wenches steal none: say your prayers twice a day, and as I take it, you have performed your function.
I may be even with you.
Hark, the Court's broke up. Go help my old Lord out of his caroche, and scratch his head till dinner time.
Well.
Fie Madam, how you walk! By my maidenhead you look 7 years older than you did this morning: why, there can be nothing under the Sun valuable, to make you thus a minute.
Ah my sweet Bellapert thou Cabinet
To all my counsels, thou dost know the cause
That makes thy Lady wither thus in youth.
ud'slight, enjoy your wishes: whilst I live,
One way or other you shall crown your will.
Would you have him your husband that you love,
And can't not be? he is your servant though,
And may perform the office of a husband.
But there is honour, wench.
Such a disease
There is in deed, for which ere I would die.—
Prithee, distinguish me a maid & wife.
Faith, Madam, one may bear any man's children,
Tother must bear no man's.
What is a husband?
Physic, that tumbling in your belly, will make you sick i'th' stomach: the only distinction betwixt a husband and a servant is: the first will lie with you, when he please; the last shall lie with you when you please. Pray tell me, Lady, do you love, to marry after, or would you marry, to love after?
I would meet love and marriage both at once.
Why then you are out of the fashion, and willbe contemned: for (I'll assure you) there are few women i'th' world, but either they have married first, and love after, or love first, and married after: you must do as you may, not as you would: your father's will is the Goal you must fly to if a husband approach you, you would have further off, is he your love? the less near you. A husband in these days is but a cloak to be oftener laid upon your bed, then in your bed.
Humpe.
Sometimes you may wear him on your shoulder, now and then under your arm: but seldom or never let him cover you: for 'tis not the fashion.
Best day to nature's curiosity,
Star of Dijon, the lustre of all France,
Perpetual spring dwell on thy rosy cheeks,
Whose breath is perfume to our Continent,
See Flora turned in her varieties.
Oh divine Lord!
No autumn, nor no age ever approach
This heavenly piece, which nature having wrought,
She lost her needle and did then despair,
Ever to work so lively and so fair.
Uds light, my Lord, one of the purls of your band is (without all discipline fall'n) out of his rank.
How? I would not for a 1000 crowns she had seen't.
Dear Liladam, reform it.
Oh Lord: Per se, Lord, quintessence of honour, she walks not under a weed that could deny thee any thing.
Prithee peace, wench, thou dost but blow the fire, that flames too much already.
By gad, my Lord, you have the divinest tailor of Christendom; he hath made you look like an Angel in your cloth of Tissue doublet.
This is a three-legged Lord, there's a fresh assault, oh that men should spend time thus!
See see, how her blood drives to her heart, and straight vaults to her cheeks again.
What are these?
One of 'em there the lower is a good, foolish, knavish, sociable gallimaufry of a man, and has much taught my Lord with singing, he is master of a music house: the other is his dressing block, upon whom my Lord lays all his clothes, and fashions, ere he vouchsafes 'em his own person; you shall see him i'th' morning in the Galley-foist, at noon in the Bullion, i'th' evening in Quirpo, and all night in—
A bawdy-house.
If my Lord deny, they deny, if he affirm, they affirm: they skip into my Lords cast skins some twice a year, and thus they live to eat, eat to live, and live to praise my Lord.
Good sir, tell me one thing.
What's that?
Dare these men ever fight, on any cause?
Oh no, 't would spoil their clothes, and put their bands out of order.
Mrs, you hear the news: your father has resigned his Presidentship to my Lord my father.
And Lord Charolois undone forever.
Troth, 'tis pity, sir.
A braver hope of so assured a father
Did never comfort France.
A good dumb mourner.
A silent black.
O fi vpon him, how he weares his cloathes!
As if he had come this Christmas from St. Omers,
To see his friends, and returned after twelftide.
His Colonel looks fienely like a drover,
That had a winter lain perdieu i'th' rain.
What, he that wears a clout about his neck,
His cuffs in's pocket, and his heart in's mouth?
Now out upon him!
Servant, tie my hand.
How your lips blush, in scorn that they should pay
Tribute to hands, when lips are in the way!
I thus recant, yet now your hand looks white,
Because your lips robbed it of such a right.
I prithee sing the song
Deuoted to my M.
Romont will come, sir, straight.
'Tis well.
My Father.
My honourable Lord.
My Lord Novall, this is a virtue in you,
So early up and ready before noon,
That are the map of dressing through all France.
I rise to say my prayers, sir, here's my Saint.
'tis well and courtly; you must give me leave,
I have some private conference with my daughter,
Pray use my garden, you shall dine with me.
we'll wait on you.
Good morn unto your Lordship,
Remember what you have vowed— to his Mrs.
Perform I must.
Why how now Beaumelle, thou look'st not well.
thouart sad of late, come cheer thee, I have found
A wholesome remedy for these maiden fits,
A goodly Oak whereon to twist my vine,
Till her fair branches grow up to the stars.
Be near at hand, success crown my intent,
My business fills my little time so full,
I cannot stand to talk: I know, thy duty
Is handmaid to my will, especially
When it presents nothing but good and fit.
Sir, I am yours. Oh if my tears prove true,
Fate hath wronged love, and will destroy me too.
Sent you for me, sir?
Yes.
Your Lordship's pleasure?
Keeper, this prisoner I will see forth coming
Upon my word— Sit down good Colonel.
Why I did wish you hither, noble sir,
Is to advise you from this iron carriage,
Which, so affected, Romont, you wear,
To pity and to counsel ye submit
With expedition to the great Novall:
Recant your stern contempt, and slight neglect
Of the whole Court, and him, and opportunity,
Or you will undergo a heavy censure
In public very shortly.
Hum hum: reuerend sir,
I have observed you, and do know you well,
And am now more afraid you know not me,
By wishing my submission to Novall,
Than I can be of all the bellowing mouths
That wait upon him to pronounce the censure
Could it determine me torments, and shame.
Submit, and crave forgiveness of a beast
'tis true, this boil of state wears purple Tissue,
Is high fed, proud: so is his Lordship's horse,
And bears as rich Caparisons. I know,
This Elephant carries on his back not only
Towers, Castles, but the ponderous republic,
And never stoops for't, with his strong breath trunk
snuffs others titles, Lordships, Offices,
Wealth, bribes and lives, under his ravenous jaws,
What's this unto my freedom? I dare die;
And therefore ask this Camel, if these blessings
(For so they would be understood by a man)
But mollify one rudeness in his nature,
Sweeten the eager relish of the law,
At whose great helm he sits: helps he the poor
In a just business? nay, does he not cross
Every deserved soldier and scholar,
As if when nature made him, she had made
The general Antipathy of all virtue?
How savagely, and blasphemously he spoke
Touching the General, the grave General dead,
I must weep when I think on't.
Sir.
My Lord, I am not stubborn, I can melt, you see,
And prize a virtue better than my life
For though I be not learned, I ever loved
That holy Mother of all issues, good,
Whose white hand (for a Sceptre) holds a File
To polish roughest customs, and in you
She has her right: see, I am calm as sleep,
But when I think of the gross injuries,
The godless wrong done, to my General dead,
I rave indeed, and could eat this Novall
A soulless dromedary.
Oh be temperate,
Sir, though I would persuade, I'll not constrain
Each man's opinion freely is his own,
Concerning any thing or anybody,
Be it right or wrong, 'tis at the judge's peril.
These men, Sir, wait without, my Lord is come too.
Pay'em those sums upon the table, take
Their full releases: stay, I want a witness:
Let me entreat you Colonel, to walk in,
And stand but by, to see this money paid,
It does concern you and your friends, it was
The better cause you were sent for, though said otherwise.
The deed shall make this my request more plain.
I shall obey your pleasure Sir, though ignorant
To what is tends?
Worthiest Sir,
You are most welcome: fie, no more of this:
You have out-weeped a woman, noble Charolois.
No man but has, or must bury a father.
Grave Sir, I buried sorrow, for his death,
In the grave with him. I did never think
He was immoral, though I vow I grieve,
And see no reason why the vicious,
Virtuous, valiant and unworthy men
Should die alike.
They do not.
In the manner
Of dying, Sir, they do not, but all die,
And therein differ not: but I have done.
I spied the lively picture of my father,
Passing your gallery, and that cast this water
Into mine eyes: see, foolish that I am,
To let it do so.
Sweet and gentle nature,
How silken is this well comparatively
To other men! I have a suit to you Sir,
Take it, 'tis granted.
What?
Nothing, my Lord.
Nothing is quickly granted.
Faith, my Lord,
That nothing granted, is even all I have,
For (all know) I have nothing left to grant.
Sir, ha' you any suit to me? Ill grant
You some thing, any thing.
Nay surely, I that can
Give nothing, will but sue for that again.
No man will grant me any thing I live for.
But begging nothing, every man will give't.
Sir, the love I bore your father, and the worth
I see in you, so much resembling his,
Made me thus send for you. And tender here
whatever you will take, gold, jewels, both,
All, to supply your wants, and free yourself.
Where heavenly virtue in high blooded veins
Is lodged, and can agree, men should kneel down,
Adore, and sacrifice all that they have;
And well they may, it is so seldom seen.
Put off your wonder, and here freely take
Or send your servants. Nor, Sir, shall you use
In aught of this, a poor man's fee, or bribe,
Unjustly taken of the rich, but what's
Directly gotten, and yet by the Law.
How ill, Sir, it becomes those hairs to mock?
Mock? thunder strike me then.
You do amaze me:
But you shall wonder too, I will not take
One single piece of this great heap: why should I
Borrow, that have not means to pay, nay am
A very bankrupt, even in flattering hope
Of ever raising any. All my begging,
Is Romont's liberty.
Here is your friend,
enfranchised ere you spoke. I give him you,
And Charalois. I give you to your friend
As free a man as he; your father's debts
Are taken off.
How?
Sir, it is most true.
I am the witness.
Yes faith, we are paid.
Heaven bless his Lordship, I did think him wiser
He a statesman, he an ass Pay other men's debts?
That he was never bound for.
One more such would save the rest of pleaders
Honoured Rochfort.
Lie still my tongue and bushes, called my cheeks,
That ofter thanks in words, for such great deeds.
Call in my daughter: still I have a suit to you.
Would you requite me.
With his life, assure you.
Nay, would you make me now your debtor, Sir.
This is my only child: what she appears,
Your Lordship well may see her education, Beau.
follows not any: for her mind, I know it
To be far fairer than her shape, and hope
It will continue so: if now her birth
Be not too mean for Charolois, take her
This virgin by the hand, and call her wife,
endowed with all my fortunes: bless me so.
Requite me thus, and make me happier,
In joining my poor empty name to yours,
Then if my state were multiplied ten fold.
Is this the payment, Sir, that you expect?
Why, you participate me more in debt
That nothing but my life can ever pay,
This beauty being your daughter, in which yours
I must conceive necessity of her virtue
Without ill dowry is a PRINCE's aim,
Then, as she is, for poor and worthless I,
How much too worthy! Waken me, Romont,
That I may know I dreamt, and find this vanished
Sure, I sleep not.
Your sentence life or death.
Fair Beaumelle, can you love me?
Yes, my Lord.
You need not question me, if I can you.
You are the fairest virgin in Digame
And Rochfort is your father.
What's this change?
You met my wishes, Gentlemen.
What make
These dogs in doublets he ere!
A Visitation, Sir.
Then thus, Fair Beaumelle, I write my faith
Thus seal it in the sight of Heaven and men.
Your fingers tie my heartstrings with this touch
In true-Love knots, which nought but death shall lose.
And yet these ears (an Emblem of our loves)
Like Crystal rivers individually
Flow into one another, make one source,
Which never man distinguish, less divide:
Breath, marry, breath, and kisses, mingle souls
Two hearts, and bodies, here incorporate:
And though with little wooing I have won,
My future life shall be a wooing time.
And every day, new as the bridal one,
Oh Sir, I groan under your courtesies,
More than my father's bones under his wrongs,
You Curtius-like, have thrown into the gulf,
Of this his Countries foul ingratitude,
Your life and fortunes, to redeem their shames.
No more, my glory, come, let's in and hasten
This celebration.
All fair bliss upon it.
Mistress.
Oh servant, virtue strengthen me.
Thy presence blows round my affection's vane:
You will undo me, if you speak again.
Here will be sport for you. This works.
Peace, peace.
One word, my Lord Novall.
What, thou wouldst money; there.
No, I'll none, I'll not be bought a slave,
A Pander, or a Parasite, for all
Your father's worth, though you have saved my life,
Rescued me often from my wants, I must not
Wink at your follies: that will ruin you.
You know my blunt way, and my love to truth:
Forsake the pursuit of this lady's honour,
Now you do see her made another man's,
And such a man's, so good, so popular,
Or you will pluck a thousand mischiefs on you,
The benefits you have done me, are not lost,
Nor cast away, they are pursed here in my heart,
But let me pay you, sir, a fairer way
Than to defend your vices, or to soothe'em.
Ha, ha, ha, what are my courses unto thee?
Good Cousin Pontalier, meddle with that
That shall concern thyself.
No more but scorn?
Move on then, stars, work your pernicious will.
Only the wise rule, and prevent your ill.
Fly not to these excuses: thou hast been
False in thy promise, and when I have said
Ungrateful, all is spoke.
Good my Lord, but hear me only.
To what purpose, trifler?
Can any thing that thou canst say, make void
The marriage? or those pleasures but a dream,
Which Charaloyes (oh Venus) hath enjoyed?
I yet could say that you receive advantage,
In what you think a loss, would you vouchsafe me
That you were never in the way till now
With safety to arrive at your desires,
That pleasure makes love to you unattended
By danger or repentance?
That I could.
But apprehend one reason how this might be,
Hope would not then forsake me.
The enjoying
Of what you most desire, I say th' enjoying
Shall, in the full possession of your wishes,
Confirm that I am faithful.
Give some relish
How this may appear possible.
I will
Relish, and taste, and make the banquet easy:
You say my lady's married. I confess it,
That Charolois hath enjoyed her, 'tis most true
That with her, he's already Master of
The best part of my old Lords state. Still better,
But that the first, or last, should be your hindrance,
I utterly deny; for but observe me:
While she went for, and was, I swear, a Virgin,
What courtesy could she with her honour give
Or you receive with safety— take me with you,
When I say courtesy, do not think I mean
A kiss, the tying of her shoe or garter,
An hour of private conference: those are trifles.
In this word courtesy, we that are gamesters point at
The sport direct, where not alone the lover
Brings his Artillery, but uses it.
Which word expounded to you, such a courtesy
Do you expect, and sudden.
But he tasted the first sweets, Bellapert.
He wronged you shrewdly,
He toiled to climb up to the Phoenix nest,
And in his prints leaves your ascent more easy.
I do not know, you that are perfect critics
In women's books, may talk of maidenheads.
But for her marriage.
'Tis a fair protection
'Gainst all arrests of fear, or shame for ever.
Such as are fair, and yet not foolish, study
To have one at thirteen; but they are mad
That stay till twenty. Then sir, for the pleasure,
To say Adulterie's sweeter, that is stale.
This only is not the contentment more,
To say, This is my Cuckold, than my Rival.
More I could say— but briefly, she dotes on you,
I it prou othrwise, spare not, poyson me
With next gold you give me.
How's this servant, courting my woman?
As an entrance to
The favour of the mistress: you are together
And I am perfect in my qu.
Stay Bellapert.
In this, I must not with your leave obey you.
Yu Taylor and your Tire-woman waite without
A stay my counsayle, and direction for
Your next day's dressing. I have much to do,
Nor will your Ladyship know, time is precious,
Continue idle: this choice Lord will find
So fit employment for you.
I shall grow angry.
Not so, you have a jewel in her, Madam.
I had forgot to tell your Ladyship
The closet is private and your couch ready;
And if you please that I shall lose the key,
But say so, and 'tis done.
You come to chide me, servant, and bring with you
Sufficient warrant, you will say and truely,
My father found too much obedience in me,
By being won too soon: yet if you please
But to remember, all my hopes and fortunes
Had reverence to this likening: you will grant
That though I did not well towards you, I yet
Did wisely for myself.
With too much fervour
I have so long loved and still love you, Mistress,
To esteem that an injury to me
Which was to you convenient: that is past
My help, is past my cure. You yet may, Lady,
In recompense of all my duteous service,
(Provided that your will answer your power)
Become my creditress.
I understand you,
And for assurance, the request you make
Shall not he long unanswered. Pray you sit,
And by what you shall hear, you'll easily find,
My passions are much fitter to desire,
Than to be sued to.
Sir, 'tis not envy
At the start my fellow has got of me in
My lady's good opinion, that's the motive
Of this discovery; but due payment
O what I owe her Honour.
So I conceive it.
I have observed too much, nor shall my silence
Prevent the remedy— yonder they are,
I dare not be seen with you. You may do
What you think fit, which willbe, I presume,
The office of a faithful and tried friend
To my young Lord.
This is no vision: ha!
With the next opportunity.
By this kiss, and this, and this.
That you would ever swear thus.
If I seem rude, your pardon, Lady; yours
I do not ask: come, do not dare to show me
A face of anger, or the least dislike,
Put on, and suddenly a milder look,
I shall grow rough else.
What have I done, Sir,
To draw this harsh unsavoury language from you?
Done, Popinjay? why, dost thou think that if
I ere had dreamt that thou hadst done me wrong,
Thou shouldest outlive it?
This is something more
Than my Lords friendship gives commission for.
Your presence and the place, makes him presume
Upon my patience.
As if thou ere were't angry
But with thy tailor, and yet that poor shred
Can bring more to the making up of a man,
Then can be hoped from thee: thou art his creature,
And did he not each morning new create
Thou wouldst stink and be forgotten. I'll not change
On syllable more with thee, until thou bring
Some testimony under good men's hands,
Thou art a Christian. I suspect thee strongly,
And willbe satisfied: till which time, keep from me.
The entertainment of your visitation
Has made what I intended on a business.
So we shall meet— Madam.
Use that leg again, and I'll cut off the other.
Very good.
What a perfume the musk-cat leaves behind him!
Do you admit him for a property,
To save you charges, Lady.
'tis not useless,
Now you are to succeed him.
So I respect you,
Not for yourself, but in remembrance of,
Who is your father, and whose wife you now are,
That I choose rather not to understand
Your nasty scoff then,—
What, you will not beat me,
If I expound it to you. here's a Tyrant
Spares neither man nor woman.
My intents
Madam, deserve not this; nor do I stay
To be the whetstone of your wit: preserve it
To spend on such, as know how to admire
Such coloured stuff. In me there is now speaks to you
As true a friend and servant to your Honour,
And one that will with as much hazard guard it,
As ever man did goodness.— But then Lady,
You must endeavour not alone to be,
But to appear worthy such love and service.
To what tends this?
Why, to this purpose, Lady,
I do desire you should prove such a wife
To Charaloys (and such a one he merits)
A Caesar, did hee liue, could not except at,
Not only innocent from crime, but free
From all taint and suspicion.
They are base that judge me otherwise.
But yet be careful.
Detraction's a bold monster, and fears not
To wound the fame of Princes, if it find
But any blemish in their lives to work on.
But I'll be plainer with you: had the people
been learned to speak, but what even now I saw,
Their malice out of that would raise an engine
To overthrow your honour. In my sight
(With yonder pointed fool I frighted from you)
You used familiarity beyond
A modest entertainment: you embraced him
With too much ardour for a stranger, and
Met him with kisses neither chaste nor comely
But learn you to forget him, as I will
Your bounties to him, you will find it safer
Rather to be uncourtly, then immodest.
This pretty rag about your neck shows well,
And being course and little worth, it speaks you,
As terrible as thrifty.
Madam.
Yes.
And this strong belt in which you hang your honour
Will outlast twenty scarfs.
What mean you, Lady?
And all else about you Cap a poe,
So uniform in spite of handsomeness,
Shows such a bold contempt of comeliness,
That 'tis not strange your Laundress in the League,
Grew mad with love of you.
Is my free counsel.
Answered with this ridiculous scorn?
These objects
Stole very much of my attention from me,
Yet something I remember, to speak truth,
Deceived gravely, but to little purpose,
That almost would have made me swear, some Curate
Had stolen into the person of Romont,
And in the praise of good wife honesty,
Had read an homely.
By thy hand.
And sword,
I will make up your oath, 'twill want weight else.
You are angry with me, and poor I laugh at it.
Do you come from the Camp, which affords only
The conversation of cast suburb whores,
To set down to a Lady of my rank,
Limits of entertainment?
Sure a Legion has possessed this woman.
One stamp more would do well: yet I desire not
You should grow horn-mad, till you have a wife.
You are come to warm meat, and perhaps clean linen
Feed, wear it, and be thankful. For me, know,
That though a thousand watches were set on me,
And you the Master-spy, I yet would use,
The liberty that best likes me. I will revel,
Feast, kiss, embrace, perhaps grant larger favours:
Yet such as live upon my means, shall know
They must not murmur at it. If my Lord
be now grown yellow, and has chose out you
To serve his Jealousy that way, tell him this,
You have something to inform him.
And I will.
Believe it wicked one I will. Hear, Heaven,
But hearing pardon me: if these fruits grow
Upon the tree of marriage, let me shun it,
As a forbidden sweet. An heir and rich,
Young, beautiful, yet add to this a wife,
And I will rather choose a Spittle sinner
Carted an age before, though three parts rotten,
And take it for a blessing, rather than
Be fettered to the hellish slavery
Of such an impudence.
Colonel, good fortune
To meet you thus: you look sad, but I'll tell you
Something that shall remove it. Oh how happy
Is my Lord Charaloys in his fair bride!
A happy man indeed!— pray you in what?
I dare swear, you would think so good a Lady,
A dower sufficient.
No doubt. But on.
So fair, so chaste, so virtuous: so indeed
All that is excellent.
Women have no cunning to gull the world.
Yet to all these, my Lord
Her father gives the full addition of
All he does now possess in Burgundy:
These writings to confirm it, are new sealed
And I most fortunate to present him with them,
I must go seek him out, can you direct me?
You'll find him breaking a young horse.
I thank you.
I must do something worthy Charaloys friendship.
If she were well inclined to keep her so,
Deserved not thanks: and yet to stay a woman
Spurred headlong by hot lust, to her own ruin,
Is harder than to prop a falling tower
With a deceiving reed.
Some one seek for me,
As soon as he returns.
Her father! ha?
How if I break this to him? sure it cannot
Meet with an ill construction. His wisdom
Made powerful by the authority of a father,
Will warrant and give privilege to his counsels.
It shall be so— my Lord.
Your friend Romont: would you ought with me?
I stand so engaged
To your so many favours, that I hold it
A breach in thankfulness, should I not discover,
Though with some imputation to myself,
All doubts that may concern you.
The performance
Will make this protestation worth my thanks.
Then with your patience lend me your attention
For what I must deliver, whispered only
You will with too much grief receive.
See wench!
Upon my life as I forespoke, he's now
Preferring his complaint: but be thou perfect,
And we will fit him.
Fear not me, pox on him:
A Captain turn Informer against kissing?
Would he were hanged up in his rusty Armour:
But if our fresh wits cannot turn the plots
Of such a mouldy murrion on itself;
Rich clothes, choice fare, and a true friend at a call,
With all the pleasures the night yields, forsake us.
This in my daughter? do not wrong her.
Now begin.
The games afoot, and we in distance.
'tis thy fault, foolish girl, pin on my veil,
I will not wear those jewels. Am I not
Already matched beyond my hopes? yet still
You prune and set me forth, as if I were
Again to please a suitor.
'tis the course
That our great Ladies take.
A weak excuse.
Those that are better seen, in what concern
A Lady's honour and fair fame, condemn it.
You wait well, in your absence, my Lords friend
The understanding, grave and wise Romont.
Must I be still her sport
Reprove me for it.
And he has traveled to bring home a judgement
Not to be contradicted. You will say
My father, that owes more to years than he,
Has brought me up to music, language, Courtship,
And I must use them. True, but not t'offend,
O render me suspected.
Does your fine story begin from this?
I thought a parting kiss
From young Novall, would have displeased no more
Than heretofore it hath done; but I find
I must restrain such favours now; look therefore
As you are careful to continue mine,
That I no more be visited. I'll endure
The strictest course of life that jealousy
Can think secure enough, ere my behaviour
Shall call my fame in question.
Ten dissemblers
Are in this subtle devil. You believe this?
So far that if you trouble me again
With a report like this, I shall not only
judge you malicious in your disposition,
But study to repent what I have done
To such a nature.
Why, 'tis exceeding well.
And for you, daughter, off with this, off with it:
I have that confidence in your goodness, ay,
That I will not consent to have you live
Like to a Recluse in a cloister: go
Call in the gallants, let them make you merry,
Use all fit liberty.
Blessing on you.
If this new preacher with the sword and feather
Could prove his doctrine for Canonical,
We should have a fine world.
Sir, if you please
To bear yourself as fits a Gentleman,
The house is at your service: but if not,
Though you seek company else where, your absence
Will not be much lamented—
If this be
The recompense of striving to preserve
A wanton giglet honest, very shortly
'Twill make all mankind Panders— Do you smile,
Good Lady Looseness? your whole sex is like you
And that man's mad that seeks to better any:
What new change have you next?
Oh, fear not you, sir,
I'll shift into a thousand, but I will
Convert your heresy.
What heresy? Speak.
Of keeping a Lady that is married,
From entertaining servants.—
O, you are welcome.
Use any means to vex him,
And then with welcome follow me.
You are tired
With your grave exhortations, Colonel.
How is it? Faith, your Lordship may do well,
To help him to some Church-preferment 'tis
Now the fashion, for men of all conditions,
however they have lived, to end that way.
That face would do well in a surplice.
Rogues, be silent— or—
S'death will you suffer this?
And you, the master Rogue, the coward rascal,
I shall be with you suddenly.
Pontallier,
If I should strike him, I know I shall kill him:
And therefore I would have thee beat him, for
he's good for nothing else.
His back
Appears to me, as it would tire a Beadle,
And then he has a knotted brow, would bruise
A court like hand to touch it.
He looks like
A currier when his hides grown dear.
Take heed he curry not some of you.
God's me, he's angry.
I break no Jests, but I can break my sword
About your pates.
Here's more.
Come let's be gone.
we are beleaguered.
Look they bring up their troops.
Will you sit down with this disgrace?
You are abused most grossly.
I grant you, Sir, we are, and you would have us
Stay and be more abused.
My Lord, I am sorry,
Your house is so inhospitable, we must quit it.
Prithee Romont, what caused this uproar?
Nothing.
They laughed and used their scurvy wits upon me.
Come, 'tis thy jealous nature: but I wonder
That you which are an honest man and worthy,
Should foster this suspicion: no man laughs;
No one can whisper, but thou apprehendest
His conference and his scorn reflects on thee:
For my part they should scoff their thin wits out,
So I not heard 'em, beat me, not being there.
Leave, leave these fits, to conscious men, to such
As are obnoxious, to those foolish things
As they can gibe at.
Well, Sir.
Thou art known
Valiant without detect, right defined,
Which is (as fearing to do injury,
As tender to endure it) not a brabbler,
A swearer.
Pish, pish, what needs this my Lord?
If I be known none such, how vainly, you
Do cast away good counsel? I have loved you,
And yet must freely speak: so young a tutor,
Fits not so old a Soldier as I am.
And I must tell you, 'twas in your behalf
I grew enraged thus, yet had rather die,
Then open the great cause a syllable further.
In my behalf? wherein hath Charalois
Unfitly so demeaned himself, to give
The least occasion to the loosest tongue,
To throw aspersions on him, or so weakly
Protected his own honour, as it should
Need a defence from any but himself?
They are fools that judge me by my outward seeming,
Why should my gentleness beget abuse?
The Lion is not angry that does sleep,
Nor every man a Coward that can weep.
For God's sake speak the cause.
Not for the world.
Oh it will strike disease into your bones
Beyond the cure of physic, drink your blood,
Rob you of all your rest, contract your sight,
Leave you no eyes but to see misery,
And of your own, nor speech but to wish thus
Would I had perished in the prison's jaws:
From whence I was redeemed 'twill wear you old,
Before you have experience in that Art,
That causes your affliction.
Thou dost strike
A deathful coldness to my heart's high heat,
And shrinkest my liver like the Calenture.
Declare this foe of mine, and lives, that like
A man I may encounter and subdue it,
It shall not have one such effect in me,
As thou denouncest: with a Soldier's arm,
If it be strength, I'll meet it: if a fault
Belonging to my mind, I'll cut it off
With mine own reason, as a Scholar should
Speak, though it make me monstrous.
I'll die first.
Farewell, continue merry, and high Heaven
Keep your wife chaste.
Hump, stay and take this wolf
Out of my breast, that thou hast lodged there, or
For ever lose me.
Lose not, Sir, yourself.
And I will venture— So the door is fast.
Now noble Charaloys, collect yourself,
Summon your spirits, muster all you strength
That can belong to man, sift passion,
From every vein, and whatsoever ensues,
Upbraid not me hereafter, as the cause of
jealousy, discontent, slaughter and ruin:
Make me not parent to sin: you will know
This secret that I burn with.
Devil on't,
What should it be? Romont, I hear you wish
My wife's continuance of Chastity.
There was no hurt in that.
Why? do you know a likelihood or possibility
Unto the contrary?
I know it not, but doubt it, these the grounds
The servant of your wife now young Novall,
The son unto your father's Enemy
(Which aggravates my presumption the more)
I have been warned of, touching her, nay, seen them
Tie heart to heart, one in another's arms,
Multiplying kisses, as if they meant
To pose Arithmetic, or whose eyes would
be first burned out, with gazing on the others.
I saw their mouths engender, and their palms
Glued, as if Love had locked them, their words flow
And melt each others, like two circling flames,
Where chastity, like a Phoenix (methought) burned,
But left the world nor ashes, nor an heir.
Why stand you silent thus? what cold dull phlegm,
As if you had no drop of choler mixed
In your whole constitution, thus prevails,
To fix you now, thus stupid hearing this?
You did not see 'em on my Couch within,
Like George a horseback, on her, nor a-bed?
Noah.
Ha, ha.
Laugh ye? e'en so did your wife,
And her indulgent father.
They were wise.
Wouldst ha' me be a fool?
No, but a man.
There is no dram of manhood to suspect,
On such thin airy circumstance as this
Mere compliment and courtship. Was this tale
The hideous monster which you so concealed?
Away, thou curious impertinent
And idle searcher of such lean nice toys.
Go, thou seditious sower of debate:
Fly to such matches, where the bridegroom doubts:
He holds not worth enough to countervail
The virtue and the beauty of his wife.
Thou buzzing drone that 'bout my ears dost hum,
To strike thy rankling sting into my heart,
Whose venom, time, nor medicine could assuage.
Thus do I put thee off, and confident
In mine own innocency, and desert,
Dare not conceive her so unreasonable,
To put Novall in balance against me,
An upstart craned up to the height he has.
Hence busybody, thou'rt no friend to me,
That must be kept to a wife's injury,
Is't possible? farewell, fine, honest man,
Sweet tempered Lord adieu what Apoplexy
Hath knit sense up? Is this Romont's reward?
Bear witness the great spirit of my father,
With what a healthful hope I administer
This potion that hath wrought so virulently.
I not accuse thy wife of act, but would
Prevent her Praecipuce, to thy dishonour,
Which now thy tardy sluggishness will admit.
Would I had seen thee graved with thy great Sire,
Ere live to have men's marginal fingers point
At Charaloys, as a lamented story.
An Emperor put away his wife for touching
Another man, but thou wouldst have thine tasted
And keep her (I think.) Puff. I am afire
To warm a dead man, that waste out myself.
Bleed— what a plague, a vengeance is't to me,
If you will be a Cuckold? here I show
A sword's point to thee, this side you may shun,
Or that: the peril, if you will run on,
I cannot help it.
Didst thou never see me
Angry, Romont?
Yes, and pursue a foe
Like lightning.
Prithee see me so no more.
I can be so again. Put up thy sword,
And take thyself away, lest I draw mine.
Come fright your foes with this: sir, I am your friend,
And dare stand by you thus.
Thou art not my friend,
Or being so, thou art mad, I must not buy
Thy friendship at this rate; had I just cause,
Thou know'st I durst pursue such injury
Through fire, air, water, earth, nay, were they all
Shuffled again to Chaos, but there's none.
Thy skill, Romont, consists in camps, not courts.
Farewell, uncivil man, let's meet no more.
Here our long web of friendship I untwist.
Shall I go whine, walk pale, and lock my wife
For nothing, from her births free liberty,
That opened mine to me? yes; if I do
The name of cuckold then, dog me with scorn.
I am a Frenchman, no Italian borne.
A dull Dutch rather: fall and cool (my blood)
Boil not in zeal of thy friends hurt, so high,
That is so low, and cold himself in't. Woman,
How strong art thou, how easily beguiled?
How thou dost rack us by the very horns?
Now wealth I see change manners and the man:
Something I must do mine own wrath to assuage,
And note my friendship to an after-age.
MEnd this a little pox! thou hast burnt me. oh fie upon't, O Lard, he has made me smell (for all the world) like a flax, or a red headed woman's chamber: powder, powder, powder.
Oh sweet Lord!
That's his Perfumer.
Oh dear Lord,
That's his tailor.
Monsieur Liladam, Aymour, how allow you the model of these clothes?
Admirably, admirably, oh sweet Lord! assuredly it's pity the worms should eat thee.
Here's a fine Cell; a Lord, a tailor, a Perfumer, a Barber, and a pair of Mounsieurs: 3 to 3, as little will in the one, as honesty in the other. 'Sfoot i'll into the country again, learn to speak truth, drink Ale, and converse with my father's Tenants; here I hear nothing all day, but upon my soul as I am a Gentleman, and an honest man.
I vow and affirm, your tailor must needs be an expert Geometrician, he has the Longitude, Latitude, Altitude, Profundity, every Dimension of your body, so exquisitely, here's a lace laid as directly, as if truth were a tailor.
That were a miracle.
With a hair breadth's error, there's a shoulder piece cut, and the base of a piccadill in puncto.
You are right, monsieur his vestaments sit: as if they grew upon him, or art had wrought 'em on the same loom, as nature framed his Lordship as if your tailor were deeply read in Astrology, and had taken measure of your honourable body, with a Iacobs staff, an Ephimerides.
I am bound t'ee Gentlemen.
You are deceived, they'll be bound to you, you must remember to trust 'em none.
Nay, faith, thou art a reasonable near Artificer, give the devil his due.
ay, if he would but cut the coat according to the cloth still.
I now want only my master's approbation, who is indeed, the most polite punctual Queen of dressing in all Burgundy. Pah, and makes all other young Ladies appear, as if they came from board last week out of the country, Is't not true, Liladam?
True my Lord, as if any thing your Lordship could say, could be otherwise than true.
Nay, a my soul, 'tis so, what fouler object in the world, than to see a young fair, handsome beauty, unhandsomely dighted and incongruently accoutered; or a hopeful Chevalier, unmethodically appointed, in the external ornaments of nature? For even as the Index tells us the contents of stories, and directs to the particular Chapters, even so does the outward habit and superficial order of garments (in man or woman) give us a taste of the spirit, and demonstratively point (as it were a manual note from the margin) all the internal quality, and habiliment of the soul, and there cannot be a more evident, palpable, gross manifestation of poor degenerate dunghilly blood, and breeding, then rude, unpolished, disordered and slovenly outside.
An admirable lecture. Oh all you gallants, that hope to be saved by your clothes, edify, edify.
By the Lard, sweet Lard, thou deserv'st a pension o'the State.
Oth' tailors, two such Lords were able to spread Tailors o'er the face of a whole kingdom.
Pox a this glass lit flatters, I could find in my heart to break it.
O save the glass my Lord, and break their heads, they are the greater flatterers I assure you.
Flatters, detracts, impairs, yet put it by,
Lest thou dear Lord (Narcissus-like) should dote
Upon thyself, and die and rob the world
Of nature's copy, that she works form by.
Oh that I were the Infanta Queen of Europe,
Who (but thyself sweet Lord) shouldst marry me.
I marry? were there a Queen o'th' world, not I.
Wedlock? no padlock, horselock, I wear spurs
To keep it off my heels; yet my Aymour,
Like a free wanton jennet i'th' meadows,
I look about, and neigh, take hedge and ditch,
Feed in my neighbour's pastures, pick my choice
Of all their fair-maned mares: but married once,
A man is staked, or powned, and cannot graze
Beyond his own hedge.
I have waited, sir,
Three hours to speak w'ee, and not take it well,
Such magpies, are admitted, whilst I dance
Attendance.
Magpies? what d''ee take me for?
A long thing with a most unpromising face.
I'll ne'er ask him, what he takes me for.
Do not, sir,
For he'll go near to tell you.
Art not thou a Barber Surgeon?
Yes sirrah why?
My Lord is sorely troubled with two scabs
Aim. Humph—
I prithee cure him of 'em.
Pish: no more,
Thy gall sure's overthrown; these are my Council,
And we were now in serious discourse.
Of perfume and apparel, can you rise
And spend 5 hours in dressing talk, with these?
Thou'dst have me be a dog: up, stretch and shake,
And ready for all day.
Sir, would you be
More curious in preserving of your honour.
Trim, 'twere more manly. I am come to wake
Your reputation, from this lethargy
You let it sleep in, to persuade, importune,
Nay, to provoke you, sir, to call to account
This Colonel Romont, for the foul wrong
Which like a burden, he hath laid on you,
And like a drunken porter, you sleep under.
'Tis all the town talks, and believe, sir,
If your tough sense persist thus, you are undone,
Utterly lost, you will be scorned and baffled
By every lackey; season now your youth,
With one brave thing, and it shall keep the odour
Even to your death, beyond, and on your Tomb,
Sent like sweet oils and Frankincense; sir, this life
Which once you saved, I ne'er since counted mine,
I borrowed it of you; and now will pay it;
I tender you the service of my sword
To bear your challenge, if you'll write, your fate:
I'll make mine own: whate'er betide you, I
That have lived by you, by your side will die.
Ha, ha, wouldst ha' me challenge poor Romont?
Fight with close breeches, thou mayst think I dare not.
Do not mistake me (coz) I am very valiant,
But valour shall not make me such an Ass.
What use is there of valour (nowadays?)
'Tis sure, or to be killed, or to be hanged.
Fight thou as thy mind moves thee, 'tis thy trade,
Thou hast nothing else to do; fight with Romont?
No, i'll not fight under a Lord.
Farewell, sir, I pity you.
Such loving Lords walk their dead honours graves,
For no companions fit, but fools and knaves.
Come Malotin.
'Sfoot, Colbran, the low giant.
He has brought a battle in his face, let's go.
Colbran d''ee call him? he'll make some of you smoke, I believe.
By your leave, sirs.
Are you a Consort?
D''ee take me for
A fiddler? you're deceived: look. I'll pay you.
It seems he knows you one, he bumfiddles you so.
Was there ever so base a fellow?
A rascal?
A most uncivil Groom?
Offer to kick a Gentleman, in a Nobleman's chamber? A pox of your manners
Let him alone, let him alone, thou shalt lose thy arm, fellow: if we stir against thee, hang us.
'Sfoot, I think they have the better on him though they be kicked, they talk so.
Let's leave the mad Ape.
Gentlemen.
Nay, my Lord, we will not offer to dishonour you so much as to stay by you, since he's alone.
Hark you.
We doubt the cause, and will not disparage you, so much as to take your Lordship's quarrel in hand. Plague on him, how he has crumpled our bands.
I'll e'en away with 'em, for this soldier beats man, woman, and child.
What mean you, sir? My people.
Your boy's gone,
And door's locked, yet for no hurt to you,
But privacy: call up your blood again, sir, be not afraid, I do
Beseech you, sir, (and therefore come) without more circumstance
Tell me how far the passages have gone
'Twixt you, and your fair Mistress Beaumelle.
Tell me the truth, and by my hope of Heaven
It never shall go further.
Tell you why sir?
Are you my confessor?
I will be your confounder, if you do not.
Stir not, nor spend your voice.
What will you do?
Nothing but line your brainpan, sir, with lead,
If you not satisfy me suddenly,
I am desperate of my life, and command yours.
Hold, hold, i'll speak. I vow to heaven and you,
she's yet untouched, more than her face and hands:
I cannot call her innocent; for I yield
On my solicitous wrongs she consented
Where time and place met opportunity
To grant me all requests.
But may I build on this assurance?
As upon your faith.
Write this, sir, nay you must.
Pox of this Gun.
Withal, sir, you must swear, and put your oath
Under your hand, (shake not) ne'er to frequent
This lady's company, nor ever send
Token, or message, or letter, to incline
This (too much prone already) yielding Lady.
'Tis done, sir.
Let me see, this first is right,
And here you wish a sudden death may light
Upon your body, and hell take your soul,
If ever more you see her, but by chance,
Much less allure her. Now, my Lord, your hand.
My hand to this?
Your heart else I assure you.
Nay, there 'tis.
So keep this last article
Of your faith given, and stead of threatenings sir,
The service of my sword and life is yours:
But not a word of it, 'tis Fairy's treasure;
Which but revealed, brings on the blabbers, ruin.
Use your youth better, and this excellent form
Heaven hath bestowed upon you. So good morrow to your Lordship.
Good devil to your rogueship. No man's safe:
I'll have a Cannon planted in my chamber,
Against such roaring rogues.
My Lord away
The Coach stays: now have your wish, and judge,
If I have been forgetful.
Ha?
D''ee stand
Humming and hawing now?
Sweet wench, I come.
Hence fear,
I swore, that's all one, my next oath I 'll keep
That I did mean to break, and then 'tis quit.
No pain is due to lover's perjury.
If love himself laugh at it, so will I.
I grieve for the distaste, though I have manners,
Not to inquire the cause, fall'n out between
Your Lordship and Romont.
I love a friend,
So long as he continues in the bounds
Prescribed by friendship, but when he usurps
Too far on what is proper to myself,
And puts the habit of a Governor on,
I must and will preserve my liberty.
But speak of something, else this is a theme
I take no pleasure in: what's this Aymeire,
Whose voice for Song, and excellent knowledge in
The chiefest parts of Music, you bestow
Such praises on?
He is a Gentleman,
(For so his quality speaks him) well received
Among our greatest Gallants; but yet holds
His main dependence from the young Lord Novall:
Some tricks and crotchets he has in his head,
As all Musicians have, and more of him
I dare not author: but when you have heard him,
I may presume, your Lordship so will like him,
That you'll hereafter be a friend to Music.
I never was an enemy to't, Baumont,
Nor yet do I subscribe to the opinion
Of those old Captains, that thought nothing musical,
But cries of yielding enemies, neighing of horses,
Clashing of armour, loud shouts, drums, and trumpets:
Nor on the other side in favour of it,
Affirm the world was made by musical discord,
Or that the happiness of our life consists
In a well varied note upon the Lute:
I love it to the worth of it, and no further.
But let us see this wonder.
He prevents my calling of him.
Let the Coach be brought
To the back gate, and serve the banquet up:
My good Lord Charalois, I think my house
Much honoured in your presence.
To have means,
To know you better, sir, has brought me hither
A willing visitant, and you'll crown my welcome
In making me a witness to your skill,
Which crediting from others I admire.
Had I been one hour sooner made acquainted
With your intent my Lord, you should have found me
Better provided: now such as it is,
Pray you grace with your acceptance.
You are modest.
Begin the last new air.
Shall we not see them?
This little distance from the instruments
Will to your ears convey the harmony
With more delight.
I'll not consent.
Y'are tedious,
By this means shall I with one banquet please
Two companies, those within and these Gulls here.
How's this? It is my Ladies laugh; most certain
When I first pleased her, in this merry language,
She gave me thanks.
How like you this?
'Tis rare,
Yet I may be deceived, and should be sorry
Upon uncertain suppositions, rashly
To write myself in the black list of those
I have declaimed against, and to Romont.
I would he were well of— perhaps your Lordship
Likes not these sad tunes, I have a new Song
Set to a lighter note, may please you better;
'Tis called The happy husband.
Pray sing it.
Ha, ha, 'tis such a groom.
Do I hear this, and yet stand doubtful?
Stay him I am undone,
And they discovered.
What's the matter?
Ah!
That women, when they are well pleased, cannot hold,
But must laugh out.
Help, save me, murder, murder.
Undone forever.
Oh, my heart!
Hold yet a little— do not hope to scape
By flight, it is impossible: though I might
On all advantage take thy life, and justly;
This sword, my father's sword, that ne'er was drawn,
But to a noble purpose, shall not now
Do th' office of a hangman, I reserve it
To right mine honour, not for a revenge
So poor, that though with thee, it should cut off
Thy family, with all that are allied
To thee in lust, or baseness, 'twere still short of
All terms of satisfaction. Draw.
I dare not,
I have already done you too much wrong,
To fight in such a cause.
Why, darest thou neither
Be honest, coward, nor yet valiant, knave?
In such a cause come do not shame thyself
Such whose bloods wrongs, or wrong done to themselves
Could never heat, are yet in the defence
Of their whores, daring look on her again.
You thought her worth the hazard of your soul,
And yet stand doubtful in her quarrel, to
Venture your body.
No, he fears his clothes, more than his flesh
Keep from me, guard thy life,
Or as thou hast lived like a goat, thou shalt
Die like a sheep.
Since there's no remedy
Despair or safety now in me prove courage.
How soon weak wrong's o'erthrown lend me your hand,
Bear this to the caroche— come, you have taught me
To say you must and shall: I wrong you not,
Y'are but to keep him company you love.
Is't done? 'tis well. Raise officers, and take care,
All you can apprehend within the house
May be forth coming. Do I appear much moved?
No sir.
My griefs are now, Thus to be borne
Hereafter I'll find time and place to mourn.
I was bound to seek you, sir.
And had you found me
In any place, but in the street, I should
Have done,— not talked to you. Are you the Captain?
The hopeful Pontalier? whom I have seen
Do in the field such service, as then made you
Their envy that commanded, here at home
To play the parasite to a gilded knave,
And it may be the Pander.
Without this
I come to call you to account, for what
Is passed already. I by your example
Of thankfulness to the dead General
By whom you were raised, have practised to be so
To my good Lord Novall, by whom I live;
Whose least disgrace that is, or may be offered,
With all the hazard of my life and fortunes,
I will make good on you, or any man,
That has a hand in't; and since you allow me
A Gentleman and a soldier, there's no doubt
You will except against me. You shall meet
With a fair enemy, you understand
The right I look for, and must have.
I do,
And with the next day's sun you shall hear from me.
Pray bear this to my father, at his leisure
He may peruse it: but with your best language
Entreat his instant presence: you have sworn
Not to reveal what I have done.
Nor will I— but—
Doubt me not, by Heaven, I will do nothing
But what may stand with honour: Pray you leave me
To my own thoughts. If this be to me, rise;
I am not worthy the looking on, but only
To feed contempt and scorn, and that from you
Who with the loss of your fair name have caused it,
Were too much cruelty.
I dare not move you
To hear me speak I know my fault is far
Beyond qualification, or excuse,
That 'tis not fit for me to hope, or you
To think of mercy; only I presume
To entreat, you would be pleased to look upon
My sorrow for it, and believe, these tears
Are the true children of my grief and not
A woman's cunning.
Can you Beaumelle,
Having deceived so great a trust as mine,
Though I were all credulity, hope again
To get belief? no, no, if you look on me
With pity or dare practise any means
To make my sufferings less, or give just cause
To all the world, to think what I must do,
Was called upon by you, use other ways,
Deny what I have seen, or justify
What you have done, and as you desperately
Made shipwreck of your faith to be a whore,
Use th' arms of such a one, and such defence,
And multiply the sin, with impudence,
Stand boldly up, and tell me to my teeth,
You have done but what's warranted,
By great examples, in all places, where
Women inhabit, urge your own deserts,
Or want of me in merit; tell me how,
Your dowry from the low gulf of poverty,
Weighed up my fortunes, to what now they are:
That I was purchased by your choice, and practise
To shelter you from shame: that you might sin
As boldly as securely, that poor men
Are married to those wives that bring them wealth,
One day their husbands, but observers ever:
That when by this proved usage you have blown
The fire of my just vengeance to the height.
I then may kill you: and yet say 'twas done
In heat of blood, and after die myself,
To witness my repentance.
O my fate,
That never would consent that I should see,
How worthy thou wert both of love and duty
Before I lost you; and my misery made
The glass, in which I now behold your virtue:
While I was good, I was a part of you,
And of two by the virtuous harmony
Of our fair minds, made one: but since I wandered
In the forbidden Labyrinth of lust,
What was inseparable, is by me divided.
With justice therefore you may cut me off,
And from your memory, wash the remembrance
That ere I was like to some vicious purpose
Within your better judgement, you repent of
And study to forget.
O Beaumelle,
That you can speak so well, and do so ill!
But you had been too great a blessing, if
You had continued chaste: see how you force me
To this, because mine honour will not yield
That I again should love you.
In this life
It is not fit you should: yet you shall find,
Though I was bold enough to be a strumpet,
I dare not yet live one: let those famed matrons
That are canonized worthy of our sex,
Transcend me in their sanctity of life,
I yet will squall them in dying nobly,
Ambitious of no honour after life,
B that when I am dead, you will forgiue me.
How pity steals upon me! should I hear her
ten words more, I were lost— one knocks, go in.
That to be merciful should be a sin.
O, sir, most welcome. Let me take your cloak,
I must not be denied— here are your robes,
As you love justice once more put them on:
There is a cause to be determined of
That does require such an integrity,
As you have ever used— I'll put you to
The trial of your constancy, and goodness:
And look that you that have been eagle-eyed
In other men's affairs, prove not a Mole
In what concerns yourself. Take you your seats
I will be for you presently.
Angels guard me,
To what strange Tragedy does this destruction
Serve for a Prologue?
So, set it down before
The judgement seat, and stand you at the bar:
For me? I am the accuser.
And Beaumelle my daughter in the place
O one to be arraig'd.
O, are you touched?
find that I must take another course,
Fear nothing. I will only blind your eyes,
For justice should do so, when 'tis to meet
n obiect that may sway her equall doome
From what it should be aimed at.— Good my Lord,
A day of hearing.
It is granted, speak— you shall have justice.
I then here accuse,
Most equal judge, the prisoner your fair Daughter.
For whom I owed so much to you: your daughter,
So worthy in her own parts: and that worth
Set forth by yours, to whose so rare perfections,
Truth witness with me, in the place of service
I almost paid Idolatrous sacrifice
To be a false adultress.
With whom?
With this Novall here dead.
Be well advised
And ere you say adulteress again,
Her fame depending on it, be most sure
That she is one.
I took them in the act.
I know no proof beyond it.
O my heart.
A judge should feel no passions.
Yet remember
He is a man, and cannot put off nature.
What answer makes the prisoner?
I confess
The fact I am charged with, and yield myself
Most miserably guilty.
Heaven take mercy
Upon your soul them it must leave your body.
Now free mine eyes, I dare unmoved look on her.
And fortify my sentence, with strong reasons.
Since that the politic law provides that servants,
To whose care we commit our goods shall die,
If they abuse our trust: what can you look for,
To whose charge this most hopeful Lord gave up
All he received from his brave Ancestors,
Or he could leave to his posterity?
His Honour, wicked woman, in whose safety
All this life's joys, and comforts were locked up,
With thy lust, a thief hath now stolen from him,
And therefore—
Stay, just judge, may not what's lost
By her own fault, (for I am charitable,
And charge her not with many) be forgotten
In her fair life hereafter?
Never, Sir.
The wrong that's done to the chaste married bed,
Repentant tears can never expiate,
And be assured, to pardon such a sin,
s an offence as great as to commit it.
I may not then forgive her.
Nor she hope it.
Nor can she wish to live no sun shall rise,
But ere it set, shall show her ugly lust
In a new shape, and every on more horrid:
Nay, even those prayers, which with such humble fervour
She seems to send up yonder, are beat back,
And all suits, which her penitence can proffer,
As soon as made, are with contempt thrown
Off all the courts of mercy.
Let her die then.
Better prepared I am. Sure I could not take her,
Nor she accuse her father, as a judge
Partial against her.
I approve his sentence,
And kiss the executioner: my lust
Is now run from me in that blood in which
It was begot and nourished.
Is she dead then?
Yes, sir, this is her heart blood, is it not?
I think it be.
And you have killed her?
True, and did it by your doom
But I pronounced it
As a judge only, and friend to justice,
And zealous in defence of your wronged honour,
Broke all the ties of nature: and cast off
The love and soft affection of a father.
I in your cause, put on a Scarlet robe
Of red died cruelty, but in return,
You have advanced for me no flag of mercy:
I looked on you, as a wronged husband, but
You closed your eyes against me, as a father.
O Beaumelle, my daughter.
This is madness.
Keep from me— could not one good thought rise up,
To tell you that she was my age's comfort,
Begot by a weak man, and borne a woman,
And could not therefore, but partake of frailty?
Or wherefore did not thankfulness step forth,
To urge my many merits, which I may
Object unto you, since you prove ungrateful,
Flinty-hearted Charaloys?
Nature does prevail above your virtue.
No: it gives me eyes,
To pierce the heart of design against me.
I find it now, it was may state was aimed at,
A nobler match was sought for, and the hours
I lived, grew tedious to you: my compassion
Towards you hath rendered me most miserable,
And foolish charity undone myself:
But there's a Heaven above, from whose just wreak
No mists of policy can hide offenders.
Force open the doors— O monster, cannibal,
Lay hold on him, my son, my son.— O Rochfort,
'Twas you gave liberty to this bloody wolf
To worry all our comforts,— But this is
No time to quarrel; now give your assistance
For the revenge.
Call it a fitter name— justice for innocent blood.
Though all conspire
Against that life which I am weary of,
A little longer yet i'll strive to keep it,
To show in spite of malice, and their laws,
His plea must speed that hath an honest cause.
WHy 'tis both most unconscionable, and untimely
T' arrest a gallant for his clothes, before
He has worn them out: beside you said you asked
My name in my Lords bond but for me only,
And now you'll lay me up for't. Do not think
The taking measure of a customer
By a brace of varlets though I rather wait
Never so patiently, will prove a fashion
Which any Courtier or Innes of court man
Would follow willingly.
There I believe you.
But sir, I must have present moneys, or
Assurance to secure me, when I shall.—
Or I will see to your coming forth.
Plague on't,
You have provided for my entrance in:
That coming forth you talk of, concerns me.
What shall I do? you have done me a disgrace
In the arrest, but more in giving cause
To all the street, to think I cannot stand
Without these two supporters for my arms:
Pray you let them lose me: for their satisfaction
I will not run away.
For theirs you will not,
But for your own you would; look to them fellows.
Why do you call them fellows? do not wrong
Your reputation so, as you are merely
A tailor, faithful, apt to believe in Gallants
You are a companion at a ten crown supper
For cloth of bodkin, and may with one Lark
Eat up three manchets, and no man observe you,
Or call your trade in question for't. But when
You study your debt-book, and hold correspondence
With officers of the hanger, and leave swordmen,
The learned conclude, the tailor and Sergeant
In the expression of a knave are these
To be Synonima. Look therefore to it,
And let us part in peace, I would be loath
You should vndoe yr ee.
To let you go
Were the next way.
But see! here's your old Lord,
Let him but give his word I shall be paid,
And you are free.
'slid, I will put him to't:
I can be but denied: or what say you?
His Lordship owing me three times your debt,
If you arrest him at my suit, and let me
Go run before to see the action entered.
'Twould be a witty jest.
I must have earnest:
I cannot pay my debts so.
Can your Lordship
Imagine, while I live and wear a sword,
Your son's death shall be revenged?
I know not
One reason why you should not do like others:
I am sure, of all the herd that fed upon him,
I cannot see in any, now he's gone,
In pity or in thankfulness one true sign
Of sorrow for him.
All his bounties yet
Fell not in such unthankful ground: 'tis true
He had weaknesses, but such as few are free from,
And though none soothed them less than I: for now
To say that I foresaw the dangers that
Would rise from cherishing them, were but untimely.
I yet could wish the justice that you seek for
In the revenge, had been trusted to me,
And not the uncertain issue of the laws:
'Tas robbed me of a noble testimony
Of what I durst do for him: but however,
My forfeit life redeemed by him though dead,
Shall do him service.
As far as my grief
Will give me leave, I thank you.
Oh my Lord,
Oh my good Lord, deliver me from these furies.
Arrested? This is one of them whose base
And object flattery helped to dig his grave:
He is not worth your pity, nor my anger.
Go to the basket and repent.
Away I only know now to hate thee deadly:
I will do nothing for thee.
Nor you, Captain.
No, to your trade again, put off this case,
It may be the discovering what you were,
When your unfortunate master took you up,
May move compassion in your creditor.
Confess the truth.
And now I think on't better,
I will, brother, your hand, your hand, sweet brother.
I am of your sect, and my gallantry but a dream,
Out of which these two fearful apparitions
Against my will have waked me. This rich sword
Grew suddenly out of a tailor's bodkin;
These hangers from my vails and fees in Hell:
And where as now this beaver sits, full often
A thrifty cape composed of broad cloth lists,
Here kin unto the cushion where I sat
cross-legged, and yet ungartered, hath been seen,
Our breakfasts famous for the buttered loaves,
I have with joy been oft acquainted with,
And therefore use a conscience, though it be
Forbidden in our hall towards other men,
To me that as I have been, will again
Be of the brotherhood.
I know him now:
He was a prentice to Le Robe at Orleans.
And from thence brought by my young Lord, now dead,
Unto Dijon, and with him till this hour
Hath been received here for a complete monsieur.
Nor wonder at it: for but tithe our gallants,
Even those of the first rank, and you will find
In every ten, one: peradventure two,
That smell rank of the dancing school, or fiddle,
The pantofle or pressing iron: but hereafter
we'll talk of this. I will surrender up
My suits again: there cannot be much loss,
'Tis but the turning of the lace, with ones
Additions more you know of, and what wants
I will work out.
Then here our quarrel ends.
The gallant is turned tailor, and all friends.
You have them ready.
Yes, and they will speak
Their knowledge in this cause, when thou thinkst fit
To have them called upon.
'Tis well, and something
I can add to their evidence, to prove
This brave revenge, which they would have called murder,
A noble justice.
In this you express
(The breach by my Lords want of you, new made up)
A faithful friend.
That friendship's raised on sand,
Which every sudden gust of discontent,
Or flowing of our passions can change,
As if it ne'er had been: but do you know
Who are to sit on him?
monsieur Du
Assisted by Charmi.
The Advocate
That pleaded for the Marshals funeral,
And was checked for it by Novall.
The same.
How fortunes that?
Why, sir, my Lord Novall
Being the accuser, cannot be the judge,
Nor would grieve Roshfort, but Lord Charaloys
(However he might wrong him by his power,)
Should have an equal hearing.
By my hopes.
Of Charaloys acquittal, I lament
That reverent old man's fortune.
Had you seen him,
As to my grief I have now promised patience,
And ere it was believed, though spoken by him
That never broke his word, enraged again
So far as to make war upon those heirs,
Which not a barbarous Scythian durst presume
To touch, but with a superstitious fear,
As something sacred, and then curse his daughter,
But with more frequent violence himself,
As if he had been guilty of her fault,
By being incredulous of your report,
You would not only judge him worthy pity,
But suffer with him.
But here comes the prisoner,
I dare not stay to do my duty to him,
Yet rest assured, all possible means in me
To do him service, keeps you company.
It is not doubted.
Why, yet as I came hither,
The people apt to mock calamity,
And tread on the oppressed, made no hormes at me,
Though they are too familiar: I deserve them.
And knowing what blood my sword hath drunk
In wreak of that disgrace, they yet forbore
To shake their heads, or to revile me for
A murderer, they rather all put on
(As for great losses the old Romans used)
A general face of sorrow, weighted on
By a sad murmur breaking through their silence,
And no eye but was readier with a tear
To witness 'twas shed for me, than I could
Discern a face made up with scorn against me.
Why should I then, though for unusual wrongs
I chose unusual means to right those wrongs,
Condemn myself, as over-partial
In my own cause Romont?
Best friend, well met,
By my heart's love to you, and join to that,
My thankfulness that still lives to the dead,
I look upon you now with more true joy,
Then when I saw you married.
You have reason
To give you warrant for't; my falling off
From such a friendship with the scorn that answered
Your too prophetic counsel, may well move you
To think, your meeting me going to my death,
A fit encounter for that hate which justly
I have deserved from you.
Shall I still then
Speak truth, and be ill understood?
You are not.
I am conscious, I have wronged you, and allow me
Only a moral man to look on you,
Whom foolishly I have abused and injured,
Must of necessity be more terrible to me,
Than any death the judges can pronounce
From the tribunal which I am to plead at.
Passion transports you.
For what I have done
To my false Lady, or Novall, I can
Give some apparent cause: but touching you,
In my defence, childlike, I can say nothing,
But I am sorry for't, a poor satisfaction:
And yet mistake me not: for it is more
Than I will speak, to have my pardon signed
For all I stand accused of.
You much weaken the strength of your good cause,
Should you but think
A man for doing well could entertain
A pardon, were it offered, you have given
To blind and slow-paced justice, wings, and eyes
To see and overtake impieties,
Which from a cold proceeding had received
Indulgence or protection.
Think you so?
Upon my soul nor should the blood you challenge
And took to cure your honour, breed more scruple
In your soft conscience, then if your sword
Had been sheathed in a Tiger, or she Bear,
That in their bowels would have made your tomb
To injure innocence is more than murder:
But when inhuman lusts transform us, then
As beasts we are to suffer, not like men
To be lamented. Nor did Charalois ever
Perform an act so worthy the applause
Of a full theater of perfect men,
As he hath done in this: the glory got
By overthrowing outward enemies,
Since strength and fortune are main sharers in it,
We cannot but by pieces call our own:
But when we conquer our intestine foes,
Our passions breed within us, and of those
The most rebellious tyrant powerful love,
Our reason suffering us to like no longer
Then the fair object being good deserves it,
That's true victory, which, were great men
Ambitious to achieve, by your example
Setting no price upon the breach of faith,
But loss of life, 'twould fright adultery
Out of their families, and make lust appear
As loathsome to us in the first consent,
As when 'tis waited on by punishment.
You have confirmed me. Who would love a woman
That might enjoy in such a man, a friend?
You have made me know the justice of my cause,
And marked me out the way, how to defend it.
Continue to that resolution constant,
And you shall, in contempt of their worst malice,
Come off with honour. Here they come.
I am ready.
See, equal judges, with what confidence
The cruel murderer stands, as if he would
Outface the Court and justice
But look on him,
And you shall find, for still methinks I do,
Though guilt hath dide him black, something good in him,
That may perhaps work with a wiser man
Than I have been, again to set him free
And give him all he has.
This is not well.
I would you had lived so, my Lord that I,
Might rather have continued your poor servant.
Then sit here as your judge.
I am sorry for you.
In no act of my life I have discerned
This injury from the court, that any here
Should thus uncivilly usurp on what
Is proper to me only.
What distaste
Receives my Lord?
You say you are sorry for him:
A grief in which I must not have a partner
'Tis I alone am sorry, that I raised
The building of my life for seventy years
Upon so sure a ground, that all the vices
Practised to ruin man, though brought against me,
Could never undermine, and no way left
To send these grey hairs to the grave with sorrow.
Virtue that was my patroness, betrayed me:
For entering, nay, possessing this young man,
It lent him such a powerful Majesty
To grace whate'er he undertook, that freely
I gave myself up with my liberty,
To be at his disposing; had his person,
Lonely I must confess, or far feigned valour,
Or any other seeming good, that yet
Holds a near neighbourhood, with ill wrought on me,
I might have borne it better: but when goodness
And piety itself in her best figure
Were bribed to my destruction, can you blame me,
Though I forget to suffer like a man,
Or rather act a woman?
Good my Lord.
You hinder our proceeding.
And forget
The parts of an accuser.
Pray you remember
To use the temper which to me you promised;
Angels themselves must break Baumont, that promise
Beyond the strength and patience of Angels.
But I have done, my good Lord, pardon me
A weak old man, and pray add to that
A miserable father, yet be careful
That your compassion of my age, nor his,
Move you to any thing, that may disbecome
The place on which you fit
Read the Indictment.
It shall be needless, I myself, my Lords,
Will be my own accuser, and confess
All they can charge me with, or will I spare
To aggravate that guilt with circumstance
They seek to load me with: only I pray,
That as for them you will vouchsafe me hearing:
I may not be denied it for myself,
When I shall urge by what unanswerable reasons
I was compelled to what I did, which yet
Till you have taught me better, I repent not.
The motion honest.
And 'tis freely granted.
Then I confess my Lords, that I stood bound,
When with my friends, even hope itself had left me
To this man's charity for my liberty,
Nor did his bounty end there, but began:
For after my enlargement, cherishing
The good he did, he made me master of
His only daughter, and his whole estate:
Great ties of thankfulness I must acknowledge,
Could any one freed by you, press this further?
But yet consider, my most honoured Lords,
If to receive a favour, make a servant,
And benefits are bonds to tie the taker
To the imperious will of him that gives,
there's none but slaves will receive courtesy.
Since they must fetter us to our dishonours.
Can it be called magnificence in a Prince,
To pour down riches, with a liberal hand,
Upon a poor man's wants, if that must bind him
To play the soothing parasite to his vices?
Or any man, because he saved my hand,
Presume my head and heart are at his service?
Or did I stand engaged to buy my freedom
(When my captivity was honourable)
By making myself here and fame hereafter,
Bondslaues to men's scorn and calumnious tongues?
H hi faire daghters mind bin like her feature,
Or for some little blemish I had sought
For my content elsewhere, wasting on others
My body and her dowry; my forehead then
Deserved the brand of base ingratitude:
But if obsequious usage, and fair warning
To keep her worth my love, could preserve her
From being a whore, and yet no cunning one,
So to offend, and yet the fault kept from me?
What should I do? let any freeborn spirit
Determine truly, if that thankfulness,
Choice form with the whole world given for a dowry
Could strengthen so an honest man with patience,
As with a willing neck to undergo
The insupportable yoke of slave or wit toll.
What proof have you she did play false, besides your oath?
Her own confession to her father.
I ask him for a witness.
'Tis most true.
I would not willingly blend my last words
With an untruth.
And then to clear myself,
That his great wealth was not the mark I shot at,
But that I held it, when fair Beaumelle
Fell from her virtue, like the fatal gold
Which Brennus took from Delphos, whose possession
Brought with it ruin to himself and Army.
here's one in Court, Baumont, by whom I sent
All grants and writings back, which made it mine,
Before his daughter died by his own sentence,
As freely as unasked he gave it to me.
They are here to be seen.
Open the casket.
Peruse that deed of gift.
Half of the danger
Already is discharged: the other part
As bravely, and you are not only free,
But crowned with praise for ever.
'Tis apparent.
Your state, my Lord, again is yours.
Not mine,
I am not of the world, if it can prosper,
(And yet being justly got, I'll not examine
Why it should be so fatal) do you bestow it
On pious uses. I'll go seek a grave.
And yet for proof, I die in peace, your pardon
I ask, and as you grant it me, may Heaven
Your conscience, and these judges free you from
What you are charged with. So farewell for ever.—
I'll be mine own guide. Passion, nor example
Shall be my leaders. I have lost a son,
A son, grave judges, I require his blood
From his accursed homicide.
What reply you
In your defence for this?
ay but attended
Your Lordship's pleasure. For the fact, as of
The former, I confess it, but with what
Base wrongs I was unwillingly drawn to it,
To my few words there are some other proofs
To witness this for truth, when I was married:
For there I must begin. The slain Novall
Was to my wife, in way of our French courtship,
A most devoted servant, but yet aimed at
Nothing but means to quench his wanton heat,
His heart being never warmed by lawful fires
As mine was (Lords:) and though on these presumptions,
joined to the hate between his house and mine,
I might with opportunity and ease
have found a way for my revenge, I did not;
But still he had the freedom as before
When all was mine, and told that he abused it
With some unseemly licence, by my friend
My approved friend Romont. I gave no credit
To the reporter, but reproved him for it,
As one uncourtly and malicious to him.
What could I more, my Lords? yet after this
He did continue in his first pursuit
Hotter than ever, and at length obtained it;
But how it came to my most certain knowledge,
For the dignity of the court and my own honour
I dare not say.
If all may be believed
A passionate prisoner speaks, who is so foolish
That durst be wicked, that will appear guilty?
No, my grave Lords: in his impunity
But give example unto jealous men
To cut the throats they hate, and they will never
Want matter or pretence for their bad ends.
You must find other proofs to strengthen these
But mere presumptions.
Or we shall hardly
Allow your innocence.
All your attempts
Shall fall on me, like brittle shafts on armour,
That break themselves; or like waves against a rock,
That leave no sign of their ridiculous fury
But foam and splinters, my innocence like these
Shall stand triumphant, and your malice serve
But for a trumpet to proclaim my conquest;
Nor shall you, though you do the worst fate can,
howe'er condemn, affright an honest man.
May it please the Court, I may be heard.
You come not
To rail again? but do, you shall not find
Another Rochfort.
In Novall I cannot.
But I come furnished with what will stop
The mouth of his conspiracy against the life
innocent Charaloys. Do you know this Character?
Yes, 'tis my sons.
May it please your Lordships, read it,
And you shall find there, with what vehemency
He did solicit Beaumelle, how he had got
A promise from her to enjoy his wishes,
How after he abjured her company,
And yet, but that 'tis fit I spare the dead,
Like a damned villain, as soon as recorded,
He broke that oath, to make this manifest.
Produce his bands and hers.
Have they took their oaths?
They have and rather than endure the rack,
Confess the time, the meeting, nay the act;
What would you more? only this matron made
A free discovery to a good end;
And therefore I sue to the Court, she may not
Be placed in the black list of the delinquents.
I see by this, Nouals revenge needs me,
And I shall do.
'Tis evident.
That I
Till now was never wretched, here's no place
To curse him or my stars.
Lord Charalois,
The injuries you have sustained, appear
So worthy of the mercy of the Court,
That notwithstanding you have gone beyond
The letter of the Law, they yet acquit you.
But in Novall, I do condemn him thus.
I am slain.
Can I look on? Oh murderous wretch,
Thy challenge now I answer to die with him,
A guard: disarm him.
I yield up my sword
Unforced. Oh Charlaloys.
For shame Romont,
Mourn not for him that dies as he hath lived,
Still constant and unmoved: what's fall'n upon me,
Is by heaven's will, because I made myself
A judge in my own cause without their warrant:
But he that lets me know thus much in death,
With all good men forgive me.
I receive the vengeance, which my love
Not built on virtue, has made me worthy, worthy of.
We are taught
By this sad precedent, how just soever
Our reasons are to remedy our wrongs,
W are yet to leaue them to their will and power,
That to that purpose have authority.
For you, Romont, although in your excuse
You may plead, what you did, was in revenge
Of the dishonour done unto the Court:
Yet since from us you had not warrant for it,
We banish you the State: for these, they shall,
As they are found guilty, or innocent,
Be set free, or suffer punishment.