Fair Thamesis, upon whose silver breast
Arion with his Dolphin new doth rest.
How I admire thy Glory, State, and Pride,
Upon this Solemn day thus beautified?
Ganges renowned in all foreign Lands,
Nor Tagus boasting of her golden Sands
Can parallel thy Riches; Not Caister
Famous for Swans, nor Po her clear streamed Sister:
Winding Meander, nor yet Simois Flood,
Which Fame saith, at the Trojan Siege van blood.
Swift Rubicon, whose memory shall last,
Because it, Caesar with his Army post.
Choaspes, that almost guirts Persia round:
Nor Issa, by Darius' aeath renowned.
The Amazonian Thermedon, the Nile
That breeds in it the weeping Crocodile.
The Euphrates, the Volga, and the Ryne,
Nay Iordan too, that waters Palestine:
What Paris Some, or Rome's swift Tiber be,
The one a Brook, the other a Ditch to thee,
And my Crowned Dolphin doth proclaim thee thus,
thouart the choice Darling of Oceanus.
And if thou hast a Genius, (as 'tis guest
All Rivers have?) know wherein thouart most blessed.
Not that thy Banks are so defenced and stable,
Nor within Land thouart so far navigable,
Not for thy Flux and Reflux, (Ebbs and Tides)
Or the rich Meadows bordering round thy sides.
Not that being pleased, thouart smooth, being angry, curled,
Nor thy rare Bridge not equalled through the World.
Not for those goodly Buildings reared so buy,
To make thes line to perpetuity.
Not for thy spacious Limits and Extents,
(And yet all those unrivald Ornaments.)
But if I truly shall to thee commend,
That bliss wherein thou others dost transcend,
Behold this Day the Honour and the State
Of this thy Great and God like Magistrate.
Not waited on by Boats made of the Trunks
Of Canes, or hollowed Trees, or petty junks,
Or wanton Gondelaes': but Barges, strong,
And richly decked, who as they plough along
Thy breast, with their smooth keels to make their way,
See how the Wind doth with their streamers play,
How beautiful thy Waves how thronged thy shores,
And what a music's when they strike their Oars▪
To see them with Grave Magistrates so manned,
Powerful by Sea, and potent too by Land.
So many Sciences, and Mysteries
Distinguished into several Companies,
In sundry bottoms: and each Art and Trade
Known by the Flags and Pendants here displayed.
And London which Metropolis we call,
The Fount and Scaturigo of them all.
Grave Praetor, now this Day to be invested
The Head of all these, pass on unmolested,
In your great Inauguration proceed,
Which to your lasting Honour is decreed.
In your return baske you shall understand,
Those Triumphs that attend on you by Land.
DOth any wonder, why St. Katherine, she
The Patroness of this fair Company
Is mounted on a Lion? Let such know,
That (being a Queeney this kingly beast doth owe
Me duty by instinct: Besides I come
Both with Virginity and martyrdom,
Sainted moreover, and (of these) the least
Able to tame the most insulting Beast.
But this is he the billows doth divide,
And therefore justly on his back I ride:
All these belonging to this Worthy Trade,
The Lion, Sea-waves, and the Princely Maid:
That for the Arms: note next what I display
In this my Banner here, Serve and obey:
Rare Moral in this Motto, (if well scanned)
For Kings are Gods, Viz-gerents, and command
By Sword and Sceptre: and by their good Grace
Can prefer others both to power and place.
As you this Day behold this Scarlet worn,
And Sword of justice thus in public borne;
The Cap of Maintenance, Choler of Esses,
(Which travelers in all their large progresses
Can in no City parallel, that's scite
In th' earth's division, known quadrupertite:)
So, whosoever shall himself oppose
Against this Magistrate, (as one of those
The King deputes as Chief) himself he brings
To be a rebel to the King of Kings:
Far be it an arch-traitor in that kind
'Mongst all these goodly Companies, (combined
In mutual love and league:) should dare to appear
In the fair Progress of this Praetor's year.
Behold, and view who my attendants be,
Constancy, Zeal, Truth, and Humility.
Be constant then unto this Grave Lord Maior,
And the two Shrieves that his assistants are;
Chose by the public Voice and Senate's Doom,
As Censors, and the Tribunes were in Rome;
Do it in Zeal, in Truth, and all submission,
That their be found no cross interposition
Betwixt Power and Obedience, so shall all
Arts, Mysteries, and Trades Mechannicali,
Thrive, prosper, and increase, so long as they
Honour the King, the Magistrate obey.
I Perseus, Ioues son, borne of Heavenly Stead,
Mounted upon a swift Pegasian Steed,
Who with his hoof struck up the Muses Well,
Whence Euthusiasma's and high Ruptures swell.
As through the eyrie tract I forced my way,
Spied here the Lovely Maid Andromeda,
Cheynd to a Rock, on whom (so Fate hath lowerd)
Ready by a Sea-whale to be devoured.
Know there is figured in this Princely Maid,
Chastity, and Innocence, which Divine aid
Is ready to assist still from above,
By one or other of the Sons of Ioue.
Of which denomination, none, more Grace
Can claim than you, who are in power and place,
And hold this Day in chief; then Perseus like,
Keep that your Sword still drawn, ready to strike;
Making such Monsters of your justice taste,
Who insidiate the Innocuous and the Chaste.
Observe (Grave Sir) the Arms and Shield I bear,
Such as yourself, and others ought to wear,
Both for Defence and Offence: and in me
Embleamed, all those prime Virtues that should be
In Persons of your Power, my Sword resembles
Unpartial justice, at which guilt still trembles;
My Winged-horse, Celerity and Speed:
In doing it, that no illegal deed
May pass unscourged, and there be took no rest,
Until relief be given to the oppressed.
This Shield that bears the Gorgon's head imblazed,
Upon whose Snaky locks who ever gazed,
Were turned to statues of cold senseless stone,
Is that (Grave Magistrate) you now put on.
Whilst on your Arm you wear this constant Targe,
Bearing yourself uprightly in your Charge.
All such as shall in Malice or in Pride
Your Purple State detract from, or deride,
Discover this before them, it hath power
To freeze them into Marble the same hour
Strive you to imitate what I have done,
Since you this day, are Perseus and Ioues son.
No beast of all the Wilderness can vaunt
Like Srength or Wisdom with the Elephant.
And therefore, (if considered well) none may
Better become the Triumphs of this Day.
What Hieroglificke can a man invent,
Emblem or Symbol, for a Government
In this high nature, apter or more fit
Devised before, or to be thought of yet.
He bears a Castle (as this day we see,
But of what strength and puissance must you be
Supporting this great City? who must lay
Your shoulders to a burden; such as may
Make Atlas shrink beneath it; Temples, Towers
Rialtoes, spacious Mansions, Suburb bowers.
A weight to make th' Hesperian Giant droop
And Hercules, (who bore up Heaven) to stoop.
Next, of what Understanding, Apprehension,
What judgement, Knowledge, Wisdom and Retention?
Of what Foresight? what Body and what Brain?
What an Antomedan to guide the rain
Of Steeds vnmannaged? what a Palinure
To steer this Helm? and such a Bark assure
In a Sea troubled, where can be no trust
In an unconstant Surge or angry Gust?
Yet such an Elephant we hope to find
Of you, both in th' ability of Mind
And strength of Arm, by that encouragement
The former passage of your life hath lent:
Showed in your judgement and Experience,
Your Gravity, and unchanged Temperance;
All general Virtues that become such State,
Behooveful in so Great a Magistrate:
So after Times unto your Fame shall story
How you have borne up in her pristine Glory
This flourishing City, not once shrinking under
So great a burden, (to successive wonder)
Since no skilled Pilot better could command
By Sea, or expert Charicter by Land.
Twelve hours twice told, distinguish night and Day,
Twelve Caesars of the Iulian Line did sway
Rome's Empire, and in euery case of strife
Where Action's tried or if concerning life,
Twelve makes the jury full: the Zodaiacke Lines
Are likewise filled by twelve Celestial Signs,
Amongst which one in your Emblazons borne
Is numbered by the name of Capricorn.
Twelve sibils we account, and they foretold
Things happened since, although they spoke of old
By twelve: the blessed Word in the Church instated
Was at the first divuldged and propagated.
Twelve Companies you are in Chief, 13. here
Present that number with those Arms they bear.
And hence the Inundant Scaturigo grows,
Which through our Kingdom's large Dominions flows,
By founded Schools, by Colleges, by Trade,
By Traffic, by Commerce, by Project laid.
For thrifty Bargain and all competent gain,
Asswell arising from the Hand as Brain.
London the Mother and the Fountain styled.
And you of all her Sons new eldest Child;
(Heir to her great good Works) encourage still
These pious Acts, and by Example fill
Void places with the like, and in this State
You bear, as being now chief Magistrate:
So order this your numerous Charge, that they
May God, the King, Yourself Serve and Obey.
Now hath the Sun put off his golden beams,
Watering his hot Steeds in cold Ister streams,
And tired with his day's travel, in the West
took up his Inn: But ere you go to rest,
Remember what Arion still proclaims
In the due honour of the noble Thames.
Next, how your Queenlike Saint directs the way
For you to rule, for others to obey.
Then to be called Ioues Son you have the Grace,
And that in Persaus figured is your Place.
That in this able Elephant's implied
Your Strength to bear, your judgement to decide.
Last, that you are the Spring and Fountain made
To water enery Science, Art, and Trade;
Observing those, your Honour shall shine bright,
And so a happy and most blessed good-night.