GOod day to your Lordship:
Thanks Adorni.
May I presume to ask if the Ambassador
Employed by Ferdinand, the Duke of Urbin
Hath audience this morning?
'Tis uncertain,
For though a counsellor of state, I am not
Of the Cabinet counsel. But there's one if he please
That may resolve you.
I will move him Sr.
If you have a suit, show water, I am blind else.
A suit, yet of a nature, not to prove
The quarry that you hawk for: If your words
Are not like Indian wares and every scruple
To be weighed and rated, one poor syllable
Vouchsafed in answer of a fair demand,
Cannot deserve a fee.
It seems you are ignorant,
I neither speak, nor hold my peace for nothing:
And yet for once, I care not if I answer
One single question, gratis.
I much thank you.
Hath the Ambassador audience Sir today?
Yes.
At what hour?
I promised not so much.
A syllable you begged, my Charity gave it.
Move me no further.
This you wonder at?
With me 'tis usual.
Pray you Sr. what is he?
A gentleman, yet no lord. He hath some drop
Of the king's blood running in his veins, derived
Some ten degrees off. His revenue lies
In a narrow compass, the king's ear, and yields him
Every hour a fruitful harvest. Men may talk
Of three crops in a year in the fortunate Islands.
Or profit made by wool. But while there are suitors
His sheep shearing, nay shaving to the quick
Is in every quarter of the Moon, and constant,
In the time of trussing a point, he can undo
Or make a man. His play or recreation
Is to raise this up, or pull down that, and though
He neve yet took orders, makes more Bishops
In Sicilie, than the Pope himself.
Most strange!
The presence fills. He in the Malta habit
Is the natural brother of the King, a by blow.
I understand you.
Morrow to my Uncle.
And my late Guardian. But at length I have
The reigns in my own hands.
Pray you use 'em well,
Or you'll too late repent it.
With this jewel
Presented to Camiola, prepare
This night a visit for me. I shall have
Your company Gallants I perceive, if that
The King will hear of war.
Sr. I have horses
Of the best breed in Naples, fitter far
To break a rank, then crack a lance, and are
In their career of such incredible swiftness
They outstrip swallows.
And such may be useful
To run away with, should we be defeated.
You are well provided Signior
Sr. excuse me.
All of their race by instinct know a Coward.
And scorn the burden. They come on like lightning,
Foundered in a retreat.
By no means back 'em.
Unless you know your courage sympathize
With the daring of your horse.
My lord, this is bitter.
I will raise me a company of foot,
And when at push of pike I am to enter
A breach, to show my valour, I have bought me
An armour cannon proof
You will not leap then
o'er an outwork in your shirt
I do not like
Activity that way.
You had rather stand
A mark to try their muskets on?
If I do
No good, I'll do no hurt.
'Tis in you Signior
A Christian resolution, and becomes you,
But I will not discourage you.
You are Sr.
A knight of Malta, and as I have heard
Have served against the Turk.
'Tis true.
Pray you show us
The difference between the city valour.
And service in the field.
'Tis somewhat more
Than roaring in a tavern, or a brothel,
Or to steal a Constable from a sleeping watch;
Then burn their halberds; or safe guarded by
Your tenants sons, to carry away a Maypole
From a neighbour village; you will not find there
Your Masters of Dependencies to take up
A drunken brawl, or to get you the names
Of valiant chevaliers, fellows that will be
For a cloak with thrice died velvet, and a cast suit
Kicked down the stairs. A knave with half a britch there,
And no shirt (being a thing superfluous,
And worn out of his memory) if you bear not
yourselves both in, and upright with a provant sword
Will slash your scarlets, and your plush a new way;
Or with the hilts thunder about your ears
Such music as will make your worship's dance
To the dolefull tune of Layrma,
I must tell you,
In private, as you are my princely friend,
I do not like such Fiddlers.
No? they are useful
For your imitation; I remember you
When you came first to the Court, and talked of nothing
But you rents, and your entradas; ever chiming
The golden bells in your pockets, you believed
The taking of the wall, as a tribute due to
Your gaudy clothes; and could not walk at midnight
Without a causeless quarrel, as if men
Of courser outsides were in duty bound
To suffer your affronts: but when you had been
cudgeled well, twice or thrice, and from the doctrine
Made profitable uses, you concluded
The sovereign means to teach irregular heirs
Civility, with conformity of manners,
Were two or three sound beatings.
I confess
They did much good upon me.
And on me— the principles that they read were sound.
You'll find
The like instructions in the Camp.
The King.
we sit prepared to hear.
Your Majesty
Hath been long since familiar, I doubt not,
With the desperate fortunes of my Lord, and pity
Of the much that your confederate hath suffered
(You being his last refuge) may persuade you
Not alone to compassionate, but to lend
Your royal aids to stay him in his fall
To certain ruin. He too late is conscious,
That his ambition to encroach upon
His neighbour's territories, with the danger of
His liberty, nay his life, hath borough in question
His own inheritance: but youth and heat
Of blood in your interpretation, may
Both plead, and mediate for him. I must grant it
An error in him, being denied the favours though
Of the fair Princess of Sienna
He sought her in a noble way) t'andeavour
To force affection, by surprisal of
Her principal seat Sienna.
Which now proves
The seat of his captivity not triumph.
Heaven is still just.
And yet that justice is
To be with mercy tempered, which heavens Deputies
Stand bound to minister. The injured Duchess
By reason taught, as nature, could not with
The reparation of her wrongs, but aim at
A brave revenge, and my Lord feels too late
That innocence will find friends. The great Gonzaga,
The honour of his Order, I must praise
Virtue, though in an enemy. He whose fights
And conquests hold one number, rallying up
Her scattered troops, before we could get time
To victual, or to man the conquered City,
Sat down before it, and presuming that
'Tis not to be relieved, admits no parley,
Our flags of truce hung out in vain, nor will he
Lend an ear to composition, but exacts
With the rendering up the towne, the goods, and lines
Of all within the walls, and of all Sexes
To be at his discretion.
Since injustice
In your Duke, meets this correction, can you press us
With any seeming argument of reason,
In foolish pity to decline his dangers,
To draw 'em on ourself? Shall we not be,
Warned by his harms? The league proclaimed between us.
Bound neither of us farther than to aid
Each other, if by foreign force invaded,
And so far in my honour I was tied.
But since without our counsel, or allowance,
He hath took arms, with his good leave, he must
Excuse us, if we steer not on a rock
We see, and may avoid. Let other Monarchs
Contend to be made glorious by proud war,
And with the blood of their poor subjects purchase
Increase of Empire, and augment their cares
In keeping that which was by wrongs extorted;
Guilding unjust invasions with the trim
Of glorious conquests; we that would be known
The father of our people in our study,
And vigilance for their safety, must not change
Their ploughshares into swords, or force them from
The secure shade of their own vines to be
Scorched with the flames of war, or for our sport
Expose their lives to ruin.
Will you then
In his extremity forsake your friend?
No, but preserve ourself:
Cannot the beams
Of honour thaw your icy fears?
Who's that?
A kind of brother, Sir, howe'er your subject,
Your father's Son, and one who blushes that
You are not heir to his brave spirit, and vigour,
As to his Kingdom.
How's this?
Sir, to be
His living Chronicle, and to speak his praise
Cannot deserve your anger.
Where's your warrant
For this presumption?
Here, Sir, in my heart.
Let Sycophants, that feed upon your favours,
Style coldness in you caution, and prefer
Your ease before your honour; and conclude
To eat and sleep supinely, is the end
Of humane blessings: I must tell you Sir,
Virtue, if not in action, is a vice,
And when we move not forward, we go backward;
Nor is this peace (the nurse of drones, and cowards)
Our health, but a disease.
Well urged my Lord.
Perfect what is so well begun.
And bind,
My Lord, your servant:
harebrained fool! what reason
Canst thou infer to make this good?
A thousand
Not to be contradicted. But consider
Where your command lies? 'Tis not, Sir, in France,
Spain, Germany, Portugal, but in Sicilie,
An Island, Sir. Here are no mines of gold,
Or silver to enrich you, no worm spins
Silk in her womb to make distinction
Between you, and a Peasant, in your habits.
No fish lives near our shores, who's blood can die
Scarlet, or purple; all that we possess
With beasts, we have in common: Nature did
Design us robe warriors, and to break through
Our ring the sea, by which we are environed;
And we by force must fetch in what is wanting,
Or precious to us. Add to this, we are
A populous nation, and increase so fast,
That if we by our providence, are not sent
Abroad in colonies, or fall by the sword,
Not Sicilie (though now, it were more fruitful,
Then when 'twas styled the granary of great Rome)
Can yield our numerous fry bread, we must starve,
Or eat up one another.
The King hears
With much attention.
And seems moved with what
Bertoldo hath delivered.
May you live long, Sir,
The King of peace, so you deny not us
The glory of the war; let not our nerves
Shrink up with sloth, nor for want of employment
Make younger brothers thieves; 'tis their swords, Sir,
Must sow and reap their harvest; if examples
May move you more than arguments, look on England,
The Empress of the European Isles,
And unto whom alone ours yields precedence,
When did she flourish so, as when she was
The Mistress of the Ocean. Her navies
Putting a girdle round about the world,
When the Iberian quaked, her worthies named;
And the fair flower Deluce grew pale, set by
The red Rose and the white: let not our armour
Hung up, or our unrigged Armada make us
Ridiculous to the late poor snakes our neighbours
Warmed in our bosoms, and to whom again
We may be terrible: while we spend our hours
Without variety, confined to drink,
Dice, Cards, or whores. Rouse us, Sir, from the sleep
Of idleness, and redeem our mortgaged honours.
Your birth, and justly, claims my father's Kingdom;
But his Heroic mind descends to me,
I will confirm so much.
In his looks he seems
To break ope Janus' Temple.
How these younglings
Take fire from him!
It works an alteration
Upon the King.
I can forbear no longer:
War, war, my Sovereign.
The King appears
Resolved, and does prepare to speak.
Think not
Our counsel's built upon so weak a base,
As to be overturned, or shaken with
Tempestuous winds of words. As I, my Lord,
Before resolved you, I will not engage
My person in this quarrel; neither press
My Subjects to maintain it: yet to show
My rule is gentle, and that I have feeling
Of your Master's sufferings, since these Gallants weary
Of the happiness of peace, desire to taste
The bitter sweets of war, we do consent
That as Adventures, and volunteers
(No way compelled by us) they may make trial
Of their boasted valours.
we desire no more.
'Tis well, and but my grant in this, expect not
Assistance from me. Govern as you please
The Province you make choice of, for I vow.
By all things sacred, if that thou miscarry
In this rash undertaking, I will hear it
No otherwise than as a sad disaster,
fall'n on a stranger: nor will I esteem
That man my Subject, who in thy extremes
In purse or person aids thee. Take your fortune:
You know me, I have said it. So my Lord
You have my absolute answer.
My Prince pays
n me his duty.
Follow me, Fulgentio,
And you, Astutio.
What a frown he threw
At his departure, on you.
Let him keep
His smiles for his state Catamite, I care not.
Shall we aboard tonight?
Your speed, my Lord,
Doubles the benefit.
I have a business
Requires dispatch, some two hours hence I'll meet you.
Nay Signior this is too much ceremony in my own house.
What's gracious abroad, must be in private practised.
For your mirth-sake
Let him alone, he has been all this morning
In practice with a peruqued Gentleman usher,
To teach him his true amble and his postures,
When he walks before a Lady
You may, madam,
Perhaps, believe that I in this use art,
To make you dote upon me by exposing
My more than most rare features to your view.
But I as I have ever done, deal simply,
A mark of sweet simplicity ever noted
I'the family of the Syllies. Therefore Lady,
Look not with too much contemplation on me,
If you do, you are i'the suds.
You are no Barber?
Fie no, not I, but my good parts have drawn
More loving hearts out of fair ladies' bellies,
Than the whole trade have done teeth.
Is't possible?
Yes, and they live too, marry much condoling
The scorn of their Narcissus, as they call me,
Because I love myself.
Without a rival;
What philtres or love-powders do you use
To force affection? I see nothing in
Your person, but I dare look on, yet keep
My own poor heart still.
You are warned, be armed,
And do not lose the hope of such a husband
In being too soon enamoured.
Hold in your head,
Or you must have a martingale.
I have sworn
Never to take a wife, but such a one
(O may your Ladyship prove so strong) as can
Hold out a month against me.
Never fear it,
Though your best taking part, your wealth were trebled
I would not woo you. But since in your pity
You please to give me caution, tell me what
Temptations I must fly from?
The first is
That you never hear me sing, for I am a Syri.
If you observe, when I warble, the dogs howl
As ravished with my Ditties, and you will
run mad to hear me.
I will stop my ears,
And keep me little wits.
Next when I dance
And come aloft thus, cast not a sheep's eye
Upon the quivering of my calf.
Proceed, Sir,
But on no terms, for 'tis a main point, dream not
Of the strength of my back, though it will bear a burden
With any porter.
I mean not to ride you,
Nor I your little Ladyship, till you have
Performed the Covenants. Be not taken with
My pretty spider fingers, nor my eyes,
That twinkle on both sides.
Was there ever such
A piece of motley heard of! who's that? you may spare
The Catalogue of my dangers.
No good Madam,
I have not told you half.
Enough good Signior,
If I eat more of such sweet meats, I shall surfeit.
Who is't?
The brother of the King.
Nay start not,
The brother of the King! is he no more?
Were it the King himself, I'll give him leave
To speak his mind to you, for I am not jealous,
And to assure your Ladyship of so much,
I'll usher him in, and that done, hide myself.
Camiola if ever, now be constant
This is indeed a suitor, whose sweet presence,
Courtship and loving language would have staggered
The chaste Penelope. And to increase
The wonder, did not modesty forbid it
I should ask that from him, he sues to me for;
And yet my reason like a tyran, tells e
I must nor give, nor take it.
I must tell you
You loose your labour. 'Tis enough to prove i,
Signior Sylli came before you, and you know
First come first served yet you shall have my countenance
To parley with her and I'll take special care
That none shall interrupt you
You are courteous.
Come wench wilt thou hear wisdom?
Yes from you Sr.
If forcing this sweet favour from your lips
Fair Madam, argue me of too much boldness
When you are pleased to understand, I take
A parting kiss, if not excuse, at least
'Twill qualify the offence.
A parting kiss Sr.?
What Nation envious of the happiness
Which Sicilie enjoys in your sweet presence,
Can buy you from her? or what Climate yield
Pleasures transcending those which you enjoy here,
Being both beloved and honoured. The North-star
And guider of all hearts, and to sum up
Your full account of happiness, in a word,
The brother of the King.
Do you alone,
And with an unexampled cruelty,
Enforce my absence, and deprive me of
Those blessings, which you with a polished phrase
Seem to insinuate, that I do possess,
And yet tax me as being guilty of
My wilful exile? what are Titles to me?
Or popular suffrage? or my nearness to
The King in blood? or fruitful Sicilie,
Though it confessed no Sovereign but myself,
When you that are the essence of my being,
The anchor of my hopes; the real substance
Of my felicity, in your disdain
Turn all to fading and deceiving shadows?
You tax me without cause.
You must confess it.
But answer love with love, and seal the contract
In the uniting of our souls, how gladly
(though now I were in action, and assured,
Following my fortune; that plumed victory
Would make her glorious stand upon my tent)
Would I put off my armour, in my heat
Of conquest, and like Anthonie pursue
My Cleopatra! will you yet look on me
With an eye of Favour?
Truth bear witness for me,
That in the judgement of my Soul, you are
A man so absolute, and circular
In all those wished-for rarities, that may take
A Virgin captive, that though at this instant
All sceptred Monarchs of our Western world
Were rivals with you, and Camiola worthy
Of such a competition, you alone
Should wear the garland.
If so, what diverts
Your Favour from me?
No mulct in yourself,
Or in your person, mind or fortune.
What then?
The Consciousness of mine own wants. Alas Sr.
We are not parallels, but like lines divided
Can ne'er meet in one Centre, your Birth Sir
(Without addition) were an ample Dowry
For one of fairer Fortunes, and this shape,
Were you ignoble, far above all value;
To this, so clear a mind, so furnished with
Harmonious faculties, moulded from heaven,
That though you were Thersites in your features
Of no descent, and Irus in your fortunes,
Ulysses like you would force all eyes, and ears
To love, but seen, and when heard, wonder at
Your matchless story. But all these bound up
Together in one Volume, give me leave
With admiration to look upon 'em,
But not presume in my own flattering hopes,
I may or can enjoy 'em.
How you ruin
What you would seem to build up. I know no
Disparity between us, you are an heir
Sprung from a noble family, fair, rich, young.
And every way my equal.
Sir excuse me,
One airy with proportion, ne'er discloses
The eagle and the wren tissue, and freeze
In the same garment monstrous: But suppose
That what's in you excessive, were diminished
And my desert supplied, the strongest bar,
Religion stops our Entrance, you are Sir
A Knight of Malta, by your order bound
To a single life, you cannot marry me,
And I assure myself you are too noble
To seek me (though my frailty should consent)
In a base path.
A dispensation Lady
Will easily absolve me.
O take heed Sr.
When, what is vowed to heaven, is dispensed with,
To serve our ends on earth, a curse must follow,
And not a blessing.
Is there no hope left me?
Nor to myself, but is a neighbour to
Impossibility: true love should walk
On equal feet, in us it does not Sir.
But rest assured, excepting this, I shall be
Devoted to your service.
And this is your
Determinate sentence?
Not to be revoked.
Farewell then fairest cruel. All thoughts in me
Of Women perish. Let the glorious light
Of noble war extinguish love's dim taper
That only lends me light to see my folly;
Honour, be thou my everliving Mistress,
And fond affection as thy bondslave serve thee.
How soon my Sun is set: He being absent,
Never to rise again! what a fierce battle
Is fought between my passions! methinks
We should have kissed at parting.
I perceive
He has his answer, now must I step in
To comfort her, you have found, I hope, sweet Lady,
Some difference between a youth of my pitch,
And this bugbear Bertoldo, men are men,
The king's brother is no more: good parts will do it,
When Titles fail, despair not, I may be
In time entreated.
Be so now to leave me,
Lights for my chamber, O my heart!
She now
I know is going to bed to ruminate
Which way to glut herself upon my person,
But for my oath-sake I will keep her hungry,
And to grow full myself, I'll straight to supper.
Embarked tonight do you say?
I saw him aboard, Sir,
And without taking of his leave?
'Twas strange!
Are we grown so contemptible?
'Tis far from me Sir, to add fuel to your anger,
That in your ill opinion of him, burns
Too hot already, else I should affirm
It was a gross neglect.
A wilful scorn
Of duty and allegiance, you give it
Too fair a name. But we shall think on't: can you
Guess what the numbers were that followed him
In his desperate action?
More than you think, Sir.
All ill affected spirits in Palermo,
Or to your government, or person, with
The turbulent swordmen, such whose poverty forced 'em
To wish a change, are gone along with him;
Creatures devoted to his undertakings
In right or wrong, and to express their zeal,
And readiness to serve him, ere they went
Profanely took the sacrament on their knees,
To live and die with him.
O most impious! their loyalty to us forgot?
I fear so.
Unthankful as they are.
Yet this deserves not
One troubled thought in you, Sir, with your pardon
I hold that their remove from hence makes more
For your security, than danger.
True; and as I'll fashion it, they shall feel it too
Astutio, you shall presently be dispatched
With letters writ, and signed with our own hand,
To the Duchess of Sienna, in excuse
Of these forces sent against her. If you spare
An oath to give it credit, that, we never
Consented to it, swearing for the King,
Though false, it is no perjury.
I know it.
They are not fit to be state agents, Sir,
That without scruple of their conscience, cannot
Be prodigal in such trifles.
Right, Astutio.
You must beside from us take some instructions
To be imparted, as you judge 'em useful,
To the General Gonzaga. Instantly
Prepare you for your journey.
With the wings
Of loyalty and duty.
I am bold to put your Majesty in mind.
Of my promise,
And aids, to further you in your amorous project
To the fair, and rich Camiola: there's my ring
Whatever you shall say that I entreat
Or can command by power, I will make good.
Ever your Majesty's creature.
Venus prove propitious to you.
All sorts to my wishes:
Bertoldo was my hindrance. He removed,
I now will court her in the conquerous style,
Come, see, and overcome. Boy.
Sir, your pleasure.
Haste to Camiola, bid her prepare
An entertainment suitable to a fortune,
She could not hope for. Tell her, I vouchsafe
To honour her with a visit
'Tis a favour
Will make her proud.
I know it
I am gone, Sir.
Entreaties fit not me, a man in grace,
May challenge awe, and privilege by his place,
SO melancholy say you?
Never given
To such retirement.
Can you guess the case?
If it hath not its birth, and being from
The brave Bertoldo's absence, I confess
It is passed my apprehension.
You are wide,
The whole field wide. I in my understanding
Pity your ignorance: yet if you will
Swear to conceal it, I will let you know
Where her shoe rings her.
I vow, Signior,
By my virginity.
A perilous oath
In a waiting-woman of fifteen, and is indeed
A Kind of nothing.
I'll take one of something
If you please to minister it.
Nay, you shall not swear,
I had rather take your word, for should you vow:
Damn me, I'll do this, you are sure to break
I thank you Signior, but resolve us.
Know then,
Here walks the cause. She dares not look upon me,
My beauties are so terrible, and enchanting,
She cannot endure my sight.
There I believe you.
But the time will come, be comforted, when I will
Put off this vizor of unkindness to her,
And show an amorous, and yielding face:
And until then, though Hercules himself
Desire to see her, he had better eat
His club then pass her threshold, for I'll be
Her Cerberus to guard her.
A good dog.
Worth twenty porters.
Keep you open house here?
No groom to attend a Gentleman? O, I spy one.
He means not me, I am sure.
You sirrah; sheepshead,
With a face cut on a cat-stick, Do you hear?
You yeoman pewterer, conduct me to
The Lady of the mansion, or my poniard
Shall disembogue thy soul.
O terrible!
disembogue! I talk of Hercules, and here is one
Bound up in decimo sexto.
Answer wretch.
Pray you little gentleman, be not so furious,
The Lady keeps her chamber.
And we present?
Sent in an Embassy to her? But here is
Her gentlewoman, Sirrah hold my cloak,
While I take a leap at her lips, do it and neatly;
Or having first tripped up thy heels, I'll make
Thy back my footstool.
Tamberlaine in little!
Am I turned Turk! what an office am I put to!
My Lady, gentle youth is indisposed.
Though she were dead and buried, only tell her,
The great man in the Court, the brave Fulgentio
Descends to visit her, and it will raise her
Out of the grave for joy.
Here comes another!
The devil I fear in his holiday clothes.
So soon,
My part is at an end then, cover my shoulders,
When I grow great, thou shalt serve me.
Are you Sirrah
An implement of the house?
Sure he will make
A joint-stool of me!
Or if you belong
To the Lady of the place, command her hither.
I do not wear her livery, yet acknowledge
A duty to her. And as little bound
To serve your peremptory will, as she is
To obey your summons. 'Twill become you Sir,
To wait her leisure, than her pleasure known
You may present your duty.
Duty? Slave,
I'll teach you manners.
I am past learning, make not
A tumult in the house.
Shall I be braved thus
O I am dead! and now I sown.
Help, murder!
Recover Sirrah, the Ladies here.
Nay then
I am alive again, and I'll be valiant.
What insolence is this? Adorni, hold,
Hold I command you.
Saucy groom.
Not so Sir,
However in his life, he had dependence
Upon my Father, He is a gentleman
As well borne as yourself. Put on your hat.
In my presence, without leave?
He has mine Madam?
And I must tell you Sir, and in plain language,
howe'er your glittering outside promise gentry,
The rudeness of your carriage and behaviour
Speaks you a couser thing.
She meanes a clowne S.
I am her interpreter for want of a better.
I am a Queen in mine own house, nor must you
Expect an Empire here.
Sure I must love her
Before the day, the pretty soul's so valiant.
What are you? and what would you with me?
Proud one,
When you know what I am, and what I came for,
And may on your submission proceed o,
You in your reason must repent the coarseness
Of my entertainment.
Why fine man? what are you?
A kinsman of the Kings.
I cry you mercy,
For his sake, not your own. But grant you are so,
'Tis not impossible, but a king may have
A fool to his kinsman, no way meaning you Sir.
You have heard of Fulgen.
Long since Sir,
A suit-broker in Court. He has the worst
Report among good men I ever heard of,
For bribery and extortion. In their prayers
widows and orphan's curse him for a canker,
And caterpillar in the state. I hope Sir,
You are not the man, much less employed by him
As a smock-agent to me.
I reply not
As you deserve, being assured you know me,
Pretending ignorance of my person, only
To give me a taste of your wit; 'Tis well and courtly,
I like a sharp wit well.
I cannot endure it,
Nor any of the Syllies.
More I know too,
This harsh induction must serve as a foil
To the well tuned observance and respect,
You will hereafter pay me, being made
Familiar with my credit with the King,
And that, contain your joy, I deign to love you.
Love me? I am not raped with't.
Hear't again.
I love you honestly, now you admire me.
I do indeed, it being a word so seldom
Heard from a courtier's mouth. But pray you deal plainly,
Since you find me simple. what might be the motives
Inducing you to leave the freedom of
A bachelor's life, on your soft neck to wear
The stubborn yoke of marriage? And of all
The beauties in Palermo, to choose me,
Poor me? that is the main point you must treat of.
Why I will tell you. Of a little thing
You are a pretty peat, indifferently fair too;
And like a new-rigged ship both tight, and y'are
Well trussed to bear. Virgins of Giant size
Are sluggards at the sport: but for my pleasure,
Give me a near well timbered gamester like you,
Such need no spurs, the quickens of your eye
Assures an active spirit.
You are pleasant Sir,
Yet I presume, that there was one thing in me
Unmentioned yet, that took you more than all
Those parts you have remembered.
What?
My wealth Sir.
You are i'the right, without that beauty is
A flower worn in the morning, at night trod on
But beauty, youth, and fortune meeting in you,
I will vouchsafe to marry you.
You speak well,
And in return excuse me Sir, if I
Deliver reasons why upon no terms
I'll marry you, I fable not.
I am glad
To hear this, I began to have an ague.
Come your wise reasons.
Such as they are, pray you take them.
First I am doubtful whether you are a man,
Since for your shape trimmed up in a lady's dressing
You might pass for a woman: now I love
To deal on certainties. And for the fairness
Of your complexion, which you think will take me,
The colour I must tell you in a man
Is weak and faint, and never will hold out
If put to labour, give me the lovely brown.
A thick curled hair of the same die; broad shoulders,
A brawny arm full of veins, a leg without
An artificial calf, I suspect yours,
But let that pass.
She means me all this while,
For I have every one of those good parts,
O Sylli, fortunate Sylli!
You are moved Sir.
Fie no, go on.
Then as you are a courtier;
A graced one too, I fear you have been too forward,
And so much for your person. Rich you are,
Devilish rich, as 'tis reported, and sure have
The aids of Satan's little fiends to get it,
And what is got upon his back, must be
Spent you know where, the proverb's stale, one word more
And I have done.
I'll ease you of the trouble,
Coy, and disdainful.
Save me, or else he'll beat me.
No, your own folly shall, and since you put me
To my last charm, look upon this, and tremble.
At the sight of a fair ring? the Kings, I take it.
I have seen him wear the like; if he hath sent it
as a favour to me.
Yes, 'tis very likely,
His dying mother's gift, prized at his crown,
By this he does command you to be mine,
By his gift you are so: you may yet redeem all.
You are in a wrong account still. Though the King may
Dispose of my life and goods, my mind's mine own,
And shall be never yours. The King (Heaven bless him)
Is good and gracious, and being in himself
Abstemious from base and goatish looseness,
Will not compel against their wills, chaste Maidens,
To dance in his magnious circles. I believe
Forgetting it, when he washed his hands, you stole it
With an intent to awe me. But you are cozened,
I am still myself, and will be.
A proud haggard,
And not to be reclaimed, which of your grooms,
Your coachman, fool, or footman, ministers
Night physic to you?
You are foul-mouthed,
Much fairer
Than thy black soul, and so I will proclaim thee.
Were I a man, thou durst not speak this.
Heaven
So prosper me, as I resolve to do it
To all men, and in every place, scorned by
A tit of pen-pence?
Now I begin to be valiant
Nay, I will draw my sword. O for a butcher!
do a friend's part, pray you carry him the length of't.
I give him three years, and a day to match my Toledo,
And then we'll fight like Dragons.
Pray have patience.
I may live to have vengeance; My Bertoldo
Would not have heard this.
Madam.
Pray you spare
Your language; Prithee fool, and make me merry:
That is my Office ever.
I must do,
Not talk, this glorious gallant shall hear from me.
IS the breach made assaultable?
Yes, and the moat
Filled up, the cannonier hath done his parts,
We may enter six a breast.
There's not a man
Dares show himself upon the wall
Defeat not
The soldiers hoped-for spoil.
If you, Sir,
Delay the assault, and the City be given up
To your discretion, you in honour cannot
Use the extremity of war, but in
Compassion to 'em, you to us prove cruel.
And an enemy to yourself.
A hindrance to
The brave revenge you have vowed
Temper your heat,
And lose not by too sudden rashness, than
Which be but patient, will be offered to you
Security ushers ruin; proud contempt
Of an enemy three parts vanquished with desire
And greediness of spoil, have often wrested
A certain victory from the conquerors gripe.
Discretion is the tutor of the war,
Valour the pupil, and when we command
With lenity and your directions followed
With cheerfulness, a prosperous end must crown
Our works well undertaken.
Ours are finished
If we make use of fortune.
Her false smiles
Deprive you of your judgements. The condition
Of our affairs exacts a double care,
And like bifronted Ianus, we must look
Backward, as forwards: though a flattering calm
Bids us urge on, a sudden tempest raised,
Not feared, much less expected, in our rear
May foully fall upon us, and distract us
To our confusion. Our scout! what brings
Thy ghastly looks, and sudden speed?
Th'assurance
Of a new enemy.
This I foresaw and feared.
What are they, know it thou?
They are by their colours
Sicilians, bravely mounted, and the brightness
Of their rich armours doubly guilded with
Reflection of the Sun.
From Sicilie?
The King in league! no war proclaimed! 'tis foul
But this must be prevented, not disputed
Ha, how is this? your ostrich plumes, that but
e'en now like quills of Porcupines seemed to threaten
The stairs, drop at the rumor of a shower?
And like to captive colours sweep the earth?
Bear up, but in great dangers, greater minds
Are never proud. Shall a few loose troops untrained
But in a customary ostentation,
Presented as a sacrifice to your valours
Cause a dejection in you?
No dejection.
However startled, where you lead, we'll follow
'Tis bravely said. We will not stay their charge,
But meet'em man to man, and horse to horse.
Pierio in our absence hold our place,
And with our footmen, and those sickly troops,
Prevent a sally. I in mine own person,
With part of the cavalry, will bid,
These hunter's welcome to a bloody breakfast,
But I lose time.
I'll to my charge.
And we
To ours. I'll bring you on.
If we come off
It is not amiss, if not, my state is settled
NO aids from Sicilie? Hath hope forsook us?
And that vain comfort to affliction, pity
By our vowed friend denied us? we can nor live,
Nor die with honour: like beasts in a toil
we wait the leisure of the bloody hunter,
Who is not so far reconciled unto us,
As in one death to give a period
To our calamities, but in delaying
The fate we cannot fly from, starved with wants,
we die this night to live again tomorrow,
And suffer greater torments.
There is not
Three days' provision for every soldier,
At an ounce of bread a day left in the City.
To die the beggar's death with hunger, made
Anatomies while we live, cannot but crack
Our heartstrings with vexation.
Would they would break,
Break altogether, how willingly like Cato
Could I tear out my bowels, rather than
Look on the conquerors insulting face,
But that religion, and the horrid dream
To be suffered in the other world denies it.
What news with thee?
From the turret of the fort
By the rising clouds of dust, through which, like lightning
The splendor of bright arms sometimes broke through,
I did descry some forces making towards us,
And from the camp, as emulous of their glory,
The General, (for I know him by his horse)
Tnd bravely seconded. encounter'd 'em.
Their greetings were to rough for friends, their swords
And not their tongues exchanging courtesies.
By this the main Battalias are joined,
And if you please to be spectators of
The horrid issue, I will bring you where
As in a Theater you may see their fates
In purple gore presented.
Heaven. If yet
Thou art appeased for my wrong done to Aurelia,
Take pity of my miseries. Lead the way, friend.
WE have 'em yet, though they cost us dear. This was
Charged home, and bravely followed. Be to yourselves
True mirrors to each other's worth, and looking
With noble Emulation on his wounds,
(The glorious Livery of triumphant war)
Imagine these with equal grace appear
Upon yourself. The bloody †swsat† you have suffered
In this laborious, nay toilsome harvest,
Yields a rich crop of conquest, and the spoil
Most precious balsum to a soldier's hurts
Will ease and cure 'em. Let me look upon
The prisons faces. O how much transformed
From what they were. O Mars! were these toys fashioned
To undergo the burden of thy service?
The weight of their defensive armour bruised
Their weak, effeminate limbs, and would have forced'em
In a hot day without a blow to yield.
This insultation shows not manly in you.
To men I had forborne it, you are women,
Or at the best loose carpet knights, what fury
Seduced you to exchange your case in Court
For labour in the field? Perhaps you thought.
To charge through dust, and blood, an armed foe,
Was but like graceful running at the ring
For a want on mistress glove, and the encounter
A soft impression on her lips. But you
gaudy butterflies, and I wrong myself
In parling with you.
Vae victis. Now we prove it.
But here's one fashioned in another mould,
And made of tougher metal.
True, I owe him
For this wound bravely given.
O that mountains
Were heaped upon me, that I might expire
A wretch no more remembered.
Look up Sr.
To be o'ercome deserves no shame. If you
Had fall'n ingloriously, or could accuse
Your want of courage in resistance, 'twere
To be lamented: But since you performed
As much as could be hoped for from a man,
(Fortune his enemy) you wrong yourself
In this direction. I am honoured in
My victory o'er you: but to have these
My prisoners, is in my true judgement rather,
Captivity than a triumph; you shall find
Fair quarter from me, and your many wounds
(Which I hope are not mortal) with such care
Looked to, and cured, as if your nearest friend
Attended on you.
When you know me better,
You will make void this promise: Can you call me
Into your memory.
The brave Bertoldo!
A brother of our order! By Saint Iohn,
(our holy patron) I am more amazed,
Nay thunderstruck, with thy Apostasy,
And precipice from the most solemn vows
Made unto heaven, when this, the glorious badge
Of our redeemer was conferred upon thee,
By the great master, than if I had seen
A reprobate Iew, an Atheist, Turk, or Tartar
Baptized in our religion.
This I looked for,
And am resolved to suffer.
Fellow Soldiers
Behold this man, and taught by his example
Know that 'tis safer far to play with lightning,
Then trifle in things sacred. In my rag
I shed these at the funeral of his virtue,
Faith and religion; why I will tell you
He was a gentleman, so trained up, and fashioned
For noble uses, and his youth did promise
Such certainties, more than hopes, of great achievements,
As if the Christian world had stood opposed
Against the Ottoman race to try the fortune
Of one encounter, this Bertoldo had been
For his knowledge to direct, and matchless courage
To execute, without a rival, by
The votes of good men chosen general,
As the prime soldier, and most deserving,
Of all that wear the cross, which now in justice
I thus tear from him.
Let me die with it,
Upon my breast.
No, by this thou were't sworn
On all occasions, as a knight to guard
Weak Ladies from oppression, and never
To draw thy sword against 'em, where as thou
In hope of gain or glory, when a Princess
And such a Princess as Aurelia is,
Was dispossessed by violence, of what was
Her true inheritance, against thine oath,
Hast to thy uttermost laboured to uphold
Her falling enemy. But thou shalt pay
A heavy forfeiture, and learn too late,
Valour, employed in an ill quarrel, turns
To cowardice, and virtue then puts on
Foul vices vizard. This is that which cancels
All friendship's bands between us Bear 'em off
I will hear no reply. And let the ransom
Of these, for they are yours, be highly rated.
In this I do but right, and let it be
Styled justice, and not wilful cruelty.
WHat I have done Sir by the law of arms
I can, and will make good.
I have no commission
To expostulate the act. These letters speak
The King my Master's love to you, and his
vowed service to the Duchess, on whose person
I am to give attendance.
At this instant.
she's at Pienza; you may spare the trouble
Of riding thither: I have advertized her
Of our success, and on what humble terms
Sienna stands: though presently I can
Possess it I defer it, that she may
Enter her own, and as she please dispose of
The prisoners and the spoil.
I thank you, Sir.
I'the mean time, if I may have your licence,
I have a Nephew, and one once my ward
For whose liberties and ransoms, I would gladly
Make composition.
They are, as I take it,
Called Gasparo, and Anthonio,
The same, Sir,
For them you must treat with these, but for Bertoldo,
He is mine own, if the King will ransom him,
He pays down fifty thousand crowns, if not
He lives, and dies my slave,
Pray you a word.
The King will rather thank you to detain him,
Then give one crown to free him.
At his pleasure.
I'll send the prisoners under guard; my business
Calls me another way.
My service waits you,
Now Gentlemen do not deal like Merchants with me,
But noble Captains, you know in great minds
Posse, & nolle nollle.
Pray you speak
Our language.
I find not in my commission
An officers bound to speak or understand
More than his Mother tongue.
If he speak that
After midnight 'tis remarkable.
In plain terms then,
Anthonio is your prisoner. Gasparo yours
You are i'the right.
At what sum do you rate
Their several ransoms.
I must make my market
As the commodity cost me.
As it cost you?
You did not buy your Captainship? your desert
I hope advanced you.
How? it well appears
You are no soldier. Desert in these days?
Desert may make a Sergeant to a Colonel,
And it may hinder him from rising higher,
But if it ever get a company,
A company, pray you mark me, without money
Or private service done for the general's Mistress,
With a commendatory Epistle from her,
I will turn lanceprizado.
Pray you observe, Sir:
I served two prenticeships, just fourteen year,
Trailing the puissant pike; and half so long
Had the right hand file, and I fought well, 'twas said too:
But I might have served, and fought, and served till doomsday
And never have carried a flag, but for the legacy
A buxom widow of threescore, bequeathed me,
And that too, my back knows, I labour hard for,
But was better paid.
You are merry with yourselves
But this is from the purpose.
To the point then.
Prisoners are not ta'en every day, and when
We have 'em we must make the best use of 'em.
Our pay is little to the part we should bear,
And that so long a coming, that 'tis spent
Before we have it, and hardly wipes off scores
At the Tavern, and the Ordinary.
You may add to
Our sport took up on trust.
Peace, thou smock vermin.
Discover commanders, secrets! In a word, Sir,
We have required, and find our prisoners rich:
Two thousand crowns a piece, our companies cost us,
And so much each of us will have, and that
In present pay.
It is too little; yet
Since you have said the word, I am content,
But will not go a gazet less.
Since you are not
To be brought lower, there is no evading
I'll be your paymaster.
we desire no better.
But not a word of what's agreed between us,
Till I have schooled my gallants.
I am dumb, Sir.
And where removed now? hath the Tyrant found out
Worse usage for us?
Worse it cannot be.
My greyhound has fresh straw, and scraps in his kennel,
But we have neither.
Did I ever think
To wear such garters on silk stockings? or
That my too curious appetite, that turned
At the sight of godwits, pheasant, partridge, quails
Larks, woodcocks, calvered salmon, as course diet,
Would leap at a mouldy crust?
And go without it;
So oft as I do, O how have I jeered
The City entertainment. A huge shoulder
Of glorious fat Ram Mutton, seconded
With a pair of ta'en cats, or coneys, a crab tart
With a worthy loin of veal, and valiant Capon,
Mortified to grow tender. These I scorned
From their plentiful horn of abundance, though invited:
But now I could carry my own stool to a tripe,
And call their chitterlings charity, and bless the founder.
O that I were no farther sensible
Of my miseries than you are! you like beasts
Feel only stings of hunger, and complain not
But when you are empty: but your narrow souls
(If you have any) cannot comprehend
How insupportable the torments are,
Which a free and noble soul made captive, suffers:
Most miserable men! and what am I then,
That envy you? Fetters though made of gold,
Express base thraldom and all delicates
Prepared by Median cooks for Epicures,
When not our own, are bitter quilts filled high
With gossamer and roses, cannot yield
The body soft repose, the mind kept waking
With anguish and affliction.
My good Lord.
This is no time, nor place for flattery Sir,
Pray you style me as I am, a wretch forsaken
Of the world, as myself.
I would it were
In me to help you.
I if that you want power Sir,
Lip comfort cannot cure me, pray you leave me
To mine own private thoughts.
My valiant Nephew!
And my more than warlike-ward! I am glad to see you
After your glorious conquests. Are these chains
Reward for your good service? If they are
You should wear 'em on your necks (since they are massy)
Like Aldermen of the war.
You jeer us to!
Good uncle name not (as you are a man of honour)
That fatal word of war, the very sound of't
Is more dreadful than a Cannon.
But redeem us
From this Captivity, and I'll vow hereafter
Never to wear a sword, or cut my meat
With a knife, that has an edge or point. I'll starve first
I will cry broom or cat's meat in Palermo;
Turn porter, carry burdens; any thing,
Rather than live a soldier.
This should have
Been thought upon before. At what price think you
Your two wise heads are rated?
A calf's head is
More worth than mine, I am sure it had more brains in't
Or I had never come here.
And I will eat it
With bacon, if I have not speedy ransom.
And a little garlic too, for your own sake Sir
I will boil in your stomach else.
Beware of mine
Or the horns may choke you. I am married Sir.
You shall have my row of houses near the palace
And my villa all.
All that we have.
Well, have more wit hereafter
For this time you are ransomed.
Off with their irons.
Do do. If you are ours again, you know your price.
Pray you dispatch us: I shall ne'er believe
I am a freeman, till I set my foot
In Sicilie again, and drink Palermo,
And in Palermo too.
The wind fits fair,
You shall aboard tonight with the rising Sun
You may touch upon the coast. But take your leaves
Of the late General first.
I will be brief.
And I, my lord heaven keep you.
Yours to use
In the way of peace, but as your soldiers never.
A pox of war no more of war.
Have you
Authority to lose their bonds, yet leave
The brother of your King, whose worth disdains
Comparison with such as these, in irons?
If ransom may redeem them, I have lands,
A patrimony of mine own assigned me,
By my deceased sire to satisfy
whate'er can be demanded for my freedom.
I wish you had Sir, but the king who yields
No reason for his will, in his displeasure
Hath seized on all you had; nor will Gonzaga,
Whose prisoner now you are, accept of less
Than fifty thousand crowns.
I find it now
That misery ne'er comes alone. But grant
The King is yet inexorable, time
May work him to a feeling of my sufferings.
I have friends, that swore their lives and fortunes were
At my devotion, and among the rest
yourself my lord, when forfeited to the Law
For a foul murder, and in cold blood done,
I made your life my gift, and reconciled you
To this incensed king, and got your pardon.
Beware ingratitude. I know you are rich
And may pay down the Sum.
I might my lord,
But pardon me.
And will Astutio prove then
To please a passionate man, the kings no more,
False to his maker and his reason? which
Commands more than I ask? o summer friendship,
Whose flattering leaves that shadowed us in
Our prosperity, with the least gust drop off
In th'autumn of adversity! How like
A prison is to a grave! when dead we are
With solemn Pomp brought thither, and our heirs,
(Masking their joy in false dissembled tears)
Weep o'er the hearse, but earth no sooner covers
The earth brought thither, but they turn away
With inward smiles, the dead no more remembered.
So entered in a prison.
My occasions
Command me hence my lord.
Pray you leave me, do;
And tell the cruel king, that I will wear
These fetters till my flesh, and they are one
Incorporated substance. In myself,
As in a glass, I'll look on humane frailty,
And curse the height of Royal blood: since I
In being borne near to Iove, am near his thunder.
Cedars once shaken with a storm, their own
Waight grabs their roots out. Lead me where you please;
I am his, not fortunes martyr, and will die
The great example of his cruelty.
HE undergoes my challenge, and contemns it,
And threatens me with the late Edict made
'Gainst duelists, than altar cowards fly to.
But I that am engaged, and nourish in me
A higher aim then fair Camiola dreams of,
Must not sit down thus. In the court I dare not
Attempt him; and in public, he's so guarded
With a herd of Parasites, Clients, fools and suitors,
That a musket cannot reach him, my designs
Admit of no delay. This is her birthday,
Which with a fit and due solemnity
Camiola celebrates; and on it, all such
As love or serve her, usually present
A tributary duty. I'll have something
To give, if my intelligence prove true,
Shall find acceptance. I am told, near this grove
Fulgentio very morning makes his makers
With his petitioners. I may present him
With a sharp petition. Ha, 'tis he my fate
Be ever blessed for't.
Command such as wait me
Not to presume at the least for half an hour
To press on my retirements.
I will say, Sir, you are at your prayers
That will not find belief,
Courtiers have something else to do, be gone, Sir,
Challenged! 'tis well I and by a groom! still better I
Was this shape made to fight? I have a tongue yet,
howe'er no sword to kill him, and what way
This morning, I'll resolve of.
I shall cross
Your resolution, or suffer for you.
WHat are all these?
servants with several presents,
And rich ones too.
With her best wishes, Madam,
Of many such days to you, the Lady Petula
Presents you with this fan.
This Diamond
From your Aunt Honoria.
This piece of plate
From your Uncle, old Vincentio, with your arms
Graven upon it.
Good friends they are too.
Munificent in their love, and favour to me.
Out of my cabinet return such jewels
As this directs you, for your pains; and yours;
Nor must you be forgotten. Honour me
With the drinking of a health.
Gold on my life!
She scorns to give base silver.
Would she had been
Borne every month in the year!
Month? every day.
Show such another maid.
All happiness wait you.
I'll fee your will done.
How, Adorny wounded?
A scratch got in your service, else not worth
Your observation; I bring not madam
In honour of your birthday, antique plate,
Or pearl, for which the savage Indian dives
Into the bottom of the Sea; nor Diamonds
hewn from steep rocks with danger: Such as give
To those that have what they themselves want, aim at
A glad return with profit: yet despise not
My offering at the altar of your favour;
Nor let the lowness of the giver lessen
The height of what's presented. Since it is
A precious jewel, almost forfeited,
And dimmed with clouds of infamy redeemed
And in in its natural splendour, with addition,
Restored to the true owner.
How is this?
Not to hold you in suspense, I bring you, madam,
Your wounded reputation cured, the sting
Of virulent malice, festering your fair name,
Plucked out and trod on. That proud man, that was
Denied the honour of your bed, yet durst
With his untrue reports, strumpet your fame,
Compelled by me, hath given himself the lie,
And in his owne blood wrote it, you may rd
Fulgentio subscribed.
I am amazed!
It does deserve it, Madam. Common service
Is fit for hinds, and the reward proportioned
To their conditions. Therefore look not on me
As a follower of your father's fortunes, or
One that subsists on yours, you frown I my service
Merits not this aspect.
Which of my savours,
I might say bounties, hath begot, and nourished
This more than rude presumption? since you had
An itch to try your desperate valour, wherefore
Went you not to the war? couldst thou suppose
My innocence could ever fall so low,
As to have need of thy rash sword to guard it
Against malicious slander? O how much
Those Ladies are deceived and cheated, when
The clearness and integrity of their actions
Do not defend themselves, and stand secure
On their own bases? Such as in a colour
Of seeming service give protection to 'em,
Betray their own strengths. Malice scorned, puts out
itself, but argued, gives a kind of credit
To a false accusation. In this
This your most memorable service, you believed
You did me right, but you have wronged me more
In your defence of my undoubted honour,
Then false Fulgentio could.
I am sorry, What
Was so well intended, is so ill received,
Yet under your correction you wished
Bertoldo had been present.
True I did:
But he and you, Sir, are not parallels,
Nor must you think yourself so.
I am what
You'll please to have me.
If Bertoldo had
Punished Fugentio's insolence, it had shown
His love to her, whom in his judgement he
Vouchsafe to make his wife. A height I hope
Which you dare not aspire to. The same actions
Suit not all men alike: but I perceive
Repentance in your looks. For this time leave me
I may forgive, perhaps forget your folly,
Conceal yourself till this storm be blown over.
You will be sought for, yet for my estate
Can hinder it, shall not suffer in my service.
This is something yet, though I missed the mark I shot at.
This Gentleman is of a noble temper.
And I too harsh, perhaps in my reproof,
Was I not Clarinda?
I am not to censure
Your actions madam: but there are a thousand
Ladies, and of good fame, in such a cause.
Would be proud of such a servant.
It may be;
Let me offend in this kind. Why uncalled for?
The Signiors, madam, Gasparo and Anthonio,
(Selected friends of the renowned Bertoldo)
ashore this morning.
Without him?
I think so.
Never think more than.
They have been at Court.
Kissed the king's hand; and there first duties done
To him, appear ambitions to tender
To you their second service.
Wait 'em hither.
Fear do not rack me, reason, now if ever,
Haste with thy aid, and tell me such a wonder,
As my Bertoldo is, with such care fashioned,
Must not, nay cannot, in heavens providence,
So soon miscarry; pray you forbear, ere you
Take the privilege, as strangers to salute me,
(Excuse my manners) make me first understand,
How it is with Bertoldo?
The relation
Will not I fear deserve your thanks.
I wish
Some other should inform you.
She dead?
You see, though with some fear, I dare inquire it.
Dead! Would that were the worst, a debt were paid then,
Kings in their birth owe nature.
Is there ought
More terrible than death?
Yes to a spirit
Like his. Cruel imprisonment, and that
Without the hope of freedom.
You abuse me,
The royal King cannot in love to virtue,
(Though all springs of affection were dried up)
But pay his ransom.
When you know what 'tis
You will think otherwise; No less will do it
Then fifty thousand crowns.
A pretty sum,
The price weighed, with the purchase, 50. thousand?
To the King 'tis nothing. He that can spare more
To his minion for a mask, cannot but ransom
Such a brother at a million, you wrong
The king's magnificence.
In your opinion,
But 'tis most certain. He does not alone
In himself refuse to pay it, but forbids
All other men.
Are you sure of this?
You may read
The edict to that purpose, published by him,
That will resolve you.
Possible! pray you stand off,
I I doe not mutter treason to my selfe
My heart will break; yet I will not curse him,
He is my king. The news you have delivered,
Makes me weary of your company, we'll salute
When we meet next. I'll bring you to the door.
Nay pray you no more compliments.
One thing more
And that's substantial. Let your Adorni.
Look to himself.
The king is much incensed
Against him for Fulgentio.
As I am
For your slowness to depart
Farewell sweet Lady.
O more than impious times! when not alone
Subordinate Ministers of justice are
Corrupted, and seduced, but kings themselves,
(The greater wheels by which the lesser move)
Are broken or disjointed; could it be else
A king, to soothe his politic ends, should so far
Forsake his honour, as at once to break
Th'Adamant chains of nature and religion,
To bind up Atheism, as a defence
To his dark counsels? will it ever be
That to deserve too much is dangerous,
And virtue, when too eminent a crime?
Must she serve fortune still? or when stripped of
Her gay, and glorious favours, lose the beauties
Of her own natural shape? O my Bertoldo!
Thou only Sun in honour's Sphere, how soon
Art thou eclipsed and darkened! not the nearness
Of blood prevailing on the king; nor all
The benefits to the general good dispensed
Gaining a retribution! But that
To owe a courtesy to a simple Virgin
Would take from the deserving, I find in me
Some sparks of fire, which fanned with honour's breath
Might rise into a flame, and in men darken
Their usurped splendour. Ha! my aim is high,
And for the honour of my sex to fall so,
Can never prove inglorious. 'Tis resolved:
Call in Adorni.
I am happy in
Such employment, Madam.
he's a man,
I know that at a reverend distance loves me,
And such are ever faithful: What a Sea
Of melting ice I walk on! what strange censures
Am I to undergo! but good intents
Deride all future rumours.
I obey
Your summons, Madam.
Leave the place Clarinda,
One woman, in a secret of such weight,
Wisemen may think too much, nearer Adorni.
I warrant it with a smile.
I cannot ask
Safer protection, what's your will?
To doubt
Your ready desire to serve me, or prepare you
With the repetition of former merits,
Would in my diffidence wrong you. But I will
And without circumstance, in the trust that I
Impose upon you, free you from suspicion.
I foster none of you.
I know you do not.
You are Adorni by the love you owe me.
The surest conjuration.
Take me with you,
Love borne of duty, but advance no further,
You are Sir as I laid to do me service,
To undertake a task, in which your faith,
judgement, discretion, in a word, your all
That's good, must be engaged, nor must you study
In the execution, but what may make
For the ends I aim at.
They admit no rivals.
You answer well, you have heard of Bertoldo's
Captivity? and the king's neglect? the greatness
Of his ransom, fifty thousand crowns, Adorni,
Two parts of my estate.
To what tends this?
Yet I so love the gentleman (for to you
I will confess my weaknesses) that I purpose
Now, when he is forsaken by the king,
And his own hopes to ransom him, and receive him
Into my bosom as my lawful husband,
Why change you colour
'Tis in wonder of
Your virtue, Madam.
You must therefore to
Sienna for me, and pay to Gonzaga
This ransom for his liberty, you shall
Have bills of exchange along with you. Let him swear
A solemn contract to me, for you must be
My principal witness, if he should. But why
Do I entertain these jealousies? you will do this?
Faithfully, Madam. But not live long after
One thing I had forgot. Besides his freedom
He may want accommodations, furnish him
According to his birth. And from Camiola
Deliver this kiss, printed on your lips
Sealed on his hand! you shall not see my blushes,
I'll instantly dispatch you.
I am half
Hanged out of the way already, was there ever
Poor lover so employed against himself
To make way for his rival? I must do it,
Nay more, I will. If loyalty can find
Recompense beyond hope, or imagination
Let it fall on me in the other world,
As a reward, for in this I dare not hope it.
YOu have seized upon the Citadel, and disarmed
All that could make resistance
Hunger had
Done that before we came; nor was the soldier
Compelled to seek for prey the famished wretches,
In hope of mercy, as a sacrifice offered
All that was worth the taking.
You proclaimed,
On pain of death, no violence should be offered
To any woman.
But it needed not,
For famine had so humbled 'em and took off
The care of their sex's honour, that there was not
So coy a beauty in the town, but would
For halfe a mouldy biscuit sell herself
To a poor bezonian, and without shrieking
Where is the Duke of Urbin.
Under guard,
As you directed
See the Soldiers set.
In rank, and file, and as the Dutchess passes
Bid 'em veil their ensigns, and charge 'em on their lives
Not to cry whores.
The devil cannot fright 'em
From their military licence, though they know
They are her subjects, and will part with being,
To do her service; yet since she is a woman,
They will touch at her britch with their tongues, and that is all
That they can hope for.
O the devil! they are at it.
Hell, stop, their bawling throats; again! make up
And cudgel them into jelly.
To no purpose,
Though their mouths were there,
They would have the same name for 'em.
I Do beseech your highness not to ascribe
To the want of discipline, the barbarous rudeness
Of the soldier in his profanation of
Your sacred name, and virtues
No, Lord General,
I have heard my father say oft, 'twas a custom,
Usual in the camp, nor are they to be punished
For words, that have in fact deserved so well.
Let the one excuse the other.
Excellent Princess!
But for these aids from Sicily sent against us
To blast our spring of conquest in the bud:
I cannot find, my Lord Ambassador,
How we should entertain't but as a wrong.
With purpose to detain us from our own.
howe'er the King endeavours in his letters
To mitigate the affront.
Your grace hereafter
May hear from me such strong assurances
Of his unlimited desires to serve you,
As will, I hope, drown in forgetfulness
The memory of what's past.
we shall take time
To search the depth of't further, and proceed
As our counsel shall direct us.
we present you
With the keys of the City, all lets are removed,
Your way is smooth and easy, at your feet
Your proudest enemy falls.
we thank your valours
A victory without blood is twice achieved,
And the disposure of it to us tendered,
The greatest honour, worthy captains thanks.
My love extends itself to all
Make way there.
'tis here determined (great examples armed
With arguments produced to make it good)
That neither tyrants, nor the wrested laws;
The people's frantic rage, sad exile, want,
Nor that which I endure, captivity,
Can do a wise man any injury:
Thus Seneca, when he wrote it, thought. But then
Felicity courted him; his wealth exceeding
A private man's happy in the embraces
Of his chaste wife Paulina,; his house full
Of children, clients, servants, flattering friends
Soothing his lip-positions, and created
Prince of the Senate, by the general voice,
As his pupil news suffrage: then no doubt
H held, and did believe this But no sooner
The princes' frowns, and jealousies had thrown him
Out of security's lap, and a centurion
Had offered him what choice of death he pleased,
But told him die he must: when straight the armour
Of his so boasted fortitude, fell off
Complaining of his frailty. Can it then
Be censured womanish weakness in me, if
Thus clogged with irons, and the period
To close up all calamities, denied me,
(Which was presented Senica) I wish
I ne'er had being, at least, never knew
What happiness was, or argue with heaven's justice?
Tearing my locks, and in defiance throwing
Dust in the air? or falling on the ground, thus
With my nails, and teeth to dig a grave or rend
The bowels of the earth, my stepmother,
And not a natural parent? or thus practise
To die, and as I were insensible,
Believe I had no motion
There he is:
I'll not inquire by whom his ransom's paid
I am satisfied that I have it: nor allege
One reason to excuse his cruel usage,
As you may interpret it, let it suffice
It was my will to have it so, he is yours now,
Dispose of him as you please
howe'er I hate him,
As one preferred before me, being a man,
He does deserve my pity. Sir, he sleeps:
Or is he dead? would he were a Saint in heaven;
'Tis is all the hurt I wish him. But was not
Borne oh such happiness. No he breathes, come near,
And if 't be possible, without his feeling
Take off his irons so, now leave us private
He does begin to stir, and as transported
With a joyful dream, how he stares! and feels his legs,
As yet uncertain, whether it can be
True or fantastical.
Ministers of mercy
Mock not calamity. Ha! 'tis no vision!
Or if it be, the happiest that ever
Appeared to sinful flesh! who's here! His face
Speaks him Adorni! but some glorious Angel
Concealing its divinity in his shape,
Hath done this miracle, it being not an act
For wolvish man. Resolve me, if thou look'st for
Bent knees in adoration?
O forbear Sir,
I am Adorni, and the instrument
Of your deliverance; but the benefit
You owe another.
If he has a name,
as soon as spoken, 'tis writ on my heart,
I am his bondsman.
To the shame of men,
This great act is a woman's.
The whole sex
For her sake must be deified. How I wander
In my imagination, yet cannot
Guess who this Phoenix should be!
'Tis Camiola.
Pray you speak't again, there's music in her name
Once more I pray you Sir.
Camiola,
The Maid of honour,
Cursed Atheist that I was,
Only to doubt it could be any other,
Since she alone in the abstract of herself,
That small, but ravishing substance comprehends
whatever is, or can be wished, in the
Iudea of a woman. O what service,
Or sacrifice of duty can I pay her!
I not to live, and dye her charities slave,
Which is resolved already.
She expects not
Such a dominion o'er you: yet ere I
Deliver her demands, give me your hand:
On this, as she enjoined me, with my lips
I print her love and service by me sent you,
I am o'erwhelmed with wonder!
You must now
(Which is the sum of all that she desires)
By a solemn contract bind yourself, when she
Requires it as a debt, due for your freedom
To marry her.
This does engage me further,
A payment! an increase of obligation!
To marry her! 'twas my nil ultra ever!
The end of my ambition! O that now
The holy man, she present, were prepared
To join our hands, but with that speed, my heart
Wishes, mine eyes might see her.
You must swear this.
Swear it? Collect all oaths, and imprecations
Whose least breach is damnation, and those
Ministered to me in a form more dreadful,
Set heaven, and hell before me, I will take 'em:
False to Camiola? Never. Shall I now
Begin my vows to you?
I am no Churchman,
Such a one must file it on record, you are free,
And that you may appear like to yourself
(For so she wished) her's gold with which you may
Redeem your trunks and servants, and whatever
Of late you lost. I have found out the Captain
Whose spoil they were. His name is Roderigo.
I know him.
I have done my parts.
So much Sir
As I am ever yours for't, now methinks
I walk in air! divine Camiola,
But words cannot express thee. I'll build to thee
An altar in my soul, on which I'll offer
A still increasing sacrifice of duty.
What will become of me now is apparent!
Whether a poniard, or a halter be
The nearest way to hell (for I must thither,
After I have killed myself) is somewhat doubtful?
This Roman resolution of self-murder,
Will not hold water, at the high Tribunal,
When it comes to be argued; my good Genius
Prompts me to this consideration. He
That kills himself, to avoid misery, fears it,
And at the best shows but a bastard valour,
This life's a fort committed to my trust,
Which I must not yield up, till it be forced,
Nor will I: he's not valiant that dares die,
But he that boldly bears calamity.
A Seat here for the Duke. It is our glory
To overcome with courtesies, not rigor;
To Lordly Roman, who held it the height
Of humane happiness, to have kings and Queens
To wait by his triumphant chariot wheels
In his insulting pride, deprived himself
Of drawing near the nature of the gods,
Best known for such, in being merciful,
Yet give me leave, but still with gentle language,
And with the freedom of a friend to tell you,
To seek by force, what courtship could not win,
was not harsh, and never taught in love's mild school.
Wise Poets feign that Venus' coach is drawn
By doves, and sparrows, not by bears, and tigers.
I spare the application.
In my fortune,
Heaven's justice hath confirmed it, yet great Lady,
Since my offence grew from excess of love,
And not to be resisted, having paid too,
With the loss of liberty, the forfeiture
Of my presumption, in your clemency
It may find pardon
You shall have just cause
To say it hath. The charge of the long siege
Defrayed, and the loss my subjects have sustained
Made good, since so far I must deal with caution,
You have your liberty
I could not hope for gentler conditions.
My Lord Gonzaga.
Since my coming to Sienna, I have heard much
Of your prisoner; brave Bertoldo.
Such an one, Madam, I had.
And have still, Sir, I hope.
Your hopes deceive you. He is ransomed madam,
By whom, I pray you, Sir.
You had best inquire
Of your intelligencer. I am no informer.
I like not this.
He is, as 'tis reported,
A goodly gentleman, and of noble parts,
A brother of your order.
He was, Madam,
Till he against his oath wronged you, a princess,
Which his religion bound him from.
Great minds
For trial of their valours oft maintain
Quarrels that are unjust, yet without malice,
And such a fair construction I make of him.
I would see that brave enemy;
My duty
Commands me to seek for him.
Pray you do:
And bring him to our presence.
I must blast
His entertainment; may it please your excellency,
He is a man debauched, and for his riots
Cast off by the King my Master, and that, I hope, is
A crime sufficient
To you his subjects,
That like as your king likes
But not to us;
We must waigh with our owne scale. This is he, are!
How soon mine eye had found him! what a port
He bears! how well his bravery becomes him!
A prisoner! nay, a princely suitor rather!
But I am too sudden.
madam, 'twas his suit,
Unsent for, to present his service to you,
Ere his departure.
With what Majesty
He bears himself!
The devil I think supplies him,
Ransomed, and thus rich too!
You ill deserve
The favour of our hand; we are not well,
Give us more air.
What sudden qualm is this?
That lifted yours against me.
Thus once more,
I sue for pardon
Sure his lips are poisoned,
And through those veins, force passage to my heart
Which is already seized upon.
I wait, Madam,
To know what your commands are; my designs
Exact me in another place.
Before
You have our licence to depart; if manners,
Civility of manners cannot teach you
T'attend our leisure, I must tell you, Sir,
That you are still our prisoner, nor had you
Commission to free him.
How's this, Madam?
You were my substitute, and wanted power
Without my warrant to dispose of him.
I will pay back his ransom ten times over,
Rather than quit my interest.
This is
Against the law of arms.
But not of love:
Why, hath your entertainment, Sir, been such
In your restraint, that with the wings of fear
You would fly from it?
I know no man, madam,
Enamoured of his fetters, or delighting
In cold or hunger, or that would in reason
Prefer straw in a dungeon, before
A down bed in a Palace.
How, come nearer;
Was his usage such?
Yes, and it had been worse,
Had I foreseen this.
O thou mis-shaped monster!
In thee it is confirmed, that such as have
No share in nature's bounties, know no pity
To such as have 'em Look on him with my eyes,
And answer then, whether this were a man,
Whose cheeks of lovely fullness should be made
A prey to meager famine? or these eyes
Whose every glance store Cupid's emptied quiver,
To be dimmed with tedious watching? or these lips,
These ruddy lips, of whose fresh colour, cherries
And roses were but copies, should grow pale
For want of Nectar? or these legs that bear
A burden of more worth, then is supported
By Atlas wearied shoulders, should be cramped
With the weight of iron? O I could dwell ever
On this description!
Is this in derision
Or pity of me?
In your charity
Believe me innocent. Now you are my prisoner
You shall have fairer quarter, you will shame
The place where you have been, should you now leave it
Before you are recovered. I'll conduct you
To more convenient lodgings, and it shall be
My care to cherish you. Repine who dare;
It is our will. You'll follow me?
To the centre,
Such a Sibylla guiding me.
Who speaks first?
We stand, as we had seen Medusa's head!
I know not what to think, I am so amazed!
Amazed! I am thunderstruck!
we are enchanted,
And this is some illusion.
Heaven forbid!
In dark despair, it shows a beam of hope.
Contain thy joy, Adorni.
Such a Princess,
And of so long experienced reservedness
Break forth, and on the sudden, into flashes
Of more than doubted looseness.
They come again,
Smiling, as I live: His arm circling her waist:
I shall run mad: Some fury hath possessed her.
If I speake, I may be blasted. H, I'll ubl
A prayer or two, and cross myself, and then
Though the devil fart fire, have at him.
Let not, Sir,
The violence of my passions nourish in you
An ill opinion; or grant my carriage
Out of the road, and garb of private women,
'Tis still done with decorum. As I am
A Princess, what I do, is above censure,
And to be imitated.
Gracious Madam,
Vouchsafe a little pause, for I am so rapt
Beyond myself, that till I have collected
My scattered faculties, I cannot tender
My resolution.
Consider of it,
I will not be long from you,
Pray I cannot!
This cursed object strangles my devotion!
I must speak, or I burst. Pray you fair Lady,
If you can in courtesy, direct me to
The chaste Aurelia.
Are you blind? who are we?
Another kind of thing. Her blood was governed
By her discretion, and not ruled her reason
The reverence and Majesty of Juno
Shined in her looks, and coming to the camp,
Appeared a second Pallas. I can see
No such divinities in you. If I
Without offence may speak my thoughts, you are,
As it were, a wanton Helen.
Good, ere long
You shall know me better.
Why, if you are Aurelia's
How shall I dispose of the Soldier?
May it please you
To hasten my dispatch?
Prefer your suits
Unto Bertoldo, we will give him hearing,
And you'll find him your best advocate.
This is rare!
What are we come to?
Grown up in a moment
A favourite!
He does take state already.
No, no, it cannot be, yet but Camiola,
There is no stop between me and a crown,
Than my ingratitude! a sin in which
All sins are comprehended! Aid me virtue,
Or I am lost.
May it please your excellence
Second me, Sir.
Then my so horrid oaths,
And hell. deep imprecations made against it.
The king your brother will thank you for th'advancement
Of his affairs
And yet who can hold out
Against such batteries, as her power and greatness
Raise up against my weak defences!
Sir,
Do you dream waking, Slight, she's here again.
Walks she on woollen feet!
You dwell too long
In your deliberation, and come
With a cripple's pace to that which you should fly to
It is confessed, yet why should I to win
From you, that hazard all to my poor nothing,
By false play send you off a looser from me?
I'm already too too much engaged
To the king my brother's anger; and who knows
But that his doubts, and politic fears, should you
Make me his equal, may draw war upon
Your territories, were that breach made up
I should with joy embrace, what now I fear
To touch but with due reverence.
That hindrance
Is easily removed. I owe the king
For a royal visit which I straight will pay him,
And having first reconciled you to his favour,
A dispensation shall meet with us,
I am wholly yours.
On this book seal it.
What hand and lip too, than the bargain's sure,
You have no employment for me?
Yes Gonzaga,
Provide a royal ship.
A ship? Saint Iohn,
Whither are we bound now?
You shall know hereafter,
My lord your pardon, for my too much trenching upon your patience.
Camiola.
How do you
Indisposed, but I attend you.
The heavy curse that waits on perjury,
And foul ingratitude, pursue thee ever.
Yet why from me this? In this breach of faith
My loyalty finds reward! what poisons him
Proves Mithridate to me! I have performed
All she commanded punctually, and now
In the clear mirror of my truth, she may
Behold his falsehood. O that I had wings
To bear me to Palermo! This once known,
Must change her love into a just disdain,
And work her to compassion of my pain.
Undone! undone! poor I that whilom was
The top and ridge of my house, am on the sudden
Turned to the pitifullest animal
Of the lineage of the Syllies!
What's the matter?
The king! break girdle, break!
Why? what of him?
Hearing how far you doted on my person,
Growing envious of my happiness, and knowing
His brother, nor his favourite Fulgentio,
Could get a sheep's eye from you, I being present,
Is come himself a suitor, with the awl
Of his authority to bore my nose,
And take you from me, Oh, oh, oh.
Do not roar so;
The king!
The king! yet loving Sylli is not
So sorry for his own, as your misfortune,
If the king should carry you, or you bear him,
What a looser should you be? He can but make you
A queen, and what a simple thing is that
To the being my lawful spouse. The world can never
Afford you such a husband.
I believe you,
But how are you sure the king is so inclined?
Did not you dream this?
With these eyes I saw him
Dismiss his train, and lightning from his coach,
Whispering Fulgentio in the ear.
If so
I guess the business
It can be no other
But to give me the bob, that being a matter
Of main importance, yonder they are, I dare not
Be seen, I am so desperate, if you forsake me,
Send me word that I may provide a willow garland
To wear when I drown myself. O Sylli, o Sylli!
It will be worth your pains Sir to observe
The constancy and bravery of her spirit,
Though great men tremble at your frowns, I dare
Hazard my head, your majesty set off
With terror, cannot fright her.
May she answer
My expectation.
There she is.
My knees thus
Bent to the earth (while my vows are sent upward
For the safety of my Sovereign) pay the duty
Due for so great an honour, in this favour
Done to your humblest handmaid.
You mistake me,
I come not (Lady) that you may report,
The king to do you honour, made your house
(He being there) his court, but to correct
Your stubborn disobedience. A pardon
For that, could you obtain it, were well purchased
With this humility.
A pardon Sir?
Till I am conscious of an offence.
I will not wrong my innocence to beg one,
What is my crime Sir?
Look on him I favour,
By you scorned and neglected.
Is that all Sr.
No minion, though that were too much. How can you
Answer the setting on your desperate bravo
To murder him?
With your leave, I must not kneel Sir.
While I reply to this: But thus rise up
In my defence, and tell you as a man
(since when you are unjust, the deity
Which you may challenge as a King, parts from you
'Twas never read in holy writ, or moral,
That subjects on their loyalty were obliged
To love their sovereign's vices, your grace, Sir,
To such an undeserver is no virtue.
What think you now Sir?
Say you should love wine,
You being the King, and cause I am your subject,
Must I beever drunk? Tyrants, not Kings
By violence, from humble vassals force
The liberty of their souls. I could not love him
And to compel affection, as I take it,
Is not found in your prerogative.
Excellent virgin!
How I admire her confidence
He complains
Of wrong done him: but he no more a King,
Unless you do me right. Burn your decrees,
And of your laws and statutes make a fire
To thwee froz nuee of deliquent,
If he escape unpunished. Do your edicts
Call it death in any man that breaks into
Another's house to rob him, though of trifles
And shall Fulgentio your Fulgentio live?
Who hath committed more than sacrilege
In the pollution of my clear fame
By his malicious slanders
Have you done this?
Answer truly on your life.
In the heat of blood
Some such thing I reported.
Out of my sight,
For I vow, if by true penitence thou win
This injured Lady to sue out thy pardon,
Thy grave is digged already.
By my own folly
I have made a fair hand of't,
You shall know Lady
While I wear a crown, justice shall use her sword
To cut offenders of, though neerest to s.
ay, now you show whose Deputy you are,
I now I bathe your feet with tears, it cannot
Be censured superstition.
You must rise.
Rise in our favour, and protection ever:
Happy are subjects when the prince is still
Guided by justice, not his passionate will.
YOu see how tender I am of the quiet
And peace of your affection, and what great ones
I put off in your
You do wisely.
Exceeding wisely! and when I have said,
I thank you for't, be happy.
And good reason,
In having such a blessing.
When you have it,
Bat the bait is not yet ready. Stay the time,
While I triumph by myself, King, by your leave,
I have wiped your royal nose, without a napkin,
You may cry willow, willow, for your brother,
I'll only say go by; for my fine favourite,
He may gra, where b , is may wate
Like a puppy's over a frumenty pot, while Sylli
Out of his two-leaved cherry-stone dish drinks Nectar
I cannot hold out any longer; heaven forgive me,
'Tis not the first oath, I have broke, I must take
A little for a preparative.
By no means.
If you forswear yourself we shall not prosper.
I'll rather lose my longing.
Pretty soul!
How crull it is of e! let m bsse yet
Thy little dainty foot for't: that I am sure
Is out of my oath.
Why, if thou canst dispense with't
So fair, I'll not be scrupulous; such a favour
My amorous shoomakr steles
O most rare leather!
I do begin at the lowest, but in time
I may grow higher.
Fie, you dwell too long there!
Rise, prithee rise
O I am up already.
How I abuse my hours! what news with thee now?
Off with that gown, 'tis mine, mine by your promise
Signior Ador. is returned! now upon entrance;
Off with it, off with it, Madam.
Be not so hasty,
When I go to bed 'tis thine.
You have my grant too;
But do you hear Lady, though I give way to this,
You must hereafter ask my leave before
You part with things of moment.
Very good,
When I am yours, I will be governed.
Sweet obedience!
You are well returned.
I wish that the success
Of my service had deserved it.
Lives Bertoldo?
Yes, and returned with safety.
'Tis not then
In the power of fate to add to, or take from
My perfect happiness: and yet he should
Have made me his first visit. Ador. So I think too
But he
dar'st not appear, I being present,
That's his excuse, I warrant you.
Speak, where is he?
With whom? who hath derv'd moe from him? o
Can be of equal merit? I in this
Do not except the King.
he's at the Palace
With the Duchess of Sienna. One coach brought 'em hither.
Without a third. he's very gracious with her,
You may conceive the rest.
My jealous fears
Make me to apprehend.
Pray you dismiss
Signior wisdom, and i'll make relation to you
Of the particulars.
Servant, I would have you
To haste unto the Court.
I will outrun
A footman for your pleasure.
There observe
The Duchess train and entertainment.
Fear not,
I will discover all that is of weight
To the liveries of her Pages, and her footmen.
This is fit employment for me.
Gracious with
The Duchess! sure you said so?
I will use
All possible brevity to inform you, Madam,
Of what was trusted to me, and discharged
With faith and loyal duty.
I believe it
You ransomed him, and supplied his wants imagine
That is already spoken; and-what vows
Of service he made to me is apparent;
His joy of me, and wonder too perspicuous;
Does not your story end so?
Would the end
Had answered the beginning, in a word,
Ingratitude, and perjury at the height
Cannot express him.
Take heed.
Truth is armed
And can defend itself. It must out, Madam.
I saw, the presence full, the amorous Duchess
Kiss and embrace him, on his part accepted
With equal ardour, and their willing hands
No sooner joined, but a remove was published,
And put in execution.
The proofs are
Too pregnant. O Bertoldo!
he's not worth
Your sorrow, Madam.
Tell me, when you saw this
Did not you grieve as I do now to hear it?
His precipice from goodness raising mine,
And serving as a foil to set my faith off,
I had little reason.
In this you confess
The devilish malice of your disposition.
As you were a man, you stood bound to lament it,
And not in flattery of false your hopes
To glory in it: when good men pursue
The path marked out by virtue, the blessed Saints
With joy look on it, and Seraphic Angels
Clap their celestial wings in heavenly plaudits,
To be a scene of grace so well presented,
The fiends and men made up of envy mourning;
Where as now on the contrary as far
As their divinity can partake of passion,
With me they weep, beholding a fair Temple
Built in Bertoldo's loyalty turned to ashes
By the flames of his inconstancy, the damned
Rejoicing in the object: 'Tis not well
In you Adorni.
What a temper dwells
In this rare Virgin, can you pity him
That hath shown none to you?
I must not be
Cruel by his example, you perhaps,
Except now I should seek recovery
Of what I have lost by tears, and with bent knees
Beg his compassion. No; my towering virtue
From the assurance of my merit scorns
To stoop so low. I'll take a nobler course,
And confident in the justice of my cause,
The King his brother, and new Mistress, judges,
Ravish him from her arms, you have the contract
In which he swore to marry her?
'Tis here Madam.
He shall be then against his will my husband,
And when I have him, I'll so use him, doubt not,
But that your honesty being unquestioned,
This writing with your testimony clears all.
And buries me in the dark mists of error.
I'll presently to Court, pray you give order
For my caroche.
A cart for me were fitter
To hurry me to the gallows
O false men!
Inconstant! perjured! my good Angel help me
In these my extremities!
If you ever will see brave sight,
Lose it not now. Bertoldo, and the Duchess
Are presently to be married. There's such pomp
And preparation.
If I marry, 'tis
This day or never.
Why with all my heart,
Though I break this, I'll keep the next oath I make
And then it is quit.
Follow me to my Cabinet,
You know my confessor, Father Paulo?
Yes. Shall he
Do the feat for us?
I will give in writing
Directions to him, and attire myself
Like a Virgin-bride, and something I will do
That shall deserve men's praise, and wonder too.
And I to make all know, I am not shallow
Will have my points of Cochineal and yellow.
HAd our division been greater, Madam,
Your clemency, the wrong being done to you
In pardon of it, like the rod of concord
Must make a perfect union, once more
With a brotherly affection we receive you
Into our favour. Let it be your study
Hereafter to deserve this blessing, far
Beyond your merit.
As the Princess grace
To me is without limit, my endeavours
With all obsequiousness to serve her pleasures
Shall know no bounds, nor will I being made
Her husband, forget the duty that
I owe her as a servant.
I expect not
But fair equality, since I well know
If that superiority be due
'Tis not to me, When you are made my consort
All the prerogatives of my high birth canceled
I'll practise the obedience of a wis,
And freely pay it. queens themselves, if they
Make choice of their inferiors, only aiming
To feed their sensual appetites, and to reign
Over their husbands, in some kind commit
Authorized whoredom, nor will I be guilty
In my intent of such a crime.
This done,
As it is promised, Madam, may well stand for
A precedent to great women: but when once
The griping hunger of desire is cloyed,
(And the poore foole advanc'd, brought on his kn
Most of your Eagle breed, I'll not say all
(Ever excepting you) challenge again,
What in hot blood they parted from.
You are ever.
An enemy of our sex, but you I hope Sir
Have better thoughts.
I dare not entertain
An ill one of your goodness.
To my power
I will enable him to prevent all danger
Envy can raise against your choice. One word more
Touching the Articles.
In you alone
Lie all my hopes, you can or kill or save me,
But pity in you, will become you better,
(Though I confess in justice 'tis denied me)
Then too much rigor.
I will make your peace
As far as it lies in me, but must first
Labour to right myself.
Or add or alter
What you think fit. In him I have my all,
Heaven make me thankful for him.
On to the Temple
Stay royal Sir, and as you are a King
Erect one here, in doing justice to
An injured maid.
How's this?
O I am blasted!
I have given some proof, sweet Lady, of my promptness
To do you right, you need not therefore doubt me,
And rest assured, that this great work dispatched,
You shall have audience and satisfaction
To all you can demand.
To do me justice
Exacts your present care, and can admit
Of no delay. If e'er my cause be heard
In favour of your brother, you go on Sir,
Your sceptre cannot right me. he's the man,
The guilty man, whom I accuse, and you
Stand bound in duty, as you are Supreme,
To be impartial. Since you are a judge,
As a Delinquent, look on him, and not
As on a brother; justice painted blind
Infers, her Ministers are obliged to hear
The cause and truth, the Judge determine of it,
And not swayed, or by favour, or affection,
By a false gloss, or wrested comment alter
The true intent, and letter of the law.
Nor will I Madam,
You seem troubled, Sir,
His colour changes too.
The alteration
Grows from his guilt. The goodness of my cause
Begets such confidence in me, that I bring
No hired tongue to plead for me, that with gay
Rhetorical flourishes may palliate
That, which stripped naked, will appear deformed.
I stand here, mine own advocate; and my truth
Delivered in the plainest language, will
Make good itself, nor will I, if the King
Give suffrage to it, but admit of you,
My greatest enemy, and this stranger Prince,
To sit assistants with him.
I ne'er wronged you.
In your knowledge of the injury, I believe it,
Nor will you in your justice, when you are
Acquainted with my interest in this man
Which I lay claim to.
Let us take our seats,
What is your title to him?
By this contract
Sealed solemnly before a reverend man,
I challenge him for my husband.
Ha. was I
Sent for the Friar, for this? O Sylli! Sylli!
Some cordial, or I faint.
This writing is
Authentical.
But done in heat of blood,
(Charmed by her flatteries, as no doubt he was)
To be dispensed with.
Add this, if you please,
The distance and disparity between
Their births and fortunes.
What can innocence hope for
When such as sit her judges, are corrupted!
Disparity of birth, or fortune urge you?
Or Siren charms? or at his best in me,
Wants to deserve him? Call some few days back,
And as he was, consider him, and you
Must grant him my inferior. Imagine
You saw him now in fetters with his honour,
His liberty lost; with her black wings despair
Circling his miseries, and his Gonzaga.
Trampling on his afflictions; the great sum
Proposed for his redemption; the King
Forbidding payment of it; this near kinsmen,
With his protesting followers, and friends,
Falling off from him; by the whole world forsaken;
Dead to all hope, and buried in the grave
Of his calamities, and then weigh duly
What she deserved (whose merits now are doubted)
That as his better Angel in her bounties
Appeared unto him, his great ransom paid,
His wants, and with a prodigal hand supplied,
Whether then being my manumised slave,
He owed not himself to me?
Is this true?
In his silence 'tis acknowledged
If you want
A witness to this purpose, I'll depose it:
If I have dwelled too long on my deservings
To this unthankful man, pray you pardon me,
The cause required it. And though now I add
A little in my painting to the life
His barbarous ingratitude, to deter,
Others from imitation, let it meet with
A fair interpretation. This serpent,
Frozen to numbness, was no sooner warmed
In the bosom of my pity, and compassion,
But in return, he ruined his preserver
The prints the irons had made in his flesh
Still ulcerous; but all that I had done
(My benefits in sand, or water written)
As they had never been, no more remembered.
And on what ground; but his ambitious hopes
To gain this Duchess favour,
Yes, the object,
Look on it better (Lady) may excuse
The charge of his affection.
The object
In what? forgive me, modesty, if I say
You look upon your form in the false glass
Of flattery, and self love, and that deceives you,
That you were a Duchess, as I take it, was not
Charactered on your face, and that not seen,
For other feature, make all these that are
Experienced in women, judges of 'em,
And if they are not Parasites, they must grant
For beauty without art, though you storm at it,
I may take the right hand file.
Well said i'faith;
I see fair women on no terms will yield
Priority in beauty.
Down proud heart!
Why do I rise up in defence of that,
Which, in my cherishing of it hath undone me.
No Madam, I recant, you are all beauty,
Goodness, and virtue, and poor I not worthy
As a soil to set you off; enjoy your conquest
But do not tyrannize. Yet as I am
In my lowness from your height, you may look on me,
And in your suffrage to me, make him know
That though to all men else I did appear
The shame and scorn of women, he stands bound
To hold me as her masterpiece.
By my life
You have shown yourself of such an abject temper,
So poor, and low conditioned, as I grieve for
Your nearness to me.
I am changed in my
Opinion of you Lady, and profess
The virtues of your mind, an ample fortune
For an absolute Monarch.
Since you are resolved
To damn yourself, in your forsaking of
Your noble order for a woman, do it
For this. You may search through the world, and meet not
With such another Phoenix.
On the sudden
I feel all fires of love quenched in the water
Of compassion, make your peace; you have
My free consent; for here I do disclaim
All interest in you: and to further your
Desires, fair Maid, composed of worth and honour,
The dispensation procured by me,
Freeing Bertoldo from his vow, makes way
To your embraces.
Oh, how have I strayed,
And wilfully, out of the noble tract
Marked me by virtue! Till now, I was never
Truly a prisoner; to excuse my late
Captivity, I might allege the malice
Of fortune; you that conquered me confessing
Courage in my defence was no way wanting
But now I have surrendered up my strengths
Into the power of vice, and on my forehead
Branded with mine own hand in capital letters
Disloyal, and Ingrateful, though barred from
Humane society, and hissed into
Some desert ne'er yet haunted with the curses
Of men and women, sitting as a judge
Upon my guilty self, I must confess
It justly falls upon me, and one tear
Shed in compassion of my sufferings more.
Then I can hope for.
This compunction
For the wrong that you have done me, though you should
Fix here, and your true sorrow move no further,
Will in respect I loved once, make these eyes
Two springs of sorrow for you.
In your pity
My cruelty shows more monstrous, yet I am not,
Though most ingrateful, grown to such a height
Of impudence, as in my wishes only
To ask your pardon. If as now I fall
Prostrate before your feet, you will vouchsafe
To act your own revenge, treading upon me
As a viper eating through the bowels of
Your benefits, to whom with liberty
I owe my being, 'twill take from the burden
That now is insupportable.
Pray you rise,
As I wish peace, and quiet to my soul
I do forgive you heartily, yet excuse me:
Though I deny myself a blessing that
By the favour of the Duchess seconded,
With your submission is offered to me
Let not the reason I allege for't grieve you,
You have been false once. I have done. And if
When I am married (as this day I will be)
As a perfect sign of your atonement with me
You wish me joy, I will receive it for
Full satisfaction of all obligations
In which you stand bound to me.
I will do it,
And what's more, in despite of sorrow, live
To see myself undone, beyond all hope
To be made up again.
My blood begins
To come to my heart again.
Pray you Signior Syl.
Call in the holy Friar. he's prepared
For finishing the work.
I knew I was
The man. Heaven make me thankful
Who is this?
His Father was the banker of Palermo,
And this the heir of his great wealth, his wisdom
Was not hereditary.
Though you know me not,
Your Majesty owes me a round Sum, I have
A seal, or two to witness, yet if you please
To wear my colours, and dance at my wedding
I'll never sue you.
And I'll grant your suit,
Gracious Madonna, Noble, General,
Brave Captains and my quondam rivals wear 'em
Since I am confident you dare not harbour
A thought, but that way currant.
For my part
I cannot guess the issue.
Do your duty,
And with all speed you can, you may dispatch us.
Thus as a principal ornament to the Church
I seize her.
How.
So young and so religious.
She has forsook the world.
And Syllie too,
I shall run mad.
Hence with the fool, proceed Sir
Look on this maid of honour now
Truly honoured in her vow
She pays to heaven, vain delight
By day, or pleasure of, the night,
She no more thinks of this fair hair
(Favours for great kings to wear)
mun now be shorn. Her rich array
Changed into a homely grey.
The dainties with which she was fed
And her proud flesh pampered,
Must not be tasted, from the spring,
For wine cold water we will bring
And with fasting mortify
The feasts of sensuality.
Her jewels, beads, and she must look
Not in a glass, but holy book;
To teach her the ne'er erring way
To immortality. O may
She as she purposes to be
A Child new borne to piety,
Persever in in it, and good men
With Saints and Angels say Amen
This is the marriage! this the port! to which
My vows must steer me, fill my spreading sails
With the pure wind of your devotions for me,
That I may touch the secure haven, where
Eternall happinesse keepes her reside ne,
Temptations to frailty never entering.
I am dead to the world, and thus dispose
Of what I leave behind me, and dividing
My state into three parts, I thus bequeath it.
The first to the fair Nunnery, to which
I dedicate the last, and better part
Of my frail life; a second portion
To pious uses; and the third to thee
Adorni, for thy true and faithful service.
And ere I mistake last farewell with hope
To find a grant, may suit to you is that
You would for my sake pardon this young man
And to his merits love him, and no further.
I thus confirm it.
And as ere you hope
Like me to be made happy, I conjure you
To reassume your order; and in fighting
Bravely against the enemies of our faith
Redeem your mortgaged honour.
I restore this
Once more brothers in arms,
I'll live and die so.
To you my pious wishes. And to end
All differences, great Sir I beseech you
To be an arbitrator, and compound
The quarrel, long continuing between
The Duke and Duchess.
I'll take it into
My special care.
I am then at rest, now father
Conduct me where you please.
She well deserves
Her name, the Maid of Honour! May she stand
To all posterity, a fair example,
For noble Maids to imitate. Since to live
In wealth and pleasure is common; but to part with
Such poisoned baits is rare, there being nothing
Upon this Stage of life to be commended,
Though well begun, till it be fully ended.