I Know that this worshipful Audience,
Is at this time together congregate:
Of our practice to have intelligence,
And with the same themselves to recreate.
God grant us grace the same well to publicate.
But for them that have slept at Parnassus:
This faculty is more meet for them then for us
Pandite pierides vestro sacra ostia vita.
Open your holy doors O pleasant Muses,
Direct our tongues to speak eloquently:
Virtues to praise and to touch abuses,
dividing either of them plain and directly.
That it may appear to all our Audience evidently.
That this matter which we now go about:
By your inspiration was first found out.
O that with some grace you would us inspire,
And deal with us as with Orpheus you dealt:
Then should all affections have their desire,
For through his Music he made stones to melt,
No kind of pain in Hell then the souls felt.
For he played so pleasantly with his Harp:
That they forgot their pains grievous and sharp.
Tantalus forgot his hunger and thirst,
Sisyphus loft of rolling his Stone:
Ixion tormented among the worst,
Forgot his whéel that he was hanged on.
The woman Belides left work anon:
Whose labour was continually to fill a Tun:
Whereout by clefts the liquor still doth run.
These fables wherefore do I call to mind?
Truly because I desire with all my heart:
That our English Méeter may be of such kind,
Both to leave all grievousness and smart.
And also to be pleasant in every part.
That those which come for recreation:
May not be voided of their expectation.
Poets feigned Mercurius to have wings,
both on his head and on his heels also:
For lively and swift he was in all things,
appearing rather to flee then to go:
Of him they fain many goodly things more.
But for our purpose this shall serve this season:
and why I speak, you shall know the reason.
Mercurius is the God of eloquence,
By whom I understand the ministers of talk:
Such must have the wings of intelligence,
In their heads before their tongues to far do walk.
The danger of rash speech they must wisely calk.
When, where, and to whom they speak they must note:
Before that any thing pass out of their throat.
As Mercurius hath wings upon his head,
So hath he wings on his heels ready to fly:
When affections standeth in reason's stead,
Reporters of tales use eft 'zounds to lie,
The heels affections do also signify.
The wings do always reason comprehend:
Which unto Virtue aught to condescend.
Few words to wise men are sufficient,
Without a cause I give not this monition:
Unto good men it is plain and evidient,
That many men have that lewd condition.
By their evil words to bring good men into suspicion.
By their undiscrete talk they do much harm:
Because they want reason their tongues to charm.
Let this pass and go we to the Argument,
Which we will declare in words general:
Now such as have a learned judgement,
Know that among the Poets comical,
In brief sentence it was usual.
To show the whole contents of the Comedy:
In the argument which did well verily.
But our tongues hath not so comely a grace,
In that point, as hath the Latin and Greek:
We cannot like them our sentences eloquently place,
That our Poets to their Orators may be like
As they know well which for such matters do seek.
But to do our best, indeed we will not neglect:
Trusting that wise men the same will accept.
Our title is Enough is as good as a feast,
Which Rethorically we shall amplify:
So that it shall appear both to most and lest
That our meaning is but honesty,
Yet now and then we will dally merrily.
So we shall please them that of mirth be desirous:
For we play not to please them that be curious.
For a Preface I fear I am to long
But I have said that I will say now:
The Worldly man is frolic lusty and strong,
Who will show his qualities before you,
Stout he is and in any wise will not bow.
Behold yonder he cometh into this place:
Therefore thus I finish our simple Preface.
BEcause I am a man endued with treasure,
Therefore a worldly man men do me call:
In deed I have riches and money at my pleasure,
Yea, and I will have more in spite of them all.
A common saying better is envy then ruth,
I had rather they should spite then pity me:
For the old saying now a days proveth truth,
nought have nought set by as daily we see.
I wis I am not of the mind as some men are,
Which look for no more than will serve necessity:
Not against a day to come I do prepare,
That when age cometh I may live merrily.
O saith one enough is as good as a feast,
Yea, but who can tell what his end shallbe?
Therefore I count him worse than a Beast,
That will not have that in respect and see.
As by mine own Father an example I may take,
He was beloved of all men and kept a good house:
Whilst riches lasted, but when that did slake,
There was no man that did set by him a Louse.
And so at such time as as he from the world went,
I mean when he died he was not worth a groat:
And they that all his substance had spent,
For the value of xii. pence would have cut his throat.
But I trow I will take heed of such,
They shall go ere they drink when they come to me:
It doth me good to tell the chinks in my hutch,
Moore than at the Tavern or ale house to be
God careth for his as the Prophet David doth say,
And preserveth them under his merciful wing:
The Heavenly I mean, that his will do obey,
and observe his holy commandments in all thing.
Yet not for our sakes, nor for our deserving.
But for his own name sake openly to declare:
that all men here on Earth aught to live in his fear.
This same is one of our jolly talkers,
That prattleth so much of Heaven and Hell:
O, I tell you these are godly walkers,
Of many strange things they can tell.
They pass men yea Angels they excel,
Sir, are you not called the Heavenly man?
I have been in your company ere now but I cannot tell when
Yes certainly Sir, that is my name,
Unworthy of any such title I do confess:
God grant that I may deserve the same,
And that my faults I may amend and redress.
Therefore now the truth do you here express,
Is not the Worldly man your name?
Yea in deed Sir, I am the very same.
From the Heavenly man I cannot be long absent,
Which in God's promises hath his consolation:
Considering that he always is content,
Patiently to suffer God's visitation.
For understand you? my name is Contentation.
Whom the worldly man doth mock and deride:
And will not suffer him once in his mind to abide.
This same is the Grandsire of them all,
This is he that will through water and fire:
Good reasoning betwixt us now hear you shall,
For to follow him he will me earnestly require,
But he shallbe hanged or he have his desire.
You are welcome Sir, saving my quarrel in deed:
You have reported of me much more than you need.
Nothing but truth Sir, certainly I have said,
Often times I have counseled you your covetousness to leave
But my words as feathers in the wind you have weighed,
And stuck to them as Glue to the water doth cleave.
But take heed the reward thereof you shall receive.
Once again I advertise thee to be content:
And give thanks to God for that he hath thee sent.
I pray you be you content for I am pleased,
And meddle you no more with me than I do with you:
To be angry without a cause, without mends must be eased
We willbe more earnest than ever we were now.
woe (saith our Saviour) to those that are rich,
Which therein only have their consolation:
He curseth them not be cause they have much,
but because they receive it not with contentation.
Building therewith to themselves a good foundation,
That is to lay here on Earth treasure great store:
to purchase a kingdom that lasteth ever more.
Passion of me masters, what would you have me to do?
You are fond fellows indeed as ever I knew:
If I should not take pains, ride, run and go
For my living, what thereof would ensue?
A beggar should I die, masters this is true,
Then my wife and children that I leave behind:
I fear me at your hands, small relief should find.
I have been young (saith David) and now am old,
Yet the righteous forsaken I never did see:
Nor their seed begging Bread I did not behold,
Therefore your mind to the Prophets doth not agree,
Cast all thy burden and care (saith Christ) on me.
And I will provide to keep thee from danger and strife:
Only seek thou to live a godly and good life.
When Solon was asked of Croesus' the King,
What man was most happy in this vale terestrial:
To the end he seemed to attribute that thing,
When men be assosiate with treasures selestiall.
By the beginning no man can judge the same Solon doth say,
That any man is happy that beareth breath:
But yet by the end partly judge we may,
For true happiness (saith he) consisteth after death.
If this be true as undoubtedly it is,
What men are more wicked, wretched and miserable:
Then those that in riches accounted their bliss,
Being infected with Ambition that sickness uncurable.
The treasure of this world we may well compare,
To Circe's the Witch with her crafty cawtilitie:
Wherewith many men's minds so poisoned are,
That quite they are carried to all infidelity,
They are conjured so in deed and bewitched so sore,
That treasure is their trust, yea, hope and delight:
Enough serveth them not till that they have more,
So against Contentation they still strive and fight.
Though the Worldly man do follow their lust,
Crying on Earth is our felicity and pleasure:
Yet God doth so rule the hearts of the Just,
That their study is, chiefly to get Heavenly treasure.
Friends I take you both for honest men,
I promise' you I would be glad to do for the best:
Marry than I take care which way and when,
I may get treasure therewith to live in rest.
O, me thinks it is a very pleasant thing,
To see a great heap of old Angels and Crowns:
When I have store of money I can be merry and sing,
For money as men say winneth both Cities and towns.
Alas why should you not have that in estimation,
Which God hath prepared for his dear elect:
Should not our minds rest in full contentation,
Having trust in that treasure most high in respect,
Saint Paul whom the Lord so high doth erect.
Says, it passeth the sense, our memories and mind:
Much less can our outward eyes the same find.
As for the treasure that you possess here,
Through fickleness of Fortune soon fadeth away:
The greatest of renown and most worthy Peer,
Sometime in the end falleth to misery and decay.
Record of Dionysius a King of much fame,
Of the valiant Alexander, and Caesar the strong:
Record of Tarquinus which Superbus had to name:
And of Heliogabalus that ministered with wrong,
To recite them all it would be very long.
But these be sufficient plainly to prove:
How soon and uncertainly riches doth remove.
It is true, and therefore a mind well content,
Is great riches as wise king Solomon doth say:
For we have seen of late days this canker pestilent
Corrupting our Realm to our utter decay.
Ambition I mean which chiefly doth reign,
Among those who should have been example to other:
Yea we see how the brethren they did disdain,
And burned with fire, the Child with the mother.
It is often seen that such monstrous Ambition,
As spareth not to spill the blood of the innocent:
Will not greatly stick to fall to sedition,
The determinations of God thereby to prevent,
But God I trust shall disappoint their intent.
And overthrow the power of fading treasure:
And 'cause us all to wish for the heavenly pleasure.
O you ancient men whom God hath furnished with fame,
Be ye always mindful to walk in the ways of the Just,
And ad ever more virtue to your honest name,
And at no hand be over come with covetous or lust,
But in God's holy promise put confidence and trust.
And then double felicity at the last we shall possess:
And then in all Earthly doings God shall give good success
You poor men and commons walk in your vocation,
Banish fond fantasies which are not convenient:
Settle your minds with enough to have contentation,
Considering that that leadeth to treasures most excellent,
For these are uncertain, but they are most permanent.
Your necessity apply with treasure, faith and trust:
And you shall have enough always among the Just.
And indeed enough is as good as a feast,
Good Lord how your words have altered my mind:
A new heart me thinks is entered in my breast,
For no thought of mine old in me I can find.
I would to God you would take me in your company,
And learn me how I may be an heavenly man:
For now I perceive this world is but vanity,
Let a man therefore make of it as much as he can.
Do you speak as you think? and as you mind do you say?
Can you be content to lead the rules of a godly life?
I do mean it truly and I will study them night and day,
For I regard neither treasure, Children nor wife.
Give me your hand then together let us depart:
And I will wait on you sir, with all my heart.
When Covetous is busy,
Then we three be all merry,
for he doth trimly invent:
To make us fine frolic cheer
Be victuals never so dear,
and all our money clean spent
Therefore we spare for no cost
We can be trusted of our host
For shillings xx. and one:
Covetous hath a good wit,
He findeth a mean to pay it,
when all our money is gone.
Therefore trole the bowl to me,
With huf child & have to thee,
the longest liver pay all:
Our trust is in Covetise,
For he is prudent and wise,
therefore money cannot fall.
O Covetous prudent Prince,
All strong walls thou dost convince
and rulest them every one:
Thou dost drive many a drift,
And makest for us much shift,
when all our money is gone.
AT Black heath field where great Golias was slain,
The Moon lying in child bed of her last Son:
The Tyburn at warwick was then King of Spain,
By whom the land of Canaan then was won.
It happened between Peterborow and Pentecost,
About such time as ivy was made of Wormwood:
That Child's work in Basil wood with fire was lost,
And all through the treason of false Robin Hood.
That saw Sir Guy of Warwick, and Colebrand,
Which fought against the Sun and stopped his light:
Yea (quoth Hobgoblin) let me take them in hand,
Children, children not able to resist my might
A wonderful bloodshed was in those days,
For Saint Steephen fought against the golden Knight:
In so much that Peter was fain to give his Keys,
To those God knows that had to them no right.
With the grief of that, all the Saints in Heaven,
Proclaimed open wars at Barnard in the field:
They fought from six of the clock to eleven,
Or ever the Traitors would give over and yield.
But to say there was triumph, in faith there was,
Saint Steephen the yunger was made Captain of the Guard:
wonderful it was to see such things he brought to pass,
As I am sure the like of them ye never heard.
By gisse (quoth Saint Steephen) it was time to trudge,
Friar Francis took his flight to Paul's steeple:
In faith he was even with them for an old grudge,
For he carried away the Weathercock in spite of the people.
Then was I dubbed Knight at Kinistone,
And made Officer of all Courts and laws:
I gave Offices and livings many a one,
Mary in deed you may say, it was for a cause.
In faith the same day that Midsummer was married,
I never laughed better in my life:
For even suddenly away Saint Vncumber carried,
Both the Bridegroom and the Bride his wife.
No remedy on God's name but I must bear them company,
Cheer, in faith there was, cheer in howls:
And who was minstrel but Saint Anthony,
He made melody for all Christian souls.
A quarter of a year we tarried there in the tent,
Wherein we had Capricorn baked like read Dear:
I tarried so long till I was shent,
Iesu how they cried out of me there.
Well, I must abroad among my friends,
Every hour till I come they think a day:
I will go among then to fulfil their minds,
Far ye well Gossip I must needs away.
What brother Covetous? whether away so fast?
I saw you not by the Mass, till I was almost past.
What mine own Brother temerity:
I rejoice to see you, I swear by the Trinity.
For thee we three have taken great thought,
Lord, how far about for you we have sought?
And I pray you where have you three sought for me?
In the King's bench and in the Marshalsée.
Yea, and in all the counties, and at Newgate:
For these are places meet for thine estate.
I perceive well it must be my chance:
above all your kinsfolk you to enhance.
Your place is at Saint Thomas awatring:
Or else at Wapping beyond Saint Katherine's.
There will I dub you Knights of the Halter:
Among your mates there strongly to talter.
You are to blame in faith Precipitation:
For you began this fond communication.
You are Knaves to use such salutation:
Why Brother we speak for your consolation.
Speak what you will, even with you I can make.
Speak you in mirth, and in mirth I do it take.
But by the mass and if you go about me to flout:
I will make the better of all you three a Lout.
No Sir, not, we came not hither you to molest:
Our business I tell you is very earnest.
By God's ears true, if now we make not shifted:
We are all four like to have a great lift.
If ever Covetous were in danger of punishment:
He standeth now at the point of banishment.
Sancte Blaci, you make me much to muse:
Passion of me Sirs, why what news?
I think the day of judgement be now at hand:
For it was never thus since the world did stand.
The worldly man hath forsaken Covetous clean:
And unto Contentation, and Enough he doth lean.
What doth he? Benidicite is this true?
Yea faith, he is quite becomen a new.
Moore over with the heavenly man he is associate:
Where he studieth the rules of godly life early & late.
Body of me Precipitation, fetch me my gown:
My Cap, and my Chain, I will to the Town.
Marry Sir, in deed it is time to stir Coals:
I will go near to fetch some of them out of their holes.
Haste maketh waste Brother Covetous ye wots:
Not loo●●e so soon cold, as that is most hot.
I warrant you the worldly man will soon be weary:
For they will not suffer him once to be merry.
And verily he is inclined to be naught:
therefore think not that by them he will long be taught
Now by the mass, of one that should have sapience,
I never heard none utter such a foolish sentence.
Know you not that when so ever a Sinner doth repent:
That God forgiveth him his wickedness incontinent.
True in deed as here tofore hath been seen:
Many have been made heavenly that worldly have been.
Here is your Gown, your Chain and your Cap:
Body of me, but for shame thou shouldst bear me a rap.
Whoreson théef, the Devil in Helthée choke:
What meanest thou foolish knave to bring my Cloak.
Why my brother is blind, I hold you a Crown:
Body of me he knoweth not a Cloak from a Gown.
Tush masters he was stirring in the morning betime:
At four of the Clock in a Seller he was saying of Prime.
I blame him not though betimes he stéer:
For he is made Ale cunner in our Parish this year.
His pains is so great in tasting of drink:
That many times his eyes into his head do sink.
And then he looketh priestly as narrow as a Crow:
I tell you he can scarce read the letters of his Crosrowe.
Body of me, you are Knaves all three:
Take Gown, Chain, Cap and all for me.
I will be even with you all I swear by God's mother:
Choose you shifted how you can one for an other.
I warrant you I shallbe able to shifted for myself:
Or else you may say I were a foolish elf.
Why brother, you said you would all things well take:
Yea but I would not have you your fool me to make.
For you know well enough that of you all three:
I am worthy the governor and Ruler to be.
Covetous (saith the wise man) is the root of all evil:
Therefore Covetous is the chiefest that cometh from the devil.
But this is that Knave I mean Precipitation:
But I will be even with him I swear by the Passion.
I am sorry by my truth that you are so sore offended:
What Sir, if a fault be made it shallbe amended.
Nay faith I am an Ale cunner, or some drunken fool:
I am no better but your courage I will cool.
That witless knave to, Inconsideration,
He was beginner of this disputation.
But it is no matter once or Christmas day:
I will be even with you, be as be may.
What worshipful M. Covetous are you angry with me?
I am sorry for it man, what can I more be?
hang me up by the neck like a strong thief:
If ever I speak any word that shall put you to grief.
I would do for you Sirs, for I love you all three,
Marry then I look that as I am you should accept me
By my troth Brother, I dare say none of us all:
But that to do as you bid us, ready find you shall.
Marry then on good fellowship let us like friends agree:
Why above all things that desire we.
Will you help then to make me gay?
As you will wish it, so we will you array.
Will you consent to show unto me reverence?
Yea, at all times we will show to you our obedience
Will you take me for your master and head?
Yea marry Sir, for so it standeth us in stead.
And do you say as you think in very deed?
Yea, that shall you prove in all time of need.
First to help on my gown some pains do you take
And then I will see what curtsy you can make.
It is trim indeed, by the mass in that Gown:
Me thinks you be worthy to be Mayor of a town.
Say you so? then how like you this countenance?
Very comely and like a person of great governance
Then all is well, come, come do your duty:
O worthy Prince Covetous we humbly salute ye.
Body of me, that same will mar all:
When in company I come if Covetous you do me call
Therefore it is best for us all to change our names:
Or else peradventure we shall come to shames.
Well, hold your peace, then let me alone:
And I will devise names for you every one,
Sirrah, nay you gape at me:
What shall my name be?
You will have it or I have it, will ye?
Sirrah, thy name shallbe.
What I pray you?
A shame take thee unmannerly Lout:
Thou camest so hastily thou hast put me out,
Nay, that maid looks on me:
Come hither Inconsideration, I have a name for thee
Have you Sir? I pray you what shall it be?
Nay by the mass, it is gone again:
And I would know it I tell you very fain.
Yea, but you must tarry till I have it:
I tell you my Brother hath a brave wit.
A shame take them I have them now all three:
Come hither brother I will tell you what your name shallbe.
You know the men now a days to reason do trust:
Therefore Reason, yourself from hence forth name you must.
temerity, I know well thy quality:
Thou art heady, thou shalt be called Agility.
I study a name for Precipitation if it may hit:
Let me see, by my truth, that shalt be called Ready wit.
An excellent name in deed, for I am ready & quick with a pen:
For before I see one I can condemn ten.
I pass not for any man's matters or cause:
money and wit shall govern the Laws.
Well masters I have chosen names for each one of you:
But mine own name I know not I make God a vow.
How if I call my name Wit or Policy?
Marry Sir, that agreeth to your nature exceedingly.
Truth, for what shall the worldly man do with you three?
Except to maintain you, he take in me.
Little worth is Reason, ready wit and agility:
Except to maintain them there be a Policy.
Sirs you tell me the worldly man is converted:
Yea faith that for ever from us he is departed.
For ever (quoth he) ha', ha', ha', not, not I warrant thee I
What this gear meaneth full well I do espy.
Tush he purposeth to go both to heaven and to hell:
And faith news from thence to the people to tell.
He will be a Prophet that was wont to be a devil:
But his prophecy I think will prove but evil.
Well no more words, enough is as good as a feast:
They say it is perilous with edge tools to jest.
Now Sirs I will tell you, this is all my drift,
To get the worldly man hither by some shift.
temerity thou shalt with him thyself acquaint:
And what thou canst do, to him forth thou shalt paint
Virtue is made an error by temerity:
For stoutly he standeth against the verity.
For temerity learned men do say:
Is a quality to do all things without delay.
So that if thou mayst get into his habitation:
He will soon be weary of enough and contentation.
Then with him shall work Precipitation:
Who is of this property and inclination.
To see and to do all with out forecast:
Not thinking of things to come or of things past.
Therefore after that temerity doth once enter:
Thou shalt put thy service in adventure.
Then Inconsideration shall get into his mind
Who is a quality much of the same kind.
He weigheth neither the time, person nor place:
Neither (as they say) the tail nor the the face
Thus if you three within him once be placed:
You shall see that Enough of him shall soon be disgraced
Under the name of Policy to enter I do not doubt:
And I being entered Enough shallbe cast out.
For where Covetous in any place doth remain:
There content with enough cannot abide certain.
So that he shall run headlong into the pit:
Doing all things headlong without modesty or wit.
Lo, here to you my mind I have disclosed:
All have I said that I have now purposed.
By the faith of my body it is worthily devised:
In all the haste go thou and be thou disguised.
Marry now there cometh an other thing to my remembrance
Are none of you acquainted with ghostly Ignorance?
What he pardy? he is my ghostly Father:
I would speak with him so much the rather.
For divers causes that I do consider:
My brother and thou shall depart hence together.
Look you make you trim as fast as you can:
And then in haste seek to speak with the worldly man.
Inconsideration to ghostly Ignorance, thou shalt resort:
And this message from me to him thou shalt report.
First that he name himself devotion:
And we will help him to dignity and promotion.
Charge him not to be out of the way:
For we purpose to sand for him this present day.
For as much as you put your trust & confidence in me:
What I can do for you, or it be long you shall see.
Where to find ghostly Ignorance I am sure:
Seldom or never at home at his own cure.
Not, the Sermons that ghostly ignorance hath made:
Hath almost brought all the Parishes in England out of trade
Well, high you a pace, that you were gone:
Precipitation and I will tarry here alone.
Far well Covetous till we meet again:
That shall not be long if our purpose we obtain.
Nay hear you? God be with you, will you begone?
Body of me you are no better than knaves every one.
Far well Covetous? nay far well good Lob.
You have even as much manners as hath a Dog.
Plain Covetous? this is according to promise is it not?
Well what I intent to do for it, I wots what I wots.
I cry you mercy right worshipful Master covetise,
Most prudent, politic, sapient and wise.
Pardon us by my truth, it was but forgotten:
Nay I take it even thus, soon ripe soon rotten.
I am no body with you, but by him I swear:
I look the greatest stroke amongst you to bear.
Enough is as good as a feast, we are warned I trow
From hence forth our duties I warrant ye we will show,
We take our leave of you noble prince Covetise:
The King, Emperor, yea the God of all vice.
O worthy visage, and body well compact:
O goodly man in wit, work and fact.
We simple creatures do show to you obedience:
Being minded to depart under your patience.
Yea marry, this is some what like the matter:
Crafty knaves, how they can a fool flatter.
Far ye well both, give me your hands one after an other:
I love ye as dearly as the Children of my mother.
How sayst thou Precipitation? how likest thou this matter?
By my truth I will tell the truth, Yea and not flatter.
I perceive well enough what here in you do mean:
You will not leave till you have marred him clean.
Not only riches singular and private:
But also public weals you will spolyate.
For I perceive by your former monition:
That through ghostly Ignorance you will destroy devotion.
I mean true faith, in God's love and hope:
And 'cause him in clear Sun shine, for light to grope.
Thou thinkest as truth is in very deed:
I intent no less if my device may likely speed.
There will I begin and if error once rage in religion:
I warrant thee in public weal will soon be division.
Well, what you intent to me doth not appertain:
My nature is to rage's where haste doth reign.
And what causeth haste? but only temerity:
That maketh fools hardy with Security.
Precipitation forth doth this worldly man lead:
So that all his affairs be done rudely on head.
Then Inconsideration both night and day:
Shall prompt him forward nothing at all to weigh.
Neither to consider his beginning:
Neither at the end what shall be the winning.
So that if all we do our proper nature and kind:
He shall not regard who shall the profit find.
Lupus est in fabula, no more words.
I never fear any such kind of birds.
This is the worldly man I suppose indeed:
To work wisely with him I see we had need:
I find it true as the wise king Saloman doth say,
It is better to have a little with the fear of the Lord
Then to have much treasure and yet go astray,
I mean to decline from God's holy word.
The proverb saith enough is as good as a feast,
He that hath enough and cannot be content:
In my judgement is worse than a Beast,
For he wanteth a good conscience mind & intent.
The Chariot of Covetous as Barnard doth writ,
On four wheels of vices is carried away:
And these be the four vices that he doth recite,
Contempt of God, forgetfulness of death each day.
Faint courage, and ungentleness he doth say.
These be the wheels that to adversities cart doth belong:
These have persuasions to beguile men many and strong.
The same Chariot hath two horses which doth it draw,
The one named Raveny and the other nigardship:
Their Carter is Desire to have, who always doth claw,
By fraud or guile one an other to nip,
This Carter hath two cords to his Whip.
The one is Appititite and felicity for to get:
The other is called Dread and fear to forlet.
When this Chariot gone in the ground of man's mind,
He is not once able to think a good thought:
For Covetous doth the heart so much to lucre bind,
That he judgeth all things to be vain and naught,
Except some gain or profit thereby be brought.
I myself am able to say it, for I do it know:
To have gotten money I studied to deceive high and low
But thanks be to God the Father of all might,
Which will not the death of Sinners as Scripture doth say
It hath pleased him to open unto me the the true light,
Whereby I perceive the right path from the broad way,
Therefore I am content myself for to stay.
With Enough which bringeth me to quiet in body & mind:
Yea. and all other commodities there with I do find,
Godliness is great riches if a man can be content,
When God hath sent him plenty and Enough:
Let us praise him for our food and raiment,
And live godlily all our lives through,
For we must tread the paths of death so sharp and rough.
And then shall we be sure to carry as little away:
As we brought with us thus Saint Paul doth say.
Body of me he is marvelous foregone:
We shall have somewhat to do with him anon.
It was ill luck that he came not alone.
I would that beggarly knave in Hell were.
Well let me alone I will go near,
To 'cause him of his company to be weary:
I have done as great acts thrice this year,
I am not to learn to row in Illirans Ferry.
I will go to him and thou shalt wait upon me,
Thou shalt hear what a take to him I will tell:
If thou speed well now I dare promise' thee,
The Devil will give thee the Crown of hell.
God speed you Sir, I pray you might I be so bold,
As to have a word or two with you in your ear?
Yea, hardly my friend say what you would.
Your mind unto me you may boldly declare.
I pray you are you not acquainted with this gentleman?
I would fain speak with him a word or twain alone:
I beseech you help me to my request if you can,
For I have haste on my way I must needs be gone.
If you had required a greater thing of me,
I would have done it for you I tell you certain:
Sir, one of yonder men which you do see,
Would speak with you alone very fain.
I will go to him and know his mind:
is it you that would speak with me my friend?
Yea forsooth sir?
What say you to me?
O Sir, o good Sir, o, o, o my heart will break:
O, o, for sorrow God wots I cannot speak.
What is the matter? wherefore weep you thus?
Pure love causeth him, Sir I was.
I am sure that be loves you at the heart.
I thank him truly it is undeserved on my part.
Gentle friend I pray you cease your lamentation:
Sure it is a strange thing to see a man weep on this fashion.
I cannot choose, o, o, I cannot choose:
Whow? I cannot choose if my life I should lose.
To hear that I hear, o well it is no matter:
O, o, o, I am not he that any man will flatter.
To hear what you here, why what hear you of me?
Marry sir he heareth the wonderfully changed you be
I am so in deed, for that I give God the glory:
And if you be my friend for my change you are not sorry.
I trust I have chosen all for the best:
For my former wickedness I hate and detest.
Whow, nay I would to God that were the worst:
But I shall have ill will, I think I am accursed.
I judge him not to be of a discrete mind:
That for the truth will be angry with his friend.
The talk of talkers tongues I do not much way:
Yet I pray you heartily tell me what they say.
Covetous, covetous, every man saith you be:
A shame take them all prattling knaves for me.
I am of such a nature as no man is but I:
To hear my friend il spoken of I had rather die.
Yea wiss man, you are called even so:
All the country of you speak both shame and wo.
He was wont (saith one) to keep a good house:
but now (saith an other) thereiss no living for a mouse
If this be the worst, for their talk I do not care:
Let them say so still hardly and do not spare.
I trust I have chosen with Mary the better part:
O yet good Sir, this grieveth him to the heart.
Yea God wots, it is none other, it is none other:
I love you as well as mine own born brother.
Think you that it grieveth me not to hear each boy and Girl:
To say that the worldly man is become a Churl?
He had need to live very sircumspectly:
That would take upon him to please all men directly
Behold Enough.
Nay hear you, this grieveth me worst so God me save:
They say you keep company with every beggarly knave
Where I keep company they have naught to do:
As near as I can into none but honest company I go.
See you, I pray you Enough.
Nay but hear you, is Enough his name?
Yea in deed, it is even the very self same.
Saint Dunstone, a man would not judge it by his cote:
Now truly I would not take him to be worth a groat,
Hark you, hark you, in faith know you not me?
Not truly that I wots of, I did you never see.
That is marvel in deed the truth for to tell:
I dare say your father knew us both very well.
Did you never hear him speak of one Policy?
Yes that I have sure an hundred times verily.
I am he verily and this your friend Ready wit:
With whom to be acquainted for you it is fit.
Truth in deed as Seneca saith wittily:
The wise man and not the rich is voided of misery.
Policy and ready wit: now the truth is so,
There is no man living that can spare you two.
I trust God worketh for me happily in deed:
To sand me all such things whereof I have need.
For without a ready wit, who can answer make?
Without a policy all commodities will slake.
A ready wit will soon gather and conceive:
What he shall forsake and what he shall receive.
Tevely now I remember a saying of Tully the divine:
Where he doth both wisdom and learning define.
Learning maketh young men sober (saith he)
And it causeth old men of good comfort to be.
Policy is the riches and possession of the poor:
Yea, it garnisheth the rich with goodly adore.
So that there is no frate calling or degree:
That may conveniently without you be.
Give me your hands for you are welcome heartily.
I am exceeding joyful of your good company.
Enough, I beseech you bid my friends welcome hither:
For from henceforth we must dwell all together.
Be not rash in taking of a friend Aristotle doth say:
Nor when thou hast taken him, cast him not away.
Admit not thy friend either high or low:
Except his behaviour to others thou dost know.
For look how before he hath served his other friend:
Even so will he serve thee also in the end.
Your parables truly I do not well understand:
Except you mean I should have no freendis but you by me to stand
Enough is as good as a feast, well you wots:
Moore then enough: a man needeth not.
Whether it be lands, money, friends or store:
if he have enough: what needeth he any more?
I perceive that against us two you do grudge:
Can a man of policy and ready wit have to much?
The noble king Solomon was rich & had wisdom great store
Yet he seized not daily to pray to God for more.
Get thee store of friends (saith Cicero) for it is deemed:
A true friend more than Kinsfolk is to be esteemed.
It is an old proverb and of an ancient time:
Which saith, it is not all Gold, that like Gold doth shine.
Not more are all friends that friendship pretend:
As it approved with many in the end.
Yea enough, but I am sure that this policy:
And this ready wit are my friends verily.
Are we? ye faith there of you may be sure:
We are they which your wealth shall procure.
Enough is not enough without us two:
For having not us, what can enough do?
Enough is maintained by wisdom and policy:
Which is contained of a ready wit naturally.
Having a ready wit and of policy the skill:
You need not to care for this enough except you wil.
There is another enough which is invisible:
Which enough, to want is impossible.
As for this Enough is enough I cannot deny:
But this enough serveth but even competently.
You have no more now then doth yourself serve:
So that your poor brethren for all you may starve
But enough that cometh by us twain:
Is able yourself and many other to sustain.
Your words are even as true as the Gospel:
As one named Reason of late to me did tell.
You may be more heavenly saith he having riches:
Then if you had nothing the truth to express.
I find his words true for when alms I would give
I have not wherewith the needy to relieve.
Enough I have for myself I cannot say nay:
But I would I had more to secure the needy always
These words proceed from a covetous mind:
And from a worldly lust which doth you blind.
was not the poor widow for her offering praised more
Than all they that offered of their superfluity & store.
The sacrifice of God as the prophet David doth say
Is a broken heart and a good mind always.
He says well by Lady, yea and like an honest man,
But yet Sir, riches to be good, well prove I can.
For every man is not called after one sort:
But some are called to prophecy, some to preach & exhort.
And he by that means Heaven joys to win:
But every man knoweth not that way to walk in.
Therefore every man (as his vocation is) must walk:
I am sure that against this you will not talk.
The greatest boasters are not the best givers:
Nor the earnest preachers are the best livers.
As sucre increaseth riches and honour,
So covetous enlargeth daily more and more.
I know sun in this realm which once were content
With poorly enough which God to them had sent.
Wishing of a good conscience as they said verily:
That God would once again restore the verity.
If it please thee good Lord (said they) thy word to us again sand
And then truly our Covetous lives we will amend.
But since it hath pleased God, them to wealth to restore:
They are ten times more Covetous than they were before.
Yea headlong without all consideration:
They for Covetous make some laws in that nation.
Such buying and selling of Leaces and benefices:
Such doubling of wares to extreme prices.
So shamefully God's ministers they poule & shave:
That not half enough to live upon they have.
But it is an old saying and a true certainly:
it will not out of the flesh that is bred in the bone verily.
The worldly man will needs be a worldly man still:
Well choose you I will let you alone do what you wil.
I cannot think but those that of me hold scorn:
Will be glad of me or ever the year be half worn.
Marry far well? adieu to the devil:
Body of me, he would make me his drivil.
You may see what a trusty friend he is:
A beggarly knave I warrant you by the bliss.
And even so he and they went about me to make:
Within a while I should have gone to the hedge for a stake.
I warrant you that you should have proved shortly:
They would not have lost you one groat nor penny.
I marvel you would tarry with them any time or season:
You are old enough I trow to be ruled by reason.
A shame take them all, I have spent on them xx. pound:
That I had of money and of mine own good ground.
I am a shamed of myself so God me save:
Because I have sold almost all that ever I have.
My friends and companions when I go in the street:
So God help me, I am a shamed with them to meet.
Passion of me it was time to look about:
They would quite have undone you, or else without doubt.
But I trow, I trow, if you will be ruled by me:
What I will do for you, or ere it be long you shall see.
A thousand, thousand, thousand ways I can invent:
To fetch in double as much as you have spent.
Be ruled by you? yes here I do you both embrace:
As mine own mind to follow all my lives space.
For I tell you plain I am weary of their School:
It is time for you, else they would have made you a fool.
I perceived no less in deed by the talk of Reason:
But so it should have come to pass in season.
And do you my brother Reason perfectly know?
Yea, and with him one called Agililitie I trow.
Reason came to me, and mihi flectere mentem he said:
Sola solet ratio dux sida sophorn est it cannot be denayed.
To nature and Reason he doth open injury,
Which of other men council doth seek:
God hath given men Reason and their wits Policy,
To forsake that is il, and to take that he doth like.
And believe you not these words to be very true?
Yes, and I have thought on them xx. times since I tell you.
O Sirs me thinks if I had money and treasure again:
In faith I would be a lively lad I tell you plain.
Heavenly man (quoth he) let them be heavenly for me:
The best heaven is me thinks is rich for to be.
In faith it shall cost me and my friends a fall,
But you shallbe twice as rich as you were before:
We will do it to spite them even with all,
Though we do hundreds wrong therefore.
I have set some aloft in a high place,
Which had rather die I dare well say:
Then one inch of their state should fall or abase,
But rather to climb up higher if they may.
Whow, of this world I rule the whole state,
Yea faith I govern all laws, rites and orders:
I, at my pleasure raise war, strife and debate,
And again I make peace in all Costs and borders
Nay, yet a much more marvel then that,
Behold, see you this little pretty hand?
This is an Arm of steel for it overthroweth flat,
The strongest walls and towers in a whole land,
Power I have laws to altar and make,
And all laws made are guided by me:
All that is done, is done wholly for my sake,
What strength I have by this you may see.
Moore over I have in this little hand,
The hearts of all men & women upon Earth:
I rule them both by Sea and by land,
Plenty I make and I make also dearth.
Whow, it is wonderful that is done by policy,
While you live take heed strive not against policy:
The best of them all are glad of Policy,
Yea in Westminster hall they use much policy.
Prudentia noset omnia, saith the noble man Tully
Policy knoweth all things both good and ill truly.
O Policy, what meant I from reason & thee to stray?
Never will I forsake you nor yours after this day.
O help me Policy, help me to some money:
Whose taste I love better than the taste of honey.
Sigh worthy policy you have entertained:
Now none of his instruments must be disdained.
Disdained? no faith let him teach me what he will:
And I will do it, if it were mine own father to kill.
Say you so? by the mass give me your hand:
Come go with me, let us no longer idle stand.
O how hard a thing and difficult it is,
For them that in their riches do trust:
To enter into the kingdom of Heaven or bliss,
The words of our Saviour to be true grant we must,
it is as easy for a Camel through an Needles' eye to thrust?
As for him that on riches hath fixed his mind:
The way to eternal salvation to find.
Example hereof you see with your eyes,
Of the worldly man given to vain pleasure:
He promised you heard, from sin to arise.
And said he would not love neither money nor treasure.
But as he aught to love it, that is in a due measure.
But behold how quickly his promise he hath broke:
Whereby he kindleth God's wrath against him to smoke.
For now hath he entertained to him temerity
Precipitation and heady Inconsideration:
These cause him to work all things hedely,
And covet to be had in reputation.
Then covetous disguiseth himself on such a fashion.
That as Seneca saith, he doth good to no man:
But hurt, & most to himself as time shall prove when.
Alaz, alaz, to whom should I make my moan?
For ever and a day cham quite undone.
My Londlord is so covetous as the devil of hell:
Except I'll give him such a shameful rent.
As cham not able, away ich must incontinent.
Chave dwelled there this zix and therty year:
Yea these forty, ich may tell you well near.
And ich never paid above yearly vive pound:
And by our Lady, that to be enough chave vound.
Well, now I must give him even as much more:
Or else ich must voided the next quarter or bevore.
O masters, is not this even a lamentable dhing?
To see how Londlords their poor tenants do wring.
And they are not so covetous to ask nother, ich believe:
But a zorte of vooles are as ready to give.
And especially Strangers, ye a shameful zorte:
Are placed now in England and that in every port.
That we, our wives and Children, no houses can get:
Wherein we may live, such price on them is zet.
Chad thought a while a go my Londlord would not have done thus
For he said he would be a heavenly man I was.
But soul, the Devil is as Heavenly as he:
Three times worse than he was before as var as I can zée.
Body of me, this would make a man to swear:
A shame take them marry, that ever they came there.
Nay by gisse I thought he would not be heavenly long:
For that to his nature were clean contrary and wrong.
Yonder are such a sort of Ruterkins lively and jolly:
That all that can be gotten is little enough for their belly.
Soul we work, we labour, and that night and day:
Yet can we scant have meat and drink the truth to say.
And that which we have, is ill enough for Dogs:
And we are served with all, like a many of Hogs.
What servant? I pray thee what news with thee?
By my truth Father Tenant even as you see.
Kept like no man's servant, but rather like a slave:
That I am weary of my life I tell you so God me save.
My master taketh on like the Devil of hell:
There was never one so hasty, cruel and fel.
But so covetous Lord, Lord you will not believe:
I think all his mind and study to bribery he doth give.
Now a pestilence take him, vile cankered Churl:
He is neither good to man, women, boy nor girl.
Is this the heavenly man? a shame take him else:
Body of me, in all wickedness he now excels.
And if a thing come in his head be it good or ill:
Without all wit or reason, do it he wil.
But so covetous, Lord I think if he might choose:
The dropping of his noll he would not lose.
Every week truly, nay then every day:
He must have account how many Eggs his hens lay
Why? there was never seen such a miser as he:
That the plague cut the throat of him for me.
I have wrought for him this half year by the week:
And now my work is done my money is to seek.
If I and all mine should starve for money:
Of him I dare say I should not get one penny.
A shame take him, how well the Scripture of him is weighed:
Which saith sleep not till the Hireling thou hast paid.
I see well that I complain not of him alone:
But others as well as I, have good cause to moon.
Well Servant, weeping will not help this gear:
But God will plague him for it, I do not fear.
I told you Hireling how you should be served:
What Servant, thou lookest as though thou were starved.
He looketh as lustily, freshly and as well:
As all the Servants that with his master do dwell.
His master? why? he is no better than a thief:
For so that he may have it, he cares not who suffer grief.
Nay by the mass that words is but to true:
So that his riches increaseth he careth not who rue.
I know the occasion of all this géer:
But I would not for twenty pound it should come to his ear
He saith, that he will never leave his extorsion:
Till of riches he have gotten an innumerable portion.
He will build, plant, set, and sow:
Till such a fame of him abroad there grow.
That there is none like to him in all the Country:
And so by that means he shall come to authority.
But lightly those that come to authority after that rate:
Do end their lives in some miserable and unhappy state.
thou fool (saith Christ) this night will I fetch thy soul from thee:
And than who shall have the things that thine be?
Well, let him alone, I hope all will prove for the best:
Even as he leadeth his life so shall he find rest.
Peace, peace for God's sake, look where the Steward comes:
Body of me Sirs, which way shall I run?
God speed you, what mean you? would you speak with me?
Yea Sir, even to desire your worship my uréend vor to to be.
Ich have a zertain petition to your maship to move:
And ich desire you to be my uréend in it vor God's love.
What is the matter? let me know it at once:
I have somewhat else to do then hear to tread the stones.
By my truth Sir I beseech you vor me to speak a good word:
To your good master and my Londlord:
Ich have dwelled in his house this forty years almost,
And thereupon chave bestowed much money and cost.
And now ich hear zay ich must double my rent:
Or else voided out of it and that incontinent.
I beseech you vor God's sake on me take some pity and bone:
If I be put out for ever I cham undone.
O good Sir, I know that you may do much:
By my truth I can do nothing here in:
And so God help me I esteem no such matters worth a pin.
By'r Lady Sir you have had it a fair season:
And that a man should make what he can of his own it is reason
I warrant you, therebe enough that that rent will give:
But they shall never thrive on it then I believe.
Ich know what he may do with the house and ground:
He may chance to vinde rend enough of vive pound.
Well, care not you for that, if you he a wise man:
You were best to get one better cheap where you can
For I know that so much for it, have he may:
Yea, if it stood empty even this present day.
Well Sir, yet me thinks there should be a conscience
I think God hateth such covetous, sir by your patience.
Thou art a foolish fellow, here of to me to complain:
For I meddle with no such matters I tell you plain.
Good gentleman, God save your life I pray to our lord:
May I be so bold to speak with you (gentleman) one word:
Whether the Devil wilt thou? into mouth me think.
Foyes Gods aims, how he smells all of drink.
Nay by my truth Sir, I drink none other drink to day:
But a little fleet milk mingled with whey.
For so God help me if for drink or meat I should die:
I have not one farthing, any therewith to buy.
And by my truth Sir, this is my suit at this time:
I served your master in making Brick and lime.
Half a year together not missing one day:
And by my truth all my wages is yet for to pay.
And if it please you herein to show me some pleasure:
The same to my power with like I will measure.
Body of me, what a beggarly knave is heear?
Why, canst thou not forbear thy money one year?
Not by my truth Sir, for I have no lands:
Nor nothing to live upon, but only my hands.
I beseech you be good to me.
Why? I meddle not with such things that dost know
Yes Sir, you are master Steward I trow.
No faith I am but master receiver:
I take in all, but by gisse I am no payer.
Your master hath a great sort of receivers in deed:
But not one to pay the Hireling his true meed.
What worthy policy? what make you here to day?
About your affairs I have business this way.
And behold Sir as I traveled the Street:
With these two fellows I chanced for to meet.
Who told me that they had an earnest suit to you
One for his house that he dwelleth in now.
Wherein (he saith) you go about to do him much wrong:
For he saith that he hath dwelled in it very long.
The other said, you own him a piece of money:
he wrought with you half a year & had never a penny
And thus they took on with me before you did come:
And now have I showed you the whole circumstance & some.
Marry hung them Villains have I naught to do:
But to stand and reason matters with them two?
Hear you tenant, in few woordis you know my mind
According as I have told you, so you shall me find.
Other provide money your lease to renew:
Or else you shall out incontinent this 'tis true.
O Londlord me thinks this is to much extremity:
Alas upon mine age take you some pity.
Ch'm old & have many Children and much charge:
I trust lendlord ich shall vinde you better at large.
I cannot tell what I should do more believe me:
Many Landlords would not do as I do by thee.
For I am content for money that shouldst have it before an other:
I can do no more for thee if thou wert my brother.
Thou must be answered father, there is no remedy:
By Saint Anne me think he speaketh very reasonably.
This reasonable speaking cometh from an unreasonable mind:
Woe be to him that to such inconveniences shall a man bind.
If it please you Sir, help me to my money if you may:
Not by my faith Sir, you get it not to day.
You thall tarry my leisure, I will pay you when I see cause:
You are happy Sir, in your hands you have the laws.
But by gisse if I had any thing that would do you pleasure:
You should have it when you would and not tarry my leisure.
Well I believe verily that the prayers of the poor & his cry:
Shall ascend into the ears of the Lord God on high.
And he will plague all those that righteousness withstand:
And as the Prophet saith, root their posterity out of the land.
Well Hireling, let us depart this place:
It prevaileth not us of him to crave any grace.
Not more shall it prevail him the Scripture saith in deed:
To ask mercy of the Lord when he standeth in need.
Ha', ha', ha', I must laugh, so God me save:
To see what a sort of suitors now a days we have.
I warrant you if you will be ruled by Reason and policy:
You shall have all the world to sue to you shortly.
A common saying the Fox fareth the better and not the worse:
When that the good wife doth him ban and curse.
So what care I though to curse me the people do not cease?
As long as by them my riches doth increase.
O policy, how glorious my buildings do shine?
Not gentleman's in this country like unto mine.
Sirrah what shall I do? I must make my barns more great:
For I have not room enough to lay in my Rye and wheat.
Set men a work with it as soon as ye can:
If you lack room, make more you may then.
By gisse I will, they shall in hand to morrow:
I thank you policy I need nothing to borrow.
Sirrah, the little tenament that by my house doth stand:
I would I could get that to, even out of hand.
I want a little buttrye to lay in my drink:
And that would serve the turn handsomely I think.
And to say the truth it is not meet that such a beggar as he:
Should dwell so near under the nose of me.
Who the Devil put that into your mind?
Marry even that did reason my trusty friend.
I have been about it myself all this week:
Ready wit all the Laws for to delay doth seek.
We will have it I warrant you by hook or by crook:
Tush I warrant you for such odd ends daily we look.
O thou Earth, Earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord:
Know thyself to be no better than Clay or dust:
See that thy life to God's truth do always accord:
For from earth thou camest and to earth thou must.
What is the matter? why what ail ye? why look you so about
I heard a terrible noise, surely without doubt.
Which pronounced the words of the Prophet Ieremy:
Saying Earth, Earth, turn thee speedily.
Why, and are you afraid, and amazed at that?
I see well you have a heart like a Gnat.
That Servant that diligently doth fulfil,
And watcheth at all times for the coming of his master:
And doth in the mean season apply his will,
Of his master's goods, there be no spoil nor waster.
That servant shallbe sure to be a Taster.
Of God's blessings and joys everlasting:
Where as is all consolation and nothing wanting.
But that servant that liveth idly without care,
And looketh not diligently upon his Office:
His master shall come suddenly or he be aware,
And shall minister to him according to justice.
The portion of hypocrites shallbe his.
Into utter darkness cast him out will he:
Where as weeping and gnashing of teeth shallbe.
O Sirrah, marry God's blessing on his heart:
Full honestly he teacheth you Sir, their part.
These be the words of the holy Scripture:
Declaring the difference between the just and unpure
Good Lord I would know what those woordis do mean
Your Chaplain can tell you, for he is very well seen.
I pray you policy, call him to me hither:
But look that you come again both together.
Yes that we will I warrant, you need not to fear:
We will be here again or a Horse can lick his ear.
By my truth me thinks I begin to war sick:
In sending away my counsellor, I was somewhat to quick.
Well, I will sit me down and say to sleep here:
Till they into this place again do appear. O my head.
It is even I that upon thee doth blow,
Filling thee with plagues and sundry disease:
What I am, indeed I will learn thee to know,
For I am not afraid thee to displease.
Thou shalt depart from thy house and land,
Thy wife and Children beggars thou shalt leave:
Thy life thou shalt lose even out of hand,
And after death thy just reward receive.
Thy ill gotten goods shall not thee deliver.
Thine costly buildings shall nothing prevail,
Thy odours, thy sweet smells and thou shalt perish together,
Thy rings, thy bracelets, and Gold chains shall fall.
Strangers and those whom thou didst never know,
Shall possess that, which by fraud thou hast got:
Thy seed from of thy ground God will overthrow,
Because at his Prophets preaching thou amenddest not.
Thou sleepest in death as the Prophet David doth say,
Out of which sleep when thou shalt awake:
Thou shalt perceive thou must needs away,
And that on thee God will no mercy take.
I am the plague of God properly called,
Which cometh on the wicked suddenly:
I go through all towns and Cities strongly walled,
Striking to death and that without all mercy.
Here thou wicked covetous person I do strike,
Which once on the plough hadst taken hold:
But willingly again thou runnest in the Dike:
Therefore thy plague shallbe doubled seven fold.
Come Sir Nicolas, come sir Nicolas, come Sir Nicolas come
Ch'm faint by gisse, would ich had a little more buni.
A pestilence take thee, hast thou not enough yet?
Not, I can drink a Galon and eat never a bit.
Come in the knaves name you must expound a matter
I can expound good ale from fair water.
Tush fellow thou must expound a piece of Scripture
I can do it as well as any Bishop I am sure.
I have spouted with the Genevians xx. on a row:
And thou wert to good for them all I trow.
Was I? yea faith that I was you shall under stand
With a piece of Latin I set them all one dry land.
And I pray thee heartily what was it? let me hear:
Thou shalt if thou wilt promise' to give me a pot of beer
Magistrorum clericium inkepe miorum
Totus perus altus yongus et oldus
Multus knavoribus et quoque fasorum
Pick pursus omnius argentus shaws & polus.
Let me see what they are all able to say to this.
For out of deut a worthy piece of learning it is.
A man may as much edifying out of my latin take:
As ye may out of expositions that many ministers make
Even as thou sayst, in faith much of a kind:
For they place the scriptures as feathers in the wind.
Peace body of me, our master is a sleep:
Marry it was time indeed for us silence to keep.
O I would if I could, but now it is to late:
Hold thy peace I pray thee and do me no more rate.
To whom speak you to Sir? to him or to me?
There is no remedy now man, & that thou dost see.
Passion of me Sirrah, he dreameth me think:
Is there no remedy, but to hell I must needs sink?
For my life devotion he is haunted with the Mare:
Nay it is some wurser thing truly I fear.
I hold a Crown he is not very well:
So me thinks for he dreameth of going to Hel.
We will wake him out of that troublesome sleep:
Good Lord seest thou not? behold how he doth weep
How do you good master? is he a sleep or a wake?
O good Lord, how my heart doth ache.
O sick, sick, never so sick in my life berfore:
Good Lord, policy I think I shall never go home more.
Marry God forbidden, why where is your grief?
All the parts of my body wanteth relief.
O Devotion, I have such pains in my head:
That truly, truly, I wish myself even dead.
Me thought you dreamed, for to yourself you did talk
In deed Sir, I dreamt I had a great journey to walk.
O what great pains and torments I thought myself in:
Lying in fire which to burn did never lin.
And me thought before me the plague of God did stand:
Ready to strike me with a Sword in his hand.
And ever I asked him what was the cause:
He answered that I was a transgressor of God's Laws.
But Lord how sick I am, and how terrible is my pain:
No place in my body, but sickness therein doth reign.
I like not these foolish dreams, policy my friend:
Tush a straw, upon them never set your mind.
He that to dreams giveth any confidence or trust:
Without doubt very unquietly live he must.
O sick, sick, sick, o my head, o my back:
What would you have Sir? tel us what you lack.
Is it not best that I call hither a Physician?
That he may of your sickness declare the disposition.
O yea, yea, do so good devotion, I pray thee devotion
God's blessing on thy heart, for thy witty motion.
Depart I pray thee with as much haste as may be:
It shall not be long or he be here, you shall see.
O policy sick, never so sick, o hold my head:
O sirrah, what shallbe come of all my goods when I am dead?
Dead? body of me, do you rocken to die this year?
Hold your peace I warrant you, ye need not to fear.
Lo, see you not how the worldly man showeth his kind?
As sick as he is, on his goods is all his mind.
O policy if I might not die, what a fellow would I be
In all this country should be none like unto me.
S●ca, what a goodly Warret have I made in my hall?
But yet my banqueting house pleaseth me best of all.
O, o, alas what a pang is this at my heart?
Body of me Aqua vitae, Vinagre, needs help he will depart.
Saint Vncumber be with us, and the blessing of S. Anthony:
Help, help our Lady of Walsingham and all her holy company
Why? how now? what is the matter? how doth he Policy?
Body of me help, he is gone else and that verily
Stand away foolish knave and let master Physician come:
Master Flebishiten, should I say, M. Physician, I pray you look in his bum
By your leave my masters, me thinks it is no time to jest:
Stand back I pray you, and do not me molest.
Passion of me masters, count you this a play?
One of you quickly bring me hither a Key.
Some drink, Aqua vitae, if it may be got:
With speed let us have some drink that is hot.
Nay, I told you before he was past remedy.
Not there is life in him, yet I see verily.
Run I pray you and fetch such things as we lack:
Some drink and a pillow to lay at his back.
Here is drink and all things ready at hand:
Give me room I pray you, out of my light stand.
Iesu mercy, lo how busy master Phesition is:
Here you Sir? is it not best you look on his pis.
Good fellow be content, I pray thee heartily:
Thou art disposed to jest me think verily.
Good fellow? goodman whoball, I will make you change your note
Before that for your labour you get the value of a groat.
What how worldly man, in God's name I say:
Look up for the love of God, do not like a beast decay.
Who is there? what art thou that callest me?
Marry Sir, master Flebishiten, Physician is come & it was he
O sirs, sirs, I fear me all this labour is in vain:
You might have let me go, I was well out of my pain.
O master Physician, how think you? what say you to me?
By my truth there is no remedy but one, that I can see.
You must put your will to Gods will I can say no more:
Why? foolish Physician he knew that well enough before.
What sayst thou? is there no remedy but I must die?
No Sir by my truth, as far as I can see or espy.
God may do much, for he is omnipotent:
But you are past help in this world in man's judgement.
What the devil dost thou here? then get thee away:
Depart Physician, and thou haste no more to say.
I trust then, Sir you will content me for my pains taking:
You shall have a new loaf, at the maids next baking.
Go thy ways I pray thee and trouble not my mind:
For these news, to give thee any thing, in my heart I cannot find
Good Lord have mercy on thee, belike it is to late to amend:
In wickedness thou hast lived, even so thou wilt end.
Gentleman, I trust you will not see me lose my labour:
Gentleman go as you came, you are not so much in my favour
A common saying in deed, that is like unto like:
A wicked M. for wicked servants, God must needs strike
O Sirs, is there no remedy? what shall I say?
Is it not best I set all things at a stay?
Yes make sure work of that while as you be here:
It is time in deed, for death in you doth appear.
Once you know that I am greatly in def:
And now every one will strive, their own for to get.
Bid my wife therefore get a letter of administration, as soon as she may
And then as she listeth, my Criditors she may pay.
In deed I have enough to pay every man his:
But by Lady I cannot tell what mine own shall mis.
Commend me to her, and bid her take no thought:
But in any wise let her (as near as she can) for go naught.
By my truth this is wonderfully well invented:
As you have said, I warrant you it shallbe frequented.
Your mind in this thing undoubted is not ill:
Now as for other things it is best you make a wil.
It shallbe (Devotion) even as thou haste said:
Writ quickly for of my life I am afraid.
O must I needs die? o must I needs away?
Here is Ink and Paper, what shall I writ?
In the name, first of all do thou in dite.
In the name, in, in, in, in the name, what more?
Of, of, of, of, what more?
Body of me, down with the paper, away with the Ink:
Passion of me Covetous he is gone me think.
Hold, hold him, let us see if any life in him be:
Nay hold him that will, the Devil hold him for me:
Passion of me he is dead, how shall we do now?
Canst thou not tell? no more can I, I make God avow.
Sirrah here was a trim end that he did make:
Thou never heardst him the name of God in his mouth take.
Tush, God: a straw, his mind was other ways occupied:
All his study was who should have his goods when he died.
Indeed all men may perceive his mind to be corrupt and ill:
For God would not suffer him to name him in his wil.
A strange matter, when men have given over God:
They may be sure to be scourged with his sharp rod.
This is the end always where I begin:
For I am the root of all wickedness and sin.
I never rest to teach and instruct men to evil:
Till I bring them both body and soul to the Devil.
As we have done this worldly man here as you see:
Come therefore Ignorance, wait thou upon me.
The Devil and I, thou shalt see will not leave:
Till we have made the greatest part to us to cleave.
Come, let us go hence, here is no more to be said:
Farewell my masters our parts we have played.
O, o, o, o, all is mine, all his mine,
My kingdom increaseth every hour and day:
O, how they seek my majesty divine,
To come to me they labour all that they may.
The worldly man (quoth he) nay the devilish man than,
For more wickedness and mischief than he did use:
I myself indeed never devise can,
O at his jolly wisdom I must needs muse.
How cunningly put he his money to usury?
Yea, and that without offence of any law:
He was not to learn any kind of bribery,
Whereby wicked gains to him he might draw.
An abominable drunkard, a stinking Lecherer,
A filthy Sodomit, a corrupt canscience within:
A privy slanderer, and a subtle murderer,
To be short, a very dunghill and sink of sin.
O my boy Covetous, I may thank thee of all this
Thou nousledst him in all mischief and vice:
Therefore shalt thou be sure to have my bliss:
For above all other thou indeed art most wise.
Thou teachest the worldly man, a leacemonger to be,
To oppress the poor and of his riches him to defraud:
Wickedly to use the laws he learned of thee,
Therefore indeed thou art worthy of much lawd.
All you worldly men, that in your riches do trust,
Be merry and jocund, build Palaces and make lusty cheer:
Put your money to Usury, let it not lie and rust,
Occupy yourselves in my laws while ye be here.
Spare not, nor care not, what mischief you frequent,
Use drunkenness, deceit, take other men's wives:
Pass of nothing; one hour is enough to repent,
Of all the wickedness you have done in your lives.
O if you will thus after my Laws behave,
You shall have all things as this worldly man had:
Be bold of me, what you will to crave,
And doubt you not but with you I will play the loving lad.
Yea, and after death I will provide a place,
For you in my kingdom for ever to reign:
You shall tare no worse than doth mine own grace,
That is to lie burning for ever in pain.
Come on mine own Boy, go thou with me,
Thou hast served me duly, and hatest me never:
Therefore now for thy pains rewarded shalt thou be:
In ever lasting fire that burneth for ever.
He that toucheth pitch, shallbe defiled with the same,
And he that keepeth company with those that be vicious:
Shall at the length grow like unto the same,
Working things wicked and pernicious,
Even so it is also to be associate with the righteous.
For he that haunteth and keepeth honest company:
Cannot choose but live according to the same actually.
Example, the Iewes being conversant with the Heathen,
Drank of their superstition and idolatry:
And by that means fell from the true God of Heaven,
To worshipping of Blocks which was mere blasphemy.
Likewise it is at this day verily,
Christian men are seduced by keeping of ill company:
And brought from the very truth to hypocrisy.
And who are those that are thus deceived?
Even such as are not content when to are well:
They be not thankful for that they have received,
But ever they think still more and more to excel,
Contentation from their minds they do expel.
And under the pretence of reason, wit and policy:
They covet to run to mischief and sin hedely.
Like as Gold and silver is tried in the fire,
So faithful men in the furnace of adversity be proved:
The heavenly must not live as flesh and lust doth desire,
But heavenly things of heavenly men be loved.
With no kind of temptation he must be moved.
Be it sickness or poverty, or what so ever of God is sent:
The heavenly must take it patiently and be therewith content
Enough is as good as a feast, where contentation doth dwell,
For where he remaineth is the spirit of God with rest:
The unquiet mind of the covetous doth grudge and swell,
And to live with enough he doth abhor and detest.
The greedy gasping of Covetous doth him so molest.
That to be rich he all his whole mind doth set:
Nothing regarding how the same he doth get.
Pythagoras saith, that a man of Covetous desire,
Cannot be contented neither with abundance:
For the more he hath, the more still he doth require,
Wherefore such persons provoke God to vengeance,
Example of the worldly man, late of remembrance.
Whose wicked life offended the Lord so exceedingly.
That his heavy plagues came upon him suddenly.
God grant his end, example may be,
To all men how their riches they shall use:
Make not that thy God, which should be servant unto thee,
For in so doing thou dost it greatly abuse.
I pray God (I say) that our covetous we may refuse,
And one of us to love an other, for that pleaseth God dost:
So shall we be sure to inherit the good land of rest.
By God's great goodness I am sent unto thee,
Rest is my name wherein the heavenly shall abide:
Happy are those persons that come unto me,
For I being present all troubles I do divide.
With joys I am adorned, yea on every side,
Which are prepared for the heavenly from the beginning:
And given unto them for a reward of their godly living.
Thanks be given to thee O Father omnipotent,
Thy mercies Lord, and not my deserts truly:
Hath caused those joys to me to be sent,
Grant me grace therefore to praise thy name duly.
Thy goodness appeareth to me every day newly.
Whilst breath and life prolong my days:
My mouth shall not cease thy holy name to praise:
Enough is as good as a feast, here let us stay,
We have troubled our audience, that let us remember:
Let us conclude therefore, but first let us pray,
That it will please God in mercy our good mistress to tender,
Our faith to establish wherein we be slender.
That at the last day when the trump shall blow:
For to be heavenly men the Lord may us all know
First let us call to God for Iesu Christ's sake,
Long to preserve Elizabeth our most noble Queen
Good Lord grant her highness the heavenly path to take,
And that all bye ways, of her highness may be seen.
Increase her wealth, prolong her health, preserve her life:
That long she may rule this realm, without debate or strife.