ARe you the Authour of this Play?
What then?
Out o' this Poetrie, I wonder what
You doe with this Diſeaſe, a ſeed of Vipers
Spawnd in Parnaſſus poole, whom the world frownes on,
And heere you vent your poyſon on the Stage.
What ſay you ſir?
Oh you are deafe to all
Sounds, but a Plaudite, and yet you may
Remember, if you pleaſe, what entertainment
Some of your Tribe haue had, that haue tooke paynes
To bee contemn'd, and laught at by the Vulgar,
And then aſcrib'd it to their ignorance.
I ſhould be loath to ſee you mooue their ſpleenes
With no better ſucceſſe, and then with ſome
Commendatory Epiſtles flie to the Preſſe,
To vindicate your credit.
What if I doe?
By my conſent Ile haue you
Baniſht the Stage, proſcrib'd, and interdicted
Caſtalian water, and Poeticall fire.
In that you wrong th'approved judgments of
This noble Auditory, who like a Spheare
Mooved by a ſtrong Intelligence, ſit round
To crowne our Infant Muſe, whoſe caeleſtiall
Applauſe, ſhee heard at her firſt entrance.
This way of Poetry has deceiv'd many;
For tis not every one that writes a Verſe,
Has waſht his mouth in Helicon, or ſlept
On the two topt Parnaſſus, there's great difference
Betwixt him, that ſhall write a lawfull Poeme,
And one that makes a paper of looſe Verſes,
To court his looſer Miſtreſſe; there's much ayre
Requir'd to lift up the Dircaean Swanne,
When he ſhall print his tracts among the clouds:
Not as your ignorant Poetaſters vſe,
In ſpight of Phoebus, without Art or Learning,
T'uſurpe the Stage, and touch with impure hands,
The loftie Buskin, and the Comick ſtile.
This I confeſſe; but when the proſperous gale
Of their auſpicious breath ſhall fill our ſayles,
And make our high-borne thoughts ſwell like a tyde:
And when our bolder Muſe ſhall put on Buskins,
And clap on her Talaria on her feet,
Then like ſwift Mercury, ſhee may aſpire
To a ſublimer Region, with that force,
And beare that weighty burthen on her wings,
That ſhee ſhall feare to cracke her pincons.
Tis this licentious generation
Of Poets, trouble the peace of the whole Towne;
A Conſtable cann't get his Mayd with child,
A Baker nor a Scrivener looſe his cares,
Nor a Iuſtice of Peace ſhare with his Clerke;
A Lord can't walke drunk with a torch before him,
A Gallant can't bee ſufferd to pawne's Brecches,
Or leaue his cloake behind him at a Taverne,
But you muſt jerke him for it.
In all ages
It hath been ever free for Comick Writers,
If there were any that were infamous,
For luſt, ambition, or avarice,
To brand them with great liberty, though I
Diſclaime the priviledge; no impure language,
As Stygian mud ſtird up with Charons oare,
Ne're belcht ſo fowle an ayre, ſhall ever mixe
With our ingenious mirth, nor need we feare,
Any their foule aſperſions; whilſt the wiſe,
Sit to controule and iudge, in whoſe cleare eyes,
As we deſerue, we looke to ſtand or fall,
Paſſing prophaner people, and leaue all
To be determined as you cenſure. Boy
Goe and ſubſcribe it quickly what I ſay.
Hee's growne contemptuous, & flings away
In a rapture; for this, when I am in,
If I can't laught at's play, Ile laugh at him.
TIs true indeed, our loue is like our life,
There's no man bleſt in either, till his end.
And he whom Fate points to that happineſſe,
A thouſand paſſions mocke his doubtfull hopes,
Till Vertue that can never be extinct,
Shall riſe aboue their rage, and call downe Hymen,
Attended with as many ſeverall ioyes,
To triumph in the circle of our brow.
But that the fatall vnion of our hearts,
Should breed ſuch iſſues of extremity,
In both our fortunes, yet the greateſt griefe
I feele, is in your wrongs, not in my owne.
Nere thinke of it; what though my father made me
A ſtranger to his loynes, and cut me off
From my inheritance, becauſe he thought me
A rivall in his loue, that fatall loue
Whoſe jealouſie prevayl'd ſo in a Woer,
That it kild al affection in a father.
Theſe ill begotten thoughts he ſtill maintayn'd,
And cheriſht to his death, whoſe period
Of life, was the beginning of my miſchiefe:
For he gaue all the land unto my brother.
One leſſe deſerving, would I could report
That he had any worth, his il wrought mind,
Too apt for the impreſſion of all vice,
As if he were to ſtriue with his eſtate,
And had no other Enemy, would make
A conqueſt of his ruine. So negligent
Of what his father wrongfully bereft me,
That he ſpends all inryot, and ſo vainely,
As if hee meant to throw it after him,
Onely he has a fooliſh flaſhing wit,
Too weake to ſuſtaine, or prevent his fall,
But no ſolidity of mind or judgement.
And now imagines he can ſalue it up,
By being ſtil'd, A Fine Companion.
Let that intitle him to all my right,
Whilſt I ſecure in my imputed crime,
Thinke thee a better portion; all my fault
Was honeſty, and true affection.
And thoſe ſtill envious fate inſults upon.
But we will liue together, and what ere
Shall interpoſe to poyſon our true loue,
Still triumph o're their malice.
Deare Valeria,
Had fortune pleas'd to place me in that meanes
My birth aſſur'd me, we had ſpent our life
Luld in the lap of peace, our dayes had runne
Smooth as the feet of time, free from all tumults.
And why not ſtill?
It may doe ſo, but I
Haue not a fortune equall to your vertues,
And to ſupport the title of your worth.
My mind was never yet ambitious.
And there is nothing but your company,
Can ſatisfie, or limit my deſires.
I loue you better then to iniure you.
I will reſigne you to ſome richer heire,
Whoſe heapes of wealth left by his greedy father,
Vntoucht as is your goodneſſe, may advance you,
And make you happy, thinke on't, be not cruell
To your owne ſelfe.
On how haue I deſerv'd that you ſhould thinke
So ill of me? you may divorce the luy,
The Vine from her embraces, me you can not.
Where is the care you wont to haue of me?
What is my fault? you can be well without me,
And I ſhall pleaſe you beſt when I am abſent.
Nay my Valeria doe not weepe ſo ſore,
Thy griefe adds more to mine, it is enough
I part from thee, my heart with drops of blood,
Payes tribute to the Ocean of thy teares:
This treaſure of thine eyes, if ſpent for thoſe,
That lye unterr'd, wanting their funerall rites,
And reſtleſſe walke upon the Stygian ſtrand,
So long as fate has limited their curſe,
Would ſend them over to Eliſium.
One grain of that ſame griefe which clogs her heart,
Would lye in ballance 'gainſt the vniuerſe.
The ioy and happineſſe of all mankind,
Are given to me in her, and ſhe was borne,
T'upbrayd the world, and tell them they are falſe.
What ſhall I doe when you are raviſht from me?
Could Portia rather ſwallow glowing coles,
Then burne with a deſire of her loſt Brutus?
Shall the example of thoſe times deſcend
To ſhame my loue? Could the Aegyptian Queene,
Rather endure the poynant ſtings of Adders,
Then that of death which wounded Antony▪
And muſt I then ſurviue you? can I liue,
When you that are my ſoule are taken from me?
Oh tis not now as when Penelope
Could ſtay ten yeares the comming of her loue,
And ſpan a tedious web of fooliſh thoughts,
In expectation.
Faith that fled to heaven,
And truth, that after once mens hearts grew cold,
Would goe no longer naked, now againe
Are come to dwell with mortals. Here's a woman,
In whoſe compariſon all wealth is ſordid.
And ſince ſhe proues ſo conſtant, fate it ſelfe
Shall not be blam'd for me that I for ſooke her.
Are you ſo well reſolu'd? but I may croſſe you.
Oh me my father, I am quite undone
I am no body.
Yes, you are the wickedſt,
The moſt vngratious child, that ever liu'd
Vnder ſo good a government, but that
Shall turne to tyrannie, ſince your diſcretion
Can not diſtinguiſh of the difference.
Haue I, what ſhould I ſay? cheriſht you up,
With tenderneſſe, and coſtly education,
To haue you made a Sacrifice to beggery,
To one that's cut off, diſinherited,
The ſonne of the people?
Pray ſir forbeare,
My wrongs doe not permit you to abuſe me.
Sir tis moſt baſely done of you, to uſe
The charity, and freedome of my houſe,
Thus to ſeduce my daughter: but for that
If you can keepe her as well from your mind,
As I can from your ſight, you may in time,
Learne to forget her. You were beſt goe travell,
Repaire your ſelfe by ſome new found plantation,
Not thinke to ſupplant my iſſue. This place,
Is moraliz'd with thrift and induſtry,
Suites not with men of your condition,
That haue no ſtocke but their gentry. Get you in,
And for your part ſir, know my houſe no more,
Ile provide her a husband. So farewell.
How ere I ſpeed, comfort attend thee ſtill,
And ſo my beſt Valeria farewell.
Nere tell mee on't, a Gentleman muſt ſhew himſelfe to be a Gentleman.
I ſo he muſt ſir, but in you there's ſmall reſemblance of one.
Come you are an importunate Aſſe, a dull heavie fellow, and I muſt beare with you muſt I? by this light I will not liue out of the blaze of my fortunes, though it laſt but a minute, to linger out a tedious ſiege of adverſities.
Yet you may liue with more credit, at a competent rate as your land will allow you.
Land? there was my unhappineſſe to haue any, I was borne to none, 'twas meerely thruſt upon me, and now I can not be quiet for it; tis like a wife that brings a thouſand impediments, I muſt take an order, I can not walke the ſtreets in peace, your Magnifico ſtops his great horſe to ſalute me, an other treats of marriage, and offers me his daughter, your Advocate racks me with impertinences, and to free my land from incumbrances troubles me ten times worſe, what with friends and Counſellors, fellowes that ſeeme to me of an other ſpecies I could reſigne my intereſt.
All this ſir is a grace to you, if you conceiue it.
I'le ſell all, twere a ſinne to keepe it. When didſt thou know an elder brother diſinherited, and the land continue with the iſſue? now for me to liue thriftily upon it, were no otherwiſe then to mock fate and contemne providence.
But now you know the danger, you may prevent it.
What ſhould I dote upon caſualties, truſt Scriveners with my money, fellowes that will breake, and all the wit in Towne can't ſolder them up againe?
You may ſcorne my advice, but when tis too late—
I tell thee, I'le keepe no Land, not no houſes, candle rents that are ſubject to fire and ruine, I can't ſleepe for feare of them; theres no danger in coyne, twill make a man reſpected, drinke, and bee drunke, weare good cloaths, and liue as free as a Parthian.
But when all's gone, where's your reſpect, and gentility then?
Where iſt? why in my blood ſtill, wee'l both runne one courſe nere out of the vaine I warrant thee.
If you can hold in this vaine tis more laſting then a minerall.
Prethee good honeſt, old patcht peece of experience, goe home and weare thy ſelfe out in contemplation, and doe not vexe me with problemes, they can doe no more good upon me, then a young pittifull Lover upon a Miſtreſſe, that has the ſullens.
Well ſir, I could willingly waite upon you in the way of honour and reputation.
No no, you ſhall not need my homo frugi, goe about your buſines, and though men of my quality, doe ſeldome part with any thing, for good vſes, for Gameſters and Courtiers haue but little charity, yet for this once, I will treſpaſſe againſt cuſtome, and here's ſomething to put you into a fortune, I could wiſh it more, but you know how my man has uſed me, and my occaſions.
I ſee yet in his good nature a reluctancie againſt ill courſes, hee has not quite ſhak'd off his humanity, there are hopes to reclaime him; if not ſir gallant, when all is ſpent, the returne of this money will be gratefull; and ſo farewell.
Adiew, and commend me to my Vncle, tell the Mechanicks without, that I vouchſafe them admittance. I will not ſpend all in whoring and ſack. I will haue ſome cloaths of valew, though they be but to pawne in a vacation, for this purpoſe I haue ſent this morning to conſult with the authentiall iudgements, of my Taylor, Sempſter and Haberdaſher; and now am I ſtudying with what ſtate I ſhall uſe them.
Come in fellowes, I ſent for you together, becauſe you ſhould receiue your inſtructions: I am to make mee a ſuit, and I would haue you determine, about the forme and the accoutrements, for the fitting of the points and the garters, and the roſes, and the colours of them. Nature is much beholding to you, though there be a difference in the accidents, yet you can reconcile them, & make them ſuit handſomely together. I am a Gentleman, and would not be diſgrac'd for my irregularity.
You ſay well ſir.
I tell you my diſpoſition, I am wholy addicted to rarities, things that are new take me; new plays, new miſtreſſes, new ſervants, new toyes, new fangles, new friends, and new faſhions, and theſe I deale with, as in a quarrell I would not be behind hand with any of them.
Sir you ſhall command our endeavours.
I thought fit to take your adviſe, & you are beholding to me, you are the only men in the world that can rule me.
Sir for curioſity wee haue the maydenheads of all the witts in Europe, and to your ſervice wee will imploy both our art and our induſtry.
I am informed of your qualities, I heare you are men of intelligence, by this light I wonder the ſtate is not afraid of you.
Wee hope they haue no reaſon for that ſir.
Yes, you are dangerous followes, and haue plots and devices upon mens bodies, and are ſuſpected to bee ſorcerers, that can transforme a man into what ſhape you liſt.
It pleaſes you to bee merry ſir.
Nay by this hand, 'tis given out, that you are great ſchollers, and are skild in all the habituall Arts, and know their coherences, and that you are a kind of Aſtrologers, obſervers of times and ſeaſons, and for making of Matches, beyond all the gallants in the Kingdome.
We would match things as neere as we could ſir.
And beſides that, you are proud of your knowledge, for when you haue once got a mans good name, you make what account you liſt of it.
Not ſo ſir.
Yes, and preſume upon't, and thinke vvhat ever injury you doe a man, you can bee ſaved by your Booke This is true, and care not a pin for the Law, for you hold good Cuſtome to bee farre beyond it.
We would be loath to giue any Gentleman diſtaſt ſir.
I muſt commend you, in that you are not partiall, for you make the like reckoning of every man. Well, to the purpoſe.
You'l haue your ſuit of the Spaniſh faſhion?
What with two wallets behind me, to put up faults and abuſes, or elſe Ile caſhiere my men, and they ſhall ſerue me for attendants, hangers on, ha? No by this aire, I am too good a gentleman to haue my arms trickt up with ſuch gewgawes.
Sir, you muſt be conformable.
Well, I am content to be perſwaded: when ſhall I haue them?
You ſhall not miſſe within theſe three dayes, and what elſe is requiſite, ttuſt to my care to apply it.
Well I am ſatisfied, and hereafter beleeue mee, as I beleeue thee.
Sir, Maſter Spruſe is come to viſit you.
Maſter Spruſe? prethee bid him come vp. Well, ther's a Gentleman, of all I know, can juſtly claime admiration, for his complement, his diſcourſe, his habit, his acquaintance, and then for profering of curteſies, & never doing any; I may giue away all I haue, before I ſhall arriue at the grace of it.
Pray ſir, when did you ſee the noble Captaine?
Who Captaine Whibble; Maſſe now thinke on't thou ſhalt goe ſeeke him out, and entreat him to meete mee at the Horſ-ſhooe Tauerne at dinner, I loue that houſe for the ſignes ſake, 'tis the very print of the ſhooe that Pegaſus wore, when hee broke vp Helicon with his hoofe, and now in relation of that, your Poets and Players, ſtill haunt about the brinkes of it. Sirrah tell him withall, that Maſter Lackewit the Cittizens ſonne will bee there, and other good company, and wee vvill have muſicke and vvenches, goe thy vvayes, and you Maſter Snip, meet me about three a clocke to take vp theſe commodities, ſo novv I haue done with you.
Saue you Maſter Careleſſe.
Maſter Spruſe you haue much honour'd mee vvith your preſence.
I mett vvith a diſaſter comming vp, ſomething has raviſht the taſſell of my Garter, and diſcompos'd the vvhole fabricke, 'tvvill coſt mee an houres patience to reforme it; I had rather haue ſeene the Common wealth out of order.
Sure it was not faſt tyed to your leg.
As faſt together, as the faſhion is for friends now adayes to be tyed, with certaine knots of complement, which the leaſt occaſion diſ-joynes. Ile onely tucke it vp, and when my better leaſure permits, reduce it to perfection.
What box haue you there?
A conceit, a conceit, a rare invention one of the happieſt that ever my witt teem'd withall.
Bleſſe me with the diſcovery.
You ſhall ſweare to be ſilent then.
As cloſe as that covering.
Then looke you, I will participate the myſtery; this petty fogging boxe promiſes that I have great ſuits in law, this is to delude the world now: But I muſt tell you I am a kind of a Sollicitor, an earneſt ſuitor to every wench I ſee.
Very pretty, proceed.
What doe you thinke I have in this boxe then?
I know not.
A bundle of blanke loue letters, ready pend with as much vehemency of affection, as I could get for money, only wanting the ſuperſcription of their names, to whom they ſhall be directed, which I can inſtantly, and with eaſe indorſe vpon acquaintance.
And ſo ſend them to your Miſtreſſe?
You vnderſtand mee. I no ſooner fall into diſcourſe with any Lady, but I profeſſe my ſelfe ardently in lone with her, and being departed, returne my Boy with one of theſe Letters, to ſecond it, as I ſaid paſſionately deciphering how much I languiſh for her. Which ſhee can not but deepely apprehend, together with the quickneſſe and promptitude of my ingenuitie in the diſpatch of it.
Ile practiſe this device. Prethee let mee ſee one of them, what's heere? To the fayre hands of—
I there wants a name, they fit any degree or perſon whatſoever.
Let mee ſee this then. To the Lady and Miſtreſſe of his thoughts, and ſervice.
There wants a name too. They are generall things.
Ile open it by your favour ſir, whats heere? Moſt reſplondent Lady, that may juſtly bee ſtiled, the accompliſhment of beautie, the Seat and manſion of all delight, and vertue, in whom meete the joy, and deſires of the happie. Some man heere perhapps might feare, in prayſing your worth, to heighthen your diſdayne, but I am forc'd though to the perill of my neglect, to acknowledge it: For to this houre my curious thoughts, and wandering, in the Spheare of feminine perfection, could never yet finde out a ſubiect like your ſelfe, that could ſo detaine and commaund my affection.
And ſo it goes on: How doe you like it?
Admirable good, put them up againe.
Nay I haue ſo ſtrange a wit, few men do jumpe with it.
All my delights are ſteept in Elegancie,
And cenſur'd by an Arbitration,
Before I doe approoue them; I haue ſearcht
The duſt of antiquity to find out
The rare inventions that I am verſt in,
My ſeverall Garbes and Poſtures of the body,
My rules for banquetting, and entertainment:
And for the titillation of my laughter,
Buffoones and Paraſites, for I muſt tell you,
I ſtill affect a learned luxury.
You haue a very compleat ſuit on too me thinkes.
Tis as freſh as the morning, and thats the grace on't, a new Play, and a Gentleman in a new ſuit, claime the ſame priviledge, at their firſt preſentment their eſtimation is double.
And whither now doe your employments direct you?
I tooke your lodging by the way, I am going to dazell the eyes of the Ladies with my apparition.
I am not ſo conformable as I could wiſh, or elſe I would attend you. I tooke up a new man, for pitties ſake, ſome three dayes ſince, to waite upon me, which fooliſh ſinne I will abandon whilſt I liue for it. Hee ran away with two hundred pounds, the remnant of a morgage, and ſince that I was put to a new perplexity to ſupply me.
By this hand, if you had ſpoke but yeſterday I could haue furniſht you.
Why what a rare way is here now, to engage a man for nothing? I muſt ſtudy it.
How does your brother digeſt the loſſe of his inheritance?
Very well ſure, for ſometimes he has nothing elſe to digeſt; and hee has enough of that too: it ſticks in his ſtomacke worſe then a Surfet. Alaſſe wee landed men are but fooles to him, it makes him ſober, and wiſe, very temperate.
Theres Valeria a fooliſh peeviſh thing that he cals Miſtreſſe, good for nothing but to whet a mans wit, and make a Whore on, I can't beleeue there's any reall loue betweene them.
Has ſhe received any of your Letters?
Yes twenty, and nothing will prevaile. I haue ſought to corrupt her any time this twelue moneth, and can doe no good on her, her father giues me opportunity out of pretence of good will, but I uſe it cleane contrary; for alaſſe, I can not loue any wench farther then to lye with her. I can not faſhion my tongue to ſpeake in any other Character. I would not willingly looſe all this time and labour. I'le make ſhort of it, either worke her to obedience, or doe her a miſchiefe.
Tis well reſolved, and there's her ſiſter Aemilia. She will glance ſometimes affectionately upon me; were it not a mad thing, when I haue ſold all my Land to her father to get her into advantage? I thinke that will be the end of it.
Me thinkes Lackwit her brother might ſtand thee in ſome ſtead for the conveyance.
Well tis the trueſt ſpaniell that, I put a hundred jeers upon him, and yet he loues me the better, I can pawne him as familiarly as my cloake.
The time cals upon me.
Ile diſmiſſe you, will you preſent my ſervice to the Ladies and excuſe me?
I ſhall bee proud to make my tongue the Organ of your commands ſir.
I will hold you no longer from your happineſſe, but I ſhall envie the intercourſe of your mirth.
Then he is paſt hope?
Hee has no ſenſe of his miſery, a ſtrong ſtupidity, a lethargy has poſſeſt him: his diſeaſe is infectious, it has caught hold of his eſtate, & brought that into a conſumption.
No meanes to reclaime him?
I know not what to apply, when remedies are hurtful, giue him good counſell, and you poyſon him.
I would my brother had beene better adviſed, then to giue his Land to a Prodigall.
Fitter indeed the right Heire ſhould haue had it: you might doe well to turne your compaſſion upon him: a poore iniur'd Gentleman, and ſtands equall in your blood.
No Ile marry a wife, and get an heire of mine owne, I haue made a motion to Maſter Little good the Vſurer, about one of his daughters, and wee are partly agreed, I am going to aske her good will in it.
Looke you ſir. Pray ſtand by, here hee comes with his trayne.
Is it not well reſolu'd Captaine?
Yes by the ſoule of Hercules, tis a good foreſight, to ſell all and prevent misfortunes. The world's full of uncertaineties: Land may be barren, ſervants deceitfull, make money I ſay, & what a man ſpends with his friends, ſhal ne're periſh.
I ſay by the heart of valour, that man liues beſt at eaſe, that has no money at all.
What ſhall he doe then Lieutenant?
By the faith of a ſouldier, for the exerciſe of his wits hee may doe any thing: if all trades fayle he may turne Pimpe, tis a noble profeſſion to liue by, if he can performe that office well, hee need aske no more of his Genius.
Body of me, nor no better preferment.
As I am a ſinner tis a good ſcience, a mathematicall myſterie of undermining holds, and when the breach is open, be the firſt man that ſhall enter.
But I thinke there bee ſo many of them, they can hardly liue one for an other.
As I am vertuous tis growne into credit, and you haue very good men that ſtudy it. Good Knights and Squiers that haue thriu'd by it.
Stab me, what ſullen Saturne is that, lookes ſo oblique upon us, as I am Martiall I will confront his aſpect.
Good Captaine be appeas'd, it is my Vncle, I can not avoyd him: let me entreat your abſence for a while, meet me at the Horſe-ſhooe.
Fire of my blood you ſhall rule me: come Lieutenant.
Shall I ſpeake or hold my peace?
E'ne which you pleaſe, good Vncle.
I tis all one to you, for any impreſſion I ſhall make: would I could refraine to take notice of thee, but ſtill nature over ſwayes me, and affection breaks out into counſell but to no purpoſe.
Troth vncle youth will haue his ſwing.
I upon a Gallowes, if you hold on, that will bee the end of you. That I ſhould liue to ſee my brothers goods ſo miſpent, the life of his labours ſuckt out by ſuch Horſeleaches.
Horſeleaches, doe you know what you ſay? no, you doe not apprehend the worth that dwels in theſe men: to ſee how a man may be miſtaken in the diſtinction of vertue.
Nay ſir, tis as I told you, you may as ſoone recall an arrow when tis flying, or a ſtone from praecipice, as reclaime him.
Oh vncle, that you ſhould thus carpe at my happines, and traduce my Camradoes, men of ſuch ſpirit and valour.
Yes, Captaine and Lieutenant, how a vengeance came they by theſe titles? fellowes that haue beene onely fleſht in the ruine of blacke pots, and glaſſe windowes, the very skum of all rudeneſſe.
Haue you any money about you?
What to doe?
Bribe me to keepe counſell: you are but a dead man if they know on't: you haue puſt out your ſoule in their calumnies.
Hang them fellowes ſo ſordid, that no diſgrace can ſticke upon them, they are choyſe company; for there's hardly the like of them. A man cannot diſcerne the ground of their diſcourſe for oaths, unleſſe you were divorc'd from all reaſon, you would not be wedded to ſuch acquaintance.
Why how now mungrell, are you barking? by this ayre tis an indignity to my diſcretion, that is ſo happy in the election of their vertues: the onely prime wits in towne, things come ſo rarely from them, a man is kept in a perpetuall appetite. I would not let them ſtay to offend you, neither can I endure their reproach. Farewell vncle.
Well I will not trouble my ſelfe any more to looke after him, Ile marry, and thruſt him out of all, that's the concluſion.
Deſinit Actus primus.
But are you certaine of it?
I oreheard it.
When ſhe did plot her owne deſtruction,
And ſeald it with her hand, and kiſt upon't.
You know Aurelio?
Yes ſir, was it he?
That Begger, that undone thing.
Let me alone
To fetch her off the quick-ſands, and then Ile board her,
And ſteere her my ſelfe.
That I were ſo happy
To know ſhe lou'd you. Huſwife doe you heare?
Here is a Gentleman has Land and meanes,
And wit, and beauty, more I wis then tother:
Make much of him, and what he ſayes, be rul'd by him.
Let me alone, I warrant you.
I leaue you.
Now all the powers of loue aſſiſt me in it,
To counterfeit a Paſſion and Diſſemble.
All my delight's to foole them, and then leaue them.
I ſerue your women, as the Hollanders
Doe by ſome townes they get; when they haue wonne them,
They ſlight them ſtraight. Now I addreſſe my ſelfe.
Lady how fare you? you are melancholy.
If you doe know't ſo well, why doe you aske me?
Tis from the tender care I haue of you:
But an ill fate purſues my true endeavours,
To haue them ſtill miſconſtrued: Tis not well done,
To lay the burthen of your cruelty
On my affection, and to make that faith,
The paſſiue ſubject of your dire disdaine,
That is ſo actiue in obedience.
Pray let me counſell you.
Counſell, whats that?
Not Phoebus with his art, or all the drugs
Of Theſſaly can eaſe my griefe; the Sea
Knowes no ſuch ſtraight as I now labour in.
Why whats the matter?
Oh my heart, my heart.
Would you would rip it up, that you might ſee
Your ſelfe enthron'd, and all my faculties
Paying their homage to your memory.
I thinke I doe it indifferently.
All this and more, Lovers can ſpeake at pleaſure.
Propoſe a courſe how I might winne beliefe:
Were there a way to it, as deepe with danger,
As to the Center, I will ſearch it out.
When I haue nothing elſe to doe.
Your thoughts haue found ſuch eaſie utterance,
That I ſuſpect their truth, they ſeeme to ſavour
Of art, more then of paſſion. I haue heard
Great griefes are ſilent, neither doe I find
Thoſe Symptomes of affection in your lookes.
You change no colour, and your ioynts are ſtedy.
Your eyes appeare too full of petulancie,
As if they did reflect with inward ſcorne,
T'upbrayd your falſhood.
Now by all my hopes,
By all the rites that crowne a happy vnion,
And by the roſie tincture of your cheeks,
And by your all ſubduing eyes, more bright
Then heaven.
Hold there.
I prize you 'boue the world.
What ſhould I ſay, when vowes cannot prevaile:
If you perſiſt, and ſtill ſo cruell be,
Ile ſweare there's no plague like loues tyrannie.
And all this while I doe not care a pin for her.
I haue engagd it to your friend already.
But loue makes no diſtinction.
If you ſay ſo,
I muſt debarre my heart the knowledge of you.
This will not doe, I muſt be more laſcivious.
Come my faire Venus, ſit by thy Adonis.
What doe you ſtart? are you afraid of loue,
That is all faire, and from whoſe brighteſt heaven,
Are blowne away all ſwolne clouds of deſpaire?
His brow is ſmooth, and all his face beſet
With bankes full of delight, a golden Chaine
Of wanton ſmiles hangs round about his neck;
And all his way before him ſtrew'd with roſes.
Come let us ſit and dally, taſt thoſe pleaſures.
Loue is no niggard, we may eate and ſurfet.
And yet our dainties ſtill remaine as freſh,
As they were never toucht.
Iſt come to that?
I thought whither you tended. I am unskilfull:
Vntaught in thoſe deepe, but ill myſteries.
Ile teach you all, and lead your wandring ſteps,
Through all thoſe wayes, where to find the way
Will be to looſe it.
I am very ſorry,
The times diſeaſe has ſo prevail'd upon you.
Tis the perfection now of complement,
The onely end to corrupt honeſty.
To proſtitute your oathes, and winne our hearts
To your beliefe, is the Court eloquence.
Theſe are harſh tunes, and ill become your beauty:
Whoſe proper paſſion ſhould be wantonneſſe.
Why ſhould you looſe the benefit of youth,
And the delights? giue freedome to your will.
When age and weakeneſſe mortifies your thoughts,
You may correct this looſeneſſe.
Sir I cannot
Heare you with ſafetie.
I muſt dye then, I am ſlaine, unleſſe
Thoſe words, and ſmiles, that wounded me, doe heale me.
Had I knowne that, I'd haue condemnd them both,
To ſilence and obſcurity.
You had then,
Rob'd nature of her beſt perfection.
And that had beene a ſacriledge. Nay ſweet,
Your beauty is a thing communicable,
And though you doe impart, you may retaine it.
Sir I haue ſumm'd th'accounts of all your cares,
And I doe find their number more then weight.
Things but of cuſtome with you, and your vowes
Are but a cloud of wind, and emptineſſe;
Forc'd by the ſtorme of luſt. When it is over,
And your thoughts calm'd, then you will loue that vertue,
Which as a tye and Anchor did withhold you,
From driving to deſtruction. So I leaue you.
That ever any woman ſhould be vertuous;
I haue incloſ'd a fire within my breaſt,
Will burne this frame of nature into cinders,
Her beauty has ſurpris'd mee, I am caught
In love; by this light, twere a mad jeſt now
If I ſhould turne honeſt, and woe her ſo:
If ſhee perſiſts, I muſt doe ſo beleeu't,
And hate my ſelfe, as long as I liue for it.
Well I have playd ſo long about the candle,
That my wings are ſing'd with it, ſhee is honeſt
I ſee it, and that ſomething in this age.
Out of theſe doubts ſome ſtrange thing vvill ariſe,
A ſtrong diſeaſe muſt have ſtrong remedies.
Crochet vvhere are you?
I am heere ſir.
Crochet you know, that I am determind to marry my other daughter Aemilia, to old Dotario the Citizen.
Yes ſir, and then ſhee and I ſhall be both in one predicament.
How ſo man?
Why ſir, for ought that I can perceive, ſhee is like to haue but a cold reverſion, and thats the ordinary allowance for men of my function, ther's not ſo much left of him, as will ſatisfie a Ladyes appetite for once, hee is pickt to the very bones vvith age, and diſeaſes.
Tis no matter ſo long as his purſe is vvell cram'd.
His purſe that ſhee lookes after is lanke enough I vvarrant it, it greiues mee to the heart, that ſuch a young beginner as my Miſtriſſe, ſhould have no better hopes of trading.
Belike thou thinkſt that Nature is vncharitable in him, no he has benevolence in ſtore for her; vvhat becauſe he is old, I am old my ſelfe, man.
And if he vvere older, tvvere no great matter.
If I vvere older knave?
No ſir, if he vvere older.
Why vvhat then?
His death would the ſooner make her honourable: for hauing one foote in the bed, and the other in the grave, if ſhee be rul'd by mee, 'tis but her giving him a lift, and the next turne marry with a Lord.
Sayſt thou mee ſo?
Yes ſir, a Citizens wife no ſooner caſts her rider, but one of your Court gallants mounts her preſently.
The knaue is very pleaſant.
Why ſir, your Citizens widdows are the onely rubbiſh of the kingdom, to fill vp the breaches of decayed houſes.
Whats her preferment then, Crochet?
Why then ſir, ſhee ſhall be made a Lady at the leaſt, and take place of her mother. Shee ſhall haue clyents waite at her gates with preſents, and yet haue their ſervile offices paſſe vnregarded, ſhee ſhall mannage her husbands eſtate, and adviſe him in his office.
Is that all?
No ſir, ſhee ſhall haue more privileges then that, to be as proud as ſhee liſt, and haue new wayes to expreſſe it, ſhee ſhall ride vp and downe in her Litter, and haue a Coach, and foure Horſes follow after, full of Gentlemen Vſhers and waiting women.
And yet the fooliſh girle will not perceiue it.
Alas ſir, though you and I haue ſo much wit to looke into theſe things, how ſhould my yong Miſtriſſe be capable of it, when her husband that ſhall be is not able to put the caſe to her?
Go, fetch her hither, Ile adviſe my ſelfe.
O theſe perverſe girles, that are led with nothing, but fancy fooliſh things, and yet have wit to bee obſtinate, if they ſet vpon a toy, they muſt haue it becauſe they are wilfull, then they are as changeable in love as a Camelion, and thinke they can liue by the ayre of it. They wil venter to ſell their fathers fortunes and their owne, for a nights lodging.
Come Aemilia, theſe ſhowers are vnſeaſonable. They will extinguiſh the torch, that ſhould burne bright before thy unptiall; be not diſmayd, you are young and ſo is Aurora, ſhee lookes freſh every morning: yet diſdaines not to kiſſe her old Tithou, and lyes all night with him, and when ſhee riſes, betrayes with her bluſhes, the wanton heat of her paramour.
Good ſir, thinke your power may command my duty, but not my affection.
Tempt not my patience, I would not willingly vſe the authority of a father to command, what I had rather winne by entreaty.
You know ſir, the incovenience ſtill happens to theſe forc'd matches, they never come to good, and if you compell mee to like of him, you muſt expect the ſame iſſue, you ſhall neuer make mee any other preſident.
Not when I entreat you?
I ſhall never love him.
And you know ſir, what an ominous thing it is, when a woman does not loue her husband, ſhee will either cuckold him, or poyſon him, and ſo be burnt for a Martyr in wedlock. a Lit. Shee muſt faſhion her ſelfe to loue him, I have vndertooke it.
And then Ile vndertake for the tother.
Will ſhee haue her liberty reſtrain'd? will ſhee renounce my protection? ſhall not I diſpoſe of her? if not, let her vſe her pleaſure, betray her ſelfe, like her other ſiſter to beggery, be like Scylla, cut the purple haire of my life, and then turne Monſter, let her.
Oh mee, what ſhall I doe? would my life were a ſacrifice.
Ile tell you what you ſhall doe, be adviſ'd; refuſe not a good offer, thinke of old Dotario, thinke how to love him, thinke of his wealth, thinke of his honour, thinke of mee, thinke of your ſelfe, thinke what will come after, if you be ſtubborne.
And what ere you think to do, ſay nothing Miſtreſſe.
Well Crochet, Ile leaue thee to perſwade her whil'ſt I fetch the old man to confime it
O my diſtracted thoughts, and the raſh counſell
Of lone and hatred, when they are oppos'd
By avarice of parents, that confine
Their childrens fancies to there ſordid mind.
Were the bright ſunne their of spring, they would joyne him,
Vnto the earth, if gold might be ingendred.
Wee in our ſelues haue no part, if debard
The election of our love, and our condition
Is worſe then beaſts, whoſe will acknowledgeth
No check in that; the Turtle takes her mate
Without compulſion, and in Summers prime,
Each bird will chuſe out her owne Valentine.
Well, Miſtreſſe you doe not apprehend the good you may have, by marrying of an old man.
Prethee what good?
Firſt, beſides the honour he ſhall conferr vpon you by his age, you ſhall not find him ſo fiery, and vnruly as commonly your youths are, and therevpon being cold of his tempter, you may the eaſier mannage him.
Thy mirth comes importunely on my greife.
Then you ſhall be his darling, and he ſhall dote vpon you, and though he ſtriues to pleaſe you never ſo much, he ſhall lament, that he can doe it no better, and acknowledge his weakeneſſe, that he comes ſhort of your deſert, and what he deſires, and be ſorry, that all he has, is too little for you.
I perceive it well enough Crochet.
The onely thing that you need feare him for, is his tongue, for they ſay old men are great talkers, but you'l match that member well enough, and for any other part about him, you'l have but little to doe withall.
Looke you here comes the old Leacher, he lookes as freſh as an old play new vampt, pray ſee how trim hee is, and how the Authours have corrected him, how his Taylor, and his Barber have ſet him forth; ſure he has receiued an other impreſſion
I thinke the foole will be tedious.
Well, now I have brought you together, heere Ile leaue you, when lovers parly, Parents are no fitt Auditors; ſee that you vſe the Gentleman reſpectiuely, and though ſir, ſhee ſeeme coy and deny you, impute it not to perverſenes but modeſty. Mayds in their firſt aſſaults conſult with ſhame, in the next with weakeneſſe. So I leave you,
Faire Miſtreſſe, I would aske you a queſtion, if you pleaſe to anſwer me.
No Miſtreſſe of yours Sir, yet if you aske nothing but what I pleaſe to anſwer, you may.
I would firſt demand your opinion of me.
Truly I have no skill to make any conjecture by the outward appeareance, but by the Title page of your face, I ſhould judge you to be ſomewhat ancient.
Take my word for it, the Index is falſe printed, if you pleaſe to turne to the booke, you ſhall find no ſuch thing written.
O tis worme eaten, time has cankerd it, beſides there be ſo many daſhes, my vnderſtanding will not ſerve mee to reade it, and a woman has no vſe of her Clergy.
But love has renew'd it ſweete Lady, and this is another edition.
How long is it ſince the coppy has beene alter'd?
Let it not ſeeme ſtrange to you that I have felt this transformation, your forme has wrought a miracle vpon me, the pulchritude of your feature, that is able to extract youth out of age, and could make Aeſon young againe, without the helpe of Medea, it has put a fire into mee, and I muſt impute it neither to Herbes, nor Philtrums, but to the influence, and power of your beauty.
A fire, 'tis a fooliſh one, that leades you without the precinct of your gravity, I ſtrange, a man of your judgement ſhould talke ſo prepoſterouſly.
Why ſweete Lady?
Sweete Lady, what a petulant word is there, for a man of your beard? a Boy of fifteene would not have ſpoke it without bluſhing, and ther's a ſmile able to turne my ſtomack. I wonder you will make your ſelfe ſo ridiculous.
If this be the beſt language ſhee can afford him, 'twere ſafe for mee not to heare it. I may be call'd for a witneſſe.
Stay Crochet, whither goeſt thou?
Ile come preſently ſir, Ile come preſently.
Now you are alone, Ile tell you what I thinke of you, you are an old doting foole, one that twenty yeares ſince, has drunke the Lethe of humanity, and forgot of what ſexe thou wert, worne out of all remembrance of thy ſelfe, thou haſt a body, that a feaver cannot heat, nor poyſon worke upon, a face more rugged then winter, thy beard is moſſe, and thy skin ſo hard, that the perpetuall dropping of thy noſe cannot ſoften it.
Theſe indignities are not to be endur'd, her abuſes are more monſtrous, then the prodegie ſhee would make of me.
And yet you would bee in loue forſooth, whom Cupid with all his ſtrength is not able to pierce, you haue not one pore open to let in an Arrow, more need haue a cordiall to comfort you.
Ranke iniuries, mocke me to my teeth.
If you had any.
I would your father heard you: he left no ſuch thing in your Commiſſion. How dare you doe it?
Yes and if I marry you, Ile uſe you accordingly, Ile haue no mercy on thy age, I tell you before hand, that when it happens, it may not ſeeme ſtrange to you.
Well ſhee may play with the line, Ile giue her ſcope enough, but when I haue her faſt, Ile twitch her, and draw her as I liſt to me.
Doe but heare what I ſay to you, and it ſhall fall out, no Prognoſtication like it.
Sure tis ſome fury, it cannot be a woman ſhee is ſo impudent.
When I am your wife, if you are ſo hardy to venter on me, your whole ſtudy ſhall be to pleaſe me, and yet I will not grace it with acceptance; I will liue as your Empreſſe, lye a bed, and command you, and your ſervants, and you ſhall not dare to anger me.
Not dare to anger you.
No if you doe, I will fill the houſe with noyſe, and deafe thee with clamours.
Sweet heart you ſhall haue all content, I loue a life theſe ſpirited wenches, that are all fire and motion, they ſtirre a quickneſſe in a man, in fuſe an activity.
Hee will not be put off, I muſt terrifie him farther: and for your eſtate, you ſhall not meddle with it, Ile take up your rents for you, and diſpoſe of them, as I thinke fit; onely Ile allow you to carry ſome farthings in your pouch to giue to Beggers.
And what will you doe with the reſt ſweeting?
For the reſt, Ile ſpend it upon my ſelfe in bravery: there ſhall not be a new faſhion, but Ile haue it. Ile looke after nothing elſe; your houſe ſhall be a mart for all trades. Ile keepe twenty continually at worke for me; as Taylors, Perfumers, Painters, Apothecaries, Coach-makers, Sempſters, and Tire-women. Beſides Embroyderers, and Penſions for intelligencers.
Shee'l waſte all I haue in a moneth: the expences of an Army will not maintaine her.
Beſides, I will haue acquaintance with all the Ladies in Court, and entertaine them with banquets, yet for all that I will make my complaint of you to them, traduce your infirmities, and they ſhall conſpire againſt you, and pitty mee.
I had rather bee under twenty Executions, then the laſh of their tongue.
Then you ſhall kiſſe mee very ſeldome, and when I vouchſafe you the favour: and you ſhall doe it not as a huſband, but as a father, not a ſmacke of laſciviouſneſſe.
What a ſanctified creature ſhall I enioy?
I will lye with you the firſt yeare once a moneth, as a Parſon vſes to inſtruct his Cure, and yet not bee queſtion'd for neglect, or non reſidence: marry the next yeare, if you liue ſo long, once a quarter ſhall ſuffice you.
The next yeare if I liue ſo long? ſhee thinkes of my death already.
Theſe are the leaſt of your evils. I will haue one to cuckold you, and you ſhall take it for a curteſie, and uſe him the kindlier for it.
Oh me, I can endure it no longer, that word ſtrikes cold to my heart: were I an enemy, and ſhee had vanquiſht mee, I would not yield to ſuch Articles. Ile propoſe theſe conditions to her father, and ſee if hee will allow them in all conſcience to be reaſonable.
Maſter Careleſſe promis'd to bee here inſtantly. Ile tell him what a fine youth he has to his Vncle.
Here is the Gulph that I wallowes all my Land:
And to this deſperate Whirlepit am I reeling.
And there's the ſmooth ſtreame that muſt guide me to it.
Were I as provident, as was Ʋliſſes,
That Syren there might ſing me to my ruine.
Saue you faire Lady.
Saue you Maſter Careleſſe.
Will you heare me ſpeake any wiſe ſentences?
I am now as diſcreet in my conceit,
As the ſeven Sophyes of Greece, I am full
Of Oracles, I am come from Apollo,
Would he had lent me his Tripos to ſtand upon;
For my two legges can hardly carry me.
Whence come you, from Apollo?
From the heaven
Of my delight, where the boone Delphicke God,
Drinkes ſacke, and keepes his Bacchanalias,
And has his incenſe, and his Altars ſmoaking,
And ſpeakes in ſparkeling propheſies; thence doe I come.
My braines perfum'd with the rich Indian vapour,
And heightned with conceits: from tempting beauties,
From dainty Muſicke and Poeticke ſtraines,
From bowles of Nectar, and Ambroſiacke diſhes:
From witty Varlets, fine Companions,
And from a mighty continent of pleaſure,
Sayles thy braue Careleſſe. Where's your father Lady?
I thought I had beene worthy ſalutation.
Theſe Ceremonies are aboliſht with me.
I kiſſe none but my Punke, but in this humour,
Ile kiſſe any body. Ile marry thee;
But not a penny joynture.
Where I loue,
I will not ſtand upon conditions.
I would accept this invitation,
But thy father is a Vſurer, a Iew.
And if I marry in his tribe I ſhall thriue,
And I hate thriving. I am come to morgage,
To pawne, or ſell Lady.
Doe you want money?
Doe I want money? let me conſter this.
Tis a good promiſing queſtion, and requires
A ſober politicke anſwer, yes I want money.
I haue not ready coyne; but there's a jewell
Will fetch you twenty pound.
But doe you dare truſt me?
I giue it freely.
Then I ſay thy father,
In getting thee has redeemed all his ſinne.
She has confirm'd my loue, and I will marry her.
Let me ſurvay it well, tis an Amethiſt.
Why doe you aske?
Becauſe they ſay that ſtone
Has ſecret vertue in it to recover,
A man that's intoxicated, and I doe find
That I am not ſo drunke, as I was.
O Maſter Careleſſe here has beene your Vncle
A woing to me.
What that peece of ſtockfiſh,
That has kept Lint thus long, would haue young fleſh now.
If hee could get it.
Tis ſuch a ranke Goat.
I made ſuch ſport with him, and terrified him, how I would uſe him if I were his wife,
That he is frighted hence.
Tis well done of you, he upbrayded me to
That he would marry, but Ile croſſe his worſhip.
Wee'll vexe him ten times worſe yet, I haue plots
Maturing in my head, ſhall crowne thy wit,
And make him deſperate, that he ſhall dye,
And leaue us nothing. I would not be troubled,
With any of his wealth, no not ſo much,
As to mourne for him, but I cannot ſtand
Now to relate it. Come Aemilia.
I haue declar'd my mind, but when ile doe it,
Ile in, and ſleepe, and dreame upon't, and tell thee.
Bring me to that, and ile yield to any thing.
Nay, good wife heare me.
You ſhall pardon me: he is my ſonne I hope, as well as yours, and he ſhall bee faſhion'd after my humour: why, ſhould you thinke to hinder my proſpect from looking to him? I ſay he ſhall ranke with the beſt, ſpend his money and learne breeding.
Doe, make a Gallant of him or a Gull, either will ſerue, he may ride up and downe, and haue his Coach waite for him at Playes and Tavernes, take up upon truſt, conſort with wits and ſword-men, bee afraid of Sergeants, and ſpend more for his Protection then would pay the debt: he may be a Stickler for quarrels, and compound them at his owne charge: reele every night to his lodging, and be viſited in the morning with borrowing Letters, dice at Ordinaries, and lend on all hands.: ſeale at all houres, or be beaten to it. Theſe are gifts in a ſonne, beyond art or nature, for a father to be proud of, or elſe he may runne away with all he can get, and when tis gone, lye at a neighbours houſe till his peace be made.
No you ſhall keepe him ſtill at home with you; he ſhall not dare to enlarge his Charter, to haue any more wit then his father, let him ſit in the ſhop with nere a paire of cuffs on his hands, and play at Fox and Geeſe with the foreman, entertaine cuſtomers, with a diſcourſe as moatheaten as your cloath, and not be able to looke upon a Lady, but court ſome filly creature of his owne tribe, with ſpeeches out of bookes, ten times worſe then any remnant; and after ſupper ſteale abroad and be drunke in feare, this you can be content with. Well, when he was a child, it was the prettieſt talking thing, and the wittieſt withall, the neighbours tooke ſuch delight to heare it. There was a good Knight lay in my houſe then was ſo kind to him, but you nere knew the reaſon, ſince you haue cleane marr'd him that's apparant.
Ile doe any thing wife that you will haue me.
Yes when tis too late; and the cuſtome of ruſticity is growne into an other nature with him, when his mind is ſetled upon the Lees of it, and the edge of his humour quite taken off, when learning has brought downe his ſpirit, then you'l repent his reſtraint; has he not a pretty ingenuity?
So much the worſe, when tis corrupted: marke mee what I ſay, giue him the reines, and if Fidlers ſleepe in a weeke, Tavernes keepe their doores ſhut, the Conſtable ſit on a ſtall in peace, or wenches walke the ſtreets for him (if he be like his father) nere credit me againe.
So much the better, I would haue it ſo, giue him meanes to performe it, ſhew your ſelfe a loving father, and be true in your propheſie.
I muſt yield to her for my quietneſſe ſake, was ever man thus tyed to a Chymera, thus vext with that ſhould bee his happineſſe. I haue married with tumult, and begot my affliction, not one of my generation will be rul'd; and for my wife, ſhee has a tongue will runne poſt ſixteene ſtages together, and nere tire for it; with that ſhe can worke me to any agreement. Well take your ſonne to your charge, doe what you liſt with him: but for the wenches, Ile either chuſe them husbands, or elſe they ſhall trudge without any other Dowry, then what nature has beſtowed on them, that's certaine.
Within there, call your young Maſter hither Crotchet, hee has beene all this day at his ſtudy, makes the boy mopiſh with his ſcholerſhip, for want of better exerciſe; as revelling, courting, feaſting, and the like, be ſtands plodding and muſing as if his eyes turn'd with a wire, it has poyſond his very complexion, he is growne fallow with it, I know not what would become of him, if I did not ſometimes put money in his purſe, and ſend him abroad, to ſinne for his recreation.
Sweet wife be pacified.
No, Ile teach you what tis to anger a woman that brought a Dowry with her.
See what a Picture of formality you haue made of him, come hither ſonne Lackwit, what booke haue you there?
This is a booke of Heraldry forſooth, and I doe find by this booke that the Lackwits are a very ancient name, and of large extent, and come of as good a Pedegree, as any is in the Citie; beſides they haue often matcht themſelues into very great families, and can quarter their Armes, I will not ſay with Lords, but with Squiers, Knights, Aldermen, and the like, and can boaſt their deſcent to be as generous, as any of the Lafooles, or the Iohn Dawes whatſoever.
What be the Armes ſonne?
The Lackwits Armes, why they are three Aſſes rampant, with their eares prickant, in a field Or, and a Rams head for their creſt, that's the Armes.
Well ſaid ſonne, ſtand for the credit of the houſe.
Nay, I will uphold it beſides, though my father be a Citizen, yet I am a Gentlemans ſonne by the mothers ſide.
I that he is ile be ſworne, the Fondlings are as good Gentlemen, as any be in the Citie, the boy has a Parlous head, how ſhould he find out this I marvaile?
Find it out, as if I were ſuch a foole, I did not know my owne Coat.
Yet husband, I never ſaw you weare one in my life.
Not a fooles coate, but I ſhall haue one of your Spinning very ſhortly.
Ile tell you father if I lift now; I can goe twenty degrees backe like a crab, to find out the tracke of our gentility.
Loe you there, can you bee content thou man perverſe to all reaſon, having a ſonne of ſo large and proſperous hopes, that might ſtand up the glory of his kindred, of ſuch pregnancie of wit and underſtanding, ſo rich in the qualities that can beare up a Gentleman, to let him ſinke, and not cheriſh him with thoſe helpes that might advance his gallantry. You haue had your floriſhing ſeaſon, and are now withered, your bloſſomes of beauty are blowne off & therefore muſt be content out of that dry ſtalke to afford ſome ſap to maintaine his ſucceſſion; pray how many young Gentlemen haue you in this Towne, that goe in pluſh, and their fathers to plow in the countrey? ſhall we haue worſe Preſidents in the Citie? impart I ſay, and giue him twenty peeces, and when they are gone giue him twenty more.
What to doe?
Will you diſparadge him, as if he knew not what to doe with it? doe you thinke that Fencers, Dancers, Horſematches (Ile haue him verſt in all theſe, and omit nothing that may demonſtrate his breeding;) beſides Miſtreſſes, and implements that belong to them require, nothing?
Was ever any mother in this humour? that ſhould reclaime her ſonne from his ill courſes, to animate him, and ſupply his ryot: let her enioy her follies, ſmart for them, and then repent; here hold, there's twenty peeces, I am ſure all throwne away, they are in a conſumption already, and will be dead, and drawne out by to morrow. What thinkeſt thou Crotchet?
Nay ſir they are condemn'd, that's certaine, you haue paſt your iudgement upon them, and my young Maſter muſt execute it.
I giue it loſt Crotchet, I giue it loſt; but ſtay, my daughters; I had need haue Argus eyes to looke about mee, or the Dragons that watcht the Heſperides: I am beſet on all hands; my daughters are wily, my wife wilfull, my ſonne I know not what, with the feare of my money, doe ſo diſtract me, that my wits are diſioynted amongſt them, all the remainder of my hopes is, if Valeria haue prooved tractable to Mr. Spruſe, and that Dotario has received comfort in his Aemilia. I labour with expectation till I goe in, and be delivered.
Stay husband, Ile go with you: but harke you ſon Lackwit, doe you know to what purpoſe this gold was given you?
To no purpoſe at all, but I know, what I purpoſe to doe with it.
What iſt?
I purpoſe to make a medicine of it.
A medicine.
Yes I will diſſolue it into Aurum potabile, and drinke nothing but healths with it.
Then you are right.
Nay I will domineer, and haue my humors about me too.
Doe any thing, for the improuement of your diſcipline. Come Crotchet.
Stay Crotchet, doe you perceiue nothing? you dull animall looke here.
I ſir, I hope you meane to giue me one, or two of them.
No, I will not giue, nor lend a friend a penny, there's no ſuch confutation of a mans being a Gentleman; but when I am drunke, and haue my wine and my whores about me, Ile ſpend twenty or thirty ſhillings upon you, but I will not giue you a penny Crotchet.
Then farewell ſir.
You know where to come to me, you ſhall find me in my pentificalibus.
COme ſiſter, though our liberty be ſtraightned,
Our mind ſtands free, without compulſion,
There's none can make a rape upon our will.
Well if they underſtood a women truely,
They would not ſeeke to curbe ſo, whoſe nature
Rejoyces like a torrent, to make way
Spight of impediments. Now if their wiſedome
Should let us alone, we might perhaps our ſelues
Find out the inconvenience, and prevent it,
Which they like a falſe perſpectiue would ſeeke,
To multiply upon us.
I ſhall never
Recall that faith, which I haue plighted once
To my Aurelio. Ile runne all hazards,
And violent attempts, to throw my ſelfe
Into his armes.
I would not haue you leaue him,
Nor yet turne deſperate. Now would I rather
Get him by ſome deviſe, I loue a witty
And an ingenuous tricke aboue my life:
And ſhould take more delight to over-reach them,
Then to enjoy my purpoſe.
But I dare not
Play with my fortune ſo, nor truſt adventures,
If Fate would be ſo gratious to preſent
An opportunity.
Come feare it not.
You ſee what a man they would put upon me,
Might be my father. H' has leſſe vigour in him,
Then any Catamite. There's not reſeru'd
So much as one maſculine graine in him.
A fellow that's as bald, as a Lookinglaſſe,
And whoſe diſeaſes are beyond Arithmeticke:
Not a joynt of him free, a gowty numneſſe
Has ſeiz'd his feete and fingers, and there's all
The ſtiffeneſſe he has left: and were I married
I muſt ſpend all my life in rubbing of him
With hot wollen cloaths, and applying Plaiſters,
And Cataplaſmes, and trenchers to his belly;
Muſt undergoe the perſon of a Chirurgion,
Not of a wife: and yet I am not terrified:
It moues me not, I make a jeaſt of it;
Becauſe I meane t' abuſe them all, and chuſe
Where I like beſt.
It is a happy ſpirit,
That rules in you, I would I had one like it.
Like me; thou haſt not ſtudied thy ſelfe ſo well:
Nor haſt that ſeaſon of thy mother in thee.
Obſerue her faſhions, take example by them:
Although her husband be penurious,
Hard as the mettle, that he dotes upon.
Yet ſhe can make him mallemable, and worke him,
And turne, and hammer him, and wire-draw him,
And rule him with as much correction,
As one would wiſh to governe. For my part;
When I haue ſtretcht my braines, made all the ſhifts,
The wit of woman can be pregnant of.
And ſhew'd my loue by ſuch experience,
As ſhall outſtrip beliefe, all for his ſake
That ſhall enioy me, which is Maſter Careleſſe.
And when he has me, if hee ſhall preſume,
On former paſſages of my affection,
To overſway me in the leaſt deſire,
To contradict, and tempt my patience,
Ile ſhake off all obedience, and forget it.
Ile ſlight him, yet prevaile.
Alaſſe my heart is
Tender, and violable with the leaſt weapons,
Sorrow can dart at me.
You are a foole,
And every one that will can make you ſo:
When was your ſweet heart Maſter Spruſe here with you?
But lately, and preſented ſuch a Scene
Of proteſtations, and then varied it,
So cunningly, that loue and luſt together
Were interwoven with ſuch ſubtle threads,
That I could ſcarce diſtinguiſh them.
Take heed,
What ere he ſpeakes, it tends but to corrupt you,
I'de ioyne commerce of language with a Sphinx,
Ere I'de daigne to anſwer him. Maſter Careleſſe
Told me his humours, ſeemes he boaſted of it,
He gaue his character, the moſt perfideous,
And loue abuſing creature in the world;
That all his vowes were treacherous: his ſmiles,
His words, and actions, like ſmall Rivulets,
Through twenty turnings of looſe paſſions,
At laſt would runne to the dead ſea of ſinne.
What ere he ſayes, I reſolue nere to truſt him.
Bee wiſe, and conſtant, and then governe fate:
And in the interim, how ere matters fall,
Wee I find a tricke wench, how to cheat them all.
See here he comes againe.
I come ſweet Lady,
To reare the trophies of your conqueſt up.
And yield my ſelfe the greateſt.
What's the matter?
Your lookes haue tane me priſoner. I am captiu'd,
Bound with the golden chaine of your looſe haire,
And on your frownes depends my deſtiny.
Tis about the old matter; you may ſaue
This labour, or goe ſeeke ſome new deviſe.
In faith theſe ſtale exordiums can not take me.
Indeed my ſiſter, and I, know you well enough.
But Lady ſince my change you doe not know me.
I am now Metamorphis'd, and that fancy
That roved, and was rebellious, by her power
Is brought within command.
I ſo you told me.
Here I preſent a ſad oblation.
A heart that bringeth its owne fire with it,
And burnes before your beanties diety.
Offer'd vp with as much deuotion,
As ever true loue ſacrifiſed any.
Well you may jeſt with mortalls, but I am not
So blind, but I can ſee through all your miſts:
Were I a goddeſſe, as you terme mee one,
Siſter to Phoebus, or armd like Minirva,
I would transforme you ſtraight; and fix you vp
A monument, for your Hypocriſy.
Now by that ſacred ſhrine, brighter then Venus.
To whom I pay my Orizons: that forme
That faire Idea, that rules all my thoughts,
Thy ſelfe I meane, that ſpotleſſe ſeat of pleaſure:
The continent of all perfection,
This ſpring of loue, that iſſues from my ſoule.
Runnes in a ſtreame as pure, as are your vertues,
Full fraught with zeale, immaculate and free
From all adulterate mixtures.
On my life.
I cannot frame mee to beleeue one word.
Hold thy owne there wench, and I warrant thee.
Phoebus, how haue I anger'd thee, to lay
Caſſandra's curſe on mee that was not truſted:
When ſhee ſpake true and moſt prophetically?
Sir, he that is accuſtom'd to deceiue.
Gaines this reward by it when he ſpeakes truth,
Not to be credited.
Obſerve mee Lady.
And marke the harmony, does it not ſound
Vpon the ſtring; as if my heart kept touch?
And ſo it ſounded firſt to the ſame tune.
That was ill ſett, this is a different paſſion.
But 'tis all ſhew; and nothing ſerious.
You can not judge by former evidence.
It is not fitt proofe to confirme this motion,
This is a true text, that a falſe gloſſe of it.
But I ſhall never ſo interpret it.
What can I ſay more, then to ſware I loue you.
But ſhould you now diſſolve your eyes to teares,
Were every accent in your ſpeach a ſigh,
And every geſture, every motion in you,
An Hierogliphicke to comend that loue:
Had you the ſpells of it, and magicke charmes
Set round about the circle of your armes,
To draw mee to you, I would ſeale my eares,
Deafe as the ſea, to ſhiprack't marriners:
And ſo I leave you to your better fortunes.
Am I deſpis'd, and ſlighted? fooliſh girle,
Th' haſt loſt thy ſelfe, that which is beſt in nature,
Turnes to the worſt corruption, my ſcorn'd loue
Shall now convert to hatred. Tis decreed,
Fraud and revenge ſhall be my counſellors;
Whats heere, a ring? ſhee loſt it now. I know it,
The ſame Aurelio, wont to weare on's finger;
He ſent it as a gift, 'tis ſo, the poeſy.
In loue I write
All my griefe, all my delight.
The very ſame. Were I beſt poyſon it,
And ſend it backe to her? No, it ſhall ſerve
To poyſon her good name; there's no foule fact,
That Love, when it is injur'd, dares not act.
Come honeſt Fido, thy beſt love ſupplys,
Part of my hoped fortunes. Thats true freindſhip,
Miſery cannot ſhake, which crownes thy merit.
Sir, could my power produce forth any thing
Worthy your acceptation, or my ſervice,
I would with hazard of my life performe it.
So much I owe your vertues, ſo much pitty
Your injuryes; but this poore taske ſo eaſy,
Conſiſting more of pollicie, then danger,
Giues not my loue an equall teſtimony.
You could not doe an office more deſerving,
Or gratefull to my ſoule, then to bring tidings
Hovv my love fares, each ſyllable ſhee ſpake,
Though by an eccho I receiue the voyce,
Is able to inſpire new life into mee.
How do's ſhee? is ſhee well? and mindfull of us:
Speake it a thouſand times; never did ſound
Touch a more gladſome eare.
By all curcumſtance
I could conjecture, I read in her lookes
A ſtrange diſturbance. When I gaue the ring,
A Letter to her, as if joy and feare,
Had runne on ſeuerall arrants, and return'd,
Swift as her thoughts, and ſpoke her loue in ſilence.
Th' haſt ſeene the treaſury of my happineſſe.
Speake, am I rich or no?
Shee is a Mine,
A ſtore-houſe of all beauty, all content:
Her brow a banke of pleaſure; her bright eyes
The cheefe and onely moouer of your loue,
So multiplyed their flames, that they appear'd
To mee moſt like a firmament of fires,
Yet chaſter then the Veſtall; and below
Clouded with ſorrow, which dropt pearles for you,
And do's incloſe a ſoule richer then it,
Wherein is lockt the wardrope of all vertues;
Yet ſure that ſoule had left her manſion,
But that ſhee ſtayes to bid you wellcome thither.
And why ſhould I be ſtaid from going to her?
Why ſhould a couetuous eye watch ore that wealth
That is my right, I will goe claime my due,
And juſtifie the ſeiſure. Why ſhould parents,
That can giue to their children, neither mindes,
Nor yet affections, ſtriue to governe both?
'Tis not juſtice: yet where ſhould I complaine?
Loue has no barre to pleade at, nor no lawes
To rule vs by, nor Court to judge our cauſe.
Sir, this is Captain Whibble, the Towne ſtale,
For all cheating imployments: a paraſite
Of a new ſect: none of your foothing Varletts,
But a ſwearing Sycophant, that frights a man
Into a beliefe of his worth; his Dialect
Is worſe then the report of a Cannon,
And deafes a ſtranger with tales of his valour,
Till his concluſion be to borrow money.
His company is a Cipher in the reckoning,
'That helpes to multiply it: your deare brother
Admires his diſcipline, and will ſweare to it.
Is this one of his comrades?
Sir, this is
His prime aſſociate. Ile lay a hundred pound,
I gueſſe by his phyſiognomy his buſineſſe,
Hee is either trudging now vnto a broaker,
Or to invite ſome new heire to a breakefaſt,
To ſeale for the commodity; or elſe
Wandring abroad to skelder for a ſhilling
Amongſt your bowling alleyes; moſt commonly
There lyes his ſcene: or perhapps man ſome whore,
A province that he vſually adornes.
Prethee good Fido, goe and baffull him:
Put an affront vpon him, if his valour
Prompt him to make reſiſtance, Ile ſtep out
And ſecond thee.
His valour? 'tis the leaſt
Thing to be fear'd, he has not one ſparke in him
To kindle a true anger.
Sulphur of Styx,
Can you not ſee? Death where be your eyes?
You'd haue me waſh them in the chanell, would you?
Yes very faine ſir, if you durſt attempt it.
Heart, doe you ſtemme mee? and he had a beake
He might have ſplit mee: body of Iupiter,
He ranne mee athwart the midſhips. Spirit of fury,
I thinke that he has ſprung a planke in mee.
Then you may lye by the Lee, and mend it.
Horrour of man, lay a Captaine aboard.
A man of warre, and not cry amaine to him?
How, you a Captaine? I rather beleeue
That you are one of thoſe that vpon ſervice,
Were ſeene to carry Tomkins in your Gunnes,
And made a ſhift to diſcharge a league of:
Was it not ſo? that might take vp your bullet,
And ſhoote againe, and doe no hurt with it.
You a man of warre?
S'life doe you queſtion it?
Ile tell thee Slaue to thy aſtoniſhment,
I haue bene ſtil'd, the rocke of Pirats, I;
I haue plowd vp the Sea, till Boſphorus
Has worſhipt me; I haue ſhot all the Gulphes,
And ſeene the navell of the world, you ſtinkard.
How ſlaue, and ſtinkard, ſince you are ſo ſtout,
I will ſee your Commiſſion ere I part.
Strength of my braines, ſee my Commiſſion?
Ile blow thee up like a deck. Sonne of Neptune,
Off or ile fire thee.
I am grapled with you,
And will hang by your ſide, till you be calmer,
And be ſo, or Ile lay my trident on you.
Come to your tacklings.
Tis a bold actiue boy,
I ſee there's nothing to be got but knocks by him.
Giue me thy hand old Rover, hoiſe up thy top Sayle,
And goe in peace.
Sir this will not appeaſe me,
I muſt haue ſatisfaction.
Reach me thy fiſt,
And be reconcil'd: what thou doſt not know me:
Though I am valiant, yet tis out of the road
Of my humour, to diſgrace any man.
This will not ſatisfie me.
I ſay againe,
Giue me thy wriſt. Know me, and my lodging;
Ile giue thee a Supper: there's a good plumpe wench,
My Hoſteſſe, a watermans widdow at the ſigne
Of the red Lettice in Southwarke, ſhall bid thee welcome.
But I muſt haue you leaue your ſwearing firſt,
And be temperate.
Heare me honeſt Trojan.
As I am vertuous, as I loue my friends,
That I may ſweare.
No, not as you are vertuous.
Why then on my word, ile giue thee a ſupper.
What? I will not offend thee my good drumſticke;
Ile conforme my ſelfe, come to me at night,
And ile be as good as my word, old Bracer.
But if I come, and looſe my labour, what followes?
Then Teucer, in pure zeale and verity,
Ile belabour you the next time I meet you.
What Scufler, doſt thou thinke ile faile my friends?
No Hector I ſcorne it. Ile pawne my cloake firſt.
Farewell Actorides.
What is he gone?
I, and as glad he has eſcapt from me,
As from the Syrtes.
How he bore it out
With impudence?
Yes did you obſerue him?
There's nothing can diſcountenance him, ſtill
This is his poſture, he were excellent,
To venter at a Lottery.
Why miſchiefe?
I doe not thinke he would ever draw a blank.
We muſt purſue the project. Sup with him
At any hand.
The jeſt is behind to ſee,
In what a miſerable perplexity,
He will be put to entertaine us.
Come.
You know father, for I muſt ſtill call you ſo, how you charg'd your daughter to uſe me reſpectiuely.
Yes marry did I: and to ſhew a double dutie, as might ſuite with the reverence of your age, and honour of her huſband.
Well, and as ſoone as you were gone, ſhe had no more regard to mee, then if I had beene an old horſe, or an old Servingman.
Why tis impoſſible ſhee ſhould tranſgreſſe in ſuch a high poynt of humanity.
Elſe there was ſome fury in her ſhape that did ſo. I am ſure ſhe ſhapt me out to bee the ridiculouſeſt old aſſe in Europe.
Her modeſty would not permit it in her.
If my words haue any weight in them; ſhe ſet as light by me, as by the leaſt feather in her Fanne.
Why is this true Aemilia?
No indeed ſir.
How no indeed; doe you deny it? O palpable, ſhee reckond up a whole Catalogue of abuſes, and malicious practiſes, that ſhe would aſſault me with, if I were her husband, the leaſt of which were aboue all patience.
Doe you thinke ſir, if I intended any ſuch thing, I would haue forewarned you?
No tis not likely.
That you had but heard the diſgrace ſhe put upon me, in calumniating the vigour, and ability of my perſon.
I cannot beleeue it.
And then terrified me, that the wind of her humour ſhould be ſtill againſt me, to croſſe me in every thing I deſired, yet the courſe of my deſtiny ſhould be more impetuous then before.
The old Gentleman did but dreame ſo.
Nay more, ſhe ſaid I was an old dry ſtumpe, that had not the leaſt drop of moiſture in me, yet by the vertue of her humidity, ſhee would make my temples ſo ſupple, that they ſhould ſprout, and bud a freſh.
Come ſhe would not ſay ſo.
Yes, and that all my eſtate ſhould bee too little, to maintaine her in prodigality, and invite acquaintance.
Alaſſe good Gentleman, I told him how other women vſed their husbands, but I would conforme my ſelfe to obedience.
I, that you might know what a bleſſing you had in her.
Oh was it ſo? I cry you mercy, I miſtooke you. Here take this Pearle for amends; I am ſorry I haue ſinned againſt ſo ſweet a ſimplicity.
Come I knew you were in an error.
Then to avoyd all cavillation hereafter, ſee what I haue provided.
What haue you there?
I haue here a Syngraphus, a writing with articles, that muſt be drawn between us, before there can be any copulation.
Wherefore, did you ſo?
Looke you ſir, I was in a little ſuſpenſe of her behaviour, and therefore in relation of that, which I thought ſhe objected, yet has ſince proved to be otherwiſe: notwithſtanding theſe rules, which may ſo much conduce to my happineſſe, and haue beene ſo much advis'd upon with deliberation, I would haue eſtabliſh't.
Pray lets heare them.
They are onely ſome ſew propoſitions, and exceptions to bee obſerved on her behalfe, for the better ſecurity of my quiet, when I ſhall be married to her.
Now I conceiue you, reade them out.
Firſt, that after Hymen has once joyned us together, ſhe ſhall admit of no man whatſoever, to intitle him with any ſuſpitious name of friend, or ſervant: doe you marke me.
Well proceed.
Next▪ if any of her old acquaintance come to viſit her, as Nurſes, Midwifes, and the like, creatures of ſecreſie, ſhe ſhall returne them word, ſhe is not within, or otherwiſe accommodated.
Very good.
Ile haue it written ſo upon the doores.
You may perceiue by her ſilence, ſhee will conſent to any thing.
Then to avoyd alloccaſions of writing Epiſtles, ſhe ſhall receiue none, nor haue any Paper, Pen, Inke, or Waxe in her cloſet.
That's ſomewhat hard.
Shee ſhall not haue any maſculine bawdy Picture hang in her Chamber, but ſhall take it downe, and ſell it away as a thing unprofitable, and an inticement of phantaſie.
That in my conceit is very reaſonable.
She ſhall bid no man to dinner, but I will invite them, and when they are ſet, ſhee ſhall not caſt amorous glances upon them, nor drinke to them, nor licke her lips at them, nor ſhew her teeth when ſhe laughs, nor her tongue when ſhee ſneezes.
For all theſe, ile engage my ſelfe.
Beſides, ſhe ſhall not take upon her, to contrary me in any thing, nor ſeeme more or leſſe wiſe then my ſelfe.
That's not much amiſſe neither.
Shee ſhall ſend no Hierogliphicks, nor meate cut in Characters, nor tread upon any mans foote under the Table, nor when they are riſen, giue them her hand to kiſſe, or open her palme to haue her fortune told her, nor yet ſhew them her ring, or receiue any of theirs, and read the poeſies.
Is this all?
She ſhall know no language but her owne, nor ſpeake any equivocating word.
In my mind now theſe lawes are very conſonant to a good diſpoſition, and if I were to marry my ſelfe, I'de propoſe the like.
And for her religion, ſhe may pray to any innocent goddeſſe, as Diana and the graces, but if ſhe haue any thing to ſay to Mars, Mercury, or Apollo, ſhe ſhall acquaint mee with it, and I will preſent her devotions.
Haue you done now?
Laſt of all, when ſhe is ready to goe to bed, ſhe ſhall not put out the candle to walke up and downe in her ſmocke, and ſhake her body in the darke, and if ſhe be content, I take her as my owne.
All theſe ſhe ſhall ſubſcribe to, if ſhee be my daughter.
Why then weele proceed to the Church?
Are you agreed or no?
Pray let me ſpeake one word with him in private.
Yes what you-pleaſe ſweet Lady, it is granted, were it a hundred pound to buy pins and petticoats.
Tis not a thing Sir, of that deare expenſe:
Though you were pleaſd to tax me for that crime▪
'Tis onely this, time was, I could not loue you;
Though reaſon ſince, has rectified my iudgement,
And clear'd my eyes, that I can ſee my good.
Then I confeſſe I made a ſolemne oath,
None ſhould enioy my loue; but he that durſt
Attempt to ſteale mee; this is not intended,
For any perill to you, but for ſafeguard
Of my firſt vow, which I muſt needs performe.
Now if you pleaſe to come at a ſet houre,
None but your ſelfe, and fetch mee, I will yeeld
To goe with you, whither you ſhall command.
'Tis done bright Hellen, I will be thy Paris,
And fetch thee, though thou wer't at Lacedemon,
And care not a pinne, for all the power of Greece.
What are you agreed?
Yes, wee are both agreed.
Some few ceremonies, and then wee haue finiſh.
Fido, I am now advis'd vpon a plot,
If it ſucceed, ſhall crowne my invention.
Something about the Captaine.
Hang him Kaſtrill.
I ſcorne to looſe a thought on him; my braines
Repine at his memory. Tis a new deuiſe,
The iſſue of extremity. Tis thus,
I will turne a deſperate Gameſter in loue,
And venter all vpon one caſt.
Take beed ſir,
There may be plots, but little policy,
Fortune and loue, are inſolent, and tickliſh.
Come Ile doe it. Ile ſend thee with a letter
Vnto my Miſtreſſe, that ſhall make her mad.
How, make her mad, what doe you expect from that: what can you gaine by the loſſe of her wits?
I ſhall gaine my deſire.
And doe you prize
The ſatisfying of a lewd deſire
So much, to rob your Miſtris of her ſenſes?
Can you accuſe her of inconſtancy?
Or taxe her of diſhoneſty? Or will you
Prove falſe to her? what miſcief do you intend?
What hopes can you conceive, that may ſecure
So great a ſinne from Heavens juſt puniſhment?
Have you a drug or incantation,
And thinke to make her ſenſeleſſe of her griefe,
With the privation of her underſtanding?
Not any of theſe.
If you doe, you muſt imploy
Some other meſſenger. Let me adviſe you
Keep her in her right mind while you have her:
Love of it ſelfe is an illuſive ſpirit,
And will enough diſtract her without helpe.
She ſhall ſeeme mad but in appearance Fido;
And with that feigned frenzy move a pitty
From all, that muſt impute it to her ſufferings.
Twere a mad jeſt: but is this all your plot?
No, this is not the maine one, theres another
Of greater conſequence, and ſecrecy,
For a ſound mind to beare, and tis a burthen
Worthy thy care and honeſty: Thinke not
I am ſo deſperate and heady, to launch forth
Into thoſe dangerous Seas without a Pilote,
And I have choſe thee for my Palinurus.
You never knew a man of leſſe experience,
I doe not kenne one Rocke, or Shelfe, and Love
Has many.
Tis no matter, thou and I
Will ſinke a Paean to loves victory.
COme my voluptuaries, my ſonnes of comfort,
That know no ſorrow, ſing like Graſſe-hoppers
And feare no winter, nor no poverty;
Leade on my moving pillars of delight,
My Alchymiſts of pleaſure, that convert
All like your ſelves: can make old Cato dance,
And turne Fabricius to an Epicure,
Should he behold you.
Thou ſayſt right Telemachus;
Tis wine, and mirth that breed theſe raptures in thee.
Body of Iove, there's nothing but a rabble
Of leane and ſtary'd imaginations
Accompany ſobriety: Some wine there,
That I may court my Cockatrice.
Good Captaine
Bid our noble friend welcome.
You know my humour,
To men of ordinary pretence, I ſeldome
Vſe to debaſe my ſelfe below the Nod
Of ſalutation, but for your ſake
I receive him as a man deſerving.
Give me thy hand Cadmus.
I deſire ſir to incorporate my ſelfe into your acquaintance.
Tis well ſaid, doe the like noble office to our friend here ſweet Lievtennant.
Sir he ſhall command my heart and hand on his occaſions, Ile as ſoone draw in his quarrell, as to piſſe againſt a wall.
Theſe are the mirrours of the time old boy, that ſhall ſhew you how to adorne your behaviour, that you may paſſe in all company with confidence of approbation.
And not erre the breadth of a naile.
He ſhall be able to paſſe through the needles of all occurrences.
And they would but learne me to ſweare and take Tobacco, tis all I deſire.
Come they ſhall doe it, and I muſt tell you, theſe ſuggeſtions in you are arguments of a generous diſpoſition, whence doe they flow I wonder?
That mother wit that put them in my head, has put money in my purſe, and as farre as that money will leade me, I will be bold and wiſe: I have my humours, and I ſcorne the pollution of the Mechannicks.
How doe you like theſe replyes Captaine?
Very well, by the faith of a ſouldier, excellent well, they are good relliſhing anſwers, and expreſſe an ebullition in his nature, ſwelling to conformity.
What, I will beare my ſelfe like a Gentleman.
I, and the way to beare your ſelfe like a Gentleman, is ſometimes not to be able to beare your ſelfe at all. Lievetennant, what ſay you?
I ſay by Hermes, he that has a fortune,
And power to acquaint the world with his perfections,
And ſeekes to ſmother them, let him dye wretched.
You have no other way then this, to render you worthy of ſociety.
What, he may turne ſtinkard, and live in the Country with rootes and bacon, and not drinke a cup of good wine in a twelve-moneth, nor know how the yeare goes about, but by obſervation of Husbandry. He may keepe two couple of dogs and a Sparrow-hawk, and levell his diſcourſe by them. He may be ſtil'd a civill Gentleman, ten ſphaeres below a foole: He may marry a Knights daughter, a creature out of faſhion, that has not one commendable quality, more then to make a corner pye and a ſallad, no manner of courtſhip, but two or three dances, as old as Mounſier, and can play a few Leſſons on the Virginalls that ſhe learnt of her Grandam: beſides ſhe is ſimple, and dull in her dalliance.
He tells thee right my brave Frisker, they are lumpiſh girles, heavy in their ſport, and cannot move with art.
There's a wench, has her Suburb trickes about her I warrant you: hold there Bellerophon, take thy Ocyrois, and mount her like Phlegon.
Now doe I want ſome two or three good oaths, to expreſſe my meaning withall.
Captaine, what thinke you, ſhall he be a brother?
Yes he deſerves it, let him be a brother.
Give him the principles of the brotherhood.
Are you reſolved to be a brother ſir?
Any thing I, you ſhall make a blowing horne, or what you liſt of me.
Nothing can be ſuddenly perfect, but muſt aſpire by progreſſion, he muſt be practiſed in certaine duties, before he can be an ingrafted member of the fraternity.
He ſhall doe any thing that is requiſite.
Well then, for the firſt two moneths we muſt dine every day at a Taverne, where it ſhall be lawfull for any brother to bring his ſhadow with him; and beſides the full income of wine and proviſion, to beſpeake any ſuperfluous diſh that he affects: but that which ſhall moſt commend the diſcretion of your worth, is, that after the diſſolution of the Feaſt, no man beſides your ſelfe muſt know what's to pay, or take notice of the reckoning.
I muſt pay all, muſt I?
You underſtand me rightly, and I applaud your capacity; from thence, we muſt have a Coach attend at the doore, to carry us to a Play, and at night to a Bawdy-houſe.
And all at my charges?
What elſe? And if any brother need a Cloake, or a Sute, or ſo, you muſt not ſtay till he publiſh or intimate his wants; but preſently, by the ſtrength of your owne Minerva, picke out the meaning, and take order to ſupply him: have you any credit with the Tradeſmen?
Yes, I have a Taylor that will truſt mee for any thing that Ile have him.
That Taylor ſhall have cuſtome, tell him ſo; and one thing more, now brother, for ſo I muſt call you, we muſt have all things in common, no difference in the poſſeſſion of any thing.
Pray explain that rule to me, I do not underſtand you.
Why thus; this Hat is mine, and that yours, as you conceive now, but they are neither mine nor yours upon the premiſes: but may be transferr'd upon occaſion to either, as thus, doe you conceive me? Tis uſuall amongſt us.
Tis very well, is this all?
Ile make but one experiment more of your apprehenſion, and have done. Looke you.
O I ſhall doe this to a haire, and by the ſame conſequence I ſhall be a Captaine ſomtimes: ſhall I not?
Yes, when the date of your taske is accompliſht, you ſhall be any thing.
Tis enough, this once a weeke will render him exact. Shall's haue a ſong and a dance Captaine?
Hang a Song, you ſee what little roome wee have for our mirth, and you would fill it up with aire, would you?
Nay, but by that aire, I hold a Song very delightſome, the very place, as a man would ſay, and ſuperficies of pleaſure.
Prithee let it alone, by that element it charmes me into melancholly.
Then good Captaine let's have a Dance, for theſe Gentlewomens ſakes; beſides there be many that come to ſee nothing elſe.
Why can you dance?
What a queſtion is there to a man of quality? Yes I can dance, and that ſome that are here ſhall ſee and feele before we part; for I meane to ſhake my heeles with that fervour, that it ſhall ſtrike them into a fit of my love, ſhall be worſe then any ague to them.
Say you ſo? Wee'l try that ifaith. Come on Squeakers, racke up our feet and eares to your Inſtruments.
What tune Captaine?
Play us the fine Companion.
Well ſaid my efteminate Varlets, this was auſpiciouſly performed.
I am afraid this dancing will breed ſpavins in my legs, this caper has put me in remembrance of a clicke in my back, I got at my laſt vaulting.
No thou art deceiv'd my noble Hyacinth, tis a myſtery will exalt thee Hylas, 'twill make thee riſe I ſay, and put gold in thy purſe, thou ſhalt follow the Court like a Baboone, when a thouſand proper fellowes ſhall ſherke for their ordinary; 'twill make thee converſant with Ladies, and they ſhall give thee Diamonds to pawne, and thou ſhalt ride up and downe in thy foot-cloth my little Dolphin Some wine there Tony: I call'd for wine an houre agoe, and could get none.
Fill out ſirrah. What's here the Epitome of a glaſſe? By the wombe of Bacchus, a ſcore of them are too little for a draught.
O Lord Captain, nine ſuch hornets are able to ſting a man to death.
By Saint George he that dyes ſo, dyes valiantly.
What my bold Bravo, be not afraid, and thou wert dead 'twere nothing, Ile come but with a troope of Wenches: and a noyſe of Fidlers, and play thee backe like Orpheus. What's to pay Drawer?
Sir you have built a ſconce ſince you came in of thirty pounds, and before you have any more, my Maſter intends to be ſatisfyed.
What money have you brother?
Who I? O Lord brother Captaine, I have not the third part of it.
No matter, I nere thinke upon ſuch tranſitory reckonings: come, lets have a health, and my brother Lackwit ſhall beginne it. Reach three Ioynt ſtooles hither Drawer.
What to doe Captaine?
Ile ſhew you, you ſhall aſcend here, and be Captaine of this Fort: Ile inſconce you; come intrench your ſelfe, and play from your Battery, and ſo every man round, there take your Lintſtocke in your hand, and give fire, now every man as farre off as he can from the command of his Ordinance. Farewell brother.
Why Gentlemen, I hope you will not uſe me ſo, your brother, why Gentlemen.
There Drawer, take him for a pawne, tell him when he has no money he muſt be ſerv'd ſo, tis one of his chiefe articles.
How now, what are you preaching ore your cups? Now you are in your Pontificalibus indeed.
Good Crochet helpe me downe, I ſhall breake my necke elſe.
How came you there?
I know not, an ill houre of the brotherhood, Ile after them with a vengeance.
You muſt ſtay and pay the reckoning firſt, beſides the Muſicians expect ſomthing.
Who I pay the recknoning? 'Slight I came but now in.
That's all one, you were all of a neſt, they are flowne away, and there's none left but your ſelfe.
S'death the Captaine is gone away with my Hat, and my cloake too, I tell thee Ile pay no reckoning.
Tis all one to me, if you can ſatisfy my Maſter ſo.
What ſhall I doe Crochet?
Give him what you have, and if he will take your word for the reſt, Ile excuſe your Hat and cloake, and ſay you loſt them in a skirmiſh; you muſt ſcratch your hands in halfe a doſen places with a pin.
I ſo I will, come ſir, Ile goe in and talke with your Maſter.
Beſides, I have another buſineſſe I came to tell you of, that you and I muſt doe together, you ſhall reape the whole credite on't your ſelfe, if you can manage it handſomly, 'twill gaine you that reputation with your Father, that you ſhall never looſe your ſelfe while you live againe.
What is't Crochet?
Goe in and Ile tell you.
You much amaze me.
Sir perhaps I might
With better judgement, and more thankes conceale
So great a wickedneſſe, but my true love to you
Could not withhold it, you have read ſome ſtories,
And theſe are things not unheard of in nature,
No newneſſe at all, the ſelfe ſame luſt and pride,
As well rules her that treads upon the flint,
As her that rides upon the necks of ſlaves.
Stay let me pauſe awhile; ſhe is a woman,
Whoſe age and forme might tempt me to diſtruſt her,
But yet her manners forbid me to beleeve it.
Beleev't? She is a cloſe Adultereſſe,
Of moſt ſtrange exerciſe, a Fricatrice
Inſatiable: and has ſhe none but you,
That ſhe can find to bayt with her allurements,
To cover her lewd projects? This moved me,
I'd not have medled elſe.
O doe not wrong her,
Good ſir doe not wrong her, it cannot be.
You have bin ſtill kept ignorant, for my part,
I never yet expected better from them
I count them but as ordinary chances,
Triviall, and drawne out from the lap of Fortune.
Beleeve me ſir, there is no day ſo holy,
That ceaſes to betray a womans falſehood,
My medicine workes, I ſhall be even with her.
I ſought at firſt to make her mad in jeſt,
But now Ile make her mad in earneſt: yet
Tis not good to be too credulous; a word ſir.
I muſt have better proofes then your bare word,
To juſtify this accuſation;
Her vertue muſt not ſtumble at a ſtraw.
Sir tis not threats that can extort from me,
More then I liſt to ſpeake: I ſee you troubled,
And therefore will not leaue you in ſuſpenſe;
Know that I made my ſelfe experiment.
For all let this confirme you: this ſhe gaue me
Vpon the premiſes.
O I ſhall burſt:
Here is a ſight to make the Sun run backeward;
Good ſir forgiue me, that I preſt you ſo,
Conſider't as your owne caſe: were you hee,
That put your confidence, your happineſſe,
All in a womans loue, and found her falſe?
I muſt confeſſe I thinke it would afflict me:
Ile leaue you ſir, I haue diſcharg'd my conſcience.
But of more ill, then ſhe has goodneſſe in her.
How now what Planet ſtrucke? how doe you ſir?
This tis to be in loue: what alterations
It breeds? it makes a man forget his friends.
Come ſir be merry, your project has tooke.
She fell into her fit, ſoone as ſhe read it,
And tore the papers and talkt idly, and ſhew'd
The ſymptomes of the prettieſt lunacie.
What haue you loſt your ſpeech? thoſe folded armes,
And rownes, expreſſe a ſorrow, more then loue.
His eyes, though fixt upon their object, ſhew
The wandring ſpheare of his diſturbed mind,
Is whirld about in error. Pray looke up ſir.
I am not dumbe, I haue a care within me,
Speakes to my troubled ſoule.
Why whats the matter?
O heare it then, and witneſſe it for ever.
When ere thou feeſt a woman, in whoſe brow,
Are writ the characters of honeſty,
And cals the gods to iuſtifie her truth,
Sweare ſhee's a Syren, and a Crocodile.
Conclude her falſe, it is enough ſhee vowes,
And ſpeakes thee faire, the winds waite on her lips,
Straight to diſperſe her oaths.
You doe but jeſt ſure
There is not one of them, that is the ſame
She would appeare to be; they all are painted.
They haue a Fucus for their face, an other
For their behaviour, their words, and actions.
Come come, theſe are but qualmes of jealouſie.
Giue no faith to their brow: for in that greene
And flouriſhing field of ſeeming vertue, lurkes
A Snake of luſt, in whoſe voluminous wreaths,
Are folded up a thouſand treacheries,
Plots, Miſchiefes, and diſſimulations,
That man nere thought of. For in wickedneſſe,
The wit of woman was nere yet found barren.
I thinke he meanes to be mad himſelfe too:
Your reprehenſions are too generall:
For by theſe words your owne Valeria ſuffers.
Why there's the ſumme of all that I haue ſpoke,
The abſtract of all falſhood. Tis a name, will
Bliſter the tongue of fame, in her report
Is drown'd the memory of all wicked women.
Is your Valeria falſe?
Once my Valeria, but now mine no more,
(For they are periſht that haue loſt their ſhame)
Is falne from vertue paſt recovery.
The golden Organs of her innocence
Are broke, not to be ſolderd
In my conſcience
You wrong her, this is nothing but th' abundance
Of loue; will you goe and ſup with the Captaine?
And driue away melancholy.
O no, my heart
Is ſhut againſt all mirth.
Then Ile goe ſeeke
Your brother out, and he ſhall goe along with me:
Ile ſhew him with a perſpectiue ifaith,
What a braue Captaine he has: hee ſhall be
In a diſguiſe, as my Companion,
Then if he will maintaine a Paradox,
That he is either valiant, or honeſt,
Ile be made the ſcorne of their company.
But my fate guids me to the contrary:
For if my Miſtreſſe doe not honeſt proue,
She has put a period to my life and loue.
Come, be not diſmaid, what ere you ſay,
Ile ſweare it: you muſt affirme you loſt your hat
And cloake in a skirmiſh.
So I will Crotchet.
Maſſe thou wert not with us at the firſt neither.
Why what if I had ſir?
Thou mightſt haue carried
Away two or three of the Captaines oaths with thee.
I can coyne them my ſelfe without any treaſon I warrant you.
Oh Crotchet, I am thinking now, how brauely ile liue, when my father is dead.
Yes, pray let me heare you.
I haue drawne the map of it already: Ile goe every day in my cloake lind with pluſh, and my bever hat, Ile keepe my whores, and my running horſes, and ile maintaine thee in as good a pyed livery, as the beſt footman of them all goes in.
You will ſir, what ungratious villaine could haue ſaid this? where's your cloake and your hat? yes you ſhall haue money to ſpend an other time.
How now what's the matter?
Looke you, doe you know this Gentleman?
How comes this about?
Nothing but the fortune of the warres forſooth: my young maſter has beene in as ſtout a fray as ever the Genius of Fleetſtreet trembled at.
How was it ſonne?
Let Crochet relate. I ſcorne to be the trumpet of mine owne valour, I.
Doe, tell the ſtory, Crochet.
Indeede hee made them all runne away, that I am certaine of.
Nay but ſhew vs the manner of it.
Why forſooth I came at the latter end of the feaſt, and the beginning of the fray, and there my young Maſter was got aboue them all, and ſtood vpon his Guard, and held his weapon in his hand ſo dreadfully, as it he would haue powred downe his fury vpon any man that ſhould come neere him.
And will you be angry with him for this? 'twas well done, take no wrong of them, better looſe all the cloathes off from his backe, then to keepe a cloake for his cowardiſe.
Now is the time to moue the other buſineſſe.
Well mother, if you will giue mee twenty pound more, Ile doe you ſuch a peece of ſervice, that you ſhall thanke mee for it as long as you live.
What is it ſonne?
Nay you ſhall not know, before it be done: the concluſion ſhall crowne it.
Well husband, giue it this once, and Ile vrge you no more, lets ſee how the Boy will imploy it.
Yes, ſend one arrow after an other and looſe both.
Nay, but giue it him for my ſake, I am confident he has a good project; you have example for it in your trade. How many haue you, that breake dayly, and yet their freinds ſet them vp two or three times one after an other?
Once more you ſhall prevaile with mee. Here hold, but if this miſcarry, nore aske mee for a penny againe.
I warrant you, come Crochet.
Muſt Crochet goe with you?
Yes, tis a buſineſſe that can not be done by one alone▪
Well Miſtreſſe, pray throw an old ſhooe after vs.
Gentleman you are very welcome. What Hoſteſſe, come hither good Hoſteſſe.
You haue a good handſome Hoſteſſe, I perceiue Captaine.
She is cleanly and good condition' hats my comfort, and by the power of beauty, if a man were combuſtile, hee might find in her eyes, that would kindle a conflagration.
What Gentlemen be theſe Captaine?
Peace good Hoſteſſe, I would not willingly proclaime their diſgrace: one of them is a Gentleman, that I baſtinadoed the other day; and now he is come to giue me a Supper, to be reconcil'd to me, but take you no notice.
Captaine here is a friend, that I would willingly commend to your acquaintance.
Sir as I am a true ſouldier, I embrace your loue in him, and thats as much as I can ſay. Hoſteſſe theſe are not ordinary gueſts with you; therefore you muſt be reſpectfull: and faith if you ſay the world Gentlemen, one of theſe nights, wee'l every man procure as many of our acquaintance as we can, and be merry here at Supper for crownes a peece. What thinke you?
This is not the buſines wee come about ſir.
I know it well enough. Hoſteſſe, prethee good ſweet, honey Hoſteſſe, ſtep and buy us a joynt or two of good meate, and a Capon, and lay it to the fire preſently.
Where's the money?
Death to my honour, doe not queſtion it, but doe as I bid you.
I haue not ſix-pence in the world, the Cobler had all I had, for mending of your boots.
Goe you muſt make ſhift, and get more then.
Why if theſe Gentlemen come to beſtow a Supper on you, let them giue me money aforehand.
Speake lower woman, art mad?
I tell you I haue not a penny in the houſe.
Speake lower I ſay. Goe borrow it of thy neighbours, Ile ſee it payd.
Yes and turne mee behind the dore for my reckoning; You haue ſerv'd me ſo I know not how often, no I haue truſted you too much already: you haue not payd me a penny for your lodging, ſince you came to my houſe, beſides what I haue lent you out of my purſe.
Bane to my credit, you will exile mee beyond the confine of eputation: goe pawne ſome Pewter, or one of thy braſſe pots. S'light doe not diſgrace mee, doe any thing rather, take the ſheets off from my bed.
Yes, you care not what becomes of any thing. Why can you not aske them for money?
S'life, a man may plot till his heart ake, and you ſtill ſeeke to croſſe mee, you will vndoe me in my deſignes.
You haue more ſignes in your head, then hang at all the Alehouſes in towne againe.
Prethee woman, heare mee what I ſay. I know they come to ſpend vpon mee, and will crouch, and doe any thing, yet when I out of my nobleneſſe, and beyond expectation, ſhall vſe them ſo curteouſly, 'twill be ſuch an ingagement, that I can borrow ten or twenty peeces of them at my pleaſure.
I tell you I can not doe it, nor I will not.
Faith Gentlemen I muſt entreat you to excuſe mee, my Hoſteſſe is not very well ſhee tells mee, and I thinke ſhee is not ſo well ſtor'd with neceſſaries to entertaine you, as I could wiſh; and indeed ſhee has nere a ſpitt in the houſe, therefore wee'l deferr it till to morrow night, when 'twill be more convenient at a Taverne.
Well ſir, your excuſe ſhall prevaile, wee are not inexorable vpon extremity.
In his you haue wonne mee to your obſervance for ever.
Captaine I haue another thing to propound to you, heere is a friend of mine has lately receiu'd injury from one Maſter Careleſſe, and vpon debatement of the matter, this Gentleman is ſo apprehenſiue of his diſgrace, that he can not poſſible put it vp with ſafety of his reputation, and therefore deſires to haue it determined in plaine field. Now as hee is informed, his adverſary accepts of it, and has choſen you for his patron in the quarrell.
By the ſhine of Phoebus, I wonder what ſtrange impudence has poſſeſt him. As I am a man to honour, I haue brought him ſucceſſiuely off from a hundred of theſe, to the perrill of my life, and yet am dayly obnoxious to new aſſaults for him.
Then you diſclaime to haue any hand in the action.
By the paſſion of valour, Gentlemen Ile tell you, I loue a noble imployment with my life, but for ſuch a pittifull, drunken, ſhallow coxcombe, I hate to be ſeene in ſuch a buſineſſe.
Doe you thinke no better of him, Captaine? if he be ſo vnworthy, I would adviſe you not to meddle with him.
By the faith of a Soldier, if he haue any care of his credit, let him not deale with him, he will but defile himſelfe with ſuch an abject: I hold him to be ſo poore condition'd, I would not enter a Countrey Gentleman vpon him.
Yet you keepe him company, Captaine.
I confeſſe I haue done, and my intendments were good in it; I ſaw him ſo raw, and young, I was induc'd to beleeue there might be ſome hopes of him: but after much impulſion, when I found him ſo vnapt, and indocile in his owne nature, I gaue him loſt, and ſo I eſteeme of him, by my life.
Oh thou trecherous villaine, doſt thou betray mee to my ſelfe, and belye mee to my face? how many quarrels haue you brought mee off from?
Never none by Ioue.
I will not raile at you, but I will cudgell you, and kicke you, you man of valour.
Hold as thou art a man of renowne, thou wilt ſtrike thy foote into mee elſe, my body is as tender as a bogg.
Thou cowardly perfidious raſcall: haue I for this made thee my aſſociate, payd for thy ſwaggerings, and breaking of Tapſters, and Oſtlers pates, fed thee at a charge a man might haue built an Hoſpitall; drencht thee with Sacke, and Tobacco, as thy face can witneſſe?
Oh hold as thou art worſhipfull.
Come ſir ſurrender your robes, that you haue polluted with coſenage. Here Fido, take this hat and cloake: I will not leaue him a covering for his knavery: theſe are the trophies of your treachery, theſe.
Nay good ſir doe not pillage mee of all, ſtay till I get my owne againe.
If Lackwit will reſtore them he may, elſe you muſt reſolue to goe bareheaded before your right worſhipfull fortune, with a truncheon in your hand like a Verger, and ſo I leaue you. Come Fido now for my Miſtreſſe.
Well, thoſe good qualities that are bred in a man, will never out of him thats my comfort.
And ſince I am the ſcorne of Captaines made,
Ile ſeeke a better and more thriving trade.
Come ſir, now I haue found you, not the power,
And ſtrength of fate, ſhall pull you from my vengeance.
And though I know thy life too meane a ranſome
For the redeeming of the priceleſſe loſſe
Of her abuſed honour, Yet what Nature
Enables thee to pay, Ile take in part,
And leaue the execution of the reſt
Vnto Hels iuſtice.
What doe you intend ſir?
Looke you: t' unfold your heart ſir with this ſword,
And reade the falſhood that is written in it.
Come I muſt know the truth, and reaſon too,
If there be reaſon for a wicked act.
You meane about Valeria?
The ſame.
Still an ill conſcience will betray it ſelfe,
And ſends forth many a ſcowling, fearfull looke,
To deſcry danger; if he ſtand confident,
And juſtify it to the face of terrour,
Then ſhe is falſe.
I heare ſhe is runne mad.
Is, and the cauſe of her diſtemperature
Is the reproach you put upon her honour.
The wound then is too deepe, and an ill Fate
Has driven the ſhaft of my intended malice
Beyond the ſcope I aim'd at.
Was it malice?
That word has ſtrooke me both with joy and anger,
Both in ſuſpence, which ſhould weight downe the ſcale
Of my deep burdned mind. What horrid baſeneſſe
Durſt ſo attempt to prophane innocence?
It was my love to her.
What is his hate,
Whoſe love has prov'd ſo ominous?
That love
Being wrong'd, begot that hate.
Thou haſt done ill.
And like a fooliſh and young Exorciſt,
Haſt conjur'd up a ſpirit of that fury,
Thy art cannot allay.
Repentance may.
I only meant to give her name a gaſh,
That might be heal'd againe without a ſcarre,
Or any ſpreading playſter of wide rumour,
With helpe of her compurgators, but only
To vexe her.
What's the offence that did provoke
This imputation? Did ſhe ever wrong you?
Maligne your wit? Diſgrace you before your Miſtris?
Diſparage your behaviour? Had ſhe done ſo,
Yet this revenge were diſproportionate.
Vrge me no more, I cannot looke on her
Without ſuch a reflection of my crime,
As muſt give ſhame a luſtre; there's no man
But once in's life may ſinne beſides his nature,
Nay perhaps contrary: this is a deed
I muſt abhorre to juſtify.
You have given
Almoſt a ſatisfaction.
Twas a ſcandall,
Aroſe from my repulſe, and has no witneſſe
Beſides your eares; if it were ſilenc'd there,
The world were ignorant of it; I heare
She is runne mad upon the griefe, I am ſorry
Her puniſhment has outſtript my deſires.
Ile undertake, what ere you ſhall propoſe,
For the recovery of her wits, or honour.
And Ile make uſe of your kind profer ſir.
I will reſigne her where ſhe moſt affects,
And give you all aſſiſtance to obtaine her.
You ſpeake honeſtly, I ſhall imploy you;
I know you have that credite with her father,
You may adviſe him in a thing that reaſon
Shall ſeeme to ſecond; bring but this to paſſe,
You have made requitall for all injuries.
Shew me the way, Ile do't; be you the mover,
Ile be the inſtrument.
You are my Genius,
My hope, my opportunity, my Fate;
And in effecting this you cannot erre,
To make me happy, and recover her.
HOw doe I looke now Crochet?
Very dreadfully: like a Citizen in a fray, as feare full as Priapus in a garden.
Well, and thou art ſure there is but one of them, and he comes diſguis'd like Dotario, to ſteale away my ſiſter?
Yes ſir, and this is the old Gentleman himſelfe, and ſomebody has ſtole away his habite to abuſe him.
That man that has done ſo ſhall thinke of me and this place as long as he lives for it: Goe and give warning Crochet, that no man withſtand me, unleſſe he be weary of his life.
If any man be ſo hardy, let him take his chance.
Let him expect my fury Crochet. I will batter any man that ſhall come neere me, my fiſt is like a Sling, my head like a Ram, and my whole body an Engine, and I will make any man toothleſſe that ſhall offend me.
Then you will make his mouth as unſerviceable as your fathers gumm'd velvet.
I long to exerciſe my puiſſance: thou art ſure there is but one of them? ſtand by a little, and let me flouriſh with my ſword, to animate my ſpirits; now whatſoever hee is, that comes in my way, I pronounce him to be a miſerable mortall.
What haſt thou there Crochet.
I imagin'd there would be a great deale of blood ſpilt in the skirmiſh, and ſo I brought theſe to wipe the wounds, nothing elſe ſir: looke you here they come.
Give by Crochet, till I queſtion them: it behooves a wiſe man to deal with words, before he deſcend to blowes: what arrant knight are you ſir? and whither doe you travell with that Damoſell?
Preſſe that point home.
O brother Lackwit, how came you ſo accoutred? or were you ſet here for a watch-man to guard us?
No ſir, I doe not guard, nor regard any man, and yet Ile ſtand upon my guard, and this is the poynt Ile maintaine.
What doe you meane brother Lackwit?
How, I your brother? No, I ſcorne to have affiance with ſuch a conny-catcher: you ſir Neſſus, deliver up your theft, or I will play the Hereules with you.
I am going to marry her, my name is Dotario, and this is your ſiſter Aemilia.
I, ſhe is my ſiſter, but you are a counterfeit, and have ſtolne her away.
Seize her for fellons goods, ſhe belongs to the Lord of the ſoyle.
Thou villaine, doſt thou not know, if I were dead, and her other ſiſter, ſhe would be next heire, and then thou mightſt be hangd for her?
But I had her conſent, and her fathers, my name is Dotario your neighbour, that have fed you with cuſtard and apple-pie a hundred times.
I, this Gentleman has, but you have abus'd him, and tooke his wrong name upon you.
I am the ſame.
He lyes, beat him for lying, what doe you ſtay for?
I am conſidering with my eye, which part of him I ſhall firſt cut off.
Let's bind him faſt, and then lay him upon his backe, and geld him.
A match. Let's lay hold on him; what is he gone? how finely might my father have been cheated, and all wee now, if I had not beene: that's ſome roguing Servingman diſguis'd Ile lay my life on't; if I be not fit to be chronicled for this act of diſcretion, let the world judge of it. Well Crochet, when I have marryed her to the right party, if my father does not give me forty pounds more, he ſhall marry the next daughter himſelfe.
You muſt not be too ſudden now in the opening of your plot, after you have marryed them.
Adviſe me good Crochet.
Why before you reveale your proceedings, you ſhall preſent your ſelfe with a great deale of confidence, and promiſe of deſert; walke up and downe, with a joyfull agony, and a trembling joy, as if you had eſcapt from a breach, or redeem'd your country: then when you ſee them ſufficiently fill'd with expectation, you may draw the curtaine of your valour, and ſtound them with admiration.
So I will Crochet, come let us to the Church.
Come Maſter Littlegood, be comforted,
I have as great a ſhare in the miſfortunes
Of your diſtracted daughter, as your ſelfe.
O doe not ſay ſo, ſhe was all my joy.
Then men begin to underſtand their good,
When they have loſt it, and an envious eye
Seekes after vertue when it is extinct,
That hated it alive.
You have reaſon
To pitty me the more, and lament for her,
Becauſe I deſtin'd her in marriage to you.
And I had well hoped to have been made happy
In her affection, a true Lovers griefes
Tranſcend a parents.
No, you are deceived,
A parent is confin'd, and his joyes bounded,
And only limited to ſuch a ſubject,
And driven from thence, have no where elſe to reſt on:
For if his children be once taken from him,
Which are the cauſe, then his delight and comfort,
That are the effects, needs muſt vaniſh with them:
But in a Lover it falls otherwiſe,
Such as your ſelfe, whoſe paſſion, like a deaw,
Can dry up with the beames of every beauty
That ſhall ſhine warme upon you, need not prize
The loſſe of any; you have no alliance,
Nor naturall tye commands you to love any,
More then your fancy guides you; and the windes
Have not ſo many turnings, nor the Sands
So many ſhiftings, nor the Moone changes.
Sir you ſpeake truth, upon my knowledge that,
He is as ſlippery, as an Eele, in love,
And wriggles in and out, ſir, at his pleaſure;
He can as eaſily diſpenſe with vowes,
As ſweare them; and can at a minutes warning,
If an occaſion ſerve, ſupply himſelfe
With a continuall, and freſh entertainment
Of a new Miſtris.
Troth I muſt confeſſe,
I have been a little faulty that way.
And why would you ſir, knowing this before,
Suffer your daughter to be abus'd by him?
Now by my life, I thinke, and 'twere not for me,
You'd wind your ſelfe into ſuch Labyrinths,
You'd not know how to extricate your ſelfe.
Peace good Wife, ſince there is no remedy.
Doe not deſpaire, there is yet remedy;
I know a ſcholler, a great Naturalliſt,
Whoſe wiſedome does tranſcend all other Artiſts,
A traveller beſides, and though his body
Be diſtant from the Heavens, yet his mind
Has pierc't unto the utmoſt of the Orbes,
Can tell how firſt the Chaos was diſtinguiſht,
And how the Sphaeres are turnd, and all their ſecrets,
The motion and influence of the ſtarres,
The mixture of the Elements, and all
The cauſes of the Winds, and what moves the earth,
And then he has ſubjected to his knowledge
The vertues, and the workings of all hearbs,
And is an Aeſculapius in Phyſicke,
No griefe above his art.
Can he heale mad folkes?
Were they as mad as Ajax Telamon,
That ſlew an Oxe in ſtead of Agamemnon,
Hee'l warrant them.
How ſhould one ſpeake with him?
I brought him with me, he is at the doore.
Prithee goe call him Fido, you ſhall heare him,
And as you like his ſpeech, ſo credite him.
Is this the man?
This is the Doctour ſir.
I am bold to make relation of your skill here
To this old Gentleman, who has a daughter
That is ſuſpected to be mad.
Suſpected, is ſhe no otherwiſe?
She is ſtarke mad.
It came by love?
Yes ſure, what thinke you on't?
An ordinary diſeaſe, and cure, in ſome things
I am of an opinion that Stertinius
The Stoick was, who held all the world mad.
As how, good Maſter Doctour?
Thus I prove it;
What is ambition, and covetouſneſſe,
Or luxury, or ſuperſtition,
But madneſſe in men? and theſe raigne generally.
Your Lawyer trots, and writes, as he were mad,
His Clyent is madder then he; your Merchant that marryes
A faire wife, and leaves her at home, is mad:
Your Courtier is mad to take up ſilkes and velvets
On ticket for his Miſtris; and your Citizen
Is mad to truſt him.
Nay he is a rare man,
And has done many and ſtrange Cures ſir.
I have indeed.
Pray relate ſome of them.
To ſatisfy your Ladiſhip, I will.
Yes good Sir, let us heare them.
Then Ile tell you. There was once an Aſtrologer brought mad before me, the circulations of the Heavens had turn'd his braines round, he had very ſtrange fits, he would ever be ſtaring, and gazing, and yet his eyes were ſo weake, they could not looke up without a ſtaffe.
A Iacobs ſtaffe you meane?
I, and hee would watch whole nights, there could not a ſtarre ſtirre for him, he thought there was no hurt done, but they did it, and that made him look ſo narrowly to them.
How did you heale him ſir?
Onely with two or three ſentences out of Picus Mirandula, in confutation of the act; and as many out of Cornelius Agrippa, for the vanity of it.
That was excellent.
The next was a Souldier, and he was very furious; but I quieted him, by getting his arrerages payd, and a Penſion for his life.
You tooke a hard taske in hand, Mr Doctour.
But the moſt dangerous of all was a Puritan Chandler, and he ran mad with illuminations, he was very ſtrangely poſſeſt, and talkt idly, as if he had had a noyſe of bells in his head; he thought a man in a Surpleſſe to be the Ghoſt of Hereſy, and was out of love with his owne members, becauſe they were called Organs.
O monſtrous!
I and held very ſtrange poſitions, for he counted Fathers to be as unlawfull in the Church, as Plato did Poets in his Common-wealth, and thereupon grounded his concluſion for the lawfulneſſe of whoredome; for he ſaid that marriage, as it is now uſed, was the only ring-leader of all miſchiefe.
How did you heale him ſir?
Why Lady with certaine pills of ſound doctrine, and they purg'd his ill humours.
That was very ſpeedy.
Then there was a Muſician that runne mad with Crochets, the fit was ſo violent upon him, that he would nothing but ſound perpetually.
How did you with him ſir?
I ſerv'd him as Hercules ſerv'd his Maſter Linus, broke his Fiddle about his pate, and ſent him away without ere a penny, and that brought his head in tune.
Ile remember this ifaith.
Then there was a Huntſman that was very wood, he would nothing but hoope and hollow, and was wonderfully in love with an Eccho.
How did you reclaime him?
Why I ſerv'd him in his owne kind, he had a very handſome wench to his wife, and while he was playing the Cephalus abroad, and courting his Aura, I turn'd him into an Actaeon at home, ſet a faire paire of hornes on his head, and made him a tame beaſt.
Husband that was exellent, was it not?
I cured a poet too, and indeede, they are a generation that are little better then mad at all times: I was faine to giue him over, becauſe himſelfe, and others tooke ſuch delight in his fury. I could not tell what to make of him, his diſeaſe was ſo pretty and conceited, and he was no ſooner well, but he would preſently fall into a relapſe. I could make relation of a thouſand ſuch, as Painters, Alchymiſts and the like, but it would be tedious.
Nay ſir, wee are confirm'd of your skill. Will you haue my daughter brought forth to you ſir, that you may ſee her in her fit?
No by no meanes, 'twill ſpend her ſpirits too much. Ile take her home with mee, and anoynt her browes with a little Helleborum, and ſome other receipts that Ile giue her, and Ile warrant you, Ile bring her ſafe too in three houres, and well recovered.
Sir, you will doe an office, that will not more deſerue honour then reward.
Sir, I ſhall deſire nothing but my paines for my ſatiſfaction.
Good ſweet Fido conduct him in, and goe along with him, that if any heereafter ſhall be ſo averſe, in his ignorance, to all goodneſſe, as to queſtion this miracle, you may be produc'd as a witneſſe.
And what will you doe ſweet wife?
Why Ile ſtay heere, and expect my ſonne Lackwit, with his project. He ſent mee word he would come preſently, and ſee where he enters.
Crochet, bid them ſtay without, till I call for them. Make roome there, and let ſuch produce there Game, that haue good cardes to ſhew.
How now ſonne Lackwit; whither away ſo furious?
I am ſure all the wit and valour I had, was at ſtake for it.
Why whats the matter
There was old ſhuffling and cuting amongſt them, and I had not ſpied their knavery they might haue put a tricke vpon vs, faith.
Why were you at cardes ſonne?
No, I was at dice. I came the Caſter with ſome of them I thinke, and I had like to haue made their bones rattle for it. There was a Rooke would haue gone at In and In with my ſiſter, if I had not made a third man, he would haue ſwept all away, and wiped our noſes when he had done.
Tell vs how was it ſonne?
No matter how; but if I haue not playd the wiſe man now, and done an act worthy of applauſe, let mee bee hiſt off for my labour.
Letts heare, what is it?
If it be no more thankes worthy, Ile tell you at my leaſure, when you haue prepar'd your vnderſtanding.
What is it Crochet?
Peace ſirrah, Ile haue no man tell it but my ſelfe, becauſe the prayſe of it belongs wholy to mee; and I could but effect halfe a dozen more ſuch exployts, Ide write my owne Commentaries.
You put vs too much into a longing, ſonne.
Well I am content to open the ſluſes of your happineſſ; let them in Crochet, but take heed you be not too greedy of it, leſt the ſodaine joy overwhelme you.
Whats heere, Maſter Dotario, and my daughter Aemilia, hand in hand, & married together? Nay then tis as I would haue it. The boy has done well, and I muſt applaud him for it.
O muſt you ſo ſir? Well, there they are Barke and Tree, but as I am a hairy beaſt, if I had not been, they had been as farre a ſunder, as Temple barre and Algate.
How ſo ſonne?
Why Ile ſhew you. there was an other Changling as like to him in ſhape, as Iupiter to Amphitrue, nay if I ſhould ſay, as I am to, let mee ſee what?
To a foole.
No, to my ſelfe.
Tis all one.
That would haue married her in his ſtead, and carried her away, if I had not prevented them.
Whether it bee a ſhadow or a ghoſt, that haunts him in his owne proper forme, I know not, but there he comes againe.
Why, how now ſonne Dotario, you haue made haſte to beget one ſo like you already.
O ſir, tis I am cheated, guld, and abus'd, and which is worſe, by one that ſayes he is my ſelfe too.
Why what are you?
O ſir I am that old Gentleman, that ſhould haue married your daughter, and there's an Aſmodeus, a devill in my habit, that has beguild me of her.
Come ſir uncaſe, your ſelfe; tis no glory for you to lurke any longer under the perſon of ſuch a wretch.
Who is here, my Nephew Careleſſe? nay then tis ten times worſe then I thought of: my diſgrace will bee as common as Conduit water, the very Tankard-bearers will mocke at me, I ſhall be made their laughter at Tavernes, the table talke at Ordinaries.
Nay good Vncle doe not thinke ſo ill of me, abrace of thouſands ſhall chaine up my tongue, that you may liue as conceal'd as you pleaſe.
O ſir you haue proved your ſelfe to bee a fine Companion.
Nay hold up your head ſir, this was your deviſe, your maſter peece of wit, and valour? nay you may bragge of it, the credit belongs to you.
Crotchet I would thou wert a poſt, that I might beat out my braines againſt thee.
Saue you Gentlemen.
Looke you ſir; here's the Doctor, and your daughter already.
Well there's ſome comfort yet to make amends for the reſt.
Come downe on your knees ſir.
How now what are you?
Lately the Doctor, but now your ſonne Aurelio.
What more gulleries yet? they haue coſend mee of my daughters, I hope they will cheate me of my wife too: haue you any more of theſe tricks to ſhew, ha?
No more ſir, if we may obtaine your favour for theſe, and thinke good ſir what loue may doe; you haue beene young your ſelfe.
Troth and ſo I haue, and beene as waggiſh as the beſt of you. Well Maſter Dotario, what ſhall we doe? the boyes haue out ſtript us, there's now no remedy, and my affection relents.
So does mine too, and I would doe any thing, if I might bee freed of this ignominie, that it might not bee knowne what a foole this loue has made of me.
Ile undertake for that ſir if you will yeeld to a motion.
Any thing upon theſe termes.
Then thus: you are rich, and your Nephew Aurelio here is poore, yet hee was borne to an inheritance; now doe you but conferre ſomething preſently upon him, and aſſure him the reſt after your death, and Ile promiſe they ſhall obſerue you with as much obſequiouſneſſe, as you deſire.
And what ſhall my Nephew Careleſſe doe?
Why Maſter Littlegood ſhall giue him his Land againe.
If he will doe one, Ile doe the other.
That he ſhall, Ile ſee that done upon my word.
Ile not ſtand againſt a good motion at any time.
Why then boyes be happy in your Miſtreſſes.
Sir this ſpeech from you is more comfortable then if Hymen had ſpoke it: and for my brother Lackwit Ile take him to my protection, and ſtand in his defence againſt all machinous Engines that ſhall bee planted for the battery of his wit and fortune.
Pray ſir will you get him his cloake and hat againe that he loſt in the skirmiſh.
I ſo I will; Fido ſhall reſtore them to him.
Well I would know, how all theſe things had come to ſo good perfection but for me now.
Nay, if fortune ſhould not favour ſuch as you and I are, ſhee would leaue her old wont.
What's my old Reformado come againe?
Nay you need not feare me now, I am as mild as my beere: I am her husband and your Hoſt till death.
What turn'd Hoſt?
Yes, and I thought it my duety to preſent you with the firſt fruits of my profeſſion. Fill out a glaſſe Tapſter, that I may drinke to this good company. Gentlemen you are all welcome.
Is this your Tapſter Captaine?
Yes, and does he not ſuit well with his function? he has learnt already to runne up ſtaires and downe ſtaires, as nimble as a Squirill, and can anſwer to any man that ſhall call him, as loud and peremptorily as the beſt of them.
Thats a good entrance.
He is a little out of countenance at the firſt, but when you come to my houſe, you ſhall heare him ſpeake in a big accent, whats to pay in the Lyon? whats to pay in the Dragon? be not diſmaid Tapſter, be not diſmaid.
Well I perceiue we muſt keepe Holiday: there's nothing angers me now, but Maſter Spruſe is diſappoynted of his Miſtreſſe.
Take no care for that, I haue more Miſtreſſes then I can tell what to doe with.
Sir I haue a ſiſter, though ſhee had no part in this buſines, yet for her beauty, vertues, and Dowry, may well deſerue you: if you can like of her, Ile doe what I can to obtaine her for you.
Sir you ſhall command mee in what you pleaſe, and my thankes for your loue; and here I vow never to diſſemble any more in this kind, but to be truely and ſincerely affectionated to whom ſoever you ſhall commend me.
Nay if you would not doe ſo, you were unworthy of her.
To gaine a womans loue thus all may ſtriue,
But wealth ſhall be put backe, when wit ſhall thriue.