CAn Thamesis himselfe so farre forget?
But 'tis so long since Tame and Isis met,
That 'tis not rare; for we two are growne old,
And being Riuers, subiect to take cold:
Forc't with extremity of paine to grone,
As troubled with the grauell and the stone.
(Whole shelues are in our raines) but (Fates so please)
By Artists helpe we late haue got some ease.
Thankes to our Patriots: O when I looke
On you, I must acknowledge to a Brooke
My River had beene turn'd, had not your care
Beene euer studious for our best well-fare.
(My recollection helpe me) you are hee
That vp to Stanes and downe as farre as Lee,
Are my great Lord in cheife; first then I bow
To your Inauguration, and I now
Rowse me in my Sea Chariot, drawne or led
By your owne Griffons: Birds, who haue the head
Of Eagles, Lyons body, wings beside,
All Symboles of that Praetor, who shall guide
So great a state; know further, Griffons can
Snatch from the Earth the harnest horse and man
To pray on them at pleasure, these imply
That you must alwayes haue an Eagles eye
To out gaze the Sun, and keepe that Aquilant sight
To see what's wrong, and to distinguish right.
The Lyons strength and boldnes you must haue
(With all his pitty,) for to such as craue
Or yeeld vnto him, aining themselues dying,
Scorning to kil, he will not touch them lying:
But such as striue or shall oppugne his lawes,
He rends and teares them with his Kingly pawes.
The wings your Griffons beare, import what speede
should be apply'd to such as iustice neede:
But why should I though best of Neptunes sonnes
(Whose streame almost by your permission runnes)
Instruct him who can teach? since the last yeare
Till this day, neuer ran my Tides so cleare
As now they doe, were neuer so become
With Barges, Ensignes; Trumpets, Fyfe and Drum,
Me thinkes you make me yong againe to view
Old customes kept, and (in them) all things new.
Though I by name of Thamesis ame knowne
My streames are yours, you welcome to your owne,
Passe, and returne safe, thus much on we build,
What's on my Waters wanting Land shall yeeld.
IF a true Shepheard you desire to see,
Looke this way, for hee's embleam'd here in me:
But you graue Praetor rais'd to this high state,
Hee whom as now I only personate
The numerous throng, which you this day behold
Are your owne Sheep, this Citty is their fold,
And by your graue descretion they shal best,
Know where to browze by day, by ight to rest.
As I, so you must on a Diall sit
Which hath no Gnoon but my staffe to it,
And such your Swoord is now, your wakefull eye
Must still be ope to watch where you can spy
The Rauenous Woolfe to presse, and block the way,
Least hee on any of your Flocke should prey:
Although my Dog fly from him, who hath binne
Rent with his pawe, and feares his horrid grinne,
Yet at all houres (you see) I ready stand
With armed hart, and Sheepe-hooke in my hand,
(So with your Swoord must you) both with an hye
Vndaunted Spirit, and with a Vigilant eye,
Least any eious thorne, or schratching bryer,
May race their Skinnes, or on their Fleeces tyer,
And that your charge so carefully be borne
They may be neuer But in Season shorne:
Great reason too you haue, for by this Trade,
(Of which Great Freeman, you first Free were made)
The whole Land's Cloath, no Mistery, no Art,
Science, or Manifacture, that hath part
In Theory or Practick, but must all
Giue due respect to this in generall:
For since the Trade of Cloathing first begun,
Both from the scorching of the sommers Sun,
And blustering North-Winds, Rich, Poore, Young and Old
Haue beene defenc'd, nor could that Fleece of Gold
Colchos still boasts, (in the'Auncient Poets road
So vsefull proue, or make so fine a threed
With ours, (low pris'd because not counted rare)
No remote Climat's able to compare:
It is that onely Marchand Zewhich brings
All nouels wanting heere, euen forreigne Kings
Haue thought themselues Rich Habited to haue worne
Such Cloath as for the commonnesse we scorne,
Oh blesse then our increase, those that haue been
I'th Worlds remote parts, and strange Nations seene,
For want of Cloath find them goe naked there,
Yet men like vs, and the same Image beare,
Make much Sir of your great Charge, 'tis not mine,
Y' are the true Shepheard, I my place resigns.
I Mercury, the Patrone of all Trade,
Of Trafficke and Commerce, am this day made
A speaker from the Gods: (for my quicke motion
Can sayle as well vpon the Land as Ocean:
And who the Merchant better can assure,
Then Mercury, the Lord of Mercature?
To you, this Day with state and power indow'd,
Whose winged Ships all forreigne Seas haue plow'd,
And mauger, surge, gust; or tempestuous flawe
Discouered what our Pole-starre neuer saw.
They from cold Arctos to the burning Zone
Haue washt their keeles to find out lands vnknowne.
Crossing the Boreal and the Australl lynes,
To view the set and rise of all the Signes.
To you whose Factors in both Indies lye,
The East and West: (all parts both farre and nye,)
vp, then downe the Volga steere,
To k i Musco what is chepe or deere:
And wh Hespein Tagu can affoord,
(To this noble Island) take abrd.
There's nothing the braue Persian can old rare,
Bu his her brought by your great Cost and Care.
The potent Turke (although in faith aduerse)
I pd th he with England can commerce.
What Genoua, Luca, Florence, Naples yeeldes,
What growes, or's found through all the Latian fields.
What is in China, Greece, or Ormous sold,
(That Diamond worthy to be set in Gold.)
For Norway, Danske, France, Spaine, the Netherlands,
What's best in them, comes frequent to our hds.
And for transportage of some surplus ware,
(Our owne wants furnisht) what we best can spare.
No rarity for profit or for pleasure,
But brought to vs in an abundant measure.
To this braue Isle, (by Neptune moared round)
You giue a Wall; not fixt on any ground,
But mouing 'tweene the Ocean and the Ayre,
Which as you build, yearely you repayre.
And (though a woodden Fabricke) so well knit,
That should inua force once menace it
With loud voic't Thunder, mixt with Sulpherous flame,
'Twould fke, or send them backe with feare and shame.
Graue Sir, you neede
To follow now, then him whom you succeede
Next on your Motto thinke: so happy prooue,
Let yo be in him that reignes aboue.
GRaue Praetor, with your Censors, (Sheriffes elected,
And now in place) it is from you expected,
That hauing your Authority from Kings,
(And many hundred yeares since) all such things
As Custome (by Time strengthned) hath made good,
You should maintaine, withall your liuelyhood,
Which that you will performe, we doubt the lesse.
When we consider who's your patronesse,
The Holy and blest Virgin, (further) this
Fabricke before you plac't, The Bower of blisse.
If we to greater, lesse things may compare
These present, but the petty Symbols are
Of what is future; for bare Prudence here
Pt and confin'd in humane knowledge, there
Shall be reduc't to Wisedome that's Diuine.
Tempeance (which is bare Abstinence) shall shine
In clarity immaculate: Iustice, which
Oft swayes the Ballance so, that to the Rich
It most inclines, shall by an equall Scale,
(Leaing nor this, nor that way) so preuaile,
That Right in glorious Star-wreaths shalbe crown'd,
And Iniury in tenebrous Lethe drownd.
Braue Fortitude which chiefely doth subsist
In opposition of the Antigonist,
(Whether that hee the Bodies mortall state
Seeke to supplant, or Soule inidiate)
Shall stand impugnable, and thenceforth be
Fin'd and repur'd to all Eternity:
When you arriue at yo Caelestiall Tower,
Which aptly may be titled FREMANS Bower.
The way to finde which, through these vertues lies
Call'd Cardinal: The stepps by which to rise,
These Graces shewe, Faith, Hope, and Loue attend you:
Who on their vnseene wings shall soone ascend you.
These (when all Earths pompe ales) your prayers shal bring
Where Saints and Angels Haleluiahs sing.
SLeepe may you soundly Sir, to morrow prest
To a yeares trouble for this one nights rest,
In which may Starres and Planits all conspire,
To warme you so by their celestiall Fire
Aries whose Gold-Fleece Greece doth so renowne
May both inrich you and this Glorious owne,
That Taurus in your strength may so appeare,
You this great wieght may on your Shoulders beare:
That the two Twins the Mothers blest increase,
May in this Citty still continue peace.
That Cancer who incites to hate and spleene
May not in your faire Gouernment be seene
That Leo waiting on your iudgement seate
May moderate his rage and scorching heate,
That the Celestiall Maide may you aduice
Virgins and Orphans still to patronize
And rather then your iustice heere should faile,
Libra no more be seene with Golden scale
And that the Scorpions sting may be so charm'd
The poore may not be wrong'd, nor innocent harm'd,
That Chirons bent bow so may guide your will,
You may still aime, but neuer shoot to kill:
And Capricorne though all things said to dare
Though he haue power, yet may haue will to spare
That as Aquarius doth his water power
You may your goodnes on this Citty shower,
Pisces, the last of Twelue, the Feete they guide,
From Head to Foot, O may you so prouide.