A Strange Play you are like to haue, for know,
We use no Drum, nor Trumpet, nor Dumbe show;
No Combate, Marriage, not so much to day,
As Song, Dance, Masque, to bumbaste out a Play;
Yet thèse all good, and still in frequent vse
With our best Poets; nor is this excuse
Made by our Author, as if want of skill
Caus'd this defect; it's rather his selfe will:
Will you the reason know? There haue so many
Beene in that kind, that Hee desires not any
At this time in His Sceane, no helpe, no straine,
Or flash that's borrowed from an others braine;
Nor speakes Hee this that Hee would haue you feare it,
He onely tries if once bare Lines will beare it;
Yet may't afford, so please you silent sit,
Some Mirth, some Matter, and perhaps some Wit.
OH friend, that I to mine owne Notion
Had ioyned but your experience; I haue the
Theoricke, But you the Practicke.
I perhaps, haue seene what you haue onely read of.
There's your happinesse.
A Scholler in his study knowes the starres,
Their motion and their influence, which are fixt,
And which are wandering, can decipher Seas,
And giue each seuerall Land his proper bounds;
But set him to the Compasse, hee's to secke,
When a plaine Pilot can, direct his course
From hence vnto both th'Indies; can bring backe
His ship and charge, with profits quintuple.
I haue read Ierusalem, and studied Rome,
Can tell in what degree each City stands,
Describe the distance of this place from that,
All this the Scale in euery Map can teach,
Nay, for a neede could punctually recite
The Monuments in either; but what I
Haue by relation onely, knowledge by trauell
Which still makes vp a compleat Gentleman,
Prooues eminent in you.
I must confesse,
I haue seene Ierusalem and Rome, haue brought
Marke from th'one, from th'other Testimony,
Know Spaine, and France, and from their ayres haue snckt
A breath of euery language: but no more
Of this discourse since wee draw neere the place
Of them we goe to visit.
Noble master Geraldine, worshipfull master Dalauill.
I see thou still remember'st vs.
Remember you, I haue had so many memorandomes from the multiplicities of your bounties, that not to remember you were to forget my selfe, you are both most ingeniously and nobly welcome.
And why ingeniously and nobly?
Because had I giuen your welcomes other attributes then I haue done, the one being a Souldier, and the other seeming a Scholler, I should haue lied in the first, and shewed my selfe a kind of blockhead in the last.
I see your wit is nimble as your tongue,
But how doth all at home?
Small doings at home sir, in regard that the age of my Master corresponds not with the youth of my Mistris, and you know cold Ianuary and lusty May seldome meet in coniunction.
I doe not thinke but this fellow in time may for his wit and vnderstanding make Almanackes?
Not so sir, you being more iudicious then I, ile giue you the preeminence in that, because I see by proofe you haue such iudgement in times and seasons.
And why in times and seasons?
Because you haue so seasonably made choise, to come so iust at dinner time; you are welcome Gentlemen, ile goe tell my Master of your comming.
A pleasant knaue.
This fellow I perceiue
Is well acquainted with his Masters mind,
Oh tis a good old man.
And shee a Lady.
For Beauty and for Vertue vnparraleld,
Nor can you name that thing to grace a woman
Shee has not in a full perfection,
Though in their yeeres might seeme disparity.
And therefore at the first, a match vnsit;
Imagine but his age and gouernement,
Withall, her modesty, and chaste respect;
Betwixt them, there's so sweet a simpathie,
As crownes a noble marriage.
Tis acknowledged,
But to the worthy gentleman himselfe,
I am so bound in many courtesies,
That not the least, by all th' expression
My Labour, or my Industry can shew,
I will know how to cancell.
Oh you are modest.
Hee studies to engrosse mee to himself,
And is so wedded to my company,
Hee makes mee stranger to my Fathers house,
Although so neere a neighbour.
This approues you,
To be most nobly propertied, that from one
So exquisite in Iudgement, can Attract
So affectionate an eye.
Your Carracter,
I must bestow on his vnmerrited Ioue,
As one that know I haue it, and yet ignorant
Which way I should deserue it: Heere both come.
Gentlemen, welcome, but what neede I vse
A word so common, vnto such to whom
My house was neuer priuate; I expect
You should not looke for such a needles phrase,
Especially you Master Geraldine,
Your Father is my neighbour, and I know you,
Euen from the Cradle, then I loued your Infancy,
And since your riper growth better'd by trauell;
My wife and you, in youth were play-fellowes,
And nor now be strangers; as I take it,
Not aboue two yeeres different in your Age.
So much hee hath out stript mee.
I would haue you
Thinke this your home, free as your Fathers house,
And to command it, as the Master on 't;
Call bouldly heere, and entertaine your friends,
As in your owne possessions, when I see't,
Ile say you loue me truely, not till then;
Oh what a happinesse your Father hath,
Farre aboue mee, one to inherit after him,
Where I (Heauen knowes) am childlesse.
That defect
Heauen hath supplied in this your vertuous Wife,
Both faire, and full of all accomplishments.
My Father is a Widower, and heerein
Your happinesse transcends him.
Oh Master Geraldine,
Flattery in Men's an adiunct of their sex,
This Countrie breeds it, and for that, so farre
You needed not to haue trauell'd.
Trueth's a word,
That should in euery language relish well,
Nor haue I that exceeded.
Sir, my Husband
Hath tooke much pleasure in your strange discourse
About Ierusalem and the Holy Land;
How the new Citie differs from the old,
What ruines of the Temple yet remayne,
And whether Sion, and those hills about,
With these Adiacent Townes and Villages,
Keepe that proportioned distance as wee read;
And then in Rome, of that great Piramis
Reared in the Front, on foure Lyons Mounted,
How many of those Idoll Temples stand,
First dedicated to their Heathen gods,
Which ruined, which to better vse repayred,
Of their Panthaeon, and their Capitoll,
What Structures are demolish't, what remaine.
And what more pleasure to an old mans eare,
That neuer drew, saue his owne Countries aire,
Then heare such things related. I doe exceed him
In yeeres, I must confesse, Yet he much older
Then I in his experience.
Master Geraldine,
May I bee bould to aske you but one question.
The which I'de be resolued in.
Any thing, that lies within my knowledge.
Put him too't,
Doe Sister, you shall finde him (make no doubt)
Most pregnant in his answere.
In your trauells
Through France, through Sauoye, and through Italy,
Spaine, and the Empire, Greece and Palestine,
Which breedes the choycest beauties.
Introath Lady
I neuer cast on any in those parts
A curious eye of censure, since my Trauell
Was onely aymed at Language, and to know;
These past me but as common objects did,
Seene, but not much regarded.
Oh you striue
To expresse a most vnheard of modestie,
And seldome found in any Traueller,
Especially of our Courtrey, thereby seeking
To make your selfe peculiar.
I should be loath
Professe in outward shew to be one Man,
And prooue my selfe another.
One thing more,
Were you to marry, You that know these clymes,
Their states and their conditions, out of which
Of all these countries would you chuse your wife.
Ile answere you in briefe, (as I obserue)
Each seuerall clime for obiect, fare, or vse,
Affords within it selfe, for all of these
What is most pleasing to the man there borne;
Spaine, that yeelds scant of food, affords the Nation
A parsimonious stomach, where our appetites
Are not content but with the large excesse
Of a full table; where the pleasing'st fruits
Are found most frequent, there they best content;
Where plenty flowes, it askes abundant Feasts;
For so hath proudent Nature dealt with all;
So in the choyce of Women, the Greeke wantons
Comple'd beneath the Turkish slauery,
Vassaile themselues to all men, and such best
Please the voluptious, that delight in change;
The French is of one humor, Spaine another,
The hot Italian hee's a straine from both,
All pleased with their owne nations euen the Moore,
Hee thinks the blackest the most beautifull;
And Lady, since you so farre taxe my choyce,
Ile thus resolue you; Being an English man,
Mong'st all these Nations I haue seene or tri'd,
To please me best, heere would I chuse my bride.
And happy were that Lady, in my thoughts,
Whom you id deine that grace too.
How now Sister,
This is a fashion that's but late come vp,
For maids to court their husbands.
I would wife
It were no worse, vpon condition,
They had my helping hand and purse to boote,
With both in ample measure; oh this Gentleman,
I loue, nay almost doate on.
Ya'ue my leaue,
To giue it full expression.
In these armes then,
Oh had my youth bin blest with such a sonne,
To haue made my estate to my name hereditary,
I should haue gone contented to my graue,
As to my bed; to death, as to my sleepe;
But Heauen hath will in all things, once more welcome,
And you sir, for your friends sake.
Would I had in mee,
That which he hath, to haue clamd it for mine owne,
How euer, I much thanke you.
Now sir, the newes with you.
Dancing newes sir,
For the meat stands piping hot vpon the dresser,
The kitchin's in a heat and the Cooke hath so bestir'd himselfe,
That hee's in a sweat. The Iacke plaies Musicke, and the Spits
Turne round too't.
This fellowes my best clocke,
Hee still strikes trew to dinner.
And to supper too sir, I know not how the day goes with you, but my stomacke hath strucke twelue, I can assure you that.
You take vs vnprouided Gentlemen,
Yet something you shall finde and wee would rather
Giue you the entertaine of houshold guests,
Then complement of strangers, I pray enter.
Ile stand too't, that in good hospitality, there can be nothing found that's ill, he that's a good house-keeper, keepes a good table, a good table, is neuer without good stooles, good stooles, seldome without good guests, good guests, neuer without good cheere, good cheere, cannot bee without good stomackes, good sfomackes, without good digestion, good digestion, keepes men in good health, and therefore all good people, that beare good minds, as you loue goodnesse, be sure to keepe good meat and drinke in your houses, and so you shall be called good men, and nothing can come on't but good, I warrant you.
Away you Corridon.
Shall I bee beate out of my Masters houe thus?
Thy Master, wee are Lords amongst our selues,
And heere we Liue and Reigne, Two yeeres already
Are past of our great Empire, and wee now
Write, Anno Tertio.
But the old man lives,
That shortly will depose you.
Ith' meane time,
I, as the mighty Lord and Seneshcall
Of this great house and castle, banish thee,
The very smell ath' kitchin, bee it death,
To appeare before the dresser,
And why so?
Because thou stink'st of garlike, is that breath
Agreeing with our Pallace, where each Roome,
Smells with Muske, Ciuit, and rich Amber-greece,
Alloes, Cassia, Aromaticke-gummes,
Perfumes, and Pouders, one whose very garments
Scent of the fowlds and stables, oh fie, fie,
What a base nastie rogue tis.
Yet your fellow.
Then let vs put a Cart-Horse in rich trappings.
And bring him to the Tilt-yard.
Prancke it, doe,
Waste, Ryot, and Consume, Mispend your Howres
In drunken Surfets, lose your dayes in sleepe,
And burne the nights in Reuells, Drinke and Drab,
Keepe Christmasse all yeere long, and blot leane Lent
Out of the Calender; all that masse of wealth
Got by my Masters sweat and thristy care,
Hauocke in prodigall vses; Make all flie,
Powr't downe your oylie throats, or send it smoaking
Out at the tops of chimnies: At his departure,
Was it the old mans charge to haue his windowes
Glister all night with Starres? his modest House
Turn'd to a common Stewes? his Beds to pallats
Of Lusts and Prostitutions? his Buttrey hatch
Now made more common then a Tauernes barre,
His Stooles that welcom'd none but ciuill guests,
Now onely free for Pandars, Whores and Bawdes,
Strumpets, and such.
I suffer thee too long,
What is to me thy countrey, or to thee
The pleasure of our Citie? thou hast Cowes,
Cattell, and Beeues to feed, Oues and Boues,
These that I keepe, and in this pasture graze,
Are dainty Damosellaes, bonny Girles;
If thou be'st borne to Hedge, Ditch, Thrash and Plough
And I to Reuell, Banquet and Carrowe;
Thou Pessant, to the Spade and Pickaxe, I
The Battoone and Steeletto thinke it onely
Thy ill, my good, our seuerall lots are cast,
And both must be contented.
But when both our seruices are questioned.
Looke thou to one,
My answere is prouided.
Farewell Musk-Cat.
Adue good Cheese and Oynons, stuffe thy guts
With Specke and Barley-pudding for disgestion,
Drinke Whig and sowre Milke, whilest I rince my Throat,
With Burdeaux and Caarie.
What was hee?
A Spie Sir,
One of their Hindes oth' countrey, that came prying
To see what dainty fare our kitchin yeelds,
What Guests we harbour, and what rule we keepe,
And threats to tell the old man when he comes;
I thinke I sent him packing.
It was well done.
A whoreson-Iack-an-apes, a base Baboone,
To insinuate in our secrets.
Let such keepe, the Countrey where their charge is.
So I said Sir.
And visit vs when we command them thence,
Not search into our counsels.
'Twere not fit.
Who in my fathers absence should command,
Saue I his only sonne?
It is but iustice.
For am not I now Lord?
Dominus fac totum.
And am not I your Steward?
Well remembred,
This night I haue a purpose to bee Merry,
Iouiall and Frollicke, how doth our cash hold out?
The bag's still heauy.
Then my heart's still light.
I can assure you, yet tis pritty deepe,
Tho scarce a mile to th' bottome.
Let mee haue
to Supper, Let mee see, a Ducke—
Sweet Rogue.
A Capon—
Geld the Rascall.
Then a Turkey—
Now spit him for an Infidell.
Greene Plouer, Snite,
Partridge, Larke, Cocke, and Phessant.
Nere a Widgin?
Yes, wait thy selfe at Table.
Where I hope your selfe will not be absent.
Nor my friends.
Weele haue them then in plenty.
Cauiare, Sturgeon, Anchoues, pickle Oysters: Yes,
And a Potato Pie; besides all these,
What thou think'st rare and costly.
Sir, I know
What's to be done; the stocke that must be spent,
Is in my hands, and what I haue to doe,
I will doe suddenly.
No Butchers meat,
Of that, beware in any case.
I still remember,
Your father was no Grasier, if he were,
This were a way to eate vp all his Fields,
Hedges and all.
You will be gone sir.
Yes, and you are ith' way going.
To what may yong men best compare themselues?
Better to what, then to a house new built?
The Fabricke strong, the Chambers well contriu'd,
Polisht within, without, well beautifi'd;
When all that gaze vpon the Edifice,
Doe not alone commend the workemans craft,
But either make it their faire president
By which to build another, or at least,
Wish there to inhabite: Being set to sale,
In comes a slothfull Tenant, with a Family
As lasie and debosht; Rough tempests rise,
Vntile the roofe, which by their idlenesse,
Left vnrepaired, the stormy showres beat in,
Rot the maine Postes and Rafters, spoile the Roomes,
Deface the Seelings, and in little space,
Bring it to vtter Ruine, yet the fault,
Not in the Architector that first reared it,
But him that should repaire it: So it fares
With vs yong men; Wee are those houses made,
Our Parents raise these Structures, the foundation
Laid in our Infancy; and as wee grow
In yeeres, they striue to build vs by degrees,
Story on story higher; vp at height,
They couer vs with Councell, to defend vs
From stormes without: they polish vs within,
With Learnings, Knowledge, Arts and Diseiplines;
All that is nought and vicious, they sweepe from vs,
Like Dust and Cobwebs, and our Roomes concealed,
Hang with the costliest hangings; Bout the Walls,
Emblemes and beautious Symbols pictured round;
But when that lasie Tenant, Loue, steps in,
And in his Traine, brings Sloth and Negligence,
Lust, Disobedience, and profuse Excesse;
The Thrist with which our fathers tiled our Roofes,
Submits to euery storme and Winters blast,
And yeelding place to euery riotous sinne,
Giues way without, to ruine what's within:
Such is the state I stand in.
And how doth this Tire become me?
Rather aske, how your sweet carriage,
And Court behauiour, doth best grace you, for Loucrs regard,
Not so much the outward habit, as that which the garment couers.
Oh heer's that Haile, Shower, Tempest, Storme, and Gust,
That shatter'd hath this building; Let in Lust,
Intemperance appetite to Vice; withall,
Neglect of euery Goodnesse; Thus I see,
How I am sincking in mine owne disease,
Yet can I not abide it.
And how this Gowne? I prethee view mee well,
And speake with thy best Iudgement.
What doe you talke of Gownes, and Ornaments;
That haue a Beautie, pretious in it selfe,
And becomes any thing.
Let me not liue, but she speaks nought but truth,
And ile for that reward her.
All's one to mee, become they mee, or not,
Or bee I faire, or fowle, in others eyes,
So I appeare so to my Lionell,
Hee is the glasse, in whom I iudge my face,
By whom in order, I will dresse these curles,
And place these Iewels, onely to please him,
Why do'st smile.
To heere a Woman, that thinks her selfe so wise, speake so foolishlie, that knowes well, and does ill.
Teach me wherein I erre.
Ile tell thee Daughter; In that thou knowest thy selfe to bee beloued of so many, and setlest thy affection, only vpon one; Doth the Mill grinde onely, when the Wind sits in one corner? Or Shippsonely Saile, when it's in this, or that quarter? Is hee a cunning Fencer, that lies but at one Guard? Or he a Skilfull Musician, that plaies but on one String? Is there but one way to the Wood? And but one Bucket that belongs to the Well? To affect one, and despise all other, becomes the precise Matron, not the Prostitute; the loyall Wife, not the loose Wanton: Such haue I beene, as you are now, and should learne, to Saile with all Windes, defend all Blowes, make Musicke with all Strings, know all the wayes, to the Wood, and like a good trauelling Hackney, learne to drinke of all Waters.
May I miscarry in my Blandaes loue;
If I that old damnation, doe not send
To Hell, before her time.
I would not haue you Mother, teach me ought,
That tends to iniure him.
Well looke too't when 'tis late, and then repent at leasure, as I haue done; Thou see'st, heeres nothing but Prodigallity and Pride, Wantoning, and Wasting, Rioting, and Reuelling, Spoyling, and Spending, Gluttony, and Gormondising, all goes to Hauocke, and can this hold out? When he hath nothing left, to helpe himselfe, how can he Harbour thee? Looke at length, to Drinke from a dry Bottle, and feed from an emptie Knap-sacke, looke too 't, 'twill come to that.
My parsemony shall begin in thee,
And instantly, for from this houre, I vow,
That thou no more shalt Drinke vpon my cost,
Nor taste the smallest Fragment from my Board;
Ile see thee starue ith' street first.
Liue to one man? a ieast, thou may'st aswell, tie thy selfe to one Gowne; and what Foole, but will change with the Fashion, Yes, doe, Confine thy selfe to one Garment, and vse no Varietie, and see how foone it will Rot, and turne to Raggs.
Those Raggs, be thy Reward; Oh my sweet Blanda,
Onely for Thee, I wish my Father dead,
And neere to Rouse vs from our Sweet delight;
But for this Hag, this Beldam, shee whose backe,
Hath made her Items, in my Mercers Bookes,
Whose raucnous Guts, I haue Stuft with Delicates,
Nay euen to Surfit; And whose frozen Blood,
I haue Warmed with Aquauitae; Be this day
My last of Bounty, to a Wretch Ingrate,
But vnto Thee, a new Indenture Scaled,
Of an affection fixt, and Permanent,
Ile loue thee still, bee 't but to giue the lye,
To this old Cancker'd Worme.
Nay, be not angrie.
With thee, my Soule shall euer be at peace,
But with this loue seducer, still at Warre.
Heere me but speake.
Ope but thy lips againe, it makes a way,
To haue thy Tongue pluck'd out.
What all in Tempest?
Yes, and the Storme, raised by that Witches Spells.
Oh 'tis a Damn'd Inchantresse.
What's the businesse?
Onely some few words, slipt her vnawares,
For my Sake, make her peace.
You charge me deepely,
Come Friend, will you be Moou'd at womens Words,
A man of your knowne iudgement?
Had you but heard,
The damn'd Erronious Doctrine that shee taught,
You would haue iudg'd her to the Stake.
But Sweet heart,
Shee now Recants those Errours, once more Number her
Amongst your Houshold seruants.
Shall she beg, and be denyed ought from you?
Come this Kisse, Shall end all former quarells.
'Tis not possible,
Those Lippes should mooue in vaine, that two wayes plead;
Both in their Speech, and Silence.
You haue preuail'd,
But vpon this Condition, no way else,
Ile Sensure her, as shee hath Sentenc'd thee;
But with some small Inuersion,
Speake, how's that?
Not too seuere, I prethee see poore wretch,
Shee at the barre, stands quaking.
Now, hold vp?
How man, how?
Her hand, I meane; And now 'e thee,
According to thy Councell giuen to her:
Saile by one Winde; Thou shalt, to one tune Sing,
Lie at one Guard, and Play but on one String,
Hencefoorth, I will Confine thee to one Garment,
And that shall be a cast one, Like thy selfe
Iust, past all Wearing, as thou past all Vse,
And not to be renewed, til't be as Ragged,
As thou art Rotten.
Nay sweet.
That for her Habbit.
A cold Sute, I haue on 't,
To preuent Sursit,
They Diet, sha I bee to one Dish confin'd,
And that too Rifled, with as vncleane hands,
As ere were laid on thee.
What hee scants me in Victuals, would he but alow once in Drinke.
That shall be the refuse of the Flagons, Iaoks,
And Snuffes, such as the naftieft Breathes shall leaue;
Of Wine, and Strong-water, neuer hope,
Hencefoorth to Smell.
Oh me, I already.
If I since in my State, of all the rest,
Be thou excused, what thou proposed to her,
Beldam, is now against thy selfe decreed,
Drinke from drie springs, from empty, Knap-sacks fede.
No burnt Wine, nor Hot-waters.
Take her hence.
Indeede you are too cruell.
Yes to her,
Onely of purpose, to be kind to thee;
Are any of my Guests come?
Feare not Sir,
You will haue a fill Table.
What, and Musicke?
Best Consort in the Citie, for fixe parts.
Wee shall haue Songs then?
Bith' eare.
And Wenches?
Yes bith' eyc.
Ha, what was that you said?
We shall haue such to beare you company,
As will no doubt content you.
Enter then:
In Youth there is a Fate, that swayes vs still.
To know what's Good, and yet pursue what's Ill.
And what's this Dalauill?
My apprehension,
Can giue him no more true expression,
Then that he first appeares, a Gentleman,
And well conditioned.
That for outward shew;
But what in him haue you obserued else,
To make him better knowne?
I haue nor Eyes,
To search into the inward Thoughrs of Men,
Nor euer was studied in that 'Art,
To iudge of Meus affection by the face;
But that which makes me best opinion'd of him,
Is, That he's Companion, and the Friend
Beloued of him, whom you so much commend,
The Noble Master Geraldine,
Thou hast spoke,
That which not onely crownes his true desert,
But now instates him, in my better thoughts,
Making his Worth, vnquestioned.
Hee pretends
Loue to my sister Pru. I haue obseru'd him,
Single her out, to priuate conference.
But I could rather, for her owne sake, wish
Young Geraldine would fixe his thoughts that way,
And shee towards him; In such Affinity,
Trust me, I would not vse a sparing hand.
But Loue in these kindes, should not be compel'd,
Forc'd, nor Perswaded; When it freely Springs,
And of it selfe, takes voluntary Roote,
It Growes, it Spreads, it Ripens, and brings soorth,
Such an Vsurious Crop of timely Fruit,
As crownes a plentious Autume.
Such a Haruest,
I should not be th' vngladdest man to see,
Of all thy sisters friends: Now, whence come you?
Who, I Sir, From a Lodging of Lardgesse, a House of Hospitality, and a Pallace of Plenty; Where there's Feeding like Horses, and Drinking like Fishes; Where for Pints, w'are serued in Pottles; and in stead of Pottle-pots, in Pailes; in stead of Siluer-tanckards, we drinke out of Water-tanckards; Clarret runs as freely, as the Cocks; and Canarie, like the Conduits of a Coronation day; Where there's nothing but Feeding and Frollicking; Caruing in Kissing; Drinking, and Dauncing; Musicke and Madding; Fidsing and Feasting.
And where, I pray thee, are all these Reuels kept?
They may be rather called Reakes then Reuells; As I came along by the doore, I was call'd vp amongst them; Hee-Gallants, and Shee-Gallants, I no sooner look'd out; but saw them out with their Kniues, Slashing of Shoulders, Mangling of Legs, and Lanching of Loynes, till there was scarce a whole Limbe lest amongst them.
A fearefull Massacre.
One was Hacking to cut off a Necke, this was Mangling a Brest, his Knife slip from the Shoulder, and onely cut of a Wing, one was picking the Braines out of a Head, another was Knuckle deepe in a Belly, one was Groping for a Liuer, another Searching for the Kidneyes; I saw one plucke the Sole from the Body (Goose that she was to suffer't) another prickt into the Breast with his one Bill, Woodcocke to indure it.
How fell they out at first?
I know not that, but it seemes, one had a Stomacke, and another had a Stomacke; But there was such biting and tearing with their teeths, that I am sure, I saw some of their poore Carcasses pay for't.
Did they not send for Surgeons?
Alas no, Surgeons helpe was too late; There was no stitching vp of those Wounds, where Limbe was pluckt from Limbe; Nor any Salue for those Scarrs, which all the Plaister of Paris cannot Cure.
Where grew the quarrell first?
It seems it was first Broacht in the Kitchin; Certaine creatures being brought in thither, by some of the House; The Cooke being a Colloricke fellow, did so Towse them and Tosse them, so Plucke them and Pull them, till hee left them as naked as my Naile, Pinioned some of them like Fellons; Cut the Spurres from others of their Heeles; Then downe went his Spits, Some of them he ranne in at the Throat, and out at the Back-side; About went his Basting-Ladle, where he did so besawce them, that many a shrode turne they had amongst them.
But in all this, How did the Women scape?
They fared best, and did the least hurt that I saw; But for quietnesse sake, were forc'd to swallow what is not yet digested, yet euery one had their share, and shee that had least, I am sure by this time, hath her belly full.
And where was all this hauocke kept?
Marry Sir, at your next neighbours, Young Master Lionell, Where there is nothing but Drinking out of Dry-Fats, and Healthing in Halfe-Tubs, his Guests are fed by the Belly, and Beggers serued at his Gate in Baskets; Hee's the Adamant of this Age, the Daffadill of these dayes, the Prince of Prodigallity, and the very Caesar of all young Citizens.
Belike then, 'twas a Massacre of meat, not as I apprehended?
Your grauity hath gest aright; The chiefest that fell in this Battell, were wild Fowle and tame Fowle; Phessants were wounded in stead of Alfaresse, and Capons for Captaines, Anchoues stood for Antiants, and Cauiare for Corporals, Dishes were assaulted in stead of Ditches, and Rabbets were cut to pieces vpon the rebellings, some lost their Legs, whil'st other of their wings were forc'd to flie; The Pioner vndermind nothing but Pie-crust; And—
Enough, enough, your wit hath plai'd too long vpon our patience;
Wife, it grieues me much both for the yong and old man, the one,
Graces his head with care, endures the parching heat and biting cold,
The terrours of the Lands, and feares at Sea in trauell, onely to gaine
Some competent estate to leaue his sonne;
Whiles all that Merchandise, through Gulfes, Crosse-Tides,
Pitats and Stormes, he brings so farre; Th' other
Heere Shipwrackes in the Harbour.
Tis the care of Fathers; and the weakenesse
Incident to youth, that wants experience.
I was at the beginning of the Battell,
But heere comes some, that it seemes
Were at the rifling of the dead Carcasses;
For by their mirth, they haue had part of the Spoile.
Youare pleasant, Oendemen, what
Might be the Subiect of your pleasant sport,
It promiseth some pleasure?
If their recreation
Bee, as I make no question, on truth grounded,
'twill beger sudden laughter.
What's the Proiect?
Who shall relate it.
Master Geraldine, if there be any thing can please my Eare,
With pleasant soundes, your Tongue must be the Instrument,
On which the Sring must strike.
Bee't his then.
Nay heare it, 'tis a good one.
Wee intreat you, Possesse vs oth' Nouell,
Speake, good Sir.
I shall then, with a kind of Barbarisme,
Shaddow a Ieast, that askes a smoother Tongue,
For in my poore discourse, I doeprotest,
'twill but loose his luster.
You are Modest.
Howeuer speake, I pray; For my sake doo't?
This is like a hastie Pudding, longer in eating then it was in making.
Then thus it was, this Gentleman and I,
Past but iust now, by your next Neighbours house,
Where as they say, dwels one Young Lionell.
Where I was to night at Supper.
An vnthrist Youth, his Father now at Sea.
Why that's they very Subiect, vpon which
It seemes, this Iest is grounded, there this Night,
Was a great feast.
Why so I told you, Sir.
Bee thou still dumbe, 'tis-hee that I would heare.
In the height of their Carowsing, all their braines,
Warm'd with the heat of Wine; Discourse was offer'd,
Of Ships, and Stormes at Sea; when suddenly,
Out of his giddy wildnesse, one conceiues
The Roome wherein they quafft, to be a Pinnace,
Moouning and Floating; and the confused Noise,
To be the murmuring Windes, Gusts, Marriners;
That their vnstedfast Footing, did proced
From rocking of the Vessell: This conceiu'd,
Each one begins to apprehend the danger,
And to looke out for safety, flie saith one
Vp to the Manne-top, and discourer; Hee
Climbes by the bed post, to the Teaster, there
Reports a Turbulent Sea and Tempest towards;
And wills them if they'le saue their Ship and lines,
To cast their Lading ouer-board; At this
All fall to Worke, and Hoyste into the Street,
As to the Sea, What next come to their hand,
Stooles, Tables, Tressels, Trenchers, Bed-steds, Cups,
Pots, Plate, and Glasses; Heere a fellow Whistles,
They take him for the Boat-swaine, one lyes strugling
Vpon the floore, as if he swome for life,
A third, takes the Base-violl for the Cock-boate,
Sits in the belly on't, labours and Rowes;
His Oare, the Sticke with which the Fidler plaid;
A fourth, bestrides his Fellowes, thinking to scape
As did Arion, on the Dolphins backe,
Still fumbling on a gitterne.
Excellent Sport.
But what was the conclusion?
The rude multiude,
Watching without, and gaping for the spoyle
Cast from the windowes, went bith' eares about it;
The Constable is called to Attone the broyle,
Which done, and hearing such a noise within,
Of eminent Ship-racke; enters the house, and finds them
In this confusion, They Adore his staffe,
And thinke it Neptunes Trident, and that hee
Comes with his Tritons, (so they cal'd his watch)
To calme the Tempest, and appease the Waues;
And at this point, wee left them.
Come what will, ile steale out of Doores,
And see the end of it, that 'scertaine.
Thanks Master Geraldine, for this discourse,
Introath it hath much pleased mee, but the night
Begins to grow faste on vs, for your parts,
You are all young, and you may sit vp late,
My eyes begin to summon me to sleepe,
And nothing's more offensiue vnto Age,
Then to watch long and late.
Now good Rest with you.
What saies faire Prudentilla? Maids and Widdows,
And wee young Batchelors, such as indeed
Are fore'd to lie in Solitary beds,
And sleepe without disturbance; wee methinks,
Should desire later houres; when Married Wines,
That in their amorus armes, hug their delights;
To often wakings subiect; their more hast,
May better be excused.
How can you,
That are as you confesse, a single man,
Enter so farre into these Misticall secrets
Of Mariage, which as yet you neuer prooued.
There's Lady, an instinct innate in man,
Which prompts vs to the apprehensions
Of th 'vses wee were borne to; Such we are
Aptest to learne; Ambitious most to know,
Of which our chiefe is Marriage.
What you Men
Most meditate, wee Women seldome dreame of.
When dreame Maids most?
When thinke you?
When you lie vpon your Backs, come come, your Eare.
Wee now are left alone.
Why say wee be who should be iealous of vs?
This is not first of many hundred Nights,
That wee two haue beene priuate, from the first
Of our acquaintance, when our Tongues but clipt
Our Mothers-tongue, and could not speake it plaine,
Wee knew each other; As in slatnre, so
Increast our sweet Societie; Since your trauell,
And my late Marriage, Through my Husbands lone,
Mid-night hath beene as Mid-day, and my Bed-chamber,
As free to you, as your owne Fathers house,
And you as welcome too 't.
I must confesse,
It is in you, your Noble Courtesie,
In him, a more then common considence,
And in this Age, canscarce find president.
Most trew, it is withall an Argument,
That both our vertues are so deepe imprest
In his good thoughts, hee knowes we cannot erre.
A villaine were hee, to deceiue such trust,
Or (were there one) a much worse Carracter.
And she no lesse, whom either Beauty, Youth,
Time, Place, or opportunity could tempt,
To iniure such a Husband.
You deserue, euen for his sake, to be for euer young;
And hee for yours, to haue his Youth reuew'd;
So mutuall is your trew coniugall Loue; Yet had the Fates so pleas'd
I know your meaning,
It was once voyc'd, that wee two should haue Matcht,
The World so thought, and many Tongues so spake,
But Heauen hath now dispos'd vs otherwayes;
And being as it is, (a thing in me,
Which I protest, was neuer wisht, nor sought)
Now done, I not repent it.
In those times,
Of all the Treasures of my Hopes and Loue,
You were th' Exchequer, they were Stor'd in you;
And had not my vnfortunate Trauell crost them,
They had bin heere reserued still.
Troath they had,
I should haue beene your trusty Treasurer.
Howeuer let vs Loue still, I intreat:
That, Neighbour-hood and breeding will allow;
So much the Lawes Diuine and Humaine both,
Twixt Brother and a Sister will approue;
Heauen then forbid, that they should limit vs
Wish well to one another.
If they should not,
Wee might proclaime, they were not Charitable,
Which were a deadly fin but to conceiue.
Will you resolue me one thing?
As to one, that in my Bosome hath a second place, next my deere Husband.
That's the thing I craue,
And onely that, to haue a place next him.
Presume on that already, but perhaps,
You meane to stretch it further.
Onely thus farre,
Your Husbands old, to whom my Soule doth wish,
A Nesters age, So much he merits from me;
Yet if (as proofe and Nature daily teach)
Men cannot alwayes liue, especially
Such as are old and Crazed; Hee be cal'd hence,
Fairely, in full maturity of time,
And we two be reseru'd to after life,
Will you conferre your Widow-hood on mee?
You aske the thing, I was about to beg;
Your tongue hath spake mine owne thoughts.
Vow to that.
As I hope Mercy.
'Tis enough, that word
Alone, instates me happy; Now so please you,
Wee will diuide, you to your priuate Chamber,
I to find out my friend.
Nay Master Geraldine, one Ceremonie rests yet vnperform'd,
My Vow is past, your oath must next proceed,
And as you couet to be sure of me,
Of you I would be certaine.
Make ye doubt?
No doubt; but Lone's still Iealous, and in that
To be excused; You then shall sweare by Heauen,
And as in all your future Acts, you hope
To thriue and prosper; As the Day may yeeld
Comfort, or the Night rest, as you would keepe
Entire, the Honour of your Fathers house,
And free your Name from Scandall and Reproach,
By all the Goodnesse that you hope to enioy,
Or ill to shun—
You charge me deeply Lady.
Till that day come, you shall reserue your selfe
A single man; Conuerse nor company
With any Woman, Contract nor Combine,
With Maid, or Widow; which expected houre,
As I doe wish not haste, so when it happens,
It shall not come vnwelcome; You here all, Vow this.
By all that you haue said, I sweare, and by this Kisse Confirme.
Y'are now my Brother,
But then, my second Husband.
Wee had a stormy night on't.
The Wine still workes,
And with the little rest they haue tooke to night,
They are scarce come to themselues.
Now 'tis a Calme,
Thankes to those gentle Sea-gods, that haue brought vs
To this safe Harbour; Can you tell their names?
He with the Painted-staffe, I heard you call Neptune.
The dreadfull god of Seas,
Vpon whose backe neere stucke March flees.
One with the Bill, keepes Neptunes Porposes,
So Ouid sayes in's Metamorphosis.
A third the learned Poets write on,
And as they say, His name is Triton.
These are the Marine gods, to whom my father
In his long voyage prayes too; Cannot they
That brought vs to our Hauen, bury him
In their Abisse? For if he safe ariue,
I with these Sailors, Syrens, and what not,
Am sure heere to be shipwrackt.
Stand vp stiffe.
But that the ship so totters: I shall fall.
If thou fall, Ile fall with thee.
Now I sincke,
And as I diue and drowne, Thus by degrees,
Ile plucke thee to the bottome.
A maine for England, See, see,
The Spaniard now strikes Saile.
So must you all.
Whence is your ship, from the Bermoothes?
Worse, I thinke from Hell:
We are all Lost, Split, Shipwrackt, and vndone,
This place is a meere quick-sands.
So we feared.
Wher's my young Master?
Heere man, speake, the Newes?
The Newes is, I, and you—
What?
Shee, and all these—
I?
We, and all ours, are in one turbulent Sea
Of Feare, Dispaire, Disaster and mischance swallowed:
Your father, Sir—
Why, what of him?
He is, Oh I want breath.
Where?
Landed, and at hand.
Vpon what coast? Who saw him?
I, these eyes.
Oh Heauen, what shall I doe then?
Aske ye me what shall become of you, that haue not yet
Had time of studdy to dispose my selfe;
I say againe, I was vpon the Key,
I saw him land, and this way bend his course;
What drunkard's this, that can out sleepe a storme
Which threatens all our ruines? Wake him.
Ho, Rioter, awake.
Yes, I am wake;
How dry hath this Salt-water made me; Boy,
Giue me th' other Glasse.
Arise, I say,
My Fathers come from Sea.
If he be come, Bid him be gone againe.
Can you trifle at such a time, when your Inuentions.
Braines, Wits, Plots, Deuices, Stratagems, and all
Should be at one in action? each of you
That loue your safeties, lend your helping hands,
Women and all, to take this drunkard hence,
And to bestow him else where.
Lift for Heauens sake.
But what am I the neerer, were all these
Conuey'd to sundry places and vnseene;
The staine of our disorders still remaine,
Of which, the house will wirnesse, and the old man
Must finde when he enters; And for these
I am here left to answere: What is he gone?
But whither? But into th' selfe same house
That harbours him; my Fathers, where we all
Attend from him surpriseall.
I will make
That Prison of your feares, your Sanctuary;
Goe get you in together.
To this house?
Your Fathers, with your Sweet-heart, these and all;
Nay, no more words but doo't,
That were to betray vs to his fury.
I haue't heere,
To Baile you hence at pleasure; and in th' interim,
Ile make this supposed Goale, to you, as safe
From th' iniur'd old mans iust incensed spleene,
As were you now together ith' Low-Countreyes,
Viriginia, or ith' Indies.
Present feare,
Bids vs to yeeld vnto the faint beliefe
Of the least hoped safety.
Will you in?
By thee we will be counsell'd.
Shut them fast.
And thou and I to leaue them?
No such thing, for you shall beare your Sweet-heart company, And helpe to cheere the rest.
And so thou
Meanest to escape alone?
Rather without,
Ile stand a Champion for you all within;
Will you be swai'd? One thing in any case
I must aduise; The gates boulted and lockt,
See that 'mongst you no liuing voyce be heard;
No not so much as a Dog to howle,
Or Cat to mewe, all silence, that I charge;
As if this were a meere forsaken house,
And none did there inhabite.
Nothing else?
And though the old man thunder at the gates
As if he meant to ruine what he had rear'd,
None on their liues to answere.
'Tis my charge;
Remaines there nothing else?
Onely the Key; for I must play the goaler for your durance, To bee the Mercurie in your release.
Me and my hope, I in this Key deliuer
To thy safe trust.
When you are fast you are safe,
And with this turne 'tis done: What fooles are these,
To trust their ruin'd fortunes to his hands
That hath betrai'd his owne; And make themselues
Prisoner to one deserues to lie for all,
As being cause of all; And yet something prompts me,
Ile stand it at all dangers; And to recompence
The many wrongs vnto the yong man done:
Now, if I can doubly delude the old,
My braine, about it then; All's husht within,
The noise that shall be, I must make without;
And he that part for gaine, and part for wit,
So farre hath trauell'd, striue to foole at home:
Which to effect, Art must with Knauery ioyne,
And smooth Dissembling meet with Impudence;
He doe my best, and howsoere it prooue,
My praise or shame, 'tis but a seruants loue.
Discharge these honest Sailors that haue brought
Our Chests a shore, and pray them haue a care,
Those merchandise be safe we left aboord:
As Heauen hath blest vs with a fortunate Voyage,
In which we bring home riches with our healthes,
So let not vs prooue niggards in our store;
See them paid well, and to their full content.
I shall Sir.
Then returne: These speciall things,
And of most value, weele not trust aboord;
Meethinkes they are not safe till they see home,
And there repose, where we will rest our selues,
And bid farewell to Trauell; for I vow,
After this houre, no more to trust the Seas,
Nor throw mee to such danger.
I could wish
You had tooke your leaue oth' Land too.
And now it much reioyceth me, to thinke
What a most sudden welcome I shall bring,
both to my Friends and priuate Family.
Oh, but how much more welcome had he beene,
That had brought certaine tidings of thy death.
But soft, what's this? my owne gates shut vpon me,
And barre their Master entrance? Whose within there?
How, no man speake, are all asleepe or dead,
That no soule stirres to open?
What madde man's that, who weary of his life,
Dares once lay hand on these accursed gates?
Whose that? my seruant Reignald.
My old Master,
Most glad I am to see you; Are you well Sir?
Thou see'st I am.
But are you sure you are?
Feele you no change about you? Pray you stand off.
What strange and vnexpected greetings this,
That thus a man may knocke at his owne gates,
Beat with his hands and feet, and call thus loud,
And no man giue him entrance?
Said you Sir;
Did your hand touch that hammer?
Why, whose else?
But are you sure you toucht it?
How else, I prethee, could I haue made this noise?
You toucht it then?
I tell thee yet I did.
Oh for the loue I beare you,
Oh me most miserable, you, for you owne sake,
Of all aliue most wretched; Did you touch it?
Why, say I did?
You haue then a sinne committed,
No sacrifice can expiate to the Dead;
But yet I hope you did not.
'Tis past hope,
The deed is done, and I repent it not.
You and all yours will doo't. In this one rashnes,
You haue vndone vs all; Pray be not desperate,
But first thanke Heauen that you haue escapt thus well;
Come from the gate, yet further, further yet,
And tempt your fate no more; Command your seruants
Giue off and come no neerer, they are ignorant,
And doe not know the danger, therefore pity
That they should perish in 't; 'Tis full seuen moneths,
Since any of your house durst oce set foot
Ouer that threshold.
Prethee speake the cause?
First looke about, beware that no man heare,
Command these to remooue.
Be gone. Now speake.
Oh Sir, This house is growne Prodigious,
Fatall, Disasterous vnto you and yours.
What Fatall? what Disasterous?
Some Host that hath beene owner of this house,
In it his Guest hath slaine; And we suspect
'Twas he of whom you bought it.
How came this
Discouer'd to you first?
Ile tell you Sir,
But further from the gate: Your sonne one night
Suppt late abroad, I within; Oh that night,
I neuer shall forget; Being safe got home,
I saw him in his chamber laid to rest;
And after went to mine, and being drowsie,
Forgot by chance, to put the Candle out;
Being dead asleepe; Your sonne affrighted, calls
So loud, that I soone waken'd; Brought in light,
And found him almost drown'd in fearefull sweat;
Amaz'd to see't, I did demand the cause:
Who told me, that this murdered Ghost appeared,
His body gasht, and all ore-stucke with wounds;
And spake to him as followes.
Oh proceed, 'tis that I long to heare.
I am, quoth he,
A Trans-marine by birth, who came well stored
With Gold and Iewels, to this fatall house;
Where seeking safety, I encounter'd death:
The couetous Merchant, Land-lord of this rent,
To whom I gaue my life and wealth in charge;
Freely to enioy the one, rob'd me of both:
Heere was my body buried, here my Ghost
Must euer walke, till that haue Christian right;
Till when, my habitation must be here:
Then flie yong man, Remooue thy family,
And secke some safer dwelling: For my death,
This mansion is accurst; 'Tis my possession,
Bought at the deere rate of my life and blood,
None enter here, that aymes at his owne good.
And with this charge he vanisht.
Oh my feare,
Whither wilt thou transport me?
I Intreat keepe further from the gate, and flie.
Flie whither? Why doest not thou flie too?
What need I feare, the Ghost and I am friends.
But Reignald.
Tush, I nothing haue deserued,
Nor ought transgrest: I came not neere the gate.
To whom was that thou spakest?
Was't you Sir nam'd me?
Now as I liue, I thought the dead man call'd,
To enquire for him that thunder'd at the gate
Which he so dearely pai'd for: Are you madd,
To stand a fore-seene danger?
What shall I doe?
Couer you head and flie; Lest looking backe,
You spie your owne confusion.
Why doest not thou flie too?
I tell you Sir,
The Ghost and I am friends.
Why didst thou quake then?
In feare lest some mischance may fall on you,
That haue the dead offended, For my part,
The Ghost and I am friends: Why flie you not,
Since here you are not safe?
Some blest powers guard me.
Nay Sir, ile not forsake you: I haue got the start;
But ete the goale, 'twill aske both Braine and Art.
We are bound to you, kind Master Geraldine,
For this great entertainement; Troath your cost
Hath much exceeded common neighbour-hood:
You haue feasted vs like Princes.
This, and more
Many degrees, can neuer counteruaile
The oft and frequent welcomes giuen my sonne:
You haue tooke him from me quite, and haue I thinke,
Adopted him into your family,
He staies with me so seldome.
And in this,
By trusting him to me, of whom your selfe
May haue both vse and pleasure, y'are as kind
As money'd men, that might make benefit
Of what they are possest, yet to their friends
In need, will lend it gratis.
And like such,
As are indebted more then they can pay;
Wee more and more confesse our selues engaged
To you, for your forbearance.
Yet you see,
Like Debtors, such as would not breake their day;
The Treasure late receiued, wee tender backe,
The which, the longer you can spare, you still
The more shall binde vs to you.
Most kind Ladies,
Worthy you are to borrow, that returne
The Principall, with such large vse of thanks.
What strange felicitie these Rich men take,
To talke of borrowing, lending, and of vse;
The vsurers language right.
Y'aue Master Geraldine,
Faire walkes and gardens, I haue praised them,
Both to my Wife and Sister.
You would see them,
There's no pleasure that the House can yeeld,
That can be debar'd from you; prethee Sonne,
Be thou the Vsher to those Mounts and Prospects
May one day call thee Master.
Sir I shall; Please you to walke.
What Master Dalauill,
Will you not beare vs company.
'Tis not fit
That wee should leaue our Noble host alone,
Be you my Friends charge, and this old man mine.
Well, bee't then at your pleasure.
You to your Prospects, bt there's proiect heere
That's of another Nature; Worthy Sir,
I cannot but approue your happinesse,
To be the Father of so braue a Sonne,
So euery way accomplish't and made vp,
In which my voice is least; For I alasse,
Beare but a meane part in the common quier,
When with much lowder accents of his praise,
So all the world reports him.
Thanke my Starres,
They haue lent me one, who as he alwayes was,
And is my present ioy; If their aspect
Be no wayes to our goods Maleuolent,
May be my Future comfort.
Yet must I hold him happie aboue others,
As one that Solie to himselfe inioyes
What many others aime at; But in vaine.
How meane you that?
So Beautifull a Mistresse.
A Mistresse, said you?
Yes Sir, or a Friend,
Whether you please to stile her.
Mistresse? Friend?
Pray be more open languag'd.
And indeed,
Who can blame him to absent himselfe from home,
And make his Fathers house but as a grange,
For a Beautie so Attractiue? Or blame her,
Huging so weake an old Man in her armes,
To make a new choice, of an equall youth,
Being in him so Perfect? yet introath,
I thinke they both are honest.
You haue Sir,
Possest me with such strange sancies.
For my part,
How can I loue the person of your Sonne,
And not his reputation? His repaire
So often to the House, is voyct by all,
And frequent in the mouthes of the whole Countrey,
Some equally addicted, praise his happinesse;
But others, more Censorious and Austere,
Blame and reprooue a course so disolute;
Each one in generall, pittie the good man,
As one vnfriendly dealt with, yet in my conscience,
I thinke them truely Honest.
'Tis suspitious.
True Sir, at best; But what when scandalons tongues
Will make the worst? and what good in it selfe,
Sullie and staine by fabulous mis-report;
For let men liue as charie as they can,
Their liues are often questioned, Then no wonder,
If such as giue occasion of suspition,
Be subiect to this scandall: What I speake,
Is as a Noble Friend vnto your Sonne;
And therefore, as I glory in his Fame,
I suffer in his wrong; for as I liue,
I thinke, they both are honest.
Howsoeuer, I wish them so.
Some course might be deuis'd,
To stop this clamor ere it grow too wrancke;
Lest that which yet but inconuenience seemes,
May turne to greater mischiefe; This I speake
In Zeale to both, in soueraine care of him
As of a Friend; And tender of her Honour,
As one to whom I hope to be allyed,
By Marriage with her Sister.
I much thanke you,
For you haue cleerely giuen me light of that,
Till now I neuer dreamt on.
'Tis my Loue,
And therefore I intreat you, make not mee
To be the first reporter.
You haue done
The office of a Noble Gentleman,
And shall not be so iniur'd.
See Master Geraldine,
How bold wee are, especially these Ladies
Play little better then the theeues with you,
For they haue robb'd your Garden.
You might Sir,
Better haue term'd it saucenes, then theft;
You see we blush not, what we tooke in priuate,
To weare in publicke view.
Besides, these cannot
Be mist out of so many; In full fields,
The gleanings are allow'd.
These and the rest,
Are Ladies, at your seruice.
Now to horse,
But one thing ere wee part, I must intreat;
In which my Wife will be ioynt suter with me,
My Sister too.
In what I pray.
That hee
Which brought vs hither, may but bring vs home;
Your much respected Sonne.
How men are borne,
To woe their owne disasters?
But to see vs
From whence he brought vs Sir, that's all.
This second motion makes it Palpable:
To note a Womans cunning; Make her husband
Bawde to her owne laciuious appetite,
And to Solicite his owne shame.
Nay Sir,
When all of vs ioyne in so small a suit,
It were some iniurie to be deni'd.
And worke her Sister too; What will not woman
To accomplish her owne ends: But this disease,
Ile seeke to Phisicke ere it grow too farre:
I am most sorrie to be vrg'd sweet Friends,
In what at this time I can no wayes grant;
Most, that these Ladies should be ought deni'd,
To whom I owe all Seruice, but occasions
Of weighty and important conscequence,
Such as concerne the best of my Estate,
Call him aside; excuse vs both this once,
Presume this businesse is no sooner ouer,
But hee's at his owne freedome.
'Twere no manners
In vs to vrge it further, wee will leaue you,
With promise Sir, that he shall in my will,
Not be the last remembred.
Wee are bound to you;
See them to Horse, and instantly returne,
Wee haue Imployments for you.
Sir I shall,
Remember your last promise,
Not to doo't, I should forget my selfe:
If I finde him false
To such a friend, be sure he forfeits me;
In which to be more punctually resolu'd,
I haue a proiect how to fift his foule,
How 'tis enclin'd; whether to yonder place,
The cleare bright Pallace, or blacke Dungeon: See,
They are onward on the way, and hee return'd.
I now attend your pleasure.
You are growne perfect man, and now you float
Like to a well built Vessell; 'Tweene two Currents,
Vertue and Vice; Take this, you steere to harbour;
Take that, to eminent shipwracke.
Pray your meaning.
What fathers cares are, you shall neuer know,
Till you your selfe haue children; Now my studdy,
Is how to make you such, that you in them
May haue a feeling of my loue to you.
Pray Sir expound your selfe, for I protest
Of all the Languages I yet haue learth'd,
This is to me most forraine.
Then I shall;
I haue liued to see you in your prime of youth
And height of Fortune, so you will but take
Occasion by the forehead; to be briefe,
And cut off all superfluous circumstance,
All the ambition that I ayme at now,
Is but to see you married.
Married Sir.
And to that purpose, I haue found out one,
Whose Youth and Beauty may not onely please
A curious eye; But her immediate meanes,
Able to strengthen a state competent,
Or raise a ruined Fortune.
Of all which,
I haue beleeue me, neither need nor vse;
My competence best pleasing as it is;
And this my singularity of life,
Most to my mind contenting.
I suspect, but yet must prooue him further;
Say to my care I adde a Fathers charge,
And couple with my counsell my command:
To that how can you answere?
That I hope:
My duty and obedience still vnblam'd,
Did neuer merit such austerity;
And from a father neuer yet displeas'd.
Nay, then to come more neere vnto the point,
Either you must resolue for present marriage,
Or forfeit all your interest in my loue.
Vn-say that language, I intreat you Sir,
And doe not so oppresse me; Or if needs
Your heauy imposition stand in force,
Resolue me by your counsell; With more safety
May I infringe a sacred vow to heauen,
Or to oppose me to your strict command?
Since one of these I must.
Now Dalauill,
I finde thy words too true.
For marrie, Sir, I neither may, nor can.
Yet whore you may;
And that's no brech of any vow to Heauen:
Pollute the Nuptiall bed with Michall sinne;
Asperse the honour of a noble friend;
Forfeit thy reputation, here below.
And th' interest that thy Soule might claime aboue,
In you blest City: These you may, and can,
With vntoucht conscience: Oh, that I should liue
to see the hopes that I haue stor'd so long;
Thus in a moment ruin'd: And the staffe,
On which my old decrepite age should leane;
Before my face thus broken: On which trusting,
I thus abortiuely, before my time,
Fall headlong to my Graue.
It yet stands strong;
Both to support you vnto future life,
And fairer comfort.
Neuer, neuer sonne:
For till thou canst acquit thy selfe of scandall,
And me of my suspition; Heere, euen heere,
Where I haue measur'd out my length of earth;
I shall expire my last.
Both these I can:
Then rise Sir, I intreat you; And that innocency,
Which poyson'd by the breath of Calumnie, cast you thus low,
Shall, these few staines wipt off, with better thoughts erect you.
Well, Say on.
There's but one fire from which this smoake may grow;
Namely, the vnmatcht yoake of youth; And
In which, If euer I occasion was,
Of the smalest breach; The greatest implacable mischiefe
Adultery can threaten, fall on me;
Of you may I be disauow'd a sonne;
And vnto Heauen a seruant: For that Lady,
As she is Beauties mirror, so I hold her
For Chastities examples: From her tongue,
Neuer came language, that ariued my eare,
That euen censurious Cato, liu'd he now,
Could mis-interpret; Neuer from her lips,
Came vnchaste kisse; Or from her constant eye,
Looke sauouring of the least immodesty: Further—
Enough; One onely thing remaines, which on thy part perform'd, Assures firme credit to these thy protestations.
Name it then.
Take hence th' occasion of this common fame;
Which hath already spread it selfe so farre,
To her dishonour and thy preiudice, From this day forward,
To forbeare the house: This doe vpon my blessing.
As I hope it, I will not faile your charge.
I am satisfied.
To which hand shall I turne me; Here's my Master
Hath bin to enquire of him that sould the house,
Touching the murder; Here's an Vsuring-Rascall,
Of whom we haue borrowed money to supply
Our prodigall expences; Broke our day,
And owe him still the Principall and Vse:
Were I to meet them single, I haue braine
To oppose both, and to come off vnscarr'd;
But if they doe assault me, and at once.
Not Hercules himselfe could stand that odds:
Therefore I must encounter them by turnes;
And to my Master first: Oh Sir, well met.
What Reignald; I but now met with the man,
Of whom I bought you house.
What, did you Sir?
But did you speake of ought concerning that
Which I last told you?
Yes, I told him all.
Then am I cast: But I pray tell me Sir,
Did he confesse the murder?
No such thing; Most stiffely he denies it.
Impudent wretch; Then serue him with a warrant, let the Officer
Bring him before a Iustice, you shall heare
What I can say against him; Sfoot deni't:
But I pray Sir excuse me, yonder's one
With whom I haue some businesse; Stay you here,
And but determine what's best course to take,
And note how I will follow't.
Be briefe then.
Now, If I can aswell put off my Vse-man,
This day, I shall be master of the field.
That should be Lionells man.
The ame, I know him.
After so many friolous delaies,
There's now some hope. He that was wont to shun vs,
And to absent himselfe, accoasts vs freely;
And with a pleasant countenance: Well met Reignald,
What's this money ready?
Neuer could you
Haue come in better time.
Where's your master, yong Lionell, it something troubles me, That hee should breake his day.
A word in priuate,
Tush, Priuate me no priuates, in a word,
Speake, are my moneys ready?
Not so loud.
I will be louder yet; Giue me my moneys,
Come, tender me my moneys.
We know you haue a throat, wide as your consience; You need not vse it now—Come, get you home.
Home?
Yes, home I say, returne by three a Clocke,
And I will see all cancell'd.
'Tis no past two, and I can stay till three,
Ile make that now my businesse, otherwayes,
With these lowd clamors, I will haunt thee still;
Give me my Vse, giue me my Principall.
This burre will still cleaue to me; what, no meanes
To shake him off; I neere was caught till now.
Come come, y'are trouble .
Preuent that trouble,
And without trifling, pay me downe my cash;
I will be fool'd no longer.
So so so.
I haue beene still put off, from time to time,
And day to day; these are but cheating tricks,
And this is the last minute ile forbeare
Thee, or thy Master: Once againe, I say,
Giue me my Vse, give me my Principall.
Pox a this vse, that hath and one so many:
And now will confound mee.
Hast thou heard this?
Yes Sir, and to my griefe.
Come hither Reignald.
Heere Sir; Nay, now I am gone.
What vse is this?
What Principall hee talkes of? in which language
Hee names my Sonne; And thus vpbraideth thee,
What is't you owe this man?
A trifle Sir,
Pray stop his mouth; And pay't him.
I pay, what?
If I say pay't him; Pay't him.
What's the Summe?
A toy, the maine about fiue hundred pounds;
And the vse fiftie.
Call you that a toy?
To what vse was it borrowed? At my departure,
I left my Sonne sufficient in his charge,
With surplus, to dey a lage expence,
Without this neede of borrowing.
'Tis confest,
Yet stop his clamorous mouth; And onely say,
That you will pay't to morrow.
I passe my word.
Sir, if I bid you doo't; Nay, no more words,
But say you'le pay't tomorrow.
Ieast indeed, but tell me how these moneys were bestowed?
Safe Sir, I warrant you.
The Summe still safe,
Why doe you not then tender it your selues?
Your eare sir; This summe joyn'd to the rest,
Your Sonne hath purchast Land and Houses.
Land, do'st thou say?
A goodly House, and Gardens.
Now ioy on him,
That whil'st his Father Merchandis'd abroad,
Had care to adde to his estate at home:
But Reignald, wherefore Houses?
Now Lord Sir,
How dull you are; This house possest with spirits,
And there no longer stay; Would you haue had
Him, vs, and all your other family,
To liue, and lie ith' streets; It had not Sir,
Beene for your reputation.
Blessing on him,
That he is growne so thiftie.
'Tis strooke three,
My money's not yet tender'd.
Pox vpon him,
See him discharged, I pray Sir.
Call vpon me
To morrow Friend, as early as thou wilt;
Ile see thy debt defraid.
It is enough, I haue a true mans word.
Now tell me Reignald,
For thou hast made me proud of my Sonnes thrift;
Where, in what Countrey, doth this faire House stand.
Neuer in all my time, so much to seeke;
I know not what to answere.
Wherefore studdiest thou?
Vse men to purchase Lands at a deere rate,
And know not where they lie?
'Tis not for that,
I onely had forgot his name that sould them,
'Twas let me see, see.
Call thy selfe to minde.
Non-plust or neuer now; Where art thou braine?
O Sir, where was my memory; 'Tis this house
That next adioynes to yours,
My Neighbour Ricots.
The same, the same Sir; Wee had peniworths in't;
And I can tell you, haue beene offer'd well
Since, to forsake our bargaine.
As I liue,
I much commend your choice.
Nay, 'tis well seated,
Rough-cast without, but brauely lined within;
You haue met with few such bargaines.
Prethee knocke,
And call the Master, or the seruant on't;
To let me take free view on't.
Puzzle againe on Puzzle; One word Sir,
The House is full of Women, no man knowes,
How on the instant, they may be imploy'd;
The Roomes may lie vnhansome; and Maids stand
Much on their cleanlinesse and huswiferie;
To take them vnprouided, were disgrace,
'Twere fit they had some warning; Now, doe you
Fetch but a warrant, from the Iustice Sir;
You vnderstand mee.
Yes, I doe.
To attach him of suspected murder; Ile see't scru'd;
Did he deny't? And in the intrim, I
Will giue them notice, you are now ariu'd,
And long to see your purchase.
Councell'd well; And meet some halfe houre hence.
This plunge well past,
All things fall euen, to Crowne my Braine at last.
Where shall we dine to day?
At th' Ordinarie.
I see Sir, you are but a stranger heere;
This Barnet, is a place of great resort;
And commonly vpon the Market dayes,
Heere all the Countrey Gentlemen Appoint,
A friendly meeting; Some about affaires
Of Consequence and Profit; Bargaine, Sale,
And to conferre with Chap-men, some for pleasure,
To match their Horses; Wager in their Dogs,
Or trie their Hawkes; Some to no other end,
But onely meet good Company, discourse,
Dine, drinke, and spend their Money.
That's the Market, Wee haue to make this day.
'Tis a Commoditie, that will be easily vented:
What my worthy Friend,
You are happily encounter'd; Oh, y'are growne strange,
To one that much respects you; Troath the House
Hath all this time seem'd naked without you;
The good Old Man doth neuer sit to meat,
But next his giuing Thankes, hee speakes of you;
There's scarce a bit, that he at Table tastes,
That can digest without a Geraldine,
You are in his mouth so frequent: Hee and Shee
Both wondering, what distaste from one, or either,
So suddenly, should alianate a Guest,
To them, so deerely welcome.
Master Dalauill,
Thus much let me for him Apoligie;
Diuers designes haue throng'd vpon vs late,
My weakenesse was not able to support
Without his helpe; He hath bin much abroad,
At London, or else where; Besides 'tis Terme;
And Lawyers must be followed, seldome at home,
And scarcely then at leasure.
I am satisfied,
And I would they were so too, but I hope Sir,
In this restraint, you haue not vs'd my name
Not, as I liue.
Y'are Noble—Who had thought
To haue met with such good Company; Y'are it seeme
But new alighted; Father and Sonne, ere part,
I vow weele drinke a cup of Sacke together:
Phisicians say, It doth prepare the appetite
And stomacke against dinner.
Wee old men,
Are apt to take these courtesies.
What say you Friend?
lie but enquire for one, at the next Inne,
And instantly returne.
'Tis enough.
Besse: How do'st thou Gitle?
Faith we may doe how we list for you, you are growne so Great a stranger: We are more beholding
To Master Dalauill, Hee's a constant Guest:
And howsoee to some, that shall bee namelesse,
His presence may be gracefull; Yet to others—
I could say somewhat.
Hee's a noble fellow,
And my choice friend.
Come come, he is, what he is; and that the end will prooue.
And how's all at home?
Nay, weele not part without a glasse of wine,
And meet so seldome: Boy,
Drawer Anon, anon Sir.
A Pint of Clarret, quickly.
Nay, sit downe: The newes, the newes, I pray thee;
I am sure, I haue beene much enquir'd of
Thy old Master, and thy young Mistris too.
Euer your name is in my Masters mouth, and sometimes too In hers, when she hath nothing else to thinke of:
Well well, I could say somewhat.
Heerc's your wine Sir.
Fill Boy: Here Besse, this glasse to both their healths; Why do'st weepe my wench?
Nay, nothing Sir.
Come, I must know.
Introath I loue you Sir,
And euer wisht you well; You are a Gentleman,
Whom alwayes I respected; Know the passages
And priuate whisperings, of the secret loue
Betwixt you and my Mistris; I dare sweare,
On your part well intended: But—
But what?
You beare the name of Land-lord, but another
Inioyes the rent; You doate vpon the shadow,
But another he beares away the substance.
Bee more plaine.
You hope to inioy a vertuous widdow-hood;
But Dalauill, whom you esteeme you friend,
Hee keepes the wife in common.
Y' are too blame,
And Besse, you make me angry; Hee's my friend,
And she my second selfe; In all their meetings,
I neuer saw so much as cast of eye
Once entertain'd betwixt them.
That's their cunning.
For her; I haue beene with her at all houres,
Both late and early; In her bed-chamber.
And often singly vsher'd her abroad:
Now, would she haue bin any mans aliue,
Shee had bin mine; You wrong a worthy Friend,
And a chaste Mistris, y'are not a good Girle;
Drinke that speake better of her, I could chide you,
But I'le forbeare; What you haue rashly spoke,
Shall euer heere be buried.
I am sorry my freenesse should offend you,
But yet know, I am her Chamber-maid.
Play now the Market-maid.
And prethee bout thy businesse.
Well, I shall—that man should be so fool'd.
Shee a Prostitute?
Nay, and to him my troath plight, and my Friend;
As possible it is, that Heauen and Earth
Should be in love together, meet and kisse,
And so cut off all distance: What strange frensie
Came in this wenches braine, so to surmise?
Were she so base? his noblenesse is such,
He would not entertaine it for my sake:
Or he so bent? His hot and lust burnt appetite
Would be soone quencht, at the meere contemplation
Of her most Pious and Religious life.
The Girle was much too blame; Perhaps her Mistris
Hath stirr'd her anger, by some word or blow,
Which she would thus reuenge; Not apprehending
At what a high price Honour's to be rated;
Or else some one that enuies her rare vertue,
Might hire her thus to brand it; Or, who knowes
But the yong wench may fixe a thought on me;
And to diuert me from her Mistris loue,
May raise this false aspersion? howsoeuer,
My thoughts on these two columnes fixed are,
She's good as fresh, and purely chaste as faire.
Oh Sir, you are the Needle, and if the whole County of Middlesex had bin turn'd to a meere Bottle of Hay, I had bin inioyn'd to haue found you out, or neuer more return'd backe to my old Master: There's a Letter Sir.
I know the hand that superscrib'd it well;
Stay but till I peruse it, and from me
Thou shalt returne an answere.
I shall Sir: This is Market-day, and heere acquaintance commonly meet; and whom haue I encounter'd my gossip Pint-pot, and brim full; nay, I meane to drinke with you before I part, and how doth all your worshipfull kindred? your sister Quart, your pater-Pottle, (who was euer a Gentlemans fellow) and your old grandsier Gallon; they cannot chuse but be all in health, since so many healthes haue beene drunke out of them: I could wish them all heere, and in no worse state then I see you are in at this present; howsoeuer gossip, since I haue met you hand to hand, I'le make bould to drinke to you—Nay, either you must pledge me, or get one to doo't for you; Doe you open your mouth towards me? well, I know what you would say; Heere Roger, to your Master and Mistris, and all our good friends at home; gramercy gossip, if I should not pledge thee, I were worthy to be turn'd out to Grasse, and stand no more at Liuery: And now in requitall of this courtesie I'le begin one health to you and all your society in the Oeller, to Peter Pipe, Harry Hogshead, Bartholomew Butt, and little master Randall Rundlet, to Timothy Taster, and all your other great and small friends.
Hee writes mee heete,
That at my discontinuance hee's much grieu'd,
Desiring me, as I haue cuer render'd
Or him or his, to giue him satisfaction
Touching my discontent; and that in person,
By any priuate meeting.
I Sir, 'tis very true, The Letter Speakes no more
Then he wisht me to tell you by word of mouth.
Thou art then of his councell?
His Priuy and please you.
Though neere so strict hath bin my fathers charge,
A little I'le dispense with't, for his loue;
Commend me to thy Master, tell him from me,
On Munday night (then will my leasure serue)
I will by Heauens assistance visit him.
On Munday Sir:
That's as I remember, iust the day before Tuesday.
But 't will be midnight first, at which late houre,
Please him to let the Garden doore stand ope,
At that I'le enter; But conditionally,
That neither Wife, Friend, Seruant, no third soule
Saue him, and thee to whom he trusts this message,
Know of my comming in, or passing out:
When, tell him, I will fully satisfie him
Concerning my forct absence.
I am something obliuious; Your message would bee the truelier deliuered if it were set downe in blacke and white.
I'le call for Pen and Incke,
And instantly dispatch it.
Now impudence, but steele my face this once,
Although I neere blush after; Heere's the house,
Ho, whose within? What, no man to desend
These innocent gates from knocking?
Whose without there?
One Sir that euer wisht your worships health;
And those few houres I can find time to pray in,
I still remember it.
Gramercy Reignald,
I loue all those that wish it: You are the men
Leade merry liues, Feast, Reuell, and Carowse;
You seele no tedious houres; Time playes with you,
This is your golden age.
It was, but now Sir,
That Gold is turned to worse then Alcamy,
It will not stand the test; Those dayes are past,
And now our nights come on.
Tell me Reignald, is he return'd from Sea?
Yes, to our griefe already, but we feare
Hereafter, it may prooue to all our cost's.
Suspects thy Master any thing?
Not yet Sir;
Now my request is, that your worship being
So neere a Neighbour, therefore most disturb'd,
Would not be first to peach vs.
Take my word;
With other Neighbours make what peace you can,
I'le not be your accuser.
Worshipfull Sir;
I shall be still your Beads-man; Now the businesse
That I was sent about, the Old Man my Master
Claiming some interest in acquaintance past,
Desires (might it be no way trouble some)
To take free view of all your House within.
View of my House? Why 'tis not set to Sale,
Nor bill vpon the doore; Looke well vpon't:
View of my House?
Nay, be not angry Sir,
Hee no way doth disable your estate;
As farre to buy, as you are loath to sell;
Some alterations in his own hee'd make.
And hearing yours by worke-men much commended,
Hee would make that his President.
What fancies
Should at this age possesse him; Knowing the cost,
That hee should dr of Building.
'Tis suppos'd,
He hath late found a Wife out for his Sonne;
Now Sir, to haue him neere him, and that necrenesse
Too, without trouble, though beneath one roofe,
Yet parted in two Families; Hee would build
And make what's pickt, a persit quadrangle,
Proportioned iust with yours, were you so pleased,
To make it his example.
Willingly; I will but order some few things within,
And then attend his comming.
Most kind cox-combe,
Great Alexander, and Agathocles,
Caesar, and others, haue bin Fam'd, they say.
And magnified for high Facinerous deeds;
Why claime not I, an equall place with them?
Or rather a presedent: These commanded
Their Subiects, and their seruants; I my Master,
And euery way his equalls, where I please,
Lead by the nose along; They plac'd their burdens
On Horses, Mules, and Camels; I, old Men
Of strength and wit, loade with my knauerie,
Till both their backs and braines ake; Yet poore animalls,
They neere complaine of waight; Oh are you come Sir?
I made what haste I could.
And brought the warrant?
See heere, I hau't.
'Tis well done, but speake, runs it
Both without Baile and Maineprize?
Nay, it carries both forme and power.
Then I shall warrant him;
I haue bin yonder Sir,
And what sayes hee?
Like one that offers you
Free ingresse, view and regresse, at your pleasure;
As to his worthy Land-lord.
Was that all?
Hee spake to me, that I would speake to you,
To speake vnto your Sonne; And then againe,
To speake to him, that he would speake to you;
You would release his Bargaine.
By no meanes,
Men must aduise before they part with Land,
Not after to repent it; 'Tis most iust,
That such as hazzard, and disburse their Stockes,
Should take all gaines and profits that accrew,
As well in Sale of Houses, as in Barter,
And Traficke of all other Merchandize.
See in acknowledgement of a Tenants duty,
Hee attends you at the gate; Salute him Sir.
My worthy Friend.
Now as I liue, all my best thoughts and wishes
Impart with yours, in your so safe returne;
Your seruant tels me, you haue great desire
To take suruiew of this my house within.
Bee't Sir, no trouble to you.
None, enter bouldly;
With as much freedome, as it were your owne.
As it were mine; Why Reignald, is it not?
Lord Sir, that in extremity of griefe,
You'le adde vnto vexation; See you not
How sad hee's on the suddaine,
I obserue it.
To part with that which he hath kept so long;
Especially his Inheritance: Now as you loue
Goodnesse, and Honesty, torment him not
With the least word of Purchase.
Councell'd well;
Thou teachest me Humanitie.
Will you enter?
Or shall I call a seruant, to conduct you
Through euery Roome and Chamber?
By no meanes;
I feare wee are too much troublesome of our selues.
See what a goodly Gate?
It likes me well.
What braue caru'd poasts; Who knowes but heere,
In time Sir, you may keepe your Shreualtie;
And I be one oth' Seriants.
They are well Caru'd.
And cost me a good price Sir, Take your pleasure,
I haue businesse in the Towne.
Poore man, I pittie him;
H'ath not the heart to stay and see you come,
As 'twere, to take Possession; Looke that way Sir,
What goodly faire Baye windowes?
Wondrous stately.
And what a Galleric, How costly Seeled;
What painting round about?
Euery fresh obiect to good, adds betternesse.
Tarrast aboue, and how below supported; doe they please you?
All things beyond opinion; Trust me Reignald,
I'le not forgoe the Bargaine, for more gaine
Then halfe the price it cost me.
If you would? I should not suffer you; Was not the
Money due to the Vsurer, tooke vpon good ground,
That prou'd well built vpon? Wee were no fooles
That knew not what wee did.
It shall be satisfied.
Please you to trust me with't, I'le see't discharged.
Hee hath my promise, and I'le doo't my selfe:
Neuer could Sonne haue better pleas'd a Father,
Then in this Purchase: Hie thee instantly
Vnto my house ith' Countrey, giue him notice
Of my arriue, and bid him with all speede
Poaste hither.
Ere I see the warrant seru'd?
It shall be thy first businesse; For my Soule
Is not at peace, till face to face, I approoue
His Husbandrie, and much commend his Thrift;
Nay, without pause, be gone.
But a short iourney;
For hee's not farre, that I am sent to seeke:
I haue got the start, the best part of the Race
is runne already, what remaines, is small,
And tyre now, I should but forfeit all.
Make haste, I doe intreat thee.
This is the Garden gate; And heere am I set to stand Centinell, and to attend the comming of Young Master Geraldine: Master Dalauill's gone to his Chamber; My Mistresse to hers; 'Tis now about Mid-night; A Banquet prepared, bottles of Wine in readinesse, all the whole Houshold at their rest; And no creature by this, honestly stirring, sauing I and my Old Master; Hee in a bye Chamber, prepared of purpose for their priuate Meeting; And I heere to play the Watch| man, against my will; Chauelah, Stand; Who goes there?
A Friend.
The Word?
Honest Roger.
That's the Word indeed; You haue leae to passe freely Without calling my Corporall.
How goe the affaires within?
According to promise, the businesse is composed, and the serants disposed, my young Mistris reposed, my old Master according as you proposed, attends you if you bee exposed to giue him meeting; Nothing in the way being interposed, to transpose you to the least danger: And this I dare be deposed, if you will not take my word, as I am honest Roger.
Thy word shall be my warrant, but secur'd
Most in thy Masters promise, on which building;
By this knowne way I enter.
Nay, by your leaue, I that was late but a plaine Centinell,
Will now be your Captaine conducter: Follow me.
I wonder whence this strangenesse should proceed,
Or wherein I, or any of my house,
Should be th' occasion of the least distaste;
Now, as I wish him well, it troubles me;
But now the time growes on, from his owne mouth
To be resolu'd; And I hope satisfied:
Sir, as I liue, of all my friends to me
Most wishedly, you are welcome: Take that Chaire,
I this: Nay, I inteat no complement;
Attend—Fill wine.
Till the mouthes of the bottles yawn directly vpon the floore, and the bottomes turne their rayls vp to the seeling; Whil'st there's any blood in their bellies, I'le not leaue them.
I first salute you thus.
It could not come
From one whom I more honour; Sir, I thanke you.
Nay, since my Master begun it, I'le see't goe round
To all three.
Now giue vs leaue.
Talke you by your selues, whilest I find something to say to this: I haue a tale no tell him shall make his stony heart relent.
Now, first Sir your attention I intreat;
Next, your beliefe that what I speake is iust,
Maugre all contradiction.
Both are granted.
Then I ; With due acknowledgement
Of all your more then many curtesies:
Y'aue bin my second father, and your wife,
My noble and chaste Mistris; All your seruanes
At my command; And this your bounteous Table,
As free and common as my Fathers house;
Neither 'gainst any, or the least of these,
Can I commence iust quarrell.
What might then be
The cause of this constraint, in thus absenting
Your selfe from such as loue you?
Out of many,
I will propose some few: The care I haue
Of your (as yet unblemisht) renowne;
The vntoucht honour of your vertuous wife;
And (which I value least, yet dearely too)
My owne faire reputation.
How can these, in any way be questioned?
Oh deare Sir,
Bad tongues haue bin too busie with vs all;
Of which I neuer yet had time to thinke,
But with sad thoughts and griefes vnspeakeable:
It hath bin whisper'd by some wicked ones,
But loudly thunder'd in my fathers eares,
By some that haue malign'd our happinesse;
(Heaunen, if it can brooke slander, pardon them)
That this my customary comming hither,
Hath bin to base and sorded purposes:
To wrong your bed; Iniure her chastity;
And be mine owne vndoer: Which, how false?
As Heauen is true, I know't.
Now this Calumny
Ariuing first vnto my fathers eares,
His easie nature was induc'd to thinke,
That these things might perhaps be possible:
I answer'd him, as I would doe to Heauen:
And cleer'd my selfe in his suspitious thoughts,
As truely, as the high all-knowing Iudge
Shall of these staines acquit me; which are meerely
Aspersions and vntruthes: The good old man
Possest with my sincerity, and yet carefull
Of your renowne, her honour, and my fame;
To stop the-worst that scandall could inflict;
And to preuent false rumours charges me,
The cause remoou'd, to take away the effect;
Which onely could be, to forbeare your house;
And this vpon his blessing: You heare all.
And I of all acquit you: This your absence,
With which my loue most caucll'd; Orators
In your behalfe. Had such things past betwixt you,
Not threats nor chidings could haue driuen you hence:
It pleads in your behalfe, and speakes in hers;
And armes me with a double confidence,
Both of your friendship, and her loyalty:
I am happy in you both, and onely doubtfull
Which of you two doth most impart my loue:
You shall not hence to night.
Pray pardon Sir.
You are in your lodging.
But my fathers charge.
My coniuration shall dispence with that;
You may be vp as early as you please;
But hence to night you shall not.
You are powerfull.
This night, of purpose, I haue parted beds,
Faining my selfe not well, to giue you meeting;
Nor can be ought suspected by my Wife,
I haue kept all so priuate: Now 'tis late,
I'le steale vp to my rest, But howsoeuer,
Let's not be strange in our writing, that way dayly
We may conferre without the least suspect,
In spight of all such base calumnious tongues;
So, Now good-night sweet friend
May he that made you
So iust and good, still guard you. Not to bed,
So I perhaps might ouer-sleepe my selfe,
And then my tardy wakeing might beay me
To the more early houshold; Thus as I am,
I'le rest me on this Pallar; But in vaine,
I finde no sleepe can fasten on mine eyes,
There are in this disturbed braine of mine
So many mutinous fancies: This, to me,
Will be a tedious night; How shall I spend it?
No Booke that I can spie? no company?
A little let me recollect my selfe;
Oh, what more wisht company can I find,
Suiting the apt occasion, time and place;
Then the sweet contemplation of her Beauty;
And the fruition too, time may produce,
Of what is yet lent out? 'Tis a sweet Lady,
And euery way accomplisht: Hath meere accident
Brought me thus neere, and I not visit her?
Should it ariue here are, perhaps might breed
Our lasting separation; For 'twixt Louers,
No quarrell's to vnkindnesse; Sweet opportunity
Offers preuention, and inuites me too't:
The house is knowne to me, the staires and roomes;
The way unto her chamber frequently
Trodden by me at mid-night, and all houres:
How ioyfull to her would a meeting be,
So strange and unexpected; Shadowed too
Beneath the vaile of night; I am resolu'd
To giue her visitation, in that place
Where we haue past deepe vowes, her bed-chamber:
My fiery loue this darkenesse makes seeme bright,
And and this the path that leades to my delight.
And this the gate vntoo't; I'le listen first,
Before too rudely I disturbe her rest:
And gentle breathing; Ha? shee's sure awake,
For in the bed two whisper, and their voyces
Appeare to me vnequall;—One a womans—
And hers;—Th' other should be no maids tongue,
It beares too big a tone; And harke, they laugh;
(Damnation) But list further; 'Tother sounds—
Like—'Tis the same false periur'd traitor, Dalauill,
To friend and goodnesse: Vnchast impious woman,
False to all faith, and true coniugall loue;
There's met, a Serpent and a Crockadell;
A Synon and a Circe: Oh, to what
May I Compare you?—But my Sword,
I'le act a nobel execution,
On two unmatcht for sorded vilianie:—
I left it in my Chamber, And thankes
That I did to; It hath preuented me
From playing a base Hang-man: Since securely
Whilst I, although for many, yet lesse faults,
Striue hourely to repent me; I once loued her,
And was to him intir'd; Although I pardon,
Heauen will find time to punish, I'le not stretch
My iust reuenge so farre, as once by
To make your brazen Impudence to ;
Damne on, reuenge too great; And to suppresse
Your Soules yet lower, without hope to
Heape Ossa vpon Pelion: You haue made mee
To hate my very Countrey, because heere bred:
Neere two such monsters; First I'le leaue this House,
And then my Fathers; Next I'le take my leaue,
Both of this Clime and Nation, Trauell till
Age snow vpon this Head: My passions now,
Are vnexpressable, I'le end the thus:
Ill man, bad Woman, your vnheard of ,
This uniust censure, on a Iust man giue,
To seeke out place, where no two liue.
A happy Morning now your Lady,
To equall the content of a sweet Night.
It hath bin to my wish, your desire:
And this your comming by
Vnto my Sister Pru. cuts of suspition
Of any such conuerse 'twi you and .
It hath bin wisely carried.
One thing troubles me.
What's that my Dearest?
Why your Friend Geraldine,
Should on the sudden absent himselfe?
Has he had thinke you no intelligence.
Of these our priuate meetings.
No, on my Soule,
For therein hath my braine yours;
I studdying to engrosse you to my selfe,
Of his continued absence haue bin
Yet hee of your affection no way iealous,
Or of my Friendship—How the plot was cast,
You at our better leasure shall pertake;
The aire growes cold, haue care vnto your health,
Suspitious eyes are ore us, that yet sleepe,
But with the dawne, will open; Sweet you
To your warme Sheets; I now to fill my owne,
That haue this Night bin empty.
You aduise well;
Oh might this Kisse dwell euer on thy Lips,
In my remembrance.
Doubt it not I pray,
Whilest Day frights Night, and Night pursues the day:
Good morrow.
Now is the Goale deliuerie; Through this backe gate
Shift for your selues, I heere vnprison all.
But tell me, how shall we dispose our selues?
Wee are as farre to seeke now, as the first;
What is it to repreeue vs for few houres,
And now to suffer, better had it bin
At first, to haue stood the triall, so by this,
Wee might haue past our .
Sweet Reignald.
Honest roge.
If now thou failest vs, then we are lost for euer,
This same sweete Reignald, and this honest rogue,
Hath bin the Burgesse, vnder whose protection
You all this while haue liu'd, free from Arrests,
But now, the Sessions of my power's broake up,
And you expos'd to Actions, Warrants, Writs;
For all the hellish rabble are broke loose,
Of Seriants, Sheriffes, and Baliffes,
Guard vs Heauen,
I tell you as it is; Nay, I my selfe
That haue bin your Protector, now as subiect
To euery varlets Pestle, for you know
How I am engag'd with you—At whose suit sir.
Why didst thou Start.
I was afraid some Catchpole stood behind ,
To clap me on the Shoulder.
No such thing; Yet I protest
Thy feare did fright vs all.
I knew your guilty conciences.
No Braine left?
No crotchet for my sake?
One kisse then Sweete,
Thus shall my crotchets, and your kisses meete.
Nay, tell vs what to trust too.
Lodge your selues
In the next Tauerne, ther's the Cash that's left,
Goe, health it freely for my good successe;
Nay, Drowne it all, let not a Teaster scape
To be consum'd in rot-gut; I haue begun,
And I will stand the period.
Brauely spoke.
Or perisn in the conflict.
Worthy Reignald.
Well, if he now come off well, Fox you all;
Goe, call for Wine; For singe of my selfe
I will oppose all danger; But I charge you,
When I shall faint or find my selfe disttest;
If I like braue Orlands, winde my Horne,
Make haste vnto my rescew.
And die in't.
Well hast thou spoke my noble Charlemaine,
With these thy Peeres about thee.
May good Speede
Attend thee still.
The end still crownes the deede.
Sir sir, your threats nor warrants, can fright me;
My honestie and innocency's knowne
Alwayes to haue bin vnblemisht; Would you could
As well approue your owne Integrity,
As I shall doubtlesse acquit my selfe
Of this surmised murder.
Rather Surrender
The price I paid, and take into thy hands
This haunted mansion, or I'le prosecute
My wrongs, euen to the vtmost of the Law,
Which is no lesse then death.
I'le answere all
Old Lionell, both to thy shame and scorne;
This for thy Menaces.
This is the House, but where's the noyse that was wont to be in't? I am sent hither, to deliuer a Noate, to two young Gentlemen that heere keepe Reuell-rout; I remember it, since the last Massacre of Meat that was made in't; But it seemes, That the great Storme that was raised then, is chast now; I haue other Noates to deliuer, one to Master Rycott—and—I shall thinke on them all in order; My Old Master makes a great Feast, for the parting of young Master Geraldine, who is presently vpon his departure for Trauell, and the better to grace it, hath inuited many of his Neighbours and Friends; Where will be Old Master Geraldine—his Sonne, and I cannot tell how many; But this is strange, the Gates shut up at this time a day, belike they are all Drunke and laid to sleepe, if they be, I'le wake them, with a Murraine.
What desperate fellowe's this, that ignorant
Of his owne danger, thunders at these Gates?
Ho, Reignald, Riotous Reignald, Reuelling Reignald.
What madnesse doth possesse thee, honest Friend,
To touch that Hammers handle?
What madnesse doth possesse thee, honest Friend,
To aske me such a question?
Nay, stirre not yo?
Not I; The game begins.
How doest thou, art thou well?
Yes very well, I thanke you, how doe you Sir?
No alteration; What change about thee?
Not so much change about me at this time,
As to change you a Shilling into two Teasters.
Yet I aduise thee Fellow, for thy good,
Stand further from the Gate.
And I aduise thee Friend, for thine owne good, stand not betwixt mee and the Gate, but giue me leaue to deliuer my erant; Hoe, Reignald, you mad Rascall.
In vaine thou thunder'st at these silent Doores,
Where no man dwels to answere, sauing Ghosts,
Furies, and Sprights.
Ghosts; Indeed there has bin much walking, in and about the House after Mid-night.
Strange noyse oft heard.
Yes, terrible noise, that none of the neighbours could take any rest for it, I haue heard it my selfe.
You heare this; Heere's more witnesse.
Very well Sir.
Which you shall dearely answere—whooping.
And hollowing.
And shouting.
And crying out, till the whole house rung againe.
Which thou hast heard?
Oftner then I haue toes and singers.
Thou wilt be depos'd of this?
I'le be sworne too't, and that's as good.
Very good still; Yet you are innocent:
Shall I intreat thee friend, to auouch as much
Heere by, to the next Iustice.
I'le take my souldiers oath on't.
A souldiers oath, What's that?
My corporall oath; And you know Sir, a Corporall is an office belonging to a souldier.
Yet you are cleere?
Murder will come to light.
So will your gullery too.
They say my old Master's come home; I'le see if hee will turne me out of doores, as the young man has done: I haue laid rods in pisse for some-body, scape Reignald as hee can, and with more freedome then I dust late, I bouldly now dare knocke.
More mad-men yet; I thinke since my last voyage,
Halfe of the world's turn'd franticke: What do'st meane,
Or long'st thou to be blasted?
Oh Sir, you are welcome home; 'Twas time to come
Ere all was gone to hauocke.
My old seruant? before I shall demand of further busin. Resolue me why thou thunder'st at these doores,
Where thou know'st none inhabits?
Are they gone Sir?
'Twas well yet they haue left the house behind;
For all the furniture, to a bare bench,
I am sure is spent and wasted.
Where's my sonne,
That Reignald pasting for him with such speed,
Brings him not from the Countrey?
Countrey Sir?
'Tis a thing they know not; Heere they Feast,
Dice, Drinke, and Drab; The company they keepe,
Cheaters and Roaring-Ladds, and these attended
By Bawdes and Queanes: Your sonne hath got a Strumpet,
On whom he spends all that your sparing left,
And heere they keepe court; To whose damn'd abuses,
Reignald giues all encouragement.
But stay stay;
No liuing soule hath for these sixe moneths space
Heere enter'd, but the house stood desolate.
Last weeke I am sure, so late, and th' other day,
Such Reuells were here kept.
And by my sonne?
Yes, and his seruant Reignald.
And this house at all not haunted?
Saue Sir with such Sprights.
This Murder will come out.
But see, in happy time heere comes my
Neighbour of whom he bought this mansion; He I am sure
More amply can resolue me: I pray Sir,
What summes of moneys haue you late receiued
Of my young sonne?
Of him? None I assure you.
What of my seruant Reignald?
But deuise
What to call lesse then nothing, and that summe
I will confesse receiu'd.
Pray Sir, be serious;
I doe confesse my selfe indebted to you,
A hundred pound.
You may doe well to pay't then, for heere's witnesse Sufficient of your words.
I speake no more then what I purpose; lust so much I owe you, And ere I sleepe will tender.
I shall be as ready to receiue it, and as willing,
As you can bee to pay't.
But prouided,
You will confesse seuen hundred pounds receiued
Before hand of o?
But by your fauour;
Why should I yeeld seuen hundred receiu'd
Of them I neuer dealt with? Why? For what?
What reason? What condition? Where or when
Should such a summe be paid mee?
Why? For this bargaine: And for what? This house,
Reason? Because you sold it: The conditions? Such
As were agreed betweene you: Where and When?
That onely hath escapt me.
Madnesse all.
Was I not brought to take free view thereof,
As of mine owne possession?
I confesse;
Your seruant told me you had found out a wife
Fit for your sonne, and that you meant to build;
Desir'd to take a friendly view of mine,
To make it your example: But for selling,
I tell you Sir, my wants be not so great,
To change my house to Coyne.
Spare Sir your anger,
And turne it into pity; Neighbours and friends,
I am quite lost, was neuer man so so'd,
And by a wicked seruant; Shame and blushing
Will not permit to tell the manner how,
Lest I be made ridiculous to all:
My feares are to inherit what's yet left;
He hath made my sonne away.
That's my feare too.
Friends, as you would a mn
Depriu'd at once, both of his wealth and sonne;
And in his age, by one I euer tender'd
More like a sonne then seruant: By imagining
My case were yours, haue feeling of my griefes
And helpe to apprehend him;
Furnish me with Cords and Fetters,
I will lay him safe in Prison within Prison.
Weele assist you.
And I.
And all;
But not to doe the least hurt to my old friend Reigd.
His Leggs will be as nimble as his Braine,
And 'twill be difficult to seaze the slaue,
Yet your endeauours, pray peace, heere hoe comes.
My heart mis-giues, for 'tis not possible
But that in all these windings and indents
I shall be found at last: I'le take that course
That men both troubled and affrighted doe,
Heape doubt on doubt, and as combustions rise,
Try if from many I can make my peace,
And worke mine owne atonement.
Stand you close,
Be not yet seene, but at your best aduantage
Hand him, and bind him fast: Whil'st I dissemble
As if I yet knew nothing.
I suspect
And find there's trouble in my Masters lookes;
Therefore I must not trust my selfe too farre
Within his fingers.
Reignald?
Worshipfull Sir.
What sayes my sonne ith' Countrey?
That tomorrow,
Early ith' morning, heele attend your pleasure,
And doe as all such dutious children ought;
Demand your blessing Sir.
Well, 'tis well.
I doe not like his countenance.
But Reignald? I suspect the honesty
And the good meaning of my neighbour heere,
Old master Ricott; Meeting him but now,
And hauing some discourse about the house,
He makes all strange, and tells me in plaine termes,
Hee knowes of no such matter.
Tell mee that Sir?
I tell thee as it is:
Nor that such moneys, tooke vp at vse, were euer tender'd him
On any such conditions.
I cannot blame your worship to bee pleasant,
Knowing at what an vnder-rate we bought it, but you euer
Were a most merry Gentleman.
(Impudent )
But Reignald, hee not onely doth demie it,
But offers to depose Himself and Seruants,
No such thing euer was.
Now Heauen, to see to what this world's groe too.
I will make him—
Nay more, this mn will not confesse the Murder.
Which both shall deerely answere; You have warrant
For him already; But for the other Sir,
If hee denie it, he had better—
Appeare Gentlemen,
'Tis a fit time to take him.
I discouer the Ambush that's laid for me.
Come neerer Reignald.
First sir resolue me one thing, amongst other Merchandize
Bought in your absence by your Sonne and me,
Wee ingrost a great comoditie of Combes,
And how many sorts thinke you?
You might buy
Some of the bones of Fishes, some of Beasts,
Box-combes, and Iuery .
But besides these, we haue for Horses Si,
Mayne-combes, and Curry-combes; Now Sir for men,
Wee haue Head-oombes, -combes, I and Cox-combes too;
Take view of them at your pleasure, whil'it for my part,
I thus bestow my selfe.
Well said Reignald, nobly put off Reignald,
Looke to thy selfe Reignald.
Why dost thou clibo thus?
Onely to practice
The nimblenesse of my Armes and Legges,
Ere they prooue your Cords and Fetters.
Why to that place?
Harbour long, and now it must bee my Sanctuary; Dispute now, and I'le answere.
To challenge me of Murder?
Oh sir, the man you kil'd is aliue at this present to iustisie it: I am, quoth he, a Trans-marine by birth—
Why, challenge me receipt of Moneys, and to giue abroad, That I had sold my House?
Why? because sir,
Could I haue purchast Houses at that rate,
I had meant to haue bought all London.
Yes, and Middlesex too, and I would haue bin thy halfe Reignald.
Yours are great,
My wrongs insufferable; As first, to fright mee
From mine owne dwelling, till they had consumed
The whole remainder of the little left;
Besides, out of my late stocke got at Sea,
Discharge the clamorous Vsurer; Make me accuse
This man of Murder; Be at charge of warrants;
And challenging this my worthy Neighbour of
Forswearing Summes hee neuer yet receiued;
Foole mee, to thinke my Sonne that had spent all,
Had by his thrift bought Land; I and him too,
To open all the secrets of his House
To mee, a Stranger, On thou insolent villaine,
What to all these canst answere?
Guiltie, guiltie.
But to my Sonnes death, what thou slaue?
Not Guiltie.
Produce him then; Ith' meane time, and—
Honest Friends, get Ladders.
Yes, and come downe in your owne Ropes.
I'le fetch a Peece and shoote him.
So the warrant in my Masters pocket, will serue for my Murder; And euer after shall my Ghost haunt this House.
And I will say like Reignald,
This Ghost and I am Friends.
Bring faggots, I'le set fire vpon the House,
Rather then this indure.
To burne Houses is Fellony, and I'le not out
Till be fir'd out; But since I am Besieged thus,
I'le summon supplies vnto my Rescue.
Before you chide, first heere mee, next your Blessing,
That on my knees I begge; I have but done,
Like mis-spent youth, which after wit deere bought,
Turnes his Eyes inward, sorrie and ashamed;
These things in which I haue offended most,
Had I not prooued, I should haue thought them still
Essentiall things, delights perdureable;
Which now I find meere Shaddowes, Toyes and Dreames,
Now hated more then earst I doated on;
Best Natures, are soonest wrought on; Such was mine;
As I the offences, So the offendors throw
Heere at your feete, to punish as you please;
You haue but paid so much as I have wasted,
To purchase to your selfe a thrifty Sonne;
Which I from hencefoorth, Vow.
See what Fathers are,
That can three yeeres offences, fowle ones too,
Thus in a Minute pardon; And thy faults
Vpon my selfe chastise, in these my Teares;
Ere this Submission, I had cast thee off;
Rise in my new Adoption: But for these—
The one you have nothing to doe withall, here's his Ticket for his discharge; Another for you Sir, to Summon you to my Masters Feast, For you, and you, where I charge you all to appeare, vpon his displeasure, and your owne apperils.
This is my Friends one I loued,
Onely because they haue bin deere to him
That now will striue to be more deere to you;
Vouchsafe their pardon.
All deere, to me indeed, for I haue payd for't soundly,
Yet for the sake, I am atton'd with all; Onely that wanton.
Her, and her Company, abandon quite;
So doing, wee are friends.
A iust Condition, and willingly subscrib'd to.
But for that Villaine; I am now deuising
What shame, what punishment remarkable,
To inflict on him.
Why Master? Haue I laboured;
Plotted, Contriued, and all this while for you,
And will you leaue me to the Whip and Stockes;
Not mediate my peace.
come downe.
Not till my Pardon's sealed, I'le rather stand heere
Like a Statue, in the Fore-front of your house
For euer; Like the picture of Dame Fortune
Before the Fortune Play-house.
If I haue heere
But any Friend amongst you, ioyne with mee
In this petition.
Good Sir, for my sake, I resolued you truely
Concerning Whooping, the Noyse, the Walking; and the Sprights,
And for a need, can shew you a Ticket for him too.
I impute my wrongs rather to knauish Cunning,
Then least pretended Malice.
What he did,
Was but for his Young Master, I allow it
Rather as sports of Wit, then iniuries;
No other pray esteeme them.
Euen as freely,
As you forget my quarells made with you;
Rais'd from the Errours first begot by him;
I heere remit all free; I now am Calme,
But had I seaz'd vpon him in my Spleene—
I knew that, therefore this was my Inuention,
For Pollicie's the art still of Preuention.
Come downe then Reignald, first on your hands and feete, and then on your knees to your Master; Now gentlemen, what doe you say to your inuiting to my Masters Feast.
Wee will attend him.
Nor doe I loue to breake good company;
For Master Wincott is my worthy Friend,
And old acquaintance; Oh thou crafty Wag-string,
And could'st thou thus delude me? But we are Friends;
Nor Gentlemen, let not what's heere to past,
In your least thoughts disable my Estate;
This my last Voyage hath made all things good,
With surplus too; Be that your comfort Sonne:
Well Reignald—But no more.
I was the Fox,
But I from hencefoorth, will no more the Cox—
Combe, put vpon your pate.
Let's walke Gentlemen
Sonne, let me tell you, you are ill aduised;
And doubly to be blam'd, by vndertaking
Vnnecessary trauell; Grounding no reason
For such a rash and giddy enterprise:
What profit aime you at, you haue not reapt;
What Nouelty affords the Christian world,
Of which your view hath not participated
In a full measure; Can you either better
Your language or experience? Your selfe-will
Hath onely purpose to depriue a father
Of a loued sonne, and many noble friends,
Of your much wisht aquaintance.
Oh, deare Sir,
Doe not, I doe intreat you, repent you
Of your free grant; Which with such care and studdy.
I haue so long, so often laboured for.
Say that may be dispens'd with, shew me reason
Why you desire to out of your Countrey,
Like some Malefactor that had forfeited
His life and freedome; Heere's a worthy Gentleman
Hath for your sake inuited many guests,
To his great charge, onely to take of you
A parting leaue; You send him word you cannot,
After, you may not come: Had not my vrgence,
Almost compulsion, driuen you to his house,
Th' vnkindnesse might haue forfeited your loue,
And raced you from his will; In which he hath giuen you,
A faire and large estate; Yet you of all this stangenesse,
Show no sufficient ground.
Then vnderstand;
The ground thereof tooke his first birth from you;
'Twas you first charg'd me to forbeare the house,
And that vpon your blessing: Let it not then
Offend you Sir, if I so great a charge
Haue striu'd to keepe so strictly.
Mee perhaps,
You may appease, and with small difficulty.
Because a Father; But how satisfie
Their deare, and on your part, vnmerited loue?
But this your last obedience may salue all:
Wee now grow neere the house.
Whose doores, to mee,
Appeare as horried as the gates of Hell:
Where shall I borrow patience, or from whence?
To giue a meeting to this viperous brood,
Of Friend and Mistris.
Y'aue entertain'd me with a strange discourse
Of your mans knauish wit, but I reioyce,
That in your safe returne, all ends so well:
Most welcome you, and you, and indeed all;
To whom I am bound, that at so short a warning,
Thus friendly, you will deigne to visit me.
It seemes my absence hath begot some sport,
Thanke my kind seruant heere.
Not so much worth Sir.
But though their riots tript at my estate,
They haue not quite ore-throwne it.
But see Gentlemen, these whom we most expected, come at length; This I proclaime the master of the Feast,
In which to expresse the bounty of my loue,
I'le shew my selfe no niggard.
Your choise fauours,
I still taste in abundance.
Methinks it would not mis-become me Sir,
To chide your absence; That haue made your selfe,
To vs, so long a stranger.
Pardon mee Sir,
That haue not yet, since your returne from Sea,
Voted the least fit opportunity,
To entertaine you with a kind salute.
Most kindly Sir I thanke you.
Methinks friend,
You should expect greene rushes to be strow'd,
After such discontinuance.
Mistris Pru,
I haue not seene you long, but greet you thus,
May you be Lady of a better husband
Then I expect a wife.
I like that greeting:
Nay, enter Gentlemen; Dinner perhaps
Is not yet ready, but the time we stay,
Weele find some fresh discourse to spend away.
Not speake to me? nor once vouchsafe an answere,
But sleight me with a poore and base neglect?
No, nor so much as cast an eye on her,
Or least regard, though in a seeming shew
Shee courted a reply? 'twixt him and her,
Nay him and mee, this was not wont to be;
If she haue braine to apprehend as much
As I haue done, sheele quickly find it out:
Now as I liue, as our affections meete,
So our conceits, and shee hath singled him
To some such purpose: I'le retire my selfe.
Not interrupt their conference.
You are sad Sir.
I know no cause.
Then can I shew you some;
Who could be otherwayes, to leaue a Father
So carefull, and each way so prouident?
To leaue so many, and such worthy Friends?
To abandon your owne countrey? These are some,
Nor doe I thinke you can be much the merrier
For my sake?
Now your tongue speakes Oracles;
For all the rest are nothing, 'tis for you,
Onely for you I cannot.
So I thought;
Why then haue you bin all this while so strange?
Why will you trauell? suing a diuorce
Betwixt vs, of a loue inseperable;
For heere shall I be left as desolate
Vnto a frozen, almost widdowed bed;
Warm'd onely in that future, stor'd in you;
For who can in your absence comfort me?
Shall my oppressed sufferance yet breake foorth
Into impatience, or endure her more?
But since by no perswasion, no intreats,
Your setled obstinacy can be swal'd,
Though you seeme desperate of your owne deare life
Haue care of mine, for it exists in you.
Oh Sir, should you miscarry I were lost,
Lost and forsaken; Then by our past vowes,
And by this hand once giuen mee, by these reares,
Which are but springs begetting greater floods,
I doe beseech thce, my deere Geraldine,
Looke to thy safety, and preserue thy health;
Haue care into what company you fall;
Trauell not late, and crosse no dangerous Seas;
For till Heauens blesse me in thy safe returne,
How will this poore heart suffer?
I had thought
Long since the Syrens had bin all destroy'd;
But one of them I find suruiues in her;
Shee almost makes me question what I know,
An Hereticke vnto my owne beliefe:
Oh thou mankinds seducer.
What? no answere?
Yes, thou hast spoke to me in Showres,
I will reply in Thunder; Thou Adultresse,
That hast more poyson in thee then the Serpent,
Who was the first that did corrupt thy sex,
The Deuill.
To whom speakes the man?
To thee, falsest of all that euer man term'd faire;
Hath Impudence so stool'd thy smooth soft skin,
It cannot blush? Or sinne so obdur'd thy heart,
It doth not quake and tremble? Search thy conscience,
There thou shalt find a thousand clamorous tongues
To speake as loud as mine doth.
Saue from yours,
I heare no noise at all.
I'le play the Doctor
To open thy deafe eares; Munday the Ninth
Of the last Moneth; Canst thou remember that?
That Night more blacke in thy abhorred sinne,
Then in the gloomie darknesse; That the time.
Munday?
Wouldest thou the place know? Thy polluted Chamber,
So often, witnesse of my sin-lesse vowes;
Wouldest thou the Person? One not worthy Name,
Yet to torment thy guilty Soule the more,
I'le tell him thee, That Monster Dalauill;
Wouldest thou your Bawd know? Mid-night, that the houre;
The very words thou spae? Now what would Geraldine
Say, if he saw vs heere? To which was answered,
Tush hee's a Cox-combe, fit to be so fool'd:
No blush? What, no faint Feauer on thee yet?
How hath thy blacke sins chang'd thee? Thou Medusa,
Those Haires that late appeared li golden Wyers,
Now crawle with Snakes and Adders; Thou art vgly.
And yet my glasse, till now, neere told me so;
Who gaue you this intelligence?
Onely hee,
That pittying such an Innocentis mine,
Should by two such delinquents bee beray'd,
Hee brought me to that place by mirracle;
And made mean eare witnesse of all this.
I am vndone.
But thinke wharthou hast lost
To forfeit mee; I not withstanding these,
(So fixt was my loue and verable)
I kept this from thy Husband, nay all eares,
With thy transgressions smothering mine owne wrongs,
In hope of thy
Which begin thus low vpon my knees.
Tush, bow in ,
Which thou hast most offended; alas,
Saue in such (Scace vnheard of) Treacherie,
Most sinfull like thy selfe;
Wherein, Oh wherein, hath my vnspotted and vnbounded Loue
deseru'd the least of these? Sworne to be made a ale
For terme of life; And all this for my goodnesse;
Die, and die soone, acquit me of my Oath,
But prethee die repentant; Farewell euer,
'Tis thou, and onely thou hast Banisht mee,
Both from my Frinds and Countrey.
Oh, I am lost.
Why how now, what's the businesse?
Goe take her Vp, whom thou hast oft throwne Downe, Villaine.
That was no language from a Friend,
It had too harsh an accent; But how's this?
My Mistresse thus low cast vpon the earth
Grauelling and breathlesse, Mistresse, Lady, Sweet—
Oh tell me if thy name be Geraldine,
Thy very lookes will kill mee?
View me well,
I am no such man; See, I am Dalauill.
Th'art then a Deuill, that presents before mee
My horrid sins; perswades me to dispaire;
When hee like a good Angel sent from Heauen,
Besought me of repentance; Swell sicke Heart,
Euen till thou burst the ribs that bound thee in;
So, there's one string crackt, flow, and flow high,
Euen till thy blood distill out of mine eyes,
To witnesse my great sorrow.
Faint againe,
Some helpe within there, no attendant neere?
Thus to expire, in this I am more wretched,
Then all the sweet fruition of her loue
Before could make me happy.
What was hee clamor'd so lowd,
To mingle with our mirth this terrour
And affright?
See Sir, your Wife in these my armes expiring.
How?
My sister?
Support her, and by all meanes possible
Prouide for her deere safety.
See, shee recouers.
Woman, looke vp.
Oh Sir, your pardon;
Conuey me to my Chamber, I am sicke,
Sicke euen to death, away thou Sycophant,
Out of my sight, I haue besides thy selfe,
Too many sinnes about mee.
My sweet Mistresse.
The storme's comming, I must prouide for harbour.
What strange and sudden alteration's this,
How quickly is this cleere day ouercast,
But such and so vncertaine are all things,
That dwell beneath the Moone.
A Womans qualme,
Frailties that are inherent to her sex,
Soone sicke, and soone recouer'd.
If shee misfare,
I am a man more wretched in her losse,
Then had I forfeited life and estate;
Shee was so good a creature.
I the like
Suffer'd, when I my Wife brought vnto her grae;
So you, when you were first a widower,
Come arme your selfe with patience.
These are casualties
That are not new, but common.
Burying of Wiues,
As stale as shifting shifts, or for some seruants,
To flout and gull their Masters.
Best to send
And see how her fit holds her.
Sir, my
In these few Lines commends her last to you,
For she is now no more; What's therein writ,
Saue Heauen and you, none knowes, This she desir'd
You would take view of; and with these words expired.
Dead?
She hath made one then a free release,
Of all the debts I owed her.
My feare is beyond pardon, Dalauill
Hath plaid the villaine, but for Geraldine,
Hee hath bin each way Noble—Loue him still,
My peace already I haue made with Heauen;
Oh be not you at warre with me; My Honour
Is in your hands to punish, or preserue;
I am now Confest, and only Geraldine
Hath wrought on mee this vnexpected good;
The Inke I write with, I wish had bin my blood,
To witnesse me Repentance—Dalauill?
Where's hee? Goe seeke him out.
I shall, I shall Sir.
The Wills of Dead folke should be still obeyed;
How euer false to mee, I'le not reueale't;
Where Heauen forgiues, I pardon Gentlemen,
I know you all commiserate my losse;
I little thought this Feast should haue bin turn'd
Into a Funerall; What's the newes of him?
Hee went presently to the Stable, put the Sadle vpon his Horse, put his Foote into the Stirrup, clapt his Spurres into his sides, and away hee's Gallopt, as if hee were to ride a Race for a Wager.
All our ill lucks goe with him, farewell hee;
But all my best of wishes wait on you,
As my chiefe Friend; This meeting that was made
Onely to take of you a parting leaue,
Shall now be made a Marriage of our Loue,
Which none saue onely Death shall separate.
It calles me from all Trauell, and from hencefoorth,
With my Countrey I am Friends.
The Lands that I haue left,
You lend mee for the short space of my life;
As soone as Heauen calles mee, they call you Lord;
First feast, and after Mourne; Wee'le like some Gallants
That Bury thrifty Fathers, think't no sinne,
To weare Blacks without, but other Thoughts within.