MOſt grave Opinion!
Confidence moſt welcome,
Is Phanſie come to Court?
Breaking his way
Thorough the Guard.
So violent?
With jeafts Which they are leſſe able to reſiſt,
Hee'l cracke a Halberd with his wit,
A moſt
Strong Phanſie, yet we ha' knowne a little Engine
Breake an ingenious Head peece. But your Maſter—
Companion ſir. Phanſie will keepe no Servants,
And Confidence ſcornes to waite.
Cry mercy ſir,
But is this Gentleman, this Signior Phanſie
So rare a thing, ſo ſubtile as men ſpeake him.
He's a great Prince of th' Ayre, beleeue it ſir,
And yet a Bird of night.
A Bird!
Betweene
An Owle and Bat, a queint Hermophrodite,
Begot of Mercury and Venus Wit and Love.
He's worth your entertainement.
I am moſt
Ambitious to ſee him, he is not
So nimble as I wiſh him, where's my Wife,
My Lady Novelty?
Your Wife? you might
Have fram'd a newer word, they can but call,
Vs ſo i'th Country.
No exception
Deare Madam Novelty, I muſt prepare you,
To entertaine a Gentleman, where's Admiration,
Our Daughter?
Here ſir, what gay man is this?
Pleaſe you honour us, and bring in your friend ſir.
Ile doo't but he prevents me.
Sir I am ignorant
By what titles to ſalute you, but y'are welcome to Court.
Saue your ſelfe ſir, your name's Opinion.
And yours Phanſie.
Right.
Mine Iollity.
Mine Laughter, ha, ha, ha.
Here's a ſtrange ſhape.
I never ſaw the like.
I come to doe you honor with my friends here
And helpe the Maſque.
You'le doe a ſpeciall favour.
How many Antimaſquesha they? Of what nature?
For theſe are Phanſies that take moſt, your dull
And phlegmaticke inuentions are exploded,
Giue mee a nimble Antimaſque.
They haue none ſir.
No Antimaſque? ide laugh at that i'faith.
What make wee here? No Iollity.
No Antimaſque.
Bid'em downe with the Sceane, and ſell the Timber,
Send Iupiter to graſſe, and bid Apollo
Keepe Cowes againe, take all their gods and goddeſſes,
For theſe muſt farſe up this nights entertainement,
And pray the Court may haue ſome mercy on 'em,
They will bee jeerd to death elſe for their ignorance,
The ſoule of wit moues here, yet there be ſome
If my intelligence faile not, meane to ſhew
Themſelues jeere Maiors, ſome tall Critticks have
Planted Artillery and wit murderers.
No Antimaſque? Let 'em looke too't.
I have heard ſir;
Confidence made them truſt, you'de furniſh 'em,
I feare they ſhould have made their addreſſe earlier
To your invention, but your braine's nimble,
Pray, for the expectation that's vpon 'em
Lend them ſome witty fancies, ſet ſome engines
In motion, that may conduce to the deſigne.
I am their friend againſt the Croude that enuy 'em
And ſince they come with pure deuotions
To ſacrifice the in duties to the King
And Queene, I wiſh em proſper.
You have charmd me,
Ile be their friend tonight, I have a Fancy
Already.
Let it be ridiculous.
And Confident.
And Iolly.
The firſt Antimaſque
We will preſent our ſelves in our owne perſons,
What thinke you on't? moſt grave Opinion
You ſhall doe well to lead tho dance, and give it
Authority with your face, your lady may
Admire what ſhe finds new.
I ſhall applaud.
The Novelties.
And I admire.
They tumble,
My skull's too narrow.
Now his Phanſies caper.
Confidence, waite you upon Opinion,
Here Admiration, there Novelty,
This is a place for Iollity and Laughter
Phanſie will dance himſelfe too.
How like you this deuice?
Tis hanſome—but
Opinion will like nothing.
It ſeemes new.
Twas bold.
Twas Iocund.
Did not I doe the foole well?
Moſt Admirably.
Nay, and the Ladies doe but take
My part, and Laugh at me, I am made, ha, ha.
I could wiſh ſomething ſir, of other nature
To ſatisfie the preſent expectation.
I imagine, nay, I'me not ignorant of proprieties
And perſons, tis a time of peace, ile fit you.
And inſtantly make you a repreſentation
Of the effect.
Of peace? I like that well.
And ſince in nothing, they are more expreſt
Then in good fellowſhip, ile preſent you with a Taverne.
A ſpicke and ſpan new Taverne.
Wonderfull, heere was none within two minutes.
No ſuch wonder Lady, Tauernes are quickly
up, it is but hanging out a Buſh at a Noblemans doore,
or an Aldermans gate, and tis made inſtantly.
Wil't pleaſe you Ladies to except the wine?
Well ſayd Conſidence.
It will bee new for Ladies
To go to th' Taverne, but it may be a faſhion,
Follow mee Admiration.
And the foole,
I may ſupply the abſence of your Fidlers.
If wee can, lets leave Opinion behind us,
Phanſie will make him drunke,
I am glad they are off, are theſe effects of peace?
Corruption rather.
Oh the Beggers ſhew
The benefit of peace.
Their uery breath
Hath ſtifled all the Candles, poyſond the
Perfumes, Beggers a fit preſentment? how
They cleaue ſtill to my noſthrill, I muſt tell you,
I doe not like ſuch baſe, and ſordide perſons,
And they become not here.
I apprehend,
If theſe diſtaſte you, I can fit you with
Perſons more cleanly,
What thinke you of Proiectors?
How Proiectors!
Here's one already.
This is a Iocky,
He is to advance a rare, and cunning bridle
Made hollow in the Iron part, wherein
A vapor ſubtly conueyd, ſhall ſo
Coole and refreſh a horſe, he ſhall nere tire
And now he fals to his pace.
This other?
His habit ſpeakes him
A Country fellow, that has ſold his acres
To purchaſe him a flayle, which by the motion
Of a queint wheele, ſhall without helpe of hands,
Threſh Corne all day, and now he layes about him.
This with a face Philoſophicall and beard,
Hath with the ſtudy of twenty yeares, found out
A lampe, which plac'd beneath a furnace, ſhall
Boyle Beefe ſo thoroughly, that the uery ſteame
Of the firſt Veſſell, ſhall alone be able
To make another Pot aboue ſeeth ouer.
A moſt Scholaſticke proiect; his feete follow
The motions of his braine.
But what thing's this?
A Chimera out of Rablais?
A new proiect,
A Caſe to walke you all day vnder water.
So vaſt for the neceſſity of ayre,
Which, with an artificiall bellowes coold
Vnder each arme, is kept ſtill from corruption,
with thoſe glaſſe eyes, he ſees, and can fetch up
Gold, or what ever Iewels ha' beene loſt,
In any River of the World.
Strange Water-Rat!
This grave man, ſome yeares paſt was a Phiſition,
A Galeniſt, and parcell Paracelſus,
Thrin'd by diſeaſes, but quite loſt his practice,
To ſtudy a new way to fatten Poultry
With ſcrapings of a Carrot, a great benefit
To th' Commonwealth.
He will deſerve a monument.
This is a kind of Seagull too, that will
Compoſe a ſhip to ſaile againſt the winds.
Hee'l vndertake to build a moſt ſtrong caſtle
On Goodwin ſands, to melt huge Rockes to jelley,
And cut 'em out like ſweetmeats with his keele,
And thus he ſayles.
I know not ſir, how this may ſatisfie,
But might we be beholding to your fancy
For ſome more queint variety, ſome other
Then humane ſhapes, would happily delight,
And reach the expectation, I ha ſeene
Dainty devices in this kind, Baboones
In Quellios, and ſo forth.
I can furniſh you.
Phanſie will much obliege us.
If theſe objects
Pleaſe not, Phanſie can preſent a change,
What ſee you now?
A Wood, a broad-fac'd Owle,
An Ivy-buſh, and other Birds about her.
Theſe can imagination create,
Silence, obſerve.
This all you will preſent?
You ſpeake as if
Phanſie could be exhauſt, Invention flowes
From an immortall ſpring, you ſhall taſte other
Variety, nimble as thought. We change the Scene.
What are theſe?
Dotterells, be patient, and expect.
Madam accuſe your abſence,
We know
All your devices ſir.
Ha, what's the matter,
Confidence, Iollity, Laughter, Admiration,
And Madam Novelty, and drunke! theſe are
extreames indeed.
Admirable Opinion.
Be confident.
And fooliſh.
I am as light now.
Let 'em enioy their Phanſies.
What new change
Is this? theſe ſtraines are heavenly.
Hence yee profane farre hence away,
Time hath ſicke feathers, while you ſtay,
Is this delight
For ſuch a glorious night,
Wherein two skyes
are to be ſeene,
One ſtarry, but an aged ſphere
another here,
Created new and brighter from the Eyes
of King and Queene?
Hence yee profane, farre hence away,
Time hath ſicke feathers while you ſtay.
Wherefore doe my ſiſters ſtay
Appeare, appeare Eunomia,
'Tis Irene calls to thee,
Irene calls;
Like dew that falls
Into a ſtreame,
I'me loſt with them,
That know not how to order me.
See there ſhee ſhines, oh ſee
In her celeſtiall gayety
Cround with a wreath of Starres to ſhew
The Evenings glory in her brow.
Thinks not I could abſent my ſelfe this night,
But Peace is gentle, and doth ſtill invite
Eunomia, yet ſhouldſt thou ſilent be
The Roſe and Lilly which thou ſtroweſt
All the cheerefull way thou goeſt
Would direct to follow thee.
Thou doſt beautifie increaſe,
And chaine ſecurity with peace.
Irene faire, and firſt devine,
All my bleſſings ſpring from thine,
I am but wilde without thee, thou abhorreſt
What is rude, or apt to wound,
Canſt throw proud trees to the ground,
And make a Temple of a Forreſt.
No more, no more, but ioyne
Thy voyce, and Lute with mine.
The world ſhall giue prerogative to neyther
We cannot flouriſh but together.
Irene enters like a perfum'd ſpring,
Eunomia ripens every thing,
And in the golden harveſt leaves
To every ſickle his owne ſheaves.
Swifly, oh ſwiftly, I doe move to ſlow,
What holds my wing from making haſt
When every Cloud ſailes by ſo faſt?
I heard my ſiſters voyce, and know
They haue forſaken Heavens bright gate,
To attend another State,
of gods below.
Irene chaſt Evnomia.
Wee
Diche, have ſtayd expecting thee,
Thou giu'ſt perfection to our glory,
And ſeale to this nights ſtory.
Aſtrea ſhake the cold dew from thy wing.
Deſcend.
Deſcend.
Deſcend, and helpe vs ſing,
The Triumph of Ioves upper Court abated
And all the Deities tranſlated.
The Triumph of Ioves vpper Court abated
And all the Deities tranſlated.
Now gaze, and when thy wonder will allow,
Tell what thou haſt beheld.
Never, till now,
Was poore Aſtrea blind, oh ſtrange ſurprize,
That too much ſight ſhould take away my eyes,
Am I in Earth or Heaven?
What Throne is that,
On which ſo many Starres do waite?
My Eyes are bleſt agen, and now I ſee
The Parents of vs three.
'Tis Iove and Themis forward move,
And ſing to Themis, and to Iove.
To you great King and Queene, whoſe ſmile.
Doth ſcatter bleſſings through this Ile,
To make it beſt
And wonder of the reſt,
We pay the duty of our birth,
Proud to waite vpon that Earth
Where on you moue,
Which ſhall be nam'd
And by your chaſt embraces fam'd
The Paradiſe of loue.
Irene plant thy Oliues here,
Thus warm'd, at once, theile bloome and beare,
Eunomia pay thy light,
While Diche, covetous to ſtay,
Shall throw her ſilver Wings away,
To dwell within your ſight.
No forraigne perſons I make knowne,
But here preſent you with your owne,
The Children of your Raigne, not blood
Of age, when they are vnderſtood.
Not ſeene by faction or Owles ſight,
Whoſe trouble is the cleareſt light,
But treaſures to their eye, and eare,
That loue good for it ſelfe, not feare.
Oh ſmile on what your ſelues have made,
Theſe haue no forme, no ſunne, no ſhade,
But what your vertue doth create,
Exalted by your glorious fate,
Thei'le towre to heaven, next which, they know,
And wiſh no bleſſedneſſe but you.
That very looke into each eye
Hath ſhot a ſoule, I ſaw it flie.
Deſcend, move nimbly, and advance,
Your ioyfull tribute in a dance.
They that were never happy Howers
Till now, returne to thanke the Powers
that made them ſo
The Iland doth reioyce,
And all her waves are Eccho to our voyce,
Which in on ages paſt, hath knowne
ſuch treaſures of her owne.
Live Royall paire, & when Your ſands are ſpent
with Heauens and Your conſent,
Though late, from Your high Bowers,
Looke downe on what was Yours,
For till old time his Glaſſe hath hurl'd
And loſt it, in the aſhes of the world,
We Propheſie, You ſhall be read, and ſeene,
In every Branch, a King or Queene.
D'ee thinke to keepe vs out?
Knocke her downe.
Knocke downe my Wife, I'de ſee the talleſt Beefe-eater on you all, but hold vp his Halberd in the way of knocking my Wife downe, and ile bring him a button-hole lower.
Nay, let 'em, let 'em Husband, at their perrill.
Complaine to my Lord Chamberlaine.
My husband is ſomewhere in the workes; I'me ſure I helpt to make him an Owle and a Hobbihorſe, and I ſee no reaſon but his Wife may bee admitted in Forma paperis, to ſee as good a Maske as this.
I never ſaw one afore, I am one of the Guard, though of another complexion, and I will ſee't now I am here, though I be turn'd out of the Kitchin to morrow for't.
I, come, be reſolute, we know the worſt, and let us challenge a priviledge, thoſe ſtaires were of my painting.
And that Timber I ſet vp: ſome body is my witneſſe.
I am ſure my husband ſold 'em moſt of the Feathers; ſome body promis'd me a fall too if I came to Court, but let that paſſe.
And mine embroyder'd two of the beſt habits, what though we be no Ladies, we are Chriſtians in theſe cloathes, and the Kings ſubiects God bleſſe us.
Nay, now I am in, I will ſee a dance, though my ſhop-windowes be ſhut vp for't, tell us? — hum? dee heare? doo not they laugh at us? what were wee beſt to doe, the Maſquers will doe no feates as long we are here, be rul'd by me, harke euery one, 'tis our beſt courſe to dance a figary our ſelues, and then they'l thinke it a peece of the Plot, and we may goe off agen with the more credite, we may elſe kiſſe the Porters-lodge for't, let's put a tricke vpon 'em in renenge, 'twill ſeeme a new device too.
Content.
And the Muſitians knew but our mind now▪ Harke they are at it, now for a lively friske. now, let vs goe off cleanely, and ſome body will thinke, this was meant for an Antimaſque.
Why doe you dwell ſo long in clouds
And ſmother your beſt graces,
'Tis time to caſt away thoſe ſhrouds
And cleere your manly faces.
Doe not behave your ſelues like Spies,
Vpon the Ladies here,
On even termes got meete their eyes,
Beauty and love ſhine there.
You tread dull meaſures thus alone,
Not ſatisfie delight,
Goe kiſſe their hands, and make your owne
With every touch more white.
In envy to the night,
That keepes ſuch Revels here,
With my vnwelcome light,
Thus I invade her ſpheare.
Proclaiming marres
To Cinthia, and all her Starres,
That like provd Spangles dreſſe her azure Treſſe.
Becauſe I cannot be a gueſt, I riſe
To ſhame the Moone, and put out all her eyes.
Come away, away, away
See the dawning of the day,
Riſen from the murmuring ſtreames,
Some ſtarres ſhew with ſickly beames,
What ſtocke of flame they are allow'd,
Each retiring to a Cloud,
Bid your active ſports adiew,
The morning elſe will bluſh for you.
Yee featherd-footed howers runne
To dreſſe the Chariot of the Sunne,
Harneſſe the Steeds, it quickly will
Be time to mount the Eaſterne hill.
The lights grow pale with modeſt feares,
Leaſt you offend their ſacred eares,
And eyes, that lent you all this grace,
Retire, retire to your owne place.
And as you move from that bleſt Paire,
Let each heart kneele, and thinke a prayer,
That all, that can make vp the glory,
Of good, and great, may fill their ſtory.