COrrantoes sailing, and no foot post lte
Possessing us with Newe; of forraine State,
No accidents abroad worthy Relation
Arriving here, we are forc'd from our owne Nation
To ground the Scene that's now in agitation.
The Project unto many here well knowne;
Those Witches the fat Iaylor brought to Towne,
An Argument so thin, persons so low
Can neither yeeld much matter, nor great show.
Expect no more than can from such be rais'd,
So may the Scene passe pardond, thoug not prais'd.
WAs ever sport of expectation,
Thus crost in th▪ height.
Tush these are accidents, all game is (subject to.
So you may call them
Chances, or croses, or what else you please,
But for my part, Ile hold them prodigies,
As things transcending Nature.
O you speake this,
Because a Hare hath crost you.
A Hare? a Witch, or rather a Divell I think▪
For tell me Gentlemen, was't possible
In such a faire course, and no covert neere,
We in pursuit, and she in constant view,
Our eyes not wandring but all bent that way,
The Dogs in chase, she ready to be ceas'd,
And at the instant, when I durst have layd
My life to gage, my Dog had pincht her, then
To vanish into nothing!
Somewhat strange, but not as you inforce it,
Make it plaine
That I am in an error, sure I am
That I about me have no borrow'd eyes.
They are mine owne, and Matches.
She might find some Muse as hen not visible to us,
And escape that way.
Perhaps some Foxe had earth'd there,
And though it be not common, for I seldome
Have knowne or heard the like, there squat her selfe,
And so her scape appeare but Naturall,
Which you proclaime a Wonder.
Well well Gentlemen, be yu of your own faith, but (what I see
And is to me apparent, being in sence,
My wits about me, no way tost nor troubled,
o that will I give credit.
Come, come, all men
Were never of one minde, nor I of yours.
To leave this argument, are you resolv'd
Where we shall dine to day?
Yes where we purpos'd.
That was with Master Generous.
True, the same.
And where a loving welcome is presum'd,
Whose liberall Table's never unprepar'd,
Nor he of guests unfurnisht, of his meanes,
There's none can beare it with a braver port,
And keepe his state unshaken, one who sels not
Nor covets he to purchase, holds his owne
Without oppressing others, alwayes prest
To indeere to him any knowne Gentleman
In whom he finds good parts.
A Character not common in this age.
I cannot wind him up
Vnto the least part of his noble worth.
Tis far above my strength.
See who comes yonder,
A fourth, to make us a full Messe of guests
At Master Generous Table.
Tush let him passe,
He is not worth our luring, a meere Coxcombe,
It is a way to call our its in question,
To have him seene amongst us.
He hath spy'd us, there is no way to evade him.
That's my griefe; a most notorious lyar, out upō him.
Let's set the best face on't.
What Gentlemen? all mine old acquaintance?
A whole triplicity of friends together? nay then
'Tis three to one we shall not soone part Company.
Swcet Mr. Whetstone.
Dainty Mr. Whetstone.
Dlicate Master Whetstone.
You say right, Mr. Whetstone I have bin, Mr. Whetstone I am, and Mr. Whetstone I shall be, and those that know me, know withall that I have not my name for nothing, I am hee whom all the brave Blades of the Country use to whet their wits upon; sweet Mr. Shakton, dainty Mr. Bantham, and dainty Mr. Arthur, and how, and how, what all lustick, all froligozone? I know, you are going to my Vncles to dinner, and o am I too, What shall we all make one randevous there,
You need not doubt of your welcome.
No doubt at all kind Mr. Whetstone; but we have not seene you of late, you are growne a great stranger amongst us, I desire sometimes to give you a visit; I pray where do you lye?
Where doe I lye? why sometimes in one place, and then againe in another, I love to shift lodgings; but most constantly, wheresoere I dine or sup, there doe I lye?
I never heard that word proceed from him
I durst call truth till now.
But where so ever I lye 'tis no matter for that,
I pray you say, and say truth, are ot you three now
Going to dinner to my Vncles?
I thinke you are a Witch Master Whetstone.
ow? A Witch Gentlemen? I hope you doe not meane to abuse me, though at this time (if report be true there are too many of them here in our Country) but I am sure I look like no such ugly Creature.
It seemes then you are of opinion that there are Witches, for mine own part, I can hardly be induc'd to think there any such kinde of people.
No such kinde of people! I pray you tell me Gentlemen, did never any one of you know my Mother?
Why was your Mother a Witch?
I doe not say as Witches goe now a dayes, for they for the most part are ugly old Beldas, but she was a lusty young Lasse, and by her owne report, by her beauty and faire lookes bewitcht my Father.
It seemes then your Mother was rather a yong wanton wench, than an old wither'd witch.
You say right, and know withall I come of two ancient Families, for as I am a Whetstone by the Mother-side, so I am a By-blow by the Fathers.
It appeares then by your discourse, that you came in at the window.
I would have you thinke I scorne like my Granams
Cat to leape over the Hatch.
He hath confest himselfe to be a Bastard.
And I beleeve't as a notorious truth.
Howsoever I was begot, here you see I am,
And if my Parents went to it without feare or wit,
What can I helpe it.
Very probable, for as he was got without feare,
So it is apparent he was borne without wit.
Gentlemen, it seemes you have some private businesse amongst your selves, which I am not willing to interrupt, I know not how the day goes with you, but for mine owne part, my stomacke is now much upon 12. You know what houre my Vncle keeeps, and I love ever to bee set before the first grace, I am going before, speake, shall I acquaint him with your comming after?
We meane this day to see what fare he keepes.
And you know it is his custome to fare well,
And in that respect I think I may be his kinsman,
And so farewell Gentlemen, Ile be your fore-runner,
To give him notice of your visite.
And so intyre us to you.
Sweet Mr. Whetstone.
Kind Mr. Byblw.
I see you are perfect both in my name & sirname; I have ever bound unto you, for which I will at this time be your Noverint, and give him notice that you Universi will bee with him per praesentes, and that I take to be presently.
Farewell As in praesenti.
It seemes hee's peece of a Scholler.
What because he hath read a little Scriveners Latine, hee nver proceeded farther in his Accidence than to Mentiri non est meum; and that was such a hard Lesson to learne, that he stucke at mentri; and cu'd never reach to non est meum: since, a meere Ignaro, and not worth acknowledgement.
Are these then the best parts he can boast of?
As you see him now, so shall you finde him ever: all in one strain, there is one only thing which I wonder he left our.
And what might that be:
Of the same affinity with the rest.
At every second word, he his commonly boasting
either of his Aunt or his Vncle.
You name him in good time, see where he comes.
Gentlemen, Welcome, t'is a word I use,
From me expect no further complement:
Nor do I name it often at one meeting,
Once spoke (to those that understand me best,
And know I alwaies purpose as I speake)
Hath ever yet suffiz'd: so iet it you;
Nor doe I love that common phrase of guests,
As we make bold, or we are troublesome,
Wee take you unprovided, and the like;
I know you understanding Gentlemen,
And knowing me, cannot persuade your selves
With me you shall be troublesome or bold,
But still provided for my worthy friends,
Amongst whom you are lifted.
Noble sir, you generously instruct us, and to exprsse
We can be your apt schollers: in a word
Wee come to dine with you.
And Gentlemen, such plainnesse doth best please me, I had notice
Of so much by my kinsman, and to show
How lovingly I tooke it, instantly
Rose from my chayre to meet you at the gate.
And be my selfe your usher; nor shall you finde
Being set to meat, that i'le excuse your fare,
Or say, I am sory it falls out so poore;
And had I knowne your comming wee'd have had
Such things and such, nor blame my Cooke, to say
This dish or that hath not bin sauc'st with care:
Words, fitting best a common Hostesse mouth,
When ther's perhaps some just cause of dislike
But not the table of a Gentleman;
Nor is it my wives custome; in a word, take what you find, & so
Sir without flattery
You may be call'd the sole surviving sonne
Of long since banisht Hospitality.
In that you please me not: But Gentlemen
I hope to be beholden unto you all,
Which if I proove, Ile be a gratefull debtor.
Wherein good sir.
I ever studied plainenee, and truth withall.
I pray expresse your selfe.
In few I shall. I know this youth to whom my wife is Aunt
Is (as you needs must finde him) weake and shallow:
Dull, as his name, and what for kindred sake
We note not, or at least, are loath to see,
Is unto such well-knowing Gentlemen
Most grossely visible: If for my sake
You will but seeme to winke at these his wants,
At least at table before us his friends,
I shall receive it as a courtesie
No soone to be forgot.
Presume it sir.
Now when you please pray Enter Gentlemen.
Would these my friends prepare the way before,
To be resolved of one thing before dinner
Would something adde unto mine appetite,
Shall I intreat you so much.
O sir you may command us.
I'th meane time
Prepare your stomackes with a bowle of Sacke.
My Cellar can affoord it; now Mr. Arthur
Pray freely speake your thoughts.
I come not sir
To presse a promise from you, tak't not so,
Rather to prompt your memory in a motion
Made to you not long since.
Wast not about
A Mannor, the best part of your estate,
Morgag'd to one slips no advantages
Which you would have redeem'd.
True sir the same.
And as I hinke, I promist at that time
To become bound with you, or if the usurer
(A base, yet the best title I can give him)
Perhaps should question that security,
To have the money ready. Wast not so?
It was to that purpose wee discourst.
Provided, to have the Writings in my custody.
Else how should I secure mine owne ese.
To denie that I shod appeare oth' World
Stupid, and of no braine.
Your monie's ready,
And I remaine a man oblig'd to you.
Beyond all utterance.
Make then your word good
By speaking it no further, onely ▪
It seemes your Vncle you trusted in so far
Hath failed your expectation.
Sir he hath, not that he is unwilling or unable.
Bt at time fit to be socited;
For to the Cories wonder and my sorow,
ee is much to be pitied.
Why I intreat you.
Because hee's late become the sole discourse
Of all the countrey; for of a man respected
For his discretion and knowne gravitie,
As master of a govern'd Family,
The house (as if the ridge were fixt below,
And groundfils lifted up to make the roofe)
All now turn'd topsie turvy,
Strange, but how?
In such a retrograde & preposterous way
As seldome hath hin heard of. I thinke never.
Can you discourse the manner?
The good man, in all obedience kneels vnto his son,
Hee with an austere brow commands his father.
The wife presumes not in the daughters sight
Without a prepared courtesie. The girle, shee
Expects it as a dutie; chides her mother
Who quakes and trembles at each word she speaks,
And what's as strange, the Maid she dominiers
O're her yong mistris, who is aw'd by her.
The son to whom the Father creeps and bends,
Stands in as much feare of the groome his man.
All in such rare disorder, that in some
As it breeds pitty, and in others wonder;
So in the most part laughter▪
How thinke you might this come.
T'is thought by Witchcraft.
They that thinke so dreame,
For my beliefe is, no such thing can be,
A madnesse you may call it: Dinner stayes;
That done, the best part of the afternoone
Wee'le spend about your businesse.
Nay but vnderstand me neighbor Doughty.
Good master Seely I do understand you, and over and over understand you so much, that I could e'ene blush at your fondnesse; and had I a sonne to serve mee so, I would conure a divell out of him.
Alas he is my childe.
No, you are his childe to live in feare of him, indeed they say old men become children againe, but before I would become my childes childe, and make my foot my head, I would stand upon my head, and kick my heels at the sides.
You do not know what an only son is, O see, he comes now if you can appease his anger toward me, you shall doe an act of timely charity.
It is an office that I am but weakly versd in,
To plead to a sonne in the fathers behalfe,
Blesse me what lookes the devilish young Rascall
Frights the poore man withall!
I wonder at your confidence, and how you dare appeare before me.
A brave beginning.
O sonne be patient.
It is right reverend councell, I thanke you for it, I shall study patience shall I, while you practice waies to begger mee, shall I?
Very handsome.
If ever I trangresse in the like againe—
I have taken your word too often sir and neither can nor will forbeare you longer.
What not your Father Mr. Gregory?
Whats that to you sir?
Pray tell me then sir, how many yeares has hee to serve you.
What do you bring your spokesman now, your advocat,
What fee goes out of my estate now, for his Oratory?
Come I must tell you, you forget your selfe,
And in this foule unnaturall strife wherein
You trample on your father. You are falne
Below humanitie. Y'are so beneath
The title of a sonne, you cannot clayme
To be a man, and let me tell you were you mine
Thou shouldst not eat but on thy knees before me.
O this is not the way.
This is to raise Impatience into fury.
I do not seek his quiet for my ease,
I can beare all his chidings and his threats,
And take them well, very exceeding well,
And finde they do me good on my owne part,
Indeed they do reclaim me from those errors
That might impeach his fortunes, but I feare
Thunquiet strife within him hurts himselfe,
And wastes or weakens Nature, by the breach
Of moderate sleepe and dyet; and I can
No lesse than grieve to finde my weaknesses
To be the cause of his affliction,
And see the danger of his health and being.
Alas poore man? Can you stand open ey'd
Or dry ey'd either at this now in a Father?
Why, if it grieve you, you may look of ont,
I have seen more than this twice twenty times,
And have as often in deceiv'd by his dissimulations
I can see nothing mended.
He is a happy re that has brought vp his son to this.
All shall be mended son content your selfe,
But this time forget but this last fault.
Yes, for a new one to morrow.
Pray Mr. Gregory forget it, you see how
Submissive your poore penitent is, forget it,
Forget it, put it out o'your head, knocke it
Out of your braines. I protest, if my Father,
Nay if my fathers dogge should have sayd
As much to me, I should have embrac't him.
What was the trespasse? It c'ud not be so hainous.
Wel Sir, you now shall be a Iudge for all your jeering.
Was it a fatherly part thinke you having a sonne
To offer to enter in bonds for his nephew, so to indanger
My estate to redeeme his morgage.
But I did it not sonne?
I know it very well, but your dotage had done it,
If my carehd not prevented it.
Is that the businesse: why if he had done it, had hee not bin sufficiently secur'd in having the morgage made over to himselfe.
He does nothing but practice waies to undo himselfe, and me: a very spendthrift, a prodigall sire, hee was at the Ale but tother day, and spent a foure-penny club.
'Tis gone and past sonne.
Can you hold your peace sir? And not long ag at the
Wine he spent his teaster, and two pence to the piper,
That was brave was it not?
Truely we were civily merry. But I have left it.
Your civility have you not? For no longer agoe than last holiday evening he gam'd away eight double ring'd tokens on a rubbers at bowles with the Curate, and some of his idle companions.
Fie Mr. Gregory Seely is this seemely in a sonne.
You'le have a rod for the childe your father shortly I feare.
Alasse did hee make it cry? Give me a stroke and Ile beat him,
Blesse me, they make me almost as mad as themselves.
'Twre good you would meddle with your own matters ir.
Sonne, sonne.
Sir, Sir, as I am not beholden to you for house or Land, for it has stood in the name of my ancestry the Seelyes above two hundred yeares, so will I look you leave all as you found it.
What is the matter con yeow tell?
O Lawrence, welcom, Thou wilt make al wel I am sure.
Yie whick way con yeow tell, but what the foule evill doone yee, heres sick an a din.
Art thou his man fellow ha? that talkest thus to him?
Yie sir, and what ma' yoew o'that, he mainteynes me to rule him, and i'le deu't, or ma'the heart weary o'the weambe on him.
This is quite upside downe, the sonne controlls the father, and the man overcrowes his masters coxscombe, sure they are all bewitch'd.
'Twas but so, truely Lawrence; the peevish old man vex't me, for which I did my duty, in telling him his owne, and Doughty here maintaines him against me.
I forbodden yeow to meddle with the old carle, and let me alone with him, yet yeow still be at him, hee serv'd yeow but weell to bast ye for't, ant he were stronk enough, but an I faw foule with yee an I swaddle yee not savorly may my girts brast.
Prethee good Lawrence be gentle and do not fright thy Master so.
Yie, at your command anon.
Enough good Lawrence, you have said enough.
How trow yeou that? A fine World when a man cannot be whyet at heame for busie brain'd neighpors.
I know not what to say to any thing here,
This cannot be but witchcraft.
I cannot indure it nor I will not indure it.
Hey day! the daughter upon the mother too.
One of us two, chuse you which, must leave the house, wee are not to live together I see that, but I will know, if there be Law in Lancashire for't, which is fit first to depart the house or the World, the mother or the daughter.
Daughter I say.
Do you say the daughter, for that word I say the mother, unlesse you can prove me the eldest, as my discretion almost warrant it, I say the mother shall out of the house or take such courses in it as shall sort with such a house and such a daughter.
Daughter I say, I wil take any course so thou wilt leave thy passton; indeed it hurts thee childe, I'le sing and be merry, weare as fine clothes, and as delicate dressings as thou wilt have me, so thou wilt pacifie thy selfe, and be at peace with me.
O will yo so, in so doing I may chance to looke upon you. Is this a fit habite for a handsome young Gentlewomans mother, as I hope to be a Lady, you look like one o'the Scottish wayward sisters, O my hart has got the hickup, and all look greene about ; a merry song now mother, and thou shalt be my white girle.
Ha, ha, ha! she's overcome with joy at my conversion.
She is most evidently bewitcht.
There was a deft Lad and a Lasse fell in love,
with a fa la la, fa la la, Langtidowne dilly;
With kissing and toying this Maden did prove,
with a fa la la, fa la la, Langtidowne dilly;
So wide ' th wast, and her Belly so high,
That unto her mother the Maiden did cry,
O Langtidowne dilly, O Langtidowne dilly,
fa la la Langtidowne, Langidowne dilly.
Thus wodden yeou doone and I were dead, but while I live yoeu fadge not on it, is this aw the warke yeou con ine?
Now comes the Mayd to set her Missses to work.
Nay pi'thee sweet Parnell, I was but chiding the old wife for her unhandsomnese, and would have been at my work presently, she tels me now she will weare fine things, and I shall dresse her head as I list.
Here's a house well govern'd?
Dresse me no dressings, lessen I dresse yeou beth, and learne a new lesson with a wainon right now, han I bin a servant here this halfe dozen o'yeares, and con I fee yeou idler then my selve!
Nay pritheesweet Parnell content, & hark thee—
I have knowne this, and till very lately, as well govern'd a Family as the Country yeilds, and now what a nest of severall humors it is growne, and all divellish ones, sure all the VVitches in the Country, have their hands in this home-spun medley; and there be no few 'tis thought.
Yie, yie, ye shall ye shall, another time, but not naw I thonke yeou, yeou shall as soone pisse and paddle in't, as lap me in the mouth with an awd Petticoat, or a new paire shoine, to be whyet, I cannot be whyet, no I wonnot be whyet, to see sicky doings I.
Hold thy prattle Parnell, aw's com'd about as weene a had it, wotst thou what Parnell? wotst thou what? o deare, wost thou what?
VVhat's the fond wexen waild trow I.
We han bin in love these three yeares, and ever wee had not enough, now is it com'd about that our love shall be at an end for ever, and a day, for wee mun wed may hunny, we mun wed.
What the Deowl ayles the lymmer lowne, bin thy braines broke lowse trow I.
Sick a waddin was there never i' Loncoshire as ween couple at on Monday newst.
Awa awaw, sayn yeou this sickerly, or done you but jaum me?
I jaum thee not nor flam thee not, 'is all as true as booke, here's both our Masters have consented and concloyded, and our Mistresses mun yeild toyt, to put aw house and lond and aw they have into our hands.
Awa, awaw.
And we mun marry and be master and dame of aw.
Awa, awaw.
And theyn be our Sijourners, because they are weary of the world, to live in frendiblenesse, and see what will come on't.
Awa, awaw, agone.
Nay 'tis true Parnell, here's both our hands on't, and give you joy.
And ours too, and 'twill be fine Ifackins.
Whaw, whaw, whaw, whaw!
Here's a mad businesse towards.
I will bespeake the Guests.
And I the meat:
I'le dresse the dinner, though I drip my sweat.
My care shall sumptuous parrelments provide.
And my best art shall trickly trim the Bride.
VVhaw, whaw, whaw, whaw.
Ile get choyce musick for the merriment.
And I will waite with wonder the event.
VVhaw, whaw, whaw, whaw.
HOe! well met, well met.
Meg. VVhat new devise, what dainty straine
More for our myrth now then our gaine,
Shall we in practice put.
Nay dame,
Before we play another game.
VVe must a little laugh and thanke
Our feat familiars for the pranck
They playd us last.
Or they will misse
Vs in our next plot, if for this
They find not their reward.
'Tis right.
Therefore sing Mawd, and call each spright.
Come away, and take thy duggy,
Come my Mamilion like a Puggy,
And come my puckling take thy teat,
Your travels have deserv'd your meat.
Now upon the Churles ground
On which we're met, lets dance a round;
That Cocle, Darnell, Poppia wild,
May choake his graine, and fill the field.
Now spirits fly about the taske,
That we projected in our Maske.
Now let us laugh to thinke upon
The feat which we have so lately done,
In the distraction we have set
In Seelyes house; which shall beget
VVonder and sorrow 'mongst our fos,
VVhilt we make laughter of their woes.
Ha, ha, ha!
I can but laugh now to foresee,
The fruits of their perplexity.
Of eely's family?
I, I, I, the Father to the Sonne doth cry,
The Sonne rebukes the Father old;
The Daughter at the mother Scold,
The wife the husband check and chide,
But that's no wonder, through the wide
VVorld 'tis common.
But to be short,
The wdding must bring on the sport
Betwixt the hare-brayn'd man and mayd,
Master and dame that over-sway'd.
Ha, ha, ha!
Enough, enough,
Our sides are charm'd, or else this stuffe
VVould laughter-cracke them; let's away
About the Iig. we dance to day,
To spoyle the Hunters sport.
I that, be now the subject of our chat.
Then list yee well, the Hunters are
This day by vow to kill a Hare,
Or else the sport they will forsweare;
And hang their Dogs up.
Stay, but where
Must the long threatned hare be found?
They'l search in yonder Meadow ground.
There will Ibe, and like a wily VVat,
Vntill they put me up; ile squat.
I and my puckling will a brace
Of Greyhounds be, fit for the race;
And linger where we may be tane
Vp for the course in the by-lane;
Then will we lead thir Dogs a course,
And every man and every horse;
Vntill they breake their necks, and say—
The Divell on Dun is rid this way. Ha. ha, ha, ha.
All the doubt can be but this,
That if by chance of me they misse,
And start another Hare.
Then we'll not run
But finde some way how to be gone.
I shal know thee Peg, by thy grissel'd gut,
And I you Gilian by your gaunt thin gut.
But where will Mawd bestow her selfe today?
O' th' Steeple top; Ile sit & see you play.
At meeting, and at parting Gentlemen,
I onely make use of that generall word,
So frequent at all feasts, and that but once; y'are welcome.
You are so, all of you, and I intreat you
Take notice of that speciall businesse,
Betwixt this Gentleman my friend, and I.
About the Morgage, to which writings drawne,
Your hands are witnesse.
VVe acknowledge it.
My hand is there too, for a man cannot set to his Marke, but it may be call'd his hand; I am a Gentleman both wayes, and it hath been held that it is the part of a Gentleman, to write a scurvie hand.
You write Sir like your selfe.
Pray take no notice of his ignorance,
You know what I foretold you.
'Tis confest, but for that word by you so seldome spoke
By us so freely on your part perform'd,
VVe hold us much ingag'd.
I pray, no complement,
It is a thing I doe not use my selfe,
Nor doe I love 't in others.
For my part, could I at once dissolve my selfe to words
And after turne them into matter; such
And of that strength, as to attract the attention
Of all the curious, and most itching eares
Of this our Crittick age; it cou'd not make
A theame amounting to your noble worth:
You seeme to me to super-arrogate,
Supplying the defects of all your kindred
To innob le your own name: I now have done Sir.
Hey day, this Gentleman speakes likes a Country
Parson that had tooke his text out of Ovids Metamorphosis.
Sir, you Hyperbolize;
And I coo'd chide you for't, but whil'st you connive
At this my Kinsman, I shall winke at you;
'Twil prove an equall match.
Your name proclaimes
To be such as it speakes, you, Generous.
Still in that straine!
Sir, sir, whilst you persever to be good
I must contiuue gratefull.
Gentlemen, the gratest part of this day you see is spent
In reading deeds, conveyances, and bonds,
VVith sealing and subscribing; will you now
Take part of a bad Supper.
VVe are like travellers
And where such bayt, they doe not use to Inne.
Our love and service to you.
The first I accept,
The Last I entertaine not, farewell Gentlemen.
VVe'l try if we can finde in our way home
VVhen Hares come from their coverts, to reliffe,
A course or too.
Say you so Gentlemen, nay then I am for your company still, 'tis sayd Hares are like Hermophrodites, one while Male, and another Female, and that which begets this yeare, brings young ones the next; which some think to be the reason that witches take their shapes so oft: Nay if I lye Pliny lyes too, but come, now I have light upon you, I cannot so lightly leave you farewell Vnckle.
Cozen I wish you would consort your selfe,
With such men ever, and make them your President,
For a more Gentile carriage.
Good Master Generous—
Robin.
Sir.
Goe call your Mistresse hither.
My Mistresse Sir, I doe call her Mistresse, as I do call you Master, but if you would have me call my Mistresse to my Master, I may call lowd enough before she can heare me.
Why she's not deafe I hope, I am sure since Dinnr
She had her hearing perfect.
And so she may have at Supper too for ought I know, but I can assure you she is not now within my call.
Sirrah you trifle, give me the Key oth' Stable,
I will goe see my Gelding; i' th' meane time
Goe seeke her out, say she shall finde me there.
To tell you true sir, I shall neither finde my Mistresse here, nor you your Gelding there.
Ha! how comes that to passe?
Whilst you were busie about your writings, she came and commanded me to saddle your Beast, and sayd she would ride abroad to take the ayre.
Which of your fellowes did she take along to wayte on her?
None sir.
None! hath she us'd it often?
Oftner I am sure then she goes to Church, and leave out Wednesdayes and Fridayes.
And still alone?
If you call that alone, when no body rides in her company.
But what times hath she sorted for these journeyes?
Commonly when you are abroad, and sometimes when you are full of businesse at home.
To ride out often and alone, what sayth she
When she takes horse, and at her backe returne?
Onely conjures me that I shall keepe it from you, then clappes me in the fist with some small piece of silver, and then a Fish cannot be more silent then I.
I know her a good woman and well bred,
Of an unquestion'd carriage, well reputed
Amongst her neighbors, reckon'd with the best
And ore me most indulgent; though in many
Such things might breed a doubt and jealousie,
Yet I hatch no such phrensie. Yet to prevent
The smallest jarre that might betwixt us happen;
Give her no notice that I know thus much.
Besides I charge thee, when she craves him next
He be deny'd: if she be vext or mov'd
Doe not thou feare, Ile interpose my selfe
Betwixt thee and her anger, as you tender
Your duty and my service, see this done.
Now you have exprest your minde, I know what I have to doe; first, not to tell her what I have told you &, next to keep her side-saddle from comming upon your Gueldings backe; but how soever it is like to hinder me of many a round tester.
As oft as thou deny'st her, so oft clayme
That teaster from me, 't shall be roundly payd.
You say well in that sir, I dare take your word, you are an honest Gentleman, and my Master; and now ake mine as I am your true servant, before she shall backe your Guelding again in your absence, while I have the charge of his keeping; she shall ride me, or Ile rie her.
So much for that. Sirrah my Butler tels me
My Seller is drunke dry, I meane those Bottles
Of Sack and Claret, are all empty growne
And I have guests to morrow, my choyse friends.
Take the gray Nag i'th' stable, and those Bottles
Fill at Lancaster,
There where you use to fetch it.
Good newes for me, I shall sir.
O Robin, it comes short of that pure liquor
We drunke last Terme in London at the Myter
In Fleet-street, thou remembrest it; me thought
It was the very spirit of the Grape,
Meere quintessence of Wine.
Yes sir, I so remember it, that most certaine it is I never shal forget it, my mouth waters ever since when I but think on't, whilst you wre at supper above, the drawer had me down into the Cellar below, I know the way in againe if I see't, but at that time to finde the way out againe, I had the help of more eies than mine owne: is the taste of that Ipsitate sil in your pallat sir?
What then? But vaine are wishes, take those bottles
And see them fil'd where I command you sir.
I shall: never c'ud I have met with such a faire opportunitie: for iust in the mid way lies my sweet-heart, as lovely a lasse as any is in Lancashire, and kisses as sweetly see her going or comming, i'le have one smouch at thy lips, and bee with thee to bring Mal Spencer.
Go hasten your return, what he hath told me
Touching my wife is somewhat strange, no matter
Bee't as it will, it shall not trouble me.
Shee hath not lyen so long so neere my side,
That now I should be jealous.
You seeme sir a Gentleman of quality, and no doubt but in your youth have beene acquainted with affaires military, in your very lookes there appeares bounty, and in your person humanity. Please you to vouchsafe the tender of some small courtesie to help to beare a souldier into his countrey.
Though I could tax you friend, & justly too
For begging 'gainst the Statute in that name,
Yet I have ever bin of that compassion,
Where I see want, rather to pittie it
Than to use power. Where hast thou serv'd?
With the Russian against the Polack, a heavy war, and hath brought me to this hard fate. I was tooke prisoner by the Pole, & after some few weeks of durance, got both my freedom and passe. I have it about me to show, please you to vouase the perusall.
It shall not need. What Countreyman.
Yorkeshire sir. Many a sharp battell by land, and many a sharpe storme at sea, many a long mile, and many a short meale, I have travel'd and suffer'd ere I c'ud reach thus far, I you sir take my poore & wretched case into your worships noble consideration.
Perhaps thou lov'st this wandring life
To be an idle loitering begger, than
To eat of thine owne labour.
I sir! Loitering I defie sir, I hate lazinesse as I do leprosie: It is the next way to breed the scurvie, put mee to hedge, ditch, plow, thresh, dig, delve, any thing: your worship shal find that love nothing lesse than oitering.
Friend thou speakest well.
Your Mill quoth he, if ever you take me in your mill againe, i'le give you leave to cast my flesh to the dogges, and grinde my flesh to pouder, betwixt the Milstones. Cats do you call them, for their hugenesse they might bee cat a mountaines, and for their clawes, I thinke I have it here in red and white to shw, pray looke here sir, a murreine take them, ile be sworne they have , where I am ure it itcht not.
How cam'st thou in this pickle?
Yoiu see sir, and what you see, I have felt, & am come to give you to undestand i'le not indure such another night if you would give mee your mill for nothing, they say we Millers are theeves: but I c'ud as soone bee hangd as steale one piece of a ap all the night long, good Landlord provide your selfe of a new tenant, the noise of such catterwawling, & such scratching and clawing, before I would indure againe, i'le bee tyed to the aile when the winde blowes sharpest, and they flie swiftest, till I be torne into as many fitters as I have toes and fingers.
I was a Miller my selfe before I was a souldier. What one of my own trade should be so poorely spirited frighted with cats?
Sir trust me with the Mill that he forsakes.
Hre is a blade that hangs upon this belt
spight of all these Rats, Cats, Wezells, Witches
Or Dogges, or Divels, Shall so coniure them
I'le quiet my possession.
Well spoke Souldier.
I like thy resolution▪ Fellow, you then
Have given the Mill quite over.
Over and over, here I utterly renounce it; nor would I stay in it longer, if you would give me your whole estate; nay if I say it, you may take my word Landlord.
I pray sir dare you trust your mill with me.
I dare, but I am loth, my reasons these.
For many oneths, scarce any one hath lien there
But have bin strangely frighted in his sleepe,
Or from his warme bed drawne into the floore,
Or clawd and scratcht, as thou seest this poore man,
So much, that it stood long untenanted,
Till he late undertooke it, now thine eies
Witnesse how he hath sped.
Give me the keies, ile stand it all danger.
'Tis a match: deliver them.
Mary withall my heart, and I am glad, I am so rid of em.
Now I have gathered Bullies, and fild my bellie pretty well, i'le goe see some sport. There are gentlemen coursing in the medow hard by; and 'tis a game that I love better than going to Schoole ten to one.
What have we here a brace of Greyhounds broke loose from their masters: it must needs be so, for they have both their Collers and slippes about their neckes. Now I looke better upon them, me thinks I should know them, and so I do: these are Mr. Robinsons dogges, that dwels some two miles off, i'le take them up, & lead them home to their master; it may be somthing in my way, for he is as liberall a gentleman, as any is in our countrie, Come Hector, come. Now if I c'ud but start a Hare by the way, ill her, and carry her home to my supper, I should thinke had made a better afternooones worke of it than gathering of bu lies. Come poore curres along with me.
My Dog as yours.
For what?
A piece.
'Tis done.
I say the pide dog shall outstrip the browne.
And ile take the brown dogs partagainst the pide
Yes when hee's at his lap oule take his part.
Bantam forbeare him prethee.
He talks so like an Asse I have not patience to indure his non sence.
The browne dogge for two peeces.
Of what?
Of what you dare; name them from the last
with the double rings, to the late
Coy'nd which they say are all counterfeit.
Well sir, I take : will ou cover these, give them into the hands of either of those two gentlemen.
What needs that? doe you thinke my word and my money is not all one?
And weigh alike: both many graines too light.
Enough of that, I presume Mr. Whetstone, you are not what belongs to the sport of hunting.
I thinke I have reason, for I have bin at the death of more .
More then you shed the last fall of the leafe.
More then any man here I am sure. I should be loath at these yeares to be ignorant of hairing or whoring. I knw a hare close hunred, clime a tree.
To finde out birds
Another into a river, nothing appearing above water, save onely the tip of her nose to take breath.
Nay that's verie likely, for no man can fish with an but his Line must be made of hare.
You say right, I knw another, who to escape the
Dogges hath taken a house, and leapt in at a window.
It is thought you came into the World that way.
How meane you that?
Because you are a bastard.
Bastard! O base.
And thou art base all over.
Needs must I now condemne your indiscretion,
To set your wit against his.
Bastard? that shall be tried; well Gentlemen concerning Hare-hunting you might have hard more, if he had had the grace to have said lesse, but for the word Bastard, if I do not tell my Vncle, I and my Aunt too, either when I would speake ought or goe of the sore for any thing, let me never be trusted, they are older than I, and what know I, but they might bee by when I was begot; but if thou Bantam do'st not heare of this with both thine eares, if thou hast them still, and not lost them by scribling, instead of Whet-stone call me Grind-stone, and for By-blw, Bulfinch. Gentlemen, for two of you your companie is faire and honest; but for you Bantam, remember and take notice also, that I am a bastard, and so much i'le testifie to my Aunt and Vncle.
What have you done, 'twill grive the good old Gentleman, to heare him baffled thus.
I was in a cold sweat ready to faint
The time he staid amongst us.
But come, now the Hare is found and started▪
She shall have Law, so to our sport.
A Hare, a Hare, halle, halloe, the Divell take these curres, will they not stir, halloe, halloe, there, there, there, what are they growne so lither and so lazie? Are Mr. dogges turn'd tykes with a wanion? the Hare is yet in sigh, halloe, halloe, mary hang you or a couple of (i you were worth hā ging, & have you serv'd me thus? erve you with the like sauce, you shall to the next bush, there will I you, and use you like a couple of curs as you are, & thogh not lash you, yet lash you whilest my switch will hold, nay since you have left your speed, ile see if I can put spirit into you, and put you in remembrance what halloe, halloe meanes.
Now blesse me heaven, one of the Greyhounds turn'd into a woman, the other into a boy! The lad I never saw before, but her I know well; it is my gammer Dickison.
Sirah, you have serv'd me well to swindge me thus.
You yong rogue, you have vs'd me like a dog.
When you had put your selfinto a dogs skin, I pray how c'ud I help it; but gammer are not you a Witch? if you bee, I beg upon my knees you will not hurt me.
Stand up my boie, for thou shalt have no harme,
Be silent, speake of nothing thou hast seene.
And here's a shilling for thee.
Ile have none of your money gammer, because you are a Witch: and now she is out of her foure leg'd shape, ile see if with my two legs I can out-run her.
Nay sirra, though you be yong, and I old, you are not so nimble, nor I so lame, but I can overtake you.
But Gammer what do you meane to do with me
Now you have me?
To hugge thee, stroke thee, and embrace thee thus,
And teach thee twentie thousand prety things.
So thou tell no tales; and boy this night
Thou must along with me to a brave feast.
Not I gammer indeedla, I dare not stay ont late, My father is a fell man, and if I bee out long, will both chide and beat me.
Not sirra, then perforce thou shalt along,
This bridle helps me still at need,
And shall provide us of a steed.
Now sirra, take your shape and be
Prepar'd to hurrie him and me.
Now looke and tell mee wher's the lad become.
The boy is vanisht, and I can see nothing in his stead
But a white horse redie sadled and bridled.
And thats the horse we must bestride,
On which both tho and I must ride,
Thou boy before and I behinde,
The earth we tread not, but the winde,
For we must progresse through the aire,
And I will bring thee to such fare
As thou ne're saw'st, up and away,
For now no longer we can stay.
Help, help.
Thanks my sweet Mall for thy courteous entertainment, thy creame, thy cheese-cakes, and every good thing, this, this, & this for all.
But why in such hast good Robin?
I confesse my stay with thee is sweet to mee, but I must spur Cutt the faster for't, to be at home in the morning, I have yet to Lancaster to ride to night, and this my of bottles, to fill to night, and then halfe a score mile to ride by currie-combe time, i'the morning, or the old man chides Mal.
Hee shall not chide thee, feare it not.
Pray Bacchus I may please him with his wine, which will be the hardest thing to do; for since hee was last at London and tasted the Divinitie of the▪ Miter, scarce any liquour in Lancashire will go downe with him, sure, sure he will never be a Puritane, he holds so well with the Miter.
Well Robert, I find your love by your haste from me, ile undertake you shal be at Lancaster, & twise as far, & yet at home time enough, and be rul'd by me.
Thou art a witty rogue, and thinkst to make me believe any thing, because I saw thee make thy broome sweepe the house without hands t'other day.
You shall see more than that presently, because you shall beleeve me; you know the house is all a bed here: and I dare not be mist in the morning. Besides, I must be at the wedding of Lawrence and Parnell to morrow.
I your old sweet heart Lawrence? Old love will not be forgotten
I care not for the losse of him, but if I him not hang me: but to the point, if I goe with you to night, and help you to as good wine as your master desires, and you keepe your time with him, you will give me a pinte for my company.
Thy belly full wench.
I'le but take up my milk payle and leave it in the field, till our comming backe in the morning, and wee'll away.
Goe fetch it quickly then.
No Robert, rather than leave your company so long, it shall come to me.
I would but see that.
Looke yonder, what do you thinke on't.
Light, it comes; and I do thinke there is so much of the Divell in't as will turne all the milke shall come in't these seven yeares, and make it burne too, till it stinke worse than the Proverbe of the Bishops foot.
Looke you sir, heere I have it, will you get up and away.
My horse is gone, nay prithee Mal. thou hast set him awa, leave thy Roguerie.
Looke againe.
There stands a blacke long-sided jade: mine was a truss'd gray.
Yours was too short to carrie double such a journey.
Get up I say, ou shall have your owne againe i'th morning.
Nay but, nay but.
Nay, and you stand butting now, i'le leave you to look your horse. Payle on afore to the field, and staie till I come.
Come away then, hey for Lancaster: stand up▪
COme away wife, come away, and let us be ready to breake the over the Brides head at her entrance; we will have the honour of it, we that have playd the Steward and Cooke at home, though we lost Church by't, and saw not Parson Knit-knot do his office, but wee hall see all the house rites perform'd; and. what a day of jollity and tranquility is here towards?
You are so frolick and so cranck now, upon the truce is taken amongst us, because our wrangling shall not wrong the Wedding, but take heed (you were best) how ye behave your selfe, lest a day to come may pay for all.
I feare nothing, and I hope to dye in this humor.
Oh how hot am I rather then I would dresse such another dinner this twelve moneth, I would wish Wedding quite out of this yeares Almanack▪
Ile fetch a Cup of Sack Wife—
How brag he is of his liberty, but the holy day carries it.
Here, here sweet-heart, they ar lóng me thinks a comming, the Bels have rung out this halfe houre, harke now the wind brings the sound of them swetly againe.
They ring backwards me thinks.
I fack they doe, sure the greatest fire in the Parish is in our Kitchin, and there's no harme done yet, no some merry conceit of the stretch▪ ropes the Ringers, now they have done, and now the Wedding comes, hearke, the Fidlers and all, now have I liv'd to see a day▪ come, take stand, and be ready for the Bride-cake, which we will so cracke and crumble upon her crowne: o they come, they come.
Ioy, health; and children to the married paire.
& Parn. We thanke you all.
So pray come in and fare.
As well as we and taste of every cate:
With bony Bridegroome and his lov mate.
This begins bravely.
They agree better then the Bels eene now, 'slid they ung tunably till we were all out of the Church, and then they clatter'd as the divell had beene in the Belry: on in the name of Wedlocke, Fidlers on.
On with your melody.
Enter the Gates with joy,
And as you enter play the sack of Troy.
Welcome Bride arnell.
Bridegome ,
In you before, for we this cake must breake.
Over the Bride—
Forgi' me- what's become
O' th' Cake wife!
It out of my hand, and is into I think.
? the divell of crum is here, but bran; nothing but bran, what prodigie this?
Is my best Brides Cake come to this! o wea warth it.
How daintily the Brides haire is powder'd with it.
My stands to see it.
And mine.
I was never so amaz'd!
What meane?
Pax, I think but some of m Father and Mothers oguery, this is a Law-day with 'em, to what they list.
I never feare any thing, so long as my but idden me thinke of her, and me.
Well Gentlemen, let's follow the in, and feare nothing yet, the house smels well of good .
Gentlemen, will it please you draw neere, the guests are now all come, and the house almost full, meat's taken up.
We were now comming.
But sone Greg, Nephew Arthur, and the rest of the young Gentlemen, I shall take it for a favor if you will (it is an office which very good Gentlemen doe in this Country) accompane the Bridegroome in serving the meat.
With all our hearts.
Nay neighbor Doughty, your yeares shall excuse you.
Peugh, I am not so old but I can carry more meate then I can eate, if the young cood carry their drinke as well, the Country would be quieter—
VVell fare your hearts,—the dresser calls in Gentlemen,
'Tis a busie time, yet will I review the Bill of fare, for this dayes dinner—(Reades) for 40▪ people of the best quality, 4. messes of meat; viz. a leg of Mutton in plum-broth, a dis of Marrowbones, a white-broth, a Surlovne of beefe, a Pig, a Goose, a Turki, and two Pyes: for the second course, to every messe 4. Chickens in a dish, a couple of Rabbets, Custard, Flawn, Florentines, and stewd pruines,—all very good Country fare, and for my credit,—
The service enters, O well sayd , play up the meat to the Table till all be serv'd in, e see it passe in answer to my bill.
Hold up your head Mr. Bridegroome.
On afore Fidlers, my in my honds.
Inprim, a leg of Mutton in plum-broth,—how now Mr. Bridegroome, what carry you?
'Twere hot ne now, but now it's caw'd as a steane.
A stone, 'tis horne man.
Aw—
It was Mutton, but now 'tis the horns .
Aw where's my Bride—
'Zookes, I brought as good a Surloyne of Beefe from the Dresser as Knife coo'd be put to, and see—Ile stay i' this house no longer.
And if this were not a Capon in white broth, I am one i' the Coope.
All, all's transform'd, looke you what I have!
And I.
And I! Yet I feare nothing thank my Aunt.
I had a Pie that is not open'd yet, Ile see what' in that—live Birds as true as I live, look where they flye!
Witches, live Witches, the house is full of witches, if we love our lives let's out on't.
O husband, O guests, O sonne, O Gentlemen, such a chance in a Kitchin was never heard of, all the meat is flowne out o' the chimney top I thinke, and nothing instead of it, but Snakes, Bats, Frogs, Beetles, Hornets, and Humble-bees; all the Sallets are turn'd to Iewes-eares, Mushromes, and Puck fists; and all the Custards into Cow sheards!
VVhat shall we doe, dare we stay any longer?
Dare we! why not, I defie all VVitches, and all their workes; their power on our meat, cannot reach our persons.
I say so too, and so my Aunt ever told me, so long I will feare nothing; be not afrayd Mr. Doughty.
Zookes, I feare nothing living that I can see more then you, and that's nothing at all, but to thinke of these invisible mischiefes, troubles me I confesse.
Sir I will not goe about to over-rule your reason, but but for my part I will not out of a house on a Bridall day, till I see the last man borne.
Zookes thou art so brave a fellow that I will stick to thee, and if we come off handsomely, I am an old Batchelour thou know'st, and must have an heyre, I like thy spirit, where's the Bride? where's the Bridegroome? where's the Musicke? where be the Lasses? ha' you any wine i' the house, though we make no dinner▪ lets try if we can make an afternoone.
Nay sir if you please to stay, now that the many are frighted away, I have some good cold meates, and halfe a dozen bottles of VVine.
And I will bid you welcome.
Say you me so, but will not your sonne be angry, and your daughter chide you.
Feare not you that sir, for look you I obey my Father.
And I my Mother.
And we are all at this instant as well and as sensible of our former errors, as you can wish us to be.
Na, if the Witches have but rob'd of your meat, and restor'd your reason, here has beene no hurt done to day, but this is strange, and as great a wonder as the rest to me.
It seemes though these Hags had power to make the Wedding cheere a Deceptio visus, the former store has scap'd 'em.
I am glad on't, but the divell good 'hem with my Surloyne, I thought to have set that by mine owne Trencher—But you have cold meat you say?
Yes Sir.
And Wine you say?
Yes sir.
I hope the Country wenches and the Fidlers are not gone.
They are all here, and one the merriest Wench; that makes all the rest so laugh and tickle.
Gentlemen will you in?
Agreed on all parts.
If not a Wedding we will make a Wake on't, and away with the Witch; I feare nothing now you have your wits againe: but look you, hold 'em while you have 'em.
I confesse thou hast done a Wonder in fetching me so good Wine, but my good Servant Robert, goe not about to put a Myracle upon me, I will rather beleeve that Laneaster affords this Wine, which I thought impossible till I tasted it, then that thou coo'dst in one night fetch it from London.
I have known when you have held mee for an honest fellow, and would have beleev'd me.
Th' art a Knave to wish me to beleeve this, forgi'me, I would have sworne if thou had'st stayd but time answerable for the journey (to his that flew to Paris and back to London in a day) it had been the same Wine, but it can never fall within the compasse of a Christians beleefe, that thou cou'dst ride above three hundred miles in 8. houres: You were no longer out, and upon one Horse too, and in the Night too!
And carry a Wench behind me too, and did something else too, but I must not speak of her lest I be divell-torne.
And fill thy bottles too, and come home halfe drunke too, for so thou art, thou wouldst never a had such a fancy else!
I am sorry I have sayd so much, and not let Lancaster have the credit o' the Wine.
O are you so! and why have you abus'd me and your selfe then all this while, to glorifie the Myter in Fleet-street?
I could say sir, that you might have the better opinion of the Wine, for there are a great many pallats in the Kingdome that can relish no Wine, unlesse be of such a Taverne, and drawne by such a Drawer—
I sayd, and I say againe, if I were within ten mile of London, I durst sweare that this was Myter Wine, and drawn by honest Iacke Paine.
Nay then sir I swore, and I sweare again, honest Iack Paine drew it.
Ha, ha, ha, if I coo'd beleeve there were such a thing as Witchcraft, I should thinke this slave were bewitch'd now with an opinion.
Much good doe you sir, your Wine and your mirth, and my place for your next Groome, I desire not to stay to be laught out of my opinion.
Nay be not angry Robin, we must not part so, and how does my honest Drawer? ha, ha, ha; and what newes at London, Robin? ha, ha, ha; but your stay was so short I think you coo'd heare none, and such your haste home that you coo'd make none: is't not so Robin? ha, ha, ha, what a strange fancy has good Wine begot in his head?
Now will I push him over and over with a peece of paper: Yes sir, I have brought you something from London.
Come on, now let me heare.
Your honest Drawer sir, considering that you consider'd him well for his good wine—
VVhat shall we heare now?
VVas very carefull to keepe or convay this paper to you, which it seemes you dropt in the roome there.
Blesse me! this paper belongs to me indeed, 'tis an acquittance, and all I have to show for the payment of one hundred pound, I tooke great care for't, and coo'd not imagine where or how I might loose it, but why may not this bee a tricke? this Knave may finde it when I lost it, and conceale it till now to come over me withall. I will not trouble my thoughts with it further at this time, well Robin looke to your businesse, and have a care of my Guelding.
Yes Sir. I think I have netled him now, but not as I was netled last night, three hundred Miles a Night upon a Rawbon'd Divell, as in my heart it was a Divell, and then a VVench that shar'd more o' my backe then the sayd Divell did o' my Bum, this is ranke riding my Masters: but why had I such an itch to tell my Master of it, and that he should beleeve it; I doe now wish that I had not told, and that hee will not beleeve it, for I dare not tell him the meanes: 'Sfoot my Wench and her friends the Fiends, will teare me to pieces if I discover her; a notable rogue, she's at the VVedding now, for as good a Mayd as the best o'em—O my Mistresse.
Robin.
I Mistresse.
Quickly good Robin, the gray Guelding.
VVhat other horse you please Mistresse.
And why not that?
Truly Mistresse pray pardon me, I must be plaine with you, I dare not deliver him you; my master has tane notice of the ill case you have brought him home in divers times.
O is it so, and must he be made acquainted with my actions by you, and must I then be controll'd by him, and now by you; you are a sawey Groome.
You may say your pleasure.
No sir, Ile doe my pleasure.
Aw.
Horse, horse, see thou be,
And where I point thee carry me.
VVas there ever such a medley of mirth, madnesse, and drunkennesse, shuffled together.
Thy Vnckle and Aunt, old Mr. Seely and his wife, doe nothing but kisse and play together like Monkeyes.
Yes, they doe over-love one another now.
And young Gregory and his sister doe as much overdoe their obedience now to their Parents.
And their Parents as much over-doat upon them, they are all as farre beyond their wits now in loving one another, as they were wide of them before in crossing.
Yet this is the better madnesse.
But the married couple that are both so daintily whitled, that now they are both mad to be a bed before Suppertime, and by and by he will, and she wo' not; streight she will and he wo' not, the next minute they both forget they are married, and defie one another.
My ides eene ake with laughter.
But the best sport of all is, the old Batchelour Master Doughty, that was so cautious, & feat'd every thing to be witehcraft, is now wound up to such a confidence that there is no such thing, that hee dares the Divell do his worst, and will not out o'the house by all persuasion, and all for the love of the husbandmans daughter within, Mal Spencer.
There I am in some danger, he put me into halfe a beliefe I shall be his heire, pray love shee be not a witch to charme his love from mee. Of what condition is that wench do'st thou know her?
A little, but Whetstone knowes her better.
Hang him rogue, he'le belye her, and speak better than she deserves, for he's is love with her too. I saw old Doughty give him a box o'the eare for kissing her, and hee turnd about as he did by thee yesterday, and swore his Aunt should know it.
Who would ha'thought that impudent rogu would have come among us after such a baffle.
He told me, hee had complain'd to his Aunt on us, and that she would speak with us.
Wee will all to her to patch vp the businesse, for the respect I beare her husband, noble Generous.
Here he comes.
Hearke you Mr. Byblow do you know the lasse within?
What do you call her, Mal Spencer?
Sir, what I know i'le keepe to my selfe, a good cvile merry harmlesse roe she is, and comes to my Aunt often, and thats all I know by her.
You doe well to keepe it to your selfe sir.
And you may do well to question her if you dare. For the testy old coxcombe that will not let her goe out of his hand.
Take heed, he's at your heels.
Come away Wenches, where are you Gentlemen?
Play Fidlers: lets have a dance▪ ha my little rogue.
Zookes what ayles thy nose.
My nose! Nothing sir.— — Yet mee thought a flie toucht it. Did you see any thing?
No, no, yet I would almost ha'sworn, I would not have sprite or goblin blast thy face, for all their kingdome. But hangt there is no such thing: Fidlers will you play?
Gentlemen will you dance?
With all our hearts.
But stay wheres this houshold?
This Family of love? Let's have them into the revels.
Hold a little then.
Here they come all
In a True-love knot.
O Father twentie times a day is too little to aske you blessing.
Goe too you are a rascall: and you houswife teach your daughter better manners: i'le ship you all for new England els.
The knot's untied, and this is another change.
Yes I will teach her manners, or put her out to spin two penny tow: so you deare husband will but take mee into favor: i'le talke with you dame when the strangers are gone.
Deare Father.
Deare Mother.
Deare Father and Mother pardon us but this time.
Never, and therefore hold your peace.
Nay thats unreasonable.
Oh!—
But for your sake i'le forbeare them, and beare with any thing this day.
Doe you note this? Now they are all worse then ever they were, in a contrary vaine: What thinke you of Witchcraft now?
They are all naturall fooles man, I finde it now.
Art thou mad to dreame of Witchcraft?
He's as much chang'd and bewitcht as they I feare.
Hey day! Here comes the payre of boyld Lovers in Sorrell ops.
Nay deare hunny, nay hunny, but eance, eance.
Na, na, I han' swarne, I han' swarne, not a bit afore bed, and look yeou it's but now dauncing time.
Come away Bridegroome, wee'll stay your stomack with a daunce. Now masters play a good: come my Lasse wee'l shew them how 'tis
Whether now, hoe?
Hey day! why you rogues.
What do's the Divell ride o' your Fiddlestickes.
You drunken rogues, hold, hold, I say, and begin againe soberly the beginning of the World
Ha, ha, ha, How's this?
Every one a severall tune
This is something towards it. I bad them play the beginning o' the World, and they play, I know not what.
No 'tis running o' the country severall waies.
But what do you thinke on't.
Thinke! I thinke they are drunke Prithee doe not thou thinke of Witchcraft; for my part, I shall as soone thinke this maid one, as that theres any in Lancashire.
Ha, ha ha.
Why do'st thou laugh?
To thinke this Bridegroome should once ha'bin mine, but he shall rue it, ile hold him this point on't, and thats all I care for him.
A witty Rogue.
I tell you sir, they say shee made a payle follow her t'other day up two payre of stayres.
You lying Rascall.
O sir forget your anger.
Looke you Mr. Bridegroome, what my care provides for you
What, a point?
Yes put it in your pocket it may stand you instead anon, when all your points be tane away, to trusse up your trinkits, I meane your slopes withall.
Mal for awd acquaintance I will ma'thy point a point of preferment. It shan bee the Foreman of a haell Iewrie o'points, and right here will I weare it.
Wy'a, wy'a, awd leove wo no be forgetten, but ay's never be jealous the mare for that.
Play fidlers any thing.
I, and lets see your faces, that you play fairely with us.
We do sir, as loud as we can possibly.
Play out that we may heare you.
So we do sir, as loud as we can possibly.
Doe you heare any thing?
Nothing not we sir.
'Tis so, the rogues are brib'd to crosse me,
And their Fiddles shall suffer, I will breake em as small as the
Bride cake was to day.
Looke you sir, they'l save you a labour, they are doing it themselves.
Oh brave Fidlers, there was never better scuffling for the Tudberry But.
This is mother Iohnson and Gooddy Dickisons roguerie, I finde it but I cannot helpe it, yet I will have musicke: sir theres a Piper withour, would be glad to earne money.
She has spoke to purpose, & whether this were witchcraft or not: I have heard my Aunt say twentie times, that no Witchcraft can take hold of a Lancashire Bag-pipe, for it selfe is able to charme the Devell, ile fetch him.
Well said, a good boy nów; come bride and bridegroome, leave your kissing and fooling, and prepare to come into the daunce. Wee'le have a Horne-pipe, and then a posset and to bed when you please. Welcome Piper, blow till thy bagge cracke agen, a lusty Horne-pipe, and all into the daunce, nay young and old.
Bravely performd.
Stay, wheres my lasse?
Vanisht, she and the Piper both vanisht, no bodie knowes how.
Now do I plainly perceive again, here has bin nothing but witcherie all this day; herfore into your posset, & agree among your selves as you can, ile out o'the house. And Gentlemen, if you love me or your selves, follow me.
I, I, Away, away.
Now good son, wife, and daughter, let me intreat you be not angry.
O you are a trim mother are you not?
Indeed childe, ile do so no more.
Now sir, i'le talke with you, your champions are al gon.
Weell sir, and what wun yeou deow than?
Whay, whay, whats here to doe? Come awaw, and whickly, and see us into our Brayd Chember, & delicatly ludgd togeder, or wee'l whap you out o'dores ith morne to sijourne in the common, come away.
Wee follow yee.
KNow you this gingling bridle, if you see't agen? I wanted but a paire of gingling spurs to make you mend your pace, and put you into a sweat.
Yes, I have reason to know it after my hard journey, they say there be light women, but for your owne part, though you be merry. Yet I may be sorry for your heavinesse.
I see thou art not quite tyr'd by shaking of thy selfe, 'tis a signe that as thou hast brought mee hither, so thou art able to beare mee backe, and so you are like good Robert. You will not let me have your masters gelding, you will not. Wel fir, as you like this journey, so deny him to me hereafter.
You say well mistresse, you have jaded me (a pox take you for a jade.) Now I bethinke my selfe how damnably did I ride last night, and how divellishly have I bin rid now.
Doe you grumble you groome? Now the bridl's of, I turne thee to grazing gramercy my good horse, I have no better provender for thee at this time, thou hadst best like Aesops Asse to feed upon Thistles, of which this place will affoord thee plenty. I am bid to a better banquet, which done, ile take thee up from grasse, spur utt, and ake a short cutt home. Farewell.
A pox upon your tayle.
The Lady of the feast is come, welcome, welcome.
Is all the cheare that was prepared to grace the wedding feast, yet come?
part of it's here.
The other we must pull for. But whats hee?
My horse, my horse, ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha.
My horse, my horse, I would I were now some country Major, and in authority, to see if I would not venter to rowze your Satanicall sisterhood: Horse, horse, see thou be, & where point thee, cay me: is that the trick on't? the divel himselfe shall be her carrier next if I can shun her: & yet my Mr. will not beleeve theres any witches: theres no runing away; for I neither know how nor whether, besides to my thinking, theres a deepe dich, & a hye quick-set about mee, how shall I passe the time? What place is this? it looks like an old barne: ile peep in at some cranny or other, and try if I can see what they are doing. Such a bevy of beldames did I never behold; and . like so many Cormorants: Marry choke you with a mischiefe.
Whoope, whurre, heres a sturre, never a cat, never a curre, but that we must have this demurre.
A second course.
Pull, and pull hard
For all that hath lately bin prepar'd
For the great wedding feast.
As chiefe.
Of Doughtyes Surloine of rost Beefe.
Ha, ha, ha.
'Tis come, 'tis come.
Where hath it all this while beene?
Some
Delay hath kept it, now 'tis here,
For bottles next of wine and beere,
The Merchants cellers they shall pay fo't.
Well,
What sod or rost meat more, pray tell.
Pul for the Poultry, Foule, & Fish,
For emptie shall not be a dish.
A pox take them, must only they feed upon hot meat, and I upon nothing but cold sallads
This meat is tedious, now some Farie,
Fetch what belongs unto the Dairie.
Thats Butter, Milk, Whey, Curds and Cheese,
Wee nothing by the bargaine leese.
Ha, ha, ha.
Boy, theres meat for you.
Thanke you.
And drinke too.
What Beast was by thee hither rid?
A Badger nab.
And I bestrid
A Porcupine that never prickt.
The dull sides of a Beare I kickt.
I know how you rid Lady Nan,
Ha, ha, ha, upon the knave my man.
A murrein take you, I am sure my hoofes payd for't.
Meat lie there, for thou hast no taste, and drinke there, for thou hast no relish, for in neither of them is there either salt or savour.
Pull for the posset, pull.
The brides posset on my life, nay if they come to their spoone meat once, I hope theil breake up their feast presently.
So those that are our waiters nere,
Take hence this Wedding cheere.
We will be lively all, and make this barn our hall.
You our Familiers, come.
In speech let all be dumbe,
And to close up our Feast,
To welcome every gest
A merry round let's daunce.
Some Musicke then ith aire
Whilest thus by paire and paire,
We nimbly foot it; strike.
We are obeyd.
And we hels ministers shall lend our aid.
Now whilest they are in their jollitie, and do not mind me, ile steale away, and shift for my selfe, though I lose my life for't.
Enough, enough, now patt,
To see the brides vext heart,
The bridegroomes too and all,
That vomit up their gall
For lacke o'th wedding chere.
But stay, wheres the Boy, looke out, if he escape us, we are all betrayed.
No following further, yonder horsemen come,
In vaine is our pursuit, let's breake up court.
Where shall we next met?
At Mil ▪
But when?
At Night.
To horse, to horse.
VVhere's my Mamilian.
And my Incubus.
My Tyger to bestri'd.
My Puggie.
My horse.
Away, away,
The night we have Feasted, now comes on the day.
Come sirrah, stoope your head like a tame jade,
VVhil'st I put on your Bridle.
I pray Mistresse ride me as you would be rid.
That's at full speed,
Nay then Ile try Conclusions.
Mare Mare, see thou be,
And where I point thee carry me.
I see what Man is loath to entertaine,
Offers it selfe to him most frequently,
And that which we most covet to embrace,
Doth seldome court us, and proves most averse;
For I, that never coo'd conceive a thought
Of this my woman worthy a rebuke,
(As one that in her youth bore her so fairely
That she was taken for a seeming Saint)
To render me such just occasion,
That I should now distrust her in her age;
Distrust! I cannot, that would bring me in
The poore aspersion of fond jealousie;
VVhich even from our first meeting I abhorr'd.
The Gentile fashion sometimes we observe
To sunder beds; but most in these hot monthes
Iune, Iuly August, so we did last night.
Now I (as ever tender of her health)
And therefore rising early as I use,
Entring her Chamber to bestow on her
A custom'd Visite; finde the Pillow swell'd,
Vnbruis'd with any weight, the sheets unruffled,
The Curtaines neither drawne, nor bed layd down;
Which showes, she slept not in my house to night.
Should there be any contract betwixt her
And this my Groome, to abuse my honest trust;
I should not take it well, but for all this
Yet cannot I be jealous. Robin
Is my horse safe, lusty, and in good plight?
What, feeds he well?
Yes sir, he's broad buttock'd and full flanck'd, he doth not bate an ace of his flesh.
When was he rid last?
Not sir since you backt him.
irrah, take heed I finde you not a Knave,
Have you not lent him to your Mistresse late?
So late as this last Night?
Who I sir, may I dye sir, if you finde me in a lye sir.
Then I shall finde him where I left him last.
No doubt Sir.
Give me the Key o'th Stable.
There Sir.
Sirrah, your Mistresse was abroad all night,
Nor is she yet come home, if there I finde him not,
I shall finde thee, what to this present houre
I never did suspect; and I must tell theee
Will not be to thy profit.
Well sir, finde what you can, him you shall finde, and what you finde else; it may befor that, instead of Gramercy horse, you may say Gramercy Robin; you will beleeve there are no Witches! had I not been late brideled, I coo'd have sayd more, but I hope she is ty'd to the racke that will confesse something, and though not so much as I know, yet no more then I dare justifie—
Have you found your Gelding sir?
Yes, I have.
I hope not spurr'd, nor put into a sweat, you 'may see by his plump belly and fleeke legs he hath not bin sore travail'd.
Y'are asawcy Groome to receive horses
Into my Stable, and not aske me leave.
Is't for my profit to buy Hay and Oates
For every strangers jades?
I hope sir you find none feeding there but your owne, if there be any you suspect, they have nothing to champeon, but the Bridle.
Sirrah, whose jade is that ty'd to the Racke?
The Mare you meane sir?
Yes, that old Mare.
Old doe you call her? You shall finde the marke still in her mouth, when the Bridle is out of it? I can assure you 'tis your owne Beast.
A beast thou art to tell me so, hath the wine
Not yet left working? not the Myter wine?
That made thee to beleeve VVitcherat?
Prithee perswade me,
To be a d unken Sot like to thy selfe;
And not to know mine owne.
Ile not perswade you to any thing, you will beleeve nothing but what you see, I say the Beast is your owne, and you have most right to keepe her, shee hath cost you more the currying, then all the Combs in your Stable are worth. You have paid for her Provender this twentie yeares and upwards, and furnisht her with all the that she hath worne, of my Knowledge, and because she hath been ridden hard the last Night, doe you renounce her now?
Sirrah, I feare some stolne jade of your owne
That you would have me keepe.
I am sure I ound her no ade the lst time I rid her, she carried me the best part of a hundred Miles in lesse then a quarter of an houre.
The divell she did!
Yes so I say, ither the dell or she did; an't please you in and take off her , and then tell me who hath more right to her, you or .
VVell Robert, for this once Ile play the Groome,
And doe your office for you.
I pray doe Sir, but take heed lest when the Bridle is out of her mouth, she put it not into yours; if she doe, you are a gone man: if she but say once▪ Horse, horse, see thou be. Be you rid (if you please) for me.
My blood is turn'd to Ice, and my all vitals
Have ceas'd their working! dull stupidity
Surpriseth me at once, and hath arrested
That vigorous agitation; VVhich till now
Exprest a life within me: I me thinks
Am a meere Marble statue, and no man;
Vnweave my age O time, to my first thread;
Let me loose fiftie yeares in ignorance spent:
That being made an infant once againe,
I may begin to know, what? or where am I
To be thus lost in wonder.
Sir.
Amazement still pursues me, how am I chang'd
Or brought ere I can understand my selfe,
Into this new VVorld.
You will beleeve no VVitches?
This makes me beleeve all, I any thing;
And that my selfe am nothing: prithee Robin
Lay me to my open, what art thou,
Or this new transform'd Creature?
I am Robin, and this your wife, my Mrs.
Tell me the Earth
Shall leave it's seat, and mount to kisse the Moone;
Or that the Moone enamour'd of the Earth,
Shall leave her spheare, to stoope to us thus low.
VVhat? what's this in my hand, that at an instant
Can from a foure leg'd Creature, make a thing
So like a wife?
A Bridle, ugling Bridle Sir.
A Bridle, hence inchantment,
A Viper were more safe within my hand
Then this charm'd Engine
Take heed Sir what you do, if you cast it hence, and she catch it up, we that are here now, may be rid as far as the Indies within these few houres, Mistresse down of your Mares bones, or your Mary-bones whether you please, and confesse your selfe to be what you are; and that's in plaine English a Witch, a grand notorius Witch.
A Witch! my wife a Witch!
So it appeares by the storie.
The more I strive to unwinde
My selfe from this Meander, I the more
Therein am intricated; prithee woman
Art thou a Witch?
It cannot be deny'd, I am such a curst Creature.
Keep aloofe, and doe not come too neare me, O my trust;
Have since first I understood my selfe,
Bin of my soule so charie, still to studie
What best was for it's health, to renounce all
The workes of that black Fiend with my best force
And hath that Serpent twin'd me so about,
That I must lye so often and so long
With a Divell in my bosome!
Pardon sir.
Pardon! Can such a thing as that be hop'd?
Lift up thine eyes (lost woman) to yo Hils;
It must be thence expected: look not down
Vnto that horrid dwelling, which thou hast sought
At such deare rate to purchase, prithee tell me,
(For now I can beleeve) art thou a Witch?
I am.
VVith that word I am thunderstrooke,
And know not what to answer, yet resolve me
Hast thou mad any contract with that Fiend
The Enemy of Mankind?
O I have.
What? and how farre?
I have promis'd him my soule.
Ten thousand times better thy Body had
Bin promis'd to the Stake, I and mine too,
To have suffer'd with thee in a hedge of flames:
Then such a compact ver had bin made. Oh—
What cheee sir, show your selfe a man, though she appear'd so late a Beast; Mistresse confesse all, better here than in a worse place, out with it.
Resolve me, how farre doth that contract stretch?
What interst in this Soule, my selfe coo'd claime
I freely gave him, but his part that made it
I still reserve, not being mine to give.
O cunning Divell, foolish woman know
Where he can clayme but the least little part,
He will usurpe rhe whole; th art a lost woman.
I hope not so.
Why hast thou any hope?
Yes Sir I have.
Make it appeare to me.
I hope I never bargain'd for that fire,
Further then penitent teares have power to quench.
I would see some of them.
You behold them now.
(If you looke on me with charitable eyes)
Tinctur'd in blood, blood issuing from the heart,
Sir I am sorry; when I looke towards Heaven
I beg a gracious Pardon; when on you
Me thinkes your Native goodnesse should not be
Lesse pittifull than they: 'gainst both I have err'd,
From both I beg attonement.
May I presum't?
I kneele to both your Mercies.
Know'st thou what a VVitch is?
Alas, None better,
Or after mature recollection can be
More sad to thinke on't.
Tell me, are those teares
As full of true hearted penitence,
As mine of sorrow, to behold what state
What desperate state th'art falne in.
Sir they are.
Rise, and as I doe, so heaven pardon me;
We all offend, but from such falling off,
Defend us. Well, I doe remember wife,
When I first tooke thee, 'twas for good and bad;
O change thy bad to good, that I may keep thee,
As thn we past our faiths, till Death us sever.
I will not aggravate thy griefe too much,
By Needles iteration: Robin hereafter
Forget thou hast a tongue, if the least Syllable
Of what hath past be rumour'd, you loose me;
But if I finde you faithfull, you gaine me ever.
A match sir, you shall finde me as mute as if I had the
Bridle still in my mouth.
O woman thou had'st need to weepe thy selfe
Into a fountaine, such a penitent spring
As may have power to quench invisible flames
In which my eyes shall ayd; too little all,
If not too little, all's forgiven, forgot;
Only thus much remember, thou had'st extermin'd
Thy selfe out of the blest society
Of Saints and Angels, but on thy repentance
I take thee to my Bosome, once againe,
My wife, sister, and daughter: saddle my Gelding,
Some businesse that may hold me for two dayes
Calls me aside.
I shall Sir, well now my Mistresse hath promis'd to give over her Witchery, I hope though I still continue her man, yet she will make me no more her journey-man; to prevent which the first thing I doe shall be to burne the Bridle, and then away with the Witch.
Sir you have done a right noble courtesie, which deserves a memory, as long as the name of friendship can beare mention.
What I have done, I ha'done, if it be well, 'tis well, J doe not like the bouncing of good Offices, if the little care I have taken shall doe these poore people good, I have my end in't, and so my reward.
Now Gentlemen, you seeme very serious.
'Tis true we are so, but you are welcome to the knowledge of our affayres.
How does thine Vncle and Aunt, Gregory and his sister, the Families of Seelyes agree yet, can you tell?
That is the businesse, the Seely houshold is divided now.
How so I pray?
You know, and cannot but with pitty know
Their miserable condition, how
The good old couple were abus'd, and how
The young abut'd themselves; if we may say
That any of hem are their selves at all
Which sure we cannot, nor approve them fit
To be their owne disposers, that would give
The governance of such a house and living
Into their Vassailes hands, to thrust them out on't
VVithout or Law or order, this consider'd
This Gentleman and my selfe have taken home
By faire entreaty, the old folkes to his house,
The oung to mine, untill some wholesome order
By the judicious of the Common-wealth,
Shall for their persons and estate be taken.
But what becomes of Lawrénce and his Parnell?
The lusty couple, what doe they now?
as poore folks, they are as farre to seeke of how they doe, or what they doe, or what they should doe, as any of the rest, they are all growne Ideots, and till some of these damnable jades, with their divellish devises bee found out, tod scharme them, no remedy can be found, I mean to lay the Country for their Hagships, and if J can anticipate the purpose, of their grand Mr. Divell to confound'em before their lease be out, be sure ile do 't▪
A Skimington, a Skimmington, a Skimington.
Whats the matter now, is Hell broke loose?
Tom Shakstone, how now, canst tell the newes?
The news, ye heare it up i'th aire, do you not?
A Skimington, a Skimington, a Skimington.
Hearke ye, do you not heare it? theres a Skimington, towards gentlemen.
Ware Wedlocke hoe.
At whose suit I prithee is Don Skimington come to towne.
Ile tell you gentlemen, since you have taken home old Seely and his wife to your house, and you their son and daughter to ours, the house-keepers Lawrence, and his late bride Parnell are fallen out by themselves.
How prithee?
The quarell began they say upon the wedding night, and in the bride bed.
For want of bedstaves?
No but a better implement it seemes the bridegroome was unprovided of, a homely tale to tell.
Now out upon her shee has a greedy worme in her, I have heard the fellow complain'd on, for an over mickle mn among the maids.
Is his haste to goe to bed at afternoone come to this now?
Witchery, witcher, more witcherie still flat and plaine witchery. Now do I thinke upon the codpeece point the young jade gave him at the wedding: shee is a witch, and th was a charme, if there be any in the World.
A ligatory point.
Alas poore Lawrence.
He's comming to make his mone to you about it, and sh too, since you have taken their masters & mistresses to your care, you must do them right too.
Marry but ile not undertake her at these yeares, if lusty Lawrence cannot do't.
But has she beaten him?
Grievously broke his head in I know not how many places: of which the hoydens have taken notice, and will have a Skimington on horse-backe presently. Looke ye, here comes both plaintiffe and defendant.
How now Lawrence, what has thy wedlock brought thee already to thy night-cap?
Yie gadwat sir, I ware wadded but aw to seun.
Han yeou reeson to complayne or ay trow yeou gaffer Downought? Wa warth the day that ever I wadded a Downought.
Nay hold Parnel hold.
We have heard enough of your valour already, wec know you have beaten him, let that suffice.
Ware ever poore mayden betrayed as a ware unto a swagbellied Carle that cannot aw waw that cannot.
What saies she?
I know not, she catterwawles I think. Parnel be patient good Parnell, and a little modest too, 'tis not amisse, wee know not the relifh of every eare that heares vs, lets talke within our selves. Whats the defect? Whats the impediment? Lawrence has had a lusty name among the Batchllors.
What he ware when he ware a Batchelor, I know better than the best maid ith tawne. I wad I had not.
Peace Parnell.
'Tware that, that cossen'd me, he has not now as he had than?
Peace good Parnell.
For then he could, nt now he connot, he connot.
Fie Parnel fie.
I say agean and agean, hee connot, he connot.
Alas poore arnel.
I am not a bit the beter for him sin wye ware wad. Cries
Heres good stuff for a jurie of women to passe upon.
But Parnel, why have you beaten him so grievously?
What would you have him doe in this case?
He's out of a doing case it seemes.
Marry sir, and beat him will into his grave, or backe to the Priest, and be unwaddded agone, for I wonot bee baund to lig with him and live with him the laife of an honest woman for aw the layves good i'Loncoshire.
An honest woman: thats a good mind Parnel What say you to this Lawrence?
Keepe her of o'me, and I shan teln eou, and she be by I am no body: But keep her off and search me, let me be searcht as never witch was searcht, and finde ony thing mor or lasse upo me than a sufficient mon shold have, and let me be hon by't.
Do you heare this Parnell?
Ah leear, leear, deell tacke the leear, troist yee and hong yee.
Alasse it is too plaine, the poore fellow is bewitcht.
Heres a plaine Maleficium versus hanc now.
And so is she bewitcht too into this immodesty.
She would never talke so else
I prayn yeow gi' me the lere o'that Latine sir.
The meaning is, you must get halfe a dozen bastards Within this twelvemoneth, and that will mend your next mariage.
And I thought it would ma' Parnel, love me i'd be sure on't, and gang about it now right.
Y'are soone provided it seems for such a journey.
Best tarry till thy head be whole Lawrence.
Nay, nay, ay's white casten away ent I be vnwadded agen
And then ine undertack to find 3 better husbands in a bean cod.
Heare gentleme, the shew is comming.
What shall we stay & see't.
O by all means Gent.
'Tis best to have these away first.
Nay mary shan eou not sir, I heare yeou well eogh, & I con the meaning o'the show well enogh, & I stay not the show & see not the show, & a'one i'the show, let me be honckt up for a show ile ware them to mel or ma with a woman that mels or mae's with a testril a longie, a dow little losell that connot, & if I skim not their skimingtons cockskeam for't, ma that warplin boggle me a week lonker, & thats a curse eno'for any wife I tro. from the boord, and yet for ought I can see I am never a whit the neerer What not one kisse at parting ?
Well Cozen this is all you have to do:
Retire the Gallants to some privat roome,
Where call for wine, and junckets what you please,
Thn thou shalt need to do no ther thing
Than what this note directs thee, observe that
An trouble me no farther.
Very good, I like this beginning well: for where they sleighted me before, they shall finde me a man of note.
Of this the meaning
Marry Lasse
To bring a new conceit to passe.
Thy Spirit must borrow more,
To fill the number three or foure;
Whom we will use to no great harm,
Only assist me with thy charme.
This night wee'l celebrate to :
'Tis all for mirth, we mean no hurt.
My Spirit and my selfe command;
Mamillion, & the rest at hand, shall all assist.
Withdraw then, quicke,
Now gallants, ther's for you a .
Heer's a more privat roome gentlemen, free from the noise of the Hall. Here we may alke, and throw the chamber out of the casements. Some wine and a short banquet.
So now leave us.
VVee are much bound to you maer Whetstone.
For this great entertainment: I see you command
The house in the absence of your vnkle.
Yes, I thanke my Ant; for though I be but a daily guest yet I can be wlcome to her at midnight.
How shall we passe the time?
In some discourse.
But no such discourse as we had last, ech you.
Now master Whetstone you reflect on me.
'Tis true, at our last meeting some few words
Then my lips, which I could wis forgot:
I thinke I call'd you Bastard.
I thinke so too; but whats that amongst friends, for I would faine know which amongst you all knowes his owne father.
You are merrie with your friends, good master Blow, and wee are guests here in your Vnckles house, and therefore priviledged.
I presume you had no more priviledge in your getting than . But tell me gentlemen, is there any man here amongst you, that hath a minde to see his father?
Why, who shall shew him?
Thats all one; if any man here desire it, let him but speake the word, and 'tis sufficient.
Why, I would see my father.
Strike.
Doe you know him that lookes so full in your face;
Yes well, a pedant in my fathers house.
Who beeing young, taught me my A, B, C.
In his house, that goes for your father you would say: For know one morning, your mothers husband rid early to have a Nisi prius tryed at Lancaster Syzes, hee crept into his warme place, lay close by her side, and then were you got. Then come, your heeles and tayle , and kneele your own deare father.
Ha, ha, ha.
I am abused.
Why laugh you Gentlemen? It may be more mens cases than his or mine. Bant. To be thus .
Come, take it as a jest
For presume 'twas meant no otherwise.
Would either of you two now see his father in earnest
Yes, canst thou shew me mine?
.
Hee lookes on you speake, doe you know him?
Yes, he was my mothers Taylor, I remember him ever since I was a childe.
Who when hee came to take measure of her upper parts had more minde to the lower, whilest the good man was in the fields hunting, he was at home .
Then, since no better comfort be had,
Come downe, come downe, aske blessing of your dad.
Ha, ha, ha
This cannot be indur'd.
It is plaine Witchcraft.
Nay since we all are bid unto one feast,
Lets fare alike, come shew me mine too.
Strike.
He points at you.
What then?
You know him.
Yes, Robin groome belonging to this house.
And never served your father?
In's youth I thinke he did.
Who when your supposed father had businesse at the Lord Presidents Court in Yorke, stood for his Atturney at home, & so it seems you were got by deputy: what all a mort? if you will have but a little patience, stay & you shall see mine too:
And know I shew you him the rather,
To finde who hath the best man to his Father.
—
Now Gentlemen make me your President, learne your duties, and I doe—A blessing Dad.
Come, come, let's home, we'l finde other time,
When to dispute of these things—
: Nay Gent. no in begun in , let's not end in ; you see are more By-blowes than beare the ; It is growne a great kindred in the Kingdome. Come, come, all friends; Let's into the Cellar and conclude our Revels in a lusty health.
I faine would strike, but cannot.
Some strange fate holds me.
Here then all anger end,
Let none be mad at what they cannot mend.
Now say what's next?
I'th' Mill there lyes
A Souldier yet with unscratcht eyes,
Summon the Sister-hood together
For we with all our Spirits will thither;
And such a Catterwalling eepe,
That in vaie shall thinke to sleepe.
Call Meg, and Doll, , , Iug,
Let none appeare without her Pug.
We'l try our utmost Art and skill.
To fright the stout Knave in the .
THou art a brave Boy, the honour of thy Coun try; thy Statue shall be set up in brasse upon the Market Crosse in Lancaster, I blesse the time that I answered at the thee: okes did I ever thin that a Godson of min should have ought hand to fist with the Divell!
He was ever an unhappy Boy Sir, and like enough to grow acquainted with him; and friends may fall out sometimes.
Thou art a dogged Sire, and doestnot know the vertue of my Godsonne, my sonne now; he shall be thy sonne no longer: he and I will worry all the Witches in Lancashire.
You were best take heed though.
I care not, though we leave not above three untainted women in the Parish, we'll doe it.
Doe what you please Sir, there's the Boy stout enough to justifie any thing he has sayd. Now 'tis out, he should be my Sonne still by that: Though he was at Death's before he would reveale any thing, nable jades had so threatned him, and as soone as ever he had told he mened.
'Tis well he did so, we will so swing them in twopenny halters Boy.
For my part I have no reason to hinder any thing that may root them all out; I have tasted enough of their mischiefe, witnesse my usage i' th Mill, which could be nothing but their Roguerie. One night in my sleepe they set me a stride stark naked a top of my Mill, a bitter cold night too; 'twas day light before I w aked, and I durst never speake of it to this houre, because I thought it impossible to be beleeved.
Villanous Hgs
And all last Summer, my Wise could not make a bit of butter.
It would not come, it?
No Sir, we could not make it come, though she and I both together, churn'd almost our out, and nothing would come, but all ran into thin waterish geere: the Pigges would not drinke .
Is't possible▪
None but one, and he ran out of his wits upon't, till we bound his head, and layd him a sleepe, but he has had a wry mouth ever since.
That the Divell should put in their hearts to delight in such Villanies! I have sought these two dayes, and he of a , though none mortall, but could not finde whom to mistrust for a Witch till now this boy, this happy boy informes me.
And they should neere have been sought for me if their affrightments and dive devices, had not brought my Boy into such a sicknesse; VVhereupon indeed I thought good to acquaint your worship, and bring the Boy unto you being his Godfather, and as you now stick not to say his Father.
After you I thanke yo Gossip. But my Boy thou ha fied me in their names, and thy knowledge of the women, their turning into shapes, their dog-trickes, and their horse trickes, and their great Feast in the Barne (a pox take them with my Surloyne, I say still.) But a little more of thy combat with the Divell, I prithee; he came to thee like a Boy thou sayest, about thine owne bignesse?
Yes Sir, and he asked me where I dwelt, and what my name was.
Ah Rogue!
But it was in a quarrelsome way; VVhereupon I was as stout, and ask'd him who made him an examiner?
Ah good Boy.
In that he was my Sonne.
He told me he would know or beat it out of me,
And I told him he should not, and bid him doe his worst;
And to't we went.
In that he was my sonne againe, ha boy; I see him at it now.
VVe fought a quarter of an houre, till his sharpe nailes made my eares bleed.
O the grand Divell pare 'em.
I wondred to finde him so strong in my hands, seeming but of mine owne age and bignesse, till I looking downe, perceived he had clubb'd cloven feet like Oxe feet; but his face was as young as mine.
A pox, but by his feet, he may be the Club-footed Horse-coursers father, for all his young lookes.
But I was afraid of his feet, and ran from him towards a light that I saw, and when I came to it, it was one of the VVitches in white upon a Bridge, that scar'd me backe againe, and then met me the Boy againe, and he strucke me and layd mee for dead.
Till I wondring at his stay, went out and found him in the Trance; since which time, he has beene haunted and frighted with Goblins, 40. times, and never durst tell any thing (as I sayd) because the Hags had so threatned him till in his sicknes he revealed it to his mother.
And she told no body but folkes on't. VVell Gossip Gretty, as thou art a Miller, and a close thiefe, now let us keepe it as close as we may till we take 'hem, and see them handsomly hanged o' the way: Ha my little Cue-divell, thou art a made man. Come, away with me.
These two nights I have slept well and heard no noise
Of Cats, or Rats; most sure the fellow dream't,
And scratcht himselfe in 's sleep. I have traveld' Desarts,
Beheld Wolves, Beares, and Lyons: Indeed what not?
Of horrid shape; And shall I be afrayd
Of Cats in mine owne Country? I can never
Grow so Mouse-hearted. It is now a Calme
And no winde stirring, I can beare no sayle;
Then best lye downe to sleepe. Nay rest by me
Good Morglay, my Comrague and Bedfellow
That never fayl'd me yet; I know thou did'st not.
If I be wak'd, see thou be stirring too;
Then come a Gib as big as Ascapart
VVe'l make him play at Leap-frog. A brave Souldiers lodging,
The floore my Bed, a Milstone for my Pillow,
The Sayles for Curtaynes. So good night.
Is Nab come?
Yes.
Where's Jug?
On horseback yet,
Now lighting from her Broome-staffe.
But where's Peg?
Entred the Mill already.
Is he fast?
As sencelesse as a Dormouse.
Then to work, to work my pretty Laplands
Pinch, here, scratch,
Doe that within, without we'l keep the watch.
Am I in Hell, then have among'st you divels;
This side, and that side, what behinde, before?
Ile keep my face unscratch'd dispight you all:
What, doe you pinch in private, clawes I feele
But can see nothing, nothing pinch me thus?
Have at you then, I and have at you still;
And stil have at you.
One of them I have pay'd
In leaping out oth' hole a foot or eare
Or something I have light on. What all gone?
All quiet? not a Cat that's heard to mew?
Nay then Ile try to take another nap,
Though I sleepe with mine eyes open.
Robin, the last night that I lodgd at home
My Wife (if thou remembrest) lay abroad,
But no words of that.
You have taught me silence.
I rose thus early much before my houre,
To take her in her bed▪ 'Tis yet not five:
The Sunne scarce up. Those horses take and lead'em
Into the Stable, see them rubb'd and drest,
We have rid hard. Now in the interim I
Will step and see how my new Miller fares,
Or whether he slept better in his charge,
Than those which did precede him.
Sir I shall.
But one thing more—
Now from the last nights witchcraft we are freed,
And I that had not power to cleare my selfe
From base aspersion, am at liberty
For ow'd revenge: I cannot be at peace
(The night-spell being took of) till I have met
With noble Mr. Generous: in whose search
The best part of this morning I have spent,
His wife now I suspect.
By your leve Sir.
O y'are well met, pray tell me how long is't
Since you were first my Father?
Be patient I beseech you, what doe you meane Sir?
But that I honour
Thy Master, to whose goodnesse I am bound,
And still must remaine thankfull, I should prove
VVorse thn a Murderer, a meere Paricide
By killing thee my Father.
I your Father? he was a man I alwayes lov'd
And honour'd. He bred me.
And you begot me? oh you us'd me finely last night?
Pray what's the matter Sir?
My worthy friend, but that I honour you
As one to whom I am so much obligd,
This Villaine could not stirre a foot from hence
Till perisht by my sword.
How hath he wrong'd you?
Be of a milder temper I intreat,
Relate what and when done?
You may command me,
If aske me what wrongs, know this Groome pretends
He hath strumpe my mother, if when, blaz'd
Last night at midnight. If you aske me further
Where, in your own house; when he pointed to me
As had I been his Bastard.
I doe this? I am a horse agen if I got you, Master, why Master.
I know you Mr. Arthur, for a Gentleman
Of faire endowments, a most solid braine,
And setled understanding. Why this fellow
These two dayes was scarce sundred from my side,
And for the last night I am most assur'd
He slept within my Chamber, 12. miles off,
We have nere parted since.
You tell me wonders.
Since all your words to me are Oracles,
And such as I most constantly beleeve.
But Sir, shall I be bold and plaine withall,
I am suspitious all's not well at home;
I dare proceed no farther without leave,
Yet there is something lodged within my breast
Which I am loath to utter.
Keepe it there,
I pray doe a season (O my feares)
In my Vncles absence who but I should comfort my Aunt,
Am I not of the Bloud, am not I next of Kin?
Why Aunt?
Good Nephew leave me.
The Divell shall leave you ere ile forsake you, Aunt, you know, ic is So, and being so sicke doe you thinke ile leave you, what know I but this Bed may prove your death-bed, and and then I hope you will remember me, that is, remember me in your Will.
Who's that knocks with such authority. Ten to one my Vncles come to towne.
If it be so, excuse my weaknes to him, say I can speake with none.
I will, and scape him if I can; by this accident all must come out, and here's no stay for me
Againe, stay you here with your Aunt, and ile goe let in your Vncle.
Doe good Mal, and how, and how sweet Aunt?
Y'are well met here, I am told you oft frequent
This house as my Wives choyse companion,
Yet have I sldome seene you.
Pray, by your leave Sir,
Your wife is taken with a suddaine qualme
She hath sent me for a Doctor.
But that labour ile save you, Soldier take her to your charge.
And now where's this sicke woman.
O Vncle you come in good time, my Aunt is so suddainly taken as if she were ready to give up the spirit.
'Tis almost time she did, speake how is't wife
My Nephew tels me you were tooke last night
With a shrewd sicknesse, which this Mayde confirmes.
Yes sir, but now desire no company.
Noyse troubles me, and I would gladly sleepe.
In company there's comfort, prithee wife
Lend me thy hand, and let me feele thy pulse,
Perhaps some Feaver, by their beating I
May guesse at thy disease.
My hand, 'tis there.
A dangerous sicknes, and I feare t death,
'Tis oddes you will not scape it. Take that backe
And let me prove the t'other, if perhaps
I there can finde more comfort.
I pray excuse me.
I must not be deny'd,
Sick folkes are peevish, and must be ore-rul'd, and so shall you.
Alas I have not strength to lift it up.
If not thy hand Wife, shew me but thy wrist,
And see how this will match it, here's a Testate
That cannot be out-fac'd.
I am undone.
Hath my Aunt bin playing at handee dandee, nay then if the game goe this way I feare she'l have the worst han on't.
'Tis now apparant
How all the last nights businesse came about,
In this my late suspicion, is confirm'd.
My heart hath bled more for thy curst relapse
Than drops hath issu'd from thy wounded arme.
But wherefore should I preach to one past hope?
Or where the divell himselfe claimes right in all,
Seeke the least part or interest? Leave your Bed,
Vp, make you ready; I must deliver you
Into the hand of Iustice. O deare friend
It is in vaine to guesse at this my griefe
'Tis so inundant. Soldier take away that young
But old in mischiefe.
And being of these Apostat's rid so well,
Ile see my house no more be made a Hell.
Away with the.
Ile out o'the Country, and as soone live in Lapland as Lancashire hereafter.
What for a false illusive apparition? I hope the divell i not able to perswade thee thou art a Bastard.
No, but I am afflicted to thinke that the divell should have power to put such a trick upon us, to countenance a Rascal, that is one.
J hope Arthur has taken a course with his Vnclc about him by this time, who would have thought such a foole as hee could have beene a Witch?
Why doe you thinke there's any wise folks of the quality; Can any but fooles be drawne into a Covenant with the greatest enemy of mankind? yet J cannot thinke that VVhetstone is the Witch? The young Queane that was at the Wedding was i'th house yee know.
See Lawrence and Parnell civilly accorded againe it seems, and accoutred as they were wont to be when they had their wits.
Blest be the houre I say may hunny, may sweet Pall, that Ay's becom'd thaine agone, and thou's becom'd maine agone, and may this ea kisse ma us tway become both eane for ever and a day.
Yie marry Lall, and thus shadden it be, there is nought getten by fawing out, we mun faw in or we get nought.
The world's well mended here; we cannot but rejoyce to see this, Lawrence.
And you been welcome to it Gentlemen.
And we been glad we han it for you.
And I protest I am glad to see it.
And thus shan yeou see't till our deeing houre.
Ween eon leove now for a laife time, the Dewle shonot ha the poore to put us to peeces agone.
Why now all's right and straight and as it should be.
Yie marry that is it, the good houre be blessed for it, that put the wit into may head, to have a mistrust of that pestilent Codpeece-point, that the witched worch Mal Spencer go me, ah woe worth her, that were it that made aw so nought.
Is't possible?
Yie marry it were an Inchauntment, and about an houre since it come intill our hearts to doe, what yeou thinke, and we did it.
What Parnell?
Marry we take the point, and we casten the point into the fire, and the point spitter'd and spatter'd in the fire, like an it were (love blesse us) a laive thing in the faire; and it hopet and skippet, and riggled, and frisket in the faire, and crept about laike a worme in the faire, that it were warke enough for us both with all the Chimney tooles to keepe it into the faire, and it stinket in the faire, worsen than ony brimstone in the faire.
This is wonderfull as all the rest.
It wolld ha scar'd ony that hadden their wits till a seen't, and we werne mad eoht it were deone.
And this were not above an houre sine, and you connot devaise how we han lov'd t'on t'other by now, yeou woud en blisse your seln to see't.
Yie an han pit on our working geere, to swinke and serve our Master and Maistresse like intill painfull servants agone, as we shudden.
'Tis wondrous well.
And are they well agen?
Yie and weel's laike heane blisse them, they are awas weel becom'd as none ill had ever beene aneast'hem; Lo ye, lo ye, as they come.
Sir, if a contrite heart strucke through with sence
Of it's sharpe errors, bleeding with remorse
The blacke polluted staine it had conceived
Of foule unnaturall disobedience
May yet by your faire mercy finde Remission;
You shall upraise a Sonne out o'the gulph
Of horrour and despaire, unto a blisse
That shall for ever crowne your goodnesse, and
Instructive in my after life to serve you,
In all the duties that be fit a sonne.
Enough, enough, good boy, 'tis most apparant
We all have had our rrors, and as plainly
It now appeares, our judgments, yea our reason
Was poyson'd by some violent infection,
Quite contrary to Nature.
This sounds well.
I feare it was by Witchcraft: for I now
(Blest be the power that wrought the happy means
Of my delivery) remember that
Some 3. months since I crost a way ward woman
(One that I now suspect) for bearing with
A most unseemly disobedience,
In an untoward ill-bred sonne of hers,
When with an ill looke and an hollow voyce
She mutter'd out these words. Perhaps erelong
Thy selfe shalt be obedient to thy sonne.
She has play'd her pranke it seemes.
Sir I have heard, that Witches apprehended under hands of lawfull authority, doe loose their power; And all their spels are instantly dissolv'd.
If it be so, then at this happy houre,
The Witch is tane that over us had power.
Enough Childe, thou art mine and all is well.
Long may you live the well-spring of my blisse,
And may my duty and my fruitfull Prayers,
Draw a perpetuall streame of blessings from you.
Gentlemen welcome to my best friends house,
You know the unhappy cause that drew me hether.
And cannot but rejoyce to see the remedy so neee at and.
Come Gossip, come Boy—Gentlemen you are come to the bravest discovery—Mr. Seely and the rest, how is't with you? you look reasonable well me thinkes.
Sir, we doe find that we have reason enough to thank you for your Neighbourly and pious care of us.
Is all so well with you already? goe to, will you know a reason for't Gentlemen: I have catcht a whole Kennel of Witches. It seemes their Witch is one of 'hem, and so they are discharm'd, they are all in Officers hands, and they will touch here with two or three of them for a little private parley, before they goe to the Iustices. Master Generous is comming hither too, with a supply that you dreame not of, and your Nephew Arthur.
You are beholden Sir to Master Generous in behalfe of your Nephew for saving his land from forfeiture in time of your distraction.
I will acknowledge it most thankfully.
See he comes.
O Mr. Generous, the noble favour you have shew'd
My Nephew for ever bindes me to you.
I pittyed then your misery, and now
Have nothing left but to bewayle mine owne
In this unhappy woman.
Good Mistresse Generous—
Make a full stop there Sir, sides, sides, make sides, You know her not as I doe, stand aloofe there Mistresse with your darling Witch, your Nephew too if you please, because though he be no witch, he is a wel-willer to the infernal science.
I utterly discard him in her blood
And all the good that I intended him
I will conferre upon this vertuous Gentleman.
Well Sir, though you be no Vnckle, yet mine Aunt's mine Aunt, and shall be to her dying day.
And that will be about a day after next Sizes I take it,
O here comes more o'your Naunts, Naunt Dickenson & Naunt Hargrave, ods fish and your Granny Johnson too; we want but a good fire to entertaine 'em.
See how they lay their heads together?
No succour.
No reliefe.
No comfort!
Mawsy, my Mawsy, gentle Mawsy come,
Come my sweet Puckling.
My Mamilion.
What doe they say?
They call their Spirits I thinke.
Now a shame take you for a fardell offooles, have you knowne so many of the Divels tricks, and can be ignorant of that common feate of the old Iugler; that is, to leave you all to the Law, when you are once seized on by the tallons of Authority? Ile undertake this little Demigorgon Constable with these Common-wealth Characters upon his staffe here, is able inspite of all your bugs-words, to stave off the grand Divell for doing any of you good till you come to his Kingdome to him, and there take what you can finde.
But Gentlemen, shall we try if we can by examination get from them something that may abbreviate the cause unto the wiser in Commission for the peace before wee carry them before 'em.
Let it be so.
Well say, stand out Boy, stand out Miller, stand out Robin, stand out Soldier, and lay your accusation upon 'em.
Speake Boy doe you kno these Creatures, women I dare not call 'em?
Yes Sir, and saw them all in the Barne together, and many more at their Feast and Witchery.
And so did I, by a Divellish token, I was rid thither, though I rid home againe as fast without switch or spur.
I was ill handled by them in the Mill.
And I sliced off a Cats foot there, that is since a hand, who ever wants it.
How I and all my family have suffered you all know.
And how I were betwitched my Pall. here knowes.
Yie Lall, and the Witch I knaw, an I prayen yeou goe me but leave to scrat her well-favorely.
Hold Parnell.
Yeou can blame no honest woman, I trow, to scrat for the thing she leoves.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doe ou laugh Gentlewoman? what say you to all these matters?
I will say nothing, but what you know you know,
And as the law shall finde me let it take me.
And so say I.
And I.
And I, other confession you get none from us.
What say you Granny?
Mamilion, ho Mamilion, Mamilion.
Who's that you call?
My friend, my Sweet-heart, my Mamilion.
You are not mad?
Ah ha, that's her Divell, her Incubus I warrant; take her off from the rest they'l hurt her. Come hether poore old woman. Ile dandle a Witch a little, thou wilt speake, and tell the truth, and shalt have favour doubt not. Say art not thou a Witch?
'Tis folly to dissemble yie sir, I am one.
And that Mamilion which thou call'st upon
Is thy familiar Divell is't not? Nay prithee speake.
Yes Sir.
That's a good woman, how long hast had's acquaintance, ha?
A matter of sixe yeares Sir.
A pretty matter. What was he like a man?
Yes when I pleas'd.
And then he lay with thee, did he not sometimes?
Tis folly to dissemble; twice a Weeke he never fail'd me.
Humh—and how? and how a little? was he a good Bedfellow?
Tis folly to speake worse of him than he is.
I trust me is't. Give the Divell his due.
He pleas'd me well Sir, like a proper man.
There was sweet coupling.
Onely his flesh felt cold.
He wanted his great fires about him that he has at home.
Peace, and did he weare good clothes?
Gentleman like, but blacke blacke points and all.
I, very like his points were blacke enough. But come we'l trifle w'yee no longer. Now shall you all to the Iustices, and let them take order with you till the Sizes, and then let Law take his course, and Uivat Rex. Mr. Generous I am sorry for your cause of sorrow, we shall not have your company?
No sir, my Prayers for her soules recovery.
Shall not be wanting to her, but mine eyes
Must never see her more.
Mal, adiew sweet Mal, ride your next journey with the company you have there.
Well Rogue I may live to ride in a Coach before I come to the Gallowes yet.
And Mrs. the horse that stayes for you rides better with a Halter than your gingling bridle.
Mr. Seely I rejoyce for your families attonement.
And I praise heaven for you that were the means to it.
On afore Drovers with your untoward Cattell.
Why doe not you follow Mr. By-blow. I thanke your
Aunt for the tricke she would have father'd us withall.
Well Sir, mine Aunt's mine Aunt, and for that trick I will not leave her till I see her doe a worse.
Y'are a kinde Kinsman.
Come Mawsy, come Puckling,
And come my sweet Suckling,
My pretty Mamillion, my Ioy,
Fall each to his Duggy,
VVhile kindly we buggie,
As tender as Nurse over Boy.
Then suck our blouds freely, and with it be jolly,
While merrily we sing, hey Trolly Lolly.
We'l dandle and clip yee,
We'l stroke yee, and lepe yee,
And all that we have is your due;
The feates you doe for us,
And those which you store us
Withall, tyes us onely to you.
Then suck our blods freely, and with it be jolly,
While merrily we sing, hey Trolly Lolly.
NOw while the Witches must expect their due
By lawfull Iustice, we appeale to you
For favourable censure; what their crime
May bring upon'em, ripenes yet of time
Ha not reveal'd. Perhaps great Mercy may
After just conmnation give them day
Of longr life. We represent as much
As they have done, before Lawes hand did touch
Upon their guilt; But dare not hold it fit,
That we for Iustices and Idges sit.
And personate their grave wisedomes on the Stage
VVhom we are bound to honour; No, the Age
Allowes it not. Therefore unto the Lawes
VVe can but bring the Witches and their cause,
And there w leave'em, as their Divels did,
Should we goe further with'em? Wit forbid;
What of their storie, further shall ensue,
We must referre to time, our selves to you.