Know worthy Troop, that I great Thetis am,
Who (hearing of theſe Triumphs) hither came
From th'Azure court of my moſt deepe Abyſſe
To grace my faireſt daughter Thamiſis,
I every twelve houres, by this Child of mine,
Do ſend you ſilks and velvets, oyle, and wine,
Gold, ſilver, Jewels, fiſh, ſalt, ſundry ſpices,
Fine and courſe linnen, druggs of divers prices:
What every Realme or climate can produce,
I ſee it ſafe tranſported for your uſe.
Thus from the boſome of the Deepe my floods
(By Thames) doe every Tyde ſend up your goods,
For which this matchleſſe well deſerving River,
Your Cloth doth backe againe to me deliver,
With other riches, which I o're the Sea
Unto my other daughters doe convay;
For your commodities I'le ever flow
Unto Danubius, Iſter, Rhine, and Poe,
To Maze, Seine, Volga, Ems, Elve, and Tanales,
To Tygris, Nilus, Ganges, Euphrates,
To Tyber, Jordan, Xanthus, Jndus, Tagus,
Paſt Aſphaltites, or Blacke Mortuus Lacus
As far as Sol or Cynthia ſpread their beames,
As far as Oceanus ſends his ſtreames,
So far will I your ſervant ever be,
In any thing you'l deigne to put on me:
And humble thanks faire Thames and I doe render
To you, who of her well-fare are ſo tender,
Who with great coſt and care doe lend your hands,
To cleare your ſervant Thames from ſhelves and ſands:
Go on and cleanſe her, as you have begun,
And ſhe ſhall doe for you as ſhe hath done.
We are aſſur'd that Heaven will ever bleſſe
Your ſtores, who doe her injuries redreſſe,
Thetis and Thames, their ſervices ſhall ſhow
To you, as long as they doe ebb and flow.
Thus with our humble dutious bending downe,
Long may this Citie flouriſh with renowne.
Almoſt 500 daies, beheld have I
The Triumphs of Great Londons Mayoralty,
And ſure old Time, with Joy doth truely ſay,
He n're was better pleaſ'd than at this day;
Not that I thinke a temporizing Lord,
Or Pleaſer of the Time ſhall weild the ſword,
But as your Honourable Predeceſſors
Have mended Time, by puniſhing Trangreſſors;
So Time hopes that th'addition of your yeare,
Will make him more Illuſtrate, pure and cleare.
For of all fading things 'tis manifeſt,
As Time is uſ'd, hee's either worſt or beſt.
All thoſe that rightly have their Honours won:
Have uſ'd Time well, (as you my Lord have done.)
This Honour was ordaind you, from your youth
You ever lov'd my lovelieſt daughter TRVTH,
And ſhe hath rais'd you; and ſhe did prefer
You to this dignity to Maintaine her.
I doe command her, ſtill with you t'abide,
Doe you defend her, ſhe ſhall be your guide:
For truth-ſake Time ſhall be your ſervant ſtill;
And in your juſt commands, obey your will.
Time ſhall tranſport your Marchandiſe and wares,
Time ſhall aſſiſt you in your great'ſt affaires:
Time ſhall be alwaies yours Auſpitiouſly,
And Time will bring you to Eternity.
Her's Hermes, from his Spheares circumferance
Hath brought the Poet wit, and Eloquence;
And quick Invention, likewiſe he Inflam'd
Into the Artiſts that theſe pageants fram'd,
That for your future Honour, this may be
A day of well Compoſ'd Variety
Of Speach and ſhew, theſe Triumphs we preſent,
We hope (as they are meant ſhall give content)
We humbly wiſh, that you this yeare may finde,
Full of true worth as is your worthy mind.
By me faire London in obedience ſhewes
The ſervice, love, and duty that ſhe owes
To this daies Triumph, but my aime is higher,
My thankfulneſſe doth up to heaven aſpire,
Which unto me hath ſo propitious beene,
That I doe ſee this day, and now am ſeene
The Queene of Cities, Empreſſe of content,
And Princeſſe of unmarched government;
Weigh well my ſtate, and think on other ſtates,
Thebes is ruin'd with her hundred Gates;
Numantia, Carthage, great Jeruſalem,
And Babylon, what are become of them?
Conſtantinople doth in ſorrow lye,
And groane beneath the Turkiſh tyranny:
Rome, and all Cities that hold Rome ſupreme,
Their glorie's are eclips'd or but a dreame;
Whilſt fire and ſword doth Germany moleſt,
London's ſecure, with peace and plenty bleſt,
Turke, Pope, and war, beare here no rule or ſway,
For I one God, one King, one Law obey;
Ther's my ſecurity, and my ſtate doth ſtand
Supported by the unſupported hand,
Theſe are the meanes and inſtruments whereby
We riſe to Honour, painfull Induſtry.
An Idle Citizen is like a Moth,
One ſpoyles b'example t'oher ſpoyles the Cloth,
True Citizens are the true Cities ſonnes,
The others are but baſtards, mad that runnes,
Like Runnagates, or curſed Imps of Caine,
And never ſhall to Honours ſeat Attaine:
Worke on my Lads, and you in time may be,
Good members of this Honour'd Company,
And though good Freeman (of this Corporation)
Deceaſ'd before his halfe yeares expiration,
Yet Heaven hath ſoone provided for our good
Another worthy of this Brother-hood.
And now my Lord, I give my ſelfe and mine,
To your command and charge, and I divine
That as great is the Honour of your ſeat,
Your Government ſhall be more good than great.
Low ſteps begin to mount the higheſt hills,
Great Rivers have their heads from little Rills:
From ſervitude growes freedome, and from thence
(Through Induſtry) ſprings Worth and Eminence.
All ſuch as will true Honours ſeat aſcend,
Muſt doe (as theſe have) firſt obey and bend:
For though Humility to man ſeemes low,
The fruit of it as high as Heaven doth grow:
Tis diligence doth the puny-clarke prefer,
To be a Reverend Judge, or Counceller;
Paines and much perill oft obtaines the grace,
A common Souldiour gaines a Generals place:
The pooreſt Schollers ſtudy (by degrees)
Aſcends the height of ſpirituall dignities,
And from th'apprentice ſeven yeares ſervitude
Proceeds the grave gowne, and the Livery-Hood,
Till (in the end) by merit, paines and care,
They win the Grace to fit in Honours chaire;
Thus Humble ſervice is advanc'd and rear'd
To Honours ſeat, obey'd, belov'd and fear'd.
Authoritie's the touch-ſtone of the minde,
And ſhewes which way the bearer is inclin'd:
For having power joyned to his will,
It makes him much more good, or much more ill:
It makes him to foreſee, with Judgements eye,
That Juſtice without Mercie's cruelty:
That Mercy without Juſtice is much worſe,
Breeds ſcorne, contempt, makes power to leeſe her force.
When you in ſcales of Equity doe lay
The ſword of Juſtice, who dares but obey.
Your faith and Honour are in marriage joynd
By oath this day, which no man can unbinde,
Therefore my Lord (whoſe ſervice and true merit
Hath made this Honour your's which you inherit)
Tis treble Joy that you doe wiſely know
To mix thoſe vertues well, and to beſtow
Them juſtly, as occaſion ſhall incite:
To gard the good, and make wrong render right,
In which expectance all our hopes abounding,
Joy crowne this day with Drums and Trumpets ſounding.
My Honour'd Lord, let me, (a rurall Swaine,
And humble ſhepherd from the lowly plaine)
As plainly bid thee welcome to this ſtate
Of Englands greateſt civill Magiſtrate.
A ſhepherd joyes to ſee this day, and I
Will fleece my flock's t'nrich thy company:
I am Endimion, that of yore did keepe
Upon th'Arcadian hils my harmeles ſheepe:
Whereas by ſtudy, and by obſervations
I found the Moones change and her variations,
And for my ſake the Swaines doe ſtill prefer
The booke ycleap'd the ſhepherds Kallender.
Apollo kept Admetus ſheepe (tis ſaid)
And Tamberlaine (whom Mighty Kings obey'd)
Was once a ſhepherd, and the Time was when
That ſhepherds were the nobleſt, ableſt men.
This golden creſted Ram, on which I ride
To welcome you, and ſee you dignifide,
Is the Celeſtiall figne, (Aries by name)
Come from the Zodiack to adorne your fame.
And from the Ram, and his increaſing breed
Neere halfe mankinde have meanes to Cloath and feed.
By picking wooll, thouſands releife doe gaine,
s many carding, ſpinning doth maintaine:
Wooll-men, a great and wealthy trade doe drive,
Weavers, in great abundance worke and live,
The Clothiers, Fullers, Tuckers, Shermen, Dyers,
From the ſheepes fleece have feeding and attires,
But all theſe Trades, which I doe here infer,
Have all relation to the Cloth-worker,
For were it not for him the reſt were nothing,
He onely makes it Cloth, and fit for Clothing,
Without the Cloth-worker, the Drapers Trade
And Merchants Traffick would decay and fade,
Theſe from the fleece got Clothes and nutriment,
For (under heaven) the Ram's the Inſtrument.
And when bright Phoebus ſhall in March begin
To take the Ram for his celeſtiall Inne
Such golden tincture on his fleece heele ſet,
Which many golden peeces ſhall beget,
And whereas men (to make their worths appeare)
Doe give their ſervants Liveries once a yeare,
The Ram (in bounty) paſſeth man I note.
And gives his Maſter every yeare a coate
Thus poore Endimion, with the beaſt he tides,
Doth wiſh you proſperous windes, and happy tides,
That by commerce, and good Negotiation,
Wooll turn'd to Cloth, and Cloth by transformation,
Be turn'd to gold, that you may ſay with joy,
That Iaſons fleece (to yours) was but a toy.
Time, that this day his ſervice hath expreſt,
In duty brings your Lordſhip to your reſt:
Yet er'e I take my leave, (for your content)
I'le ſhew the meaning of this Monument.
Then know, this ruind peece doth ſhew that ſtones
And tombes conſume, as doe their owners bones,
For Time is circular in his effects,
Builds and throwes downe, and ruins and erects:
But fortune, death or fame, or Time cannot
Make vertuous men, or vertue be forgot.
For Immortallity is pleaſ'd to make
Fame with his Trumpe the drowſie world to wake,
Who from demolliſhed delapidations
Proclaimes the memorable nominations
Of worthies of this worthy company,
Who Honourd liv'd, and did with Honour die.
Sir William Hewet was, as you my Lord,
To poyz the ballance and to weild the ſword:
Sir Rowland Hayward next, next Sir Iames Hawes,
Did rule this Citie juſtly by the lawes;
Next was Sir Edward Oſboorne Londons Mayor;
Then Sir Iohn Spencer gaind the honourd Chaire,
Sir Thomas Schinner after had the place;
Next did Sir Nicholas Moſley gaine the Grace;
Then Sir Iohn Watts his yeare with Honour paſt,
And Noble Freeman who deceaſed laſt.
King Iames the wiſeſt, and the learnedſt King,
Whoſe fame throughout the ſpacious world doth ring,
He knew your merits, worth and dignity,
And therefore choſe your worthy company
To be his Brother-hood; he did underſtand,
You were moſt fit for his fraternall band.
And you my Lord, whom Time hath brought to be
The nobleſt Branch of this fraternity,
Time here ſalutes you, wiſhing you may move
More high in Honour, as you doe in love.
Tis truly ſaid, that man that rules his paſſions,
Doth conquer more, than he that conquers Nations.
As you have rul'd your ſelfe, let it appeare
In ruling London this enſuing yeare,
So you, with Time ſhall be together bleſt,
And Time ſhall bring you to Eternall Reſt.