FRom the high Senate of the gods, to You
Bright glorious Twins of Love and Majesty,
Before whole Throne three watke Nations bend
Their willing knees, on whose Imperiall browes▪
The Regall Circle prints no awfull frownes
To fright your Subjects, but whose calmer eyes
Shed joy and safety on their melting hearts
That flow with cheerefull loyall reverence.
Come my Cyllenius, Ioves Ambassadour:
Not, as of gold, to whisper amorous tales
Of wanton love, into the glowing eare
Of some choyce beauty in this numerons traines
Those dayes are fled, the rebell slameis quench'd
In heavenly brests, the gods have sworne by Styx▪
Never to tempt yeelding mortality
To loose embraces Your exemplar life
Hath not alone transfus'd a zealous heat
Of imitation through your vertuous Court,
By whose bright blaze your Pallace is become
The vy'd patterne of this under-world,
But the aspiring flame hath kindled heaven;
Th' immortall bosomes butne with emulous fires,
Iove rivals your great vertues, Royall Sir,
And Iuno, Madam, your attractive graces▪
He his wild lusts, her raging jealousies
She layes aside, and through th' Olympique hall,
As yours doth here, their great Example spreads,
And though of old, when youthfull blood conspi'd
With his new Empire, prone to heats of lust,
He actedincests, rapes, adulteries
On earthly beauties, which his raging Queene,
Swolne with revengefull fury, turn'd to beasts,
And in despight he transform'd to Stars,
Till he had fill'd the crowded Firmament
With his loose Strumpets, and their sputious race,
Where the eternall records of his shame
Shine to the world in flaming Characters;
When in the Chrystall myrrour of your reigne
He view'd himselfe, he found his loathsome staines;
And now, to expiate the infectious guilt
Of those detested luxuries, hee'll chace
Th' infamous lights from their usurped Sheare,
And drowne in the Lethae an flood, their curs'd
Both names and memories. In whose vacant rooms
First you succeed, and of the wheeling Orbe
In the most eminent and conspicuous point,
With dazeling beames, and spreading magnitude,
Shine the bright Pole-starre of this Hemispheare,
Next, by your side, in a triumphant Chaire,
And crown'd with Ariadnes Diadem,
Sits the faire Consort of your heart, and Throne;
Diffus'd about you, with that share of light
As they of vertue have deriv'd from you,
Hee'll fix this Noble traine, of either sexe;
So to the Brittish stars this lower Globe
Shall owe its light, and they alone dispence
To' th world a pure refined influence.
BY your leave, Mortals. Gooden Cozen Hermes, your pardon good my Lord Ambassadour: I found the tables of your Armes and Titles, in every Inne betwixt this and Olympus, where your present expedition is registred, your nine thousandth nine hundred ninety ninth Legation. I cannot reach the policy why your Master breeds so few States-men, it suits not with his dignity that in the whole Empyraeum there should not bee a god fit to send on these honourable errands but your selfe, who are not yet so carefull of his honour as your owne, as might become your quality, when you are itinerant: the Hosts upon the high-way cry out with open mouth upon you for supporting pilfery in your traine; which, though as you are the god of petty Larcinry, you might protect, yet you know it is directly against the new orders, and opposes the Reformation in Diameter.
Peace Rayler, bridle your licentious tongue.
And let this Presence teach you modesty.
Let it if it can; in the meane time I will acquaint it with my condition. Know, (gay people) that though your Poets who enjoy by Patent a particular privilege to draw down any of the Deities from Twelf-night till Shrove-tuesday, at what time there is annually a most familiar enter-course betweene the two Courts, have as yet never invited me to these Solemnities, yet it shall appeare by my intrusion this night, that I am a very considerable Person upon these occasions, and may most properly assist at such entertainements. My name is Momus. ap-Somnus-ap-Erebus-aep-Chaos-ap-Demorgorgon-ap-Eternity. My Offices and Titles are, The Supreme Theomastix, Hupercrittique of manners, Protonotarie of abuses, Arch-Informer, Dilator Generall, Vniversall Calumniator, Eternall Plaintiffe, and perpetuall Foreman of the Grand Inquest. My privileges are an ubiquitary, circumambulatory, speculatory, interrogatory, redargutory immunity over all the privy lodgings, behind hangings, doores, curtaines, through key-holes, chinkes, windowes, about all Veneriall Lobbies, Skones or Redoubts, though it be to the surprize of a perdu Page or Chambermaid, in, and at all Courts of civill and criminall judicature, all Counsels, Consultations, and Parlamentary Assemblies, where though I am but a Woolsacke god, and have no vote in the sanction of new lawes, I have yet a Praerogative of wresting the old to any whatsoever interpretation, whether it be to the behoofe, or prejudice, of Iupiter his Crowne and Dignity, for, or against the Rights of either house of Patrician or Plebeian gods. My naturall qualities are to make Iove frowne, Iuno powt, Mars chafe, Venus blush, Vulcan glow, Saturne quake; Cynthia pale, Phaebus hide his face, and Mercury here take his heeles. My recreations are witty mischiefes, as when Saturne guelt his father; the Smith caught his wife and her Bravo in a net of Cobweb-Iron; and Hebe, through the lubricity of the pavement tumbling over the Halfpace, presented the Embleme of the forked tree. and discover'd to the tann'd Ethiops the snowie cliffs of Culabria with the Grotta of Puteolum. But that you may arrive at the perfect knowledge of me, by the familiar illustration of a Bird of mine owne feather, old Peter Aretine, who reduc'd all the Scepters and Myters of that Age tributary to his wit, was my Parallell; and Frank Rublais suck'd much of my milke too; but your moderne French Hospitall of Oratory, is meere counterfeit, an arrant Mountebanke, for though fearing no other fortunes than his Sciatica, hee discourse of Kings and Queenes with as little Reverence as of Groomes and Chamber-maids, yet he wants their fangteeth, and Scorpions tayle; I meane that fellow, who to adde to his stature thinks it a greater grace to dance on his tiptoes like a Dog in a doublet, than to walke like other men on the soles of his feet.
No more impertinent Trifeler, you disturbe
The great Affaire with your rude scurrilous chat:
What doth the knowledge of your abject state
Concerne Ioves solemne Message?
Sir, by your favour, though you have a more especiall Commission of employment from Iupiter, and a larger entertainment from his Exchequer, yet as a freeborne god I have the liberty to travell at mine owne charges, without your passe or countenance Legacine; and that it may appeare a sedulous acute observer, may know as much as a dull flegmatique Ambassadour, and weares a treble key to unlocke the mysterious Cyphers of your darke secrecies, I will discourse the politique state of Heaven to this trimme Audience—
At this the Scaene changeth, and in the heaven is discovered a Spheare, with Stars placed in their severall Images; borne up by a huge naked Figure (onely a peece of Drapery hanging over his thigh) kneeling and bowing forwards, as if the great weight lying on his shoulders opprest him, upon his head a Crowne, by all which hee might easily bee knowne to be Atlas.
—You shall understand, that Iupiter upon the inspection of I know not what vertuous Presidents extant (as they say) here in this Court, but as I more probably ghesse out of the consideration of the decay of his naturall abilities, hath before a frequent convocation of the Superlunary Peeres in a solemne Oration recanted, disclaymed, and utterly renounced all the lascivious extravagancies, and riotous enormities of his forepast licentious life, and taken his oath on Iunos Breviary, religiously kissing the two-leav'd Booke, never to stretch his limbs more betwixt adulterous sheets, and hath with patheticall remonstrances exhorted, and under strict penalties enjoyned a respective conformity in the severall subordinate Deities; and because the Libertines of Antiquity, the Ribald Poets, to perpetuate the memory and example of their tryumphs over chastity, to all future imitation, have in their immortall songs celebrated the martyrdome of those Strumpets under the persecution of the wives, and devolved to Posterity the Pedigrees of their whores bawds, and bastards; it is therfore by the authority aforesaid enacted, that this whole Army of Constellations be immediately disbanded and casheerd, so to remove all imputation of impiety from the Coelestiall Spirits, and all lustfull influences upon terrestriall bodies; and consequently that there be an Inquisition erected to exspunge in the Ancient, and suppresse in the moderne and succeeding Poems and Pamphlets, all past, present, and future mention of those abjur'd heresies, and to take particular notice of all ensuing incontinences, and punish them in their high Commission Court. Am not I in election to be a tal Statesman think you, that can repeat a passage at a Counsell-table thus punctually?
I shun in vaine the importunity With which this Snarler vexeth all the gods, Iove cannot scape him: well, what else from heaven?
Heaven! Heaven is no more the place it was; a Cloyster of Carthusians, a Monastery of converted gods, Iove is growne old and fearefull, apprehends a subversion of his Empire, and doubts lest Fate should introduce a legall succession in the legetimate heire, by repossessing the Titanian line, and hence springs all this innovation. We have had new orders read in the Presence Chamber, by the Vi-President of Parnassus, too strict to be observed long, Monopolies are called in, sophistication of wares punished, and rates imposed on commodities. Injunctions are gone out to the Nectar Brewers, for the purging of the heavenly Beverage of a narcotique weed which hath rendred the Idaeaes confus'd in the Divine intellects, and reducing it to the composition used in Saturnes Reigne. Edicts are made for the restoring of decayed house-keeping, prohibiting the repayre of Families to the Metropolis, but this did endanger an Amazonian mutiny, till the females put on a more masculine resolution of solliciting businesses in their owne persons, and leaving their husbands at home for stallions of hospitality. Bacchus hath commanded all Tavernes to be shut, and no liquor drawne after tenne at night. Cupid must goe no more so scandalously naked, but is enjoyned to make him breeches, though of his mothers petticotes. Ganimede is forbidden the Bedchamber, and must only minister in publique. The gods must keepe no Pages, nor Groomes of their Chamber under the age of 25. and those provided of a competent stocke of beard. Pan may not pipe, nor Proteus juggle, but by especiall permission. Vulcan was brought to an Orotenus and fined, for driving in a plate of Iron into one of the Sunnes Chariot-wheeles, and frost-nailing his horses upon the fifth of November last, for breach of a penall Statute prohibiting worke upon Holi-dayes, that being the annuall celebration of the Gygantomachy. In briefe, the whole state of the Hierarchy suffers a totall reformation, especially in the poynt of reciprocation of conjugall affection. Venus hath confest all her adulteries, and is receiv'd to grace by her husband, who conscious of the great disparity betwixt her perfections and his deformities, allowes those levities as an equall counterpoize; but it is the prettiest spectacle to see her stroaking with her Ivory hand his collied cheeks, and with her snowie fingers combing his sooty beard. Iupiter too beginnes to learne to lead his owne wife, I left him practising in the milky way; and there is no doubt of an universall obedience, where the Lawgiver himselfe in his owne person observes his degrees so punctually; who besides to eternize the memory of that great example of Matrimoniall union which he derives from hence, hath on his Bed-chamber door, and seeling, fretted with starres in capitall Letters, engraven the Inscription of CARLOMARIA. This is as much I am sure as either your knowledge or Instructions can direct you to, which I having in a blunt round tale, without Stateformality, politique inferences, or suspected Rhetoricall elegancies, already delivered, you may now dexteriously proceed to the second part of your charge, which is the raking of your heavenly sparks up in the Embers, or reducing the Etheriall lights to their primitive opacity, and grosse darke subsistance; they are all unrivited from the Spheare, and hang loose in their sockets, where they but attend the waving of your Caduce, and immediately they reinvest their pristine shapes, and appeare before you in their owne naturall deformities.
Momus thou shalt prevaile, for since thy bol
Intrusion hath inverted my resolves,
I must obey necessity, and thus turne
My face, to breath the Thunders just decree
'Gainst this adulterate spheare, which first I purge
Of loathsome Monsters, and mis-shapen formes▪
Downe from her azure concave, thus I charme
The Lyrnean Hydra, the rough unlick'd Beare,
The watchfull Dragon, the storme-boading Whale▪
The Centaure, the horn'd Goatfish Capricorne,
The Snake-head Gorgon, and fierce Sagitta;
Divested of your gorgeous starry robes,
Fall from the circling Orbe, and e're you sucke
Fresh venome in, measure this happy earth,
Then to the Fens, Caves, Forrests, Desarts, Seas,
Fly, and resume your native qualities.
Are not these fine companions, trim play fellowes for the Deities? yet these and their fellowes have made up all our conversation for some thousands of yeares. Doe not you faire Ladies acknowledge your selves deeply engaged now to those Poets your servants, that in the height of commendation have rais'd your beauties to a parallell with such exact proportions, or at least rank'd you in their spruce society. Hath not the consideration of these Inhabitants rather frighted your thoughts utterly from the contemplation of the place? but now that these heavenly Mansions are to be voyd, you that shall hereafter be found unlodged will become inexcusable; especially since Vertue alone shall be sufficient title, fine, and rent: yet if there be a Lady not competently stock'd that way, shee shall not on the instant utterly despaire, if shee carry a sufficient pawn of handsomenesse; for however the letter of the Law runs, Iupiter notwithstanding his Age and present austerity, will never resuse to stamp beauty, and make it currant with his owne Impression; but to such as are destitute of both, I can afford but small encouragement. Proceed Cozen Mercury, what followes?
Look up, and marke where the bright Zodiack
Hang like a Belt about the brest of heaven;
On the right shoulder, like a flaming Iewell,
His shell, with nine rich Topazes adorn'd,
Lord of this Tropique, sits the skalding Crab▪
He, when the Sunne gallops in full careere
His annuall race; his gastly clawes uprear'd,
Frights at the confines of the torrid Zone,
The fiery teame, and proudly stops their course,
Making a solstice, till the fierce Steeds learne
His backward paces, and so retrograde
Poste downe-hill to th'opposed Capricorne.
Thus I depose him from his laughty Throne▪
Drop from the Sky, into the briny flood,
There teach thy motion to the ebbing Sea,
But let those fires that beautifi'd thy shell
Take humane shapes, and the disorder shew
Of thy regressive paces here below.
This Crab, I confesse, did ill become the heavens; but there is another that more infests the Earth, and makes such a solstice in the politer Arts and Sciences, as they have not beene observed for many Ages to have made any sensible advance: could you but lad the learned squadrons with a masculine resolution past this point of retrogradation, it were a benefit to mankind, worthy the power of a god, and to be payed with Altars; but that not being the worke of this night, you may pursue your purposes: what now succeeds?
Vice, that unbodied, in the Appetite
Erects his Throne, hath yet, in bestiall shapes,
Branded, by Nature, with the Character
And distinct stampe of some peculiar Ill,
Mounted the Sky, and fiz'd his Trophies there:
As fawning flattery in the little Dog;
I'th bigger, churlish Murmur; Cowardize
I'th timorous Hare; Ambition in the Eagle;
Rapine and Avarice in th'adventurous Ship
That sayl'd to Colhos for the golden fleece;
Drunken distemper in the Goblet flowes;
I'th Dart and Scorpion, bit ing Calumny;
In Hercules and the Lyon, furious rage;
Vaine Ostentation in Cssiope▪
All these I to eternall exile doome,
But to this place their Emblem'd Vices summon,
Clad in those proper Figures, by which best
Their incorpore all nature is exprest.
From hence forth it shall be no more id in the Proverbe, when you would expresse a riotous Assembly, That hell, but Heaven is broke loose: this was an arrant Goale-delivery, all the Prisons of your great Cities could not have vomited more corrupt matter: but Cozen Cylleneus, in my judgement it is not safe that these infectious persons should wander here to the hazard of this Iland, they threatned lesse danger when they were nayl'd to the Firmament: I should conceive it a very discree course, since they are provided of a tall vessell of their owne ready rigg'd, to embarque them all together in that good Ship called the Argo, and send them to the plantation in New-England, which hath purg'd more virulent humours from the politique body, then Guacum and all the West-Indian drugs have from the naturall bodies of this Kingdome: Can you devise how to dispose them better?
They cannot breath this pure and temperats Ayre
Where Vertue lives, but will with hasty flight,
'Mongst fogs and vapours, seeke unsound abodes.
y after them, srom your usurped seats,
You foule remainders of that viporous brood:
Let not a Starre of luxurious race
With his loose blaze staine the skyes chrystall sace.
Before the entry of every Antimasque, the Starres in those figures in the Spheare which they were to represent, were extinct; so as, by the end of the Antimasques in the Spheare no more Stars were seene.
Here is a totall Ecclipse of the eighth Spheare, which neither Booker, Allestre, nor any of your Prognosticators, no nor their great Master Tico were aware of; but yet in my opinion there were some innocent, and some generous Constellations, that might have beene reserved for Noble uses: as the Skales and Sword to adorne the statue of Iustice, since she resides here on Earth onely in Picture and Effigie. The Eagle had beene a fit present for the Germans, in regard their Bird hath mew'd most of her feathers lately. The Dolphin too had beene most welcome to the French, and then had you but clapt Perseus on his Pegasus, brandishing his Sword, the Dragon yawning on his backe under the horses feet, with Python's dart through his throat, there had beene a Divine St. George for this Nation: but since you have improvidently shuffled them altogether, it now rests onely that wee provide an immediate succession, and to that purpose I will instantly proclaime a free Election. O yes, O yes, O yes, By the Father of the gods, and the King of men.
Whereas wee having observed a very commendable practise taken into frequent use by the Princes of these latter Ages, of perpetuating the memory of their famous enterprizes, sieges, battels, victories, in Picture, Sculpture, Tapistry, Embroyderies, and other manifactures, where with they have embellished their publicke Palaces, and taken into Our more distinct and serious consideration, the particular Christmas, hanging of the Guard-Chamber of this Court, wherein the Navall Victory of 88. is to the eternall glory of this Nation exactly delineated; and whereas We likewise out of a propheticall imitation of this so laudable custome, did for many thousand yeares before, adorne and beautifie the eighth roome of Our caelestiall Mansion, commonly called the Starre-Chamber, with the military adventures, stratagems, atchievements, feats and defeats, performed in Our Owne person, whilst yet Our Standard was erected, and Wee a Combattant in the Amorous Warfare. It hath notwithstanding▪ after mature deliberation, and long debate, held first in our owne inscrutable bosome, and afterwards communicated with Our Privy Councell, seemed meet to Our Omnipotency, causes to Our selfe best knowne, to and dis-array Our fore-said starre-Chamber all those Ancient Constellations which have for so many Ages been sufficiently norious, admit into their vacant places, such onely as shall be qualified with exemplar Vertue and eminent Desert, there to shine in d ble Characters of glory to all Posterity. It is therefore Our divine will and pleasure, voluntarily, and out of Our owne free and proper motion, meere grace and speciall favour, by these presents to specifie and declare to all Our loving People, that it shall be lawfull for any Person whatsoever, that conceiveth him or her selfe to bee really endued with any Heroicall Vertue or transcendent Merit, worthy so high a calling and dignity, to bring their severall pleas and pretences before Our Right trusty and and Welbeloved Cozen, and Councellor, Don Mercury, and god Momus, &c. Our peculiar Deligates for that affaire, upon whom We have transferr'd an absolute power to conclude, and determine without Appeale or Revocation, accordingly as to their wisedomes it shall in such cases appeare behovefull and expedient. Given at Our Palace in Olympus the first day of the first moneth, in the first yeare of the Reformation.
Who's this appeares?
This is a subterranean Fiend, Plutus in this Dialect term'd Riches, or the god of Gold; a Poyson hid by Providence in the botome of the Seas, and Navill of the Earth, from mans discovery, where if the seeds begunne to sprout above-ground, the excrescence was carefully guarded by Dragons; yet at last by humane curiosity brought to light, to their owne destruction; this being the true Pandora's box, whence issued all those mischiefes that now fill the Vniverse.
That I prevent the message of the gods
Thus with my haste, and not attend their summous;
Which ought in Iustice call me to the place
I now require of Right, is not alone
To shew the just precedence that I hold
Before all earthly, next th'immortall Powers;
But to exclude the hope of partiall Grace
In all Pretenders, who, since I descend
To equall tryall, must by my example,
Waving your favour, clayme by sole Desert.
If Vertue must inherit, shee's my slave;
I lead her captive in a golden chayne,
About the world: Shee takes her Forme and Being
From my creation; and those barren seeds
That drop from Heaven, if I not cherish them
With my distilling dewes, and sotive hear,
They know no vegetation; but expos'd
To blasting winds of freezing Poverty,
Or not shoot forth at all, or budding, wither:
Should I proclaime the daily sacrifice
Brought to my Temples by the toyling rout,
Not of the fat and gore of abject Beasts,
But humane sweat, and blood powr'd on my Altars,
I might provoke the envy of the gods.
Turne but your eyes and marke the busie world,
Climbing steepe Mountaines for the sparkling stone,
Piercing the Center for the shining Ore,
And th'Oceans bosome to rake pearly sands,
Crossing the torrid and the frozen Zones,
Midst Rocks and swallowing Gulfes, for gainful trade,
And through opposing swords, fire, murdering Cano ▪
Skaling the walled Townes for precious spoyles.
Plant in the passage to your heavenly seats,
These horrid dangers, and then see who dares
Advance his desperate foot; yet am I sought,
And oft in vaine, through these, and greater hazards;
I could discover how your Deitie
Are for my sake sleighted, despis'd, abus'd,
Your Temples, Shrines, Altars, and Images
Vncover'd, rifled, robb'd, and disarray'd
By sacrilegious hands: yet is this treasure
To th' golden Mountaine, where I sit ador'd
With superstitious solemne rights convay'd,
And becomes sacred there, the sordid wretch
Not daring touch the consecrated Ore,
Or with prophane hands lessen the bright heape;
But this might draw your anger downe on mortals
For rendring me the homage due to you:
Yet what is said may well expresse my power
Too great for Earth, and only fit sor Heaven.
Now, for your pastime, view the naked root,
Which in the dirty earth, and base mould drown'd.
Sends forth this precious Plant, and golden fruit.
You lusty Swaines, that to your grazing flocks
Pie amorous Roundelayes; you toyling Hinds,
That barbe the fields, and to your merry Teames
Whistle your passions; and you mining Moles,
That in the bowels of your mother-Earth
Dwell the eternall burthen of her wombe,
Cease from your labours, when Wealth bids you play,
Sing, dance, and keepe a cheerefull holy-day.
Plutus, the gods know and confesse your power,
Which feeble Vertue seldome can resist;
Stronger then Towers of brasse, or Chastity;
Iove knew you when he courted Danae,
And Cupid weares you on that Arrowes head
That still prevailes, But the gods keepe their Throne:
To enstall Vertue, not her Enemies,
They dread thy force, which even themselves have felt,
Witnesse Mount-Ida, where the Martiall Maid,
And frowning Iuno, did to mortall eyes
Naked, for gold, their sacred bodies show,
Therefore for ever be from heaven banish'd.
But since with toyle srom undiscover'd Worlds
Thou art brought hither, where thou first didst breath
The thirst of Empire, into Regall brests,
And frightedst quiet Peace from her meek Throne,
Filling the World with tumult, blood, and warre,
Follow the Camps of the contentious earth,
And be the Conqu'rers slave, but he that can
Or conquer thee, or give thee Vertuous stampe,
Shall shine in heaven a pure immortall Lampe,
Nay stay, and take my benediction along with you. I could, being here a Co-Iudge, like others in my place, now that you are condemn'd, either rayle at you, or breake jests upon you, but I rather chuse to loose a word of good counsell, and entreat you to bee more carefull in your choyse of company, for you are alwayes found either with Misers, that not use you at all; or with fooles, that know not how to use you well: Be not hereafter so reserv'd and coy to men of worth and parts, and so you shall gaine such credit, as at the next Sessions you may bee heard with better successe. But till you are thus reform'd, I pronounce this positive sentence, That wheresoever you shall chuse to abide, your society shall adde no credit or reputation to the party, nor your discontinuance, or totall absence, be matter of disparagement to any man; and whosoever shall hold a contrary estimation of you, shall be condem'd to weare perpetuall Motley, unlesse he recant his opinion. Now you may voyd the Court.
What Creature's this?
The Antipodes to the other, they move like
Two Buckets, or as two nayles drive out one another;
If Riches depart, Poverty will enter.
I nothing doubt (Great and Immortal Powers)
But that the place, your wisedome hath deny'd
My foe, your Iustice will conferre on me;
Since that which renders him incapable,
Proves a strong plea for me. I could pretend,
Even in these rags, a larger Soveraignty
Then gaudy Wealth in all his pompe can boast;
For marke how few they are that share the World;
The numerous Armies, and the swarming Ants
That sight and toyle for them, are all my Subjects,
They take my wages, we are my Livery:
Invention too and Wit, are both my creatures,
And the whole race of Vertue is my Off-spring;
As many mischiefes issue from my wombe,
And those as mighty, as proceed from gold.
Oft o're his Throne I wave my awfull Scepter,
And in the bowels of his state command,
When 'midst his heapes of coyne, and hils of gold,
I pine, and starve the avaritious Foole.
But I decline those titles, and lay clayme
To heaven, by right of Divine contemplation;
She is my Darling, I, in my sost lap,
Free from disturbing cares, bargaines, accounts,
Leases, Rents, Stewards, and the feare of theeves,
That vex the rich, nurse her in calme repose,
And with her, all the Vertues speculative,
Which, but with me, find no secure retreat.
For entertainment of this houre, Ile call
A race of people to this place, that live
At Natures charge, and not importune heaven
To chayne the winds up, or keepe back the stormes,
To stay the thunder, or forbid the hayle
To thresh the unreap'd eare; but to all weathers,
Both chilling srost, and scalding Sunne, expose
Their equall face. Come forth, my swarthy traine,
In this faire circle dance, and as you move.
Marke, and foretell happy events of Love.
I cannot but wonder that your perpetuall conversation with Poets and Philosophers hath furnished you with no more Logick, or that you should thinke to impose upon us so grosse an inference, as because Plutus and you are contrary, therefore whatsoever is denyed of the one, must bee true of the other; as if it should follow of necessity, because hee is not Iupiter, you are. No, I give you to know, I am better vers'd in cavils with the gods, then to swallow such a fallacie, for though you two cannot be together in one place, yet there are many places that may be without you both, and such is heaven, where neither of you are likely to arrive: therefore let me advise you to marry your selfe to Content, and beget sage Apothegmes, and goodly morall Sentences in disprayse of Riches, and contempt of the world.
Thou dost pres me too much, poore ndy wretch,
To claime a station in the Firmament,
Because thy humble Cottage, or thy Tub
Nses some lazie or Pedantique vertue
In the cheape Sun-shine, or by shady springs
With roots and pot-herbs; where thy right hand,
Ting those humane passions from the mind,
Vpon whose stocks faire blooming vertues flourish,
Degdeth Nature, and ummeth sense,
And Gorgon-like, turnes active men to stone.
Wee not require the dull society
Of your necessitated Tempe,
Or that unnaturall stupidity
That knowes nor joy nor sorrow; nor you forc'
Falsly exalted passive Fortitude
Above the active: This low abject brood,
That fix their seats in mediocrity,
Become your servile minds; but we advance
Such vertues only as admit excesse,
Brave bounteus Acts, Regall
All-seeing Prudence, Magnimity
That knowes no bound, and that Heroick vertue
For which Antiquity hath left no name,
But patternes only, such as Hercules,
Achilles, Thesus. Backe to thy loath'd cell,
And when thou seest the new enlightned Spheare,
Study to know but what those Worthies were.
See where Dame Fortune comes, you may know her by her wheele, and that vayle over her eys, with which she hopes like a seel'd Pigeon to mount above the Clouds, and pearch in the eighth Spheare: listen, she begins.
I come not here (you gods) to plead the Right,
By which Antiquity assign'd my Deitie,
Though no peculiar station 'mongst the Stars,
Yet generall power to rule their influence,
Or boast the Title of Omnipotent,
Ascrib'd me then, by which I rival'd Iove,
Since you have cancell'd all those old records▪
But confident in my good cause and merit,
Claime a succession in the vacant Orbe,
For since Astraea fled to heaven, I sit
Her Deputy on Earth, I hold her skales
And weigh mens Fates out, who have made me blind,
Because themselves want eyes to see my causes,
Call me inconstant, 'cause my workes surpasse
The shallow fathom of their human reason;
Yet here, like blinded Iustice, I dispence
With my impartiall hands, their constant lots,
And if desertlesse, impious men engrosse
My best rewards, the fault is yours, you gods,
That scant your graces to mortality,
And niggards of your good, scarce spare the world
One vertuous, for a thousand wicked men.
It is no error to conferre dignity,
But to bestow it on a vicious man;
I gave the dignity, but you made the vice,
Make you men good, and I'le make good men happy▪
That Plutus is refus'd, dismayes me not,
He is my Drudge, and the externall pompe,
In which he decks the World, proceeds from me,
Not him; like Harmony, that not resides
In strings, or notes, but in the hand and voyce.
The revolutions of Empires, States,
Scepters, and Crownes, are but my game and sport,
Which as they hang on the events of Warre,
So those depend upon my ning wheele.
You walike Squadrons, who in ,
Dispute the Right of Kings, which I ,
Present the modell of that martiall ,
By which, when Grownes are stak'd, I rule the game.
Madam, I should censure you, pro salso clamre, for preferring a scandalous crosbill of recrimination against the gods, but your blindnesse shall excuse you. Alas! what would it advantage you, if vertue were as universall as vice is? it would onely follow, that as the world now exclaimes upon you for exalting the vicious, it would then raile as fast at you sor depressing the vertuous; so they would still keepe their tune, though you chang'd their Ditty.
The mists, in which future wrap'd,
That oft succeed beside the purposes
Of him that workes, his dull eyes not discerning
The first great cause, offer'd thy clouded shape
To his enquiring search; so in the darke
The groping world ound thy Deity,
And gave thee rule over contingencies,
Which, to the piercing eye of Providence,
Being fix'd and certaine, where past and to come,
Are alwayes present, thou dost disappeare,
Losest thy being, and art not all.
Be thou then onely a deluding Phantome,
At best a blind guide, leading blinder fooles;
Who, would they but survay their mutuall wants,
And helpe each other, there were left no roome
For thy vaine ayd▪ Wisedome, whose strong-built plots
Leave nought to hazard, mocks thy futile power.
Industrious labour drags thee by the locks,
Bound to his toyling Car, and not attending
Till thou dispence, reaches his owne reward.
Only the lazie sluggard yawning lyes
Before thy threshold, gaping for thy dole,
And licks the easie hand that feeds his sloath.
The shallow, rash, and unadvised man
Makes thee his stale, disburdens all the follies
Of his mis-guided actions, on thy shoulders.
Vanish from hence, and seeke those Idets out
That thy santasticke god head hath allow'd,
And rule that giddy superstitious crowd,
Pleasure, a young woman with a smiling face, in a light lascivious habit, adorn'd with silver and gold, her Temples crown'd with a Garland of Roses, and over that a Rainbow circling her head downe to her shoulders.
What wanton's this?
This is the sprightly Lady Hedone, merry Gamester, this people call her Pleasure.
The reasons (equall Iudges) here alleag'd
By the dismist Pretenders, all concurre
To strengthen my just title to the Spheare.
Honour, or Wealth, or the contempt of both,
Have in themselves no simple reall good,
But as they are the meanes to purchase pleasure;
The paths that lead to my delicious Palace;
They for my sake, I for mine owne am priz'd.
Beyond me nothing is, I am the Goale.
The Iourneyes end, to which the sweating world,
And wearied Nature travels. For this, the best
And wisest sect of all Philosophers,
Made me the seat of supreme happinesse.
And though some, more austere, upon my ruines
Did to the prejudice of Nature, raise
Some petty low-built vertues, 'twas because
They wanted wings to reach my soaring pitch.
Had they beene Princes borne, themselves had prov'd
Of all mankind the most luxurious.
For those delights, which to their low condition
Were obvious, they with greedy appetite
Suck'd and devour'd: from offices of State,
From cares of family, children, wife, hopes, feares
Retir'd, the churlish in his Tub
Enjoy'd those pleasures which his tongue defam'd.
Nor am I rank'd 'mongst the supersluous goods;
My necessary offices preserve
Each single man, and propogate the kind.
Then am I universall as the light,
Or common Ayre we breath; and since I am
The generall desire of all mankind,
Civill Felicity must reside in me.
Tell me what rate my choycest pleasures beate,
When for the short delight of a poore draught
Of cheape cold water, great Lysimachus
Rendred himselfe slave to the Scythians.
Should I the curious structure of my seats,
The art and beauty of my seuerall objects,
Rehearse at large, your bounties would reserve
For every sense a proper consellation;
But I present their Persons to your eyes.
Come forth my subtle Organs of delight,
With changing figures please the curiouss eye,
And charme the care with moving Harmony.
Bewitching Syren, guilded ,
Thou hast with cunning artifice display'd
Th' enamel'd outside, and the honied verge
Of the saie cup, where deadly poyson lurks.
Within, a thousand sorrowes dance the round;
And like a shell, Paine circles thee without,
Griefe is the shadow waiting on thy steps,
Which, as thy joyes' ginne tow'rds their West decline,
Doth to a Gyants spreading sorme extend
Thy Dwarfish stature. Thou thy selse art Paine,
Greedy, intense Desire, and the keene edge
Of thy fierce Appetite, oft strangles thee,
And cuts thy slender thread; but still the terrour
And apprehension of thy hasty end,
Mingles with Gall thy most refined sweets;
Yet thy Cyrcan charmes transforme the world.
Captaines, that have resisted warre and death,
Nations, that over Fortune have triumph'd,
Are by thy Magicke made effeminate.
Empires, that knew no limits but the Poles,
Have in thy wanton lap melted away.
Thou wert the Author of the first excesse
That drew this reformation on the gods. (have
Canst thou then dreame, those Powers, that from heaven
Banish'd th' effect, will there enthrone th' cause?
To thy voluptuous Denne, fly Witch, from hence,
There dwell, for ever drown'd in brutish sense.
I concurre, and am growne so weary of these tedious pleadings, as I'le packe up too and be gone: Besides, I see a crowd of other suitors pressing hither, I'le stop'em, take their petitions and preferre 'em above; and as I came in bluntly without knocking, and no body bid me welcome; so I'le depart as abruptly without taking leave, and bid no body fare-well.
These, with forc'd reasons, and strain'd arguments,
Vrge vaine presences, whilst your Actions plead,
And with a silent importunity
Awake the drousie Iustice of the gods
To crowne your deeds with immortality.
The growing Titles of your Ancestors,
These Nations glorious Acts, joyn'd to the stocke
Of your owne Royall vertues, and the cleare
Reflexe they take from th'imitation
Of your fam'd Court, make Honours storie full,
And have to that secure fix'd state advanc'd
Both you and them, to which the labouring world,
Wading through streames of blood, sweats to aspire.
Those ancient Worthies of these famous Isles,
That long have slept, in fresh and lively shapes
Shall strait appeare, where you shall see your selfe
Circled with moderne Heroes, who shall be
In Act, what ever elder times can boast,
Noble, or Great; as they in Prophesie
Were all but what you are. Then shall you see
The sacred hand of bright Eternity
Mould you to Stars, and fix you in the Spheare.
To you, your Royall halfe, to them shee'll joyne
Such of this traine, as with industrious steps
In the faire prints your vertuous feet have made,
Though with unequall paces, follow you.
This is decreed by Iove, which my returne
Shall see perform'd; but first be hold the rude
And old Abiders here, and in them view
The point from which your full perfections grew.
You naked, ancient, wild Inhabitants,
That breath'd this Ayre, and prest this flowery Earth,
Come from those shades where dwels eternall night,
And see what wonders Time hath brought to light.
RAise from these rockie cliffs, your heads,
Brave Sonnes, and see where Glory spreads
Her glittering wings, where Majesty
Crown'd with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye
Diffusive joy, where Good and Faire,
Vnited sit in Honours Chayre.
Cll forth your aged Priests, and chrystall streames.
To warme their hearts, and waves in these bright beames.
From your consecrated woods,
Holy Druids. 2. Silver stoods,
From your channels fring'd with slowers,
Hither move; forsake your bowers
Srew'd with hallowed Oaken leaves,
Deck'd with slags and siedgie eaves,
And behold a wonder. 3. Sy,
What doe your dulr eyes survay?
We see at once in dead of night
A Sunne appeare, and yet a bright
Noone-day, springing from Starre-light.
Looke up, and see the darkened Spheare
Depriv'd of light, her eyes shine there;
These are more sparkling then those were.
These shed a nobler influence,
These by a pure intelligence
Of more transcendent Vertue move,
These first feele, then kindle Iove,
From the bosomes they inspire,
These receive a mutuall sire;
And where their slames impure returne,
These can quench as well as burne.
Here the fare victorious eyes
Make Worth only Beauties prize,
Here the hand of Vertue tyes
'Bout the heart lov's amorous chayne,
Captives tryumph, Vassals reigne,
And none live here but the slaine.
These are th' Hisperian bowers, whose faire trees beare
Rich golden fruit, and yet no Dragon near.
Then, from your impris' ning wombe,
Which is the cradle and the tombe
Of Brittish Worthies (faire sonnes) send
A troope of Heroes, that may lend
Their hands to ease this loaden grove,
And gather the ripe fruits of Love.
Open thy stony entrailes wide,
And breake old tlas, that the pride
Of three fam'd kingdomes may be spy'd.
Pace forth thou mighty Brittish Hercules,
With thy choyce band, for only thou, and these,
May revell here, in Loves Hesperides.
HEre are shapes form'd it for heave,
Those move gracefully and ,
Here the Ayre and paces meet
So jus, as if the skilfull seet
Had struck the Vials▪ 1. 2. 3. So the Ear
Might the unefull footing heare.
And had the Musicke silent beene,
The eye a moving tune had seene.
These must in the unpeopled skie
Succeed, and governe Destinie,
Iove is temp'ring purer fire,
And will with brighter flames attire
These glorious lights. I must ascend
And helpe the Worke.
We cannot end
Heaven so much treasure. 2. Nor that pay
But rendring what it takes away.
Why should they that here can move
So well, be ever-fix'd above?
Or be to one eternall posture ty'd,
That can into such various figures slide.
Iove shall not, to enrich the Skie,
Beggar the Earth, their Fame shall fly
From hence alone, and in the Spheare
Kindle new Starres, whilst they rest here.
How can the shaft stay in the quiver,
Yet hit the marke?
Did not the River
Eridanus, the grace acquire
In Heaven and Earth to flow,
Above in streames of golden fire,
In silver waves below?
But shall not we, now thou art gone
Who wert our Nature, wither,
Or breake that triple Vnion
Which thy soule hld together?
In Concords pure immortall spring
I will my renew,
And a more aive Vertue bring
At my retune. Adieu.
VVHilst thus the Darlings of the Gods
From Honours Temple, to the Shrine
Of Beauty, and these sweet abodes
Of Love, we guide, let thy Divine
Aspects (Bright Deity) with faire
And Halcyon beames, bcalme the Ayre,
We bring Prince Arthur, or the brave
St. George himselfe (great Queene) to you,
You'll soone discerne him; and we have▪
A Guy, a Beavis, or some true
Round-Table Knight, as everfought
For Lady, to each Beauty brought.
Plant in their Martl , War's seat,
Your peacefull pledges of warm snow,
And, if a speaking , repeat
In Loves know guage, tales of woe;
Say, in soft whispers of the Palme,
As eyes shoot darts, so Lips shed Balme.
For though you seeme like Captives, led
In triumph by the Foe away,
Yet on the Conqu'rers necke you tread,
And the fierce Victor proves your prey,
What heart is then secure from you,
That can, though vanqui, yet subdue?
BE fix'd you rapid Orbes, that beare
The changing seasons of the yeare
On your swift wings, and see the old
Decrepit Spheares growne darke and cold▪
Nor did Iove quench her fires, these bright
Flames, have ecclips'd her sullen light:
This Royall Payre, for whom Fate will
Make Motion cease, and Time stand still▪
Since Good is here so perfect, as no Worth
Is left for After-Ages to bring forth.
Mortality cannot with more
Religious zeale, the gods adore.
My Truths, from humane eyes conceal'd,
Are naked to their sight reveal'd.
Nor doe their Actions, from the guide
Of my exactest precepts slide.
And as their owne pure Soules ntwin'd,
So are their Subjects hearts combin'd.
So just, so gentle is their sway,
As it seemes Empire to obey.
And their faire Fame, like incense hurld
Altars, hath perfum'd the world.
S O. Wisedome. A L. Truth. E V S. Pure Adoration.
H O. Concord, D I. Rule E V P. Cleare Reputation.
Cwne this King, this Queene, this Nation▪
, Truth, &c.
Brave Spirits, whose adventrous feet
Have to the Mountaines top aspir'd,
Where faire Desert, and Honour meet,
Here, from the toyling Presse retyr'd,
Secure from all disturbing Evill,
For ever in my Temple revell.
With wreathes of Starres circled about,
Guild all the spacious Firmament,
And smiling on the panting Routs
That labour in the steep ascent,
With your resistlesse influence guide
Of humane change th' incertaine tide.
But oh you Royall Turtles, shed,
When you from Earth remove,
On the ripe fruits of your chaste bed,
Those sacred seeds of Love.
Which no Power can but yours dispence,
Since you the patterne beare from hence.
Then from your fruitfull race shall slow
Endlesse succession.
Scepters shall bud, and Lawrels blow
'Bout their Immortall Throne.
Propitious Stars shall crowne each birth,
Whilst you rule them, and they the Earth.