TO this faire Company I am to ſay,
You're Welcome all, to a well meaning play,
For ſuch our Author made it, with intent
To defame none. His Muſe is innocent,
A Virgin yet, that has not found the wayes
Out of foule crimes to raiſe her ſelfe a prayſe;
And therefore She deſires, you would excuſe
All bitter ſtraines, that ſuite a Satyr Muſe:
And that which ſo much takes the Vulgar Eare,
Looſenes of ſpeech, which they for jeſts do heare;
She hopes none ſuch are here, therfore ſhe dares
Venter this ſtory, purg'd from lighter ayres:
A piece intire, without or patch, or maime,
Round in it ſelfe, and euery where the ſame.
And if there be not in't, what they call wit,
There might haue bin, had it bin thought ſo fit.
A Shepheards Muſe gently of loue does ſing,
And with it mingles no impurer thing.
Such ſhe preſents vnto your eares, and eyes,
And yet your Chriſtian freedome not denies
Of liking, or diſliking what you will,
You may ſay this is well, or that is ill,
Without diſpute; for why ſhould you that pay
For what you haue, be taught what you ſhould ſay,
Or made to judge by any ſquare, or rule,
As if you came not to a Stage, but Schoole?
No, he that made it, ſayes, if you will eate,
He will not force your ſtomackes, there's your meat,
Which if you like tis well, if not, all's one,
There muſt be difference in opinion:
Beſides, he's ſure what ever hee could wiſh,
Your taſte, and not his Art muſt praiſe the diſh.
HEre in this Grove I left her, here amongſt
Theſe Poplars, Laurells, and theſe Sycamors,
Guilty of her ſad loſſe: And yet behold
They doe appeare as freſh and full of verdure,
As when my Love cloth'd in her cleareſt lookes,
Did give them grace and luſtre: Why do we
Poore ſilly men bred up in cares, and feare,
The Nurſe of our Religion, ſtoope to Nature,
That onely knowes to forme, not to preſerve
What ſhe has made, ſince careleſſe of her worke,
She leaves to giddy Fortune the whole power
Of ruling us: Theſe ſenſeleſſe Trees ſtand ſtill,
And flouriſh too, and in their pride upbraide
My loſſe to me; but my deare Sylvia being
Natures beſt peece, made to excuſe the reſt
Of all her vulgar formes, ay me! was left
To deſolation, till ſome horrid Satyr
Bred in theſe Woods, and furious in his luſts
Made her his prey, and now has carried her
Into his darke retirings, or ſome Cave
Where her poore Thyrſis never more ſhall ſee her.
But I will be reveng'd, this Wood that now
Is ſo bedeckt with leaves and freſh array,
Ile levell with the ground, untill it be
As deſolate as I.
Alas poore ſhepheard!
It ſhall affoord no ſhade to any thing
That hither us'd to come for its releife;
But henceforth be for ever infamous:
That when ſome gentle ſhepheard paſſes by,
And ſees this ground rent with the crooked plough,
Here, he may ſay, here 'twas that Sylvia
Was loſt, and then ſhall turne another way.
Good Thyrſis, do not make ſo much of griefe,
Y'have fed it with too many teares already,
Take comfort now.
What has my preſent ſtate
To doe with comfort? if you ſee the trees
Widdow'd of leaves, the earth growne hard, and ſpoild
Of the greene mantles which ſhe wont to weare,
You wonder not if winter then appeare.
By theſe we know that ſeaſon.
And muſt I,
When ſhe is gone, whoſe Sun-like eyes did cheriſh
An everlaſting Summer in my life,
Feele any ſpring of joy to comfort me?
No father, griefe with me is beſt in ſeaſon.
But whilſt you mourne thus, who looks to your flock?
All as the ſhepheard is, ſuch be his flocks,
So pine and languiſh, they, as in deſpaire
He pines and languiſhes, their fleecy locks
Let hang diſorder'd, as their Maſters haire,
Since ſhe is gone that deskt both him, and them.
And now what beauty can there be to live
When ſhe is loſt that did all beauty give?
But yet, mee thinks, for one that is a ſtranger,
Scarce knowne to any here, but by her name,
Theſe plaints are overmuch: beſides there are
In fruitfull Arcady as faire as ſhe,
I'me ſure more rich and wiſe, make out of them
A choiſe. Nerina is as faire as ſhe,
Dorinda's flocks are more then Silvia's,
And carry on their backs more wooll then hers.
Let ſuch baſe Peſants, as the Gods, do hate,
Admire their wealth, and them, for what they have,
Their bodies, and their ſoules materiall
Alike, of droſſie ſubſtance are compounded,
And can contemplate nothing but the earth.
No, Silvia, whom ſome better God (perhaps
For the reward of my well tuned pipe)
Sent downe to me made up of ayre, and fire,
Though ſince, becauſe I knew not how to uſe
With faire reſpect a gift ſo great as ſhe,
Has juſtly reft her from me, is ſo much,
So great a part of me, that in her abſence,
Amidſt my griefe I feele ſome little joy,
To ſee how much of me each minute waſteth,
And gives me hope that when I ſhall diſſolve
This earthly ſubſtance, and be pure as ſhe
(For ſure the Gods have taken her undefil'd)
I may injoy her lookes, and though it be
Prophane to touch a hallowed thing like her,
I may adore her yet, and recompence
With my religion the proud thoughts I had
once to injoy her.
See how fond you are
T'embrace a ſhadow, and to leave the ſubſtance.
The love of Hylas to Nerina has
More hopes then yours; though ſhe be yong and coy
Yet whilſt Nerina is, and Hylas too,
One time or other, they may both haue joy
May they prove happy in each others love,
And nothing pleaſe, but what each other do,
For ſo liv'd Thirſis and his Silvia,
Whilſt Silvia was, and Thirſis was her loue,
What ever Thirſis pip'd pleaſd Silvia,
Thirſis admird what ever Sylvia ſung
And both their joyes were equall, or but one,
Well I can now remember (and it is
Some comfort to remember what I moane)
That when our loves began, how firſt I gaz'd
On her,, and ſhe was pleaſd that I ſhould looke
Till greedily I had devour'd the hooke.
Love gave me courage then to ſpeake my thoughts,
And gave her pitty to receive my words,
They linkt our hearts together: from that time
When ere ſhe ſaw me ſtrike the furious Boare,
(Though then my caſe ſhe ru'd, and ſigh'd full oft)
Yet was ſhe pleas'd to ſee my victory,
And I receiv'd my vigour from her eye.
Then would ſhe make me Chaplets of the beſt
And choiceſt flowers to adorne my head:
Which when I wore, methought I then did graſpe
The Empire of the world; but what of that?
The more I then enjoy'd of heavenly bliſſe,
The more my preſent griefe and paſſion is.
Well Thyrſis, ſince my words doe but renew
The ſtory of your griefe, I'le leave to uſe
Perſwaſions to you; for 'tis time I ſee,
And not my words, muſt cure your maladie
That time muſt put a period to my life,
Or elſe it never will unto my griefe:
Come Boy, and under this ſame hanging bow,
The note which thou attemperſt to my words,
Sing, and be happier then thy Maſter, Boy.
SHall I becauſe my Love is gon,
Accuſe thoſe golden darts
Which to a bleſſed union
Strooke our two loving hearts,
Since Fortune, and not Love hath caus'd my moane?
No, her pure Image I ſhall prize,
Imprinted in my breſt,
More then the faireſt Miſtreſſe eyes
That ever Swaine poſſeſt,
Which in eternall bonds my fancie tyes.
Come then you ſharpeſt griefes, and try
If you can pierce my heart,
But uſe, if you would have me dye,
The beſt you can of Art,
To wound a breaſt ſo arm'd with conſtancy.
Enough: I'le ſigh the reſt out: Goe my boy,
Be carefull of thy tender Lambes, whilſt I
Seeke out ſome hidden place to pine and dye.
BEleeve Mirtillus, never any love
Was bought with other price then love alone,
Since nothing is more precious then it ſelfe.
It being the pureſt abſtract of that fire,
Which wiſe Prometheus firſt indu'd us with;
And he muſt love that would be lov'd againe.
Why? who can ſay Mirtillus does not love,
Mirtillus, he who has imploy'd his youth
Ever in ſervice of the faireſt Nymphs.
Mirtillus cannot love.
No, gentle Hylas?
This Ribband, and this haire you ſee me weare
Are they not enſignes of a lover? ſay
What ſhepheardeſſe whom ever Swaine thought faire,
Has not Mirtillus courted, and obtaind
Some favour from? but you will thinke becauſe
I do not fold my armes, and ſigh, and ſpend
The dayes the Gods have given me to rejoice,
In whining paſſion, walking ſtill alone,
Now proud with hopes, then caſt downe with deſpaire,
Unequall to my ſelfe in every thing,
I cannot love. No, Hylas, know I love
Dorinda, Cloris, Amarillis, all
Whom ever love did to his Altars call:
And when this Miſtreſſe frownes, I am content
To take another, when that flame is ſpent
By time, or put out by a Rivall, ſtraite
A third ſupplies her place, perhaps more worthy,
If leſſe, becauſe ſhe loves, Ile thinke her ſo.
Alas, Mirtillus, I doe pitty thee,
Pittie the error which thou wandreſt in,
That thinkſt thou lov'ſt, and know'ſt not what it is,
Why what is love ſay you, if mine be not?
I know Mirtillus, that no lover yet
Purchaſ'd a laſting pleaſure without griefe;
For love has gall in it, as well as honie,
And ſo compounded, that who ſo ere will taſte
The ſweetes of it, muſt take the bitter too,
Out of both which is made our conſtancy,
You that embrace the falſe delights alone,
Are a faign'd lover, or more truly none.
I know not what you meane by conſtancy,
I'me ſure I loue the faireſt.
Still you erre,
For if you lov'd the faireſt, none had bin
The object of your choiſe but my Nerina,
Nerina, ſhe the glory of theſe woods
The only ſubject of all ſhepheards ſong.
She has her ſhare of beautie with the reſt,
And I confeſſe ſhe's fit for love as any;
But why ſhe onely ſhould take up your breaſt,
And ſhut out all that have a right as good,
Whoſe equall, or tranſcendent beautie pleades
As juſt a title to't, as hers can do,
I cannot reach the reaſon, but admire
Your faith, and what you praiſe, your conſtancie.
Mirtillus, though I know your ſtubborn heart
Could never entertaine a lovers thought,
Yet did I thinke you would have bin more tender
How you prophan'd a name ſo ſacred as
Nerina's is, whom never any Swaine
Nor rurall God, nor Satyr, though he be
Of ſavage kinde would ever violate;
Nerina in whoſe forme love ever dwells
Attended by the Graces, which do range
Themſelves in order 'bout her comely face,
Whoſe breaſts without are hills of whiteſt ſnow,
Within the ſeate of blameleſſe modeſtie,
Regard of honor, and pure chaſtity
Nor may a looſe thought ever harbor there
To tempt ſuch lovers as you ſeeme to be.
Is it for that you ſlight her?
No, I loue her
As I do others, with whom I compare her.
But you that loue with ſuch intemperance,
Make of your love a glaſſe, wherein you ſee
Each thing much greater then indeed it is:
My loves too cold you ſay, but I am ſure
Yours is too hot for any to endure:
A meane perhaps 'twixt theſe I might approve
You might, if there were any meane in love.
But whilſt we talke thus, ſee, the flame has caught you,
your beauteous flame Nerina is at hand
Dorinda with her, dare you ſtay th'encounter.
No let's with draw, and watch her where ſhe gos.
DOrinda, I have miſt the chaſe to day,
Such is my chance, and he that lodg'd the deere,
Told me it was the faireſt in theſe Woods.
The Gods doe love you ſure, that have left
Your thoughts ſo free for ſport; mine are not ſo.
Thou art in love, I warrant, art thou not?
That angry God purſues me in his fury,
And forces me to love where I am ſcorn'd.
Hapleſſe Dorinda, why ſhould he deſpiſe thee?
Many a Swaine, and many a rurall God
Have ſought thy favors, and have ſought in vaine,
Now thou art juſtly puniſht with diſdaine.
Truſt me Sweet-heart, I cannot chooſe but wonder,
To thinke that one of ſuch a comely grace
(I doe not flatter you) could ſue to any
For love, who are much fitter to be lov'd:
Scorne him aſmuch as he does thee, for men
Love us no more, when we love them agen.
Ah good Nerina, you have ſpoken truth:
It may warne other Nymphs by my example
How they profeſſe their loves to any man:
I'me paſt the cure, he that wounded me,
Has left me quite diſarm'd, and robb'd me of
All thoſe defenſive arts which men will ſay
Are naturall and proper to our ſexe:
I cannot change a face, or weepe one teare,
Or laugh againſt my will, ſo violently
My Fate hath thruſt me to this love, that all
My faculties confeſſe their weakneſſe, and
My flame is got ſo much above my reach,
can not put it out, nor ſmother it.
Alas poore wench, tell me who is the man
Made up of ſo much rigid cruelty,
That I may ſhun him whereſoere I goe.
Do not you know him?
No.
I heare he boaſts
To every ſhepheard, and to every Nymph,
How much I love him.
Then it muſt be Daphnis.
Venus forgive me, if I do diſcloſe him,
But he will do't himſelfe: Tis he Nerina.
Daphnis, that woes my father to win me,
He is my daily ſuitor, now I know
How much he owes to pitty, and to thee:
Untill he pay that debt, I ſhall deſpiſe him.
Why, do not you love him as much as I?
Love him? I know no greater miſery,
Then to love one that's not of humane race,
A Tyger rather, but a Tyger is
More milde then he.
For loves ſake ſay not ſo.
He has a manly feature, and does ſhew
As much of grace in his comportment, as
The beſt of ſhepheards can him Titan made
Of better clay, then he did other men:
Although his heart be flint, and hardeſt rocke.
Yet is his heart ſo hard, or are my parts
Rather unequall to his high deſerts?
For he can love I ſee, ſince you he loves,
And you deſerve it: had he thought me worthy,
He would have lov'd me too; but as I am
Worthleſſe Dorinda, I am made his ſcorne,
And I had rather be ſo, then Nerina
Should want a ſervant ſuch as Daphnis is.
Prethee no more of him, I hate his name
As much, as I would do the loſſe of honor,
Which he injuriouſly would rob me off,
No, no, Dorinda, if by love I be
Inhrald to any, Daphnis is not he.
Why, is there any can deſerve you more?
Yes many, that I could tell how to love
Rather then him: for why ſhould I love him
Whilſt Hylas lives and languiſhes for me?
Hylas who lov'd me in my infancy,
And being then a boy was never well
If I was abſent, nor indeed was I
Content with any but his company.
Our flocks ſtill fed together, I on him,
And he on me did feed his greedie eyes.
Since though his yeares have ſtild him man, he has
Continu'd that firſt love with ſuch reſpects,
So full of innocence and ſimple truth,
That howſoere my outward coyneſſe is,
My heart within tells me, 'tis onely his:
Ay me! my father! prithee let's away.
But Daphnis comes with him, for loves ſake ſtay.
PAn be as cruell to his flocks and him,
As he has bin to me.
Go, leave your curſing,
And follow her, let me alone with him.
Ha! have I found you? Hoh! Nerina, ſtay,
Your father calls you; was not that my daughter
That made away ſo faſt?
Who, ſhe thats gon?
eleeve your eies no more, they are falſe to you.
Could you take one for her, thats nothing like her.
Twas Cloris went from us.
Iſt poſſible?
Tis true.
I thought, that it had bin my love.
I durſt have ſworne that ſhe had bin my daughter,
What made ſhe here? 'Twill nere be otherwiſe;
Young women will be chatting with young men,
What ere their father ſay. It was not ſo
When I was young, a boy, as you are, ſhepheards.
Wee are not men with him, till after fiftie.
We never durſt keepe company with women,
Nor they with us, each one did carefully
Attend his charge: And when the time was come
That we grew ripe in yeares, and were ſtaid youths,
Our Fathers would provide us wives: we did not
Carve for our ſelves, as now a daies they doe:
But now our children thinke themſelves as wiſe,
Nay wiſer then their Fathers, and will rule 'em:
They can no ſooner peepe out of the ſhell,
But they muſt love forſooth; I would faine know,
Whether 'twere fit a Maide ſhould be in love,
(I ſpeak now of that skittiſh girle my daughter
Before ſhe aske her Fathers leave and liking?
Tis true Charinus, 'twere not fit indeed:
Who ſhould beſtow the daughter, but the Father?
But Shepheards did you never heare, that once
There was an Age, the neareſt to the Gods:
An age we rather praiſe then imitate;
When no mans will, nor womans was inforc'd,
To any bent, but its owne motion:
Each follow'd Natures lawes, and by inſtinct
Did love the faireſt, and injoy'd their wiſhes;
Love then not ty'd to any intereſt
Of blood or fortune, haſtned to his end,
Without controll, nor did the Shepheard number
Her ſheepe that was his choice, but every grace
That did adorne her beauteous minde or face;
Riches with love then were not valued,
Pure uncompounded love, that could deſpiſe
The whole worlds riches for a Miſtreſſe eyes.
Pray tell me Daphnis, you are young and handſome,
The lover of our faireſt Nymph Nerina:
Would you for all that fruitfull Sicilie
Can yeeld, or all the wealth of Perſia,
Change one poore locke of your faire Miſtreſſe haire,
Whilſt ſhe is yours, and you her ſhepheard are.
Would ſhe were mine, I'de aske no portion.
Spoke like a Lover of the ancient ſtampe.
Sonne, ſonne, ſhe ſhall be yours: why? am not I
Her Father, ſhe my daughter; may not I
Beſtow her where I pleaſe?
Yes if ſhe like
The man, ſhe will beſtow her ſelfe, ne're feare it.
What? ſhe beſtow herſelfe without my leave?
No, no, Mirtillus, you miſtake my daughter.
I cannot get her once to thinke of marriage,
And truely I do muſe to ſee a wench,
That in all other things (although I ſay it)
Has wit at will, can pin her ſheepe in fold
As well as any, knowes when to drive them home:
And there ſhe can do twenty things as well:
Yet when I ſpeake to her of marriage,
She turnes the head, ſhee'le be a Dryade, ſhe
Or one of thoſe fond Nymphs of Dians traine.
Old man, beleeve her not, ſhe meanes not ſo,
She loves to keepe the thing for which ſhe is
So much belov'd, I meane her Maidenhead;
Which, whilſt ſhe has, ſhe knowes to play the Tyrant,
And make us ſlaves unto her ſcornefull lookes:
For beauty then it ſelfe moſt juſtifies,
When it is courted, if not lov'd, it dies.
Well, we will thinke of this: Come Daphnis, come,
I ſee you love my daughter, and you onely
Shall have her, it is I that tell you ſo,
That am her Father.
Thanke you good Charinus:
But I had rather ſhe had told me ſo.
THis day the Sunne ſhot forth his beames as faire
As ere he did, and through the trembling aire
Coole Zephyrus with gentle murmuring
Breath'd a new freſhneſſe on each Tree and Plant:
My Kids as game ſome too, as ere they were;
All ſhew a face of gladneſſe but my ſelfe.
And why not you aſwell by their example?
Not in this life, here joy would be untimely:
The Gods reſerve for me their comforts in
Th' Elyzian fields, or elſe they mocke my ſorrows.
O ſay not ſo, they're juſt and pittifull.
They are, but Father, (ſo I ſtill muſt call you)
When in the ſadneſſe of my ſoule I askt
Before the Altar of our great Apollo,
What ſhould become of me, or where my love
Bright Silvia was, whether alive or dead,
Why ſhould the Oracle reply, Goe home,
Thou ſhalt enjoy thy Silvia?
What more could you
Deſire to heare?
I, but when greedily
I askt the time, the anſwere was, That day
Thou art not Thirſis, nor ſhe Silvia.
Then in this life I'me ſure it muſt not be,
For I was Thyrſis ever call'd, and ſhe
Knowne by no other name then Sylvia.
It may be for your importunity
You might deſerve this anſwere, or elſe is it
Becauſe the Gods ſpeake not their myſteries
To be conceiv'd by every vulgar ſence?
I now remember what Acriſius,
The wiſe and vertuous Acriſius
Was wont to ſay.
Why? what ſaid he?
Does it concerne me ought?
It may do ſonne,
He bid us flie all curioſitie.
Seeking to know what future time may bring
To us, which onely Gods above do know,
And if at any time they do impart
This knowledge unto us, it is inwrapt
In ſuch a miſt, as we ſhall neere ſee through it:
Becauſe, ſaid he, we have enough to doe
With what is preſent: the celeſtiall powers
Would not cut of our hopes, nor multiply
Our cares, by ſhewing us our deſtinie.
Oh this diſcourſe to a deſpairing lover,
What comfort does it bring? for heavens ſake leave it,
And me; for I am beſt, I finde, alone:
Yet ſtay, there's ſomething that I faine would aske you:
You ſaid this Circle here about my necke
Has ſo continu'd from my infancie,
When firſt you tooke me up.
Tis true, that Circle
Hung looſely then about your necke, which ſince
Is filld with it. I left it there, becauſe
I ſaw ſome letters that were wrought about it.
And may they not be read?
I thinke they may:
But I could never finde ſo greate a Clerke,
As could tell how t'expound the meaning of them.
My life is nothing but a Myſtery;
That which I was, and that which I ſhall be,
Is equally unknowne. Now, if you'le leave me
Unto my thoughts, they'le keepe me companie.
I will, but here is one come to ſupplie me.
I, let me alone.
HE that mournes for a Miſteris,
When he knows not where ſhe is,
Let him kiſſe her ſhaddow faire,
Or ingender with the ayre;
Or ſee if with his teares he can
Swell at an ebb the Ocean:
Then, if he had not rather die,
Let him love none, or all as I.
This is the doctrine that I ever taught you,
And yet you profit not; theſe ſcurvy paſſions
Hang on you ſtill: You that are yong and active,
That may have all our Nymphs at your devotion,
To live a whining kind of life as this,
How ill it does become you?
True Mirtillus.
And yet I doe not envie thee the pleaſure,
Thou haſt in thy diſpers'd affections.
You would, if your head were right once; but love,
Your love does make an Aſſe of all your reaſon.
Sure, a true lover is more rationall
Then you, that love at randome every where.
I doe not thinke ſo; all the reaſon love
Has left you, to imploy in this diſcourſe,
Will hardly bring me to confeſſe it to you.
Why? all mens actions have ſome proper end,
Whereto their meanes and ſtrict endeavours tend:
Elſe there would be nought but perplexitie
In humane life, and all uncertaintie.
Well, what will you inferre on this?
That you,
Who know no end at all of wild deſire,
Muſt in your wandring fancie ſee this way
Leads unto madneſſe, when too late you finde
That nothing ſatisfies a boundleſſe minde.
I, but I do confine my ſelfe to two,
Or three at moſt; in this varietie
I pleaſe my ſelfe, for what is wanting in
One, I may finde it in another.
No.
Not in another, one is the onely Centre
The line of love is drawne to, muſt have all
Perfections in her, all that's good and faire,
Or elſe her Lover muſt beleeve her ſo.
I, there's your error, that's the ground of all
Your teares, and ſighs, your fruitleſſe hopes and feares,
When ſhe perhaps has not ſo much t'adorne her
As the leaſt grace your thoughts beſtow upon her.
Well, be it ſo; and yet this faire Idea
Which I have fram'd unto my ſelfe, does argue
Vertue in me; ſo that if ſhe be loſt,
Or dead, (ay me! the ſad remembrance of
My Sylvia cauſes this) yet I muſt love,
Becauſe the Character is indelible,
Writ in my heart, and heaven is witneſſe to it.
Well, I'le no more of this, I'le be converted,
Rather then call this griefe to your remembrance.
Why? doſt thou thinke I ever ſhall forget her?
Or that where ere I ſet my carefull foote,
As in this place, will it not tell me, that
Here Sylvia and I walkt hand in hand,
And here ſhe pluckt a flower, and anon
She gave it me; and then we kiſs't, and here
We mutually did vow each others love?
Nay leave good Thyrſis, I did come to tell you,
This holy-day our Royall Prince Euarchus
Being remov'd to his houſe here neere adjoyning,
Sent to command us to attend his perſon,
With all our ſports and wonted merriment,
Wherein you alwaies bore the chiefeſt part.
And I have heard, ('tis not to make you bluſh)
The Princeſſe has commended your rare Art
And hanſome graces, which you gave your Muſicke.
Come, you muſt goe with us, for Hylas is
So farre ingag'd in love, and neere his hopes,
He will not ſtirre unleſſe his Miſtreſſe goe.
Alas Mirtillus, I have broke my Pipe,
My ſighs are all the muſicke which I now
Can make, and how unfit I am t'attend
So great an expectation, you may ſee.
Yet give me leave to thinke on it, at night
Perhaps Ile goe with you.
Till then farewell.
The gentleſt youth that ever plaid on Pipe:
But ſee, who's here? oh, 'tis my other Lover,
His Miſtreſſe with him, I will not diſturbe him.
SHepheard, I would you'd leave to follow me.
How can I ſweeteſt, when my heart is with you?
With me? then tell me where, and ſee how ſoone
I ſhall reſtore it you.
Oh, this is fine.
It hangs upon your eies, where being ſcorcht
With their diſdaine, and dazel'd with their luſtre,
It flies for eaſe unto your roſie lips.
But beaten thence with many a harſh deniall,
Faine would it come for better harbour here,
But here for ever it muſt be an Exile:
For pittie then faire Nymph, receive it you;
And if you can, teach it the hardneſſe of
Your owne, and make it marble as yours is.
I ſee he is not ſuch a Novice as
I tooke him for; he can tell how to ſpeake.
Well, if my heart be ſuch as you will make it,
I am ſo much the gladder; that it is
Of ſtrength to be a fence unto my honour.
In vaine a fence is made to guard the ſheep,
Where no wolfe ever came.
What if within
It keepe a dog of prey, would they be ſafe?
For my part Ile not cheriſh in my breaſt,
The man that would undoe my chaſtitie.
Then cheriſh me, for you beſt know, I never
Attempted any thing to caſt a ſpot
On that white Innocence, to which I am
A moſt religious votary.
More foole you;
It may be if you had, it needed not
Ha' come to this.
Yes, yes, you may remember,
I bluſh to tell it you, when firſt my thoughts
Were pure and ſimple, (as I hope they are
Still, and will ſo continue, whilſt I flie
Such companie as you) I thought you one
Whom never any flame impure had toucht:
Then we converſt without ſuſpect together.
And am I not ſo ſtill? why do you now
Flie from me thus?
The cauſe I ſhall tell you,
Since you will not remember; though it be
Unfit for me to ſpeake, yet you ſhall know
How juſt my anger is.
Ay me! moſt wretched!
What have I don?
When tending of my flocks
Under the ſhade of yonder Mirtle tree.
(Which beares the guilt of your ſoule miſdemeanour)
My maide Coriſca cried out for my helpe,
Becauſe a bee had ſtung her in the face:
You heard me ſpeake in pittie of her ſmart,
A charme, my mother taught me, (that being ſaid
Cloſe to the place affected, takes away
The paine) which gave her eaſe, but you uncivill,
Turning my courteſie to your vile ends,
Fain'd you were ſtung too, and cried out, your lips
Had from the ſame ſharpe point receiv'd a wound;
Prayd me to ſay the ſame charme over there.
I charitably lent my helpe to you,
Miſtruſting nothing of your purpoſes,
When with ungentle hands you held me faſt,
And for my thanks gave me a luſtfull kiſſe,
Canſt thou remember this, and yet not bluſh?
O impudence!
You will excuſe the heate
Of my deſires; ſtill I feele that ſting
But dare not aske the cure, nor did I then
Do any hurt, but ſince you thinke it was
A fault, I do repent it, and am ſorry
I did offend you ſo.
Better, and better
He'le cry anon, he has already askt
Forgiveneſſe of her.
Well ſhepheard looke
You never ſee me more, I cannot love
At all, or if at all, not you: let this
Settle your thoughts.
Oh, it diſtracts them more:
But ſince my preſence is offenſive to you,
I muſt obey, yet if I thought you would,
When I am dead, the Martyr of your beautie,
Shed one poore teare on my untimely grave,
And ſay that Hylas was unfortunate
To love, where he might not be lov'd againe,
My aſhes would find reſt, and ſo farewell
The faireſt, but the cruellſt Nymph alive.
What will you leave her thus?
I prithee, come,
The ſentence of my baniſhment is paſt,
Never to be recall'd.
Are theſe the hopes
You fed upon? O what a thing in Nature
Is a coy woman! or how great a foole
The man is, that will give her leave to rule.
ALas my Hylas, my beloved ſoule,
Durſt ſhe, whom thou haſt call'd cruell Nerina,
But ſpeake her thoughts, thou wouldſt not thinke her ſo,
To thee ſhe is not cruell, but to her ſelfe:
That law which Nature hath writ in my heart,
Taught me to love thee, Hylas, and obey
My father too; who ſaies I muſt not love thee?
Oh diſproportiond love and duty, how
Do you diſtract me? if I love my choiſe,
I muſt be diſobedient; if obedient
I muſt be linkt to one I cannot love.
Then either love give me my libertie,
Or nature from my duty ſet me free.
NErina, ſince nor teares nor praiers can move
Thy ſtubborne heart, Ile ſee what gifts can do:
They of my ranke, whom moſt do deeme unworthy
Of any virgins love, being rough, and bred
To mannage the eſtates our fathers left us,
Unskild in thoſe hid myſteries, which loues
Profeſſors onely know, have yet a way
To gaine our wiſhes: firſt we get the father,
He knowes our pleaſures, and gives his conſent:
The daughters eies being blinded with our gifts
Cannot ſo ſoone ſpie our deformities,
But we may catch her to: This Alcon ſaies,
A man whom age and obſervation taught
What I muſt learne; yet though moſt women be
Such as he has deliver'd, my Nerina
Seemes not to have regard to what I give,
But holds me and my gifts both at one rate.
What can I hope then out of this poore preſent,
A looking-glaſſe, which though within our Plaines
'Tis ſeldome ſeene; yet I have heard in Citties,
They are as common as a locke of wooll:
However, if ſhe take it, I am happy,
So Alcon tells me; and he knowes full well,
(He gave it me) that whoſoe're ſhall looke
Her face in it, ſhall be at my diſpoſe:
In confidence of this I will preſent it,
And ſee my Fortune; ſure I muſt needs ſpeed:
My friend, her father comes along with her.
But oh my Fate! is not that Nymph Dorinda
Which keepes them company? Yes, ſure 'tis ſhe;
A curſe light on her importunitie.
Her father urges ſomething, and I hope
On my behalfe; let me obſerve a little.
ANd as I oft have told you, I doe wiſh
To ſee you wiſe.
Is ſhe not ſo Charinus?
Does ſhe ſay any thing that's out of reaſon?
Do not tell me of reaſon; I would heare
Of her obedience, therefore I ſay, be wiſe,
And doe as I would have you.
What would you
Have her to doe? you ſee ſhe anſwers not
To contradict you.
I will have her anſwer
To what I now demand, that is, to marry
Daphnis, and I will have her love him too.
Love him Charinus? that you cannot do.
Her body you may linke i'th' rights of Hymen,
Her will ſhe muſt beſtow her ſelfe, not you.
Oh, ſhe was borne to be a plague unto me.
Why ſhould ſhe wiſh or hope for any thing,
But what I'de have her wiſh or hope for onely?
Come, to be ſhort, anſwere me, and directly;
Are you content to marry Daphnis, ſay?
What is your pleaſure Father?
You do not heare
It ſeemes, but what you liſt; I aske you once
Againe, if you will marry Daphnis, ſpeake?
Sir, I would marry whom you pleaſe to give me:
I neither can, nor ought to make my choice,
I would referre that to you: But you know
My inclination never lay to marry.
I know you ſhal do that which I command.
Now heaven forbid, that I who have thus long
Vow'd to Diana my Virginitie,
To follow her a Huntreſſe in theſe Woods,
Should yeeld my ſelfe to the impure delights
Of Hymen, and ſo violate my faith.
A fine devotion, is it not? to make
A vow, and never aske your Father leave;
The Lawes will not permit it to be ſo.
The vow Charinus, is not made to men:
The Lawes have not to doe with that which is
Seal'd and recorded in the Court of Heaven.
Do not tell me of vowes, I'le have her marry;
And marry Daphnis: Is he not rich and handſome?
Ay me! I would he were nor rich, nor handſome,
It may be then he would regard my ſufferings.
No, Daughter, do not you beleeve, you can
Catch me with ſhifts and tricks: I ſee, I tell you,
Into your heart.
Alas, I would you did,
Then your diſcourſe would tend another way.
Yes, you have made a vow I know, which is,
Whilſt you are young, you will have all the Youth
To follow you with lies and flatteries.
Foole, they'le deceive you, when this colour fades,
Which will not alwaies laſt, and you goe crooked,
As if you ſought your beautie loſt i'th' ground:
Then they will laugh at you, and finde ſome other
Fit for their love; where if you doe as I
Command you, I have one will make you happie.
Ay me moſt miſerable!
Now I'le come in,
And ſee what I can doe with this my gift.
Looke now, as if the Fates would have it ſo,
He comes juſt in the nicke of my diſcourſe:
Come, uſe him kindly now, and then you ſhall
Redeeme what you have loſt, my good opinion.
O moſt ungratefull chance! how I doe hate
The ſight of him!
Were it to me he came,
How happie would this faire encounter be!
Daphnis, you're welcome, very welcome to me,
And to my Daughter: what is that you have there?
A preſent, which I meane to give my love.
See but how true a lover Daphnis is;
His hand is never emptie when he comes:
Welcome him Daughter, looke what he has for you.
O good Charinus, none muſt looke in it,
But ſhe herſelfe to whom it is preſented.
I am an old man, I, and therefore care not
To ſee my wither'd face, and hoarie haire:
Give it that young thing, ſhe knows what to doe with it.
Daughter, come hither, uſe him courteouſly,
And kindly too: (Be ſure you take his gift.)
Daphnis, I'le leave you both together here;
My ſheepe are ſhearing, I can ſtay no longer.
Farewell old man; health to my deareſt Miſtreſſe
And to you ſhepheard.
Daphnis am not I
Worthy to have a ſhare in your ſalute?
How can I give thee part of that, whereof
I have no ſhare my ſelfe?
If you would love
There, where you are belov'd againe, you might
Make your content ſuch, as you would your ſelfe.
If you, Nerina, would vouchſafe to love
Him that loves you, and ever will, you might
Make your content ſuch as you would your ſelfe.
Shepheard, I oft have wiſht you not to trouble
Me and your ſelfe with words: I cannot love you.
As oft Dorinda have I ſpoke to you,
To leave to trouble me: I cannot love you.
Will you then ſlight my love, becauſe 'tis offer'd?
Will you then ſlight my love, becauſe 'tis offer'd?
Some body elſe may love you, I cannot.
Some body elſe may love you, I cannot.
O cruell words; how they do peirce my heart!
O cruell words, how they do peirce my heart!
How can I helpe it, if your deſtinie
Lead you to love, where you may not obtaine?
How can I helpe it, if your deſtinie
Leade you to love, where you may not obtaine.
It is not deſtinie that injures me,
It is thy cruell will, and marble heart.
It is not deſtinie that injures me,
It is thy cruell will, and marble heart.
No Daphnis, 'tis not hardnes of my heart,
Nor any crueltie that cauſes this.
Then 'tis diſdaine of me.
Nor is it that:
I do not ſee in Daphnis any thing
To cauſe diſdaine.
Why do you not replie
In thoſe ſame words to me, malicious Eccho?
Pray leave me, I have other buſineſſe now
To trouble me; if you diſdaine me not,
Faire Nymph, as you pretend, receive my offer.
What's that?
My heart.
I will gentle Daphnis.
O importunitie!
Give her thy heart,
She has deſerv'd it, for ſhe loves thee, Daphnis.
Firſt I would teare it peecemeale here before you.
O me unfortunate! O cruell man!
Stay good Dorinda, I'le goe with thee, ſtay.
Let her goe where ſhe will, behold ſweete ſaint
This Mirror here, the faithfull repreſenter
Of that which I adore, your beautious forme,
When you do ſee in that how how lovely are
your lookes, you will not blame my love.
If I refuſe it,
My father will be angrie, let me ſee it:
Here take thy glaſſe againe: what ailes my head?
I know not where I am, it is ſo giddie:
And ſomething like a drouſineſſe has ſeiz'd
My vitall ſpirits.
How do you love? not well?
Heavy o'th ſuddaine; Ile goe home, & ſleepe.
So, let her goe, and let this worke awhile.
Shee caſt an eye upon me as ſhe went,
That by its languiſhing did ſeeme to ſay,
Daphnis I'me thine, thou haſt o'recome at laſt:
Alcon, th'haſt made me happy by thy art.
Q. TEll me what you thinke on earth
The greateſt bliſſe?
A. Riches, honor, and high birth.
Q. Ah, what is this?
If love be baniſhed the heart,
The joy of Nature, not of Art?
What's honor worth, or high deſcent?
Or ample wealth,
If cares do breed us diſcontent,
Or want of health?
A. It is the order of the Fates,
That theſe ſhould waite on higheſt ſtates.
Cho. Love onely does our ſoules refine,
And by his skill
Turnes humane things into divine,
And guides our will.
Then let us of his praiſes ſing,
Of love, that ſweetens every thing.
Madam, you're overheard.
I care not Delia.
Although my libertie, and free diſcourſe
Be here denide me, yet the Aire is common:
To it then will I utter my complaints,
Or to thee, friend, to whom my love will dare
To ſhew the ſecrets of my heart, for others
I do not care, nor feare; ſo thou be faithfull.
Madam, I have no life, but what I wiſh
May be imploy'd to do your beauties ſerice;
My tongue is rul'd by yours: what you would have
It ſpeake, it ſhall; elſe further then my thoughts
Nothing ſhall venter, that you leaue to me:
And thoſe my thoughts, Ile keepe to ſuch reſtraint,
As they ſhall never come within my dreames,
Leſt they betray your counſells: this I vow
Religiouſly by—
Hold, I will not
Have thee to ſweare, nor would I thou ſhouldſt thinke,
That I ſo much ſuſpect thee, as to urge
An Oath; I know thou haſt too much of goodneſſe
(That's bred within thee) to betray a truſt:
And therefore without further circumſtance,
I'le let thee know my fortunes, part of which
I'me ſure th' haſt heard already.
Madam, I have,
And wiſht that they had ſorted to your wiſhes.
I thanke thee Delia, but my evill Genius,
That has purſu'd my innocence with hate,
Brought me from thence where I had ſet my heart,
Unto this curſed Court, which, though it be
My place of birth and breeding, I doe finde
Nothing but torment, and affliction in it.
I gueſſe the cauſe ſweet Madam, but that's paſt
And now forgotten: if you cleere your looks,
Your Father will inlarge you, and ne're thinke
On what you did, but that you are his daughter.
Alas my Delia, thou doſt miſtake,
My liberty is of no worth to me,
Since that my love, I feare, will ne're be free:
Nor doe I care what idle Ladies talke
Of my departure, or my ſtrange diſguiſe,
To colour my intents; I am above
Their envie or their malice:
But for th' unluckie chance that ſent to me
The over-curious eyes of him I hate,
Thou know'ſt the man.
Yes, you meane Cleander,
Sonne to Eubulus, who is now your keeper:
What Starre directed him to finde you out?
His love forſooth, for ſo he colour'd his
Unſeaſon'd boldneſſe, told me, he was not able
To want my ſight: and ſo, when every one
Had given o're their ſtrict enquirie of me,
He onely with too much officiouſneſſe,
Obſerv'd me in the Woods, walking alone:
And when I would have ſhunn'd him (which perhaps
Had I not done, he had not ſo well knowne me)
He came, and utter'd, as his manner was,
His tedious complaints; untill at length
He brought me with him, making no reſiſtance:
And to ingratiate himſelfe the more,
He ſaid he would convey me where my Father
Should have no knowledge of me: I refuſed it;
Willing however to be ridde of him.
And now you know, it is a full Moneth ſince
I did returne to Court, but left my heart
Behinde me in thoſe fields, wherein I joy'd.
Madam, has not the Court more pleaſure in it,
Then the dull Countrie, which can repreſent
Nothing, but what does taſte of ſolitude?
'Twas ſomething elſe that carried you away.
Tis true my Delia; for though thou wert
Privie to my departure, yet the cauſe
Thou couldſt not tell, which I will now unfold,
And thinke I truſt my honor in thy hands,
And maiden modeſtie: 'twas love that did it.
Love Madam? ſure it is impoſſible
You ſhould finde any thing there worth your love.
Thou know'ſt the ſhepheards, that do dwell about
This place (which for their entertainements onely
The King my father built) did uſe to come,
As now they do, being ſent for unto Court:
I ever lik't their ſports, their harmeleſſe mirth,
And their contentions, which were voide of malice,
And wiſht I had bin borne juſt ſuch a one.
Your ſtate is better Madam as you are.
But I confeſſe the rather, cauſe there was
One amongſt them, of a more comely grace
(Though none of them did ſeeme uncomely to me)
Call'd Thyrſis; and with him me thought I could
Draw out my life, rather then any other,
Such things my fancie then ſuggeſted to me:
So well he ſung, ſo paſſionate his love
Shew'd in his verſe, thereto ſo well expreſt,
As any one would judge it naturall:
Yet never felt he flame, till this of me:
Often he came, and oftner was deſir'd
Of me, nor did I ſhame in publique there
Before my father, to commend his graces;
Which when I did, the whole Court, as they uſe,
Conſented with me, and did ſtrive to make them
Greater then I, or any elſe could thinke them:
At laſt I was ſurpriz'd, I could not helpe it;
My Fate with love conſenting, ſo would have it.
Then did I leave the Court, I've told thee all.
Tis ſtrange, but Madam, though in that diſguiſe,
How could you hope, a ſtranger, to be lov'd
Of him you held ſo deare?
I fain'd my ſelfe
Of Smyrna, and from thence ſome Goats I had,
And Sheepe, with them a rich commoditie.
Neare him I bought me land to feed them; he
Seem'd glad of it, and thinking me a ſtranger,
Us'd me with ſuch civilitie and friendſhip,
As one would little looke for of a ſhepheard;
And did defend me from the avarice
Of the old ſhepheards, which did thinke to make
A prey of what I had. At length I ſaw,
He did addreſſe himſelfe with feare to me,
Still gazing on me: knowing my love to him,
I eaſily beleev'd he lov'd me too:
For love, alas, is ever credulous.
And though I was reſolv'd, having my end,
(Which was no more, then to diſcourſe with him)
Nevr to let him know what flame I felt:
Yet when I ſaw his teares, and heard his vowes,
(Perſwaſive ſpeakers for affection)
I could not chooſe but open to his view
My loving heart; yet with this caution,
That he ſhould ever beare reſpect unto
My honor, and my virgin chaſtitie:
Which then he vow'd, and his ambition
Never was more then to attaine a kiſſe,
Which yet he hardly got: thou ſeeſt, ſweete Delia,
How willingly I dwell upon this Theame.
But canſt thou helpe me now, that I have open'd
My wound unto thee.
Alas, I would I could
Invent the way to cure you; I ſhould ſoone
Apply my helpe: yet ſtay, this day it is
The ſhepheards come to Court.
'Tis true, they come;
But what is that to me, if Thyrſis come not?
Or if he come, how ſhall he know me his,
Or I injoy his companie?
Let me alone
To worke out that.
Thou dreamſt, thou canſt not do it.
Ile undertake it, but how ſhall I know him
Without inquiring, which muſt breede ſuſpition.
True, and beware thou aske; the Majeſtie
Which ſits upon his brow, will ſay 'tis he,
Thyrſis my love; but yet perhaps at this time,
If I my ſelfe not flatter, thou ſhalt know him,
By his eies caſt downe, and folding of his armes,
And often ſighs, that interrupt his words.
For if his ſorrow weares the liveries,
Which mine does for his abſence, by theſe ſignes
Thou ſhalt deſcrie him.
Theſe are ſilent markes:
Yet will I not deſpaire to finde him out.
But when thou haſt, what wilt thou ſay to him?
Give me but leave to uſe my mother wit,
You would be gone together, would you not?
Thou ſpeak'ſt my thoughts: do this, and I will crowne
Thy faith, thou ſhalt be Queene in ſteed of me.
If you could crowne me with your vertues Madam,
I ſhould be a Queene indeed; in the meane time,
As I am Delia, Ile do this buſines.
Do it, and when th' haſt don, the God of love
Reward thee with thine owne deſires for this.
Madam withdraw, I heare your keepers comming.
SIr you have put a bridle on my paſſions,
And given my ſoule the libertie it wiſht:
I now intreate your pardon, for beginning
A thing of ſo great conſequence without
Leave and advice from you.
Tis well Cleander,
It will behove you then to be reſerv'd,
And locke this ſecret up: for 'tis no jeſting
With Kings that may command our lives and fortunes:
You now perceive her whom we call the Princeſſe,
To be your ſiſter, and the love you beare her,
Muſt be a brothers freindſhip, not a lovers
Paſſionate heate; but yet ſhe muſt not know,
That I her father am, and you her brother:
And truſt me ſon, had I not ſeene deſpaire
Of life in you, which this love brought you too,
I ſhould not have reveal'd, what now you know.
It was a comfort Sir, I doe confeſſe,
That came in time to reſcue me from death,
So great her ſcorne was, and my love ſo violent.
Now you're at peace, I hope.
I am: but if
I be too curious in asking where
The Kings ſon is, I ſhall deſire your pardon:
For ſure it were injuſtice to deprive
So great a Prince, of that which he was borne too.
You are too far inquiſitive; yet becauſe
I have ingag'd you in a ſecret of
As great importance, this I will not hide.
The King, I told you, when his wife grew neere
The time of her deliverie, ſent to know
Of our great Oracle, whether the childe ſhould be
Female, or Male, and what ſhould be their fortune.
What ſaid the Oracle? have you the anſwere?
It onely was imparted unto me,
And this it is which I have never ſhewen
To any but the Queene: here take and reade it.
If ere thy iſſue male thou live to ſee,
The childe thou thinkst is thine, thine ſhall not be,
His life ſhall be obſcure: twice ſhall thy hate
Doome him to death. Yet ſhall he ſcape that Fate:
And thou ſhalt live to ſee that not long after,
Thy onely ſon ſhall wed thy onely daughter.
This Oracle is full of myſterie.
It is; and yet the King would needs interpret
That ſhould it prove a man-childe, twas a Baſtard:
And being loth that one not of his blood
(As he conceiv'd by this) ſhould be his heire,
Told me in private, that if it were Male,
He would not have it live, yet fearing moſt
To publiſh his diſhonor, and his wives,
He charg'd me not reveale it unto any,
But take the childe, and ſee it made away,
And make the world beleeve it was ſtill borne.
And did you ſo?
No, for indeed I durſt not
For any thing, become a murderer.
How did you then?
I went unto the Queene,
Shew'd her the ſtate ſhe was in, and beſought her
To be as carefull of me, as I was
Of her, and we would worke a better end
Then ſhe expected, ſo we both agree'd;
That if the Childe ſhe then did labour with,
Prov'd to be Male, I ſhould with care conceale
The birth of it, and put a female childe
Inſteed of it, which I was to looke out.
It fortun'd that your Mother then was ready
To be deliver'd of your ſiſter, and
Time and good fortune did conſpire to ſave
The Kings child, and to make my daughter Princeſſe.
But what did then become of the yong Prince?
The Queene proteſting to me, that it was
The Kings owne Childe, conjur'd me to preſerve it,
Which as mine owne I could not; for already
Many tooke notice that my childe was female:
And therefore I was faine to publiſh her
As dead, and buried an emptie coffin.
I rode forth with the childe a full nights journey,
With purpoſe to deliver it to ſome
Plaine honeſt man, that would be carefull of it,
And not inquiſitive to know whoſe childe
It was, but give it breeding as his owne:
When being frighted with the noiſe of Armes
Of ſome out-lawed theeves, that did infeſt
The place, I made all haſte I could to ſcape 'em,
Conſidering my charge; for that I knew
If I were taken, though they ſpar'd my life,
The charge I had, muſt needs betray me to
The King, and then I could not hope for mercy:
I laid it downe there cover'd cloſely o're,
A circle 'bout his necke, wherein was writ,
In characters knowne onely to my ſelfe,
And to the King; in which I us'd to cloath
Secret diſpatches, when I writ to him
From forraigne States, and within the Circle
I grav'd the Kings leſſe Seale, which then I kept.
Some Gold beſides, and Jewels there I left,
That whoſoe're ſhould finde him, might with that
Defray the charge of his education;
Howe're, next day I purpos'd to returne
With ſpeede, and carrie it to ſome abode.
But did the Queene know this?
She did not,
Till my returne next day: then when I told her,
The childe was thence remov'd where I had left him,
Belike thoſe theeves had carried him away.
'Tis probable.
How could the Queene take this
So ſad a ſtorie?
With ſuch impatience,
That being weake before, ſhe ſhortly di'd.
But yet ſir, with your favour might you not
Have made inquirie after him?
I durſt not,
For feare of being diſcover'd; on your life
Take heed how you reveale this.
I am charm'd.
Then let us watch my daughter, for I feare
The flight ſhe made was for ſome other end,
Then for retirement which ſhe does pretend.
Henceforth I ſhall obey her as my Princeſſe,
And love her as my ſiſter, not my Miſtreſſe.
You ſhall do well: Come, let us to the King.
IT was my dreame, and I will ſend it to her;
Though I my ſelfe by her too cruell ſentence,
Muſt never ſee her face.
What paper's that?
Love-verſes, as I live; what's here, a Dreame?
Nay, I will read 'em, therefore ſtand aſide.
SLeepe, thou be calmer of a troubled ſprîte,
Which leadſt my fancy to that ſweet delight,
Wherein my ſoule found reſt, when thou didſt ſhow
Her ſhadow mine, whoſe ſubſtance is not ſo:
Wrappe up mine eyes in an eternall night.
For ſince my day ſprings onely from that light
Which ſhe denies me; I account the beſt
Part of my life is that which gives me reſt.
And thou more hard to be intreated, then
Sleepe to the heated eyes of franticke men;
Thou that canſt make my joyes eſſentiall,
Which are but ſhadowes now, be liberall,
And out-doe ſleepe, let me not dreame in vaine,
Ʋnleſſe thou mean'ſt I ne're ſhall ſleepe againe.
Alas poore foole! will ſhe not let thee ſleepe?
I knew I ſhould be mock't, but I'le divert him;
What are theſe thou haſt brought along with thee?
The Maſquers, Hylas, theſe are they muſt trip it
Before the King: doſt like their properties?
What Paris, and Oenone, the old ſtorie?
But newly made, and faſhion'd to my purpoſe;
Brought hither to make good my owne poſitions
Againſt the company of puling lovers;
Which if I doe not, and with good effect,
Let me be one my ſelfe; and that's a torture
Worſe then Apollo laid upon the Satyr,
When the rude villaine durſt contend with him:
Looke this way Hylas, ſee Oenone here,
The faireſt Nymph that ever Ida bleſt,
Court her departing ſhepheard, who is now
Turning his loue unto a fairer object;
And for his judgement in varietie
See how the ſeaborne Goddeſſe, and the Graces
Preſent their darling Helena to him.
Be happy in thy choiſe, and draw a war
On thee, and thine, rather then ſet thy heart
Upon a ſtale delight: Do, let her weepe,
And ſay thou art inconſtant. Be ſo ſtill;
The Queene of love commands it: you that are
The old companions of your Paris here,
Moue in a well pac'd meaſure, that may ſhew
The Goddeſſe, how you are content for her
Faire ſake to leave the honor of your woods:
But firſt let her, and all the Graces ſing
The Invitation to your offering.
COme lovely boy unto my Court,
And leave theſe uncouth woods, and all
That feed thy fancy with loves gall,
But keepe away the honey, and the ſport.
Cho. Come unto me,
And with varietie
Thou ſhalt be fed, which Nature loves, and I.
There is no Muſique in a voice,
That is but one, and ſtill the ſame.
Inconſtancy is but a name,
To fright poore lovers from a better choice.
Cho. Come then to me, &c.
Orpheus, that on Euridice
Spent all his love, on others ſcorne,
Now on the bankes of Heber torne,
Findes the reward of fooliſh conſtancy.
Cho. Come then to me, &c.
And ſigh no more for one love loſt,
I have a thouſand Cupids here,
Shall recompence with better cheere
Thy miſ-ſpent labours, and thy bitter coſt.
Cho. Come then to me, &c.
Shepheards, if you have any pittie, come,
And ſee a woefull ſpectacle.
What is't
That can be worth the breaking of our ſports?
The gentle Nymph Nerina.
What of her?
The laſt of her I thinke, ſhe lies a dying,
And calls to ſpeake with you.
Curſe of your follies;
Do I live here whilſt ſhe is dying there?
But ſhepheard, what diſeaſe is't that ſo ſoone
Could ſpend his force upon her? ſhe was well
This morning, when ſhe made poore Hylas ſicke.
I know not, I am ſent unto the well
Of Aeſculapius to fetch ſome water
For her recovery. I muſt be gone.
Shepheards here let us end. I thinke we are
Perfect in all the reſt: This night the King
Muſt ſee't, reſolve on that.
We are all ready.
Then lets away, and ſee what will betide
This gentle Nymph Nerina.
We'le goe with you.
HOld up thy head good childe, ſee he is come;
Bring me the water quickly, whilſt there is
Some life in her: now chafe her good Dorinda.
All is in vaine, I cannot live; deare father
Farewell: what ſhepheard's that lies on the ground?
Is it not Hylas?
Yes, it is he, Nerina.
Alas poore ſhepheard, tis my greateſt griefe,
That I have grieved him, I would beg life
For nothing but to make him ſatisfaction.
Hylas, what on the ground? looke up and ſpeake
Alas, he's dead.
It cannot be: good father
Let me goe to him, and but touch his eare,
It may be that my voice may have more vertue.
Do what thou wilt ſweete heart: ſee my poore child
How charitable ſhe is, being halfe dead
Her ſelfe, ſhe pities others.
Marke her fineneſſe,
Now at the brimm of death: ſhe kiſſes him:
And tooke this way to mock her ſimple father;
O fine invention! ſure a womans wit,
Does never faile her.
Hylas, Hylas, ſpeake,
Nerina calls thee; ſpeake to thy Nerina.
What cannot love doe? It revives the dead,
He's come to himſelfe againe.
What God is it,
That has the power to returne my ſoule
From the Elyſian fields?
It is no God,
A Goddeſſe rather, Hylas. 'Tis Nerina,
Looke where ſhe is.
Ah then I do not wonder
I cannot die, when my beſt ſoule comes to me:
Shall wee live ever thus?
How faine I would
Forthy ſake, Hylas, but it cannot be:
I feele a heavy ſleepe ſit on my head,
And my ſtrength failes me, helpe me ſweet Dorinda,
Farewell for ever: oh I die, I die.
And muſt I then be call'd to life againe,
To ſee my life expire before my face?
You Fates, if you will take a ranſome for her,
Then take my life: but you are ſure of that
Youle ſay already: for in her one death
Two lives are forfeit: Nerina, gentle Nymph,
The cauſe why now I live, open theſe eyes
Once more, and I ſhall flouriſh like thoſe plants
The ſunne gives life to: elſe I fall, and wither,
Leaving behinde naught but a worthleſſe ſtemme:
Speake to thy Hylas, ſweete Nerina, ſpeake.
Ay me! my daughter, hadſt thou liv'd, perhaps,
I might have ſeene thee married to Daphnis,
Now we muſt ſee thee buried: Ay me!
Hylas.
She lives, give me ſome more of that,
That water there, ſee now ſhe comes againe:
O gentle deſtinies, but ſpare this thred,
And cut a thouſand courſer, ſpeake Nerina,
Give me ſome comfort, give thy father ſome,
Or elſe behold three lives fall in thy death.
You Fates, that keepe th' accompt of all our daies,
Adde but one minute to my life, that I
May quit my ſoule of thoſe two heavy burthens
Which now oppreſſe it: Dry your eyes good father,
Remember that the Gods doe ſend us nothing
But for our good; and if my journey be
Shorter then yours, the leſſe will be my trouble:
Will you forgive me father, that I have not
Paid ſo much duty to you; as I ow'd you:
Take my good will, I pray, inſteed of it.
See her good Nature: I childe, 'tis enough,
Thou alwaies wert obedient.
Shall I dare
To ſpeake my thoughts, and ſo diſcharge my ſoule
Of one loade yet?
I, doe my childe, ſpeake freely.
I've heard you ſay, that no ſinne was ſo heavy
As is ingratitude.
'Tis true, Nerina,
How ſhe remembers what her father ſaid!
Then be not angry, if I now muſt tell you,
That this poore ſhepheard, whoſe ſwolne eyes you ſee
Cover'd with teares, for many yeares now paſt
Has courted me: but ſtill with ſuch a love,
So full of truth and gentle ſervices,
That ſhould I not requite him with my love,
I ſhould be guilty of ingratitude:
Therefore before I die, ſpray give leave
That he may have my dying heart, which living,
I ſtill debar'd him of. Hylas, thy hand.
O ſtay a little death: here, take thou mine,
And ſince I cannot live the wife of Hylas,
Yet let me die ſo: Sir, are you content?
I am, with any thing that pleaſeth thee.
Tell me, are you ſo Hylas?
O my love,
Aske me if I would live amongſt the Gods,
But aske not this: Sir, have we your conſent?
You have, it is in vaine now to denie it:
You ſee, Dorinda, what her vow's come to.
Then let me die, take me into thy Armes,
Sweet love, you'le ſee my coffin ſtrew'd with flowers,
And you Dorinda, will you make a garland?
I die a virgine, though I die his wife.
Alas, ſhe's gon.
She's dead, and do I live?
Looke to the ſhepheard there: oh my Nerina!
Vexe not her ſoule, I pray, with often calling,
You ſee ſhe's dead.
Then there is no hope left:
Pray helpe us ſhepheards now to beare her hence;
You'le come I hope to ſee her in her grave.
HEre I am come unto a place, where griefe
They ſay has no abode. In Princes Courts,
I've heard there is no roome for loves laments:
For either they enjoy, or elſe forget,
Thrice happy men, to whom love gives ſuch leave:
It may be that this place, or people may
Worke ſo with me, and melt this frozen heart:
Ah foole, that canſt beleeve the change of place,
Or ayre, can change thy minde; the love thou bearſt,
Is woven ſo within thy thoughts, that as
Out of this piece thy Sylvia wrought for thee,
Thou canſt not take her name forth, but withall
Thou muſt deface the whole: ſo Thyrſis thinke
The winde that here may riſe, or heat, or raine
Thou maiſt auoide, thy love will ſtill remaine,
And when thou dieſt, then may it die with thee;
Till then reſolve to endure thy miſery.
This is the garden, which I ſaw him go to,
And that is he, for all the markes ſhe gave me
To know him by, he beares.
A heavineſſe
Weighs downe my head, and would invite me to
Repoſe my ſelfe; Ile take the offer, here
Ile reſt awhile, for I have need of it.
How if I be deceiv'd, and this ſhould proove
Another man: what then? I can excuſe it;
He's layd already, and I feare, aſleepe,
Ile ſtay untill he wake, but then ſuppoſe
That any body come, and take me here,
What will they thinke of me? Beſt wake him: ſhepheard:
It is a hanſome youth, ſee what a grace
Shewes it ſelfe in his feature, ſuch a face
Might take the heart of any Lady living,
I, though ſhe were a Princeſſe: ſhepheard: what
Not yet? his ſleepes are ſound.
Ah Sylvia,
Preſerve thy life, oh let me die; Alas
I do but dreame; me thought I ſaw my ſelfe
Condemn'd to die, and Sylvia to ſave me,
Offerd her ſelfe, and would needs die for me:
'Twas a ſweet ſhadow, let me court this dreame.
He muſt not ſleepe againe: ſhepheard looke up.
Who envies me this ſmall repoſe, indeed
I do not often ſleepe; ha, who are you?
Sent to thee, from thy Sylvia, ſhepheard riſe
And follow me.
Doe I dreame ſtill? what are you?
Came you from heaven where my Sylvia is,
And muſt I thither? whoſo ere you are,
An Angell, or a feind, in ſuch a name
You come, as I'me conjurd to follow you:
But I muſt die firſt: Here is to be with thee.
Stay, hold thy hand, I live, thy Sylvia lives
To make thee happy, if thou wilt goe to her.
You're habited like thoſe I've ſeene at Court,
And courtiſie they ſay is ever there,
Yet mingled with deceit: if you do meane
T'abuſe me for your ſport, this way will prove
Too ſad to raiſe mirth out of. There's no ill
That I have done to you, or any elſe,
Unleſſe my conſtancy be here a ſinne.
His griefes have made him wilde, I have no time
Left me to uſe perſwaſions, or to make
This truth apparant to you; on my word
You ſhall be ſafe, and if you dare beleeve me,
Ile bring you where your love is; follow me.
Why ſhould I doubt, or feare to goe with her?
Ill does he call for phyſicke, whom the Law
Has doom'd to die: There's no condition
Can prove worſe to me then my preſent one.
Pray lead me where you pleaſe, I'me ſure of this,
To one that's deſperate, no way's amiſſe.
ALl leave the roome. Eubulus, I'me reſolv'd
To hold an eaſier hand over my daughter
Then I was wont: Therefore I ſent Cleander
To bring her to my preſence, though ſhe have
Wrong'd her great birth and breeding by her follies,
Yet I conſider that ſhe is my daughter,
And this reſtraint cannot but harden her
In her fond reſolutions: have you ſought
By all the meanes you can to ſift the cauſe
Of her departure?
Sir, I have tryed,
By all the waies that fit a ſubject, to
Enquire a truth of one that is his Princeſſe.
And what have you diſcover'd?
Nothing more
Then what my ſon Cleander did before.
I have heard his relation: but I wonder
How for a whole moneths time, ſhe ſhould abide
Within our confines, when ſo great a ſearch,
Through all our Countryes, and lowd proclamations
Were made for her recovery.
Tis true.
She herein was ingenuous, and confeſt,
That ſhe foreſaw what ſearch would be made for her,
Therefore with ſome about her ſhe had plotted,
To hire a barke, that might convey her hence,
In a diſguiſe to Smyrna, where ſhe ſtayd,
Till time did fit her; that with ſafety
She might returne in habite of a Nymph,
Unto the place, where then Cleander found her:
But why ſhe left the Court, ſhe will not tell.
I will not force her to't: ſome little time
Perhaps may make diſcovery of that ſecret:
But unto thee my faithfull Counſellor.
(As unto one my heart hath ſtill bin open)
I will diſcover what my purpoſe is,
In ſending for theſe ſhepheards to my Court.
I ſhould beleeve, they' reſent for to delight
Your Majeſty, as they were wont.
No Eubulus,
But for a greater end; I feare my daughter,
And therefore I have ſent for her to ſee
Theſe ſports, with purpoſe to obſerve her lookes,
For I ſuſpect ſhe loves ſome ſhepheard there.
It cannot be: ſhe will not ſtaine her birth
With ſuch ignoble love; yet I confeſſe,
Revolving all the cauſes of her ſtrange
Departure, I could fixe on none but that.
Well, if ſhe do ſo, I will let her forth,
Forth of my blood, and whoſoere he be
Whoſe fortune markt him out to be the object
Of this her love, ſhall finde Ixions Fate,
He ſhall embrace a ſhadow; by my life
They both ſhall die.
O my gracious Lord,
Remember ſhe's your daughter.
I, thou ſtill
Doſt plead for her, but yet am I her King
As well as father, private men reſpect
Their profits, and their private intereſts
Of kindred, but the actions of a King,
To honor, and renowne muſt be directed:
Conſider that, and then thou wilt forget her.
Cleander, welcome, how does Calligone?
Is ſhe not glad to come unto our preſence?
Why doſt not anſwere? art thou frighted man?
I know not how to anſwere any thing,
Unleſſe your Majeſty will ſigne my pardon.
Why what's the matter, ſpeake, and ſpeak it freely
Then know great ſoveraigne that when I went
As full of joy, as ſpeed, with your glad meſſage,
I found the Princeſſe.
What, not dead, I hope?
Dead to her honor.
Ha!
In ſhort my Lord,
I found her walking in the garden with
A ſhepheard, (more of him I cannot tell)
But ſhe was habited in that attire
She wore, when from the woods I brought her home,
I ſlipt away, not being ſeene by them,
And if you pleaſe to goe, perhaps great Sir,
You ſtill may finde them there.
How now Eubulus,
Are my preſages true? ſhall I then ſleepe
With this diſgrace, and let my neighbour Princes
Mocke at my humble fortunes, when they heare
The daughter of Euarchus matcht her ſelfe
With a baſe ſhepheard? Goe Eubulus quickly,
Here take my ſignet, let this be your warrant
To put them both to death.
How? both my Lord?
I, both.
Your daughter too?
Why do you queſtion me?
Haue I not ſaid they both ſhall die: diſpatch.
Let me not ſee thee, till they both be dead.
What haſt thou done? thou raſh inhumane boy?
Depriv'd thy father of a childe, thy ſelfe
Of thine owne ſiſter, whom but now thou knewſt.
Well may the King take that deare life away,
Which he did never give: I will goe tell him,
I am her father: but I looſe my life
If I do that, as guilty of a treaſon.
Go Murderer, hadſt thou no pittie in thee?
Sir I do feele ſo much of griefe within me,
For this my act, that if my blood will ſerve
To ſave her life, Ile make no price of it:
Yet could I not imagine, that the King
Would have bin ſo inrag'd; or if he would,
I had no time to thinke of it before.
No time? who bid thee haſten to the ruine
Of thy poore father, and thy family?
The meſſages which come to do us hurt,
Are ſpeedy: but the good come ſlowly on,
But Sir, remember what a ſtraight we're in:
It will concerne us, to invent ſome way
To ſave my ſiſter, though the ſhepheard die;
He will deſerve it for his bold attempt.
Go take thy way, whither thou wilt thy ſelfe,
That way is beſt, which leads me to my grave.
What luck is this? This is more haſte then ſpeed:
I am reſolv'd (though my life lie at ſtake)
To ſtand the fury of th'inraged King:
Who knowes but he may be as ſorry for
His ſuddaine act, as I for mine. 'Tis here
To ſave her, though it coſt her lover deare.
NAy ſtay a little Thyrſis, we are ſafe,
My warie keepers now are with the King.
Madam, for my poore ſelfe I doe not feare,
But when I thinke on you, and how your name,
And ſtate that is ſo eminent, muſt needs
Receive a certaine ſcandall, and foule blot,
If we be ſeene together, blame me not,
Though I do feare or doubt: What cruell fate
Angry with men, that gave us hearts alike,
And fortunes ſo aſunder; you're a Cedar,
I a poore ſhrub, that may looke up unto you
With adoration, but ne're reach your height.
But Thyrſis I do love you; love and death
Do not much differ, they make all things equall:
The Monuments of Kings may ſhew for them
What they have bin, but looke upon their duſt,
The color, and the weight of theirs, and beggers,
You'le finde the ſame: and if 'mongſt living men
Nature has printed in the face of many,
The characters of nobleneſſe and worth,
Whoſe fortune envies them a worthy place,
In birth, or honor. When the greateſt men
Whom ſhe has courted, beare the marks of ſlaves,
Love ſure will looke on thoſe, and lay aſide
The Accidents of wealth and noble blood,
And in our thoughts wil equall them with Kings.
'Tis true divineſt Lady, that the ſoules
Of all men are alike, of the ſame ſubſtance
By the ſame maker into all infus'd,
But yet the ſeverall matters which they worke on,
How different they are I neede not tell you:
And as theſe outward Organs give our ſoules
Or more, or leſſe roome, as they are contriv'd,
To ſhew their luſtre; ſo againe comes fortune,
And darkens them, to whom the Gods have given
A ſoule divine, and body capable
Of that divinity, and excellence:
But 'tis the order of the Fates, whoſe cauſes
We muſt not looke into: But you deare Madam,
Nature, and fortune have conſpir'd to make
The happieſt alive.
Ay me moſt wretched!
What pleaſure can there be in higheſt ſtate,
Which is ſo croſt in love, the greateſt good,
The Gods can tell how to beſtow on men?
Yet ſome do reckon it the greateſt ill,
A paſſion of the minde, form'd in the fancy,
And bred to be the worſt diſeaſe of reaſon.
They that thinke ſo, are ſuch as love excludes,
Men full of age, or foule deformitie.
No Thyrſis, let not us prophane that deity:
Love is divine, the ſeed of every thing,
The cauſe why now we live, and all the world.
Love is divine, for if religion
Binds us to love, the Gods who never yet
Reveald themſelves in any thing to us
But their bright Images, the faireſt creatures,
Who are our daily objects; loving them,
Wee exerciſe religion: let us not
Be ſcrupulous, or feare; the Gods have care
Of us, and of our piety.
But take heed,
We cannot be too warie: many things
Oppoſe our wills, yet if you thinke it fit,
And this nights ſilence will ſo favour us,
Weele goe together: if we quit this Countrie,
It is no matter, all the world to me
Will be Arcadia, if I may injoy
Thy company, my love.
No Sylvia,
(Pardon mee deare, if ſtill I call you ſo)
Enjoy your fortunes, thinke how much your honor
Muſt ſuffer in this act: For me I finde,
It is enough that I have ever lov'd you:
Now let me at the light of your bright eie,
Burne like the bird whoſe fires renew her neſt,
I ſhall leave you behind me to the world,
The Phenix of true love and conſtancy:
Nor is that bird more glorious in her flames,
Then I ſhall be in mine, though they conſume me.
It muſt not be, for know my deareſt ſhepheard,
I ſhall not tell one minute after thee;
I finde my ſoule ſo linkt to thine, that death
Cannot divide us.
What then ſhall we do?
Shall we reſolve to live thus, till we gaze
Our eies out firſt, and then loſe all our ſenſes
In their ſucceſſion? ſhall we ſtrive to leave
Our ſoules breath'd forth upon each others lips?
Come let us practiſe: this our envious Fates
Cannot deny us.
What a ſight were this
To meete her father? This would make him mad
Indeed, and execute his rage himſelfe.
Madam, your father's here.
Ha Delia!
Cleander, is it thou? then I'me betraid
The ſecond time, but muſt thy fortune make thee
The inſtrument of my undoing ſtill?
Shepheard, I will not honor thee ſo much
As to enquire thy name) thou haſt don that
Thou wilt pay deare for: And I hope thy death
Will take away the blot of this diſgrace
Th'haſt laid upon the Princeſſe.
If you do this,
Youle make me happy, it was this I lookt for,
My triviall acts of life, this of my death
Will recompence with glory; I ſhall die
To ſave my Princeſſe, and whats more, to ſave
The life of her life, her unſpotted honor.
Bleſt Lady, though you are as innocent
And chaſte as pureſt Virgins, that have yet
Seene nothing in a dreame to warme their blood,
Yet the malicious world, the cenſuring people,
That haſte to caſt durt on the faireſt things,
Will hardly ſpare you, if it once be knowne
That we were here together: As for me,
My life is nothing but variety
Of griefe and troubles, which with conſtancy
I have borne yet: tis time that now I die,
Before I do accuſe the Gods that have
Brought me to this, and ſo pull on my death
A puniſhment. Will you be mercifull,
And end me quickly?
Shepheard, know for this
Thy reſolution, which in noble bloods
I ſcarce have found, I willingly would grant
What thou deſir'ſt. But ſomthing muſt be knowne
Before that time either from you, or you.
I know Cleander, it is me you aime at:
I do confeſſe this ſhepheard is my love;
For his ſake I did leave the Court, and thee,
Unworthy as thou art, to be his Rivall.
Madam, my duty bids me ſpeake to you,
Not as a lover now; but as you are
My Princeſſe, and the daughter of my King.
I would not for the world have thoſe deſires
Which I had then; for ſure my bolder love
Would have tranſgreſt the limits of all duty,
And would have dar'd to tell you, that this ſhepheard
Was not a match for great Arcadias heire,
Nor yet one fit for my Competitor.
'Tis not his outward feature, (which how faire
It is I do not queſtion) that can make him
Noble, or wiſe: Whereas my birth, deriv'd
From ancient Kings, and yeares not far unſuiting
Thoſe of your owne; to theſe my education
(To you well knowne,) perhaps might make me worthy
Of being your ſervant.
Canſt thou looke on this,
This piece Cleander, and not bluſh to boaſt
Thy follies thus, ſeeking to take away
From his full vertue, if but this one act
Of his appeare unto the world? (as know
It ſhall; for Ile not ſhame to publiſh him,
Though I die for it) will it not devoure
Thy empty glories, and thy puft up nothings,
And like a grave will burie all thy honors?
Do, take his life, and glory in that act,
But be thou ſure, in him thou ſhalt kill two.
What meane you, madam?
Not to live a minute,
After his death.
That all the Gods forbid.
No, they command it rather, that have made
Our ſoules but one: Cleander, thou wert wont
To be more courteous; and I do ſee
Some pitie in thee: if not for pitties ſake,
Yet for thine owne good ſpare this life, and take
Mine; for thou knowſt, when I am dead, this kingdome
Thy father will inherit, or thy ſelfe.
Tis but the waiting of an old mans death,
Who cannot long out-live me: will you do't?
Sir, you are noble, I do ſee you are,
You lov'd this Lady once: by that dear love
(With me it was a conjuration
To draw my ſoule out, whilſt I was ſo happy)
I do beſeech you ſpare her noble life,
Her death will ſit full heavie on your ſoule,
And in your height of Kingly dignities
Diſturbe that head, which crownes will give no reſt to.
To take my life is juſtice.
Rather mine;
I have offended in firſt loving him,
And now betraying him unto his end.
Be not ſo cruell madam to your ſelfe
And me, to envy me a death ſo noble.
Sir, as you hope your love ſhall ever proſper,
Your great deſignes, your fights, (what ere they are)
As you do hope for peace in your laſt houre,
And that the earth may lightly cloath your aſhes,
Diſpatch me quickly, ſend me to my death.
A ſtrange contention! Madam will you pleaſe
A little to retire: Tis your honor
That I do ſtrive to ſave, as well as life:
Pray do not croſſe my purpoſe, I ſhall do
Something that you may thanke me for.
Cleander,
Save but the ſhepheard, and Ile crowne thy merit.
Will you be pleaſd to enter here?
But ſweare
That thou wilt ſave him.
I ſhall do my beſt,
I dare not ſweare, for tis not in my power
To do what you command.
But will you ſweare
To let me know of it before he die?
I will by heaven.
Then I take my leave.
And Thyrſis be thou ſure, what ever Fate
Attends thy life, the ſame does governe mine:
One kiſſe I muſt not be deny'd.
Fy Madam,
How low is this in you?
Then thus we part,
To meete againe, I hope.
Downe ſtubborne heart,
Wilt thou not breake yet? In my death I finde
Nothing that's terrible, but this Farewell
Preſents my ſoule with all the paines of hell.
I'me ſorry that this buſines went not forward.
So am not I, we're rid of ſo much trouble.
Yet it is ſtrange the King ſhould ſend for us,
And when we were come, command us to returne.
No, 'tis not ſtrange, it was his will to do ſo:
But if you have an itch of dancing, friends,
Next holy-day we'le ha't amongſt our ſelves,
And every man ſhall dance with his owne ſweetheart:
What ſay you ſhepheards, wil't not be as well?
It will be very fine. But where is Thyrſis?
I, where is he! you went along with him,
Where did you leave him?
Walking in a garden,
Where when I came to call him, he was gon.
It ſeemes he cares not for our company.
Neither for yours nor any mans beſides.
He is much alter'd, ſince his love was loſt;
Methinks he is nothing like the man he was.
Well then beware my friends how you ingage
Your ſelves in love: He is a faire example,
And Hylas too, he's drooping for his miſtreſſe;
Daphnis is mad, they ſay; if you have a minde
To die, or to runne mad, then be in love.
See where he comes, in what a fume he is.
I do not like his fumes: pray let's away.
HE will not now be found the Traitor: but
Where e're he be, nor heaven, nor hell ſhall ſave him
From my revenge. To take away the life
Of that ſweet innocent, without whoſe ſight
He knew I could not live, and to do this
Under the name of freindſhip: O you Gods,
What age can parallell ſo great a miſcheife?
This is his Magicke glaſſe, which had the vertue
To make her mine, but ſent her to the Gods.
Bleſt ſoule, I will revenge thy death, and then
Ile follow thee my ſelfe.
Daphnis, my love,
Whither ſo faſt?
Now love deliver me;
And muſt you come to trouble me? Be gon;
I cannot ſtay to heare thy tedious follies.
Were all your vowes then made but to abuſe me?
Are there not paines to puniſh perjur'd men?
And will they not ore'take you?
'Las poore foole,
The Gods doe laugh at ſuch ſlight perjuries
As come from lovers.
Yet it was no conqueſt
To deceive one that would be credulous,
A ſimple maide that lov'd you.
Then I ſee.
There is no end of womens reaſoning;
Or elſe this might ſuffice thee, that I cannot
No nor I will not love thee.
Never?
Never.
Goe cruell man, and if the God of love
Will heare my prayers, thou in thy love ſhalt thrive,
As I in mine: that when thou art forlorne,
Thou maiſt remember her thou now doeſt ſcorne.
IT was the cruell practiſe of my Fate,
That lifted me unto the height of bliſſe,
To make my fall the greater: for no ſooner
Did I injoy the love of my Nerina,
But in a moment ſhe was taken from me:
A love ſo dearely bought with ſighs and teares,
So many yeares ſpent in the gaining her,
And loſt in one poore minute: It is better
Alwaies to live a miſerable life,
Then once to have bin happy: ſhe is dead,
And I alive that cannot live without her:
Tis fit that I die too; but by what meanes?
By violence? No, that the Gods forbid.
A lingring greife, I neede not feare, will kill me,
When every day I ſhall repaire, as now,
Unto her tombe, and conſecrate my teares,
And tearing ſighs unto her bleſſed Ghoſt,
Some pittying God, when I'me diſolv'd away
Upon her aſhes, will congeale thoſe teares,
That they may cloath her duſt: whilſt ſome kinde ſhepheard
Paſſing this way does write this on her grave.
See here Nerina, that from Hylas eyes
Fed her faire flame, now in their dew ſhe lies.
Thus I will have it, ſo the words ſhall runne.
IT ſhall not ſerve thy turne, malicious ſhepheard,
Though thou haſt tane my love away by tricks,
Yet all thy cunning, and thy practiſes
Shall not ſecure thee from my revenge.
Are theſe the thanks I have for that rich jewell
Which I beſtowd on thee, ungratefull man?
Yes, for a poyſond glaſſe, a precious jewel.
I do confeſſe 'twas poyſond.
Do you ſo?
And to do me a courteſie, you kild her.
Yet heare me, ſhe is not dead; and if ſhe be,
e pay my life for hers.
Be ſure thou ſhalt:
But canſt thou hope for ſuch a ſtrong illuſion
To mocke my ſence? did I not ſee her dead?
She did appeare ſo: what you thought was death,
s but a lethargie: though I profeſſe not
To draw the Moone downe from the ſphere ſhe is in,
Or make the ſunne looke bloody by my Arte,
Yet am I well informd in everything
This glaſſe is made of, and I know th'effects
t workes, and can dicourſe 'em.
Let me heare them.
Have patience, and you ſhall; the Glaſſe you ſee
Of this rare Mirrour which I gave you, is
Made of a Memphian ſtone, that has the power
To bring a deadly ſleepe on all the ſenſes:
With it, to make th'effects more ſtrong, is mingled
The Quinteſſence, extracted in a Limbecke,
Of the Torpedo, which has ſuch a quality,
That if the Fiſher touch it with his hooke,
A poiſon ſtraite will creepe through all his veines,
Till it benumme his ſenſes: This compounded,
And made into a glaſſie metall, ſoone
Reflects upon the eyes of him that lookes in't
A ſleepie poiſon, which will ſtupifie
The vitall parts. Yet, he that gave it me,
Taught me the Cordiall water, which he us'd
To reſtore ſpirits and heate unto thoſe vitalls;
And I have brought it with me for our purpoſe.
What have I wrong'd you now? or is my preſent
Worthy the thankes you give me?
Yet you were
Too blame, that you'd not tell me this before
I gave it her.
In that I ſhew'd my love;
For I did feare your reſolution,
Though I were certaine of recovering her.
And what muſt now be done?
Here, where you found me,
ſaw her laid, and buried in the clothes
e wont to weare, her father ſo would have it:
waited on the funerall, with purpoſe
o ſee the ſtone laid hollow on her grave,
or feare of hurting her.
It was well don.
Here Ile apply my medicine; you ſhall ſee
Whether I lie or no.
Let's loſe no time.
long to ſee my love alive againe.
Then helpe to lift this ſtone; ſee where ſhe lies,
he ſame Nerina?
She is dead, I ſee.
Love is ſtill full of feares: give me the water.
Here, but take heede it do not ſpoile her face.
If ſhe be dead, you neede not feare the change
Of any color; what a childe is love?
The Gods, I ſee, will not let beautie die:
he breathes, ſhe ſtirs, her eies begin to open
As after ſleepe. O miracle!
How now?
s ſhe alive? will you beleeve your ſence?
Now I have put her in your hands, be ſure
You do not let her goe, and loſe no time.
If you give credit to her words, you're loſt.
What cannot womens words and flatteries
Effect with ſimple lovers? thinke on that,
Be confident: Ile leave you to your Fate.
You Gods where am I now? what place is this?
What light is this I ſee? are the ſame things
Seene in this new world, as they are in th' other?
Or in the grave do men ſee waters, trees,
As I do now, and all things as I liv'd?
But ſure I live ſtill: if I doe, why then
Was I here buried amongſt theſe flowers?
Sure I am dead; but yet I walke and ſpeake,
And I have heard that thoſe who once are dead,
Can never uſe their voice, or action:
But who is this I ſee here? Daphnis, ha!
Are you dead too, as well as I?
No ſweet,
I live to be the ſervant of Nerina.
I, ſo ſaid Hylas, whil'ſt I liv'd with him.
She thinks of Hylas ſtill, what ſhall I do?
But tell me Daphnis, in what place am I?
In Daphnis heart you live, and ever did.
And ſo ſaid Hylas, when we liv'd together.
O Gods againe? Nerina thinke not on him,
You muſt love me.
Muſt they in this new world,
As they have chang'd their lives, ſo change their loves,
I never ſhall do that.
You are deceiv'd.
You are not dead.
Not dead? how came I hither then?
By my device to keepe me company.
But will you not declare, how I came hither?
Aske me not that, but goe along with me.
Stay ſhepheard, whither would you have me goe?
Where love and ſilence ſhall befriend us beſt.
But tell me Daphnis, was not I once dead?
You were, but I your ſervant chang'd that death nto a ſleepe.
I know not what you meane,
Can you change death into a ſleepe?
I can,
And did for love of you.
This is a riddle,
Pray let me know what you do meane by it.
Come with me, and you ſhall.
Nay, tell me firſt.
Then know faire ſhepheardeſſe, that when I ſaw
My love, my ſervices, my gifts, my vowes,
Did all returne to me without your love,
I had recourſe unto this Artifice,
A pleaſent one of loves Invention,
Which you may well remember.
What was that?
I did preſent you with a looking glaſſe.
You did, but what of that?
Nothing at all.
Pray goe this way with me.
But tell me firſt.
That caſt you into this deepe lethargie:
Such was the Magicke of it.
To what purpoſe
Did you do this?
To make you mine.
Yours, Daphnis?
How could you hope that without my conſent?
My ſervices I thought would merit it,
Beſides the world not dreaming but you were
Dead, and here buried, we two might liue
Together without being knowne to any.
But could you practiſe tricks on thoſe you love?
Now you are paid with your owne Artifice:
For know, ther's none that can diſpoſe of me
But Hylas, who has long preſerv'd my heart,
And now my father, (whom I did reſolve
For ever to obey) has made him mine,
By giving his conſent, which had not bin
But for this tricke of yours.
Why then it ſeemes
You do not love me.
Love you? know I had
Rather embrace my death againe, then thee.
Then 'tis no time to dally, come along,
Or I will force you.
Helpe me ſhepheards, helpe.
Foole, ſtop your mouth, no humane helpe ſhal ſave thee
This is the place where I am come to pay
My teares firſt ſacrifice, upon this tombe
That glories in the ſpoiles of all my wealth.
Hylas, come helpe me, ſee'ſt thou not that Daphnis
Will raviſh me?
Ha, what doe I heare?
The voice of my Nerina? ſo ſhe ſpake
When ſhee did live; but now, alas, ſhee's dead:
Some Devill mockes me with a viſion,
And voice unto it.
Will you ſee me raviſht
Before your face? O Hylas! oh my Love!
Tis ſhe, it is no viſion▪ hold Raviſher,
My love thou canſt not take without my life.
What noiſe is this?
Some ſhreike much like a womans.
Oh helpe my love, Mirtillus.
Shepheard, hold,
Let goe this Nymph.
Or death, or victory
Shall crowne my enterprize.
Who makes this out-cry?
Sir, I ſhall coole you, if you be ſo hot.
My daughter here? was ſhee not buried?
Away foule ſpirit, away; let's part theſe ſhepheards.
O father, do you thinke that I am dead,
I am alive, as you are; touch me, ſee.
She is alive indeede: how cam'ſt thou hither?
Daphnis, whom you would have to be my husband,
Brought me to this ſuppoſed death and grave.
By what ſtrange meanes, Nerina?
By the glaſſe
You bid me I ſhould take: he has confeſt
To mee that it was poiſon'd.
Can it be?
Can Daphnis doe this? he had little reaſon.
She was a foole to crie, I ſhould ha' pleas'd her
Ere this perhaps.
Here Hylas, take my daughter,
For ſhe is thine: you Daphnis, I did further
In all I could, till you would finde a tricke
To put your ſelfe beſide her.
I forgive him:
For though it was ill meant, yet did it ſort
By accident unto my good.
But will
Our Lawes permit a Raviſher to live?
No, no Montanus: let him live, and envie
Our preſent happineſſe.
Cover, you Gods,
The world in publique ruine, or elſe ſhew me
A way to hide my ſhame.
What will he doe?
He will go hang himſelfe: what plots hee had
To foole himſelfe with!
They that practiſe tricks
Finde them as jades, that throw 'em firſt, then kick 'em
As his has don.
Come ſhepheards, lets away,
And ſolemnize theſe nuptials.
Stay Montanus,
Did the King ſend for you?
He did.
And how?
The meſſage came from Thyrſis.
I'le goe with you:
'Tis ſtrange the King ſhould ſend for you: pray heaven
Thyrſis have done no miſchiefe there, he's hanſome,
Of a good grace, and moving eloquence:
Perhaps ſome Lady may have taken him
Up for her ſelfe, and he, Ile lay a wager,
Will be ſo ſqueamiſh, that if Sylvia
Come in his minde, he ne're will do her reaſon,
And then her plot will be how to betray him:
Would I were in his place.
I would thou wert,
So he were ſafe.
I would comply, ne're feare it;
They live a heavenly life of love in Court,
To that which we do here; a Miſtreſſe there
Will ſatisfie the longings of her lover,
And never trouble Hymen for the matter:
Then if they like not, they may looke elſe-where,
Thou wilt be puniſht one day for thy miſchiefe.
The miſchiefe's in my tongue, I ne're do any.
No, I have heard that Stella was with childe
By thee, and thou muſt father it.
Who, I?
Take me at that once, fathering of children,
And make me common father of them all:
A child's a prettie thing, and I ſhould joy
To ſee one of mine owne. Ile tell thee truth
Montanus, by this hand I never lay
With any woman in my life.
How then?
You' have courted all; who is it that Mirtillus
Has not profeſt to love?
I do confeſſe it,
And that is all I could do; for before
I could get earneſt of any ones love,
To whom I made addreſſe; even ſhe would ſay,
You have another miſtreſſe, go to her,
I wil not be her ſtale: and ſo by this meanes,
Nor this, nor that would do me any reaſon.
You had ill lucke, it ſeemes, 'twas not your fault.
No, for if they would beleeve me, I did ſweare
I had no other. Pray, Montanus, tell me,
For you have knowne the ſeverall waies of wooing,
Which is the beſt, and ſafeſt?
O Mirtillus,
Gray haires have put the wilder thoughts of love
Out of my head; cold blood and frozen limbes,
Fright all thoſe heates away, in place of which
Diſcretion and ſobriety ſhould come.
But I have heard, old men doe ſometimes love.
They dote, Mirtillus, give it the right name;
In old mens bloods Cupid does quench his flames.
But as we goe, Ile tell thee, not to love
At all is beſt; but if you needs muſt love,
Love one, and ſeeke no further, thou wilt finde
Enough of her, if once ſhe prove unkinde.
THere is no way to avoide the ſhame of this:
Each ſhepheards boy that ſings unto his flocke,
Will make me the ſcorn'd ſubject of his ſong.
Had you bin ſuddaine as I counſail'd you,
You had not faild: but you young men doe never
Goe through with any thing.
For heavens ſake,
Call not that wicked deede to my remembrance.
I do repent me, that I e're beganne it:
I would not for a world have ended it:
Nerina's chaſte, and faire, and I a villaine.
Leave me, I pray, for ſomething tells me, you
Did firſt adviſe me to this damned act.
Nay, if you prize my friendſhip at this rate,
I'le leave you to your pennance.
This old man
Is full of malice, nothing troubles him;
The ills that he has done, flie from his thoughts,
And he rejoyces that he did, them queintly:
I have begun my youth, as if I meant
To have my age ſo puniſht as his is,
Who's this? Dorinda? I have done her wrong:
I ſu'de for love to her firſt, which obtain'd,
I ſtucke diſgraces on her; let me aske
Forgiveneſſe now, for 'twere too much to hope,
That ſhe ſhould love one ſtain'd with ſuch a deed
As I have done, ſo foule and impious.
Great love, if yet thou art not ſatiſfied
With all the wrongs I have ſuſtain'd for thee:
My blood, I hope thy anger will appeaſe,
Which thou maiſt glut thy ſelfe with.
Gentle Nymph.
I've beene too gentle, doe not mocke me with't:
O Daphnis, is it you? this is not well,
To mocke me thus; your looks when arm'd with frownes,
Gave not my heart ſo deepe a wound as this.
I meane no ſcorne, I come to aske your pardon
For what I've done already, not to heape
More ſinnes upon my head.
'Tis very ſtrange.
But true Dorinda, will you ſpit upon me?
Take your revenge, for I have well deſerv'd it.
But is this ſerious Daphnis? oh take heed,
Cracke not my heart with ſuch a loade of griefe
And ſcorne, ſo preſt as this is; if you doe,
The Gods will puniſh it: for though they have
Neglected me thus long, they will revenge
Such injuries as theſe.
My many ills
Diſcredit my repentance: if my words
Can finde no faith with you, beleeve my teares,
Indeed they are not feign'd.
Even ſo you look't
When firſt you ſtole my heart: but I forgive you,
What ere become of me; I ſtill muſt love you.
Forgive me firſt, and then I will beginne
By my endeavours and true ſervices
To deſerve ſomething of you, if not love.
There is not that hard heartedneſſe in man
Which I did thinke, for he repents I ſee:
O Daphnis, if thou mean'ſt not this as ſcorne,
Take me into thine armes, and I will be
Thy ſlave.
O ſay not ſo, let me
Rather be thine; it will be pride in me
To be ambitious of it.
Oh my heart!
What ſuddaine joy thou ſtrik'ſt into it now!
But yet methinkes I feare thou doſt not love me.
Why ſhould you feare? by Pan you are to me
What ere you can imagine; equall, above
All that I ere thought faire; and if you be
Content to hide my faults, and take me to
Your nuptiall bed, (which yet I dare not hope)
But if you will, when ere that day ſhall come,
Th'embraces of my love and me, ſhall be
Such as the Cyprian boy from our abundance,
Shall take his fires to kindle other hearts,
Yet leave with us a flame, which we will cheriſh,
And keepe alive unto eternitie.
Women are ever credulous moſt then,
When knowledge of the truth would but afflict them:
I dare not now diſtruſt you, though I knew,
What you have ſaid, were falſe, it has a ſemblance
Of ſuch a pleaſing truth: Give me thy hand,
And take thou mine; whilſt we walke thus intwin'd
I ſhall thinke Daphnis never was unkind.
WHat, are they dead? Is the Kings will obey'd?
No Sir, they live, and Hymen in his bands
Has ty'd them both; the happieſt knot that ere
Knit two ſuch equall hearts, and loves together:
Oh I am raviſh'd with the newes, my joy
Is greater now, then if ſh'had beene the daughter
Unto our King, and I had married her.
I am amaz'd; pray Jove thou beeſt not mad.
Somewhat exalted, Sir, beyond my my ſelfe,
But yet not mad: Goe, Sir, unto the King,
Tell him, Cleander lives to make him happy.
Sure thou wilt come unto thy ſelfe anon,
Prethee bethinke thee.
Yes Sir, I doe thinke,
And know that I have newes to make him live,
And you an age yet longer.
This is ſtrange.
Tis true.
But what is true?
Tis true, my Siſter
Shall be a Queene.
If ſhe doe live, I thinke
She will; but yet you know we were commanded
To cut that life off.
But your haſtie ſonne,
That came ſo ſpeedy with a fatall meſſage,
Was not ſo forward now; they both doe live,
And both are married.
Jupiter forbid.
The Fates command it, 'tis their proper worke▪
The Shepheard is a Prince, your Prince, and mine,
And married to my Siſter,
Ha! what's that?
Prithee digeſt thy troubled thoughts, and tell me
What Prince is this thou mean'ſt?
Archigenes.
Thou dream'ſt, it cannot be.
No, then come forth
You royall paire, and teſtifie your ſelves.
Father, your bleſſing.
Ha!
Nay, I've told all.
She knowes ſhe is your daughter: looke Sir here;
Here we muſt place our reverence.
Who's this?
Not yet? then looke upon this Circle, that
You know for certaine, though you know not him.
'Tis it, it is the ſame: Archigenes
Sonne of Euarchus and Eudora:
This is my character, and this my ſeale.
Sir, I have heard that by your piety,
My infant life was ſav'd: now by the goodneſſe
Deriv'd from you, unto your ſonne, I have
Not onely found my life, but my content,
The ſumme of all my hopes, this Lady here,
Without whoſe love my life had bin a torment.
And I the happieſt maide that ever was
Conducted by the power of ſimple love,
Have found in place of him I thought a ſhepheard,
A Princely lover.
Riſe Calligone:
The Gods are juſt I ſee, that favoring
My innocence, have brought this match about.
But ſay Cleander, what Fate guided thee
To this diſcovery?
Sir, ſhould I tell you,
How many waies I caſt to ſave my ſiſter
After the fatall meſſage which I brought,
I ſhould be tedious, and keepe you from
What you do long to heare: In ſhort I ſoone
Reſolv'd to make away this royall ſhepheard.
And knowing that in this affaire, to keepe it
Secret, diſpatch was needefull, I commanded
A ſervant, of whoſe faith and courage I
Was well aſſur'd, to kill him in my preſence.
'Tis ſtrange, thou ſhould'ſt be preſent at a murder.
'Twas a neceſſity was laid upon me,
Becauſe I would be ſure to ſee him dead,
I bad him chooſe his death, when manfully
He ſaid, he car'd not how, ſo he might die.
I knew to ſtrangle him, was the readieſt way,
Which death himſelfe was ready to embrace:
This his ſo noble reſolution,
Did ſtande me from mine; my ſervants hands
Trembled for feare,
Preſaging what a ſinne they were to act:
He bad him be aſſur'd he would not ſtart,
And often call'd him to diſpatch him quickly.
What man could have a heart for ſuch a deed,
And ſee his face.
The Prince, before he came
To put the fatall twiſt about his necke,
Beſought me, as I ever hop't for peace,
I ſhould preſerve the Princeſſe: this I promis'd,
And whatſoever elſe he would deſire:
He anſwered, nothing now, but haſty death,
Then ſtripping off his doublet, I eſpide
With a quick eye this golden Circle here,
When haſtily I bid my ſervant hold,
And let him goe. He ask't me why I ſtaid,
I told him that about his necke was Sacred,
He would have rent it off, but I forbad it.
What did you then?
Sir, I did well remember
What I had heard of th' Oracle and you,
Which with the computation of his yeares,
I found agreeing to make up a truth
Which you before aſſur'd me; then I ask't him,
Whether he would be married to the Princeſſe
Before he died; he thought that I had mockt him,
And ſaid, I practis'd Tyrannie upon him:
Then went I to my ſiſter, and deſir'd
The ſame of her; in fine, I ſaw them both
Joyne hands and hearts together, but the Prince
Thought this a dreame of life, which certaine death
Would wake him from, untill I did aſſure him
Of his great State, and that his love, whom now
He thought to be the Princeſſe, was my Siſter,
All which I did referre unto your knowledge.
This day for ever let it holy be,
And you whom love has brought through deepe deſpaire,
Unto the haven of your happineſſe,
Enjoy each other freely. Of you brave ſhepheard,
(But now my Prince) I ſhall enquire anon
Where, and with whom you liv'd.
Sir, the ſhepheard,
hom I call father, ſtayes without; Montanus
s name is, by whoſe gentle hands, (as he
as often told me) I was reſcu'd firſt
om cold and death, ſince under his kind roofe
oſterd, and bred as his.
Goe call him in,
ou're welcome both, you may applaud your fortune
hat brought you ſuch a Shepheard: ſtay all here,
Whilſt I goe to the King. This day will adde
ore yeares unto his life, when he ſhall ſay,
o day ſhone brighter on Arcadia.
We are both come to doe our duties to you.
as being ſent for, and Mirtillus with me,
o celebrate your joyes: within a while
he Shepheards and the Nymphs will all be here.
My old companions ſhall be welcome all,
s you are now; I never ſhall forget
our courteſie, nor theirs.
Nor I the Nymphs
nce my deare fellowes; but you Mirtillus,
hough you did ſcorne to love, yet could you ſing
ell, if you liſted of it.
Can ſhepheards then
eſpiſe that Deity which we adore?
Madam, I reverence it in you,
he perfect'ſt patterne of a conſtant lover,
nd in the honour of your Nuptialls
have a Song, which if your Grace will heare,
'Twill entertaine the time.
Let it be ſung.
Hymen, God of marriage bed,
Be thou ever honoured:
Thou, whoſe torches purer light,
Deaths ſad tapers did affright,
And inſteed of funerall fires,
Kindled lovers chaſt deſires:
May their love
Ever prove
True and conſtant: let not age
Know their youthfull heate t'aſſwage.
Maides prepare the Genial bed,
Then come night, and hide that red
Which her cheekes, his heart does burne:
Till the envious day returne,
And the luſty bridegroome ſay,
I have chac'd her feares away,
And inſteed
Of virgin head,
Given her a greater good,
Perfection, and womanhood.
Thanks good Mirtillus, this indeed was proper
Unto your ſubject.
Your thrice happy match,
eing but now come to my knowledge, made me
ontract my ſelfe into a ſtraiter roome,
hen the large ſubject might afford.
The King.
Although I wonder, yet I doe beleeve thee,
y faithfull Councellor.
Your Majeſty
as found me alwaies reall, but this truth
he Oracles accompliſhment will prove,
hat did foretell their match.
Reade it, Eubulus,
nce more; and then call in my ſonne and daughter.
If ere thy Iſſue Male thou liv'ſt to ſee,
The childe thou thinkst is thine, thine ſhall not bee.
Calligone is not my childe, proceed.
His life ſhall be obſcure, twice ſhall thy hate
Doome him to death, yet ſhall he ſcape that Fate.
'Tis true, that twice I did command his death,
irſt thinking him a baſtard, then a ſhepheard,
or his offence; the Gods are juſt: Goe on.
And thou ſhalt live to ſee that not long after
Thy onely ſonne ſhall wed thy onely daughter.
This was a riddle ever till this day,
Their marriage has made it plaine. Eubulus,
Call in Archigenes, and call thy daughter
The faire Calligone, that I may powre
My bleſſings on them: And I long to ſee
Thoſe characters, thou writſt about his necke,
That I may call him mine.
See where they are.
Archigenes come neerer, for thou art
A ſtranger yet, although thou be my ſonne:
The Character is plaine, it is the ſame
Eubulus writ to me: you heavenly powers
Give me a heart that may be large enough
T'expreſſe my joy for theſe, and thanks to you.
My royall father, (for I am inſtructed
To call you ſo) If I have don amiſſe
In haſting to this match, I aske your pardon.
And I for daring to aſpire ſo high
Without your leave.
Riſe both, you have my bleſſing.
But who are theſe?
This is the ſhepheard Sir,
Who tooke me up firſt, whom till now I call'd
Father, and he deſerv'd it for his care.
Eubulus, this is he, Montanus, iſt not?
He is deliverd to me for the ſhepheard,
Of whom your Majeſty may if you pleaſe
Be well inform'd of all thoſe paſſages,
I left untold.
Some other time we'le heare them.
Let him be well rewarded.
Sir, theſe ſhepheards
Are come to entertaine your Majeſtie,
With their devices, as their cuſtome is,
In which ſometimes, untill my fortune chang'd,
I bore apart.
Let them be feaſted all,
And ſtuddy ſomething new to celebrate
Theſe Nuptials, which I will have proclaim'd
Throughout my kingdome: and Eubulus, ſee
That every thing be fitted for their honor.
Come let us to the Temple, that we may
With holy ſacrifice appeaſe the Gods,
Whoſe great decrees, though we did ſtrive to hinder,
Yet are they now fulfill'd. It is in vaine,
T'oppoſe the Fates, whoſe lawes do all conſtraine.
TO you moſt royall paire, whoſe lives have brought
Vertue in faſhion, and the world have taught,
That chaſt innocuous ſports become the ſtage
No leſſe then civill manners do the age:
We dedicate this Piece, but yet with feares,
To have diſpleas'd ſo chaſt, ſo tender eares;
Which, if you free us from, we'le call this play
No more the Shepheards, but our Holy-day.