HOw now Prologue! is your mind ſo much on your part, that you muſt run over men as you goe?
The fault was yours ſir, that would ſo careleſly ſit in his way, that was to doe his part by you; tho we hope to run over ſome before we have ended; and yet without any Cynicall obſervation, eſpecially of the wiſe.
Why for Iuvenal's ſake? what has thy new tunn'd Poetry vented? will you raile? will you be ſatiricall, and bite? and rub the City with ſalt?
Faith ſir you muſt know, that the giddy looſenes of vicious humors, does ſo rankle in moſt parts of our time's impoſthum'd gallantry, that tis a hard thing Satyram non ſcribere: and therefore we are deſirous to launce it a little, and give the ſore an iſſue, that vanity ſeeing the fouleneſſe of the matter which made it ſwell to ſuch a ſeeming greatneſſe, may loathe it ſelfe, and ſeeke a cure for the diſeaſe.
Doe yoe heare Prologue! your Author is a foole: is he deſirous to buy Fame at ſuch a rate, that he wil ſmart for't? will not examples move him? can he not live private, but he muſt be medling with Tigillinus? Did he never heare of the Proverb, that it's better railing at Hercules then at a Clowne to his face? I prethee tell him of it, and let him know, tis better live ſtill private and unknowne, then have our ſmarts to ev'ry eare be blowne.
Troth it is true ſir, Ile put him in mind of it.
I prithee doe, and tell him withall, that ſo choiſe an Audience deſires not to glut their eares with others infamie, nor ever wiſh'd their mirth ſhould feed upon the ranke diſtemperature of other mens vices; but come to behold a Scene merry and harmeleſſe, as free from ſower invectives, as fulſome bawdery: as for thoſe whoſe dull palats can reliſh nothing, unleſſe it be ſawced with the verjuice of a tarte pen, be hoſtile enemies to their piſhes and meawings, and ſcorne to beg or buy a reconciling; their defects make them deſperate, and their envy cannot blaſt an unbeholding wit: to the candor of the reſt, any mirth will be more pleaſing than railing: ſome harmeleſſe and innocent humour, that may paſſe with allowance of the times, will be welcomer to them, and ſafer to you.
Sir in our Authors name I thanke you: and would you but pleaſe to ſpeake with him your ſelfe—
I will preſently, and diſſwade his intention, and yet I doubt not but to give ſufficient contentation to his Auditors, whoſe patience I feare I have wrong'd by interrupting their Prologue.
I ſhould have opened the Argument of our Play, but ſtumbling on this ſtranger, makes me doubtfull what wee ſhall have — howſoever —
The ſelfe diſtruſt that guides his baſhfull pen
Wills him intreat your patience, and if then
This ſlight worke pleaſe you, time more purely ſpent
Shall once more ſweat to better your content:
Lighter defects a ſerious Muſe amends;
And ſlight beginnings have ſome perfect ends.
SIgnior Antonio, pray how did you like the Maske wee had here to night, for my Lord Lucilio's ben venuto?
Well of a wooden one, ſet forth by a Dancer and an Architect, as the faſhion is.
Alas Signior, there muſt bee ſomething to prolong and ſtrengthen theſe devices, when Poëts, in favour of the ignorant, are faine to leave 'hem ſo ſhort winded, and almoſt ſpeechleſſe.
So ſir; But now tell mee Rigazzo, what have you learn'd all this time you have beene with your Lord at the Vniverſitie?
More than I can reckon Signior, and yet I have the Art of memorie to help me.
As what ſir?
I can name you all the Alehouſes and Tavernes in Athens, and moſt part of the Bawdy-houſes; marry to know them all, onely Night, that has beene ſome ſcores of yeares acquainted with 'hem, and the Devill that gathers their rents, could teach me: and indeed I was too young to be their ſcholler, elſe I might have beene a better proficient in them too.
I thinke ſir your time was ſpent in ſuch ſtudies.
No, not all Signior, I can ſteale as deſperately as a Purſivant; fiddle the Geeſe, Ducks, Hens, Lambs, and Calves, five mile round by booke; and cover the matter as ſmoothly as your Citizen does his perjury, and your Stoick his Lecherie: for I had moſt ſober Graduates for my Tutors in all.
'Twas pitty your Rogueſhip had not proceeded Maſter of Art in the facultie of theeving.
It's no matter Signior for theeves to proceed Maſters of Art, when ſo many Maſters of Art doe proceed theeves, and that's the leaſt converſion, you know Signior.
Are you ſo nimble at your Logick ſir?
As a hungry Scholler at a Henrooſt.
Take heed you labour not your ſelfe out o'breath, your learning's but ſhort winded.
Long enough to runne with a Stoick, Signior. I may bee able to reade moralitie, get me ſome night-geere, and a red Noſe, and then I am moſt illuſtriouſly compleate.
Away, the Duke.
Thus hath our coſt and beſt invention ſweat
To ſeale your welcome from th' Athenean Schooles:
And truſt me ſonne, your thankes are much in debt
Vnto theſe Ladies, whoſe too prodigall loves
Have ſearch'd for jewels, thus to doe you grace.
My Lord, I doe acknowledge it a debt
As to their loves: Onely your Princely care
To grace our new returne hath ſo ſurpaſs'd
The former expectation we conceiv'd,
That I am forc'd now to confeſſe I live
A deſperate bankerout to your royall favours.
Your good deſerts may ſoone requite our love,
But tell us, How does learning flouriſh now
In Athens?
Iuſt as Vertue at the Court;
For with the times affecting ignorance
'T has baniſh'd true induſtrious labour thence;
And vicious looſneſſe finding none reſiſt,
Has ſo ingros'd the moſt refined wits,
And by the terrours of her ſenſuall threats,
Bred ſuch deluding Crocodiles in their braines,
That like the thirſty ſwift Egyptian dogges,
They ſcarcely taſte of thoſe faire ſeven-fold ſtreames,
Into whoſe depth their induſtrie ſhould dive:
And having onely got a ſeeming face
Of ſuperficiall knowledge, 'mongſt the groſſe
And beaſt-like ſenſe-conceiving multitude,
They moſt ambitiouſly ſeeke and purſue
Vulgar applauſe for their poore out-ſide skill,
"And by ſuch mudwall ſtayres doe often riſe
"Vp to the top of abus'd dignities.
How can deſerving vertue flouriſh then,
If ſacred learning be ſo ſleightly ſought?
As twinn-borne ſiſters, both doe ſhare alike
Their equall portions in the worlds eſteeme,
For in thoſe hallow'd places, which a true
And carefull liberalitie did conſecrate
As pure religious ſhrines to god like Skill,
Where Vertue richly inveſted with her beſt
And precious ornaments, might give a full
And glorious luſtre like a noone-tide Sunne;
There ugly Vice, even in the baſeſt formes,
Climing by ſteps of Art up to the height
Of horror, ſtandeth in a praecipit,
And thruſt but one ſtep farther, with her fall
Will cruſh her ſelfe, and overwhelme the world.
To grieve at this, were in theſe ſenſeleſſe times
To become monſtrous; and to feele no griefe,
Were to be ſenſeleſſe with the times themſelves.
Obſerve him good my Lord, and let your eye
Be jealous now —
Have patience good Adraſta,
We ſtrive in vaine to bandy with loves power
And unreſiſted Charter of the gods,
Which time and abſence ne'r could violate.
— As is your ſoule.
O be prodigious then!
And in deſpight of cuſtome let the world
See that it's poſſible a womans minde
Can reſt in one: you muſt be valiant too,
And dare th'affrighting dangers that we meet,
I feare we have ſwelling paſſages to wade,
"For we muſt feele amidſt a world of evils,
"A womans Spleene, worſe than the worſt of devils.
Now Lady Iulia let this cōfirme your welcome,
And yours Althea: truſt me I could wiſh
The ſeaſon ſo diſpos'd, ſince that our ſonnes
Happy and ſafe returne has made us glad,
That we might dedicate a longer time
To harmleſſe mirth: but now the night growes old,
And we ſhall wrong your patience too too much.
Muſt it be ſo? Have all thoſe laviſh ſignes
Of undeſerved favours heapt on you
By your too carefull father, and our ſelf,
Been ſpurres to your contempt? Or could the ſweets
Of our affection prodigally caſt,
Make you not reliſh what your duty owes?
Elſe did you thinke becauſe they alwayes ranne
In ſuch an uncheckt current to your will,
That no ingratitude could make the ebbe?
O impious times! wherein a parents care,
When ſhee has combated the pangs of death
To give her children life; ſtood all her time
Like to a carefull Centinell for their youth,
And ſpent the nights in penſive watchfulneſſe,
(Forcing ſoft nature to forbeare her reſt)
To plott their good; muſt all be fruſtrated?
And by a childs proud will ſee all things croſt?
Their Parents hopes, and their owne fortunes loſt?
How hath our love to thee? our wiſhes toyl'd
To build thy paſſage to a higher ſpheare,
And by ſome noble match to raiſe thy Houſe,
And muſt thy baſe attempts looke downeward ſtill?
Mongrell our blood? and ſet a laſting ſcarre
Vpon our progeny, by fixing thus
Thy ſtubborne paſſions on baſe Iulia's childe?
Madam, not to yeeld what Nature makes us owe,
Were to bee made leſſe reas'nable than beaſts;
And nothing's more againſt a generous minde,
And freeborne ſpirit, than foule Ingratitude:
Yet muſt your Grace remember that we take
Nor all from Parents: the hand of heaven and Fate
Does by the laſt infuſion of the ſoule
Give the rich forme, and by a ſecret tract,
And unavoyded path, leads us to what
Seemes good to it; and though our mindes be free
In this impulſe, wee love by Deſtinie.
I muſt confeſſe I love; nor was the flame
Of my affection, when it kindled firſt,
Like to a paper fire, that with a blaze
Of luſt, begins and ends at once, and leaves
Nought but black infamie behinde: nor can
The leaſt diſhonour ſtaine our Dukedomes title
From her, whoſe Blood ſtands firme by long deſcents,
Even in the heart of unbought nobleneſſe,
Whoſe Reputation's ſound, Revenues faire,
Beauty able to inrich a Dukedome, and deſerts
To be an Empreſſe. Were then our fortunes rais'd
By thoſe high ſteps to which I ſhould aſpire
To joyne with greatneſſe, I muſt joyne with vice,
"For they are oft obſerv'd to joyne their hands,
"And he not ſtoops that ſtayes where Vertue ſtands.
Has Athens taught you bee an Oratour?
Degenerous boy, Ile coole your vertuous flame,
And make thee rue the baſeneſſe of thy choiſe.
How deepe a conflict doe my thoughts indure
'Twixt Love and Dutie! Wert not a mothers tongue
That wrong'd thy worth Althea, I would have torne it
From out th'injurious throat in thy revenge,
"And held it to their eyes, to let them ſee
"How it had wrong'd it ſelfe by wronging thee.
By my troth I am glad to ſee thee well my little
Gallow-clapper; how haſt thou done this many a day? ha!
Faith prettily well Miſtris Fraileware, as a man of my profeſſion might; I had all the chiefe trades in the City to help mee doe well.
What trades were they, thou wert too young for any occupation yet.
Not above three yeares at moſt: but I earn'd ſomething with working and wayting on my Lord, as Tankard-bearers, Labourers, and Servingmen doe: I ſtole and cozen'd, as Taylors, Shopkeepers and Cutpurſes doe; I let out my Lords books, and tooke money for the uſe of'hem, as the later ends of gouty Merchants doe: and yet for all this I was forc'd (as many of you Citizens are) to goe many times to bed with a hungry conſcience.
You'll never leave your crackery, but tell mee prethee ſirrha, is Athens a fine Towne? What be theſe College, like? didſt thou goe to ſchoole there?
O, an excellent place for a woman that will uſe trading: You ſhall have the Schollers lie at your ſweet Frailes night and day; they bee forc'd to ſweeten their diſputations with Grocers reaſons: and cuſtome could not but make your husband one of the head men of the City preſently.
Now by my troth I thinke it were a very good place for a ſtale ſhopkeepers wife of the City to ſet up in: o'my conſcience, a woman of our occupation might thrive there.
I, and ſhe were down never ſo low, the ſchollers would doe it—and how does Maſter Damaſippios the lecturing Stoick? When was he here?
Doſt remember him? let me ſee—o'my honeſty, I never ſaw him ſince his laſt morall Lecture againſt the ſinnes of the fleſh—yes heaven forgive me to ſweare, now I remember me, the ſame day my husband went a duck-hunting; and then he came hither, and brought mee many good things: wilt thou goe to him againe ſometimes for mee? Ile give thee ſome figges and Tobacco.
Yours to command; Ile ſmoake in your buſineſſe then i'faith.
Prethee come to me when my husband is out of the ſhoppe.
Adieu the two deſiring ſinnes of the City. Avarice and Lechery: if I doe not meet with your morall venery, would I might goe lowſie, and have but three pence to play with this moneth.
Come good Alaſtor! be but ſecret now,
And I ſhall live indear'd unto thy faith;
The matter much imports us; and in caſe
That my rewards ſhould dye with me, the State
Will one day thanke thee for't. I have his ſeale,
His hand and ſtile exactly counterfeit:
Then heare thy charge; Thou muſt this evening haſte
Covertly to the Lady Iulia's houſe—
But canſt bee ſecret?
As your owne thoughts Madam,
I can ſtick as cloſe to any peece of villany
As a Punk to a Farmers ſonne new gentiliz'd;
And when beſides ſo many good angels tempt,
They are enough—to make a woman keepe counſell.
Well then; make meanes to ſpeake there with Althea,
Tell her thou com'ſt from Lord Lucilio,
Who in important buſineſſe has imployed thee;
I know ſhee'll take thy meſſage privately:
Deliver her this letter; ſeeme that Lucilio
Has none but thee on whom he can relie
In this ſo dangerous an enterpriſe:
Shee upon this will-bee more free and open
To the deſigne: then marke her, good Alaſtor!
Obſerve each word and geſture that ſhee uſes;
If thou canſt wring a looke that may diſcover
But a conſenting thought, it will ſuffice:
For when offending lives withſtand our will,
Wee muſt ſeeme good, though we determine ill.
Here's a villanous pitfall to ſtifle a poore wench in; who can bee a beggar, now, that's not afraid to bee damn'd? well, I can no more tell how to thrive without doing villany, than greatneſſe can without doing injury. Pretty peece of man's fleſh I my heart will leap when I ſee thee come off the Rock like a Mag-Pie; and I ſhall wiſh, for thy ſake, that nature had made women a litle lighter, all of feathers, that they might have taken hurt by no manner of falling: but pitty is a thing clean out of faſhion, and the high way to irreparable Beggary; Ile none of it.
Nay good my Lord yeeld not your ſelf ſo much
To theſe unſeaſon'd Paſſions, that doe ſit
Like midnight on your thoughts; me thinks the ayre
Of Athens ſhould have purg'd theſe humours quite:
In troth, my Lord, the world will condemne you,
Of what Antonio?
Why of melancholy.
Which ſome define is weakneſſe in a Lord,
And in a Lady pride or fullenneſſe,
But in a wiſe man 'tis flatt foolery.
Prethee forbeare Antonio; let me in ſilence
Vent out the cares that overwhelme my ſoule;
Thou know'ſt how deep an angry mothers ſpleene
Wounds the ſoft love that I am forc'd to beare
To my Altheas vertues. How can I chuſe
But weep away my youth, when I remember
The dreadfull oppoſitions which my ſoule
Hath formerly ſuſtain'd for her; the cares
That have out-runne my yeares, and like to corſives
Have eate into my fleſh, there ſeiz'd upon
All faculties of life, and ſpred their venome
Through every veine and ſinew of my heart?
'Tis your owne fault, that thus will ſpend your ſelfe
In ſuch extreames of paſſion, that encreaſe
The number of your griefes above your ſpirit;
Faith 'tis unmanly done; call you this love?
Antonio, thou miſtak'ſt the name of love
In thy Lucilio, if thou conceiv'ſt it dull
And ſprightleſſe melancholy, whoſe corroding humour
Feeds on the faint dejection of a minde
That dares not meet an apprehenſive thought
Of leaſt misfortune, but it baſely yeelds:
I have held up, thou knoweſt, againſt all plots
A womans wit could manage or invent,
Or cauſe the Duke my father countenance
To blow out the chaſte flame of my affection,
Have laid my breſt open to envy's ſpight,
And ſuffer'd even to baniſhment it ſelfe;
If I may tearm't a baniſhment from her
Who is all things to me, divine Althea,
Life, Countrey, fortune; all that this world cals happy.
Strange Symptomes of affection!
Say, Antonio,
Was it not Baniſhment? that even when Iove
Had licens'd us in heav'n, and meant to ſend
Himen to earth in white and Prieſtly robes
To joyne our hands, as Cupid had our hearts;
Then to be taken hoodwinkt from my hopes,
And ſent in haſte from Court, juſt in the harveſt
Of my deſires, to combate with the Arts,
The aire and clime of Athens, whil'ſt the Sunne
Trebled his courſe to the Coeleſtiall Ramme.
Yet know my Lord that your indulgent Parents
Out of their Princely care intended it
But as a courſe of Phyſick, to recover
Your love-ſick thoughts, hoping that Time & Abſence,
Ioyn'd with the precepts of Philoſophy
Might purge you to a remiſſneſſe of affection,
And by degrees conquer this mouldy paſſion.
All which ſuppoſed remedies deare friend,
Set the diſeaſe a working, much leſſe cure it:
True love, Antonio, is immutable,
A divine Charter of affection
Confirm'd in heav'n, and can by no preſcript
Of Art or Nature ever be reſtrain'd.
—Nullis amor eſt medicabilis herbis,
—Nec proſunt Artes.
Yet ſince in vaine you ſtrive
To bandy with a mother, me thinkes Love
Tir'd in the depth of woe, ſhould call your Reaſon
To a new choiſe fitting your Birth and Fortunes.
Call woes to woes, I am reſolv'd to trie
The worſt of ſpleene: and ſince her vertuous thoughts
Have daign'd to meet affection, that on wings
Of true borne faith hath rais'd it ſelfe, to claſpe
With her deſerts, the moſt auſtereſt tempeſt
Envy can ſhowre upon our innocent loves,
Shall ne'r diſ-joyne us.
I have done my Lord.
Then prethee Antonio, let me in peace retire,
I feele ſome ſtrange events lie at my heart
My thoughts cannot preſage: I feare, my friend,
I have but dream'd as yet, but now mine eyes
Muſt wake to meet true ſolid miſeries.
To ſee how ſtrong love is, and the command
It has o'r humane hearts! Poore Lord, I know
Thy true-borne griefes are firme, and that chaſt faith
Never conceiv'd to wave with floating likeneſſe;
Makes thee thus ſinke into the depth of ſorrow.
Nay, good Signior follow him, put him out of the humour, or elſe he will turne madman ſhortly.
Why ſir?
Becauſe he thats firſt a Scholler, next in love, the yeare after, is either an arrant foole or a ſtarke madman.
How came your knavery by ſuch experience?
As fooles doe by newes, ſome body told me ſo, and I beleeve it. But in good earneſt I had forgot to tell my Lord of the meſſage he ſent me in.
Whither in the name of Mercury was that?
To ſee how the Lady Donna Fiozza did.
Oh! how does her beauteous Ladiſhip?
Sick, terrible ſick.
Phyſick defend! prethee of what diſeaſe?
Yeſterday her Monkey had a fall off the ſide table, and ever ſince ſhe has had a ſtrange fit of an ague.
How does her Lord?
Faith not well neither, and therefore he begins to be moſt ſparingly vertuous.
The pox he does.
On my fidelitie you are the foule mouth'dſt gallant that ever wore Cloves in's Gummes: you ſay an Italian Count has the pox.
Your neater word good Galateo?
By this light you Courtiers bee the dulleſt creatures living; you learne nothing but flattery and begging. You muſt know ſir in a Nobleman 'tis abuſive; no; in him the Sarpigo; in a Knight the Grincomes; in a Gentleman the Neopolitan ſcabb; and in a Servingman or Artificer the plaine Pox: Iuſt as your ſaying goes, that Noblemen bee never drunke, but take a ſurfeit; Schollers be ill at eaſe; and poore men onely they are drunke, yet all's but one diſeaſe: There's an old rime for you: adieu Signior, I muſt to my Lord.
Farewell hedge-pike.
Did my Lord ſo farre impart the buſineſſe to your ſelfe?
He did, and does intend to uſe my help alone in effecting of his project.
I prethee returne him this anſwer, and bee ſilent.
Sweet villany, thou art the thrivingſt trade under heaven.
Warme blood aſſiſt me! how has wonder ſeiz'd
The frozen paſſages that ſlowly guide
My ſhivering ſpirits up to the ſeat of life!
Murder the Duke! now innocence forbid,
And let our ſelves be as out loves, unſtain'd.
Tyrannous affection! can thy transforming power
Enforce our paſſions thus beyond our ſelves?
Rob us of nature and the ſenſe of man?
Seize all our actions? force us to forget
That we are children? and with loves finger blot
Cleane from our thoughts the pietie we owe
To them that gave us life? Carry us headlong
To ſuch a gulfe of ſinne? where we muſt drowne
Our ſelves, our honour, and that ſecure content
A guiltleſſe conſcience brings to innocence!
Ah deare Lucilio! how are thy vertues dimm'd
In my beſt thoughts, that like a Chriſtall mirrour
Still held the ſhapes of thy deſerving actions
Vnſpottedly reſembl'd! what ſpirit of night
Has mixt it ſelfe with thoſe untainted vowes
Thy never yet ambitious ſoule pour'd forth
To attend our loves? Some Angel, deare Lucilio,
Deſcend into thy fancy to perſwade thee
By all the bands Love, Duty, Nature, Heaven,
Can bring to binde thee in a tender feare
Of roughly breathing on the ſofteſt ayre
That toucheth but his ſafetie, to deſiſt.
From this unnaturall act of paricide.
Fatall experience ſpeakes; and makes it good,
They ſtand not firme that riſe by ſteps of blood.
Vrge me no more: the white unſpotted hand
Of never trecherous juſtice, ſhall not bluſh
By our imbrewing it in bleeding innocence.
Nor ſhall poſteritie in after times,
Seeking examples of black tyranny.
Finde our names regiſtred in the Catalogue
Of thoſe whoſe deeds have given wide infamy
Life to attend their memory, and brand it
With ſhame, more durable than braſſe or marble.
Yet good my Lord reſpect your falling State,
Let not that watchfull eye that never ſlept
In carefull purſuit of your peoples good,
As now regardleſſe of your houſes Honor,
Be dazell'd with imaginary feare
Of meere ſuppos'd injuſtice. Shall foule mouth'd rumor.
Beſprinkle our whole race with Iulia's blood,
And follow it into poſteritie
As a live witneſſe of your looſe neglect?
Methinkes thoſe politick rules of government
Which you have ſtudy'd, ſhould at laſt informe
Your ſcrupulous conſcience, making it to know,
What oft doth ſeeme injuſtice, is not ſo.
Can there be more than ſhedding guiltleſſe blood?
They highly offend that let their Countries good.
They let no good, that never did deny it.
'Tis guilt to live when as their deaths may buy it.
But 'tis not good that's bought at ſuch a rate.
No price is great that makes Kings fortunate.
They be not fortunate that riſe by vice.
Who ſtayes till Vertue lifts will never riſe;
And therefore deareſt Lord by thoſe chaſte vowes
Which firſt I brought unto your nuptiall bed;
By that attractive beautie which mine eyes
Once gave your youthfull thoughts to feed upon,
Preuent this miſchiefe, let the ſtrumpet die,
Whoſe baſeneſſe ſtaines your ever princely blood,
By ſitting ſole Commandreſſe in the thoughts
Of our degenerate ſonne, the onely hope
Iuſt heaven and nature now has left your Throne.
Let not that god of fooles, ſoft Conſcience, then,
That ſeldome findes a name 'mongſt perfect Stateſmen,
Sway your experienc'd wiſedome, but provide
Your honour live, when all your ſelfe have dy'd.
Death to mine eyes, I muſt ſee thee kneele,
Thy words have charm'd my ſoule, benumm'd my thoughts
Againſt the ſtinging touch of ſharpe remorſe;
I will reſolve her death, nor ſhall ſhe live
That ſtands 'twixtfull content and thy deſires.
But how ſhall ſwift wing'd fame, my deare Adraſta,
Be held from loud proclaming our diſgrace?
Policie will's ſome ſeeming cauſe be had
To make that good which juſtice knowes for bad.
Leave that to me; I have procur'd from her
A letter, whoſe points but chang'd transferre the ſenſe,
This in the publike Seſſions being read,
And ſhee acknowledging the hand and ſeale,
Will be a moſt ſufficient teſtimony
Of traiterous attempts againſt your State
And perſon, which the groſſe multitude
Will never ſcanne, but confidently, hold
Her condemnation juſt.
Wee'll then give order
For her attachment and impriſonment
Meane while your ſelfe may with perſwaſive words
Prepare Lucilio's minde to meet her death.
So's juſtice wrong'd, and innocence muſt die,
When they withſtand a womans tyrannie.
ILe enſure you 'tis true Miſtris Abigail, my Husband was call'd from my ſide at midnight by the Dukes Purſivant at Armes, commanded to bring his weapon ready with him, becauſe they would reprehend my Ladie Iulia's daughter in her bed; nay, I am ſerv'd ſo many times in the yeare; and if it were not for a little honour wee have by being the Conſtables wife of the Pariſh, or leave to build a new Pue in the Lecture houſe, or meeting at the Queſt-houſe ſometimes; wee had better never bee in authoritie, than have ſo many hewings and cryings, ſuch paſportings; that the whole yeare while our Husbands be Magiſtrates, we be very widdowes, for any feeling we have of thē; and if we had not their company in the day ſometimes, we ſhould eene forget wee were maried: 'tis too true Miſtris Abigail: but you have a happy turne.
Indeed Miſtris Frailware our Husbands ſhould not be troubled with common buſineſſe; and Maſter Damaſippus does meditate and practiſe his Principles by my ſide till nine a Clock many times. But I pray, what did you heare was the cauſe of my Lady Iulia's daughters contamination?
O, why ſhee was in love with my young Lord Lucilio, and would have, God bleſſe us, ſtabb'd' the Duke with a panado, and then be marry'd where the Dutches would or no.
Now Iove forſend it! How deſperate be theſe princock Gentlewomen when they be in love! they'll venture upon any weapons: I marvell themſelves be not afraid of ſtabbing: I warrant you ſhee'll to the Rock for it.
I cannot tell that; but a Friend I have in the Court was here before breake of day and told me all.
Lord Miſtris Frailware have you any friends in the Court?
I theſe ſeven years, Miſtris Abigail, have I had friends there, and acquaintance too, I thanke my beautie, three yeares before I was marri'd. Ile tell you Miſtris Abigail, theſe Courtiers be the fineſt, ſweeteſt ſmelling Gentlemen that be; they will have ſome friends in the City now and then, for varieties ſake, but they'll pick and chuſe: and for mine owne part Ile enſure you, that before I was marry'd, of a browne-wench, marke what I ſay, to ſpeake of a browne-wench, I was as ſweet a creature as liv'd. There was a Nobleman here in Florence—I, there was a Knight too that would eate but little meate except—how ever it was my hap to fell figges in the Citie; Ile enſure you that my fleſh was ſo tender, that if a fellow with a ſtrong breath had kiſs'd me, all my lips would have bliſter'd. I wore my ſilke Stockins then, and my Bodkins of beaten Gold, I thanke my own wit, and had Velvet Cloakes, and Velvet Coloches come to ſee mee.
Doubtleſſe you were one of the happieſt living, to have ſuch bleſſings: I would to heavens my husband, or I, might have an Office under theſe Courtiers, that I might have friends at Court too.
Ile enſure you Miſtris Abigail, many of 'hem be able to doe a woman a good pleaſure ſometimes; and yet there be ſome againe that promiſe more than all their ſtrength can performe too, when they be put to it; for alas, Courtiers doe for ſo many, that they cannot doe for all: for mine owne part, I have try'd 'hem, and try'd 'hem agen; and ſome of 'hem have ſtood to mee very ſufficiently and friendly, when I have come to ſee the Masking and Beare-baiting there.
God's my pitty, is there Beare-baiting at Court? doe the Ladies love Beare-baiting?
O, abomination: they'll ſo ſhift for corners and places to be at it, that their waiting gentlewomen can ſeldome come to the paſtime. And how does your good husband Maſter Damaſippus?
In good deed la not well: hee has beene ill at eaſe ever ſince t'other night.
Ah ſweet man! he does ſo labour, and labour to fill us with moralitie, that hee's ee'n tyr'd out in the Citie amongſt us.
Fie upon't: how heavy this authoritie ſits upon us! ever ſince midnight in the Dukes buſineſſe! but it ſtands us upō it; 'tis for the credit of the City: we muſt doe more than one bare Office, or wee cannot bee good ſubjects. Here take in my weapon.
I'faith 'tis a fine time o'day to come home at: Gods my precious, doe you thinke to leave me ſo ſtill? from twelve a Clock till I riſe I muſt he alone dreaming, and dreaming, ſometimes that you are dead; ſometimes that I am with childe, and a luſt for a thing that I cannot have; ſometimes again that you have falne downe the Stayres, and broke your back; and ſuch fearfull dreames that I cannot reſt an houre, becauſe I can doe nothing but dreame.
O, good wife! we be for this yeare Magiſtrates Officers of place, men of imployment, the upholders of the Citie, the eyes of the Common-wealth: and therefore when matters of State call, wee muſt come with wiſedome, and with ſeverity anſwer our Vocation.
Focation me no Vocation: for as true as I am marry'd, if you put me in ſuch frights by going away, and leaving mee in the darke, Ile get me a bedfellow ſhall ſtick cloſer to mee, ſo I will; cannot you have a Deputy as well as an Alderman? I hope you are in authority too.
O patience deare Miſtris Frailware! patience with your Spouſe: my husband told me that patience was one of the ten morall vertues.
I Miſtris Abigail, if a woman had ſuch a husband as you have, that were able to put patience into a woman; ſhe might eaſily be content and have mortall vertues enough too.
Nay prethee Duck be quiet: when the Seſſions are paſt wee ſhall have more leiſure; meane while lets in, and drinke this fury over in a cup of Canary. Come Miſtris Abigail.
Let it ſuffice Antonio that thy friend
Entreats thy ſilence; nor let thy curious love
Queſtion our farther projects; leave to enquire
Till time and rumour ſhall diſcloſe the Plot
Of my intentions, whoſe unexpected end
Shall ſtand beyond preventions murdering ſight,
And turne the edge of ſpleene upon it ſelfe:
Thus much I will impart unto thy faith;
What fits thee not to know, leave to deſire.
My Lord impute it not to curiouſneſſe
That I have urg'd your patience to unfold
What you intend; for by the hallowed name
Of zealous friendſhip, which my heart retaines
Engrav'd by your deſerts, 'tis only love
That makes me thus ſeeme jealous of your good
However would your Grace but try my faith
By making it a partner in your ils,
Till having paſs'd theſe ſtormes, and beene approv'd
Inviolably firme, it may deſerve
The name of friend to which't has long aſpir'd,
Nay, now thou complement'ſt and doſt afflict
The tender love thy faith hath bred in me.
I tell thee friend I muſt not truſt the ayre
'Twixt thee and mee; the nights concealing ſhades
Shall never hear't diſclos'd: not that I feare
Thy friendly ſilence; but the barren plot
Of my invention, will admit but me
Into the doubtfull ſcene; I muſt alone
Finiſh the Act my hopeleſſe love began.
O my Antonio! could my ſorrowes poure
Into thy breaſt but halfe what I conceive,
What could the ſpleene of potent envy adde
To the vaſt heapes of miſchiefe, that doe lie
Vpon my groveling fortunes, now caſt downe
Beneath the baſe of miſerie and griefe?
When I muſt ſtand like to a ſenſeleſſe marble
Frozen into a ſtone with ſtrong reſpect
Of filiall duty, and ſee Althea dye,
Throwne downe by my ambitious love, that aym'd
At her tranſcendent vertues. This wounds my heart,
And puts a fire to the cold melancholy
That hath ſo long poſſeſs'd my chillied ſpirits,
And bids them ſeeke revenge, that when fraud thinks
To ſeize upon the neck of innocence,
The repercuſſive flame that will reſult
From their abhorred deeds, ſhall ſinge their wings,
And make them fall as low as were their actions,
Where they ſhall lye and view the ugly ſhapes
Of all thoſe miſchiefes that attend oppreſſion.
But now conceale me friend, and be no more
Inquiſitive of the particulars,
Report will ſoone divulge the ſcope of all.
If abſence cauſe inquiry after mee.
Let fall ſome ſpeeches that I am withdrawne
To a retired privateneſſe awhile,
Vntill Althea's Tragedy be o'r,
Not able to affront my ruin'd hopes.
Nor ſtand Spectator at her guiltleſſe death.
So fare thee well, and if we never meete
Remember that I liv'd and dy'd thy friend.
Doe not torment my ſoule, but let me ſhare
Thoſe paſſages of danger, that oppoſe
Their hideous jawes againſt your innocent hopes;
For at no greater rate man ſels his breath,
Then with a friend to buy a faithfull death.
Thy words Antonio cannot adde an Atome
To the full love that's harbour'd in my breaſt
Of thy true reall worth: then be content.
And leave me, for 'tis impoſſible that more
Than my unhappy ſelfe can bee contain'd
Or have an Action within the narrow limits
Of my deſignes.
Then thus I take my leave
With as much feeling paine, as if my foule
Were by ſome violence ſhot from out my bowels,
Farewell my Lord, my vowes and wiſhes guard you
From awkward Fate, whil'ſt I 'twixt hope and feare
Attend the iſſue of theſe ſtrange attempts.
So now Lucillo arme thy ſelfe for death,
That from thy blood ſhe may regaine a life
And freedome, whom thy weake affection ſold
To undeſerved ſlaughter and black infamy.
Immoved powers! we muſt not aske you why
And yet methinkes I could expoſtulate
The reaſon of this mixture in the frame
Of all our Vniverſe! why every perfect good
Is girt with ſuch a multitude of ils?
Not the moſt ſacred and puiſſant Throne
Of divine Iuſtice (whoſe Majeſtick forme
Beares a reſemblance of that Power Supreme
That equals Kings and Slaves, by giving each
Deſerved vengeance for their actions
Can ſtand ſecure, but all the brood of hell,
Bribes, Reſpects, Envy, and what e'r perverts
The ſtricteſt line of vertuous equity,
Will preſſe up to the Iudgement Seat, and there
Transforme the beauteous picture of the Godhead
Into the hatefull ſhapes of tyrannie,
Of blood and murder—But I forget my ſelf,
And like en angry woman, chide the Heavens,
When I ſhould doe. Fortune and ſtealth aſſiſt
My juſt adventures; and a friendly ſleepe
Seiſe all the eyes and eares that would purſue
Our harmleſſe Stratagems. This is the window,
If my directions faile not, that does impriſon her,
Whom Vertue, Nature, and the mild aſpect
Of all the Conſtellations ſweat to make
A free-borne Empreſſe —
Whoſe that?
Lucilio.
O my deare Lord!
How fares my Althea?
As one that lives but in the armes of death,
And like a froſt-kill'd worme is halfe reviv'd
By your faire preſence, whoſe deſired ſight
Makes a warme blood poſt through my trembling veins
To tell my heart this newes, that ere I die
I once ſhall ſpeake to you: But I muſt chide
Youe Grace my Lord, that would ſo ſtaine your love
With ſouleſt ſpots of blood.
Blood to their ſoules that thought it, for by
The ne'r appaled heart of innocence,
The new-borne babes firſt ſmiles were ne'r more chaſte
Then was my breaſt frō thoughts of murder. O Althea!
What will a woman loath, that's all poſſeſt
With wrath, and has the killing voyce of Iuſtice
Tun'd to pronounce her mercileſſe revenge?
The ſword by her ſteel'd conſcience edg'd to ſlaughter,
And undefended lives to worke upon?
It was your ſeale and hand that did perſwade
Me to the murder, but my ſelfe return'd
Diſſwaſive arguments to beate you from't.
It was my ſeale, which by my mothers charge
'Tis thought the Page ſtole out, without ſuſpect,
As I conceive, of miſchiefe; all the reſt
Was meerly counterfeit. But bee advis'd,
And I will choake the hungry throat of Treaſon,
That gapes for blood, with ſuch a working pill,
As it ſhall loath to ſwallow, and vomit up
Their bloody plots in ſick repentance.
No my deareſt Lord, let me in contentment die,
Since you are innocent, and in my Tombe
Bury your danger, that have thus long ſate
A heavy burden to your happineſſe.
Long maiſt thou live untill the gods, Althea,
Shall ſummon thee from hence to make a ſtarre,
And grant Commiſſion to the winged Poſt
Of heaven, to ſteale away thy ſoule in ſleepe:
That Divine mould was not ordain'd to ſuffer
A painfull ſhipwrack in thy lifes departure.
'Twill ſweeten much the bitterſt throes of death
When I ſhall thinke my labouring ſoule does worke
For my Lucilio's reſt: then let my guiltleſſe Ghoſt
Securely paſſe up to the fields of peace,
For I am weary and would gladly die.
Vrge it no more, the very ſound of death
Wiſh'd to thy innocence, comes like a clappe
Of armed thunder to mine eares, and thou
Shalt live, though I ſhould ſearch the utmoſt tortures
Tyrannie did ere invent, to find a death
Might ranſome thee: and therefore if thy love
Does yet reſpect Lucîlios conſtancy,
Reſolve and ſecond mee: Diſpute no more,
But make ſome meanes to let me downe a line,
That I may faſten this diſguiſe unto it.
There draw it up, and put it on with ſpeed,
Suſpitions eye dogs every ſtep I tread.
How ſtrong is ſad affliction on my State!
When I muſt ſteale a death, and thinke me bleſt if none
Doe interrupt my paſſage to deſtruction.
Oh that the paths of Fate ſo ſtrange and invious
Should lead us into life, and through a Maze
Of chances, bring us to ſuch unpaſſable periods,
That we muſt leape the bankes, and give our breath
To ſhunne the ills that doe incounter us.
Come, have you yet diſpatch'd?
I have my Lord; but what of this?
Then once more lend your line.
Faſten thoſe Hookes to your window, and come downe.
A more troubleſome deſcent then from the Rock,
But your fall gentler. So: Now flie Althea,
And live as happy as my unhappy love
Had made thee miſerable: time may bee
More friendly to thee, and beget ſome meanes
That thou maiſt one day ſit amidſt thy friends—
Nay, doe not weep Althea; thou ſhalt ſee
This will worke both our freedomes; and if I die,
My ſilent Ghoſt ſhall in the pleaſingſt formes
At mid-noon dayes come oft to viſit thee.
Farewell—
What meanes your Grace?
To out-runne trechery, and winne a Goale
That ſhall enrich my name, make envy ſwell,
And drowne her ſelfe in overflowing Gall.
Ile meet the uglieſt ſhapes that ever Death
Appear'd to Nature in, before Ile leave
Your Grace expos'd to danger for my life.
No more, for I have vow'd what I intend,
And if thou doſt withſtand it, to make this houre
The laſt of breathing to mee: therefore be gone;
Ile lie at Stake my ſelfe, that you may ſteere
No interrupted courſe; and ſince the law
Gives Virgins leave to pleade and die conceal'd,
I with this Scarfe here will bee your Attorney:
Haſten your flight, leaſt miſchiefe finde you ſlow,
Wee ſhall both fare the better. At the Parks end
By a Fount that riſeth from the Chaulky Banke,
Camilla ſtayes with your Viaticum:
Shee'll be thy partner in thy baniſhment.
Once more farewell; and, if I die, for ever.
And if you die I ſhall not long out-live you.
In what a ſad dilemma ſtands my ſoule
In this divulſion betweene love and danger!
Yet bleſſe mine eyes once more with ſight of you.
Farewell Althea.
Deareſt Lord farewell.
Againe farewell Althea! all the favours
Of Guardian Angels, and mild'ſt influences
Propitious Heaven retaines, waite on thy ſufferings.
Come diſpatch, the Duke's at hand.
I wonder he ſits himſelfe in judgement to day.
The matter in queſtion is great.
Many thinke the poore Gentlewoman is innocent.
They be fooles to ſay ſo.
Why, is't a folly to ſpeake what they thinke?
I, as very a folly as to be vertuous indeed: Do'ſt imagin twill gaine any thing but hate?
Yet many dare pawne their lives that ſhee is guiltleſſe.
None but ſuch as were predeſtin'd never to bee great; they bee tender conſcienc'd dunces: they never leatn'd Eſops Fables.
Why for that?
Do'ſt not remember the tale of the Lion that baniſh'd all horn'd beaſts from Court?
That was a madd Lion i'faith—
That then the Foxe went away as baniſh'd too, becauſe if the Lion ſhould ſay his prickt eares were Hornes, what then?
But ſhe was thought ever vertuous and modeſt.
Shee would not have beene guilty ſo ſoone elſe: ſhall a ſwaggering wench that will take Tobacco eight and forty times in foure and twenty houres; talke bawdy as familiar as an Oyſter wife; retaine ſeven ſervants with good backes, and a weake husband to keep Doggs from doore; have no priviledge above ſuſpected vertue?
Faith I remember when I went to Schoole, my Maſter vs'd to tell us a Verſe or two out of a Poet— & hic damnatus inani—Iudicio: I ha'forgot the Poëts name, but I remembred the Verſe by another, where he inſtructs creatures of our faculty.
Why what does he teach us?
Nay nothing but tells us onely, that if wee will thrive by ſervice, we muſt be either cloſe Panders, palpable flatterers, or cozening Villaines.
A good Servingmans Tutor was that Poët I warrant him.
Give back there, and let the priſoner ſtand forth.
How did wee thinke, that when the ſtormes of warre
Were with our danger, care, and coſt expell'd
From out theſe confines, and the warmth of peace
Turn'd like a Spring to ſhine within your bounds,
We ſhould have ſate ſecure? Or after all
Thoſe toiles, that ſpent our ſtrength, dry'd up our blood,
Haſten'd the hand of time to ſeize our haires,
Before his date, and onely in purſuit
Of your (lov'd people) ſafty and content;
Our owne now fainting wearineſſe of age
Should taſte that freedome which our labours bought
In plenteous fulneſſe for the pooreſt ſwaine?
And we have clos'd the Evening of our age
Within a fearleſſe ſlumber? But how weake
Are all the hopes that wretched Princes faine!
When in the calme of peace, while wee ſuppoſe
Our perils baniſh'd, and our ſelves ingirt
With ſuch impenetrable love, as we
Embrace our people with, then ſtand our lives
Expos'd to thickeſt dangers, which conceal'd
Doe ſtrike the deeper, and are warded leſſe.
Such is the miſerie that followes State,
That when we want abroad, we finde at home
Foes to beſiege our lives. The diſcontent
Of ſome aggrieved ſpirits, that thinke we ſtand
'Twixt their deſires and them; and which is worſe,
The idle paſſions of unbridl'd youth,
Rather than miſſe thoſe hopes enflamed luſt
Has fir'd within their thoughts, will overturne
Whole States, and climbe up to their aymed ends
By our heap'd ſlaughters: Yet I leaſt had thought
Such Tragick Acts had knowne a womans breaſt,
Nor if I could, Althea, would your life
(Strong to retort ſuſpition) once permit
Our leaſt miſtruſt to ſtaine your vertuous name:
And had we not by heavens appointment found
Vnder your hand and ſeale the firmeſt proofes
Of tempting our owne blood to paricide;
Suſpitions ſtrongeſt proofes had ne'r induc'd
Our never lightly credulous beliefe
To harbour your diſlike? But ſhould we now
Neglect our ſafety, and our Countries good,
When all the Providence of Fate conſpires
To bring thoſe treacherous practiſes to light,
Which Heaven abhorres; wee ſhould contemne the Heavens,
Abuſe that forme of juſtice we ſuſtaine,
And ſtand as guilty of thoſe waſtefull ruines
Our cruell mildneſſe gives your actions ſcope
To call upon your Countrey and our ſelves.
We therefore by the Lawes denounce you guilty
Of Treaſon 'gainſt our perſon and the State.
Were it for life my Lord I ſtood to ſpeake,
I ſcarce would give the breath that I muſt ſpend
To ſave that life: But ſince your Grace does know
A womans prejudice has doom'd our death,
For my names life Ile ſpeake, and not for mine;
If infamy might die when we doe die,
I would be ſilent: for know my gracious Lord.
I ſcorne to beg a life, but come all arm'd
In ſuch a compleate innocence, as dares
Meet angry injuſtice in the jawes of death.
And without trembling ſtand his violence.
But that theſe Acts of blood, theſe horrid crimes
Of paricide, of luſt, and helliſh ſinne,
Which will out-live our Tombes, and make our names
Come hatefull to poſterities Records.
Should have a birth within a Virgins breaſt
That never yet was conſcious of a wiſh,
'Gainſt your deſired ſafety; I muſt take leave
To tell your Grace, that it was meerly feign'd
By the bloody hand of Envy, to cut off
That ſacred band of love the Heavens have knit
'Twixt your ſonnes heart and my chaſte innocence.
Nor doe I taxe your juſtice for my death,
But doe impute it moſt to his fond love,
That by proteſts of vertue and deſire,
Drew my beleeving ſoule to his affects;
For when my feares urg'd theſe enſuing ils,
His uncontain'd affection breaking forth
In ſignes of extreme paſſion, ſo conſum'd
My powers, that had my thoughts beene cold as Snow,
His zeale pour'd out in ſuch inflaming vowes
Would melt them.
We muſt check your impudence,
That ſwels beyond the bounds we did expect
Your modeſty ſhould have obſerv'd: you wrong
Our ſonne, and in our ſonne our ſelves; know you
This hand and ſeale?
I doe my honour'd Lord,
Yet were that Hand and Seale never found guilty
Of conceiv'd wrong 'gainſt or your Sonne or you.
'Twill ſpeake it ſelfe, call it to witneſſe then.
MY Lord the attempt is dangerous and foule, therefore deſiſt not; to enjoy the ſweets our preſent Nuptials would being could I endure your hand ſtain'd with ſuch an Action. More when wee meet: feare not; but—Heaven and Fate will ſecond vertue. Be ſtill your ſelfe, and I will reſt
Had you a priviledge to ſhrowd the bluſh
Your conſcious guilt caſts 'gainſt the eyes of Heaven
As from our ſight you doe conceale the Die
That writes your Acts in ſhame upon your Cheekes,
You might deny theſe proofes, and ſweare them fain'd;
But that all-ſeeing power that notes the wild
And ſecretſt paſſages of mans conceit,
Deteſting thoſe foule crimes of luſt and blood,
Reveales your Acts. Stand therefore, and from the Seate
Of Iuſtice heare your doom; ſince your ambitious hopes
Soar'd up, and by our Blood did meane to climbe
Into that Seat which Nature and our right
Had given to us: be therfore from the Rock
Throwne with your hopes, that your example teach
How low they fall, that climbe above their reach.
And you Antonio we charge to ſee
The execution ſpeedily perform'd.
As ſweet as cooling dew comes to the breſt
Of ſcorched Autumne, ſo Deaths ſlumber fals
On oppreſs'd innocence. And good Antonio,
Since 'tis your charge to ſee us dead, let mee
Entreat this favour that my body be
Speedily interr'd: and pray you tell the Duke
That I requeſt his Grace not grieve too much
Hereafter, for what I willingly now ſought,
And he againſt his will made me to finde.
Then that I may have a litttle ſpace in private
To bid the world farewell; and this is all
A dying Virgin begs, and for your friend
Lucilio's ſake you muſt not now deny it.
Wonder of womē! could my attemps but yeeld
Halfe what my heart conceives, theſe limbs ſhould die,
As many ſeverall deaths as they containe
Conduits of life, to make your innocence live,
For your Lucilios ſake, whoſe woes will ſwell
Poore Lord, like to a winde-driven Ocean,
When he ſhall heare you dead, and beare him downe
To ſome diſaſtrous end.
You are deceiv'd,
Deare friend; Lucilio's woes end with my life.
Nor will a thought of griefe, a teare or ſigh
Trouble his peacefull ſleeps when I am dead.
But I ſhall ſtraine your patience too farre, and give
The Duke a cauſe to blame your too much favour.
My little leaſt of any thing, thou parcell of man, what's the newes with thee?
Newes from the Fortunate Ilands Maſter Damaſippus: The very Elizium of your delight, and delicious Nectar of pleaſure; Miſtris Ambroſia Frailware commands halfe her ſelfe to your learned conceipts, and the reſt to the heate of your inferiour Moralities.
O the odoriferous flowre of Florence! How does ſhee?
In able ſtrength and ſtrong appetite: and earneſtly entreates this evening your preſence at Supper: her Husband will bee forc'd by Oath buſineſſe to be abſent; and therefore you muſt feed her with the fruits of your company, and you ſhall bee fed with the ſtrength of confirming meates that edifie.
Thy reward ſhall overtake thee: I will firſt accompany this Lady to her death, and prepare and ſtrengthen her according to moralitie, and then I will be ready to give all moral comfort to the ſweet deſires of our deare Paramour.
Ile meet your moral comfort with ſuch a Phyſicall counter-buffe, that Ile ſpoile your tilting for that night i'faith.
ANd as I told you ſweet Lady, make your reconcilement with the world, that you bee not hindred from your death: if you owe any thing, you muſt forgive and forget it, that you may dye according to moralitie.
I thanke your labour Maſter Damaſippus,
I hope my peace with heaven and earth's confirm'd,
And you ſhall need trouble your ſelfe no farther.
But you Antonio, whoſe deſerving truſt
Muſt be a witneſſe of the lateſt gaſpe
Our fainting ſoule ſhall draw, tell to the world
How undivided was the tender love
Betwixt Althea and Lucilio's life:
And let me vow't into thy full beliefe,
That the ſoft Ayre faun'd with the cooling breath
Of a milde Sommers Evening from the Weſt
Was not leſſe murderous than Althea's wiſh—
Nay weepe not man, we cannot weepe our ſelves,
We doe intreat this death to end our woes,
Not to encreaſe them. Farewell Antonio;
And if in after times you heare our friends
Sigh for our hapleſſe death, bid them deſiſt;
We did but quench the thirſt envy had chas'd us into.
—Come honeſt friend
Diſcharge your Office, for ſorrow 'gins to fit
Heavy upon our heart that faine would reſt.
Madam, forgive me your death.
Which here I doe
As freely as I wiſh my weari'd Ghoſt
May finde a feareleſſe paſſage through the ſtrange
And uncouth ſhades that leades our ſoules to Reſt
Where ſhall I runne to meet, that, which beheld
Kils with a deadlyer wound then doe the eyes
Or coldeſt poyſon of a Baſiliske.
Althea ſtay—and let thy wretched Parent
Take the laſt farewell of her dying childe.
Ah why did Nature make my unhappy wombe
Fruitfull by thee, and yet reſerve mine age
To out-live the extremities of griefe, and ſee
Thy diſmall end by an untimely death?
Was I reſerv'd for this? Or were the crimes
Of our black guilt ſo horrid in the eyes
Of Heaven, that nothing but the fatall ſcourge
Of ſevere juſtice in the woefull'ſt forme
Could expiate our ſinne? How were I bleſt
If the firſt inſtant that imparted life
To thy ſcarce featur'd ſelfe (joy to my wombe)
Had beene the laſt in which we both had breath'd!
Madam! doe not afflict your ſelfe, nor let your cares
Live from our death; Althea cannot dye,
But with her innocence does buy a life
That ſhall extend her worth beyond the reach
Of Time and Envy. Therefore as you reſpect
Your daughters peacefull happineſſe, take truce
With ſorrow but till we be dead, and Heaven
That ſtill protects the innocent, will ſhow
How juſt it is in plaguing thoſe that ſtrive
By treacherous plots to oppreſſe innocent lives.
Canſt thou perſwade the Ocean in a ſtorme
To leave her ſwelling? Or a Bullet ſhot
To ſtop its paſſage? No Althea! no!
The lighteſt Arrow is not more powerfull ſent
Vnto his Mark than we are throwne to death.
Therefore farewell, Ile haſte to meet thee there,
Where no injuſtice nor oppreſſing tyrannie
Shall ſever our embraces; and let this kiſſe
Seale up that vow upon thy dying lips—
What's here? has ſorrow ſo transform'd thy ſhape?
Or dull'd the wonted vigour of my ſight,
That it ſees nothing right proportioned?
Madam conceale me for Althea's love,
Who lives, but baniſh'd onely for a while;
And let me die that ſhe may freely live;
My Lord Lucilio, doe you mocke my woes?
O where's Althea? have you murder'd her?
And come to upbraid the miſeries we feele?
Is 't not enough that I muſt loſe that ſtay
On which my aged widdowhood rely'd;
But you muſt jeſt at anguiſh? Is not our blood
Enough to ſatisfie the thirſt of Treaſon,
But you muſt ſwallow more? Ile not conceale
Your murdering plotts, but lay theſe Actions ope
To the wide worlds eyes; and leave the reſt,
In hope that Heaven, who doth your treacheries view,
As you have dealt, ſo they may deale with you.
What meanes my Lord?
To dye as I am doom'd,
Therefore let me goe.
Antonio, lend your help
To ſave the Prince, whom you have brought to death.
My heart! force him to live, or by the Seat
Of Iuſtice, you ſhall die as many deaths
As you have Arteries.
Then we muſt live to ſee thoſe griefes alive
Which death would end, and life will but revive.
Poſte to the Duke before, and let him know
The ſtrangeneſſe of the accident.
Antonio: know that I ever held thy faith till now
True to thy friend, and thought thou wouldſt aſſiſt
His miſerie, which thou hadſt richly done
If I had dyed.
O honour'd Lord, be theſe
Your harmeleſſe attempts that you conceal'd
With ſuch a nice reſerv'dneſſe from your friend?
Come good my Lord, let us repaire to Court
That now ſtands wondring at this ſtrange report.
My Head's in labour with a jeſt Maſter Conſtable, and I have a warrant to your authoritie to ſee me well deliver'd on't.
I can drinke Sack, and talke bawdy for a need, if it come within the compaſſe of my Office.
Why there be two ingredients then to the compoſition of a Midwife, and if you'll be rul'd in the Action, wee ſhall laugh and lie downe, and have an excellent banquet at the delivery.
Gi'me thy warrant then, and Ile ſerve it as greedily as a beggarly Vnderſherife does an Action of ſlander: But what is't? what is't boy?
Faith ſir, the common danger that haunts men of your place, fils Theaters, and gives many of your Landleſſe Gallants their gilt Spurres, and their feathers.
Vnſhale it, unſhale it,
Why Sir, in ſober City Italian, that man of little wit, leſſe learning, and no honeſty M. Damaſippus the Stoick meanes this Evening with pure moralitie to—
What ſir?
Cuckold you ſir.
Body o'mee! that embleme of hypocriſie; hee lookes as cold and mortifi'd as a Capon of a weekes killing.
Hang him Lobſter, hee's as hot as a Cockſparrow, and as irreligious as as a Low-Countrey Lombard: Hee's good for nothing but that which men keepe old Stallions for: he would have done rarely well after Deucalions flood, or five hundred of 'hem now for the new plantation—But i'faith I would bee reveng'd on him.
Reveng'd? I'll give up my ſhop to be reveng'd on him, turne Summer to plague him with Citations—
And then out-bribe him, that hee ſhall finde no mercy i'th Bumme-Court.
Or elſe I will be ſterne in my authoritie, ſet him in the Stocks, and ſet the Stocks at mine owne doore—
Or elſe I would hire ſome Iew to make him factious, And then get him baniſh'd to Amſterdam to ſaw Brazill.
Or hire a Witch to take away his Inſtrument of luſt, and then he'll hang himſelfe in his owne girdle.
Or get ſome body to promiſe him ſome Bookes and a new Gowne to deny the plurality of the gods, then informe againſt him, and goe drunke to ſee him burnt.
Elſe Ile get him Carted, and lye with his wife the while.
I, and ſend him word of it when he is i'th Cart.
Some dreadfull vengeance or other my offended Authority ſhall take on him. I proteſt I never miſtruſted it.
Alas no; I knew you were a true Cuckold innocent.
A Cuckold innocent: what's that?
One of the eight Tribes into which your liverie is divided—Nay, nay, nay ſober Maſter Conſtable, be not dejected; let not your head ſinke before it has ful lading: for look you, I'll ſhew you the dignitie of your eſtate: your Cuckoldhood ſir is more worſhipfull than the beſt of all the foure and twenty Companies; Becauſe in ſome ages you have had ſome of the beſt of all thoſe Companies Fellowes of the Liverie. Secondly, you have had all ſtates and rankes belonging to it. Sylla, Domitian and Claudius, great Emperours of the world, never car'd to be free of the Goldſmiths or Merchant-Taylors Hall, yet they were huge Cuckolds. Thirdly, you have your wit in chuſing approv'd, which muſt of neceſſitie ſhow you to have beene wiſe men, and therefore moſt commonly you are in Offices. Fourthly you have ſometimes better men to be your followers than your ſelfe, for they be glad to follow and come after, where you have beene before. Fiftly, you have others to worke for the propagation of your name, while you be idle, and reape the fruits of their labours. And laſtly, it makes your way to heaven Maſter Conſtable, infallible for if you die quickly, you die an innocent—But let me be your Pilot, and if I doe not learne you a courſe to pay this Puffin, this all Priapus, this Goate rampant in's owne kinde, let my wit bee for ever crack't.
If thou couldſt doe it in ſome bitter manner.
Truſt me not elſe—for looke you Sir, if it were a Courtier of a good perfume, and rich Garter; or a Gallant of the new faſhion, with freſh inſides; nay, an 'twere a barren Alderman that would viſit his Wench ſecretly, and were in the way to authority, why, 'twere ſomething tolerable. But to be horn'd by a Sir, that's no Knight, one that will lie as faſt as an Alminack-maker, a thred-bare-grogran-worſted-lack-Latin! 'tis inſufferable.
O 'tis, I know 'tis.
Your onely revenging remedie, then, is prevention in the ſame kinde, which you ſhall moſt dexterouſly atchieve me duce, id eſh, ſi ego dux fuero, little Maſter Conſtable.
How ſweet boy, how?
Doe you but invite Miſtris Abigail to Supper this evening, who knowes nothing of her husbands being there, and leave the reſt to my providence.
Ile doe it Boy i'faith, I will, I will indeed Boy.
About it then, Ile meet you at your comming backe and give directions for the reſt.
Your Grace hath beene exceeding patient
To undergoe theſe paines, and come to us.
Good Micale I was unfortunate
I had not knowne thy skill and us'd it ſooner;
For ſince Heavens power denies me juſt revenge
And meanes, to worke my will, Ile ſearch the depth
Of hels dark'ſt Angels, but I will diſſolve
That firme link'd band of love: and to that end
Shrowded in this diſguiſe I came to thee
That thou maiſt let ſome nimble ſpirit ſlip
From out the powerfull Circle after her;
And with thy ſpels purſue her unto death.
Madam, It ſhall be ſpeedily perform'd
Pleaſe you a while retire into this roome
And waite the ceremonious houre, while wee
Prepare us for the ſacrifice, and provide
Thoſe powerfull ingredients which we uſe
In the confection of our charmes,
I will.
Mic. Sarvia! Sar. Mother! Mic. Take thy flight
While the Moone affords thee light,
While the Dog-Starre ſhines downright
On the powerfull Aconite,
And the Hearbes appeare in ſight.
Sar. Away and waſh your body white
In the ſpring, and clenſe you quite,
For Ile ſoone the Shepheard fright,
And bring home to mend the right
A female Lamb as black as night.
Mic. Haſte then, quicke retune thee home.
Doe not tho forget the ſtone
In the Toade, nor Serpents bone,
Nor the Mandrake though he groane,
Pull him up, he is our owne.
Sar. Ile ſteale beſides (let me alone)
The great blacke Cat from jumping Jone,
And make the Nurſe and Mother moane
When their fatlings throat is ſhowne:
Mic. Haſte then, quicke returne thee home.
Where be we now Antonio! is not this life
On the farre ſide of death, and ſinkes beyond
A non exiſtens? Hadſt thou not made thy friend
Bleſt in thy faith, if thou hadſt yeelded way
To my deſires, and I had cleerly leapt
From the maine top of miſchiefe, and falne ſhort
Of theſe calamities? Oh the groſſe overſight
Of our miſtaking nature, that is ſo baſe
To buy a draught of ayre with ſeas of ills!
Or thinke we benefit a friend, when wee
Doe turne his houre-glaſſe to make life runne;
Though every minute hailes downe miſ-fortune thick
As it doth Sand into the empty receptacle.
Nay, give me leave to tell your Grace my Lord,
This ſtrong deſire of death, that hath poſſeſt
Your will thus farre, does not expreſſe the ſignes
Of that true valour your ſpirit ſeemes to beare;
For 'tis not courage, when the darts of chance
Are throwne againſt our State, to turne our backs,
And baſely runne to death; as if the hand
Of Heaven and Nature had lent nothing elſe
To oppoſe againſt miſhap, but loſſe of life,
Which is to flie and not to conquer it.
For know it were true valours part, my Lord,
That when the hand of chance had cruſh'd our States,
Ruin'd all that our faireſt hopes had built,
And thrown't in heaps of deſolation;
Then by thoſe ruines for our thoughts to climbe
Vp, till they dar'd blinde fortune to the face,
And urg'd her anger to increaſe thoſe heaps,
That we might riſe with them, and make her know
Wee were above, and all her power below.
Why this my Lord would prove us men indeed.
But when affliction thunders o'r our Roofe,
To hide our heads, and runne into our graves
Shewes us no men, but makes us fortunes ſlaves.
Antonio, thou wouldſt turne Philoſopher
To doe thy friend a kindneſſe; but 'tis not wordes
Our buſineſſe askes, we muſt have action now.
Thou ſeeſt my fathers anger for this freeing
Althea from her death, ſwels like a tide
Halfe flowne, that labours 'gainſt an adverſe winde,
And does command us leave the Court awhile,
And paſſe for Greece (as if our travaile could
Be Bawd unto the chaſtity of faith
That's vow'd to vertue) when my long weary'd minde,
Already's toyling in a pilgrimage
Vp to the ſhrine of Natures rich perfections:
Therefore Antonio thou muſt take the ſhape
Of all (ſave miſery) that I containe:
And for I know my fathers jealouſie
Will entertaine all rumours that are left
Where ere my name paſſe; thou muſt bee Lucilio:
And ſo my name travaile alone with thee
It will ſuffice; for fame doth ſometimes gull
The beſt intelligence. Then ſhape thy courſe
Fartheſt from Athens, to thoſe parts of Greece
Where I am leaſt knowne.
Pardon me my Lord
If I conſent not: for ſhould your ſafety call
To leap the Tyrrhene Cliffs into the maine,
Stand in the face of a fir'd Canon,
Or hale a ſleeping Lyon from the way
Where you muſt paſſe, my love would force me runne
Againſt the edge of danger for your life.
But this is onely a pretended ſhew
To win our abſence, that none may interrupt
Your torrent of impatience, that poſts
Like melted Snow from off the Apenine
Downe to deſtruction.
Thou art curious ſtill
With our intentions, and miſtak'ſt me much.
Beleev't Antonio if I might have dyed
When the vaſt flood of ſpleene was at the full,
And thought to overflow whole worlds of love:
When Envy ſtood a tip-toe to catch hold,
And pull downe innocence to trample on't,
And ſweet Revenge was at her on to ſpeake
From my bruis'd bones; then death had been a heaven:
But now my head's turn'd braſſe, & ſpeakes times paſt,
And harden'd is againſt the worſt of ils,
Though every frowne my angry mother gives
Should come like hammers 'gainſt my forehead,
May I beleev't my Lord,
By Heaven I will,
And ſo reſolve: yet for thy farther truſt,
I will bee open to thee; my meaning is
To put off name and habit for a while,
Till I have found Althea, and knit that knot
Which hell it ſelfe ſhall never violate;
And therefore carry rumour ſtill with thee,
That it may have no leaſure to deſcry
What I embrace. Farewell Antonio!
And prethee let this evening bee the laſt
Of thy delay: Heaven will be my friend,
And ſend content, or give my woes an end.
Soft, Ile not leave you to goe ſeek that end: your name ſhall travaile, but Ile not carry it. Though you have vow'd not to procure your death; you are in love—manet.
D'sfoote Sir, your ſpeeches be peremptory.
Why Sir, I ſaid it, and I ſay it agen, that the Dukes Sonne was a foole, and a mad-man, to venture his life for ere a womans love in Italy.
I yeeld Sir, 'twas a mad part to venture a painful death for a woman, when a woman will venture nothing, but ſhe'll have pleaſure at one end of it, for the life of a man; yet the Dukes Sonne was not a madman for it.
I ſay he was.
I ſay you lie
D'foote Sir, you will not ſtrike me?
Yes, and whip thee with Birch i'the Noſe.
Bravely perform'd Alaſtor, 'tis politiquely done, bee noble and doe not ſtrike.
Why ſir, this is not mine owne ſword.
And therefore thou hadſt no authority to uſe it: Come I have other buſineſſe for thee, that ſhall gaine thee gold.
I thanke you ſir, for indeed I had a ſuit to you before.
It is the better trade of the two by halfe: I know thou canſt begg valiantly: but to the buſineſſe. Thou knowſt my Lord Lucilio goes away in diſgrace 'twixt baniſhment and travaile: he is not well, and therefore would ſtay behinde a while unknowne: onely thou muſt goe before and put on his name, that the world may take notice of his paſſage, and hold rumour buſie, till hee comes privately and overtakes thee—But come to my lodging, where Ile diſpoſe of farther particulars, and furniſh thee with apparell and crownes for thy journey.
I attend you ſir.
Why Debora I ſay! why Debora.
Anon forſooth. —
Come bring away the Napkins quickly, and make ready here, (theſe heavy Ars'd wenches are ſo ſlow) and doe you heare, bid one of the Boyes fetch me a Pinte of Oligant, Buls Blood, and a quart of Canary; and look that the white Broth with Eringoes and Marrow be not over-boyl'd; I know M. Damaſippus loves it well.
Ioy and peace of minde be to my deare Pupill, let mee give thee a morall kiſſe.
In pure moralitie M. Damaſippus, you are moſt heartily welcome— Would this wench would come away that wee had Supper once.
That word hath eterniz'd thee my ſweet Ambroſia; and thy name is written in Elizium among Ioves paramours: Wherefore let the beloved of Iove feaſt and banquet according to moralitie.
You are ſo full of learned ſayings ſtill: I have ſtudyed too a great while, would I could reade once.
Soule of the world! thou ſhalt bee illuminated without reading, for I will infuſe knowledge into thee, and thou ſhalt bee repleate.
Can you doe ſo M. Damaſippus?
I can my Summum bonum: and thou ſhalt have the Mandragoras for thy fecundity; and I will free thee from the vicious note of ſterility.
O the bleſſings of theſe Philoſophers! Come ſweet M. Damaſippus, ſit, and lets ſup quickly.
Content.
O Miſtris! my Maſter and Miſtris Abigail are comming up the ſtreet together.
Thunder from heaven confound 'hem, and the fire of Aetna conſume their ſteps.
Charitable M. Damaſippus, get in here till I can ſhift 'hem—ſo, 'tis well,
Good Miſtris Abigail, I was ſure before hee was not here. How now wife! at high Supper! and Wine! and Iunkets! and knacks! and all alone! this feaſt would have beſeem'd thy friends and Neighbours, the worſhipfull of the Pariſh, our fellow Magiſtrates: but I thanke thee for't, I have a ſtomacke now as ſharp—as if I would eate for anger. I would not for a pound I were to beguile any one of his Supper to night, Come ſit Miſtris Abigail.
Miſtris Frailware will you ſit by your husband?
No forſooth, my ſtomack does ſo wamble: when Supper was dreſſing methought I could eate ſuch a deale; and now the ſight of—the meat does ſo fill mee: I pray Husband bring Miſtris Abigal into my Chamber, I think I ſhall be very ill.
By and by duck, we follow thee—ſo, ſit as cloſe to mee now as mine Office, and here's a health in Canary to the formall Cuckold thy Husband.
Fy M. Frailware that you'll have ſuch a fearfull word in your mouth.
Hang him, hee's a Goate, and thou haſt, and ſhalt make him deſerve it.
I muſt confeſſe hee has a ſtinking breathe indeed; & that I have traverſd the paths of goodfellowſhip for your ſake.
I, and wilt doe ſtill, though thy Husband heard thee ſay ſo.
I and will doe it though my husband heard mee.
Why now thou ſpeak'ſt like a ſiſter of the Lecture, and according to moralitiy.
Nay I have been forward enough to you M. Frailware, ever ſince my firſt mariage: for in good earneſt I did marry M. Damaſippus, only becauſe I ſaw the Philoſophers wives goe with the firſt of the Pariſh, and ſo forth—but my heart—
Let the City have it wench, and let my fine pure formall peece of Stoicity weare out ſix grogran Elbowes with pleading moralities, and counterfeit railing againſt the ſinnes of the fleſh; ſpend all hee can flatter from women to play the Epicure; and then make ragged Lectures and exerciſes in Cellars and Gravell Pits for a collection of ſeven pence, ere thou giv'ſt him ſo much as a good wiſh.
Nay ſo hee ſhall; for truely he is growne a very Pharao, a hard-hearted Mirmidon to me of late.
A ficus for him whorſon Crab; hee playes the Goate rampant abroad I heare.
It eene makes me many times wiſh him in his grave, that he might ſleepe and I were free.
Thou art free now my ſweet Ab: come, gi'me a threave of kiſſes—who would live tyed to ſuch a Bull of Baſon.
Will pleaſe you have any Muſick?
Muſick! moſt opportunely welcome; wee'll make a night on't now: ſtrike up Tigellius.
Away with him prophane Tavern-Leech.
Nay prethee Miſtris Abigail have patience.
I will not heare it.
By this kiſſe you muſt—play on ſirrha— Muſick is a noble Science.
Well this fit would coſt me an exerciſe if my Husband knew it: but I can endure any thing for your ſake ſweet M. Frailware.
God a mercy—
What an earthquake! more Devils i'the Vault? are you fir'd, and will blow us up? who have we here?
The very'ſt Cuckold of a dozen.
Neighbour Damaſippus! now by my authoritie welcome into the Livery: wee'll have a company ſhortly.
O, my husband! I will goe to an exerciſe preſently, that the gods may appeaſe your wrath.
I ſee our wives will bring us to all the venerable degrees of the City, before they have done.
Frailware, I will curſe thee from the Temple of Diana; and thou ſhalt be excarnify'd by doggs.
We are Acteons both: let us knock heads.
Step before him and ſhut the doore, I have a plot againſt his Beard. ha ha ha—
Now tell us Micale
What Sacrifice was that held you ſo long,
And would not admit our preſence?
Madam, I muſt diſcloſe more than the ſecreſie
Of our rul'd Diſcipline will well permit,
If I reveale each Act particular,
And forme that that dread Sacrifice includes.
But what I may without the prejudice
Of our ſtrict and inviolable Canons,
Your Grace ſhall know, Iuſt at the depth of night,
(Which time is Ceremonious) I went downe
To a cleare Fountaine, where I bath'd and cleans'd me
From head to foote? Then tooke a female Lamb
Black as the night, and digging firſt a hole
That might receive the ſacrificed blood,
I open'd all the Veins that traverſed
The neck, untill I left the carkaſſe dry:
Then with a hallow'd Knife I ſeparate
The head, and ſplatted it. That done, I heapt
A pile of conſecrated fire, whereon
Now burnes the body of the Holocauſt.
Then tooke I Infants fat, and luke-warme blood
Drawne from it's throate, mingl'd with Viper Wine,
And diſtill'd Hemlock, with the Mandrakes roote,
Night-ſhade, Moonwort, and dreadfull Aconite,
Which to the flame I powr'd with Milke and Honey,
A holy banquet to great Hecate
Whom we invoke; and leave the ſacred fire.
Soone as our backs are turn'd, we heare a noyſe
In hideous ſhapes, that would affright and ſhake
The conſtant'ſt force of Natures beſt Male courage:
Yet muſt we not looke back whence they proceed,
For then all's fruſtrate; but as the fire conſumes
The offerings impos'd, the groanings ceaſe,
And then appeare the Spirits which wee implore,
And which will ne'r appeare unleſſe firſt pleas'd
With ſome oblation.
How doe you point the formes which they aſſume?
Each hath his private Charme, peculiar for the ſhape which pleaſeth moſt, and is leaſt fearfull.
Mother the noyſe is done,
The flames grow pale and dimme, and in dark ſhowes
Speake the approaching horrour which they feele.
Be gone and leave us then—Now Madam ſit,
And in this glaſſe behold what Magick feature
There riſeth from the earth to doe you ſervice.
What Spirit is this?
This is a common ſpirit of much practiſe; it goes in the forme of a young Gentlewoman worne out of ſervice, and keepes her reſidence in the Suburbs, till ſhe has ingroſs'd all the diſeaſes of the City, which ſhe delivers by whole ſale to her cuſtomers: From ſixteene to foure and twenty; ſhee is for none but Bever Hats, Gold Lace, and Taffety Linings: Before thirty ſhe fals to Roaring Boyes, Sharks, Servingmen and Artificers: from thence to Porters and Skavingers; till freed by all degrees, ſhe becomes a Nurſe of the Trade by five and forty; then many times a ſix penny Witch, and ſo back againe to an everlaſting Devill.
What is this?
This is a Spirit Madam that takes many times the habit of an old Gentlewoman, gets into Ladies familiarities, & teaches the tempers of Complexion; the compoſition of meats that ſtrengthen and provoke luxury: the uſe of quelque choſes and Dildoes: has Aretine at her fingers ends. 'Twas ſhe that firſt invented double Locks, and a ſute of Keyes to every Office: Shee exalted the horne of the Buttery, & made the Silver Bole neglect the company of the black Iack: and preferr'd a Bill againſt eating Breakfaſts and ſitting up late, to the prejudice of Tallow-Chandlers. In fine, ſhee ſets Families together by the eares, and flattering her ſelfe into great mens expenſes, becomes the bane of Hoſpitalitie.
'Tis a familiar Spitit, methinkes I could bee acquainted with her—But who is this?
O this is a Devill of many ſhapes, and indeed Madam ſeldome at leiſure, that wee can have any uſe of him. He fawnes him into ſervices of place, and perſwades men, otherwiſe morally civil, from the chaſte Sheets of their beautifull and vertuous mariages: becomes an Intelligencer, and panders them to Milk-maids, Kitchin-wenches, and Oyſter-wives. Hee refuſes no deed that heaven abhorres, and Hell trembles at, ſo his Lord ſin with him. He is a very chain'd ſlave to his Maſters vices, and leaves him in nothing but Actions of honour and vertue. An other time hee is a concealed Druggiſt or Apothecary, puts on the name of a great Traviller, poyſons at an houre, and is in great requeſt.
Speake to him good Micale, and let him know our buſineſſe.
Stay then thou Spirit of night, and by the power
The chiefe commander of your ſhades hath lent,
I doe adjure thee tell where lives Althea?
He tels me Madam, in the Mountaines farre from hence.
But how ſhall we procure her death?
By poyſon! gi'mee ſomething then that kils
Paſt Cure, and ſpeedily—it is ſufficient.
I have a nimble Spirit at command
That by an oyntment which we doe apply
To parts of our mark'd bodies, is at hand,
Who poſts us through the regions of the ayre,
When oft wee meet at ſolemne feſtivals,
Or doe admit a novice to the oath
Of our abſtruſe and powerfull diſcipline:
Leave it to us, and ere to morrowes Sunne
Touch but three Points of Weſt beyond Mid-noone,
My ſelfe will ſee Althea dead.
Thanks gentle Micale, for thou haſt eas'd me much,
Ile not forget thy paines, nor leave thy skill
Without regard, for wee have much to know.
'Tis a curious age Madam, and we are full
Of buſineſſe now, ſo many come to know
Who ſhall ſurvive, their Husbands or themſelves;
And then how long; whom they ſhall marry next:
What place and oportunitie muſt meet
To raiſe their titles; with a million more
Of womens queſtions—But the day begins
To looke upon us.
I muſt haſten then
Leaſt ſome miſ-fortune doe diſcover me:
Farewell Micale, hell proſper our deſigne.
Feare it not Madam, I will not ſleep nor eate,
Till by Althea's death I joyntly free
Your Sonne and Houſe from Cupids Tyranny.
THe day growes hot, and with the climing Sunne
That mounts to th'height of noone, our cares doe flie
Drawne on by feare and griefe, to deep deſpaire.
Lets reſt under this ſhade until the ſindging Ray a little hath withdrawne it ſelfe.
And gladly too, for I am as weary of travell, as I am of a Shepheards life.
I Camilla, the deſire of being publike is the diſeaſe of our Sex: we thinke the Countries free breathing ſpaciouſneſſe a priſon, where the loſſe of libertie is the want of company. But if there were one of us, whoſe contents were not without her, ſhe would ſhun that common concurſe of eyes, as ſhe does the opinion of deformity; and perceive that the beſt perfectiō had no greater enemy than publike aſpects.
This is forc'd now, and ſavours not of your temper and womans ſeaſoning, to hold Paradoxes againſt nature, and opinions oppoſite to our owne feelings. 'Sprecious Madam, if Nature fram'd us to pleaſe, how can we pleaſe where's none to be pleas'd but Beaſts and Birds, whoſe apprehenſion was ne'r made capable of proportion, and therefore regard it not.
And therefore condemne us of unnaturalneſſe, that when beauty was equally ſhar'd 'twixt them and us, they reſpect it as it is; whil'ſt wee, blinded by reaſonable ſenſe, conceive it the richeſt gift Heaven could give, ſtudy it above the ſoule, and equall to life, tho it meerly touch our outſides, as clothes doe.
Nay deare Miſtris, let's talke a little now like our ſelves like women; and tell mee whether an excellent Qualitie forc'd from operation, or a rare peece of worke held from ſight, bee not a wrong to the Author, as well as the thing? O they were fowly deceiv'd that ſought perfection in a Nunnery!
Thats the errour of our ambition, that while wee take our ayme at admiration, by publikeneſſe and common flattery, we miſſe that repute among the wiſeſt, which our beauties not proſtituted would infallibly merit; becauſe every thing, though leſſe perfect, yet leſſe common, is more admired, as we ſee in the Sunne and a Comet.
You are Bookiſh ſtill: and Ile ſtand to it yet, there's no woman but loves them both: and therefore being naturall to our Sex, why ſhould it bee tearmed unnaturalneſſe in us, to cheriſh beautie, or wiſh the perfection of civill mens amiable ſocietie, when that ever begets love, and love is ever ſecōded with flattery. I like a Wench that's pure mettall, and ſpirit, and the very foule of her kinde; that when a Lord wantons her, will forſake her home, give off her father and competent meanes to the poore of the Pariſh; ſtick to the City, like a Prodigall to the Counter, that cannot be drawne out by all the friends, he has; lives clearely by her wits, yet reaſonable honeſt too and all to be flatter'd.
Such Camilla be the diſgrace of their Sex: whoſe appetites change with varietie; and taint the generall name of women with the vicious note of inconſtancy.
That's the folly of men, to terme inconſtancie vicious in us, for were they not ſo prone to wrong us, they would ne'r expect it, but know that to bee too conſtant to them, were to bee too diſloyall to our ſelves, which I hope ne'r came nigh a womans wit.
Yet it is the perfection of vertue to loſe by the exerciſe.
By the pleaſures of change, I ſweare this conſtancy is a mortall ſinne, and not a vertue in any of us.
A ſinne! and mortall!
A ſinn, and moſt mortall, becauſe moſt againſt nature, and brings many of us to lead Apes in Hell. To loſe the ſweets of youth, the very Nectar of Nature, and fruſtrate the end of our Creation; can this be leſſe than a mortall ſinne?
'Tis a worke of merit, and they be Saints worthy to have their names written upon the Altar of Chaſtity. 'Tis belov'd of Heaven, and ſometimes fortunately rewarded here.
As for example—
My ſelfe you meane.
I am no Divine, ſpight of the time I muſt ſpeake my thoughts.
Why then 'tis I,
Why then 'tis you: would any woman breathing, that had her 5 ſenſes, and no red head, no blew lips nor raw Noſe, no deſperate fortunes, nor crackt reputatiō, but walk'd upright in the face of the world, and in the Aprill of her age, ſo devote her ſelfe to one, that ſhe muſt undergoe theſe miſeries, when by renouncing him, ſhee may underlie ſo many commodities? To turne Savage here, and hold conference with none but hils and ſheepe, when ſhe might have variety of faſhions, wits, and breathes to Court her at home. I proteſt I would love over a whole Play-houſe of Gallants firſt.
I could be angry with thee Camilla, for Ile firſt be treacherous to my owne ſoule, ere buy content or kingdomes with perfidiouſneſſe.
God reward you, for man will never.
Vertue is rich, and rewards it ſelfe: and if my wrongs merit Lucilios ſafetie, Heaven redouble 'hem.
Now Micale thou haſt the ſight of them,
And art already 'ſpy'd; caſt out the baite.
What is ſhee? Sure ſome voluntary occaſion has driven her this way.
'Tis ſome Camelion perhaps, that lives upon the breath of newes, and comes to intelligence us here.
What, no ſalute! methinkes the furious heate
Should make 'hem ſoone inquiſitive to know
What I came laden with into theſe Mountaines,
Which yeeld no other juice but Chriſtall Springs:
I have a Liquor here to quench their thirſt,
Phyſick to purge them from their loving humours,
And that aſpiring minde that does inveſt
Altheas hopes within a Ducheſſe ſtile.
Faith Miſtris my ſtomack takes this for an invitation, I have a great appetite to be acquainted with the honeſt Shepherdeſſe, for I am dry at heart, though my teeth water.
Yet be not impudent, invite not thy ſelfe.
Why no, I ſhall doe as cuſtome and faſhion forces us in wooing, forbeare and be coy, look to be invited and pray'd, when we be ready to ſtarve: Ile to her & dine, that's paſt reſolving— Come will you goe?
Not I.
Your reaſon?
Becauſe I have none to goe.
Nor I to ſtay—Shepherdeſſe proface: I thinke your feaſt be neither gluttonous nor miſerable, that thus you make it in the ſight of heaven.
'Tis the Countries priviledge faire Shepherdeſſe to ſhun both: will't pleaſe you ſit and eate?
Your kindneſſe makes mee preſume, yet I feare to be over bold.
Command and try, theſe Hill-Inhabitants diſſemble not.
I have a melancholy friend here by, whom diſcontent makes ſcarce ſociable: yet perhaps company & your Bottle would infuſe a little ſpirit, and make a Sunſhine on her thoughts.
You are too blame if you left her then, ſoleneſſe feeds melancholy: pleaſe you we goe and ſit with her?
That were to trouble your kindneſſe.
Nay you miſtake me then, methinks Shepheards ſhould not know theſe Court complements, more then that does the Countries honeſty.
Come, rouze your ſelfe, and meet a banquet that comes freely to you.
I cannot eate.
Why then you cannot live.
And therefore I cannot eate, becauſe I cannot live.
Yet ſtrengthen Nature, and out-live ſorrow.
'Twere Tytius plague, to renew ſtrength for griefe to feed on.
And to let ſorrow keepe you faſting were to ſtarve with Tantalus.
A hard choiſe for me the while.
Vertuous conſtancy; thou art belov'd of Heaven, and fortunately rewarded.
Peace good Eccho.
Come Nymph, you muſt bee joviall, theſe love griefes availe you nothing: men perhaps laugh at 'hem.
Why true: here's a health and wiſedome to you
Both to your ſelfe, I am not ſick.
Pledge her faire Nymph.
See what a company of religious fooles wee maides bee, to ſigh and hang the head for ere a rough-hewne-ſtubble cheeke on 'hem all, when a Crab-fac'd Cynick, that has neither land nor hanſomneſſe, will ſcoffe at affection, and ſay hee knowes foure Wenches, who if they were ſtampt and ſtrain'd, ſo, that he might draw out the vertue of one, the beauty of another, the witty good nature of a third, and the Portion of a fourth; he could make a reaſonable good Wife for ere a yonger brother in the land.
By Pan but ſuch a wife would right well fit a Worſhipfull Heire.
Nay that were pity faith, then fooles ſhould trouble two houſes. Come will you take your Liquor?
good Spirit leave thy tempting: my heart growes cold and pants, as if it did preſage ſome fatall ill ſtood nigh me.
Theſe be the dreames of love: here take a draught, and waken imagination, fancy is ſtrong with you.
I thinke ſo too; pray heaven it be no more.
Great Brimo, ſhall our labour be fruſtrate!
Ile frame a lye ſhall make her hang her ſelfe
For griefe, ſince poyſon failes— yet taſte a little,
The Citie yeelds no better Cordiall to baniſh feares.
I cannot drinke—were you in the City late?
I was, and ſaw a heavy ſpectacle,
The Dukes ſole Heire, who taking the diſguiſe
Of a condemned Lady, that ſtood tainted
Of Treaſon, was throwne downe from off the Rock,
And, by the priviledge of Law that gives
Our Virgins leave to pleade and dye conceal'd,
Vntill his Funerall, was ſtill unknowne.
Since when, the Duke to ſatisfie the wrath
His ignorance had bred by ſuch a loſſe
Vnto the State, has burnt the guiltleſſe mother
Of that young Lady, perſecutes her Kinne,
Raced their ancient Houſe, and vowes the death
Of her, who yet is fled, and none knowes where.
Oh—
Are you poyſon'd with a lie?—What ailes you Laſſe?
What fainting?
I am not well; good Shepheardeſſe
Leave us a while; I thanke thee for her meate,
But the Sawce comes worſe than poyſon to my breaſt.
Then fare you well: I am ſorry to have bin the Meſſinger of that afflicts you—and kils not preſently,
Although I hope this lie proves to thy heart,
Poyſon more ranke then ere was us'd by Art.
O we have liv'd too long Camilla, and
Out-ſlept the houre in which wee ſhould have dyed,
Plagues, guilt and miſchiefe have o'rtaken us,
Becauſe we ſlack'd, and would not quit the world
To reſt in pure white Tombs of innocence,
I feare ſome of us ſhall recompence our ſloth too ſoone, for I am wondrous ill.
Poore wench, theſe newes have wounded thee.
Not to diſſemble, no: but from the Wine
I taſted of the Bottle, went a cold
Through every veine, that ſettling at my heart,
Shuts up the paſſages of life, and fils
The Organs of my powers with ſuch a froſt
As kils the ſpirits that ſhould harbour it.
Does Hell conſpire with envy then to perſecute
Our miſery? and ſent ſome fiend to take
That ſhape, that ne'r till now did ſhrow'd ſo foule a ſin.
My ſoule growes faint and weary of her houſe,
And Death claimes right in all my Vitall parts:
Help me Althea! help me Miſtris!
Or bury me at leaſt, and cloſe mine eyes,
Death is the beſt—
Of all lifes miſeries.
Dead— ſtarke dead—
It is not much I aske the Angry heavens,
Lend but my wits to die, I crave no more:
Or if you have a further puniſhment
Reſerv'd, be milde, and hurle it quickly on mee
With its full weight— Poore wench, I have no tooles
To breake the earth, nor meanes to burie thee:
Thou haſt not kill'd a Mother, nor a Prince,
Nor beene the ruine of thy Family;
Is't ſuch a guilt to beare me company,
That thou muſt dye, and want what Homicides,
And Malefactors finde? —a grave! Here take
This Scarfe, Lucilio was wont to weare it;
Tell him thou haſt it for thy Shrowd, and I
Am gone to meet him, and have onely begg'd
A truce with fatall miſchiefe, whilſt I hie,
That where hee dyed, there I may likewiſe die.
Poore ſoule farewell.
Come, hands to worke, it is the Feſtivall
Of our Silvanus, we muſt round entrench
The place fitteſt for dancing.
And ſtrew the bankes
On which the Summer Lord and Lady ſit
To ſee the ſports, with theſe rich ſpoyls of May.
Our Shepherds will be frolicke then, and loſe
No Ceremony of their ancient mirth.
I like 'hem well: the curious preciſeneſſe
And all-pretended gravities of thoſe
That ſought theſe ancient harmleſſe ſports to baniſh,
Have thruſt away much ancient honeſty.
I doe beleeve you: 'tis the exerciſe
Of ſuch, only to ſeeme, and to be thought,
What they are not, holy. They keep the feaſt
Of our great Pan, with more than needfull ſtrictneſſe,
And take upon 'hem to bee great oath-haters,
When all is but diſſembling, and their Devotions
Like Witches charmes, diſguis'd with ſeeming good
To beare out wickedneſſe.
Then they have reaſon, for they that live by ſhowes muſt paint faire.
Alas, what's here? a Shepherdeſſe aſleep!
Sweet benefit of our life, to whom a Turfe gives a more ſecure ſleep, than a Palace doth a Monarch.
But this is death, not ſleep.
Why then ſhee's abſolutely bleſt: Nature has given her an acquitance from the reckonings of fortune and miſerie.
We muſt in charity bury her.
To your Tooles then, we can doe no leſſe: though it bee ſcarce in faſhion now to be charitable.
Faſhion is a Traviller, and Shepheards cannot follow it.
I Laurinda, it travels into all Nations the world o'r.
And therefore ſhould goe round.
And therefore does goe round, blindfold, like a Mill-Horſe, who thinkes he goes forward, yet keeps his courſe circular. But now Laurinda what further Ceremony can you deviſe for this Funerall? poore hapleſſe Coarſe!
To mourne for we know not whom, and when peradventure death was the beginning of her happineſſe, were to abuſe our ſelves, and be ſorry ſhe could be no longer miſerable.
Ile ſtrow my flowers on her Virgin Hearſe,
And rob another Meddow for the ſports,
The place affords no other Ceremony.
Yes, wee muſt have a Countrey Song for her farewell from the earth, and welcome to the earth.
Ile doe my beſt, though it bee unſeaſonable to ſing at burials.
Poore Wench, even in the flower of her age! although I knew thee not, yet for thy memory Ile change with thee—
Your hand Arminio.
Laur. Die, die, ah die!
Wee all muſt die:
'Tis Fates decree,
Then aske not why.
When we were fram'd the Fates conſultedly
Did make this law, That all things borne ſhould die.
Yet Nature ſtrove
And did denie
We ſhould be ſlaves
To Deſtinie:
At which they heape
Such miſerie
That Natures ſelfe
Did wiſh to die:
And thankt their goodneſſe that they would foreſee
To end our cares with ſuch a milde Decree.
—Farewell and ſleep for ever.
'Tis too late, I have miſs'd him, and all my labour's loſt. Speed you ſhepheards and your worke.
Sir, you are welcome, but our ſad worke is ſped already, and ſo are they for whom we worke.
Why is it ſad then if both be ſure of ſpeeding?
Becauſe Sir the beſtſpeed our labour can have, is the ſad end of their life for whom we worke. We have buried the dead.
'Tis well that Charity is not runne the Countrey then. But whom have you buried?
One doubtleſſe as unfortunate as unknowne, a ſtranger ſure in theſe parts, and as ſhee ſeem'd, a maid: further particulars we know not: but pittying ſhee ſhould want a buriall, as we came by and ſaw her dead, we gave her that which earth denies to no misfortune, a poore grave.
And tooke from off her face this Scarfe, bleſs'd with the laſt kiſſe her dying lips could give.
O my apprehenſive ſoule!
What meane you Sir? doe you know it?
I too too well. Poore Lord that wont'ſt to weare
this Relique, which is now left for an Index
To turne thee to thy woes. Good Shepheard
Grant me thus much and beſtow it on me.
Faith Sir ſince I perceive you long for it, you ſhall prevaile: and if ſhee were of your acquaintance, keepe it as a monument of her untimely death. So fare you well Sir.
Too timeleſſe death that kill'd two hearts in one!
And now Lucilio, where ere thou liv'ſt,
Here we may joyntly finiſh both our labours,
Since here lies bury'd all thy hopes and feares.
Too vertuous maid Althea! could the earth
Yeeld thee no better place to enſhrine thee in:
Yet can its baſeneſſe never dimme thy name,
That ſhall be ſung into poſterity
By a whole race of Virgins, and thy Fame
Shall be a Tombe more durable to thee
Then Braſſe or Marble. So farewell Althea!
Ile ſtraight returne this newes to thy ſad mother,
That ſhee may give with ſome ſolemnities
Thy unhappy death its lateſt exequies.
Slave to affliction, that muſt ſtill purſue
The ſhadowes of my hopes, claſping the windes
To feed the hunger of my diſcontent,
And ſet aloft by greatneſſe, ſtand expos'd
To every clap of Fortunes thundering,
Still baniſh'd from the ſight of ſweet content
That ſits below me. Had my birth but bin
As free from height as from ambition:
I might have ſlept under a ſilent roofe,
And eate ſecurely of a Countrey Feaſt,
Bound to no Ceremonious pathes of State,
Nor forc'd to torture mine affections,
Or chaine them till they ſterve to ſome deform'd
Remedy of love, and change our lives content
For a bare title, that forſooth muſt come
To edge a line of words, and make our names ſwell
To fill th'ambitious thirſt of greedy age—
How eaſily could I forget my ſelfe
By looking ſtill upon thee, honeſt habit!
And could I finde her, whom the tyrannie
Of love hath made mee ſeeke, I would not tread
So many weary ſteps back for a Dukedome.
Now Maſter Conſtable, how like you this project? Doe I not draw all things to the life?
Excellent Boy! for a ſearching braine thou mightſt have made a Head-borrough.
What an ambidextrous ſhaver have I got to doe the feate?
Can he draw teeth I wonder?
I, who doubts it? 'tis the ſemi-ſphere of his Profeſſion: why doe you aske?
becauſe I would have this hatefull Stoiks two rowes of teeth drawne, for treſpaſſing at my Table.
You'll ſave nothing by that, for the want of teeth will make him come the oftner to your wifes White-broth, her Marrow, and Eringoes, who will likewiſe cram him up with Potatoes, Oyſters, metamorphis'd Muſhromes, and ſuch like ſelf-ſwallowing provocatives, that will runne down his throate as glibbie, as your pils of Butter, and make as much haſte into his Belly, as they will make out againe into hers.
How thou doeſt charge my head with ſcruples!
No; the way to deſtroy all fundamentall reference betweene him and your wife hereafter, and to ſpoyle him for ever giving freſh ſappe unto your hornes, let his offenſive member be now lopt off, before the Sunne enters the Ramme.
And what then Boy?
Why when we have reduc'd him to this impotent ſtate, we will ſtraight diveſt him, and truſſe him up naked in a Wheele-barrow, and ſend him home in the poſture of an innocent, with his hands cleaving to the outſides of his knees, and his noſe betweene his two Thumbes.
Content; and wee'll goe pawne his clothes the while, and be drunke with the money.
Stay, this is a little two Tragicall, now I thinke on't: wee'll ſpare his wifes night-peece for her ſake, till the next conjunction— Harke—our Checkerman has him by the Poll already: now Maſter Conſtable ſtand cloſe to your revenge, diſſemble a feare a while, wee ſhall be ſummon'd ſtraight.
Come out you unpoll'd Stoick, 'tis time you had the curteſie of my Razer.
Good ſir, I need it not.
I'll force it on you ſir: as I am Pluto's Barber in Ordinary I will trimme you, come, I long to doe it, therefore ſit downe, and make your Beard ready for diſſection—wee muſt have help I ſee; Conſtable come hither, come I ſay, and feare not, but doe your Office, force him to fit, if your Authoritie bee ſtrong enough: you trembling ſlave come helpe.
I come, I come ſir.
Damaſippus I command you to ſit in the devils name.
So, hold him there. Now Damaſippus before my mortall Razer ſeize your morall Beard, what can you ſay to ſave it?
Oh ſir, it is an Ornament and ſpeciall gravity belonging to our Sect.
Impoſſible that haire ſhould argue wit; I rather thinke it does ecclipſe a good diſputative face, and makes you look more like a Travelling Greeke, then an Italian Stoick.
Yet for Antiquitie-ſake ſpare me theſe haires that never yet were cut.
How! Nunquam tondenti Barba cadebat?
Never ſince 'twas a Beard ſir, it is yet tipt with the Downe, the reliques of my youth, and in a primitive ſtate.
Why then ſir the antiquitie of this your primitive Beard ſhowes you to have beene a ranke enemy to our Profeſſion.
Why ſir, I kept it for that end that Nature gave it, as a garment to cloathe the face of age in winter.
Yet know Damaſippus, tho it keep your face lukewarme, then; it breeds a froſt in your Liver, devours the radicall humour of your body, and endangers you to a Conſumption: But in Summer, eſpecially the Dog-dayes, ſuch a Dung-mix of haire, and vaſt foregrowne Beard as this, were enough to keepe your Chin ſweating, nine dayes together, and turne every haire of theſe to Snakes.
Moſt devilliſhly argu'd.
Now Saturne, Vertumnus, and the god of Sheep-ſheare guide my hand—
Oh, oh—
Hold, I have almoſt done.
Shave him cloſe.
And waſh him too in Lethe-water, that he may forget his way to my houſe.
So, let him riſe.
Why this was quickly done.
And valiantly ſuffer'd.
Now Damaſippus, in hope that you'll heareafter bee a reform'd man, Ile bee no more a Devill.
Nor Fidler I.
Would I could caſt my head too.
O you damn'd Villaines! have you betraid mee thus to ſhame and horrour!
Be not angry Damaſippus: now the Antependium of your face is off, you have a more Sibiline aſpect a great deale.
True, hee lookes now juſt like a Gooſe return'd out of an inchaunted hole without her feathers.
Iuſt Nemeſis inſpire me with revenge
That theſe unlectur'd miſcreants may drinke
Of the like Cup.
Wee have already Damaſippus, our wives have mingled it.
And you have both taſted of the horne of abundance—
That your heads may be exalted like a brace of Bucks—
According to moralitie vertuous Damaſippus.
Thou art dearly welcome good Aſſaſſino:
Now ceaſe to wonder why I ſent for thee;
I had a daughter once, Aſſaſſino,
A comfort to mine age, life to my veines,
A living Image of her fathers vertues,
Faire, modeſt, and which is halfe monſtrous
In theſe polluted times, inwardly chaſte:
I doe remember ſuch a one I had.
And have ſtill Madam, for rumour ſayes ſhe lives.
No, no, poore Girle, rumour has oft bely'd her.
Seeſt thou this Scarfe?
I Madam, what of that?
And doe'ſt not ſee the letters writ in blood,
That tell me ſhe is dead, murdred, and on
The Mountaines bury'd in obſcure contempt?
Madam not I,
Why no, I thought as much.
But looke Aſſaſſino, if thou hadſt felt
The gripes of woe that have through pierc'd my ſoule,
Seene an appalling ſight would make thee tremble,
Or through the ſpectacles of love didſt view
A loſſe as deare as heaven, thou wouldſt diſcerne
Theſe bloody Characters, and meet her pale Ghoſt
In every ſlumber, begging with ſilent ſhowes
And deep fetch'd groanes a mothers ſlow revenge.
Good Madam, I am ſorry for it—
Then to recount the wrongs, the infamy
Heapt on her youth, when by moſt trecherous plots
Shee was attaint of murder, and became
The marke for every vulgar tongue to ſpit
Slander and treaſon on her faire report;
And laſt her undeſerv'd impriſonment—
By heavens 'twas a foule abuſe; what wer't beſt to doe?
And now to force her flie her deareſt Countrey,
Friends, hopes, contents, twixt oppoſite love and hate,
To live in obſcure exile, poore, forlorne,
Suſpitious ſtill of death, and flying that,
To wade each houre deep into miſery,
To meet another death before her, and ſinke
Vnder the double hand of murder, not
Into a Tombe, but a poore Mountaine grave,
No rites nor obſequies at her interment,
Buried without a teare, unpitied, unreſpected.
'Fore Heaven Madam I would revenge it.
My ſoule Aſſaſſino labours for revenge;
Yet I'm a woman, and can ſprinkle them
But with a few ſalt teares, and curſe, and pray,
Which is a weake foundation for my revenge
To climbe and over-looke them.
You have friends: call in the enemie, & mutine.
That's full of hazzard, for a peace being ſworne,
The enterprize may make them happier,
Vs ſtill more miſerable: But if my griefe
Were arm'd with ſuch a hand, as would o'rturne
The frame of all thoſe hopes for which they ſweate,
And ſpurne that in the duſt, which they would raiſe
With hatefull deeds, up to the point of ſtate:
That I might ſee them grieve, and waile the loſſe
Which now afflicts my carefull widdowhood,
Know what it were to loſe a childe, ſole comfort
Of their declining yeares, and ſend their a-
Ged Coarſes to the grave, hopeleſſe of iſſue.
To make away the Prince; 'tis that you meane,
Thou art within me already?
And mark Aſſaſſino how eaſie 'tis,
Since time, occaſion, travaile, and his ſoleneſſe,
Thy ſelfe not knowne, gives advantagious meanes
To ſecond thine attempt: doe but reſolve
And Fate will ſtraight reſolve to ſecond thee
In ſuch a righteous and juſt revenge.
Madam the enterpriſe is dangerous,
And though I have a daring ſpirit that bids
Mee undertake the deep'ſt attempts of blood
For your revenge, and in ſo juſt a quarrell,
Yet muſt you thinke the danger I ſhall paſſe
Cannot but highly merit recompence.
Vow't; & propoſe the ſumme; my Houſe, my Purſe,
My Meanes, and whatſoe'r is mine is thine:
Be bold and faithfull, Ile ever hold thee deare,
Call thee our Houſes Champion, and the hand
Of heaven's juſtice mark'd to puniſh ſinne,
And plague the guilty thoughts of tyranny.
But Madam the report of his paſſage is ſo obſcure,
That I can hardly learne which way hee tooke.
I have dogg'd the rumour of his journey, and can
Exactly informe thee, come take directions,
And gold to furniſh thee.
Then I reſolv't;
And he ſhall die.
Now thou doſt powre freſh youth
Vpon my haires, newly reviv'ſt my ſoule,
Put'ſt ſpirits to my heart dry'd up with ſighes,
And mak'ſt freſh blood traverſe my empty veines,
For the ſweet'ſt heaven the ſpleenes of women finde
Is full revenge to our aggrieved minde.
It's ſtrange I heare not from the Prince, nor Antonio, who promis'd to meet mee here, where I have now ſtay'd three dayes in expectance, and had the winde bin faire, muſt have paſs'd for Greece—'Fore Heaven it's a gallant thing to be a Lord, if but in name, you ſhall be ſo applauded in every vanitie, ſcurrill jeſt, and impious action: A Satten Therſites that ſtalks among the Peſants like the Stork that Iupiter ſent among the frogs, will ſo bend and bow to your little Toe, fawne and proteſt your excellencies; Si bene ructavit—Sirectum minxit— I would I had the faith that ſome have, I would never be unlorded againe. 'Fore Heaven I muſt begin to fawne, and get my ſelfe created: This ſervice done for the Prince is a good ſtep to it.
Now Captaine, the winde's unconſtant ſtill, every where ſave where to ſteed us.
Womaniſh my Lord, womaniſh.
Indeed their levity has gotten them now that Simile appropriated.
But they ſhew'd other Cards before they wonne it, too.
Nay, that's enough i'faith.
Yet they had more.
As what!
Why their tongues, which fill houſes, as the buſtling of Windes doe Climates: they overturne Families, and States, as winds doe Trees, Towres, Ships. And for your diverſitie of winds you have your diverſitie of women: for your whirlewindes that claſpe and carry a thing in the ayre, till it fall daſht to peeces; you have of your Females that will claſpe and beare you, till at your next fall you will thinke one peece will ſcarce hang by another. For your freezing windes, you have them that will breed ſuch a froſt in your bones, that change of weather will make 'hem as rotten as the ground after a ſudden thaw: And for your blitting and burning windes, you have of them too, that will blaſt and ſcorch moſt ambidextrouſly. Onely the difference is, that there bee but ſixteene points in the Card, where the winde can be unprofitable to a man: but a woman has for the moſt part, the whole compaſſe of her Card unprofitable, which containes two and thirty points at leaſt.
Then the Grāmarians methinkes did ill to make Ventus of the Maſculine Gender.
The Grāmarians my Lord were meere Schollers, & meere Schollers be meere fooles, and meere fooles are eaſily deceiv'd in matter of Gendring.
Impoſſible ſir, they couple Genders by Booke.
Right my Lord: ſo they all ſtudy Riders Dictionary, and therefore become excellent Horſemen.
Newes from Court to your Grace; a ſtiffe robuſtious Letter-Carrier makes much inquiry where he may be delivered of ſome matters he has beene in travaile withall.
Cozenage and diſſimulation help me, it's impoſſible to ſcape diſcovering. D'sfoote I muſt walke ſtately, looke ſcornfully, talke ſimply, and be Noble at all points now. But it fals out ſomething fortunately to be in the Evening: let him have entrance.
Health to your Grace.
As much to them that bring it: how fare our friends at Court?
As wanting no part of welfare but your wiſh'd preſence.
Have you ought to impart that concerns us?
I have my Lord, and muſt have private conference with your Grace.
Attend us then on the Litto, where Ile preſently meete you, and take this ſoft Evening breath.
Heaven, Ayre, Place, Time, and all will fit thy death.
By Iove methinks I begin to be my Craftes-Maſter and Lord it handſomely. If it were as eaſie for a Villaine to be a Lord, as a Lord to be a villaine, I would write noble inſtantly: get mee a Herald for ſeven ſhillings, or a frowne to forſweare himſelfe, and draw my Pedigree as deep as Romulus. Captaine, as the wind ſerves, either on the Litto, or at my Lodging.
Wee will attend your Grace.
'Tis ſtrange that ſuch a perſonage ſhould thus obſcurely travell.
Tuſh Navarchus, our common-wealth is among fiſhes, and our pollicie with the windes, and therefore no marvell if Courtiers tricks ſavour not on our palats.
Yet fearing diſgrace above damnation, and loving a popular eſteeme more then heaven; methinkes obſcuritie ſhould fright 'hem.
Faith no; for you ſhall have a Courtier of the firſt Velvet head, when the tide runnes low, and in a place unknowne, will familiarly turne you to his old trade, accoutre his palfrey moſt neatly, and thanke obſcurity for drowning the unfit honour hee had lately ſlipt on and off.
'Tis a diſeaſe indeed they have, to feele no touch of future honour, nor taſte any thing more than what lies before 'hem.
Tut, they be wiſe in that, for their conception being precipitate, and their births raſh, they knew their glories birth would bee like the flies I have ſeene by a River in Aegypt, that begin to live in the morning, are at full age by noone, and die before Sunne ſet: and therefore their honour feeds like mothes upon apparell, and objects meerly preſent—flaſhes—flaſhes.
But ſuch an imputation cannot ſtaine his honor, whoſe graine taken in the die of a Dukes blood, ſtands immaculate ſpight of all fortunes.
'Tis true, and therefore peradventure parſimony invites him to this obſcuritie, for Ile aſſure you, that to be miſerable, and not fight, are growne to be two right honourable qualities,—
Captaine, you ſtand talking here of a Cock and a Bull, while our rich fare is gone another way.
Who? my Lord the Prince?
I your Lord the Prince.
Which way, for profits ſake?
That way that many Lords doe for profits ſake: downwards, downwards.
Prethee ſpeake not in enigmas; be underſtood.
In plaine Dagger termes the Prince is ſlaine.
D'foot 'tis ſharp newes.
By whom?
Why, that ſwart Rutter that brought the meſſage from Court, delivered it in ſuch keene termes, that it went to his heart: & when he had done, tumbled him off the Litto into the water to catch Whitings. But two Merchants ſpying it, rais'd the people and tooke him, and now the Governour is gone a fiſhing after the Body.
This amazes mee, done ſo ſuddenly.
Death's a quick Carver when he comes in that ſhape.
Who ſet him on ſayes he?
Some valiant Squire or other, who is yet unknowne, nor will the Governour urge the knowledge, but ſends him back to Court, that the Duke may take notice of all.
Come, lets to the the Litto, and ſet our helps to find the Body.
Content.
BVt have you found the body?
Wee have my Lord
With long laborious ſearch, it was three Tydes
Lockt in the armes of Neptune, who at length
Enforc'd by maine conſtraint reſign'd it up,
But all the face ſo mangled and deform'd,
That but his clothes, nought could have made it known,
The which embalm'd we ſtraight clos'd up in Lead,
And with the murderer brought it to your Grace,
That after his due exequies perform'd,
You might quench ſorrow in revenge, and draw
His blood, whoſe hand hath ſpilt beſt part of yours.
Thou art deceiv'd, good friend, 'twas not his hand,
But the juſt hand of Heaven that whips my ſinnes,
And through my Veins powres out the innocent blood
Which I had ſpilt before; the hand that holds
The equall Ballance to diſcerne the waight
'Twixt Princes juſtice and their tyrannie,
Meaſures their bleſſings and their plagues, alike,
To their faire vertues or black infamies,
And makes the horrid acts of murderous mindes
But inſtruments of plague to puniſh guilt;
And pay us in the coyne with which we hop'd
To buy our gluttonous ſurfets. Such is the ſtate
Of Princes priviledge, that we may runne
Into the depth of ſinne, and uncontroul'd
Pull vengeance on our heads, while the ſmooth hand
Of peſtilent flattery claps us on the back,
And gives us edge to villany, till they ſee
Miſery and deſolation cloſe us round;
Then they flie back, and gaze, as on a place
Stricken with furious thunder in a ſtorme:
When every vulgar hand has lawes, and feare
Of prying authority to hold him backe,
And friendly enemies to upbraid him with
His faults, and keepe him in the bounds of mercy,
Onely our height bereaves us of theſe helps,
And wee are ſooth'd in vices, till we runne
Beyond the reach of grace, and ſtand within
The ſhot of heavieſt vengeance, which ſeldome comes
Short of our merits—O my ſonne! my ſonne!
I ſhall grow madd with griefe: my frighted conſcience
Opens the Booke, where I doe view my ſinnes,
And feele the furies with their wounding whips
Laſhing my guilty ſoule to penitence.
I was unhappy
To bee the meſſenger of this ill newes.
Who's this? Fioretta the Lady Iulia's woman? My heart! what meanes her habit?
Come Lovers bring your cares,
Bring ſigh-perfumed ſweets,
Bedew the grave with teares,
Where death and vertue meets:
Sigh for the hapleſſe houre
That knit two hearts in one,
And onely gave love power
To die when 'twas begun.
Saving your mirth faire Lady, what preparation's this?
a Bridall ſir; true love and greatneſſe be divorc'd, and now they bee both going to be married to misfortune.
'Twas a marriage long ſince, my ſelfe was at the wedding: But be a little plainer, & tell me who it is to be maried?
Indeed Sir, Beauty, Vertue, and too much faith for a woman, are going to the cold armes of a ſullen Churle, one that conſumes ere hee lets goe: yet hee is better than your other husbands are; he forſakes them not, leaves them not in miſery, hee wooes them not with flatteries, and poyſons with unkindneſſe: hee never ſweares, and lies, but continues faithfull till Doomes-day. Who be you?
A ſtranger in your City, a poore Husbandman.
A poore Husband? then thou art a poore diſſembler, a poore murderer: O you husbands kill more than ſcurvie Phyſitians, or a plaguy Summer. But art a ſtranger?
A very ſtranger here.
Why that's all one, thou canſt not bee a ſtranger to her fame, if thou haſt liv'd but a moneth in the world. Poor innocent Althea makes her laſt mariage, and I am one of her Bridemaids.
To whom for loves ſake?
To her grave for love's ſake, an honeſt Husband: tis better then the Dukes ſonne, that ſent her from the City, to dye in the Mountaines? Ah 'twas unkindly done, not to goe nor ſend after her! yet poore Lord hee is kill'd, dead too now, and has met her Hearſe here—
So thoſe two ſoules that ne'r were borne to have
A Nuptiall Bed, have found a Nuptiall Grave.
Beauty and Vertue ſtrove
Who ſhould adorne her moſt,
Till faith conſpir'd with love,
And all their labours croſt.
Antonio kill'd! Althea buried!
Then thou haſt liv'd Lucilio to behold
The height of miſchiefe, and the worſt of chance,
And thou maiſt dare thy angry Starres to inflict
What ere they can effect, that's worſe than this.
Murderd thy friends! ruin'd their ancient names!
Hatefull to thy Parents, lothſome to thy ſelfe!
O 'tis high time to die, and I doe wrong
Althea's conſtancy to breath an houre
After I know ſhe has prevented me.
Methinkes I heare love chide my backwardneſſe.
And tell me how unworthy I am growne,
To have two friends ſo firmely vertuous,
Conſtant and loyall, and outlive them both,
Yea be their Murderer, and ſtand alive
Spectator at their funerall, as I would bid
The reſt weep on, whil'ſt I give ayme to teares,
And marke who grieves moſt deep at my foule actions.
So then, let Fortune make a period here,
Since we are met juſt in the midſt of woe,
And ſtand upon the Center of miſhap.
Whence we may ſee the full circumference
Of all that Sphere, that bounds the power of Fate.
Come Madam we will mixe our teares a while,
Dropping them joyntly on the Marble Tombes
Of our dead Iſſue, till the ſtones receive
Large Characters of griefe, carv'd by the drops
That ceaſeleſſe flow from our too late laments.
Great Lord, if woes with woes may be compar'd,
Or to the meaſure of our cauſe of griefe
Wee might in ſad contention drop our teares,
Shower for your drop, Pound for your dramme of woe
My breſt and eyes would yeeld, which now are growne
A boundleſſe harbour for the depth of care.
For though wee meet in this, that both have loſt
The deareſt treaſures of deſired life,
Yet hath your Grace a partner in diſtreſſe
A comfort to the reſidue of your yeares,
And therefore hope that Heaven may yet reſtore
This ruine of your Houſe. Beſides you have
The body of your ſonne, on whoſe dead Coarſe
You may beſtow your teares, and honour him
With fitting place and Royall exequies:
When Heaven hath ſhut thoſe comforts from my heart,
Left me a widow to ſuſtaine the waight
Of all this burden, and no partner elſe
To bring mine aged haires unto the grave
But ſtill repining griefe: and am deny'd
The aſhes of my childe, on whoſe cold Hearſe
Mine eyes might pay thoſe tributary teares
Which her misfortune, and my woes exact,
And onely can embrace an empty ſhrine.
Yet my good Lord, I oft forget my cares
To grieve at yours, and wiſh Althea's death
Might have ſuffic'd the anger of the Fates,
Without Lucilio's blood, whoſe guiltleſſe fall
Hath ſtrook a ſadneſſe through th'appalled lookes
Of all your ſubjects, made them ſtand amaz'd,
And wonder there ſhould live upon the earth
Envy enough to blaſt ſuch gracefull hopes.
Let me be open Madam to your love,
'Tis but the doome of Iuſtice I ſuſtaine;
I know I wrong'd your daughters innocence,
And onely know it now, for plagues make knowne
That, oft, for ſinne, which once we thought was none.
No my good Lord, ſhee was not innocent,
In that ſhe bounded not her looſeſt thoughts
Within our element but would admit
The dangerous fires, of ambitious love
Into her Virgin breſt, that's ſafelyeſt knit
Where all proportion juſtly equals it.
Wrong not her worth good Madam, the power of death
Is weake to ſtaine her name, and we were bleſt.
If ſuch perfection, joyn'd unto our Blood,
Had with our ſonne ſucceeded in the Throne
Of this unhappy and dejected State.
Beleeve me Madam I did ever love
Althea's Vertues, and was inly glad
When by that Stratagem my ſon had freed
Her innocence (as I proteſt I thought)
And wiſh'd her ſcape as ſafe from that injuſtice
As could my heart deſire.
Alas good Madam, I have felt your Grace
Still loving to my daughters poore deſerts,
And nothing did increaſe my ſorrowes more
Then that I wanted meanes how to requite
Your Graces love.
Come, we forget our ſelves in Ceremonies,
And waſte the time, whoſe every inſtant yeelds
Scarce ſpace enough for that large taske of griefe
Sorrow exacts each inſtant from our hearts,
Good Madam wee will conſecrate one Tombe
To both their Memories; and ſince in life
Their hearts were ſo united by Loves hand,
In death their Graves ſhall joyne: ſo will ourſelves
Bequeath the remnant of our dayes from hence,
You to ſad cares, and we to penitence.
You to ſad cares, and wee to poenitence—
Why then you'll feed upon the bitter fruits
Of your ambition, and by experience finde,
Vertue, not Honour is heaven unto the minde.
Deare Father, I conceive your griefe, as true
As is my love, and feele methinkes a ſting,
That ſpurs me onward to prevent the plagues
My loſſe will bring upon your hoary age,
And makes me thinke I heare the frequent voyce
Of potent Nature whiſper to mine eare
The duty that I owe, and bids me meet
Thoſe miſchiefes quickly, by diſcovering mee:
But the perſwaſion's weake when I muſt owe
More then a duty, or all Natures ſelfe
To the chaſte merits of Althea's love,
Who was the firſt I murdred; then the name
Of holy frendſhip, which my requeſt abus'd
In lov'd Antonio, whom I murdred next:
My debt's above a life, which though I give,
My ghoſt muſt be a ſlave to pay the reſt,
And their deſerts ſtand yet unſatisfy'd.
But ô yee Spirits of truth! whoſe conſtant faiths
Merit perhaps to heare theſe laſt laments
My dying ſoule powres forth; be pleas'd to take
The poore oblation of a loathſome life,
Which I as gladly vow unto your loves,
As miſery would turne it ſelfe to bliſſe.
And ſince I was a murderer to your worths,
Ile chuſe that death that murderers doe paſſe;
And thou hadſt liv'd Antonio, if thy love
Had not before with-held me from the fall,
And ſaving onely me hath murdred all.
Madam,
My love to you and to that vertuous Lord
Could doe no leſſe: I doe aſſure your Ladiſhip
The murderer has confeſs'd, in hope of life,
The circumſtances, meanes, and opportunity
Which you ſo fitly urg'd, and hath incens'd
The Duke ſo violently againſt your ſelfe,
That he has vow'd your death, & doth intend
A ſharp revenge to all your family.
And but I know Lucilio yet does live,
Beleeve me Madam I ſhould hate the fact,
And be the firſt ſhould feed my thirſty eyes
With their beſt blood, that ſpilt leaſt part of his.
Alas Antonio, what would you have me doe,
When I beheld my daughter murdred thus
'Twixt love and hate, and I no meanes of help
To take revenge, or comfort to my griefe?
Well Madam let's not ſtand to expoſtulate
The cauſe; the act was foule, and (but the hand
Of Heaven turn'd it from him 'gainſt whō you meant it)
Hatefull, and worthy of the deep'ſt revenge.
Your way is now to ſhun the furious wrath
The Duke's enflamed with, and for a while
Lie cloſe in ſome diſguiſe, till the loſt Prince
Make his returne, who doubtleſſe will ere long
Give notice to my ſelfe where he remaines:
And for your farther aſſurance Lady, Ile take
Some ſtrange attire with you, and we will both
Be preſent at the Execution.
Where you ſhall heare perhaps the lateſt words
The murderer will ſpeake againſt your ſelfe,
And in the preſence of the Duke avouch
Your guiltineſſe.
Thankes good Antonio, There the gift is free,
When 'tis beſtow'd on deepeſt miſerie.
Lie there thou gentle weed, that haſt prolong'd
A weary life, thou whoſe diſſembling ſhape
Has help'd me reach the place which drew that life
As an attractive Load-ſtone to it's end.
Some friendly Paſſinger will for this reward
Beſtow perhaps a buriall on my Coarſe;
And be my death as freely exempt from ſight.
As is my griefe, that never innocent eyes
May bee infected with thoſe fumes of guilt
My lateſt gaſpe breathes forth, reſerv'd till now
To bee unfortunate in all ſave this,
That I ſhall ſacrifice my deareſt blood
Vpon that Altar where Lucilio dyed,
And let one aire receive our joyned ſpirits
And ſacrifices to Faiths Deitie.
And witneſſe now you zealous thoughts of love,
Witneſſe the vowes my affection held ſo deare,
My ſoule comes unconſtrain'd to you deare Lord,
And parts as freely from a gladſome heart,
As ere it wiſh'd to enjoy the lively ſight
Of your deſired preſence—
— Awake my fancy, doe mine eyes conſpire
To aggravate my griefe, or does the ſtrong
Imagination of my loſſe preſent the ſhape
Of his dead perſon to my troubled ſenſe?
What ſtrange confuſed paſſions 'gin to raiſe
A ſtormy combate 'twixt my minde and death!
Though ſafely now arriv'd within the Port
Where for exchange of breath I ſhall regaine
The long deſired preſence of her ſoule
That hovers in expectation of my comming.
Methinkes I ſleep, that, thus illuſive ſhowes
Doe mock my apprehenſion: or is't decreed
That even in death I muſt indure affliction?
And die in height of woe? How like his pace,
His geſture, ſhape, and countenance! true conſtant ſpirit!
(That wouldſt not be unleſſe thou mightſt be true)
Did not my greedy ſight diſtract my thoughts
To feed upon thy ſhadow, and make me forget
My buſineſſe next in hand: I ſhould have flowne
To be a ſhadow, and have walk'd with dead
Lucilio—
Lucilio! was it my fond conceit? or elſe
Her ghoſt, that lookes each minute for my approach,
Thinkes my ſtay long, and cals upon my name?
I come Althea, ſwift as breake the windes
From out the Eolian Caves, give mee but ſpace
To take my flight from off that —
Bright Angell! Goddeſſe! whatſoe'r thou art
That haſt aſſum'd that ſhape to adorne thy ſtate,
And give a better luſtre to thy Deity;
Doe not delude my woes, nor make my death
More miſerable then my ſelfe have done.
It does invite me ſpeak, and with his ſilent looks
Seemes to intreat a word, yet my faint heart
Throbbing with feare, denies to ſecond ſpeech.
Be what thou wilt; I know no ſpirit of night
Durſt to attempt that forme, that ne'r was made
But to inveſt a ſoule more faire and pure
Then are the Spheres. Ghoſt! Angel! Goddeſſe! Nimph!
Speake, daine a word to tell me what thou art,
That thus appearſt in ſuch a glorious ſhape
To intercept my death? Art thou an Angel
That thus wouldſt ſhew the world what they have loſt
By ſeeing her heavenly forme? Or art thou elſe
Some ſpirit of Diviner excellence
That haſt put on that ſhadow, thine owne nature
To beautifie? Or does Althea's ghoſt
Come thus to meet and chide my ſlothfulneſſe?
Or has thy worth chaſte Nymph, deſerv'd to ſcape
The hand of death, and made thy perfect ſelfe
All ſoule, immortall, and an unmixt ſpirit,
That thoſe rich vertues which great nature heapt
In thy creation, might by envious death
Ne'r be diſſolv'd, nor the cold ſenſleſſe earth
Embrace and taint thy pure delicious beauty,
For which the Starres grew envious to the world?
What ere thou art, if thou haſt ſenſe of griefe
But correſpondent to the ſhape thou bear'ſt,
Add not more torment to the depth of woe
That does accompany my death, and urge
No more the ſight and memory of her
Whom I have wrong'd; envy has left me nought
But life to yeeld in ſatisfaction,
Which here I come to tender as thy due:
Or if thou doubtſt the payment, and didſt come
To take a view how willingly I dyed;
Then be my witneſſe that the chaſed Stagge
Flies not more ſwiftly to the cooling ſtreames
Then I to death —
Stay.
Speake.
O ſtay deare love!
Speake, ſpeake thou heavenly ſpirit,
And tell me ſince thy ſelfe art made Divine,
What makes thee come in confines of the wretched,
And mixe thy ſelfe with us whoſe earthly loades
Detaine us yet in life and miſery?
Why, I doe live.
I know thou doſt, thou wert not fram'd to die,
Nor at thy birth, when Heaven and Nature joyn'd
To give thee thoſe rich Dowries thou enjoy'ſt,
Did they intend to make ſuch excellence
Mortall and ſubject to the ſtroke of death.
But where deficient Nature could extend
Her force no farther to preſerve thy life,
Heaven would ſupply the want, and turne thy ſtate
To immortality, yet why ſhouldſt thou,
When I have ſeene thy Funerals perform'd,
Come to afflict me, and augment my griefe?
Sweet love, if you doe live, as feare and hope
'Twixt adverſe paſſions make me doubtfull yet,
Know that I live as when we parted laſt,
Nor ere was yet interr'd.
No, no, the earth grew feeling of her loſſe,
And grieving to be robb'd of ſuch a jemme,
Refus'd to ſhut that treaſure in her wombe
Where foule corruption muſt have tainted it:
Or did my fortunes yet beyond thy death
Purſue thee farther, and bereaving firſt
Thy innocent life, in ſome forſaken wood
Leave thee unburyed, and thy reſtleſſe ghoſt
Comes now to ſeeke a Sepulcher of me?
Great Lord, recall your ſelfe, and give me leave
To ſpeake what will reſolve this doubtfull maze
In which your ſenſes wander, and can finde
No paſſage out. Since I laſt left your Grace
Travelling in that diſguiſe, I loſt indeed
Camilla, poore Companion of my cares:
But hearing that your ſelfe in ſhape of me
Was by your Fathers doome throwne off this Rock,
Knowing my ſufferance guilty of your death,
I came to end my life where you had dyed,
And expiate the murder with my blood
Where 'twas committed on your guiltleſſe ſelf,
Reſerv'd by Heavens mild hand to this bleſt houre
Wherein our innocent loves might once more meet
In ſpight of envie.
Lives my Althea then?
Then live Althea ſtill! But ſpeake no more
Leſt the vaſt Tyde of joy o'rwhelme my ſoule,
And kill as quick as griefe: Or my ſad heart
Vnable to ſuſtaine this burden of wonder,
Sinke and yeeld vanquiſh'd. I have much to aske,
But let it reſt: yet tell me how thou far'dſt
In this long baniſhment?—ſtay, who comes yonder?
Now the wind's turn'd, and fortunes laviſh hand
Powres downe content beyond expectation.
Come thou inhumane murderer of my ſonne,
Traytor unto thy Countries ſtate and ſafety,
And now before the ſtroke of Iuſtice ſeize
Thy hatefull life, reſolve the wondring world
Why the ſlight motives of a womans words
Should winne thee to ſo foule and horrid crimes?
What I have ſaid your ſelfe are witneſſe to,
Nor needs it be renew'd; nor can I adde
One word or ſyllable to make it more.
Then let the Execution proceed,
That wee may doe this lateſt Exequie
To his wrong'd ghoſt, which is to ſee his blood
Reveng'd with blood of thoſe that murdred him,
As we have vow'd to doe, and not to leave
Theſe weeds of ſorrow, till we have conſum'd
The race and name of them that did conſpire
In this abhorred Action: And would it might
Suffice the injuries we did his life,
Thus to revenge his too untimely death;
And from that height—
Am I awake, or dreame I? Is it my fancy
Breeds this deluſive ſhow in my weak braine?
Or doe their ſoules come to condemne our guilt,
More cōſcious of their death, then whō we have brought
To die for it? See, doe thy dazled eyes
Perceive that object which my ſelfe beholds:
Or is't ſome ſhadow that abuſes mee?
And none but mee?
My ſonne my Lord, my ſonne!
More knowne by's ghoſt, then if his living forme
Had met mine eyes: ô ſpeake to him my Lord!
If thou beeſt ſuch as is thy ſemblance,
By all that duty that thy life did owe
Vnto a Parent; by the Bands once due,
Of Love and Nature, that unites the ſoules
Of children and their carefull nouriſhers,
I doe adjure thee tell, why in this midd'ſt
Of day you come thus to renew our griefe?
What has there wanted to your Funerals,
When we have wept us dry, and ſpent our teares
More thicke than winter ſhowers upon your Hearſe?
Done all the Rites and Exequies were due
To your interring? And have vow'd revenge
To all that did conſpire in that foule Act
Of thy too guiltleſſe murder
Know that wee are return'd
From out thoſe Seats of Bliſſe where we were plac'd
By your unjuſt proceedings, to make knowne
That what you did was 'gainſt the will of Fate.
For ſee, what you deny'd upon the earth,
The power of Heaven does grant, and has confirm'd
Our long-borne loves with an Eternall peace:
Where our two ſoules in ſweeteſt union knit,
Enjoy their Nuptials out of Envies reach.
Yet know there are ſome puniſhments reſerv'd
For the vile Treaſons practis'd in purſuite
Of our unmerited wrongs; and that their ſinne
Is mark'd for plagues, that ſeeke by force to breake
The League that Love and Faith doe joyntly knit.
Then let 'hem fall, wee are prepar'd for woes
Though ſhot as thick as Haile from out the Clouds,
Our guilt is greater than thoſe puniſhments,
Or all our future plagues can expiate.
Yet on our bended knees thus low to earth
As we did both conſpire in that foule plott
We here entreat your pardons, and withall
Wiſh the offended Heavens would bee appeas'd
With Vowes and Oriſons; and would your ghoſts
Forget thoſe injuries wee did your loves
And reſt in peace with us, and with the world.
Father we will, but ſhould we live againe,
You would not yet relent, and yeeld our loves
The ſufferance you ſee the Heavens have done.
By Heavens I would; nor ſhould the potent'ſt hand
Of earth reſiſt your preſent Nuptials.
Then wee'll be ghoſts no more, but ever ſue
For your mild ſufferance of our happineſſe.
Wonder and amazement do not oppreſſe me!
O we are bleſt beyond deſert!
Yet is my joy but ſmall amidſt your many,
Since you have burnt my innocent Mother,
And razd our Family.
No my deare daughter, ſee I ſafely live
Ne'r bleſt till now, and now o'r-joyd with bliſſe,
Then joyes would be compleate had I not loſt
By thy vile murderous hand ſo deare a friend.
Your friend ſtill lives, and never felt his life
Sweet till this inſtant, when I may behold
Theſe joyes combin'd.
Why then there nothing wants
But celebration of your Nuptials,
Which we will doe with greater ſignes of joy,
Then we had griefe in your ſuppoſed Funeralls.
But whoſe death is this murderer guilty of?
Onely Alaſtors, a fellow as wicked as himſelf.
We give him then his life, but baniſh him
From our Dominions: and for this ſtrange event
We will expect a farther leiſure
To heare the whole diſcovery of the chance,
And leave the reſt to mirth, that ſhall command
In all our Feaſts, and whom wee'll Crowne as King,
To be chiefe Lord in all our Banquetting.
IVdging Spectators all, for this wee know,
That either you are ſuch, or ſhould be ſo,
Now to your cenſures lowly as his minde
Our Authour all ſubmits, and hopes to finde
In ſuch a faire aſſembly no ſuch eyes
As ſcoute at Theaters, and come like flies
To taint the innocent'ſt labours with their tongues,
Raiſing their richeſt gaines from others wrongs:
If ſuch an envious Canker hap to lurke
Here, and hath onely ſate to taxe the worke
With curious ſcanning; let that envy know
He ſcornes his cenſure onely, and can ſhow
'Gainſt all ſuch labour'd hiſſes, Perſeus Shield,
In ſuch a fearleſſe Pen as ne'r ſhall yeeld,
'Till his cold merits doe his worth bewray,
Or make himſelfe a mewing Statua.
Nor is he of thoſe ſelf-admiring Apes
That thinke none's features faire, whoſe birth eſcapes
Their labouring braines; hee heares and ſees, and knowes,
And yeelds all reverence to the worth of thoſe
VVhom ſolid Art extols, and unto ſuch
Hee humbly vailes his Scene, that for the touch
Of unaffecting cenſures hither came;
Hee ſought your mirth more than a Poets name.