SIr, this ſhort journey from my Princes Throne,
Is meant in Embaſſie to You alone;
To You, whom he receives not as his Gheſt,
For You are both his Ornament and Feaſt.
Although his Greatneſſe is not taught to bow,
His Subjects feare, he will doe homage now,
Which he eſteemes no leſs'ning to his State,
Since 'tis his Love decrees it, not his Fate.
Nay more, his Meſſage moves ſo low, I feare,
What ſounds like tender Courtſhip in your eare,
His Iealous Barons will diſlike, and cry,
I am perverted to diſloyaltie;
Vrge my Commiſsion falſe, then taxe me for
An eaſie Traytor, no Embaſſadour;
As if my words would pull his Empire downe,
Shorten his Scepter, and contract his Crowne;
Thus whiſper'd by my feares, I muſt impart
For Ceremony now, what is his heart,
Though with content of Truth, I may report
You haue a num'rous Faction in his Court.
This Pallace where, by ſword, then law maintain'd
His few, but mighty Anceſtors have raign'd,
Is conſecrated yours; which he doth give,
Not in regard he hath ſhort time to live;
For ſo, ſince his Succeſſor is unknowne,
You take what is his Subjects, not his owne,
And what is a ſurrender now, would be
Receiv'd tomorrow as a Legacie:
If more of his free love, I ſhould relate,
They'd ſtile it homage in our Iealous ſtate.
Come ſhut our Temple and away,
Our bold ſeditious God ſhall ſtay;
Wee'l ſerve no ſacrifice to day,
Our humor is to Feaſt, not Pray.
The Battell which our Knights have won,
Did laſt untill th' amazed Sun
For feare, did mend his uſuall pace,
And ſet betimes to hide his face.
And now the ſtory of their fight
Is univerſall, as his light,
Which Fame upon her ſwifter wing
Hath early brought for us to ſing.
Heark! heark! the trouble of the day draws neere,
And now the Drum doth teach the heart to beat,
Whilſt Trumpets cheriſh not, but wound the eare
Of ſuch, who are ordain'd for a defeat.
Heark! Heark! ſome groane, and curſe uncertaine Fate,
Which vs for blood and ruine, doth create.
Charge! charge! cries ev'ry bold ambitious knight,
Whilſt artificiall darkneſſe hid their way,
The lightning of their Swords was all their light,
For duſt, & ſulphrous clouds had chok'd the day.
Heark! heark! ſome groane, and curſe uncertaine Fate,
Which vs for blood and ruine, doth create.
Burn, burn, was ſtraight the noyſe in ev'ry Tent,
Whilſt ſome miſ-led by their diſorder'd feare,
Did helpe to kindle what they ſhould prevent,
And ſcap'd the Van to periſh in the Reere.
Heark! heark! ſome groane, and curſe uncertaine Fate,
Which vs for blood and ruine, doth create.
Fly, fly, cryes then the tame dejected Foe;
Each wondring at the terror which he feeles,
And in the hurry of their overthrow,
Forſook their Arms, and truſted to their heels.
Heark! heark! ſome groane, and curſe uncertaine Fate,
Which vs for blood and ruine, doth create.
Stand! ſtand! was now the word our Knights did give,
For weary of purſuit, they had no will
To grace with death, who baſely ſought to live,
As if unworthy of their paines to kill.
Heark! heark! ſome groane, and curſe uncertaine Fate,
Which vs for blood and ruine, doth create.
Whither ſo gladly, and ſo faſt,
As if you knew all danger paſt
Of Combat, and of War?
As you believ'd my armes were bound,
Or when I ſhoot, ſtill ev'ry wound.
I make, is but a ſcar.
Arme now your breſts with ſhields of ſteele,
And plates of Braſſe, yet you ſhall feele
My arrowes are ſo keene,
Like lightning that not hurts the skin,
Yet melts the ſolid parts within,
They'l wound, although unſeene.
My Mother taught mee long agoe
To ayme my ſhafts, and draw my Bow
When Mars ſhee did ſubdue.
And now you muſt reſigne to Love,
Your warlike hearts, that ſhee may prove
Thoſe antick Stories true.
Vnarme, unarme! no more your fights
Muſt cauſe the virgins teares,
But ſuch as in the ſilent nights,
Spring rather from their feares,
Such diff'rence as when Doves do bill,
Muſt now be all your ſtrife:
For all the blood that you ſhall ſpill,
Will uſher in a life.
And when your Ladies falſly coy
Shall timerous appeare,
Believe, they then would faine enjoy
What they pretend to feare.
Breath then each others breath, and kiſſe
Your ſoules to union:
And whilst they ſhall injoy this bliſſe,
Your bodies too, are one.
Too morrow will the haſty Sun
Be fear'd more of each Lover,
For hindring to repeat what's done,
Than what it may diſcover.
Make roome for our God too, make roome,
For now ſurpriz'd, and raviſh'd with delight,
Apollo is from Delphos come,
T'inſpire, and breath himſelf in every Knight.
His God-head is inclin'd to prove
How justly proud, and happy you will be,
When with the powers of War and Love,
Hee ſhall unite his wiſer Deity.
Then ſtill, as if not made of Earth,
Expreſſe your thankfulueſſe in active pleaſure.
Whilſt you deſigne your hearts to Mirth,
Your eares to numbers, & your feet to meaſure.
Behold, how this conjunction thrives!
His radiant beames Apollo ſtrives
So much to ſtrengthen and increaſe,
As growth and verdure nere ſhould ceaſe.
Come you induſtrious ſlaves of plenty, bring
All that is hop'd for in an Eaſtern Spring:
Or all that Autumne yields, when ſhe doth pay
Thoſe promis'd hopes where 'tis perpetuall day.
Come ſtrew this ground (delay us not with ſlowth)
Strew till we walke on ſweet Cecillian Flowres,
To prove how Seeds have haſtned in their growth,
Drop Indian fruits, as thick as Aprill ſhowres.
The furious Steed, the Phyph and Drum
Invite you ſtill to Triumphs of the War,
Till you as glorious ſhall become
On Earth as Mars, in Heaven as bright a Star.
The Balmes rich ſwet, the Myrrhs ſweet teares
Perfume your breath when you would Paſsion move:
And may her heart, that you indeeres,
the center be, her Eye the ſphaere of Love!
And may your Language be of force
To body winds, and animate the Trees,
So full of wonder your diſcourſe,
Till all your gueſſes ſhall be Prophecies.
May our three Gods ſo long conjoyne,
To raiſe your ſoule, and rarefie your ſenſe,
Till you are render'd ſo Divine,
'Twill be no Sin t' implore your Influence.