I Suppose you are assembled here, supposing to reape the fruite of my trauayles: and to be playne, I meane presently to presente you vvith a Comedie called Supposes, the verye name vvherof may peraduenture driue into euery of your heades a sundry Suppose, to suppose the meaning of our supposes. Some percase vvill suppose we meane to occupie your eares vvith sophisticall handling of subtill Suppositions. Some other vvill suppose vve go about to discipher vnto you some queint conceiptes, vvhich hitherto haue bene onely supposed as it vvere in shadovves: and some I see smyling as though they supposed vve vvould trouble you vvith the vaine suppose of some vvanton Suppose. But vnderstand, this our Suppose is nothing else but a mystaking or imagination of one thing for an other: for you shall see the master supposed for the seruant, the seruant for the master: the freeman for a slaue, and the bondslaue for a freeman: the stranger for a vvell knovven friend, and the familiar for a stranger. But vvhat? I suppose that euen already you suppose me very fonde, that haue so simply disclosed vnto you the subtilties of these our Supposes: vvhere othervvise in deede I suppose you shoulde haue hearde almoste the laste of our Supposes, before you coulde haue supposed anye of them arighte. Let this then suffise.
HEre is no body, come foorth Polynesta, let vs looke about, to be sure least any man heare our talke: for I thinke within the house the tables, the plankes, the beds, the portals, yea and the cupbords them selues haue eares.
You might as well haue sayde, the windowes and the doores: do you not sée howe they harken?
Well you iest faire, but I would aduise you take héede, I haue bidden you a thousande times beware, you will be spied one day talking with Dulippo.
And why should I not talke with Dulippo as well as with any other, I pray you?
I haue giuen you a wherfore for this why many times, but go too, followe your owne aduise till you ouerwhelme vs all with soden mishappe.
A great mishappe I promise you: marie Gods blessing on their heart that sette suche a brouche on my cappe.
Well, looke well about you: a man would thinke it were inough for you secretly to reioyce, that by my helpe you haue passed so many pleasant nightes togither, and yet by my trouth I do it more than halfe agaynst my will, for I would rather you had setled your fansie in some noble familie, yea and it is no small griefe vnto me, that reiecting the suites of so many nobles and gentlemen, you haue chosen for your darling a poore seruaunt of your fathers, by whome shame and infamie is the best dower you can looke for to attayne.
And I pray you whome may I thanke but gentle nourse, that continually praysing him, what for his personage, his curtesie, and aboue all, the extreme passions of his minde, in fine you would neuer cease till I accepted him, delighted in him, and at length desired him with no lesse affection, than he earst desired me.
I can not denie, but at the beginning I did recommende him vnto you (as in déede I may say that for my selfe I haue a pitiful heart) séeing the depth of his vnbridled affection, and that continually he neuer ceassed to fill mine eares with lamentable complaynts.
Nay rather that he filled your pursse with bribes and rewards.
Well you may iudge of Nourse as you liste: In déede I haue thought it alwayes a déede of charitie to helpe the miserable yong men, whose tender youth consumeth with the furious flames of loue: but be you sure if I had thought you would haue passed to the termes you nowe stande in, pitie nor pencion, peny nor pater noster shoulde euer haue made Nurse once to opē hir mouth in the cause.
No of honestie, I pray you, who first brought him into my chamber? who first taught him the way to my bed but you? fie Nourse fie, neuer speake of it for shame, you will make me tell a wise tale anone.
And haue I these thanks for my good wil? why then I sée wel I shall be counted the cause of all mishappe.
Nay rather the author of my good happe gentle Nourse, for I would thou knewest I loue not Dulipo, nor any of so meane estate, but haue bestowed my loue more worthily than thou déemest, but I will say no more at this time.
Then I am glad you haue changed your minde yet.
Nay I neither haue changed, nor will change it.
Then I vnderstande you not, how sayde you?
Mary I say that I loue not Dulipo, nor any suche as he, and yet I neither haue changed nor wil change my minde.
I can not tell, you loue to lye with Dulipo very well: this geare is Gréeke to me, either it hangs not well togither, or I am very dull of vnder standing, speake plaine I pray you.
I can speake no plainer, I haue sworne to y• cōtrary.
Howe? make you so deintie to tell it Nourse, least she shoulde reueale it? you haue trusted me as farre as may be, I may shewe to you, in things that touche your honor if they were knowne: and make you strange to tell me this? I am sure it is but a trifle in comparison of those things wherof heretofore you haue made me priuie.
Well, it is of greater importance than you thinke Nourse, yet would I tell it you vnder condition and promise that you shall not tell it agayne, nor giue any signe or token to be suspected that you know it.
I promise you of my honestie, say on.
Well heare you me then: this yong man whome you haue alwayes taken for Dulipo, is a noble borne Sicilian, his right name Erostrato, sonne to Philogono, one of the worthiest men in that countrey.
How Erostrato? is it not our neighbour, whiche?
Holde thy talking nourse, and harken to me, that I may explane the whole case vnto thée: the man whome to this day you haue supposed to be Dulipo, is (as I say) Erostrato, a gentleman that came from Sicilia to studie in this Citie, & euen at his first arriuall met me in the stréet, fel enamored of me, & of suche vehement force were the passions he suffred, that immediatly he cast aside both long gowne and bookes, & determined on me only to apply his study: and to the end he might the more cōmodiously bothe sée me and talke with me, he exchanged both name, habite, clothes and credite with his seruāt Dulipo, whō only he brought with him out of Sicilia, and so with the turning of a hand, of Erostrato a gentleman, he became Dulipo a seruing man, and soone after sought seruice of my father, and obteyned it.
Are you sure of this?
Yea out of doubt, on the other side Dulippo took vppon him the name of Erostrato his maister, the habite, the credite, bookes, and all things néedefull to a studente, and in shorte space profited very muche, and is nowe estéemed as you sée.
Are there no other Sicylians héere: nor none that passe this way, which may discouer them?
Uery fewe that passe this way, and fewe or none that tarrie héere any time.
This hath béen a straunge aduenture, but I pray you howe hang these thinges togither? that the studente whome you say to be the seruant, and not the maister, is become an earnest suter to you, and requireth you of your father in mariage?
That is a pollicie deuised betwéene them, to put Doctor Dotipole out of conceite, the olde dotarde, he that so instantly dothe lye vpon my father for me: but looke where he comes, as God helpe me it is he, out vpon him, what a luskie yonker is this? yet I had rather be a Noonne a thousande times, than be combred with suche a Coystrell.
Daughter you haue reason, but let vs go in before he come any néerer.
WEre there dames héere, or did mine eyes dazil?
Nay syr héere were Polynesta and hir nourse.
Was my Polynesta héere? alas I knewe hir not.
He muste haue better eyesight that shoulde marry your Polynesta, or else he may chaunce to ouersée the best poynt in his tables sometimes.
Syr it is no maruell, the ayre is very mistie to day: I my selfe knew hir better by hir apparell than by hir face.
In good sayth and I thanke God I haue mine eye sighte good and perfit, little worsse than when I was but twentie yeres olde.
How can it be otherwise? you are but yong.
I am fiftie yeres olde.
He telles ten lesse than he is.
What sayst thou of ten lesse?
I say I woulde haue thoughte you ten lesse, you looke like one of sixe and thirtie, or seuen and thirtie at the moste.
I am no lesse than I tell.
You are like inough to liue fiftie more, shewe m your hande.
Why is Pasiphilo a Chiromancer?
What is not Pasiphilo? I pray you shewe me it a little.
Here it is.
O how straight and infracte is this line of life, you will liue to the yeres of Melchisedech.
Thou wouldest say, Methusalem.
Why is it not all one?
I perceiue you are no very good Bibler Pasiphilo.
Yes sir an excellent good Bibler, specially in a bottle: Oh what a mounte of Uenus here is, but this lighte serueth not very well, I will beholde it an other day, whē the ayre is clearer, and tell you somewhat, peraduenture to your contentation.
You shal do me great pleasure: but tell me, I pray thé Pasiphilo, whome doste thou thinke Polynesta liketh better, Erostrato or me?
Why you out of doubt: She is a gentlewoman of a noble minde, and maketh greater accompte of the reputation she shall haue in marrying your worship, than that poore scholer, whose birthe and parentage God knoweth, and very fewe else.
Yet he taketh it vpon him brauely in the countrey.
Yea, where no man knoweth the cōtrarie: but let him braue it, bost his birth, and do what he can, the vertue and knowledge that is within this body of yours, is worth more than all the countrey he came from.
It becommeth not a man to prayse himselfe: but in déede I may say, and say truely, that my knowledge hath stoode me in better stéede at a pinche, than coulde all the goodes in the worlde. I came out of Otranto when the Turkes wonne it, and first I came to Padua, after hither; where by reading, counsailing, and pleading, within twentie yeres I haue gathered and gayned as good as ten thousande Ducats.
Yea mary, this is the righte knowledge, Philosophie, Poetrie, Logike, and all the rest, are but pickling sciences in comparison to this.
But pyckling in déede, whereof we haue a verse:
The trade of Lavve doth fill the boystrous bagges,
They svvimme in silke, vvhen others royst in ragges.
O excellent verse, who made it? Virgil?
Virgil? tushe it is written in one of our gloses.
Sure who so euer wrote it, the moral is excellent, and worthy to be written in letters of golde: but to the purpose: I thinke you shall neuer recouer the wealth that you loste at Otranto.
I thinke I haue doubled it, or rather made it foure times as muche: but in déed, I lost mine only sonne there, a childe of fiue yeres olde.
O great pitie.
Yea, I had rather lost all the goods in the worlde.
Alas, alas, by God and grafts of such a stocke are very gayson in these dayes.
I know not whether he were slayue, or the Turks toke him and kept him as a bond slaue.
Alas, I could wéepe for compassion, but there is no remedy but patience, you shall get many by this yong damsell with the grace of God.
Yea, if I get hir.
Get hir? why doubt you of that?
Why, hir father holds me off with delayes, so that I must néedes doubte.
Content your selfe sir, he is a wise man, and desirous to place his Daughter well, he will not be too rashe in hys determination, he will thinke well of the matter, and lette him thinke, for the longer he thinketh, the more good of you shall he thinke: whose welth, whose vertue, whose skill, or whose estimation can he compare to yours in this Citie?
And hast thou not tolde him that I would make his Daughter a dower of two thousand Ducates?
Why, euen now, I came but from thence since.
What saide he?
Nothing, but that Erostrato had profered the like.
Erostrato? how can he make any dower, and his father yet aliue?
Thinke you I did not tell him so? yes I warrāt you, I forgot nothing that may furder your cause, and doubt you not, Erostrato shal neuer haue hir vnlesse it be in a dreame.
Well gentle Pasiphilo; go thy waies and tell Damon I require nothing but his daughter, I will none of his goods: I shal enrich hir of mine owne: & if this dower of two thousand Ducats séem not sufficiēt, I wil make it fiue hundreth more, yea a thousand, or what so euer he will demānd rather thē faile: go to Pasiphilo, shew thy selfe frēdly in working this feate for me, spare for no cost, since I haue gone thus farre, I wil be loth to be out idden. Go
Where shall I come to you agayne?
At my house.
When?
When thou wilte.
Shall I come at dinner time?
I would byd thée to dinner, but it is a Saincts euen which I haue euer fasted.
Faste till thou famishe.
Harke.
He speaketh of a dead mans faste.
Thou hearest me not.
Nor thou vnderstandest me not.
I dare say thou art angrie I byd thée not to dinner, but come if thou wilte, thou shalt take such as thou findest.
What? thinke you I know not where to dine?
Yes Pasiphilo thou art not to séeke.
No be you sure, there are enowe will pray me.
That I knowe well enough Pasiphilo, but thou canst not be better welcome in any place than to me, I wil tarrie for thée.
Well, since you will nédes, I will come.
Dispatche then, and bring no newes but good.
Better than my rewarde by the rood.
O Miserable couetous wretche, he findeth an excuse by S Nicholas fast, because I should not dine with him, as though I should dine at his owne dishe: he maketh goodly feasts I promise you, it is no wonder though he thinke me bounde vnto him for my fare: for ouer and besides that his prouision is as skant as may be, yet there is great difference betwéene his diet and mine. I neuer so much as sppe of the wyne that he tasteth, I feede at the bords ende with broune bread: Marie I reach always to his owne dishe, for there are no more but that only on the table: Yet he thinks that for one such diner I am bound to do him al the seruice that I can, and thinks me sufficiently rewarded for all my trauell, with one suche festiuall promotion: and yet peraduenture some men thinke I haue great gaynes vnder him: but I may say and sweare, that this dosen yere I haue not gayned so muche in value as the poynts at my hose (which are but thrée with codpéece poynt and al): he thinks that I may féede vpon his fauour and fayre words: but if I could not otherwise prouide for one, Pasiphilo were in a wyse case. Pasiphilo hath mo pastures to passe in than one, I warrant you: I am of housholde with this scholer Erostrato, his riuale, as wel as with Domine Cleander, now with the one, and then with the other, according as I sée their Caters prouide good chéere at the market: and I finde the meanes so to handle the matter, that I am welcome to bothe. If the one sée me talke with the other, I make him beléeue it is to harken newes in the furtherance of his cause, and thus I become a broker on both sides. Well, let them bothe apply the matter as well as they can, for in déede I will trauell for none of them bothe: yet wyll I séeme to worke wonders on eche hande. But is not this one of Damons seruants that commeth foorth? it is, of him I shall vnderstande where his master is. Whither goeth this ioyly gallante?
I come to séeke some body that may accompany my master at dinner, he is alone, and would fayne haue good company.
Séeke no further, you could neuer haue found one better than me.
I haue no commission to bring so many.
How many? I will come alone.
How canst thou come alone that hast continually a legion of rauening wolues within thée?
Thou doest as seruants commonly doe, hate all that loue to visite their maisters.
And why?
Bicause they haue too many téeth as you thinke.
Nay bicause they haue to many tongues.
Tongues? I pray you what did my tongue euer hurt you.
I speake but merily with you Pasiphilo, goe in, my maister is ready to dine.
What? dyneth he so earely?
He that riseth early, dyneth early.
I woulde I were his man, maister doctor neuer dyneth till noone, and how dilicately then god knoweth, I will be bould to goe in, for I count my selfe bidden.
You were best so.
Hard hap had I when I first begon this vnfortunate enterprise, for I supposed the readiest medicine to my miserable effects had bene to change name, clothes, & credite with my seruant, & to place my selfe in Damons seruice, thinking that as sheuering colde by glowing fire, thurst by drinke, hunger by pleasant repasts, and a thousande suche like passions finde remedie by their contraries, so my restles desire might haue founde quiet by continuall contemplation. But alas, I finde that only loue is vnsaciable, for as the flie playeth with the flame till at last she is cause of hir owne decay, so the louer that thinketh with kissing and colling to content his vnbrideled apetite, is cōmonly sene the onely cause of his owne consumption: Two yéeres are now paste since vnder the colour of Damons seruice I haue bene a sworne seruant to Cupid, of whō I haue receiued as muche fauour & grace as euer man founde in his seruice, I haue frée libertie at al times to behold my desired, to talke with hir, to embrace hir, yea (be it spoken in secrete) to lye with hir, I reape the fruites of my desire, yet as my ioyes abounde, euen so my paines encrease, I fare like the couetous man, that hauing all the worlde at will, is neuer yet content, the more I haue, the more I desire. Alas, what wretched estate haue I brought my selfe vnto, if in the ende of all my farre fetches, she be giuē by hir father to this olde doting doctor, this buzard, this bribing villaine, that by so many meanes seketh to obtaine hir at hir fathers hands? I know she loueth me best of all others, but what may that preuaile when perforce she shalbe constrained to marie another? Alas, y• pleasant taste of my sugred ioyes doth yet remaine so perfect in my remē brance, that the least soppe of sorow séemeth more soure th ̄ gall in my mouth: if I had neuer knowen delight, with better contentatiō might I haue passed these dreadful dolours. And if this olde .M. impsimus (whom the pockes consume) should wyn hir, then may I saye, farewell the pleasant talk, the kind embracings, yea farewel the sight of my Polynesta, for he like a ielouse wretch will pen ir vp, that I thinke the birdes of the aire shall not wynne the sighte of hir. I hoped to haue caste a blocke in his waye, by the meanes that my seruaunt, who is supposed to be Erostrato, and with my habite and credite is well estemed, should proffer himselfe a suter, at the least to counteruaile the doctors profers: but my maister knowing the wealth of the one, and doubting the state of the other, is determined to be fed no longer with faire wordes, but to accept the doctor, (whom he right well knoweth) for his sonne in law: well, my seruaunt promised me yesterday to deuise yet againe some newe conspiracie to driue maister doctor out of conceite, and to laye a snare that the foxe himselfe might be caughte in, what it is, I knowe not, nor I saw him not since he went about it: I will goe sée if he be within, that at least if he helpe me not, he maye yet prolong my life for this once. But here commeth his lackie, ho Iack heark, where is Erostrato?
ERostrato? mary he is in his skinne.
Ah hooresone boy, I saye, howe shall I fynde Erostrato?
Finde him? howe meane you, by the wéeke or by the yere.
You cracke halter, if I catche you by the eares, I shall make you answere me directly.
In déede?
Tarry me a little.
In fayth sir I haue no leisure.
Shall we trie who can runne fastest?
Your legges be longer than mine, you should haue giuen me the aduauntage.
Go to, tell me where is Erostrato?
I left him in the stréete, where he gaue me this Casket, this basket I would haue sayde, and bad me beare it to Dalio, and returne to him at the Dukes Palace.
If thou sée him, tell him I must néedes speake with him immediatly: or abide awhyle, I will go séeke him my selfe, rather than be suspected by going to his house.
I Thinke if I had as many eyes as Argus, I coulde not haue sought a man more narrowly in euery stréete and euery by lane, there are not many gentlemen, scholers, nor Marchantes in the Citie of Ferrara, but I haue mette with them, excepte him, peraduenture he is come home an other way: but looke where he commeth at the last.
In good time haue I spied my good maister.
For the loue of God call me Dulipo, not master, maintayne the credite that thou haste hitherto kepte, and let me alone.
Yet sir let me sometimes do my duetie vnto you, especially where no body heareth.
Yea, but so long the Parat vseth to crie knappe in sporte, that at the last she calleth hir maister knaue in earnest: so long you will vse to call me master, that at the last we shall be heard. What newes?
Good.
In déede?
Yea excellent, we haue as good as won the wager.
Oh, how happie were I if this were true.
Heare you me, yesternight in the euening I walked out, and founde Pasiphilo, and with small entreating I had him home to supper, where by suche meanes as I vsed, he became my great friend, and tolde me the whole order of our aduersaries determination: yea and what Damon doth intende to do also, and hath promised me that frō time to time, what he can espie he will bring me word of it.
I can not tel whether you know him or no, he is not to trust vnto, a very flattering and a lying knaue.
I know him very well, he can not deceiue me, and this that he hath tolde me I know must néedes be true.
And what was it in effect?
That Damon had purposed to giue his daughter in mariage to this doctor, vpon ye dower that he hath profered.
Are these your good newes? your excellent newes?
Stay awhile, you will vnderstande me before you heare me.
Well, say on.
I answered to that, I was ready to make hir the lyke dower.
Well sayde.
Abide, you heare not the worst yet.
O God, is there any worsse behinde?
Worsse? why what assurance coulde you suppose that I might make without some speciall consent from Philogono my father?
Nay you can tell, you are better scholer than I.
In déede you haue lost your time: for the books that you tosse now a dayes, treate of smal science.
Leaue thy iesting, and procéede.
I sayde further, that I receyued letters lately from my father, whereby I vnderstoode that he woulde be héere very shortly to performe all that I had profered: therfore I required him to request Damō on my behalf, that he would stay his promise to the doctor for a fourthnight or more.
This is somewhat yet, for by this meanes I shal be sure to linger and liue in hope one fourthnight longer, but at the fourthnights ende when Philogono commeth not, how shall I then do? yea and though he came, howe may I any way hope of his consent, when he shall sée, that to follow this amorous enterprise, I haue set aside all studie, all remembraunce of my duetie, and all dread of shame. Alas, alas, I may go hang my selfe.
Comforte your selfe man, and trust in me: there is a salue for euery sore, and doubt you not, to this mischéefe we shall finde a remedie.
O friend reuiue me, that hitherto since I first attempted this matter haue bene continually dying.
Well, harken a while then: this morning I tooke my horse and rode into the fieldes to solace my selfe, and as I passed the foorde beyonds S. Anthonies gate, I met at the foote of the hill a gentleman riding with two or thrée men, and as me thought by his habite and his lookes, he should be none of the wise. He saluted me, and I him: I asked him from whence he came, and whither he would? he answered that he had come from Venice, then from Padua, nowe was going to Ferrara, and so to his countrey, whiche is Scienna: As soone as I knowe him to be a Scenese, sodenly lifting vp mine eyes, as it were with an admiration I sayd vnto him, are you a Scenese, and come to Ferrara? why not, sayde he: quoth I, halfe and more with a trembling voyce, know you the daunger that should ensue if you be knowne in Ferrara to be a Scenese? he more than halfe amased, desired me earnestly to tell him what I ment.
I vnderstande not wherto this tendeth.
I beléeue you, but hearken to me.
Go too then.
I answered him in this sorte: Gentleman, bicause I haue heretofore founde very curteous entertaynement in your countrey, béeing a student there, I accompt my selfe as it were bounde to a Scenese, and therefore if I knewe of any mishappe towards any of that countrey, God forbid but I should disclose it: and I maruell that you knowe not of the iniurie that your countreymen offered this other day to the Embassadours of Countie Hercule.
What tales he telleth me: what appertayne these to me?
If you will harken a whyle, you shall finde them no tales, but that they appertayne to you more than you thinke for.
Foorth.
I tolde him further, these Ambassadoures of Countie Hercule had dyuers Mules, Waggons, and Charettes, laden with diuers costly iewels, gorgious furniture, & other things which they caried as presents, passing that way to the king of Naples▪ the which were not only stayd in Sciene by the officers whō you cal Customers, but serched, ransacked, tossed & turned, & in the end exacted for tribute, as if they had bene the goods of a meane marchaunt.
Whither the diuell will he? is it possible that this geare appertaineth any thing to my cause? I finde neither head nor foote in it.
O how impaciēt you are: I pray you stay a while.
Go to yet a while then.
I procéeded, that vpon these causes the Duke sent his Chauncelor to declare the case vnto the Senate there, of whom he had the moste vncurteous answere that euer was heard, whervpon he was so enraged with all of that countrey, that for reuēge he had sworne to spoyle as many of them as euer should come to Ferrara, and to sende them home in their dublet and their hose.
And I pray thée how couldest thou vpon the sudden deuise or imagine suche a lye? and to what purpose?
You shall heare by and by a thing as fitte for our purpose, as any could haue happened.
I would fayne heare you conclude.
You would fayne leape ouer the stile, before you come at the hedge: I woulde you had heard me, and séene the gestures that I enforced to make him beléeue this.
I beléeue you, for I know you can counterfet well.
Further I sayde, the duke had charged vpon great penalties, that the Inholders and vitlers shoulde bring worde dayly of as many Sceneses as came to their houses: the gentlemā béeing (as I gessed at the first) a man of smal sapientia, when he heard these newes, would haue turned his horse an other way.
By likelyhoode he was not very wise when he would beléeue that of his cūntrey, which if it had bene true, euery man must néedes haue knowen it.
Why not? when he had not béene in his countrey for a moneth paste, and I tolde him this had hapned within these seuen dayes.
Belike he was of small experience.
I thinke, of as litle as maye be: but beste of all for our purpose, and good aduenture it was, that I mette with suche an one. Now harken I pray thée.
Make an ende I pray thée.
He, as I say, when he hard these words, would haue turned the bridle, & I saying a countenance as thoughe I were somewhat pensiue & carefull for him, passed a while, and after with a great sighe saide to him: gentleman, for the curtesie that (as I said) I haue founde in your countrey, and because youre affaires shall be the better dispatched, I will finde the meanes to lodge you in my house, and you shall saye to euerye man, that you are a Sicilan of Cathanea, your name Philogono, father to me that am in dede of that countrey and citie, called here Erostrato: and I (to pleasure you) will (during youre abode here) doe you reuerence as you were my father.
Out vpon me, what a grosse hedded foole am I? now I perceiue whereto this tale tendeth.
Well, and how like you of it?
Indifferently, but one thing I doubt.
What is that?
Marie, that when he hathe bene here two or thrée dayes, he shal heare of euery man that there is no such thing betwene the Duke and the Towne of Sciene.
As for that let me alone, I doe entertaine and will entertaine him so wel, that within these two or thrée dayes I will disclose vnto him all the whole matter, and doubte not but to bring him in for performance of as muche as I haue promised to Damon: for what hurte can it be to him, when he shall binde a strange name and not his owne?
What, thinke you he will be entreated to stande hounde for a dower of two thousand Ducates by the yeare?
Yea why not, if it were ten thousande, as long as he is not in déede the man that is bounde?
Well, if it be so, what shall we be the nerer to oure purpose.
Why, when we haue done as muche as we can, how can we doe any more?
And where haue you left him?
At the Inne, bicause of his horses, he and his men shall lye in my house.
Why brought you him not with you?
I thought better to vse your aduise first.
Well, goe take him home, make him all the chéere you can, spare for no cost, I will alowe it.
Content, loke where he commeth.
Is this he? goe méete him, by my trouthe he lokes euen lyke a god soule, he that fisheth for hym, myghte be sure to catche a cods heade: I will rest here a while to discipher him.
HE that trauaileth in this worlde passeth by manye perilles.
You saye true sir, if the boate had bene a litle more laden this morning at the ferrie, wée had bene all drowned, for I thinke, there are none of vs that could haue swomme.
I speake not of that.
O you meane the foule waye that we had since wée▪ came from this Pada, I promise you, I was afraide twice or thrice, that your mule woulde haue lien faste in the mire.
Iesu, what a blockehead thou arte, I speake of the perill we are in presently since we came into this citie.
A great perill I promise you, that we were no soer ariued, than you founde a frende that brought you from the Inne, and lodged you in his owne house.
Yea marie, God reward the gentle young man that we mette, for else we had bene in a wise case by this tyme. But haue done with these tales, and take you héede, and you also sirra, take héede y• none of you saie we be Sceneses, and remember that you call me Philogano of Cathanea.
Sure I shal neuer remember these outlandish words I coulde well remember Haccanea.
I say, Cathaenea, and not Haccanea, with a vengeance.
Let another name it then when néede is, for I shall neuer remember it.
Then holde thy peace, and take héede thou name not Scene.
Howe say you, if I faine my selfe dum as I did once in the house of Crisobolus?
Doe as thou thinkest best: but looke where commeth the gentleman whom we are so muche bounde vnto.
Welcome, my deare father Philogano.
Gramercie my good sonne Erostrato.
That is well said, be mindfull of your tong, for these Ferareses be as craftie as the deuill of hell.
No, no, be you sure we will doe as you haue bidden vs.
For if you should name Scene they would spoile you immediatlye, and turne you oute of the towne, with more shame, than I woulde shoulde befall you for a thousande Crowns.
I warant you, I was giuing thē warning as I came to you, and I doubt not but they will take good héede.
Yea and trust not the seruauntes of my householde to far, for they are Frareses all, and neuer knew my father, nor came neuer in Sicilia: this is my house, will it please you to goe in? I will follow.
THis geare hath had no euill beginning, if it continue so and fall to happie ende. But is not this the silly doctor with the side bonet, the doting foole, that dare presume to become a suter to such a péerlesse Paragons? O howe couetousnesse doth blind the common sort of men: Damon more desirous of the dower, than mindfull of his gentle & gallant daughter, hathe determined to make him his sonne in lawe who for his age maye he his father in law, and hath greater respect to the abundance of goods, than to his owne naturall childe. He beareth well in minde to fill his owne purse, but he litle remembreth that his daughters purse shalbe continually emptie, vnlesse Maister Doctour fill it with double ducke egges. Alas, I iest and haue no ioye, I will stand here aside and laughe a litle at this lobcocke.
MAister, what the diuell meane you to goe séeke guestes at this time of the day? the Maiors officers haue dyed ere this time, which are alway the last in the market.
I come to séeke Pasiphilo, to the ende he maye dyne with me.
As though sixe mouthes and the cat for the seuenth, be not sufficiente to eate an harlotrie shotterell, a pennieworthe of chese, and halfe a score spurlinges, this is all the dainties you haue dressed for you and your familie.
Ah gréedie gut, arte thou afearde thou shalt want?
I am afearde in déede, it is not the first time I haue founde it so.
Shall I make some sporte with this gallant? what shall I say to him?
Thou arte afearde belike that he will eate thée and the rest.
Nay, rather that he will eate your mule, both heare and hyde.
Heare and hyde? and why not fleshe and all?
Bicause she hath none, if she had any fleshe, I thinke you had eaten hir your selfe by this time.
She may thanke you then, for your good attendance.
Nay she may thanke you for your small allowance.
In faith now let me alone.
Holde thy peace drunken knaue, and espye me Pasiphilo.
Since I can doe no better, I will set such a staunce betwéene him and Pasiphilo, that all this towne shall not make them frendes.
Coulde you not haue sent to séeke him, but you must come your selfe? surely you come for some other purpose, for if you would haue had Pasiphilo to dinner, I warant you he would haue taried here an houre since.
Holde thy peace, here is one of Damons seruaunts, of him I shall vnderstande where he is: good fellow arte not thou one of Damons seruauntes?
Yes sir, at your knamandement.
Gramercie, tell me then, hath Pasiphilo bene there this day or no?
Yes sir, and I thinke he be there still, ah, ah, ah.
What laughest thou?
At a thing, that euery man may not laugh at.
What?
Talke, that Pasiphilo had with my maister this day.
What talke I pray thée?
I may not tell it.
Doth it concerne me?
Nay I will say nothing.
Tell me.
I can say no more.
I would but know if it concerne me, I praye thée tel me.
I would tell you, if I were sure you would not tell it againe.
Beleue me I will kepe it close: Carion giue vs leaue a litle, goe aside.
If my maister shoulde knowe that it came by me, I were better die a thousande deathes.
He shall neuer know it, say on.
Yea, but what assurance shall I haue?
I lay thée my faith and honestie in paune.
A prettie paune, the fulkers will not lend you a farthing on it.
Yea, but amongst honest men it is more worth than golde.
Yea marie sir, but where be they? but will you nedes haue me to tell it vnto you?
Yea I pray thée if it any thing appertaine to me.
Yes it is of you, and I woulde gladly tell it you, bycause I would not haue suche a man of worship so scorned by a villaine ribaulde.
I pray thée tell me then.
I will tell you so that you will sweare neuer to tell it to Pasiphilo, to my maister, nor to any other bodye.
Surely it is some toye deuised to get some money of him.
I thinke I haue a booke here.
If he knewe him as well as I, he woulde neuer goe aboute it, for he maye as sone get one of his téeth from his iawes with a paire of pinchers, as a pennie out of his purs with suche a conceite.
Here is a letter wil serue the turne: I swere to thée by the contents hereof neuer to disclose it to any man.
I will tell you, I am sorie to sée how Pasiphilo dothe abuse you, perswading you that alwayes he laboureth for you, where in déde, he lyeth on my maister continually, as it were with tooth and naile for a straunger, a scholer, borne in Sicilia they call him Roscus or arskisse, he hathe a madde name I can neuer hit vpon it.
And thou recknest it as madly: is it not Erostrato?
That same, I should neuer haue remembred it: & the villaine speaketh all the euil of you that can e deuised.
To whom?
To my maister, yea and to Polinesta herselfe sometimes.
Is it possible, Ah slaue, and what saith he?
More euill than I can imagine: that you are the miserablest and most nigardly man that euer was.
Sayeth Pasiphilo so by me?
And that as often as he commeth to your house, he is like to die for hunger, you fare so well.
That the deuill take him else.
And that you are the testiest man, and most diuers to please in the whole worlde, so that he cannot please you vnlesse he shoulde euen kyll himselfe with continuall paine.
O deuilishe tong.
Furthermore, that you cough continually and spitte, so that a dogge cannot abide it.
I neuer spitte nor coughe more than thus, vho, vho, and that but since I caughte this murre, but who is frée from it?
You saye true sir, yet further he sayth, your arme holes stincke, your féete worse than they, and your breathe worst of all.
If I quite him not for this geare.
And that you are bursen in the cods.
O villaine, he lieth, and if I were not in the stréete thou shouldest sée them.
And he saith, that you desire this yong gentlewoman, as much for other mens pleasure as for your owne.
What meaneth he by that?
Peraduenture that by hir beautie, you would entice many yong men to your house.
Yong men? to what purpose?
Nay, gesse you that.
Is it possible that Pasiphilo speaketh thus of me?
Yea, and much more.
And doth Damon beleue him?
Yea, more than you woulde thinke, in suche sort, that long ere this, he would haue giuē you a flat repulse, but Pasiphilo intreated him to continue you a suter for hys aduantage.
How for his aduantage?
Marie, that during your sute he mighte still haue some rewarde for his great paines.
He shall haue a rope, and yet that is more than he deserueth: I had thought to haue giuen him these hose when I had worne them a litle nearer, but he shall haue a. &c.
In good faith sir, they were but loste on him. Will you any thing else with me sir?
Nay, I haue heard to much of thée already.
Then I will take my leaue of you.
Farewell, but tell me, may I not know thy name?
Sir, they call me Foule fall you.
An ill fauored name by my trouthe, arte thou thys countrey man?
No sir, I was borne by a castle mē cal Scabbe catch you, fare you well sir.
Farewell, oh God how haue I bene abused? what a spokesman? what a messanger had I prouided?
Why sir, will you tarie for Pasiphilo till we die for hunger?
Trouble me not, that the deuill take you both.
These newes what so euer they be, like him not.
Art thou so hungrie yet? I pray to God thou he neuer satisfied.
By the masse no more I shall as long as I am your seruaunt.
Goe with mischaunce.
Yea, and a mischiefe to you, and to all such couetous wretches.
BY that time we come to the house, I truste that of these xx. egges in the basket we shal find but very few whole, but it is a folly to talke to him: what the deuill, wilte thou neuer lay that sticke out of thy hande? he fighteth with the dogges, beateth the beares, at euery thing in the streate he findeth occasion to tarie, if he spie a slipstring by the waye such another as himself, a Page, a Lackie or a dwarfe, the deuill of hell cannot holde him in chaynes, but he wil be doing with him: I cannot goe two steppes, but I muste loke backe for my yonker: goe to halter sacke, if you breake one egge I may chance breake.
What will you breake? your nose in mine ars
Ah beast.
If I be a beast, yet I am no horned beast.
Is it euen so? is the winde in that doore? If I wer vnlodē I would tel you whether I be a horned beast or no.
You are alway laden either with wine or with ale.
Ah spitefll boy, shall I suffer him?
Ah cowardelie beast, darest thou strike and say neuer a worde?
Well, my maister shall knowe of this géere, either he shall redresse it, or he shall lose one of vs.
Tel him the worst thou canst by me.
What noise, what a rule is this?
Marye sir, he striketh me bicause I tell him of his swearing.
The villaine lieth deadlie, he reuiles me bicause I bid him make hast.
Holla: no more of this. Dalio, doe you make in a readinesse those Pigeons, stock Doues, and also the breast of Ueale: and let your vessell be as cleare as glasse against I returne, that I may tell you which I will haue roasted, & which boyled. Crapine, lay downe that basket and followe me. Oh that I could tell where to finde Pasiphilo, but looke where he commeth that can tell me of him.
What haue you done with Philogano your father?
I haue left him within, I woulde faine speake wyth Pasiphilo, can you tell me where he is?
He dined this day with my maister, but whether he went from thence I know not, what would you with him?
I would haue him goe tell Damon that Philogano my father is come and ready to make assurance of as much as he wil require. Now shall I feach maister docor a schole point, he trauaileth to none other end but to catche Cornua, and he shall haue them, for as old as he is, and as many subtilties as he hath learned in the law, he can not goe beyond me one ace.
O déere friend, goe thy wayes seke Pasiphilo, finde him out, and conclude somwhat to our contentation.
But where shall I finde him?
At the feastes if there be anye, or else in the market with the poulters or the fishemongers.
What should he doe with them?
Mary he watcheth whose Caters bie the beste meat, if any bie a fat Capon, a good breast of Ueale, freshe Samon or any suche good dishe, he followeth to the house, and eyther with some newes, or some stale iest he will be sure to make himselfe a geast.
In faith, and I will seke there for him.
Then muste you néedes finde him, and when you haue done I will make you laughe.
Whereat?
At certaine sport I made to day with maister doctor.
And why not now?
No it asketh further leysure, I praye thée dispatche, and finde out Pasiphilo that honest man.
THis amorous cause that hangeth in cōtrouersie betwen Domine doctor & me, may be compared to thē that play at primero, of whō some one peraduenture shal léese a great sum of money before he win one stake, & at last halfe in anger shal set vp his rest, win it, & after that another, another, & another, till at last he draw ye most parte of the money to his heape, ye other by litle & litle still deminishig his rest, till at last he be come as néere the brinke, as earst ye other was, yet againe peraduenture fortune smiling on him, he shal as it were by péece meale, pull out ye guts of his fellows bags, & bring him barer than he himself was tofore, & so in playe continue still, (fortune fauoring now this way now y• way) till at last ye one of thē is left with as many crosses as God hath brethren: O howe often haue I thoughte my selfe sure of the vpper hande herein? but I triumphed before the victorye: and then how ofte againe haue I thoughte the field loste? Thus haue I béene tossed now ouer, nowe vnder, euen as fortune list to wherle the whéele, neither sure to winne nor certayne to loose the wager: and this practise that nowe my seruaunte hath deuised, although hitherto it hath not succeded amisse, yet can I not count my selfe assured of it, for I feare still that one mischance or other wyll come and turne it topsie turie. But looke where my mayster commeth.
DVlipo.
Here sir.
Go in and bid Neuola and his fellowes come hither that I may tell them what they shall go about, and go you into my studie, there vppon the shelfe you shall find a roule of writings which Iohn of the Deane made to my father, when he solde him the Grange ferme, endorced with both their names: bring it hither to me.
It shall be done sir.
Go, I will prepare other maner of writings for you thā you are aware of. O fooles that trust any mā but themselues now adayes, oh spiteful fortune, thou doest me wrōg I thinke, that from the depth of Hell pitte thou hast sente me this seruant to be the subuersion of me and all mine, come hither sirs and heare what I shall say vnto you: go in to my studie, where you shall find Dulippo, step to him all at once, take him and with a corde that I haue laide on the table for the nonce, bind him hande and foote, carie him into the dungeō vnder the steares, make fast the dore and bring me the kay, it hangeth by vppon a pin ou the wal, dispatche and do this geare as priuily as you can, and thou Neuola come hither to me againe with spéede.
Well sir I shall.
Alas how shall I be reuenged of this extreme despite? if I punishe my seruant according to his diuelishe deserts, I shall heape further cares vpon mine owne head, for to suche detestable offences no punishment can séeme sufficient, but onely death: & in such cases it is not lawfull for a man to be his owne caruer, the lawes are ordyned, and officers appoynted to minister iustice for the redresse of wrongs: and if to the potestates I complayne me, I shal publishe mine owne reproche to the worlde: yea, what should it preuayle me to vse all the punishments that can be deuised? the thing once done can not be vndone. My daughter is defloured, and vtterly dishonested, howe can I then wype that blot off my browe? and on whome shall I séeke reuenge? Alas, alas, I my selfe haue bene the cause of all these cares, and haue deserued to beare the punishment of all these mishappes. Alas, I should not haue committed my dearest darling in custodie to so carelesse a creature as this olde Nourse: for we sée by common proofe, that these olde women be either péeuishe, or to pitifull: either easily enclined to euill, or quickly corrupted with bribes and rewards. O wife, my good wife (that nowe lyest colde in the graue) now may I well bewayle the wante of thée, and mourning nowe may I bemone that I misse thée: if thou hadst liued, such was thy gouernement of the least things, that thou wouldest prudently haue prouided for the preseruation of this pearle: a costly iewell may I well accompte hir, that hath béen my chéefe comforte in youth, and is nowe become the coroue of mine age. O Polynesta, full euill hast thou requed the clemencie of thy carefull father, and yet to excuse thée giltlesse before God, and to condemne thée giltie before the worlde, I can count none other but my wretched selfe the caytife and causer of all my cares: for of all the dueties that are requisite in humane lyfe, onely obedience is by the parents to be required of the childe, where on ye other side the parēts are bound, first to beget them, then to bring thē foorth, after to nourish them, to preserue them from bodily perils in the cradle, from daunger of soule by godly education, to matche them in comfort enclined to vertue, to banish them all ydle and wanton companie, to allow them sufficiente for their sustentation, to cut of excesse the open gate of sinne, seldome or neuer to smile on them vnlesse it be to their encouragement in vertue, and finally, to prouide them mariages in time cōuenient, lest neglected of vs, they learne to sette either to much or to litle by themselues: fiue yeares are past since I might haue maried hir, when by continuall excuses I haue prolonged it to my owne perdition: Alas, I shoulde haue considered, she is a collop of my owne flesh, what should I thinke to make hir a princesse? Alas alas, a poore kingdome haue I now caught to endue hir with: it is too true, that of all sorowes this is the head source and chiefe fountaine of all furies: the goods of the worlde are incertaine, the gaines to be reioyced at, and the losse not greatly to be lamented, only the children cast away, cutteth the parents throate with the knife of inward care, which knife will kill me surely, I make none other accoumpte.
SIr, we haue done as you badde vs, and here is the key.
Well, go then Neuola and séeke master Casteling the iayler, he dwelleth by S. Antonies gate, desire him to lend me a paire of the fetters he vseth for his prisoners, and come againe quickly.
Well sir.
Heare you, if he aske what I would do with them, say you cā not tell, and tell neither him nor any other, what is become of Dulippo.
I warante you sir. Fye vpon the Deuill, it is a thing almost vnpossible for a man nowe a daies to handle money but the metall will sticke on his fingers: I maruelled alway at this fellowe of mine Dulippo, that of the wages he receiued, he could mainteine himselfe so brauely apparelled, but now I perceiue the cause, he had the disbursing and receite of al my masters affaires, the keys of the granair, Dulippo here, Dulippo there, in fauoure with my master, in fauoure with his daughter, what woulde you more, he was Magister fac totum, he was as fine as the Crusadoe, and we silly wretches as course as canuas: well, behold what it is come to in the end, he had bin better to haue done lesse.
Thou saist true Neuola, he hath done to much in déed.
From whence commest thou in the deuils name?
Out of the same house thou camest from, but not out of the same dore.
We had thought thou hadst bene gone long since.
When I arose from the table, I felte a rumbling in my belly, whiche made me runne to the stable, and there I fell on sléepe vppon the strawe, and haue line there euer since: And thou, whether goest thou?
My Master hath sent me on an errand in great hast.
Whether I pray thee?
Nay I may not tell, Farewell.
As though I néede any further instructions: O God what newes I hard euen now, as I lay in the stable: O good Erostrato and pore Cleander, that haue so earnestly strouen for this damsell, happie is he that can get hir I promise you, he shal be sure of mo than one at a clap that catcheth hir, eyther Adam or Eue within hir bellie: oh God how men may be deceiued in a woman: who wold haue beléeued the contrary but that she had bin a virgin? aske the neighbours and you shal heare very good report of hir, marke hir behauiors & you would haue iudged hir very maydenly, seldome seene abroade but in place of prayer, and there very deuout, and no gaser at outwarde sightes, no blaser of hir beautie aboue in the windowes, no stal at the doore for the bypassers: you would haue thought hir a holy yong woman. But muche good doe it you Domine Doctor, he shall be sure to lacke no corne in a deare yere, whatsoeuer he haue with hir else: I beshrewe me if I let the mariage any way. But is not this the olde scabbed queane that I heard disclosing al this géere to hir master, as I stoode in the stable ere nowe? it is she. Whither goeth Psiteria?
TO a Gossip of mine héereby.
What? to tattle of the goodly stirre that thou keptst concerning Polynesta.
No, no: but how knew you of that géere?
You tolde me.
I? when did I tell you?
Euen now when you tolde it to Damon, I both saw you and heard you, though you saw not me: a good parte I promise you, to accuse the poore wenche, kill the olde man with care, ouer and besides the daunger you haue brought Dulipo and the Nursse vnto, and many moe, fie, fie.
In déed I was to blame, but not so much as you think.
And how not so muche did I not heare you tell?
Yes, But I will tell you how it came to passe: I haue knowen for a great while, that this Dulipo and Polynesta haue béene togither, and all by the meanes of the nurse, yet I held my peace, and neuer tolde it. Now this other day the Nursse fell on scolding with me, and twyce or thryce called me drunken olde whore, and suche names that it was to badde: and I called hir aude, and tolde hir that I knew well enoughe howe often she had brought Dulipo to Polynestas bed: yet all this while I thought not that anye body had heard me, but it befell cleane contrarye, for my maister was on the other side of the wall, and heard all our talke, wherevpon he sent for me, and forced me to confesse all that you heard.
And why wouldest thou tell him? I woulde not for. &c.
Well, if I had thought my maister would haue taken it so, he should rather haue killed me?
Why? how could he take it?
Alas, it pitieth me to sée the poore yong woman how she wéepes, wailes, and teares hir heare, not esteming hir owne life halfe so deare as she doth poore Dulipoes: and hir father, he wéepes on the other side, that it woulde pearce an hart of stone with pitie: but I must be gone.
Go that the gonne pouder consume the olde trotte.
WHat shall I doe? Alas what remedie shall I finde for my ruefull estate? what escape, or what excuse maye I now deuise to shifte ouer our subtile supposes? for though to this day I haue vsurped the name of my maister, and that without chece or controll of any man, now shal I be openly discyphred, and that in the sight of euery man: now shal it openly be knowen, whether I be Erostrato the gentleman, or Dulipo the seruaunt: we haue hitherto played our partes in abusing others, but nowe commeth the man that wil not be abused, the right Philogono the right father of the right Erostrato, going to seke Pasiphilo, and hearing that he was at the water gate, beholde I espied my seruaunt Litio, and by and by my olde maister Philogano setting forth his first step on land, I to fuge and away hither as fast as I could to bring word to the right Erostrato, of his right father Philogano, that to so sodaine a mishap some subtile shift might be vpō the sodaine deuised. But what can be imagined to serue the turne, although we had a monethes respite to beate oure braines about it, since we are commōly knowē, at the least supposed in this towne, he for Dulipo, a slaue & seruant to Damon, & I for Erostrato a gentleman & a student? But beholde, runne Crapine to yonder olde woman before she get within the doores, & desire hir to call out Dulipo: but heare you? if she aske who would speake with him, saye thy selfe and none other.
HOnest woman, you gossip, thou rotten whore, hearest thou not olde witche?
A rope stretche your yong bones, either you muste liue to be as old as I, or be hanged while you are yong.
I pray thée loke if Dulipo be within.
Yes that he is I warant him.
Desire him then to come hither and speake a word with me, he shall not tarie.
Content your selfe, he is otherwise occupied.
Yet tell him so gentle girle.
I tell you he is busie.
Why is it suche a matter to tell him so, thou crooked Crone?
A rope stretche you marie.
A pockes eate you marie.
Thou wilt be hanged I warant thée, if thou liue to it.
And thou wilt be burnt I warant thée, if the canker consume thée not.
If I come néere you hempstring, I will teache nowe to sing sol fa.
Come on, and if I get a stone I will scare crowes with you.
Goe with a mischiefe, I thinke thou be some deuill that woulde tempte me.
Crapine: heare you? come away, let hir goe with a vengeance, why come you not? Alas loke where my maister Philogano commeth: what shall I doe? where shall I hide me? he shall not sée me in these clothes, nor before I haue spoken with the right Erostrato.
HOnest man it is euen so: be you sure there is no loue to be compared like the loue of the parents towards their children, it is not long since I thought that a very waightie matter shoulde not haue made me come oute of Sicilia, and yet now I haue taken this tedious toyle and trauaile vpon me, only to sée my sonne, & to haue him home with me.
By my faith sir it hath bene a great trauaile in dee and to much for one of your age?
Yea be you sure: I came in companie with certaine gentlemen of my countrey, who had affaires to dispatche as far as to Ancona, from thence by water to Rauenna, and from Rauenna hither, continually against the tide.
Yea, & I think y• you had but homly lodging by ye way.
The worst ye euer man had, but that was nothing to the stirre that ye serchers kept with me whē I came aborde y• ship, Iesus how oftē they vntrussed my male & ransacked a litle capcase that I had, tossed & turned all that was within it, serched my bosome, yea my bréeches, that I assure you I thought they would haue flayed me to searche betwene the fell and the flshe for fardings.
Sure I haue heard no lesse, and that the marchantes bobbe them some times, but they play the knaues still.
Yea be you well assured, for suche an office is the inheritance of a knaue, and an honest man will not meddle with it.
Well, this passage shall seme pleasant vnto you whē you shall finde your childe in health and well: but I praye you sir why did you not rather send for him into Sicilia, thā to come your selfe, specially since you had none other businesse? peraduenture you had rather endanger your selfe by this noysome iourney, than hazard to drawe him from hys studie.
Nay, that was not y• matter, for I had rather haue him giue ouer his studie altogether and come home.
Why? if you minded not to make him learned, to what ende did you send him hither at the first?
I will tell you: when he was at home he did as most yong men doe, he played many mad prankes and did many things that liked me not very well, and I thinking, that by that time he had sene the worlde, he would learne to know himselfe better, exhorted him to studie, and put in his electiō what place he would go to. At the last he came hither, and I thinke he was scarce here so sone as I felt the want of him, in suche sorte, as from that daye to this I haue passed fewe nightes without teares: I haue written to him very often that he shoulde come home, but continually he refused still, beseching me to continue his studie, wherin he doubted not (as he said) but to profite greatly.
In dede he is very much commended of all men, and specially of the best reputed studentes.
I am glad he hath not lost his time, but I care not greatly for so muche knowledge, I woulde not be without the sighte of hym againe so long, for all the learning in the worlde. I am olde nowe, and if God shoulde call mée in his absence, I promise you I thinke it woulde driue me into desperation.
It is commendable in a man to loue his childrē, but to be so tender ouer them is more womanlike?
Well, I confesse it is my faulte: and yet I will tell you another cause of my comming hither, more waightie than this. Diuers of my countrey haue bene here since he came hither, by whom I haue sente vnto him, and some of thē haue bene thrice, some foure or fiue times at his house, and yet could neuer speake with him: I feare he applies his studie so, that he will not léese the minute of an houre from his booke. What, alas, he might yet talke with his countrymen for a while, he is a yong man, tenderly brought vp, and if he fare thus continually night and day at his booke, it may be enough to driue him into a frenesie.
In dede, enoughe were as good as a feast: lo you sir, here is your sonne Erostratoes house, I will knocke.
Yea, I pray you knocke.
They heare not.
Knocke againe.
I thinke they be on slepe.
If this gate were your Grandefathers soule, you coulde not knocke more softly, let me come: ho, ho, is there any bodye within?
WHat deuill of hell is there? I thinke he will breake the gates in péeces.
Marie fir, we had thoughte you had béene on sléepe within, and therefore we thoughte best to make you: what doth Erostrato?
He is not within.
Open the dore good fellow I pray thée.
If you thinke to lodge here, you are deceiued I tell you, for here are guestes enowe already.
A good fellow, and much for thy maisters honesty by our Ladie: and what guestes I pray thée?
Here is Philogano my maisters father, lately come out of Sicilia.
Thou speakest truer than thou arte aware of, he wil be, by that time thou hast opened the dore: open I pray thée hartely.
It is a small matter for me to open the dore, but here is no lodging for you, I tell you plaine, the house is full.
Of whom?
I tolde you: here is Philogano my maisters father come from Cathanea.
And when came he?
He came thrée houres since, or more, he alighted at the Aungell, and left his horses there: afterwarde my maister brought him hither.
Good fellow, I thinke thou haste good sport to mocke mée.
Nay, I thinke you haue good sporte to make me tary here, as though I haue nothing else to doe: I am matched with an vnrulye mate in the kitchin, I will goe loke to him another while.
I thinke he be drunken.
Sure he séemes so: sée you not how redde he is about the gilles?
Abide fellow, what Philogano is it whome thou talkest of?
An honest gentlemā, father t Erostrato my maister.
And where is he?
Here within.
May we sée him?
I thinke you may if you be not blinde.
Go to, go tell him here is one wold speake with him.
Mary that I will willingly doe.
I can not tell what I should saye to this géere, Litio what thinkest thou of it?
I cannot tell you what I shoulde saye sir, the worlde is large and long, there maye be moe Philoganos and moe Erostratos than one, yea and moe Ferraras, moe Sicilias, and moe Cathaneas: peraduenture this is not that Ferrara which you sent your sonne vnto.
Peraduenture thou arte a fle, and he was another that answered vs euen now. But be you sure honest man, that you mistake not the house?
Nay, then god helpe, thinke you I knowe not Erostratos house? yes, and himselfe also: I sawe him here no longer since thā yesterday: but here cōmes one that wil tell vs tidyngs of him. I like his countenaunce better than the others that answered at the windowe erewhile.
WOuld you speake with me sir?
Yea sir, I would faine knowe whence you are.
Sir I am a Sicilian, at your commaundement.
What part of Sicilia?
Of Cathanea.
What shall I call your name?
My name is Philogano.
What trade doe you occupie?
Marchandise.
What marchandise brought you hither?
None, I came onely to sée a sonne that I haue here, whom I saw not these two yeares.
What call they your sonne?
Erostrato.
Is Erostrato your sonne?
Yea verily.
And are you Philogano.
The same.
And a marchant of Cathanea?
What néede I tell you so often? I will not tell you a lye.
Yes, you haue tolde me a false lie, and thou arte a villaine and no better.
Sir, you offer me great wrong with these iniurious wordes.
Nay, I will doe more than I haue yet proffered to doe, for I will proue thée a lyer, and a knaue to take vpon thée that thou art not.
Sir I am Philogano of Cathenea, out of all doubte, if I were not I would be lothe to tell you so.
Oh, sée the boldnesse of this brute beast, what a brasen face he setteth on it?
Well, you may beleue me of you liste: what wonder you?
I wonder at thy impudencie, for thou, nor nature that framed thée, can euer counterfaite thée to be me, ribauld villaine, and lying wretch that thou arte.
Shall I suffer a knaue to abuse my maisters father thus? hence villaine, hence, or I will sheath this good fawchiō in your paūch: if my maister Erostrato find you prating here on this fashiō to his father, I wold not be in your coate for mo cunnie skinnes than I gat these twelue monethes: come you in againe sir, and let this Curre barke here till hée burst.
LItio, how likest thou this géere?
Sir, I like it as euill as may be, but haue you not often heard tell of the falsehood of Ferrara, and now may you sée, it falleth out accordingly.
Friend, you do not well to slaunder the Citie, these men are no Ferrareses you may know by their tong.
Well, there is neuer a barrell better herring, betwene you both: but in déed your officers are most to blame, that suffer such faultes to escape vnpunished.
What knowe the officers of this? thinke you they know of euery fault?
Nay, I thinke they will knowe as litle as may be, specially when they haue no gaines by it, but they ought to haue their eares as open to heare of such offēces, as the Ingates be to receyue guests.
Holde thy peace foole.
By the masse I am afearde that we shal be proued fooles both two.
Well, what shall we do?
I would thinke best we should go séeke Erostrato him selfe.
I will waite vpon you willingly, and either at the schooles, or at the conuocations, we shall find him.
By our Lady I am wery, I will run no longer about to seke him, I am sure hither he will come at the last.
Sure, my mind giues me that we shall find a new Erostrato ere it be long.
Looke where he is, whether runnes he? stay you awhile, I will go tell him that you are here: Erostrato, Erostrato, ho Erostrato, I would speake with you.
NOwe can I hide me no longer, Alas what shall I doe? I will set a good face on, to beare out the matter.
O Erostrato, Philogano your father is come, of Sicilia.
Tell me that I knowe not, I haue bene with him and séene him alredy.
Is it possible? and it séemeth by him that you know not of his comming.
Why, haue you spoken with him? when saw you him I pray you?
Loke you where he standes, why goe you not to him? Looke you Philogano, beholde youre deare sonne Erostrato.
Erostrato? this is not Erostrato, thys séemeth rather to bée Dulippo, and it is Dulippo in déede.
Why, doubte you of that?
What saith this honest man?
Mary sir, in déede you are so honorably cladde, it is no maruell if you loke bigge.
To whome speaketh he?
What, God helpe, do you not know me?
As farre as I remember Sir, I neuer sawe you before.
Harke Litio, here is good géere, this honest man will not know me.
Gentleman, you take your markes amisse.
Did I not tell you of the falsehood of Ferrara master? Dulippo hath lerned to play the knaue indifferently well since he came hither.
Peace I say.
Friend, my name is not Dulippo, aske you thorough out this towne of great and smal, they know me: ask this honest man that is with you, if you wyll not beléeue me.
In déede, I neuer knewe him otherwise called than Erostrato, and so they call hym, as many as knowe him.
Master, nowe you may sée the falsehood of these fellowes, this honest man your hoste, is of counsaile with him, and would face vs downe that it is Erostrato: beware of these mates.
Friende, thou doest me wrong to suspecte me, for sure I neuer hearde hym otherwise called than Erostrato.
What name could you heare me called by, but by my right name? But I am wise enough to stand prating here with this old man, I thinke he be mad.
Ah runnagate, ah villaine traitour, doest thou vse thy master thus? what hast thou done with my son villaine?
Doth this dogge barke here still? and will you suffer him master thus to reuile you?
Come in, come in, what wilte thou do with thys pestil?
I will rap the olde cackabed on the costerd.
Away with it, & you sirra, lay downe these stones, come in at dore euerye one of you, beare with him for his age, I passe not of his euill words.
ALas, who shall reliue my miserable estate? to whome shall I complaine, since he whome I broughte vp of a childe, yea and cherished him as if he had bene mine owne, doth nowe vtterly denie to knowe me? and you whome I toke for an honest man, and he that should haue broughte me to the sighte of my sonne, are compacte with this false wretch, and woulde face me downe that he is Erostrato. Alas, you might haue some compassion of mine age, to the miserie I am now in, and that I am a stranger desolate of all comforte in this countrey, or at the least, you shoulde haue feared the vengeaunce of God the supreme iudge (whiche knoweth the secrets of all harts) in bearing this false witnesse with him, whome heauen and arth do know to be Dulippo and not Erostrato.
If there be many such witnesse in this countrey, mē may go aboute to proue what they will in controuersies here.
Well sir, you maye iudge of me as it pleaseth you, and howe the matter commeth to passe I knowe not, but truly, euer since he came firste hither, I haue knowen him by the name of Erostrato y• sonne of Philogano a Cathanese, now whether he be so in dede, or whether he be Dulipo, (as you aleadge) let that be proued by them that knew him before he came hether. But I protest before god, that which I haue said, is neither a matter compact with him, nor anye other, but euē as I haue hard him called & reputed of al mē.
Out and alas, he whom I sent hither with my sonne to be his seruaunt, and to giue attendance on him, hath eyther cut his thrate, or by some euill meanes made hym away, and hath not onely taken his garmentes, his bookes, his money, and that which he broughte oute of Sicilia wyth him, but vsurpeth his name also, and turneth to his owne commoditie the bills of exchaunge that I haue alwayes allowed for my sonnes expences, Oh miserable Philogano, oh vnhappie olde man: oh eternall god, is there no iudge? no officer? no higher powers whom I maye complaine vnto for redresse of these wrongs?
Yes sir, we haue potestates, we haue Iudges, and aboue al, we haue a most iuste prince, doubt you not, but you shall haue iustice if your cause be iust.
Bring me then to the Iudges, to the potestates, or to whome you thinke best: for I will disclose a pat of the greatest knauerie, a fardell of the fowlest falsehode that euer was heard of.
Sir, he that will goe to the ciuill lawe, must be sure of foure things: first, a right and a iust cause: then a righteous doctor to pleade: next, fauour Coram Iudice: and aboue all, a good purse to procure it.
I haue not heard, that the law hath any respect to fauour, what you meane by it I cannot tell.
Haue you no regarde to his woordes, he is but a .
I pray you sir, let him tell me what is fauour?
Fauour cal I, to haue a friend néere about the Iudge, who may so sollicite thy cause, as if it be right, spéedie sentence may ensue without any delayes: if it be not good, then to prolong it, till at the last, thine aduersarie being wearie, shal be glad be compound with thée.
Of thus much (although I neuer heard thus much in this countrey before) doubt you not Philogano, I will bring you to an aduocate that shall spéede you accordingly.
Then shall I giue my selfe, as it were a pray to the doctors, whose insatiable iawes I am not able to féede, although I had here all the goods and landes which I possesse in mine owne coūtrey, much lesse being a straūger in this miserie. I know their cautels of old: at the first time I come they will so extoll my cause, as though it were alredy woon: but within in seuēnight or ten dayes, if I do not continually féede them as the crow doth hir brattes, twentie times in an houre, they will beginne to waxe colde, and to finde canels in my cause, saying, that at the firste I did not well instructe them: till at the laste, they will not onely drawe the stuffing oute of my purse, but the marrow oute of my bones.
Yea sir, but this man that I tell you of, is halfe a Sainte.
And the other halfe a Deuill, I hold a pennie.
Well saide Litio, in déede I haue but small confidence in their smothe lookes.
Well sir, I thinke this whom I meane, is no suche manner of man: but if he were, there is suche hatred and euill will betwene him and this gentleman (whether he be Erostrato or Dulippo, what so euer he be) that I warrant you, he will doe what so euer he can do for you, were it but to spite him.
Why? what hatred is betwixt them?
They are both in loue and suters to one gentlewoman, the daughter of a welthie man in this citie.
Why? is the villeine become of such estimatin that he dare presume to be a suter to any gentlewomā of a good familie?
Yea sir out of all doubt.
How call you his aduersarie?
Cleander, one of the excellentest doctors in our citie.
For gods loue let vs goe to him.
Goe we then.
WHat a mishappe was this? that before I coulde méete with Erostrato, I haue light euen full in the lappe of Philogano, where I was constrained to denye my name, to denie my maister, and to faine that I knew him not, to contend with him, and to reuile him, in such sort, that hap what hap can, I can neuer hap well in fauour with him againe: therfore if I could come to speake with the right Erostrato. I will renounce vnto him both habite and credite, & awaye as fast as I can trudge into some strange countrey, where I maye neuer sée Philogano againe. Alas, he that of a litle childe hath brought me vp vnto this day, and nourished me as if I had bene his owne: and in dede (to confesse ye trouth) I haue no father to trust vnto but him. But loke where Pasiphilo commeth, the fittest man in the worlde to goe on my message to Erostrato.
TWo good newes haue I heard to day alreadye, one that Erostrato prepared a great feast this night: y• other, that he séeketh for me, and I to ease him of his trauaile, least he shoulde runne vp and downe séeking me, and bycause no man loueth better thā I to haue an errand where good chéer is, come in post hast euen home to his owne house: and loke where he is.
Pasiphilo, thou muste doe one thing for me if thou loue me.
If I loue you not, who loues you, commaunde me?
Go then a litle there, to Damons house, aske for Dulipo, and tell him.
Wot you what? I cannot speake with him, he is in prison.
In prison? how commeth that to passe? where is he in prison?
In a vile dungeon there within his maisters house.
Canst thou tell wherfore?
Be you content to know he is in prison, I haue told you to muche.
If euer you will doe any thing for me, tell me.
I pray you desire me not, what were you the better if you knew?
More than thou thinkest Pasiphilo by god.
Well, and yet it standes me vpon more than you thinke, to kepe it secrete
Why Pasiphilo, is this the trust I haue had in you? are these the faire promyses you haue alwayes made me?
By the masse I would I had fasted this night with maister doctor, rather than haue come hither.
Well Pasiphilo, eyther tell me, or at fewe woordes neuer thinke to bee welcome to thys house from hence forthe.
Nay, yet I had rather léese all the gentlemen in this towne, but if I tell you anye thing that displease you, blame no body but your selfe now.
There is nothing can greue me more thā Dulipos mishappe, no not mine owne, and therfore I am sure thou canst tell me no worsse tidings.
Well, since you would néedes haue it, I wil tell you: he was taken a bed with your beloued Polynesta.
Alas, and dothe Damon knowe it?
An olde trot in the house disclosed it to him, whervpon he tooke bothe Dulipo and the Nurse which hath bene the broker of all this bargayne, and clapte them bothe in a cage, where I thinke they shall haue sowre soppes to their swéete meates.
Pasiphilo, go thy wayes into the kitchin, commaund the cooke to boyle and roast what liketh thée best, I make thée supra visour of this supper.
By the masse if you should haue studied this seuenight, you could not haue appoynted me an office to please me better, you shall sée what dishes I will deuise.
I Was glad to rid him out of the way, least he shoulde sée me burst out these swelling teares, which hitherto with great payne I haue prisoned in my brest, & least he should heare the Eccho of my doubled sighes, which bounce from the botome of my heuy heart. O cursed I, O cruell fortune, that so many dispersed griefes as were sufficient to subert a legion of Louers, hast sodenly assembled within my carefull carcase to freat this fearfull heart in sunder with desperation: thou that hast kepte my master all his youthe within the realme of Sicilia▪ reseruing the wind and waues in a temperate calme (as it were at his commaunde) nowe to conuey his aged limmes hither, neither sooner nor later, but euen in the worst time that may be: if at any time before thou haddest conducted him, this enterprise had bene cut off without care in the beginning: and if neuer so little longer thou hadst lingred his iorney, this happie day might then haue fully finished our driftes and deuises. But alas, thou hast brought him euē in the very worst time, to plunge vs all in the pitte of perdition. Neither art thou content to entangle me alone in thy ruinous ropes, but thou must also catche the righte Erostrato in thy crooked clawes, to rewarde vs bothe with open shame and rebuke. Two yeres hast thou kepte secret our subtil Supposes, euen this day to discipher them with a sorowfull successe. What shall I do? Alas what shifte shall I make? it is too late nowe to imagine any further deceite, for euery minute séemeth an houre till I find some succour for the miserable captiue Erostrato. Well, since there is no other remedie, I wil go to my master Philogano, and to him will I tell the whole truthe of the matter, that at the least he may prouide in time, before his sonne féele the smart of some sharpe reuenge & punishment: this is the best, and thus will I do: yet I know, that for mine owne parte I shal do bitter penance for my faults forepassed: but suche is the good wil and duetie that I beare to Erostrato, as euen with the losse of my life I muste not sticke to aduenture any thing which may turne to his cō moditie. But what shall I do? shall I go séeke my master about the towne, or shall I tarrie his returne hither? If I méete him in the stréetes, he will crie out vpon me, neither will he harken to any thing that I shall say, till he haue gathered all the people woondring about me, as it were at an Owle. Therefore I were better to abide here, and yet if he tarrie long, I will go séeke him, rather than prolong the time to Erostratos perill.
YEa dresse them, but lay them not to the fire, till they wil be ready to sit downe: this géere goeth in order: but if I had not gone in, there had fallen a foule faulte.
And what fault I pray thée?
Marie, Dalio would haue layd the shoulder of mutton and the Capon bothe to the fire at once, like a foole, he did not consider, that the one woulde haue more roasting than the other.
Alas, I would this were the greatest fault.
Why? and either the one should haue bene burned before the other had ene roasted, or else he muste haue drawne them off the spitte: and they would haue bene serued to the boorde either colde or rawe.
Thou hast reason Pasiphilo.
Now sir, if it please you I will go into the towne and buye oranges, lyues, and caphers, for without suche sauce the supper were more than halfe lost.
There are within already, doubt you not, there shal lacke nothing that is necessarie.
Since I tolde him these newes of Dulipo, he is cleane beside him selfe: he hath so many hammers in his head, that his braynes are ready to burst: and let them breake, so I may suppe with him to night, what care I? But is not this Dominus noster Cleandrus that commeth before? well sayde, by my truthe we will teache master Doctor to weare a cornerd cappe of a new fashion: by God Polynesta shall be his, he shall haue hir out of doubt, for I haue tolde Erostrato suche newes of hir, that he will none of hir.
YEa, but how wilt▪ ye proue that he is not Erostrato, hauing suche presumptiōs to the cōtrarie? or how shal it be thought that you are Philogano, when an other taketh vpon him this same name, and for proofe bringeth him for a witnesse, which hath bene euer reputed here for Erostrato?
I will tell you sir, let me e kepte héere faste in prison, and at my charges let there be some man sente into Sicilia▪ that may bring hither with him two or thrée of the honestest men in Cathnea and by them let it be proued if I or this other be Philogano, and whether he be Erostrato or Dulipo my seruant: and if you finde me contrarie, let me suffer death for it.
I will go salute master Doctour.
It will aske great labour & great expences to proue it this way, but it is the best remedie that I can see.
God saue you sir.
And rewarde you as you haue deserued.
Then shall be giue me your fauour continually.
He shall giue you a halter, knaue and villein that thou arte.
I knowe I am a knaue, but no villein, I am your seruaunt.
I neither take thée for my seruāt, nor for my friend.
Why? wherin haue I offended you sir?
Hence to the gallowes knaue.
What softe and fayre sir, I pray you, I prae se, you are mine elder.
I will be euen with you, be you sure, honest man.
Why sir? I neuer offended you.
Well, I wil teache you: out of my sight knaue.
What? I am no dogge, I would you wist.
Pratest thou yet villein? I will make thée.
What wil you make me? I sée wel the more a man dthe suffer you, the worsse you are.
A villein, if it were not for this gentlemā, I would tell you what I.
Uillein? nay I am as honest a man as you.
Thou liest in thy throate knaue.
O sir, stay your wisedome.
What will you fight? marie come on.
Well knaue, I will méete with you another time, goe your way.
Euen when you list sir, I will be your man.
And if I be not euen with thée, call me cut.
Nay by the masse, all is one, I care not, for I haue nothing: if I had either landes or goods, peraduenture you would pull me into the lawe.
Sir, I perceiue your pacience is moued.
This villeine: but let him goe, I will sée him punished as he hath deserued. Now to the matter, howe sayde you?
This fellow hath disquieted you sir, peraduenture you would be lothe to be troubled any further.
Not a whit, saye on, and let him goe with a vengeance.
I say, let them send at my charge to Cathanea.
Yea I remember that well, and it is the surest way as this case requireth: but tell me, howe is he your seruaunt? and howe come you by him? enforme me fully in the matter.
I will tell you sir: when the Turkes won Otranto.
Oh, you put me in remembrance of my mishappes.
How sir?
For I was driuen among the rest out of the towne (it is my natiue countrey) and there I lost more than euer I shall recouer againe while I liue.
Alas, a pitifull case by saint Anne.
Well, procéede.
At that time (as I saide) there were certaine of oure countrey that scoured those costes vpon the seas, with a good barke well appoynted for the purpose, and had espiall of a Turkey vessell that came laden from thence with great aboundance of riches.
And peraduenture most of mine.
So they boarded them, & in the end ouercame them, and brought the goods to Palermo, from whence they came, and amongst other things that they had, was this villeine my seruaunte, a boy at that time, I thinke not paste fiue yeres olde.
Alas I lost one of that same age there.
And I beyng there, and lyking the Childes fauour well, proffered them foure and twentie ducattes for him, and had him.
What? was the childe a Turke? or had the Turks brought him from Otranto?
They saide he was a Childe of Otranto, but what is that to the matter? once .xxiiij Ducattes he cost me, that I wot well.
Alas, I speake it not for that sir, I woulde it were he whom I meane.
Why, whom meane you sir?
Beware sir, be not to lauishe.
Was his name Dulippo then? or had he not another name?
Beware what you say sir.
What the deuill hast thou to doe? Dulipo? no sir, his name was Carino.
Yea, well said, tell all and more to, doe?
O Lord, if it be as I thinke, how happie were I? and why did you change his name then?
We called him Dulippo, bycause when he cryed as Children doe sometimes, he woulde alwayes cry on that name Dulippo.
Well, then I sée well it is my owne onely Childe, whom I loste, when I loste my countrey: he was named Carino after his grandfather, and this Dulippo whom he alwayes remembred in his lamenting, was his foster father that nourished him and brought him vp.
Sir, haue I not told you enough of ye falshood of Ferrara? this gentlemā will not only picke your purse, but beguile you of your seruaunt also, and make you beleue he is his sonne.
Well goodfellow, I haue not vsed to lie.
Sir no, but euery thing hath a beginning.
Fie, Philogano haue you not the least suspect that may be of me.
No marie, but it were good he had the moste suspecte that may be.
Well, hold thou thy peace a litle good fellow. I pray you tell me Philogano had y• child any remembrance of his fathers name, his mothers name or ye name of his familie?
He did remember them, and could name his mother also, but sure I haue forgotten the name.
I remember it well enough.
Tell it then.
Nay, that I will not marie, you haue tolde him to much already.
Tell it I say, if thou can.
Cā? yes by y• masse I cā wel enough: but I wil haue my tong pulled out, rather thā tell it, vnlesse he tell it first: doe you not perceiue sir, what he goeth about?
Well, I will tell you then, my name you know alredy▪ my wife his mothers name was Sophronia, the house that I came of, they call Spiagia.
I neuer heard him speake of Spiagia but in déede I haue heard him say, his mothers name was Sophronia: but what of y•? a great matter I promise you, it is like enoughe that you two haue compact together to deceiue my maister.
What nedeth me more euident tokens? this is my sonne out of doubt whom I lost eightéen yeares since, and a thousand thousand times haue I lamented for him: he shuld haue also a mould on his left shoulder.
He hath a moulde there in déede: and an hole in an other place too, I woulde your nose were in it.
Faire wordes fellow Litio: oh I pray you let vs goe talke with him, O fortune, howe much am I bounde to thee if I finde my sonne?
Yea how small am I beholdē to fortune, that know not where my sonne is become, and you whom I chose to be mine aduocate, will nowe by the meanes of this Dulipo become mine aduersarie?
Sir, let vs first goe find mine: and I warrant you yours will be founde also ere it be long.
God graunt, goe we then.
Since the dore is open, I will neither knocke nor call, but we will be bolde to goe in.
Sir, také you héede, least he leade you to some mischiefe.
Alas Litio, if my sonne be loste what care I what become of me?
Well, I haue tolde you my minde Sir, doe you as you please.
COme hither you olde kallat, you tatling huswife, tha the deuill cut oute your tong: tell me, howe could Pasiphilo know of this géere but by you?
Sir, he neuer knewe it of me, he was the firste that tolde me of it.
Thou liest olde drabbe, but I woulde aduise you tell me the truth, or I wil make those olde bones rattle in your skinne.
Sir, if you finde me contrarie, kill me.
Why? where should he talke with thée?
He talked with me of it here in the stréete.
What did you here?
I was goyng to the weauers for a webbe of clothe you haue there.
And what cause coulde Pasiphilo haue to talke of it, vnlesse thou began the matter first?
Nay, he began with me sir, reuiling me, bycause I had tolde you of it: I asked him how he knewe of it, and he said he was in the stable when you examined me erewhile.
Alas, alas, what shall I doe then? in at dores olde whore, I wil plucke that tong of thine out by the rootes one day. Alas it gréeueth me more that Pasiphilo knoweth it, than all the rest: he that will haue a thing kept secrete, let him tell it to Pasiphilo, the people shall knowe it, and as many as haue eares and no mo: by this time he hath tolde it in a hundreth places. Cleander was the firste, Erostrato the seconde, and so from one to another throughout the citie. Alas, what dower, what mariage shall I nowe prepare for my daughter? O poore dolorous Damon, more miserable than miserie it selfe, would god it were true that Polinesta, tolde me ere while: that he who hathe deflowred hir, is of no seruile estate, as hitherto he hath bene supposed in my seruice: but that he is a gentleman borne of a good parentage in Sicilia. Alas, small riches should content me, if he be but of an honest familie, but I feare that he hathe deuised these toyes to allure my daughters loue. Well I wil goe examine hir againe, my mind giueth me that I shall perceiue by hir tale whether it be true or not. But is not this Pasiphilo that commeth out of my neighbours house? what the deuill ayleth him to leape and laughe so like a foole in the high way?
O God, that I might finde Damon at home.
What the deuill would he with me?
That I may be the firste that shall bring him these newes.
What will he tell me, in the name of God?
O Lord, how happie am I? loke where he is.
What newes Pasiphilo, that thou arte so merie?
Sir, I am mery to make you glād: I bring you ioyfull newes.
And that I haue nede of Pasiphilo.
I knowe sir, that you are a sorowfull man for this mishap that hath chaunced in your house, peraduenture you thoughte I had not knowen of it: but let it passe, plucke vp you sprites, and reioyce, for he that hath done you this iniurie is so well borne, and hath so riche parents, that you may be glad to make him your sonne in law.
How knowest thou?
His father Philogano one of the worthiest men in all Cathanea, is nowe come to the citie, and is here in your neighbours house.
What, in Erostratos house?
Nay in Dulipos house, for where you haue alwayes supposed this gentlemā to be Erostrato, it is not so, but your seruaunt whom you haue emprisoned hitherto, supposed to be Dulipo, he is in dede Erostrato, and that other is Dulipo: and thus they haue alwayes, euen since their first ariual in this citie, exchaunged names, to the ende that Erostrato the maister, vnder the name of Dulipo a seruaunte, mighte be entertained in your house, and so winne the loue of your daughter.
Well, then I perceiue it is euē as Polinesta told me.
Why, did she tell you so?
Yea: But I thought it but a tale.
Well, it is a true tale: and here they will be with you by and by, both Philogano this worthie man, and maister doctor Cleander.
Cleander? what to doe?
Cleander? Why therby lies another tale, the moste fortunate aduenture that euer you heard: wot you what? this other Dulipo, whom all this while we supposed to be Erostrato, is founde to be the sonne of Cleander, whom he lost at the losse of Otranto, and was after solde in Sicilia to this Philogano, the strangest case that euer you heard: a mā might make a Comedie of it, they wil come euen straight, and tell you the whole circumstance of it themselues.
Nay I will first goe heare the storie of this Dulipo, be it Dulipo or Erostrato that I heare within, before I speake with Philogano.
So shall you doe well sir, I will goe tell them that they may stay a while, but loke where they come.
SIr, you shall not nede to excuse the matter any further, since I haue receiued no greater iniurie than by words: let them passe like wind, I take them well in worthe, and am rather well pleased than offended, for it shall bothe be a good warning to me another time howe to trust euery man at the first sighte▪ yea, and I shall haue good game hereafter to tell this pleasant storye another day in mine owne countrey.
Gentleman, you haue reason, and be you sure, that as many as heare it, will take great pleasure in it, and you Philogano may thinke, that god in heauen aboue, hath ordained your comming hither at this presente, to the ende I mighte rcouer my lost sonne, whom by no other meanes I could euer haue founde oute.
Surely sir I thinke no lesse, for I thinke that not so muche as a leafe falleth from the tree, withoute the ordynance of god. But let vs goe seke Damon, for me thinketh euery day a yeare, euery houre a daye, and euery minute to much till I see my Erostrato.
I cannot blame you, goe we then, Carino take you that gentleman home in the meane time, the fewer the better to be present at such affaires.
MAister doctor, will you not shewme this fauour, to tell me the cause of your displeasure?
Gentle Pasiphilo, I muste néedes confesse I haue done thée wrong, and that I beleued tales of thée, whiche in déede I finde now contrary.
I am glad then that it procéeded rather of ignorance than of malice.
Yea beleue me Pasiphilo.
O sir, but yet you shoulde not haue giuen me suche foule wordes.
Well, content thy selfe Pasiphilo, I am thy frende as I haue alwayes bene: for proofe whereof, come suppe with me to nighte, and from day to daye this seuen night be thou my guest: but beholde, hercommeth Damon out of his house.
WE are come vnto you sir, to turne your sorowe into ioye and gladnes: the sorow, we meane, that of force you haue sustained since this mishappe of late fallen in your house. But be you of good comfort sir, and assure your selfe, that this yong man whiche youthfully and not maliciously hath committed this amorous offence, is verie well hable with consent of this worthie man his father, to make you sfficient amendes, being borne in Cathanea of Sicilia, of a noble house, noway inferiour vnto you, and of wealth (by the reporte of suche as knowe it) farre excéeding that of yours.
And I here in proper person, doe presente vnto you sir, not onely my assured frendship and brotherhoode, but do earnestly desire you to accepte my poore childe (thoughe vnworthy) as your sonne in lawe: and for recompence of the iniurie he hath done you, I profer my whole lands in dower to your daughter, yea and more would, if more I might.
And I sir, who haue hitherto so earnestly desired your daughter in mariage, doe now willingly yelde vp and quite claime to this yong man, who both for his yeares, and for the loue he beareth hir, is most méetest to be hir husbād: for where I was desirous of a wife by whom I might haue yssue, to leaue that litle which god hath sent me, nowe haue I litle néede, that (thankes be to god) haue founde my déerely beloued sonne, whom I loste of a childe at the siege of Otranto.
Worthy gentleman, you frendship, your alliaunce, and the nobilitie of your birthe are suche, as I haue muche more cause to desire them of you, than you to request of me that which is already graunted: therefore I gladly, and willingly receiue the same, and thinke my selfe moste happie now of all my life past, that I haue gottē so toward a sonne in lawe to my selfe, and so worthye a father in lawe to my daughter, yea and muche the greater is my contentation, since this worthie gentleman maister Cleander, doth holde himselfe satisfied. And now behold your sonne.
O father.
Beholde the naturall loue of the childe to the the father, for inwarde ioye he cannot pronounce one worde, in stéede wherof he sendeth sobbes and teares to tell the effect of his inwarde intention. But why doe you abide here abrode? will it please you to goe into the house sir?
Pasiphilo hathe saide well, will it please you to goe in sir?
Here I haue brought you sir, bothe fetters & boltes.
Away with them now.
Yea, but what shall I doe with them?
Marie I will tell thée Neuola, to make a righte ende of our supposes, lay one of those boltes in the fire, and make thée a suppositorie as long as mine arme, God saue the sample. Nobles and gentlemen, if you suppose that our supposes haue giuen you sufficient cause of delighte, shewe some token, wherby we may suppose you are content.