WITH bended knees thus humbly doe I pray,
You bleſſed powers, that glorifie this day,
And to my frozen lipps haue vtterance giuen,
Speak, O ſpeak the Commands you bring from heauen!
For by times Embleme that ſince Noahs flood,
I thus haue graſp'd, my ſoule hath vnderſtood,
The world no farther Iorney hath to ſaile
Then is betwixt this Serpents head, and taile.
If then before the Earths great funerall,
Moſt glorious SIR, you hither come to call
The Inmates of this ſolitarie place
To ſtrict accoumpt, for Heauens ſake daigne the grace
To lend your patience, and a gentle eare
To what I ought to ſpeak, and you may heare:
A Prodigall profuſe in vaſt expence,
That nothing ſtudied, but to pleaſe his ſenſe,
Trimming a glorious outſide, whil'ſt within
He cheriſht nought, but propagating ſinne,
That multiplied ſo faſt, there was no place
Allow'd for virtue, or for ſauing grace;
God of his mercy pleaſed was at laſt
A gratious Eye vpon his ſoule to caſt,
Which being ſo neere a finall rack as now
His only care, his ſtudie is, but how
He may redeeme the yeares he loſt in ſinne
And liue as he to liue did now beginne.
What followed next muſt be conceau'd of courſe,
Confeſſion, contrition, and remorſe,
Theſe guides to heauen he happily perſu'd,
View'd his paſt life, and that againe review'd:
And to that end he purchas'd at a price
This field, then ſterill, now his Paradiſe;
Where he as man of old, by God being bound
With Adam, wrought, and dig'd, and dreſt the ground.
Here are no Riuers ſuch as Eden had,
Nor were theſe banks with trees or flowers clad
T' invite a ſtay, the Owle, not Philomell
Within this ſolitarie place did dwell.
And I, the Genius of this obſcure Caue
Since the great deluge, liu'd as in a graue,
Chain'd to this ROCK, my Toumb-ſtone in diſpaire
Of freedome, or to view ſuch beames, as are
Shot from your Virtues: All my dayes were night,
Vntill the humble Owner brought to light
Theſe eyes of mine, and forc'd great nature ſhow
This maſter-peece, a grace ſhe did not owe
To any age before, and ſooth to ſay,
I thinke it was created 'gainſt this day.
If then you be the God of Brittaines earth,
And rule this Ile, (as ſure you are by birth)
Vouchſafe a bleſſing, ſuch a one as may,
Preſerue this ROCK, my manſion from decay.
For envie would expell me from my home,
And ſinck me in the ruines of my owne.
But let the true Poſſeſſor, to whom heauen
For pure devotion-ſake this place hath giuen,
Let him in peace enioy it, that he may
Build Altars here, and daily offerings pay
For his preſeruers health grant this, and then
I that liu'd long with ſtones, will liue with men:
And thinke the golden age is now begunne,
In which no injuries are meant or done:
Such Innocents as yet remaine with vs
That doe inhabit here, and humbly thus
We meane to liue, having no other fare
Then uncurſt water, uncorrupted aire.
Vouchſafe to enter, and you here ſhall find
Nothing but what may pleaſe a diſpleas'd mind.
My bold Commiſſion's done, and I returne
Downe to my humble graue, my peacefull urne.
I charge thee anſwere me to what I aske, Echo: aske
Hath ought preſented to theſe Princes pleas'd? Echo: pleas'd
Pleas'd? O gentle Eccho ſpeak that word againe, Echo: againe
How haue they lik'd our Rock, our Caue, our Well? Echo: well
Well! proud would their Hoſt be ſhould I tell him Echo: tell him
Tell him Eccho, I will that he diſpaire not Echo: Spare not
What ſhall we giue them by way of thankfulnes? Echo: thankfulnes
That, like thee, is aire; we would giue what's reall Echo: all
All, why all that we haue is but this Rock, Echo: this Rock
Giue them this poore Rock, Eccho meane you ſo? Echo: ſo
To which of them, to'th King or to the Queene? Echo: the Queene
What to the King, if this be giuen the Quene? Echo: the Queene
The Queene, there's nought more pretious: 'tis true: Echo: true
Can nothing more be added to his bliſſe? Echo: bliſſe
Bliſſe, the bliſſe of Heauen Eccho you meane ſure; Echo: ſure
Sure be't to them both as this our bleſſing; Echo: ſing
Sing gentle Eccho, is that thy deſire? Echo: deſire
THen bleſſed be this paire
On the earth, in the aire,
Bleſſed in their Girles, and Boyes,
Let them live to heare it told,
Their grand-Grandchildren are growne old.
Let her beauty ever laſt,
And his vigor neuer waſt.
Let the ſea, that bounds theſe Iſles,
Ebbe at leaſt ten thouſand miles:
And returne no more, but leaue
New kingdomes for them to bequeath
To the many heires they get;
And when they pay natures debt,
Let their bodies not be found
Dwelling in the ſluttiſh ground,
But tranſlated to thoſe thrones,
Only built for bleſſed ones.
Eccho let theſe prayers be
Poaſted vp to Heauen by thee
And if granted let vs know,
Gentle Eccho anſwere ſo Echo: ſo
So, then 'tis agree'd aboue Echo: aboue
That this paire ſhall liue, and loue: Echo: and loue
And for euer happie be Echo: happie be
In their bleſt poſteritie. Echo: poſteritie
Eccho, for this newes I'le giue Echo: giue
Leaue that thou ſhalt euer liue Echo: liue
In this Paradiſe of theirs, Echo: theirs
Theirs Eccho, 'tis no more mine, Echo: mine
Theirs, and thine, Eccho euer, Echo: euer
Fates decrees alter neuer. Echo: neuer
HArke, harke, how the ſtones in the Rocke
Strive their tongues to unlock,
And would ſhow,
What they know,
Of the Joy here hath beene
Since the King and the Queene
Daigne to ſay
They would pay
A viſit to this cell:
But all tongues cannot tell;
Nor language expreſſe
Our full thankefullneſſe.
Harke, harke, how the ſtreames roule along,
And for want of a tongue
Ʋent in teares
All their feares
Leaſt the King, leaſt the Queene
Being come, having ſeene,
What we have
In this cave,
That nothing can delight
That is brought to their ſight,
Or fully expreſſe
Our hearts thankefullneſſe.
Harke, harke, how the Birds in the groves
Strive to tender their loves,
For the Spring,
That the King,
And the Queene bring along:
Doe but ſee how they throng
With their notes
In their throats,
On each Banck, in each Buſh
sits a Larke, and a Thruſh,
That fayne would expreſſe
Their hearts thankefullneſſe.
Harke, harke, we humbly doe intreat
How your Hoſts heart doth beate,
How it pants,
Cauſe it wants
What he gladly would bring
To the Queene, and the King,
Daigne to ſpeake,
Leaſt it breake,
Let him know you are pleas'd
That his heart may be eas'd
Or this Rock or this cave
Is his Tombe or his grave.