And how and how?
The cause depends.
No Mistresse.
Yes, but no Wife.
For now she is a Widdow.
But I resolve—
What does shee say to thee.
Shee sayes, I know not what she sayes, but I must tak another course, and yet she is—
A creature of much sweetenesse, if all tongus
Be just in her report, and yet tis strange
Having seven yeares expected, and so much
Remonstrance of her Husbands losse at Sea,
She should continue thus.
What if she should
Renew the bond of her devotion
For seven yeares more.
You will have time nough,
To pay in your affection.
Ide make,
A voyage to Cassanra's Temple first,
And marry a deform'd Maide, yet I must
Confesse she gives me a faire respect.
Has she,
A hope her Husband may be living yet?
I cannot tell; she may have a conceipt,
Some Dolphin has preserv'd him in the storme,
Or that he may be tenant to some Whale;
Within whose belly he may pracise ,
And feed on fish, till hee be vomited
Vpon some coast, or having scap'd the seas,
And billes of Exchange fayling, he might purpose
To foote it ore the Alpes in his returne,
And by mischance is fallen among the mise,
With whom perhappes he battens upon fleepe,
Beneath the Snow.
This wer a Vagary.
I know not what to thinke, or is sh not the worse for the coy Lady that lives with her.
Her Kinswoman?
Such a malicious peece,
(I meane to love) tis pittie any plac
But a cold Nunnery should be troubled with her;
If all maides were but her disciples, wee
Should have no generation, and the world
For want of Children in few yeares undone by't:
Here's one can tell you more, is not that Iarvis
The Widdowes servant.
Whether in such hast man?
I am commanded Sir to fetch a Gentleman.
To thy Mistresse? To give her a heate this morning.
I ha spied him; with your pardon—the servant goes to Laey
Good morrow Maister Venture.
Franke Tryer.
You looke iocond and high,
Venus has bin propitious,
I dreamt last night thou wert a Bridegrome.
Such a thing may be, the winde blowes now
From a more happie coast,
I must leave you, I am sent for,
To thy Mistresse
Without more ceremony, gentlemen my service-farwell.
Ile tell thee, I have a Mistresse.
I beleeve it
And yet I have her not.
But you have hope.
Or rather certainty.
Why, I heare she is
A very Tyrant over men.
Worse, worse,
The needle of a Diall never had
So many wavetings, but she is touch'd,
And she Points onely this way now, true North;
I am her Pole.
And she your Vrsaminor,
I laugh to thinke how other of her Rivals
Will looke when I enioy her.
Yare not yet contracted?
No she chang'd
Some amorous tokens, do you see this Diamond?
A toy she gave me.
Cause she saw you a Sparke.
Her flame of love is here, and in exchange
She tooke a chaine of Pearle.
Youle see it hang'd.
These to the wise are arguments of love,
And mutuall Promises.
Your Lordship's welcome to Towne,
I am blest to see your honour in good health.
Prethee visit my Lodgings.
I shall presume to tender my humble service.
What's he?
A sprigge of the Nobilitie,
That has a spirit equall to his fortunes,
A gentleman that loves cleane Napety.
I guesse your meaning.
A Lady of pleasure, tis no shame for Men
Of his high birth to love a Wench his honour
May priviledge more sinnes, next to a Woman
He loves a running horse, setting a side these recreations,
He has a Noble Nature, valiant, bountifull.
I was of his humour till I fell in love,
I meane for wenching, you may guesse a little,
By my legges, but Ile now be very honest,
And when I am married—
Then you are confident
To carry away your Mistresse from em all.
From Ioue himselfe though he should practise all
His shapes to court her, tis impossible
She should put any trick upon me, I
Have wonne her very soule.
Her body must
Needes be your owne then.
I have a brace of Rivals
Would they were here that I might Ieere em,
And see how opportunely one is come,
Ile make you a little sport.
I ha bin Melancholy.
You will, expresse a favour in't.
M. Venture, The first man in my wish
What gentleman is that?
A Friend of mine.
I am his servant, looke yet, we are friends▪
An't shall appeare, how ever things succeed
That I have lov'd you, and you take
My Councell in ill part.
Whats the businesse?
For my part, I have
Vs'd no inchantment, philter, no devices
That are unlawfull, to direct the streame
Of her affection, it flowes naturally.
How's this? prethee observe.
I do and shall laugh presently.
For your anger
I weare a sword, though I have no desire
It should be guilty of defacing any
Part of your body, yet upon a just
And noble provocation, wherein
My Mistresse love, and honour is engaged,
I dare draw blood.
Ha, ha, ha!
A Mistresse love and honour? this is pretty.
I know you cannot
But understand me, yet I say I love you,
And with a generous breast, and in the confidence
You will take it kindely, I returne to that
I promis'd you, good councell, come leave off
The prosecution.
Of what I prethee?
There wilbe lesse affront then to expect
Till the last minute, and behold the victory
Anothers, you may guesse, why I declare this?
I am studious to preserve an honest friendshipp.
For though it be my glory, to be adorn'd
With trophies of her vanquisht love.
Whose love?
This sounds as if he Ieer'd you
Mushroompe!
What dee meane gentlemen? friends and fall out
About good Councell.
Ile put up a gaine
now I thinke better on't:
Tis done discreetly,
Cover the nakednesse of your toole I pray.
Why looke you Sir. If you bestow this Councell
Out of your love, I thanke you; yet there is
No great necessitie, why you should be at
The cost of so much breath, thing's well considered.
A Ladies love is mortall, I know that,
And if a thousand men should love a woman
The dice must carry her, but one of all
Can weare the Garland.
Now you come to him.
For my owne part, I lov'd the Lady wel,
But you must pardon me, If I demonstrate
There's no such thing as you pretend, and therefore
In quittance of your loving, honest Councell,
I would not have you build an ayry Castle,
Her Starres have pointed her another way,
This instrument will take her height.
Ha.
And you may guesse what cause you have to triumph,
I would not tell you this, but that I love you,
And hope you will not runne your selfe into
The cure of Bedlam, hee that weares this favour
Hath sence to apprehend.
That Diamond.
Observe it perfectly, there are no trophies
Of vanquisht love, I take it, comming toward you,
It will be lesse affront, then to expect
Till the last minute, and behold the victory
Anothers.
That Ring I gave her.
Ha, ha, ha!
This was his gift to her, ha, ha, ha!
Have patience spleene, ha, ha!
The scene is chang'd!
She wonot use me thus, she did receive it
With all the circumstance of love.
I pitty him, my eyes runne ore, dost heare,
I cannot choose but laugh, and yet I pitty thee.
She has a Ieering wit, and I shall love her
More heartily for this. What dost thinke?
Poore Gentleman how he has foold himselfe.
Ile to her againe.
Nay, be not passionate!
A faith thou wert too confident, I knew
It could not hold, dost thinke Ide say so much else?
I can tell thee more, but lose her memorie.
Were it more rich
Then that which Cleopatra gave to Anthony,
With scorne I would returne it.
She give you this Chaine?
She shall be hang'd in chaines, ere I will keepe it.
Stay, stay, let my eye
Examine that—this Chaine—
Who would trust woman after this?
The very same
She tooke of me, when I receiv'd this Diamond.
Ha ha! you doe but iest, she wonot foole
You o'this fashion, looke a little better, one may be like another.
Tis the same.
Ha, ha, I would it were, that we might laugh
At one another, by this hand I will
Forgive her, prethee tell me—ha, ha, ha!
You will carry her
From Ioue himselfe, though he should practise all
His shapes to court her.
By this Pearle, o Rogue!
How I doe love her fort, be not dejected;
A Ladies love is mortall, one of all
Must weare the Garland, do not foole your selfe
Beyond the cure of Bedlam.
She has fitted you
With a paire of fooles Coats, as hansomely
As any Taylor, that had taken measure,
Give me thy hand.
Nay lay your hads together
How to revenge it, and so gentlemen I take my leave.
She has abusd us.
Let vs take his Councell,
Wee can be but what we are.
A paire of credulous fooles.
This other fellow Fairefeild has prevail'd.
Which if hee have—
What shall we do?
I thinke we were best let him alone.
Dee heare? Weele to her againe, youle
Be ruld by me, and tell her what wee thinke on her.
She may come to herselfe, and be asham'd on't.
If she would affect one of us, for my part
I am indifferent.
So say I too, but to give us both th canvas
Lets walke, and thinke how to behave our selves.
What dee meane to do with him?
Thou art
To much a Tyrant, the seven yeares are past,
That did oblige me to expect my Husband
Engag'd to Sea, and though within those limits
Frequent intelligence hath reported him
Lost, both to me, and his owne life, I have
Bin carefull of my vow; and were there hop
Yet to embrace him, I would thinke another
Seven yeares no penance, but I should thus
Be held a cruell woman, in his certaine
Losse, to despise the love of all mankinde.
And therefore I resolve, upon so large
A triall of his Constancy, at last
To give him the reward of his respcts.
To me and—
Marry him.
You have apprehended!
No marvaile if men raile upon you thn,
And doubt whther a Widdow may b sav'd,
We Maides are thought the worse on, for your asines,
How are poore women overseene? We must
Cast a way our selves upon a whyning lover
In charity, I hope my Cousens Ghost
Will meete, as you go to Church, or if
You scape it then, upon the Wedding night—
Fy, Fy.
When you are both a bed and candles out.
Nay put not out the candles.
May they burne blew then, at his second kisse
And fright him from—well I could say something
But take your course—he's come already.
Put him off, but another twelue moneth, so, so,
Oh love into what foolish labyrinthes
Dost thou leade us! I would all women were
But of my minde, we would have a new world
Quickly, I will goe studie Poetry,
A purpose, to write verses in the praise
Of th' Amazonian Ladies, in whom only
Appeare true valour (for the instruction
Of all posterity) to beate their husbands.
How you endeare your servant.
I will not
Be guilty of more stay.
Sweete Lady.
Y'are come in time Sir, to redeeme me.
Why Lady.
You wilbe as comfortable as strong waters,
There's a Gentleman.
So uncivill to affront you?
I had no patience to heare him longr;
Take his offence before you question him.
And be most happy if by any service
You teach me to deserve your faire opinion.
It is not civill to uesdrop him, but
I'me sure he talkes on't now.
Of what?
Of Love, is any thing more ridiculous?
You know I never cherish that condition,
In you tis the most harsh unpleasing discord,
But I hope you will be instructed better
Knowing how much my fancy goes against it,
Talke not of that and welcome.
You retaine
I see your unkind temper, will no thought
Soften your heart, disdaine agrees but ill
With so much beauty; if you would perswade,
Me not to love you, strive to be lesse faire;
Vndoe that face, and so become a Rebell,
To heaven and Nature.
You doe love my face then!
As heavenly prologue to your minde, I doe not
Dote like Pigmalion on the colours!
No you cannot, his was a painted Mistris,
Or if it be the minde you so pretend
To affect, you encrease my wonder of your folly,
For I have told you that so often.
What?
My minde so opposit to all your Courtship,
That I had rather heare the redious tales
Of Hollinghead, then any thing that trenches
On Love, if you come fraught with any,
Cupids devises, keepe em for his whirligiggs,
Or lande the next edition of his Messenger,
Or post with a mad packet, I shall but
Laugh at them, and pitty you.
That pitty—
Doe not mistake me, it shall be a vry
Miserable pitty without love!
Were I a man, and had but halfe that hansom nesse,
(For though I have not love, I hate detraction,)
Ere I would put my invention to the sweate
Of Complement, to court my Mistris hand
And call her smile blessing beyond a Sunne beame,
Entrat to wait upon her, give her Rings
With wanton, or most lamentable Poesies,
I would turne thrasher.
This is a new doctrine,
From women.
'I will concern your peace, to hav some faith in't.
You would not be neglected.
You neglect
Your selves, the Noblenesse of your birth and nature
By servile flattery of this jigging,
And that coy Mistresse, keepe your priviledge
Your Masculine property.
Is there
So great a happinesse in nature!
Theres one
just a your minde; can there be such happinesse
In nature, fye upont if it were possible,
That ever I should be so mad to love,
To which I thanke my Starres I am not inclin'd,
I should not hold such servants worth my garters,
Though they would put me in security
To hang themselves, and ease me of their visits.
Y'are a strange gentlewoman! why, look you Lady?
I am not so inchanted with your vertues
But I do know my selfe, and at what distance
To looke upon such Mistresses,
I can be scurvely conditiond, you are—
As thou dost hope for any good, rayle now
But a little.
I could provoke you.
To laugh, but not to ly downe, why! prethe do!
Goe y'are a foolish creature, and not worth
My services.
A loud that they may hear,
The more the merrier, Ile tak't as kindly
As if thou hadst given me the Exchange, what all this cloud
Without a shower?
Y'are most ingratefull!
Good, abominable peevish, and a wench
That would be beaten, beaten blacke and blew.
And then perhaps she may have colour for't,
Come, come, you cannot scold with confidence
Nor with grace, you should looke bigge and swear
You are no gamster, practise Dice
And Cardes a little better, you will get
Many confusions and fine curses by't.
Is not she mad?
To shew I have my reason
Ile give you some good Councell; and be plaine wo'yee
None that have eyes, will follow the direction
Of a blinde guide, and what dee thing of Cupid?
Women are either fooles, or very wise,
Take that from me, the foolish women ar
Not worth your love, and if a woman know
How to be wise, she wonot care for you.
Do you give all this Councell without a Fee?
Come, be lesse wild! I know you cannot be
So hard of soule.
Prethee let my body alon!
Why are you thus peremptory? had
Your mother bin so cruell to mankinde,
This heresy to love, with you had bin unborne.
My mother was no maide.
How Lady?
She was married long ere I was borne, I take it,
Which I shall never be, that rules infallible,
I would not have you foold it'h expectation,
A favour all my Sutors cannot baost of,
Goe home and say your praiers, I wonot looke
For thanks till seven yeare hence.
I know not what
To say, yes I will home and thinke a Satyre,
Waseer man Ieer'd thus for his good will?
The Licence wilbe soone dispatcht.
Leave that
To my care Lady, and let him preume,
Whom you intend to blesse with such a gift,
Seale on your lips the assurance of his heart,
I have more wings then Mercury, expect
Your servant in three minutes.
Take more time!
Youle over heate your selfe and catch a surfet.
My nimble Lady I ha busines, wee
Will have a Dialogue another time.
You do intend to marry him then.
I have promised
To be his wife, and for his more security
This morning.
How? this morning?
What should one
That has resolv'd lose time? I do not love
Much ceremony, suits in love, should not
Like suits in Law, be rack'd from tearme to tearme.
You will joyne issue presently, without your councell,
You may be ore throwne; take heed, I have knowne wives
That have bin ore throwne in their owne case, and after
Non suited too, thats twice to be undone,
But take your course, some Widdowes have bin mortifyed.
And Maides do now and then meete with their match.
What is in your Condition makes you weary?
Y'are sicke of plenty and command, you have
Too too much liberty, too many servants,
Your Ieweles are your owne, and you would see
How they will shew upon your husbands wagayle,
You have a Coach now, and a Christian Livery
To waite on you to Church, and are not Catechise'd
When you come home, you have a waitingwoman,
A Monkey, Squirrell, and a brase of Islands
Which may be thought superfluous in your family
When husbands come to rule. A pretty Wardrobe
A Tayler of your owne, a Doctor too
That knowes your body, and can make you sicke
It'h spring, or fall, or when you have a minde to't
Without controule, you have the benefite
Of talking loud and idle at your table
May sing a wanton ditty, and not be chidde,
Dance and goe late to bed, say your owne prayers,
Or goe to Heaven by your Chaplaine.
Very fine.
And will you lose all this? For I Sisley, take thee Iohn,
To be my Husband; keepe him still to be your servant,
Imitate me, a hundred suiters cannot
Be halfe the trouble of one husband. I
Dispose my frownes, and favours like a Princesse
Deject, advance, undo, create againe
It keepes the Subjects in obedience,
And teaches em to looke at me with distance.
But you encourage some.
Tis when I ha nothing else to do for sport,
As for example.
But I am not now in tune to heare em, prethee
Lets withdraw.
Nay, nay, Lady we must follow yee.
Musicke and revelles? they are very merry.
By your favour Sir.
Y'are welcome.
Pray is this a dancing Schoole.
No dancing Schoole.
And yet some voyces sound like women.
Wilt please you
To taste a cup of Wine, tis this day free
As at a Coronation; you seeme
A Gentleman.
Prethee who dwels here?
The house this morning was a widdowes Sir!
But now her husbands, without circumstance
She is married.
Prethee her name.
Her name was Mistresse Bonont.
How long since her husband dyed.
Tis two yeares since she had intelligenc
He was cast away, at his departure he
Engag'd her to a seven yeares expectation
Which full expir'd this morning she became
A Bride.
What's the gentleman she has married.
A man of pretty fortune, that has bin
Her servant many yeares.
How dee meane wantonly, or does he serve for wages.
Neyther, I meane a Suitor.
Cry' mercy, may I be acquainted with his name.
And his person too, if you have a minde too't
Maister Lacy, Ile bring you to him.
Mr. Lacy, may be tis he, would thou couldst helpe me to
A sight of this gentleman, I ha businesse with
One of his name, and cannot meete with him.
Please you walke in.
I would not bee intruder
In such a day, if I might onely see him.
Follow me and Ile do you that favour.
Whose that peepes?
Peepes! whose that? faith you shall dance.
Good Sir you must excuse me, I am a stranger.
Your tongue does walke our language, and your fete
Shall do as we do, take away his Cloake
And Sword, by this hand you shall dance Monsieure No pardonne moye!
Well said Maistr Bridegrome, the gentleman
May perhappes want exercise.
He will not take it well.
Th Bridegrom's merry!
Take me no takes, come choose your irk
For dance you shall.
I cannot, youle not compell me.
I ha sworne.
Tis an affront as I am a Gentleman,
I know not how to foote your Chamber jigges.
No remedy, heres a Lady longes for one vagari
Fill a boule of Sack, and then to the Canaries.
You are circled with your friends, and do not well
To use this priviledge to a Gentlemans
Dishonour.
You shall shake your heeles.
I shall, Ladies tis this gentlemans desir
That I should make you mirth, I cannot dance
I tell you that afore.
He seemes to be a Gentleman and a Souldier.
Good Mars be not so sullen, youle do more
With Venus privately.
Because this Gentleman is engag'd Ile try.
Will you excuse me yet.
Play excuse me, yes any thing you'le call for.
This motion every morning will be wholsome
And beneficiall to your body Sir.
So, so.
Your pretty lump requires it.
Wheres my sword, sir I have bin your hobby horse.
You danc't something like one.
Ieere on my whimsy Lady.
Pray impute it
No trespasse studdied to affront you Sir,
But to the merry passion of a Bridegrome.
Prethee stay, weele to Hide Parke togethr!
There you meet with Morrisdancers, for
You Lady I wish you more joy, so farewell.
Comes, ha tother wherle, lustily boyes!
You are resolv'd then.
I have no other care left,
And if I doo't not quickely my affection
May be too farre spent, and all physicke will
Be cast away.
You will shew a Manly fortitude.
When saw you Maister Tryer?
Not since yesterday!
Are not his visits frequent?
He does see me sometimes!
Come! I know thou lov'st him! and he will
Deserve it, hee's a pretty gentleman.
It was your Character, that first commended
Him to my thoughts!
If he be flow to answere it
Hee loses me againe, his minde more then
His fortune gain'd me to his praise, but I
Trifle my pretious time.
Farewell! al my good wishes stay with thee.
And mine attend you! Maister Tryer.
I come to kisse your hand.
And take your leave.
Onely to kis't againe!
You begin to be a stranger! in two mornings
Not one visit, where you professe affection.
I should be surfetted with happinesse
If I should dwell here.
Surfets in the Spring
Are dangerous, and yet I never hard,
A lover would absent him from his Mistris
Through feare to be more happy, but I alow
That for a Complement, and dispute not with you
A reason of your actions y'are now welcome
And though you should be guilty of neglect,
My love would over-come any suspition.
You ar all goodnesse
With me prethee admit him!
Sir, my Lord saw you enter, and desires
To speake with you!
His Lordship shall command, where is he?
Below Sir!
Say, I instantly waite on him?
Shall I presume upon your favour Lady?
In what!
That I may entreate him hither, you will honour me
To bid him welcome, he is a gentleman
To whom I owe all services, and in
himselfe is worthy of your entertainment.
If he be yours command me!
My Lord! excuse
Nay I prevent your trouble—Lady I am
Your humble servant, pardon my intrusion
I hano businesse, only I saw you enter.
Your Lordship honours me.
What gentlewoman's this.
Wy—
A Lady of pleasure, I like her y, it has
A prety twirle, wot-will she bid one welcome.
Be confident my Lord, sweete Lady pray
Assure his Lordship he is welcome,
I want words.
Oh sweete Lady your lip in silence
Speakes the best language.
Your Lordship's welcome to this humble roofe!
I am confirm'd.
If your knew Lady, what
Perfection of honour dwels in him,
You would be studious with all ceremony
To enter taine him! beside, to me
His Lordship's goodnes hath so flow'd, you cannot
study, what will oblige more then in his welcome!
Come, you Complement.
Though I want both ability and languag,
My wishes shall be zealous to expresse me
Your humble servant:
Come, that humble was
But complement in you too.
I wood not
Be guilty of dissembling with your Lordship,
I know words have more proportion
With my distance to your birth and fortune,
Then humble servant.
I doe not love thes distancs.
You would have her be more humble, this will try hr,
If shee resist his siege, she is a brave one,
I know hee'le put her too't, he that doth love
Wisely, will see the triall of his Mistris,
And what I want in impudence my selfe,
Another may supply for my advantag,
Ile frame excuse!
Franke thou art melancholy!
My Lord I now reflected on a businesse,
Concernes me equall with my fortune, and
It is the more unhappy that I must,
So rudely take my leave.
What? not so soone.
Your honours pardon.
Are you sir in earnest!
Love will instruct you to intrpret fairely,
They are affaires that cannot be dispenced with,
I leave this noble gentleman.
Hee's a stranger,
You wonot use me well, and shw no care
Of me, nor of my honour, I pray stay!
Thou hast vertue to secure all, I am confidnt,
Temptations will shake thy innocence,
No more then waves, that clime a Rocke, which soon
Betray their weakenesse, and discover thee,
More cleare and more impregnable
How is this?
Farewell, I will not sin against your honours clemncy
To doubt your pardon.
Well and there be no remedy I shall see you
Anon ith Parke, the Match holds, I am not willing
To leave you alone Lady.
I have a servant.
You have many, in their number pray write me,
I shall be very dutifull.
Oh my Lord!
And when I have done a fault I shall be instructed,
But with a smile to mend it.
Done what fault?
Faith none at all, if you but thinke so.
I thinke your Lordship would not willingly
Offend a woman.
I would never hurt em,
'Thas bin my study still to please those women,
That fell within my conversation.
I am very tender hearted to a Lady,
I can denie em nothing.
The whole sex is bound to you.
If they well considered things,
And what a stickler I am in their cause,
The common cause, but most especially
How zealous I am in a Virgins honour,
As all true Knights should be, no woman could
Deny me hospitality, and let downe,
When I desire accesse, the rude Portcullice,
I have a naturall sympathy with faire ones,
As they do, I do! theres no hansome woman
Complaines, that she has lost her maindenhead;
But I wish mine had bin lost with it.
Your Lordship's merry!
Tis because you looke pleasant,
A very hansome Lodging, is there any
Accomodations that way.
Ther's a garden,
Wilt please your Lordship tast the ayre on't.
I meant othr conveniency, but if
You please Ile waite upon you thither.
You and I had better stay, and in their absence
Exercise one another.
How meane you Page.
Ile teach you away that we may follow em,
And not remove from hence.
How prethee?
Shall I begge your lip?
I cannot spare it.
Ile give you both mine.
What meanes the Child?
Because I have no upper lip, dee scorne me?
I ha kist Ladies before now, and have
Beene sent for to their Chambers.
You, sent for!
Yes, and beene trusted with their Clossets too!
We are such pretty things, we can play at
All hid under a Fardingale; how long
Have you bin a waiting creature?
Not a moneth yet.
Nay then I cannot blam your ignoranc, You have perhappes your maidenhead.
I hope so.
Oh lamentable! away with it for shame,
Chaffer it with the Coachman, for the credit
Of your profession, do not keepe it long,
Tis fineable in Court.
Good Maister Page,
How long have you bin skild in those affaires?
Ere since I was in Breeches, and youle finde
Your honesty so troublesome.
How so.
When you have truck'd away your Maidenhad,
You have excuse lawfull, to put off gamesters,
For you may sweare, and give em satisfaction,
You have not what they lookt for, beside the benefit
Of being impudent as accasion serves,
A thing much in rqust, with waiting cratures,
We Pages can instruct you in that quality,
So you be tractable.
The boy is wild.
And you will leade me a Chase, il follow you.
Why, did you ever thinke, I could affect
Of all men living such a thing as you are.
What hope, or what encouragement did I give you
Because I tooke your Diamond, must you presently
Bound like a ston'd horse.
Shee's a very Colt!
Cause you can put your hat of like a dancr,
And make a better legge, then you were borne to,
For to say truth your calfe is well amended,
Must this so overtake me, that I must
Strait fall in love w'e yee, one step to Church,
Another into the Sheets, more to a bargaine
Y'are wide a bow, and some thing over shot.
Thn this is all that I must trust to, you
Will never ha me?
In my right minde, I thinke so
Why, prethee tell me what I should do with thee?
Can you finde nothing to do with me!
To finde any Monkey spiders, were an office
Perhappes you would not execute!
Y'are a gipsy!
And none of the twelue Sibills in a Tarverne,
Have such a tand complexion, there be Dogges
And Horses in the world.
They'le kepe you company!
Tell me of Spiders?
Ile wring your Monkeys necke off.
And then puzzle
Your braine to make an Elegie, which shalb sung
To the tune of the devill and the baker, good!
You have a pretty ambling wit in Summer,
Dee let out, or keepe for your own
Riding, who holdes your stirrop, while you jump
Into a jest, to the endangering
Of your ingenious quodlibets.
Come tha'st said enough.
To him, you would have som.
Some testimony of your love, if it please you.
Indeed I have heard you are a pretious gentleman,
And in your younger, could play at trap well.
Fare you well gentlewoman, by this light a devill,
Ile follow my old game of horse-rasing.
I could teare her Ruffe! I wo'd thou wort
A Whore then ide be reveng'd, and bring the Prentices
To arraigne thee on Shrovetuesday, a pox upon you.
A third man, a third man, two faire gamesters.
For shame lets goe!
Will you stay gentleman; you ha no more wit,
To venter, keepe your heads warme in any case,
There may be dregges in the bottome othe braine pan,
Which may turne to somewhat in seven yeares, and set
You up againe, now Sir.
Lady I am come to you.
It does appeare so.
To take my leave.
Tis granted Sir god buy.
But you must stay and heare a little more,
I promise not to trouble you with Courtship,
I am as weary as you can b displeased woot.
On these conditions, I would have the patinc
To heare the brasen head speake.
Whether, or how I purpose to dispose
My selfe hereafter, as I know you have
No purpose to enquire, I have no great
Ambition to discourse, but how I have
Studied your faire opinion, I remit
To time, and come now only to request
That you would grant, in lew of my true service
One boone at parting.
Forboone I proceede!
But you must sweare to prforme truely what
I shall desire, and that you may not thinke
I come with any cunning to deceive you,
You shall except what ere you would deny me,
And after all Ile make request.
How's this?
But it concernes my life, or what can else
Be neerer to me that you sweare.
To what?
When you have made exceptions and thought,
What things in all the world you will exempt,
From my petition, Ile be confident
To tell you my desire.
This is faire play!
I would not for an Empire by a trick
Oblige you to performe, what should displease you.
This is a very strange request; are you in earnest;
Ere you begin shall I except? tis oddes
But I may include, what you have a minde to, then
Wheres your petition?
I will runne that hazard.
You will, why looke you; for a little mirthes sake,
And since you come so honestly, because
You shannot say, I am compos'd of Marble,
I doe consent.
Sweare!
I am not come to that,
Ile first set bounds to your request, and whn
I have left nothing for you worth my grant,
Ile take a zealous oath to grant you any thing.
You have me at your mercy!
First, you shannot
Desire that I should love you!
That's first, proceede!
No more but proceede, dee know what I say.
Your first exception forbid's to aske
That you should love me.
And you are contented.
I must be so.
What in the nam of wonder will h ask m,
You shall not desire me to marry you.
That's the second.
You shall neither directly, nor indirectly with m to lye with you,
Have I not clipt the wings of your conceipt.
That's the third.
That's the third, is there anything a young man would Desire of his Mis, when he must neither love, marry, nor lye with her.
My suite is still untoucht.(with her.
Suite! if you have another suite tis out of fashion,
Ye cannot begge my state, yet I would willigly
Give part of that to be rid on thee.
Not one Iewell.
You wo'd not have me spoyle my fac, drinke poyson,
Or kill any body.
Goodnesse forbid that I should wish your danger.
Then you wo'd not ha me ride through the Citty naked,
As once a Princesse of England did through Coventry.
All my desires are modest.
You shall not begge my Parrat nor intreate me
To fast, or weare a hayre smocke.
None of these.
I wonot be confin'd to make me ready
At tenne, and pray till dinner, I will play
At gleeke as often as I please, and see
Playes when I have a minde to't and the racs,
Though men sho'd runne Adamits before me.
None of these trench on what I have to ask.
Why then I sweare—stay
You shannot aske me before company
How old I am, a question most untoothsome,
I know not what to say more, Ile not be
Bound from spring garden, and the Sparagus.
I wo'not have my tongue tyde up, when Iv'e
a minde to jeere my suitors, among which
Your worship shall not doubt to be rmmbrd,
For I must have my humor, I am sicke else;
I will not be compeld to heare your sonnets,
A thing before, I thought to advise you of,
Your words of hard concoction rude Poetry
Have much impayred my health, try sence another while
And calculate some prose according to
The elevation of our pole at London,
As sayes the learned Almanacke—but com on
And speake your minde, I ha done, I know not what
More to except, if it be none of these
And as you say feazable on my part,
I sweare.
By what.
For once a kisse, it may be a parting blow,
By that I will performe what you desire.
In few words thus receive it, by that oath
I binde you, never to desire my company
Hereafter, for no reason to affect me,
This I am sure was none of your exceptions.
What has the man sayd?
Tis cleere, I am confident
To your understanding.
You have made me sweare
That I must never love you, nor desire
Your company.
I know you will not violate,
What you have sworne, so all good thoughts possesse you.
Was all this circumstance for this? I never
Found any inclination to trouble him
With too much love, why should he binde me from it,
And make me sweare, an oath that for the present,
I had no affection to him, had beene reasonable,
But for the time to come, never to love,
For any cause or reason, that may move m
Hereafter, very strange, I know not what to thinke on't,
Although I never meant, to thinke well on him,
Yet to be limitted, and be prescrib'd,
I must not do it? twas a poore tricke in him,
But Ile goe practise something to forget it.
Lady y'are welcome to the spring, the Parke
Lookes fresher to salute you, how the birds
On every tree sing; with more cheerefullnesse
At your accesse, as if they prophecyed
Nature would dye, and resigne her providence
To you, fit onely to succeede her.
You expresse
A Master of all Complement, I have
Nothing but plaine humilitie, my Lord
To answere you.
But ile speake our owne English,
Hang these affected straines, which we sometims
Practise, to please the curiosity
Of talking Ladyes, by this lippe th'art welcome,
Ile sweare a hundred oathes upon that booke,
An't please you.
They are at it.
You shall not need my Lord, I'm not incredulous.
I doe beleeve your honour, and dare trust
For more than this.
I wonot breakē my credit
With any Lady that dares trust me.
She had a cruell heart, that would not ventur
Vpon the ingagement of your honour.
What? what durst thou venture now, and be plain wo'm
There's nothing in the verg of my command
That should not serve your Lordship.
Speake, speake truth and flatter not,
Vpon what security?
On that which you propounded sir, your honour,
It is above all other obligation,
And he that's truely noble will not stain it.
Vpon my honour will you lend me then
But a nights lodging.
How sir.
She is angry
I shall obtaine, I know the tricke ont, had
She yeelded at the first it had beene fatall.
It seemes your Lordship speakes to on you know not.
But I desire to know you better Lady.
Better! I should desire my Lord.
Better or worse, if you dare venture one,
Ile hazard t'other.
Tis your Lordships mirth.
Y'are in the right, tis the best mirth of all.
Ile not beleve my Lord you meane so wantonly
As you professe.
Refuse me if I doe not
Not meane? I hop you have more Charity
Then to suspect, Ile not performe as much,
And more than I ha said, I know my fault,
I am too modest when I undertake,
But when I am to Act let me alone.
You shall be alone no longer
My good Lord.
Franck Tryer.
Which side holds your honour.
I am o'thy side Franck.
I thinke so! for
All the Park's against me, but 6. to 4.
Is oddes enough.
Is it so much against you.
Lady I thinke tis two, to on.
We were on even termes till you came hithr,
I finde her yeelding, and when they doe run?
They say presently.
Will you venture any thing Lady?
Perhaps she reserves her selfe for the horse rac.
There I may venture somewhat with his Lordship.
That was a witty one.
You will b doing.
You are for the footmn.
I runne with the Company.
Ile go your halfe.
No thanke you Iack, would I had tenn pecs more
On't.
Which side.
On the Irishman.
Done! Ile maintaine the English,
As many more with you, I love to cherish
Our owne Countrymen.
Tis done my Lord.
Ile rooke for once, my Lord Ile hold you twenty more
Done with you too.
Your Lordship is very confident.
Ile lay with you too.
Lye with her h meanes.
Come, you shall venture something,
What gold against a kisse, but if you lose,
You shall pay it formally downe upon my lipp.
Though she should winne, it would be held extortion
To take your money.
Rather want of modesty,
A great sinne if you observe the circumstance,
I see his Lordshippe has a disposition
To be merry, but proclaime not this free laye
To every one, some women in the world
Would hold you all day.
But not all night swete Lady.
Will you not see 'em my Lord?
Franck Tryar, youle waite upon this gntlwoman,
I must among the gamesters, I shall quickly
Returne to kisse your hand.
How dee like this gallant.
Hee's one it becomes not m to censur.
Dee not finde him coming, a wilde gentleman
You may in tim convrt him.
You made me acquainted with him to that purpose,
It was your confidence, Ile do what I can,
Because he is your noble Friend, and one
In whom was hid so much perfection
Of honour, for at first 'twas most invisibl,
But it begins to appeare, and I do perceive
A glimering, it may breake out a flame,
I shall know all his thoughts at our next conference,
He has a secrt to impart he sayes
only to me.
And will you heare it?
Yes Sir, if it be honourable there is no harm in't,
If otherwise you do not doubt my innocence.
But do not tempt a danger.
From his Lordship.
I do not say from him.
From mine owne frailety.
I dare not conclude that but from the mattr
Of his discourse, on which there may depend
A circumstance that may not prove so happy.
Now I must tell you Sir, I see your heart
Is not so just as I deserve, you have
Engag'd me to his conversation,
Provok'd by jealous thoughts, and now your feare
Betrayes your want of goodnes, for he never
was right at home, that dare suspect his Mistris,
Can love degenerate in noble breasts,
Collect the arguments, that could invite you
To this unworthy tryall, bring them to
My forehead, where you shall inscribe their names
For virgins to blush at me, if I do not
Fairely acquit my selfe.
Nay be not passionat.
I am not Sir so guilty to b angry,
But you shall give me leave unlesse you will
Declare, you dare not trust me any further,
Not to breake off so rudely with his, Lordship.
I Will hear what he meanes to say to me,
And if my councell may prevaile with you,
You shannot interrupt us, have but patience
Ile keepe the story for you, and assure
My ends have no base mixture, not my lov
To you could bribe me to the least dishonour,
Much lesse a stranger, since I have gone so farre
By your commission, I will proceede
A little further at my perrill Sir.
I know thou art proofe against a thousand Engins,
Pursue what waies you please.
This morning married?
That your brothers Mistris.
She that Ieeres all within Gunshotte.
In the way of Suiters,
She is reported such a tyrant.
My Brother.
Frank Tryer.
Brother do you know that gentlewoman.
Tis she, then you and I must seeme more familier,
And you shannot be angry.
What gentlewomans that?
She does not know thee.
Was this his reason, pray if you love me lets
Walke by that gentleman.
Master Fairefeild.
Is that well trust gentleman on of them that run.
Your sweet heart.
Ha, ha, Ide laugh at that!
If you allow a bushell of salt to acquaintanc,
Pray vouchsafe two words to a bargaine while you live
I scarce remember him, keepe in great heart.
Oh Sir you are very well met here.
We are met indeed, Sir thanke you for your musick.
It is not so much worth.
I made you merry Mastr Bridgrom.
I could not choose but laugh.
Be there any races here.
Yes Sir horse and foote.
Youle give me leave to tak my Course then.
This is the Captaine that did Dance.
Not so nimbly as your wit, pray let mē ask you a question.
I heare that gentlewoman's married.
Married without question Sir.
Dee think he has bin aforehand.
How dee meane.
In English has he plaid the forward gamestr
And turnd up trump.
Before the Cards be shufled?
I lay my life you mane a coate Card
Deale againe, you gave one to many
In the last tricke, yet Ile tell thee what I thinke.
What?
I thinke she and you might ha shewn more wit.
Why she and I?
She to ha kept her selfe a Widdow, and
You not to have asked me such a foolish question,
But if sh had beene halfe so wise, as in
My conscience she is honest, you had mist
That excellent occasion, to shew
Your notable skill in dancing, but it pleasd
The learned destinies to put things together,
And so we separate.
Fare yee well Mistris.
Come hither, go to that gntleman Mr. Fairefeild.
Prethee sweete heart who runnes?
An Irish and an English footeman?
Will they runne this way?
Iust before you, I must have a bet!
Nay, nay you shannot leave me.
Do it discreetely, I must speake to him,
To ease my heart I shall burst else,
Weele expect em here, Cousen, do they runne nakd?
That were a most immodest sight.
Her hav bin such fellowes, Cousen.
It would fright the women!
Some are of opinion it brings us hither,
Harke what a confusion of tongues there is,
Let you and I venture a paire of Gloves
Vpon their feete, Ile take the Irish.
Tis done, but you shall pay if you lose.
Heres my hand, you shall have the Gloves if you winn.
I thinke they are started.
A Teag, A Teag, make way for shame.
I hold any man forty peeces yet.
A hundred pound to ten, a hundred pces to tn, will
No man take me?
I hold you Sir.
Well you shall see, a Teag a Teag hey.
Ha well run Irish.
He may be in a Bogg anon.
Can they tell what they doe in this Noise,
Pray Heaven it do not breake into the Tombes
At Westminster, and wake the dead.
She's yonder still, she thinks thee a new Mistris.
I observe her.
How goe thinges Franke.
Prethee observe that creature.
She leeres this way.
I ha done such a strang cure upon her,
Sh'as sent for me, and I will entreate thee Franke
To be a witnes of my triumph, tis
Now in my power to punish all her Ieeres,
But Ile go to her, thou shalt keepe a distance
Only to heare, how most miraculously
I ha brought things about.
The cry returnes.
Make way there, a Teag, a Teag, a Teag.
Forty, fifty, a hundred peeces to ten.
I hold you.
Well you shall see, you shall see.
This gentleman does nothing but talke, he maks good
No bet.
Talke? you prate, Ile make good what I please Sir.
Make the best you can o' that.
For heavens sake lets remove.
What for a naked weapon!
Fight gentlemen, y'are fine fellowes, 'tis a noble cause,
Come Lady Ile discharge your feares,
A Cup of Sacke, and Anthony at the Rose
Will reconcile their furies.
I make a doubt whether I should go to hr,
Vpon a single summons.
By any meanes.
What women are forbidden
They're mad to execute, she's here, be you
It'h reach of her voyce, and see how I will humble hr.
But keepe at some fit distance.
You honour me, and shall
Command me any service.
He has gone a strange way to work with me.
Well advis'd, observe and laugh without a noise.
I am asham'd to thinke what I must say now.
By your leave Lady! I take it you sent for me?
You wonnot be so impudent, I, send for you▪
By Whom or when?
Your servant—
Was a villaine if he mention'd
I had any such desire, he told me indeed
You courted him to entreate me that I would
Be pleas'd to give you another audience,
And that you swoare, I know not what confound you,
You would not trouble me above six words.
You ar prettily dispos'd.
With much adoe you see I have consentd,
What is't you would say?
Nay, what is't, you would say?
Be you no prompter to insinuate
The first word of your studied Oration,
He's out ons part, come, come Ile imagine it,
Was it not something to this purpose—Lady,
Or Mistresse, or what you will, although
I must confesse; you may with justice laugh at
My most ridiculous suite, and you will say
I am a foole.
You may say any thing.
To come a gen, whom you hav so tormnted,
For nere was simple Camomile so trod on,
Yet still I grow in love, but since there is
No hope to thaw your heart, I now am desperate,
Oh give me, lend me but the silken tye,
About your legge, which some doe call a garter,
To hang my selfe, and I am satisfied, am not I a witch.
I thinke th'art past it,
Which of the furies art thou made already,
I shall depart the world, nere feare it Lady,
Without a necklace, did not you send for me.
I shall laugh a loud sir.
What madnesse has
Possest you? have I not sworne you know by what,
Never to thinke well of you, of all men
Living, not to desire your companie,
And will you still intrude, shall I be haunted
For ever, no place give me priviledge;
Oh man what art thou come to?
Oh woman!
How farre thy tongue and heart doe live asunder,
Come; I ha found you out, off with this vayle,
It hides not your complexion, I doe tell thee,
I see thy heart, and every thought within it,
A little peevishnesse to save your credit
Had not bene much amisse, but this over
Over doing the businesse it appeares
Ridiculous, like my suite as you inferred,
But I forgive thee and forget thy trickes
And trillabubs, and will sweare to love thee
Hartily; wenches must ha their wayes.
Pardon me sir, if I have seem'd too light,
It was not rudenesse from my heart, but a
Disguise to save my honour if I found
You still incredulous.
I love thee better
For thy Vagaries.
In vaine I see I should dissemble w'e,
I must confesse y'ave caught me, had you still
Pursued the common path, I had fled from you,
You found the constitution of women
In me, whose will, not reason is their law,
Most apt to doe, what most they are forbidden,
Impatient of curbes in their desires.
Thou sayest right.
Oh love I am thy Captive, but I am forsworn▪
Am I not sir?
Nere thinke o' that.
Nere thinke on't.
Twas a vaine oath, and well may be dispenst with,
Oh sir, be more religious, I never
Did violate an oath in all my life,
Though I ha beene wilde, I had a care of that,
An oathe's a holy obligation,
And never dreaming of this chance, I tooke it
With true intention to performe your wishes,
Twas but a kisse, Ile give it thee agen.
But tis inrold in that high Court already,
I must confesse, I could looke on you now
With other eyes, for my rebellious heart
Is soft and capeable of loves impression,
Which may prove dangerous, if I cherish it,
Having forsworne your love.
Now I am fitted.
I have made twigges to ierke my selfe—well thought on
You shall absolve your selfe, your oath does not
Oblige you to performe what you excepted,
And among them, if you remember, you
Said you must have your humor you'd be sicke else,
Now if your humor be to breake your oath
Your obligation's void.
You have releev'd me!
But do not triumph in your conquest sir,
Be modest in your victory.
Will not you
Fly off againe, now Y'are at large.
If you
Suspect it, call some witnsse of my vowes,
I will contrct my selfe.
And I am provided,
Franke Tryer appeare, and shew thy Phinomy,
He is a Friend of mine, and you may trust him.
What summe of money is it you would borrow.
I borow?
This gentleman your friend has fully
Possest me with your wants, nay do not blush,
Debt is no sinne, though my owne monyes sir
Are all abroad, yet upon good security,
Which he answeres you can put in, I will
Speake to a friend of mine.
What security?
Your selves, and two sufficient Aldermen,
For men are mortall and may breake.
What meane you?
You shall have fifty pounds for forty wekes
To do you a pleasure.
Youle not use me thus?
Fare you well, you have miraculously brought things about.
You worke by stratagem and Ambuscado.
Do you not thinke your selfe a proper gentleman,
Whom by your want of haire some hold a wit too,
You know my heart, and every thought within it
How I am caught, do I not melt like hony
It'h dogge daies, why do you looke so staring.
Do not you love me for all this?
Would I had Art enough to draw your picture,
It would shew rarely at the exchange, you have
A medly in your face of many Nations,
Your Nose is Romane, which your next debauchment,
At Taverne with the helpe of pot or candlesticke
May turne to Indian flat, your lip is Austrian,
And you do well to bit it; for your Chinne
It does incline to the Bavarian poke,
But seven yeares may disguise it with a bard,
And make it more ill favoured; you have eyes
Especially when you goggle thus, not much
Vnlike a Iewes, and yet some men might take em
For Turkes, by the two halfe Moones that rise about m,
I am an Infidell to use him thus.
Till now I never was my selfe, farewell
For ever woman, not worth love or anger.
Dee heare one word,
I'de faine speake kindly to him,
Why dost not raile at me?
No, I will laugh at thee and at my selfe,
To have bin so much a foole, y'are a fine may game.
I shall foole too much, but one word more,
By all the faith and love of womankinde,
Beleeve me now, it wonot out.
Farewell
When next I dote upon thee be a Monster.
Harke sir the Nightingale, there is better lucke
Comming towards us.
When you are out of breath
You will give over, and for better lucke,
I do beleeve the bird, for I can leave thee,
And not be in love with my owne torment.
How sir.
I ha said, stay you and practise with the bird,
Twas Philoml thy say, and thou wert on,
I should new ravish thee.
I must to th' Coach and weepe, my heart will brak else,
I'me glad he does not see me.
Whither will you walke my Lord? you may engag
Your selfe too farre and lose your sport!
I would
Goe farther for a little sport, you mane
The horse race, they're not come into the Park yt,
I might doe something else, and returne time
Enough towinn five hundred peeces.
Your Lordship had no fortune in the last match,
I wish'd your confidence a happier successe.
We must loose sometimes—harke the Nightingale
You win my Lord I dare engag my selfe.
You make the Omen fortunate, this bird
Doth prophesie good lucke.
Tis the first time I heard it.
And I this spring, lets walke a little fur thr.
I am not weary but—
You may trust your person Lady.
I were too much wicked to suspect your honour
And in this place.
This place, th place were good nough
If you were bad enough, and as prepar'd
As I, there have beene stories that some hav
Strucke many deere within the Parke:
Foule play,
If I did thinke your honour had a thought
To Venture at unlawfull game, I should
Ha brought lesse confidence.
Ha Tryer,
What does he follow us?
To shew I dare
Be bold upon your vertue, tak no notic
Ile waft him back agn, my Lord walke forward.
Thus farre alone? yet why doe I suspect?
Hang jealousie tis naught, it breeds too many
Wormes in our braines, and yet she might ha suffered m,
Master Lacy, and his bride!
I was wont to have one alwayes in my chambr.
Thou sha't have a whole quire of Nightingales.
I heard it yesterday warble so prettily.
They say tis luckie, when it is the first
Bird that salutes our eare.
Doe you beleeve it.
I am of his minde, and love a happy Augury.
Observe the first note alwayes
Cuckoo?
Is this the Nightingale?
Why doe you looke so?
Are not we marryed,
I wood not have beene a bachelour to have heard it.
To them they say tis fatall.
And to marryed men
Cuckoo is no delightfull not, I shall
Be superstitious.
Lets walke a little furthr.
I waite upon thee, harke still ha ha ha.
I am not much in love with the broad ditty.
Frank Tryer, I ha beene seeking thee
About the Parke.
What to doe,
To be merry for halfe an hour, I finde
A scurvie Melancholy Creepe upon me,
Ile trye what sacke will doe, I ha sent my footman
To th' Maurice for a bottle, we shall meete him,
Ile tell thee to'ther story of my Lady.
Ile waite on you.
But that she is my sistr,
Ide ha thee forsware women, but lets walk.
This way they marched, I hop thy wonot leape
The pale, I do not know the disposition
Of my capring gentleman, and therefore two not
Be indiscretion to observe him, thinges
Must be a little better reconcil'd,
The Nightingale—this can presage no hurt,
But I shall lose my Pigeons, they are in view
Faire and farre off.
He must be a Pegaus that beates me.
Yet your confidence may deceive you, you will tide
Against a Iockey, that has horse-manshippe.
A Iocky, a Iackanapes a horse-backe rather,
A Monkey or a Masty dogge would shew
A Giant to him, and I were Alexander
I would lay the world upon my Mare, she shall
Run with the devill for a hundred peeces,
Make the match who will.
Not I, you shall excuse me,
Nor would I win his money.
Whose?
The devils, my gold has burnt this 12. moneths in my pockt,
A little of his amongst, would scorch my thighes
And make such tinder of my linings, that
My breeches never after, would hold mony,
But let these passe; wheres Lacy and his Bride?
They are walk't to heare the Nightingale.
The Nightingale? I ha not heard one this year ▪
Listen, and we shall heare one presently,
Cuckoo.
The bird speakes to you.
No tis to you.
Now do I suspct
I shall lose the race.
Despaire for a Cuckoo.
A Cuckoo wo'not flatter,
His word will goe before a gentlmans
It'h City? tis an understanding bird
And seldome failes, a Cuckoo, Ile hedge in
My money presently.
For shame be confident.
Will you goe halfe.
Ile goe it all, or any thing.
Hang Cuckoo's then.
My Lord, Bonvile, Lacy, and his bride!
How now gentlemen?
Your honours servants.
Ladies, I kisse your hands.
You are the man, will run away with all
The gold anon.
Your Iockey must fly else.
Ile hold your honour thirty peeces more.
Tis done.
Do you ride your selfe.
I shall have the Raines in my owne hand Lady.
Master Rider, saw you not my Cousen.
Cry mercy she is here, I thought y'ad follow'd us.
Your kinswoman,
I shall be honoured to be your servant Lady.
Alas my Lord youle lose by't!
What?
Honour me being my servant! her's a brace▪
Of gentlemen will tell you as much.
But will say nothing for our credits.
You looke as you had wept.
I weepe! For what?
Come toward the Lodge, and drinke a sillabub.
A match!
And as we walke, Iacke Venture thou shalt sing,
The song thou madst ot'h horses.
You shall pardon me.
What among friends? my Lord if you'd speake to him.
A song by all meanes, prethee, let me
Intreate it, what's the suctect▪
Of all the running horses.
Horses and Mares put them together.
Lets ha't, come I heard you can sing rarely.
An excellent voyce.
A Ravishing tone.
Tis a very ballad my Lord, and a course tune.
The better, why does any tune become
A gntleman so well as a ballad, hang
Curiosity in musicke, leave those crotchets
To men that get their living with a song,
Come come beginne.
COme Muses all that dwell nigh the fountaine,
Made by the winged horses heele,
Which firk'd with his rider over each Mountaine,
Let me your galloping raptures feele.
I doe not sing of fleas, or frogges,
Nor of the well mouth'd hunting dogges.
Let me be just all praises must,
Be given to well breath'd Iilian Thrust.
Young Constable and kill deeres famous,
The Cat the Mouse and Noddy Gray,
With nimble Pegabrig you cannot shame us,
With Spaniard nor with Spinola.
Hill climing white-rose, praise doth not lacke,
Hansome Dunbar, and yellow Iack.
But if I be just all praises must,
Be given to well breath'd lilian Thrust.
Sure Spurr'd sloven, true running Robin,
Of young shaver I doe not say lesse,
Strawbery Soame, and let Spider pop in,
Fine Brackly and brave lurching Besse.
Victorious too, was herring shotten,
And spit in's arse is not forgotten.
But if I be just all honour must
Be given to well breath'd Iilian Thrust.
Lusty Gorge and gentlemen, harke yet,
To wining Mackarell fine mouth'd Freake,
Bay Tarrall that won the cup at Newmarket,
Thundring tempest, black dragon eake.
Pretious sweetelippes, I doe not lose,
Nor Toby with his golden shoes,
But if I be just, all honour must,
Be given to well breath'd Iilian Thrust.
Excellent, how thinke you Lady?
I like it very well.
I never thought you were a Poet sir.
No no, I doe but dabble.
You can sing early too, how wre these parts
Observ'd, invisible?
You may see Lady.
Good sir your pardon▪
Doe you love singing, hum, la la.
Who would ha thought these qualities were in you,
Now or never.
Why I was cosend.
You are not the first I ha cosend, shall I wash
Your faces with the drops of Helicon, I ha fancies in my head.
Like Iupiter you want a Vulcan but
To cleave your skull, and out peepes bright Minerva.
When you returne Ile tell you more my Lord.
Give me a subject.
Prethee Cose doe.
Let it be how much you dare suffer for me.
Enough—hum, fa, la la.
Master Venter y' are expected.
Are they come?
This halfe houre my Lord.
I must see the Mare, you will excuse this rudenesse,
Sirra stay you and waite upon these Ladies.
Tis tim to make me ready,
Ladies I take this leave in prose,
You shall see me next in other fete.
I wish your sillabub were nectar Lady.
We thanke you sir, and here it comes already.
So so, is it good milke?
Of a Red Cow.
You talke as you inclin'd to a consumption,
Is the wine good?
It comes from his excellenc head!
My service to you Lady, and to him
Your thoughts prferre.
A health!
No depe one? tis lawfull for gentlewomen
To wish well to their friends.
You have oblig'd me—the wishes of all happinsse
To him you heart hath chosen.
Duty now▪
Requires I should be willing to rceiv it
As many joyes to you both, when you are marryd.
Marryed?
You have not vow'd to dye a virgin,
I know an humble servant of yours Lady?
Mine!
Would be sorry you should be a Nunne.
Dee thinke he loves me then?
I doe not thinke
He can dissemble where he does professe
Affection: I know his heart by mine;
Fairefield is my brother!
Your Brother? then th danger's not so great, but
Let us change our argument: with your pardon,
Come hither pretty one; how old are you?
I am young Lady, I hope you doe not take me for a
Dwarfe.
How yong I pray then?
Foure summers since my life was question'd,
And then a Iewry of yeares did passe upon me.
He is upon the matter then, fiften.
A game at Noddy.
You can play your Cards already it sem, come drink
A this sillabub!
I shall spoyle your game Ladies, for if there be sack
In't it may make you flush a three.
The boy would seeme witty.
I hope Ladies you will pardon me, my Lord
Commanded me to waite upon you, and
I can doe you no better service, than
To make you laugh.
They'r here, blesse you!
Master Fairefield you are welcome.
I presume so, but howsoever it skils not.
I doe not come to borrow money.
And yet all they that doe so are no fooles,
Money or Lands make not a man the wiser,
I know hansome gentlemen ha paun'd
Their cloathes.
Ile paune my skinne too with a woman.
Wipe your mouth, here's to you sir!
Ile pledge ye quicksilver, where's your Lord?
He has left Virgo sir, to goe to Libra,
To see the horsemen weighed.
Lady my service!
Brother, you interpose too farre, my Lord
Has us'd me honourably, and I must tell you
Some body has made a fault.
Master Fairefield!
I kisse your hand.
My Lord and you hav walk'd.
Yes sir.
My sister shall excuse, here's to thee and thy creame boul.
I thanke your worship.
There is more honesty in thy petticoat
Than twenty satten ones.
Doe you know that?
I know by her pale, and sh were othrwise
T'would turne her milke, come hither let me kisse the,
Now I am confirm'd, he that shall marry thee
Shall take thee a Virgin at my perill.
Ha you such skill in Maidenheads.
Ile know't by a kisse,
Better then any Doctor by her urine,
Be merry with thy Cow, farewell! com Franke,
That wit and good cloathes should infect a woman.
Ile tell you more hereafter, pray lets heare
Who winnes.
Your servant Ladies.
What dost thinke Iockey.
The crack oth'field against you
Let em crack Nuts.
What weight.
I thinke he has the heeles.
Get but the start.
How ever if I get within his quarters let m alone.
Mounts Chevall.
They are started.
Twenty pounds to fifteene.
Tis done we'e.
Forty pounds to thirty.
Done, done, Ile take all oddes.
My Lord I hold as much.
Not so.
Forty pounds to twenty.
Done, done.
You ha lost all my Lord, and it wr a Million.
In your imagination, who can helpe it?
Venture had the start and keepes it.
Gentlemen you have a fine time to triumph,
Tis not your oddes that makes you win.
Shall w vnture nothing oth' horses,
What oddes against my Lord?
Silke stockings.
To a paire of persum'd gloves I take it.
Done!
And I as much.
Done with you both!
Ile have em Spanish sent.
The stockings shalbe Scarlet, if you choose
Your sent, Ile choose my colour.
Tis done, if Venture
Knew but my lay it would halfe break his necke now,
And crying a Iockey hay.
Is the wind in that coast, harke the noyse.
Is Iockey now?
Tis but a paire of gloves.
Within a Iockey.
Still it holds.
How ha you sped my Lord?
Won, won, I knew by instinct,
The mare would put some tricke upon him.
Then we ha lost, but good my Lord the circumstance.
Great Iohn at all adventure and grave Iockey
Mounted their severall Mares, I shan'ot tell
The story out for laughing, ha, ha, ha,
But this in briefe Iockey was left behind,
The pitty and the scorne of all the oddes,
Plaid bout my eares like Cannon, but lesse dangerous.
I tooke all still, the acclamations was
For Venture, whose disdainefull Mare threw durt
In my old Iockeys face, all hopes for saking us,
Two hundred peeces desperate, and two thousand
Oathes sent after them, upon the suddaine,
When we expected no such tricke, we saw
My rider that was domineering ripe,
Vault ore his Mare into a tender flough,
Where he was much beholding to one shoulder,
For saving of his necke, his beast recovered,
And he by this time somewhat mortified,
Besids mortified, hath left the triumph
To his Olympick Adversary, who shall
Ride hither in full pompe on his Bucephalu
With his victorious bagpipe.
I would faine see how Venture lookes.
Hee's here, ha, ha,
I told you as much before, you would not
Beleeve the Cuckoo.
Why, how now sir!
And I had broke my necke in a cleane way,
Twou'ld nere ha griev'd me, Lady I am yours,
Thus Caesar fell.
Not in a slough dere Iacke.
You shall heare further from me.
Come to Knightsbridge.
That Cuckoo was a witch Ile take my death on't.
Here comes the Conquerer
From the Conquest of Ierusalem
Returnes Vespasian, &c. ha, ha, mer mercy Iockey.
I told you if I came within his quarters,
Omnes. A Iockey, a Iockey.
This shall be but your earnest, follow me
At pretty distance, and when I say draw,
Play me a galliard, by your favour sir,
Shall I speake a coole word with yee.
With all my heart.
You do owe me a dance if you rmember,
And I will have it now, no dispute, draw!
That wonot serve your turne, come shake your heeles,
You heare a tune, I will not change my toole,
For a case of Rapiers, keepe off at your perils
I ha sworne.
For havens sak some to part em.
Dost heare.
And you may heare the bagpip is not dumbe,
Will you to this geere, or doe you meane to try
How this will scoure you, come, come, Ile have it.
Hold, I will!
So, now we are on even tearmes, and if
You like it not, Ile use my tother instrument.
Th'art a brave fellow, come your wayes.
Hold! you shannot fight, ile understand
Your quarrell.
Good my Lord lets have one passe.
Your weapons shall runne through me,
And I must tell you sir, have beene injurious.
Good Lady why? in doing my selfe right.
In wronging me.
I am not sensible of that.
Could any shame be fastned upon him
Wherein I have no share.
I was provokt
By him if you remember, and was not
Borne so unequall to him I should uffer
His poore affront.
This was a day of peace,
The day wherein the holy priest hath tyed
Our hearts together, Hymen's Tapers yet
Are burning, and it cannot be a sinne
Lesse than a sacriledge, to extinguish them
With blood, and in contempt of heavens proceeding
Thus to conspire our separation
No Christian would prophane the marriage day,
And when all other wish us joyes, could you
Intrude your selfe to poyson all our mirth,
Blast in the very bud all our happinesse
Our hopes had layd up for us.
I was a stranger,
That makes ye more uncivill, w wer merry
Which could not offend you.
I had no thought
To violat your mirth.
What came you for?
With whom had ye acquaintance, or what favour
Gave you accesse, at so unfit a time
To interrupt our calme and free delights;
You cannot plead any abuse, where you
Were never knowne, that should incite you to
Revenge it there, I take it you were never
His Rivall.
Tis confest!
What malice then
Prevail'd above your reason to pursu us
With this injustice?
Lady, give me leave!
I were a villaine to be guilty of
The basenesse you accuse me? your servant
Shall quit me from intrusion, and my soule
Is my best witnesse, that I brought no malice
But unstay'nd thoughts into your roofe, but when
I was made the common laughter, I had bin
Lesse than a man, to thinke of no returne
And had he beene the onely of my blood,
I would not be so much the shame of soldir
To have beene am'd and suffered, and you are
Too hasty in your judgement, I could say
More, but tis dishonour to expostulate
These causes with a woman, I had reason
To call him to account, you know not all
My provocation, things are not with me as with another man.
How is that? the matter
May spread too farre, some former quarrell, tis
My best to reconcile em, sir I may
Be ignorant if any thing have past
Before this morning, I pray pardon m
But as you are a gentleman, let me▪
Prevaile, your differences may here conclude;
'Las I am part of him now, and betweene
A Widdow and his wife, if I be thus
Divorc'd—
Ile be his servant.
Sir you shew
A noble disposition, good my Lord
Compose their differences, prethee mete his friendship.
I have satisfaction, and desire his love.
Th'ast done but like a gentleman, thy hand
Ile love thee while I live.
Why so all friends.
I meete it with a heart, and for disturbing
Your mirth to day.
No, no disturbance.
Then give me but th favour
To shew I wish no sorrow to the bride,
I have a small oblation, which she must
Accept, or I shall doubt we are not friends,
Tis all I have to offer at your Wedding.
Ha.
There's my hand to justifie it at fit tim,
Peruse it, my Lord I shall be studious
How to deserve your favour.
I am yours.
My Lord let me obtaine, youle honour m
To night.
I was taken by a Turkish Pirate, and detain'd many yeares
A prisoner in an Island, where I had dyed his Captive,
Had not a worthy Merchant thence redeemed & furnished me,
Blessed delivery.
To me? from Venture he is very mindfull, good,
I shall make use of this.
Till then conceale me.
Excellent stuffe, but I must hav another
Name subscrib'd.
Will you walke Ladies.
Your servants waite upon
We humbly thanke your honour.
A brave sparke.
Sparke, he's the vry Bonfie of Nobility.
My Lord you honour us.
And what we want
In honourable entertainement, we bsech
Our duties may supply in your construction.
What needes this ceremonie.
Thou art welcome too Franke Tryer.
I give you thankes, and wish you still more joy sir.
Weele shew your Lordship a poore Gallery.
But where's my new acquaintance?
His Nagge outstript the Coaches,
Hee'le be your guest anon, feare not!
While they complement with my Lord, let you and I
Change afew words.
As many as you please.
Then to the purpose
Touching your brother, Lady,
Twere tedious to repeate, he has bn plas'd
To thinke well of me, and to trouble you
With the discourse how I have answered it
Twere vaine, but thus how ere he seeme to carry it
While you were present, I doe finde him desperate.
How!
Nay I speake no conjecture, I have more
Intelligence than you imagine, you are his sister,
And nature binds you to affect his safety,
By some convenient Messenger send for him;
But as you love his life doe not delay it;
Alas I shall be sorry, any gentleman
Should for my sake take any desparat course.
But are you serious?
Perhaps good counsell
Applyed while his despaire is gren may cure him,
If not?
You mak m wonder.
I know the inconsiderate will blam
Me for his death, I shall be rail'd upon
And have a thousand cruelties throwne on me,
But would you have me promise love and flatter him?
I would doe much to save his life, I could
Shew you a paper, that would make you bled
To see his resolution, and what
Strange and unimitable wayes he has
Vow'd to pursue, I tremble to thinke on em.
There's not a punishment in fiction
And Poets write euough of hell, if you
Have read their story, but heele try the worst,
Were it not that I feare him every minute.
And that all haste were requisite to save him,
Yo should peruse his letter.
Letter! since we saw him▪
Since, I must confesse, I wondred,
But you in this shall see I have no malice,
I pray send for him, as I am a gentlewoman
I have pure intention to preserve his life;
And cause I see the truth of his affliction,
Which may be yours or mine, or any bodies
Whose passions are neglected, I will try
My best skill to reduce him, here's M. Tryer!
He now depends upon your charity,
Send for him by the love you beare a brother.
Will you not Chide my want of Manners gentlewomen
To interrupt your dialog
We ha done sir.
I shall be still your servant.
Here's a riddle; but I will doo't,
Shall I presume upon you for a favour.
You shall impose on me a trouble
My Lord, ▪
We misse you above Lady.
My Lord I waite upon you, I beseech
Your pardon but a minute—will you doe this,
It is an office he may thanke you for,
Beside my acknowledgement.
Yes Ile goe
And yet I doe not like to be sent oft,
This is the second time.
Now I am for your Lordship,
What's your pleasure.
I would be your Echo Lady, and returne
Your last word—pleasure.
May you never want it.
This wonot serve my turne.
What my Lord?
This is the charity of some rich men,
That passing by some monument that stoope
With age, whose ruines pleade for a repaire
Pitty the fall of such a goodly pile,
But will not spare from their superfluous wealth
To be the benefactor.
I acknowlede
That empty wishes are their sham, that hav
Ability to doe a Noble worke,
And flye the Action.
Come! you may apply it,
I would not have you a gentlewoman of your word
Alone, they're deedes that crowne all, what you wish m
Is in your owne ability to give;
You understand me; will you at length consent
To multiply, weele point a place and time,
And all the world shall envie us.
My Lord!
Lord me no lords, shall we enjoy lippes upon't,
Why doe you looke as you still wondred at me,
Doe I not make a reasonable motion,
Ist onely in my selfe, shannot you share
I'the delight, or doe I appeare a Monster
'Bove all mankind, you shunne my embrace thus▪
There be some Ladies in the world ha drawn
Cuts for me, I ha beene talkd on and commended,
How ere you please to value me.
Did they see you thus perfectly.
Not alwayes, 'twas
Somtimes a little darker when they prais'd me,
I have the same activitie.
You are
Something, I would not name my Lord.
And yet you doe, you call me Lord, that's something
And you consider, all men are not borne tot.
T'were better not to have beene borne to honours,
Than forfeit em so poorely, he is truely
Noble, and best justifies his blood
When he can number the descents of vertu.
You'le not degrade me.
Tis not in my power
Or will my Lord, and yet you prsse me strangely
As y'are a person, separate and distinct
By your high blood, above me and my fortunes
Thus low I bend, you have no noble title
Which I not bow to, they are Characters
Which we should read at distance, and there is
Not one that shall with more devotion
And honour of your birth, expresse her service,
It is my duty, where the king has seal'd
His favours, I should shew humility
My best obedience to his act.
So should
All hansome women that will be good subjects.
But if to all those honourable names,
That mark'd you for the peoples reverence,
In such a vitious age, you dare rise up
Example too of goodnesse, they which teach
Their knees a Complement, will give their heart,
And I among the number of the humblest.
Most proud to serve your Lordship, and would rfuse
No office or command, that should engage me
To any noble tryall, this addition
Of vertue is above all shine of State,
And will draw more admirers; but I must
Be bold to tell you sir, unlesse you prove
A friend to vertue were your honour cetupled,
Could you pile titles till you reach the Clouds.
Were every petty Mannor you possesse
A Kingdome, and the bloud of many Princes
Vnited in your veynes, with these had you
A person that had more attraction
Then Poesie can furnish, love withall,
Yet I, I in such infinite distance am
As much above you in my innocence.
This becomes not.
Tis the first libertie
I ever tooke to speake my selfe, I have
Bin bold in the comparison, but find not
Wherein I have wrong'd vertue, pleading for it.
How long will you continue thus?
I wish
To have my last houre witnesse of these thoughts,
And I will hope before that time, to heare
Your Lordship of another minde.
I know not,
Tis time enough to thinke o'that hereafter,
Ile bee a convertite within these two daies,
Vpon condition you and I may have
One bout to night, no body heares.
Alas you plunge too farre, and are within this minute,
Further from heaven then ever.
I may live
To require the curtesie.
Live my Lord to be
Your Countries honour and support, and thinke not
Of these poore dreames.
I find not desire to sleepe, and I were a bed wee.
Tis not improbable my Lord but you
May live to be an old man, and fill up
A seate among the grave Nobility,
When your colde bloud shall starve your wanton thoughts.
And your slow pulse beate like your bodies knell,
When time hath snow'd upon your haire, oh then
Will it be any comfort to remember
The sinnes of your wild youth, how many wives,
Or virgins y'ave dishonour'd? in their number,
Would any memory of me (should I
Be sinfull to consent) not fetch a teare,
From you perhaps a sigh to breake your heart,
Will you not wish then you had never mixt
With Atheists, and those men whose wits are vented
In oathes and blasphemy, now the pride of Gentlemen,
That strike at heaven, and make againe of thunder.
If this be true? what a wretched thing should I
Appeare now, if I were any thing but a Lord,
I do not like my selfe, give me thy hand
Since there is no remedy, be honest! theres no harme
I'this I hope, I wonot tell thee all
My minde at once, If I doe rurne Carthusian,
And renounce flesh upon this, the devill is like
Toha the worst ont—but I am expected.
My Lord ile follow yee.
Brother welcome?
Sir we are both obligd to you
A Friend of yours desirers some private conference.
With me?
He does not looke so desperate; how dee brother?
Well—dost not see me?
Ile come to thee presently.
What's the meaning?
Nay I know not, She is full of mysteries a late;
Shees here agen, there is some tricke in't.
Brother I sent for you, and I thinke twas time,
Pray harken to this gentlewoman; she will
Give you good councell, you and I withdraw sir.
Whither you please.
Y'ar a strang gentleman,
Alas, what doe you meane? is it because
I have dealt justly with you, without flattry
Tould you my heart, youle take these wicked courses?
But I am loath to chide, yet I must tell you
Y'are too, too blame, alas you know affection
Is not to be compeld, I have bin as kinde
To you as other men, nay I still thought.
A little better of you, and will you
Give such example to the rest,
Because forsooth, I doe not love you,
Will you be desperate?
I will be desperate!
'Twere a fine credit for you, but perhapps
Youle go to hell to be reveng'd o me,
And teach the other gentlemen to follow yee,
That men may say 'twas long of me and raile at
My unkindnesse, is this all your Christianity?
Or could you not prosecute your impious purpose,
But you must send me word on't, and perplex
My conscience with your devilish devises
Is this a letter to be sent a Mistris?
I send a letter?
You were best deny your hand.
My names subscrib'd, who has done this?
Rivers of hell I come, Charon thy Oare
Is needlesse, I will swim unto the shoare,
And beg of Pluto, and of Proserpine,
That all the damned torments may be mine,
With Tantalus Ile stand up to the chin
In waves, upon Ixions wheele Ile spin
The sisters thread, quaile Cerberus with my groane,
And take no Phisicke, for the rowling stone
Ile hang my selfe, a hundred times a day.
There be short daies in hell.
And burne my selfe as often if you say
The word.
Alas not I.
And if I ver chance to come
Within the Confines of Elizium,
The amazed Ghosts shall bee agast to see,
How I will hang my selfe on every tree,
Heres a strange resolution.
Is it not?
Whither is fled your piety! but sir
I have no meaning to exasperate
Thoughts that oppose your safety, and to shew
I have compassion, and delight in no
Mans ruine, I wil frame my selfe to love you.
Will you? why thanke you!'
Heres my hand I will;
Be comforted, I have a stronger faith.
I see then you haue charity for an ned.
Ile lose my humour to preserve a life,
You might ha met with some hard hearted Mistresse,
That would a suffred you to hang or drowne
Your selfe.
I might indeed.
And carried news
To the distressed Ghosts, but I am mercifull,
But doe not you mistake me, for I do not
This out of any extraordinary
Former good will, only to save your life.
There be so many beames convenient,
And you may slip out of the world before
We are aware, beside you dwell to neere
The River, if you should be melancholy
After some tides, you would come in, and be
More talkt off then the Pilchards, but I ha done:
You sha'not go to hell for me, I now
Am very serious, and if you please
To thinke well of me instantly weele marry,
Ile see how I can love you afterward,
Shal's to the Priest?
By your good favour, no
I am in no such tune.
You do suspect
I ieere still? by my troth I am in earnest.
To save my life you are content to marry me,
Yes.
To save thy life, I will not be troubled with thee
How?
No Madam jeere all, I am now resolv'd,
Talke, and talke out thy heart, I wo'not lose
My selfe a scruple, ha you no more letters,
They're pretty mirth, wou'd I knew who subscrib'd
My name▪ I am so farre from hanging of my selfe,
That I will five yet to be thy tormenter,
Vertue I thanke thee for't, and for the more
Security, Ile never doe againe;
Nor marry, nor endure the imaginations
Of your fraile sex, this very hight I will
Be fitted for you all, Ile geld my selfe,
'Tis something lesse then hanging, and when I
Have carv'd away all my concupiscence,
Observe but how Ile triumph, nay Ile doo't,
And there were no more men in the world.
Sir, sir, as you love goodnes
Ile tell you all, first heare me, and then execute,
You wonot be so foolish, I doe love you.
I hope so, that I may revenge thy peevishnes.
My heart is full, and modesty forbids
I should use many words, I see my folly,
You may be just, and use me with like cruelty,
But if you doe I can instruct my selfe,
And be as miserable indeed as I
Made you in supposition, my thoughts
Point upon no sensuality, remit
What's past, and I will meete your best affection,
I know you love me still, do not refuse me.
If I goe once more backe, you nere recover me.
I am as ticklish.
Then lets clapt up wisely,
While we are both i'th humor, I do finde
A grudging, and your last words sticke in my stomack
Say ist a Match? speake quickely, or for ever
Hereafter hold your peace.
Done!
Why done!
Seale and deliver.
My hand and heart, this shall suffice till morning.
Each others now by conquest, come lets to e'm
If you should false now.
Hold me not worth the hanging.
I knew not, she was thy Mistresse, which incouraged
All my discourses.
My Lordy' ave richly satisfied me, and
Now I dare write my selfe, the happiest lover
In all the world, know Lady I ha tryed you.
You have it seemes.
And I have found thee right
And perfect gold, nor will I change thee for
A Crowne imperiall.
And I have tryed you,
And found you drosse, nor doe I love my hart
So ill, to change it with you.
How's this?
Vnworthily you have suspected me,
And cherish'd that bad humor, for which know
You never must have hope to gaine my love,
He that shall doubt my vertue, out of fancy,
Merits my just suspition and disdaine.
Oh fie Franke, practise jealosie so soone,
Distrust the truth of her thou lov'st, suspect
Thy owne heart sooner, what I have sayd I have
my pardon for; thou wert a wife for him
Whose thoughts were nere corrupted.
Twas but a tryall and may plead for pardon.
I pray denie me not that liberty,
I will have proofe too, of the man I choose
My husband, beleeve me, if men be
At such a losse of goodnesse I will value
My selfe, and thinke no honour equall to
Remaine a Virgine.
I have made a trspasse
Which if I cannot expiare, yet let me
Dwell in your Charity.
You shall not doubt that.
Pray my Lord know him for your servant.
I am much honour'd.
You cannot but deserve more by the title of her brother.
An other couple.
Master Fairefield and my Cosen are contracted.
Tis time I thinke, sister ile shortly call you.
I ever wisht it.
Franke Tryer is melancholy, how hast thou sped?
No no I am very merry.
Our banes sir are forbidden.
On what termes?
My Lord you meet but a course ntertainemnt,
How chance the musicke speakes not, shall us dance?
Rivers of hell I come!
Charon thy Oare is needelesse, save you gallants!
I will swimme unto thy shoare, art not thou Hero.
But you are not Leander if you be not drown'd,
In the Hellespont.
I told thee I would drowne my selfe a hundred times a day
Your letter did.
A ha?
It was a devillish good one.
Then I am come
To tickle the confines of Elizium,
My Lord I invite you to my wedding,
And all this good companie.
I am glad your shoulder is recovered;
When is the day?
Do thou set the time.
After to morrow, name it, this gentleman
And I shall be marryed i'th morning, and you know
We must have a time to dine, and dance to bed.
Married?
Yes you may be a guest sir, and be welcome.
I am bob'd agen,
Ile bob for no more Eeles, let her take her course.
Oh for some Willow garlands.
This is my boy, how now sirra?
My Lord I am employ'd in a devise;
Roome for the melancholy wight,
Some doe call him willow Knight,
Who this paines hath under taken,
To finde out lovers are forsaken,
Whose heads, because out little witted,
Shall with Garlands straight be fitted.
Speake who are tost on Cupids Billowes,
And receive the Crowne of willowes,
This way, that way, round about,
Keepe your heads from breaking out.
This is excellent, nay nay Gentlemen
You must obey the Ceremony.
He tooke measure of my head.
And mine.
It must be my fate too.
Now we beth:
And if you please to try, I doe not thinke
But this would sit you excellently.
Mine! What does he meane?
I prethee Master Lacy try for once,
Nay he, he has some conceipt.
For thy sake Ile doe any thing, what now?
Y'are now a Messe of willow gentlemen,
And now my Lord Ile presume to bid you welcome,
Is not this the gentleman made you dance.
My new acquantance, where's thy beard?
I left it at the Barbers, it grew rancke,
And he has reap'd it.
Here, take thy toy agen.
It shannot neede.
You tell me wonders Lady; is this gentleman
Your Husband?
Ca. How her husband my Lord?
Yes indeed Lady, if you please you may
Call me your kinsman, seaven yeare and misfortune,
I confesse, had much disguis'd me, but I was
And by degrees her husband.
After a tedious
Arriv'd to make me happy.
This is rate!
My Lord and Gentlemen,
Y'are no lesse welcome than before, M. Lacy droope not.
This turne was above all expectation
And full of wonder, I congratulate
Your happinesse.
All of a brotherhood.
M. Bonavent, a my Conscience tis he!
Did fortune owe me this?
A thousand welcomes.
Equall joyes to thee, and Master Fairefield.
Nay then you but obey the cremony.
I was not ripe for such a blessing, take her,
And with an honest heart I wish you joyes,
Welcome to life agen, I see a providence
In this, and I obey it.
In such good company twould never grieve
A man to weare the willow.
You have but chang'd
Your host, whose heart proclaimes a generall welcome.
He was discovered to me in the Parke,
Though I conceal'd it.
Every circumstance
Of my absence, after supper weele discoutse of,
I will not doubt your Lordship meanes to honour us.
Ile be your guest, and drinke a joviall health
To your new marriage, and the joyes of your
Expected Bride, hr after you may do
As much for me, faire Lady will you write
Me in your thoughts, if I desire to be
A servant to your vertue, will you not
Frowne on me then?
Never in Noble waies;
No virgin shall more honour you.
By thy cure
I am now my selfe, yet dare call nothing mine,
Till I be perfect blest in being thine.