FEllow colleagues, ſince it hath pleas'd our King,
Renowned Edward, of his ſpeciall favour
To ſpheare us in this height of eminence,
And maks vs rulers over Scotland,
Lets ſhew our ſelves worthy the dignities
Conferred upon us.
That's not by lenity,
For howſoere the armed hand of war
Ha's made them ours, they are a Nation
Haughty and full of ſpleen, and muſt be manag'd
With ſtraighter reins and rougher bitts.
Ahlas,
I finde them eaſie, tractable and mild,
Autority may with a ſlender twine
Hold in the ſtrongeſt head, then what needs tyranny,
Vſe rein or bitt, by this all doubts are cleer'd,
'Tis alwayes better to be lov'd then fear'd?
And by your leave, Sir Thomas,
We have good reaſon to defend our own.
You are as cleer of danger, and as free from foes.
As he that holds a hungry wolfe by th' eares,
The principles are true, truſt not thy wife
With ſecrets, nor thy vaſſall with thy life,
Sound example proves it.
And private policy confirms it, I could urge reaſon why, ſhew cauſe, wherefore, and ſpeake to purpoſe wherby, but my betters are in place, I know them to be pregnant, and a ready wit's worth all.
For our owne ſafeties then, and Englands honour,
Let not us loſe what our King hardly wonne.
To that effect called we this ſolemne meeting,
To which we have ſummon'd divers: chiefly Wallace,
Late Sheriffe of Ayre, which office tho the King
Conferred on me, the haughty Scot thinks much
To tender up, obſerve his inſolence.
Preſumptuous Groom, this is a ſeat for Eagles,
And not for Haggards.
Selbie 'tis a ſeat,
I, and my Grandſires Grandſire have enjoyed
And held with worſhip, and till Edwards hand
Remove me from't, Wallace will ſtill poſſes't.
Proud Wallace dares not.
Selbie, both dares and doe,
And muſt, and will, tho ſubject unto Edward,
I'me Selbies equall both in birth and place:
Tho in mine Office, Edward joyn'd you with me,
He never made you ruler over me.
You'le finde he did, reade that Commiſſion,
And tell me then, if Selby or your ſelf,
Be Sheriffe of Ayre.
To what my King commands
I humbly bend, reſigning on my knee
Both Staffe and Office.
Which thus Selby breaks
Over thy head, and now proud Sir acknowledge
Selby your Ruler, and with your place reſigne
Your Caſtle and your Lands.
That's not inſerted in your Commiſſion.
What the King has given I ſurrender,
For my Lands they'r ſtill mine own,
Were purchas'd with the ſweat of my deer Anceſtors,
And ere I loſe a pole, a foot, I or the ſmalleſt turfe a ſilly
Larke may build on, Ile loſe life.
At your own choice, either your lands or life,
Or both.
Or neither, royall Edwards mercy
Sits above Selbies malice.
Surly Groom,
Mercie's for ſubjects, by what Evidence,
Charter or Service do you hold your Land?
Selby by none, that title which I had
I have given my ſonne, a boy of that proud temper,
As ſhould he heare thy inſolent demand,
Would pluck thee from thy ſeat, and lay thy head
A ſatisfaction at his fathers feet,
But heavens forbid it, Selby thus it ſtands,
Thou haſt my Office, and my ſonne my Lands.
He muſt ſhew how he holds 'em.
So he can,
And Selby will ſhew evidence ſufficient,
Mine, my deere Fathers, and my Grandſires ſword.
He weares good evidence about him Selby,
And will upon the leaſt occaſion
Both ſhew and prove it lawfull.
If the ſword be your beſt plea, y'ave but a naked title,
And by our autority we here command
You and your ſonne at our next generall meeting,
To bring in your Surrender, or undergo
The penalty of traytors.
Oh you the patrons of poore injur'd ſubjects,
Do Graham juſtice, Selbies riotous ſonne
Aſſiſted by a crew of diſſolutes!
Has ſtole my onely daughter, and intends
A violent Rape, or which more cuts my ſoule
A forced marriage.
Inconſiderate foole,
The boy affects her, and with my conſent
Intends a lawfull marriage, 'tis a favour
Her betters ſue for.
Oh let u'm hate, my bloud
Shall never enter league nor hold alliance
With him that hates my Country.
Reſt your thoughts,
He has her, if he likes her he ſhall wed her,
And Graham as a dowry ſhall enjoy
Thy preſent ſtate, revenues, goods and lands,
Fret out thy ſoule, he ſhall.
Shall?
I, Sir ſhall,
It's the higheſt favour conqueſt can afford,
For a ſlave to joyn alliance with his Lord,
And Wallace ſee preſent ſurrender made
Or look for ſtorms.
So ſay I too, and 'tis not the leaſt part of policy, neither.
Will have my Lands.
Inforce me give a dower.
Miſery decre'd above compariſon.
Complain unto the King.
The King alas.
I have heard a ſtory how the ſubtle Fox
Having ſtole a Lambe, the family of ſheep
Drew a petition, and with full conſent
Prefrr'd it to the Lion, he imploy'd
'Bout earneſt and more ſerious buſineſſe,
Appoints the Beare Commiſſioner, to take up
This bloudy difference; the Beare impannels
A partiall jury all of Wolves, they chooſe
The Fox their Fore-man, they conſult and finde
The ſheepiſh Nation guilty, and with generall breath,
Caſt, judged, condemned, and ſentenc'd all to death.
Men ſhould have ſouls.
But tyrants being no men,
Have conſequently none; complaints in ſlaves,
Are like to prayers made over dead mens graves,
Nor heard, nor pitied, heaven ha's impos'd a curſe,
Which ſuffrance in time may cure, cōplaints make worſe.
Then as it is lets bear't, win heaven to friend
He that begins knows when and how to end.
Maske her, come Peg hide your Scottiſh face.
Why ſhild I hayd my Scottis face, my Scottis face is as gude as yare Engliſh feace, 'tis a true Scotties feace.
I know 'tis ſweet Peggy, and becauſe 'tis not a picture for every Painter to draw forth, let this curtaine be pind before it.
Hange yare flee-flaps, na Scottis woeman is aſheamed a that luke, that the maſter painter abuife guifes her, whare mun I gang and now, fay, fay, fay, what loſſell am I that am hurrand thus till and fra with ſweards and wapins, whay mun backerd men gang fencing and floriſhing about me, am I yare may-game?
No Peggy, th'art my priſoner, but here's thy jaile.
Are yee my jalor? what kin bin you to the hangman? ſenu you? whare's hee? wha is that foule loone amang you, that mun be my hangman?
Here's no man here your hangman, or your jailor.
Wha then be you?
Your friends that hold you only in bonds of love.
I reckand mickle your luife, fay upon ſike luife, the awd fellon theef, luifand the true mans ſiller as you luifand me, I'de rather be a Scutchmans whore, then an Engliſhmans waife, and be dreave toth' Kirke with helters.
Tell mee what proud Scot loves thee, what Scot dare touch thee now th'art Selbies?
Hang thee, hang thee foule meazel'd lowne,
What Scuttiſhman darres guiff my luif underſtood
My caſe, on Gads deare earth yow ſud no farder gange
As butchers kie toth the grund he ſud yow bange.
All mildneſſe is in vain, take ſome rough courſe.
Toth' Church, away, Ile marry her there by force.
Away with her.
Yonders Wallace, and's true.
The Devill and's dambe bee't, budge not.
O my luife theſe Sotherne Carles mickle wrang 'gainſt mee warcke, and now wad force mee gang untill the Kirke, and marry Selby, Wallace my Io not I.
Vnhand that beauteous prize, proud ſlave, 'tis mine.
Slave! th'art a villain Selby.
Are ye ſo brave.
Look to my wench.
Kill 'em.
We are no Stares to die by dozens.
Back, the quarrels mine, and if one ſingle Scot proud'ſt of your ſwarme dares anſwer me, ſtep forth.
Your firſt man I Sir.
Harke Gentlemen, let not ſo ſleight a ſhowre,
Which yet lies hid and wrapt in one poore cloud,
Be by rough winds (raiz'd up by you) diſperſ'd
Into a generall ſtorme, to many eyes
Of Scots and Engliſh ſhoots, quick lightning forth
Already, but your abſence will allay
Thoſe fires which elſe muſt kindle, get then away,
Take ſhelter in yon taverne.
Agreed.
Look to my Peggie.
Guard my love, hee and I will onely exchange cold words.
Now Sir, your cold words.
This Scotch Laſle I love.
Is that all?
Yes.
I love her too, can any words more cold,
Strike to your heart?
Is ſhe your wife?
No.
She's your whore.
Vmh, neither.
She gangs with me then.
But the dew lekens not whither,
If you can win her, weare her, ſhe's wholly mine.
She is?
She is, our Laſſe are not Engliſh common,
I'me right Scotch bred, till death ſtick to a woman.
And to the death thou ſhalt, no more but this,
Thou ſhalt beare from me Scot.
When?
Inſtantly.
Make time Sir, of your weapon, time, and place.
This Whinyard.
This.
Our ſwords do now agree, and of one length and ſcantling.
Why ſhould not we, if we muſt Surgeons
Have to morrow or anon
If not as good now, 'tis the Engliſh faſhion
To ſwagger it out, and then drink and then fight
And kill in cold bloud having ſlept ſound all night,
And oftentimes all gaſh'd, the ſeconds fall,
When home in whole skins come the principall.
So about words, the Lawyer wrangling ſtands,
And loſes in mean time his clients lands.
Do'ſt teach me fencing too in thy own ſchool?
I'le beat thee or be beaten, one draws ſhort breath.
I feele no ſickneſſe.
Yet th'art neere thy death.
At it ſo hotly.
Kill him, 'tis faire.
Inglorious conqueſt, for King Edwards crown,
I'de trample on no enemy were hee down.
There—if th'art well, part.
I'le die, or in thy heart bloud waſh this infamy.
Mercy on my ſoule.
He's ſlain.
Away.
Shift for your ſelves, 'twill prove a ſtormy day.
Search, call for Surgeons, follow the murderer.
Wa is me, ligs my luife on the cawd ground,
Let me come kiſſe his froſty mouth.
What Scot iſt?
Oh, 'tis yong Selby!
Ha'my ſonne, who ſlue him?
That fatall hand of Wallace.
Follow the villain.
Ize jocund and weel now.
Lay upon her faſt hold.
Hang me I reck not.
Away with her to priſon.
Not all the bloud and treaſure we have ſpent
Like zealous prodigals in Paleſtine,
Goes half ſo neer our heart, as that proud France,
Knowing our merit ſhould bar us of our due.
France dares not.
Yet he does.
'Twas not demanded.
How, not demanded? thinks the bold Lord Percy,
That Grimſby dares not (lawfully employ'd) demand.
But not command.
Yes command, Percy.
Grimſby, thou canſt do well in Gariſon.
Weare ſhamoys for a grace, project for bloud,
Make eight dayes to one week, turn executioner,
And hangman like ſend fifty in one morning,
To feed the Crows, and live upon dead pay.
He's a man worſe then dead that—
Stop thy throat or—
VVhat?
Ile cut it.
Cut throat.
'Tis a trade,
By which few proſper, and yet thou art made.
A man as good as—
A hangman.
A foule blot
Lies in your throat.
Thy foul-mouth, waſh it Scot.
In Percies bloud Il'e waſh't.
Grimſby you leane
To hard upon our ſufferance, and noble Percy.
Our honor'd ſecond in all inward combats,
Thou haſt too many worthy parts of man,
To throw thy ſelf on this unequall hazard,
Grimſby thou ſtandſt ſo much degreed below him,
Both in deſcent and eminent qualitie,
The many favours we have grac'd thee with,
Bluſh to have been conferr'd upon a man
No better temper'd.
May it pleaſe my Soveraigne
Confirme his grant touching—
The Crown of Scotland,
Save other time, Grimſby th'aſt raiſed
A ſtorm which ſhowers of bloud can hardly lay.
Dread Liege,
If all the youthfull bloud that I have ſpent,
And wealthy honors that my ſword hath wonne
Waving the Chriſtian Standard in the face
Of the proud Pagan, in the holy Land,
Merit the name of hangman, Grimsby caſts
Them and himſelfe at royall Edwards feet,
And like an out worn ſouldier, humbly begs,
No penſion (but look Percy) nor yet office
But leave to leave the Court, and rich in ſtars
To loſe more bloud, or win more worth in wars.
VVe will not loſe thee Grimſby, valiant Percy,
If love in us, or loyaltie in you,
Have any power.
My Soveraignes pleaſure ſits above my private paſſions.
Then joyn hands,
Our ſubjects both the native of two Lands.
Friends Grimſby.
Friends in ſhew,
But in my breſt bloudy revenge lies ambuſh't.
Gracious Liege.
Th'art no Muſician, Bruce, thou keep'ſt falſe time,
We ſtrike a bloudy lachrymae to France,
And thou keep'ſt time to a Scotch ligge to armes.
Edward will be more kind to Chriſtians.
Let Chriſtians be more honeſt then to Edward,
In expedition of this holy warre,
When France in perſon was enjoyn'd to march,
To work his ſafetie we engag'd our own,
Caſheer'd his fainting ſouldiers, and on promiſe,
Of ſo much gold at our return, ſuppli'd
The French deſignes our ſelfe, and is our love,
And loſſe of bloud, halfe which at leaſt had drop'd
Out of French boſomes, quittant with owe none,
Pillage and play the free-butter for more,
The news.
Dread Soveraigne, Scotland is infected
With a moſt dangerous ſurfet, it breaks out
In ſtrong rebellion.
This is your Kingdome Bruce.
I have no hand in't tho.
Shouldſt have no head, did we but think it,
VVhoſe the chief?
One Wallace, a fellow meanly bred,
But ſpirited above beleefe.
Some needy borderer.
How is our boſome parted, is their power
Of any ſtrength? Bruce, leavy powers for France;
If we but thought thee touch'd in't, warlike Percy,
Beaumont and Sebaſtian fetch him in
Or with a ſecond and more fatall conqueſt
Ruine that ſtubborne Nation.
Gracious Edward,
Tho war ha's made them ſubjects, heaven defend
Subjects ſhould make 'em vaſſals.
We conceit you,
If any officer of ours tranſgreſſe
Our will, or go beyond his bounds prefix't
VVee'l have his head, he our high worth depraves,
That our free ſubjects ſeek to make his ſlaves.
We do not.
See we finde it not.
Let Ellianor win ſo much favour as to march along
Tho conquer'd, 'las we are neighbours of one clime,
And live like them ſubject to change and time.
Royall Edward,
Though Wallace and ſome ſpleenfull diſſolutes
Wrong'd with the yoke of bondage caſt it off.
Let not the whole Land ſuffer.
Nor do we wiſh it Grimsby, ſhould the fates
But turn the wheele we might with them change ſtates,
Be Scotlands ſubjects, let but Rebellion kneele,
Wee'l weare ſoft mercy, and caſt off rough ſteele.
I'le undertake it.
Let meſſengers be ſent,
To queſtion the proud Rebell, and if Grimsby
Faile in his plot, Northumberland and Clifford
Shall ſecond him in armes, ſo ſlight a fo
Muſt not detain us from our French deſignes,
Our Queen ha's all our breſt, and tho we might
Iuſtly perhaps confine your liberty,
Bruce, we inlarge it, giving you command
In our French wars, obſerve him neerly Lords,
I have read this maxime in ſtate policie.
Be ſure to weare thy danger in thy eye,
France lights a Comet, Scotland a blazing Star,
Both ſeeke for bloud, wee'le quench um both with war.
Prethee good Wallace.
Ill betides his ſoule,
That ſpeaks of goodneſſe, thinks or meditates
Of any goodneſſe more then how to free
Impriſon'd Peg.
But heare me.
Caſtle weares but a ſlender bolt of brick.
Turn'd mad!
And ſay the moat be fifty fathomes deep,
Fiftie times fiftie, ſay it reach through to hell,
Wallace will ſwim't.
Swim't, yes ſo wilt thruſt an oxe into an Eg-ſhell,
And roſt it by Moon-ſhine, but why ſhould Wallace?
Why ſhould proud Selby, though his forward ſon
Were juſtly ſlain, impriſon Peg?
Poor Lambe ſhe is no murtherer.
In my conſcience ſhe ne're drew weapon
In anger in her life.
Not at ſharp I think, but by your leave 'tis thought,
She ha's practis'd in private; put Wallace to foil, and made
Him lie at his hanging ward many a time and oft.
Wher's my ſonne?
With Peggie, father, manacles of griefe,
Hang heavy on my ſences.
Shake 'em off.
Shew thy ſelf worthy him that thou call'ſt father,
Or Peggie dies.
What thunderclap was that?
Able to waken death or ſhake the ſhrowd
From off a dead mans ſhoulders, Peggie dies,
Should thunder ſpeak it, Wallace would ſweare it lies,
Who ſpake that, fatall Nuntio?
His breath.
That gave thee being, Haſlerigs return'd.
Whence, from the Devill?
From England, and this inſtant
But thou com'ſt in, and yeeld thy ſelf, her life
Diſſolves to aire.
The charitable Angels waft her to heaven.
Reſolve you then to loſe her?
How ſhall we ſave her, ſingly as I am
I will oppoſe me 'gainſt the town of Lavercke,
Swim the vaſt moat, and with my truſtie ſword
Hew down the Caſtle-gates, diſhinge the doores,
File off her irons, and through a wall of ſteele
Attempt her reſcue.
'Tis impoſſible.
Impoſſible, what's the news from Englands?
Grimsby the fire-brand of his Country
Comes to inſnare you, on the heele of him
Treads a huge army led on by the Queen,
Percy and Clifford.
Torture and death itſelf cannot divide us.
Sir John Graham, you ſhall be the engine
Our policie muſt work with, ſtreight give out
That hearing of the Engliſh expedition,
Our faction is diſſolv'd.
Whats's this to Peggies reſcue?
Much, this rumour
Blown through the Land will ſtay the Engliſh forces,
And give us time and means to ſtrengthen ours,
That once in act, repair to Haſterig,
Selby and Thorn, urge Peggies innocence,
And for her freedom and your own make faith,
To yeeld me priſoner, 'twill be no doubt excepted,
Your ſelf once pardon'd, and your daughter free.
What reſts for Wallace?
Proſper'd deſtinie,
If the great cauſe we undertake be good,
'Twill thrive, if not, be't waſht in VVallace bloud.
Is it by generall Proclamation voic'd
That but proud VVallace yeild, Peg Graham dies,
The Cryers are all hoarſe with balling of it.
T'is time for providence to ſtirre the King,
(I know not upon what complaints) pretends
This rank Rebellion rather, took his root
From wrongs in us, then treacheries in VVallace.
And ſends his forces rather to examine
And queſtion our demeanours, then their treaſons.
We muſt prevent it, how think you, Sir Jeffery?
Troth even as you think, policie muſt prevent it.
Sir John Graham craves conference with the Cōmiſſioners.
Admit him.
A man, me thinks, of your experience,
Reſpect and education ſhould not linke
Your ſelf in ſuch a chain of counterfeits.
Nor have I Lords, but for your beſt advantage,
And Englands good, traitors and dottrels,
Are ſold for all alike, he that will take them
Muſt ſeem to do as they do, imitate
Their vicious actions, ſtrive to take upon him
Their idle follies, joyn companies, and drive
Them into a net ſuſpectleſſe.
So did not Graham.
Speak not before your knowledge, you detain
My onely daughter priſoner, will Selby
And his colleagues free her and pardon me,
If I diſſolve the brood of traitors
And give up Wallace in bands?
Let's daughter be produc'd.
And th' execution for awhile deferr'd,
Though in her cauſe Selby ha's loſt a ſonne
And with him all content, ſo deer I tender
The peace of Scotland and my Soveraignes good,
As give the traitour to the hand of Law
And with her life take thine.
Good policie.
Aye trowe, ye mean not Wallas his devoire,
And dowty valour merits mare repute nor
Sike fawe language.
A fowle traitour,
I have converſt with Wallace, thrown my ſelfe
Into his boſome, mingled thoughts with him,
And find him neither worthy of thy love,
Nor my alliance.
Fay, ſa, not ſea, my bunny Wllace luifes me.
Yes as a Politician does a knave
For his own ends, hearing thy death proclaim'd,
But he come in, I told him on't, he ſmiled.
I urg'd thy love and conſtancy, ſtill he ſmil'd,
And to confirm't he baſely ha's cut off
All his aſſociates, and given up himſelfe
Wholly to me.
Hawd rherefor cherritie, and wad yee give
Him to his faes, that gave
His blood to your protect?
I will and have,
For thine enlargement and my own I have,
No more, here comes the Rebell.
Traiterous man,
Is this thy love? theſe thy deep promiſes?
Art thou their Aspies? See Selby here's the hand
Cleft thy ſonnes heart.
For which baſe villain I'le ſee thee hang'd.
Thou knoweſt not thy own eyes,
May feed the Crows aſſoon as mine, Toads and Snakes
May dig their lodgings in thy breſt,
And Devils make faggots of thy bones firſt,
But my ſentence.
Here, Graham, for thy ſervice,
We enlarge thy beauteous daughter.
A milde exchange,
Angels approve it.
Next, thee to thy Lands and Offices we reſtore.
And what for Wallace?
Race him from your thoughts.
Rac'd byn his name furth the
Whayte buke of life that ſpeaks it.
Hence.
Dear Wallace, thoe ane ſhrude
Hawd not our bands, wees meet in yander cloud,
Whare na fell Southern nowther can extrude,
Nor bar na fra celeſtiall pulchritude,
Aid gange thy gate, till heaven, and as we flay,
Like turtle Dowes weeſe bill & find gude play.
Rare reſolution, what weak heart would faint,
Having ſo conſtant a companion?
Selby my ſoul's bound on a glorious voyage,
And would be free'd out of this jayle of fleſh,
Then hinder not my voyage.
'Tis not policie, wee'l rather ſet it forwards.
Raiſe a Gallowes fifty foot high,
ye ſhall not go by water, wee'l ſend you up a neerer way.
All's one,
Axe, halter, famine, martyrdome, or fire,
All are but ſeverall paſſages to heaven,
Let my ſoule go the furtheſt way about,
Come tir'd with tortures, ſhooting out my heart,
The deepeſt wounds, like ſtrong Certificates
Find kindeſt welcome.
Stay th'execution, and having read this Warrant, know
'Tis the Queens pleaſure, you ſend in this traitour
Vnder my conduct to the Engliſh Campe:
Rebellion of this nature muſt be ſearch'd,
With ſharper torture.
I outdare the worſt,
He is no man that is afraid of death,
And Wallace his reſolve ſhall out-live breath.
'Tis but ſhort-liv'd elſe, firſt ſee him bound and hud-winckt,
Then leave him to my care.
Bear with this Rebell, my love.
My ſervice.
And my policie to the good Queen and Ladies.
Come Wallace, now your pride draws neer the fall.
Why Grimsby, if I fall,
'Tis but to gather ſtronger force to riſe,
For as a ball's thrown down to raiſe it higher,
So death's rebound ſhall make my ſoule aſpire
The glorious clouds, ſo long I die ſecure.
Death cannot threat more then I dare endure.
No not a man more then my private followers,
The Queen enjoyns it.
Farwell, valiant Grimsby, and farwell danger.
Policie and all.
The traitors fled, and Wallace thus ſuppreſt,
My ſons blouds paid, and his wrong'd ghoſt at reſt.
And the whole land at quiet, wher's Sir Iohn Graham?
Wee'l joyn him partner in Commiſſion,
'Twill be a means to make our party ſtrong,
And keep down mutinies, ſearch out old Wallace,
And hang the Carle at his own door, Sir Ieffrey,
Place tables in the ſtreets, bonefires, and bels,
Since without cauſe they murmur, let u'm know
That with their knees wee'l make their proud harts bow.
Sir Jeffrey, be you Maſter of the Feaſt,
You keep the purſe, if money fall out ſhort,
Send out for more, you have commiſſion for't.
VVHat talk'ſt of Conſcience? th'art an apparant rebell.
How can he be a rebell was nere ſubject?
What right has Edward to the Crowne of Scotland
(The ſword except) more than my ſelfe, or Grymsbie?
What greater right then conqueſt?
Then what cauſe,
Iuſter thou mine? reſpected Country man,
Thou haſt beene nobly valued, and held ranke
With beſt deſervers, look upon the wounds
And mortall ſtabs of that diſtreſſed breaſt
That gave thee ſuck; ſee thy poore brethren ſlaves,
Thy ſiſters raviſht, and all out-rages
That bloudy Conqueſt can give lycence to,
See this, and then aske Conſcience if the man
That with his bloud ſeeks generall reformation
Deſerves the name of Traitour,
Whither do'ſt leade me?
To Northumberland
And Beaumont.
Butchers do your worſt,
Torture, I ſpit defiance in thy face,
And death, embrace thee with as kinde a narme
As if thou wert.
Thy Father.
And thy waife.
In heaven or in a ſlumber, who reſolves me?
Speake, am I dead, or living? or aſleep?
Or all, or both, or neither? tell me fate.
Me thinks I ſee my Father, warlike Graham,
The Fryer, what Peggie too? I prethee joye
Do not ore-flow my ſences, deereſt friends
Pegg, Father, Coming, Mentith, Graham, ſee
I am new moulded, and here ſtands the creature
That by a warrant granted from the Queene
Form'd me from out a ſecond Chaos breath'd
New life, new motions, new dimenſions,
To tell the ſtory were to ſhame the world,
And make all mankinde bluſh.
May luive.
Our prayers.
And all our friendſhip like a coat of ſteele
Stand betwixt him, and danger.
All joyne hands,
Thus like a mountaine Cedar Wallace ſtands
Amongſt a grove of friends, not to remove
For Edwards thunder, nor the frowne of Jove,
I'le hew the yoke from off my countries necke,
Or never houſe, this religious Fryer
Is a full witneſſe to the ſacred bond
Twixt heaven and me, which on my part I'le keep,
Or pay the forfeit with my bloud.
Heaven ſhield
Many a tall wood oake beene fell'd
Ere Wallace ſtoope, heed Gentrid ſawe
Theke ſword ſhall keep in mickle aw,
Fell Sotherne folk, many a crie,
Fray cradled barns, e're he ſhall flie,
Nurſes ſighes, and mothers tears
Shall ſwell the clouds, till thy awne bloud,
Prove falſe thilk Crag ſall nere lig dead.
Shall Wallace live till his owne bloud prove falſe,
Why, that can never be till palſey age
Hath thruſt his icy fingers through my veins,
And frozen up the paſſages of bloud.
The town of Lavercke, peopled only with Engliſh pride
And overjoyed with thy ſurprizall are made drunk with mirch,
Bonefires, bels, banquets, and the devill and all
Invite our ſwords to their ſad funerall.
Cloſe with advantage, put your ſelves in Armes,
And ceaſe their forfeit lives, this holy Frien
Shall firſt beſtow a matrimoniall band
Of our united love, and then my ſword
Like winged lightning ſhall prepare a way,
To Lavercks doom.
Nea marry, ſtay a wheane,
Dip not thy winyard in the weambe
Of Lavercks town, for giffe thou gange,
Thouſe weark thy lives friend mickle wrang,
Thouſe come back ſeafe, but barne I feare,
Iſe never blinck upon thee meare,
Kneel till thy Sier his benuſon crave,
Next duty bin till dig her grave,
Kiſſe, kiſſe thy Peg, for well a neer,
Thaſe amerous twins ſall nere kiſſe mare,
Till in deaths armes they kiſſe, thilke ſtate
Stands writ in heaven and ſeal'd by fate.
Then fate diſſembles with mee, this the ſecond time
She has by viſion ſummon'd me to armes,
Whom have you there?
Seeking the cave for ſhelter,
See whom kind fare hath given us.
Trecherous Wallace,
The doting wizzard, and diſſembling woman
Chief cauſe of this Rebellion, now revenge,
Clothe thee in crimſon, and prepare to feaſt,
Wee'l tune ſuch diſmall muſick, as ſhall dint,
Smiles in thy ſhallow cheeks.
Alas, for wae,
What gars this Iewde? what ill intend ye man?
To make rebellion fatherleſſe,
And murder a madding widdower.
Oh, ſpare mine age.
Pitie my beauty.
My religion.
Like pity, as thy barbarous ſonne beſtow'd
On my boyes life, ile print upon thy boſome.
Like pitie as thy husband pitileſſe,
Took on the widdows tears, and Orphans cryes
That kiſt his, and hung about his knees
At Lavercks maſſacre, Ile ſhew on thee.
Thus fell my ſonne,
And thus the father of his murtherer fals.
Thus wither'd the pride of Laverck,
And thus fades the flower that caus'd their ruine.
Thus religious cries
Were ſtopt with ſteele, and thus religion dies.
Wallace, revenge me as thou art my ſonne.
Revenge thy wait,
Revenge Religion.
Thunderbolts and fire rampier your throats,
The ſlaves growne infinite,
And moves in every place at once,
Shift for your ſelves:
Proud Wallace recking in the bloud of Lavercke,
Like a fierce tiger nurſt in humane ſpoyle,
Purſues the ſlaughter, the barren hills lye ſtrewed
With mangled limbes, ſuch as the gentle night
Reſcue from death, fall in the morning flight,
Then flye or fall for company,
Flie from a rebell, but fate keep true courſe,
Weele ebbe like flouds, to flow with ſtronger force.
Purſue the ſlaughter, whilſt I, ſalvation ſhield me.
Fryer Gertrid anſwer me, what barbarous hand
Has caſt my friend into this cold dead ſweat,
Reſolve me gentle Father, fellon death,
Tha'ſt acted ſacrilegious burglary, and told my father.
Wallace.
No excuſe.
Ay ſea husband.
Intreat not, ye are guilty both.
And parties in the deereſt robbery,
Then though my wife and father (mercy fate,)
Play not the tyrant with me, do not try
My ſences bore their weake abilitie,
Ceaſe to afflict me, or I ſhall turne Rebell,
And breathe invectives gainſt thy power.
O my deare Wallas for the luive waife,
For ſiuve of awe ſawles, and thy daying waife,
Lift to my latter accens, and attend
Of all thy joyes the derne and diſmawe end.
Torture above indurance,
King of dreames diſſolve my viſion.
Wallace is awake.
O if I be, let my ſoule never ſleepe,
In the bleſt boſome of my Anceſtors,
Till I have drawne a ſea of purple teares
From forth the boſomes of the murderers,
Deere Peggie, father, Gertrid, which way, where
How, when, what meanes, what cauſe ſhall I deviſe
To finde it out, and venge your tragedies?
I'le teach ye how,
Selby and Haſlerigg byn the fell blood-hounds
Whae have hunted laife untill thicke toyles of death,
Are they turn'd hangmen?
Religious cryes, beauteous entreats, and reverend well-awayes
Could not winne grace or favour,
Wallas revenge my death,
And for a favour keep my hindmoſt breath.
And houſe it here.
Where's VVallas? never eye
Saw ſuch a ruthleſſe maſſacre.
Yes Grimsby,
VVallace can ſhewe a maſſacre will proove
Thine but a may-game.
Terrible and ſtrange!
Doſt ſtart at this? then ſee a ſpectacle
Of force to ſtay the motion of the ſpheares,
Or ſtrike the Sun dead in the browe of heaven,
Looke, and like men ſhort from the browe of thunder,
Fall ſeneeles, death wounds not ſo deepe as wonder.
Whoſe bloody act was this?
The bloody acts
Contriv'd and plotted by experienc'd villaines.
Who were the authors?
Iudge, they all ſpake Engliſh,
Death beſt becomes that Dialect,
The firſt was bloody Haſleriggs, the ſecond
More villaine-like was Selbyes, but the third
All had a hand in.
Engliſh Embaſſadours.
They are welcome, let not one ſullen browe
Be ſeene in all this fiery firmament.
Welcome, your buſineſſe?
Farre more like a Prince,
Then a baſe rebell looks the Northerne traytor.
Thus to a rebell from a royall King,
If VVallace will confeſſe himſelfe a traytor,
And for his bloody outrages and thefts,
Crave mercy, and ſubmit himſelfe to Edward,
There's hope of life.
Still charitable Engliſh.
Tis not he ſure,
This looks not like a man ſhold ſhake a kingdome.
This it he ſhall denie,
Rape, murther, ruine, all the ſonnes of warre
Stands ſtriving for the prey, and once let looſe,
Shall not be checkt, nor taken up, till rage
Be tyr'd with murther, and thy ſelfe in chaynes
Hang'd like a villaine.
This is all perfit Engliſh, have ye yet ſpoke?
We have.
Then we begin,
And to a tyrant thus ſayes a loyall ſubject,
If Edward will confeſſe himſelfe a tyrant,
And kingly fellon, and make good ſuch theft
As he and his have practis'd, ſue his peace
By yeelding up his and himſelfe to VVallace,
There's hope of life, this if he ſhall deny
Rape, murther, ruine, all the brood of warre
Shalbe let flie, and never be lur'd of
Till they be gorg'd, and bated with the heart
Of the proud King himſelfe.
Now ſpeakes a man
Would thruſt Iove from Olympus.
Calme your ſpleene,
For now ſpeaks mercy, if your Countryes wrongs
Grow from abuſe in Edwards ſubſtitutes,
You ſhall have equall hearing, and the wrongs
Puniſh't in the deſervers.
This ſhould not be Engliſh,
Or if it be King Edward is no tyrant.
What anſwers VValace?
Firſt pray pardon me,
If like the working of a troubled ſea
My boſome roſe in billows, for though the windes
That rais'd the ſtorme be downe, yet the deare ruines
Lye ſtill in view, a father, and a wife,
Age, beauty, and religion, for thee
Thouſands ſhall weep, as many wives
Shed purple teares for thee, as many Church-men
Offer their reeking ſoules in ſacrifice,
Court, City, Church, the Chamber of your King,
The Chaire of State ſhall be no priviledge.
This was not Edwards act.
Yet ſuch as Edward
Plac'd in commiſſion, oh t'was a churliſh ſtorme,
And wretched I like a forlorne ſurviver
Left to interre their deare remembrances.
Good gentleman.
But bid relentleſſe Edward
Send in the pyrats Haſlerigg and Selbye,
And in their hands letters of Murt ſubſcribed,
To make me Maſter of my owne revenge,
Or like a Ball wrapt in a cloud of fire,
Ruine ſhall fall upon his palace top,
Pierce through the roofe, and in his chayre of State
Sollicit Iuſtice.
Into his Princely eares I'le give your wrongs.
Will VValace here adviſe?
Yes.
Then be rul'd by Grymsby.
Thanks for thy kindneſſe. Lords Embaſſadors,
Such we eſteeme you, may we crave peruſall
Of your commiſſion?
VVallace ſhall command it.
Mountfort and Glaſcott, what third fellow's that?
One of our followers.
Good, his name is not inſerted,
One call out a headſman.
Ambitious rebell, know I am a Prince,
And nephew to the Queene.
Wer't thou the King,
Having no portion in the Embaſſie,
I'de ha' thy head, goe on, and ſtrike it of,
A ſecond cut his tongue out, and a third
Thruſt out their eyes, and put their followers to the ſword.
VVallace wilbe more milde.
VVallace wilbe more juſt
Then ſee the Law of Armes diſgrac'd
Sound Drums and drown their cries.
Revenge beats at heavens gates for tyrannies.
So now our tragick Muſe jets on the ſtage,
You that for ſeeing baſeneſſe want your ſight,
Beare with this preſent our indeer'd, commends
Back to the Queen, and ſay ſo much we tender
Her ſacred honour, weed not ſee it wrong'd
Even in her Nephew, you that for ſparing ſpeech
In honours cauſe are juſtly mute, conduct
This eyeleſſe meſſenger, abuſe not our intent
In the delivery, make ſpeedy haſte,
Leſt we be there before you, ſhare in like wrong,
Lend him your eyes, and borrow you his tongue,
If any queſtion you about your harms,
Say Wallace did it in the right of Armes.
This will affright the Engliſh.
Honor'd Grimsby,
This and ten thouſand, thouſand more extremes
Cannot appeaſe my anger, you that love me
See thoſe I lov'd inhum'd, my ſelfe diſguiſ'd,
Will be their Convoy to the Engliſh Campe,
And ſee their uſage.
'Twill be an act of danger.
The fitter him that undertakes it, Wallace
Would hold himſelf not worthy of his fate
Should he bawke danger, diſſwade not, I will on
Were certain death againſt my boſome bent,
There's gain in bloud it's honorably ſpent.
And ſuch I feare will thine be, honour'd friends
See thoſe remayns of honorable love
Cradled in earth, that once perform'd take Armes
To venge their deaths, Mentith, I attend
The comming of ſome ſpeciall friends by oath,
Bound to aſſiſt us, hark how their friendly drums
Chide them for loytring.
Honor'd Douglas, welcome,
Welcome Mackbeth, and doughty Winterſdale,
Not, unto men more, driven in needfull want,
Could you have brought ſupply.
The better welcome,
Gold to rich men, and treaſure to the wealthy,
Are known companions, wher's our Generall,
The hopefull VVallace?
Gone in queſt of death,
Firme as his fate, cauſe he ſees danger ſhuns him,
He's gone to ſeek it in the Engliſh tents.
So Hercules ſought honour out in Hell.
He not deſerves, the name of Generall,
Dares not face danger, and out-do the Devill.
And ſuch a man is VVallace, yet leaſt worth
Bears him beyond his ſtrength, bring up your powers
For preſent charge, his thoughts are tragicall,
And full of bloud, active, and violent all.
You that beſt know 'em, feed 'em, all that's ours,
For Scotlands good call VVallaces and yours.
Whare man? till the Engliſh Campe ſenu you, gad ſides you gang as I ha' ſeene mony a your Contrymen like ranck riders amble up weſtward, you gang the wrang wey man, you ſall luſe and ye play at ſhoolagroate, ha' ye na linckers?
Ahlas I want my eyes, but have a tongue,
He ſees, but cannot ſpeake.
Blyncke at ſmaw faults then, make me the thridman, and here's a bunny noyſe of Fidlers to gang fra winehouſe to winehouſe, a blind harper, a mute Cornet, and an old Scotch bagpipe worne toth' ſtumps.
Are you a Scotch man Sir?
Ye marry am I, boddy and ſawle a true Scotchman borne, but a true liegeman, hang him that does not luife your King, and your Countryman, what gude victales is that which thilke bonny man that haz glazen windows to his lindging has tyed up in his wallet there?
Tis the head of a young murderd gentleman.
What ſenn you man! a mans ſcalpe, I doubt ye be three fawſe knaves liggand yare heads together about na gudenes, a traytors head iſt not?
No, but we ha' met with villaynes worſe then traytors.
VValace your countryman, that bloody hangman
Mangled us all three thus.
VValas my Countryman, ay ſay upon him,
Fawe lymmerlike wad I had his head here too,
Ized beare it by my ſawle toth' Engliſh Campe
Or neere gang farder.
Twold be a glorious fight there.
And you could ſee it ye ſulled ſea ſo man, VVallace
Cut of my ſhancks too, cauſe I ran away from him
To ſerve your gude Prince, harke man, I weare
Na ſhooen but wodden clampers.
Of charity leade us to th' Engliſh Campe,
Ye ſhall beſides thanks be moſt royally payd.
Ganalang man tis hard by now, a mans head
I deempt the pure man had gaugand lang to lawe
And ſae was thruſt out of dores by head and ſhoulders.
No lawe was ere ſo cruell as Wallas is.
Ne marry? na law ſa cruell, fay man fay, I luick'd upon a man a lawe not lang ſince that ſent an awde man and his wife, and many barnes a begging, he had better a ſlizand theire weazond pipes, and cut theire heads off, but whay was a ſa bludy mynded thinke ye?
I cannot judge.
Marry man, to get poſſeſſion of the pure mans houſe, but there was a cat ganged beyond the man a lawe.
A cat goe beyond a lawyer? how?
I'le tell you how, the man a lawe being got in, the Cat outreach'd him, and leaped to th' top oth lindging, and ſtandand on the tyles, the man a lawe ſcoarning any ane to be abuife him, offer to fling and dingand downe the poore puſcatt, but ſhe meawed at him, and cryed hawd thou foule lowne hawd, as thou thruſts out this poore man and his barnes, ſa there is ane abuife ſall thruſt out thee, ſtay blind man, here comes ſouldiers.
Stand que voula, ſpyes about our trenches?
And ſee they have knock'd ſome man downe ſirra,
You that carry two faces under a hood,
What are you?
He muſt be preſt, he will not ſpeake.
What art thou I charge thee? haſt thou neere a tongue
In thy head? give the word.
He has no tounge indeed ſir.
Two heads and neere a tongue, what are you?
That like a blind ſſe ſtand ſtill, and cannot tell us ſo.
I'me blind indeed,
Conduct us to the Lords i'th' Engliſh Campe.
How Lords, are you Ladyes that you long for Lords?
Do you take us for gulls to goe tell the Lords here's a dumbe man would ſpeake with'em, what are you ſirra? come halt not, lets not find you in two tales y'are beſt.
Ize a Scotch man ſir, ye ſhall neere find me in twa tales.
A Scotch man ſir, do you know where you are ſir?
Your blew bonnet on before an Engliſh ſcull,
Where's your leg ſir, when an Officer ſpeaks to you?
My leg ſir is not in my galligaskin and flop as yours is, I'ze a pure Scotch ſouldier out at heeles, and am glad to beſtirr my ſtumps, guide theſe gude men y'are wranged Countrymen, wha that fawſe traytor Wallace has miſuſand in ſike wiſe.
Wallas, oh ſlave!
I ſhall live (fellows in armes out at Elbows)
To give fire to my peece with a burnt ynch of match
Made of that raſcals fat of mawegut.
By my ſawle ſir wad I might come
To'th making of ſike a match.
Here's my hand, becauſe thou ſayeſt ſo,
Thou ſhalt be by when I make him give fire to my touch-hole.
The Lords are going to view the trenches.
Every man to his parrapet,
To your trenches you tatterd roagues!
Its well done fellowes.
Cry your Lordſhip mercy,
This blind buzzard here cannot ſee,
Whither will you march headlong my friend?
What men are theſe?
I leave them to your Honors ſifting,
I have fortifications to look too.
There's drinking money, hence to your works.
Bleſſe your honours.
What men are theſe, I aske, will no man ſpeak?
Heare and in hearing wiſh the ſound unheard,
Youthfull Sebaſtian nephew to the Queene
Longing to ſee the man fam'd for th' exceſſe
Or goodnes and of badnes, ſeeing unjoyned
In honored Embaſſie diſguis'd attempted
The rebell Wallaces preſence.
Glaſcot and Mountford.
Who did this damned villany?
Our meſſage told,
The traytor newly ſet on fire with madnes,
Showing the mangled bodies of a Fryer,
His wife and father, burſt out into flames
Hye hot and violent, In which fierce rage
Revolted Grimsby knew Sebaſtian
(Tho Herald like he went diſguiſ'd) and ſeazed
Him and us for three intelligencing ſpies,
Cut off his head, his tongue, and Glaſcots eyes.
Hang up this, provide for theſe, trufle him up.
What ſen ye man?
What ſlave, what Turke that murders his owne brethren
Durſt play the tyrant thus? hang all the Nation
Whom we have tane to mercy, I'le not ſpare
Fathers, nor mothers, nor their bawling barnes,
fire their houſes, hang up this tike firſt.
Ah bonny men, I met um playe and at bo-peep, & gangand out a their way, and ſall I be hanged for my good deeds of charrity, I'ze a poor Scutch ſouldier, and am ron away from that Rebell Wallas, to feight and for your gude Prince, ah he's a gude King, and y'are all bonny men, I'ze follow ye all to the death, and to the Devill, and ony man dare gang ſo far for all my clutches, giffe I clutch Wallace, he's neer carry it till hell nor heaven.
If he do, may Percies name be croſt
Out of the roll of men.
So much ſwears Clifford.
Sneak not away ſirra, y'are not gone yet.
I ken it vary weel.
I'ze not gangan to hanging yet.
Yet though a traitour, thus much let me ſpeak
For abſent VVallace, were the caſe your own,
Or one that's baſer having any ſpirit,
A murder'd father and a bleeding wife,
Mangled before him, would ſtrike fire in ſnow,
Make loyalty turn traitor, and obedience
Forget all duty.
But our Nephews death
And the diſgrace done our Embaſſadours.
They then put off their title, and put on
The name of ſpies, when in their companies,
They take diſguiſ'd obſervers.
By my ſawle the Engliſh are gallant men.
No ſnare to intrap this Wolfe?
How Northumberland, intrap a fo?
Sure 'tis no Engliſh word,
Clifford at leaſt was ne're acquainted with't.
Give him fair ſummons, dare him to the field,
And trap him then.
Ah bony man!
His being a traitour warrants it, diſpatch
A ſecond meſſage with acknowledgment
Of former wrongs to our Embaſſadours,
With promiſe of a friendly enterview
Early to morrow, impartially to heare
Their wrongs, and mildely miniſter redreſſe.
Inſnare him ſo and ſpare not, for you'le finde I feare,
That Selby, Haſlerig, and the reſt
Lay yokes too heavy on the Nations neck.
If they do puniſh 'em.
Puniſh 'em, ſdeath hang 'em.
Shall we agree to have ſuch meſſage ſent
To allure this bloudy Tygre into th' net
And waking then or ſeping kill him.
No.
All ſtratagems are lawfull 'gainſt a fo.
Do what you will, but my conſent is no.
I'le venture to the Rebell.
Do good Beaumont, Scotchman dar'ſt thou conduct him as his guide?
But return ſirra, or the next time we take yee
Y'are Crag ſhall pay for't.
I'ze not run away fra yee, giffe I do hang mee and drae mee, cum bully Joe, I dare not gang to the Scottis Campe, th'yle ſa ſlay upon me, Iſe near cum back agen, but lze bring you where yee ſhall ſee that Lowne VVallace.
That's all I wiſh; lead on.
Marry ſall I, luke to your ſelfe,
Iſe thruſt you into the Dewles chops.
For getting out let me ſcuffle.
Conſult for preſent execution.
What is, what ſhould, what can this Wallace be?
Whom fame limbs out for ſuch a gallant peece,
And is ſo curious in her workmanſhip,
No part deforms him,
Yet Wallace is a Rebell, his chief ſcandall
Is poverty of Gentry, by my ſword
Wert no impeach to my deare Anceſtors,
I well could ſpare him ſome of my unus'd titles,
Or would at martiall gaming ſo I might loſe
And Wallace winne ſo much of Cliffords honour,
Our ſtocks might be alike, but I exceed,
This night he is betray'd, he ſhall not,
I'le turn traitor firſt he ſhall not,
Call Beaumont back, or elſe by Cliffords honor,
An oath which I eſteem above my life,
I will turn traitor, and reveale your plots,
Call him back.
Is Clifford mad?
No Percie's lunatick, ſuppoſe he be a traitor
And diſcipline of the field allow the act,
What honour is it for a herd of yours
To worry a ſleeping Beare? goe call him back.
See he comes uncall'd.
The news.
News call you it, let no Scot come neer your tents,
Wallace ſends you this token.
Ha, how, Wallace.
Was that the traitor?
By Mars his helme, a compleat Warrior,
I ſo love his worth, I'le court it with my ſword.
Had you but ſtood in diſtance of his thunder,
For, we parted juſt where our trenches ended,
You'de ha' ſworn the God of VVar had ſpoke,
Quoth he, tell Percy, he ſhall not need.
To hunt me in my tent, I'le rouze him in's own,
And bids me give you this wooden ſtumpe,
And ſweares to make you weare it,
If you dare ſtand him in the field.
Baſe Rebell, why durſt he not ſtand here?
None pray'd him ſtay,
Twas manners being not welcom'd to get away.
He ſends, commends to Clifford, with this wiſh,
That if at this great match of life, and death,
He chance to loſe the ſmalleſt part of honour
His ſword may joyn't, he knows beſt how to uſe it.
At my return from France, quoth he, this vow
Which I have promis'd ſhall be ſurely payed,
Our Country overtopt with tyranny,
Makes us flie thither for ſuccour, Aeolus,
Let favourable winds and tydes aſſiſt me,
That ſpoak, revolted Grimsby and his powers
Met him in Armes, what further he intends,
Harke their Drum tels, here my Commiſſion ends.
Lets ſend him commendations too, beat ours.
Set downe Bolt, I can beare with thee no longer.
No more can I beare any longer with you, Sir Ieffry, but what a reeling drunken ſot is this ſea, that caſts up ſuch gobbets as this, is this a windfall or no now ſir Ieffery? your Worſhip knows both the tags and points of the law.
Yes ſure it is a windfall, for as we walk'd upon the ſhore, we ſaw the ſhip ſplit, this fell out, the winds were the cauſe, therefore it muſt needs be a windfall.
Well ſome body ha's had but a bad fiſh-dinner to day.
The Seas have croſt them that ſought to croſſe the Seas, and therefore for my part I'le never meddle with theſe water-works.
Nor I, lets be more wiſe then a number of gallants, and keep the land that's left us, did you ever ſee ſuch gambols as the waves made ſir Ieffery?
Never ſince I wore the nightcap of Iuſtice, and that this her dudgeon dagger was a my ſide.
Did you note what puffing the winds made till they got great bellies, and then how ſorely the ſhip fell in labour.
Didſt heare what a dolefull cry they made,
When their maine yard was ſplit?
Alas ſir, would it not make any man roare that had but an inch of feeling or compaſſion in his belly to have his mayne yard ſplit, and how the marriners hung by the ropes like Saint Thomas Onyons.
I ſaw it Bolt with ſalt eyes.
So that you may ſee at ſea however the winde blowes, if a man be well hung, hees cocke ſure.
But Bolt what doſt thou thinke this to be?
A matter of ſome weight as I take it.
I hope 'tis gold 'tis ſo heavy, and 'twas going out of the Land.
Like enough, for gold goes now very heavily from us, and ſilver too, both red chincks, and white chincks flie away, but ſir Ieffery, if this be gold, how rich is the ſea, thinke ye, that has innumerable ſuch ſands?
More rich then the land, and more fat.
So it had need, for the land looks with a leane payre of cheeks, yet it has an excellent ſtomach, it digeſts any thing.
Then tis like the ſea, for all's fiſh that comes to net there.
I'le tell you the myſtery of that, looke what mouthes gape at land, the ſelfe ſame gape at ſea, all the land is one kingdome, and all the ſea another.
And people in't.
And people in't (right worſhipful) but they all go Weſthod, as there are good and bad here, ſo there are good and bad there, gulls here, gulls there, as great men here eate up the little men: ſo Whales feed upon the leſſer fiſhes.
Belike then the watry common wealth are ill govern'd.
No bravely, for heroicall Hector Herring is King of fiſhes.
So.
Rich cobs his good ſubjects, who at Yarmouth lay downe their lives in his quarrell, ſword-fiſh and Pike are his guard.
On.
Freſh Cods the gallants, and ſweet ſlipper the Knights, whiting-mopps the Ladies, and Lillie-white-muſſels the wayting-gentlewomen.
Dangerous meat to take too much of.
But who the pages?
Shrimps.
No, no ſir, perriwinckles are the pages, perriwinckles.
No Iuſtices among them?
Yes ſir Ieffery, Thornebacks are the Iuſtices, Crabs the Conſtables, whom if you butter with good words, 'tis paſſing meat at midnight.
Ah, ha.
Dogfiſh are Iaylors,
And Stockfiſh the poore common people.
Indeed they live hardly.
But ſir they are beaten too't, then have you wet Eeles for whores, and great Oyſters for Bawds.
Why great Oyſters Bawd?
Becauſe for the moſt part they are ſtewed.
Very good.
Laſtly, becauſe no Kingdome can ſtand without laws, and where law ha's her eyne, there Lawyers & Pettifoggers ſwarme, therfore the Lawyers here are ſharks, and gudgeons the poore Clyents.
Wa ho ro ſol fa, ſol fa.
Harke.
Peace Bolt.
Nay peace you good ſir Ieffery, peace, peace.
Sol la, ſol la ſol la ſol la.
Some Faulconers teaching his Hawke prickſong, Shall I mocke him in's owne key.
Do.
Sol fa ſol fa, here boy.
Here boy, wa ha ho ho,
All haile to you two.
And all ſnow to you ſir.
Sirra what art thou that wiſheſt all the haile to light upon us two?
Anſwer wiſely to my maſter,
For hee's a Iuſtice of peace, and you'l be ſmelt out.
I am a drown'd rat.
A Rat?
Do you take ſir Ieffrey for a Rat-catcher,
Youle tell a ſweet tale for your ſelfe anon.
Pox rot you, I am ſhipwrack't,
Give me ſome meate.
Shall I make his Mittimus? he begs ſir.
I'ha met more then my match, Neptune and I,
Wraſtling for fals, he got the maſterie,
I'me with his beating bruis'd, weary, cold, weak,
Liquor'd ſoundly.
He's drunk.
Yet ſo thirſtie ſcarce can ſpeak,
If ye be men, help me to food and fire.
What Countryman art thou ſirra?
A Scot, give me ſome victuals pray.
No minde but of thy belly.
Sirra, ſirra, you are a Scot, and I a true Engliſh Juſtice.
Not a word of Latine, neither Juſtice, nor Clarke.
Peace Bolt in the Kings name, I charge thee, if you will eat bread earn bread, take up this luggage, ſirra, follow me home to my houſe, thou ſhalt have good bread, good drink, and good fire, up I command thee.
I am neceſſities ſlave, and now muſt beare.
Muſt! nay, ſhall: are not the Engliſh your good Lords and Maſters?
Well they are.
Do you grumble ſir, on ſir Jeffrey.
Have an eye to him Bolt, leſt he give us the ſlip,
And were you in this terrible ſtorm at Sea ſay you?
Over head and eares, ſir.
If th'execution had been upon the land Sir Ieffrey, as 'twas upon the Sea, your worſhip had been in a worſe pickle then he.
Why Knave? why?
Becauſe he that ha's a bad name is half-hang'd,
And your worſhip knowes, ye have but an ill name.
Thou Varlet is not wiſe good?
Yes, come along porter, wiſe is good.
And is not acre good?
Yes paſſing good.
Why ſhould Wiſeacre being put together be nought then?
Is not Plumb-porridge good, Sir Ieffrey?
Yes.
Would I had this trunk full of 'em.
Peace Greedi-gut, Plum-porridge is good, and Bag-pudding is good, but put them together, and they are filthy meat.
Well, that's true.
Right ſir.
How now?
Hunger is good, and two Woodcocks are good, But the feathers of thoſe two Woodcocks muſt be pluck'd firſt.
Hold I charge thee.
Y are a ſcurvy Iuſtice, yare man's an Aſſe, and you another with a velvet foot-cloth on your back, I ken ye vary weel, and Iſe knock ye vary weele, if any thing be worth victales, it goes down here.
The Devill choake you, if you be a man of your word.
Wiſeacres, if you would fain know who ha's got this traſh from yee, 'tis I, Wallace the Scot.
Wallace.
Flie ſir Ieffrey,
He calls us Woodcocks, let's flie and raiſe the Country.
D'e ye grumble? raiſe the Devill and ſpare not.
Wert thou a cheſt of gold, I'de give thee all for victuals,
Hunger, they ſay, will break ſtone wals,
Your chops are not ſo hard,
Ye ſhall burſt tho with iron ribs ye were bar'd,
—victuals—wine too,—few juſtices doe feed the hungry thus, o theſe VViſeacres are the braveſt fellowes, ſpecially Engliſh VViſeacres.
I'le now be my own carver, miſery and age
Want and deſpaire have brought me to deaths doore,
And ſhall I not enter? yes I will, this key
Shall doo't, is death ſo ſurly, may a poore man
Speake ſooner with a King then ſpeake with him
When he has moſt need of him, ugly leane ſlave,
So I may ſee him, no matter for a grave.
How now, what do'ſt looke for?
For that which a quarter of the world
Wants, a tree to be hang'd upon.
Art weary of thy life?
Yes all men are of their old wives, my life ha's gone up and downe with me this threeſcore and odde yeares, 'tis time to be weary on't I thinke now.
And when tha'ſt hang'd thy ſelfe, whither do'ſt thinke to go then?
To the Linnen-draper.
What Linnen-draper?
The richeſt in the world, my old Grandmother the Earth, how many paire of ſheets has ſhe had, thinke ye, ſince Adam and Eve lay together, It's the beſt Inne to lye at, a man ſhall be ſure of good linnen.
Who dwels hereabouts?
One upon whom all the poore in the Countrey cryes out.
Whoſe that?
Scarcity, dearth, penurie, famine, hunger, I have not knowne that man lives by food theſe foure dayes, and therefore I'le deſcend to th' Antipodes, becauſe I'le kicke at this world.
Stay, famine ſhall not kill thee, ſit and eate
Thy belly full, thy cares in good wine drowne,
By my owne fall I pitty others downe,
Is't not good cheere?
Brave, I thanke you for it, how many beggers does a rich man eate at his table at one meale, when thoſe few crummes are able to ſave a mans life, how came you ſir into this fearefull neſt of Screech-owles and Ravens?
Caſt up by the Sea, I was ſhipwrack'd and loſt all my company.
Would I had beene one of 'em, I have loſt more then you have done, I ha' loſt all that I had but my ſinnes, and they hang ſo heavy on my eye-lids, I can ſcarce look ſo high as the brimmes of my hatt to heaven, I have ſuch a minde downwards, I have almoſt forgot who dwels over my head.
Looke up, be not afraid, there raignes no tyrant,
Wud thou hadſt beene with me at ſea.
So wud I.
Hadſt thou an Atheiſt been, and God not known,
Th'adſt found him in the deepe, there hee's beſt ſhowne,
He that at Sea is ſhipwrackt, and denyes
A Deity (being there ſav'd) damn'd lives and dyes,
Man no where in the twinckling of an eye
Is throwne ſo neare to hell, or rais'd ſo high
Towards heaven, then when hee's toſſ'd upon the waves
It muſt be a hand omnipotent there that ſaves,
But how came you ſir hither?
I was baniſh'd from England (but that grieves me not)
But I kill'd an old man, he was call'd Wallace.
Ha?
Wallace, and me thinks hee's ſtill at mine elbow.
Elbowe? idle: Selby my fathers murderer?
Thinke not upon it, ſit eat heartily
Thy laſt, ſit downe, I ſay, never to riſe,
Drinke wine, drinke deepe, let thy ſoule reele to hell.
I am almoſt dead with cold.
I'le fetch dry ſticks,
And with two flints kindle fire, beat out his braines:
O that phyſicke had the power to make thee yong,
I'de fetch thee drugs from th'utmoſt of the world,
And then would arme thee, or, into thy veines
Halfe my owne bloud I'de power, to lend thee ſtrength,
That I might kill thee nobly.
Be quiet, I'le pay thee.
How now?
A ſlumber took me, and me thought old Wallace
Clapt me upon the ſhoulder with one hand,
And with the other pointed to his wounds,
At which I ſtarted, ſpake, but know not what,
I'me cold at heart.
I'le ſeeke for fire.
I thanke ye, if what I utter ye tell to any, I am a dead man,
You have me at your mercy, and may betray me.
Not I, eate and get ſtrength, I'le ſeek for fire,
Vnleſſe I be a devill (tho I have cauſe
To kill thee) yet my quicke hand ſhall eſchew it,
Thy careleſſe confidence does bind me to it,
This mercy which I ſhow now is for Gods ſake,
In part of payment of his ſhowne to me,
If I ſhould kill thee now, thou oweſt me nothing,
Live, and be ſtill my debter, I ſhall do thee
More harme to give thee life, then take it from thee,
Heaven in my fathers bloud who is chiefe ſharer,
Shall ſtrike for me a revenge more juſt and fairer.
Selby, Selby,
How like a Churle thou feed'ſt alone,
And greedy art to fatten miſery—Selby?
Here.
Look I ha' found a jenniting tree.
Where ſtands it?
I'le not tell thee; ſee brave food.
Lets taſte it.
Not a paring, what haſt there?
The dole of plenty.
Good old Rogue I thank thee,
I have a ſtomack like a Lawyer,
Lets eat fruit when we have fill'd our bellies.
Not a bitt.
Ha?
Not a paring of cheeſe.
I muſt.
Thou ſhalt not, I pay thee in thy own coyne.
Thy doting age is almoſt at her journies end,
My youth having far to go needs more proviſion,
And ile have this—
Hands off
You Dog, you old Devill.
I thank thee, thou haſt cut the threed in two,
Of all my woes, heaven pardon us both, adue.
Selby, no water from the hallowed Fount,
Toucht thee, thou art ſo fatall, Selby, dead!
Gods building which ha's ſtood this threeſcore yeeres,
This ha's defac'd, would it were up agen
With ruine of mine own, I never knew
Partners but one ſtill th'other overthrew,
Thou and I did ſet up with one ſtock of care
I have undone thee, and now all's my ſhare,
'Tis not ſo ſinfull nor ſo baſe a ſtroke
To ſpoile a Willow as an old reverend Oke,
From me th'art gone, but i'le from hence nere fly,
But ſit by thee, and ſigh, and weep, and die.
Stand, that's he who turns his taile to us, which is as much as to ſay, A fart for your Worſhip.
Down with him.
Peace, it's a wilde Bull wee come to ſet upon, and therfore let thoſe Dogs that can faſten bite ſoundly.
My harts, we come not to bait an Aſſe in a Beares skin, but a Lion in his own skin, he's a traitour.
How know we that?
Thus, he hides his face, and wee are not to back a traitor, Sir Jeffrey, you'le get between mee and the Gallows, if I ſtrike him down.
I'le enter into a Recognizance to hang before thou ſhalt hang.
If you ſee my heart begin to faint, knock you mee down to put life into me.
Feare nothing.
Be damn'd both gods and men the act deteſt,
Oh heaven; wipe this ſinne out for all the reſt.
Your ſins are wip'd out ſir, your Scottiſh ſcore is paid ſir.
Is he down?
He ſprawles, ſtay there's one aſleep by him,
Shall I kill the lice in his head too?
No, wake not a ſleeping Maſtive, the Kings in the field, Lets poſt to him, Bolt, thou ſhalt be a Knight as deep as my ſelfe, for this manly deed, as ye go through the Country, cry aloud, the traitor's dead.
Cry it out at the Croſſe, and at the old Palace,
That Bolt was the man that brain'd luſty Wallace.
The traitor's dead, the traitor's dead, &c.
Thou ſhalt have fire anon old man, ba', murdred?
What ſhouldſt thou be? the face of Haſlerig,
'Tis he, juſt heavens ye have beſtow'd my office
Vpon ſome other, I thank ye that my bloud
Stains not my hand, however both did die
(In love or hate) both ſhall together lie,
The Coffin you muſt ſleep in is this Cave,
Whole heaven your winding ſheet, all earth your grave,
The early Lark ſhall ſadly ring your Knell,
Your Dirge be ſung by mournfull Philomell,
Inſtead of flowres and ſtrewing herbs take theſe,
And what my charity now fails to do,
Poor Robin-redbreſt ſhall, my laſt adue,
I have other ſtreames to ſwim through, or calme
Venture, 'tis brave when danger's crown'd with palme.
Vpon this field-bed will we lodge this night,
The earth's a ſouldiers pillow, here pitch our tents.
Vp with our tents.
To councell, beat a Drum.
Beat it for action then, and not for words,
Vpon our Speare points our beſt counſell fits,
Follow that (noble Generall) up with no tents
If you dare hold me worthy to adviſe,
But with an eaſie march move gently on.
You ſpeak againſt the Scholerſhip of war.
Now their Beef-pots, and their Cans,
Are toſſ'd in ſtead of Pikes, their Armes are thrown
About their Wenches middles, there's their cloſe feight,
Let us not loſe the forelock in our hands,
Of us they dream not, yet we are as free-born
As th' Engliſh King himſelf, be not their ſlaves,
Free Scotland, or in England dig our graves.
A Wallace, A Wallace, A Wallace!
Rugeroſſe, what cry is this?
Of the whole Army,
Grown wild twixt joy and admiration,
At the ſight of Wallace.
Ha.
That dreadleſſe Souldier,
For whom all Scotland ſhed a ſea of teares
As deep as that in which men thought him dead,
Sets with his preſence all their hearts on fire,
That have but ſight of him.
A Wallace, A Wallace.
Intreat him hither.
D'ee heare th' Engliſh march? they are at hand.
Now Grimsby, they for Pikes are toſſing Cans.
I am glad our thunder wakes 'em.
Shall we on?
Whether iſt beſt to ſtop 'em in their march,
Or here to make a ſtand and front 'em.
Stand.
Or elſe retire back to the ſpacious Plaine
For battaile far more advantagious.
And ſo retiring be held runawayes.
Here ſtands my body, and ere this Engliſh Wolves
Stretch their jaws ne're ſo wide, from hence ſhall drive
I'le rather lie here fifty fathome deep,
Now at this minute, then by giving back
One foot, prolong my life a thouſand yeers.
Then let us die or live here.
Arme, arme.
Fall back? not I, death of my ſelfe is part,
I'le never flie my ſelf, heres no falſe heart:
Lets in our riſing be, or in our falls
Like bels which ring alike at Funerals,
As at Coronations, each man meet his wound,
With ſelf-ſame joy as Kings go to be crown'd,
Where charge you?
In the battaile, valiant Grimsby
Is Generall of our Horſe, the infantry
By comming is commanded, Mentith and you
Shall come up in the Reare.
The Reare.
Yes.
No, ſir.
Let Mentith, Wallace ſhall not.
He may chooſe.
Were I to hunt within a Wilderneſſe
A herd of Tigres, I would ſcorn to cheat
My glories from the ſweat of others brows,
By encountring the fierce beaſts at ſecond hand,
When others ſtrength had tam'd him, let me meet
The Lion being new rowz'd, and when his eyes
Sparkle with flames of indignation,
I ha' not in the Academe of War
So oft read Lectures, chief now to come lag,
Ile ha' the leading of the Van or none.
Then none, you wrong us all,
Men now are plac'd, and muſt not be diſhonour'd.
So, diſhonour'd.
Charge in the Reare for Gods ſake, now to ſtand
On terms of worth hazards the fate of all.
Well be't ſo then, the Reare, ſee you yon hill,
Yonder i'le ſtand, and tho I ſhould ſee Butchers,
Cut all your throats like ſheep, I will not ſtirre
Till I ſee time my ſelfe.
Your pleaſure, on,
Each Leader ſpend his beſt direction.
Which is the fellow?
I am the party ſir.
Stand forth before the King,
Nay, he's no ſheep-biter.
Didſt thou kill Wallace?
Yes marry did I ſir, if I ſhould be hang'd here before yee, I would not deny it.
How didſt thou kill him? hand to hand?
Hand to hand, as Dog-killers kill dogs, ſo I beat out his brains I'me ſure.
Me thinks, thou ſhouldſt not look him in the face.
No more I did, I came behind his back & felld him.
Art thou a Gentleman?
I am no gentleman borne, my Father was a poore Fletcher in Grubſtreet, but I am a gentleman by my place.
What place?
A Juſtices Clarke, ſir Jeffery Wiſeacres.
My man, if it pleaſe your Majeſty, an honeſt true Knave.
Give to ſir Wiſeacres Clark an hundred pounds.
I thank your grace.
God confound all your foes at the ſame rate.
But if this Wallace, ſirra, be alive now,
You and your hundred pounds ſhall both be hang'd.
Nay I will be hang'd ere I part from my money,
Who payes, who payes?
Charge, charge.
The news brave Clifford.
The daring Scot fuller of inſolence then ſtrength Stand forth to bid us battell.
Throw defiance back downe their throats, and of our Heralds
Northumberland the honor ſhall be thine, tell'um
We come to ſcourge their pride with whips of ſteele,
Their City hath from Iuſtice ſnatch'd her ſword
To ſtrike their Soveraigne, who ha's turn'd the point
Vpon their own breaſts, tell 'em this.
I ſhall.
Where's noble Bruce?
Here.
I have a meſſage, but tis more honorable, ſent to you too,
The Herald ſaies that Wallace dares ye, his
Spite is all at you, and if your ſpirit be great
As his, you finde him in the reare.
Hang up that wiſeacres, and the fool his man.
My maſter, not me ſir, I have a Recognizance of him
To ſtand betwixt me and the gallows.
A Kings word muſt be kept, hang 'em both.
One word more good Sir, before I go to this geere,
If a Kings word muſt be kept, why was it not kept, when he gave me the 100. li. wipe out one, I'le wipe out the other.
That jeſt hath ſav'd your lives, let me ſee you fight to day.
Bravely like Cocks.
Now Wallace look to your coxcombe.
Move on.
We have fleſh'd them ſoundly.
I would not wiſh to meet with braver ſpirits.
Stay, Bruce, what's yonder on the hill?
They are Collors.
Why do they mangle thus their Armies limbes?
Whats that ſo farre off?
Sure 'tis the Reare, where burns the black brand,
Kindles all this fire, I meane the Traytor Wallace?
What turn'd Coward?
A dogge of ſo good mouth, and ſtand at bay?
If in this heat of fight we breake their ranks,
Preſſe through, and charge that devill, Bruce thy ſelfe.
To hell if I can chaſe him.
Charge up ſtrong, harke, brave,
Let now our hands be warriors, not our tongues.
They flye, they flie.
The Engliſh ſhrink, knit all our nerves
And faſten Fortunes offer.
Keep ſteedy footing, the daye is loſt if you ſtir,
Stirre not, but ſtand the tempeſt.
I cry on.
And I.
So do not I, this ſtarting backe is but an Engliſh earth-quake, which to duſt, ſhakes rotten towers, but builds the ſound more ſtrong.
Lets on, and dare death in the thickeſt throng.
Did I not give you warning of this whirpoole
For going too farre?
We are all dead men, yet fight
So long as legges and Armes laſt.
In how quicke time
Have we about you built a wall of braſſe?
Had he whom here you call your Generall
A Souldier beene remarkable of great breeding,
And now to be caught with lyme-twigs?
Keepe our ground.
If we muſt fall, fall bravely.
Wound for wound.
Exeunt King and Bruce purſuing the Scots.
Take breath, I would not have the world rob'd of two ſuch ſpirits, poaſt to the King, and tell him that the nobleſt Harts of the whole heard are hunted to the toyle,
Aske whether they ſhall fall, or live for gaine.
I ſhall.
Charge.
For honours ſake come downe, and ſave thy Countrey.
Whoſe is the day?
Tis Edwards, come reſcue
Our Generall, and the noble Grimsby.
Who?
Our Generall and ſtout Grimsby are encloſd
With quick-ſets made of ſteele, come fetch them off,
Or all is loſt.
Is the day loſt?
Loſt, loſt.
Vnleſſe the day be quite loſt, I'le not ſtirre.
Tis quite loſt.
Why then deſcend amaine, art ſure tis loſt?
Yes.
Then wee'le winne it againe.
How now?
The King proclaimes that man a traytor
That ſaves when he may kill.
Charge them blacke day,
The Lyon hunts a Lyon for his prey.
A fight.
Too late.
Why then farewell,
I'le make what haſte I can to follow thee,
Bruce, Bruce, I am here, 'tis Wallace calls thee,
Dares thee.
Tho I nere ſtoopt unto a traitors lure,
I ſcorne thine, why do'ſt thou ſingle me,
Yet turnſt thy weapon downward to the earth?
Lets breathe and talke.
I'le parly with no traytor but with blows.
Ye ſhall have blows your guts full,
I am no traytor.
Why 'gainſt thy Soveraigne lifts thou then thy ſword?
You ſee I lift it not.
Tell Edward ſo thy King.
Longſhancks was never Soveraigne of mine,
Nor ſhall whilſt Bruce lives, Bruce is my Soveraigne,
Thou art but baſtard Engliſh, Scotch true borne,
Th'art made a maſtive 'mongſt a heard of wolves,
To weary thoſe thou ſhouldſt be ſhepheard of.
The fury of the battell now declines,
And take my counſell, though I ſeeme thy foe,
Waſh both thy hands in bloud, and when anon
The Engliſh in their Tents their deeds do boaſt,
Lift thou thy bloudy hands up, and boaſt thine,
And with a ſharpe eye note, but with what ſcorne,
The Engliſh pay thy merit.
This I'le try.
Dar'ſt thou alone meet me in Glaſco-moore,
And there I'le tell thee more?
Thou haſt no treaſon towards me?
Here's my hand,
I am cleare as innocence, had I meant treaſon
Here could I worke it on thee, I have none.
In Glaſco-moore I'le meet thee, fare thee well.
The time.
Some two houres hence.
There I will untie
A knot, at which hangs death or Soveraigntie.
We have ſwet hard to day.
Twas a brave hunting.
Sit, ſome wine
Away in the field all fellows, whoſe is this?
It was my Coat at Armes, but now tis yours at legges.
Away, why giveſt thou me a cuſhion?
Becauſe of the two, I take you to be the better man.
A ſouldiers coat ſhall never be ſo baſe
To lye beneath my heele, th'art in this place
My fellow, and companion, a health to all in England.
Let it come.
Is not this he that kill'd VVallace?
No ſir, I am onely he that ſaid ſo,
As you ſit, ſo did I lye.
Sirra, where's your maſter?
My maſter is ſhot.
How ſhot, where?
I'th backe.
Oh he ranne away.
No, my Lord, but his harneſſe Cap was blowne off, and he running after it to catch it, was ſhot betweene necke and ſhoulders, and when he ſtood upright he had two heads.
Two heads how?
Yes truly, his own head and the arrow head, it was twenty to one that I had not beene ſhot before him.
Why prethee?
Becauſe my Knights name being Wiſeacres, and mine Bolt, and you know a fooles bolt is ſoon ſhot.
He ha's pind the foole upon his maſters ſhoulder very handſomly.
Sirra, go ſeek your maſter, and bid him take order for burying of the dead.
I ſhall Sir, and whilſt he takes order for the burials of the dead, i'le take order for the ſtomacks of the living.
How fought to day our Engliſh?
Bravely.
How the Scots?
The pangs of war are like to child-bed throwes
Bitter in ſuffering, but the ſtorme being paſt,
The talk, as of ſcap't ſhipwrack ſweet, doth taſte,
The death of the Scotch Generall went to my heart,
He had in him of man aſmuch as any,
And for ought I think, his bloud was poorly ſold
By his own Countrymen, rather then ſought by us.
Had not the Reare where Wallace did command,
Stood and given ayme, it had bin a day
Bloudy and diſmall, and whoſe hard to ſay,
Sir, you ſhall give me leave to drink a health
To all the valiant Scots.
Clifford, I'le pledge thee, give me my bowle.
Sir, I remembred Wallace in my draught.
I did not, ſo this cup were Wallace Skull,
I'de drinke it full with bloud, for it would ſave
The lives of thouſands.
I for your Kingdoms would not pledge it ſo.
I would, no matter how a traitor falls.
Percy, ten thouſand Crowns ſhould buy
That traitors head, if I could hav't for money.
I would give
Twice twenty thouſand Crowns to have his head
On my ſwords point cut from him with this arme,
But how i'th field, nobly, hand to hand, not this ſtraw
To a hangman that ſhould bring it me.
Let that paſſe,
Wher's Bruce, our noble Earle of Carrick?
I ſaw him not to day,
I did, and ſaw his ſword
Like to a Reapers Sithe, mow down the Scots.
Here he comes.
Brave Armory, a rampant Lion within a field all Gules,
Where haſt been Bruce?
Following the execution which we held
Three Engliſh miles in length.
Give him ſome wine, art not thirſty?
Yes for Scottiſh bloud, I never ſhall have
Enough on't, the Kings health.
Let come.
How greedily you Scot drinks his own bloud!
Ha, ha, ha.
If he ſhould taſte your bitterneſſe, 'twere not well.
What's that ye all laugh'd at?
Nothing but a jeſt.
Nay, good Sir tell me.
An idle jeſt, more wine for Bruce.
No more, I have drunk too much,
Wallace and I did parlee.
How in words?
No Percy, I'me no prater, 'twas with ſwords,
Your laughing jeſt was not at me?
Sir, no.
Bruce would fain quarrell,
I ha done ſir.
Peace, what Trumpet's that?
From the enemy ſure.
Go learn.
I come from Wallace.
So Sir, what of him?
Thus he ſpeaks.
He bids me dare you to a freſh battaile, by to morrowes ſunne,
Army to Army, troup to troup, he challenges,
Or to ſave bloud, fifty to fifty, ſhall the ſtrife decide,
Or one to one.
A Herald to the traitor.
Go and thus ſpeak, we bring whips of ſteele,
To ſcourge Rebellion, not to ſtand the braves
Of a baſe daring vaſſall, bid him ere that Sun
Which he calls up be riſen, pay it and ſave
His Country and himſelfe from ruine, charge him on his head,
To make his quick ſubmiſſion; if he ſlow the minutes,
Wee'le proclaime in thunder his and his Countries ruine,
Go be gon, Arme.
Arme, Arme.
A Land that's ſick at heart muſt take ſharp pils,
For dangerous phyſick beſt cures dangerous ils.
As you are a ſouldier, as y' are noble
I charge you and conjure you to unclaſpe
A book in which I am graveld.
Perhaps I cannot.
Yes, if you dare you can.
Dare? Clifford dares
Do any thing but wrong and what's not juſt.
Then tell me ſir, what was that bitter ſcorn,
Which I like poyſon taſted in my wine?
I care not if I doe, becauſe I love vertue even in
My enemy, the bowle of wine kiſſing your lip.
Behold, quoth one how eagerly you Scot,
Drinks his own bloud.
You Scot drinks his own bloud, which Scot?
Beſt wake ſome Oracle.
Who brake the jeſt upon me?
Pray pardon me.
The Oracle I'le wake is here, oh Wallace,
I ne're had eyes till now, they were clos'd up
By braving Engliſh, witchcraft drinks his own bloud,
England my ſtepdame take my bitter curſe,
Thy own nails teare thy own bowels, oh my parent
Dear Scotland, I no more will be a goad,
Pricking thy ſides, but if ere I draw a ſword,
It ſhall be double-edg'd with bloud and fire,
To burn and drown this Kingdome and this King.
My Generall
Charg'd me in privacie to give you theſe.
Thanks noble Clifford, what did he bid thee ſay?
Nothing but ſo.
A pair of Spurs, Bruce nere was runaway,
Twelve ſilver pence, oh bitter ſcorn, with Judas,
I have betray'd my Maſter, my dear Country,
And here's the embleme of my treachery,
To haſten to ſome tree, and deſperate die,
Twelve ſterling ſilver pence, ſterling, ha ſterling,
'Tis a limbe of Scotland, ſpurs for flight,
Clifford, i'le thither, comment I wrong or right.
Stay noble Grimsby, ere he further paſſe
One of us certifie our Generall,
Perhaps hee'l not admit him to his preſence.
'Tis like ſo, ſtay him here, that pains be mine.
Let Ruge-croſſe bring his pleaſure.
Come agreed.
You bring from Longſhanks ſome ſtrange meſſage now.
At leaſt he ſends his Gauntlet.
Gauntlet, no the Engliſh
Fight not two dayes together, but like ſwaggerers,
A fray being made up with a wound or ſo,
The man whoſe throat before ſhould have been cut,
Is a ſworn brother, now we have mall'd your Nation,
Thei'le fawn on us like Spaniels, will they not?
And that's thy errand, iſt not?
Commonly, when Engliſh ſee at cuffs they are too weak, they fall to fiſhing, and then bait the hook with mercie, and the Kings pardon, at which who bites ha's his ſwallowing ſpoiled for ever, there's no Scot but ſcorns to hang his hope on your Kings promiſes, be it nere ſo ſmoothly gilded.
He gilds none ſir.
I warrant he would pawn half his Dominions to ſhake hands with Wallace, and be friends.
Had he but him in's Court, he would out-ſhine
His capring gallants, be would dote on him,
As Jupiter did on Ganymede, and make him
His chief Minion.
Hee does already ſo really dote upon him, 'tis not yet the age of one houre ſince my Maſter ſware to give ten thouſand Crowns to Scot or Engliſh, that were ſo bold to bring him Wallace's head.
The Engliſh Herald.
Ten thouſand Crowns.
Would make a faire ſhew in our purſes Jack.
I could pick out five thouſand heads,
That I durſt boldly ſell him at that rate.
Ten thouſand Crowns.
I and Court wind-falls too,
Some Engliſh Earldome or ſo, here is none but friends,
Should you betray the conference, I care not,
I would deny it, and I would oreſway
Your proofs tho neere ſo maſſie.
It ſhall not need, beleeve me worthy Mentith.
What here you looke is ſafe.
Shall we earne this Engliſh gold, ten thouſand crownes?
My hand.
They are ours, hee's dead.
No more, he comes.
I am to him no vaſſal, hee's a tyrant,
So tell him, ere his frowne ſhall bend my knee,
This ſhall be hang'd upon the gallow tree,
For my appearance tell him this, I'le dyne
On Chriſtmas day next in his Engliſh Court,
And in his great Hall at Weſtminſter, at's owne boord,
Wee'le drink Scotch healths in his ſtanding cups of gold:
His blacke Iackes hand in hand about his Court
Shall march with our blew bonnets, we'le eate nothing
But what our ſwords ſhall carve, ſo tell his Souldiers,
Wee'le ſit like Lords there whilſt they rayle like ſlaves,
Go with Scotch threats, pay backe your Engliſh braves.
Youle make the Engliſh mad.
A brave defiance.
Defiance,
Lets mad them more, they ſhall not ſleep to night,
Good Grimsbie beat a drum, let bon-fires ſhine
Through all our army, as if our Tents were burnt,
And we diſlodg'd, but recollect our troops
Into an ordered body, ſome thing wee'le do
To make our Chronicles ſwell with Engliſh rue.
A Drum, call a Drum.
Oh ſir John Mentith I have crackt the Ice,
To a deſigne, which if it will ſucceed,
England no more ſhall ſtrike, nor Scotland bleed.
Com. Lets be partakers, deare ſir.
What will you ſay, if I winne Bruce from the Engliſh?
The happieſt day that ever ſhone on Scotland.
And crowne him King?
That's the up-ſhot muſt crowne all, I'm to meet him
Before one houre grow old in Glaſco-moore.
How meet him?
As I am, both come alone, no words to any.
Our lips are ſeal'd.
Will you ride, or go on foot?
No more, I'le ride.
Wee'le paſſe the wood on foot.
Jack Mentith, I do laugh to think what face,
Longſhancks wil make, when he ſhall heare what gueſts
Will dine with him in's Court on Chriſtmas day.
What face? he'le kill the Herald ſure.
Oh! ſome charme for me to be inviſible there, and ſee him.
For my part, of ten thouſand crownes by this hand,
I do wiſh you there.
For as many of mine, I ſweare.
Time may come,
In his Exchequer we may ſhare twice that ſumme.
Hence, hye you before, keep cloſe in the wood,
Breake forth if you ſpie treaſon, if not, not.
Good.
Ha, if what thou ſeem'ſt thou art, ſtep forward, ſpeake,
I have fac'd more horrid terror.
Whare do'ſt gang?
What's that to thee?
Thouſe not leſt and lang,
Twa wolves will ſuike thy bluide, by the third night,
I charge thy ſawle meete mine, thy death is dight.
Thou art a lying ſpirit.
Bruce byn thy bane,
Gif on thou gang luke not turne backe againe,
Wallace beweere, me thinks it thee ſhould irke,
Mare need haſt thou to ſerve God in the Kirke.
Stay, if thou haſt a voyce th'art bloud and bone,
As I am, let me feele thee, elſe I'le thinke thee
A ſorcerous imaginarie ſound:
Stand me, th'art ſome Engliſh damned witch,
That from a reverend Fryer has ſtoln his ſhape
To abuſe me—ſtay—art gone? no Hagge I will not.
It ſpake ſure, told me Bruce ſhould
be my bane,—cannot—ſhall not,
heaven knows ſuch things onely.
That eye hath ſhot me throw, wounds me to death,
I know that face too well, but 'tis ſo gaſtly,
I'le rather with my nayles here dig my grave,
Then once more behold thee.
Part from me vext ſpirit, my bloud turnes to water,
I beſeech thee affright me not—it's gone.
Alace Scotland to wham ſalt thou compleyne,
Alace, fra mourning wha ſall the refayne?
I thee beſeekand for him dy'd on tree,
Come not nere Bruyce, yet Bruyce ſall not hurt thee,
Alace, alace, no man can ſtand 'gainſt fate.
The dampe dew fra the heaven does gyn to faw,
I to my reſt mim gange ere the Cock crawe.
It was my wife, what horror meete I here?
No Armour in the world can hold out feare.
We ſtay for your direction.
Whom did you meete?
No body.
Saw ye nothing?
Not any thing.
Twas my braines weakneſſe then,
I have ſeene ſtrange ſights, that anon I'le tell;
If Grimsbie we meete never more, farewell.
Ha, I am ſtrucke dumbe, oh mans ſlippery fate!
Miſchiefes that follow us at our backs we ſhunne,
And are ſtrucke downe with thoſe we dreame not on.
I have beſide with Wallace ſherife of life,
Held private conference, who in Longſhancks name,
Who ſweares to me we ſhall have good preferment,
Beſide the promiſt gold.
Peace, Wallace comes.
Is the Bruyce come?
It is not yet his houre.
Who came along with you?
My foot-boy onely, who is tying up my horſe.
Him muſt I kill.
I'le looke if Bruce be in ſight yet—
Do.
Y'are ſad.
My minde is ſhaken but the ſtorme is o're,
What cry is that?
Be arm'd, Bruce with a force comes to betray thee,
From ſome villaines hand thy foot-boy is murdered.
Murdred? Bruce ſhall repent this deed.
So ſhalt thou, away with him.
Helpe to diſguiſe me Souldier, in exchange
Take theſe for thine, and here's ſome gold to boot.
If I be not hang'd, my Lord, in all my bravery,
I care not.
Phew, I warrant thee,
Seale up thy lips and eyes, thou neither ſeeſt
Nor canſt tell where I am.
Not I my Lord.
Oh my poore wrong'd countrey, pardon me heaven,
And with a feather pluck'd from mercies wing,
Bruſh off the purple ſpots, that elſe would grow,
Like freckles on my ſoule.
My Lord, here comes company.
Here quicke mine own agen, and get thee gone.
Sirra Souldier, ſaw'ſt thou the Earle of Huntington?
Huntington?
The Lord Bruce, I meane.
Who cals for Bruce?
Muffled up, and alone, I'le to the King.
Do, ſirra be gone.
Whither's Percy gone? he ask'd for Bruce.
There's great enquirie for you.
By whom?
The King has a freſh command for Bruce.
For me? he may command his Subjects.
True, and Huntington is one.
Is none.
No Subject?
None that dare oppoſe your King, Oh my impoſtum'd ſpleene,
Will flie into their faces, what command
Has England now?
Freſh powers are to be levied,
Which Bruce of Huntington muſt leade.
'Gainſt whom?
Gainſt proud Wallace, 'gainſt the Scots.
I will not, I'm not his Butcher,
Gainſt the Scots I will not fight.
How, will not?
No, will not Clifford.
Peace.
My Lord, I dare not,
In this laſt battell I receiv'd ſome wounds
That yet bleed inward, I will no more banquet ſtrangers
With my native bloud.
Bruce ſpeaks not like a ſubject.
Engliſh Edward commands not like a King,
Thrice honour'd Clifford, I'le truſt you with my boſome.
No, you ſhall not.
My virgin honour is ſo chaſt, it ſhall not
Keepe companie with a diſquiet boſome,
Nor talke with diſcontents.
It ſhall not, I will but,
Spare me, the ayre hath eares no more,
You ſent to me, I will but tell bold Clifford
Not a word,
My thoughts owe as much honour as their Lord.
Within traytor, traytor.
A mutinie, what noyſe is't?
Mentith, a Knight of Scotland.
Keepe him off.
What com'ſt thou for?
Comyn my countryman and I have brought
A jewell to your Highneſſe, which if 'twere right
As 'tis known counterfeit, 'twere worth a kingdome,
Wearied with warre, and pittying the deep wounds
Which fainting Scotland beares upon her breaſt,
And knowing that the onely ſword which gaſhes
Her tender ſides, is grip'd in Wallace hands,
I in my love to peace, and to the ſafetie
Of two great Nations, am the man that layed
Snares to entrap this monſter, that devoures
So many thouſand lives, the Rebell's tane.
Where is he?
I have brought him to your Engliſh Camp,
Force would not doo't, but policie, we ſtruck the Stagge
To the ground, and thought him dead, but heaven put backe
The blow of purpoſe, hee's now come to life,
From an aſtoniſhment when we thought him dead,
To th'end the world may ſee the publique ſhame
Of an Arch-traytor.
Mentith hath wonne fame,
And honour by this act, fetch in this devill.
Thou wilt have Englands thanks, but Scotlands curſe,
Thou never haſt done better, never worſe,
Damn'd Iudas to thy Country-man and friend.
Where am I?
Here with Bruce.
Bruce my Soveraigne?
My bloud is ſold, this is not Glaſco-moore,
Some villaine hath betray'd me.
Speak to your country-men, Comyn and Mentith.
Comyn and Mentith?
Something it was that made the modeſt night
Looke angry on the world, I this was it,
And this was it that cleft my fathers grave,
And rais'd him from his monumentall bed of earth
To give me gentle warning, this was it,
That made my ſtarre, when all the reſt look'd pale,
Bluſh like a fiery Meteor, can Heaven winke at this?
It can, it doth, and at farre greater miſchiefs.
Not of thy acting?
Yes of mine.
Not here.
Here or in Hell.
Why then goe act them there,
Boaſt of them there, in that black Kingdome tell
That by a true ſubject a baſe Rebell fell.
Whats that?
Your Scotch jeweller is ſlain,
By whom?
By Wallace.
Heare me ſpeak King Edward.
Good my Liege heare him,
Clif. I have vow'd,
Neither to heare nor ſee him, drag him hence,
Mine eye ſhall nor be ſo compaſſionate
To view him, leaſt I pitie him: hang, draw, and quarter him.
Firſt heare me ſpeak,
Drag him hence, and let that heart, thoſe limbes,
Which were the motives to rebellious warre
Be torn aſunder, caſt upon that ground,
Which he with unkinde ſteele ſo oft did wound,
Away with him.
Farewell, to all the World,
I ha met death too often to feare him now,
Only it grieves me that I have not freed
Scotland my native ſoile from tyranny,
Bruce, thou haſt a Kingdome, loſe it not.
Stop his throat.
I go to one too,
And on my grave, when death hath there down laid me,
Be this my Epitaph, mine own betrayes me—
Let him have noble triall.
He ſhall have the triall of an Arch-traitour,
Percy and Clifford take hence Bruce.
Me hence?
You hence ſir, from this houre I ſweare,
Never to ſee thee Earle of Huntingdon,
Harke Clifford, and Northumberland, awa
What is King Edwards meaning?
Your head ſhal feel our meaning, ſee it diſpatch'd.
You may.
My honor'd Lord, although untimely death,
Hath taken hence one engine of that work,
That brought that Rebell Wallace to his end.
Seeing our Countries peace, and Englands good,
Is by his death made perfect and compleat,
I doubt not but the promiſed reward
Of full ten thouſand Crowns ſhall now remayn,
To the Survivor.
Comin, I perceive
It was reward, not love that acted it,
But you ſhall have your due, of that anon.
I told thee Bruce, that thou upon thy head,
Shouldſt feele our meaning, and that all the world,
May know we value honour above conqueſt,
Having a power able to turn all Scotland
Into a Chaos, here twixt both our Armies,
Give us thy oath of fealty, and weare
Both Crown and title of thine Anceſtors.
England is full of honour, Bruce doth bend
To thy command.
Give him his oath of fealty,
With him thoſe Lords which are his Countrymen.
Stand back, a Serpent ſhall not with his breath
Infect our Kingly eares, die ſlave, for he
That would betray his friend ſhall nere ſerve me.
What hath Bruce done?
A ſacrifice of honour and revenge, no traitors hand
Shall help to lift a Crown up to my head,
Thou didſt betray, then die unpitied.
Brave Bruce, I'le love thee for this honor'd act,
Thou haſt perform'd a noble piece of juſtice:
Now ſhall the Ghoſt of Wallace ſleepe in peace,
And perfect love ſhall twixt theſe Lands increaſe.
He hath his full reward for his foule treaſon,
Drag hence the ſlave, and make him food for Crows.
The Lamp that gave Rebellion light, hath ſpent
The oile that fed it, all our ſpears are turn'd
To Palmes and Olive branches, all our ſtars
Are now made whole, peace is the balme of wars.