GReat Praetor, and grave Senators, she craves
A free admittance on these curied waves,
Who doth from long antiquity professe
Her to be your gratious Patronesse:
Oft have I on a passant Lyon sate,
And through your populous streets beene borne in state:
Oft have I grac'ty our Triumphes on the shore,
But on the Waters was not seene before.
Will you the reason know why it doth fall,
That I thus change my Element? you shall:
When Triton with his pearly trumpets blew
A streperous blast, to summon all the crew
Of Marine gods and goddesses to appeare,
(As the annuall custome is) and meet you here:
As they were then in councell to debate,
What honour they might adde unto the state
Of this Inauguration; there appear'd
God Mercury, who would from Iove be heard:
His Caducaus silence might command,
Whilst all attentive were to understand
The tenor of his message: who thus spake.
The Sire of gods, with what you undertake
Is highly pleas'd, and greatly doth commend
That faire designe and purpose you intend;
But he beheld a Machine from an high,
Which at first sight daz'd his immortall eye;
A royall Arke, whose bright and glorious beams
Rivall the Sunnes, ready to proove your streames:
A vessell of such beauty, burthen, state,
That all the high Powers were amaz'd thereat;
So beautified, so munified, so clad,
As might an eight to the seaven wonders adde:
VVhich must be now your charge; 'twas Ioves owne motion,
That all of you attend her to the Ocean.
This notwithstanding, such was their great care,
(To shew that o're you they indulgent are)
That Neptune from his Chariot bad me chuse
Two of his best Sea-horses, to excuse
His inforc't absence: Thames (whose breast doth swell
Still with that glorious burthen) bad me tell,
That loves command shall be no sooner done,
But every Tide he'le on your errands runne
From hence to the Lands end, and thence againe
Backe, to conveigh your trafficke from the Maine:
My message thus delivered; now proceed
To take your oath, there is no further need
Of my assistance; who on Land will meete you,
And with the state of greater Triumphes greete you.
SAcred's the number foure, Philosophers say,
And beares an happy Omen; as this day
It may appeare: foure Elements conspire,
Namely, the Water, Earth, the Aire, and Fire,
To make up man: the colours in him bred
Are also foure, White, Pallid, Blacke, and red:
Of foure Complexions he existeth soly,
Flegmaticke, Sanguine, Choler, Melancholy.
His meate foure severall digestions gaines,
In Stomacke, Liver, Members, and the Veines.
Foure qualities cald primae within lie,
Which are thus titled, Hot, Cold, Moist, and Drie.
He acts his whole life on this earthy stage,
In Child-hood, Youth, Man-hood, Decripit age.
The very day that doth afford him light,
Is Morning the Meridian, Evening, Night.
Foure seasons still successively appeare,
Which put together make a compleat yeare.
The earth, with all the Kingdomes therein guided,
Is into foure distinguish'd parts divided.
The foure Windes from the Worlds foure quarters blow,
Eorus, Favonius, Auster, Aquilo.
All Morall vertues we in foure include,
As Prudence, Iustice, Temperance Fortitude.
Court, City, Campe, and Countrey, the foure CCCs;
Which represent to us the foure degrees,
Requir'd in every faire and flourishing Land,
Substract but one a Kingdome cannot stand.
Foure Colonels are in this City knowne,
Of which you, honoured Sir, have long beene one:
And those foure Crownes, (for so the high Powers please)
Embleme the Kings foure Scepters, and foure Seas.
The fift Imperiall Arch above, proclaimes
That glorious Crowne, at which his Highnesse aimes.
Thus is our round Globe squard, figuring his power,
And yours beneath Him, in the number foure.
THis Structure honour'd Sir doth title beare
Of an Imperiall Fort, apt for that spheare
In which you now moove, borrowing all her grace,
As well from your owne person, as your place;
For you have past through all degrees that tended
Vnto that height which you have now ascended.
You have beene in this City ('tis knowne well)
A Souldier, Captaine, and a Colonell.
And now in times faire progresse, to crowne all,
Of this Metropolis chiefe Generall.
You, of this Embleme, which this day we bring,
To represent the Chamber of the King,
Are the prime governour: a Royall Fort,
And strongly sed, as not built for sport,
But for example and defence: a Tower
Supported by no lesse than Soveraigne power:
The Theologicke vertues, the three Graces,
And Charites have here their severall places.
Here Piety, true Zeale, study of Peace,
(By which small mites to Magozines increase)
Have residence: now opposite there are
To these, and with them at continuall warre,
Pride, Arrogance, Sloath, Vanity, Prestigion,
Prophanesse, the contempt of true Religion,
With thousands more, who assiduatly waite
This your Imperiall Fort to insidiate.
You may observe i'th musicke of your Bels
Like sound in Triumphes, and for funerall knels;
Marriage and death to them appeare all one,
Masking nor mourning cannot change their tone:
With our Fort 'tis not so, whose faire pretence, is
To comply with the nature of offences,
Errors: she knowes in low termes how to chide
Great faults, with greater noise are terrifi'd:
But she can load her Cannons, and speake loud
To encounter with the arrogant and proud:
Whats further in your Praetorship assign'd,
You, in your Londons Mirrour there may find.
BEhold me Sight, of the five sences prime,
(Now best complying with the place and time)
Presenting Londons Mirrour, and this Glasse
Shewes not alone what she is, or once was,
But that the spacious Vniverse might see
In her, what their great Cities ought to be;
That every forraigne Magistrate from hence
Might learne how to dispose his Opticke sence.
Aspice saith, Looke toward and upon
Desartfull men whom this Age frowneth on.
And Despice cast downe thy powerfull eye
On the poore wretch that doth beneath thee lye.
Then Conspice take counsell first and pause
With meditation, ere thou iudge a cause.
Prospice bids looke a farre off, and view
(Before conclude) what dangers may insue.
Perspice wils, in sifting doubts, then scan
The nature of the matter with the man.
Let every cause be searcht, and duely sought,
Saith Inspice, ere thou determinst ought.
Circumspice saith, looke about to immure
So great a charge, that all within be sure.
Considerate Respice inioynes thee last,
To cast thine eyes backe upon all things past.
For Londons selfe, if they shall first begin
To examine her without, and then within,
What Architectures, Palaces, what Bowers,
What Citadels, what turrets, and what towers?
Who in her age grew pregnant, brought a bed
Of a New Towne, and late delivered
Of such a burthen, as in few yeares space,
Can almost speake all tongues, (to her more grace.)
Then her Cathedrals, Temples new reparing,
An act of true devotion, no man sparing
His helping hand; and many, 'tis well knowne,
To further Gods house have forget their owne.
Vnto her outward shape I doe not prize her,
But let them come within to anatomize her.
Her Praetor, scarlet Senate, Liveries,
The ordering of her brave societies:
Divine Astraea here in equall scale
Doth ballance Iustice, Truth needes not looke pale,
Nor poverty deiected, th'Orphants cause,
And Widowes plea finde helpe; no subtile clause
Can make demurre in sentence: a faire hearing,
And upright doome in every Court appearing:
Still to preserve her so, be't your indeavour,
And she in you, you her shall live for ever.
WE o a Valediction are confin'd,
(Right Honoured) and intreat You beare in minde
What was this Day presented: Your chiefe Saint
A Martyr once of the Church militant,
But now of the tryumphant, bids You spare
Your selfe this Night: for to a World of Care
You are ingag'd to morrow, which must last
Till the whole progresse of Your Yeere be past.
The Spheare-like Globe quadrated, lets You know,
What Pro-Rex doth to the foure Scepters owe.
Your Military honours, (in your Dayes
Of lesse commnd) th' Imperiall Fort displayes,
And Londons Mirrour, that all men may see
What Magistrates have beene, and ought to be.
Set is the Sunne long since, and now the Light
Quite fayling us, Thrice Honourd Sir, good Night.