In wet and cloudy mists, I ſloowly riſe,
As with mine owne dull weight opprest.
To cloſe with ſleep the jealous lovers eyes,
And give forſaken Virgins rest.
Th' adventrous Merchant and the Mariner,
(Whom ſtormes all day vex in the deep)
Beginne to trust the windes when I appeare,
And loſe their dangers in their ſleep.
The ſtudious that conſume their brains and ſight,
In ſearch where doubtfull knowledge lies,
Grow wearie of their fruitleſſe uſe of light,
And wiſh my ſhades to eaſe their eyes.
Th' ambitious toyling Stateſman that prepares
Great miſchiefes ere the day begins,
Not meaſures day by houres, but by his cares;
And night must intermit his ſinnes.
Then why, when my ſlow Chariot us'd to clime,
Did old mistaking Sages weepe?
As if my Empire did uſurpe their time,
And houres were lost when ſpent in ſleep.
I come to eaſe their labours and prevent
That wearineſſe which would destroy:
The profit of their toyles are ſtill miſſ-ſpent
Till rest enables to enjoy.
The third in purple, and black, on her head a dormouſe.
The Chariot of Night being arrived to the middle of the aire, ſtaid, and after ſome dialogue with her attendants, ſhee aſcends ſinging, and is hidden in the clouds.
Why dreadfull Queen doſt thou appeare,
So early in this Hemiſphere?
Where all to triumphs are addreſt,
As they did need as little reſt
As wandring Planets have above;
Who ne're are tir'd, yet ever move.
As little wearie as are they;
As free from ſuffrings and decay,
Or feare of fleeting times expence;
Not tir'd, with weight, or vex'd with ſenſe.
Why would Oblivion mix with theſe that ſtrive,
To raiſe new joyes, and keep the old alive?
What is the uſe of ſilence here?
Thou ſee'st (great Empreſſe) ev'ry eie,
Doth watch for meaſures, ev'ry eare
Doth hearken after harmony.
Why are we come to give their labours eaſe?
That reckon ſleepe a death, reſt a diſeaſe:
And all this Iſle their triumphs now expreſſe,
Not to beget, but ſhew their happineſſe:
A precious ſigne, they know their owne estate,
And that makes Nations chiefly fortunate:
For it alike ſhould often valued be,
To know, as to deſerve felicitie.
You just, and carefull Registers of houres,
And you whoſe ſev'rall ever uſefull powers,
Diſpoſe and make me pleaſing whilst I ſway,
Produce fantasticke creatures of the night,
Though not t' advance, yet vary their delight;
Perhaps theſe triumphs may defer the day.
All that our ſtriving miſtery preſents
Will be but foiles to nobler ornaments,
Yet I ſo trust the cauſes of their joy,
And am ſo envious of thoſe glistring ſhowes
The Sunne in pride, not favour doth diſcloſe,
That I would lengthen what I can't deſtroy.
Morpheus the preſenter of humane ſhapes.
Iceles, of fearfull viſions.
And Phantaſte, of any thing that may be imagined.
Why (as if guilty) doſt thou hide thy head
(Dull ſleepe!) in gloomy ſhades with Poppy ſpread?
If thou doſt ſteale our houres, is it a crime?
Thou doſt but lay them by for mens releefe,
And art at worſt a profitable theefe;
Pay'ſt Nature double what thou ſteal'ſt from Time.
Invoke thy chiefeſt ſonnes, and ſtraight appeare,
To make theſe pleaſures ſit to laſt a yeare!
I come! I come! and that I more may pleaſe,
My Morpheus I have brought, and Iceles,
With wilde Phantaſte; each of them hath pow'r
To raiſe Ideas from my ſhady Bow'r:
Thoſe dreames of humane formes; of worſe eſtate
That reaſon want, and things inanimate.
How we ſhall fill each mortall with delight,
To ſhew the ſoules fond buſineſſe ev'ry night;
When ſhe doth inwardly contract her beames,
To figure out her influence in dreames!
How they will ſmile, that mans immortall part,
Works things leſſe perfect than if rul'd by Art!
4. Witches.
1. Devill in the ſhape of a Goat.
Robin-goodfellow.
1. Dairy-maid.
1. Kitchin-maid.
The bright perpetuall Traveller
Doth now too long the day defer,
Can he grow old,
Or, in his fierie chariot cold,
Or weary cauſe he ſtill one courſe doth runne?
Bold Heſperus thou dost mistake the Sunne:
Though's journeyes never can be paſt,
But muſt for ever laſt,
Though 'tis not limited how far,
Becauſe it ſtill is circular,
Yet ſure he cannot tire,
Nor mortally wax old,
Nor's univerſall beames grow cold,
Since fed with immateriall fire.
What is the cauſe he then ſo long doth ſtay?
He hath reſign'd the pow'r of making day
Throughout this Hemiſpheare,
To a terrestr' all beautie here.
Now I perceive why Poets call him wiſe
He knowes the way how to preſerve his eyes,
This earthly Star (long ſince the boaſt of Fame)
Is both become his envy and his ſhame.
'Tis true, ſhould he appeare, he were undone,
And eclipſed though in his pride of noone.
Yet in her lookes he'le leaſt of danger finde,
She darkens thoſe with beauties of her minde.
If thou wilt ever ſhine above,
And in thy Spheare ſtill ſafely move,
Deſcend, and ſummon ſtrait
Apollo's Priests that wait
I'th garden o'th Britanides.
Enough, Ile rowſe them from their eaſe,
That they with Hymnes may celebrate
Her vertues ever bleſſ'd estate.
Her Nymphs (whoſe beauties can't expire,)
'Cauſe dayly kindled by her fire,
Muſt needs be raviſh'd with thoſe layes,
Since as their owne they love her praiſe.
Wiſely did Arts great Lord
That rul'd Mythologie,
No vest for Truth afford,
But to each eye
Ordain'd her body naked ſtill, to ſhow
Some kind of truths men baſhfully ſhould know;
Thy praiſes being truths are ſilenc'd ſo.
Yet mightie ſpirits raiſe
Their actions up to Fame,
When lifted high with praiſe:
Then who will blame
Great vertue for ambition when it ſtrives
To feed on praiſe (the food by which it thrives?)
Who earn'ſt, yet hat'ſt, himſelf of truth deprives.
We know it is more lawfull farre
Than poſſible to ſing your praiſe,
Who ſhewes how gentle, wiſe, and juſt you are,
Muſt trace wide meaſures, not in common wayes.
As ſome in warre neere a defeat,
Confeſſe betimes th' are overcome,
To ſave their deſp'rate honors byretreat;
ſo wee retire, leſt wonder ſtrike us dumb.
How dull and uneffectuall is that rage,
Which ſwels our Poets when their numbers flow?
Reſembling ſillily, in ev'ry ago,
Things excellent, to what they leaſt doe know.
How poorely have they done, when they compare
A beauty that can rule ſevereſt eyes,
Vnto ſome pretty twinckling ſenſleſſe Starre?
Yet thinke they mend her by ſuch ſimilies.
If it be ſafe to gaze on beauty in extremes,
Look there, correct your judgements by your ſight!
Thoſe beauties neare her, are made up of beames,
They gather'd from her uſeleſſe ſcatter'd light.
Now judge (if faireſt Starres no more containe
Than what is certaine to th' Aſtrologer)
Whether compar'd to Starres ſhe ſo much gaine,
As Starres have gotten when compar'd to her?
Was there no other way
Our wonder to allay
But thus to falſifie reliefe?
For ſeeing quickly tir'd,
What moving we admir'd,
You turne our wonder into griefe.
Renew your meaſures now
Though but awhile, to ſhow
This reſpite was not wearineſſe;
But you by thee did pleaſe
To give our pleaſures eaſe,
Which if continu'd, had growne leſſe,
You that are chiefe in ſoules, as in your bloud,
And nothing better'd by your high deſcent,
Ev'n in your paſſions as in reaſon good,
To whom vaſt power can adde no ornament.
Though Men the bleſt eſtate of Angels praiſe,
'Cauſe not perplex'd with what we ſexes call;
Yet you by ſuch a humane diff'rence raiſe
Your vertue more, becauſe 'tis conjugall.
Be long expected in your Thrones above!
And ſtay on earth untill our judgements know
The noble uſe of that we ſo much love;
Thus heaven ſtill lends what we would ever owe.
The Maſquers dance the Revels with the Lords▪