HEre, Daphne, by your father Peneus ſtreams
(which falling from the top of Pindus mount,
Waters Hemonian Tempe) let us ſit,
All daughters to the Rivers flowing neere:
There old Apidanus ſteales (murmuring) by;
Next, Poplar-ſhadowed Enipeus glides:
Not far, Amphriſus, Aeas, and 'mongſt theſe,
(Not leaſt) my father, good old Inachus
Lifts up his reverend head, with freſh floures crown'd,
Preſcribing lawes and limits to his ſtreams,
To bound them in their channels, curb their torrent,
Leſt in their pride they ſhould o'reſwell their banks;
Commanding them, through thouſand ſtrange indents
To pay his plenteous tribute to the ſeas.
And how much are we bound vnto the gods,
(Faire Io) to be Nymphs, not generated
From mariſh Meares, nor yet from ſtanding Lakes,
From ſedgy brooks, thick pooles, or ſhallow foords,
Nor yet from violent and robuſtuous ſeas.
Their waters keep a ſmooth and gentle courſe,
Not mov'd to fury by the warring windes;
Nor when loud fluxes fall to ſwell their bounds,
And make deep inundations on the meads:
Nor can the parching drought ſo dry their ſprings,
But that their channels keep a temperature:
Their modeſt ſhallowes ſerve us for coole baths
In ſummer time to play and wanton in:
Their depths, to bate our hookes with wormes and flies
Faſtned to lines made of ſmall twiſted ſilke,
And ſo betray the creatures of the floud.
Their chryſtall waves are Myrrhors, in the which
We dreſſe our heads, and put theſe curles in forme,
Sometimes ſo cunningly, as if that Art
Had power to exceed Nature: and againe,
With careleſſe, but ſo curious a neglect,
As if meere Chance did antecede them both.
This makes us of the Satyrs ſo admir'd,
And of the Faunes and Swaines ſo much belov'd.
Why, have you Sutors, Daphne?
Beſides ſuch,
For theſe my father, by whoſe will I am ſwayd)
Accounts as mean) of Gallants I have change;
oth City and the Court.
But I may claim
Prioritie above all water Nymphs,
Nor can the Naiades compare with me;
No, Daphne, not your ſelfe. The rurall Swaines,
hey gather from theſe banks mellifluous floures,
nd make you chaplets to adorn your browes,
nd ſhadow your choice beauty from the Sun,
ay thinke them coſtly Preſents: but I'am one
To whom the gods themſelves have offred gifts.
Then before all the daughters of theſe flouds
claim a juſt precedence.
By what dream,
r rather by what brain-ſicke fantaſie
ath Io been deluded?
My apprehenſions
e no weake fantoms to beguile the ſence,
t reall, and in action; with their form
hey beare a being ſubſtance.
Hath your Beauty
d amongſt men ſuch long and ſtrange neglect,
at Io would to colour ſuch diſgrace,
ccuſe the gods of weakneſſe?
Let earths Beauties
enſure of Earth, meere terren as yours be,
d aime no further: the while this of myne
all be new queſtion'd by the Powers Divine.
Now by what gods, for Heav'ns ſake?
Not the meaneſt,
ſuch as we call under-deities,
melancholy Saturn, (by his ſon
il'd and baniſht from the ſupreme rule)
Phoebus, a meere Vaſſal to the earth,
And forc'd each naturall day to meaſure heaven;
As Neptune, Soveraign o're the Seas, to whom
Our tributary rivers hourely pay:
As Mercury, though ſon to Iove himſelfe,
No better than his Foot-boy or his Page,
Compeld at every ſummons to his ſpeed:
But of the potent Thunderer.
He of whom
You have learn'd to thunder theſe impoſſible braves.
Io, I am aſham'd.
Yes, that your beauty's
Compoſed of the groſſer elements,
Want that attraction to call Iove himſelfe
Downe from his heavenly Fabrick, to behold
Vs in our eminence.
Strange wonder ſure,
To looke vpon that face in which we Mortals,
And value it at beſt, can nothing ſpy,
Breed admiration in a Deity!
Appeare, Iove, in thy glory, let them know
Ei, ſham'd confeſſe their fond ſurmiſes vain,
And what it is, thy god-head to prophane.
Fly, fly, leſt we be thunder-ſtrooke, away;
Let's ſeeke our ſafety, danger's in our ſtay.
Thou Daphne, who Ioves preſence now doſt ſhun,
Swifter ere long ſhalt from, Apollo run.
But there lie that which makes us terrible,
Affrighting gods and men. Io to thee
In calmes I come, and Faire one make me proud,
To ſeale the love which I ſo long have vow'd.
What ſteale? what vow?
Both thou ſhalt finde impreſt
On thy ſmooth cheeke, ſoft lip, and Ivory breſt,
Forbeare to handle; yet I never knew
A man ſo bold and rude: Can gods diſpence,
To teach us Women unknowne impudence?
Nay rather we ſolicit you to prove
What yet you have not try'de, the ſweets of love.
Things that I would not learn.
A Truant ſtill?
If you want art, Io, I can teach you skill:
Give me your hand, your lip: why theſe but are
The Prologue to a paſtime much more rare.
Women by nature are ambitious, and
Long to know what they do not underſtand.
I'le practiſe you in that which you before
Ne're knew.
In all this lip-ſport? or what more
Is in theſe kiſſes meant? I am ſo dull,—
All theſe my Comment ſhall explain at full.
In vain you ſtrive.
Should I do ought ſave well,
I were vndone, my fathers flouds would tell;
Theſe are his banks, they'l blab: What mean you? fie;
They ſwell above their bounds, only to ſpie
And ſee what we are doing. Piſh, away,
Such deeds of darkneſſe can you do by day?
Beſides, ſhall I conſent to what you mean,
Not all theſe ſilver drops can waſh me clean.
Where I doe ſtain I can again make pure:
And that Day ſhall not hinder us, be ſure:
Ariſe you fogs and damps, your vapors gather,
To ſhroud us both from Iuno and thy father.
You make me bluſh.
Theſe bluſhes none ſhall ſee;
Behold theſe miſts, to curtain us and thee.
Well, when what moſt you ſue for, you have won,
My comfort is, I ſee not what is done,
And Io now I'le teach thee ſports untry'de,
In darkneſſe beſt a Virgins bluſh to hide.
Not in the heav'ns? where then? In vain it were
To ſearch the ſeas; the blew vein'd Norae,
And green hair'd Dorides with all their brats,
Styl'd by the names of water goddeſſes,
(Though Proſtitutes to Neptune) 'mongſt them all
Yeeld not a face to pleaſe his curious eye.
Where then? The earth? I that, if any place,
Yeelds choice of tempting Beauties: Argos bred
A golden Danaë, Thebes afforded an
Alcmena and a wanton Semele;
Pelagia, a Caliſto; Sparta nurſt
A ſwan-like Laeda, (Strumpets) of all which
I ſought a ſure, but found a vain revenge.
Why may not then Theſſalian Tempe yeeld
Like faſcination, ſince their impudence
Is more and more encourag'd by my wrongs:
Here then I make inquiry. The day's cleare;
Whence come theſe foggy myſts that choke the aire,
In ſo ſerene and bright an hemiſphere?
Aut ego fallr, aut ego ledar.
If from the earth, this ſudden overcaſt
Would ſmell of thicke and ſuffocating damps:
If from the aire, or any ſulph'rous fire,
It would be found by their caliditie.
If from the Rivers, or theſe mooriſh fennes,
Humiditie would tell vs whence they were.
No, theſe are forc'd, and by ſome god-like power,
Created for a more peculiaruſe:
And now my jealouſie moſt truly prompts me.
'Tis ſome illuſion, made to blinde myne eies
From a new injury; which if I finde,
On this one Strumpet I will ſtudy more,
Than all that have my vengeance ſcap'd before.
The clamorous Queen's deſcended from the Spheres,
To finde the cauſe of this illuſive Fog:
But Io I have ſo tranſhap'd thee now,
That ſhe by no means can diſcover thee;
And in that confidence I'le front her boldly.
Jove heare? my jelouſies are then not vain,
Howe're I'le give him gentle entertaine,
Concealing what's within.
My lovely Iuno?
My Brother and my Husband Iupiter?
What make you here on earth?
What other reaſon,
But that I miſt my ſoveraign Lord in heaven;
And then I yoakt my Peacocks, to their bills
Ty'd ſilken bridles, and in my light chariot
Made of fine gold, and deckt with Eſtrich plumes,
Deſcended as you ſee. But what affaire
Might Iuno be ſo bold to aske her Lord)
Detaines you now in Tempe?
Though it fits not
Your Sex to aske a thing that ill beſeemes,
Or pry into the counſels of the gods;
Yet thus much I'le reſolve you? I came downe
To cenſure here ſome cauſes amongſt men,
And ſet things crooked upright.
Now I ſpy
That which hath drawne him headlong from the sky,
And I will make th' Adulterer himſelfe
uthor of my iuſt vengeance.
Thou once gon,
e were again tranſhap'd, and we both one.
weet Iuno will you once more mount your Chariot,
nd keep your ſtate above My deſignes ended,
will not long be from you.
My craft now
Shall match his cunning; if there be in me
A godhead, I have caſt her deſtiny.
Deare loving Lord, ſince 'twas my kindeneſſe drew me
To ſee vnto your ſafety (though I know
The Deities in every place ſecure)
Give me ſome gift on earth, that I in heaven
May applaud your royall bounty.
Be it bred
Beneath the Moon, 'tis my Saturnia's.
I have not ſeen ſo ſweet and lovely a Beaſt
White without ſpot or ſtain; Is ſhe of the herd
Belonging to theſe Medowes?
She is, no doubt.
Why doth my Iuno aske?
To make her myne.
A gift too ſmall for Juno to entreat,
Or Iove to grant; Demand ſome greater boon.
This Cow or nothing.
Shee's not for thy uſe;
What would my Love do with her?
Only this,
(Being above the reſt moſt beautifull)
To ſacrifice her to your Deity.
Not for the triple world: What was it, Sweet,
That you of me demanded?
Now to know
What put you in this feare? Nay I have beg'd,
And muſt not be deny'd. And have I found you?
In what a ſtreight am I? her to betray,
And give her up into her enemies hand,
In man would prove a ſavage cruelty,
Much more in us: and to deny a gift
Appearing of ſo ſmall a conſequence,
Would but augment her too much jelouſie,
And open that which is as yet conceal'd.
What hope have I to enioy greater things,
That am deny'd a trifle?
Say I will not,
And give no reaſon; it may then appeare,
This Heifer to be no ſuch as ſhe ſeems.
Well, ſhe is yours; but how will you diſpoſe her?
So carefully, becauſe ſhe is your gift,
My ſeruant Argus with a hundred eyes
Shall guard her from all dangers.
'Tis enough,
In that, to us you ſhall expreſſe your love.
But prove he to her churliſh or vnkinde,
There's one, at once his hundred eies ſhall blind.
So, ſhe is now your charge.
And being myne,
I'le teach baſe Earth to injure what's divine.
Where is my ſeruant Argus?
Who's that calls?
The ſacred goddeſſe Iuno? What new ſervice
Will you command your vaſſal?
Tak't in briefe;
Beholdſt thou This? This? This no matter what,
Not worth a name; only a thing I loath;
Out on thee: But I'le ſpare my railing words,
To expreſſe my hate in action.
What's the cauſe
The poore beaſt trembles that?
A Beaſt indeed:
Like ſuch ſhe ſhall be us'd; behold her, Argus;
Are theſe lips fitting for a god to kiſſe?
Theſe hoofes apt palms to gripe? theſe tears fit pillowes?
On which a Deity ſhould breſt himſelfe?
Theſe, eyes to tempt? or this an hide to touch?
Theſe hornes? (ô me) in myne owne heraldry
She mocks me without bluſhing.
In all this
How will you uſe my ſervice?
As a Spy:
An hundred eyes thou haſt, of all which number
I will allow thee two to ſleep by turnes;
The reſt to watch this Strumpet; and of all,
But two to winke, the reſt to gaze at full:
Behinde thee thou haſt eyes, both ſides, before;
Which way ſoe're thou turnſt ſhee's in thy view.
"A thouſand he had need, all piercing bright,
"To watch a Lover from his choice delight.
And is this all?
Something I had forgot:
Thou art an Herdſman, Argus, and thou know'ſt
To tame vnruly cattell; ſhe is ſuch:
In ſome unworthy halter binde her neck,
For ſuch a Beauty the firſt Cakanet.
Her browſing be the Brakes and bitter couche,
For dainties feed her with the ſoureſt herbs;
Lead her through briers & brambles, which may ſcratch
Her itching skin even till her ſoft ſides bleed,
Raiſe vp the mud in cleare ſprings when ſhe drinks,
Keep her from ſhadow, in the parching Sun,
Till ſhe be ſtung with horſe flies, and the brees:
Let her not reſt but where the ground's ſtill bare;
Feather her bed with thiſtles and ſharp thornes;
And for her footing chuſe the barren paths
Strow'd with looſe pointed flints to gall her hoofes.
Argus farewell, I leave her to thy truſt,
A ſweet reuenge for her inſatiate luſt.
Drawing this piece of Beaſts fleſh thus along,
Me-thinks I looke like Lybian Hercules
Leading the Dog of hell: nay I ſhall fit her
According to my charge, and I will keep thee
(Calfe with the white face) ſafe enough from bulling,
The longeſt day that I haue eye to ſee.
What do you hang an arſe? Ptrow, come along,
I'le leade you to bare feeding, and finde ſallets
To take downe your full flanks and theſe plump cheeks.
Along, I'le watch thee well enough from ſhrinking
Necke out of collar. Nay, on; thou ſhalt finde,
Though my face from thee, I have eyes behinde.
Speake not to me of comfort, Jo's loſt!
Had ſhe miſcarried on the earth, her body
Would have given inſtance of her timeleſſe fate:
Or had ſhe been by ſavage beaſts devour'd,
Her garments ſtain'd with bloud would tell her death.
Had ſhe in myne or theſe my neighbour floods
Periſht, they would have borne her gently vp,
And caſt her on ſome banke for buriall.
Deare Inachus do not torment your ſelfe,
Nothing ſo loſt, but may be found at length:
For hauing ſeen no token of her death,
There's of her life ſome hope.
Behold, Amphriſus
With this your antient neighbour Appidan,
Peneus and others, as we moane your loſſe,
So in our pitty come to comfort you.
O, brackiſh not your waters with your teares,
That yet run pure and freſh; but be of comfort.
In vain you ſpeake of what you cannot give,
As I in vaine lament myne Io's loſſe.
How now, curſt Cow? What, ſtart you at that name?
I'le make your long hornes ſhorter.
Io, where?
If under earth, I'le ſend my ſprings in ſearch
As low as to the Centre, Io, where?
If ſnatcht vp in the aire, like dew exhal'd,
With eyes fixt vpward I will ſtill thus gaze,
Till from the boſome of ſome gentle cloud,
Thou drop into myne armes. Faire Io, where?
I thinke the beaſt hath breezes in her taile,
She cannot keepe her ſtill.
But ſtay, what's hee
That leads the faireſt Heifer tether'd faſt,
That e're drunke of my ſtreames; for Io's ſake
I loue all creatures that are beautifull.
How now you Harlatry?
Thou churliſh heardſman,
I know thee, Argus, jealous Iuno's Spy,
Why canſt thou be ſo fierce to one ſo faire?
What's that to thee, or any of you all.
Amongſt all creatures Nature ever made,
Some to have native beauty 'bove the reſt,
Commanding ſoft affection, this is ſuch.
With all myne eyes I ſpy no difference,
But love all beaſts as beaſts.
The more beaſt thou.
But why ſhould this, the faireſt of all heards,
Caſt ſuch a pitteous moving eye on you,
As wooing your acquaintance?
And 'tis true,
Where ere I go, her ſad eye followes me,
So ſhe too, did not Argus keepe her backe:
See, ſee, how gently ſhe endures my touch,
And makes an offer (had ſhee power) to ſpeake.
Heare, take theſe floures, and now ſhe kiſt myne hand,
Whileſt pitteous teares drop down her tender cheeks.
What ſhould I ſay? poore beaſt I pitty thee,
And all the good I can do is to grieve,
Th' haſt ſuch a churliſh Keeper.
Inachus, I feare
There's ſomething greater in't.
What greater can be,
Vnleſſe there live ſome vnderſtanding ſpirit
In this irrationall and ſavage ſhape:
What wouldſt thou have, that in this beſtiall figure
Beg'ſt humane pitty? what intends ſhe, thinke you,
By pawing on the ground? Obſerve her, brethren,
It ſeemes ſhe hath writ ſomthing in the duſt,
And ſee, two letters are imprinted faire,
As if it were my Io's Character, And here I reade Io.
Io: and ſee, in every ſtep ſhe hath trod,
That word impreſt.
This ſhe? whom I ſo long in vain have ſought,
Through forreſts, groves, and mountains, fields & floods?
This ſhe, whom I in finding ſhall moſt loſe?
O miſerable wretched Inachus,
More miſerable Io, thus transform'd:
I terme thee lovely, till I knew thee ſuch;
But when thy former beauty I record,
Thou ougly art, miſhap'd, and terrible.
Can the gods ſuffer this?
Leave this your howling.
Forbeare, or in this cord I leade her forth,
Ile ſtrangle her. Dare not to follow me,
There's danger in me both waies; ſhe ſhall periſh,
And you muſt bleed. Come, Minion we will clime
You craggy mountain top, a proſpect fit
For Argus only, who (not moving) can
Behold at once from whence the foure winds blow,
And there with her I'le like a Beacon ſtand,
To watch and to give warning. Will you drive?
I ſay purſue me not, for if you do,
Ile make her ſure, and you repent it too.
Why ptrow there.
With what a pitteous action, wailing tongue,
She gave a loving, but a loath farewell.
But that the high Powers are not limitable,
Who vvould beleeve this wonder poſſible.
We muſt not queſtion what the gods can do,
Yet in th' extremitie of all extremes,
And worſt of bads, deſpaire not, Inachus.
How eaſie 'tis for thoſe that taſt not griefe,
Bid others be of comfort.
Reverend Sir,—
There is no reverence due: not to the gods,
If this be ſeen and ſuffer'd: O my Io.
With acclamations I will fill the Meades:
In ſtead of prayers, Ile execrate and curſe,
And to the burthen of myne untun'd ſhreeks
The rocks and caves ſhall echo to thy name.
But Inachus.—
But when your Chanels ſwell,
You can have dammes and ſluces to diſcharge
Superfluous waters, leſt your torrents rage;
And will you bar the conduits of myne eies
To eaſe the flux of my ſurcharged heart?
My care was, Io, to provide a man
To be thine husband; but I now muſt finde
One of the bellowing heard to cal me ſonne:
To have ſome pretty infant draw thy breſt,
But now muſt ſome py'de urchin ſucke thy teats.
But that I am immortall, and the dores
And gate to death againſt me are debar'd,
I'de weepe my ſelfe to nothing, and this Beeing
Scatter amongſt my flouds, that mixt with them,
They might (in leſſe than drops) amongſt their waves,
Convey me to the all-devouring ſeas,
To mix my brine with his, and be ſo loſt;
And loſt, forgotten: But I am ſtill the ſame,
And Io, I'le ſtill call vpon thy name.
How am I mov'd with Inachus exclaimes?
Why are the eares of gods kept open ſtill,
But firſt to heare, then pitty? haſt thou not, Mercury,
Seene Io's teares? Perceiv'd her ſcalding ſighs,
And even thus far heard her ſuſpires and grones,
Tortur'd beneath that Neatherd churliſh groome,
More ſavage than the beaſts he feeds?
I have.
How oft hath ſhe, thinking to heave her hands
For divine pitty; when ſhe ſpy'de her hoofes
Caſt them to th' earth, with them her head with ſhame,
And bellowing when ſhe would complain her griefe,
Started at her owne ſound?
How oft, when grazing on her fathers banks,
(Theſe fruitfull banks on which ſhe vs'd to ſport)
Offring to drinke, when in his Cryſtall ſtreams,
In which ſo often ſhe with pride hath lookt,
On her white brow, red cheeke, and golden curles:
Now when ſhe ſpies thoſe lips a god hath kiſt,
Stretcht to ſo vaſt a wideneſſe, penthous'd o're
With inlarg'd noſthrils; looking on thoſe eyes,
(In which 'twas once my ſole delight to looke)
To ſee them broad and glaring; her cleare brow
Late deckt with ſhining jewels, preſt with hornes.
How oft hath ſhe (more frighted than aſham'd)
Thought, from her ſelfe, in vaine, to hide her ſelfe?
This can you ſee? not ſtudy how to helpe?
I do, and will, by thyne aid, Mercury;
Hye therefore to the top of Pindus mount,
(There Argus keepes his watch) in ſome diſguiſe;
Thy Caduceus and thy wings layd by,
Finde with the ſlave ſome conference, till by cunning
Thou charm'ſt his waking eies, and being faſt,
Cut off his head, and with one blow extinguiſh
So many lights at once.
Great Iove I will:
But thus condition'd, you will interpoſe
Your awfull power 'twixt me and Iuno's hate.
Preſume th' art ſafe in vs.
Then Argus dies;
One fatal ſtroke ſhall ſhut an hundred eies.
How doſt thou like thyne uſage, madam Cow?
Your lodging and your dyet? How doſt thinke
This hempen chaine becomes thee? Will you ſee
Your ſweet face in the riuer once againe?
Or how doth your faire beaſtſhip feele your ſelfe?
Wouldſt thou not haue ſome Bulchin from the herd
To phyſicke thee of this venereall itch?
If not, I'le ſee what Nettles muddy ſtreams,
Couch-graſſe and weeds, thornes, briers, & flints can d
Theſe failing, here's a goad to prick your ſides.
If all theſe medicines will not tame your luſt,
I'le muſter new inventions. Nay, I know
You looke for pitty, but it lives not here.
In this high watch-tower ſtand I ſentinel,
To ſpy who comes and goes. I am made thy gardian,
Ile gard thee both from danger and from reſt;
'Twas in thy hearing, Iuno's late beheſt.
This ſhape may prove ſuſpectleſſe, and the fitteſt
To cloud a godhead in; my plumed hat
And fether'd ſandals, by the which I am knowne,
I have left at foot of this deſcending hill:
My ſnaky Rod I have to this ſheephooke turn'd.
Accommodated thus, to Argus now,
Ariſtors ſonne: behooves him keepe good watch,
Whom Mercury (Ioves ſon) intends to catch.
But Many-eyes have ſpy'de me.
How now ſhepheard,
There's none who in that ſimpl ſhape or name
Needs treaſon feare. Should any come prepar'd
For miſchiefe, I have lights about me ſhine
Sufficient to prevent it: but thou ſeem'ſt
None of ſuch ranke. Come ſit by me and talke.
The ſervant to the great Saturnia
Doth me no common grace.
Thou know'ſt me then?
What ſhepheard but not only knowes your name,
ut feares your ſtrength?
Nay ſit (by me th'art ſafe)
And tell ſome pretty tales to make me laugh:
have not long been merry.
Firſt reſolve me;
s that faire heifer of ſome neighbour herd,
You drag thus in an halter?
Shee's my charge,
A witty Brute, a moſt ingenious beaſt,
A very apprehenſiue Animal,
That can do tricks: ſhe hath been taught, I tell thee,
To write and reade.
Argus, not poſſible.
'Tis as I ſaid before: but having her,
Some pretty tale, I prethee.
But what if
Some goddeſſe ſhould live in this ſhape diſguis'd,
To whom you are ſo churliſh. I could tell you
A ſtory to that end.
Such toyes I love.
Thus the Pierides report: The Gyants
Aſſembled and made war againſt the gods,
Heape Oſſa upon Pelion, Caucaſus
Vpon Pernaſſus, Pindus above them;
Hill upon mountain, mountain vpon hill,
Till they had made a ſcale that reache to heaven.
The conflict then began: the monſtrous Typhon
Was Captain of the Gyants: Of the gods
Great Iove, Archduke. The Generals met and fought.
In briefe (to cut off circumſtance) the earth
Prevaild 'gainſt heauen. The gods are forc't to fly:
Iove, chac'd by Typhon into Egypt, chang'd
Himſelfe into a Ram: Apollo, frighted,
Turnes to a Crow, Bacchus into a Goat,
Iuno a Cow, Diana to a Cat;
Venus into a Fiſh, and tooke the ſea;
Mars to a Pigmy, leſt he ſhould be knowne:
And Mercury, ſyrnam'd the crafty god,
Into a Fox.
A Fox? But I would meet
That craft which could beguile Argus bright eyes.
Proceed, proceed, good ſhepheard.
Why may not then
Some goddeſſe be included in this ſhape?
A goddeſſe, ſaiſt thou? thinke me equall then
With one of theſe huge Gyants, if not greater,
That have the power and potencie to leade
A god-head in a ſtring. But ha, what muſick
Was that ſtrooke vp? 'Twas ſweet and delicat,
Nor have I heard the like.
My fellow ſhepheards
Behinde that rocke (from whence an echo growes)
For the more grace have chus'd that place as fitteſt,
Preſt to beſtow their cunning vpon you,
Whom they havé heard, much tyr'd with watching long
And ſhall we have ſome merry Madrigall
To paſſe away the time with?
What you pleaſe.
I fame would know how firſt theſe Pipes came up
That make this dainty muſicke?
Firſt from Pan
The god of Shepheards. In the memory
Of the Nymph Syrinz, Muſicke ſtrike and tell,
How in th' Arcadian plaines it once befell.
Syrinx, one of Dian's traine,
Hunting with her on the plaine,
Arm'd alike with ſhafts and bow;
Each from other would you know?
Which from which could not be told,
Saue ones was horne, the others gold.
Hey ho; very fine muſicke I promiſe you.
Now it begins to worke.
Pan he ſees himſelfe makes fine,
In his cap he pricks a Pine:
Now growes careleſſe of his heard,
Sits by brookes to prune his beard,
Meets her, and hath minde to wooe,
Much he ſpeakes, and more would doe.
'Tis pleaſing, but it makes me melancholy,
And drowſie too withall.
'Twill do anon.
Still he profers, ſhe denies;
He purſues (for Syrinx flies.)
Paſt her knees her coats vp flew,
He would faine ſee ſomething new:
By the leg and thigh he gueſt
(It ſeemes) the vertue of the reſt.
Were it not for my charge I'de take a nap.
This addes wings vnto his pace,
The goale for which he is in chace.
She addes feathers to her ſpeed;
Now it was no more than need.
Almoſt caught, Alas ſhe cries,
Some chaſte god my ſhape diſguiſe.
The reſt may ſleepe ſecure, ſo I can keepe
But two eyes waking.
Here's a charme for them.
Laedon heares, and girts her round,
Spies a reed that makes ſweet ſound:
Such is Syrinx. Wondring Pan
Puts it to his mouth anon:
Yet Syrinx thou art myne he ſaid,
And ſo of her his firſt pipe made.
My charm hath tooke effect; with theſe thyne eyes
Take thy laſt ſleepe, thou haſt not one to ſee;
My taske is done, and Jo thou now free.
The dying groans of Argus call'd down,
To know what of his luſtre is become.
What, all extinct? and is no memorie
Extant of their knowne brightneſſe? hath one night
(Whoſe nature ſhould be to be proud of ſtars)
Shut at one time an hundred? nay at once?
Should euery piece of time deprive ſo many,
How ſhortly would theſe lights innumerable
Be vaniſht into nothing? But deare Argus,
That all may know thou hadſt a louing miſtreſſe,
Grieuing thou ſhouldſt thus periſh for her ſake;
And that theſe eies (now blinde) in after-times
May giue a light to perpetuitie,
And memorize thy name, thy faith and fall,
Thy hundred eyes (who waſt for Iuno ſlain)
I will tranſport into my Peacocks traine;
Whilſt ſuch a bird hath breeding, and can bee,
Her painted feathers ſhall remember thee.
And whileſt an heifer graſeth on the plaine,
Io, her hoofe ſhall ſtill imprint thy name.
My Iuno are we friends? Let her long divorce,
My faire intreats, with Inachus exclaimes
Invoke thy love and pitty, by my life.
You vſe me like a ſiſter, not a wife,
My bed is ſtill ſo empty.
Now by Styx,
An oath no god was ever knowne to breake,
Signe her releaſe, ſhe ſhall hereafter be
To Iove as a meere ſtranger.
Since by that you ſweare,
What's paſt is loſt, it cuts off future feare,
Saving my quarrell, Mercury, to you.
Madam, I did your ſeruant no great wrong,
ave teaching him to reliſh a new ſong.
Where jars are mediated, vain it were
Call injuries in queſtion. As with Iupiter,
With you we are atton'd.
Now Mercury,
ince Iuno is appeas'd, fetch Io hither,
her owne native beauty, whom we will
Reſtore vnto her father.
Sir I ſhall.
O Iupiter! ô Iuno!
Inachus,
rceaſe exclaimes, thy prayers have had acceſſe,
hy teares been pittied, and thy loſſe bemoan'd;
Argus is ſlain, and faire Saturnia pleas'd,
nd Io to her priſtine ſhape reſtor'd.
Thanks you immortall gods.
No ſooner was this mighty Queene appeas'd,
t the rough haire dropt from her tender skin,
er hornes fell off, her eies appeard to ſhine
a leſſe orbe, her mouth and lips contracted
oth into compaſſe, and their native ſweetneſſe,
r ſhoulders are reſtor'd, fingers and hands;
r parted hoofe diuided into five,
ow with two feet contented, for on them
e ſtraightway ſtood erect, and of a Cow,
ve whiteneſſe, nought retaining, and even yet
e feares to ſpeake, leſt ſhe in ſtead of words
ould bellow forth her minde.
Yet will I dare
s give my father greeting.
O my childe.
I am ſtill jealous of that face: What's he
hat makes but a mean ſport of wedlocks breach,
But thinkes to violate an oath no ſin,
Though calling teſtates all the Stygian gods?
Great King and Lord, Brother and Husband too,
If I be worthy of thoſe attributes
Yourſelf have daignd, and all the gods approve,
Grant me a ſecond boon.
For thy remiſneſſe
In Io's late affliction, ſpeake, 'tis granted.
Then from theſe fields of Tempe baniſh her,
As far as into Egypt.
From her father?
Be you pleas'd,
And Iuno ſhall, I hope, be ſatisfied.
Io, you ſhall to Egypt be confin'd,
Be that your puniſhment for Iuno's hate:
Which executed you ſhall taſte our love.
In Egypt held a goddeſſe thou ſhalt be,
Ador'd and worſhipt in thine heifers ſhape;
Oblations ſhall be daily offer'd thee,
And Incenſe burnt to thy divinitie,
And this for ever. Iuno, in vain you ſorrow,
Ioves word is paſt, and cannot be revok'd.
And now with this one Maxim we conclude;
Where luſt is puniſht, though the bloud be tainted,
It (after ſuch long Penance) may be ſainted.