WHy lovely Daphne, will you loſe yo Youth,
And let your beſt houres paſſe yo Well you know,
Beautie's a Floure, which not being cropt in time,
Soone withers on the ſtalke, and then (alas)
Will neither ſerve for vſe nor ornament.
You owe me ſweet grand-children, pretty babes,
Even for your birth you do: it is a debt
That I would ſee diſcharg'd: I to my parents
Paid it in thee; it is a Bond ſtands firme,
'till canceld in thy ſweet poſteritie.
See, I have brought thee Suitors, choiſe ones too,
Two noble Rivers, both reſiding neere,
Amphriſus, and ſtill-flowing Appidans,
Yong, and of means, both active and of ſtrength
To wreſtle againſt barrenneſſe, and give
The hugge the foile. Being dead, I live in thee:
Live thou too in thine iſſue; ſo ſucceſſively
Our Line and memory ſhall never periſh,
But laſt as long as Time.
Your father (Daphne)
Counſels with iudgement, and this argument
I could by many reaſons amplifie.
As, That without ſucceſſion (one age paſt)
Mankinde ſhould ceaſe to be. O what a puniſhment
Deſerve they from the gods, that would deſtroy
o glorious a creation, and to leave
o wonderfull a fabricke as the world is,
To no admirers?
Save the Plants and Beaſts;
And what can they diſtinguiſh?
Therefore, Daughter
Make vſe of time: a ſeaſon being paſt,
Can never be recall'd, no, not a moneth.
A moneth? no day, no houre, no minute can:
herefore make uſe of opportunitie
Which throwes it ſelfe vpon thee: but being ſtreightned,
Will after prove a ſtranger; the leaſt inſtant
y long repentance cannot be redeem'd.
To you I bow in duty, as to a father;
And theſe affront in noble courteſie,
Not wronging him, to ſhew my breeding baſe,
coffing your profer'd love with womaniſh ſcorne.
is counſels, your perſuaſions, I commend,
nowing both fitting, were they ſeaſonable.
hat Maids ſhould love men I am not ignorant,
that the breeding world ſhould ſtill encreaſe;
hat Progenie ſhould reach from age to age,
nd that the gods make't a neceſſitie,
o have all their miraculous works admir'd:
l this I know; but
I'le proceed: But what
Can you produce againſt this?
Heare me out:
But when I in my beſt conſiderat thoughts
Ponder my youth, and what it is to loue;
That vowes are tyes not eaſie to be loos'd,
And that the ſmalleſt finger can pluck on
What not the hand and arme can well put off:
That Mariage is a Maze, which enter'd in,
The line is ſnatcht thence which ſhould guide us out.
Ere hazard then that vnknowne labyrinth,
Much blame me not to pauſe.
What needſt thou feare?
Fond timerous Girle, did not thy mother this
Long time before thee?
Nay, hereafter too
May not your daughter do ſo?
I'le reſolve you
That, when I have a daughter of my yeares,
And tutor'd by her mother.
Excellent Nymph,
Theſe are evaſions meere vnneceſſarie;
We know you to be ripe, and our ſelves grown,
Betwixt us is equalitie in ſtate,
And paritie in yeares: nor is our courſe
Irregular or indirect, we come
Admitted by your father, as a way
Plain, and not interdicted: nor is our ſuit
So far with cradle it may childiſh ſeem;
Nor ſo old, to appeare decrepit: we are two
Rivals, yet friends; ſo you chuſe one of either,
Even he that is deſpis'd reſts ſatisfied,
Nor is our love divided.
I commend you:
There is of you leſſe danger, and leaſt feare
That you ſhould die of love; when both of you
Come with like premeditation to diſgeſt
A rigorous anſwer.
Pray what ſhould we do?
Our ſervice we have offer'd equally:
The world is wide, and if we ſpeed not here,
We muſt provide us elſewhere.
Worthy friends.
To be moſt plain, to me moſt pleaſing is:
Then take as plain an anſwer; I confeſſe me
Weake as I am) vnworthy of your love.
And yet not ſo low pris'd, but have bin courted
Both by as great and good. Nor can you blame me,
If I in adding to your worths, ſhall ſpare
From mine, in the leaſt kinde to derogate.
To you then, as my equals, I entreat;
Or if you ſhall deny me, Daphne then
Proclaimes it as her will. I muſt retyre me
For ſome few moneths, in them to meditate
What mariage is, and truly ſtudy man,
(A booke in which I yet have truanted.)
Now, if I in my more maturitie,
And after ſome ceſſation of your ſuits,
Can ground this Maxime, Man is worthy us,
And we of him; wee'l breviat your long motions
Within a few ſhort termes.
You ſpeake but reaſon:
And ſo long wee'l attend you.
Moſt fit, that ſuch as bargain for their lives,
hould reade us o're and o're, before they ſet
Their hands to that Indenture. We are pleas'd.
And I that you are ſo. Nor can my father
At this be diſcontented.
Not I, Childe;
I would not hurry on my ioyes too faſt,
Having ſuch hope of them. And yet, ſweet Daphne,
The more thou haſts their harveſt, the ripe crop
Shall be to them more welcome. For this time
'Tis beſt to leave her to her privacie:
More leiſure that ſhe hath to meditate,
Leſſe time you have in which to be reſolv'd,
'Twill ſhorten expectation.
May theſe houres
That adde vnto your yeares, ſtill as you grow,
Increaſe toward us your love.
Friend you pray well,
And in that hope I take a loving leave,
By kiſſing your faire hand.
You underſtand a curteſie as well,
Once being done, as ſhe that knowes to do't.
Farewell. Where be my maids?
My Lady, at hand.
Daph. Doth either of you know what this love is,
That men ſo much affect it?
Truſt me, not I: I never lookt ſo far into man
and moſt ſure I am, man never yet entred ſo farre in
me, that I ſhould know how to define it. But can y
tell the reaſon why this little god is ſtill portraid like
childe?
I think, becauſe that dotage which he breeds
Only belongs to children. 1 Nymph. But why naked
Either t' affright the Modeſt; or to ſuch
As vow to him, to expreſſe their impudence.
But why with bow and arrowes?
That denotes
Inconſtancie, becauſe the ſhafts of love
Are ever ſhot at random.
Wherefore hood winkt?
Howe're his ſhafts are aim'd, it ſhewes his kind
Becauſe they ſtrike the eies of Reaſon blinde.
Then am I with Love quite out of love, beca
at theſe yeres I ſhould be loath to have one to lead
Yet do I love the beauty of the ſpring,
To liſten to the birds, with various layes
To welcome in his comming. I affect
The pride and warmth of Summer, to behold
Aboundant Autumne poure his harveſt forth
In plenteous ſheafes; to ſee the preſſes bleed
A flowing vintage. But I moſt admire
The glory of the Sun who comforts theſe:
For without him, what were the earth? what heaven?
If all were darkneſſe, who ſhould then diſcerne
The luſtre of the one or of the other,
The freſh fertilitie proudly adorn'd
With choiſe and change of all diſcolour'd floures?
More than a cas'd up Iewell, what were Beauty,
Without the Sun to give a brightneſſe to 't?
What's ornament, without the Sun to iudge it?
What to be faire or foule, without the Sun,
To cenſure and diſtinguiſh which is beſt?
The Sun's the deity which I adore.
Here then upon this verdure caſt your ſelves,
And reſt a while; not long 'tis e're he will
In all his glory mount the Eaſtern hill.
Here on the top of the mount Ericine
Ambuſh thy ſelfe, (a place ſacred to me)
Where thou mayſt boldly front the god of Light,
Who hath by this already chac'd hence night.
I'le leave thee now: ſtrike, but ſtrike home, my ſon,
I'le in theſe ſhades abſent me whil'ſt 'tis done.
He mocks my bow, but Phoebus ſoon ſhall finde
Cupid hath power to ſtrike the Sun-god blinde.
The ſtars are frighted from the firmament,
And at the ſight of our illuſtrious beams
Darkneſſe vnto the blacke Cymmerians fled.
Now to our daily progreſſe through the Signes.
But ſtay, what's he that with our honors, arm'd,
(The Bow and quiver, proper ſole to us)
Braves us upon high Erix Promontorie?
I know him now, 'tis Paphian Venus ſon,
To whom ſome fooles have vow'd a deity.
I'le know the reaſon why the baſtard brat
Dares thus aſſume my trophies. 'Morrow Cupid.
As much to Phoebus.
Weake brat reſolue me,
By whoſe inticement thou haſt bin ſo bold
To take to thee the embleme of my power?
Is't not ſufficient, thou with brain-ſicke toyes
Canſt fill the heads of mad men and of fooles,
Who'aſcribe to thee a god-head, meerly uſurpt?
But thou muſt weare my due Impreſa inſculpt,
And ('bout thy ſhoulders) thoſe known ornaments,
Apollinis inſignia? (Apollo's Enſignes)
And why thine?
Becauſe I am ſtyl'd the god of Archerie;
And where I aime I hit, my prey or enemy,
Kill neere or far. The monſtrous ſerpent Python
(Whoſe bulke being ſlaine, an hundred acres ſpred)
Had from this bow his wounds, and I my honors:
And ſhall a childe boaſt eminence with me?
Phoebus, thy bow hath monſters ſtrooke to ground,
But myne hath power the gods themſelves to wound,
Of which thou art not leaſt. Mother he's ſped, He ſhoot
I have pierc'd him home with my ſhafts golden head.
Thou art myne own ſweet boy, thy darts ne're fail
And now Apollo languiſh and looke pale,
More wan than did thy ſiſter Moon once prove,
When for Endymion ſhe was ſicke of love,
Whil'ſt I laugh and reioyce. Now make all ſure,
And ſtrike faire Daphne whil'ſt ſhe ſleepes ſecure,
But with contempt and hate.
My arrow flies,
And as it hits, ſicke of diſdain ſhe lies.
Now mother let's away.
Phoebus, I divine,
Thou'It ſay his ſhafts can wound as deep as thine.
What alteration's this I feele? a heate
Beyond myne owne fire, kindled at myne eye.
All ſleep is ſtill in darkneſſe, yet our ſoules
See when our eies are ſhut. My breſt's in uprore;
And yet a dream tels me, the morning gray
Sayes the Sun's up, I ſhame to looke on day.
What Beautie's this on earth, tranſpiercing more,
Than can the beams from my celeſtial Orbe?
The Sun is up; Awake: What, ſhame you not
That he ſhould finde you ſleeping?
Sweet Nymph ſtay.
The ſhades beſt pleaſe me, I in them will play;
The Sun's too hot and ſultry.
I am hee
That meaſures out the yeare; and ſhun you me
Fair'ſt of thy ſex, behold the Suns bright eye,
That all things ſees, by whom you all things ſpy.
Will you in everlaſting darkneſſe dwell?
Light is heavens emblem, and becomes it well:
Where I appeare, I comfort and make glad;
Be comforted in me, why are you ſad?
Would you in blindneſſe live? theſe raies of myne
Give that reflect by which your Beauties ſhine,
For what are artificial lights? when I
Appeare in fulneſſe they ſoon faint and die.
They only put on counterfeits: my rayes
Falſe colours finde, and give the true the praiſe.
If yours be ſuch, then prove them by my light,
The world will cenſure they are pure and right.
His piercing beams I never ſhall endure,
They ſicke me of a fatall Calenture.
What are you better to be lovely born,
If not beheld? What's ſtate, if not obſerv'd?
Or wherefore before Cottages do we
Prefer the ſtately Palace, and the ſumptuous roofe?
What vertue were in jewels without me?
Elſe ſhould they be with pibbles equall pris'd.
Wherefore did Nature make you with bright eies,
Which profit not in night without my beams?
Why ſhould the Roſe be red? the Lilly white?
The Violet purple? and the Holly greene?
All rheſe my creatures. But when I decline,
And night uſurps upon the Vniverſe,
Their tincture's not diſcern'd: but white and red
Which in your peerleſſe cheeks exceed all floures,
What luſtre beare they? When my beams are gone,
The faire and foule in darkneſſe ſeem all one.
That darkneſſe doth beſt pleaſe me: let's away,
My beauty will be ſun burnt if I ſtay,
Hee'l blaſt me like an Ethiope.
Doſt thou fly me?
Love bids me follow, and I muſt purſue:
No vault, no cave or cavern ſo obſcure,
Through which I will not pierce, to finde thee out,
Th' Antipodes for ever want my rayes:
To gaze on her, I'le this Meridian keepe,
And till attain the ſaint that I adore,
Here ever ſhine, where night ſhall be no more.
Laugh Cupid, laugh, for I am halfe reveng'd,
And ſhall e're long be fully, when this Blab
Shall in his courſe, or too much lag or ſpeed
Poſt ſomtimes, and again run retrograde.
Where by his too long preſence th' earth is ſcortcht,
Or by his abſence th' other world ſhall freeze:
And all that lies beneath the Moon complaine:
And that the gods at mans requeſt ſhall call
Diſorder into queſtion. What can then
Both heaven and earth conclude when this is done,
But this thou didſt to avenge me of the Sun.
Will not Mars thanke me for't?
And kiſſe thee too.
O ſtill by his example puniſh thoſe
That ſhal our ſweet adulterate ſports diſcloſe.
Why flies my Daphne, knowing 'tis in vaine:
Love makes me ſwifter than thy feare can thee.
O me, I am ſo tortur'd with the Sun,
I hate my very ſhadow.
I purſue not
As Eagles, Doves do; or the Lions, Harts;
Or Wolves, the Lambe. Love is my cauſe of haſt:
Run not ſo faſt, leſt thou ſhouldſt trip perhaps,
And do thy ſelfe ſome dammage: the ground's rough,
Shouldſt thou but ſlide, and I the Author on't,
How much would it offend me? To preuent which,
Stay but thy haſt, and I will ſlack my ſpeed.
I am almoſt breathleſſe.
See, I am no Satyre,
Shepheard, or ſuch as live by grazing herds,
Delphos is myne, Pharos, and Tenedos:
Thou know'ſt not who thou fly'ſt, I am Apollo,
The only god that ſpeakes by Oracle:
Iove is my father, and the Muſes nine
Are all my daughters: I am Patron held
Of Numbers, Raptures, and ſweet Poeſie.
My ſhafts are ever certain where they aime,
(Yet one more certain, which hath pierc't me deep)
Phyſicke is myne, I firſt devis'd that Art,
And could it help me, I were then aſſur'd:
But Love is by no Simples to be cur'd.
O now I am quite ſpent; help, goddeſſe Iuno,
(Queene of chaſte marriage) bright Diana, help
One of thy true vow'd Virgins: change my ſhape,
That I this hot adulterous Sun may ſcape.
Thanks, ô ye Powers divine: the Spheres aſſent
To my chaſte prayer: your heavenly dooms are iuſt.
Here grow I fixt againſt all powers of luſt.
Strange prodigie! Leſſe hope is in her ſtay,
Than in her ſpeed: her bodie's round incompaſt
With a rough rinde, in which her warm heart beats.
Her haire is all grown vpward into boughes,
Here milke white fingers and her armes advanc'd
To great and leſſer branches: her faire feet
But late ſo ſwift, faſt rooted in the earth:
And I, whom Love late blinded, now may ſee
My Daphne turn'd into a Laurel tree.
Her life ſtill ſtruggles in the churliſh barke,
And from her lips I feele her breath ſtill flow.
One bleſſed kiſſe at parting, but in vain,
The very tree ſhrinks from me in diſdain.
And yet in laſting memory of thee
And of my love, thou ſhalt be ever myne:
In all ovatious triumphs and rich ſhewes
The Laurel ſhall ingirt the Conquerors browes.
All eminence ſhall thinke it grac'd in thee.
Poets, the Muſes darlings, ſhall from thee
Receive their honor, and the beſt eſteem'd
Be crowned Laureat, and no excellence
But have it's noble eſtimate from hence.
Emperors ſhall priſe thy leaves above pure gold:
For thou ſhalt ever wait on victorie;
And as my youthfull and ſtill unſhorne haires
(Vnchanging) of this golden hew are ſeen,
So ſhall the boughes and branches ſtill be greene,
And arme againſt Ioves lightning. And all theſe
Shall be for our ſake by the gods approv'd,
In memory that Daphne we once lov'd.
How comes it, faire Aurora, we the Houres
Are thus diſturb'd?
One halts, whileſt th' other runs;
Somtimes made longer by a many minutes,
Somtimes not full three quarters?
Am not I
As much diſtemper'd, being forc'd to riſe
So oft before my time? which makes my husband
Old Tython jealous (for he bed-rid lies)
I have light on ſome new Love.
All's out of order.
How comes this ſtrange confuſion riſe of late?
My ſpring to grow ſo forward by the Sun?
Summer complaines that I uſurpe on her.
As much as I on thee, Autumne on me,
And ſaith, that in my ripening I include
His harveſt, and ſo rob him of his due.
Have I not cauſe? when thou not only claimſt
The honor of my crop: But frozen Winter,
Hee keeps a coile too, ſwearing, I intrude
Into his bounded limits.
This I am ſure
I am curtaild of my right; my ſnow is melted,
And hath not time to cloath the mountain tops:
September is like May, Ianuary as Iune:
And all my bright and pretious Iſicles
Melting to nothing: What's the reaſon trow we?
'Tis the Suns ſlackneſſe, or his too much ſpeed,
That breeds all this diſtraction.
The Sun, ſay you?
Breake he, or not directly keepe his day,
Seaſons and Houres all out of order ſtray.
Behold her whom you ſpeak of, Day, whence come ye?
I parted now with Night, who had bin here,
But that both muſt not in one place appeare.
And what ſaith ſhe?
Like you, railes on the Sun,
And ſaith he doth her wrong: nor blame her, when
Being full twelve houres, he ſcarce affords her ten.
Day, you are the Suns miſtreſſe, hath he not
Reveald the cauſe to you?
No, his known brightneſſe
Hath unto me been only darke in that.
Nor am I of his counſell.
Fine world grown,
When every drunken Sexton hath the skill
To make his giddy clocke go truer far
Than can the beſt Sun dyall.
What are you
That murmure thus againſt our Deitie?
Are you not all our creatures? though we give you
Full ſailes on earth, do not we ſteere the helme?
Diſpoſing you both where and how we pleaſe;
And dare you thus rebell?
The god of Light
Is our great Lord and Soveraigne.
This ſubmiſſion
Hath ſomewhat calm'd us: had you ſtill ſtood out,
Diſorder, we had to Confuſion turn'd,
And ſo you all been ruin'd. But henceforth
Morning ſhall keep her houre, Houres meaſure day,
In a true ſcope the Day proportion Weekes,
Weekes, Moneths; Moneths, ſeaſons; to ſum up the yeare.
And wee our courſe in that, perfecting time:
That nothing in this concordance appeare
Either prepoſterous or vnſeaſonable.
For which our grace, where-ever you ſhall finde
This new ſprung Laurel, you Aurora I charge,
With your moiſt teares bathe her green tender boughes:
From whence I will exhale them with my beams.
Houres, do you wait vpon her gentle growth.
Day comfort her: Ver cheere her with thy ſpring.
Thou Summer give her warmth: and Autumne, thou
Dare not to ſpoile her of her plenteous leaves:
Nor Winter thou with thy robuſtuous guſts,
To blait her laſting verdure. Theſe obſerv'd,
Still flouriſh under us. And that this unitie
May laſt amongſt you many fortunate yeres,
End in a Hymne tun'd to the chiming Spheres.
HOwſoe're the Minutes go,
Run the houres or ſwift or ſlow:
Seem the Months or ſhort or long,
Paſſe the ſeaſons right or wrong:
All we ſing that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.
Early fall the Spring or not,
Prove the Summer cold or hot:
Autumne be it faire or foule,
Let the Winter ſmile or skowle:
Still we ſing, that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.