GOod morrow.
So to you, faire Shepheardeſſe.
What newes in our Arcadia?
I know none:
For well you wot it is no newes with us,
That men ſhould prove inconſtant.
Thinke you ſo?
Thought's free.
I pray can you define me Thought?
Let me bethinke my ſelfe, I thinke I can:
For I have thought of many things e're now.
But can you gueſſe what I thinke?
I (perhaps)
May jumpe with your conceit, come neere't at leaſt.
Of colours there are none ſo oppoſite
As white and blacke: and of the Elements
Than fire and water none more contrary:
Nor is there ought ſo antipathy' de in men,
As what they thinke and ſpeake.
Now let me helpe you:
Mens thoughts like Courtiers clokes are often ſhifted,
And change as oft as they are truly ſifted.
This then hath been the cauſe of womens ſorrow;
Men thinke to day ill, to do worſe to morrow:
Witneſſe Amphriſa's ſervant.
Pitty 'tis,
o faire a body, and ſo ſweet a ſoule
hould be ſo foulely dealt with. Her falſe Lover
nkindely hath forſooke her.
That's the reaſon
hee's growne into ſo deepe a melancholy.
wonder any woman dare truſt man,
nce, like as the Chamelions change themſelves
nto all perfect colours ſaving white;
they can to all humors frame their ſpeech,
e only to prove honeſt.
You ſay well.
t as no wormes breed where they feele no warmth,
o Vultures watch where they can finde no prey;
o Pirat roves but where he hopes for ſpoile:
none of theſe falſe ſervants wait, but where
hey finde a yeelding Miſtreſſe.
Indeed light minds are catcht with little things,
nd Phancie ſmels to Fennell.
But Amphriſa
Is held to be the wiſeſt ſhepheardeſſe
That lives in our Arcadia.
But I have heard,
Late wit and cheated wiſedome to be counted
Next neighbours unto folly. Shepheards now,
The holier that they ſeeme in outward ſhew,
The hollower are their hearts. By ſubtill ſophiſtry
(As I have heard) the beſt Philoſophy
May be perverted. And mens flatteries
Are iuſt like Circes riches, which can turne
Vain glorious fooles to Aſſes, credulous Fooles
To Woodcocks, pretty wanton Fooles to Apes,
And proud Fooles into Peacocks.
But amongſt theſe,
Amphriſa had no place.
See, here ſhe comes
That for her ſelfe can anſwer.
But 'twere ſinne
In us, not to be anſwer'd, thus to ſuffer her
To pale the cheerefull bloud in her farre cheeks,
Through wilfull paſſion. Which I'le not endure.
Then rowſe her from theſe dumps.
You'r ſad, Amphriſa:
Sweet may we know the cauſe?
Amphriſa. You have prevented
A ſtrange conceit which ſomewhat troubled me;
But by your interruption almoſt loſt.
Nay recollect your ſelfe, pray let us hear't.
I was thinking, why Parraſius, drawing Youth,
Made Love to tickle one ſide with a feather,
To move a ſmile; and with the other hand
To ſting it with a Scorpion.
You'r ſtung then.
But I was thinking on Praxiteles,
Who drew his miſtreſſe thus: Looke on her one way,
She laught upon him: Strait before, ſhe wept:
But change the ſide, and caſt your eye adverſe,
And then ſhe appear'd ſleeping. And ſo you,
Fit but your phanſies unto ſuch a face,
You'l ne're complain of ſervant.
Then it ſeems,
My ſtorie's told aforehand.
Yes, and rumor'd
Through all Arcadia.
And none pitty me?
There's none ſo marble breſted, but doth melt
To heare of your diſaſter.
Is there one,
To whom the cauſe of my diſeaſe is knowne,
That can preſcribe me cure for't?
Without feeling
Your pulſe, I know the nature of your griefe:
You have an heate, on which a coldneſſe waits,
A paine that is endur'd with pleaſantneſſe,
And makes thoſe ſweets you eat have bitter taſte:
puts eies in your thoughts, eares in your heart:
Twas by deſire firſt bred, by delight nurſt,
And hath of late been wean'd by jelouſie.
But how can theſe diſguſts be remedy'd,
Which Reaſon never yet could comprehend?
By patience.
That's a phyſicke all preſcribe,
But few or none doth follow. Pray what is't?
It is the beſt receit that can be tooke
Both againſt love and fortune (Croſt in both.)
To wiſh the beſt, to thinke vpon the worſt,
And all contingents brooke with patience.
s a moſt ſoveraigne medicine.
And moreover;
What cannot be redreſt with peeviſhneſſe,
Ought to bee borne with patience.
Patience?
he is ſo like to Fortitude herſelfe,
That by her ſweet aſpect ſhe appeares to be
Her ſiſter or her daughter.
The onely remedy for injuries, is
By patience to forget them. And more noble
It is to yeeld your ſelfe in triumph to't
Then to be drawne by force.
You have prevaild,
For I am now your Patient; and intreat you,
Like skild Phiſitians, ſtudy for my health.
From their Doctors
The ſick expect more art then eloquence:
And therefore what defect you find in words,
Expect in our Preſcriptions.
I never was with paſtime better pleas'd;
So cleare a morning, and ſuch temperate ayre;
The Sun ſo bright, yet ſparing of his heat,
Made all the toyle we tooke (to chace the Stag)
To ſeeme no labour, but an exerciſe.
The wily beaſt to ſhun our ſwift purſute,
Forſooke the Plaines, to take the mountaine tops.
Yet maugre the oppoſure of the Rocks
And clifts depending to moleſt our ſpeed
Our well-tride Nymphs, like wild Kids clim'd thoſe hils
And thrild their arrowie Iavelins after him:
Nor left the chace, till all thoſe golden heads
Were new ſtain'd in his blood.
It prov'd, great Queene
Your active Nymphs were better breath'd than he,
For whom we could not overtake, we tyr'd:
That done, we toucht our Beagles, and ſo made
Both hills and vallies eccho to his death.
He ſtood ſo long, and made us ſtray ſo far,
Amongſt the Swaines and lovely Shepheardeſſes,
That uſe to graze their Flocks upon theſe downes;
The Sun muſt needs paſſe the Meridian,
E're we can reach the Lodge.
The Arcadian Girles
Are of no common beauty; as their habits
Much grace the fields; ſo many of thoſe features
Mine eye by chance hath glanc't on in the Chace,
In mine opinion would become the Court.
They ſay, theſe virgins are acute in wit,
And fluent in conceit, to ſpeake or ſing;
As having oft drunke from the Muſes ſpring.
See, Royall Queene, where three (not of the meaneſt
Or leaſt to be reſpected) are retyr'd.
Be not too lowd, Theſe bowes will ſhelter us;
Let's lſten how they faſhion their diſcourſe,
And how far ſhort the Folds and Cottages
Come of the Court or City.
Nay pray preſcribe. 'Tis ſaid of all Phyſitians
What good comes by their Phyſick, the Sun ſees:
But in their art, if they have bad ſucceſſe,
That the earth covers. Howſoe're I ſuffer,
You blameleſſe are.
All thoſe that are unskilfull
Will flatter griefe 'till it grow deſperate.
But though you know the uſe of Phyſick ſweet,
To taſte it is unſavory.
Howſoever I am prepar'd.
Imagin firſt, You never had a ſervant.
Not ſo: for who can know the ſweet of eaſe,
That never was in paine?
Or ſay ſhe had,
Thinke that he ne're playd falſe.
A meere relapſe,
Before the firſt be cur'd, to thinke him faithfull,
Were but to enter her diſeaſe anew,
To make her griefe more violent.
But one ſpeake:
The medicine that's propos'd of contraries,
Can ne're breed peace of mind.
All, ſolid ſence.)
For I perceive, thoſe that are ſound themſelves,
Have ſtill more will to help, than skill to cure.
Well, Miſtreſſe Doctor I'le give way to you.
Thinke then you had a ſervant, and he falſe;
For whoſe ſake never more truſt per jur'd man.
And though ſome ſay Iove winks at Dovers Oathes,
'Tis (after) with broad eyes to puniſh them.
Words ſhould not credit men, but men their words:
For he that breaks his promiſe lies to heaven;
And whom Heaven hates, who but would feare to love
Moſt curſed 'tis to flatter and forſweare;
And dearth of oathes is bleſſed barrenneſſe.
You'r ſicke at heart: the only help for that
Is, Let your heart abhorre his trecherie,
And him, for it. You'r pain'd too in the head,
For that here's balm made or a willow wreath.
Let this charm'd c ele but impale your brows,
'Tis preſent help for both.
Make this apparant.
Thus: All th' Arcadian Swains & Nymphs that
Your browes ingirt with this for ſaken wreath
Will take note of his falſhood, and your faith;
Your innocence, and his inconſtancie:
And thoſe that weare teares in their eies for you,
Of love and pitty, to be thus abus'd,
Will ſteep their tongues in wormwood and in gall,
To brand him for his open perjury;
Their pitty, with your patience join'd,
(With this to boot) will prove an abſolute cure.
Some eaſe I finde already, crowne me then.
May, whereſoe're your head you ſoftly pillow,
Be ne're more troubled, whil'ſt thus wreath'd in willow
Nor ſhall it, Alope, for from this houre,
Hearts griefe nor heads paine ſhall of me have power.
I now have chac'd hence ſorrow.
This conceit
Hath tooke me highly; and great pitty 'tis,
That ſuch choice wits ſhould finde no other eares
Than thoſe that Swains, and flocks, and fowls have. Wit
So ſpent, is only treaſur'd in the aire.
The earth hath leaſt part on't. Virgins, Good day.
Nay, do not fall too low.
You are our Queen.
And Lady of our fortunes.
By that title
I do command you then to ſpare your knees.
Nay riſe.
'Tis only by your Grace and goodneſſe
We breathe and live.
It is enough to me,
That you preſent us ſuch acknowledgement.
And as for you, faire Virgin, I could wiſh
Your Willow were a Lawrel. Nay, ſo 'tis:
Becauſe all ſuch may be ſtyl'd Conquerors,
That can ſubdue the ir paſſions.
Our feare is,
That if our rude diſcourſe have toucht your eare,
The courſeneſſe might offend you.
Pleas'd us highly:
Which that you may perceive in mee's vnfeignd,
I charge you, as I am your Soveraigneſſe,
All coyneſſe and evaſion ſet apart,
To be moſt free in language.
Impoſition
That comes from you is vnto us a Law,
Which ought to be kept ſacred.
I'le as freely
Command then, as you willing are t'obey,
For were I not a Queen, I'de wiſh to be
As one of you, a witty Shepheardeſſe.
Pray ſing me ſomthing of your countrey life,
To make me more in love with't.
Tis our feare; A life that is ſo meane, ſo ill expreſt
As needs it muſt bee, (if impos'd on us)
May make you rather loath it.
I had thought
Courts onely had beene fill'd with complement,
Of which I ſee, the cottage is not cleare.
Give not our ſimple truth, and feare to offend,
A character we know not (gratious Queene)
But howſoever, if you make us faulty,
You have the power to pardon.
And preſume
That's granted, e're the offence be.
Then thus, Madam.
We that have knowne no greater ſtate
Than this we live in, praiſe our fate:
For Courtly ſilkes in cares are ſpent,
When Countries ruſſet breeds content.
The power of Scepters we admire;
But ſheep-bookes for our uſe deſire.
Simple and low is our condition;
For here with us is no ambition.
We with the Sunne our flockes unfold,
Whoſe riſing makes their fleeces gold.
"Our muſick from the birds we borrow;
"They bidding us, we them, good morrow.
Nay, faire ones, what you have begun in ſong,
Continue in diſcourſe: Wee would heare more
Of your pleas'd life.
Your highneſſe may command.
Our habits are but courſe and plaine,
Yet they defend from wind and raine.
As warme too, in an equall eye
As thoſe be, ſtain'd in Scarlet dye.
Thoſe that have plenty weare (we ſee)
But one at once; and ſo doe we.
The Shepheard with his home-ſpun Laſſe
As many merry houres doth paſſe,
As Courtiers with their coſtly Girles,
Though richly deckt in gold and pearles:
And though but plaine, to purpoſe woo,
Nay oft-times with leſſe danger too.
Thoſe that delight in dainties ſtore,
One ſtomack feed at once, no more.
And when with homely fare we feaſt,
With us it doth as well digeſt:
And many times wee better ſpeed;
For our wild fruits no ſurfets breed,
If we ſometimes the Willow weare,
By ſubtill Swaines that dare forſweare.
We wonder whence it comes, and feare,
Th' have beene at Court, and learn'd it there.
If any Lady then ſhall pleaſe,
Whoſe cheeke lookes pale through my diſeaſe,
By any faithleſſe ſervant, or falſe friend,
(Being cur'd myſelfe) this I can give or lend.
Beleeve't, a ſweet concluſion: for oft-times
Such things fall out. But we have further heard
(Beſides what now our eares are witneſſe to)
That as your words keepe time, your voices tune;
So hath the curious motion of your feet
Beene taught to know true meaſure. You can dance?
Yes royall Princeſſe, as we ſing and ſpeake,
After ſuch rurall faſhion.
If no worſe,
It may become a Theatre of eyes,
Yet wreſt no bluſhes from you. Will you then,
Since that we parallell in number thus,
Helpe us to fill a meaſure?
So wee thought
There might no jarring diſcords grow from us,
To ſpoile your better muſick.
No ſuch feare.
Come then, ſuch muſicke as the place will yeeld,
Wee'l inſtantly make vſe of.
Compleat in all: You have made us now Eie-witnes
Of what, Relation ſparingly hath ſpoke.
To encourage which, and that ſo great a merit
Paſſe not without ſome meed, receive theſe favors,
And weare them for our ſake.
Time bids us part.
Greater than theſe we have for you in ſtore,
And mean hereafter to employ you more.