PRice of my life: now if the Devill have bones, these Dyce are made of his. Was ever such a cast seene in this Age? Could any Gull in Europe (saving my selfe) fling such a cast?
Eye.
No.
Yes.
But I say no: I have lost an hundred pound,
And I will have my saying.
I have lost an other hundred, Ile have mine.
Ey, yes, I flung a worse: a worse by .
I cry you mercy , loosers may speake,
Ile not except gainst you: but let me see
Which of these two that pocket our
Dares contradict me?
Sir, not I:
I say you have had bad casting.
So ay I.
I say this Hatt's not made of
Which of you all dares say the contrary?
It may bee .
Very likely Beaver.
would faine a with , to get of money againe; but the they have wise to part with it.
I say it is not blacke.
So say wee too.
false: his Cap's of Wooll, ▪tis blacke, and Wooll, and Wooll and blacke.
I have nought to say to losers.
Have I nothing left to set at a Cast? Ey finger,
Must you be in gold, and not a of silver in my ?
A Bale of fresh Dice. Hoe, come at this Ring.
Fie M. , 'tis time to over.
That's the Winners phrase: Hold me play; Or hee that hath uncrown'd me, take a order with him.
Fresh dice: this ewell I
Take this and all. Ile play in spight of .
Since you will needs; trip for the .
I see it is hard to goe a winner from this company.
The Dice are mine:
This Diamond I valew at twentie markes:
Ile venture it at a throw.
'Tis you.
Then at all. All's mine. Nay M. Boyster,
I barre you: let us worke upon the winners.
Gramercy Sinks: Nay, though I owe you no quarrell, yet you must give mee leave to draw.
I had rather you should draw your sword,
Then draw my money thus.
Againe sweet Dice: nay I barre swearing, Gentlemen, let's play patiently. Well, this At the Candlesticke, so—
Now Dic at all. To tho, quoth the .
precious lucke.
. I thinke ;
and so : there's .
Hee all with .
With Trayes, how say by
Oh hee's old dogge at Bowles and Trayes.
Lend me some money: be my halfe one .
Ile once out-brave this with a throw
So now the Dice are mine, wilt be my halfe?
I will.
Then once Ile play the Franck .
Let mee but see how much you both can make,
And Ile cast at all, all, every Crosse.
Now blesse us all, what will you every Crosse
I will not leave my selfe one Crosse to blesse me.
I set.
And so doe I.
Why then at all. How▪
Nay, sweare not, lets play patiently.
Damn'd Dice: did ever Gamester see the like?
Never, never.
Was ever knowne such ?
Drunke nor sober, I ne're saw a man cast worse.
Ile prove this Hat of mine an .
Which of you dares say the contrary?
As faire an Helmet as any man in Needs to weare.
, thy Hat is blacke.
Vpon better recollection, 'tis so indeed.
I say 'tis made of Wooll.
True, my losing had tooke away my Senses,
Both of Seeing and Feeling: but better lucke
Hath brought them to their right temper.
But come, a pox of Dice; 'tis time to give over.
All times are times for winners to give over,
But not for them that lose. Ile play till midnight,
But I will change my lucke.
Come, come, you shall not.
Give over: give over: doe I pray,
And chuse the Fortune of some other hower:
Let's not like debosht , play our Clothes,
Belts, Rapiers, our needfull ornaments:
'Tis childish, not becomming Gntlemen.
Play was at first ordayn'd to passe the time;
And sir, you but abuse the use of Play,
To employ it other wise.
You may perswade me—
For once Ile leave a loose.
Then put on your Helmet; let's leave this abominable Game, and find out some better Exercise. I cannot indure this when men loose.
And there's not a more testie waspish Companion then thy selfe when thou art a looser, and yet thou must bee vexing others with, Play patiently Gentlemen, and lets have no swearing.
A signe that I can giv good counsell better than take it: but say, Where be the prettiest wenches, my hearts?
Well remembred, this puts mee in mind of an appointment I had with a Gentlewoman of some respect.
I have you sir, I have you; but I think you will never have her: 'tis the Knights daughter in Gracious Street. Have I toucht you?
You have come somewhat neere me, but toucht me not. Master Haringfield, will you beare me company thither? Have you seene the Gentlewoman, M. ?
Never sir.
How have you heard of her?
That hath, as other women have,
That she goes for a Mayd, as others doe, &c.
I can assure you, shee is a proper Gntlewoman.
Then i she have you, she is like to have a proper Gentleman.
You should tell them so that know it not. Adjew Gentlemen.
I am glad yet they goe so lightly away.
What will you doe M. Boyster?
Somewhat.
You will not acquaint me with your businesse.
No: I am in love, my head is full of Proclamations. There is a thing call'd a Virgin. Nature hath shewed her Art in making her. Court her I cannot, but Ile doe as I may.
Doe you goe, or stay sir?
Goe.
You before, Ile follow. He thinkes with his blunt humour, to enter as farre as I with my sharpe: No, my true Trojan, no: There is a faire sweet modest rogue, her name is Luce: with this Dandiprat, this pretty little Apes face, is yon blunt fellow in love; and no marvell, for shee hath a Browe bewitching, Eyes ravishing, and a Tongue enchanting: And indeed shee hath no fault in the world but one, and that is, shee is honest: and were it not for that, shee were the onely sweet Rogue in Christendome. As I live, I love her extreamely, and to enjoy her would give any thing: But the foole stands in her owne light, and will doe nothing without Marriage: but what should I doe marrying? I can better indure Gives, than Bands of Matrimonie. But in this Meditation, I am glad I have wonne my Money againe. Nay, and shee may be glad of it too: for the Girle is but poore, and in my pockett I have layd up a Stocke for her, 'tis put to use alreadie. And if I meete not with a Dyce-house, or an Ordinary by the way, no question but I may increase it to a summe. Well, Ile unto the Exchange to buy her some prettie Noveltie: That done, Ile visite my little Rascall, and sollicite instantly.
Where is my Father? Ioseph.
Mistresse, above,
And prayes you to attend below a little.
I doe not love to sit thus publikely:
And yet upon the traffique of our Wares,
Our provident Eyes and presence must still wayte.
Doe you attend the shop, Ile ply my worke.
I see my father is not jelousof me,
That trusts mee to the open view of all.
The reason is, hee knowes my thoughts are chast,
And my care such, as that it needes the awe
Of no strict Overseer.
Yonders Luce. Save thee.
And you too, sir, y' are welcom; want you ought,
I pray, in which our Trade may furnish you?
Yes.
Ioseph, shew the Gentleman.
Tis heere that I would buy.
What doe you meane sir, speak, what ist you lack?
I pray you wherefore doe you fixe your eyes
So firmely in my face? what would you have?
Thee.
Mee?
Yes, thee.
Your pleasure is to jest, and so I take it.
Pray give me leave sir, to intend my worke.
You are fayre.
You flout mee.
You are, goe too, you are,
Ide vexe him that should say the contrary.
Well, you may say your pleasure.
I love thee.
Oh Sir!
As I live, I doe.
Now as I am a true Maid,
The most religious oath that I dare sweare,
I hold my selfe indebted to your love:
And I am sorry there remaines in mee,
No power how to requite it.
Love mee, prethee now, doe if thou canst▪
I cannot.
, if thou canst.
Indeed I cannot.
Yt aske thine heart, an see what may be done.
In troth I am sorry you should spend a igh
For my sake unrequited, or a teare;
Ey, or a word▪
'Tis no matter for my words, they are not many,
And those not very wise one's neither.
Yet I beseech you spend no more in vaine.
I scorne you not; as farre from mee,
As are the two Poles distant: therefore Sir,
Because I would not hold you in suspence,
But tell you what at first to trust unto,
Thus in a word, I must not fancie you.
Must-not?
I cannot, nor I may not.
I am gone:
Thou hast given me, Luc, a Bone to gnaw upon▪
Alas, that Beauty should be sought of more
Then can injoy it: might I have my wish,
I would seeme faire but onely in his eye,
That should mee in a Nuptiall tye.
Morrow ; In exchange of this , see
what I have brought thee from the Exchange.
What meane you Sir, by this?
Guesse that by the circumstance, here's a Ring▪ weare't for my sake; twenty Angels, pocket them you foole; come, come, I know thou art a Maid, say nay, and take them.
Sweet Master Chartley, doe not fasten on me,
More then with ease I can shake off: your Gift
I reverence, yet refuse; and I pray tell mee,
Why doe you make so many Errands hither?
Send me so many Letters? fasten on me
So many favours? what's your meaning in't?
Harke in thine eare, Ile tell thee; nay heare me out, is't possible so soft a body should have so hard a soule? Nay now I know my penance, you will be angry, and schoole me for tempting your modesty: a figge for this modesty, it hinders many a god man from many a good turne, & that's all the good it doth. If thou but knewst, Luce, how I love thee, thou wouldst be farre more tractable. Nay, I barre chiding when you speake▪ Ile stop thy lips if thou dost but offer an angry word, by this hand Ile di', and with this hand too. Goe to now, what say you?
Sir, if you love me, as you say you doe,
Shew me the fruits thereof.
The stocke I can, thou maist see the fruits hereafter.
Can I beleeve you love mee, when you seeke
The ship wrack of mine Honour?
Honour! there's another word to flap in a mans mouth: Honour! what shouldst thou and I stand upon our Honour, that were neither of us yet, Right Worshipfull?
I am sorry Sir, I have lent so large an eare
To such a bad discourse; and I protest
After this , never to doe the like.
I must confesse, of all the Gentlemen
That ever courted mee, you have possest
The best part in my thoughts: but this course language
Exiles you quite from thence. Sir, had you come,
In stead of changing this mine honest name
Into a Strumpets, to have honoured me
With the chaste Title of a Modest Wife;
I had reserv'd an eare for all your suits:
But since I see your rudenesse finds no limit,
I leave you to your lust.
You shall not, Luce.
Then keepe your tongue within more moderate bounds.
I will, as I am vertuous, I will: I told you, the second word would be Marriage. It makes a man forfeit his Freedome, and makes him walke ever after with a Chaine at his heeles, or a Iack-an-Apes hanging at his elbow: Marriage is like his labyrinth, and being once in, there's no finding the way out. Well, I love this little property most intollerably, and I must set her on the Last, though it cost me all the shooes in my shop. Well Luce, thou seest my stomacke is come downe; thou hast my heart already, there's my hand.
But in what way?
Nay, I know not the way yet, but I hope to find it hereafter, by your good direction.
I meane, in what manner? in what way?
In the way of marriage, in the way of honesty, in the way that was never gone yet: I hop thou art a Maid, Luce.
Yes Sir, and I accept it; in exchange
Of this your hand, you shall receive my heart.
A bargaine, and there's earnest on thy lips▪
Ile call my Father, Sir, to witnesse it:
See, here hee comes.
Father, save you, you have happened of an ward Son-in-Law; here I am, how doe you like mee?
Sir, I was nearer then you were aware,
And over-heard both summe and .
Then I perceive you are an old Eves-dropper:
But what doe you thinke of it, Father?
I entertaine the motion with all love,
And I rejoyce my Daughter is preferr'd,
And rais'd to such a match; I heard the contract,
And will confirme it gladly: but pray Sir,
When shall the merry day be?
Marry, even to morrow by that we can see; , lose no more time, le ake order for that.
Stay but a moneth.
A I thou canst not hire me too't. Why Lce, if thou beest hungry, thou stay a moneth from meat? Nay, if I see my diet before me, I love to fall too when I have a stomacke. Here, buy thee a new Smocke; let's have a new Bed too, and looke it be strong: there's a box of Rings and Jewels, lay the up. Ha ; me thinkes the very name of Wedlock hth brought me to a Night-cap already, and I am growne civill on the . There's more money for Dishes, Platters, Ladles, Candlesticks, &c. as I shall them downe in the Inventorie.
But whom shall wee invite unto the Wedding?
Ey, thereby hangs a Tale, we will have no more at our marriage, but my selfe, to say, I take thee Luce; thou to say, I Luce take thee Robin: the Vicar to put us together, and you Father, to play the Clerke, and cry Amen.
Your reason for that.
I would not for a world it should bee knowne to my Friendes, or come to my Fathers care. It may bee tenne thousand pounds out of my way for the present: therefore this is my conceite, Let us bee marryed privately, and Lce shall live like a Mayde still, and beare the Name. Tis nothing Lce: it is a common thing in this age to goe for a Mayde, and bee none. Ile frequent the house secretly: eare not Girle, though I revell abroad a dayes, Ile bee with thee to bring a nights, my little Whiting Mopp.
But so I may incurre a publike scandall,
By your so oft frequenting to my Chamber.
Scandall? what scandall? Why to stopp the mouth of all scandall, after some few dayes do I appeare in my likenesse, marrid man and honest hous-keeper, and then what becomes of your scandall? Come, send for Mr. Vicar, and what we doe, lets doe suddenly.
Cold comfort for me.
If you purpose to be so privately married, I know one excellent at such an exployt: are you not acquainted with the of Hogsdon?
O the Witch, the Beldame, the Hagge of Hogdon.
The same, but I hold her to bee of no such condition. I will anone make a steppe thither▪ and punctually acquaint her vvith all our proceedings: shee is never without a Sir Iohn at her elbow, ready for such a stratagem.
Well, bee't so then.
Heigh ho: have I disguis'd my selfe, and stolne out of the Countrey thus farre, and can light of no better newes to entertaine mee? Oh this wild-headed wicked Chartley, whome nothing will tame. To this Gallant was I poore Gentle-woman betroathed, and the Marriage day appoynted: But hee out of a fantastick and giddy humour, before the time prefixed, posts up to London. After him come I thus habited, and you see my welcome, to bee an are-witnesse of his second Contracting. Modestie would not suffer mee to discover my selfe, otherwise, I should have gone neere to have marred the match. I heard them talke of Hogsdon, and a Wise-woman, where these Aymes shall bee brought to Action. Ile see if I can insinuate my selfe into her service: that's my next project: and now good luck of my side.
Fie, fie, what a toyle, and a moyle it is,
For a woman to bee wiser then all her neighbours?
I pray good people, presse not too fast upon me;
Though I have two ares, I can heare but one at once.
You with the Vrie.
Here forsooth Mistresse.
And who distill'd this water?
My wives Limbeck, if it plase you.
And where doth the paine hold her most?
Marry at her heart forsooth.
Ey, at hor heart, hath a griping at her heart.
You have hit it right.
Nay, I can see so much in the Vrine.
Iust so much as is told her.
Shee hath no paine in her head, hath shee?
No indeed, I never heard her complaine of her head.
I told you so, her paine lyes all at her heart:
Alas good heart! but how feeles shee her stomacke?
O queasie, and sicke at stomacke.
Ey, I warrant you, I thinke I can see as farre into a Mill-stone as another: you have heard of Mother Notingham, who for her time, was prettily well skill'd in casting of Waters: and after her, Mother Bombye; and then there is one Hatfield in Pepper-Alley, hee doth prettie well for a thing that's lost. There's another in Coleharbour, that's skill'd in the Planets. Mother Sturton in Goulden-lane, is for Forespeaking: Mother Phillips of the Banke-side, for the weaknesse of the backe: and then there's a very reverent Matron on Clarkenwell-Green, good at many things: Mistris Mary on the -side, is for recting a Figure: and one (what doe you cal her) in Westminster, that practiseth the Booke and the Key, and the Sive and the Sheares: and all doe well, according to their talent. For my selfe, let the world speake: harke you my friend, you shall take—
'Tis strange the Ignorant should be thus fool'd.
What can this Witeh, this Wizard, or old Trot,
Doe by Inchantment, or by Magicke spell?
Such as professe that Art should be deepe Schollers.
What reading can this simple Woman have?
Tis palpable grosse foolery.
Now friend, your businesse?
I have stolne out of my Masters house, forsooth,
with the Kitchin-Mayd, and I am come to know of you,
whether it be my fortune to have her, or no.
And what's your suit, Lady?
Forsooth, I come to know whether I be a Maid or no.
Why, art thou in doubt of that?
It may bee I have more reason then all the world knowes.
Nay, if thou com'st to know whether thou beest a Maid or no, I had best aske to know whether I be with cild or no.
Withdraw into the Parlour there, Ile but talke with this other Gentlewoman, and He resolve you presently.
Come Siy, if shee cannot resolve thee, I can, and in the Case of a Mayden-head doe more then shee, I warrant thee.
Forsooth I am bold, as they say.
You are welcome Gentlewoman.—
I would not have it knowne to my Neighbours, that I come to a Wise-woman for any thing, by my truly.
For should your Husband come and find you here.
My Husband woman, I am a Widdow.
Where are my braines? 'tis true, you are a Widdow; and you dwell, let me see, I can never remember that place.
In Kntstreet.
Kentstreet, Kentstreet! and I can tell you wherfore you come.
Why, and say true?
You are a Wagge, you are a Wagge: why, what doe you thinke now I would say?
Perhaps, to know how many Husbands I should have.
And if I should say so, shuld I say amisse?
I thinke you are a Witch.
In, in, Ile but reade a little of Ptolomie, and Erra Pater; and when I have cast a Figure, Ile come to you presently.
Now Wagge, what wouldst thou have?
If this were a Wisewoman, shee could tell that without asking. Now me thinkes I should come to know whether I were a Boy or a Girle; forsooth I lacke a service.
By my Fidelitie, and I want a good tsty Lad.
Now could I sigh, and say, Alas, is some Bawd trade-falne, and out of her wicked experience, is come to bee reputed wise. Ile serve her, bee't but to pry mto the mysterie of her Science.
A proper striping, and a wise, I warrant him; here's a penie for thee, Ile hire thee for a yeare by the Statute of Winchester: prove true and honest, and thou shalt want nothing that a good Boy—
Here Wise-woman you are ot againe, I shall want what a good Boy should have▪ whilst I live: well, here I shall live both unknowne, and my Sex unsuspected. But whom have wee here?
Come Harinld, now wee have beene drinking of Mother Red-caps Ale, let us now goe make some sport with the Wise-woman.
Wee shall be thought very wise men, of all such as shall see us goe in to the Wise-womans.
See, heere shee is; how now Witch? How now Hagge? How now Beldame? You are the Wisewoman, are you? and have wit to keepe your selte warme enough, I warrant you.
Out thou knave.
And will these wild oates never sown?
You Inchantresse, , Shee-devill▪ you Madam , Lady , you are too old, you Hagge, now, for conuring up Spirits your selfe; but you keepe prettie yong Witches your roofe, that can do that.
I, or my Family conjure up any Spirits! I defie thee, thou yong Hare-brain'd—
Forbeare him till he have his Senses about him, and I shall then hold thee for a Wise-woman indeed.: otherwise, I shall doubt thou hast thy name for nothing. Come friend, away, if thou lovest me.
Away you old Dromadary, Ile come one of these nights, and make a racket amongst your SheeCatterwaullers.
I prethee let's be civill.
Out of my sight, thou Shee-mastiffe.
Patience, weet Mistris.
Now blesse mee, hee hath put mee into such a feare, as makes all my bones to dance, and rattle in my skin: Ile be reveng'd on that swaggering companion.
Mistris, I wish you would, hee's a meere Madcap, and all his delight is in mis-using such reverent Matrons as your selfe.
Well, what's thy name, Boy?
I am even little better thn a Turn-broach, for my name is Iacke.
Honest Iacke, if thou couldst but devise how I might cry quittance with this Dicke, I will goe neare to adopt thee my Soe and heire.
Mistris, there is a way, and this it is;
To morrow morning doth this Gentleman
Intend to marry with one Mris Luce,
A Gold-smiths Daug; you know the Maid?
My Daughter, and a smug fact Girle.
I had a note but late from her, and shee meanes
To be with me in th'evening; for I hae bespoke
Sir Boniface to marry her in th morning.
Doe but prevent this Gallant of his Wife,
And then your wrongs shall bereveng'd at full.
Ile , as I am Matron; Ey, and shew him a new tricke for his learning.
Morrow.
Y'are welcome Sir.
Art wise?
Hee should be wise, because hee speakes few words.
I am as I am, and there's an end.
Canst conjure?
Oh that's a foule word! but I can tell you your Fortune, as they say; I have some little skill in Palmistry, but never had to doe with the devill.
And had the devill never any thing to doe with thee? thou look'st somewhat like his damme. Looke on mee cast tell what I ayle?
Can you tell your selfe? I should guesse, you be mad, or not well in your wits.
T ▪art wise, I am so; men being in love, are mad,
And I being in love▪ am so.
Nay, if I see your complexion once, I thinke I can guesse as neare as another.
One Mistris Luce I love, knowst thou her, Grannam?
As well as the Beggar knowes his Dish. Why shee is one of my Daughters.
Make her my wife, Ile give thee forty pieces.
Take them Mistris, to be reveng'd on Chartley.
A bargain, strike me luck, cease all your sorrow,
Faire Luce shall be your Bride betimes to morrow.
Th▪art a good Grannam; and, but that thy teeth stand like hedge-stakes in thy head, I'de kisse thee.
Pray will you in; come hither lacke, I have
A new tricke come into my head, wilt thou
Assist mee in't?
If it concerne the crossing of the marriage with
Mistris Luce, Ile do't what e're it be.
Thou shalt be tyred like a woman; can you make a curtesie, take small strides, simper, and sme modest? me thinkes thou hast a womans voyce already.
Doubt not of me, th act them naturally.
I have conceited, to have Luc married to this blunt Gentleman; shee mistaking him for Chartley, and Chtley shall thee, being a Boy, and take thee for Luce. Wilt not be excellent?
Oh super, super-excellent!
Play but thy part, as Ile act mine, Ile fit him with a Wife, I warrant him.
And a Wife Ile warrant him.
Ha, then tho sawest them whispering with my Daughter.
I saw them, if it shall please you, not whisper, but—
How then, thou knave?
Marry Sir Knight, I saw them in sad talke; but to say they were directly whispering, I am not able.
Why Taber, that sad talke was whispering.
Nay, they did not greatly whisper, for I heard what was said, and what was said, I have the wit to keepe to my selfe.
What said the unthrift, Taber, tell me knave? Tell me, good knave, what did the unthrift say?
I am loath to be call'd in question about men and woms matters, but as soone as ever he saw your Daughter, I heard what was spoke.
Here sirra, take thy Quarters wages afore-hand, and tell me all their words, and what their greeting was at their first encounter; hold thine hand.
Thankes, Noble Sir, and now Ile tell you. Your daughter being waling to take the aire of the fields, and I before her; whom should wee meet just in the nicke?
Iust in the nicke, man?
In the high-way I meant, Sir.
Ha, and what conference past betwixt them, Taber?
As well as my Pipe can utter, you shall know Sir. This Gentleman meeting with my yong Mistris full butt; imagine you were she, and I yong Master Sencer; now there you come, and here I meet you; he comes in this manner, and put off his hat in this fashion.
I, but what said hee?
Be with you, faire Gentlewoman; and so goes quite away, and scarse so much as once look' backe: and if this were langage to or to a yong Ladie, judge you.
But spake hee nothing else?
Nothing as I am true.
Why man, all this was nothing.
Yes Sir, it was as much as my Quarters wages afore-hand.
Here are two Gentlemen with great desire,
Crave conference with my Father: here he is,
Now Gallants, you may freely speake your minds.
Save you Sir, my name is Sencer; I am a Northampton-shire Gentleman, borne to a thousand pound Land by the yeare: I love your Daughter, and I am come to crave your good-will.
Have you my Daughters, that you covet mine?
No Sir, but I hope in time I shall have.
So hope not I. Sir, Sir, my Daughters yong, and you a Gentleman unknowne, Sencer? ha, Sencer? O Sir, your name I now remember well, 'tis rank't 'most thrifts, dicers, swaggerers, and drunkards: were no ou brought before me, some moneth since, for beating of the Watch, by the same token, I sent you to the Counter?
I confesse my selfe to have been in that acton, bu note the cause, Sir: you could not have pleasur'd mee so much, in giving mee a piece of gold, as at the same time to helpe me to that Counter.
Why Sir, what cause had you to beat the Watch, and raise a midnight tumult in the streets?
Nay, but heare mee, sweet Sir Harry: Being somewhat late at Supper at the Miter, the doores were shut at my Lodging, I knock't at three or foure places more, all were a-bed, and fast: Innes, Tavernes, none would give me entertainment. Now, would you have had me dispair'd, and layne in the streets? No, I bethought me of a tricke worth two of that, and presently devis'd, having at that time a charge of money about me, to be lodg'd, and safely too.
As how, I pray you?
Marry thus: I had knockt my heeles against the ground a good while, knew not where to have a Bed for love nor money. Now what did I? but spying the Watch, went and hit the Constable a good sowse on the Eare, who provided me of a lodging presently; and the next day, being brought before your Worship, I was then sent thither backe againe, where I lay three or foure dayes without controule.
O, y'are a Gallant! is that Gentleman
A Suitor too?
I am a Suitor in my friends behlfe,
No otherwis: I can assure you, Sir,
He is a Gentleman discended well,
Deriv'd from a good hous, well quallify'd,
And well possest; but that which most should move you,
Hee loves your Daughter.
But were I to chuse,
Which of thse two should please my fancie best,
I sooner should affct this Gentleman,
For his md carriage, and his faire discourse,
Then my hot Suitor; Ruffians I detest:
A sooth and square bhaviour likes mee best.
What say you to me, Lady.
You had best aske my Father what I should say.
Are you angry, sweet Lady, that I ask't your Fathers consent?
No, if you can get his consent to marry him, shall it mee?
Indeed you therein much forget your selfe,
To sound her Father e're you tasted her.
You should have first sought meanes for her good-will,
And after compast his.
He can prevaile with neither: Gentlemen,
If you will come to revell, you are welcome;
If to my Table, welcome; if to use mee
In any gratefull Office, welcome too:
But if you come as Suitors, there's the doore.
The doore!
I say the doore.
Why Sir? tell not me of your doore, nor going out of it, your companie is faire and good, and so is your Daughters; Ile stay here this twelve-moneth, e're Ile offer to trouble your doore.
Sir, but you shall not. Taber! where's that knave?
Why Sir, I hope you doe not meane to make us dance, that you call for a Taber.
Nay Master Sencer, doe not urge the Knight,
Hee is incenst now, chuse a fitter houre,
And tempt his love in that: old men are testie,
Their rage, if stood against, growes violent;
But suffred and forborne, confounds it selfe.
Where's Taber?
At hand, noble Master.
Shew them the doore.
That I will, and take money too, if it please them.
Is thy name Taber?
I am so eclip't Sir.
And Taber, are you appointed to give us Iacke Drum's entertainment?
Why sir, you doe not play upon me.
Though I cannot, yet I have knowne an Hare that could. But Knight, thou doest not forbid us th House.
Yes, and forewarne it too.
But by thy favour, wee may chuse whether we will take any warning or no. Well, farewell olde Knight, though thou forbidst mee thine house, Ile honour , and extoll thee; and though thou keepst mee from thy Daughter, thou shalt not hinder mee to love her, and admire her: and by thy favour, sometimes to see her: A Catt may looke at a King, and so may I at her. Give me thine hand, Knight, the next time I come into thy company, thou shalt not onely bid me welcome, but hire mee to stay with thee, and thy daughter.
When I doe that, enjoy my full consent,
To marry Graciana.
Tis a match, strike mee lucke:
Wife that may bee, farewell: Father in law that
Mut bee, adiew. Taber, play before, my friend
And I will daunce after.
Whe I receive thee gladly to mine hose,
And wage thy stay, thou shalt have ,
Doubt not, thou shalt. Here's a strange Humourist,
To come a wooing. Taber, are they gone?
I have plaid them away, if it please your Worship▪ and yonder at the doore attends a Schoolmaster, you sent for him, if you remember, to teach my little yong Master and Mistris.
A proper Scholler, pray him to come .
Eques : : non quid est in Tergo, sed salve bona virgo.
Sir, you may call me nick-names: if you love me, speake in your Mother-tongue; or at the , if Learning be so much ally'd unto you, that Latine unawares slowes from your lips: to make your mind with my knowledge, pray utter it in English: what's your name?
Sit .
Ile tell you my .
Will you tell it to no men.
Ile entertaine none e're I know their names:
Nay, if you be so dainty of your name,
You are not for my service.
Intende .
Not for twenty Nobles:
Trust me, I will not buy your name so deare.
O Ignorantia! what it is to deale with stupidity?
Sir , Sir , heare me one word,
I see, , vero negligitis.
I thinke he saith we are a companie of fooles, and Nigits, but I hope you shall not find us such, Mastr Schoolmaster.
Friend, friend, to cut off all vaine circumstance,
Tell me your name, and answer me directly,
Plainly, and to my understanding too,
Or I shall leave you: here's a deale of gibberish.
Vir bone.
Nay, nay, make me no bones, but do't.
Then in plaine vulgar English I am call'd, Sir Boniface Absee.
Why this is somewhat like, Sir Boniface,
Give me thine hand, thou art a proper man,
And in my judgement, a great Scholler too:
What shall I give thee by the yeare?
Ile trust, Sir, to your generosity;
I will not bargaine, but account my selfe
Mille & mille modis, bound to you.
I cannot leave my Mils, they'r farm'd already,
The stipend that I give, shall be in money.
Sure Sir, this is some Miller that comes to undermine you, in the shape of a Schoolmaster.
You both mistake the Scholler.
I understand my English, that I know;
What's more then Moderne, doth surpasse my reach.
Sir Bonifa, come to me two dayes hence,
You shall receive an answer; I have now,
Matters of some import that trouble me,
Thou shouldst be else dispatch't.
Sir Boniface, if you come to live in our house, and be a Familist amongst us, I shall desire you better acquaintance, your Name and my Phisnomy should have some consanguinitie, good Sir Boniface.
vales, vales.
Goe with you to the Ale-house? I like the motion well; Ile make an excuse out of doores and follow you. I am glad yet, we shall have a Good-fellow come into the house amongst us.
vir .
You shall not have me at Saint Magnes, my house is here in .
I know it, sweet Knight, I know it.
Then virgo formosa, & Domine valete.
Ey, in you shall heare of me,
Sir Bonif. He shall instruct my children; and to thee,
Faire , reade the Latine tongue,
Who, shall Sir Bawdy-face?
Sir Boniface, you foole.
His name is so hard to hit on.
Come Daughter, if things fall out as I intend,
My thoughts shall peace have, and these troubles end.
Iack, thou art my Boy.
Mistris!
Ile be a Mother to thee, no Mistris: come Lad, I must have thee sworne to the orders of my house, and the secrets thereof.
As I am an honest Lad, I am yours to command. But Mistris, what meane all these womens pictures, hang'd here in your withdrawing roome?
Ile tell thee, Boy; marry thou must be secret. When any Citizens, or yong Gentlemen come hither, under a colour to know their Fortunes, they looke upon these pictures, and which of them they best like, she is ready with a wet finger: here they have all the furniture belonging to a privat-chamber, bedde, bed-fellow and all; but mum, thou knowest my meaning, Iacke.
But I see comming and going, Maids, or such as goe Maids, some of them, as if they were ready to lie downe, sometimes two or three delivered in one night; then suddenly leave their Brats behind them, and conveigh themselves into the Citie againe: what becomes of their Children?
Those be Kitchin-maids, and Chamber-maids, and sometimes good mens Daughters; who having catcht a clap, and growing neare their time, get leave to see their friends in the Countrey, for a weeke or so: then they come, and for a matter of money, here they are delivered. I have a Mid wife or two belonging to the house, and one Sir Boniface a Deacon, that makes a shift to christe the Infants: we have poore, honest, and secret Neighbours, that stand for common Gossips. But dost not thou know this?
Yes, now I doe: but what after becomes of the poore Infants?
Why, in the night we send them abroad, and lay one at this mans doore, and another at that, such as are able to keepe them; and what after becomes of them, we inquire not. And this is another string to my Bowe.
Most strange, that womans brain should apprehend
Such law lesse, indirect, and horrid meanes
For gaine! How many unknowne Trades
Women and men are free of, which they never
Had Charter for? but Mistris, are you so
Cunning as you make your selfe: you can
Neither write nor reade, what doe you with hose
Bookes you so often turne over?
Why tell the leaves; for to be ignorant, and seeme ignorant, what greater folly?
Beleeve me, this is a cunning Woman; neither hath shee her name for nothing, who out of her ignorance, can foole so many that thinke themselves wise. But wherefore have you built this little to the doore, where sitting, you may heare every spoken, by all such as aske for you.
True, and therefore I built it: if any knock, you must to the doore and question them, to find what thy come about, if to this purpose, or to that. Now they ignorantly telling thee their errand, which I sitting in my Closet, heare, presently come forth, and tell them the cause of their comming, with every word that hath past betwixt you in private: which they admiring, and thinking it to miraculous, by their report I become thus famous.
This is no Trade, but a Mysterie; and were I a Wise-woman, as indeed I am but a foolish Boy, I need not live by your service. But Mistris, we lose our selves in this discourse, is not this the morning in which I should be married?
Now, how had I forgot my selfe? Mistris Luce promist to be with mee halfe an houre , but and disguis'd, and so shalt thou be too: here's a blacke Vaile to hide thy face against the rest come.
Sit tibi bona dies: salus & quies.
Into the withdrawing roome, Sir .
Without any compunction, I will make the Conjunction.
Now keepe thy countenance, Boy.
Feare not mee, I have as good a face in a Maske, as any Lady in the Land could wish to have: but to my heart, hee comes, or he comes not; now am I in a pittifull rlexity, untill I see the event of all.
No more Iacke now, but Mistris Luce.
I warrant you Mistris: that it happens so luckily, that my name should be Luce too, to make the marriage more firme!
My honey svveet Hagge, vvhere's Luce?
svveet heart, but disguis'd and vail'd, as you are visarded.
vvhat's the reason vvee are thus Hoodwinkt?
No discovery of your selves for a million, there's Sir Boniface within, shall hee blab vvho you are? Besides, there's a yong Heire that hath stolne a Lords Daughter from the Court, and vvould not have their faces seene for a World: cannot you be content to fare well, and keepe your ovvne counsell, and see, yonder they come.
Gramarcie my Sugar-candie svveet Trot.
Mum, no more vvords.
If the great Heire and the yong Lady be so dainty of their Complexions, they shall see (my svveet Luce) vvee can visard it vvith the best of them.
That Gentleman, by the Wisevvomans description, should be Master Chartley. (Meaning Boyster.)
That gallant Wench, if my Grannam fable not,
Should be Luce: but vvhat be those other?
You vvrong mee, but to aske, vvho but a yong Heire, and a Lady of the Court: that's Luce, take her, and keepe your promise.
Poc palabras.
That's Chartley, take him Luce.
But who be they?
A Lord and Lady shall Sir Boniface stay,
Rather then so, strive who should leade the way.
Now Iack my Boy, keepe thine owne counsell, and countennce, and I shall cry quittance with my yong Gallant. Well, by this time Sir Boniface is at his Booke. But because there is a mistake, knowne onely to my Boy and my selfe; the Marriage shall be no sooner ended, but Ile disturbe them by some sudden out-cry, and that too, before they have leasure to unmaske, and make knowne themselves one to another; for if the deceite were knowne, I should fall into the danger of that yong mad Rascall. And now this double apprehension of the Lord and the Lady shall fetch mee off from all; I know it is Sir Boniface his custome, to make short vvorke, and hath dispatcht by this: And novv Wise-vvoman, try if thou canst bstir thy selfe like to a Mad-vvoman—shift for your selves, Warrants and Pursevants! Away, Warrants and Pursevants! shift for your selves.
Ile take this way.
I this.
Curris : My cheeks are all Murry,
And I am gone in an hurry.
O Heaven! vvhat shall become of me?
I knovv vvhat shall become of me already.
O svveet Daughter, shift cloathes vvith this Lady! Nay, as thou lov'st thy credit and mine, change Habits—So, if thou bee'st taken in her Garments, finding the mistake, vvill let thee passe; and should they meet her in thine, not knovving her, vvould no vvay her: and this prove to both your securities and my .
As fast as I can, good Mother: So Madam farewell.
All happy joyes betide you.
Ha, ha, let me hold my sides, and laugh: Here were even a Plot to make a play on, but that Chartley is so fool'd by my Boy : Well, heele make a notable Wagge, Ile warrant him. All the Iest will bee, if Boyster should meete with him in Luce's habitt, which hee hath novv on, hee would thinke himselfe meerely gull'd and cheated; and should Chartley meet with Luce as shee is now Roab'd, hee would bee confident hee had marryed her. Let mee see how many Trades have I to live by: First, I am a VVise-vvoman, and a Fortuneteller, and under that I deale in Physicke and Fore-speaking, in Palmistry, and recovering of things lost. Next, I undertake to cure Madd folkes. Then I keepe Gentlewomen Lodgers, to furnish such Chambers as I let out by the night: Then I am provided for bringing young Wenches to bed; and for a need, you see I can play the Match-maker. Shee that is but one, and professeth so many, may well bee tearmed a Wise-woman, if there bee any.
Why, runne away, and leave my Wench behind? Ile backe: vvhat have Warrants and Pursevants to doe with mee? with mee? why should I budge? why should I weare Maske or Visard? If Lords or Ladies offend, let Lords and Ladies ansvver; let mee better bethinke mee. Why should I play at Hob-man blinde? Hum; vvhy marry in Tenebris, ha! is there no tricke in it? If my Grannam should make mee a yonger Brother now, and instead of Luce, pop mee off vvith some broken commoditie, I vvere finely serv'd: most sure I am, to be in for better and worse, but with vvhom, Heaven and my Grannam knovves.
I am stolne out of doores, to see if I can meet my Husband; with vvhom I purpose to make some sport, ere I suddenly disclose my selfe: vvhat's hee?
Heyday, what have vvee here, an Hoberdehoy? come hither you.
'Tis Mistris Luces Husband,
Ile not leave him thus.
What art thou?
Doe you not know mee?
That Maske and Robe I know?
I hope so, or else I vvere in a vvo case.
That Maske, that Gowne I married.
Then you have no reason, but to injoy both them and me too, and so you are like; I should be loath to divorce Man and Wife.
I am fool'd, but vvhat crackt vvare are you, forsooth?
I belong to the old Gentlevvoman of the house.
Ile set her house on fire: I am finely bobb'd.
But I hope you will not bobb me.
No I'se vvarrant thee: vvhat art thou? Girle or Boy?
Both, and neither; I vvas a Ladd last night, but in the morning I vvas conjured into a Lasse: And being a Girle novv, I shall be translated to a Boy anon. Her's all I can at this time say for my selfe: Farevvell.
Yes, and be hang'd vvithall. O for some Gun powder to blovv up this Witch, this , this damn'd ! O I could teare her to fitters vvith my teeth! Yet I must be patient, and put up all, lest I bee made a jeere to such as knovv mee: fool'd by a Boy! Goe too, of all the rest, the Girle Luce must not knovv it.
So, now am I the same man I was yesterday; who can say I was disguis'd? or who can distinguish my condition now? or reade in my face, whether I be a married man, or a Batchelor?
Who's that?
Luce.
Sweet Husband, is it you?
The newes?
Never so frighted in my dayes.
What's become of the Lord and the Lady?
The Lord fled after you, the Lady staid; who maskt, and halfe unready, ran fast after her poore affrighted Husband: now all's quiet.
This storme is then well past, and now conveigh your selfe home as privately as you can: and see you make this knowne to none but your Father.
I am your Wife and Servant.
This name of Luce hath beene ominous to mee; one I should have married in the Countrey, and just the night before, a toy tooke me in the head, and mounting my Hse, I left Capons, Ducks, Geese, Poultry, Wildfowle, Father, and Bride and all, and posted up to London, where I have ever since continued Batchelor, till▪ now. And now—
Nay on, I Pretkee fellow on, my Father will wonder where I have beene visiting. Now, vvhat had I forgot? Taber, there's money, goe to the Gold-smiths, bid him send mee my Fanne; and make a quicke returne: on, fellow on.
Her Fanne at the Gold-smiths! now had I forgot to aske her his name, or his signe: but I will after to know.
Sirrah, goe call mee backe that Serving-man,
And aske him vvhat's the Gentle-vvomans name.
I shall; ho, you: Friend, you.
Who's that calls?
'Twas I.
Your businesse? you should be one, though not of my cognisance, yet of my condition: a Serving-creature, as I take it: pray vvhat's your vvill vvith mee?
Pray Sir, what might I call that Gentlevvoman, on vvhom you were attendant?
You may call her vvhat you please, but if you call her otherwise then in the vvay of honestie, you may perchance heare on't.
Nay, be not offended: I say, vvhat do you call her?
Why Sir, I call her as it shall best please mee, sometimes yong Lady, sometimes yong Mistris; and vvhat hath any man to doe with that?
Are you so captious, sirrah, vvhat's her name? Speake, and be briefe.
Ey marry Sir, you speake to purpose, and I can resolve you: her name is Gratiana. But all this vvhile I have forgot my Mistris Fanne.
Gratiana! oft have I heard of her, but saw her not till now: 'tis a wench, a very prettie wench, nay, a very, very, very prettie wench. But what a Rogue am I, of a married man? nay, that have not beene married this six houres, and to have my shittle-wits runne a Wooll-gathering already? What vvould poore Luce say if shee should heare of this? I may very well call her poore Luce, for I cannot presume of five pounds to her portion: what a Coxcombe was I, being a Gentleman, and well deriv'd, to match into so beggarly a kindred? What needed I to have grafted in the stocke of such a Choake Peare, and such a goodly Popering as this to escap mee? Escape me (said I?) if shee doe, shee shall doe it narrowly: but I am married already, and therefore it is not possible, unlesse I should make away my wife, to compasse her. Married! why who knowes it? Ile out-face tho Priest, and then there is none but shee and her Father, and their evidence is not good in Law: and if they put mee in suite, the best is, they are poore, and cannot follow it. I marry Sir, a man may have some credit by such a Wife as this; I could like this marriage well, if a man might change away his Wife, still as hee is a weary of her, and cope her away like a bad commoditie: if every new Moone a man might have a new Wife, that's every yeare a dozen. But this, Till Death us depart, is tedious: I will goe a wooing to her, I will; but how shall I doe for jewels and tokens? Luce hath mine in her custodie, money and all; tush, Ile juggle them from her well enough: see, here shee comes.
Here is my Husband, I pray move him in it.
It toucheth both our reputations nearly;
For by his oft repaire, now whilst the Marriage
Is kept from publike knowledge, your good name
May be by Neighbours hardly of.
, what, melancholly already▪ re thou hast had good cause to be mrry, and what was.
I have great reason, when my name is toss'd
In every Gossips mouth, and a by-word
Vnto such people as it least concernes.
Nay, in my hearing, as they passe along,
Some have not spar'd to brand my modestie,
Saying, There shee whom yong Chartley keepes.
There hath ee ntred late, betimes gone forth.
Where I with pride was wont to sit before,
I'm now vvith shame sent blushing from the doore.
Alas poore foole, I am sorry for thee, but yet cannot helpe thee, as I am a Gentleman. Why say , thou losest now shillings worth of Credit, stay but a time, and it shall bring thee in a thousand pounds worth of commoditie.
Son, Son, ad I esteem'd my profit more
Then I have done my credit, I had now
Beene many thousands richer: but you see,
Truth and good dealing beare an humble saile;
That little I injoy, it is with qiet,
Got with good conscience, kept with good report:
And that I still shall labour to preserve.
But doe you heare mee?
Nothing Ile heare, that tends unto the ruine
Of mine, or of my Daughters honestie.
Shall I be held a Broker to lewd Lust,
Now in my waine of yeares?
Will you but heare ?
Not in this case. I that have liv'd thus long,
Reported well, esteem'd a welcome Guest
At every Table, there respected;
Now to be held a to my Daughter?
That I should live to this
But harke you Father?
A Bawd to mine owne child▪
Father?
To my sweet Lce!
Father?
Deale with me like a Son, then call me Father;
I that have had the tongues of every man
Ready to crowne my Reputation:
The hands of all my Neighbours to subscribe
To my good like; and such as could not write,
Ready with Palsie and fingers,
To set their cribling markes.
Why Father in Law?
Thou hadst a Mother Luce; 'tis with me
To say thou hadst, but hast not; a kind Wife,
And a good Nurse she was: she, had she liv'd
To heare my name thus canvast, and thus toss'd,
Seven yeares before she dy'd, I had beene a Widower
Seven yeares before I was: Heaven rest her soule,
Shee is in Heaven I hope.
Why so now, these be good words, I knew these stormes would have a showre, and then they would . Now if your anger be over, heare me.
Well, say on Son.
Stay but a Moneth, 'tis but foure Weekee; nay, 'tis February, the shortest Moneth of the yeare, and in that time I shall be at full age; and the Land being intail'd, my Father can dis-inherit mee of nothing. Is your I satisfied you? Well, I see you chollericke hasty men, are the kindest when all is done. Here's such of , weepes to thinke of his Wife, shee weepes to see her Father cry ▪ Peace , wee shall else have thee dred of the Woman kill'd with kindnesse.
Well Son, my anger's past; yet I must tell you,
It grieves mee that you should thus it off,
Concerning us, no such a deere degree.
In private be it spoke, my Daughter tels me,
Shee's both a Wife and Maid.
That may be help't.
Now Luce, your Fathers pacifi'd, will you be pleas'd? I would indure a Quarters punishment for thee, and wilt not thou suffer a poore Moneths penance for mee? 'Tis but eight and twenty dayes, Wench; thou shalt fare well all the time, drinke well, eate well, lie well: come, one word of comfort at the later end of the day.
Yours is my fame, mine honour, and my heart
Link't to your pleasure, and shall never part.
Gramercie Wench, thou shalt weare this chaine no longer for that word, Ile multiply the linkes in such order, that it shall have light to shine about thy necke, oftener then it doth: this jewell, a plaine Bristowe stone, a counterfeit. How base was I, that comming to thee in the way of Marriage, courted thee with counterfeit stones? Thou shalt weare right, or none: thou hast no money about , Luce?
Yes Sir, I have the hundred pounds that you gave me to lay up last.
Fetch it; let mee see, how much branch'd Sattin goes to a Petticoat? and how much wrought Velvet to a Gowne? then for a Bever for the Citle, and a Blackbagge for the Country: Ile promise her nothing, but if any such bee brought home, let her not thanke mee for them.
Gramercie Luce, Nay, goe in, Gravitie and Modestie, ten to one but you shall heare of mee, you see mee againe.
I know you kinde, my hastie Language unto my rage, not mee.
Why, doe not I know you, and doe not I know her? I doubt you'l wish that I had never knowne either of you: now, what sayst thou, my sweet Luce?
My words are yours. so is my life: I am now part of your selfe, so made by Nuptiall vowes.
What a Pagan am I, to practise such villany against this honest Christian! If Gratiana did come into my thoughts, I should fall into a vaine 'to pittie er: but now that I talk of her, I have a tongue to▪ wooe her, Tokens to win her; and that done, if I doe not find a tricke, both to weare her, and wearie her, it may prove a piece of a Wonder. Thou seest, Luce, I have some store of Crownes about me, there are brave things to be bought in the Citie; Cheapside, and the Exchange, afford varietie and raritie. This is all I will say now, but thou mayest heare more of mee hereafter.
Heaven speed you where you goe Sir; shall we ?
Though not from scandall, wee live free from .
Ile in before.
I am still in love with Luce, and I would know
An answer more directly: fie, fie, this Love
Hangs on me like an Ague, makes me foole▪
Coxcombe and Asse: why should I love her, why?
A Rattle-Baby, Puppit, a slight toy,
And now I could goe to buffets with my selfe,
And this Love away: but see, that's Luce.
I cannot shun him, but Ile shake him off.
Morrow.
As much to you.
I'le use few words, Canst love me?
Deed Sir no.
Why th farewell, the way I came, Ile goe.
This is no tedious Courtship, hee's soone answer'd,
So should all Sutors else bee, were they wise;
For being repulst, they doe but waste their dayes
In thanklesse suites, and superficiall praise.
Sweare that thou wilt not love me.
Not Sir, for any hate I ever bare you,
Or any foolish pride, or vaine conceite:
Or that your feature doth not please mine eye,
Or that you are not a brave Gentleman:
But for concealed reasons I am forc'd
To give you this cold answer; and to sweare
I must not, then with patience pray forbeare.
Even farewell then.
The like to you, and save your hopes in me.
Heaven grant you your best wishes; all this strife
Will end it selfe, when I am knowne a Wife.
I am satisfied good M. Harringsfield touching your friend, and since I see you haue left his dangerous company, I limit you to bee a welcome guest vnto my Table.
You haue bin alwayes noble.
Taber: the newes with thee?
May it please the right worshipfull to vnderstand that there are some at the Gate who dance a turne or two without, and desire to bee admitted to speake with you within.
The Scholler is it not.
Nay sir, there are two Schollers, and they are spowting Latin one against the other; And in my simple Iudgement the stranger is the better Scholler, and is somewhat too hard for sir Boniface: For he speakes lowder, and that you know is ever the signe of the most learning, and hee also hath a great desire to serue your Worship.
Two schollers; My house hath not place for two, thus it shall bee. Taber admit them both, wee though vnlearned will heare them two dispute, and hee that of the two seemes the best read, shall bee receiued, the other quite casheired.
In that you showe but Iustice, in all persons merit should bee regarded.
Venerabilis magistri: Absint vobis capistri.
Et tu domini calve, iterum atque, iterum salve,
Amo amas amavi, sweete Lady Heauen saue yee.
This approues him to be excellent, but I thank my breeding I vnderstand not a word, you tong-men you whose wealth lyes in your braines; Not in your budgets heere mee: Be it knowne, my house affords roome for one Schoole-master but not for more. And I am thus resolved, take you that side gentle sir Boniface, and sir possesse you that.
Hee of you two in arguing prooues the best. To him will I subscribe are you agreed.
Nec animo, nec corde, nec vtroque.
No more of that nec corde, noble Knight, he wishes you nec corde, thinke of that.
A Cord about my necke, sir Boniface.
Speake doe you use mee well.
Domine currogas:
Is this to bee indured, to call a Knight.
Cur, Rogue and Asse.
I find my selfe abus'd.
Yet patience good syr Harry, and heare more pray sir Boniface: of what Vniversitie? Were you of.
I was student in Brazen nose.
A man might guesse so much by your pimples, and of what place were you:
Petrus dormit securus; I was Sir of Peeter house Sir Boniface. Natus eram, in Woxford, and I proceeded in Oxford.
Est mihi bene nostrum, thou wouldest say, in Gotam; For my part sir Harry, I can reade Seruice and Marry, Que genus et flexum, though I goe in genes Fustion, scalpellum et charta I was not brought vp at Plowe & cart, I can teach Qui mihi, and neyther laugh nor tee-hee, sed as in presente, if your worship at this present, Iste, Ista Istud, will doe mee any good, to giue mee legem pone in Gold or in monie. Piper atque papauer, I'le deserue it with my labour.
But when goe you to dispute.
Nomnativo hic prediculus, his words are most ridiculous: But tu thou, qui the which, deridest those that bee rich, conteruc hanc sententiam, constrne mee this sentence. Est modus in rebus sunt certi denique fines:
Est modus in rebus: There is mud in the rivers.
Sunt certi denique fines, and certaine little Fishes.
I warrant you he hath his answer ready.
Dij boni boni.
Heele giue you more bones then those to knw on Sir Boniface.
Kartere Moosotropos Poluphiltate phile poetatis Tes Logikes retoon, onch elashiste sophoon.
That is as much as to say, in our mterna lingna I will make you sir Boniface, confesse your selfe an Asse in English, speake open and broad words, for want of Latin, and Denique instruct mee to resolue such questions as I shall aske you in our moderne tongue.
Confesse him an Asse, speake obsceane words after intreate thee to resolve thy questions. Doe that, possese the place.
Di do and dum: No more words but mum:
Noble sir Harry; Nunquam sic possit?
Sir Boniface is sicke already and calls possit, no marvell, being so threatned.
You Boniface, decline mee I am a no after the first coniugation, amo , vocito vocitavi. Titubo titubavi?
I am not the preceptor to a pupill.
But can decline it, marke sir Timothy:
I am a no,
Bene bene.
I am an as?
Most treue most treue, vos estis, ut egojum , that what he confest is, as true as the pestis.
This Scholler workes by magick hee hath made him confesse himselfe an Asse.
Per has meas manus vir, tues insanus,
Ile make him fret worse yet; Sir Bouiface: quid est grammatica.
Grammatica est ars,
Fye, fye, no more of these words good sir Boniface.
Attend againe, proceed mee with this verse
of reverent Cato: Si deus est animus-
Nobis ut carmina dicunt.
Di quoth ha, out on him for a beastly man.
I would not hue him teach my children so for more then I am worth.
O! but reverend syr Harry you must subaudi.
Ile never bee so baudy whilest I liue, nor any of mine I hope.
O! Propria quae maribus:
y Boniface, it is those maribo, that makes you talke so broadly?
Venerabilis vir hom ille est ebrius.
What doth hee meane by that.
H saith, I can speake Hebrewe
I Beleeu't:
But if syr Boniface still co these lessons,
He'l, speake the French tonue perfit.
Now to the last, ile taske syr Boniface, but with an question. Tell mee syr: Whats Latin for this Earth?
Facile and easy more fit for the pupill then the preceptor: whats Latin for this Earth? Tellus.
Tell you; no syr, it belongs to you to tell mee.
I say Tellus is Latin for the Earth.
And I say, I will not tell you what is Latin for the Earth; vnlesse you yeild mee victor▪
You haue no reason: good syr Timothy,
The place is yours.
Hee hath deserv'd it well.
But ile deserue it better, why this fellow
s Franticke, you shall heere mee make him speake
Idely and without sence. I'le make him say,
His Nose was Husband to a Queene,
Sir Timothy not possible.
Hee will not speake it for shame.
That you shall heere; Magister Boniface.
Quid ais domine Timothy.
Who was Pasiphas husband Queene of Creete.
Who knowes not that, why Minos was her Husband.
That his nose was; did I not tell you so.
I say that Mins was:
That his Nose was ha has.
Ile not beleeue it.
there are a brace of Augels.
You are not for my turne sir Timothy.
You are the man shall reade vnto my daughter
The Latin tongue, in which I am ignorant:
Confesse your selfe an Asse; speake bawdy words;
And after to talke idely. Hence away:
You sall haue my good word, but not my pay?
Opus est vsus; Timothy you abuse us.
Is weare by a nowne, had I thy hose downe,
Qui que quod, I would so smoake thee with the rod:
Ille Illa Illud, vntill I fetch blood.
But Nobiles valete, remaine in quiete.
Sir Timothy, there is some Gold in earnest,
I like you well take into your tuition,
My daughter Gratiana; the newes Taber.
Of another gallant noble sir that petends to haue businesse, both with you and my mistresse,
Admit him.
Lusty Iuventus; will it please you to draw neere.
Noble Knight, whil'st you peruse that sweete Lady, tell mee how you like this:
You presse so suddainly vpon mee syr
I know not what to answer.
Mad Chartly; what makes desperation heere.
To the word wooer let mee add the name speeder my father hath written to your father, and the cause of his writing at this present, is to let you vnderstand, that hee feares you haue liu'd a maide too long: and therefore to prevent all diseases incident to the same; as the greene sicknesse and others. Hee sent mee like a skilfull Physitian, to take order with you against all such maladies. If you will not credit mee, list but how fervently my father writes in my behalfe.
Hee is my onely sonne, and shee I take as your onely daughter, what should hinder then,
To make a match betweene them, (well tis well tis good I like it) I will make her Ioynter three hundred pounds a yeare.
How say you by that sweete Lady three hundred pounds a yeare and a proper man to boote.
All's good, I like it, welcome M. Chartly.
Thou art no child of ine
Vnlesse thou bidst him welcome. This I presume
To bee your fathers hand.
But Ile bee sworne he never writ it.
And this his seale at Armes.
Or else I vnderstand it very poorely, but Ldy▪
In earnest of further acquaintance, receiue this Chayne,
These Iewels, hand and heart.
Refase no Chaine nor Iewels, heart nor had, but in exchange of these bestowe thy selfe thine owne deere selfe vpon him.
My selfe on him, whom I tell now I neere saw? Well since I must, your will's to mee a law.
Nay then tis time to speake, shall I stand heere wavting like a Coxcombe, nd see her giuen away before my face? stay your hand syr Harry; and let mee claime my promise.
My promise ile performe syr Timothy, you shall haue all your wages duly paid.
I claime faire Gratiana by your promise.
No more syr Timothy, but Sencer now,
You promis'd mee when you receiued my service,
And with your liberall hand did wage my stay:
To endowe mee freely with your daughters Love,
That promise now I claime.
Meer cosnidge, knavery,
I tide my selfe to no conditions.
In which such guile is practised, come sonne Chartly,
To cut of all disasters incident.
To these proceedings wee will sollemnise
These Nuptiall rites with all speede possible.
Farewell good syr Timothy; farewell learn'd syr Timothy.
Why: and farewell learned syr Timothy.
For now syr Timothy and I a two:
Boast on, bragge on, exalt exalt thy selfe,
Swim in a Sea of pleasure and content
Whilst my Barke suffers wrack ile bee revenged,
Chartly; ile cry vindicta for this Horne,
Next time thou gorest, it must bee with thy horne,
I am mad, and know not at what.
I could swagger but know not with whom,
I am at oddes with my selfe; and know not why:
I shall bee pacified, and cannot tell when,
I would faine haue a wife but cannot tell where,
I would fasten on Luce but cannot tell how.
How; where; when; why; whom; what.
Feeding sure makes mee leane, and fasting fat.
Not all this while once see mee.
His occasions, perhaps inforce his absence.
His occasions:
Vnlesse hee find occasion of new Love.
What could inforce such absence from his spouse:
A I growne fowle and blacke, since my espousals.
It should not seeme so; For the shop is daily,
Custom'd with store of Chap-men, such as come
To cheapen Love. O no, I am my self?
But Chartly hee is changed.
You know that Gentleman.
Escape him if thou canst.
Hee cannot, I arrest you;
At whose suite.
Not at mine owne, thats dasht, I loue thee not.
Thou art a Spaniard, Gipsee, a meere Blackamore:
Againe, I say I loue thee not.
A Blackemore, a Gipsy?
Sure I am chang'd indeed, and thats th cause
My Husband left mee so, this Gentleman
Once tearmd mee beautifull, how looke I Ioseph.
As well as ere you did, fat, freh, and fayre▪
You lye boy, pocket that, and now be gon.
And what shall then become of my Mistresse▪
Ile waite vpon your Mistresse.
I know you will not waite on such a Gipsie.
Yes Luce on such a Gipfie: Boy, abi abi.
Abide fir, you neede not feare that I haue no purpose to leaue her.
Now you are going to the wedding-house.
You are bid to be a Bride maid, are you not.
What wedding sir, or whose?
Why Chartleyes; Luce hath hee bin thy friend so long, and would not bid thee to wite on his Bride. Why lookst thou red and pale, and both, and neither.
To Mr. Chartleyes Bridals, why, to whom, Should hee be married.
To Grace of Gratious street.
To Gratiana?
Behrow you sir you doe not use mee well,
To buze into mine res these strange vntruths:
I tell you sir, 'tis as impossible
That they two should mach: as Earth and Heauen to meet.
You'l not beleeue it, pray then harke within,
The Nuptiall musicke ecchoing to their ioyes.
But you giue credit to no certaintyes:
I told you but a tale, a lye, a fable?
A monstrous, a notorious idle untruth,
That you were blacke, and that I lou'd you not.
And you could credit that.
Who's tell-troth now.
Know yo that an, or know you that fin Virgin:
Whom by the arme hee leades.
I'le not indure't: Heauen giue you joy sir:
I thanke you: Luce?
Looke to the Maid shee faints.
Grace, come not neere her Grace.
Father keepe off, on Gentlemen apace.
Shes troubled with the falling sicknesse, for
Oft hath shee fallen before mee.
Nay if it bee no otherwise, on gentlemen.
Let those with her striue to recouer her.
Keepe off, the disease is infectious:
If it were in a man, it were nothing, but the falling sicknesse in a woman is dangerous.
My tother father in Lawe, now shall I bee vtterly sham'd, If hee assure to know mee, I'le out face him.
Sonne your well met.
How fellow.
I cry you mercy sir.
No harme done friend, no harme done.
If hee? hee could not but haue known mee there, Yet he was wondrous like him.
How cheare you Luce, whence grew this passion.
Pardon mee sir, I doe not know my selfe:
I am apt to swound, and now the fit is past mee.
I thanke you for your helpe; is master Chartly
Vanisht so soone:
Yes: and to supply his place, see where thy father comes.
Hee hath not such a suit, besides this gallant
Led by the arme a Bride, a lusty Bride?
How much might I haue wrong'd the Gentleman.
By craving his acquaintance, this it is,
To haue dimme Eyes. Why lookes my daughter sad.
I cry you mercy. Sir I saw not you.
I would I had not seene you at this time neither, farewell.
If hee be gone? then call mee vent my griefe, ▪ Father I am vndone,
Forbid it Heauen.
Disgrac't, despis'd, discarded, and cast off.
How, mine owne child:
My Husband, O my husband?
What of him.
Shall I the shower of all my griefe at once
Power out before you: Chartly, once my husband
Hath left mee to my shame. Him and his Bride,
I met within few minutes.
Sure t'was they.
I met them two, t'was hee; base villaine Iewe.
I'le to the Wedding boord, and tell him so:
Ile doo't as I am a man?
Bee not so rash.
Ile liue and dye vpon him;
Hee's a base fellow, so I'le prooue him too.
Ioseph my Sword.
This rashnesse will vndoe us.
Ile haue my Sword.
It hath bin twice in France, and once in Spaine,
With Iohn a Gaunt, when I was young like him
I had my wards, and foynes, and quarter-blowes:
And knew the way into St. Georges fields.
Twice in a morning, Tuttle, Finsbury?
I knew them all, ile too him, wher's my sword,
Or leaue this spleene, or you will oerthrow
Our fortunes quite, let us consult together,
What wee were best to doe.
I'le make him play at Leap-frog, well I heare thee
I cannot prue our marriage, it was secret,
And hee may find some cavell in the Law.
I'le too him with no Law, but Staffood Lawe.
I'le ferret the false boy, nay on good Luce.
Part of your spleene, if you would change to counsel,
Wee might revenge us better.
Well I heare thee.
To claime a publicke marriage at his hands:
Wee want sufficient proofe, and then the world
Will but deride our folly, and so adde
Dubble disgrace vnto my former wrong.
To Law with him hee hath a greater purse,
And nobler friends, how then to make it knowne?
Is this his damsk'd kirtl frendge with Gold,
His blacke bagge, and his Beaner, tis well yet
I haue a Sword:
And I haue a project in my Braine begot,
To make his owne mouth witnes to the World
My innocence, and his incontinence?
Leaue it to mee, ile cleare my selfe from blame,
Though I the wrong, yet hee shall reape the shame.
Now or never, looke about thee Sencer, tomorrow is the Marriage day which to preuent, ly not within the compasse of my apprhension, therefore I haue thus disguised my selfe, to goe to the, Looming womans, the Fortune tellers. The ay thing, the nothing, this over against mother Red-caps is her house, ile knocke.
Whose there? What would you haue.
I would speake with the wise gentlewoman of the house.
O belike you lost somewhat.
You are in the wrong youth.
I am somewhat thicke of , pray speak out.
I say I haue not lost any thing, but wit and time,
And neither of those sh can helpe mee too:
The you belike are cro in Loue, and come to know what successe you shall haue.
Thou hast hit it sweete ladde; thou hast hit it.
What is it, you say sir:
Thou hast it it?
I pray in, ile bring you to my Mistresse▪
This is the house, knock Ioseph, my businesse craues dispatch.
Now am I as angry, as thou art timerous, and now to vent the next thing I meete, O tis the doore.
Who's there, what are you.
A maid and a wife.
And that would grieue any wench to bee so,
I know that by my selfe, not Luce.
Boy, where's your Mistresse.
In some private talke with a Gentleman?
Ile fetch her to you presently.
If shee and you see mee not, I am but dead,
I shall be made, a by-word to the World:
The scorne of women; and my Fathers shame:
You tell mee your name is Sencer, I knew it before, and that Chartly is to bee married, I could haue told it you.
Married to morrow, O mee!
Ey but you tell mee, that Chartly before to morrow shall bee disappointed of his, make that good, Thou shalt haue twenty Angels.
Ile doo't, stand aside, ile haue but a word or two with this Gentlewoman; and I am for you presently.
O! Mother, mother.
My husband marry another wife tomorrow? O changeable destinie, no sooner married to him, bu instantly to loose him. Nor death it grieues mee so much that I am a wife, but that I am a maid too, to carry one of them well is as much as any is bound to doe, but to be tide to both, is more then flesh and blood can indure.
Well trust to mee, and I will sell all things streight.
Wher's this Witch, this hagge, this beldan, this wisard, and haue I found thee, thus then will I teare, mu ble and maule thee.
Helpe, help, and if you be a gentleman.
Forbeare this rudenesse, hee that touches her, Drawes against mee.
Against you sir, apply thou, that shall be tride.
Helpe, helpe, part them helpe.
With patience heare her speake.
Now Trot, now Granam, what canst thou say for thy selfe: what Luce heare be patient and put vp them, shee must not see the end.
Than trince of all sides, if wee come for counsell,
Let us with patience heare it:
Then first to mee.
You would preuent young Chartlyes marriage, you shall: harke in your eare.
It pleaseth mee.
You-forestall Gratiane wedding, 'tis but thus.
Ile doo't,
You would inioy Luce as your wife, and lye with her to morrow night. Harke in your care.
Fiat.
Away, you shall injoy him, you are married,
Luce away, you shall see Chartly discarded from Gratiana,
Sencer bee gon, and if I fayle in any of these or the rest,
I lay my selfe open to all your displeasures.
Farewell till soone:
You know your meeting place.
Wee doe?
You shall report mee wiser and cunning too.
Ile adde one night more to the time, I haue said.
I haue not many I hope to liue a maid.
Fye, fye, what a time of trouble is this to morrow to morrow is my mistresse to be married, and wee seruingmen are so pusled.
The dinner's halfe done, and before I say
Grace, and bid the old Knight and his guest proface.
A medicine from your trencher, good M. Taber.
As good a man as ere was sir Saber:
Well thinke it no shame, men of learning and wit, say study gets a stomacke, friend Taber a bit.
Lick cleane good sir Boniface, and saue the scraper a labour.
But soft let mee ponder:
Know you him that comes yonder?
Most heartily welcome, would you speake with any heere.
Pray is the yong gentleman of the house at leisure▪
Meane you the Bridegroome M. Chartly.
I haue a Letter for him. You seeme to be a gentleman your selfe, acquaint him with my attendance, and I shall rest yours in all good offices.
Sir Boniface, pray keepe the gentleman company I will first acquaint your lippes with the vertue of the Seller.
Adesdem come neere, and tast of your beere. Welcome, sine dole, for puntis te vole,
When I tast of your liqour.
Gramercy master Vicar.
Most heartily welcome: your curtesie I beseech you, ply it off intreate you, pray sir Boniface keepe the Gentleman company; till I acquaint my yong master with his businesse.
Taber, I shall besolas manus.
A vostre seruitor.
Hee what art thou,
A hanger on, if it please you:
And I a shaker off, ile not beare your gallowes,
You shall not hang on mee.
O. Mr Bridegroome.
Gentlemen, the Ladies call vpon you to dance, they will be out of measure displeased, if dinner beeing done, you bee not ready to leade them a mesure:
Indeede women love not to bee scanted of their measure.
Fie sir Boniface: haue you forgot your selfe, Whilst you are in the Hall, there's never a whetstone for their wits in the Parler?
I will enter and set an edge vpon their I ngenies.
To mee sir, from whom? a letter to her most deere, most louing, most kind friend Mr. Chartly these bee deliuered: sure from some wench or other I long to know the contents.
Now to cry quittance with you for my farewell learn'd sir Timothy.
Good newes, as I liue, there's for thy paines my good sir Pandarus: Hadst thou brought mee word my father had turnd vp his heeles. Thou couldst scarcely haue pleased mee better: (Hee reades) though I disclaime the name of wife, of which I account my selfe altogether vnworthy, yet let mee claime some small interest in your loue, this night I lye at the house where wee were married, (the Wisewomans I meane) where my maiden-head is to bee rifled, bid fayre for it, and inioy it, see mee this night or never, so may you marrying Gratiana, and louing mee, haue a sweete wife and a true friend: This night or never, your quodam wife: Hereafter your poore sweet-heart no other: Luce. So when I am tyr'd with Gratiana, that is when I am past grace. With her I can make my rendevowz, ile not slip this occasion, nor sleepe till I see her, thou art an honest ladde, and maist prooue a good Pimpe in time. Canst thou advise mee what colour, I may haue to compasse this commodity.
Sir, shee this night expets you, and prepares a costly banquet for you.
Ile goe, although the Devill and mischance looke bigge,
Feyne some newes that such a peece of Land is falne to you, and you must instantly ride to take possession of it, or which is more probable, cannot you perswade them you haue receiu'd a letter that your Father lyes a dying.
You rogue, I would hee did but the name of that newes is cal'd, too good to be true.
And that if ever you will see him aliue, you must ride post into the Country.
Enough: if ever I prooue Knight errant thou shalt bee mine owne proper squire, for this thou hast fitted mee with a plot, doe but waite heere note how I will manage it,
Tabor my horse, for I must ride to night▪
To night sir.
So tell my Bride and Father, I haue newes that quite confounds my nces.
How ride to night, the marriage day to morrow
And all things well provided for the feast.
O tell mee sweete, why doe you looke so pale.
My Father, O my Father:
What of him.
What of your father, Sonne?
If ever I will heere his aged tongue.
Preach to mee counsell, or his palsy hand,
Stroake my wild head, and blesse mee, or his eyes:
Drop teare by teare which they haue often done,
At my misgovern'd rioting youth.
What should I more, if ever I would see;
The good old man aliue. Oh, Oh?
Goe thy wayes for thou shalt ha't.
But doe you meane to ride.
Ey Grace, all this night.
Not all the night without alighting sure:
You'l finde more in't then to get vp and ride,
The Gentlemans riding, bootes and spurres.
Why Taber?
Nay Grace, now's no time.
To stand on scrupulous parting. Knewest thou my businesse.
As shee shall knowe it:
And how I meane this night to toyle my selfe.
Marry hang you brock.
Thou would be moane my travell.
I know t'would grieue her:
You father, Grace, good Mr Harringsfield.
You sir, and all pray for Gentlmen, that in this darke
nights journey I may finde smooth way, sweete speed and
all things to my minde.
Wee'l see my sonne take horse.
But I will say.
I want the heart to see him post away?
Saue you gentlewoman, I haue a message to deliver to one Mistre Gratiana, this should bee the Knights house her father.
It is: The message that you haue to her.
You may acquaint mee with, for I am one
That knowes the inside of her thoughts.
Are you the Lady,
Sir I am the poore gentlewoman▪
There is a conning woman dwells not .
At Hogsden Lady, famous for her skill.
Bedes some private talke that much concernes your fortunes in your love. Shee hath to shewe you this night if it shall please you walke so farre as to her house, an admirable suite.
Of costly needle worke, which if you please.
You may by vnder-rate for halfe the valew
It cost the making, about sixe a clocke.
You may haue view thereof, but otherwise.
A Lady that hath crau'd the sight thereof:
Must haue the first refusall.
Ile not fayle her.
My husband beeing this day rid rom home.
My leasure fitly serues , thanke you Mistresse?
At sixe à clocke.
I will not fayle the houre.
Now to sir Harry, his is the next place.
To meete at Hogsden his fayre daughter Grace.
Good heauen; This London is a stranger growne, and out of my acquaintance, this seauen yeares I haue not seene Pauls steeple, or Cheape, crosse.
Sir.
Hast thou not made inquiry for my Sonne.
Yes sir, I haue askt about euery where for him,
But cannot heare of him.
Disperse your selues▪ quire about the Tavernes, Odinaryes, Bowle-allyes, Tecourts, Gaming-houses. For there (I feare) hee will be found.
But where shall wee heare of your woship againe.
At Grace Church by the Conduit, ir Harry, but stay, leaue off a while bootlesse search, had e're man such a wild braine to hi row, of such small hope, who when should haue married a fayre, a modest, and a vertuous maide, rich and revenewed well, and even the night before the marriage day, tooke horse, road thence whether Heaven knowes, since the distracted virgin hath left her Fathers house, but neather feumd, yet in their search wee haue measured out much Ground.
Your orship will bee there.
Yes, not to fle.
At halfe an houre past sixe, or before seaven.
You shall not finde us at sixe and at seaven, ile
Warrant you: good health to your worship.
Farewell good fellow,
At the Wisewomans house I know it well:
Perhaps sh knowes some danger touching mee.
I'le keepe mine houre.
Sir Harry, a hand a hand to balk you it were siun.
I shall be bold to make your house mine Inne:
Brother Chartly; I am glad to see you.
Mee thinkes sir Harry you looke strangely on mee.
And doe not bid me welcome with an heart.
And blame mee not to looke amazedly,
To see you heare.
Why mee?
Come come, y'are welcome.
And now ile turne my strangenesse to true joy,
I am glad to see you well, and safe recovered▪
O your late grievous sicknesse.
The strange amazed lookes that you cst off
You put on mee, and blame mee not to wonder,
That you should talke of sicknesse to sound men,
I thanke my starres, I did not tast the griefe
Of inward paine or outward malady,
This seaven yeeres day.
But by your favour brother,
Then let mee haue my wonder backe againe.
Before I quite part with it, let mee knowe,
Why you the name of brother put vpon mee.
In every clause, a name as strange to mee:
As my recovered sicknesse,
You are plesant,
And it becomes you well, wlcome againe,
The rather you are come just to the wedding.
What wedding sir.
That you should aske that question:
Why of my daughter Grace.
Is Grace bestow'd? Of whom I pray,
Of whom, but of your .
I wonder brother Chartly, and my friend,
You should thus play on .
But by your favour,
Were you tenne Knights Sir Harry, (take mee with you)
My sonne match with your daughter, my consnt,
Not worthy to bee crau'd.
Nay, then I see:
You'l stirre my patience, know this forward match tooke its first birth from you.
From mee?
From you.
Peruse this letter, know you your owne hand.
T'was well that I reseru'd, your hand a witnesse
Against your tongue, you had best denie the Ioynter,
Of the three hundred pounds made to my daughter,
Tis that I know you ayme at, but your seale.
Shall not make mee approue it, I denye
This Seale for mine, nor doe I vouch that hand,
Your daughter and the dower, letter and all
I quite disclaime, sir Harry you much wrong mee.
I can beare more then this, heape wrong on
wrong, and ile support it all, I for this time
Will cast my spleene behind mee, and yet heare mee,
This letter your sonne Chartly as from you,
Delivered mee. I like the motion well.
My spleen is further throwne aside then yours.
And I am full as patient, and yet heare mee;
My sonne's contracted to another maid,
Nay I am patient still, yet that I writ
This letter seald, this impresse I denye.
Why then the jack your hand did counterfeit.
Why then hee did so, where's that vnthrift speake?
Some houre agoe, hee mounted and rid post.
To giue you visit whom hee said lay sicke
Vpon your death-bed.
You amaze mee sir.
It is an ill presage, hereon I see.
Your former salutation tooke its ground:
To see mee safe recovered of my sicknesse.
Indeed it did, your welcome is a subject.
I cannot vse too oft, welcome againe,
I am sorry you this night must sup alone:
For I am else-where cald about some businesse,
Concerning what I know not, howers run on.
I must to Hogsden, high time I were gon.
Perhaps to the Wisewomans, shee may tell mee.
The fortunes of my sonne, this accident,
Hath bred in mee suspition, and strange feares.
I will not sup alone, but I protest,
'mongst some this night. I'le play the intruding guest.
But will sir Harry come.
Presume will, and Chartly too.
Ile haue the knae by the eares.
Nay patience sir, leaue your revenge to mee.
Granam I am come according to promise.
And welcome to the best hole that I haue in Hogsden.
Good even.
Thanks sir, a good even may it proe,
That each may reape the fruits of their owne Love:
That shall bee my prayer too.
Come what shall's doo.
Withdraw, Ile place you all in severall roomes.
Where sit, see, but say nothing.
Heere sweete Mistresse, I know the place well e ver
Since I was heere to know my fortune.
Call mee some halfe an houre hence.
Your Ladiship is most lovingly welcome. A low stoole for the Gentlewoman boy: I made bold to send to you to take view of such a peece of worke, as I presume you haue seldome seene the like.
of whose doing, I pray.
A friend of yours and mine. Please you withdraw Ile bring you too't.
Mistresse.
One calls sweet Lady, I shall doe you wrong,
But pray you thinke my little stay not long:
Here sir in this retyring Chamber.
Gramercy friend, how now; whats here to do
A pretty wench and a close chamber too.
That you haue so much grac't my Mothers house,
With your desired presence worthy Knight.
Receiue a poore Maides thanks, who's there? a chayre
And cushin for fir Harry.
Thanks most fayre.
Please you but a few minutes heere to stay:
Till my returne, ile not bee long away.
The gentlewoman will waite on you by and by .
And ile attend her friend,
Of all those doubts I long to know the end::
The Knight you seeke was heere, or will bee reight, and if you bee the man you name your selfe. You are most welcome, and you shall not backe, sill you haue scene si Harry.
youth.
I saw him heere, and under priviledge of tance made I to stay.
And you are welcome sir, I pray.
Now they in , that looke
Into one. Were come we had all our company.
Harke, theres on knocks 'tis on my life▪
One of you let him in I mee
To entertaine his comming.
What? old acquaintance . Not a word?
Yet some lip labour if thou lovest mee.
My Husband?
What young Chartly?
How? My .
Come, come away with this wailing in woe, if thou putst finger in the eye a little longer, I shall plunge in paine too presently.
O husband, husband.
Husband?
What thou my sweete wife,
Wife? O my hart.
In that name I a poore childs part.
O husband; How haue you ?
Nay how doe I meane to the: as a
Should use his wife.
I hope hee doth not to her so.
I hope so too,
My is a Witch.
Nay , sweete wife weeping if mee,
O can you blame mee, knowing that the of all these Springs tooke their , from you, you know, you will know, not since are past, since wee were married.
Married, I can no longer.
It cannot bee.
It is not possible.
Ile bee even with thee, for this old granam.
And though wee wanted wite vpon arth,
Yet Heaven beares record of our Nuptiall ,
Tush, when wee, meete in heaven let talk of that.
Nay come you asse, you foole, whats past is past,
Though man and wife, yet I must marry nowe.
Another gallant, heere's thy letter Luce.
And this night I intend to lodge with thee.
I'le sctch her eyes out first, although I love her.
Prethe bee merry?
I haue made a gull of Grace, and old Harry thinks mee
a great way off, I tould the Knight,
My father lay a dying, tooke post horse,
Rid out of Holbur, turn'd by Islington,
So, hither wench to lodge all night with thee.
Heeres one saith nay to that,
Was that your journey:
Why I too much of Grace already▪
Thou hast no grace at all.
Nay lets to bed, if thou couldst but imagin how
I loue thee Luce.
How i it possible you can loue , and go about to marry another.
Dost thou not know rich? Why you foole as soone as I haue got her dower, it is but giuing her a dram, or a pill to purge mcholy to make her turne vp her heeles, and then withall that wealth, come Io li with thee my sweete raskall.
Shee thanks you, and is much beholding to you.
I am betraide.
Art thou my suiter? would'st thou marry mo ▪
And thy first wife aliue, then poyson mee,
To purchase my poore dowre.
What shall I say, or thinke, or doe, I am at Nonplus.
Hast thou the face, thou brazen impudence,
To looke vpon mee past grace.
Thou canst not properly call mee pst grac, for
I never inioyd thee yet: I cannot tell, whether
I blush or no, but I haue now at this time,
More Grace, then I can tell what to doe with.
Who drew thee to this folly?
Who but the old dotard thy Father, who when I was honestly married to a civill maide, perswaed mee to leaue her, I was loath at first but after intreating, vrging, and offring mee large proffers, I must confesse I was seduc't to come a wooing to thee.
My father, villaine.
Ey thy father Grace. And were he heere I would Iuifie it to the old dota face.
Vil'd boy thou dar'st not bee so impudent.
When did I meete thee, seeke or sue to thee:
When? Name the day, the month, the houre, the yeare.
Plots, plots. I can but cry you rcy both, Say that I haue done you wrong, I can bee but sorry for it, but indeede to cleare you, and lay the fault where it ought to bee. All this comes from mine owne father in the countrey, who hearin I had married with Luce. Sends mee word of. his blessing to bee divorst from her, and to come a suiter to your daughter, I thinke you haue his hand and to show.
My hand and seale, when was that letter wri.
Heyda, if you get one word more of mee to night, but scurvy lookes, ile giue you leaue to hang mee▪
Vilde boy,
Vngratious villaine.
Trecherous youth?
No at all?
No .
This is bad company who hath reduc't thee?
Speake on my blessing, who hath thus misled thee?
But no more lyes I charge thee.
Bad company hath bin the shame of mee, I was as vertuously giuen as any youth in Europe, till I fell into one Boysters company, 'tis hee that hath done all the harme vpon mee.
I.
And if hee should deny it?
What then you'd cry him mercy.
I had best bite out my tongue, and speake no more what shall I doe, or what shall I say, there is no out-acing them all ntlemen, Fathers, wiues, or what else. I haue wrongd all. I confesse it that I haue, what would you more, will any of you rayle of mee? Ill beare it, will any of you beate mee? So they strike not too har Ile suffer it, will any of you challenge mee? Ile answer it. What would you haue mee say, or doo? One of these I have married, the other I haue betrothed, yet both maides for mee; Will you haue mee take one, and leaue the tother? I will, will you haue mee keepe them both? I will.
Periured not mine.
What you heere too? Nay then I see all my good friends are met together, wilt thou haue mee Luce? I am thy Husband, and had I not lou'd thee better then Grace. I had not disappointed the marriage day to morrow.
Lasciuious no,
Wilt thou haue mee Grace, for had I not lou'd thee better then Luce. I would never after I had married her bin contracted to thee.
Inconstant no,
Then neither married man, widdow nor batcheller, whats to bee done? Heeres even the proverbe verifi'd, betweene too stooles, the tayle goes to ground.
Now I bethinke mee this our meeting heere is wondrous strange, call in the Gentlewoman that ownes this house.
Old trot, ile trounce thee.
Here is the marriage prou'd twixt Luc and Chartly, witch this was not your promise.
Haue patience, and in the end wee'l pay you all. Your worships are most hartily welcome, I made bold to send for you, and you may see to what end, which was to discover vnto you, the wilde of this, of this wanton wag pasty, a wil-doates I warrant him, Harry that your daughter hath scap't thi , tnke this gentleman, and then make of him as deserues.
O, I remember him.
Hee never pleas'd mine eye so well as now.
I know his Love, and hee in Chartlyes place
My favour shall possesse.
Thanks my sweete Grace.
Ey and the more the inconstant youth to spight.
I gaue her thee in Chartlyes sight.
There's one gone already, but thi is my wife and her ile keepe in spight of the Devill and his dam.
Not from her lawull Husband.
That am I.
That is the Gentleman, acce ▪ him Luce.
And you then like of her, nay make it good,
This gentleman married you visarded, you him mistaking him for Chartly, which none but my boy Iack was privy too: after shee chang'd her habit with him, as you with Iack.
And you in mistresse Luces habit.
May I beleeue you mother.
This bee your token.
Her that I married, I wrong twice by the finger.
Of that token, my hand was sensible.
And ere the clamorous and lod noise bee gne,
I whisperd to her thus.
You are the man,
Thanks granam, what thou promist thou hast done.
And leauing him, I take you for my sonne.
Two gone, then wheres the third, this mak mee mad, where is my wife then, for a wife I had.
Not see thy wife. Come hither jack my boy.
Nay take him to thee, and with him all joy.
Well art thou seru'd to bee a generall scorne,
To all thy bloud: and if not for our sakes,
For thy soules health and credit of the world,
Haue some regarded to mee, to mee thy father.
Enough sir: if I should say I would become
A new man; You would not take my word.
If I should sweare. I would amend my life,
You would not take mine oath, if I should bind my selfe, to become an honest man you would scarce take my bond.
I should doe none of these.
Then sir, when to all your judgements I see me past grace, do lay hold of Grace, and heere begin to retyre my selfe, this woman hath lent mee a glasse, in which I see all my imperfections, at which my conscience doth more blush inwardly, then my face outwardly, and now I dare confidently vndertake for my selfe I am honest.
Then I dare confidently vndertake to helpe you to a wife who desires to haue an honest man or none, looke on mee well, simple though I stand heere I am your wife, blush not at your folly man, perhaps I haue more in mee, then you expect from mee.
Knavery and riot both which, are now to mee meane foige.
You and I haue bin better acqinted and yet search mee not too farre least you shame mee, looke on mee well, nay better, better yet, ile assure you I left of a petticoate when I put on these breeches,
What say you now, shee skatters her hayre.
First loue, and best beloved?
Let me bee both or neither.
My boy turn'd girle I hope shee'l keepe my counsell from henceforth, ile never entertaine any servant but ile haue her searcht.
Her love hath drawne her hither after him.
My loving daughter welcome thou hast runne,
A happy course to see my sonne thus chang'd.
Father, call mee once againe your sonne, nd sir Harry mee your friend: an hand, and mistresse Grace an hart, in honourable loue. Where I hane wrong'd you Luce forgiue. Impute my errours to my youth not , with Grace I interchange, an imbrace with you Luce, a parting busse I wish you all joy, devide my art amongst you, thou my soule.
Nay mother midnight theres some loue for you.
Out of thy folly, beeing reputed wise,
Wee, selfe conceated ha our follyes found:
Beare thou the name of all these comick acts.
Luce and Grace, (O covetous man) I see,
I sought to ingrosse what now suceth three.
Yet each one wife, enough, one Nuptiall Feast:
Shall serue three Bridalls , bee thou chiefe guest.